$2 .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·66
Autumn,1975


JJILNJI REVISITED


Articles
BY FRED  COGSWELL, ROY DANIELLS, W.  H. NEW, J. G. SNELL, PETER NEARY, DOUGLAS  M. DAYMOND, ROBERT  D. DENHAM, KATHLEEN O'DONNELL

Poems
BY JOAN THORNTON, ROSEMARY AUBERT, ERIN   MOURE, ELIZABETH JOHNSTON, DARIEN  WATSON, MAUREEN MCCARTHY, ANNE CORBETT, AUDREY  CONRAD,  CATHERINE MCKAY

Review Articles and Reviews
BY MIKE DOYLE,  RODERICK  HAIG-BROWN, CHRISTOPHER LEVENSON, HALLVARD DAHLIE, LINDA  SANDLER, CALVIN   L.  SMILEY, ROBERT  GIBBS, KEITH  GAREBIAN, FRANCES MANSBRIDGE, MARY  JANE EDWARDS, MORRIS  WOLFE, GLENYS STOW, SANDRA  MARTIN

Opinions and Notes
BY JOSEPH PIVATO,  LINDA  ROGERS


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








VALEDICTIONS
Pacey and Crawley






IT IS A  cuRious  THING about  living in Canada, in its literary world, that  one can  know a person, work with him, correspond  with  him, share some close thoughts  with him, and  yet, distances and our way of life being what they are, realize when it all comes to an end how rarely one has met him in the flesh. Recently two men have died who played great roles in the development  of literature  in  Canada, mediational  as well as creative  roles, and  I  have  felt  the sadness one feels when  friends  depart.  And  yet, when  I  come  to  remember,  I realize that  I met Alan  Crawley once only in the flesh, twenty-six years ago when I first came back to Canada from  England,  and  that  I can  have sat and  talked with Desmond Pacey no more than  three times in the last decade.  Nevertheless, there was so much in common, so much in shared thoughts and  hopes that  went beyond mere links of letters or of disembodied voices at the ends of wires, that  I believe I  knew them,  and  know  I  valued and  understood  what  they sought  to achieve and in such large measure did achieve.
Of Desmond Pacey, two men who in fact knew him more closely and  directly than  I did, Roy Daniells and Fred Cogswell, are writing in the pages of this issue. I myself have said what  I feel I must of him in an article  published  recently in the Toronto Globe and Mail, in which I remarked on his importance as a literary historian, on his more limited but genuine virtues as a critic, on his role in encour­ aging younger scholars and fostering literary magazines, on the long unchallenged position of his Creative Writing in Canada as "the  only up-to-date handbook  of our  literary  history  that  we  had  available."  I  remarked  that  "Pacey's   role in arousing interest in Canadian writers and writing has been enormous, and rivalled

3

EDITORIAL



in recent years, I think,  only by that  of A. J. M. Smith with his great anthologies which were acts of history and  criticism as well as of discriminative  selection."
I will be content  to let the  writers who follow say what  else must  be said of Desmond  Pacey, though  I feel impelled before giving place to them  to add  that only now he is dead and  his work can be seen as a whole, within its context, does one realize fully what  a presence he has been in our national  cultural  life over a whole generation,  from  the day  his first book-on  Frederick  Philip  Grove who remained  an enduring  interest-appeared in 1945· It would be false to say that he cannot  be replaced,  for  it is a measure  of his achievement  that  others  have emerged to sustain the role he once upheld. But one can look back to times when his influence was crucial,  and  when  he was irreplaceable,  if by that  one  under­ stands that  without him our literature-or at least our image of it-might have been greatly  different  from  what  it  became. He  was an  abiding influence,  yet perhaps, though  he died early and  at the height of his intellectual  energy, his role was in the major sense fulfilled.
The same could be said of Alan Crawley, whose active role was of much shorter duration  than Desmond Pacey's, but equally crucial. When I came first to Canada there were, apart  from Canadian  Forum and the short-lived Here and Now, only two literary  journals  in English,  both of them small in size and  financially  im­ perilled.  One  was John  Sutherland's Northern  Review,  edited  from  Montreal, and  the  other  was Alan  Crawley's  Contemporary  Verse,  edited  from  Victoria. Both of them vanished  in the early 195o's, and there followed a hiatus of several years before their places were taken by Tamarack  Review in 1956; after that  the age of subsidized and surviving  journals began to give writers a varied and assured field for publication  such as had existed at no time before in  Canada.
I remember  with gratitude that  Alan Crawley published  the first of my verse to appear  in Canada, but I am not sure whether he or John Sutherland published the  first of my  Canadian prose.  Certainly  it  was  one of  them,  for  there  was nowhere else but  their  journals  to go, and  much  as one eventually  regretted  the varying  necessities that  forced  these courageous editors to end  publication,  one appreciated the devotion  with which they had kept their magazines  operating  in a milieu where few but  writers themselves and  a handful  of their friends seemed to care  about  the existence of literature,  and  where even fewer  were convinced of its importance in  embodying  whatever  consciousness of themselves  and  the uniqueness of their land Canadians were developing.
For Alan Crawley  his editing  was a labour  of love, but also part  of an extra­
ordinary  drama  of self-regeneration.  He had  always been interested  in  the arts,


4

EDITORIAL



and  in literature especially; it was part  of his upbringing,  of the  atmosphere  he had breathed  since his Ontario childhood. But the interest had  remained  unacti­ vated  during  the years when he studied  and  built up his practice  as a successful corporation lawyer.  In  mid-career,  in his forties, an  illness  unexpectedly  struck him incurably  blind.  He came  west to  British Columbia,  learnt  Braille,  and  in rediscovering  poetry  he found  his  vocation.  Poetry,  felt  through   his fingertips, listened to, learnt  by heart,  became his life, and,  having the leisure and  the will, he conceived  the idea  of the magazine,  devoted  entirely  to poetry  in a contem­ porary tone, which he felt was lacking. In 1941, when its first number  appeared, Contemporary Verse was not yet the only poetry magazine in Canada, but  places to print verse were so few that it could not help play a vital role, during  the eleven years until  its end  in  1952,  in  encouraging  both  the  already  known  poets like Earle Birney, Dorothy  Livesay and  P. K. Page, and the younger poets like James Reaney  and  Jay  Macpherson  who  were  to carry  the tradition  forward  into  the
195o's.
Contemporary Verse, whose whole achievement in physical shape  can  be held in the two hands, so slim were the issues compared  with today's Canada-Council­ fattened   journals,  is an  extraordinary feat,  even  in  retrospect, since  Crawley's judgment-perhaps because it was inevitably a  judgment of the ear, was so true that  amazingly  little  that  passed his editorial  view seems even now  discardable.  The  issues of the  journal,  read together,  have the containment  of an  anthology, a selection  by a brilliant  connoisseur and  critic  of the  best works in  an  art  he did so much  to foster and  in his own way to shape. Crawley  never wrote  poetry himself, but  his feeling for it was almost  faultless.
As an editor, as a man,  Crawley made an ineradicable  impression on those he
encountered. I remember over almost half a life the one afternoon  we talked away at Floris McLaren's house so long ago in Victoria, and  the extraordinary  feeling of alertness and-strangely -of  probing watchfulness this blind man  projected. Losing his eyes, he seemed to have toned  all other  antennae  to their  maximum receptivity.
Six years ago, in Canadian  Literature's  tenth  anniversary  issue, we published
a  documentary which  George  Robertson  had  compiled  on  Crawley's  life  and work. Let me end by quoting from it three passages spoken by P. K. Page, whom Crawley  encouraged  when she was a young poet and  who  remained  his friend until  death. Uttered  by a poet who knew Crawley personally in a way I  knew him mainly through  his work, they give as close a feeling as anything  I have heard or read  of what Crawley was like to encounter  as an editor, as a man.

5

EDITORIAL



I remember  that  he would write back and  tell you that  he just didn't think  the poem was good  enough.  I have  no idea  how he went  about  doing  what  he did. He certainly communicated with you. I think probably the thing that  one needed more than criticism was encouragement, because, in my own case any way, I wrote rather  for myself, and  when  I suddenly found  that  you could write for somebody else as well, you could  write  for a  response-it was a  very curious  experience. This  may sound  ridiculous,  but  it's  true  nevertheless. Alan  as far  as I was  con­ cerned  had  a  facility  to  turn  on  the  tap,  but  how he  worked  critically,  I've  no idea. If he didn't like what came out of the tap, he'd send it back quite ruthlessly, at least ruthlessly isn't  the word, but quite  directly. He was always very  direct  in all his dealings  with  you. If he liked the  poem he told you;  if he  didn't he told you. But  the  main  thing  was some kind  of  a  contact,  some  kind  of  a  tension between two people, some kind of a polarity.

* 	* 	*
He was a very emotional  man,  Alan, a very undemonstrative emotional  man. You saw very little of the emotion, but you felt a great deal of it, and  you felt that he was very much in touch with you in some way. That  he had a strong empathetic quality, is the feeling I had about  him. As a result of this, one had no shyness with Alan and  this was his great  strength  for me -I  was a rather  reticent  person and to suddenly find somebody with whom one was not shy, someone in an editorial capacity, that  is-because after all one did find one's own individuals  with whom one wasn't shy of course -but  to find somebody in an editorial  capacity  to whom you could show a poem that  you thought  maybe was simply awful, "but  it doesn't matter,  if it's  really awful,  Alan will tell me it is; and  if it  isn't  awful,  well, we can talk about it."
* 	* 	*

I remember  this marvellously Spanish  looking man. He  looked as if he might have come out of-or he might almost have been an El Greco painting  with this extraordinary alive quality  about  him, and  a tremendous  capacity  to know where everybody was in the room and  to be following and with you in your conversation. Periodically I used to stay with Alan and Jean  in Caulfield where they were very generous  to poets, I must say -long suffering and  generous and  we'd  get mildly drunk  in the evening  and  quite  bawdy, and  laugh  a tremendous  amount.  I think it was the laughter  I remember as much as anything. I don't  know whether  he was dominating the  room  he was in but  he was on  top of the  room he was in;  and seemed a good deal sharper  than  the rest of us, which indeed  he was, I think.

P. K. Page  on  Alan  Crawley.  I  can  conceive no  better  or  more truly  felt and spoken tribute.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


6


DESMOND  PACEY


1. by Fred Cogswell


















DESMOND PACEY  was hom m Dunedin  m New Zealand, but at an early age his mother,  widowed in  World  War  I, returned  to England where  he attended school at  Nottingham. Before he could complete  his studies, she emigrated  to Canada and  married a man  who ran a small farm  near Hamil­ ton,  Ontario. As a  result of this  unsettled  upbringing  and  his days as  a lonely farm  boy, Desmond  Pacey developed, I feel, one of the cardinal ambitions  of his life, later  to be splendidly  realized, that of being a member of a large family and of sinking permanent roots in the life of a community.
Desmond  Pacey was a bright boy, fond of reading, and  his mother  determined and distilled into him the idea that  there was a better life than  farming,  that  this life was to be achieved  by academic  prowess, and  that  to support  it financially, scholarships  and  prizes had  to be won. Scholarships and  prizes were won,  and Desmond Pacey attended  the Universities of Toronto  and Cambridge and on concluding  his courses found himself a professor, first at Brandon  College, Mani­ toba,  and,  after  1944, at the University of New Brunswick, the institution  with which his name is principally connected.
By that  time,  the  goals of his life and  the  road  to them  had  become  habits
that  were to stand him in good stead for a life-time. The first impression Desmond Pacey always gave both students and colleagues was one of energy and enthusiasm. He  went  through  the  corridors  of the University  of  New  Brunswick  whistling.

7

DESMOND PACEY



His sustained energy and good spirits were often a marvel to us less buoyant colleagues, but  we strongly suspected  that  they were rooted  in  the security  and peace of a happy  marriage  and  a rich family life which to his credit  he worked as hard  to preserve as he did at anything  else.
Nor were his non-academic interests confined to the family. He participated wholeheartedly  in community  ventures, and  his strenuous dancing  and  singing enlivened the social gatherings  of which he was fond. Until  the last few years of his life, he found  time for soccer, cricket, and tennis, and was always to be found in attendance at  the  University's  athletic  events. Sometimes  he could  be found, too, although  he was always modest and reticent about it, in the pulpit  of a local church,  for,  like  Northrop   Frye,  he  was  an  ordained  minister  of  the  United Church  of Canada.
As a teacher,  Desmond  Pacey never apologized or tried to explain  the impor­
tance of literature; it was as self-evident to him as the beat of a heart or the pound of a pulse. And in a very short time he had the best of his students thinking  as he did. His own life had been enriched  by his perception of a growing and  develop­ ing tradition,  and  he took it for granted  that  the teaching  of literature ought  to stress a broad  humanity  based upon sincere expression rather  than  upon  intrica­  cies of form.  He  took  a  personal  interest  in  his students,  was  proud  of  their achievements,  sustained  them  in their  failures,  and  corresponded  with  many  of them  until the time of his death.
Nowhere  did  his respect for  literature  and  his intrinsic  modesty and  shyness appear  more  patent  than  in  his attitude  towards  his own  writing.  He  wrote  a novel, which in my opinion  contains much honest and attractive  realism derived from the circumstances  of his life on an Ontario farm, but he never tried so hard to have this book published as he did to forward  the work of other writers whom he admired.  His short  stories were of a  high standard,  and  his children's  verse was charming  in  the  manner  of Dennis  Lee's more advertised  Nicholas   Knock and  Alligator  Pie, but he spoke seldom, if at all, about these accomplishments.
As a department head,  Desmond  Pacey functioned  in  two eras-the  era  of
the absolute head and the era of the departmental servant, the chairman  of  com­ mittees. I have always felt that  his actual  intentions  and  achievements  in  both roles have to some degree been misunderstood in some quarters  of the University of New Brunswick and  the  Canadian academic  community  as a  whole. I think two traits  in  his character  occasioned these misunderstandings. The  first is that he so identified himself with his work that  any attack  on it seemed to him to be a  personal  attack  upon  himself and  he sometimes  responded  in  kind.  Further-

8

DESMOND  PACEY



more, the very identification  of himself with the immediate  institution  he served, whether it was the  English  Department, the School of Graduate Studies,  or the whole academic side of the University of New Brunswick, led others outside those institutions  to conclude  that  he was being an "empire  builder"  when  it seemed perfectly clear to him that  he was merely performing  meritorious  service. Often, too, at Learned Societies and other meetings, when he forced himself to talk-as shy men sometimes do -he overstated his case and appeared  brash to those who did not understand the emotional  pressure and difficulty underlying  the very fact of speaking. The cardinal  test of an administrator is in his ability to pick able men and  to  keep  them  happily  and  fruitfully  employed.  For  this,  Desmond  Pacey deserves as high a rating as any one I knew. The U.N.B. English Department over the past quarter  century  has lost few professors who joined it. It is a happy  place to work and has few, if any, equals in Canada  in the degree of freedom,  harmony, and  mutual  respect that  exists among its members.
Desmond  Pacey  as a department head  will always be noted  for  at  least  two
solid and  far-seeing achievements. The  first is the degree to which  he pioneered and enlarged the scope of the study of Canadian literature  at U.N.B. The second is his decision, in conjunction with the University of British Columbia,  to embark upon  the Ph.D.  programme in English, thereby  breaking  the monopoly  on that degree in  Canada held  previously by the  University  of Toronto, an  institution which at that  time did not look very favourably  upon Canadian studies. In  both these actions, he helped to prepare  the way for the spate of interest  in Canadian literature  that  has  now overtaken  nearly every university in  this  country.
As an administrator, Desmond  Pacey served the University of New Brunswick
as Dean of Graduate Studies, Acting President,  and  Vice President  Administra­ tion. He did his work ably and  unstintingly. However disappointed  he may have been when he was not made  full-time president,  he gave his successor unstinting loyalty and  resisted attractive  opportunities  to go elsewhere. He died, at it were, "in  harness".
As a scholar, Desmond  Pacey was not, I felt, a great seminal mind with a deep
intuitive grasp of pattern  in the midst of complexity, but he did have more than a usual degree of foresight. He,  before any one else, was beating  the  drums  for the greatness of Frederick  Philip Grove, hailed Grove as a major  novelist. Before any  one else, too,  he acclaimed  Irving  Layton  as a  major  poet.  His  work  on Leonard  Cohen's  The Beautiful Losers shows an acumen  and  insight in dealing with complex material  that are at odds with the opinions of those who are inclined to dismiss him as a mere "literary  historian". Throughout the past thirty  years his

9

DESMOND PACEY



has been a voice of sanity in Canadian criticism, and  he has resisted such "band­ wagon"  attempts to make one aspect of literature  the whole of  literature as the cult of mythopoeic  poetry,  Northrop Frye's "garrison  mentality", the  Canadian followers of the  Black Mountain school of poetry,  and  the work of such  thesis­ makers as Margaret Atwood  and  D. G. Jones. Before any one else, although  he now has plenty of company,  he turned  his attention  backward  to an  important second look at the unjustly  neglected major poets of nineteenth  century  Canada.
Always Desmond  Pacey kept in his mind  the vision of a great  good  place, a
kind  of repository for tradition and  all the grace and  beauty  embodied  by it, a place to which  he turned  for  restoration  when summer  holidays and  sabbatical leaves permitted,  and  to which, I suspect, he planned  to go when  he had retired. That place to him was Cambridge University, seen through  the halo of pre-War graduate school memories, and  reburnished  by the unstinting  courtesy and  hospi­ tality he received there while a visitor in more recent years.
It is difficult to be objective about  a friend, about  a man who in so many ways moulded  me into  the  man  I  am.  I  did  not always agree with  Desmond  Pacey, and  the  effect of his  excessive personality  upon  me  was at  times  abrasive,  but these  things  seem  as  nothing   now  compared   to  the  many  kindnesses,  often unsolicited, I received from him. Thinking  back through the years of our long relationship,  a trivial,  almost ludicrous  incident  comes to mind.  I  am  glad  now that  I  did  not  drop  the  ball  but  made  the  catch  at  the  boundary  in  a  cricket match  against  a pick-up side from  Mount  Allison University. This  enabled  Des­ mond,  a rather  poor  bowler, to dismiss the opposing team's  most dreaded  bats­ man. Had  I dropped  that  ball, would I still have been in a position to write this memoir?  I  think  so-but  our  friendship  for a spell would  have  been  severely




CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741



10

DESMOND PACEY



tested. Desmond was a keen competitor.  He did not go easily to his grave, and  I for  one  hope  that  all the  traditional beauty  of Cambridge University  is but  a shadow  to the glory of where he is now. I hope, too, that  it will give him scope for activity, for an idle Desmond  Pacey would be absolutely unthinkable.




2. by Roy Daniells
w.WERE   RETURNING  from Switzerland  and,  stopping  in
Florence,  walked  through   the  cypress-shaded Swiss Protestant   cemetery  where
names familiar to literature  are carved with loving care as memorials. That after­ noon,  arriving  in Rome,  we found  a cable with  the  news of Desmond  Pacey's death.
It was characteristic  of him that, a few weeks earlier, he had written  to us, not concealing  the seriousness of his diagnosis but putting  the  best possible construc­ tion  on it and  hoping  to continue  his work during  the  next  months  and  years. The  news was therefore  an  unexpected  shock;  it did  not  seem  possible that  so continuous  a line of effort and  achievement  could thus come to a close.
Only later did one realize that  his customary courage and confidence had never failed, even in the presence of the last enemy, had been strong enough  to comfort the very friends from whom he had the most right and  need to expect sympathy and support.
In this he was acting true to fonn. I had first met him when he was an English student  and I was a very junior instructor in Victoria College, Toronto. We soon had friends in common, and ties among members of that  group  have endured  for over  forty  years.  They  were  ties  of  common  interest  in  common  subjects­ English, History, the Canadian past and the future  of  Canada-and they were predominantly intellectual interests, without the bias of  partisan  politics, religious dogmatism  or personal ambition.
In due course Desmond won an award that took him to Trinity  College, Cam­ bridge, and I moved on to the Department of English in the University of  Mani­ toba.  We kept up a correspondence  and,  to my great  joy, he was  appointed to fill a similar  position  at  Brandon  College. We  had  now  a  professional  relation that  flowed as smoothly as our old friendship. Desmond's pervasive saving grace,


I I

DESMOND PACEY



that  triumphed  over all difficulties in those lean and academically desperate years of the early 194o's, was his inimitable  combination  of cheerfulness, courage and candour. Every difficulty-of  climate, communication,  curriculum, accommoda­ tion, conflicting views of colleagues-each was faced with the same imperturb­ ability,  the  same  energy,  the  same  resource and  the same  confidence  that  the standards of Toronto or of Cambridge  could  be established  and  upheld  on the Western  Prairies. These  were  difficult years, happy  years,  years of accomplish­ ment. In many of his students  Desmond awakened a love of literature and  a life­ long gratitude.
He left us in  1944,  when  he became head of the English Department in the University of New Brunswick. There  were, however, many opportunities of  keep­ ing in touch in addition  to correspondence. The learned societies met every sum­ mer, in one major  centre or another,  and for days on end there was that  kind of personal and  academic  interchange of news and  views that  acts as blood stream in  the  body of our  widely dispersed  Canadian community.  One  had  often  the double pleasure of seeing both Desmond and Mary and sensing the harmony  and mutual  stimulation  of that  most fortunate  union.
During  these years the work was being done that led to his Creative Writing  in in Canada  and  his Ten  Canadian  Poets. Their  critical significance  has already been dealt with elsewhere. The  tactics he used, in terms of objectives, of method and manner,  were no less important. He drove at essentials. His first book was a milestone  placed  beside the  road  that  led  perforce to a  comprehensive  literary history of Canada. This enterprise early claimed him as an associate editor, a role he never ceased to fill. At the time of his death,  a greatly expanded  edition of the Literary History of Canada  was going to press. To his soundness of judgment  all those associated with it are eager to pay tribute.
His greatest  influence,  across the  years, has been in the  example  he set. His choice of subjects  was  always  close to central  problems of  the  culture  of this country  and  his patient  investigation  of such figures as Grove  and  Roberts  was aimed at establishing the dominant characteristics of our diversified heritage. Con­ sistency, reliability, integrity,  centrality-one searches in vain  for the  adequate  characterization of his life-long endeavour.
His great virtue as a friend and as a colleague was his utter dependability.  One
knew where to find him and one could count on his support  in times of difficulty, his advice in perplexities, his sanity and common sense in scenes of confusion and the invariable  warmth  of his response to one's needs.
I shall never forget our last meeting, which extended over several days, on his


12

DESMOND PACEY



own ground of the  University of New Brunswick.  What  shone  out  was the  respect and  affection  felt for him by his colleagues and  others associated  with  the campus. As a  teacher, an  administrator, a  champion  of  academic values  in the  com­ munity, it was clear  that  his influence  was  widespread. The  same  qualities that  had  made  him,  forty  years earlier, stand  out  among honours students were  now fully  apparent.  Centrality without ostentation; warmth  without sentimentality; heartiness without affectation; robustness  of judgment without loss of fine distinc­ tions;  an instinct  for essentials without any forcing of issues.





M]IJDEN ]IUNT


Anne Corbett




Seems all right if the going down
to die happens at home where blood and  relatives can dandle  the emptying body safe from the alien click
and snapping shut of clinics.

The  trappings  of an event bring in the family. I am an event in passing, lying here not
wearing the proper colour for the time of day, not stressed and strutted  for the occasion. Everything I was set out
to do is done:  every possession accorded my right to stay within the family. It's
knowing one's place that's important, from six feet down to three stories up, the length
and  width of the boundaries. This business of dying is only a process, a sort of making room.

It's  all right knowing where and with whom
I'll lie. I have my place, relinquish
nothing,  but then  I've reconnoitred  for years.


CANADIAN LITERATUREAND COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



w






HAVE GROWN into a habit in Canada of thinking our· selves influenced  rather  than  influential,  and imitative  rather  than  innovative.  By diminishing  creative  effort before looking closely at  works of art,  such  attitudes turn  a lock on criticism.  Nothing  firmer than  faint  praise is possible. And  if we wait constantly for the flowering of a recognizably distinctive Canadian culture, we risk ignoring  that  which exists already, that  which has emerged and  emerges from our  way of living and  looking at the world, is implicitly Canadian, and  is alive. I am not denying  the existence of influences upon Canadian literature, nor decrying the skills involved in technical imitation  and  creative parody;  by trying to distinguish  between  influence  and simple response, however,  I am  concerned with showing how the experience of the world can enter, without controlling, Canadian  perspectives.
"Influence" suggests that  an  author  surrenders  his identity to a direction out­ side himself or his culture; "response" leaves the control in the author's own hand, and  too often we confuse the two. At one extreme, if authors  respond to  pheno­ mena outside Canada, critics merely wonder what  was wrong with  Canada that it didn't  provide the same stimulus. Under  these conditions,  nationality  becomes the significant criterion  in making literary  assessments rather  than  simply a des­ cription of cultural source. For example, the poems Earle Birney wrote in response to his experiences of South  America  and Asia inspired reviews which questioned their  Canadian-ness and  wondered  when the  poet would get around  to writing as well about  his own country.  Like Milton's Satan,  however-and Birney the Romantic would  I  hope appreciate the comparison-the sensitive artist  carries his "own  country'' with  him wherever  he goes. The  sensitive critic must follow, appreciating the landscape in whatever direction it expands. In an age of mobility, one  in  which  rapid  transit  and  mass  media  give the  artist  physical as well as

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



mental  running  room,   the   occasions  for  meeting   disparate  experiences -for responding to  them  and  for  being  responded to-multiply  drastically. I want here  to  probe  only  some  of  those  associations,  to  consider   Canadian writers  in relation to their  Commonwealth responses and  counterparts, and  to indicate some of the  directions that  future criticism  might  usefully pursue.
If we start  by throwing England out of the  Commonwealth for a minute, thus peremptorily getting rid of the  need to discuss visitors to England and  direct con­ tacts  with  English  cultural traditions, we are  still  left  with  an  intricate  network  of  Canadian-Commonwealth literary   relationships. Earle   Birney  observing  the Caribbean, Asia, and  the South  Pacific; Sara  Jeannette Duncan or George  Wood­  cock in India; P. K. Page in Australia; Dave Godfrey,  Audrey Thomas, Margaret Laurence, David  Knight, Dorothy Livesay, and  others  in  various  parts  of Africa
-all  reflect  a direct  experience with  a foreign  landscape that not  only  becomes transformed into metaphor in any particular work but also helps direct  the course of each  writer's separate literary development. The  discovery  of Africa  or  Asia, that  is, does not remain static; it contributes to the  progress of each  literary  mind.
As Audrey  Thomas puts it in Mrs. Blood, a novel  set partly  in Ghana:

There  are smells here which will always be part of Africa for me; and  yet if  some­
one asked later  what  Africa  was like and  I said 'Mansion  Polish',  or  'Dettol', or
'the  smell of drying  blood',  they wouldn't  understand.  And  they  would  be  right not  to, for  the  real Africa  (whatever  that  may mean)   is none  of  these and  my Africa is only real for me.

And  for  her  central character, Africa  is a metaphor for  an  experience to which she  cannot adapt, a  vitality  she  ambivalently loves but  from  which  she  is  con­ stantly  separated, an  environment in which  a  place  name like  Freetown  utters sharply dislocating ironies,  forcing  her  back  into  the  harassing uneasiness of  her own self. Margaret Laurence, at  the opening  of her autobiographical  account of life  in  East  Africa,   The   Prophet's  Camel  Bell, poses the   question  even  more  explicitly:

Nothing can equal in hope and apprehension  the first voyage east of Suez, yourself eager for all manner  of oddities, pretending to disbelieve in marvels lest you appear naive  but  anticipating them  just  the same, prepared  for  anything,  prepared   for nothing,  burdened  with  baggage-most of it useless, unburdened by knowledge,
... bland as eggplant  and as innocent of the hard earth  as a fledgling sparrow....

And in your excitement  at  the  trip,  the last thing in the  world  that  would occur to you is that  the strangest  glimpses you may have of any creature in the distant lands will be those you catch  of yourself.

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



The trick  is to  glimpse  oneself  both  as  person  and  as  writer. The  admittedly white-liberal biases  that   helped  impel  Mrs.  Laurence to  translate Somali  poetry for  her  first published book,  A  Tree   for Poverty, added  to  her  knowledge of the continent. So did  the  friendship with  Nigerian  writers  like  Christopher  Okigbo, Wole  Soyinka,   and  Chinua Achebe,   which  later  contributed to  the  modulated judgments of her African  literary commentary, Long  Drums  and  Cannons. They left  her,  however,  still an  outsider. To  place any  of the works  of Achebe,  Ngugi, Ekwensi,  Oyono, or  p'Bitek  beside  This  Side  Jordan  is to see  how  much   more sharply defined  the cultural conflict  is in the African  novels. In  Ghanaian fiction, moreover-in the  vitriol  of Ayi Kwei  Armah's The Beautyful Ones  are not  yet Born and  the traditional village commitments of the stories of Christina Ama  Ata Aidoo-the pressures  of  language and   of  modernity  carry   an  accompanying threat of deracination; to sense that  is to appreciate more  fully  the  fundamental differences between  one kind of African cultural desolation  and  whatever is experi­ enced  in Canada.
Yet  Margaret Laurence learned more  than   just the subtleties of  characteriza­ tion,  the attraction of exotic settings,  and  the force of provocative metaphor from the writing  of This  Side  Jordan  and  The  Tomorrow-Tamer. She learned to probe  the  nature of freedom, to  examine the  relationship between  hierarchical tradi­ tional  order  and  the  contemporary thrust  towards individuality, and  to  take  her discoveries  back  into  her  own  culture. In  1g6g  she spelled  out  something of her changing awareness of Africa,  the  metamorphosis of the  exotic  marvel  into   (at  once)   a burgeoning reality  and  a metaphor for a quality  of mind:

I guess I will always care about  Africa. But the feeling I had, in everything  I wrote about  it, isn't  the feeling I have  now. It  would be easy to convey the impression that  I've become disillusioned with the entire continent, but this would be a distor­ tion. What has happened, with Africa's upheavals, has been happening all over the world. Just  as I feel that  Canadians can't  say them when  we talk  of  America's disastrous and  terrifying  war in Vietnam, so I feel we can't  say them of  Africans. What  one has come to see, in the last decade, is that  tribalism is an inheritance of us all. Tribalism  is not such a bad thing, if seen as the bond which an  individual  feels with his roots, his ancestors, his background. It may or may not be stultifying in  a  personal  sense, but  that  is a  problem  each  of us has  to solve  or  not  solve. Where  tribalism  becomes, to my mind, frighteningly  dangerous  is where  the tribe
-whatever it is, the Rausa,  the Ibo, the Scots Presbyterians, the Daughters of the American  Revolution,  the  in-group-is  seen as 'the  people',  the  human  beings, and  the others, the un-tribe,  are seen as sub-human.  This  is not Africa's  problem alone ; it is everyone's.1

16

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



Such  an  assertion  does not  insist on an  identity between,  say, Vanessa  McLeod's loving  rejection of  her  Calvinist   grandfather in  A  Bird in  the  House  and   the uncertain growth  of Obi  Okonkwo in Achebe's No Longer  At Ease, even  though both  characters find themselves  continually influenced  by the  very traditions they have  tried  consciously  to reject.  The  stories differ  both  tonally  and  in the  extent of their  cultural implications. But Margaret Laurence does insist on the  principles of humanitarianism that  transcend cultures,  to which  her affirmation of particular ancestral traditions gives form  and  by which, at the same time,  restrictive customs are  liberated. Her  response  to Africa  was thus  based  upon  her  Canadian  precon­ ceptions  and  became  the  lens through which  she  re-examined and  managed to voice  them.   Africa   was  both   object   observed   and   the  subjective   reshaper  of experience; it did not absorb  the  artist,  but  rather  stirred  artistry into being.



IN THE  POETRY of  Dorothy   Livesay,  we  find  a  comparable African response, one that  grows out of and contributes to the Poet's own develop­ ing  point-of-view. The  blend  of lyricism  and  social conscience  that  characterized such  early  poems  as "The Child   Looks Out" or  "Day and  Night"  had  already given  Dorothy Livesay a distinctive voice by the time UNESCO sent  her to Zam­  bia in 1959· A sensitivity  to rhythm and  a deliberate attempt to manipulate it for impassioned documentary purposes  were only two of  the features of her verse that resulted  from  that  union.  What  Africa did was intensify her commitment to social causes,  and   immerse   her-however  slightly-in   an  oral   culture,  where   the rhythms of speech  had  significant  meaning and  implicitly  articulated the society's shared  myth.
To  illustrate what  I mean  by "implicit articulation", I want  to refer  to a book called  Muntu, which   probes  the  underlying principles  of  African culture. The author, Janheinz Jahn, writes about the spoken  word  as follows:

All magic is word magic, incantation and  exorcism, blessing and  curse. Through
Nommo, the word, man establishes his mastery over things....

If there were no word, all forces would be frozen, there would  be no procreation, no change,  no life. 'There is nothing that  there is not;  whatever  we have a name for, that is'; so speaks the wisdom of the Yoruba priests. The  proverb signifies that the naming, the enunciation  produces what it names. Naming  is an incantation, a creative  act. What  we cannot  conceive of is unreal; it does not  exist. But  every human  thought, once expressed, becomes reality. For the word holds the course of

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



things in train  and  changes and  transforms them. And since the word has this power, every word is an effective word, every word is binding. There is no 'harm­ less', non-commital word. Every word has consequences. Therefore the word binds the muntu. And the muntu  is responsible for his word.

The force, responsibility, and commitment of the word, and the awareness that the word alone alters the world; these are characteristics of African culture....

But Nommo, the word, "precedes  the image", is given "cultural significance" only by the  muntu -by  man  (alive  and  dead,  ancestor  and  deified  ancestor  alto­ gether)  -making  the  essence of language  not  a  received vocabulary  through which  (as in  Europe)  a  nation  "understands its own  cultural  unity",  but  the creative,  transmuting  "way   of  using  speech"  that   "places  function  ahead  of object".
Dorothy  Livesay acknowledges as much -and like Margaret  Laurence  admits her separateness from the culture she watches-when in her poem "Village" she speaks of the people who "do  not love this place, or name it/ they are too much of it/ ... j Between the  land  and  themselves/ they feel no difference."  Yet like Armah's Ghana  and  Achebe's  Nigeria,  Zambian  society in  the  2oth  century  is beset by European modernism  and  awaits  a  reconciliation  with  its  traditional past. The  electrifying,  potentially  revolutionary  visions of Alice Lenchina  of the Lumpa  sect were  one  result  of such  tension,  and  they stimulated  in  the  early tg6o's  a remarkable social unrest, which the country's new nationalism  could not altogether  answer. Dorothy  Livesay responded with her poem "The Prophetess", in which the rhythinic  changes and incantatory  repetitions draw upon the sounds of the drum  culture.
One  cannot,  however, describe "The  Prophetess" as a drum  poem-a  poem cycle called Masks by the  Caribbean  poet Edward  Brathwaite  shows how much further  the  technique  can  be taken -nor see it  as "African" in  anything  but setting. It is sharpened, shaped,  by an African experience, but it reworks themes of discrimination  and  childbirth that  Dorothy  Livesay had  explored  before, and it relates in its technique not  just to drums but also to theories about speech  pat­ terns  and  incantatory effects  that  had  become  prevalent  in  Vancouver  poetry circles by the time she returned  from Africa. The  continuing  sensitivity to poetic technique  that  allowed her then  to respond to the work of, for example, George Bowering and  bill bissett, urged The  Unquiet  Bed (in  which  "The  Prophetess" and  "Village" appear)  into  the  form it took;  but  Africa seems to  have  been a key experience in provoking  that  continuing  sensitivity in the first  place. Taking

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



her out of her culture,  it made her conscious of her own identity -a recognition which let her poetic identity  acquire  new dimensions.
If Laurence  and Thomas  and  Livesay in various ways utter  a division between themselves and  Africa  which  overrides their subjective  possession of an  African experience, Hubert Aquin,  in his novel Trou  de Memoire, works from  an  intel­ lectual  proposition  to  insist on  a  metaphysical  unity.  The  correspondence  that opens his novel, that  is, between an Ivory Coast  revolutionary  pharmacist  and  a Montreal  one,  rapidly  develops  beyond  letter-writing  into  an  identifying  set  of personality  correspondences  that   blend  character   and  give  depth   to  the  plot. Essentially what it underlines is an identity between the defiance of imperial  power in  West  Mrica and  what  Aquin  sees as  the  need  for  revolutionary   action  in Quebec.  David  Knight's  novel  Farquharson's Physique  and  what  it  did  to  his mind  probes a related issue:  that of the personal effects of political involvement, the relationship  between  public and  private  identities  and  the upsets that  occur when they war with each  other inside a single culture  or  personality.  (The  exis­ tence of all these works, incidentally, emphasizes the need for further  comparative  studies of  French-  and  English-language  literatures  in  Canada; their  differing perspectives often focus  on  the same issues and  the fact  that  they  might  prove complementary  warrants sympathetic examination.)
The  contrast  David  Knight  draws  between idealistic and  pragmatic   political options  relates  to  what  Margaret   Laurence  says about  tribalism  as  well as  to Hubert  Aquin's  activism. But it is in Dave Godfrey's The  New  Ancestors that  we find a more .impassioned blend of Laurence's cultural sensitivity and Aquin's poli­ tical fervour, and a more direct insistence on the necessity for metaphysics in mod­ em  Western  life. Godfrey  acknowledges, in other  words, not  just  the  Margaret Laurence  sentiment  that  "the  strangest glimpses ... in the distant  lands  will be those you catch  of yourself", but  also the intensification of that statement  as we can see it in, for example, Mircea Eliade's Myths, Dreams and  Mysteries. Quoting  Heinrich Zimmer, Eliade affirms that a dialogue with the "true" African or Asian will help a Westemer  rediscover a "universally valid" spiritual  outlook, for " 'it is only after a pious journey in a distant  region, in a new land,  that  the meaning  of that inner voice guiding  us on our search can make itself understood  by us' ".
This belief, I take it, is what underlies the hallucinative, visionary "Fifth  City" episode in The  New Ancestors; it seeks the functions of African art, those of  plac­ ing the independent forces of nature  at man's command,  of creating  new reality, or issuing imperatives  to time, and  of fascinating  (rather  than  arguing)  its lis­ teners to the conclusions that  reside in its manner  of expression. What  ought  to

19

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



result  is a  recognition of a  valid  life  pattern, but  such  a  discovery  rests  also on one's  sensitivity  to  ancestral traditions. To  quote  from  M untu  again:

The  past has a double function.  On one side it is Kintu,  the stuff of forces, which is awakened  in images and  ordered  and  transformed  with reference  to the future. On  the other  hand  it is a pattern  for the future,  for it contains  the wisdom of the ancestors, the knowledge of the order  which is held to shape  the  present.

The  political  irony in Godfrey's book comes from  his recognition of the artificiality of traditions currently being  followed  either  in the  Lost Coast  of his novel  or,  by implication, in  the  Canada to  which  he  himself  is committed. To  transfer  alle­ giance  to valid spiritual beliefs, to find "new  ancestors" in other  words,  is a diffi­ cult  task in the face  of modem political  pressures.  It perhaps becomes  a  political  as well  as an  ethical  quest  simply  because  of that. In  any  event  it  is  inherently uncertain of its outcome. The literary  method  Godfrey  employs  to capture such tension -and  to lead  us, by fascination, to moral conclusions-involves him  in cumulative references  to African proverbs  and  quantum theory.  The one  serves as a kind  of incantatory counterpoint, a flowing commentary that  goes unnoticed in  rigid  contemporary political  systems;  the  other   voices  a  scientific  theory   of uncertainty that  underlies the constant metamorphosis of energy  forces. The func­ tion  of such  references  is to  remind  us of the  moral  order  absent  from  modem thinking and  the fact  that  order  is not a necessary or an easy result of any change. Despite  such  an  equivocal  prognosis,  Godfrey  is ultimately committed to action,  committed to  change,  because  only  in  constant  re-creation can  the  forces  that  permeate life be awakened into images  and  made,  in an African  sense, "real". To participate in the making of that  reality  is his function  as artist; to appreciate the nature of that function is to discover  the interpenetration of a world  of things  (of images  and  objects) and  the  world  of spiritual apprehension which  the  African "way  of  using speech" implicitly conveys.



EARLE BIRNEY IN Asia becomes another of Mircea Eliade's spiritual travellers to a distant region,  but  though  his fundamental premise  is not dissimilar  to  Godfrey's-dissatisfaction  with  the  way  American and   European mythic  structures impede any  true  expression  of the  Canadian imagination-the method he  discovers  for  his art  differs  markedly. Where  Godfrey   found  word, Birney  finds silence;  where  Godfrey  found  a way to animate the  world  of things, Birney  found   a  consciousness  of  the  vitality  of  Nada;   where  Godfrey   found   a


20

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



culture   that  controlled  time  through  artistic  utterance,   Birney  finds  a  culture whose art  acknowledges time  but  rejects its final authority.  When  in  "Bangkok Boy" he  celebrates  a  moment  of  joy that  is forever,  or  when  in  "A  Walk  in Kyoto"  he distinguishes between the script of language  and  "the  simple song of a man",  or when in "The Bear on the Delhi Road"  he plays with the word "fabu­ lous" in order  to demonstrate   the  persistent reality of myth  and  the  essentially insubstantial trance  of empirical  reality, we find examples  of the  way  in  which Asian culture  has affected Birney's poetry. My point is not to assert that a radical change occurs in his viewpoint;  what Asia seems to have done is to crystallize for Birney the essence of what he had long sought, to make apparent what  the direc­ tion of his work had seen. When  in earlier  poems he had  asserted  freedom  and the expanse of a new land,  he drew his images from  European  myth. Like Euro­ pean explorers, he was seeking to articulate  a "Strait of Anian" that  would open the  west to  European  access. The  title of  Near  False Creek   Mouth emphasizes the matter.  "False Creek",  an inlet of salt water that slices Vancouver part  way, from  west to east, was thought  by early  explorers to be the Strait  of Anian;  at that  point  they  were  trying  to  connect  to  Europe,  to  find  a  fast  route  home. Birney, however, comes in "November Walk Near False Creek Mouth", to stand reflectively near  the western  edge of  the inlet,  between the  commercial  empire that  has expanded  to the coast and the Orient out at sea. In that  midway position, sensitive to both the European traditions  and  the Oriental  mysticism that  attract  and  exert their influence  upon  him, he locates the imaginative  ground  which  as Canadian artist he accepts as distinctively his own.
If the  pre-Asian  poems fret  about  aging  and  the  passing  of  time,  the  post­
Asian poems acknowledge and accept it. If the early work seeks specific historical roots, the later  work discovers a universality of spirit  that  transcends  place  and time. If the poems of the 194o's and  195o's press constantly for a fresh language of poetry,  the most recent  poems of the  197o's strive for  the  insights  of vision that  concrete poetry at its most successful can allow. Its design is not  an escape from language, but an intensification of the vitality that language  tries to render. In creating concrete poems he does not deny the word; he merely rejects the process of definition, of limitation, that  words often impose on life. Writers like Margaret Avison and  F. R. Scott have noted  a comparable  frustration  with language  and resolved their  dilemma  as much  as they can  by experimenting  with  patterns  of print  and  sound.  For  Birney, encountering  the  Caribbean, Asia, and  the South Pacific has been instrumental in allowing him to articulate  the  relation  between that  problem  of artistic  method  and  what  he sees to be  the  central  tensions in

21

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



Canadian experience. The Asian  poems are  not extraneous to his work,  in other words;  they  grow  from  it,  bear  upon  it,  and  therefore  expand the  literary  con­ sciousness which  in Canada we can  accept  as our  own.



CANADIAN WRITERS  are  not  the  only  ones  to  travel   and respond, however,  and  in the  work  of the  South  African  and  Barbadian emigres in Canada, John Peter  and  Austin  Clarke,  we find reactions  to Canada that  give us a different perspective towards our  image  and  towards the  whole  question  of Commonwealth literary interaction. To  read  the  works  of  Douglas   Stewart, a New  Zealander in Australia, or Clive  Barry,  an  Australian in Africa,  or  William Hart-Smith, an  Australian in  New  Zealand, or Vic  Reid,  a Guyanese in  Africa, or  Peter  Abrahams, a  South  African in  Jamaica, is to observe  comparable  pro­ cesses of literary adaptation taking place. The point  is that  the  new  environment swims  somehow   into  each  writer's existing  cultural commitments.  John  Peter's Canada, therefore, becomes  as politicized  as the  South  Africa  he left  behind,  the South  Africa  that  appears in  the  works of Nadine Gordimer,  Dan  Jacobson, or Alan  Paton; and  Austin  Clarke's glimpses of Toronto in, say, The  Meeting  Point, ripple  with  all  the  racial  indignation and  implosive laughter  of  his countrymen George  Lamming and  Edward Brathwaite. When  Peter  tries  to characterize the Canadian  physiognomy, for example, a swift stereotype  results,  not  a careful  por­ trait; a character in Take Hands  at Winter  "even  looked  like a  Canadian, raw­  boned  and  rangy-a cowboy  with  a disconcertingly English  voice".  It is an out­  sider's view. In  another book,  Along  that Coast, Canadian society  comes in  for comparable description; a  Canadian visitor  to South  Africa  has  this  to say:

"In  Canada you don't  seem to be really in the world. Whatever  the real issues are today they aren't  present, or at least they aren't  tangibly present. They don't  seem to impinge. It's  in other  countries  that  the real progress seems to be going on. Not progress, I guess you'd  have  to say evolution.... Canada's a  backwater.  I don't mean  it's backward  of course, I mean it's out of touch, off centre.... What's  the most important single problem  anywhere  in the world, for  this century?  It's  the problem of race, isn't  it?  It's  our revolution, the Racial  Revolution.  It's  going on all over Africa and Asia and  the only way to get some idea of it is to come out to a place like this. The  real twentieth  century's here. We've got cars and  television and things but in Canada the century's  indeterminate.

Ignoring for  a moment the  style and  simplistic  tendencies  of the  argument, it is possible to link its viewpoint with  that  of writers like Aquin  and  Vallieres.  But to


22

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



say that  is to link  Peter  with  the  most  politicized   (and  in some  sense,  therefore, atypical) of Canadian writers. A different  approach to the  passage  would  observe what  exposure  to Canadian society has done for Peter's  own  perspective. In  exile from  a situation to which  he has a strong  moral  reaction,  he finds ways of making comparisons that  will clarify  his relationship with the moral issue;  comparison becomes  a dominant technical device,  then,  by which  his work  communicates  its political  stance.
As Peter  and  Clarke are  variously  aware,  the  racial  situation that  stirs such  a character as Laura Hunt to seek twentieth century  reality  in South  Africa  exists merely  to a different degree  in Canada itself. The  tribulations of Bernice  Leach, a West  Indian maid  in Toronto, in The  Meeting  Point, demonstrate the  matter clearly.  In some ways more  poignant, however,  is a scene in Clarke's earlier  The Survivors  of the Crossing, a novel  about  social and  economic  inequalities in  the Barbados plantation system. In it, a rebellious character named  Rufus  is disabused of his ideal  vision of Canada. A co-worker  named  Jackson, who  had  earlier  tried to  buck  the  system  and  been  run  off the  island,  has  been  writing his friends  in vivid terms:

Boysie took the crackling letter from his pocket, cleared his throat  five or six times, and  began reading it aloud.
'Dear  Rufus', he read,  paraphrasing it  to suit  the  temperament of  the  meeting.
'Life up  here in Canada  is the  same thing  as living in Goat-heaven and  Kiddy­ kingdom. ... and if  a man is a hustling kind  of man, and if any of them  fellars what  working  on the  plantation  is hustling  kinds of men, they  could  bring  home eighty,  ninety,  even  a hundred  dollars on  pay-day. That  is what  Canada  means. That  is advanced,  progressive living.'

But  when  Rufus,  in  trouble with  the  plantation authorities, actually telephones
Jackson to announce his wish to emigrate too, Jackson  says:

"You  wake me up from sleeping. I vexed as arse. I just come home from  washing off cars, and I tired as a dog. Rufus? Rufus? Lis'en to me! I say I tired as a horse. I write you a letter, but  I had  to write that  kind o' letter-But, by the  way, you not  thinking  o' making  me pay for this blasted long-distance  tellyphone  call, eh?
'Cause  I is a car-washer, and  the money is only eighty cents a' hour! Rufus?  You still there?  I sorry to paint  a technicolour  picture  o' the  place, but, Jesus Christ, man!  I couldn't  let you know that  up here in this country  is the same slavery as what  I run from back in the island-you understand, Rufus?  Rufus?"

The passage  carries  an  emotional authority even  if stopped at  that   point, but
Clarke has  another purpose in mind  as well;  he wants  not  simply  to  probe  the

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



ways in which a whole class of people is socially enslaved, but also to demonstrate the  ambivalent  effects of the  difference  between  the reality  of a  place and  the ostensible realities that  get marketed  to people outside it. He makes his character Boysie pick up the dangling  telephone  receiver that  Rufus has abandoned, there­ fore, accept matter-of-factly how Rufus has been misled, but in the same breath ask Jackson  blandly  to send him a Roy Rogers shirt. Though  empirical  realities are openly articulated, the stereotype somehow lives on in a different  compart­ ment of Boysie's mind.  The  capacity  for endurance that  that  represents mingles with an awareness at the same time of its blind, perhaps obstinate inaccuracy. The  laughter  that  Clarke  demands  from  his reader  by the end  of the scene is there­ fore tinged  with  both  fond  amusement  and  savage  irony. The  combination  of humanitarian and  reformist  principles that  guides the author's stance  makes his satire  gentle towards  individuals  like Boysie, but  with types and  institutions  and liberal pretension it is concurrently  severe. Canada, the pretend-liberal  benefactor and absentee landlord  in the Caribbean, comes in, therefore, for searing exposure.
Earle Birney's South  American  poems spell out the extent to which Canadians he observes share  in  many  of the  material  grossnesses of  North  American  life; characters  like the lady monologuist of "Most of a dialogue in Cuzco" participate in  all  the  narrowmindedness of  the  Oregon  truck-driver  in  "Billboards  Build Freedom of Choice".  In so far as Madison Avenue has educated  Canadian taste, the glimpses of America  that  one finds in Balachandra  Rajan's Too  Long in the West  pertain  to  Canada too.  The  satiric  tone  is dispassionate,  however,  and though critical, somewhat bemused. Unlike Clarke's characters, Rajan's touring Indian  student  Nalini  manages  to  adapt  successfully to  her  new environment; though  she is unrealistic  before she arrives in New York, for example, she does not have to surrender her preconceived illusions because life in New York appears to be so bizarre  that  she can  translate  it into  her own terms. The  result of her initial encounter  with the city is one of the book's most splendidly comic scenes:

She seated herself precisely on a swivelling stool that was designed for someone with fourteen and a half inch hips. She disdained to reach for the menu; she had already read articles about American cuisine and knew  what she should order to qualify as a citizen.
'I'll  have Boston clam chowder,' she said, 'and  roast stuffed, young Vermont
turkey. With golden-brown, melt-in-your-mouth Idaho  potatoes. And king-sized, tree-ripened California peaches.'
'We got chop suey,' the girl said, 'and Swedish meat balls and Swiss steak. But
e

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



'Then I'll  have  a  hamburger,' Nalini  insisted,  doggedly.
'You  want  it with  French fries?'
'I want  it,'  said  Nalini, clenching her  pretty  teeth,  'with   potatoes that  taste  of American earth, fried  in  the  only  way  they  should  be,  in  butter fresh  as  a  New England welcome.  And  then  I'll  have  pie  like your  grandmother used  to  bake  it when  America was  real  and  itself.'
'You  mean,  home  fried,'  the girl reproved her. 'Why  don't you say so instead  of
letting your  hair  down?  And  the  pie's  ten cents  extra  with  French ice-cream.' With  a sigh of resignation, Nalini  settled  down  to her international repast. When
it was over, she took again  to the roads of discovery. A tree-ripened smile beckoned to her  from  the  shop  window  opposite.  She  walked  up  and  looked  cautiously into the  face.  It belonged   to a  man  with  a  Louisiana shrimp complexion.
'I want   some  Palestinian  oranges,' Nalini   said.  She  had   learned  her   lesson well. To  be truly  American one  had  to be exotic.
'What's wrong  with  Florida?' the man  demanded grimly.
'I'm sorry,'  she apologised. 'I've been on the wrong  side of the  street.  I'll  take  a half-dozen, sun-drenched, passion-kissed  tangerines.'
He  looked  at  her  approvingly. 'You  sure  know what's good  for  you.'  He  tossed
some photogenic fruit  into  a bag and  played  an  amorous tune  on  his cash  register.
'They're sixty-eight   cents  a  dozen  and  worth  double.  Wrapped in  cellophane to seal  in  the  goodness.  Want anything else, honey?  The  egg  plant   today  is  super­ special.'
Her  faith  in America was restored. Here  was a civilisation  that  grew  eggs instead of hatching them.  It seemed  rather a pointless  thing  to do, but  creative energy  in its nature often  had  to be pointless....
'I'll take two of them," she said.

With Rajan, Clarke, Peter and others we find  writers responding both to speci­ fic locales and  to  the  idea  of  North America, the  issues and attitudes that  North American society   represents in  their own   culture. When the   Guyanese  novelist Wilson Harris  responds to  Malcolm Lowry, by  contrast, finding in  his  work

a drama of living  consciousness,  a drama within  which  one  responds not  only  to the  overpowering and  salient   features of  the  plane  of  existence   . . . but   to  the essence of life, to the instinctive grains  of life which  continue striving and  working in the  imagination for fulfilment, a visionary  character of fulfilment,2

he is responding not  to Canada and  the  Canadians but  to the  fictional world that exists  within Malcolm Lowry's own  books.  Harris's range of  response is  remark­ ably  wide, of course; he  finds  "daring intimations" of  visionary  fulfilment

in the  peculiar style and  energy  of Australian novelists like Patricia White and  Hal
Porter, a  French novelist  like  Claude Simon,  an  English/Canadian novelist  like

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



Malcolm Lowry and an African problematic writer like Tutuola.  Lowry's novel Under  the Volcano  is set in  Mexico where it achieves a  tragic reversal of the material climate of our time, assisted by residual images, landscape as well as the melting pot of history, instinctive to the cultural environment of the Central and South Americas.

Such endeavour imaginatively  to discover and distil the patterns  that emerge from the  "native  life and  passion"  characterizes  Harris's  own  work  and  incidentally helps give it its challenge. One  route into it is through the relationship  with other Commonwealth writers to whom  Harris has expressed an affinity; in discovering their worlds, they seek their culture's  imaginative soul, they seek to transcend  the material  landscape  in order  to be enfranchised in the discovery of spiritual illum­ ination.  The  particulars will vary from society to society; the literary  techniques may  differ;  the  purpose  of the  task and  the  quality  of the  response,  however, remain  essentially the same.
Something  of the same symbiotic relationship accounts for the Australian  poet A. D. Hope's response toP. K. Page. Page's own reactions to Australia-couched in poems like "Cook's  Mountains" or "Bark  Drawing",  with  their  evocation  of the simple power of private sight-express a characteristically  personal reflection of a visited landscape.  Hope,  by contrast -though equally in character  for him
-manages to respond to Page herself, and to her language,  country,  and point­ of-view, in such a way as to intellectualize about the nature and function of poetry. The  key poem  to  pay  tribute  to  Page is called "Soledades  of the  Sun  and  the Moon",  written in 1957 and  included in her Collected Poems. Its title draws for its metaphor on Page's 1944 novel The  Sun and the Moon;  what Hope does with it is apply it to the difference  between the Australian  and  Canadian sensibilities as exemplified in the work of Page and himself, and  to celebrate  the meeting of these "solitudes":

The hemispheres set their crystal walls between.... Yet, through the burning circles of desire, Immortal spirits behold, each in the other:
His pillar of flame serene,
She, the unknown somnambulist of her fire.

Only in space, not time, the pattern changes: Over your land of memory, enchanted
Glides the Celestial Swan, and in your bitter Darkness the She-Bear shambles round the Pole; Anvils of summer, in mine, the iron ranges

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



Rise from its arid heart to see the haunted
River  of Light  unroll
Towards  Achemar, where Hermes  the transmitter
Of spirits, herald  of men and gods, has granted
Speech  between soul and  soul,
And each to each the Swan and  Phoenix glitter.

The  mortal  hearts of poets first engender The  parleying of those immortal  creatures; Then from their interchange  create  unending Orbits of song and  colloquies of light....

Accept  the incantation  of this verse;
Read  its plain words; diving the secret message
By which the dance itself reveals a notion
That moves our universe.
In  the star rising or the lost leaf falling
The  life of poetry, this enchanted  motion, Perpetually  recurs.
Take, then, this homage of our craft and calling!




E FACT THAT  we  can  locate  so  many   points  of  contact between  Canadian and   other   Commonwealth literatures indicates the  possible existence  of meaningful parallels  between  them. There are  parallels among topics and  ideas; political  issues, ethical  questions,  and  problems  related  to  the  motiva­ tion  of human behaviour, for example,  all transcend national  boundaries. There are  parallels  that  derive from  particular literary  associations, and  from  the  chang­ ing  patterns of taste  and  style. When  the  contemporary  Australian poet  Michael Dransfield  writes  "I'm the  ghost  haunting an  old  house,  my  poems are  posthu­ mous",3  it is impossible  not  to be reminded of  fragments from  the  second  book of bp nichol's  The  Martyrology:

stein did say
the hardest  thing is making the present continuous living day to day

iwant to explain
as composition does
only this present moment

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES


now actually  past knowing the words are
1 am

this moment  is
everything  present  & tense
i write despite my own misgivings say things as they do occur
the mind moves truly is it free
nothing's  free of presence others pressing in
your friends  assert themselves as loving you are tortured  with gradually  you learn  to enjoy

thus you write a history


And  there  are  parallels in  time; one  effect  of  mass  media   communication  has been  to synchronize countries in disparate time  zones, to  make  knowledge of an event  anywhere in the  world  an  almost  instantaneous occurrence elsewhere.  In  a looser way, one can see shifts from  colonial  to national sensibilities  occurring with approximate contemporaneity-for the "Old" Commonwealth at the end  of the nineteenth century, and  for  the  "New" one  in  the  middle  of the  twentieth. And one  can  seek  an  instructive relationship between  the  attitudes and   concerns of the  European-centred societies and  those of the Third World  with  their acknowl­ edgment of radically different traditions. When  in separate studies Claude Bissell and   John  Matthews have  examined  the  "common  ancestry" of   Canada and  Australia,  the  "problems that   were  basically  similar,   even   though  they   often worked  out solutions  that  were startlingly different",4   they acknowledge the  liter­  ary  perspective one  can  gain  from  such  comparative study.  A  familiarity with literary  history  and  with  the crosscurrents of literary thought can  modify  not only our  understanding of past  accomplishments but  also our estimation and  interpre­ tation of the  present. As the  New  Zealand  poet  and critic  Kendrick Smithyman puts  it somewhat later:

Aware of our openness to influence  [today], we are ... inclined  to think of earlier phases as significantly  non-involved  or independent.... If there  was ... a trans- cending sense of being a colonial, then  it gained  strength  from  direct  connection with other  colonials, fellows of an expansive, and  not  just North  American,  New

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



World. If likeness between  physical situations  was credible,  so too were  credible likenesses of social situation  and social problems, particularly  when like aspirations were in  play....  Influencing  under  such conditions  was not  simply  'being  influ­ enced',  but an affair of participation, of exchange.... The  commonwealth of com­ monwealth  literature has a good deal more to be explored.5

It would  be dangerous, however,  after  finding  recurrent sensibilities,  after  noting opportunities for influence and  actualities of response, after  tracing historical  ties and  cultural parallels,  to assume  that  the  Commonwealth has  produced a coher­ ent  community of literary  artists  or to affirm the existence  of a single  "Common­ wealth   Literature". The  points   of  contact  allow  certain   overlap;   even   more strongly-as  critics  like  Matthews, George  Whalley,  and  R.  E.  Watters 6   have variously   noted-they  emphasize  the  extent   to  which   differing  environments encourage artists  to  develop  along  different  lines,  to invigorate  the  English  lan­ guage  with  their  own society's  rhythms, images,  and  connotations, to cast univer­ sal humanity into  particular social moulds,  to draw upon  local  and  specific truths for the concrete  realization of their  vision.
At best such a process would  prove a genuinely  creative  endeavour, at once documenting the  empirical realities  of  a  region  and  illuminating the  recurrent mental, emotional, and  spiritual dilemmas of mankind. But  the  pressure  to sepa­ rate  these literary  functions is strong,  particularly in newer  literatures,  where,  as Balachandra Rajan notes,  writer  and  committed citizen  are  one  and  the  same, and  the  temptation exists to devise a work of art  that  will yield  primarily to the social   historian. Rajan  distinguishes pointedly   between   such   commitment  to nationality, or what  he calls "the establishing  of a collective myth or image", and a  concern for  identity, "the process  of creative  self-realization"  to  which  every true  artist  is necessarily  dedicated. He writes:

A sense of nationality  can grow out of the discovery of identity  and  it is important that this should happen  frequently, if one is to establish a tradition that  is both distinctive  and  rooted.  But  while  identities  may  cohere  into  a  nationality,   that emerging  myth or image should  not be used as a frame within  which  the  artist  is obliged to discover himself, or by which the value of his discovery is to be judged.7

Professor  Carl  Klinck  alludes  to a similar  distinction  when  in  his "Introduction" to the  Literary  History  of Canada, he distinguishes  between  "whatever is native, or has been naturalized, or has a direct  bearing  upon  the native" and  "a chauvin­ istic hunt  for 'Canadianism' ".The latter, which  he rejects,  would limit  the  free­ dom from  national boundaries that  art implicitly  enjoys;  the former, to which  his

COMMONWEALTH RESPONSES



work  has  been  dedicated, seeks that  "studied knowledge  of ourselves  and  of our own  ways"  without which   neither artist  nor  critic  can  satisfactorily render   the truths of experience.
In  noting  how  individual writers  exert  their  characteristic will upon  the influ­ ences  that   bear  upon  them, we see the  process  of "creative  self-realization" in action.  To the extent  that  they participate in any given culture, they communicate the  basic  attitudes and  assumptions that  inform  that  culture's traditions; to the extent  that  they commit themselves also to the reality of their  private vision, such traditions become  transcended, transformed, and  re-created in the  fabrication of each  new work of art. The relation between Canadian and  other  Commonwealth writing  offers us one arena in which  to seek that  triumph of artistry: finding  it is what  engages  and  continually electrifies  us as readers  of literature.


NOTES

1 "Ten  Years' Sentences," Canadian  Literature, no. 4I  (Summer,  Ig6g),  I3·
2  "Tradition and  the West Indian Novel," Tradition  the Writer  and Society  (Lon­
don:  New Beacon, I g67) , 34·
8  Quoted  in Thomas  W. Shapcott, ed., Australian  Poetry Now  (Melbourne:  Sun, I970),203.
4  Claude  Bissell, "A Common  Ancestry:  Literature in Australia  and  Canada," Uni­ versity of Toronto  Quarterly, XXV,  no. 2  (January  I956),  I42; cf.  J. P. Matthews, Tradition in Exile  (Toronto: University of Toronto,  I g62) .
5   "The Common  Experience,  the  Common  Response," Journal  of Commonwealth
Literature, VI  (June  I971), I7-I8.
6  George Whalley, "Celebration and  Elegy in New Zealand  Verse," Queens  Quar­ terly, LXXIV  ( I967), 738-753;  R.  E. Watters,  "Original   Relations,"  Canadian Literature,  no. 7 (Winter,  Ig6I), 6-I7, and "A Quest for National  Identity," Pro­ ceedings of the 3rd Congress of the International  Comparative  Literature  Associa­ tion  (The  Hague: Mouton,  Ig62), 224-241.
7   "Identity and  Nationality," in  John  Press, ed., Commonwealth Literature  (Lon­
don:  Heinemann Educational, I g65) , I o6.


THE UNITED STATES AT JALNA,

]. G. Snell


LJALNA   NOVELS are  best known  for their  evocation  of the  British ideal  in a  Canadian setting. The  Whiteoaks are  the  epitome  of the
British heritage  in Canada-haughty, aristocratic,  conservative,  bound  strongly together as a family in a rural  homestead of considerable tradition. And  yet with English Canadians, loyalty and support for the Empire and for things British have always been paralleled by a rejection of the United States. Recent studies of  Cana­ dian imperialist  thought  have examined  in depth  the relationships between  anti­  Americanism  and  Canadian imperialism. 2    Certainly  for  Mazo  de  la  Roche  the image of the United  States played an important role in supporting  the pro-British sentiment  and  life-style so predominant at Jalna.
The  period  in which  the Jalna  novels were written  ( 1927-1960)  was one  of considerable  anxiety in Canada  regarding  the American  cultural  "take-over" of the Dominion,  Royal commissions expressed their concern for the potential  loss of Canadian identity and the growing intrusion of American popular  culture; move­ ments and  journals led by Canadian intellectuals showed similar fears.  Even the federal government  was moved to action, however moderate: the Aird  Cominis­ sion,  the   Massey  Commission,  the  Canadian  Broadcasting   Corporation,  the National  Film Board, the Canada  Council. In the late twenties and early thirties, when the outlines of Jalna  were being created and  determined, Canadian atten­  tion to such  problems was very strong, with a  good  deal of thrust  and  vigour  to their  proposals and  actions.3  At the same time, however, there  was an  apprecia­  tion of American  success, prosperity,  and  well-being that  fostered  among  Cana­ dians some desires for emulation.



ONE PERSON at  Jalna,  Alayne Archer,  symbolizes  Ameri­ cans. Born and  raised in New England,  she appears  in the first novel  written  in the series as the wife of Eden  Whiteoak.  Before long she has been  seduced  by

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA



Renny  Whiteoak, and  this is followed  by her divorce  from  Eden  and  marriage to Renny,  the family  patriarch and  the standard of Canadian and  Whiteoak against which  all  other   family   members   must  measure   themselves.  At  the  same   time Alayne  is  never  shorn   of  her  American background. "Though  she  had  spent almost  half her life in a British  country  she was still very conscious of her Ameri­ can  roots. She subscribed to  the  more  intellectual of American  periodicals. She kept  in touch  with  what  was going  on in the  political  scene."4   The marriage of the  representative figures  of Canadianism and  Americanism is  never  a  real  or  a rewarding union.  They  have separate bedrooms; quarrels are frequent; communi­ cation  is difficult  and  sometimes impossible; at  one  point  a  lengthy  separation occurs.  In  truth Alayne  never  fits in. She is often  at Jalna, but  is never  a part  of it. In Variable Winds  at ]alna, we read:

It seemed to Alayne that  the long yellow velour curtains at the windows of  dining­ room  and  library  with  which  Renny  refused  to  part  laughed  at  her.  As they heavily undulated in the warm summer breeze they seemed to say, "We shall hang here when you are gone." In  truth she sometimes felt that  the very essence of the house was antagonistic  to her....

And later:

"If you  [Alayne]   are  not  one of the  [Whiteoak] clan  after  all  these years,"  he
[FitzturgisJ  said, "can  I ever hope to be?"

Alayne  never  joins with  the  Whiteoaks  fully and  never really comes to understand them.   Of   her  two  children,  one   (Adeline)  takes  after   Renny   and   the  other (Archer) resembles Alayne  in character and outlook.  It is noteworthy that  Archer too  never seems to feel at  home  at Jalna.
In  not admitting Alayne  into  the family  while retaining her  presence through­ out  the story since  the mid-twenties, Mazo  de la Roche  was clearly manipulating this character in  order  to demonstrate that  there  are  differences  between  Cana­ dians  and  Americans. Language  and  geography   might   throw  the  two  peoples together, but  beliefs, attitudes, heritage  and  sentiment would  continue to impose barriers between  the  two  countries. While  Canada and  the  United States  might  live beside one another, they would  never truly join together. For although Alayne  and  Renny  do  join  together in  the sense of being  married  and  having  children, there is no fundamental union in the realm of spiritual harmony. Whatever attrac­ tions  exist  (and continue to  exist)   between  the  two, fundamental and  deep-set differences  make  for  very uneasy  bed-partners.

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA



Time  and  again  throughout the  Jalna series the  United States  is employed as a  symbol  of  wealth,   prosperity  and   economic   success.  Alayne   personifies   this image,   particularly in  the  first  novel,  ]alna. When   she  first  arrives   at  Jalna, Alayne  is accepted (in  part,  at  least)  because  of her supposed   wealth:

... as a matter  of fact  Meg did  not greatly desire the love of Alayne. She rather liked her,  though  she found  her hard  to talk to, -'terribly  different,' -and she told her grandmother that  Alayne was a 'typical American girl.' "I won't  have it," Grandmother had growled, getting  red, and Meg had hastened  to add,  "But  she's very agreeable, Gran,  and  what  a blessing it is that  she has money!"

When  Alayne's  aunt arrives  at  Jalna, the same  image  is-in  White,oak  Harvest
-invoked:

"Just  what  is Miss Archer's  position?" asked Ernest.  "She  looks like a million dollars."
"Well-she  owns a very nice house which she has let  [said  Renny]. But she
has had very heavy losses. I didn't  inquire  into them. You know what  Americans are. They cry poverty if they have to do without  their accustomed  luxuries."
The  minds of the  uncles were profoundly relieved. They  lost no time in letting the  rest of  the  family  know  that  Miss Archer's  losses had  still  left  her  affluent. There  was nothing  to fear from her; possibly something  to gain.

Canadians generally  have a well developed  image  of the United States  as a prosperous,  well-to-do  region  whose  inhabitants have  a  natural ability  to  make money. In  particular Canadians often feel that  Americans have  a shrewd, almost uncanny sense of a good  bargain. Miss de  la  Roche  makes  effective  use of  this image.  At  one  time,  in Variable  Winds  at  ]alna, Renny  was contemplating the purchase of a  rather expensive  colt,  East  Wind.  He  felt  that   the  price  was  too steep  until  an  American arrived and  began  to  extol  the  virtues  of  the  animal. Such  remarks  enhanced the  horse's  value  in  Renny's mind,  and  he  quickly  pur­ chased  the  colt.  At  another time,  the  Whiteoaks  dabbled in  the  boom  mining shares  in the  192o's.  An  American, Mr.  Kronk,  repeatedly increased the  attrac­ tiveness of the shares  by saying  that  Americans were "gobbling them  up".5  This  same  Mr. Kronk  represents the standard Canadian image of an American shyster. The  entire  issue of these Indigo Lake mining  shares was false; Kronk managed to swindle a number of Whiteoaks out of many  thousands of  dollars.
But  more  generally  there  is a  favourable economic  image  of  the  States.  The Republic had  been  a source  of  wealth  and  opportunity for  Mazo  de  la  Roche and  her  family,  and   that   country fulfills  many  of  the  same  functions for  the

33

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA



Whiteoaks. It is a  place  where  one  can  "exploit" one's  abilities  to  the  greatest advantage, as  in  the  case  of  Eden's writings.  Americans set  an  example to  be followed:

... Finch sought advice on the subject of the New York stock. Meg  and  Maurice threw  themselves into  the  discussion of it with enthusiasm.  He  would  be a fool, they said, not  to take advantage of such an opportunity.  Why should  Americans have  all  the  money  in  the  world?  And  if  they  had  got  it,  why should  they  be allowed to keep it? Finch  could do no better than  to bring some of it here where it was so badly needed. He might  become a rich man. 6

The  United States was even looked on favourably as a developer of Canada's resources:

The  dark  hand  of the waiter  taking up the tip pleased him  [Ernest], the faces of the other  passengers interested.  Round-faced, shrewd looking New York  business men, some of them. He thought  rather  ruefully:  "Been looking after  their interests in Canada, I suppose.... Well, if we haven't  the initiative or capital  to develop our own country,  and  if the Mother  Country  doesn't do it, why, there's  nothing  for it but  to let the Americans  undertake it."7

De la Roche  has thus  clearly  realized  the  dichotomy  in Canadian economic  atti­ tudes  towards the  American Republic. There is a love-hate   relationship.  While Canadians  worship   or  envy  American success  and   attempt  to  emulate  their example, they  also criticize  and  mock  Yankee  acquisitiveness and  materialism.



l:E UNITED  STATES also assumes  an  image  of  culture and sophistication in the Jalna novels. American magazines  and  an American publish­ ing house are  the means  whereby  Eden  is able to gain success as a poet. The  only new  books at  Jalna are  those  sent  out  to Alayne  from  her  friends in  New  York City. The United States  is frequently pictured as a centre  of culture  where  one is able to appreciate the finer things in life. The  Republic is also regarded as being more  sophisticated and   progressive.  On  arriving in  Manhattan, Eden  felt  that  these  "New Yorkers  would  surely  look on  him  as a  Canadian backwoodsman."8
When another member of the  family  returns from  that  city,  Meg  greets  him:

"To  think,"  she exclaimed,  "that you have  been in  New York since  I  saw you last!" She regarded  him as if she expected to find something exotic in him. "What you must have seen!"9

One  is left with  a decided  impression  of Canadian feelings of inferiority.


34

UNITED STATES AT  J ALNA



Yet  at the  same time the  author has  captured the  prejudice that  Canadians feel   quite  deeply    towards  America.  The  Whiteoaks frequently  lash    out   at Americans.

"Prejudices," put  in  Philip.
"Very well. Prejudices. Prejudice against  making  a fetish of material progress­ against  all  the  hurry-scurry after  money  that  goes on  in  the  big  American cities. They [our  settler  ancestors]  wanted   to  lead  contented peaceful  lives  and   teach their  children to fear  God,  honour the Queen, fight  for  her  if  necessary.  In  short,  behave  like gentlemen." [said  Admiral Lacey]  10

And:

"What Adeline  should  have  been  doing  in  these past  months," said  Alayne,  "is  to have gone to a university. I very much  wanted to enter  her at Smith, as you know." "Never heard  of it,"  declared Nicholas.  "Where is it?"

"It is the most notable women's college on  the continent," she returned. "Never heard  of it,"  he persisted, and  emptied his teacup  with  audible gusto.

"I myself  am  a  graduate of  Smith  College." Alayne  spoke  with  a  little  asperity. "Ha," returned the  old  man.  "That  accounts for  the  only fault   you  have." Alayne looked  enquiringly at  him.
"An  air  of superiority, my dear."11

The materialistic and aggressive nature of American society  is frequently noted. Says   Ernest: "What is there for   you  in  New  York?   Crowds,  crowds, crowds. Struggle, struggle. You,  a  Whiteoak, struggling in  a  foreign mob! Uncongenial work. Homesickness...."12   American society  is represented as  matriarchal;  hus­ bands are  pictured as unmanly and submissive. In reference to  Alayne, we  read:

"It is all  the  fault  of  that  American woman," explained Meg.  "She is utterly selfish. She is ruining my brother's life with  her lack of understanding."
"They are  incompatible. That  is all  there  is to it,"  added  Piers.
. . . "She  is a  very subtle  woman," said  Meg.  "And   a  very  determined one.  She intends to stay away  until  Renny is thoroughly upset. She  intends to frighten him. Then when  his spirit  is broken,  she will come  back  to Jalna. She  is determined  to make  an American husband of him." 13

Such a well  developed image of American marriage serves  as  a  decided contrast to  Jalna (certainly after Gran's death, and in  some  respects before)  where the male dominates and controls developments.


35

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA





l:E OUTLINES of the American image had already been well defined by the series as a whole when Morning  at  ]alna was published  in 1g6o. Although  it was the  final  novel written  in the Jalna  series, it was situated  in  a very early time period. The  American  Civil War provides the setting for a weak plot involving Southern  agents in Canada,  Confederate schemes and a raid against the  North,  black slaves, and  some Southern  guests at  the  Whiteoak  homestead. Many  of the major  characters of the Jalna  series are, of course, absent,  notably Alayne and  Renny  and  their  generation.  And yet one is struck  by the continuity of themes presented by Mazo de la Roche in her image of the United  States. Here in this final work the symbol of the American  Republic  is most fully developed.
Lucy and Curtis Sinclair  have been invited to stay at Jalna  by their friends, the Whiteoaks,  until  the  War  ends.  The  Sinclair  home in Southern   Carolina  has been ruined  and  their  plantation destroyed. The  novel clearly attempts  (and  not too successfully) to evoke some sympathy for these Southerners  and to encourage antipathy towards  the  North.  In  the  immediate  context  of  the  War,  Yankee devastation  of Confederate areas  is emphasized;  Northern  forces have  brought with  them  ruin,  property  destruction,  looting, and  rape.  Southern  plans to raid Union  shipping on the Great  Lakes are commended:

Adeline [i.e., Gran]  threw herself on her plump down pillows, her body quiver- ing with excitement.
"What  a glorious revenge!" she said.
"By Jove," he [Philip]  said, "you have a wicked grin."
"I feel wicked when I think of those despicable Yankees."

Destruction  and  killing by Confederate  forces was only fair, given the actions of the North.
The  Whiteoaks' guests are representative figures of that  familiar stereotype, the
Cavalier  society of the  South.14   Both are  well educated,  cultured,  and  refined. Curtis  Sinclair  had  been educated  in France,  while Lucy had  studied  music in Europe.  Curtis  was  a  Southern   gentleman,  "a  figure of  dignity.  An  arresting figure", and dressed "in  the height of fashion".

Outwardly he was as tranquil,  as charming as a Southern gentleman should be. "Ah, what a manner  that man has!" Adeline exclaimed to Philip.

Lucy Sinclair was "an  exotic type", elegant, and dressed in Paris gowns purchased on a visit to France  before the War. The Sinclairs have roots, tradition,  a family

UNITED STATES AT   JALNA



heritage.  Just  before their  arrival,  Adeline is portrayed  as being very concerned that the well-to-do, sophisticated Sinclairs will disapprove of the lack of "real elegance",  of servants, and of entertainment at Jalna; she wishes that  there  were an  entire suite of rooms for such visitors, rather  than  "a  paltry  bedroom  and  a cubby-hole for Mrs. Sinclair's maid." The Whiteoaks go out of their way to accommodate  the Sinclairs. The children are sent away for several days to provide the Southerners  with peace and quiet. Adeline and  Philip "dress" for dinner  and "put  our best foot foremost" to impress their guests.
Even the question of slavery is dealt with sympathetically. At various times we are informed  that  the Sinclairs own a large plantation  with one hundred  slaves, and  then  "great  plantations and  hundreds  of slaves";  Curtis'  father  has several large estates and seven hundred slaves. And yet the Sinclairs hate slavery, accord­ ing  to  the  Whiteoaks.  The   blacks  are  retained  in  bondage  because  they  are dependent  on their white owners; the slaves are happy and contented; even after being freed, the blacks do not drift  away, but  rather  remain  on the estates to be clothed and fed.
In contrast  to this favourable  image of the Cavalier  South  (which  the  reader well knows has been destroyed by the defeat of the South in the War), the Yankee is also introduced into the plot. The Northern soldier, as already mentioned, is portrayed  in  negative  terms. The  Lincolns are  uncouth  and  "know  nothing  of good manners". Yankees are  aggressive and  commercially grasping;  it was their greed which first introduced  slavery into the South. Curtis Sinclair declares:

They're the people who have made money and are still making it. They sold the slaves to us in the first place.

Later in the story, Mazo de Ia Roche briefly introduces a New England  merchant, Mr. Tilford.  The stereotype is finely drawn.  He "was a shrewd  business  man­ still youngish, with a future  far from dark  ahead  of him"  and  through  relatives had prospered in the cotton trade  with England.  Tilford  is a  rich, clever, knowl­ edgeable,  unemotional,  hard-headed, able, firm  New  England  entrepreneur in the typical Yankee mould.



Y.T THESE   CONTRASTING IMAGES of  Cavalier  and  Yankee create in the reader some nagging uncertainties. There  is evoked no simple com­ mitment  to the cause of the South. The Sinclairs are not entirely likeable. Curtis is  physically deformed,  a  hunchback,  and  this  characteristic  seems  to  play  no

37

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA



important role in the story except to raise certain  emotions in the reader. Slightly repulsive physically, Mr. Sinclair presents a somewhat ludicrous picture of a Con­ federate  warrior  riding  off to mortal  combat  with  the foe. This element  of  bur­ lesque is underlined  when the raid itself, after  considerable  planning and subter­ fuge, is thwarted   with  ease. The  Sinclairs do not  like children,  a  characteristic  almost guaranteed to cause at least partial  alienation  of the reader and  certainly presenting  a  contrast   with  the  Whiteoaks.  The  slaves are  ill-treated   by  their owners;  the servants  brought  to Jalna are  poorly clothed,  but Sinclair  does not care. After all the talk of Northern  destruction  and  ruin of  the Confederacy,  the Sinclairs remain  wealthy. In describing conditions in the South  at the end of the War, Adeline declares:

Ruin, James, ruin. But Curtis Sinclair has bought a fine house in Charleston, or what is left of Charleston. They beg us to visit them when conditions are more favourable.

At  the  end  of the  novel, the  Sinclairs suddenly  reappear  on  a ship  bound  for England.  They are affluent, have enough money for a business holiday in Britain in good style, and  are making  excellent profits from the cotton  trade.  American "know-how" and  commercial  ability is stronger even than  the Cavalier  image of the South, and  this idea appears  elsewhere as well. All of these elements combine to  moderate   considerably  any  compassion  one  may  have  for  the  Confederate States.
While the North,  then,  has a decidedly negative image, the representations  of the South are certainly ambivalent. This ambivalence is found also amongst Cana­ dians in Morning  at  ]alna. While the  Whiteoaks  are clearly  sympathetic  to  the South  and  opposed  to the  North,  contrasting  attitudes  appear  very early in the book. Two neighbouring families are strongly "on  the side of the Yankees". The Busbys consider  Lincoln  to be "a  splendid  man";  they  pray  daily for the  Presi­ dent and for their son who has joined the Northern Army. So opposed to slavery (and  this is the determining  issue) is this family of U.E.L. descent that  they refuse to enter  Jalna  while  the  Southerners  are there,  and  the  Busbys succeed in dis­ covering and  foiling the  plans for a  raid. And yet even Elihu  Busby has mixed feelings.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Whiteoaks,  the  Laceys, James  Wilmott,  and  Lucius
Madigan  are all opposed to the North.  No wonder  that  young Nicholas asserts:

If I were grown I shouldn't  mind going to that  war. The  trouble is I shouldn't

UNITED STATES AT  JALNA



know which side to fight on. Our friends are all for the North, but our mother and father and you [Madigan]  are for the South.

Despite  the North's  opposition  to slavery, the  Canadians at  Jalna   (who  also disliked slavery)  in this novel sympathized  with the Confederates  for  two major reasons. First,  the  South  had  a  social structure   and  a  civilization  which  was admired.  This has already  been indicated  in the images of the Sinclairs, but it is also found in the depiction  of the South itself. "How  I should  love to see  Rich­ mond!" proclaimed Adeline. "The very name captivates  me. It's so romantic,  so civilized, while here  we are  in the wilds." Second, the  Confederate  States  were the victims of Northern  aggression. The War was being fought, Augusta informed little Ernest, because the Yankees would not allow the Southerners  to keep their slaves in peace. Southern  agents were planning  raids because they "don't want to see our  [their]  country swallowed up by the Yankees." This  was something  with which  the  Whiteoaks  and  their  friends  could  empathize; it  could  happen   to British North America.

"Before many years" -Madigan spoke sombrely -"this country will be taken by the Americans."
"We have the North Pole," said Ernest. "The  Americans can't  take that  from
us."
"Wait  and see," said Madigan.



ERE	thus a number of constant elements to the symbol of the United States and Americans in the Jalna novels.15  The  culture  and sophis­ tication of the Republic  (or the South)  is there; all Americans seem to possess the economic ability, acquisitiveness, and wealth of the Yankee. But most important, the  United  States  and  Canada are  different,  even  in  conflict.  Americans  are aggressive, self-confident,  and  sometimes even  "cocky".  The  Republic   and  its people are a threat  to the inhabitants of the Dominion. Physical seizure, cultural  and  econoxnic take-over,  the  changing  way  of life in  the  Twentieth  Century (represented  in  part  by  noisy, disharmonious-but  vibrant-big  city  life in Manhattan) -all  of  these  represent  important  threats to  the  way  of  life  at JalnajCanada.
The  image of the  United  States  at Jalna  acts as an  effective counterpoise  to
the British-Canadian  environment which predominates  the rural  and  family set­
ting in the novels. American  characteristics  and  trends  are  used as a  means  of


39

UNITED STATES  AT JALNA



emphasizing by contrast the  British  aspects of the  Whiteoaks. But  more  than  this, the attitudes of rural  Ontario towards the United  States are  portrayed as a means of revealing  more  fully the kind  of people -the kind of British  Canadians -the Whiteoaks are.  Attitudes towards the  United  States  have  always  been  an  impor­ tant   element   within   Canadian  thought, and   Miss  de  la  Roche has  effectively caught the general  thrust  of Canadian images of the Republic. The animosity, the prejudice, the  criticism,  the  envy,  the emulation, and  the respect are all captured in the  representation of the  Whiteoaks. The  Jalna novels are  an  interesting and valuable reflection  of one  author's assessment  (however  idealized)  of the  nature of the  English-Canadian environment in  the  first half  of  the  twentieth  century.


NOTES

1 I would like to acknowledge  the very helpful comments of my colleague, Professor
D. M. Daymond,  on earlier  drafts  of this article.
2   Carl  Berger, The  Sense of Power: Studies in the  Ideas of Canadian  Imperialism, I867-1914  (Toronto, I970); Norman  Penlington, Canada and Imperialism, 1Bg6- I899  (Toronto, I965).
8 See for example:  A. MacMechan, "Canada as a Vasal State," Canadian  Historical Review, I, 4  (December  I 920),  pp. 347-353; P. E. Corbett,  "Anti-Americanism," Dalhousie  Review, X, 3  (Autumn, I930),  pp. 295-300; "American Influences  in
the  Dominion,"  Round  Table, 43  (June   I92 I), pp. 67 I-675;  J. E. O'Brien,  "A
History  of the  Canadian Radio  League,  I930-I936,"  Ph.D.  thesis, University  of
Southern  California,  I964;  J. C.  Weaver,  "Canadians Confront   American  Mass
Culture,  I9I8-I930," unpublished  paper delivered to the Canadian  Historical Asso­
ciation  annual  meeting at Montreal,  I972.
4  Mazo de la Roche,  Renny's  Daughter  (London,  I953),  pp. 5-6.
5  Mazo de la Roche, Whiteoak Brothers: ]alna-1923  (Toronto, I953),  pp. 54, 83, I6o,  I62.
6  Mazo de la Roche, Finch's Fortune  (London,  I93I), p. 92.
1 Mazo de la Roche, Whiteoaks of ]alna (Toronto,  I929),  p. I44.
8  Jalna, p. 103.
9  Whiteoaks of ]alna, p. I92·
11 Mazo de la Roche, Mary Wakefield  (Toronto,  I949),  p. 54·
11 Renny's  Daughter, pp. 5-6.
12  Whiteoaks of Jalna, p. I56.
13 Finch's Fortune, p. 3I8.
14 For  an  excellent  analysis of this image in American  literature  see W. R. Taylor, Cavalier and Yankee: The  Old South  and American National Character  (London, I963).
1  Some  of  these elements  are  also found  in  De  la  Roche's  other  works. See, for example, The  Two  Saplings  (I942)   and The  Return  of the Emigrant  (I928).


BELL ISLAND BALLADS



Peter Neary





IN '895  la.ge  scale mining of tron o<e was 'tarted at  Bell
Island,  Conception   Bay,  Newfoundland. This  mining  venture,   which  in  time
became an important element in the development of an integrated  iron and steel industry  in  the Atlantic  region  of Canada,  lasted  until  1966,  when  the  sudden closure  of  the  last  of  the  mines  (on  one  month's  notice  from  the  Company, Dominion  Wabana  Ore Limited, a subsidiary of Hawker Siddeley Canada Ltd.), deprived  a community  which had  numbered  12,281 in 1961 of its sole means of support.  This in tum  precipitated  one of the greatest single industrial  catastrophes in Canadian history-a catastrophe  for which neither the federal  nor provincial government  was prepared.
The  ballads which follow were collected on Bell Island during  the autumn and winter of 1972-73. My purpose in making this effort was to look for evidence in the  popular  culture  of the Island  which would  reveal how ordinary  Newfound­ landers  had  reacted  towards  industrial  labour  and  life in company  towns when these had first intruded  into their traditional  outport and mercantile world around the tum  of the century. The  ballad  tradition  of the island of  Newfoundland and Labrador seemed an  obvious place to look for information  of  this kind  because it  has  clearly  been carried  over  from  the  pre-industrial  to  the  industrial New­ foundland  world.
The  best known ballad of the relevant genre is "The  Badger Drive",  which was written  by John  V. Devine around  1915 and  which describes the life of loggers working  for the Anglo-Newfoundland Development  Company,  Newfoundland's first pulp and  paper  manufacturing concern.  It  bears many  resemblances  to the two songs presented  here. All three  celebrate  the courage,  fortitude  and  skill of the working man.  In  "The  Badger Drive"  the  point is very explicit:   "There is one class of men in this country  that  never is mentioned  in song/But now  that their  trade  is advancing  they'll  come out on top before long/They say that  our sailors have danger  and likewise our warriors bold/But  there's  none know the life

BELL ISLAND BALLADS



of a driver what he suffers in hardship and cold/With their pike poles and  peavies and batteaux  and all/And it's hard to get over their time." In the first of the Bell Island  songs-"Wabana You're   a  Corker" 1 -the  miner  is  characterized   as someone who "must  be more than  brave". There  was among  the Newfoundland working class a great solidarity  and a great pride but these were not such, as the checkered history of unionism on Bell Island suggests, as to make straight  the path of working class organization  in the new industrial  world. The  reasons why these very attractive  Newfoundland attributes  could not  easily be mobilized by union organizers let alone by political reformers are also hinted at in the "Badger  Drive" and the two Bell Island songs. All three point to a deeply entrenched  acceptance of the efficacy of social and industrial  hierarchy and a profound sense of deference among  Newfoundland working  people. "The  Badger Drive"  and  the  two songs printed  below also suggest  that  there  were  many  Newfoundlanders  who  wel­ comed enthusiastically  the foreign entrepreneurs  who sought to use the  resources of their land;  in contemporary economic nationalist  terms they were full of "false consciousness". The  frequent  references to time in the ballad  "Wabana You're  a Corker"  are also significant.  As has been the  case in many  other  pre-industrial  societies,  Newfoundlanders did  not  adjust  very  readily  to  the  time  discipline required  by industrial  work;  significantly in  1925 there  was a  wildcat  strike on Bell Island when  the Company  first tried to introduce  a punch  clock system. All these elements -the  acceptance  of social and  industrial  hierarchy;  the sense of deference;  and  the  enthusiasm  for the new resource  ventures -are made  quite explicit in the last  verse of "The Badger Drive" :  "So now  to conclude  and  to finish,  I  hope  that  ye all  will agree/In wishing  success to  all  Badger  and  the A.N.D.  Company j And long may they live for to  flourish, and  continue  to chop drive and  roll/ And long may the business be managed  by Mr. Dorothy  and  Mr. Cole." The song "The Eighteenth  of April" from Bell Island is less explicit about this but  the idea  is there  nevertheless:  "It's for  Bobby Chambers,  he's the  boss of the mine/He planned  out  the trestle and  then the main  line/He planned  out the main  line that  runs east and  west/ And  everything  runs  in his mine  for the best." All of this  is a  reminder  of the  danger  of  projecting  into  the  past  and particularly  on to the working class the contemporary  disdain for the "corporate ripoff"  of  Canadian  resources.  The  Newfoundland   workingman   offered  little resistance to the  activities of foreign  entrepreneurs.  Like the  French  Canadians  who erected in the centre of the town of Baie Comeau a statue of Colonel Robert McCormick  ( r88o-1955)  of the  Chicago Tribune, dressed in the  costume of a voyageur and seated in a canoe, Newfoundlanders showed themselves very willing

BELL ISLAND  BALLADS



indeed  to be made over into  an  industrial proletariat. Nor  was the  point  of their potential lost on  the  developers. In  I910  an  English  visitor  to  Grand Falls,  the centre  of  the  Anglo-Newfoundland Development Company's  operations and   a town  remarkably like Baie Comeau, gave this account of the  Newfoundland work­ ing man:

The  workers at the Grand  Falls factory, though  the great majority  are natives, are described  by the  superintendent as being as various  of language  as though  they came straight  from  the construction  of the Tower  of Babel. But he hopes to have them  practically  all natives soon. The  love of the sea and  the fishing, however, is in the blood of the  native folk, and they are apt  to obey its call and  get down  to their  fishing work again  after  a spell of this up-country  labour. Still, it is thought that  they will soon be broken of this, will realize the advantage of the good houses in which  they are  placed  at the Falls, and  the blessing of a constant  employment and  a steady wage. Lord  Northcliffe, in his liberal, long-sighted  way, does all that can be imagined  to make their life agreeable. He has made a present of a gramo­ phone to each of the more important houses-we are not informed  of  the effect,
if all are set going with a different "record" in each, at  the same moment-and has sent them  out  a large assortment of instruments  of music, with a view to the institution  of a  town  band.  For  lack of a  bandmaster, it  appears  that  a  certain discord  rather  than  the  desired  harmony,  is the  immediate  result,  but  no  doubt this will mend  itself. And  there  is a cricket  ground  of sorts;  so what  more  have they to wish for? Speaking in all seriousness, life seems as good as can be expected for these workers at  the Falls, and in a short while they will, no doubt,  realize all its goodness.2

The ballads which  follow,  and  to which  this  note  is intended to serve  as  an introduction, were  collected  on  Bell Island   in  November I972,  and   February I973· John Fred  Squires,  who sang the  ballads  for the  author, was born  at  Broad Cove on November 25,I 883. His parents  died when  he was very young and he was "raised up"3  at  Natick, Massachusetts, by two of his sisters. He  returned to New­ foundland in I 9I o  and   began  work  on  Bell  Island. In   typical  Newfoundland fashion  he was unwilling "to  tie [himself]  up to one  job all the time". He  wanted "to  try it all". Accordingly, he "worked on every job was on this Island". He loaded  ore, laid  rail, drilled, blasted,  and  repaired. He worked  both  on the "surface" and  "underground". He  also  managed to  keep  a  small  farm.   In  short   he  is a  fine example of  a  "knock about" Newfoundlander-the  best  that  his island   home has produced. The ballads  he remembers date  from  the early years of the  mining  venture. Mr.  Squires thinks  that  "The Eighteenth of  April" is the  older  of  the two;  "Wabana You're a Corker" was written around  I9IO,  mainly  by his friend

43

BELL ISLAND BALLADS



Mike  Hibbs, a  "surface man" from  Portugal Cove.  The  very  existence  of  these songs is evidence of the successful  transfer  of an outport tradition to the industrial world.  But  the  ballads are  important too for  the  clues they  give  to  the  attitudes of ordinary Newfoundlanders to their  new working  environment. They  form  part of  a  small  group of  ballads that   hold  up  this  mirror   for  the  historian  to  the beginnings of "the new  Newfoundland". The  songs remembered by  Mr.  Squires exhibit  the infectious enthusiasm of the first fine careless moment, long  before  the more  sombre  side  of the  new  life had  become  fully  apparent-when  Wabana was a corker in a real rather than  an ironic sense.


Wabana rou're A Corker4

Ye men that  works down in this cave, Your courage  must be more than  brave, To  work a mine beneath  the wave, Wabana  you're  a corker.

With your oil flash strapped  up to your side, And on your back a miner's  pride,
And bold John  Davis5   for your guide, Wabana  you're  a corker.

Down in those dark and weary deeps,
Where  the drills do hum and  the rats do squeak, Day after  day, week after  week.
Wabana  you're a corker.

The  boss will show you to your room, With a lighted  lamp  will show a gloom, And perhaps  those walls will be your tomb, Wabana  you're  a corker.

John  Fred Squires6   repairs  the drills,
When  he gets them  ready, he'll send them in,
If she don't  work now she never will, Wabana  you're a corker.

The  driller he jacks up his bar, Between the rib and  a loaded car, Where  all those miss exploders are, Wabana  you're  a corker.


44

BELL ISLAND BALLADS



Come  now boys and  look alive, Another pair  of slices drive,
And  don't come  up 'till  half  past  five, Wabana you're  a corker.

When  you comes  up by the  drain, Who will you meet  but  that  McLean,7
Saying,  "I will cut  your time again", Wabana you're  a  corker.

I asked  old  Alfred8 for my time,
I knowed  he  couldn't write  a  line, And  Lockey9  was down  in the mine, Wabana you're  a  corker.

All  the  women  on  Bell Isle,
They  sleeps in bed 'til half past nine,
And  light's  their  fire with  the  batcher's10  oil, Wabana you're  a corker.

All  the  women   joins a club,
To  feed  their  pigs on the hatcher's grub. They feeds  them  in a  ten  pound  tub, Wabana you're  a  corker.

With  one  hello  and  a simple  knock, Get  up  old  cook it's six o'clock,
The water  wagon  is around the  block, Wabana you're  a corker.

If you're  living  on  the Green, Every  morning you'll  get  beans, And at  supper  time again  its beans, Wabana you're  a corker.


The Eighteenth of April 11

The eighteenth of April,  being  the date  of the  year,
We  jumped  in our  small boats, for Bell Island did  steer, To  land  on the  island  we were all inclined
Take our  picks and  our shovels, go to work  in  the  mine.

45

BELL ISLAND BALLADS



It's  for  Bobby Chambers/2  he's  the  boss of the  mine, He  planned out  the  trestle  and  then  the main  line, 13
He  planned out  the  main  line  that  runs  east  and  west, And  everything ran  in his mine  for  the best.

It's  for  Davey  Fraser/4  he's  boss on  the  pier, And  likewise  young  William  is a chief  engineer, For  doing  up  steamwork or anything wrong, Stop  a leak  in  a boiler,  it won't  take  him  long.

It's  for  Billy Nurse,15  he's  a fine looking  man,
Comes  down  in the  pit16 with  the  book in his hand, He'll  ask you your  number, he'll  take  down  your  time,
He  will  give  you  every  hour  that  you  work  in  the  mine.

It's  for Jabez  Butler,17 he's working  up West, He  takes  all  the  new  cars  away  from  the  rest, He  fills them  with  ore,  he fills them  up  there,
Grips  them  on  the  main  line,  sends  them  out  to  the  pier.

The cars  from  the  east'ard they  comes  very slow, The cars  from  the  west'ard like hell  they do go, They're took  from  the  donkey,18  oh isn't  that  fine,
Takes  'em  out  on  the  switch,  and  grips  them  to the  main  line.

It's  for Billy Sutherland/9  he's  a sturgy  old  block, He  haves Charlie Carter 20  by night  on the rock, And  likewise young  William  looking  after  the ore, And  if you lets a car  off he'll  dump you for  sure.


NOTES

1 The name  Wabana came  into  existence  after  the  mining  operation began.  It was not  legally  defined  until   I950 but  in  general was  taken  to  mean  the  area  of  the Island  around the  mining operation. E. R. Seary  gives the  following  information on the  name  in Place Names  of the  Avalon  Peninsula  of the  Island  of Newfound­ land  (Toronto, I97I), 26: "Wabana, on  Bell Island  ... which  is almost  the  most easterly   land   in  the  American continent,  was  imposed   about   I895  by  Thomas Cantley, an  official  of  the   Nova  Scotia   Steel  and   Coal   Company,  which   had secured  a lease of the  iron  deposits  on  the  island  in  I893· WABANA  seems to be an  arbitrary formation from   an  Abnaki   word  Wabuna'ki, from  wabun, a  term associated  with  'light', 'white', and  refers to the morning and  the east; a'ki  'earth',
'land'; hence   wabuna'ki is  an  inanimate singular term  signifying   'east-land', or
'morning-land', the  elements referring to animate dwellers  of the  east  being  want­
ing."  Professor Seary's  reference is to The Daily News, St. John's, January -6,  I962.
2   Horace G. Hutchinson, A Saga  of the "Sunbeam» (London, I9I I), I I9-20.

BELL ISLAND  BALLADS



" Mr.  Squires' words  are  from  my  tape-recorded conversations with  him.
4  The  song  was communal in  origin  and  was, according to  Mr.  Squires, composed over  a  period  of  time,  with  many  voices contributing to  the  final  product. Mike Hibbs  was not, therefore, an author in the conventional sense but  the central figure in a communal process. The version  of the ballad  given here  is a composite of two renditions by Mr.  Squires-one given in November  I972, and  the other in  Febru­ ary  I973· A "corker" in  Newfoundland is someone  or something enjoying a heady  success.
5  John  Davis  was from  Harbour Grace  and  had  worked  at  the  seal fishery.  On  Bell Island he was "head kicker" (foreman) in  the  Scotia  No.  2 mine   (Squires  inter­ view, February I2, I973)·
6  The singer of the  ballad.
7  Lockey  McLean was from  Nova  Scotia  and  was "boss man" with  the Scotia  Com­
pany  (Squires  interview, February I2, I973).
8 Alfred  George  was from  Harbour Grace  and  worked  on  Bell Island as a "surface man", i.e. one who worked  for the  mining  companies above  ground (Squires inter­ view, February I2,  I973).
9  Lockey  McLean.
10  Batcher's were  "mainlandsmen", i.e. men  from  elsewhere  in  Newfoundland, who boarded in company owned  houses  with  resident  families.  They were  expected to provide part  of the  family  provisions.
11 This  song apparently has no formal title. The  title given here is taken  from  the first stanza.
12  Bobby Chambers was from  Nova  Scotia  and  was "head man" for  the  Scotia Com­ pany. The Scotia  No.  Iarea was often  referred  to as Chamber's No. Iin his honour (Squires  interview, February  I2,  I973).
13 For  a long  time  ore  was carried from  the  'Back'  of the  Island   to  the  piers  at  the
'Front' in open  cars over  a narrow gauge  railway,  which  was known  as "the main
line".
14 Davey  Fraser  was  from  Nova  Scotia.  He  worked  around the  piers,  on  the  deck­ heads  and  for a time ran  the company staff house  (Squires  interview, February I2, I973). The  deckhead stood  at  the  mine  entrance and  housed  the  machinery con­ trolling  its  main  transportation system. After  passing  over  the  deckhead the  ore went  through a refining  process  before being  hauled  across the  Island to the  load­  ing piers.
15 Billy Nurse was from  Nova Scotia  and  was a timekeeper (Squires interview, Febru­
ary  I9, I973) •
16 A generalized name for the mines.
17 Jabez  Butler  of Clarke's Beach,  Conception Bay, was a  policeman who  "threw it up"  to work on Bell Island (Squires  interview, February I2,  I973).
18 A small  engine  that  hoisted  cars  from  the  surface  pits  and  onto "the main  line" (Squires  interview, February  I9,  I973).
19 Billy Sutherland was from  Nova Scotia. He was "foreman by night" with  the Scotia
Company (Squires  interview, February I9, I973).
2° Charlie Carter was from  Topsail, Conception Bay. He worked  as a "rock  picker  by night" (Squires  interview, February  I9, I973).

47


WHITEOAK CHRONICLES
A Reassessment



Douglas M. Daymond






DOROTHY LIVESAY  '<cently  'uggested  that  "the  time has come when we must  cease being literary snobs in Canada  and  look seriously at the work of our popular  writers."1 Among those writers whose worth has been obscured by false myths is Mazo de la Roche, a writer who produced  a substan­ tial  and  significant  body of work which achieved  international  recognition  and admiration and  yet has almost invariably  been dismissed as a  popular  writer  of romances. Since 1950,  several writers2  have expressed the belief  that  a reappraisal of de la Roche is needed;  however, most recent studies have failed to provide a serious examination  of her  writing.  Ronald  Hambleton's  fragmented and  occa­ sionally inaccurate biography3  largely ignores her literary significance and George Hendrick's  study  is  patronizing  and  superficial.4     Repeatedly,   critics  have  dis­ played  an  unwillingness to examine  de la  Roche's writing  with  the  care  that  it merits. This present study is an attempt  to clarify the structure,  range and central themes of the Whiteoak Chronicles,  the series to which de  la  Roche  gave-as she said-"the sustained  work of a lifetime." 5



BETWEEN 1925  AND  1960,  Mazo de la Roche wrote sixteen novels which describe the history of the Whiteoak  family from  1852  until  1954· At the time of her death, she had begun work on a seventeenth. These chronicles, her best known work, represent a significant imaginative  achievement, for, within the limitations  involved in writing sixteen novels which deal essentially with one family in one setting, she displays considerable inventiveness.
The  principal  setting for the Whiteoak series is the Jalna  estate and  a limited
surrounding area,  although   many  of the  novels include  events  which  occur  in New  York,  Ireland  or  England. In  general,  the  chronicle  of the  Whiteoaks  is coherent and consistent in its framework, chronology, characterization and themes,

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



despite the  fact  that  the  various  instalments  were  not  written  in  chronological order.  After 1alna,  nine  novels carry  the  Whiteoak  history forward  until  I954, while the  remaining  six move  back in  time  to  deal  with  earlier  events  in  the history of the family. The  three novels which followed 1alna proceed in a direct chronological  fashion  through  events which  culminate  in  the  death  of Adeline ( Whiteoaks  of 1alna,  I929), Finch's  inheritance   (Finch's  Fortune,  I93 I), and Renny's  affair  with  Clara  Lebraux   (The   Master  of 1alna,   I933)· With  one exception,  the  following  twelve,  published  between   I935  and   I96I,  alternate between the history of the family before 1alna ( I85I-I924) and the events which follow The  Master  of 1alna. The six novels which return  to the past do so in no clearly organized pattern. Of these, the initial three, Young  Renny  ( I 935) , White­
·oak Heritage  ( I 940), and  The   Building  of  1alna   ( I 944), move  progressively further  into  the  past  until  the  earliest events, which  are outlined  in  the second chapter  of 1alna, have  been expanded.  The  next  two, Mary  Wake field ( I 949) and  Whiteoak Brothers  ( I 953), move forward  to describe events  just  prior  to those dealt  with in 1alna. The  final novel in the Jalna  series, Morning  at 1alna
( I96o), is actually the second in terms of the history of the Whiteoak  family.
Throughout the Whiteoak  chronicles a number  of motifs, scenes, and  plot pat­ terns  are  repeated,  often  with  little  variation.  Skating  and  swimming  parties;  flirtations;  family  squabbles;   precocious  children;   violent  quarrels; the  family church;  arrivals  and  departures  of family members or outsiders; characters who receive legacies; characters  who long for experience, adventure,  or power, or who feel stifled and seek a freer life in a new country;  characters  who are secret observ­ ers of erotic scenes or  refugees from  repressive domestic situations; secret  trysts in primeval groves, on Jalna's rustic bridge, beside flowing streams,  or along  the lakeshore; extra-marital intrigue;  incestuous and homosexual relations;  passionate encounters  and  husky voiced conversations;  romantic  love;  violence;  loyalty  to the family -these  are staple  ingredients  of  the  Jalna world.  Likewise, natural descriptions and descriptions of family  history, household pets and  the numerous Whiteoak  horses occupy  considerable  space  in  each  novel. Sudden  and  almost inexplicable  shifts  in  characters'  attitudes  combine  with  the  most  remarkable  coincidences to produce  plots  which  occasionally make  inordinate demands  on the reader's  willingness to suspend belief.
In surveying the Jalna  novels, one may object to the repetition,  the formulaic quality of some of the plotting, the lack of variety in style, the illogical resolution of emotional situations, the melodramatic  tone of many of the conflicts, the senti­ mentality,  the  contrived   and  sometimes  poorly  integrated   plots,  the  lengthy

49

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



debates over domestic  trivialities and  the awkward  soliloquies and  purple narra­ tion. Despite these objections, the extent of the Whiteoak  history and  the gradual  expansion of that  history without sacrificing unity and continuity; the creation  of a large  cast of clearly  delineated  characters; the  humour,  irony  and  sympathy with which these figures are  most often viewed by their  creators;  the  wealth  of fine descriptions of flowers, animals  and  the changing  seasons; the subtle  blend­ ing  of experience  and  imagination   which  is apparent  in  characterization  and incident;  the expression  of a deeply felt concern  for the  decline of an  era;  the sharp  definition  of scene  and  background; the  careful  balancing  of characters  and intertwining  of events; the sense of the close relationship between the human  and  the  natural; and  the successful expression  of sincere feeling for  individual  freedom  and  tradition, represent  a  considerable  achievement  and  therefore  the chronicle  merits  attention,   both  as  an  extensive single  work  on  an  imaginery family and  as individual  novels which reveal the  preoccupations  of de Ia Roche and  her readers.
The  central  and  unifying  themes  of the  Whiteoak  chronicles  are  individual
freedom on the one hand and tradition and order on the other. The chronicles consistently illustrate  de  Ia Roche's  fascination  with  instinctive  activity,  vitality and  rebellion as well as her devotion to tradition  and to the family as an institu­ tion which  provides stability  and  order.  In  the Whiteoak  world,  tradition resists change, and  instinct challenges intellect. Characters  regularly act  or speak "pas­ sionately,"  "intensely," "truculently," "emotionally,"  "eagerly,"  "vehemently," and "suddenly." Yet, despite the disruptive results of  instinctive and spontaneous  behaviour,  which  often leads to infidelity, divorce  and  illegitimate  children  and threatens  the  fabric  of  family  unity,  life  at  Jalna  remains  fundamentally  un­ changed  in the midst of a rapidly altering world.
Lovat  Dickson, one of de Ia Roche's  closest friends and  her  editor  for  many years, recently described the Jalna series as a single large house which began with
]alna and  proceeded  to grow as additional  rooms were added  to create an archi­ tecturally balanced  and complete structure.6  The original house, the additions and the  complete  whole reveal the  architect's  persistent concern for  a  design which would emphasize  individual  freedom  and  tradition,  the most  prominent  themes of the Whiteoak chronicles. Thus  ]alna ( 1927), The Whiteoaks of ]alna ( 1929), Finch's Fortune  ( 1931)  and The  Master of ]alna ( 1933), the four novels which represent the core of the saga define the family and estate in terms of the conflict between freedom and tradition. This same conflict is apparent in varying degrees within  each  of the  Whiteoak  novels and  in the larger contrast  between the first

so

WHITEOAK  CHRONICLES



six and the last six instalments in the Whiteoak history. The  initial six novels emphasize individual  freedom; the final six novels stress the importance of  tradi­ tion. To a large extent, the international success of these novels can  be attributed to this design. De la Roche's  popularity suggests not only the conservatism  of her readers  but  also  their  longing  for  freedom.  The  Whiteoak  novels satisfied  the desire  for  personal  freedom  within  the  framework  of   traditional living;   they offered  both  escape and  reassurance.  In  a limited  sense  they embodied  central ingredients  of an entire  culture,  and  to this extent  de la  Roche  can  be regarded as one who transformed  social history into mythology.


JALNA  (1927),  The   Whiteoaks   of  ]alna   (1929),   Finch's Fortune  ( 1931)  and The  Master of ]alna ( 1933)  carry the history of the White­ oaks from  1924 to 1933· ]alna and  Whiteoaks  are among  the most successful of de la Roche's  novels;  Finch's  Fortune  and  The  Master  of ]alna  are  much  less
satisfying and seem to falter as a result of Adeline's absence and de la Roche's involvement with Finch  Whiteoak. Nevertheless, in these earliest ventures into the Whiteoak world, the sources of de la Roche's original interest in the Jalna  novels can  be identified.  On  the  foundation of  these four  novels, and,  in  particular,
]alna and  Whiteoaks  of ]alna, de la Roche  was to erect  the  one-hundred  year history of the Whiteoak family.
]alna is a striking and original manifestation of de la Roche's  desire to experi­
ence freedom and stability, to create an environment  in which these contradictory and divisive values could co-exist creatively though not always harmoniously,  and to demonstrate  that stability could be achieved without repression and  that inde­ pendence  need  not lead  to disorder  and  disintegration.  Like the  romance-novel form in which the Whiteoak series is written, ]alna and Whiteoaks of ]alna repre­ sent and  reflect an  unresolved  tension between contradictory  elements.
]alna presents a family of independent  and spontaneous individuals  who share in a life characterized  by continuity  and disorder. The family of the estate,  with its history and  associated traditions,  provide a sense of symmetry, continuity  and stability despite the spontaneous  and independent  actions of individual family members. The  course of life and  love at  Jalna is far  from  stable;  nevertheless, though irrational  behaviour  intervenes to cause dissension, disruptions  and, occa­ sionally, violence, the family remains essentially intact. The family is tom by large and small, real and  imagined  conflicts and animosities. Still, despite  Eden's  hur· ried departure, the  conclusion  is far  from  bleak or  pessimistic. The  reunion  of

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



Pheasant  and  Piers,  the  marriage  of  Meg and  Maurice,  and  the  dance  which joins the Whiteoaks in a celebration  of Adeline's centenary  confirm the resiliency of the Whiteoak  family and its ability to withstand the shocks and  pressure which are  the inevitable  concomitants of their free and  impulsive way of life.
Although  the central  figure of W hiteiOaks  of  ]alna is clearly  Finch,  the  novel also seeks to define the  uniqueness  of the entire  Whiteoak  clan.  It attempts  to clarify the  pattern  of life at  Jalna  and  the essential characteristic of the  family who live there-the "extravagant and  wasteful energy of their  emotion,"  their lack of reticence, the "solid wall they presented to the world",  "the  closely woven, harsh fabric"  of their relationships  with one another,  their  warmth,  their sense of a common past, their empathy  with animals, their "extreme devotion as a family", their  negligence, variability  and  greed,  their  tendency  to  be a  law  unto  them­ selves, their  selfishness and  selflessness: "They  raised  Cain  and  then  they  took hands  and  danced  in a circle around  the Cain they had  raised. They sowed the wind and reaped the whirlwind,  but they wanted no outside labour  to help gamer  that  harvest."  The  Whiteoaks  represent  the  blend of tradition and  individuality which de la Roche felt was crucial for survival in a rapidly changing world.
The Whiteoaks recognize the importance  of both individual freedom and tradi­ tion  and  endorse  these contradictory values while remaining  vital,  creative  and free of irresolution and frustration. In the Whiteoak chronicles the tension between individual freedom and tradition remains but it is presented as a source of strength and energy. Not surprisingly, few outsiders find it an easy task to become assimi­ lated into the way of life at Jalna. Too often they lack the necessary sympathy for a combination  of the spirit of individualism and the spirit of conservatism, and as a result they find the  Whiteoaks  too traditional  or too willing to abandon tradi­  tional ways of thinking and  behaving.
Jalna  is a garrison  but  not the usual garrison associated with Canadian litera­ ture  and  described  by Northrop Frye  and  Douglas Jones  as a  response  to  the threat  posed  by the  irrational energy  of the  land.  Jalna  is an  embodiment   of "nature and  culture"; it incorporates  both  "the  world of  appearances and  the world of spontaneous  feeling."7  The  posture of Jalna  and the Whiteoaks is defen­ sive but  the  threat  is associated  neither  with  the  anarchic  individualism  of the Whiteoaks  nor with the  pressure exerted  by their  wish that  the traditions  of the past  be allowed  to  flow into  the  present. They  are  threatened by the  changes accompanying   the  development  of  technology  and  the  growth  of  the  modern world. De la Roche's feeling that  these changes would destroy individualism  and

52

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



tradition resulted in an  increasing  nostalgia which gradually  shifted  the  tone of the Whiteoak  chronicles from celebration  to lamentation.



BETWEEN 1933 and 1961, de la Roche wrote six novels based on events in the years between 1852 and  I924. Three  of these-The Building of
]alna ( I 944), Morning  at ]alna ( I 960),  and Mary Wake field ( I 949)  -are set in  the  last  half  of the  nineteenth   century  and  three-Young Renny   ( I935), Whiteoak Heritage  ( I940), and The  Whiteoak  Brothers ( I953)  -are set in the period between the turn of the century and  I 924. Though  all but two of these are generally inferior to ]alna, they reflect a number of de la Roche's  preoccupations and  reveal her conscious efforts to create a consistent and coherent  family history. In  comparison  with  the  later  instalments in the  Whiteoak  history,  the  first six novels are  more often self-contained,  less inhibited  by family history, more  posi­ tive in their  outlook,  less nostalgic,  and  more  preoccupied  with  individuals  in search of freedom. Altogether,  they suggest that  de la Roche was more confident and  more successful when she wrote of the past.
Of  the six pre-Jalna  novels, The  Building  of  ]alna is the  most successful. It functions as an excellent introduction  to the chronicles and emphasizes the energy of the Court  family and the stability of the Whiteoak family. It also establishes a number  of motifs, themes, scenes and  character-types.  Inheritance, the  new  life, the struggle  for  power  in male-female  relationships, emigration,  the  hidden  ob­ server, the outsider, and  the tension between freedom and  convention  are  prom­ inent aspects of this novel.
The  Building of  ]alna dramatizes  and expands  upon the outline  of family  his­ tory provided in the second chapter  of ]alna, and nearly a third  of the book pre­ sents events prior to the arrival of the Whiteoaks in Ontario.  The opening chapter  describes the meeting and marriage of Philip and Adeline and fills out their family backgrounds.  Adeline,  born  in  County  Meath,   Ireland,   left  her  home  when, despite  her  obvious  beauty,  she  failed  to  attract   any  admirer  with  "sufficient means to set up an establishment." When her sister married  an  officer stationed at Jalna,  Adeline accepted an invitation  to visit there and in her sister's home in India,  she was introduced  to  Philip  Whiteoak,  an  officer in  the  Hussars.  They were married inI 847 and, soon after the birth of their first  child, Augusta,  they decide to begin a new life away from the "conventionalities of Army life." Then,  even as they ponder  the  move, Philip's  uncle dies  "leaving  him  a  considerable property" in  Quebec.  Consequently  the  Whiteoaks  depart   for  Canada;  their

53

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



primary  motivation  is a deepset longing for freedom:  "There was in them  both an  adventurous  pioneer spirit  that  laughed  at discouragement,  that  reached  out toward  a freer life."
In  the spring of 1853, Philip,  dissatisfied with life in Quebec,  decides to move to  Ontario where  a  military  friend,  David  Vaughan,  a  retired  Anglo-Indian Colonel, has settled "on  the fertile shore of Lake Ontario". In his letters to Philip, Colonel Vaughan  clearly indicates some of the essential values of the settlement into which the Whiteoaks  move:

"Here," he wrote, "the winters are mild, we have little snow, and  in the long fruit­ ful summer the  land  yields grain  and  fruit  in abundance. An agreeable little settle­  ment  of respectable families  is being formed. You and  your  talented lady, my dear  Whiteoak,  would   receive   the   welcome   here   that   people   of  your   consequence merit."

Colonel Vaughan, the spokesman for this British garrison, "was one of those for­ tunate  men ... who can look forward to the future secure in the thought ... that no further  change  is to be considered."  His announced  aim is "to  keep this little settlement  purely British".

It was  his  most  cherished wish  to  draw   congenial  people   to  the  corner of  the province where   he  had  settled, and,  with  their   help,  establish   the  customs  and traditions of England, to be enjoyed  and  cherished by their  descendants. To  these he  wished  to  add   the  breadth and  freedom   of  the  New  Land. He  believed  the combination to he  the  ideal  one  for comfort, tolerance and  content.

Two of the elements indicated  by Colonel Vaughan, tradition  and freedom, are the essential components  of the Jalna  world. Novel after novel in the Jalna  series celebrates the British connection  and  the traditions  associated with  that  connec­ tion, as well as the importance of individual  freedom and  the instinctive life. The struggle depicted in the early novels of settlement  and in the later  novels of con­ solidation is not the result of man's  attempt  to subdue  and  then exploit a hostile environment  hut  the outcome  of a determined  effort by  members of the White­ oak family to preserve these values in the midst of  rapidly changing social, politi­ cal, economic and  physical conditions.
Six chapters  of The   Building  of  ]alna are  devoted  to  events  preceding  the
arrival  of the  Whiteoaks  in  Ontario in  June   1853· The   remaining  seventeen chapters  describe the events between then  and  October  1854,  when  both  Jalna and the new Whiteoak  church  were completed. Considerable attention  is devoted to the gradual  evolution  of the Whiteoak estate.  From the outset, Jalna  is asso-


54

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



ciated with energy and lively activity as well as stability and permanence: "Always there was some living thing to watch at Jalna". Its birth is accompanied by dance and song and  we are told that  "the  house would teem with life, with  emotion". The  formless "vastness  of the  forest" is gradually  shaped  into  a  " 'park' " and Jalna grows amid the songs of French Canadian woodcutters and dance music provided  by Fiddling  Jock, an elderly Scotsman  who lives in a small  cottage on Whiteoak  property.
In  the later  chapters  of The  Building  of  ]alna a  number  of social  activities serve to introduce  the members  of the community  in which  the  Whiteoaks  live. Both  Philip  and  Adeline  are  presented  as " 'unconventional people' ": "They had wanted  reality, freedom  from  rules made long before their  time,  the oppor­ tunity to lead their lives in their own fashion." Yet the community  in  which they settle is " 'close and  conventional' " and, soon after  their arrival, Adeline's  "wild behaviour"  and  "unconventionality" give rise to criticism in the neighbourhood. Elihu  Busby, a descendant  of a  United  Empire  Loyalist who  in  some  respects resembles de la Roche's grandfather (Daniel  Lundy)  is particularly  critical. Elihu was the original owner of much  of the land about Jalna.  Proud,  egotistical, con· servative  and  authoritarian, Busby shares several  of  Daniel  Lundy's  prejudices and, like him, resists his daughter's plans for marriage.  Eventually,  as the White­ oak history develops, one of his  grand-daughters marries  Adeline's  fourth  child and becomes the mother  of  Renny and Meg Whiteoak.
Among the most familiar scenes in the fiction of de la Roche is the one in which one or  more  characters  swim,  often  to  the  unconcealed  delight  of some secret observer. Swimming  is consistently equated  by de la Roche  with freeing of  emo­ tions and  a return  to a childlike simplicity. In  The  Building  of ]alna this scene becomes the focal point for several motifs and  themes. Adeline decides to " 'give something  more spirited  in the way of entertainment' " and  proposes a  bathing  party to which the " 'oldsters who carp at the licence of the young' " will not be invited. As the party develops the participants  undergo a transformation and  loss of inhibition: "the  old  conventions  seemed  cast  aside  and  they  lay  relaxed  in childlike abandon." For the swimmer, "life seemed strange  and  full of beautiful and violent possibilities."
This mood is shattered  by the sudden appearance of Elihu Busby whose "sense of decorum  is outraged"; he accuses the  Whiteoaks  of importing  " 'outlandish habits from the Old  World'" and describes their activities as "'Dissipated'" and detrimental  to the morality of the community:

55

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



What I do say is that so much license is not good. In time it will lead to disgrace­ ful things ... Manners  and  morals are never at  a standstill. Either  they rise or they decline.

Busby's attempts  to end the party are unsuccessful. Throughout the Jalna chroni­ cles the forces of convention  make  repeated  attempts  to subdue  instinctive  and individual  behaviour.
The  Building of ]alna is among  the most successful of the Jalna  chronicles. It is well constructed  and carefully plotted, and clearly sets forth some of the crucial aspects of the Whiteoaks, their way of life and their estate. It also serves to set the tone  for  most  of  the  early  chronicles  and  provides an  interesting  contrast   to Centenary  at ]alna, the novel in which de la Roche describes the one-hundredth anniversary of the building of Jalna.



JALNA IS ESSENTIALLY detached from specific social, economi­ cal or political issues and developments;  nevertheless, as the final six novels reveal, the  Whiteoaks  could  not  permanently   ignore  the  implications  of   the  changes which are  taking  place all around  them or the effects of the depression  and  the Second World War, and the erosion of traditional sources of order and continuity. In the final six novels of the Jalna  series, de la Roche's awareness of these events and conditions led to an increasing preoccupation  with change. Her consciousness of one's family and one's sense of a common past as means of offsetting the sense of insecurity  and  meaninglessness engendered  by  rapid  change  are  increasingly apparent in these works. Her  nostalgia for the  past  and  her antipathy for much that  was modem  are  equally  obvious. Not  surprisingly, in  the  later  novels the Whiteoaks,  their  home and  their traditions, are seen by de la Roche increasingly as symbols of permanence and  tradition  and  less as the upholders  of individual  freedom.  Ultimately,  de la Roche seems to imply, the individual  must  be willing to sacrifice himself to maintain  tradition  and  continuity.
In the final six instalments in the Jalna chronicles-Whiteoak Harvest ( 1936), Wakefield's Course  (1941), Return  to ]alna (1946), Renny's  Daughter  (1951), Variable  Winds  at  ]alna  ( 1954)  and  Centenary  at  ]alna  ( 1958), de la Roche was writing  of her immediate  present. All but  one of these books were  written after she had been forced to give up her life in the English countryside and return to Canada and life in Toronto. They  reveal her bitter antagonism  towards much that is characteristic of the modem  world. Though  the tension between individual freedom  and  tradition is evident  throughout  these works, there  is an  increased

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



tendency to sentimentalize  the  past, to resist all change, and  to cling with  a kind of desperation  to those traditions which survive. These novels depict de Ia Roche's private confrontation  with a world utterly unlike the one in which she had grown up and  the one she had for several years been able to create  while living in  Eng­ land. In the earliest Jalna novels, de Ia Roche turned comfortably  to an essentially pastoral and idyllic world where change was gradual  and  life allowed a mingling of tradition and  individual  freedom.  In  the final Jalna novels  nostalgia  for that world  is blended  with  a conviction  that  the modem  world  is  less innocent,  less free, more violent and  more  prone  to disintegration.  In  the  midst  of significant change, she became sceptical in her attitude  toward  the modem  world and  more committed  to the past and  the values she associated  with  it. To  her, change  and progress often seemed synonymous  with  a decline  in  individual freedom  and  a loss of valid traditions.
Though individual freedom is stressed throughout  the Whiteoak  chronicles and remains a significant theme in the final instalments, the focus in the novels which deal with the Whiteoak  history from 1934 to 1954 is on the conflict between the defenders of tradition  and  those forces which threaten  to undermine and  destroy it. Each  of the novels which  present the history of the Whiteoaks  between  1934 and  1954 emphasizes change  and  the efforts of the  Whiteoaks  to  protect  Jalna and  the way of life it represents from those developments  which  would  alter  or destroy  it.  Renny's  willingness  to  arrange  a  loveless marriage for  his  beloved daughter  is the final evidence of the sense of desperation  with  which he attempts to resist the erosion of Whiteoak  traditions. It is difficult to read these final instal­ ments in the history of the  Whiteoaks  without  feeling that  de Ia Roche  was no longer celebrating a dream  of liberty and order but lamenting  the failure of that dream. This is nowhere more evident than  in Centenary  at  ]alna  (1958).
Like The  Building of ]alna  ( 1944), the introductory  novel in the Jalna  series, Centenary  at ]alna, the final instalment, is one of de Ia Roche's  better  novels and provides  an  interesting  conclusion  to  the  long  Whiteoak   history.   The   book examines the events which culminate in the celebration of the one-hundredth anniversary of the building of Jalna. It reveals Renny's plan to arrange  a wedding between the cousins Philip and  Adeline (descendants of the original  Adeline and Philip)    as  a  fitting   means   of  celebrating   Jalna's   one-hundredth  birthday. Although  he succeeds and  although  the novel and  the series end,  as they began, with a wedding and  with the christening of a child whose name is Ernest  White­ oak,  the  centenary  celebrations  are shadowed  by the  violent  and  tragic  events connected  with  Finch's  son  Dennis.  And  despite the  novel's  affirmation  of the

57

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



continuing  life of the family and  its traditions,  there is an  underlying  pessimism that  reveals itself as a warning  about  the violence that  a  breakdown  in  family structure  can precipitate. The  malice and violence of several scenes in Centenary at ]alna are not equalled  in any of de la Roche's other writings.
Renny's  " 'worship  of family  tradition' " and  his devotion  to  Jalna   result in his proposal of a marriage  between  his daughter  Adeline and  Piers's son Philip; Adeline and Philip are strikingly like the original pair of Whiteoaks in appearance and temperament, and Renny fosters the idea of their marriage  with all his Court determination. As he explains to Philip:

"It  would be establishing the family all over again-in a fine sort of way. Another good-looking healthy pair-in  love with each other and with life at Jalna."

Renny is not deterred  by the fact that  Philip and Adeline do not reveal any love for one another.  To  him, it is more significant that  Philip  always is "respectful toward  tradition", "accepts  with  pride the traditions  of his family"  and  regards himself as "dedicated to their  preservation".  Renny  is quite  willing  to  gamble with the future happiness of his own daughter in order to ensure the continued existence of Jalna :

A new and desperately urgent life was thrusting up, out of the colonial past, but he ignored it, not so much in antagonism as in absorption by his own manner of life. He simply could not imagine a change in Jalna itself.
The  fine-clad house, surrounded  by its lawns, its meadows, its pastures and
woods, was to him the enduring  symbol of the life his grandparents  had carved out  of the  wilds of a  new country, and  to which his uncles and  parents  had adhered. He saw no reason for changing it.

The  loyalty of the Whiteoaks  to the family is particularly  evident in this novel. When  Archer  (Renny's son)  questions Renny's  purchase  of a two-hundred-acre farm  adjoining  Jalna,   Piers comments  on  "'the many  insignificant  little  places going  up  all  about'" and  then  explains:  "'Its been our  tradition, Archer,  to follow in the footsteps of our forebears. To be like them and even more so .. .'." Archer, despite his unemotional nature  and  his detached  point of view, responds to the family mystique:  "'This family has been the structure  of all our lives. We don't  think about  it. It's  like the air we breathe. It's sacred  to us'."
Although  Mazo de la Roche intended to write further instalments in the history of  the  Whiteoaks,  Centenary   at  ]alna  became  the  final  chapter   in  the  one­ hundred-year saga.  Despite  its dances, dinners,  weddings  and  its parallels  with the  events  described  in  The   Building  of  ]alna, Centenary   at  ]alna  does  not

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



recreate  the  sense  of  innocence,  vitality  and  excitement   which   pervades   the earlier novel. At times the "unrestrained high spirits" and  the elaborate celebra­ tions in Centenary  at  ]alna seem like artificial ceremonies that  have lost  much  of their  validity  and  significance and  that  scarcely conceal  harsher  realities. Those realities include  violence, loneliness, change  and  death.  The  appearance of grey in Renny's  hair,  Noah  Binn's tale of an old grey horse driven  mad  by a sudden encounter  with one of his own species in a city where he had grown accustomed to seeing  only  " 'millions  of  cars' " the  reference  to  "a  changing   world",   the "troubled  and uneasy state of the world", and "the crudity, the violent immaturity of modem  life", and  the reminder  that  " 'Time takes away our  pleasures' " seem to undermine  a gaiety  which  often appears  artificial.  Noah's  macabre wedding gift, an  enlarged  photograph of the  Whiteoak  family  plot  in  the  graveyard,  is equally sobering:  " 'It goes to show what young brides and  bridegrooms come to. Like the rest of us'."
Centenary  at  ]alna begins and  ends with  the reflections of Mary  Pheasant, a delicate, shy and nature-loving  child who represents the anti-thesis of the neurotic and  morbid  Dennis.  In  the  midst of  threats,  attempted  suicide,  violent  death, incest and  jealousy, she manages  to remain  refreshingly innocent.  When  Dennis accuses her of being " 'an  ignorant  little girl',"  Mary  replies:  " 'I don't  want  to know'."  She  delights  in spiders  and  roses, "the  sound  of leaves  being  tumbled by a breeze or a sudden  burst of song from  an  unseen bird,"  and  the  fairy-like atmosphere  of Fiddler's  Hut,  and does not question "where  or why". Though the adults  have  given her  a watch  "to  make  her  more  conscious of the  passing of time",  Mary  still  lives in  an  essentially timeless world,  inhabited   by  Humpty Dumpty, the Mad Hatter, the Three Bears and Red Riding Hood. One is tempted to see  Mary  and  Dennis  as opposing sides of de la  Roche's  awareness  and  to regard  Mary's  appreciation of the innocence  and  vitality of childhood  and  her tragic  awareness  of  their  inevitable  destruction.  Centenary   at  ]alna  may  well reflect de la  Roche's  despairing  acceptance  of the fact  that  the  world  of order and  independence which she had  created  through  the one-hundred-year  history of the  Whiteoaks  had  become more  remote  than  ever  from  modem   reality.



lE WHITEOAK  CHRONICLES, although  they  are  often  indi­ vidually weak, represent  an impressive accomplishment  when  viewed as a single history. Inevitably, the repetition of scenes and situations and even the consistency of the characterization detract  from these works. Particularly  in the novels set in


59

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



the post-]alna  years, one finds the new twist of plot and the new characters  an insufficient antidote  to the monotony developed by the repetition of family history, the similarity  of scene and  the predictable  nature  of so many  episodes.  Inescap­ ably, the  references to the  portraits  of Philip  and  Adeline,  the  lengthy  debates over domestic trivialities, the inconsequential  talk about  horses, the conversations emphasizing  character traits  which  have  already  become too  familiar,  and  the repetition  of family  history grow  tiresome. At the same time,  the consistency of de Ia Roche's vision is a part  of the attraction of the chronicles. In this large and complex tapestry  with its innumerable strands  and  continually  proliferating  pat­ terns one becomes increasingly aware of the creator's imaginative  energy and  the conscious and   unconscious  preoccupations   which  directed  that  energy.  De  Ia Roche  was  deeply  involved,  emotionally  and  intellectually,  in  the  world  she created and then extended  over a hundred years: "... the Whiteoaks without  her quite  realizing it held a mortgage  on her imagination; they would not leave her in peace unless she was writing about them."8
The  Whiteoak  chronicles  provide  an  intimate  insight into  the nature  of their
creator  and  a fascinating  documentary on the special tastes and  needs of a very large group of readers, for one easily arrives at the conclusion that  de Ia Roche's conscious and  unconscious  preoccupations  were also those of a large  proportion of her  readers.  The  most prominent  of these is the  conflict  between  individual freedom  and tradition which, with the exception of a few occasions on which de Ia Roche's involvement  with events in her own life blurs this conflict, is developed with consistency throughout the Whiteoak chronicles. Her history of the Whiteoak family can be regarded  as a defence of individual  freedom and  "the  conservative ethos",  which  Philip  Thody  regards as "inseparable  from the family  novel as a literary form".9
The  Whiteoak  novels combine elements of romance and elements of the novel. On the one hand,  their lively and convincing presentation of highly individualistic characters,  the immediacy with which they dramatize  domestic action, their work­ ing out  of quite  complex  family  relationships  in  the  "great  tradition"  of  Jane  Austen,  George  Eliot  and  others,  and  the  readers'  awareness  that  Jalna  has counterparts in past and  present social history contribute  to their sense of realism. On the other hand,  Jalna's separation  from the outside world, the fact that  much of the action  occurs outside  the social order,  the  tendency  toward  anarchy  and the equation  of the wilderness with liberty, the looseness of the  books' structure  and  their  characteristic shifting  from  violent  melodramatic  actions  to  comic  or pastoral scenes show the extent to which elements identified with the romance are

6o

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



also incorporated in these novels. The  contradictions  which  Richard Chase asso­ ciated  with the romance-noveP0  and the tensions which Douglas Jones, Northrop  Frye  and  Warren  Tallman identified  with the tradition  of Canadian  fiction are present throughout the Whiteoak  chronicles.
In the Jalna  novels de la Roche created a microcosm which often suggests that civilization need not be founded  on repression, that individual  freedom  and spon­ taneity  are  not  necessarily destructive  of order  and  tradition, and  that  the  life instinct need not be sacrificed to culture.  ]alna and the other novels in the White­ oak  chronicles are  the  imaginative  expression of an  ideal  toward  which de  la Roche  had  been moving since the earliest of her short stories. In  it  she found  a viable resolution of a problem with which she had long been concerned.  From this point of view, her willingness to linger within the Whiteoak  world is not difficult to understand.
The  imaginative  history of the Whiteoaks records de la Roche's  sceptical  reac­ tion to the modern world and her nostalgia for an earlier existence, perhaps partly idealized as childhood recollections often are. Her sense of loss as well as her doubt are  not simply a  result of her  recognition  that  the  English  influence  was  being weakened  in Canada, though  she clearly experienced  this attenuation as  a  loss; she found  too much  in the  emerging  world which  was destructive  of a  way of living and  an attitude toward  life which she cherished,  perhaps  not  only  as an idealized  memory but also as a dream fostered by the constricting  circumstances of her own childhood.  In defiance of change, de la Roche clung tenaciously  to a past in which memory and  fantasy were interchangeable  and  created  for  herself and   the  multitudes   who  read  and  enjoyed  the  Jalna  novels  a  world  which appeared  more free, more vital and  more stable than  the  present.

"I  think my readers have a longing for the stability and freedom of those distant days when the world seemed very large."

The  Whiteoaks are  distinguished  by their  capacity  for embracing the  contra­ dictory values which fascinated de la Roche all her life. They  recognize the claims of both  individual  freedom  and  tradition  and  are able to live  creatively  despite, or perhaps  because of these divisive pressures. Jalna  and the family it protects and supports  are the ultimate  manifestations of de la Roche's need for  an imaginary  retreat  characterized  by freedom  and stability without  repression or chaos. Jalna  is a symbol not only of the divided  nature  of  Canadian culture  but  also of belief in the creative potentiality  of the tension  between the individualism  and  the gar­ rison mentality.

WHITEOAK CHRONICLES



NOTES

1 Dorothy  Livesay, "Getting It Straight," Impulse  (Volume  I, No.2) p. 34·
2  Claude  Bissell, "Letters in Canada," University  of Toronto  Quarterly,  23 ( I953), p.  270. See  also  Dorothy   Livesay,  "Mazo  Explored,"   Canadian   Literature, 32 (Spring,  I967),  p. 59·
3 Ronald  Hambleton, Mazo  de la  Roche  of ]alna  (Toronto: General  Publishing, Ig66).
4 George Hendrick,  Mazo  de la Roche  (New York:  Twayne  Publishers,  I97o).
5  Mazo de la Roche,  Ringing  the  Changes (London: Macmillan,  I957), p. 265.
6  Lovat Dickson, taped  interview  with D. Daymond, April 2I,  I972.
7  Douglas Jones,  Butterfly  on  Rock  (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, I97o), p. 33·
8 Edward  Weeks, letter  to D. Daymond,  March  2, I972.
9  Philip  Thody,  "The Politics of  the  Family Novel:  Is Conservatism  Inevitable?"
Mosaic  (Fall,  Ig6g), p. 95·
10 Richard   Chase,  The   American   Novel  and  Its  Tradition  (New  York:   Anchor
Books, I957).






HONESTY
 

Audrey Conrad


I am laid bare -
a field of worms and flowers open to the birds
and eyes of all.

I stretch  my muscled abdomen in adulation.
A lover's tongue
can  find  no secrets  here.

Yet it is possible to find
in dark spirals of the mind a small white nude
who curls herself and hides.

Openness is as fine defense as any.


FRYE'S THEORY  OF SYMBOLS



Robert D. Denham




LA RECENT  NUMBER OF    Poeti", Tzvetan Todomv  d;,.ru,.es
almost  peremptorily  Northrop  Frye's  re-interpretation of the  medieval  doctrine
of four levels of literary meaning.  "I find it inadequate," he says, "because, with­ out being necessarily false, it is not really helpful. The  four  meanings  are  postu­ lated in advance,  and  any utterance  appears  to be as ambiguous  as any other."1
Such a brief account,  however, makes it impossible to determine  whether  Frye's
theory of meaning  is, in fact, of no use, and whether  it does make any utterance as ambiguous  as any other. Frye's theory of meaning is found  in the course of an extended  discussion of symbolism in  Anatomy of Criticism, and  to  be properly understood  it needs to be placed in the context of his argument there.
In The Critical  Path,  Frye remarks that  his theory of literature was developed from  an attempt  to answer two questions:  What  is the  total  subject  of study  of which  criticism forms  a  part?  And  how do  we arrive  at  poetic meaning?2 The Second  Essay of the  Anatomy- "Ethical  Criticism:  Theory  of Symbols"-is addressed to this latter  question. Frye's starting  point is to admit  the  principle  of polysemous meaning, a modified version of Dante's four-fold system of  interpreta­ tion. Once  the  principle  is granted,  he claims, there  are  two  alternatives: "we can either stop with a purely relative and  pluralistic position, or we can go on to consider the possibility of a finite number  of critical methods, and  that  they can all be contained  within a single theory."
Frye develops his argument  by first placing the issue of meaning  in a broader context:
The  meaning of a literary work forms a part of a larger whole. In  the previous essay ["Theory of Modes"]  we saw that the meaning of dianoia was one of three elements, the other  two being mythos or narrative and ethos or characterization. It  is better  to  think,  therefore,  not simply of a  sequence of  meanings, but   a sequence of contexts or relationships in which the whole work of literary art can be placed, each  context  having  its  characteristic mythos  and  ethos  as  well as its dianoia or meaning.

FRYE's THEORY OF  SYMBOLS



Context,  then,  rather  than  meaning,  becomes the crucial criterion.  Frye refers to these contextual  relationships  as "phases",  which is the organizing  category  for the taxonomy of his theory of symbols.
The  word "ethical", therefore, in the title of the Second Essay obviously does not derive from the meanings which ethos had in the First Essay of the Anatomy. Frye is not concerned  here to expand  the analysis of characterization found there. The  word  refers,  rather,  to  the  connection  between  art  and  life  which  makes literature   a  liberal  yet  disinterested  ethical  instrument.  Ethical  criticism,  Frye says in the Introduction to the Anatomy, refers to a "consciousness of the presence of society.... [It] deals with art  as communication from the past to the present, and  is based on  a  conception  of the  total  and  simultaneous  possession of past culture". It is the archetype,  as we shall see below, which provides the connection between past and  present.
Unlike  the  other  three  essays in  the  Anatomy, Frye's  theory  of symbols  is
oriented  toward   an  analysis  of  criticism. "Phases"  are  contexts  within  which literature can be interpreted; they are primarily meant  to describe critical proce­ dures  rather  than  literary  types; in short,  they  represent  methods  for  analyzing symbolic meaning.
"Symbol"  is the first of three basic categories Frye uses to differentiate  the five phases. Here we encounter the breadth  of reference and  unconventional usage so often  found  in Frye's  work;  for in the Second Essay "symbol"  is used to mean "any  unit of literary  structure which can be isolated for critical attention". This broad definition permits Frye to associate the appropriate kind of symbolism with each  phase, and  thereby  define the phase at  the highest level of generality. The symbol  used as a  sign  results in  the  descriptive  phase;  as motif,  in  the  literal phase;  as image, in the formal  phase;  as archetype,  in the mythical  phase;  and as monad,  in the anagogic  phase.
Before looking at  these abstractions  more closely, we need to observe the two additional  categories  underlying  Frye's  definition  of the  phases:  narrative   (or mythos)  and meaning  (or dianoia). These terms also have a wide range of  refer­ ence, much  wider  even than  in Frye's theory  of modes. One  can  only  indicate the  general  associations  they  have in  Frye's  usage. Narrative  is  associated  with rhythm,  movement,  recurrence,  event,  and  ritual.  Meaning  is  associated  with pattern, structure,  stasis, precept,  and  dream.  The  meaning  of  "narrative" and the meaning of "meaning", then, are never constant,  always changing  according  to the context of Frye's discussion. The central role which this pair of terms plays in the Second Essay, as well as in the entire Anatomy, cannot  be over-emphasized.

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS





LITERAL AND  DESCRIPTIVE PHASES.     The  first two of Frye's contexts, the literal and descriptive phases, are linked together in his discussion because, unlike the other  three phases, they are defined in relation  to each other. The  method  is one of dichotomous  division, whereby Frye sets up a whole series of  opposing  terms  within   the  triadic  framework   (symbol-narrative-meaning). The  opposing sets of categories are  then  used to define, to give content  to,  the expressions "literal" and  "descriptive".
The  opposing terms of the first category  (symbol)  are  motif  and  sign,  repre­ senting  the kinds of signification  which the literal and  descriptive  phases  respec­ tively embody. These  words are  defined in  turn  by another  series of  opposites. When the symbol is a sign, for example, the movement of reference is centrifugal, as in descriptive or assertive works; and  when the symbol is a  motif, the  move­ ment  is centripetal,  as in imaginative,  or what  Frye calls  "hypothetical", works. Similarly, in the former  case, where allegiance is to the reality-principle, value is instrumental  and  priority  is given  to instruction;  and  in  the  latter,  where  alle­ giance is to the pleasure-principle,  value is final and  priority  is given to delight. Underlying  Frye's distinction  between  the  "narrative" and  "meaning" poles of the dichotomy is an assumption, fundamental to much  of his work, that  art  can be viewed both temporally  and spatially. This assumption, specified to the narra­ tive movement of the literal phase, is seen as rhythm;  and applied  to the narrative  movement of the descriptive phase, it is the relation which the order  of words has to external  reality. Similarly,  when  the spatial  aspect  is more  important in  our experience of a work, we tend to view it statically, as an integrated unit, or to use Frye's chief  metaphors,  as pattern  or structure.3
Each of the phases of literature has an affinity to both a type of literature  and a critical procedure. This  relation  for the descriptive and  literal  phases of  litera­ ture can be represented by a continuum  running from documentary naturalism  at one pole to symbolisme and  "pure poetry" at the other. Although  every work of literature is characterized  to some degree by both these phases of symbolism, there can  be an infinite number  of variations  along the  descriptive-literal  continuum. Thus,  when the descriptive  phase predominates, the narrative  of literature  tends toward  realism, and  its meaning  toward  the  didactic  or descriptive  (e.g.,  Zola, Dreiser).  At the other  end of the continuum  is the tradition  of writers like Mal­ larme,  Rimbaud,  Rilke,  Pound,  and  Eliot.  Here  the  emphasis  is on  the  literal phase of meaning:  literature  is considered "as centripetal verbal pattern, in which

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



elements of direct  or verifiable statement are subordinated to the  integrity of that pattern".
In  a similar  fashion, the literal and  descriptive phases are  reflected  in two chief types of criticism. On  the one hand, related  to the descriptive aspect of the symbol, are  the various  kinds of documentary criticism  which  deal  with  sources,  historical transmission, the  history  of  ideas,  and  the  like. Such  approaches assume  that  a poem  is a verbal  document whose "imaginative hypothesis" can  be made  explicit by assertive  or propositional language. A literal  criticism, on  the  other  hand,  will find  in  poetry  "a subtle   and  elusive  verbal   pattern" that   neither leads  to  nor permits  simple  assertive  statements or prose paraphrases.
As Frye's  language indicates, the  principal assumption underlying his analysis of the literal  and  descriptive phases is one he shares with the  major proponents of the  New  Criticism-those whose  concern   has  been  to  locate   the  meaning of poetry  in the  nature of its symbolic  language. Frye's  distinction between  assertive and  hypothetical meaning is closely akin, for example,  to Cleanth Brooks's opposi­ tion  between  factual and  emotional language, to I. A. Richards' emotive-referen­ tial  dialectic,  and  to  the  procedure running throughout  contemporary criticism which  attempts to separate poetic language from  that  of  ordinary usage or science on the  basis of the  more  complex, ambiguous, and  ironic meaning of the former. The  characteristic method of inference in  each  of  these  procedures is, as R.  S. Crane observes, based on a similar dialectic; for they all employ-Frye included
-a process of reasoning to what  the  language and  meaning of poetry  are  from
what  assertive  discourse  and  rational meaning are  not.4
Frye would  like to refute  the semantic analysis of logical  positivism,  that  is, the reduction of  all  meaning to  either   rational or  emotional discourse.  While  it  is true  that  the  subtlety and  range of  reference  contained in  his discussion  of  the literal  phase will not  permit a simple  equation between  the  meaning expressed  by symbols in this phase and  the  non-descriptive meaning of analytic philosophers, it is no less true  that  he still remains within  the framework of the theory  he opposes; for what  Frye does is to convert  his denial  of the principles of linguistic  philosophy into  the  principles of  his  own  poetic  theory.  The   primary assumptions remain the same,  namely,  that  poetry  in the literal  and  descriptive phases  is primarily  a mode  of discourse  and  that  there  is a  bi-polar  distribution of all language and, thus,  of all meaning. 5
The first section  of  Frye's  theory  of symbols  results  in  an  expansion and  re­ arrangement of the  medieval schema  of four  levels of interpretation,  according to  which  literal  meaning is discursive  or  representational meaning.  Its  point  of

66

FRYE's THEORY OF  SYMBOLS



reference  is centrifugal.  When  Dante,  for example,  interprets  scripture  literally, he points to a correspondence between an event in the Bible and a historical event, or at least one he assumed  to have occurred in the past. In  this sense, literature signifies real  events. The  first medieval  level of symbolism thus  becomes Frye's descriptive  level. His own literal  phase, however, has no corresponding rung  on the medieval  ladder.  The  advantage of reshuffling the categories,  Frye  believes, is that  he now has a framework  to account for a poem literally as a poem -as a self-contained verbal structure whose meaning is not dependent  upon any external reference. This redesignation is simply one more way Frye can indicate  the differ­ ence between a symbol as motif and sign. As a principle of his system,  however, it reveals clearly the dialectical  method  he uses to define poetic  meaning.  He  is not  satisfied,  however,  with  the  dichotomy,  calling  it  a  "quizzical   antithesis between delight and  instruction,  ironic withdrawal  from life and  explicit connec­ tion  with  it".  Therefore,  in  his discussion of the  third  phase  of symbolism  he attempts  to move beyond  these now-familiar  distinctions  of the  New Criticism.



l:E FORMAL PHASE.     This aspect of symbolism relates spe­ cifically to the imagery of poetry. Formal criticism, however, can be seen as study­ ing literature  from  the  point  of view, once again,  of either  mythos  or  dianoia. The  meaning of these two terms remains close to the meaning  they had  in Frye's discussion of the literal and  descriptive  phases, though  here they function  differ­ ently. In the first two phases, narrative (mythos) and meaning  (dianoia) tended to diverge in Frye's argument toward  opposite poles. In  the formal  phase, how­ ever, his interest is on  making  them  converge until  they  are  somehow  unified; for  it  is the  essential unity  of  a  work of literature  which  the  word  "form" is usually meant  to convey.
Frye's explanation  of this point  involves a highly complex  dialectic.  He  uses,
first of all, the concept of imitation  to contravene the form-content dichotomy. Mythos,  he says, is a secondary  imitation  of an  action  because  it  describes the typical rather  than  the specific human  act. And dianoia is a secondary  imitation of  thought   because  it  is also  concerned  with  the  typical,  in  this  case,  "with images, metaphors,  diagrams,  and  verbal ambiguities out of which specific ideas develop". The  assumption  here seems to be that  the concept of secondary imita­ tion, because it represents the typical, is a principle which unifies formal criticism and thus permits the discussion of poetry on this level always to remain internaP The  concept  of typicality,  Frye feels, avoids the antithesis implicit  in  the literal

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



and  descriptive  phases. Yet  his use of the word "typical" is equivocal,  meaning something  different  in  each  case:  more  philosophical  than   history  on  the  one hand,  and  more historical  than  philosophy on the other.
The second argument for the unity of formal criticism rests on the movement­ stasis dichotomy,  analogized  once again to the terms mythos  and  dianoia. Every detail of the  poem is related  to its form, Frye claims, and  this form  remains the same "whether it is examined  as stationary  or as moving through  the work from beginning to end".  His main point is that we need to balance the ordinary  method of studying symbolism, which  is solely in terms of  meaning,  with  the study of a poem's  moving  body  of imagery.7   The  method  of  definition  at  this  point  con­ tinues to rely upon  the principle  of dichotomous division:  mythos  versus dianoia, movement versus stasis, narrative versus meaning, structure versus rhythm, shap­ ing form versus containing form. Yet the way the pairs of opposites function,  as compared  with their use in the first section of Frye's essay, is that they do not point to  realities  outside  the  poem.  Poets  do  not  directly  imitate   either  nature   or thought; they create  potential, hypothetical,  and  typical forms. It is this concep­ tion  of art  which  Frye sees  as  helping  to  resolve the split  between  delight  and instruction,  between  form  and  content.
Criticism in the formal  phase is called "commentary", or "the  process of  trans­ lating  into explicit  or discursive language  what  is implicit  in  the  poem".  More specifically, it tries to isolate the ideas embodied in the structure of  poetic imagery. This  produces allegorical interpretation, and, in fact, commentary sees all litera­ ture  as  potential   allegory.  The   range  of  symbolism   ("thematically significant imagery") can  be classified according  to the degree of its explicitness, which is to say, all literature can  be organized  along  a  continuum   of formal  meaning, from the most to the least allegorical.
The  criterion  for  Frye's  taxonomy  is the degree to which  a  writer  insists on relating  his imagery  to precepts  and  examples. Naive allegory is so close to dis­ cursive writing that  it can  hardly be called literature  at all. It belongs "chiefly to educational literature on an elementary  level:  schoolroom moralities,  devotional exempla,  local pageants,  and  the like". Even though  such  naive forms have no real hypothetical  centre, they are considered allegorical to some degree since they now and  then  rely on images to illustrate their theses.
Frye's  two  types of  actual  or  formal  allegory, continuous  and   freistimmige, show an  explicit connection  between image and  idea, differing  only in that  the former  is more overt  and  systematic. Dante,  Spenser, and  Bunyan,  for example, maintain  the allegorical  connection  throughout  their  work;  whereas  writers like

68

FRYE'S THEORY OF  SYMBOLS



Hawthorne, Goethe,  and  Ibsen  use symbolic equations  which  are  at  once  less explicit  and  less continuous.8    If the structure of  poetic  imagery  has  a  strong doctrinal  emphasis, so that  the internal  fictions become exempla,  as in Milton,  a fourth  kind of allegorical relation  is established. And to the right  of this, located at the centre of Frye's scale, are works "in  which the structure of imagery,  how­ ever suggestive,  has  an  implicit  relation  only  to  events  and  ideas,  and  which includes  the  bulk  of Shakespeare." All other  poetic  imagery  tends  toward  the ironic and  the paradoxical  end of the continuum  and  would include the kind of symbolism implied  by the metaphysical conceit and  symbolisme,  by Eliot's objec­ tive correlative and  the heraldic emblem. Beyond this mode, at the extreme  right of the scale, we encounter  indirect  symbolic techniques,  like  private  association, Dadaism,  and  intentionally  confounding  symbols.
What  Frye has done is redefine the word "allegory",  or at least greatly expand
its ordinary  meaning;  for he uses the term not only to refer to a literary conven­ tion but  also to indicate  a  universal structural principle  of literature.  It is uni­ versal  because  Frye  sees all  literature   in  relation  to  mythos  and  dianoia.  We engage in allegorical  interpretation, that  is, whenever  we relate  the  events of a narrative  to conceptual  terminology.  This  is commentary,  or  the  translation   of poetic into discursive meaning.  In  interpreting  an  actual  or  continuous  allegory like The   Faerie  Queene,   the  relationship  between  mythos  and   dianoia  is  so explicit that  it  describes the  direction  which  the  commentary must  take.  In  a work like Hamlet  the relationship  is more implicit. Yet commentary  on Hamlet is still allegorical; for if we interpret  the play as (say)  a tragedy of indecision, we begin to set up a kind of moral counterpoint  (dianoia)  to the events of its narra­ tive ( mythos)  that  continuous allegory has as a part  of its structure. We should expect, then,  that  as allegory  becomes more implicit,  the direction  in which  the commentary   must  go  becomes  less prescriptive.  And  this  is  precisely  Frye's position: an  implicit  allegory like Hamlet  can  carry  an  almost  infinite  number  of interpretations.9



kE MYTHICAL PHASE.	If in the  formal  phase a  poem  is considered as representing its own class-a unique artifact lying midway between precept  and  example,  in  the  mythical  phase  it  is seen generically  as one  of  a whole  group  of similar  forms.  Here  Frye's  most  fundamental  principle  is  his assumption  regarding  the total  order  of words; for the study  of poetry involves not simply isolating works as imitations  of nature  but  also considering  them  as

6g

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



imitations of other  poems. And since literature shapes itself out of the total order of words, the study of genres becomes important. Frye reserves his treatment of genres for the Fourth  Essay of the Anatomy, concentrating here on the principle which ultimately provides the basis of the study of genres: convention. He empha­ sizes the  conventionalized  aspect  of art  not  only because it  is close to  his  own interests  as a  critic  but  also  because  he  believes literary  convention  has  been neglected  by critics. Thus,  he spends  some time  elaborating   a  number of  his favourite  topics:  that  the more original art is, the more profoundly imitative it is of other art;  that  we have been schooled in realistic prejudices about  the creative process; that  the conventional  aspect of poetry is as important as what  is distinc­ tive in poetic achievement.
The  symbol which  characterizes  the fourth  phase is the  conventional  symbol
-what Frye calls the "archetype." The study of convention  is, of course, based on analogies. In the case of archetypes, it is analogies of symbolism. To see Moby Dick, for example,  as an archetype  is to recognize an analogy between  Melville's whale  and  other  "leviathans and  dragons of the  deep from  the  Old  Testament onward". He  is  but  one  of  a  recurring  tradition   of  such  creatures  clustered together  in our  experience  of literature; such images come together  in our ima­ ginative  experience,  Frye argues, simply because they are similar.
The function  of signs, Frye observes, are also dependent  on conventional asso­ ciations. But the  difference  between signs and  archetypes  is that  the  latter are complex variables, which means that  a given archetype  may symbolize a variety of objects, ideas, or emotions. Some archetypal associations are more obvious than others, even though  there are no necessary connections, "no intrinsic or inherent correspondences  which must inevitably  be present." But  archetypes  are not only complex;  they  also  vary  in explicitness. Frye sees these  relations  schematically, running  from pure convention  at one extreme to pure variable  at the other. The range of conventions should  not be confused with the scale of allegorical mean­ ings in the third  phase; the two scales are parallel only in so far as their common criterion  is the  degree of explicitness which  images and  archetypes,  respectively have.10
The  symbol as archetype  is the first principle  underlying  Frye's  definition  of the  fourth  phase.  How  do  the  categories  mythos   and  dianoia  function  in  this definition?  The  pairs  of opposites  in  his dialectic  now  become  recurrence   and desire, ritual and myth. Relating  these terms to mythos  and  dianoia  depends once more on  a highly abstract  deduction.  "Ritual and  dream," Frye says, "are  the narrative  [mythos]  and significant content  [dianoia]  respectively of literature  in

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



its archetypal  aspect." He reaches this conclusion analogically. That ritual  is the narrative  aspect of the archetypal  phase follows only because of Frye's  previous definition  of ritual  as a  recurrent  act  of symbolic communication. The  quality of recurrence, in other words, is what narrative  and ritual have in common. How then does Frye arrive at the principle of recurrence? To some degree it is present in his initial definition of narrative in the literal  phase, where  mythos  is seen as rhythm,  or  the  recurrent  movement  of words. But  in  the  formal  phase,  recur­ rence  as an  aspect  of  mythos  disappears  altogether  from  Frye's  discussion. It might  be  argued  that  the  principle  is implicit  in  the  formal  phase  in  Frye's account  of typical actions;  but this hardly accounts for the fact  that  "typicality" is used  to  define  both  narrative and  meaning.  The  "example" is  the  formal aspect of narrative,  and  the temporal  association Frye makes is to see mythos  as a moving  body of imagery.
It would appear,  then, that  in order to keep his categories consistent, that  is, to
make  recurrence  a  principle  of narrative  throughout  each  of  the  phases,  Frye must find some way of re-introducing it into the formal  phase. And  he does this by simply asserting that  in  the  "exemplary  event  there  is an  element  of  recur­ rence,"  which  is to say, apparently, that  we desire the  exemplary  event  to  be imitated  again  and  again. The  point is, however, that  recurrence  is  maintained as a basic category by an analogical  leap from the literal to the mythical  phase, bypassing the formal  phase.
Frye employs the same  kind  of dialectic  in  moving from  the  precept  of the formal  phase to the dream  of the  mythical. Here  the transition  is based on  the assertion  that  there  is a  strong  dement   of desire associated  with  the  precept. Desire, therefore, becomes the mediating category between the third and fourth phases. Putting  it straightforwardly, the form of the argument is this:  Desire is related  to precept;  precept  is the dianoia of formal  critcism. Desire is related  to dream; dream is the dianoia of archetypal criticism. The  relationship  is, of course, once again  analogical.
Once Frye has distinguished ritual and dream, which on the archetypal  level represent mythos and dianoia respectively, he seeks to unite them  under thecate­ gory of myth-which explains the title of the fourth  phase. From the perspective of this phase, Frye argues, we see the same kinds of processes or rhythms occurring  in literature  that we find in ritual and dream. There  are two basic patterns: one, cyclical, the  other,  dialectical.  Ritual  imitates  the  cyclical  processes of  nature: the rhythmic  movement  of the universe and the seasons, as well as the recurring  cycles of human life; and  literature in its archetypal  phase imitates  nature  in the

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



same way. The  dialectical  pattern, on the other  hand, derives from  the world of dream,  where desire is in constant  conflict with  reality. Liberation  and  capture, integration and  expulsion,  love and  hate are some of the terms  we apply  to this moral  dialectic  in ritual  and  dream.11 The  same pattern,  when  expressed  hypo­ thetically,  is to  be found  in  literature.  Archetypal  criticism,  Frye  concludes,  is based upon these organizing  patterns.
To  see archetypal  criticism  as concerned  with  the social aspects of poetry is, as we have observed Frye saying, to emphasize the relationship  of the individual poem to other poems. But this is only half of what should be properly emphasized, for a poem is also a "part of the total  imitation  of nature  that  we call  civiliza­ tion."  What  does it  mean  to say civilization is a  total  imitation   of  nature,  an idea that  occurs repeatedly  in Frye's work? He himself refers to it metaphorically as "the  process of making  a total  human  form out of nature." He means that  as civilization develops, the natural world is transformed  from  the non-human into something  with  human  shape  and  meaning,  a  process which  is  given  direction by desire. Because man  is not  satisfied, for  example,  with  roots  and  caves, his civilization creates  "human forms  of nature" in fanning  and  architecture.12
Criticism  on the  archetypal  level, therefore,  is concerned  not  just with  genre
and  convention.  Because it views the symbol as a natural  object  with  a human meaning, its scope is expanded to include civilization. And from  this perspective, poetry becomes a product  of the vision of the goals of human  work. The  Blakean influence  behind  these ideas,  especially the concept of civilization  as a "human form",  is a point  to which we shall return  shortly.
This  view, says Frye, makes it tempting  for the archetypal  critic  to see art  as an  ethical  instrument   whose function  is to serve society by visualizing its goals. Similarly, in the descriptive  phase we are likely to encounter  truth  as an external goal for art,  and  in the literal  and  formal  phases, beauty. But as none  of these external  standards can  ultimately  determine  the value of literature, we need to move beyond the archetypal  phase and the goals of civilization, where art is not an end in itself, "to culture, where it is disinterested and liberal, and stands on its own feet." By such passage, we climb to the anagogic level.



E         This phase is Frye's beatific critical VISIOn.  Its  argument is more  difficult  because more  visionary.  It  moves into  a world of Blakean  ontology  and  Neo-Platonic  metaphysics, a  world  of discourse so far  removed from  the  usual languages  of criticism that  the quizzical  response

72

FRYE'S THEORY OF   SYMBOLS



of some readers has sounded  like Pound's  dismissal of the medieval fourth  level: "Anagogical? Hell's  bells, 'nobody'  knows what  THAT is."13 This  kind  of  state­ ment  is understandable if Frye's statements  are  taken  out  of context,  in  which case, it is true, what he says about  anagogy approaches  the limits of  intelligibility. The  problem, then, is to place these statements  in the framework  of  his discourse.
Frye begins by drawing  an analogy between his anagogic  phase and  the medi­ eval fourth  level. Anagogy is defined as "universal  meaning," a definition  which, although   not  exactly  consistent  with  medieval  usage/4   is important  in  Frye's description  of the  anagogic  symbol. Frye  draws  a  second  analogy  between  the fifth phase and  the fifth mode of his own framework.  Both are  concerned  with the mythopoeic  aspect of literature, that  is, with "fictions and  themes relating  to divine or quasi-divine  being and  powers.m 5   These two analogies should  alert  us to  expect  a  description  of  the  anagogic  phase  which  draws  upon  religious  or visionary language.
The  analogy  to  myth  having  been drawn,  Frye  moves toward  the  principle upon which the fifth phase is said to rest:  the centre of the order  of words. That such a centre  exists is predicated  on the assumption  that  our  "greatest" literary experiences derive from works which are the most mythopoeic. These  are, at one end,  primitive  and  popular  works, both of which afford  "an  unobstructed view of archetypes," and, at the other, the learned and recondite mythopoeia  in writers like Dante,  Spenser, James,  and  Joyce. "The inference seems to be," says Frye, "that the learned  and the subtle, like the primitive and the popular,  tend  toward the  centre  of imaginative  experience."  The  crux  of  the  matter   comes  in  this heavily value-laden  statement: "In  the greatest  moments  of Dante  and  Shake­ speare, in, say, The  Tempest  or the climax of the Purgatorio, we have  a  feeling of converging significance, the feeling that  here we are close to seeing  what  our whole literary  experience  has been about,  the feeling that  we have  moved  into the still centre of the order of words."
Frye realizes the difficulties attendant on this kind of assertion;  he, therefore, faces the  problem  of trying to define the norm  underlying  the order -the  "still point"  around  which  his literary  universe revolves. His  first  recourse  is to  the categories which have been used continually, though  not univocally, throughout the Second Essay: symbol, mythos, and  dianoia.
The symbols of the anagogic  phase are universal symbols, what  Frye  refers to as "images of things common to all men." Some symbols, therefore, are not bound by nature  or history. This illimitable aspect of the anagogic symbol is what  Frye's definition fastens upon.

73

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



The  dianoia  and  mythos of the  mythical  phase,  we recall,  were dream  and ritual  respectively. Expanding these categories to define the symbol of the  ana­ gogic phase, Frye says that  "literature imitates  the  total  dream  of man,  and  so imitates the thought  of a human  mind  which is at the circumference  and  not at the centre of reality." This is the "meaning" pole of Frye's dialectic. At the other pole, representing  the "narrative" aspect, poetry is said to imitate "human action as total ritual, and so [to imitate]  the action of an omnipotent human  society that  contains all the powers of nature  within itself." Unlimited social action  (or total ritual)   and  unlimited  individual   thought   (or  total  dream)   are  the  dialectical opposites, therefore,  which unite  to produce the macrocosmic aspect of the ana­ gogic phase. This  centrifugal  movement, extending  indefinitely  outward  toward a periphery  where  there  are  no limits to  the intelligibility of the symbol, is but one of the  aspects of the  anagogic symbol:  the  macrocosm  of total  ritual  and dream. The  other,  as we have seen, is the centripetal  movement,  turning  inward toward  the  centre  of the  literary  universe, or  toward  the  microcosm,  which  is "whatever poem we happen  to be reading." Seen together, these two movements produce  the anagogic  symbol, or  what  Frye calls the "monad". This  is a para­  doxical  concept,  but  only in the sense that  an expression like "concrete univer­ sal" is also paradoxical; for "monad" refers to the individual  poem which mani­ fests or reflects within  itself  the  entire  poetic universe.
The  figure of William  Blake looms large behind  Frye's thought  in this section,
a  more  important influence  than  the  one  allusion  to him  might  suggest. In  a prefatory note, Frye tells us he learned his principles of literary symbolism and Biblical typology from Blake in the first place. And when Frye refers to the "ima­ ginative limit of desire" and  to the apocalypse as "the  imaginative conception  of the whole of nature  as the content  of an infinite and  eternal  living body",  he is using the same  kind  of language  he used in  Fearful  Symmetry to describe  the implications  of Blake's view of poetry. In  Frye's understanding of Blake, in fact, we begin to strike close to the heart  of a number of his fundamental convictions: his Romantic aesthetic,  the  idea  that  critical  principles  derive  ultimately  from poetic vision, his belief in the possibility of a  cultural  synthesis. 16
"Anagogic  criticism," Frye says, "is usually found in direct connection  with religion, and  is to  be discovered  chiefly in  the  more  uninhibited   utterances  of poets themselves". It is important not to overlook what  is being  proposed  here. Frye is not saying  that  anagogic  symbols can  be found  in  uninhibited   poetry. He  is saying,  rather,   that  if we  want  to  discover  what  anagogic  criticism   is, we have to turn  to the  poetry  of the more uninhibited  writers. At the  anagogic

74

FRYE'S THEORY OF  SYMBOLS



level,  in  other  words,  poetry  merges  into  cntlciSm  and   v1ce versa.  We  find anagogic  criticism, to give some of Frye's examples, "in  those passages of Eliot's quartets  where the words of the poet are placed within the context  of the incar­ nate Word.... in Valery's conception  of a total intelligence which  appears more fancifully in his figure of M. Teste;  in Yeats's cryptic utterances about  the artifice of eternity, ... in Dylan Thomas's exultant  hymns to a  universal  human  body." Frye does not include  Blake among  his examples here,  but  ten  years earlier  he had  written  a book on Blake's prophecies in which he came  to the same conclu­ sion-that in deciphering  Blake's symbolic code one must tum  for a solution to the literature  itself, not to critical  principles lying outside  the  prophecies.
"I had  not  realized  before this last rereading,"  Frye says in  the  preface  to a
1962  reprint  of Fearful Symmetry, "how completely the somewhat  unusual  form and structure  of my commentary  was derived from my absorption  in the larger critical theory implicit in Blake's view of art. Whatever  importance the book may have,  beyond its merits as a guide  to Blake, it owes to its connection  with  the critical theories that  I have ever since been trying to teach,  in Blake's name  and in my own."  The  most important Blakean idea  in  the  Second  Essay has  to do with the principles of simile and  metaphor,  Frye's discussion of these coming  at the end of his theory of symbols. In a system so firmly dependent on the method of analogy as Frye's, where argument  proceeds by associative leaps, it is not sur­ prising to find frequent  references to these two grammatical forms of  association. Frye is not so much interested, however, in the historical use of simile and  meta­ phor as he is in the modes of thought  which  underlie  them.  These  are  analogy and  identity, principles representing  the two processes by which  the imaginative  power of mind  transforms  the non-human  world  (Nature)  into something  with human shape and meaning  (Culture). This is the point at which  we begin to see the strong influence of Blake.
Frye associates analogy and simile with both descriptive  meaning  and  realism,
and  identity and metaphor  with poetic meaning and myth -a separation  based on Blake's distinction between Locke's natural  epistemology and his own imagina­ tive one. The  relationship,  however, as it is spelled out in the  Anatomy, is more complex than  this. The  conception  one has of simile and  metaphor depends  on the level of criticism he is engaged in;  the meaning which  metaphor has at  the descriptive level, for example, will differ from its meaning at the anagogical.  Frye maintains, in short, that there is a conception of  analogy and  identity  appropriate to each of the five phases.
We must  ask, finally, what  purpose is served by Frye's analysis of the  phases


75

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



of symbolism? This  question  should  be answered  in  the  context  of  Frye's  aim, which is to argue  that  a finite  number  of valid critical  emphases  can  be sythe­ sized into one grand  system. Thus  he is led to maintain,  to take one example, that historical scholarship  and  the  New Criticism should  be seen as  complementary,  not  antithetical,  approaches.   His  attempt   to  join  these  and   other  legitimate methods into a broad theory of contexts means that his attention is always directed away from  the  peculiar  aims and  powers of a given critical  method.  And  even though  the differences among approaches  provide the basis for his classifying them in the first place, these differences are always related  to a single set  of concepts, the most important being symbol, narrative,  and  meaning. In  other  words, Frye translates  the  principles  and  methods  of other  approaches  into  the  language  of his own discourse;  and  this, along  with the breadth  of  reference of his own spe­ cial categories, expanded  far  beyond  the  particular  meaning  they have  in Aris­ totle, greatly facilitates the achievement  of his synthetic end.
Our  question  then  becomes:  What  function  is served by the synthesis? A part of Frye's answer is found  in his discussion of the formal  phase,  where he claims that  knowledge of the "whole  range  of possible commentary" will help "correct the  perspective of both  the  medieval  and  Renaissance critics who assumed  that all major  poetry should be treated  as continuous allegory, and of the modem  ones who maintain  that  poetry  is essentially anti-allegorical  and  paradoxical." There is no need for the critic, in other  words, to restrict himself to one approach. "The present  book,"  Frye says about  the  Anatomy, "is not designed to suggest a new program for critics, but a new perspective on their existing programs, which in themselves are valid enough. The  book attacks no methods of criticism ... [but] the  barriers  between  the  methods.  These  barriers tend  to  make  a critic  confine himself to a single method  of criticism, which is unnecessary, and  they  tend  to make him establish his primary  contacts, not with other critics, but with subjects outside criticism."
Frye's theory of phases, however, has a function  beyond that  simply of  univer­ salizing  the  critical  perspective  and  thus  serving  to  lessen critical  differences. Whether  or not  the  desired  new  perspective can  become a  reality  depends  ulti­ mately on critics accepting  the terms Frye uses to define their common concerns. It is important to note, however, as we move up Frye's critical ladder  to the last two phases -the mythical and anagogic -that we arrive at the kind of criticism on which the unification of critical  thought depends. "In  the process of breaking down barriers,"  Frye says, "I think archetypal  criticism has a central  role, and  I

FRYE'S THEORY OF  SYMBOLS



have given it a prominent  place." Frye's theory of phases, in other  words, serves to indicate  where he himself stands as a critic. His conception  of the archetype  is absolutely crucial to his entire  theory, not simply as a stepping  stone to the  ulti­ mate critical enterprise of the anagogic phase but also as the basis for his theories of myth and  genre  (in the Third  and  Fourth  Essays).


IT IS, OF   COURSE,  too early to suggest how history will come to judge Frye's theory  of symbols, or, for that  matter,  the  entire  Anatomy and
Frye's later  work. When  the time comes for that  judgment,  however,  it  will be properly  made,  I  think,  only in terms of the entire  framework  of his criticism: his aim,  his principles and  assumptions, his critical language,  and  his method  of reasoning. I  have tried  to keep these things in mind  in this exposition  of Frye's theory of symbols, for I think they lessen the chance of his statements  being taken out  of  context   and   they  help  to  guard   against   peremptory   dismissals,  like Todorov's.
Although  anything  like a final judgment lies in the future,  a provisional  assess­
ment  can  be offered from  the  perspective  which  views Frye's  work  as a  whole. First of all, it is clearly of practical  value. It is a system of terms  and  doctrines and  a method  of doing criticism that  can be used to answer one kind  of critical question:  the analogical  relation  of literary  works to one another.  The  evidence for this is not only Frye's own practical  criticism but also the growing  number  of critics  who  have  found   his general  approach,  his  special  categories,  and   his method of doing criticism genuinely useful. Second, his criticism is a creative, aesthetic achievement  in itself. His conceptual  structures  are,  as George  Wood­ cock has pointed out, "as complexly structured  and  as filled with  allusive reson­ ances as any poem.m7    This is to say that  Frye's work goes  beyond a strict  func­ tionalism where utilitarian  values reign supreme.  It provides one good reason for reading him, especially for those who believe that criticism need not exalt instruc­ tion at the expense of delight.
Finally,  Frye's  writings  taken  together  form  a  metacriticism,   reaching   far beyond literature  itself in an effort to account  for and defend  all the products  of culture. In this respect Frye provides a meaningful, if traditional apology for the humanities and a way of doing criticism on a grand scale. It is a kind of criticism which, to use a phrase from Frye's theory of symbols, approaches  the imaginative limits of desire.

77

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



NOTES

1 "Meaning in  Literature: A Survey," Poetics, No.  I   ( I97 I), p.  I 1.
2  Frye  equates  pluralism  here   with  relativism. Yet,  although  the  pluralist  would affirm  that  there  is a finite  number of valid  critical   methods, he  would  certainly deny  that  they  can  all  be contained within  a single  theory.
8 He says, for example, that  a poem's  meaning in the  literal  phase  is "its  pattern or integrity as a  verbal  structure," and  its meaning in  the  descriptive phase  is "the relation of its pattern to a body  of assertive  propositions" (AC,  78).
4  See  R. S. Crane, The  Languages of Criticism   and  the  Structure of Poetry,  I953,
pp.  IOO-I02.
5   It can  be argued that  in attempting to refute  the logical  positivists, Frye has let the opposition dictate the terms  of the argument. Meyer  Abrams  makes  the same  point about  Philip  Wheelwright's The  Burning  Fountain in "The Newer  Criticism: Pri­ soner  of Logical  Positivism?" Kenyon Review, I 7 (I 955),  I 39-43.
6   In  formal  imitation, Frye says, the  work of art  does not reflect external events  and ideas,  but  exists  between   the  example and  the  precept". Or  again,  "The central principle of the  formal phase,  that  a poem  is an  imitation of nature, is ... a  prin­ ciple  which  isolates  the  individuals poem".
7   "The form  of a poem  is the  same  whether it is studied  as narrative or as meaning, hence  the  structure of  imagery  in  Macbeth may  be studied   as  a  pattern  derived from  the  text,  or as a rhythm of repetition falling  on  the audience's ear". Anatomy of Criticism. 85.
8 Freistimmige : the  pseudocontrapuntal style  in  music  where  strict  adherence to  a given number of parts  is abandoned, voices being free to enter  and  drop  out  at will.
9  See  also  Frye's   essay  on  "Allegory" in  Princeton   Encyclopaedia  of  Poetry  and Poetics,  ed.  Alex  Preminger (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton Univ.  Press,  I965),  pp. I2-I5. On  "commentary" see also his essay, "Literary Criticism," in The Aims  and Methods of Scholarship in Modern Languages and  Literatures, ed. James  Thorpe (New  York: Modern Language Association,   I963),  pp. 65-66.
10 The  most  highly  conventional literature is  likely  to  be  na.lve  (i.e.,  primitive or popular). It would  follow  then  that  archetypes are  easiest  to study,  because  more obvious  and  explicit, in na.lve forms:  which  is one reason  for  the  frequent allusion in Frye's  work  to primitive and  popular forms.
11 Frye  uses  the  word  "ritual" more  or  less conventionally. "Dream,"  however,  as evident  from  our  discussion  already, refers not simply  to the subconscious  activities of  sleep  but   to  the  entire  inter-relationship between   desire  and   repugnance in shaping thought.
12  The complete scale of the  human forms of nature (animal, vegetable,  mineral) , as well as those of the  divine  and  social worlds,  is developed  in detail  by Frye in the Third  Essay.
13  Quoted (and   endorsed  as  aptly   characterizing Frye's   position   on  the  anagogic symbol)   by Walter Sutton, Modern American Critcism, I963, p.  255·
14 The word  comes  from  the  Greek,  meaning "mystical" or  "elevation" ("a  leading up"). As a  medieval level  of  interpretation, it  signaled  ultimate truth,  belonging outside  both  time  and  space.  Dante refers to it as "beyond the senses" and  as con-

FRYE'S THEORY OF SYMBOLS



cerned  with  "higher matters belonging   to  the  eternal glory"   (Convivio, II, I). Before  him,  Aquinas  had  defined  the anagogical "sense" in similar  terms  (Summa Theologica, Part  I, QI, Art.  I o). The  word seems generally to have meant spiritual or  otherworldly.  Frye's   term   "universal" seems  more  accurately  to  parallel  the second medieval  level, the allegorical, which  referred  to truth in relation to human­ ity as a whole  or  universal truth. See  Helen  F. Dunbar, Symbolism  in  Medieval  Thought, I929, pp.  I9, 95-98, 270-7I, 468-69.
1  Frye  calls attention to the  fact  that  he uses the  word  "myth" in two senses:  myth as a form  of communication combining ritual  and  dream (in  his discussion  of the fourth phase)   and  myth  as a story  about  the  gods  (in  this  discussion  of  the  fifth phase, as well as in the  First  Essay).
16 In  the  history  of discourse  about literature most critics  have  derived  the  deductive foundations of their  critical theories  from  philosophers, from  other critics,  or  from what  might  be called  broadly  the  speculative and  discursive  currents of  thought which were prevalent at the time. Frye is a notable  exception to this tendency, hav­ ing derived  a number of his  most  important critical   principles from  the  study  of imaginative writers.  Some influential critics have, of course,  been  poets  at the same time  (e.g., Johnson, Dryden, Coleridge,  Arnold,  and  Eliot), but  their  influence  on other  critics  has  not  come  primarily from  their  poetry.
11 "Criticism and  Other Arts,"  Canadian  Literature,  No. 49  (Summer, I97I).



BECJIUSE I COULD NOT STOP FOR GOD
 



Catherine McKay


Because  i could  not  stop for God he kindly  stopped for  me
said-listen! I got a deal like you wouldn't believe believe  and  you shall  be saved.
I went  to church i kneeled i prayed i wanted a reply
but  God said  call back next week I'm  all booked  up could  you throw  a dime in  the  basket?
I did,  i went  back  next week
He said  OK what's your  problem? I said  i forget!
He said then  come back next week next  week's  Special  Charities.
So i did, i went  back
He said  I got you a deal like you wouldn't  believe but  i believed  it
Things don't shock me the way they used to.
Amen.

79


FRANCOIS HERTEL
The Unprecedented Voice




Kathleen 0' Donnell






EAN90IS HERTEL ""  a poet reveaffi the evolution  of Quebec thought  in this  century.  His  poetry,  published  between  1934  and  1967,  largely antedates  the Quebec  revolution.  He was among the first in the province to ques­
tion  traditions.  In  the I 94o's,  his voice was unprecedented   and  unique.  Hertel could  not  at  that  time  remain  freely in  Quebec  to express  his thought.  Some twenty  years later,  when  his attitudes  were widely appreciated,   he returned  to Canada. It  is the  purpose of this article to examine  the development  of Hertel's thought  through  his poetry,  both  for  its own sake and  as an  indication  of the Quebec  revolution.
Born in Riviere-Ouelle in 1905, Rodolphe Dube was educated  in Trois-Rivieres and  ordained   a  Jesuit  priest.  In  1947,  he  departed  for  France  where  he  has remained  except for extensive travels and a recent sojourn in Kingston,  Ontario. His move to France  took place at approximately  the same time as his  abandon­ ment of the Jesuit life. All of his works have been published under the pseudonym, Franc;ois Hertel. The  source of the name is explained:

Mois,  je me suis rebaptise Hertel.
Ce  furent des especes de hobereaux de chez  nous, Des  nobles  qui  etaient aussi coureurs de bois.
Je leur  ai pris leur  nom; car  ils avaient neglige d'avoir des enfants;
Et il ne faut  pas qu'un beau  nom se perde.1

The original Hertel is commemorated also in the poeins "La  Verendrye" and "Le luth  des vieilles rues".
Hertel  published four books of poetry before 1947:  Les voix demon reve, Axe
et  parallaxes, Strophes  et catastrophes, and  Cosmos, and  four  others,  published

8o

FRANCOIS HERTEL



between 1948 and 1961, may be considered as forming a second group. They  are entitled Quatorze, Mes naufrages, ]eux de mer et de soleil, and Poemes europeens,
of which the final poem is "Adieu  a la poesie". Many of the previously published
poems are reprinted in the final volumes of poetry: Anthologie 1934-1964,  Poemes perdus et retrouves, and  Poemes d'hier et d'aujourd'hui 1927-1967.
Les voix de mon reve  ( 1934)  presents fifty poems under  the divisions:  "Voix de chez nous," "Voix des soirs," "Voix intimes," "Voix sculpturales," and  "Voix de la fantaisie."  Those  titles indicate  the fundamental attitudes and  interests of the poet. His feeling for the homeland  illuminates the first group  of poems. "Voix des soirs" consists of  poems expressive of the  quiet,  meditative,  and  sometimes melancholy mood of evening. The poems of "Voix des soirs" and  "Voix  intimes" often rise to the level of prayer. The  author's  most personal  thought  concerning his relationship  to God,  his work as educator,  and  his aim  as  poet,  inspire  the section "Voix intimes". In the poems of "Voix sculpturales" is revealed the poet's sensitivity to the beauty  of poetry, of music, of dream,  but  especially of nature. The  serious manner  of the first four  parts of the book is varied  in "Voix  de la fantaisie". In those poems, even though the subjects may be characterized by gentleness or  nostalgia,  there  is an  attempt  at  gaiety and  humour,  particularly in form. The  neatly  designed  form  of this first volume and  of each  poem  was never repeated  by Hertel.  Nor did he ever again write poetry with the same mea­ sure of objectivity, and control of imagination  and emotion as are found  here.
Axe et parallaxes ( 1941)  is dedicated to Paul Claudel. In the dedicatory  poem, Hertel's  aim is defined:

Moi, je voudrais plutot passer au dela de l'image Epurer le phantasme au creuset de la relation Decanter l'idee.

The  search  for  intellectual   meaning  lies within  Hertel's  concept  of  poetry  as defined in "Axe ou art  poetique".  In  the  poem, "Tristesse",  there  is a  plea for pure knowledge: "Je  veux le don total, la nue vision et l'etreinte de l'Idee solide." The  poems of this volume treat  the author's  most serious thoughts: the  belief in man's  total  dependence  of God,  the mystery of the trinity,  the  Eucharistic  pres­ ence. The  poem,  "Dialogue" reveals an  understanding   of  grace  and  leads  to
"Supplique de l'homme", a  prayer  for  purification  and  salvation.  "Priere a la
vierge", a prayer only in its conclusion, is an attempt  to know Mary,  the inspira­ tion of art  and  devotion  through  the ages. Divine and  human  creation  are  dis­ cussed in "Journal". "Parallaxe d'une  meme etoile" treats of  the  bond  between

FRANCOIS HERTEL



two widely separated  people who regard  the same star. The  dramatic pieces also tend to describe and reveal a theme:  destiny in "Soir ultime", suffering in "Notre­ Dame  des Laurentides", the  nature  of man  in "Geometrie  de  Montreal". The  final  poem,  "Priere pour  les philosophes",  prays for a  continued   awareness  of man  as a creature  of God.
The  same  serious  and   religious  attitude   pervades  Strophes  et  catastrophes ( 1934). Its first poems recall the  patriotic  and  personal poems of Les Voix de mon  reve.  A repeated  theme  is the  regret for lost youth.  Hertel  expressed little desire for life beyond the time of youthfulness.

L'homme qui doit vieillir, qu'il s'exile peut-etre
Qu'il  renferme sa mort dans un coffre d'airain.

The  theme  of the  beauty  of youth is stressed through  this  book. The  poems on Jesuit saints  are  written  from  the  knowledge and  ideals of Hertel's  own  youth. The  last section of the  book is addressed to the young poets of Quebec.  Hertel speaks to them and counsels:

Rien n'est plus beau que toi, jeune poete. Reste done en grace avec la nature et avec Dieu,
Et que Celui-ce te mene a ton glorieux calvaire!

The  drama  "Jeunesse" stresses the similarity between youthfulness and  art.  The whole is founded  on the belief in the youthfulness of God who is shown in "Viste du Dieu"  to the  ultimate  source of human  creativity.
Cosmos  ( 1945)  shows the height of Hertel's philosophical poetry. The  opening lines are full of strength  and  conviction:

Dans la maturite de mon age
Parfaitement sain de corps, et d'esprit me croyant sain,
J'ai  voulu d'un  effort puissant de tous mes muscles
Exprimer;
Dire ce que n'avait pas ete dit encore sur le Cosmos
Grace a une maniere unique de la concevoir.

"Cosmos"  presents  the  whole  history of the  universe, beginning  and  ending  in God. Somewhat  in the manner  of the previous book, Cosmos  explores meanings, describes experiences,  delineates  values. The  human  experiences  of solitude,  of the world, of self, and  of art  are touched in successive poems. The  moods of the poems vary from  anguish  to ecstacy as Hertel  ranges mentally  through  a gamut of human  experience  which culminates in the final pieces entitled  "Petits  poemes

FRANCOIS HERTEL


a la gloire du sport"  and "Priere  pour les artistes". Sports are described as "reflets d'un  divinite  joueuse" by which man is raised "vers Celui qui est l'auteur des techniques et des harmonies". Sports, characterized  by technique  and harmony, resemble art  by which  also man  is drawn  to God  in  the  manner  described  in "Priere pour  les artistes".  In  this concluding  poem of the book, Hertel  describes the artist  as a man  chosen to suffer, to give of himself, and  to offer his work in homage to God.
Totally  suggestive  of  the  talent  of the  author,  these  four  books yet  do  not clearly indicate  the direction  to be followed in his maturity.  From  the  delicacy and charm  of Les Voix  de mon reve, he moved to the meditative  and  philosophi­ cal work of Axe et parallaxes, then to the aesthetic and didactic notes of Strophes et catastrophes, and  finally to the  breadth  and  elevation  of  Cosmos. There  was yet no quarrel  with himself. The  poems of charitable  love, of  humble  faith,  and of personal holiness were not to be repeated.



b:E SECOND  MOVEMENT of Hertel's  poetry differs in subject matter  and in mood from the work of his first period. In the publications  of I 948 to I g6 I, strength  of imagination, trenchancy  of feeling, and  the  incisive  truth of human  experience  are developed and  illustrated.  Hertel's  prose works of this time  reveal the  direction  of his intellectual  development  toward  atheism  and  a cosmic humility.
Quatorze, the  first book of his second  period,  reproduces  many  of the  early works found  suitable  and  adequate in form  according  to  the  theory  of poetry described in the Introduction to that book. The  elements of poetry are defined as a personal rhythm and an original conception of the world. Through poems of nostalgia,  of  imagination, of  aesthetics, Hertel  presents  his  understanding and creation of life. The new poems, added here, indicate a change in Hertel's thought concerning  man.  His view had  been generally  understanding and  appreciative. His aversion, when it was expressed, was directed only against the errors of man as, for example, in "Cosmos"  and in "Saints  martyrs  du Canada". In  Quatorze, however,  he wrote:  "Entre les animaux,  l'homme  est le moins  humain." The imagery becomes hard  and metallic to convey this new and  disillusioned view of mankind.  Certainly, that attitude  and understanding had been present in "Le surhomme" but  here there is no counterbalance of "Le  point  de vue de Dieu".
That  harsh  view of humanity  results in a turning  away from  mankind  and  a concentration  on the self in Mes naufrages. The soul is in a state of wretchedness,

FRANCOIS HERTEL



of despair, of exile. The  intensity of suffering leads to a state of inversion so that satisfaction  is found in the underworld,  in the black silence, under  the black sun. The  damnation is accepted  as the  bitter  fate of the unhappy  and  rejected. The state  is most horrifying  as it  is active, strong,  and  vengeful. This  book contains Hertel's  strongest  poetry, poetry of the anguish of the inward  struggle.
The  poems of  ]eux  de  mer  et  de soleil represent  a  continuation, in  a  more concentrated form, of the themes of the inevitability of destiny, of the absurdity of life, of the  vileness of man.  Continued  also are  the images of ocean  and  of night,  and  the  mood  of bitter  loneliness. The  self-deprecation,  which  had  been apparent from Hertel's  earliest expression, is exaggerated  until there is no respect for or value of the  human  state.  "En  pleine nuit"  expresses a damnation of all mankind.  Awareness of the condition  is obliterated  in sleep, in intoxication.  Yet, there  remains,  as in the poem "A  rna mere",  an  understanding of the worth  of one human  being and  a hope for unity, for the end of loneliness, in some future life. For  poetry  of this density  of thought,  there  is necessitated, as described  in "Art  poetique",  strong  and  controlled  verse. Through it, the author  hopes to be delivered from the monster imprisoning  him.
This  whole second  movement  of Hertel's  poetry  is poetry of exile, poetry  of Europe,  work which does not have the security, physical or spiritual,  of his home. The last volume of this second group of poems, Poemes europeens repeats the nightmare poems of Mes naufrages. Thus the book opens with a mood of  harsh­ ness and  bitterness. In  the face of the suffering of life, death  becomes an  accept­ able  alternative. The  desperation  grows until  all sense of  reason  and  sanity  is doubted. The only attitude found  possible is that  of epicureanism  as described in the poem "Sterilite". That  sense of sterility leads to the decision  against  poetry:

J'ai  plus de cinquante ans. Halte-Ia, mon beau vice! Ne faisons plus d'efforts au-dessus du normal. Fermons bien les volets sur l'univers complice,
Carle bien qu'on impose est la source du mal.

There  remain, if not the pleasure of writing, at least those of travel and discovery. Such subjects inspire  the  poems of Europe  and  Africa. All the sources of  enjoy­ ment by this time lie outside the self. Concentration upon himself or upon human  nature  leads only  to  revulsion. He  must  find  beauty  and  exultation  externally,
and he does so magnificently in "Hymne a l'univers".
The poems of this second period of Hertel's writing reveal a complexity and concentration  not found  in the early work. The  statements of poetic theory indi-

FRANCOIS HERTEL



cate  Hertel's  deep consciousness of himself as poet. The  forms are designed  and justified in  accordance  with  the  development  of his thought.  In  Quatorze, the sonnet form provides perfectly for the poems of description and  reflection. In that book, Hertel  also gave, as he demanded  of any  poet, his concept  of  life. It  is hard  and  disillusioned. Unbearable, it could not  be expressed simply or  in  pre­ scribed  forms.  Hence,  there  are  the  poems of  desperation   of  M es  naufrages, written  in free verse. Some relief from the personal anguish  was certainly  found in the art  of poetry as it is described and  practised  in  ]eux  de  mer et de solei[. There  was yet, though,  no experience  of peace. Only  a sense  of  acceptance,  as expressed in Poemes europeens, was to come. That  ability to live and  enjoy was to increase as it was directed  outward  to a glorification of  the world  and  of the whole universe. In  his first books, Hertel  began  from  the security  of faith  and tradition  which he began to question. The second group of  poetry volumes show him rather  beginning from disillusionment and  desperation, and  proceeding  to a position of epicureanism  and  cosmic humility.
While Hertel's final three volumes of poetry  give very little new material,  they yet reveal concisely the development  of the author  and  his own evaluation  of his work. In Anthologie 1934-1964 are conserved selected poems from all the previous publications. Given in chronological  order, these poems show Hertel's  first  tradi­ tions and  reflections, the  increasing  disquietude  and  inward  suffering,  the final view of man within the universe. Poemes perdus et retrouves, containing selections from Poemes europeens and  ]eux de mer et de soleil, as well as previously unpub­  lished  work, shows the  pleasure,  the  torment,  and  the  final  balance  of feeling experienced  in Hertel's  development  towards  his personal  philosophy  of life.



kE DEVELOPMENT  OF   HERTEL'S  ATTITUDES may  be  sum­ marized. From the beginning, there was a tone of melancholy. It became the bitter anguish  of human  solitude.  The  early  tender  feeling for  mankind,  particularly  children, was replaced by an awareness of the inhumanity  of man. The love of the homeland  as expressed in  the  poems of Three  Rivers gave  way  to a  poetry of Europe and of the whole universe. The choice was one of anonymity over identity. The first poeins expressed a clear reasonableness about life as being totally directed toward God. In the second period, that faith is lost, and there is only a feeling of the absurdity of life. Poeins of historical or philosophical description  were replaced by descriptions of personal inward suffering. The  first book concluded  with light humour; the last, with  a  statement  of epicureanism.  Poetry,  which  was at  first

FRANCOIS HERTEL



created  as an offering  to God,  was explained and  justified, and  finally abandoned.
All such changes indicate the growth  of individual thought, necessary in human maturity. Never  to  be regained was the  original  innocence. Yet,  a greater peace than here expressed  might  be hoped  for. Of all the  mysteries  that  Hertel probed, suffering  is not  one.  In  the  later   poetry,  it is masked  with  gaiety.  Thus Hertel remains, in the  end,  without a philosophy  of rest or happiness.
The  examination and  rejection of tradition and  the  subsequent formation of new  thought characterizes the  development of a  people  as well as an  individual poet.  In  this  sense,  there   was  first  suggested   an  analogy   between   the  Quebec turmoil  of the  1g6o's and  the  intellectual evolution  revealed  so succincdy in  the poetry.  The  poetry  of Fran<;ois Hertel  forecasts  and  illuminates the  growth of his native  province from  the  early  traditionalism to  the self-questioning of the  mid­ twentieth century.

NOTES

1 Franc;ois Hertel,  Axe et parallaxes (Montreal: Les Editions Varietes, 1941), p. 10.





Jl FIRST TIME

Joan Thornton



Our  relationship  shagged brilliant  ice Beard  of the Arctic   nights crenellated Dreams  beneath  eyelids half closed ecstasies Ice melting  between our legs  trickles cold Exciting  between  my hands   love cupping Your sacrament    drink it down to its dregs Lapsed  on this mattress   soaking with our
Combined  sweats   white sheets rustle of words
Articulate  unspoken feelings
Only fingers & thighs talk   Memory Sprouting ears all over my skin   soaks Up  impressions   retinal shifts   sweet Oscillations    oiled   Loves ball bearings
A World  over   frees this amazing shudder

86


NEW WOMEN  POETS



Selected by
Al Purdy



STORM  WARNING 2  is a book of poems, soon to be  published, by writers under  thirty years of age; or slightly over if  I  stretched  a point. And  I  hasten  to  add;  that  age limit  is the  publisher's decree, not  mine.  Many  of the  women  poets in  S.W. 2  are there as a result of a press release pleading for more women  poets from all points of the  Canadian  compass. Over  a three-week  period I  must  have  read  five thousand poems, many  written  in  the  style or under  the  influence  of writers  like  Marianne Moore, Leonard Cohen and other great Americans. However, in the  poems published here, I can see few traces of other writers' influence;  but that  may  be the  result of severe eye strain on my  part. In any case, I'm  very enthusiastic about  the  book as a whole, and these poets in  particular. They  are dazzlers: and if  I ever had any doubt about the ability of women  poets, that  dubious doubt is hereby solemnly exorcised by "people" in this book. As for male  poets for whom there is no room in this stable­ they are quite good too. 	A.P.






ONE PICTURE IS WORTH Jl THOUSJIND FJICTS


Ted  Hughes
is smiling  up  at  me handsomely half-toned
in  a  borrowed anthology. This  is the  first  time
I have ever seen
the  photogenic row of perfect teeth,
the carefully  casual  hair brushed  back
from  the  dashing brow
 



Rosemary Aubert

WOMEN POETS



and  his neat  little  collar pointing twice
at  his silky tie. He  looks
like someone
you'd  want  to meet in  a  bar
some  night  when  you were hell-bent on  going
all  the  way
(when  you were  twenty,  say, and  up  til then
had  been saving  it).
Or  maybe  like  the  guy
your  otherwise useless roommate brought to the senior  prom. What he  looks  like
is every  man
your  mother ever  told  you to stay away  from.
I don't know  anything
about Ted  Hughes, don't even  want  to read his sample poems
posed  here
in  natty  little  pinstriped four-line stanzas.
I'd rather
nurse  my prejudice, hear  him  yelling
in  the  sunny  little  kitchen, "You don't even  know what  to use
a goddam oven  for."
And  hear  behind  her her mother's voice, soft, insistent,
like a charitable scourge falling on  dead  ears, "Sylvia, I told  you so."




88

WOMEN POETS



TRUSTING THE SONG

Erin Moure

out  of the  black  dawn  of  british  factories thru switch-points of time & into the  black  night  ot mountains trusting the  ritual
of metal  gripped 	cold
in  the  palm  of  your  hand

rumbling low & certain
across trestles 	curving  dark into  cedar
trusting the  blind  robot
switches 	  rail  beneath you fixed to rock      trusting bolts      electric circuits 	trusting cylinders
lubed  w/  oil
trusting ties 	& the wheels rusht momentum luring you east
from  vancouver

rolling  thru  the  bend  into the  white  trusting light
of another train

knowing each wrenched jolt seconds  before -
knowing  crusht  metal
jerkt  from  your  fist 	concussion of steel hurtling your awful
flesh hard  on  the  grade - trusting
the black space  before  your eyes
trusting death

is this
what  your  ancestor children  groped coal from  the  cheeks of england for? is this what  your ancestor  madmen

Bg

WOMEN POETS



moulded iron  into  pistons for?
is this why your  forebears
left sheep  & their  fields dressed
wf cotton?

that  one  night  on  the mountain line you should  be discovered
dead  beneath a diesel engine 	your  trust derailed	glint  of steel & a memory
of two centuries 	graved
in white  light  behind  your eyes?




IN OUR HE]IT


Elizabeth Johnston


I collected  a paper hat  as I came  in the door and  frantic fingers  pulled  me into  the  room. You stood  by somewhere, a figure of cement, while  a voice whispered in my ear
that  there  was pot  to be had  near  the stair,
I fancied  that  a young  musician  began  to look at  me while  we all inhaled desperately.

I forgot  my reasons  for coming
and  watched while  you ran  hot  hands toward a cool blonde
and  my head  cursed  revenge  at  your head,
then  you turned your  guilty eyes to loud  conversation.

My  best friend
asked  me to attend while she tried  to relate  to strangers and  the  more  she drank, the more  she wanted  to relate, I wondered that  I wanted her
or even  you with  your  polygamous  lust.

The hostess' little  daughter
crept  slowly down  the  stairs  and  held  hands  with  you before  being  carried away  by her  mother.

WOMEN POETS



My musician, in passing, put  an  unseen  hand on  my thigh and  muttered an  invitation.
I heard myself moan  as my eyes closed and  my dress slipped  away.
There was an  explosion  and  a man  screamed
Suddenly you and  I were outside, naked  and  fucking in the snow and,  in our  heat,
telling  each other that  this was enough.




ME  JIS MY GRJINDMOTHER


Rosemary Aubert


Sometimes
I look up quickly
and  see for  an  instant her  face
in  my mirror, random tightness turns  my mouth
into  a facsimile  of hers, eyes caught oddly
in the glass make  me into  her
looking  at  me.
Now  that  she's dead, I understand
that  it is right
that  I should  age
and  wrinkle  into  her. It brings  her  back,
it puts  me into
the  cycle of family. We look at  all  time with  just that
one same  face.

WOMEN POETS



FOETUS IN )I J)IR

Darien Watson


Hello baby.   I
didn't expect  to find  you here bathed
in  the  sterile  hiss of Science;
but
the  light  is sterling
and  rejoices  in your  presence, ovals  its mercuries
to admire you as
I do.
So here  you are,
resting  like submerged waterlilies do,
halfway between bottom  and  top
of your  jar:

Rare baby,  parian
porcelain and  creamy  rose, I see  jewellers'  veins finer  than silk from  caterpillars
tracked under your  cobweb  skin, and  ten  toes!
Ten  fingers: Twenty
pink  bristles  plucked from  a eat's  tongue. Rare boy, I
see herring ribs, a cage
for  your  locket-sized  heart;
and  a fat  umbilicus twisting  white like a first birthday candle,
keeping you  company.

It's  me baby.   I
thought you  were  gone,  but here  you are, smiling
as though you were made  that  way, your  eyes small
incisions,  unwrinkled.

WOMEN POETS



Effortless, your smile goes in for  itself and  the  light.
I'm glad  you
didn't scream; there  was no time  for interruption
of spherical dreams like clouds  or  balloons,  you came  through intact, right down  to your
single floret of baby's breath balls; rocked
in  the  warm  jelly of your  jar,
six-inch  Christmas stocking child,
innocent homunculus.






GROWING OLDER


Maureen McCarthy




Growing older
I begin to feel
 


the immensity,

the  snow begins  to glisten in my marrow, the  loneliness  echo  from my voice,
and  though I long  to wander like Ulysses this has  become
slowly, finally,
the land  of all my language.




(Other  poems  from  this  selection  appear  on  pages  13, 62, 79,
86, 108)

93


review articles



ANIMATE IMAGININGS

Mike Doyle


ELDON  GARNET,  The   Last  Adventure, Oberon  Press;   VICTOR  COLEMAN,   Stranger, Coach House Press; BILL  BISSETT,   medicine  my  mouth's on  fire, Oberon  Press; STUART  MACKINNON,  The  Intervals, Coach House Press.


A FRIEND suggested  recently that  my criticism  doesn't fully  live up  to its name,  that  it doesn't find fault enough; so let  me  preface   my  brief  discussion  of these four  books by saying that  for a long time  I've  felt it is the critic's primary  job to illuminate the work he is discussing,  as, say, Ford  Madox Ford  habitually did  in a long reviewing career. Marianne Moore once said  that, "Criticism should  animate the  imagination, afford  comparisons one had  not  thought of, should  be affirmative with    unequivocal   gusto ..." As   an example she  gave  Pound's The Spirit  of Romance, admittedly a  landmark  work. In   my   view,   almost   any   book   that   is worth  discussing is worth  affirming. Given the  choice,  I'd  rather ignore  a  bad  book or  a  bad  poem  altogether  (unless  there's a chance that  it  may  do  definite harm). Of  course,   there's  not  often   the  oppor­ tunity  to be unequivocally affirmative, but one's  central view of the  work  should  be positive.
When   I  come   to  the   four   books  in hand  I  respond   to  them   with   varying degrees  of enthusiasm. All are  competent (there are so many  hundreds, thousands perhaps, of  competent  poets  today),  all are  fluent,  and  if they  have  a  pervasive

94
 
weakness  it  is that   they  are  too  fluent.  I find  that   the  one  which   might   be  con­ sidered   the  least  literate is the  strongest  in  poetry.
Although Eldon  Garnet has done  some good things (including co-founding Press Porcepic), I am  not  much  turned on  by The Last Adventure. This  is a pity, in the first instance  because I am a great  admirer of Tony  Onley,  whose graphics grace  the book. As a "piece  of book"  The Last Adventure (Oberon, but printed by Coach House)   is good  to hold  in  the  hand. It's the  poems  which  make  me  uneasy.
Moments of  experienced  reality   seem to  be scattered about  among generalized musings, lacking in hard specific contact. Such   musings   are   nearly   impossible   to lift to the level of incandescence:

phantoms riding across  the  open  field lances  drawing quarters
with  the  air  screaming
their  way  into  the  guns  into
the  sound  of the  gun  and  we  ride drawn ride  the tide  following
the  moon. no  turning  back
after the  first kick,  standing still.

Presumably because  it has special  signifi­ cance  this  poem  opens  the  "adventure". Is  it  a  birth   poem   ("first  kick")? Pos­ sibly. Are  the phantoms  real?  Everyone's

REVIEW ARTICLES



are.  But   are   these  convincing,  compel­ ling?   Who,    or   what,    is   "screaming"? Technically  the  word  is  meant   to  work on  "air" and  on, what, "phantoms"? Or "lances"? Why  is  "screaming" placed  at the  end  of line  three?  It's  melodramatic there.  Garnet's  syntax   doesn't  grab   at one's  attention,  make  one  do  any  work, but   generally  goes  "trailing  on/  in  one straight  unbroken line".  He  subscribes  to the new orthodoxy of minimum punctua­ tion,  which  can  be  (unless  you  have  the tflan  vital  of  someone  like  Williams) an invitation to snore  off.
Conjured up in a world  in which  there is "no  escape  from  the downward spiral", his protagonist, rider  in  strange cars through strange night  landscapes, hunter, bare survivor in frozen terrain, is "unable to do more than circles", moving inward towards a self-imposed  death (after which he writes the poem!). Blankets,  chestnuts, microscopes,   many    specifics   are   men­ tioned,  but   they  are   not  somehow  ren­ dered   palpable, largely  because  they  are offered   in  a  dour  and  unresonant mea­ sure. Where do such conclusions  leave me, after  my opening  statement? A first  line of  one   Garnet   poem,   "shadows  in   an uneasy  dream" sums up  the  book for me, not  a  bad   book,  but  lacking   in  rigour.
Like Garnet's book, Victor  Coleman's Stranger  begins  by  moving   into   traffic. For  Garnet's "I  wander in  the  stream" we  have  Coleman's "the too soft  arm enfolds   us/  as   we   elbow   our   way   up stream", and  that  "soft  arm" is the extra dimension. Coleman experiments syllabic­ ally  and  with  the  line,  technical  matters which   tend   to  make   him   stick   to   the point. The point, however,  might  seem to some rather old-fashioned-for the stance is  discursive  and   (sometimes even  expli­ citly)   moralizing. Is it  looseness or  epis-
 temological ambiguity which  makes him write, "the  gazebo glints/ or is it a plant?" and  "you  would  think/ the  shadow  else­ where"? Both  these are  from  "A Glove", which  has  taut  resonance, on  the  theme "my  arms/ around you/  bleed   this  poe­ try".  Skilful   use  of  line  does   not  alto­  gether  offset  the  abandonment of  tradi­ tional  punctuation. As  so  often,  the  method  has led to  a reduced syntax,  loss of  some  of  the  advantages of  language. Gain  in  swiftness  and  ease,  avoidance of the static and cumbersome, has also meant  loss  of   complexity    and    sophistication, though   the   gaps   in   "Back   East",  for example, have  a kind  of meta-syntactical effect.
"I can't  stop  being  there/ accumulat­ ing the pleasures/ of being other people", he  says,  though   Stranger  is  an  apposite title. That the "other  people" are  almost always women, and  the  relationships ero­ tic, may account for a voyeuristic element in the poems. A  tension,  hard  to explain, invests  their  texture, which   is monoton­ ous (i.e., in a monotone), yet fragmented, spiky,  "crumpled shards" (the  man  says, of his  heart.  Never  use the  word  "heart" in  your  poems,  they  used  to  tell  me  in the  days of Eliot's hegemony) . The sub­ stance of the whole may be gathered from a brief "trailer" (rather more directly "explanatory" than  usual,  however) :

I look  for  you  in  mythology
I look  for  you in  the  books  in  the  room
I can  see your  face  in  the  window
but  I am  afraid to  turn my  head
I snarl  behind  a darkened door
and   push  my  heavy   self  against and   by you

By no means  the  most  engaging or  grip­ ping   moment   in  Stranger  this   passage nonetheless  has it all  (except for  the odd starburst), the  self's  preoccupations, the

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



self-preoccupation,  the  single-track  syn­ tax,  and   the  push   for  contact, at  once oblique, aware, and  anxious. When  all's said,  within  a small  area  of  consciousness the  book  has  genuine  magnetism.
Bill  bissett's  is a  more   hopeful  world. By   now   his   mixture  of   chant-poems, visual concretes, and  commitment poems, always  offered  with   engaging energy,  is very  familiar. The shapes of  the  poems (in the mouth, in the eye)  fix one's atten­ tion,   the   personal  phonetics  and   typo­ orthography and  the  absence of "careful libran". Again  one  notes  the  absence  of venturesome syntax   (a  strong  preference for   the   declarative  sentence)   but   per­ ceives  it  in  a  different  universe, not  of thought, but  meditation,  here   in  many instances   on   the   soul,   "yr   soul   twind around th orange ths  time".
Many  of the "soul" pieces are shape poems,   based   on   the   single   word,  ap­ parently exploring the  soul's  (physical?) dimensions. Others  ("soul",  and   other) are based on a mantra-like line repetition, which   is  often   also  visual.  Still   others  shape  as a repeated  line which  gradually modulates  into  either an  exploration of the  meaning  ("what does mean  mean?") of  that   line,   or   takes   a   direction   (or variety  of  directions) the frame-line opens the  way  to  (such   are   "a forest   in  the shell  and  water" and  "into the  open  lips of th sun") . Others again are  discursive, though these  too  commonly offer  arrest­ ing  individual visual  shapes.  For  obvious reasons  these are  the easiest  to talk about  at  length, but  they  often  have  the  least impact. One  here offers a poetic, "a pome dusint   have  to  be  about  anything often it  can  be  abt  nothing".  His  best  poems are   not   "about",  but   are   meditation­ objects.  Approximately,  the  one  critical  note  in  the  book,  struck  several  times, is

g6
 anti-government, anti-political. Though perhaps the  weakest  of  the  poetry,  these add   a   dimension  and   to  some   extent earth the book, which  is a welcome addi­ tion  to  the  canon of  a  distinctive  poet.
Stewart Mackinnon's The   Intervals  is
both  like and  unlike  Gamet's book. Gar­ net  cools  our   heels  in  an   Arctic  inner landscape, Mackinnon is less spectacular, more  ruminative, though lacking  bissett's ultimate  joyousness  or  Coleman's rever­  berating of syllables  against  the  range  of his experience. "Why  am  I  here?" Mac­ kinnon  seems, in  effect,  to be asking,  and  dares  to  open  his  whole  collection   with a  line  like,  "In  the  long  silence  of  the heart".   The   book    (another  physically good  to the hand)  reminds one of a rna-· ment   in    Ibsen's    Brand,   when    Agnes thinks:

It is easy  to be strong in  the  stonn
Easy to live the  warrior's life
But  to  sit  down   alone in  silence  ... is harder

(or,  of  course,  Pascal's   famous  observa­ tion, that  all man's difficulties come about because he can't  sit quiet  at home alone.) Mackinnon  has   mixed    feelings   about "this  interval/ of  comatose seclusion". He writes  of  it  both  as  "halcyon days"  and  "winter in the  heart" in what  appears to be  an   autobiographical  sequence   on   a time  of  retreat and  inner  questioning.
What I come up  against in The  Inter­
vals is an  often-quoted dictum of Eliot's with  which   I've   quarrelled  for  most  of my life:  "The more  perfect  the artist, the more  separate  in  him  will  be  the  man who suffers and  the mind  which  creates". I  have  never  agreed  with  this,  but  it  has edged  me  towards  carefulness. When  we publish have  we the  right  to assume  that our day-to-day life will inevitably interest a thousand people? Of  course  not. I am

REVIEW ARTICLES



interested   in    what 	Mackinnon	goes through in this book,  I discover  a fellow­ feeling  there,   but  I  couldn't  confidently  assert  that   many  others must  be. Again, if  the  substance is routine  enough  (and it is)  and  the  thought  also  (as it is),  we are left with  the area  of  "language exper­  iment", but Mackinnon himself says "any­ way    I'm     no    strategist" -his  poem­  structures and   syntactical   deployments are  in  no  way  a  making-new or  a  dis­ covery.  Again  here  lack  of  punctuation leads to attenuation, revealed  by repeated use of  conjunctive or disjunctive sentence
 patterns.  I  can't  resist  it:  the   lack   of rigour  either   leads  to  or  derives  from  a lack  of  vigour.   I  feel  I'd   like  the  man behind   these  poems,  and   I'm  curious as to  how   he   has  such   sinewy   heroes   as David  Livingstone, Rasputin  and  Rosa Luxembourg (as the  book's  cover states).
Though  Mackinnon's  work   is  nearer in  kind  to  my  own,  a  reading of  these four  books together tends  to highlight for me a fitful  magnetism characteristic of Coleman's work, but  most of all  the hard energy and assurance which  make  bill bissett's  writing  so distinctive.



COLOURS OF DIFFERENT KINDS


Roderick Haig-Brown


HUGH MACLENNAN, Rivers of Canada. Macmillan. $25.00.


THIS   IS  NOT one  book,  but two.  There is  the  heavy  quarto  picture book,  rich   with   colour   as  they  all  are these  days,  and  there  is Hugh  MacLen­ nan's text,  rich  in  colours  of  an  entirely  different kind.  The  two  are  interrelated, of course,  but  they  do  not  really  belong together.  The    picture   book    is   to   be looked at and  left around -pleasant and often  interesting.  MacLennan's text  is to be  read;  it   should   not   be   printed  in double   columns   on   shiny   paper    in   a volume  weighing  the  better   part  of four pounds. It belongs in a book of a size and shape  to  be  held  in  the  hand  and  read.
It  is something, to  take  on  the  rivers of Canada. Canada has a substantial pro­ portion  of  the   world's   freshwater,  and rivers  to  match.  Canada  is an  immense conception, as a  nation, as geography, as
 
distance, as social  history  and  her  rivers play  a  big  part   in  all  of  this.  MacLen­ nan  has faced  the challenge honestly  and  has   made   a   fine   book   about    the   big Canadian  rivers.
No  book  could  possibly  tell  the  whole story of Canada's rivers. To  write  an effective book of this kind one must select certain rivers and  choose  a point  of view from   which   to  write.   MacLennan  sees our   rivers   as  geological   agents   and   as nation-makers  and   he   selects   them   to these  ends.  He  writes  as  scholar,  Cana­ dian,  poet,  riverman; he  is not  intimate with  his chosen  rivers,  nor  are  such  big rivers  really  subjects  for  intimacy. Mac­ Lennan  sees  them   broadly   as  powerful forces shaping the  physical  aspects  of the country and  almost  equally   powerful   in directing its human development. But  he

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



feels and  expresses also the emotional aspects  of  moving  water, its  beauty  and patterns and  persistence.
Time and  again   in  the  course  of  the
book I found myself with an almost eerie feeling  that  MacLennan's roots and asso­ ciations  extend   right   back  to  the  begin­ nings  of  Canada. His  sympathy  for  the Selkirk  settlers  is so deep  and strong  that  he  might   well  have   been  one  of  them; the  association through  a  recollection of his  great   grandmother  Abigail   Bigelow with  Timothy  Bigelow  almost   gives  the impression that  he was himself  a traveller with   Timothy  to   Niagara  Falls,   Lake Ontario, Toronto  and  Montreal in  July of  r8o5.  There  is  a  similar   intensity   in his accounts of  the  explorations of Alex­ ander Mackenzie,  David  Thompson and Simon  Fraser, but  those  men  seem  quite  close to all of us.
Perhaps the  best idea  of  the  book  can be  given   in   the   names   of   the   chosen rivers:  the  St.  Lawrence first  and  fore" most,  the  Ottawa, the  St.  John with  so much    of   its   lovely   valley   lost   to   the "status symbol"  of  Mactaquac Dam, the Miramichi, the Niagara, the Red,  the Saskatchewan, the Mackenzie, the Sague­ nay,  the  Hamilton, the  Fraser  and   the Columbia. There is a special view of each and  every one  of them  and  each  is fitted into  its  place  in  the  pattern  of Canada. MacLennan, as  always,  is searching into "the riddle  of  Canada" and  the  type  of men   and  women   the  country  produces from  the different parts  of itself. In  ways of life  and settlement along  the  different rivers  he offers  some  of the  answers.
Some  of the  most  exciting  parts  of the book  take  one   back   through  geological ages  to  the  different forms  of  land  and water   that   are  still  echoed   on  occasion today-the flood plain  of the Red  River,

g8
 for instance, that  was once  Lake  Agassiz, "the  largest   fresh   water   lake   in   exis­ tence", and  included the wonderful Delta Marshes  and  Lake  Winnipeg. The  sense of the glaciers  is never  far  away  in  Mac­ Lennan's  Canada,  nor   is  the   haunting concept  that  one  day  they  will  take  over the  land   again.  The  sense  of  geological  past  is strong  in  the magnificent descrip­ tion  of the  Grand  Falls of the  Hamilton, which  MacLennan  never  saw  and  could not   have  described  with  anything ap­ proaching such  vivid  strength if  he  had seen   them; the  description  is  a  recon­ struction from  the granite skeleton of the falls after  the water  had  been diverted to the  Churchill Project.  Following closely upon  this  vivid  description his  apprecia­ tion of the magnificence of the  Churchill Falls Development is deeply  moving  and  in strong  contrast to the bitter  condemna­ tion of the ill-conceived James Bay Development  that   follows  a  few  pages later.
It  disturbed me  a  little   to  find   the Fraser  characterized again  and  again  as "savage" and once as seeming  "absolutely hostile to man  and  all his works". To  me the   Fraser   is  also   the   Thompson,  the Chilco,   the  Stellaco,  the   Nechako and itself  clear   back   to  Tete  Jaune  Cache and  the  Rocky  Mountains, a superb and beautiful river system that  makes  the  life and  character of  half  of  British  Colum­ bia.  Nor  do  I  feel  it  should   be  called  "yellow": through most  of  the  year  it  is the  colour  of desert  sand  and  in  spite  of its  glacial   origins   it   does   not   carry   a particularly heavy  load  of  silt. These  in­ accuracies  of  impression   are   easily  ex­ plained by MacLennan's  later   note  that  all   his  visits  except   the   last   one   were made  during the  spring run  off and  per­  haps  I should  not  have hurt feelings over

REVIEW ARTICLES



them. But "yellow malevolence" seems hardly fair  to  a  river  so  magnificent in beauty, so superbly  powerful and  so rich in  yield  to  those  who  live  with   it  and know  it.
This sort of comment is really  nothing more   than   regional   chauvinism  and   in no way alters  the fact  that  this is a splen­ did,  even  noble  book about  rivers, Cana­ dian  rivers and  their meaning in the past,
 present  and  future of  our  country. It  is more  than  able  to stand   on  its own  and I hope that when the present edition is exhausted it will be republished as a book to be read,  perhaps with  a  few  carefully selected pictures, certainly with  a few additional  maps.   No   book   by  a  great writer  should  become  lost  in  the  evanes­ cense of a modern picture book.



TOWARDS UNIVERSALITY

Christopher Levenson

EARLE  BIRNEY,  Collected Poems.  McClelland &  Stewart. 2  vols.  $2o.oo.


IF A  SELECTED WORKS  is a simplified  plan  of the  inner  city  with  all the requisite tourist sights, the complete works  is more  like  the  local  street   map with index  that  contains  as well the men­ tal  homes  and  sewage  treatment  plants.  For   Earle    Birney   such   an   analogy  is particularly appropriate, both  because  in his  poetry    (and   here   even  in   the  geo­ graphical rather  than   straight  chrono­ logical  ordering of  his  poems)   he shows himself  to  be  a  seasoned  world-traveller whose trunk  is plastered  with many  exotic labels, and  because  in his maturer poetry he has consistently  used his sense of place as the starting point  not  simply  for  local colour   but   also  for   casual-seeming but well-developed meditations on such recur­ ring  themes  as  the  relationship  between  poverty  and  affluence, civilization and  the primitive,  in   which    he   views   himself ironically  as  the  self-conscious  outsider, spy  disguised   as  tourist.  "Cartagena de Indias," which  finds  human and   poetic unity  beneath  social  and  cultural diver­  sity is a well-known example of this stra-
 
tegy, but  the geographical metaphor extends   also  to  such   a  movingly  witty late  poem  of love or  longing as "i  think you are  a whole  city".  The metaphor of woman   as  landscape, familiar  to  us  at least  since  Shakespeare's Venus  and Adonis,  takes on a fresh  twist  in his low­ key conclusion:

i can  hear  your  beat- ing  centre	will  i will i 	make  it
are  there  maps  of  you

i keep  circling    imagmmg parks    fountains 	your  stores

back  in  my single  bed  i wander your  stranger	dreaming
i am  your  citizen

Indeed, this poem  reveals  one  key aspect of   Birney's   work.   Although,  as   Frank Davey has pointed out, there has been a general  shift  in Birney's  writing since  the late forties from  the public  to the private man  and  from "professorial omniscience" to a  humbler willingness  to  discover,  his private man  still operates within a public context. Even though his best poems have

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



become  increasingly personal in the sense that    they   are   recording  not   universal truths but  his impressions, they  are  never confessional    in   tone   but    observe   and evoke   relationships  between   individuals and  races.
If one  returns to  the  first  volumes  this
public  aspect  can  be seen  to  be one  uni­ fying  factor  throughout  his  ceuvre  that counteracts   the    somewhat    centrifugal effect  of Birney's  immense formal  virtuo­ sity. Although Birney has remained a left­ wing,   liberal    agnostic   whereas  Auden  turned to Christianity,  the  parallels with Auden's personality  and  career are  sug­ gestive.   Because   of   their   strong   socio­ political  commitments, both  poets  wrote much  in the thirties that  now seems over­ rhetorical;  both    expressed    a   sense   of social  doom:

If the  crops  from   these  smoking furrows the ache in  the  back,  the  smile  of his wife were  lines  in  the  map  of a  reasoned future without booby  traps and   hidden mortars of
class
and   the  doom   forever poised  in  the  eorld  s heaven....

and  both  poets experimented with Anglo­ Saxon  alliterative verse,  though  what  at its best, as in "Vancouver Lights", served as a  valuable structural  principle, some­ times  disintegrates into  mannerism  and encourages one  of  Birney's  earlier weak­ nesses,  adjectivitis,  with  a  corresponding diminution of  the  role  of  the  verb.  Both poets,  finally,  have  modified   their  domi­ nant  tone  from  didactic to ironic backed by a keen moral  awareness and  a concern  for   humanity  in   all   its  frailty,   though Birney's  conclusions,  as distinct  from  the sense  of  the   rhythms, are   considerably more  pessimistic. The main difference, of course,   lies  in  Birney's  enormous  gusto and  exuberance, which  leads  him  to dis-


100
 regard literary tact and even didactic effectiveness for the sake of pyrotechnics, whereas   Auden's characteristic stance   is one  of  cool,  bored   distance. Sometimes, as in  "Atlantic Door", an  abundance of disparate imagery  results in metaphoric overkill: too much  is happening in the individual lines so that  one never really enters  into  the  cadence of the  poem  and the  semantic meaning stifles in  a clutter of adjectives. Yet it is probably this same capacity for excess that  has given us such entertaining tours  de force in mimicry  of Chaucerian or New Zealand English  and of Fiji or  Mexican "pidgin".
This element of excess decreases in the later    poetry,    which    is   more    laconic, though    its  attention  to   the   occasional vivid detail  is no less precise. Like Purdy, however,  Birney is often  most effective in recent  modes  when  he can  give free  rein to his garrulity, or what  appears as such. Sometimes he lapses into  the slackness of conversation rather  than  its colloquial vigour  ("In  Purdy's Ameliasburg" strikes me in this way)  but a poem such as "Cucurachas in Paradise" by contrast modulates   gradually   and     attractively from  casual  anecdote to  science  fiction.
Beyond one's admiration for Birney's sheer versatility, that ranges from the traditional narratives of "David" and "Conrad Kain" through the  dramatic structure of "Trial of a City" to his recent experiments with  concrete poetry,  the overwhelming impression is that of the triumph of a  certain sort  of  personality, a  certain way  of  looking  at   the  world. For despite his success in some longer meditative poems like "Near False Creek Mouth" and  the  smaller-scale charm of such epigrams as "Curac;ao", Birney's virtues  seem to me to be essentially  those of  the  ironist.  One   does  not  necessarily

REVIEW ARTICLES



attain universality by travelling but, start­ ing  out   as  he  does  with   a  breadth of human sympathy, Birney's  journeys  have afforded   him  many  occasions  to  develop
 it. All that  Birney's reputation needs now, to complement this splendidly-produced but  expensive  boxed  edition is a  paper­ bound  version  at  half  the  price.




THE MINOR MARVEL

Hallvard Dahlie


BRIAN  MOORE,  The  Great  Victorian Collection. McClelland and  Stewart.  $7-95·


BRIAN MOORE's new novel is essentially  a  work  about  the  act  of  crea­ tion and  the attendant philosophical spec­ ulations  about  the  nature of reality.  The  extravagant   premise  upon   which   it   is predicated -the  tangible  realization of one's  dream-poses  a  problem   both  for Moore  and  the  reader, though I  suspect that  Moore  is far  more  satisfied  with  his handling of it than  the average reader initially  will  be. Indeed, the  control  and confidence that Moore displays over his material suggests that  he has no qualms about   it  at  all,  and   all  reports   indicate that he finds this novel one of the most satisfying  of his ten  novels  to date.
The  weaving  of a realistic  story upon a fantastic  premise   has  of  course   been  a long  accepted  part   of  our  literary  heri­ tage,   as   works   like   Swift's   Gulliver's Travels  amply   testify.  Once  Gulliver is transported to  the  appropriate  island,  as it were, the rest of  his tale is quite  accept­ able  as  a  realistic  chronicle,  and   Swift makes sure of that  initial step  by spelling out  precise geographical and  navigational details.  Moore  achieves  a similar degree of   verisimilitude  by  providing rational, logical  explanations of the  very ordinary events   surrounding  Anthony  Maloney's
 
arrival in Carmel-by-the-Sea, of his character  and   background,  and   of   his dream   with   its  sudden fulfilment. The trick is of course to delude the reader momentarily  into   a  "willing  suspension of disbelief" and then to re-instate him quickly   and   logically   into   the   credible world.  The  dream  coming  true  is admit­ tedly  the  sticky  point   in  the  novel,  but since we realize along  with  Maloney that  "no  one has ever done anything remotely like  it  before,"   we  really   cannot  apply  the rational rules of  reality  to this pheno­ menon,   any  more   than   we  can   to  the many   kinds  of  miracles that   have   been recorded  throughout the  world.
The  place  of miracles,  secular or otherwise,   and   more   generally   of  faith, has   always   occupied  a   large    part    in Moore's  novels:  Judith Hearne, Mrs. Tierney, Fergus  Fadden, Tomas  O'Mal­ ley, all  in  their  own  way  dramatized the emptiness  and  terror of a world  devoid  of the miraculous. In  Fergus  ( I970), Moore  had  also experimented  with  the  fictional possibilities    of    dreams,    hallucinations, and  other  inexplicable  visions,  but   that  novel was concerned more  with  a kind  of personal  exorcism   than   with   the   more objective  and   complex   realm   of  ideas.


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



There was a certain deja vu quality about it,  and  in  many  respects  the  dilemma of Fergus  Fadden was revealed and  resolved through  his  being  exposed   to  a  ghostly procession   of  variants of  earlier  Moore protagonists-Diarmuid Devine,  Ginger Coffey,  Brendan Tierney, Gavin   Burke. In  that   work  the  dividing line  between reality  and  unreality, or  between   dream and  waking,  was always  quite  clear,  and when    Fergus    dismissed    his   ghosts   at novel's   end,   his   position    on   terrestrial reality   was,  if  not   completely  comfort­ able,  at  least  tangible and  recognizable.
The   Great  Victorian  Collection  sug­ gests among  other things  that  at  least all of Moore's personal ghosts have been laid to  rest,  for  in  terms  of  his own  life  and career   it  is  probably  the  least  autobio­ graphical of all his novels. Yet in a larger  sense it is an autobiography of  himself  as an   artist,  and   a   portrait  of   all   artists whose     most     extravagantly     imagined works  of art  have  come  into  being.  The  realization  of  one's   dream   is,   next   to creating  life  itself,   the  ultimate  act   of creation, for  one  can  shape  this  product without any  regard  for  the  rules  of a ra­  tional  world, though, as Maloney quickly discovers,  the created thing  brings  with it its own  rules which  must  not  be violated.  When  an  artist  creates anything -book, painting, sculpture, or Collection -there are   really   two   aspects   of   the   creation which  are frequently in opposition: the product   as   the    artist    conceived    and shaped  it, and  the  interpretation ( s)  of it offered   by  the   rest  of  the   world.   The artist  cannot change what  he has created, and  any  attempt to do  so will debase  it, but  the  rest of the  world  is really  free  to do what  it will to the work of art-even, Moore  wryly concedes, transform it  into a  kind  of  Disneyland. If the  work  is in


102
 any way remarkable-and Maloney's Collection is certainly that-then it will remain,  as  one  scientific   journal   com­ mented after  Maloney's death, "a  minor  marvel   ... which   will  outlive  the  man who  created it."
Yet,  remarkable as  the  Collection  is, Moore's attention keeps  coming   back  to "the man  who created it,"  for  Maloney's dilemma as a human being involved  with a  creation that  he  cannot really  control provides   a   complex    challenge  for   the novelist.   Like  many   of  Moore's earlier protagonists, Maloney represents the very essence of ordinariness, and  there  is noth­ ing in his career  or his nature which hints  at  any  extraordinary  possibilities: "that ordinary  young   man   was   twenty-nine years  old  and   an  assistant   professor   of history   at   McGill   University  in  Mont­ real," and  though  his  rational nature is stressed,   Moore   allows   the   New   York Times  man, Brewster, to comment, "I've been  wondering who's  behind   Maloney. He   doesn't  strike   me   as  very   smart." There is no irony  here -Moore reserves that   device  for  other characters in  the novel-and Maloney is ultimately totally credible   because  he  is  so  ordinary and guileless.
There is, however,  sufficient  evidence in Maloney's academic background to make  the nature of his miracle plausible : his  doctoral dissertation  had  dealt   with the art and architecture of Victorian England, and  he  had   once  nourished  a hope, quickly squashed by his academic adviser  as "impractical", of creating his own  collection  of  Victoriana. The   form of Maloney's creation, therefore, is not entirely  fortuitous, and  Moore  adds  a further  element   of   conviction  to   Ma­ loney's  part  in  it  by carefully  dramatiz­ ing  the  demanding  commitments it  im-

REVIEW ARTICLES



poses upon  him.  For  him  it is not  merely a  pleasant   dream come  true   but  rather the creation of a new and  somewhat frightening  consciousness   for   Maloney, with its own irrevocable conditions which ultimately destroy  its  creator.
The  whole  question of the creative act and  the nature of the resulting reality occupy  Moore   from  the  outset,  and  the novel's opening paragraph establishes the uncertainty shared  alike  by Maloney and the  reader throughout this extraordinary experience :

There is still  some  confusion as  to when Anthony Maloney first  saw  the   Great  Vic­ torian  Collection. Can  it   be  said   that  he first  envisaged the  Collection in  his  dream? Or  did  he create it in  its entirety  only  when he woke  up  and  climbed out  of  his bedroom window?

Reminiscent of Keats' lines, "Was it a VISion, or  a  waking   dream?  . . . Do  I wake  or sleep?", this  passage  raises simi­ lar  questions  about the  creative imagina­ tion  that   the  nightingale did  for  Keats.  But Maloney  does not  drift into the ima­ ginative  state  either  through "a draught of vintage" or  "on  the  viewless  wings of Poesy";  instead, he  "went to  sleep  in  a normal   manner and  passed  an  unevent­ ful night. Sometime in the early  morning he awoke for a few minutes, then,  falling asleep again,  began  to dream."
Such   is  the  prosaic,   unprophetic  be­ ginning of Maloney's secular miracle, and in  the same  plausible  tone, Moore  moves deftly  to  explore   the  human and  meta­ physical implications of the phenomenon. In  a  sense, such  an  event   calls  out  for melodrama  and   hyperbole,  but   Moore  long  ago  recognized  the  dramatic power of  the  unheightened scene  and  of  ordi­  nary realistic dialogue, and  through these low-key   devices   he   brilliantly   demon-
 strates  how  the  world's  multitudes, as  it were,  very  quickly  betray   the  creator of this  miracle for  their   own  ends.  Moore takes  the  opportunity here   to  get  off  a few  satirical   thrusts at  the  manipulators of   present-day   miracles - journalists, television    ogres,   policemen   and    other guardians of public  order. A particularly clever  scene  involves   the   two  acknowl­ edged  world  experts on  Victoriana, Pro­  fessor  Clews  of  Yale  University and  Sir Alfred  Mannings of  London, who  have  come  to  offer  their  learned  pronounce­ ments  on  the  Collection. They  meet  by chance  in  the darkened parking lot  loca­  tion of the Collection, and  refuse  to con­  sult  with  one  another  while  examining the items by means  of flashlights. "Soon," Moore  observes,  "[ Mannings']  flashlight began    crisscrossing    that    of    Professor Clews": surely  an  appropriate picture of



Announcing
JOURNAL OF
CANADIAN  POETRY

"Critical Studies  in Canadian  Poetry"

P.O. BOX  5147, STN. F, OTTAWA, K2C  3H4, CANADA

Editors:
W. Glenn  Clever,  Frank M.  Tierney

Contributions are  invited  for first issue, Winter  1976

No restrictions as to length

EDITORIAL POLICY
To  publish  significant analytical and  historical research on  Canadian  poetry.

REVIEW ARTICLES



unimaginative research experts feebly probing the  vast  darkness of their  ignor­ ance   while  all  the   while   the  object   of their  research stands   revealed  for  all  to see.  On   much   the   same   note,  Moore  seems  to  be  whimsically  exploring what  man's  responses   would   be  if  a  miracle  suddenly  were   visited   upon   the   world.  One   suspects   that   if   Christ did   return, Professor   Clews  would  undoubtedly de­ clare   Him   to  be  a  clever   imitation  of the  Real  Thing,  and   Bernard  Hickman of   Management Incorporated  would promptly  offer   to  represent  Him   on  a cross-nation tour,  promising lots of "audi­ ence potential" and  "first class for  [Him] and   [His]  party  all  the  way."
In  a way, the  entire novel can  be read as  an  allegory -somewhat  speeded   up, to be sure-about the mutual disintegra­ tion  of  the  artist   and   his  art,  or  about the  relationship between   these  two  enti­ ties.  It is significant that   in  his  original dream, at  the  precise  moment  that   Ma­  loney  knows  he  is in  charge  of  the  Col­ lection,  he  wakes  up,  and  he  must  thus literally  confront  what   he   has  created. From   that   point  on,  he  is  exclusively  in charge of his creation only in his dreams, for   his   waking   jurisdiction   over   it   is methodically being assumed  by the world at large, which is, of course, as it must  be. Many  months after  he  had  dreamed  his Collection  into   being,   Maloney   experi­ enced  a  sudden revelation about  its real nature: "He saw  it  for  the  first  time  as it   really    was:    a   faery    place,   ringed  around  by  spells  and   enchantments,  a web   of  artifices   as   different  from   the reality  it sought  to  commemorate as is a poem   about  spring  from   spring   itself."  Part of this sentiment  must  be construed
 as  a  product of  his  private  despair, for by this time  he was unable either to con­ trol  his creation or  to escape  from  it,  as his  frenzied   visits   to  Los   Angeles   and  Montreal  proved   to  him.  For   a   poem about   spring  may  not  be  as  essential   to mankind as spring  itself,  but  it  can  still be a very remarkable and artistic achieve­ ment,  worthy  of  perpetual  preservation. So it  is with  Maloney's creation: it  may have  been  debased   and   transformed  in the  Disneyland atmosphere of  the  world at  large, but it continues to be "a minor marvel," even  though  its  creator  fades from  the  world.
In terms of characterization, The Great
Victorian  Collection  is  particularly  suc­ cessful in  its cast  of peripheral  figures - especially  police  Lieutenant  Polita, Pro­  fessor   Clews,   Bernard    Hickman,  and  Maloney's   mother.   With    a   few   deft strokes,   Moore  captures  the  essence  of both  their  nature  and   their  functions in relation to  Maloney's  dilemma.  Moore  seems  to me not  quite  so successful  with the major secondary  characters, Frederick Vaterman   and   Mary  Ann   McKelvey, whose  sub-plot   of   repeatedly  thwarted seduction attempts stands   perhaps  form­ ally  in  counterpoint  to  the  Collection's scenes  of  strange  sexual  perversion, but who as characters don't  quite  earn  suffi­ cient  credibility. It  is  perhaps inevitable that   the  only  character  who  gains   our  full   attention   is   Maloney  himself,   for only he has no ulterior motive  in relation to   the   Collection. In  his   sympathetic understanding of  this  man's human  di­ lemma,   Moore  gives  the  lie  to  his  own words  by  ensuring that   Maloney will  in fact   for   the  reader  outlive  the   "minor marvel" that  he  created.

REVIEW ARTICLES


COLUMBUS COLUMBO?

Linda Sandler

JOHN ROBERT coLOMBO,   The   Sad  Truths. Peter   Martin.  $8.95   (cloth), $3.95 (paper). JOHN ROBERT  COLOMBO, Translations  from the  English.  Peter  Martin.
$8.95   (cloth), $3.95   (paper). Under   the  Eaves  of a  Forgotten Village: Sixty Poems   from  Contemporary  Bulgaria,  translated  by  John   Robert Colombo  and Nikola Roussanoff.  Private printing, Hounslow  Press.


ON PAGE  ONE of The Sad Truths,  John  Robert  Colombo    cata­ logues   the   phenomena  that   go   by  the name  of Colombo. He  does  not  mention the similarity between  his name and  that  of Christopher Columbus, whom he most resembles. Like Columbus, Colombo is an explorer  whose   discoveries   extend    the awareness of his people. The  found  poem, which  he  popularized in  this  country, is a  device  for   translating  history   andjor popular   culture  from   the   periphery  to the  centre  of  consciousness; Colombo's Canadian Quotations is a massive exten­ sion  of  this device,  while  Colombo's ori­ ginal   poetry   brings   foreign   forms   into Canadian culture.
The  language of  Colombo's poetry  is the denotative language of the eighteenth­ century  philosophe,  translating meaning from  the dark  places of the mind  into  the light; and   the   frame  of   his  poetry   is philosophical.  Understandably,  perhaps, Colombo's   readers   are   partitioned  into those   who   call   him   the   quintessential poet   and   those   who   reserve   the   term poetry   for   the  metaphoric  language of passion-for whom  Colombo is an  anti­ poet.  The  factions  arise  from  a desire  to define  and  limit  the  language and  forms of  poetry,   and   from   unfamiliarity  with the  poetry  of other  countries.
John  Glassco,  in  the  introduction  to The  Poetry  of  French   Canada   ( 1970) says  that   "Faithful  translation ... is in
 
fact   the  strictest   examination  a  poem's intimate structure can  undergo, an  ulti­ mate  screening  that  may  leave  it  nothing but  its intellectual content or  'meaning', its  images  and  inner  pulsation." Colom­ bo's  poetry  has  the  semblance of  poetry which  is  pre-screened  in  the   process  of being   translated   from   the   inarticulate  poetic  impulse  into  language. His  poems have  a dispassionate, intellectual surface, but  his language and  his borrowed forms evoke the inarticulate realm of experience.
The  first of Colombo's Sad Truths is himself. He explores the mystery of his identity  and   experience,  moves   to   na­ tional   identity  and    his   own   sense   of Canada, to stories and speculations about  history  and  culture  (to  which  he  admits both  Helen  of  Troy  and   the  Hollywood heroines) . The  theme of  each   poem  is developed   in  a  series  of  sketches   or  a story.  The  source  for  these  forms  is the French recit, which  Colombo has defined in  a  private communication  as  a  prose narrative with  poetic  overtones. Andre Gide, one of the foremost practitioners of the recit, gives a rather more  illuminating account of  the  form   in  the   Journal   of The  Counterfeiters. Gide  was  oppressed by the fictional  simplification of complex events  and  ideas,  and   resolved   to  avoid direct  narrative. An event, he said, should be  shown  from  varying  angles,   so  that the reader  collaborates to shape its mean­ ing.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Colombo's poems,  found  and  made, work  on  the  principle of oblique  presen­ tation. "All  in  the  Family" is a  series of comic  anecdotes about his son  Jonathan, showing the  way  a  child  filters cultural phenomena.

Garbage trucks  fascinate him.  Here's   what he   said   a   few   months   before   his  fourth birthday:
"Oh, here come the  garbage men  deliver­
ing  garbage!"

Contemplating a plastic  mannequin, Jonathan  asks  his  mother  whether  his own arm  is plastic, or whether it works electrically.
Innocence and  its converse, experience of  evil,  are  running themes in  The  Sad Truths, evoking  Colombo's most  power­ ful  responses.  In  "The Child  of  Europe" he  tells  the  story  of  Kaspar  Hauser, the visionary  wolf  child  whose  fate  inspired  so many  speculations about  the  brutality of  civilized  society.  Colombo  again   pre­ sents  the  story obliquely, through several contemporary   versions,   so   illuminating the   interrelation   of   history   and   myth. "After Stesichorus", perhaps the  most beautiful  poem  in  the  book,  articulates the  idea  that   we  live  less  by  sad  truths than   by  magnificent fables.

What  about  fabulous  Helen,  whose face, we know, because  they  wrote  so, "launched a thousand ships."
(A  thousand? A hundred? A single sloop?) Not a wave was made,  not  a blade  of grass,
not  a grain  of sand,  was crushed  underfoot, or thrown  joyously high in the air.
Not a word, not  a word.

What  we do know  is this: This  tale  is not  true.

No  tale  is ever  true.

The impact of the  poem  doesn't depend on   verbal   rhetoric:  Colombo has  bor­ rowed   a  simple   rhetorical   device   that

106
 translates passion  into  form.  This  is the work  of a craftsman and  a  poet.
Translations  from the English is a book
of   found    poems,    variously    arranged, which shows Colombo in his familiar role as  treasurer and   interpreter  of  popular culture.  In   his  found   poems   as  in  his original    poems,    Colombo   collaborates with  some "first  author"-this  time  not with  the  great   poets,  but  with   the  folk artists  of advertising and  commerce, with local heroes, matinee idols, and  above all, with  Robert  LeRoy  Ripley,  the  collector of   "Incredible  Oddities".  The   found poem  borrows  content rather than  form
-and this, Colombo says, is what  makes it credible.  "Who believes a sonnet  these days?" But the best entries have the low credibility of a  sonnet.

RESOLUTIONS  PASSED  BY   THE   BOARD OF COUNCILMEN, CANTON, MISSISSIPPI
1.  Resolved,  by this Council,  that  we build a new Jail.
2.  Resolved,  that  the  new Jail  be built out of the  rna terials  of the  old Jail.
2.  Resolved,  that  the old Jail  be used until the new Jail  is finished.

This  is a  fragment of  authentic  official­
dom.
An obvious feature of the found  poem is that  it must  (usually) be identified and placed    in   a   cultural  context.   Appro­ priately,  every  text  has  a  subtext  in  fine print   consisting   of   editorial  comments and  quotations related to pop culture and  the   aesthetics   of   collage.   Translations  from  the   English  is  a  lot  of  fun,   but Colombo   operates  defensively,    with    a weighty, and  sometimes misleading, vali­ dation  of  his  enterprise. Under  "Hand­ bill", an ad for an old-fashioned panacea, Colombo   appends T.  S.  Eliot's   theory that   "Immature  poets   imitate;  mature poets steal" -which is hardly  applicable

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  this  case.  Another tendentious  quota­ tion  is from  Marshall  McLuhan:  "art is anything you can get away with." "4's" is a fourteen-page catalogue of phenomena that  come  (go?)  in fours.  Colombo calls it  a conceptual  poem  based  on  "the no­ tion  that  a work  of art  can  be a selective accumulation". I'm   not  sure  he  should get  away  with  that-it  seems an  appal­ ling waste  of space.
As   evident  in   Colombo's   Canadian
Quotations, Colombo has an eye for signi­ ficant   oddities. But  some  of  the  poems show him  more clearly  as the maker than  as the collector. In  "Some  of  the Artifacts of  the  Twentieth Century",  he  achieves a strange music  by interweaving a discur­ sive  line  and   an  inventory of  artifacts. "Monopoly"  is  pure  folk  art: a song for two  voices,  the  winner's and  the  loser's. Like most folk art, "Monopoly" is a poet's work,  wrought  from  found  elements.
Under  the  Eaves of a Forgotten  Vil­
lage: Sixty Poems from Contemporary Bulgaria is the  latest  product of  Colom­ bo's  diverse  and  inventive  energies.  Des­ pite  the  fact  that  Colombo's only  access to the  Bulgarian  language is through his co-translator,  Nikola  Roussanoff, and  to Bulgarian    poetry     through   magazines  available in  Toronto, Under  the Eaves is a  valuable   book  that   deserves   to  have more  impact  on  our  poetry  than   it  will
-having been  privately financed and distributed.
In  Bulgaria, literature has an  officially
recognized   social  function. The  writer's function, as  articulated by  Georgi  Dja­ garov, president of the Bulgarian Writers'  Union, is to communicate Bulgaria's "dis­ coveries  about  human  nature", its hopes and  anxieties about  the  present  and  the future.  Although  these  poets  are  mani­  festly   unfree  to   criticize   social   institu-
 tions, and are sometimes  required to write poems with a progressive  message,  Under the Eaves is a book of lyrics and  specula­ tive  poems,  and   is  remarkably  low  on cant. That there  are advantages in  being a   people's   representative  shows   in   the poetry-in the strength of the philosophic habit,  in the directness of expression. Bul­ garian  poetry  is not  the  territory where "a  poem should   not  mean, but  be."
The  translations apparently follow  the originals   closely,  but   this   is  Colombo's kind  of poetry,  and  in  the  main,  diction and  rhythm are  rendered in their  English equivalents -simply and   directly, as  in these  startling lines  from  Damyan  Dam­ yanov's  "Freedom".

[Freedom] is the future's seed and  soil. It  is a shirt  with  a  bullet  hole
through  which you can see the sun.

Alexander  Gerov's   "Man",   reminiscent of Thomas Hardy's poems,  has a late nineteenth-century flavour.

Along its cosmic paths,
the  cosmos blindly  roams  ... but  man  alone,  my friends,
thinks  and  feels and  knows....

Trouble comes when  the  co-translators confuse  their  dictions, inverting the  word order for the sake of rhyme or whim, subverting an  otherwise contemporary idiom.  Andrei  Germanov's Bridge,  a superb  political  parable, is marred by in­ versions  and  awkwardness.

I am  the  bridge,  for  you erected,
I am  the bridge you have  neglected.

But  the shore  opposite  is your  future's dream.
I still say nothing.  My mighty  arch
merely carries  you across  to the  other  side.

I am  the bridge.

But this is of secondary importance. What


107

REVIEW ARTICLES



counts  is  that   Colombo and   Roussanoff have  done  some good  translations of fine poems,  and   that   Under  the   Eaves  is  a cultural document embodying a  view of literature  radically  divergent  from   our own.
In his capacity as editor and  translator,
 Colombo  has  served   Canadian  culture well.  In   his  capacity  as  poet,   he  is  no less of  a  cultural dynamo: I  have  por­ trayed   him   as   the   supreme   translator, who   converts   foreign   forms   and   tech­ niques  to his own  use, and  so extends  the possibilities  of  Canadian  poetry.





KEEPING THE REJILITIES IN LINE

Maureen McCarthy



Burning paper
 
crumbles into  ash,

and  so we learn  the  lesson of irreversability. the  process is
a final one, no matter how  we rage.

it is only in the caverns
of the  mind that  ash  turns  into  paper,
and  that's a question of


it's  important
 imagination.

to keep the difference straight.

says who?
you ask,
and  I am  not surprised. I find it difficult  myself

keeping  all these realities

following that  principle -
he goes on­
we are incessantly  reduced  by death. I don't know  who he is-
 
in line.

I watch  him-
 
from  a distance.


108




ARDUOUS GAMES

MICHAEL  BULLOCK,   Randolph Cranstone   and the  Pursuing  River.  Rainbird Press,  $10.00.

MICHAEL BULLOCK   invites   the   reader to play games with his newest work of surrealistic fiction,  Randolph Cranstone and the  Pursuing River:   trace  the  paral­ lels between  the first and  second sections!  discover  a  line  of progression  within   the fragmented  tales!  guess  the  significance  of  the   drawings   which   accompany  the text!  detect  all  the  patterns of myth  and imagery! The  games  will  be  long   and arduous;  one  hopes   that   the  prize   will be substantial.
The first half of the book traces the im­
aginative adventures of Randolph  Gran­ stone,  a figure  for  the creative artist  and,  by extension, all mankind. His adventures are "imaginative" because they take place in  a  fictional   world   liberated  from   all laws  of  time,  space  and   logic.  Bullock does  not  establish  his  character within  a world  apparently  familiar  to  his  reader  and   then   transform  it  into   a  world   of dream   and   hallucination.  Instead,  he plunges his readers  into  a nightmare.  No paraphrase or summary can  do  justice to the  fertility  of Bullock's  imagination, for at every turn  Randolph Cranstone experi­ ences some incredible, unpredictable sen­ sation.  This   section  finds  its  structuring metaphor  in  Randolph's departure from his estate and  his visit  to a Western  City which  contains within  it a walled  Orien­ tal   City.   Randolph's  major  adventures occur  inside  the  Oriental City,  and  Bul­ lock gradually makes explicit  the parallel  between   this  region  and  man's  powerful
 imagination, hemmed in by a hostile material world. By teaching him  to resign himself   fully   to  his  imagination,   Ran­ dolph's  experiences free   him   from  the futility   and   apprehension   that   he   felt while  he  lived  on  his  own  estate. When  he discovers that  he cannot eliminate nor control  these powers,  he yields himself  to their   direction.  His   imagination  is  the "pursuing river"  of  the  title.  It threatens to drown  him,  but  it assures  him  that  he need  never  thirst.
Randolph returns to  his  estate, where he  begins  to  write  in  order   to  cultivate the imaginative depths he has  discovered within   himself.  The second   half   of  the book consists of a series of his tales and sketches,  from  one  paragraph  to  a  few pages   in   length.  In   many   ways,  these short pieces are much  more  effective  than the sustained  narrative which  preceded them. Randolph Cranstone may be, in effect,  a  better  writer  than  Michael  Bul­ lock. Each  tale  serves  as a  metaphor for the operation of the imagination. In  their cumulative  effect,  these   fragments  des­ cribe  Bullock's  conception of  the  power and  potentialities of  man's  capacity for feeling  and  creativity. Individually, each sketch  welcomes a relaxed  contemplation of  a  detailed image.  These   pieces  avoid the  vague   expressions   of  emotional   re­ sponse  favoured by Bullock  in  the  open­  ing  section:  "feeling  for  some  reason"; "he  sensed a connexion"; "though baffled by it, she quickly accepted  the  metamor­ phosis  as  a  fact." Randolph  Cranstone writes   with   a   freshness   and    directness which  make  Bullock's  part  of the  narra­ tive  look  amateurish in  comparison.
After   the  reader  has  established  this basic amount of order in the material, he must  exert  all  this  energies   to  decipher the  message  it  contains. Unfortunately,

I09

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   message  is rather perfunctory. The imagination is a  powerful force  in  man's nature; man's   rationality cannot control his imagination; a developed imagination in  one  individual  can   exercise   a  wide­ spread   influence  on  the  world;  the  ima­  gination   offers    freedom,    but    it    also threatens possible danger. Bullock's  state­ ments   are   little   more   than    platitudes, and  as a consequence his writing appears to spring  from self-indulgence rather than  a  clear  sense  of  an  audience with  whom he  wishes  to  communicate. He  displays himself  to his readers  and  orders  them  to admire and  imitate his imaginative free­ dom.
Why should  the  reader  play  the  games demanded by the author? Bullock  refuses to  write  as  an  intermediary between   his own  imaginative awareness and  his read­ er's   sensibility.   Instead,  he  engages   his audience  in   the   explication   of   a   text which  he has designed  to praise  the  ima­  gination,   not   to  understand  it.  By   x­ pressing himself  in a literary form  wh1ch encourages the  exercise  of man's rational faculties,  Bullock    actually   hinders   his reader's attraction  to  the   world   of  the imagination. The  intellectual intricacies of  his  relentlessly  surrealistic form  effec­ tively  counter his creative  purpose: they make   the  imagination  appear cold  and distant,  not   warm   and   immediate. Al­ though  Michael   Bullock   urges   man   to cultivate  his  imaginative powers  instead  of  his  rational  nature, his  particular use of  surrealism prevents  the  suspension of one's  intellectual  perceptions. He   forces his reader  to play  literary games  with  his text.  Bullock's  games  are  masterfully  de­ signed,   but   the  rewards for  solving  his puzzles  are  disappointingly  meagre,. and the  method of solution  is disheartemngly counter-productive.	CALVIN L. SMILEY

I I 0
 PLACING PRATT

SANDRA DJWA,  E.  ]. Pratt:  The  Evolutionary
Vision. Copp   Clark, $3.50.

THE   TITLE announces  the   intent  and central concern  of this  exceptionally fine study.  It sets out  to  define  a  vision, not a static  one, largely in terms  of analogues and  influences  without doing  violence  to the  poetry  itself.  The purpose is clearly to  place  Pratt   as a  transitional figure  in the intellectual tradition of the late nine­ teenth   century   while  acknowledging his right  to stand  with  the  moderns.
There are dangers in such an approach. The  meaning of poetry  is different from the meaning of philosophy, theology or science.  Distinctions made  by  the  work­ ing  intellect  are  often  absorbed  or  trans­  muted   by  the   working   imagination.  A poem's  essence as language in movement, language  responding often  to  conflicting feelings and  intellectually unresolved  per­ ceptions,  demands that  it  be much  more than  a sum  of influences  or  the  embodi­ ment  of a view.
One  of the virtues  of this  book  is that in spite of its doggedness  in pursuing rela­ tionships  the  critic   is well  aware  of  the poetic  vision as something finally  beyond the reach  of these. Her  caveats are neces­ sary both  for herself  and  for  her  readers.

Darwin's evolution and  T. H. Huxley's  cos­ mology  may  have   provided the  intellectual outlines of Pratt's poetic world but Canadian history  Canadian geography  and  Canadian culturl
heart and  his moral vision,  give  substance to this  world.

Sandra  Djwa   rightly   assigns   the  sub­ stance  of  the  poetry   to  the  final  impon­  derables  while her concerns in this limited study   are  clearly   more   with  the  initial  ponderables. In the weighing-up, though,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



she sometimes  allows what  she can  define and  document more  value  than  what  she cannot. This  is not  an  unexpected  draw­ back  in such  a study,  especially  since  the critic   is  constantly  recording   her   own awareness of it. After  a good seven pages of  clear-eyed analysis,  in  which  she  lays the  ground  of  her  study,  Sandra Djwa  figuratively throws  up  her  hands -

One of  the  pleasures awaiting the  reader of  Pratt's work  and   criticism on  it  will  be the  discovery of a multi-dimensional yet ulti­ mately   opaque   figure.  Pratt   resists    easy classification.

But her acknowledgement of Pratt's opaqueness does  not  deter   her  from  the effort  to  penetrate as  close  to  the  heart as  she  can   get  in  a  brief   and   limited study.
The book  consists  of  an  introduction
and    ten   chapters  which    take   up   the major poems in a roughly  chronological fashion. Djwa's purpose  to a large  extent dictates the ordering and  selection.  The introduction is a most  useful chapter, for it contains the central argument  concisely yet substantially. The critic  traces  Pratt's development from  an anti-romanticism rooted  in Darwinian ideas and  his own experiences of the natural world,  through attempts "to  equip  man  with  an  ethical guide  for the  struggle  against  nature", to "an  evolutionary cosmology amalgamated
with  J. C.  Smuts'   'holism'", which  she
sees  as  underlying the  last  major  work. The  rationale of the  book is clear:

Because Pratt  was  such  an  indefatigable researcher and   because  an  understanding  of his  specific   uses  of  source materials  illumi­ nates the  synthesizing quality  of  his  poetic imagination,  a  substantial  amount  of  new material suggesting sources and  analogues is introduced into  this  study. Sometimes ... I have  indicated textual analogies and  left  the reader to  decide for  himself   whether or  not this  identification is  justified.
 The  direction given  the reader to "decide for  himself"  is  a  needed   one,  since  the critic  appears to  push  some  of  the  less well-documented  analogies  more  persis­ tently  than  those  for  which  she  can  give external evidence.
Since  the intent of the  book is to place Pratt solidly in a late  nineteenth century intellectual tradition, the  early  chapters, I  think,  are  strongest. The  relationships between  "Clay" and  the  early  published poems  and   various   strands of  influence are  clear  and  clearly  shown.  Chapter 2, "'Demonology,' 'Pauline Eschatology' and Newfoundland   Verse,''   is  characterized by such  perceptive statements as-

Pratt seems  to  have  assimilated  Newfound­ land  folk  belief,  a  broad  spectrum of  feeling which  at one end, admits superstitious "hap" and   assigns  demonic  power to  nature and, at  the   other  end,   widens  into    Christian faith.

and

The  relation  between    man   and   nature  in Pratt's view is primarily the  animating force of life,  the  vital  spark  of "authentic fires" or energy, which   first  evolved  in   the  sea  and now flows through human  veins.

From   the  latter, Sandra Djwa  proceeds to one of the  most  sustainedly  illuminat­ ing sections of the book, an analysis of the "blood" metaphor in  the  early  poems.
Her   interpretation  of   The   Witches'
Brew  as  a  "mock   heroic   structure"  in which Tom  the seacat  becomes  the Adam of  an  upsidedown  Paradise   Lost   is  in­ genious. It suffers perhaps from  the effort here  to see Pratt's imagination  wholly  in terms  of other  writers.  In  comparing the poem  to the  popular  Newfoundland bal­ lad,   "The   Killigrew's  Soiree",  Sandra Djwa  offers a stronger description of the active  ingredients in  the  recipe:

. . . the  sense  of  driving  rhythm  which in-

Ill

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



forms  Pratt's poetic voice  in  general ... can be linked  with  the  Newfoundland oral  tradi­ tion,  in  particular  with  pulpit  oratory, the hymn, and   the  folk  song.  All  these  expres­ sions  have  in  common a  brisk  and  insistent rhythm  that   is  largely  a   reflection  of  the patterns of  Newfoundland speech....

Of the later  chapters, "The Problem Hero: Brebeuf  and  His Brethren", is per­ haps  the  best, largely  because  there is no effort   to  bring   the   poem   into   a   fixed resolution.

. . . the  real   problem of  the  work  seems  to go  far  deeper. In  essence, it  appears to  be the dichotomy between the transcendent seventeenth-century Christianity of Brebeuf, the  poem's subject, and   the  human-centred, turn-of-the-century, new   theology of  Pratt, the  poet.  In  other terms, the  poem  may dramatize a  certain  conflict in  Pratt's  own mind....

This  base allows  the  critic  a  full  aware­ ness  of  the   paradoxes  at   the   heart   of Pratt's mature vision.
It is surprising and  perhaps disappoint­
ing  in  much  the  way  that  "Towards the Last  Spike" is itself disappointing that  in her penultimate chapter Sandra Djwa should  insist so on a single influence, that
of J. C. Smuts,  on Pratt's final vision. The
evidence  is tenuous-

Pratt probably knew  of Smut's work  prior  to his  1930  visit  because Holism and  Evolution had   been   a   popular  book   for   some   time. Also, a paper which Smuts gave  about a year later . . . was   given   world-wide  publicity. But,  perhaps because his  subjects prevented him,   Pratt  does   not   begin    to   seize   upon holism   as  a   way   out   of   the   evolutionary dilemma until the  1940s.

The saving  grace  of such  passages  is that they  are  admittedly speculative. The  use of Smuts' ideas in conjunction with  those of Einstein  in an analysis of the opening of the  poem  justifies  the  argument. Further justification comes from  seeing this chap­ ter  as an  effort  to place  Pratt's last large


112
 work  more  firmly  in  his  total  develop­ ment  and  to assign  it  the  weight  there  it deserves.
The  concluding chapter  is one  of  the book's  great   strengths.  It  complements the  introduction  by  defining   more  pre­ cisely  the   Canadian  tradition   and   by asserting  Pratt's central place  in  that  tra­ dition  on  the strength of the intervening chapters. The  conclusion  also allows San­ dra Djwa  to speak of matters of form and tone  and   diction  and   to  underline  the ambivalences that  these  inhere in.  Hav­ ing   been   at  such   pains   throughout  to make   connection,  Sandra  Djwa   wisely chooses to end  her study  by affirming  the distinctions.
This  study  is one  not  likely  to  be  dis­ placed soon. Its value  is not one of simply asking  for  assent  but  one  of  challenging the reader  to view more largely  our  larg­  est poet.
ROBERT GIBBS


LIBERATION IN THE RAG-AND-BONE  SHOP

MICHEL   TREMBLAY, Les  Belles  Soeurs.  Trans­ lated by  John Van   Burek  and   Bill  Glassco.  Talonbooks. $3.50. Hosanna.  Translated by John  Van   Burek   and   Bill   Glassco. Talon­ books.  $4-95·
THE   PARADOX  OF   Michel   Tremblay   is that   his   mode   of   realism   succeeds   in making  theatre a liberating experience despite   preoccupying  themes   of  submis­ sion   and   failure.  Although   Les   Belles Soeurs  (first performed in  1g68)  is about  the  destruction of  a  woman's dreams  of status  while  Hosanna  (first performed in
1973)  is about  a transvestite whose male body  traps   a  female   psyche,  both  plays drive  towards  liberating   Quebecois

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



theatre from  its conservative subjects  and tame  resolutions.
Such  liberation involves  a  question of
language. Tremblay is unabashedly a dramatist en  joual, that  unique brand  of Quebec  French  so  difficult   to  translate into  an  English  equivalent. Joual  prob­ ably   has  as  many   champions  as  it  has opponents,  and   there   is  no   reason   to believe  that   all  or  even  most  playgoers will agree  that  it has a legitimately liber­ ating   function  in   Quebec  theatre.  Of course,   its  usage   is   more   popular  now than   it  was  in  the  past,   for   joual  has survived   the  famous  onslaught of  Frere Untel whose castigation of its "barbarity'' once   heated   a  controversy  of  the   late fifties  and  early  sixties.  Frere   Untel   (or Brother    Anonymous),   in    his    famous tirade,   claimed    that    joual   was   a   de­ humanized language that  was insidiously negative  in both  form  and  effect.  Taking his cue from  Le  Devoir's  Andre  Lauren­ deau   who  had   invented the  word  as  a corruption of cheval, Frere Untel claimed that    the   language  was   one   of   horses. Today,  of   course,   Frere   U ntel's   is  a muted  voice in  Quebec, but  the  province  has  its Claire  Kirkland-Casgrain who,  a few  years  ago,  railed  against Tremblay's plays   for   their   unflattering   image   of modern Quebecois. Not  that  such  attacks  would  hurt   Mr.   Tremblay, for  he  is a playwright who does not allow partisan politics  or  nationalism  to  interfere  with his artistic  purpose. We could,  of course, question  the extent  of his theatrical achievement, but  we cannot  prohibit  his use of  joual as a legitimate diction for the French  stage any more than  we could disallow Israel Horowitz a Bronx argot, Shelagh  Delaney  her  Cockney, and  John Arden  his various dialects.
Tremblay's characters-especially  in
 Les   Belles  Soeurs-speak  a   racy,   tart language as loose and  slangy as it is sharp and   cutting.  The   dramatist  appears  to know  the  old  maxim   that  language is a mirror  of life, and  his realism  is achieved as much  through  joual as it is through a type   of   bittersweet   tragi-comedy.  And joual is, above  all,  a language of reality, for   its  vulgarity  and   hybridization are qualities   obtained  from   the   culture  of Quebec. The  characters  of   Les   Belles Soeurs cannot help  themselves  when  they mix regionalisms with Anglicisms or when they intermingle religiosity  and  scurrility. They    are    most    truly    themselves-a people,  victimized   by  overt   and   hidden cultural  violations,   who   live   in   sordor while  they dream of romance. Their  lan­ guage   becomes   an   expression    of   their condition,  giving   them   a   social   stamp which  they,  in  the  final  analysis,  cannot reject  unless they wish to be outcasts.
"To  change your  language  you  must change   your   life" -so runs   a  line   by Derek  Walcott, a  West  Indian poet,  and I can think of no better  epigraph for a discussion of the language in Les Belles Soeurs.  We  see in  this  play  that  charac­ ters speak  joual because  they think   joual, and  they  think   joual because  they live it. The  play is rooted  in  the spirit of its lan­  guage   and   since  much  of  this  spirit   is rough,  tough,  fast, and  shrill,  the charac­ ters -all  of  whom   are   female -come across  as  battling  vulgarians whose  vio­ lent  passions burst into  the open  once the veneer  of  camaraderie has worn  off. The  fun   and   trouble   begin   after   Germaine Lauzon  has won a million  saving  stamps,  and   there  is  no  let-up in   the  dialogue which maintains a quick  clip  through the inflation  and  deflation of  Germaine's dreams  of luxury.  The women  come  and go, speaking not of Michelangelo and  art

I I 3

BOOKS IN REVIEW



but   of  lotteries,   sex,  and   the   wearying routines   of  daily  life.  Without  the  force of  language,  these   characters,  we   feel, would   descend   forever   into   an   Ulro   of the  spirit,  for  their  lot  in  life is basically cheap and,  therefore, cheapening. Theirs is a domestic  existence  of drudgery where daily  routine seems to revolve  around housework, quarrels,  television,   and  en­ forced    submission    to   demanding   hus­ bands.  In  frustration the  women  cry  that  they  are  sick of  this "stupid, rotten  life" but  we must  not  be misled.  They  are not sentimental  sob   sisters-despite    their occasional self-pity-for they all partici­ pate  together in a life of mixed emotions. Their  moods  run  the  gamut  from  ribald humour to nasty pettiness, from malicious  gossip  to  weekly  prayerfulness. After  at­  tacking  one another, the women  conform  to  the  norms  of  a  homogeneous group. Their  language, with  its  special  mixture of   eccentric id!oms and  adulterated ex­ pressions,  becomes  a mirror of their con­ fusion  and  contradiction, and  it  sustains them  as a breed  who  have acquiesced to more  violation than  they could  ever ima­  gine for  themselves. Those  few -such as Lisette   de  Courval -who are  aware  of this subtle  victimization fail  to break  out of  the  setting  for  they  know  instinctively that  they need  acceptance in the place of their breeding.
The  unfortunate thing   about   Trem­
blay's  play  is that  the  joual is largely  un­ translatable. How  do  we find  an  equiva­ lent  in  English  for  an  idiom  in  another language unless  by  a  substitution  of one metaphor  for   another   or   by  a  general  approximation  of  meaning?  And  this  is just  the  problem which  has  been  forced  upon  John   Van   Burek  and  Bill  Glassco who  have   sought   to  render  Tremblay's plays into  a colloquial Canadian-English.

I 14
 Unfortunately, the translation of Les Belles Soeurs  is not  a  total  success. I am not altogether convinced that  I am listen­ ing to French-Canadian characters speak Tremblay's lines. True, I have  the feeling that  I am listening  to no-nonsense  speech, as direct  and  frank  as it is muscular and often   escamotee,  but  the  rhythm  seems off and  I can well understand why Trem­ blay has  been  so  reluctant to allow  Eng­ lish productions of his plays.
But  despite   the  loss  of  the  linguistic
rhythm  and cadences of the original, this version does project itself forcefully as a satire.  Replete with  eccentrics and single­ minded   slatterns, the  play  exposes  greed and  jealousy while  insisting  that  the  real culprit  is  a   society   which    encourages materialism    and    mindless    conformity. When  Germaine's own  sisters  scheme  to steal  her  stamps,   it  is  not  because  they are  simply   jealous  of  her  sudden  good fortune, but that,  like Marie-Ange, they demand a system of equitable accretion. They  ask why only one member of society should  benefit  from  wealth  while  the majority (oh, that  democratic word!)   are forced  to slog through endless drudgery. This is the plaint  which galls them as Germaine plans a renovation of her apartment. This  is also  the  voice of  pro­ test that  produces  a savage  climax  when the  women   battle   over   the  stamps  and demolish  Germaine's dreams.
It is a useless complaint in  a sense for there  are  no winners  in  the  play. Every­ body   loses -especially   those   who   had hoped   to  be  liberated from  the  tyranny  of  drudgery and   the  grip  of  social  con­ formity.  Tremblay appears  to be  imply­ ing  that   it  is finally  a  question of  broad cultural  influences  rather than  of narrow  psychological  ones.  That is why  he ends the play with choruses  of "0 Canada" as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



a rain  of stamps  falls over Germaine who weeps  and  sings in final  submission. Ger­ maine   and   her  rivals  are  all  part  of  a false society -one whose members try to destroy  in others  what  they lack  in them­  selves. Nobody  breaks  out  of  this  society without paying  a heavy  price,  but  this is a  society  that, at least,  provides  the  con­ solation  of  numbers for its nature is such that  it  pulls all to the same level.
Our  reactions  to Les Belles Soeurs  need not  depend on our  identification with  its characters'  subculture, for   the   vices  of greed  and  jealousy  are  universal ones which  cut  across  all  lines  of  regionalism and  language. When   we hear  Germaine cry "My  stamps! My stamps!" we do not have  to concern  ourselves  with  the ques­ tion of race or dialect  for here is a person whose  utopian dream   has  been  lost irre­  trievably, and  she becomes  as  relevant to us as Harpagnon or Shylock.
Tremblay  has  a  way  of  locating  the most  sensitive  areas  in his characters' psyches without being lugubrious in the process. The  belles soeurs never beg their audience for  sympathy for  they  try  and react  to  life  with  the  wholeness  of  anti­ thetical  emotions,   without   tipping   the scale in favour  of either laughter or tears. Tremblay accordingly manifests a special gift  for  taking  unpleasant or  discordant characters and  using their  humanity as a subject  for  unsentimental treatment.
This  is a gift especially evident in Hosanna, an  affecting study   of   psycho­ sexuality.  Ostensibly  a story of  two homo­ sexuals  in  a  love-hate  relationship, it  is really  an  exploration  of   a  transvestite's confusion, and   I  find   it  less  noisy  and more  penetrating than  Les Belles Soeurs.  I also find  it  unencumbered by the  bur­  dens  of  translation, for  joual is really  of minor  importance in  this  drama  unless
 we   choose-as    some   may   want-to read the play as an allegory of Quebec's identity-crisis.  I prefer  to read  the play straight  (if  you  pardon  the   pun) ,  and leave the allegory to others.
Hosanna  is more  affecting than either Charles Dyer's  Staircase  or  Mart  Crow­ ley's  The Boys  In  The  Band.  It  is also more  accomplished than  Edward  Albee's one-act    play,   The  Zoo   Story,   and   its decadent  force  recalls  some  of   the  best moments in  Tennessee  Williams.  Yet  its Broadway   appearance   was  an   unfortu­ nate   disaster,   and   I   feel  that   this  was because  of  crassly  commercial  competi­ tion  and  critical  ennui with  plays  about  homosexuals.
As in Les Belles Soeurs, Tremblay  looks into his characters' lives from  the outside. As Jean-Claude Germain has pointed out in a preface  to the 1968 French edition of the    play,    Tremblay   is   unlike    either Gratien Gelinas or Marcel Dube in his external approach. Although there  are family  feuds  in  his  plays,  as there  are  in those by Gelinas,  Tremblay does not  find himself   standing  in   the   centre  of   the living-room. He  observes  as if through a window-pane, but  he observes keenly and succeeds in moving us.
One of the most striking aspects of Hosanna   is  its   lack   of   sensationalism. There is an  undeniable degree  of explicit language, double  entendres, and  theatri­ cal pyrotechnics but  these do not distract us  from  the  pitiable  plight  of  the   title character  and    "her"   mate.   Tremblay once   again   is  able   to   mix   pathos   and laughter in this slice of  life, and  although Hosanna  loathes   and   pities   herself   she does not become cloyingly  sentimental.
There is always a fundamental mixture of  toughness   and   tenderness  in   Trem­ blay's  main  characters, and   the  mixture

'I 15

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



serves  as an  adhesive for flawed  psyches. This  play is set in a furnished bachelor apartment  somewhere in  Plaza   St.  Hu­ bert  and   the  setting  is steeped   in  a  sad­ ness and  solitude  that  serve  as a sign for the   characters'  fates.   As  in   Les   Belles Soeurs,  the dichotomy between aspiration and   reality   is  simultaneously   romantic and   depressing for  we  are  dealing with two  figures  whose  lives  have  a  smell  of psychic  death amid   the  lurid   colours  of their   apartment.  Nowhere, of  course,  is this   irony   so   highly   in   evidence  as  in Hosanna's extravagant imitation of Eliza­ beth    Taylor's  Cleopatra   costume.    Its heavy wine-red  lace, decorated with gold, traps  a  female  soul  in  a  male  body  and thereby frustrates Hosanna's most intense wish  to be a  femme   fatale,  a triumphant queen    (in   two  senses) . And   Tremblay compounds  the   dichotomy  in   Cuirette, the  fattening stud,  whose  name  suggests the  leather he  wears  so  tightly  and  pro­ vocatively  like a motor-cycle freak, a sort of early  Marlon Brando rebel.  Cuirette's arrogance and   easy  self-assurance occa­ sionally  dissolve  into  the  ridiculous and,  as such, counterpoint Hosanna's frequent self-ridicule.
Hosanna and  Cuirette are  desperate people fighting  for an integrity that is impossible  to achieve.  For one thing,  both have pseudonyms for Hosanna is really Claude Lemieux, hairdresser, while  Cui­ rette  is Raymond Bolduc,  artist-manque. For   another,  both   are   incapable  of  a sexuality   based   on   a  stable   psyche   for they  are  continually  at  battle with  each other  in an  attempt  at irreversible domi­ nation. They  are  ridiculously caught be­ tween  two sexes, and  have  only a tenuous  consolation for  being  a  third   sex,  as  it were. While  it is true  that  their  reconcili­  ation  at  the  end  is touching  (after both

IJ6
 have  lost certain   illusions)   it  is also true that  their lives never lose a second-rate pathos.
While Tremblay joins Albee, Dyer, and others  in delineating the  tyranny  of psychosexuality, he does not indulge  in armchair  psychoanalysis. He   allows  his two   characters  a  give-and-take  that   is much more balanced than  the one-sided protest  in  Albee's  The Zoo  Story. More­ over, Hosanna  is never strident even at its most  desperate, and  its force  is  achieved  through action  or  imitation  rather than  through hypertrophic language.
In effect, then,  the achievement of Hasanna  is also one  of liberation for  this play, like Les Belles Soeurs, shows that Quebec can  provide a stimulus to talent that   seeks  to  transcend  cliches  of  situa­ tion,  character, and   language.  Hosanna refuses   to  become    a   melodrama  or   a comedy  that  rounds  out  its vision  with  a false or unconvincing resolution. Fittingly,  it has  two acts as if to show-again like Les  Belles  Soeurs- that   there   is  really no  third act in life because last-minute conversions or resolutions are  the relics of outmoded theatre. If Tremblay did noth­ ing other  than  expose  this simple fact,  he would achieve  a sort of artistic liberation, but,   of  course,   he  does  more:   he   uses vulgar  characters and portrays them  most strikingly    m     prose-poetry.   Hosanna's touching    self-contempt   leaves   an    in­ delible  impression,   and   though   the  play will not have broad  appeal, its mixture of anguish  and   humour is  controlled  with admirable verve  and  shows Tremblay's mastery. Like Les Belles Soeurs, this play succeeds  in giving  artistic form  to  unre­ fined instincts  and  urges, confirming that  truth, in any language, must  begin in the foul  rag-and-bone shop of the  heart.
KEITH  GAREBIAN

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



SIMPLE STORIES

ERNEST   BUCKLER,   The    Rebellion   of   Young David  and  Other  Stories.  McClelland & Stewart.

ERNEST  BUCKLER's overdue   collection of  short  stories  contains fourteen  which have   appeared  in   periodicals   between
1941  and   1959.  All  were   published  in relatively  large  circulation  magazines­ Atlantic   Advocate,  Chatelaine,   Esquire, MacLean's and  Saturday  Night-which may   have   influenced    Buckler's   use  of forms  and  language which  are  closer  to the  mainstream of  popular writing than  one  finds  in  his  longer  prose  works.  His style   in  these   stories   is  much    simpler than  the  complex and  at  times  involved manner that  characterizes his novels The Mountain   and   the    Valley   and    The Cruelest Month. Most  of the stories have a  folksy, fireside  manner, as  if  they  are being  told  rather than  written. The  oral nature of the stories is enforced by the fre­ quent use of repetition and reminiscence.
Whatever its motivations, the simpler approach  does   have   its   advantages.  I find  Buckler's  style  in  his  longer   works often becomes self-conscious, too highly wrought. On   the  other hand   the  stories do  not  generally   have   the   deep  reson­ ances  that  make  The  Mountain  and the Valley  such  a  rich  experience. All  but  a few  of them  have  a  rather  conventional happy   ending, perhaps  required  by  the magazines'  readership.   Still,   the   prose reveals  all  the  loving  care  that   Buckler has for language, occasionaly  startling the reader   with  breathtaking images: "The sun  drowsed  like  a  kitten   curled   up  on my   shoulder."   Or:   "Somehow in   the country men  never  seemed  to skate  after life stopped  its circling just above their shoulders  and  settled  on  them."
 A strong moralistic strain  pervades these stories.  Especially   important is  the  idea that  we  never  get  to  know  another  per­ son, so that  our  judgments of them  must always  be suspect.  The need  for  charity and  tolerance plays a large  part  in  "The Rebellion of Young  David" and  "Long, Long   After   School", and   is  present  in most  of  the  other  stories. This  moralism contributes  to   a   sentimental  strain  in many  of the stories, which  becomes  espe­ cially  obtrusive   in  some  of  the   shorter pieces such as "Long, Long After  School", where  the  moral  issue  assumes  a  central position.
The predominant rural   themes of  the stories have much  in common with The Mountain and the Valley. One  of the earliest,   "The  First-Born Son",  was  in­ corporated into  that  novel, while  the title story,  "The Rebellion of Young  David", found  its way into  The  Cruelest  Month. Most  of  the  stories  are  set  in  the rural  Maritime surroundings before the  advent of  machinery. The  most  successful   are those  such  as "The First  Born  Son"  and "The Dream  and the Triumph", in which Buckler  succeeds  in  communicating the richness  of the  land  and  the  vital  figures who  struggled   to  survive,  both  emotion­ ally and physically, in a land  where  living was difficult but deeply  rewarding. Those stories which  are  more  removed from  the land  seem superficial  by comparison. This is especially  true  of "Glance in  the  Mir­ ror"   and   "Another  Christmas",   which deal  with scenes from  the life of a writer.
Buckler makes the most out of a few archetypal situations. This gives a rhythm to the book which imparts a greater unity than  possessed by most volumes of short stories. A number of stories  are  narrated by or  about  a sensitive  boy. Often, as in "The  Clumsy   One"  and    "The   Wild


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Goose",  the sensitive  but  impractical nar­ rator  has a more  earthbound but  reliable  brother. Other  stories   explore  the con­ trasts  between   city  and  country, or  the relationship between a  child  and  his fa­ ther   or   stepfather.   A   number  of   the stories  explore   the  various   tensions   the death of  one  parent  can  introduce into the   family  situation, especially   when   a child  is  involved. Romance  is  rare  and low-key. Buckler's  portraits of women are few  and  generally not  as  penetrating as those of  his powerful men who draw  their vast strength from  their  communion with the  land.
This collection  of stories solidifies Buck­ ler's   reputation,  although  it   does   not greatly   extend   it.  They are  unsophisti­ cated, sometimes  even  naive  in  their  ap­  proach, but  embody   a  tremendous com­ passion  and  understanding for  his  land and   the  people  who  inhabit it.  Readers who can share  Buckler's  sympathies, and there  will  be many,  will find  the  book  a satisfying  experience.

FRANCIS  MANSBRIDGE


WINDOWS

100 Poems of Nineteenth  Century Canada, selected by Douglas  Lochhead and  Raymond Souster.  Macmillan.

100 Poems of Nineteenth Century Canada is  an  anthology of  poetry   selected   from the  work of authors who lived  and  wrote in  Canada before  I goo.  In  addition to choosing   the  poems,  Douglas   Lochhead and   Raymond  Souster   introduce  them with a "Preface" which  places them  in an historical and  literary context; arrange them  in chronological order  according to the date  of birth of each author; and conclude them  with "Biographical Notes"
 on each of the poets and an authorftitle "Index."  According to  the   editors,   the "aims" of  the  anthology are  "to  provide the  reader with  one  window  overlooking the  landscape of  our  past, ... to  help  to establish  a sense of  that  time  and  place, to stimulate a taste for our early poetry or to nourish  one already established."
As  a  reader   with  a  "taste ... already established" for   nineteenth-century  Ca­ nadian literature, I  was  happy  to  find that  some of Lochhead and  Souster's "old  favourites" were also mine. I reread "The Tantramar Revisited" with  delight  and  greeted    the   name   of   Rosanna  Eleanor Mullins Leprohon with pleasure. My taste for this literature was also "nourished" by the  inclusion  of  William  Wilfred  Camp­ bell's  elegy  "Bereavement of  the  Fields. In  Memory of Archibald Lampman" and "stimulated"  by  the   selection   from   the poetry  of Isabella Valancy Crawford.
As well as enjoying these aspects  of the selection,  I also like other  features of 100
Poems   of  Nineteenth   Century  Canada. The  "Index," although not really needed, is useful. The  placing of the "Biographical Notes"   after  the  poems  underlines the editors' wish "to  allow the poems to speak for   themselves." The  inclusion   of   the "Notes," however,  and  the  chronological presentation of the  poetry  stress that  it is important for Canadians to have "a view of  the  past ... a  sense  of  that   time  and place." This  historical sense is further cultivated in  the  "Preface" by Lochhead and   Souster's   brief   description of   nine­ teenth-century Canadian publishing, their references   to  nineteenth-century literary styles, and  their avowed  uneasiness  at  the currently fashionable cliches about  Cana­ dian   culture  evoked   by  such   terms   as "colonialism" and  "garrison mentality" and   popularized  by  Margaret  Atwood's

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Survival,  which  they  rightly  dub  a "dan­
gerously narrow book".
Looking  through a  window  at  a land­ scape  does,  nevertheless, limit  what one sees. And  the  pleasant views  through the "window" of 100 Poems notwithstanding, several  aspects  of  its  landscape are  dis­ turbing. The  editors  warn   the  reader  in the    "Preface"  that    their    selection    of poems  has  been  affected  by  "the usual limitations ... [of] space,   time,  personal  preference,  and  whatever else conditions the  choice  of  those  who  make  antholo­ gies."  This  is  a  necessary   warning, for every   anthologist  has   to   make   choices which in the end  probably do not entirely  satisfy  even  himself.  Still,  some  "limita­ tions" of the  landscape of Lochhead and Souster's  window  are  worth  noting.
The  work of thirty-four authors is rep­ resented    in   this   anthology.  Of    these, eighteen, including Susanna  Moodie, are each  represented by  one  poem; five, in­ cluding Joseph   Howe,  by  two;  and  an­  other    three,    Charles   Sangster,  George Frederick Cameron,  and  Francis Joseph  Sherman,  by,  respectively, five, five,  and four. Only  the poetry  of Isabella Valancy  Crawford,   William    Wilfred    Campbell, Charles G. D. Roberts, Archibald Lamp­ man,  Bliss  Carman, and  Duncan Camp­ bell Scott is more adequately represented. Because  of  the   rgoo  cut-off   date  of  the anthology, however, the  selection of poems   by  Campbell, Roberts, Carman, and  Scott  is chiefly limited  to  those each wrote  or published  in  the  nineteenth century. There are,  for  example, no  In­ dian  poems by Scott.
These choices have several results. The landscape of 100 Poems is one  in  which six  larger   trees  dominate many   bushes, most of them  too small to be easily visible. Since  these  big  trees,  with  the  exception
 of Crawford, are  those  which  have  tradi­ tionally  represented Canadian  poetry,  the picture seen through Lochhead and  Sous­ ter's   window   is  itself   virtually  a  cliche  view of the  Canadian  literary landscape. Because   of   the   time   limitation  on   the selection,   the    trees    of    Campbell's, Roberts', Carman's, and Scott's poetry  are each  trimmed in  a  lopsided  way.  Scott's poetry  in particular is badly cut.
Other aspects   of  this  "window ... on
our  past"  bother me  as  well.  Fragments such  as the  few lines  lifted  out  of Mair's "Tecumseh" serve  no  purpose and  mis­ represent both  the author and  his drama. Even   though  the   editorial   problems  of nineteenth-century  Canadian  poetry   are  sometimes  complex  and  "every  effort  has been  made  to  present in  this  antholOg'J versions  of  poems  as  they  appeared dur­ ing the lifetimes  of the  poets  themselves," an  effort  should  also  have  been  made to state clearly  the source  of the  version  the editors  chose  of  each  poem  and   to  indi­ cate  variations of  each  poem  when  they exist.   Although   the    Toronto    Reprint Library is  reproducing  important works first published in nineteenth-century Can­ ada,  the  "puffing" of  these  reprints and  the   virtual   neglect   of   other  Canadian series  in  the  "Biographical  Notes" seem just  a  little   unfair. Surely,  for  example, the  New  Canadian  Library's edition of Mrs. Leprohon's Antoinette de Mirecourt deserves  a  mention. The  note  on   Mrs. Leprohon,   moreover,   is   unfortunately typical  of  many  of  these  "Notes". It  is inaccurate  in  that   her  date   of  birth   is incorrectly stated. It is misleading in that it  stresses   her   poetry    when   her   most
important  work   was  her   prose   fiction. And it is vague: "popular as poet and novelist"  says  little   about  the  role  that Mrs.  Leprohon  actually  played   in   the

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cultural  life    of    nineteenth-century
Canada.
My response to this anthology,  then, is on  the  whole  more  negative  than  posi­ tive,  more  troubled  than  enthused. One reason  for  this response is  the quality  of the editing, which is just not good enough. But the main reason for it is, I think, that for  many  of us the  time  for  the  kind of "generalization" about  Canadian culture seen through  the window of 100 Poems of Nineteenth   Century   Canada   has  gone and that now when we look at our litera­ ture,  we  expect  a sharper  and  more de­ tailed view of "the  landscape  of our past" than  that  selected  by Douglas  Lochhead and Raymond Souster.

MARY  JANE EDWARDS


GRATUITOUS ACTION

JUAN  BUTLER, The  Garbageman. Peter  Martin
Associates, $6.95.
IN A  Saturday  Night  review of Juan Butler's  first novel, Cabbagetown  Diary: A   Documentary,  Eldon   Garnet   wrote, "The  'characters' of  Cabbagetown  are
. . . just   as  we   might   imagine   them. Preoccupied  with sex and drinking, unin­ terested  in  the  humanitarian  efforts  to lift them out of their lives." And it's true. The   characters   are  just   as  one  might imagine them -if one accepts the stereo­ type of the working class perpetuated by Butler.  If one  doesn't-and I  don't­ Cabbagetown  Diary  is little  more  than superficial and  patronizing,  its characters  and situations  (despite the subtitle)  with­ out  documentary value. The  book is  re­ markable  only for its lack of  compassion and  for an  obsession with  the sadomaso­ chistic   that   is  at   times   reminiscent   of Mickey Spillane.  In  these  passages But-


120
 ler's prose comes to life in a way that  it doesn't  at any other  time.
Sadomasochism  is  central   to  Butler's plotless second  novel, The  Garbageman. The  first three-quarters of the book con­ sist of  the  psychopathic  and  sadomaso­ chistic  fantasies  and for   recollections­ one is never completely certain  which - of Fred  Miller during  three  early morn­ ing hours  in his suburban  Toronto bed­ room. The fantasies andfor recollections take us from Toronto to Kenora  to Bar­ celona   to  Paris;   the   novel  ends   with Miller  in  a Toronto  psychiatric  hospital attempting to organize some of his fellow patients  into "Paranoids for  Peace".
At  various  times, Miller's  voice as he tells his story takes on some of the char­ acter, but unfortunately never the feeling, of  a  number  of  other  voices -Samuel
Beckett, Hubert  Selby Jr., J. D. Salinger,
William Burroughs, Jerzy Kosinski, R. D.
Laing.  (The  title is taken from a passage in which Miller appears to be trying out some of Fritz Perls' wisdom:  "... reality is the very instant  something  is  happen­ ing.... Reality is right now. Second after second after second of it. For  the rest of your  life. And  life  is  what   happens   to you....  Garbageman  or  mystic....")
But as in Cabbagetown  Diary, it's only when  Butler  is writing  about  sadomaso­ chism  that  The  Garbageman  comes  to life:  Fred  Miller  kills  his  cat  twice - first by bashing  in its skull and  later  by slicing its head off. He doesn't  just roll a homosexual sailor in  Barcelona; he but­ chers  him -first  by  smashing  a  bottle over  his  head  and  ramming  the  jagged remains into him. Then  he shoots the top of the sailor's head off. "Without knowing why,"   Miller   tells  us  deliciously,  "my first  reaction  is to  plunge  my  left  hand into  his brain  cavity, grab  a  handful  of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mucous-like matter,  pull   it   out,   blood running  down   my  wrist,   and   throw   it heavily   towards   the  wall  where  it  lands with  a  dull  plop.... Gray-white,  blood­ coated   brains  with  nerve  ends  still  twit­ ching." Later, in a scene set in  Paris  and more   vividly  gruesome than  any  I can recall   in  fiction,   Miller   rapes  a   young woman, bites  off one  of  her  nipples  and stabs  her  to death. All  the while  he gives us  a  dispassionate  play-by-play  descrip­  tion  of the  event  as  if it were  an  artistic  happening. "From  where  I'm  standing," he  reports,  "I see  a  large   head   of  un­  kempt  black  hair   cascading in  disarray over  two pulsating yellow globes. A very interesting surreal   perspective. One   that would   have   equally   intrigued  both   the Marquis de  Sade  and  Max  Ernst." Her face   reminds  him   "of   the   ghastly   and contorted   features  of   the   unfortunate wretch in Edward Munch's 'The Scream'."  After   he's   stabbed  her   and pulled   out   the  knife,  he  says,  "I  stand back  in  awe  at  the  spectacle I have  in­ advertantly created: a blood-flower  blos­ soming  in  a  blue-jean ocean  ... a  real­ life  Rene   Magritte....  How   I   wish  I had  a camera." He  begins  and  ends  the scene by reading poetry  to her-Baude­ laire  to  her  live  body  and  Swinburne to her   corpse: "That I   could  drink   thy veins  as  wine,  and  eat/Thy breasts  like honey!   ..."
Apart   from    the   violence,    however, what  we have  in The Garbageman is not the controlled madness of the surrealism Butler  continually tells us we're  reading, but  rather a soporific  and  mindless  cata­ logue  of  cliches.  Fred   Miller  winds  up sounding like someone  who's never  quite  got over the discovery that the tooth  fairy doesn't   exist.   "People   don't  love   each other,"  he   complains,   "they    use   each
 other." A liberal,  he sneers,  "is  an  ivory­ tower  radical   who  ... cringes  in  horror the   moment   he  is  asked   to   personally help  alleviate the  problem he informs us about  in such a scholarly way. A liberal  is a status-seeking snot-nose who lacks even the courage  of his convictions."
The   violence  itself-particularly  the rape  scene -reminded  me  of  the  death of Viennese body artist  Rudolph Schwarz­ kogler inI g6g. Over  a number of months until  he died, Schwarzkogler sliced off his penis and  other  parts  of his body  inch  by inch    while    a    photographer   carefully recorded  the event. The photographs were later  shown  in  a  gallery. Had   Schwarz­ kogler  martyred  himself   for  some  clear reason,  one  might   applaud  his  act.  But so far  as I can  tell, he didn't. Compared with,  for  example,  the  social   comment clearly implicit  in Mark Prent's pickled penises  and  sliced  breasts   at   the  Isaacs Gallery in Toronto last  year, what Schwarzkogler  did   seems   gratuitous,  a cruel  perversion   of  the  notion  of  art  for art's  sake.
Butler's  novel seems equally gratuitous. It's  not  that   psychopathic fury  can't  be an  understandable response  to the  world. We  know   that   it  can   be.  The  trouble with Butler  (as with so many  recent film­ makers,  etc.)  is his inability to make that  point   clear-to  explicitly or   implicitly provide   a  context   for   the  violence.  All that's clear-painfully,  hauntingly, but ultimately  pointlessly  clear -is  the  vio­ lence itself. All the  novel  does do  is once again   raise  the  thorny question of  what it  says  about   us   that   so  many   writers,  artists,   popular    singers,   photographers and  members   of  their   audiences  are  so hooked  on  what  appears to  be  a  gratui­ tous concern  with  the  grotesque  and  the violent. 	MORRIS WOLFE


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A KIND OF TURBULENCE

E.  w.   THOMSON,   Old   Man   Savarin   Stories.
Introduction  by  Linda   Sheshko.  University
of Toronto Press, $4.50.

LORRAINE  MCMULLEN    ( ed.), Selected   Stories of  E.   W. Thomson. University of  Ottawa Press, $3-75·
A CANADIAN FELLOW of the Royal Society of Literature of the  United Kingdom, speaking in  honour of  Archibald  Lamp­ man  in  I9I4, said of his native literature:

Between  our  patriotism and  our  criticism we born  Canadians more  or less indulgently acclaim    as   Canadian  poetry   almost   any verses  that  indicate amiable design.  This  is as it should  be. To  listen  awhile  to any who try to sing wholesomely, is at worst a fault which leans to virtue's  side. Brickbats may properly  be thrown  at  those  who bawl harmfully.   We  can   always  go  away  if we don't  like the singing.

While  the  sentiments of  "The Canadian Abroad", the  poem   which   precedes   the larger  of these two collections of E. W. Thomson's short  stories, can scarcely be designated harmful bawling, the  reader may well be tempted to go away. Nostal­ gia for his homeland, felt while the writer  spent  ten years in Boston as revising editor  and   short   story   writer  for  the   Youth's Companion, is conveyed through the well­ worn  images  of  the  Maple Leaf  school, crooning rapids, honking geese, gold  and crimson  woodlands, all of which  send  his heart  "winging north"  to  where   "rosy­ cheek  maiden and  hazel-hue boy/  Listen grave while the Angelus  ends ... "
The  biting  opening of  Thomson's  first story  in  Douglas   Lochhead's  reprint  of the  I917 collection, Old Man Savarin Stories: Tales of Canada  and Canadians, is a welcome relief from  these verses of amiable design.  "Yes,  indeed, my grand-

122
 father was once  in  jail" is a familiar sen­ tence   to   most   readers  of   native  short  stories, as is the comic balance of  honour, family affection, and  financial  juggling in "Privilege of the  Limits". The  other  six­ teen  tales  are  less well  known,  and  only nine  of  them  are  Canadian in  context, although five of  the seven  others,  set  in the United States, South  Africa  and  Eng­ land, have Canadian-born narrators. The
I 9 I 7  collection  was  an  enlarged  version
of  Old  Man  Savarin  and  Other  Stories ( I895), leaving  out  two  of  the  original fourteen  tales  and   adding  the  opening poem and five stories. In it the vigorous aspects of Thomson's writing are well dis­ played.  The  keynote  to  his  prose  style is action.   In  many  of  the  tales  a  narrator tells of his personal  experiences; in all of them  voices speak  continuously,  often  in dialect,  bringing a  dramatic  liveliness  to the scene. Movement and  activity  are al­  ways present; a heroic father is swept over Niagara Falls;  a  lumberman's son works feverishly  to salvage  a broken  crib of logs in  order   to  support his  starving family; ten  soldiers  of the  Army  of the  Potomac gallop    through   the    night   carrying despatches at  the  risk of their  lives. Even in the quieter stories, the inner action is vigorous. Old John, in "The Waterloo Veteran," is a comparatively static  figure, standing martially erect,  fiercely proud  of his campaign medal; but  his imagination lives  on  the  battlefield, with  Boney  and the  old  Duke,  with  the  troops  at  Inker­ man,   and   finally  with   his  warrior  son, who  dies  attacking a  Sepoy  fort  in  the Indian mutiny.
Thomson's characters tend  towards stereotype, but are  usually  cast in a tough mould. Dour Davie,  a Scots hero, with his jaw set like iron, drives a sleigh over forest trails  to  his home  despite his broken  leg,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in  order   to  save  the  fortunes of  his  em­ ployer.  In  the  title  story  a girl  of  fifteen traps  her avaricious landlord under water with  her  fishing  scoop,  while  her  cousin "she's  laugh   so she  cant   hardly  hold  on wis me to de hannle." Even  the poor and hungry retain  a  feeble  vitality.  Mini,  in "The  Shining Cross  of   Rigaud",  is  not strong  enough  to  get  milk  to  his  dying baby sister before his callous mother seizes it  to  exchange for  gin; but  he  finds  the power  to  walk  and  climb  many  miles to the mountain cross where  he believes that  Angelique's spirit   will   be   found.  The  vigour  of  sentiment,  humour, and  melo­ drama inhabits most  of the  characters in these tales. Setting, too, usually  reinforces Thomson's effect of  movement and strength. The  sweeping   currents of  the Niagara River  above  the  Falls  are  bril­ liantly  visualized  in  "John  Bedell,  U. E. Loyalist", while  the crackling and  falling rocks in "Petherick's Peril" grimly empha­ sizes the  hero's  dilemma as he clings to a Cornish  cliff, looking  down  five hundred feet  to the  ocean  "now  almost  hidden  by the   vast   concourse   of   wheeling  and  affrighted birds."
Thomson's prose  style,  then,  has  more
to  recommend it  than   the  quality of his prefatory   verse   might    suggest.    Linda Sheshko's  introduction to  the  University of  Toronto  reprint,  after   giving   useful biographical information on this political journalist,  poet,   and   short   story   writer, reflects the comment of several critics that Thomson's  obstinate,   humorous,  honest individuals  are   good   representatives  of local types of Glengarry Scots and Ottawa valley  "habitant" life. Lorraine  McMul­ len,  editor   of  Selected   Stories  of E. W. Thomson, points out  the masculine quali­  ties of the narratives, the lack of romantic interest,  and  the passive nature of most of
 the women  described. Her introduction to that  collection,  which  consists of eleven of the stories from the I g I 7 edition, describes Thomson  as  an   important   part   of  the nineteenth century. He  was  a  friend   of Lampman and   D.  C.  Scott,  a  critic   of contemporary poetry, and a writer  of boys' stories  and   verse  as  well  as of  the  Old Man   Savarin Tales.  McMullen sees  his "local  colour" qualities as typical  of writ­  ers  of  this  period,   and   suggests   that   in addition he reflects some of the realism  of American  and   French novelists  such  as James  and Zola.
While I can appreciate the angular and
mobile  values  of Thomson's writing, and can see their  place  in the development of Canadian letters,  I question Lorraine Mc­ Mullen's  comment  that    Thomson   was "the most  skilful  Canadian  storyteller  of the   time". Scott   and   Roberts,  at   least, could  lay claim  to  more enduring notice.  Thomson  tells  a  good  tale,  in  the  sense that  he  manipulates character, suspense, crisis  and  climax   with  skill.  There  are, however,  a number of negative aspects  to the  stories  which   make   them,   perhaps, more of a historical curiosity  than  a pleas­ ure   to  the  modern  reader.  His  peasant characters,  for   example,  tend   towards caricature, particularly in  their  dialogue. "Sure, it'll  be cold  entirely,  Peter  dear," says the  Irish  Mrs. McGrath as she ladles out  the last bowl of cornmeal mush  to her destitute family,  "and  the  warmth is so comforting. Give me little Norah now, the darlint, and  be after eating your supper." In  "The  Red-Headed  Windigo", super­ stitious  French  Canadian  loggers  shake with  fear  at  the  thought of the  cannibal spirit  whose  apparent tracks  they  find  in the  snow,   and   it   takes   a  level-headed Englishman to  discover  the  trick  behind


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  footprints and  to  reassure  his under­
lings.
Personality caricature  is often  accom­ panied   by  emotions expressed  in  a  way popular in  the  nineties, but  possessing  a distinctly   period   quality  now.  Obstinate Peter  McGrath, who  refuses cut-rate log­ ging   work,   is   reduced  to  stealing  food from   his  former  employer. When   John  Pontiac,  catching him,  makes  him  a gift of the provisions  instead  of hurling him in jail  (and  offers him a new job at the same low   rate) ,  he   is  bathed  in   tears   and gratitude. "Go  in,  Mary  Ann -go  in­ and  kiss-the feet of him." Equally cloy­ ing,   the   deathbed  scene   in   "Drafted", with  brothers reunited and  a heart-rend­ ing  memory   of  the  folks  at home,  must have  affected   the  sensibilities  of  many  a female  reader when it first appeared.
Emotions are  difficult  to separate from values; and  Thomson's values  seem to me to  be  conservative  ones.  Loyalty   to  the employer and maintenance of his financial stability  are  issues in  at  least  five stories. While   Renwick  realizes   that   his  editor, Miss Minnely, is manipulating his power of free  expression, he accepts  this  with  a kind  of  admiration. Greedy  landlords or storekeepers appear  in  several   tales,  but the  poor  use  only  the  weapons of  luck, wit,   and   laughter  against  them;  their place  in  the  order  of things  goes unques­ tioned.  Poverty  is  accepted   (for the  French or Irish) as a corollary of  foolish­ ness, bad   judgment, or  vice,  and  for  the hungry children gnawing a bone  the only hope  is charity. Most unacceptable about  the writer's values, however,  are  the indi­  cations  of a racial hierarchy. The English  are  loyal, strong, and  practical; the Scots are frugal, hardworking, courageous, wit­ ty,  tough,  financially stable,  and  teetotal (a formidable list) ; the  French and  Irish

124
 are picturesque, devout,  emotionally vola­ tile, liable  to sink  into  poverty, and  born to be manual labourers; while in  the  dis­ stressing story "Great Godfrey's Lament" we  find   the   last   living  son  of  a Scots father and  an  Indian  mother, sorrowing over  his long-dead youngest  brother, who had  been  the  parents' favourite because "White was  Godfrey,   and  rosy of  cheek like my father; and  the  blue  eyes of him would  match  the sky when  you'll  be see­ ing  it  up  through a  blazing  maple  on  a clear  day of October ... The  rest of  us all were  just Indians ... " The Gaelic idiom on the Indian tongue  is as incongruous as the idea that  the jealousy of  the six brown brothers  was  based   not  directly on  the father's injustice but on the fact  that  they were   shut   out   from   the  great   McNeil cultural inheritance. When  the father died and   Godfrey,  though  the   youngest,   be­ came   their   paternal  director,  all   was peace  and contentment until  his death­ from   consumption,  the   fatal  Indian disease.
It is worth  remembering that  Thomson was  a  successful  writer   of  boys'  stories. The  tales  in  these  two collections possess the better qualities  of juvenile  fiction,  the rapid  action,  the simple, clear characteriz­ ation,   the  vivid  dialogue;  but   they  also tend  to suffer from  the weakness  inherent in  many   of  the  narratives of  the   Boys' Own   Annual    or   the   B.O.W.C.  series. Their predominant values and  themes are those   of   the   late    nineteenth   century, values not for all time but for a particular day.
GLENYS STOW

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A MODERN CIRCE

JOHN  s. CROSBIE,   The Incredible Mrs. Chad­ wick: The  Most   Notorious Woman  of Her Age.  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  $7-95·

CASSIE CHADWICK  LIVES.  Although  the notorious embezzler,   forger,   and  seduc­ tress was buried   (albeit  in  a  suspiciously light  coffin)  in  I907,  she is still  conning people.  The   latest   victim  of   this  latter  day  Circe  is none  other  than  John Cros­ bie,   author  of   The   Mayor    of   Upper  U psalquitch, the  world's  first  Dictionary  of Puns,  and  now  self-appointed  hagio­ grapher of  Cassie  Chadwick,  nee  Betsy Bigley, alias  Emily  Heathcliffe, Cassie  L. Hoover,  Lydia  De  Vere,  Elizabeth Cun­ ard, and  a variety  of other  pseudonyms.
Crosbie's  wife  first  drew  his  attention to  the   "most   notorious  woman   of  her age,"   and  from   that   moment, he  dates his slavish devotion to the woman  who fleeced  many  of America's financial  wiz­ ards  of all but  their  shirts  by claiming to be the  natural daughter of  Andrew Car­ negie. Crosbie painstakingly has recreated her   flamboyant   escapades  and   erected what he calls a "monument to Betsy Big­ ley."  Cold  as stone,  without a  breath  of vitality,  the  book is essentially  a straight­ forward   reordering   of     contemporary newspaper accounts. The  only  exception occurs  in the first few  pages  where  Cros­ bie seems to be indulging his own  fanta­ sies  under the  guise  that   he  "dared  to guess what kind of childhood would  pro­ duce  such  a woman."
Born on a farm  in Eastwood, Ontario, in  I857,  Betsy Bigley quickly  learned the value  of money,  trading her  virginity  for
$so  at  age  I3 and  using  the  proceeds  to float her first round of spurious cheques. This  was only  the  beginning of a  career that  saw  her  as a  prostitute, clairvoyant,
 and  society matron. She netted three husbands -the second  signed a marriage contract giving  her  full  possession  of all his assets should  they separate. Her  third mate  was a wealthy  and  socially  promin­ ent Cleveland doctor named Leroy Chad­ wick, whom she encountered in a brothel. He  quickly  swallowed   her  tale  that   she had accepted the position  of madam, mis­ takenly  thinking she was to be the matron of  a   home   for   girls.   Chadwick   deter­ mined   to  "rescue her"  and   in   a   neat  reversal  of  the  "spider and   the  fly"  in­  vited  her into  his home.
Using  her  marriage as collateral, Betsy embarked on a glorious  buying  spree fin­ anced  first  by husband Leroy,  and  then by kiting cheques,  seducing bankers, trad­ ing  on  her  relationship to  Andrew  Car­ negie, and finally forging the steel baron's name  to notes  worth as much  as $5 mil­ lion.  Eventually, she  was  caught  short, arrested, put on trial -Andrew Carnegie himself  was in attendance all  six days - and sentenced to ten  years imprisonment. She  died  in  jail  after   pre-arranging an elaborate funeral, including the composi­ tion of her own eulogy.
The author gives  us little  insight  into Betsy's  character and  makes  no  analysis of motivation. Yet, even  this superficial account  cannot    obscure    the   fact   that Betsy /Cassie   was  an   extraordinary  wo­ man.   What   drove   her   to  commit  such excesses  and   to  trifle  so  cavalierly  with men's   affections?   She   was  not   a  great  beauty,  nor  was  she  particularly  clever, cultured  or   witty.   What   then   was  the secret of her power?  The enigma remains for-certainly   the   impressionable   John Crosbie  is in  no  position   (condition?)  to tell us.
SANDRA MARTIN


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



RESEARCHER'S GAZETTEER

THE THIRD  EDITION OF   THE Directory of Special Libraries and Information Centres  has   just  been   published  by  the Gale    Research   Company   of   Detroit, under the editorship of Margaret Labash Young,  Harold Chester Young, and Anthony T. Krukas. This  immensely use­ ful  compilation is a guide  to  the  kind  of specialized   collections  that are  likely  to be   of   interest    to   researchers    in   the libraries  and    archives  of   the   United States and  Canada;  the   institutions covered   include  not   only   university  li­ braries   and   libraries  maintained  by  all levels   of   government   from   the   centre  down   to  the  municipality, but   also  the libraries  and archives  of societies, business corporations, newspapers, whether acces­ sible  to  the  general public  or  otherwise. Volume I  ($55.oo)  is the actual directory of  the  libraries  and  information centres,  I,435  pages  in length and  covering some I3,o78  institutions in  the  United  States and  Canada. Volume 2  ($35.00) is a geographic index  of  the  actual  libraries and  a directory of personnel.
I have  never  yet found such a directory
that  was flawlessly complete, and this, despite  its vast coverage, is no exception. For  example, there  is no  mention of the Special   Collections  division   at   the  Mc­ Pherson    Library  in   the   University   of Victoria, with  its  important archives of modern English  poets  like Robert Graves









u6
 and  Herbert Read; there  is no  mention of the collection of Lowry papers at the University of British  Columbia library; nothing is said of the collection  in the Vancouver Public  Library devoted  to Northwest History.  These are  all  impor­ tant  research  resources  in our  immediate locality; other   readers in  different areas  may   find   further   omissions.   Yet   as  it stands   the  Directory  performs a  definite  service,  and   the   editors   are   quite   evi­ dently   conscious   that   their   task   is  not complete, since  their  plan  provides  for periodic  supplements.

G.W.


ADDITIONAL INDEX

THE  Canadian   Essay  and   Literature Index,
1973   (University  of  Toronto  Press,   $27.50) is  a   new   venture  that    one   hopes   may   con­ tinue. Compiled by  Andrew D.  Armitage  and
Nancy   Tudor, it   brings   together  items   pub­ lished   in  magazines  of  general  interest  or  of specifically literary  interest, including   poems and  stories  as  well  as articles and  reviews; the main   other criterion for  inclusion  is  that   the periodicals in  question  should not   be  indexed already  in   Canadian   Periodical   Index. This  means   that,  while   Canadian  Literature  and  other established  journals feature in  the  Can­ adian Periodical Index, the Canadian  Essay and Literature  Index  includes many  short-lived and obscure little  magazines which  the  older  index  has  ignored.  Together, they  leave  few  periodi­ cals  untouched, and  give  as  comprehensive a view   as  one   could   wish   of   the   offerings  of Canadian  magazines in  a  given   year.  An  im­ mensely   useful  research  tool,  which  librarians should  be talked  into buying.
o.w.




LOOK BEYOND ENG. LIT.

IN  HIS   ARTICLE  "The  Unending Cycle," for Canadian Literature No. 63, Leonard W.  Sugden writes,  "In  ['Incubation, for the  first  time,  the  author had  incorpor­ ated   into   his  work  the  methods of  the French New  Novel and shown  the strong influence of the 'conscious stream' method  pioneered  by  James   Joyce  and  Virginia Woolf."
I found  this  statement disturbing. Though  this   critic    acknowledges that Gerard Bessette's  novel  shows  the  influ­ ence  of  the  nouveau roman  he  feels that  the stream  of consciousness method comes from   the   works   of   Joyce   and   Woolf. These   authors  may   be  the   pioneers   of this narrative technique in English  litera­ ture, but in French where  the method first appeared  the  pioneers   are   Proust,  Gide and   Dujardin.  Joyce   acknowledged  his debt  to  Edouard Dujardin  whose   I887 novel,   Les  Lauriers   son  coupees,   is  the first significant instance of monologue interieur. Does it not seem likely that  the French Canadian novelist  may also be following  the example of these influential French authors?
It is  not  my  intention  here  to  single
out  this  fine  essay for  criticism   but  only to  cite  this  one  flaw  as an  example of a problem: too narrow a perspective in Canadian letters.  We  find  such  lapses in many  places.  To  me  they  are representa­ tive of an  Anglophone habit  of thought. I am  not  suggesting   that  Sugden  shares this   mentality  since   he   shows   a   good
 knowledge   of  French fiction,   both  Que­ becois writing  and  French existentialism. The  habit  of  thought to  which  I am  re­ ferring   seems  to  view   literature  almost exclusively  in terms of English  and  Amer­ ican cultural traditions.
Now  that   English   Canadian  scholars
are  looking  into  French Canadian  litera­ ture  more  and  more  they  should  keep  in mind    that,  despite    their    Anglophone backgrounds and  biases, there is a French literary  tradition  to  consider. When  ex­ amining  literary   phenomena  not   only from   French  but  from   English   Canada we  should   be  aware of  traditions from the European continent.
On   a  wider   note  we  should   begin  to look  beyond  the  confines  of  the  English cultural tradition and  examine Canadian letters  in  terms  of  works  from  more  re­ mote  parts  of the  world. Commonwealth literature is one context in which  to place the  writing  of our  authors. Another ap­  proach is  comparative studies   involving Spanish American literature. Bessette's  le Cycle  with  its  broad   perspective dealing with several  generations of characters has affinities   with    Cien   Aiios    de   Soledad (I g67)    by   the    Colombian  novelist, Gabriel Garcia-Marquez. Canadians con­ cerned  with  the regionalism in our novels might   be  interested  in  the  emphasis on regional   aspects  in  the  works  of  Carlos  Reyles  (Uraguay)  and  Mariano Latorre (Chile). The small  towns  of  Laurence's A Jest of God  and  Ross' As For Me  And My  House  have  a  parallel in  the  Argen­  tine  novel of  Manuel Galvez,  La Maestra  Normal   ( I9I4). Callaghan's More Joy in Heaven   has   kinship   with   the   Chilean novel Hijo  de Ladr6n ( I95I) by Manuel Rojas.
I am  not suggesting  that  these novelists have   influenced   one   another  nor   even

OPINIONS AND NOTES



that  they were aware of their  respective works. The  general affinities are  the strik­ ing ones here.  It is intriguing the manner in  which   all  these  authors of   the  New World,   writers   of   relatively   young   na­  tional    traditions  like   that   of   Canada, have  been able  to create distinct national literatures that  reflect  the native  environ­ ment  and  the  aspirations of their  people. These  lands  of  the  Western Hemisphere, with    often   harsh    climates,    and    these multi-cultural nations are shaping new traditions of which  Canadians should  be aware. Multi-cultural like Canada for among  the many Spanish names of these southern authors we find Irish, German, French  and   Italian  ones   too :   Reyles, Lynch, Eichelbaum, Carpentier, Usigli, Storni, Agustini.
By comparing the works of our  authors
with   those  of  South  Americans we  will get new and  wider  perspectives of the achievements of Canadian writers. Cana­ dians  will be pleasantly surprised  both  by the    similarities  and  the   differences between   Canadian  letters  and   those  of Latin America.

JOSEPH PIVATO


NO MORE TWIST

Just  to refer  George  Bowering,  review­ er of Audrey  Thomas's Blown Figures, to the    Oxford    Concise    ("Twist,   thread, rope,    etc.,")   and    to   Beatrix    Potter's Tailor  of Gloucester,  the source  of  the quotation "No  more  twist."
Twist,  George,  is thread for sewing  up little  coats,  repairing the  "parameters of the   self"   and   presumably  for   hanging blown  figures.

LINDA  ROGERS
 (For  the  pleasure  of ironists,  the  Shorter OED gives at least 14 other  definitions of twist used as a noun,  and  almost  as many of its use as a verb; few are  in  any  way connected  with   tailors   and   even   fewer with  hangmen. ED)



FICTION IN FRENCH

WITH   ALMOST TWENTY books   published or announced,  Harvest  House's  French  Writers of Canada series  is  rapidly  becoming an  insti­ tution in  the  Canadian  literary  world  that in its  own  way  parallels McClelland &  Stewart's New Canadian Library. It is true  that  the  New Canadian  Library   includes  some   translations of Quebecois novels,  but  these  are  usually   the rare  books -like  the  novels  of  Gabrielle  Roy
-that have  received  wide attention in English­
speaking  Canada.   The   French   Writers   of Canada, as  a  series,  sets  out   to  introduce  to the   Anglophone  public  Quebecois  books   of high  standard, and  also  high  standing in  their own   world, which   have   not   previously  been made  available in  translation. This means  that in  each  case  new  translations have   been  com­ missioned,  and   so,  quite  apart  from  making some  excellent books  available to  a  whole  new readership, the  series  gives  encouragement  to the  activity of translation  which  is so necessary for  the  mutual understanding of the  two major Canadas.  Except for  Louis   Dantin's Fanny, a semi-naturalistic  novel   based   on   the  author's experience of  living  in  a  black  ghetto in  Bos­ ton,   the   novels  in   the   most   recent   batch   of titles   (all   priced   at  $2.50) are   in   that  vein of   lyrical    fantasy  which    one   encounters  so often   among French Canadian  and   so seldom among English Canadian  writers, The  Double Hook     and    Gwen    McEwen's   novels    being  among the  rare  exceptions. The  Grandfathers by   Victor-Uvy    Beaulieu,   ]os    Carbone   by Jacques   Benoit    and    Jacques   Ferron's   two books,   The   Saint   Elias   and    The   Juneberry Tree, all  lead  us  into  dreamlands whose  rela­ tion  to the  actual world  is real  but  ironic, even  when, as in The Saint  Elias, a pseudo-historical form  is   used   and   people   who   have   actually  lived   are    introduced  or   indirectly   mocked. Such   fiction  belongs,  perhaps,   to   an   older, more ordered and  more  static society  than that  of   English Canada.  One   has   to   be  at   grips with one's  daily  world   to  build   above  it  one's artificial  Edens. 	L.T.c.
