$2.oo  per  copy



CANADIAN
L!J1lrERATURE
N°·67
Winter, 1976



M}INNERS OF CRITICISM



Articles

BY ROSEMARY SULLIVAN, S. NAMJOSHI, JEAN MALLINSON, WYNNE  FRANCIS, ANDREW J. POTTINGER, DAVID M.  MONAGHAN, KEITH GAREBIAN


Poems

BY PETER STEVENS, CHRISTOPHER LEVENSON



Review Articles and Reviews

BY AUDREY  THOMAS, R. T. ROBERTSON, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, LARRY SHOULDICE, ANTHONY APPENZELL, PATRICIA  MORLEY, ROBERT  GIBBS,
AL PURDY, PETER HAY, DOROTHY LIVESAY, GARY WERDEN, JACK WARWICK



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









MANNERS OF CRITICISM






MANNERS OF  CRITICISM, like those of any other art, change constantly,  sometimes  in  response  to  impulses  that  are  worldwide,  more  often in  response to  the  changing  circumstances  of an  individual  culture,  But, while in  certain  areas  of life change  involves obsolescence, this  is not  the  case with good criticism, any more than  it is the case with good poetry or good fiction. We may not, for example,  be able to imagine ourselves writing as Dryden  or Arnold wrote,  but  that  does not  prevent  us from  responding  to  many  aspects of their work:  its insights into  authors  who were their  contemporaries,  its reflection  of the  mores of their  period,  its statements  of critical  principle  whose application extends beyond their  age, and,  finally, its quality as prose.
It  was thoughts  of this  kind  that  came  to my  mind  when  I  re-read  W.  E.
Collin's The White  Savannahs, which appeared  first in 1936 as a self-consciously modernist critique of Canadian poetry, and which has now been reprinted  in the University of Toronto Press's Literature of Canada  series (paper  back, $5.95), with an excellent introduction by Germaine Warkentin.  Re-reading The White Savannahs at the same  time as I was looking back over the  English critics who were influenced  by the  post-Romantic   French  tradition   ( Sainte-Beuve,  Baude­ laire, the Symbolists in general), critics like Pater  and  Arthur  Symons,  I recog­ nized a kind of period tone  that  could not have been repeated  with  any  authen­ ticity of feeling after about  1939, though its analogues might be picked up at any time back to theI 88o's In his kind of tremulous excitement over literature,  Collin belonged by temperament to the earlier half of the twentieth century, and it seems significant that  all his three  books were published  by 1936, and  that  though  he still lives, 39 years afterwards,  his production  since World  War  II has consisted

2

EDITORIAL



of a handful  of articles,  the last of which appeared  a decade  ago,  and  the  last but one 19 years ago.
Professor Warkentin  bravely attempts to place Collin in the hierarchy  of  Cana­
dian criticism, but she rightly finds the greatest strength of The  White Savannahs in its author's "sense of immediacy".  She goes on, and  in my view less surely, to pin him into place, as she puts The  White  Savannahs "squarely  between two types of Canadian criticism".

At  one  extreme is  the  work  of  the  strictly  historical   critic   as  practiced by  Carl Klinck, Collin's contemporary at  Western  Ontario. At  the  other is the  elaborate system-building of Northrop Frye.  Between  them  is Collin,  resolving  difficulties  by the continuous practice of the  critic's  'art  of reading'. For  such  an  art  to flourish the  critic  must  have  a  profound belief in  the life of literature.

What  Professor Warkentin  seems to suggest, even if she does not do so deliber­ ately, is that,  being between  Klinck and  Frye, Collin has some of the  historical attitude  and some of the system-making. But in fact one finds little trace of con­ scious systematizing in  Collin's work, and  only enough  history to relate  works to the lives of their  authors  and  to the similar  works of other  authors.  The  stress, even when  comparisons  are  made,  is always on the  poetry  and  on  the  reader's direct relationship  to it, and to my mind Germaine Warkentin is much  nearer the truth -and  perhaps  gives us the  whole truth -in another  passage  where she remarks:   "The White   Savannahs  is not  a  principled  modernist   tract  but  an excited report  by a brilliant  and only partially informed  mind  about  the current  state of affairs at the creative frontier of a new literature."
The  White  Savannahs  was in fact part of the process by which Collin became a Canadian critic; it must be seen, to realize the full significance of the man's contribution  to our critical tradition,  in relation to the essays he wrote on French Canadian poetry  at  the same  time  as he  was compiling  the  annual  survey  of Quebec  literature  for the University  of Toronto  Quarterly,  a task  he continued from 1940-1946. Unfortunately, he did not sustain his commentary  on Canadian poetry in English over the same period, and so we are forced  to  judge his work in  that  field according  to the limitations  of his experience  when  he  wrote  The White  Savannahs in the mid-thirties.
Essentially, the basic experience was one he shared  with many  English writers and  scholars between  the  18go's  and  the  193o's,  who fell in  love with  French post-Romantic  literature, and  were not only profoundly impressed  by the  poetry and fiction of the Symbolists (who continually crop up in The  White  Savannahs), but also adopted  the easy and  at times meandering  manner  of the Sainte-Beuve

3

EDITORIAL



causerie,  which  does not  regard keeping  to the point  as a totally  necessary  virtue. Unlike  the younger  Canadian critics of our  own day,  Collin  is not in The  White Savannahs  conscious  of a self-contained national literature, within  which  all the necessary  cross-references can   be  made; the  consciousness  of  such   a  literature hardly  existed at  all in the  193o's.  And so he is constantly, and  without arousing any feeling of inappropriateness, referring back to models in  French and  English (but rarely American) traditions. Even when  he points to the  political  affiliations of Canadian poets in the 193o's,  he tends to see them in the context  of the leftism of the  English  193o's.
The  choices  he  makes  among the  poets  of the  time  partly  reflect  his  unsure­
ness of the terrain, but  they  also emphasize  the erosion of the decades on  passing reputations. Time has declared Pratt, Klein,  Smith,  Scott  and  Livesay  to be the poetic winners  of theI 93o's,  and  it says much  for  Collin's  acuteness of  judgment that  he picked  them  and  discussed  them  with so much  sympathy and  understand­ ing.  But  Marjorie  Pickthall and   Leo  Kennedy are  poets  whose  standing  has declined  greatly  in recent  years, and  re-reading their  poetry  gives one  little  confi­ dence  that  it will  rise again. In  praising  them,  one  feels,  Collin  let  himself  be guided  by the  whims  of the  time  rather than  by a sense of  sound  poetry.  Then there  are  the two mysteries  of the  book. Why,  alone  among the  earlier  Canadian poets,  did  Collin  pick Archibald Lampman? Why  not  D.  C.  Scott  and  Charles G. D. Roberts as well? Was  it  perhaps because  their success in  accepted careers somehow  repelled  Collin,  while  Lampman's isolation and  unhappiness, his bitter­ sweet tone  and  his sense of failure, appealed to a romantic sense of the  poet's  lot? And  why, instead  of any of the  Francophone writers  of the time  who were  Cana­ dian   by  birth   and   background, did  he  choose  Marie   Le  Franc,  metropolitan French  by origin  and  an  immigrant like himself? Today  Marie  Le  Franc is even less remembered than  Pickthall or Kennedy, and she seems a strange choice indeed  for  a  man  who  afterwards  became  so knowledgeable in  the  poetry  of  Quebec.
Nevertheless, and  despite  the shortcomings inevitable  in any  book  on  modem­ ism in Canadian poetry  written as early as the 193o's,  The  White Savannahs  is a vital  work  that   even  now  transmits some  of  the  excitement  that  went  into  its writing,  while readers  who  have  become accustomed to  regarding Northrop Frye as  the  original fount   of  mythopoeic criticism  in  Canada will  be  intrigued  by Collin's  emphasis on  the  role of the  poet  as myth-maker, and  his frequent refer­ ences to that  epoch-making masterpiece, source and  mirror of so much  in modem poetry,  The  Golden Bough.
Criticism  in  Canada has changed since  The  White  Savannahs,  not  merely  in


4

EDITORIAL



attitude, but also in techniques, and  at least one end of it touches on areas  of exact scholarship of a kind  that  in the  193o's  were never applied to Canadian authors. Editing Canadian Texts, collected  by Frances  G. Halpenny (and published by A. W. Hakkert with no price indicated) presents the  papers  given  at  the  Conference on  Editorial Problems held  at  the  University  of Toronto in  1972,  and  attended by no  less than 75 scholars  in  the  field. W. H.  New  introduces the  proceedings with a general  survey of the  peculiar problems  of editing  Canadian texts,  and  the remaining speakers  proceed  into special fields, Bruce Nesbitt discussing the editions of Lampman, and  Desmond Pacey  the  letters  of Frederick Philip Grove,  Pierre Savard  talking   on  the  critical edition   of  Fran(_;ois-Xavier Garneau's   complete works, and  Sheila  Fischman ending with a very interesting account of the  editing of  Ellipse, the  journal  devoted to  publishing  translated texts  in  both  Canadian languages. Editing  Canadian  Texts   is  provocative reading  because   it  suggests more  than  it  says,  and  leaves  one  in  no  doubt   that   with  the  acquisition of  a history,  the study  of Canadian writing  has also acquired those  peculiar problems arising   out  of  the  natural  reticences   and   deceptions   of  writers  which   occupy
scholastic  critics in any  developed literary  culture.

GEORGE WOODCOCK








SUNSET
 


Peter Stevens


The low sun is looking you straight in the eye. Paddling  up that stare you cannot  splice his golden disc; the headland  shuts sudden
an eyelid closing upwards  the gold then you float
in the spread  bruise the sun
has basilisked from the dying day­
light.

The  moon drops  blue milk onto the lake.

5


SURFACING
AND DELIVERANCE




Rosemary Sullivan




lrs  DIFFICULT to  read  M..-g..-et  Atwood's   recent  novd
Surfacing  without  thinking  of its imaginative  counterpart, James  Dickey's Deliv­
erance, since so much  is similar  in theme  and structure.  Dickey speaks for  both novels when  he says that  the  motivating  force of Deliverance is the  recognition that the wilderness is fast disappearing.1 Each novelist feels that self-definition can only be achieved  through  a return  to nature  in a test for survival.  In  flight from the "world  of systems",  each  feels a need for submergence  in a  concept  of the natural that  verges on violence or madness. Atwood's novel was published almost simultaneously  with  her book Survival,  a thematic  guide to Canadian literature. It is the imaginative  expression of the theoretical  preoccupations  of that  book, a writer's attempt  to make self-conscious some of the key patterns  which constitute the shape  of Canadian literature. To  explore in what  way Atwood's  book is an expression of the Canadian tradition  is important, but the startling similarities between Atwood's  and  Dickey's novels invites a quite different  problem.  Would a comparison  of the two lead  to any tentative  conjectures  as to national  differ­ ences  in  the  imaginative   preoccupations  of  two  cultures?  Of  course  such  an exploration  would be difficult. Can any single work be taken as representative  of the preoccupations of its culture?
In his brilliant study, The  American  Adam, R. W. B. Lewis indicates in what way this is possible. For  the person interested in the history of ideas he explains that  a representative  imagery or anecdote can usually be discovered in the works of imaginative  writers which  crystalizes the concerns of a cultural  period. Every culture  as it  advances  toward  maturity  seems to  produce  its own  determining debate  over ideas that  engross it:  the order of nature,  money,  power, salvation,

6

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



the machine.  Behind  its terms of discussion is an  image  or  motif  that  animates the  ideas, for  what  is articulated   is a  comprehensive  view of life. When  these coherent  images  or  narrative patterns  are  made  self-conscious, the  culture   has finally yielded up its own special and identifying myth. As the image-making pro­ cess is an  evolutionary  one,  it  is to  be expected  that  cultural  self-images  will change. Rather  than the nineteenth  century American Adam that is Lewis' theme, much  contemporary American  literature  seems to yield a  nostalgic version of it, an attempt  to flee from  the mechanized  world of human construction  in pursuit of an aboriginal  self recovered in a primitive nature  that  has become a forum  of original sensation. While far from  the only narrative pattern,  it is yet an expres­ sive and enduring  one to which Dickey in particular gives powerful embodiment. Because so much  has been written  about  the mythology of American  literature, it is not difficult to see certain  predominant  themes of Deliverance  as expressive of cultural  preoccupations.
But  Canadian literature  is still in the  process of finding  its own  mythology. What  must  be asked  is whether,  in  Survival, Atwood  has  found  an  enduring image adequate to Canadian experience. The image she offers is that  of a collec­ tive  victim  struggling  for  survival,  of  a  culture  obsessed with  feelings  of self­ depreciation  and  insignificance and which often seeks to escape the responsibility of self-definition through  its victim role. Whether  this image actually identifies a native  tradition  can  only be determined  by the future imaginative  works which will be created  out of it, as Atwood herself insists, not simply as reflections but as explorations,  attempts  to make self-conscious the experience  of being a victim in a colonial culture. To  any Canadian however, the  pattern  seems to hold out  the promise of truth.  A theoretical  conjecture  in  Survival, it  is made  into  complex personal experience in Surfacing so that  what  was propositional  becomes experi­ ential,  verifiable  through  its capacity  to  move  with  that  intensity  reserved  for works which deal with more than  the personal. In this essay I propose to explore the imaginative  rendering of this tradition; its workability as a cultural  pattern  in Surfacing. A contrast  to Dickey's Deliverance, so related yet so different, seems to me to be the  best way to  identify  what  is peculiarly Canadian about  Atwood's novel.
Both Surfacing and  Deliverance are explorations of man's  relation  to nature,  a theme rarely so well expressed as by Charles Olson:  "It comes to this:  the use of a man  by himself and  by others, lies in how he conceives his relation  to nature, that  force to which he owes his somewhat small existence." Atwood  and  Dickey are fundamentally opposed in the discoveries their characters  make about  nature

7

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



and the resolutions to which these discoveries lead. Such discrepancies may define something  more  than   the  personal.  They  may  be expressions of  the  enduring debates  which  preoccupy  distinctive  cultures  over  the most  basic of  problems: the  problem  of power;  of the  use of man  by man;  of the  order  of nature  and man's  relation to it.



JAMES DICKEY begins Deliverance  with a revealing quotation from  Georges Bataille:  "11 existe a la base de la vie humaine  un  principe d'in­ suffisance." We see through  his characters  Ed  Gentry  and  Lewis  Medlock  that this "insufficiency"  is a fundamental boredom,  the cause of which  is normality;
the long declining  routine  of everyday existence embodied  in  the  job, the  wife, the suburban   environment: "I  was really frightened,  this  time.  It  had  me for sure, and  I knew that  if I  managed  to get up, through  the enormous  weight  of lassitude, I  would still move . . . with a sense of being someone else, some poor fool who lives as unobserved  and  impotent  as a  ghost, going  through  the  only motions it has."  Ed Gentry  describes himself as a get-through-the-day man  who slides, living by anti-friction, finding  the  modest  thing  he can  do and  greasing that  thing. His friend  Lewis, though fundamentally  different -"he was the only man I knew determined to get something out of life who had both the means and the will to do it" -is  plagued  by this same boredom. "He  had  everything  that life could give, and  he couldn't  make it work." To  understand  this boredom  is to recognize the fatalism  which is at the core of all of Dickey's work. Life must fail, must  prove inadequate to expectation  because at its core is a paradox: the process of accustomization. Experience brings not knowledge but the death  of intensity and a man "will risk everything for a bit of intensity that  he thought  he would never have again".2  This quest for intensity is an archetypal  ingredient  of the romantic sensibility, but Dickey's solution is particularly American,  a nostalgic return  to primitive nature,  seen so often in his poetry as the potent world of adolescence when  the  discrepancy  between ideal  and  real was least marked.  In Self-Interviews Dickey defines the ideal man  as the intensified, totally  responsive man with a capacity for complete participation, for commitment  of the self to whatever is contemplated. As a consequence of modem  mechanization  which exercises only the pragmatic,  functional  capacities of the individual,  this intensity is lost, to be replaced  by a numbing  of sensibility. The single way to break down this process is through  a recovery of intimacy  with nature,  a re-integration  with that   half-dreaming,   half-animal   part  in  the  human   make-up   that   is  funda.

8

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



mentally  primitive,  absolutely  untouched  by civilization and  through  which  can be recovered a personally animistic  relation  to things.
Such is the basic pattern  of Deliverance. Nature allures its two central characters Ed  and  Lewis as  potential  chaos -nothing in  normal  life can  offer  its edge. Hungering  for a kind of life that  isn't out of touch with other forms of life, they return  to nature  in a curious courting of disaster in order  to prove their  capacity for survival. The  theme  which develops is common to many  American  novels­ the  perilous testing of man  against  man,  the  bonding  of male  aggression in  an assault on nature.  What  may prove disturbing  to the reader  however, is that  the essential ingredient  of intensity  is violence. The  capacity  for  survival  is defined in  the  old  terms:   machismo,  the  virile code  of  risk,  man  pitted  murderously against man in a trial of courage  under pressure. When faced squarely,  a nostal­ gia for the test of violence is seen to be the motivating force of the novel. Dickey never evades  the  importance of this theme  to  his  work.  In  Self-Interviews  he writes of war:  "There's a God-like feeling about fighting on our  planet.  It's  use­ less to deny it;  there is ... You can never do anything  in your life that  will give you such a feeling of consequence  and  of  performing  a dangerous  and  essential part  in a  great  cause  as fighting  in a  world  war....  You  feel a  nostalgia  for war because all the intensities of life, youth, danger  and  the heroic dimension, as nearly as you will ever know them in your own personal existence, were in those days." As Dickey adds, it is useless to say this is wrong; it is felt. This self-induced captivity  to the  "heroic  dimension" is indelibly a  part  of the  American  psyche and is the product  of a peculiarly American brand  of romanticism,  anti-social in its implications,  which  insists on  the inevitable  superiority  of the  primitive  and instinctive  over the  civilized and  cultivated.  Under  this  code,  women  come  to stand  for social strictures.  Ed's  wife is responsible for  his boredom  "just  as it's any woman's  fault  who  represents normalcy." The  flight into  nature  becomes a flight into a closed  masculine  world where a man can recover the heroic dimen­ sion normally lost to him.
Margaret Atwood's novel begins on a similar premise to Dickey's. Her unnamed narrator  returns to the wilds of Northern  Quebec ostensibly in search of her miss­ ing father,  but  her  return  is also a  process of submergence  in  nature  through which she discovers the artificiality of what  Dickey calls the world of  "men  and their systems". The  irony is that  she is not even initially aware,  as  are  Dickey's two main characters,  of the boredom which is at the root of her experience. She lives anaesthetized,  incapable  of feeling yet ignorant  of her  incapacity  to do so. The  re-emergence in nature  and  in her past exposes this inadequacy to her. The


9

SURFACING AND DELIVERANCE



cause of it  however is not  the  fundamental insufficiency at  the  basis of human existence which Dickey finds; instead,  the numbing  of sensibility, the entropy  of feeling is the consequence  of a  process of self-deception. The  novel begins with the narrator's having  been divorced  from her husband, in her mind  a stereotype of the insensitive male who has tried to force her into the passive role of wife and mother. She has left him and  their child in a bid for freedom. All this proves to be a lie. We learn  gradually  that  the husband,  child, and  marriage  are  fictions. She  was not  married,  but  rather  played  at  it  in an  affair  with  a  married  art teacher,  and  the child she has left "in  another  city" is dead,  aborted  in a dingy backroom clinic. She has fabricated  an illusory past in which she plays the passive role  of  victim  to  escape  moral  responsibility for  the  death  of  her  child.  She explains:  "I couldn't  accept it, that  mutilation,  ruin I'd  made,  I needed a differ­ ent version." She balances precariously on a thin edge of sanity carrying the dead child within her. The eventual  demolition of her fictive life through  her return  to the wilds of her childhood  brings her to the edge of madness; yet a madness which is the beginning of true vision. She discovers that victimization has been an excuse to escape responsibility for evil.
The culture of Northern  Quebec,  and by implication, of Canada as a whole is an important backdrop  to the novel because the narrator's  predicament  is indica­ tive of the culture  which produced  her. The  northern  landscape  is a "melange of demands  and languages" where the only conspicuous signs of culture are the bill­
boards:  "THSALADA, BLUE  MOON  COTTAGES    Y2    MILE, QU  BEC
LIBRE, FUCK YOU,  BUVEZ  COCA  COLA  GLAC,
X-ray  of it would  be the  district's  entire  history."  It  is described  as a  pastiche culture  which escapes responsibility for self-definition by passivity. It claims itself as victim to American cultural domination  thereby sharing a complicity in its victimization  by a failure  to fight back. Atwood's remarkable  insight  is to have seen that emotional entropy is simultaneously a cultural and personal predicament.
Deliverance  and Surfacing begin on a similar premise. Their characters  discover a  fundamental  inadequacy,   an  emotional  entropy  in  their  ordinary   life.  For Dickey this is to be identified romantically, impersonally as a fatal flaw, the para­ dox of accustomization  in human  experience. For Atwood the problem  is moral and therefore personal-a self-deception caused by moral and emotional timidity. Both analyses can  be seen as products  of cultural  predisposition. The  diagnosis which  both novelists offer is the same. At the core of the dilemma  of  emotional ennui  is a failure  of feeling, of total  response, identified through  the  characters'  attitudes  toward  nature  which are fundamentally  flawed. For  Ed  Gentry  nature


10

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



is a dead past which she has exorcised. Inevitably, a rejection of nature  is a rejec­ tion  of a fundamental part  of the self. Atwood  speaks for  both  novelists  when she defines the problem as a separation  of body and  head,  logic  and  feeling, the insistence of the mind to abstract  itself from the process of  being:  "We  refuse to worship;  the  body worships with  blood and  muscle but  the  thing  in  the  knob head  will not,  wills not  to,  the  head  is greedy, it  consumes  but  does not  give thanks".  For  both authors  the only means by which an integrity  or wholeness of self can  be recovered  is through  a literal  and  metaphoric  return  to  nature  and thus to the unconscious element  of the self in search of new vision. Both offer a kind of psychic bending backward  in a gesture of repossession to an earlier  primi­ tive integrity of self. Yet in search of  authenticity,  Dickey turns to a cult of sensa­ tion;  Atwood turns inward  to moral self-castigation.
For both novelists the experience of returning  to the wilderness is an experience of penetration to a previously unknown or repressed self, the unconscious. Dickey's character Ed Gentry compares entering nature  to his entrance into the unknown, into the unconscious in sleep. It was "something  unknown that  I could not avoid, but  from  which  I  would  return". Initially  nature  appears  to  him  as a  massive indifferent  force  that  is not  morally  explicable,  but  in  confrontation  with  it  a man discovers his capacity for survival which rests on a standard of physical cour­ age, sheer nerve;  survival  "came  down to the man,  and  what  he could  do."  In the crisis for survival, the cult of sensation is recovered:  "I had never lived sheerly on nerves before, and a gigantic steadiness took me over, a constant  trembling  of awareness".  Under  the pressure of death,  things never witnessed, never beheld so closely before  are  absorbed   by  an  almost  mystically  supersensitive  awareness. Suffering  itself is desirable as sensation:  "It had  been so many  years since I had been really hurt  that  the feeling was almost  luxurious"; fear  is exhilarating: "I felt wonderful, and fear was at the centre of  the feeling:  fear and anticipation­ there was no telling where it would end."
We are in that part of the American imagination that seeks out war, the wilder­ ness, the calculated  risk, violent death  as the only means of recovering  the sense of  consequence  and  meaning  lost  to  the  emasculated   world  of   contemporary experience.  However Dickey does not leave us in the cult of  sensation.  He  offers a  profound   and  disturbing   insight.  When  a  man  enters  into  nature's violent cycle he finds himself in a moral vacuum, the terrible freedom of which is exhilar­ ating and enjoyable. The  threat  of nature  is unconsciousness, mindlessness. In its predatory  cycle, man  partakes of its vast indifference. When  Ed  Gentry  is about to kill the hillbilly who has assaulted  his friend,  Dickey writes:  "I still believe I


I I

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



felt, in the moonlight,  our  minds fuse. It was not that  I felt myself turning  evil, but that  an enormous  physical indifference, as vast as the whole abyss of light at my feet, came to me:  an indifference not only to the other man's  body scrambling and  kicking on the  ground  with  an  arrow  through  it, but  also to mine."  With his victim framed  in the sight of his weapon the death appears  to him to have an abstract  beauty:  "I had  never seen a more beautiful or convincing  element of a design.  I  wanted  to  kill him  just like that." A  powerful  drunken  exhilaration comes from  the  awareness  that  "there's  not  any right  thing."  This  is an  extra­ ordinarily  powerful conception.  To conclude that  mortality is a graft, civilization a veneer over instinct, is conventional  enough. It is even common to speak of this instinct  as positive, life-energizing.  But to explore  the  mindless  violence of the unconscious freed  by the  enormous  physical indifference of  nature  and  discover in it the pure exhilaration of evil reminds us of Conrad's Heart of Darkness. What is astounding  is that  this leads to no moral insight. Dickey has made self-conscious the lure of violence which is endemic to American romanticism,  but he is honest with himself when he draws no moral revulsion from this. It is too easy to judge the novel's theme  as tamer  than  it  actually is. The  return  to the  wilderness is a metaphoric return  to the  hidden  reaches of the self where, in an atmosphere  of terror,  the  release of the  murderous  capacities  of the self is experienced  as an exhilarating freedom.  Dickey would  probably insist that  there  are  areas  on  the edge of civilization -the  Southern  outback  being one-where  social morality is ambiguous  and  even dangerous,  and  a man  must create  his own  moral  code to survive. Drew  Pearson  is naive in  assuming that  normal  standards of  justice can support  him in such circumstances. This is of course true. But Dickey's theme is not the aberrations of social justice. The  real core of energy in the novel comes from  the  exhilaration  which  man  discovers when  he escapes social normalcy  to re-enter  the  predatory-aggressive  cycle of nature  from  which  he has withdrawn  at the cost of emotional  wholeness.


IN Surfacing the return to nature is also the motivating  theme, but  with  very different  results than  in Dickey's Deliverance. Nature  becomes a forum, not for emotional  intensity but of moral self-scrutiny. The novel deals with
the problem of power. The narrator has neatly divided the moral world into killer and victim, the intrinsically innocent  who are misused and  the evil predators,  the "Americans", who can relate to the rest only through the megalomaniac  assertion of power. The  putrid  body of the heron is their symbol in the novel; they kill it


12

SURFACING AND DELIVERANCE



since "the  only relation  they could have to a thing  like that  was to destroy it". Atwood seeks to propel her character  beyond this simplification to the recognition, similar  to  Dickey's,  that   violence  is intrinsic  to  the  human   personality:   "To become like a little child again,  a barbarian, a vandal: it was in  us too, it  was innate." But  the  question  remains,  what  moral  conclusion does she  draw  from this discovery? She does not find the primitive exhilaration  which Dickey's char­ acter feels, but rather  insists on the need to move beyond the  predator-pursued, killer-victim  mentality.  Perhaps  the  difference  between  Atwood's  and  Dickey's viewpoints can  be clarified  through  the relation  each  author  adopts  toward  the animal  world. Throughout Dickey's work the  animal  world  is seen as mystery, challenge, otherness, and the only relationship man can have to it is the life-death one of the hunter-hunted -the hunter  matching himself against  his victim  and conquering,   assimilating  the  primitive  animal  energy  and  wildness  to  himself. Dickey is motivated  by a nostalgic desire to  re-enter  the  cycle of the  man  who hunts for his food, a compulsion perhaps created  by that  need which he expresses so often in his work to know the universe emotionally. Atwood rejects the nostalgia of this position. In  the  relation  he conceives to nature,  as Olson says, is defined the use of a man by himself and  by others. It is too easy to be caught  in the trap  of predator   (even  when  powerfully motivated  by the desire for a primitive  ani­ mistic intensity)  where the only relation one can conceive to external  nature  and therefore to other men is that of  power. In fact, in the terms of Surfacing, Dickey reveals himself  in  this  attitude  as Atwood's  archetypal   American.   His  test  of courage and  manhood  lies not only in a man's capacity for self-control but in his ability to bring  others  under  the control of his will, to manipulate their  fate  in the god-like role of the  hunter. For Dickey in all human  encounters,  including love, there  are  two  roles,  and  given such  a  range  it is obvious  which  side one chooses to  be on.  Atwood  sees beneath  the  predatory  cycle of  nature   another,  sacrificial cycle: "The  animals die that we may live ... but we refuse to worship
... the head is greedy, it consumes but does not give thanks." The inchoate mum­ blings of the narrator in her madness conceal real insight. We must move beyond the  victor-victim  relationships,  which  are simplistic categories,  to  a  new  vision which  recognizes that  if nature  is a sacrificial cycle of life dying to sustain  life, then  man's  position in it is not  hunter  but suppliant  and  the energy  he absorbs from  nature  is not  that  of power but of awe, the capacity  to  worship. Atwood works through  to this insight in a very powerful fashion, dispelling the narrator's simplistic notions of good and  evil in one of the most  dramatic moments  in  the novel.

SURFACING  AND DELIVERANCE



The narrator has been diving in search of the mystic Indian  symbols which her father  had  been studying  before his death.  In  one of her  plunges she discovers her father's  corpse which,  bloated  and  distorted,  appears  in  its watery  element like the foetus she had  aborted.  The  death  symbols of the novel conflate:  heron, foetus, corpse, as, for the first time, she recognizes her own culpability.  She too has within her the "American" capacity for death  but in wilful self-deception has rejected  her own  murderousness.  The  scene is powerfully handled,  the  submer­ gence in water  being simultaneously  a plunge into the past and  into the  uncon­ scious regions of the self where  the  ghosts of the  past are  confronted.  Her  dis­ covery is of course  an  insight  into  the  perilous nature  of  innocence.  To  define oneself as innocent  (i.e. victim)  is per se dishonest since  being human  inevitably means being guilty.3   The  narrator's subsequent  madness is a process of expiation and  rebirth.
For the narrator, the revelation  of the foetus-corpse appears  as a vision  occa­ sioned by gods unacknowledged  or forgotten.  Through  it she achieves a  contact with the springs of feeling long dried within her, a contact which is sacred because awakened  by a power outside the self. On  the edge of madness she searches out the sources of this  power.  Through a  ritual  of purification  she  sears  away  the human  form  encasing  her,  trying  to  become  animal  and  in  her  frenzy  has  a succession of  visionary  experiences.  The  pattern  for  this  sacred initiation  into nature  is derived  from  primitive  initiation  rituals. A  probable  source  is Mircea Eliade's  Shamanism.4     Shamanism,   as  described  by  Eliade,  is  a  technique   of ecstacy, a  process of induction  into  the sacred.  Whoever  aspires to  be shaman must go through  a period of psychic isolation in  which the mind swings between extremes of ecstasy and  madness,  and  the aim  of  which is transformation from the  human  state.  The   prescribed  rituals  are  outlined  by  Eliade  and  Atwood adapts  these to her own end. They  follow a  precise psychological order: retreat to the bush -symbol of the beyond-to a kind of larval existence (the  physical and psychic regression of Atwood's character) ; prohibitions as to foods, with cer­ tain  objects and  actions taboo  (in  her madness, the narrator  intuits  rules which dictate  appropriate  foods,  permissible  areas;  the  fasting  induces  hallucinatory  states) ;  hypnotic  sleeping  (the  narrator builds  a  lair  and  sleeps in  a  position simulating  a larval state) ; secret language  (the  narrator  regresses to non-verbal communication) ; dismemberment or cleansing of the body in symbolic death  (the narrator purges her "false body" in the lake water) ; spirit guides assist the aspir­ ant  in  his  quest  for  resurrection   (the  images of the  miraculous  double  woman and  the  god  with  horns). Atwood  is able  to offer this initiation   ritual  which

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



symbolically simulates the death  and resurrection of the regenerate self in remark­ ably  dramatic personal  terms. The  quest she ascribes to  the  narrator  is clearly visionary:  "The  gods, their  likenesses: to see them  in  their  true shape  is fatal. While you are human; but after the transformation  they could be reached". After an  arduous  period  of preparatory waiting  transformation   does  occur,  radically altering  the narrator's perceptions  of nature.  The  first such  visionary experience she undergoes is one of mystical translation  to otherness. She feels that  disintegra­ tion  of the empirical  self and  reintegration  into  nature  that is characteristic of mystical experience:  "I'm ice-clear,  transparent, my  bones and  the  child  inside me showing through  the green webs of my flesh.... I lean against a tree, I am a tree leaning.... I am not an animal or a tree, I am  the thing  in which the trees and  animals move and  grow, I am a place." Nature thus seen from  the inside is a living continuum  of pure being, no longer the indifferent  or  hostile force from which she had  felt alienated.  Her  mother  later  appears  to  her  in  human,  then animal form as if the boundaries of the animal and human  are co-terminous  after death.  Finally nature  appears  as a kind of  Manitou,  a forbidding  and  awesome presence in the landscape;  it's the "thing you meet when you've stayed  here too long alone. I'm  not frightened,  it's too dangerous for me to be frightened  of it;  it gazes at me for a time with its yellow eyes, wolf's eyes.... It does not approve of me or disapprove of me, it tells me it has nothing  to tell me, only the fact  of itself." That  nature  should  appear  as  Manitou  is interesting.  Atwood  implies a vision of the divine not as the  benevolent oversoul of the nature  pantheist  but as a forbidding indigenous presence with which one seeks a truce.5  As are  all mani­ festations of the divine, it is also one of the ghosts of the self; exploited, destroyed, tamed or encroached upon only at grave cost to the self. But if awesome and terri­ fying it has other aspects since it is immediately transmuted  to the form of a fish, a sacred icon, or protecting spirit: "It hangs in the air suspended,  flesh turned  to icon, he has changed again, returned  to the water. How many shapes can he take?" The  vision implies that  nature  is neither hostile nor benevolent;  it exists in itself, a  living  process which  includes  opposites-a process of life as energy.  Sanity returns with the capacity  to be awed by nature,  to respect its fearful  and sacred rituals, its unknown gods. But the rational  mind abstracts itself from  this process of  being. One of the most profound  insights of the book comes from  the  narra­ tor's father: "He  wants the forest to flow back into the places his mind  cleared: reparation." Like Robertson  Davies in The  Manticore Atwood  offers a vision of the sacredness of the natural world, into which man can enter  by abandoning his will to power:  "The  ideal  would be somebody who would  neither  be a killer or

SURFACING AND DELIVERANCE



a victim,  who  could  achieve  some  kind  of  harmony with  the  world,  which  is a productive or creative harmony, rather than  a destructive relationship".


IN  BOTH Surfacing and  Deliverance we are led to ask in what way the energies  of nature have  proved  convertible. When  the  characters emerge
from  the outback, what  knowledge do they bring  with  them?  Dickey's  characters certainly  emerge  chastened. Deliverance is prefaced  with a second  quotation which makes this point: "The pride  of thine  heart  hath  deceived thee,  thou  that  dwellest in  the  clefts of the  rocks,  whose  habitation is high;  that  saith  in  his heart,  Who shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground" (Obadiah, verse  3). In  retrospect we see that  the characters come  to recognize  that  the desire to impose  one's  own  idea or order   on  nature ends  in  failure. As  the  narrator says  of  Lewis  Medlock,   he "wanted the thing  [in  life]  ... that  must  be subject  to the  will".  He  confuses his power  to control  the  map-image of nature with  power over  the  reality.  Through the chastening power  of the river  he discovers his hubris; he learns  he cannot  take on the whole nature, and  recognizing his mortality, he becomes  more  human. Yet we  are  left  with  a  marked feeling  of  deflation  at  the  end  of  the  novel  because little  has  changed  externally. After  the  violence  of  nature, the  business  world becomes  precious  for  its normalcy-boring but  not so much  as before. The  wife
is seen  as  tender,  professional, tough,   qualities   which   had   been   undervalued. Though the  two  main   characters had  hoped  for  the  promise  of  "other  things, another life, deliverance," they end as middle-aged "tenderfeet" gathering around a calm  civilized  lake drinking beer and  water-skiing. Have  the  energies  of nature then  proved  inconvertible? We  turn  to  Ed  Gentry  for the  answer  since  he alone carries  within  him  the surviving image  of the  river, symbol  of mindless  primitive energy.  Dickey summarizes his character's insights in an interview for The South­ ern Review:

In  this country  a  man  can  live his whole  life without  knowing  whether  he's  a coward  or not. And I think  it's important  to know. And what  you're  supposed to believe, gradually,  and  to  see about  Ed  Gentry,  is that  he, as  he  plots  out  this ambush  of the hillbilly, what  you are supposed to be aware  of is that  this decent guy,  this  art  director,  this  minor  pillar  of  the  community,  decent  family  man, suburbanite, is really a born  killer. He figures it out exactly right  as to how to kill this  guy, and  he  does  it.  He  carries  it  out,  and  gets away  with  it.  I  mean  he doesn't  have to keep on doing it, and do these things again  later  on in life-he's done  it once and  that's  all  he needs to do it. That's  all  he needs  to know, that

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



he's capable of it. And  as you see in the  last few pages, it's  a quietly transfiguring influence  on  him.  He  knows.  He  knows  what   he  did.  He  knows  what he'll   do, if he  has  to, because  he's  done  it.7

We are left with the test for survival as measuring-up,  the ability to assume an aggression-attack  mentality,  the  myth  of self-reliance translated  into  machismo, and thus tottering  from true insight into parody. Can there be no more profound test of heroism that  this test of violence as a man  goes it alone in  the  untamed wilderness, a test so rarely  possible today that  it drives a writer  of Dickey's  bril­ liance nostalgically to create a hillbilly outback with triple murder  and sodomy as the subject  of his first novel? Yet there i<>   something evasive about  this wilderness at  the  core of the  American  imagination.  Wright  Morris  poses the  problem  in The Territory Ahead: "Nature-even nature  red in tooth and claw-is child's play when  confronted  with human  nature". As always D.  H.  Lawrence  gets it perfectly:  "Absolutely  the  safest  thing  to  get  your  emotional  reactions  over  is nature." 8  In this wilderness a man works out but his own salvation  alone, making up his moral code as he goes along. If there are others with  him  they are either his victims  (both  real and  the savage phantoms  of his  unconscious mind)   or his dependants who increase his heroic stature as victims he must save. It is essentially a solo performance in a test of manhood.  What is disturbing is the inherent simpli­ fication of this vision. The  problems of human  motive, of nature  versus human nature,   of social  responsibility  are  evaded,  perhaps  with  the  recognition   that morality  means the death  of intensity since its essential ingredient  is measure.
This mythification of violence is not evident in Canadian literature. Even when the theme of a literary work is violence, and indulgence is psychic violence in particular,  as in Leonard  Cohen's Beautiful  Losers, the attitude assumed is usually different. The stance taken is often ironic. (It  has been too little noted  how  per­ sistent  in  Canadian literature  is this technique  of ironic  deflation  which  often becomes a self-depreciating  humour,  bordering  on self-parody). An essential  dis­ tinction  in  the  responses of  the  two  literatures  toward  violence  is implicit  in Atwood's  Survival; a  distinction  which  is not  meant  to  be  self-congratulatory. One  aspect of American  romanticism  is the cult of  sensation, with  its potential exoneration  of violence as a  psychic test. The  counterpart to  this in  Canadian literature  is the myth of violence internalized, masochism or victimization.  North­ rop  Frye  draws  the  distinction  precisely  when  he says that   the  violence  and destructiveness which are turned  outward  in the American  psyche, are  repressed and  turned  inward  in  the  Canadian.  The  myth  of self-reliance,  of  the  heroic

SURFACING AND DELIVERANCE



dimension,  which can degenerate  into machismo or measuring-up,  is inverted  in the Canadian tradition. Life-destroying forces are usually seen as personal:  paraly­ sis through  guilt,  inability  to act,  lack of feeling. And this leads to a  dangerous simplification which is Atwood's  major point in Survival. The  myth of  victimiza­ tion leads to an evasion of responsibility. Responsibility is located  elsewhere.
Atwood's  purpose  in Surfacing  is to alert  to the dangerous  self-indulgence  of masochism. As  she  writes  in  Survival,  the  danger  of being  a  victim  is that  it creates a need:  the obsession with victimization can become the will to be a  vic­ tim, inferiority developing into a fatalism, a will to lose. One  must move beyond these simplifications of power. It is essential to moral  maturity  to  recognize the capacity  to kill as innately  human,  but moral and  social sanity  does not  impose it as a test of strength  and  survival. Courage  is of another  order  altogether.  For Atwood  the  experience  of nature  offers at  best survival,  with  one's  moral  and civilized self intact; there is no deliverance to another state since, after the moment of vision the gods once more prove theoretical: "No gods to help me now, they're questionable  once more,  theoretical  as Jesus. They've  receded,  back to the  past, inside the skull....  No  total  salvation,  resurrection."  Yet,  however  ambiguous the momentary  experience of the sacred otherness of  nature  has been, it does lead to a predication  about  man's  relationship  to himself  and to others. At the end of the novel the narrator has achieved the simple conviction of the need "to  prefer life, I owe them that." The  problem then remains to become human: "Does any­ one  ever  achieve  it;  being  human.  If  you  define  human   beings as  necessarily flawed,  then  anyone  can  be one.  But if  you define them  as something  which  is potentially better,  then it is always something  just out of reach." 0
In  retrospect,  what  finally strikes the reader  about  Dickey's vision in  Deliver­ ance is the  romantic  nostalgia  for  a spontaneous  response to  nature  that  is its impelling  force. It is the  reverse side of an  earlier  American  myth:  from  the myth of inexhaustible  resources to the myth of resources exhausted, all or nothing. No better work of criticism has been written  on this theme  than  Wright  Morris' The  Territory  Ahead,  nor  any  better  novel than  The  Great  Gatsby  with  Fitz­ gerald's  brilliant  ending: "He  did  not  know  that  it  was  already  behind  him, somewhere back in that  vast obscurity beyond the city,  where the dark  fields of the  republic  rolled on  under  the  night. Gatsby  believed  in  the  green  light,  the orgiastic future that  year after year recedes before us. It eluded us then,  but that's  no matter-tomorrow we will run faster, stretch  out  our  aiins farther.... And one fine morning -So we beat  on, boats against  the  current,  born  back cease­ lessly into the past."  Huck Finn's  wilderness, the territory ahead,  is always in the

18

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



past so that  the  present  is always a diminution.  The  essential  human   problem for Dickey still remains  the need to create other  wildernesses of the imagination in which  can  be  discovered  something  commensurate   to  man's   capacity   for wonder.  Perhaps  this  is why the  moon-shot seems, for  him  and  for  others,  the potential  basis of a  new compelling  myth.  In  his  poems, if not  in  Deliverance, this theme is convincing.  Yet it is the basis of something  tragic  in the American imagination which moves between poles: on the one hand the search for intensity (a source of the  pageantry  and  idealism so powerfully a part  of American  life, but also of the cult of violence from which Dickey is never entirely free and  which has as its corollary a rejection of social normalcy, a desire to escape from culture) and the nostalgia and despair which come from a rejection of present life, so that the novelist from either  pole is on the outside, and the novel while it may have a Faustian  intensity, is rarely able to offer the profound social panorama which we associate with the genre. There  are of course many exceptions but the American novel has too long drawn  its deepest energies from the romantic for these to break a general rule.
The  Canadian psyche is essentially different,  perhaps more European, because the romantic,  exploratory  and idealistic have always been tempered  by the reflec­ tive and  observant.  Canadians have  tended  to focus on  a  consequent  lack  of energy and  intensity in Canadian fiction, conscious only of a standard of  Ameri­ can  romanticism.  But instead of that  intensity, another  kind of depth can and  is being achieved. The  conflict which is external in American literature-the artist against  his society as romantic,  anti-hero, or existentialist white negro on the out­ side-which often leads to brilliant rhetoric as with Norman  Mailer or nostalgia, can be internalized  as the author  within his society absorbs its conflicts into him­ self, as Atwood's character begins to do in Surfacing. This may lead to a novelistic tradition of mature moral vision on a broad social canvas;  with a new version of imaginative survival not in flight from the society of man's construction  but within society, because individual  liberation is synonymous with collective social libera­ tion. The  Canadian novel may take as its theme the need to put  down  roots, to participate joyfully, as Atwood  says,  in one's own  place,  recognizing  that  self­ knowledge "Who  am  I" can only be answered in terms of "Where is here".

NOTES

1 William  Heyen,  "A  Conversation  with James  Dickey," The  Southern   Review, g, No. I (January 1973),  150.
2  James Dickey, Self-Interviews, ed. Barbara and James Reiss (New York:  Dell Pub­
lishing Co., 1970),  p. 167.

rg

SURFACING AND  DELIVERANCE



8  See Graeme Gibson,  interviewer, "Margaret  Atwood," Eleven  Canadian Novelists
(Toronto: Anansi,  1972), p. 22.
4  Mercea Eliade, Shamanism:  Archaic   Techniques of  Ecstasy,   tr.  Willard Trask
(Princeton University Press,  1964), pp.  64, 288.
See Atwood's description of indigenous gods in Survival, p. 54·
6  Gibson,  p. 27.
7  Heyen,  p.  155·
8  Wright Morris, The Territory Ahead: Critical  Interpretations in  American Litera­
ture  (New  York: Atheneum, 1963).
9 Gibson,  p. 26.




MY FJITHER, DYING
 


Christopher Levenson


The  world  contracted to a single room, a single view over suburban trees. Everything is outside, beyond,  remote.

Over  a glass of water,  flowerpots,  paper  towels he has complete dominion:
fastidious with  age,  he re-arranges incessantly all that's within  his grasp
as if playing  chess with  some unseen  opponent and  pondering each  move.

Our  words  have  atrophied, my rude  health  a rebuke.
I tell  him  friendly lies and  watch  him
diminishing into  childhood, helplessly lifted  and  washed.
Will alone is not enough.

Everything is within,  inaccessible,
a safe  whose combination I have  lost. The  last  right  of age is silence.
His eyes drained of perception have long since put  aside all false shame.  His one good hand toys endlessly with  the threads of the coverlet. I try  to read  the  parchment of his face. Outside the world  decays.

20



DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



S. Namjoshi



T.CENTRAL  TENSION in P. K. Page's  poetry  arises  from
the effort to mediate  between the  private world and  the external  one. It  is pos­
sible to describe this tension in political terms, but it would be misleading, in my opinion,  to trace its source to a sympathy for political minorities or for the under­ dog  or  for  the  "victims" of society who are  isolated  in some  way,  but  cannot subscribe to their external  reality. These elements exist, but  are  not,  I  think  her major  preoccupation.  As I hope to show, her "involvement" is  primarily that  of an  artist,  rather  than  political. The  two kinds of involvement  are  not  mutually exclusive;  but the second is subordinate to the first, and  is, indeed,  an extension of it. That the artist  must make the effort to mediate  between  the internal  and the external  is central  to her poetry. No matter  how  painful  the  process may be there  can  be no turning  away,  no ivory tower  aestheticism. Even  the  observer's stance  is rejected and  though  several of her  poems deal with it, she is extremely critical  of its validity. That  the temptation exists is an almost inevitable  result of the tension at the core of her  poetry. The individual  trapped  in  his ivory tower of memory and  reminiscence, the victim in the grip of impossible social circum­ stances,  are merely off-shoots of the central  persona:  the  woman  caught  within the confines of her inner  reality,  her  personal Noah's Ark, seeking some  way to reconcile the internal  and  external, to make a harmony  out  of the double  land­ scapes. And for this woman the essential mode of mediation  is the artist's activity, the  painter's  art  (helped  out,  as  always, with  a little luck of what  is otherwise known as grace).
Initially an examination  of her "political" poems -those that deal with victim­
ization  in some form  or  another-is  instructive.  Not  only  do  they  clarify  her position, but even in these poems it is possible to see a secondary  issue emerging that  is more  characteristic   of  the  body of  her  poetry. The   Preview  group  of which  she was a member  had  leftist leanings, and  several  of  her  poems  reveal

21

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



what  may be termed  a "pro-proletarian" consciousness. In  poems such  as "The Stenographers", "Shipbuilding Office" and "Offices" 1 (quoted  below)  she seems to be drawing  upon  personal experience.

Oh believe me, I have known offices - young and old in them both - morning and evening;
felt the air
stamp faces into a mould ...

There is "class consciousness" in her poetry, but it is a rather  white-collar, angli­
cized one.2   Poems such  as "Bank  Strike-Quebec- 1942" and  "Squatters-
1946" deal specifically with strikes, but her most obviously political poem perhaps is "Election  Day".3  In the poem she votes against the Tories and  casts her ballot, "a  bounder,  in the box". She has, of course, deliberately stolen the word  "boun­ der" from the vocabulary  of the class that she votes against,  but her very famili­ arity  with it gives her away.  Again,  when the election is over, the  threat  at  the end of the poem, whether  it refers to a future  Tory defeat or a coming insurrec­ tion  (probably   the  former), sounds  childishly defiant  and  quite  hopelessly in­
nocuous:

I pass the empty lot. The old dog
has trotted off to bed. The neighbourhood
is neatly hedged with privet still, the lights are blinking off in the enormous homes.
Gentlemen, for the moment, you may sleep.

What  is most interesting  about  the  poem, however, is the  distinction  that  P. K. Page makes as a matter  of course between the  private  and  personal.  When she goes out to vote, she leaves behind the "tight  zone" of her "tight  and  personal thought". As she listens to the  election results she is aware  that  for the moment her  privacy  is no longer  intact,  though  on  this occasion she  does not  seem  to mind very much.
Radio owns my room as the day ends. The slow return  begins, the voices call the yes's and the no's that ring or toll;
the districts all proclaim themselves in turn and public is my room, not personal.

It  is difficult not  to feel that  she has done  her duty as a good  citizen  and  can now return  to her normal  pre-occupations.

22

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



Certain  other poems are concerned  with issues that  have only recently become
"political". "Outcasts" appears  to deal with sexual deviants.

Subjects of bawdy jokes and by the police treated as criminals, these lovers dwell deep in their steep albino love -
a tropic area where nothing grows.

"The Condemned" describes people in prison, "In  separate  cells they tapped  the forbidden  message". And the poem "His  Dream"4  could be given an  interpreta­ tion that  the Women's  Liberation  Movement would approve of, though  it would be misleading,  I  think,  to see P. K.  Page  as a  Feminist on  the strength  of one
poem.

He dreamed his eyes made colours as they looked at roses, sky and sun,

He was charmed
that all were eager for his coloured stare.

But, for the woman, he was unprepared. She stood beside him but refused to take what she was offered, even with a choice

... one by one
each object he had coloured now rejected
the colour he had given it, instead
made of itself the colour it had needed:
sky-blue, sun-yellow, and the roses-red.

It is possible to see the  woman  as a figure denying a male definition  of her,  but it  is more  accurate,   I  think,  to  see her  as  the  artist's  conscience  refusing  any mediation  that is not truthful.
As a rule, the poems in which  P. K. Page deals with tyranny  in one form  or another   reveal  a  sympathy  for  the  victims  rather  than  an  identification   with them.  There  are,  however, two poems, which  to my mind,  form  an  exception. These  are  "Only  Child"  and  "Portrait of Marina".5  In  the  first the  only child grows up into his mother's image of him, "her very affectionate son, the noted naturalist", but at  the very moment  of her triumph  his dream  recurs.  He  finds himself catching  the  birds one  by one, naming  them,  breaking  their  necks, and tossing them on to the wide material  lap. Marina  is a more passive victim. She is made to devote her life to the re-creation of her father's sea experience in tapestry.

23

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



Now, what  is most noteworthy  about  the poems "Only  Child"  and  "Portrait of Marina" is not the fact of victimization  as such, but the precise way in which the tyranny is exercised. The  only child is not permitted  to work out the relation­ ship  between his feeling for the  birds and  the fact  of their  external existence in his own terms. Instead,  he has to accept the relationship worked out by his mother. As it happens, for her, mere labels and classifications suffice as mediators.

There were times he went away-he knew not where

suffered her eagerness on his return
for news of him-where had he been, what done? He hardly knew, nor did he wish to know
or think about it vocally or share his private world with her....

He had no wish to separate them in groups or learn the latin.
or, waking early to their song remark, "the thrush," with certain swervings flying,
"Ah, the swifts."

Marina's case is a little different.  She has a specific task to perform. She has to make  the picture  out  of blue wool for her father,  but the experience  out  which she creates is not her own.

To her the name Marina simply meant he held his furious needle for her thin
fingers to thread again with more blue wool to sew the ocean of his memory.

The  picture  that  it  would  have  been  right  for  Marina   to  make  would  have involved the inter-action of her private universe with the external  world. This is what  Marina  has been denied. And this mediation  between the internal  and  the external,  the private  and  the public, the individual  and the world is P. K. Page's central concern. The  problem of power relationships is peripheral  and only arises when  the freedom  to mediate  is denied. The  denial  of this freedom  is tyranny. There  is an involvement,  but it cannot  be expressed adequately  in purely political terms.  Even  in  the  poems  which  are  concerned  with  power  relationships  her chief preoccupation  is still in evidence.
From  the foregoing  it should  be possible to guess that  P. K. Page would  not agree with the point of view of the isolationists, those who deliberately cut them-

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



selves off from their surroundings. The poems in which she deals with people who take  the  observer's  stance,  the  outsiders, foreigners,  permanent tourists,  do,  in fact, show that  she is familiar  with the stance,  but  considers it wrong,  even  un­ necessary. There is a hint of compassion for such people, and the reason is obvious. They  have,  of  their  own  will, deprived  themselves  of  the  chance  to  mediate between the internal  and  the external. They are their  own  victims, and  the fact of their estrangement  denies them  the possibility of harmony.  She  addresses the "foreigner" as follows:

A room will hold you a smile but you will not look.
From a long past of walking you have come
wearing blinkers and the balanced look.

"The  Permanent  Tourists"  are described as "the  terrible tourists with their empty eyes/ longing  to be filled with  monuments".  And  of the  "Isolationist" she  says that  he  "Lived  like  a  saint  and  finds himself a  leper".  Even  the  poem  "Old Man",6   in  which  she  is reasonably  sympathetic  to  the  European emigre,  who does not feel at home in Canada, ends with the lines:

He hates this pallid place
and dreams of a bright green future in the past.

The irony is evident. For the totally estranged there can be no reaching out from the ark of isolation.



l:E MAIN  BODY   of P. K. Page's  poems deals with  the indi­ vidual's attempt  to bring the microcosm into alignment  with the  macrocosm, so to speak, more directly. Very frequently the dichotomy corresponds to two land­ scapes and almost as frequently  one of the two is white, perhaps,  and  the media­ tion between the two worlds then  corresponds to the  painter's  activity, or occa­ sionally to that of the gardener.  However, it  would  be a mistake to look for any consistency in  the  representation  of the  landscapes  or in  the  way in  which  the attempt  to mediate is viewed. In different poems the snowscape can represent an idealized  landscape,  a  childhood  scene, a  harsh  reality,  a  blank  canvas  or  an internal  dream.  Nor  is  the  inner  world shown  as  consistently superior  to  the external reality. The inner world may correspond to a nightmare, a wishful dream,  a pleasant  memory,  an  artificial  reality or a genuine  perception.  Similarly,  the

25

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



external  world may correspond  to a reality of false conventions  (the  tea-table) , a man-made  dystopia  enclosed  by  office walls,  a  formal  garden,   an  elaborate tapestry,  a climate  of winter,  a climate  of summer,  an area  of whiteness, or an overgrown area  of lush vegetation.
The  artist's  effort  is directed  towards  bringing  the two landscapes  into  some sort of alignment  that  permits a glimpse of the truth. Curiously enough  this effort is often accompanied by a great  deal of pain and the outcome  may be either frustration   or  despair.  These  negative  feelings arise,  I  think,  from  four  major causes:  the stress inherent  in the situation; a fear of the more cruel and  unkind aspects of the external  world;  the hopelessness of trying to make other  people see what she sees; and  an anxiety that  the artist in her eagerness to depict  what she sees may, in fact, have depicted  what she wishes to see. An examination of some of the key poems should make this clear.
The  title of an early poem, "Schizophrenic" is revealing:

Strong for the dive he dived one day at tea-
the cakes like flowers, the cups dreamy with cream­
he saw the window a lake and with a scream nobody heard, shot by immediacy 7

The  window  corresponds  to  the  human  eye, of  course,  which  is the  gateway between  the two worlds.
At times the discrepancy  between the two landscapes is indicated  in terms of summer and winter. The  white sheets of paper that the stenographers use are representative  of winter, and may have suggested the thoughts of the ice-man, but these thoughts  are, in fact, memories of summer.

their eyes ...
flutter in the snow-storm of paper ...

In the pause between the first draft and the carbon
they glimpse the smooth hours when they were children - the ride in the ice-cart, the ice-man's name,
the end of the route and the long walk home ...

And since the  eye is the gateway  between  the  two worlds, the  last lines of the poem have a certain  inevitability.

In their eyes I have seen
the pin men of madness in marathon trim race round the track of the stadium pupil.8

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



The  sense of frustration  is the  result of a total inability to make  the  two worlds cohere. Even insubstantial  memories seem preferable to the mechanical  "realities" of office life.
In  a later  poem, "Arras", the disquiet arises from another  cause. The  peacock
introduced  by the eye into the external  tapestry is vaguely sinister. The  tapestry is like a formal garden.

But  a peacock  rattling his rattan tail  and  screaming has found  a point  of entry. Through whose eye
did it insinuate in furled  disguise ...
I confess:
It was my eye. Voluptuous it came.

The  sense of fear  in  the  poem  derives from  the  fact  that  no  one  else sees it:

I  thought their  hands  might  hold  me if  I spoke
... but  they stand as if within a treacle, motionless,
folding  slow eyes on nothing.9

Here she almost seems to derive a grim satisfaction from the fact that  the peacock is a disturbing  element, even though  the others fail to perceive it.
There are poems, however, in which P. K. Page shows a mistrust of the painter's activity, particularly  of the painter's  infusion of colour into objects. To  paint  can also mean to paint over. She prefers the whiteness to a tinted  landscape,  and this corresponds  in certain  poems to a preference for snowscapes. "Stories  of Snow" is an example of such a poem:

Those  in  the  vegetable rain  retain an area  behind  their  sprouting eyes
held soft and  rounded with  the dream  of snow.10

Now, the distinctly "Canadian" elements in the terms of the dilemma  are, of course, obvious:  the white landscape,  the months of being confined  within  four walls, the sense of not  quite  belonging, the  duality  which  arises from  a  reality within a reality-a temperate almost tropical climate inside and  winter  outside. However, it is worth pointing out that the traditional  associations of snow within the framework  of English literature  do not correspond  to the  Canadian  experi­ ence of snow, and that  P. K. Page is aware of the discrepancy and  uses it to great effect. In  Canada  the snow is neither ephemeral,  nor exotic, nor merely  a cover

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



for some hidden  reality.  To  a large  extent  the snow, embodying  as it does the menace of cold, is the  reality. The  deliberate  exoticism of the  "stories of snow" in juxtaposition  with tropical  exoticism transfigures the snow stories into a fusion of the  extraordinary and  the  everyday,  the  fantastic  and  the  familiar,  even - if one chooses to use the tenns- of the ideal and  the real. "Images of Angels" employs a similar technique. In the transfigured landscape  (a white and gold land­ scape)  those extraordinary angels "part musical instrument  and  part  daisy"11  are entirely convincing.
It would be incorrect  to assume that  the effort to make the two worlds cohere invariably  leads to failure  or feelings of frustration  and suspicion. The  writing of the poem is in itself an achievement; so is the transfigured  snowscape  described above.  There  are,  in  addition, certain  poems in  which  the  sense  of  being  in harmony  with  the world  comes through  more explicitly. "Now  This  Cold  Man
... " is a case in  point. The  act  of gardening  (re-arranging the outside  world)
corresponds to the activity of the  painter;  a harmony  is achieved,  and  the thaw­
ing of the cold man  accords  with the external thaw.

Kneeling in welters of narcissus his
dry creaking joints bend with a dancer's ease, the roughened skin softens beneath the rain  ... and  something rare and  perfect, yet unknown,
stirs like a foetus just behind his eyes.12

The  poem "As Ten  As Twenty" which appears  as "Love  Poem"  in  her first book of poems expresses this feeling of oneness in a different  way:

For we can live now, love; a million in us breathe, ... They, in us, free our love,
make archways of our mouths, ...

Here the individual  breaks through  his isolation, his personal "ark", and  experi­ ences a feeling of kinship  with  the whole world. The  last stanza  can in  fact,  be interpreted in such a way as to suggest a reference to Noah's  ark.

As ten, as twenty, now
we break from single thought and rid of being two,
receive them and walk out.13

Such an interpretation, perhaps,  stretches the imagery a little, but does not alter

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



the  essential  meaning. As its first title indicates, it is, of course,  a love  poem,  but it includes  the  world.
However, it is the poem "Cry Ararat!", the last poem in her last book of poems, which  is in  my opinion, her  most successful effort  at  bringing the  private world and  the  external world  into  alignment. "Ararat!"  is the  cry  of the  isolated  indi­ vidual  trapped within  the confines of his private ark. A glimpse  of Mount Ararat affords  him  the  hope  of a possibility other  than  the chaos  of the  flood outside,  or the stifling closeness of his own four  walls. He  need  not withdraw into his private world,  nor  is his individuality submerged in the  flood.

In  the dream  the mountain  near but  without  sound
A dream through  binoculars ... Swiftly the fingers
Seek accurate  focus ... then as if from the sea
the mountain  appears ...
These are the dreams that  haunt  us, these the fears.
Will the grey weather wake us,
toss us twice in the terrible night to tell us the flight is cancelled
and  the mountain  lost?

0, then cry Ararat!

The  dove returning to the ark with a green twig in her beak serves as a mediat­ ing  agent.  The   promise  of  land  that  she  brings  with  her  justifies  the  effort,  if justification  were  needed.

The  dove believed
in her sweet wings and in the rising peak with such a washed and easy innocence
that she found rest on land for the sole of her foot and, silver, circled back,
a green twig in her beak.

The  last  few lines describe  the  kind  of effort  and  concentration demanded of the artist.

The leaves that make the tree by day, the green twig the dove saw fit ...
The  bird in the thicket with his whistle

29

DOUBLE LANDSCAPE



the crystal lizard in the grass ...
this flora-fauna flotsam, pick and  touch require  the focus of the total I.

It is fitting  that  this poem should  give its name  to the book which  contains her poems  "new and   selected". It is a  definitive   and  serious  investigation  of  her theme,  and  brings  the  dilemma postulated by her to a final  resolution.
As  a  postscript I cannot help  expressing  a  minor  misgiving.  Must  a  deluge occur  before such  serenity  can  be achieved?


NOTES

1 For "The Stenographers" see P. K. Page, Cry Ararat!  (Toronto/Montreal: McClel­ land  & Stewart,  I 967),  p. 7 I ; for "Ship-building Office" Preview, Montreal, No. I 5, August  I 943; and  for "Offices" Preview, No. I 6, October  I 943·
2   The poem "Ecce Homo"  (Contemporary Verse, No. I, September  I94I)  is of some interest as a first reaction  to London.
3 For  "Squatters-I946" see  Contemporary Verse,  No.  I9,  Fall   I95I; for  "Bank­ Strike-Quebec-I94'2" see Unit of Five, ed. Ronald  Hambleton  (Toronto:  Ryerson Press, I944), p. 37; and for "Election  Day" see Cry  Ararat!, pp. 65-55.
4  For  "Outcasts" see Contemporary Verse, No.  I6, January   I946;  for  "The  Con­ demned"  seeP. K. Page, As Ten As Twenty  (Toronto: Ryerson Press,  I946)  pp. I8-I9; for "His  Dream" see Contemporary Verse, No. 3I, Spring  I950.
5  See Cry  Ararat!, pp. 44-45 and pp. 83-85.
6  For "Foreigner" see Cry Ararat!, p. 6I; for "The  Permanent Tourists"  Cry  Ararat!, p. 76;  for "Isolationist" Canadian  Poetry  Magazine, 6:4,  March   I943;  and  for "Old  Man"  Canadian Forum, 25:299, December  I945, p. '2I6.
7   Contemporary Verse, No. IO, April  I944·
8  "The  Stenographers", Cry  Ararat!, p. 71.
9  Cry  Ararat!, pp. 100-IOI.
10 Ibid., pp. 26-27.
11 Cry  Ararat!  pp. 34-35·
12  Ibid., p. 8I.
13 Ibid., p. 63.











go


KINGDOM OF ABSENCE



Jean Mallinson



IAGREE WITH W. J. Keith, who recently edited  the Selected
Poetry and Critical Prose of Charles G. D. Roberts, that-with  two exceptions,
the  early  poem  "The Tantramar Revisted"  and  the  later   "The  Iceberg" - Roberts'   best  poems  are  the  descriptive  lyrics, mostly  in  sonnet  form,  which appeared  in Songs of the Common Day, with a few scattered  here and  there in the earlier In Diverse Tones  and  the later The  Book of the Native.

The  quiet,  unostentatious tone  of this descriptive poetry -the exploration and discovery  of 'what  beauty  clings/ In  common  forms'-is  something that  Roberts can  achieve  and  maintain with  apparent ease. Here  he avoids  the  simplistic on the one hand  and  the pseudo-profound on the other.... Once  again, to call  this poetry
'descriptive' implies  no sense of limitation; indeed,  his general avoidance here  of anything that  could  be called  a  'criticism  of life'  becomes  a  positive  strength.... it is still possible to discern  an intriguing reaching-out towards a profundity of  out­ look-the seeds of what  might  well grow into  the individual vision of an unques­ tionably  major poet.  Roberts seems poised on the threshold of greatness. An astute contemporary reader of  Songs  of the  Common Day  might   well  have  looked   to Roberts' next  poetic  volume  for the revelation  of his mature genius. 1

Reading  through  Roberts'  critical essays, particularly  his  Introduction to the anthology  Poems  of Wild   Life,  "Wordsworth's   Poetry"  and   "The  Poetry  of Nature" I wondered if the possible reason for his failure  to achieve  the  promise of Songs of  the  Common Day is that  he could not  reconcile  his critical  theory with  what  he was in fact  doing  in the  poems which  we most  admire.  Roberts describes accurately his own temperamental preference in "The Poetry of Nature" when he says that  the power in nature  which moves us "may  reside not less in a bleak  pasture-lot  than  in a  paradisal  close of bloom and  verdure,  not  less in  a roadside thistle-patch  than  in a peak that soars into the sunset.... it may  work
... through  austerity or reticence or limitation or change."  He goes on to divide
"the  poetry of earth" into  "That which deals with  pure  description,  and  that

KINGDOM OF ABSENCE



which  treats  of nature  in some  one of its many  relations with  humanity." The argument of  his essay is that   purely  descriptive  poetry  is scarcely  worthy  the name, and that  the true poetry of nature,  as seen in Keats and  Wordsworth,  is to be found only when nature  has passed through  "the  alembic of the heart,"  when "man's heart  and  the  heart  of  nature  ... [are]   closely involved."  He  praises Byron, who found in nature  "an  expression of his hopes, his fears, his cravings, his despair",  Keats,  "his  soul  aflame  with  the  worship  of beauty,  . . . impassioned toward  the manifestations  of beauty in the world about him".2
It is evident  to anyone  reading  Roberts'  best poems that  this Romantic  view of the poetry of nature  was suited neither to his temperament as it is revealed in his poems, nor  to  the  landscapes  to  which  he was drawn  and  in  the  midst  of which he had grown. The  more  he removes himself and  his temptation to relate or reflect, the more  precise and  objective and detailed his lines, the more we are moved.  The  two  sonnets  from  In  Diverse Tones,  "The Potato  Harvest" and "Tides", communicate a clairvoyant sensitivity to the nuances of colour and sound in  the landscape.  There are  human  figures in the  first poem,  but  they  are seen from a distance,  almost heard  rather  than  seen:
Black on the ridge, against the lonely flush,
A cart, and stoop-necked oxen; ranged beside
Some barrels; and the day-worn harvest folk,
Here emptying their baskets, jar the hush
With hollow thunders; down the dusk hillside
Lumbers the wain; and day fades out like smoke.

There  is more projection  of human  feelings into landscape in "Tides": The ebb­ tide "sighs" "Reluctant for the  reed-beds",  "the  winding channels  grieve". The restrained  melancholy  and  the  evocation  of water,  tides, even  the  specific line "ebbing  in the night-watches  swift away",  are very like Arnold,  but the final line "And  in parched  channel still the shrunk stream mourns" has a grip and strength which is Roberts' own, at his best.
Before discussing Roberts'  preoccupation  with absence, I would like to look at
some remarks in James Cappon's essay "Roberts  and the Influences of his Time", published  in  1905.3   Cappon   is judicious in  his  appreciation   of  Roberts'  finest qualities, and agrees with Keith  that  "the  deepest thing in his poetic passion and experience  is his  poetry of natural description."  He wrongly,  I  think,  says that the basis of Roberts'  nature  poetry  was "a  pure  aestheticism"  but  aptly  calls it impressionistic. His main criticism of Roberts as a poet is his apparent inability to deal with human  life:

KINGDOM OF  ABSENCE



This  narrow  range  of observational  power is evident in the absence  of any direct treatment of human  life, of human  as distinguished from naturalistic sentiment, ...
Nor is the poetry of these sonnets likely to make any strong appeal  to a more philosophically  minded  class of  readers, ... The  sonnet  sequence  hardly  leaves any strong  unity  of moral  impression on our  minds. There  is a  want  of a  basal note in Roberts  in this respect which makes his poetry little more than  a wavering impression taken from  the surface of things and  giving no comfort,  no stay to the mind.... With  all his gifts, then,  Roberts evidently lacks two things.... He  does not as a poet give us either a lively, vigorous presentation  of life or a profound  and critical  interpretation of it.

It is certainly true,  as Cappon says, that  for one  who  wrote  so much, the  range of Roberts' poetry  is narrow; but  it seems  to  me  that  it  is precisely  the  almost absence  of  human figures  from  the  landscapes in  the  poems that   makes  them interesting. Of  the sonnet  "Mowing" Cappon remarks
But  there  is no mention  of mowers;  there  is no human  figure  in  the  field. This artistic asceticism may be serviceable in obtaining a certain  purity of impressionistic effect, ... But for poetry at least the example of Millet is probably  better  than  that of Rousseau, ...

It seems to me, on the contrary, that  the strength of the  poem  lies in the sense it conveys  of  mowing  not  as something which  is done,  but  as  a  relentless  process which  happens. The mowing  machine is in  a sense an  intrusion in  nature, but the imagery links it to nature:
This is the voice of high midsummer's heat.
The  rasping vibrant  clamour  soars and shrills
0'er all the meadowy range of shadeless hills, As if a host of giant  cicadae  beat
The cymbals of their wings with tireless feet,
Or  brazen grasshoppers with triumphing note
From  the long swath proclaimed  the fate  that  smote
The  clover and  timothy-tops  and  meadowsweet.

The  crying knives glide on;  the green swath lies, And all noon long the sun, with chemic ray, Seals up each cordial essence in its cell,
That  in the dusky stalls, some winter's day,
The  spirit of June,  here prisoned by his spell, May cheer the herds with pasture memories.

There is in these sonnets  a range  of times, seasons, vistas;  but  I get  the impres­
sion that  it was to "austerity and  reticence" as he calls it in his essay that  Roberts


33

KINGDOM OF  ABSENCE



responded most  authentically. In  "Burnt Lands" we find  an  early  exploration of negation, the  absence  of things:
. . . such fields as these,
Where comes no cheer of summer leaves and  bees, And  no shade  mitigates  the day's white scorn.
These serious acres vast no groves adorn ;
But giant  trunks, bleak shapes that  once were trees, Tower  naked,  unassuaged of rain or breeze,
Their  stern  grey isolation grimly borne. In  "The Winter Fields" he describes
Winds here, and sleet, and frost that  bites like steel.
The  low bleak hill rounds under  the low sky. Naked  of flock and fold the fallows lie,
Thin  streaked  with meagre drift.

I do not wish to suggest  that  Roberts wrote  only about  winter  and  the  absence of things  and  people.  Yet  he seems most authentic when  writing of these  things. He  is by temperament drawn to  the  bleak  and  the  austere. Margaret Atwood's remark  that  "There is a sense in Canadian literature that  the true  and  only season here  is winter: the  others  are  either  preludes  to it  or  mirages  concealing it" 4   is true  of  Roberts. Yet  his  emotional preference   for  stubble   fields,  deserted  land­ scapes,  grey sea and  sky is often  weakened  by the  poetic  language in  which  it  is expressed.  His  poem  "The Stillness  of the  Frost" comes  close to confronting his fascination with  the  negation of winter,  though it  is marred  by  the  rhetoric of the closing lines. It is interesting that  in its use of the negative  it  anticipates P. K. Page's  poem  "The Snowman":

Out  of the frost-white wood comes winnowing  through
No wing;  no homely call or cry is heard. Even the hope of life seems far deferred.
The  hard  hills ache beneath  their spectral hue. A dove-grey cloud, tender  as tears or dew,
From  one lone hearth  exhaling, hangs unstirred, Like the  poised ghost of some unnamed  great  bird In  the ineffable pallor of the blue.

P. K. Page's  poem  ends

And  I could hear  no sound
As far  as I could  hear  except a round
Kind  of an echo without  end


34

KINGDOM OF  ABSENCE



rung like a hoop below them and above jarring the air they had no need of
in a landscape without love.

Roberts, too, perceives the winter landscape like the world as it must  have been, at the dawn  of time,  when  it lay "cold,/ Unwaked  to love".
These poems are only a handful  among the hundreds  that  Roberts  wrote;  far
more numerous are the fatuous  and facile poems in which he fails to move aside, but rather  places himself and  his ideas in the landscape  and  the  poem,  and  the result is usually the shallow rhetoric of what Roberts called "poems of aspiration".


IT SEEMS TO ME  from a superficial acquaintance with Roberts' poetry that  he possessed a modest talent for an easy mastery of verse form,  and an acute and sensitive eye and  ear, not for people but for landscape.  The influ­ ences which led him  to dissipate  his poetic gifts were no doubt  various  but  his
central dilemma is one that  is shared  by all colonial writers. It is the  problem  of style in a context  which  has no indigenous literary  tradition, and  for  which  the only available models are old-world forms, not entirely appropriate to the novelty of experience in a new land.  It takes a writer of genius, a Whitman  or an Emily Dickinson, to solve the  problem  in a radical  way, and  as Cappon  shrewdly  says of Roberts'  poetry, it "remains very much  a pure literary  tradition, the  element of natural  impulse in it being hardly strong enough to make original  moulds for itself."
The  continuing  existence of this problem, even today, is both  a challenge  and a distraction  to the writer, and  one of the causes of the preoccupation with style and the tendency toward  mannerism  and eccentricity of style which is typical of North American literature at its best and its worst. Style, here, is never something given, it always has to  be invented.  But  Roberts  was a facile  imitator, not,  in poetry, an innovator.  What  he did  best, descriptive poetry,  he rated  lowest and abandoned.
The strength and weakness of North American style has always been its reliance on the colloquial, either  a sense of communal speech rhythms,  or, as in the case of the contemporary  Black Mountain  poets and  those they have influenced,  the elevation of the idiosyncracies of an individual  poet's  breath  and  speech, to the basis of a system of poetics. The  weakness of colonial style is, as I  have said  of Roberts, its often timid  reliance on traditional  models which  belong to the  poet linguistically but which are not appropriate  to the novelty of experience in a new


35

KINGDOM OF  ABSENCE



setting. It is perhaps particularly unfortunate that  Roberts  and  others  in his time had  or  thought they  had,  not  only  a style  but  a  philosophy  of  nature which  it was hard  to evade. Had  he been  writing  from  eighteenth century models  it might have  been  more  apparent that  pastoral poetry  as it was then  written in  England was  absurdly inappropriate  as  a  model  for  writing  about   his experience in  the Canadian  bush,  and   he  might   have  invented   something  new.  In   fact,   in  his poetry  he lacks strength, adventure, nerve; he is derivative. He  did  not  tum to colloquial speech  as  the  basis of  a  new  style  as, with  mixed  results,  did  Drum­ mond. His uneasiness  concerning what  he was about  in  poetry-along with  the presence  of an  eager  market -turned  his imagination toward the  animal story in  its  various  forms,  a genre  which  both  Keith  and  Margaret  Atwood   consider  particularly Canadian, and  in which  Keith  thinks  Roberts made  his most  impor­ tant  contribution to Canadian literature. Here  he could  use his knowledge of the wilds unhampered by Romantic convention; here  he could  appear to disappear; and  here, to  judge  by Keith's comparison between  prose passages from  the stories and  similar passages from  the  poems, he found  his strength. Keith  says:

In  his prose Roberts  never  pontificated.  He made  no attempt to impose his view of the world  upon  his readers.  None the  less we have been able  to extract  from the short stories a coherent  position which may without  undue  pretentiousness  be called  a  vision  of  nature....  I  see  the  difference  [between  the  prose  and  the poetry]  as literary  rather  than  philosophic. I prefer  the prose because I believe it to attain  a noticeably  higher  degree of artistic success than  the  poetry.5

There is one late  poem,  the  title  poem  of The  Iceberg and Other  Poems, pub­
lished  in  1934,  of  which  Keith says in  his introduction to  the  Selected  Poems:

Interestingly  enough,  'The  Iceberg'  itself is one of the few pieces in which a rela­ tion  to the animal  stories can  readily  be seen. In  tracing  the  cycle of an  iceberg from its spawning  'A thousand  miles due north/ Beyond Cape  Chidley'  to its final merging  in  the  'all-solvent  sea'  of  warmer  latitudes,  Roberts  offers in  verse  an equivalent  to the  kind  of animal  story I have called the  representative  chronicle
-a story in which  we are  presented  not with  the  unique  adventure of a single
individual   but  with  a  characteristic life-pattern.  Moreover,  Roberts   has  boldly employed  the  first-person  narrative voice so that  the  poem  expresses, as it were, the actions of a natural force harshly independent  of man.  [By strictly  confining hi nself] ... to an unemotional  reporting  of events, he succeeds in communicating a viewpoint that  is frighteningly  non-human.

Most  of Roberts' late  attempts at  free-verse  are  pale imitations of Whitman; but in this  remarkable poem  he masters  in  his own way the  irregular cadence of the

KINGDOM OF  ABSENCE



free-verse line, and  embodies-in the speaker,  the great  iceberg-his fascina­ tion  with  the inhuman, the negative,  which  has been tracking  him  through  his poetic career. Now he turns and  faces it, the landscape  which is without  love or hate,  which  is, so far  as human  values go, absence, indifference:

Under the  pallid  dawning Of  the  lidless Arctic  day Forever no  life stirred.
No  wing  of  bird-
Of  ghostly  owl low winnowing
Or  fleet-winged ptannigan  fleeing  the  pounce  of death, - No foot of backward-glancing fox
Half  glimpsed, and   vanishing like  a  breath, - No lean  and  gauntly stalking  bear,
Stalking its  prey.
Only  the  white  sun,  circling  the white  sky.

At the centre of the poem is a vision of the ocean-ecological, organic, indiffer­ ent  to our concerns-and, in the midst of it, "the  Alp afloat",  "A shape  pearl­ pale and  monstrous",  which somehow becomes an organic  part  of  it:

And  now around  me
Life  and  the  frigid  waters  all aswarm. The smooth  wave  creamed
With  tiny capelin and  the  small  pale squid, - So pale  the  light  struck  through them.
Gulls  and  gannets screamed
Over  the feast,  and  gorged  themselves,  and  rose, A clamour of weaving wings, and  hid
Momently my face. The great  bull  whales
With  cavernous jaws agape, Scooped  in  the  poil,
Their humped forms  just awash,  and  rocking softly,­ Or  sounded  down,  down  to the deeps, and nosed
Along  my ribbed  and  sunken  roots,
And  in  the  green  gloom  scattered the  pasturing cod.

The iceberg waits, in the fog, "greatly  incurious and unconcerned", as a ship approaches: it "towered,  a dim immensity of doom". The cataclysmic destruction of a great  ship  and  its passengers is simply one incident  among  the  others  that mark  the voyage of the iceberg from the Arctic north  to the southern seas where

37

KINGDOM OF ABSENCE



it  becomes  "A  little  glancing globe  of  cold"  and  then  its  "fragile, scintillating frame" merges  "forever in the  all-solvent sea".
In  an  essay  published in  1886,  "The Outlook   for  Literature"6 , Roberts has written with   perception about  the  problems  of  creating a  literature in  a  new country. He is aware of the  powerful  potential subjects,  particularly in  the land­ scape:

These  stem  coasts, now  thundered against  by Atlantic  storms,  now  wrapped  in noiseless fogs,  these  overwhelming   tides,  these  vast  channels   emptied   of  their streams, these weird reaches of flat and marsh and dike, should create a habit of openness  to  nature, . . . If environment   is anything,  our  work  can  hardly  prove tame.

These  are  the words  of a  man  upon  whom  the  landscape he knows  has made  a deep  impression. Environment is something; indeed,  in a country where  so much had  been left behind that social and  cultural arrangements often seemed  arbitrary, nature provided  the only real imperative. But Roberts,  though he wanted to write what  he called  "that  characteristically modem verse which  is kindled  where  the outposts   of  an  elaborate and   highly  self-conscious  civilisation   come  in  contact with  crude humanity and  primitive nature"7   too often harkened to what  he called "the voice from  the drawing room" rather than  the "voice  of the wilderness". He sensed  and  shared what he  perceived  as his countrymen's apprehension lest they be  seen  as  uncultured,  unconventional, rugged.   His  achievement  as  a  poet  is uneven, flawed,  very short  of first rate,  yet when  he was  able  to forget  the  am­ biguous  burden of late  Romantic  preconceptions and  lose himself  in  that  land­ scape  which  he called  "stem,  overwhelming, vast, weird" his work  did  not  prove tame.

NOTES

1 Keith,  W. J., Introduction to Selected  Poetry  and  Critical  Prose of Charles  G. D. Roberts, ed. Keith,  University of Toronto  Press, 1974, pp. xxiv-xxv.
2  Roberts, Charles  G. D., "The Poetry of Nature"  in Keith,  op. cit.,  pp. 276-281.
3  Cappon, James,  "from  Roberts and  the  Influences of his Time, 1905, in Masks  of
Poetry,  ed. A. J. M. Smith,  New Canadian Library, McClelland  and Stewart,  Ltd.,
pp. 45-54·
4  Atwood, Margaret, Survival, Anansi, Toronto,  1972, p. 49·
5  Keith,  W. J., Charles  D. G.  Roberts, Copp Clark, 1969, pp. 106-ro7.
6  Roberts; Charles G. D., "The Outlook for Literature" in Keith, ed., Selected  Poetry and  Critical  Prose, pp.  260-264.
7  Roberts, Charles  G. D., "'Introduction' to Poems of Wild   Life,"  in Keith,  op. cit.,
pp. 265-270.


LAYTON AND NIETZSCHE





J17nne Francis








LAYTON HAS NEVER  made any =ret of Iris debt  to  Niet­ zsche.  On   the  contrary he  draws  our  attention to  it  insistently-by  choice  of words  and  phrases  (etiolation, antinomies, the  glare  of noontide,  joyful  wisdom, the stillest  hour,  good  Europeans, new tables) ; by symbols  (sun,  flame, fire, star,  dance, serpent) ; by explicit  reference  in titles and  elsewhere  to Apollo, Dionysus, Heraclitus, Zarathustra, the  ubermensch, Eternal Recurrence. Prefaces as well as poems  abound in themes  and  motifs drawn from  Nietzsche: his Heraclitean pre­ mises,  his  Hellenism, his  moral   psychology,  his  repudiation  of  Christianity, his aversion  to orthodoxies, institutions, systems, his affirmation of  life, his unfaltering faith  in  the  redemptive,powers of creativity.  With  such  evidence as this  Layton  certainly leaves no doubt  as to the  Nietzschean  cast of  many  of his ideas.
There is more  than an affinity of minds between  the two writers.  Layton claims
that   he  "recognized  himself" in  Nietzsche,  that  Nietzsche's  work  confirmed  his own  vision of reality.  It was at least  partly  a matter of temperament. Layton had no need  to borrow  from  Nietzsche what  he already  possessed:  a cheerful  disposi­ tion,  a volatile temper, a contrariety of spirit,  a love of paradox, a  zest  for  con­ troversy  and  polemic,  a strong  sense of irony, a voracious appetite for life. Add  to this a charismatic personality, a sense of mission, the  gift of  rhetorical  persuasion  and  an  extraordinary measure of self-confidence. Layton  brought all these quali­ ties  to  his reading of Thus  Spake  Zarathitstra, for  example, and  without doubt they  facilitated his acceptance of the  ideas  he  found therein. The two  men  are obviously  kindred spirits  and   Layton  responded as  one  of  "the few"  to  whom Nietzsche directed  his message.
The fact of "recognizing" himself in Nietzsche  had the catalytic effect of releas­
ing a torrent of creative energy  which  through the years Layton has spentpara-


39

LAYTON AND  NffiTZSCHE



doxically, in "finding" himself. Exploring reality through  his poems has involved plumbing  the  depths  of  his  own  experience  and  thereby  discovering  himself. Nietzsche urged upon his followers the need to discover the "true self":  "Become who you are!" If we have any doubt that Layton has been acting on this prescrip­ tion we need only look at the poem "There were no signs", he chose to place at the beginning of both  the 1965 and the 1971 Collected Poems.

By walking I found out
Where I was going.

By intensely hating, how to love.
By loving, whom and what to love.
By grieving, how to laugh from the belly. Out of infirmity, I have built strength.
Out of untruth,  truth.
From hypocrisy, I weaved directness.

Almost now I know who I am.
Almost I have the boldness to be that man.

Another step
And I shall be where I started from.

During  the Forties when  Layton's  orientation  was predominantly Marxist  his poetic output  though  significant  in quality  was relatively slight  in  volume.  He knew himself to be a poet even then and he worked hard  at perfecting  his craft; but  his vision was  diffuse,  its emotive  potential  relatively  low. The  impact   of Nietzsche took effect early in  the Fifties. It  clarified Layton's  vision, brought  it suddenly  into sharp  focus. And  it swept away the cobwebs of his Marxism,  for the dialectical  interpretation of history which  had  attracted   Layton  to  Marx  is also present in Nietzsche but in a form more hospitable to the spirit of lyric poetry and  more consistent with  Layton's own observations of current  world  politics.
Between 1951 and  1958 Layton  published ten books of poetry  (including  the thirty-one  poems in Cerberus). In each of these books successively, the structure of his vision was more  fully elaborated  until  its outline  was clearly defined  in "For  Mao Tse-Tung: A Meditation  on Flies and  Kings"  ( 1958) .1 Recognizing this poem as an important statement  Layton chose from it  the  title of his next book, a volume of collected poems, A Red Carpet  for the Sun. This title phrase is taken from the very fruit of his "Meditation ..."-a quatrain of intensely fused

LAYTON AND  NffiTZSCHE



metaphor   which  is Nietzschean  to  the  core  and,  in  retrospect,  quintessentially
Layton.

They dance best who dance with desire, Who lifting feet of fire from fire
Weave before they lie down
A red carpet for the sun.

Among other important poems of the Fifties which are profoundly  Nietzschean are "In the  Midst of My Fever",  "Seven  O'Clock  Lecture",  "The Cold  Green Element"  and  "Whatever Else Poetry is Freedom".  Conceived  during  a  period of extreme  personal anguish each of these poems is a powerful statement on the function  of poetry  and  the fate  of the  poet,  themes  which  are  central  to  both Nietzsche and  Layton.  Almost all of the lesser poems of that  decade  can  also be read with profit in the Nietzschean perspective. Their  astonishing  variety of  sub­ ject matter   and  style  attest  to  the  fecundity  of  Layton's  imagination  and  the versatility of his talent  as well as to his thorough  command  of  Nietzschean idioms and  motifs.  His  first  Nietzschean  preface  was  written  in  the  Fifties  also.  It appeared  as a "Note" to the second printing of A Laughter in the Mind  ( 1958). The  title  and  the  inscription  for  this book are  drawn  from  Nietzsche, and  the preface makes  the first emphatic  statement  of themes  which  dominate  Layton's  "Forewords" from then on. One has only to compare this "Note" with his untitled preface to his work in Cerberus ( 1952)  to realize how much of a hold Nietzsche has taken on Layton's  thought  during  the intervening  years.
During  the Sixties and  Seventies the outpouring of Layton's  talent  continued unabated, his  Nietzschean  base still firm. The  increase  in  recent  years  in  the number  of introspective  poems should  not  deceive us;  they are  quite  consistent with the  duty  of the  "ubermensch" to seek his true self. Nor should  the  Israeli poems distract  us. They  are not a departure but a fulfilment  of Layton's  dream of the Jews-namely that  they possess the greatest potential  to become "higher men".2  Witness the admiration he shares with  Nietzsche for the Old  Testament prophets,  including  the "last" and  greatest of them,  Jesus of  Nazareth. Of  the poems that  have  been  born  of Layton's  far-flung  travels in  these two  decades, the occasional exotic subject  does not obscure the basic vision. In fact,  the hun­ dreds  of  poems  Layton  has  published  since  "For   Mao  Tse-Tung"  have  not changed either the outline or the internal structure  of that vision. What they have contributed  is a fabulous intricacy of patterning  and a rich texture. Layton's  "red carpet" is of a close and expert weave.

LAYTON AND NIETZSCHE



A recognition of the basic Nietzschean thrust of Layton's work should  not lead to reductive conclusions about  his talent. As a poet he owes no more to Nietzsche than  T. S. Eliot  does  to  Christianity.  What  Eliot found  in  Christianity   was a store of images which  he felt to be true  and  a mythic structure  upon  which  to articulate  his vision. Layton's  talent  is his own;  his originality,  like that  of any other poet, derives from his imagination  and his personal life experience. Nothing in  Nietzsche prepares  us for  the  pathos  of "The Bull Calf",  the  poignancy  of "Berry Picking",  the curious, symbolic drama  of "The  End of the White  Mouse", the gaiety of "The Day Aviva Came to Paris",  the wry good humour  of  "Shake­ speare"  or the fun,  the rage, the terror,  the delight-to say nothing  of  the fine craftsmanship-with which  Layton  makes  his  poetic statements.  Nor  does  a reading  of Thus  Spake  Zarathustra, for  example,  prepare  us for  the  brilliance with which Layton  develops the sun imagery to be found  therein.  He  has made the sun a central symbol in his work and has elaborated an intricate and thoroughly consistent pattern  of fire and flame imagery to support  it. Once the significance of the sun symbolism is fully recognized, literally  hundreds  of  Layton's  poems can be read wijh great insight without recourse to Nietzsche. Yet the basic Nietzschean structure  is there, throughout, and to be aware of it is to read all of Layton more intelligently.
We have noted that a central concern of both writers is the nature  and function of art and that  Layton has explored the role and fate of the artist in a number  of his finest and  most complex  poems. His most lucid rendering  of the Nietzschean aesthetic is the much-anthologized "The  Birth of Tragedy" ( 1954). This  poem has of course been enjoyed  by thousands  of readers without  benefit of Nietzsche but for those who wish to explore it deeply some awareness of the source of its ideational  content  is mandatory.
The  title of the poem is identical  with that  of Nietzsche's famous first book, a prolix essay on the origin of art. In retrospect, Nietzsche condemned  this essay as being too Hegelian and dualistic -"errors" which he corrected in his later  work; but he never repudiated or abandoned  the premises he established in The Birth of Tragedy  regarding the dialectical nature  of art  and the supremacy of aesthetic over all other values. These ideas were seeds which flowered in all his later  works. Since Layton throughout his work takes account of both the seeding and  the flowering of Nietzsche's aesthetic we need first to look at the early statement and then  extract  from   the  later   work  those  developments  which  are  relevant   to Layton's poetry.

LAYTON AND NIETZSCHE




bE VERY   TITLE of Nietzsche's essay is important,  juxtapos­ ing as it does the pain and  joy of birth with the suffering and  death connoted  by tragedy.  It introduces  a theme  which persists throughout  Nietzsche's  (and  Lay­ ton's)   aesthetic:  joy and  suffering  are inextricably  related in  both  life and  art. The  essay was intended  to trace the history of art from its origins in Greek myth and  ritual  to its greatest  development  in tragic opera;  but  we soon discover that Nietzsche is exploring not merely the history but also, and with greater enthusiasm, the mythic and psychic origins of art. This is implicit in the use he makes of two Greek art-sponsoring dieties.
The  first of these is Apollo the sun god, god of light and  reason and  of all the
plastic arts, especially poetry. Most significantly, Apollo is the god of  transfigura­ tion:  it is Apollo's gift of "fair  illusion" which enables man  to apprehend reality, to find meaning in nature  and significance in life. (Nature requires man's  reason and imagination  to give it meaning:  "... my forehead bringing/ intelligence into this featureless waste"  writes Layton  in "Thoughts in  the  Water" ( 1956). And "The Fertile  Muck"  ( rg56)   begins "There are  brightest  apples  on those trees/ but  until  I,  fabulist,  have spoken/ they do not  know  their  significance  ... The wind's  noise is empty.")  Illusion  organizes chaos, gives form  to experience,  per­ mits man  the dream  of a world  of  individual  "appearances" and  a  vision of a radiantly  harmonious  universe  where all things  individual  have  their  role and importance. This capability Nietzsche calls "redemption through  illusion". Raised to the level of art  the Apollonian  spirit is gloriously manifested,  for example,  in the rendering  of  experience through  the disciplined rhythms  and  graceful images of a lyric poem.  (The serene  joy of Apollo triumphs  in Layton's  "New  Tables"
( 1954)  and in "The  Sweet Light Strikes My Eyes" ( rg68)  which ends"... God, the sweet light strikes my eyes;/  I am transfigured and once again  the world, the world is fair.")
Such a complete  victory for Apollo is rare  however for  he has as a constant adversary  a dark  god of terrifying  power. Dionysus represents  reality,  the  abyss of chaos. He is the ever-turbulent, destructive force which is the unknowable source of all experience. A human  being cannot  experience reality directly  and  survive as an integrated  whole, for the Dionysian element is the explosive, disintegrating force of raw energy. By itself this energy cannot  give meaning  to life or produce a work of art, for it is imageless, non-rational,  formless. In The Birth  of Tragedy Nietzsche relates Dionysus to  the  non-plastic art  of music  which  he  regards  as the  one  artistic  expression  closest to  the  "will"  of  the  universe -that  ever-


43

LAYTON AND  NffiTZSCHE



surging discordant  energy which is reality. The  test of the Apollonian  poet is the degree to which he can  resolve the discord, translate  the dissonance  of Dionysus into a tolerable, pleasurable  "music". (Layton  employs this theme in "Orpheus" ( 1955): "... the poet's heart/ has nowhere counterpart/ Which  can  celebrate/ Love equally with Death/ Yet by its pulsing bring/  A music into everything." And elsewhere  he  extends  the  "discord-music" metaphor   to  include   "silence".  A finished poem, like a musical score, is silent; it has resolved the clashing antin01nies and it remains as a vivid record of the struggle with reality: "Energy  must crackle on a silent urn ..." ("The Graveyard", 1968).
The  greatest  poetry  in other  words is that  which takes the  fullest account  of reality. Apollo's triumph of serenity and  joy must be won at the necessary expense of a tragic struggle  with  the  Dionysian forces of darkness, chaos, suffering  and death.  Throughout The  Birth  of Tragedy   Nietzsche views the  development  of art  as  a  suspenseful series  of  dialectical  encounters  between  these  two  spirits. Apollo always triumphs eventually,  else there  would  be no  art  to  write  about, though   Nietzsche  betrays  a  very strong  attraction to  Dionysus  without   whom Apollo would have no function.
Dionysus makes his most fascinating  appearance as the earth  god, god of dark­ ness, dismemberment  and  death,  who is associated with the vegetation myths and fertility  rituals. Here  his dark  powers are  evoked by jubilant  satyrs  in frenzied celebrations of creativity and  rebirth.  In such orgiastic celebrations the individual  while under  the spell of Dionysus loses himself, gives free  reign  to  his passions, forgets himself completely. For this reason Dionysus is pictured as the god of wine, of intoxication,  of rapture, of lust. Extravagant self-abandon  dissolves the  bond of the individual  will, shrugs  off the  restraints of reason and  makes  possible an ecstatic  communion  of the  individual  with  his  fellow-creatures  and  with  all of nature. At such moments man is returned  to the "material womb of being'' where he enjoys a sense of union  with the original  Oneness of the universe. This  is the Dionysian experience which for Nietzsche represents another mode of redemption.  (Layton's satirical  poems offer a veritable troupe of Dionysian revellers-satyrs, nymphs, fauns, inebriates, gamblers,  rakes and roues, some modem, some bearing Greek or Roman  names-all of whom engage in some form of self-abandon  and thumb their noses gleefully at respectability, prudery, repression and self-righteous­ ness. Many  of his love  poems emphasize  the  delirious  joy and  the  redemptive power  of lust. And  in  some of his most  complex  poems the  Dionysian  reveller takes the form of a social outcast -a  buffoon, a crippled  poet, a caged artist, a cretinous child, a murdered  dwarf,  a madman  frenzied by his revered vision. All

44

LAYTON  AND NIETZSCHE



such poems reveal a tragic loss of self as the cost of a deeper insight into  reality; and  the  pain,  suffering  and  "death" involved  are  suffused  with  an  anguished ecstasy.)
But this form of redemption,  Nietzsche claims, cannot  be known  as such  until
the  Apollonian  spirit  "rescues"  the  individual,  asserts control  over  the  flood  of passion and sublimates it in a form that  can be apprehended, contemplated and enjoyed.  Considering  such  formative  power  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  the proper  name  for the artist  as such is Apollo. On  the  contrary  Nietzsche  insists that  art  has its origins in  two  radically  dissimilar realms  and  that  the  greatest form of art  derives from a dialectical tension between the two. The  artist in The Birth of Tragedy  is Janus-faced; his name is hyphenated: Apollo-Dionysus. The two spirits, linked in a tense and  tragic struggle, give birth  to the greatest,  most redemptive  forms of art.  But the hyphenation  also indicates  that  the two gods of art  are  united  against  a  common  enemy.  Nietzsche,  describing  the  history  of Greek tragedy,  attributes  its eventual  decline to the growth  of the Socratic spirit. The  name  he gives to the forces which are inimical to art  is Socratism.8
Socratism  is the spirit of rational  inquiry which seeks always to interpose theo­ retical knowledge between experience and reality. It substitutes "truth" for reality, implying  that  reality is knowable  and  that  the  way  to  it  is through  logic and reasoning. Socratism  prevails wherever men  put  their faith  in science  and  tech­ nology, in  education  and  progress, in  evolution,  social engineering  or  political programmes, to the virtual exclusion of "spiritual" and aesthetic modes of redemp­ tion. By extension, the  term  Socratism  implies Nietzsche's censure  of  all  closed systems and  orthodoxies  (be  they philosophical, scientific, political  or  religious) which  paralyze  the  will, expunge  the mythic  dimension of  experience  and  rele­ gate the blessedness and perfection of man to some future historical period or after­ life. The Socratic mentality  breeds an easy optimism and a false pessimism (both objectionably  romantic)  and evades the real issue of man's  predicament. A society in which this mentality is prevalent  exerts a levelling force:  it sacrifices the indi­ vidual to the state; it suppresses the non-conformist and  the heretic and it will not tolerate the artist except as a very tame version of Apollo. (These are motifs which govern  many  of Layton's  prefaces  and  characterize  numerous  poems  in  which he attacks  the mentality  of  the bourgeois, the philistine, the  bureaucrat, the aca­ demic, the critic, Marxists and  especially Russian communists. As for tame  poets, Layton's  contempt  is writ large in such poems as "The Modern  Poet",  "No  Shish Kebab" and  "Anti Romantic" as well as in several "Forewords" where he casti­ gates poets for their cowardliness.)

45

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



And  since the  spirit  of Socratism  is intent  upon  either  the  correction  or  the extirpation of all evil and  disruptive  forces, its chief target,  Nietzsche claims, is Dionysus  whom  it  will  ostracize,  incarcerate  or  destroy  at  every  opportunity. ("Dionysus  is dead:" says Layton  in his  ".Foreword"  to  A  Red  Carpet   for the Sun  ( 1959), "his corpse seethes white-maggoty with social-workers and analysts." The  many  poems  which  feature  the  artist  being  tormented  and  rejected  by a "Socratic" society culminate  in the strikingly original "With  the Money I Spend" ( 1961 ). Here the poet speaks to his loved one who represents the spirit of Beauty,
Poetry:  "The  Leninists are marching  on us.I Their  eyes are inflamed  with social
justice. I Their  mouths  are  contorted  with the  brotherhood  of man.I Their  fists
are heavy with universal love....")
Nietzsche regards such a society as having lost touch with reality. It is sick and very  much  in  need  of  redemption.  Thls  judgment  applies  to  the  whole  post­ Socratic  Christian  world. Among  his own contemporaries  Nietzsche  described  a limpness of spirit, a moral flaccidity, an apathy in the face of  evil-the result of centuries of excessive rationalism,  debilitating  Christian  values/ and  an  evasive and ennervating  romanticism.  Man's  capacity for  heroism has atrophied,  leaving him defenceless against  the forces of destruction.  Nietzsche foresaw that  a rising tide of superstition,  mysticism, violence,  meaningless wars  and  terrorism  would engulf the Twentieth Century.  To be saved, to be restored to health  and sanity, modem  man must revive the tension between good and  evil and  regain a respect for the terrible powers of Dionysus. And he must recognize the evil in himself and assume  the  burden  of guilt.  Only  then  can  he  hope  to  organize  the  chaos  of Dionysianism and  rechannel  his energies towards  creative  redemption.  (Layton,  who has lived to see Nietzsche's dark prophecies come true, is not so sure that  re­ demption  is close at hand.  The horrors and obscenities of current  events continue to provide him with tragic documentation  of his own psychological and mega politi­ cal vision. As Nietzsche's  heir, and  as a poet-prophet  in  his  own  right,  he con­ tinues to exhort his fellow men to recognize the evil of their days, to accept their share of guilt and  to strive to create a new life of dignity, sanity and  freedom.)
Nietzsche closes The Birth  of Tragedy with  a  call for  the  restoration  of the
tragic vision-a firm reyoking of the powers of Apollo and  Dionysus. If this can be assured, he is more than  willing to give Socratism its due:  it is a necessary anti­ thesis to art at its best and an eternal provocation to the assertion of the supremacy of aesthetic values. On  this note The Birth of Tragedy ends, with a call to Diony­ sus to take his place at the centre of the stage.
It remains to observe how in Nietzsche's later work the figure of Dionysus comes

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



to dominate  the stage. For, conceived at first as Apollo's antagonist,  then  linked with him in a common entreprise, Dionysus eventually assumes Apollo's full power and  prestige. This  most significant  transformation  comes about  with  Nietzsche's discovery of the "will-to-power".
At first he saw this concept as referring only to human  psychology, as the basic eros urging man beyond self-preservation to fulfilment and perfection through  the overcoming of the self. But then he extended it to all living things:  Nature's reck­ less fecundity  offered endless examples. Finally he saw that  it  characterized the entire cosmos. As such it was implicit in the "will of the universe"  referred  to in The   Birth  of Tragedy;  but  the  cosmic will-to-power  is  no  longer  a  frenzied undirected  striving  but  rather  the  irrefutable  urge  to  become  which  is forever forming  and  dissolving and  reforming-giving birth  to  itself, dying  and  being reborn.  To  this will-to-power  Nietzsche gave the  name  of Dionysus. Thereafter Dionysus is reality in process and  Nietzsche now views him as the ultimate  goal as well as the primary source of all existence.
Dionysus no longer  requires  Apollo to give him  form;  for  within  himself he provides for the dialectic  between form and  chaos, forever destroying  and  creat­ ing himself. As such he becomes the Eternal  Creator  in a Heraclitean universe of flux wherein the basic element is fire. Thus he even approximates Apollo's symbol, the sun. Zarathustra is a sunworshipper,  and  Nietzsche  declares  himself a wor­ shipper  in the  "Dionysian  faith". (The  last verse of  Layton's  "Logos"   ( 1964) expresses this faith: "I laugh  and  praise the  Dionysian/  Everywhere  irrational  thrust/ That   sends  meteors  spilling/  into  dust/ This  enchantment  risen  in  the bone."  So  does  "Zoroastrian"  which  begins  "I want  nothing/ to  ever  come/ between me and the sun ... " In fact hundreds of his poems containing  sun and flame imagery can  be read with  deeper insight as the tributes  of a Dionysian to his God. And we may note that whenever Layton uses the word "God" seriously in his poems or prefaces, it is Dionysus to whom he most often refers. Fortuitously Dionysus as Layton  and  Nietzsche conceive him is not incompatible with  either Heraclitus'  Eternal  Flux  or the  Jehovah  of the Old  Testament, a circumstance  which allows for considerable flexibility in the interpretation of Layton's  work.) 5
In the light of his Dionysian faith Nietzsche entertains  the hypothesis of Eternal Recurrence  which  postulates  that  everything  that  happens  happens  again  and again forever, albeit  in cycles (Great  Years)  which span  periods of time longer than  any  known  history.  (Layton's   "Eternal  Recurrence"  ( 1971)   is  a  quite literal rendering  of this concept.  More subtle are "Orpheus" ( 1955)   and  "If I Lie Still"  ( 1963).)  The  idea  was not  original  with  Nietzsche  and  at  first  he

47

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



found it abhorrent because it implied no end to pain, suffering and death. His Dionysian faith  however assured him that  by the same token life, creativity  and joy could  also recur  eternally.  If Eternal  Recurrence  is ground  for  a  necessary pessimism it also offers the  potential  for  boundless joy.
But the  question  remains:   how can  a man so sanctify every  moment  that  he might  want  to live it again  and  again?  Nietzsche's pessimism led  him to despair of mankind  in general: the many seem incapable  of more than  endurance, pas­ sive suffering.   (Layton   expresses  his compassionate  contempt   for  the  massen­ mensch  in  "For  Mao  Tse-Tung ... " ( I958)   and  numerous  other  poems;  he differs from  Nietzsche only to the extent  that  he puts out  the call to all men  to become "creative  sufferers" though  without much hope of response.)  "The few", those to whom Nietzsche directed his message, might learn to live the "good life". To these he held up the ideal of the ubermensch.  (This figure is named  in several of Layton's  poems;  in others  he appears  in  various  guises,  notably  as  Layton's persona in "Beach  Acquaintance" ( I967)  and as the more subdued  figure in "A Dedication" (I 964) .)
The  ubermensch  is not  a man  of the future,  the goal of evolution.  And  cer­
tainly he is not a supernatural saviour or superman.  (Layton  ridicules these mis­ conceptions in "Paging Mr. Superman" (I 958).) Nor, though  he has appeared  in history  (Socrates,  Caesar,  Napoleon,  Goethe are  Nietzsche's examples), is he the  product  of history or  of anything  but  himself. The  ubermensch  creates  and recreates  himself through  self-knowledge and  self-discipline. He  is a  passionate man  who learns to control  his passions; a  man  of reason who trains  himself to act rationally as if by instinct;  a suffering man who takes joy in life whatever  the cost. He exults in the will-to-power which pulses so strongly through  him driving him to "cultivate" himself, to strive continuously  toward  higher  modes of being. He is strict with himself and  ruthless toward  anyone or anything  which threatens  to inhibit  him or restrict  his freedom  to change  and  grow. Thus  he grows from weakness into strength,  from sickness into  health,  from cowardliness and  slavery into boldness and freedom. ("Out of infirmity, I have built strength  ... " writes Layton in "There Were No Signs"," ... Almost now I know Who I am./ Almost
I have the boldness to be that  man.... ")
The  ubermensch  is a  Yea-sayer.  Nietzsche's formula  for  greatness  is  "amor­ fati"-the  joyous affirmation  of one's  own  existence and  of  the  life-force  in eternity.  (Layton, praising  the  flame  of life  as it  passes through  him  writes: "'Affirm life,' I said, 'Affirm/  The  triumphant grass that covers the worm;/ And the flesh, the swinging flesh/ That burns on its stick of bone.' "  ("The Swinging

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



Flesh",  1961)) The  ubermensch  is a Dionysian. His self-realization  is a continu­ ous process of self-discovery and  self-overcoming. His achievement  is  not  to  be judged in moral or utilitarian terms;  rather,  like a work of art,  he is valued  for his wholeness, his integrity and grace-in a word, his style. ("It's all in the man­ ner of the done," says Layton, "Manner redeemeth everything: j  redeemeth  man, sets him up among,/  over, the other worms, puts/  a crown on him, yes, size of aj mountain lake,/  dazzling    more dazzling!/ than a slice of sun"  ("It's All in The Manner", 1954).)
"The most spiritual  men  are  the strongest,"  claims Nietzsche.6    And  the  most
powerful life is the creative life. It is not surprising therefore  that  of the types of men  with  the  mark  of  the  ubermensch   (the  hero,  the  philosopher)   Nietzsche favours  the  artist.  The  Dionysian  artist  "creates  himself",  as  Nietzsche said  of Goethe, through  his art,  and  he delights in the process however  painful  and self­ destructive  it may  be.  He  is thereby  most like a  god-like  Dionysus-over­ joyed with  his  continuous  recreation  of  himself in  the  universe.  Dionysus  the eternal  creator  is god the eternal  artist. The  human  Dionysian  poet is therefore both  the creation  and  the analogue  of the divine artist,  since he recreates  him­ self and the world in every poem he writes.
This final vision of the Dionysian artist was implicit in Nietzsche's earliest book.
In  an ecstatic passage in The  Birth of Tragedy  he wrote:  "Only  as an aesthetic product  can the world be justified to all eternity.... Only as the genius [e.g., the poet]  in the act of creation  merges with the primal  architect  of the cosmos can he truly know something of the eternal essence of art.... He is at once the sub­ ject  and  object,  poet,  actor   and  audience."    (To   realize  how  closely  Layton parallels Nietzsche even to this conclusion one need only read his "Like  a  Mother Demented" ( 1968), a poem in which man's dilemma and  the irony of  the whole cosmic drama  implied  above is made  tragically clear.)



kE PERSONA in Layton's  "The Birth of Tragedy"7  is  Niet­ zsche's Dionysian artist. With  the accent on "birth", on becoming,  the poem ex­ plores the creative process on three interconnected levels-the natural, the human and  the cosmic. Happily  engaged  in the writing of his poem the  poet  delights in his ability to give meaning  to the life-and-death  process which he observes in his natural  surroundings.  ("... In  me, nature's  divided things/  ...  have  their  frui­ tion.")  He  pays tribute  to  Apollo  and  Dionysus  ("the  perfect  gods")   whose spirits assist and reward his strivings. He exults in his own growth,  sacrificing his


49

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



old self as he gives birth  to a new one. He  rejoices in his freedom  as one who, accepting  his fate,  enjoys a  harmony  with  the whole of the  destructive-creative continuum. He salutes the cosmic artist at work in the universe as the "birthday" of a new cycle of existence is celebrated. And since the creative  process is one of eternal  recurrence  the last line returns us to the beginning where we find the poet in the act of redeeming  the moment: "And me happiest when I compose poems." The  poem is not "Dionysian" in the popular sense. It does not exploit the more lurid and  dramatic sufferings of the tormented  poet, the figure of the dying god shrieking his exultant  defiance. By contrast it is the more thoroughly  Nietzschean for its exuberance  and  "cheerfulness". Zarathustra taught  not  an easy optimism but  a cheerful  courage.  Nietzsche's concept  of happiness  was a sense of power
suffused with  joy.
"The Birth  of Tragedy" was  published  in  1954· Twenty  years later  Layton wrote another  poem on the poetic process which deserves to be considered as the obverse side of the same coin. The  mood of "The  Birth of Tragedy" was one of serene joy, its stanzaic form allowing for fluctuating flame-like rhythms to express elation. "Ithaca" is more tightly structured,  its turbulence  contained  in four taut quatrains to sustain the desired tension. The persona is once again that of the Dionysian poet;  but the poem carries us closer, in the poetic process, towards completion  and,  in the cosmic process, towards the precipice of destruction,  dis­ solution, death. Again the moment  of creativity is celebrated,  this time the excru­ ciating  joyous moment  when the poet is about  to achieve a finished  poem: " ... the imperial moment  just before/  the relieving ambiguities of  ejaculation,/ when he can still urge on his ecstasy j and ecstasy and fate are one ... " High  in the sky Helios, too, appears  to await  the zenith:  " ... the exact instant  of plenitude  and decline ... " ("Mid-day; moment  of the shortest shadow;" wrote Nietzsche, "end of the longest error;  zenith of mankind; incipit  Zarathustra.") Layton greets the moment  of fruition  and  destruction  with an ecstatic "amor-fati" as the last verse captures  the climax in a fitting Heraclitean image:

The total white exquisiteness before corruption when the wave's wide flaunting crest
with smash and tumult prepares to break into bleak nothingness on Ithaca's shore.

In  1974  Layton  also published  The  Pole-vaulter the  title  of which  is taken from  the  poem  "Pole-vaulter", its  persona  an  ageing  ubermensch:  " ... Spry and  drugged  with  love/  I pole-vault/ over my grave." The  book is dedicated  to

so

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



two contemporary Jewish  women  writers who in their fight against Russian Com­ munism  exhibit  heroic courage. "The world is redeemed by [such]  pole-vaulters," says Layton  in  the  Foreword. The  book has two  inscriptions. The  first is drawn from  Nietzsche:

In  the end it must be as it is and  always has been: great  things remain  for the great, abysses for the profound,  nuances and shudders for the refined, and, in brief, all that  is rare  for  the rare.

The  second  inscription reads:

We must live so we can tell what  man is capable  of doing  to man.  Perhaps  this is God's will.
"Jew in Treblinka"

The   most  recent  volume   of  Layton's selected  poems,  The  Unwavering  Eye, ( 1975), takes  its title  from  a  poem  which  pays explicit  tribute to  Nietzsche. It concerns  a  response  to  life and   to  oncoming death. The   poet  observes  the  ele­ ments  of nature engaged in their  eternal  dialectic.  Over  them  presides the symbol of  Dionysus,  the  great   eye of  the  sun,  now  "glaucomic". A  central  symbol   in Layton's work,  the sun  here represents  the steady  gaze of Nietzsche whose  vision, though blurred towards the  end  by madness,  never  flinched  from  reality.  " Nietzsche,  hero and  martyr ... died innocent, a gentle lunatic ... "

The  abyss belched
and  pulled him downward
by the two ends of his drooping moustache

Now I cannot  look
at a solitary sunlit stone
and  not think of Nietzsche's unwavering  eye

Nietzsche  did  not  want  disciples;  he provided  no dogma  or system  which  "fol­ lowers" might  lean on. Zarathustra taught  the over-coming of the self, the glorifi­ cation  of the  moment; the  affirmation of life through all eternity. A true  Diony­  sian is on his own: he must  assert his joy in his own  individual existence  with  all that  that  entails  of cosmic dialectics,  history,  heredity,  environment and  personal  attributes. Thus, though much   in  Layton   becomes  clearer   through  an  under­ standing of his Nietzscheanism, his talent  and  originality derive  from  a combina­ tion of sources unique to him. Nietzsche sometimes spoke of the will-to-power as an

LAYTON AND  NIETZSCHE



"instinct of freedom". As a  poet, Layton equates these  tenns with his  gift  in one of his finest  poems on  the  poetic process:

So whatever else poetry  is freedom. Let
Far  off the impatient cadences  reveal
A padding for  my breathless stilts. Swivel
0 hero,  in the fleshy groves, skin and  glycerine, And sing of lust,  the sun's  accompanying shadow Like  a vampire's wing, the stillness in dead  feet­ Your  stave  brings  resurrection, 0 aggrieved  king.

("Whatever Else Poetry  Is Freedom",  1958)


NOTES

1 I  have  elsewhere  published a  close  reading of  this  poem  which  reveals  its  Nietz­
schean  structure.
2  Cf. "Note" to A Laughter  in the Mind:  "A  Hebrew, I worship  the Divine  in extra­ ordinary men,  know  that  all flesh is grass and  that  everything ripens  into decay  and  oblivion.... It seems to me now  I have always known  this...." As a post-Christian pagan  Layton draws  on both  Hellenic culture and  Hebraic values. His yearly travels  in Greece  and  his concern with  Twentieth Century Jewish  history  lend  immediacy to this traditional dialectic especially  in his poems of the Sixties and  Seventies.
8  Nietzsche  is  as  ambivalent  towards Socratism as  he  is  towards Christianity. His attacks on  these  forces  are  directed against  their  negative  effects,  as he  sees them. He has a great  reverence for the "true" Socratic spirit  of inquiry, and  he reserves an important place  for  reason  in his philosophy.
4 Nietzsche's  chief  score  against Pauline  Christianity-as distinct from  the  original teachings of Jesus-is that  it has lent itself as an ally and  instrument to the Socratic state  by sanctifying repression  of the  passions and  self-effacement of the  individual and  by promoting thereby  a "slave  morality". (For  similar  reasons Layton has aimed scores of attacks at  the  rigidly  orthodox, the  hypocritically pious  and  the  puritani­ cal among both  Christians and  Jews.)
5  Considering the  omnipotence of this Dionysus  one  may  ponder the  role  of Apollo in Layton's work.  In  his "Foreword" to The  Swinging Flesh (1960)  he says:  "Like all  artists  I  am  concerned with  Appearance and  Reality  and  with  the  traffic  that goes on between  them.  Appearance I both  love and  distrust  and  think  of as an  en­ chanting mistress,  fertile  in invention, endlessly playful." Allowing  for the change of sex, this  mistress  is Apollo.  In  the  perspective of the  Dionysian  faith  everything is antinominal: Apollo's  gift  of "illusion" is therefore also "deception",  the  "will  to falsehood  in the hearts of men" ("Seven  O'clock Lecture"). Poets are "liars"; poems are  "anodynes" -temporary relief  from  the  pain  and  suffering  of  existence.  "Art also finally  crumbles and  falls  back  into  life as the  water-lily's  brightness crumbles into  the  pondscum that  surrounds it."  (A  Red Carpet  for the Sun,  1959.)
6   It is important to note  that  Nietzsche  makes  no division  between  the  physical,  the mental and  the  spiritual. The  spiritual is simply  the  highest  manifestation of  the will-to-power.
1 I have  elsewhere  published a detailed explication of this poem.


THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"





Andrew J. Pottinger





T.MAJORITY of Under the Volcano's critics have directed
their   attention  away   from   any  interpretation  of  the   work's   psychological   or
"literal" level, and  the  consequent emphasis  on symbolic  and  mythic  interpreta­ tion  has seriously dehumanized the  novel.  Further, the  reader who  fails  to  con­ sider  in  detail  this "immediate" level of Under  the Volcano  may  come  to  over­ look  a  major  component of  Lowry's  meanings-a dimension of  irony,  centred on the  theme  of alienation, which  he painstakingly and  specifically  built  into  the novel  during its rewriting, and  which  emerges  only  through an  alert  reading of the  work as an "engaged" novel, an account  of human confrontation in historical  time.
Lowry  adopted a fictional  technique in his major  novel  which  conforms, more
exactly  than  interpretations of the  novel's mythic  structures tend  to recognize,  to
Sartre's description of  the  modem novelist's  imperative:

... we had to people our books with minds that  were half lucid and  half overcast, some of which we might  consider  with more sympathy  than  others,  but  none  of which would have a privileged point of view either upon the event or upon himself. We had to present creatures  whose reality would be the tangled  and  contradictory tissue of each one's  evaluations of all the other  characters-himself  included­ and  the evaluation  by all the others of himself, and  who could  never decide from within  whether  the  changes  of their destinies came  from  their  own efforts, from their own faults, or from  the course of the universe.
Finally, we had  to leave doubts,  expectations,  and  the  unachieved  throughout our works, leaving it up to the reader  to conjecture  for himself by giving him  the feeling, that  his view of the plot and  the characters  was merely one among  many others.1

53

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



Under the Volcano conforms to this prescription by presenting the critical reader with a universe of inter-personal  evaluation  which parallels in its complexity that of his own  day-to-day  experience.  It is thus  equally  difficult  for  him  to make "final" moral judgments of the actions in Lowry's fictional world as it is to answer the moral questions he actually faces every day.
By way of  preliminary  illustration,  consider  an  action  whose setting  is even more politically intense than the Mexico of Under the Volcano-Robert Jordan's killing the young Spaniard who opposes his leadership  of the  guerrilla  force in Hemingway's  For Whom  the Bell Tolls. Hemingway goes to great lengths to pre­ sent  all the evidence most readers  need in order  to exculpate  Robert  from  any moral  guilt. The  question  of moral  guilt arises, and  is determined  conclusively, within  the fictional world of the novel; the reader  is only called  upon  to assent, not to deliberate.  His reading  experience, in this particular respect, is very unlike his experience of day-to-day  moral  issues where the  relevant  evidence  he might like to have in order to make a decision is not always available,  and  where other evidence  seems intractably ambiguous  in  its moral  implications.  Hemingway's  fictional world is morally simplified for his reader  in a way that  Lowry's is not.
Hemingway  cannot,  of  course,  be fairly  taken  as a  representative  for  other modern  novelists either in general or in particular.  His position is extreme. Other novelists, however,  may  present  far  more  complex  moral  worlds  than  Robert Jordan's while, nevertheless, setting  out  just as Hemingway  does to  clarify the issues involved on the reader's  behalf. But the extremism of Hemingway's fictional technique  in this respect makes his treatment  of Robert  Jordan's action  an espe­ cially illuminating  contrast  with  Lowry's treatment  of a similar  fictional  event. Geoffrey Firmin's  violent death  at the hands of the three "Chiefs of Police" seems quite  clearly to raise the same kind of moral issues as Hemingway  "disposes of" in the case of Robert  Jordan -issues which any comprehensive interpretation of the intense final chapter,  and  hence of Under the Volcano as a  whole, ought  to consider. In  fact,  a conscientious  reading  of this last chapter  shows that  moral guilt for Geoffrey's death  is not  positively ascribed by  Lowry's  narrator to any­ body in particular,  least of all to the men who actually kill him.
Lowry's  narrative  stance,  unlike  Hemingway's,  forces  the  critical  reader  to note, above all, the  temporal  nature  of the protagonist's  situation; the "events" taking place in Parian,  at the Farolito, have to be interpreted  by each of the parti­ cipants  in the drama  before they can  act  upon them. The  same "fact" may be fitted into different  patterns  in the minds of different observers and  so  come to acquire quite divergent significance for Geoffrey on the one hand and for the three

54

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



police chiefs who kill him on the other. Unlike the reader, the three  police chiefs and  Geoffrey do  not  have  the  luxury  of time  in which  to analyse  each  other's actions as objectively as possible; they are not free, as the  reader  is, to evaluate the various possible, but equally plausible interpretations of their adversaries' behaviour.
A comparison  of the "Mexican version" of the noveF with  the  published  one precisely highlights  the  attention   that  Lowry  paid  during  revision  to  the  con­ struction  of a pattern  of incriminating circumstantial  evidence  that  mounts up, piece by piece throughout the final chapter, against the Consul. Many, if not most, of the  changes  made  by Lowry to this chapter  were features  that  increased  the damning appearance of Geoffrey's behaviour  in the eyes of the three  chiefs who must interpret what they see under the pressures of passing time. That the Consul omits paying for his drinks and  for Maria  is a modification  of  Lowry's  original plan,  as  is the  presence  in  Geoffrey's  jacket  of  Yvonne's  letters  addressed  to "Firmin", and  Hugh's  incriminating documents.  In  the  Mexican  version of the novel the Consul  had  destroyed the letters by the time  he came  to be searched, and he had not lost his passport earlier in the day. Geoffrey's drawing  the map of Spain  is similarly an addition  in the later  version of this chapter. These  changes achieve  two  major  effects:  first,  they  emphasize,  for  the  reader,  the  Consul's entrapment in circumstance; secondly, they serve to heighten  the irony  whereby the police-chiefs, in tum,  though in a different sense of the word, are "entrapped" by their  own propensity to react with the utmost suspicion towards  foreigners.
The  reader  has, of course, been given a privileged insight into  both  Geoffrey's
personal history and  his mental  processes through  eleven preceding  chapters dur­ ing which his mind is the focus of attention. The  three chiefs of police must gain a very different image of the Consul. If they have no additional information con­ cerning  him than  that  which they acquire  during  this final  chapter,  their  image of Geoffrey is constructed  partly from reports by the patrons and  barmen  of the Farolito,  who could observe his behaviour from the time he arrived,  partly  from their  own  direct  observation  of and  discussion  with  the  Consul  himself,  and  is apparently completed   by information   received  over  the  telephone  from  some higher authority.
The  possibility that  the police-chiefs have an image of the Consul  as an  arro­ gant,  drunken,  alien criminal  and spy who might  well "tum dangerous" at  any moment -he does, after all, make an assault on the chiefs, brandishing  a deadly weapon -constitutes their "defence"  in the eyes of the critical reader who faces the problems of ascribing moral guilt for Geoffrey's death. The  police might well

55

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



see themselves as confronted  by a man attempting  to cheat their countrymen  and representing  their  ideological  enemy,  Bolshevism. He  resists what  might  be, in their  eyes, a legitimate  arrest  while showing no signs whatever  of acting  peace­ fully;  and  he is finally shot  in fear  as much  as in  anger  when  he  attempts  to escape. Careful  examination of two  passages in  particular  shows  how  Lowry's narrator allows this defence to remain consistent with the facts, and  thus refrains from  endorsing  Geoffrey's subjective  and suspicious interpretation  of the  police­ chiefs' actions. In  the scene leading directly to the shooting, the Consul's  killer is described in detail:
The  Chief of Rostrums was looking down at  him. . . . "What  the hell you think you do around  here? You  pelado, eh? It's  no good for your health.  I  shoot de twenty people." It  was half a threat, half confidential.. ..
"I blow you wide open from your knees up, you Jew chingao," warned the Chief of Rostrums....
(My emphases)

The  language  the  "objective" narrator  chooses to describe the  Consul's  killer is reserved and non-committal as far as moral judgment is concerned, and actually tends to intensify the moral ambiguity of the Chief of Rostrums' position. The  use of the terms "threat" and  "warned" suggests that  up to this stage there  may be no "premeditation" in the  Chief of Rostrums'  mind. His behaviour,  verbal  and otherwise, is quite consistent with his having an image of the Consul as a danger­ ous criminal. The  three chiefs may well have had their image of the Consul con­ firmed  on  the  telephone,  and  it is thus  ignorance  and  mistaken  identity,  com­ bined with suspicion, which lead to their shooting a politically and  legally inno­ cent  man.  Hugh,  whose documents  Geoffrey is mistakenly  carrying,  and  which incriminate  him so clearly in the eyes of the police, is, indeed, many of the things which the  police-chiefs suspect Geoffrey of being. He is staying with  the Consul for only a few days before sailing to Spain with a cargo of high explosives, and, as a journalist,  he is sending information  to  England  which reflects adversely on the Sinarquista cause.
The  reader  might  conclude  from  this that  the chiefs are  morally  justified in arresting  Geoffrey, but  that  their  warnings and  threats  are shown  to be nothing but  camouflage  for  a more sinister  purpose:  such  harassment  would  make  any man  react  violently. This,  however,  would  constitute  a  moral  decision  on  the part of the reader which is not directed in any strict sense by the text. If the reader ascribes moral guilt to the  police for their harassment  of Geoffrey, he has passed through  a  process of judgment  similar to that  which he undertakes  in the com-

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



parable situations  of everyday life. He comes to a decision that  Geoffrey's lying about his name, carrying incriminating documents, lack of a passport and drunken arrogance  is insufficient warrant for the police-chiefs' response;  but  this decision will be based on the  reader's  own moral code-not  upon  any  code implied  or set forth in the novel. Lowry structures  the moral universe of Under  the Volcano in such a manner  that  the narrative  voice sanctions  no particular interpretation or evaluation  of its fictional  events. The  reader  is left, as Sartre  puts  it,  "with doubts, speculations,  and  the  unachieved"; and  he is left, like the  protagonists, "to bet, to conjecture  without evidence, to undertake  in uncertainty  and  persevere without hope."3  Without  more evidence than  Lowry is willing to allow his reader, in the form, for example,  of omniscient insight into the police-chiefs' minds,  the novel raises the moral issues surrounding a man's violent death and yet, effectively, leaves the reader in little better a position than  the protagonists  when it comes to resolving them.
This  point  is further  borne  out  by the  narrator's presentation  of  the  mental image  (thieves,  murderers)  that  Geoffrey constructs  of  his  "persecutors",  the fascist Uni6n Militar:

He started. In front of him tied to a small tree he hadn't  noticed, though it was right opposite the cantina  on the other side of the path, stood a horse cropping the lush grass. Something familiar about the beast made him walk over.  Yes­ exactly  as he  thought .... Unbidden,  an  explanation  of  this  afternoon's  events came to the Consul. Hadn't  it turned out to be a policeman  into which all those abominations he'd observed a little while since had melted, a policeman leading a horse in  this direction?  Why should not that  horse [the  property of the  dying Indian in chapter VIII] be this horse?
(My emphasis)

The  narrator makes no claim  here to veracity of vision on the  Consul's  part. The  key phrase  introducing Geoffrey's mescal-driven speculation  is an  extreme example of semantic ambiguity-"Yes-exactly as he thought". Given the con­ text, this phrase cannot  reasonably  be interpreted  as an  objective statement  on the  part  of the narrator, "Yes-it was exactly as Geoffrey  had  thought";  the reader  must  interpret   it  as the  reported  thought  in  Geoffrey's  drugged  mind, "Yes-exactly as I thought", in which case the description  and  deduction  that follow are both entirely subjective. In other words, there is no unambiguous claim made by the narrator at this crucial point concerning the guilt or innocence of the Union Militar with respect to the Indian's  death. The  fact of the horse's presence with its restored though  empty saddlebags  does not  make the  Consul's explana-

57

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



tion any more acceptable to the impartial reader than, for example, the possible explanation of the police-chiefs' treatment  of Geoffrey offered above. Their possession of the horse does not imply that  the police have actually  stolen either it, or the money which, incidentally,  nobody has seen any way. Again,  however, it should  be emphasized  that  to say this is not  to say that  the  police-chiefs are innocent,  or to insist that  their motivation  is such as to justify the Consul's arrest from  a moral  point  of view. No final moral  judgment  is indicated  or suggested by these facts alone.
Under  the pressures of time, however, Geoffrey must, on the basis of the limited
evidence at his disposal, make exactly the same kind of prematurely  final evalua­ tion of the police-chiefs as they must, in turn, make of him. He sees the members of the Union  Militar  not as men but as "fascists". In the Mexican version of the novel this interpretation of Geoffrey's was far more blatant  and melodramatic­ he says to the police-chiefs in his final outburst,  for example, "You're pure evil". In  the  published  version this overt  political stereotyping  is  more  restrained  but the principle remains the same. As far as the Consul is concerned,  the three men he  confronts  are  not  human   beings,  "innocent   until  proven  guilty",   but  the embodiment  of everything  he detests.
The  Consul's prime demand  during  his final outburst is "Give me those letters
back!" For  the  police-chiefs, Yvonne's letters  are  material  evidence  confirming their suspicions as to Geoffrey's being a spy. However, owing to Geoffrey's para­ noid interpretation of the  police-chiefs' role in the death  of the  peasant,  he sees their  possession of his wife's love-letters as a horrible travesty of cosmic  justice: the  letters  come  to  represent  the  possibility of wholehearted  human  trust  and communion; and the police-chiefs seem, consequently, to represent the forces that destroy such communion. He sees them quite literally as the source of  alienation and distrust that  allows, or forces, men to "pass by on the other side."
The mescal the Consul has consumed facilitates the giving body, in a hallucina­ tory fashion,  to these interpretations and  deductions.  Because he  prejudges  the police-chiefs in this manner,  as the source of alienation and suffering, he also sees in their faces first, "a  hint of M. Laruelle",  the thief who robbed him of Yvonne; second, an image of himself as "the  Chief of Gardens again",  as the man  who had allowed  the dying  peasant  to lie alone,  unaccompanied,  in  the dust;  and  third, a further  image of "the  policeman  Hugh had  refrained  from striking  this after­ noon"  and  who, Geoffrey thinks,  is directly  responsible for the  peasant's  death.
The irony of this passage is extreme. The Consul recognizes the horror of  alien­
ated humanity,  and indistinctly sees this lying at the root of his own and all men's

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



predicament; but  he himself suffers from the same alienation  in making  such  a judgment  of the men he faces. In  adopting  the most "vicious"  explanation  pos­ sible of the  police-chiefs' conduct,  the  Consul  himself fails  to  escape  from  the trap  of his conditioning: he fails to give the  police the consideration  as human  beings  which  he feels they  withhold  from  both  him  and  the  common  people represented by the dying Indian.
The  revelation  of this ironic  dimension through  a careful  examination of the novel's "immediate" level in chapter  XII  points the way to an  enlarged  under­ standing  of the theme  of communion  and  alienation  itself. In  the  final chapter,  some aspect of the breakdown  in  human  communication  is presented  on  almost every page:  by calling for "Mescal" as the chapter  opens, the  Consul  cuts him­ self off from normal  human  perception;  his not paying for his drinks arises from a  mistrustful  misunderstanding  between  "A  Few  Fleas"  and  himself;  and  his initially  cynical response to Yvonne's letters-"Had  Yvonne  been  reading  the letters of Heloise and  Abelard?" -is further  evidence of  misunderstanding and failure  to trust  another  human  being. He  jumps to  conclusions concerning  the possession of the peasant's  horse by the Union  Militar, and  drunkenly  refuses to give the three chiefs his correct  name,  not  trusting  them  with  accurate   personal information.  By their  conversation  on  the  telephone,  the  police-chiefs seem  to confirm the mistaken identity  of Geoffrey  with the murderer  who  has "escaped through  seven states",  Geoffrey refuses to trust in the offers of help from the old lady and  the fiddler/potter,  while  Diosdado seems to interpret his reaching  out across the bar as an attempt  to strike him. At every stage, suspicion  and  distrust obscure  each  participant's  vision  of his fellow men so that  human  communion  becomes impossible.
At every stage, too, the frontiers of language  act to separate  the  Consul from
those around  him. The  final scene in the barroom  is obviously an  image  of the complete  failure  of all  human  communication  as Yvonne's  letters  are  mingled with the stories of the drunken  Weber, and with the deserter speaking incoherently of Mozart writing the Bible. And nowhere is this theme of alienation  more power­ fully dramatized  than  when  the  Consul traces the map  of Spain  in  the  mescal spilled on the surface of the  bar.
No direct report of the Consul's mind is presented during  this episode, but the narrative  seems to suggest that  the map  of Spain  is drawn  in almost  automatic response to his thoughts  of Yvonne, whose letters Diosdado  has just returned  to him.  He  uses the  map  as illustration  for memories of conjugal   happiness  with Yvonne, and as a means of establishing a human contact  with Diosdado:  "These

59

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



letters you gave me-see?-are from my wife, my esposa. ?Claro? This is where we met. In  Spain.  You recognize it, your old home, you know  Andalusia?"  His ploy is obviously vain. "The Elephant's" command  of English is too weak for him to follow the Consul's speeding mind as Geoffrey explains the connection  between the three  of them: Yvonne,  Diosdado,  and  himself.
Communication, and  hence communion,  is impossible between them not only, however, because of this language  barrier, but also, perhaps,  because Diosdado is suspicious of the  Consul  as an  American  spy even before they speak.  Whatever Geoffrey says to him  will be interpreted within this framework  of suspicion, for the existence of which neither Geoffrey nor Diosdado alone can legitimately be blamed. It is a framework  created  by historico-political circumstances,  by the fact that  Diosdado,  like the  cinema  proprietor  of chapter  I, has  had  experience  of spies in the past, and knows they bring nothing but trouble to a man like himself. Diosdado  seems  to  interpret  Geoffrey  as  making  some  kind  of  indeterminate political  point,  and  it  may  be  due  to  this  that  the  three  Union   Militar  men eventually arrive in the Farolito. The narrative  voice never makes it clear whether Diosdado  himself  actually  calls them,  and  they  may  well  have  been  called  by the  "group at  the  other  end  of the  bar",  whose faces "turned in  the  Consul's direction."  Even  if they are  not  "called"  at all, the map  incident  forms a basis for their  accusing the Consul  of being a "Bolsheviki prick".
On  the  one  hand,  then,  the  Consul unfairly  jumps to conclusions:  he inter­ prets the policeman's  leading  the slain  (we suppose)  peasant's  horse as incrimin­ ating  the  Union  Militar  and  confirming  the suspicious picture  of  them  he had painted for Hugh earlier in the day. He thus fails to give the policemen the benefit of the doubt.  On  the  other  hand,  Diosdado, the other  men  in  the  bar  and  the police-chiefs all seem  to  fail  to  give Geoffrey this  same  human   consideration. Distrust  is mutual,  and  neither  "side"  can see straight  or  openly for  their  con­ ditioning.
The  final futile attempt  at  unconstrained  human  communion  is made  by the
old  fiddler  who  whispers  rrcompaiiero" to the  dying  Geoffrey,  and  it may  be, though  there  is no  certainty  here  either,  that  the  only characters  who  can see straight,  who are not alienated  from their fellow men by distrust, are the ordinary Mexican  people "of indeterminate class" whom, significantly, "the  Consul hated to look at".
The  main  critical  insight  achieved  by the  enquiry  undertaken  here  is that Lowry's concern  with man's  alienation  from his fellow man,  in a world without moral  norms or community,  is embodied  in the ambiguous  narration itself:  the

6o

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



reader  must  become aware  of and  experience this alienation  for  himself as part of the reading  process:

The literary work, at its best ... provides moving images  (in both the descriptive and  perceptual  senses of the  phrase),  and  thus engages the  reader,  in Sartre's term, as homme-dans-le-monde, as man in situation, and to demands not  dispas­ sionate contemplation nor political or moral activity, but rather  dialogue....4

The  reader of Under  the Volcano discovers his alienation from the protagonists each  time  he  faces  his own  human   response  to  their  actions -a  categorical imperative, for example, that an action like the police-chiefs' killing of the Consul be morally evaluated.  He then finds himself in precisely the same kind of morally ambiguous  and  opaque  universe as that  of the  protagonists  when  he recognizes the sheer lack of "contact" between himself and  the fictional figures he attempts to  judge. They  are  "closed  off" from  him. The  narrative  gives him  a  personal history of Geoffrey, the victim,  which  is full of ambiguity,  to say the  least,  no matter  how fully his consciousness is explored during  the Day of the  Dead;  and he  is alienated   from  Geoffrey's  killers through   his  having  neither   omniscient insight into their minds, nor sufficient detailed information  concerning their actual behaviour.  The  reader  must  eventually  experience  his own  alienation  when  he finds himself unable  to unearth  any evidence within  the novel to prove  beyond a reasonable  doubt  that  when  they kill the  Consul  the  members  of  the  Union Militar  act  against  their  consciences. This will seem a ludicrous  conclusion  only so long as the  reader  fails to recognize that  the  Consul's perception,  partly  due to the alienation  induced  and symbolized by his mescal drinking,  is as distorted as that  of his apparent  persecutors.
Naturally,  Lowry's introduction during  revision of this powerful  irony  on the novel's literal  level extensively affected the very important role played  by myth and symbol in Under  the Volcano. This study must largely ignore that  dimension of the novel for reasons of space;  but one or two relevant  points  may  be made regarding  the  shift  in  relationship  between  the  literal  and  other  levels. In  the Mexican  version of the  novel, myth and  symbol served the  purpose  of  "propa­ ganda" -to  cast the  three  police-chiefs, for example, as minions  of  Mephisto­ pheles,  and  very  little  else. This  attempted   one-to-one  allegorical  relationship between  symbolic  and  political  realities  inevitably  presented  the  political  and moral  dimensions of human  experience in  historical  time as flat  and  simplistic. The  whole  orientation of  the  novel consequently  shifted  during  revision  from being a moralistic attack  on fascism as the source of all evil, towards emphasizing,

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



through  irony, the  very sin of which the novelist himself had  been guilty in  his earlier  version:  premature judgment  of his fellow man.
Lowry both  recognized  and  rejected  the  artistic  aridity  and  invalidity  of  his
own earlier version in which the major protagonists were little more than counters moved in the predetermined and conventional  pattern  of a mythic eternity  where "life was a forest of symbols". He confronted  the fully human  questions of life in time which  were implicit  in the story he wished to tell, relinquished  his earlier commitment  to the essentially static universe of myth, and  "restored  to the event its brutal  freshness, its ambiguity,  its unforseeability".5   And  these latter  are  the very qualities  that  the reading  proposed  here emphasizes as characteristic  of the published novel's literal level. The  three police-chiefs remain at another  level the minions of Mephistopheles  in the story of Faust,6  but they are also far more. The story of Faust  comes, through  Lowry's revision, to have a more meaningful  and powerful bearing  on the condition  of modern  man  when the figures in question are  not  solely allegorical,  but  understandably  human.  In  the  published  novel, instead of seeing men as ciphers, and, like Geoffrey, pointing to the fascists as the source of alienation,  Lowry dramatizes  the tragedy of a world where,  under  the pressures of time, it is either  possible or inevitable  that  the Consul and  his killers interpret  the  facts as they  do.  He  presents the  reader  with  a  fictional world  of which it is virtually  impossible to decide finally whether  its protagonists  are  any more capable  than  human  beings of escaping from the influence of a world-wide atmosphere  of distrust and suspicion that  conditions every perception  they make.
The  relationship  between  Lowry's  Mexican  version and  the  published  novel, when viewed in this perspective, is uncannily akin to the relationship  which Rene Girard  noted  between  Camus'  L'Etranger  and  La  Chute.7   On  a  certain  level, Lowry must have undergone  the same kind of "existential conversion" as Camus, and  perceived  that  it  was an  act  of literary  "bad   faith"  to  give his narrative authorial  sanction in the earlier version of the novel to Geoffrey's subjective vision of fascist evil. As in La Chute, the real question in the published version of Under the Volcano  is no longer "who  is innocent, who is guilty?" but  "why  do we, all of us, have to keep  judging and  being judged?" In  La Chute  Camus substituted for the Meursault  of L' Etranger a hero with a different point of view. Lowry, in his published version, performs precisely the same kind of reorientation  by "desert­ ing" and "incriminating" his hero, denying Geoffrey's subjective  vision  the sanc­ tion of the objective  narrator:

Meursault [like both the Consul and the Lowry who wrote the Mexican version]

THE CONSUL'S "MURDER"



viewed evil as something  outside  himself, a  problem  that  concerned   the  judged [the  fascists]  alone,  whereas  Clarnence  [like  both  the  Lowry  of  the  published version and  his reader]   knows that  he, himself, is involved. Evil is the  mystery  of a pride which, as it condemns  others, unwittingly condemns  itself. ... Reciprocity between  the I and  the  Thou  asserts itself in the very efforts  I make  to deny it: "The sentence which you pass against your fellow men," says Clamence,  "is always flung back into your face where  it effects quite  a bit of damage."

The argument presented here  may  be generalized  so as to  apply  to the  whole world  of the  published   novel,  and  not  only  to  the  culminating, extreme moral encounter. Each  of  the  relationships and  interactions that   the  reader  observes, both  in retrospect  and  in all their  immediacy, engage  him; and  each  one  "ulti­ mately  invokes  [an] exercise  of  discrimination and  existential  choice...."8    In this way the  reader  brings  himself  up short  against  the intractable questions sur­ rounding his own life:  the  uncertain relationship between  freedom and  morality, and  the "absurd" imperative of having  to judge one's fellow man  under  the  pres­ sure  of time,  while seriously  alienated from  him in a world  where  "community", in any  meaningful sense, is non-existent.


NOTES

1 Jean   Paul  Sartre,   What  is  Literature?, trans.  Bernard  Frechtman  (New  York: Harper & Row, I965), p. 2I8-Ig   (my emphasis).
2   Richard Hauer  Costa, in his article "Pieta, Pelado, and 'The  Ratification of Death': The Ten-Year  Evolvement of Malcolm Lowry's Volcano," JML, 2, No. I  (Septem­ ber  I97I), 3-I8, has noted the existence of two principal  versions of the novel:  the "Mexican  version" completed  in Mexico by I 938, and the "published version" com­ pleted in Canada.
8 Sartre,  p. 2 I g.
4  William V. Spanos, "Modern Literary Criticism and the Spatialization of Time: An
Existential Critique," ]AAC, 29, No. I  (Fall  I97o),  Ioo.
5  Sartre,  p. 220.
6 See Anthony R. Kilgallin's  "Faust  and Under the  Volcano," Malcolm Lowry: The Man  and   his  Work, ed.  George  Woodcock  (Vancouver:  University   of  British Columbia  Press, I97 I), p. 26-37.
7  "Camus's  Stranger  Retried," PMLA, 79 (December  I964),  5I9-33·
8 Spanos, p. I oo.


METAPHORS
AND CONFUSIONS




David M. Monaghan



T.TITLE   of a  novel usually serv<S  as a  pointer  to  the
author's main  concern.  However,  this is not the case in Robertson  Davies' Fifth
Business because, if we follow the route signposted by the title, we find ourselves pursuing  a secondary  theme. The  term "Fifth  Business" refers to Dunstan  Ram­ say's vital, but peripheral,  influence on the loves of Boy Staunton and Paul Demp­ ster, men of importance in the public world from which he is excluded.1 Thus,  it suggests that  this  novel, like  A  Mixture  of Frailties,  is primarily  about  people whose lives are played out in public. As such we might expect it to be an elabora­ tion  of  Ramsay's  comment   that  "we  cast  [people  in  prominent  positions]  in roles, and  it is only right  to consider  them  as players." While it does deal with this issue, Fifth  Business is mainly  concerned  with  Ramsay  and  his private  life drama  rather  than  with Boy Staunton, Paul Dempster and  the  public worlds of business, politics and the theatre.
It is necessary to recognize the false emphasis of the title because it reflects what seems to  be  a  real  confusion  in  Robertson  Davies'  mind  about  the  subject  of Fifth Business. Besides being granted  undue  importance  by the novel's title, the public  theme  is overstressed  both  in  Dunstan  Ramsay's  introductory   comments and  in the concluding  events. Ramsay's  initial claim that  he achieved  the "full stature  of a man"  because he undertook  the "vital  though  never glorious role of Fifth  Business", and the prominence  given to his part in Staunton's death  which we are  intended  to take  as the  fulfillment of Liesl's claim  that  he can  make a real life for himself by becoming  Fifth Business, both assert his public role as the cause of his personal success. Robertson  Davies thus asks us to look for  a single complex theme in which the personal and public are inextricably  bound  together, rather  than  for  two separate  strands.  However,  the  main  action  of  the  novel,

METAPHORS AND  CONFUSIONS



which  comprises  the  story  of  Dunstan  Ramsay's  life  up  to  and  including   his seduction by Liesl, does not support  this contention. The  public theme illuminates the private in that  we learn much about  the ideal of the authentic man  from  the limitations  of people like Staunton  and  Dempster,  who conceal  their  real selves behind  public masks. But it is not  a part  of it in any direct  sense since Ramsay becomes a mature  adult  because he eventually  finds the courage  to cast off the false self he has adopted  throughout his adult life and  not because he is involved in Paul  Dempster's  rise to fame as a magician  or in the death  of Boy Staunton, the Lieutenant-Governor manque.
Clearly, what  has gone wrong in Fifth Business is that  Robertson  Davies  has,
at times, misused the concept of Fifth Business. Its role in the novel is essentially a metaphorical one in  that  it crystallizes the  complex of ideas which  constitute the public theme. As such it can serve no useful function  in relation  to the main personal theme. However, it seems to have exercised such an influence on Davies' imagination  that in the opening and closing sections of the novel he tries to make it the controlling  metaphor  rather  than  a subsidiary one. In order  to understand what Fifth Business is actually about, as opposed to what Robertson  Davies claims it is about,  we must examine Ramsay's development in relation  to its correct metaphorical core, the concept of "the  boy". Only then can we see that  the main theme properly reaches its climax with the seduction scene and  that  the death  of Boy Staunton not only has no relevance to the main  theme  but also makes  non­ sense of what  is established by the first climax.
The  term "boy" is employed in three different senses which serve to define the
three main stages in Dunstan  Ramsay's  development.  It is first used in its literal sense to describe childhood,  the  period  during  which  the individual  on  the  one hand  lives according  to the standards of his family and  immediate  society and on the other  begins to develop an independent  self. Secondly, it defines the false adulthood  which most of us achieve by choosing to shape  ourselves according  to the  demands  of a  specific social  code. Its  most obvious  use in  this  context  is Staunton's adoption  of the name Boy at the point in his life when he embarks  on precisely this kind of self-formation. However, as Paul Dempster  points out later, Boy's name symbolizes his desire to be loved and it is thus applicable  to all those people, including  Dunstan  Ramsay,  whose actions  are shaped  by a  need  to  be accepted.  Finally,  the  term  boy describes the  authentic   man,  that  is, the  man who casts off all social definitions and  who achieves, in  Father  Blazon's  words, "unity of the life of the flesh and of the life of the spirit". In order to discover this essential being the individual  must yield up the egotistical aspects of the self to a

METAPHORS  AND CONFUSIONS



larger spiritual  force and  hence becomes a boy in the sense expressed, albeit senti­ mentally,  by little  W.V.  "'Our sense ... is nothing  to  God's;  and  though  big people have more sense than  children  the sense of all the big people in the world put together would be no sense to His. We are only little babies to Him.'" Ram­  say is transformed  into  this kind  of boy as a result of his  encounter  with  Liesl.
Robertson Davies uses the term boy to epitomize two very different adult states because he believes that  each of us constructs his adulthood  out of one aspect of the dualistic authentic-inauthentic nature  of the child. The  inauthentic aspect of the child is that  part  which  operates  according  to the demands  made  on it  by family and society and  the authentic  is that  part  which compels it to express its essential  spiritual   and  imaginative  self,  even  if this  involves  contradicting  its society's expectations. Thus, when Ramsay says that "a boy is a man in miniature" and that  "a  boy ... is an imprisoned man striving to get out",  he does not mean that the man is a product  of the entire boy, but of a part of him.
The duality of the childhood experience is particularly strong in Dunstan Ram­ say's case. Familial  and communal  influences play such a large part  in the forma­ tion  of his childhood  self that,  in  his restrospective account  of  his  early years, Ramsay  pays considerable  attention  to defining his milieu. In  Book  I,  Chapter  III, he establishes the narrowly  moralistic stance of the village and the "Scottish" qualities of common sense, prudence and concern for position which characterized  the Ramsay family, before going on in the following chapters to demonstrate  how fully these standards became  his own. Ramsay's attitude  towards the events sur­ rounding  the birth  of Paul  Dempster  most clearly  demonstrates  the influence of environment  on  his character. Because of his  Presbyterian  background  he feels an acute sense of guilt even though  he played only a peripheral  part  in the snow­ ball incident,  and  because of his society's  view that  sex is a "hog-wallow" this guilt is intensified by the vague sexual  dimensions of the incident.
However,  beginning  with  his interest  in an  insane  member  of  the  Athelstan family, a spiritual  and  imaginative  impulse begins to draw  Ramsay  away from the conformity, order and rationality of Deptford society and towards the mysteri­ ous and  irrational  areas  of human  conduct.  Eventually  this aspect  of  Ramsay's personality finds consistent expression through  his friendship with Mrs. Dempster.
Whenever  Deptford  society is made aware of Ramsay's  authentic  self it reacts with  hostility, viewing it as the work of the Devil. This  definition  is established by the  mad  woman  who  shuns  Ramsay  because she suffers from  the  delusion that  he is a "false friend", that  is, the Devil. Amasa Dempster reacts in a similar way. When  he  discovers  that  Ramsay  has  been  teaching  Paul  conjuring  and

66

METAPHORS AND  CONFUSIONS



telling him stories of the Saints, he accuses him of being "the  agent ... by means of which the  Evil One  had  trailed  his black slime across a pure  life."
The  claims of the community  and  the self are finally brought  into direct  con­ flict when  Mrs. Ramsay,  having  discovered his friendship  with  Mrs.  Dempster, insists that Ramsay choose between them. The choice is essentially between cling­ ing  to the  inauthentic aspect  of the  child,  and  being  his  mother's  "own  dear laddie",  and  committing  himself to the authentic  self  which  Mrs. Dempster  has nurtured. Ramsay  is too aware  of his mother's  faults to be willing to subjugate himself to her will. Moreover,  having already been acknowledged  "as a man",  he does not wish to retreat  into childhood. However, although  he realizes that  Mrs. Dempster  "lived  by a light  that  arose from  within"  and  could  lead  him  to full self-knowledge, he lacks the maturity  to accept her as his guide. Thus,  he avoids choosing either by joining the army.
Ramsay's lack of decision on this occasion has a crucial effect on his later  life
because it separates  him from  the spirit of Mrs. Dempster  for some forty  years. Having  escaped his mother,  Ramsay falls under the equally destructive  influence of Diana  Marfleet,  who teaches  him to cultivate  the outer  man  at  the  expense of the inner. As we might  expect from someone who is so committed  to correct form  that  she "thinks  it  bad  manners  to be factual  and  serious",  Diana  offers Ramsay  only the superficial  kind  of maturity  involved  in  improving  his  word usage and  his eating  habits,  and  acquainting  him  with  the  "strange  lands"  of sexual knowledge and  the musical show. The fact that  Ramsay  grants  his sexual initiation  the same importance as seeing Chu-Chin-Chow indicates  the  lack  of any deep spiritual  implications  in his relationship  with Diana.2
The  nature  of the damage  which Diana  does to Ramsay's  personality  is indi­ cated by the name which he adopts to mark his new life-style. Just as St. Dunstan drove away the Devil  by tweaking his nose with a pair  of tongs, so  "Dunstan" Ramsay, as a  result of Diana's  influence,  rejects the  Devil of his  authentic self which had been so prominent  in his childhood. The change which is thus wrought is pre-figured in Ramsay's two war-time nicknames. The  first nickname,  Deacon, implies a man committed  to spiritual values and the second, Charley, a man who, like the entertainer  Charley  Chaplin,  exists only as a  public  personality.



EssENTIALLY, Ramsay emerges from his relationship with Diana  as a boy in  the sense epitomized  by Boy Staunton. Hence,  the  adopted names Dunstan  and  Boy are synonymous. There  are,  of course, obvious  differ-

METAPHORS  AND CONFUSIONS



ences between  Ramsay  and  Boy Staunton-whereas  Staunton adheres  to  the crudest  materialistic  values, Ramsay  pursues intellectual  goals. Moreover,  Ram­ say is always at least vaguely aware  that  there is something lacking in his chosen way of life. Nevertheless, they are similar in the crucial sense that  each denies the inner, spiritual  self. As Ramsay  himself says in retrospect:  "to  him, the reality of life lay in external  things, whereas for me the only reality was of  the spirit-of the mind,  as I then  thought,  not  having understood  yet what  a  cruel  joker and mean  master the intellect can  be."
This  common  denial  manifests itself most obviously in their  attitudes  to what they respectively assume is religious. Staunton's religious life revolves around  the Anglican Church,  but he demonstrates  little understanding  of its spiritual  aspects. For  him, membership  of a  Church  is entirely a social matter  and  he  joins the Anglican Church  because it is "in some way more hightoned  than  the evangelical faiths,  and  thus  [he  is]  improving   [his]  social standing." The   Christ  of  Boy Staunton's faith  is not  the one  who directed  man  to cultivate  his inner  self and to tum  away from  materialistic  values, but is the one conjured  up  by the Reve­ rend  Leadbeater. This  Christ  is "a  very distinguished  person",  "a  designer  and manufacturer", "a  man of substance" and "an  economist".
Ramsay's faith  is the private one he developed during his childhood.  However, although  it evolved to satisfy the needs of the inner  man,  unlike Boy Staunton's religion,  Ramsay  nevertheless  converts  it  into  an  expression of  the  outer  man which,  in  his case, is the intellectual  man.  Rather  than  continuing  to seek  self­ knowledge through  the Saints, Ramsay  increasingly looks upon  them  as subjects for scholarly research. His study of Wilgefortis, for example, involves him in seek­ ing variants of the legend in which she is involved and even leads him  to dabble in medical research on excessive facial hair, but it has little to do with  the essen­ tial  truth  concealed  behind  the  details of  her  life. Similarly,  although Ramsay suffers materially in undertaking to care for Mrs. Dempster, the other  icon of his private  religion,  he  is  inspired   to  do  so  by  intellectual  rather   than   religious motives:  "Now  I should  be able to see what  a saint  was really like and  perhaps make a study of one without  all the apparatus of  Rome."
By dedicating  himself to externals  Ramsay, like Boy Staunton, becomes exces­ sively concerned  with his public image and suffers from a consequent  inability to enter into personal relationships. The  public man is of so much more importance  to Staunton than  the private that,  rather  than  try to develop his own  personality, he dedicates himself to goals which will win him a worldly  reputation. Thus,  he pursues  wealth  and  high  social  position  and  models  himself on  the  Prince  of

68

METAPHORS  AND CONFUSIONS



Wales. Since Staunton  denies his own humanness,  it is not surprising  that  he is unable to recognize the unique existence of others. Leola is the main victim of this trait  because she is regarded  as nothing  more  than  an  accessory to  the  image Staunton is trying to create for himself. When she fails in her role as wife of "one who had once hobnobbed  with a Prince", she is simply rejected. Boy's attitude to sex further  underlines his stunted  approach  to human  relationships.  For him, sex is divorced from love and is nothing more than a form of physical activity, analo­ gous, in Ramsay's words, to "a  workout".
Superficially, Ramsay's attitude to worldly reputation  is the opposite of  Staun­ ton's since he eschews all conventional  paths  to public  prestige. By  choosing  to remain a High School teacher he sacrifices any chance he might have of becoming wealthy or of improving  his social position, and by engaging himself in the obscure field  of  hagiography   he  denies  himself even  a  general  intellectual reputation. Nevertheless, Ramsay  is basically concerned  with what  others  think  of him  and his unconventionality  is, in many  respects, as much a  public pose as Boy Staun­  ton's conventional  businessman figure. Indeed,  the person which Ramsay  creates for himself is such a powerful social instrument that Boy Staunton, who is always alert to ways in which he can eke the full potentiality out of any public situation, invites him to his parties in order  that  he might serve as a counterpoint to the general  tone of conventionality:  "Sometimes  I heard  Boy speaking  of me to the bankers  and  brokers as 'very  able  chap -speaks several languages  fluently  and writes for a lot of European  publications-a bit of an eccentric  of course, but an old friend'."
Although  Ramsay mainly exploits his interest in the Saints as part  of his pose of oddness, he also strives to win whatever  academic  reputation he can from  it. Not  content  to  pursue  hagiography  for its own sake,  he  brings  himself  to  the attention  of the Bollandists and  repeatedly  tries to impress them  with  the results of his research. Since Ramsay's pursuit of academic reputation  is marked  by a competitive  spirit  very similar  to  Boy Staunton's,  it is appropriate that  Father Blazon should define his attitude to the Saints as "spiritual  athletics",  a metaphor reminiscent  of the workout  image  which defines Staunton's approach to sex.
Ramsay's  failure  to develop the inner man,  "to  forgive [himself]  for  being  a human  creature", as Father  Blazon puts it, makes him insensitive to  the  needs of others. In general Ramsay  does not use people in the blatant  way Boy Staun­ ton does, although  he certainly  uses Staunton  himself as a source of  income and amusement,  but he is no more capable of entering into a genuine human  relation­ ship. Because of his intellectual  bias, Ramsay chooses to be an observer, a position

6g

METAPHORS AND  CONFUSIONS



which  he feels frees him  from  all  responsibilities to others.  Thus,  although  he realizes that Staunton is destroying Leola by trying to mould her according to his own  preconceptions,  he  refuses  to  involve himself:   "I never  intervened   when Leola was having a rough  time.... To be honest, I must also say that  I did not want to shoulder the burdens  of a peacemaker."  Even when Leola makes a direct plea for help, Ramsay  self-righteously rejects her on the gmunds  that  he is "not to be a victim of her self-pity". This inability to comprehend  the needs of others is epitomized  by  Ramsay's  response  to  the  news  that  Leola  has  attempted to commit suicide. Rather  than  sympathize with Leola's situation,  Ramsay, for once very clearly revealing  his concern  with public reputation, expresses anger  at  the discomfort her tactless suicide note could have caused him:  "Fool, Fool, Fool! Thinking  only of herself and  putting  me in an  intolerable  position  with such  a note. If she had  died,  how would it have sounded  at an inquest?"
Although  Ramsay  is scornful of Boy's attitude  to sex, his own is no less inade­ quate  since he usually withholds  from sexual activity altogether  in order to avoid any  emotional  entanglement. In  the  few instances  where  he  has  engaged  in  a sexual  relationship  he has successfully deprived  the  women  with  whom  he was involved of any individuality by giving them allegorical names which reduce them to types:  "There was Agnes Day, who yearned  to take upon  herself the sins of the whole world.... Then  there was Gloria Mundy,  the good-time girl. ... And, of course, Libby Doe, who thought  sex was the one great, true, and  apostolic key and cure."
There  are two reasons why Ramsay eventually manages to break with the false image which he has created  for himself, while Staunton  remains a boy, in the inauthentic sense, throughout his life. Firstly, although  Ramsay  misuses his Saints and  Mrs. Dempster,  he never entirely loses sight of their original  function.  As a result he frequently  questions his way of life and has the potential  for recognizing the  "illumination" for  which  he seeks, should  it  appear.  Boy Staunton, on  the other  hand,  except for a fleeting moment  of doubt,  refuses to acknowledge  that his life could  have  taken  any  other  direction.  Secondly,  Ramsay  is fortunate enough  to meet  Liesl, whose influence enables him to  resurrect  his almost  sub­ merged childhood self.



RAMSAY achieves self-knowledge in the single epiphanic moment  of his seduction  by Liesl. However, this climactic experience  is the cul­ mination  of a more protracted process during which he has gradually  been break-

70

METAPHORS AND  CONFUSIONS



ing loose from  his accustomed  life-style. Although  Ramsay  visits Mexico simply to carry out further  research,  he is so impressed by the simple piety of the wor­ shippers at the shrine of the Virgin of Guadalupe that he begins to penetrate back to the genuine core of his interest in the Saints:  "anti-clericalism  and  American bustle would soon free them  of their  belief in miracles and  holy  likenesses. But where, I ask myself, will mercy and divine compassion come from  them." Ram­  say's approach  to experience  alters further after  he joins Paul Dempster's troupe because he enters  metaphorically, as well as literally, into  a  world  of magic.  In contrast to his usual engagement  in the analytical task of scholarly research, Ram­  say undertakes  to write  a fictional  autobiography  of  Magnus  Eisengrim,  in  the composition of which  he is "under no obligation  to  be historically  correct  or  to weigh evidence",  thus allowing primacy for once to his imaginative faculties. As a result, and without intending  to do so, Ramsay begins to recapture  the authentic  self he  last  knew  as  a  child:   "Working  on  these  illusions  was  delightful   but destructive of my character. I was aware that  I was recapturing the  best of my childhood;  my imagination had  never known  such glorious freedom."
The  ground  is  thus  made  ready  for  the  encounter  with  Liesl. This  incident serves as a microcosm of Ramsay's entire development because it begins with him reverting  completely  to  the  role  of social man.  His  attitude to  Liesl's lesbian encounter  with  Faustina  is conventional  and  moralistic  and  he  berates  her  for deviating from all standards of "decency and honour".  As Liesl points out, Ram­ say is behaving "just  like a little  boy", and  she sets herself the  task of  releasing the other,  and  authentic aspect of his childhood self, which she  describes, again in keeping with the novel's dominant  metaphorical  patterns,  as his "devil". Ram­  say's response to Liesl's attempt  to seduce him and hence prove he is "a  human,  like other  people"  is, as we might  expect  of a  man  who  has  withdrawn from human  involvement  for so many  years, one of  rejection. By pulling  Liesl's nose, he reasserts that  he is St. Dunstan  and,  as such, wants  nothing  to  do with  the Devil. However, this St. Dunstan  self has been so weakened during  the preceding weeks that when Liesl persists, Ramsay abandons  his spectator  position and  yields to her. As a result of committing himself  to another  human  being, Ramsay  at last experiences "deep  delight" and "an  aftermath  of healing tenderness!"
Ramsay,  then,  emerges from  his experiences in Mexico as a  boy in the  sense that  he now lives according  to the dictates of his imaginative  and  creative  self and is capable of engaging himself emotionally with others. This  development completes the novel's main theme. However, as he concludes his use of the "boy" metaphor,  so Davies turns  his attention  again  to Fifth  Business. As  part  of her

METAPHORS AND CONFUSIONS



advice to Ramsay, Liesl offers the comment that he is Fifth Business. Her intention is simply further  to convince  Ramsay  of the importance  of his life by showing him that even those who live on the perimeter of great events have a role to play, and  she makes no attempt  to extend  his function  as Fifth  Business beyond  his involvement  in  Paul  and  Mrs. Dempster's  lives. For Liesl, the essential Ramsay is still to be found  in the authentic  boy that  she has nurtured  into life. However, in the novel's final section Robertson  Davies makes much  more out of Ramsay's role as Fifth  Business-so much so that  he finally claims it as being the source of his maturity.  This  claim  is, in  itself, confusing  enough  because  it  dismisses most of what has gone before, but, even more puzzling is the fact that  the values to which Ramsay  adheres  as Fifth  Business contradict  those to which  he aspired as the authentic  boy. By playing Fifth  Business in the events which culminate  in Staunton's death   Ramsay  reverts  to  his earlier  position  as  a  spectator   and  a moralizer.  The  encounter  between  Boy Staunton  and  Paul  Dempster  fascinates Ramsay  in the  voyeuristic way that  Boy's marriage  to Leola did:  "I wanted  to see what  would  happen,  and  my appetite  was given the special zest of knowing who Eisengrim really was, which Boy did not, and  perhaps  would  never learn." And it is nothing  more dignified than a desire to see how the objects of his atten­ tion  will react  and  a moralistic  sense that  Staunton  should  not  go  unpunished that  inspires Ramsay,  in the name of Fifth  Business, to reveal Boy's involvement in Paul's  birth: "Either I spoke now or I kept silence forever. Dunstan  Ramsay counselled against  revelation,  but  Fifth  Business would not  hear."  Ramsay  tries rather  belatedly to conceal his unworthy  motives by posing as Staunton's poten­ tial saviour  and  pleading  that  he admit  to his involvement in the snowball  inci­ dent  in order  that  he might  at last learn the truth  about  himself and  become a human  being. However, the tone he adopts in dealing with Staunton is too hostile and  punitive  for us to believe that  he is primarily  concerned  with  his salvation. By finally rebuffing Staunton with the cruel comment that  he is King Candaules, Ramsay  remains  a  detached   meddler  who  subsequently  is  responsible  for  his former  friend's  death  at  the  hands  of the  enraged  Paul.
Since Fifth Business is Robertson Davies' most ambitious novel, and in its central sections, his most successful, it is regrettable  that  he should have let the metaphor of Fifth  Business get out  of hand.  As it is, the novel makes complete sense only if we focus on the development  of the  boy concept and  ignore much  of what  is claimed  by the opening  and  closing sections.

METAPHORS AND  CONFUSIONS



NOTES

1 The  term also has secondary implications in that  Robertson Davies  gives some atten­ tion  to  the  idea  that, not  only  is Ramsay  fifth  business  in  the  lives of  others,  but that  they, in turn,  are  fifth  business in his life. I  have  chosen  not  to  deal with  this implication of fifth  business  because,  although the  inversion  of  the  main  metaphor is neat,  it serves finally  only  to express  what  we would  normally  assume  in  dealing  with  anyone,  either  in fiction  or  in  real  life-namely,  that   the  individual's life is shaped  by everyone with  whom  he comes into contact.
2  Robertson Davies  emphasizes  the  limitations of  these  experiences  by  contrasting them  with  Ramsay's later  superficially  similar  but  essentially  different involvement in the magic show and  seduction by Liesl. Whereas the earlier theatrical and  sexual experience had  only  the  value  of  novelty  the  later  served  to  liberate Ramsay  im­ aginatively and  emotionally.









WJIR-TIME MEMORIES
 


Christopher Levenson


War-time memories: unlighted trains slowly crowding the  railheads, sidings alive with  secret  movement, the skies
a mystery,  somewhere
the flare of a match, a voice extinguished
the  air-raid  warden's face
as he emerged  from  the shelter after  the  all-clear,
every action  galvanic, camouflaged in drama,
whole  lives a prey  to darkness. I, only eight  years old
at  the  barber's, gazing in Picture  Post
at scenes from  a distant theatre, a desert  draped in  canvas
and  tanks'  twisted  carcases,
relished  the  hushed  tones, the stage whispers, this shared  past  that  divides like darkness
and  hollows my blood.

73


THE REAL COURSE OF LIFE
 





Keith Garebian


LNOVELS  of John  Buell are not mcre exercises   m the
thriller  genre.  They  are  undoubtedly   "entertainments" in  the  general  sense in
which  Graham  Greene  used that  word, yet they have a subtle  approach   to the course of life brought  under  dramatic examination.  They  demonstrate the sym­ biotic relationships between the real and the unreal, good and evil, innocence and guilt, deception  and self-knowledge. Buell traces quests for soul-satisfaction  made by his main characters  past a line of no-return,  and he is less interested in solving a crime than  he is in exploring  the mystery of an  inexorably  decaying  world.
It is my intention  to explore the nature  of reality and the course of life viewed
by Buell. I believe Buell's vision is metaphysical  rather  than  merely "escapist", much as is the case with Graham Greene's vision, though  Buell's stories and characters  are  radically  different  from  Greene's.  Buell is a  writer  with  a style (although sometimes  reduced  in scope to make  mass acceptance  possible)  that tries to do justice to the visible world. There  is a depth in Buell which is sounded only as we become aware  of the  central  direction  in his stories. We discover in the author's symbolism, plot, and characterization a concern for the metaphysical which is no less intriguing  than  a concern for superficial experience. Of course, I do not use "superficial" in a disparaging sense for Buell shows how various experi­ ences can engage the writer's full powers of sharp observation, objectification,  and immediacy. However, my intention  is to sound Buell's depth and for this purpose I eschew  the  mechanics  of  the  thriller  genre  in  order  to  concentrate on  the author's vision of reality.
The  central experience  in Buell is what is called in The  Pyx  ( 1959)  "the  real course  of  life",  where  the  vulnerability   and  self-knowledge  of  the  victim  are operative.  Crime  is the  event  that  creates criminal  and  victim,  for  it  intersects guilt and  innocence, good and  evil, but it is not an isolated phenomenon or the focal experience. The  criminal  event is a point from which  Buell may  probe­ forward   (as  in  Four  Days or  The   Shrewsdale  Exit)   or  backward   (as  in  The  Pyx)  -into the course of life which produced  it.

74

THE REAL  COURSE OF  UFE



Good  and  evil -with  all their  attendant complications -grow  within  "the real course of life", and Buell's interest lies in observing the tensions between good and  evil within  the controls of a milieu. Buell's vision is informed  with  a sense that the mutable  decay of milieux impinges upon the inner world of man,  thereby creating  confusion  and  emphasizing  human  limitations.  When  we confront  the demonic  world of Keerson  (The Pyx), the criminal  environment of Milt  (Four Days), or the  brute  world of the  motorcycle "toughs"   (The Shrewsdale  Exit) our worst suspicions of human  vulnerability are tested. We expect  human  failure and  we meet it when  the outer  world of reality is counterpointed by the  inner world of man.
Buell observes the effects of human  dream  and  ambition  in the  course of life which  often  overpowers the individual.  Milieu interacts  with  character in such a subtle but ineluctable  way that  the danger of the "real  course of life" is empha­ sized and  magnified  beside the  weakness of the human  soul.
Buell's mythic pattern  is not oriented towards any romantic  or sentimental resolution  of the  conflicts  between  dream  and  actuality,  milieu  and  character. Rather, it is a pattern  deeply tinged by a realism which, while not always neutral, does maintain a sharp  focus on  the growth  of vulnerability  and  self-knowledge within the "real course of life". Milieu and character  interact  to produce mysteri­ ous destructiveness which affects the protagonist, but the conclusion of  the mythos (story)  is not achieved through  a de rigueur resolution of iniquity. We are made to follow the  protagonist's  involvement  with  reality  until such  time  as a line of no-return  has been crossed. What  survives at the end of the  pattern  is the  "real course of life", that is, a measure of self-knowledge for the protagonist  trapped  in a decaying world.
From  the  very start,  critics  have  perversely ignored  the  profound  aspects  in Buell's novels. The  Pyx was received as a suspense thriller  much  in the tradition of an  Erie Stanley  Gardner,  Agatha  Christie, or  Mickey Spillane  story.  It  was bruited  that   Four  Days  ( 1962)   was  a  thriller  to  leave  us gasping,  and  The Shrewsdale Exit  ( 1972)   was praised for telling a powerful, "shocking" story that was engrossing in its depiction of "impossible odds". But there  is more to Buell's work than  sensational  excursions into evil ritualism  and  crime.  What  we should not lose sight of is "the  real course of life" -something that  is vividly outlined in The  Pyx, chronicled in Four Days, and vindicated  with strong  feeling in The Shrewsdale  Exit.
The  Pyx introduces Buell's concern with the power and danger of reality by depicting  dual worlds in insidious conflict. Elizabeth  Lucy's world of dream  is in

75

THE REAL COURSE OF LIFE



jarring collision with the world of action, and when we encounter  the Black Mass symbolism we note  the discord  between virtue  and  vice in a scandalous,  under­ ground  context. The  Pyx, of course, thrives on its dualities:  Elizabeth  Lucy flirts with  Catholicism  and  spiritual  puritanism  as she wanders  deeper into  Keerson's diabolism;  the "nothingness" of her soul and the "solidly real" world outside her are  metaphysical   poles which  are  objectified  and  dramatized  rather  than  ab­ stracted  and  intellectualized.
The  Pyx, it is true,  does not immediately suggest its own richness. It is not  a
successful book, for the Black Mass ritualism, so central  to the meaning  and denouement of the story, is too tenuous. Nevertheless, the major  interest for me is not the diabolism nor  the crime-solving by Detective  Henderson; it is the inter­ play between the two worlds of Elizabeth Lucy as they create "the  real course of life". As in any mystery thriller there is a conflict between the outer and the inner in human  experience,  but here Buell charges this conflict with a grim, hallucina­ tory quality  that  grips us through  the eerie blend of Elizabeth's outer  and  inner worlds.
The  outer world of The  Pyx is the ambience of Montreal  (strongly felt in the
film but  not  as vividly in  the  book)  with  its melange of the spiritual  and  the material,  virtue and  vice. This mixture serves as catalyst for the collision between Elizabeth Lucy's flirtation with Catholicism and her eventual involvement with Keerson's Black Mass and  his ring of vice. It is a world of sensationalism in both the sacred and  the profane,  for it intersects underground religion and scandalous crime.
From  the very first page of the novel there is an attempt  to separate  the edges
of the actual  and  the fictional. Jack Trudel,  the cab-driver  who witnesses  Eliza­ beth's body hurtling  from an apartment to the street below, is aware of a distance between dreams  (of money and sex) and acts (for happiness in the massive city).  But "the  real course of life" blurs the distinction  between dream  and  actuality. After witnessing Elizabeth's  death  he is confused and  disturbed:

Real violence was too much for him; in the cheap stories, he could always dream of sex; but the actual  thing ... Already he was beginning to dismiss it as outside the real course of life.

By alternating between  Past and Present in his narrative,  Buell is able to create the  blurring  (in  Elizabeth's  life)  of the outer  world of act  and  the inner  world of dream,  nightmare, or illusion. Elizabeth, it is shown, has "no  mental  picture of herself as an outwardly  visible person";  she has only an inner vision of aliena-

THE REAL  COURSE OF  LIFE



tion and  chaos. Reality  appears  to be unalterable  because she feels too far  away from  all around  her and  merely a medium for sensation. She is often  described in the act of waiting where she is shown to be in a type of suspension. Her  drug addiction   (fed  by insidious  Meg  Latimer)   does not  help  and  Elizabeth  is  fre­ quently in a mental daze.
Elizabeth is suspended  in Time,  between an unwanted  past and  a fey present. She loses her right to choose and  the trap  leaves her feeling empty  and  damned.
One of the paradoxes  in The  Pyx is the anguished  despair  of Elizabeth  as she experiences the "huge  nothingness of evil confronting  her" in the massive reality outside. In this paradox  the apparently  irreconcilable are the poles of nothingness and the solidly real. The  two poles form a rack for Elizabeth  and  we watch  her (in the words of Jimmy  Rande,  her friend with his own psychic disorder)  grow increasingly taut with the strain. Elizabeth finds it impossible to change or become something  else. There is a taedium  vitae, an  addiction  to the  hazing  energy of heroin, and a hallucinatory  submission to the rites of Keerson -all consequences of her  unrealized  "screamingly  desired wish" to find  the shadows  of peace and repose.
There  is a sense of Elizabeth's  impotence in the course of events and this weak­
ness is compounded  by the absence of any reality in the heart  of things to which she can attach  herself and  give substance and strength  to her existence. She flirts with Catholicism,  but,  unwilling  to submit  to the sacrament  of  penance,  she is without  benediction.  She  is comforted  by Jimmy  Rande  but  drifts  away  from him. She becomes involved with Keerson and cannot  elude his agents. Elizabeth perceives that  reality is dangerous  when it exists as something  so largely outside the  power  of the  human  soul,  but  she can  do  nothing  to  escape  or  resist the reality.



l:E IMPLICATION  that  reality  is more  potent  than  danger itself is also evident  in Buell's second novel, Four Days  (I g62), which is  osten­ sibly a chronicle of a  young  boy's fatal  idealization  of his elder  brother  who is involved in crime. Here the boy perverts reality  (just  as Elizabeth  Lucy  perverts religion with the pyx)  by making  Milt, his brother,  the  justification for  his life. Here,  too, the  victim  is the  one  who cannot  "assess the  situation   or  read  the signs." He can only react, like Elizabeth  Lucy, and  await  the ambush  of life.
Reality  is shaded  more  deftly  in  Four  Days than  it  is in  The   Pyx,  mainly because Buell does not have to gamble with the nuances of the Black Mass. Evil

77

THE REAL  COURSE OF  UFE



still  exists as part  of  the  massively  real  but  this  time  the  hugeness  of  evil is not so much  in the  reality  outside  the  victim  as it is in  the  victim's ideal  itself. It is Milt  who  is evil, and  the young  boy's  reverence  for  Milt  becomes,  in  effect,  a reverence for  evil.
The prime  process in Buell's story is the  boy's tumble into  a mysterious destruc­ tiveness. By aligning himself  with  Milt,  the  boy distorts  the  nature of  reality.  He assigns to Milt's  criminal scheme  an  importance that  is greater than  the  external world  around him. The plan  is not  viewed  as part  of reality,  but  reality  instead  is seen as part  of the  plan:
Reality  was now this plan;  he didn't  question its source or  judge it or choose; it was there, and it offered a continued  existence with Milt, an alternative to nothing­ ness, like finding a light switch in the dark. But the house around  the switch eluded his insight.

The boy therefore has  only  a  partial security-a security,  moreover, that  is an illusion  because  the  final  reality  is destructive.
Deception for  the  boy, however,  is part  of reality.  Just  being  alive  makes  him
feel that  he is getting away  with  something. He  is convinced  that  people  have  to be fooled  and  his sense of disguise  becomes  acute.  Believing  that  evil  will make him visible,  he  goes  to  church to  blend  with  the  congregation where  "no  one would  see him  unless he  did  things  wrong." He  avoids  places  in  his  neighbour­ hood  where  people  might  know  him  and  he  tries  to ensure  that  others  will not touch  his inner  reality.
However, his attempts at  disguise  are  trying  and  fraught with  danger:

he had to be a boy on a bike, and  that  made him overaware  of everything-he couldn't  stop  to watch  things,  he couldn't  even  look at  them  in  passing. All of existence was shrivelled  into  this one action,  and  the sunlit  city around  him  had to become an enemy.

Exposure to sunlight and  people  renders  him vulnerable:

The  cars began  to irritate him;  nobody was looking at him, but  he felt stared  at: he was himself now, not acting,  not protected  inwardly  by role-playing,  and  not realizing that  his appearance was still in character; the self he felt was weak and vulnerable,  exposed like a film in the sun, making him dread  even a casual ques­ tion  by a stranger,  and  his fear  made  him create  questions:  'Hot  day,  hey  kid? Where  are  you going?  Run  a message for me, kid?  Pull  that  bike over  so I can pass. Tell  your  goddam  brother-Don't worry,  kid, keep  moving,  we  got  'em fooled'-Milt's voice was back, giving purpose to his actions-'Just  before you get here  you take off part  of the  uniform,  cap, leggings, the  jacket  and put  that in your bag-you don't  wait  for me-don't wait for me-don't  wait.'

THE REAL  COURSE OF LIFE



Concomitant with the senses of disguise and vulnerability is a feeling of suspen­ sion in time and space. Time  does not exist for the boy except  as a tightness or pressure that seems to "make  things exist only within his head, free of  the physical and  devoid of duration,  timeless, like pain."  He feels a  helplessness-a "sensa­ tion  of being  pulled  away  despite  himself, of going  helplessly where  he  didn't  want  to, and  being distressed at  not knowing  the  place  he  resented  so much."
Paradoxically,  such helpless suspension comforts him for it boosts his need for anonymity. "Nowhere" is better than "somewhere" because the lack of definition makes it an  environment  that  does not oppress consciousness and  where  he can be safe in its anonymous unreality.
Tension  is developed by the boy's attempts  to resist the power  of reality. The factual  world seems to leap at him and he is disturbed by the moving scenery, the car, and even himself. He tries to obliterate or dim his own visibility. In his room he wonders if he should put on the light when the street outside is lit and  the sky is still bright.  He  decides against  it  because the  outside  world  will look  bigger this way and  draw itself into the room. Then  there will be light everywhere  and this will make reality too strong  for him. The  boy works on the assumption  that vision or voyeurism is a reflexive action:  to see implies to  be seen. "If you see the trees, they can see you now." The  relentless clarity pushes him-after  Milt's violent death -along a beach  until  he is sure he cannot  be seen.
The  boy discovers that  reality  cannot  be annihilated  either  through   his false
image of Milt or through  his search for darkness and cover. His compulsion to be invisible converts, in the final moments of his drama,  into a hallucinatory dream. He tries to swim away from the law which is trailing him for his connection  with the criminal  Milt, but  his nervousness, exhaustion,  and  despair  propel  him  into a hysterical dream  that  ends with his drowning.



TE TENSION of reality  (so inimical  to  Elizabeth  Lucy  in The Pyx and the boy in FO'ur Days)  acquires a nightmarish horror in The Shrews­ dale Exit, Buell's latest exploration  of the victim theme. Joe Grant's story passes through  three main phases: the horrifying murder of his wife and young daughter  by three  motorcycle thugs;  Grant's vengeful  attack  on  the  murderers,   his im­ prisonment,  and  escape into the  isolated expanses of an  interior  farmland; and his compromise with the  law and  the locked-in system  of  society. Of  the  three phases, the  first is probably  the  most exciting,  as  Buell  captures   perfectly  the vulgar rhetoric of the psychotic murderers and the acute grief of Grant. The second

79

THE REAL  COURSE OF  LIFE



phase  is more  contrived although it  is  justifiable  in  terms  of  Buell's  signal  for retribution. The third phase,  while impressive in its subdued tension  and  pastoral quality, does leave  us with  a feeling  of disappointment because  it  never  reaches a climactic denouement   anticipated in  the  earlier  phases.  However, the  especial virtue  of the  novel  is its delineation of the  tension  of reality-a  tension  that  is heightened by Grant's line  of  no-return.
The major   forces  of  tension   spring   out  of  the  reality  of  murder:  they  are derived   from   the   brutal  assault   on  the   Grant  family,   from   Joe's   anguished memory  of the  crimes,  and  from  the  buffeting  of past  and  present.  The tension charges  the  antithesis of  the  visible  and  invisible  aspects  of  reality -just  as  it does in  Four Days. Joe  Grant, like the  boy in Buell's second  novel, feels insecure in light  and  threatened by his lighted  room:

With  lights on,  he  hadn't been  able  to see outside  and  could  be seen inside. It made him feel watched,  hunted  in some way, liable to detection.  In  the dark,  all was reversed  and  he  felt  more  at  ease. He'd  come a long  way from  the  secure casual life of less than  a week ago. Porch lights, hung in lanterns  under  the motel canopy, enabled  him to make out everything in the room. He was still dressed, in the  cotton  pants  and  sport  shirt  he'd  brought  to  be less noticeable.  He  felt  too vulnerable  undressed,  too unready  for a vaguely hostile universe. It was paranoid. He was aware of it, he  just couldn't  shake it off.
The  dim  room made  memory  vivid. The  toughs. The  image of Sue and  Patty in their  hands. It was too much. Mercifully he was interrupted.

Joe  wonders  if he has  been  observed  by anyone.  When  he drives  he is coiled and tense, attempting to remain furtive. As much  the  hunted  as he is the  hunter, he watches  his  mirrors   and   tries  to  muffie or  conceal  his intrigue. Hence   the  low intensity of sound  and  light  in  those  portions  of the  plot  which  concern  Grant's intrigue.
For  Grant, vision  is linked  to survival  because  to observe  and  not  to  be seen increase  his chances  of  tracking his prey  while  eluding  the  law  simultaneously. While  reading a  book on  firearms, he happens upon  the sentence: "The human organism cannot hold sights  absolutely  steady  on the  target." Here  the  physics of visual  aim are  a  proem   to  the  metaphor of  hunter and   target. This  creates  a pattern opposite  to that  in either  The  Pyx or Four Days because  Grant does not attempt to escape  the  solid  world  outside  him. Of  his own  choosing,  he  crosses a line  of no-return and  we do  not  derive  a sense of dreamlike suspension  on  his part:
He cleaned  the pistol, put  a frozen dinner in the oven, and  drank  the surviving

So

THE REAL  COURSE OF  UFE



can of beer as he waited for the food to cook. The  line that  was being crossed tugged at his attention.  He had no myths to give glory to the crossing, only the knowledge of his wife and  daughter,  his own made-empty life. He should have been here last swnmer or even earlier, learning the cold skills that now disturbed him. Would it have been different? The pistol had nothing to say.

Knowledge  of purpose  and  direction  comes to  him  when  he  hears  his own echoes, although  the solid world does not  necessarily answer  his questions. Still, Grant  is fully conscious and  far  removed from either  Elizabeth  Lucy's  drugged suspension  or  the  young  boy's  neurotic  and  immature  self-victimization.   Real sound, verified by his quick senses, awakes him out of dream  (whenever  he yields to memory or fantasy)  into knowledge of the visible, tangible world outside  him.
Experience  becomes a puzzling and  haunting  fact in Buell's stories because it undergoes change  in the retelling by witnesses. As Grant  repeats  his story about the crimes against  his family, the event grows less and  less actual  and  becomes something  different from what  had  happened.  With this unsettling  phenomenon there appears  a vacuum  in the soul of the protagonist and  Grant  feels the world around  him growing emptier.
What  complicate  the fate of Joe Grant-and  this is shown  to be the crux of the victim theme  in Buell-are the protagonist's  responses to evil. The  crux  is reached  at  that  point  when  the  protagonist  realizes that  a line of no-return   has to be crossed. Joe Grant  acknowledges as much when he notes that  the past is the past while the present demands  a firm commitment  to action. In The  Pyx, Eliza­ beth  Lucy  learns  from  Meg  Latimer  that  she  must  commit  herself   totally  to Keerson:

(Elizabeth]  "Look, I'm here. I've come this far." (Meg]  "It's  not far enough."
"All  right, what is far enough?"
"When you can't tum  back. That's  what far enough is."

Sometimes  the  line  of  no-return   is reached  prematurely  as  m  Four  Days,  for example,  where we are  given every indication  that  the boy's desire to align  his fate with his elder brother's  has been a lifelong obsession which generates  a fatal conflict with the law.
The  Shrewsdale Exit crystallizes the complicated nature  and  fate of Buell's protagonists. Joe  Grant  faces imposing odds  in  a  locked-in system  and  suffers much more than  he deserves to, yet retribution  is an elusive event.  What  we find in this story (which  ultimately confirms the quality of Buell's realism)  is an observation  of a man  "more  sinned  against  than  sinning"  denied  a  vengeance

8J

THE REAL  COURSE OF  LIFE



he has persistently sought. Grant  discovers the overwhelming power of the societal system when  he is in the penitentiary. Prison is a contrived  expression of  law­ a force that oppresses as it restrains. Grant  observes the nefarious effects of a legal system that  can  create  a  persecution  complex for some people  (Willy  Dreye for example), and  when  he  escapes from  it  he  takes  note  of  the  larger, "whole system".
Elizabeth  Lucy  and  the young  boy are  no less victimized  by the  worlds they inhabit  or pass through. Their  respective environments  are postlapsarian  in their corruption  and  seductive  evil. Elizabeth  Lucy is immersed in a drug  and  prosti­ tution  ring before she even meets Keerson and  when she dies the violence of her end obtains silence and  evasion from those who exploited her vulnerability.  Her world,  like the  young  boy's, is a  massive place  (full  of  massive pleasures  and sensations)  that  forgets  its victims unconscionably.  Were  it  not for  the  likes of Detective Henderson  in The Pyx and the priest in Four Days Buell's worlds would be unjust  and  as hostile as the vaguely threatening ones in Green's  fiction. As it is, very few of Buell's characters  expend  any  grief  for  Elizabeth  Lucy  and  the young boy. Their  world is dim and plastic, dominated by dark bars, empty rooms, and indifference. It takes a priest to pray for forgiveness but his prayer is as piti­ able as it is pitying, for it is a helpless acknowledgement of the mystery of suffering and evil:

The  priest whispered a formal  prayer for the dead, "requiem  aeternam  dona ei -" but his mind seemed to chatter its own colloquy: he has paid for his love, Lord, have mercy on him. You know the worst about him, and that's  a  circum­ stance for forgiveness, it was that  way when You were on earth.

Buell's characters are  not  romantic  heroes or  heroines  but  acquire  a  flawed heroism almost by default. Buell reaches beyond the sentimental superficies of romantic  heroes to the inescapable paradoxes of impure heroism. Of course, there are no rigid categories in Buell's fictional worlds because reality is much too com­ plex and  ambivalent  for neat  divisions. The  protagonists do not  consciously seek after  heroism although   the  young  boy in  Four  Days  is the  closest thing  to  an exception. They  quest after  peace and soul-satisfaction  rather  than  for  power in a material sense. Elizabeth  Lucy is too weak to physically survive Keerson's attri­  tion but spiritually she becomes one of the good finally resisting the forces of anti­ Christ.  Joe  Grant's self-knowledge  and  renunciation  of revenge  purify  his soul and make him a person whom suffering and evil have touched without destroying. His heroism is purified  by his decision  to abandon revenge and  it is denoted  in

THE REAL  COURSE OF  LIFE



terms of a victory. Only the young boy in Four Days consciously seeks a connec­ tion with  the heroic,  but  he is too immature  and  neurotic  to  be  considered  the same way as Grant.  He yearns to be attached  to Milt and  converts his desperate solitariness and  flight into  an  untenable  posture of  romantic  heroism. He  is, of course, too weak to  defeat  the  law but  there is a  special  pathos  about  his soli­ tariness, for the boy's anguished loneliness is a sign of love-an undying, unyield­ ing  love for  his  brother-and in  this  way  he  vindicates  the  potential  of  the human   soul  to  magnify  itself  in  a  world   made  all  too  solid  and   gross  by
materialism.

As IN  THE  FICTION of Graham  Greene,  Buell's novels pro­
vide a suggestion of "gTace" in a decaying world. Buell is fascinated  by the idea
of a "fall"  to the  degTee of identifying  the  workings of "gTace" as a  counter­ balance  to human  weakness and  corruption.  True,  there  is no leap  to  God,  no tortuous discovery of faith  in the Greene cachet. However, salvation  is sought­ not in religious terms  but in a metaphysical sense of harmony.  Even  as some of the  protagonists  tumble  into destruction  in a  hostile universe  they  receive some form  of  benediction.  Occasionally  they  deliberately  seek  the  blessing  but  fre­ quently  blessing comes  to  them  unsought.  Elizabeth  Lucy,  who  does  not  ever submit  to orthodox  Church   rites, eats the sacred  host  rather  than  desecrate  it according  to  Keerson's  sacrilegious orders  and  in  so  doing  she  expresses  her fundamental goodness. She establishes herself on  the side of God  and  becomes stronger than chaos because she believes in sacredness. As the dying Keerson pro­ claims,  Elizabeth  is one of the good -as Henderson  is one of the righteous. But benediction  or "gTace" need not  be in religion itself.  For Joe  Grant  there  is not even a flirtation  with  religion. At the funeral  of his wife and  daughter the only fact brought  home to him is the experience of real presences-other than  God's. Grant's  "grace" is the memory of Sue and  Patty for they are "a  sort of benedic­ tion."  Of course, another  "gTace" is Grant's choice of  justice and  the renuncia­  tion of violent revenge at the end of his story.
The  religious nuances  in  Buell share  affinities with  those  in  Greene  and  the strongest  example  of this occurs  in  Four Days where  the  young  boy's spiritual fate is left an open,  throbbing  question-slightly reminiscent  of the  ambiguous soul-consequences of  Pinky  and  Rose in  Brighton  Rock.  Of  course, the  boy in Four Days hardly  possesses Pinky's cold, cruel, criminal  nature  but  he does opt for Milt and makes of his evil brother an unrealistic idol of strength.  Where Pinky

THE REAL COURSE OF LIFE



lapses from  his boyhood  faith  and  weeps silently in a  movie-house  for  his lost innocence, the boy in Buell's book uses religion as a "perfect front" for his involve­ ment  with  Milt.  Religion  is debased  to  the  level of automatic  responses and unexamined  prayers in Latin. The secret seal of Confession is used as a protection against  the law but the boy's love for Milt is indeed  an expression of God's own charity  and when the priest prays that  God might forgive the boy  we might  well think of the suggestion in Brighton Rock that Pinky, who admits his own damna­ tion, could still inherit  the strange  mercy of God.
However, Buell, unlike Greene, does not concern himself with a context for eschatology. God's  wishes and  actions  are  irrelevant  because  it  is people  who choose  for  themselves.  Perhaps,   we  could  argue   that   the  characters  subcon­ sciously seek God but even if this were demonstrable  it would remain outside the realm of theology because it is an issue for psychologists. When drama  begets its own sense of the spiritual  in Buell it is only in the manner  of a character seeking something larger and stronger than  the human soul. It is described as a "shadow" of peace and  repose in The  Pyx, or a distant light of  peace in Four Days. But it remains vague and  outside  the soul. Only Joe Grant finds an  approximation of it  and  then  it  emerges as something  non-religious:  a  clarity  of self-knowledge acquired  after  remorse and  revenge have  been  purged.
Buell's novels tempt  us into  anticipating a  climactic  retribution  which  never
develops, and while this may create an anti-climax  (as in The  Shrewsdale  Exit), the  strategy  does  testify to  a  vision charged  with  pathos,  sincerity,  and  truth. Joe Grant,  after  all his suffering and  yearning for revenge, finds the truth  about himself and his world. This is the only novel where Buell works towards a synthe­ sis for his protagonist.  Grant  is given a solution which is trite in  juxtaposition  to his intense, personal agonies and  because his is a story about  the feeling of agony it loses some of its impact  when  that  feeling becomes explanatory,  discursive, or didactic.  Nevertheless, it  is a story that  admits  the  truth  about  man's  locked-in system and  the  compromises  demanded  for  survival. So it  retains  a  pathos  for Grant  while being sincere  and  truthful  in  its anti-climax.  We  are  returned  to the milieu  which  produces  both  good and  evil in  the solidly real course of life. We realize at the end  that  the  humane attitude  of the author  is checked  by the grim  nature  of  reality. It is  the  milieu  that  survives-however  much  at  the expense of the  victims -and  this  confirms the inexorable  reality  of the  course of life under  dramatic observation.


review articles



EXTRAORDINARY GIRLS AND WOMEN




Audrey Thomas




ALICE  MUNRO.  Something I've   Been  Meaning to  Tell  You.  McGraw-Hill  Ryerson.
$7·95·

"MRS. PEEBLES  SAID she couldn't make  pie crust,  the  most  amaz­ ing  thing  I  ever  heard   a  woman  admit. I  could,   of  course,   and   I   could   make light  biscuits and  a white cake and  a dark cake,   but   they  didn't  want   it,  she  said they   watched  their  figures."   So  reflects the narrator of the story, "How I met  my Husband". Reading and  re-reading these stories  I became  aware  of how often  Alice Munro  isolates  her  heroines   (and   with one  notable exception the  central char­ acters   in  this  book  are   all  women)  in some  fashion  so that   their  world-view  is in  conflict   with,   or  at   least   juxtaposed upon,  another. Edie,  in  "How I  met  my Husband",  is  isolated   not   only   by  her youth  and  inexperience:

("Listen  to  me.  Listen. I'm  wondering if you  know  what   being  intimate  means. Now tell  me.  What did  you think it means?" "Kissing," I howled.)

but   by  the   fact   that   she  is  a  genuine "farm girl"  whose  family  actually  works the farm.  Her employers  are a doctor and
 his  wife,  well-off,   with   inside   running water  and  a constant supply  of ice cubes. Mrs.  Peebles  has  only  two  children and lies down  in  the afternoons. Edie,  who  is "new come from washing  dishes in a dish­ pan  with  a  rag-plugged  hole  on  an  oil­ cloth-covered table  by the light  of  a coal­ oil lamp," is fascinated by this new world and  the  newness  of her  situation enables  her   to   observe   and   comment  on   the people around her with  the  curiosity  and amazement of a tourist  in a strange land.  This  device  is  used  again   and   again  - brilliantly and  with  variations-in  these stories.  One  woman  ("The  Spanish Lady")   is  on  a  train  westbound out  of Calgary, one  is in another city, a strange city, searching for some  vital  information about  her  dead  ex-lover   ("Tell Me  Yes or No"). In "Winter Wind" a snowstorm isolates a young  girl  in  the  house  of  her grandmother and  great   aunt. When  she arrives   Aunt   Madge is  ironing-"they ironed   everything,  down   to  underwear and  potholders" -and  the  grandmother

as

REVIEW ARTICLES



is "making a lovely carrot pudding for supper." "Lovely   smells,"   the  girl  says, and  then, "Compare this to the scene at home":

1The only  warm room   there was  the  kit­ chen.  We  had   a  wood   stove. My   brother brought  in   wood   and   left   tracks  of   dirty  snow  on  the  linoleum; I swore  at  him.  Dirt and  chaos    threatened   all    the   time.    My mother often had  to  lie  down on  the  couch and   tell  her  grievances. I argued  with   her whenever  possible, and  she   said   my  heart would   be  broken when  I  had   children  of my  own.  We  were  selling eggs  at  this  time,  and  everywhere there were  baskets   of  eggs with   bits  of  straw and   feathers  and   hen­  dirt stuck  to them, waiting to be cleaned.

Order contrasted with  chaos.  It is also typical of a Munro heroine that  the girl wants   to  go  home   early,   return to  the chaos   because   "comfort  palls"   and   she has "more scope" for self-development (as well as role-playing)  back in the disorder of her  mother's house.
Munro heroines   are  true  adventurers. Edie  walks over  to see the  pilot; later  she bakes  him  a crumb cake; the  woman  in "Tell Me  Yes  ..."  decides   to  travel   to the dead lover's town, and thus suffers a betrayal  she   would   never   have   known about   if  she'd   been   able   to  leave   well enough alone. She is given a brown  paper bag  by the dead  man's wife:

They are   letters, not   in  their  envelopes. This is what I knew   I would   find,  I knew I  would    find   my   letters . . . But   then    I notice  the   writing  is  not   mine. I  start  to read. These letters are  not  mine, they  were not  written by me.  I skip  through every  one of  them   in  a  panic and   read   the  signature. Patricia.  Pat. P.

These woman  and  girls can  never leave well enough alone. They  won't even settle down  properly into  comfortable old  age. Dorothy,   in   "Marrakesh",   remembers how  as  a  child   she   had   hated  change "and clung  to old  things,  old  messy, rot-

86
 ten,  picturesque things." In  her  seventh decade she finds  this clinging  to the  past is gone  and  in  its  place  (here she  is  un­ like  her   companion and   contemporary Viola)    is  "a   strong  curiosity". "There was  in  everything  something  to  be  dis­ covered." For her there  can be no "peace­ ful letting-go". And so, after  she witnesses the violent coupling of her restless grand­ daughter  with   the  man   next   door,  she spends  a  few  anxious   minutes in  terror  and shock, afraid she might  have a stroke
-"here,  in  her   nightclothes,  and   not even  on  her  own  property," she  reflects:

1What   if  Viola  had   seen   any   of   that? More than  she  could  stand. Strength is necessary, as  well  as  something  like  grati­ ttude,  if  you  are   going   to  turn  into  a  lady  peeping Tom as the  end  of your  life.

It's   not  that   Munro heroines   are  un­ afraid    to   take   risks -they   are   afraid, most  of  them  have  "soft  centres" as  the old   chocolate  ads   used   to   say  - but rather  that   they  are  compelled  to  take them.  Something in  their  nature  drives them  to it. And  so they  are seeing  things they shouldn't: the rat poison in the spice cupboard   in    "Something   I've     Been Meaning  to  Tell  You",   the  animal-like sex of the  young  couple  in  the  basement in  "Walking on  Water" (I  include   old Mr.  Lougheed as  a   Munro  "heroine" here -he  would  understand and  not  be displeased  I think), the scene  mentioned above in "Marrakesh", and  so on. Or making  connections better   left  unmade:

"Florence!  Where  are   Jimmy  and   Du­ val?" Robina with   a  swing  of  her  one  full arm   caught  me  across   the  face,  across   the mouth . . . ("Executioners".)

Even   when  ill with   a  terminal   disease (the   girl's   mother  in  "Winter  Wind") they  lead  lives of  noisy  desperation and paint, with  hands  that   won't   still  their

REVIEW ARTICLES



awful  trembling, the kitchen cupboards yellow.  They   are  fierce,  passionate,  vul­ nerable   outsiders, and   their  keen  intelli­  gence  makes   them   realize   that  the  best they  can  do  is  to  seem  to  be  like  other  people. As the narrator tells us in "Execu­ tioners":

I believed that with luck and good management I could turn out to seem like anybody  else.

And  adds,  "And  this  is  in  fact   what   I
have  done."
So, in the end,  Munro records  the lives of  extraordinary  girls  and   women,   the misfits  of  any   time  and   generation.  (I should  think  this is one  of the reasons for her   extraordinary appeal  to  both   men and  women.) There is happiness in  the book-or brief moments of it  ("Tell Me Yes  or  No",   "The  Found Boat",  "Ma­ terial", "How I met  my  Husband"), but there  is also  a  great  deal of  pain,  both physical  (mothers with cataracts or Park-
 inson's  Disease, dead  or alcoholic fathers, secondary  characters with  missing  limbs) and  of the  heart. Yet  one  is left  with  an impression  of laughter, of the comic necessity for, as well as vanity of, human wishes. Order is what  we  think  we long for;  chaos  is what  we choose. Or  should. Munro seems  to  be  saying   we  should. Who can settle  for ironed  sheets and car­ rot  pudding, for  "lovely  smells",  a  safe marriage or  a  limited   world-view  when it  is all  out  there  waiting? I'll  end  with the voice of the narrator in "Tell Me Yes or  No".

,We made  a  turn  on  to  a  freeway  north of the  city. As we came  off the  access  road we faced  west. The  streaks  of sky  between the  clouds  were  a  fiery  pink.  The  lights  of the   cars  seemed   to  stream   together,  mile after  mile. It  was all  like the  kind  of vision of   the   world -a   fluid,   peaceful    vision, utterly  reassuring-that I used to get when
I  was drunk.  It  said  to me,  "Why  not?" It used  me  to  have  faith, to  float  upon   the present,  which  might   stretch out  for  ever.




HEART OF A STRANGER
 

R. T.Robertson


CLARA THOMAs,   The   Manawaka   World   of Margaret   Laurence. McClelland and
Stewart. $10.00.


"THE MANAWAKA WORLD" was a  phrase  inevitable in  talking  about Margaret  Laurence's  work  even   before
The   Diviners  appeared  last   year.   But
Clara Thomas's book begins with a Yoru­ ba symbol  and  quotations about  Mrican literature  (one   from   Long  Drums  and Cannons)   as  epigraphs.  This  is  Mana­ waka,   Manitoba?  Yet  she  is  right:  the Manawaka  world  begins in  Somaliland, just as Perry  Miller, "disconsolate on  the edge of a  jungle of central Africa," found  thrust  upon   him  the  mission  of  under-
 
standing the  New  England Puritans that resulted   in  his  scholarly   studies, among them  that  notable  collection Errand  into the Wilderness.
But we do not yet know the true dimensions of  that   world,  or  how  Mar­ garet  Laurence composed  it on her return from   the   wilderness.   And   that   is   why Clara Thomas's second book on Margaret Laurence will not be her last. The growth of  the  Laurence corpus  since  Margaret Laurence  was  published  in  1g6g,  espe­ cially   the   apparent   completion  of   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



Manawaka  cycle  in  The  Diviners, has allowed  a  corresponding development of the   understanding  the   scholar   demon­ strated  in  her  first  study.  That  greater understanding, although  carefully articu­ lated  in  the  structure  and  demonstrated in  the  commentary  of   The  Manawaka World, contains once  again   the  promise of  an  even  more  complete presentation of the complex vision of this prime  Cana­ dian    novelist.   Or   Afro-Canadian? Or Commonwealth?
The earlier study  recognized  the  crux in calling  Margaret Laurence a Canadian writer: in  1g67 she  had  published more African than   Canadian books, including her  first four,  all  set  in  Africa  and  com­ posing   the   first   decade  of  her   writing  life. And  while  the  African books were a mixed   batch -translations  of   poetry,  a travel  book,  a  novel,  and  a  collection of short  stories -the  two  Canadian novels were firmly centred on  Manawaka, Man­ itoba.  The end  of  the  second  decade  of publishing   evens   the   balance  only   to make  the  discrepancy more  obvious.  We now  have  a  conspectus of  the  ladies  of Manawaka from  young Vanessa  McLeod and  the two Cameron sisters to Mother Morag and  Old  Mother Shipley.  The Africana  is  now   even   more   mixed   by adding a study of West African writers. Africa  would  seem  to  encourage the diversity  of  the  writer's  talents,  Canada to concentrate them  on  Manawaka. And because  it  is  easier   to  discuss  the  cycle than  the mixed  batch many  critics  prefer to  ignore  the  African books.  Yet  one  of them,   The  Prophet's Camel   Bell,  Mar­ garet   Laurence calls  "the  most  difficult thing  I ever  wrote." In  this she has gone further than  any  other  Canadianist. It is part   of  Clara  Thomas's  achievement  to tackle  this crux and  attempt to show how

88
 important that  element is to  the  Mana­
waka  world.
W.  H.  New  found   the  theme of  The Stone   Angel   in   The  Prophet's  Camel Bell,  "the strange   glimpse   of  the  self". For  Clara Thomas that   book,  our  only overt  autobiography of  Laurence,  "pro­ vides  a  logical  starting point   for  a  con­ sideration of all her work" because it con­ tains  the  text  that  "could  serve  well  as an  epigraph" to  everything she  has writ­  ten:   "Ye  know  the  heart   of  a  stranger, seeing  ye  were  strangers in  the  land   of Egypt." Laurence's first  novel,  This Side Jordan,  is  set  in  Ghana but,   according to  New,  "by   an   oblique   and   probably unconscious  route  it  brings  us  to  under­ stand   something more  of  a  comparable but   not   identical  desire   [for   indepen­ dence]  in   Margaret   Laurence's  native  Canada." Comparable  but  not  identical
-what  is  the  oblique   route   by  which
Africa becomes part of the Manawaka world?
Mostly the route still lies underground; from   the  structure of  the   book  we  see that   Clara Thomas centres   her  Mana­ waka  World  in  the  five Canadian novels and  Jason's Quest, and  gives  them  more  than    half   her   space,   ending  with   an extended  and   detailed   analysis   of  The Diviners,  the  longest  and  the  last  novel. That chapter begins with  the observation that  in its structure the novel imitates the first  short  story,  "The  Drummer of  All the  World,"  published  in  1956;   and   it ends  by  calling  it  a  "homecoming  novel
. . . closing  the  Manawaka works."  The
chapter in part sums  up those works, and the way in which  Morag's past  is encap­ sulated  fore and  aft in her  present might  have   served   as   the   model   for   Clara Thomas's own  structure. But  in  the  cen­  tral  chapters- the   Manawaka  world

REVIEW ARTICLES



proper-the  African material is present generally only  in  the  chapter  epigraphs from  Achebe  and  the  West  Indian  poet, Edward  Brathwaite. The  African   con­ nection  has  gone  underground   between  the  early  chapters entitled  "The  Ances­ tors"   and   "Departures"   and   the   final chapter, a consideration  of  Long  Drums and   Cannons   which   locates   Margaret Laurence  firmly  "among the  writers   of the  emergent  nations," an  amplification and  bolstering of W. H. New's  suggestion about   a  possible affinity  between   Ghana at   the   moment  of   independence  and Canada  now.
The  preliminary and  closing  chapters are  not  wholly  at  odds  with  the  central group; the same  careful analysis  is given the  first four  African  books as the Cana­ dian  novels, often  affording insights, espe­ cially in the choice of  quotation, that  will have   to  be  taken  into  consideration  in future discussion of  these works. That dis­ cussion  would  be  helped   by an  index  to the  present  study  and  a  bibliography of the  writer's  work  as  detailed  as  in  the earlier  study,  but  we should  all  be prop­  erly  grateful  for  the  biographical  infor­  mation,  the   novelist's    own   statements (even   when   not   footnoted) ,   and    the exhaustive   checklist   of   secondary  ma­ terial.   And  for  the  penultimate chapter, "The  Town-Our  Tribe", which   col­ lates  all  the  Manawaka cycle  to  focus  a picture  of  the  town,   relate   it  to  other small  towns  in  Canadian literature, and hint   in   its  title   how   African  they   all might  be.
But the main  interest  for future discus­ sion of that  "oblique route" between  the poles  of  Margaret   Laurence's  imagina­ tion  lies in  the  way  the  structure of  this study   suggests   metaphorically  the   real dimensions   of    the    Manawaka   world.
 These  are, of course,  the dimensions of Margaret Laurence's world  and  of ours, of   the   universe;  the   Preface  to   Long Drums  and  Cannons  is  Margaret  Lau­ rence's    credo   as   a   writer:   Literature offers insights  "into the  human  dilemma as  a  whole   [and]  it   must   be  planted firmly in some soil."
This  is no novel  insight  into  the work­ ing  of literature but  it  suggests  that   for Margaret Laurence Africa  is  more  than  the  "catalyst", as Clara  Thomas calls  it, of her vision and  her writing. Rather than  the   Britain   Margaret   Laurence  knows well and  uses  as freely  in  her  last  novel as she can use Canada in that  and  others,  Africa   stands   in   her   imagination  as  a reference  point  for  the  universe.  She  has firmly planted her writing in her own soil and  converted  that   microcosm  into   her world by imagining it surrounded with Africa,  her  own  intimate  knowledge of the   human   dilemma   focussed    in   her Africa which is the universal (and  more diffused)   dimension of  her  Manawaka.
We still do  not  know  exactly  how  this
imaginary  universe   works.  The route   is still a secret  in  the  heart  of this  stranger of   ours   but    she   may   well   supply    it eventually -by   sending  her   Manawa- · kans  to Ghana?-as  V.  S. Naipaul  has revealed  his universe  in  In  a Free State. Only  when   the  route   is  revealed   by  its sole  owner   and   proprietor  (as   William Faulkner used to describe  his relationship to   Yoknapatawha  County)   will   Clara Thomas be able  to trace  it for us in steps more   literal   than   metaphorical.  When that   happens  we  shall   all  applaud  the laurels  that  crown  the work -and  name
-of Margaret Laurence and  the comple­
tion  of the  labours of her  diviner, Clara
Thomas.

Bg

REVIEW ARTICLES


VIOLATION OF
THE BURIAL PLACES


Herbert Rosengarten



MATT COHEN,  Wooden Hunters. McClelland  & Stewart  Limited. $8.gs.


MATT COHEN has established himself very rapidly as an important Canadian writer,  and  Wooden Hunters confirms  the earlier  promise  of Columbus and  the  Fat  Lady  and  The  Disinherited. Set on an island off the coast of B.C., the novel dramatizes the  conflict  between  an aggressive  and  exploitative white  society, and  a  decaying but  tenacious Indian community, under as great  a  threat  of extinction as  the  soggy  rain-forest about to  be  plundered by loggers.  The  atmos­ phere  is heavy  with  death, from  the  rot­ ting   mortuary  poles  of   the   abandoned Indian village,  to  the  long  black  hearse driven   round   the  island  by  "C.W.", the white  hotel-owner from  Montana. C.W.  helps  the  logging  company  to  open   up new   trails   and   log   hitherto  untouched areas,  including  the  old  Indian  village;  and,   in   the   novel's   violent   and   bloody climax,  when   the  old  burial-places  are violated, C.W.  pays  for  his  moral  blind­ ness with his life.
Those  readers  who  regard the  novelist as  primarily  a  social  commentator   will find much  grist for  their  mill here,  for at one  level  Wooden  Hunters is an  indict­ ment  of white  rapaciousness and  insensi­ tivity,  an  attack on  the  traditional dis­ regard  by European  culture of the  rights and   values   of   aboriginal  societies.  The

go
 Indians in the  story-Johnny Tulip, piano-player in C.W.'s hotel, his blind, oracular mother, his battered sister Mary Gail -all  are  victims  of  the  alien  pres­ ence on the island,  which  seeks to destroy even  their  past.  But  Cohen  goes  beyond the  relatively  simple  level  of  social criti­  cism,  to more  complex  issues:  he is also concerned with  the  broader conflict  be­ tween   "civilized"   and    "natural"  man,  between    reason   and    feeling,    between  words  and  experience. The  division  be­ tween  white   and   Indian  is  more   than political here, involving totally different responses  to  life  itself.  The   Indians are part of the island, alive to its presences, intuitively understanding the language of nature; the whites,  products of a society devoted  to rational control of its environ­ ment,  have  lost  that   language,  and  can no longer  respond  freely  to the claims of nature. C.W.'s  father "often  used  to say that  what  made  man  different from  the animals  was  his   mind";  and   it  is  the devoted  cultivation  of this  faculty  which makes the white man  incapable of under­ standing the  natural world.
Laurel Hobson, Johnny Tulip's white lover,  is a  refugee  from  the  white  world of reason  and  analysis; her  sleep  is  con­ stantly  disturbed by images  of  her  dead parents, calm,   precise,   unloving,  whose

REVIEW ARTICLES



favourite  pastime  was   the   creation  of maps  which  were more  real  to her  father than  the  places  they  represented. Laurel drops  out  of  university because   the  life of the  mind  cannot satisfy her  needs; she returns to  the  island,  to a  place  haunted by images  of decay  and  death, which  yet breeds   new  life  within   her,  and   which holds   more   meaning  for   her   than   the sterile  centres of urban civilization like Vancouver. In  this  paradox  Cohen  has expressed  a theme identified by Douglas Jones  in  Butterfly on  Rock  as  character­ istic  of Canadian writing:

The   world  is a  wilderness;   guilt,  isolation, the  menace   of  death   are   inherent  in  the human   condition. Yet  the  problem  of  how to  affirm  such  a  world  . . . is  resolved  by accepting these conditions. That  acceptance effects a real transformation: the alienation produced  by attempts to exclude or destroy every  menace  is replaced   by a  larger  com­ munion.

Wooden Hunters is not  a philosophical novel, and such issues are treated only indirectly; but  Cohen's characters must face   the  reality   of  isolation   and   death, and  come  to  terms  with  their  own  mor­ tality.
There  is  material  enough   for   three
novels  here: the  themes  of clashing  cul­ tures,   of  guilt   and   alienation, of   puri­  tanical  repression   and   inhibition.  Such themes  call  for  epic  treatment;  but  des­ pite  the  breadth of  Matt  Cohen's ima­ gination, he has not entirely  succeeded  in investing  his story with  the  substantiality or largeness  of  outline that  gives a  novel like The Stone  Angel  its  power  and  sig­ nificance. The  reader  recognizes  the  im­ portance of  the novel's  themes,  yet is not wholly   satisfied   that    the   novelist   has managed to give them  adequate embodi­ ment.  Despite her  centrality in  the  plot, and  the  detailed past  with  which  she  is
 bestowed,  Laurel Hobson is for  the  most part  a  colourless  figure,  almost   as  indis­ tinct  in  person  as  she  is  in  personality. Her  white  lover  Calvin,  whose  role  is to objectify   the  uncertainty  and   confusion within   Laurel  herself  as  he  struggles   to understand their relationship, leaves even less  of  an   impression  on   the   reader's mind.   Is  he  tall  or  short?  fat   or  thin?  Even  if  we  are  given  such  details,   they fail to register: having little  or  no physi­ cal dimension, Calvin  remains a faceless, inarticulate blur.  Some  of Cohen's char­ acters  seem  too  slight-intellectually or emotionally,  as   well  as   physically-to carry  the  weight  of  his  themes.
This  cannot be said  of  the  Indians in Wooden Hunters; their  physical  presence is  unmistakable,  and   vividly   conveyed, from   the  heat   of  Mary   Gail's  body  to the   wooden   eyeballs  of  Johnny Tulip's mother. Johnny Tulip himself  is the  best thing   in  the  book.  In   him,   Cohen  has drawn a memorable image  of the declin­ ing  Indian, one  that  can  stand  compari­ son  with  the  figures  created  by  Duncan Campbell Scott.  Dispossessed and  broken  by  an   alien   culture,  yet   surging  with hidden   vitality,   Johnny   Tulip  has   the kind  of craggy  strength  that   makes  him, dying as he is, seem ageless and  immortal, a   folk-hero   confronting  his   fate   with courage  and dignity.  Perhaps that  is why the other characters seem so pale  and  in­ significant in comparison: they have been conceived  on  a  smaller   scale,  their  fates are   of  importance  only   to   themselves; they lack the representative quality which marks  the  best characters in  the  best  fic­ tion.  Johnny  Tulip,  however, has   that  quality; and  consequently Wooden Hunt­ ers,  though   flawed,  is  a  novel  of   more than  passing  interest.

91

REVIEW ARTICLES


CRITICISM IN QUEBEC


Larry Shou'ldice



MAX  DORSINVILLE, Caliban  Without Prospera. Press Porcepic.  ANDRE  BROcHu, L'instance critique. Lemeac.  JEAN-CHARLES   FALARDEAU, Imaginaire  social et litterature. Hurtubise HMH.


IN  THE  YEARS since  the  tur­ bulent  sixties,  the  literary scene  in  Que­ bec  has  changed  from   one  of  explosive creativity to one  of rather quiet  reassess­ ment  and  consolidation. There  are  signs that  a  new  period  of cultural  dynamism may  be beginning, but  only  time  will tell whether  the   current   flickers   of  excite­ ment   and  productivity  will  become   the full  flames  of  revolution  or  merely  an­  other brushfire. In any case, one area  that  has    maintained   the    momentum   and trends that  emerged  in  the  sixties  is that of criticism.  It is a field of increasing im­ portance in Quebec letters,  as  the  forces of  Marxism and  structuralism  collide  or merge  with  the more traditional thematic and   sociological   approaches,  leading  to the  growing  diversity   and   specialization apparent  in  the  three   books  of  literary criticism  discussed  here.
Subtitled "An  Essay on Quebec and Black Literature", Caliban Without  Pros­ pero is an  ambitious and  often  fascinat­ ing  study.   Using   the   Caliban-Prospero metaphor,  Dorsinville  attempts to  illus­ trate   not  only  the  relationship  between European  and   Post-European  cultures (in which category he includes everything from American to Third-World writings)  but  also  the  whole  complex of  attitudes and  reflexes within  emergent literatures themselves.  It is an  analogy  that   works
 well enough  in  general terms,  and  parti­ cularly  with  Black  literature, but  its ap­  plication  to  Quebec literature  becomes somewhat more  tenuous; colonial domin­ ation  and  The White Niggers of America notwithstanding, to describe  the relation­ ship  of Quebec  with  either  France or  its English   oppressors   in   Calibanic  terms requires  stretching  the   metaphor  so widely  that it  becomes  almost  meaning­ less.   Perhaps    the   author  realizes   this; references   to  Caliban  are   absent   from large sections of the book dealing with Quebec, and  he  insists  on  this  aspect  as little  as possible in  the  concluding chap­ ter.  Nevertheless, one  senses a  slight  in­ congruity.
Structuring his argument on a series of parallels  in the origins, evolution and pre­ occupations of Black American and Que­ bec  literatures,  Dorsinville  establishes   a number of  fruitful areas  of  comparison. The  study is nicely developed  and  on  the whole  well-balanced,  the  one  exception being a chapter on religion  and  the Black that  has  no  corresponding discussion  of religion   in  Quebec;  whatever  the   rea­ son  for  this -certainly  there  is  no  lack of  material-it spoils  the  symmetry   of an  otherwise exemplary  comparative  method.
The literatures are  examined in  three basic  stages  of  development:  an  initial

REVIEW ARTICLES



period   of  growing   rebellion   and   revolt, and   finally  an  emerging sense  of   com­ munal identity and  self-articulation. Per­ ceiving  the  present  period  in  both  litera­  tures  as one  of  increasing maturity, self­ confidence   and   reconciliation  to   life's pluralism,  the  author bases  his optimism  mainly on his interpretation of two recent novels -rather   scanty   evidence,  as  he himself  admits.
A few quibbles. The book is strangely bound,   printed  in   tiny   type   on   rough paper  that  makes reading difficult,  and illustrated with  a  bizarre  series of  photo­ graphs that   have  only  a  vague  connec­  tion  with  the  content. The  prose  too  is disconcerting   at    times,    a   mixture  of learned   academic writing  with  more  in­ formal  levels of language  and  frequently awkward   phrasing.
These are minor flaws, however, in an interesting and  highly  original discussion. Basing his central argument on a percep­ tive  comparison  of  the   two  literatures, Dorinville makes  a convincing study  that  is well worth  the attention of even general readers.
L'instance  critique by Andre  Brochu  is
a  collection  of  articles  and  reviews  pub­ lished   from    1961   to    1973   in   various periodicals  and    journals. One   of   the bright  young  activists  in  Quebec  letters, Brochu emerged  in the sixties as the chief literary  analyst  for Parti-pris, a review in which   the  socio-politico-intellectual  de­ bates  of   those  turbulent times  somehow found   their   focus.  Since   Brochu's  con­ cerns  and  attitudes are  very  much  those of his  time  and  place,  perhaps the  most fascinating aspect  of the book is its reflec­ tion   of  the   author's   evolution   from   a rather naive-but  deeply  committed­ young radical into  a  more measured and somewhat chastened literary figure. There
 is a tinge  of sadness-and self-pity-in his  discussions   of  the   critic's  function; one  feels  the  disillusionment and  bitter­ ness as  he  increasingly realizes  that   the critic's  role  in  any  revolution is  likely  to be  marginal at  best.  The  honesty of  his self-examination makes the whole  process rather poignant, and  he emerges, as they say, a sadder but  a  wiser  man.
The book  is divided into   three   parts, the first an approach to various questions of  literary  theory,   a  second   and   longer series of medium-length discussions of particular authors, and  a final  brief selec­ tion  of reviews  of individual  books. Bro­ chu's  theoretical writings  are a mixture of reflection,  analysis,  dogma  and   polemic.  Rebelling   against    criticism    based    on extra-literary  criteria, particularly moral  or  social  considerations,  he  attempts  to formulate   his   own   conception  of   the "new"   criticism,    concentrating  on   the supremacy of the text,  the  need  for com­ prehension rather  than  evaluation,  and the  importance  of   intrinsic patterns  of images,  themes  and  values.  This,  he sug­ gests,  may   be   complemented  by  other  areas   of   humanistic  study   and   will  be eventually  superseded  by  structural  an­ thropology; but,  he  emphasizes,  literary works must  always  first  be  considered in terms  of  their  own  context.  Setting his goal  as the  rediscovery  and  reappropria­ tion of a Quebec identity, he stresses the need  to examine Quebec literature in the light   of   its   own   particular  necessities, limits and  frame of reference.
The  test comes, of course,  when  we see these  theses put  into  practice in  his own critical  articles  which  make  up the second and  third  sections  of  the  book.  There  is no doubt  that  Brochu  is a perceptive and intelligent reader. His analyses  are  full of new insights  and  his arguments are  gen-

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



erally  convincing, especially  with  regard to nineteenth century novels and  the work of Gabrielle Roy;  with  Theriault and Bessette, however, his interpretation  seems somewhat laboured, and  his commentary on  Giguere's "Roses  et  ronces" -a  con­ cession perhaps to the  pressures  of  struc­ turalism-is  extremely murky  and  con­ fusing.  One  wonders too  if the liberation of Quebec hasn't become  for  Brochu  the absolute  sine  qua  non  that  religion,  mo­ rality  or  sociology  were  for  his predeces­  sors; in  assessing all Quebec literature in view of its relevance to l'indentite quebe­  coise,  he  runs   the  risk  of  injecting the very sort  of  extra-literary criteria he  has so frequently attacked in other  critics.  In any case, the  book as a whole  is informa­ tive and  enlightening, and  will be a parti­ cularly  useful  tool  to students of Quebec literature.
lmaginaire social et litterature by Jean­ Charles Falardeau is also  a  collection of essays  that   have  in  most  instances been previously     published.    Considered   the dean  of sociological  criticism  in  Quebec, and   deservedly   esteemed    for   his  I g67 study  Notre  societe  et  son roman, Falar­ deau   has   this   time   produced  a  rather meagre  and initially  disappointing book. The first article, a general  survey of criti­ cism of  the  Quebec novel,  is little  more than   a  listing  of  existing   studies.  Then follows an account of the evolution of the hero  in  Quebec literature, an  interesting study  in itself but  now rather dated by its lack of reference to contemporary  novel­ ists. One  wonders,  in fact,  why  this Que­ bec  section  was  included at  all,  since  it bears little  or no relationship to the  parts  that  follow.
The core of the present volume,  a four­ part  series entitled "Problematique d'une sociologie  du  roman", is a  complex   and

94
 ambitious attempt  to  develop  the  bases for a sociological approach to literature. Steeped in  the  preoccupations  (and  jar­ gon)   of  contemporary French  criticism,  it  is a  highly  theoretical  examination of literary and  sociological  concepts, exist­ ing  methodologies,  the  nature and   role of  imaginative  processes,  and   finally,  of course,    the   relationship   between     the novel  and  society.  Falardeau's insistence  on the social role of the imagination, and  his  particular linking  of this to formal developments in  the  novel,  are  definitely the  high  points  of  the  book,  indicating, albeit  abstractly, a variety of potentially rewarding methods  and  directions for the investigation of literary works.
If Falardeau's discussions  are  refresh­ ingly  free  of  dogma, they  are  also  dis­ appointingly inconclusive. His final chap­ ter, for instance,  a ten-page  reflection  on "le  sens du  merveilleux", is impressive  in both   its  erudition  and   its  lyricism,   but one  feels uneasy  at  its  apparent aimless­ ness. And  although  again   a  number of possible fields of  investigation are pointed  out,  there  is  very little  connection with the  rest of  the  book.
lmaginaire social  et  litterature is thus an  uneven  work, both  in its lack  of unity and   in  the  quality   of  its  analyses.  The central section,  together with  an  impres­ sive  bibliography at  the  end,  stands  out as a considerable contribution to sociolog­ ically  oriented   criticism,  but   the   other  articles  are only of passing interest. What saves the  book is  Falardeau's  underlying humanism; as Gilles  Marcotte points  out in  a  graceful   introduction,  Falardeau's work  is  infused  with   moderation, com­ mon   sense  and   an   openness   of  mind, which  are  finally more  winning than  the most  elaborate and  technical theories  in his discussion.

REVIEW ARTICLES


PROBLEMS OF BIOGRAPHY

Anthony Appenzell


JOSEPH  SCHULL, Edward   Blake:  The   Man  of  the  Other   Way, 1833-IBBI.  Mac­ millan,  $13.95· Mike: The  Memoirs  of  Lester  B. Pearson,  Volume  Three.  Uni­ versity of Toronto Press,  $15.00. LOVAT DICKSON,   Radclyffe Hall  at  the  Well  of Loneliness.  Collins.   $1 !.95·


CANADIAN  BIOGRAPHY  can  be divided  into  two fairly  well-defined  cate­ gories.  There is the  immediate  kind,  in which  a  public  figure-usually  a  politi­ cian-is  subjected in  mid-career to  the glare  of light  which  is as necessary  to his kind  as the sunlight to normal men. Tru­ deau,   Diefenbaker,   Stanfield,  even   de­ feated   Walter  Gordon  have   been   sub­ mitted to that kind of examination, which is inevitably  partisan, tending either to­ wards   panegyric,  in   which    case   it   is quickly  forgotten, or  towards denuncia­ tion masked  as honest  exposure, in which case it is read,  not  to see the  man  whole, but to see the weaknesses that  underlie his public  strength. A living  leader  becomes, by the very necessities of public  exposure, a humanoid image  both  larger  and smal­ ler   than   life,  and   his   biographers  will either  genuflect  before him or  try  to pull him  down.
The  other  kind of Canadian biography
-and it is undoubtedly the  best kind­ concerns itself  with  those  who  are  dead.  And,   contrary  to  the  old   maxim,  it  is usually  dead  men  who  tell  the  most  in­ teresting tales, if only  because  they  have necessarily  withdrawn  from   the   lists  of power,  and  we can  view  them  at  the dis­ tance  in  which  passion  becomes  compas­  sion,  feeling  with   rather  than   about   a person.
But  here  is another trap,  and  it is one into  which  at  least  some  of  the  writers
 
here  discussed  seem   to  have   fallen.   In feeling  with, we  do  not  idolize  our  sub­ ject, but we do tend  to identify with him, to make our own  his hopes and struggles. Any   practicing  biographer   knows   how strong  such  a  temptation  can  be, how  at certain   points  the  subject's thoughts be­ come  his own, and, even  more  strangely, how he may begin to suffer  from  the sub­ ject's psychomatic ailments and  find him­  self   drawn  into  personal predicaments startlingly similar  to those in which  the subject  was involved.
I  would  not  like  to  speculate on  how far   Joseph   Schull,   in   writing  the   first volume  of his life of Edward Blake, Ed­ ward Blake: The Man of the  Other Way, found  himself suffering from  the  tics and  dolours  of the  morose  and  nervous man about   whom  he  writes,  but  it  is certain  that  he has lived himself  remarkably well into  the  mind  of  a  maverick nineteenth century   Grit    (a  kind  of  mind   entirely  different in  texture and  temper from  the marshmallow minds  of late twentieth cen­ tury Canadian Liberal politicians.)  More­ over  he  has  shown   his  power  of  distin­  guishing  between  kinds of  nineteenth cen­ tury Grit, for he has caught admirably the nuances  of difference in background, per­  sonality   and   eventual  outlook    between Blake,  a  man  so stern-principled that  at times  he  found  himself  forced  to  deny  a politically  expedient action that  stuck  in his moral  craw,  and  Laurier  (subject of


95

REVffiW ARTICLES



another interesting Schull  biography), whose sharp political  instincts left  him  a far  more  ambivalent human being.
Not  that  Blake's  efforts  to  remain the moral    man   and   the   politician  at   the same  time  kept  him  out  of contradictory situations. He agreed, allowing his lawyer self to argue down  his  moral  self,  to  the worst  excesses of the  anti-Riel campaign, and  condoned incitement  to  kidnapping when  the  Ontario government offered  a reward  for  the capture of Riel  whom  the federal  government  had   deliberately  let go. But-and Schull  says nothing of this interesting incident though it falls within the  period  of  this  present   volume  of  his Life-in  1875 when  Blake was  Minister for  Justice and  Gabriel Dumont had  set up   his   local   government  in   the   little Metis   republic  of   St.   Laurent  on   the Saskatchewan, Blake  defended Dumont and  praised  his public  spirit,  just as later he  would   denounce the  ineptitude that led Sir John A. Macdonald and  his asso­ ciates  into  the situation where  the North­ west  Rebellion became  inevitable.
One  has little fault to find with  the understanding and  generally  sympathetic portrait  of  Blake   that   Schull   presents. Blake  has  been  neglected by our  histor­ ians  largely  because  they  have  not  been willing   to  disentangle the  obliquities of his  nature,  and   he  deserved  a   patient biographer, whom  in Schull  he has at last encountered.  Yet   there   is  a  difference between  understanding and  partisanship, and Schull  has allowed  the strength of his sympathies to lead  him  too far  in the lat­ ter direction. The point  of view thi:ough­ out   his  book  is  unrelievedly  Grit, and Macdonald and  the Tories are  treated as figures of impossible burlesque, with  Mac­  donald  staggering on  stage  as  the  dia­  bolically  devious  drunkard  with  a  regu-

g6
 larity   that   in  the  end   becomes  entirely tedious.  After  all-even  leaving  Blake's weaknesses    out    of	account-George Brown  was  hardly  the  kind  of  man  one would  desire  as a  friend, and  Alexander Mackenzie was somewhat more  complex than  the  naive  stonemason whom  Schull periodically  exhibits.   Here    is   another temptation of the  biographer: to become so immersed  in his central character that all   the   rest   are   merely   humours. Mr. Schull   has  fallen   to  the  temptation,  so that    Blake,   the   admirable  Anglo-Irish gentleman, is highlighted by the contrast­ ing  chorus  of  Scottish  comics-Grit as well  as  Tory-who  misunderstand and hamper him  to the  end.
The  third  volume  of Mike: The  Mem­
oirs of the  Rt.  Hon.  Lester  B. Pearson, poses a curious biographical problem. Ostensibly   it  is  autobiography,  complet­ ing  the first two volumes  of  Mike, which were  mainly  in  Pearson's own  hand. But in  fact  this  final  volume  of  the  Pearson memoirs,  covering  his time of active  poli­ tical  leadership,  from  1957  to  1968, is a skilful  compilation  by  the  editors,   John  A.  Munro and  Alex  I. Inglis.  The  core
-considerably   less   than    half    of   the whole-is a body of first-person material whose  completion  was  rendered  impos­ sible  by  Pearson's death.  Using  diaries, scripts  of  speeches,  extracts  from   Han­ sard,  the editors  have fleshed  this nucleus of  original   material  into  a  book  that   is readable, historically  informative and,  as a  portrait, moving.  I  found   it  the  most impressive   of  all   the   three   volumes   of Mike,  perhaps  because  Pearson   did  not have  time  here  to  continue shaping the image   of    himself    as   the   archetypical simple  Canadian that dominated the  earlier  volumes  and   made   them   tedious  and   unconvincing.  Now,   in   this   final

REVIEW ARTICLES



volume,  we have  Pearson  in  the midst  of the   struggle,  fighting    doggedly   in   the day-to-day battle  of  politics,  hurrying to beat  death, and  a  much  more  tense  and terse and  muscular being  emerges,  which after  all  must  be nearer  the  real  Pearson than  the  hero  of Volumes One  and  Two, who seemed  too  nice  and  simple  ever  to have  been  a politician. The  Pearson  in Volume Three is still an  appealing char­ acter,   but  much   more  credible,  because much  tougher.
Radclyffe Hall  at  the  Well  of  Loneli­ ness  tells  the  life  of  a  person  in  whose company both  Edward  Blake  and  Lester Pearson  would  have  felt  uneasy. There is no  record   that  Radclyffe  Hall  ever  flut­ tered   the  dovecotes   of  the  Land   That God   Gave   Cain,   but   her   biographer, Lovat  Dickson,  is a  Canadian who some years  ago  returned  home  after   a  career  as a London publisher. Since then  he has written   a   series   of   books -the   most recent   on  H.  G.  Wells  and   Archie  Be­ laney   (alias   Grey   Owl)  -which   drew on  his  memories  of  writers  about  whom he   had    acquired  a   degree   of   special knowledge  because   of   his   professional  association with them. There is more than  a little of the Ancient Mariner about Mr. Dickson,   for   he   has   a  strong   urge   to make his revelations before  time runs out. Fortunately he writes with eloquence and wit, so that  it is no uncomfortable burden to be  his  Wedding Guest.
As in the case of the recently  preceding Dickson  books, there  is a personal  tale to be  told  before  we  get  deeply  into  Rad­ clyffe   Hall  and  the  Well   of  Loneliness. After  Radclyffe Hall's death, Una  Trou­ bridge,   with   whom   she   had   lived   de­ votedly  for  many  years  and  who became her  legatee,  appointed  Dickson  her  own executor,  which   meant   that   eventually
 the  Radclyffe  Hall  copyrights come  into his  hands.  She  also  wanted  Dickson   to write  an  authorized  biography of   Rad­ clyffe  Hall,  but  this  at  the  time  he  de­  clined   to  do,   though  he   accepted  the executorship, at  a  time  when  Radclyffe Hall's  copyrights  seemed  worthless.  Since then,  with  the growing  permissiveness of the  rg6o's,  Radclyffe  Hall's books  have once again  come into print and  have  sold widely;  the  owner  of  them  has  been  re­ warded  beyond  his expectations, and  it is from   a  sense  of   obligation  as   well  as because   he  finds   the   tale  of  Radclyffe Hall  interesting  and  in  its  own  way  ad­  mirable that  Dickson  has  at  last  written  the  biography  Una Troubridge wanted. Owing   to   the   nature  of   the   material mainly  available to  him-nineteen  vol­ umes of Una's diaries  and  a file of John's (Radclyffe Hall's) letters-it has become largely  the  story  of  one  passionate  love relationship plus a couple  of public scan­ dals  which  arose  out  of Radclyffe  Hall's  flamboyant  but   courageous   attempt  to make   the  world  accept  her  as  she  saw and  felt  herself  to be.
The  better  known  of the  Hall  scandals was  that  associated  with  her  novel,  The Well  of Loneliness, which  was banned in rg28  by an English  magistrate. The  Well of Loneliness  is in fact a rather dull  novel written   in  a  manner  that   even   in   the
192o's seemed  old-fashioned, the  manner of an  Edwardian romance which  varied from  the  norm  by  dealing with  love  be­ tween  members   of  one  sex  rather  than  between    members    of   both   sexes.   The Well's  honesty  was its principal virtue. It was in no sense pornographic or obscene, but  its frankness  in  talking  about sex in unaccepted ways led to its condemnation. It shared, in fact,  the same  fate  as books whose  attitude  to  sex   was  aggressively

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



"normal", like  Lady  Chatterley's  Lover, or  aesthetically Rabelaisian, like  Ulysses, and  there  is no reason  to suppose  that  it was discriminated against specifically  be­ cause  of  its  Sapphic  overtones,   though this  is what  Dickson  suggests.  It  was the victim   of  a   puritanism that   sought   to suppress  any  overt   and  frank  discussion of sexuality.
The whole question of Radclyffe Hall's
bold  proclamation of her  lesbianism  is in fact   somewhat  more   difficult   to   assess than  Dickson  appears to think. The diffi­ culty  is symbolically   emphasized  by  the strange coincidence that  Radclyffe Hall  brought a libel action very similar  to that  which  Oscar  Wilde rashly brought against  the  Marquess of   Queensbury, and   that  the  defendant  happened  to  be  Queens­ bury's son-in-law. Wilde  lost his case and slipped into disaster; Hall  won a nominal victory  which   was  wiped  out   when   the case was appealed. The essential  point  of comparison,  I   suggest,   is   that    unlike Wilde  she  never  at  any  point  risked  im­ prisonment and   the  total  destruction  of her  social  and  personal  life; she  did  not have to die beyond  her means.
In fact, Dickson  is another biographer who   has   become   so  involved   with   his leading character that   he  no  longer  sees her situation in a balanced way. Consider, for  example, the  following passage  near the  end  of his book:   he is talking in the historic  present  about Radclyffe Hall  and Una  Troubridge.

... What continually surprises is the  solemn conviction  these   women  have   that a  great social  wrong   exists   which   must   be  righted. In  this    woman   homosexuals   have    been much more militant than men,  understand­ ably   enough  as   they   had   to  fight   on   two fronts, the   sexual  and   the  domestic, desir­  ing  equality in  both.

With   due   respect   to   the   undoubted

g8
 courage of Radclyffe Hall  and  her  asso­ ciates,  the fact is that  in their  day women homosexuals  could    afford   to   be   more militant since  they  risked  far  less  than  male   homosexuals.   The  Victorians  had found   themselves  quite  incapable of  ad­  mitting  that   their  womenfolk  might   be capable of  Sapphic  practices, and   there  were  no  laws  penalizing lesbians  in  the way   male   homosexuals  were   penalized until long after  Radclyffe Hall  was dead; I  knew  several  men  in  the  London Bo­ hemia  as late as the  194o's-but no wo­ men-who    had    been   imprisoned  for homosexual  acts  between,  to use the  cus­ tomary  phrase,  "consenting adults". Les­ bians,  of  course,  risked  social  ostracism, though  it  was  surprisingly  unevenly   ap­  plied,  but  they did  not  risk  the  sanctions of  criminal  law.  It  was  much   more   a matter of  negative  than  of  positive  per­  secution,  of their being denied  the oppor­ tunity  to describe their  emotions publicly,  of  their  loves  being   refused   a  standing
equal  to  heterosexual love, and  being - wherever    possible  - tactfully   ignored. These,  indeed,  were  disabilities that  de­ manded  attention  because  they  implied  contempt, but  there   seems  no  point   in exaggerating the  perils in which, in com­ parison    with    men    like   Oscar   Wilde,  women   like   Ralclyffe   Hall   lived   their  lives.   Nor   should   we   allow   Radclyffe Hall's splendours and  miseries  as a  per­  sonality  and  a symbol of sexual liberation to  blind  us to her  manifest inferiority as a writer. Her techniques never  rose above  those   of  the   best-selling   novelists   who served   the   vanished  circulating  library  public  of  the  192o's. It was only  because she wrote  about  the  "love  that  dares  not speak  its name" that  she did  not  become the  darling of  Mudie's and   the  Times  Book  Club.





WHERE THE MYTH TOUCHES US

HUGH    HOOD,   The    Swing    m  the    Garden.
Oberon  Press.

HuGH   HOOD has  done   for   Summerhill Avenue, Toronto, what  Mordecai Richler has done for St. Urbain Street, Montreal. I grew  up  at  the  corner of  Summerhill and   Jean, half  a  block  away   from   the home  of  Hood  and  of  his fictional  nar­ rator  Matt Goderich. In "The Governor's Bridge  is Closed,"  Hood   has  written of the  network   of  ravines   which  crisscross the Rosedale  area and shape its character. The  ravines  do  not come  into  this  novel. But  MacLennan Hill  is there, along  with the   Bridle   Path, "Merrill's"  Drugstore, and   the  red  and   yellow  Rosedale   buses (complete  with   rubber  mudguards and books of transfer stubs, their  colours  vivid in the mind's  eye) ; the two schools, Whit­  ney  and   Our   Lady  of   Perpetual  Help; "mysterious  Saint    Andrew's   Gardens, trackless  and  inviolate"; and  the  rails of the  CPR   main   line   which   run   imme­ diately   behind   the   narrator's  backyard  along the hillside separating North  Rose­ dale  from  Moore  Park.
It is a  joy to find  one's  personal  terra cognita  turned into myth.  Many  residents of Joyce's Dublin must have felt this sense of familiar strangeness, and  the  tension between  fact  and  myth.  I had  a curious feeling,  as I laid  down  the  novel,  that  I had   just  relived   the  first  decade of  my own life, which  happens to be roughly co­ incident  with   that   of  Hood's   narrator
 
Matt  (b.  1930)   and  with  Hood   himself (b. rg28). Although Matt's experiences were not mine  (I had,  for example, no interest   in  cars,   trains, or  ships),  they made  mine  more  meaningful. Hood's artistry creates  a framework in which memories  move. This is an  aspect  of one of  the  basic  founctions of  art,  its ability to give universal  meaning to particulars. In   a   similar   vein,   nine-year-old Matt Goderich, moved  by his father's  identifi­ cation  with  the  people  who  will suffer  in a  European  war,   understands   how   "a single  man's  life  may  stand   for  the  lives of many, perhaps in the end  for universal  life."
The   Swing  in  the  Garden is  the  first of a projected series of twelve novels, a roman  fieuve in the manner of Marcel Proust's  Remembrance of Things Past. Proustian  references recur,   sometimes rather self-consciously.  In  the Goderich family, Sunday drives in the country alternate with   trips   to  the  docks.  Matt is reminded  of  Proust's narrator  and   of his weekend  choice  of excursions from Combray along  the Guermantes' path, or along  the way to Swann's house.  Proust's narrator  discovered   much   later   in   life that  the two ways united to form  a single meaning:

I see as in  a  moral vision  that our  weekend excursions  had   the   same    range  of   impli­ cation.  "Down  to   the   docks"  led   deeper and  deeper into   city  life,  into  the  essential Toronto of  pickup  and  delivery  and  redis­ tribution of  wealth into  parcelled-out  units  in  small  tankers. "Into  the country" uncov­ ered  our  supportive  hinterland, the  recover­ able   past   of   Upper  Canada....  The ways of   Guermantes   and   Swann,  imaginatively recast    in   Ontarian   terms,  are    the    ways "into  the   country"  "down  by  the   docks."

The  handling of time is deceptively simple.  The  mind  of  the  adult narrator, a sophisticated art-historian,  is set along-

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



side the experiences of himself  as a child, rather like  parallel tracks.  Didactic  pas­ sages  for  example,  the   nature  of   time and  change, are  validated by  the  narra­ tor's   scholarly   interests   or   those  of  his father, a  professional  philosopher.  As  a child,  Matt is vaguely aware of the elasti­  city of chronological  time  in conjunction with  emotional  experience:

Why  should   time   passed   on  Cornish  Road seem  to  have  from   three  to  four times  the value,    so   to   speak,    of   Summerhill  time? Was   it   simply    that    earlier  time    seemed truncated  or   somehow  foreshortened,  tele­ scoped  as it receded into  memory? ... Time is involved with  value  in  some  way,  a  point
I  ought  to  have   made  to  my  father. That period  is an instance of double-chronology, psychological "felt"  time   and  that   of   the calendar.

Hood's  models,  besides Proust, are novelists such as George  Eliot  and  Balzac. He  obviously  aspires  to  catch the  entire social  fabric in  his  net.  His  feeling   for social  nuance, for  the  ambiance of  class feeling "in the by no means democratic society of English-speaking Canada in the twenties  and  thirties," is excellent. Matt, delivering magazines, knows  the  distance that  separates him  from  classmate Bea Skaithe who  lives on  Highland  Avenue. The curving path, the  shrubbery, the heavy door  with  brass knocker, induce inferiority feelings of a specific flavour. Class  barriers are  flexible  but  neverthe­ less real:

Our sense  of  social   relationship is  just  like that, full  of  personal fantasies compounded of   pride  or   shame  and   simple   feelings  of security  and   belonging....  Status  was  in­ volved  in  all  kinds  of  behaviour, your  diet,  your  choice of  color  in  clothes.

In style, The Swing in the Garden is reminiscent of Around the Mountain, twelve  essays  ambiguously  described   on the    dust    jacket    as   "scenes,    sketches,


100
 stories, pieces, incidents, evocation (call them what  you will)." Hood  himself calls them  fiction.  It took  two readings before I was willing to agree  with  this definition, but  I  came  to  it.  There are  many  pas­ sages   in   Swing   which    will   strike   the reader   as  prose   verite  or   documentary journalism  covering  a multitude of topics from Toronto shipping to the finer points of running a restaurant. This  type of fic­ tion follows from  Hood's feeling  for "the holy in the daily," and  artistic  metaphysic which  is also expressed  in his 1971 essay, "Sober Coloring: The Ontology of Super­ Realism." No ideas  but  in  things.  Hood calls  himself   a  moral   realist,   one   who points to the transcendental element  in natural objects. In the novel, Matt speaks of  art   uniting men  of  different cultures and   epochs:  "Objects  tie   the   interior worlds of multitudes together."
Hood's pace  is leisurely.   (Why  hurry, in  a  roman   fleuve?)  The five  parts   of Swing take  Matt Goderich from  infancy to the age of nine, while Canada moves through the Depression to the brink of World  War  Two.  His  panorama takes in Spain,  Maritain, Woodsworth, Sir Joseph Flavelle,  Mackenzie King,   and  the  aca­ demic   socialists  who   could   not   believe that   Stalin   would   ever  co-operate  with Adolph    Hitler.  The   Goderich   family move  from  relative  affluence  to  poverty, when  the father's radical principles drive him  out  of  his  university  job,  and  bad weather   sabotages  his  summer  venture into  the  restaurant business.  At  the  end of the  novel, Canada is moving  into  the tragedy of war and  Matt, into intimations of adolescence.
There   are   some   memorable   comic
scenes. One  concerns Saturday  matinees at  the  Beverly,  a  neighbourhood theatre

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



featuring a double  bill for  ten cents. Pan­
demonium is an  added  attraction :

It  sounded like  Gehenna  or   Armageddon,
<lr  the   awakening  of  the   Divine  Beast   in
:the   Revelation  to  Saint  John  on   Patrnos. We   would   whiz   up   and   down   the   aisles, allowing  the   less  nimble  ushers   almost to catch us, then  turning on the afterburners, spurring away  and  evading them  by slipping along  a   row   of  our   buddies from   school, whose   legs  and   elbows   would  impede  the usher   as  he  snatched  at   our   windbreakers.

Another scene  describes  a  policeman on a  bicycle chasing an  ancient Ford  across Toronto Island, where  cars  were  forbid­ den.  (It had  been driven  across the ice in winter.) A night  raid  on  Hanlan's Island  privy  coveted  as a  prospective clubhouse ends  in failure when both  privy  and  row­ boat  sink  in  Long  Pond.
Despite  Hood's flair for slapstick,  the comic  tone is frequently subtle.  A remark of  Matt's  father, "What  we  have   is  a six room  house,"  may  not sound  hilarious to  the   average   reader   but   it  is  one  of Andrew Goderich's small  turns  of phrase which   his  family  love  to  parody, "with almost  antiphonal repetition." Matt  des­ cribes   his   father's  kind   of   humour   as "almost impossible  to  explain  or  defend  before   people   with  no  ear  for  it."  The
 phrase   describes   much   of   Hood's  own wry  sense  of  fun.
Hood's first four  novels  demonstrate a remarkable  variety   in  technique. White Figure, White Ground  is relatively  tradi­ tional  in form.  Its protagonist is a painter in search of his roots. The narrative func­  tions  as metaphor.  (Hood  has  said  more than   once  he  considers narrative  to  be an  important  element  of  fiction.)  The Camera   Always   Lies   is  a   romance,  a witty  parody  of  Hollywood films,  and  a rollicking    satire    of   American   moeurs. Many    reviewers    seemed    to   miss   the parody   and   panned  it   severely.   In   A Game  of Touch, Hood  uses the  game  as "a  microcosm  of  middle-class eastern Canada"  (George Woodcock's phrase). The  novel  is both  a modern example of the picaresque form,  where  the interest centres  in the structure of society, and  an informal kunstlerroman with political cartoonist Jake  Price  as  the  artist-to-be­ educated.  You   Can't   Get   There  From Here is an  anti-utopia, a brilliant parody  of   human   folly   and   unrealistic  social aspirations, set  in  the  mythical state   of Leofrica.
With  nine books to his credit   (ten, counting the  Beliveau  biography), Hood





CANADIAN   AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS/228-4741
 









IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seems  to  be  moving   into   a  comfortable high  gear  and  settling down  for  the  long haul. First of twelve: the idea might intimidate some  writers. The  Swing   in the  Garden  is marked by the  social  con­ cerns  which  have  always  been  prominent in   Hood's   fiction,    and    the   conscious regard   for  craftsmanship or  metier, his watchword. Matt Goderich  observes  that  there   is  a  kind   of  mind   among   some writers   of   fiction   which   feeds,   almost compulsively,  upon   facts;   and   another which   lies  "not in  the  facts  themselves but  in  the  exactions of  the  a  priori  form into  which  they had  to be made  to fit.... This   alliance   of   doubled  realities   may, often  does,  issue  in  art  of  extraordinary richness." Where   do   we   place   Hood's work?  I opt  for  the double  reality.  Facts
transformed.
PATRICIA MORLEY



JOSEPH HOWE THE WRITER
JOSEPH  HOWE,  Poems   and   Essays,  edited  by
M.  G.  Parks.   University of  Toronto  Press.
$4·95·
JOSEPH  HOWE, Western and  Eastern Rambles: Travel  Sketches of  Nova   Scotia,  edited  by M.  G.  Parks.   University of  Toronto  Press.
$3·50.
JosEPH   HOWE, the   writer-journalist, essayist, poet and  orator-is one I con­ tinue  to wish will be better  than he is. Knowing something of his career  as a public    man    and    particularly   of   that heroic   stand   he  made  for   the   press  in
1835,  I expect  to find  more  of the man's force  in his writing than  I do. Once  that disappointment  is  by,   I   can   read   him without pain  and  some  of him  with con­ siderable  enjoyment-but  always   with the  expectation that  his  independence of


102
 mind  and  his physical  vitality  will charge his words -and sometimes  they do.
Outside of anthology pieces, Howe's work  has  not  been  readily   available to the modern  reader. William  Annand's edition  of The Speeches  and  Public  Let­ ters  and  the  1874  edition of  Poems  and Essays have  been  long  out  of  print,  and  compendia like D. C. Harvey's The Heart of  Howe   and   ].  Murray  Beck's  Joseph Howe:    Voice   of  Nova   Scotia,    though useful, hardly  serve the needs of the liter­ ary   student.   Professor   Parks    and   the University  of  Toronto Press in reprinting Poems  and  Essays and  in  collecting   the Travel   Sketches  have   done   us  a  great  service.  A good  deal  of  the  enjoyment I get  from  these  volumes  comes  from  the excellent    introductions  Professor   Parks has provided. Not least of the services he renders   in  these  is drawing attention to what  remains  to be done:

For the Novascotian he wrote  numerous editorials,   essays,   and    reviews,    many    of which  reveal  his wide interests outside of politics.   In   his  own   and   other  newspapers also  appeared  much   of  his  verse,  including the many  satires and  humorous pieces not selected    for   the    187 4   collection.  Still   in manuscript  among  his   voluminous papers are  several  travel  diaries written with  more regard for literary craftsmanship than  most productions of this  kind.

(Poems and  Essays, p. ix)

In  the  poems and  essays, including the travel    sketches,   Howe   appears  not   so much   a  slavish  adherent to  conventions as  one  so  thoroughly comfortable  with them  that  he has  no  need  or  inclination to  break  with  them.  His  decorum is not self-conscious;  in fact,  his apparent relish of  the  forms  he  uses is itself  enough   to keep   them   from   stifling.   The   impulse and   the   form   are   at   home   with   each other, and  such  faults  as there  are  point

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to  the   limits   of  an   imagination rather than  of a form  or convention. His great­ est   ease   is  perhaps  in   the   formal   ad­ dresses,  where   phrase   and   period   must reflect  most  closely  the  man's voice  and physical  bearing.
Howe's  poems  are  minor. Apart   from "Acadia", as Professor  Parks observes, his "mature   attempts  to    turn    provincial scenes   into   poetry   are   respectable   ex­ amples    of   their    genres."    "Acadia"   is another matter, a  poem  that for  all  its shortcomings  manages  to  convey  ambi­  valent   attitudes   toward  colonial   enter­ prise, the Indians, ties to the motherland, and   local  loyalties.  Other poems  in  the collection  echo  these concerns-but faintly.  From  the  sample  Professor  Parks gives  of  Howe's lighter   verse,  the  lump could  well  have  done  with  their  leaven­ ing,   witness   these   stanzas   addressed  to Anna  Swan,  the  Nova Scotia giantess:

Your  heart is safe, it beats  so high
No lover  in the  Nation
Could ever  hope  to waft  a sigh
To  such  an  elevation.

I'd  try the  motion of those  rolling pillows
That through thy  Kerchief show
Catching the  breath that might awake the billows
Or-Boston's organ blow.

Howe   is  a  man   of  our   history.  The interest  we  have  in  his writing is bound to  our  interest  in  him  as a  man,  and  so the  desire  for  a  fully  rounded figure.  In a  writer  as  conventional as  Howe,  each genre  serves  to  illuminate and  comment on the  others; none  by itself contains the whole man. As Professor Parks indicates, what we may look for and miss in the published work may show up in the yet unpublished:

From   the   published  sketches, or,  as  Howe called  them,  the   Rambles, we  learn  some­ thing of  his  actual life  on  the  road.  They
 have    other   purposes,  however,  than   the recital   of   his    day-to-day   experiences   in journal fashion. For   that factual history of his  life  as  a  traveller with exacting business to   transact,  one   may   turn  to   a   series   of personal letters  written  to  his  young   wife
... during  and   after  the   period  when    the
sketches were  being  published in  the  Nova­
scotian.

(Western and  Eastern Rambles)

The  Rambles use travel  mostly as an organizing principle. Rambling is for Howe,  as for others  who  have  worked  in this  genre,  a  movement within  a  space rather  than   one   through  it.   The   best travel   essayists,  though,  do   manage  to give more distinct impressions of persons, places, or  things  encountered than  Howe does. Haliburton's Clockmaker sketches, though   they   blow  out   in  the   swells  of S. Slick's  rhetoric, nevertheless create the illusion  of  passing  from  one  distinct and fully  observed   place   to  another.  Howe gets little directly  from  his linear  journeys but a largely sublime  landscape and  a generalized social  climate. The rambling that  counts is through Howe's  capacious mind.  The discoveries  we make  are  not individual finds but fascinating mixes like this:

As  we  retrace a  part of  the  road we  came, we  have  an  opportunity of surveying the College  and  Academy, and  to mark  more particularly  the   figure   of  the   village, and the  rural cottages by which it is surrounded; but   we   must   restrain  our   ramblings, and make  more  rapid progress, or  the  end  of our journey  will  be  like   the   end   of  Don   Juan and   Tristram Shandy, a  pretty considerable distance off.

The passage  is representative in  what it tells of Windsor,  in the impulse it acknowledges, and  in  the  curb  exercised or   to-be-exercised.  Howe   is  expressing here, one might  argue,  a need  for a more fully  and  freely  compendious form  than he   has   found.    Generally,  though,   he


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



manages to  make  ample room  for  him­
self,  even  in  the  confines  of  a  sentence.

There is also in the neighbourhood, what Shakespeare would call 'a good portly man, i'faith, and  a  corpulent; of a cheerful  look, a  pleasing  eye,  and  a  most  noble  carriage, and,  as  I  think,  his  age,  some  fifty' -and let him  but get  the flat of his generous  palm upon  your  back,  and  may  old  Nick  eat  me for a sandwich if you get out  of his clutches in a  hurry-stories   will  he  tell  you  and jokes will he  crack,  and  if the  bottle,  when kept  in  motion   by  his  good  humour,  does not  travel  as  far  or  as  fast  as  the  sun  (to which  Sheridan once  compared  it)   it  flies round  its orbit  much quicker.

This   is  Howe   the   rambler  at   his  best, letting his literary stock  soak his observa­ tions   and   absorb   them   into  an  almost purely   verbal,   imaginative  broth,   which is  no  less strong   for  that.  The man   he must   have  appeared  to  others   and   the man   he  seemed   to  himself  find  as  com­ plete   an   expression   here   as   anywhere. The  form he adopts and  the cast he gives to   it   are   enough  his  to   have   genuine distinction.
Professor  Parks  introduces the Rambles
with   all  that   one  might  reasonably  ask for and  more about Howe's  career, the province,   the  history   of  travel   in  Nova Scotia,  and  the  literary qualities of the sketches.  Like  that  to  Poems and Essays, this  introduction is ample, scholarly  and interesting  in   itself.   All  together,  these two volumes  of what  one  hopes  will be a larger  series are  most  satisfying.

ROBERT GIBBS


ENDURING  ESSENTIALS
THE    FAROE   ISLANDERS    SAGA,   translated by
George  Johnston. Oberon.
IT BEGINS with  murder. Two  Faroese brothers, Brestir  and  Beinir,  are  killed  by one  Hafgrim  and   his  men,   assisted   by
 Thrand  for  reasons   of  profit.   Sigmund and  Thorir, sons of the two brothers, wit­ ness the  killing.  After  it  Thrand  pays  a ship's    captain   to   take    Sigmund   and  Thorir so far away  they will never  return to the Faroe  Islands  for revenge on reach­ ing  manhood. The   two   boys  arrive   in Norway   far  northeast, are   given   haven  by  an  outlaw, Thorkell  Dryfrost. Thor­ kell schools the  two orphan cousins in all the  Norse  warlike  arts,  treats  them  as  if they   were   his  own   sons.  The   outlaw's daughter, Thurid, falls  in  love  with  the heroic  Sigmund, and  is pregnant by him when the two young men depart from Thorkell's mountain hideout for the court of Earl  Hakon.
At  this  point,   which   is  really  only  a prelude, it's  plain  what  is about   to  hap­ pen.  Sigmund   and   Thorir  will   become mighty  men, sea raiders  in  the service  of Earl   Hakon   and   later   King  Olaf  Tryg­ gvason. They will then seek 'father-atone­ ment' from  Thrand,  who  by  that   time has  become  the  most  prominent man  in the  Faroes.  Earl  Hakon has  made   judg­  ment  against  Thrand, demanding sover­ eignty  and  tribute from  the  Faroes.  Later the   Norse   King   Olaf   Tryggvason  also requires  that  the   Faroese   forsake   their heathen ways and  become  Christians. All this is said  to have  happened a thousand years ago.
But Thrand is a fox in other  ways than his red  hair.  He  does  not  welome  Chris­ tianity, nor  do the independence-minded Faroese  have any desire  to be subjects  of Norway's  King Olaf. Thrand  equivocates and  delays  payment of the  'father-atone­ ment'  judgment. Eventually he is respon­  sible for the deaths of both  Sigmund and Thorir. The   two  cousins  are   forced   to swim  for  their  lives  to  escape  Thrand's men,   reaching  another  island   where   a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sea-weakened Sigmund  is  murdered  for his gold  ring.
The  Saga  has  several  other  sub-plots,
but   the   Sigmund  and   Thorir   'father­ atonement' battle with  cunning  Thrand, anti-Christian  and   Faroese   nationalist, remains  central. The  two cousins are con­ ventional stock  figures  in  the  Saga,   but attractive since  sympathy generally runs toward  such  desperate survivors  of  their fathers'  murder.  And   yet  Thrand  is  a nationalist, apparently  wants   the  Faroe Islands  to remain  independent. He is also anti-Christian. And  these  are  two  quali­ ties with  which  I  feel  some  kinship  my­ self. But  Thrand's  nationalism and  anti­  Christianism are suspect  by reason of self­ interest:  he   is   reluctant  to   part    with father-atonement money  or relinquish his own high  position  in the islands.  And  the death of  Sigmund,  his  head   cut  off  by Thorgrim the  Bad for  the  sake of a gold ring-that  is incongruously reminiscent of Christopher Marlowe being  murdered with  a three-penny knife.
We   learn   from   George   Johnston in
his introduction that  the Faroe  Saga is fiction, despite  inclusion  of definitely  his­ toric   characters  like   Earl    Hakon   and King  Olaf  Tryggvason. It may  have been written by  an  Icelander, but  was  not  a dramatic version  of  history,  such  as  the Icelandic  settlement  of   Greenland  by Eirik  the  Red  and  Leif  the  Lucky's  Yin­ land discoveries. Says Johnston: "It must now  be found   only  as  a  series  of  inter­  polations  in other  sagas."
The    Saga's    fictional    character   and other  inaccuracies come as a considerable letdown   for   me;   but   I   console   myself with its apparent authenticity, murder, blood feud and  revenge. Those  last things run  through all  the   Icelandic sagas,  in fact  through all human history.  But  as a
 definite  romantic, I sympathize more with Sigmund and  Thorir than fox-like Thrand, differing in this feeling  from  the translator himself.
The Faroe Saga, in George Johnston's version, seems both  modern and  archaic. There  are   abrupt  shifts   of  tense   from present   to  past  in  the  same   paragraph. And  we  get  lovely  archaic-modem  lan­ guage  like, "The bigger  mare's  cunt  you if  you  can't bring  down   two  men   with two dozen  ..." I can  hear George  John­ ston's  own  chuckle  behind  the  phrase.
All  this  gives  the  saga  an  odd  feeling for  the  reader, as  if  it  were  an  experi­ mental   short  novel  surfacing in  another time   continuum. There  are   no   heroic  posturings  or  speeches; nobody  stands  in a Norse great  hall  thundering and  thirst­ ing  for  revenge.  All  the   more   chilling  then,  when Sigmund says to Thorir after  watching  their  fathers' murder: "Let us not   cry  cousin,   and   remember  all   the longer."
Unless you're  a scholar or immortal Viking,   you   cannot  know   the   ancient Norse language, and  must  compare one translated saga with  another to make  any judgment  as  to  accuracy  of  translation and  literary  excellence. I did read some of the  Icelandic sagas  a few  years  ago,  and my  memory   of  them   is  that   they  were more  orotund, complicated in  plot,  gen­ erally  less readable than  the  Faroe  Saga.  Now that  may be because of differences in general  character of the other sagas,  per­ haps less expert translators. I don't know. But   whatever   the   reasons,    this   Faroe  Islanders Saga  seems  to  me  remarkably interesting.
It   moves.  There  is  scarcely   any   ex­ traneous  material;   everything  is   func­ tional.  One   passage  describes  sea-raider Sigmund's discovering enemy Norse ships


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in harbour: "the fifth of these was a drag­ on  ship." Reading  that   I  stiffened   for some   reason,   thinking  of   the   Gokstad  Ship,  and  Coleridge's "There was a ship, quoth he."  And  while  the  Saga  may  be fictional,  it does translate one back to that thousand-year-old  era,  scarcely   less  vio­ lent  and  bloodthirsty than  now.
Few  people  reading the  Faroe Saga  or this  review  are  likely  to  know  where  the Faroe  Islands  are  located. I did  not  my­ self,  had   barely   heard   of  them.  There­ fore:   The   Faroes  are  between  Shetland and  Iceland, "a  small  archipelago in the North    Atlantic."    There   are    eighteen islands  of  different  areas,   and   no  trees grow  there  except  those  planted by  the people   themselves.   The    fifty   thousand islanders   live  by  fishing,  are  now  under  Danish rule,  and  their  language is Norn,  a variant of the old  Norwegian. Modern novels  and  poems  have  been  written in this survival-language from  the  past; it is the   language   of   learning  in   Faroese schools.
But  back  to  the  Saga  itself. The char­
acters in it, those Norse who later became Faroese,  strike  me as supra-human, much larger  than  life.  And  I suppose  the  rea­ son   for   that    impression  is   the   Saga­  writer's method and  art: stripped  of all but    things    he   regarded   as   essentials. Among  those were loyalty, honour, friend­ ship,    love,   endurance,   treachery   and courage-things that have endured since time's  beginning.
AL  PURDY


PLAYS IN DISGUISE
LAWRENCE  RUSSELL,   Penetration.  Sono   Nis,
$6.95·
MYsTIFICATION  and   specialization  seem to  be  the  main  thrust and  sole rationale

106
 of contemporary academicism. Lawrence Russell  should  know  about that; for  the past  few  years  he  has  been  teaching at the   University    of  Victoria.  He   knows about  it  and  he  obviously  tries  to play it down. The  back  jacket  blurb  of this book tries to capture his down-to-earth, folksy manner, by quoting him: "These days I am more into multi-media, particularly DNA,  which  is a 'magazine' issued on stereophonic tape,  particularly my electric guitar,  which   takes   me   places   I  have never   been   to   before ... " You   would hardly  dare  accuse  such  a  guy  of  teach­ ing  Creative Writing  at  an  institute of higher   learning,  you  know,  like  a  uni­ versity.
I first  came  across  some  of  these  five
playlets some years ago when  I was work­ ing   as  dramaturge  for   the   Vancouver Playhouse.   They   had    only   been   given amateur  productions, mainly  by an  able high  school  teacher in  Chilliwack, Ray Logie.  I tried  to  interest the  Playhouse, which   at   that   time   still   had   a  studio stage, supposedly  for  experimental  work. In   those  days  it  was  even   harder than now to sell a Canadian theatre on Cana­ dian   plays,   especially   very   short   one­ acters.  A  little  later,   or  perhaps at  the same  time,  Lawrenee  Russell  sent me an essay  of  his,  entitled   "Theatre  of  the Invisible". which   was  supposed   to  help me  understand   his  plays.  It was  full  of arcane  phrases, like "inscape" and  "audi­ ence fragmentation". I frankly  confessed to  being  confused  by  all  this,  while  still professing  a partiality for  the  little  plays themselves,  simply   for   what   they   are: well-written, good, suspenseful, economic theatre. Three of the plays were produced finally  by  the  Factory  Lab   in  Toronto, and  I am  glad. But  now I find  a learned gentleman, also  from   the   University of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Victoria, has  written an  introduction  to this   volume, freely quoting  from the Theatre of  the  Invisible   as  part   of  the
'intellectual  framework'  for   the   plays.
The aim, one reads, is to enlighten; yet I still find this whole business as so much academic claptrap (for  want  of a more folksy expression.)
No  amount  of  mystification  will  dis­
guise  the  fact  that  four  out  of these  five plays are  straightforward one-acters, well written in  the  semi-absurdist style of the Sixties,  somewhat reminiscent of Pinter's short  plays  and  even  more  of Ray  Brad­ bury's  short  stories,  and  none  the  worse for  that. The  fifth  piece,  which  is  intro­ duced   by  the  author under   the  aegis  of "total theatre" because  it is  meant to be tape-recorded  and   heard   in   the   dark,  could  just as easily be described as "words  for   tape", or  a  "radio  piece"   or  some other  intelligible term. But calling a spade a  spade   might   not   have   prompted  yet another  academic from  the  University of Manitoba  (also  quoted   on  the  back  jac­ ket)  to opine  that  "Russell is the heaviest avant-garde  playwright in  the  country." Well,  I respectfully  beg to differ. For  one thing,  there  does not seem  to be much  of an  avant-garde in  this  country, "heavy" or  otherwise,   and   on  the  whole,  one  is thankful. Lawrence  Russell  has  hit  upon a  formula  which  has  served  him  well  in turning  out   a   number  of  clever   shorts with  considerable promise. Now   one wants  to see if he is going  to write  some full-length plays,  where  characters  have to  be  fully  developed, relationships and sentiments portrayed, ideas argued, ques­ tions  answered, and   blackouts  followed by another scene. The  profession of writ­ ing plays is a time-honoured one and  dis­ tinct  from putting out "magazines" called
 DNA   on   tape   and   playing   an   electric guitar.
Penetration is a beautifully produced volume  but  it  is not  worth $6.gs.  Play­ scripts  are  a commodity, trade  tools, and  it  would  have  been  more  useful  to pub­  lish  the  playlets  separately in  fifty  cents pamphlets,  to   aid   production  by  small theatre groups,  at  universities, or  in  the community.  As  it  is,  the   book  is  most likely to be bought  by collectors and  aca­  demics,  as  if  it  were  poetry or  fugitive  prose  pieces.  And  when   you  are  in  the business of theatre, this  distinction is not purely academic: it  makes a deadly difference.
PETER HAY


GRIT IN THE OYSTER

FLORENCE   MCNEILL,    Ghost   Towns.  McClel- land  and  Stewart. Paper,  $3-95·

PoETRY communicates pain  much  more readily  than   joy. Why  this  should   be,  I am not foolhardy enough to pronounce upon.   I  suspect  it  has  something to  do with   the  oyster's   irritant  becoming the pearl.  And  perhaps only  mystics  like Hopkins know  how  to create the  experi­ ence  of  joy's transport, love's  escstacy  as well as of the  soul's  dark  night? Satirists cannot   come  near  it-else  they  tumble into  sentimentality.
Florence  McNeil is steering her boat through these conflicting waters. Her fine, ironic commentaries are  placed  at the be­ ginning  of  the  book.  Although she  is a native    of   British    Columbia  the   title "Ghost Towns" will  not  lead  you  to  the abandoned gold  mines  of the  hinterland. Her  ghosts are  nostalgic, called  up  from the past of celluloid.  She is writing about


107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



childhood, the  childhood of our  century in North America, with  its Victorian hangovers.  Her   tidy,  appraising  eye records,  in  vivid  metaphor, the  way  the past   looks  to  us  now,   from   its   photo­ graphs,   films,   newspaper    descriptions, family  albums.
This  has  been  done  before,  of  course, and   Atwood's  use  of  the  device   in  her earlier books of poetry  would  seem  to be un-reproducible. But McNeil has her own voice,  her   own   irony   and   coolness.   In the   best  poems  she  achieves   an  objec­ tivity  that  makes  her  human  rather than  feminine  (in  the  latter  role  she  has  no axe to grind) . Here  Florence is Alice and the   Wonderland  is  the  world  of  after­ knowledge:

Your  are  out  of  place  with  your  prim  head hat
that  great accusing face
a  child  from  a  nightmare
that disturbed Carroll and   Tenniel and   told  us  their   Victorian  rest was  only  temporary

who  put  you on  a train

and wheeled you  into our  untidy  times

but  here  you  are  passing   through our  lives threatening us  with   your   propriety

Saunter  through your  own  underworld
Alice
or  jump  across  your  sunny oxford brooks
and   leave  us  to  think   there are  no machines that   bind  you  to  this  age
give  us  permission to  take  you  off  the  train

-Alice on  the  Train

The poem  "Old Movies" has  two sec­ tions:    Queen  Victoria's  Funeral   and "The Boer  War". The strong  first  stanza is    characteristic   of    McNeil's    poetic formula  (and   sometimes  it   is   close  to being  a  formula, a  scientific  model  from which  she  works) :

108
 Has  the  old  Queen lived  so long mled as  a stamping girl
as  lacy  dark  burden
on  a  throne grown increasingly larger seen  Dickens turn London into  chapters presided over Darwin
and  the  frenzy  of  jungle structures above   and   below  the  cities
colored the  globe  red  with  English ink rspilled the  blood
from  her  girlish  pen

The  final  stanza  is always  a commentary on the items  presented:

Better to  let  the  fable   be
record her  death in  dignity in  print

and   bury  this  black  and  white record

.the  vicious  faces  of nations
passing   like  puppets with   tangled strings aeading  grey  processions
M'hich blend  with  one  hopeless  frenzy into   the  twentieth century

A  powerful   series  of  metaphors, but weakened, attenuated  by so many adjec­ tives. The same might  be said for the Boer War  section:

leaving only  the  silent   moviemakers cranking out   negative  reoorts
to  wonder
about the  disorderly columns retreating unedited
into   the  future

For me, the poem should end there. But McNeil   is  relentless   in  hammering  her point  home. She adds:

but  there is no definition yet for  what  they are  doing
and a show  without words can   never   be  cited
as  dangerous

In a number of strong  poems from  this collection     of    seventy-five    the    poet's method  works:  as in  "Montgolfier's  Bal­ loon", "Lillienthal's Glider", "1915 Fight­ ing  Planes" where  the  pilot  "forever out of  focus"  is  "captain of  a  skeletal   tri­ angle",  "defender of a  cloud".

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  method certainly captures  some­ thing  we have  all experienced, especially in   a   shorter,  more   concise   poem   like "Newsreel." But  because   the  pattern in many  of the  poems  is so consistently for­ mal,  and  so insistent  on  extended meta­  phors,  the  sameness  can  become  tedious. One  is led  to expect  that  each  poem  will end  with  its  aphoristic commentary and the reader is left with  no chance at all to leap,  to  jump  at  his  commentary. Prose should  tell all, but  poetry  should  tell half. McNeil's   personal     reminiscences   of childhood appear  intermittently  as  the book  proceeds. The  same   irony   comes through  vividly  in  "Saturday  Matinee", "When  I Was  Down   Beside  the   Sea", "Domestic  Alice",   "West   Coast  Christ­ mas",  "First Dive" -poems  that are  de­ lightfully   worth   having. Here  is  a  part  of   one   beautiful  portrait,   "A   Grand­
father":

When I visited  my grandfather
as  a  child he  was  constantly mending

it  was  the  sails  that fascinated me watching him  by the  hour
welding old  canvas into   mythical  voyages
I asked  to  come  along
though  the   rain   fell   continuously  on   our plans
and  his  old   boat   rotted  like   a   wooden tombstone
in  the  backyard
his  hands    deftly melting needle and   twine linto yielding oceans
were  awkward with  grandchildren looking up  from  his  sewing
he'd grope frantically for  names exorcising evil  spirits
by  patting  assorted unrecognized heads and  seeing  that we  did  not  stir
flounder in  his  pockets tfor pennies

All in  all,  Ghost  Towns provides  very solid  fare.  Perhaps  there   are   too  many poems  in  the  book, in  these  days of one-
 course   meals.   One   tires,   especially   to­ wards  the  end  where,  as Ihinted  at  the beginning of this  review,  there  is a  flag­ ging   quality  to   the   dozen   or   so   love poems.  Beside   true   love,   satire   cannot breathe! And  Icontend   that   McNeil's true  contribution, and  a very real one for Canadian poetry,  is in  its  relationship to the   tradition  of   Birney,   F.   R.   Scott,  Purdy:  an   ironic  self-mockery  that   in­ cludes  us all.
DOROTHY LIVESAY



REALISM, PICARESQUE
PSEUDO-CONFESSION

CLAUDE   JASMIN,    Ethel     and    the    Terrorist.
Translated by David S. Walker. Harvest House. $2.25.  MARIE-CLAIRE BLAis,  St. Law­ rence  Blues. Translated by Ralph  Manheim.
Doubleday. $8.g5.   HUBERT  AQUIN, Blackout.
Translated by Alan  Brown. House of Anansi.
$3.50 (paper), $8.50 (cloth).

THESE THREE translations of Quebecois novels   have   a   peculiar  thematic   simi­ larity  in  that  each  finds  the  political and social  issues  centring  around  separatism secondary   and  in  some  cases  almost   ir­ relevant,  and   concludes  that    personal, usually love, relationships are paramount. But  the artistic  traditions the  three  grow out  of  make  them  very  different books: Ethel and the Terrorist is a quite  straight­ forward, realistic  narrative, St. Lawrence Blues  is something like  a  French  Cana­ dian  version  of picaresque, and  Blackout is largely  concerned with  playing tricky, sophisticated games  with  artistic conven­  tions and  the  reader's  expectations.
Ethel  and the Terrorist by Claude Jas­ min concerns  a conflict  in the loyalties  of Paul,  the  protagonist, and  contrasts the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



emotions and  values  those  loyalties  come to represent. Although he is very much involved  in  the  terrorist activities of  the separatist   "Movement"   (he    plants    a bomb  which  kills a night  watchman) , he is building a love  relationship with  non­ French  Canadian,  Jewish,   Ethel,   with whom  he flees to New York City. During the  trip  to  New  York,  and  in  the  subse­ quent  time spent  there,  Paul begins to re­ flect  upon   the  hate  which  has  begun  to surface   in   the   "Movement",  and   con­ trasts   this  with  the   race-obscuring  love he  feels  for  Ethel.
The choice  of  Ethel  over  the  "Move­ ment", of love over  hate,  is  quite  simple until    Paul   is   caught   between    federal  police  from  Ottawa,  who offer  him  free­ dom in return for acting as a stool pigeon from   within   the   terrorist  organization, and  French  Canadian  terrorists, who  in­ sist  that   he  terminates  his  relationship with   the  Jewess.  The  ensuing decision introduces   the   full   complexities  of  the issues  involved,   but  the  ending is some­ what  ambiguous  and   leaves  the   reader uncertain of how  Paul  resolves the ethics of  his conflict.  Although the  strength of his love for Ethel  convinces  the leaders  of the  "Movement" to  ease  their  racist stance,  it is unfortunately unclear how he intends  to   redirect   a   political  group which has moved from a positive to a destructive stage,  or  what  value,  if any, this  kind   of  destructive,  murderous activity  might  have.  It also seems  regret­ table   that   these  important  complexities are  approached  only  at  the  end  of  the novel,  where   the  difficulties  in  making  such  an   impossible   choice  can  be  only briefly  portrayed.
In   St.  Lawrence Blues   Marie-Claire Blais takes a more comprehensive, though more  purely  descriptive, view  of  French

IIO
 Canadian life and  the  role  of organized political  activity  within  it. A simple  epi­ sodic  plot  is used  to  present an  almost  exhaustive  number  of   two-dimensional "type" characters in  this  stylized  version of QUI!becoise  low-life. The  novel is nar­  rated    by   Ti-Pit,  whose   name   means "little-nothing", and  who  tells  us almost as much  about  the other  characters as he does   about    himself.    His    friends    and acquaintances include:  Mere   Fontaine, the   motherly   proprietor  of   the   shabby rooming  house   in   which   Ti-Pit   lives; Mimi,  a homosexual  drag queen; Ti-Cul, a  childhood friend   from   the  orphanage who escapes from  prison  in order  to com­ mit a hideous, vengeful  murder; Papilion, a  radical  separatist and  a  poet  trying  to write  in perfect  Joual; Papineau, a hypo­ critical,  materialistic,   communist;  Mrs.  Papineau,  who  becomes  a radical femin­ ist; a lawyer from Quebec City who earns
$25,ooo  per  year  fixing  parking  tickets, and who decides to write a pornographic novel;  Baptiste,  Ti-Pit's friend   from  the rubber  factory  who is laid off so the com­ pany will not have  to pay him  a pension; Baptiste's son,  Ti-Guy, a  heroin  addict; Vincent, a  not  very  religious  priest  who devotes  himself  to  helping  criminals and drug   addicts,   and  an  ambulance driver  who  seems  indifferent to  all  deaths and  potential deaths.
Seen against  the backdrop of this array of characters is a Christmas-Eve general strike  of  all  French  Canadian  workers, most of whom seem only out for a lark. Violence eventually errupts and  a student is killed  by police.  The  public  mourning over  the  death of  this  "martyr" is  con­ trasted   with  the  lonely,  suicidal,  poison death of Ti-Guy, who, on his death bed, is comforted only  by his girlfriend,  Ti-Pit, and  Vincent. Ti-Guy's dying words under-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cut the possible positive political value in­ herent in such  a massive  protest:  "... if someone  takes me in his arms  ... I think
... I  think  I'll  live ..."
The  novel ends with  a dream in which Ti-Pit rejects  his nickname and  its mean­ ing,   presumably  developing  a  sense  of self-respect or self-love which might begin to  counteract  emptiness,  brutality,  and loneliness;  but as Ti-Pit realizes, it is only a dream.
Although the  novel's  concern for  indi­ viduals  and  their  need  for  love  is  clear, surprisingly,  it  is  not   a  powerful  emo­ tional  novel.  The  thin  characters do  not evoke  the  sympathy  necessary   to  make this  kind  of  theme  completely  effective, and  although these  characters  provide  a kind  of description of  "Joualonie", there is little  evaluation of  this  society.
A  book  very  different in  nature  from
these   first   two  is  Blackout    by  Hubert Aquin. It begins with a letter  from Olym­ pe  Ghezzo-Quenum, a  Black,  politically  radical, Ivory  Coast  pharmacist, toP. X. Magnant, pharmacist, and leader  of Que­ becois  separatists. P.  X.  Magnant  then narrates an obsessional, partially drug influenced, confession  of  the  murder of his   lover,   Joan.  This   is  edited    by   a "friend" of Magnant's, with  occasional additional editorial notes from  R.R.  R.R. takes  an  increasingly  active  role, altering and  adding to Magnant's text,  until  the latter half of the novel is narrated by the "editor", R.R.,  and  the  diary  of  Ghezzo­ Quenum.
The  novel  is oftentimes confusing but always challenging as Aquin  plays his intricate literary  games. The  first of many false  scents  is  the  appearance  that   the novel will have an epistolary form  with Olympe  Ghezzo-Quenum a  major  char­ acter, but  after  his letter, the only one in
 the novel, he is not mentioned again for almost  one hundred pages. Similarly, one expects   P.  X.   Magnant  to  defend   his crime with  his politics,  but  he admits that separatism  is no  justification. When   the identity  of R.R., the mysterious second editor,  is finally "revealed" in the middle of the novel, she misrepresents herself, leading   both   the  editor and   the  reader astray.  Several  commonplace literary motifs  are  evoked  only  to be parodied or metamorphosed:   the   obsessional   char­ acter  "confessing" is  finally  appreciated not    because    he    removes    the    moral  grounds   for  condemnation,  but   because his remorse  develops  into  real  love and  a painful sense of loss; instead of one "edi­ tor"  there  are  two; and  several  apparent dopplegangers  become   false  ones,  while a  hidden one  finally  emerges.
The  ideas of art  as artifice and  as arti­ fact  seem  to  fascinate Aquin.  Each  seg­ ment  of the novel is a text written by one of the characters, and read, revised, and/ or  edited   by  one  or  more  of  the  other  characters. The  activities of  reading and  writing   are   part   of   the   action   of  the novel, and characters develop as a result of  what  they  have  written and   read.   P. X. Magnant's feeling  for Joan grows into love as he writes, and  he consciously  tries to make  a metaphor for Joan's body with his bloodstained manuscript.  R.R.'s  false self-identification  is designed  to  confuse the editor  and  thus  alter  their  interaction not only as competitive editors,  but as characters as well.  R.R.'s final  happy  re­ laxed  feeling  is largely  a result  of  reading the  novel  Blackout. But  on  another level all  of  the   novel's  documents  form   the constructed artifice for Aquin's challenge to the  reader  to understand exactly  what is happening.
Thematically, the similar  radical politi-


II I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cal  views of Ghezzo-Quenum and  Mag­ nant  lead  the  reader   to  believe  social  or political   concerns  will  be  foremost, but these  interests   slowly  fade,  and   through each  of the  bizarre, subjective narrations is  seen  a  desperate,  almost   obsessional,  desire  of  fulfilling  human love.

GARY WERDEN


COUREUR DE BOIS
NORMAND LAFLEUR,  La vie traditionnelle du Coureur  de bois aux  XIX• et XX• sielces. Editions  Lemeac.

THIS  ETHNOGRAPHIC   DESCRIPTION  of  a folk   type   is  of   immediate  interest  to readers of Canadian literature, because literature and  legend  have  made  so much of  the  coureur   de  bois.  Lafleur  concen­ trates  on  three  specific  regions, mention­ ing  other   parts  of  Quebec  and  Ontario. If you want  colourful  first-hand descrip­  tions   of  what   went   on   in   the   lumber  camp, or   how  a  man   used   to  catch   a moose and  take  it  home  to the  family  for butchering,  you will find them  here, com­ plete  with diagrams, in careful transcrip­ tions   of   conversations  with   men   who remember. Their language has  been  lov­ ingly preserved,  but sufficiently annotated for  the  city  reader to  whom  the  book  is addressed.
The underlying thesis is in the tradition
of  F.  A. Savard. The   bushman is living proof  of  an  adaptation to  the  land, far deeper  than  that  of the farmer, and  going back  through time  in  a  way  that   makes French Canadians into  partial continuers of  the  seventeenth-century Indians. The book  was  originally a  D.E.S. thesis,  and aims   at   objective  recording,  but   man's links   with   nature  and   history   have   an easily  recognized   emotional  significance.

I I 2
 There are moments when  Lafleur  does not clearly  relate  his emotional overtones to the  type of evidence  he is using. A few references  to the  coureur  de bois's love of freedom have no visible origin in the catalogue of techniques for  trapping and fishing, nor in the collection of backwoods aphorisms. This   side  of  the   coureur   de bois  tradition  has  survived   in  the  myth which   has  grown  around  the  folk  type, and  has its own history,  especially in literature. With  Lafleur's work  as a  new point  of departure, we should  be able  to make more exact cross-references between literature, folk myth  and  social  history.
The  term "coureur de bois" survives in modern speech more vigorously than might  have  been  expected. Lafleur's  in­ troduction connects  it with  the  usage we know from our  history  books. This  part  is very  uneven.  It raises  much  interesting evidence  but  does  not  solve  the  difficult problem  of how the word was being  used in  the  middle   period   (Lafleur seems  to avoid the vexed question of distinguishing between  coureur  de  bois and  voyageur). The  most  valuable  contribution  of  the work  is the fuller  documentation of the convergence of  different  forest   types  in the  nineteenth century, and  the  survival into  our  own  time  of  real  contact with the forest. Lafleur  rightly disclaims all sociological  theory  in  his  portrait of  the last representatives of a long and  often neglected  tradition which  has played a positive role in the cultural and  economic development of Canada.

JACK WARWICK

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ON THE VERGE


*****  MARGARET PRANG,  N. W. Rowell: On­
tario  Nationalist. University  of  Toronto  Press.
$25.00.  To  write the  life  of a  might-have-been
is perhaps the  most  difficult task  a  biographer
can  set  herself. And  Margaret Prang's subject,
N.  W.  Rowell-whose   name  is  now   hardly remembered even  by  historically minded  Can­ adians-was   a   man   who   had   great    poten­ tialities  and   never   realized them. He  might, had    he   wished,  have   succeeded   Laurier  as leader of  the   Liberal  Party,  instead  of  Mac­ kenzie   King, but   he  was  too  stiffly  Ontarian, too  rigidly principled, to  be  able   to  make  the necessary  accommodations.  Today we  remem­ ber  Rowell -if at  all -as  partially  responsi­ ble  for  the  Rowell-Sirois Report  which   did  so much   to  define   the   hitherto  dubious confines of  federal  and  provincial powers, but   he  was also   a   notable  Methodist,  a   notable  Liberal leader in  provincial and  dominion politics, and perhaps the  most  knowledgeable constitutional lawyer    of   his   time.    Above   all,   he   was   an archetypical  WASP, doggedly Protestant,  dog­ gedly  monolingual, doggedly teetotal, doggedly suspicious  of  Quebec  politics   and   politicians, and   under  his   democratic  guise   a   thorough authoritarian, for  he elevated his own  will into  a   principle  and   then   sought to  make   others into  moral men  by imposing it on  them: hence  the  fervent  insistence on  prohibition and con­ scription that  in  the  end  destroyed  him   as  a politician. It would  have   been  easy  to  write  a partisan  study  of   Rowell,  and    the    tempta­ tion   would   have  been  to  condemn. Margaret Prang has  avoided  that  temptation, and   as  a result she  has  written a  remarkable biography. She    explored   with    understanding    Rowell's actions and  captured what   little of  his  inner life   he  allowed  to  escape   from   an   elaborate concealment; she  is  clearly a  devotee  of  the window-pane school   of  writing, and   through her    careful,  unbiassed  prose,    the    image  of Rowell  shines    clear,  in   all   its   honesty,  its rigour,  its   intolerance.  "How  unpleasant  to meet   Mr.   Rowell!" one   is  often  tempted to intone,  yet,   as   Dr.    Prang  displays,  he   was often  in    fact    very    pleasant   company  and capable of  deep  compassion. Like  all  of  us, he was  moved   by a  mixture of  feeling and  prin­ ciple. Too  often, principle ran   wild  and  dis­ torted his  actions, and   this   was  the  cause of his  failure.

****   DONALD    CREIGHTON,      Canada:     The
Heroic    Beginnings.    Macmillan.   There   are
 authors who  establish  by  sheer talent and  in­ dustry such  credits in  the  bank  of  achievement that  even   their lesser   works  command atten­ tion. It  is  this   quality that   distinguishes  the true  man  of letters from  the  hack; for  the  first makes   something interesting  and  craftsmanly out   of  the  most  menial  literary task,  whereas the    second    stamps   mediocrity   on   his   most ambitious  efforts.  Donald Creighton  is  of  the first  kind; despite  all  his  academic affiliations, he stands in  his  books  as a true man of  letters. And    in    Canada:   The    Heroic    Beginnings, though   he  is  saying   very   little  that  has   not been  said  in  his  early   books,  and  though  he is-as  it   were-repeating  himself   on   com­ mission   (since   the  book  is  meant to  celebrate the   achievements  of   the   Historic  Sites   and Monuments Board), he  still   produces a  sound and   readable  review    of   the   Canadian   past. And  if  his  book  ends  in  something of  a  dying fall,  with   the  small   if  gallant incident of  the voyage   of  the  Saint   Roch, this   merely  shows us Donald Creighton in  the  unfamiliar role  of master of  the  anti-climax!

**** 	ELIZABETH    BAIRD,    Classic   Canadian Cooking.    James   Lorimer,   $9-95·   BLANCHE POWNALL    GARRETT,    Canadian Country   Pre­ serves  & Wines.  James  Lorimer,  $9-95·  The best  books  on  food  are  those  that can   be  both used   with   profit   and    read    with   enjoyment, that  not  only give sound recipes, but also  trans­ mit  a  sense  of  passion   in  the  search for  them  and  a  pride  in  the  art of  preparing good  food. These two  books, which  admirably complement each    other,  fulfil    both    functions   superbly. Classic  Canadian  Cooking   not   only   reminds us  of   half-forgotten   culinary  delights  of  our  youth,  but  also  introduces other  possibilities of which  most  of  us  were   unaware, and   does   it not    only  with    knowledgeable   introductions that  impress  on  us  the  role  of  food  in  our  na­ tional   heritage, but  also  with   the   kind  of  wit that  juxtaposes - for    example - Scripture Cake   and   Delicious  Devil's  Food.  Canadian Country  Preserves and  Wines  dips  deeper not only   into    the   landscape-for    many of   its recipes  are  based  on  wild  gleanings-but also into   the  pioneer tradition  with  its  old  kitchen gardens  and   its   folklore  of   making  do   and making  well.  Both   authors are  proudly  con­ scious   of   the   historical  resonances  of    their subjects, and   in  each   case   the   design  of   the book   is   excellent -readable  type    for   those with  practical things  on  their minds,  pleasant wood   engraving  illustrations  from   the  days when  cooking first  proved itself  as  an  art, and  a  book  light  to  handle and falling  easily  open  for  use.


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



****   J. L. GRANATSTEIN, Canada's  War: The
Politics    of   Mackenzie   King's    Government,
1939-1945. Oxford  University   Press.   $r8.g5. The true images  of  public men  are  often  slow in  crystallizing.  Only   now,   without  diminish­ ing   our   varying esteems for   Macdonald  and  Laurier, do  we  realize   that  a  trinity of  great political  Canadians  cannot    do    other   than  include-reluctant   though    we   may    be   to assert it-that  unattractive  man   and   superb leader, William Lyon  Mackenzie King. King's paraded mediocrity, his secretiveness, his super­ stitions,  his  obsession  with   national unity, his sense  of  being not  merely conspired against by his  fellow  citizens but  also  the  personification of    a   young  nation   threatened   by   enemies, bound  him   to  Canadian  people of  both  lan­ guages  by  the  veins  of  affinity, by  the  subtle capillaries of identification. It is not accidental that  the  longest   years   of  real  Liberal  ascend­ ancy   were   those  enjoyed  under King. And  of all  King's Years, the  most  significant and  evi­ dently  the   most   satisfying   to   this   smug   and  uncertain   being  were   those   in  which  he  ma­  noeuvred  the   canot   de   maitre   of   Canadian state through  the  rapids of  racial tension dur­ ing   World   War    II,  between the    Scylla   of British  imperial arrogance  and   the   Charybdis of   American  nco-imperial  power   hunger into  the  post-war lake  where Canada  for  a  blessed period sustained the  illusion of  being  the  most important  of  the   world's  middle  powers.   In
Canada's  War, J. L. Granatstein gives  us  the
best  political history we  have   yet  had   of  that
recent but  already strange  period from   which
the   actors  have   almost  passed   away; he  also helps  to indicate how  King's manoeuvres in extricating  himself   and   his   country  from   its early   difficulties  in   becoming  a   true    nation have  contributed to  the  problems of  American economic and   political domination  we  are  to­ day  so desperately attempting  to  mitigate. But King, the   Prince  of  Denmark in  this  play  of power, remains as  elusive as  ever; the  fascin­ ating   book   that  will   be   his   true   biography remains to  be written, and  when   it  is  given  to us  its   best   passages  may   well   consist   of  elo­ quently evasive  silences.


****   The  Bloomsbury  Group, edited by S. P. Rosenbaum.   University   of    Toronto    Press,
$ro.oo paperback, $25.00 cloth. During the present century Bloomsbury has  been  a  potent and  evocative word   in  English literary  circles. By the  time  I  first  heard it  at the  end  of  the
1920's, it had   already  taken on  a  generalized
air; it  tended to  mean  modernism gone  man­
darin,  that  slightly mysterious world   of  older


II4
 
and    successful   writers  who   held    the   passes through which  younger writers were  trying   to enter. All  kinds  of  writers who   never   in  fact had   much    connection  with    the   Bloomsbury Group were  included in  this  wider  definition: certainly Eliot  though not  Huxley, and  equally certainly  Eliot's  publishing  house   of  Faber & Faber,  which    operated  from    the   very   geo­ graphical  heart  of   Bloomsbury.   Historically, however, the  Bloomsbury Group  was  that cir­ cle  of   painters  and   writers   which   found  its most   visible   centre  in   the   family    of   Leslie  Stephen, and   most   notably   in  his  daughters, Virginia Woolf  and  Vanessa  Bell.  There was Lytton Strachey but  not  his  devoted Carring­ ton,   there   were  those  two  noted  fuglemen of modernist art, Clive  Bell  and  Roger Fry,  there was -linked    to   the    writers   and    painters mainly by a  shared devotion to  G.  E.  Moore's philosophy-the economist Maynard  Keynes, and,  elusively   and  intermittently,  there    was E.   M.   Forster.  Class,    education  and    tastes united the  Group, which   in  recent years,  and especially since  Michael  Holroyd's  monumen­ tal  book on Lytton Strachey, has  been  arousing a  renewed public interest, as  well  as  a  revival of  the  controversy regarding  what the  Group really  was. The  Bloomsbury Group, a fascinat­ ing    collection   of    documentary   writings  by members and  onlookers  (some  of  them  hither­ to   unpublished),  presents  an   unusually inti­ mate   glimpse  into   one  of  the  most  influential and   interesting  conjunctions  of  talent in  the English literary tradition. Professor Rosenbaum is  planning to  write a  literary  history of  the Bloomsbury Group;  the  present volume  serves as  an  admirable prelude to  such  a  venture.


***  R.    B.    NEVITT,  A   Winter  at  Fort   Mac­ Leod.  McClelland  &  Stewart,  $7-95·  This  is one   of   the   documents  of  western   Canadian history which  the  Glenbow  Foundation is Cal­ gary   is  now   releasing  in   collaboration  with McClelland  &   Stewart.   Nevitt  went   on   the celebrated  western  drive   of   the   NWMP  as Assistant  Surgeon,  and   in   this   role   spent  a winter at  Fort  MacLeod, filling  his spare time  by writing a diary in  the  form  of  letters to  his fiancee.  He   was   also  one   of   those   talented, untrained artists who went  to  the  West  in sur­  prising numbers  during the  later years  of  the nineteenth  century, and  apart from   the  inter­ est  of his  written chronicle of  everyday life  in an   early   Mountie  post,   the   illustrations  pre­  sent  some  extraordinary vivid   visual   glimpses  of   Indians, police   posts,   metis   encampments, and  other aspects  of existence in  the  first  years when  Canada dominated the  great  plains.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



***   JAMES H. GRAY, The  Roar  of the Twen­ ties. Macmillan, $12.95. James Gray  emerged as a writer of  books -after a long  journalistic career-with  that splendid  recollective docu­ mentary on  the  Depression, The  Winter Years. He  has  since  followed it  with  a  series  of works dealing  with    various   aspects  of   prairie  life before   World  War   II,  and   The   Roar  of the Twenties is another in  the  same  vein,  a  rather breezy   portrait of  a  decade, with   some  inter­ esting   documentation   on   hitherto  rather  ob­ scure aspects of  the  time, such,  for  example, as the  emergence of  the  Ku   Klux   Klan in  Can­ ada.  It is  a   piece   of   good   popular  history, worth adding to  one's  shelf  of  prairie writing, but,   despite  Gray's  efforts, it  lacks   the   sense of  profound  personal involvement one  experi­ enced    on   reading  The   Winter   Years,  the quality distinguishing that classic  of  Canadian autobiography from  everything  Gray   has  writ­  ten  since.

***   LEWIS  C.  WALMSLEY, Bishop  in  Honan. Mission  and  Museum in  the  Life  of William C. White. University of Toronto Press. $ro.oo. Despite  his  long   career  as  an   Anglican  mis­ sionary in  China,  William C.  White's  highest  claim   to  our   gratitude is  the  great  collection of   Chinese  artifacts-the  best   outside  the People's Republic  of  China-that  he  assem­ bled   for   the   Royal   Ontario   Museum.  White began   his  career  as  a   literalist,  evangelizing Christian  of  a  peculiarly  Victorian kind   very difficult to  reconcile with   the  connoisseur and  scholar,  deeply   conscious  of   the   values   and  value   of   Chinese  civilization,  that   he   later became,   and    certainly  the   most   fascinating aspect  of   Walmsley's  biography  of  the   Sino­  phile  bishop  is  the  painstaking way  he  recon­ structs, from   White's own   words   in   journals, letters and   other  writings, the   course of  this metamorphosis.


FOR POST CATACLYSMIC NEW ZEALANDERS
IF  ALL   OUR  history books  were  destroyed, the post-cataclysmic explorer  from   New   Zealand, so  beloved   of  futurist writers, would   still  gain an astonishingly vivid and  on the whole an astonishingly accurate   picture  of   what   our past  was  like  if  a  collection of  Canadian  fic­ tion   somehow  managed   to   escape    a   future holocaust. For   English Canadian   novelists-
 as  distinct from  our   poets  and even  our   short story   writers-have  been   notably  concerned with   the   social   landscape,  both   in   its   great national sweeps  and  its  local  intimacies. Occa­ sionally, by the  accidents of a  season's  publish­ ing,   this   preoccupation  is   strikingly   empha­ sized.
It is  so  emphasized  in  the   latest  batch of fiction to appear in  the  New Canadian Library, a  group of  novels   that  incidentally brings the list  of  the  series,  not  counting special volumes, up  to  I 20  titles. With   the  exception of  Rudy Wiebe's The  Blue Mountains of China  and, somewhat  more    doubtfully,  of   Grove's   Our Daily  Bread,  none   of  the  eight books  can   be classed   as   major  fiction,  either  in   a   world sense or a Canadian sense.  But,  taken together, they  illuminate a surprisingly broad area of our collective experience.
Frederick  Niven's  bildungsroman, The  Fly­ ing  Years,  traces  the   youth, life  and  old  age of  a  Scot   evicted  from    the   Highlands,  who emigrates to  Canada; in  the  process  the  whole  development  of  the   west   is   delineated  from  the  age  of  the  fur  traders to  the  high   days  of the  railway culture, so  that  really  we  have  the story  of  a  society's growth  as  well  as  a  man's growth. Our   Daily  Bread,  Grove's  vast,   dull  and   immensely awkward  sketch  of  a  master­ piece,   takes  a fragment  of  the  same   tapestry, and    shows   the   pioneer    generation   on    the prairies    succumbing   to    the    pressures  and temptations  of  commercial exploitation  in   a land   drained  of  its  fertility; in   odd   ways   it goes beyond  a document of Grove's times  and becomes   a  curious, fumbling  prophecy of  our own   age  of  technological rapine  and  vanish­ ing  resources.
Roger  Lemelin's  The   Plouffe   Family  is  of course one  of  the  pioneer works   on  urban  as
distinct  from   rural  Quebec.  Competition  has
robbed  it  of  novelty   and   time   has   dulled  its
edge,   so  that  Lemelin begins   to   emerge  in one's   view   as   a   kind    of   Quebecois  Grove, splendid in intent and  industry, but  grandiose rather than  great. Gabrielle Roy's  Windflower, intrinsically a far  better book,  takes  one  to  the very  edge  of  the  Quebecois world, in  Ungava, where  English  Canada   and    French  Canada come  together in  competition for  the  soul  of a third  culture,  as  ancient  and   fragile  as   the Arctic   flowers,  that of  the  Eskimo. In  its  sad story  of  the  breaking of  the  girl  Elsa  through her  contacts with   the  invading modern world, it   draws  a   mordant  picture  of  what  history seems   to  have   written  as  inevitable tragedy; the   encounter of  a  highly  specialized   primi­ tive  people   and   an   industrial  civilization.
Two  obstinately surviving Canadian  minori-


115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ties   are   personified  in   the   families   which­ rather more than individuals-fulfil  the  heroic roles    in    Wiebe's  The   Blue    Mountains   of China and  in Laura Goodman  Salverson's The Viking  Heart. The  Blue  Mountains of  China is the  third, the  most  intense, and  the  broadest in  its  grasp, of  Rudy  Wiebe's novels   of  Men­ nonite   setting.   Though  Canada   forms    the uniting knot  of  this  fascinating work,  it  is the universal  Mennonite experience that emerges; in   all   its  deep  faith  and   rebellious  faithless­ ness,  in  its contrasts of  greed  and  self-sacrifice, of  bigotry and   universal compassion, the  story is  carried over   all  the   pathways of  the  world where modern Mennonites  have  wandered, in Russia    and    in   China,  in   Paraguay  and    in Canada. The  Viking  Heart, of  course, is  the classic   novel   of  the   Canadian Icelandic  com­ munity, or,   to   be  more accurate,  the  classic novel   in   English,  since   Canadian   Icelanders have   a   considerable literature  in   their  own language. Despite its  conventionality  of  writ­ ing  and   sentiment,  and its  clumsiness of  con­  struction and  psychological insight, The  Vik­ ing   Heart   still  moves   one   at  times   with   its descriptions of the  experiences of one  highly conscious group  of  immigrants  who   adjusted to  Canadian society  without in  any  way  aban­ doning loyalty   to  their own  historic  culture.
Earle  Birney's Down  the   Long   Table  and Edward McCourt's The  Wooden Sword   take us  into   an   area  of   the   Canadian   collective consciousness that  is especially near   the  novel­ ist's   bone,   given   that  most   Canadian  writers in  recent years  have  doubled  as  academics. In each   novel  the  central figure is  a  professor of English facing   a  past   that  has  been  dramatic­ ally  unacademic, a  past  in  the  real  world  that lies  outside  the   suburbanities  of  the   modern campus.  Birney's  Gordon   Saunders,  hauled before   one   of  the   obscene  Red-hunting com­  mittees of  the   American   195o's, sees  opening before  him  under the  glistening varnish of  the long  table  a  memoried  vision  of his  radical life in  the  193o's, the  "real life"  of  left-wing fac­  tional  infighting  which  in  satiric  recollection turns  out  to have  been  as  insubstantial-con­ fronted  by  the  hard  facts   of  power-as  any other  romanticism.  Edward  McCourt's   pro­ tagonist in The Wooden Sword (a  novel whose undramatic ironies have  never  been sufficiently recognized)   is   plagued    by   recurrent   night­ mares that  are   ruining  his  marriage and   un­  dermining his career. It is  only  when  he forces  himself   to  remember the  wartime  experiences buried  by  a  guilty  memory  that he  is able  to accept  his   own   weakness  and,   even    more  appalling,  his   own   ordinariness.  Rarely,  in Canadian  fiction,  have   we  had   an   anti-hero

n6
 so  closely  reflecting  the  evasions  and  tribula­ tions  of  our  national psyche  as  Ed  McCourt's Steven Venner, whose   identity,  when at  last  he so Canadianly succeeds in  grasping it,  turns out  to  be  symbolized, not  by  a  wooden horse, but  by a  wooden  sword.
A  Canadian  now   seeking  his  original am· biance, or  that  curious future New  Zealander finding  orientation   within   the    approximate reality of our  past,  might easily find  himself equipped with  a less adequate guide than these eight    novels,   newly    reprinted  and    variously priced between  $1.95 and  $2.95·
L.T.C.


SMALL  PRESSES
GRACE TRATT's Check List  of Canadian Small Presses:   English   Language, published  by  the Dalhousie  University Libraries  ( $2.50)  is  an indispensable handbook  for  anyone interested in Canadian publishing during the  past  decade. Small   presses  have   been  so  numerous, and   in many   cases  so  ephemeral, that  it   is  difficult for  any  enquirer to  trace all  of  them, and one knows    of   presses   that  Ms.   Tratt  does   not record. But  she  lists  far   more that  are  unfa­ miliar, and   it  is  the   fact   that  her   list   is  so much more  comprehensive than  anything else existing  that   makes    this    152   page    mimeo­ graphed   account  of   some   234   English  lan­  guage   little   presses,  together with   their main  publications, such  a  valuable accomplishment.

o.w.

ERRATUM
WE DEEPLY  REGRET  that owing  to  typographi­ cal  errors which  slipped past  the editorial eye, the   names   of  two   of  the  contributors  to   the feature on  women   poets  in  Canadian  Litera­ ture   66   were   given   wrongly.  Anne   Corbett should  read  Anne  Corkett, and  Audrey Conrad should   read  Audrey Conard. Both   these  con­  tributors  have  accepted our  apologies with  the greatest   forbearance  and   good-nature,  but   a public correction of our  error is still  necessary.

G.W.





SOURCES OF POETRY


SIR,

Upon   reading   Linda   Rogers'   review    of Fraser Sutherland's  In  the  Wake of ... (Can. Lit. No. 65), one is amazed at her ignorance. Literary tradition has  always  included  transla­ tion   with   many   great  poets,   and   Jesser  ones, including translation as  a  part   of   their  reper­ toire.  Surely  Ms.  Rogers  would  not be  so flip­ pant in  her   dismissal   of  this  art form   if  she were   reviewing Pound's   translations,  or  even Robert  Lowell's  Imitations. One   also  ponders whether she  has  read  Auden's poems  inspired
by  paintings,  one   of  his   most   famous  being "Musee  des   Beaux   Arts."  Her    general   con­ demnation of  poetry  inspired either  by  poems or  paintings indicates a large  gap  in  her  under­ standing of sources  for poetry, which  appear to be limited by her  to "human and  geographical landscape." A  very  parochial  attitude.
The   inclusion of  Sutherland's Auden   poem
in  the  list  of imitations or  "guided tour(s)"  is misleading in  the  extreme as  the  poem  is one in  which   Auden's "human landscape" is  most excellently explored. The poem  is neither  imi­ tation nor  translation.

LUCILLE  KING-EDWARDS



MACLENNAN BIOGRAPHY
ANY  CORRESPONDENCE  or   reminiscences  con­ cerning Hugh MacLennan which  your  readers may  have  to offer  will  be of great  assistance to me  as  his  prospective biographer.  If you  have such   information  or   material,   please   contact me:
E. Cameron,
Assistant   Professor, English  Department, Concordia University, Loyola  Campus,
7141  Sherbrooke St.  W., Montreal   H4B IR6.
