$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
.N°·31






Jl  SJILUTE TO 	F.  R. SCOTT


Articles
BY RONALD  SUTHERLAND, A.  J. M. SMITH, ROBIN  SKELTON, ROY DANIELLS

Poems
BY F. R. SCOTT

Chronicle
BY MARY  BROWN

Reviews
BY HUGO MCPHERSON, A. W. PURDY, W. H. NEW, ROBERT  BUCKEYE, GEORGE  ROBERTSON, ROBERT  HARLOW, GEOFFREY CREIGH,
S. E. READ, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, FRED  COGSWELL, ABRAHAM ROGATNICK, L. T. CORNELIUS


A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








CANADIAN LITERATURE AND THE CENTENNIAL




THE  CENTENNIAL   CELEBRATION is an  historical festival  com­ memorating  a  political  event,  and  it might  well be asked  what  interest  it  can have for a literary  magazine.  After all, if one discounts mere polemics, the litera­ ture  that  emerged from  the event itself was negligible. Indeed,  by I 867  very few books that  can  now  be given  serious critical  consideration  had  been  produced in any of the provinces which then became Canada. Even the so-called Confedera­ tion  Poets came  many  years afterwards  and  had  nothing  to do  with  Confedera­ tion considered as mere political event.
Yet political events often  have their social and cultural  consequences-some­ times, as in the case of the Restoration  of Charles II, or the First World War, of profound  importance in  the  re-shaping  of literatures.  And  if,  as we believe, a distinguishable  literature   which  can  be  called  Canadian  has  appeared   by the
I g6o's, it has inevitably  been shaped  and conditioned by the circumstances which
followed from  Confederation. It is obviously different from  the kind of literature we should  have  had  if the  territory  which is now called Canada had  been  ab­ sorbed into the United  States, or if the constituent colonies had followed separate existences and  had emerged into the twentieth century as a mosaic of little nations like the former  colonial territories  of West Africa.
By now critics have  begun  to define with growing sharpness  many of the ele­
ments that do-as a result of Confederation-condition our outlook as a people and hence the way we write. The  vertical social mosaic, and the horizontal ethnic mosaic  polarized  by  the  duality  of  English  and  French  cultures;   the  tenuous strip  of human  existence along the borderlands,  with the nodules of increasingly cosmopolitan  cities and  the  growing  lonelinesses of prairie  and  coastal villages; beyond human  settlement,  the vast solitude, bearing down from the north, of the

3

EDITORIAL



great  cold empty  land,  and  pressing up from  the south  the aggressive world  power whose  force  we  repel,  because  we  must,  with  the  small  insistence  of the  limpet shaped  to  resist the  breakers.  All these factors  have  become  component elements in our  consciousness, and  hence in our works of literature and  art.
But, however  closely linked  the building  of a nation and  the growth of a litera­
ture  may  appear to be, it is the literature that  concerns us, not the political  event, and  during the  coming  year  we shall  discuss  informally, rather  than   celebrate, the writing  which  has taken  place in Canada during the  past  century.  Our  plans do  not  mean  that  we shall  ignore  that  running examination of current and  con­ temporary writing which  is perhaps  the  most  important of our  functions.  Never­ theless,  we  shall  devote  more  space  than   usual  to  broader  surveys  considering  from  various  viewpoints  the  past  and  future of Canadian literature. The  first of these,   Ronald  Sutherland's "Twin  Solitudes", dealing   with   parallels  between  English   and   French  Canadian  fiction,   appears  in   this  issue.  Others,  putting different   historical   points  of  view  on  Canadian  literature,  by  such   writers   as Desmond   Pacey,   Ralph   Gustafson   and   Warren  Tallman, will  follow  in  later issues. Some  past  Canadian writers,  like John  Sutherland, Frederick Niven,  Sara  Jeannette Duncan  and   Isabella   Valancy  Crawford, will  be  considered   for  the first  time  in  Canadian Literature, and  Ralph Connor, whom   F.  W.  Watt   ex­ amined   in  our  first  issue, will  be  re-viewed  by  Roy  Daniells.  One  special  issue will be  devoted  to  considering  the  past  and  present  of publishing  in Canada.

* 	* 	*
The  subject  of publishing  leads us to end  with  a note of congratulation for the remarkable example of  book  production provided  by  McClelland & Stewart in
Birds of the  Northern Forests  ($2o.oo), with  paintings by  J. F. Lansdowne and
text  by John A. Livingston.  Mr.  Lansdowne's excellent  colour  plates  and  mono­ chrome  sketches  show  that  representational art  still has its uses;  photographs can rarely  present  such  recognizable or  such  evocative images  of  birds,  or,  for  that  matter, flowers  or insects, as the craftsman of Mr.  Lansdowne's proficiency.  Mr.  Livingston's text  is modest  but  informative, intelligently partisan on  the  issue of conservation, and  written  with  that  spare  clarity  which  still makes  the  narratives of the great  nineteenth-century naturalists such  enjoyable reading. For bird-lovers, as distinct  from  bird-killers  who  get  short  shrift, this  will  be  a  pleasant  book  to possess, particularly as it is presented  as the  first of  a series covering  the  various  natural regions  of  Canada; for  those  who  are  interested in  the  craft  of publish­  ing,  it  reaches  a standard that  could  and  should  be achieved  more  often.

4



TWIN	SOLITUDES




Ronald Sutherland





"0NE  OF  THE FUNCTIONS and responsibilities of literature," says the  American  critic  Marius  Bewley, "is  to define nationality  in  the act  of describing or dramatizing it."'  And when one considers French  Literature,  Ameri­
can  Literature,   English  Literature,  indeed  any of the distinctive  national  litera­ tures, it is clear that  Bewley's statement  is correct. These literatures  have accom­ plished the subtle  definition  of nationality. However intricate  and  mysterious the process of recognition,  citizens of the various nations are somehow  able to recog­ nize themselves as such. Language,  philosophy, theology, history,  politics, and  a variety  of  other   things  undoubtedly   make  their  contribution,  but in  the  final analysis it is literature  which has up to now provided the definition. Key writers, either  consciously or  unconsciously,  have  created  their  works within  particular  mystiques.  Which  is  not  to  say,  incidentally,  that  these  works  are  necessarily regional, or chauvinistic,  or even lacking in universal significance, but simply that they  have  been  distilled  through  the  complex  apparatus of national  myth  and national  sense of identity.  One  thinks of  Shakespeare,  Mark  Twain,  Chekhov, Moliere or Robert  Burns.
Then  one thinks of Canada and Canadian  Literature; and  a number  of some­
what  troubling  speculations  come immediately  to mind.
What  about  Canadian Literature?  Has it succeeded in even suggesting a defini­ tion  of Canadian identity?  If so, what  are  the aspects of this definition? If not, is it because of a weakness in the literature? Have the key writers not yet emerged? Have  they gone unnoticed?  Or  could it be that  there is no distilling apparatus of positive Canadian myth  and sense of identity  adequate  to condition our  creative writers?  Supposing  such  an  absence, is it  detrimental   to  the  creative  process? Moreover, and  what  is probably  the most vital question of all, in a country with

5

TWIN SOLITUDES



two  distinct  languages  and  literary  traditions,  neither  one  manifestly  dominant over  the  other  in  terms of production  or  quality,  each  one  apparently  isolated from the other, are we to presume two independent definitions of the same sense of identity, or rather  two separate  national  mystiques each with its separate defi­ nition;  or, in line with certain  pessimistic comments of the last few years, would we be wise to presume nothing  at all?
This  paper  will be an  attempt,  through  parallel  analyses of principal  themes in  the  twentieth-century  French-Canadian and  English-Canadian novel, to shed some light  upon  these questions. It  does not,  of course, intend  to provide  con­ clusive answers to all or any of the questions posed, but is conceived  rather  as a prolegomenon  to further  study.
Of  the  thousands  of novels which  have  been  written  in  French  and  English Canada, there are only a few, it would seem, which have had any kind of impact on  any  segment  of the  national  consciousness. For  particular attention   I  have selected those novels which seem to me to be the most appropriate for the socio­ literary  study  proposed,  but  I  have also tried  to select from  among  those  works which  have lasting  artistic and  thematic  qualities.  When  expedient,  I shall  pro­ vide  English  translations  of the  French,  attempting to preserve  what  I  think  is the tone of the original.
Besides brief observations, such as the series of commentaries  published in  Le Devoir litthaire in December 1959, a short article  by Nairn Kattan  in the forty­ second  issue of  Liberte,  a  pioneering study  by Thomas  Farley  of  Ottawa, and remarks  by Edmund   Wilson, very little appears  to have  been  written  in  recent years  about  comparative   Canadian  Literature. Yet  when  placed  side  by side, each of the literary traditions of Canada  becomes far more meaningful than when considered apart.  For that matter,  there are fruitful comparisons possible between Canadian and  American  Literature,  and between Canadian and Russian Litera­ ture, but these will have to await attention. If I may submit  a conclusion before I have  properly  begun,  when  French-Canadian  and  English-Canadian novels are studied   together,  it  becomes evident  that  there  are  many  significant  parallels, parallels which  loom all the more fascinating  as one discovers the improbability of inter-influence.  It also becomes evident, interestingly enough, that a good num­ ber  of  the  accepted  differences  between  the  cultures  of  French  Canada and English  Canada   do  not  in  fact  exist. For  both  English-speaking  and  French­ speaking Canadians, major  writers included,  are guilty of taking a small segment of the other society, albeit shaped into mythic reality, and using it as a substitute for the complex whole.

6

TWIN  SOLITUDES



BOTH THE   French-Canadian and  English-Canadian  novel have gone through  a remarkable  evolution in the last forty years or so. During this evolution,  three  major  interlocking  themes have emerged:

1)  The Land and Divine Order;
2)  The Breakup of the Old Order;
3)  The Search for Vital Truth.

In  French-Canadian Literature,  the first of these major  themes-"Land  and Divine  Order"-is  illustrated  by what  has  been called le  roman  paysan or  le roman du terroir. Louis Hernon's Maria Chapdelaine, of course, is the best known of  this  group  of  novels  and  has  undoubtedly  had  the  greatest  influence. The climax  of  the  tradition   came  in  the late  thirties  with  the  publication  of  Felix­ Antoine Savard's  Menaud  maitre-draveur and Ringuet's Trente  Arpents. Menaud maltre-draveur,  which  reproduces  passages from Maria  Chapdelaine  throughout its text, is not of the same stature  as either Hernon's or Ringuet's work. In a way it resembles Ralph  Connor's  The  Man  from Glengarry, although it falls far short of the latter in convincing description of the river drives. It has none of the detail characteristic of Connor,  such as the loggers all standing  around attentively, wait­ ing for the telltale snap  as MacDonald  Mhor  bends a man over his knee, about to break his back. On  the other hand, it does not degenerate into a Sunday School tract,  as does Connor's   book. Nobody, including  his  adored  daughter,  converts Menaud  into a lover of all men. He remains a psychopath, obsessed with the idea of  "the  enemy."  In  Savard's  work there  is a  certain  originality  of style, incor­ porating  Canadianisms into  the  prose in  a  manner  which  perhaps  foreshadows the  stylistic experiments  of  a  few  very  recent  French-Canadian novels, experi­ ments which we shall consider later; but Menaud  maltre-draveur is a prose poem rather  than  a  realistic  novel.  Viewed  as a  prose poem,  its sentimentality,  sub­ jectivity and distortion  are less detrimental  to the value of the work. Maria Chap­  delaine and Trente  Arpents,  on the other  hand,  are realistic novels of high merit and penetrating insight.
It has been recognized for years that Louis Hernon succeeded in crystallizing fundamental values  of French-Canadian rural  society through  the characters  in the novel Maria  Chapdelaine. There  is a kind of masochism in the father  of the family, who  will not  allow himself to remain  on a farm  once  he has brought  it to the  point of productivity, but  must move again into  the wilderness, dragging his family  along  with  him.  The  mother  Chapdelaine,  who  has  always secretly yearned  for  an  easier life, remains  loyal to the end, when  wasted from  years of

7

TWIN SOLITUDES



toil and deprivation  she gives up and dies. Just  before her death,  which the father obviously finds more annoying  than  tragic,  he  tries to cheer  her  up  by saying: "You  will die when  the good Lord wants you to die, and  I don't  figure it's time yet. What  would  he do with  you? Heaven  is full of old ladies, but  here we've got only one, and she can still do a little work, sometimes."
Maria  will be like her  mother.  She has moments  of doubt,  especially in  con­ nection  with  the handsome  adventurer  Franc;ois Paradis.  When  he is lost  in the bush, she takes the appropriate  measures. She knows that if one repeats a thousand Ave Marias on the day before Christmas, then asks a favour of God, barring extra­ ordinary  designs on the  part  of the divinity,  the favour  will be granted.  Unfor­  tunately,  God  does have  extraordinary   designs in  this  particular  instance,  and Fran15ois freezes to death  in  the forest. At  first, it is  hard  for  Maria  to accept. "Christ  Jesus, who  hold out  your arms  to the  unfortunate," she says to herself, "why  didn't  you deliver him from  the snow  with  your  pale hands?  Why, Holy Virgin, didn't  you permit a small miracle when  he stumbled  for the last time? In all  the  heavenly  legions, why  couldn't  he  have  had  an  angel  to show him  the way?" 3  But  Maria's  doubts  do not last long, for like her father  and  mother  she knows the  deep  satisfaction  of being  sure. As Hernon  put  it:  "Oh!  Certainty! The  contentment  of an  august  promise which  dispels the  terrible fog of death.  While  the  priest was  performing  the holy rites and  his murmur  mixed with  the sighs of the dying woman, Samuel Chapdelaine and  his children  prayed without lifting  their  heads,  almost  consoled, free  from  doubt   and  worry,  certain  that whatever  happened  was according  to a  pact  with  the  divinity, which made  the blue  heaven  sown with stars  of gold  an  authentic blessing." 4   Maria,  then,  can turn down  the offer of Lorenzo Surprenant to go with him to the United  States, and accept a continuation  of her mother's life by marrying  her neighbour Eutrope Gagnon.
Throughout  the  novel  Maria  Chapdelaine, one  is aware  of  the  two  major
thematic  ideas, the land and the divine order. In fact, these ideas merge into one, for  the  land,  with  its  changeless cycle of seasons, its absolute  permanence,  its mixture  of cruel severity and  arbitrary  sustenance,  becomes symbolic of the  ac­ cepted  divine order.  The  more a person is in  harmony  with  the land, therefore, the more he is in harmony  with God. Or  perhaps  I should say with a  particular  concept of God, considering the stern, unremitting nature  of the land in question
-the  Jansenist,  Calvinist,  Puritan  concept of God.
Turning to  Frederick  Philip  Grove's  Our  Daily  Bread  and  Ringuet's  Trente
Arpents,  one  finds  the  same  thematic  ideas  of  the  land  and  the  divine order;

8

TWIN  SOLITUDES



although  both  books  also introduce  the  beginning  of the  dissolution of the old order.  As a matter  of fact,  Our  Daily  Bread  and Trente  Arpents, the first  pub­ lished  in  1928  and  the  second  in  1938,  are  so strikingly similar  in  theme  and plot and  even in certain  scenes, that one wonders if  Philippe Panneton had ever read  Grove. On  the other  hand,  the two books are entirely different in detail, in atmosphere,  in  technique,  so that  in  the highly unlikely  event that  Ringuet  did borrow  certain  ideas,  he subjected  them  thoroughly  to  his own creative  process. Trente  Arpents, it  must  be  pointed  out,  is a  far  better  novel than  Our   Daily Bread.  Its rhythmic  prose, its skillful use of  colloquial diction, an accurate  repre­ sentation  of  French-Canadian  joual, is  vigorous and  captivating,  in  contrast  to Grove's stiff, often  lumbering  style. Ringuet  had  a genius for selecting the kind of  small  detail  which  brings  a  character  alive, engaging  the  imagination   and sympathy  of the reader.  When Phydime Raymond,  for example, visits Euchariste  Moisan  to  negotiate  for  Moisan's  half  of  a  small  wood,  which  he  desperately wishes to buy, the ancestral Norman  propensity for circumlocution is illustrated in a manner  worthy of Maupassant at his best. Raymond  explains that he has come to see if the sick  cow is getting  better. Then  the conversation, between drags on their  pipes,  proceeds  to  diseases in  general,  the  weather,  the ice road  which  is becoming  dangerous,  the elections. On  his way out the door,  Raymond  inquires about  the fence bordering  the two properties and who should repair it that  year. Then  he,  who  is the  one  wanting  to buy  Moisan's  half of the  wood, offers to sell his  half  to  Moisan,  observing  that  it  isn't  worth  ten  dollars to  him.  And Moisan,  who has not  the least notion of buying land, says that such a purchase might  be a good idea. And on they go, each somehow divining exactly what the other has in mind.  Compared  to Ringuet's  technique of characterization, Grove's is stark and clinical. Nonetheless, considered as an artistic whole, despite its obvious shortcomings,  Our   Daily  Bread  does make a deep impression upon  the  reader, an impression of magnitude  of vision. It  may well have as permanent  a place in Canadian Literature as Trente  Arpents.
The  parallels in  the  two novels are manifest. Both stories concern  a man  ob­ sessed with the idea of building  a dynasty upon the land, an Old-Testament type of  dynasty.  Both  men,  Euchariste   Moisan  and  John  Elliot,  have  loyal,  long­ suffering  wives, each  of whom  was chosen to bear  children  and  each  of  whom brings  four  sons  and  six daughters  into  the  world. Alphonsine,  Moisan's  wife, dies delivering  her  last  child,  while  Martha   Elliot is a victim  of  cancer  of the womb,  making   them  both  martyrs  to  their  husbands'  obsessions.  Like  Chap­  delaine's  wife and  Alphonsine,  Martha  has always secretly harboured  a sense of

9

TWIN SOLITUDES



frustration, but she is the only one of the three who gets a chance to express this long  denied  feeling. In  a fantastic  scene, perhaps  one  of Grove's  best, she rises from her deathbed  and goes to a dance, the loose, heavy folds of her dress draping grotesquely about her wasted body.
Samuel  Chapdelaine, John  Elliot and  Euchariste  Moisan  have identical  atti­ tudes  toward  the  land.  Elliot's  daughter  Cathleen,   the  only one  who  makes  a successful marriage,  chooses a university professor. Of this man  Elliot speculates: "Woodrow  Ormond,  a sensible man,  mature  beyond his years! But  unanchored  in  the soil." 5   In  Trente   Arpents,  speaking of the  habitant farm  establishments, Ringuet  wrote:   "La  patrie  c'est Ia terre,  et  non  le sang." 6   The  land  is more important  than  even  the  blood. And  coping  with  the  land  isolates the  Elliots, the Moisans and the Chapdelaines  from even the most monumental events of the outside  world.  Hearing  of the prospects for World  War I,  Moisan is completely bafHed: "Those  people," he says, "how  can  they  think  about  fighting when  the harvest isn't in yet." He begins to see how war fits into the divine order when the local  priest explains to him:   "La  France  sera  punie;  elle a chasse les pretres." When  John  Elliot  discovers that  his son  Arthur has  joined  up,  his reaction  is "Enlisted?  What  were we coming to?  Meddling  in  the  European  war?"  At the end  of  Our  Daily  Bread, Elliot  staggers across miles of country,  finally crawls the  last few yards on his hands  and  knees, to die on his own  piece of land.  At the  end  of Trente   Arpents,  Moisan is still alive, working  as a watchman  in  an American  garage  and  dreaming  of his thirty  acres, but  earlier in the book there is a scene siinilar to  the climax of Our  Daily Bread. Ephrem  Moisan, the uncle from whom  Euchariste inherited  his farm, is found  lying on one of his fields: "II etait  mort  sur sa terre, poitrine contre  poitrine, sur sa terre qui n'avait  pas con­ senti au  divorce"-breast against breast, on his land,  which had  not consented to a divorce.
Moisan  and  Elliot are  both denied the realization  of their dremns. Elliot wit­
nesses the  complete  disintegration  of his tiny empire,  Moisan  is dispossessed by his son Etienne, and  as old men they are both helpless and  unwanted,  compelled to visit children  in surroundings  which  are alien and  incomprehensible.  Elliot is a sad  misfit in  his daughter's  elegant  Winnipeg  home,  and  old Moisan wanders aimlessly around  the American  town where his son Ephrem  has settled. Not one of their many  children adopts the values of the father.
It is perhaps  Grove who  best sums up these values when  he has John  Elliot say, "I don't  want  my children  and sons-in-law to be rich. But I want  them  to show me to my satisfaction that they can make their daily bread."  In other words,

10

TWIN SOLITUDES



the  purpose  of life is not  the  pursuit of comfort or happiness according  to one's lights, but  to fit into  the  design  conditioned  by the land,  to fit into  the divine order.  Happiness  does not  enter  the  picture,  no more  for John  Elliot than  for Samuel  Chapdelaine or  Euchariste  Moisan. As Jean  Simard  put  it in MonFils pourtant  heureux;  "On   y est pour faire son devoir, voila tout.  La  vie n'est pas un  roman." 7    When  Elliot  rationalizes  with  the  words,  "If God  has  ordained things that  way, perhaps  there  was a meaning  to it, a purpose",  he professes the same almost masochistic resignation  as the Chapdelaines,  the same "acte  de sou­ mission a Ia volonte divine" as found in Trente  Arpents.
There  is no need to look further  than  these three novels for clarification of the first major  theme,  although  the  theme  itself can  be found  in  dozens of novels. The  philosophy of life concerned  is clear. It is one which  could induce  a strong power of endurance, a sense of absolute security. Man in harmony  with the cycles of nature,  with  the  noble  calling of the land,  with the  divine order.  Man  con­ stantly  reminded  of his subordinate status by the caprices of nature,  yet  assured by this  very subordination of  a  complementary  superior  force,  a  Providence,  a greater  design of which  he is a  part.  There  is no need  to search  for  meaning. Within  the framework,  the human  cycle of birth, marriage,  death is simple, suffi­ cient and  all-meaning.
The  conclusion one  must  come to after  considering the observations  of these three  writers is that  rural  French  Canada  and  rural  English Canada shared  the same  fundamental values. Despite differences of language,  religions and  degree of involvement  with an organized  church, the basic view of man and the land, as detected  by  three  novelists who  made  a  point  of analyzing  this  view, was the same across Canada, and  perhaps throughout  the Western World for that matter. One  suspects, however, that  there is a peculiarly Canadian flavour in the deter­ mination  to embrace  a  life whose requirements  presuppose a sacrifice.  Perhaps it  has something  to do with  the inhospitality of the land  and  the severity of the climate. Perhaps it is related to the spectre of defeat inherited by French Canadians  and  English Canadians alike. For it is often forgotten in French Canada that the founders of so-called English Canada-the United Empire Loyalists, the Scottish Highlanders,  the Irish and  Ukrainians-can  hardly  be said to have settled here on the wave of victory.



l:E SECOND  MAJOR  THEMATIC  idea  which  emerges  from  a comparative   study  of  the   French-Canadian and   English-Canadian  novel-


I I

TWIN SOLITUDES



"Breakup  of the old order" -can  be observed  in a large  number  of novels, in­ cluding the final sections of Our Daily Bread and Trente  Arpents. In other words, many  writers have  attempted  and  are still attempting to analyze the  transitional period  and  the  process by which one set of values is replaced  by  another.  This process coincides with large scale urbanization, man's  removal from dependence upon  the cycles of nature, but it would not be correct to distinguish the contrast­  ing  values as rural  and  urban  in  application.  The  new  values have spread  into rural  areas,  just as the old  values generally  held  true  for  people in  cities. The great  urban  centre  has simply become the spawning  ground  for our  philosophies of life.
In  the second group  of novels, harmony  with  the divine order is replaced  by the  pursuit  of security, which during  the  transition  period  is conceived in terms of wealth  and  material  comfort. Sex, not yet an end in itself, remains functional, but  the function  is no longer reproduction. One  cannot,  of course, give dates to this transitional  process; it is actually  a state  of mind.  It has been going on for centuries  more  or  less; although  I suspect  that  it  picked  up momentum  during and  immediately after the Second World War.  It is a state of mind characterized not so much  by a search for new meaning or truth  as by the desire to adapt  new situations  and  experiences to the old values, with  resulting  confusion and  often a sense of guilt.
As I have said, a number of novels explore this state of mind:  Grove's Master
of the  Mill,  Robert  Elie's Il  suffit d'un  jour, Ross's As For Me  and My  House, Richard  Joly's  Le  Visage de l'attente,  Garner's The  Silence on the Shore,  Mc­ Dougall's   Execution,  several  of  Callaghan's  novels, several works   by  Robert Choquette, Yves Theriault  and  Jean  Simard,  among  others.  The following five novels are  especially significant:  Gabrielle  Roy's  Bonheur  d'occasion-a book, incidentally,  which  suffered much  in  translation, as any  Montrealer  will imme­ diately realize when startled by a famous old district being referred to in the trans­ lation  as "the  Saint  Charles Point"-then  W. 0.  Mitchell's  Who  Has Seen the Wind, Hugh  MacLennan's The  Watch   that  Ends  the  Night,  Gerard  Bessette's La Bagarre and John  Marlyn's Under  the Ribs of  Death.
Gabrielle  Roy's Bonheur d'occasion mainly concerns a family living in a Mon­ treal slum. Azarius Lacasse, the father, works on and off, and the family never has sufficient for its needs. Always behind in rent,  they must shift from· one broken­ down  flat to another  every spring. Rose-Anna,  the mother,  follows the old farm practice  of a  baby  every year or so, pitifully  attempting   to adapt  her situation to the old order of values, satisfied that she has, as she puts it, "endure son purga-

12

TWIN  SOLITUDES



toire  sur  terre." Like  the  child  Brian  in  Mitchell's Who  Has Seen the Wind, she struggles  to  achieve  a  concept  of God,  and  although  she does not  arrive  at  any­ thing  quite  so anthropomorphic as "R.W. God,  B.V.D.," she is equally  unortho­ dox  when  she  says,  "Maybe he forgets  sometimes.  He's  bothered with  an  awful  lot  of  headaches." And  we  are  told  that  "the old  crack  in  her  faith  came  from  this  candid   supposition  that   God,   distracted,  tired,   harassed   like  herself,  had  come to the  point  where  he couldn't pay much  attention to human needs." 8 Alex Hunter in  Marlyn's Under  the Ribs of  Death echoes Rose-Anna when  he muses to  himself:    "Was there a  presence interested enough?  Perhaps this  being,  if  it  did  exist,  acted   upon  motives  as inexplicable and  capricious as his own." 9
But the child  Brian  probably expresses what  is in the minds  of all of these charac­ ters  when  in  reply  to  his grandmother's statement, "The  why -that's  another thing.   That's for   the   Lord," he  says,   "God   isn't  very  considerate-is  He,  Gramma?" '0
In  these  novels,  then,  and  in  MacLennan's The  Watch that  Ends  the  Night
and  Bessette's La Bagarre, the notion of God as dispenser of the divine order is disappearing,  but   there  is  a  lingering   doubt, with  the  result  that   many   of  the characters are  confused, confused  about  themselves,  about their  duty,  and  about society.  The  protagonist of  La  Bagarre, Lebeuf,  who  is  working  as  a  tramway sweeper  to  pay  his way  through university,  does not  know  what  to do  when  an­ other  of  the  sweepers  begs  him  to  help  his daughter. The girl,  Gisele, is  excep­  tionally  pretty  and   intelligent, and  the  father is afraid   that  the  local  priest  will parley  her  into  becoming a  nun.  He  is careful  to  add, "Les  curc es,
rien  contre,  r'marque ben."" Lebeuf  finally suggests that  the girl  take  a job and follow  courses  part-time at  Sir  George  Williams  University, for  the  idea  of  part­ time  studies  has  been  only  very  recently  introduced to  French-Canadian  institu­ tions. But the suggestion  of George  Williams worries Gisele's father. "L'instruction, j'sus pour  cent  pour  cent," he replies. "Seulement, l'ecole  anglaise, c'est une  autre paire  de manches, tsu comprends ..."
In  each  of the  five novels,  two or more  generations are  presented, and  there  is
usually  a  contrast of  values  between   the  generations. Gisele,  for  example, has ideas  of her  own,  which  do  not  include  fitting  into  any  preconceived pattern of divine  order. She  has  found out  that   men  notice  her.  Florentine, Rose-Anna's daughter in  Bonheur  d)occasion, has gone ever further-she has found  the possi­ bility  of exploiting sexual  desire.  Sally, in  The  Watch  that  Ends the  Night, be­ cause  of  reasonably  affluent  circumstances is not  quite   a  budding  Sister  Carrie like  Gisele  and   Florentine, but  as she  tells her  stepfather  George, she  does  not

TWIN SOLITUDES



intend  to make  the mistake his generation  made.  She agrees with her boyfriend Alan  that  they ought  to go for a weekend up  north.  "How  is he going to know if he really wants  to marry  me," she asks George, "unless  he's found  out first if I'm  any  good?"" All these girls are determined  to find emotional  security and material  comfort  whatever way they can;  each one of them is a remarkable con­ trast to Maria  Chapdelaine.
The  young men in these novels are even more determined  than the girls. There is Lebeuf in  La  Bagarre, but  the characters  of Jean  Levesque in Bonheur  d'oc­ casion and  Alex Hunter  in Under  the Ribs of Death  are clearer examples. Both are  blood brothers of Joe Lampton  in John  Braine's  Room  at  the Top, born on the wrong side of the tracks, tough, cunning,  ruthless when  necessary, and ready to use almost any means to get to the other side of the tracks. Jean  Levesque can force himself to abandon  Florentine when it becomes apparent that she will only be in  his way. Alex Hunter  can  abandon  his  family, his ethnic  group,  his very name and identity.  But each of these young men must pay the price of recurring doubts, guilt feelings, and isolation.
Along with  most of the other  characters,  they  must suffer. They  must suffer because  a sense of security comes essentially from  within,  from  the kind of  con­ viction of a Samuel Chapdelaine or John Elliot. They replace the land by material  goods,  and  not  yet able  to  divorce their  minds  from  the  old system,  they  pre­ suppose an order which is not there. And worse, whose non-existence is repeatedly demonstrated. Capricious as it is, the land cannot  disappear  as can worldly wealth during  an economic depression, and spring is always sure to follow a winter. With regard  to the characters  in  MacLennan's The  Watch that  Ends the  Night,  they embrace  the supposed new order of socialism, panacea  of the sick society, only to be largely disillusioned in the end.
In  the  five novels, there  are  many  more characters than  those already  men­ tioned,  a  great  variety  in  fact,  for  each  of  the  authors  is especially  skillful at delineating  character.  Common to all of these books, however, is a character  who acts as a  background  against which the anxieties of the other  characters  can  be more readily grasped.  In Who  Has Seen the Wind, it is the Ben, and  the young Ben also. In  Bonheur d'occasion, it is Alphonse, who has been raised in a shack on the city dump.  In La Bagarre, it is Marguerite, Lebeuf's mistress, although  not enough is said about  her to make her as obvious as the others. In Under  the Ribs of Death,  it  is Uncle  Janos,  and  in The  Watch  that  Ends  the  Night,  it is the major  character  Jerome.  What  all these characters have in common is that  they exist in amoral  worlds of their own, essentially unimpressed by the conventions of

TWIN  SOLITUDES



the  society around   them.  They  can  avoid  the ordinary  problems  of living and adjusting,  because they instinctively obey some internal  animal force. When these people do have trouble, it is because of a conflict between themselves and the immediate  society. The  Ben must  find a  new hiding  place for  his still, and  he joins the church  so that he can become its janitor and keep his still in the church basement.  Alphonse and  his father  must leave their shack in the dump  when the shanty  town  is burned  to  the ground  by city officials. Jerome,  by far  the most complex  of  the  group,  automatically  does what  George and  other  men  cannot do:  he fulfils the life of a  woman  with  a weak heart  by impregnating her and risking her death.  And it works, because it is a private affair and  the woman has full confidence in him. But in the army and the medical profession he continually runs into difficulties with duty and authority.
The  type of conflict which people such as Jerome and the Ben experience, how­ ever, is seldom within themselves, as is the case with so many of the other charac­  ters. They  may  be philosophers of a sort,  but  they are  not the  creators  of phil­ osophical  systems, because  they  function  mainly  from  impulse. They  learn  by experience, as did Jerome  in the war, or as the Ben  when he decided to free his caged owl after spending  time in jail. There  is something of the wild creature  in all of them,  and  they are  associated with a wild  or natural  environment  in some way:  the lumber  camp,  the city dump  and  the prairie for Jerome,  Alphonse and the  Ben;  the  dream  of  Marguerite to set  up  a little motel in  the country  with Lebeuf, the stories of Uncle Janos's adventures  as a sea captain.  All these charac­  ters seem to exude  an  aura  of  self-reliance and  independence  which  becomes a source  of fascination  for  others.  Divorced  from  external  order  and  concepts of order,  they remain  basically unaffected  by the breakup of the old order, and they serve  to  underline  the  instability  and  artificiality of  a society incapable  of co­ ordinating  its own  realities with its assumed ethical values.




l:E THIRD MAJOR THEMATIC IDEA of the french-Canadian and English-Canadian novel is "The Search for Vital Truth". This idea  has revealed itself especially in  novels of  the  last  three  or four  years, in  particular   Douglas Le  Pan's  The   Deserter, Hubert   Aquin's  Prochain Episode, Jacques  Godbout's Le Couteau  sur la table, and  Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful Losers. The  search for meaning,  of course, can  be found  in  a large  number  of books, but  the kind of search  I have in mind  here is in a special category -it begins at the zero point.

TWIN SOLITUDES



All  values  have  been discarded  or  cannot  be genuinely  accepted,  and  the  pro­ tagonist  attempts  from his experience of life to formulate  an approach  to  reality which can supply him with a raison d'etre. Whereas with Brian in Who  Has Seen the  Wind, or  George in The Watch that  Ends  the  Night, or  Alex  Hunter, or Lebeuf, there is primarily a struggle of adaptation, in the works of Le Pan, Aquin, Cohen  and  Godbout  it is a matter  of creation,  creation  from  the  raw materials of personal experience.
In  each of these novels the protagonist  has withdrawn  from his family and conventional  society. Rusty  in  The Deserter,  the  only  central  character  of the four  books who is given a name at all, and  the protagonist  of Le  Couteau both leave  the  army;  while the  central  figure in  Beautiful Losers  is living in  a  tree­ house, and the hero of Prochain  Episode is in jail for terrorist activities. In Aquin's novel  the  story shifts between  the  prisoner's  introspection  and  the  narration  of events leading up to his arrest.
All four novels dwell upon the influence of what can be called peak moments­ brief  periods  when  the  character  achieves a  harmonic of mental,  spiritual  and physical satisfaction,  an experience of beauty which is equated with truth.  These periods seem almost independent  of space and  time, and the descriptions of them in each  book involve a type of imagery suggestive of a return to the pristine con­ dition.  For the central  characters  the peak moment  is also associated with sexual experience  and  a  particular  woman.  Edith  in  Beautiful Losers,  K in  Prochain  Episode, Althea  in  The   Deserter,  and  Patricia  in  Le  Couteau  are  remarkably similar.  Each is physically beautiful;  in fact, each of these creatures  is simply the embodiment  of physical female  beauty,  special  attention  being  paid  by all four authors  to the magnificence of the  thighs. It  is as if these girls has been created by A. J. M. Smith's  sorcerer in  Lachine,  for they can  permit  an experience re­ moved  from  thought,  morality, lust or inhibition  of any  kind.  But they can  not voluntarily  permit  a  repetition  of this superb  experience.  As Cohen  writes:  "it was  just a shape  of Edith:  then  it was just a humanoid  shape;  then it was just a shape-and  for a blessed second truly I was not alone, I was part of a family. That was the first time we made love. It  never happened  again. Is that what you will cause me to feel, Catherine  Tekakwitha? But aren't  you dead? How do I get close to a dead saint? The  pursuit seems like such nonsense." '3
Catherine Tekakwitha,  by the way, is the venerated  Iroquois Virgin, converted by  the  Jesuits,  who  died  in  x68o from  self-inflicted  mortification  of the  flesh. Cohen's  Beautiful Losers, its meaning perhaps somewhat obscured by an overload of sordid detail, which has caused the book to be gravely misjudged by a number

x6

TWIN  SOLITUDES



of reviewers,  uses this extreme religious fanatic as a symbol of absolute  conviction. The   conviction  is morbid and  perverted, but  it still represents a vivid  antithesis to  current nothingness, a  condition of mind  otherwise  only  relieved  by the  peak moment and  the  kind of conviction associated  with Quebec Separatism, the posi­ tive  psychological  value  of  which  is underlined by Cohen, Godbout and  Aquin. Cohen  goes further than  Le  Pan,  Aquin, perhaps  even  Godbout, in  creating  an impression   of  the  spiritual  bankruptcy of  the  age.  His  pseudo-character F.  is symbolic  of  the  physical,  sensual   aspects  of  man,  and  the  surface   homosexual relationship  between   the   protagonist  and   F.  represents  modem  man's frantic search  for  sensual  experience, his worship  of  the  body  beautiful, the  sex kitten, the  pop  society's  conscious  or  unconscious  fascination  with   the  forbidden, the novel, or the  perverted. F.'s  legacy of soap, cosmetics and  firecrackers is symbolic of various  sensations, those  connected with  the  World  War  and  family  life being appropriately denied  the  protagonist.
Godbout also  creates  a  strong  atmosphere of spiritual bankruptcy, but  dwells more  upon  social, political  aspects than  upon sex and sensation. His method, how­ ever, is very similar  to Cohen's. Both authors employ what  Cohen  describes as "the newsreel  escaped  into  the  Feature," a  mixture  of fact  and  fiction,  abandoning traditional narrative and  plot  for  a numbered series of small sections, each  con­ cerned   with  an  aspect  of  the  protagonist's  consciousness.  Godbout incorporates liberal  amounts of English  into  his text,  and  Cohen  does  the same  with  French. Heroines in  both  books  are  crushed  to  death,  and  at  the  end  both  protagonists  enter   a  self-effacing identification  fantasy.   Cohen's  device  of  the  protagonist's impossible   desire  for   union   with   the  Iroquois  Virgin,   Catherine  Tekakwitha, provides  a fascinating dramatization of the search theme.
There is little satire  in any  of the four  novels, for each  of the central characters is more  concerned with  the  annihilation of his own identity and  the search  for a vital  truth   to  justify  his existence  than  with  what  may  be  wrong  or false in the society  around him.  The  emptiness of the society is communicated, but  not satir­ ized. Rusty  discovers  the  underworld of misfits and  criminals created  in the after­  math  of the  Second   World  War.  Many  of the  people  he meets  are like the Ben, as is the  Mexican Pedro  in  Le Couteau; they are able to function on the impulse level  and  thereby  achieve  an  enviable  primitive  happiness.  "Only  be careful  not to think,  or look closely, or  ask questions,  or play the intellectual," the narrator in Le  Couteau says  of  Pedro.' 4   In  Beautiful   Losers,  F.  writes  to  the protagonist: "You  plagued  me like the  moon.  I knew you were bound  by old laws of suffering and  obscurity." And  Le Pan  writes of Rusty: "After  his vigil with Steve it cheered

TWIN SOLITUDES



him  to think of them feasting and  moving on, knowing the world was desperate but not caring, baiting it, challenging it with its own heat, guardians  and wastrels of its most essential carnal  warmth.  They  would  create  festivals in  the cold, he was sure,  wherever  they were. He  was glad  they existed, although  he was shut out  of  their  perfection  too." '5 A subtle change  in attitude  has thus taken  place since  the  novels treating  the second  major  theme:   people like the  Ben are  no longer  the oddballs  and outcasts, but are  now the possessors of a kind of  perfec­ tion. And  the problem for Rusty and for the three other  main  characters is that they cannot  submerge  their intellects. They  are  the victims of  their own honesty, intelligence  and  awareness, stranded  without  an  engagable  point  of  reference. Nor can  they be sustained by a projection or continuum  of  peak moments;  they cannot  cross the river of meaning by hopping from the stone of one sensual experi­ ence to another.
Douglas  Le Pan  differs from the other  three authors in that  he concludes The Deserter  on  a mildly positive note. Rusty eventually  accepts that  life is a shared experience, demanding  sacrifice and only occasionally providing a glimpse of self­ fulfillment,  a complexity of animal, emotional  and intellectual  aspects, devoid of any superimposed  order,  yet still permitting  the individual  through  involvement to breed  a  personal order  and  meaning  around  himself. He is a  long way from the  rationale  of  Samuel  Chapdelaine   and  John   Elliot,  for  in  determining   the significance of a human  life the emphasis is now on the man  rather  than  an in­ herited divine order, but there are the common elements of shared experience and sacrifice, and  Rusty is finally able to face the world. The protagonist of Beautiful Losers comes to a realization of his state, but without Rusty's impetus to commit himself:  "0 Father,  Nameless and  Free of  Description," he says, "lead  me from the Desert of the Possible. Too long I have dealt with Events. Too long I labored to become  an  Angel. I  chased  Miracles  with  a bag of Power  to salt  their  wild Tails.  I  tried  to  dominate  Insanity  so I  could  steal  its  Information. I  tried  to program   the  Computers  with  Insanity.  I  tried  to  create  Grace  to  prove  that Grace  existed.... We  could  not  see the  Evidence  so we stretched  our  Memo­ ries.... we did  not  train  ourselves to  Receive because we believed there  wasn't Anything  to Receive and we could not endure  with this Belief." Le Couteau and Prochain   Episode, on the other  hand,  both  end  with  a deep sense of frustration  and it would appear  that each of the four authors in his own way is close to social and  pyschological reality.
One  thing, however, is clear:  considering the particular social climate in which
Godbout  and  Aquin  wrote their books and deferring  for a moment the universal

18

TWIN  SOLITUDES



thematic  implications,  these two authors are undoubtedly  close to Quebec  reality. In  both books the internal  frustration  of the protagonists is overtly correlated with recent events in French-Canadian society. Godbout  actually incorporates  into his text,  along  with  statistics  on  the  American  nuclear  arsenal  and  various  other tragic  world  developments,  a  newspaper  report  of the  F.L.Q.   bombing  which killed an  elderly  watchman, William  O'Neil.  Aquin's  Prochain  Episode  has an obvious  allegorical  level  of  interpretation:  the  protagonist  is French-Canadian youth seeking self-fulfillment, which is equated  with independence for French Canada. H. de Heutz,  in his various guises, is the power structure  associated with English Canada and  the federal government. The girl K, object of the protagon­ ist's  adoration,   is  la  patrie,  Quebec.  The  love  affair,  then,  becomes  a  highly emotional  patriotism,  and  there is the strong implication  at  the end of the book that  K, Quebec,  has betrayed  this patriotic sentiment. The reader is made aware of the  possibility that  H.  de  Heutz  has some kind of deal  with K, for the  pro­ tagonist  overhears  a  telephone  conversation  between  him  and  a girl staying  at I'hOtel  d'Angleterre. When  the protagonist goes to  this  hotel for his prearranged rendezvous with K, she has already left.
To  pursue  this train  of thought  a little further,  it seems to me that  the level of interpretation of  Le  CoU!teau and  Prochain  Episode  which  has  to do  with  the current  situation  in  Quebec  is highly revealing,  perhaps  more  revealing  than  a Royal  Commission  report  could ever be, because a creative  writer is free to use artistic intuition  and  imagination as well as analysis. Both Godbout  and  Aquin, and  Leonard   Cohen  to  a  certain  extent  also, imply  that  the  present  unrest  in French  Canada has really nothing  to do with the question of what French Cana­ dians  want.  A list of wants  can  be formulated  easily enough,  no  doubt,  but  to supply  these wants  will not solve the problem,  which is primarily  a community projection  of  the  sense  of  frustration  so effectively dramatized  in  the  work  of Godbout   and  Aquin.  Moreover,  this sense of frustration   is  hardly  peculiar  to Quebec,  as a  number  of contemporary  novels from several  countries  reveal, as Godbout  himself illustrates  with his varied  references to the  world scene, and  as Aquin  suggests by his hero's  identification  with different  types of exiles. It  has reached,  it  would  seem,  a  heightened  degree in  French  Canada, but  I suspect this is so mainly because in Quebec, conveniently, there are all the ingredients for the  illusion of  a  specific cause and  a specific solution.  What  is not  illusionary, however,  is that  French   Canadians sense and  fear  that  they  are  being steadily overwhelmed  by what  they call the Anglo-Saxon mentality or way of life, which is  precisely  the  same  thing  many  English  Canadians   also fear  but  refer  to  as

TWIN SOLITUDES



Americanization,  which in turn is known to many Americans as the furious dehumanization of the age. In Cohen's Beautiful Losers, the idea is arrestingly illustrated  in  a  passage where  a  Danish  Vibrating machine  comes alive on its own, like a Frankenstein's  monster, and  succeeds in  bringing  sexual satisfaction to Edith. Aldous Huxley, an international figure, projected  the idea to an ultimate end and  called it the Brave  New  World.
But  to  get  back  to  the  common  themes  of  French-Canadian and  English­ Canadian Literature,  it  is clear  that  Douglas  Le· Pan,  Hubert   Aquin,  Leonard Cohen  and  Jacques  Godbout  are  all concerned  with  the  same  basic  problem. Their  approaches  to the problem, of course, differ. In fact, it is hard  to imagine four  worlds  so  completely  different  as  those  of  the  four  books in  question­ Godbout's  prairie  motels and  mobile set, Aquin's  Alpine  roads and James  Bond intrigue,  Cohen's  Indian  legends and  sensual fantasies,  Le  Pan's  London  dock­ yards and  leftovers of a war. Yet despite these differences, all four novels explore the  same  emptiness,  the  same  inspiration,  the  same  frustration, and  the  same major  thematic idea of man's quest for vital truth.



IT CAN BE   SAFELY SAID, therefore, that  French-Canadian and English-Canadian  novels of  the  Twentieth   Century  have  traced  a single  basic line of ideological  development,  creating  a  whole spectrum  of common  images,
attitudes  and  ideas. They  have done so for the most part  independently,  each in its own solitude, but obviously we have twin solitudes. In effect, recalling Marius Bewley's statement  that  writers define nationality,  it becomes evident that  French Canadians and  English Canadians  are  much  more  alike than  many  spokesmen have ever dared  to suspect. Aside from language,  it is quite  probable  that  there are  at  the  moment  no fundamental cultural  differences  between  the two major ethnic  groups  of Canada. Cohen's  Beautiful Losers  could  almost be a sequel to Godbout's  Le  Couteau sur la table.  We have evolved according  to  the same pre­ scription.  We have outgrown  what differences we may once have had,  the Rev. Ellis of Hamilton and Canon  Groulx notwithstanding.
It  should  be  pointed  out,  however,  that  there  are  certainly  well established myths  to  endorse  the supposition  of  two  distinctly  different  cultures,  and  that these myths  have  been  perpetuated  by writers in  both  languages.  Not counting Hugh   MacLennan and  Canon   Lionel  Groulx,  there  are  no  twentieth-century French-Canadian or English-Canadian writers  I know  of who have ventured  to


20

TWIN  SOLITUDES



offer more than  a gesture of insight into the other ethnic group. French-Canadian characters  can  indeed  be found  in  English-Canadian  novels-there are Blacky Valois in  Allister's  A  Handful  of  Rice,  Gagnon  in Callaghan's The   Loved  and the Lost and one of the prostitutes in his Such is My Beloved, Rene de Sevigny in Graham's Earth  and  High  Heaven,  Frenchy Turgeon  in Garner's Storm  Below and  a whole family in  his Silence on the Shore, and  a multitude of others;  but these characters   are  either  stereotyped  or  completely out  of  context.  The  same situation  obtains  with  the French-Canadian novel. Even Patricia  in  Le Couteau is the familiar  stereotype of the wealthy English person from the west side of the Montreal   mountain, with   a  hint   of  the  Hemingway  "rich  bitch"  for  colour. Patricia  is not  in fact  of English origin  at  all, being half Jewish  and  half Irish according  to  the  author; but  then  even  for  French-Canadian intellectuals  the word  anglais has  always been  a very catholic  term.
I mentioned   Hugh   MacLennan  and  Canon  Groulx  as  exceptions.  Groulx, however, is not  really an exception  to the general rule of mutual  ignorance.  His L'Appel de la race, a novel written in  1922, does indeed consider English Canada, but  upon  a basis of racist theories which would hardly be taken seriously except in places like South  Africa and  Alabama.  Hugh  MacLennan's Two Solitudes, on the  other  hand,  is  a  unique   and  impressive  accomplishment.  It has  become, almost  overnight  seemingly, a  historical  novel. The  author  set out  to dramatize certain  basic concepts  which  had  conditioned  French-Canadian society, and  he succeeded  in  doing so. Some  readers in French  Canada  have been dismayed by the ending  of the  book and  its implication  that  Paul will be assimilated into the English group.  But what  in fact  happens is that  part way through  the book Mac­ Lennan  shifts from  dramatization of group  concepts to characterization of indi­ viduals, so that  the denouement  should not be regarded as a prophecy about  the future  of French  Canada. One  English-speaking novelist, incidentally, did in fact predict  that  French  Canadians would  be  assimilated, and  with  great  rapidity. That  novelist was Frances  Brooke, and her prophecy was made in the year  1769.
With Hugh  MacLennan's Two Solitudes as a partial exception, the two literary
traditions   of  Canada  have  remained   essentially isolated.  In  a  recent  issue of Liberte,  Nai:m Kattan suggested that  so far  as the English-language  tradition  is concerned,   the  individual   writers  are  even  isolated  from  one  another.'6   But  I don't   think  that   Mr.  Kattan  is entirely  correct.  Even  though   geographically separated,  the  major  writers  of English Canada are undoubtedly  aware  of each other's  work, possibly as much  so as French-Canadian writers living in the same apartment block in  Montreal. Mr.  Kattan's real point, however, was that  com-


21

TWIN SOLITUDES



pared   to  English-Canadian novelists,  the  novelists  of  French Canada are  a  far more  homogeneous group,  which  is true.  They  are  also, I might  add,  so  produc­ tive that  if an  outside  observer  were asked  to indicate which  of the  two language groups  in  Canada is in greater danger of disappearing culturally, he  would  very probably pick the  English-Canadian.
At the moment, for instance,  an intriguing linguistic  experiment is taking  place.
Jacques Renaud in Le Casse, Claude Jasmin, Gerald  Godin, and Laurent Girouard in  parts  of  La  Ville  inhumaine have  elected  to use  joual, the  Quebec dialect,  as a literary  language. They  have  done  so, presumably, as a symbolic  protest.  The critics for  the  most  part  are either  uncertain about the significance  of this experi­ ment,  or  they  condemn  it outright as a  kind  of submission  to  corruption. ]oual certainly  is a conglomeration of corruptions, contractions,  archaisms, mispronun­ ciations,  loan  words and  innovations-which, of course, is precisely what  French was  before  the  Isle de  France standard and  the  formidable Academie fran<;;aise, or what  English  was and  regional  spoken  English still is. Any notion  of legitimacy  in language must  perforce be a figment  of the purist's imagination. But be that  as it  may,  the  recent  experiments with   joual  could  have  far-reaching effect.  One  has  only  to  recall  the  influence  of  Mark  Twain on  American Literature, or  the cultural explosion  in  Norway  with  the  creation of  a  distinctive   Norwegian lan­  guage   based   upon   rural   dialects.  Some   French-Canadian  critics  may  well  be lamenting the very initiative  which might  lead  to a distinguishing idiom.
To  return once  more  to  the  comparative novel,  one  last  question remains  to be  considered,  the  question   of  national identity  with  which   we  began.   It hao; been  shown  that  in the  course of twentieth-century evolution, principal novels in French and  English  Canada have  embraced the same  spectrum of attitudes and ideas,  albeit  separately. What has  this  phenomenon to do  with  the  definition of national identity? Has  our  literature produced one,  or  two, or  no definitions?
In   the  first  place,  if  the  notable   parallels   in  French-Canadian and  English­ Canadian Literature have  any  significance  at  all,  then  it must  be  because  there  does  exist  a  single,  common   national  mystique, a  common set  of  conditioning forces,  the  mysterious  apparatus of a single  sense of identity. But, nevertheless, I think  that  our  literature has not yet succeeded in  providing more than  an embry­  onic  definition of  nationality. The  reasons  for  this lack  of  success up  to now  are probably myriad. We have  moved  through stages of  masochistic resignation and dependence, as illustrated in  the  works  of  Hernon,  Grove  and  Ringuet, of con­ fusion  and struggle  of adaptation, as seen in novels by Roy,  MacLennan, Mitchell, Bessette and  Marlyn, and  we are at  the  moment groping simultaneously with  the

22

TWIN  SOLITUDES



very  essence of  truth. We  have  not  had  an  intellectual climate  of positive  myth and  idealism  to  work  within, as the  Americans have  had  for  instance. We have always  known  that  this country is not the "garden of the world," and  any notions of  "manifest  destiny" the  French-Canadian explorers  possessed, long  ago  went down  the drain. There has been  too much  of the Catherine Tekakwitha in us for our  own  good.  We,  French Canadians and  English  Canadians, have  perversely insisted  upon  isolation   and  upon  stereotyped  images  of  each  other,  and  like the characters in  Le  Pan,   Cohen, Aquin   and  Godbout, or  even  in  MacLennan's Barometer  Rising, we know  what  we are  not, but  we are  either  unwilling or still incapable of articulating what  we are. Yet, as this paper  has attempted to demon­ strate, a  process of involuntary  consolidation of literary  efforts  has begun to take effect,  and  an  emerging national  mystique  is somehow  dictating  the  themes  of Canadian creative  writing.
This  process could  be strengthened by a greater  mutual knowledge on the part of both  groups  of Canadians and  an  increase  in comparative studies.  More  and better   translations would  be  useful. But  even  of  greater  benefit  for  French­ Canadian novels, so many  of which  contain  excellent  colloquial  dialogue,  would be  a series of annotated editions,  providing  in appendices  translations of difficult expressions,  somewhat as  the  standard editions  of  Chaucer do.  In  any  event,  I think  that  we are  now  at  a stage of genuine mutual interest, which  is likely to be sustained. It seems  also likely that  as mutual knowledge  of French-Canadian and  English-Canadian  Literature  increases,   as  we  become   more   aware   of  the  sig­ nificant  parallels  between  the  two, both  bodies of literature will increase  in scope and   power,  and   we  shall  at  the  same  time  move  toward a  positive  sense  and adequate definition of Canadian identity.



Notes

'  Introduction to  James  Fenimore  Cooper,  Major  Writers  of   America,  ed.  Perry
Miller et al. (New York, 1962), p. 280.
Louis Hernon, Maria Chapdelaine  (Paris-Coulommiers:  Le Livre de poche, 1954),
p. 193:  Tu  mourras  quand  le bon Dieu voudra  que tu  meures, et  a mon idee <;a
n'est  pas encore  de  ce  temps  icitte. Qu'est-ce  qu'il  ferait  de  toi?  Le  Paradis  est
plein de vieilles femmes, au lieu qu'icitte  nous n'en avons qu'une  et elle peut encore
rendre des services, des fois ...
3  Louis Hernon,  p. 146:  Jesus-Christ, qui tendais les bras aux malheureux,  pourquoi ne l'as-tu  pas releve de Ia neige avec tes mains pales? Pourquoi,  Sainte Vierge, ne l'avez-vous pas soutenu  d'un  geste miraculeux quand il a trebuche  pour Ia derniere

23

TWIN  SOLITUDES



fois?  Dans  toutes  les legions du  ciel, pourquoi ne s'est-il  pas  trouve  un  ange  pour lui montrer le chemin?
4   Louis  Hernon, p.  2 I 8: Oh! la certitude! le contentement d'une promesse  auguste qui dissipe le brouillard redoutable de la mort! Pendant que le pretre accomplissait les  gestes  consacres  et  que  son  murmure se  melait   aux  soupirs  de  la  mourante, Samuel  Chapdelaine et  ses enfants  priaient sans  relever  la  tete,  presque  consoles, exempts   de  doute   et  d'inquietude, surs  que  ce  qui  se  passait  la  etait un  pacte conclu   avec  la  divinire,  qui  faisait  du  Paradis bleu  seme  d'etoiles  d'or   un  bien legitime.
5   Frederick Philip  Grove, Our  Daily Bread  (Toronto, Ig28), p. 77·
6  Ringuet, Trente Arpents  (Montreal: Fides,  I964), p. 59·
7   Jean  Simard, MonFils pourtant  heureux  (Mont11eal: Le Cercle du livre de France, Ig56), p. 6o.
8  Gabrielle Roy,  Bonheur  d' occasion  (Montreal: Editions Beauchemin, I g65,), p. 8g: "Peut-etre qu'il  oublie  des fois. II y atant de  misere  qui  s'adresse  a lui."  Ainsi, la seule  felure   dans  sa  foi  venait   de  cette   candide  supposition que  Dieu,  distrait, fatigue, harasse  comme  elle, en arrivait a ne plus accorder qu'une attention eparse aux  besoins  humains.
9  John Marlyn, Under the  Ribs  of Death, New  Canadian Library Series  (Toronto, I964), p. 2 I r.
10  W. 0. Mitchell, Who Has Seen  the Wind, Macmillan Paperback Series  (Toronto, I947), p.  I70.
" Gerard Bessette,  La Bagarre (Mont11eal: Le Cercle  du livre de France, I958), p. 5 I.
'"  Hugh MacLennan, The Watch that  Ends  the  Night   (Toronto, Ig6o), p. 64.
'3 Leonard Cohen, Beautiful Losers (Toronto, Ig66), p. g6.
I4   Jacques Godbout, Le Couteau sur la table  (Paris: Editions du Seuil,  Ig6s), p. g8: Seulement  faut   pas  s'aviser  de  reftechir,  de  regarder, de  sourx.;onner, de  jouer  a l'intellectuel ...
'5 Douglas  Le Pan, The  Deserter  (Toronto, I964), p. 226.
'6   Nairn  Kattan,  "Romanciers canadiens-anglais et canadiens-franc;ais," Liberte, No.
42 (Nov.-Dec. Ig66), p. 479·

















24



F. R. SCOTT AND
SOME OF HIS POEMS




A. ]. M. Smith





IN   FRANK scarr  we  have  a  figme  whom  rome  Cadyle  of
Canada's second  century  might  write  about  as The  Hero  as Canadian Poet or
perhaps  more soberly as The  Poet as Man  of Action. Politician, lawyer, teacher, scholar, and  public figure, F. R. Scott has been in the forefront  of the battle for civil liberties and  social  justice in Canada. He was one of the doctors  presiding over the births of the CCF  and  the New Democratic  Party;  he fought  and  won the legal battles against the padlock law of Premier Duplessis and against the censorship of Lady  Chatterley's  Lover; he has written studies of Canada's consti­ tution,  has  been  Dean  of  Law  at  McGill,  and  is at  present  a  member  of the Royal  Commission  on Bilingualism and  Biculturism. And he has, since his early days as a law student  at McGill, been a poet.
The  main  function  of a poet, of course, is to write poems, and  Scott has been
doing  that  steadily  for  more  than  three  and  a half decades. But his energy, his generous good will, and his natural  self-assertiveness that  makes him an inevitable and stimulating  leader, were thrown into the battle for the new poetry in Canada as soon as it was joined in the mid-twenties. The  now classic satire The  Canadian Authors Meet  was one of his first shots, while his social and editorial  participation in the doings of the Preview group  and  the encouragement  he has given to other poets in  Montreal  have  kept  up the good work to the present moment.  There  is hardly a poet in Canada who has not, passing through Montreal, made his pilgrim­ age to Clarke  Avenue,  Westmount,  and  been royally entertained  and stimulated with wise and  witty talk about  poetry and  poets; and all of them from  the early days of Leo Kennedy, Abe Klein, and myself, through the time of  Patrick  Ander­ son, John  Sutherland, P. K.  Page, and  the  rest to the  overlapping  and  hetero-

F. R. SCOTT



geneous  groups  that  might include Louis Dudek, Ralph Gustafson, Irving Layton, Doug  Jones,  and  John  Glassco,  felt  the  charm, energy  and  good  sense that  ani­ mated  Frank Scott  and  make  him  one of the leaders  in every group.
Ralph  Gustafson has  expressed  in  an  appropriate and  witty  piece of  verse  a judgment that  I  think  every one of the  poets  I have  named would  agree  is just:

To say
that this man is fantastic is to be
Frankly wrong.
Real
is the right root for him.
He bears history, the lakes
he dives under, the cold hard sun he walks in,
Canada  perhaps....

Praise
he goes into, padlocks
he gets well out of and piety....

Mortality moves him,
he goes for wrong-doing, never lets bad enough alone....

Words
he gets the wear out of ... buried with respectable honour goes
Scott-free.

"He bears  history,jthe lakes/he dives  under  ..." These  lines  will take  us into the  first  poem  in  Scott's  new  book,*  "Lakeshore," one  of  the  finest  and  most characteristic pieces in the collection.
* Selected  Poems, Oxford University Press, $4·75·

F.R.SCOTT


IT WILL  SERVE as a gateway  through which  to enter  into  an examination of some  of  his most  striking  themes  and  interesting techniques.
Its  theme   is  Man's history,  which  extends  back  into   pre-history   and   before man. Its  unifying   symbol  is  water  as  the  source  of  life.  The   poem  establishes through  a  specific   concrete  personal   experience   a  contact  in  awareness   with biological   history,  stretching back  to  the  primordial  beginnings of  life  and   all around to the  earthbound  mechanical now of "a  crowded  street."
By  the  edge  of  a  lake,  the  poet-- or,  better,  the  sensuous  mind   that  is the protagonist  of  so  many   of  Scott's   metaphysical lyrics-contemplates  water, earth, and  sky. There is first "the bevelled edge of land," then  "the fretted sands" that   the  eye  follows  as  they  "go  slanting   down   through liquid   air." Now  the regard  is fixed  on  stones  below  the surface  of the  water  and  held  too at  the sur­ face where the stones seem to be

Floating  upon their broken sky
All netted by the prism wave
And rippled where the currents are.

This  is exact,  clear,  and  elegant.  There is a seventeenth-century grace  about these opening lines. One  thinks  of Cowley's  praise:   "His  candid style like a clean stream   does  slide."  It  is a style  that  admits,  indeed  invites,  Wit-as  we see in the  next  couple  of stanzas. The poet  (Man-and-Mind) peers into  the  water.

I stare through  windows at this cave Where fish, like planes, slow-motioned, fly Poised in a still of gravity ...

The  windows  are  the surface of the water  and  the surfaces  of the eyes. Note  also the hushed  gravity  of the last line and  the gentle  punning on still.
But  the most striking  object  that  confronts the poet is his own  reflection.

I am a tall frond that waves Its head below its rooted feet Seeking the light that draws it down To forest floors beyond its reach Vivid with gloom and eerie dreams.

At  the  beginning of  the  fourth stanza   the  sensuous  mind   dives  down  into  the depths  of  the  water   and  into   the  pre-racial a:ons of  the  past,  and  for  the  four next  stanzas   we  become, like  the  diver,  liquid  and  loosed  and  silent,  "Stroked by the fingertips  of love,"

F.R. SCOTT



Too virginal for speech or sound And each is personal and laned Along his private aqueduct.

But  this return to  the  all-embracing primordial womb  can  be only  a momentary glimpse  of a long-lost  freedom,  a long since forfeited harmony with  our environ­
ment.

Too soon the tether of the lungs Is taut and straining, and we rise Upon our undeveloped wings Toward  the prison of our ground A secret anguish in our thighs And mermaids in our memories.

This is our talent, to have grown
Upright  in posture, false-erect, A landed gentry, circumspect, Tied to a horizontal soil
The floor and ceiling of the soul; Striving, with cold and fishy care To make an ocean of the air.

The   physical  and  sensuous  exactness  of  the  beginnings of  the  first  of  these  two stanzas  is  admirable, as is  the  emotional and  imaginative rightness  of  the  end. The  witty  implications in naming our  arms  "our  undeveloped wings" should  not go  without notice  either.  In  the  next  stanza, the  aptness  of  the  joke in  calling mankind "a  landed  gentry" adds  to the  laughter of the  mind  which  it is one - though  only one -of  the functions  of this poem  to provoke.
But  it  is  not  with  laughter, however  philosophical, that   the  poem  ends,  but
with wonder.

Sometimes, upon a crowded street, I feel the sudden rain come down And in the old, magnetic sound
I hear the opening of a gate That loosens all the seven seas. Watching the whole creation drown I muse, alone, on Ararat.

Here,   at  the  threshold   of  his book,  Scott  moves  from  the  poetry  of  concrete images  through wit  and  metaphysical imagination  to  myth   and  magic.  A  long cool dive into  Lake  Massawippi and  the poet comes up with  a rich hoard  of racial

F.R. SCOTT



memories,  dreams, desires  and  aspirations. All are  perfectly  fused : earth, water, air;  science  and  mythology; mermaids, Venus,  Noah; the  I and  All-Mankind; a crowded  street  and  "the water's deepest  colonnades."


"LAKESHORE"  is an excellent starting point for a consideration of Scott's  non-satirical poetry.  The themes  and  the motives  of many  of his most
completely  articulated poems  are seen in it at their  clearest  and  most direct.  The fascination with  water,  as an  element  and  as a symbol;  the  identification of the poet's  Self  with  Man  and  of  the sensuous  perceptive  physical  being  with  Mind; and  the inescapable tendency to identify  or interchange the language and  imagery of  science   (especially   biology,  geology  and  psychology)   with  the  language and imagery  of religion :  all these  are  here.  And  they are to be found  also, in varying degrees  and  proportions, in such  deeply  felt  and  intellectually stimulating poems
as  "Paradise Lost"    "Eden"   "Journey"  "My Amoeba   is  Unaware"  and  the
' 	' 	' 	'
best  of the  pieces on  India and  the  Far  East-"Bangkok", "Water", "A  Grain
of Rice", and  "On the  Death of Gandhi".
"Lakeshore" may  also serve  as an  exemplar both of the "candid" style derived from   Imagism  and   of  the  witty  metaphysical style  that,   without being  in  the least  derivative,  recalls  Marvell and   Waller-or,  if  you  prefer,  Auden. Some of  the  earliest   poems  dating from  the  days  of  the  McGill  Fortnightly Review already  have  a simplicity  of language and  an exactness of imagery which  are the firstfruits  of  conscious  discipline,  control, and  humility.  Little  pieces like "North Stream" and   Snowdrift" or  the  much   later  haiku  "Plane  Landing in  Tokyo" exhibit  these qualities in miniature splendour.
A pure  and  naked  perception alone  could  not, of course, satisfy Scott  for more
than   a moment, and  most  of  his poems  that  start  out  as an  image  soon  become images,  and  perceptions soon become  concepts  and  blossom in metaphor, analogy, and  conceit.  Mind  comes flooding in.
Many of  the  early  very  simple  verses grouped   near  the  beginning of Selected Poems are nevertheless  quite  delightful, though  their importance perhaps is mainly historical   (they   date   from   the  mid-twenties)  and  technical  (they  show  Scott's later  style beginning to form). "New  Names" develops in  a personal and  indeed almost  rapturous way  the  old  thesis that  writers  as different as  Mrs.  Traill and Mr.   Douglas   Le  Pan   have   united   in  expressing-that  Canada is  a  country without a  mythology. Scott  suggests  we must  make  our  own  anew.  "Old Song"

29

F.R. SCOTT



finds  and   expresses  an  austere   cadence   m  the  almost-silence of  the  northern wilderness:

far  voices
and  fretting leaves this music the hillside gives

but in the deep Laurentian river an elemental  song for ever

a quiet calling of no mind
out of long ::eons



granite lips
a stone throat

Here  we  are  back  to the  purest  imagism  and  a style  that  is the  ultimate in  sim­ plicity  and  suggestiveness. This  poem  has  a theme  and  a style that  are irresistibly appealing to the  Canadian poet,  as new  poets  like Bowering  and  Newlove  show as clearly  as E. J. Pratt or W. W. E. Ross. Here,  as in "Lakeshore", we have  the sense of vast distances  in space  and  time and  a view of  geological  pre-history that
goes back  even  farther than  the ages of man-as-fish.
Another  poem   that   rises  naturally  out  of  such   telescopic  probings   into   the geologic  and  biologic past and  therefore has  affinities with  "Lakeshore" and  "Old Song"   is  the  strange  meditation called  "Mount  Royal". This  is  a  Pratt  poem with  a difference. One  thinks  of the  vivifying  dynamism of the  description of the Laurentian Shield  in  "Towards the  Last  Spike". Here  time  is speeded  up:   the Mountain rises out of the sea; the sea subsides, leaving  its deposit  of silt and shells; Man  walks  and  builds  his muddled cities "where crept  the  shiny  mollusc," and the poet or poet-mind observes it all.

Where flowers march, I dig these tiny shells
Once  deep-down fishes safe, it seemed, on sand....

The   joke  about   the  fishes building  on  sand   and  thinking themselves  safe  alerts us  to  the  fact  that  irony  and  satire  are  this  poet's  chosen  weapons. The satire

F.R.SCOTT



here  is  directed   against   man's vanity,   pride,  and  blind  self-confidence as  in Hardy's lines on  the  loss of the Titanic, where  dim  moon-eyed  fishes stare  at the mighty  wreck  and  query  "What does this vaingloriousness  down  here?" The situa­ tion  is  reversed  in  "Mount Royal". It  is the  fish who  have  been  stranded and passed  by. Now  they  are  cited  as an object  lesson that  suburban and commercial man,   who  builds  his  villas  on  the  reclaimed  island  of  the  mountain, fails  to heed-blindly  and  foolishly,  it is implied,  since the forces of  atomic destruction are to hand. The  poem ends in angry scorn.

Pay taxes now, Elect your boys, lay out your pleasant parks, You gill-lunged, quarrelsome ephemera! The tension tightens yearly, underneath,
A folding continent  shifts silently
And oceans wait their turn for ice or streets.




b:ERE IS A  CURIOUS  CONSEQUENCE  of  this  geologic  view that we can observe in some of Scott's  most characteristic poems.  He is a man  capable of-indeed  unable to  refrain   from -taking long  views,  both  backwards into the  past  and  forward into  the  future, an  idealist  in  the  popular sense  of  the word.  Both in his political  life as a socialist and  his literary life as a poet he wel­ comes the  new, the  just, and  the generous-and always in the broadest and most generous   terms.   Poems  that   embrace vast  cosmic  distances, both  of  space  and time,  lend  themselves  to thinking in abstractions. There is world  enough  and  time for  all the  great  abstractions to come into  being,  to evolve  and  grow,  to change, to grow  old,  and  perhaps to die. The  good ones we must  cultivate,  preserve,  and nourish; the  bad  ones  we  must  kill.
There is a very  peculiar class of poems in which  these  consequences of taking large   views  are  quite   explicit.   Some  of  its  members   are  "Creed",  "Conflict", "Dialogue", "Degeneration", poems concerned  with War  or with Love, and a remarkable series of what  for  want  of a better  name  I will call "defining" poems
-among them  "Memory", "Heart", "Was", "Caring", and  (with  a difference) "Stone". Let us look at one or two of them.
"Conflict" is  a  rather  Emersonian poem  on  the  tragic   paradox of  war.  It
develops  the  thesis that  men  on  both  sides in any conflict  fight  for  the good  they know  and  die  with  equal courage for  the opposite  sides of truth:

F.R.SCOTT



When I see the falling bombs Then I see defended homes. Men above and men below
Die to save the good they know....

Pro and con have single stem
Half a truth dividing them....

Persecution's cruel mouth
Shows a twisted love of truth....


Here  speaks  the  defender  of unpopular causes,  the idealist  who loves the abstract and  the  universal. It is the wide application of unparticularized truth  that  such  a poetry  seeks to secure.  Universals  and  abstractions are  employed  with  the  confi­ dence  born  of  an  utter  faith  in  their  reality  and  validity.  Such  words  as  good,  wrong,   bravery, love,  truth, prison,  ghetto,  flag,  gun,  rack,  rope,  persecution, sacrifice,  whether  abstractions or  collective  symbols,  are  made  to  glow  with  the vitality  of an  individual existence-or are  used as if they did so glow.
How  this is done,  the eight quatrains entitled  "Dialogue" may demonstrate. In
structure and  language this poem  is as taut  and  concentrated as "Conflict", but its movement is in the reverse direction -from sensation  and  particularity (from the  concrete, that   is)  to  the  universal,   a  universal   which  is equated  with  the spiritual-"spirit takes communion/From every  living  touch." The  progression is straightforward. "Sense is more  than  mortal." Our  bodies are the gateway  to a supra-sensual  world.   Eye,  ear,  and  hand   contribute to  the  synthesis  of  a  new form  "to house a new conception."

Desire first, then structure Complete the balanced picture. The  thought requires the form.

The   poem's   rhetoric is serpentine, for  we  have  now  reached  -this  is the  fifth
of eight  stanzas -the  point  where  the  poem  begins:

The hour is ripe for union, And spirit takes communion From every living touch.

The  end  in  the  last two stanzas  is surprising and  unheroic. The  serpent cannot rear  back  and  strike;  instead  it sinks down  and  seem  to collapse.

32

F.R.SCOTT



For us, how small the power To build our dreams a tower Or cast the molten need.
For us, how small the power.

So few, so worn, the symbols. No line or word resembles The vision in its womb.
So few, so worn, the symbols.


Truth, not  wishes,  hopes,  or  evasions,  is the  business of  poetry;   and  this  poem would  be a lesser one if it ended  any other way.
What is needed  always  is a new  language, new images,  and  a new  technique. Scott has been  trying  all his life-and sometimes with heartening success-to find these. Some of his notable successes are moving  love poems that  have been  placed in  this  collection  immediately after  "Dialogue". Their newness  and  hence  their effectiveness  lies in nothing more strange  than  an absolute  fidelity to the occasion and  the emotion  that  has brought them  into being. One,  called  "Meeting", begins like this:

If what we say and do is quick and intense,
And if in our minds we see the end before starting, It is not fear, but understanding  that holds us.


Here  the  conciseness  of the  syntax  contributes potentialities to the  meaning. It is not fear  that  holds  us apart but  understanding that  holds us together.
Other poems  that   approach or  achieve  the  new style  are  "Will  to  Win" -a
deceptively  light  and  witty  jeu d'esprit  in which  the lightness  enables  the  poet  to keep control  of the situation and the wit serves to define it; "Vision"-beautifully rhymed   quatrains in  which   the  "newness" or  rightness  comes  from   the  clarity with  which  the sharp edge of every idea is defined; and  "A  l'Ange  Avantgardien"
-the explicit  statement of a romantic view of poetic creation according to which
the emphasis  must  always  be on the making  never on the made.
One  of  the  most  striking  paradoxes of  Scott's  poetic  life is that  the  ceaseless flow of energy  which  throws  up poems of all kinds and  in all modes should never­ theless  be able  to shape them  with  extreme  care,  whether the  work  in  hand  is a piece  of  impressionistic and   typographical experiment or  a  closely  knit web  of thought, like the  fine late poem  "Vision" -a true metaphysical lyric that  begins:

33

F.R.SCOTT



Vision in long filaments  flows Through the needles of my eyes. I am fastened  to the rose ...

I am clothed  in what eye sees.

and ends:

Tireless eye, so taut  and  long,
Touching flowers and flames with ease, All your wires vibrate  with song
When  it is the heart  that  sees.


Here is song that is as well written as prose -a poem that  reiterates the valid­
ity of the "candid" style of "Lakeshore"  and  the earlier imagist  pieces.
This style is seen at its most purely intellectual  in what  I have called the "de­ fining"  poems-lyrics  that  perhaps  have developed  out  of Scott's  training  as a lawyer.  Lawyers, like poets, are involved with  words, with  definitions, and  with subtle  quibbles. Some of  these  pieces, as for  example  "Memory", are  apt  and ingenious metaphor:

Tight skin called  Face is drawn Over  the skull's bone comb Casing  the honey brain

And thoughts like bee-line bees Fly straight  from  blossom eyes To store sweet facts in cells ...

Within  the waxy walls Lifetimes  of sounds and smells Lie captive  in the coils ...

Others,  like "Was" seem merely verbal,  until  we notice  that  here the  universal and  the abstract  are made concrete and immediate,  the ideal transformed  before our eyes into the real:

Was is an  Is that  died
in our careless hands and  would not stay
in its niche of time.



34

F.R. SCOTT



We crumble all our nows
into the dust of Was ... forgetting  Was

cannot  be shaken off follows close behind breathes  down our neck ...

One day we shall look back into those staring eyes
and there will be nothing left but
Was.

Another "defining"  poem  of  the  same  sort  is  the  one  beginning "Caring  is loving,  motionless," but  the lines entided  "Stone" show an interesting difference. In these  what  is being  defined  is not  an  abstraction or a state  but  an object,  a solid item,  "a still of gravity". The  method  is entirely  different  from  that  of imagism. The  purpose  of an imagist  poem is to perceive and to present  perception, but  here we go further in an effort  to grasp  the idea of the thing  and  of its place in history. The   motion  too  is  just  the  reverse  of that  in  "Was", where  an  abstraction was made  concrete; here  a concretion is seen in the light of thought-the remarkable thing  being,  however,  that  the  thought is made  to seem to radiate from  the stone
itself:

A stone is a tomb
with the door barred.

A still picture
from a flick of motion.

A stone is a closed eye reflecting what it saw....

In  these  distichs  we  come  back  to  the  sense of time  in  which  Scott  is so deeply immersed   that   it  recurs  in  poem  after   poem.  Here  the  mind   moves  from  the glacial  epochs  of pre-history to the  bursting  stone that  falls on Hiroshima.
Perhaps in  coming  to  a  close  I  should  return   to the  personal. But  actually  I
have  not  been  away  from  it. The  old dictum  that  the style is the  man  has never been more clearly  illustrated than  in the  poetry of F. R. Scott.  All his poems, from the gayest  and  lightest  expression  of delight  in life through his pointed  and  savage satires  to the  profound lyrics  I have  been  mainly  considering, are  informed and qualified  by a sense of responsibility  and  an inescapable sincerity, which  is serious but  never  solemn  and  rich  without ostentation.

35



FOUND	POEMS




F. R. Scott





BRITISH INDUSTRI)ILJST
)IPPROVES )IP)IRTHEID


Is the headline. Sir Francis de Guingand
Chairman of Rothman's of Pall Mall,  Ltd.,
(substantial cigaret  and  tobacco  holdings in South  Africa)
said black Africans in general
are "just  too immature for self-government". While  admitting
"It's an immensely complex  problem, of course",
he said he was "all in favour of separate development". Apparently the Portuguese colonies
are doing "awfully well, you know", while black Africans
"are  killing each other". "Those Somali  chaps - they're  bound  to cause trouble. Same thing in the Congo. Awful mess.
And Burundi, Urundi,
or whatever  you call the place.
Killing each other  by the thousands. Dreadful,
just dreadful".
And as for Nyerere of Tanzania,

FOUND POEMS



he is "playing far too much into  the hands
of the wretched Chinese".
(Montreal Gazette, 10 Oct.,  1966)




ONE CURE FOR LONELINESS


Noted
the recent  letters
from  people who are lonely and  find time hanging heavily on their  hands.

Some form of hobby can serve to interest such folk.
Such  a hobby  need not be expensive nor demand undue  space
or equipment.


News events
or stories and  articles
from  the press and  magazines can  be clipped  and  pasted
in a scrapbook.


This  book could  be
I am told
as cheap as a five cent copy book and  a jar of paste
is mentioned
at about
19 cents.
(Montreal Star,  July  15, 1965)


37

FOUND POEMS



FROST-BITE


The  term  frost-bitten
denotes  the effect produced by extreme cold, accompanied by a sharp biting  wind.
In such weather, persons are liable to ha•;c the nose, toes, fingers, ears,
or those parts where the circulation of the blood is
scanty  and  slow,
frost-bitten,
without  being made  aware  of the change by their own sensations;
often they are first informed of their  misfortune by a passing stranger,
who observes the nose becoming quite  white,
while the rest of the face is very red.
In such a predicament it is at first startling to see an utter stranger running up to you with a handful of snow, calling  out
"your nose, sir: your nose is frost-bitten:
and,  without further ceremony,
rubs without mercy at your proboscis - it being the first time, perhaps,
that  anyone  has ever dared  to tweak  and  twinge
that  exquisitely sensitive organ  -
which some have considered  the seat of honour.
If snow
be well rubbed  in
in due time,
there is a chance of saving
the most prominent feature of the face;
if not,
or if heat be applied,
not only is the skin destroyed,

FOUND POEMS



but  the nose,
and a great  part of the adjacent surface, are irrevocably lost.

(From a History  of Upper and Lower  Canada, by
L. Montgomery Martin, 1837, p.  r86)










JIDVERTISEMENT


Thin-film decoder
for high-speed pulse code modulation systems
converts  binary  pulse sequences into analog  signals.
Circuit consists
of precision  resistor network
and  multiple-encapsulated control  diodes. Precision  resistors
generate reference  currents that  are switched  into resistive ladder network.
Output voltage is proportional to binary  code
applied  to diodes.
Precision  sufficient for decoding g-digit  binary  codes
is obtained,
at code rates up to I 2  me
( 108 mb/s pulse rates).
(Scientific  American, 1965)

39



A POET OF THE MIDDLE SLOPES




Robin Skelton


AT A TIME  WHEN  !"netic 'ymbolbm and 'hetmical ges­
ticulation are running neck and  neck with  pseudo-imagist reportage and structure­
less  colloquialism  in  the  race  towards   a  Canadian  Parnassus, it is  enormously rewarding to  turn  one's  glasses on  a  poet  of  a  different colour,  and  one  whose measured steady  progress has been unattended by ballyhoo  and  self-dramatization. F.  R.  Scott's  Selected  Poems'  brings  together   the  best  work  of over  forty  years, and  the result is impressive.
Mr.  Scott  has  not  chosen  to date  the  poems  in  his collection, so that it is im­ possible,  without  doing   a  good  deal  of  research, to  discuss  the  poems  chron­ ologically.  I am  sure  this is deliberate; what  matters about poetry  is  not  its de­ velopment  but  its  identity. This   book  represents, not   a  history,  but  a  poetic personality,  and   the  varying   viewpoints   and   tones  are  better  seen  as  comple­  mentary portions  of one pattern than  as stages upon  a journey.
As one  reads  the  book the  pattern emerges  very clearly. It is, I think,  the  pres­
sure of intelligence  that  dominates and  moulds  Mr.  Scott's  poetry. This intelligent, rigorous,  even  sceptical,  approach to experience is most  obvious  in  the  satirical poems, of course, for there  the intelligence  must  have the last incisive and  derisory word.  It is also, however,  present  in  the  most  lyrical  and  most symbolic  poems. Thus, when we read the final stanza  of "Old Song":
only a moving with no note granite lips
a stone throat

while  we  are  affected  by  the  associative  power  of  the  imagery, we  are  equally moved  by the economy  and  rigour  of the language; the poem displays its decisive­
' F. R. scoTT, Selected  Poems, Oxford  University Press. $4·75·

A POET  OF  THE  MIDDLE SLOPES



ness  as  an  essential  part  of  its  perception. Thus  again  m  "Trans Canada" the implications of the opening images  are witty as well as sensually  vivid.

Pulled from our ruts by the made-to-order gale
We sprang  upward into a wider prairie
And dropped  Regina below like a pile of bones.

If, here,  the  implications of  the  ascent  of  the  spirit  from   the  body,  and  the hint  at  the  hackneyed after-life image  of happy  hunting grounds, have,  like the "made-to-order gale", sardonic overtones,  this does not  in  any  way  destroy,  but rather  enriches   the  validity   of  the  speaker's   emotions.  Scott,   like  Donne,   like Carew,  and   like  Marvell, speaks  as  a  complete   man; his  passions  involve  his intelligence,  and  his intelligence gives rise to passion.



IT IS,  PERHAPS, characteristic of  any  poet  addicted  to  the precise counterpointing of intelligence  and  passion that  he should  also be inclined
towards neatness  of form.  Scott  has handled most kinds of verse in his time,  and his sense of form  is such  that  he  can  make  the  most of free  as well  as of highly disciplined   patterns. He  knows  the  possibilities  of  colloquial  ease  as  well  as  he knows  the  opportunities of  formal  rhetoric. Thus,  looking  through his work  one can  gather  examples of  technical expertise  in almost  every  manner.
Compare for  example the  deftly  Whitmanesque opening of  "Audacity" with the gnomic  traditionalism of "Advice".

They say we lack audacity, that we are middle class, without  the adventurousness  that arises from the desperation  of the lower
classes or the tradition  of the upper classes.
They say we are more emphatically middling than any country west of Switzerland, and that boldness and experiment  are far from
our complacent  thoughts.
But I say to you, they do not know where to look, and have not the eyes to see.
For audacity is all around  us, Boldness sits in the highest places,
We are riddled  with insolence.	("Audacity")

Beware the casual need
By which the heart is bound;

A POET OF  THE  MIDDLE SLOPES



Pluck out the quickening seed
That  falls on stony ground.

Forgo the shallow gain, The favour of an hour. Escape, by early pain
The  death  before the flower.        ("Advice")


This  type  of control  leads sometimes  to a self-consciousness  that  militates  against passion   and   over-emphasizes  the  virtue  of  order. Certainly there  are  very  few instances of  emotional excess,  and   even   the  visionary   poems  rather suggest  a disciplined   contemplation than  a  blinding  illumination on  the  road  to  Emmaus.
This  is, perhaps, healthy. The  Romantic heresy that  the philosophic importance
of  an  experience is the  greater  the  nearer  it  gets  to hysteria  finds  no support in F. R. Scott; he is clearly inclined  to reverse Blake's dictum and  say "Bless braces, damn relaxes". Nevertheless, there is great  emotional power in many of his poems; the  power  is expressed  by the  tautness  of  the  verse and  the  poised  tension  of the language, thus "Coil" begins:

Coil is a tense a caged thing coil is a snake or a live spring

Against  the  tension,  however,  is balanced a sense of calm  and  a feeling  for slow organic movement. Thus  "Departure" concludes:

We shall find, each, the deep sea in the end, A stillness, and a movement only of tides
That  wash a world, whole continents  between, Flooding the estuaries of alien lands.
And we shall know, after the flow and ebb, Things central, absolute and whole. Brought clear of silt, into the open roads,
Events shall pass like waves, and we shall stay.


Mr.  Scott's  imagery  is rarely  very novel,  though  it is almost  invariably  appro­ priate. He  deals in images of the natural landscape and  the seasons more than  in those  of  the  city,  though  his satirical   poems  are  inclined   to  be  both  urban and urbane. The third  stanza of "Boston  Tea  Party   1940" runs:

A POET OF THE  MIDDLE SLOPES



The Harvard pundit's  tea is brought
Amid the ample female forms. He quits his crevices of thought
To taste the soft and simpler norms ...

This,  in syntactical structure and  in cadence,  is very close to Eliot,  and  I am sure the  closeness is intentional. Here,   however,  as in  some  other  cases,  the  result  is rather a  predictability of tone  than  an enriching ambiguity of reference. A poem that  operates simultaneously in  terms  of two sensibilities, one  ostensible  and  one implied  by allusion  or pastiche, requires  an all-embracing, all-including originality of vision if it is not  to become  merely  a pleasing game.  It must  be admitted that many  of  Mr.  Scott's  poems  become  games.  Sometimes  these  are  delightful, and yet such  trivia  as "The Canadian Authors  Meet"  and "Saturday Sundae" impose a superficiality upon  the  total  persona  of the  book;  the former  jibe has point  and still  applies,  but  even  here  there  are  moments  of mere  facetiousness.  "Saturday Sundae" is worse, being both  arch  and insensitive.

Him of the front-flap apron, him I sing, The counter-clockwise clerk in underalls. Swing low, sweet chocolate, Oh swing, swing, While cheek by juke the jitter chatter falls.

The  sensibility  portrayed by the  poem's speaker seems to me to be even less attrac­
tive than  that  of the  world  he mocks.

My brothers and my sisters, two by two, Sit sipping succulence and sighing sex. Each tiny adolescent universe
A world the vested interests annex.

There is an  element of potential pathos  here  which  undermines the  whole  poem, and  makes the final  verse appear both  imperceptive and  heartless.
The  satirical poems  of F. R.  Scott,  though  much  praised, seem to me too often to lack  that  hunger after  the  ideal,  which  animates the  best satirists,  whether of the  radical  or  other   persuasion. There is more  cleverness  than  vehemence about them; they  relate  to the great  satires  as the grotesqueries of Leech  relate  to those of Goya.
It is, perhaps, by way  of  the  satires  that  I find  myself coming  to a conclusion about   Scott's   work.  He  is a  splendid   versifier,  an  intensely  intelligent writer,  a wit,  and  a man  of deep  feeling; nevertheless,  though  his stated  opinions are often

43

A POET  OF THE  MIDDLE SLOPES



radical, liberal,  and  sophisticated, his modes  of operation are so dependent upon already established modes  and  attitudes that   poetically   (and  in  the  context,  not of  Canada, but  of  the  English-speaking world)  he  must  be  regarded as a  con­ servative. Nevertheless  on the Canadian scene  he is an  important figure, he repre­  sents  emotional discipline,  intelligence,  and  craftsmanship, and  must  be reckoned  one  of our  four  or  five finest living  poets. His  work  may  not  place  him  alongside the  greatest   of  the  twentieth-century poets  of  England and  America,  but  poets should  be  judged  by their excellences not by their  limitations, and Scott has made  a  number of  poems  that  ensure  his survival   down   the  years.  He  may  not  have reached  the  highest  peak  of  Parnassus,   but  he  is assured  of  a  place  upon  the middle  slopes. Only  a very few can ever hope  to climb farther.










CANADIAN  LITERATURE LITTERATURE CANADIENNE
edited by Inglis F. Bell and Susan W. Port

The first of a series of Canadian  Literature  publications, this is a listing of Canadian creative and critical writings in English and  French  for the  period  I959-I963.  An amended cumulation of the annual  lists from Canadian Literature, it supplements the two recent compilations of English­ Canadian  literature  and criticism, Watters'  A Checklist of Canadian Literature and  Background Materials and
Watters' and Bell's On  Canadian Literature and the several recent bibliographies of French-Canadian Literature.

HARD  COVER  $5.50
PAPERBACK	$2.50

PUBLICATIONS  CENTRE, UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH CoLUMBIA Vancouver  8, British Columbia




44




GLENGARRY
REVISITED




Roy Daniells








RALPH CONNOR's WORKS  fill a whole shelf in  any Cana­
dian   library   and, though worn  bindings  on  multiple   copies show  that  someone
has  pulled  them   down   pretty  often,  we should   not  be  much   tempted to do  so now  were  it  not  for  The Man from Glengarry, published  in  1901.  It has slowly assumed   the  status   of  a  minor   classic,  after a  period of  immense   popularity followed   by  total   neglect.   Reprinted  for  the  New  Canadian  Library in  1g6o, with  a  brief  but  enlightening introduction by Ross Beharriell, it can  stand  alone as  Connor's testimony, but  is usefully  thrown   into  relief  if flanked  by his  auto­ biographical Glengarry Schooldays ( 1go2)   and  Postscript  to  Adventure  ( 1938)  and   illuminated  by  an  occasional   dip  into  the  other   novels.  Readers  pursuing the   Glengarry  theme   should,  however, disregard The  Girl   from  Glengarry  ( 1933); it  is a  story  of  the  stock  market  in  the  192o's  and  demonstrates how bald  and  superficial Connor could  be when  his daemon deserted him.
"All  that  is set  down  in  Glengarry  Schooldays  is true." This  avowal  answers for  the  author's entire  work.  There is in fact  no change  of persona  between  the Reverend  Charles  Gordon  and   the  pseudonymous  writer   of  stories.  For   most Canadians, the  minister   of  St.  Stephen's Church in  Winnipeg, chaplain on  the Western  Front during the First World  War  and afterwards Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly, is quite  simply  Ralph Connor. Born  in Ontario's eastern  county  of Glengarry in 186o, he looked out into  the Glengarry farms  and forests  from  the  vantage point  of his father's manse  during the  first ten  years of his life. It is to this decade that  we must  tum  for the primary pattern from  which

45

GLENGARRY REVISITED



all  his works  unfolded. Familiar outlines  are  here  superimposed: the  Canadian bush,  the  Scottish  clan,  the  doctrines  of Calvin   and   the  archetypes of  a  child's dream.  Connor's  perception   of  greatness,   in  this  life  and   beyond,   is  directed down  immemorial  vistas.
His  Glengarry lies at  the  heart  of the  most  primeval of all forests, a Schwarz­
wald  antedating even  the  stories  Grimm   preserved. "It lines  up  close and  thick along  the  road,  and  here  and  there  quite  overshadows it. It crowds  in  upon  the little farms  and  shuts them  off from one another and  from  the world  outside,  and peers in through the little windows  of the  log houses looking so small  and  lonely, but  so beautiful in  their  forest  frames." At  the  end  of a  perspective  of time  past, Connor sees this  landscape of his childhood, simplified, stylized  and  lighted  by a glow  of warm  affection.  It is a fairyland, more  solid  and  real  than  actuality. "A dim  light  fell  over  the  forest  from  the  half-moon and  the  stars,  and  seemed  to fill up  the  little  clearing  in  which  the  manse  stood,  with  a weird  and  mysterious radiance. Far  away in the forest the long-drawn howl of a wolf rose and  fell...." Or  Spring   is  breaking: "The  bare  woods  were  filled  with  the  tangled   rays  of light  from  the setting  sun.  Here  and  there  a hillside facing  the east lay in shadow that  grew  black  where  the  balsams  and  cedars  stood  in  clumps.  But  everywhere else the  light  fell sweet  and  silent  about  the  bare  trunks, filling the  long  avenues under   the  arching maple  limbs  with  a yellow  haze." This  luminous  veil belongs to le temps   perdu,  living  only in  memory: "The solid  forests  of Glengarry have vanished, and  with  the  forests  the  men  who  conquered them."
Instinctively Connor brings  his great  Highlanders on stage  as woodsmen rather than  farmers. Salient  ceremonies  of this self-contained world  in  the  heart  of the forest  are  the  sugaring-off, an  annual  tribute from   the  maple  groves,  and  the logging-bee,  a mass assault upon  the brule. The  forest,  moreover, is a main source of  livelihood.   Each  winter  the  shanties  are  filled  with  Glengarry men  who  will fell the  huge  pines and  with  broad-axe square the  timber ready  for  rafting  down river  to  Quebec. When  the  scene  shifts  to  that  city or  to  the  far  West,  there  is a marked  loss of intensity  and  loosening  of texture. It is only in the  forest world, where  custom  makes  life sweet,  that   Connor is fully  at  home  and  his daemon fully functioning.
In  Canada the  Scottish  unicorn  retains  his crown; compare the  English  coat of  arms  with  that   of  Nova  Scotia.   Immigrants from  Scotland have,  from  the earliest  days of settlement and in all parts of the country, found Canada congenial. Connor's  Glengarry takes  its  name  from   a  region  in  north   Perthshire, on  the southern edge of the Highlands. The  confluence of the  Garry and  Tummel rivers

GLENGARRY REVISITED



lies  just  above   Pitlochry, from  whose  streets  the  Canadian visitor  looks  north­ ward   into  familiar landscapes. Glen  Garry  is part  of  the  Atholl  basin  where  a floor  level of  about  fifteen  hundred feet is ringed  by mountains more  than  twice as  high,  pierced  by  the  opposed  passes of Drumochter and  Killiecrankie. From  this  species  of  environment the  transition to  eastern  Canada  was  an  easy  one. The  Scottish  inhabitants of Connor's Glengarry are "mostly  from  the  Highlands and   Islands" and   their  cohesiveness  is strengthened  by  pressure  from  Irish  and  French-Canadian  settlements bordering their territory. In  Glengarry Macdonalds can  comfortably coexist with Campbells although the latter  have  perpetrated "the vilest  act  of  treachery recorded in  any  history,  the  maBSacre of the  Macdonalds of Glencoe." It is as though a new  Canadian clan with  Glengarry as its patrony­ mic had  been,  by agreement,  created. Connor, as chaplain of the  43rd  Cameron Highlanders of  Canada,  wore  appropriately enough  the  "Glengarry" cap.
A strong  family  likeness marks  the forest  people, the Canadian clan. The  hero, Ranald Macdonald, remains  "the  man  from  Glengarry", individualized only  by the  intensity   with   which   the  common   flame  burns   in  him.  Connor's life  and works  in  general abound with  evidence  that  he shares  with  his hero  this  incan­ descence. In The  Doctor, we see the Southern belle lola Lane, "possessed of a fatal, maddening beauty" which  works destruction among  her  lovers, closing  her brief life  by  Loch  Fyne  in  the  West  Highlands, where  the  sacredness  of the  soil and the scene are  conducive to an edifying end. Connor's own feeling of  rapture when first  he  visited  Scotland is  brilliantly   captured in  Postscript to  Adventure. The  loyalty, strength and  seriousness of Connor's heroes;  their  pride, elan  and  willing­ ness to stand  on a point of honour; their instinctive implementation of the Scottish regimental  motto   "Nemo  me  impune lacessit!":  everything shows  them  to  be Highlanders at  one  remove,  their  clan  feeling  intensified  rather than  diminished by the migration.
Other matters such  as  the  virility  and  patriarchal authority of  the  men,  the purity  and  noble  compassion of  the  women,  are  perhaps  best  considered in  the context  of Glengarry religion,  for it is hard  to know where  the clansman ends and the  Calvinist  begins.  Connor's own  degrees of emphasis  should  be taken  note of: "The  men  are  worth   remembering. They   carried   the  marks  of  their   blood  in their fierce passions, their  courage, their loyalty;  and of the forest in their  patience, their   resourcefulness,  their   self-reliance.  But   deeper than  all,   the   mark   that reached  down  to  their  heart's core was  that  of their  faith, for  in  them  dwelt  the fear  of God." Gradually we come  to agree  that  it is the  third  strand, of religion, which  twisted  against  the  other  two produces  the magic  thread, fastened  to some

47

GLENGARRY REVISITED



archetypal bole in the depth  of Connor's dream forest and  giving him in all subse­ quent  times  and   remote  places  a  sure  tug  of  orientation  toward  his  centre  of reference.




REGION,  RACE    AND    RELIGION:   this  is  Connor's  perpetual trilogy.  We see Ranald (clearly  Connor's alter  ego), become  a successful business man  and  sportsman, idol of the Albert  Club  in  Quebec, encountering the  minis­ ter's  wife, Mrs.  Murray, who is there  on a visit. "Then they  began  talking about  Glengarry, of  the  old  familiar places,  of  the  woods  and  the  fields,  of  the  boys and  girls now growing  into men and  women,  and  of the old people, some of whom were  passed  away.  Before long  they were talking  of the church and  all the varied interests  centering in  it,  but  soon  they  went  back  to  the  theme   that  Glengarry people everywhere are never long together  without discussing-the great  revival." As we enter  and  re-enter  the closed world  of the forest  we become  aware that  the  little  clearings,  hewed  out  by a physical labour  not less than heroic,  are  ruled by heads  of households,  each  a  tower  of strength  in  his own  domain. We  listen to  old  Donald Finch  when  he learns  that  his son  has  resisted  the schoolmaster:
"Woman, be silent!  It is not  for  you to excuse  his wickedness.... Your  children have  well  learned   their  lesson of rebellion  and  deceit.  But  I vow  unto  the  Lord I will  put  an  end  to it  now,  whatever. And  I will give  you  to  remember, sir," turning to Thomas, "to  the end  of your days this occasion.  And  now, hence from this table.  Let  me not see your face  till the Sabbath is past,  and  then,  if the  Lord spares  me,  I shall  deal  with  you."  The  close association  of  parental and  divine authority is no  accident. Calvinism  and  the  clan  were  two  concepts  upon  which rested  the whole fabric  of Glengarry society. They  were naturally complementary. "Religion in Glengarry in those days was a solemn  and  serious  matter, a thing
of  life  and  death."  Calvin's conception of  God  as  beyond  reason,  inexplicable, omnipotent and   requiring no  justification   of  his  ways  to  men,  suited  perfectly the   Highlanders'  psyche.  But  the  individual's  reaction   to  so  overwhelming a presence  is not simple  or single. God  was viewed,  rather remotely, as ruler  of the universe,   author  and   disposer of  every   man's being;   predestinating some  to heaven, leaving  others  for  damnation; all  this for  causes  which  no discussion of foreknowledge could  ever render  acceptable to human reason.  More  immediately, God  appeared as a super-ego,  demanding all  but  impossible  physical  and  moral effort  from   the  elect-primarily from  the  minister   of  each   presbytery-"He

GLENGARRY REVISITED



must  be a man  to whom  God  is more  real than  his universe." And  since we tend to ask of others  what  has been  asked of us, the same demanding quality, the same intention  to  dominate, possessed  all  relationships. "The  Glengarry folk  were  a fighting   people.  The whole  spirit  of  the  school  was  permeated  by  the  fighting motif.  Every  recitation was  a  contest.  The  winners  went  joyously to the  top,  the failures   remained  ignominiously at  the  foot ... The  gravest  defect  in  our  edu­ cational system  was the  emphasis laid  upon  feats of memory.... In  all my Glen­  garry  school  days  I never  drew  a map." What need of maps  when  purpose runs in  linear  progression  from  one  point  of decision  to  the  next?  Bunyan's Christian was  given  no  map  to  show  his  way  to heaven,  only  the  directive, Keep  to the straight and  narrow path!
Counterbalancing the  imperious paternal  figure  is  the  female  ideal,  whether
virginal   or  maternal, filling  the  roles  of  Beatrice  and   Our Lady  of  Perpetual Help.  Here  Connor's very limitations become strengths. Sexuality rises into an immense  romantic sublimation, completely  convincing because it must have corresponded  to  Connor's deepest   experience   and  firmest  belief.  Mrs.  Murray, the  minister's wife, and  Kate, the girl whom  the hero wins at  the close, are essen­ tially  the same.  Spirited, radiant, resourceful,  devoted,  they are  without weakness or  lapse,  but  true  to  the  experience of the  idealist.  Watching the sun set behind lofty  crests  of  the  forest,  which  gleam  like spires  against  the  light,  it  is easy to believe  that  "the streets  of the  city are  pure  gold"  and  to know  toward  what  city Mrs.  Murray is directing the  gaze  of her son. Connor's intensity  of  vision makes his stereotypes  convincing; they  reveal  themselves  as embodiments  of some  Pla­  tonic or Christian reality of an ultimate kind.
His  conception of  excellence  is single  and  closely focussed.  For  those who fall outside  its narrow range  there  is little  comprehension. English,  Irish  and  Ameri­ can  characters are  not  denigrated; they simply  and  visibly fail  to  measure up  to Scottish  standards.  Methodists, Baptists  and  Roman Catholics are  not  evil;  they are  denied  the  Calvinistic virtues.  But what  he lacks in breadth is made  up in his capacity  to  rise  to  an  0 altitudo! The  schoolmaster, Craven,  is  telling  of  the death of old  Mrs  Finch: "... but  believe me, sir, that  room  was full of glory.... There were  no farewells,  no wailing,  and  at the very last, not even tears. Thomas, who  had  nursed  her  for  more  than  a  year,  still supported  her,  the  smile on  his face  to the  end.... I had  no need  to fear. After a long silence she sat up straight, and  in  her  Scotch  tongue  she said,  with  a kind  of  amazed joy in  her  tone,  'Ma fayther! Ma  fayther! I am  here.'  Then she settled  herself back  in her son's  arms, drew  a  deep  breath, and  was  still.  All  through  the  night  and  the  next  day  the

49

GLENGARRY REVISITED



glory  lingered   round   me.  I  went  about  as in  a strange world.  I  am  afraid   you will be thinking  me foolish, sir."
For  reasons  hard  to formulate but  lying deep  in his own  experience, Connor's
stories  are  shot  through  with  the  idea  of violence.  From  past  generations of wild Highlanders the  Glengarry  men  inherit  a fighting spirit.  And  their  pride  as clans­ men  is strengthened by their  sense of being  among the  elect,  predestined  to vic­ tory.  From strength of will, to intense  individualism, to boastful competitiveness, to open  violence is an easy progression.  Connor's imaginative involvement is com­ plete,  though his attitude is necessarily  ambiguous. He  may  be a minister  of the gospel  but  his delight  in violence is almost  ineradicable. He  relates,  in  Postscript to  Adventure, how  "the  tales of the  fierce old  days survived  down  into  my time, stirring my  youthful  heart  with  profound  regret  that  deeds  so heroically  splendid  should   all  be  bad.  For  in spite  of the  Great   Revival we were  of the same  race, with  ancient  lust of battle  in our blood." He  records  with  pride  how  his brother, "stripped to his shirt  on  a winter  day",  dared   any  man  from  the  next  settlement to step out.  "He had  the strength of a bull."
How  does  this  pride  in  primeval  strength, barely  out  of  touch  with  primeval ferocity,  square itself with  Connor's vocation as a servant of Christ?  One  searches for answers  on several levels and  amid some confusion of ideas. Macdonald Dubh, crippled by  a dastardly blow from  the  Frenchman LeNoir  and  slowly dying  as a result,  not  only  forgives  his enemy  but  persuades Ranald  to  forego  the  idea  of vengeance. Each   renunciation is arrived   at  after  long  inward agonies  of father and  son. The  moral  glow which ensues leaves certain shadows undispelled. LeNoir repents, after  being saved from death  by Ranald, but can we assume all scoundrels will  do  the  same?  And,  initially,  are  we  to  believe  that   a straightforward  blow delivered   by  an  aggressor  does no  harm, least  of all to  a  Highlander? And  how are  we  to  reconcile  the  God  of  vengeance, inhabiting  the  recesses of  Connor's creed,  with  forgiveness  of enemies,  when  Connor's own  sentiments of  Christian mildness  are  neighboured by his delight  as, after  a hockey  game,  the  foul  player is knocked  senseless by one  splendid   retributory blow?  The fact  is that  violence and  competitiveness are  instinctive  and  therefore inexplicable:  "Glengarry folk, being  mostly  of  Highland stock,  love  a  fight." Connor's autobiography records how  he  could  not  refrain  from  striving  to  beat  his own  brother as  a  binder  at harvest  time  and  how for ten years after  his overstrained heart  showed  the effect. The  competitiveness at  all levels appears meaningless and  even  the  violence  has an  air of unreality, like the combats  of Milton's angels. Connor's effort  to take the sting  out  of  vengeance   by Christian forgiveness  succeeds  only  in  one  exemplary

GLENGARRY REVISITED



case, where  vengeance would  mean  murder. His tacit  assumption that  the  good, like  Milton's Abdiel,  are  basically  invulnerable fails to  convince.  His  concept  of muscular Christianity  finds  us  wondering with  De  Lacy,  the  Englishman, "Ye gods!  psalms  and  hymns; and  how  the fellow knocked  those  Frenchmen about." Or  we  remain poised  like  the  dialogue  between  Kate  and   Mrs.  Murray: "But isn't  it  awful,  Auntie? They  might  kill him."  "Yes, dear, but  it sounds  worse to us perhaps than  it is."
Connor's plot is a string  on which  to thread  significant  incidents. His character­
ization  is of significant types,  with  some  variation within  a type.  These  combine within   an   intensely   realized   physical  and   ethical  setting,   a  boyhood   memory preserved   with  that  shining intensity  of  which  the  Victorians alone  seem  to  be capable. "We   will  always  be  thinking  of  you,"  says Macdonald to  his nephew, "and more  than all, at  the  Bible class and  the meetings she will be asking for you and  wondering how  you are  doing,  and  by night  and  by day  the door  will be on the  latch  for  your  coming." For  all its quality  of dream, this is also the  realistic record  of  a  particular period  and  locale  of Canadian sensibility.  The  more  one reads  the  Glengarry trilogy,  the  less separable do  fact  and  fiction  appear. "The tales of the lumbermen in The Man   from Glengarry are from  real life."




bE ULTIMATE  QUALITY of Connor's writing, which  puts  him almost  in a class by himself  among  our novelists, is his capacity for transcendence. It absorbs  his  absurdities, renders  innocuous his irresolution about violence,  and lifts him  above  the  ranks  of regionalists  and  deployers  of local  colour.  His  vision of greatness  is compelling because  he was himself compelled.  The  immense  dignity of the  homeward coming  of Big Mack  Cameron, drowned while  trying  to save a Frenchman among the  logs, is in  danger  of being  dissipated  by an  anxious  sway of opinion among the  mourners keeping  the wake, as to their  dead  friend's calling and  election,  when  Macdonald Bhain,  grown  calm  and  looking  intently  into  the darkness,  has  a vision-"And yonder is the lad,  and  with  him  a great  company, and   his  face  is shining, and   oh!  it  is a  good  land,  a  good  land!" Abrupt but authentic, this surge  of insight  dispels all doubts.  For  Connor there  is a dynamic even  in memories  of the  departed. Ranald finds in  Mrs.  Murray "a friend  whose influence followed  him,  and  steadied   and  lifted  him  up  to  greatness,  long  after the  grave  had  hidden   her  from  man's  sight." These  solutions  are  typical  of  Pro­ testantism, in  that  enormous stress is laid  on  the salvation of  the  individual, on

GLENGARRY REVISITED



his integrity  and  moral effort; of Calvinism, in that  all action on the part  of the elect is ipso facto  portentous and determining; and, supremely, of primitive Puri­ tanism, in that  insoluble problems are transposed into a higher stratum,  an eternal world,  an  ultimate  vision. It has  been  recalled  that  among  hymns sung  in  St. Stephen's,  in Winnipeg, "Fight  the Good Fight", "There were Ninety and  Nine" and  "Onward  Christian  Soldiers"  held  pride  of  place.  And  with  reason  there was appended   to  Connor's  autobiography  the  familiar  envoi  Bunyan  wrote  for Mr.  Valiant-for-Truth:  "So  he  passed over,  and  all  the  trumpets  sounded  for him on the other side."
Connor's  story, whether presented as fiction or  related  as personal experience, finally opens out into the expanse of the Canadian West, a mundane  equivalent of his drive  toward  transcendence.  "Wherever there  was lumbering  to be done, sooner  or later  there  Glengarry  men were to be found,  and  Ranald  had  found them  in  the  British Columbia  forests." Connor's imagination gives them  a  role beyond  that  of felling timber  on the Pacific slope. They  are  the visible link  be­ tween  East  and  West, which have  been politically united  in Confederation  and now, through  the  building of the C.P.R.,  will become one society. They  are the bearers of an ethos of truth  and honour without  which Confederation is meaning­  less, "a  common  loyalty that would become more vividly real when  the provinces had  been  brought  more  closely together  by the  promised  railway." Such  is the theme of Ranald's speech to a mass meeting in  New  Westminster and  the crowd hails  him,  "Glengarry! Glengarry!"
It is natural  to ask whether Connor's conception of life is relevant to an under­ standing  of Canada. Without  question  he interprets reliably the dynamic of the four  or  five decades  following Confederation,  with  special  reference to Ontario and  the opening West. His own role was not inconsiderable; his concepts of Chris­ tian  truth,   personal  loyalty and  political  responsibility  were shared,  in  varying degrees, by unnumbered  Canadians.  He did more  than  provide a locus classicus of  the  forest image,  a  uniquely  Canadian recherche  du  temps perdu, and  a synoptic view of the Scottish-Calvinist ethos. He rose above the particulars  of his creeds into  a  vision of Canadian domain  and  destiny. The  little world of rural virtues  and  rural  violence, of skills learned  in  forest and  farm,  of individualism strengthened   by  clan  loyalty, was  precisely -in  historical  fact-a  microcosm which  could expand  to become the larger  world of Western Canada society and enterprise,  before the pattern  was again modified by rising immigration. Physical strength  and  adeptness  played an overwhelming  role in a world of railway con­ struction,  homesteading  on  prairie  quarter-sections,  and  felling of great  trees on

52

GLENGARRY REVISITED



mountainsides. The  drive  toward violence  was absorbed  in labour, deflected  into hunting and  field sports,  transposed  into  construction, and  sometimes,  as Connor hoped,   channeled  into   an  assault   upon  wickedness  in  low  places.  It is  worth remembering that  our  westward expansion   was, in historical  fact,  accomplished with  incredibly little  open  violence. The  record  of territorial acquisition, of Riel's suppression, of the  Pacific  gold  rush  and  the  opening  of communications, is one of  confused   moderation, a  collective  desire  to  remain   innocent of  outrage and excess.
To  the  latent   issues of  French-speaking versus  English-speaking cultures  and of  Catholic  versus  Protestant  Connor   turns   an  unseeing  eye.  Readers  of  The Man  from Glengarry may  make  what  they  will of the  opening  scene  where  the Irish-French gang  is  blocking   the  mouth   of  the  river  but  gives way  to  the  de­ mands   of  the  Glengarry gang  for  free  passage  of  their  logs. They   can,  if  they wish,  read  significance into  LeNoir, the  French-Canadians' leader,  who  moves from  murderous hostility  to outright co-operation with  Macdonald. Connor's own  emphasis  is  on  western   expansion as  absorptive of  all  energies,  a cure  for  all enmities.  The  imperial theme  of the dominion fills his imagination, transcendence enters  as his solution, and  "Glengarry forever!" becomes more than a cry to rally a  clan: it  is  the  talisman, all  suggestive  and  all sufficient,  of  Connor's sense of greatness.

























53








EXPERIMENT IN
CANADIAN THEATRE




Mary Brown






LAST SUMMER,  when   mo't  amateur  theatre gmups were struggling  to  find  one  Canadian play  for  the  1967  Dominion Drama  Festival, some  young  theatre buffs  in  London, Ontario,  jumped   the  centennial gun   by finding   and   producing five  Canadian plays.  They   called  the  project   "Summer Theatre 66-An  Experiment in  Canadian Theatre". Five  nights  a  week  for five weeks in July  and  August  they  performed in the  Althouse  College of  Educa­ tion  auditorium (no  wings, no flies, no air  conditioning) to an  average  audience of two  hundred. The  experiment was subsidized  by faith  and  by a small  number of  patrons  who  paid  twenty-five  dollars  for  a series ticket.
Even  in  professional  theatre, I  am  told,  directors encounter opposition  to the
use of Canadian scripts,  and  in  the  amateur theatre the  resistance  is formidable indeed. London, a rich, conservative, provincial town  of 18o,ooo, is no exception in  this  respect;  most theatre  goers here  will heave  a sigh  of relief when  the  1967
DDF   Canadian play  festival  is over  and  they  can  go  back  to  recently  released Broadway shows  and  Shakespeare in  the  summer at  nearby  Stratford. I say this to make  it clear  that  the idea  of a festival of Canadian plays in London, Ontario was daring indeed. It engendered a good  deal  of hostility  on  the  one  hand, and some remarkable dedication on the other.
Unfortunately, the decision to do Canadian scripts was made  just a month and a half before  the season started. A more conservative bill was discarded, and  a week

54

EXPERIMENT IN  THEATRE



later   Summer Theatre  66  announced it  would  produce   plays  by  Dan   Daniels, Jack   Cunningham,  James  Reaney, John  Coulter   and   a  revue  by  "Company Authors". This  decision  was  partly  the  result  of two seminar sessions which  pre­ ceded  the season. At one seminar David  William,  one of the directors at Stratford last summer, spoke  about  his production of James  Reaney's The  Killdeer for the Glasgow  Citizen's Theatre in  November '65;  at  the  other  John  Hirsch, also at Stratford last  year,  enthusiastically argued   the  need  for  a  company to  define  its function. Subsequently, in  Stratford, he suggested  to  the  Summer Theatre exe­ cutive an all-Canadian bill.
With  a great  sense of  mission,  the  executive  decided  to  provide  "some  rather neglected   authors" with   performances of  their  plays.  Producer Keith   Turnbull said,  "There will never  be any  hope  of improving the quality of Canadian  plays unless  the  audiences are  given  a  chance   to  see  them.  However, vision  itself  is not  enough; the  audience must  see them,  and  then .they must  present  their  criti­ cisms."  Part  of the  "experiment" was to invite the audience to stay after  the show and  talk  about   the  play  and  the  production with  the  author and  director.
The   two  moving  spirits  behind   Summer Theatre 66 were  Keith  Turnbull, a
recent  graduate from  Western, and  James Reaney,  poet, playwright and  professor of  English  at  the  University of  Western   Ontario in  London; Dr.  Reaney was Resident Author  for  Summer Theatre 66,  a  position  he  also  held  concurrently with  the  Stratford  Shakespearean Festival.  They  were supported by  a  company of  about   thirty,  a few of  whom  had  had  professional  experience, most  of whom were  under-graduates or  high  school students. A few older  actors  were  imported from  the  London Little  Theatre and  half a dozen were academics. The Technical Director, the  Publicity Manager  and  the  Director  for  one  show  were  paid.
The  Audition  by Dan  Daniels  opened  the season. It has a small  cast  (4m.  2f.
I int.,  as they say)   and  is about  an  actor  who  arrives  backstage  to audition and gradually  loses  the  sense  of  his  own  identity through   the  machinations of  the director, his wife  and  a stage  manager. Each  act,  according to Mr.  Daniels,  is a complete unit   and   he  believes  that,   collectively,  the  three  acts  bring   about   an additional value.  He  attempts to set  up  a contradiction between  the  action  and the  dialogue and  he  does  it  in  the  language of  the  theatre of  the  absurd. The first  act  is fascinating theatre. The  second  and  third  acts  suffer  from  too  much undigested Camus.  Daniels   himself  says  that  these  two  acts  were  written "at  a more  intellectual level  and  that  is their  weakness". The   Audition  won  the  best Canadian play  prize in the  Western  Quebec Region  of the DDF  in  I965.  Daniels has  also scripted   two  films,  the  first of  which,  Footsteps in  the  Snow, was  pre-

55

EXPERIMENT IN  THEATRE



rniered  a year  and  a half  ago. The  second,  How  to Avoid  Sex, is in  production. The author lectures in creative  writing  at Westbury College.
M arise by Jack  Cunningham, like The   Audition, "was  conceived  as a  three­
act  play in which  any one act could  be produced independently from  the others". There are  two  characters, a  man  and  a  woman, who  appear in  each  act;  they are   the  same   two  characters  with   different  identities,  "as   all  men's   identities change with   every  major   confrontation". Brecht   and   Camus again.   Marise  is the name  of the girl in the first act and  in the  London production the same actress played  the  girl in  each  of the  other  acts  while  the  men  were  different. This  was a  mistake  since  the  theme  of the  play  is revealed   through the  variations in  dia­ logue in each  act.
Cunningham is a twenty-four year  old  graduate of Sir  George  W"illiams  Uni­ versity,   co-founder  and  former   producer  of  Instant Theatre  (lunch  time  pro­ ductions)  in  Montreal's Place  Ville  Marie. He  is currently  attending the  new playwrighting course at New York University.
In  the  middle  of  the  season  we  had  a  revue  by  "Company  Authors" called Down  Wellington. Wellington Street  in  London is rich  at  one  end  and  poor  at the  other.  Members of  the  company interviewed  a  variety  of  residents  and  the revue  script  was  based  on  these  interviews, glued  together under  some  pressure by the  resident  author, James  Reaney.  The programme notes for Down Welling­ ton included a few samples of the raw material.

Q.    The  Canadian Indian  is under  strong  social pressures to stay on the  reserve.
Should   these  pressures  be  maintained  or  should  the  Indians   be  gradually taken off the reserves?
A.	The  Indians  will become just as extinct  as the buffaloes; that's  why we should
keep them on the reservations.

Q.    What  do  you think  about  the  national  Centennial plans as they stand  now? A. 	Well the way I see it we are going to have  a concert  hall every twenty miles from Vancouver  to Halifax,  and  I mean,  we don't  have that  many concerts!

Q. 	What do you think of This Hour Has Seven Days affair?
A. 	Actually, Pearson is afraid of LaPierre  who is bi-lingual and  wants to become P.M. -that's why  Pearson  had  to  get  rid  of  him.  LaPierre   would  be  a good  P.M.  I  would  certainly  vote for  him  because he is not  lazy like most French Canadians.

Unfortunately, the  revue script  failed  to live  up  to the standard of these samples of regional  humour.

s6

EXPERIMENT IN THEATRE

BY FAR  THE  MOST EXCITING EVENT of the season  was a play by James Reaney called  Listen to the Wind. It takes  place  in an  Ontario farm­
house sometime during the  thirties.  Acted in front  of a blue cyclorama, on a bare stage,  with  a  laden   properties table  in  full  view,  Listen to  the Wind   made  un­ expected  but  eminently reasonable demands on  the imagination of the  audience. A boy named  Owen (the  young  innocent who appears in other  plays by Reaney) spends  his summer putting on  plays with  his cousins, his relatives  and  the neigh­ bourhood children. The  play  within   a  play  is  their  adaptation of   a  Victorian novel  The  Saga  of  Caresfoot  Court.  There are  two  lines  of  action  in  the  play. Owen  fights illness and  tries  to get  his parents  together  again;  Angela Caresfoot  threads her way through a world  of evil manorhouses and sinister women. The two stories  illuminate each  other  as the  ten  characters in  Owen's story  double  in the Caresfoot   Court episodes.  Like  Reaney's other  plays,  Listen  .fo  the  Wind  has  a comic  framework  within   which   acts  of  violence  and  horror  are  perceived  with an  innocent eye. Reaney also directed  the  play and  brought to that  task a highly unorthodox  and   individual  theatricality. Fourteen children  acted   as  a  Chorus  to  become  trees  in  the  forest,  the  wind,  a  pack  of mad  hound   dogs  or  village children  as  the   needs  of  the  script  dictated. They   also  manipulated  property, scenic,  music  and  sound  effects  (recorders and  coconut shells)  in full view of the audience. One   of  the  most  successful  pantomimes  involved  a  boy who  cantered across the front  of the stage  with  a wagon  wheel under  one arm  to suggest a horse and  carriage. Other  actors  trotted along  behind  him  in  a  delightful simulation of a Victorian carriage ride.  The  railway train  was a  janitor's dolly;  a stepladder was  the  ancestral oak  tree.  The  effect  was of children's games  played  out  ritual­ istically on an open stage.
In  a  programme note  for  Listen to the Wind, Reaney  talked  about  plays.


We've had  theatre  of cruelty  (the rebirth of tragedy-the imitation  of our death­ wish) ;  we've  had  theatre   of  absurd   (the  rebirth  of  comedy-the  imitation  of our  bitter  laughter); we've  had  the  theatre  of  detachment (the  rebirth  of  the miracle  play -Mother Courage  drags her cross) . The one thing we  never imitate enough is just-games, play-imitation itself. The instinct  to  just "have fun"­ to  make  a  pattern simply  because like a  whooping crane  we  can't  help doing  a spring  dance  with  our  bodies. Look at  kids playing hopscotch.

For  the  final  show  of the season,  the executive  hired  a young  professional  Tim Bond,  who  had  been  apprenticing at  Stratford, to direct  John Coulter's Riel. If you saw  the  CBC  TV adaptation in  Ig6I, which  starred Bruno  Gerussi  as Riel,

57

EXPERIMENT IN THEATRE



or  the  New  Play  Society  production starring  Mavor  Moore   in  I950,  you  will know  that  the  play  has a great  many  scenes. The cast  has  twenty-seven  speaking parts  plus settlers,  surveyors,  half-breeds,  Orangemen, demonstrators, British  and Canadian troops  and  an  audience for  the  trial.   Mr.  Bond  gave  us a  reasonably tight   production  of  this  dramatic  documentary,  achieved in  part   by  extensive cutting. The trial  scene, however,  failed  and  Riel  emerged as a neurotic prophet rather than  a sad,  courageous leader  of his people.
In  addition to the five Canadian plays, there  were  three subsidiary  productions. Two   of  them,   Noah's   Flood  and  The Farce  of Poor   fohn, were  produced  by Summer Theatre  66  in  a  downtown  park   and   subsidized   by  the  Chamber of Commerce. An  open  air  production of Comus ran  for  three  nights  in  a  natural amphitheatre behind  one  of the  Colleges and  was subsidized  by the  Department of English at Western.
Many  good things came out of the season, one of which  was the October revival
of Listen  to the  Wind  in the  University's brand new Talbot College Theatre and subsequently at  McMaster University  in  Hamilton. The play  will also get  a new production by another  group  for competition in the  regional  festival of the  DDF. Tim   Bond,  the  director   of  Riel,  returned to  London last  fall  to direct  the  first play  in Western's new four  hundred seat  theatre. The Summer Theatre 66 season also gave  support to  the  autumn production of  two  French Canadian  plays  in London Little  Theatre's Second  Theatre, under the  direction of Yves Gelinas  of Montreal.
Financially  unstable,  artistically   uneven,   Summer  Theatre  66  was   an  im­ practical and  spontaneous eruption. May  there  be  many  more  of them  all  across the  country. Amateurs have  the  tremendous advantage of being  able  to work for love  and  operate on  a shoestring.  And  talent has  never  been  confined  to  union houses.




review articles



MEN	AND  WOMEN­ RED  ALL  OVER


Hugo McPherson


HUGH  GARNER, Men and  Women. Ryerson. $4-95·


"ONE  OF MY  NOVELS was given a   back-handed  compliment  by  a  critic
of  the  psuedo   [sic J -literary sort,"  writes
Hugh Garner in  his  Preface to The Yellow  Sweater, 1952:  " 'Mr. Garner has made  only a slight compromise with com­ mercialism  here.'  "  "Let me   tell   that guy,"  Garner comments, "that  Mr.  Gar­ ner  has  only  made a  slight  compromise with  commercialism,  and  literary styles, anywhere or  at  any  time.  With   the  ex­ ception   of deleting  profanity from  a few stories,   none   of   them   have   ever   been changed  in   order   to   comply   with   the shibboleths  of  a specific  market."
In  diction, syntax,  tone,  and  meaning this  passage  suggests  a  great   deal  about Hugh Garner's approach to  writing. He rejects alike the nuanced psychological dialogue of  Henry James, the  cool  strat­ egy  of  Hemingway's  best  style,  and   the incandescent fever  of such  "first  person" writers   as  Kerouac or  Hubert  Selby  Jr.  Yet  Garner won  the  Governor  General's award   for  fiction  in  1963  for  his  contri­ bution to  Canadian  letters,  and  his  best work  lingers  in  the  imagination  with  a
 persistence   that   defies  both   the   hipster taste  for  dream-it-now, and  the  intellec­ tuals   who   scorn   all   but   highly    self­ conscious   narration.  What,  then,   is  the secret  of Garner's peculiar  power?
His   new   collection    of   short    stories,
Men   and  Women,  falls   short   of   such earlier  achievements as "The  Conversion of   Willie   Heaps",  and   the   celebrated "One-Two-Three Little  Indians", but it reveals  anew   the   range   of  his  observa­ tion:   his  spectrum  reaches  from   British Columbia  lumber  camps   to   the   gaudy  entrails  of   E-t-n's   Christmas  Toyland where   a   superannuated  worker  plays Santa  Claus  for dreaming children. Hugh Garner  has recorded more  facets  of  Can­ adian   life  than   any  other   writer  of  his generation, yet range is not his secret;  he would   no  doubt  say   that    a   thousand other    journalists    have   encountered   as many  curiosities  as  he  has.
Plot  is an  equally  unsatisfactory index to his peculiar  gift, for he relies on struc­ tures  that  range  from  0. Henry  to J. D. Salinger.  In  "Black  and  White  and  Red All  Over,"  for   example,  we   meet   the

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



abstemious "Bob" who has gone to a roadhouse  to  get  drunk.   He  reflects  on his  daughter Brenda,  who  asks such childish   riddles   as  "What is  black  and white ... ?" and  on his model wife Lillian who  married him  "on  the  bounce"  from an  affair  with Clyde. Then  business friends, the  Herridges, arrive,  and  Bob is finally  drunk enough  to tell the  piranha­ like  Mrs.   Herridge  that   her   Clyde-boy will  not  join  their  party  tonight. Lillian,  he confesses, died in bed, but Clyde made  it  to  the  kitchen   where  he  wiped-out on the  newspapers that  Lil  had  spread  on a freshly-washed  kitchen  floor.  And  that's the  end  of the  0.  Henry  riddle.  In  "Not That I Care," an adolescent  hero, Arthur, misses   his   chance   with   lovely   Debby, mainly  because  he  was too shy, and  ends up  treasuring a  crumply   newspaper   pic­ ture of her  bridal  announcement. Tough beans  for Arthur  (Salinger), and  no plot at  all.
The   difficulty  in  Men   and  Women  is that   Garner borrows  stereotypes from Lever   Brothers   and  Lux  and  frequently fails   to   improve  on   the   white-whiter­ whitest,  or  grey-greyer-greyest pattern  of those  moralities.
Yet  despite  his obsessive interest  in the situations  of  soap-opera,  Hugh   Garner is able to make many of his people come alive.   They    are   ordinary  people   who have   no  sophisticated  reactions   to  poli­ tics,  manners, food,  or sex. They  are  the people  who  live  just down  the  block, in the  apartment above,  or  out  on  the  back concession.   They   are  Canadian  versions of   Everyman:  their   commonest   sin  is pride,   and   their  greatest  weakness  is ig­ norance. At  moments Garner judges these characters:   for   example,    the   salesman "hero"  of   "Mama  Says  To   Tell   You She's  Out" casually  goes to  bed  with  the

6o
 estranged  wife   of   his   wartime  buddy, and then-because  her children have witnessed   the   encounter-decides  that he has seen "delinquincy and  God  knows what    else   being   made  ... Surely,   even away   out   here    [Calgary?],  there   was such    a   thing   as   the    Children's   Aid Society,   and   neighbors  who   would   be more than  happy  to report  what  they couldn't help  but see, by phone or letter?" Yet  the  hero-judge in this context is self­ condemned; he is outraged that  children should  suffer,  yet quite  prepared  to enjoy the  embrace of his buddy's wife.  C'est  la vie.   The  morals    which   Garner   draws  usually expose  the weakness of the moral­ izer.  In   his  heterodox  world   nobody   is free  of  guilt,  and  his  most  pious  heroes, as in "Stumblebum"  (probably the cruel­ lest  allegory  in  the  book), are  the  worst self-deceivers of  all.
Garner's secret  is that  he is a  genuine
moralist-a writer who  tells us as much about  our  real moral  habits as Hawthorne told  his New England audience a century ago in  Twice-Told Tales. The difference is   that    Garner  has   no   clearly-defined code,  such   as  Puritanism, to  challenge. Instead, he sees man  in naturalistic terms as a creature who seldom  understands his deepest   motives;  yearning for  love  and self-justification,  he   suffers   and   inflicts suffering   on  others.   Thus  the   idealistic young  minister of "Dwell in Heaven, Die on   Earth"  sacrifices   the    middle-class principles of his wife to his obsessive wish to  redeem   alcoholics and   junkies;   then, recognizing that   his  addicts use him  un­ scrupulously,  he   decides    that    he   had better   go  bourgeois  and   take  a  comfort­ able  parish.   But  that solution  will  prob­  ably  be  equally  false  and  painful.
Garner's vision  of  average experience
has   no   room   for   those   who  find   their

REVIEW ARTICLES



operative values  in  art,  thought, spiritu­ ality  or  good  cooking; he  sees  even  his own literary  pursuits as a trade or "craft". Value,  then,  rises out  of such  basic  mat­  ters  as  sex,  family   ties,  and  shared   ex­ periences.    Significantly, the   only   really optimistic  tale   in   the   volume   is  "The Decision", the   concluding  story.   Mrs. Tanner,  recently widowed, wants to adopt  a  baby.  Her  paunchy, conventional law­ yer reveals that  the child  is her  husband's by-blow.  But  Mrs.  T.  has  long  been con­ scious  of   her   husband's  infidelities   and is  prepared  to  nurture the  child  of  the one man  she has loved.  That is Hugh Garner's tribute to  the  eternal  verities.
The  most  evocative tale  of this  collec-




PROSE BIRNEY
 tion,  however-"You  Never  Ast Me Before" -deals with   high  school  lovers who have  just consummated their  passion in  a  park.  She  is worried   that  her  harri­ dan  mother will  see  stains  on  her  coat,  but she tells him: "I never done it before
'cause   you  never   ast   me   before,   that's why." He "couldn't remember asking her at   all ... It   just   seemed   to   have   hap­ pened,  that's all."
For  these innocents the ordeal  of being Men    and    Women   has    begun.    Their anguish  is that   they  live in  a  newspaper world   where  social  forms   and   deep  in­ stincts  seldom  balance. The outcome, for Garner, is  likely  to  be  neural   bleeding, or  the  terrible  violence  of  "red  all over."








A. W. Purdy



EARLE BIRNEY, The Creative  Writer. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
$1.25  softbound.


NINETEEN  SIXTY-SIX has  been a good year for Earle Birney. His Selected Poems  appeared  in  the  spring,  focusing the full  panorama of a lifetime's work between   the  covers  of one  book.  In  July a musical  play,  based on  the  novel, Turvey, was  produced at  the  Charlotte­ town  Summer  Festival. And   now  seven of  Birney's  radio  "talks"  have  been  pub­  lished  by  C.B.C.,  entitled The  Creative  Writer.
The   book   is  a   compendium  of   the author's attitudes  towards everything from  the creative process itself to the education of  a  writer. The  chapters are
 not literary  essays in a conventional sense, each  with  a  point  to  hammer home  ( al­ though  they do have  points) , and there  is nothing  of  preaching or  forcible  imposi­ tion  of  the  writer's  own  opinions.   And the   book's  origin   as  radio  talks  for  the "listening pleasure" of  the  general public is  plainly   visible   in   its   simplicity   and "openness" to  anyone who  wants  to  let Birney's   speaking  voice   flow   into   his mind.
And  yet the  book's  simplicity  is partly an   illusion.   The  subjects   discussed   are not simple or easily resolved, in fact are frequently controversial,  which   means

61

REVIEW ARTICLES



that   the   wntmg is  an  object   lesson  in good   prose -interesting,   easily   under­ stood,  and  presenting ideas  whose depths require   further  mental  sounding   on  the part  of  the  reader   (or  listener).
Well,   what    does  Earle   Birney   think about    creative  writing   courses,   for   in­ stance?  As  might   be  expected,  since  he headed    such   a   department   for   several years  at  U.B.C.,  Birney  approves-with reservations. But:     "he    [the  creative writer)  should    not   stay   around   after graduation,  however  many  of  his  fellow artists    are    there    in    academic   chains around him."
Of   course   the   writer   of  those  words
has stayed around universities himself, though one  is inclined  to let him  off this self-created  hook,  because  he  has  some­ how   escaped   or   transcended   the   "aca­ demic  chains"  of his own  warnings.  And one cannot imagine Earle Birney shackled or  gagged  in any  sense.
In  his  first  chapter Birney  deals  with "Reasons and   Unreasons for  Poetry" - both  the  objective value of having  poetry at all, and  personal  reasons for writing  the stuff.  Since  poetry  seems  to  me  its  own objective  justification, Birney's  thoughts on  the  poet's  compulsions  seem more  in­ teresting. Among  them,  the  habit,  like a drug   habit   or  collecting   postage  stamps and  match  folders.  And there  is the addi­  tional   reason  of  not  knowing  what  your thoughts   are,    about    almost   anything, until  you get  them  down  on  paper.
Birney  himself,  he  tells  us in  Chapter II, writes  as a form  of exorcism  for some experience  or  thought in  his  own  past. He describes the genesis and reasons for writing  three   of  his  poems:   "The  Bear on   the   Delhi   Road"  (partly guilt); "Aluroid" (he  was haunted by the drama of a living  cliche)  ; and  most  fascinating
 of all  to myself, "Bushed". Once  I wrote a  I,5oo-word analysis  of  "Bushed",  des­ cribing it as primarily a poem of  personal change, internal metamorphosis from  the outside. Now  Birney  tells us it is a simple description of the  mental  processes of an old   trapper  who   went   bush-crazy  from too  much   solitude.  All  my  complicated explication  gone  down  the  drain! I am double-crossed and  literarily betrayed!
But elsewhere in the book Birney says something to the effect that  the mental processes  of  a  poet  work  in  such  a  way as  to  make  the  reader  aware  of  all  sorts of  allusions,  symbols,  inferences, and  in­ terpretations  that    he    (the   poet)    may not  have   been  thinking about  when  he wrote  the  poem.  I.e., if you see something different in  the  poem  than   I  put  into  it, then   your  vision  is still  valid  20-20. Or,  if you saw only my vision, that's all right  too.   Therefore,  I   (the   reviewer)    may still insist that  "Bushed" is about  personal change. "Only among other  things!"-I hear   Birney  interject  in his  most  magis­ terial  voice.
"A  poem,  a  painting, always  requires all, more  than  all,  the  maker  has-." In other  words,  the ordinary self of the  poet couldn't have  written the  poem.  But  for a   little   while,   during  composition, the writer   is  somewhat  more   than   himself; brief  flashing  thoughts occur  to him,  that must    be    committed   to   paper    imme­ diately; he  is stretched to  his  limits,  has become  very  different from  his  ordinary self,  which   may  be  a  university  prof.,  a social  worker,  or  a  bank  clerk.  And  this is no sooner  consciously  realized  than  the experience is gone.
Birney   also  discusses  experimentalism
(including the  Black  Mountain boys and "found   poems"),   the    feasibility    of   a writer  having his wife support him  (tern-

REVIEW ARTICLES



porarily), and  the  vicissitudes  of writing his  novel,  Turvey. It seems  that   a  real "Mr. Turvey" turned up to paint Birney's house, a man who possessed some of the fictional  Turvey's background. And  then the   publisher  nearly  went  crazy, wanting to get "Mr. Turvey" to sign legal waivers precluding future  lawsuit.
Fortunately I  disagree  with  Earle  Bir­ ney  on  one  or  two  factual  points.  If I didn't this   review   might  sound   like  a Hollywood   eulogy  for  the  genius  of  the great   dead   Sam   Goldwyn.  Birney  says: "-nobody reads  the  lyrics of  the Hittites and    the   Sumerians,   because    they   are crumbled into  non-existence." Well, The  Epic  of  Gilgamesh  is  admittedly narra­ tive,  but  I think  it  also includes  lyricism. And  so  do  the  god-myths of  Sumer,  in Frankfort's Before  Philosophy.
And  re.  prose-writers being  only  that,
 and  poets  narrowly  poets:  "-the  tradi­ tion   is  that   Callaghan,   Gabrielle   Roy, MacLennan,  Richler,  and   so  on,  write  what  is called  prose, while Souster,  Anne Hebert,  Acorn,  Purdy,   etc.,  write   what  is called  verse, and  never does one species whistle  in  the  other's  territory."  While  the  generality  may  be  true,   the  specific instances,  apart   from   Souster,  are   not. Anne   Hebert  has   written  short   stories, among  them   being  "The House  on  the Esplanade";  Acorn    has   written   many short  stories,  and  I myself  perhaps a hundred plays, among them  being a dramatization of Birney's own poem, "David". But in general  I suppose  the generality is true.
And the general  thesis of this book cer­
tainly   holds  true:  that   in  a  continuing age of war,  racialism, abuse of individual freedom, increasing conformity, the




The President's Medals
THE UNIVERSITY OF  WESTERN ONTARIO

Dr.   G.   E.   Hall,  the   President  of  the   University  of  Western  Ontario,  an­ nounces the  opening of  the  competition for  the  President's Medals for  1967.  These medals are  awarded annually for  the  best  single  poem,  best  short  story,  best  scholarly article, and  best  general article submitted for  the  competition. A sum  of  $1 oo  will  be  awarded with  each  medal.
To   be  eligible, a  work   must   be  written by  a  Canadian citizen   or  a  person resident in  Canada, and   must   have  appeared in  a  Canadian  publication in the   calendar  year   preceding  the   year   of  the   award. The  closing   date  for entries is March 12,  1967.
Competitors should submit three   copies  of each  entry, at least  one  of  which must   be  a  tearsheet  from   the   issue  of  the  publication  in  which   the   entry appeared. Each   copy  should  be  clearly   marked  with   the  name and   address of  the   person submitting  the  entry, and   with   the  name of  the  category in which   it  is submitted. No  entries will  be  returned. Entries should be  sent  to the  Chairman of  the  Awards Committee,  Professor R.  G.  N.  Bates,  Depart­ ment  of  English,  University  College, The   University  of  Western  Ontario, London, Ontario.
Judges  reserve the  right  not  to  make   an  award if  the  calibre of  the  entries does  not  warrant it.

REVIEW ARTICLES



writer   and   artist   can  hold  up  a  mirror to humanity and  advocate sanity  by  por­ traying   insanity.   And  yet,  Birney  insists, the  writer   is  not  a  preacher or  a  man with   a  mission.  He  serves  his  own  pe­ culiar  gods, iconoclast  though  he may  be in  other  respects.
Towards  the  end  of  his  book  Birney says:  "Personally, I want  to be a creative man,   not  a  bee  nor  a  rat  nor  a  grizzly nor  a mouse.  Which  means  that  I strive, in  this  herding age,  to  remain  a  cayuse, an unbroken horse, who will have to be dragged, or  ridden  and  broken  to arrive at the roundup or the horse butcher's. I'll even settle for the role of the coyote, that lonely yapping ornery stinking enduring snooty   creature,  that    wild-to-hell-with-
 conformity  dog,   that   prototype  of   the damn-you-general critter we call a writer
-howling alone,  yet hoping  to hear  one other  yip-yip  start up over  the  next  hill." Which   is  pretty   dramatic,  but   I  don't think  he  over-states his case.
And beyond all this, past such personal credos,  on  the  other side of talk,  remains the puzzling paradoxical as-yet-unwritten­ down   Birney,  perhaps  a  cipher   even  to himself,   still   working  on   his  ideas   and  still examining and  re-examining his own entrails;  from   the   perspective  of   both floor  and   ceiling,  trying  to  decide  what  everything means,  if  it  means   anything. And  with  the death  of any  of us unlikely to  be more than  fifty or sixty years away, the question  still seems important.





CLICHES  AND ROARING WORDS

W.H.New

CHARLES E.   ISRAEL,  The Hostages. Macmillan. $5-95·
CHRISTINE  vAN DER MARK, Honey in  the  Rock. McClelland & Stewart. $4-95·
ROBERT KROETSCH,  The Words of my  Roaring. Macmillan. $4.95.


CHARLES ISRAEL'S new novel The   Hostages should   prove   (justifiably) to   be  popular  in   paperback,  but  it  so depends on  topicality for  its  effect  that it  is  likely  to  prove   ephemeral  as  well. Easily  readable, suspenseful,   and   giving the  impression  at  once  of absolute  values and   relative    standards,  it   has   all   the virtues  of  the  fairytale, the  thriller,  and the  adult western.  The  fairytale emerges in a kind of Hansel-and-Gretel story of Innocent Children discovering  Fear  but prepared  to  attack  Evil.  The  accoutre­ ments  of the  Western  include  a good-but-
 tired   hero  and  a  bad-but-sincere villain, who,   here,   encounter  each   other   when the children are  kidnapped, and  establish the   conflict   that    the   book   in   thriller fashion   successfully  resolves.
Apparently, then,  the  skeletal  parts  of the  novel are  all borrowed, but this should not  disturb us. The suspense  itself is real. What,  exactly,   causes   suspense   in   any book is not  just  the  plot,  of course-the arrangement  of  events;  also  involved   is the  ease  with  which   the  reader   will  ac­ cept  the  plausibility of  those  events,  and  The  Hostages depends for  any success at

REVIEW ARTICLES



all upon our willingness to believe that extreme right-wing and extreme left-wing beliefs  CAN   lead  to  extremist actions.  So far,  this  is  so  straightforward  as  to  ap­ pear    superficial.   But    Israel    offers   us specific  events.
The   book   opens   with   a   school   bus collecting sons  and  daughters of  various international U.N.  employees,  but   it quickly   reveals    that    something  is   not right.   The   driver   is  different;  the   bus itself  is  different; the  route   to  school  is followed   for  only  part   of  the  way.  One mother  alone   is  suspicious,   but  bureau­ cracy  stands  in  the  way  of  her  enquiries being  answered   satisfactorily-a bu­ reaucracy which  shows  itself  not  only  in the self-protective  verbiage  of the  school, telephone, and  bus company officials, but also  in  the  workings   of  the  U.N.   itself. An  unwilling  Red   China has   just  been allowed  a  seat  in  the  General  Assembly, and,  though it  secretly  plots  war  against the  western   world   any  way,  the  delega­ tion  is presently  on its way to New York. A   schizophrenic  group   of    Rightwing Americans, meanwhile,  kidnaps  the  chil­ dren,  to  hold  them  hostage  till  the  U.N.  indicates it will  reverse  its stand  and  bar entry  to the Chinese, or else to kill them. The   time-honoured  suspense   device   of the  whodunit  combines,   then,   with   the timely  question  of  moral   choice.   There are  values:  the  children are  good,  peace is  good -yet  to  make  any  choice  is  to deny   at  least   one  of  them.   To   opt  for the  delegation  makes   the  chooser   party to  murder; to  bar  the  delegation  would lead   inevitably  to  international  war.   A kind  of Aristotelian sense of "fear" builds up,  and   the  reader becomes  involved   in making the  decision.
But  all this works only up to a point­
strangely enough, only  as  long  as  Israel
 deals in groups. The  U.N.  delegations are fine as long as we can  leave  them  in  the abstract,  but   the   author  has   to  create individual people,  and  when  he tries, the types  lose  their   credibility  and   become trite.   One  must   put   up  with  a  Haitian delegate   shrieking   at   (naturally)  a  Do­ minican: "'He  steal   my  daughter!  He kidnap   her!'"  Then there  is a  (typical) Arab   versus  a   (typical)    Israeli,   and   a (typical) drunken  American virago  with a  (typical)   milktoast husband. Even  the children  cease  being  credible  when   the author  looks  at  them   individually. The ostensible   adolescent    jealousy   which   is supposed  to divide  Arturo and  Steve, for example,   simply  makes   them   ostensibly adolescent. The   novel  departs too  often from  the reality of its generalizations, and too  often,  therefore, losing  the  vigour  of its opening  pages, it bogs down  in maud­ lin detail.
To  work  acceptably with  types is diffi­
cult,  for  the generalization and  the cliche do  not  radically  differ  from  each  other. Some  difference  does exist, however,  and unfortunately-- and  all  too  obviously­ Christine van  der  Mark, in  Honey  in  the Rock, has been  unable  to make  use of it. To   reread    her   earlier   novel,   In   Due Season   (1947), is  to  reacquaint oneself with  the  promise  she  showed,  the  ability  she  had  to evoke a sense of place  and  to create   a  strong  central  character.  This  new novel is about southern Alberta, and about religious  bigotry,  but it has  none of the  power  of  Rudy   Wiebe's  Peace  Shall Destroy   Many,  nor   any   of  his  careful way  with  words.  None  of  Miss  van  der Mark's characters breaks  out  of  the  lan­ guage   surrounding  them-not   Fenna, the  most  rebellious  and  most  unhappy of the  five Leniuk  sisters, who at one  point,  "chilled   and  lonely",  "wept  bitterly,  the

6s

REVIEW ARTICLES



hot  tears  burning her freezing  face". Nor the humanitarian and  more likeable Reu­ ben Zwick, who is made  to look at every­ thing  "with his clear  intrepid  gaze".  Nor Dan,    the    naive   teacher,   who  has   "a skinny  arm,  wiry  and  strong", and  who, with  such  words  as  " 'Time will  help' " and  "'Get some sleep' ", supports Philip,  the   naive   preacher,  and   causes  him   to respond    "'There's  a  light  in  you,  Dan  Root'", before  his  heavy  lids  drop   and he  turns  his face  to  the wall.  Not  any of them.   And  so  none  of  them   truly  exist as people,  nor does the novel acquire any life.
Even  Robert Kroetsch, in  The   Words of my  Roaring, burdens  himself with imi­ tative   and   hackneyed   phrases,  which   is sad,  because  his work  undoubtedly is the worthiest   accomplishment  of  the   three books  under review  and  clearly  demon­ strates a capable talent. The  plot is slight: Johnnie Backstrom, the young undertaker, politically  opposes  Old  Murdoch, the country doctor   who  had  delivered   him, in  an  Alberta   provincial   election  during the  depression. But  the  plot  can  be slight when  the  central character is as interest­ ing as he is here.  We see everything from the  undertaker's point  of   view,  and   the quality of the irony can  be seen in such  a deceptively flat statement as this:  "I said something   about  old  Doc   bringing   you into  this  hellhole  mess, but  what  was he doing  to  get  you out  of it?"  All the  pol­ itical  acumen of an  old campaigner, and all  the innate rural  conservatism of the electorate  are   on   Murdoch's  side,   but the  time,  and   naivete-and the  sancti­ monious    radio   perorations  of   the   new leader,  significantly   named  Applecart­ are  on  Johnnie's.  So,  somewhat  unwill­ ingly, are  we.
The   reservations are  all  caused  by the

66
 stereotyped catch   phrases  we keep  stum­
bling  into.  J. Backstrom is really  Holden
Caulfield  in  disguise,  grown  older  by twenty   years,  but   not  having   traded  in his vocabulary in  the  meantime. "I have this  amazing  set  of  teeth,"  he  tells  us. "I was   trying   to   protect  her.   I  really was."   "I  have   this   magnificent  set   of teeth." Even   (so  help  me) :  "I'm an undertaker. ... I'm   dead   serious."   For­ tunately  Kroetsch  overcomes   this,   and  Johnnie survives  it  all  to  become  a  real figure-cynical, bawdy,  brash,  and  pro­ foundly innocent. Maybe  this  makes  him even  more  like  Salinger's  character, but it   relates    him   also   to   the   tragicomic figures  in  several   recent  films:   Morgan, A   Thousand  Clowns.  What  begins   as farce    takes   on   another   tone,    another depth, and  another sensitivity  to  the  di­ lemma  of  being human.
Johnnie,  like    other  contemporary
"heroes", is really  a little  man  who  finds he  has  to  choose,  who  commits   himself without thinking, who thinks  too late and discovers that all choices have effects. Specifically, he has  averred, in  the  midst of   drought,  that    rain   will   fall   before election    day,   and    finds   to   his   mixed horror and   delight   that   his  claim  is  ac­ cepted   as  a  campaign  promise.  The  de­ light  is part  of what  propels him forward: "Good  God,   life   is  short  ... my  body cried.   So  live,  it  said.  Live,  live.  Rage,  roar."  The   horror  is  his   consciousness that  he also destroys.  As Helen  Murdoch, the   doctor's daughter,  tells  him:  "You  talk.  You  hunger and  thirst.   You  stride  and  thunder and  roar. ... But in the end you smash." He  knows  he lives in  chaos, and   for   that   reason  his  stability   lies  in hanging on  to  "the  old  chaos" -yet  he finds  he  has  promised   change, rain,  in­  stead.    The   rain    comes,   and    with    it,

REVIEW ARTICLES



ironically,  a  death which,  as  undertaker, he  must  respond   to.  With   the  rain,  too, comes his certainty of election and  his growing   sensitivity   to  what   people   are like-truths  which    he   could    perhaps have found anyway but which have been related   to  the  rain  and   so  related  to  a kind  of deceit.  They  bring,  therefore, not a  joyous illumination but  a sense of  des­ pair.    Coupled  with   an   equally   strong
 sense of  duty,  this  promises  a  future  for the  man  with  huge  hands and  the  mag­ nificent  teeth,  though a  paradoxical one
-inevitably related  to his need for chaos and   his   ability   to   survive   it.   If  this doesn't   exactly   seem  rosy,  it  does  seem real,   and   the   words   of   his   roaring - racy,   flippant,  simple,   and    sad-ring true.





NOUVEAU 	ROMAN  MADE  EASY


Robert Buckeye


MARIE-CLAIRE BLAIS,  A  Season   in  the  Life  of Emmanuel. Farar, Strauss &  Giroux.
$4-50 u.s.


THE WORLD OF THE  WORKER in  Zola's  fiction  had  no  exit.  Dominated by the Church and a matriarchal family structure  and   restricted  by  growing  in­ dustrialization and  a rigid class hierarchy, he   rarely   escaped   exhausting   drudgery. Few   paths   led   upward. He   could   ex­
change the  country for  the  town  but  his
condition  did   not   noticeably  improve. The   Church  offered   education  and   an easier   life;   but   the   learning  was  frag­ mentary and  parochial, while  sexual  re­ pression,  normal in society, often  resulted in   perversion  among   clergy   practicing enforced  celibacy.  Alcoholism,  prostitu­ tion,  thievery,  and  murder were  the  only sure  means   of   freeing   oneself   from   the imprisoning  society,  and  these  were  self­ defeating.
Such   is  modern  Quebec  of   Marie­
Claire  Blais'   A   Season   in   the   Life   of
 Emmanuel. The  farm  family of the novel, controlled by the  eternal grandmother, is typical:  its  lump-like  sons   and   placid daughters live like draft animals. In con­ trast,  three  of the  children more sensitive than   the  rest  struggle   against  this  exis­ tence.  Heloise,  who  early  mistakes  a sen­ sual  impulse  for  a  religious  ecstasy,  joins a  convent;  Fortune-Mathias-called Number  Seven-goes  to  work  in  town;  and Jean-Le Maigre, beaten  by the father for   reading   and   writing, is  sent  to  the Noviciat    against    his   will.   Predictably, Heloise  becomes  a  prostitute and  Num­ ber Seven  a  thief,  while  Jean-Le  Maigre dies tubercular, a young  poet whose writ­  ing  is viewed  by the  clergy  as a  tempta­ tion  of  the  devil.
All  of  this  is  implicit  in   Miss  Blais'
novel. Her  concern is not sociological  cri­
ticism  nor  a  psychological  study.  Rather

REVIEW ARTICLES



she  wishes  to  render   the  texture of  this world   as  ::esthetic.  Her   juxtaposition  of scene  and  image,  shifls  in  point  of  view and   time,   and   presentation  of  varying levels of consciousness for a montage which  distances  itself from the actuality of the  world  it  is describing.  The  reality  of the  novel, its experience, is itself. Its sub­ ject is poetic  creation in Wallace Stevens'  sense  of   the   term-the  imaginative faculty's attempt  to  create   the   outside  world  in  its  image,  an  effort  doomed   to failure unless it conspires  with  the  reality outside   it.  The  poetic  aspirations of  the novel's characters are in their  turn  modu­  lated  by Miss Blais' own poetic sensibility.
Language  as  always  is  a  measure   of
perception, and  in  this respect, Miss Blais betrays   both   her  ::esthetic  concerns   and the  psychological  demands of her charac­ ters  in  writing which  neither  illuminates them   nor  itself.  Metaphors  are confused if  not   actually   impossible,  images   are banal,   and   point   of  view,  inconsistent. Generally,  her  language  conveys  nothing except  its  own  poverty,  and  her  charac­ ters, finally,  are  unbelievably  stock, inno­ cent  of any  real  complexity,  not  because life  in  Quebec is so unreal  or  elemental but  simply  because  this is how  they  have been  rendered.
Edmund Wilson,  who writes  the intro­ duction,  and    others    review   the   book favourably. Given  a  comparatively fresh subject  (a  farm  family  in  Quebec   prov­  ince)    treated   in   a   relatively    familiar manner  (despite  poetic  intentions, natu­ ralistic  elements   are  present)    by  a  new young   writer    (this   is  Miss  Blais'   fifth book   at  age  27)   with  avowed  ;:esthetic and  moral   ambitions, the  cliched   judg­ ment  of  many   could   be  expected.  But why critics of Wilson's calibre value Miss Blais  needs  to  be examined.

68
 Never  before  has fiction  removed  itself as  far  from  its  bourgeois  origins.  A  ma­ jority  of  writers   now  see form  in  fiction serving  the same  function it has  in  other  arts.   Language  is  the   writer's   paint   or tone   scale,   something  to   be   arranged, placed   in   certain  relations  for  ::esthetic reasons.   As  Robbe-Grillet,  Hawkes,   and  William   H.  Gass  illustrate,  it  is  possible to  talk  about   fiction  in  terms  analogous to  abstract painting,  atonal   symphonies,
poetry.    Form   is  content  and   meaning
not   an   adjunct  to  it  nor  something to be  disposed  of  before  understanding can occur.
If the   dominant  concern    of   many
writers   is  the   exploration  of  form   and language,  the    impulse  of   others  like Mailer   and  Kesey  is  the  search  for  new modes   of  consciousness   through  drugs, sex,  violence,  and   jazz. A  third   trend   is discernible  in  the   novels  of  Grass   and Pynchon who,  in  their  parody  and  satire, loosely  combine the  aims  of  Mailer   and Robbe-Grillet to create  a protest  which  is both   a   negation  of  traditional ::esthetic and   moral   values  and  an  exploration of new ones.  It is only  necessary  to consider the   reaction  to   Burroughs'  writing,  at once  a  protest   of  what  is  as  well  as  an exploration  of  form   and   consciousness, to  understand  how  inimical   and   obtuse this  fiction  is  to  the  bourgeois  critic.  By nature  a   humanist,  he   finds   little   in modern  fiction   to  appreciate.  Mailer   is distasteful, Burroughs obscene,  Grass im­ moral,   Hawkes   unintelligible, and  even as  conventional  a   thinker   as   Nabokov  is precious,  sometimes  perverse, even  per­  verted. Miss Blais occupies  an  anomalous position    among these   writers.  She   is clearly   a  serious  writer  not   to  be  com­ pared   with  the  likes  of  Franc;oise  Sagan  as  Wilson  takes  pains  to  point  out;  she

REVIEW ARTICLES



has  affinities  with  the  nouveau roman; it is easy to take her for her contemporaries.
But if her intention is serious, her achievement is not. The effect of A Season in   the   Life   of  Emmanuel  is  that   of  a television  documentary. It appears  artis­ tic;  it  seems  to  explore  something  new; it  protests  against an  evil.  Upon   reflec­ tion,  it is somewhat less. The  conflicts are too  nicely balanced  and  the struggles  too easily won;  the  whole  has  been distanced from  its reality so that  it exists inspected, packaged,  clean.  It is intellectually sim­ plified  and  morally   uplifting, fit  fare  for our  living  rooms.   And   we  need  devote only  half  our  attention to  it.  But  for  the humanist, the  novel  is generally  intellig­ ible,  it is moral,  it  is to  a  degree  artistic.
 It  is, in fact,  positive.
The   connection  with   Miss   Sagan   is not  entirely  spurious as Wilson  contends. No one  would  think  of comparing Grass or  Mailer  with  her,  and  Wilson's  choice in this  regard  suggests some shared  affin­ ity. If Miss Blais  is a  better  writer  than  Miss Sagan,  this  does  not  imply  that  she is of  a  different order. A  Season  in  the Life   of  Emmanuel  is  for   midcult  con­ sumption; it  is  Zola  made  pleasant, the nouveau   roman  made  easy;  and   it  may very  well be the  last  refuge  of  the  bour­  geois critic  from  a fiction  where  art  once again   outstrips   cnhClsm   and,   perhaps, begins   to   return   to   its   pre-bourgeois  origins.










Love and Work Enough

THE  LIFE  OF ANNA JAMESON

by Clara Thomas

In this first large scale biography  of
Anna  Jameson Mrs. Thomas assembles the complex patterns of her life and literary circles, and  assesses her work providing a fascinating and  informative portrait of a memorable woman.

$5·95	UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  PRESS





6g





MIDDLE
OF THE WAY

MICHAEL SHELDON,  The  Unmelting Pot. Hut­
chinson.

MICHAEL  SHELDON is an  English  writer now living  in  Canada, and  The  Unmelt­ ing Pot is his second  novel. The first, The  Gilded   Rule, about   an   English   emigre who  takes a  job as a PRO for  a Canadian bank,  received  good  notices  in  England and    little   enough   attention  here.   His second   book  is  a  variation on  the  same subject:  the  world  of  the  "New   Cana­ dian" in  Montreal. It is an unusual  theme  at  a  time  when  so  much   writing   about present-day Quebec is conerned with  re­ lations  between  the  French  and  the Eng­  lish. It is a useful reminder that Montreal, as well as Toronto and  Vancouver, is an ever   more   cosmopolitan   city,   and   this flavour   has   not   been   diluted  by  the strength of  the  tensions  revolving  about  the   two  major  races.  There were  times when   I   felt   Mr.   Sheldon   was   almost perversely  avoiding that  topic:  it is, after all,   the   obsessional   theme   of  the  mid­ sixties  in  Montreal. Yet  The  Unmelting Pot  sets  out   to  tell  another  story,  and one  can  hardly  fault  its  writer  for  being faithful  to   it.   Nor   are   his   characters themselves  unaware of  the currents of the new  Quebec that  swirl  around them.
The   device   that   links  his  characters
together  is  a   house,   a   converted   Vic­ torian  mansion now  broken  up  into four apartments in an  area,  one supposes, like
 
Westmount. Now if there  is one device in fiction   that   is  liable   to  push   the   most painfully truthful story into  the  cozy regions   of  soap   opera,   it  is  the   device of  drawing together the separate lives of several different people by putting them under  the same roof. It immediately challenges you to look for coincidence, paradox, and  sentimentality. Mr. Sheldon skilfully avoids  these excesses. His charac­ ters   do   bump    into   one   another  occa­ sionally,  as  people  must  who  live  in  the same  house,  but  in  a  world  of  fictional  contrivance, what  is the odd  bump  in the night?   In short,  he  gets  away   with   it. The house  is real, without being  personi­  fied, and  his characters are  real too, with varying degrees  of success.
Stephen and  Ghislaine Wiener   live  in one  flat.  He  is  a  quiet,   gentle,  hopeless man,  an  intellectual who  is called  upon from   time   to  time  to  talk  on  the  CBC about   "international trends   and  events". His  wife  who  lives  with  the  disappoint­ ment   of  a  life  that   should  somehow   be better, if  she  could  only  go  back  to  the days  of  her  youth  in  Belgium  where  her parents were  pro-German and  before she began  sleeping  with  allied  soldiers.  They  have  an 1 I -year-old  son, Paul,  who-as is  frequently  the  case-is  a  totally   as­ similated Canadian,   and    is   therefore growing  farther   and   farther  from   his parents.
In   another  flat   live  the  Anghelescus.
Like Stephen, Grigor  is a Rumanian. He is also  promoting a  real  estate  deal.  His wife  is of  an  old  and  influential  French­ Canadian  family.    Anghelescu   has   got money   out   of  Stephen  to  put   into   his scheme,  the  success of which  depends  on where   the  government  decides  to  route  its  new  highway. It is  now  (!)  the  Que­ bec of the Quiet Revolution, and  patron-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



age  IS   hard, if  not  impossible,   to  come by,  so  there   is  a  real   danger  that   the highway   may  be  routed, after   all,  with­ out   regard   to  all   the   political   pressure  that  the syndicate is attempting to mount.
In  the two remaining fiats live Brian,  a
young-executive-on-the-make,  and  Rose­ mary,   an   English   girl   who  works  in  a gallery  and  is a suppressed  lesbian.  Brian seduces  Rosemary, an  experience hardly  more   pleasurable for  him  than for  her, and    they   commence   an   "affair".  Mr.  Sheldon   is very  good  with   the  attempts at   conversation, the  discussion   of  films and  books, the  sheer  passing  of time,  be­ tween    two   people   of   totally    different temperament.  He   is   also  very   good   at dealing  with   Brian's   attempts  on   the ladder  of   corporate  success.  And   I  am sure  he  has  captured the  flavour  of emi­ gre   conversations  in   cafes  between Stephen and  his  European friends,  con­ versations  which,   as  one   of  them   says, they   have  imported  from  the   coffee­ houses  of Vienna.
The characters are  well-drawn  and plausible; their  interactions reasonable, their    dialogue  accurate.  Why   then    is The  Unmelting Pot  so  much   less  than it  promises?   I  think   the  answer   lies  in the   disturbing  neatness   of  the  contriv­ ance:  which   is  another  way  of   saying, its  predictability. It  is  as  if   the   author were  content  to  scoop  out  only  the  top half  of  his  characters'  lives,  and  has  left a  richness  and  complexity,  while  hinted  at,  still  undiscovered.   There  is,  overall, a  sense  of  disappointment at  what   does come close to being  a first-class  evocation of a  certain  kind  of life, and  then  misses. The  author has  made   believable   people, but  he has  not  asked  enough of them,  he has   not   pushed   them   to   the   limits   at which   their   fundamental  souls   are   re-
 vealed.  Or  is he suggesting  that  this, too, is part  of the  Canadian experience?
In  fact,  Mr.   Sheldon   has  either   done too little or too much with his supposed theme.  There  is much  talk of finding  a Canadian identity.

"No," Stephen argued. "This  is  the  un­ melting  pot.   Because  we   who   come   here  do   not   change.  All   the    time    we   try   to adapt  the   environment  to   our   own   tastes  and   customs."
"I would  like  to  change," Ghislaine said. "I would  like  to  feel  I am  just  as Canadian as  my  son  is."
"I  wonder," Rosemary found herself commenting,  "how  much  it   matters   any­
way."
Perhaps it  does matter, but  the  author has  not  made   us  feel  that   it  does,  one way  or  another, and  such  conversations, so frequent in  this  book,  are  really over­ laid  on  the characters, and  have  nothing to  do  with  that   which   moves  us  about  them.  People  do  not  embody  a  theme  by talking  about  it,  and  one  is left  with  the uncomfortable feeling  that   the  theme  is here  only  to  give  the  look  of  seriousness to a very competent piece of  fiction.  This  may  be an  unkind  judgment.  Unfortun­ ately,   Mr.  Sheldon   has  written  a  book right   down   the   middle    of   Publishers' Row:  neither  serious  nor original enough  to be really good, nor trivial  enough to be really   popular.  He   can,   and   must,   do better.	GEORGE ROBERTSON


LACK OF DISTANCE

MARGARET LAURENCE,   A   fest  of God.  McClel­
land  &  Stewart.  Cloth,  $s.oo.  Paper, $2.50.

AFTER  THE STONE  ANGEL it  was  easy to feel  that   Mrs.   Laurence  had   it   made. Sight  had  become  insight; natural ability

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



had  hardened into  style; and her voice, so important in a novelist, had begun to sing above   the  solid  drumbeat of  her  narra­ tive.  Good   things   were  happening, and it  was  wonderful to  know  it  and  to  ap­  plaud. Now,  with  the  appearance of  A Jest  of God, I  find  myself suddenly   ap­  plauding  with  only  one  hand.   It is  an unfortunate gesture  for a reviewer  to find himself   making,   because  it  has  a  noise of  its  own,  one  which  drowns  out  easy casual responses and demands other, more precise  ones which  will both  explain  and justify    this   private  sound   and   public  gesture  as something other  than  arrogant dismissal.
The book  is written  in  the  first  person
and  in  the  present  tense,  a  difficult  and demanding  technique, but  one  used  by many  writers  whose concern  is alienation and  whose antecedents are perhaps trace­ able  to Camus and  Kafka  rather  than  to Dostoyevsky  or  perhaps,  closer  to  home, Dickens,   Hardy,   Arnold  Bennett.  These  writers   tend  toward   hard  edges  and  de­ fined  surfaces  which reflect a disinterested universe  if not  always an  actually  absurd  one.   Mrs.   Laurence's  novel  is  about   a kind   of   alienation  too.  But  it  is  about alienation from  the  Self, from  a  possible identity, rather than  from  society  or  the world   at   large.   Her   protagonist   is  in­ volute,   confined   by  personal   fears,  em­ barrassments and  inabilities.   Her  milieu is a small  town,  a cramped set of quarters, and  her  view of the  world  is correspond­ ingly,  and  necessarily,  narrow.  Herein, it seems  to  me,  lies the  problem.  The  cos­ mic  joke  promised  by  the  title,  the  tech­ nique  and  the bare-bones  narrative struc­  ture  is never  delivered.  Indeed   it  cannot be  delivered   because  a  cosmic  joke  de­ mands  a   cosmos   for   the   punchline  to rattle  around in.  In  this  novel  the  clash
 between  techniques and  the intention precludes  jokes, cosmic  or  otherwise.
The   intention  (which   is  achieved)   is to tell the  story  of Rachel Cameron, who is a prairie-town grade two  teacher, trapped  in  a  life  she  never   made.   Her dead  father was  an  undertaker,  her mother is a  hypochondriac and  a  sweet­ mouthed tyrant, and  her sister was bright  enough   and   selfish  enough   to  have  left to marry. Rachel is stuck  with supporting and  living  with  mother.  When  we  meet her  she is in her middle thirties,  a woman  who  must   act   now  or  be  doomed. Her  first  move  is toward  Calla, a fellow spin­ ster,  who  has  found  some  relief  in  reli­ gion.  Calla  makes  a  pass  at  Rachel, and this  betrayal  leads  to  her  second  move, toward  Nick,   a  teacher  from   the   city, who  simply  uses her  sexually.  The  coun­ terpoint  theme    to   those   two   outward movements   is  provided    by   Rachel's mother who   cannot  let   her   go.  These  outside    conflicts    scrape   rawly    against  Rachel's inner  needs, and she is propelled toward  a  crisis  which  harbours in  it  the seeds of victory.
Rachel is shy,  awkward, embarrassed,
self-absorbed to  the  point  of  hysteria.  "I feel   so   apprehensive  now   that    I   can hardly   sit  here   in   a  pretense   of  quiet. The  muscles of my face have wired my jawbone  so tightly  that   when  I move  it, it   makes   a   slight   clicking   sound.   Has anyone heard? No, of course not. Their minds   are   on   the   preacher  and -the hymn.  The  hymn?  I can  stand. I seem to be  taken   to  my  feet,   borne   ludicrously aloft,  by  the  sheer  force  and  the  weight of   the   rising   people   on   either   side   of me."  Nothing in  Rachel's life  is  uncon­ cerned; the  simplest   acts  require  worry. "How cold  the  wind  is  getting. I should  have  worn   a  scarf  and  my  gloves."  But





ARCTIC RHODODENDRONS
BY A. W.  PURDY

They are small  purple surprises and  after  you've seen  them
a number of times in water-places
where their  silence seems related to the  river's  rumble
you  think  of them  as 'noisy  flowers' a matter of ass,ociation  I   guess
But that  doesn't explain  it the  vivid blue-purple
and  white foam  zig zagging from  flower to flower
on their  moss-green islands
-and no one has seen  them  here but  the  loud  river
and  the  land  itself
Like the Stations of the Cross if a man  were  religious
-but the  feeling  I     have
for something like this
replaces God 	Pangnirtung, N.W.T.


u'bsorrs1Bau <lrompanl!,
INCORPO ATED :z•o MAY 1870
presents this work as one of a new series written by Canadian poets




73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



she  is also  capable of  becoming  literary. "I could  see myself ... on every side road and  dirt  track  for  miles around, over  the years.  I  wandered  lonely  as  a  cloud­ like  some   anachronistic  survival   of  ro­ mantic pantheism, collecting wild flowers, probably, to  press  between  the  pages  of the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."   The  sor­ rowful  moan  is constant. Visits to friends, her   mother's   bridge    parties,    her   first sexual  experience, the  possibility of preg­ nancy,  of  cancer -all  are  given  nearly equal  emotional weight.  Rachel  is mono­ lithic.  Her  character is carpeted  wail-to­  wail   with    her   failures.   Unable   to   be loveable,    she   is   not   loved;    physically unattractive,  socially inept,  sexually fear­  ful,  one  could  imagine a psychiatrist  giv­ ing   up   and   uttering  that   famous   line:  "Let's face  it,  you are inferior."
What is lacking-and even  the  diffi­
cult  first  person  present  tense  technique, if  properly   used,  could  handle this  fault
-is objectivity, distance,  irony.  One simply  gets  tired   of  listening   to  Rachel taking  pot-shots at herself. The reader, instead  of identifying, finds himself  (her­ self, too, I should  think)   silently shouting at  her  to  get  some  eye-liner,  save  for  a mink,  strong-arm a man,  kill  her  mother and  stop  bitching. In  short, what  worked for  the  author in  The  Stone  Angel,  with its  more  leisurely  pace,  its  sense of  time and   place   and   character,  here   betrays her.  Hagar swims strongly  in  the last full tide of   her  life. Rachel drowns as  a character in  the  first flood of her experi­ ence.  It is a familiar story Mrs. Laurence is telling,  and  a good one:   but, in  bring­ ing  it  off,  technique is  everything,   and when  it fails, the  novel  fails.
And  it  fails  in  very  important  ways.
Because of the way the story is told, the mother can  have  but  one  characteristic,

74
 and   when  she  speaks  or  acts  she  is able to strike  only one  chord  in  Rachel: duty. Still, she is more successful  than  the other two  main  characters in the  book.  Rachel knows  who   her  mother is,  what   she  is, and   where   she  came   from.   But   when Calla  and  Nick  are  introduced, the prob­ lem of  narration, of exposition,  has  to be faced.   The only  way  the  author  has  of explaining  these   people   is  through  dia­  logue,   and   dialogue   cannot   be  success­ fully   used  in  place  of  narration. It  be­ comes   talk;   worse,   it   becomes   an   ex­ change  of   information.  Both   Nick  and  Calla    suffer   from    having   to   explain themselves,   being  forced   to  strike   poses and   sometimes   even   to   orate.   Here   is Nick   just    before    he   makes   out   with Rachel.  "There  isn't    anyone    like   me, darling.  What  you're    trying   to   say  is that    you   envied    Ukrainians.  What   I would   like  to  know   is  why."   Question and   answer  sessions.  One   yearns  for  the third   person   point  of  view  and  the  om­ niscient  author-old-fashioned  techni­ ques   for   an   old-fashioned   story   of   a fellow   creature  who   goes   through  the great   crisis  of   her   life,   learns   to   love, learns   to   forgive    all   of    her   betrayers  (even  herself), and  understands, perhaps, that   if  life  is  given  in   jest,  the   joke  is hers  to  live.
If the   precise   response   must   be  that
this  book  is  a  failure, one  reads  it  with the  awareness, all  of the  way through it, that  he is engrossed  in  a Margaret  Laur­ ence  novel.  Only  she  could  have  written
-and  placed  perfectly-the long scene
between   Rachel and  Hector, the  under­ taker   who   has  modernized  her   father's business.  Few,  if any  others, could  depict  with  such  stunning accuracy  the  kind  of sensitivity   Rachel  has.   If  she   made   a doubtful decision   about  how  to  tell  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



story,  one  must  admit that   she  does  get it   told,   and   that   it   has-especially  in the  last fifty pages -the  power  to move. One-handed applause is perhaps not enough.
A parting shot  must  be directed at  the publisher.   McClelland &  Stewart should be   ashamed    of   themselves.    The   book looks and  feels as if it were left over from the   Second   World   War,   and   the   dust jacket  is a  jest indeed.
ROBERT HARLOW



CAMPUS CARICATURES

DENIS  GODFREY, No   Englishman Need   Apply.
Macmillan. $5.95.

NoVELS   ABOUT ENGLISH  DEPARTMENTS written  by  members  of  English  depart­ ments   have   proliferated  in  the  last  few years.  Mr.  Denis  Godfrey's  recent book, No  .Englishman Need  Apply  shares  with
many  of  them  a  failing which  is almost
a characteristic of the genre: it confines itself so exclusively  to the activities  and problems  of a specific  professional  group that  it becomes  claustophobic.
The  hero   of   the   novel   is  a   young
Englishman, Philip  Brent,  who  accepts  a position  at a western  Canadian university only   because    the    academic  system   of which  he is a  product cannot  accommo­ date  him.  The  novel endeavours to chart  Brent's  progress  towards integration into an academic community whose standards of  personal  and  professional conduct dif­  fer  markedly from  those  to which  he has been   accustomed.   Much   is   made    of Brent's initial   contempt  for  the  provin­ cialism  of  Canadian  academic  life,  and
 also  of  the  mistrust and  suspicion  occa­ sioned  in  the  university  community  itself by his apparent assumption of superiority. In  an  intensive  analysis  of  the  conflicts and  tensions which  arise from  the central situation,   the   novel   finds   its   principal theme.
Though there  is much  of interest  here,
the novel does not finally succeed. Neither Marston, the  fictitious   prairie   university town where  the greater part  of the action is set,  nor  Brent,  described  in  the  novel as  "the   standard  English  academic  pro­ duct", is  thoroughly credible.  Each  is  a humourless  caricature.  The   contrived typicality   of  both   community  and   indi­  vidual   is  much   too   obvious   and   is  a source   of  continual   irritation   to   the reader.  The   elaborate   sub-plot,   which  principally  concerns   Brent's   wife,  Lucy, and  her  attempt to  rejuvenate her  mar­ riage and  to discover  on a new continent a future for her  child, is over-sentimental and its integration with the main  plot is highly  artificial.  The  consequence is that the overall  structure seems very wooden indeed.
The novel, however,  contains sufficient
that   is sensitive  and   perceptive to  cause the reader  to regret  the general  deficiency of  craftsmanship. The  presentation of some  of  the  minor   characters,   particu­ larly the academics, is effectively handled and   the   dialogue  is   occasionally   good. Mr.  Godfrey  is himself  an academic, and the  best thing  in the novel is undoubtedly his  portrayal  of   some  of  the   corrupter aspects  of   university   politics  and  of  the various  ways in  which  academic intrigue gradually undermines the principles of those  continually engaged   in  it.
Deficient   in  structure, over-solemn   m tone,   and   almost   entirely   without   hu­ mour,   this  is  a  disappointing  book.  Al-

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



though it occasionally achieves some momentum,  the   novel  never   really  gets off the  ground.
GEOFFREY  CREIGH


MAVERICK NOVELIST
RUDY WIEBE,  First and Vital  Candle.  McClel- land   &  Stewart.  $5·95·
Runv WIEBE  is something of a maverick. He   is,  by  inclination,  part   theologian, part   sociologist,   part   moralist.  He   has not as yet clearly branded himself as a novelist.  The evidence  is in  his writings.
In  his  first  novel,  Peace Shall  Destroy
Many  (I g62),  he  dissected  the  anatomy of a small Mennonite community. Though  a   Mennonite  himself   by   up­ bringing,   he  went   about   his  task   with courageous  honesty.   After   stripping  off the  community's  respectable  outer   skin, he revealed  cankerous  sores-greed, bru­ tality,  and  intolerance-that were  thor­ oughly  repugnant. His ruggedly  powerful  story  incensed   more  than   one  righteous critic.  Mr.  Wiebe  is no longer  the  editor  of a  Mennonite journal  in Winnipeg. He now teaches  English  at Goshen  College in Goshen,   Indiana.  The   climate   there   is, I believe, tolerable.
But   Mr.   Wiebe   is  a  young  man   not easily dismayed.  The  hostility  he cr:eated in some quarters was closely followed by critical    appreciation  in   others.    So   he went   to  work  on  a  second   novel,  First and   Vital  Candle. He   found   the   title for  his  new  work  in  lines  from  Gerard Manley  Hopkins:
Come  you  indoors, come  home; you  fading fire
Mend   first  and   vital candle in  close  heart's vault:
You   there are   master, do  your  own  desire.
 Perhaps  this  choice  of  title  is  a  reasser­ tion  of his own  theological  position,  per­ haps,  also,  a  reaffirmation  of  confidence in  himself.   Be  that   as  it  may,  First  and Vital Candle certainly  contains a  strong  undercurrent   of   theological   argument and,  like  the  earlier   book,  uses a  small, closed,  and  disintegrating society  for  the scene  of  the  action.  This  time,  however,  the  community  is  Indian-Ojibway­ and  the  location is in  northern Ontario, not  far  from  the  cold  waters  of  Hudson Bay.
The    only    fully-treated   character   is
Abram   Ross,  an  "Arctic man  in  all  his hirsute    splendor",   a   restless   bachelor, who,  after   years  as  a  fur  trader among the   Eskimos,  is  transferred  by  the  Fro­ bisher   Company  to   its   small   store  at Frozen  Lake,  an  Ojibway settlement. His express orders  are  to salvage an operation on   the   verge   of   failure.  His  opposition comes  from   Sig  Bjornesen, an  indepen­ dent   trader, a  "big   grey-haired brute", who,   by  his   encouragement  of   regular  orgies of  drinking, has completely under­ mined   the   morale  of   the   community. Facing   Bjornesen    and   supporting  Ross are   two   pallidly-sketched   missionaries, Joshua  Bishop   and   his  wife  Lena,   and the  new  teacher, Sara  Howell,  a spinster of  some  physical   charm, much   given  to the   reading  of  the  Bible,  and,   like  her friends the Bishops, holding firmly to the belief that  salvation can  be achieved  only by God's  grace   (and  this through the ac­ ceptance of  Christ  the  Saviour) and  not by  good   works;   for   "when   weighed   in the   final -God's-balances    our   very best, or  what  we think  it is, is little  more than   scum."
The  outcome of the  struggles  is incon­
clusive.  The  Frobisher store  is closed and
Abe,  with   perhaps some  ftickerings  of  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



new   belief  implanted  in   him,   is  flown out  to civilization. Bjornesen  fades into nowhere.  Sarah, more  commonly called Sally, is drowned when  the  spring  break­ up  of  the  river  floods  an  isolated  cabin where   she   has  gone   to   pray.   And   the Bishops   (unsupported   by   any   church), having   baptized a  few  hesitant Indians, remain   at  Frozen  Lake  in  the   hope  of baptizing more.
But   this  inconclusive  conclusion  does
not seem, really, to matter much. For the book, as a whole, is not successful. Its architecture-or  rather its lack  of good architecture-is in my view the greatest weakness. The core of the story is the struggle  at  Frozen  Lake.   But  the  reader does  not  even  get  to  Frozen   Lake  until the  ninety-ninth page,  and  he  must  wait for another forty-two pages to meet  the proper Miss Howell,  the only female character worthy of more  than  a  passing glance   in  the   entire   story.  This   failure to  get  down  to  the  main  business  results in part from an unbalanced opening movement, set against  the  background of a   superficial   Winnipeg  society,   and   in part  from  flashbacks,  in  which  Abe  (us­ ing  the  first  person  singular)   reflects  on the   brutality  of  life  in   the   Arctic,   the unhappiness of his own  rigidly-controlled Presbyterian  childhood,  and   his  experi­  ence  in  the  war.  Further, the  structure throughout  is   weakened    by   peripheral events  that  add  little  to  the  heart  of the matter,  and   by  theological,  moral,   and ethical   debates   that   are   strangely   mis­ placed.
But  all this  is not  to say that  First and
Vital Candle  is a total  failure. Wiebe composed   his  work  only  after  consider­ able  study  of  a  particular  problem   in  a particular  society.  Somewhere along  the  line,  he  has  gained  considerable  knowl-
 edge   about    the    Ojibway-their    lan­ guage,  their  traditional  mythology,  their daily  lives, and   the   problems   they  face in   a   changing  world.   About   them   he writes   with   conviction  and   sympathy.  Moreover,  when  he is at  his  best  he can write  superbly.   His  descriptions of  out­  door   scenes,  handled  with   poetic  sensi­ tivity,  are  often  memorable; and  his de­ piction  of  violence -the  violence  of the river  as it  breaks  its  normal   boundaries, or  the  violence  of  the  drunken group  in Bjornesen's  store-are dramatically con­ vincing,  and  make   for  exciting  reading.  And,  for  readers   more  devout  than  my­ self, I  grant  the  possibility  that the  por­ trayal  of  the  Bishops  and  Miss  Howell, even  with  their  stilted  sermonizing, may well  carry  considerable  impact.
In   brief,  this   novel  as  an   attempted artistic   whole   does   not  succeed,   but   it does  contain   certain  of  the   ingredients of  greatness.  Mr.  Wiebe  is still  a  young man  (he  was born  in  1934); he is a seri­ ous  and  an  energetic craftsman; and  he is highly  intelligent, perceptive,  thought­ ful,  and  humane. He  is  already  at  work on  his  third   novel.  In  time's  fullness  he may   well   make   a   significant,  perhaps even  a  great  contribution  to  the  corpus of Canadian  fiction.  That time  will come when   he  ceases  being   a  maverick,  and clearly   brands   himself   with   one   word only:  Novelist.                               s. E. READ


FRENCH
INDIVIDUALISTS

ROBERT  FINCH,   The Sixth   Sense:  Individual­ ism  in  French  Poetry,  1686-1760.   Univer­ sity  of  Toronto  Press.  $8.50.

RoBERT  FINCH,  up  to  now  best  known to  the  general   literary public   as  one  of

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



our  better  poets in the traditionalist vein, has now, in The Sixth  Sense:  Individual­ ism  in  French  Poetry, I686-IJ6o, turned to  criticism.   His  approach  is  historical, and   his   book   is   drawn   together    by  a definite  thesis;  he sets out  to demonstrate that    French   eighteenth-century  poetry has  been  both  misunderstood and  under­ rated.  Its  quality  is  much   higher   than has  been  generally  granted; its approach was  not  nearly  so closely wedded  to  the dogmas  of  neo-classicism  as  insufficient study  has  usually  led  us to  suppose.  To the  contrary, he suggests that  the indi­ vidualistes, whose  theories   and   practice in some ways anticipated those commonly associated  with  romanticism, were more important than  has usually been assumed, forming a counter-movement to the poetic  establishment of the time rather similar   to  that   which  men  like Chardin and  Watteau  represented in  painting.
The existence  of  a  trend,  rather than
a   movement,   Professor   Finch   demon­ strates  admirably by his study of  the poets themselves   and   of  a  number  of   critical  theorists who  provided  a  justification  for their   practice  and,   in  general,   for   the liberation  of   poetry   from   neo-classical limitations.  He  also  illustrates his  thesis by numerous  quotations from  these  rela­ tively   unavailable  poets.  It is  here  that  his  advocacy   thins  out,  for,  read  as  one may through his extracts, it is hard  to convince oneself  that  these poets  were as good  as  Professor  Finch sometimes  sug­ gests, or  that, in  quality  at  least,  he  has uncovered a literary  peer for Chardin. If he  makes  the  eighteenth  century  seem  a little   less of  a  poetic  desert,  the  flowers he  gathers are  humble.
GEORGE WOODCOCK
 SENSIBILITY AND EVANGELISM

JOSHUA  MARSDEN, The Narrative  of a Mission to  Nova  Scotia, New  Brunswick, and  the Somers    Islands,   with    a   Tour    to   Lake Ontario. S.  R.  Publishers  and  Johnson  Re­ print  Corporation. $g.oo.
ALL CANADIAN HISTORIANS,  both  literary and  otherwise, should   be grateful to  the Johnson  Reprint  Corporation  for  mak­ ing  available  this  scarce,   but  important book.  The  Narrative of  a  Mission  is, it seems  to me,  important in  several  senses. Firstly,  it  is a  classical  illustration of Eli Halevy's  thesis,   linking   romantic  sensi­ bility  and  evangelical religion.  Secondly,  it  is important for  the  first-hand account it  gives of  conditions on  the  frontiers of the New  World  more  than  a century and a  half  ago.  Thirdly, it demonstrates  how the  Methodist Church was able, by filling a  gap  in  the  barren life  of  the  colonies, to stamp its distinctive ethos-emotional­ ism   held   in   tension   by  a   rigid   moral  code-upon   the   ethos   of  the   Atlantic Provinces   for   over  a  century  after   it began  operations in  that  region.  Finally,  to  the  researcher the  book  is a  first-rate source  of  facts  and   names  with  respect to missions in general  throughout the last quarter of the eighteenth century and  the first quarter of the  nineteenth.
As  literature, The  Narrative  of   a Mission   is  not  very  successful.   Marsden was  later   to   refine   his  style  and   write much   better   books.  In this,  one  of  his earliest, he  was  writing with  an  eye  on his middle class  (one  suspects  his middle class female) audience. The result  is a peculiar  blend   of  crisp  narration,  senti­ mentality, and  religious  ejaculations that
-a generation earlier-Richardson's
Pamela   would   have   loved.  The  poetry

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



also,  although  it  keeps  better   than   that of most  pioneer  versifiers  the  form, anti­ thesis   and   point   of   the   classic   heroic couplet, is hackneyed in thought, diction, and    image.    The   following   passage   is Marsden at  his poeticizing  best:

Here purple grapes in swelling clusters grow, There  milk-white arrow-root abounds below: See  rich  in  juice  the  musky  melon lies,
Aloof  the  bread-roots, green cassadas rise:
The savoury onion, and  the  yellow  squash, The pumpkins green, and  bowl-formed
calabash,
In  the  green woods  now  beauteous to
behold,
The yellow  orange pour  the flaming gold; ...

The most entertaining aspect  of The Narrative of a Mission  is the transparent picture it gives of the  often  muddled but well-meaning thoughts, hopes,  fears,  and deeds of a genuinely good man.  The following  passage  is an  example:

I spoke   to  one   of  the   sailors  about  g1vmg them  some bibles  I had  procured for the purpose; the  honest fellow  observed, "that sailors  sometimes   spoke    bad    words,    but meant  no   harm,  as  it   was   a   custom that they  could   not  prevent." What a  pity  these honest  tars   should  consider  swearing  as  a part of  a  sailor's calling. One of  the  cooks, a   black   man,  desired  me   to   find   him   a chapter, that he  might get  it  be  yeart, and live   up   to   it.   Honest  African,  how   many have   it  at  their finger's ends,   but  want   thy unaffected simplicity. I  put   a  bible   in  the other  cook's   pocket, which   I  hope   he  will use   to   his   eternal  advantage;   heard  the second   mate swear and   gently touched him by  the   arm; he   smiled.  "Alas,  how   many smile  at   what  the   world   should  weep."

If Goldsmith had   not  already created Dr.    Primrose,  Joshua   Marsden   would have -a little  more  tediously  and  a little less attractively-done  so.
FRED COGSWELL
 MODERN ART DEFENDED

JERROLD   MORRIS,   On   the   Enjoyment   of
Modern  Art.  McClelland &  Stewart. $2.50.

Do  WE  NEED YET   another volley of words from  the embattled camp  of defenders of twentieth-century  art?   Yes,  if  it  is  des­ patched  with   the  clarity   and  simplicity of  which  Jerrold  Morris  is  capable.
The   notion   "that you  either   'dig'   or
you don't" is rejected impatiently by Morris,   who   sincerely   believes   in   the power of persuasion. This faith  has helped him  to  produce one  of  the  best-written, most   easily  read,   and-if   he  is  right about  persuasion-one of the  most  per­ suasive   of  defenses   for   the   artistic  be­ haviour  of our  times.
Courteously  apologizing  that   his  own
work  was  not  meant to supersede  others of its kind, the  writer  nevertheless  admits that  "the  temptation for the erudite critic to  turn  his exposition into  a work  of art for its own sake"  has not helped  to stimu­ late  the interest  of the intelligent layman. Morris   has  written  this  essay  for  the layman.  It could  easily  become  required  reading  in every high  school -or at least for every high school teacher. In less than  forty  pages of text, including the captions  under   the   reproductions,  the   reader   is offered  a  fine  thumb-nail history  of His­ tory  of  Western   Art,  a  fistful  of  simple, yet  profound criteria for  a  philosophy  of criticism,  and  a quite  adequate survey  of the   areas   and   ideas   which   have   been attracting the  attention of  artists  during
the  past  century.
The  only quarrel one might  pick would be  with  the  "Gallery of  Canadian Art" series which may be leaning precariously backward in order to add  Canadian con-

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tent  to  this  particular volume  which doesn't    require  it.   Thus,   although  the text deals with a discussion of world movements  implying    universal    import, and   with   a  description  of  ideas   which have   originated  in   many   places   other than   Canada,  the   illustrations  are  dis­ covered  to be exclusively of works with' a "Made in  Canada" stamp  upon  them.  It would    be   deplorable   should   this   em­ barrassing  nationalism   discourage   non­ Canadian  readers.
There is further irony  in  the  fact  that Morris  recently  blamed  the  economic failure   of  his  highly  respected  "Interna­ tional" gallery in Toronto on the inability  of his Canadian clients to appreciate non­ Canadian art.
The author agrees  that   his  "explana­ tion", though it  may  help  one  to respect modern art,  will probably  help  no one to "understand" it, nor even to enjoy it, and he  reminds   the  reader  that  "there is no substitute  for   looking".  We  might   add that   looking  at  reproductions is no  sub­ stitute  for   looking    at   the   real   thing,  especially  when  the  reproductions are  of the   pocketbook   size   and   pinch-penny quality which  are  inflicted  upon  us here.
Morris   makes   many   references   to  ar­
tists  and   works   of  the  past,  suggesting that   "the interested reader  may  refer  to them  elsewhere". Yet, this book prepared for the  uninitiated might better have been illustrated with some of those older "back­ ground"  works  pointedly  referred   to  in the  essay.  The  reader  could   then   have stepped   out  of  his  own  door  to  seek in local galleries examples  of the contempor­ ary to study in the light of Morris'  text.
ABRAHAM ROGATNICK





8o
 NEW  FRENCH
STUDIES

JOHN    c. LAPP,   Zola before the   Rougon­ Macquart.   University  of    Toronto  Press.
$s.oo.
JAMES   A.  LEITH,   The Idea   of  Art   as  Propa­ ganda   in   France,  I 750-1799:  A   Study  in the  History of Ideas. University of  Toronto Press.   $4·95·

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  Press  Ro­ mance Series  seems  now  to  be an  estab­ lished  publishing venture, since the books under review  are  its  seventh  and  eighth  volumes,  and  others  are  already   appear­ ing.
Zola  before  the  Rougon-M acquart  is a notable addition  to  the  series,  and   also to the growing  company of recent  studies which  have  considered Zola  on  his  liter­ ary  rather than  on  his moralistic  or  pro­  pagandistic merits.  The long period  when Zola   was  dismissed   as  a   merely   sensa­ tional  writer  or  as a  rather  dull  realist  is at   last   ended.  Critics  are   beginning  to agree-more  or  less-with Gide's  esti­ mation when  he placed  Germinal among the  ten  great  French novels.  Above  all, it   is  being   recognized  that,   whatever Zola's   literary   theories,    and    whatever curious   methods  of  work   he   based   on them,  his  novels  were  not  in  fact  realist in  any  strict  sense  of  that   term.   Where they  are  most  effective  it  is because  of a massive symbolism  which transforms their characters into  personifications of human passions   and    social   urges,   and   which gives  their   key  incidents a  metaphorical quality.
These aspects   of  Zola  are  evident   in
their  most  dominant forms in the greater novels   of   the   Rougon-Macquart   series, where-in  books  like Germinal and  Le Debacle-an  apocalyptic intensity of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



vision irradiates Zola's  rendering of the climactic events.  But  his early,  and  often disregarded  writings,   many   of  them  be­ longing  to a period  before  Zola  had even the   pretension  to  be  a  realist,  contain, in their  poetic  fancies  and  their Gothicist  horrors,  the  roots of those  very aspects of Zola   which   are   attracting   the   present generation of readers and  critics  back  to his   major    works.   In   Zola   before   the Rougon-Macquart  it  is  these  aspects  of the  French  novelist's  work  on  which  Dr. Lapp  concentrates,  and   his  book  is  an excellent  pioneer monograph in the study of   the   early   Zola;  it   will   undoubtedly open   the  way  to  more  extensive  studies of  the  novelist's  lesser  but  by  no  means always  insignificant writings.
Dr.  Leith's   book,  The Idea  of Art  as
Propaganda    in   France,   covers   an   im­ portant subject  because, in many respects, the  French  Revolution  marks  the  great watershed that  divides  the  last vestiges of the  Renaissance world,  with  its  discovery of  the  individual's importance,  from  the first stages of the totalitarian world which, in   various   and   often   disguised   degrees, reverses   that   attitude.   It is  a  time   of choice    and    indecision,   and    in   many ways  one   finds   the   individualistic  and the  proto-totalitarian attitude closely mingled.
This  is particularly the  case in  the ap­ proach   of  the  French  revolutionaries  to art,  and  Mr.  Leith  has carried out a very useful service in  describing attitudes dur­  ing  and   before  the   Revolution  towards the  function  of  the   artist   in   a  society dominated by the crisis of fundamental political  change. He  begins  by reminding us that  art  had  already in  the  past  been considered from two  widely varying points of view;  in the middle ages its usefulness  in  educating men  in  religious
 truths had   been   recognized,   and   some­ thing  very near  to a  propaganda  art  had flourished; the  Renaissance, on  the  other  hand,  brought with  it a strong movement towards   a  completely   <esthetic   view  of art  and  towards  a view of the artist  him­  self as "a  lonely genius  pursuing a special vision."
The  men   of   the   eighteenth  century were  divided    between   these   two   view­ points,  and,  as Mr.  Leith  shows convinc­ ingly,  writers  like Diderot and  the  other  Encyclopedists were  inconsistent  in  their  attitudes,  something  stressing  the  moral  content  of a work, sometimes  concerning themselves  solely  with  its  <esthetic quali­ ties. This  inconsistency continued  to the Revolution, and  Mr.  Leith  shows  that  at this period, though  the theory of art as propaganda was  thoroughly worked   out by  those   who   concerned  themselves   at this period with the public function of painting and  sculpture, in fact  nothing approaching the control  over artists exer­ cised by modem totalitarian governments was ever achieved. Art in  practice almost always  continued  to  delight   rather than  to  instruct.
The  I de a  of  Art    as  Propaganda    in France   is  a  contribution  to   the   whole subject   of  the   role   of  art   in   political life,  but  it  is also  a  most  interesting  de­ monstration   of   the   split   mind    of   the French  Revolutionaries,  who   in   many  fields sketched  out  the  theory  of a  totali­ tarian  society  but were prevented by their  heritage of individualism from ever work­  ing  out   in  practice  any   aspect   of  that  society.
L. T. CORNELIUS






8r

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



PAPERBACKS

DuRING  REGENT MONTHS yet   another Canadian  paperback series has  begun  to appear. This  newest venture is the Ryer­ son  Paperbacks, and  one  volume  which will  be  of  particular interest   to  readers of  Canadian  Literature  is  a  reprint  of Desmond  Pacey's   Ten   Canadian  Poets ($2.75).  The   essays  it   contains   begin, oddly,   with   one   on   Charles    Sangster,  whom  all  Dr.  Pacey's  persuasion   cannot  convince  one  is a  figure  worth  resurrect­  ing;   they  then  proceed   to  the  so-called Confederation   poets,    revealing    clearly that   the  author's  preference -like our own -is   for   Duncan  Campbell  Scott, and  end with a group  of five essays-the best  in  the  book -on  the  leading  elder poets  of  the  modern  movement in  Can­
ada,  from  Pratt,  through A. J. M. Smith,
F.   R.   Scott,   and   A.  M.   Klein,   to  an Earle  Birney  who  has since passed beyond his  early  bounds  and   needs  reconsidera­ tion.    Other  volumes    in    the    Ryerson Paperbacks include Grant  F. 0. Smith's  The Man  Robert  Burns  ($3.25)   (hardly a  book  at  all  but  rather  a  bulky  file of useful  source  material  unassimilated and badly   arranged)  and  Alan  Easton's   re­ collections    of   the    wartime   Canadian navy, 50  North  ($2.50).
The   Clarke   Irwin    Canadian   Paper­
backs  continue to  produce   volumes  that fill in the gaps in available modern Cana­ dian  classics. Sometimes  their  merits  are historical   rather  than  intrinsic; for  ex­ ample,  though  one is interested to re-read Robertson Davies'  The   Diary  of Samuel  Marchbanks ($I .50), it is only to wonder  that  so many good  plays and  novels have emerged  from  a  beginning of such  mea­ gre   facetiousness.  The   Book   of   Small ($1.50)   combines   two  small  reminiscent
 works  by Emily  Carr,  the  title  book  and A   Little    Town  and   A   Little    Girl,   a kind   of  child's   guide   to  early  Victoria. Neither conveys the same intensity of experience as her  classic Klee  Wyck. Bousille  and  the  Just  ($1.25), the  best­ known    play   by   Gratien   Gelinas,   still strikes   with   chilling   intensity.   But   per­ haps   best   of   all   this   bunch   of   Clarke  Irwin  Paperbacks, for   its   vivid   recon­  struction  of  a  modern man's  immersion in  a   primeval  way   of   life,   is  Doug Wilkinson's  Land     of    the    Long   Day ($r.go), in  which   he  gives  a  clear  and very  moving  account of  his  year  of  life as   an   adopted  Eskimo   in   a   hunting family.
Particularly  welcome among other paperbacks are the reprint (which  the publishers oddly  call  "An  Original  Pub­ lication")  of  Leonard Cohen's  first  book of  verse,   Let   us  Compare   Mythologies by  McClelland  &  Stewart   ($2.50)    and the  Canadian  University  Paperbacks edi­
tion  of J. Mackay Hitsman's military his­
tory,  The  Incredible  War  of	1812 ($2.50), a scholarly  and  at the same time highly   readable  account  of   a   war   in which    comedy    was   continually    over­ balancing  tragedy.  (Why,  one  wonders,  has   nobody   ever   written a   Turvey  of I8I2?)  Drier, but  no less  worthy  fare,  is W.  M.   Whitelaw's The  Maritimes  and Canada    before   Confederation, whose reprinting after  30  years  by  the  Oxford University   Press   ($r.g5)  is  given   topi­  cality   by  the   Centennial.  Finally,   two most  un-Canadian classics have  appeared in  paperbacks, edited   by Canadian scho Iars. One  is a  new  and  abridged  transla­ tion  of  The Works of Mencius  (entitled merely   .Mencius),  prepared   and   intro­ duced   by  W.  A.  C.  H.  Dobson   in  the Canadian  University Paperbacks ($2.25).

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The   other   is  the  Doubleday Anchor  re­ issue  of  Sismondi's  one   volume  version of  his  History   of  the   Italian  Republics ($r.g5)   with   a   long   introduction  by Wallace   K.   Ferguson  of  the  University of Western  Ontario. It  is good  to see this great  book  back  in  print; time  has  worn away  surprisingly  little  of its stylistic  lus­ tre  and invalidated surprisingly few of its
r 30 years'  old  arguments.
G.W.


THE VERGE

GooD AND  BAD BOOKS   alike  demonstrate in   some   way   the   personality  of   their creators, although sometimes   the  revela­ tion   is  an   inadvertent   one.   However, Gordon  Sinclair's  Will   the  real  Gordon  Sinclair   please stand  up   (McClelland & Stewart)  quite  consciously  depicts   him­ self  as  himself  sees him.  The   many  who know him on television  will hardly  expect him  to  be  humble, and  if  this  is a  valid reaction,   then  in   his   book    the   real  Gordon   Sinclair   is  standing  up   all  the way   through.  Still,   it   does   have   some interest  as a social history, for the sketches of  Toronto  in   the   Igro's and   2o's  are honest  and  blunt.
A Party  Politician: the Memoirs of Chubby Power,  edited  by Norman Ward (Macmillan), is also a retrospective  view of a personal  involvement in a political world,  but  here  the  politics  involves  Ot­ tawa  and  government rather than  news­ papers  and  the economics  of  buying food. After  an  overly  extended  and slow start,  Senator  Power's   book   moves   on   in   a rather  more   lively  way  with   his  assess­ ments  of conscription,  provincial politics in  Quebec, and  Mackenzie King.   In  his preface,  he eschews  any  claim  to call this
 work  either  autobiography or  history;  in some sense it is both-of  a frankly  parti­ san kind. The  partisanship amply charac­ terizes   the   author  himself,   and   rather than   detracting from   his  picture of  the period, it supplies  the vantage point  from which   we  can   get   what   appears  for   a time  at  least to be a  clearer  view.
The  retrospective assessment  is perhaps
easier  than   the  contemporary  one,  and this  difficulty  afflicts Pierre  Berton's  The Cool   Crazy   Committed  World    of   the Sixties   (McClelland & Stewart) , a series of  television  interviews which  deal  with such   subjects   as   birth    control,  James Bond,  and  civil  rights,  and   range   from the  pop  intellectualism of Ray  Bradbury to  the  confessions  of  a  confession-maga­ zine writer  and  a  witch. Berton  has tried to   picture   society   by   showing   us   the people  it   has  produced;  the   publishers  have  tried  to sell us Berton  by including in  the  purchase   price   a  mini-record  of unbreakable  plastic,  immortalizing the voices of the original  interviews. Cool, crazy, and committed indeed. It is a book in   which   the   misprint    Normal  Mailer seems less an error  than  a symptom  of the scale of values of the world that  Berton presents.
Readers  of Weekend i\1agazine will already   have  met  some  of  Stuart  True­ n,an's   The   Ordeal   of  John  Gyles   (Mc­ Clelland & Stewart), the story of a Puri­  tan   boy  enslaved   by   Indians  in   r68g. They  will recall  that  he learned to under­ stand   both  Indian  and  French  ways  of life  and   became  invaluable as  an  inter­ preter   when  he  was  returned  to  Maine eight  years later. Weekend obviously  pub­ lished  the  best  bits.  Trueman has  unfor­  tunately tried   to  make his   biography "popular"   by   inventing  long   pieces  of seventeenth-century  conversation,  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



these   are   merely   incredible.    When   he now and  again  relics on Gyles' own  jour­ nal,   thhook   returns   to  life.
The  Clear  Spirit:  Twenty  Canadian
Women  and   their   Times, ed.  by  Mary Quayle   Innis    (University  of   Toronto Press), is  the  Centennial  project   of  the Canadian  Federation  of   University Women,   and   presents   brief  biographies of  twenty deceased important  women by  fifteen   live  ones.  One   therefore  ap­ proaches   it  as  a  kind  of  anthology,  de­ lighted    to   find   there   an   essay  on   the vigorous  and  relatively  unknown  agricul­ turalist E. Cora  Hind,  but deeply grieved to  find   that   the  Canadian  schoolchild's
 idol,  Laura Secord,  has  been  left  out.  It is  disturbing,  too,   to   note   how   incon­ sistent   the  quality of  the  prose  is,  for  it varies   from   the   Sarah   Binksian  cliches in Ruth Howe's "Adelaide Hunter Hood­ less"  all  the  way  through  to  two  essays that  deserve special note:  Clara Thomas's study   of   the   Strickland   sisters  and Dorothy  Livesay's  study   of  Mazo  de  Ia Roche.   These   two  demonstrate  the  ap­ parently  effortless   combination  of   fact
:.>nd  personality that  one always  hopes  to find in biographical writing, and  that illuminates our  glimpse both of the people and  of  the  age in  which  they  live.
W.H.N.










BIBLIOGRAPHY
&
INDEX
 Since the publication  of all issues of CANADIAN LITERATURE has been put forward  one month, we have decided, in  the  interests of  complete  coverage, to postpone publication of the
Annual Bibliography  until the Spring

Issue in the beginning  of May.


The Index  for  CANADIAN LITERATURE will  shortly be brought up to d,ate. Meanwhile our readers are referred to the fact that all our articles are included in the Canadian  Periodical Index.
