$3.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·79
Winter, 1978


j(  POETRY MISCELL}(NY


Articles

BY  E.  A. POPHAM, ELIZABETH BREWSTER, ROSEMARY SULLIVAN, WENDY KElTNER, SUNITI NAMJOSHI, DENNIS BROWN


Poems

BY  P. K. PAGE, TOM WAYMAN, DOROTHY LIVESAY, PIER GIORGIO  DICICCO, PATRICK LANE, CLAIRE E.  HARRISON


Reviews, Opinions,  and Notes

BY ROY  DANIELLS, D. G.  JONES, ROWLAND LORIMER, STEPHEN SCOBIE, D. M.  R.  BENTLEY, ALEXANDRE AMPRIMOZ, PETER STEVENS,
ROBERT JAMES  MERRETT, MARY JANE  EDWARDS, ROBIN SKELTON, KATHY  MEZEI, FRED COGSWELL, DONALD PRECOSKY, RON  GRAHAM, ESTHER SAFER FISHER,  ANTS REIGO


A QUARTERlY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








BUREAUCRATIC MANAGEMENT





THE PETER  PRINCIPLE RIGHTLY DESERVES its reputation. But the cruellest irony associated with the book-one which Laurence  Peter and Ray­ mond  Hull  might  themselves  have  predicted -has been  its  total  inability   to change the procedures it exposes. Bureaucracies abound, subdivide without  pause, and multiply without being fruitful. People continue to ascend power structures  to their  level of incompetence  and  to wield power  incompetently.  And  despite  the many talented  people in government,  business, education  and  other  institutional  organizations, the institutions themselves increasingly appear  to reward the institu­ tionally predictable.
The "good"  principals and presidents and power brokers-by which one means those individuals  whose talent  for efficiency has not come at  the expense of  im­ agination  or intelligence or human  insight -repeatedly assert their  individuality  against the systems they must contend with. Perhaps because it is individuality  they value, and individuality which gives them value, they have not been able to impose their character  upon  the systems. To sacrifice the individuality is little answer, for the value would disappear  whatever organization took it over. And the confronta­ tive politics which  bureaucratic organization engenders are merely elaborate  war games engineered by would-be generals who lack any other kind of war to manage.  Faced with this play of power, most people are cast in the audience's  role, but in the process they also accept  a reversal of  character  models. On  the stage  are the puppeteers, and in the audience are the puppets. And appreciating  the Peter Prin­ ciple does not cut the strings. It expresses an ironic defence of sorts against  power, an indictment  which  asserts a  perennial independence  of attitude,  whatever  the appearance  of behavioural  control  might suggest to the contrary.  But  this inde­ pendence, too, may be an illusion. As bureaucracies  increase in anonymity,  they can rely more and  more successfully on apathy  and fear to increase their  power. The power to deny independence  is not then a distant step for them to take, and

2

EDITORIAL

the fact that it is taken daily in the name of stability does not make it any the more laudable. But how to combat  the anonymity? and  how to combat  the fear?
The  problem with fear is that, because "bad" administrators are always unwill­ ing to admit  to their  terminal  level in the Peter-principle  hierarchy -and  hence are afraid  of being  caught  out  by those above them-fear  is self-perpetuating. The  powerless are afraid for their security of the powerful, who in turn  are afraid of the responsibility which their position implies. So they defer authority  upwards. They  take  no decisions without  higher  approval,  which  the  higher  authority­ interpreting any application for the approval of something novel as an administra­ tive escape mechanism  rather than the birth of a valid idea-seldom if ever gives. So no ideas move up from the imaginative  and intelligent, because there's  an  un­ imaginative and  unintelligent  barrier  between such originators  and  anyone  with both authority and  wit to appreciate  them. Characteristically  the people who act as that  barrier  cannot  laugh, cannot listen, do not hear, and  will never admit  to a mistake. Without  power they would be pitiable;  with power they are intrinsically dangerous. Already empty themselves, they deny their particular society of its life's blood. And much of the time they even do so unknowingly. Relying on an inherited structure, they cannot  see that it continues to live only if actual  individual  people continue  to animate it. Declaring themselves for stability and  order,  they cannot appreciate how  necessary a little disorder is if human  lives are  to continue  to be creative. Wielding  power rigidly, they cannot  distinguish between  authority  and autocracy, nor allow options and  opportunities  to others lest these in some way undermine their  own  fragile  hold  on  security,  whether  political  or  moral  or whatever.
Anyone  who  has encountered  classically bureaucratic   acts  will recognize  the coupled fear and ambition in the people who perform them. Government's impulse to centralize-to centralize everything-is like nothing so much as an American wagon-train encircling  more  and  more  tightly  round  Confederation   Square  in defence of a set of mind it has never allowed to be refreshened. And the centrifugal impulse of Canada's regions seems to emerge from a series of confrontations  be­ tween aspiring  centralists, each with his own definition of centre and  power  and truth.  Opposition counter-impulses  to regionalize everything  would set up  mini­ wagon  trains  all across the country,  all denying  the  flexibility that  comes  from open and  inter-regional communication. The  possibilities Canada  has  repeatedly represented -the possibilities that derive from co-ordinated individual  options­ can only prosper in a more open atmosphere:  a climate open to imagination and ideas among  the recent  and  the  junior and  the mobile as well as the established and the senior and  the fixed. To set up controls over imaginative  possibilities is to deny the options that  people ought  to have by right.
Literature and  the other  arts are not as free from such management as many humanists  would like to believe. When Jack  McClelland, speaking  of publishing,

3

EDITORIAL

distinguishes diametrically  between  "Toronto" and  "the  regions," he  draws  ap­ parently unquestioningly on an acceptance of a centralism  of his own definition­ shared  by many,  perhaps, but  not by the nation  at large. Yet it affects the  publish­ ing industry, the  possibilities  of communication, and  the fact of book distribution, not to mention  other  kinds  of imaginative enterprise. When  the  Canada Council defines in advance that  it will support only modern dance  in Vancouver and  only ballet  in Winnipeg, it looks at  a centralized master  plan  rather than  at  the  talent or enterprise it could  be fostering. Yet it affects individual human beings.  When most of the morally  outraged who  rail publicly against  vice choose language and  books  as their  target   rather than  violence  and  the  barrenness of  administrative imagination, they  betray  their  own  insecurity  about  themselves  and  their  trans­ parent political  ambition. Yet  they  cause  nervous  bureaucrats to  run  at  once  in protective circles. When  paper matters more than  people, and  the ease of access to a target  more than  the  justifiability  of  reaching it, a society is in a precarious state.  To  help it, the imaginative and creative  and  intelligent have to stop running from the fear of being called elitist; they have to stop minimizing their  talent; they  have to stop  suffering  the  mediocre  when  their  society  needs  able  people  and  sound  ideas;  they have to assert  the rights of the creative  and intelligent to a stimulating public  education;  they  have  to start  reassessing what  are  problems  and  what  are solutions  in  Canada, and   they  have  to  do  so  unafraid of  their  own  and   their
country's future.
W.H.N.






PRISONERS
 


P.K.Page


One can spot them at once although  not
as one might suppose
by their handcuffs, which of course, they wear or by their rage
their air of guilt
their wounded  pride but by the sharp-nosed
clean-shaven  man in drip-dries
who sits indifferent invisibly shackled
at their side.

4

A.M. KLEIN

The Impulse To Define



E. A. Popham






L
192o's and in the  193o's), which includes two volumes of poems selected by the poet, Hath  Not a ]ew ( 1940)  and Poems ( 1944), and the verse satire of the Nazi regime, The  Hitleriad  (1944); and the "Canadian" group,  which  is best  repre­ sented  in The  Rocking  Chair and Other  Poems  (1948), a volume  composed of poems written in the middle and late 194o's and selected for volume publication.  Perhaps the sole ground for dispute in the critical pigeon-holing of his work is The  Second  Scroll, Klein's  novel-travelogue published  in 1951. Some  critics,  placing their emphasis on the historical context of the novel, declare that  it is Zionist in orientation; others claim that the Zionist theme is universalized, and that  the state of Israel  becomes "a symbolic expression of every man's imagined  home."1
That Klein's  work  underwent  several shifts  in subject-matter is undeniable. There  is an obvious progression in his poetry from Velvel Kleinburger  and Barri­ cade Smith  with their  poker and  protests in the Radical  poems;  through  Childe Harold, Reb  Zadoc  and  Solomon  Warshawer,   and  the  homeless  wanderings,  ghetto  mentality,  and  persecution which form so much  of Jewish  history;  to the rocking  chairs and  Roman  Catholicism  of French  Canada.  Indeed, without  too much  danger  of contradiction, one can summarize  Klein's  basic themes  as:   ( i) the need for social reform;  ( ii)  the suppressed potential of  the Jewish people;  (iii)  the nature  of the French-Canadian  milieu.
Furthermore, Klein's poetry exhibits major technical changes which correspond closely with his transition  from "Radical" and "Jewish"  to "Canadian" subjects. A prime example of the method dominant  in his early poetry is "Design For a Medieval  Tapestry" (Hath  Not  a  few), a series of portraits  introduced by the poet's sketch of a Jewish ghetto in medieval Germany.  In  this sequence  we hear

5

A.M. KLEIN

from:  Reb Zadoc, a modern  version of the Zadoc who had  anointed  Solomon in Israel's golden age; figures reminiscent of victims of biblical persecutions, but here deprived  of  the  eventual   triumph   accorded   their  predecessors-Job,   Esther, Daniel;  biblical  prophets  of  promise or  warning,  here compromised  by  fear­ Nahum,   Isaiah,  Ezekiel.  The  situation  evoked  in  the  poem  is  distanced  from Klein's audience  by hundreds  of years, and, by shaping his characters  on biblical models, Klein forces his readers still further  into the  past; yet the refrain  of the first of his portraits  ("Reb Zadoc Has Memories")  pointedly finds application  in the year of the poem's publication-1940:

Reb Zadoc's brain is a torture-dungeon; Reb Zadoc's brain is a German town.

In  Klein's last book of poetry the approach  is decidedly unlike that  of the  early poetry. In The  Rocking Chair, an object, a rocking chair or a grain elevator, takes on new and complex connotations under the poet's stringent  analysis: the rocking chair  becomes  "act   and  symbol"  of  French  Canada; the  grain  elevator  gains mythic stature  because "bread is its theme, an absolute."
However, despite the seemingly disparate  nature of thematic  concern and  tech­ nique  in  his  poetry,  an  essential element  in  virtually  all  of Klein's  work  is his attempt  simultaneously to present and to define his subject. While the early poems take a tradition  and  create around  it a defining situation, the later poems take an object and create for it a defining tradition.  The difference between the early and the later poetry is owing to a shift in emphasis rather  than any great  revelation in poetic  vision. Subject  and  technique  may, and  do,  change  somewhat,  but  the impetus behind Klein's work remains the same. Paradoxically, it is largely because of this compulsion for definition  that  the thematic  concerns of his poetry  are in one sense so limited  and,  at  the same time, so fully  developed.  Within  the  ex­ tremely general divisions of "Radical," "Jewish," or "Canadian," he demonstrates  an  extraordinary talent  for  the  examination  of  minute  detail;  a  character, an object, or a moment  in time is magnified and expanded  into a universal statement which is eventually  fitted  into  the larger,  defining pattern  of a series of related poems or even a volume of poetry.
Though  the impulse to define is apparent throughout  Klein's poetic career, it is in his novel, The  Second  Scroll, that  he provides what may be his most  compre­ hensive statement  of the poetic theory that both grew out of, and served  to direct, that impulse. The  Second Scroll has generally been viewed as a work which sheds some light  on  the  movement  in  Klein's  poetry  from  "Jewish" to  "Canadian" subjects. Perhaps  the most extreme example of this interpretation of  the  novel is put forward  by John  Matthews,  who has suggested that  the life of  the character  Melech Davidson may be taken as an autobiographical gloss, a vehicle by means of which Klein defines and  assesses his own ideological development:

6

A.M. KLEIN

There  is what one might call a trichotomy of parallels throughout:   the ancient tribulations of the Jewish people, their modern re-enactment, the spiritual Odyssey of Klein himsel£.2

This statement  may be extended still further,  for the novel seems also to stand  as an autobiographical survey of poetic technique.  In The  Second  Scroll, Klein  has provided his reader  with an examination  of the pros and cons of various types of poetry, an examination which, as it was made not long after his own thematic  and technical  transition  in The  Rocking Chair, may be considered in part  as a state­ ment of his own poetic alternatives.
The  novel presents a double  but interlocking  plot:  the search  by the narrator for his uncle, Melech Davidson, and the narrator's professional commission to find and define the poetry of the new state of Israel. This  first plot, through  the nar­ rator's accounts of the life of his uncle Melech, provides a basis for a survey of the Jewish  experience  in  twentieth-century  Europe;  the second  plot  provides  Klein with a forum for an examination  of the nature of poetry in a period of  accelerated cultural  change.  From  various angles, Klein considers the messianic  potential  of the return  of the Jews from exile, the rebuilding of the state, and  the reunion  of the dispersed tribes to form a people. However, the tinge of Zionist fervour  is also present in his search  for a distinctive Israeli  poetry, a search  which  becomes an expectation  of prophecy-the great creative "fiat." Significantly, the critical dis­ cussion of poetry in the novel is presented in conjunction  with the resolution of the political situation  which  for  approximately  fifteen years had  been  Klein's  own major  thematic  focal  point.
In  the novel, as the  narrator sits in a plane  bound  for  Israel,  he strikes up  a
conversation with an American "assimilated" Jew. His acquaintance, maintaining that  the founding  of the  Jewish  state is "our  version of the  Incarnation,"  con­ cludes about  the nation  in exile:

It was true, that the Jews qua Jews-the tatters of that original divine vestment, the shreds of the flesh that  once showed forth  the Lord -had  recognizably  re­ mained. But not as of yore : they no longer served in their first role, they were not any more the Idea's style and title. They had been reduced to but a single function: mnemonic of the past....
Jewry had ceased as Existence. Among the nations it constituted an anomaly, in speech it was a solecism; the verb to be confined to the passive mood!

The state of Israel in Diaspora is described in tenns of an "Idea" imperfectly com­ municated, an  incomplete  or  distorting  definition.  Significantly,  the  charge  of "mnemonic  of the  past" has also frequently  been levelled at Klein's own  poetry, particularly the Hath Not a few collection. This definition of the state of the nation is offered in terms of modes of thought and expression -"anomaly," "solecism," and "passive mood,"  tenns  which could be, and indeed have been, applied  to the major part of Klein's  poetic canon to the 194o's.

7

A.M. KLEIN



ALTHOUGH KLEIN  WAS  ACTIVELY INVOLVED in  the  Zionist movement in Canada,3 his poetry did not, for the most part, deal directly with the horror confronting the European  Jew in theI ggo's and 4o's. Instead, he appeared to retreat in many of his poems to the Middle Ages and the archaisms of the King James Bible. Denunciation was distanced by time and diction, and was thus, some critics claim, made  less effective.4   It  is perhaps  that  E. J. Pratt's review of The Hitleriad,  Klein's  violent satiric attack  on Hitler,  was favourable,  not because of its poetic expertise,5  but because

The subject  has pulled  the threnodist away from the wall of lamentation and  placed the  satirist  in a colosseum  with  a grenade in his hand  and  a good  round curse  on his lips.6

The  Rocking  Chair  was hailed  as a  correction  of  Klein's  "nose-dive  into  an­ tiquity"7 and  as a movement  away from the parochial vision created  by his con­ centration  on Jewish culture  and tradition.
Yet in the majority  of the poems in Hath  Not a jew and  Poems, the evocation
of past events and  continuing  traditions  is not made for its own sake, but  as a commentary   on,  or  symbolic  definition  of,  the  present  situation.   These   two volumes, which  may  be seen as part  of a single process of definition,  were  ap­ parently  the  product  of careful  selection and  organization  on  Klein's  part.  He opens Hath Not a jew by establishing the nature and the limitations of his subject­ matter  ("Ave Atque Vale"). In the second poem of the volume, "Childe  Harold's Pilgrimage," he proceeds to outline  through  the  person of  "Harold," who under Klein's direction  becomes the archetypal  "Jew," the  historical and  psychological context of his "Jewish" poetry:  the history of  persecution, the now-present  threat  of Naziism, and  the alternatives  for present  action. The  remainder  of the  poems in Hath  Not  a  jew and  in Poems, ranging freely in time and situation  from  the biblical to the contemporary, fit into the  framework  provided  in these first two poems. As a result, they may be taken to be an organic, if somewhat disconnected, whole-a  jigsaw portrait  of the threatened  Jewish culture.
However,  if the early poetry does not entirely warrant  the reductive  charge  of
"mnemonic of the past" levelled at Jews in general by the travelling  companion of Klein's narrator in The  Second Scroll, it does offer a statement  almost totally in terms of Jewish culture.  Klein's  novel, continuing  this association between  the socio-political state  of Judaism  and  the concerns of the early  poetry,  proclaims with the political release provided with the defeat of Germany and the subsequent formation  of the  Jewish  state  an  expectation  of the  fulfillment  of  the  nation's stifled potential.  Israel should provide the Jewish people with the long awaited opportunity  for  "existence"  in an  "active  mood"  and  for  the  articulation of a more universal statement.

8

A.M. KLEIN

The  narrator's quest  for  a new  poetry  is initially  disappointing. He  seeks  pro­ phecy,  a definition  of a new spiritual state,  and  finds only a number of  factional and  incompletely communicated visions. The  first of these is the  insular  vision of the radical, of which  the narrator says:

It would vanish, it did not belong to the essential thoughtways  of our  people ... ; it surged  up only as an  answer  to contemporary  history. It was Israel's  retort  to Europe, couched in Europe's  language.

The second  of the  new  trends  is more  positive in the  narrator's eyes -the poetry of the settlements. Though derivative, this poetry  provides  the  pastoral "names," the  "adamic intimacy," which  had  been  lacking  in  the  urban literature of  the "ghetto-gotten Rashi":

One sensed a groping  towards the phrase, the line, the sentence  that  would gather in its sweep the sky above and  the earth  below and set new constellations  in each. But the word did not come.

Next, he encounters the  poetry of "the schools," political  and  religious  manifestos, of which:

Only the orthodox  paytanim dispensed with program  notes for their  platform  did not have to be set up, it was already  there, a table prepared,  a Schulchan Aruch. Their  theme was a continual  backward-glancing  to the past and  their  technique  a pedantry  of allusiveness, their  work was of Moses mosaic, a liturgy, God's  poetry, which is to say poetry for the Most Merciful of Readers.

As Klein's  narrator comments: "I had the originals; I was seeking  the tone  which might  yet  again  re-echo,  not  the  faint  echo  of the  long  since  sounded." Lastly,

There  was also the vogue of the young and  very wise Nathan, an agile craftsman who moulded  the ancient  speech to modern  use, whose rhymes were in theinselves witty, and whose wit had but one target, the iniquity of the gentiles.

Unlike  the original  Nathan, the  prophet through whom  the  plans for  the Temple and  the messianic  promise  of the Davidic  covenant were communicated to David, these poets "referred to"  and  "did  not make,  Occasion."
Significantly, a  measure of these evaluations may  well  be self-critical. Several of these unsatisfactory modes  of poetry may  be credited  to Klein  himself  at some point  in his career, for  he has amply  exhibited  his radical, traditional, and  satiric tendencies. By the same  token,  his narrator's expression  of a poetic ideal  may  also offer a definition  of the  type of poetry towards  which  he saw  himself  to be mov­ ing. Although he never  does find  a modern-day prophet, the  "consolation  prize" in the narrator's search  is a poet who at least shares  none of the  negative aspects  of the various  trends  which  have,  to this point,  been  rejected. The unsatisfactory poets are  derivative; they  grope  towards  some  philosophical,  political,  or  artistic  statement which  they  either  fail  to  attain, or  degrade  by  transforming it  into

9

A.M. KLEIN

polemic.  The narrator finds  a  poet  whose  aim is to  reduce  derivativeness to  a m1mmum.
Fortunately, Klein  also makes  this poet  a theorist,  and  is thus  able  to  accom­
pany  examples of this  "underivative" poetry  with  a critical  analysis  by  the  poet himself:
a poem is not a destination, it is a point of departure. The destination  is determined by the reader. The  poet's function  is but to point direction. A poem is not the con­ flagration  complete, it is the first kindling. From this premise it follows that poems should  be brief, laconic. Sparks.  I write, therefore,  poems that  do not exceed one line. Sometimes, of course, it is such a difficult art-I have to extend  myself to a line and a half, even two lines. It is a prolixity which leaves me discontented.

One  of the examples of this  poetry  provided  by the narrator is equally  eloquent in its communication of these principles- (No.   17) "Literature":
Out  of that chambered  pyramid the triliteral verb
The  mummies rise....

This  is, in skeleton  form,  the  poetry  of definition: underivative, not  because  it is totally  original in its thought, but  because  it states  its case in an  extreme of  pre­ cision. While  Klein  did  not limit  his later  poetry  to one or two lines, The Rocking Chair demonstrates his own growing  tendency  toward  certain  elements  of  this last type  of poetry.  For  the  most  part, his later  work  is underivative, complete in its own  internal statement; its component parts  are  often  "tri-" or  multi-  "literal." Something even  closer to the  narrator's poetic ideal is found outside  the  poetic
circles of the  new  nation, in  the  physical  reconstruction of  Israel:

And  then-it  was after  I had  returned  from  Tiberias  to Tel  Aviv  to  attend  a literary soiree-then the creative activity, archetypal, all-embracing,  that  hitherto I had sought in vain, at last manifested  itself. Not at  the soiree. In  the streets, in the shops, everywhere about me. I had looked, but had not seen. It was there all the time-the  fashioning  folk, anonymous  and  unobserved, creative  word  by word,
phrase by phrase, the total work that when completed would stand as epic revealed!

In what  amounts almost  to a defence of "found" poetry, Klein's narrator acclaims the  poetic  potential of the  commonplace, the  poetry of signs. Tel  Aviv's commer­ cial  centre  has  been  dubbed Sneh,  the  burning bush,  "which had  burned and  burned  but   had   not  been  consumed"; a  dry-cleaning firm  becomes   Kesheth,  "the rainbow, symbol  of the  cessation  of floods." Of  principal importance to the narrator is the source of these metaphors: "born not of the honoured laureate, but of some actuary, a man  of prose!"
The poetic  theory  of the  narrator's "consolation prize"  is realized  in  the self­ definition  of  the  Israeli  people.  In  their  signs, simultaneously  "archetypal" and newly created "word by word," tradition is remolded, reinterpreted, and  is given new  and  contemporary application in the  "sparks" of  these  one  word  analogies.  While  in a sense derivative, the  movement of both  the poetic  and  physical  recon-

10

A.M.  KLEIN

structions  of Israel  is also seen  as prophetic,  for  its images  are  redefined  and directed to new use. The novel itself partakes in this movement, for it is a "second scroll," a new Torah  for a new age. The  poetic quest of the  narrator, so closely linked with the new Exodus of Israel, is completed only when he feels he has found a definition of the physical development of the state:
The  fixed epithet  wherewith  I might designate Israel's  poetry, the  poetry of recaptured  time, was now evident. The  password was heard  everywhere-the miracle!
I had found the key image.

On one level, The  Second Scroll traces the emergence of the Jewish nation from the  limbo of incomplete  definition  and  frustrated  potential.  As  Israel  begins to achieve self-definition, however, the task of reaffirming the threatened identity of the  "Jew" which Klein  had  assumed in the  193o's and  early  1940's  is rendered obsolete. His last book of poetry, The  Rocking  Chair, has been lauded  critically as a movement  towards  a more realistic, less confining stance,  but  the change  in Klein's  subject-matter and  technical  presentation  may not  be evidence  of a  re­ direction  of  poetic  vision so  much  as  an  indication  of  changing   times.  The "Jewish" poetry, while ethnic, was also extremely topical;  Shakespeare  and  Mar­  lowe are consciously set aside for more immediate considerations.  Now, with The  Rocking  Chair,  Klein  moves once again  to  new considerations,  and  new  tech­ niques are required for their explication.



KLEIN WAS  ABLE, IN   THE  EARLY POEMS,  to appeal  for  his terminology to an exhaustive fund  of cultural  tradition.  The  concentration of his later  poems, to a certain  extent, necessitated the poet's adoption  of an expository stance. In order to define, or to move towards a definition of, Canadian subjects, Klein  had  first to establish the  existence of some sort of cultural  identity.  As  a result, as Miriam  Waddington observes:
Folkloric objects become important; we are in a world of spinning wheels, Montreal meeting halls, Catholic hospitals, and Quebec liquor stores. It is as though Klein were seeing his real surroundings for the first time without allowing either literary or religious traditions mediate his vision.8

Nonetheless, if the  poet is, for the most part,  unable  to draw  on any established "literary  or  religious tradition" in these poems, the  objects,  the  situations,  even the  language  with  which  he  is working, do  have  definite  if  not  immediately obvious historical, social, or philological traditions  behind them. Klein's  ability to capitalize on these untapped  traditions  forms the basis of his presentation  in The Rocking  Chair.
In "Political  Meeting," the issue of conscription, tremendously  controversial in


II

A.M. KLEIN

French  Canada, is emblematically presented in  the  counterpoint of the  poem's two "political  meetings": one in the school auditorium,  the other in the street out­ side. The  essential nature  of this division, and the problem at its source, are given definition in the last three lines of the poem:

The whole street wears one face, shadowed and grim; and in the darkness rises
the body-odour of race.

Klein's  exposition, appealing  to the  negative "tradition" of French/English  dis­ trust, reveals a problem much more deep-seated than the political issue with which the poem is nominally  concerned.
In "Pawnshop," Klein appeals to socio-economic and biblical tradition  to con­ struct  a complicated  web of association. The  pawnshop,  innocent  enough  in it­ self, grows to ominous  proportions  under  the  accumulated  weight  of the  poet's thematic  expansion  towards  a  final statement.  From  a  place  where  people sell their  valuables, it becomes a place where the people themselves are weighed and ticketed. It houses an inventory of objects displaced from their proper setting and deprived  of  their  proper  emotional  significance. Gradually,  the  shop  and  the despair,  poverty,  and  social injustice  it  represents become  in  Klein's  expanded vision a threat  to society as a whole. The instigator of the problem, in the process of universalization,  is identified  not as some villain who  consciously created  the time-bomb situation,  but as the prototype of humanity:

The architect is rusted from his plaque. Was his name Adam?

The  Fall, after all, consisted of trading  an ideal for a negative reality. At the same time, Klein cites as the culprit Adam Smith, theorist of "laissez-faire" economics:

Was his trade a smith Who thought a mansion to erect of wealth that houses now the bankrupt bricabrac,
his pleasure-dome made myth
his let-do hospitality made stealth?

The  dream  is contrasted   with  the  "bankrupt," insolvent  reality;  the  fledgling
Kubla  Khan  is left with a distortion of the dream.
The  final universalization  of the symbol is made in literary  terms:

Synonym
of all building, our house, it owns us; even
when free from it, our dialectic grave.
Shall one not curse it therefore, as the cause,
type, and exemplar of our social guilt? Our own gomorrah house,
the sodom that merely to look makes one salt?

12

A.M. KLEIN

The  Klein of the Radical  and  Jewish poems with his concern  with social guilt is evident  here, but the statement  goes beyond social criticism. The  mentality  of the pawnshop  is his subject;  it is, therefore, human  nature  which is "cause,  type, and exemplar." The final biblical allusion to "sodom" and "gomorrah" is to a type of human  iniquity: Lot's  wife became  a  pillar  of salt  because  of  her  inability  to escape the "gomorrah" mentality.
In  "Political  Meeting"  and  "Pawnshop," we have seen how Klein, in the pro­ cess of defining a situation  or an object, manipulates established traditions  in such a way as to give his "Canadian" subject more universal application, and, simul­ taneously, to create around it a sense of a new and autonomous  tradition. Another, more  basic, manipulation of tradition  is evident  in  his use of  language  in The Rocking Chair poems.
In  his earlier  poetry, Klein's language,  his mode of expression, was extremely important in the communication of the spirit of the Jewish people. What  so often has been criticized as undue  use of archaism  was, in fact,  a species of imitative form.9  This  significance of language  is made  explicit in The  Second Scroll with Uncle Melech's  purposeful  assignment of certain subjects to the language appro­ priate to their expression. In the letter in which Melech re-establishes communica­ tion with his family, the narrator notes the abandonment of  Marxist  jargon. The letter ends with a series of commentaries,  each in the language  or type of diction appropriate to its thought:  "language biblic,"  a  "Mishna," a  Talmudic com­ mentary,  a reference  to the  Gabbai.  In  the same vein, the  narrator-critic in his search  for the poetry of New Israel searches primarily for the "word," the mode of expression which will reflect the creative impulse evident in the state's  physical reconstruction.
The  biblical echoes of Hath  Not a  few, Poems, and  The  Hitleriad serve pri­
marily  to  universalize the  particular, to equate,  for example,  Nazi  Germany  or the pogroms of the 193o's and  4o's with other times and  events in a long history of persecution.  Klein's  mode of expression in this poetry is inseparable  from  the message conveyed. In The Rocking Chair, a variation of this concern is apparent in the bilingual expression of such poems as "Montreal," in which the  people of Quebec  are  given their  appropriate voice. As Klein  himself explained  the  me­ chanics of the poem:
the following verse ... is written in a vocabulary which is not exactly English. It is written so that any Englishman who knows no French, and any Frenchman  who knows no English ... can read it.... It contains not a word ... which is not either similar to, derivative from, or akin to a French word of like import; in short, a bi­ lingual poem.10

This exploitation  of the origins, the etymologies, of words also appears  in The Rocking Chair in Klein's  unilingual  poems. Miriam  Waddington provides what may  be an  illuminating  commentary  on  Klein's later  poetry when  she  observes

A.M. KLEIN

that  these poems evidence a movement  away from the "archaism" of the Jewish poetry  to "metaphor," which  also "doubles,  condenses." 11  Once  again,  subject seems to determine  mode,  as the  essence of this  change  is from  a  tendency  to "double" time perspective in the early poetry to a tendency to "double" connota­ tion in The  Rocking Chair.
Perhaps the most successful example of this type of expression is "Lone  Bather"
in which Klein demonstrates his ability to manipulate even the smallest significant units of expression. This  poem comes the closest of any of Klein's work to putting into operation  the  poetic theory  of the "consolation  prize"  poet in The  Second Scroll:  it is not a "destination" but a "point  of departure"; the  basis of its  pre­ sentation  is the "tri-literal" connotation  of words.
The  first two lines of the poem serve as a definition of its contents, a defence of
its internal validity, and a prime example of the poet's linguistic juggling act. Individual words are made to function as images in their own right as the reader is included in the imaginative self-definition of the bather /poet:

Upon the ecstatic diving board the diver, poised for parabolas, lets go....

The  "diving  board" is "ecstatic" -subject to, or, more fitting  here,  producing ecstacies. "Ecstacy," in turn,  may be defined as "an  exalted state of feeling, rap­ ture"  or  as "trance, poetic  frenzy."  The  diver  is "poised"-balanced  or  sus­ pended-in  preparation for "parabolas." The  term "parabolas" not only  refers to the  physical shape  of the dive, but also carries resonance of the Greek  words from which it is formed: hence, parabolic, of the nature  of parable. As the diver "lets go," he releases not only the physical motion of the  poem, but also springs into  the "ecstatic," parabolic  frame  of mind  which allows its imaginative equa­ tions:

lets go his manshape to become bird. Is bird, and topsy-turvy
the pool floats overhead, and the white tiles snow their crazy hexagons.

The  poem inventories  a series of states of being-bird, dolphin,  plant,  merman
-as the diver constantly redefines himself according to his element. Yet these are, finally, relinquished,  "rubbed" away as the bather  becomes "personable plain"­ himself.
This ability of the poet/bather constantly to redefine his status, and thus to re­ create his world, is the theme of "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape." This poem, the last in The   Rocking  Chair  collection, serves also to some extent  as  Klein's statement  of the  type of poetic definition attempted  in the  volume, a  statement which is echoed three  years later  in the critical discussion in The  Second  Scroll.
Here, as in The  Second Scroll, the relationship of the poet to the society he serves

A.M. KLEIN

has been altered in some way. The  poet's traditional role involves the definition of that society; he is defined as

he who unrolled our culture from  his scroll - the  prince's quote,  the rostrum-rounding roar­ who  under  one name  made  articulate
heaven, and  under  another the seven-circled air.

Society, however, has found  new media of self-definition in its editors,  actresses, and  broadcasters.  The  poet is assumed "dead," and  though  he is potentially  use­ ful, he is not really missed:

like the mirroring lenses forgotten on a brow
that  shine  with  the guilt of their  unnoticed world.

The  "forgotten" poet is confronted  with  a number  of alternative  roles which correspond roughly with the poetic stances which are to be declared inadequate by the narrator of The  Second Scroll. The ideal, exemplified by our poet in the mo­ ments in which his vocation is reaffirmed, is the perception  of poetry as valuable in its own right, without  any artificially constructed social application:  language  becomes a physical thing to the poet, a lover:

Then he will remember his travels  over that  body­
the  torso verb,  the  beautiful face of the noun, and  all those shaped and  warm  auxiliaries!
A first love it was, the recognition of his own. Dear limbs adverbial, complexion of adjective, dimple and  dip  of conjugation!

The  poets who have succumbed  to the pressures of their anonymity,  in searching for an audience,  forfeit this relation to their art:

Thus, having  lost the bevel in the ear,
they  know  neither up nor down,  mistake  the  part for the whole, curl themselves in a comma,
talk technics,  make  a colon  their eyes. They  distort  - such  is the  pain  of their frustration-truth
to something convolute and  cerebral.

Some lend themselves to propaganda, "the  multiplying word," and lose their autonomy; others, searching  in their own minds or in religion or sex for subject­ matter,  disconnect  themselves and  their art  from  reality:

0 schizoid solitudes! 0 purities
curdling upon  themselves!  Who  live for  themselves, or for each  other,  but  nobody  else;
desire  affection, private  and  public  loves; are  friendly, and  then  quarrel and  surmise the secret  perversions of each  other's Jives.

A.M. KLEIN

For  the  true  poet  it  is "infelicity" rather than   "fame" or  "private or  public loves" that  proves to be the creative  stimulus. His social displacement serves as the basis for the  creation of a personal  universe:

Therefore he seeds illusions. Look, he is the nth Adam taking a green inventory
in world but scarcely uttered,  naming, praising, the flowering fiats in the meadow, the
sabled fur, stars aspirate, the pollen whose sweet collusion sounds eternally. For to praise

the world-he solitary man-is breath
to him. Until  it has been praised, that  part has not been. Item by exciting item-
air to his lungs, and  pressured blood to his heart - they are pulsated, and breathed,  until they map,
not the world's, but his own body's chart.

This  world  is sentient because  it is a reflection  of the  artist  who  "names" it; the "pollen" of the "flowering fiats" is in "collusion" both  with  creation and  creator. The  poet,  assumed  dead  at  the  beginning of the  poem,  undergoes, through the act of creation, a vital  physical regeneration, for that  same "body" of words which previously confirmed his sense of poetic vocation  now enables the  process of "fiat." Simultaneously object  and  subject, world  and  creator, the  poet  is able  to  negate the "schizoid  solitudes" which  plague  poets of less comprehensive concerns.
In The  Second Scroll, Klein  looks to the  poets of the Israel  of a second  Exodus
to  provide  a new  Torah. The  ideal  poet,  although he is never  really  discovered, would  be a poet of "the miracle," a new Moses. In "Portrait of the Poet  as Land­ scape," Klein's  poet  partakes in the archetypal act of Adam: as the "nth Adam," his art  approximates as closely as possible the divine  act of Creation. In  re-defin­  ing,  and  thus  recreating, the  world  in  their  poetry  these ideal  poets move  away from  the  traditional stance  of the  poet  as definer /preserver, a  stance  which  has either  been rejected by a modern technological society, or as in The  Second Scroll, been  made  obsolete   by  political   circumstance. They  become  instead   definers/ creators who seek to accomplish by their  creative redefinition  of the  world  around them   something  that   the   "distorting"  poets,  with   their   propaganda  or  self­ absorption, cannot:

To find a new function  for the declasse craft archaic  like the fletcher's;  to make a new thing; to say the word that will become sixth sense; perhaps by necessity and indirection bring
new forms, anonymously, new creeds-
0 somehow pay back the daily larcenies of the lung!

16

A.M. KLEIN


This passage could ultimately qualify as Klein's own  poetic creed in the  194-o's. His  attempt to "make a new  thing" is evident in the  transition from the  "Jewish" concerns of the  193o's and  early 194-o's to the  "Canadian" subjects of The  Rock­ ing  Chair. His  craft made "declasse" by  contemporary history, he  moved from close adherence to  tradition and traditional modes of expression to the  considera­ tion  of new  areas, and a culture which  was in  need  of creative definition.


NOTES

1 Tom  Marshall, "Theorems Made  Flesh,"  in his ed.,  A. M.  Klein  (Toronto:  Ryer­
son, 1 970) , p. I 59·
2   John Matthews, "Abraham Klein  and  the  Problem of Synthesis," A. M.  Klein,  p.
1 4-7·
3 Klein  was a member of B'nai  Brith  Youth and  the Labour Zionist  Organization. He also edited  Canadian  Jewish Chronicle from  1939-1955 in which  time  he became  a prominent spokesman for Canadian Jews.
4  Louis  Dudek   raises  what  may  be  the  most  extreme of  the  critical  objections to Klein's use of archaism: "this  language experiment of  Klein's-really a  private language-cannot be called  a success. It  is when  he accidentally quits  his  turgid rhetoric that  he is most successful.  Some  words  one  feels, are  seen in  print  for  the first  and  last  time:  'farewelled,' 'nihility,' 'insignificantest,' 'maieutically.'  As  for
'beautified,' which  occurs in Poems, Shakespeare himself called  that  'an ill phrase,  a
vile  phrase,  "beautifies" is a  vile  phrase'.'' ("A.  M.  Klein," in  A. M.  Klein,  ed.
Marshall, p. 70.)  Even  one of Klein's  chief supporters expresses some doubts on this
account. Miriam  Waddington comments:  "Klein's  use  of  archaisms has  always
puzzled  me. If he  were  a  bad  poet  who  used  archaism to  make  prosaic  language poetical, there  would  be no problem. But a poet with an ear  as fine and  as clever  as
Klein's and  with  a skill that  Thomas Mann calls 'the  visible accoustic' would  never mar  his poems with archaic words unless their  use had a deeper  significance." A.M. Klein  (Toronto: Copp Clark,  1970), p. 11 1.
5   Klein  himself denied  that  The  Hitleriad was of any great  value  as poetry.  However, as he wrote  to James Laughlin, his publisher   (New  Directions Press):  "I do  think that  apart from  poetic  merit, perhaps because of poetic  demerit, The  Hitleriad  has great   potentialities for  large-scale distribution.''  (As  reported by  Waddington, A. M.  Klein, p. 81)
6  E. J. Pratt, "Review of The  Hitleriad," in  A. M.  Klein, ed.  Marshall, p. 21.
7  John  Sutherland, "Canadian Comment," in  A. M. Klein, ed.  Marshall, p. 59·
8  Waddington, p. 92.
9  As Tom  Marshall observes  in  his introduction to  the  Ryerson  collection of essays on  Klein,  Klein's use of  "his  private pseudo-biblical or  Elizabethan English"  fol­ lowed  "the  example of Spenser  who  sought  to  re-affirm  tradition  with  deliberate archaism." (A.M. Klein, p. xxiii.)
10 A.  M.  Klein,   Preview   (September 1944),  as  reported  by  Miriam  Waddington,
p. I 10.
11 Waddington, p. 113.

THE WHITEWOOD ELEGIES

Tom Wayman

A light,  far  off
seen through a window  of the house at  night. A light.
11 	Sandy  wrote: "On  November 16
Pat  committed suicide. He used
that  stupid  8 mm. Mauser he bought  in Vancouver, if you remember. You know
he has  been severely troubled; he has been  in psychiatric centers here  in Saskatchewan and  on medication, etc.,  at  times
but he wasn't on any now.
He  had  come  to live with  me and  the baby  in Limerick, then  gone  to the coast, when  you last saw him,
and  returned in the Spring.
He  was under  care and  seemed  to be real good. He got himself  a job in Regina
which  he held  down  right  until  the last.
He would  phone  up and  tell me he loved me, etc., and  even come  down,  but
he was really  tortured with  his mind.

"He had  just been down  to see me that  Sunday and  seemed  to realize that  he needed  help  again but  never  made  it. I was nice to him,  thank  God, or I'd  never  be able  to survive  now. He  is buried
in the churchyard near  the farm,  if you remember, or perhaps he never  took you there?"

m 	Rage  in the darkness on the dirt  roads
around Whitewood: 1972. Pat  at  the wheel
as the tires churn through the summer  dust talking  about  his life
-his parents' farm  again,  and  working  maintenance for the Highways, what  he misses
of Vancouver, his few friends  here. Beside us on the seat, a bottle  of rye, "Saskatchewan acid" he calls it,

POEM

and  we finally  turn  up  the driveway  of a farm and  stop  under the sleeping house:
"Naw. They  know me.  They  won't  mind." We open  the  whisky, while the radio
brings  in Winnipeg loud in the night
-rock and  roll. "Quit worrying.
If they look out  they'll recognize the car. We can't drink  on the roads
because what  the  Mountie does Saturday night is drive  around looking for people like us
killing  a bottle  in comfort. That's crime  in  Whitewood
-that and  using farm  gas in your car. Here we're  okay: this is private property."

And  later,  through the windshield a light  travelling a distant  road:

"Must be him.  Nobody else would  be out  this  way at  this hour."

We watch  the light pass.

iv 	Now,  driving in the late afternoon with  a strong  south-west  wind
and  a white sky perhaps rain  later. The utility  poles
head  past, measuring the highway;
the wide fields grown green the first June after  his death.

From  the  road,  the land  pulls back in slow, subtle  hills
of wheat, barley, flax, sunflower
or the intense  yellow of rapeseed.
Trees stand  in long groves on the horizons or close by the shoulder;
low poplar and  birch scrub.

On  the  highway  through Whitewood,
the  Esso station  that  is also a restaurant

rg

POEM

and  the Greyhound stop
where  Steve,  coming  from  Vancouver one  winter to see Pat,  unannounced and  broke,
got off in the cold to phone  the farm
and  found  him  gone, working  in the north.
The farm  sold three  years now, bought  by a cousin. And  the  wind  along  the  road
pushing before  it
the  heads  of the  high  green  embankment grasses;
tall stalks
of yellow clover and  wolf willow nod  again  and  again

It is his name
he gets remembered by-what it means to whoever knew him,
and  also the name  of the land of which  he was one  more
who drew  in like a moving  lamp:
a white  man,  a wagon,
a railroad, then  the steady flow of the  highway  traffic-another of those planting the land
and  paving  it

with a name and  a light

v 	In  the lounge  of the Vancouver Island  ferry the next month, his head  against  the window, coast sunshine
across the remembered, unexpected face. He sleeps as the huge engines
heave  the vessel forward through  the Strait.

Perhaps in a moment he will awaken:
confused  as always for an instant
then  ready  to laugh  at  himself for falling  asleep but  bristly,  too:  staring  round
in case anyone is mocking  him. Now his hands
lie in his lap:

20

POEM

the  thick  fingers, stained  with  nicotine, placed  there  like ten familiar tools
ready  to be picked  up to get back to the  job.

Beyond him the steel deck
and  the green  fields of the sea with  their  distant mountain rim.
An hour  out  of Tsawwassen, he sleeps with  his old Pontiac aboard
with  the other vehicles,
his hair  against the glass, and  his face, the face of a dead  man
and  the face of a stranger soft and  bathed now
in the whole light.





SURREfll



I am  in a dream within  a wood
not able  to move, become a watcher.

But you throw  the  ball of fire look!
I become a catcher,
hold  in my gnarled hand the  key to  nature.
Tum it  over
and  winter flowers
on the  jack-frost  pane. Tum it  twice
and  a green  rain  falls dissolving all your fears. Tum it thrice
and  you pound the  earth with  your body demanding, demanding
the green  forces of summer.
 


Dorothy Livesay




























21

POEM

In  the fourth season you walk  through fire eternally tum
into  the flames, driven

out  of this drouth find  haven, heaven.








THE EMPTY SLEEVE
 


Pier Giorgio Di Cicco


Love  dies down.  Love opens the window,  breaks  its legs going out,  comes scratching at  the door at xmas, wanting wingtips. Love sits on the  roof of my tongue  asking swallows. Love  is
so far  away,  I'm  going  to send it roses in remembrance of
a snowfall. Love says remember me  remember me,  I was that  honey thing
that  made you whole, I was that  woman  with scarlet legs and  a coat
of mail.
I met  love as I  was taking  a walk  the  other  night,  it  had  one  word for  the moon  and  one for a star; between  the  two, I  forgot  it.

Love came  back, and  its dead  wood met it. Love asked itself for food and  lost appetite.

One  day, I was sitting  on the grass with one foot  in a hammock of spring. Love  came  by, a little boy I waved  off. I was smoking the air.  Love came

back  and  wept,  and  I felt sorry, tomorrow  I will buy a store and  sell all  the  bones back. I will sell everything,
and  sail through the rooms of grass, where  two ships are  waiting  for me,
one with  flags for  the other.





22

THE I OF THE OBSERVER

The Poetry of F. R. Scott





Elizabeth Brewster







BOTH EYES  AND I's  ARE  IMPORTANT in the  poetry  of F. R. Scott. The eye sometimes seems remarkably detached, the "needle" through  which "long  filaments"  of vision flow  (as in  the  poem  "Vision"). The  "wires"  with which  it is equipped  seem almost  mechanical.  One  might  be tempted   to think the "I" behind  the "eye"  rather  a chilly one except for the  reminder  that  these wires "vibrate with song j When it is the heart  that  sees."
In  the early poems "we"  is almost more common  than  "1." Overture   ( 1945)
is full of poems in the first person plural:  "Dedication," "Flux," "Armageddon," "Recovery," "Spring:   1941,"  "Spain:  1937,''   "War   News,"  "Resurrection," "Enemies," "The   Barons,"  "Villanelle."  These  are  public,  didactic,   hortatory poems, often calls to action, expressing a kind of solidarity with the human  race and a faith in a new socialist world. In this period of change and  conflict, as the author  says in "Flux," "There's naught  for me and  you, only for us." Yet, as he says in the same poem, it is "the  ultimate I, the inner mind,"  which is "The only shelter proof against attack."
"1," when he appears in some of the poems in Overture, is close to the didactic
"we."  The  seeing "I" of "Conflict" could  be changed  to  "we"  without  much change  in  mood or meaning.  In  the  title  poem itself the speaker  watches  (the word seems more exact than  listens to)  a Mozart sonata,  detaching  himself from the  "pretty" performance  because  this  "perfection" seems trivial  when  placed beside the  "world  crescendo"  outside the room. Yet his feelings are  not  as  con­ temptuous  as he  pretends.  He  is obviously delighted  to see "The bright/ Clear notes fly like sparks  through  the  air,"  tracing  their  "flickering  pattern."  These sounds  are  strikingly visual, and  their  visual and  tactual  nature  is  emphasized when the author  speaks of "harmonies  as sharp  as stars."
Sometimes  the  speaker  shifts  back  and  forth   between  "I" and   "We." In
"Examiner" Scott writes from the point of view of the teacher  watching  the "hot

F.R.SCOTT


and  discouraged" students write  the  examination he  has set.  He  also  looks  out from  a window  onto  the  natural world  of trees and  grass, contrasting with  "the narrow frames  of our  text-book schools."  Because the "I" of this poem  is a public personality, an  educator speaking in anger  at  the  kind of education he is obliged to give, it is easy for  him  to shift  to "we" when  he asks,

Shall we open the whole skylight of thought
To these tiptoe minds, bring them our frontier  worlds
And the boundless uplands of art for their field of growth?

Scott's  eye likes a wide space,  we notice. He likes to gaze out  beyond  the windows to "boundless uplands," whether actual  or metaphorical.
The  same sort of wide-ranging eye is at work in "Trans Canada," where  "we" rise  from  Regina in  "the plane,  our  planet," travelling "into a  wider  prairie." Because  of the  triumph of science  involved,  "every  country below  is an  I land" (a curious change of the "No man  an island" allusion, since the  "I land" in Scott's poem  is "common to man  and  man" and  therefore indicates, or appears to indi­ cate,  community rather than  isolation).
In  the  final five lines of the  poem,  there  is a startling shift  from  "we" to "I"
(though perhaps prepared for  by the  "I land" line). The  narrator recalls  other nights, on land  instead  of in the air, when he has "sat  by night  beside a cold lake j And  touched things  smoother than  moonlight on still water." We are suddenly­ and  effectively -made aware of the  jar between  the  public, didactic "we," mak­  ing comments on man  and  science, and  the  personal  "1," who remembers making  love down  there  on the earth and  is now rather afraid  of  the inhumanity of moon on cloud,  although he also exults  in this spacious coldness.
It is chiefly  in  love  poems  ("Autumnal") or  poems  about the  natural  world ("Laurentian")  that   the  personal  enters  these  early  Scott   poems;   yet  the  love poems  are  certainly not  confessional,  and  the  poet  is acutely  conscious  that  the experience he writes  about is a "literary" experience:

Leaves curl and die:
All has been said of them that need be said
By the old poets, and all has been said
Of you and me long years ago....




RRHAPS THE  BEST OF   scoTT's POEMS  are  contained in  two books  published in  the  middle of  his  poetic  development:  Events  and  Signals (I 954)   and  Signature  (I 964).
A. J. M. Smith, in his well-known  article  "F. R. Scott and  Some of his Poems,"
speaks of "the sensuous  mind  that  is the  protagonist of so many  of Scott's  poems" while  discussing  "Lakeshore," from  Events and Signals, a  poem  which  he recog-

P.R.SCOTT

nizes as central to Scott's non-satirical work.  Smith  recognizes  also in  this  poem and  others  "the identification of the  poet's  Self with  Man." As in  "Trans  Can­ ada," the self in this poem is detached and  observant; and  at the end of  the poem the narrator says of himself, "Watching the whole creation drown/ I muse,  alone,  on Ararat." There is exultation in this conclusion,  in the narrator's ability  to reach  back  in time  to  Noah,  to see the  passage of centuries in  a  moment of time.  And there is something godlike  (if also mildly frightening)  about this "I" who watches "creation drown" from  the  top  of a  mountain, as  the "I" of  the  later  "Mount Royal" seems to derive  a grim  pleasure from warning the "quarrelsome ephemera" of  Montreal that   their  city  may  in  time  be  overwhelmed by  ice  or  oceans.  Al­ though Scott  does  frequently  identify  "Self  with  Man"  (and  perhaps therefore can  frequently merge  the  "I" in  the  "We")  he  not  infrequently separates Self out from  other  men  and  places it in  pleasurable solitude  on a mountain top  or in the  air.  The individual cannot  always  be  social,  fraternal,  public-spirited, and  benevolent. Some of the  best of  Scott's  poems  (such  as "Incident at  May  Pond") derive  their  peculiar  effectiveness  from  the  clash  between   the  benevolent social self and  the solitary, sardonic, observant  "1."
"We" is less common in  Events  and  Signals than   in  Overture. It occurs  in
"Lesson," a  poem  which  speaks  for  the  collective  conscience,  and  in  "A  1'Ange Avantgardien," where  Scott  exhorts  his  fellow  poets  on  their   journey  into  the unknown  country of new  poetry.  In  "Picnic" the  "we" is genuinely personal, as the  poet speaks  for  a group  on  an  outing  into  the  country. It is a  group which worships  with  "ceremonial bread" and  the  "ancient blaze" of fire;  yet the  high moment   of  the  day  comes  when  each  member  of  the  group is touched by  the land's quiet,  and  "As  the  failing  sun goes down/ Each  one  is left  alone." In  "A Grain  of Rice" there  is a movement  back  and  forth  between  the  "We" and  the "I" and  also between  a  microcosmic  and  a  macrocosmic vision.  The  speaker  is conscious of the  "majestic rhythms" of the  universe:

The  frame of our human house rests on the motion
Of earth  and moon, the rise of continents, Invasion of deserts, erosion of hills,
The  capping  of ice.

He  is also conscious  of  the  "tiny  disturbances," human and  natural, which  the eye  of  the  individual observer   can  see-the  appearance from   its  cocoon,  for instance,  of "a  great  Asian  moth,  radiant, fragile." The  voice of the  poet is medi­ tative,  almost Wordsworthian, explicit in its statement, but  expressing wonder and worship  rather than  making any  call to action:

Religions build walls round our love, and science Is equal of error and truth. Yet always we find Such ordered  purpose in cell and in galaxy,

F.R.SCOTT

So great a glory in life-thrust and mind-range, Such widening frontiers to draw out our language
We grow to one world through
Enlargement of wonder.

Although  the speaker  is aware  of the flaws in both  religion and  science, he is a partial  believer in both. The  universe, with its "ordered  purpose" and  "widening frontiers"  is a miracle to him. Not for nothing  is F. R. Scott the son of the late Archdeacon  Scott, devout  Christian, socially conscious citizen, and  amateur astronomer.
The  "I" of "Bangkok" is conscious of both the universality of religion and the
differences in its forms. Outside  a Bangkok temple he reflects:

I had been here before
But never to this place
Which seemed so nearly home
Yet was so far away
I was not here at all.

The  wind in the temple bells is almost able to create a "continent  of love" within the temple;  but  the narrator's own "lack  of love" prevents the  miracle.
The serious, meditative  "I" of such poems as "Lakeshore," "A Grain  of Rice," and  "Bangkok" may be contrasted  with the comic party-goer of "Martinigram" and the role-playing "I" of "I am Employed." The comic is not without its serious overtones in these poems:

How hard to strike against this management, picket one's habits, unionise dreams,
down tools and march into the thoroughfares holding the banner high: UNFAIR  TO MYSELF.

The  discontent  with  the  "management" of the Self comes out  more seriously in "Ann  Frank." The  poet, with his typical fondness for wordplay, points out that he and Ann Frank  "share  a common name." Yet the name is not the chief bond between them, nor has he "stared  into the dark"  while waiting "the  Nazi knock." What  they share  is imprisonment  and  hunger,  hers literal, his in "the  prison of the self," with  the food of the emotions beyond  reach though  not  beyond sight. "Ann  Frank" is placed directly after a group of love poems. (Maybe  it is itself
a sort of love poem to the  unknown  girl.)  The  love poems here seem more  per­ sonal, less "literary," than  those in Overture. Yet the beloved is usually  seen in terms of cold landscape,  or, incidentally,  of battle, as in "Signature." The image in "Departure" is typical of the view of the beloved as part  of  landscape:
Always I shall remember you, as my car moved
Away from the station and left you alone by the gate
Utterly and forever frozen in time and solitude
Like a tree on the north shore of Lake Superior.

F.R.SCOTT

How much of the loneliness of the woman-as-tree is a reflection of the inner soli­
tude of the eye that  observes her?
One  of the poems about  love which has the air of being intensely personal  is not in the first person at all, but  in the third  person. This  is "Invert." Here  the poet writes about  a man  who so yearns for love that  each  minor  "conversion" causes him to pour forth  "a  whole cathedral  of worship and  prayer"  to the lady who caused it. Disillusionment  always follows, however.

Always he came away with his own lost soul Wrapped round the cold stone fact he would not face Till, lonely amid the flux, his ego turned
And creeping back upon its source was left
Beside his own true love, himself, in the crypt of his heart.

The  poem may not be a self-revelation,  but,  placed as it is near  the end  of the group  of love poems, it seems dramatically  to make an ironic or bitter  comment on their authenticity.  Yet it is followed by "Caring"-which is in turn  followed by "Ann  Frank."
Signature  ( 1964)   contains  some interesting  appearances  of the  "I" and  the "eye." Scott's fondness for the godlike vision appears in "Incident at May Pond," "A Hill for Leopardi," and "Eclipse," as well as in "Mount Royal."  In "Incident at  May Pond"  the narrator tells of an incident  in which he plays God  (or  per­ haps experimental  scientist)   to an  ant,  which  he places on  a stick that  he  then puts on the waters of the pond. The  narrator's  feelings are divided.  He identifies in  part  with the  ant  "(And  straightway  I  was captive  too)," but  clearly  he is also fascinated  by this opportunity to see how the ant  will act  in  its frightening  predicament.  The  stick,  after  some  misadventures,  comes  to  rest  beside  a  log which could act as a dock to the little ship and lead it to ground; but the perverse ant  decides to swim. Astonishingly, he manages  to swim six  out  of the  ten  feet
to land:

I was enchanted by his skill,
His canny sense of where to go.
I felt exempted from the guilt
Of playing God with someone's life....

But both ant and  poet are surprised  by a minnow "lurking  furtive  underneath." And  underneath  the "swirl"  created  by the minnow  there  is "A second swirl, a splash, a plop." Nature  is as full of hidden dangers as it is in a Pratt  poem;  but they are  comic here because  of the smallness of the scale. The  comedy  is half frightening,  however. This  narrator is clearly the same as the  god-like  narrator of "Lakeshore," who  watches  "the  whole creation  drown,"   not  without  some pleasure.

F.R.SCOTT

The microcosmic vision of "Incident at  May  Pond" complements the  macro-­ cosmic  vision of "Hill for  Leopardi." This  poem  takes off from  a  poem  by Gia­ como  Leopardi, "L' infinito." In  Leopardi's poem,  the narrator on his lonely hill  imagines "vaster space" and  "unfathomed peace" beyond it; listening to the wind,
he says,

I match  that infinite calm unto this sound
And with my mind embrace eternity,
The  vivid, speaking present and dead past; In such immensity my spirit drowns,
And sweet to me is shipwreck in this sea.

Presumably it is Leopardi's sense of infinity  of space  and  time  which  appeals  to Scott,  resembling as it does the  feeling of his own  narrator of "Lakeshore." The "I" of "A Hill  for  Leopardi" is a sort of astronaut of the  mind:

The  traffic and all the trivial sounds
Fade far away. I mount
Swiftly, for time is short, flight beckons
Out  where the world becomes worlds, suns pass, distances
Curve into light, time bends, and motion
A sweep of laws
Rolls up all my strength  and all
Into  one marvel.

The  poem voices effectively the religious-scientific awe of the  human mind observ­ ing the  "sweep  of laws"  of the  universe; it also hints,  by the  allusion  to Marvell's "To His Coy Mistress" and  by the suggestiveness of the word  "mount"  (and later "thrust"), at the sexual  ecstasy  which  is akin  to this sense of the  marvellous. But Scott's  narrator  (unlike the  narrator of Leopardi's poem)  comes  back  to  earth.

A loved voice, a touch
A phone ringing, and the thrust dies.
Another  journey ends where it began
Shipwrecked  on ground  we tread a little while.

The  narrator is brought back  to  ordinary reality  by voice or  touch; he is "ship­ wrecked" at  the  point  where  the  journey  began.  (There is an  interesting contrast with Leopardi, who also experiences shipwreck, but on the sea in which he drowns  with  happiness. Scott's  narrator is shipwrecked on  dry  ground;  his  spirit  is not drowned in the experience of eternity.)
Scott's  fondness  for  the  godlike  vision comes out  more  amusingly in  the  two-­
line poem  "Eclipse":

I looked the sun straight  in the eye. He put on dark glasses.

F.R. SCOTT

One sees the "I" of the poem, even though  jokingly, assuming a godlike equality with the sun-even a superiority  to him. Pratt's  "Truant," asserting his superi­ ority to the "Great  Panjandrum," comes to mind.
One of the most interesting poems of Signature is "Vision,"  which I mentioned at the beginning of this essay. Here the "I" talks about the "eye" and  in the final stanza  addresses it directly. If "I" and "eye" are not identical,  at least the "eye" does much  to create the "1," for "I am clothed in what eye sees." "Mind" bends its appearance to the colours it sees. The  physical nature  of vision is emphasized in a statement  such as "I am fastened to the rose / When it takes me by surprise." The  self is intensified by the "stars  and stones" which it observes. Yet it is when the  heart  sees that  the  "wires"  of the  "tireless eye" are  made  to  "vibrate  with song." Poetry is the creation of an "I" in which "eye," "mind," and "heart" com­ bine. "Eye"  does, however, seem rather  to dominate.
More uses of "I" and "eye" might be noted in The  Dance Is One  ( 1973)  but they would probably not be significantly different from earlier examples. The  "I" of The  Dance  Is One  is generally  (as in "On  Saying Good-Bye to my Room  in Chancellor  Day Hall"  or "Orangerie") more casual and conversational  than  the "I" in  Overture. In  "On   the  Terrace,  Quebec,"  he  gives us  a  rare  nostalgic glimpse into his childhood:

By Valcartier, three Laurentian hills. Many years ago, as children
looking north from the Rectory window on the longest day of each year
we saw the sun set in the second dip.

In "Counter-Signs," he jokingly takes on the persona of Irving Layton. In "Danc­ ing,"  the separateness  of the "I" from others, including  the  beloved, is seen not as loss but as gain:

we are two not one
the dance is one

Finally,  in "Signal," two lovers are isolated  (as  the sacrament  is isolated  from worshippers in a monstrance  above the altar)   by

the screen of me
and the screen of you
the inside and outside
of a window

In  a typical  Scott  metaphor, which contains suggestions of winter,  wide vision, sunlight, and  religious and sexual experience, he concludes:

29

F.R.SCOTT

I scratch the frosted pane with nails of love and faith and the crystalled white opens a tiny eye
reveals
the wide, the shining country.

Ihave largely ignored  Scott's  satires, the  productions of his "needle  eye," not because Ido  not  admire  them  but  because Iwanted  to  concentrate   on  other aspects of his vision. I have also omitted  discussion of his translations  and  found poems. Certainly  when an author  chooses to adopt the "I" of another  author  he is in some measure revealing his own vision; but the revelation is not as direct as that made in the poems that  are entirely his own.
What  appears  in the poems I have discussed is an "I"  ("We") of considerable
complexity, sometimes  witty, sometimes didactic,  sometimes reflective, angry  or' loving, revealing itself obliquely  rather  than  directly. It is not as confessional or overtly autobiographical an  "I" as that  of Alden  Nowlan  or Al Purdy,  for ex­ ample,  although  of course the  confessional "I" of Purdy  or  Nowlan  may  have its own  kind of self-protection.  Scott's  "I" is greatly  concerned  with  his "eye," with the way he sees things, whether  physically or mentally with his "vision." His vision may be microcosmic or macrocosmic, but he especially enjoys a broad view,
a view of suns, stars,  space,  unknown  frontiers,  "boundless  uplands," and  "the wide, the shining country." It is in some ways a lonely vision in which the self is isolated and separate, except on those rare occasions when one world pulls another into  its "field  of force"  (as  the  little  girl in  "Girl  running  Down  Hill,"  from Signature,  pulls the man). But it is also a vision of unity in separateness. Worlds, suns, nations, lovers, insects, all take part  in a cosmic dance,  and  "the  dance  is one."




















go

MINIJITURES
 


P.K.Page




A stone
in a clenched fist

it hurts 	just to look
at  her


ii

Her  eyes like tacks
prick  everywhere they look. The smiling  mouth
does not  undo  their  smart. White  teeth - unproffered band-aid
for your hurt.


iii

Is it the smaller  eye­
that  shining  auger  -
that  bores into  everything it sees?
The little  eye that  glints like tiny gristle?

Or  is it skyscape eye­
wide-angle lens -
which  clicks its shutter silently and  thieves shot  after  accurate shot?

A SIZE LARGER THAN SEEING

The Poetry of P. K. Page*




Rosemary Sullivan







A

I none  too sober slipping  in the mud where  rigged  with  guys of rain
the  clothes-reel gauche
as the  rangey  skeleton  of some gaunt delicate spidery  mute
is pitched as if
listening;
while  hung  from  one  thin  rib a silver web -
its infant, skeletal,  diminutive,
now sagged  with  sequins,  pulled  ellipsoid, glistening.1

Page  is a  kind  of conjuror   playing  her own  private  linguistic  game  and  she could seemingly go on indefinitely manipulating images with this dexterity. Rarely

* In  view  of  recent   publications, Canadian   Literature   wishes  to  state   that   this  article   was accepted  in March  1976.

P. K. PAGE

has one so complete a sense of a poet luxuriating  in language.  Yet the whole mo­ mentum  of the poem is reversed with the remarkable  line:  "I suffer shame in all these images." This line, with its powerful anguish, is the pivot of Page's poetics, for here she articulates  one of the deepest impulses of her work. She has such  a remarkable   verbal  gift  that  the  image-making  process can  become  almost  too seductive. In her hands, images are self-generating, and multiply and reproduce  in a kind of literary  osmosis. Thus  one has the sense in her early  poetry of images taking over and sidetracking  the poem into perspectives that  the theme  does not suggest. "After  Rain" is an extraordinary poem in that  Page senses not only the technical, but also the theoretical  implications of her susceptibility to image.
Perhaps  this can  be clarified through  an exploration  of Page's  attitude toward metaphor. She  recognizes metaphor  as the  poet's  most perfect  instrument. She writes in an essay on A.M. Klein that metaphor  is a way of seeing; it" 'gives two for one' -gives two in one. Two or more separate  ideas, objects, images, fuse. In so doing generate  energy. Illuminate."2  Yet there is a danger  in this for the kind of poet  Page  is, and  she  herself seems to intuit  it: the  danger  that  the  energy generated  can be illusory. The  condition where metaphor can  be made  to rever­ berate indefinitely, where everything can be seen in terms of everything else, can lead language  away from  insight and  make it an autonomous  game, an  evasion of clarity. The  emphasis must be on meaning.
Page  is an  almost entirely  visual poet. Her  imagistic  dexterity  is based  on  a sensibility that is sensual and, in fact, her sensitivity to physical image is so extreme that it is as if the sensory perceptors had been stripped  bare. In  moments of  fan­ tasy, word free-fall, nature  and its particulars  appear  in her poetry as generative, life-energizing, and  there  is a  peculiar  empathic  intensity  in  her  response to it. There  is a negative  counterpart to such moments,  however, in  poems of vertigo which describe  the  visual  world  as aggressively assaulting  the  perceiver;  poems like "Vegetable Island," where the individual is invaded  and infected  by the sen­ sual world, "has  no strength  to meet a tree j debauched with blossoms" and  must seek to erase "the  touch and scent of flowers."
In 1945 P. K. Page published her first and only novel, The  Sun and the Moon, under the pseudonym Judith Cape.3 In a curious way it encapsulates these two alternative  responses to the natural world. Its heroine, born during a lunar  eclipse, has a devastating  capacity  for empathic  response to nature.  In seemingly neurotic states, she is able to identify so completely with nature  that she becomes inanimate rock, or tree. Throughout the book, there is a curious sense of reciprocity, of fluid interchange  between the human  and the natural. The  heroine's empathic gift per­ mits her to perceive the static reality of inanimate  things; chameleon-like, she can know "the still sweet ecstasy of a change in kind." The  author  is ambiguous in her attitude  toward  her heroine;  on the one hand, her protean  gift of self-effacement gives her access to ecstatic moments of identification  with  nature. There  are con-


33

P. K. PAGE

vincing passages where  the  metamorphosis  is outward-the heroine  becomes a rock, a chair, a tree, experiencing these forms of existence in moments of identity. But there  is an  alternative  rhythm  where  the self is invaded,  and  becomes the receptacle of external  objects. In fact the heroine becomes succubus;  not only her identity, but also the identity of the other is destroyed by her chameleon  presence. To my mind comes the analogue  of Keats'  "Carnelian  Poet": "When I am in a room with People if I ever am free from speculating on creations of my own brain, then  not myself goes home to myself:  but  the identity of every one in the  room begins to press upon  me that,  I am in a very little time annihilated."4  To  control this  invasion  an  extraordinary exertion  of  will is necessary. For  the  poet,  this means a  control  through  technique,  verbal  dexterity.  But  P. K.  Page's  greatest dilemma  is to ensure that  this control  is not sterile, that  language  is explored  as experience, not evasion.
This,  then,  is the  concern  of the  persona  in "After  Rain." With  a  baroque
extravagance, the  poet's mind  builds from the visual assault of nature  an exotic web of fragmentary images. They seem to metamorphose  spontaneously  and  any attempt  to hold  the  poet to an  emotional  or visual consistency is futile.  Yet the incompleteness of the poet's private image world is focused suddenly  by the pres­ ence of the other,  the gardener.  The  poet is trapped  by her remarkable  respon­ siveness to nature.  Images of rim and hub define the private space which circum­ scribes her,  making  her  fantasy  exclusive, self-involved. The  poet  asks  to break from self-involvement  to another  kind of seeing, and  this appeal  is at  the centre of Page's work:

And choir me too to keep my heart a size larger than seeing, unseduced by each
bright glimpse of beauty striking like a bell, so that the whole may toll,
its meaning shine
clear of the myriad images that still­
do what I will-encumber its pure line.

Here is the paradox: a sensibility so richly susceptible to sensual detail,  to "each bright  glimpse of beauty,"  that  even the sense of self, of separateness  from  the physical world,  seems threatened. To  the  poet  this  means  an  almost  unlimited store of image and metaphor, but without a controlling principle. Page recognizes the  dilemma  at  the  core of her  imagistic suggestibility and  she would  be  "un­ seduced"  by the  myriad  images which seem to assault the eye in "After  Rain." She has sensed the need to convert image into symbol, that  painful  ritual  which the poet must impose on himself. She must seek a poetic order or rationale for the myriad  details.  The  whole she seeks is another  order  of  perception  altogether,  "larger  than  seeing." The  eye becomes the most potent  image in her  work. It  is through  the visionary eye of the imagination  that  the marvelous involution  takes

34

P. K. PAGE

place:  from the multiplicity  of sensual detail to the controlling  principle  of  sym­
bol:  "The  eye altering,  alters all."


PK. PAGE   SEEMS TO  HAVE INTUITED HER  SUBJECT  from  the beginning, but it has taken her time to bring her full capacities to bear on it. It is fascinating to read through  her entire work, watching as she ferrets out the meta­
phoric world that  corresponded  to the needs of her sensibility. She is an intuitive poet,  one  of  the  empathizers,  and  reading  her  Poems  Selected   and   New   the image comes to mind  of the exotic "animal" entitled  "And  You, What  do you Seek?" which illustrates the cover of her  rg67 Cry  Ararat/ 5  It  is a perfect image for the poet:  ornate  and  beautiful.  Its thin sensory projectile  extended,  the  ani­ mal seems propelled by a blind empathic energy that depends upon another order of intuitive  vision in its infinitely patient  probing.
Page has published four volumes of poetry-a total of  I r 4 poems, not includ­ ing poems published in magazines and never collected. Poems  Selected  and  New  is her definitive volume to date.  It  is not, however, ordered  chronologically,  and to have a sense of her development one must revert to earlier books. She began her poetic career  with a  reputation  as a poet of social  commitment  and  is probably still best known for the  poems of theI 94o's written  while she was a member  of the Montreal  Preview  group  of poets. This is unfortunate because her "socialist" poems are, to my mind, her least successful. In fact few subjects could have done more to distract  Page  from  her  finest gifts. Like Wallace  Stevens, she is almost entirely a poet of the imagination; her poetry has more to do with folklore, myth, and archetype than  with objective time, history, and social fact. A fear of egocen­ tricity may have led her to seek the supposed objectivity of the socialist theme, but it was a direction that  led to a deep split at the core of those early poems. Many of the best of them describe the dilemmas of office girls, with an obviously genuine compassion. Yet even the good poems like "The  Stenographers" are oddly unsatis­ fying because the poet's verbal facility betrays her. The attention  she gives to meta­ phor  distracts  from  the  human  dilemma  that  is her  theme.  Images  seem self­
conscious, even flippant: "handkerchiefs  between the  breasts, alive I flutter  like
pallid bats" or "the  pin men of madness in marathon trim I race round  the track of the stadium  pupil."  We  tire  of the  surrealistic  brilliance  of  metaphor. The poems, as John  Sutherland once wrote, suffer from monotony  of form;  for even excessive variety is eventually  repetitious.6   It  is the personal  poems from  among the early ones that  are most powerful. The disjunction that  mars the others is not present either  because  metaphor  is subordinated  to subject  or  the  spontaneous
exfoliation of metaphor  is itself the poem's theme.
Many  critics  have  been  puzzled  by  the  incipient  terror  under   the  smooth,


35

P. K. PAGE

urbane  surface of the early poems, betrayed  by the hallucinatory  intensity of  im­ ages like "the  pool brims like a crying eye," or in poems such as "Some There Are Fearless"  and  "Element," a fantasy  of escape in a dream  of  emersion  into  the anonymous  dark.  The  cause of this pervasive sense of fear  is  unlocated  in any specific way, but it does seem to be metaphysical in  implication. One  of the best of the early poems is "If It Were You," which describes the approach of madness and details the physical sensation  of vertigo with terrifying precision. The  poem's impact  comes from the immediacy  of the  personal address and  from  throwaway lines like "If it were you ... not me this time," which buckle against the tight con­ trol of the imagery. The  experience  described is one of entrapment in the blind circle of self with  the  mind  held  in  "walls  of air,"  "single  and  directionless in space."  It  is as if the spinning  world  of "After  Rain"  has suddenly  solidified. A recurring  image of stasis in a metaphoric garden,  "the spinning  world ... stuck upon  its poles" is Page's  private  image of hell:

And there you might stay forever, mechanically occupied, but if you raised your head
madness would rush at you from the shrubbery
or the great sun, stampeding through the sky
would stop and drop -
a football in your hands
and shrink as you watched it
to a small dark dot
forever escaping focus.

The  verbal  dexterity  that  propels the images through  several involutions  here perfectly transcribes the sense of diminishing focus that the poet wants to convey; and  there  is a rhythmic  precision that  keeps everything under  control  and  leads inexorably  to the  final couplet:   "as  all the exquisite unborns  of your  dreams / deserted you to snigger behind  their hands?" Page has written  in an essay on A. M.  Klein  that  she  was struck  by the  way in  which, "for  all  his acceptance  of ideological and  psychological theory, he seemed to reach beyond both to a larger reality. And this, though  I comprehended  it only vaguely, I recognized as real.m Many  have tried to account  for the anguished sense of loss in the early poetry as a longing to return  to the  pristine innocence of childhood, but,  of course, this is only a metaphor. Deeper  at  core is this reaching  beyond to a larger  reality,  in­ tuited in a poem like "If It Were You," and articulated  with a growing assurance throughout her work. The  discrepancy  between the ideal world of the imagina­ tion, the potent  world of dream,  and the real world of the senses becomes one of her most obsessive subjects.  Her  finest early poem, "Stories of  Snow,"  describes this  with  exquisite  precision.  It  is one of those rare  things,  a  perfect  poem, in which language  and  metaphor have a compelling inevitability and  rightness. The poem is a kind of parable.  In  countries of lush vegetation, the imagination  seeks

P.K.PAGE

the opposite, the stark imagery of snow; as if the imagination, never satisfied with the  real, must seek the fantasy,  the ideal, impossible other.  And  any  attempt  to match  the made  to the sensed always falls short  of the dream; the  dreamer  of snow is left with one of those bizzare glass globes enclosing a winter scene, familiar from everyone's childhood, now locked safely in a teakwood cabinet -a poignant image  of the atrophied  imagination. To  lose the dream  causes anguish; finding himself  mistaken  in  his expectations  that  the  dream  has  been  actualized,   the dreamer  "lies back weeping."  Histrionic, except that  the  poem makes us believe in  snow  as symbolic of imaginative  vision, and  believe that   vision is the  only means to Ararat,  the  paradise  regained. The  poem has an  extraordinary surreal quality  as images devolve into  their opposites:  lush green  to abstract  white;  the swan  a  warm  metamorphosis  of snow. There  is a  frightening  dimension  to  the poem when the imagination's hunger becomes so intense that  even death  seems a gentle seduction.  The  poem ends  with one of those remarkable inversions that were to become Page's signature:

And stories of this kind are often told
in countries where great flowers bar the roads
with reds and blues which seal the route to snow­
as if, in telling, raconteurs unlock
the colour with its complement and go
through to the area behind the eyes
where silent, unrefractive whiteness lies.

Commenting in  retrospect  on  the  image, Page  has written:  "My  subconscious evidently knew something about  the tyranny of subjectivity when it desired to go
'through  to the area behind the eyes'." The escape from subjectivity is through  the symbol-making process; to understand  this process it may be most helpful to turn to another  medium altogether.
Given the visual intensity of Page's poetry, it is not surprising  to learn  that  she
is also a painter.  She began painting  in Brazil, when her husband  was appointed Canadian ambassador  there. In a fascinating essay in Canadian  Literature  called "Questions and  Images"  she describes how "Brazil  pelted me with images." Re­ duced to wordlessness in a foreign culture, as if "starting  again from a pre-verbal state,"  Page describes how the old compulsion to record, which  had  been verbal, sought  a visual outlet in painting.  The  image world was rich and  suggestive:

What was that  tiny fret, that  wordless dizzying vibration, the whole molecular dance? ... What was that golden shimmer, the bright pink shine on the anturias, the delicately and exactly drawn design of the macaw's feathers? Why did I sud­ denly see with the eye of an ant? Or a fly? The golden-yes, there it was again­ web spun by the spider among the leaves of the century plant?8

"Brazil,"  it is clear, is a state of mind:  the daylight world of infinitely reverberat­
ing detail of a densely textured  poem like "After  Rain," so clearly transcribed  on

37

P.K.PAGE

many  of  her  canvases.  Its  counterpart, and  the  opposite   pole  of  images  in  her work, is the night  (or  dream) world  of Mexico  where  she lived for several  years:

If Brazil was day, then  Mexico  was night. All the images of darkness hovered for me in the Mexican  sunlight.  If Brazil was a change  of place,  then  Mexico  was a change of time. One was very close to the old gods here. Death  and the old gods ... Coming as I do from a random  or whim-oriented culture, this recurrence  and inter­ relating of symbols into an ordered  and significant pattern -prevalent  too in the folk arts of pottery and weaving-was curiously illuminating  ... Great or little, for me it was still a night  world-one into which the pattern was pricked  like a con­ stellation-bright, twinkling, hard  to grasp, harder still to hold. A dreaming  world in which I continued  to draw and to dream.9

The  transition from  Brazil  to Mexico  describes a creative  metamorphosis: images dissolve into  their  symbols. The two countries  define precisely the  bouleversement of the final image  of "Stories of Snow": from  the disturbing multiplicity of detail through the  vortex  to  patterned space.  The  mandorla or  "eye" image  occupies the  symbolic  centre  of this  pictorial  world.  On  one side of the  eye, the  sensuous multiple world; when  pulled  through the  aperture, unrefracted whiteness.
Page  asks:  "I wonder   now if 'brazil' would  have  happened wherever   I was?" It is a teasing  conundrum. Does the occasion  create  the  artist,  or  does the  place, any  place,  become  catalyst, activating a  potential that  is incipient? In  any  case, these two poles, the sensuous  day  world of "brazil" and  the symbol-ridden mystic night  world,  define a dialectic central  to her  poetry.



IN AN   ESSAY IN   Canadian  Literature,  "Traveller, Conjuror, Journeyman," Page  has frankly defined  the  "larger reality" she seeks as a mystic wholeness.  Using  a  typically  domestic  image,  transformed and  made  exotic,  she writes:

I am a two-dimensional  being. I live in a sheet of paper.  My home has length and breadth  and  very little thickness. The  tines of a fork pushed vertically through the paper  appear  as four  thin silver ellipses. I may, in a moment  of insight, realize that it is more than coincidence  that four identical but independent silver rings have entered  my world. In a further breakthrough  I may glimpse their unity, even sense the entire fork -large, glimmering, extraordinary. Just beyond my sight. Mystify­ ing; marvellous.
My two-dimensional consciousness yearns to catch some overtone which will con-
vey that  great resonant  silver object.10

Only  in moments of stillness,  at-tension, is such  a bouleversement  of the  normal world  possible. The ideal  condition is one of pure  receptivity, inner  silence.  One thinks   of  Wordsworth's  wise  passiveness  or  Theodore  Roethke's  long-looking. Such  silent  patient waiting is an  activity  more  potent  than   any  searching. Thus

P.K.PAGE

Page's  best  poems  always  describe  still moments of the  psyche  which  reveal  the mind  in the  act of transition to, as her finest poem  would  have  it, another space.
P. K.  Page  has  written: "Most of my  poems  have  been  doors  closing.  A few were doors opening."11 I find myself turning to Rilke to identify  a sense of anguish, mystical in implication, which  is beneath the baroque surface  of her  poems:

Surely  there  is a degree of need  to which  the angels must lend  ear,  radiations of extreme  emergency  which  men  do  not  even  perceive,  which  pass through   their dense world  and  only over yonder, in  the angel's  aura,  strike  a gentle,  sorrowful note of violet, like a tinge of amethyst in a pocket of rock crystaJ.l 2

Page's  best  poems  are  "radiations of extreme  emergency," expressions  of a  com­ pulsion  to find  a visionary  world  commensurate to the  needs of the imagination. The  penultimate poem of Poems Selected and New, "Cry Ararat!" is a poem  that  seeks to open  doors.  The  title  alludes  to  Mount Ararat, the  mountain on  which the dove landed after  the flood. It is an image  of a second Eden, recovered by the imagination in the  dream state  of "focused  reality":

First soft in the distance, blue in  blue air
then sharpening,  quickening taking on green.
Swiftly the fingers seek accurate  focus
(the  bird
has vanished so often before the sharp lens could deliver it)
then as if from the sea
the  mountain  appears emerging  new-washed growing maples and  firs. The  faraway,  here.

Against  this image  is set the  deflation  of normal reality:

This  is the loss that  haunts  our daylight  hours leaving us parched  at nightfall
blowing like last year's leaves sibilant on blossoming trees.

The  most  valued  moments in  Page's  poetry  are  moments of fantasy and  dream because

When  dreaming,  you desire and  ask for  nothing  more than stillness to receive
the l-am  animal,

39

P.K.PAGE

the we-are leaf and flower, the distant mountain near.

She is speaking of the state of at-tension when external  reality is invested with a sense of presence;  a condition  known only by the child who lives in a  "quick" landscape  where  objective  nature  is a  world  of answering  subjects.  The  adult recovers this world only in rare moments when penetration  to the unconscious self in dream states releases the transcendental  powers of the self. Page speaks of this self as a "dimensionless point in my absolute centre," to reach which "requires  the focus of the  total  I." The  expression describes emotional  integration  as though consciousness comes into contact  with deeper, unnamed  feelings which form the substrata  of being and  to which we rarely penetrate.  Such moments are charged with  numinous  energy and  bring  a sense of completeness "as  if I  had  drawn  a
circle in my flight I and  filled its shape- I find air a perfect fit." The  problem
with this emotional  kind of mysticism is that the experience is transient,  involving an  overwhelming sense of revelation of a noetic quality  but  without  intellectual content.  It  implies another  kind  of consciousness, non-rational  and  potential,  if rarely actualized. But the intuition  remains incomplete and the fall from assurance is inherent  in the experience itself. The  poet's anguish comes from the recognition that our sense of deepest reality is dependent on whimsy: " 'Must  my most exqui­ site and private dream  remain  unleavened?'" The  poem's chief  poignancy lies in its sense of a·reality  intuited,  which must remain  forever  undefined.  The  poem ends with the remarkably  cogent couplet:

A single leaf can block a mountainside, all Ararat be conjured by a leaf.

A perfect couplet to describe the evanescence of the mystic dream.  In  retrospect, it becomes obvious that  the title of the poem is an imperative.
The  poem falls short of its dream, and partly for technical reasons. In an effort to convey a sense of mystical reality, Page reverts to traditional  symbolism, but it intrudes  upon  the  poem by calling attention  to itself. The  problem  is similar  to that  of another  great  poem, Theodore  Roethke's  "In  A Dark  Time." In  both cases, the poet has no traditional and still workable structure  of belief which can provide him with the metaphors  essential to his vision. In "Cry  Ararat!" we balk at the line "the world stopped at the Word" and in Roethke's poem at the final metaphor: "one  is One, free in the tearing  wind,"  because the language  carries no realizable meaning; or perhaps, more precisely, because the inherited structure of meaning implicit in the words is too potent. The  poet cannot  use them without calling  on the  traditional beliefs that  give them  meaning.  This  is not  only the poet's responsibility. It is symptomatic  of the disjunction at the core of our modern culture  that  now our  most potent  metaphors  "remain  unleavened."
The final poem of Poems Selected and New, "Another  Space,"  is P. K. Page's

P. K. PAGE

finest work. Its brilliance is a matter  of perfect technical  control.  Its subject is a dream  in which the  poet sees a mandala: a personal vision of the  archetype  of the cosmic dance -the poet, a solitary viewer, is reeled into a human  circle con­ nected by an invisible axis to a starry spool. In such a poem, the  poet  must  con­ vince that  she offers  more  than  a  formal  arrangement   of  archetypal symbols. Page's poem convinces entirely; there is a feeling of recognition, a leap in response as if an  elemental  feeling larger  than  personal  experience  were  tapped   by  the poem. Part  of the achievement  is a consequence of the rhythmical  rightness of the poem. A precision in the use of line break catches the compulsive, hypnotic rhythm of the dream state:

Those people  in a circle reel me in.
Down  the whole  length  of golden  beach  I  come willingly  pulled  by their  rotation
slow
as a moon  pulls waters
on  a  string
their  turning circle  winds around its rim.

There  is a  pulsative  "surging  and  altering"  rhythm  even  to  the  images  which alternate  in a sequence that one can only call an exfoliation of images:  from rose to sunflower to bumble top to Chagall figures. One has the sense of looking into a kaleidoscope. No  change  is abrupt; as in  dream,  the  principle  is one  of  meta­ morphosis.
The  primitive  ritual  dance  (a  reference to Chagall  brings to mind  the  Chas­ sidic dance) 13 expresses the ultimate wholeness and harmony  of a universe that  is forever surging  and  altering,  yet forever one. The  dream's  meaning  comes  as a revelation of a subjective synthesis as the barriers of the self dissolve. The  experi­ ence is so simple and  so profound  that it staggers the mind.  I think  of a line by Theodore  Roethke  to describe the change of state:  "To  what  more vast permis­ sion have I come." The  oxymoronic quality of the dream  is caught  in the image "staggering lightness," as the dreamer is pulled into the archetype  by the "blow of love." Throughout the poem Page has used traditional diction-circle, axis, fixed parts,  rose-but  in  such  a  way that  the  private  integrity  of the  experience  is never  invaded,  and  yet a  recognizable structure  is  given  to  the  whole.  Tradi­ tionally, as in Sir John Davies' Orchestra or in the Divine Comedy, the controlling principle of the cosmic dance is Divine Love. Page convinces us that  the breaking down of the isolation of the self in the dream state gives access to an overwhelming sense of numinous  energy, and  that  to define the impulse behind  this most  pro­ found  reaching  out  beyond  the  limitations  of  the  self, the  only adequate word is love.
Stasis, solidification,  has  always  described  a  hell state  for  Page;   the  bright
osmosis in which  the self dissolves and  is integrated  with  its deeper  substrata  is

P. K. PAGE

described  as a molecular dance. Fluidity leads to new direction, another seeing in a "dimension I can  barely  guess":

And something in me melts.
It is as if a glass partition  melts-
or something  I had  always thought  was glass -
some pane that  halved my heart is proved, in its melting, ice.

And to-fro all the atoms pass in bright  osmosis
hitherto
in stasis locked where  now a new
direction  opens like an eye.

It is fitting  that  these  stanzas recall  the  earlier  prayer: "And choir  me  too to keep my heart  a size / larger  than seeing." The  momentary glimpse  of an inform­ ing structure initiates the longed-for break  from solipsism. The  poem's humility is moving.  It recognizes  that  the trembling or shaking  is in the  human eye, but  that  this does not call into  question or invalidate the  assurance  of  informing structure. And only once that  order  is sensed can the validity of the personal  or other  persons be  reached; only  then  does  the  heart   melt.  This  understanding points  a  "new direction" in  Page's poetry  as she  continues to  explore  her  vision  of the  poet  as Traveller, Conjuror, Journeyman.

NOTES

1 Poems Selected  and  New   (Toronto: Anansi,  I974)·  All other  references  are  to this edition.
2   "The Sense of Angels," Dialog  (Passover I973),  pp. I8-I9.
8  Rpt.  in The  Sun  and the Moon: and Other  Fictions (Toronto: Anansi,  I973).
4 John  Keats,  "To Richard   Woodhouse,  27 October   I8I8," Selected  Poems  and
Letters, ed. Douglas Bush  (Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin, I959), pp. 279-80.
5   Cry Ararat!:  Poems New  and Selected  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  I967).
6  Essays, Controversies and Poems, ed. Miriam  Waddington   (Toronto:  McClelland
& Stewart,  I972), p. I07.
7   "The Sense of Angels," p. I9.
8 "Questions  and Images," Canadian  Literature, 4I  (Summer  I969), p. I8.
9 Ibid., p. I9.
10 "Traveller, Conjuror, Journeyman," Canadian  Literature,  46  (Autumn   I97o), p.
36.
11 Quoted  by Tom  Marshall  in "Inferno, Paradise and Slapstick," Canadian  Litera­
ture, 64 (Spring  I975), pp. I04-7·
12 Letters to Benvenuta, trans. Heinz Narden  (London: Hogarth  Press, I 953) , p. I 7.
13  Marshall,  p. 104.

42

THE MEJISURE
(for P. K. Page)



What is the measure then,  the magpie  in the field watching over  death, the dog's eyes hard as marbles breath still frozen  to his lips? This  quiet  repose

the land  having given up the battle  against  sleep the voices crying  out  beneath the snow.
It is the cold spear  of the wind  piercing  me

that  makes  me sing of this, the hunger in your  eyes. It is the room  of your  retreat
the strain  in the  hand  when  it reaches  out  to touch

the  dried  and  frozen  flowers brittle  in their  vase the strain  when  the mind desires praise ...
the music as of soldiers wandering among  their  dead

or the  poor  dreaming of wandering as they  break their  mouths open  to sing as prisoners  sing.
Or  soldiers marching toward  their  devotions

or the poor marching or the rich in their  dark
rooms  of commerce saying this is finally  the  answer this will allow  us the right  to be and  be. To  be

anything. In  the field the rare stalks of grass stick stiffly into air.
The poor,  the  broken  people,  the endless suffering

we are  heir  to, given to desire and  gaining little. To  fold the arms  across the breast and  fly
into  ourselves. That painless darkness  or stand

in the field with  nothing everywhere and  watch the first flakes falling  and  pray for the deliverance of the  grass, a dog's death  in the snow?  Look

there.  Stark  as charred bone a magpie stuns  his tongue against  the wind
and  the wind  steals  the rattle  of his cry.
 



Patrick Lane

















































43

GUSTAFSON'S DOUBLE HOOK




Wenqy Keitner







RALPH GUSTAFSON'S  POETIC DEVELOPMENT  recapitulates in miniature the general pattern  of the growth of poetry in Canada: it begins with a typically colonial deference to "the  Greats" of English literature  with imitations of Spenser, Shakespeare, and  the Romantics;  passes through  a transitional phrase of dependency  on  newer  but  still foreign  models, primarily  Hopkins  and  Eliot; and  culminates  in  the  post-war  period  in  a vigorous, distinctive  maturity. The third  phase of his career begins effectively in  rg6o with the publication  of Rivers among  Rocks, a book which collects his poetry for the sixteen-year  period  1944-
1 959, and  it includes the eight  books which have followed it to date  in increas­
ingly rapid succession: Rocky  Mountain Poems, Sift in an Hourglass, and  Ixion's Wheel  in the 196o's;  Selected  Poems, Theme  and Variations  for Sounding  Brass, Fire on Stone, Corners in the Glass, and Soviet Poems in the 197o's. This body of poetry-as all good  poetry  must, according  to Eliot-creates the illusion of a view of life through  its selected  range  of imagery,  distinctive  interrelationships between  structure  and  content,  and  characteristic  major  themes:   nature,  love, ephemerality,  unjustifiable  death,  and the conflict between time and space.
Gustafson's quest for meaning  is conducted  not in the terminology  of rational
discourse, Romantic aesthetics,  or Christian  dogma, in his final  period, but  pri­ marily  through  love -love of woman,  works of art,  and  natural  beauty. That  his ultimate religion (prophetic of Leonard Cohen's)  is love is demonstrated from the time of Rivers  among  Rocks  in a poem such as "Beach  with White Cloud."  Gustafson's  fundamental  conviction   that   the  transcendent   is  attainable  only through  the sensuous is underscored  by the use of Christian imagery of blood and bread in this love poem:

The  rage touched Your knees, thighs. Blood broke, bread, Stone, skies.

44

GUSTAFSON'S DOUBLE HOOK

"Beach with White Cloud"  is a passionate celebration of sexual communion, but frequently  Gustafson's love poems move beyond simple joy to urgent  defiance and even elegy. Gustafson typically writes with a double vision, bringing into focus simultaneously  both the beauty  and the brevity of life.
The  persona  of "Armorial," for  example,  ponders  what  colours  and  images
might compose his heraldic arms. He and his lover could be represented  by "gules" and "leopards/ Passant on bars of gold." The contrasting colours of red and gold, like the  two  discrete strands  of imagery  on  which  the  tapestry  of  this  poem  is woven -one based on English history and the other on Canadian  geography­ highlight this characteristic  doubleness of vision.
The imagery in "Armorial" includes flowers ("roses," "lilies," "rod  and  blood­ red weed and rush") , and other living creatures  ("leopards," "larks," and "por­ cupine") or embodiments  of the life force ("water," "field"). But  the lover per­ sona feels stalked by death: roses remind him of the Wars of the Roses; the  por­ cupine strikes an image of the arrow-riddled  Richard  III killed at Bosworth Field; and  the lily is also ambiguous,  having  Lawrencean  overtones of  sexuality  ("She lay down with love and  my hand/ Was gold with dust of lily")  and  equally  of death-Richard falls twisted  in  a  ditch,  "His  hand  wristdeep  in  lily."  This elegiac love poem ends with the poignant line, "My  love wept." Love and  death are counterpointed; so, too, are Europe, with its historical  pageantry  and  famous monuments,  and Canada, a country "Far  from kingdoms, which regal grew," "a field without  myth or rhetoric." Gustafson's  coat-of-arms,  like his vision of life, combines several fundamental contraries.
The  dichotomy  between what  Eli Mandel,  in Contemporary  Canadian  Poets, has termed a "cultivated  literary awareness" and an "almost  primitive feeling for place" -a dichotomy  Mandel  finds in several contemporary  Canadian  poets­ is one of the chief characteristics of Ralph Gustafson's poetry. Alternately,  he is a hoary traditionalist  and a new Canadian Adam taking his green inventory.  In the sense in which Northrop  Frye used these terms in his famous terror  review, Gus­ tafson's  poetry  is sometimes "original"-returning  to cultural  origins  through study  and  imitation  of poets and  other  artists of the  past -and  at  other  times "aboriginal"-drawing its inspiration from the land. Gustafson uses the sensuous to reach  the  transcendent,  but  this contact  with  physical realities may  be made either  directly with things in nature  or indirectly  with their  recreations  in works of art-poems, paintings, tapestry, music, sculpture, and so on. Furthermore, it
is notable that  in so far as he depicts the natural  world, Gustafson  writes almost
exclusively about  Canada; while in so far as he responds to the world of art,  he writes almost entirely out of a European  cultural  context. Thus  he has two basic sources of imagery around  which he develops two distinctive poetic styles.
Gustafson writes both intricate,  refined, art  poems inspired  by foreign  master­
pieces (for example, the poems grouped  in the "Music  and  Imagery" section of


45

GUSTAFSON'S DOUBLE HOOK

Selected  Poems), and  also strikingly  more  direct  nature  poems depicting  with authenticity  the sharp,  irrefutable  details of Canadian rural  life and  landscape under  the impact  of swiftly changing  seasons. In  these explorations  of the geog­ raphy of his native land, Gustafson's style is hefty, solid, and exposed, "Like field­ rock brown/ Against the turning  blade."
Rocky Mountain Poems, a collection of descriptive and reflective nature  poems,
tests this thesis and  draws  out  the implications  for a writer  of living in  a  post­ colonial society, "a  country  without  myths,"  a  place without  a  long  history of visible achievement  where  "all  is a beginning"  and  where there  are few historic national symbols and  no "tapestry and coronations, kings crowned/ With weights of gold." Overpowered by the harsh, massive grandeur  of the Rockies, Gustafson's persona searches out mankind's place in the universal scheme, attempting  to com­ prehend  his own relation to nature  which, despite his metaphysical efforts to yoke it to  human  consciousness, remains  vast,  primal,  and  insurmountable. Quickly humbled by the mammoth landscape, the poet persona recognizes that the Rockies are "immeasurables" and that "On mountains/ One does not try out metaphors"; thus he turns his attention to smaller, more manageable  portions of the landscape,  closely observing small  details:  a hummingbird,  a flower, strawberries,  and  pine needles. Ultimately,  he suggests that this "elsewhere/  Crazy, nearer look" can and must replace borrowed myths altogether.
In the poem, "At  Moraine  Lake," which exposes a conflict between Canadian geography  and  Western  tradition, Gustafson  writes  contradicting  Wordsworth with an important pun on the key word "lie":
Myths
Lie about us in our infancy.
Take her of the foam somewhere where
It's warmer. Look, I am occupied with
The irrevocable decisions of the ants.

"At  Moraine  Lake" deposes European  mythology and replaces it with an authen­ tic spirit  of  place-an  emphasis  which  links Ralph  Gustafson,  at  least  in  his "aboriginal" poems, with other  contemporary  post-colonial writers.
In  the Introduction to his Penguin  Book of Canadian  Verse  written  just two
years earlier, Gustafson had  pointed out already that "There are no Aphrodites in Canadian poetry-the seafoam is too cold. The Furies have to be imported. The Laurentian Shield is the intruder." Thus,  he maintains, the Canadian poet ought to locate  his symbols in  the  land-here  the  ants-something  alive  and  indi­ genous.
The final poem of the Rocky Mountain collection, "In the Yukon," is structured
again on the polarity between historic civilizations (European) and wilderness (Canadian). It begins:  "In   Europe  you can't  move without  going down  into history,/  Here, all is a beginning."  What  Canadians  have instead of engulfments

GUSTAFSON'S  DOUBLE HOOK

by the past is geography, nature; the grandeur  of this country, Gustafson suggests, lies in its natural pageantry  of flora and fauna,  rather  than  in the realm of social struggle  and  cultural   achievement.  Thematically   and  also stylistically  in  these nature  poems, Gustafson  thus has

pitched glove off, touched cleanly the green ice
the green fire.

Just  as the  Group  of Seven artists abandoned  European  conventions  and  tech­ niques to portray adequately and authentically  the vibrant,  bold colours and lines of the northland, the McGill Movement poets, and later Ralph Gustafson, needed to develop a new poetic idiom honed down for recreating the  jagged, uncivilized beauty of this country.




BHAPS BECAUSE THE   LAND   as antagonist  to  the  human figure lies at the core of the Canadian experience, failure and  death  assume spe­ cial significance in our literature, even in the poetry of Ralph  Gustafson  who in certain  respects still holds a Romantic  view of nature.  Death  and  oblivion need not be synonymous in countries  with ancient  and  still viable cultural  traditions.  By contrast,  for the  relatively  newer transplanted  populations  of Canada, there can be little confidence in continuity  through history or art.  Also, the four sharp seasons here are a constant  reminder of the passage of time, and  the alien beauty of this cold northern  land  presents striking objective correlatives for the state  of mind of individuals  confronting  their own mortality. For example,  in one of the poems from Sift in an Hourglass, inspired equally by Galla Placidia's  mausoleum in Ravenna,  Italy,  and  a crystal of snow in Sherbrooke, Quebec,  Gustafson  sug­ gests that  death, contemplated serenely in a European setting within the man-made contours  of  a  tomb   decorated   with  mosaics  which  have  outlasted   centuries, assumes less manageable proportions in  the open spaces of the  Canadian land­ scape. Here the persona cannot structure  reality as

eight Beatitudes, Death
the ninth, and crossed into four,
north, south, east, west, the arch of the kingdom
eternal, the Beatitude Death....

In  the falling snow,  dimensions scarcely exist;  certainly  reason  cannot  compre­
hend them. "And  in that  Winter  Night" ends:

47

GUSTAFSON's DOUBLE HOOK

myriad, the snow falling, light ineffable and death
ineffable, the moment determining, understanding death, death understood under that winter night.

Ephemerality  emerges as one of the dominant  themes of Sift  in  an  Hourglass, a collection which-by its title alone-reaffirms Gustafson's ties to British liter­ ary tradition; in fact,  he becomes almost a poet's poet. Gustafson's  "aboriginal" style -his spare  lyricism and  habit  of stripped-down  statement -is  elicited  al­ most exclusively by the  Canadian terrain; when  he writes of England,  Greece, and  other  foreign  countries  or  takes his inspiration  from older  works of  art,  his style consistently tends  to be more allusive, complicated,  and  elaborate.  Gustaf­ son's "original" writing echoes and  reverberates with references to a broad  spec­ trum  of  English  literature, as  well as to  European   history  and  mythology.  In several instances,  borrowing  diction  from  literary  tradition  reinforces  the  theme of transience  at the level of style by showing that  even language  is subject  to the processes of time.
The  very mutability  of things,  however, in Gustafson's view, should  make  us
treasure them the more fervently. One of his poems is subtitled, "An  Accolade for Death  who Makes Beauty Beauty"; another,  "The  Exhortation," begins with the premise that  "Grief's  love's origin."  Echoing Yeats, Gustafson writes with  Diony­ sian intensity:
Love
Is the thing, is it not?
To rage and sing, to thrust
The grinning skull and grave
And know the singing lust.

Unlike Christianity  with its life-negating aspects, as Gustafson  perceives it, the pagan  religions of ancient  Greece or Egypt  come close to his own emphasis on sensuality. The  persona in "The Valley of Kings" from Ixion's Wheel comments: "They  weren't  far  wrong: I the  body  kept I to  keep the  soul."  Again  in  "The Histiaean Poseidon:  Athens," looking at the fifth-century B.C. bronze statue of the
Greek god of the sea whose love affairs were almost as numerous if less celebrated than  those of Zeus, the Christianized  Gustafson persona is moved to a passionate identification  with the primitive divinity:
I cry blasphemy.
Cry,
The hurl of the god
Is my hurl,
Hard, flung.

Repeatedly, his poems incorporate the belief that one reaches the highest meaning

GUSTAFSON'S  DOUBLE HOOK

of life through  an affirmation,  not a denial, of sensuous reality. Such  affirmation is made,  however, with full tragic  awareness of the fleeting nature  of all  experi­ ence and  frequently even of art. At the centre of Gustafson's  poetry  lie the twin facts of beauty and  mutability; he contends that,  despite injustice, violence, and death,  only a full embrace  of transience sufficies. Paradoxically  though,  many  of the poems on this theme in Ixion's Wheel  and other collections are articulated in a highly elliptical and  allusive style, leaving Gustafson  vulnerable  to  charges  of aestheticism or academicism,  while his historical and  foreign illustrative  material has raised, for Canadian readers and  critics, the question of his relevance.
By the end of the 196o's, Gustafson's two separate styles, one direct,  the other allusive, hitherto  elicited by two distinct orders of experience:   one of Canadian nature  and  weather,  the other  of European  art  and  myth, and  conveyed  by two different  types of imagery:  one  geographical  and  the  other  historical,  begin  to merge. The  mixed media  protest  poems of Theme  and Variations   for Sounding Brass ( 1972)  -a striking  contrast  to  Ixion's  Wheel-focus  on  the  victims of international as well as local violence and  injustice, from  Cambodia to Quebec, and,  taking  an  engage stance,  use bold, plain,  prose-like statements. Gustafson sets for himself the task to "Shock our hearts" into a realization  of the extent  and significance of monstrous current  events, and  the collection demonstrates  his full mastery of the public poem. The  general structure  which contains  these five wit­ ness poems-theme and variations -is borrowed, of course, from music; so, too, are each of the five individual  structures: nocturne,  fantasia,  ricercare,  aubade, and coda. The central theme is love-no longer just in individual  but in enlarged socio-political terms-and  the variations show, in a range  of different  national contexts, the grim, dehumanizing results of its distortion or ultimate  absence.
Gustafson's vocabulary, syntax, and  rhythm in these poems are close to prose; in fact, in some instances, patterns of reference are established by means of  incor­ porating  into the poetry snatches of prose, usually from political speeches. There  is a very interesting connection, then, between Gustafson's response to the Rockies and to political events of the past decade:  in both cases, he encounters realities for which  parable  and  metaphor  seem irrelevant  and  for which only  "plain/ State­ ment"  is appropriate.
Fire on Stone,  winner  of  the  Governor  General's  Literary  Award  for  1974, marks a sharp  return  to a more personal and  reflective lyric mode  as Gustafson resumes his study of nature,  his world travels, and his Pound-like  journey through the past to find touchstones of relevance for citizens of the contemporary, polluted, war-torn  world. In these poems, Gustafson blends or moves freely between his two styles and  two quarries  of images:  the symbolic desire for light,  illumination, is one of the principal motifs, but it is pursued by a process sometimes antithetical, sometimes parallel, to the ascent of Plato's mythic caveman. Acutely conscious of growing older, the Gustafson  persona-almost always a nearly autobiographical

49

GUSTAFSON'S DOUBLE  HOOK

figure -wants  "all j Heart-saddening  things  resolved."  He  feels  that   "Death ought  to bring/ An answer  to the questions." Yet he knows, finally, that  it will not, and in these poems the great antinomies -life and death, beauty and brevity, good and evil, time and  eternity,  nature  and  art-remain  unreconciled.
"North  Cape,"   the  opening   poem,  juxtaposes  natural   beauty -"midnight sun,"  "fjord," "gulls" -with   man-made   ugliness -"rubbish,"  "napalm."  A fundamental opposition  is suggested, too, between the  persona  and  his lover on the one hand, and  the engulfing  natural  and  political environments  on the other. Characteristic of Ralph  Gustafson, reality is portrayed as the interplay of dualities. Several other  poems-"Sunday Morning  at Hammerfest," "Nails  at  Nijo," and "0 Permanent   Paean   Periclean," for  example -underscore his  vision of  the world as a combination, metaphorically,  of both  debris and  miracle,  stone and fire. His antinominal view of reality and  his unusually  positive informing  vision perhaps  are  given  fullest  expression  in  "0 Mud,  Thou   Vile  Sublime."   Here Gustafson  confounds  categories  in lines which  combine  Elizabethan   word  play ("But  what  is grave?  and  quick?  Life j Itself's a low-down  buried  pun")  with contemporary  conversational  rhythms  ("Tuesday wasn't it, we felt good?"). The persona concludes resolutely:

Something's
True amid all this slither surely?

Cock-crow surely dawn; this pulled
And washed-out line of intimate Monday,
A stretch of purest meanwhile briefs?

The  pun on "briefs"  and  the  almost parenthetical  placing of "meanwhile" -a word  choice  which  itself underscores  temporariness-give this  last  line  tragi­ comic  possibilities, but  the  dominant note is celebration,  for  the  satisfaction  of Monday's  wash or for Tuesday's health and  happiness.




ULTIMATELY,  IN   GUSTAFSON's   UNIVERSE,  "The  moment­ when  is what  pertains." In  "To   Old  Asclepius-Lyric at  Epidaurus," life is again  documented   as  being  both  painful  and  beautiful,  and  this  poem  seems intended  as a final statement. In  manuscript  draft,  it is entitled  "Summation at Epidaurus," and the conclusion Gustafson reaches here is reiterated  in many other poems which similarly  rejoice  in  "the  hour's  magnificence,"  "that hour,"  "the flashed instant." Both are equally real, "Sting of  wasp and swallow of moon," and his poetry urgently recommends  that life be lived fully moment  by moment since joy balances grief.
Characteristically, and  perhaps  as a  result of his musical background,  Ralph

50

GUSTAFSON's DOUBLE HOOK

Gustafson structures  experience in counterpoint. Life and  death  are brought  into focus almost simultaneously  by the speaking voice of the  two-part  "Bishop  Erik Grave's  Grave"  and by the gardener  persona of "Poem  in April" and  "Hyacinths with  Brevity." Alluding  in a veiled way to Shakespeare  and  Eliot,  and  also  in­ cluding  homespun  domestic  details, the  latter  poem is both  richly  allusive  and compellingly direct as the persona implores with passionate ambivalence:

these forty bulbs ... should be Already in the ground so swift the wind Blows and brief the constituency
Of sun.

The  motif of light is an important strand  in the intricately  plaited  imagery  of the recent Corners  in the Glass, too. As the sun, it symbolizes the life force itself; as reflected light, it suggests philosophical illumination,  Joyce's claritas. But shun­ ning  abstract   thought  and  pure  speculation,  Gustafson's  intellectual  grappling  with the meaning  of life here issues directly in joyous celebration  of  the tangible, audible,  visible universe. The  movement  away  from  orthodox,  religious, other­ worldly solutions to the problems of the human  condition, which was begun tenta­  tively in the early Flight into  Darkness and developed more fully in Rivers  among  Rocks   and  Sift  in  an  Hourglass, culminates  in  readily  accessible symbols  and images and  in pithy, direct language-a style which now illustrates the primary thesis:  "I'll have the concrete."  In  "Argument," Gustafson  proclaims:
Light, Erigina's Light
(Capital L) 's
An abstract absolute
I'll have the sun
On cranky crystal, corners in
The glass, tablecloths and silver,
Oranges with peels on them.

One fine poem on the carpe diem  theme is "The  Moment  Is Not Only Itself." Gustafson's  familiar  gardener  persona is presented here as raking  autumn  leaves while listening to Chopin. The  joy and beauty of this October  day seem able, at least momentarily,  to create a favourable equipoise of opposites and  "make  end/ Of foliage, of summer, descendings, however j You finish it, not matter." The  joy of the moment itself is of supreme importance, carrying significance for the future in providing  what  immortality  there is on earth.  Thinking  of love, he concludes that  "What is real is what the heart j Has."
Both literally as well as metaphorically, throughout  Corners in the Glass Gustaf­ son  presents  himself as a  cultivator  of his own  garden,  focussing  attention on common details in the immediate  environment. The majority of  these poems is set in rural Canada, largely in the vicinity of Gustafson's own home in North  Hatley, Quebec.  Sharply  criticized in the  1g6o's for being a Grand  Tour poet, in recent

GUSTAFSON'S  DOUBLE HOOK

years Gustafson has become increasingly a regional poet, the Canadian equivalent, in some respects, of Robert  Frost. His autobiographical persona is no untutored country bumpkin, of course;  but  what concerns him above all is not speculation but  sensation,  not  history  but  geography,  not  the  foreign  but  the  local-the beauties of flowers, birdsong,  and  even the antics of midges at the corner  of his patio on a summer  afternoon.  En joying the backyard scene, he confesses that  he is content  to remain  "Oblivious of Agamemnon  and  a thousand  ships."
From the time of Rivers among Rocks, Gustafson's themes had begun to stress the value of the  here and  now. "A  Candle  for Pasch"  had  concluded  with  this­ world emphasis:   "Joy  here, least:  if none."  "Apologue"  had  underscored  that  "taken  joy is all."  But Gustafson's  medium  at that  stage did not always embody his message; in fact,  it often  worked at cross purposes. By the  r 97o's, style and theme reinforce each other, so that  Gustafson's thoughts are articulated in sensu­ ous terms. This is demonstrated succinctly in poems such as "The Overwhelming  Green"  or "Of  Green Steps and Laundry" which notes:

she will hang
Blue and white shirts and a patched quilt
On the laundry line that runs from the kitchen
Step to the yard telephone pole and sheets
That  smell of winter's cold, and the pulley
Each time the line is launched will squeak, And that will be important.

These  latest  poems about  Canada, furthermore, tend  to be set in  winter.  They explore the Canadian psyche in the context of northness and against the anagogic equivalent  of winter,  age. Gustafson's  Canada  is no longer the angular,  incisive, overpowering  Rockies;  the landscape  is that  of the Quebec  Townships-harsh but  gentle, lonely but  powerfully  beautiful.  "Airborne  Thanksgiving" speaks of "those  loved/ Contradictions" and  would seem to set Gustafson  amongst  those Canadians who hold "thanksgiving and  snow in their  pockets." Diverging from Frye, Jones,  and  Atwood,  Gustafson's  vision highlights  neither  terror  nor  bare survival, but rather  the meeting of challenge with strength, grace, and acceptance of loneness and,  ultimately,  of death.
Brevity and  death,  he concludes,  assume significance only for  those  who are lovers of life; this is the theme  of "Improvisations on Lines of Somebody  Else." That here Gustafson's  inspiration  comes from  lines written  by fellow Canadian poet George Johnston  quietly underscores in another  way both the dominant na­ tional theme of this collection and  also the repatriation  of Gustafson's style. Des­ pite the fact that  his very latest book, Soviet Poems ( rg78), is the diary of  a trip outside Canada (his invited reading tour of the Soviet Union in the fall of r 976), what it stresses is that  "unpolitical humanity  is the same," and  it does not invali­ date the judgment  that,  in his poetry of the 197o's considered as a  whole, Ralph

52

GUSTAFSON'S  DOUBLE HOOK


Gustafson demonstrates not  the  bleak  discovery of Thomas Wolfe that we  can't go  home again, but  rather the  felt  truth of  Margaret Laurence that we  must go home again. In the  life-long process  of  uncovering this  truth in  his  own   way, Ralph Gustafson has  produced an  impressive body  of  poetry which bears witness
to a personal, as well  as a national, struggle.






THE  COLLECTOR
 


Claire E. Harrison


He arranged shells
in shallow  drawers, in cabinets, containing the lavishness of oceans in  neat  and  quiet  rows.

My grandfather, of precarious heartbeat and  locked into deafness, who spoke love with  tiny mollusks showing  me brown  limpets
with  holes in the centers like small  volcanoes,
and  angel  wings, tender
white  fans  with  scalloped  edges.

I liked to stroke the vitreous olives
the whorls of orange-dusted whelks, too child-intent to notice

that  his breaths were being gathered arranged in their  rhythmic sequence and  numbered, like the finite chambers of a nautilus.










53

IN THE WHALE'S  BELLY

Jay Macpherson's Poetry


Suniti Namjoshi





JAY MACPHERSON'S  FIRST MAJOR BOOK   of poems, The  Boat­
man, was published in  1957  by Oxford University Press and  then  republished in
1968  with  the  addition of sixteen  new  poems.1  Her  second  book  of poems, Wel­ coming Disaster, appeared in 1974.  No discussion of modern Canadian  poetry  is complete without  at  least  a  mention of  Jay  Macpherson's name,  but  the  only article  on her  poetry  that  I have  come across is the  one by James Reaney, "The Third  Eye:   Jay   Macpherson's The   Boatman,"  which   appeared  in  Canadian  Literature  in  1960.   Fortunately, that   article   is  almost  definitive.  Superficially, there seem to be some obvious  differences between  The  Boatman and Welcoming Disaster. The  second  in some  ways seems much  "simpler." It is my  purpose here to explore  some  of the  similarities and  differences  with  the  aid  of Jay  Macpher­ son's other  writings,2  which  include two theses, two lectures, and  a children's text on classical mythology.
As Reaney  makes  clear,  the  central  myth  of The  Boatman  is that  of the  ark.
The ark  appears to contain us, as though  we were  trapped in the  belly  of some monstrous creature, and  its contents appear to  be  hopelessly  miscellaneous; but properly  perceived, Man, in fact,  contains the  ark,  and  its contents are  ordered:

In  a poem entitled  "The Anagogic Man"  we are presented  with ... the figure of a  sleeping  Noah  whose  head  contains  all  creation  ... The  whole  collection  of poems requires  the  reader  to  transfer  himself from  the sleep our  senses keep  to Noah's  sleep, and  from  Noah's  sleep eventually  to the first morning  in  Paradise.

Or,  to state  the  matter in Northrop Frye's  terms:

In  the anagogic  phase literature imitates  the total dream  of man, and  so imitates the thought  of a human  mind which is at the circumference  and  not at  the center of its reality.... When  we pass into anagogy, nature  becomes, not  the  container, but the thing contained... Nature  is now inside the mind of an infinite man  who builds his cities out of the Milky Way.3

Noah's salvaging operations at  the  time  of the  flood correspond to the  activity of the  poet,  the  man  who  perceives  or  "dreams" and  thus  makes  "a Cosmos  of miscellany." In  other  words,  Noah, Endymion (the  sleeping  shepherd)  and  the

54

JAY MACPHERSON

poet merge into one another. The  type of the  poet is, of course,  Orpheus; and Narcissus, Orpheus  and Psyche are interconnected  figures. Narcissus is not seen in a  negative  light  by Jay  Macpherson. He  also is  the  type  of the  poet,  and  the elegiac Orpheus  engages in the same activity.4    But the poet as an Orpheus or as a Psyche are conceptions that  are of greater importance  to the second book ( W el­ coming Disaster) than  to the first, because both stories contain  an element that is missing in the stories of the other figures. Both Orpheus  and Psyche have to make a  journey underground. Redemption  is no longer  a matter  of starting  with  the world of the fall and  gradually  proceeding  upwards.  In  the second  book it  be­ comes necessary to  hit  bottom  and  then  to make  the  journey  up  with  a  fully regained or "half-regained Eurydice."  Now the problem  is not simply to get the animals outside, but to find the way to that perception again, the source of dream- ing:  "If you love me, take me back/ To tread again the ancient track...." Again, "Take me, guide of souls, with you/  Paddled  in your ghost canoe...." Psyche is cast out of the palace,5  and has to separate the seeds of good and evil6  and to make the  journey to the underworld  before she can  be reunited  with  love.
Again, as Reaney makes clear about The  Boatman,  the separation of the sexes corresponds to the separation  between Man  and  Nature: "So  Man,  once a com­ plete Man with Eve inside him, has seen himself split into two." In The Boatman it is enough  to say that  in a fallen world all attempts  at  union  are  bound  to be somewhat unsatisfactory:  "The sexes waking, now separate  and sore,/ Enjoy con­ junction not feasible before; j But never long enough, never near enough, nor yet/  Find their death mortal, however deeply met." In Welcoming Disaster the corpses that  result from this disjunction  have to be recognized and  acknowledged.  They have to be given their due. It is only then that they can in any way be recovered. "Naked  spectres, come for shrouding,/ Those I failed and snubbed  and  crossed,/  In the deadly waters crowding: j Angel, let not one be lost." In The  Boatman the Ark appears simply as a much misunderstood creature  that  has been needlessly at odds with Man: "Why  did  your spirit/ Strive so long with me?"  In  Welcoming Disaster it is the self itself that is lost, and that is the corpse that  must be recovered.
The obvious place to go looking for corpses is, of course, the world of the dead, the Kingdom  of Hades,  the world undersea, the world of memory, the world of the past. This is the world that  Welcoming  Disaster is primarily  concerned  with. Noah  the  boatman  can  be turned  quite easily into a fisherman/ and  this is, in fact, done in The  Boatman, but  the action is kindly rather  than  expiatory.  To restate the matter,  Noah is not a diver. Again, sleep imagery can be used to point the contrast between a drugged sleep and the sleep of the dreamer  who sees with the third eye of real perception. This also is done in The Boatman, but in W elcom­ ing Disaster the world of nightmare must first be explored.  It  becomes necessary to come to terms with or at least to face the past before the process of  dreaming  can begin again.  (The  Muses are, after all, the daughters  of memory.)  But here

55

JAY  MACPHERSON

a  passage from  Anatomy of Criticism  is very much  to the  point:   "Recurrence and desire interpenetrate, and are equally important  in both ritual and dream.... In  the  middle  of all  this  recurrence,  however, is the  central  recurrent   cycle of sleeping and  waking life, the daily frustrations of the ego, the nightly awakening of a titanic  self." The  descent into the kingdom of Hades is not a search for the waters of forgetfulness, but for the source of dreams, for, in a sense, "pools where
I fished with  jamjars  for minnows,"  for "strangeness  of water." Rivers  are life­
giving, the sea is destructive.  (In  "Revelations" there is no more sea.)  The boat­ man appears  as a type of Charon. The corpses to be brought  back are their own, the  kid and  the  teddy  bear  (doll-god). This  is, in fact,  done,  and  expiation  is achieved  by  a  kind  of  acceptance of wrongs  done  and  wrongs  endured. The prayer to "infallibly  restore my share in perdition"  is granted.




ERE                                     To quote  jay Macpherson: "... if you take Paradise Lost as illustrating literature's imaginative world-picture  over a very long period it gives us an essentially four-level arrange­ ment with Heaven on top, Hell at the bottom, and the unfallen  and fallen worlds the important two storeys in between...."8   If Heaven  is the total  dream  or the ark contained,  then Hell is the waking nightmare  or existence inside the belly of the  fish. "Out of the  belly of hell I  cried. . . . I  went  down  to the  bottoms  of mountains; the earth  with  her  bars was about  me forever."9    Reaney  points out that  The  Boatman  shows the  way  up  from  the  fallen  world.  "If 'here'  is this world and  'there'  the world of Eternity,  then  this book  shows the reader  all the necessary steps of the way."
In Welcoming Disaster there are two kinds of movements. The  first of these is
concerned with the two lower levels, and the five sections of the book indicate the pattern. It is after a descent into the underworld  that it is possible to return  to the ordinary  world of everyday life, the world in which "Some are plain lucky-we ourselves among them:/ Houses with books, with gardens, all we wanted,/ Work we enjoy, with  colleagues we feel close to-/ Love we have,  even."  The  teddy bear brought  back from the past can in this world be seen in its ordinary  aspect as a worn-out  toy, but he is at the same time "the  Tammuz  of my song,/ Of death and hell the key,/  And gone to mend the primal wrong,/ The  rift in Being, Me." While, in one sense, there is a movement from the fallen world to the world of nightmare and  back again  to the daylight world, there is another  kind of  move­ ment as well. To  put it simply:  If you dig deep enough, the way down  becomes the way up, and  you eventually  see the stars. In  Northrop  Frye's  terms:  "if we persevere with  the mythos  of irony  and satire, we shall pass a  dead  center, and finally see the  gentlemanly  Prince  of Darkness bottom  side  up."  Appropriately

JAY MACPHERSON

enough  this movement can be seen most clearly in the middle section of the book, "The Dark  Side,"  that  is, when  the lowest point  of the  descent  is reached.  It occurs, for  example,  in the  lines:  "A  well of truth,  of images, of words./ Low where Orion lies j I watch the solstice pit become a stair, j The constellations rise." But see also "Transformation" in the fourth  section, "Recognitions": "Tadwit is the world-tree  made: j I, reposing in his shade,/ See through  leaves the heavens, where j Whirls in play a smallish Bear...."
It is evident, of course, that  the ark for Jay  Macpherson  represents not a with­ drawal  into  isolation,  but  a merger  into  a community,  a sealing  of the  "rift  in Being," the externalization  of the dream. The final chapter  of her doctoral disser­ tation deals with Canadian literature,  and she observes there: "The dream  ... at least points towards communion.  If at our worst our  civilization is mass-minded, reflecting  the  qualities  of  nature   at  deadest  . . .  perhaps  at  best  it  is socially­ minded,  and  the search for America or True North  resolves itself as the quest of community."10  It is the descent into the kingdom of Hades  that  makes this entry into the world of community  possible.
For the purposes of the central theme, that is the closure of "the  rift in Being," it does not really matter  very much whether  Man is represented  by a male figure or by a female one. With regard to The  Boatman Reaney makes the following observation: "In  the 'Garden  of the Sexes' we see the natural feminine and fallen world imprisons man's waking life until he is bound to a Tree; but at night  Man escapes from  his prison in dreams  and  it is Nature  that  finds herself imprisoned there." And again:  "So Man, once a complete Man with Eve inside him, has seen himself split into two. He has been content  to copulate  with  the other  half  (the hideous  hermaphrodite Phoenix) ;  now  the  first  Man  returns." In  Welcoming Disaster it  is made  explicit  that   the  figures  are  interchangeable.11    "First   was Inanna ... She sold to Hell, to save her skin, Dumuzi  ... Hell was Ereshkigal, her sister-her, then  ... he had  a sister too, it seems Geshtinanna ... She too offered herself for him ... Four are there? No, my Ted, I guess just us two...."12
Psyche seeks a lost love;  Orpheus a lost Eurydice;  Demeter  a  lost Persephone,
Venus  a lost Adonis. Alice, the little girl who fell down  a hole in the earth  and then figured she had dreamed  it all, seeks herself. (The  poem "Playing" gives us the Questor  Frustrated.)  And  Jonah  in the whale's  belly is in  an  underground world. But it is convenient in some ways to see the primary questor  figure as that of Psyche since the doll-god is not allowed to speak directly for himself.
Murderer  and victim are interchangeable, two halves of one another/3  and the quest is in a sense a joint quest. Jay  Macpherson  sees the reverse of the story of Psyche in the story of Bluebeard.14  Since the fact of murder  must first be faced, Bluebeard's  chamber  serves very well as in the  poem, "Visiting": "takes  one to know  one:  he/  Never fooled me,  Even without  the/ Blood on  the  key....  I/ Can't  any more/ Tell you to what, love, you've/ Opened  your door."

57

JAY  MACPHERSON

Again,  Psyche's  candle or lamp can  be seen as a means  of exploring the under­ world   (something that  must  be done)   and  also as a  beacon  for  those  now  lost. "Long desired  the  dead  return. I Saw  our  candle  and  were  safe...." "Take the
lantern: here I'll stay I Nevermore behold  the day, I Keep a lasting  watch  above I
My  undying monster love."  In  her  lecture  on  Beauty  and  the  Beast,  Jay  Mac­
pherson  expresses interest  in

the  odd  reversal  by which  ... in Keats  and  in  the  Brontes ... Psyche becomes specifically the poetic soul, and  the other worldly lover at the window becomes the spirit of inspiration-whereas in the old story he is burned  by the lamp  and  flies out in a temper,  in Romantic revision the point of the lamp  is to guide him safely in.

This   aspect  of  the  story  fits  in  very  well  with  the  first  section   of  Welcoming
Disaster, "Invocations."
About  Apuleius' story  itself Jay  Macpherson says:

it seems close to the themes of fall and  redemption; ... Psyche ... is also the first literary  model  we have  of the  adventures  of a human  heroine  along  the  lines of the labours and sufferings of such a hero as Hercules  [who also descended into the underworld]; but  what  the  story is most obviously doing  ... is commenting  on the double nature  of love.... Cupid  ... is certainly also the dragon....

So then, if asked what  the  book is about, it would  be easy to say that  it is about a little  girl and  her  teddy  bear.  What could  be more  familiar? But  it is also about the  human soul  exploring hell.  What could  be  less abstruse, less abstract than
human pain?-"too late  ... I ... to  unlearn I needed  familiar pain.  I Come,
little  thorn." The most  obvious  point,  however,  is that,  placed  side  by side, The
Boatman  and  Welcoming Disaster reveal  that  the  distance  between  the  mytho­
poeic and  the  familiar is less great  than  might  be supposed.


NOTES

1 Her very first book, Nineteen  Poems, was published at the Seizin Press, Deya, Mal­ lorca  in  1952 by Robert  Graves. 0 Earth  Return   (Toronto,  1954)   contains the poems from Section  II of The  Boatman. "A Dry Light"  and  "The Dark  Air" ap­ peared as a pamphlet  in the 196o's, from Hawkshead  Press, Toronto. These do not appear  in The  Boatman. "Jonah, a cantata  text  set to  music by John  Beckwith, arranged  by him  out  of the  Bible with commissioned  verse by Jay  Macpherson" appeared  in Reaney's  Alphabet, No. 8, June  1964, pp. 8-13. Six "Emblem  Draw­ ings for the Boatman" appeared in Alphabet,  No. 10, 1965, pp. 51-57· Welcoming  Disaster was published  privately  in 1974  (Saannes  Publications,  Toronto).
2   "Milton  and the Pastoral Tradition," Master's Thesis, University of Toronto, 1955; "Narcissus:  some uncertain reflections," Alphabet,  No.  I (Summer  1960),  pp. 41-
57, and  No. 2  (July  1961)  pp. 65-71;  Four  Ages of Man:  The  Classical Myths
(Toronto: Macmillan, 1962); "Narcissus, or the Pastoral of Solitude;  Some Con­
ventions  of  Nineteenth-Century Romance,"   doctoral  dissertation,   University  of
Toronto  ( 1964) ; "Pratt's  Romantic Mythology,"  The  Pratt  Lecture,   Memorial

JAY MACPHERSON


University, St. John's Newfoundland, I972;  "Beauty and  the  Beast and  Some Rela­ tives,"  A Lecture Given  to  the  Friends  of the  Osborne and  Lillian   H. Smith col­ lections  at  Boys and  Girls House,  Toronto Public  Library on  Jan. 28,  I974·
3  Anatomy of Criticism (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton Univ.  Press,  I97I), p.  I I g.
4  See  "Narcissus: some  uncertain  reflections,"   p.  56:   "Behind Romantic  elegy­
such  poems  as Kubla Khan and  Dejection-stands the  'gloomy  egoist'  Narcissus
... He  carries  his laments for  a  lost paradise over  from  the  poems  into  romances
... " And  again: "Orpheus is the  central figure  of Renaissance pastoral elegy ... The  identity in  his myth  of mourning poet  and  the one  mourned for  clarifies  and
justifies the  old  inclination of  the  pastoral elegiac  poet  in  another's fate  to  weep his own."
5   See "Narcissus," p. 6g. Psyche's  castle is the house of the  soul. The whale's belly is its opposite.  See  "Jonah, a  cantata text,"  p  g, "(Whale)  ... A living  soul  I did contain j Till  God  withdrew that  soul again."
6 See "Milton and  the  Pastoral Tradition," pp. 40-4I. This  is one  way of looking  at the task Venus  sets Psyche. The other  two tasks and  the main  purpose of her errand could   be  interpreted in  such  a  way  as  to  fit  in  with   the  poems  in  Welcoming Disaster, but  perhaps that  would  be stretching matters.
7   See "Emblem Drawings for The  Boatman," p. 56. The  one for the boatman depicts an  ark with  a hat  on its head  and  a fish swimming  underneath.
8   "Pratt's Romantic Mythology," p. 6. See also "Milton and  the  Pastoral Tradition," pp. 3-4, and  Northrop Frye,  Fables of Identity (N.Y.: Harcourt, Brace  and  World, I963), p. 63.
9  Jonah,  2. But see also "Jonah, a cantata text,"  p. I I, and  "Narcissus, or The  Pas­
toral  of Solitude," p. 442.
10  "Narcissus, or The Pastoral of Solitude," p. 447·
11 See "Narcissus," p. 52:  "One could  compare for example the  view of ... Landino
... that  Narcissus is the man  who yearns after  earthly beauty,  while  his own soul ...
fades  away  ... to the  configuration of 'my Spectre Round Me.'  The same  pattern
applies  in  Blake's  view  of  the  Fall:  the  watery  surface   in  which   Adam   sees  his
image  corresponds to Adam's sleep in which  his emanation Eve  is separated from him  and  becomes  the  delusive  object  world  of nature.''
12 As Jay  Macpherson indicates in  the  notes  to Welcoming Disaster,  the  figures  are taken  from  Ancient Near  Eastern  Texts  Relating to the  Old  Testament, edited  by James  B. Pritchard, 2nd  edition  (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton Univ.  Press,  I955). The  fertility  goddess,  Sumerian Inanna is the same  as Ishtar. Dumuzi is Tammuz (Adonis).
13 See  "Narcissus," pp.  56-57· "The Narcissus  motif  is characterized by a  tendency towards   triangular grouping of  persons,  roughly  corresponding to  Narcissus,   the other  self and  Echo,  or in Blake's convenient terms,  'Subject', 'spectre' and  'emana- tion.'  ... Which   is the  soulmate and  which  the  demon   is left  to  the  particular writer.... As with  Frankenstein's 'demon' and  'friend', the  moral  status  of one  or both  of the supporters may  be left  profoundly ambiguous."
14  "Beauty and  the Beast and  Some  Relatives," pp.  I2-I3. "It's inevitable that  in later story-telling we should  find split  forms of this theme: on the  one  hand the  'Beauty and  the  Beast'  group, where  the  hideous  beast  becomes,  or  proves  to  be after all, the  desirable   lover -on  the  other hand  a  group  where  the  dashing suitor   turns out  to be a monster, and  what  I may call  the archetype there  is the  story  of  Blue­ beard...."

59

SUSAN MUSGRAVE
The Self and the Other




Dennis Brown






SusAN MUSGRAVE's The  Imp<tene (1976), bcg;ns by pm· senting a mystery. "Anima," the first poem, addresses a shadowy "you"  who exists entirely as smell:

You smell of the woods You smell of lonely places.

You smell of death
of dreams I am afraid of.

When  the "I" persona reaches out for this "you"  it abruptly  vanishes:  untouch­ able, inaudible, invisible, it retreats "into the only darkness j animals come from."  Yet for all its mysteriousness, the "you"  will be familiar to those acquainted with Miss Musgrave's   poetry  (a  poetry  admired  by  an  increasingly  wide  circle  of readers). For it is associated with the characteristics of  her unique and disturbing  world -"woods,"  "lonely  places,"  "death,"  "dreams," fear-and,  as  I shall argue, this "you"  constitutes the key to an  understanding  of that  world. For the Musgrave  "wilderness,"  as Ted  Hughes  has  called it, is essentially relational; a product  of the  outward   gropings  of  selfhood  toward  the  "you"  in  its  varying aspects. At the core of the poetry is a fluctuating  relationship between the self and the other.
To  emphasize  the  uniqueness  of this self-world is not  to  deny  the  influences upon the poetry-which include Allen Ginsberg, Sylvia Plath,  and Anne Sexton. What  is remarkable,  however, is the extent  to which such  influences have been assimilated, even in the early poems. This  may be partly because Musgrave  has not had a formal education  in literature, and  has been able to keep her mentors at a distance-often difficult in an academic situation.  But there is a more im-

6o

SUSAN MUSGRAVE

portant  reason. For the Musgrave  self, if often victimized, fragmented, confused, is, in the last analysis, very tough  indeed. It commits itself to encounter-with the natural  world, lovers, mystic creatures, demons, fairies-yet  always emerges, integral  if not unscathed.  Not  betrayal,  desecration, rejection  or apparent  anni­ hilation  can finally destroy the persona whose voice is the voice of the poetry. "I
will eat my way out I of my own skinny veins ... I I will ruin  you," she vows to
the threatening  other in "Songs of the Sea Witch."  That  this is not pure bravado is attested by the persistence of the same self-voice in poem after  poem, in the face of threat  after threat.  And  in terms of poetic influences, as in terms of the dra­ matic  antagonists,  the self is never about  to be swamped.  In  short,  Susan  Mus­ grave uses her influences; very rarely is she used by them.
With respect to dramatic situations in the poetry, of course, the persona's tough­ ness must  not  be overstressed. It  is a strength  in  extremis:  a  final  capacity  for transcendence  of crisis, engendered  only out of sensitivity,  vulnerability  and  soli­ tude. Even while the poetic voice persists, the dramatic  self  may be rent into more pieces than Adonis. Hence the unity of the self is experienced only through  a con­ tradictory  fragmentation. The  self is fluid,  metamorphic,   undergoing   in  poem after  poem  an  almost  ritual   journey  into  disaster, separation   and  destruction (that  "long  journey beginning  nowhere"). And  part  of what  is involved in  the quest is, in fact, the problem of whether there is such an entity  as the self at all.
The  first poem in Songs  of the  Sea-Witch ( 1970)   constitutes a useful point of departure since it looks back to childhood and  postulates a family unit of  experi­ ence -"we." An open gate in a field initiates a world of children's shouts, mush­ rooms, grandpa,  and imitated  birdcalls. It is somewhat Edenic  (hence "unreal"), but the ending sets a pattern  for the sombreness of many later poems:  "our  hearts
toll like clappers I in the bell of the dark."  "The  Spilled Child"  leaves this world
of communal  experience behind,  while yet alluding to it -the title phrase recur­ ring three  times. The  protagonist's  childhood  is the  prey of the shadowy  other who demands its destruction -a prolonged "burning" postulated at the end. The
horror of alien incursion is conveyed in startling images:  "The abandoned bird I
wingless and screaming"; "to sew her body I to the ground  with  worms." Here, then, the "you" -presumably a lover -demands a part of the self as the  price of relationship. The  world of "we"  is sacrificed to the world of "you"  and  "I", and  in the  process the  "I" too is torn  apart.  Already the  world  is expressed as balance  of power, relationship  as barter  and  sacrifice, selfhood  as splitting  and
loss.
However,  this is not always so. In "For  Sean"  the self-other  dialectic  is more optimistically  drawn.  The  vision of the  "lady  of the green"  sets up  the  funda­ mental  relationship which achieves a tentative  apotheosis:
and I breathed as you
in the dark ocean night

61

SUSAN MUSGRAVE

caught beneath your moon caught in her laughter
that was yours- almost then
I knew who I was

The sense of assimilation into the partner's  world is central  here:  it occurs essen­ tially through the magical intermediary -the poem opening and closing with the lady. In  effect, the other  has been dualized  into lover and  anima  or  muse. The
lady is "your  lady I lost to you," and at the same time she creates the reality of
the lover for the self: "she seeded in the full of the moon I your heart I -pushed it behind  my breast."  At the  end she threatens  to leave, trailing  the  ambiguous
phrase "through your wake." Can the relationship last without  her? Certainly, as presented, it has been wholly created  through  her. The self "possesses" the lover by being  "possessed" by what  "possesses" him. Just  as in  later  poems the self becomes the spirit she invokes, so here the other becomes an identity  (hence gives the self identity too)  by virtue of his spiritual daemon.
The  "spiritual" factor is the  basic key to the tone and  purport  of Musgrave's
poems. Whether  the  self apprehends its own  temporal  physicality,  the  natural world, or a sexual partner,  the mood of the verse is determined  by the presence or absence of the spiritual  (or imaginative) dimension. It is very like Martin  Buber's distinction  between  "I -Thou"  and  "I -It"  (as whole existential  postures), with  the difference that  Susan  Musgrave's  "Thou" may at  times appear  almost as chilling as her "It." But the "Thou," however mythologized, is positive in that it gives meaning-and hence defines the self. Without it the other is nauseous in the Sartrean  sense:  relationships are arid, exploitative; the natural world becomes a wilderness of fragments: the self is dissipated into a  vortex  of unrealities.  In
"Once More" the despiritualized  "you" is a nothingness: "You are I only a mad­
man I in all the spaces I can't  fill"; hence the self becomes reified and fragmented in a rigmarole of carnality: "I toss you I random  pieces from my thigh, I finger­ nail  parings, I a section  of hair."  Or  in  "After  the  Battle"  the  "you"  literally becomes a  corpse  and  all  that  remains  is nonentity:  "That is - I  nothing  to
remain, I nothing to destroy." But unlike Sartre or Beckett, Musgrave is not expressing the logical inevitability of meaninglessness. The  question of meaning is essentially experiential: it either is or is not there, depending  on the random visi­
tations of vision. Her  landscapes  are frequently despiritualized  because the other has just deserted them. The moment of many poems is the moment of withdrawal of the other, leaving only the husks of personality, the rag-ends of an empty world. In "January 6" this is dramatized in terms of love:

Since you left
I have waited like the hours
unseen and heavy ...

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

The  long days mate with the nude on the calendar

I have packed time like a suitcase

Now there  is nothing  to do but organize my boredom.

The  other  as "Thou" (or  muse)  may be simultaneously sexual,  natural, imagina­ tive and  religious: it is the well-spring of creativity  and  meaning in this world.  Of course  the  bulk  of the  poems -especially  the  earlier  ones -are  devoted   to  be­ wailing  its absence.  In  a quite  strict  sense Musgrave's poems  are  Romantic. But it  is precisely  this  Romantic search   for  ultimate meaning in  almost   everything she  writes  that  most  distinguishes her  poetry  from  the  hundreds of other   poems about  love, landscape and  the lost self that  appear in magazines each  year.




kE sECOND BOOK Entrance of the  Celebrant  ( 1972) shows a greater concern  with  the  poem  as artefact; an  attempt at  fuller  objectivization through the  use of mythological figures, talismanic objects  and  semi-ritual  situa­ tions. The   verse  is tighter, less rhetorical-at times,  in  fact,  too  elliptical and  somewhat obscurantist. But  the  (many) successes achieve  a  quasi-mystic power, as in  "Gathering in  the  Host's  Wood." The  dramatic  situation is central here: but  it is by no means  static  and  the  pattern of its  transitions must  be assimilated by careful  reading. The  poem is essentially atmospheric, so that  we have less ritual  enactment than  the mood  of enactment built  up through cinematic glimpses. This  is appropriate since the subject-a rare moment  of apotheosis  of the self with  the other-is arcane. The  poem expresses the imaginative act itself. The  first section effects an accumulation of  preparations-the host's gathering, the  plight  of "the hunted," the  Elf-queen's departure, the vision of the  "little  friend." In  the  record
a preliminary union  of the self and  skuld is dramatized: "My tongue  kisses I the
cold kiss of her I mouth, her lips I the borders  of constellations." In  the  third the magical  forest  is presented: it  is a  place  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  magical dead,
frozen  in the mirror of art,  where  one footfall  could  awaken  them.  And  so to the
final apotheosis:

She
as a toad, and I a squirrel,
embrace  in the
royal fire, spitting ash in memory of a king.

The   word  "we" in  this  section  signals  the  rare  moment   of  union.   The   self  is possessed in  possessing its anima  -a  unique  summation won  from  all  the  rejec-

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

tions, persecutions, bafflements  exorcised in other  poems. But it is typical  of Susan Musgrave's world  that  this summation should  have  nothing of the Adamic gleam or Beatific Vision  about it. It is pagan, witchy, animistic,  awesome; celebrating an ecstasy of coldness,  death, triumph and  possibly revenge.
The  bulk of the  poems  in this  collection  express, once again,  not so much  apo­ theosis as the  need  for it. The  self is trapped in a world  of partial  becoming and  incipient destruction; of birth  through death  and  death  in life;  of  variable lovers, mysterious  familiars and   fearful, if  fascinating, elemental  powers.  It seeks  for communion with  stones and  bones and  stars;  it mates  and  wrestles with  men  and  mankind; it hunts  with  birds  of prey and  consults  with  witches;  almost  always it turns  back  in  on  itself,  returns to  un-creation,  becoming lost in  a  wilderness  of blood,  feathers and  dying  ash.  But  the search  for apprehension persists:  "Every­
thing   must  learn  I How   I have  dreamed it";  "the I closed  thought  open   to
delivery"; "dreaming how I would  I love him if I knew him"; "everything I have
become is something already  gone."  In  poem after  poem Musgrave keeps her appointment with  herself-and with  the  world  that  has made  and  unmade her, the metamorphic shapes  of that  other  which  haunts her as much  by its absence  as by its sudden epiphanic visitations. And  almost  always she manages to articulate a pattern of meaning to mark  some important boundary: "the shape  of darkness,
a sound  I that  nowhere would  dare  to form."
The  poems  may  be approximately differentiated into  three  main  kinds:   those which  concern  the self and  the  natural world; the self and  the  male; the self and its familiars. Such  categorization is arbitrary, of course:  the  familiars may  speak through natural objects; the lover's  world  will include  both  objects  and  familiars; the  familiar may  appear as an  aspect  of the  male,  and  so forth. Nevertheless  the distinctions serve to focus emphases in the  poems as well as to facilitate discussion of them.  In  the  first category the  emphasis  is on the  lone self caught  in  the  toils of  birth, death and  becoming, and  encountering the  impersonal objects  of  the natural world  which  stand  potentially as codes to meaning. "Facing Moons" can be quoted in full:

This  night spent watchful,  waking, no sound as the
moment  of all sound
echoes anything  else,

this moment  facing moons in darkness, dull glow
from watchers,  here and  I

here but  not here before myself

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

inside-
moon of sleep constant inside sleep, moon that I am creeping down.

The  poem articulates  a polarity  between the self ("watchful," "darkness," "here but not here")  and  the object,  ("moon  of sleep," "dull  glow," "constant"). The self responds actively to the other: there is "no sound"  but the moment  "echoes I
anything  else";  the self is "here" but yet not so, and  is "before  myself I inside." In a sudden transition at the end it moves to assimilate the moon into its own need
("moon  of sleep"), hence, "moon  that  I am I creeping down."  It  is a relatively simple poem but it expresses one form of dynamic in the Musgrave self-world­ awareness, complication,  assimilation. In inspired moments the natural world may be apprehended by appropriation: or, the self may be apprehended by becoming the other.
"The Herd" (unhelpfully  titled, I think)  is considerably more complex. Again it starts  from  a  specific  place  ("No  one  would  come  here")   and  time  ("this time"), but it holds the potentiality  of "forever" and "distances." It concerns soli­ tude  and  hence  its ultimate  locus is the  dimensionless vortex  of  the  individual
mind:   "I am  somewhere I nearer  myself";  "All  I  am  becoming  anyway I is
wrong";  "Again  and  again  I grow I no older." The self is in search of its identity
-any kind  of identity.  It  is "like  roots," exists in  darkness,  hears  but  cannot remember  sounds, senses "all  things  disappearing," remains  ageless, imagining, but not finding, a man: yet also it asserts its own immortality  and  integrity  ( re­ sisting self-betrayal), senses the inevitability of process and finds a partial identity in aloneness, "haunting the dark ground."  Not only is the world alien here, but the self is, too-a  perceived  flux, living and  partly living, nauseous  yet to  be pro­ tected, inventive but  also fated;  its own creative strivings seen as a function  less owned than  trapped  in. It is a powerful poem and  one that  yields to empathetic
interpretation even as it admits confusion:  "The  words tell I again and again and
maybe this time I dream  of finding what it was they say." As in "Simply" the self is "there  ... I moving, not yet I not alive";  and  yet this also is a living experi­ ence:  the predicament  of the self exiled both from  the meaningful  other  and its own meaning.
In  poems about  the self and  the male the motivation  is similar  to that  in the love poems in Songs of the  Sea-Witch. In  "Crow  Wood"  the  male is also a  fa­
miliar, a spirit  ("every  man I his ghost"), and  the self acknowledges his passing
rather  than  becoming part  of his life: in "To  Someone Asleep" there is relation­
ship, but between active self and passive other; in "Finding Love" the relationship is more  human  and  changeable: "I told  you, then I the  first lie  I  had  in  my heart"; in "As Death  Does" it is nostalgic, sensual, elegiac. The  dialectic is never
repeated as such:  each poem sounds out, as if by radar,  the imagistic pattern  of a

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

new relational  experience.  What  is remarkable,  indeed, is the absence of cliche; the absence, even of any inherited  guidelines in the encounter  of self with  male. All is intuited  uniquely within  the confines of Musgrave's private  vision.
"The night, the real night ... "is particularly interesting because it suggests the degree to which the self half-creates the male other:

I had dreamed him before, the stranger within me
I have been waking beside. For a long time it was so dark
I couldn't  remember anyone
Then I wanted it to be night again.

The  poem proceeds to postulate  a negation, the lover announcing "I  have  van­
ished!" "That sadness," the  poet notes, "I was waiting for"; she has a vision of him "walking I into the blind sun" and the poem moves on to speculate  on "this gladness we have shared I together in our first loneliness." "Shared" is an impor­ tant  word in Susan  Musgrave's  verse, and a comparatively  rare  one. It  typically
embraces dimensions of solitude and betrayal which appear  as its normal opposite. Assimilation and differentiation, togetherness through  an awareness of the other's essential aloneness, fidelity woven out of dreams of betrayal are hall-marks  of this
relational  world.  "It is doubtful  ... I that  I shall  return  by you I in  the same
shape  as I  came"  we read  in "Finding Love." Relationship  is tenuous -every new start  may seem a different  kind of failure-yet  the need for it remains.  In fact the male other is the frequent  objective correlative of the larger  "Thou." In a sense all Musgrave's  poems are love poems, for her sense of the universe is essen­ tially relational.  This explains the peculiar "conjugation" of her verse, which one might term the First Person Vocative. Both the "I" and  the "You" look beyond the reader to some ultimate  Other  as the real addressee.
The spirit-world evoked in poems about the self and its familiars may, as I have suggested, express its own kind of horror. But it provides meaning -for the poet, probably  a magical  meaning; for  the  reader,  at  the least a  metaphoric one. In "Sounding," for example, the unnamed  spirit  ("she") is virtually  a projection  of
the self: "she is I the same as I am and I I am the same I as anyone alone." This
projected lady assumes the kind of external identity the self often lacks on its own. She is prodigal,  tenacious, forceful, mysterious, pervasive, courageous,  faithful  in her fashion. She never threatens  to engulf the self as the male often does; rather she represents a self-echo and provides a form of transcendence even in the poem's
typical  ending-in-crisis:   "She  follows me I attentive I to  the  failing  edge."  In
"The Tribe  of the Sea" the other  is an apparition  seen in relation  to a group of old men. Her  eyes are "the  moon's  colour";  she personifies the grave, seclusion, seduction;  she sprouts flowers, is naked "with  the new moon's life." Not surpris­ ingly she is too much for the old men, who go fishing elsewhere;  meanwhile  the

66

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

lady  glides off "riding I the  last wave out."  Almost surprisingly,  the  poem  suc­ ceeds on its own terms. The  lunar  spirit is fully evoked. There  is no Celtic Twi­ light  fayness or  dreaminess  in  her  presentation: she  is sensual,  magnetic,  dan­ gerous. To this reader at least, she succeeds in invoking the white Goddess as few of Robert  Graves' poems actually do.
"Night   and  Fog"  presents  the  familiars  as "voices":   it  expresses separation between the self and these others and hence offers a useful counterpoint to "Sounding" and  "The Tribe  and  the Sea."  But its central  importance  springs from  overt declaration  of the realities which underline  virtually  all these poems. "Night  and  Fog" is structured as a dialogue between  the self's meditative  char­ acterization  of the  voices and  its direct appeal  to the other  they  represent. The voices have  called  her  into  the  woods;  they  are  "everything,"  dimly  figured
("Moss  grew I over their  faces, seaweed I was their  hair") ; they  inhabit  mist,
fire, moon;  they represent a deep part of the self -"theirs are the wounds I be­
neath the scar"-indeed they have created it; but they are dying, and then "they are  dead  now I and I do not answer."  In fact, they refuse to answer throughout the  poem:  hence the anguished  appeals of the persona:

'Stay with me -you who are other to all

I am-you whose darkness is the shadow of my birth'.

'Stay beside me-you  I have returned  to
more times ever than
before;  you I  have  returned  to other than anyone,
other to myself'.

'Stay with me, I need your comfort now. One  wish is that you would  return  and
all would be warm again!'

(italics mine)

Throughout the world of Musgrave's  poems-behind the identity of the self and its functions, the reality of objects, lovers, familiars-is heard  the echo of these voices of  the  other.  And  in  this  poem-as  in  many  others-even  the  echo threatens  to vanish. At the end there is a final appeal,  "Stay  with me," and  then
a note of assertion:  "Out on the I trailing edges of darkness I I scatter  their last
bones before me I to my will." This  is fair  rhetoric,  but  no answer  to the  need expressed in the poem. When the mood of defiance is passed the self will have to

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE


wait for these "last  bones" to live again,  for the voices to speak  as animistic Word. For  the  voices constitute the  life-principle behind  the  "will" itself.




GRAVE-DIRT AND  SELECTED  STRAWBERRIES  ( 1973)  consti­ tutes  an  important  new  stage   in  Susan   Musgrave's  poetic  development. It  is divided  into  three  sections-Grave  Dirt, Kiskatinaw  Songs  and  Selected Straw­ berries-each rather different in subject  matter, intent  and tone. Selected Straw­ berries, in fact,  is quite  unlike  anything Musgrave has written before.  I shall  con­ sider  it only briefly, for  I do not  believe this delightful tour-de-force points  a per­ manent direction for  her  poetic development. Strawberries is witty,  light-hearted, knowing,   mock-proverbial,  satiric:  full  of  surreal   images,   pseudo-information, pastiches  and  zany  conceits. The  self as protagonist is entirely  withdrawn, leaving the field clear for the preposterous, hilarious,  all-purpose symbol of the strawberry, which  is located  at  the  very  centre  of world  history.  The   collection  is splendid, and  one  hopes for  more  like it, since  it expresses a vital  new  vein  of talent. But it is not a product of  Musgrave's central  poetic imagination: it constitutes rather a witty spin-off from her deep  and  darker  preoccupations with the self-world.  The  issues articulated in Sea-Witch and  Entrance can  only be  elaborated in a  poetry which  takes  up  where  they  leave  off.
Kiskatinaw   Songs   (written  before  the  Grave-Dirt  poems)    effects  this  in  a
unique way.  For  Susan   Musgrave has  here  employed   "primitive" rhythms and
"natural" images  to create a neo-tribal synthesis of self and  other:

Grand-father, rise up
Spread  earth
Over me.
That man's  eye
Was a fire that  burned
Into  me.










or:
 What  sort of fire, grand-daughter, What  sort of fire?

Ashes to animal
It could be that.

("Transformation Song")


Bindweed bind
The  hunting moon

Bind the stars

68

SUSAN MUSGRAVE

Bind the hollow mountain
The dry stream.

Bind the backed-up
Broken water

Bind the sky.

("Net Maker's Song")

This new mythological objectivity  (expressing a Collective Consciousness as well as Unconscious)  does indeed  "bind" self to other, other  to other,  and  female  to male. Self-as-fragmentation becomes transformed  into  the  tribal  self, where  the world  has social coherence.  Thus  the  concealed  "tense"  in  these  poems  is the First Person Plural-the lost "we" of "After the Rain"  projected as Indian  com­ munal consciousness.
The transcendence  resulting from this breakthrough is evident  in the new  rela­
tions  with  nature,   male  and  Spirit  respectively. Female-male  interchange,  for instance, shows none of the familiar exploitation and anguish. On  the contrary  it becomes playful, sensuous, comradely, wholesome.

Go to the right place
My thick one - empty out
Go ahead
I keep my face hid. Go on
Like this, when the fish jump.

("Counting  Song")

In "Children's Song" the sexual act, far from being isolating and disillusioning, is a shared  game  which  fructifies the larger  community.  The  children  watch  and learn themselves, en joying the interchange in Blakean innocence:  "He  puts it in J
He pulls it out.... Because I like to watch J  They show me." And such relational
warmth  characterizes  even separation  here. "Song at Parting" expresses affection, tenderness and mutual  understanding: "When  I fly up,/ Don't  look out!" says the
woman repeatedly, and near the end:  "Between us there is J  Much  to be remem­
bered." The simple dignity of these words contrasts strongly with the strident recrimination  of many earlier  poems. And there is also here the notion of simple affectionate  service, one to the  other:   "Should  you fail and  darkness  come....
Then  I will come to that  place J  And bury you." This is a far cry from the sophis­
ticated self-male world where death  and  burial  tend  to be psychic annihilations visited by one partner  upon the other.
Natural  objects and  spiritual  forces are also fruitfully  inter-dependent in  this collection. Where the modern self is normally divorced from its fragmentary world

6g

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

and fleeting familiars, the tribal self is part of both spirit and  nature.  There  is no need for the "I" to yearn for a "Thou" beyond the "It" because all entities unite here as "We." Reality  has become a spiritualized  continuum:

From the throat of a
Fish-hawk
I fell in

From the gullet of a
Black-shag
I fell in

From the shroud of my
Grand-father
I fell in.




Bind my dried-up
Deadhand  sister
 ("Cradle Song")


Bind the backed-up
Broken water

Bind the hunched-up
Humpback salmon

Bind the witch
("Net Maker's Song")

As in the earlier realm of the familiars, this world may at times be cruel, dark and ugly. But it has meaning-a meaning  not dependent  on  present  mood.  Hence even suffering  and  death  may  achieve  their  appropriate ceremony:   "Fish-eye
feeds the I White bird I Lay bones around  his heart." In Kiskatinaw  Songs, then,
the preoccupations  of the earlier  poems achieve at least a temporary consumma­
tion:  the questing  persona has here attained  wholeness in the other as communal self. However,  the "tribe" is ultimately self-projected, even self-invented-Mus­ grave is of the modern Western culture, for all her delicate mythologizing. Hence these songs represent  a further  mapping  of her  mental  territory,  not the  end  of the journey.
In  Grave-Dirt  and  in the later  poems from Impstone  (which  I shall consider
together  because they represent  a single period of development)   we are  back in the world of fragmentation and  loss. However  there  is a still greater  degree of objectivization  here-especially in certain  poems. The  fear of rejection  and vio­
lation  remains -at  times projected  in new and startling  ways:  "I want I enor­
mous  darkness I inside  me, I unnatural I emptiness, I not  small  fingers  and I

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

bodies all lodged and  I lost ... " ( "Mterthought"). But the self-other  dialectic is also developed in two uniquely objectivized ways: by mask and by narrative  myth. These devices, together  with the  presence of "occasional"  poems  ("Burial of the Dog,"  etc.)  indicate  the  extent  to which  Musgrave  has  begun  to  distance  and control  her preoccupation  with the self-world.
The  use of mask  to get outside  the suffering "I" and  thus  achieve  a  certain balance is especially effective in relation to the theme of solitude.  Agriv is given public identity  as "The Hermit," while the girl in "One-Sided Woman" is seen consistently from the outside -both her "inner" world of thoughts  and  dreams and  her outward  habits  and  appearance  (her  sexual organs  are  the  most  fully described part of her)  being peculiarly reified. In this poem as in "The Hermit" we have an accumulation of short sections which build  up  refracted  glimpses of life through  a considerable  time-span-in contrast  to the  earlier  emotive  "mo­
ments."  The girl is the victim of both natural  forces (e.g., "the  I moon's  pull")
and the male "hunger." She is world-weary, forlorn, geared  to habit.  Yet a part of her still rebels:

The person inside her is beating the
damp walls­ Knocking on stone
now and again
in the wreckage of
her dreams.

Like Tennyson's Mariana she exemplifies a type of stricken  vulnerability. Any possibility of transcendence  of the situation  (suggested here in terms of "maps," "a  journey")   is crushed  by nausea,  anguish,  boredom.  The  past  and  present  is inescapable:  a  new future  apparently  impossible. We  have  here  not  active  tor­ ment  but  passive suffering. The  self becomes reconciled  to its world  in  terms of
passive despair:   "the I calm  centre  of a I different  storm."   In  section  xrr the
exploitative  men  cannot  finally  touch  her:  "her  eyes like stones I that  water I
could not reach."
Agriv's technique  of survival in "The  Hermit"  is an even completer  surrender to stoical passivity. An old man, he is at the opposite pole to the young woman of other  poems. Time  works on  him  not only as memory,  but  as physical erosion. Horrific images express the assaults of the natural  world.

The ravens came for his eyes; Agriv said nothing....

eels risked his left nostril. ...

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

Agriv has eyes like burned-out stumps in a second-growth wilderness.

Agriv is almost  a case-study of the self at  bay; He represents  Minimal,  even Terminal, Man -like a  Beckettean  tramp   transmogrified  into  a  West  Coast Wordsworthian rustic. He must endure  the assault of predators,  of wind and ice, of time, of the female apparition, of his own exhaustion  and  self-laceration.  Yet he has both  Independence and  a form  of Resolution. He  achieves co-existence
with  the  world  through  stoicism:  "Agriv  said I nothing."  He  apprehends and
subsists-shivering, breathing "in  the thin light," hearing the sounds of his own decay, learning  the suffering  of woman,  "not  pitying age"-not  even  his own. He  has learnt  to  be what  he  is-what  the  other  renders  him.  Instead  of the agonized fragmentation of Songs  of the  Sea-Witch we have here a bitter integrity
which constitutes a form of self-sufficiency: "A man could be lonelier I always I
sharing  the same  bed."  The  creator  in "Genesis"  has no better  defence  against solitude.
"The Carver," the last poem in lmpstone, reveals a natural  connection  between
the mask and the narrative myth as devices. The carver is to an extent a mask of the  poetic  self, suffering   ("waves   break I over  his  heart"), but  also  creating ("Metals are clearer, I bone is nearer, I but wood understands"). But the carver
is in fact Time, and so the poem becomes a myth of natural  creation -that sculp­ tural  erosion which  unbares  the  final shape  of an  Agriv. Time  as  process (the natural world as other)  is both separate from the self in the manner of its creation and closely related to it in being creative. Myth provides the meaning  and  whole­ ness to a world that  too often seems fragmented  and incoherent.  But the myth is of a special  kind  here. Though it is "personal"   (as  opposed  to  the  communal myth of Kiskatinaw Songs) the self does not appear  as character  in relation to the mythic  other  ( cf.  "Gathering in  the  Host's  Wood").  Following  Hughes'  Crow poems,  perhaps,  Musgrave   has  created  a  series of  unique  myths-narrative rather  than dramatic-which are self-subsistent, constituting an apotheosis of the self-other opposition without  exploiting  the polarity directly.
"The Impstone" is a prime example of this, combining the resignation of "The Hermit" with the fable-like impersonality  of, say, "Genesis." The  self-other  dia­ lectic achieves synthesis at a further  level: neither escape from nor a turning loose of emotion, in Eliot's celebrated  terms, but the establishment of a finally  Roman­ tic "objective  correlative" -like Wordsworth's  Peele Castle, at once adamantine
and luminescent. "This stone has been I rained on I this stone has been I left out
in the I dark." But resignation does not preclude creative activity. So the stone can
create  woman  (the  other?)   in  1; can  register poetic truth  in  VI  ("knowing  the

SUSAN  MUSGRAVE

truth's disguised I as a bulldozer or a I typewriter"). In fact  the impstone provides an  almost   excessively  fitting  summation of  Miss  Musgrave's preoccupations to date. It is multifaceted like  the  strawberry; it  comprehends single  identity and relationships and   transcendence; it  is  primeval and   archetypally modernist at once; it symbolizes both  self, and  world, and  therefore  the self-world. In  addition, along  with  other  poems  from  "Grave-Dirt" and  Impstone, it  adds  to  the  earlier paradigm the  important  dimension of Time. The  "carver" is always  immanent here, setting  the poems beyond  the earlier "tense" of the psychological present. The
past  has now  its own  reality,  irrespective of present  mood  ("This stone  I was an
island I once  ... ") ; the  impstone's identity includes  all its past  metamorphoses. The ending of the  poem  is somewhat melodramatic (literally  gun-in-mouth), but the  central symbol  transcends this. Suffering,  creating, enduring, the  impstone is a touchstone which  consolidates Musgrave's poetic  identity: as a  Canadian  sur­ vivor, a psychic survivor, a Romantic survivor.












Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from the current  list)

RELEASE, by Pegeen Brennan,  $3.50
THE BELIEVABLE BODY, by C. H. Gervais, $3.50
SPIDER IN THE SUMAC, by Paul Gotro, $2.50
MOVING INLAND, by Diana Hayes, $4.00
SCARECROW, by Rosalind MacPhee, $4.50
NO OTHER LODGINGS, by Frances Itani, $4.00
POINTWISE, by Derk Wynand, $4.00

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton,  N.B. E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED ON  REQUEST)



73


review articles





FRINGE BENEFIT

Roy Daniells


A.   J. M.   SMITH,  The   Classic  Shade,  Selected  Poems. McClelland & Stewart,  $5·95·


THE WORK OF Arthur Smith has been examined with  such critical acu­ men  and  so discriminately praised  that  it would   be   superfluous  here   to   attempt another   survey  of   his   characteristic merits.  What  follows is a species of fringe  benefit,    the   personal    impression   of   a reader   on  the  west  coastal fringe  of  the Canadian  mainland,  far  from   the  corri­ dors of  critical  power.
I was  leafing  through  The  Classic Shade,  reviewing    some   old   favourites, when  I was summoned to a Chinese wed­ ding   reception,  with   a  few  other  Occi­  dentals  similarly    honoured.   During  a dinner   of   more-than-oriental-splendour, we had  come  to the  sharks' fins when  my opposite number at table, a specialist in antiques,  with  a  background of   Winni­ peg  schools  and  U.B.C., began  for  some reason  to quote  Carman and  I felt again,  even  on  this  coniferous coast,  that  "The scarlet   of  the  maples can  shake  me  like a cry." But what  really shook me was that  anyone  outside  a  lecture room  should  be spontaneously  quoting a  Canadian poet, line by line.
Arthur Smith  I suddenly apprehended
as  moving   between   two  worlds,  one  dy­ ing,  as  the  tradition of  Carman,  Lamp­ man  and  Roberts subsides,  one  powerful  to be born.  The  question arose, How  well has Smith  provided a continuum, bridged

74
 
the  gap,   or  at   least   navigated  between these diversities?
Canadians can  seldom  quote from their own  English-language poets. The  man  in bus  and  the  student in  the  cafeteria are likely  to  know  that  Carman, Pratt,  Bir­ ney, Scott,  Smith  and  others  deserve  our gratitude  but  he  is  unlikely  to  produce four  consecutive  Jines to  prove it. We all know  the  reasons:   they  range  from  such mechanical matters  as  the  reluctance of schools  everywhere to  require  "memory work"  to such  demographic problems  as the shift and drift  of population, the lack of  reciprocal  influence   between   French and   English   poets   in   Canada  and   the steady  influx of immigrants with  cultures and  languages  of  their  own.  My  friend, quoting Carman and  manipulating  his chopsticks,  is an endangered species.
As  we   reached  the   eleventh   course,
something indescribably delicious  encased in sesame seeds, it dawned upon  me that to  the  upcoming generation  in  this  fair province  the  poetry  of  Roberts and  Ned Pratt  may  seem   remote  indeed.  About one-third of  the  students in  the  schools of  Vancouver proper,  the  core  commu­ nity,  do  not  have  English  as  a  first  lan­ guage  and  few  indeed  of this  third  have any  knowledge  of  French.  They   will,  in due course,  produce their own idiom  and  their  poets and  playwrights. The  Chinese

REVIEW ARTICLES



alone, a large  minority in  the  city:  what infusion, from  their culture of the past millenium, will  they  make  into  the  mov­ ing stream  of Canadian sensibility on this western  fringe?
Thinking of Arthur Smith  as a  bridge delicately suspended between  what  has been   and   what   is  yet   to  come,   I am secretly  delighted by his regard  for rhyme and  audible rhythm, those pillars of the temple  that  have served  poets as different as  Walter Scott  and  William  Blake.  (My delight  is   secret   because   my   younger friends have  been telling  me that  I should now look for the pattern of the poet's thinking, not  the "superficial" patterning of his verse.)
Not  that  Smith  treats  rhyme  as a con­
striction.

Over  the  Galway shore The  white bird is flying Forever, and  crying
To  the  tumultuous throng
Of  the sky his cold  and  passionate song.

Line   I appears  unrhymed  but  is subtly echoed   in  Line  3,  as  lines  2  and   3 are echoed  in the last line. And we remember these  lines  because  of this  built-in  rhym­ ing   resonance.  Since   time   immemorial poetry   has  been  composed  to be  heard  and  repeated. The  bard  is  not  a  man  at a typewriter. Bard has become a synonym for  poet   becauseof   the  great   variety   of styles  and  subjects  that   have  lent  them­  selves   to    memorable  utterance.   Give memory  a  moment   to recall  its  treasures  and  what  do  we hear? "Once more  into the   breach,   dear   friends,   once   more," "Gentle and  affable  to me hath  been  thy condescension," "The  poplars  are  felled, farewell   to   the   shade,"  "Till   we  have built  Jerusalem In  England's green  and pleasant  land,"  and   so  on  down   until "They're  hangin' Danny Deever   in  the mornin'." Nor is memorableness confined to  the  standard authors; few  recall  the creator of  "The friendless  bodies  of  un­ buried  men"; the  author of "If I  should
 die,  think  only  this  of  me"  is cherished for  that  one  cry and  Newbolt's name  re­ membered for little  more  than  "The gat­  ling's  jammed  and  the colonel's dead."
I doubt  if Smith   ever  wrote  anything more  compelling  than   "The  Lonely Land." It is, for  one  thing,  applicable as a recognizable scene  to almost  any Cana­ dian   province  and   its  visual   impact  is immediate. But  consider, too,  the artistry of its rhymes.  "And   the  pine  trees/ Lean one way" has been adumbrated and made  to   seem   inevitable   by   "gray,"  "bay," "spray"  in  preceding  lines.  And,  at  the close,  the  rhyme  breaks  down  under the stress  of  the  idea,   which   itself  concerns something broken.
This  is the  beauty of  strength
broken  by strength
and still strong.
Leon  Edel  and  others  have  made clear how  squarely  Smith   the  man  stands  be­ hind  Smith  the  poet. His origins  in Mon­ treal's  Westmount, his acquaintance with both  France and   the  United  States,   his long labours  as a  critical anthologist and his early  desire  to  define  his poetic  voca­ tion-these  are  all  contributory  to  the final   impact   of   the   poems   themselves. Specific   references   to   French  originals  and  Greek myths  are  more  than   casual; they are  places where,  as on some breath­ ing   human  body,   the   structure  of  the whole  shows  for  a  moment the  curve  of rib or collarbone. The structure of Smith's landscape references  is a  little  more puzzling; they seem for the most part unlocated, although perhaps to the reader in Eastern  Canada their  provenance is clearer.  His classical and  Canadian mate­ rials  combine  with  a  deftness  that  keeps us  from   feeling   them   as  an   amalgam. Here   he  resembles   Jay  Macpherson, to whom  he has offered  an admiring tribute in  his verses. When  she  evokes  the  ever­ returning Canadian  Spring, it  is a classi­ cal image  that underlies the picture: "the

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



shepherd under   the  snow/ Sleeps  circled with  his  sheep." Similarly, when   Smith takes me into  the wood

Where the  crisp  floor  muffies the  tread
And  the  classic shade of cedar and  pine
.Soothes  the  depraved head

the image is both  Mediterranean and available a  hundred yards  from  where  I am living.
It is perhaps ungracious to criticize  any poet's   treatment of  the  universal  theme of death. Yet  I  must  admit that  Smith's view,  for  one  of  his  buoyancy,  wisdom and  composure, seems to me unnecessarily negative.

And  tomorrow will be late, For the  ear  shall  turn to clay And  the scrannel pipe  will grate, Shiver, and  die  away,

<A  sigh  of the  inconsequential dead, A murmur in  a drain,
Lapping a severed head, Unlaurelled, unlamented, vain.

One  feels that  he would  pair with Lycidas and   not   with   the   makers   of  lean   and flashy  songs.  Even  the  specific  poem  en­ titled  "My  death" seems strangely incon­  clusive as it concludes:

I am  the  food  of its  hunger. It enlivens my darkness, Progressively illuminating
What I know  for  the  first  time, yes, Is what I've  always  been  wanting.

Smith  is much  possessed  by death and  it is perhaps too  much  to  ask for  such  cer­ tainties   as  Bronte's "what  thou  art  can never   be   destroyed,"   dispensing,   as  it does   with    "the   thousand   creeds,"  in favour of  instantaneous apprehension. Or  for  Dylan  Thomas' refusal   to  mourn for a  child  who  sleeps  "by  the  unmourning water  of   the  riding   Thames" which  as­ sures  that   "after the  first  death there  is no  other." Perhaps Smith's intense  focus in  "The Archer" is as much   as  we have reason  to ask.
 Nothing remains for breath now but  to waive His prior  claim  and  let  the  barb fly clean Into the  heart of what I know  and  hate­ The central black,  the  ringed and  targeted
grave.

Most  of Smith's poems  we  now  enjoy would  have  been  read  with  comprehen­ sion  and  appreciation   by  the  generation of   Roberts,  Lampman,    Carman   and  Scott.  Rhythm and  rhyme  are  respected; images, though  requiring some considera­ tion,  are  in  the main  clear  and  effective; subjects-including    cross-references  to other  poets-enrich  our  sense of a com­  mon  human  experience. "Ancestral ener­  gy  of   blood   and   power/ Beats   in   his sinewy breast."
It is  certain   that   a  poet  can  become
memorable on  the  strength of a handful of poems  that  show a fine excess of sensi­ bility  and   achieve   a  genuine  utterance. The   upcoming  local  generation, a  twist of  many   strands  and  enervated  by  the bombardment of   radio  and  TV -what will this generation make of Sinith? They  will,  I  am  sure,  latch  on  to  such  poems as   the    "Ode"  commemorating Yeats, which  transcends its ostensible  subject  to celebrate the poet absolute; "Chinoiserie," which  links a French sensibility  with a Chinese  work of art; "The Long  Land," which is Canada, pure  and  simple; "Brig­ adier" in which  the  immemorial  irony of differences   in  military  rank   is  made   to sparkle;  the   "In  Memoriam"   for   Ned Pratt, once  more  transcending  the  par­ ticular   for  the  universal; and   probably "The  Archer,"  against  which   my  own prejudice will not  be widely shared. This half-dozen  would  by themselves  suffice to make  Arthur Sinith  part  of our  heritage and  a contributor to our  future.
I have oinitted to pay tribute to M. L.
Rosenthal's "Introduction"  to  this  vol­ ume, which  probes more angles of Smith's sensibility   than   the   above   and   is  well worth  a careful  reading.

REVIEW ARTICLES


BORN OF THE LANDSCAPE


D. G. Jones


en GERVAIS, Poems   for American Daughters. The  Porcupine's Quill, $2.95. JOHN  FLOOD, The Land  They Occupied. The Porcupine's Quill.
TIM INKSTER,  The Crown Prince  Waits for a Train. The Porcupine's Quill, $2.95. DWIGHT GARDINER, A Soul  Station in My  Ear. Coach House, $4.50.
BRIAN HENDERSON,  Paracelsus. The  Porcupine's  Quill,  $I0.95, $4.95 paper.


THIS  IS AN  INTERESTING har­  vest  of  slim  volumes.   They  suggest  the extent   to  which  orienting  oneself  to  the world  and   to  words  has  become  proble­ matical. Five  poets  supply  five  different answers.
ch  Gervais' Poems for  American Daughters  begins  with   Christ,  the  ven­ triloquist,  working   the  dummies  on  his knee  and   ends  with  a  little  girl  cutting out   paper    angels.    In    between   is  the neutral air  inhabited  by  bodies-mostly women,  mostly anonymous, mostly word­  less. The  word  becomes  phallic  or simply somatic,  as in "vVoman":

Eight  months pregnant her  nipples
the  colour of
strong tea

heavy
sagging belly
like a drawn out
voice

complaining her  beauty
is
violated verse

Bodies  define  a  local  space -and  obey natural laws. "Falling Star" remembers a boy sent  to  bed  and  pushing at  the  bed­ room  window  till it flew from  his hands:

suddenly to be arranged over  the earth like a  jig

saw  puzzle  & leaving behind a rent  in  the  sky.
 
It  is a fallen  world.  The  men  talk  bigger and  fall  harder. The   coyote-killing,  pri­ apic  farmer of "His  Father" is carried off with  cancer   of  the  brain.  Charles Atlas sags. Earle  Birney, despite his word hoard, breaks   falling   from   a   tree.   One   large metaphor orients   them  in  their  fall.  We read  in  "Carol Tree"  that   "the   hanged  man,   the  Christs," the  "prodigal ghosts of/  tragedies, fallen once  more," are  "the  bruised  fruit  below/ the  boughs  of  their mother."
Women   are   less  brittle,  yet  bear   the brunt  of the  fall.  Thus, says the  speaker, a  woman  is roused  "to  breathe back  life into  me."  Thus   a  woman   is  a  physical glow,  of  face   and   shoulders,  of  "large hips  and  breasts/ moving  with  assurance at/ ease in breaking/ boundaries."
But   these  encounters  are   casual   and lack any larger  articulation. At best, such moments   may  be  given  a  local  precision and  a minimal  style. "Gift" would  appear to  redeem   the   failure  to  even   manage that.
He  always  lacked style     This  morning was no different
found drowned at the  bottom of a
well  three miles  away.

Such style may give to the deluge the economy and  grace of a miniature. "Poem  for a Daughter" reads:

Her
coloring book

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



.lies wet

in  a field after
a
storm
 
&heavy
 Abitibi where Scott  paddles north  in his canoe.  Both,  in  effect,  "capsize dreams/ as well as boats."
The first lines of the  book, "Dogs bay­
ing at  the  landscape/ as at  a full  moon,"


John   Flood   would   anchor The   Land They  Occupied  in a larger moral  and historical  context,  the   conflict   between the aboriginal people  and  the white  man. The preface focusses the   argument around Duncan Campbell Scott  and  his rgos-rgo6 negotiations of the  James  Bay Treaty. Photographs of Scott,   his  friend Edmund Morris, native Indians and Metis guides add to the documentary character of the  book.
Of  the  poems  roughly   a  third   survey the  early  penetration of aboriginal lands as glimpsed  through the case histories of George  Gladman, Michel, a voyageur, Franklin,  Riel,    Lorne    Saunders,   Mrs. Clay. The  central third  turns  upon  Scott. And  the  last  third   brings  us  up  to  date with further case histories  or personal reports.
Scott   is  the  fulcrum. Before  him  the
white  man  tends  to be assimilated to the land; after  him  the  Indian, the land itself, tends  to be assimilated to the white  man's world.
The scheme   is  neat,   almost   a  cliche.
But  as we read,  things  begin  to slip their moorings; the moral orientation begins to blur,   the   point   of  view  to  become  am­ biguous.  The debate between   Scott  and Morris,    between    the   accuracy  of   the photograph and  the accuracy of  painting, is  incorporated  into   the   text.  Less  and less can  we see "two objects/ separately/ occupying/ themselves."  The speaker identifies   with   the   Indian,  but   he  also identifies   with  Scott.  Kitpoo, champion shaman,   following   his  erection  over   a waterfall  is no less absurd   than  Franklin in the arctic hunting foxes for their  pelts. The   Europe  where   Scott   has   sent   his daughter is no  less treacherous than   the
 might  have warned  us:  our  historical ground   is  not  rational. "Northwest  Pas­ sage" gives us the first glimpse  of a night­ mare   vision  that  dissolves  metonomy in metaphor. It unfolds an  underworld where   a  speaker   (the  speaker?)  invites Mah  e kun  (the  wolf?)  to attack, saying, "Give  it to them." And he does.

Attacks in the  night
.pisses on  caches  of food.

Torrents of urine  burn  out, make  oily and  rank
the  mouths and  bellies  of hysterical men

becoming history.

The  stones, the snowy owl, the  Indian, the  white  man,  the  dead  and  the  living, all now inhabit  this underworld. We may travel  through  it by train, but  it will be a night  journey.

•To move  on the  night train
is to whistle  down  the  night mare
room  of steel  rail blind  and  disfigured
toward a discovery  that  is not
a destination

like  the  magic
of a door  between cars

We  may  sit  tight,  or,  opening the  door, slip and  fall into  the  land.  Either way, it makes little difference.

and if he falls under the wheels of the  train
the  broken pieces of his body  will wave like the  corpse  of a dead god
a lethal germ  that  once inhabited life
at the  passengers
!Whose pathology is that of ravens
rummaging through waste between the steel  rails.

Flood's  recovery of Canadian history, its translation into myth,  may  remind one of

REVIEW ARTICLES



recent  literature, of  Atwood  or  Lee,  but it  has  its  own  particularity in  the  selec­ tion   of   material  as   in   manner.   Such echoes  are  especially  strong  in  the  final, title  poem,  until  we arrive  at  the conclu­  sion  with  its  peculiar  shrunken image  of the  flood:   "The land/  they  occupied in­ cluded   heaven/ and   earth." It  had   its own  natural  boundaries. It was  a  world with  a  vertical orientation, of  metaphor, of  identity. Now,  as  we  try  to  give  it  a purely  horizontal orientation, to fix things in  place   with   survey   lines   and   railway ties,  we  only  dig  our   own   graves.   We establish no essential relation; we founder.

when

we are  wreckers of a  nation
we  scar
with   diggings
of stunted epiphanies, shovelling
ourselves
disjointed into 	incoherent
trenches, vulnerable
.with the  litany of death
blotting

as a pool of rainwater the  reprieve
of the  tragic grin  we claw.

Raven and  railway  show  up  again  in Tim   Inkster's The  Crown Prince  Waits for a Train. The  book opens  with  a score of crows on a dirt  road,  although "when a girl  passed each  day  on  a bicycle/  they flew off/  leaving  dirt  and  gravel,  no fur­ ther  secrets/  excepting a road in sore need of repair." If the actual landscape is  too empty,  one  may  simply  furnish a  raven from  the   poet's  closet  thus   lending "uniqueness/ to an  otherwise  dreary line of  snow/ and   telegraph   poles."   A  neat trick, but there  is more.

Raven shudders and  moves  to  the edge of the  crosstree, then  resting
against its right  wing  becomes a loophole
through which  is sighted in  the  distance
a house  on fire.
 Inkster's world  has  the  orientation of a baroque  theatre. Despite protests, the speaker  is something of a poseur,  a  trans­ vestite,  an  illusionist   working  with  mir­  rors.  As  the  poet  he  is  a  voyeur,  "who  watches/ life  through a  gilt  framed mir­  ror/ graven  with  his  own  reflection." As the  printer he  is  a  pimp,   whose  artifice  is to language "no  more  than  the  idea  of a  whore/ to  an   adolescent/ naked   in  a haystack."  Looking at  a  Tarot card   he may  see  himself  as printer; seated  inside on  a  sunny  afternoon,  he  is  wearing a green visor, and  he appears "to  be simply writing." The  printer, upon  reflection, becomes the poet.
Everything reflects everything else. The immediate landscape becomes a screen upon which to project a film of the past. Watching a lady  watching a  freighter in the  harbour, the  speaker remarks:

... you  were  screening
a film in  which  this  take was  a memory,
and  there  are  the  children
climbing rope  ladders slung
over  the  sides of the  ship, poised
and dropping off
Jike black  tadpoles into  the  sea.

Those  tadpoles  have  to  be  watched. But generall.wthing happens. Past and pres­ ent  can  coexist  because  for  Inkster  time has stopped, his world  has been frozen.
"The  Train  in   the  Station," for  ex­
ample,   presents    us  with   slate   shingles under  a grey sky, semaphores, telegraph, a   "station  with   benches    painted red/ where   porters   sit   in   uniforms/ braided with years/  of service."

tA  man  could  yet walk  through the  door into the  waiting room  and up  to the  wicket tbut there  are  no tickets

and  the  station too is a photograph sharpened as with  bits of gold  tinsel used to mount it in an  album.

It is in just such a station that the Crown

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



Prince,  or  the  poet,  or anyone you like is condemned to wait.

No  train, hence no departure
or  plot,  but  see, the  man  has  now become  a  hero
through sheer  lack  of motion; the  hands in  his pockets are fixed  as in dread of worse  pain.

Paradoxically, the train  has become a metaphor of  a  world   that   has  stopped, the photograph of a world  of shifting images,  metamorphosing objects.
They  are metaphors of a demonic iden­
tity. The  hero  may well dread worse pain, for  he is in  hell,  where  the  past  is simply repeated,  where   out   of   the   frost,   fire, flood  emerge   the  dead.   In  the  water  off Tobermory the divers  touch  the  wreck of the  City  of Cleveland  and  out  float  the corpses   of   dead    lovers.   In    the   snow "north of where crow  comes/ to be called Raven,"  there   emerges   a   man   dressed only  in  a  shirt,   "the cheeks  of  his  but­ tocks/  crisp   as  frost."  Nearby,   indistin­ guishably    silver   as   the   snow,   is   "his grandfather's  plated   pocket  clock."    In nightly  visitations Brebeuf  emerges  to feel "the   shame   ooze  finally/ from   his  loins
. . . glisten down  his thigh."
Complete, predictable, Inkster's sophis­ ticated  hell  has  its fascination. But  there is  a   danger:  love,   a   mere  1f:traction, might  set  time  once  more  in  motion. In "To a   Woman  Almost   Thirty," the  speaker  pleads,  "Lover  please  leave  me."  Because   she  is   blonde,   because   he  has bought a  clock,  because  "there is some­ thing/ about   the   urging of  a  finger/ necessary  to  set  going   the  mechanism," he  fears   for  the   future  of  his  baroque illusion-though   even if   something should   happen he  would  try  and  mam­ tain  it.

Lover  please  leave  me, I am  afraid
that eventually you will  bear  children although in the  end  the  hours
anyway are  the  result  of antics

8o
 played  out  by wooden birds with  gaily  painted faces.

Dwight   Gardiner's  A  Soul  Station in My  Ear tells us we can  tune out the fallen world   and   tune   in,  once   more,   to  the music of the heavenly  spheres.

The  stars  are our  lovers
They  are  loud  and  clear.

Love  is a radio. Love is a zen radio. Love is an  ear.

With  a little  Zen,  a little  Tantra, a little help from  your friends -bush music, the Art  Ensemble  of Chicago, Kerouac, Op­ pen-a little grass, a little breath control, everyman  may become  his own  radio.
With  their conviction that  "We are saved,/ the   signs/ are   unmistakable," these lyrical aphorisms have  a certain hip vitality.  But  apart from  the  doctrine and the directions (do  nothing as hard  as you can,  try  93  on  the  FM   dial,  catch   the next Trane) the program itself remains largely inaudible, ineffable. It's  hard  to distinguish the saint  who arrives  at satori from   the  receiving   set  that   is  hit  by  a short-circuit.

Turn on  the  radio
with  its awesome   possibilities
and  become  invisible for  a while.  Ah,

stoned  again. The lights cranking in my head.

These lighthouses cranking on & off
from  the  city  (and me)

are  tied  with
invisible  radio  waves.
Trane calling from  a distance.

Chuck   Miller's   collages   translate  this aural  world into visual icons, surreal land­ scapes. They  are,  perhaps, apt. But typi­ cally   they   give   us   that   incongruous mixture of  the  mechanical  and   organic  (which  the  electronic age  might  hope  to resolve?)   and   they  are  deserted :  Egyp-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tian  ruins,  steel  bridges  and  buildings,  a bird/rocket   flying   from    a   mechanical mouth  or   ear   as   from   an   automated launching pad-the  beautiful waste  of stars. This  is the music of silence.
Perhaps that  is the  ultimate word, beyond   the  static,   after   the   radio   goes dead.    But   then,    too   often   the   poems sound  like mere chit chat.
Brian  Henderson's Paracelsus comes as
a  kind   of  derailment. We  might   try  to read  it  as history,  as documentary, but  it won't  work. What are we to make of this Renaissance genius  who becomes  the per­ sona  of the  poems  and  who is also some­ thing   of  a  mountebank?

The Montebank is not  simply  a charlatan despite his faulty hat.
To the  crowd  he reveals
the  sun  through it.

Yet  we begin  with some pretty black stuff, flayed bodies, entrails, poisonous  toads. Paracelsus comes  into  the  world  dream­ ing of toads.

Jn the  mines
where he was  metallurgist
,Paracelsus ran  into  his friend Fugger
who  owned  them.
 Things, words  hinge together for  certain periods only
,then  their  constituent elements separate out

Such  is our  normal, fragmented sense of things in a fallen world. As in a failed alchemical experiment -or as in a phase of that  experiment-we are  left  with:

residue  at the  borrom, murk, evaporation, clouds overhead, simple  water between,
possibly  contaminated.

But then,  the speaker  notes:

As I write  this
I)'OU  come  into  the  room your  hair, your  body
rwet
glistening warm.

The  technique is a kind  of no-technique. It   is  a  matter  of  following  Paracelsus trying   to  find   things   through   inadver­ tence:

attempting to align  himself exactly with  things
so that  things  would  align 	themselves n

'Croak,' he said.

He  was  a  modern physician,  successfully treating  syphilis,   exploring  the   idea   of occupational  diseases, of  preventative medicine. But  he  was  also  an  alchemist, an  anti-vivisectionist, a  man  who  hoped, it  appears, for  a  resurrection by  becom­ ing   his  own   toad.   For   the   toad  is  the stone  of  the  philosopher,  the  foul  mass from  which  he may distill the  pure  elixir, the  pure  gold  of the  philosopher's stone.
Everyman may  become  his own  toad, to prove  the alchemical wisdom that  what is  below   reflects   what   is  above,   what is inside  reflects  what  is outside-to recover  in an  analytical age  the intuition of  a  radical   identity, of  the  unity  of all things.
 It is a matter of arranging to be arranged
by the world.
Thus   the  toad,  the  real  toad,  amphi­ bian,  completes   his  habitat of  field  and marsh,  an  addition, but  also swallows  its objects,   becomes   infested   by  stone   and clod, building  "a semantics/ of the place." Thus:

This  toad  I speak  of
(said  Paracelsus in a book)
is a vernacular toad either silent
or croaking my own squat leaping language-
a  language hidden
lin a bush  and a field by softening logs and  hardening stones
,that  only  repeated listening
ambling through it
will find.

8r

REVIEW ARTICLES



All the  books  delude, are  incomplete.
The body  is your  text sounding it.
We are back where  we started with Gervais' bodies in a local  space,  but  with a  difference-in  their   encounters  they are  sounding each   other, becoming the other.  "It  is   this   continual/ meeting/ where   we  are/ that   floods  our  separate rooms."    We   redeem   ourselves    in   the other,  in the world. On  the subject  of redemption Paracelsus is reported as saying:
 environment. But we arrive by a different route,   by  the  alchemist's  conception  of the  coincidence  of  opposites,   that  con­ traries   cure   contraries,  that    the   "true ground  of medicine  is love."
These  too  might  be considered poems for  American daughters.  These   too  end with  the  flood,  but  also  with  a  rainbow.

After  the  rain
the  spectrum arc completes itself in  this still  water we
look out  over.

'No  one  wishes  to buy  back  the  lease but  simply  to take  over  the  house.
As a people  we approximate
who  we are  not
 These   too  invoke   an   apocalyptic  time, but  it is not demonic. Henderson's world contains  not  only  past  and   present   but

yet.
We arrive at  something not  unlike  Olson and   the  so-called   Modernist poets'  em­ phasis  on  man  as a  subject  participating with   the   objects   of  his  immediate  en­ vironment. We  arrive at  something very close to Dennis  Lee's emphasis on  listen­ ing, on being attentive to the  paradoxical duality  of   all   things   in  our   immediate
 also  the  future. It is "the  daughter you
don't  yet  have"   who   plays  on  a  stone circled by water, who was born of the landscape under  the rainbow.

Dr. Paracelsus, who  has  no diploma, performed the  section.
You are  scarless.
Our daughter steps  off the  stone and  comes  out  the front door
behind us.




COMMUNICATIONS IN CONTEXT

Rowland Lorimer

MARSHALL MCLUHAN,  translated by Derrick de  Kerckhove, D'Oeil  a Oreille. Edi­
tions  Hurtubise HMH.
PAUL  RUTHERFORD,   The Making of  the   Canadian Media. McGraw-Hill  Ryerson,
$12.95, paper $5.95.
PATRICIA  HINDLEY,   GAIL M.    MARTIN  and   JEAN   MCNULTY,   The Tangled Net: Basic
Issues  in  Canadian Communications. J. J. Douglas, $12.95.
ROBERT COLLINS,  A  Voice  from  Afar: The History   of Telecommunications in  Can­
ada.  McGraw-Hill  Ryerson, $14.95.


THE FOUR BOOKS that  are the basis  of  this  commentary provide an interestingly  divergent collection. The writing is various,  being that of a theorist­ humanist, an  historian, a  journalist and three   media   researchers.  That so  diver-
 
gent  a group  would  find  a common  sub­ ject  is  perhaps  a  sign  of  the  character and  organization of Canadian enquiry in the field of communications. For  the con­ ceivers   of  Canada  as  "little  and   tardy  America," I  am  sure  that   such  a  diver-

REVIEW ARTICLES



gence  represents an early stage in the evolution of an identifiable "field," one which   is,  of  course,   "further  advanced in the  U.S.A."
But the fact is that communication research  and  theory  is far more  advanced and  exciting  in Canada than  in  the  U.S. As McLuhan himself says, the Americans are   always   behind   the   times.  And   yet, while the books that are the basis for this commentary provide  something of an indication of the breadth of viewpoint brought to  the  field,  I  am  not  sure  that (with   the  exception of  the  collection on and  by McLuhan)  they  capture what  is most  exciting  about  Canadian work.
McLuhan  is  the   theorist-humanist  I have  referred  to. It is his work  which provides  some  overall   perspective which can  be used  to relate  the  disparate views of  the  central  topic   of  the  three   other books. To comment on this collection  of essays I did some broader reading around
the  selections  in  D'Oeil a Oreille.  It  was
a  good  chance to  review  McLuhan.  Be­
cause  I  have  not  made  particular use of McLuhan in  my own  work,  I have  read him  in  bits  and  pieces  from  1g66  to  the present.   My  memory  of my first  impres­ sions   is  that    I   thought  the   work   was trivial.  As I saw it McLuhan was writing  in   a   very   opaque  manner   about  the obvious.  I was not  the only one who  was unable   to  "put on"  McLuhan  formally  although I was very  much  already wear­  ing   what   he   was   writing    about.  The  numerous   reviewers   of   his   early   work were  usually prepared to grant him origi­ nality  but  certainly not  wisdom,  a  grain  of  truth  in  his ideas,  a  neglected  factor, but  certainly not  the  identification of  a fundamental yet unrecognized viewpoint.
But   time   and   this   mini-retrospective have  allowed  me  to see two  strengths in McLuhan.  The   first  is  his  scholarship. His work, like that of his forebear, Harold Innis,    is  firmly   grounded  on   both   a breadth and depth  of  understanding
 which  appears very  seldom  in  social  en­ quiry  in  North  America. This fact  comes through most  clearly  in  The  Gutenberg Galaxy. The  second strength  is the  power of  his  analysis.  The  predictions  he  has made   on  the  basis  of   his  analysis   have stood  the  test  of  a  little  over  a  decade. While  this  may  not  seem  like  a  terribly  significant  length  of  time, the accomplish­ ment  is,  considering the  nature of  com­ munications and  its rate  of development, formidable.
The selections  Derrick  de  Kerckhove has  chosen  for  D'Oeil  a  Oreille  provide
an  interesting  range   of  McLuhanesque. In  a  sense  this  set  of  readings  performs much  the same  job as Understanding Media,  a  job  not  inappropriate to  Mc­ Luhan's concern   with   presenting  some­ thing  in  a  mode  reflective  of  the  central thesis.  Here   we  have   McLuhan  in  con­ versation,  in commentary, under contract (I presume) , being made  linear by others,  and  so on. This  is not  unlike  a repertory. As  McLuhan says  in  one  of   the  essays, Bogart   buffs  gain  a  sense  of   their   man through his various  movie roles. Here  we gain  a  sense of  McLuhan  in  his  writing for  various  purposes.  For  the  most  part,  however,  the  sense we gain  is the  spinoff of  the  position  not  its  roots,  its  applica­ tion  rather than   its  formulation. This  is especially   true   of   "La  popote aux   no­ velles,"  "De  la  Russie," and   "Toutes les responses sont questions.... "
The    scholarship  is   more    visible   in
"Roles,  masques et repn  sentations."
is because McLuhan is addressing himself to   academics   about  academic  activity. One of the other reasons that this essay deserves particular attention is that  it contains  a definition  of "content," a defi­ nition  which  leads  to  an  elaboration of "medium"  as   in   "the   medium  is  the message."

IL'usager  d'un medium ou  d'une technologie en est  le contenu. Le  Lecteur est  le contenu

REVIEW ARTICLES



du  poeme   ou  du  langage dont il  se  sert  et pour utilizer n'importe laquelle de ces formes, il  doit  litteralement Ies endosser  Ies "revetir." Du  coup, Ie voila  lance  dans 'une exploration imaginaire qui  lui  fait  decouvrir
a  Ia  fois   les  possibilites  et   Ies  Iimites   du
medium.

It is  in  such  tidbits   that one  finds  the genius   of  McLuhan,  in  the   conception rather than   the  application. This   is not to  cast  de  Kerckhove's effort  negatively. In  fact,  with   just  a  few  tidbits    we  are introduced  to  novel   ideas   at   aaccus­ tomed   pace.  This   contrasts to  the  bom­ bardment of conceptions which McLuhan presents   in  his  own   writing.  In  such  a
collection as that  in D'Oeil a Oreille  one
can   begin  to  sense  the  generics  of'Mc­
Luhan  because  one  is given  a  sufficient number of examples to  digest  them.  The added   advantage  of  such   a  mixture  is that  the  detail  of  the  "probes"-for  in­ stance,  that  movies  and  TV differ funda­ mentally  by  virtue of  the  fact  that   the former is "light  on"  and  the latter "light  through"-can be  seen   for  what   they are,  individual  examples of   the  general  conception. As a  consequence  the  reader  will fee_!less inclined to dismiss or accept  the entire system based  on this one insight or folly.
One   thing   must   be  said   about   Mc­
Luhan's "probes." It  may  be  that   with future   technological  development  the concept of "light   through" may  come  to have a far-reaching power  and  McLuhan will  be  hailed   as  prophetic. But  it  may also be the case that  the  construction will never  be  particularly important. In  that case  the  point  will  be used  by detractors as  an   example  of  the   "hit  and   miss" aspect  of  McLuhan's  thought.  However, such  a  probe  is  just  an  extension of  his notion  about  the importance of the inter­ changeability  of  type.   It is  a  seized-on point  which  appears central to  the  tech­ nology. However, it  may  prove  not  to be crucial.  Indeed,  it   may   prove   to  be  a
 misreading  by  the   master   of   his  own system.
Perhaps  the  most  engaging aspect  of
McLuh n's
volved  If  one  attempts to  "put him  on"
a_s   one  surely  must   to  appreciate his  in­
sights.  In   such  a  process  of  immersion
?ne ends  up either  frustrated or, if allow­
mg  McLuhan  his  humanity,  somewhat
bemused   and  a  little  wiser.  It is impor­
tant   to  remember  that   he  comes  to  us from    Joyce,   utterly   charmed.  And    I would   think   that   he  is  involved   in  an attempt to extend  the genre. Both authors car;; e
on   m both  senses of the phrase.  It is the
fun   of  being   on   the   trail   without  the climax  of capture, control and  as a result the  transformation of identity.	'
But  such  a process  of enquiry has  cre­ ated  somewhat of a paradox around Mc­  Luhan.  The   academic   stands   for   that  which  thought  can   encompass.  But  thought is a limited  medium of "being." Also  scholarship  has  evolved  in  associa­ tion  with  print.  Scholarship is a  limited medium  for  the  expression   of  thought. To   some  extent   McLuhan has   realized that   he  is  limited   by  print.   In  fact,  he has   made   a  valiant  attempt  to   reach  beyond  these limitations.  In  so doing  he
?as  offended  his brethren. As I see it, the Issue  can   be   characterized  as   follows. While  academics may  follow  a  thousand useless paths certainly they report on each patwith  as  little   ambiguity  as  seems possible.  In  other words,  while  they  can be faulted  for  trivial  choices  and  filtered or  even  mistaken  vision,  rarely  can  they be faulted  for sloppy  characterizations of what  they were  about. McLuhan's offen­ siveness to the  average academic  may  be based on their  misreading his concern for a  correspondence  between  method   and subject   as  sloppiness.   I  take  his  style  to be a lasting enchantment with  Joyce,  the master mechanic.
But  the basic paradox is this. The nar-

REVIEW ARTICLES



rowness  of the  academic enterprise (that is,   the   application  of   thought  to   the world), lends it a power,  the power of potential  clarity    and    associative   over­ statement. That  power  is  realized  when the  subject happens  to  be  far  more  im­ portant than  the investigator realized  and when    sjhe  happens  to   capture  in   a characterization the  elements of the  sub­ ject. McLuhan may have  hit  the  jackpot. But  the  paradox is  that  while  he appears to  be  talking   of   "humankind" and   the nature of  present  day  life,  he  is in  fact talking  of  "enquiring minds" and  "com­ munication systems."  Thus  the  intellec­ tual  elite  may be becoming "retribalized" through an  increase   in  the  span  of  both their  curiosity  and  their effect.  Undoubt­ edly,  the  media  are  organizing informa­ tion   about  the   world   outside   personal  experience in the way that  McLuhan has outlined. But  the  man  on  the  street  will go on  living  much  the  same  kind  of life because  the  nature of the information he needs  to act  on a  world  in  which  he has effect comes from his personal experience. I  guess  that  I  merely  want   to  point  out that   while  it   may   seem  otherwise  and while  he  may  seem   to  claim   otherwise  McLuhan   is   no   more    talking    to   the "common  man" than   is  any  other   aca­  demic. At the end of a four-month period of  log  cabin   building outside   the  reach of the media  I met  an  actor  who, having  done   much   the   same,   told   me  of  the peculiar  life  in  his  part   of  the  woods. There the only  people  he met  were  those of  CBC   radio   and   the  only   things   he knew  of  the  world  came  from  the  same source. "And you know what  they are saying," he said, "it's not true,  I see no evidence  of it."
While   there   may   be   a   paradoxical
aspect  to McLuhan's writing, there  is something close to a  degree  of perversity to the writing of Paul Rutherford. After organizing  the   discussion   of   his   three essays around the  media  and  their  orga-
 nizing   characteristics,  he   tells   us   that content is the  really  significant variable. He   claims   that    his   research    has   un­ covered  little  evidence that  "the  medium is  the  message."  Far   more  important in his   opinion   is  content.   Now   although Rutherford appears to  be  speaking with reference to  McLuhan, in  fact  he  is not. What   Rutherford   means   by  content  is much   the  same  as  what  you  or  I  might  mean  by it. Which  is not  what  McLuhan means.  Further  on  Rutherford  makes  a rather intriguing  statement to  the  effect that  the  "multimedia" (his  clever  term)  may  now  be the  masters  of consciousness but  no media  have  ever  been  the  masters  of  fate.  Such  a  statement  needs  expan­ sion.  It  is not  there.  Part  of the  reason  it is not  there  is that  Rutherford appears to be committed to a  jolly pluralism and  is reluctant  to  explore   the  depths  of  any issue. He contends that  because the media "mediate"  they  are   the  servants rather than  captains of consciousness. In another example of  what   I  take  to  be  the  same phenomenon, at  the  top  of one  page  he notes:

The organized community was  and   is  mov­ ing   against  an  institution  whose  overween­ ing   power   seems   to  threaten   the  fabric  of democratic society.

He   then   spends   the   rest   of   the   page building  up   to  a  condemnation  of  the CRTC for  its arrogance in  leading such a   struggle.   Such   apparent  changes  of heart, or more accurately, statements of problems  and rejections of attempted solutions  plainly  miff  me.
The book is composed  of three  essays: "The rise of the newspaper," "The golden age  of  the  press,"  and  "The triumph of the   multimedia."  They   do   little   more than  exist side by side. The sense of social history   which   one   gains   from   the  first two  essays is only  tantalizing because  it is   so   incomplete.   As   a   person    more inclined    to   reading  social   science   and

REVIEW ARTICLES



literary criticism   I  found  the  essays  frus­ trating in  their  narrow focus. The  infor­ mation  Rutherford presents  is not worked into  an  exploratory framework. The  last sentence  of the book ("Enjoy the present:
... it  can't last  forever") conveys  quite well the  rather lackadaisical aspect  of the expositions. They   are  so  relaxed   that   I longed   for   some   intensity.  One   gets  a hint  of  the  "massification" of  the  media and   their   content,  but   no   attempt  is made   to  characterize the  significance of that  very  fundamental  difference. When I reached the statement on page go which read,  "All considered, then,  the present multimedia supply  their  clientele with an excellent   service,"   all   I  could   say  was "Oh, terrific!"
It is certainly not  the case that Ruther­
ford   is  ignorant.  He   notes   that    as   a result  of advertising,

Masses of anonymous people  were  joined  in ephemeral  "consumption communities"  de­ fined  by the  common use of identical  goods.

He  is even  prepared to take  stock  of the fact  that   "the   news  media   (was  turning in the  196o's)  into  an  adversary of  parti­ san  authorities," that  TV  casts a  fuehrer image  on individual political leaders,  and that    the   media    lean   heavily   towards  novelty  and  away  from  celebration and hence   cohesion   and   stability.  But   such insights  go  to  waste.  They  do  not  form the  basis  for  a  characterization. And  by defining   his  quarry in  the  last  essay  as the "multimedia," and  emphasizing their pluralism and  difference, he obscures  their hegemony.  Only   government  is  to   be feared    as   a   unitary  body   capable  of destroying the  variety  of effort  and  con­ tent   which   is  available  to   us   all.   My thought  is  that   we  deserve  more.   It is plainly  facile  to speak  of  "the  waning of the  advertising boom."  Advertising is a symbol   of   control.   The   symbol   may change slightly  but  the  control will  not, except  under  very extreme circumstances.

86
 And  certainly  to state  that  advertising is the  incentive  for  the  multimedia to serve a plural  audience is quite  peculiar.
For  all  its  shortcomings The  Making of the  Canadian Media  is an  important book.  It  provides  a  beginning outline of a  Canadian  situation. Little   exists  else­ where   and  as  a  consequence  we  hardly  understand  how  we  have   been   talking  with  ourselves  during our  short  history. It  is  for  the  same   reason   that  my  col­ leagues'   book,  The  Tangled   Net, is  so very important.
One   of   the   ironies   of   placing   Mc­ Luhan's work alongside the other three  is that   he  argues  that   the  organization of the  ascendant  media   of  our  culture are making  national boundaries obsolete.  Yet the  other  three  works start  their  enquiry using  national  boundaries as  basic  limits of their analysis. This  slight  problem does not  go  unnoticed, especially   by  Hindley et  al.  Underlying  their   description  is  a concern  for  cultural  integrity  and   de­ velopment  even  while  they   are  dealing  with   technologies   which   are   ever-more unaffected  by distance. In  fact,  in  some sense  they  document the  struggle  of  the nation  state  to survive  in  the  presence  of technologies which  make  it  unnecessary.
The  Tangled Net   provides  an  intro­ duction  to  a  number  of  areas  of   com­ munication. Publishing, film,  radio,  TV,  cable,   telephony,   computers,  and   satel­  lites:   each  is the  subject   of  at least  one chapter, and the state  of each is presented to  be  much   the  same  as  the  others.   It seems   to   me   that  this   conclusion  is reached   because  the  authors are  dealing with  each  area  at  the  level of the  funda­ mental   contradiction  between    the   ten­  dencies of the technology and  the national context  within  which  they  exist.  What is depicted is the struggle  within the  nation to regulate  matters in such a way as to prevent  the domination of each of these media   from   the   control  of  the   United States.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Much of the material which  is used in the  book is official evaluation of the state of  affairs  in  each  medium. Many  docu­ ments  are  federal reports on  the  state  of the   industries.  Perhaps  this   should   be sufficient  for such  a book,  but  it seems to me that  quite  a bias gets written in which the   authors  do   not   intend,  one   which leads  to an unnecessary pessimism. If one takes any stock in  the characterization of federal   Liberal    politics   as  outlined  by James  and  Robert Laxer in  The Liberal Idea  of  Canada, it  is no  wonder that  an official  point   of  view  would   lead   to  an overall  pessimism.  Canadian  Liberalism fits  hand  in glove with  American liberal­ ism.  The   latter  is  the  ideology   of  free enterprise, the  former is  the  ideology  of continentalism and  of openness  to  domi­ nation by outside  interests. Given such an overlying   perspective a  nationally  based communication    network    exists    as   an anomaly  to  basic  policy.  Thus it  is  not too   terribly   surprising  that   federal  re­ ports   might   tend   to  overemphasize  the enormity  of   the   job   of   maintaining  a nationally  based communication network in  face  of  the  laws of economic and  cul­ ture  development  and   growing   interde­ pendence.
A far different picture might  emerge  if one  examined the energies  that  are  being put into the development of the various cultural  industries in  Canada. Given   a fairly  full  familiarity with  each  of  these areas  and  placing  those efforts  in an over­ all  context   of  concern for  building the integrity and  independence  of Canada a number of  different  insights  might   have been   presented.   Such   a   point   of   view almost  emerges  in  some  of  the  chapters on telecommunications where  the authors and   their   colleagues   in   their   research group have  done  extensive research. But it  is distinctly  lacking  in  the  chapters on publishing and  film.
A word or two needs  to be said regard­
ing   the  process  by  which   The  Tangled
 Net  came  into  existence. Back  in  I g67  I had  the chance of working  as a  graduate assistant   at   OISE  for   E.   V.   Sullivan  when  he was rewriting Ausubel's textbook  on  child  development. I was one of four or   five  assistants,   two   of   whom,   as   I recall,   were   working   full   time   on   the project.  It  was  our  responsibility  to  ar­  range  abstracts  by  subject for  Sullivan's use as  he  wrote  the  particular chapters. It was a massive  task. After  we had  done our  work  he  drafted the  chapter; it  was then  looked over  by Ausubel,  and  follow­ ing  that  sent,  in  revised  form,  to  Grune and  Stratton who  then  sent  it  for  com­ ment  before it was published.
The  Tangled  Net    is  designed    as   a general reader as well as an introductory textbook.  It represents a much  more diffi­ cult  task  than   Sullivan  was  faced  with. First it is not a rewrite. Secondly, it deals with    an   area    where    the   background material is  not  to  be  found  in  an  easily identifiable   set   of    academic   journals. Thirdly,  its  writing   required  a  general  sense of the history  of  Canada along  with a  specific  knowledge  of  the  communica­ tions industries.  Fourth, it  was not  aided by  any  grants.  Fifth, the  publisher  had not  had  a great deal  of experience in  the publishing of  this kind of book. The  book seems  to  suffer from  a  rush  for  publica­ tion  both in its lack  of a full bibliography and,   as   I  understand it,   no  academic readers  before  publication. All  these  fac­ tors  appear to  have  had  some  effect on the   book  which   would   make  a   second edition  well worth  the effort.
But as I have said, The Tangled Net  is extremely  important. Its  importance lies in   the  fact   that   it   takes  a   profoundly Canadian perspective. It is quite  possible that  before long  (perhaps it is happening already), a  U.S.-produced  book  will  be exported  to  Canada  outlining the  rela­ tions  between  the  various forms  of  com­  munication  and    social   forms,   cultural phenomena and  so forth. As is  common,

REVIEW ARTICLES



generalizations from  the  U.S.  experience will be turned into  low level theory which students will  be  told  are  explanations of the  Canadian experience, since  they  are universal  laws. And as usual they will be encouraged  to  see  the  Canadian  experi­ ence  as  slightly  different  from  the  basic American  one.   It is  only  because   com­ munications theory  is  more advanced in Canada that  books such  as The Tangled Net  managed to appear before  the Amer­  ican  influx.  It  is  only  through these  that  we will give ourselves  a sense of our  own history  as we have seen it.
The style in which  A Voice   from  Afar is written is much  different from  that  of The Tangled Net  and  The Making of the Canadian Media. The sense of the history of  telecommunications is also  much  dif­ ferent. The  focus   of  the   book,   on   the individuals that  figured  in  the  history  of telecommunications  in  Canada,  both lends   a  strength and  detracts from   the subject   matter. My  first  reaction was  to dismiss  it  for  being  directed  to  proving  that   not  all  pioneer  heroes  were  or  are American. But  the book held  my interest,  as does, I confess, the "People" section  of
111aclean's.
Collins  shows  a  skill  at   journalism in
providing a  sense  of  the  context  within which   various   technological innovations developed  and   in  which   various   of  the Canadian  giants   lived.   Clearly  such   a contextual flavour   is  not  sufficient  in  a more  serious  work  but  its equivalent  was lacking   in  The  Tangled  Net   and   The Making of the Canadian Media. A Voice from  Afar  is the  kind  of book  that  might be  used  to  advantage in  schools  as  an adjunct   to    history,    geography,   social studies,   or  even  physics  courses.   It  cer­ tainly  provides  within the  limitations of its   focus   a   sense   of    Canadian  social history.




88
 The book has two weaknesses. The first is that  it  provides  no  sense  of  the  work­ ings of the various  sets of  interests which have  come  into  play  in  the  determining of   the   organization   of    the   Canadian media.  Its  rather simplistic view which  is presented  implicitly  is one  which  empha­ sizes  the  competitive  struggles   between  various  inventors, entrepreneurs,  big businesses, and  so forth. One  is left  with the impression that cultural development rests  with  the  energies   of  private  entre­ preneurs competing with  each  other  for the  massive  profits  which   will  accrue  to the  individual who  is  successful  in  cap­  turing  the  business of  the  public  through the  introduction of  the  latest  technologi­ cal  innovation.  While   that   dynamic has played  a  major  role  in  the  early  days of establishing  the  technology, such  an  em­ phasis  is  a  distortion  which   ignores,  as one  major  example, the  role  of  govern­  ment.  The situation created by  the  pub­  licly   owned   CNR  which    allowed    Sir Henry Thornton to experiment with radio is completely  underplayed. Sir  Henry  is portrayed  as  an   innovative  radio   freak rather than  as a public  servant extending his communications mandate into  a new technology.
As Collins  comes  closer  to the  present,
the   emphasis   on   individuals  inevitably gives way  to a  discussion  of the  technol­ ogy itself. The  reader is thus  left  with  a certain regret,  and  hence  a  solid  founda­ tion for nostalgia  about the good old days when   the  efforts  of  an  individual could turn   the  country  on   its  ears.  That, of course,  is a distortion  which  comes  from the   book's  primary  focus.   It is  all  the more  regrettable  because  in  spite  of  the fact  that  the  subject matter of  the  book is exclusively Canadian, the  reader  is led towards   the   conclusion  that    the   great American ethic is the saviour  to us all.





SHADES OF PRECISION

FRED WAH,   Pictograms   from  the   Interior   of
B.C. Talonbooks.
DON   DOMANSKI, The  Cape  Breton  Book  of the
Dead.  Anansi,  $7.95  cloth,  $3.95  paper.
TERRY   CRAWFORD,    The    Werewolf    Miracles.
Oberon, $7.95.
THE   TITLES of  these   three   books  sug­ gests  an  immediate  similarity  of   theme or   concept  - which   is   probably   why they  turned  up  together,  in  one  batch,  on the reviewer's  desk. They suggest ways of mediating between  the  normal, every­ day   world    (that   fiction   dear  to  sober reviewers,   if  not  always   to  poets)    and something other:  a  sense  of  the  primi­ tive,   the   supernatural,  the   wild.   And though  the "Interior" of Wah's title is geographically accurate, it  surely  carries a  symbolic  level  as  well.  It is  with  the interior of  our  own  conscious   and  sub­ conscious   minds   that   we  wish  to  com­ municate with  pictograms, or  a  Book of the  Dead; it  is  from   these  depths that  both  werewolves  and  miracles arise.
But  this thematic similarity does not in fact   take  the  reader very  far.  The  dis­ tinctions between   those  books  are  to  be made  in  terms  of technique, or  precision of form,  accuracy of  perception. This  is not  at  all  the same  thing  as accessibility,  in  the  sense of the  book's  being  "easy  to read," or delivering a fully graspable ex­ perience   to   the   reader: I  find   Wah's Pictograms   the  least  accessible  of  these three  books, but it is, in a sense, the most precise  and  accurate. It is also by far  the best.
Terry Crawford's The Werewolf Mira­
cles is a collection  of short  pieces, mostly in prose, cast in a loosely surrealist mode. As one  reads  through the  book,  various
 strands of narrative start  to appear and gradually  coalesce:  a   re-telling  of  the story of Judas in science  fiction  terms is finally   linked   to   the   episodes   about   a young  man  lying  in  a  field  after  a  car­ crash.  But  not  all  the  various  fragments come  together as  neatly   as  this,  and  in the end the effect of those that do is more artificial   than    organic,   more   irritating than  convincing.
For  Crawford, we are  told,  "A  miracle
. .. is the window  through which  we look
to  see soul  in  body,  spirit   in  matter... the  miracle  occurs  when  what   is merely real becomes true,  when  the known  is dis­ covered  to  be unknown, the  unknown is found  to be known." If this sounds  overly pretentious, that's because  it is:  and  noth­  ing  in  the   poems   justifies   this  kind   of introduction. Perhaps the fault  lies in the dismissive  tone of  "merely real":  Craw­ ford's  poems  are  so determinedly surreal  that  they  make  insufficient contact  with the "known" level of reality,  from  which alone   they   could   derive   the   emotional truth which  surrealism needs  if it  is not to  be  the  boring   relation  of  some stranger's dreams. The  window   needs  a frame.
Or  perhaps the  fault  lies in  the  genre of the short surrealistic prose-poem. I confess  that   my  lack  of  sympathy for Crawford's book  may  stem  largely  from my  general   lack   of  sympathy  for   this genre.  It seems to me dangerously loose: without some rigour  of form,  the  writing can  too  easily,  as  here,  slip  into  indul­ gence and  superficiality.
Don   Domanski  is  on   solider   ground with The Cape  Breton  Book of the  Dead. Here   there   is  the  same   attempt  to  see the  unknown  in  the  known,   but  rather than  trying  to deal  with  it directly, as werewolves  or  miracles, Domanski at  his best  lets  it  emerge by  implication from the   scenes   and   images   of   his   natural world. The weakest  poems in the book are those in which  this happens in too obvious

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



or  forced  a  manner, as  in  the  melodra­ matics  of  "To a  Boy Lost  in  the  Forest and  Believed  Dead".
As the  title  suggests  (at  least  in  part: it  is  not  a  notably   Buddhist book), the main  concern   is with  death. This  is  ap­ proached especially  through animals, and most  especially  through dogs. By the  end of  the  book  Domanski  is  able  to  project this image  onto another  plane  in  a poem on  the  Constellation of  the  Small  Dog;  and  in  the  final  poem,  "Nightwalk", it is the  poet,   but   not   the   natural  environ­ ment,  who can "hear/ the dog  call every­ thing/ by its proper name."
Nevertheless, I  still   find   something missing  in  these  poems  (one  only  has  to evoke  the  example of  Michael Ondaatje to  see  that   the   animal  poems   are   not entirely  successful), and  again I think  the distinction is formal, not  thematic.  Do­ manski  is able  to produce a sense of  ten­ sion and  unease  in his images, but not  in his   rhythms.  Too   often    the   line-break falls,   conventionally, at  the   end   of  a phrase    or    sentence,   and    the    poems' movement  is  smooth,   predictable,  and undisturbing. It  was  only  on  a  second reading  of  many   of   the   poems   that   I noticed  how disturbing  the  images  were: on a first reading, the rhythmic monotony had  lulled  me  almost  asleep.
Fred   Wah's Pictograms   from the  In­ terior of B.C. consists of a series of  poems based   on   pictographic  drawings   repro­
duced  from a scholarly work by John Comer. The original drawings are repro­ duced  on the pages facing  the poems, and the   whole   volume   has   the   impeccable appearance we have come  to expect  from Talonbooks. I  say   that   the   poems   are "based   on"  the  drawings,  for  it  is hard  to  be  more  explicit. Sometimes they  ap­  pear   to  be  direct  "translations"; some­ times they appear to take off at a tangent from  the  originals; most  often   they  are something  in  between. The  poems   are often sparse and enigmatic, and  the draw-

go
 ings  do  not  always  make  the  references clear:

The  feathers  of my mind  increase as I reach  for the  choices
chance  for  what  else
other  than  what  I knew  (know)
another talks  to  me  (  I think)
something  (things)  to see

Yet  the  total  effect  of  this  is  not,  curi­ ously,  one  of  imprecision: if  the  reader  feels at times excluded from  these poems, it  is  because   he   is  excluded   from   the whole experience of the  Interior, in both literal   and   symbolic  senses.  The poems offer a way in, which  is difficult  and  un­ compromising, but  not  ultimately impos­ sible.  I know  that  I will  return   to  this book  far  more  often   than   I will  to  the other  two.
And again,  what  convinces  me is the language: the feeling Wah  has for lines, words, and  rhythms. The poems are often broken-up,  hesitant,  and   tentative, but they   are   always   exploratory,  and   ulti­ mately   revealing,  in   the   same   way   as pictograms, less by what  they  can  say in paraphrasable content  than  by  what   in their  physical  existence  they  are.

Ambling  along out  of you
I  count  it all in my mind

many  many  many pretty  straight across a sky.

STEPHEN  SCOBIE


MODERNIST

LEO   KENNEDY,   The   Shrouding. Golden   Dog
Press, $2.95.

THE  GOLDEN  DOG REPRINT   of  Leo  Ken­ nedy's   The   Shrouding,  originally   pub­  lished   in   Toronto  in   1933,  will  be  of interest   and  value   to  all  those  who  are concerned with  the development of mod-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ermsm   m  Canada. No  doubt   partly  be­ cause   he   has   been   for   many   years   a resident  of  the   United  States,  Kennedy has  become  little  more   than   a  name  in Canada and  The  Shrouding-a  volume which  was in  the  van  of Canadian mod­ ernism-has  become  more  talked  about  than   known  or  read.   The   Golden  Dog Press is to be commended, then,  not  only for making generally  available what  Leon Edel,  in  his  perceptive and   informative Introduction to the reprint, correctly calls the  "first  volume ... to  be  published   by a  Montreal Group poet," but  also for, in a  sense,  repatriating Leo  Kennedy.  To­ gether    with   reprints  which    are   either  available  or   projected  of  such   crucial  documents as The White  Savannahs and New    Provinces,  the    reprint   of	The
 Shrouding will contribute substantially to a wider  understanding of the artistic and intellectual forces  which  shaped the modern tradition in Canada.
Leo Kennedy himself is also to be commended for  resisting   the  temptation to  revise  the  poems   in  The  Shrouding, for  allowing   the  volume   to  appear  with only the slightest emendations (a Latin spelling corrected here, an interjection altered  there)   or-as he says in his own short Preface to  the  reprint-with (nearly) "all its imperfections on its maidenhead." For  it  is the  imperfections of  The Shrouding, as  much   as  its strengths,  which   are   of  interest  to  the literary historian.
Under the  heading of "imperfections" may   well  come   the   fact   that,   for   Leo



'Thought
A !Uv w of Cultur4i! a.nd JcWa.

THOUGHT was founded  in 1926 as  a forum for the discussion  of the humanities.  Published quarterly, its primary aim is the interchange  of ideas on timely, contemporary issues in philosophy,  theology, literature, and the arts   within  the  context   of  the  Judaeo-Christian  tradition.   Each   issue discusses  most if not all of these four areas.  Occasionally,  THOUGHT is devoted  to a special topic or outstanding figure, as in the Thomas  More and Martin Buber issues. Past contributors  include: W. H. Auden, Walker Percy, Walter Ong, Bernard Lonergan, Gabriel Marcel, Margaret Mead, Kurt Waldheim, and Avery  Dulles.
THOUGHT  is now in its 54th year of publication and is numbered among the top journals of its type in existence. Moreover, THOUGHT has among its subscribers many foreign libraries and universities.

Subscriptions: $12.00 per year (Introductory $9.00) (Calendar  year only)

Individual  copies:  $4.00

Please send your prepaid order  to Journals  Department Fordham  University  Press University  Box L
Bronx,  NY 10458



91

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Kennedy, modernism apparently  meant T. S. Eliot.  It  meant dense,  metaphysical poems  written often  in  tight,   traditional forms.  It  meant putting the  tradition­ and   Kennedy's tradition   is   very   much Eliot's,   but   with   the   addition  of  Eliot himself-at the service of the individual talent, and  bringing about a reminting of rusty   words   and   forms.   Perhaps  Ken­ nedy's  greatest  error   was  his  failure   to realize  that  Eliot  is a  poet  from  whom  it is  impossible  to  borrow   or  steal  without being  found   out.   Thus  The  Shrouding bears  the  indelible imprint  of  the  early Eliot.    Entire  lines,   stanzas,    and   even poems   read   like   excised   passages   from The Waste  Land. Even  Kennedy's vision of nature as a  graveyard  whispered over by what  is, cyclically,  rebirth and, dialec­ tically,  resurrection owes  more  to  Eliot's early   poetry   than   to  the  Canadian sea­ sons.  (A comparison  between  any  one of the several sonnets  in The Shrouding and a  sonnet  by either  Lampman or  Roberts would  reveal  not only how the same form can  be used as a  vehicle  for vastly  differ­  ing  conceptions  of  nature, but  also  how Kennedy's outlook and  intentions differed from  those  of previous Canadian  poets.) Kennedy's   April    is   not    the   April   of Lampman. It is Eliot's "cruellest month," with   "Each   pale   Christ   stirring  under­ ground"  ("Words for  a  Resurrection")
and   with   "plaited  strands  of ... grass" which  "Bind  up  this heart  that  splits and
bleeds I As   each    sharp  lilac   leaf    un­
sheathes"	("Perennial").   The   buried
bulbs and  gods and  the burgeoning shoots and   blossoms  with   which   Kennedy  ex­ presses  his  life-death-rebirth pattern  are rooted  in  Eliot  and, beyond  him,  in  the mythical soil which  nurtured The Golden  Bough.  But despite  his many  and obvious debts  (most  of which  he admits  to in his disarming  Preface) ,  Kennedy   has   mo­ ments,   in  such   spare,   precise   poems  as "The Captive" and   "Mad  Boy's  Song,"  when  he lives up  to, and  even  beyond  his
 own  sardonic  estimation of  himself  as  a poet who "wrote  of dying  I As though life mattered" ("Self  Epitaph").
Time  is in the process of judging  Klein, Pratt,  Smith,   Scott   and   a   handful  of others  to be the major Canadian poets of the 'thirties. But literary historians should not   be  concerned  only  with   the   major figures. The  spirit of an era is often  better found  in its less major and, yes, more derivative poets and  thinkers. Those  who would  understand the  origins  and  direc­ tion   of  Canadian  modernism  could   do worse than  to begin with  one of  its begin­  nings:  Leo  Kennedy's The  Shrouding.

D. M. R. BENTLEY


POETIC JOURNEYS

MIKE    DOYLE,   Stonedancer. Auckland    Univ.
Press and  Oxford  Univ.  Press, $7·95·
FRASER    SUTHERLAND,     Within  the    Wound.
Northern Journey  Press, $2.00.

THESE ARE  BOOKS of a rare  quality, and while reading  them  I felt more  like shak­ ing hands  with their  authors than writing a  conventional  review.  It is  with  Latin gusto  and  with  the  echo  of  a  somewhat Baudelairian  sculptured   exoticness   that  Fraser  Sutherland  welcomes  you in "The Piazza":
This  is your happiness
the  wave-borne  jests that  lie
scattered on the  tranquil sands these are  veins in  the  marble
the  starfish found outside  its element.

In  "Responsible Worlds: After  St Exupery," Mike  Doyle  meditates, with  a seducing   simplicity,   upon   nature's  har­ mony. Then he  states  that  only  men are separated  by  a  self-made   psychological space.   Beyond   its   Joycean   charm  the poem's   final  epiphany  opens   a  central question  in  literature:
a girl passes homeward smiling  to herself

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



filled with  adorable  inventions  & with fables her  reverie isolates her  from  me
how shall  I enter  into  it?

Mike  Doyle and  Fraser  Sutherland are aware  that  a poet's  objective is the order­ ing  of  our   vaguely   perceived   world   of images.  This   basic  integrity  and  intelli­  gence  are   reflected   even  in  the  weaker lines   of  the   two   books.  Doyle's   words about  the   passing  girl  are  not   tremen­ dously  original. We  could  say  the  same thing  for  Sutherland's "City Men" that  begins  with "The city  is a  wound." But it  is  by  starting with  the  spare,   the  im­ mediate or the lyrical that  these poets find the elan to move to multilinear level of references,  to the almost  perfect world  of metaphorical perception in which  they carve  for  us their  discoveries: statues  in the  neighbourhood of truth.
Mike  Doyle's  "Noah" is the  perfect example of the  type  of  poetic  conscious­ ness  we  are   attempting  to  clarify.  The  thirteen-page poem  is divided  into  forty­ six  parts  and  is  more  an  exploration of the  myth  than one of those  amusing ren­  derings   of  a  biblical   story.   Again,   one detail  will be enough  to illustrate Doyle's highly  intuitive method. The first stanza of  "Noah" tells  us  about the  work,  the fear and  the  anguish  involved  in  gather­ ing  the  animals "on  that  first  morning." The second  stanza  reads :
Jung  and  Teilhard both  make  stones breathe.
Aphrodite released  from  a shell. Stones, shells,  Might  some  of  these  not  have  been
chosen?
The  question  raised  here  is evidently colossal and  one feels like the child  in the third  stanza  who asks:  "Are there  giants in this country,  daddy?" But some aspects of the  problem  tell  us that we are  para­ doxically  dealing   here  with  pure  poetry and  not  with  any  intellectual  invasion  of the Muse's domain. There is, for instance, the  poetic  stubborn  will  to  look  at the myth  with  a  naive  eye. Here  it  is trans-
 lated   by  the   belief   that   the   Flood  de­ stroyed  all  images  of  previous  existence and  that  therefore we can  trace the gene­ sis  of  life  only  back   to  the  Ark.  Then what  is questioned here  has  to  do  with
Jung's and  Teilhard's visions of the evolu­
tion of human consciousness. Doyle comes
back  to this in  his twenty-seventh stanza where,  while  speaking of  snails,  he  im­ plicitly   refers   to  the   slow  evolution  of
human consciousness. So instead of the beauty  of "the  Omega point" we are  left with  the  contemplation of "the syphilitic vulva  of  the  future." Now  we  must  say that   this  type  of  acid   irony   is  a  valid method   of  poetic   investigation.  At   the global  level  "Noah" is  a  successful  and coherent poem  and  every  reading reveals another dimension like "The ends  of the rainbow   rooted   in   the  soil  of  the   new world" that  "grow  again  and  again  as flowers."
In  Fraser  Sutherland's "Good Times" we  are  attracted  to  the  last  line  of  the poem:  "Today penicillin and  a big cigar." The  poem  itself is a smooth  rendering of a man's  nostalgia, something we all share: and  in  that  sense  the  title  says  enough. But  the  clever  linguistic puns  contained in the last line indicate that  today  is best represented by a straight line, a generalized phallic  symbol. On  the other  hand, in the description of the  past  we find  words  like "oranges," "pumpkin" and  "earth." The incantatory repetitions are  also  there   to contribute to  the  circular  perception of the  past.  By opposing the  whole  of  his first  poem  to its last  line  Sutherland  an­ nounces   the   basic  conflict   that   he  will develop   in  the  rest  of  the   book.  Some  might  object   that   the  poet  didn't  make this choice consciously-all the better.... But in these books the only function of aesthetic refinement is to serve the render­ ing  of  an  ideal   universe  where   compas­ sion for the sufferers  and denunciation of the  enemies  of man  are  the  poets'  main
objectives.

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Fraser  Sutherland's "Marcel" is a strong   description   of  a   retarded   "Ig­ year-old in a Children's Hospital." But it is perhaps  in "The Two  Hearts  of  Frida Kahlo"  that   the  poet  exposes  a  tragic example  of  suffering  in  the  life  of   the politically   committed    artist.    In   "The  Poverty of Gesture"  we find the echo of a    Baudelairian   misogyny,    that    also emerges  in  some  of  the  other  poems. There  are signs of great promise in With­ in  the  Wound, and   Fraser   Sutherland might  very  well  evolve  to  the  level  of "Auden's  Face":

This  was Auden's  face. He
chose, was given  these  serious  ruins,
the  mark  of bitter  weather.

Stonedancer  gives us the  best of what Mike Doyle has been writing for the past ten years. Poems like "The Inquisitor" show that  from his earlier  "self-absorbed subjectivism" he has evolved to a position that allows him to look at reality with courage.  Finally  "The Journey  of Meng Chiao"  sets  Mike  Doyle  on  a  last  and long poetic voyage:

I must  leave  you  here  by  the  pinewoods under  the  sky,
I must  go now. What   do  I hope  to find
when  I arrive?
If I am lucky, the  pinewoods  under  the sky.

And this is what Stonedancer  and Within the Wound are:  the former an Homeric journey, the latter  a first step towards an Orphic  adventure.

ALEXANDRE AMPRIMOZ


ZEROING IN ON ZERO

J.   MICHAEL   YATES,   The   Qualicum  Physics. Kanchenjunga  Press.  Breath   of  the   Snow Leopard. Sono Nis Press.

SoME TIME AGO  I complained  about  the obscurity of Yates' poetry in a review of Canticle  For Electronic  Music,  but  that

94
 sequence is of startling clarity in compari­ son with The  Qualicum Physics, which is exasperating in its inexplicitness.
A pretentious  intellectualism  is always threatening  to break through  the specifics of  the  landscape  in  Yates'  poems.  His early work, written  before he came to Canada, Spiral of Mirrors and Hunt in an Unmapped   Interior,  despite  some  hazi­ ness of  image  and   language,  generally controlled  the ideas within particularized scenes and  short  glimpses,  even  though he was pushing  into  them  as landscapes symbolizing the deeper recesses of human  feelings  and   intellectual  concepts,   the stretching  beyond consciousness, a  terri­ tory  he  described  as an  "unmapped in­ terior." This  territory  was  the arena  for delving into limits and  extensions of the human  mind,  survival  in  the  depths  of the  destructive  element,  a  theme  he ex­ amined  with some success in The  Great Bear Lake  Meditations, though  even in that  book, the same maddening  gestures of philosophic insight wrapped  in the covers of epigrammatic gibberish mar the symbolic  thrust   into   the   double   land­ scape of exterior and  interior  zero.
I presume that  The  Qualicum Physics is attempting  to  chart  the  same  area.  I can  only say 'presume'  because  the  lan­ guage  of  the  poem  makes  no  effort  to clarify  or  expound.  I can  guess  at  the theme  by extrapolating a  meaning  from the long epigraph about a dance in which one dancer  is an  isolate  but  is somehow joined to the dance. From this epigraph  one  can  assume  that  Yates'  concern  is with   the   individual    self,   self-reliance turning  into  introversion,  with  isolation and   the   threatened   self,  and   perhaps secondarily with the nature  of the artist's place, his commitment  to self andfor to community.   The    recurring    image   of ocean and tides to establish the essential polarities:   motion  against   the  fixity  of shore, the between-world of the shoreline and  the solidity of mountains.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



This   is a  rough  estimate of  what   the poem  is saying and if it sounds overblown, then  it  is probably because  the  language of  the  epigraph is overwrought, and  the poem  itself  is self-indulgent to  the  point that, as  I  was reading it,  I  began  to feel that  the whole poem was a hoax or at the very least  a self-parody. But  if it  is hoax or  parody, it  is humorless  and  so wasted at this length, for  the density  of language muffles any  comprehension of its aim.
The  poem  is an  undigested mixture of linguistic   convolution,  snobbish   phrase­ dropping in other  languages, latinate vo­ cabulary in  uneasy combination with  the colloquial,  some  excruciating  word-play and  punning and at times the most  turgid  rhythms and   tongue-tying  harshness  of diction. Further darkness  descends  on the reader  when  he  tries  to  figure  out  what Yates  is  doing  with  the  typography. The  basic  type is italic,  interrupted by normal  print,  but  it  is  not  clear   whether  these are  two  voices  (two  states?  the  voices of sea   and   shore?) , and   more   confusion comes   from   the   fact   that    the   foreign phrases,   which   occur   often,   are   put   in normal print,  but  the  reader  isn't  sure  if they   belong   to   the   print-voice  or   the italic-voice.
I  have  rarely  been  so expasperated  by
a  poem-but let  Yates  speak  for  him­
self:
Pyrric  fagotti flame  once-concerti
Toward the   sum  where   the   pyrotechnician,

Estremo, effimero,  oxidizes  alive
While the  oxen   peep  their   piccolos.

The  Spitzlicker metaphysical yo-yos
I  follow  in  and  again  in -Io, eyw,

This uneverlasting vida  entre  suenos

If this  kind  of  self-indulgent  mumbo­ jumbo  running rampant  appeals to  you, by all means  read  The Qualicum  Physics, but  Breath of the Snow  Leopard is much better, covering much  of the same ground  in  a  series  of  poetic  sequences. Starting
 from   an  epigraph  by  Demokritos, The is is no more  than  the isn't,  the  book, like The  Great  Bear  Lake  Meditations   (in­ deed, one of the poems here  is for Blackie Canada who  provided an  epigraph  for The   Meditations)   is  concerned  with   a journey  to minimal existence,  an oblitera­ tion  into  a  nothingness  which   may  re­ veal new modes of being.
The   first   section,   "Naked   Singulari­ ties,"  tries  to  balance   polarities  as  the persona  searches  for  pure being.  Yet  the paradox of such  a  search  is that  selfless­ ness cannot exist  without individuality­ he cannot be swallowed  without swallow­ ing:  references   to  sea  beasts  and   water  give  a  firm  reality  to  these  lyrics  as  the poet  wrestles  with   interior and   exterior space, moving in one  poem  from  "I must remain  close to myself in  these  times"  to "I must  keep  space  at  a  remove  a  little longer/It  will  come   for  me  in  its  own black  time."
This  nothingness within and  without becomes  the  thematic  thread  of  "Poem of the Endless,"  a sequence in  which  the poems express a shearing away  process in the face of barriers created by others  and the self. Moving  through, sloughing off, closing   doors,   the   persona    pushes   his bridge  "From  nowhere to  nothing.  No­ when." Though  the   bridge  collapses  in the  last  poem  of  this  sequence, he  may still fall into other spaces, an  entry  which may  burn  him  up  as in  the  next  section, "Burn Tissue  Cycle."  Perhaps this  is the essential  aesthetic experience for  its own sake  ("to burn  with  a hard and  gem-like flame") ,  the  burning of  desire,   the  de­ structive  urge   to   reduce   everything   to minimal    ash,   with   double   possibilities opening: "To peer  into  or  pass  through the mirror  of  ashes." This  burning down to  simple  essence  destroys   the  ordinary processes of  time and  communication, so that  the book can  then  move into  "Three Schedules  of  Silence," the  first  part   of which is "Blue  Mundus," a series of short

95

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cryptic   poems,  each   separated from   the other  by a zero, examining the  whittling down  to achieve  a state  of "nowlessness." This  poem  is followed  by the  title  poem, a symbolic  fable  of  resurrection within  a new  existence  in  "sheer high  air" where he  dies  "[his]  own   death  repeatedly." Then  "Timesmiths In  Space"  turns around  the   fallibilities  of   art,   the   in­ adequacies of words  in  trying  "to express the  inexpressible" "to/compose         pure
pause."
The book  closes  with   "Death  Suite,"
three  poems  attempting to  define  death and   its  ultimate  obverse   side,   nirvana, each   poem   shuttling  between    ordinary print  and italics  (meaningfully this time), the italics summarizing, crystallizing, link­ ing the  three  poems:

Death like:
 they  may  yield  no  definite  meaning that the  reader  can  articulate. The  book  car­ ries  its  own  system   of   interconnections and   allusions,   whereas   The  Qualicum Physics  relies  far   too  heavily  on  an  im­ posed   intellectualism   which    rarely   sits easily   with   any   developing pattern   of image and  thought.

PETER STEVENS



WINNING A READER

GARY    GEDDES,   •  • •    War &  other    measures.
Anansi,  $3.50.
EUGENE  MCNAMARA, In  Transit. The  Penny­
worth  Press, n.p.
ALAN    PEARSON,  Freewheeling Through  Gossa­
mer  Dragstrips. Sesame  Press, $2.50.

the  sound   of an  insect  suffocat­
ing  in  a  jar.
the  last   pin-prick  of light   when
the  television is  over.
the   end   or  beginning of a long
rain.
an  eraser,  filaments   part   paper and   part  eraser
scattered in  the  shape  of a man, then blown away.

This  last  image  is taken  up  in  the  third poem  in "Death Suite", the  last  poem  in the book, for it is written "for a poet who erased through the  paper to what  was beneath."
Breath  of the  Snow  Leopard  is a more
successful  statement  of  Yates'   concerns with    the    surface    disintegrating,  part paper, part  eraser,  and  the  life  beneath, because   it  lacks  the  pretentious  postur­ ings of The Qualicum Physics, though  it still contains much  that  is elusive. But its elusiveness  sets up  reverberations because the  poetry  is more firmly  tied  to a clarity of  image,   at   times  an   almost   imagistic  suspended  animation which  for  the  most part    catches   the    contemplative   insis­ tence  on  being  and   non-being, so  that  the  poems  sustain   interest even   though

g6
 A CASUAL READER of Alan Pearson's poems
might,  at first, admire the enthusiasm for life which  they exude.  For  they  possess a mood  that  is commonly exuberant,  they are  fast-paced  confessional  statements which   are   not  at  all  morbid, and   they embody  a  sense of detail  that  seems  tire­ less. With  vigour  and  strenuous secularity Pearson  is bent on creating and  celebrat­ ing  a  fusion  of  the  banal  with  the  mar­ vellous,  the  everyday  with  the  exotic,  as the title of his volume testifies. Yet a con­  sidered  response  to  his poems  is likely  to question   the   pleasure  they   attempt  to provide  and  to  doubt   their  worth.
The   reader   will  soon  be  surfeited   by the unmodulated voice of the poems. The voice  is  too  consistently hortatory and declamatory. Moreover, this formality of stance clashes with  the easy reliance upon idiom  and   jargon.  The  result  is that  the voice  seems  simply   defensive,   that   the poet's love for the world  appears strained, and   that   his  sense  of  detail   is  cursory rather  than   essentially   curious.   Indeed, the voice is not related  variously  or inter­ estingly  to  the  poet's  actual  nervousness  about  life.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Too   many   things   impress   the   poet's mind  superficially, and  his delibemte blurring of empirical and  imaginative categories in combination with  the  indis­ tinctness  of voice and  stance  aggravates, rather  than   gives purpose to,  the  welter of  impressions   and   his  nervous  energy. One   finds  little  organic  development in argument, imagery  or  associations, while cliches  which  are amazingly trite  are  not offset  by verbal  or  structural irony.  Puns are  often  painful  because   too  local  and obvious.  They  are  one  indication of  the lack  of   dialectic between   the  particular and   the  general. Since   his  diction   and grammar are dominantly conversational, Pearson  rarely  exercises himself  in ellipsis or understatement. Too  often  there  is redundancy in his exposition  and  monot­ ony  in  his  syntax.  Because  he  does  not vary  his voice,  his confessions  frequently appear gauche and unrepresentative. Im­ portant exceptions to most of the previous remarks    are   to   be   found    in   "Riding High," which, despite  an  adolescent sub­ ject, is a controlled medley  of literary and popular  diction, and   "They Can Make You Happy," which is a plain  yet ironical poem that exposes male fantasies about prostitutes.
Eugene   McNamara's In  Transit  con­
tains fourteen short  poems which  taken together    constitute  an   accessible,   con­ trolled   and   interesting statement  about  love. The poems  begin  by  describing the renewal   of  a   relationship,   pass   on   to demonstrate  the  positive  and  destructive aspects  of  loving,  and  end  with  a  hard­ won sense of resolution  in isolation  for the poet-speaker. The  approach to  the  rela­ tionship,   the  relationship  itself,  and  the acceptance of  its  dissolution  are  defined regularly  by metaphors of  movement. But McNamara draws  for  these  images  upon the  technology  of  flying as well  as  upon more  conventional cosmic  references  and the   Icarus  myth.   He    compounds  his imagery   in  a   diffuse   and   unsystematic
 way. He  also embeds  plain  and  down-to­ earth    metaphors  and   similes   into   his images  of  movement.  His  distinctive re­ straint  with   imagery   is  also   to   be  at­  tributed to  his ability  to make  the  meta­ phors  of  movement apply  to  the  interior life.
The general  sense of control and acces­ sibility that  McNamara's  poems evidence  derives from  the fact  that, while they are private they are not merely personal. The  poet   varies   his  stance,  and   exercises   a verbal  dexterity and  an  acute awareness of the  tension  between  metrical and  syn­ tactical  units.  The  confessional  aspect  of the  poems  is also  restrained  because   of his ability  to qualify  the speaker's idea  of himself and to develop  his authorial sense of irony  thematically.
Despite his  complex   metaphorical  as­ sertiveness  and  downright manner,  Mc­  Namara's speaker  is tentative in  his  pas­ sion.  His   expressions   of  desire   for   his woman  often  give  way  to  cliches  which  expose his psychological dependence upon her.   Wherea  she   is   firm   in   her   intel­  lectual   integrity, he  is distracted by  her physical  presence. Although, however, his sympathy for things  of the  world  and  his desire  for  personal   and   imaginative  in­ dependence are  undermined  consistently, there  are signs that  the speaker  can  trans­ cend literary and  cultural poses to engage himself with  the world  in the loss of love. McNamara's  sense   of   irony   gives   cul­ tural  significance   to  the  speaker's sexual perspective and  to the  inevitable dissolu­ tion  of the  romantic  relationship.
Gary Geddes'  volume attempts to repre­ sent  the  psychological   truth of   contem­ porary  Canadian culture by depicting the character  of   Paul   Joseph   Chartier,  a veteran  of  World   War   II  who,  embit­ tered   by  both   war   and   peace-time  ex­ perience,  tries  to  blow  up the  Canadian House  of Commons but  accidentally kills himself.  Geddes'  narrative is subtle  and provocative, on  the  whole   his  stance   is

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



compelling,  and   his   thematic   develop­ ment   is very  convincing. The  history  of the  forces  which  render  Chartier spiritu­ ally  impotent and  insane   is  inseparably connected  to   the   stunting   commercial and  political structures of society that  ex­ plain,  if  they do  not  totally  justify, Char­ tier's   irrationality.   Geddes    successfully patterns the  narrative facts  round  Char­ tier  so  that   his  unique  and   frequently chaotic mentality takes  on  a  representa­ tive    force.    Chartier    is   never    treated merely as an individual. He is a victim of a   profound   social   malaise,    he   is  the spokesman  for the ordinary man's frustra­ tions  before   the  inflexibility   of  institu­ tions, and, although he is socially ineffec­ tive, in his contorted self-consciousness  he struggles   for  a  meaning outside   himself that   in  a  minimal  and   elusive   way  is found  in  trusting to history.
Chartier's experience of organized and surreptitious  killing   is  so  deep   that   he cannot be open  or  intimate. Such  things as sexual  intercourse and  appreciation of flowers  cannot be separated from  images of war. His personal fragmentation is also evidenced in  that   his  aggressive  percep­ tions  of ordinary phenomena  are  voiced in a dispassionate, lethargic tone. Alert to the general  dissociation of  perception and  compassion, Chartier cannot turn  his im­ plicit   cultural   judgments  in   a   positive direction.    Instead,   his   rationalizations become  more  sustained and  detailed. In the  first  section  Geddes  shows  well  how Chartier evades  meaning and  identity by acting out ordinary social and  cultural in­ congruities.
The argument of the  second  section  of
Geddes'  volume   is  that   commerce and industry  have   become   dependent  upon war. Chartier is lucid  about post-war de­ humanization and  he records disenchant­ ment   with   technology.   His   lapses   into vivid  memories  of  war  do  not   prevent  him  from   ironically  imagining  how  ap-

g8
 propriate machinery is for the description of human behaviour. In  the third  section, Chartier's contempt for privilege  and business  is  emphasized. Despite  increas­ ingly  confused   imagery   and  perception, Chartier comprehends the social  context. Confronting urban  complexity, he recog­ nizes social incoherence. Again  it is ironi­  cal that the few sustained thoughts about  society  that   he  has  are   upheld   only  by his  stunted military   imagination. In  the fourth section   Chartier exemplifies  per­ verse  creativity  and   helplessness  in   the extreme. He  regards  bomb-making as  a literary   exercise;   his  bomb   affords   him the  opportunity to be  rational and  sensi­ tive.  But  this  unusual  commitment soon gives way  to nihilism  and  vain,  romantic egoism.  At   the   last   moment,  however,  there  seems  to  be  a  selfless  assertion   of being  and  trust  in  the  purposefulness of time.
As implied  author, Geddes  is an impor­ tant   presence.  He  manipulates  Chartier variously  and   integrally.   Sometimes, Chartier's  imagery   is  perhaps  too  local and  self-contained, and  it is cut  off from  the double  vision  usually  provided by the implied   author.  But,  generally,  Geddes  succeeds  in  making  Chartier  representa­ tive  and  accessible.  His  is  a  rewarding volume and  by far  the most important of those  reviewed  here.  Geddes  is obviously intent  on  winning  a  wider  audience for poetry  and  on arguing in his poems  that  poetry  is necessary  for Canadian culture.

ROBERT JAMES  MERRETT




EDITOR's NOTE:  Professor Fred  Cogswell is preparing   an   edition  of   the    letters  of  .Sir Charles G. D. Roberts, and  would  appreciate hearing from  anyone holding letters from  Sir Charles. He  may  be  contacted at   the  Depart­ ment  of English, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton,   N.B.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LAMPMAN REAPPRAISED

CARL  Y.   CONNOR,  Archibald   Lampman  Cana­ dian Poet of  Nature. Borealis Press Limited. The   Lampman  Symposium, Edited  and   with an    Introduction  by   Lorraine    McMullen.
University of  Ottawa  Press.

WHEN I  REVIEWED   Michael  Gnarowski's Archibald  Lampman ( I970)  in Canadian Literature (Autumn I97I),  I  welcomed this collection  of critical  essays because it dealt  with  a writer  whom  I  then  dubbed "respected  but   rather   neglected."  Now, all   is  changed.  Archibald  Lampman ( I86I-I899), like "Can cult," is "in," and as a  result,  editions  and  criticisms  of his works are being published at a rapid  rate. Before   me,   for   example,  I   have   The Poems of Archibald  Lampman (including At the Long Sault) ( I974), the reprint of the  "Memorial Edition" of  The   Poems of  Archibald   Lampman  ( I900)   and  of At the Long Sault  and Other New  Poems
( I943); Archibald   Lampman:  Selected
Prose  ( I975); and   Lampman's  Sonnets
1884-1899  ( I976).  I also have  before  me the   books  that   are   the   subject   of  this
review.
Carl  Y. Connor's Archibald   Lampman Canadian  Poet  of  Nature   (I 977)  is  a photocopy reprint  of  a  book  first   pub­ lished  in  I 929. Originally a  doctoral dis­ sertation,  this  critical   biography  comes with  a  "Preface" which  names  the  rela­ tives   and   friends   of   Lampman   whom
Connor consulted; a "Foreword" by Ray Palmer  Baker; an "Appendix" which  lists among  other  items  Lampman's contribu­ tions  to  two  periodicals  published by his alma  mater,  the  Rouge  et  Nair  and  the Trinity University  Review; and  an  "In­ dex."   In  the  text  itself,  Connor quotes from  letters  and  other  documents which help  him illuminate not  only Lampman's life and  works  but  his time  and  place  as well.
 There are  difficulties   with   the  study. Because there  are  no footnotes, it is some­ times impossible  to identify the source  of Connor's quotations. In   "Ottawa," for example, he  quotes  from  "another letter  of   this   period"  written   by   Lampman without indicating precisely to whom  the letter  was written, when  it was written, or who  owned  the  letter  when  Connor saw it. Because  the distinction between  specu­  lation  and  fact is not  always  clear,  it  is also often impossible  to know  just how to read   such   statements  as  "his   peace   of mind  was  not  improved if  the  porridge at  breakfast  proved   burned or  the  steak tough" from   the   description  of   Lamp­ man's  "College Days."  Because  the  biog­ raphy   is  half-a-century  old,  some  state­  ments  are  out-of-date.  Although it  now seems evident  that  for  much  of his mar­  riage Lampman was in love with  another woman,  Connor  concludes that  the  poet was   a    "devoted    . . .  husband." Still, Archibald   Lampman  Canadian Poet  of Nature   is  a  good   criticism,   and   its  re­ publication is useful.
Aspects of this reprint bother me, how­ ever. Because  of the  manner of its repro­ duction, the  printing errors   of   the  first edition  are  retained. The reprint is called a "Second Edition," yet apart from  are­ vised title page, there  has apparently been no  editing.  No  information  is  provided about  the  first edition. In  order to verify that  Archibald  Lampman Canadian Poet of Nature published in  Montreal by Car­ rier   in   I929  had   been   reproduced,  I phoned  Glenn   Clever   of  Borealis   Press. He  very  graciously   answered  my  ques­ tions,  but   I  wonder why  such  informa­ tion  is not  automatically included, along with  the  title  page  of  the  edition repro­ duced,   in  every   reprint  done   by  every publisher.
The second book for review is The Lampman   Symposium   ( I976),    edited and with  an introduction by Lorraine McMullen. One   of  the   publications in

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the 	series    "Re-Appraisals:	Canadian Writers" sponsored by the Department of English  at  the  University of Ottawa, the main  source  for  each  work  in  this  series is the  material presented at  a symposium on a Canadian writer  held  at  the univer­ sity  usually  every  spring.  The  Lampman Symposium, thus, is chiefly a collection of thirteen  papers presented at  the  sympo­  sium on Lampman. In addition, the work includes  the  "Introduction" by Lorraine McMullen,  the  "Program of  the  Lamp­ man  Symposium, May  2-4,  1975,''  "The Lampman Manuscripts-A Brief Guide" by  Margaret  Coulby   Whitridge, and   a list of "Contributors."
Of this added material, the programme and   list  of  contributors are  useful.  Mc­ Mullen's introduction  indicates  some  of the   dynamics  of   the   symposium   itself. The most  important  addition, however,  is   "The   Lampman    Manuscripts -A Brief  Guide." It  lists   the   location  and  contents of the "Lampman Papers known to  exist-the   manuscripts  and   corres­ pondence of  Archibald Lampman," and  it  demonstrates perhaps more  effectively than  any other item  in the volume  the complexity  of   the   challenge  posed   by these  papers to critics  and  scholars.
Seven   papers   read   at   the  symposium form  the  bulk  of  the  printed text.  The title and  author of each  should  reveal something of its content and  approach. Michael Gnarowski discussed  "Lampman and  His  Critics"; Carl   F.  Klinck, "The Frogs:  An  Exercise   in  Reading  Lamp­ man"; Louis Dudek, "Lampman and  the Death of the Sonnet"; Louis K. MacKen­ drick,   "Sweet Patience and  Her   Guest,  Reality: the Sonnets of  Archibald Lamp­ man";   Dick    Harrison,    " 'So   Deathly Silent': The Resolution of Pain  and  Fear  in  the  Poetry  of  Lampman  and   D.  C. Scott";  Barrie   Davies,   "The  Forms   of Nature:  Some  of  the  Philosophical and Aesthetic Bases of Lampman's Poetry"; Bruce   Nesbitt,   "The  New   Lampman."

100
 According to the  reader's point  of view, he/she  will  find   these   papers  more   or less interesting, informative, or  critically sound.   I  particularly enjoyed    Dudek's and  Nesbitt's,  although the  latter  names Robert    G.   Haliburton   as    "Thomas's father" rather than   his son.  It  also  con­ tains,  as does  the  entire  volume,  numer­ ous  printing  errors,   some   of   which   at least should  have been caught, along with the mistake  on Haliburton, by the editor. The other  six papers derived  from  the panel  on either  Lampman's biography or his achievement. These short, and  on the whole  sharp,   papers  reveal  some  of  the currently fashionable concerns about, and  critical approaches  to, Lampman.  Whit­ ridge's presentation on the  panel  on biog­ raphy brought  up  the  question of Lamp­ man's  "affair" with   Katherine  Waddell and  its influence  on  his life and  works, a question  which   echoes   throughout  the criticism.  On  the  panel  on  "Lampman's Achievement," Sandra  Djwa's  suggestion that  Brown  and Scott's version of "At  the Long  Sault" is better than   the  "restored Lampman may  very  well  be"  raised  the issue  of  editorial  responsibility, an  issue important for Bruce  Nesbitt  and  his "de­ finitive edition" of Lampman's works. On  the same panel,  Robin Mathews discussed Lampman's "differing  sense  of  reality" from  an  Englishman  and   an   American and   called   for   "critics   and   poets"    to "hone  words  about   reality   as  we  live  it here," and  James   Steele   named Lamp­ man  as "the first  poet  of Canada's bour­  geois intelligentsia to sing of his disaffec­  tion  for  a  social  system  which  he  never­ theless laboured to maintain." Thus, "na­ tionalism" and  "Marxism" marched into
the closing moments of the  symposium. And  how  shall  I close  this  review  of
Lampman reprinted and  re-appraised? Well ... both  Archibald  Lampman Can­ adian Poet of Nature and  The Lampman Symposium  are  welcome additions to the criticism   about   Lampman  currently  in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



print. Each  volume,  too, is a proof of the increasing interest  in Lampman and  the growing industry in  his  scholarship and criticism. The symposium  volume  in  par­ ticular  shows  that   although  this  recent  cultivation of  the  Lampman  garden has so  far   produced  more   premature  buds and    ugly   weeds   than   fine   flowers   of scholarship and  criticism, these will come, especially  when  we have "the new Lamp­ man." In the meantime, Archibald Lamp­ man   has  become  a  much   respected   and no  longer  neglected  Canadian writer.

MARY  JANE EDWARDS


NEWLOVE'S POWER

JOHN  NEWLOVE, The Fat Man, Selected Poems
1962-1972. McClelland & Stewart, $4-95·

THE  POETRY OF JOHN NEWLOVE, as pre­ sented  here,  begins in  a dark  and  brood­ ing  whimsicality, and  moves steadily  into utter   despair. From   the  very  beginning the  protagonist chooses  to  portray him­ self  as  a  solitary  dominated  by  fantasy and  desire,  making "poems babies & love­ affairs/ out   of   women    I've    only   seen once," a wanderer on the side of the road "cold/ &  afraid." He  asks himself

With  whom  should I associate but suffering men?  For  all men who  desire  suffer; and  my desires are  too great for  me to hold  to alone. I must  see the  others....

The  others include  a ten-year-old girl scarred and mutilated from being scalded,  the  victim  of a car accident, and an  animal killed  on  the  highway.  These he celebrates and  mourns in a "tired and halting song," contemplating all his "mis­ takes and  desires," seeing himself  as lying

alone in  the  shadowed grass, fond  only, incapable of love or  truth, caught in all  I have  done, afraid
and unable to escape,  formulating one  more  ruinous way  to safety.
 The   safety   he   finds   is  in   situations which  do not  involve  him  in affection or desire;   he  envies   the   hitch   hikers   and their    aimless   travelling,   their    "feeling safe   with   strangers/ in   a  moving   car." He  reports  in  drab  low-key  language on those  who  are   "emptied  of  desire," on the   beer  parlour  and   street   life  of  the small  town,  where  all is directionless and customary. The  lovely is dangerous:

What's lovely
is whatever makes  the  adrenalin run;
therefore I count terror and  fear  among
the greatest beauty.   The greatest beauty is to be alive, forgetting nothing although remembrance hurts
like a foolish  act, is a foolish  act.

He  finds  success  a  failure, for,  recall­ ing  what  he  had  wished  to  become  and realizing  he  has  succeeded,  he  finds  that  "complete,/ I am more empty  than  ever." He  observes  the  bird  that   declines   "the privilege/ of  music"  preferring to  finger "the   absolute/  wood/ beneath,"  just   as he himself  prefers  plain  and  unvarnished speech.  Sometimes   this  plain   speech   of pain  results  in self-pity  as when  in  "The Dog" he recalls  "never  thinking anyone/ would love me," but  the self pity is coun­  tered   by  his  sardonic  envy  of  the  dog, "damn  fool/  running and  barking/ away toward  the  town."  Unloved and  unlovely humanity is portrayed in "Public Library" with  almost  hysterical  savagery  and  vig­ our;  and  thoughts of  human  stench,  ex­ crement,  and   vomit  dominate  "Samuel Hearne in  Wintertime." Recognizing our ugliness   our   futility   we   must   learn   to "Go   without/ vanity,"  though  perhaps with  a  proper   pride,   not  in  our  solitary egos,  but  in  the  land   to  which   we  be­ long. This  is expressed  in the  magnificent poem  "The Pride" which,  surveying the history  and  the  cultural traditions of the Indians, discovers that

we stand  alone,
we are  no longer  lonely
but  have  roots,

101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  the  rooted words
-recur in the  mind, mirror, so that
we dwell  on nothing else, in  nothing else, touched, repeating them,
at home  freely
at  last, in amazement.

It is perhaps in contemplating the past, in  sharing other  lives,  that   we  may  dis­ cover  something to  admire, to  revere,  as in   considering   the    strength   of   "The Doukhubor,"  and  in   "Remembering Christopher  Smart"    which     concludes  with  the lines
I see that  we all make the  world  what  we
,want.
Our disappointment lies in  the  world  as it is.

"Disappointment" is hardly an  adequate word  to describe  the  portrayal of  human­ ity  in   the   succeeding  poems.  The   title poem   is  as  brilliantly   designed   and   as vigorous   as  a   Daumier,  and   it  has  all Daumier's  relish  in  the  grotesque. "The Fat  Man,"  waiting at  the  crossing  light, is  nameless,  characterless, gross,  and  en route  to an  undignified and  messy death. He  is as hopeless  a  figure  as  the  man  in "Company" who  has  "a  smell  of having
given  upI of  having been  given  up  on,"
from   whom  women   edge  away  "feeling
something unhuman,l the  wrong  condi­ tion  of  longing,   the  wrong  character of need,/ the  long  time  waiting," and  who "en joys  disgusting  company" until   they "cease  to be amused," when  he will leave them    and   "go   somewhere  else."   This rhythm of  hopelessness,  lying, and  nausea is inescapable.
The same  things will occur in another place. Things will always  occur.
And  back  again.   The same  rhythms.
But  shorter
durations.   The time always gets  shorter.   Until n
At all.

The man  portrayed in  "Harry" is also a  creature of  futility   and   despair. The universe,  in  the  last  poems  of  the  book,


102
 has   become   a   purgatory,  even   a   hell. Earth is no  place  to  live.  "We  came   to
dream. It  is not  true,  it  is not  true- I
that   we   came   to   live   on   the   earth."
Moreover "Death is everywhere," "Sham heroes  are  popular," "Cities die  just like men," and   we  must   realize   that   "You don't  have to live if you have no dreams." In  "The Crammed World" man  "starved of something he will not admit," says "Comfort my sad eyes" and "Accept my suffering,  which  is all I have  made  of my life,/  which  is all the love I want  to offer you." The poem, and  the  book, end  with the  lines

Painful man,  your  hurt lasts  longer than a movie;
it will not amuse a woman or the future for
BO  long.  New  turns
must  be invented every  day.  And  newer tricks.     So dream; dream of success,
and  hope,  though hope  for  what  you cannot
guess, but  when  you slide
with  your  eyes closed  into  the  universe you invented viciously,
do  not complain that  the  wrong  doors  open
wide, open, wait,  then close behind you, and some friendly animal long  thought of
greets you  and  grows  fat lapping your  red  gore.

John   Newlove's  vision  is indeed   dark. His  universe  is one  of solitude, failure, ugliness and  nausea.  The only driving forces of life are desire, which  is always thwarted, and dreams  which  are never fulfilled. This world is a place of waste, despair,  and  desolation. One  is reminded of  Empson's "Villanelle"  and   the  lines

Slowly  the poison  the  whole  bloodstream fills;
It is the  waste  remains, the  waste  remains
and  kills.

Empson's  most   bleak   visions  are,  how­ ever,  given  a  kind  of qualifying  positive air by the verbal  wit, the implied admira­ tion  of  man's  inventive  intellect, just  as the  world  of  Graham  Greene  is lit  with sudden  appreciations  of  God's  grace  and mercy,   and   that   of   Samuel   Beckett   by

BOOKS IN REVIEW



flashes  of  self-gratulatory comedy.  New­ love's  vision  is not qualified  in these ways. The comedy  is never  in the slightest  life­ enhancing, there   is  no  discernible God, and   the  language is, in  the  majority of poems, bare of all but  the most anguished flourishes.  Newlove  has,  indeed, created a  place  where  no other  poet  has  yet had the   courage  to   go   without  at   least   a Swiftian irony,  a  Websterian rhetoric, or a   religious   conviction  as  luggage.  The  Newlove  man (and  one  is tempted to an ironic play upon  the author's own  name)  is  very   much   a  creature  of  our   times, however,  as  he  is also  a  universal figure
-the figure   of  need,   solitude,  despair. The poetry itself   is enormously  well crafted,  subtly   controlled  in   tone,   and richly various  in style, even while remain­ ing   consistent    to   what   emerges   as  an over-all   purpose   to   portray  the  human tragedy   with   an  economy   and   elegance  that   succeed  in  making the  whole  book a  tribute to  courage and  a  statement of the  awesome  spiritual  strength  of  man. This  Selected  Poems,  omitting as it  does many   of  the   poems   of  pure   reportage and  of whimsy which  lessened  the impact  of some of the separate collections is one of   the   most   impressive   to   have   been published in  the  English  speaking world in the  last  twenty  years. John  Newlove is now  at   the  height   of  his  powers.  One waits   impatiently  for   further   develop­ ments.
ROBIN SKELTON


TRANSLATIONS

F. R. scoTT, trans!., The Poems  of French Can- ada.  Blackfish Press.

THE   BLACKFISH   PRESS publication  of F. R. Scott's  translations is timely  recog­ nition  of Scott's  importance as a  transla­ tor   and   of   the   symbiotic   relationship between    the    arts    of    translation   and
 poetry.  As  Scott   insists  in  his  introduc­ tion:   "The author of a poem  must  select the  words  and   images  that  best  express what   he  wants   to  say:   this  is a  process akin  to  translation." Most  of  the  poems collected   here   were   translated  between  the  end  of World  War  II and  the  begin­  ning of the  Quiet Revolution in Quebec; some   can   be   found    in   John  Glassco's anthology; others  in Scott's  earlier Saint­ Denys Garneau  and Anne  Hebert  (I g62).  This  collection, first  of all,  complements Glassco's  anthology, and  recent  books  by Glassco,  Alan   Brown,   D.  G.  Jones   and Fred  Cogswell's  The Poetry  of  Modern Quebec:  An   Anthology  ( r 976)   in   the necessary   activity    of   opening   English­ Canadian eyes to the  more vibrant litera­ ture  of Quebec. Secondly, along  with  the Glassco  and  Jones  translations, it creates an   atmosphere  for   serious   dialogue  on the art  of  translation. In the introductions to  the  two Glassco  books,  The Poems  of French  Canada, and  in Scott's own  Dia­ logue  sur la  traduction  (an  exchange of letters  and  conversations with  Anne  He­  bert  about the  translation of  her  poem, "Le Tombeau des rois"-"The Tomb of Kings") lie the beginnings of an aesthetic of translation in Canada.
This  volume,  moreover, provides  con­ crete   evidence,  pleasingly   arranged,  of the  significance   of   translation  to  Scott's own poetic  process, to his artistic develop­ ment,   and   to  his  versatility as  he  shifts easily  from   satiric   to   political   to   lyric verse.  Scott  belongs   to  a  rare   breed   of Canadian  renaissance men; born  into  an establishment family,  he received  a classi­ cal education and  an  Oxford  degree  and  then  taught and  practised as  a  constitu­ tional  lawyer. He developed a passion for social  justice  (he was one of  the founders of  the  CCF), a  defiant  faith  in  our  two cultures  (he  sat  on  the  Royal   Commis­ sion for  Biculturalism  and  Bilingualism), and  a  desire  for  literary expression   and  discourse.   Translation  for   Frank  Scott


103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



was  not  only  a  poetic  but  a  political  act
-"How to  build  a  Canada that   would allow the two principal cultures to flourish freely  became   an  intellectual  and  emo­ tional   challenge  and   in   this  endeavour literature  would   obviously   play  an   im­ portant role."  In  this introduction, Scott  outlines his  strong  reaction to  the  social changes  in   Quebec  and   the  growth   of friendships   with    Quebec  writers-he had  met  all  the  poets  he  translated here except   Jean   Narrache  and,   of  course, Marc   Lescarbot  who   died   circa   1640. Scott  was able  to  collaborate with  them,  and   I  think   a  history  of  modern Cana­ dian   poetry   lies  in  these  collaborations. Undoubtedly,  Scott   is   the   pioneer    of poetic    translation  in   Canada,  and   his "collaboration"  and  friendship with Glassco and  A. J. M. Smith   (whose  1g6o Oxford anthology contained both  French and   English   poems)    and   the   inspiring example he  set  opened   up  new  horizons for  the  next  generation of  poets.  D.  G. Jones,   Margaret  Atwood,   Louis   Dudek come  to  mind.  The  exchanges and  con­ tacts  begun  by a  man  shocked  and  sur­ prised   at   the  separatedness of   two  cul­ tures  in  one  place,  have  continued, par­  ticularly  by   English   poets   in   Quebec, some  of  whom  have  found   a  centre   for a creative dialogue in the  journal, Ellipse.
Scott's  selections    (except    for    Marc
Lescarbot's "Farewell to  the  Frenchmen
Returning from  New France to Gallic France"  [ 16o6]   are   from   well   known twentieth-century poets. The majority are by Hebert and  Garneau, but  there  are  a couple  of poems each  by Roland Giguere, Fern and  Ouellette,  Jean-Guy  Pilon, Jacques   Brault     and     Pierre     Trottier. Scott's own  particular bias  prompted  his choice  and  so the  poems generally reflect, in  varying   forms,  images,  and  intensity, the  "revolt of the  individual conscience against the old imprisoning concepts." Images of imprisonment dominate the surrealistic dream sequence  that  describes
 the  "perverse enchantment  of  these rooms"  in Anne  Hebert's "Manor Life," they  remain  a  faint  echo  in  Pierre  Trot­ tier's  trenchant "State of Siege":

'Fear  of the  police
1Fear of arrests
Made me afraid of permissions
,But even  more  of  the  unknown
And  of the freedom that led  to it

But  the  minute I was  ready
Authority had  surrounded me
Had  beamed its searchlights on  me
,Which  relentlessly pinned me against the
wall
Of  the  priestless  prison  of my conscience

The    obsession   with   the   separation  of spirit  and  flesh, heart and  bone,  the presence  of death in  life, which  is partly the cry of a repressed,  isolated,  and  dying culture is caught  in  Anne  Hebert's "The Closed Room":

Leave, leave  the  fire to colour
The room  with  its reflections,
And  replenish your  heart and  your  flesh;
Unhappy pair  now separate and  lost.

Perhaps  the  most  famous   expression   of this  terrible absence  is Saint-Denys  Gar­ neau's  "Bird  Cage":

The bird  in  the  cage  of bone
Is death building his nest

As you  turn  from  the  watercolour  land­ scapes of Hebert and  Garneau, moreover, you  enter   the  winter   landscape  of  the younger   poets:   the  polar   season  of  Gi­ guere,  the  anatomy  of  the  human land­ scape  described  by  Jean   Pilon.  In  many ways  this  parallels  the  move  to symbolic and   internal   landscapes  that    we   find among  modern  English-Canadian poets.
The   translations  themselves   are   very
good -Scott  is a  meticulous craftsman. He is a more literal  translator than Glass­ co or Alan Brown. Frequently Scott main­ tains  the  original   syntax   of   the  French line which  sometimes  results in awkward­ ness,  yet  he  invariably  demonstrates an

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



unerring instinct  for the appropriate word or   phrase,  the   right   rhythm.  Although one  might  occasionally  wish  to change  a word or invert a line, Scott's translations carry  the  ring  of authenticity-you  can feel  the hand  of a conscientious poet  who cares  about   words  behind   each   line.  In "La  Chambre  fermee"  (translated  by both   Alan   Brown   and   Scott   as   "The Closed  Room"), Anne  Hebert's taut

Quatre fois
1Tant que  durera le souvenir
Du  jour  et  de la nuit

is rendered by Scott  as

Four   times
For  as long  as will last  the  memory
Of  day  and  night.

Here  the translation faithfully follows the original French syntax  and  so reads awk­ wardly.  Brown's  version  is freer and more flowing:



Literature
of Canada
Poetry and Prose in Reprint DOUGLAS  LOCHHEAD, GENERAL  EDITOR
 Four   times
Until of day  and  night
The memory  fades.

Yet in the same poem,  Scott  captures the chill  horror, so matter-of-factly stated, of

1Mon coeur  sur  la table pose
Qui  a done  mis le couvert avec  soin,

with

,When  my heart was  placed on  the  table
,who then laid  the cover  so carefully.

Brown's   trimmer  translation  is  not   so chilling:

My heart there  on  the  table, Who  set  it  with  such  care.

Scott  has  made  a  few  minor  corrections. In  "The Tomb   of  Kings," for  example, Scott  improves  the fifth  verse by dispens­ ing   with   literal    translations   of   words, creating a  more  natural  English  syntax, and  so clarifying the meaning:



At the Mermaid Inn
Introduction by Barrie Davies

The combined efforts of three poets
-Wilfred Campbell, Archibald Lampman, and Duncan Campbell Scott  produced 'At  the Mermaid Inn,' a series of weekly  newspaper columns that ran in the Toronto Globe from 6 February 1892 until July 1893. It contained a wide  range of subjects from original poetry
and prose to articles on  philosophy,
politics, and religion. This transcrip­ tion of the entire series brings to new  light one of the most readable and vital documents in Canadian life and literature. $25.00 cloth, $7.50 paper

University of Toronto Press

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The maker of the  dream
,Presses on  the  cord
Drawing the  naked  steps
One  by one
Like  the  first  drops of rain
At  the  bottom of a well


becomes

The maker of the  dream
Pulls  on  the  cord
And  my naked  footsteps come
One  by one
Like  the  first drops of rain
At  the  bottom of a well.

( 1977)

The original reads  as follows:

L'auteur du songe
Presse  le fil
Et  viennent les pas  nus
Una un
Comme les premieres gouttes de  pluie
Au fond  du  puits.

Another revision  serves to restore  the rhythm. The  1g62 translation

Seven  times  I know  the  tight  grip  of the bones
And  the  dry  hand seeking my heart to
break  it.

becomes   more   effectively   monosyllabic and  staccato in  the I 977 version:

Seven  times  I know  the  tight  grip  of  the bones
And  the  dry  hand that  seeks my heart to
break it.

However, not  all  revisions  are  improve­ ments.   The  appropriate   antiquity  and fluidity    of   "Wherefore   does   this   bird quiver" is changed into the less astonished exclamation: "What  then  makes this bird quiver" as  the  poem  moves  to its apoca­ lyptic:

And  turn toward morning
Its  blinded eyes.

Also   I  have   never   liked   the   adjective "lean" in  the  poem  "The Lean  Girl" - "thin" would  be  preferable, though  not

106
 as  descriptive of  the  girl's  fleshless state.
Scott  has characteristically  entitled his collection  The  Poems  of French  Canada
-he is  fighting  a  lonely  battle   against what  he  feels is the  vociferous  and  dan­ gerously  provincial  nationalism  of  Que­ bec. As a consequence, he  refuses  to suc­ cumb  to the trend  of converting "French Canada"  into   "Quebec." This  defiance underlines his introduction; it  is  perhaps "an   old  man's  frenzy," perhaps  an  ana­ chronistic gesture,  perhaps the  pain  of a man  who sees his dreams of  the  creative co-existence  of  two  cultures  dissolve into petty  semantics.   Titles   notwithstanding, I  can   only  wish   that   the   poems   were more  numerous and  the  introduction  to Quebec poets more extensive.
Blackfish,   a   small,   persevering   press
near   Vancouver,  has   produced  an  ele­ gant   volume  with   the  romantic  inscrip­  tion  "Designed  and  Printed  by Brett  and Safarik  at  White  Rock  by  the  Sea"  and
-B.C. government  take   notice!-the strong   condemnation "Made  in   British Columbia  Without  Government   Fund­ ing."    A   most   appropriate  and   ironic comment since  writers  and  publishers  in Quebec give and  receive  a  great  deal  of support from  their  government. May  F. R.  Scott's  influence  be far  reaching.

KATHY MEZEI


MONSTER MAKERS

JOHN     ROBERT   COLOMBO,   Mostly   Monsters.
Hounslow Press, $4.95.
Giant  Canadian Poetry   Annual 1977. 17  Can-
adian Poets.  Press  Porcepic, $2.95.

THERE ARE MANY  would-be poets writing in Canada today. There are  relatively  few readers  of poetry,  even  among the  poets. As  a   result,   publishers  are   reduced    to strange  expediencies to attempt to market poetry. They even try their hand at an exploitation  of  nostalgia.  Nostalgia  is  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



powerful  emotion,  as  I  have   reason   to know.   In   1952,  at  a  second-hand   book shop  in  Edinburgh I  once  bought copies of The Butterfly Book and The Moth Book by William  Holland for no earthly reason other than   that   I  was  an  avid  collector of Iepidoptera during the  Depression and coveted    these   volumes   in   vain   during those  years  of  boyhood.  The   two  books under  discussion  are  attempts to achieve popularity through the same human weakness  I evinced.
The recipe  of combined nostalgia,  ter­ ror,  and  perfect  safety  on  the  part  of  the reader  is  evoked   consistently   by   John  Robert  Colombo in  Mostly  Monsters, a series of found  poems  drawn  from  many sources.   Here   surely   is   something  for every  one. Superman,  Dracula, Franken­ stein,   Wonder  Woman,  She-Who-Must­ Be-Obeyed,  Buck  Rogers,  Dr.   Caligari, the Green Hornet, Mr. Moto, King Kong, and   many  more  appear in  the  pages  of this  book  in  lines  that   are  recognizably  verse  and  in  phrases   that   are  word  for word authentic, thanks to the talent of its compiler.  My  objection  to  most  of  this book  is  that   I  believe   the   poet  should create  his monsters  and  invoke his horrors out  of his own psyche  rather than  rely so literally  upon the works of others. I must admit, though, that  occasionally  Colombo can   transform,  by  the   magic   of  form, work imbedded in such prosaic books as Robert Ripley's  Believe  It or Not into something  truly   wonderful  of   its   own kind. "Kaspar Hauser" is a case in point:

Kaspar Hauser
the  mystery  child  of Europe
could  see the stars  in  the  heavens
shining at  high  noon without mechanical aid

Kaspar Hauser could  see the  stars
,in the  daytime

Only   the  cover,  frontispiece, and  for­
mat  of  Press  Porcepic's Giant  Canadian
 Poetry Annual  1977 are nostalgic of comicbooks,  but  they  seem  to  me  to  be, along  with  the  art  work  of  Sheila  Glad­ stone,  the  most attractive features  of the volume.  It  is perhaps fortunate  that   the poetry   fails  to  live  up  to  the  pompous statements of  intention often  prefixed  to it  by  its  authors. It is, all  the  same,  in­ evitably   sincere,   well   put   together  for­ mally,   and   honest   in   its  intentions. It seldom,  however,  transcends the  obvious concerns   of  the  young  adolescent  faced with  a world  that hejshe never  made.  At best, it is a good indication to other young poets,  who  may  buy  this  volume,  of how common   are   forms   and   themes   which they  are  apt  to  think,  in  their  own  rela­  tive  isolation,  to be  peculiarly their  own. It  also has  a  useful  guide  to "Who Pub­ lishes Poetry in Canada?"
Giant   Canadian  Poetry   Annual  1977 is a commendable publishing venture for the  encouragement that  publication in  it is bound  to give to young and  relatively unpublished poets.  I  think,  though, that its   format  and   cover   do   not   provide enough   nostalgia   to  make  older   readers buy it,  and  the  very young  are  not  going to be fooled into  reading poetry  by some­ thing as obvious as a format.

FRED COGSWELL


















107






LOUISE MOREY BOWMAN

BARRY  CALLAGHAN  HAS CLAIMED  that W. W. E. Ross was "the first modem poet in  Canada."1  He   bases  this  claim   upon the   assumption that  Ross   introduced Imagism into  Canadian poetry. But  Ross was not  the first Canadian to write  in the Imagist manner (though he was probably the  first to dedicate himself  totally  to it). Four  years before  his first published poem appeared in  Dial in  Ig28,  another Cana­ dian   poet,  Louise  Morey  Bowman, had published  Dream  Tapestries    (I g24),  a volume   which   contained  several   poems which  were clearly  Imagist in  technique. Her   earlier  book,  Moonlight   and  Com­ mon  Day  ( Ig22), had  also shown  a defi­ nite  Imagist influence. The  purpose of this  note  is to examine Bowman's efforts at  writing poetry   in  a  new  and  modem style  and  also  to  show  how  her  struggle to break  free of techniques which  she inherited from the nineteenth century proved  ultimately futile.
Louise   Morey   was   born   in   I 882   in Sherbrooke, Quebec.  She  was  educated by private tutors, then  at Dana Hall, Wellesley,  Mass.,  and  by extensive travel in  Europe. Married in  I gog to Archibald Bowman  she lived in Toronto until  Igig, when she moved  to Montreal where she resided  until  her  death in  I g44.
Bowman's first published poem, "North
Room,"  appeared  in   Outlook   in   May Igi3, and  she had  quite  an extensive magazine publication. Her  work appeared in  Poetry  (Chicago), Outlook, Indepen­
dent,  Dalhousie  Review,  Queen's  Quar­
terly, and  Canadian  Magazine.  She  also

108
 
published  three books with Macmillan: Moonlight and Common  Day, Dream Tapestries,  which   won  a  David   Award from  the Quebec government, and Char­ acters  in  Cadence   ( Ig38).   Logan  and French, in Highways of Canadian  Litera­ ture, included her among  the  poets of the "Second  Renaissance Period"  of  Cana­ dian   poetry,  although  their   reasons   for praising  her were not inspired  by any admiration for her  Imagism. They  wrote: "Louise   Morey  Bowman   shows  at  times an  airy  fancy  which  is almost  so ethereal as   to   be   altogether  abstract  and   un­ earthly."2    It   is  ironic   that    this   praise points   toward   one  of  the   major  weak­ nesses of  her  poetry.  It often  is,  as Des­ mond   Pacey   described it,   "deficient  in substance  and   strength."3    For   someone  attempting  to  write   Imagist  verse   this can,  as we shall see, be disastrous.
Moonlight  and Common  Day is marred by a lack of any consistent  personal style. At  times  she  seems  to  be  writing  imita­ tions  of  poets  rather than  poetry.  Obvi­
ous influences include Wordsworth, Poe, and  Swinburne. Some  of  the  poems  are openly  didactic, some  are  "modem" but not Imagist, and others show Imagist tendencies. In  this  and  in  her  later  vol­ umes  she  is caught between the  style of the  old  acknowledged masters  and   the methods  of  modern  poetry.   She   never completely succeeds  in  sloughing off the ways  of  the   past   in  favour  of  a  more natural  modem  voice.  The two  follow­ ing examples show  how  divided  her  style in  this  book  is. The first is taken  from  a poem called "Lydia":

Dost know the white, wild-cherry boughs
Ablow midst green  of May,
:That make enchanted palaces
Of houses old and gray?
1(Ah me, that  sweet, wild springtime!)

The second  is from  "Sea  Sand":

'Between the rhythmical, unfathomed sea, lAnd the  rich warm fecundity of land

OPINIONS  & NOTES



,There lies the  sand,
·The shifting sand  of beach and  dune, cPure, strange, sea dust, so alien  to green
earth.

The first is clearly  a derivation from nineteenth-century  poetic tradition. It
·  uses  archaisms,  a   regular  rhythm  and rhyme scheme, and an exclamation mark which  is  not  justified  by the  intensity of the line. She uses outdated forms and mannerisms  badly  because  they  are  not native   to  her.   "Sea   Sand," a  poem   in which   the  description  is  far   more  con­ vincing, is written in  a modern  voice.
This  conflict between modern  and
nineteenth-century styles often  occurs within  a  single   poem.   "Shadows" is  a good  example. The  first stanza  is written in  the  Imagist manner:

Oak tree, Elm  tree,
lAnd apple bough .. ,
,Their shadows fall
On the  cool  green grass.
tShadows  of willow  trees  lie in  the himmering
;and  the  pine  trees'  flicker
On crystal snow.

There is  direct   treatment of  the   thing; the images  are presented in a spare,  clean diction; and   it  is  written  in  free  verse. The second  stanza  is purely  sentimental:

(Even the  baby,  chubby and  sweet,
.Poised  on  her  tiny,  tottering feet,
Casts now  her  shadow-an instant's gloom,
Over a purple hyacinth bloom.)

The baby's  "sweetness" has nothing to do with   the  shadow  she  casts  nor  with  the rather  melancholy mood   of   the   first stanza. That image  very obviously  fails to abide by F. S. Flint's second rule of  Imag­ ism:  "To use absolutely  no word  that  did not  contribute to the  presentation."4
In   the   third    stanza   Bowman    waxes
philosophic:

Last winter, set in a fire-lit room,
Were two sprays of long-dried goldenrod ...
!Feathery, frosty  plumes.
 They themselves,
,But the  magical firelight leaped and shone Till  their  dainty, elusive shadows fell, Etched on the  oak-paneled wall.
Each was an  exquisite mystical ghost
Of  Beauty-
A miracle truth.
,Then  the  firelight died  and  they  went  out
Into

She  says that   the  goldenrods "were  cer­ tainly  ghostly  enough in  themselves" but she is not content to follow  Flint's advice  and  deal  with  things  in  themselves. She has  to  interpret  their  shadows,   not  with an   image,   but   with   a  direct   statement which pins them down  to one specific meaning: "Each was  an  exquisite  mysti­ cal ghost/ Of Beauty-/ A miracle truth." She does not, as the  Imagist must, let the image  stand  on its own  merits.  By giving it  a  stated   meaning she  has  taken  the image  and   reduced  its  function  to  that  of a  road  sign  which  indicates only  one direction.
Dream   Tapestries  is  plagued  by  the same   unevenness   of  style   and   attitude which characterized Moonlight and Com­ mon  Day.  In  a few  poems, however, she does succeed  in writing well in the  Imag­ ist vein.  The  book  is  divided into  several sections  and  one  section,   entitled "Cin­ quains," contains five  Imagist  pieces. These   poems   are   especially   interesting  because they show the coming  together of the  Canadian  setting  with   the   Imagist style. "Deep Snow" describes  a winter scene:

Powder
Of  diamond
Upon a silver birch; Old stone  wall
Buried deep.

And  you ... A scarlet bird
Whose  wild  wings flutter here
Against my soul.  How  still
The world!

Bowman   uses  simple   natural  details   to

109

OPINIONS & NOTES



establish   a  number of  contrasts  between the  two stanzas.  The first stanza  presents us with  a  picture of stillness;  the  second gives  us  movement. The  first  is  charac­ terized  by  the  colour   white;  the  second by  scarlet. The   first  stanza  contains in­ animate and  external  things; the  second contains life and  takes  us into  the  soul of the  poet.
The sequence  in  which  the  images  are
presented is very important. The poem moves  from  the  inanimate, to life, to the soul,  and  finally  back  to  the  inanimate. The   poem  takes  the  reader from  an  im­ personal  stillness,   to  a  "flutter"  in   the soul  of  an  observer   and   then  returns  to stillness.  This  sequence  implies  that   hu­ man  life  is a  soul's  "flutter" enclosed  by eternity. This  aspect of the  poem's  mean­ ing  is  linked   to   the  sense  of  opposites which  the  images  evoke,  in  that  life and eternity are  implicitly contrasted.
Another interesting, though less success­ ful,   piece   in   the   "Cinquains"  group   is "Twelve Hokku  on a Canadian  Theme." Modelled upon  Wallace  Stevens' "Thir­ teen  ways  of  looking  at  a  blackbird," it deals with  twelve aspects of Canadian life both   past   and   present   and   urban  and rural. Most  of these  hokku  are  quite  flat but  in  one  or  two  she  manages to make the  images  work.  One  of  the  best  is the fourth hokku:

'Silver-haired Marquise!
1You were  transplanted, one  Spring,
Into wild  New  France.

As in  "Deep Snow" she  uses contrast  as her  major device.  Civilization and  Eur­ ope,  as embodied by the  "Marquise," are contrasted  with   the   "wild"  new   land.  Silver is  contrasted  with  the   implied green   of  spring   and   through  that   con­ trast   is  implied  another  between youth and  old  age. These all  serve  as an  ironic comment  upon  the  "transplantation" of the  Marquise. Even   though it  is  spring


I IO
 the old ways will not  flourish  in  the  bush garden of New France.
An important poem  written in the Imagist  style which is not included among "Cinquains" is "Moment Musical":

Blue  moth! ...
Tiny, pulsating thing ...
1You and  I met  upon  a  rock hill.
,J paused ...
,You paused, and  poised
Blue,
Slue on  a dark  stone:
And  all the vibrant sunshine in  the  world
Was caught for  the  sparkle
On  your  tiny  wings ... Blue moth!

The  poem  begins by simply  presenting an image: "Blue  moth." The  exclamation mark   and   three   dots   which   follow   the image  indicate an  emotional reaction on the  part  of  the  poet  and  the  rest  of  the poem  is an  articulation of  this  reaction.
Bowman's last  and  poorest  volume  is entitled  Characters in Cadence  and  it appeared  in I 938,  six  years  before   her death. On  the whole  it marks  a return to the uneven style and  derivativeness of her first book. Buried  under  a mound of bad verse there  is one  very short  Imagist gem. It is the second of a series of poems called "Portraits of Five Sinners":

Her little  window-sills were all  too  narrow
,To hold  her  pots  of lilting daffodils.

These two lines stand  as a near perfect example   of  the   power   of  the  image   to evoke   the  deepest   of  insights   with   the least  amount of  verbiage.  The reader   is left  with   the  feeling   (it  is  never   more than  that,  it cannot be proven) that a narrowness lies within the "her" (presum­ ably Bowman  herself)   of the  poem.  This narrowness is her  "sin." Her soul  cannot accommodate the   "lilting   daffodils" of feeling  which  life  has to offer.
In  Imagism  Bowman sought  a method which  would  set  her  free  from  the  past, but  she  was  unable   to  break  away  from the grip of the Romanticism which  domi-

OPINIONS & NOTES



nated the  Canadian literary scene. This struggle  inevitably made  her poems a con­ fusing  mixture of the  old  and  new. Thus  her  work,  when  considered as a whole, is of  too  low  a quality to  make  her an  im­ portant  poet.   But   she  is  an  interesting representative  figure   nonetheless,  whose career   can   serve  to  symbolize   the  slow and painful  struggle  which Canadian poetry underwent in this century  prior  to the arrival of Pratt and  the McGill  poets.


NOTES

1 "Memoir," Shapes and  Sounds, ed.  Raymond Souster and  John Robert Colombo (Toronto: Longmans, 1968), p. 3·
2  J. D.  Logan  and   Donald G.  French,  High­ ways  of Canadian Literature  (Toronto: Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, 1928), p. 297.
3  "Louise Morey Bowman," Encyclopedia Can­
adiana.
4   "Imagism," Poetry, 1,  No.  6  (March 1913),
199·
DONALD PRECOSKY


NEW PROVINCES

THE New  Provinces  ANTHOLOGY  ( 1936) is certainly a landmark book in Canadian poetry,  a  signpost  valuable in  suggesting a  direction  in  mood   or  movement. But there  is a  danger in  extracting the  book from  its historical context by overempha­ sizing  its  later   effect  or  in  blurring the distinctiveness of  the  contributing poets by seeing  a  unity  of  purpose  which  may not have existed.
Both  errors  have  occurred. On  the one
hand,  New  Provinces  has been seen as a manifesto,  a   self-confident  doctrine  of what  poetry should  be  (made  explicit  by the  poems  themselves) , produced for  this purpose by a collecting of Canadian modernists  between   two  covers.  On  the other   hand,  the  poets  are  compared  to each  other, and  all  are  compared to the
 poets'  theoretical  wntmgs  (including  A.
J. M.  Smith's "Rejected Preface" to  the
book) . Thus theory  is made  to appear a
more important outcome of the anthology
than  the  poems themselves.
This  has  led  to  some  difficulties. Why
was F. R. Scott  being  "modest and  overly reticent"1 in his preface? Why  was the Smith  preface  rejected? How  can one account  for   certain  omissions   (e.g.   W.
W.  E.  Ross)  or  certain inclusions (E.  J.
Pratt,  perhaps) ?  How  can  one  account
for   the   variety   of  form,   content,  etc., present   among   the  poets  or  in  one  poet alone?  Why  do some  poems  appear  con­ tradictory to stated  or implied  theoretical aims and  contentions?
The  problem  lies in viewing  New Prov­ inces  as  a  unified  exposition  of   modern exemplars. The   book  and  its  nature ap­  pear  in  quite  a  different  light  when  set in time and  place.  We know, for example, that  most  of the  poets were close friends; that  most  of them  had  not  yet been  pub­  lished  in  book  form;  that  many  of  their poems   had   been   in   print   in   scattered periodicals a long while before  1936. To­  gether   these  three simple   facts   strongly  suggest   that   the   choice   of   poets   and poems  to be included was less doctrinaire than commonly  inferred.
:Moreover, there  is no evidence  to refute
Scott's  admission  in his preface that  "the need for a new direction was more appar­ ent  then  [sic] the knowledge of  what  that  direction would  be."  Even  Smith's more polemic  preface  is as general:

That the  poet  is  not  a  dreamer, but  a  man of  sense; that   poetry is  a  discipline because it is  an  art; and   that it  is  further a  useful
<trt;  these   are   propositions  which   it   is  in­
,tended  this   volume  shall   suggest.  We   are
not   deceiving ourselves that  it  has   proved them.

In   practice  these   wide   criteria  hardly make  rigid  and  detailed demands on  the new   poetry.   The   proof   of  this   is  that Smith  himself  invited  Pratt to contribute

I I I

OPINIONS &  NOTES



despite  the "barrier" which  seemed  to separate older  from  younger  poets.2  This is  particularly important  when   one   re­ members  that  Pratt not  only  felt  obliged to  object   to  the  stridency of   the  Smith  preface  but  was able  to have  it  removed from  the  anthology. Clearly  the  sense of the  book  as  new  dogma   is  undermined.
This  last point  touches on another area of debate, i.e., the  relation of this volume
to the British anthologies New  Signatures (I932) and  New  Country (I933)· There is no doubt that  Smith had  knowledge of and  was involved  with  the Thirties move­ ment  in  England, and  that  the similarity of  titles  is indicative of  a  shared   notion  of  the  collections as  modem statements, but  one  must  be careful not  to draw  too close  a  connection. First,  for  reasons  al­ ready  cited,  there   seems  to  be  a  gap  in New   Provinces    between    any   supposed theoretical intentions and  the  result  pro­ duced.  Secondly,   the   strongest   links  to British   modernism  were   held   by  Smith  who, for the most  part, left production of the Canadian anthology to Scott,  particu­ larly after  Pratt's rejection of his preface.  A comparison of  tone  and  details  of the two  prefaces  reveals  the  significance   for the  volume  of   that   fact,  especially  as  it affected   the  lack  of  a  firmly  convinced and  rigidly  schooled  editorial  vision.
My  purpose  here  is to  try  to get  away from  the  assumptions and  confusions of a theoretical approach and  consider  New Provinces  through an  analysis  of each  of the   poets   through  their   chosen   poems. Only  then  perhaps will it be appropriate to consider  the implications of their  being together by way of any  common develop­ ments  in  content and  form.  To  do  so it will  be  useful  to  hold  to  a  broad   defini­ tion   of  form,   i.e.,  to  attend  to  tone  or style  or  impact  as  the  soul  of  form   in order   to  avoid  the  failures   which  Saint­ Exupery   perceived  when   he  wrote   that  "the  intellectuals take  a face  apart; they

112
 explain   it  piece  by  piece;  and   they  can no longer  see the smile."
The poets appear in  New  Provinces  in alphabetical order, yet chance proved appropriate in placing  Robert Finch  first. While  a good study  of his work has yet to be made,  we do know of his concern with French  poetry,  and   a  neat   analogy  ap­ pears  when  we remember the  relation of Eliot  to the  French  symbolists. However, while  signs  of  this  influence  are evident in  many  of  Finch's poems  in  this  collec­ tion,  there  is also  the  presence  of  other  traditions and an interest in broad  experi­ mentation.
Smith  suggested  the inclusion of Finch along  with  Pratt and  it is useful to see the linkings  of  older  and   newer   poets  here. Finch   reveals  some  of  the  difficulties   in his first poem of the section, "The Five Kine." Archaisms  in language ("a  dearth of inauspicious ilk"; "sheering denial  be­ tween  pent  and  wrung") are  juxtaposed with   precise   and   vivid   modernisms  in image   ("a  famished  parody  of  beauty"; "leisure  is become a desert  road") . A ten­ dency  to  rhetoric  is checked  by a formal  structure  and   complicated  rhyme   pat­ tern.  The  tone  shifts  unevenly,  as  if  the poet  is  unsure  of  the  mood  he  wants  to convey,   and   so   the   poem's    emotional impact  is  neutralized. The  contemporary thoughts  on  art,   past   and   future,   lose their   power  in  the  wordy  detail   of  the symbols.  The  content itself  suggests  that the  direction  of  the  art   is  less  obvious than  its change: "The kine too had  been there   for   long,/  yet   now   they   seek  the faithless   drover's goad/ as  he   the  scat­ tered  purchase  of a song."
In  "From the Hammock" Finch  hopes to  capture the  pure  feeling  to  be  found in  "the   wood  of  sloth,  the  labyrinth  of mood." Yet  the  poet  loses that   purity  in the archaisms,  the rhetoric and  the very wordiness of his  forced imagery, so different  from   the  simple   and   effective fusion  of mood, language and  thought at

OPINIONS  & NOTES



the poem's finish: "a soundless solitude/ whose  brilliant  exile,  for   the   heart,/ is, and   not   makes,   a   work   of  art."  The nostalgia   for   romance  here,   the   regret that   contentment  is  so  often   caught  in the  "ambush thought has  laid" is signifi­ cant,  as it is in "Windowpiece" in which a   landscape  of   "old   willows   in   spun copper periwigs" is completed  not  by "a blue  buck  bearing  vermilion   horns/ led by a groom  in tightest daffodil" but  by a "silent  steam  shovel" ready  to destroy.  It is clear  that  Finch  is aware of the change  taking   place   in   poetry,   for   "From  the Hammock" is  not  primarily a  poem  of feeling   but   of   thought,  and   "Window­ piece"  is not  primarily a  glorification of trees but an exercise  in irony.
The goal  and  the  difficulties  of  trying to  fuse  poetic   traditions are   well  illus­ trated  in   "The   Excursionists"   and "Beauty my  Fond  Fine  Care." The first (I  believe)    is  a   disaster,   intellectually and  poetically forced, confused and  ordi­ nary. Admittedly it  is meant to be about Uncertainty but  that  is hardly  an  excuse
for poetry as heavy as:

What muniment a mind  must  have
Before  it stammer I believe,
.Maugre the  feats  it can  or  may  do
Balking  incontinent at  Credo, Halting the  leap  from  pro  to con Across  the  gulf of  Erewhon.

The   second  is  as  heavy   and   as  awk­ ward  perhaps in trying  to deal  with one's relation to  beauty  and   to  changing con­ cepts  of beauty  in  intellectual terms,  but this  poem  is  salvaged   by  its  conclusion:

memory, beauty, in a unique ellipsis modulate fact  to faith, now, and  for  after.

These lines succinctly accomplish the sense  and   rhythm that   the  whole  poem was  seeking,  i.e.,  the  correlation  of  the words on the page with  the music of their sounds,  the  tone  of  beauty  as a  personal friend  and  companion, the intellectual aspect  of considering the  relation of self
 to beauty,  and  the  description of the  new concept of beauty.
Compare  these   abstractions  to   "Be­ come  that   Village" where  Finch  follows the   French   influence  more   closely   by using  nature as symbol  for  love  and  art,  much   as  Baudelaire and   Verlaine  did. One   feels  here  a  confidence in  rhythm and   a  security   in   image,   a  success  in expressing   a  feeling   or  thought of  con­ tinual   hopeful   searching  for  something permanent,  without  didacticism  or   ab­ straction:

.Become that village where a world in  small  prevents my  poverty,
a common to community
beyond   the seas of access  hurled.

The firmness  of  that  base  allowed  Finch to be led  back  to the  1930's  and  create a successful   modern  poem   in   "Egg-and­ Dart." One  senses here  the  intensity and  discipline   of  thought and  emotion  that  Smith  found  so lacking in  earlier Cana­ dian   poetry.   Deeply   emotional  yet   re­ strained and  sharp, this poem manages to be  powerful  through  a  musical   rhythm of  the  perpetual and  depressing cycle  of events  the  poet  feels, and  this  is done  in a  conventional structure  that   is used  to aid the  impact   of  clear  rhyme  and   neat line-breaks:

The long,  drear moment of  the  look  that spoils
,The  little bud  of  hope; the  word  that soils
The pact  immaculate, so newly  born;
•The noisy silence  of the  old  self-scorn;
•These, and  the  sudden leaving in  the  lurch;
.Then  the  droll  recommencement of  the search.

And when  his language is applied to "imagiste" poems,  Finch  is at  his best. Language  in   "The  Hero"  in   forty-six words  is engagingly effective  in  reinforc­ ing in  tone  and  atmosphere  the dynamic heroism   of   the   warrior   until   suddenly changing  in  mood   to  the  sober,  almost  bitter  recollection of  death. The analogy  of  machinery and   warrior  adds   power


113

OPINIONS & NOTES



and   makes  "Windowpiece" seem  super­ fluous   while   making  the   theorizing  of "The Five   Kine"  unnecessary. "The Hunt," better  than anything by W. W. E. Ross, is remarkable, a  jewel with  the  tone of  a  medieval tapestry, precious,   beauti­ ful,  unique in  itself,  leaving  the  philoso­ phizing  of "Beauty my Fond  Fine  Care," "From the  Hammock" or  "Become that Village" all subordinate to its exciting twelve lines.
The poems of Leo Kennedy are less diversely  experimental  in  content,  form
and  tone  than  those  of Finch. Kennedy's prime  concern rests with  affirming the life cycle of Birth-Copulation-Death-Rebirth, a process which  is re-emphasized by tonal shifts  from  drabness to lightness  of hope, and  by conventional structures appropri­ ate  to the  theme  of regular and  rhythmic cycles. It  is perhaps the  tone  that  is most interesting in  these  poems:  the  positive though  qualified   conclusions about  life and   love.  Romanticism  is  brought  into proportion by metaphysics, as when Donne moderated the excesses of the Elizabethan poets. This is the  balance on which  Kennedy seems poised.
On  one scale is "A Bright  Swan  for my Daughter," a  lyric  in  praise  of flesh  and life   where    the   music   of   the   poem   is stressed   more   than   its  thought and   the tone  is  more  romantic than   its  classical form and  references suggest. "Letter to Girls" reiterates the  same  joyful  theme:

Cup lovers' hands about your  breasts, And  give  them  kisses sharp as wine.

Here  Kennedy reinforces the  lightness  by word-games ("surges  up  the  urgent sap,/ and  tups  the  dove,  and  dips  the  spray") but  we can  see in "Words for a Resurrec­ tion" how  he  qualifies   this  feeling  by  a more  complex symbolism  and   the  intro­ duction  of  a  strong   death  image.   The  power  of this poem  is strengthened by an effective  combination of sound  and  detail  m  developing the  thought of  Death  be-

I 14
 coming   Life  again. For   example,  com­ pare  the  use of  heavy  consonants  in  the first   stanza with   the   liberated   vowel  sounds of the last, while the middle stanza  sounds  are  transitional as partially exem­  plified  here  by the  first lines  of  each :

"Each pale  Christ stirring underground"; "And bones long quiet under frost"; "This Man of April  walks  again."
Or  compare the weighty adjectives, nouns
and   verbs  of  the   first   with   the   happy language  of   the   last,   again    with    the middle  stanza  transitional:

pale,  stirring, brown, casket, soil, shoot;

,quiet, frost,  rejoice, bells, ecstatic, inviolate;

'April,  walks, marvel, laughter, blessed, lilies.

"Delicate Clay" suggests a shift  on the balance, for  hope  is reserved  for  the  last two  lines   (again   with   a  light   speed   of vowels  and   esses)   while   the   dominant tone  is the despair  and  "furtive anguish" of  Death   in  the   cycle  of  time.   "Mole Talk" and  "Epithalamium before  Frost" rework   this  mood  and   idea  of  eventual Life  after  the  dark  agony  of  Death, but the  poem  "Epithalamium" is  more  suc­ cessful  than  these  two  in  doing  so,  for it combines    remarkably  powerful   images with   the  language  of  Death   and  Love and  the  thought of the  eternal  cycle and  thereby   manages   to   fuse   the   romantic and   the   metaphysical  in  an   impressive way.  It  is  an  epithalamium  in  Donne's sense,  but  the  emotion  is  reserved, con­ sidered  and  made  rugged. Here the poet's mother  dies  and   is   buried    beside   the "shell," the  "shrunken  side,"  the  "dust" of  her   husband.  And   in  that   "shallow bridal bed of earth," they lift

This  bloom of tansy  from  the  fertile ground:
,My sister,  heralded by no moan, no sound.

The power of this poem is repeated in "Prophecy for Icarus" in which  the agony of  Death   is captured in  the  image  of a

OPINIONS &  NOTES



bird   no  longer  able  to  fly when  it  must "know  itself betrayed." The  force of these poems comes from their ability to express what  Smith  termed  "the  emotional effect of ideas," and  the  strength of these  ideas coupled  with  image   makes  the  emotion clear  and  effective  by making  it  personal and  intense.
"Shore" and  "Testament" show  more experimentation with form if not with content. The  first  is an  imagist  poem  of irregular metre  in  which  images  of sand, waves, tide, etc., of apparent lifeless monotony,  are   used   to   evoke   the   old theme  of infinite cycles, but it lacks the precision  and conciseness to be really effective.  However, the last  three  lines do succeed  in  uniting image  and  thought to reveal the hopeful  gathering of life forces:

But  silt  by the  receded tide,  a ravel
Of  weeds  thrown high  by the  wash  of water, a crest
Of  wave,  distant, beyond the  cove.

"Testament" suggests  Kennedy's contact with   the   work  of  A.  M.  Klein   for  the force   of  language and   of  heritage in  a freer  form  gives strong  tone  to  his  emo­ tional  and  intellectual beliefs:

bearded ones at  ease  with  your  passion, dust with your  fathers' fathers and  your  sons' iSons;
,ancestors remembered though not  known,
,proudly  aloof
from  time  and  weeping, quick  again in  me and my children.

Images of life and  expressions  of thought couple   effectively  in  a  personal   manner to  make  one  wish  Kennedy had  experi­ mented further in  this direction.
It is pleasant to find  the  two poems  of A. M. Klein  following  Kennedy's "Testa­ ment" and  developing its form and  spirit. Emotion is translated into  language and together  they   give   power   to   intellect, while  intellect   restrains  emotion  by  giv­ ing  its  linguistic  manifestations a  direc­ tion and  purpose.
 This  is well  illustrated in  "Out of  the Pulver  and  the Polished  Lens." A central symbol, the story of Spinoza's persecution, gives  body  to  thoughts on  the  problems of  man's   relation with  the  infinite. Sec­ tion  Istates  the conflict  felt between  true  belief and  dogma.  Section  11  expands this to  a  broader  historical  base.  Sections 111 and  IV  weigh  faith  in  dogmas  and  doubt  respectively  while Section  v combines the two around the  ideas  of Spinoza   to  pro­ duce  further  questions. Sections  VI   and vrr suggest  alternate answers  with  a  syn­ thesis  in  Section  VIII   and  an  epilogue in Section rx.
A rational structure for presenting a theory  of mind?  Perhaps; but  Klein  rea­ lized  that   issues  of  faith   and  doubt, of emotion  and  intellect, of  microcosm and macrocosm  are  of  the  gut  as  well  as  of the mind,  and  the  path  to one is through the  other.   Therefore   language  as  both effect  and  cause of  emotion is the  key to an expression  of  intellect, much  as speci­ fics  are   keys   to   universals. The  extra­ ordinary  nature of  this  poem  is the  suc­ cessful linking of the  two.
Thus  the  images  and  language of  Sec­ tions  I  and   11  are   juxtaposed, one  with spit  and   rhetorical  questions  noisy  and violent,  the  other  with  minds  and  sharp  statements cool and  calculating, to set up the  conflict  on  both  fronts. Then 111 and IV   move  closer   in   style   to  suggest   the duality being  put forward, but  it  is obvi­ ous that  the tones differ,  one of guilt  and self-recrimination  and   the  other of  fact and  confident criticism:

Malevolent scorpions befoul thy  chambers,
0 my heart; they scurry across  its floors, Leaving the  slimy vestiges  of doubt.

Soul  of Spinoza, Baruch Spinoza bids  you
Forsake  the god suspended in  mid-air,
Seek  you that  other Law, and  leave  Jehovah
,Play his game  of celestial solitaire.

Section  v is almost  prose  to  recapitulate the duality in dual  images  (one  being the


II5

OPINIONS & NOTES



title  of  the  poem   itself)   and   hint   at  a synthesis in the questions:

Is  it  a  marvel, then, that he  forsook  the abracadabra of  the  synagogue, and   holding with  timelessness a  duologue, deciphered a IIlew scripture in   the   book?  Is  it a  marvel that he left  old  fraud for  passion  intellectual of god?

Then there  is a brilliant transfer of  emo­ tional  language to  the  intellectual  argu­ ment   ("Do genuflect   before  the  jewelled brain!")  while  the  emotional  argument has a controlled tone:

Before  the  song  of a bird, before
The breath of spring or  fall
I am  lost; before  these  miracles
I am  nothing at  all.

These  synthesize  to  explode into  a  series of linguistic  pyrotechnics in  vm, a prayer uniting faith  and  science  and  relating the microcosmic symbols  to macrocosmic lan­ guage:

A  babe   in  swaddling clothes laughs at  the sunbeams on  the  door's lintel; the  sucklings
<play with   thee; with   thee   Kopernik  holds communion through  a  lens.  I am   thy  son,
0 Lord, and   brother to  all  that lives  am  I.

The  poem ends with  Spinoza in a garden, a   beautiful  combination  of   mind   and heart    ( "Spinoza,  gathering  flowers   for the   One,/ The   ever-unwedded  lover  of the Lord") .
The  "Soiree  of Velvel  Kleinburger" shows Klein  handling images  more  than thoughts, though strong   social  comment is obviously  intended, and  we can  again see the  use he makes of language:

,And having met  your  over-rated dawns, Together with  milkmen watering their milk,
,And  having trickled sweat, according to a scale  of wages,
Sewing buttons to warm the  navels  of your
business  sages,
I have  brought home  at dusk,
My  several bones,  my much-flailed husk.

The  poem  appears as a counterpoint to Eliot's   "Prufrock" and  Klein's portrayal of  this conception of reality  achieves  im-

116
 pact.   Not   fretting  about    his  image   in Society or what he should wear, not philosophizing on himself,  Velvel simply asks  not   to  be   lectured  and   continues card-playing and  dreaming. In  backroom scenes  ( "nicotined  hand  beyond the smoke sweeps off the pot") the succession of  Velvel's   moods   is  concisely  captured
-resignation,  contempt, cynicism,  bore­
dom,  self-pity,  anger,  dreaming, patience
-and Klein  gives these sharpness by earthy, clearly enunciated language inter­ spersed   with  ironical  light   verse   ("And my  true   love,/  She   combs  and  combs,/ The  lice from off/  My children's domes") and   references   of  sudden  insight  ("fin­ gers, pricked  with a tailor's needle, draw/ The   well-thumbed  cards" or  "teachers/ With  dirty  beards and  hungry features") :

So  Velvel  dreams; dreaming, he  rises, and
.Buttons his coat, coughs in  his raised  lapel, Gropes his  way home; he  rings  a  raucous
bell.

Perhaps Klein  is achieving his purpose when the reader feels that Velvel makes Prufrock's rantings seem  rather silly.
We know that  Smith  was impressed  by E. J. Pratt's rich  diction and  his  willing­ ness to  experiment with  form  but,  after
Klein's  novelties  and  power,  one is struck by  how  conventional Pratt's  poems  ap­ pear. Admittedly Pratt had achieved some exciting  effects  before  1936,  particularly in  his  narratives, and  certainly the  sub­ ject  matter of  his  New Provinces  poems is a refreshing change from  the Canadian Authors  Association; but   it  is  hard   not to feel disappointed here.
For example,  "Text of the Oath" seems facile  in  thought, dull  in  language, and very  ordinary. "Seen   on  the  Road" and "The Drag-Irons" seem  ineffective  in impact and  simplistically handled  (e.g., is  the   drowning  of   the   captain   really meant   to  have  a  carnival air?  is  resent­ ment  really  the captain's feeling?). "The Convict  Holocaust" is  strange in  that  its

OPINIONS & NOTES



subject  (the  death  of 300 men in a prison fire)   can   hardly   help   but  move,  yet  its effect  is betrayed   when  the  "punchline" is delivered  in the first two lines, thereby making  the last line virtually superfluous. These  poems  simply  lack  control.
As  with   much   of  Pratt's  poetry   one feels   that    a   good   editor    could    have worked  wonders.  "The Man  and  the Machine" is  a  case  in  point   where   the whole  first  half  adds  nothing to  thought or  mood  and  so detracts from  the  com­ petence  of   words   and   rhythm   in   the second  part :

He  felt  his  lesioned  pulses  strum
Against the  rhythm of  her  hum,
And  found his nerves  and  sinews  knot
With  sharper spasm  as she  climbed The steeper grades, so neatly  timed From  petrol tank  to  piston  shot -
1This creature with  the  panther grace,
!This man  with slag  upon  his face.

"From Java  to Geneva" and  "The Prize Winner" are  important to understanding Pratt's views   on  man  ("Between the temple  and  the  cave/ The boundary lies tissue-thin"  but   again   the   ideas   often seem overworked and  so lose their  force. "Java" impresses   with   its  rhythm  and thought in  the  first  and  last  stanzas  and its   Neanderthal  image in  the   second ("The snarl   Neanderthal is worn/  Close to  the  smiling  Aryan  lips")   but  the  rest only  dilutes   that   effect.  "Prize   Winner" is more  totally  successful  in  its image  of the  cat  and  bird  and  the  brilliant  Abys­ sinian   child   symbol  but  all  the  musing comes close to destroying these fine lines:

,Behind  the  leap  so furtive-wild
Was such  ignition in  the  gleam,
1l  thought an  Abyssinian child
Had cried  out  in  the  whitethroat's scream.

While  these  cause  one  regret   that   Pratt did  not  apply  more  of his  talent  to  pre­ cise  imagist   poems,  at  the  very  end he surprises  us with "Sea Gulls," an exquisite  poem   in  which   image   and  language  is
 aided  by a  freer  form  and  an  absence  of didactic comment:

,Etched upon the  horizon blue
ffhe frieze  must  go unchallenged, for  the  lift
And  carriage of the  winds  would  stain the
drift
Of  stars  against a tropic indigo
Or  dull  the  parable of snow.

It  must  have  been  this quality which  im­ pressed  Smith. For  the  rest,  one  feels  he must  have  been disappointed.
The doubt  expressed  in the anthology's preface  about  the direction of modern poetry  is seen  most  clearly  in  the  poems of  its  author, Frank   Scott,   whose  work shows  a  conscious   exploration  of  styles and  content. "March Field" and  "Trees in  ice,"   for  example,  are   pure   imagist poems,  evocative   and  controlled,  precise and  aesthetic:

There is a warm  wind,  stealing tFrom blunt brown  hills, loosening Sod  and  cold loam
Round rigid  root  and  stem.

However,  Scott  cannot resist ending with a  thoughtful  bite,  though  one  still  sub­ ordinate to the image :

This cruelty is a formal loveliness on  a tree's torn  limbs
this  glittering pain.

In contrast, "Surfaces" and  "Calvary," though  centred on nature images,  are primarily   intellectual but  convey  a  tone of  awe  more  deeply  emotional than   any other  of Scott's  poems  here.  It  is  signifi­ cant  that  this  is so, for  it shows  how  the intense   emotions   surrounding   love  and life were directed into  a rationalized, con­ trolled  aestheticism  rather than   into  the vague rhetorical   generalities  of   the  nineteenth-century Canadian poets. "Sur­ faces"  is  particularly forceful in  express­ ing  the union  of men  with  the infinite by merging  image  with  absolute and  so  re­ directing the  romantic impact of  nature to  an  emotional  identification  with   the metaphysical. The  reader thus  perceives

OPINIONS & NOTES



something of the intellect through his senses:

Come, flaunt  the  brief  prerogative of  life, Dip  your  small  civilized foot  in  this cold
.water
And  ripple, for  a moment, the  smooth
.surface  of time.

"Summer Camp," "Efficiency," and "Teleological" show   a  different  experi­ ment:  prose-like   in  style,  contemporary in  tone  and  content,  didactically aggres­ sive in purpose:

Two weeks  here  in  the  sun and  air
.Through the  kindness of our  wealthy citizens Will  be a wonderful help  to  the  little tots When they  return for a winter in the  slums.

The   criticism   that   these   have   received for  "not  being  real  poetry" is challenged by  the   poems   themselves.   On   the   one hand,  they   raise   the   question  of  what poetry  is and  what it  should   be  dealing with; on  the  other, they  are  more  effec­ tive  in  poetical   form  than   one  can ima­  gine   they   could   be  in   prose   for   their precision   and   surprise are  part  of  their effect.   "The  Canadian   Authors  Meet" has  been  recognized  as  one  of  the  most successful   of  these  satires; its  ability   to capture   pretensions,   irrelevance  and   a sense of  desperate futility  gives it  a sting far  beyond  its innocently descriptive and genteel  appearance.
"Overture" sums  up  Scott's doubts  in
an image  ("A  pretty octave  played  before a  window I Beyond  whose  curtain  grows
a   world    crescendo")   and    a   question ("But  how  shall   I   hear   old   music?") though the description may  be too mech­ anical   to  give  justice  to  Mozart  or  the older  traditions. Certainly the  thought is precise:

This is an  hour
Of  new  beginnings, concepts warring for
power,
Decay  of systems -the tissue  of art  is torn
,With  overtures of an era  being  born.

The impact here  comes in the  glimpse of

118
 the  harsh  effect  of that  modern  pressure on  the  poet  as  artist  and  man.  Yet,  sig­ nificantly,  the  tone  of the  poem  is one  of resolution.
Most commentators have seen A. J. M.
Smith   as  a  rigid   mystical   and   esoteric
poet, but New Provinces shows him as experimental and  as social  as the  others. His  poems  of  social  comment  are  con­ cerned   with   the   role   of  Art   (no   pun intended) in a dead society and are there­ fore   more   abstract,  more   introspective than  Scott's  poems, which were addressed to a wider  audience. Nevertheless "In  the Wilderness" sharply  portrays   the  waste­ land  around the  poet's  world  and  stresses the  need   that  these  be  reconciled. The  tone  and  images  are  sad  but  dutiful and  the  turning from  romantic emotionalism is evident:

And  with  a young, pedantic eye
Observes how still  the  dead do lie.

His  gaze is stopped in  the  hard earth
And  cannot penetrate to heaven's mirth.

"To a  Young  Poet" outlines   the  artist's duty  more  positively  and  with  an  image which  is more  striking than  that  in "Like an  Old   Proud   King   in  a  Parable" but both  poems  declare   the  purpose   of art: to dance  elegantly  before  "stony  eyes," to sing  to the  barren rock in  "a  meadow in
the  northern stone" ("a hard  thing done I
Perfectly,  as  though without care").  "A
Soldier's Ghost" and  "News  of the Phoe­ nix"  suggest  the  result,  a  confidence  in the "triumph of beauty or love or strength or  of  spiritual  values  generally   over  all those   forces,  natural   and   social,   which seek   to   overwhelm   them."3    Love   will come  from  the  ash. The  phoenix  will be found   more  alive  than   the  bureaucrats.
The  shiftings  in style and  language are interesting to observe in these poems. "Wilderness" is  regular, repetitious and
concise,  an  expression  of a  problem  and a  state  of affairs,  but  "Proud King"  be­ comes  uneven,  archaic and  emotional in

OPINIONS  & NOTES



trying   to  cope  with  the  solitary  frustra­ tion  the  poet  feels  until   this  reaction is checked  by the calm  intellectual order  of "Young Poet"   ("Tread  the   metallic nave/ Of  this  windless  day  with/ A pace designed   and   grave"-note  that   mag­ nificent   rhyme)    and    "Phoenix."  "Sol­ dier's  Ghost" seems  to  be  trying  for  the same  tone  but  the  power  of  the  subject threatens the first stanza  with emotional rhetoric until  the style changes into a concise   and   tight   image    ("Bones/ Dis­ tilled  in  the  frontier sand/ Fumble/ The natty  chevron"). The  third  stanza  again verges on  hysteria  and  again  is answered  coolly in intellectual terms.
All  this  is  not  to  suggest   that   social
observation  is  Smith's  primary  concern. Many   of  the   poems   here   are   personal searches  for expression of feelings through precise  and  meaningful poetry.  Emotion is  important  to  Smith   but   it   must   be directed  and   intensified   in  order   to  be made  effective.  One  can  almost  set  up a scale   on   which   heart    is  balanced  by varying    amounts  of   mind.    "Prothala­ mium" and  "Epitaph"  tend  toward rhe­ toric  in  both  language and  image,  but  a tone  of  intellectual  appreciation tries  to check  the  emotional  reaction. However,  the  poet  seems  to  be  jumping back  and forth between  heart  and mind rather than merging   them,   so  that   one   feels  some­ thing  is being added  as if in  parentheses. "Two Sides of a Drum" and  "Shadows There  Are"   are  more  integrated, intel­  lectual   concepts   translated  into   a   lan­ guage  of feeling, concerned with  showing the   emotional  effects  of  ideas   and   the intellectual effect of emotions, fear  of the infinite  and  hope  of  release   being   pre­ sented  in  a clarity  of  words  and  a  com­ plexity  of  image,  as  in  "Shadows There
Are":
Yet shadows I have  seen, of me deemed deeper,
.That  backed  on nothing in  the  horrid air
or "Two Sides of a Drum":
 I fare
To  that  country under dream
:Where  eternity and  time  are
The  two sides of a drum.

I  believe  the  integration of  thought and feeling  is best  achieved  in  "The  Offices of  the   First   and   Second   Hour."  Here Smith   is able   to  capture  the  tone  of  a Gregorian  chant-austere, intensely emotional, precise and  rigid-by format, repetition, steady  rhythm, quiet  resigna­ tion,  while  at  the  same  time  he  can  use the   tone   to   transmit  and   express   the power of intellectual thought and  image:

Is the  rude  root  and  manlike shape
Of  articulate mandrake still godlike in  this
Jight?

NAY,  WE  HAVE GIVEN

Nay,  we have  given  our  flesh  to  the mouth and  our
Hearts to  the fingers of oblivion. The darkness
.Is drained out  of us slowly,  and  these  are no  more
To  us.

Finally,   in   the   "Lonely  Land"  and "The  Creek," Smith   experiments  with pure imagism built up by the use of complementary words  and   rhythms and aiming  for an  aesthetic-ascetic control of nature, a feeling  for the image  but one without sentiment, a  passion  for  beauty but one of intensity  and  intelligence. The result  is an  exciting  model  to compare to the  nature poets  for  whom  Smith  had  so much  contempt; his  poetry  gives  a  view of  our   environment  both   new  and   re­ vealing.  "The Lonely  Land" particularly has  been  compared  to  the  work  of  the Group  of  Seven,  but  so  has  New   Prov­ inces   as  a  whole   for   its  purposes   and effects. This  analogy  is useful in a limited  way. By noting  the differences among  the artists  of  the  Group  we are  reminded of the   differences among these poets. By acknowledging  the  influence   of  Realism and  Impressionism on the Group, we can obtain   a  perspective  on   the   anthology

IIg

OPINIONS & NOTES



which   allows  us  to  see  it  as  part   of  a literary  process   rather  than   as  a  clean break  from  tradition.
Thinking of the  Group raises further questions about   New  Provinces. Are  the poets  working  from  a similar  set of ideas and   purposes? Have   they  a  tone  or  im­ pact   in   common?  Is   the   theory   more important than   the  emotion?  Is  Smith's comment that   any  of  these  poems could have   been  written in  the  United States  or  Great   Britain accurate  by and  large?
The strongest impression the  book leaves  is the  dedication to  experimenta­ tion  and   intellect  by  each  of  the  poets. There  is  not   the  unity  of  approach  or rigidity  of  principle one  might have  been led  to  expect,  beyond  the  exploration of new poetic  dimensions (particularly those of  the mind). The general basis that  the poet  is a  man   of  sense,  that   techniques and  content could  be new,  that  poetry  is a discipline and  useful art,  was too broad to  insist  on  a  more  programmed  anthol­ ogy  and   the   number  of   poems   which discuss  poetry  illustrates  this  fact.
The result,  of  course,  is  that   the  vol­
ume  has  the  aura and  energy  of creative discovery, a virtue which still  shows through the fumblings and  failures which time   has  emphasized.  We  can   still  feel the exciting movement within  the volume itself towards a cleaner language, more modern images, more  relevant comment, and  a more  aesthetic control of emotions. Even  to say this,  however,  is not  to sup­ pose a community of artistic,  religious  or even  social  concerns among  the  poets  of New  Provinces; we have seen  too  clearly their  variety  of interests and  forms.
The most  common element they  share is  the   wish   to  infuse   Canadian   poetry with  "things of the  mind," with  thought­ ful intelligence regarding society or art  or life,  to  get  away   from  the   blatant and  easy   emotionalism   of    overly   romantic themes  of nature and love. In  some cases it is less a denial  of  romanticism than  an


120
 effort to give it ascetic and intellectual proportion. In  other cases  it is a turning to  the  grace  and  sharp clear-headedness of classical traditions.
While  we  can  see  in  this  the  univer­
salist influence  which  Smith  carried from the modern movement in Britain, the question   of  whether  this   volume   could have been produced in England or the United States  remains. Style  of course  is a more  intricate affair  than  mere  format or  vocabulary;  it  has  to  do  with   tones and moods which too often cannot be separated from environment. On  a simple level, for example,  we might  notice the relative  lack  of  urban  references in  New Provinces. On  a more  complex level, one might   have  been  struck   by  the  tone  of duty  and   purpose   in  this  anthology,  al­ most an  optimism in face  of rather nega­ tive  visions  of  the  world.   The  search  is futile  but  must  go on. The climbing bird will  be  betrayed   but   must   climb.   The  social  revolution   will  probably not  come but  must  be  dreamt  anyway. The  road will  pass  through  Gethsemane but  must be travelled. It  would  unfortunately take a  wider  study  to  compare this  common  mood  in  the  Canadian poets  to  the  des­ pairs   and   pessimisms   of  Europe,  so  it must suffice here  to suggest  that  there  are subtle   distinctions  in  style   beneath  the broad  universalist  purpose.
The   fact  then   that   the  poets  of  New
Provinces  seem  mainly bound   by an interest  in  experimentation and  intellect is not  to belittle  the  success of the anth­ ology  as  a  landmark in  Canadian  mod­  ernism.  To  demonstrate  those  realms  of poetry   was   no  small   thing   in   rgg6  in opening up  the  potential and  the  debate  in  a  closed  and   colonial   land.   Its  very failure   as  a   specific   doctrine  not   only increased  the  scope  of subsequent Cana­ dian   poetry  but   also  inadvertently  pro­ vided  us  forty  years  later   with  a  work­ shop   variety   of   modern  theory   in   the making.

OPINIONS & NOTES



My   thanks to  Miriam Waddington and   Frank Scott   for  their comments and   encouragement. The mistakes of course  are  mine.

NOTES

1 Louis   Dudek  and   Michael  Gnarowski,  eds., The Making of Modern Poetry  in Canada (Toronto, 1967), p. 26.
2   A.  J. M.  Smith, in  the   preface to   his  The
Book   of  Canadian  Poetry     (Toronto:  Gage,
1946).
s Desmond  Pacey,   Ten  Canadian Poets   (To­
ronto: Ryerson, 1958), p. 215.

RON GRAHAM



A. M. KLEIN: PORTRAIT OF THE POET AS JEW

JEWS  HAVE BEEN ALIENATED, anxious, and   beset  by  visions  of  the  absurdity of the  human  condition for  centuries.  But in spite  of, or because  of this, their skepti­ cism is frequently tempered with humour, and  almost  always mingled  with hope.  In response   to  the  questions "how  to  be?" and   "why   persist?" A.  M.  Klein  offers a variety  of answers.  One  of  the speakers  in "Design for Mediaeval Tapestry" looks for  a  hiding place,  another declares that it  is God's  will  that  Israel  should  suffer, and  he  qualifies  his  answer  with  comic­ tragic irony, "at  once we are three  tenses." Since  the  Hebrew  language  has  only  a perfect  tense, it encompasses time present, past  and  future simultaneously; Nahum's expression, like that of the language, succinctly depicts  his awareness of the transcience, and  even  the  futility,  of  hu­ man  life.
In  the  same  poem  Isaiah  is the  prag­
matist; Job,  the  religious skeptic; Judith, the  disillusioned   romantic. Ezekiel  offers penitence, Solomon is consumed with selfish pride, and Simeon takes refuge in apostasy.  The  first speaker,  Reb  Zadock/
 contains within himself the history of the persecution of his people, and  the others whose  names  suggest  their   Biblical  line­ age  and  their  attitudes to  life,  each  pre­  sent a vignette  of Jewish experience. The  combination of name  with characteristic, as  in  "Ezekiel   the  Simple," conveys  the ludicrous contrast between  visions of glory and  redemption  evoked   by  the  name  of the  ancient  prophet and   the  philosophy expounded   by  his  latter-day  namesake. The   hyphenated   name    "Nahum-This­ Also-Is-For-The-Good" combines both Hebrew    and   English   and   conveys   the sing-song  quality   of  the  Yiddish   idiom. Thus  he  not  only  combines three  tenses, his   name   unites   three    eras   of   Jewish history. Hebrew  was the  language of antiquity, Yiddish  was spoken  in the European Diaspora, and  English  is the language of the poet and of North Ameri­ can Jews. Esther,  whose name  is the same in  both  Hebrew  and  English, and who  is a symbol of salvation in the biblical  story, concludes  the poem. She finds no answers, only   the  age-old   question:  "Wherefore Lord  and  why?"  All  answers  are  inade­ quate, but  the question is a universal one asked  by all  men  who  are  oppressed.
The   mediaeval  setting   of  this  poem, the  use of archaisms in  "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage," and  of the names  of  mediae­ val Jewish  sages-for example in "Psalm xxxrv" (a psalm  for  the  tomb  of Rashi), and  in "Yehuda Halevi, His Pilgrimage"
-all point  to Klein's deep  attraction to this  period   in  Jewish   history.   Although harassed    by  anti-semitism  and    by   the Crusades, Jewish  life  in  Western Europe during  the   Middle  Ages    (the   Jewish Middle   Ages lasted  from   the  7th  to  the I6th  century)  was   characterized  by relative  political  autonomy, by exchange of ideas with  the Christian world,  and  by a  proliferation of  philosophical thought. These  years exemplify  the fluidity  of Jew­ ish  tradition, how  it  borrows  and  adapts (to   Judaism)  contemporary  forms  and

12I

OPINIONS & NOTES



institutions from  other cultures and  soci­ eties.2 The  separate, autonomous  Jewish society  seems  relevant to  Klein's  view of Canada in  the  poem  "Annual  Banquet: Chambre de Commerce." In Canada, and in  Quebec  specifically,  politics  and  eco­ nomics  and    culture   are   inextricably bound   together. In   this  poem   Quebec sells out  to  the  outsider and  relinquishes control of  its  own  intellectual home.  By extension, it   seems   that    Klein    would prefer  the  independence, intellectual fer­ ment  and  growing  culture which  he sees as  representative  of  the   Jewish   Middle Ages. These times were not necessarily utopian, but  for  Klein   they  do  represent a  positive  value.  In  contrast to this, Jew­ ish life in Canada is seen  as  materialistic and   superficial in  "The  Diary   of  Abra­  ham  Segal, Poet." Here, Milady Schwarz,  a  dilettante, almost   a  Jewish   version  of Pound's   "Lady   Valentine"  in   "Hugh Selwyn  Mauberly," has a "teaspoonful of art,   before  and  after cards." Like  her contemporaries  in   the   poem   who   fre­ quent   the    "pool-room,"    "dance-hall," "cinema," she symbolizes  the shallowness  of modern life.
Aside from his fondness for a type of mediaevalism, and  for  the  structured society it represents in both  Jewish  and Christian history and  literary tradition, Klein   is  also  attracted  by  the   life  and work   of   Yehuda  Halevi,  an   eleventh­ century  poet,   mystic   and   philosopher. Klein's long  poem  about  Halevi   depicts the  early   poet's  dream of   the  Promised Land and  his murder while on a pilgrim­  age  in  fulfillment of  that  vision.  Halevi's answer  to suffering  is perfect faith  in God and  dedication  to  an  ideal.   His  was  an active,  fruitful type of existence, life with purpose and  meaning. In  his  search  for values  Klein  finds  something of  signifi­ cance  in the past.
But   the  modern  poet   cannot  achieve
Halevi's  type  of  faith.  In   the  guise  of

122
 Childe   Harold   ( "Childe  Harold's   Pil­
grimage") he is plagued by doubt:

My father is gathered to his fathers, God rest his wraith!
And  his son
,Js a pauper in  spirit, a beggar in  piety,
Cut off without a penny's worth of faith.

Harold receives  no  sustenance from  re­ viewing  his  former  life;  he  is  left  with "the  stance long-suffering, the  stoic word." Like  his  Byronic  namesake,  he  is filled with  W eltschmerz; his mood  is one of self-pity,  and  the  tone  of  the  poem  is somewhat  hysterical.   Nevertheless,   the poem  does depict  the will to survive  dur­ ing times of doubt and  of oppression,  and Quebec  in  the   "thirties" was  rife  with overt  anti-semitism.3
The   mingling   of  joy  with   sorrow,   of hope    with   despair,  which    is   seen   in "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage," is a  com­ mon  feature in  Klein's work  as  it  is  in many  Jewish  rituals. He  evokes  this pre­  cise  feeling  in  the  final   line  of   "Psalm xvn,"   "He breaks   the  wineglass   under­ neath  his  heel,"  which  depicts  the  prac­ tice  of   commemorating  the   destruction of the Temple in ancient Israel  at Jewish wedding   ceremonies  to  the  present   day. In Klein's  later  work,  the bitter-sweetness associated   with  religion  and  with  ethnic culture  is  not   restricted  to   Jews;    the French-Canadian, like  his rocking  chair, "makes  a pleasure  out  of repeated pain." Both   Jew   and   French-Canadian are comforted  by  memories connected with their   respective   heritage. The   image  of the chair  in "The Rocking Chair" and  of "the  sacred  hearts,  the  crowns" in  "The Sugaring" are symbols which  embody  the traditions of  Quebec and  its  people.  In the  latter  poem,  Roman  Catholicism is associated  with sweetness, as is the Jewish religion  in Klein's "The  Venerable Bee." Many  of his poems  are filled with  images of objects  which  play  an  important part in Jewish  ritual. There is the "Y ahrzeit"

OPINIONS  & NOTES



date   (memorial of the anniversary of the death of a loved one, at  which  time each year   a  special   candle  is  lit)   in  "Heir­ loom";  the   candles,   wine   and   matzoh  (symbols of Passover)   in "The Still Small Voice"; the  rooster,  a  sacrificial offering on the eve of the Day of Atonement (this practice  has   been   largely   replaced  by donations of money to charity) in "Plum­ aged  Proxy," and  references to  "tfillin" (phylacteries) in  "Gift," "The  Scribe,"  and  many  other poems. The connotations which  these symbols carry  evoke  the  tex­ ture  of  traditional Jewish  home  life and the  quality  of  a  life  enclosed   within   a faith. The  images,  like the  objects  which they  symbolize,  are  a  constant  reminder to  the  Jew  of  his  religion.  The  phylac­ teries, worn  by males  on  the  hand oppo­ site   the   heart    and    on   the   head,    in observance of the  Old  Testament statute "And   thou   shalt   bind   them   for  a  sign upon   thy   hand, and   they   shall   be  for frontlets   between  thine  eyes"   ( Deut.  6:
8),  indicate man's   duty   to  subject   the desires of heart, mind,  senses, and  facul­ ties to God's  will.  They  are  a  symbol  of the   unity   of  the   physical,  mental  and spiritual;  emblematically   they   create   a wholeness  that Klein  sees as characteristic of earlier  ages in civilization and  of child­ hood.  The  persona   of  "Childe Harold" "cannot don  phylactery," but  the speaker in  "Gift"  can  look  back  to  the  security and innocence of his own early  life.
Indulging in  ritual  without faith   can
be seen as an empty  gesture,  but  as Klein says, "0 who can  measure  the  potency  of symbols?" In its impersonality ritual can become  highly  personal; it is a  means  to lose  oneself  in  order   to  find  oneself.  In times  of  doubt   the  memory  of  tradition may be a desperate attempt to salvage something  when   on  the  point   of  losing faith.   In  this  way,  the  rituals   and  their symbols have for Klein, the same type of significance  as  T. S.  Eliot's "fragments" to "shore  against" his  ruin.  But  many  of
 the   poems   in  Hath   Not   a  Jew  do  not have  the  universality of Eliot's "The Wasteland."  Aside    from    the    imagery which might  be obscure  to non-Jewish readers,   there   is  a  sentimentality and insularity about  them  that  is antipathetic to the modern reader.
Nevertheless,  the   use  of  images  con­ nected  with  Jewish  ritual emphasizes the tenacity    with   which   religion   grips   the poet's   imagination,  and  stresses  the   in­ tensity   of  his   disillusionment. There  is poignancy in his nostalgia  for the  time of easy  faith   before   the   adult  world   dis­ rupted the wholeness of life. Klein's vision of  the  past,  like  that  of many  Canadian poets  and   novelists,  is  centred  on  what Northrop Frye in The Bush  Garden calls "the    pastoral   myth ... associated  with childhood." Klein's Eden  is not in nature; it is in  the  past  history  of his people  and of his own life.
Attraction to,  and   doubts   about,  reli­ gion, recur  throughout Klein's work. Vel­ vel,  the   vulgar,   proletarian   skeptic    (in "Soiree")  chooses  cards  instead  of  reli­ gion.  He  mocks  the  suggestion  from  his conscience   that   "This  is  no  way  for  a man  to do":

Who
1Are you, my saint, to show  us what is right?
,Make  a fifth  hand, and  we will be contrite;
Shuffle  the  cards, be sociable,   Reb. Jew.

The   use  of  the  abbreviation "Reb." for rabbi,  which  means  "scholar" or  "teach­ er,"  reinforces  Velvel's  sense of  scorn  for both  the  advice  and  for  his early "teach­ ers/  with   dirty   beards  and  hungry  fea­ tures." The word  "Reb." also carries  the connotation of  rebel, and  Velvel  sees one aspect   of   himself   in   this   way,  but   his conscience  will  not   free   him   from   the past.   We   may   dislike   Velvel's   flippant attitudes  and  his dreams of  materialistic wealth, but  we also sympathize with  this Jewish Prufrock.
Klein's    ambiguous  attitude   towards


123

OPINIONS & NOTES



religion  is seen in many of his "psalms." "Psalm IV" is  an  ironic   modern  parody of the  23rd psalm; "Psalm v" of God's marvelous creation, man.  But  "Psalm xxxv" is a  prayer  of  thanks for  life and even  for adversity, and  the final  psalm  in "The  Psalter   of  Avram   Haktoni"  gives the speaker's raison d'etre:

The latches of my heart, descend, and rise­
•And there look  generations through my eyes.

In   the  first  four   glosses  to  The  Second Scroll   Klein   recalls  his  own  youth   and the  history   of  his  people,   with   sadness, and   often   with   bitterness,  but   the   last section,  "Gloss  Hai," is his sympathetic version  of the  Orthodox Jewish  Morning Service  and   the  last  "Psalm" is  a  tran­ scription  of   the   Biblical   "Psalm   xxx" which   is  repeated daily  at  the  Morning Service.
Speaking of Klein  in  I96I, Layton  said "Today there  is a destructive  element­ a  poison  in  the  atmosphere-making it difficult  for  the  writer  to  sustain  himself
... sensing   this ... Klein   took  refuge  in the  messianic   vision."4  The  reference is to The Second  Scroll,  which  at  that  time Layton  said  did  not  convince. But  Klein had   long  been  aware of  "poison   in  the atmosphere"; poetry   is  his  personal  an­ swer   to  apathy  in   "Boredom" (I 927), but  the  futility  and  absurdity of  the  hu­ man  condition are  stressed in "Koheleth" (I 929)   and   in  "The  Words  of  Plauni­ Ben-Plauni to Job" (I 930)  and  in  many others.   In   the  "radical  poems" he  con­ demns    those   who   erect   false   gods   of materialism. And  in  "Talisman in  Seven Shrouds" he  sees   religion   perverted  by those  who  rely on  superstition at  it  is by those who  follow  the   pseudo-messiah Shabbathai Zvi  in  "Out  of  the   Pulver  and  Political  Lens." In  the  latter poem  a more  virulent poison, religious  and  politi­  cal  fanaticism,  is  attributed to  the  pious Jews  of   Amsterdam  who  are   almost   as dogmatic  as  the  soldiers  of  the  Inquisi-


124
 tion.   The   Jews   in   "Landlord"  and   in "Pintele Yid"  are  castigated for their hypocrisy.  Even   the  messianic   vision  of The Second  Scroll  is tinged  with  doubt when  the  narrator is repelled  by the  "re­ actionary mottoes" of some  Israeli  poets. It seems to him  that  they are creating an elitist  type  of  poetry  which  excludes  the Jews  of  the  Diaspora. The  attraction to, and   skepticism   about   Israel   as  well  as about   religion  is seen  in  Uncle Melech's attitude;   he   still   hates  and   loves   the "galuth"  (the   exile).  Klein's   Jews   are sometimes  romanticized, as  Layton   says, but   they   are   also  condemned  in   these poems, and Klein  acknowledges that  the poison is not only in the atmosphere, it is part  of  the human condition.
Klein  questions  all values. The security
achieved  through religious  piety does  not console  in  later  life  (although hope  for an afterlife is the  keynote  of "Epitaph"). Assimilation   is   rejected,  because   those who lose or seek to hide  their  identity are still seen as Jews by others:

1To Gentile parties we will  proudly go And  Christians, anecdoting us, will say "Mr. and  Mrs. Klein-the Jews,  you
know ... "

Reason,  not mysticism, is the way to truth in  "Out of  the  Pulver  and   the  Political Lens,"  and  art  is renounced in  favour  of life  after   the   narrator  of  The  Second Scroll sees the Jews of the "mellah."
Yet the poet who says,

·And I in  my own  faith once  had  faith like this
but  have  not now, am crippled more  than
they

continues to  be  fascinated by the  things that he has denied. Uncle  Melech dies at Safed,  the  ancient   seat  of  Jewish  mysti­ cism  and   the  present   day  art  centre   of Israel.  Safed  is high  in  the  mountains in the   upper   Galilee,   and   to  this  day  the roofs  of  some  of  the  houses  are  painted white  or  blue  to  blend  with  the  clouds

OPINIONS  & NOTES



and  sky so that  on  His  descent  to earth, the   Messiah   will   come   to   them    first. (Klein  mentions  the   "white  roofs"   of Safed  in "Greetings on this Day.") The prose  section  of  The Second   Scroll  con­ cludes  with allusions  to Jewish  folk stories and   Biblical   passages  which  impart the idea  of rebirth. It is significant that  here, as  in  "Greetings  on  this  Day," he  uses the  word  "halidom" in  connection with Safed.  According to the  beliefs of adher­ ents of  certain branches of Jewish  mysti­ cism,  at   the  advent of  the  Messiah   the graves  of the  righteous will open  and  the dead   will   live  again   on  earth.  In   the poem,  Safed  is the symbolic  catalyst that transforms  Klein's  prose   to   poetry;  in The  Second   Scroll   it   is  the   site   from which  he  views the  grave  of Hosea, "prophet  of  social   justice"   and   that   of Simon   ben  Yochai,  who  is said  to  have written  the   Zohar. Thus,  Klein   affirms his belief in a better life, one that  will harmoniously unite   justice  in  the  mate­ rial   world   with   inward  wealth   in   the spiritual universe of man.
At his death Uncle Melech  harmonizes within  himself  intellectual and  emotional aspects  of an ideal  Judaism, but  his name will not go down  in the annals of history. Like  so many  of Klein's characters, he is
a  small  man.  Others are  the  protagonist of "Dr. Dwarf" who is presented lovingly; the  "midget Jews"  of "Etching" who are defined   nostalgically,   and   the  hypocrisy of  "Pintele  Yid"   (of  the   poem   of  the same  name)   is conveyed  with  irony.  The term  "pintele yid"  is a  commonplace in Yiddish; the suffix "ele" is both  a dimin­ utive  and  a  form  of endearment ;5    "pin­ tele"  means  a "dot" and  it is  the Yiddish term  for  the  Hebrew letter "yud," which caligraphically is a dot,  thus giving a play on  words  "yudfyid." There is the sugges­ tion  that  the  "Pintele  Yid" of  the  poem is  small   in  spirit   as   well  as  in  stature (physically  and  in the eyes of the world), but  the  satire  is done  with  affection. In
 "The  Provinces" the   smallest   province, Prince  Edward Island, is seen  as a  beau­ tiful  little  girl,  and   by  invoking  an  old Jewish   superstition,  the   poet  averts   the evil eye and  ensures  her  long life.  (Since the name  is "Prince," the angel of Death would   look  for  a   male,  and   finding  a female,  he  would  abandon  his  mission.) The   poet   in   "Portrait  of   the   Poet   as Landscape" with  a  "status of zero"  is "a dot in a government table." Like the Jew, he is  considered an  alien  and  is insignifi­ cant  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.   Perhaps this  poem  could  also be entitled "Pintele Poet."
Not  only  is  the  Jew  small,   the  terms "dwarf" and "midget" carry  connotations of deformity, and  in  "Ballad for  Unfor­ tunate  Ones"   it  is  the   blind   man,   the hunchback  and   the  poor  who  will  arise whole   at   the   advent  of   the   Messiah.  Compassion   for  Jews   extends   to  others  who   suffer   in   "The   Cripples,"   to   the Indians   in    "Indian   Reservation"   (in which  the squaws  "beneath their  alimen­ tary  shawls"  remind one  of  a  bent  Jew beneath a  prayer  shawl), to  the  French­ Canadians in "Librarie Delorme" and  in "Sire Alexandre Grandmaison." Through­ out  his work,  it  is the  oppressed, the  un­  recognized,    the   dispossessed,    who    are figuratively Klein's Jews.
It  is  when   he  combines  two  cultures that   Klein  achieves   wholeness,  if  not  in
life,   then   in  art.    In   "Montreal"  each
individual  race   retains  its  identity, but each  plays an  equal  part  in  the  universe of  the   poem.   Klein   depicts   this   union through his use of language and  he sug­ gests by his use of innovative words which combine   both   French  and  English   that  verbal  communication  between  men  can bring  them  closer  together. Language is a  symbol  of  vitality  and  of  creativity in this  poem  as  it is to  the  narrator of The Second  Scroll.
There is a more  basic and  a more  uni­
versal   means   of  communication  in   the

I25

OPINIONS & NOTES



poems "Bread" and  "Grain Elevator." Bread  is a symbol of life, and  as such it is given   particular  respect   by   traditional Jews  (bread should  not  be wasted; when stale,  it  should   be  burned or  fed  to  the birds,   but   not   thrown  away.   A  special bread   "Challah" is  baked   for   the  Sab­ bath   and   for   the   Holy   Days,  and   the benediction  for   bread   takes  precedence over  blessings  for  any  other  solid  food) . The poem "Bread" conveys this reverence  for the staff of life, the bakers  are seen as high  priests  ("white Levites"), the ovens, as  altars,  and   bread  as  the  agent   which will bring  the dead  to life. Wheat is Can­  ada's  most  important agricultural prod­  uct,  and  the grain  elevator seems  to be a particularly Canadian edifice.  The Old Testament setting  evoked  by Klein's  use of such  imagery  as "babylonians," "Levi­ athan,"  "Josephdream" in   "Grain  Ele­ vator" suggests  a   timelessness;  and   the metaphors "think  Arabian," "Caucasian sleep," "grains Mongolian" encompass the universe   spatially. It  is   by   means    of bread  that "all  the coloured faces of man­ kind"   can   be   united.  In   these   poems Klein  draws  his themes  and  images  from their  association with  his Jewish  heritage. Paradoxically, he uses them  in a way that makes these poems particularly Canadian and entirely  universal.
Klein's concrete realization of the pres­ ent  in  terms  of the  past  conveys  his  pro­ found   knowledge  of,  and  sensitivity   to, Jewish  history  and  to  both  Hebrew and Jewish   literary tradition.  Miriam  Wad­
dington,  in   her   fine   critical  work   on
Klein,  denies the  religious quality of his poetry: "he was never religious in the orthodox sense, and  this is precisely the conflict  that  lies  at  the  root  of  so much of his poetry." Waddington emphasizes what  she  calls  his  "secular Jewishness."6
Many  of Klein's poems, however, are religious  in  the  same  way  that  Donne's
"Holy  Sonnets" are religious, and  they are also religious  in a specifically  Jewish  way.
 In  Judaism it is difficult  to separate religion,  culture,  race,   way  of  life,  and even  attitudes to  life  from  one  another.
Klein  may have  been influenced by the "radical tradition in Yiddish  literature in the  thirties," but  behind  that  tradition  is the  Biblical  ideal  of  justice  and  compas­ sion towards one's  fellow  man. The  Book of  Leviticus   outlines  obligations  to  the poor,  commands love of one's  neighbour, prohibits hatred,  vengeance, hoarding of goods.  And  Passover  celebrates the  first mass revolt against  oppression in Western  history. The Bible itself may be the source of Klein's  humanitarian outlook  and  the source of  the radical tradition in Yiddish literature as well; religion would certainly  play  at   least   an   equal   part   in   Klein's  vision.  It  is significant that  in  "Epitaph" (written in  1930),  Klein  sees himself  in the afterlife sitting  in God's  lap,  the same posture   that   the   devout   Reb   Levi  Yit­ schok  assumes  in  the   poem   about  him ( 1940).
Klein's   doubts   are  as  old  as  Judaism
(in  the  widest  possible sense), the  tradi­ tion  out  of  which  he  springs  and  out  of which   he   writes.   Invective   against  the Almighty  is incorporated  into  Lamenta­ tions  and   into  the  Book  of  Job,   and  a sense   of   futility   pervades   Ecclesiastes. Pessimism   and   fatalism  are   within   the roots  of  Judaism  as is the  vision of hope eternal.
Most of the Jews that  Klein  creates  are
Orthodox, sympathetic characters. Many of them  are  wise, some  are  foolish, some evil, most of them  are skeptical. Although they are not revolutionaries, in a way they do  represent  the   temper of  the  present time,  with  its focus on the  rights of minorities. His  Jews-whether Jews, French-Canadians, Indians, poets or chil­ dren -are small men  with  large dreams.  His is a messianic  vision, not only  for his own people, but for all mankind. It is not a  facile  optimism, but  it  is  affirmation.

OPINIONS & NOTES



To   A.  M.   Klein,   Canada  is  also   the
Promised  Land:

But  the  heart seeks one,  the  heart, and  also the  mind
seeks single  the  thing that makes  them  one, if one.

NOTES

1 "Reb" means  "rabbi," "Zadock" -priest, or of  the   priestly family. Thus  he  speaks   with the  wisdom  of  the  ages.
2   Louis  Finkelstein, Jewish  Self-Government in the   Middle  Ages   (New   York:  Phillip  Feld­ heimer, I 964), p. xvi.
a  See  Gerald  M.  Craig, "The  Canadian  Set­ ting," in  A  People  and  its  Faith, ed.  A. Rose (Toronto:  Univ. of   Toronto  Press,   I959), p.  II.
4  Teangadoir, 5, no.  2  (I96I), pp.  77-78.
5   See  Miriam Waddington, A. M. Klein  (To­
ronto: Copp Clark, I970), p.  25.
6  Waddington, p.  I I.

ESTHER SAFER FISHER


THE PURDY POEM

IN   THE  PURDY POEM we  are   seldom aware  of form,  or even of verbal  texture; we  read   for   information,  and   once  we have  it,  we  feel  disinclined  to  return  to the  verbal   construct that   delivered   it  to us. This disinclination is a  natural  con­ sequence  of the fact  that  "craft" does not mean  to Purdy  what  it means  to someone like  Margaret  Avison.  The  message  or point  of a Purdy  poem  is never  very inti­  mately  related to its  surface. The  mean­  ing  of  a  line   of   Purdy's,  for   instance, hardly   ever  depends on  our  interpreta­ tion  of a  figure  of speech; we never  find any  cross-qualification  or  refinement  of meaning by the aural  and  visual qualities of the  words  themselves; nor  do we find the  kind  of  synergistic  handling of  very specific  images  we find  in  Avison.  Purdy seems  always  to  be  less  concerned  with how he means  than  with  what  he means; he is quite  willing  to use the approximate
 word  or image  in an approximate way­ indeed, he is forced  to, in order  to main­ tain the illusion of unpremeditated, casual  speech.  Understandably, we  are   apt   on this basis to dismiss the whole  question of form  in  Purdy's   poetry,   and   to  assume that  in Purdy's  case form  is subservient to content.  We  say   that    it   is  "loose"  or "open," meaning that  it does not  matter. But  in fact,  the  Purdy  poem  does  have  a very definite,  if not  very restricting form.
Purdy's   is  not   primarily  a  poetry   of ideas;  he writes about  himself  on  the one hand, and   about   people   and   places  on the   other;  and   accordingly,  his  poetry ranges  from  self-disclosure  to description, from  poems like "Winter at Roblin  Lake" to  poems  like  "Snow   at  Roblin Lake." But  this range  is deceptive. For  whatever the   subject,   whatever  the   outward   ap­ pearance, the pattern of the  Purdy  poem is  the  same.  "Winter  at  Roblin  Lake," for  instance, is ostensibly  an  autobiogra­ phical   document, lacking  obvious  struc­  ture  and  many of the trappings of poetry,  whereas   "Snow   at   Roblin    Lake"  is  a more or less autonomous artefact, written in  more  or  less traditional rhyming qua­ trains; the  two  poems  seem  similar   only in  the  respect  that  their  point  and  effect is  gently humorous. On  closer  examina­ tion,   however,    we   discover    that    both poems have  the same plot: the speaker  of the  poem   imagines   the   environment  to be hostile and  then  articulates a response to  it.  We  discover,   moreover,  that   the humour of both  poems  relies on  this plot and  is, in  effect,  a  transcendence of  the imagined   threat. We  discover   that   these poems  enact   a  drama  of  opposition, a dialectic.
The  form,  thesis-antithesis-synthesis, is
quite  distinct  in  both  poems.  The  thesis is  the  self  implied   in  the  opening  word "Seeing" of  "Winter ... ," for  instance, or simply in the  tone  of voice and  choice of language, the  famous Purdy  personal­ ity;  the  antithesis is  the  landscape; and

127

OPINIONS&; NOTES



the  synthesis  is  the  ironic   reassertion of self,  which   resolves  the  tension   between self  and   world   by  reversing  them   with respect  to  scale,  power  and   importance. The  slight  and  human is comically exag­ gerated by its juxtaposition with the mag­ nificent  and  inhuman, the  grandeur and seriousness  of  the   latter  being   thus  de­ flated.
We might  note  further that  the  rhyme in "Snow  at Roblin Lake" is not inherent in the  poem,  but  applied. The deliberate "snow" where  we  would  expect   "it," in the  fourth line, renders the  rhyme throughout  the   poem   an   intrusion.  It does nothing for the  poem,  except  in retrospect: having read  it, we may reflect that  the rhyme  is contrapuntal to the dialectic movement, proceeding from  the poem's  humorous conclusion rather than leading  to it, functioning, perhaps, as an oblique  criticism  of the  "poetical," and rhyming, in  this  sense,  with  the  conclu­ sion's mock-heroism. In  pursuing this line of  reasoning, however, we  would  be ex­ cusing  the  rhyme  rather  than appreciat­ ing  its  contribution  to   the   poem.   The  fact  that  "Winter at  Roblin Lake" is just as successful  in  producing essentially  the same  effect  as  "Snow   at   Roblin   Lake" without  using  rhyme   confirms   the  idea that   the  surface  of  a  Purdy  poem   has little relation to its meaning-structure.
At  any  rate,   upon  investigation,  most of Purdy's poems  turn  out  to be dialecti­ cal-greater  or  slighter  oppositions be­ tween  Purdy's  self and  the  subject of the poem,  followed  by  comic  or  pathetic re­ versals   of  the   kind  we  have   discussed. The  reversal   is   usually   a  simultaneous deflation  of   whatever  has   enjoyed   the upper  hand  in  the  opposition and  eleva­ tion of the underdog. Of course,  this does not  mean  that  all  of  Purdy's poems  look the same; the formula is capable of great  variation, and  it will even sustain  a poem forced into a traditional mould.
In    discovering  the   dialectic  in   the
 Purdy   poem,  however,   we  are  not  done with  it. In  the  Purdy  poem  the  dialectic is fleshed  out  in a certain way;  there  is a characteristic treatment of its terms.  In Purdy's  hands,  the  dialectic articulates a turning away  from   reality  to  the  imagi­ nation,  to  fantasy.   We  can   see   this  in Purdy's  representation of the  natural en­  vironment, the  antithesis  in  both  of  the Roblin  Lake  poems.  (This turning always occurs in the antithesis.)
In   these   two  poems,   Purdy   does  not simply  present  us with  a  few  miscellane­ ous details  to contemplate as we will:  he directs  us through a  progression  of looks and  glimpses,  in  which  the  environment is seen  to  increase  in scale  and  power  to fantastic,  mythic   proportions. This   pro­  gression  and  escalation is effected  by an increasingly figurative use of language within   the   poems:   from   denotation,  to simile, to metaphor in "Winter at  Roblin Lake"; and   from   denotation,  to  meta­ phor,   to  Biblical   allusion   in   "Snow   at Roblin  Lake." The effect  of  the shifts  in language and  imagery  is one of accelera­ tion,   of  being   first  drawn,   then   swept away, as into a whirlpool.
We  might   assume  in  the  face  of  this
sort  of presentation of the  natural world, that  Purdy's final mock-heroic stance,  his reassertion of self in, say, "Snow  at  Rob­ lin  Lake," is an  attempt  to  recover   his mental  equilibrium, that  the turning away articulated  by  the  dialectic  is  necessary because   the  world   has  become   too  dis­ tressing to contemplate. And accordingly, we might  interpret the  poem  as a  brave,  if foredoomed, attempt  to face  the world on  its  own  terms.  We  might   reason,  as Purdy  does  in  "Attempt," that   the  self's impotence  in  the  face  of  an  oppressive  natural  environment is magnificent sim­ ply because  its aspirations are the highest. The fact  is, however, that  the increasingly figurative language of  the  description of the   landscape,  in  turning from   fact   to fiction,  represents the  bankruptcy of  na-

OPINIONS & NOTES



ture: it is Purdy  who  invests  nature with significance, who  lends its power  and unlimited province; nature is neither sig­ nificant,   nor  powerful, nor  extensive by itself. Nature is never  really a threat,  just
as  Purdy   will  never  really  "take I Levia­
than   on  a  bent   pin."  Purdy does  turn
from  the world  to the  self, in accordance with   the   dialectic,  but   the   significant turning is that  from  a neutral world  to a self-induced, a  pretended fear  of  it.  For it   means   that    the   contest    in   Purdy's poems,  between   self  and   world,   is  won before it is begun. The dialectic is merely enacted  like  a  magical  ritual-a  war­ dance,  say-in preparation for an actual confrontation; and   Purdy  is  revealed   to be  a  kind  of  shadow-boxer-a gesturer  of defiance with  nothing to defy.
In  "The Cariboo Horses" Purdy seems to  admit   to  being  just  such  a  figure.  As the   speaker   of  this   poem,   he  is  disap­ pointed. The  horses of the  title are "only horses"; there  is no contest;  they  cannot  compare to the "Kiangs" and "Onagers," the  historical   and   prehistoric  horses  he can  imagine  for  himself.  The poem  com­ municates a  reluctant  resignation to  the mundane,  revealing  a  preference for  the world  of  the  imagination, for  the  world of  literature, history  and  myth.
In  this  poem  the  order  of the  terms  of the  dialectic  is the  reverse  of that  in  the two Roblin  Lake  poems.  It  is, if you will, the  corollary  of the  formula operative in the  latter. The  dialectic process  is just as distinct: the world, represented by the Cariboo horses,  is the  thesis;  the  self, in the  form  of  associations   about horses  in an  historical  perspective, is the antithesis; and  accordingly, the  synthesis  has  a  dif­
ferent  quality-"waiting  r 5 minutes I at
the   grocer's"  holds   the   centuries-and­
continents  range   of  Purdy's  associations in  a  peculiar, though satisfying  balance.
This  poem  is down-turned in  contrast to  the  Roblin   Lake   poems  because  it  is the  speaker  of the  poem  rather than  the
 subject  of the  poem  that  suffers deflation, the subject being thus back-handedly celebrated. Nevertheless the feeling that "The Cariboo Horses" successfully evokes derives  from   the  impulse   to  turn   away from  mere reality.
But  after   all,  we  do  not   have   to  go very deep  to see this  tendency in  Purdy's work.  This  same  disinclination to  dwell on the  concrete or objectively real is revealed   in  his  use  of  language. Purdy very   rarely   recreates  the   world   in   ob­ served  detail;  instead, he  refers  and  al­  ludes   to  it.  He   delights   neither  in  the sensuous   qualities  of   words   nor   in   his own senses. Even  in a  poem  like "Sunday Swim"   where    we   might    expect    some attention to the quality of the experience, we  never  discover   how  the   water   feels. It is neither warm  nor cold;  neither bland  nor  refreshing; it  offers  no  resistance   to Purdy's  thrashing: it  has  no  presence; it is  entirely   noumenal. The   most  we  get from  Purdy  is that  the water  is "dazzling" and,  incredibly, that  it is a "green jelly" against  his eyes.
At  times  Purdy  seems  literally to have taken   leave  of  his  senses.  And  when  he does  he  really  becomes  a  shadow-boxer: we  have   to  infer   the  subject's size  and shape   from   Purdy's  attitude   and    the direction and   placing of  his  "punches." The    people    and    things    in   Purdy's poetry  are  flat,  denoted only  by a  name or,  as in  "Percy  Lawson," by something like  a  "gold-toothed grin," the  striking­ ness of which,  incidentally,  is largely  due to   how   justly   it   balances   the   "nickel  raise"  Lawson  haggles  over.  People  and  things,  including Purdy's  wife, only  exist in  the  flux  of  association,  are  registered in the poems as mental events rather than  as substantial  entities in  their  own  right.  Figurative language is used only in repre­ senting  his  own  mental life, his  response to  his  subject   or  occasion.  The  Cariboo  horses, for example, are  generic; they are the  sum  or  common denominator of  all


129

OPINIONS &  NOTES



the  horses imagined "in  stables," "at  tav­ erns"   and   "on   the  high   prairie"  rather than  seen  horses.  The  most  specific  they get  is at  the  end  of  the  poem,  and  even there   the   specificity   is  one   of  location ("at the grocer's") and state  ("arriving," "waiting") .
An extreme in this regard, a poem in which  the  subject  is given  up  entirely  in favour of  Purdy's  associations and  ima­ ginings,  is "Policeman," for  here  "blue" and  "flat   footed," the  principal  physical description  in  the  work,  are  completely stereotypical. The   poem  reads  like  hear­ say.  On   the   evidence   of  "Policeman," Purdy   might  easily  be  taken   for  a  blind man.
Characteristically,  Purdy   is  least  suc­ cessful   when   he   surrenders  to   fantasy completely, abandoning  the  dialectic formula. In   "Policeman,"  he  wages  an hysterical battle  against  a  title,  and  con­ sequently there  is no  real  interaction, no opposition, and  therefore  no  resolution: the  hysteria  evaporates; the fantasy, hav­  ing  no  point  of  departure, gets  nowhere.
Mere  utilization of the formula, on the other   hand, does  not  guarantee  success for  Purdy. "Notes on  Painting," for  in­ stance,  fails because  Purdy  has attempted to develop  an  idea  about the  representa­ tion  of evil  in  painting at  the  same  time as  he  seeks  to  oppose   his  vision  of  the world   to  those  of  the  old  masters.   The  dialectic nullifies  the  argument, by mak­  ing  its  point  dependent  on  Purdy's  re­ sponse   to   the   paintings rather  than   on the  paintings  themselves,   and   the  point of   the   argument  nullifies   the   dialectic, making  the  final synthesis  of opposed visions   anticlimactic.  The    poem,   as   a
result,  reads like a jumble  of unconnected observations and  anecdotes. We  can  see, of course,  that  an  intellectual  generaliza­ tion   was   required  before   Purdy   could attempt  a   resolution  of    the  string   of oppositions  which   resulted  from   talking  about  a number of  paintings  rather than
 about  a single  painting, but  the  need  for it  resulted  from  letting the  poem  get out of control  in the first place.
In  poems  of this sort  and  in  those  like "Attempt" in which,  as George  Bowering has  said   in   Al  Purdy,  Purdy   "gives   a cheapened picture" of  his  work,  we  can see that  Purdy's  whole  attention is on the making  of a poem. He is not interested in being  faithful   to  his subject nor  to  him­ self.  And  it  is  to  this  that  Purdy's  ten­ dency  to  turn  from  fact  to  fiction  leads. For   despite   the   trappings   of  sincerity,  Purdy   is  not   a   confessional   poet:  he doesn't   turn  from  the  world  in  order  to bare  his soul, or to plumb his own depths; he  is  really  remarkably  reticent.  More­ over,  what  we do  see of  his  inner  self is so uncomplicated as to fail  to interest  us. What  we respond  to is his art,  his crafts­ manship-when it  succeeds,  when Pur­  dy's  tendency   to  leave  his  occasion  alto­  gether  behind  is sufficiently resisted.
Purdy's  poems, then,  are artificial; they are  verbal  creations, products of wit, and our  interest  in  them   is the  same  as  our interest in metaphysical poetry. We keep reading   to  see  how   he  will   justify  the flight  of  fancy,  the  outrageous  imagery, the historical and mythological allusions. Purdy  merely uses larger  and  looser tropes than  metaphor or analogy.
We can  see the  artifice  in  "Wilderness
Gothic"; it  is closer  to  the  surface   here than  in  most  of  Purdy's work.  The  dia­ lectic  formula recurs-this  time  with  a variation. As soon  as the  occasion  of the poem,  the  workman sheathing  the  spire, is  put  before us,   Purdy   predictably launches into   the   flow   of   associations  which   are   his  response   to  it.  But   this excursion   is  shorter  than   usual.   Purdy returns to his occasion  for more  fuel, and the   process  is  rebegun   with   respect   to landscape, the  workman's adjunct. It  is briefly  presented and  he takes off from it, too. When  we finally  return to the work­ man in  the  actual landscape we discover

OPINIONS & NOTES



that the rope from which he dangles has become  fraught with  the  fate  of  Icarus. The  workman has very neatly  been made equal   to  the   background  of  myth   and history  that  Purdy  has  imagined and  set him  against. It is a  satisfying  resolution, but  only  formally.  For  our  perception of the workman is not enhanced by this mythological enrichment  as  our  percep­ tion  of  the  Cariboo horses  was  by  their being  given  an  historical  dimension. The  resolution    draws   attention   instead  to Purdy's cleverness.
Fortunately  Purdy    doesn't  insist   on
this identification of the workman with Icarus. Though  he   provides  clues,  like the reference to "sky navigation," he also provides   a  little  misdirection:  he  refers to Durer in  describing the  landscape rather than  to Brueghel, whose  "Icarus" probably inspired  the poem, so that  the connection between  the  workman and Icarus  is  delayed,   for  those  who  would make  it,  until  the  end.                     ·
There is nothing restrictive about the form  that  Purdy  has  developed for  him­ self.  It is  capable  of  much   more   than Purdy  demands of it. And  yet the picture  we get of Purdy  in his poems  is of  some­ one  wearing  blinkers,  of  someone  labour­ ing   within   unnecessary   limitations.  His intellectual  and  emotional  range   is nar­  rower   than   it   needs   to   be.   Although Purdy sees and  feels, he does neither with any intensity.  Although he speculates that the  faith   of  the  workman  on  the  spire might   "reach  beyond," he  never  enter­ tains  the  possibility  for  himself.  At  the moments in  Purdy's  poems  when we feel he is most open  to the  spiritual or  mysti­ cal  dimension, to  any  kind  of   transcen­ dental   or  religious  experience,  he  turns away,   denying   his   poetry   the   kind   of depth  it  most  lacks.  In   "The  Country North  of  Belleville"  Purdy  includes him­ self  among  those "unwilling to know what their fathers  know."  He  rejects  the  tun-
 ing in  to the land  which  he characterizes with  such  empathy in  these lines:
plowing and  plowing a  ten  acre  field  until
.the convolutions run  parallel with  his own brain-

and  which,  in  the  context of  the  whole poem,   is  the  only   victory   presented in what  he characterizes as "the country of our  defeat." Purdy is content merely  to recognize  that   he  can  return  though  he must   "enquire  the   way/  of   strangers." Meanwhile there  are  more  poems  to turn out. 	ANTS REIGO


ON THE VERGE
**  A.  ROSS   MCCORMACK.   Reformers, Rebels and   Revolutionaries: The  Western  Canadian Radical Movement IBgg-Igig.   University of Toronto Press,  $15.oo; $4.95. In   recent  years the  dramatic events  of  the   Winnipeg General Strike of  1919   have   received  a  great  deal   of attention from   historians, tendentious and  ob­ jective  alike.  But  much less attention has  been paid    to   the    preceding  decades  in   western Canadian   labour   and    socialist   history,   and  Ross  McCormack's rather  pedestrianly written Reformers, Rebels   and  Revolutionaries, which  is largely  based  on  previously unexplored docu­ mentary  sources,   goes   a   great  way   towards filling  in  the  gap.  Mr. McCormack deals  with reformist  labourites  and   the   "impossiblists" of the  Socialist Party of  Canada, with  the  various aspects of the  unionist movement and  with  the Industrial Workers of the  World-the formid­ able,  inveterately romantic and   doomed  Wob­ blies.   Perhaps  the   most   fascinating chapter, indeed, is  that   on  the  Wobblies, which   shows how  strong   this  movement, so often   associated merely  with  the  United States, actually was in western    Canada  and    particularly  in   British Columbia. Continentalism has  had  many faces; the  Wobblies presented one  of its  more  shining aspects.
L.T.C.

**  RICHARD   WHITAKER.     The  Government Party:   Organizing and  Financing The  Liberal Party  of Canada 1930-58. University of  Toron­ to  Press,  $19.95· The  Government  Party   is  a ponderous  book,   but   it   deals,  after  all,   with ponderous people-with  the  Liberal Party, its organization and  financing, and, more  indirect­ ly, its  leadership during  the  era  of  Mackenzie

ON  THE VERGE



King and  St.  Laurent. This was  the  era  when Liberalism in  Canada became a monolithic movement, dedicated  more  than  anything else to  the  holding of power; in  it  one  can  find  the seeds   of   the   peculiar  arrogance  that   charac­ terizes   the   present-day ruling elite   in  Canada and    that  has   given   us,  with   two   very  short  interludes,   something  alarmingly   near  to   a one-party system.  Perhaps Conservatives should read  this  book  with  most attention; it  may  give them   some   hints   of   how  they   might  at  least partially counteract  the   historic disability laid upon    them    by    Macdonald's   great  political error, the execution of Riel  and  the  consequent alienation  of Quebec.
L.T.C.
*  RODERICK STEWART.  The Mind of Norman Bethune. Fitzhenry &  Whiteside, $I5·95· The Mind  of  Norman Bethune is  a  curious hybrid work,  part an  anthology of Bethune's own writings, part  a hagiolatry, put  together with photographs.  The  price  informs  us   that  the cult   of  St.  Norman has  spilt  out  of China and Gravenhurst, Ontario,  and   is  headed  for   the coffee   tables   of  the   nation. Parts of  the  book, like  the   last   section  showing  how   the   cult   is sustained  in  China, are   object lessons  in  how a  man   of  modest   attainments, whose  courage was no greater than that of many  other combat surgeons, can  be built  for  political purposes into a cultural hero.  That is the  pathetic side  of the book.    More     interesting   are    the    pieces    of Bethune's own  writing, and  a single  lamentable example of his incursion into the  visual  arts. Bethune was obviously a kind  of  poete  manque, a   vivid    reporter  of   experiences,  but    almost totally lacking in imaginative power, which perhaps  explains why   he  never  really   under­ stood  how  the  Stalinists destroyed the  Loyalist cause  in Spain and  why  his own  political state­ ments sound  like  a  rather   naive gramophone record.
L.T.C.

**   JOHN   H.   FERRES and   MARTIN TUCKER, eds.,  Modern Commonwealth Literature. Fred­ erick   Ungar, $28.50. The critical  sampler is a difficult  book   to   make  satisfying.   No   matter how  inclusive the  list  of subjects or  how  wide­  ranging  the   critical   perspectives,  readers  re­ main   aware of  the  limitations, the   selectivity, and    (unfortunately   here)   the    typographical errors.  It  is  as   a   set   of   mini-guides  to   the critical   reception   accorded  major   Common­ wealth  writers  that  this  book  serves.  Yet  it  is inevitably   introductory,  and    excerpts  never  provide   the   subtleties that  full   commentaries do.
 ****   MARC    GAGNE, Gilles    Vigneault.   Les presses  de l'universite Laval, $36.oo. Vigneault in  many   ways  epitomizes  the   precise   spirit of Quebec that Anglophone Canada finds  so hard to  comprehend. Anglophones appreciate the singer, the music, the songs; but francophones appreciate also the  song  that is the  singer  him­ self -the  rootedness  of  the  chansonnier  in  a cultural whole.  Gagne's  mammoth  (975-page) bibliography records  Vigneault's papers, songs, poems,  and   other  writings; it  annotates criti­ cism;   it  records   productions  and   provides an invaluable  guide   to   both   the   singer  and   his world.
W.N.

**  WILFRID EGGLESTON.   N ationa{   Research in    Canada:  the    NRC    1916-1966.  Clarke, Irwin,  $22.50.  The   scientific  stories  in   this volume-those of  combatting wheat rust,  in­ vestigating  "aviation   medicine,"   developing radar and  snow vehicles-describe  substantial battles, but  the  author burdens them   with  ex­ cessive  accounts of  the  bureaucracy and  exces­  sive  use of  the  passive  voice.  The  effect,  prob­ ably   unintentionally,   stresses   government  in­  volvement in ostensibly  objective research: the close  tie  between  science  and   military might, and   the   failure  to  resolve   the   imbalance  be­ tween  technology, imported financing, and  ex­ ported  wealth.
W.N.

**  ANNE  PITERNICK  et  aJ.  Proceedings of  the National Conference on  the  Sta:te  of Canadian Bibliography.  National   Library   of   Canada,
$7.50. These  academic papers, from  a  I974 conference,  do   not   make   easy   reading,  and they are necessary only for those interested in improving the  state of Canadian  bibliographic coverage.  Perhaps  inevitably,  the   index  and the  internal  bibliographies are   themselves the book's  finest  features.
w.N.

***   ROBERT  D. DENHAM, Northrop  Frye  on Culture  and    Literature.   Univ.   of   Chicago Press,   $I 3.oo.   A   collection  of   2 I   of   Frye's occasional reviews,  this  work  shows  the  practi­ cal  critic that  the  theorist often hides.  Frye  on Toynbee, Frye  on  Langer, Frye  on  Freud and  Jung: these  are  valuable  documents  for  more  than students of Frye.  But  equally valuable for such   students  is  Robert   Denham's  introduc­ tion:   a   long,   detailed,   balanced,  and   lucid  account of Frye's  ideas, career, and  reputation.

W.N.	w.N.
