$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·25






SYMPOSIUM ON .



Articles

BY M. W. STEINBERG, MIRIAM WADDINGTON,  DOROTHY LIVESAY, T. A. MARSHALL

Chronicle

BY ALLAN CAMPBELL


Reviews
BY CRAIG W. MILLER,  JOHN ROBERT p<)LOMBO,  J. A. S. EVANS, GUY ROBERT, A. W.  PURDY,  FRED COGSWELL, ROBERT HARLOW, MICHAEL WARREN, D. A. CAMERON,  GEORGE WOODCOCK





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









TRANS-PACIFIC GREETINGS

Meanjin's Iooth Issue





ENDURANCE IS A  RARE   QUALITY  among purely  literary  maga­ zines,  and  there  is none  in  Canada which has  stood the   course for  the  past twenty-five   years.  We  have   all,  therefore, to  acknowledge  the  superior  staying  power  of  the  leading Australian literary   review,  Meanjin  Quarterly, which  has just  completed its first  quarter-century of existence  and  published its hundredth issue.
It is an  acknowledgment which,  as editor  of Canadian Literature, I make  with
particular personal  pleasure. I remember clearly  the first issue of Meanjin Papers, as  it  was  called  in  the  early  years,  because  it  appeared in  the  same  year  as  I brought out  the  first issue of my own  first magazine, Now. I established contact (or  vice versa)  with  Clem  Christesen, the editor of Mean jin, and the acquaintance has  continued, over several  thousands of miles and  somewhat intermittently, ever since.  Our  magazines at  that  time  had  one  thing  in  common; both  were  coterie publications, since  Now   was  mainly  the  mouthpiece of  a  group of  libertarian writers  including Herbert Read, Alex Comfort, Julian Symons  and  D. S. Savage, while  Meanjin was  limited  in  a  more  regional  sense, being,  in  the  beginning at least,  the  organ  of a group of Queensland poets.
Now  went  the way of all coterie  magazines; it disappeared in 1947, in the great freeze  which,  in the  Age  of Austerity, killed off most of the  literary journals that had   flourished   in  wartime  London. Meanjin expanded its  field  of  vision  and, largely  because  of  the  single-minded efforts  of its editor, survived. In  that  same year  of  r 947  it  moved  from  Brisbane  to Melbourne, where  it became for a long period  the sole literary magazine of real standing in the whole  of Australia. There were  inevitably times  of crisis, and  eventually  Christesen  had  to give  up  at  least

3

EDITORIAL



a  portion  of Meanjin's treasured  independence by accepting  the support  of the University  of  Melbourne,  a  decision which,  as  I know,  he  reached  only  after much heart-searching. In the event, Meanjin  has only benefitted. Now it is larger, handsomer   than  ever--an enviable  144  pages-and there  is no sign of any diminution  of its real liberty of approach.
Still under  the editorship  of Clem Christesen,  Meanjin continues  to comment on  writing  and  the  world in  its slightly flat-voiced  manner,  and  it  is still the journal  to which one automatically  turns first of all for an idea of what is going on  in  the  Australian  literary  world,  which,  like its Canadian counterpart, is a diffuse  and  thinly  spread  community.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  never  been anything  narrowly  regionalist about  Christesen's  editing.  He  has been conscious of the need to maintain  the links between the various English-speaking literatures, and  his lists of contributors are peppered with English, Irish, American and South African   names.  Christesen  has  the  kind  of  dry  Australian   honesty  which  has made him always ready to admit  that  much  of what  he publishes is second-rate, as is the  case  with  the  best of magazines.  But  he  has created  and  kept  going over the years an adequate  and continuing expression of the local literary heritage of Australia,  and  this in the long run has become an invaluable  aid to the writer
and  the scholar  alike, and not merely within Australia.

G.W.












4



POET OF A LIVING PAST

Tradition in Klein's Poetry




M. W. Steinberg





IN  "AVE ATQUE VALE,"  the opening  poem in hi< fust volume of poetry,  Hath  Not  A  jew  (1940), A.M. Klein states that  his intention  is to
tum  to his Jewish heritage,  to become, as he said in a later  poem, the poet "who unrolled  our  culture  from  his scroll." Probably  no other  major  Canadian writer so  deliberately  and  consistently  wrote  within  a tradition. This  purpose  was all the more easily accomplished,  for it was a rich heritage  which, existing as a  mi­ nority  culture,  was clearly  defined  and  discernible. He  was at the same  time an intensely personal  poet,  his awareness  and  concern  with  himself  probably being reinforced  by the  realization  of the separateness of himself and  his tradition  in the general social milieu.
The  personal  element  is to  be found  in  the  tone and  style of his poetry,  the
flavour  of personality  that  permeates  most of what  he wrote. The  quality of  un­ embarrassed  sentimentality-nostalgic, tender,  affectionate -usually  preserved from excess by simplicity of statement  or held in check by light irony; the tone of impassioned   indictment   or  commitment;  his  whimsical  humour;  and  his  en­ thusiasm  as seen,  for  example,  in  his delight  in festivities or  in  expressing  his awareness of the divine:  all these characterize  his work, less tangibly  perhaps but as definitely as his highly individual  poetic language.  But  Klein  is personal in a more  direct   manner.  Autobiographical statements   are  to  be  found   in  many poems, from  the first poem in the first volume to the last poem, "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape", in his fourth  and final volume of  verse, The  Rocking  Chair and  Other   Poems  ( 1948). He  recalls scenes from  his childhood  at  home,  in school  and  on  the street,  the sights and  smells of  the  Montreal  Jewish  quarter  and the games he played;  he reminisces often about his parents  and teachers, who

5

POET OF A LIVING PAST



shaped his growth. In  Poems (I 944), in  a sequence of thirty-six  poems  entitled "The Psalter of Avram Haktani", Klein  describes  or alludes  to the  major  events of his life from  his birth  through his marriage. The title  makes  clear  the  personal reference  in  the  poems.  It  contains  an  obvious  play  on  his own  name, the  word "Haktani" in  Hebrew meaning "small" or  the  Yiddish  and   Germanic "klein". These  poems  disclose  his inmost  fears  and  hopes,  thereby  revealing many  of his interests  and  values.
Klein,   however,   for  the  most  part,  subordinates the  personal element.  Even when  he is concerned with himself, he usually sees himself in relation  to a continu­ ing  tradition,  an  attitude which   keeps  the  personal element  confined  and   yet achieves  a kind  of enlargement for it by identifying it with  a  larger  entity.  Klein conveys  this  sense  of  identification  most  clearly   in  "Psalm  XXXVI, a  Psalm touching genealogy".

Not sole was I born, but entire genesis: For to the fathers that begat me, this Body is residence. Corpuscular,
They dwell in my veins, they eavesdrop at my ear,
They circle, as with Torahs,  round my skull, In exit and in entrance  all day pull
The  latches of my heart, descend, and rise­ And there look generations through my eyes.

Klein,  a  learned Jew,  has  a strong  sense of  history  and  his  place  in it. He  is always conscious  of himself, as the furthest extension and  summation of his people and  its  heritage. For  Klein,  as for  all  traditionalists, the  past  has  an  immediacy that  makes  it  a  present  reality.  Furthermore, in  Jewish  religious  teaching, which shaped traditional responses,  time  is regarded as hallowed, and  moments in  his­ tory,  persons  and  events are exalted.  Place,  on the  other  hand, is rarely sanctified  and  tends  to  be   disregarded. This  attitude to  place,  with  its religious basis and  significance, has  probably  been  reinforced   by  the  Jewish  emphasis on  inner  ex­ perience and  by the fact that  so much  Jewish  history  has occurred in unwelcomed or tyrannous exile, where no attachment, no deep sense of belonging was possible. In   his  poetry   Klein   reflects  these  traditional attitudes. The  sages  of  Sura   and Pumbeditha,  Reb   Levi  Yitschok,  or  the   poet-rabbi  Jehuda  Ha-Levi are  his contemporaries, constituting a  past  that  is living  for  him.  Little  or  no  attention is paid  in  the  first  three  volumes  of  Klein's  poetry  to  settings.  In  The  Rocking Chair  and  Other   Poems, however,  Klein  does  indicate  a  marked sensitivity  to place,  whether it  be  a pawnshop, St.  Lawrence  Boulevard, or  Mount Royal.  As

6

POET OF A LIVING PAST



in  his other  relationships,  he finds it difficult to maintain  any  psychic distance from  that  which  he experiences;  the places become part  of him, and in describ­ ing  them  he  becomes very tender  and  personal. However,  Klein's sense of time and  of place tend  to merge. In fact, he seldom thinks of place without some time referent.  Places have  history and,  as we can see in such  poems as "Montreal", "Lookout: Mount  Royal",  and  "The  Mountain", it is the history of the  place, the events that  are associated with it that  appeal to him as much as the physical elements, and  probably  more.
At  the  core  of  Klein's  traditionalism  is his intense  religious commitment, a
concern  that  is compounded of an  emotional  attachment fostered  and  shaped from  his infancy  on,  both  at  home  and  at  school;  an  intellectual  attraction to the  challenge  of  Talmudic debate  and  the  fine-drawn  disquisitory  logic of the post-Talmudic scholars;  and perhaps most important, the spiritual need for a metaphysic  or  a system of beliefs that  would order  human  experience meaning­ fully and  purposefully  and  enable  him to find  himself in such an  order so that he could better  understand this experience, and that  would prompt him to reach beyond the seeming finitudes of time and place-in brief, to seek  God.
In  Gloss Aleph  of The   Second  Scroll, a  poem  entitled  ''Autobiographical",
Klein enumerates many of the vivid childhood memories that reveal the emotional basis of his religious attitude. His environment,  the Montreal  ghetto, was almost totally  Jewish  and   centred   about  the  home,  the  synagogue  and  the  Hebrew school. The  outstanding calendar  days were the religious festivals, with the cere­ monies  and  games  associated  with  them.  Klein's  attachment  to  ceremony  and ritual  is evidenced  in  the series of poems "Haggadah" in  Hath  Not  A  jew,  in the nuptial  psalms in Poems and  in many affectionate  references to the Sabbath and  holy day  ceremonies  at  home  and  in  the synagogue.  His  parents,  humbly circumstanced, were gentle  and  pious. His brief recollections of  them here are of his  mother  "blessing  candles,  Sabbath-flamed" and  of  his  father  telling  tales about  the famous  Chassidic  Rabbi,  the Baal Shem Tov.  He frequently  refers to his parents in his poems and in nearly every instance the context is some religious practice or observance  and  the relationship is one of  love, "Love leading a brave childjThrough  childhood's   ogred  corridors,   unfear'd".  His  references  to  his childhood   religious  teachers   reveal  the  same  quality  of  affectionate  trust  and acceptance.  To  some extent,  undoubtedly,  Klein's later  religious seeking reflects a somewhat  nostalgic  yearning  for the  relatively simple, secure and  abundantly happy  days of his childhood,  a seeking in memory for "The strength  and  vivid­ ness of nonage  days".  This  aspect of  Klein's  religious attitude  emerges in many

7

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



poems where, after considering the evils of this nightmare world, he puts his trust in God, a parent-figure,  to see him safely through. The  imagery in the concluding section of "Reb  Levi Yitschok Talks  to God"  clearly suggests this aspect.

He raged, he wept. He suddenly went mild Begging the Lord to lead him through the fog; Reb Levi Yitschok, an ever-querulous child, Sitting on God's knees in the synagogue, Unanswered even when the sunrise smiled.

The  imagery here, however, should not be taken  to indicate,  as some critics have suggested, an abdication  of mature  responsibility for a child-like faith in a father­ figure, though  certainly  much  of the emotional  force stems from such a  deeply­ rooted  association. But Klein is expressing not  primarily  a desire to escape from the  complexities  of life, or  a  personal  longing  for  his earlier  simple,  protected existence,  but  rather   a  traditional   Jewish  attitude  which  regards  God  meta­ phorically  in  terms  of a  homely, intimate,  familial  relationship,  not  remote  or austere, without  confusing the metaphor  with the  reality.
Klein's  studies  in  Jewish  law  and  philosophy  continued   after  he graduated from Hebrew school in Montreal  and even long after he abandoned his intention to enter  a seminary  to study for the rabbinate. He  draws  on his learning for his abundant -perhaps  over-abundant -references  to  Biblical  and   post-Biblical figures, and  for the historical events and legends on which he builds many of his poems. The  poems in "Talisman in Seven Shreds"  (Hath Not  A  few), and  in "A Voice Was Heard  in Ramah" and "Yehuda Ha-Levi,  His Pilgrimage"  (both in  Poems)   illustrate  not only Klein's scholarship  but  also his ability to discover the  relevance  of history and  tradition  to contemporary circumstances.  Through these allusions Klein indicates clearly his intellectual  attachment to the Jewish religious heritage.  In  the  opening  poem of  his first volume,  Hath   Not  A   few, Klein emphasizes that  when he turns from his cosmopolitan  interests and friends back to Jewish concerns, he is called by the "sages of Sura,  Pumbeditha's wise", the scholars in the Babylonian  centres where the Talmud was compiled,  and  he turns to Johanan ben-Zakkai, who founded the centre of learning  at Jabna  when the Romans destroyed the Jewish commonwealth and dispersed the Jews. Very frequently  in his poems Klein attests not only to his knowledge  of Judaism,  but to his love for these builders of Jewish scholarship.

I followed them, I loved them, sage and saint, Graybeard in caftan, juggling the when and why,

8

POET OF  A LIVING  PAST



Ascetic rubbing a microscopic  taint,
Scholar on whose neat earlocks  piety ascended
In  spiral  to the sky -

Klein's religion was more than  a nostalgic return  to a happy and secure condi­ tion of childhood,  a passive acquiescence to the ways of his forefathers. His was a continuing  struggle between belief and disbelief, an attempt,  not really successful, to reconcile his ancestral  faith  with his acceptance  of his sceptical, contemporary society.






DESPITE HIS  REVERENCE for the great  Jewish scholars and his respect for the elaborate  code of ceremony and practice  that constitutes tradi­ tional Judaism, Klein  was not unaware  of the dangers of orthodoxy.  In "Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens" (Hath Not  A  jew)  in the passage dealing with the  excommunication  of  Spinoza,  he  castigates  the  rigidity  of  dogmatists  that breeds intolerance  and  harshness. But such notes of  condemnation  are scarce  in Klein's writing  and  do not seriously shape his religious position. Of much greater import  are the few brief references, asides almost, in which he confessed his own inability  to hold firmly to his faith. In  "Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage"  (Hath Not A  jew)   after  mentioning  that  his forefathers gathered strength  to endure  historic anti-semitism from their converse with God, he added,

My father is gathered to his fathers,  God  rest his wraith! And  his son
Is a pauper in spirit, a beggar in piety, Cut  off without a penny's  worth  of faith.

A similar  and  more  obviously intrusive  confession of doubt  is to be found  in  a later  poem, when,  after  describing at some length the cripples climbing  on their knees the  ninety-nine  steps to the Oratoire  de St. Joseph,  the tone of ironic  de­ tachment   which  suggests  the  rationalist's  sense of  absurdity  of  the  action,  is dramatically   broken.  The  poet suddenly  becomes personal,

And  I who in my own faith  once had faith  like this, but  have  not now, am crippled more than  they.

In  view of such  doubts  co-existing with his veneration  of Jewish sages and  their teachings,  one  is tempted  to apply  to  Klein  the  very comment  he made  about

9

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



his good  friend  and  fellow-poet,  A. J. M. Smith. "Moreover, Smith  is, albeit  in no  orthodox sense,  of a 'true-religious heart';  like a renaissance pope, he may  or may  not  believe in God;  but  all His saints he venerates." (The Canadian Forum, Feb.,  1944,  pp.  257-8).
But  such  a view,  while  undoubtedly true  at  times,  is inadequate. Much more
often  than  such  direct  assertions  of disbelief  are  the  statements which  firmly ex­ press faith,  the  readiness  to go beyond  the reach  of his intelligence and  the limits of the  self. In  the  poem  "In Re  Solomon  Warshawer" (Poems)  Klein  indicates the  need  to  overcome one's  own  spiritual shortcoming. In  this  poem,  based  on legend,  the  exiled  king  Solomon,  the  quintessential wandering Jew,  says,

Mistake me not:  I am no virtuous saint. But I at least waged war, for holy booty Against my human  taint.

The  outcome of  these  struggles  in  Klein's  poems  is  usually  a  re-affirmation of faith. In  fact,  usually  the struggle  is not  with  one's  own  spiritual inadequacy or doubts, but  rather one that  takes place within  the framework of belief, of over-all acceptance, and  it  involves  the  need  to reconcile  evident  injustice and  suffering with  faith  in  God's   justice  and  mercy.  The  tension  in  these  poems  develops  out of  this  attempt. This  is made  clear  in  "Reb Levi  Yitschok  Talks to  God" and again   in  "Rabbi  Yom-Tob of  Mayence  Petitions His  God" (Poems) where  he affirms  "What the  Lord  gives,  He  owes;  He  owes  no  more." But  the  need  to understand in  human terms  "The how  and  when,  the  wherefore and  the  why"
remains and  hence  the  cry,

Let there be light
In the two agonies that are my eyes, And in the dungeon of my heart, a door Unbarred. Descend, 0 Lord, and speak.

It  might  be argued that  in these poems since the  poet  puts  the  affirmation into the  mouth of his historical  characters, he might  simply  be indicating his  aware­ ness  of  such   responses  and   the  strengths derived   from   the   accepting  attitude without committing himself to them.  However, such  statements are so frequently and   sympathetically  presented   that   it  is fairly  obvious  from   tone  and   context  that   Klein  shares  them.  Furthermore, in very  many  poems  he does speak  in  his own  voice  to  the  same  effect.  The   thirty-six  psalms  in  "The  Psalter of Avram Haktani"  (Poems) in  mood  and  thought are  fundamentally  religious.  Psalm  II is the most direct  admission  of his return  to his traditional religious  beliefs.

IO

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



How is he changed, the scoffers say, This hero of an earlier day, ...
0 Lord, in this my thirtieth  year
What clever answer shall I bear
To those slick persons amongst whom
I sat, but was not in their room? How shall I make apocalypse
Of that which rises to my lips,
And on my lips is smitten dumb....
Do Thou  the deed, say Thou  the word, And with Thy sacred stratagem
Do justify my ways to them.

His  last  and  fullest  statement of  the  spiritual odyssey from  unquestioning faith and  devotion  to  religious  learning through doubts  and  denials   back  to  faith  is found  in  his novel  The Second  Scroll,  where  "miracle" becomes  the  keyword  to our  understanding of  events  and  the  mysterious  intertwining of good  and  evil. The  emergence of good  out  of evil suggests a power  and  a design  beyond  human comprehension, and  the  series of poems  constituting Gloss Hai,  the  final  passage in the  book, express  unequivocally and  joyously in the language of prayer  Klein's essentially  religious  nature.
Although Klein's attachment to the  Jewish  people  and  its traditional  religious beliefs and  practices were  so deeply  rooted  in him  that  he could  probably never have  entirely   escaped  its  influence, his views and  interests  did  undergo change as  his  widening range  of  activities  took  him  beyond  the  culturally  self-sufficient and  enclosed Jewish  community. It is not surprising that  the adolescent, struggling to achieve  independence under  these circumstances, should  have done  battle with "The wicked  theologic   myth", and  concocted   "learned blasphemies" as  he tells us  in  Psalm   II  (Poems). Although Klein's emancipation began   when  he  left Hebrew school  and   attended a  secular  high  school  in  Montreal, it was  only  a slight  emancipation there  as  almost  the  only  non-Jews in  the  large  school  were the  teachers. The  broadening process  really  got  under   way  when  he  attended McGill   and  later the  University   of  Montreal. Here  Klein  got  to  know  directly members of the  other  two racial  groups  that  with the Jews  constituted the tripar­ tite  population of Montreal, and  perhaps even more important he came to know the  riches  of a culture other  than  his native  one. The impact of the great figures of  English  literature, Chaucer, Shakespeare, and  Donne,  in  particular, was con­ siderable. By  the  beginning of  the  1930's   Klein,  like  most  young  poets  of  the time,  came  under the  influence ofT. S. Eliot. Although for the  most  part  Klein

I I

POET OF A LIVING PAST



still dealt  with Jewish  experience, his style in such poems as "The Soiree of Velvel Kleinburger" and  in  passages  even  in  "Reb Levi  Yitschok  Talks   to  God",  re­ flected   Eliot's.  The   colloquialisms, the  use  of  refrain, the  seemingly  disjointed  phrases,   are  obviously  borrowed characteristics and  even  the  poet's  attitude of cynical  despair,  of  condescending pity  and  humorous contempt for  Kleinburger are  an  imitation of Eliot's  treatment of Prufrock and  Sweeney. Like most writers of  this  period   Klein  was  stirred   by  the  effects  of  the  depression  and  then  the Spanish Civil  War. His radicalism at  this time,  a continuing political  attitude­ he  stood  for  Parliament as  a  C.C.F. candidate in  1948-does  not  indicate a reversal  in  his  basic  social  response,  for  it  did  not  stem  from  a  determinist or materialist philosophy,  but  from  a  moral  passion  nurtured by  the  Hebrew pro­  phets.  This   increasing concern   with  the  general  issues  confronting society  was reflected   in  such  poems  as  "Barricade Smith,  His  Speeches", "Blueprint for  a Monument of  War", and  "Of   Castles  in  Spain", none  of  which  he saw  fit  to re-publish  when   his  collections   of  poems   appeared. His   association   with   the emerging group of able  young  Montreal  poets,  particularly A. J. M. Smith  and
F. R. Scott,  became closer. Together with  Leo Kennedy, Robert Finch  and  E. J.
Pratt, they constituted the distinctive  group whose work was published in New Provinces,  1936.  Two related   forces,  however,  Zionism  and   anti-semitism, both significant elements  in the  Jewish  tradition, kept  Klein  from  drifting far  from  his Jewish  concerns; in fact,  they intensified  his commitment to his heritage.
In  1927  while  still a student at  McGill,  Klein  became president of Canadian Young  Judaea, a  national Zionist  youth  organization. Shortly after,  he  became editor of  its  paper, The   ]udaean.  His  involvement in  Jewish   affairs  deepened when  he was appointed assistant  executive  director of the  Zionist Organization of Canada, directed  its educational programme, and  in  1936  edited  The  Canadian Zionist. He  became  a regular  contributor to the  Canadian   jewish Chronicle and in 1939  assumed  the editorship of this Anglo-Jewish paper  in Montreal, a position which  he held until  1955· In  these posts he became one of the outstanding leaders and  probably the  most effective spokesman  for the  Canadian Jewish  community. The   effort  to  establish  a  Jewish  Homeland in  Palestine and  the  need  to expose and  combat anti-semitism became  his daily  burden.








12

POET  OF A LIVING  PAST




KLEIN's INTENSIFIED  PREOCCUPATION with Jewish issues in the late 1930's and  1940's is reflected in the fact that he chose for his first volume of poetry, Hath  Not  A  few  ( 1940), only poems dealing with Jewish matters.  He deals with Jewish legend and  history, the struggle to realize the dream  of  nation­ hood in Palestine, and he rejoices in the variety of Jewish characters  and activities. Even  when  he might  have  been critical he refrained,  his deft ironic  humour, as we see in  such  poems  as "Landlord", "Shadchon", and  "Preacher", softening comments  that  might  otherwise  have  been caustic. In  part  this attitude reflects Klein's  broad  tolerance,  a comprehensive  affection for  all mankind,  except  the haters, which reminds one of Chaucer.  In part, however, he might have refrained because this book is in some sense an apologia, a conscious defence of his people, as the very title of the book suggests. Although in the opening poem "Ave Atque Vale"  the  apologia  has in it a tinge of apology, for the  most part  the  portraits  that  Klein presents are a proud display of his heritage, a dignified counter-portrait to  the  degrading  image  projected  by the  Nazis. One  of the  most frequently  re­ curring  themes is that  of anti-semitism, a  theme that  Klein examines from many aspects and  to which he responds in many moods.
The  poems that  deal  with anti-semitism in Klein's first volume taken  together reveal through  their  themes, imagery and  allusions, a many-sided and  rather  full consideration  of  the  problem.  Whether  they  were  consciously selected  for  this purpose or not is hard  to say, but certainly they reveal how the mind  of the poet grappled  with  the  issue. Although  this theme was given terrible  and  immediate significance by the German  Nazis and  their imitators,  Klein, drawing  on a great deal  of  knowledge,  historical  and  contemporary,  gives the  topic  a  perspective needed   for  adequate  understanding. In   "Childe   Harold's  Pilgrimage"  Klein depicts the contemporary scene in which the western nations remained  relatively indifferent  to the catastrophe overwhelming  the Jews, equivocating and  delaying their  deliberations  on  refugees, and  for  the most part  refusing them  admission. The  emphasis in this poem is on the Nazi outrage which Klein castigates in stac­ cato,  ironic  phrases,  and  in  a  tone  of fierce mockery   that  foreshadows  The Hitleriad. The  next poem in this volume dealing with hostility to the Jews, "Son­  net  in Time  of Affliction",  through  its allusions to David,  Bar  Cochba  and  the Maccabees,  touches on three different  periods in Jewish  history when the people were endangered  by the  Philistines, Romans, and  Hellenized Syrians. In  a series of  poems  that   follows,  "Design  for  Media:val  Tapestry", Klein  treats  of  the Christian  persecution  of the Jews in the Middle Ages.

POET OF A LIVING PAST



Klein  not  only makes reference to varying  moments  in  history to establish a context  for the contemporary  phenomenon  of anti-semistism;  he also explores in these poems the various ways in which it manifests itself and the varying motives behind  it.  In  "Childe   Harold's   Pilgrimage"   Nazi  anti-semitism  is seen  as  an insensate, primitive racial rage, violent and sadistic. In "Design for Medireval Tapestry" the  basic  motive was  religious  antagonism  supplemented   by greedy desire for material  and  sexual plunder.  And  in  the last poem in this volume on this subject,  Poem V of "Sonnets  Semitic",  Klein  returns  to the modern  period, but  the  aspects  of  anti-semitism  presented  differs  from  the  others:   here  Klein reveals  the  polite  prejudice  which   does  not  destroy  but   merely  limits and humiliates.
Klein  was at least as much  concerned  with  the nature  of the Jewish  response to  this  external  threat.  The  twentieth-century  speaker  in  "Childe  Harold's  Pil­ grimage" considers  and  rejects  prayer,  though   he  recognizes  the  strength  his forefathers derived from it under similar circumstances,  because he is cut off from his faith.  He  rejects  Esau's argument  because violence is  antithetical  to the tra­ ditional  way  of life developed  by the  ghetto  Jew,  and  he does  not  accept  the escape  offered  by suicide, for such an ignoble end  is a  denial  of the worth  and dignity  of one's  heritage. The  only defence  the  poet  here envisages is

The frozen patience waiting for its day, The stance long-suffering, the stoic word, The bright empirics that knows well that the
Night of the Cauchemar comes and goes away,-

In the eleven poems that constitute "Design for Medireval Tapestry" Klein depicts a wider range of responses: attempts to escape through flight, fearful hiding or apostasy;  and  varying  attitudes  that  prompt  acceptance. Some,  as Klein  points out,  accept  their  condition  passively, displaying  a  fatalistic  resignation   ("Reb Daniel  Shochet  reflects") -or acquiescence  in  the  will of God  ( "Nahum-this­ is-also-for-the-good  ponders"). Others,  accepting  also like  Nahum  the  justice of God's acts, postulate their own guilty, sinful nature,  and attempt  to persuade Him to  change  His  will through  their  repentance  and  reform.  Still others,  however, refuse to escape or acquiesce. In "Job  reviles" God is arraigned  for his failure to act, while in the last poem in this series, "Esther hears echoes of his voice", there is a  passionate  demand  for an  explanation.
In  Poems   ( 1944)   Klein  is less preoccupied  by  the  theme  of anti-semitism. Psalm  VI  is a  moving  total  indictment  of  mankind  for  the  Nazi  horrors,  per-

POET OF A LIVING PAST



petrated or  tolerated, and   Psalm  XXV simply  asks for  an  explanation of "the folded  present". In  two long poems in this volume, "In Re Solomon  Warshawer" and  "Rabbi Yom-Tob of Mayence Petitions  His God", Klein  does,  however, re­ state   aspects  of  this  theme   developed   in  his  earlier   volume.  In The  Hitleriad (1944), a  thematically simple  and  direct  satire,  Klein  catalogues the  Nazis and  their  crimes.  Despite  the  explosive  force  of Klein's  wrath in  this  poem, and  the sharpness of  his  wit,  the  poem  fails  primarily because  no  amount of  rhetorical sarcastic  sneers  and  name-calling, no collection  of insults or invective, it matters not  how  effectively  phrased -and  some  lines  are  very  effective -can  convey adequately the  shock  that   came  from  the  recognition  of  the  possible  extent  of human depravity.
With  the  cessation  of the  war  and  the  defeat  of Nazi  Germany, the  threat  of anti-semitism  waned   and  Klein's poetic  interest  in  the  subject ceased.  It was  a crucial   theme  for  him  not  merely  because  he felt  that   he  and  his  people  were threatened, but  because  this  complex  and  pervasive  phenomenon with  its social and  religious  implications revealed  much  about  the nature of man  and  his inter­ relationships with  his fellow men  and  with God. In so far  as it raised  the question  of evil and  God's  relation to it, this theme  impinged directly  on  Klein's religious ideas,  tested  his belief.  The  fullest exploration of this aspect  of this theme is to be found  in  the  novel  The  Second  Scroll.
The   problem   of  anti-semitism  related   also  to  Klein's commitment  to  the Zionist  cause.   He  welcomed  the  restoration of  the  spirit  of  independence and self-reliance   that   the  Zionist  effort  brought to  the  Jews  in  their   confrontation with   anti-semitism.  But  Zionism   was  a  much   more  meaningful concept than merely a mechanism for self-defence  or even for the realization of a nationalist objective. If anti-semitism was the negative  agent, the centripetal force compelling Klein  to the centre of Jewish  experience, Zionism was the positive force attracting and   holding   him  there   with  a  religious  fervour.   Franz  Kafka, in  a  reflection, commented that  the  Zionists had  grabbed hold of an edge of the "tallith" (prayer shawl) as it disappeared around the comer  in the twentieth century. This shrewd observation, made  long  before  its truth was as obvious  as it is today,  applies  only in small  measure to Klein,  for to him the  nationalist  ideal  never  became a substi­ tute  for  the  religious  one.  For  Klein,  the  reach  for  Zion,  was,  as it  had  always been   traditionally,  a  religious   yearning. Zion  had   an  imaginative  reality  and  expressed   an   imaginative  and   spiritual  need,  like  the  world   of   his  childhood which  he sought  to  regain  in  memory.



IS

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



It is a fabled city that I seek;
It stands in Space's vapours and Time's haze.
("Autobiographical", Gloss Aleph, The Second  Scroll)

The  nationalist  impulse, which Klein also fully accepted,  was but an expression of the urge for redemption and an attempt  in twentieth-century terms to realize it. Though Klein  may have had  misgivings about  other  aspects of Judaism,  on this issue he never  wavered.
Klein's  involvement  in  Zionist activity  began  early.  In  the  late  192o's  and
193o's  he was active in Canadian Young Judaea, and later in the Zionist Organ­
ization  of Canada. This in erest
January 1930,  at  the  age,.of 21, he  published  in  The  Menorah   journal  (later reprinted  in  Hath  Not  A  jew)  a sequence  of poems Greeting  on This  Day in which  he considers various aspects of Zionism, the terror  and  the wonder of the new life in the Holy Land,  the relationship  of Jew  to Arab,  the development  of the  new  Jewish  prototype,  the straight-backed pioneer  Jew.  These  two  themes are reiterated  in two other "Zionist" poems in Hath  Not A  jew, "Sonnet  in Time of Affliction" and  Poem II,  "Sonnets  Semitic".  In  the former  Klein is distressed by the violence that  compels those who seek to rebuild  peacefully the Homeland to answer  with  force. The  second  poem,  whose opening  line is an  echo  of the last line of "Sonnet  in Time  of Affliction" emphasizes with its imagery  of white doves and  orange  blossoms the  joyful aspect of the return  to Zion. In  "Yehuda Ha-Levi,  His  Pilgrimage"  (Poems), a long  allegorical  romance  about  the exile of  the  Jewish  people from  their  Homeland  and  attempted return  by the  poet­ philosopher  Yehuda  Ha-Levi,  Klein  reveals clearly  his own  passionate  longing for the  return.  The  fullest statement  of Klein's  Zionist concept  is to be found  in his novel, The  Second Scroll, where the national  theme is most clearly interwoven with  the  religious theme, for  the search for  Zion is inseparable  from  the search for God and an understanding of His ways; its attainment is seen as a miraculous manifestation  of His will.




OUGH KLEIN  WAS  SHAPED  by his beginnings  and  then  im­ pelled  by the  forces of the 193o's and  194o's  to concern  himself primarily  with the  experiences  of  the  Jewish  people,  this  concentration of  interest  did  not diminish  his achievement.  As E. K. Brown has pointed  out,  the effect has been enlarging  rather  than  limiting, for Klein's  world of characters, events and  ideas

r6

POET OF A LIVING PAST



possesses "a  solidity  and   an  intensity  ... very  rare  in  our  literature." Although Klein  drew  considerably on  his heritage,  his poems  usually  depict  human traits that  are  universal  and  express  a religious or moral  attitude common to Christian and  Jew.  E. J. Pratt, in a review of The  Hitleriad  (Canadian Forum, Oct.  rg44) stated  that  "Despite the  difficulties springing out of his scholasticism, his legalistic lore, and  his Talmudic terms  and  references  which  needed  footnotes, Klein  could appeal to us on  the  basis of a moral  culture common  to Jew  and  Gentile -that of the  Hebrew prophet and  psalmist.  All of his best  work  possessed this appeal, whether it  was  the  ringing  affirmation of  Isaiah   or  the   subdued litanies of Jeremiah, Ecclesiastes,  and  David."
Klein's interests were  not  merely Jewish.  Canada, too, was part  of his heritage.
In  the  I ggo's,  as has  been  briefly  noted,  he was closely associated  with  the  New Provinces  poetry  group, affected  by the literary  influences of Eliot  and  the seven­ teenth-century metaphysicals, and  by such social conditions as the depression  and the  rise of fascism.  In  the  early  I 94o's  he was part  of a group of  active  Montreal poets,  which   included  Patrick  Anderson and  Irving   Layton,  who  published   in Preview   and   First  Statement, the  forerunner of  Northern  Review. Partly   as  a result  of  the  impetus of  this  new  poetic  movement, and  in  part   reflecting  the intensifying sense of Canadian nationalism widely felt at the end of World War  II, Klein  felt  drawn to the  Canadian scene generally.  With the defeat  of Hitler and the  removal  of  the  menace of anti-semitism, Klein's  imagination was less domi­  nated  by  the  Jewish  condition and  he felt released  from  his burden of responsi­ bility as Jewish  spokesman. He  no longer  needed to cry his outcry, or to set beside the  ugly  stereotyped portrait  of  the  Jew,  the  Jew  and  his tradition as he knew them. In  The   Rocking Chair   and  Other   Poems   ( I948)  Klein   turned to  new themes.
The  subjects of the  poems  in this last volume are  taken  for the  most  part  from the  city and  the  province in which  Klein  lived. They  are  perceptive and  sympa­ thetic  commentaries on  people  and  the objects  and  activities  which express essen­ tial  aspects  of their  lives. Generally speaking,  however,  the  poet  is less personally  involved  in  his  material than   in  his earlier  poems.  His  tone  is  quieter, less de­  clamatory and  less urgent. He achieves greater objectivity and even greater artistic  control   because  he  maintains a  measure  of detachment  from  his subject. In  his earlier   poems  the  poet  wrote  from  within   the  world  he  depicted, totally  com­ mitted   to  it,  expressing   warmly, with  a  sense  of  immediacy and   intimacy, its achievements and  dreams, its pride  and  its fears. Despite  the dangers which  such psychological   proximity  and   commitment   pose  for  the  artist-excessive  emo-

I7

POET OF A LIVING PAST



tionalism,  and  the  subordination  of artistic  and  critical  considerations  to  extra­ literary  concerns -weaknesses from  which  Klein  was  not  entirely  free,  these poems speak directly and forcefully to us. The  poems in The  Rocking Chair and· Other  Poems  are  much  more controlled,  the  poet  no doubt  finding  it easier to order  his feelings and  to shape  his expression of them  when  dealing  with grain elevators  or  frigidaires,  or  even  when  describing   Mount   Royal  or  Monsieur Gaston.
While  contrasts  between Klein's last poems and  his earlier  ones can easily be drawn,  both  groups  reflect certain  continuing  characteristics  of the  poet. Klein still searches  for  the  archetypal image to sum  up  an  aspect  of a society or  a culture,  a symbol of a condition  or tradition whether  it be a shrine,  a  rocking­ chair  or  oxen  "lyric  with horns",  banks or  pawnbrokers,  liquor  stores or filling stations.  His sensitivity to tradition  makes him the readier  to discover  those sym­ bols which  aptly  distinguish  a  people.  Delicately  and  accurately  Klein  depicts phases of French-Canadian life-their sustaining  faith,  the demagoguery  of the politicians,  the  emphasis on class in a hierarchical  order.  In  the title poem, The Rocking   Chair,  Klein   successfully conveys   the   mood  and pace  of  French­  Canadian life, its slow conservatism. Though   for  the  most  part  Klein  refrains from  comment,  through  his use of irony the  poet shows that  he is not  unaware  of shortcomings.  He  has always, however, a sympathetic  understanding, even an affection, for the Canadien.  Deeply rooted himself in an old tradition,  he responds sensitively  to  the  French-Canadian  tradition. In  an  article  which  appeared   in
Les Gants du Ciel, Dr. A. J. M. Smith underlined  this relationship. "Dans  l'entite
patriarcale, traditionelle  et ecclesiastique qu'est le Canada francais, Klein a trouve un univers que sa sensibilite juive lui permet de comprendre et d'aimer."
Klein's   traditionalism,   his  conscious  attempt   to  re-create   the  Jewish  world past and  present as he experienced it in all its particularity affected his style and language.  The  influence of Biblical rhythms  with its balanced  and  contrapuntal effects  is obvious  in  many  of Klein's  poems,  but  the  effect on  his language  is even  more  notable.  Clearly, in  part,  Klein's  language  is distinctive  because  he, the  poet, is unique,  with his own "flavour" and  outlook,  his own tastes. But his diction is distinctive also because the world he describes is unique  and  he wished to convey this quality.  Klein, though born in Canada, belongs to that  generation of Jews  that  came  from  Europe,  and  fashioned  for itself its own community  in Canada quite  separate  and  almost complete. This  community  developed its own character   and  personality  within  the  national  pattern, a  part  of the  prevailing Canadian mosaic. Through the special qualities of his language,  the use of foreign

18

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



words,  especially  Hebraic and  uncommon English  words,  and  his imagery with its exotic  and  at times esoteric  qualities,  Klein  tried  to achieve  a kind  of linguistic apartness that   would  reinforce  the  similar  impression  of the  community and  its traditions that   he  was  writing about. Words  and  phrases  like "malefic d jinns", "cognomened", "alembic", "cauchemar", "shadchan" and  "pilpul trick", appear frequently. His  poetry  is filled with allusions to the Bible and  post-Biblical  Jewish sources,  often  relatively unknown, and  much  of his imagery  is drawn from  the same  sources  and  from  religious  ceremony  and  ritual. The  sky on  Passover  night "is  dotted   like  th'unleavened bread" and   the  moon  is  a  golden  seder   platter used  for  the  Passover  Feast   (Haggadah). In  speaking  of the  poet  Yehuda  Ha­ Levi on his  journey  to the  Holy  Land,  Klein  invokes rich  images  associated  with
the  place.

And from the beaker of the soul, that wine Which sours not; and from the bowled brain Grape  clusters tom from paradisal vine;
Honey of Samson's bees; and milk from Pharaoh's kine!

We find  the same  linguistic  tendency when  he writes about  the  French-Canadian community in  The  Rocking Chair  and  Other Poems.  The  scholarly   librarian, Monsieur Delorme, is described  as one who so loves bindings and  the old  regime "that in his mind  is gobelin'd fteur de lys." The  description of Montreal not only conveys  its  history   through  image   and  allusion,   but  its  character through the Gallicized   vocabulary.

Grand  port of navigations, multiple
The  lexicons uncargo'd  at your quays,
Sonnant  though strange to me; but chief est, I, Auditor  of your music, cherish the
Joined  double-melodied  vocabulaire Where English vocable and roll Ecossic, Mollified by the parle of French Bilinguefact your air!

Although Klein  in  this  poem  carries  this device  to such  an  extent  that  the  poem becomes  almost  a linguistic  "tour de force", the result, on the whole, is startlingly effective.
Klein's  traditionalism, then,  shaped   and  directed   his creative  powers.  It pro­
vided  him  with  a body of experience from  the living past that  stirred  his imagina­
tion and  his feelings,  and  at the same time enabled  him to consider  contemporary

POET OF  A LIVING PAST



events in historical perspective, a capacity which gave depth  and added  meaning to his experiences. His source of inspiration  was the Jewish  tradition  and  he re­ mained  fixed, rooted,  in  its scheme of reference  and  moral  values, but  the  arc of his angle of vision widened so that  he embraced  much  more.









20



SIGNS ON A WHITE FIELD

Klein's Second Scroll


Miriam Waddington


It is a fabled city that I seek;
It stands in Space's vapours and Time's haze;
("Autobiographical". The Second  Scroll.)
IREAD The  Sewnd  Scroll soon afte< its publication in 1951. At that time I was living in Montreal,  and I remember going to a public meeting
where Klein  was to read  excerpts from his new work. He read  with great  enjoy­ ment  and  style, and  later  talked,  in  his fiery oratorical  way, about  his  journey to Israel  which  had  given him the impetus for writing the book.
I had always admired  Klein's poetry, but I was strongly repelled by the diction of The  Second Scroll. Although  I read it carefully later, I became more and more convinced  that  the  book  was a  failure.  Not  only  did  the  diction  seem  to  me strained  and  tormented, but  the theme  of the Jewish Galut  and  eventual  Giloh seemed narrowly focused on the State of Israel-with all its Zionist political connotations-as well as on the theological aspects of Judaism  in a way which excluded   unorthodox   believers.  Moreover,  the  structure   of  the  book,  with  its sudden   allegorical  eruptions,   sparse characterization,  and   elaborate   glosses, seemed  to  me inexcusably  manipulative of the  reader,  and  also pointed  to the author's  unwillingness to make up his mind  about what  mode he wanted  to use, prose  or  poetry,  fiction  or  autobiography, allegory or  realism. So, on  all  three counts, diction,  theme  and  structure,  I found  The  Second  Scroll a strange,  un­ pleasing work.
With  these memories still fresh, I  took up The  Second  Scroll again  in  1964. This  time it evoked an  entirely different  response. I still had  reservations  about the structure,  but  I found  that  Klein's diction, which had so repelled me thirteen years earlier,  was rich,  profound,  and  individual; in fact, it seemed  to hold the key to the whole work.
What  then had  changed  in the intervening  years? I had changed  a little, may-


21

SIGNS ON A WHITE  FIELD



be, and  the world had changed a lot. The publication  of Emmanuel Ringelblum's Notes  from the  Warsaw  Ghetto  inI 958  had  altered  the  world for  me. It  had brought  me to a new imaginative  realization of the broad  range of possible values in Jewish  Ghetto  society, and  what  was possible, was not  all good. For the first time  I  understood  and  felt the  threat  from  within;   (the  threat  from  without  is such  an old story, and  has been so thoroughly  documented  in history and litera­ ture,  that  one of my students once tenderly described the Jews as "the cry-babies of the  world".)   After  reading  Ringelblum,  I  could  no longer  regard  the  State of Israel  as just a political entity;  it became a symbol of rescue and  recognition, the  concrete  expression of what  was best in  the ethos of a  whole  culture.  And, from  the  artist's  point of view, is any  nationalism  ever more  or  less than  this?
There  are  many  ambiguities about  The  Second  Scroll, the first and  most  ob­ vious of which is its genre.  Is it prose or poetry, fiction or autobiography,  a  re­ ligious tract  or  a literary  jokebook? The  title itself, if read  from  the  theological point of view, has certain heretical implications, since the first scroll is the Torah, the  Law, as it was transmitted  to Moses on Mount  Sinai. From  the secular point of view, The  Second  Scroll might simply be referring  to the fact  that  the Jews received  the  original  Law  in  ancient  times, and  a second  Law  is  now required to suit the new times and  the new world. There  is also the sinister un-Torah-like irony of the fact  that,  when the title is abbreviated, it reads "S,S''.
Klein called his work a novel, but as a fictional narrative  it presents serious problems. First of all, the line between fiction and autobiography is very wavering throughout, and  Klein's use of a narrator who speaks in the first person does not help  matters.  There   are  occasions  when  the  narrator slips  unmistakably  into the  author's persona, such  as when  he describes life on  the  Avenue  de l'Hotel de Ville. The  autobiographical impression is further  strengthened when the narra­ tor  tells of his assignment to visit the newly founded  State  of Israel in  order  to discover  and  translate  "the  poems  and  songs of  Israel's  latest  nest  of  singing birds".  One  cannot  help  recalling  that  Klein  too  had  translated  both  Yiddish' and  Hebrew  poetry.
Then  there is the problem of the glosses. The  use of glosses, reminiscent of the commentaries  of Talmudic  students, seems to be serving a double  purpose here: the  glosses supply  a variety  of footnotes  to the  text,  and  they  also constitute  a selection from Klein's work papers. There  is nothing  wrong with appending foot­ notes or work papers to a novel, but since it is a departure from  usual  practice, the question  arises:  does it bring any advantages?  To  the writer,  yes, for it pro­ vides him with a shortcut, and saves him the labour of integrating in the text raw


22

SIGNS ON A WHITE FIELD



material which  doesn't quite  fit in, but is still too good  to discard. To  the reader, the inclusion  of glosses offers no advantage, but on the contrary, it sets him adrift without guide  lines or  markers, so he has to decide for himself  how  to steer these footnotes  to a safe  textual harbor.
The  sparse  characterization also  raises questions.  It  is entirely   too  sketchy  to
meet  the  demands of  a  fully  developed  fictional  work.  Since  Klein's purpose  is didactic, he tries to by-pass  the issue of characterization altogether, but  this often results  in  passages so melodramatic, that  they  read  like parodies:

"My  own father  was hanged  before my eyes!" cried  out  the  younger  of the two strangers.  "I know  the  men.  I will yet return.  Revenge!"  He  broke into  uncon­ trolled  sobbing.  It  was contagious.

Still  other  descriptions read  as if they  had  been synopsized: "The  Monsignor [Piersanti] was double edged  with  paradox aimed  at easy explanations that  both the  economists and  psychiatrists had  to offer for  the  world's  ills. It was as if he were  plucking playfully  a  tuft  of  Marx's beard,  a tuft  of Freud's; not  bitter,  he was most engaging." Besides synopsizing  them, Klein often  pares his minor  figures down  to frankly  didactic outlines; so much  so, that  Mr.  Settano (Satan)  of the Roman  incident  becomes   a  personification   of  evil,  where  evil  is equated  with Settano's "materialist interpretation of history".
Nor  is  Uncle   Melech   fully  drawn   in  the  novelistic  sense.  The   narrator, in searching through Italy,  Casablanca and  Israel  for  his mysterious relative,  never actually  meets  him.  When  he is at last shown  a photograph, he finds that  it is "a double,  multiple exposure", implying that  Melech  incorporates both  the narrator and   everyman.  Professor   M.   W.  Steinberg,  in  his  introduction  to  the  recent Canadian edition  of The  Second  Scroll, suggests  that  Uncle   Melech  symbolizes both  the  Jewish   people  and   the  Messiah  concept. I would  add   to  this,  that  in Uncle  Melech  are  also merged  the  persons of "the incognito uncle and the nephew unmet". Each   is  a  mirror image  of  the  other,  and when the   two  images  are brought together, we get,  literally,  a double  exposure,  just as in  the  photograph. But  we  also  get  a  double  exposure  in  the  more  complex   metaphorical sense, in terms  of the spiritual quest  each  is engaged  in.
In  many  ways the  talents of the  narrator and  Uncle  Melech  are  similar.  Both the  narrator and  Uncle Melech  show  "what happens when  the  Talmudic disci­ pline  is  applied either   to  a  belletristic  or  revolutionary praxis". The  very  word "praxis" leads  us to  think  of "practice" and  "axis"; the  word  "axis"  makes  us think  of the line stretching between  two polarities,  which  is exactly what happens

23

SIGNS ON A WHITE  FIELD



when  you put  the Talmud at one end  of the axis and  Marx at the other,  or even when  the  imaginary line is between  the Talmud and  the  poetry  of Spenser.
A  play  of  doubles  also takes  place  in  the  reader's mind  when  he  reads  what the  narrator has  to say  about  Uncle  Melech's dialectical essay and  compares it to the  style in which  The  Second  Scroll itself is written. Uncle  Melech's essay, we are  told,  consisted  of "a  series of curious  alternations between  prophetic thunder and  finicky legalism", while the  narrator's own  interests,  like those of his relative, emerge  as  "linguistic and  polemical".
An  understanding of the  meaning of Uncle  Melech  as a character, goes hand in hand  with  an understanding of Klein's  theme  in The  Second  Scroll. The  theme is as  involuted and   braided   as  the  diction, and  can  be examined from  at  least three  points  of view:   the  literary,  the  theological, and  the  secular. In  literature, the  tradition of the  quest  theme  is ancient and  honourable, and  the figure  of the Wandering Jew  is well known  in folk lore and  myth.  Klein,  however,  adds  to the already existing  connotations of the  Wandering Jew,  the  Cabbalistic suggestion that   Uncle   Melech  is one  of  the  Lamed   V avniks. Lamed   V avnik  is a  Yiddish word  derived  from  the  Hebrew  letters  Lamed  and  V av whose  numerical value  is thirty-six, and  thirty-six  is the  number of secret  saints  (in  Hebrew, nistar), who are  supposed to exist in each  generation.
Apart from  the  ambience of secret  sainthood which  surrounds Uncle  Melech, he is also reminiscent of two famous  literary  heroes,  Homer's Ulysses and  Joyce's Leopold   Bloom.  Klein's  two  protagonists, the  narrator and   Uncle   Melech,  like Bloom and  Dedalus in Joyce's  Ulysses, are engaged in separate but  related  quests. In  Ulysses, Bloom and  Stephen  finally do meet at the end  of the day's  wanderings, but  in The  Second  Scroll, the encounter between  Uncle  Melech  and  the narrator is not  actual, but  only spiritual and  metaphorical; since  they  meet  after  Uncle Melech  has died.  Nevertheless,  Klein,  like Joyce,  attempts to merge,  through this final  encounter, the  two aspects of life which  are  represented by the narrator and Melech.  The meeting between  Bloom  and  Stephen in  Ulysses  helps  Stephen to validate his search  for  identity  as an  artist,  while  it helps  Bloom to recognize  his biological  mortality and  at the same  time shows  him  how  to extend  it  metaphor­ ically  by choosing  Stephen  for a spiritual son.
Analogously, in  Klein,  we also have  two separate searchers. The  narrator is to go  to  Israel  to  find  and  translate the  authentic new  poetry.  The narrator, then, is an  artist,  in  search  of the  truest  art.  But  to  complicate matters, the  narrator adds  to the first mission, a second one -the search  for his long lost Uncle Melech; and  the  search  for  Uncle  Melech  results in the  retracing of the  latter's footsteps,

SIGNS ON  A WHITE FIELD



so that   both  quests  finally  merge  and  are  contained in  the  single  person  of the narrator.






AND WHAT DOES MELECH's  QUEST consist of? According to Professor  Steinberg, who  sees  it  from the   religious point  of  view,  Melech's search-and Klein's-is  the  search  for  an  understanding of  "the problem  of evil and  its bearing on God's relation  to man".• Yet this answer  seems too general, and  at the  same  time,  too confining; and  it also fails to take sufficient  account of the  more  secular   questions Klein  is concerned with.  For  Uncle   Melech  moves from  an early  and  brilliant devotion  to religious studies,  to disillusion  and  political communism. Only  after  he survives  extermination by the  Nazis  does  he cast off polemics  to  become  the  Wandering Jew.  Burdened  both  by the  guilt  of his sur­ vival  and   amazement  at   the   miraculousness  of  it,  Melech   feels  compelled  to justify his life in some socially  creative  and  humanly meaningful  way.
After  a brief interfaith flirtation with Christianity through Monsignor Piersanti, and  an  epiphaneous insight  into  the  artist's  vision of life through Michelangelo, Uncle  Melech  departs for  Casablanca, where,  as his nephew learns  later,  he was nothing but  a  troublemaker. Sent  out  by the  Joint  Distribution Committee-a Jewish   welfare   organization -to  gather   statistics  in  the  Casablancan  ghetto, Melech  not only collects information, but tries to publish  it. And  he is not content with  merely  recording his indignation at  ghetto  conditions; he goes so far  as to organize and  lead  a little  army  of beggars  and  cripples  in a protest  action  against the  authorities.
At  long  last,  in  Israel,  we  come  upon his  traces in  Safed, a  city  famed  in medi<eval times  as the  centre of Cabbalistic delvings. In  Safed,  Melech  is known and   loved  both   for  his  learning  and   his  communal  work.   Melech,   then,   has moved,   dialectically, all  the  way  from  the  religious  thesis  of  the  supremacy of God's command to  man,   to  the  communist antithesis of society's  command  to man,  and  on  to  the  humanist resolution,  which  combines devotion  to  God  with an equal  devotion to man. This  then, is the meaning of survival, as Melech  at last divines it; it is the  miracle and  holiness of brotherly  human life against "the great drunkenness" and   desecration  of  murder  and   violent death.  Like  Bloom  in Ulysses,  Melech  discovers  that "man is not  born  for  a day,  but  for  all time;  ... and  that  man, being  also  a seed,  may  between  his thighs  compass  eternity".

25

SIGNS ON A WHITE FIELD



Meanwhile, the  narrator, in his search for the truest  poetry, has also discovered that  the  real  miracle  is something which  has  been  there  under  his nose all along. The  "fabled city"  which  "stands in Space's vapours and  Time's haze"  is not  to be  found   in  the  poetry  of  nostalgia,  while  the  poetry  of  lament is too  limited. Although "... the  pyramids/Preserve our  ache  between   their  angled  tons",  the satirical poetry  of  protest  is not  acid  enough  to  dissolve  this  historical  ache,  nor can  satirical  poetry  exceed the  compressed  wit of the  Hebrew poet  who summed up  survival  with  epigrammatic irony: "Said  the  seeing-eye  dog  with  the  hearing device".
The fabled  city  turns  out  to  be the  poetry  of everyday  language and  speech. For  Klein,   as  for  Shelley,  language itself  is a  vast  cyclic poem, and  like  Leo Spitzer,  the  narrator discovers "a  paradise  in linguistics".3 The Hebrew language and  speech  was in a feverish  process of renewal  in 1949; it was responding to and reflecting  all the  new  experiences  of the  people  who  were  then  arriving in Israel. The figurative language of its advertisements and  daily  transactions constituted the  real  miracle   for  Klein,  who  could  find  the  only  "completely underivative poet"  in  language. Thus, language is at  one  and  the  same  time  both  poetry  and the  source  of poetic  renewal; it is creation  and  creator together. The key image is miracle; but  the  miracle  is language, and  language, to the  narrator, is poetry, and  poetry  is creation; and  creation, as Melech  discovered  in  the Sistine  chapel, is life.
So the  two quests finally merge in Israel. The narrator, who is the metaphorical expression  of the  new world  (North America) and  the  secular  artist,  encounters the  ongoing  spiritual presence of his murdered Uncle  Melech, who stands  for the old Jewish  European world with its traditional religious learning. The  new world, as experienced in  Israel  by the  narrator, contains the death of the old, and some­ thing  new  besides. The  miracle  of art,  like the miracle  of survival,  turns out  to be life itself.
And  so it  seems  clear  that  once  you  go  beyond  the  manifest content of The
Second  Scroll, the  theme  turns  out  to be secular and  humanist, and  not,  as first appears, doctrinal in  Judaic terms.  Yet  this  raises  the  question of  the  extent  to which   a  specific  content   must  always  limit  the  work  of  art.  Homer's  Odyssey suffers some  contextual losses in translation, and  those of us who are not familiar with  Joyce's  Dublin of 1904, must  also miss a great many  references to the cul­ tural  context. The same  undoubtedly holds  true  for  The  Second  Scroll. Klein's  erudition in  Hebrew and  Yiddish,  as well as his frequent summoning  up of the ghosts of Pope,  Byron, Spenser,  and  the anonymous authors of  Anglo-Saxon epic

SIGNS ON A WHITE FIELD



and  homiletic verse,  makes  for  an  obvious  linguistic  complexity; it  also  results in  the  less obvious  loss of cultural connotation to the  reader who is not  familiar with  the  Jewish  world.
Let me give an  example of how cultural connotation works. I will use the con­
cept  of self-pity,  although the notion  of original  sin could  serve the same  purpose. Desmond  Pacey,  in  Ten  Canadian  Poets, praises  Klein  highly,  but  he  finds  it necessary  to  mention, as  well as to forgive,  Klein's  self-pity.4  William   Poster  in his  Chicago   Poetry  review  of The  Rocking  Chair is also  doing  the  same  thing when   he  criticizes   Klein   for  linguistic  excesses and   emotional  self-indulgence.s But  the  critical  canon that  self-pity  is a moral  and  literary  fault  is based  on  an unexamined and  unreasoned assumption, on  what  John  Stuart Mill  referred   to as a "received opinion". Why should the attitude and  expression of self-pity be condemned  any  more   than   other  literary   stances?  We  do  not  condemn T. S. Eliot's  disgust with  the  physical  life in the Sweeney  poems, while the violence and hatred in Norman Mailer's American Dream arouse delight  and admiration in fashionable critics.  No one finds anything wrong  with  Tennessee Williams' depic­ tion  of  heterosexual sex  as  pure  hell,  or  of  Woman as  the  Great  Destroyer; in fact,  this view is so widely  accepted  among  us, that  Hollywood has based  anum­ ber  of profitable movies  on  Williams'  dramatic premise.  I can  only suppose  that  it is permitted to hate  and  kill as long as you feel no pity  about it, either  for self or  others.  Or  perhaps our  North  American cultural  situation is such,  that   the strength of  murder is more  admirable than  the  weakness  of self-pity.
However, this is not  true  of all cultures. The  great  Russians,  from  Dostoievsky on  to  Mayakovsky,  have  always  cried  eloquently into  their  tea,  and  the  Irish poets  have  all wept  into  their  whisky with  excellent  literary results.  Interestingly enough, the  Irish  and  the  Russians,  and  a Jew  like  Klein,  express  self-pity  con­ sciously and  deliberately. Klein is fully aware  of the self-pity engendered by ghetto  life.  In   The   Second   Scroll,  the  narrator  has  an  interesting  conversation  with Krongold, a  pure  anti-ghetto and  unstereotyped Jew. Krongold is contemptuous of  Uncle   Melech's infatuation with  suffering,  and  has  little  patience with  "this nostalgia  for  suffering; this  wallowing". Later  on, among the  poets in  Israel,  the narrator himself  is critical  of the  Sabra poets  who  write  in  the  tradition of  the "ghetto and  its melting paralyzing self-pity". Self-pity, Klein  knows, may paralyze a  man,  but  it is also  a sign  that  he can  melt, and  for  him  it does not  carry  any connotation of  condemnable  weakness.  And  much  the  same  can  be said  of  the concept  of original sin. It just has never  been a big thing  in Jewish  cultural con­ sciousness.  Klein   refers  ironically   to  "original virtue"  because   he  knows  that,

27

SIGNS ON A WHITE FIELD



though  the Jews may have plenty of other troubles, original sin is not one of them.
So  we see how  a  writer's  message may be limited,  distorted,  or wrongly  de­ coded,  unless the important contextual  referents are available  to the reader. The  mention  of  contextual   referents  brings  me  up  against  Klein's  diction,  which, more  than  his theme,  simultaneously reflects his background  in Jewish  tradition  and  his love for  English literature.  Here, in the  area  of diction,  and through  his individual   and  personal  use of language,  Klein  recreates  the  "set  times" of his traditional heritage,  and  names  the "new  moons"  of  his adopted  culture.  It  is in the language,  more than  in the theme, that  we find the fusion of  Klein's two selves-the self he was born with and  the self he became.






KLEIN's DICTION  cOMBINES   the   vocabulary, syntax  and idiom  of  at  least  three  languages.  Klein's  syntactical  structures,  when  they are not  English,  are  most  often  Hebrew;   his  idiom  is  Yiddish,  translated   with  a fanatical  literalness, which is in contrast with the way he translates Yiddish poetry. His linguistic style and  word consciousness are Joyceian.  Yet the frequent  use of archaisms  owes nothing  to  the Joyceian  irony  or  deviousness, but  originates  in Klein's own mimetic homage to, and remembrance of, Spenser and Byron, among others.
It would not be practical to analyse all the Hebraisms in Klein's syntax here. However,  there  is no reason why the ordinary  reader  should  not understand the source of at least one of Klein's most irritating mannerisms,  the inversion of the usual syntactical  order  of adjective and  noun.  In  English,  the  adjective  usually precedes  the  noun  it  modifies, but  nearly  always  in  Hebrew   (as  very often  in Milton), the  adjective  follows the  noun.  In  Hebrew  the  word  for  "small''  is katan and  for  "boy", yeled,  and  "small  boy" is yeled  katan. In  Klein  we have such  inversions  as  "realms  spiritual",   "myriad   bodies  instant",  "the   body  of Adam  anticipative", "spirit  intelligential",  and  "delusions  intellectual". We also have  the  characteristic flourish of Biblical Hebrew  and  the  pomp  and  circum­ stance  of  Elizabethan rhetoric  in such  Kleinian  English  as "the  four  cubits  of my uncle's ambience", "cull  me a canticle",  "the  malefic tree on  which  herma­  phrodite  evil sits and  loves itself".
Klein  does not  hesitate  to combine, with  his formal  Hebrew  rhetoric,  the in­
formal  and  folksy idiom  of Yiddish. Yiddish  is the  vernacular spoken  for over

SIGNS ON  A WHITE  FIELD



five hundred   yean;  by  East  European  Jews,  the  mammaloschen   (mother  lan­ guage), with emphasis on "mother". It lends itself wonderfully to curses, lamen­ tations,  and  the  special  kind  of linguistic sweetness and  intimacy  which  makes the diminutive  form grow and flower in a language.
Klein's  combining  of  the  informal  idiom  of Yiddish  folk tradition   with  the formal rhetoric  of either  Hebrew or English, sometimes results in strange and disturbing  effects:  "It was high time that  the Czar and  his crew came to a black end [from  the Yiddish schwarzer sofl. But Bolshevism-that had corollaries that were anathema".
The  use of Yiddish idiom is not always as incongruous as in the example above. Klein  often  uses it effectively to convey the tone of lament  or humor  of the ori­ ginal.  Thus,  "my  fallen  crown"  from  the  Yiddish  gefallener  croin is a  lament linguistically  and  contextually  appropriate for  Melech,  whose name  in  Hebrew means  "King"; and  "From   where  comes a Jew",  retains  the  emphasis  on  the word  "Jew" that  is contained  in  the flavourful  Yiddish  expression "Fun vanen kumt  a  yid".  Discordancies  result, not so much  from  the  use of Hebrew  syntax or  Yiddish  expressions,  as from  the combinations  of  the  formal  utterance  with the informal,  in whatever  language  they happen  to occur.
Klein's  use of archaic  English is also baffling at first glance.  Why  would any
twentieth-century writer  say "Uncle  Melech was always but  a  political  subject of the Czar", "whence we had  removed", "whither my meandering reverie had led me",  "learning [was]  reviled as hapless and Jews were not ashamed  to wax rich selling pork"?  What is the significance of these "buts", "whithers", "whences", and  "waxes"?
One  of the  clues to understanding Klein's  archaisms is in his translation  of a fragmentary song from  medieval Hebrew into Middle English. Historical  context is preserved,  but  the  cultural  context  is lost. The  gap  between  Middle  English and  medieval  Hebrew  simply cannot  be bridged  by linguistic devices alone,  as Klein  implies. The  archaism,  when not  used ironically, is a mimetic  verbal ges­ ture.  I  am  convinced  that  it is, essentially, the writer's  attempt  to make  present a  bygone  era,  or  a  bygone  writer,  through  the  wilful   use of  words or  syntax characteristic   of  the  past  era  or  writer. The  artist,  as  Paul  Klee  said  in  his epitaph,  lives "just  as well with the dead  as with the unborn", and  if, in his at­ tempts to get "closer to the heart of creation  than  usual", he does not come close enough,  perhaps  we should  not blame  him. "Whither", "wax",  "whence", and "hapless"  succeed  in  conjuring  up  the voice of Spenser, but  whether  he can  be assimilated by the Kleinian  world, or can  be truly comfortable in such a Jewish company,  is a question.

SIGNS ON A WHITE  FIELD



Although  Klein  does not fully succeed in his desire to write  Hebrew  prose in English, he does succeed in creating interesting connections between the two languages. In "Gloss Gimel", which contains Melech's letter describing the Sistine Chapel,  Klein's  diction is subjected to the tremendous  tension resulting from the pull between the forces of Hebrew  and English. The  pull is twofold:  syntactical, and  also  contextual,  in  terms  of  the  polarized  contexts  of  the  Christian   and Judaic traditions.
Klein does not abandon  these tensions in "Gloss Gimel" for the sake of inventing
an analogous language in the manner of Joyce. Instead,  Klein strains the bounda ries of English to such an ultimate degree that  he just stops short of the complete shattering  of language. The  reader becomes aware of the emotional  risk involved, for  he senses that  Klein has no substitute language  hovering in the wings, and if the language  of "Gloss Gimel" fails, then the show just can't  and won't go on. In­ deed,  all through  "Gloss Gimel",  Klein is working  very close to the edge which divides meaning from non-meaning. What prevents him from creating a surrogate language,  is his view that  language  is a living, and  perhaps  even a  holy  process. The  awe and reverence which are present elsewhere in the content of The  Second Scroll, extend  also to the diction, and forbid Klein's further unmooring  from the basic  linguistic traditions  of either  Hebrew  or  English.
On  the whole, Klein is more at ease when he is altering  and  adding  to a  con­ vention  than  he would  be if he were inventing  one.  When  he  appropriates the Anglo-Saxon  poetic  convention  of  name  lists, he  uses various  witty  devices to achieve the inclusion of Jewish connotation.  In the course of his search for Uncle Melech, the narrator examines many official documents and reads through "whole catalogues  of incognitos".  The  most impressive of these  catalogues,  consists of a list of  thirty-six  names,6   suggesting that  these  are  the  thirty-six  secret saints of Cabbalah fame.
A  close scrutiny  of the  names  yields additional   meanings.  Thus,  "lsac  Cha­
mouche"  is a play on the Hebrew  Humash, the name of the volume which con­ tains  the  five books  of the  Pentateuch; "Jacob  Gottlieb" is from  the  Yiddish compound,  Gotlieb,  and  means  love of God.  "Samuel Galut" refers to Jewish exile  through   the  Hebrew  word  galut,  and  M.  Radom" contains  an  obvious reference  to  the  Hebrew   word  for  man.  "Abraham  Nistar"  incorporates   the Hebrew  word for "Secret Saint",  and "Simon Rachmin" translates from Hebrew to Simon Mercy. The  name "Ephraim Zacuta" leads back to the historical figure of Abraham Zacuto, a Hebrew astronomer who worked in Salamanca during the fifteenth  century.  "Aaron  Wassertrager"  is the Yiddish translation  of the English

SIGNS ON  A WHITE FIELD



"water boy",   and  I. I. Segal  is the  actual  name  of a  prominent  Montreal poet whose work Klein  translated from the Yiddish.  In addition to all these vocabularic strayings  in  Hebrew, English,  and  Yiddish  linguistic  pastures,  Klein  also wanders off  into  the  occasional inter-lingual  pun,  such  as  "Noah Venod". In  Hebrew, noah  and  venod  both  have  the  meaning of "wandering". The  name  Noah there­ fore  carries  a double meaning, both  in SOWld and  in sense. In  this  way, through the   bringing together  of  several  languages,  Klein  has  extended the  linguistic  resources  at  his command. The  result,  in practice, is not  always pleasing because the  disparate linguistic  elements  may  be  brought into  a  conflicting or  inappro­ priate  relation to  one  another; but  such  partial or  occasional  failure is the  price paid  for all experimentation.




IHAVE  ANALYSED Klein's  diction  in such  detail,  not  because
I  am  especially  interested in  linguistic  idiosyncrasies,  but  because  I believe  that
close  attention  to  a  writer's diction   nearly  always  illuminates his  content, and helps  us to  better   understand his themes.  In  the case of Klein,  an  analysis  of his use of, and  attitude to metaphor ("the brocade of the  gold snore")  would  show that  he considers it to be a method  of discovery  of the  realities  beyond  language: "A  poem  is not  a destination, it is a point  of departure. The  destination is deter­ mined  by the  reader. ... A poem  is not  the  conflagration complete, it is the  first kindling".
This   means   that   the  writer,   when  he  speaks  figuratively, initiates a  process which  the  reader must  complete for himself. "The poet's  function is but  to point direction". In  this  fashion, metaphor discovers,  both  for  writer  and  reader, new and  as yet  unnamed experiences. This  is perhaps what  Klein  is moving  towards when  he  has  the  narrator declare  at  the  end  of the  quest  in  Israel  that  the  key image  is miracle. Miracle, by its very  nature, is revelation; but  poetry  can  also be understood as the  revelation of human experience through metaphor.
If metaphor is understood as imaginative discovery,  then  the  word  "miracle"
as  Klein   uses  it  is  neither religious  nor  mystical,  but  secular  in  meaning, and subject   to  analytic examination. Miracle  in  poetry,  then,  takes  place,  not  as  a result of the  reader's faith  or belief, but as a result of the poet's simultaneous com­ pression and  fusion  of a number of different meanings,  which  we usually perceive  as separate in our  ordinary experience.

SIGNS ON  A WHITE  FIELD



Of  course, the  poet must  combine  these meanings  in such  a way as to guide the reader to an instantaneous  imaginative  perception  of the experience the poem is pointing towards. And that kind of experience only becomes accessible through Wordsworth's  visionary  moment,  Joyce's epiphany,  or  Klein's  miracle.  The writer's  ultimate  task is to enable  the  reader  to see for  himself through  space's vapours  and  time's  haze. Klein's fabled city lies beneath  all the paradoxes,  am­ biguities and  linguistic strangenesses of The  Second Scroll. But the reader who is willing to  nurse  Klein's  first kindlings into  conflagrations,  will inevitably  come closer to the nature  of his own festivals, new moons, and set times.



FOOTNOTES

•   Joseph Leftwich, ed. The  Golden  Peacock, An  Anthology  of Yiddish  Poetry, Cam­
bridge,  Mass.  Sci-Art  Publishers,  I 939· p. 403,  404,  405,  406.
•  M.  W.  Steinberg. "Introduction", The  Second  Scroll, Canadian  edition,  McClel­
land  & Stewart, Toronto, 196I,  p. xvi.
3  Leo  Spitzer. "Linguistics and  Literary History", Linguistics  and  Literary  History,
New  York,  Russell  and  Russell,  1962, p.  r.
4   Desmond  Pacey.  "A.  M.  Klein", Ten  Canadian   Poets, Toronto, Ryerson,   1958, p. 287.
5   William Poster.  Review  of The  Rocking Chair and Other  Poems, Poetry.  Chicago. LXXV. Nov. 1949, p. 105-ro6.
6   I  am  indebted to  Phyllis Gotlieb  for  drawing my attention to  the  fact  that  there are  thirty-six  names in the list.











THE POLISHED  LENS

Poetic Techniques of Pratt and Klein





Dorothy Livesay









TE STYLE IS THE MAN. That  famili<rr ,.ying recalh what T. S. Eliot stressed  in  his analysis  of Ezra  Pound's poetry:
People  may  think   they  like  the  form  because  they like  the  content, or  they  think
they  like  the  content because  they  like the  form.  In  the  perfect  poet  they  fit and are  the  same  thing; and  in another sense they are always the  same  thing.
A study,  therefore, of  the  styles  of two  Canadian poets  can  be  useful  only if it delivers  into  our  minds   a  clearer   understanding of  the  poet's   approach to  his work,  his themes.  My  aim  here  is not  an  analysis of technique for  its own sake, but  of technique for  the sake  of enlightenment.
In  retrospect, the  language of our  Post-Confederation poets  is singularly  con­ ventional and  dull.  Though often  felicitous  in  its music  and  imagery it  swings, supine,  in a hammock: "golden and  inappellable".' Adjectives predominate over verbs;  and  even  such  a good  imagist  as Lampman pads  out  his lines with  useless words,  simply  to fit the  required metre.  In  these poets  there is no sense of being "seized" by language, in the  Joyceian way. By 1920 it was clear  there  was a cry­ ing  need  to  liberate the  language of  poetry  in  Canada;  and  an  equally  urgent  need  to  tum from the   contemplation of  nature to  concern for  the  human condition.
The   first sign  of  experimentation in  both  areas  came  with  the  publication of
Newfoundland Verse  by E. J. Pratt, in  I 92 3; and more  markedly with his Titans,
1926. Pratt, a  robust  talker  from  our  northeastern shore,  set Toronto crackling with  his "Cachalot" and   "Witches' Brew".  The  language was  fresh,  muscular, contemporary and  often  boisterously  amusing.  The  metre  was one that  had  been

33

THE POLISHED LENS



rarely   practised   by  a  Canadian poet:   octosyllabic   couplets   with  an  anapaestic roll,  "perched on  a dead  volcanic  pile"; and  the  content was  not  too strenuous to  tax  the  average man's  ingenuity. It bore  with  it strong  echoes of mock  heroic epic  and  light  satire.  Like  Pope  or  Dryden, Pratt did  not  distrust  the  world  he mocked,  nor  did  he  wish to destroy  it. He  felt it could  stand   up  to attack. The style  of  these  early  extravaganzas, accordingly, was  marked   by punch and  zest, the  metre  moving  at  a run  or  a gallop  by means  of strong,  monosyllabic verbs; the  rhyme  staccato, to  punctuate the  humour.
They ate and drank and fought, it's true, And when the zest was on they slew;
And yet their most tempestuous quarrels
Were never prejudiced  by morals.
("The Witches' Brew")

With   his  next  poem,  "The Great   Feud", it  would  seem  from  the  style  alone that   Pratt had  begun  to  be aware  of some  conflict  in  his position.  As Desmond Pacey  has  pointed   out,  "Passages  of horrible conflict  alternate with  passages  of rollicking  humour." The  theme  is a more serious one than  that of the "Cachalot" or  "The  Witches' Brew"; and  yet the  poet  relies on  the  same  octosyllabics,  en­ jambment and  witty  rhyme  to carry  the  rhythm of the  fable.  Agreed,  the  myth­  making,   story-telling elements  are  Pratt's own;   but  he  does  not  support  these with  imagery, epithet,   or  colour.  His  chief  structural weakness  on  the  syntactic level  (to  be explored more fully later) is already evident. Pratt  depends too fully on  the  prepositional phrase.  On  one  page  of  28  lines,  chosen  at  random, there  are   24  phrases:  endless  lists of  nouns.  Variety is  gained,  notwithstanding, by means  of ingenuity in the  choice of vocabulary and end-rhymes.
If we  now  compare Abraham Klein's  earliest  work  with  Pratt's phase one  we
find  that his technical power,  evident  at the  age of twenty,  was amazingly versa­ tile.  Of  the  two  poets  Milton  Wilson  has  remarked, justly,  that   at  this  period "Their diction  often  calls for the same  critical  adjectives:  polysyllabic, technical, erudite, as well  as colloquial  or  prosaic",• and  in  metre  and  rhyme Klein  might be  thought to  be echoing  if not  imitating the  older  poet.  Yet  already in  his first book,  Hath  Not  a ]ew  ( 1940), Klein  appears to have  at his command a dazzling variety   of  poetic  forms.  The  verse  (never   "free" and  rarely  unrhymed)  ranges  widely  through octosyllabics,  heroic  couplets,  terza  rima;   and  from  short  bursts of lyricism  to the  long, sinuous  biblical  line  with  its  caesura and  parallelism:
If this be a Jew, indeed, where is the crook of his spine;
and the quiver of his lip, where?


34

THE POLISHED LENS



Behold his knees are not callous through kneeling; he is proud, he is erect.
("Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens")
The  effect here is created by the use of caesura  or  juncture, as it is now commonly called  by prosodists.  Besides the  normal  juncture between  words  Klein  indicates, in  Line  One  by  means  of  punctuation, a  pause  accompanied by a  rise in  pitch which  serves to  place  added stress and  interest  on the second  rhetorical sentence:
If this be a Jew-indeed/where is the crook of his spine-
In   Line  Two,   the   placing   of  the   rising juncture stresses  the  question word, "where":
and  the quiver of his lip/where-

In  the  next  line  the  choice  of  the  rhetorical word  "behold" m  itself  creates  a dramatic juncture:
BeholdI his knees are not callous through kneeling-he- is proudI he is erect-

It is by  means  of such  skilful  techniques as this that  Klein  creates  his powerful rhythms. Klein   uses  rhyme   also  to  emphasize his  metrical effects.  He  has  a notable facility  with  rhyme; and  in  his work  it is difficult  to find  a  rhyme  that does  not  sound   natural, at  home.  In  the  tetrameter stanzas   he  explores  many variations in  rhyme  scheme  and  in  the  terza  rima  he  varies  one-syllabled with two-syllabled rhymes  so that  the rhythm is constantly  subject to a new charge:
Seek reasons; rifle your theology; Philosophize; expand your dialectic; Decipher  and translate God's diary;

Discover causes, primal and eclectic; I cannot; all I know is this :
That  pain doth render flesh most sore and hectic;

That  lance-points  prick; that scorched bones hiss; That thumb-screws agonize, and that a martyr
Is mad if he considers these things bliss.
("Design for a Medireval Tapestry")

In  this book,  Hath  Not  a  few, Klein  established  himself  as a master  of the  craft. Added  to  the singular felicity  of his metre  and  rhyme  was the delight in vocabu­ lary  and   the   contrapuntal  use  of  pause,  or  juncture, as  evident   in  the  poem quoted  above   (particularly effective  in the  last  two verses and  helpfully marked by semi-colons  and  colon) .

35

THE POLISHED LENS


0N  Now,  to  phase  two, where   Pratt's  development will again   be  parallelled  with  Klein's. Pratt's work  of  interest   here  is The   Titanic
( 1935), a  poem  in  which  he extricates  himself  from  the  tetrametric clutch.  His line is extended now  to heroic couplets.  These,  at  their  lowest level, can  be  plati­ tudinous and  dull:

Her intercostal spaces ready to start
The  power pulsing through her lungs and heart
An ocean lifeboat in herself, so ran
The  architectural  comment on her plan.

At  the  highest  level,  where  the  rhymes  are  more  freely  arranged, the  features of enjambment and   juncture create  an  inner  tension  which  is most  pleasing:

Pressure and glacial time had stratified
The  berg to the consistency of flint,
And kept inviolate, through clash of tide
And gale, fa ade
Of inward altars and of steeple bells
Ringing the passage of the parallels.

These   images  are  common   ones,  more  vividly  played   upon  by  Melville   ("The Berg")  and  by Roberts ("The Iceberg") ; but  Pratt's vocabulary saves the  day, with  quite   a  brilliant display  of tension  between polysyllabic  words  of classical origin  (consistency, inviolate, parallels) and  a catalogue of single-syllabled nouns: gale, hint, bells, berg,  flint, clash, tide.
It must  be faced,  however: Pratt's passion for nouns  leads him into two serious difficulties.  One  is the absence  of texture; for without adjectives and  adverbs it is not  easy to appeal to the senses. And  where, in Pratt's poetry,  is there  any evoca­ tion  of  touch,   taste,  hearing, scent?  True, the  visual  appeal is there:   "sloping spur  that  tapered to a claw"; but  this is an  appeal in outline, in black and  white. One  senses that  the  poet is colour-blind. The  adjectives which  he does use, spar­ ingly,  call  no  colours  into  view:  lateral,  casual,  polar, eternal, southern, glacial.
But  the  monotony of Pratt's verse can  be traced, I believe,  to a deeper, struc­ tural   cause.  Because  he is so concerned   with  "naming" -adding  up  nouns­ he must  catch  hold of them  by using two devices:  by cataloguing; or by dangling them  from  the  hooks  of prepositions. It is rarely  possible  to find  a  line  of Pratt without a  prepositional phrase; more  often  there  are  two  or  three  bolstering  it up.  In  the  lines quoted   above  this  pattern can  be seen  in  five of  the six. In  the

THE POLISHED LENS



second line  there are  two  prepositional phrases; in  the  third, two; in  the  fourth, two.
Now  this  pattern, in itself,  is not  deplorable: it is an essential element in English
syntax. Praise of  the  noun  (sometimes amounting to  adoration!)  can  be  found in  much contemporary critical and   creative writing. Gertrude Stein   puts  it  one way:
Poetry  is concerned with  using  with  abusing  with  losing and  wanting, with  deny­ ing  with   avoiding  with   adoring with  replacing  the   noun.... Poetry  is  doing  nothing but  using  refusing   and  pleasing  and  betraying and  caressing  nouns.3

and  here  is Harry R.  Warfel, a linguist:

But  how  do  these  nouns  come  to be used so much?  They  play as subjects  of verbs, as  complements of  verbs  and  verbals,  as  objects  of  prepositions, as  independent elements, as  headwords. What is  important is  their   mode  of  turning up  every­ where.  For  example, nearly  every  noun  can  be  the  object  of several  prepositions. If the  working  vocabulary of English  has 2oo,ooo nouns  and  these unite  with  only an  average of  ten  prepositions, the  result  is two  million  adjective  and/or  adverb phrases.   If you  have   ever   wondered  why  some  writers   clutter  their   style  with prepositional phrases,  you can now see why.4

A skilful  poet  then, writing in English, will certainly use nouns to his advantage to  vary  the  stress  and  juncture; but  Pratt, I  feel,  tends to  use  nouns to  his  dis­ advantage. For  instance, the  indiscriminate use of "of" followed by  nouns  (lines
5  and   6)   ends, from sheer   repetition, in  rhythmic paralysis.
As we have seen, Klein's metrical range was wider at  the start than was  Pratt's. In his  phase two  Klein continued to  employ  polysyllabics as  well  as  the  heroic couplet. Understandably  therefore in  The  Hitleriad  ( 1944)  there are  echoes  of Pratt's style.  The form  is not  narrative like  "The Great Feud" but  the  intention is equally satiric:

And  then  there  came,-blow, trumpets; drummers, drum
The apocalypse, the  pandemonium
The war  the Kaiser from  his shrivelled  hand
Let  fall upon  the European land

Noticeable even   in  this  unremarkable stanza is the  use  of  juncture for  dramatic effect; of finite verbs; of inversion; and of clausal patterns which create rhythmic variation. Further on  Klein writes:

Club-footed, rat-faced, halitotic, the
Brave  Nordic ideal, a contrario!

37

THE POLISHED LENS



A kept man; eloquent, a Ph.D;  Carried no gun, forsooth; a radio Lethal enough for him, shouting its lies Exploding lebensraum and libido; Subtle in puncturing all human  foibles Saving his own, prolific in alibis­ Goebbels.

The  Hitleriad is not  a successful  poem.  It lacks  an  element which  Pratt  pos­ sessed in  good  measure: objectivity. Nonetheless  as a long  poem  it is interesting to compare with  one  of Pratt's because,  technically, it rings  many  more changes.  Thereby it achieves  pace;  and  on another level, irony.
In  the same  year,  1944, Klein's  real lyricism burst forth in his "psalms", thirty­ six  short   poems  in  a  great  variety  of forms   (published in  Poems). Several  are closely patterned on  the  Psalms  of David  in their  long  lines, parallelism, Hebrew inversions   and   rhetoric. Others leap  away  from  anything  but  a  superficial   re­ semblance  to  the   English  iambic   pentameter  and   allow  strong stress  rhythm, reminiscent of  Anglo-Saxon and  of  Hebrew, to  take  over.  Here  is a  delightful example, from  Psalm  XXVII, "a psalm  to teach  humility":

0 sign and wonder of the barnyard,  more beautiful than  the pheasant, more melodious than nightingale! 0 creature  marvellous!

Prophet of sunrise, and foreteller of times! Vizier of the constellations! Sage,
red-bearded,  scarlet turbaned,  in whose brain the stars lie scattered like well-scattered grain! Calligraphist  upon the barnyard  page!
Five-noted balladist! Grower of rhymes!

But  this is Klein  in his gayest,  tenderest  mood.  He  can  be more  easily likened to  Pratt in  a  poem  called  "In Re  Solomon  Warshawer". Pratt's "The Truant" is quite  comparable because  it represents  Pratt at  a high  technical level, breaking away  from  the  confines of rigid  metre.  The  heroic  couplet still holds the  thought in  check,  but  in  "The Truant" it is loosened,  stretched or  abbreviated to avoid monotony. The   tone  is vigorous,  satiric;   and  the  theme is man  himself,  pitted
against a mechanical universe.
Sire
The stuff is not amenable to fire
There still remains that strange precipitate

THE POLISHED LENS



Which has the quality to resist
Our  oldest and most trusted catalyst

Lines  such   as  these  retain   Pratt's robust,  semi-scientific  vocabulary; and   his wit takes  up  the slack  caused  by the obsessive use of prepositional phrases.  I find this  Pratt's most  interesting poem,  both  for  its  technical  virtuosity and  for  its provocative thought.  Man   is being   judged:  but  he  reverses  the  tables,  himself condemning "God" for  creating a  purely  mechanical universe.  In Klein's   "In Re Solomon  Warshawer" there  also occurs a judgment scene; in this case between the evil forces in man,  and  the good.  Man's plea before the court  (a wartime tri­ bunal) is that  of the  underdog, of the one in process of being destroyed, the Jew. The   abstract Jew  however  is so particularized that  the  reader  is  constrained to identify  with  him  (as  also is the  case in  "The Truant").
Here  is a  Nazi soldier  reporting to his superior:

Asked for his papers, he made a great to-do
of going through  the holes in his rags, whence he withdrew a Hebrew pamphlet  and a signet ring,
herewith  produced, exhibits I and 2.

I said, No document in a civilized tongue? He replied:

Produce, 0 Lord, my wretched   fingerprint, Bring  forth, 0 angel in the heavenly court, My  dossier, full, detailed, both  fact and  hint, Felony,  misdemeanor, tort!

I refused to be impressed by talk of that sort.

But   passionate  identification  with   the   rightness  of  man's cause   heightens the language to a degree  not  found  in "The traunt". Consider the lines which  begin

They would have harried  me extinct, those thrones. Set me, archaic, in their heraldries,
Blazon antique! ...

Rhyme is forgotten. Iambic regularity is broken by strong stresses aided  by trochaic and  dactyllic   rhythms. Added to  these  features  are  those  of inversion, juncture, and  punctuation used for  intonational effect. In  this respect  the  entire  poem  is a forerunner of poems in The  Rocking Chair ( I948)  where:

it is tradition. Centuries have flicked


39

THE POLISHED LENS



from its arcs, alternately flicked and pinned. It rolls with the gait of St. Malo. It is act and symbol, symbol of this static folk.

Here,  most  cunningly within  the  apparent framework of the  iambic  pentameter, Klein  has overlaid  the four-stress  beat  of much  Hebrew poetry  and  caught at the same  time  the lilt of the French language. He achieves  this tour  de force, I believe, by emphasizing the  four levels of stress;  distinguishing between  syllables that  are nearly   neutral and   thus  "outriders" in  Hopkins' sense  (alternately)  and  those that bear  tertiary, secondary  or  primary stress.  His  use  of  juncture aids  in  this process  also, as it is always well-timed   (or  isochronic).




BY THE  TIME Klein's   Rocking Chair  appeared Pratt  was already  well  established   in  his  phase  three,   with  Brebeuf  and  his  Brethren, a
long  documentary  narrative based  on  Quebec's history  and   religious  past.  The epic  length   and  scope  of  this  poem  would  indicate that  Pratt conceived  it  as a major production. But surely it could  be criticized  as a conventional piece rather than  a creative  one,  for in form  and  intention it is eminently Victorian! Nor is it comparable with  the  later  experimental poetry  of Klein.  On  the  technical  level both   poets  have  thrown off  their  patterned style,  have  pushed   rhyme  into  the background, have  sought  a  free  flowing  rhythm close to  the  rhythm of speech. But  what  speech?  I would dare  to say that  Pratt's speech  here  is prosaic, general­ ized;  whereas  Klein's  has the vernacular lilt, and  is particular.
In  Brebeuf  Pratt offers  us a steady  but  not  a  heady  blank  verse.  Would  not the  opening lines,  apparently attempting to create  atmosphere, be equally  effec­ tive if written as prose? And  the second stanza is surely one long, wordy list, noun following  upon  noun?

The story of a frontier like a saga
Rang through the cells and cloisters of a nation.

This  is not  to say  that  Brebeuf is not  without its moments of poetic  intensity.  In Stanza XII particularly the iambic  line is made undulant and  ominous by means of  dactyllic and  falling  rhythms. Then the  poem  climbs  again  to  the  climax,  a simple  image  of

In the sound of invisible trumpets  blowing

THE POLISHED LENS



Around  two slabs of board, right-angled, hammered
By Roman  nails and hung on a Jewish hill ...

These  are  the  heights; but  there  are  too many  valleys where  vocabulary, syntax, rhythm and  imagery  reveal  only  mediocrity.
How  different has  been  the  development of Abraham Klein! Behind  him  lies
the  shadow of  three  languages, three  traditions. The Jewish  writer  in  Montreal can  indeed  be said  to  bridge  the  English  and  French cultures,  and  to inject  into these   languages  the   rhythms,  inversions,   pauses   and   parallelisms  peculiar   to Hebrew and  Yiddish.

Then  he will remember his travels over that  body the torso verb, the beautiful face of the noun,

and all those shaped and warm auxiliaries.
a first love it was, the recognition of his own. Dear limbs adverbial, complexion of adjective dimple and dip of conjugation!
("Portrait of the Artist as Landscape")

In  those  lines  of  Klein   we  find  the  contemporaneous sound  of  the  "loosened" iambic   employed  by  Spender,  Auden, Day   Lewis, where  the  strong  stresses pull  the lines up short  and  leave words like "auxiliaries" "recognition" and "con­ jugation" with   only  one  strong  stress.  We  find  also  the  emotional,  rhetorical lilt of the Hebrew, created by inversion  ("Dear limbs adverbial"),  by dactyls,  and then  the  counterpoint rhythm that  surely  echoes  the  French. This  note  sounds  clearly  in short  poems such  as "Political Meeting".

he is their idol:  like themselves, not handsome, not snobbish, not of the grande al1ee. Un homme!

and   also  in  that   marvellous linguistic   carnival:  "Montreal".  In   his  linguistic sensitivity  Klein  is a surpassing fine  juggler, holding  three  globes in his hand  and tossing  them   about with  dazzling  dexterity. In  this  no  other  Canadian poet  is his equal.
Let  me  now  set down  my hope  that  this examination of the style of two poets has  revealed  something of their  attitude as creators. For  me, Pratt is a self-made poet;   Klein,   a  natural one,  possessing a  Blakeian  simplicity.   Pratt  remained a story-teller to the  end,  an  "old  artificer" collecting  artefacts and  arranging them cunningly, without committing his deeper  self. The  man,  like the  style, is easily identified. As W. E.  Collin  has noted,  "his  mind  has  undergone a scholar's disci-

THE POLISHED LENS



pline,  it  never  runs  berserk." 5  Klein,  a scholar  also  but  in a narrower discipline, probed   inwards to  the  human soul,  revealing  its  possibilities  for  creative   joy as well as its predilections for darkness, madness.
Palsy the keeper of the house; And of strongmen take Thy toll.
Break down the twigs; break down the boughs, But touch not, Lord, the golden bowl!

(from Psalm XXII: "A prayer for Abraham, against madness.")



FOOTNOTES

' D. C. Scott,  "The Height  of Land,"  in Selected  Poems."Toronto; Ryerson;  1951.
2   Milton  Wilson, "Klein's  Drowned  Poet." Canadian  Literature, No. 6.
3  Gertrude Stein, "What  is Poetry";  in The  Language  of Wisdom  and Folly, edited by Irving J. Lee. Harper, 1949.
4   Harry   R.  Warfel,  "Structural Linguistics  and  Composition" in  College  English,
val. 2o, r 958-sg.
5   W. E. Collin, The  White  Savannahs. Toronto,  Macmillan, 1936. p.  qo.





THEOREMS  MADE   FLESH

Klein's Poetic Universe




T. A. Marshall




0, he who unrolled our culture from his scroll ... and a third, alone, and sick with sex, and rapt,
doodles him symbols convex and concave ...
("Portrait of the Poet as Landscape")

At first I saw only geometry:  triangle consorting with square, circle rolling  in  rectangle,  the  caress  parabolic,  the  osculations  of  sym­ metry:  as if out of old time Euclid were come to repeat  his theorems now entirely  in terms of anatomy. Theorems  they are, but theorems made flesh ...
(Gloss Gimel, The Second  Scroll)

EM THE  ABOVE   EXAMPLES,  which  could  easily  be  multi­
plied,  one  can  see that  the  world  of Abraham Klein  is very often  seen  in  terms
of a book  (or scroll)  or as a system of geometry.  For he believes with  the Spinoza of his "Out of the  Pulver  and  the  Polished  Lens"  that  the  order  in  the  universe can  be grasped by the  intellect. One  can  reduce  providence to theorems and  set these down  in a book; the  book or system of order  devised  by man  (including, of course,  any  work  of art) is a  metaphor for  total  reality.
There are  good  reasons  for  this in  Klein's  cultural heritage. Jews  do  not,  like Roman Catholics, venerate images,  but  they  do venerate the  holy scroll itself in its  physical   aspect. This   consists  of  sheets  of  parchment sewn  together into  a scroll rolled  at  each  end  on to a piece of wood.  In  a scroll the  Hebrew is copied out letter  by letter  by hand, and  the words must remain  exactly as they have  been for over two thousand years. The  very letters must be preserved,  and are venerated as sacred  objects.

43

THEOREMS MADE FLESH



Hebrew  letters  are  very versatile. They  can be used to render  numbers  (e.g. Yod-Aleph  for  21),   and  the  pages of the  Talmud are  numbered  in  this way. The  letter  Hai  is especially significant since it is used  as a short form  of  the tetragrammaton or four-letter  abbreviation  of the name of God. Klein concludes The  Second  Scroll with his Gloss Hai,  a liturgy  affirming  the  ultimate  goodness of God's  design.
For  Hebrew  cabbalists letters and  numbers  have special  hidden  significances. It seems certain  that  Klein, who begins a poem  "I am  no contradictor  of  Cab­ bala ... ,"  has been influenced by this sort of mysticism.1   The  idea of  Jerusalem as princess  (employed  in  "Yehuda  Halevi,  His  Pilgrimage")  and  the  interpre­ tation  of the Song of Songs in terms of spiritual  marriage  are Cabbalistic.  Safed, a  city  Klein  celebrates  in  "Greeting  on  this  Day"  and  The  Second  Scroll, is chiefly noted for the school of Cabbalistic  mystics who flourished there after the expulsion  of the  Jews from  Spain.
The  Cabbala   divides itself into  the speculative  Cabbala, which  is the  "con­
templation  of  the  sensual  world  as it sprang  from  the  spiritual  essence of the Deity",  and  the practical  Cabbala,  which is "the  Talismanic use of divine names and  words  for  the  accomplishment  of certain  ends".  The   ultimate  goal  is the kingdom  of the  Messiah.•
Klein  exhibits  a  concern  for  "practical" cabbala in  "Talisman  in  Seven Shreds".  This sonnet  sequence employs the legend of the golem or robot created by the rabbi  to aid  persecuted Jewry. In  the legend the golem is brought  to life by the placement  under his tongue of a piece of parchment bearing the tetragram­ maton,  but  the speaker  of Klein's  poem mourns  the  loss of the  magic formula.
By way  of  contrast,  we  might  note  that  Isaac  Luria   ( 1533-72), the  chief cabbalist  of  Safed,  "invented   a  whole system of  amulets,  conjurations, mystic jugglery with words and numbers, and a process of ascetic practices whereby the powers of evil might  be overcome." 3
The   Cabbala   was  very influential  in  Poland,  the  land  of  Klein's  ancestors, after  the sixteenth century. Here was founded  Chassidism, a mystical reform movement  which aimed at a more direct experience  of the divine soul, and  here abounded  individuals  "who,  by manipulating the  letters spelling out  the  Divine Narne, were believed to exercise authority over spirits." 4  Klein customarily speaks of illness in  terms  of possession by defiant  evil spirits,  and  notes the  benevolent presence within himself of his ancestors in "Psalm  XXXVI, a psalm touching genealogy".
The  Cabbala  "taught a doctrine of unbroken intercourse  between God and the


44

THEOREMS MADE FLESH



world." God's  creation is matter, but is "ablaze with soul".  God needs to establish
His identity:

He  is the  En  Sof, the  Endless or Boundless one, who like Spinoza's  substance, cannot  be designated  by any known attribute,  but who is best called  Ayin  (Non­ Existent) .  Hence  in  order  to  make  His  existence  known  at  all,  the  Deity  was obliged  or  wished to reveal  Himself  to at  least some extent.  In  other  words, He had  to become active  and  creative in order  to make Himself  manifest.5

God  here  seems  to  be motivated by the same  need  that  motivates Klein's poet in  "Portrait of  the   Poet  as  Landscape". Creation is self-realization; one  must create  in order  "to  be".  The  poet's attempt at self-definition  through art  parallels God's  desire  to make  himself  manifest.  More  than  this, it is an attempt to realize the  godhead innate in every  man  and  is thus  an approach to the  Messianic king­ dom  of the  spirit.
The Cabbala has  supported its  more  extreme  doctrines   by giving  the  letters, words  and  names  of  the  Bible special  meanings. This  can  be done  by  using the numerical equivalents of the letters,  by treating individual letters as initials  or abbreviations of other  words,  or by substituting the  preceding or following  letter of the  alphabet. Klein  does not  indulge  in such  extreme  verbal  jugglery,  but  his attempts at  a bilingual poetry  and  the significance  he attaches to alphabetical characters (and to  puns  and  other  figures of speech) , can  be considered in  the light  of the  Cabbalistic belief in the magic  properties of language. Klein  may  not share  the  literal   belief  in  magic,  but  he is certainly  influenced by it.
Thus, when  he  discusses  the  faith  of French-Canadians, it is natural for him
to see a wall-crucifix as an  "agonized Y". Similarly,  it is natural for him  to think of art  as a divine  faculty. Michelangelo is for Klein  in much  more  than  a trivial sense  the  Archangel  Michael. For  the  world  is One,  and  art  is a kind  of  com­ munication with  the  perfect  whole.  Man  collaborates in  God's  continuous crea­  tion.  Therefore a connection in language (and, by extension,  any  connection of any  system-whether it  be geometry,  heraldry or  the  law)   is  a true  statement about   the  whole  universe.  Seeing  creation whole  is a  matter  of  partaking in  it through the  activity  of metaphor.




IT IS USEFUL, after  this introduction, to examine the develop­
ment  of those  persistent and  recurrent metaphors that  give to Klein's particular


45

THEOREMS MADE  FLESH



vision of the universe the coherence of myth. We have seen how persistant in his work  is the  general  notion  of the  universe as God's  writ;  we may now  briefly consider the most important  features of the microcosm that  is Klein's writ.
The  figure that  dominates  Klein's earliest poetry is certainly  the Jew as dwarf or clown, and,  more important, as martyr  and  wanderer. The  clown is an aspect of the martyr; hunted  and persecuted by his enemies, the Jew defends himself by narrowing  the scope of his world and  by a retreat  into self-deprecating  humour. "I will dwarf myself," declares Childe Harold,  "and  live in a hut." This dwarfing process can  be seen in the creation  of the comic and  charming fairy-tale  world that  takes  up  most of the  latter  part  of Hath Not   A  few. Here  is a  pleasant diminutive  world  peopled  by dwarfs,  children,  homunculi  and  elves. Love  pre­ vails, and  life's problems are scaled down, as in "Bestiary",  where a little Jewish boy is able to hunt  down the persecuting beast, Nebuchadnezzar, in the pages of the Bible. This  poetry is full of the association of the words "little"  and  "Jew". The  little, it seems, can be enough if it is self-contained  and self-sustaining, as in "Dr.  Dwarf", where all ills are cured by the magic of the Doctor, a sort of diminu­  tive Messiah.
But  the  Jew  is also engaged  in  a more positive struggle,  the  journey back  to Zion.  This  journey  is for  Klein  a symbolic  representation   of each  individual's struggle to achieve wholeness within himself and  harmony  with his environment. Israel is to be both a physical and a spiritual homecoming for the Jew; the miracle operates on a cultural  and  a personal level. The  goal can be seen in terms of the young poet's love for a beloved woman. She is seen as the fair princess of chivalry, and  the  union  with  her is analogous  to the spiritual  marriage  of God  and  his people on  their  Holy  Land.
Because a  "Christian" civilization  has betrayed  the ideals of chivalry  in mis­
treating  the Jews, Klein is able in "Childe  Harold's Pilgrimage" to describe the swastika  as "a  cross with  claws".  But  he borrows  the  conventions  of media::val chivalry  to express his vision of the quest for Zion that  is also the quest for  per­ sonal integrity.
Both personal love and  Zionism are related to the cyclic pattern  of nature.  In the  activities of love and  procreation  man  exists in  harmony  with  the  purposes of  nature.  On  the  land  Israel  the  Jewish  people can  exist as an  organic  unity in  a  way  that  it  cannot  in  the  ghetto  of  cultural  solidarity.  Nevertheless, this cultural  unity is also related  to the cycle of nature,  though  at one remove from it. For it is the symbolic expression of the soul of the  people in past generations and  it needs only to be reunited  with the land  to take on a new vitality.

THEOREMS MADE  FLESH



Underlying  Klein's  use of the natural cycle is a concept of the eternal unchang­ ing  order  of things.  Klein  believes in  an  ultimate  order,  in  an  absolute  justice that  will ensure Jewry's  recovery. Thus  he often employs the figure of the circle, the perfect expression of the world's unity, and speaks in "Out of the Pulver and the  Polished  Lens" of the  One  creation  that  is contained in God :

For  thou  art  the world, and  I  am part  thereof; he who does violence to me, verily sins against the light of day; he is made a deicide.6

Man  is a  part  of the One,  a fragment  praying unto  perfection.
As a  circle that  must  periodically  re-establish itself as a circle, the  moon is a fit symbol for  the  fluctuating human  power of creativity.  Klein's  moon  focuses within  itself  all  the  welter  of  human  emotions with  which  wholeness must  be fashioned. The  poet of "Business" is "a  hawker of the moon",  and  Klein speaks in "Preface" of poetic fame as a matter  of setting one's thumbprint on the moon. The  moon is identified  with an amazing variety of objects-charming or grand or sinister-in  Klein's  early  poetry. It is usually an  indicator  of his mood and the focus of his poetic universe.
In "Greeting on this Day" terrified Jews "see the moon drip gore." In "Design for Medieval  Tapestry" the moon is "a  rude gargoyle in the sky" of a Christian and  Juda::ophobic world. But in "Out of the Pulver and  the Polished  Lens" the moon  is  God's  "little  finger's  fingernail",  and  in  "Haggadah" it  is  a  golden platter  in  the sky.
In  "Letten;  to One  Absent"  the  moon is a mirror  in  which  loven; find each other,  and  in "Psalm  XXI" it is the seal of God upon  his open  writ;  it appean; to be the creative lens for both God and man, that area of the soul in which man and  God are  joined. The  force that  enables man to love and  to create  works of art  analogous  to God's creation  is the God within him. The  moon  may then  be said  to function  in Klein's  early poetry as a symbolic expression of the  creative world-soul.
It is significant, then, that  in the time of his greatest disillusionment and  doubt about the nature  of the order in the universe Klein's moon becomes a "smooth hydraulic  dynamo." For  the  poetry of the middle and  late  thirties suggests that if there is a God man has no meaningful contact with Him. The tetragrammaton, the  talisman  that  once enabled  man  to exercise the  creative  power  of the God within,  has been shredded  and  has lost its efficacy.
The  figure  that  dominates  this  poetry is the  golem  or  mechanical   man.  In
this perfectly  mechanical  and  materialistic  age the poet, who represents  creative


47

THEOREMS MADE FLESH



man, has  become  obsolete.  In  "Barricade Smith: His Speeches", which  contains the  image  of the  hydraulic moon,  the  poet  is caricatured as  a  fool  wasting  his energies  on "stars  archaic and  obsolete dew".
In  "Manuscript:  Thirteenth Century" Klein's fair  princess,  once  the symbolic
expression  of  love's  fulfillment,  gives herself  to  a  villain  and  is brought to ruin, and  in  "Barricade Smith: His Speeches" she is demoted to debutante. Barricade Smith, like a true  knight,  loves her  "from afar", but  she  marries first "the tenth cousin  of  the  Czar" and  then  a  "closer  relative  of  a  deposed  king",  whom  she eventually divorces  and  gives two  million  dollars  as "a  little  tip".
The poetry  of the  early forties,  however,  expresses  the  recovery  from  this  dis­ illusionment in  a  reassertion   of  the  figures  that   dominated  the  earliest  poetry.  The Jew  as wanderer or spiritual seeker,  the  fair  princess,  the  Utopian  land  of Israel,   the  moon-mirror and  the  natural cycle  are  all  restored   to  their  original  significances.
There are  changes  and  new  features, however.  The   notion  of a cosmic  court
of law  by which  Jewry's  enemies  are  to be condemned is introduced in  order  to suggest  the  justice that  must  ultimately prevail  in the  universe.  Related to this is the  curious  fact  that  the  comic  dwarf  and  the  mindless  golem   (or  automaton) seem now to be combined  in Hitler, the arch-villain and  chief disruptive influence in Klein's universe.  What  had seemed  mechanical and  inhuman is not, it appears, of any  ultimate significance.  Hitler  is nothing more  than a frustrated little  man on  the  rampage, even  though  the  restoration of  harmony in  Klein's  universe  is now  dependent upon  his destruction.
It is interesting that  Klein  now  refuses to see the  Jew  as a comic  dwarf. The Jew  as martyr and  seeker afte1 perfection  has eclipsed  the  Jew  as clown,  and  the godlike  Uncle  Melech  is lurking  in the wings.
In the  poem  "Autobiographical" ( 1943), which  seems  to  mark  the  midpoint of  Klein's development, the  poet's  personal   quest  for  the  "fabled city"  of  in­ nocence  and  security  foreshadows the career  of Uncle  Melech,  but  the city sought  by this  particular wandering Jew  is not the  actual Jerusalem (or  even Safed) ; it is the  enchanted  Montreal of his childhood. This  realization leads  us  inevitably to the  truth that  any city can  be a fabled  city, that  each  man  has a personal Zion of the  imagination.

THEOREMS  MADE FLESH


hrs NOTION,  which   was  at  least  implicit   in  Klein's  earlier poetry,  now  brings  him  to the  exploration of the Canadian scene that dominates
the  poetry  of the  late  forties. This  study  of Canada provides  another opportunity to  express  his  view  of  man's place  in  the  universe.  The   belief  in  man's  divine creativity, his  ability   to  unite  himself  to  other  men  and  even  to  God  through self-expression, underlies  the  experiments in  a  bilingual poetry.   Language is a substantial magic  that  can  unite  men  in sympathy.
In  the  poetry  of the  "Canadian" period  the figure of the dwarf-down is found
again,  but  he is not  now  a villain  or a specifically Jewish  hero.  He  is Everyman. He  is individual man  as a minority  of one-as martyr  and  clown  and  wanderer and  hero  combined. He  is the  beleaguered and  yet comical  French-Canadian of "Political Meeting", the  Indian in his "grassy  ghetto", the  lone  bather immersed in  animal delight, the  isolated   poet,  and,  finally,  the  "nth Adam", who  is not only the  poet  but  every man  with the creative power of God lying dormant in him.
Because Klein  is feeling  his way into  the  problems  of a Christian society in his French-Canadian poems  he  now  gives to Christian symbols  a more  positive sig­ nificance  than  he once did. This is, of course, a necessary consequence of the belief that  Montreal may be as much  a fabled  city as Safed.  Man's hopes can be centred  upon  the  Oratoire de  St. Joseph   as well as Safed,  or,  more  practically,  upon  a Saskatchewan  grain   elevator. Klein's   discovery  of  his  favourite  middle-eastern landscape in the  "Josephdream" of the grain  elevator  signifies his realization that  Utopia might  be anywhere, though it is probably  in  Israel  for the Jew.  This  en­ ables  us to see the  Utopian Israel  of The  Second Scroll as a symbolic  expression of every  man's imagined home.
In  this  poetry  we lose sight  of  the  beautiful princess.  Love  is presented as a
memory,  a  remembered magic  at  the  top  of Mount   Royal.  The creative  moon, too,  has  vanished  (though  it  reappears in  The  Second  Scroll  which   concludes with  "new  moons,  festivals  and  set times"). But the  figure  of the  circle  remains very prominent. We find  (in  "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape") "the mirroring lenses  forgotten on  a  brow", and   the  poet  wearing   his  zero  as  an  ambiguous garland; we find  both  the  natural cycle and  its cultural equivalent in  the move­ ment  of the  rocking  chair  and  the  Anjou  ballad.
For  the  first time  water  becomes  very important. Since  the sea is a traditional symbol  for birth  and  renewal, it is curious  that  Klein,  who was always  concerned with  various  kinds  of resurrection, did  not  use it before. 7  In  The  Rocking  Chair he does so in order  to suggest  both  the neglected  state  of the submerged poet and

49

THEOREMS MADE FLESH



the  birth  of a shining  new world  in  his imagination. The  poet's  submersion can be  (like  the  cultural ghetto  of the Jew)  a kind  of protection. It offers  the com­ fort  every  man  may  take  from  the  exercise  of  his imagination, and  provides  a home  in  the  private world  of  memories  and   hopes.  Klein  writes  in  "Lookout: Mount Royal" of

the photographer's  tripod and his sudden faces buoyed up by water on his magnet caught
still smiling as if under water still ...

The  deep  well of memories,  instincts  and  creative impulses  can  become  one with the  creative lens;  thus,  water  serves  the  function the  moon  served  in  the  early poetry.
The  suggestion  is that  man  can  express his personal experience of the  universe in  the  work  of  art,  a  distinct   and  communicable  microcosm. In  The   Rocking Chair  Klein  re-creates  childhood memories; in "And in That Drowning Instant" he submerges himself  once  again  in  racial  and  cultural memories, but  surfaces, so to speak,  in the  re-creation of the experience as poetry.
In   the  poetry  of  The  Rocking  Chair  geometry  tends  to  replace   law  as  the system  used  to suggest  the  ultimate order  of  the  universe.  This is a subtler  way of expressing  faith  in the stability  and  unity  of creation since  it is less dependent than  law  upon  human notions  of morality. The  further suggestion  of the  use of the  alphabet and  of scroll  imagery  is that   the  universe  may  contain a  message from  God.
Man's organized perception  can  at least  approximate God's  creativity. In "Krieghoff:  Calligrammes" the artist  employs  a magic  language to communicate with  God,  to participate in His creation. By ordering the  "blank whiteness" of his experience he enables  himself and  his world  to be known.
This   brings   us  back  to  the  solitary  man   who  is  Everyman. In  The   Second
Scroll  we  find  a  protagonist, Uncle   Melech,   who,  as  the  successor   to  Childe Harold, Solomon   Warshawer and  Yehuda Halevi, is the  wandering Jew,  and, thus,  Jewry  itself.  He is also Abraham Klein.  And  beyond  this he is the  creative man,   and,   thus,  the  Messiah.  For  the  Messiah  can  finally  be  identified  as  the creative man  who seeks and  discovers God  in himself.
Klein's chief  heroes-Spinoza, Yehuda Halevi, Euclid,  Michelangelo-have always  been  creative  men reaching to God  and  attempting to establish  His order. Man  is the  nth  Adam, a solitary  individual whose task is that  of every individual before  him -to  perceive  and  express  and  thus  re-create the  universe  in  order

THEOREMS MADE  FLESH



to  define  it  as  a  context for  himself.  The  God  within, the  lens,  must  focus  in itself  the  whole  of  the  God  without. All self-expression,   whether it  result  in  a system  of  geometry, the  Anjou   ballad,   a  rocking  chair,   a  Hebrew brand-name or  the Sistine  Chapel, is a means  to this end.
Klein's  own  interpretation of the  Sistine  paintings  is an  exercise  of  language as magic.  The  ceiling  is seen  as geometry  and  expressed  in language that  vividly re-creates its physical  presence  at  the same  time  as it describes  the  glory and  the dangerous limitation that  is the  human condition. Man  is depicted by  Michel­ angelo   ("say   rather the  Archangel Michael")  as a  potential god  caught in  the perilous  wheels that  seem  to determine suffering  and  death. He is able to achieve divinity  in  an  art  that   may  communicate its  infinite  meaning  to  individuals of succeeding generations. Klein  contends:

It well may be that  Michelangelo  had other  paradigms  in mind: there is much talk  of  Zimzum  and  retraction; but  such  is the  nature  of  art  that  though  the artist entertain fixedly but one intention and one meaning, that creation once accomplished  beneath  his hand, now no longer merely his own attribute, but Inspiration's very substance and entity, proliferates with significances by him not conceived  or  imagined.  Such  art  is eternal  and  to every generation  speaks with fresh coeval timeliness. In vain did Buonarotti seek to confine himself to the hermeneutics  of his age;  the Spirit  intruded  and  lo! on that  ceiling appeared  the narrative  of things to come, which came indeed, and  behold above me the parable of my days.

Melech-Klein finds  in  the  ceiling  a  prophecy  both  of the  Jewish  suffering  of the  twentieth century and  of  the  Messianic  era  that is to  follow.  Here  we  cer­ tainly  have  art  as a communication with  God.
Klein's  own  art  in Gloss Gimel  involves the creation  of a rich  prose heightened by  effects  of  sound,   rhythm, sensual  imagery   and   metaphor  to  the   power  of poetry,  a language like that  he employed  in  parts  of "Out of the  Pulver  and  the Polished  Lens." With  "Portrait of the  Poet  as Landscape", these  are  surely  his most  powerful  and   moving performances. Few  English   poets  of  the  twentieth century   have  been  capable of  such  sustained   and  concentrated and   controlled passion.  But  then,  few  modern poets have  retained  the  kind  of belief in man  and God  that  would  enable  them  to see their own utterance as fiat.

FOOTNOTES

' A.M. Klein, "Desideratum", Contemporary Verse  (June-Sept. 1943),  3·
•  "Cabbala", Universal Jewish  Encyclopedia, Vol. II, 6r4-15.
3  Ibid., 6 I 8.

THEOREMS MADE FLESH



4   Ibid.
5   Ibid., 6Ig.
6   The passage,  "he   who  does  violence ... a  deicide", which  is  strikingly  similar  to Melech's  remarks  about   deicide  in  The   Second  Scroll,  does  not  occur   in  Hath Not  A Jew ... but only in the poem's  original  publication in The  Canadian Forum, XI  (I 93 I)' 453-54·
7   Milton Wilson  has called  Hath Not a Jew ... "the driest  book in Canadian poetry" (Canadian  Literature  No. 6, I 2)  because  it has  virtually no water  imagery.  But in The   Rocking  Chair,  as Wilson  notes,  water  is related   to man's submerged life in such  poems  as "Portrait of the  Poet as Landscape", "The Break-Up", "Dress Manufacturer:  Fisherman", "Lookout: Mount Royal" and  "Lone Bather".
















52




Inanic le





LETTER FROM VANCOUVER


Allan Campbell





VaTORY SQUARE  IS THE PLACE   where our  famous  Maym Gerry  McGeer  read  the  Riot  Act, one afternoon  in April,  1935,  to a large  as­ sembly of rnnaways  from  the  relief camps. They  were angry,  unemployed  and violent, and earlier in the day had vented their frustration  in a property-smashing spree  in  several  downtown  establishments.  It  was an  emergency  situation,  and damage  to property,  particularly  private  property, was to be deplored,  but even at the time many people thought  Mayor McGeer's response singularly unimagina­  tive. The  fact  that  he did  his brief oratory  from the  base of the Cenotaph gave the event a special aura  of bad  taste.
It  is remembered   this  way  today, and  perhaps  the  memory  has  contributed
to  the general  wretchedness  of the  place. In summer,  green  and  thronged  with hurrying  shoppers  and  prostrate  down-and-outers,  the square  is seedy and faintly disreputable.  In  winter,  it  is  just a  desolate  comer  in  a  rundown  part  of the business section. But it is still the only square we have. A couple of years ago, the notion  of a  new  Civic  Square  seemed close to realization.  It was to be located uptown,  near  the  Granville-Georgia  axis, and  the  press carried  frequent  reports on the  progress of property  acquisition. Then  along came  Premier  Bennett  with plans for a much-needed extension to the courthouse, just across the street, and somewhere to house his new love, The Bank of British Columbia.  Our  city fathers lost interest in the Civic Square  project, sold the site to the provincial government and  moved  on  to bigger schemes. Vancouver  suffers from  a think-big  complex, and  plans  and  proposals  become substitutes for the  real  thing.  At  this writing, plans for  a  Civic  Square  are  on  the  heap  of discarded ideas, along  with  the

53

LETTER FROM VANCOUVER



Bank  of British  Columbia. Recent  announcements suggest  that  the  provincial government will  use  the site for  a  fifty-storey  office skyscraper, including rental space,  which  will compete  for  tenants  with  other  projects planned  by the city as part  of a downtown re-development scheme.  This  news has drawn cries of anguish from  the  city,  and  charges  of double-crossing.
Tourist  promotion has  been  so  effective  in  associating Vancouver  with  the Gulf  of Georgia, the  North  Shore  mountains and  an  equitable climate  that  even residents  have  long  believed  that  they  live in  a  beautiful city.  This  view is now changing. The mountains and  sea are  acknowledged to be  a lot of free scenery, outside  the  city limits. The  city, we realize,  must  be examined on its own  merits. It is found   wanting, because  of  the  ugly  buildings, the  proliferation of  cheap and  garish  signs, the  lack of green  open  spaces  and  all those  expressions  of  com­ mercial  single-mindedness which  have  gone  unregulated for  too  long.  Exhorta­ tions to clean  up and  beautify,  when  presented on  sthetic
response.  This  is understandable, because  no-one  expects  the owners  and  tenants
of  our  downtown stores  and  businesses voluntarily  to  spend  good  money  on on  sthetic
They  will react,  though, when  it can  be shown  that  declining profits are trace­ able,  at  least  partly,  to how  a city looks, how  pleasant it is to  be in. This is the case in parts  of Vancouver. It is not necessary  to have  read  the Buchanan Report or  volumes  by  Mumford in order  to appreciate the  consequences of a declining city  centre.  Retail  sales for  the  downtown area  have  been  declining, both  abso­ lutely  and   relatively   to  city-wide  sales. The  people  are  not  coming  any  more, and  if they  can  be  brought   back  by creating  some  relief  from  heavy  traffic,  by visual  interest, by even a minimal  sense of  style -then  by all means  support the expenditure of  tax  money  on  making  the  place  look  good.
So now the  heat  is on City Council  to get going  with  re-development plans,  of which   there   have  been  many.  Reaction  has  been  mixed,   with  official  business supporting  re-development schemes,   opposition  from   individual  businesses  re­ quired to move, and  a great  deal of apathy from those neither financially interested nor   sthetically
fine, because,  after  all, we're  just a young  city, and  we've  come  a long way from
Gastown, haven't we?
It would   be  silly  to  deny  that  the  job  of  fixing  up  a  city  must  involve  vast amounts of money,  and  master  plans  by master  minds.  Given  complex  problems of  access,  traffic  flow,  property rights  and  commercial  considerations, plus  the need  for some central direction, City Hall  must  take  the lead.  The  business com-

54

LETTER  FROM  VANCOUVER



munity   ordinarily  disapproves of  government interference,  and   our  local   Igth century   free-enterpriser, Howard  Mitchell,  is more  articulate on  this score;  but when  there  is  dirty  work  to  be  done  our  business leaders  are  most  anxious  that some  government body  take  it  over.  And,  of course,  we  are  mesmerized   by the prospect  of big  deals,  doing  everything on  the grand  scale.  But  between  concep­ tion  and  execution there  lies, it seems to me, a range  of possibilities which  need not depend on City  Hall  initiative. In countless small, inexpensive and imaginative ways, numerous stores,  offices, corners  and  blind  alleys could  be rescued  from  the brutal neglect  in  which  their  owners  choose  to leave  them. An  exception  to this depressing  situation is the  Robson  Street  thoroughfare, now largely  taken  over by Europeans. Here,  German  and   Italian businessmen   have  at  least  made  an  at­  tempt   at  re-creating some  of  the  visual  interest  and  humanizing  environment which  we  as Anglo-Saxon tourists  look for when  we  visit civilized  places.






v.NCOUVER IS A  FRONTIER TOWN,  run  by frontiersmen who, at  heart, are  still  not  convinced that   the  arts  deserve  public  subsidy  any  more than  do  the  B.C.  Lions.  But  they have  noticed  that  other  cities base their  claims to metropolitanism on the existence  of art  galleries, opera, theatre and  symphony. So we have  an official interest  in culture  which  expresses itself at theatre openings, social  occasions  and  the  like. There is, after  all,  the  matter of local  pride,  and even  the  most  intransigent philistine  can  be bought  by appeals to snobbish  self­ regard.  But  the   degree   of  commitment  has  not  been  sufficient  to  engage  the serious  attention of City  Council, and  civic grants  to cultural  organizations have been  niggardly and  haphazardly distributed. Some  months ago, Council  received from   the  Community Arts  Council   a  report   entitled  Civic  Grants  to  Cultural Organizations.  The   report  recommended that   "in  the  preparation of  the  civic budget  a  percentage of  the  total  be set aside  for  cultural  development and  this percentage should   reflect  the  growth   and  development of  the  community as  a whole." Further, the  report stressed  that support from  civic funds  should  be for "professional" performance,  especially  local professional  talent, and  that  a "Cul­ tural   Advisory   Committee"  be  formed   to  help  Council  distribute the  money.  There were  other  recommendations, too, but  at  this  writing none  have  received Council  attention.  Our mayor  and  aldermen are  too  busy  with  larger  plans.
It is not  surprising that artistic  endeavor operates in  an  atmosphere of grim


55

LETTER FROM VANCOUVER



determination. Behind  every  venture  lurks  the  spectre  of  financial disaster; the record  of  failures,   and  the  recurring financial problems faced  by  those  groups which  we  count  successful,  are  sufficient  to  lift  the  hazards out  of  the  realm  of pure  paranoia. The wrecked  hulk of the Vancouver Festival,  once the Vancouver International  Festival,   with  its  skeleton   programme  and   old  debts,  stands   as warning to  those  who  would  ignore  the  shifting currents of  public  enthusiasm and   the  shoals  of  deficit  spending. The   Vancouver Opera  Association,  on  the other   hand, is still  with  us  by  virtue  of  nickel-tight budgeting  and   a  realistic assessment  of  what   opera-goers  here  will  pay  to  see-the  standard  repertoire, with  few  exceptions.
Style, then,  is a  luxury  only  James  Bond  can  afford. Navy-blue serge suiting is  not  very  exciting, but  for  the  stump-rancher going  to  town  on  a  Saturday afternoon, it  will  have  to serve;  he is too  preoccupied with  the  prospect  of crop failure  next  year  to be gay-and  all that  backbreaking work  on the  north  forty has  knocked  the  gaiety  out  of him  anyway.
One  source  of  uplift,  for  those  who  tend  to bend  under the  weight  of all this rather depressing  talk about  money and  just hanging on, is the  Playhouse  Theatre Company. The  Playhouse   has  style,  or  perhaps I mean   something  simpler­ showmanship. A  professional  company generated by a group of  local influential citizens, it opened  in October 1963, with Brendan Behan's The  Hostage. Artistic­ ally,  the   play  was  an  unqualified  success,  but  the   popular  reaction   suggested disappointment and  some confusion.  It was excellently  produced and  acted,  but the   story! -vulgar, noisy,  crowded   with   queers   and   prostitutes-hardly  fit company for that  opening  night  audience in the Playhouse. Many  of the  patrons were  outraged,  and   their  spokesman   was  Jack  Richards, drama critic  for  the Vancouver Sun. These  people  calmed  down,  though with  the  next  two  produc­ tions:  The Boy  Friend  and  Private  Lives.
Since  then,  over  the  balance  of the  1963-64  season  and  throughout this  past one,  the  Playhouse has moved  steadily  toward  a reputation for solid professional performance coupled with  highly  imaginative promotion;  art  exhibitions in  the foyer,  a baby-sitting service at matinee shows, classy brochures and  newspaper promotion  on  a  level  of  sophistication  well  beyond   usual  expectations for  the Sun   and  the  Province. Malcolm   Black,  a  guest  director during the  first season and   now  Artistic   Director, has  maintained  the  guest-director policy  with  such visitors  as  Cyril  Simon   (Desire  Under the  Elms)  and   William Francisco  ( 0h Dad,  Poor  Dad), both  men  hailing  from  the  United States.  John   Brockington came  downtown from  the  UBC  campus,  where  he is known  for his lavish,  highly

LETTER  FROM VANCOUVER



theatrical productions of Shakespeare, to stage The  Taming of the Shrew.  Black himself  directed  the  season  opener,   Ring  Round  the  Moon, The  Seagull,  and the  musical,  Stop  the World  I Want  to Get 0If. With  plays chosen  to appeal to a  variety   of  tastes,  from   The   Caretaker  to  Charlie's  Aunt, the  company  has
avoided   the  labels  of  avant-gardist or  "commercial".
The  Playhouse, then,  is on its way, and  the going  will get easier  as Vancouver audiences begin  to  accept   theatre as  a  form  of entertainment worth   spending money on. Until recently, the scene has been dominated by amateurs, and  sources of  enthusiasm confined   to  players,  friends,  a  small  group of  able  directors and managers, and  those worthy  people who like to think  of theatre as community recreation, akin  to evening classes and  arts-and-crafts. Knocking the  amateurs is cheap and   ungenerous-but who  wants  to  gamble   money  and  good  will  on what  may  turn  out  to be a pretty  bad  evening,  with television  and  the B.C. Lions as reliable  alternatives? So  professional  theatre must  convince  a larger  potential audience that  it  has  something to offer,  that  the  ticket  buyer  need  not  sacrifice time  and   money  in  the  cause  of  community creativity, watching the  boys and girls ham  it  up  on  the  other  side of the  footlights.  And  given  our  attachment to the  idea  of  progress,  it  would  be  unthinkable to assume  that  City  Council will not  become   both   more   generous   and  more intelligent in  its  handling of  the cultural-subsidy question.
In  the  past  we have  been stung  by Nathan Cohen's remarks about Vancouver as a cultural backwater-a mere  talent  pool for Toronto. Now  everyone  knows that   Mr.  Cohen  comes  out  here  just to stir  up  trouble, but  if he has  gained  his impressions  from  a reading of the local  press, then  his reaction  is at least  honest. One  might  expect  the  newspapers to reflect  with some  accuracy the  variety  and quality  of  artistic   and  intellectual life in  the  city. Such  an  expectation in  Van­ couver  would   be  quite   misguided. There  are  reviews,  of  course,  of  music and  theatre and  exhibitions at  the small  multitude of galleries.  William  Littler, cover­ ing  the  music  scene  for  the  Sun,  and  David  Watmough, art  critic for  the  same paper, have  intelligence, conscience  and  literary  ability  and  they know  their  sub­  jects. Mr.  Watmough's series of lengthy,  in-depth interviews with local painters­ to date,  John Korner, Jack  Shadbolt-provide welcome relief from  the weekend­ supplement feature  stories  on  local  artistic  personalities,  most  of  them  suffering  from  that  flip newspaper style which  is intended, I suppose,  to assure the  readers  that   artists  are   just  ordinary  people.  Local  writers  are  almost  entirely  ignored. Rarely  does one come  across in the book pages a review or article  by a Vancouver poet  or  prose  writer. It would  be  impossible  for  a  newcomer to  this  city  to ac-

57

LETTER FROM VANCOUVER



quaint   himself with  the work of Ethel  Wilson, Robert  Harlow,  George  Wood­ cock-three  of the  city's established writers-from a reading  of the weekend­ supplement  book pages. What is needed is an inside view of artistic activity here, particularly  literary  activity, and  we need qualified  people -writers, professors, professional talkers-doing their stuff in the  pages of the  press, where the rest of us can  see them.  It may be that  the writers  are  too  busy  writing, and  the professors too  busy  counting their  money;  but  until  we  have  an  identifiable intellectual-artistic   community   here,  conducting its  meetings in  public-a genuine  Establishment-Mr. Cohen  can  quite  justly  talk  about  cultural  back­ waters.
And Gastown, really, is not that far in the past. After the opening performance of The  Hostage, at the Playhouse, a critic friend of mine met a former alderman on  his way out  of the  theatre.  Had  he enjoyed  the show? "Well", said the ex­ alderman, looking gloomy, "at  least they didn't  call anybody  a  [fellatio  practi­  tioner]".







review articles



TRANSFORMATION  AND TRANSCENDANCE
 




Craig W.Miller


ROss  G. WOODMAN, The   Apocalyptic   Vision  in  the  Poetry  of Shelley. University of  Toronto. $6.oo.


THE  ASSUMPTION THAT Shel­ ley never  ceased  to develop  or  to change  his  opinions is  unassailable. The  list  of Shelley  reading would  alone  prove  that  "the    insatiable   thirst    of    the   poet   of Alastor   for   'knowledge   and   truth'  was Shelley's   also."    (Letters,  ii.  467)    Few English  writers  have  struggled harder to reach  a mature  and  unified  view of life. Ross   G.   Woodman  differs   from   other  Shelleyan  commentators by arguing that  Shelley's search  led  him  to reject  earthly  things  and  to  be  satisfied  with   nothing less  than   the  state  of  pure   being  which death makes  possible. When viewed from this position, Prometheus Unbound is Shelley's  last  great  avowal of man's divin­ ity,  Adonais   is a  powerful  expression  of the   joy  and   peace   to  be  found   beyond the grave,  and  The  Triumph of Life  is a bitter   picture of   the  meaninglessness of life.
Woodman  believes   that   during  Shel­ ley's  last  years,  his  mind   was  the  battle­ ground for  two  irreconcilable  impulses: "a  desire  to  transform the  world  and  a desire  to transcend it."  The first desire is linked   to  the   Christian  concept  of  the redemption of soul  and  body,  which  has as  a  corollary  the  need   to  restore   and
 reform  fallen  man; the second  desire  has Orphic overtones, and  seeks a  return  to the pre-natal eternity where  souls are formed. As  the  desire  to  be  free  of  the body   grows  on   him,   "Shelley ... is  no longer  concerned with  poetB as recreators of the universe; he is concerned with  the One   which   transcends the  universe,  re­ ducing   it  by  comparison  to  a  world  of shadow  and  dream". In  Prometheus Un­ bound  the   One  is  Demogorgon,  the "white  radiance"   which   is  a   "mighty darkness",  guarding the   deep truths which  are  imageless,  and  placing in  fet­ ters Shelley's  creative imagination. Thus, for   Shelley,   "the  problem    of   evil   re­ mained   insoluble".
In  addition to  a  commendable ability
to  select   passages   from   Shelley's  work which   support  his   position,   Woodman has praise-worthy insights  into  the  poetry itself,  such  as  the  parallels between   the opening speeches of  Prometheus and Jupiter, the  evaluation  of  Godwin's  in­ fluence  on  Shelley,  and   the  linking  to­ gether   of  such   poetic   elements  as  the Maenads in  the  "West  Wind" and   Pro­ metheus Unbound.  Most important, Woodman's  theory   is  carefully   con­ structed out  of a wide range  of evidence,

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



as benefits  a theory  dealing  with  changes in  the  poet's  mind   never  specifically  re­ corded,  nor   even,   perhaps,   consciously recognized  by  the   poet   himself.  The  theory   may  very  well  be  describing ac­ curately one  of  the  sources  of  Shelley's frequent death wish  and  dejection. Cer­ tainly,   it   provides  stimulating  reading, and  puts  familiar passages into new focus.
Despite the attractive aspects of the theory, however, I do not find it fully satisfying. Woodman appears to  be underestimating Shelley's  concept  of man and  his concept of poetry. He never, of course,  denies  either the  divinity  of man or  the  power  of  poetry.  He  can  say, "In the  unbinding of Prometheus and  its consequences, Shelley  has presented the creative process whereby man taps and releases the divinity in him in order to reconstruct the  universe  into  an image  of his  own   'ideal   prototype' "; and   again, "The divinity   in  the  poet,  like  God  in the  great   creation myths,  creates  out  of matter  His  own  image   and   then   with­ draws   into  Himself,   leaving  behind  His own  visionary  form  which  is  the  reality both  of  Nature and  of art."  But  Wood­ man  does  not  follow  up  all  the  implica­ tions   of  these  statements.  By  means   of his  divinity,   man   can  "reconstruct  the universe"  (the   Promethean  urge)    and achieve "His  own  visionary  form"  (the  Orphic) .   Death  is  not   necessarily   re­ quired in either  act.  In  art,  man  captures the  "reality" of  which  the  Grecian   Urn speaks  to all mankind. Shaped  by a mind whose  vision can  see ugliness in  terms  of a  truth which  is beauty,  the  urn symbol­ izes the  power  of art to live independently of its frail  creator. So live all great  poems, and   such  is  the  goal  of  all  great   poets.
Undeniably, few men  were as little ap­
preciated  in  their  lifetime   as  was  She!-

6o
 ley. Perhaps the neglect drove him to withdraw more   and   more  from  society, to   make   death  increasingly attractive, and   to   project  his   reward   beyond   the grave.   But   to  take   literally,   "No   more let  Life  divide   what   Death can  join  to­ gether," is  to  ignore   the  dramatic  con­ text  of  the  poem,   the  elegiac  tradition, and   Shelley's   faith    that   man   can   find immortality in  art.
This  faith  is based  on  the  assumption
that   man   can  see,  by  glimpses,  the  pat­ tern  of  things  in  the  physical  world  and the   pattern  of   relations  in   the   moral. Shelley   wisely  never   forgot   the   lessons he  learned  from   the  sceptics  regarding the   reality   of   cause-and-effect  conse­ quences and  the  inevitability for  man  of "chance,  death  and   mutability".  How­  ever,  man differs  from  "things", Shelley came  to  realize,  because  man  could  per­ ceive  within himself  evidence  for  a  har­ mony  in  the  moral   universe,  and  act  on this   knowledge.  Punctuating   his   early extreme  scepticism  with   such   unlikely statements  as   "I  will   live   beyond   this life"    (Jan.,  r8 I 2),   Shelley   fought    his way to the faith  that  what matters is how we  perceive  objects.

Imagination or  mind  employed in   pro­ phetically imaging forth  its  objects  is  that faculty of   human  nature  on   which   every gradation  of   its   progress,  nay,   every,   the minutest,  change   depends.... The  only distinction   between   the    selfish   man  and  the  virtuous is  that  the  imagination of  the former  is  confined   within  a  narrow  lirni t, while   that of  the  latter  embraces a  compre­ hensive  circumference.... Selfishness is thus  the  offspring of  ignorance and   mistake; ... disinterested  benevolence is  the  product of a  cultivated  imagination  and   has  an   inti­ mate  connection  with  all   the   arts   which  add    ornament,  or   dignity,  or   power,  or stability  to  the   social   state of  man. Virtue is   thus    entirely  a   refinement   of   civilized life,   a   creation  of   the   human   mind,  or, rather  a   combination   which   it   has   made

REVIEW ARTICLES



according to elementary rules contained within itself  of  the  feelings suggested by the relations established between man and  man. (A  Treatise on  Morals).

In each   mind   must   exist   this  potential knowledge of human relations, this sense of   "universal  Harmony  or   Reason" (Clark,  210),   which the   imagination may,  or  may  not,  enlighten. Those  who have  the gift of comprehension are  poets, as Shelley  says in  The  Defence, whether they   be  writers,   statesmen,  scientists, teachers  or   theologians.  They    make known   the   "unapprehended  combina­ tions"   which   lie  beneath the  surface   of things,    the    "eternal   proportions,"   the "unchangeable  forms  of  human nature". Such  insights  reveal  the  moral nature of the universe,  and  will eventually be acted  upon,    thereby   making   all   true    poets "legislators."   The  imagination  which penetrates  beyond   the  known  is not  the passive imagination Shelley once  believed in,   which   could    not   create,  but   only perceive.   In  The  Defence, the  creative imagination is  the  "great  instrument of moral   good,"   because   it  is  inspired   by
 the ideal of love or ideal  self within  man. Asia, Intellectual Beauty,  Emilia  and  the visionary  ladies  of Alastor  and  "The Sensitive   Plant"  are   for   Shelley   such ideals.   Queen  Mab   probably  pre-dates this  view  of  man's  creative mind,   and Urania  in   Adonais    is  not   within    the mind,   but   rather  its   loving   "Mother" and  earthbound.
When   Woodman  fails   to  give   these
basic  articles   of  faith   their   full  signifi­ cance  in  Shelley's   thought,   his  attitude toward  the  key symbols  tends  to  become confusing.   For   example,   Prometheus  is man's   imaginative   power,   unregenerate man,  the creative  power  of the  imagina­ tion,   the   divinity   of  man,    the   psychic potential   of   the   dreaming  divinity   in man,   and,   through  Asia,   the   human  image   of   Demogorgpn's   power    when united  with  him.  Nowhere is he  referred  to    as    "the    human  race"-Shelley's phrase.  Nowhere   is  there   recognition of the   fact   that   Asia   cannot  come   until Prometheus  has   changed, that   Pro­ metheus' struggle is  man's   long  struggle to unite  with  his ideal   (Asia)  and  trans­  form  his world  in  the  light  of  it, or  that  Demogorgon  (surely  representing Neces­ sity   or   some   blind    power    producing change)  cannot  move  until  man  wills a change  within  himself.  To  consider  Pro­ metheus  "vengeful" because  he does  not prevent   Jupiter's  fall,   is  to  ignore   the "mutability"  which   operates  when   any man  turns from  selfishness to compassion.
If Shelley's   faith    in   the   archetype
which "forever exists in the mind" is unshakeable,  as  I   believe   it   was,  then his faith  in  poetry's  power  to  communi­ cate immortal truths is unshakeable, even though  poetry  is the  offspring of  mortal  men.  Woodman  admits this:  "Man must continue to  weave  the  spells of his imag-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ination. This side  of  the grave  the  glory of  the  Titan can  be  imaged  in no other way."  We cannot interpret Adonais merely  as  a  pure  longing  for  death's  re­ ward,  since  its  purpose   is  to  glorify  the ability   of  one   man   to  achieve  immor­ tality  through the  productions  of an  ex­ panded  imagination.  We  cannot   regard  The  Triumph of Life as  proof  that  Shel­ ley  annihilated "the  world  of  his  ima­  ginative   vision"     (I 97) ,  both    because many   Shelley   poems  which   begin   thus despairingly   end   with   a   positive   note,
 and  because  here  is faith  that   even  men of such  limited  imaginative power  as Rousseau possessed can  escape the chariot's wheels.
Woodman's study may, I repeat, be a profitable  approach  to   Shelley's   work. His   arguments  are   subtle   and   strong. But  Shelley  is to  me  more  simple  in  the sense of being  more  consistent in his approach to man's divinity, and  more complex  in  the   sense  of  being   able   to combine  many    moods    without   giving way  to  a  permanent  despair.








ON TOP OF THE PYRAMID

John Robert Colombo

ALFRED  PURDY,  The   Cariboo  Horses.  McClelland  &  Stewart.  Paper   $2.50, cloth
$4-50.


I ONCE MET an Egyptologist who   told   me   that   what   sustained   him through his many  years of archa:ological education  in   England  was  anticipating his one  big  trip  to  Egypt.  When  he  got there,    he   would   stand   on   top   of   the Great Pyramid of Cheops  and,  like a pharaoh of old, would survey the sands before  his eyes. He  finally made  the  trip. When   I asked  what  it  felt  like  to  stand on  top  of  the  pyramid and  look around, he  winced   a  bit,  and   then  said,  some­ what  sadly: "I can't remember  being  at the  top;  all  I  can  recall  is  sweating  like a horse  under the hot Egyptian sun while I  climbed up   the   dusty   side   of   that  damned  pyramid!"
 Alfred  Purdy might very well be that pyramid-climbing Egyptologist. The vista his poetry  presents  is not  half  as exciting as the  sweaty  ascent.  Purdy  has been trekking along  for  years.  He  is even  in­ cluded in  that   blunderbus of  an  anthol­ ogy  Canadian  Poetry  in  English,  edited  by  Carman-Pierce-Rhodenizer. In   Ig62, he  reached something of a  plateau with Poems  for All the Annettes, his sixth publication but his first book. With The Cariboo   Horses,  Purdy    has   reached a much   higher  plateau. What   he  will find at  the  top  of his personal pyramid is any­ one's  guess,  but  to  my  mind   the  trek  is certain  to  be  as  exciting   as  anything at the  top.

REVIEW  ARTICLES



Without being  literary about it, Purdy has evolved an extremely personal and characteristic way of writing. His poems, and  to some extent his prose, can be recognized  after  a line or so -so distinc­ tive   and   dramatic  is  his   manner.  He seems  to  have  patented  the  run-on sen­ tence,  the  unexpected  but  apt  adjective, the  galloping gait which makes the reader  move  his muscles  kinetically to keep  up. He  has  cornered  the  rapidly expanding and   contracting   perspectives  on  every­ day events,  the reportorial catalogue and the  bursting  asides.  A  good  example of his  use  of   the  aside   (which almost  up­ stages the poem  itself)  is found in "Com­ plaint   Lodged  with  L.C.B.O.  by   a Citizen in  Upper Rumbelow":

I feel  peculiar-
At  the  stop  street I  carefully
STOP
and   the  cop  stops  not
to be caught that  easy
and  I see him  watching me sit so I sit  up  straight as
"The Motorist" by  Praxiteles
excavated by Henry Ford  4
from  under a million traffic  tickets
of dead  Greeks speeding in Argos  agora or  was it "Hermes" or  "Pallas Athene" and  not  "The Motorist" at all  Anyway
there's that  cop  on  my  tail and  I signal a left  turn....

This  epic  simile wears  its learning lightly
-and  keeps  the  reader   amused   and  on his  toes.
What Purdy  does  best  is race  through
geography and  history  taking  notes along the  way.  "The Country North of  Belle­ ville"  describes  a beautiful landscape that  is as naturally full  of  people   ("and may­ be some cows and/room for  some/of   the more  easily   kept  illusions")   as   the  northern  views  painted by the  Group of Seven were full of trees. In the colloquial poem  "The  Cariboo Horses", Purdy
 counterpoints the specific "gasoline smell" of   civilization    with    "the  last   Quagga screaming  in   African  highlands"-a rural   Gregory   Corso.   Purdy   writes  this way easily and  well, but  his poetry  is all the   more   interesting  because   it   raises more  important issues. Some  of  these  is­ sues involve  the  differences between  im­ provising  and  inventing, between literary  impressionism  and  affirmations of  life.
Purdy  would   be  only  partly  a  poet  if he stopped  where his sensibility met a sensation.  He  is bothered by what  is  be­ hind   the  landscape  and   whatever  it is that   is beyond   the  observer.   In  this  re­ gion  he is a  bit  sketchy; from  "What It Was-":

Of  course  other problems exist  here  now the  necessity  for  patterns and  pattern­
makers
deciding  which    are   certainties  and   which variables
(and very few  of  the  former and  mostly latter)
and  always  the  occasional mistake.

The  "mistakes" are   seldom   stylistic - they   are   poems   that   didn't  take.  The "certainties"  Purdy   comes   up   with   are the humanitarian ideals: a sense of social injustice  not  unlike  Souster's; a compas­ sion that  doesn't lead  to action; a siding with  "love ... absolute  as  death  is" against  "animal hate". Next to his colour­ ful  settings,   the  ideas  in  his  poems  are inclined   to   be  pale   indeed.  Good   and evil are  seen as effects, never causes (from the   powerful    poem    "Notes  on   Paint­ ing"):

Isn't it strange that you search
thru paintings of all  the  old  masters, and  see evil  only  obliquely:
its results  but  never  the  cause
among  the  sunlit stones waiting to  be identified?

The  poet and  his poetry  gain  their  force

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



by  operating outside any  systems  of thought, either  artistic, religious or social, and   hence   are   fenced   in  by  their   very force.   The  poetic   utterance  is  unsyste­ matic,   as  eccentric  as  a  man  who  im­ provises   but   never   invents   a  consistent  theme-more therapeutic  than  theore­  tical,  more   private  than  public.  "Every  poem  is a little conclusion," Robert Frost said,  "a  momentary  stay  against  confu­  sion."  There are  no  pat  answers  in  any­ one's   poetry,  but   in   Purdy's  poetic universe there   are  not  even  possible  an­ swers.   It  is  as   if   Dorothy    L.   Sayer's definition  of  poetry   as  search   (and   not her   definition  of   poetry   as  statement) were  taken  to such an extreme that  there was  nothing to  search  for.
The   value   Purdy   takes  to  the  world
is an inherently poetic one-unbridled imagination,   with    its   "line   drawings" (from "Method for Calling  Up Ghosts")  :

And   something  I've   thought of  every  now and  then:
how  everything we  do  or  say  has  an  effect somewhere,
passes  outward from  itself  in widening circles,
a sort  of human magic by which
a word  moves  outside the nature of a word
a  side   effect   of  itself
 I've always  been  going somewhere­ Vancouver
or  old  age  or somewhere ever  since  I can remember.
The  Cariboo Horses offers no clear image of  man   or  society,  only  the  social  and universal swing  of things.  Human society is, at  best,  a  small  community cut  adrift in limitless geography and  ageless history. The connection between  place  and  pur­ pose is made  only in the mind  of  the poet (to  quote  from  "Method for  Calling Up  Ghosts" again) :
It's a morbid idea  perhaps,
if you  don't think  it's  ridiculous:
so many  line  drawings of dead  men,
so many white trails  on  downtown streets­
But  I don't care  much if it is for
it  exalts me  to think of those  people
passing by  tonight in  the  room  where I sit writing,
on  the  roads that I will walk  tomorrow
in  the  echoing rooms  of yesterday-
And   I think of  the  first  space   ship  leaving
earth,
going  where men  have  never  loved  women,
or  live  and  died  there
in  the  marginless emptiness until the  pale  death angel of earth
comes  for  us on  the  star  ships-

For   an   image   of   the   absolute,    Purdy steals   an   angel   from   one  mythology   or another,  but   with   more   conviction  he

the  nature of  a  word being
that when it's  been  said  it will always  be said
-a  recording exists  in  the main  deep  of
sound.
And  I think if there  was a god  somewhere
he'd be damn  jealous.

The   poetic   imagination may  be  as  per­ manent as an  X-Ray, but both  the world and   the  creator  are   in  a  flux.  Even   to his name  the  poet  evolves -in a succes­ sion  of  books  Purdy   has  let  himself  be listed    as:    A.    W.    Purdy,   AI   Purdy,  Alfred  W.  Purdy,  and  now Alfred  Purdy.  From  "The  Madwoman  on  the  Train":
 takes  his  sense  of  the  infinite   from   the
pages   of  science-fiction magazines:  the staple   of  s-f:   the  rocket  ship.


THE BIRTH OF CANADA

]. A. S. Evans


w.  L.   MORTON,   The  Critical Years: The  Union of  British   North   America   rBs7·
r873. McClelland &  Stewart. $8.50.



ONLY  FOUR YEARS AGO, P. B. Waite  could  remark in  the  preface  of his The  Life   and   Times  of  Confederation that   the   last   history   of  his  period   was R.  G. Trotter's  Canadian Federation published   in   I924-  Even   then,   the  re­ mark   was  true   only  in  a  narrow  sense, for   there   were   important  recent   works such  as  D.  G.  Creighton's  biography of Sir  John   A.  Macdonald   and   Professor Czreless'    biography   of    George   Brown which   illuminated  the   period,   even   if they   did   not   make  confederation  their central subject. But lately, historians have made  up  for  whatever their   neglect  was in  the  past.  We  have  had   Waite's   own book,  Professor  Creighton's The Road  to Confederation, and finally the  book under    review   by   W.   L.   Morton,  the twelfth   volume   of   the   Canadian   Cen­ tenary  Series.
It  is hard  to  avoid  comparisons.  Mor­
ton's    prose    is   less   magnificent   than Creighton's,   nor    is   it    as   spritely    as Waite's, but  it  is smooth   and  workman­ like, and  flows with  an  easy  competence. As one  would  expect, Morton  is at  home with  the  primary  sources  of  the  period: private  papers  and   newspaper  files,  al­ though  of  the  French-Canadian  papers  he   seems   most   to   have   consulted  La Minerve of  Montreal, which was Cartier's voice.   The   Rouge    opposition  to   Con­  federation is less thoroughly documented;
 for  that   matter, this  would  be  not  easy to  do, for the files of Le Defricheur, which voiced  the  opinions of  the  Rouge  leader A.  A.  Dorion, have  perished. But  Mor­ ton's  scrupulous record  of  Confederation politics   is  likely   to   remain  a  standard work  for  some  time.  All  in  all,  this  is a splendid   work.
Where   Morton  is  original   is  in   the span  of years he  has chosen  to examine:
I 857 to I 873.  (I assume  that  this choice
was Morton's own,  and  not  one  reached by  high-level  negotiations with  the  pub­ lisher,  for  Morton  is  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Canadian  Centenary  Series.)   In I857, the Tache-Macdonald ministry was in  power  in the  province  of  Canada; the governor  was Sir  Edmund  Head  and  the Grand Trunk railway  had  crept   west as far  as Stratford in  Upper  Canada. That year,  Head   presented  his  memorandum to  the Colonial Office recommending that  Ottawa  become   the   permanent  site  of the   capital    (in    1857,   parliament  was temporarily esconced  in Toronto). In  the same   year,   Samuel   Leonard  Tilley   re­ turned   to  power  in  New  Brunswick   (he had   gone   out   the   year   before   on   the question of  Prohibition); Prince  Edward Island   was  making another  unsuccessful attempt to buy out  its landed  proprietors, and  in Newfoundland the  problem  of the French  Shore  monopolized  politics.
By   I873,  Confederation  was  accom-

REVIEW ARTICLES



plished.    Newfoundland   had    remained out,  but  the  new  Canadian  government had  taken  over  the  Hudson's Bay  Com­ pany   lands,   and   British   Columbia  had entered the  union. The Canadian govern­  ment   had   committed   itself  to  build   a railway    to   the   west   coast,   a   promise which   owed   as   much   to   Sir   Georges Cartier's  headstrong optimism   as  it  did to  the  insistence  of  British  Columbia. In
I 873,   the   Canadian  Pacific   scandal brought  down   the   Macdonald   govern­ ment,   and   the  railway   was  delayed; as Morton points  out,  Wall  Street   crashed  in  the  same  year,  and  for  financial   rea­ sons,  the  railway  would  have  had  to  be delayed  in  any  case,  scandal  or  not.  But Confederation  had   been  achieved,  and with  the  fall of Sir John  A. Macdonald's government, the  book ends.
Of  necessity,  Morton examines  the at­
titude of the  United States  since defense against   imperialism  from   south   of  the border  was one  of the motives  for  Cana­ dian   union; for  the  British  government. it  was  the  overriding  motive.   Morton's view is that  after  the Civil  War,  the aim of American  policy  was to eliminate Bri­ tish  troops   from   North  America, and hence  their  presence  in  Canada only  in­ creased   Canada's  danger.  Morton  does not  add   (although surely  it  is a  natural corollary)   that   if  this  was  so,  Washing­ ton   was   willing   to   tolerate   Canadian union  if it meant a client  kingdom  north  of  the  border, but  an  independent Can­ adian   nationality  was  not  part   of  their vision.  Canadians  did  not  want  a  client kingdom, but   politics  is  the  art   of  the possible.  Confederation, with  its deliber­  ately   neutral  designation as  a  "Do­ minion" (which is almost  untranslatable into   French)   was  not   glorious,   but   it saved  British  North   America.

66
 A   second    point    is   the   position    of French Canada.  The  Bleu   leaders   re­ garded  Confederation as  a  compact  be­ tween  French and  English,  as in  a  sense the   old   Canadian  Union   had   been  in fact,   whatever its  original  purpose was. By  I 873,   it   was   already   clear   that   if Confederation was a compact, it was not an  equal  one; the  trouble  at  Red  River  had  shown  that. In  part  this  was due  to Ontario imperialism  and the misty visions of  the   Canada  First  movement.  But  it was  also   because   the   Fathers  of  Con­ federation had  been too divided  among themselves  to grapple properly  with  the problem  of  education  in   the   new   Do­ mlmon.
It is ironical that   the  Fathers of  Con­
federation, at  least  the  English-Canadian ones,   were   anxious  to   have   a   strong central government, although the federal



Privatt
OIIt(tOrS

The Library of the  University of British  Colwnbia, Vancouver, B.C., wishes to purchase private collections of good  library materials such  as books,  manuscripts, maps in
many general fields of knowledge.
In Canadiana, exceptional collections only  are  wanted. Please send  full  particulars to Robert M.  Hamilton, Assistant Librarian.

REVIEW ARTICLES



principle  was  necessary  to  keep  French support.  Macdonald   himself    seems   to have  believed  that  the  provincial govern­ ments   would   wither away  by a  kind  of natural  evolution  in  any   case.  Yet   the constitutions of  the  provinces  closely  re­ sembled   the  federal  one,  and  the  argu­ ments  which   the  Dominion  government would  use to win greater autonomy from  Westminster  could  equally   well  be  used by  the  provinces to  win  greater powers from   Ottawa. The  germ   of  provincial rights  was  latent  in   the  B.N.A.   act:   a
 point  which  emerges  clearly  from   Mor­
ton's  treatment.
Yet  in  1867,  the  B.N.A.  act  was  the best  possible solution; it  made  a country by gluing  together a group of scattered colonies populated by narrow-minded people   and   broadening  their   horizons. Of  course,  this  makes  it  no sacred  docu­ ment,  but still Confederation  was the one great   creative   act  of   nineteenth-century Canadian   politics.    Morton   relates    its story  well.






UN ENSEMBLE D'APPROXIMATIONS
 




Guy Robert



FERNAND DUMONT ET  JEAN-CHARLES FALARDEAU,  Litterature et societe  canadiennes­
franfiais.  Presses   de  l'Universite Laval.



LE  DEUXIEME COLLOQUE de ]a revue    Recherches  Sociographiques  du Departement de  Sociologie  et  d'Anthro­ pologie  de   I'Universioo  Laval,  a  publie un livre  de  272  pages intitule Litterature et  societe  canadiennes-fran aises; ouvrage a ete  realise  sous  Ia direction de MM.   Fernand  Dumont et  Jean-Charles Falardeau.  Dans   leur   avant-propos,  les directeurs   de   l'ouvrage  insistent   sur   le fait  que  Ia  Iitterature est un  des niveaux  tres   eleves    du    milieu    spirituel  d'une societe.  On   peut  d'abord etre  etonne de
!'importance qu'accordent les sociologues
au   phenomene litteraire, et  pourtant   Ia veflexion  nous  permet de  deviner   que  Ia
Iitterature  temoigne, a sa  fa on,
 preoccupations d'ordre intellectuel et spirituel d'une  societe.
Il  ne faut   pas  demander a ce  livre  ce
qu'il   ne   veut   pas   etre;  !'avant-propos nous  en  indique !'orientation  precise.   Il ne s'agit pas de pvesenter une etude d'ensemble de  Ia  litterature  canadienne­ fran  aise,
de   cet    ensemble  d'approximations    se
degage   des   poles  indicateurs  qui  susci­ teront  de  nouvelles  syntheses  aux  dimen­ sions   non   seulement de   !'ensemble  de notre   societe  mais  de  Ia  litterature uni­  verselle."
Dans  un  chapitre prealable, intitule "Histoire et critique Iitreraire au  Canada Fran ais",

REVIEW ARTICLES



chercheur bien connu  de l'Universite d'Ottawa,  nous   fournit  en   s'aidant  de ses  collaborateurs  une   precieuse   docu­ mentation. Nous  pourrions seulement re­ procher a  Monsieur  Wyczynski  d'abuser des    comparaisons    et    re£erences    a   la France, et  de  commettre quelques omis­ sions  deplorables et inexplicables chez un grand  erudit.  Cette   etude  nous  permet de   constater  encore   une  fois  l'urgence d'un  examen prolonge, attentif  et  aussi complete que possible de cette question importante pour  nous,  celle  de  l'histoire et de la critique litteraire au Canada Franc;ais.
Dans  sa conclusion generale,  Monsieur
Wyczynski  nous dit "qu'il faudra une fois pour    toutes   faire   un   inventaire  de   ce qu'on trouve de valable au point de vue litteraire  dans   les   revues   et   les   jour­ neaux." Un  inventaire de cette sorte  est, en effet,  une chose necessaire, mais jamais cet   inventaire  ne  saurait   etre  fait   une fois  pour  toutes,  jamais  un  examen d'un phenomene  litteraire  quel   qu'il   soit  ne saurait etre  definitif.  Par  contre, l'autre recommendation, celle qui propose qu'une bibliographie  commentee   de   toutes   les theses en litterature canadienne-franc;aise soutenues  au  Canada et  en  France soit mise  a  la  disposition   des  professeurs   et des  etudiants,  est  une   recommendation de  toute  premiere importance.
Les diff,erents chapitres de ce livre sont accompagnes d'une  tres   longue   biblio­ graphie et  celle  du  directeur  du  centre  de  recherches en  litterature  canadienne­ fran<;aise  de   l'Universite   d'Ottawa  est exemplaire.
Dans  son commentaire a l'etude de Monsieur Wyczynski,  Benoit  Lacroix  in­ siste   sur   nos   nombreuses   publications, autant  du  cotJe des livres que du  coue des revues.  C'est  la un fait qu'on  ne souligne

68
 pas  suffisamment.  Nous   nous   plaignons trop  facilement de  la  situation de  !'edi­ tion  et de la lituerature au Canada  Fran­
<;ais, si nous tenons  compte de proportion demographique,   nous  nous    rendons compte  tres  facilement  que   nous   pub­ lions ici et que  nous  consommons ice une lituerature plus abondante que celle qu'on peut   publier ou  consommer  en Europe. Le   chapitre  suivant  est   une  enquete faite   en  collaboration qui  s'intitule "Le  statut de  l'ecrivain et  la  diffusion   de  la lituerature." C'est  un point de vue sociolo­ gique   sur  le  phenomene  litreraire et  ce point  de  vue  a son importance autant au niveau  des  tableaux  comparatifs de  pub­  lications  par   rapport aux  genres,   qu'au niveau  de  quelques observations comme  celle  qui nous  apprend qu'en rg63  dans le   Quebec,  il   y   avait    seulement  I 05 librairies de  detail, dont  63 librairies cul­ turelles.  Quelques comparaisons nous ap­  prennent   qu'en   Suisse   romande  on compte  une   librairie   pour   4,ooo   habi­  tants;  qu'en   France  on   compte   une librairie pour   7,ooo  habitants; et  qu'au Quebec  on   compte  une   librairie  pour
so,ooo  habitants.
Ceci   donne   a  reflechir, d'autant  plus que   plus   loin   un   ecrivain  canadien  se plaint de la critique qui, selon lui, est inexistante. Ainsi,  ce  que  j'ecrivais dans mon    livre   sur   l'Ecole    de   Montreal  a propos   de  la  critique d'art  qui,  a  mon sens, n'existe  pas  pas  d'une fac;on  profes­ sionnelle    au    Canada-Franc;ais,   s'appli­ querait   egalement   au    dire   meme    de plusieurs 'ecrivains,  a  la critique littJeraire au   Canada-Franc;ais.  Cette situation penible,  pour  ne pas  dire scandaleuse, de la critique et de la chronique, se poursuit d'une fa<;on  incomp11ehensible.
Le    chapitre   suivant  porte    le   titre
general  de "La litrerature comme  expres-

REVIEW ARTICLES



sion   de   Ia  soc ete"   et  s'ouvre  par   une etude de Monsieur Leopold Lamontagne, intitulee "Les  courants ideologiques dans Ia   litnerature   canadienne-fran<_;aise   du
XIXe siecle".  En  commentaire a cet  ex­
pose, Monsieur Jean-Charles Bonenfant souligne Ia necessire de developper des monographies plus nombreuses et mieux faites  sur  Ia  litterature canadienne  d'ex­ pression    franc;aise,   lesquelles   monogra­ phies  sont  necessaires  avant  d'en  arriver  aux    syntheses   magistrales   dont    nous avons  besoin.
Une  excellente etude  de  Monsieur Jean-Charles Falardeau sur  "Les  milieux sociaux dans le roman canadien-franc;ais contemporain" est suivi par  un brillant commentaire de  Marcel Rioux.
La  partie  Ia plus faible  de cette  publi­ cation   me  semble  etre  celle  qui  aborde quelques  themes  de   notre  litterature recente. Michel   Van  Schendel s'attache
au  theme  de !'amour, Gilles  Marcotte a
celui  de  Ia religion,  et  Jean Filiatrault a
celui  de  Ia  vevolte.  Le  commentaire  de
Hubert Aquin  se termine sur cette  phrase tres  significative: "Ce  qui  m'apparait  en tout   cas  in eressant
legues,  leur   capacite de  decrire des  ca­ rences   comme   s'il  s'agissait   de  Ia   belle normali e."
La  derniere partie  du  livre,  s'intitule "Les  conftits et Ia comp1ementarite des m,ethodes". II s'y  trouve d'abord un article de Ciement Lockquell, portant sur l'intuition  en  critique litteraire. Cet  ar­ ticle   est   commenre  par   Eva   Kushner.
 Fernand  Dumont  nous pr,esente Ia sociologie  comme   une  methode de  criti­ que   litteraire  et  le  commentaire  en  est fait   par  Jeanne  Lapointe. En  "Conclu­ sions   et   perspectives"   le   Pere  Andre  Vachon, s.J.,  s'intJeresse au  probleme du langage,   de  !'analyse du  contenu  et  de
!'interpretation du  contenu. II est  regret­
table que ce court  mais solide article se termine par   une  derniere strophe d'une sensibilite  toute  liturgique.
C'est  un  appareil  scientifique qui  ter­
mine  ce lourd  bouquin; en  bibliographie on  trouve  Ia  liste  des  romans et  des  re­ cueils   de   poemes   d'auteurs   canadiens­ franc;ais  ci es
au cours du  colloque,  on trouve  un index des auteurs  cites.
Le  seul  jugement que   je  me  permets de  porter  sur  "Litterature et  societe canadiennes-fran<_;aises"  va  dans   le  sens d'un   souhait:  des  travaux comme  celui­ ci   nous  sont   absolument   necessaires   et quand  ils  sont  conduits  dans   cette   per­  spective,  ils ne peuvent etre  que  les bien­ venus.  II est normal que  telle  partie d'un
ouvrage  de cette  envergure paraisse  a tel
lecteur  plus faible. Ce qu'il  faut souligner, c'est !'importance  d'une  demarche
d'ordre sociologique  pour  parvenir a une
meilleure   connaissance,  et   done   a  une
meilleure   compvehension  de   ce   pheno­ mene  litneraire  qui  est  notre,  Ia  littera­ ture  canadienne-franc;aise, de  ce  pheno­ mene  qui transforme en  profondeur, qu'­ on   le   veuille   ou   non,  notre  societe canadienne-franc;aise.









6g







ALIENATION
AND ALONENESS

JOHN   NEWLOVE,    Moving in   Alone.  Contact
Press.  Paper $2.00, cloth,  $3.00.

IN  A   NARROW   PARTICULAR   SENSE poets are  in  competition with  each  other,  des­ pite  the  fact  each  one  is supposed  to  be unique.  In  another sense entirely,  quite  apart  from   the   material   rewards   for poetry   (which   don't  happen  to  be  very bounteous any  way),  a good poem acts as spur,   incentive and  springboard  for  an­ other poet.  It is  something  he  can  learn from,  somebody  else's step ahead, where­ by  he   too  can   take   a  step   ahead   still farther in  a  direction he  may  not  have known  existed. Maybe  also a  catalyst,  a thought-trigger which  affects  more  than one  person.  And because it is these things, it  enables  others   with  the  right  mixture of  humility  and   insufferable egotism  to learn.
Well,  in  this  book  I  think  John  New­ love has  learned from  people  with  some­ thing   to  teach,   though  in  no  pedantic sense.  His  rhythmic style is  smooth,   not jagged.    It  flows,  rolls   ahead   with   the certainty of  a  poet  having  something to say.  And  what  Newlove  has  to  say  sel­ dom   ventures  far  from  fact  or  concrete incident.  The   people   and   place   names seem  familiar,  though not commonplace. Even   the  few  quietly   speculative poems have  this  hard, solid  base. The one really imaginative  poem  of Newlove's  I've  seen was  published in  the  magazine  Evidence,

70
 and is not included here. The  rhythm is conversational in  tone,  but  has a "metric feeling", even if you can't always prove it.
The  title,  Moving  In   Alone,  charac­ terizes  quite  accurately the  sort of poems the   book  contains.  Isolation,  alienation and   aloneness.  In  some  degree  also  it  is poetry   of  self-pity,   the  confessions  of  a man   who  is perfectly  aware  of  the  dan­ gers  inherent  in  his  confessional   stance (i.e.,   confession   implies  some   sort  of guilt,  and  gets  close  to  the  basic  idea  of religion).
In   Newlove's   poetry   one  is  bound   to
think  of the problem  of human communi­ cation;  the  struggle   to  express  nuances, hints  and  half-formed  thoughts; the  im­ plicit   premise   that   all   of  us  are   alone essentially,   despite  the  small   twitters   of sound    we   make,   the   flutter    of   hands  reaching out  for something-

So faithless one,  I in  despair
turn from  myself  to you: Crying,
I am  the  desperate faithless one, I am  the  unbeliever, the  liar
always  confessing, have  faith  in  me!

Though inconstant as  the  wallowing sea, I will  not  move  from  about your  rock: stay  in  this  poem,  stay  with  me!
("Stay in  This  Room")

Newlove  achieves  power  and  grandeur in  the  above  excerpt, which  mere quota­ tion  conveys  very imperfectly. It  matters little   that   I  disagree   with  many  of  the things   the  poem  actually  says, and   that  therefore   the    positive    statements   are pretty  rhetorical  to  me.  The   important thing  is:  it's  a fine  poem,  probably New­ love's  best.
Not   to  be  one-sided, I'd   better  men­ tion  some of the  things  I don't like about  John Newlove.  For  instance, he ends  one short   piece   entitled   "Kamsack"   with: "but I found  it arid, as young  men  will."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I  think  this  is a derivative stereotype, al­ most  Housmanish. But  poets,  like  lovers and  actors,  are  liable  to strike  an attitude sometimes.  It's  the  very  natural  fault  of settling  for  a smooth,  complete-sounding phrase,   without   thinking  about   it   any more,    or   wondering   why   it   has   that  peculiar echo of having  been said already.
In  addition, there  is the inherent fault
of all confessional  and  personal poems, which  is "I-I-I-1" ad  infinitum. And  you begin   to  wonder   if  the   poet   was  ever merely an observer, someone you never noticed, who witnessed  a murder, or a withered  blade   of   grass   by  the   traffic light  moving   or  seeming   to  move  when cars  rushed   by.
If only  as device  or  technique to  pre­ vent    boredom    in   a   reader,   the   poet should  sometimes  get  the  hell  out  of  his own  poems,  at  least  seem  to  present  the
 facts  and  nothing else. As device  or tech­ nique  only,  mind   you:   for  even  an  ob­ server  slants  and   arranges  his  material.
However,    those   are   minor   points.   I want to emphasize one thing very strongly,  Moving  In  Alone is a fine book: Newlove's  best  to  date   (and   I  hear  the endless  echo   of  other    reviewers   saying the same  thing about now-forgotten volumes).
Despite  a few  false  notes  the  book has
the  quality  of an  integrated personal  tes­ tament. Perhaps in  future  Newlove  will call  to question  some of the  attitudes and stances  in  particular  poems.  I  think  he must in order  to write  better ones. In  the meantime, from  the perspective of a not­ neutral  observer,  the  sum-total  of  these poems  looks very  large  to me.
A. W. PURDY






Winner of the University of British Columbia Medal
{or Popular Biography ...

JOHN ADDINGTON  SYMONDS
BY PHYLLIS  GROSSKURTH

Also  winner of  the  Governor  General's  Award for   Creative   Non-Fiction,  this   full-scale   biog­ raphy  centres  around  an   enigmatic   figure   of the   Victorian era-John  Addington  Symonds
-historian, biographer,  confidant of   Swin­ burne,  Whitman  and    Stevenson,  and   a   man  obsessed   with  homosexuality in   times   of   rigid  morality. "Intelligent,  tactful   and   sensitive treatment ..." Toronto  Telegram.
At  your booksellers, $to.oo

LONGMANS  CANADA LIMITED

BOOKS IN REVIEW



JOYOUS OPTIMISM
MICHAEL   PARR,   The  Green   F•ig Tree.  Mac­
millan, $3.50.

THE   THEMES THAT UNDERLIE   most  of the  poems  in  Michael Parr's  The  Green Fig Tree are  unusual in contemporary Canadian  poetry  in  two  ways;  they  are at  one  and  the  same  time  both  religious and  joyously optimistic. Although  a few poems    (notably  "In  the   Beginning") deal successfully and memorably with a religious   theme   in  the  formal   and   his­ torical   sense,   the   poet's   key   symbol­ that  of the green  fig  tree-indicates  the source  of  his  worship.  It is nothing less than  the green  earth, the fruitful mother of  all   organic  life,  and   the  worship   is blended  with  the love and the miraculous awe  that  are  inspired  by Earth's children in their  multiplicity of form and flesh: clouds,  flowers,  insects,  trees,  snakes, foxes, crows, owls, crocuses, men, and women.   All   these   become   to   the   de­ lighted  poet  occasions  for  the celebration of  the  keen  enjoyment of  living.
The  devil's  side of the  drum  of  life­
winter,   storm,  old  age,  death,  imperfec­ tion, crime, squalor, and   idiocy-is sounded  here   softly   and   seldom.   And perhaps  that   is  the  main  defect  in  the book.   The  cumulative  effect  of  eighty­ three  pages  of  hosannas -however  well conceived   and  executed-resolves itself ultimately  to   a   stunned  monotony    in which  inevitably  the  later  poems  suffer. One  can  say  of  the  Earth, as  the  poet says,  with  his Mary  in mind:
each  _day's  rising   sun   do  I love  you:
but   lastingly
and   0 more   terrible  than   these.
but    even    such    terrible    love   for   this
 planet,  or  for   a  woman, cannot  stand the  battering of constant repetition  with­ out  modulation.
It is  in  this  relative  sameness  of  atti­
tude    that    Michael   Parr    differs   most greatly    from   the   late   Dylan   Thomas, whose  work  is most  closely  allied  to  his own in theme and technique. Although Thomas was essentially  a poet of fertility, harvest, and   the  sun  among   the  leaves, he could  rage  against  the end  of autumn or  the  dying  of  the  lig,ht. Circumstances have   not   yet  called   forth   that   rage   in Parr.    He   will   be,   one   feels,   a   much greater poet  when  they  do.  In  fact,  there are   indications  in   this  volume,   in  two poems  ("Birth" and  "Genesis") where creation  is  fused   with   pain,   of  a  more muted   rhetoric  and   a  more   precise  im­ aginative intensity.  Two   other   poems ("For  Those  Who   are   Younger   than  Poets"    and   "The  Boy  in   the   Rowan Tree")   point   to  the   potential   Michael Parr  whose  poems  will no  longer  need  a technical "bag  of tricks"  to attract atten­ tion  to them  but  will stand on simple  but inevitable  expression behind  whose clarity  one  can  see  a  true  and  imaginative re­ sponse   to   experience,  the   naked   body of   poetry.   In   the   meantime,  however,  there    is   plenty   of  competent  rhetoric, controlled  in  length  and  in  tone,  in The Green  Fig Tree. Let  us examine a typical sample   to  see  the  manner of  it:

The  crocus pushing up   through  mud, clean   as  the   whistled  blackbird  bill
that  sings   the   ring   the   new   sun   made,­
swings  in  the  grass  pure as  a  bell,

and   yellow  flings  her  music  now daring  the   enemy   of  ice
circling  with   spearpoints marching high:
no  braver sight   can   meet   the  eyes.

There is  nothing  particularly  distinc­
tive  in  the  form  of  the  above  two  quat-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



rams.   The  metre is  a   uniform  iambic tetrameter, except   that   such   key  words as  "clean", "swings", "daring", and "circling" are  emphasized  by  the  inver­ sion  of  the  accented feet  in  which  they occur. The effect  of the hackneyed words chosen   for   rhymes   in   both    stanzas   is beautifully  cancelled   by   the   relatively fresh  device  of the half-rhyme. Assonance and   alliteration   are  effective,    conven­  tional,  and  unobtrusive. Two  character­ istics,  however,  are  outstanding in  these stanzas.  One   is  the  sure-footed  balance of  the  long  sentence, which  turns   (as  it ought)  on   line  four   of  the   first  stanza and  line  one  of the  second,  which  comes to a  halt  at  the  close of line  three  of the second  stanza, and  which  is recapitulated in   the   final   line   of   the   passage.   The second    principal   characteristic   is   the
 sy:ru.esthetic linking   of  concrete  imagery with  normally diverse associations ("mud" with "clean", "sings" with "ring")  and   the  ambiguous  associations of   "pure"  and    "yellow"  with   all   the nouns  that  had  preceded the  appearance of  these  words.  Such   complex   but  con­ trolled  organization does  not  come  from chance    but    from    intelligent    patience wedded  to  technical skill.  It  will  inevit­  ably   produce  verse   worth   the   reader's respect  and   must  inevitably,  as  its  pro­ ducer  sharpens  his  powers  of observation with  practice and  ever  deepening experi­  ence,  produce great  poems  with  increas­ ing  frequency. The  Green  Fig Tree  is, it seems  to me,  a  worthy  prelude to a  dis­ tinguished   career   as  a  poet.
FRED COGSWELL





Cfl NflDIllN  LITERJITURE
BACK ISSUES

Important back issues of Canadian Literature still available include  the  following:

No. 	8.    Special Malcolm Lowry Number. Original articles, letters and poems by Malcolm Lowry, articles by Conrad Aiken, Earle   Birney, Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol  Fouchet, etc.

No.   15.    Salute to A. J. M.  Smith. Articles on  A. J. M.  Smith by Earle  Birney, Roy Fuller and Milton Wilson,together with original  poems and a  Self-Review  by   A.  J.  M.  Smith.
No.   19.    Special  E.  J. Pratt  Number.  Articles  on   E. J.  Pratt by Paul   West,  Fred  Cogswell and  Vincent Sharman,  to­ gether with Ethel  Wilson's memoir on  Alan  Crawley.

$1.25  each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE PUBLICATIONS CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.



73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A CONCOCTION CALLED FUFU

CHARLES E. ISRAEL, Shadows on a Wall.
Macmillan. $6.50.


THE  NARRATIVE  LINE of  this  novel  con­ cerns   two   people:  Nancy   Kohl    (later  Brandon)   and  Lawrence   Brandon. Nancy,  a  Pennsylvania  girl,  educated at Bryn  Mawr, goes to  England, becomes  a reporter for an international wire service, develops   a   malignancy  which   forces   a hysterectomy and  leaves her emotionally crippled. Trying to heal the wound  to her womanhood, she takes a position at the Company's bureau   in  the Gold  Coast­ a few  years  prior  to its becoming  Ghana
-where she meets a little girl, an urchin who  sells a concoction called  fufu in  the streets   of  Accra.   Nancy,  in  effect,  buys
the  girl  from   her   uncle   and   aunt  and sends  her  to  a  mission  school  to be  edu­ cated.    When,    a   few   years   later,   the bureau   is taken  over  by a  native  of  the Gold   Coast,   Nancy   returns   to  Europe, reluctantly leaving  her substitute daugh­ ter   at   the   school.   In  Geneva,   Nancy meets  Lawrence who  has served  recently with  the army  and  has stayed on to work as a  PRO  for  one  of the  European refu­ gee  organizations. They  are  married and  go  to live in California where Lawrence becomes  a staff writer  for a liberal maga­ zine  called   Patria.  They   bring  the  girl, Akua,   from   what    is  now   Ghana  and  adopt  her  as their  daughter. By this time Akua  is seventeen, a  freshman at  college and,  according to the author, emotionally  disturbed. It  is  out  of  this  disturbance that   the  major  crisis  of the  novel  arises.
The way the  narrative is plotted  seems


74
 to  be  one  of  the  problems   of  the  book. The  story  is  picked   up  as  the  Brandons are  driving   to  the  airport to meet  Alma. The scene  is told  from  Lawrence  Bran­ don's  point  of view. The next  chapter is an   excerpt  from   Nancy  Kohl's  journal  telling   of   her   departure  for   the   Gold Coast. There follows  a  chapter narrated in  the  present by  Lawrence, which  also flashes  back  to some of his life before  he knew   Nancy.   Then  there   is  a  chapter from   Nancy's   journal.  And  so  it  goes: Lawrence,  the   journal,   Lawrence,  the journal, and  each seems  to  be  designed  to  bring   us  closer  to  the  actual  present  where  the  final  conflict  with  Akua  takes place.
This  technique  does   two   things:    it
never  allows  the  author  (or  the  reader) very  near  the  actual centre of  the  story, and   it  makes   the  final  actions   and   re­ actions of Akua  and  her adoptive parents unbelievable. Akua,  the  supposed  raison d'etre  for  the  novel,  remains  throughout an   enigma -which  is  all  very  well  for the   people   in  the   book,  but  the  reader  misses  all   the  points  too,  and   the  total effect  is finally  similar  to  riding  a  train  without  the   security    of   a   meaningful destination. To put  it bluntly, the  reader  is asked  to cover  a lot  of territory  (some of  it   two   or   three   times)   in  order   to arrive  at   a   station   not   very  far   down the  track.
Nancy  Kohl's journal is interesting but
largely   irrelevant. It  tells  of  her  life  in the  Gold  Coast,  her  various  failures  as a sexual   partner,  the   neurosis   that   rises out   of  her   barrenness,  but   it  says  very little,  if anything at  all, about  Akua  as a person.   Children  are   people   too.  Law­ rence's flashbacks  are  less interesting and  less  relevant   because   they   have   to  do with  matters that  are  almost  always  out-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



side  of  the  supposed  scope  of  the  con­ cerns  of the  book. Had  this  been  a  novel about  the  Brandon's marriage, the back­ ground  material  each   of   the   partners give  would   probably  have   been   better  directed, but  as these  passages stand  now
-and  they  take  up  better  than  half  the book-they simply  make  the  reader  im­ patient  to   get   on   with   the   really   im­ portant   matters   concerning   events   in California where  the  crisis of  Akua's  ar­ rival  has  focused  the  reader's  interest.
When    finally   we   are   through   with Lawrence's German countess  and Nancy's unhappy  temptations  and   loves,  we  do move   to  California  for   the   last  ninety pages   of   the   book.   The  crisis   arrives. Akua-who seems a pretty normal teen­ ager   to  me,  give  or  take  a  few  special cultural problems, burns  the  novel Nancy is writing  and  tells her  parents she never loved  them  and   never  did.  Immediately Nancy  and  Lawrence decide  to ship  her home  to  Ghana. The girl  runs  away  to Lawrence's  best  friends, Jeff   and   Jean, who  are   negroes,   and   Jeff   understands the  problem   as  a  racial-sexual one  and turns  on Lawrence and  Nancy.  They  are put  in Coventry without ever  being given a  chance to  explain  themselves.
At this point  the reader's suspension  of disbelief  is shattered. Lawrence says Akua is bad,  rotten, evil.  Nancy  does  not  con­ tradict. They  decide  she is dead  for them and   Jeff   and   Jean    can   have   the  girl. Lawrence,  as  a   result   of  Jeff's  propa­ ganda  around  the   office,  is  fired  from the  magazine, but  then  Jeff   turns  up  at Lawrence's house  at  midnight  one  night and  says that  he  has  found out  too  that  the girl is evil-although we never know exactly   on   what   grounds.  Akua   comes back  to  the  Brandons to  be  shipped  off via  Pan  Am  for  Ghana. On   the  way  to
 


the  airport she  makes  as sensible  a  sum­ mary  of her  psychological  position as any psychiatrist could   have  done  and,  for  a moment,  Nancy    and   Lawrence   waver.  But  they  let  her  go anyway.  In  terms  of the  book,  the  implied  intention,  not  to mention  the  jacket  blurb, it is difficult  to say  why.  The  reader has  been  told  over and   over   ag,ain   that   the   parents  loved her,  that  Akua  was necessary  to  Nancy's staying  alive  as  a  personality. Suddenly the  problem   is  shifted   from   the  girl  to her  parents, and  what  seemed  to  be the direction  and  meaning of the novel are reversed.  The reader   is  left-and  it  is a  pity-with   the  feeling   that   Akua  is well  out  of  it  and   that  even  if  families in Ghana are  willing  to sell their daugh­ ters  it  would  be  well  if  the  U.S.  Immi­ gration Service  were  more  careful about whom  they  let  adopt  various  waifs from  around the  world.
There is nothing wrong,  please  let me
say,  about   writing   a  novel  concerning a teenager   from   Ghana  who  is evil.  And after   Jeff's  outburst  about   her   there   is little  the reader can  conclude except  that the  girl  is supposed   to  be viewed  as evil. But   I think   the   reader   has  a  right   to

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



know  why, and  the  way the  book is writ­ ten literally  prevents this knowledge. The structure  he  selected  forced   the  author out   of  the   ken  of   his  protagonist, and what  he  chose  to  let  that  structure con­ tain   simply   does   not   bear   on   the   girl enough  to  give  the  reader   the  sense  of having  been   informed about her. It would  have  been  better,  surely,  had  Mr.  Israel   used   much   of  the   Ghana-Paris­ Geneva-Munich material in another book and   had   taken    the   more   difficult   but more  rewarding route   to  his  destination by  staying   in   California  and   allowing Akua  to speak  for  herself.
ROBERT HARLOW

ARTIST'S PASSION
HUGH    HOOD,   White Figure,  White  Ground.
Ryerson. $5.50.

To ATTEMPT TO WRITE a novel about a painter  without invoking   la  vie  de   bo­ heme   as   a   tenuous  support    is   always praiseworthy; to write  of the artist's crea­ tive  process after  Joyce   Cary's The Horse's  Mouth is a matter of  courage. In this  novel  Mr.  Hood  does  both,  and  suc­ ceeds  to the  very extent to which his work rejects    the   past.   His   hero,   Alexander MacDonald,  is  reasonably contented with his marriage, and  accepts  the  praise  that  the artistic world  has lavished  upon  him;  he  is  as  dedicated  to  his  art   as  Gulley Jimson,   but   he   is  not   the   "romantic" artist.  His  strength  lies  in   his  attempt to  gain knowledge of himself and of his heritage,   to   come   to   terms   with   the world   both   inside   and   outside   himself, and  in this exploratory process to expand his own consciousness, and extend  the possibilities  of  his  own  creativity.
 The  plot    grows    quietly    from    two sources  in  MacDonald: his g;rowing  dis­ satisfaction   with    his   current,   popular style   of   painting,   and    his   increasing worry   about   the   death of  his  father, a disappointed  man,   some  three  years  be­ fore.  His   journey   from  Montreal to  his family  home  in  Nova Scotia  becomes  not merely  a search  for  the undisclosed  facts about   his  father,  but  for  the   unknown facts  about  himself,  facts  which  will en­  able  him  to go beyond  the superficial  joy of  his  recent   paintings. In   Nova  Scotia he  encounters a  new  world  which  he  is able  to   apprehend   artistically  with   no great  difficulty,  but  his relatives  resist his importunate attempts to  explore the background of  his  father's departure. In consequence, he  is  left  to  work  out  his own  problems in  his "white"  painting­ white   the  colour   of   joy-while talking  daily   to   his  distant   cousin   Ellen,   with whom   he  develops   a  companionable re­ lationship in  the  absence  of  his  wife.  In this   central   passage   of  the   book   Mac­  Donald  talks  to  Ellen  of his father's life, his own  life,  and  his craft.  When  finally he  finishes  the  painting, and  his father's error  is revealed to  him,  he is quite  able not  merely   to  accept  the  past,  but  also to   realize   that   in   his  innocent  though tender relationship with  Ellen  he has ex­ posed  the  "curse" which  had   been  laid upon    him   and    his   father.  From   this position   he  is  then  enabled to  return  to his  normal  world,   where   he  can   com­ plete    the    second    of   his   two   abstract paintings,  this   time   a   painting  which admits  all   the   darkness  of  which   it  is capable,  but   which   reveals   small   ele­ ments  of light  which  make  it  "genuinely comic".
Mr.  Hood's great   problem   is that   the real  action  of the  novel  goes on  between

BOOKS IN REVIEW



MacDonald  and   his  canvas.   Thus   his pure   friendship  with   Ellen,,  though  ac­ ceptable,   is   somewhat   bloodless;    and even  with   his  wife,  for  all  the  physical affirmation of  her  later  preg,nancy,  it  is still somewhat hard  to feel  that  his emo­ tion is not  in some way abstract, less real than   the   paint   that  makes   up  the  two "Light Source"  paintings. I  do  not  wish to  question the  "reality" of  l\1r.  Hood's  portrait of  MacDonald-he has achieved  a great  deal in allowing  us to participate in  MacDonald's creativity, observing per­ ceptions   far   different  from   our  own­ but merely  to indicate the cost of portray­ ing  the  good,  quiet  man  absorbed  in  an art  form  which,  after music,  must  be the hardest  to  convey  in  words.
By  contrast  Mr.   Hood   is  totally  suc­ cessful  with   his  two  Nova  Scotian  old maids.    Narrow,    suspicious,    inhibiting, they  view  the  world  with  the  values  of sixty  years   ago,   indicating   clearly   the kind  of  society  away  from   which  Mac­ Donald has grown  but  to which  he owes a  great  deal.
In  fact  the  whole  Nova  Scotia  setting
is one  of  the  book's  great   achievements. In  contrast to  the  world  of  art  as  com­ merce,   represented  by  the   two  dealers Herscovits   and  Shumsky,   Barringford, N.S.,  is the  source  of  the  quiet  in  which MacDonald can  explore his medium and himself  for   his  own  benefit.   Mr.   Hood  writes   with    a   real    affection   for   the strange landscape  of   southern  Nova Scotia,  and  one  has a strong  sense of the relation  between  the  land and the people. But  here  I would sugg,est that  on at least one occasion  in  an otherwise well-written novel  Mr. Hood is guilty  of a grave  mis­ judgment.  The  novel  is one in  which  the author is striving uphill   all  the  time  for real   individuality  in   the   thought  and
 actions  of his hero.  At  the  same  time, in creating  his  settings   he  has  often,  par­ ticularly   towards   the   beginning   of   the book,  confused   mere  fact   with  descrip­  tive atmosphere. One  knows Barringford very  well  from   the  conversation,   of  the old  ladies  and  of  the  hotel  keeper,  and by  the   end   of   the   novel   it   is  clearly a  whole  way  of   life.  In  this  light   the brief  but  appalling  intrusion of  the  nar­  rator  at  the  b101ginning of Chapter Six of the  first part  is inexplicable. "There isn't one night club -not one -in the whole of   the  Atlantic  Provinces!   Not   that   it matters!" Of  course,  it  does  matter, and is in some sense relevant  to the  book, but that    such   an   extraordinary  expression should  stand  out  coyly as a  single  para­ graph amid  two pages of relatively super­  fluous chatty  information about  Barring­ ford  reveals a disappointing lapse of taste
-big city parochialism scoffing  at  small
town  quaintness. What  the   rest  of  the book   tells  us  very  clearly   is  that   Mr. Hood  is a sufficiently accomplished writer to enable us to perceive the world he is creating  without  having   to  explicate it for  US.                                            MICHAEL WARREN


ENOUGH!  CRIED THE DUCHESS
ARTHUR  HAILEY,  Hotel.  Doubleday.  $6.95.

Hotel  has  nothing to do  with  literature: that  has already  been elaborately demon­ strated by reviewers  who  have  fried  the book from  Time   to  the  CBC. But  I  had hoped  that  perhaps it would suggest some questions  which  aren't  usually applied to this   kind   of  novel.   For  instance,  most reviewers  are  content  to consider a  book like  Hotel   as  a  failed   serious   novel-

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



but   should   we  not  consider  such  books also in terms of their sub-literary uses? Peddling factual information about  their "subjects" (this  kind  of book  has  a  sub­ ject  in  just  the  same  sense  that   a  text­ book  does), entertaining their  readers  in an   undemanding  way,  offering  a  crude kind  of moral instruction, serving a func­  tion   in   a   dull   life  rather  like  that   of television:   isn't   there  a  place  for  that? In  fact   these   are   surely  similar   to  the functions  Defoe  and  Richardson, for  in­ stance,  served  for  their  age.  So  why  the contempt  we   hear  in   the   reviewers'  voices?
The  standard  ingredients of  a   best­ seller  like  Hotel  should  each  raise  some minor   issues  as  well:   a  little  violence;  some  dreadful accident;  probably  a  pro­  fessional  and  ethical conflict;  some clean­ ing-lady-and-cigar-butt  realism;  a   little deft   smut.   Well,   why  do   we   demand these things in our fiction? When the professional  conflict is between  the g;ood innkeeper  and   the   sterile   chain   hotels, what   determines that   that   theme  is  too trivial   to  sustain   a  novel?   Is  an   adult entitled-if   he  wants  it- to  a  bit  of vicarious  voyeurism? Such  questions should  at  least  have  made  the  novel  fun to  read.
In  fact  it  is astonishingly dull,  especi­ ally  since  Hailey  has gone  to some pains to  show  how  up-to-the-minute  it  is:  for instance, the  hotel  is not complying  with the  Civil  Rights  Act  (the  hero  of course disapproves), and  the British Prime Min­ ister  is  knowingly   referred   to  as  "Hal" (though  the   action   takes   place  in   the summer   of	1g64) .   The    smut    is   not deft; the  writing is hackneyed, and  con­ fused   to  the   point   of  comedy   ("head­ lights  stabbing the  night  like  an  endless chain") ;  and   Hailey  delights  in  hand-
 ing out-to no fictional  purpose-little bits  of  inside  information and   hotelier's slang   (the   "ha-ha  room", the   "liquor­ butt  hustle") . The reader   is  bludgeoned repeatedly  over  the  most  obvious  points ("The  title  of  assistant  manag,er,  as  in most   hotels,   was   mainly   a  sop   to   the public's vanity,  allowing them  to  believe they  were  dealing with  a  higher  person­  age  than in reality.  The real  authority of the  hotel was in  the executive offices, out of  sight.")  This last  quality  in  Hotel  led another reader   to  dub  it  "fiction  for  the feeble-minded".
"An   intelligent  reader,"  Lamb   once said,  "finds  a sort of insult  in being  told: I will teach you how to think upon this subject." The  insult   helps   account  for the reviewers'  irritability. So does the realization  that   Hotel   and   books  like  it are written by novelists who do not understand their  own  characters or the subtlety    of   the    moral    questions  they raise;   Hailey   apparently  approves of  his hero   unquestioningly, for  instance,  per­ fectly  unaware of  his  self-deception, his shallowness,    his   emotional  retardation. More:  if  Hailey   really   thinks   that   the people   and   events  of  this  novel  as  he presents  them  are  serious  and  meaning­ ful,   then   he  is  unable  to  perceive   the difference between   an  arbitrary and  tri­ vial   succession   of  events   and   a   set   of events  grouped together because they are subsumed in  a  unifying  meaning. Yet  a real  novel  must  be  rooted  in such  a  per­  ception,  however  inadequate its  expres­  sion  may  be.
An   artist  can  write an   interesting
novel  on  any  topic,  but  Hotel  is finally  a dismal   reminder  that   novels  which   lack all  literary  distinction  can   only  be  sus­ tained   even  for  a  season  by a  theme or a   subject,  usually   topical,   which   pas-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sionately  engages  the  attention of the author and  reader  alike, however ephem­ eral  it  may essentially  be. In High  Places was such a book. Otherwise, the lesson of Henry James  still obtains:  books without art  are commonly books without interest. "This  has  gone   far   enough!"  snaps   a Duchess  (yes, there is actually a Duchess)  on   pa,ge  24.  With  over   350  pages  still ahead  of  him,   the  reader  may  be  par­  doned   who  agrees.               D.  A. CAMERON


THE FINE ART OF HISTORY
FRANCIS   PARKMAN,   Montcalm  and    Wolfe,
Ryerson. $ r r.oo.

IN  A    RECENT   New   Yorker  article   Ed­ mund    Wilson   discussed   Francis   Park­  man's masterwork, France  and  England in   North  America,  and   remarked: "I was surprised not  to see it  in  any  of the bookstores    or   in   the   libraries  of   the houses  I  visited." The  criticism was well made;   the    one   undoubted   classic   of Canadian history is, in the  present  gener­  ation,    much   too   little    known    among  Canadian   readers.    This   makes   all  the more  welcome  the  appearance of M ant­  calm  and  Wolfe,  originally intended by Parkman   as   the    final    section    of   his History,   with   a  most   informative  His­ torical  Foreword by Esmond  Wright.
In  discussing Tolstoy's  War  and Peace, E.   M.   Forster  once   remarked  on   the sense   of   space   in   that    novel,   on   the "great chords" which  are  sounded and which  "come  from  the  immense area  of Russia,  over  which  episodes  and  charac­ ters  have  been  scattered, from  the  sum­ total  of bridges  and  frozen  rivers, forests, roads,  gardens, fields,  which  accumulate
 grandeur  and    sonority   after    we   have passed  them." This  same  power  of  evok­ ing   space,   of   re-creating the   physical nature of a land  in which  history is mak­  ing  itself, appears in  Parkman's  work.
In  the terms  of his time,  Parkman was
a conscientious and  painstaking historian, assiduous  in  research, and  for  long  years after  him little  of importance was added to the actual  information he presented of the  complex  struggles  of French and British  armies,  of  partisans and  Indians, which preceded the final con,quest of Quebec,  while  his  character  portraits of the  men  who  fought in  these  struggles, of Wolfe,  Montcalm, Rogers,  and  all the lesser actors,  still shape  the images  which our  minds  retain   of  them.
His   Protestant  background  and  con­ victions,    indeed,   made   him    interpret harshly   the  activities of  the  Jesuit   mis­ sionaries,  and  one  detects  in  his  general  attitude an  assumption of an historic  role for  Anglo-Saxons  in the  North American continent  which    seems   to   embrace  at least   a   premonitory   suggestion   of   the doctrine of   manifest   destiny.   But  such flaws  in   objectivity   are   the   inevitable price  of  any   treatment  of  history   that  goes  beyond  mere   factualism;  interpre­ tation  incurs  bias,  and  it  cannot be said that   the  bias  of  Parkman is  too  high  a price  to pay for  the  general excellence  of a   work   which    can   stand    beside   The Decline  and  Fall  of the  Roman Empire  as an  example of  History   Considered as One of  the  Fine  Arts.
The   comparison  with   Gibbon   is  not
inappropriate.  Like    Gibbon,   Parkman was  an  almost   immaculate  stylist,  with a  rhetorical instinct  which   enabled   him to  write  magnificent set  pieces  of  topo­ graphical description without  lapsing  in­ to   meaningless   orotundity.   But,   unlike

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Gibbon, he had  the  advantage of having travelled  through  the  regions  of  which he  dealt  at  a  time  when  the  atmosphere of  the  primitive forest  existence  had  not entirely  passed  away.  It was as if Gibbon had  actually  lived  in  the  camps  of  the Goths,  and  the  combination of  environ­ mental immediacy with  the temporal de­ tachment  provided  by  the  century   and more    which    elapsed   between    Wolfe's time   and    Parkman's   is   perhaps  what gives  Montcalm  and  Wolfe  its own  par­  ticular and  inimitable quality.   It could only  have  been   written   by  a  man   who combined  with  a  historian's insight  and literary   talent   the   experience  in  youth which   led  Parkman   to  write   that   re­ markably  fine  first-hand  description  of the American West in the 184o's, The Oregon Trail.
Some  recent  Canadian  historians have
tried   to  emulate  Parkman  by  invoking the   genius   of   the   land   and   writing   a history  that   moves  through the  rhythms of  space  as  well  as  those  of  time.  But none  of  them   has  yet  produced   a  book which claims so convincingly the double honours of literature and  history as Montcalm  and  Wolfe.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


COMMONWEALTH ANTHOLOGY

MR. HOWARD SERGEANT, the editor  of the English   magazine  Outposts, devoted   to the   publication  of  Commonwealth   po­ etry,  announces that  he is engaged  in  the compilation of  an  anthology   for  schools entitled  New   Voices   of   the   Cammon­ wealth.  Mr.   Sergeant   wishes   to  invite young  and  unestablished  Canadian  poets

8o
 to  submit   their   work   to  him   for   con­ sideration in connection with  this anthol­ ogy. He  says:  "Young  and  unestablished can  be interpreted  broadly, meaning any poet  who  has  published  no  more  than  a couple   of  volumes.  I  have  no  objection to  poems  which   have  appeared in  peri­ odicals    (details   should  be  given) , but would  prefer not  to  use work  which  has appeared  in   book  form   (though  would stretch  a   point    in   the   case   of   good poems) .  The poets  should  provide brief details   (age,   birthplace,  publications, etc.)  and  enclose  an  addressed envelope, together with international reply postage coupons.  And   the  work  should   be  that most suitable for schools  (throughout the Commonwealth)." Submissions should be made  to Mr.  Howard Sergeant, 209  East Dulwich  Grove,   London, S.E.   22,   Eng­ land.



FINE PRINTING

A  GROUP  OF VANCOUVER  BOOK   LOVERS have   founded  the   Alcuin   Society,   the chief   aims  of  which   will  be  to  further the interests of book  lovers and  book  col­ lectors,  and  to promote an understanding and   appreciation  of  fine  books  through their   publication in  strictly  limited   edi­ tions.  The  books  will  deal  with  Canada, and   with  history,  literature and   the  art  of fine  printing  generally. The first  pub­  lication   will  be  an  amusing narrative of travel  in Canada in  the  r 86o's.  Member­ ship  will  be limited  to 875. Persons  wish­ ing  to  receive  a  prospectus should  write to   the   Alcuin  Society,  I ros   Denman Street, Vancouver, B.C.
