$2.50  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·72
Spring, 1977


THE PSYCHOLOGY  OF LITE TURE


Articles
BY LOUIS DUDEK, TOM   MARSHALL,  KATHY MEZEI, BETTY MOORE EWING, ANTOINE SIROIS, MARIA  TIPPETT, KENNETH C. RUSSELL


Poems
BY ANNE CORKETT, JOHN  DITSKY, RODERICK HAIG-BROWN, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, DOROTHY LIVESAY, R. G. EVERSON, AUDREY CONARD


Review Articles and Reviews
BY ANTHONY APPENZELL, MIKE DOYLE, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, AL  PURDY, ROBERT GIBBS, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN,  SANDRA MARTIN, LINDA SANDLER, RONALD BINNS


Notes
BY  AL PURDY, E.  E. GREENGRASS


A QUARTERLY OF
CRITICISM AND REVIEW










PLAYING  FAVOURITES






IT HAPPENS  sometimes-and recently it has happened quite often-that there  are Canadian-published books which appeal  to the  editor  of Canadian  Literature; which should  be brought  to the attention of readers;  but which for some reason  (because  they are reprints, because they are on the fron­ tiers of literature  proper, because they are translations of foreign texts having some bearing  on Canada) cannot  find a  place in our  beleagured  review  columns  yet really deserve more than  a tiny mention in the back pages of the  journal. So, for once-and doubtless it will not be the only time-the editorial  is being devoted to a group of such books that  caught  our eye and fancy.
Of foreign  texts with  a  bearing  on Canada,  undoubtedly  the  most  venerable are the Icelandic  sagas which  tell of the first European  discovery of  Newfound­ land. A translation  of these sagas was published in England  by Penguins in I965, under  the title of The Vinland  Sagas, but  now George Johnston-whose other self is the splendid  poetic ironist-has added to his renderings from the Icelandic a version of The  Greenlanders' Saga  (Oberon,  $7.95), done  with  appropriate starkness and accompanied  by a good brief  introduction  which discusses the back­ ground to the saga and the historical problems it arouses.
Among  reprints  one  is of  special  interest  to  Canadian  Literature. Faithful
readers  will  remember  the  fine series of  cuts  which  George  Kuthan made  to decorate  this  journal  from  our  beginnings in  I959  to his death  in  I966.  Now Hurtig  Publishers has  reprinted  his erotic sequence,  Aphrodite's Cup  which  he himself published privately inI 964)  in a handsome limited edition ofI ,ooo copies at $35.00. There  is an introduction by William McConnell, who has not done his research well, for he fails to record Kuthan's work for Canadian Literature, which produced  the longest and  most versatile of all his series of designs, undoubtedly one of the major  tasks of his last decade.

EDITORIAL

Talk  of erotica leads one to another  reprint of a book with a long underground and  ( in this case)  pseudonymous existence. In  rg6o Olympia  Press in Paris pub­ lished a sado-masochistic novel entitled The  English Governess, by a certain Miles Underwood.  Underwood's  real  identity  has  long  been  known;   he  was  John  Glassco, who once proudly remarked  that he was as much a "pornographer" as a poet.  Now,  as Harriet  Marwood, Governess, the  book  surfaces-after curious vicissitudes of underground and  pirated publication-into the Canadian paper­ back  market  (General  Publishing,  $2.95). Elegant  it  is, a  high  product  of the late  decadence,  written  in  accurate, ironic prose. But pornography, one realizes, is a relative question, and  aphrodisiac  though Harriet Marwood, Governess may have been to the generation that first enjoyed it, it is likely to register low on the
197o's  porn-scale. But hold on to your copy. The  rg8o's are coming. And  in the meantime enjoy another  facet of our most versatile classicist, John  Glassco.
A reprint  of a vastly different  kind is Charles  Heavysege's Saul  and  Selected Poems  (University  of Toronto Press, paper  $7.95,  cloth  $rg.5o), published  in the Literature of Canada reprint  series and introduced  by Sandra Djwa. Heavy­ sege is a kind of super-Grove in poetry, endowed with a rough power, but so lack­ ing  in  a  real sense of craft  that  almost everything  he does is  fumbled  and  in­ tolerably  prolix. This is why his narrative  poem  fezebel, which  occupies only 30 pages out of the 373 in this volume is-in my view-by far his most successful work, maintaining its intensity almost the whole way through,  and  marked  by an urgency  which  may  have  been  no  more  than  the  knowledge  that   the  New Dominion   Monthly, where  it  was  published,  would  not  take  a  longer  poem. Unfortunately-I emphasize  the adverb-328  pages of this Heavysege collec­ tion are taken up by the sprawling  mass of Saul, surely the most wordy play ever written, full of anachronisms  and comic infelicities, and defeating  itself dramatic­ ally by the tedious complexities of its action. There is indeed a core of true drama  in Saul, and  this was discovered by Peter Haworth, who rendered  it down into a two-hour  radio script  (about  a quarter  of its present length)  and  came out with a play that  might  not  have  been stageable,  but which -like  many  other  closet tragedies-worked well in sound alone, under Norman Newton's CBC direction.
It is a pity that  Peter Howarth's condensation of Saul has not been published, for I suspect we treat our early Canadian writers with a mawkish excess of  rever­ ence. (How  patently  absurd it is, for instance, of Sandra  Djwa  to talk of  Saul as a  "major" play!)   Poor  old  Heavysege,  after  all, never  had  the  advantage of sound  advice,  never encountered  a good editor,  never found  a  sympathetic  but critical  audience,  never met anyone to teach  him the dramatic craft,  never  had a producer  willing to put  his play on  (as Norman  Newton  eventually  did)   pro­ vided it was licked into shape  and  proportion. If he had  made such  encounters, doubtless we would  now be reading  a very different  Saul, so why not  give him posthumously  the advantages  he never enjoyed  when  he was alive? This  is not

3

EDITORIAL

really a protest against the present volume, which should exist, as it is, for the few students  of Canadian writing  who wish to see the text of Saul in all its enormity. But I hope that  one day Heavysege's obvious qualities-exemplified in the thin poet who lived within  the  fat  poetaster  we encounter  in  this volume-will  be brought  to a wider and  a less patient  public than  the academic  one, through  the publication of Peter Haworth's excellent condensations of Saul and Count  Filippo. Some  such  academically   irreverant   treatment   of  a  few  other  early  Canadian writers could show us at least their  potential virtues, what they might have been if only they had lived in a real literary world instead of a remote cultural  colony.
Out  on the ultimate  verge of literary interest, since it is no piece of fine writing and does not pretend  to the authority  of history, is Rene  by Peter Desbarats (McClelland & Stewart,  $I o.oo), a  current  study  of Levesque  and  his role in Quebec  politics; its interest for us lies in the light it throws on the political and intellectual background  that  produced not only Quebec's  (and  perhaps Canada's) Man  of Destiny but  also a great  deal of recent Canadian poetry and  fiction in the French  language.  With  luck, we shall be able to call it Canadian for a long
time.
Finally I come to a very special class of books for which the only appropriate title is Colombiana. John  Robert  Colombo has shown his virtuosity as a poet, as an editor, as a translator from languages he does not always speak. But all these not inconsiderable achievements now fade before the image of Colombo as the industrious  collector  and   arranger   of  facts.  We  already  had,  two  years  ago, Colombo's   Canadian   Quotations. It is  now  followed  by  Colombo's   Concise Canadian  Quotations  (Hurtig, $4.95), which is not merely a condensation  of the original  volume, since a quarter  of the quotations  are quite  new, garnered  since the appearance of Canadian  Quotations;  the main advantage  of the new volume is the  portability  conferred  by its smaller size. At  the same  time,  from  Oxford University Press there appears  a much more massive reference volume, Colombo's Canadian  References  ($14.95), which is really a small Canadian encyclopedia. I once described Colombo as an "assiduous impresario of novelty", and  that  aspect of him comes out  in  the  Canadian  References, as it does in  both  forms of the Canadian  Quotations, which  are  marked  though  not  marred   by  the  idiosyn­ cracies of his personal interests and  tastes. But then, all the great reference books have  been idiosyncratic,  from  Johnson's  dictionary  down to the  celebrated  I rth edition of the Britannica. And  as a desk text for convenient  dipping,  Colombo's Canadian  References  holds a serviceable finger in the dam  of information  until such time as Hurtig's too-long  delayed Canadian  encyclopedia  is funded  by the Canada Council,  which  has  been  incomprehensibly  punctilious  and  dilatory  in supporting  such a greatly  needed  compendium  of Canadian information.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


4

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LITERATURE

Louis Dudek


L



PSYCHOLOGY  of J;terature, as a topk,  ;nciud" almost everything  we want to know about literature because literature  is a product  of the mind,  a  peculiar  by-product  of the  human  psychological make-up.  To  find  out what literature  is, all you have to do is find out what life is all about  and how we fit into it. Naturally  this is an area fraught  with controversy and large differences of  opinion.  Nevertheless,  psychology is a  half-science, and  we may  get  further with it than  if we were to approach  the problem through  philosophy or theology, which  don't  seem to have much  in the way of new insights to contribute  to the enlightened  modern mind.
Using  psychology to understand  literature,  we would first have to  know  how
the  mind  works. The  magnificent  self-assurance of Professor Northrop  Frye, for example,  derives from the fact that  he believes he has discovered exactly how the mind  (or imagination)  works, and  therefore he can explain everything in  litera­ ture. I mean  no disrespect to Professor Frye. He is probably the greatest critic of the century,  the most profound, systematic, comprehensive theorist of  literature  in a  very  long  time -I  believe Lionel  Trilling  has said  the  most  original  since Aristotle -and  he is a writer we all read avidly over and over again,  with ever­ repeated  pleasure,  and  with ever-increasing irritation.  In  fact, it is impossible to speak or to think of "The  Psychology of Literature" without  coming up against Northrop   Frye's  ideas,  and  having  to  thrash  them  out  again,  and  having  to dispose of them again, before we can go a little on our own way.
Professor Frye claims he has discovered how the mind, or imagination, works. He  says it thinks  in  archetypal  patterns.  All new thoughts-all new  works of literature -are  variations  upon  the  relatively few archetypal  patterns  outlined in the  Anatomy  of  Criticism. Actually, the main scheme, or pattern, is the cycle of the seasons, the curve of rise and  decline from spring through  summer  to fall and  winter;  all imaginative  literature  and  all genres derive from  phases of this pattern.

5

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LITERATURE

Aristotle in the Poetics, wanting  to illustrate what a metaphor  is, compared  the life of man  to a day:  old age is the evening of life. Northrop  Frye has taken up this simple commonplace  and  built the central mythology of literature  around  it: man's  life from  birth  to death  is equated  with the day, from dawn  to darkness; which in turn is equated  with the seasons, from spring to winter; and this in tum is equated  to the literary  genres, from romance  (spring)  through  comedy  (sum­ mer)  to tragedy  (autumn) and  satire  (winter). All the other  major archetypes, for example  heaven  and  hell, are simply derivatives from this, heaven  being the ultimately  desirable  good things of spring and summer,  youth  and morning,  and hell being the unwanted evils of autumn  and  winter, or the darkness of old age and death. So too, the ur-myth of all literature,  according to Frye, the quest myth is derived also from this cycle of life and the seasons, since the quest is the pursuit of the humanly  desirable,  the ultimate  good, which is lost in that rise and  fall, or descent  into  darkness.  To  think  imaginatively,  for  Frye,  is to think  within  this cycle, chained  to the eternal  wheel of mythology,  because  that,  without  possible exception, is how the truly imaginative mind works.
I am not sure whether, in Frye, the psychological operations behind all this are explained  by heredity  or by environment.  Professor Frye is not a metaphysician, he is a literary scholar;  so that,  unlike the philosophers Hegel or Kant,  he does not  provide  a work of metaphysics to support  his mythopoeic  theory. Therefore we do not know whether  the myth patterns occur because the human mind works that  way from its inherent  constitution-and what,  therefore,  this would imply about  the nature  of the  universe in which such a mind was made  to think  that way-or whether  the mythologies have come together by gradual  accretion  and boiling  down,  Professor  Frye's  being  only  the  final  distillation,  or  elixir, of  a historical  product.  There  is a third  possible alternative: that  they are  construc­ tions  which  result  from  a  logical  necessity, like  mathematics,  or  perhaps  the structure of atoms, things being what they are because they could logically not be otherwise  without  self-contradiction.  Whatever  the  answer  may  be-and  Pro­ fessor Frye will no doubt  eventually  tell us-or  maybe I have  not read  deeply enough  to realize that  it is already there -we have the archetypes as the key to how the imaginative  mind thinks.
Clearly it's a very odd  psychology. To  get at these archetypes in any work of literature,  says Professor  Frye, you have to be a "literary  psychologist".1 This is a  very  strange  expression.  There  is one  human   mind,  and  only  one  kind  of psychologist, the  psychologist of  the  human  mind.  If there is a special  kind  of psychologist of  literature-or a special  mind  of  literature-then we want  to know  what  that  is:   it  must  be  a  new  creation.  Otherwise,  let's  get  back  to humanity,  and the real sort of mind that  general mankind is endowed with; let's not reserve a special kind of mind for the literary types.

6

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

Professor Frye, however, is on the side of the "specialists". He says: "The critic takes over where the  poet leaves off, and  criticism can hardly  do without  a kind of literary  psychology connecting  the poet with  the  poem." 2    [My  underlining] Elsewhere he even supposes a special kind of unconscious as a storage-place  for the  archetypes.  After  all,  the  contents  of the human  mind  that  Professor Frye claims to have discovered do not correspond with those that  Freud  was so certain he  had  discovered-"scientifically", as Freud  so often  maintained-and  they do not correspond  with the multitudes of things that  C. G. Jung  claimed to have discovered in  the  collective  unconscious. Freud  has the  Oedipus  Complex,  the Ego and  the Id,  the Superego  and  the Libido; Jung  has the Anima, the Shadow, the Animus, Eros and  Logos, the earth spirit Baubo, the mother  imago and "the immemorial  and  most sacred  archetype  of the  marriage  of  mother  and  son."8
Northrop  Frye,  however,  has the  cycle of the seasons and  the  genres, the quest myth, and the poles of paradise  and hell. Every researcher who returns from that undiscovered  country  seems to bring back a different bag of tricks. And like the gold of El Dorado,  the  treasure  turns to common rock as soon as the air of our prosaic  world  touches  it.  What   they say  about  the  unconscious  is  their  own mythology, pure poetry;  the secret life of the imagination  is not so easy to put into a cage.
We should  be clear  where  all these archetypes  come from. Their  origin is in
Platonic  philosophy, and their first appearance  is recorded in Hermetic  and Nco­ Platonic  writers, weird names like Philo Judaeus,  Irenaeus,  Hermes Trismegistus and  Dionysius the  Areopagite.4   The  OED  tells us that  "In  Platonic  philosophy, archetypal  is applied  to  ideas  or  forms of  natural  objects,  held  to  have  been present in the divine mind prior to creation, and still to exist, as cognizable by the intellect, independently  of the reality or ectypal form." The OED  quotes Francis Bacon as among the earliest English uses: "Let  us seek the dignitie of knowledge in the Arch-tipe  or first plat-forme, which is the attributes and  acts of God." As Jung says, " 'Archetype' is an explanatory paraphrase of the Platonic                   "5
In  other words, the archetype,  like the Platonic idea and  Kant's Ding an Sich, is an  unknowable  absolute  posited by the  theorist. Actual  dreams,  myths,  poems, novels, are supposed  to be derived from it,  just as phenomena  are derived from the Ding and Sich or from the absolute idea.
The  archetype in itself is unknowable. But as we are well aware,  modern man
doesn't  like transcendental absolutes. Only  the known and  the knowable  is real for  the  modern.  Therefore the  archetypal  philosophy must  be  made  empirical and  realistic. That is, the archetypes must be known by their appearances, not in their essence. This is so in both Jung  and  Frye. In Jung,  the archetypes are only known  by their  conscious manifestations:  "The  archetype  is essentially an  un­ conscious  content   that   is  altered   by  becoming  conscious  and   by  being  per­ ceived ... "6   In  Frye,  too, the  archetype in itself is unknowable,  it is a  hidden

7

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LITERATURE

reality which is, so to speak, "reconstructed" by the critic:  "Each  event or incident
... is a manifestation  of some underlying unity, a unity that it both conceals and reveals ... "7    "No  rendering  of any myth into conceptual  language  can serve as a full equivalent  of its meaning."8  And most important  for literature, Frye makes the astonishing statement: "One essential principle of archetypal  criticism is that the individual  and the universal forms of an image are identical. ... "9
In other  words, the form in which you find them in poems, plays, short-stories and  novels is identical  with  the archetypal  form. In  fact  you can  never get any nearer  to the  archetype  than  by reading  Paradise Lost, and  The  Tempest, and "Tintern Abbey",  and  Eliot's  "Ash  Wednesday".  Actual works of literature  are archetypes,  and  the archetypes  are  completely unrepresented  by actual  works of literature. (At  least that's  what  I  understand  from this, if Frye means  what  he says.)



W.LL, NOW WE SEE the general area of philosophical think­ ing into  which the archetypal  psychology falls, and  we see that  it's an empirical or secular  form  of the  transcendental. Immanuel   Kant  is the  Plato  of  modem philosophers;  he told the scientific age that we know only appearances in the only way  that  the  human  mind  knows appearances-through  the  categories  of the understanding-but that  behind  what  we know, the visible  world,  there is the noumenal  or transcendental world we cannot know. The world is a great  Christ­ mas  package,  containing  a secret, which you must not  open until  the great  day arrives, that is, the Day of Judgment. After Kant,  right up to our own time, poets and  philosophers have tried to open  that  package, and  get somehow, by trick or by cunning,  at  the noumenal  reality hidden  within. In  trying to do this, most of them  have used reality as the symbol or signature of the noumenal.  For example, in the Romantic  period, Nature  became the key to the noumenal  world. Schelling told Coleridge, and Coleridge told Wordsworth to look into Nature for "A motion and  a spirit,  that  impels j All thinking  things.... " There's  no need to go into the whole history of romantic  poetry. But as the nineteenth  century wore on, the scientists were at  work undermining the romantic theory of nature.  They  turned nature   into  dead  inanimate  matter -"an  indifferent  nature",  a  vast  empty "mindless  hostility", as Northrop Frye calls it-a mechanical  monster described as the  Grand  Panjandrum in  E. J.  Pratt's  poem "The  Truant". I. A. Richards has called this scientific reductive  idea "the  neutralization  of nature": it seemed to put  an end  to the  hope of  finding  the noumenon in the West Wind,  or "the round ocean and the living air".
So, if not the West Wind  then perhaps the East Wind. No one has written  an
Ode  to the East Wind.  It's  high time that someone did; though  by now it would not  be "the  trumpet  of a prophecy"  but  the summary of a  fait accompli. If the

8

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

external world  of nature is not  the source of revelation,  then  perhaps the opposite direction, the interior  world  of the mind  may be that  source. Here we come to the centre of Professor  Frye's  position.  He derives the germ of his ideas from  William Blake,  a visionary  poet  for  whom  "All deities  reside in  the  human breast"; who has uttered the shameful blasphemy, "Where man is not,  nature is barren". Blake looked  within  himself for the source of all that  the "Poetic Genius" creates: "Imagination, the  real & eternal World  of which  this Vegetable Universe is but  a faint  shadow.... "10
Professor   Frye's   critical   theory   is  based  on  the  apocalyptic  assumptions of visionary  poetry. That is why  he has pitched  on Blake;  why  he reverts so often  to the  Book of Revelation; why  he has borrowed  the  archetypes from  C.  G. Jung; why  he refers at certain  times to such writers as Ernst  Cassirer  and  Mircea Eliade. (A  good  scholar   leaves  great   big  footprints all  over  the  place  so  you  can  tell where  he stole the stuff.)   Thus Frye says in a crucial  passage in "The Archetypes of Literature":

Patterns  of imagery ... or  fragments  of significance, are  oracular   in  origin,  and derive from the epiphanic  moment,  the flash of instantaneous  comprehension  with no  direct  reference  to time,  the  importance  of which  is indicated  by Cassirer  in Myth and  Language. By the  time we get them, in the form  of proverbs,  riddles, commandments and  etiological  folk tales, there  is already  a considerable  element of narrative in them. They too are encyclopaedic in tendency, building up a total structure  of significance, or  doctrine,  from  random  and  empiric  fragments.  And just as pure  narrative  would  be unconscious act, so pure significance would be an incommunicable  state  of consciousness, for communication  begins by constructing narrative.
The  myth  is the  central  informing  power  that  gives archetypal  significance  to
the   ritual and   archetypal narrative to  the  oracle. Hence the  myth   is  the
archetype.... 11

As we  can  see,  this is a virtually religious statement, but  a  religion  of a very special  kind.  The   mystic  who  returns enlightened from  the  ecstatic  experience usually  tells us that  he cannot  describe or give an account of what  he has seen or received.  The  visionary  world  is closed to reason  and  to our  ordinary modes  of knowing.   But  Northrop Frye  has  tried  to  put  together   what  the  mystic  cannot express;   he  has  assembled  systematically what   he  considers  to  be  the  body  of intellectual knowledge   that  is implied  in  mystical  experience. More  important still,  he has found  the fragments of that  knowledge  in literature: "building up a total  structure of significance, or doctrine, from  random and  empiric fragments." And  when  particular writers  like Dylan  Thomas or  William  Blake  have  had  the whole  archetypal vision descend  upon  them,  or like Milton, Spenser,  and Shake­ speare, they have constructed works of an epic or tragic  wholeness, Frye has found  the entire system implicit  in works of literature.

9

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

Now, I should say one more thing about  the archetypal  theory before I leave it here. Like Ernst  Cassirer, Professor Frye is a Renaissance scholar. The Renais­ sance is an outgrowth of the great  centuries of religion; and  the literature of the Renaissance is soaked in Christian  reference and the theology of  the Bible. If you are teaching literature  in a modem school or university, this material  is very hard to translate  into  valid  contemporary terms:  as we say, we  have outlived all that
-it's out of date -God is dead -science knows-and the frame of reference of traditional literature is dusty  and  moth-eaten  as an old sofa. What  Professor Frye has done is give this old paraphernalia a new shining look. He has made its concepts  of  Heaven   and  Hell,  its  kingly tragedies,  its  religious  quest,  eternal properties of the human  mind. Thus the scheme of the Great Chain of Being, descending from God and the angels down to man, the animal  creation, and so to plants,  rocks and  stones  (which  seemed to have  been set aside by science)  has been given a permanent place in literature  by this new psychology. ("Psychologi­ cal  truth" is the  phrase  Jung  has used12 -it  recurs in Robertson  Davies-for things you must believe because, as they say, the mind is made to think that  way. This  used to be one of the standard proofs of God;  now it's a proof of the arche­ types.)  Even the  Ptolemaic  astronomy, which Milton  held fast to a half-century after  Galileo, has been refurbished  as a structural  unit in the archetypal  scheme. For the theory of archetypes  nothing is ever out of date, and nothing is ever true
-as relating to the common  world we live in -it is all part of the eternal vision revealed  by  the  awakened   imagination. No  wonder  that  people for  whom  all truths  have vanished,  or  who find their traditional  truths  rather  shaky, find this theory of literature very congenial.
I  have spent  some time  wrestling with  Northrop  Frye, poking a little fun at
him, trying  to put  his theory into  perspective. What  he did,  however, had to be done. The visionary view of literature, which had gathered force through the nineteenth  century  and  within  which literature  served as a kind of religion-in fact it replaced  religion-has needed a full systematic statement  of its theology. Frye's  psychedelic view of literature-for that's  what  it is-where  the  arche­ typal background  provides "an immense reverberating dimension of significancems to  works of literature, needed  to  be put systematically on  record.  In  fact, it is when  it  has  been  fully stated  that  we can  stand  away from  this  position  and decide whether we want to accept it or not.
Personally, I do not. Dubito  ergo sum. I cannot  accept the view that someone
else's oracular  vision, or  the  revelation  through  literature  of a supernal  order  of some kind, is the  key to literature  or to life. I  cannot  accept  the view that  the constructs  of  Northrop   Frye-which  are,  after  all,  particular with  him-are the patterns  I must keep looking for when I read new novels and poems. I cannot accept  the  visionary  view of literature,  that  something  other  than  this world is

10

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

revealed,  or some  meaning  other  than  that  we know  by the  light of sense and reason is suddenly  revealed by an extraordinary  experience;  and  that  some such special revelation, and not the light of common day, is the truth  about life and art.
They  "want   a  'vision', I having  the sun-blasted  world  before  their  eyes. I It
has been given!" Whatever  meaning life has, we have to create out of the material given us here. I  cannot  accept  that  imagination  is pre-programmed as "A stru­ tural   power,  which,  left  to  itself,  produces  vigorously  predictable  fictions."  I revolt against  a  view of literature  that  sees in  it  "abstract  story-patterns" with "interchangeable motifs that  can be counted and indexed." I oppose the tyranny of a view which claims that  "mythology as a total structure, defining as it does a society's  religious beliefs ... is the  matrix  of literature,  and  major  poetry  keeps returning  to it."  I do not want  to keep "returning"; I want to go forward.  And
I believe that literature  does go forward, as human  thought goes forward.
With  Frye, all the  meaning is to be found in the  past, or elsewhere than  right there on the page. The  great  myths and  archetypes  rarely appear  in toto in any particular  poem or novel. The  archetypal  appears in bits and  pieces only; and  yet it  is the  real  meaning  you  are  to  pick up.  I  object  to  this  way of looking  at literature.  In  one  poem, for  example-a poem  by Irving  Layton-Northrop Frye interprets  two fragments,  a reference to the sun as a "bloodsmear" and  the phrase  "my  heart  beating  in  the  grass" as signifying "a  hanged  god or  nature spirit  tom  apart   and  distributed   through   the  landscape."16   Since  there  is no hanged  god or  nature  spirit in the poem, this is to me a gratuitous importation which yet claims for itself the  place of primary  importance in  the interpretation of the poem. "Each  event or incident," says Frye, " ... is a manifestation  of some underlying unity ... "17 I do not want to look for such an abstract  unity, nor for any single meaning;  I want  multiplicity, and  actuality,  and  a forever-expanding field of unpredictable useful meanings.
To  understand   this  alternative,   we must  go  back  to  the  very  roots of  the psychology of literature. This has to do with the way man thinks and the way he has  learned  to  think.  The  ultimate  nature  of things is unknown  to us, but  we know the world through  our  minds and  our senses. This knowledge begins with perceived things, which later acquire meaning. The  dog, the cat, the bird receives some image  of an object -a  bone, a mouse, a moving insect-so that  he can effectively pursue that  thing. Man  must have begun his long mental  history with the  mere  perception  of things -he gave names  to things -and  he must  have gone on to find relations between things, to "think  with things". Levy-Strauss in The  Savage Mind  gives us some inkling of the concreteness of primitive thought: its capacity  to classify immense quantities  of things  and  to relate  things  to one another by analogy and "magical" relation.
Art is often a leap  forward  in insight, but it also has something  very archaic about it. It wants to go back to this method of thinking with things.


I I

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

So much depends upon
a red wheel barrow
glazed with rain water
beside the white chickens.

Why  does so much  depend   upon  the concrete  thing,  the vivid object? Imagine a wheelbarrow in  the  farmyard and  chickens  round-about: the  farmer says to his son,  "John, will  you  take  that   wheelbarrow into  the  bam, and  be  careful  you don't scare  the  chickens." How  does that  wheelbarrow differ from  Williams' Red Wheelbarrow? It differs  because  it  is a  mere  object  of  utility,  while  the  wheel­ barrow  in the  poem  is something more  than  that.  The  wheelbarrow in  the  poem is an object of thought, and  as such carries meanings which  the utility object  does not  have.  What kind  of  meaning? Well,  the  kind  that  objects  have  when  you "think with  things". Not  one  meaning, but  quite  a number of possible meanings. A  red  wheelbarrow  could   suggest  simply  the  idea  of  beauty,   a  beautiful  red wheelbarrow; or  it  could  connote   labour, democratic  values-red  might  even suggest  communism; or  it  could  suggest  manure and  dirt-that's  what  wheel­ barrows  carry; or it could  suggest  a heap  of  flowers-a red  wheelbarrow might be  in  a  flower  garden; it  could  suggest  bricks  and  building; it  could  suggest farming in  general; it could  suggest  an  old  technology; it could  suggest  a deco­ rated  thing,  no longer  useful-a red  wheelbarrow.... Ask your students what  a red wheelbarrow means. Every answer is a possibility.
This  kind  of thinking is the oldest  thinking  in the world. When  man  advanced in  consciousness  beyond  the  dog  and  the  cat,  he learned  to make  things  connect with  other  things,  even  "stand for  them" -by analogy,  by metaphor, by imagi­ native  association  -and  the  history  of  ideas  began.  Well,  perhaps not  yet  the history  of ideas,  but  the  history  of thought. For  a very long  time  the  primitive  mind  thought  only with things, and  learned  to make complex connections between  stories, significant objects,  animals, trees and stones, ritual actions, masks, costumes
-and  the ordinary activities  of life. There is obviously a great  richness and  value provided   by  the  ambiguity and  emotional impact of pure  presentation. But  this very  ambiguity involves  a lack  of precision,  and  it is clear  that  as time  went  on man   desired   greater  and   greater  precision,  for  some  purposes,   in   his  use  of language. (This  is  the  history  of  language from  emotive  symbolism  to  mathe­ matics.)  In  the  search   for  precision  thing-words  were  frozen  into  what  we call abstractions, old  words  in  which  some  "thing" is hidden,   but  which   now  has become  a  name  for  a  specific  category.   ("Abstract" used  to  mean  abs-away and  traho- I drag  something; but  nobody  thinks  of  dragging anything at  all

12

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

when they talk in abstractions: it all goes along smoothly like floating on air, from pure idea to pure idea.)

krs PROCESS, in a way, goes counter to poetry and art, and one might even say that a great dividing line in the history of human  culture, lost somewhere  in  the  backwards  of  time,  was  marked  by  the  transition   from  a
language  rich with symbolic concreteness to one made efficient and  precise with abstractions.   "Poetry   has  a  limited  tolerance  for  abstractions," says  Northrop Frye, with whom I agree here; and  he adds, "Poetry seeks the image rather  than the  idea.m 8   Fine,  but  here  a small clarification is needed. The  relation  between concrete imagery and abstraction  has been a very confusing problem in twentieth­ century  modem  poetry, and  it has not yet been properly solved.  William  Carlos Williams'  dictum  "No  ideas  but  in things" is only a half-truth,  or  maybe  even less. We can  no longer  have ideas only in things; that  would  be  a regression to pre-history. There  must  be abstract  ideas and  there must be  ideas in things; it's the proportion  between them that remains the real issue for poetry.
"No  ideas but in things,"  in any case, is an idea  borrowed from  Ezra  Pound. And  he learned  it from  Ernest  Fenollosa, a scholar of Eastern  languages,  who pointed  out that  the Chinese language  depended on concrete visual presentation, whereas English tended  to non-visual abstraction.  Ezra Pound  ruined  his Cantos with this idea, by making his poem a mere avalanche of concrete  things, samples, without  giving the reader  much  help in connecting these "things" together  with clear  abstract  ideas. It's  still a magnificent  poem, very vivid and  very suggestive of multitudes  of meanings;  but it lacks the proportion  between connecting  ideas and  multifaceted  realities that  communication  now demands.  It  pretends  to be an  epic  with  a coherent  thought,  but it has no coherent  thought,  either  in the parts or in the whole.
Consider,  in  this  light,  William  Carlos  Williams'  "Red   Wheelbarrow". The
key to this poem, the abstract  idea that  makes it a poem, and  that  gave him the push to write it, is right in the opening phrase:

So much  depends upon

The  thought that so much depends upon concrete perception of an object-I do not even  have to mention  the  red wheelbarrow and  the chickens-the  thought that  actual  things, experiences,  are  important,  is the whole  point  of the  poem. (You see, all the  meanings suggested above, for "wheelbarrow", were wrong:  it means simply an object, a concrete thing. What the images mean in a poem is controlled  and  limited  by the  idea.)   Thus,  Williams could  hardly  have  had  a poem without  the idea.

THE  PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

A red wheel barrow

glazed with rain water

beside the white chickens.

These  words,  alone,  would  be  a  haiku.  And  that  kind  of  poem,  coming  from Japan, assumes a preliminary  preparation of thought, of meditation, so that things in themselves speak, evoking thoughts that are already in the mind.
Meditation, or thought,  is the key. Whatever  you look at, for itself, becomes an image  fraught   with  meaning,   a  poem.  You  could  have  a  real  wheelbarrow standing  in the yard, and  keep looking at it, for itself, until it became a poem in your  mind.  But  if  you  kept  looking  at  it  only sporadically,  with  the  irritated thought,  "I've got to get  that  thing out of the way!"  it would  never become a poem; it would remain an object of utility, not an object of thought.
Aristotle puts thought  third in rank among the elements of a tragedy;  but this
is not really how he sees it.  By thought, in the list of six elements, he means the statements   or  ideas  expressed  as such  by  the  characters  in  their  speeches. He places the  narrative  or  plot first;  characters  second;  but what  he means by plot and  characters  has  really  a  lot  to  do with  thought.  (Northrop Frye  would of course agree.)  The  plot, for Aristotle, has to do with the pattern  of action dealing with  human  happiness  or  misery;  the characters  have to do with moral  nature, what  a person loves or hates;  and  poetry, he tells us, is "more  philosophical than history",  so  that   the  meaning  of such  a  plot  and  such  characters  expresses a universal truth  of life, not  just a single incident. That  is, the plot must be an idea of universal significance pertaining to human happiness or misery. I always begin the analysis of a novel or a play with the interpretation  of its plot. The  plot is the key to  the  whole meaning; it  usually contains  the meaning  in a  nutshell:  and the meaning, or thought, is primary in all works of literature.
The right proportion  between abstract ideas, or intentions, and the concrete presentation  of realities is what  we expect in any successful work. These  things are so combined  that  the richness and ambiguity that pertains to concrete presen­ tation -the  action  of  a  play  or  a  novel, the  images of  a  poem -are  given direction   and  held  in  control  by  the  general  ideas;  and  neither  is the  work impoverished  by too narrow  a  purpose, defined by abstraction,  nor is it allowed to sprawl and lose itself in a vague and wandering chaos of  particulars.
So now we have to ask, how is the meaning generated? And why is the meaning of literature,  as distinct from editorials and essays, so powerful and  lasting in its impact?  Does it  derive from  archetypal  forms, with  their "reverberating signifi-

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

cance"?  Or  is there  another  source  that  explains their  interest  and  continuing fascination?
For an answer to this, we must look to the psychology of creativity. The source of  every work  of literature   is in  a  human  individual,  and  that  individual  in a particular state of mind  and  motivation. What  do we know about  this? I would say, from  long experience  and  observation,  and  after  long resisting some of the conclusions it  leads to, that  creativity is a crisis phenomenon.  It  is the result of problems  facing  the  individual   psyche-exactly as Freud  explained  the origin of dreams-and it is an attempt  to resolve these problems in complex symbolic forms.
(The  crisis, of course, is internal; it doesn't  have to show itself in any external disturbance-but often it does. I only have  to mention  Eliot's  nervous  break­ down  after  the writing of the Wasteland, Rilke's emotional  upheavals  in writing the Duino Elegies, Nietzsche's state of possession in writing Zarathustra, Dostoev­ sky's diarrhoea in writing Crime and Punishment, Ezra Pound's physical collapse in  prison  that  resulted  in  the  Pisan  Cantos,  to make it seem  very likely that  a psychological  crisis of  some  kind  usually accompanies  the  production  of  great works of literature.)
Gregory  Bateson,  anthropologist  and  psychologist, has a  theory  which  asserts that  "there  is an experiential component in the determination or etiology of schizophrenic  symptoms  and  related  behavioral  patterns,  such  as  humour,  art, poetry,  etc."  His theory  "does  not  distinguish  between  these subspecies. Within its  terms  there  is  nothing  to  determine  whether  a  given individual  shall  be  a clown, a poet, a schizophrenic, or some combination of these."  9
In any case, the first meaning of a poem, a novel, or a play, is biographical: it comes out of the tensions and dilemmas in the mind of the author,  and it is there­ fore a concrete symbolic representation of these tensions and dilemmas. (Solutions are there sometimes;  but these are solutions as he would hope to have them work, not real solutions that  have resolved the problem finally. That is why didacticism is poor stuff in literature.)  By "symbolic" I simply mean that  the representation  is mainly  by means of "things", in the  primitive  way of thought,  and  that  the "meaning" of  these  "things" presented  is  multi-faceted  and  has  a  continuing  power  to generate  meaning  and  to be interpreted. Nothing mystical about  this, simply an imaginative  method of generating meaning.
The  first meaning  of a  poem, a  play, or a novel is biographical. But  who is that  much interested in the life-problems of the original artist? We can ignore the biographical  meaning and still go on with it. Somehow, a transfer of personal symbolism to public symbolism occurs; and this is one of the mysteries of art psychology. (It involves the question of why some works are  popular  and  some are not; why some works become classics and others are forgotten.)
When  I said that  the writing of literature  is "a crisis phenomenon", I implied

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

that  no one would think  of constructing The  Magic Mountain  or War  and Peace in the normal  course of his daily activities. Our faculties were not evolved for that kind of undertaking. We think to act, and we communicate  to join in communal action.  However,  when  an  individual  is thrown  into  an  impossible situation,  it seems that  his psyche plunges into itself, it resorts to the oldest and deepest forms of expression and  communication to try to handle  the crisis. So-called abnormal psychological manifestations   appear-neurosis, and  the  foreshadowing  of psy­ chosis in  various  degrees -as  the  accompaniments of  this  resort  to  primitive emotional  expression. The  products  of such a mind  are highly-charged  concrete emotional  images,  which  contain  in  them  many-sided  relations  to the  world  of experience;  their object is to express, and to integrate, in the old way of "thinking with  things"-with  some  help  from  the  abstract  intelligence,  which  tries  to translate  their  significance  and  to resolve its own conflicts. I seem to be pushed for a moment  into the realm of psychotherapy rather  than  literature,  but I think you can see the relation of this to literature.
The  world of rationality  and  of precise generalization  is the one in which we normally  live, and  in which we sometimes get stranded  high and dry if the vital juices don't   reach  us up  here.  But  functional  abstractions  direct  our  everyday behaviour.  And  it certainly  is a superior level of human  existence, this realm of abstract  conceptual  thinking;  on  the  practical  plane  it is absolutely essential to our  existence as social  beings. If we lose touch  with these abstractions,  or they become confused and  disordered, we become alienated-or, as they say, "out  of contact  with reality".  Actually, it is "out  of contact  with unreality"-the  world of  concepts-but this  fiction,  or  unreality,  is necessary to our  survival.  "Psy­ chosis," a noted  psychologist said  to me recently, "is an intellectual  disorder." 20
The  human  being cannot  function  successfully when he reverts to being a plant
or an animal.
At  the  higher  level  of  rational   consciousness when  serious  life-problems­ personal and social problems -come  upon us, and  we cannot solve them in the usual rational  way because they are too much for us, we inevitably regress to the older level of symbolic thinking.  The  rich human  world  of "things"  is soaked in powerful emotions; we use it for expression-the symbolic projection of our state
-and we struggle by means of it for integration,  the resolution of our problems, at the level of fundamental subsistence.
Obviously,  complete  descent  into  the  primitive  irrational  is catastrophic. For
art  and  literature,   cooperation   between  rationality  and  the  concrete  symbolic thought-process is the source of creative achievement. The cooperative working together of reason and archaic imagination is creative activity.
Now, the  troubled  individual  is not alone. He  is part of the group,  the tribe,
or the society in which he lives. If he is driven to extreme anguish, his state must be symptomatic  of something  in the group  or  the society. And  as mankind  has

16

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

developed socially, the troubled  individual-the shaman-type in primitive societies-is  one  whom  we would  call  a  borderline-case,  or  a  near-psychotic, whose visions are of great  use to the whole tribe. Peter Farb,  in his study of the Indians  of North America, says:

Search   out   the  least  skilled  hunter in  the  group,  one  who  is  also  physically  or mentally handicapped and  who  makes  nervous  movements with  his hands or  feet. You   have   probably  located   your  man.   The   shaman  actually  is  different  from everybody  else, and  the  Eskimo  is smart  enough  to recognize  this and  to put  it to work  in his society. Some  Eskimo  maintain that  they can  identify  a future shaman, even  while  he is still a child,  by certain  signs. He is meditative and  introverted; he may  have  fits or  fainting spells;  he is disturbed by dreams  and  suffers from  hallu­ cinations and  hysteria. The shaman is a psychological  type  known  as the  neurotic borderline schizoid ... 21

(We  put our  insane  people into  hospitals;  primitive  people  put  them  to use as prophets, medicine men, sorcerers and shamans.)  The  case could easily be made that   exceptional  group  leaders  in  times of  great  crisis are  often  paranoid   or psychotic individuals.  There  is a corresponding will to follow this kind of leader, as there is a charismatic  will to lead;  so that we find a profound  correspondence between  the dynamics  of the  individual  psyche and  the needs and  responses of the community.
How  does this bear  on literature?  Art is a moderate  kind of madness. A mild
excess of some kind, an internal  upheaval,  makes a man  write Finnegans Wake, or  The   Remembrance  of Things Past, or  The   Cantos. Consider  the  following lines, in which Ezra  Pound,  in tears and in great dejection of mind  ( Dakruon is poetical Greek for tears),  suffering utter humiliation,  and  caged like a beast in a box (in  the concentration  camp at Pisa),  draws up images out of his inmost self, and  gives them to us in words, so that they move us, and  record a crisis which is not only Ezra Pound's  but ours also, and an image for times to come:

Le Paradis n'est pas artificiel
but is jagged

For a flash,
 
for an  hour.

Then agony,
 
then  an  hour,
then  agony,

Hilary stumbles,  but  the Divine Mind  is abundant unceasing
improvisatore . ..

and  there was a smell of mint  under  the tent flaps especially  after  the rain
and  a white ox on the road toward  Pisa
as if facing the tower,

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE


dark sheep in the drill field and on wet days were clouds in the mountain as if under the guard roosts.
A lizard upheld me
the wild birds wd not eat the white bread from Mt Taishan  to the sunset
From Carrara stone to the tower
and this day the air was made open for Kuanon  of all delights,
Linus, Cletus, Clement
whose prayers, the great scarab is bowed at the altar
the green light gleams in his shell
plowed in the sacred field and unwound the silk worms early in tensile



in the light of light is the virtu
 LIGHT

"sunt  lumina" said Erigena Scotus as of Shun on Mt Taishan
and in the hall of the forebears
as from the beginning of wonders the paraclete  that was present in Yao, the precision
in Shun the compassionate in Yu the guider of waters22

From  this quotation, and  almost  from  every other  example of major  poetry, it will be at  once  clear  that  the integrating power of the imagination turns  on large perspectives,  on the great  issues of life, and  on the total frame of reference,  rather than  on  the  mere  detail. It is essentially  philosophical  and  religious.  Despite  the descent  into  particulars and  into  concrete  things,  the imagination in  its  deepest working  generalizes  the  meanings that  it combines  into an  order  of rationality; it uses the  particular for  the  general, and  thus  projects  a total  order. The  crisis phenomenon, at its best, especially  in art,  releases a kind of super-sanity upon  the mind,  through images  of total  harmony, of perfection, and  of ideal  fulfilment,  and this imagery  of a desirable goal  contains the general  model  of cure  for the ills of any particular life.



HAVE  MADE   the  case  that  the  individual suffering  the crisis of a society makes  his own  pain and  prayer  the cry of agony and  of hope for a whole society. He  draws  from his inner self emotional  images  that  correspond to his own  suffering  and his desire  for a cure and  for salvation. Mankind is so con­ stituted as a  body  that  the  individual and  the group  communicate empathically, just as birds  break  into  panic  at  the sign of a cry from one  bird. The community responds  to  the  complex  emotional expression of one exceptional individual. The

18

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

peculiarity of  this  multi-faceted communication is that  its  meanings proliferate and  apply  to  ever-new  conditions. What  the  artist  expressed  as perhaps his own personal  neurosis,  becomes  comprehensible as a complex  of signs referring to the age he lived in and  its human problems. But then  decades and centuries pass, and the language  of things  is re-translated again  and  again  into meanings relevant for other  times.
In  teaching literature, therefore, it is the  language  of things -the ambiguity and  suggestiveness  of literary  presentation-which should  be our  first  object  of study.  We should  learn  by example and  training to see how objects  and  incidents can  serve  to signify  an ever-expanding aura  of meaning, and  how  the  thought in a poem or story helps to focus and  control this meaning.
A good  work of art  has its own special  way to steer  the interpretation that  we should  recognize.  Each  one of us is born with a unique  shape  to his nature, a con­ stitution of emotions,  talents,  predispositions. Life is a kind of electricity that works on  this  inner   being,  and  modifies  it,  like an  electric  current inducing a  strong  magnetic force. In  creating a poem or a story, the writer's  powerful internal fields of force  arrange the  particles  of his work -images, words,  the shaping of a new reality-according to  his inner   nature, striving  toward   that  self-realization we all desire. This  is the direction of meaning that  we must find in his work.
So  a  work  of literature is a  wonderful, complex,  psychological  entity. It has
relation, first,  to  the  private biography of  the  author. It is  translated  readily, usually  by  the  author himself,  into  a  statement about   the  problems of  his own age, and  of the world  he lives in. It will be applied, later,  to other  times and  other ages. It is never  merely  a literal statement or representation; it is always literary, that  is an  object  of contemplation and  communication. As such,  it is a symbolic structure of  multiple reference -what  Pound   has  called  an  "inspired  mathe­ matics" -referring,  not  necessarily  to  any  universal  archetypes, but  to  all  the unpredictable and  yet possible eventualities of life and experience.


NOTES

1 Northrop Frye,  "The  Archetypes of Literature" in  Fables of Identity (New  York,
I963)' p. I3.
2    Ibid., p. II.
3  C.  G. Jung, "Aion" in  Violet  S. de Laszlo,  ed.,  Psyche and Symbol:  A Selection from the Writings of C. G. ]ung (Garden City, New York,   I958), p. I I.
4    See C. G. Jung, "The Collective  Unconscious and  Archetypes" in Richard Ellmann and  Charles Feidelson,  Jr.,  eds., The  Modern  Tradition   (New  York,  I965), pp.
642-643·
3  Ibid., p. 643.
6    Ibid., p. 643.
7   Fables of Identity, p. 24.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE

8   Ibid., p. 32.
9   Ibid., p. I9.
10   Quotations from   "The  Marriage of  Heaven and   Hell" and  from  "Jerusalem," preface  to Chapter IV.
11 Fables of Identity, pp.  I5-I6.
12  C.  G.  Jung, Psychology   and  Religion  (New  Haven, I938,  I96o), p. 56. See also
Robertson Davies,  Fifth  Business  (Toronto, I970), p. 207.
13   Northrop Frye,  "Myth, Fiction, and  Displacement" in Fables of Identity, p. 37·
14  Louis Dudek, Atlantis (Montreal, I 967), p. 99·
15  Fables of Identity, pp. 29, 3 I, 2 7, 33·
16   Northrop Frye, The Bush Garden (Toronto, I97I), p. 53·
17  Fables of Identity, p. 24.
18   Ibid., p. 57·
19  Gregory  Bateson,  Steps  to an Ecology of Mind  (New York, I 972), p. 272.
20    Dr.  Zygmunt A. Piotrowski, in conversation. A well-known  Rorschach expert, he is honorary professor  of  psychiatry (psychology), Thomas Jefferson  University of Philadelphia.
21   Peter  Farb, Man's Rise to Civilization (New York, I969), pp. 63-64.
22   Selections  from  Ezra  Pound, Pisan Cantos.
















CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T  lWS /228-4741


20

MOUNTAINEERS AND SWIMMERS

Tom Marshall


Roberts, moving  yet on the  high green  hill over Tantramar, needed the distance  from which  he looks. Carman, his cousin, not  so lucky
as to have  found  distance, made  of our  vagueness
a virtue, a voice  for loss
and the  uncertain floods of longing. 1



LIS INTERESTING to comp"'e  Roberu'  poem "The Tantra­ mar Revisited" with Bliss Carman's "Low Tide on  Grand Pre". Both  poems are  concerned  (as  is Wordsworth's "Tintem  Abbey", their  likely  ancestor)  with loss and  the  return to  a  remembered landscape. But  Roberts  remains aloof  from the  beloved  landscape, attempting to  hold  it  unchanged in  his  mind:
Summers and  summers  have  come, and  gone  with  the  flight  of  the swallow;
Sunshine and  thunder have been, storm,  and  winter, and  frost; Many and  many  a sorrow has all but  died  from  remembrance, Many a dream of joy fall'n  in the shadow  of pain.
Hands of chance and  change  have marred, or moulded, or broken, Busy with  spirit  or flesh, all I most  have  adored;
Even  the  bosom of Earth is strewn  with  heavier  shadows­
Only  in these green  hills, aslant  to the sea, no change!
Here where  the  road  has climbed  from  the  inland valleys and woodlands,
Dips  from  the hill-tops  down,  straight to the  base of the  hills­
Here,  from  my vantage-ground, I can  see the scattering houses, Stained with  time,  set warm  in orchards, meadows and  wheat, Dotting the  broad  bright  slopes outspread to southward and
eastward,
Wind-swept all day  long, blown  by the southeast wind.

From his  vantage-ground Roberts surveys  his country's stretching space but   also recalls  the  precise details of interiors:

Yonder, toward  the  left, lie broad  the Westmoreland  marshes­ Miles on miles they extend, level, and  grassy, and dim,

21

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS

Clear  from the long red sweep of flats to the sky in the distance, Save for the outlying heights, green-rampired  Cumberland point; Miles on miles outrolled, and the river-channels divide them­ Miles on miles of green, barred by the hurtling gusts.
Miles on miles beyond the tawny bay is Minudie.
There  are the low blue hills; villages gleam at  their feet. Nearer a white sail shines across the water, and  nearer
Still are the slim, grey masts of fishing boats dry on the flats.
Ah, how well I remember  those wide red flats, above tide-mark
Pale with scurf of the salt, seamed and baked in the sun!
Well I remember  the piles of blocks and ropes, and  the net-reels Wound  with the beaded nets, dripping  and dark from the sea! Now at this season the nets are unwound;  they hang from  the
rafters
Over the fresh-stowed hay in upland  barns, and the wind
Blows all day  through  the chinks, with  the streaks of sunlight,  and
sways them
Softly at will; or they lie heaped in the gloom of a loft.

Here  is a  power  of observation like that  of a  Maritime realist  painter. Roberts' verse is "Homeric" in its sweep  and  its enumeration of particulars, as Lampman was  probably the  first  to  note.2  As the  Tantramar lands  are  bounded and  pre­ served  by dykes, so the  poet  attempts to hold  them  in timeless suspension in the microcosm  of a poem whose  repetitions of phrase  and  whose  rhythmic  rise and  return themselves  embody  the sense of an  endless cycle.

Yet, as I sit and watch, this present peace of the landscape­ Stranded boats, these reels empty and idle, the hush,
One grey hawk slow-wheeling above yon cluster of haystacks -
More than  the old-time stir this stillness welcomes me home. Ah the old-time stir, how once it stung me with rapture­ Old-time  sweetness, the winds freighted with honey and salt!
Yet will I stay my steps and not go down to the marshland­ Muse and  recall far off, rather  remember than see -
Lest on too close sight I miss the darling illusion,
Spy at  their  task even here  the hands of chance  and  change.

Roberts holds the landscape of remembered happiness at  a distance. He seems to want  to be godlike,  above  the  battle.  By contrast, Bliss Carman immerses  himself in the intensely  re-lived  experience of love and  loss in "Low  Tide  on Grand Pre''. The landscape is made  expressive  both  of his remembered joy and  the  grief that followed  it.

A grievous stream,  that  to and fro Althrough  the fields of Acadie Goes wandering,  as if to know Why one beloved face should be
So long from home and Acadie.

22

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS

Was it a year or lives ago
We took the grasses in our hands, And caught  the summer flying low Over the waving meadow lands,
And held it there between our hands?

The while the river at our teet-
A drowsy inland meadow stream - At set of sun the after-heat
Made  running  gold, and in the gleam
We freed our birch upon the stream.

There  down along the elms at dusk We lifted dripping  blade to drift, Through twilight scented fine like musk, Where night and gloom awhile uplift, Nor sunder soul and soul adrift.

* 	* 	*
Then  all your face grew light, and seemed
To hold the shadow of the sun;
The  evening faltered,  and I deemed
That  time was ripe, and  years had done
Their  wheeling underneath the sun.

So all desire and all regret,
And fear and memory, were naught; One  to remember  or forget
The  keen delight our hands had caught;
Morrow and yesterday were naught.

The  night has fallen, and  the tide.... Now and again  comes drifting home, Across these aching barrens wide,
A sigh like driven wind or foam:
In grief the flood is bursting home.

At  first  everything is  hazy,  as  in  an  impressionist  painting or  a  romantic  film resorting to slow-motion. For  a  magical  moment it  had  once  seemed  as if love could stop time. The captured bird,  the slowed stream,  the rhyme-scheme and  the metre  reinforce  this  idea.  But  the  final stanza   returns  us  to  the  present  with  a vengeance. The bird  of happiness  (or  youth?)  escapes;  it  is the  sun   (and not "time") that  falls like a ripe fruit; days and  summers  end; the  tide  comes in. The hands  of chance  and  change are  victorious  here, too, but  unlike  Roberts, Carman makes  no attempt to distance himself from  the situation. He  lets it, so to speak, wash over him.
Roberts, at  his best in "realistic" poems of observation, is the  man  who  culti-

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS


vates olympian detachment; Carman, the lyrical impressionist  who advised  "paint the  vision,  not  the  view",  is  the  man  who  plunges  into  emotional experience. 3
Many  of our  best poets later  on  have  been either  mountaineers, who  "free" their myths from  fact  (Pratt, Birney,  Purdy,  Newlove), or swimmers  who explore  their depths   (Klein, Layton, Cohen,  MacEwen, Atwood). These   figures,  as  anyone who  has read  much  Canadian poetry  knows, actually  occur  in some  of our  most significant poems, a thing  not surprising in a country  with so much  rock and  water about. Sometimes, as in Frank Scott's  poem "Lakeshore", the figures  of swimmer and  man  on mountain (in  this  instance  Noah)   are  combined. Mountains evoke (among other  things)  objectivity and  a god's-eye view of the  dangerous external world,  water  the  ever-changing depths  of the self, the collective  unconscious  and the  racial  and  evolutionary past.  But it is, as I suggested  before,  a difference of emphasis  or method rather than  of essential  purpose  that  I mean  to stress, since all  good  poems  embody the  relationship between  inner  and  outer   worlds,  and great  art  is subjective and  objective at  once. Conciousness  involves  a continuing inter-action between  "fact" and  "dream".4




ROBERTS was the first Canadian poet of impressive achieve­ ment.  He  deserves  his special  position  as the  father of Canadian  poetry, and,  as we  know,  he gave  particular  impetus and  inspiration to  Archibald Lampman, who  in  turn   encouraged Duncan  Campbell Scott.  In  this  context  Lampman's well-known account of his discovery  of Orion is worth  our  examination:

It was almost ten years ago, and I was very young, an undergraduate at college. One  May evening somebody lent me Orion  and Other   Poems,  then  recently  pub­ lished. Like most of the young fellows about me I had been under  the  depressing conviction  that  we were situated  hopelessly on the outskirts of  civilization, where no art  and  no literature could  be, and  that  it was useless to expect  that  anything great could be done by any of our companions, still more useless to expect that we could do it ourselves. I sat up all night reading and  re-reading  Orion  in a state of the wildest excitement  and when I went to bed I could not sleep. It seemed to me a wonderful  thing that  such work could be done by a Canadian, by a young man, one of ourselves. It was like a voice from some  new paradise  of art  calling  us to be up  and  doing.  A little  after  sunrise I  got  up  and  went  out  into  the  college grounds.  The  air,  I  remember  was full  of  the  odour  and  cool sunshine  of  the spring morning. The  dew was thick upon  the grass. All the birds of our  Maytime seemed to be singing in the  oaks, and  there were even a few adder-tongues  and trilliums still blossoming on the slope of  the little ravine. But everything  was trans­ figured for me beyond description, bathed in an old world radiance  of beauty  [by] the magic of the lines that  were sounding in my ears, those divine verses, as they seemed to me, with  their Tennyson-like  richness and strange, earth-loving,  Greek­ ish flavour.  I  have  never forgotten  that  morning,  and  its  influence  has  always remained  with me.5

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS

What I find interesting in this passage,  apart from  the  attractive enthusiasm of youth,  is the  suggestion  that  poetry,  acting  upon  the  mind  and  sense,  fuses  two worlds,  the immediate physical  beauty  of Canadian spring  ("our Maytime") and the  "old" world   (which is, to  the  Canadian on  the  outskirts of  civilization, a dream-world)  of  the  cultural past:  "everything was transfigured ... bathed in an  old-world radiance of beauty  [by]  the  magic  of the lines that  were sounding in my ears,  those divine  verses ... with their  Tennyson-like richness  and  strange, earth-loving, Greekish  flavour." These  poets, as British North Americans, felt the need  to impose the  European cultural past on Canada.
Possibly, as I suggested  before, the savagery  and  mystery of Greek  myth-the stories of Orion, Marsyas  and  Acteon  for Roberts -proves more  appropriate to the  savage  and  beautiful character of the  new  land  than  the  high  art  of settled Europe. A classical  education could  take  on  a new  meaning in  a  harshly  lovely land.6   Looking  at  Roberts' poems  one feels that something in  the  nature of the new  land  could,  with  some degree  of appropriateness, be rendered in  terms  of a "Greekish" and  "earth-loving" (though hardly  a Tennysonian) sensibility. Con­ sider  these lines from  "Orion":

All the morning's majesty
And mystery of loveliness lay bare
Before him; all the limitless blue sea
Brightening  with laughter  many a league around
Wind-wrinkled, keel-uncloven, far below;
And far above the bright sky-neighbouring peaks
And all around  the broken precipices,
Cleft-rooted  pines swung over falling foam, And silver vapours flushed with the wide flood Of crimson slanting from the opening east ...

This  could  as easily be Canada as Greece;  the  passage has the same  sense of  dis­ tances  as does  "The  Tantramar  Revisited" but  not,  unfortunately, the  comple­ mentary vivid focus  on  particulars. Instead we get  this "classical" description of
a woman:

For there beside him, veiled in a mist
Where -through the enfolded splendour issued forth­ As delicate music unto one asleep
Through mist of dreams flows softly-all her hair
A mist of gold flung down about her feet, Her dewy, cool, pink fingers parting it
Till glowing lips, and half-seen snowy curves
Like Parian stone, unnerved him, waited SHE ...

This  melange of mist, music, gold and  marble tangled  up in a somewhat labyrin­
thine  syntax  may  (or  may  not)   have  excited  the  undergraduate Lampman, but

25

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS

it is more likely to suggest a coy, artfully posed statue to us than  the warmblooded woman  called for in Roberts'  happy ending to the story of Orion.  The "Tenny­ sonian"  prevails.
Roberts  is at  his best in almost  purely descriptive landscape  poems. He shies away from  any very acute  consideration  of human  relationships, and  his overtly "philosophical" poems are too grandly general to be very convincing. Aside from "The Tantramar Revisited",  it  is the  sonnets-"The Potato  Harvest", "The Pea-Fields"  and  "The Winter  Fields" in particular-that constitute  his lasting achievement as a poet. Except for the delightful "Pea-Fields" these poems tend  to be sombre in tone.
I like to ask my students whether these poems make them think of another well­ known  poet,  and  someone  usually volunteers  the  name  of  Robert  Frost.  "The Winter  Fields"  is similar  in  theme  to Frost's  poems "The  Onset"  and  "Desert Places". In  all three  of these poems there  is sharp  observation  of the coming of winter, but there is this important difference: Frost is strongly present in his poems both as distinctive voice and as character; Roberts is the remote, god-like observer. Unlike his pupil, Lampman, he would never offer such self-revelation as we find in this famous passage from  Frost's "Desert  Places":

They cannot scare me with their empty spaces Between stars -on stars where no human race is. I have it in me so much nearer home
To scare myself with my own desert places.

It  is also interesting  that  Frost,  an American  wrestling with  the optimistic  ghost of Roberts'  and  Carman's kinsman,  Emerson,  is able to suggest  the  possibility imaged  in the snow's  blankness-that existence may be a  meaningless  void­ while  the  Canadian Roberts  refuses, in  his  official "philosophical"  poems,  the possible implications  of his own description  of New Brunswick's  "amber  wastes of sky", "wide flats", "lonely flush", "lonely reaches", "waste of  hard  and meagre weeds",  "brackish  pools  and  ditches  blind",  "low-lying  pastures  of the  wind",  "crying knives", and  "sleet and frost that  bites like steel" -these quotations  are all from the descriptive sonnets-affirming instead  (in the windily unconvincing  "In the Wide Awe and Wisdom of the Night") an Emersonian "august  infinitude of Man." It is not so far, after  all, from New Hampshire  to New Brunswick. In his anguished doubt and self-doubt the somewhat younger Frost became a modem  poet. Roberts maintained an official Victorian  optimism, but only, it appears,  by refusing to enter completely his native space. Still, the best poems remain to show us that he began the journey.
Carman too exhibits a certain  cultural schizophrenia. The  official optimism of British and American  taste-makers sorts ill with his sense of the haunted  quality of his homeland.  His emotions are usually expressed in terms of natural  processes,

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS

most  notably  those  of  autumn's colourful  decline  and  decay.  His  characteristic self-images  are  tiny  flowers,  moths,  children or waifs, whose  beauty  is ephemeral and  doomed. He feels what  I have called  the eeriness of the  Canadian space:

Come, for the night is cold The  ghostly moonlight fills Hollow and  rift and fold Of the eerie Ardise hills!

The windows of my room
Are dark with bitter frost,
The stillness aches with doom
Of something loved and lost.

In  this poem, "A  Northern Vigil",  the absence of an imaginary girl named Guen­ dolyn,  who is characterized as the soul of the  place, is lamented, i.e. this  place  is empty  of spirit  or  meaning. The early  Carman seems  quite   happy  with  Edgar Allan  Poe's myth  of the lost beloved,  and  perhaps feels himself,  as Poe apparently did,  to be a culturally displaced person.
A  little  later,  having   gone  completely  American,  he  writes  his  cheerful but empty  vagabondia poems  to protest,  unconvincingly, a Whitmanesque optimism. There are  also,  however,  poems on  classical  themes   (like  "The Dead   Faun", which  objectifies  Carman's own  sense of death  and  loss in  terms  of the  classical world) , the successful  adaptations of Sappho, and  a mixing  of mythologies  that foreshadows the work of Leonard Cohen.  (In a number of ways Carman was the Leonard Cohen  of his time,  a restless man  with a remarkable lyric gift much appreciated by an  international public; one could  even  view  Cohen's song  "Su­ zanne" as an updated version  of Carman's "Lady of the  Rain": in each  a versa­ tile mother-goddess or Isis-figure  is celebrated).7
It seems  to me,  as  I've  suggested  above,  that  Carman's best  poems  convey  a sense of loss, of that  psychological  and  cultural displacement that many  sensitive Canadians have experienced. Carman does not, like Crawford and  Lampman and Scott,  go forward from  this to engage  the gods of place on their  own ground. But he leaves us, in his own vague,  musical and impressionistic  fashion, with  an atmos­
phere,  a sense of the  problem.




1 Tom  Marshall, "Macdonald Park."
 NOTES

2  A. J. M. Smith  (ed.), Masks  of Poetry  (Toronto,  1962).
3  Literary  History  of Canada, p. 413.
4  "I often wish," said Carman, "that I could rid the world of the  tyranny  of facts. What  are  facts but  compromises?  A fact merely marks  the  point  where  we have agreed  to  let  investigation  cease.  Investigate  further   and  your  fact  disappears. Under  the scrutiny of thought  all facts are alike, from the atom  to the universe ...

MOUNTAINEERS AND  SWIMMERS


and   they   dissolve   ... " (James  Cappon,  Bliss Carman's   Beginnings,   Queen's Quarterly, Autumn 1929, p. 657). More  recently,  William  Irwin Thompson writes interestingly of  the  physicists  Weizsacker  and  Heisenberg and   their  awareness of the  "psychological implications  of  the  quantum  theory"   in  his  Passages About Earth  (New  York,  1974) : " ... if the  modes  of perceiving   [subatomic particles] through laboratory instruments and  mathematics after  the  material itself,  then,  as Heisenberg would  say, we no longer  have a science of nature, but  a science  of the mind's knowledge about nature"  (p.  91). Similarly,  the  most  basic  techniques of poetry   (which  are  extensions of  the  body's  modes  of sense-perception)  after   the "object" of the  poet's  attention, however  "objective" he may  think  he is being. His true  "subject" and  what   it  is that   demands that   he  find  the  exact   form  for  his utterance, is himself  experiencing the world.
5  "Two Canadian Poets: A Lecture, 1891," Masks of Poetry, p. 30.
6  Similarly, a biblical  story could  express man's  relationship to a cruel  nature. North­ rop Frye has elucidated the hidden "Canadian content" of Heavysege's "Jephthah's Daughter" (The  Bush Garden,  pp. 150-51).
7   In  a  letter to  Michael Ondaatje in  1967  or so I  called  Cohen   (rather  unfairly) "the Bliss Carman of the  sixties".  Later, looking  at  Read Canadian,  I noticed  that Dennis  Lee had  had  at some  point  a similar  thought.




IDLE
 


Anne Corkett


I could  believe
I am  water-disliking
pressure,  I meander; am much given to idle
reflection.

There is a certain amount to be leamed from  the way water manages its shallows, the dull  resistance
of stones, the earth
readily  giving  way.

I could  believe
I am all things  did
I not lack the perfect accord  of things  whose purpose is not
to seek purpose
but  to teach  there  is
no elemental bar  to the design.

ANNE  HEBERT
A Pattern Repeated



KathyMezei




IN LES CHAMBRES DE  nors,' Anne  Hibert tells a simple  ,;tory with few characters,  little action, an uncomplicated  plot. Amid the bleakness of a mining  town,  Catherine,  the  heroine, brings up her sisters under  the shadow  of
her brooding, silent father. She encounters, in a Gothic atmosphere  of misty forests and a forbidding  ancestral mansion, the young and sensitive seigneur, Michel. He carries her off to Paris where they both hope to escape the prison of their unhappy, loveless pasts. But, Michel, an artiste manque,  imprisons her in les chambres  de bois, a stifling world of dreams.  Michel's sister, Lia, arrives and  the two siblings, caught  in a strange  and  destructive  relationship,  exclude  Catherine who  finally falls deathly ill. In one last desperate gesture of defiance, Catherine leaves Michel and  Lia and goes to recuperate  in the sunny  Mediterranean. Here she meets the earthy Bruno and becomes attuned, once again, to the natural,  real world.
Anne  Hebert's  language  is sparse and  precise, depouilte. Time  and  space are
anonymous,  and  are, in fast, internalized;  the real time and  space  of the  novel exist within the characters, within their dreams, within the confined world created by Michel and  Lia in their chambres de bois. The tone of this novel, its symbolic language,  its deceptive simplicity,  its timeless, spaceless quality,  its  paradoxical concrete abstractness are reminiscent of a fable. It is a story of a journey through death and stagnation  into life, of the affirmation of life, and of the struggle of life against  the forces of darkness, death  and evil. The  movement experienced  in this novel and reflected symbolically through language, theme and image is the repeti­ tion of a pattern  developed within individual poems and throughout the body of Anne Hebert's  work.
The clear and dramatic development that occurs in Anne Hebert's  writing, is a
development  that can be traced from her earliest poems, Les Songes en equilibre, through to her latest novel, Kamouraska, and to the poems in Mystere de la parole and  her most recent poems. Moreover this development is reflected in microcosm in both the poem, "Le Tombeau des rois", and in Les Chambres  de bois. In fact, a very close affinity exists between the volume of poetry Le Tombeau des rois and Les C hambres de bois:

ANNE HEBERT

11 y a, entre Le Tombeau  des rois et Les Chambres de bois, plusieurs  rapproche­
ments, meme anecdotiques, qu'il nous par it
du roman est precisement celle des poemes: le langage symbolique des Chambres de bois fait echo a celui du recueil; enfin, la technique structurale  du roman est
eclairee par le lien secret qui joint les uns aux autres les poemes.2

In Les Songes en equilibre, the young poet explores the external world, compos- ing a type of inventory about  what she sees and feels; she is discovering the world:

Laissez-moi mes yeux! Laissez mes yeux Courir sur le monde
Comme la couleur sur lamer!
("Tableau de greve", Songes)

It is a world clouded with songes which represent a way of interpreting and deal­ ing with the reality that  begins to close in on her. The  basic emotions here are a combination  of joy and  melancholy.
Le Tombeau des rois carries us into a world where the poet has some experience in the Blakean sense. Here and  in Les Chambres  de bois and  in the short stories, the poet explores the inner world to the limits of anguish and  death;  she descends into herself, into hell, into les chambres  fermees towards the realm of death, con­ fronts  death  and  either  emerges victorious like the falcon  in "Le Tombeau des rois", with "les prunelles crevees", like Catherine  into the arms of  Bruno, or suc­ cumbs to the raging river, and  death, like Francois in Le Torrent.
Then,  with Mystere de la parole and Kamouraska, the poet bursts into a vigor­
ous, joyful affirmation  of life and  the poetic word, an acceptance  of the self and the world, a delight  in passion with all its accompanying  sorrows and  ecstasies:

Que celui qui a rec;u fonction de la parole vous prenne en charge comme un coeur tenebreux de surcroit, et n'ait de cesse que scient justifies les vivants et les morts en un seul chant parmi l'aube et les herbes.3

Not only is the  poet's  vision altered,  but  also her style and  language.  In  Le Torrent  and  Les Songes en equilibre the language is personal, subjective, effusive like the rush of the torrent,  a little undisciplined, but already revealing the precise, cutting images so characteristic of Anne Hebert. In Le Tombeau des rois and  Les Chambres de bois, the image is more concise, the language sparse, controlled, even more  depouilll. The  experience  is still subjective  but  has been  assimilated  and carefully moulded into the form and structure. The language is as clear and limpid as a deep pool, though  in the case of the novel, it appears stilted and enclosed.
In Mystere  de la parole and  later  poems, "Le  jour qui fut",  "Pluie", "Fin  du
monde",4  and in Kamouraska, there is a mature, sophisticated control of language and  form. Here  we find  a richness -not  the  undisciplined  effusions of  adoles­ cence, nor the awkward,  too deliberate exactitude of an author seeking a style, but

ANNE HEBERT

the richness of a maturity  of expression and  vision. The  lines of Mystere  de la parole roll on,  long,  expansive,  overflowing;  the  sentences  in  Kamouraska   are short  but energetic,  comprising  the abrupt  thoughts  of a harassed  woman; both works abound  with a wealth of emotion and imagery not found  in Chambres  or Le Tombeau des rois. We have moved from  a poetry of silence and  immobility, through le tombeau  des rois and les chambres de bois towards a poesie de la parole and movement, from Les Chambres de bois which says little to Kamouraska  which tells all.
We then discover that  the movement within Chambres is similar to that  within the poem, "Le  Tombeau des rois":  descent into  the tomb  or  room  (self), con­ frontation  with death  and,  finally, a mutilated  but promising affirmation of  life. It must not be forgotten that this "rebirth" of Catherine  in Part Three is not with­ out drawbacks,  for Bruno never takes on a strong or vital character  and  we are left wondering  whether  Catherine  will fall passive victim  to  just  another  man's  desires, different  though  they  may  be from  Michel's.  Similarly,  the  child  who emerges from the tomb, in the poem, does so with "les prunelles crevees".
This  descent into  the self, symbolized by the  chambres  de bois, the  tombs  of kings, the  long night,  in order  to explore and  confront  the  limits of death  and silence, to struggle through fever, against "la main seche qui cherche le coeur pour le rompre"  (Poemes,  p. 61 ), and  this re-emergence into the light of dawn,  is a recurring movement in the poems, stories and  novels. Les Chambres  de bois can thus be seen as drawing  together  the themes and images of Le Tombeau des roi and becomes a culminative  prose expression of the poetic concerns of that volume. It  almost seems as if Anne  Hebert  found  it necessary to  repeat,  in  prose, once again, that  process she ceaselessly explores in the poetry of Le Tombeau des rois. By focussing firstly on the themes, then on the images and finally on the symbols that insist their way through  her work, we can further understand the development of Anne Hebert's  work. The  image forms the core of her work. From the images are constructed the structural and thematic patterns of the novel. The  precise and emotive  images  that   haunt   the  reader  with  their  strange   and  impressionistic accuracy comprise Anne Hebert's  chief mode of perception and  expression.


BASICALLv one theme permeates the whole of this novel, as well as most of the poems in Le Tombeau  des rois, the short stories and the plays. Anne  Hebert  continually  recreates  "!'expression  litteraire  d'une   incapacite   de
vivre".5   Man  confronted  by the bleakness, the harshness, the despair  of his exis­ tence, appalled by the spectre of death  ("Une petite mortejs'est  couchee en travers de laporte") ,6 recoils from life, from the fact of death,  retreats into himself, into
la chambre  fermee:  "Nous  nous forcons de vivre a l'intlrieur".7  Here  he experi-

ANNE HEBERT

ences a type of living death,  ( "Nous menons une vie si minuscule et tranquille"),8 dwelling in the  past, in some lost and  fantastic  childhood,  locked in silence. He either remains there like Michel in this "Chambre fermee jCoffre clair ou s'enroule mon enfancejComme un collier desenfi1e",9   or rebels violently, fatally  like Fran­ csois  in "Le  Torrent". Some  poems are  concerned  with  the  "inventory"  of les chambres  de bois, others  with  articulating the  despair of being locked  in  one's
childhood, in silence, in the past, in "ce doux ravin de gel 1en guise de memoire",
cut off from  the world. The  other  alternative  chosen by Catherine,  by Isabelle, Lucie, Sebastien  ( Le Temps sauvage), by the child in "Le Tombeau des rois", is to escape to a more open and satisfying life. It is only in Mystere de la parole that the "poet" accepting the earth in all its beauty and horror can partake in a genuine rebirth or incarnation.
This "incapacite de vivre" is a common trait of Anne Hebert's  characters: "Je me gardais  de la vraie connaissance qui est experience et possession" cries  Fran­ csois  in  Le Torrent. Why  is he, like Michel  and  Lia, "un  enfant  depossede  du monde"?   Why  does  Michel  insist  upon  un  refus  de la  vie,  du  reel? What  is Michel's strange  attraction for death? And, above all, why is the main response to this despair a refuge into the dream,  the chamber,  the chateau, the night  or the barren  wilderness? What  is this absence that  envelops the characters  like a cloak of anguish: this absence without,  which is the rejection of  the forces of life, this absence within,  which is symbolic of an incapacity  to love:  "Je  me pendrai  j  A la place de son coeur absent"  ("La Fille maigre", Poemes). Only during  that  one hour between day and night is Michel "sauve de toute absence et de toute crainte", is Michel capable of caressing his wife, Catherine.
Isolated and embittered,  Claudine,  Franc;ois' mother in Le Torrent, lives in the
forest with her son. By depriving  herself and her child of any human  warmth,  she hopes to compensate for bearing an illegitimate child.
Agnes, in Le Temps sauvage, equally embittered, attempts  to isolate her family in  the  mountains.  By living in seclusion she aspires to avoid  the  pain  that  life inflicts, the pain she once suffered when she lost her fiance to her sister.
Michel and  Lia, bound  by strange  loyalties, tainted  forever  by the arrogance, pride and depravity of an aristocratic but decaying family for whom affection does not exist, only indolence, ostentation  and cruelty, shut themselves up in les cham­ bres de bois in a futile existence of half-read books, unfinished paintings, and child­ hood memories.
Agnes in Le Temps sauvage articulates the nature of this barren existence: "La plus grande  reussite de ce monde, ce serait de demeurer parfaitment secret, a taus a soi-meme, sans age ni raison, ni responsabilite,  une espece de temps sauvage,
hors du temps et de la conscience" (Le  Temps  sauvage). The  inner self becomes a kind of locked cabinet, containing  dark and mysterious secrets. Is not this long,

ANNE HEBERT

monotonous season,  unmarked by age or reason or responsibilities, a kind  of wild time  beyond  time and  consciousness,  the very goal of Michel?
This  feeling of exile that  Anne  Hebert  is continually expressing  in one form  or another has its seeds  (in  the  terms  of reference  provided   by  her  writing) in  the alienating experience of family  life, of a deprived or lonely  childhood, a  morbid past,  in the harsh,  unrelenting land  and climate; seeds which  fall on fertile  ground in  the  sensitive,  neurotic, passive  natures of Anne  Hebert's protagonists.  More­ over,  Anne  Hebert's preoccupation with  this  "absence au  reel",   this  "ref us du present"/ 0 can  be traced  to the kind  of Catholicism prevalent in  Quebec with  its Jansenist orientation :

Tout  notre passe est inscrit dans cette seduction de !'absence  et tout  notre  present est  au  travail  dans  cette  inexorable  metamorphose  de !'oeuvre,  dans  ce  voyage souterrain  vers la lumiere,  vers la possession e l'accomplissement  [...]  la presence n'est acquise qu'a  travers  une absence vecue jusqu'a l'absurde.  I1 y a toute  la nuit
a traverser pour retrouver  l'aube et tout l'irreal a arpenter  avant  d'acceder  de nou­
veau a une geographie  de l'homme.  Les diverses modalites  d'une  absence  habitee par  la  tentation   de  la  mort  donnent   .a  !'oeuvre  d'Anne   Hebert   sa  dimension
tragique.11

But it is not the reason as much  as the  portrayal of this state  of being  that  con­ cerns Anne  Hebert. This, then,  leads us to the other  themes  which  form  an intri­ cate  part  of the "incapacite de vivre".  These are the themes of childhood, the past, dreams, death, solitude  and  silence,  enclosed  space  (and   time)   and  finally,  the inability  to love.
If we pause  for a moment and  reflect upon  these prevalent themes,  we realize that   this  obsession  with  closed  rooms,  memories,  dreams, the  past,  solitude, is really  an  obsession with  enclosed  time  and  space.  Anne  Hebert's most  intriguing image  stems  from  her  various  renderings  of this enclosed  space.  The  title  of the novel, Les Chambres de bois, is vital proof of that.  The  enclosed space,  be it tomb or chateau, is symbolic of a soul closed in upon  itself, of a stultified  inner  existence, of a neurotic self-obsession. Many  of the  poems in  Le Tombeau des rois develop around this  image  and  it  is interesting to  note,  at  this  point,  some  of  the  cor­ respondences between  these poems  and  the  novel.
In "Vieille  Image", it becomes necessary to bum  the chateau, relic of childhood

days;  the chateau  described  here reminds  us of the home of Michel  and  Lia: "Ce mirage de chateau I A la  droit  I De notre  enfance" ( Poemes). In  "Un Mur   a
peine", the  poet  is drained of life, is enclosed  in a walled  garden because  of the
"liens  durs I Que  j'ai  noues I En  je ne sais quelle  nuit  secrete  IAvec  la  mort!"
(Poemes).
The voice of "LaChambre fermee" could well be that  of Catherine, crying  out, "Qui done  m'a  conduite ici?".  She describes this "chambre fermee" where  she is

33

ANNE HEBERT

placed  like a sacrificial  Christ,  arms  spreadeagled, her heart cut  from  her  breast. The last verse foreshadows the novel:
Laisse, laisse le feu teindre
La chambre  de reflets
Et murir  et ton coeur etta chair;
Tristes epoux  tranches  et perdus.

(Poemes)

Do not "tristes  epoux  tranches et perdus" inhabit les chambres  de bois, and  is not
Catherine set to "ripen" into  a beautiful playmate for Michel  within  those rooms?
The poem  entitled "La Chambre de  bois" is closely linked  to the  novel,  and, again, the  voice emerging from  the  poem  could  be  Catherine's. The inhabitant dwells there, imprisoned with her anguished  senses while life surges at her window:
"La place  du  monde flambe comme  une forge I L'angoisse  me fait  de l'ombre I
Je suis nue et toute  noire sous un arbre amer" ( Poemes).
The poem "Vie  de chateau" describes a life that  has a clear  affiliation  with  the life led by Michel  and  Catherine. I quote  it in full:
C'est  un chateau d'ancetres
Sans table ni feu
Ni poussiere ni tapis.

L'enchantement pervers de ces lieux
Est tout dans ses miroirs polis.

La seule occupation  possible ici
Consiste a se mirer  jour et nuit.
Jette  ton image aux fontaines dures
Ta  plus dure  image sans ombre ni couleur.

Vois, ces glaces sont profondes
Comme des armoires
Toujours quelque  mort y habite sous le tain
Et couvre aussitot ton reftet
Se colle a toi comme une algue
S'ajuste  a toi, mince et nu,
Et simule l'amour  en un lent frisson amer.

(Poemes)

Here  we find the same spartan inventory of furniture as in the novel. There is the same  futile  preoccupation of gazing  in the  mirror  at oneself, that  is, delving  into one's  inner  self. As the  novel  illustrates,  the  hazard of this preoccupation is that "toujours quelque mort  y habite sous le tain". The "dead man" who feigns love in  a  slow  bitter   shudder  bears   a  strong   resemblance   to  "l'etrange  amour de Michel".

34

ANNE HEBERT

In  "Le Tombeau des rois" we find that  the enclosed space has narrowed  from a chateau  to a chamber  to become, finally, a tomb, the resting place of corpses, the space that encloses death.
In  Les Chambres  de bois, we move from the seigneurial mansion,  "trapue aux fenetres  longues  et  etroites",  from  Catherine's   home  where  her  recluse  father "parO.t apaise au coeur de sa maison bien close" into les chambres  de bois, "ces deux seules pieces lambrissees de bois, aux meubles anciens, aux bibelots rares, aux objects usuels incommodes ou abimes."
As if this tiny apartment were not small enough, Michel constructs "une  petite maison de paille",  composed of his narrow iron cot and  his piano, so that  he can retire  even further  into  his solitude.  He  then  proceeds to  fashion  another   tiny camping  ground,  "au  coin du  feu, en  cet espace reduit"  for  himself  and  Lia, where "des  verres, des livres, des cigarettes, des cendriers debordants de megots s'entasserent  sur le tapis et marquerent les places de Michel et Lia".  Their  life is now encompassed  by this "espace reduit".  Excluded from all this, Catherine has found  her own space:  "Catherine s'enfermait  volontiers dans le petit  cabinet  de toilette  qui  etait  tout  en glaces." She amuses herself with  "Ia  seule occupation
possible ici I Consiste a se mirer  jour et nuit."  But when she leaves the chambres
de bois to recuperate  at the seaside, the space opens up, the land spreads  towards
the sea, the  windows of her  bedroom  look out  over gardens,  over  the  sea  and much of her time is spent in the open air. In this way, Anne Hebert  attempts  to create a feeling of freedom and release.



IT IS INTERESTING TO  note that  in Mystere  de la  parole, the image of rooms or houses expands into cities; these, with their brimming,  bustling life become the key image; we pass out from the cloistered rooms to mingle in the life of the city. By existing in a tiny space where little happens  Michel  hopes to make time stand still. For him, real time exists in the bittersweet years of his child­ hood, real space in the faraway family home. Both are beyond his reach, especially when Lia sells the estate to her lover.
Lia has sought  to expand  her experience of time and space, her memories are
not  just childhood  fantasies  but  memories of her lover; she has visited far  and distant lands; she attempts to present a piano concert. But when her experience of love grows bitter, when her concert is a failure, like a wounded  animal,  she seeks shelter in the comfort of the arid existence created by her brother.  By attempting to make time stand  still, by further  and further  narrowing  their space  of  habita­ tion,  Michel and  Lia hope to avoid pain  by avoiding experience. And  enclosed time becomes a metaphor of enclosed space and vice versa. In  a small apartment with the curtains drawn,  one can barely distinguish between night and day, mark the passing of the seasons.

35

ANNE HEBERT

However, the result of this desperate retreat from the motion and flow and dimension that  constitute  the forces of life is a withdrawal  into  the self. Then, time is perceived in terms of memory, as an ever-present past. Feeding upon one­ self, in this way, becomes a destructive and sadistic act. The  time and space that  Michel inhabits is that  of his own inner self. But what a barren, frozen, tormented  place that  is! Its main  quality  being that  of absence, what  a  desperate  existence he has sentenced himself to! And so, the cluttered and gloomy apartment is merely the metaphor  of his own close and unhappy soul.
To prevent external  time and space from encroaching upon him, Michel insists upon  living in the  dark;  he does his work by night  and  sleeps during  the  day, frantically avoiding the sunlight. "11 ne faut pas reveiller Michel, le jour l'irrite  et le blesse; mains il en a, plus il vit," Lia informs Catherine.
Catherine  attempts to share this constricted world of Michel. But the memories of the past that haunt  Michel are not real to her and she is stifled in the tiny apart­ ment:  "Moi,  j'ai toujours  aime le jour et l'ete." She wants to run barefoot in the puddles-to feel the earth  pulsing beneath  her feet. She, unlike Michel and  Lia, does not possess the  deep and  mysterious resources of the self  that  subsume  any desire to dwell in the present and to experience the flow of life around  them. She is, in many ways, a superficial person, a passive person;  yet  the  profoundness  of Michel and Lia, tormented  as they are, does not seem particularly  enviable.
Closely allied to this incapacity  to live, is the inability to love. Here is another theme that permeates Quebec literature.  Love in the novel is either an act of desperation  or violence, tragically resolved, or at best, a calm and sensible agree­ ment between two people. These relationships are sketchily portrayed, they erupt quickly,  and  no  other  alternative  seems feasible. In  other  words,  they  are  not developed realistically. But this tends to enhance the fable-like quality of the novel. Anne Hebert  does not intend  to delve into the psychology of her characters,  their lives or emotions;  she wishes to suggest a certain  state of being,  evoke a certain mood. We are in the realm of stark charcoal sketches, not rich  oil paintings.
We have seen how images of chateaus,  chambres  de bois, develop the theme of enclosed space, of un  refus  de la vie. It is these images that  form, enhance,  and reveal the themes of the novel. Words for Anne Hebert  become symbols and  we can observe how these symbols thread their way throughout  the entire body of her work  and  complement   her  thematic  concerns.  Her  most  effective and  striking symbols seem to fall into three corresponding categories: the body, nature  and the house. There is a correlation  between the components of these categories. For example, the parts of the body such as eyes, heart, hands  (fingers),  breath  (song), bones correspond to water  (rain, fountains), forest, branches, wind, trees in nature which in tum  correspond  to mirrors  (windows),  rooms (houses, tombs),  furni­ ture,  piano  (music)   in  the  house or chateau.  These  corresponding  phenomena tend to perform similar symbolic functions and to supplement  each other.

ANNE HEBERT

Let  us now  examine three  of these  symbols  which  occur  in  the  novel:  eyes, hands and  bones.  Eyes, mirrors, and  water  are  modes  of  perception: eyes gaze outward into the external world,  mirrors  and  water  are instruments for reflection, for looking  at  and  into  oneself,  "les  prunelles  pareilles  j  A leur  plus  pure  image d'eau" ( Il y a certainement quelqu'un," Poemes).
Anne  Hebert is often  concerned with the  concept  of "transparence": windows and  the surface  waters  of pools should  be transparent so that  one  can  clearly  see into  the  life of  things.  Catherine is associated  with  this  transparence -there  is little  pretence or  illusion  clouding her  soul.  In  the  opening pages,  there   is  an emphasis  on  cleaning windows  covered  with  soot  from  the  blast  furnaces, and
Catherine insists  on  "tout  transparence refaite  a mesure". So  when   Catherine
observes  herself in  mirrors, it is "sans  que  son image  mievre  la  trompat,  refletee au  passage dans  les glaces des vitrines". And  when  she tries  to imagine herself as an  infant as she  gazes  into  the  mirror,  she is greeted,  instead, by images  of  her little sisters at  home,  reminding her of her  true  nature and  dispelling  all illusion.
However, for  Michel,  such  an occupation must  be an "enchantement pervers" for in his case "toujours quelque mort  y habite  sous le tain". Unlike  Catherine he is not  transparent; what  lies beneath his polished  surface  is too  deep,  mysterious and  disturbing for the  mirror to reflect a true  image.
Water  is even a more  profound and  complex  symbol: "La vie la  plus belle et la  plus forte  devait  ressembler  a cela:  une  eau  transparente et vive, sans  jamais revenir  en arriere, renouvelant ses images a mesure."12
Clear  waters  reflect  a lucid  image.  But waters  are  deep  and  dark  and  to sink into  them  is to sink into  a dream, into death.

L'eau  de ces bois sornbres
Et si pure et si uniquernent fluide
Et consacree en cet ecoulernent de source
Vocation  marine  ou je me mire.

("Les Grandes  Fontaines",  Poemes)

Water is the source  of the  creation of life, the symbol  of the  mysterious  depths of the creative  soul. It is also, as in Le Torrent, the destroyer  of life, the symbol  of death. It forms one of the elemental forces of life from  the  time  of the separation of the earth  and  the waters.  In  Mystere  de la parole, Anne  Hebert writes  "Je suis la terre  et l'eau  ... ". The  flow of water  cleanses and  purifies  like the  baptismal waters.  Catherine, hurt  by Michel  and  Lia's  disparaging remarks, lets  the  water flow over  her hands  as if they  were raw wounds,  hoping  to wash  away  the  pain. Michel, dreaming of a purified  Lia, calls to her:  "Lia, tu es lavee comme l'eau, rna soeur eau, c'est toi, Lia."
Catherine  experiences her  "resurrection" by  the  sea.  Thus, water   draws  its

37

ANNE HEBERT

wealth as a symbol from sources in the Bible and religious rituals, as well as from the rivers and pools of the forest, from nature.
Hands  are symbols of giving and  receiving; they are instruments  of utility and creativity;  they are symbolic of one's total being, of the relationship  between one's inner self and the outer world. In the poem, "Les Mains",  the girl's hands are an intermediary between  herself and  the world, they are making  futile gestures and
Les signes du monde
Sont graves a meme ses doigts.

Tant  de chiffres profonds
L'accablent de bagues massives et travaillees.

(Poemes)
Like Catherine,  this girl's hands  are "cette  offrande impitoyable I Des mains de douleurs parees / Ouvertes au solei!."
The  poet, in another  poem has "cette  idee I De planter nos mains au  jardin", but for the hands to flower, "Il  faudra  la saison prochaine I Et nos mains fondues
comme l'eau" ("Nos  Mains au jardin",  Poemes).
Catherine's hands are described as being capable, busy-they are the external manifestations  of her state of being. Michel pauses to admire  them  as she sews: "QueUes mains pleines de pouvoir tu as!"  But once she moves into les chambres de bois and  becomes idle, her hands are no longer rough and  reddened,  but "ses mains  [...]  devenaient  blanches  et  ses angles  [...]  s'allongeaient   comme  des griffes de bete captive." It is through  her hands that  her illness first manifests it­ self, "les premieres, ses mains vinrent a manquer."
The  most powerful image employed by Anne Hebert is that  of bones:
Je suis une fille maigre
Et j'ai de beaux os.
("La  Fille maigre", Poemes)

This stripping  to the bones, this denial of the flesh, is the striking metaphor for the refus de la vie;  it is the ultimate  depouillement. Language,  too, is stripped  to its very bones, shorn of all excess flesh, only the clear, hard,  exact word remains: the skeleton of an  idea  or  image.  Flesh  betrays one. Witness  how  Michel  suc­ sumbed  to the  warmth  and  softness of Catherine; the hard,  inflexible  bones of one's being are too rigid, too immobile to permit betrayal, action or emotion. But the skeleton -the bare outline of bones is the very image of death:

Alors surgit le theme des os, qui represente ce qu'on possede de plus sur et de plus irreductible, le dernier recours de la solitude et sa derniere complaisance. La chair devait nous faire communiquer avec le monde, et elle nous a trahi. Tandis qu'avec
les OS  on peut etre tranquille, meme si c'est une tranquilite  [sic) a I'image de la
mort. Le poete celebre maintenant, non plus la solitude aux "mais ouvertes", mais

ANNE HEBERT

la demiere extremite de l'isolement ... !'existence nue, sans beaute et sans don;
... le poete imagine des amours etranges ou la chair ne jouerait aucun role.13

To strip to the bones is the ultimate  purification.  Michel praises Lia's  thinness to Catherine,  "la  maigreur  de Lia qu'il comparait  au  pur  tranchant de l'esprit." He believes that "un  jour ... elle redeviendra pure comme ses os." Catherine and Lia are set in contrast: Catherine as the warm living flesh, Lia  the cold, brittle skeleton of death.
Claudine,  Fran ois'
dompter  jusqu'aux  os", precisely because the bones are "ce qu'on  :possede de plus sure et irreductible,  le demier secours de la solitude et sa demiere  complaisance." When Anne Hebert  plunges into the vitality of Mystere de la parole, when her vision of the world expands into a joyous affirmation and acceptance  of the earth and water, when her language grows richer and more vibrant, it is as if the world were made  flesh. But, as "Le  Tombeau  des rois" illustrates,  it was necessary to "connaitre l'etau  des os",  to experience  this depouillement  in order  to  emerge
victoriously into the fullness of a new life.
The "fille maigre" in Anne Hebert's poem, with her thin, frail, ephemeral appearance, seems to  characterize  all the  heroines:  Catherine and  Lia  of  this novel, Lucie in Le Temps sauvage, Emilie, Catherine,  Stephanie,  Dominique  in the short stories are all such intense and slight girls. Their  childlike appearance enhances their refusal to grow up. This intimation  of childish innocence and rejec­ tion of the adult world also pervades the poems of Le Tombeau des rois.
Catherine,  when confronted  by the demands of the adult  world, such as mar­
riage, retreats into childishness, "simulait le travail ou l'enfance lorsque l'un  d'eux s'arretait pour la regarder  et lui dire bonsoir." Only at the end  does she develop into a woman capable of making decisions and pursuing her own well-being. Lia, on the other hand, grows thinner,  retreating into the solace and  hardness-or as Michel would have it-the purity of her bones.
Elizabeth,  in  Kamouraska, as she  recalls her  past  is  a  plump,  middle-aged
woman, and this one heroine has developed from a thin, dreamy  girl into a solid, desirable woman:  the essence of her beauty, unlike Lia's, is in her flesh not  her bones.
Thus  words become symbols, form images that  unite  to create  thematic  and
structural patterns  in  individual   works as well as in  the  entire  body  of Anne Hebert's  writing. And we can see that the movement of Les Chambres  de bois as it is developed symbolically through  language, theme and  image is the repetition of a pattern. Les Chambres  de bois is both a crystallization and  a prophecy.

NOTES

1 Les Chambres de bois (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1958). All references to the novel are from this text. It follows two volumes of poetry, Les songes en equilibre (I 942) '

39

ANNE HEBERT


and  Le Tombeau des rois  (I 953), and  a  volume  of short  stories,  collected   under the  title  of Le Torrent  (I 950) . It is Anne  Hebert's first novel.  Since  then,  she has brought out  another volume  of poetry,  Poemes  (I 960)  comprised of  Le Tombeau des  rois and  Mystere de  la  parole,  a  collection  of  her  plays,  Le  Temps  sauvage (I 967), and  a novel  Kamouraska (I 970). Some of her later  poems  are  printed in Rene  Lacote's Anne  Hebert, (Paris: Seghers,  I969)   and  have  been  published   in various  periodicals.
2   Rejean Robidoux et  Andre   Renaud, Le  Roman Canadien-francais du  vingtieme siecle  (Ottawa: Editions  de L'Universite d'Ottawa, I966)   p.  I74·
3  "Mystere de la parole", Poemes, p. 75·
4 See Lacote, pp.  I5I-52, I55-56,  I63-64.
5   PierrePage,AnneHebert  (Montreal: Fides,  I965),p.36.
6  "une  Petite  Morte", Poemes,  p. 42.
1 Ibid.
8 Ibid., p. 48.
9  "LaChambre de  bois",  Poemes, p. 42.
10 Albert  LeGrand, Anne  Hebert: de l'exil au royaume. (Montreal: Presses de l'Uni- versite de Montreal, I967), pp.  20, 27.
11 Ibid., p. 27.
12 Page,  op. cit. p. 14 quoting from  Anne  Hebert's script,  La  Canne a peche,  p. 1.
13 Gilles Marcotte, Un  Litterature qui se fait. (Montreal: HMH, I966), p. 291.




MONSOON
 


John Ditsky


one of those days when the rain stays on, and  off and on,

making the dawn  stay on as well, fooling  the birds

-days when  the sky pours down  Sumatra on the town:

the afternoons when old colons
can  sip their  tonics-skip

administering -let the lights make  night  of outer  fact;

then  clocks lie Dali-limp,
the drums don't thump, and  you

and  I may lie (if sense
be there) in permanent siesta

MATT COHEN'S MONOLOGUE IN MORALITY


Betty Moore Ewing



IN HIS  FIRST  TWO publffihed worh, Matt   Cohen  u=l the novel form as a vehicle for a searching inquiry into the moral struggle facing  the individual  today  in  a  rapidly  expanding  technological  society.  Essentially,  the
author  is attempting to discover a solution to the personal dehumanization which results first from  extensive role playing and secondly from an  inability  to accept the responsibility involved  in being an  individual; that  is, in differing  from  the norm. The  problem  emerges as twofold. On  the one hand,  accepting  the  inevit­ ability of role playing leads to the corruption of personal integrity and the paraly­ sis of emotion. On the other hand, variance from the role or norm necessitates an honest evaluation  of self, which,  if not  impossible, is likely to  be,  at  best,  dis­ heartening.
Early  in  the  first  novel, KorsoniloIf, Cohen  states  his  intentions.  Korsoniloff
admits  that  the following  journal  (which  constitutes  the  book's  narrative)  is a "morality  monologue".  Korsoniloff, a Toronto  philosophy professor is making  a mental  pilgrimage  in search of a "true  understanding of self".  He  recognizes in his own personality the split which is the product  of sociological pressures to con­ form. Korsoniloff's opposing selves, the one active and imposing, the other passive and  introspective,  vie incessantly for supremacy.  A third  faction  develops in the form of a narrator removed from the reality of the action-a spectator  capable of viewing, at  once, opposing personalities struggling  to conquer  the  total  indi­ vidual. Korsoniloff names it the line of contiguity. If this third  power were indeed a line of contiguity,  it would by definition join the opposing halves in a compli­ cated and many-faceted,  but complete  whole. This accordingly should result in an integration  of selves and  a  liberation  from  the  struggle  for  self-identification. Instead, an implacable  arbitrariness  results. When Korsoniloff's third self assumes the role of onlooker, all action  loses meaning. The actor  can  no longer  be held responsible for his actions since he is merely  an  observer. Actions, consequently, are lifted  beyond morality  and  are  neither  right  nor  wrong.  How  then,  if Kor­ soniloff can  judge his separate selves only by their actions can he establish which is the better faction and accordingly allow that faction total supremacy? From this develops the circular motion of the morality monologue to what is, as Cohen calls

MATT COHEN

it, a non-existent  centre.  Essentially, Korsoniloff has arrived  at  the  most  funda­ mental  of philosophical  questions-what is good or evil? Because of  the  very nature  of philosophical questioning, there can be no definite solution.
Korsoniloff  himself recognizes the  paradox.  Out  of the  fear  that  our  uncon­ trived personality may be unacceptable to society, we establish our roles so firmly that  there remains no escape. He wonders if we see ourselves as others see us and if so, could we ever be sure of this matching  perception.  His final  conclusion  is that we simply do not really WANT  to see ourselves.
In  an effort to avoid confrontation with ourselves, we rely on the role created
for us by our past or occupation.  "One  must inevitably appropriate and  console oneself with one's own history." That  is, one converts one's history to one's own worth  without  authority  and  seals the gaps in the present with  the  putty  of the past. Tonker,  Korsoniloff's lawyer, exemplifies the personality hidden  behind  the employment  role. The  pile of papers on his desk is "an  externalized  monument". Not only is it neecssary for today's  generation  to establish a sense of  self-impor­ tance  through  externals  but  to eternalize  it. A house is renovated  for  "the  first child who must begin in conquered  territory". And so, false values, values today's generation  has  named  false, are  monumentalized   by the  individuals  wishing  to defy them.
The second consideration  is the acceptance of responsibility. Korsoniloff states,
with unusual candour,  that  he is "tired  of responsible reality". The  alternative,  if not  split  personality,  is total  surrender  to  unreality,  distinguished  by  irrational action. But this too is undesirable, for irrational  action demands even greater responsibility. Korsoniloff meets the dilemma head on when he ventures that per­ haps he is "afraid to be really insane".




IT rs IN  THIS  POSITION that  Johnny  Crackle  finds himself in Cohen's  second novel,  johnny Crackle  Sings. Johnny,  having lost a preliminary battle  in  the  crusade  for success, begins  to withdraw  with  increasing  regularity into the  medium  of chemically induced  euphoria.  Eventually,  withdrawal  gains an impetus  of its own, disjoint from drugs. As Johnny escapes reality and  moves into a state of (as he sees it)  oneness with the universe, he is menaced with having to face the responsibility which accompanies refusal to conform and communicate as demanded  by his role. Threatened in a psychiatric clinic with shock treatment, Johnny  realizes that  variance  from the norm will bring neither escape nor peace but rather  a discomfort far greater  than  that  produced  by role playing. Since his intent  in withdrawing was to produce  infinite peacefulness, Johnny  discards the decision as having  no ultimate  purpose.
In  Korsoniloff, Matt  Cohen  elaborates  on the theme of frozen emotion. This

42

MATT COHEN

results from two seemingly opposite causes. Gail is the  best example  of an  indi­ vidual  who  chooses to  prostitute  her  beliefs, toss off all  personal  integrity  and assume an easier mode of living-role playing. So completely does she give her­ self to the playing of roles that  she becomes totally pliant,  totally  without  a per­ sonality of her own. Morally, she is corrupt. Without  hesitation she allows Tanker  to make of her a gift to Korsoniloff, and a gift which is merely a replacement  for the  inaccessible Marie.  If she has emotions, they are  unidentifiable.  Korsoniloff sees her as unperturbed, moving with the flow as it  were, and imagines  marrying and living together  in Rosedale. Rosedale, apparently,  for Korsoniloff  represents the home of those who have successfully integrated  their  personalities with a very acceptable  norm. But as he imagines the ease of such a situation,  he can foresee the effect. Gail is a "closed system" with whom communication would be, at best, limited.
The second cause of paralyzed communication  and emotion is, surprisingly, an unwillingness to conform.  More  exactly, when Korsoniloff as narrator begins to question the established reactions of his other two selves, as mentioned  earlier, an arbitrariness  results. Introspection, therefore, although  intended  to provide  free­ dom from false actions,  results also in stultified emotion. As Korsoniloff  oversees with dread  his contrived  relationship  with Marie, he becomes so totally  removed from its actuality  that  he can no longer communicate  at all. Unable  to  play the role, yet unable to discard it, he chooses the only remaining  alternative -escape. But even at the final parting,  he is socially handicapped. Programmed  by social mores, he resents having turned  back before leaving, thus losing the "upper hand". As long as he feels that  he has lost the battle, although the relationship  has ended (which after all was his aim)  he has not truly escaped. The  disruption  of Marie's wedding represents, to Korsoniloff's distorted vision of  reality, absolute freedom.
Significantly, Korsoniloff is unwilling to admit  his guilt  when  legally charged with  the disruption  of Marie's  wedding. Morally, he sees the  issue as one-sided. Since the act was precipitated  by a need to be free of past contrivances,  to be true to his personality in opposition to the norm, then surely the act was not wrong. He perceives his innocence as necessarily so.
This  theme  of necessary innocence  is stressed repeatedly  in   johnny  Crackle Sings. Lengthy  passages of prose poetry argue  on behalf of man's  innocence  as the child of God. After all, should that not provide an unchallengeable escape from responsibility? Johnny  faced with failure reminds himself:

Yes I was born perfect flawless ... they can't take that away from us and nor can we we were perfect once and always are ... and we are still perfect and we have killed and torn apart and destroyed and we are still perfect ...

Johnny  is, in a sudden  stream  of religiosity (prompted   by fear),  attempting to establish some worth, some goodness in himself which does not rely on the opinion

43

MATT COHEN

of society. He seeks the promise  of innate value which  cannot  be destroyed  by fail­ ing  in some  socially  imposed  role.  For  Johnny, the  solution  lies in  forfeiting, at least temporarily, a public  life for a quietly secluded  marriage, in  which  the close­ ness of friends  and  the establishment of a family  (an "externalized monument"?) provide  him  with sufficient  reminder of his own worth.
For  Korsoniloff  the solution is more  difficult. After  imagining his own  suicide and  the  subsequent shooting of  an  old  woman,  he  finally  recognizes  the  latent guilt  connected with  his mother's drowning. This  realization affords  Korsoniloff a sudden insight  into  his, and  all  men's,  ability  to  destroy.  Having accepted the possibility of self, not as necessarily innocent, but as responsible for his own actions, he acknowledges his inability to stand  apart and in a "morality monologue" divide finally and  without exception, right  from  wrong.

Did I do it or didn't  I? I still don't  know.
But I know I never will.

In  both  cases, with  Johnny now  living  on the  coast  with  Jenny and  monument­ child,  and  Korsoniloff   assuming semi-communicative self-acceptance with  Gail,  we are  left with  a feeling  of futility.  This feeling  persists, not  because  there  is no total  escape from  the  jaws of social obligation, but because  the  real  battle  was for mobility  through understanding and,  having  perceived  the  predicament, we are no freer.  Avoidance, as in Johnny's case, or acceptance, as in Korsoniloff's, bring  no  promise  of relief from  forced  conformity  to socially  acceptable roles in order  to interact effectively. The monologue has indeed  been a circular one,  ever mov­ ing  toward a non-existent  centre.  Early  in the  novel,  Korsoniloff, Cohen  sets the
tone. "The mood  is spiritual poverty." Essentially,  nothing has changed.



PJICIFIC SJILMON
 

Roderick Haig-Brown


River-born  fugitives, red muscled under sheathing  silver, Alive with lights of ocean's changing colours,
The  range of deeps and distances through wild salt years Has gathered  the sea's plenty into your perfection. Fullness is the long return  from dark depths
Rendering toll of itself to the searching nets Surging on to strife on brilliant gravel shallows That  opened long ago behind the failing ice.
In violence over the gravel, under the burn of fall, Fullness spends itself, thrusting forth new life
To nurse in the stream's flow. The old life,
Used utterly, yields itself among the river rocks of home.

44

CONQUETE  HORIZONTALE   ET VERTICALE  DE LA VILLE



Antoine Sirois



LAWLLE,  acceptee comme a;pace detinitif de vie, a;t entree tardivement dans les litteratures  canadiennes d'expression fran<;aise et d'expression anglaise. La crise de 1929 et la deuxieme guerre mondiale,  points tournants dans
l'histoire  du  pays, ont  provoque  une transformation  du  roman  qui  s'attardait a
des espaces ruraux  et a des nostalgies revolues. L'industrialisation suscitee par  la guerre  a surtout  contribue  a faire ,emigrer les ruraux  vers les espaces urhains  et le
roman  vient  temoigner  de ces mutations  sociales majeurs.  Au   pied  de  la  Pente douce  de Roger Lemelin en 1944, Bonheur  d'occasion  de Gabrielle Roy en 1945, Earth  and  High  Heaven de Gwethalyn  Graham  en 1944 et  The Loved  and  the Lost  de Morley Callaghan  en 1951 nous presentent des heros nouveaux,  degages de l'ideologie rurale et marques des pveoccupations du citadin  moderne.
Le theme  de la "quete" apparait avec plus d',evidence que  jamais durant les annees quarante et  cinquante.  Il se dessine surtout sous la forme d'une  conquete
du nouvel espace urbain  qui  propose un defi a la fois materiel  et  moral.  Quatre
romans m'ont  paru bien se preter a une etude comparative  de cette quete dans les
deux litteratures.
Au  pied de la Pente  douce  ( 1944)  de Roger Lemelin, qui se deroule  a Quebec et The  Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz  ( 1959)  de  Mordecai  Richler,  qui  se
deroule  a Montreal,  illustrent  une conquete sur le plan  horizontal,  ou les  ambi­
tions des protagonistes tendent  vers des valeurs plus materielles et exterieures;  La
Fin des songes ( 1950)  de Robert  Elie et The Watch that  Ends  the  Night   ( 1959)
de Hugh  MacLennan, polarises sur Montreal,  manifestent  une recherche  plus in­
terieure que l'on qualifier de verticale par rapport  a l'autre.
Les deux  premiers  romans,  bien que  publies  a plusieurs annees  de  distance,
evoquent  des souvenirs  d'adolescents  qui  s'enracinent  dans  une  meme  periode, celle de la crise economique. L'un couvre de 1936 a 1939, l'autre de 1932 a 1951. Les histoires sont  bien connues, mais rappelons  que  les heros, Denis  Boucher  et
Duddy  Kravitz,  sont  des adolescents du  meme  age, grandissant  dans  le meme contexte economique  de l'avant-guerre, aux  prises avec une crise d'identification
que les amene d'abord  a triompher  d'eux-memes, de leur conscience, de leur sensi-

45

CONQUETE DE  LA  VILLE

bilite et  a s'emanciper de leur  milieu. L'ambition les propulse  ensuite  vers des espaces symboliques de reussite, qu'ils atteignent,  en tout  ou en partie,  vers l'age de la  majorite.  Denis  grandit  dans  un  quartier   populaire  canadien-fran<_;ais  de
Quebec, aux pieds de la Pente douce qui mene a la haute ville ou logent les riches
et les instruits;  Duddy  pousse dans  le "ghetto" juif de Montreal,   a l'ombre  du
Mont-Royal,  ou tronent  les financiers de la metropole.  Une  analyse des espaces physiques et moraux  a travers lesquels evoluent les heros rend compte des etapes
de leur marche  conquerante, de la base au sommet.
Le narrateur decrit  la basse ville, d'ou  emerge Denis, comme "un  grand  trou sombre",  sans verdure,  un sale faubourg,  pique de  bicoques, un  univers delabre
et ferme. Le ghetto d'origine  de Duddy se prete a une description tout aussi noire:
"one  street  would  have seemed as squalid  as the  next",  avec leurs "cold  water flats",  ou grandissent  des enfants sales et tristes. Les gens de la  haute  ville  per­
<_;oivent d'ailleurs  ces quartiers  comme mal fames. Les heros appartiennent a des
families ou le pere se montre  faible et sans poigne.  Madame  Boucher  domaine l'espace familial et Denis "ne  pouvait se debarrasser de l'emprise de cette femme" ( xg6). Chez Kravitz,  ou la mere est decedee, c'est le patriarche, le grand-pere,  qui impose son autorite,  transmet  la tradition  orthodoxe.  Les adolescents secouent ce cadre  severe, comme  ils rejettent  celui de leur  paroisse et de leur  communaute religieuse domines par le cure ou le rabbin. lis se retoument vers la haute ville, lieu de leur affranchissement,  image de leurs desirs. A la fois hostile et attirante,  juchee sur  ses sommets,  elle represente  la  reussite, l'argent, !'instruction, la  puissance. Duddy lorgne vers ces demeures accrochees au Mont-Royal,  habitees par ceux qui sont  "vraiment riches",  "vraiment puissants".  Denis contemple  les hauteurs  qui couronnent  la Pente douce et abritent !'instruction, la culture et les postes stables. Meme les biens elementaires  de la nature,  les arbres, les jardins, les pares nichent dans les aires 'elevees. Au  milieu de leurs concitoyens qui  pietinent  dans  les bas quartiers,  les adolescents  impatients   brisent  done  les coquilles ecologiques,  fa­ miliales, religieuses qui les retiennent,  inaugurent  la poussee des gagne-petit dans la civilisation urbaine.  Les quartiers  d'en haut  catalysent les jeunes ambitions, in­ cament des valeurs  auxquelles  ils aspirent,  que  ce soit de  posseder un  lopin  de
terre  ou de "devenir  quelqu'un" pour Duddy,  ou d'acceder   a une  puissance ou
de recolter un succes litteraire  pour Denis. Ces quartiers  refletent aussi un temps dynamique,  evolutif,  progressif, aux yeux de Denis outre par les siens, "parasites d'une  petite antiquite qui pourrit  dans les traditions" et retifs au progres, ou de Duddy, rebelle aux us et coutumes perimes de son entourage.
L'etude  des espaces physiques et moraux, et de leurs significations, nous amene a constater que deux adolescents, a une meme epoque, veulent franchir  des etapes analogues, a la recherche de valeurs, argent, puissance, prestige, liees a la nouvelle
civilisation urbaine, et qui revetent un eclat plutot materiel et ext·erieur.
Deux autres  romans viennent  illustrer une forme differente et  plus fondamen-

CONQUETE DE LA VILLE

tale de quete que semble aussi susciter Ia cite, recherche cette fois-ci de personnages dans  leur maturite.  II s'agit  de deux oeuvres des annees  cinquante, La  Fin  des songes de Robert  Elie et The  Watch  that Ends the Night,  de Hugh  MacLennan, qui  nous entrainent dans  un  pelerinage avant  tout  interieur,  des annees  1926 a
1946 pour le premier, des annees 1922 .a 1950, en majeure  partie,  pour le second.
lis couvrent  tous deux Ia crise economique et Ia seconde guerre mondiale.  Marcel a 37 ans vers 1946 et George, 45 vers 1950, annees qui, dans les recits, correspon­ dent aux. annees les plus critiques de leur vie d'adulte.
Les espaces physiques ou moraux traverses par les protagonistes signalent encore evolution, mais ils se presentent  autrement.  Le narrateur pe oit
plus globale, insiste moins sur les oppositions physiques, ce qui est deja significatif, car les heros ne mesurent  plus leur  reussite au  passage d'un  quartier  moins  fa­ vorise a un quartier  plus huppe. Au contraire  de Denis et de Duddy,  ils font une evaluation tres critique de Ia societe qui compose Ia ville et contestent les ambitions superficielles qu'elle  entretient,  ses soucis d'argent  et de prestige, ses  preoccupa­  tions futiles. La famille n'apparait plus aces adultes comme un frein a leur ambi­ tion, mais comme un espace conflictuel qui n'offre pas Ia chaleur et !'unite  desirees, ce qu'ils deplorent.  La religion meme que les adolescents  percevaient  comme  un empechement  a leur evolution,  devient ici le lieu des experiences fondamentales. Mais dans ces deux romans-ci, comme dans les deux autres, les narrateurs ou les personnages entretiennent une grande nostalgie de Ia nature.  Les jeunes citadins Ia recherchaient  deja dans Ia haute ville, a travers ses pares, ou a l'exterieur,  et l'asso­ ciaient a leurs amours et aux bons moments de leur  jeunesse. Elle garde  toujours pour  les adultes  les memes  connotations  positives et  prend  une  extension  plus grande  par son assimilation non seulement a l'enfance et a Ia jeunesse, mais aussi a Ia purete, a !'innocence,  a Ia joie et a Ia regeneration, a une sorte paradis  perdu. Marcel, en contemplant le lac, se dit: "C'est  le pays demon enfance  ... Perdue
... Elle est perdue". George declare:  "If childhood  is a garden,  the gates closed on us then and ever afterwards  we were on the outside ... ".
Dans les recits d'Elie et de MacLennan, les protagonistes se deplacent  aussi physiquement, dans et hors de Montreal, soit qu'ils deambulent sur Ia rue Sainte­ Catherine  avec les chomeurs  desoeuvres durant  Ia crise, ou arpentent le port  qui invite a !'evasion, soit qu'ils gagnent  Ia campagne  qui les regenere,  mais tous ces parcours  exterieurs  doublent  des parcours interieurs, et  traduisent  une evolution
verticale  plurot qu'horizontale. L'ideal  des personnages n'apparait pas lie a des
espaces physiques, tandis que ceux-ci, pour les jeunes conquerants, symbolisent non
seulement  le succes, mais le conditionnent  et  le concretisent  en  quelque  sorte. George et Jerome  rejettent  les ambitions superficielles de leurs concitoyens, desi­ rent, dans un premier temps, une vie de foyer et de famille et, dans un deuxieme temps, aspirent a decouvrir  Dieu et a trouver  un moyen de vivre sous Ia menace constant  de Ia mort  representee par Ia bombe atomique.  Marcel, las de Ia vie en

47

CONQUETE DE  LA VILLE

surface de  ceux  qui  l'entourent, cherche  aussi Dieu  et  tente  de se retrouver  lui­ meme  et de rejoindre les autres.  Il essaie d'atteindre a une  realite  qui  mettra  fin aux  songes  et  aux  apparences:  La  Fin des songes. George  et  Jerome,  dans  un mouvement analogue, sous une  autre image,  poursuivent une lumiere au  bout  de la  nuit: The  Watch that  Ends  the  Night.  Les  preoccupations de  Denis  ou  de Duddy,  bien  que  significatives  des  reves  d'un  proletariat  urbain  qui   cherche  emancipation et  bien-etre, sont  circonscrites  dans  des frontieres assez restreintes, physiquement et moralement.  Les  protagonistes des autres  romans  ont  conscience de s'etre embarques dans  une aventure ala dimension  meme  du monde, leur  crise individuelle s'integrant dans  la  grande  aventure humaine et  la  figurant. Mac­  Lennan fait  particulierement  ressortir  cet  aspect  par  ses references  au  mythe  de Sisyphe et a l'Odyssee, et par ses jeux de microcosme-macrocosme.
Les obstacles  que  rencontrent ces derniers  sont  a la dimension de leur  objectif. L'epreuve a traverser pour  retrouver la  realite  ou la lumiere,  la  vie authentique, est ni plus ni moins que la mort, suicide de Marcel desespere qui reveillera ses compagnons, les arrachera a leurs illusions;  descente aux enfers de Jerome, par  la guerre et les camps  de concentration, qui  mourra a lui-meme en  renon<;ant  a sa femme  qui,  parce  qu'elle le croyait  mort,  a maintenant epouse  son  meilleur  ami. Il illuminera ainsi  George  et  Catherine. Ces formes  d'aneantissement constituent le choc  revelateur des raisons  profondes de  vivre.  Le problcme fondamental  des protagonistes rejoint   celui  souleve  par  l'existentialisme,  a  l'issue  de  la  seconde guerre  mondiale, celui de la coexistence  possible ou impossible de Dieu et de la souffrance des hommes.  "Cherche Dieu  dans  ta vie, dit Marcel dans  son angoisse, et un immense vide repond a l'appel de ce mot". Les heros de MacLennan mettent egalement en doute  !'existence d'une justice superieure, face  aux  epreuves qui  les accablent. Les deux  romans se terminent cependant sur une note d'esperance, ala suite  des evenements catalyseurs rapportes ci-haut, alors que  la  vie parait  desor­ mais possible malgve la mort  qui  plane  toujours.
Les demiers romans traduisent done  une  evolution  par  rapport aux  premiers. Ceux-ci  rendent plutot  compte des debuts  d'une ,evolution sociale,  ceux  de  per­ sonnes  economiquement  defavorisees,   attivees  d'abord  par   les  appeaux  et  les miroitements de la ville,  par  des valeurs  axees sur l'avoir.  Les personnages d'Elie  et  de  MacLennan, plus  favorises  au  depart, poesesseurs d'une  instruction  plus elevee, tentent de depasser  ces valeurs  superficielles,  apanage  aussi,  constatent-ils, de la  bonne  societe  qui  les entoure, pour  se plonger  dans  une  recherche plus in­ terieure et qui  releve  de l'etre,  non  de  l'avoir. La  crise economique, la  guerre  et
!'urbanisation semblent avoir  provoque des inquietudes plus fondamentales sur le destin  de l'homme.
Des romanciers des deux  groupes  ethniques, a peu d'annees pres, bouscules  par les memes  phenomenes sociaux,  ont traduit, chacun  avec leurs moyens,  une meme quete,  sous ses deux  faces.

EMILY CARR'S
Klee Wyck


Maria Tippett




EMH.Y CARR'' Klee  Wyck wru; aw.,ded the  Govemm General's medal for non-fiction literature in 1941. The Oxford University Press publication  of the twenty-one sketches, "made  out of memories  which  had  been stored  up in  Miss Carr's  mind  as she went into  lonely places along  the  British
Columbia  coast seeking subject-matter for her painting,"  marked  not only the culmination   of  her  northern   excursions,  but  also  the  end  of  long  frustrating attempts  to see these stories into print. The  process of recalling, and  in some cases embellishing  upon those experiences, which have made Carr  into somewhat  of a legendary figure, is the subject of this essay.
From  Emily Carr's  childhood  recollections in the later Growing Pains  ( 1946) and  The Book  of Small   ( 1942), one would  assume  that,  apart   from  "Wash Mary,"  the family's native washerwoman,  the very English Carr  family had  little contact  with  the  native  Indians  of British Columbia.  The  journals  of  Richard Carr,  however, reveal that as a young traveller in North and Central  America,  he possessed a lively sympathy towards all native peoples. In Mackinac  he found  the Indians  "civil and obliging and very honest, much more so than  their white neigh­ bours",  while in the Yucatan  "the  poor Indians" were "badly  treated". In  Vic­ toria, British Columbia,  where he settled in July 1863 Richard  Carr  would  have come into frequent  contact  with the numerous Indians  who were enticed there by the colonial city's glitter, though  his first exposure to the more traditional villages probably came during  his voyage around  Vancouver  Island on  the Hudson's  Bay Company's  steamer  the  Princess  Louise  in August  1879.  None  of  the  voyaging Carrs  (Richard  was accompanied   by his daughters,  Alice  and  Elizabeth)  left a record  of  their  impressions,  but  doubtlessly shared  the  excitement  of  a  fellow traveller who recorded seeing "numerous carvings", then at their apogee. Though  Emily Carr  leads us to believe that  the discovery of the  Indian  was her own - beginning  with her idle curiosity near Trial  Island  in  "Sleep",  and  culminating with  her two major  northern  excursions of 1912  and  1928-one  may  suspect that  the seeds of her wish to have "been  born an Indian" were sown in the Carr home.
Nevertheless, it was not until 1898, at the age of twenty-seven, that  Emily Carr


49

EMILY CARR

first lived in an  Indian village.  Miss Armstrong,  a  Methodist  missionary at  the Taxis mission and school directed by the Rev. Melvin Swartout,  was a close friend of her sister Elizabeth.  In the spring of that  year Miss Armstrong  invited  Carr  to that  west coast village near  Ucluelet. Carr,  now trained  in art  at San  Francisco, sketched  the  Indians  and  delighted  in being  called  by  them  "Klee  Wyck" - "Laughing One"  in Nootkan  language.1  Though  she later  recalled that  Ucluelet "made a lasting impression  on me," the experience does not seem to have been more than  a  pleasant  and  exotic sojourn. The  decisive event in Carr's  life-long love affair with the Indian came yet another  nine years later when, with her sister Alice, she travelled to Alaska.
In  the  summer  of  1907,  Carr  embarked  from  Seattle,  Washington,   on  the Dolphin  and  travelled  to  Sitka.  There  she  met  an  American   artist,  probably Theodore Richardson,  whose pictures of the Tlingit  poles and  houses inspired her to emulation. She returned  to her Vancouver studio with the resolution "to picture totem  poles in their  own  village settings, as complete  a  collection of them  as I could."
The  following summer,  1908, Carr  made  the first of three  visits to Alert Bay, an  accessible Kwakiutl  village with  notable  figures and  house posts which  had already  attracted artists  F. M. Bell Smith, John  Kyle and  Statira  Frame.  It  was also during these years that  she met Sophie Frank, a native of North  Vancouver's Coast Salish reserve, well-known locally for the enormous woven baskets and lush blackberries  which  she sold  door-to-door  in Vancouver.  Through  Mrs.  Frank, Carr  learned  much of the Indian ways. It was probably her nieces living in areas of northern  British Columbia  who made Carr's  1912 trip to the Queen  Charlotte Islands, the Skeena River district and  points along the coast practicable. Daugh­ ters of her elder sister Clara,  Lillian Nicholles, school teacher  in  Masset,  Q.C.I., and  Emily English, wife of a cannery boss at  Balmoral on the Skeena,  together with  Methodist  missionary friends of her other sisters, provided  Carr  with bases and  contacts  for  exploration   on  perhaps  the  most significant  of  her  northern excursions. So  monumental was this  trip  for  Carr,  that  after  working  up  her summer sketches during  the winter, she felt by spring capable  of  giving an exhibi­ tion and lecture based on her summer's work.
Carr  was optimistic  that  financing  for a northern  visit the  following summer might be aided by the provincial government. The  Provincial Archives was in the process of being reorganized and, hopeful that her paintings might find a place on the walls of the new building in exchange for financial assistance, Carr approached the minister  of education   Dr.  Henry  Esson Young. The  museum  official whom Young appointed  to examine  Carr's  work found  the totems  "faithfully  drawn," but  "too  brilliant  and  vivid to be true  to the actual  conditions  of the coast  vil­ lages." This rebuff is not mentioned  by Carr in any of her autobiographical writ­ ing. It can only be an hypothesis that it had something to do, perhaps a very great

50

EMILY CARR

deal to do, with  the  considerable  redirection  of her activities at  the  time  of her move to Victoria in the following year. Dropping most of her painting  and entirely forgetting  her  ambition  of artistically  preserving  the  totems  and  houses of  the British Columbia  Indians,  Carr  began a life of landladying,  dog-breeding  and souvenir-making. Significantly, however, her souvenirs, selling as far east as Mont­ real, were small pottery objects after Indian  motifs and hooked rugs incorporating Indian  designs. The  pottery was signed EMC  or more often "Klee Wyck" with a hook-shaped symbol.2   Though  little documentation  of her contact with the Indians  during  this 1913-1927 period  is available, she did  continue  her  friendship  with Sophie Frank in North  Vancouver  and visited the Cowichan and Ahousat  Indian  reserves on Vancouver  Island.
It was not until 1927,  after the success of the "North West Coast Exhibition  of Indian  Art"  in  Ottawa, which  exhibited  pottery  and  rugs as well as paintings from  her  1912  northern excursion,  that  Carr  renewed  her  interest  in  painting Indian   artifacts.  The  following summer  she  travelled  north.  The  trip,  though "very interesting  in some ways," was "disapointing  [sic] in  many."  She  missed many  points of her  intended  itinerary.  Her  Skidigate  friends,  the  "Jimmie and Louisa" who had  provided  her with transportation in  I9I2, and  Emily English's husband,  now managing  the South  Bay cannery on the Charlottes,  were unable to provide boats at the height of the fishing season. Though  she found  an  Indian willing to take her to perhaps  the most interesting Indian  villages on the  Islands
-Tanoo, Skedans and  Cumshewa-it "rained  incessantly" and  rough seas prevented them getting any further  than Skedans. She was, however, able to visit, for the first time, Niska villages on the Nass, though here the mosquitoes hampered her severely. On  the Skeena River she was saddened  to find that  since her  I 9 I 2 trip the Gitskan poles had "greatly deteriorated" and "the  'restored'  ones have lost so much of interest and subtlety."  But the Skeena region provided  what  was cer­ tainly the highlight of her trip-the journey to Kitwancool.  Unbelievably remote in  I928,  the village lying adjacent  to the Kitwanga  River still requires  a  dusty, bumpy journey, but Carr had to endure a seven-hour wagon trip to a village whose inhabitants had  only  recently,  she  heard,  "chased  missionaries  out  and  drove surveyors off with axes."
It is difficult to overestimate the physical courage and  heartiness of Carr  on her I928  trip. True,  her passage was arranged  by Eric Brown of the National  Gallery through  the Canadian National  Railway, Marius  Barbeau  of the  National  Mu­ seum made connections for her with the manager of the Arrandale cannery at the mouth  of the Nass River,  and she still had  contacts through  her nieces,  Indians  and missionary friends. But she was a portly fifty-six. Travel  and overnight facili­ ties were rude or non-existant,  and such amenities as insect  repellent on the mos­ quito-infested  Nass consisted of mosquito oil and  her own  improvised  protective costume. The wonder is not that Carr's major northern excursions were terminated

EMILY CARR

by this 1928 visit; it is that she had the courage and endurance  not only to under­ take, but to complete  her trip. Carr  was, of course, aware of its arduous nature; she had, she wrote Eric Brown, "stood it remarkably  well." Though  she travelled the following two summers to northern  Vancouver  Island to paint the totems, this
1928 visit marked the end of her mission to make "as complete a collection of them as I could." After 1930 contact with the Indian  was limited to day visits to reserves on lower Vancouver  Island and to North Vancouver.



IN THE  LATE 192o's  when Carr  first began  to write  of these experiences  in  what  eventually  became  Klee  Wyck, she  was  confronted   with several difficulties. She had  kept a  journal  of her first, 1907, northern  visit, but that  journey seems to have provided her with little material.  For her later excur­
sions, she had "to rely on memory." She had generally been "too buisy [sic]  paint­ ing from dawn to dark to do more than write home." Carr  "intended to use these letters later perhaps," but the sister to whom she had written  "had burnt them as received." Thus  when she did  come to write,  remembering,  filling  in  the  gaps, separating the  villages,  bridging  the  smells and  the  feelings  with  words,  were things that  caused  her much  concern. "I've been tramping  round  these old vil­ lages," she  wrote  to  a  friend,  but  "-my pickings are  pretty  bumm."  Carr inserted  "bits  of dialogue  here &  there  to break  [the]  monotony"  of recording village after village. She wanted  to be "true  to the places as well as to the people," but found it difficult "to avoid slopping over to fill up." Old notes, like the "Story of Mrs. Russ's Grandmothers Pole at Tanuu," recorded when visiting the Queen Charlotte  Islands  in 1912, were probably  used to "fill  up."3  So too was a  1929 article, "Modern and  Indian  Art of the West Coast",  the last  portion  of which appears in "Canoe".4  Because she had "sketched intensely" the places came to her "with  great vividness," though  early  photographs of remote coastal villages taken by herself, George  M.  Dawson  and  C.  F.  Newcombe  were  also invaluable  in helping her to recall the layout of  many villages. Aside from notes, articles, photo­ graphs  and  sketches, Carr  no doubt  drew from  her often  repeated  repertoire  of stories about  her experiences among the Indians.
To  decipher  which  incidents  in  Klee  Wyck  were drawn  from  memory  and which were a product  of filling in the gaps is difficult. The  authenticity  of "Salt Water" may  be verified by comparing  the sequence of events  recorded  in  two letters written shortly after the incident with the story, as may portions of  "Green­ ville" and "Kitwancool". The  only inconsistency in "Salt Water" is that in one of the letters she speaks of the two Indian  children as the man's  son and  daughter; in the story they appear  as his nephew and niece. On the other hand, the strict vera­ city  of  how  Carr  learned  the  meaning  of  "D'Sonoqua",  the  Kwakiutl   "wild

52

EMILY CARR

woman  of the  woods"  totem  figure,  in  the  story  of  that  same  name  may  be questioned. She had written to C. F. Newcombe in 1912 asking "the  name and pronunciation and  meaning  of  that  figure,"  that  "wild  red  woman  with  out­ stretched  hands  among  the  nettles."  "You  called  it  by  name," she  continued,  "what do they mean  and  why erected?"  In  Klee Wyck  it is the  Koskimo, Tom, who explains to her the story of his big carved woman  who steals children  from their mothers.
Carr  oscillates between fact  and fabrication  in naming  the  participants in her stories. In some cases names are made up, in others they are consciously altered. Carr probably forgot the name of the Indian,  Fred McKay, who took her up to Greenville from the Arrandale cannery, so called him Sam.  Mr. Walter  Walker, manager  of the same cannery  on the Nass, becomes "the  cannery  boss," and  the two ladies at  Ucluelet,  Miss Armstrong  and  Mrs. Swartout, "the  Greater" and "the  Lesser" missionary. For  the  most part  the white man  remains  anonymous; the farm girl of "Cha-atl," Maria,  is an exception, the seamen, Jones and Smith, of "Salt  Water"  less so. Her  Indian  characters  are  more  often  named,  though sometimes altered from their life models. Sophie Frank  remains Sophie, but Carr's Indian  friends at Skidigate, Will and Clara Russ, whose names she would certainly have  not forgotten,  are  referred  to as Jimmie  and  Louisa in  the  five stories in which they figure. Their  sons, Will and Walt, are altered  to the equally allitera­ tive Jim and Joe, while Clara's mother, the remarkable  pipe-smoking Mrs. Brown, becomes Mrs. Green. The Douse family of the upper Skeena River, remain Douses in "Kitwancool," though  Carr  does change the chief's son Albert, to Aleck. While some changes and  omissions may be attributed to lapse of  memory, it is not  un­ common  to find that  elsewhere in  Carr's  autobiographical writing  names  have been altered.
Paucity  of sources and  difficulty of remembering  were  not,  however,  Carr's greatest  concern  in  recording  her  experiences. Having  skipped  her  last  year  of "High", she  felt  inadequately equipped  to  write. To  bridge  the  gap  between "feels"  and  "words"  would  only come easier, she thought,  if she  "were  better educated." In  1926 she had  taken  the  Palmer  Institute  of Authorship's  corres­ pondence course in writing and in the summer of 1934 she enrolled in  Mrs. N. de Bertrand  Lugrin Shaw's short story course at Victoria College. She even sent one story, "Hully-Up Paper", to the International Correspondence Criticism  Service. The  usefulness of such courses and criticism, however, bears no comparison  to the help and encouragement  that she was to receive from Flora Hamilton Burns, Ruth Humphrey  and later  Ira  Dilworth.
For many years Flora Hamilton Bums was the only person who knew that Emily was writing. Carr asked Miss Burns to be her critic "and  read  or sent her manu­ scripts for criticism." Though  she was "very shy of anyone who taught at a Uni­  versity," in the spring of 1936 she allowed Ruth  Humphrey, an English teacher at

53

EMILY CARR

Victoria College, to join Burns as her critic. The degree of help and moral support offered by Miss Humphrey was so immense that when the latter  left for a world tour in 1937, Carr wrote:

Ruth has gone.  I did  not  know  how  blue  I'd  be without her.  She  has  meant  an awful  lot these last months.

Emily acknowledged that both "Ruth and Flora have helped me, but their way of expressing is not my way."  Nor did they "see with the same eye":  "Flora  wants too much sentiment," she complained,  "and  Ruth strips and leaves them cold and inhuman." Carr  knew she was "raw", that  the  mechanics  of  her  writing  were weak, but somehow felt that she could tum  her vice -simplicity-into a virtue. For  only "if  one says something  ultra-honest,  ultra-true,  some deep  realizing of life, can  it make  the  grade,  ride  over the  top,  having surmounted  mechanics." Others-Margaret Clay, Carol  Pearson, Fred Housser, Eric Brown and  Lawren Harris-were the recipients of her manuscripts  for criticism, and  Victoria  Col­ lege stenographer, Mrs. Chapell,  and a lawyer, Oswyn Boulton, typed them before Carr taught  herself. Carr  accepted  all this help with reserve. Her belief that truth, honesty would somehow compensate  for her rawness, prohibited  her from accept­ ing, without some resentment,  the help of the more sophisticated critics. When she met  Ira  Dilworth  it was, however,  a different  matter.  He  was "a  million times younger,  a  million  times  cleverer,"  but  never  made  her  "feel  an  old  fool, or finished, or stupid  or ignorant."
Six years  prior  to  meeting  Ira  Dilworth,  Carr  had  received  rejections  from Saturday  Evening Post, The  Countryman, Atlantic Monthly and Maclean's Magazine. Her  hopes soared,  however, when in the spring  of 1937 Ruth  Hum­ phrey showed her stories to University of British Columbia  English  professor, Dr. Garnett  Sedgewick. Though Dr.  Sedgewick had seen Carr's stories  "some  years back",  he agreed to read  them  again. Carr  was pleased that  he "likes my stories and will be glad to write an introduction  if  Macmillan's  [sic]  will publish them."  Dr. Sedgewick was even willing to edit them.5  Despite the enthusiasm of both Mr. Ayres of Macmillan  and  Dr. Sedgewick, they feared the book "would  not find a big appreciative  audience." It was not surprising that shortly after  its submission to  Macmillan,   Carr  was  notified  that  they  would  be  unable  even  to  consider acceptance  for some time. Though  disheartened,  she  continued  to  pursue  other publishers, sending  "D'Sonoqua" to the British  Blackwood's  Magazine  in July. Meanwhile  Carr  waited  for Dr. Sedgewick. It was not until  February  of 1938 a year later, that, after much  prodding, the stories were returned  with "spelling and punct." corrected.  Upon  receipt,  Carr sent them to Ryerson Press who reported, three months later, that  they had  lost her only fair copy.6   Her  animosity towards publishers  now  reached  its zenith:  "I  hate  'em  all."  By the  fall  of 1939  even

54

EMILY CARR

Humphrey and  Burns  had  clisappointed her  and  she resolved that  "this  is the last time I shall hand my manuscript  over to others."
Though prospects for publication  in the autumn  of 1939  remained  bleak, Carr had, in June of that year, been corresponding with Ira Dilworth regarding  the possibility of having her stories read on the Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation. "One of the faithful  'listening  ladies',"  Ruth  Humphrey, had  taken  her  manu­ scripts "to  Vancouver  and  showed them  to Dilworth"  who felt they  "had great quality" and  "great  literary appeal".  As former  neighbour  on  both  Government  and  Simcoe streets, one-time  principal  of Victoria  High  School,  University  of British Columbia  English professor and  current  regional director  of  the  CBC in Vancouver,  Dilworth  would certainly  have not been unknown  to  Carr.  Though Carr  and  Dilworth  had  been in correspondence  by June  1939,  it  was not  until the winter  that  they began working together on her stories. The following spring she informed  a friend  that  someone, no doubt  Dilworth,  was  taking  the stories back east to have them evaluated.  It was only shortly after this that  Carr  received an  appreciative  letter  from  King  Gordon  of Toronto's  Oxford  University  Press, the future  publisher of Klee Wyck.
Emily Carr's  dependence  upon  Dilworth  began immediately.  In  July  1940  he read the stories on the CBC. In September of the same year he was "East  again", and  we can  assume that  negotiations with  William Clarke  of Oxford  University Press were well under  way. By late September  Dilworth was proposing the publi­ cation  of a "mixed  bag soon" which displeased Carr  who preferred  the "Indian stories" and  "Reminiscences  of the Old  Carr  House"  to be kept  separate. This seems to have resolved itself by June  1941 when Carr reported that "Ira was East a couple of weeks back, says Clarke is delighted with material." The pace picked up that summer  when Carr  was "looking forward  to the change in Vancouver  & to working with Ira-the book!!!!!" Though  by this time the work for  Carr's  second publication,  The  Book of Small, was being selected, the only thing holding the first back was a title-"Stories in Cedar" was vying with "Klee  Wyck" as the title. By October  Klee Wyck  was "a  real object at least even  though  only in her underwear"-the book lacked a dust jacket.
Dilworth's assistance was limited to grammatical  correction and  minor word changes. Carr wrote that he "never  added or omitted anything  without  consulting me," and  if he made suggestions "he made me re-word the thought  myself." She came to rely on his "final  judgement";  no manuscript  was complete without  it.




bE TWENTY-ONE   "short   sketches  or  glimpses"  emerged largely out of Carr's  last two northern  excursions. "Tanoo", "Cumshewa", "Sail­ ing to Yan",  and  "Cha-atl", were based on her  1912  visit, while  "Greenville",

55

EMILY CARR

"Friends", "Salt Water", "Kitwancool", and "Canoe" on her I928 visit. "D'Sono­ qua"  and "Two  Bits and a Wheel-Barrow",  are set in Koskimo villages visited in I9I2, I929 and  I930, "Juice" in the Cariboo after her six-week visit en route to Victoria from England  in  I904,  and  "Sleep"  and  "Wash  Mary"  in her Victoria childhood.  "Ucluelet" and  "Century Time"  are  derived  from  her  first visit to that  Indian  village in I 898 and in I 905 respectively. "Sophie" is a product  of her friendship with Sophie Frank encompassing  I908-I93o's, while "The  Blouse" and "The  Stare"  are difficult to place or to date.
Carr told even Dilworth  that she wrote these stories while in hospital beginning in  I937· She recalled that  "I have been lucky indeed to have words come to me when I had to give up the woods and sketching and  prepare  for long inactivity"; the  writing  took  her "back  so vividly on those sketching  trips,"  that  she forgot being sick. Actually,  they were started  much earlier. "D'Sonoqua" was begun in I934 and by June  I937 sixteen Indian  stories had  been posted to Dr. Sedgewick "for his reading and criticism". Writing was not an alternative  to painting  for the bed-ridden  artist  in  I937· The  verse and  the short story, based closely upon  her experiences, were not new forms. About twenty sketch books riddled with rhyming verse she called "jingles",  in addition  to prose fragments dating  from  I 9 I 2, were found after her death. Writing and painting were complementary  means of expres­ sion. By I934, long before her  I937 heart attack,  the creative experience of writ­ ing had  become so intense that  "I want  to write and  write longer spells than  I want to paint,"  because "writing  is more human than painting."
Though  Klee Wyck  may  have been written  for the "pure   joy of reliving and travelling among  the places and  people" she loved, it is also didactic. She tells us that she had seen Sophie Frank  drunk,  that Aleck Douse was "straight  from jail" and  that  the  Indian in "Sleep"  was "dirty  all over".  But like the smallpox  epi­ demic in Cha-atl  and  Cumshewa,  the influenza in Ucluelet,  the starving dogs in Greenville or the resentment  on Indian  Tom's  face, all was the fault of  the white man. Was it not the missionary who "came  and took the Indians  away from their old villages and  the totem  poles," and made them rely on "a store instead of ... nature"? Was the Indian  reserve across the water from Vancouver not "a different world-no hurry, no business". Could the old Indian in Ucluelet not "speak with authority  to white people"  on the wild things? Was the "Lesser  Missionary" not "glad when she came out of the dark forest," while the Indians were linked to the land, slipping "in and out of their places like animals" as the tides and the seasons directed.  To  Carr,  the  Indians  were in harmony  with  nature -the  white  man was not.
If Carr  romanticises the Indian, she idealizes herself even more. From  her first
contact  with the Indians  in "Ucluelet", she is heartily accepted. They  tell her she has "no fear",  is not "stuck  up",  and, since she knows how to laugh, they call her "Klee  Wyck". She is accepted in every village, even the hostile Kitwancool where

EMILY CARR

the Indians  are "peculiar and  resent white intrusion  greatly."  She is throughout the  doer  of  good  deeds -removing  porcupine  quills  from  the  starving  dogs, offering a Bartlett  pear  to the thirsty Doctor  Cabbage,  giving her  blouse to the dying  Mary  and  writing  Louisa's  and  Mrs. Green's  catalogue  orders.  And,  of course, there is her mission: "to make pictures of them  [the totems],  so that  your young people as well as the white people will see how fine your totem  poles used to be."
Carr, the well-wisher, the saviour not of souls but of culture, is, however, humble before the Indians.  In Ucluelet she "felt so young and empty standing  there before the Indians"; in  North  Vancouver  she was "Sophie's  Em'ly".  Though  twenty­ seven years old in Ucluelet, she writes of herself as a mere school girl  of fifteen. Gesticulating  conversations with the old man in Ucluelet and  the old  woman  in Greenville, perpetuate the child-like atmosphere.
Though  Carr portrays  herself as a person of good deeds, encountering everyone amicably,  there  are  occasions  when  the  harmonization   is not  complete.  Upon leaving Greenville only the dogs follow her to the wharf. They were "more domes­ tic and  more responsive than  Indians." "The  thought  of Lizzie's  tongue licking the jam-tin,"  prohibits her from sharing the Douse's food. And  when sleeping in the big room with the same family, she told Eric Brown that she maintained her privacy by hanging a tent fly across her comer of the room.
Carr  idealizes herself in yet another  way. She diminishes her contacts  with the
white man  by rarely mentioning  him. At Toxis where Carr  recalls that  "visitors were rare,"  there was a large white community, Ucluelet,  across the  bay. At the Arrandale  cannery on the Nass River, she lived in a cottage and  ate her meals in the mess. Although she "kept  pretty much to herself," she took tea daily with "the cannery  boss" and  his wife. On  her trips to Alert Bay and  the Queen  Charlotte Islands before 1928 she always travelled in the company of a white person. Though one cannot steal from Carr the courage displayed, especially on her later trips, the idea that she lived with the Indians  is exaggerated.




AFTER THE  EXCURSIONS into remote Indian  villages, after the trauma  of writing and remembering, and after the failures of acceptance,  Klee Wyck  was finally published  by Oxford  University Press in the autumn of 1941. Despite Dr. Sedgewick's pessimism that it would not appeal  to a larger public, it did. In fact,  it won the highest award  for non-fiction in Canada, and  has been almost continuously in print ever since.
Carr, approaching seventy, had a great sense of satisfaction over its success. She
received many congratulatory letters, though one clergyman did complain  about her treatment of the west coast missionaries. The  most comforting  aspect of the

57

EMILY CARR

reception, was  the  revenge  against   those  Victorians, especially  her  sisters,  who thought her a puttering eccentric. "Klee Wyck continues  to sell," she wrote,  "they tell me she is a Canadian Classic & is to be put into special edition  for the schools." This  made  her  "laugh and  laugh  because  you know  Aunt  Betty  always  thought me such  a  poor example for the children at Alices [school]  I smoked  and  I occa­ sionally  used  to swear,  and  my  manners were  not  up to scratch." Now  to think  that school children across Canada are "studying Klee Wyck makes me 'he-haw'."7

NOTES

1 Emily Carr,  Klee Wyck   (Toronto: Clarke,  Irwin,  I97I; original  edition,  I94I), p. 8. I am  indebted  to Mr. Peter McNair  and Mr. Allan Hoover of the Ethnology Department of  the  British  Columbia  Museum  for  their  kind  assistance  on  this matter.
2  This symbol could possibly be either the phonemic glottal stop or the Cree syllabary symbol for L plus a vowel, though  neither  seems appropriate in the context.
3 B.C. Archives, Newcombe Collection. One may compare  this story with  that  on p. I3 of Klee Wyck.
4  Compare  Carr, The  McGill  News, Supplement, 29 June  I929, p. 3 and  Carr,  Klee
Wyck, p. I I I.
5  Carr  to Humphrey, I o August  [I 937],  in University  of Toronto  Quarterly,  XLI, I I I; Carr,  Hundreds  and  Thousands, p. 291. Dr.  Sedgewick initially  saw Carr's stories in the early I93o's when Frederick Brand, lecturer in the Mathematics Department of the University of British Columbia showed them to him.
6  It was not until January I939 that  Ryerson found and returned  her manuscript.
7  Carr  to Mrs. C. Pearson, n.d., copy in author's  possession. The  author  would like to express appreciation to Fran  Gundry  for her stimulating  comments  and  to the Canada Council for a grant  which has made the research for this article  possible.


RIVERGR)ISS CONSIDERING HUMJIN HJIBITS



when they stay home children  grow roots that  is why their feet
are sore when they leave with new shoes

I want to follow the water
along this river to find out
why only old men like to repair
older clocks
 Alexandre L. Amprimoz

THE BLASPHEMIES OF A. M. KLEIN



Kenneth C. Russell



MIRIAM WADDINGTON  argues  m hcr  'tudy of  A.  M. Klein1  that  it is wrong to think  of him as a religious poet. She vigorously main­ tains that,  on the contrary,  his outlook is secular and that  much  that  is taken  as
religious  in  Klein's  verse  merely  reflects his pride  in  his  cultural  inheritance. Indeed,  she finds several of his so-called "religious" poems blasphemous2   and she is amazed  that  critics stubbornly  ignore the religious doubt  which she sees every­ where in Klein's poems.3   Consequently,  while Pacey and  Dudek  might  label the poems of Hath  Not a  few ... "religious"/ Waddington  insists, "Whatever these poems are, they are not religious."5
Faced  with such  disagreement  one must  ask what  meaning  these  critics  are putting  on  the  term  "religious".  What,  in  particular,  does it  mean  to  Miriam Waddington? This is never entirely clear  but some of her statements reveal the presuppositions underlying her eagerness to establish Klein as a modern  and there­ fore, secular  poet. She remarks  for example, that  his editorials  in  the  Canadian jewish Chronicle,  his essays on Joyce, etc., "all  show to  what  extent  he was a twentieth-century artist, committed, not to the simple universal therapy of religion, but to the power and magic which reside in language."6  Her description of religion as a therapy and its juxtaposition with what is taken to be a twentieth-century cul­ tural  credo suggests that she sees religion as retrograde and the crutch  of those not fully equal  to life's demands.  One  cannot  help but  suspect  that  the  dichotomy between  religion  and  modernity, -the either j or  gap  between  them  that   she seems to accept as self evident-will seriously influence her reading  of Klein. For her, it would seem, he cannot  be secular and  religious, and  above  all, he cannot believe and doubt. Most certainly he cannot share the horrors of this modern  age, shake his fist at the heavens and still believe.
A person who does not share  her presuppositions might  very well ask, "Why not?" And  he might well look in vain for many of the blasphemies she points to and find little evidence of denial in the doubt she continually  underlines. This is particularly  true if he reads the poems against the backdrop of the religious tradi­ tion in which Klein grew up. One can hardly, for example, term  Klein's "Psalm

59

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMlliS

XXIII" in which he breaks into heaven and wrecks the scales of justice blasphe­ mous when one remembers that Rabbi  Levi Yitzhak of Bertitchev summoned God to stand  trial for the sufferings of lsraeF  and told God bluntly that  if grace and mercy did not come "Your  throne  will not be a throne of  truth." 8  And if some of the biblical psalms lack the  playful wit of Klein's poem  they nonetheless express consternation  at  the  inexplicable  vagaries of divine  justice, and  do  this  in  the strongest language.9
In dealing with Klein's own frank way of speaking we should  perhaps  keep in mind  Irving  Layton's  remark  that  God has been part of the Jewish family for so long that  disagreements with  him take on the characteristics  of a domestic quar­ reP0  We might also pay heed to what Klein himself says in "Psalm  I66":

Consider my speech, 0 Lord, not too severely; It does not mean what it does seem to say.... For you I need not choose my language; surely
Need not measure the words with which I pray; ...
I speak to you this day
Even as once I spoke to my sire, now with You.
And I never loved one more than I did my father. (258) 11

We should  also note that  Waddington  calls "Psalm  VI" a blasphemous com­ plaint about  God's indifference.12  She tells us that in this poem God  remains un­ moved by the Nazis' extermination of the Jews while the very  angels are driven mad  by the sight of the atrocities.13  She quotes from the text  but fails to include the last two verses:

And the good Lord said nothing, but with a nod
Summoned the angels of Sodom down to earth.  ( 2 r 4)

The  last lines, it is clear, cast quite a different light on the poem and in no way can it be read as a complaint  about  God's indifference. At the most it reflects an impatience  with God's slowness to act but this dement is also evident in many of the psalms and hardly  amounts  to blasphemy.
But it would be an injustice to Waddington  and to Klein himself to deny that there are poems which seem to overstep the boundaries of religious propriety. The psalms of the Bible do, indeed,  sometimes speak as though  they are  trying to jar a sleeping God into  action14  but  they never go so far  as to  dress down  God  as a "dotard" whose ears are stuffed with wads of cloud-cotton nor attempt  to bestir him  with  the irritable  plea, "How  long will you sit on your  throne,  and  nod?" (I 39). This would seem to strain  even Elie Wiesel's proposition  that  from inside the community  a Jew may say anything to God provided that  it be on behalf of man.15
Nor  is there  any  way to explain  away  the  harshness of "Talisman in  Seven
Shreds."  Here,  God,  by a sort of mirror  image, has taken  on  the  features  of a

6o

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES

mechanized golem  (robot) and  all dogma  has  become foolishness in a fated  uni­
verse:

What, then, is good and true and beautiful, The  tongue is bitter when it must declare: matter  is chaos, mind is chasm, fool,
the work of golems stalking in nightmare  . . . (I 35)

And  even faith  that affiims  justification  after  death  in the face of life's  miseries is
bitterly  mocked:

There  is no witch of En-dor to invoke
asking dead spirits to pronounce  the fact....
But I will take a prong in hand and go over old graves and test their hollowness: be it the spirit or the dust I hoe
only at doomsday's sunrise will I know. ( 136)

If this were all there is to Klein one would  be compelled  to agree with Wadding­ ton's assessment that  Klein's  poems are certainly  not religious in the ordinary sense of the  word.16 At  best  they  would  seem to  be the  detritus of a  faith   crushed   by scepticism.  But the  attitude evident  in these poems is not  typical of his work  and they cannot be given  privileged  status  while  the  more  numerous poems  in  which his faith  is evident  are  written off as wistful  attempts to  be  religious  or  as weak departures from  secularity. One   wonders   therefore   on  what  internal evidence  Waddington can write  of Klein's "Psalm  II" that  here "we have a series of irreso­ lute  vacillations as the  poet seeks to justify his  political  retreat and  renewed reli­ gious belie£."17 There is, in fact,  nothing  irresolute about  the  poem  although he clearly knew what  people would  make of  his attitude:

How is he changed, the scoffers say, This  hero of an earlier day, ...
Who in his Zion lay at ease Concocting  learned  blasphemies To hate, contemn, and ridicule
The godly reign, the godly rule  ( 21o)

It seems to  me  that  only  a  prejudgment which  sees religion  as  weakness  and withdrawal  could   conclude  that   this  poem  expresses  uncertainty  and   retreat. Taken at  face  value  it  reads  as  a  solid  confession  of  faith   in  which   the   poet realizes  that  there  are  no  arguments to convey  to others  his experience of  God. But if there were
Then  might they also know, as I The  undeniable  verity,
The  truth  unspoiled by epigram
The  simple, I am that I am  ( 2 I I)

6I

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES

At this point it would be appropriate to go on to examine later  poems such as "Of  Remembrance", "Stance of the  Amidah", "Elegy"  and  others  which  can hardly be termed anything  other than  religious poems on the basis both of theme and attitude.18 But this would take us too far away from the criticism of Miriam Waddington and  leave  her  emphasis  of Klein's  religious doubt  unexamined. I should like, therefore, to leave a more thorough  analysis of Klein's religious poetry for another  time and  to return  to the questions of Klein's doubt  and  unbelief.
I  use the  plural  "questions" here deliberately  because while  unbelief may  be thought  of as doubt  grown into certainty  they are not necessarily connected  and they are certainly  not identical.  Doubt,  indeed, or a certain  disquieting  questing after "proof" is one of the characteristics  of faith  which by its very nature  leaves the mind thirsting  after the sureness of vision. Theology itself is born of this need of faith  to seek understanding but  the coolness of the traditional phrase- fides quaerens  intellectum -hides  the  personal  anguish  that  is so often  part  of the individual's  maturing process. It  is a  paradox  that  the naive  faith  of the  child must give way to the adult's  faith-in-tension  to be resolved finally into the mature faith that says its amen in the darkness of unconditional  acceptance.  If the child­ hood faith is never doubted,  never challenged by the questions that life throws up then  it remains  truly  a therapeutic retreat  from  reality and  can  never  come to tranquil  maturity.19



KLEIN's POETRY provides ample evidence of the three stages of faith's  growth.20   There  are  poems that  remember  an  untroubled   childhood faith,21   others that  grapple  with  God's silence22    and  finally those that  accept  the darkness  of incomprehensibility  that  is an  inescapable  part  of  believing.23    The first division is represented  by many  poems which look back nostalgically on the simple faith of childhood  or find this faith  preserved in simple people. But Klein has gone beyond  this and  he can only look back at  an earlier  time or  upon  an unquestioning  faith  with  the  realization  that  his questioning  has separated   him from such simplicity and caught  him up in turmoil. This surely is a common experience of believers and  so I cannot  agree with  Miriam  Waddington that  in "The Cripples"  Klein deals openly with his loss of faith because he reacts to the extraordinary trust shown  by the pilgrims to St. Joseph's Oratory by saying:

And I who in my own faith once had faith like this
but have not now, am crippled more than they (299) 24

I would think rather  that  his sense of weakness has been shared  by many a Chris­ tian who has watched  in wonder  what seems the less complicated, stronger faith of his fellow believers and  that  this poem is accordingly akin to those which look back nostalgically on ,the religion of his childhood.

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES

Such simple faith  is admirable perhaps but for most men  faith  must  eventually grapple with questions that  trouble its tranquillity:
Nothing  was difficult, 0 Master, then,
No query but it had an answer, clear,-
But now though  I am grown, a man of men, ...
There  is
Much  that  I cannot grasp, and much that goes amiss ( 232)

Most  painfully  of all, faith  must  suffer  the silence of God  who  refuses  to  justify himself  to man.  This  is the  theme  of "Reb Levi Yitschok  Talks to God". In  this poem  the  renowned Hasidic rebbe  who was famous  for his faith  and  blunt  ques­ tioning of God  turns  to him to complain  of the suffering  of Israel.  But  after  his
ragmg:
He suddenly went mild
Begging the Lord to lead him through  the fog; Reb Levi Yitschok, an ever-querulous child, Sitting on God's knees in the synagogue, Unanswered  even when the sunrise smiled. ( 147)

The  same  burden of silence is apparent in "Psalm I" of the  "Psalter of Avram
Haktani":
Where in this dubious days shall I take counsel, Who is there to resolve the dark, the doubt?  (210)

There is no denying  the  burden of these lines in which  the  poet finds  nothing to give him  the  clarity  of insight  that  he seeks. The  darkness  is a fact  and  yet faith continues despite the irony and  weariness. And so we have poems of mature, tran­ quil faith. Here,  for example, are lines from  "Stance of the  Amidah":
Oh, give us such understanding as make superfluous  second thought; and at Thy least, give us to understand to repent  (346)

Psalm  XXIV which  begins:

0 incognito God, anonymous Lord, with what name shall I call you?


concludes:
 

I have no title for your glorious throne,
and for your presence not a golden word, - only that wanting  you, by that alone
I do invoke you, knowing I am heard.  ( 224)


Although much  of the doubt  that  Klein's  poetry  reveals seelllS to belong within the context  of faith  rather than  outside  it, there is no denying that  there  are  lines in which doubt seems to have given way to unbelief.  One  might  point,  for instance to "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage" where we read

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES


My father is gathered to his fathers, God rest his wraith! And his son
Is a pauper in spirit, a beggar in piety,
Cut off without a penny's worth of faith. (I I 7)

It might be argued,  however, that  in these verses the poet speaks in the name of modem  Jewry which found  itself the victim of persecution despite its modernism and secularity. It is harder,  though,  to explain away the lines in "Diary  of  Abra­ ham,  Segal, Poet,"  in which the speaker separates himself from  both  the  religion of his father and the Marxism  of his brother, saying bluntly, "My  idols have been shattered  into shards"  ( 87). These lines and these negative sentiments are present in Klein's work and Waddington is right to insist that critics take note of them. It would be a mistake, however, to exaggerate their importance  or to insist that  all the  poems be read  in the shadow  they cast. Surely there is no reason at all why they should be linked with "Talisman in Seven Shreds" and  considered the keys to unlock Klein's treasure.
The  fact is that  they only take on undue importance  when  the presupposition
of a  neat  dichotomy  between  faith  and  doubt  is accepted.  Only  then  do  they become paradigms for the interpretation of all his work. Otherwise they take their place in a body of poetry which displays the erratic evolution of one man's faith in its passage from naive simplicity through  doubt  and  moments of outright  denial to a faith  that  can affirm and  delight in "The  Mystery beyond  the mysterious."
(345)
Once we free ourselves from the either for dichotomy that creates a gap between
religion and  secularity  it is possible to accept  peacefully the social dimension of Klein's  poetry,  his delight  in language  and  even his belief in  the  quasi-magical power of words and  to find all of these elements inseparably  joined to his funda­ mental  concern  with  man's  relation  to a transcendent  and  personal  God. Once we move  beyond  this mental  block we see that  Klein  is secular  and religious, socialist and Jewish and  that  he both believes and doubts.
In  conclusion  then,  we must  say against  those who call him  a  religious poet
because they find him a pious optimist, and against those who deny him this status because they find  him a faith-denying  writer of minor  blasphemies, that  A. M. Klein  is a  religious poet,  not  because  he writes devotional  piety,  but  precisely because his work reflects without  veneer the  bitter  tensions of a soul that  takes God seriously.

NOTES

1 Miriam Waddington, A.M. Klein, Toronto, I970.
2  Ibid., 65 and 68.
8  Ibid., 97·
• She presents their positions on p. IO  of her critical study.

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES

5  Ibid., Io.
6  Ibid., g8. Italics  added.
7  Abraham J. Hesche!, The  Earth is the Lord's  (Published as one  volume  with  The Sabbath), Harper and  Row,  New York,  Ig66, 84; Elie Wiesel, Souls on Fire, trans­ lated  by Marion Wiesel, Random House  (Vintage Books),  New  York,  I973, I IO.
8 Wiesel,  I IO. A similar  tone of accusation appears in the song "Rebono Shel  Olam" attributed to Levi Yitzhak.
9 It is significant   that   when  Rabbi Abraham J. Hesche! dedicated  his  book  The
Prophets, Harper & Row,  Ig62  "To the martyrs of  I940-45" he quoted Psalm  44:
All this has come  upon  us,
Though we have  not forgotten Thee, Or  been  false to Thy  covenant.
Our  heart  has not turned back
Nor  have  our steps departed from  Thy  way ...
. . . for Thy  sake we are slain ... Why dost Thou hide Thy  face?
10  Irving Layton, "Review of  Poems  (1944)"   in  A. M. Klein   (Critical  Views  on
Canadian Writers) edited  by Tom  Marshall, Ryerson  Press,  I970,  24.
11  The bracketed numbers are page references  to The  Collected Poems of A.M. Klein,
compiled by Miriam Waddington, McGraw-Hill Ryerson,   I974·
12  Waddington, A.M. Klein, 65.
13 Ibid.
14 Ps 44, 23; 59, 4; 7, 6.
15 Wiesel,  II o.
16  i.e. pious and  devout.
17  Waddington, A. M. Klein, 64.
18 It is interesting to  note  that   Helen   Gardner, the  editor   of  The   Faber  Book  of Religious Verse, London, I972, says of her own quest  for a definition of a religious poem,  "I arrived at  the  criterion that  a  religious  poem  was a  poem  concerned in some way with revelation and  with  man's  response to it." I take  this as an adequate notion  which  makes  it  possible  to  recognize  as religious  even  poetry  that  grapples in a serious  or agonized  fashion  with  the question of man's  relationship to God.
19 cf. Louis  Monden,  "Sources of  Difficulties  in  the  Life  of  Faith" in  Toward   a Theology  of Christian  Faith, edited  by Michael Mooney  at  al,  New  York,   Ig68, pp. 2I2-39·
20   In  his essay on Klein,  Louis Dudek  tries to establish  a chronological progression in his poetry  away from  religion  toward "a  realistic  and  cosmopolitan view of things". f'A. M.  Klein" in  A. M.  Klein  (Critical Views on  Canadian Writers)  edited by Tom  Marshall, p. 68). He therefore arbitrarily confines Klein's religious  verse to his immature period  explaining anything later  away  with  the  remark "No  doubt  he can return to his origins ... " p. 68.
It is manifestly  difficult  to accurately date  poems on the basis of their  publication
dates  as Dudek  points  out  and  I have  not  therefore tried  to argue that  any  strict pattern of  development of  faith  is evident  in  his  poems.  An  examination of  the
manuscripts and  the  correlation of the  poems  with  his other  writings  might  allow such  an  order  to  be established....  I  suspect  however,  that  even  then  we would find  that  the stages would  not  neatly  follow each  other  but  blend  and  mix  together
as they evolve.

KLEIN'S BLASPHEMIES


In the  meantime, however,  it should  be remembered that  when  Klein  describes the development of "Uncle Melek" in his I95I  novel, The  Second Scroll, he sees his progression  as  having three   stages:   naive,  "private" faith   gives  way  to  Marxist dedication and  finally  to  a love  of God  which  commits  him  to service  of  the  op­ pressed.  This  is clearly  a  pattern of unquestioning faith,  doubt and  unbelief,  and  ultimately a mature, consuming faith.
21 cf. e.g. "Bestiary":  (I58-59), "Psalm XV"  (2I9), "Autobiographical" (27I-73).
22   cf. e.g. "Psalm XXXIV"  (23I-33), "A Psalm of Resignation" (26I).
23 cf. e.g. "Psalm II"  (2IO-I I), "Psalm XXIV" (224).
24   Waddington, A.M. Klein, 97·



JlRS POETICJI
 


Dorothy Livesay




Words  have
no morality exist in innocence

handled well
can  perform miracles gently  massaging
the  heart
yet
like snowballs
secretly  laden with  ice can  strike  the  eye
blind

ii

Ralph,
on my first undistracted evening
in Ottawa
I heard  you airing
your  Russian travelogue
an  historical	architectural
spiritual journey:
yours,  not  Moscow's.

Thus do poets thrive! We are  vultures feeding on  the remains of man in order  to stay alive and fly.

66

POEMS

Remember Ned?
Such  an arrogance of optimism that  pours  oil on fiery seas
never  counting
the  conflagration.

111

One  feather
winging its way down graces  the  air

three  or four  or more set the  mind  floating

but  a thousand feathers, Ugh!
a choking pillow.

IV

There's a wind out  there suffers  no silence gladly:
we harness  him  with  words­
he likes that  whip.







DRIVER BEJICH



Important-looking  serious
large  yellow Works-Department plough with  a high  amber  revolving  flashing light  as on an officially-marked police auto,  along  with  several lower red
lights gesturing no-fooling  warnings

is ploughing the loose sand at  the motor  ramp
Atlantic-ocean end  of Flagler  street
The  plough  is making it easier for autos
to be driven  out  on the beach  or safely away
from  the  beach.  Our seaside village has laid  out  twenty-thousand dollars
of the  taxpayers' money-from the little  stores and  from  people  like me -to abet  a frivolity
 


R.G. Everson

POEMS

No private car or camper is driven  down
on  the  the  New Smyrna beach  for  a serious  purpose
We come  here  just for fun. There is no work
for us to do. The driver  of the plough alone  is serious.  He is important,
herding loose multitudinous grains  of sand out  of our  frivolous  ways

The  serious driver
looks as though he were pondering that  the upper beach could  be the  blowing  snow of future sun-cold  eons
or the lower  beach-the wave-rolled  flat - is fused  amber after  this next moment's bang








Jl  TREE IS FJILLING
 


Audrey Conard


Twigs, leaves, bark slips thrown off have dropped;
birds blown up in small explosion settled  down  on sapwood  feathers of white-ripped points of trunk years ago.
Now the grubbing birds fly up
from evidence at my booted  toe honeycombed with  mumble  of decay.

The  crash  with only squirrels and  birds to make away
from  thunder thrust  to forest floor is there,  with all the sounds
outside  our ken, layers
of Devonian fernfalls,
saurian growls,  volcanic  groans in concentric waves of history that crash  and  roar  their aeonian
silence, waiting for an accidental ear.
Like undone deeds, little candles,  little sins, they are  not expunged, but carry on
at angels' skirts, in unfound heavens,
with molecules  of Caesar's exhalations.

68


review articles






THE MODES OF MATURITY


Anthony Appen;:,ell


RICHARD B.  WRIGHT, Farthing's  Fortunes. Macmillan. $10.95·
IAN   MCLACHLAN, The  Seventh Hexagram. Macmillan. $g.g5.
NAIM  KATTAN,   Farewell,  Babylon,  translated  by  Sheila   Fischman. McClelland &
Stewart. $8.g5.
RUTH NICHOLs,  Song  of the  Pearl. Macmillan. $7-95·
susAN KERSLAKE, Middlewatch. Oberon  Press. $8.95  hardcover, $4.50  paper.


MoRDECAI   RICHLER  describes The Seventh Hexagram by Ian  McLach­ lan  as  "The  brilliant debut   of  an  enor­  mously  talented  novelist". Of  the  author of  Farthing's Fortunes  he tells  us "Rich­ ard   Wright is a  very  talented  man,   the best  novelist  to emerge out  of Canada in recent   years."  Good  show,  chaps! Jolly good show! The irreverant, no doubt, will suggest that  such banal  judgments say less about the novelists they praise  than  about  the  effects on  Richler's prose of his work at  the Book-of-the-Month Club.  Yet, un­ inspired   as  such   remarks   may   be,  like most  Richler has  to say about  books and writers   these  days,  there   is  a  touch   of crude truth to them.  Ian  McLachlan  has made  a  good  first  try  with  The Seventh Hexagram, though  the book has too many and  too obvious  flaws for unqualified  en­ thusiasm. And  while  it  is a  bit  of  mean­  ingless gush  to talk of Richard  Wright as "the best novelist to emerge out of Canada in  recent   years",  he  is stiii  a  very  good novelist and  all the more congenial for be­ ing somewhat out of the fashionable swim.
What I  imagine makes  Richler react
 
immoderately to both  these writers  is that they  display  enormous energy  of  writing and  a love of racy  action, while  each  of them  has strong  satirical inclinations, on the whole well fulfilled.  Richard Wright's Farthing's  Fortunes  makes  no pretensions to formal  innovation. It is picaresque in the  grand  old  manner, the  kind  of  book one could imagine  Fielding or Smollett writing  if either  were  reincarnated in our century.  There are  no  games  with  time, no structural tricks.  In  fact,  the  one  ob­ viously artificial  device,  which  makes  the frame   of  the   narrative,  is   the   kind   of thing  Defoe  and  Swift  were  using  nearly three  hundred years ago to give a flavour  of verisimilitude to their imaginary chron­ icles. The   novel  is  introduced  by  a  fic­ tional  publisher  who  claims   that   it  was told  to his tape recorder by an  obstreper­ ous   nonagenarian  he   discovered  in   an Ontario old  people's  home.
A clue to the character of the story Bill
Farthing tells-it is the story of his own life-is  given   by  the   book's   epigram, which is a quotation from  The  Horse's Mouth. But Bill is no Gulley Jimson, since

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



he lacks the riding creative passion  that makes Gulley  at once  a great  artist and  a monster  of  selfishness  who   manoeuvres even misfortune in his favour. Bill is much more    the    traditional   picaresque   half­ hero,  never  a settled  citizen,  never  dom­  inated  by an  intellectual or  creative pas­ sion,  always  open   to  the  adventures of life, but swimming with them  rather than  controlling them,  so  that  though on  the whole   he  enjoys   his  existence,  one  can never say he has shaped it.
It  is the  luck  of  the  road, the  deus  ex machina of continual coincidence, that  in fact  controls   Bill's  erratic career, and  if that   god  from   the  machine  has  a  per­ sonification, it is the  monstrous Findlater, the  genial,   gigantic  and   totally  amoral American confidence man  who  finds  Bill Farthing working  as a  boy  in  a Toronto bar   and   takes   him   under  his  ample   if somewhat ragged wing.
Findlater leads  Bill into  scrape  after scrape  as they wander across the States, alternatively feasting and  famishing, and find their way eventually to the Klondike. Their fortunes rise and  fall  dramatically as  Findlater shows  himself  all  too  often more gullible than  the suckers he tries to defraud.  The    pair    are   recruited  into Soapy  Smith's gang  in  Skagway  and  en­ dure  prison  terms  in Seattle and  Dawson City.
Bill  conceives   a  romantic passion  for Sally  Butters,  a  red-haired  burlesque dancer, that  lasts  him  to the  verge of old age,   but    though   he   has   tempestuous affairs  with  other women, Sally  always eludes  him.  Even  his attempt at  wartime heroism ends in an anti-climax in the true picaresque style; having seen his comrades killed in the battle of the Somme and sur­ vived its horrors,  he sets out  to assassinate General Haig  in retribution, but  when  he enters  the  grounds of  the  chateau where Haig's headquarters are  situated,  he  is felled by a cricket  ball and stays in a state of  amnesia   for  sixteen  years,  awakening
 like a latter-day Rip  Van  Winkle  to  en­ dure   the  Depression   and   to  wander  off with   Findlater  on  a  last  shabby   caper,  promoting phoney  prize fights in the deep South.   Now  he  realizes  the  monster   of callousness   Findlater  has   become,   and  finally parts company with  him, to return to his childhood Ontario town.  There he takes  up  with  the  daughter of  the  local undertaker's ex-prostitute wife  (who  had seduced   him  long  ago  in  adolescence), and,  after  a spell  of  amateur  mortician­ ship,  ends  his career rearing  pigs on  the advice  of an  old  Black  farmer who  told him that  "pigs  is about the  best friends  a man  can  have",   which  seems  to  accord  with   Bill's   experience,   for   no   human friend  turns  out  to be true to the end  and no love brings  lasting  happiness. Like  all good   picaresques,    Farthing's   Fortunes ends in the sadness of life spent,  its hard­ est lessons learnt.
All this is standard  Fieldingesque stuff, but picaresques  never get their effect from formal  originality; in fact, the more hack­ neyed  the  general   plot  the  better,  since what  all writers  of such books, from  Cer­  vantes  on, have  really  relied  on is-first
-the liveliness of individual episodes and
-second-the vividness  of detail  with which  a credible  setting  is created for the hero's  barely  credible adventures. Here Wright  is in his element, for  he is a first­ rate   fictional   documentarian,  doing  his research   into   modes   and  manners  very thoroughly,  weaving  a   background   of astonishing authenticity in which  the sec­ ondary characters  behave,  perhaps not as real  people  did  in  those  days,  but  cer­ tainly as characters in contemporary plays and  novels  were  made   to  do.  It is  the good old recipe of total verisimilitude once one has taken the first step into fantasy­ the recipe that  made Moll  Flanders and Gulliver's Travels and  Roderick Random so successful in their  day, and  now so en­ joyably   turns    the   tricks   in   Farthing's Fortunes.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The  most  memorable single creation in Farthing's Fortunes  is undoubtedly the monstrous Findlater, and  it is another satirically conceived  monster  of flesh and ambivalence that  dominates The Seventh Hexagram -otherwise a  very  different book from  Farthing's Fortunes. For  the character  one   remembers  most   vividly from  Ian   McLachlan's novel  is a  pustu­ lar,   foul-mouthed  gay   named   Donald  Winn,   who  is the  most  deadly  gossip in Hong  Kong and  has  parlayed  his genius for  inquisitiveness into  a  career  as intel­  ligence  agent  for  the  British  rulers  of the island.   I   am   not   sure   how   intentional this may have  been on McLachlan's part.  In   fact,   I  suspect  that   originally   Winn was conceived  as a  minor  character who would   be  useful   in   tying   together  the various  strands of  this novel of sultry love and  political intrigue in the colony  that  is a margin  between  two  conflicting worlds of self-righteous violence,  the western and the  communist. But  by  the  end   of  the book Winn  has so shouldered his way into our  attention that  he seems  to dominate the  whole  chaotic action.
In  the process, The Seventh Hexagram has  emerged  from   what   seems  to  have been  the  original   concept   of  a  kind  of political   thriller  about   the  Far  East­ Malraux laced  with  Ian  Fleming-into
a work of grand  satire  marred mainly  by the clinging  fragments of the original in­ tent.   The   main   action   centres   on   the romantically  conventional  triangle   be­ tween  Joe  Stewart (the  radical  journalist  anti-hero), Jordan King,  an  ageing  and bombastic    half-Chinese   veteran  of   the Long  March, marooned in a Hong  Kong mansion,  and   King's  French  wife  Eve­ lyne,  who  takes  Joe  as  her  lover.  There are  other  forces  that  try  to pull  Joe  out of the triangle: Winn, of course,  Mei, the erotically   tantalizing  Chinese   girl  capi­  talist, and Kwan, the aristocratic Chinese intellectual who  finds  himself  in  control
 

from ...

the golden dog press

[1 1[

n. ew& .
Interestmg


INTO   THE  OPEN
Christopher Levenson
This  is not  the narrow country of 'just  so' verse, but  poems of meaning and success­ ful  imagery  related   to the  rich  substance of personal  experience.                        $2.95

DARK  OF  CAVES
Abe Ram
A continuing novel of Montreal life which has  grown   out   of  the  situation  of  one man's   process  into  a  many-sided  discus­ sion  between  the  true  and  false  voice  of experience.                                             $2.95

POEMS
Janet Durno
A new poet who 'counts up on her fingers' moments, people, things and  gently  proves the nature of life itself.                        $2.00

HAND/GRENADE
John  Thornton
Fascinating, convincing and  reactive poems by a hard-speaking 'steward' of the English  experience in Quebec.          $1.50


15 OSSINGTON AVENUE OTTAWA, ONTARIO, CANADA KlS 3B3

of   revolutionary  manoeuvres  for   which	 	

71

REVIEW ARTICLES



he is temperamentally unfit. It seems as though   in   the    original  plan    of   The Seventh Hexagram suspense  was  an  im­ portant  element, as  it  is  in  all  conven­  tional   thriller   novels,  and  it  is  sustained  even in the final version  to such an extent  that,   though  the  novel  begins  with  Joe fleeing from  the  violent  death of  Evelyne (killed  by Jordan) and  Jordan  (killed  by Joe), it is not  until  the  end  that we are told   how  it  actually  happened, and   by then   so  much   else   has   taken   place   in other  directions that  the  final  revelation is uninteresting. There is a  similar  sense of  duty   to   the   tough-minded  Fleming  kind  of  thriller  in  the  treatment of sex, which   is  obvious  and   rather  boring,   as most  overt  description of fornication has now become.
On  the other  hand, Winn  and  his world of faggots,  never  displayed in real action, are  marvellously alive,  original and  con­ vincing,   and   it  is  with   them   that  The Seventh Hexagram takes  on  its  strength as  we  compare  the  empty   vanity   of  a revolutionary has-been   that  negates  Jor­  dan's  epic  tales of the  Long March, with the capricious viciousness  (combined with a good  deal  of  spontaneous personal  ten­ derness)  which  Donald Winn  projects  as the nature of his particular kind  of auto­ cracy.    The   Communists  bungle    their Hong  Kong  agitations; the British  bungle their  counter-measures. We see history shambling towards  some  kind  of climax, and   we  know   already  that   though  its threats will  be clumsily  fulfilled,  its  pro­ mises will not  be kept.  As a  thriller, The Seventh   Hexagram   is   marred  by   too slavish an observance of  the  rules. But as a satire  on  the  ability  of  power-or  the very chance of holding it-to make fools and  monsters  of  men  it  is admirable. In neither role,  of  course,  is it  realistic  ex­ cept  in its supporting documentary detail and   its  sharp  vignettes  of  Hong   King  life, for  the  thriller is as much  a conven­  tion as the satire; McLachlan's beginner's
 luck  had  led  him  to  be  caught  between the  two  conventions and   to  achieve   no satisfying reconciliation. I look forward to his  next   novel.   He   seems   the   kind   of writer  whom  practice will make-if  not perfect -at  least  very good.
In  Farewell,  Babylon, Nairn  Kattan moves between  conventions with  the  ad­ eptness  of  an  homme  de  lettres  trained in  the  French   tradition of  stepping with ease from  genre  to genre. Farewell, Baby­ lon is in fact  a  novel so autobiographical as to be fictionalized memoirs  rather than
roman  a  clef.  Kattan is really  telling  us
the tale of his own youth and  young man­
hood as a Jewish  intellectual in Iraq dur­ ing  the  period  of final  British occupation and  emergent  independence. But the con­ vention  of speaking  as an anonymous nar­ rator    and   of   renaming   the   remaining actors  in  the  story  enables   him  to  give that  shaping  into  an  artifact, to  justify those poetic manipulations of fact,  which not  only  create  a  haunting  picture of  a changing   Baghdad,  where    the   Jewish community  finds its ancient place  in  the land  finally endangered, but  also presents an unusually  appealing and  authentic account of the  process of growing  up.  It is a kind  of Iraqi Portrait  of the  Artist  as a Young Man, and  at  times,  in  its most exotic evocations  of a world so recent  and so lost, it achieves  the same epiphanous intensity  as Joyce  did  in his exorcizing  of the past. Since he came  to Canada, Nairn Kattan has  contributed  a  great   deal  to our  literary life;  Farewell,  Babylon  may well be the best of his gifts.
A mature fictional  tradition is a flexible one,  in  which  many  approaches of form and  viewpoint  can exist together, and  the reassuring variety among Canadian  novels is demonstrated if we compare the robust action and strong satire of Farthing's Fortunes   and    The  Seventh  Hexagram and  the subtly modified  autobiography of Farewell, Babylon with the pure lyrical fantasy  of  the last  two  books on  my list,

REVIEW ARTICLES



Song  of the  Pearl  by  Ruth Nichols  and
Middlewatch by Susan  Kerslake.
Ruth Nichols  has  already written  two excellent  books for children, and  a haunt­ ing  novel  about  transitional  adolescence, Ceremony  of Innocence,  none  of  which have  in  my view  been  sufficiently  recog­ nized    in   Canada,   though   they    have received   considerable   praise   in  Britain.  Nichols    has    always    written   on    the borderlines   of   experience,   where    the actual  merges  into  the  numinous, and  in Song  of the  Pearl she leaves  the  realm  of earthly life to write  a novel of death and reincarnation.   The    heroine,   Margaret Redmond, almost  wills herself  into  death through her love-hatred of the uncle  who raped  her as a teen-ager. The  novel begins with  her  return to earth thirty-five  years later  as an apparition to forgive  and con­ sole, and  the  rest of the  book  tells of the experiences  during death that  lead her to this reappearance in  her  old  form  which precedes  her  actual return to  earth  as a reincarnated being.
The   triumph of  Song  of the  Pearl  is the  sense  of  concrete experience  that  is given  to  the  world   of  death. From   the moment  Margaret recovers self-awareness after  dying, and  finds herself  standing on a mountain path  dressed  in her  blue cot­ ton  kimono,  the  world  she  inhabits  may present  some  curious   aspects -one  can will the appearance of food and drink, for example-but it  is  nevertheless  entirely tangible.   In    this   world    memories    of earthly  lives are intermittent; those of the last  life are  clear enough   and  are  mem­ ories  of  the  ordinary kind,  since  one  re­ mains the person of that  life before death,  but  memories   of  previous   lives  involve concrete  transitions,  so  that    Margaret lapses into these past Elizabethan and Za­ potec and Sumerian selves and  for a short time  experiences   their   tangible,  physical existence.   The   central  point   of   dying seems to  be  the  re-establishment  of con­ tact  with  one's most  primal self, as Mar-
 garet  realizes  when  she  visits  the  Oracle and  senses  that  its  power  "was  in  some way  herself;  but  a self so ancient that  it was not  yet  human in  her  terms.  It was the well of vitality  from  which  she drank in  her  deepest  sleep;  it  was  the  self  that had  first looked  down  into  the shadow  in the  depths and  had  resolved  to  become Man."
The  reason  behind  dying is that  it frees us from  the  bonds  we gather during life; those  who  waste  their  death are  people like the  ancient Chinese  extended  family Margaret  encounters, who   have   recon­ structed in  the world  of unlife  their  own lost Right  Order which  they pursue  in the Great   Compound that  Margaret is  des­ tined   to  destroy   by  fire,  thus  liberating them   from   an  obsessive  holding  on   to death   so that  they  can  return to  life  as, at  the  end,  after  her  appearance to  her uncle has exorcised  her  hatred, Margaret herself is about to return.
If Song  of the  Pearl  is speculative  as well as lyrical fiction, Susan  Kerslake's admirably  written  first   novel,   Middle­ watch, is  lyrical-archetypal.  It  is  essen­ tially  the  story  of  Sleeping  Beauty   and the   man   who   awakens   her,   in   action  rather  like  Gide's  Symphonie  Pastorale without the  bitter  ending, but  in  mood rather  like  Alain   Fournier's  Le   Grand Meaulnes;  altogether  the  kind  of  novel one might expect  to come  out  of Quebec rather than out of the Maritimes, but wel­ come  nevertheless. The   plot  is of  exem­  plary simplicity. Morgan is a young school­ master   who  comes  to  teach   at  a  Mari­ times fishing village,  where  he lives alone  at the teacherage. He rescues a young girl whom  he finds naked  and  tied to her  bed in  the  cottage from   which  her  brother, with  whom  she lived,  has fled. Sibbi  suf­ fers amnesia as a result of  her experience, and  Morgan takes her into his house and tries to nurse  her back to conscious living. The  simple  plot is managed by the mani­ pulation of  time,  so  that   we  flash  back

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



over Sibbi's  life with  her strange brother, and   Morgan's  early   contacts  with   her when  she  would  come  very  occasionally into  his  school.  But  it  is not  the  action that  is of  prime  importance; rather it  is the web of mood, through which we understand the development of a kind  of inarticulate communication between Morgan and  the  unspeaking, memoriless
 girl, until  at last, nurtured by tenderness, the spring  of recollections begins  to flow. It is a slight book, with  no attempt made to build  it into  more  than  it  is, what  the French would  call  a  recit;  but  the sure­ ness of the language irradiates every small act and  every image, so that the slightness paradoxically holds a richness,  like gossa­ mer  loaded  with  the  jewels of the  mist.



THE LIMITS OF THE GARDEN

Mike Doyle

DOUGLAS LOCHHEAD,  The   Full  Furnace. McGraw-Hill-Ryerson.


THE BACK COVER OF  The Full Furnace, Douglas  Lochhead's "Collected poems",  is garnished with  the  usual  clus­ ter  (or  do  I mean  "clutter"?)  of  critics' remarks. In  one of these which struck  me as  particularly just,  Elizabeth  Waterston speaks  of  Lochhead's poems  as  showing, "the historic  reminiscent  strain  of Cana­ dian  literature", and  she adds  that  "Such poems  quietly   attest   to   the   intellectual life  of  the  country, and  to  the  national character...."This is a testimonial worth  earning, and  worth  pondering as a useful critical  guidepost.  As  it   happens,  very recently  Victoria  (or, rather, the  univer­  sity)   has  had  its  own  little  contretemps on  the  question  of  Canadianism. As part  of a very useful contribution to the affair,  the editor  of  the Victoria Times provided a  most  timely  statement from  Northrop Frye, who said : "It is obvious  that  Cana­ dian   literature,   whatever  its   inherent merits, is an indispensable aid  to the knowledge of  Canada. It  records   what the Canadian imagination has reacted  to, and  it  tells  us things  about this  environ­ ment  that  nothing else will tell us." While  I  recognize   that   there   are   people   who have  very  different ideas  about the  pur­  poses of  literature, I  like  that  statement very  much. As  regards our  present   con-

74
 
cern,   it   provides   a   proper  perspective from  which  to  view  The Full  Furnace, which  is a book not  notable for a few masterly  set-pieces,  but  rather for  a  per­ vasive  tonal  quality.
Work  in the  collection  presumably covers twenty  years or a little  over, but at least  half  of  the   poems  are   newly  col­ lected  and   fully  eighty   per   cent  of   the work  has appeared in book form  only  in the  past  five or  six  years.  Perhaps  this accounts  for  a  certain   sense  of  homo­ geneity  I  got  through  my  first  "feel" of the  work,  though  a  variety  of forms  and  line  lengths  is  employed.
How many years work went  into Loch­ head's  The Heart  is Fire  (I959)   I do not know,  nor  do  I  know  the  book  itself. Of the  dozen  poems  from  it  included here, two  strike  me  as  particularly substantial work,   though   on   a   small   scale.   Both "Sunday Rain  at  Ignonish" and   "Nova Scotia   Fishermen"  have   the   quality  of palpability, or "felt  life".  The latter has, in addition, an  Anglo-Saxon starkness which seems appropriate at least to my Maritime imaginings:

Men  whose red-torn  faces  reveal
Breast  intimacies  of dawn  and  sudden
Spilling  from the  reeling  room
To  balance cabers  in the sun  ...

REVIEW ARTICLES



The tangible  hardwood fire, knocking screen-door, and  sand-filled  fishbarrels of these  two  poems  are   not  typical   of  the whole section,  which  tends elsewhere  to a somewhat generalized or abstract literari­ ness,  but  a  dominant virtue   is  that the poet's  presentation of himself  is agreeably  mannerly and  unpretentious.  Detail   and cadence are often  predictable enough, but the  poet   handles   both   his  role  and   his means  with  tact.
One  would  not  expect  much  develop­
ment   beyond   this  in  It  is  All   Around, dated  only a year later,  but  there  appears to   be   an   extension    of   range    in   two respects. First, a gnomic  quality, as in "Blackbird":

Out  of a quick  dead  sun a  blackbird fly,
sit  out  a  feather-while on  a  cherry treetop, then  down  down
he drop
to a  river  bank,
where  he  nose  around like old  man  on  Sunday outside a  big hotel.

For me at least, there  is something very suggestive  about  that  slight  language dis­ tortion  or hint  of inarticulateness. In con­ trast,   "Poems   in  a  Train-Newfound­ land" has the quality of jottings,  and  not especially   remarkable  ones,   except   for faint  epic intimations and  a consciousness of  ambience:

Everywhere this  land
suggests beginnings:
the  rude rock  still  dripping,
the  virgin  air
gulping with  the  first  arctic touch,
the  animal forms
gripping the  pool  edges....

Lochhead's next collection  was Poet Talking (rg64), and it is appropriate to notice  here  that  talk,  a sort  of quiet  in­ forming of  the  reader, seems  to  be  his metier. In  a few examples from  the early work you will find that  the poem emerges from  an  iambic  matrix, but  by  and  large
 Lochhead is a free verse poet,  and  I take it   that   his  line   is  the   measure  of  his speaking-voice:
Out  from  Newfie-John for  fifty  years  he  cursed taking  the ice  and   whatever. Now  a  rose  is enough,
a  joy he knows
for  his old  eyes.

In  another  poem   of  the  same   time  he writes:
we  watched this  great force knowing nothing
feeling  the  spell creating the  word.

This  is of wind, rain  and  stars,  cloud  and rock. From  the stance  of the observer,  we are   customarily  offered    a   mild   word, often  witty, with  a sense of fun,  a feeling for  the  justness of a  phrase, and  an  atti­ tude.   We  need   not   complain,   then,   if there  is  little  sense  of  risk  or   urgency.  These  qualities are  sufficiently  in  mind,  but  they often  do not  infuse  the nerve  of the line itself.
Yet  one  is struck   immediately, in  the section    from    Millwood	Road 	Poems
( 1970)  at the degree  of anchoring in con­ crete detail.  We get much  nearer the man than   seems  possible  in   earlier  sections. When   I  was  writing about AI  Purdy   a year or  two ago  I  found  in  his  work  the influence  of William  Carlos Williams  (he wrote  me later  that  this  is  not  so) . Here  again,  in  Lochhead, I  find  the  salutary effect   of  Williams,   in   the   attention  to immediate  detail,   immediate   location, and  in  a  species  of  engaged   objectivity. Perhaps   some  of   this  is  due   to  the  in­ evitable   onset   of   middle-age   (see,  for example, "Today I am  thirty-nine"), but there  is also "Homage to William  Carlos Williams". What  matters, though, is evi­ dence  of an  apparent shift  in  sensibility. Lochhead's earlier  poems seem  to tell us: here  is a  poet  in  a  poet's  universe,   the human seismograph of  mysterious Mari­ time  earth-rumblings,  the  sensibility  en-

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



cased  in  the  sou'wester. Now  we  become engaged   with   a  man,   but   a  man   who contacts us through his poems.

Overhead are  the  same  stars, but  this  is not  Halifax,
this  is Millwood Road,
I say it out  loud, Toronto.

A surprising thing about Lochhead as Torontonian, however,  is the  amount of nature poetry  this  seems  to  have  drawn from  him.  He locates  himself  in what  we may  call  the  existential middle, that ground which,  as he puts  it in the  title of one  poem,  is "No  Eden, no hell" (where even  the  latter has  a small  "h") :

I walk  the  simple  field  at Davis ville, suddenly the  urgent tunnel of a siren's sound tells me  hard and  true the  limits
of  the  garden ...

For  some  reason  the  poem  reminded me of  Purdy's  "Archaeology  of  Snow" (I can't perceive   any  telling  overt  connec­ tion) ,    and    Lochhead    cannot    match  Purdy's capacity for  making imaginative leaps   which   are   at  once  energetic  and sensitive. Within the limits  of his familiar garden, though, he  can  touch  a nerve.
In  the collection as a whole,  the  poems which  do  most  for  me  are  the  first  ten pages or so of the penultimate section, "Poems Roughly Divided":

in  winter berry  wood on  two  half-stripped tamaracks, some
fifty  cedar waxwings fed  and  flew
branch to  branch
and  despite my  noise and  staring stayed where   they  were
outlasting  me
loose  only  on  a  Sunday.

These   opening lines  of  "to   keep  alive" remind me of Williams, even  though the line or "time-life" in them  is vastly differ­ ent.  Here   and   elsewhere   in  the  section ideas  are  embodied  in  things   in  such  a way that  one  is reminded also of  Robert
 Langbaum's perceptive essay m The Modern  Spirit,  "The  New   Nature Poetry". Lochhead illustrates, in such pieces  as  "Evening  grosbeaks",  "Warb­ lers"  and  "Swifts", Langbaum's  descrip­  tion of contemporary nature poetry  as be­ ing opposed  to the  pathetic fallacy. Loch­ head  in  these poems offers  both  tact  and economy.  At times  he  verges  on  the  fal­ lacy, as in "Not mine":

a
red-tailed hawk
alights
on  a  rotting bale of hay
to look
me over  closely as I walk
his field
in a soaking wind this  Sunday

to  be alone is his  way
but  not  mine not  mine

But his encroachment is only enough  to reveal  a close engagement with  the  sub­ jects  (objects?)  of the  poem.
Elsewhere    Lochhead   says,   "at    the start  I we are all natural explorers  I pure poets", and  that,  "all our holes and  poles I
give  nothing  but   the   natural". At  one
point Langbaum claims  that, "The new concept   of  the  unconscious . . . has  ex­ tended   mind  to  the  very  borderline  be­ tween  animate and  inanimate  nature ... thus  reanimating all of  nature  and  mak­  ing  nature poetry  possible again". Some­ times  one  has  a  sense  of  this  in  reading the  best of  Lochhead's engagements with the  natural  scene.  Tentative  enough, to be sure, it is nonetheless present.
Poems such as "Not mine" have a kind
of admirable integrity  (which   has  to  do only  marginally with  the  deployment of line.  In  that  poem  and  others,  I  believe I should have managed the line in a somewhat  different fashion, but of course my  own  fashion) . Small  scale  but  true,

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   work   early   in   "Poems  roughly  di­ vided" seems best in the collection. Much  in the final section,  "WAVE I" seems, by comparison, self-conscious   and  literary.
As a collection, The  Full Furnace can­
not  justly  be summed up  as either  "sub­ stantial" or "incandescent". For the work of  a  long  span   of  time,  it  is  relatively
 slight.  Its strength seems to rest in a mea­ sure of wit, some care  in attending  to the object,  and  an  understated  trueness. Let me    conclude   by    endorsing    Elizabeth Waterston's   judgment,   quoted    already above:  "Such  poems  attest   to  the  intel­ lectual life of the country, and  to the national character ..."



A WOMAN   IS A WOMAN IS A WOMAN
Phyllis Grosskurth

BRIAN  MOORE,  The  Doctors Wife, McClelland & Stewart.  $8.gs.


I HAVE NEVER for the life of me understood why Brian Moore is considered a Canadian novelist. He lived here for­ was  it   four   years   (I948-I952)?-and wrote  precisely  one  novel  with  a  Cana­ dian  setting  (although peopled  with  Irish characters),  The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey  (r96o).  Then  in   I97I   he  wrote  a  dull account  of  the  Cross  and   Laporte  kid­ nappings, The  Revolution Script. Many of the characters in his later  novels are expatriate Canadians and  the names of Canadian cities are dropped in from  time to time.  But  surely  a  Canadian writer  is one  who  is immersed in  the  life  here.  I am not criticizing Mr. Moore  for this situation where  some people  have insisted upon  adopting him. He has every right  to live and  write  about  what  he pleases. But in  my  view  he  is still  Irish  to  the  back­ bone.
In  his first -and one of his best books
-The Lonely   Passion  of Judith Hearn ( I 950)  one of the characters has returned regretfully to Ireland to retire  after  living for many years in the U.S.A. At one point he explodes  in exasperation at  Ireland:
"There's the whole world  to worry about. So  why  bother  about   Ireland?" Mr.  Mad­ den  said.  "The Irish.  I'll  tell  you  the  trou­ ble with  the  Irish.  They're  hicks."
 
"Look   who's  talking.   You  were  a  hick once yourself."
"Hicks," Mr. Madden repeated, smiling happily.   "They   think   everybody   is   inter­ ested  in  their  troubles.  Why,  nobody  cares. A  little   island   you  could   drop   inside   of Texas  and  never  see, who  cares?  Why,  the rest  of the  world  never  heard  of  it."

Well,  we  have  heard   and  cared   a  lot about   Ireland since  then,   but   not  from Brian Moore. In his latest  novel, The Doctor's Wife, a Belfast housewife  escapes for  a  holiday   in   France  where   all   the action  takes place. Occasionally she won­ ders  vaguely  if some  familiar  landmarks have been blown up, but most of her time is preoccupied with  her love affair  with  a young  American student.
Moore  has moved  a long  way from  the
hicks  of  The  Lonely   Passion  of  Judith Hearn. In  the early  novels, his language, with  its frequent cosy addresses  to  us­ "you   see" -was  decidedly  Irish  in  in­ tonation.   His    characters   like    Ginger Coffey  and  Gavin   (The  Emperor  of Ice Cream)    were    unmistakably   fumbling Irish  blatherers.  To  some  degree   a  case could  be  made  that  by  turning his  back on  what  he  really  knows  about, some  of his  work   has  deteriorated  as  a   conse­ quence. The exquisite  novella,  Catholics

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



( 1972),  the   story   of  a  group   of  Irish priests who stubbornly adhere to their  old religious  customs  on  their  isolated  island, is a  striking  example of  where   Moore's roots  and  metier  belong.
Moore  is a difficult  writer  to discuss be­ cause his novels range  from  the bad  (The  Emperor of Ice Cream), to the mediocre  (I Am Mary Dunne)  to the dazzling  (The  Great   Victorian   Art    Collection).  His writing and  his craftsmanship are  always skilful,  but  it  is  only  when  he  allows  his imagination  full   sway   (as  in  Catholics and  The Great Victorian Art Collection) that  he  approaches a  brilliant novel.
One  of his great  assets is his Irish  gift of the gab. He is particularly skilful at describing angry  scenes  in  which  people rage vitriolically, sarcastically, and wound­ ingly -and,  cleverest   of  all,  he  knows when  and  how  to  prevent  someone  from having   the  last  word.  In  some  scenes  I found  myself recalling the Christmas din­  ner squabble over  Parnell in The  Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.
He is not an impressive  creator of char­ acter. Judith Hearn  and  Ginger  Coffey are  touching and  memorable to a degree. But  to  my  mind  there  is only  one  char­  acter  who captures our imaginative credi­  bility-Mrs.    Tierney    in   An   Answer From  Limbo. Perhaps she  emerges  from those   pages  so  successfully   because   she really knows who she is. Most of his other  characters tend  to be wispy because  they are  people  in  search  of  themselves-or, rather, of  an author  who  is  capable of giving them an  inner  life or at  least some sort of  reason  for living.
The  Great Victorian Art  Collection  is not  about particular  individuals. An amazing tour  de  force, it  is an  allegory about  the  creative  process.  The  experi­ ence of having  a dream about Victoriana only  to  wake  to  find  the  car  park  of  a motel  in  Carmel, California,  filled  with all the actual  concrete objects of a young professor's  subconscious, is breathtakingly
 original. It  is the  sort  of fantasy  that  be­ comes anagogical truth. Once  the dreams of  artists  have  materialized to  the point  where  they  are soiled and  scratched by a gaping  public,  the  artist  has  forever  lost that  particular dream.
To   my  mind,   Moore's   least  effective books  are  those  in  which  he  tries  to  be trendy,  giving  us his version  of  the  con­ temporary  woman's search   for  identity. The  first of these was Jane  in An Answer From  Limbo.  Her  mother-in-law is  im­ ported  from Ireland to look after  the chil­  dren   so   that  Brendan, the   self-centred writer, can  finally  finish  his novel.  Jane, too, is being used because  if she no longer  has  to  look  after   the  children, she  can  bring  in  the  bacon   by  returning to  her former job in an art department. Jane is doing  this  partly  for Brendan's sake, and partly for her own so that  she can get out of the house. There is not the slightest suggestion  that  she is creative or at all interested in  her  work.  Her  freedom  be­ comes  an  affair  with  the  office  Lothario who  finally abandons her  to  humiliation. If she  cannot  have   sex   with   the   ma­  chismo  type of her dreams, there  is noth­ ing  much  left  to  live for. So it's  back  to the  laundromat.
On the first page of I Am Mary Dunne,
a  thrice-married woman   recalls  an  inci­ dent  that  occurred  when  she was a child  in the convent. The  nun  had  just written on  the  blackboard, "Cogito  ergo  sum." Mary  shyly raised  her  hand  and  asked  if the  quotation should   not  have  been,  "I remember. Therefore I  am." When   the puzzled nun inquires what she means, she replies, "Because  we are what  we remem­ ber."  It is an effective  if not  particularly persuasive    means    of   introducing   the theme  of  the book. Mary  has reached the stage where  she no longer  knows who she is because  her life has been so fragmented
-even  her  husbands have  become  con­ fused in her mind.  On  the particular day of the  action  she is  expecting her  period

REVIEW ARTICLES



and,  as Moore  seems  to  believe,  women are expected  to be pretty  highly-strung at that   stage  in  the  month.  Consequently, Mary  can't  think  very coherently and  her husband  magnanimously understands her problem.
This  is a very  perplexing book.  People
exchange enigmatic looks. The  reader  is never  sure  if  the  characters are  deliber­ ately  misunderstanding one  another, or whether  Moore   is   attempting  a  subtle method  of  conveying  the  ambivalence of human  relationships. There  is  a  happy  ending  to Mary's  predicament: her  hus­ band  kisses her  good-night and  tells her that he loves her. She is actually loved by a man,  God be thanked, so her final Mot­ ley Bloom affirmation is, "I am  Mary Dunne-I am Mary  Dunne. I am  Mary Dunne." And  who,  precisely,  is she?
Moore's  most  recent   novel,  The  Doc­
tor's  Wife, is  a  feeble  version  of  Doris
 Lessing's The Summer  Before The  Dark (Come   to  think   of  it,  the   husband  in Lessing's novel was a doctor  too!). Sheila Redden, a  37 year  old  Belfast  housewife leaves for  the  Riviera for  a brief  holiday in  the  hotel  where  she  and  her  husband spent  their  honeymoon sixteen  years  be­ fore. Kevin  cannot join her for a few days so she breaks  her  journey  in  Paris  where  she falls in love with  an American gradu­ ate student who is young enough to be her son.   They    become    passionate    lovers. Mark's major assets seem to be his sexual vitality  and  the decisive  way in which  he always  makes  up Sheila's mind  for  her. Sheila's  liberation  is  sex,  sex  and   ever more sex. She describes  the experience as a state of grace.  She  is an  attractive per­ sonality  but  her  only  form  of  emancipa­ tion seems to consist in  fantasizing about  running  away   from   her   husband -al­ though  it is Mark who makes all the prac-



uoom
€·sOWn

Canada's leading feminist  literary  quarterly publishes  short  fiction, poetry  and critical  essays by and about  women.

Subscriptions  are  $6.00   per  year  for  individuals  (add   $1.00   per year  to  points  outside   Canada);  $10.00  per year  for  institutions. Sample copies $2.00

Order  your ROOM today  from:
Growing Room Collective
1918 Waterloo Street
Vancouver,  B.C.  V6R 3G6



79

REVIEW ARTICLES



tical  arrangements. Actually in  the  end she  does  not  go -Mark  is booked  on  a previous  charter and  she is to follow on another plane,  the details  of which  Mark explains  to her as though she were a demented child.  One  feels  that   if  Mark had  physically  put  her  on  the  plane,  she would  now  be rolling  in  the  hay  in  Ver­ mont.
In  the end she disappears like the man who  said  he  was  going  to  the  corner   to buy  a  package  of  cigarettes. She  cannot return to  her  husband and  she  is  incap­ able  of following  Mark  -the only alter­ natives  the  author leaves open to her. At one  point  in the novel, Sheila  reflects:

"Oh God,  The   Troubles, you  can't  blame the  Troubles for  everything. That's  become
 our big excuse. They're the only thing we believe  in  any  more   ... The   Protestants don't   believe  in  Britain   and   the  Catholics don't believe  in  God.  And  none  of  us  be­ lieves in the future."

Sheila  is in  limbo  because  she  is  help­ less, hopeless and  with no expectations for the   future-because   she   hasn't  got   a man.  This   theme   has  appeared  so  per­ sistently  in  Moore's  novels  that  it  would appear  that   he  actually  believes  that   a woman    can    find    self-realization   only through  merging   with   a  man.   Perhaps Moore left Ireland because,  like Joyce, he felt   a   love-hate   relationship  for   it.   If Moore has left Ireland physically,  he has not  abandoned the  attitudes of  the  Old Sod.





TRIBUTE TO EVERSON
 


Al Purdy


R.  G.  EVERSON,  Indian  Summer, Oberon  Press. $7.95.


RoN EVERSON is now in his seventies; this  is  his  seventh   book.  And since  he's  spent  most  of  his working  life as  a  public   relations  executive, it's  not amiss to wonder  how many  he would have produced   in   some   other    occupation? Many  more  or  none?  Of  course,  it's use­ less speculation. However, since  I  have  a fairly   close   acquaintanceship   with   the man,  I'm  inclined to think  he would  have been  even  a finer  writer, especially  if be­ ginning again  in this day and  age.
'In  the  192o's  around  the  time  when Arthur Smith  and  Frank Scott  were pub­ lishing   the   McGill  Fortnightly  with   its English-sounding title,  Everson  was writ­  ing love stories for Street  & Smith, western and  detective stories  as well for  the same string  of  American  pulp  magazines. He was also writing poems. And  taking  a law course   at  Osgoode   Hall,   Toronto;  and

8o
 
getting  married. He tried  to make a living at  writing  for  a time,  subsisting  with  his wife in a wilderness cabin, stringing his typewriter ribbon  between   trees  when  it got wet.  (I've  no idea how the ribbon  got wet, but it's one of Everson's personal anecdotes.)
However,  at  half-a-cent a word  or less
-which was  the  going  rate  from  pulp magazines-it was  pretty   hard to  sup­ port a wife, even in those non-inflationary times. Everson  graduated  in  law  around rggo, but  never  practised. (The Supple­ ment   to   the   Oxford  Companion  is  in error  by saying he did.)   The new lawyer went  directly   into  public   relations,   and over  the  years  gradually  or  swiftly  ad­ vanced   in  his  firm,  finally  becoming  its senior  partner with  consequent  increase of worldly  wealth.  He  retired  from  busi­ ness  in   rg62,  and   began   to  write  even

REVIEW ARTICLES



more intensively. Of course he had never stopped writing over  all  those  years  as a corporate  executive:  recently    I   saw   a poem  of  his  listed  in  a  Canadian  cata­ logue   that   was  published  in   Willison's Weekly  in  1933·
I'm   giving   all   this   personal  and   lit.
history  because  I think  it  throws  light  on a rather remarkable man.  Everson's writ­
ing techniques have changed completely over  the  last few years. Whereas  once  he was metrical, using rhyme and  off-rhyme, his poems are now almost entirely in free verse.   And   it's   interesting  to   compare poems in his earlier books with those of Indian Summer. But even the early books were   not   so  far-distant  in   time,   since Three  Dozen  Poems appeared in  1957·
Everson's  mind   is  encyclopaedic: it picks up information like vacuum cleaner dust,  from  books, from  life, and  from tra­ vel  as  slightly   differentiated  from   life. Scraps  of knowledge  are stored,  as well as complete interpretations of  history, dates, weather, the  moods  of  men  and  armies, etc.  Walking or driving with  him,  one  is liable  to be given a dissertation, complete with dates,  of, say the relationship of Per­ icles  to  the  Greek   city-state   in  classical Greece.   It's  a kind  of  memory   bank  he has,  an  automatic bone  computer. And suddenly, gathering wood  for  a campfire and   seeing  it  blaze  up,  analogy   strikes again:

.... dazzlements that  rear
Strange  as  Lincoln  who-middle-aged-
awoke,
Or  that one  century when  Athens blazed,
Florence but  half  that long,  and  in  the  mind
Of  Keats the  one  great year  when  seas
would   burn   ...
(From Three  Dozen  Poems)

I  happen to  think  that  is a marvelous passage, and  rather regret  that  anything similar will not come again from Everson. But something has replaced it, something that  is perhaps much  harder to do:  write
 in an  everyday  speaking voice, and  make the written-down thing  itself burn  in the reader's mind.  Not the actual words said, but the thing  that  happened, the incident, the  mood  that  rises from  words  to  leave the   poem   on  its  page   and   dwell   in  a reader's mind.  Without the  intermediate necessity  of  words  forming in  the  brain and, in some degree,  barring the way to experience? All of which  leads to so many questions  that  I'd  better  abandon the sub­ ject.  But  in  the  sense  that   words  evoke experience, there  is also  the  reverse  pro­ cess: when something happens, either tri­ vial  or  important,  we  are  quite  liable  to have  somebody  else's  poem-analogy pop into  our heads.
Some coiner of cliches said: in the mak­
ing of books there  is no end.  Just  so with analogies. I note with pleasure that in Everson's  present  book  the  quality is still in evidence.  Here's  a verse about another fire,  a  roadside  one  in  Mexico,   the  title of the poem rather awkwardly  telegraph­ ing  the  ending   (Mexican  Silence  Behind the Conquistadors) :

The far   end   of  the   scorch  which  we  are approaching is flaming noisily-
a  red  cock  crowing, elbowing upward,
flapping smoke  wings
This fire  is  the   only   event  going   on   in
Yucatan
as  though the  Spanish Christian  riders   had
just  now  passed  by

Of course there  is some danger in hav­ ing  all  this  information thrust at  one  in poems-these sidelights   and   hindsights of   history:   the   reaction   can   be,   SO WHAT? However,  in the above  example of Everson's  powers  of  analogy  (a  road­ side fire with  the Spanish Conquest), the danger is by-passed  for me, although I'm  still  not  sure  about   the  validity  of  that  analogy.
Indian  Summer  consists very largely  of
"travel poems" -a genre   of  which   the connective tissue in Everson's mind  makes full  use. Africa,  India, Japan, Indonesia

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  Norway  all provide "settings" for poems,   many   of   them    very   successful ones.  And  it  makes   me  wonder    (these travel   poems)   about  the  changing  atti­ tudes  of Canadians: are  they fwe becom­  ing  more   sophisticated and   knowledge­ able,  citizens  of a larger  world  and  quite  comfortable   there -?    Because    many Canadian poets  are  now  writing  travel poems, Birney, Layton, Pat  Lane, Gustaf­ son, etc.  And  how  does  that  equate with Margaret  Laurence and  Mordecai Rich­  ler coming  home  to Canada, having over­ lived  their   foreign   experience and   used up   the   memory   bank   of  Canada?  But poets,  unlike  novelists,   can   rarely   leave their   own  countries  permanently  unless they  write  as  objectively  as  novelists­ become   more   "professional". Eliot   and  Auden  were  exceptions to  this  rule,  but Everson  is not.
I make  no judgment as to the virtue  of this  homing  instinct of  poets,  except   to say  they do  have  such  instincts and  feel-
 ings.  Everson's  last  three  poems  are,  in­ evitably,  set in Canada, probably because he can't  help  himself. But he brings other greener fields and,  possibly, more exciting  places  home  with  him. More  exciting? If you've  ever  seen  a  fight  break   out  be­ tween  loggers  in  a  Prince   George   pub, then  what  can Samarcand offer?
Anyway,  I want  to pay  tribute to Ron Everson.   Despite   his  onerous   career   as public  relations executive and  the  chast­ ening   handicap of  great   wealth  with   a modicum of accompanying soft luxury, he has managed to produce many hard,  taut  and   just-right  poems.  Not  only  in  this book  either: in  all  his  other  books.  Of course   they're   not   all   "taut  and   just­ right". But  some  of  them   are.  Some  of them  reverberate; some  lift  right  off  the page; a few in  this book do  ( a few is a great   deal   in   my   terminology) . They  reach  into  time  and  tum the  past  inside out,  until   you  hear   an  echo  of  yourself before and after-of  all our selves.










Jl  MJITTER  OF HE7tlTH

Alexandre L. Amprimoz


a few dead  friends tum this  house into a coffin

let the crystal  vase find its own flowers

eternal and  breakable
it  knows  that  solitude burps
only  when  your memory  coughs





THESE ABIDING QUESTIONS

ELIZABETH   BREWSTER,   Jn    Search   of   Eros.
Clarke, Irwin, $6.gs.

IN PLACE OF a dedication, Elizabeth Brewster addresses some formal lines to friends  of "the old days" who disputed together   about   the   nature  and   use  of poetry.  As always she keeps her own distance-

being given  to writing casually and  as I
pleased,
can find  no theory how or what to write, merely  reflect  my small  and  personal world, a second-hand vision or a passing  love

This  disclaimer  represents well the domi­ nant   mask  of   her   work  and   the   chief subjects  of  this  collection,   but  the  lines that  follow are  perhaps more significant:

yet must  maintain, though intennittently, the worth  of the argument, my deep
concern.

The  argument is here,  in  this  book, held with   herself  but   no  less one  about   the nature and  limitations of her art,  those abiding questions  about  the  world of imagination as  against   that  of  actuality. It  is this argument, "intermittently" cer­ tain   of  itself   and   "intermittently"  dis­ trusting,   that  carries   this  book  forward  from  Sunrise  North, her  previous  collec­ tion.
At the same time as there  are question­ ings,  there  is a  quiet   joy, an  expansive­  ness and  ease,  about   In  Search  of Eros, the mark  of an artist coming  into  her  full powers.  Consisting  of  seventy-five  poems in four sections, somewhat reminiscent in arrangement of  Passage of Summer, this
 book  is a  substantial collection   and  per­ haps   Miss  Brewster's   most  satisfying   to date.
The  first section,  "The Magic Rod," opens with  a poem  addressed  to "P.K.P." The   masks  worn   by  that   poet   are   the opposite  of those preferred by Miss Brew­ ster. P. K. Page,  both as painter and poet, is an  artist  who  makes  no  effort  to  con­ ceal  the  richly  decorative  and   artificial nature of her craft; she glories, one might say,  in  the  patterns, musical   and   meta­  phorical,  of   her   art   and   through  them reaches  her  own  synthesis.   What Eliza­ beth  Brewster  is claiming here,  and  not for  just this  poem,  is a common concern, in spite  of the surface  differences.

In  and  out in and  out
we move as in a dance an  elaborate ballet though I am  clumsy spoil  the  pattern

except in dreams, where  I move as you move
perfectly
your  double
the  perfect ballerina

This   records   not  only  the  shared   quest for  perfection but  also  the  doubts   about her   own   place   in   the   ballet   and   the ballet's   place  in  life.  It raises  questions that  this book will raise again  and  again. The  final section  of the  poem  might  well serve as an  epigraph for the  book:

And  the  others move swans,  witches, the  prince, choric observers,
we all move nobody first all equal
reflecting one  another

These  opening poems  are  followed  by a  group   of  love  poems   which   pick  up from   the  love  poems  in  Sunrise   North but  move  to  a more  open  quest  of Eros. Ironic distance is kept  here  by frankness, the acknowledgement that

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



there is time  even  in bed for a little light
verse.
("Poems for  Your  Hands.")

This  humour keeps a continuity with  the earlier work and asserts Miss Brewster's separateness   from    more    solemn    love­ makers.
The  second   section,    "In  Search of
Eros",    consists   largely    of   fairy    tales, dreams and other  stories, not so much brought up to date  as brought within  the compass  of  a  particular  imagination. Here,   Miss   Brewster   displays   her   skill with   a   variety   of   verse   forms-song, ballad,   sonnet,   nursery   rhyme.  The   title poem,   described    as  "Selections  from   a longer  poem", consists of segments  of the Psyche-Eros   story,   richly   elaborated  in fine blank  verse.
The  third  section,  "Inanna," more clearly   returns  to  the   central  questions about  the  nature of things. Beneath its ironies,   it   affirms   a   primitive,  natural order   that   predates and  encompasses all
mythologies.

But  somewhere in  the country in a hovel  under trees
some  old crone  dying in  her  bed
whispered a name she had  heard in
childhood
to protect her from  the  dark
("Death of the  Gods.")

As in the previous section,  where  the story of Willie  Lump Lump, "the ugliest  man in  Canada", becomes  one  with  fairy  and folk tales, actualities of contemporary  life are  absorbed  in  the  larger  mythology.
The final  section,  "Pilgrim," has the effect  of  reiterating the  book's  main themes    and   motifs.   It  does   move   on, though, to intimations of apocalypse, suggesting   more    than    personal    doubts about  the continuity of culture and  the survival  of mankind.

But  how can  there be poems if there are  no sparrows
 and  no people?
H0w  can  a ghost  haunt
a world  without houses?

("The poet  in  the  last  days.")

The  poet's  private mythology,  her  private doubts  about  her own art  and  its place in her   life,  take  their   place   in  the   larger myth  of  our  time.  The outward  move­ ment,  evident  early  in  the  book,  is com­ plete.
As she did  in  Sunrise  North, the  poet chooses to end this fine collection  by reasserting  the  distinctness  of  her  mask from  more fashionable masks:

If I wanted to be fucked
I should  probably choose  a different word.
(Anyhow, I am  not quite sure
whether it is a transitive or an  intransitive
verb,
because  it was never  given  to me to parse.)

Usually I can  parse  words,  analyse sentences, spell,  punctuate,
and  recognize the  more  common metrical
forms.
It is almost  impossible that I shall ever  be
a truly  established poet.

, ("Disqualification")

One  might  say, of this  passage  as of the book,  that   Miss  Brewster  is  still  a  poet who insists on having  her cake.
ROBERT GIBBS



URBANE COMEDY

MARGARET ATWOOD,  Lady  Oracle.  McClelland
& Stewart. $10.00.

MARGARET ATWOOD's new novel is a com­ pound  of domestic  comedy, Jungian psy­ chology and social satire, stirred  with  wit and  flavoured  with  the occult.  Its  narra­ tor-heroine, Joan  Foster,  tells the story of her  ugly-duckling progress from  unhappy childhood in suburban Toronto to literary  success  and  fame   (reviews  in  the  Globe

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  Mail,  CBC  interviews) , and  a  per­ sonal crisis which sends her in to hiding  in Italy.  As a child, Joan  suffers from  exces­ sive  fatness,  and  the  tortures  which   this condition causes her are intensified  by her prim  mother's frustration and  despair  at having   produced   such   a   monster.  At school, at dancing-class, at  Brownies,  she is made to feel an outsider, and  learns  to hide   her   feelings,   even   to   fear   them. Though a drastic  diet  reduces  her to nor­ mal size, the adult   (and  attractive)  Joan  is still  tormented by a  lack  of  self-confi­ dence,  a fear of exposure  and failure, and she is driven  to hide  behind other  identi­ ties:  mistress  of a  Polish  emigre, wife of an  immature student  radical, adulterous lover  of  an  artist -in  each  relationship she acts  a role determined for  her  by her partner, seeking to be what  he desires, too insecure to be herself.  (Allegorists  of na­  tional identity please note.)  Joan's deeper emotional needs  find  some  outlet  in  her writing, where she can  parade her  yearn­ ings   in   the   fancy   dress   of    "costume Gothics" with  such  titles  as  Stalked  by Love, Love-My Ransom or Storm over Castleford,  published    (not  surprisingly) under  an assumed  name. She understands the  importance of  escapist  literature to the thousands of bored women  who share her  frustrations;  more  importantly, she recognizes   the   danger   of  allowing  her fantasy   to  subdue  her  real,  waking  life; and  the novel is in large part  the account of her efforts to bring  the two sides of her personality into a harmonious and  fruitful junction.
Atwood   means  to  give  her  heroine   a quality of  helpless  vulnerability, but  en­ dows her with an ironic sensibility so keen as  to  make  her  seem  the  strongest  char­  acter  in the book, a cool and  amused  ob­ server  rather than  the chief  sufferer. This  is a  minor   failing,  however,  and  it  is a relief to turn  from  the  humourless inten­ sity of Surfacing to the urbane comedy of
 

from ...

the golden dog press

book.J ...

new& Important

SELECTED POEMS
Louis Dudek
A  lively  selection   from   the   work   of  a writer   who  explores   literary,  emotional and  intellectual  territory  with   ease  and vivid insight. A poet of great  achievement.
$2.95
THE   SHROUDING
Leo Kennedy
Introduction  by Leon  Edel
Kennedy's volume  was a landmark  work. It  continues to  appeal  to,  and   to  chal­ lenge  the  contemporary  sensibility.  Leon Edel's   is  a  masterful introduction   cum reminiscence. 	$2.95

VISIONS OF  MY GRANDFATHER
Douglas  Barbour
A perceptive, young  poet who writes  with a  strong  sense of language, and  remains cool and  lucid in his statement.        $2.95

HE  &  SHE  &
Douglas  Barbour
Personal,  celebratory and   powerfully  ac­
complished  poems.                               $2.00


15 OSSINGTON AVENUE OTTAWA, ONTARIO, CANADA KlS 3B3

Lady  Oracle. In  the  former  novel,  the	 	

as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



heroine's grim entry into a primeval world and  her determined rejection of human contact conveyed  a kind  of superior con­ tempt  for the equivocations and compro­ mises of everyday life, as well as a feminist hostility   to  a  society  which  reduces   wo­ men  to  the  level  of sex  objects. In  some respects  the  pattern  is  repeated in  Lady Oracle: the  heroine, trapped in  an  iden­ tity she detests, searches for some meaning in  her  life; shedding men  along  the  way, she undergoes a ritual death and  rebirth, flirts with dark  powers in her  psyche, and emerges  to a new  awareness of self. Also reminiscent of Surfacing is the  book's at­ tack  on  the  crassly  materialistic concerns  of North American life, on  the  vulgarity of  a  society  dedicated  to  show.  Yet  in Lady  Oracle  these themes become  largely a source  of satiric  humour; there  is none of   the   morose   self-righteousness  which marks  the  tone  of  the  earlier novel.  At­ wood  has  not  lost her  seriousness  of pur­  pose,  but  her  vision  has  broadened, and she has developed a maturer sense of the possibilities  inherent in  any  given  situa­ tion.
This  is evident  in her  treatment of the occult,  which  is presented both  comically (who could  be frightened by a spiritualist medium called  Leda   Sprott?)  and  con­ vincingly: Joan's experiences with  auto­  matic   writing are  disturbingly  inexplic­  able.  These   last  give  the  book  its  title;  Joan  gathers the  products of many  hours of trance-script into coherent poetic  form and   publishes   the  collection under  the title  Lady  Oracle, a  phrase from  one  of the  poems.  The  work,  described  by  her enthusiastic   publishers   ("Morton   and Sturgess")  as  a  cross  between   Rod  Mc­  Kuen  and  Khalil Gibran, is a great  suc­ cess;  and  the  process  of  marketing the book and its author provides Atwood  with the opportunity for  some  telling  satire  at the   expense of the Canadian literary establishment. Joan  "receives" the  poems by staring into  a  mirror before  which  is

86
 placed   a lighted   candle. They   tell  the story  of  an   unfulfilled  love  between   a woman possessed of great  but unhappy power, and an evil male figure with icicle teeth  and  eyes of fire;  clearly  they  enact the conflicting  emotions within  Joan  her­ self.

She  sits on  the  iron throne
She is one  and  three
The dark  lady     the  redgold lady
The blank  lady     oracle
of blood,  she  who  must  be obeyed 	forever
Her  glass  wings  are  gone She floats down the river singing her  last  song

The allusion   to  the  Lady   of  Shalott  is clear: Joan  must  break  the  mirror if she is to  find  herself;  she  must  face  life  di­ rectly  instead  of  creating images  or  dis­ guises.  When   the  novel  begins,  we  find her  hiding,   having  faked   her  death  in order  to  begin  life  anew; at  the  end  she literally   breaks  through the  glass,  to  an acceptance of herself  as she is.
The heroine's search  for emotional ful­
filment  and  psychic  integration gives  co­ herence  and direction to a plot that might otherwise   seem  rather  creaky   and   dis­ jointed.  As is often  the  case  with  fiction cast in autobiographical form, the  narra­ tive follows an episodic line, and  parts  of the  action  are  sometimes very  tenuously connected. Why,  for  instance, does Joan  suddenly  decide   to  go  to  England?  In life, the  cause  might  be quite  obscure  or trivial;  in fiction,  we  need  to  feel  that  such  decisions  relate   to  theme   or  char­ acter, that  there  is some point,  but Joan's choice of England as the  place  for a new start  seems quite arbitrary. Still, such weaknesses seem slight  beside the deftness with  which  Atwood  handles each  episode in Joan's career  and  introduces so many unusual   and  interesting characters. She has,  too,  an  admirable control of  style; her ability to insert  the telling  phrase  and her eclecticism of reference  give her writ-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing  a  liveliness  and   polish  that   are  un­ usual    in   Canadian  fiction.   Diana   of Ephesus  and  Bertrand Russell  rub  shoul­ ders  with  Joan  Crawford  and  Kentucky Fried  Chicken; this  may  offend   purists, but  it makes  Lady Oracle a readable and (dare  it  be  said  of  serious  writers?)  en­ tertaining book. And should  Atwood  ever be  short   of   money,  she  can  always  fall back  on  Gothic romances; the  excerpts  she   provides   here   reveal   a   talent   that would   be   the   envy   of   any   Harlequin novelist.
HERBERT  ROSENGARTEN



THE AGE OLD DILEMMA

JANE RULE, Lesbian  Images. Doubleday, $g.gs.
JANE  RULE,   Theme  for  Diverse   Instruments.
Talonbooks.

IF ONE   ACKNOWLEDGES that  sexual inter­ course  has  purposes  other   (and  perhaps loftier)   than  mere  procreation, one must accept  the  validity  of sexual  unions  other than  male/female. That  most of us can­ not   is   the   age-old   dilemma  affecting  homosexuals.
In   her   reader  Lesbian  Images,  Jane
Rule,  herself  a  professed  and  practising
lesbian,   attempts  to   debunk    the   time­ honoured  theories  that  homosexuality is a  sin  andjor  a  sickness.  For   the  most part   she  is  successful,  amassing   a  great deal  of  evidence   to  shore  up  her  argu­  ments  about   what   lesbianism   isn't.  Un­ happily   she  doesn't   enlighten  us  much about  what  it  is, claiming  magisterially, "the   reality   of  lesbian   experience  tran­ scends all theories about it."
Rule  argues  that   our  moral  ancestors are  the  Jews  and   not   the  Greeks.  The nomadic Israelites-themselves continu­ ally   threatened  with   extinction -pro­ hibited  homosexuality,  no  doubt  because
 of its barrenness and its links with the religious and social customs of such alien cultures as  the  Greeks.  Later the  Chris­ tians   took   up   the   cause   and   zealously "maintained a program of  persecution of homosexuals   for   the   next   sixteen   cen­ turies."    Nowadays    the   issue   is  homo­  sexual   marriage.  Since   most   if  not   all religious  marriage  ceremonies exhort the virtue  if not the necessity of progeny,  one can    understand    the    church's   stance.  Within  that  same context, it's  difficult  to condone the  hypocrisy  of  a  church that  willingly marries  heterosexuals who open­ ly state  they will not  have  children.
Rule argues that psychological theorists and  practitioners who  insist  that  lesbian­ ism  is  a  sickness  are  dangerous  in  that  they often  produce traumas in individuals who  before  suffered  from  nothing but  a loving  preference for  their  own  sex. Les­ bians,  she  complains, endure  prejudices as  ill-considered  and  unfounded as those traditionally heaped  against  left-handed people. The  analogy  is apt, for examples abound  of the sorry repercussions of "correcting"  a   child's    left-handedness. But what about the male and female homosexuals  who  genuinely believe  they are sick and who want desperately to be cured?   Won't   they  be  tossed  out   along with the taboos?
Rule   admits   she  is  a  polemicist  -"I am  so far  from  objective disinterest that my life, or at least  the  quality of my life, depends   on  what   people   think   and   feel about  what it is to be lesbian." Still, admitting her biases doesn't  excuse her frequently  sloppy   logic  or   the   strident tone   with   which   she   condemns   anti­ lesbian arguments.
Where  is the merciless  scrutiny that flayed such enemies as Father David  Ford and  Dr.  David  Reuben when  Rule  takes on  current feminist  literati? The  chapter on recent non-fiction reads more like a progress report on the problems and strife within  the  women's  movement than  any-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thing else, with Rule displaying an annoy­ ing  reticence as  though she  were  trying to placate all factions at once.
Certainly  her   own  sense  of   separate­ ness from  lesbians  who  refuse  or  are  un­ able  to accept  traditional  roles of loyalty and  commitment in  their  relationships is told  much  more  effectively  in  fiction.  In "My  Country  Wrong", one  of the  stories included  in   her   collection Theme   for Diverse  Instruments, the  narrator is on a Christmas trip from Canada to her native California. She looks up some old friends, including Lynn   who  takes  her  to  a  gay party.  Lynn  is obviously  and  desperately on  the  make,  but  it  is the  narrator  who seems awkward, out of place, even faintly anachronistic  in   her   "navy  silk  with  a green  silk coat." At one  point  the  narra­ tor, herself a lesbian, says, "I don't believe in  fidelity  though it  is  for  me  the only practical way to  live."  Like  her  narrator Rule seems slightly in awe of  women  who have  abandoned  (surpassed?)   emotional bonds.
Traditionally  gays   have   declined    to
declare  themselves,  presumably from fear of exploitation and  discrimination. Large numbers are  going  public  now -coming out  of  the  closet -and   the  most  com­ monly  offered   reason   is  "I was  sick  of living a lie." That this honesty leads more often  than  not  to threats and abuses from heterosexuals  is  well  documented. How much  worse is the  lie  than  the  reprisals? and  if one  chooses  the  lie,  what  sorts  of taunts and  humiliations are  delivered  by other  more open  lesbians?  It is a paradox that    Rule   never   explores   satisfactorily.
What she  does  explore   with  candour and  intelligence are  the  changing images of  women  as expressed  through the  lives and  writings  of more  than  a dozen widely read  novelists.  They   range  from  women who  wanted   to  be men  (Radclyffe Hall, Gertrude Stein,  Willa  Cather, Vita Sack­ ville West)  to women  who were emotion­ ally  but  not  sexually  engaged  with  other

88
 women  (Ivy Compton-Burnett, Elizabeth Bowen)   to  women  who  recognized   and tried to suppress the lesbian sides of their natures (Colette) to women proud  to be women   and   lesbians   (Margaret  Ander­ son,  Maureen  Duffy,   Rita   Mae  Brown,  Rule  herself). Aside from  any  emotional responses  we may  have  to  the  sufferings  and  uncertainties of these women,  Rule's  careful  scholarship and   sharp  insights provide  both  a  sturdy  framework and  a context  for examining women's  literature. To say Lesbian Images is timely is absurd; it is long past due.
Few of the stories in Theme for Diverse Instruments are  about  lesbianism  per  se, but they are all about women and loving relationships. Mainly  Rule's  women  are stumbling through a  maze  of  apprehen­ sions, conditionings, and  stereotypings as they  grope  towards  a  better   understand­ ing of themselves and others.  It is a hard  struggle  and  that's  why  so  many  of  the characters  seem  alone   and   adrift, even sometimes alienated.
Rule   begins   by  giving   us  a   positive myth  about  women.  The  allegorical  title story "Theme for Diverse  Instruments" explores a matriarchical family  where  the women   are   prolific   and   dominant and the  men  by contrast infertile and  inffec­ tual.   The   metaphor  is  to   America,   its history   and   its  value   systems   but   this time  the  source  is an  Amazonian female  and   unlike   mythical   male   gods  she  is mortal, capable  of  receiving  and  bestow­ ing love.
The myth  established, we move  on  to the girl child.  In  "My  Father's House" a little girl is playing  with her elder  brother and   a  friend.   That is  they  are  playing and  she  is  joining  in  whenever they  let her.  In  her  isolation  the  little  girl  muses about   a  drawing in  her  colouring  book and  decides,  "If she  was  going  to  be  in the picture she'd  have to draw  herself in." "Drawing herself  in"  is precisely  the problem  facing  women  and  the  task that

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Rule has set herself in these stories. She succeeds  admirably and  yet  I  found  this key story tainted by a slickness and a coyness. It seemed  too pat,  too simple.
One  of my favourite stories  is "House­ keeper"  in   which   Ruth   Tedmore  is  a successful   personnel   manager  and   the competent if somewhat restrained mother of two children. She has one major fault: She wants  to be perfect. To  enhance her self  image,  to avoid  "virtue which  would threaten or  irritate," she  hires  a  succes­ sion   of   hideously    incompetent   house­ keepers.  It  is  a  technique  she  has  used brilliantly for  years  in  hiring  clerks  and assistants  for  the  managers in  her  com­ pany.  Her  best  and  worst  housekeeper is Anna   for  "cheat  she  certainly  did  and take  advantage of   and  disappoint  in  a dozen  ways a  day,  but  she  never  threa­ tened  anyone  else's  self esteem." Each  of these   women    has   adhered   to   a   role model:  Ruth  is   the   superwoman  and Anna is the chronically inadequate house­ wife and mother. As much  as Ruth needs to   surround  herself   with   imperfection, Anna  must  subordinate herself  to  excel­ lence. The  contrast  between the  two and the   resulting   conflict   frees   each   some­ what  from  her self-imposed chains.
In  "Middle Children" where  the part­ ners are  from  the first ideally suited, they invent  a label  to explain  their  happiness.  Essentially  they are  very different, except each  was  born   the  middle child  in  her family.  They  pounce  on  this  coincidence as the raison d'etre of their  compatibility. Where  no  stereotypes  exist  they  must  be invented, no matter how absurd.
Finally,   in   "Invention  for   Shelagh", Rule  gives us herself. Ostensibly  this is a series of  journal  entries -random notes for   a  letter   to  a  close  friend-but   it becomes  a  clever  and   intimate  collage. Rule  weaves  a  delicate pattern  amongst the abstract jottings  that  culminates in a self-portrait which  depicts  a woman  who has  confronted sex, career, money,  iden-
 tity, etc., and  emerged  as a loving, honest person.  She   concludes "that  I  am   dis­ covering   the  space  we  live  in,  how  in­  credibly   crowded   it  is  with  who  I  am, who each  of us is, how much  room  there  seems to be. I don't feel sure footed, but I feel together  we are."
Lesbian  Images  and  Theme for Diverse Instruments reinforce each  other  so com­ pletely  that  it  is almost   as  though  Rule consciously  wrote  one  to complement the other.   Together  they  make   a  marriage.
SANDRA MARTIN


MALIGNED INNOCENTS

JAMES  REANEY,  Sticks  and  Stones.  The   Don- nellys, Part One.  Press Porcepic.  $5·95·

IT's   EASY    to  see  why   James  Reaney's imagination was drawn to  the  legendary Black Donnellys,  the sturdy  Irish  pioneers who  were  hounded  and   killed  by  their neighbours in Biddulph Township not far from  Reaney's birthplace, Stratford, On­ tario.  From   the  time  of  the  Donnellys'  arrival   in I 844,  the  town  was  disrupted by  violent   infighting,   barnburning  and mysterious   killings;   the  murder  of  five Donnellys  in I 88o  was  the  climax   of  a bitter  vendetta,  during which  the  family stood  its  ground  despite  all  attempts by fellow-Catholic  neighbours  and   Protes­ tant   officials  to  evict   them.  After   their death -which remains unavenged -the town subsided into a more  or less tranquil convalescence, as  though a cancerous cell had  been  excorcized  from  the  social  gut. Remember  Reaney's   poem  called "Antichrist as Child?" The child, abhor­ red by nature and  by his family, sees him­  self transformed in  their  perspective into  a  hooved,  soot-suited  devil.  It's  a  poem
about  innocence.
In  Sticks  and  Stones. The  Donnellys,
Part  One, a  group of  players  resurrects the  Black  Donnellys   of  popular legend ; they are evil, quarrelsome and murderous.

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



For Reaney  these are false images of an innocent and heroic family, distorted by public  fear  and  hatred, as  much   as  the child  of  the  Antichrist  poem.   And Reaney's trilogy of plays was written to refute one  myth  and   put   another in  its place-for him  the Donnellys are Cana­ dian  heroes, resistance  fighters. They  have virtue,   courage  and   vision,  and   this  is why  they  are  despised.
Reaney   was  always   a  visionary   poet, and    he   doesn't  write    orthodox   plays. What  he's  got,  after   immersing  himself in  local  history,  court documents and legend,  is an intense, hallucinatory drama depicting a  rather  brutal  phase   of   pio­ neering  life in southwestern Ontario. The text  of Sticks  and  Stones  is recorded in a form  of symbolic  notation, choreography for  a  vision.  The  designer  at  Press  Por­ cepic  has  honoured  Reaney's text  with  a quarto sized,  two  columned "documen­ tary"  format,  complete with   period   ad­  vertisements  and   photographs  from   the original  production of  the  play.   (It was first   performed  at   Toronto's  Tarragon Theatre in  1973 by Keith Turnbull's NDWT Company.)
Reaney   started  writing  plays   at   his office desk in  the  English  Department of Acadia University, Wolfville  in  the  late rgso's. He  had  small  knowledge of what actors,  directors and   producers are  able to perform and  predictably, his first play, The Sun  and  the  Moon, was complex in structure and  richly  poetic,  but  hard   to enact   as  conventional theatre.  In   rg65, working  with  Keith Turnbull's  Summer Theatre in London, Ontario, Reaney  be­ gan  to formulate his opposition to canned realism-he evolved   a  counter   theatre emphasizing mime,  poetry,  mixed  forms, improvisation and  group collaboration­ and   to  devise  the  textual  notation  that  makes  the  reading  of his  scripts  such  an extraordinary  experience. If you've  seen the  play.
Reaney's  plays,   like   his   poems,   are

go
 governed   by  the  principle of   metamor­ phosis. There's a  bare  stage,  a  group  of players,  and  a  bagful  of  symbolic  props. Ladders become  roads  and   gaols,  sticks are violins and  iron rods, laundered shirts are  the  Donnelly  sons.  Incendiaries be­ come  court  magistrates and   victims  are murderers. The  chorus,  a shifting group, performs   various   functions  from   balla­  deering to overvoice  narration and  sound effects. The  action  weaves  between   past and  present,  Ireland and  Canada. Plot is superimposed on plot and  the language ranges from low dialect  to high poetry. Metamorphosis of images,  people  and events.  The   stage  becomes  a  vehicle  of
VlSlOn.
The  Donnellys  have  played  to  packed halls throughout the country during their national tour,  and  it's  a  rare   poet  who lives  to  see  his  vision  imprinted on  his contemporaries in  this way, realized  with its  first  and   last   intensity.  However- Many  of the  spectators I've  spoken  to found  the plays overlong, repetitious and sometimes  stagnant. This  is the  problem when   you're   watching  somebody   else's
dream.
An  interesting question remains about the politics of the play. Reaney chooses to play  down  the  origin,  in  Ireland, of the widespread hatred of the Donnellys. They were persecuted, he suggests, because they refused  to  join  a  fanatical political  sect, the Whiteboys. They  refused  to be joiners. But  the fact  remains  that  the  Whiteboys were a group  of organized Catholic peas­ ants  and  farmers,   agitating  for  land  re­ form,  and  the  Donnellys  were  thwarting an   embryonic   revolutionary   movement. They were scabs, sellouts, blacklegs.
What    Reaney    understands  so   well, what  Sticks  and  Stones  portrays, is how ideas become inverted, perverted, fuelling ancient hatreds   on  new  soil.  He  under­ stands   how  whole  communities  can   be ignited   by  a  single,   passionate  idea   of good or evil.                        LINDA  SANDLER

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE LOWRY FRINGE

Malcolm Lowry: Psalms  and  Songs, edited  by
Margerie  Lowry.  New   American  Library.
$6.gs.
ALMOST TWENTY YEARS   after   Lowry's death much  of his fringe  writing remains uncollected or unpublished, and  there remain various  gaps  and   ambiguities in the  available accounts of his life. This  is obviously not an entirely sat_isfactory situation for the reader  faced with work which  frequently explores autobiographi­ cal  material, and  which  exists in  a  com­ plex, almost  hermetic continuum of cross­ reference and  private allusion.
Malcolm Lowry: Psalms and Songs, edited   by   Lowry's   widow,   collects   to­ gether  nine  of his fugitive  stori  s,
two of which  belong  to the  penod before
Under the  Volcano was  completed, and makes  his much-revised Thirties'  novella Lunar  Caustic  available to the North American reader  in  the  form  of the  pos­ thumously-edited   version    published    in Britain  in   1968.  In   addition  this   an­  thology contains ten biographical reminis­  cences  by  friends  and  acquaintances, as well as a chapter from  an early Canadian Ph.D.  thesis on  Lowry's  style.
Much  still remains  uncollected, includ­
ing other  stories, letters,  book blurbs, nar­ rative  sketches  such  as  "The  Ordeal of Sigbjom  Wilderness" and   the  "Journal for  Eridanus",  the   key  "Work   in  Pro­ gress"   statement,  the   elusive   political­  philosophical  essay   "Halt!  I   Protest!" and  such fascinating items as Lowry's  re­ view  of Earle  Birney's  Turvey. It is dis­ appointing that  Psalms and ongs involve a reprint of much  easily accessible published    material,  rather  than    select from  the  wealth  of obscurer but  equally  relevant  material still  awaiting  publica­ tion  or collection.
Psalms  and  Songs  is  chiefly  welcome
for making  available two hitherto unpub-
 lished   stories,   "June  3oth,   1934!" and "Enter  One    in   Sumptuous  Armour". These  are  minor  yet accomplished  works from  the  period   of  Lowry's   apprenti e­ ship, and  show a plainer, more  natur hs­ tic  side   to  his  writing  than   we   might expect   from   the   author  of   U d.er  Volcano. In  the  first  story  a  missionary,  Bill Goodyear, travels  from  Paris  to Eng­  land  by train  and  ferry,  in  the  company of  a   pro-Nazi   mining   engineer na ed Firmin.  At  the end  Goodyear's broodmg, neurotic   intimations   of   apocalypse  are confirmed   by  the  news  that   Hitler  as just  consolidated  the  abs?lute autho ty of his regime  by slaughtermg the  leadmg Brownshirts.  In   sharp  contrast "Enter One   in   Sumptuous  Armour"  offers   a nostalgic  account  of  the  initiation  of  a new  boy  at  a  British  public-school, _and includes  a surprisingly benign  portrmt of what    is   transparently   Lowry's    family background in  the  Twenties.
With   the   exception  of   "The  Forest Path  to the Spring", Lowry's  stories  have tended to receive a cursory and negative response  from  critics,   and   by  including stories   as   good    and    as   different   as "China" and  the intriguingly experimen­ tal   "Ghostkeeper"  this   anthology  illus­ trates  a versatility  of  technique and  ma­  terial  on  the  author's  part   which  should  encourage a  reconsideration of  his short  fiction.
Having said  this  it  must  be  admitted that  Psalms and  Songs  is dissatisfying in some  respects.  The choice  of  stories  in­ cluded  seems perplexingly arbitrary. "On Board the 'West Hardaway'" is included, but   the  source  of  this  story,  an  earlier  piece entitled "Port Swettenham", which Lowry cannibalized, is not. "China" is re­ printed  here,  but  a  companion sea-story, "Tramps", is  not,  and   remains unpub­ lished.  "Hotel  Room  in  Chartres", des­ cribing  what  is obviously  the  first  phase of   Lowry's   unhappy  marriage  to   Jan  Gabrial,  is  here,  but  its  superior sequel

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"In Le  Havre" is omitted. "June  3oth, I934!"  is  here    (with   the   exclamation­ mark  Lowry  used  in  the  title  in all three  manuscript drafts  mysteriously  missing) but  "Economic Conference I934" is not. "Bulls   of   the   Resurrection" is  not   in­ cluded, nor  is,  more   regrettably, "Goya  the   Obscure", a precocious stream-of­ consciousness piece which  offers an amus­ ingly   ribald   account  of  an   intellectual sailor  disintegrating from syphilis.
All but  one  of  the  biographical essays have  been  published before,  and  many  of them  were  drawn on  by Douglas  Day  in his  recent   popular  biography.  Since Lowry   was  an   intensely  private  writer who sought  his literary aesthetic more  in magazine  articles   than  in   debate  with other  novelists   these   memoirs  contain little about the disciplined, questing crafts· man,  but  much  about the  public  Lowry in  his role  of the  engaging drunkard.
Lowry's Vancouver friend William McConnell  recalls    the    novelist's   anti­ pathy   to  "literary  people" and  his  acid remark that  "They don't write, they talk aseptically about  it  as  if  there  were  no bloody birth  pangs  and  the  work emerges well scrubbed." This  comment is very apt in connexion with  the  one  piece  of criti­  cism included in  Psalms and  Songs, fifty pages  from   A.  C.  Nyland's  out-of-date I967  thesis "The Luminous  Wheel: The  Evolution  of   Malcolm   Lowry's   Style."  Dr.  Nyland's use  of  the  word  "style"  is so  broad   as  to  be  generally  devoid   of value,  and  there  is an absence  of the close textual  analysis  one  would   expect   from her  title.  Instead  all  we  are  offered  is a rather  bland  collection of impressionistic generalizations containing  few  original insights  into  Lowry's  work.
Psalms   and   Songs   contains  various errors  which  demand correction. "Under
the Volcano" is once  again  mistakenly presented  as  the  original  short-story around  which   Lowry   built   his   master­ piece,   even   though  scholars   have   pre-
 viously observed  that  this  much-antholo­ gized story  is nothing  more  than  a  I 94 I draft  of Chapter Eight of the novel. Any­ one  who cares  to check  this story  against  the  I 940 draft  of  Under  the Volcano  on file at  the  University  of British  Columbia will see  that  it  is undisputably posterior. As  Brian  O'Kill has  pointed out,  this  is surely the part of the novel which Lowry explicitly extracted "as a short story" in March I94I   (Selected  Letters, p. 39).
Dr.   Nyland   makes   a  similar   mistake
when  she  remarks   that   "The  Elephant Follows   You   Around,  Sir!"  grew   into October Ferry to Gabriola. In  fact  these chapters  were   removed   for   publication as  a  story  long  after   Lowry   had   built up  his narrative to  the  length  of a novel through a  complex   process  of  accretion centred on  a  quite   separate  short-story. "Enter One  in Sumptuous Armour" is puzzlingly  included  as  one  of  "the  last stories"   though   it  is  almost   certainly  a Thirties piece, and  the  U.B.C. Lowry col­ lection  contains a  copy  of  a  letter  from his  agent's  secretary   dated  June   24th,
I94I, returning the story as unsaleable. Finally,   "China" is  included without
any  indication  to  the  reader that  it  has been  printed from  an  incomplete  manu­ script  and  actually has one  page  missing just prior  to the ending.
Psalms and Songs is essential  for  any­ one  interested in  Lowry  as  a  short-story writer  or wanting to trace  out the  coher­  ence  of his career,  but  one  suspects  that
most  Lowry  enthusiasts  will  already   be
acquainted with  the  bulk  of the  material here.                                       RONALD BINNS


ON THE VERGE
****   DONALD CREIGHTON. The  Forked Road: Canada   1939-1957.   McC!eiiand    &   Stewart,
$14.95•   HENRY   FERNS   AND    BERNARD OSTRY. The  Age of Mackenzie  King. James  Lorimer  & Company. These two books should be read together,    though    Donald    Creighton's The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Forked  Road  is  a  new   publication, and   The Age  of  Mackenzie King, by  Henry Ferns and Bernard  Ostry, is  the   reprint of  a  book  orig­ inally published in  1 955  and  virtually  ignored by   the   press   of   the   day.   Both   are   brilliant pieces  of  penetrative and  not  entirely  unparti­ san   history, and   both   are   devoted  to  the  ex­ posure    of   the   faults    behind  the   bland  and somewhat  sanctimonious  masks   that   have   so often    concealed  the   real   nature   of   Liberal leaders  and   policy   makers  in  Canada. Ferns  and    Ostry  are   particularly   illuminating  on Mackenzie  King's  early   public career and  es­ pecially  on  his  highly  dubious activities as  an expert   in   labour  relations  employed  by  the Rockefellers.  Creighton   charts  out    the   last period  of   King's  acendancy,  and    the   subse­ quent fortunes of  the  Liberal government until its  downfall  in   1957·  He  analyses  brilliantly the   special  kind   of  smug  arrogance that has been    the    strength  and -periodically-the downfall  of  Liberalism  in  Canada, and   he  is especially  good   at   penetrating  the   nice-guy  persona behind  which Lester  Pearson hid  his driving  ambition  and   his  considerable powers of  political manipulation.

****   JOHN  s. GALBRAITH.  The   Little  Em­ peror. Macmillan of Canada. $16.95· We  have long   needed  a  sound,  readable  biography  of Governor George Simpson, the man who pulled  the  Hudson's Bay  Company  out   of  the  chaos of the  long  struggle with  the  North West  Com­  pany  and  laid   the foundations for  the  present very  different commercial empire. John S. Gal­ braith  gives  it   in  The   Little   Emperor.  The  book    is    well-written,   well-researched,   and wisely   compact,  avoiding  the   temptation  to make, out  of the  vast  amount of material relat­ ing  to  the  Company in  Simpson's time,  a long, unwieldy Life-and-Times. Simpson comes  out more  in  the  round  than  previous writers have limned him, and  an unpleasant character he emerges. Merely by telling the  facts,  without weighting them  in any  particular direction, Galbraith introduces us to one of The Great Canadian Cads. But  if Simpson had  been  less personally ruthless, perhaps he would  also  have been  less  than   a  success  in  the  public role  he played  with  such  arrogance and  efficiency.

***   BRUCE HUTCHISON. The Far Side of the Street.  Macmillan of Canada. $15·95· Bruce Hutchison  is   one   of   Canada's  best   known veteran  newspapermen, and   he  has  also  writ­ ten  books.  His  latest   is  The   Far Side  of the Street, a  kind   of  autobiography.  Newspaper-
 men    are   trained  for   the    short  sprint,  the hundred-yards  races   of  writing, and   they  al­ ways  seem   to  have   difficulties  with   the   big cross   country  efforts   that  producing a   book involves.   All  Hutchison's  books,   after   imme­ diate success  because of  a  certain  journalistic brightness, have   faded  quickly  owing   to  their  essential insubstantiality, with  the  one   excep­ tion  of  his  geographico-historical account of  a favourite river, The  Fraser. And  The  Far Side of the Street  is likely  to have  the  same  fate, for after  a  good   start with   a  fine   description  of childhood and  youth, based  on  vivid  memories well-selected by  the  unconscious, it  peters out into what the  author aptly calls  "rambling reflections", which  reflect, perhaps most  of all, the  perturbations of  the  liberal mind   that  has lost  its  anchoring faith in  reason and  progress. A melancholy, honest book  in  sad  need  of  the pruner's shears.
G.W.


STRANGER THAN FICTION

AuTOBIOGRAPHY rs  NOT a  genre which-out­ side  the  memoirs of  politicians and   the  recol­ lections  of   pioneers-has    been   greatly  fa­  voured  by  Canadians, and   there  are   few  out­ standing   examples  of   it   in    our  literature. Among   them  -and one  of   the  best -is the story  of Claire Martin's  youth, which she  pub­ lished   in  two  volumes,  Dans  un  gant  de   fer
( 1965)  and    La  Joue   Droite   ( 1966).  What
Mme.  Martin had  to  tell  of a childhood  tyran­
nized  by a  parental  monster of  hypocrisy and
sadism, seemed  so extraordinary that for  her second   volume she  was  awarded  the  French­ language  Governor-General's  Award   "for   fic­ tion", though this  was  a  perfect  case  of  truth being   stranger. The  two  volumes   were   later translated by  Philip  Stratford, and   published as  a  single  volume  by  Ryerson  Press  in   1968, under the  title, In  An  Iron  Glove.  It is good to  see  them   now  reappearing in  the   Harvest House French  Writers of Canada series,  in  the  original  two-volume form, as In  an Iron  Glove and The  Right  Cheek. Philip Stratford's trans­ lation  is  a  combination  of  faithful  rendering and  resonant  English prose  which   could   serve as  a  model  for  translators at the  present time when  an  exchange of  our  literatures seems  at last  under way  on  a serious scale.
o.w.



93




THE DEATH OF A FRIEND

W. J. KEITH's article in  CanLit  about Roderick Haig-Brown, written  after Haig-Brown died,  made  me want  to say something about   knowing   the  man  my­ self. Because  it seems that  Mr. Keith did not  know  Haig-Brown  personally, and  I did,  however  slight  the  acquaintance.
I was  at a  "health lodge"  in  Strath­ cona  Park  on Vancouver Island  in 1974, writing a  piece  about  Jack  Jackovitch, painter, ex-football player,  fishing  guide and  high  school  teacher,  etc.  I intended to  call  it  "Jackovitch  and  the  Salmon­ Princess"  (yes, I have a dramatic turn  of mind), but  the editor of Weekend  Maga­ zine  destroyed   my   title.   Anyway,   Jack knew  Haig-Brown; so did  another young writer  working  at  the  lodge;  and  so did "Jungle Jim"   (that's  what   Jack   called him,  not  me) , who  owned  and  managed the  place. He was a god  to them,  having  done  so many  things  and  containing all of  them  that  perhaps they  felt  he  was a bit  beyond  them.   For  Haig-Brown  had written  some  twenty   books,  and   was  a world-respected authority on fishing. And for the past several years he'd been a magistrate at Campbell River,  a very hu­ man  magistrate. I  believe  the lumber  ty­ coons  found   him  quite   a  nuisance with his beliefs in  a balanced  ecology and  the actions  he  took  to support his beliefs. In fact  I  think   both  Jack   and  Jungle Jim were  a  little  afraid  of  Haig-Brown, cer­ tainly   held   him   in   awe.  Talking  with them  about  Haig-Brown, Jim  mentioned in a mood of  levity that  H-B was the kind of guy  who  put  on  a  tie  before  he  went to the  toilet.


94
 
Of  course  I wanted to  meet  H-B,  all these  press  agents  producing an  ache  in my  curiosity  glands.   Anyway,   the  three of us and our wives were invited  to dinner at    H-B's    house    in    Campbell   River shortly after,  perhaps as a result of my curiosity.  Or  I may  have  phoned  H-B­ I can't remember. It was a good dinner, and   I got  an   impression   of  H-B   that  stimulated my curiosity  even more: of a man   who'd   lived  an  interesting life,  as logger,  prizefighter,  trapper and   bounty  hunter, farmer, and  now  a magistrate at Campbell River. And  I kept  implying  to Jungle  Jim   that   I  meant to  relate   his anecdote of  the  man  who  put  on  a  tie before  visiting the toilet  to the  man  him­  self, being  so  amused  by Jim's alarm   in the  presence of  his god  that   I might  re­ peat  the story that  he almost  told  it him­  self.
I was impressed  enough  at  the meeting to  decide   to  write   a  piece  on  H-B  for Weekend  Magazine, if he would hold still long  enough.   I  came  back  a  few  weeks later,  and  talked  with  him  for  two  con­ secutive  afternoons. We sat beneath  tow­ ering   walls  of  books,  and  drank  H-B's  booze, good stuff too. And  I  made  notes, a  lot of  notes. We  got  along well, and  I was acquiring a friend without really  be­ ing aware of the process.
In  the  beginning I  had   a  feeling  of slight  unease  with  him,  perhaps because of the  propaganda Jack  and  Jungle Jim had  pumped into  me. And in all our con­ versation, I felt  there  was  only  time  for him  to chip  off small edges of  his knowl­ edge  about  anything. H-B had assurance without it being in any way offensive; an orderly  mind,  one  to  which   I  began   to attribute some varieties of wisdom.  I felt he knew much more about life than  I did. I had  always gulped  experience in rather frenzied  fashion,  whereas  he  had  quietly  been  aware,  always  aware, of  what   was happening. I  thought of H-B  as a small brown  man,  despite  him  having   been  a

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



middleweight   fighter,    hunter,   trapper, etc. But  all the  rowdy  and  physically  ex­ uberant things  he'd  done  withdrew  into the  far  background; he  contained  them, but   they  were  only  small   parts   of   his total. Generally the life a man  has led will leave   visible  traces   in   his   character.  I mean,   you  can  generally  identify  sales­ men  as  salesmen  or  farmers as  farmers.  But with  H-B,  all  his varied  activity had produced a   different  amalgam,  and   I began  to understand some of the  reasons for Jack's and  Jungle Jim's respect.
I  saw  him   a  couple   of  times   again.
Later, when  I  went  back  and  wrote  the article   for  Weekend, I  kept  discovering the  man  H-B  in  my mind  continually. I mean,  I'd  think  of him  at odd  times, and not in connection with  the article. It isn't possible to explain  that  entirely: but  part of it was discovering  his writing, of which I had  had only a cursory  acquaintance before,  and  read  mostly  for  purposes  of the  article. But  that  isn't  it either.
I thought he  would  live  a  long  time,
and   that   I would   know  him  for  many years.  I corresponded with  him  over cer­ tain  points  in the  piece I was writing; he explained them  to me  with  only  a  slight degree of impatience. (I'd have felt much more impatience, if I'd been him.)   In  the couple  of years since  I've  thought about him  occasionally,  and  have  written him during that  time for unimportant  reasons.
He's  dead  now. "-died with  sudden
grace   in  his  garden" as  George  Wood­ cock says? Incredible. Earle  Birney  men­ tioned  it to me in a letter.  I thought: how could   he  be  dead?   I   wrote   a   passage about   him   in  my  Weekend    piece   that denies  demise  a priori: "As well,  there  is a  maverick  quality  about  H-B,  a  refusal to  be  pigeonholed   into  anything, despite all   the   ruts   and   crevises   we   humans generally  fall  into.  Once,  having a drink
with  J. H.  Bloedel, west coast  lumbering
tycoon,  a  man  who  collected  all  sorts  of
valuables, Bloedel said, 'I hear  you're  the
 worst   troublemaker  on   Vancouver   Is­ land.' I  suppose   the  remark  was  meant to be humorous, but  was said  because  of H-B's downright hostility  to logging  com­ panies  ravaging the  land  to  naked  mem­  brane   by  razoring off   the  tall  trees  for timber  and  toothpicks.
"The awkward moment passed. Bloedel
showed   H-B   his  valuable  collection   of what-nots and  what-ises. ('They're all collectors,'  H-B said to me later,  referring to all tycoons.)  Then Bloedel  asked  H-B to do some writing on  behalf  of his lum­ ber  company. 'I  don't want   to  be  col­ lected,'  the  writer  told  the  tycoon.  I  like that."
I feel emotional about H-B's departure. Don't  ask  me   why   exactly,   because   I didn't know him  closely, not  on any day­ to-day   basis  as  Campbell  River   did.   I had  expected  him  to live longer than  me (his  grandfather died   at  age  92), and that   I  could  see  him  again  whenever I returned to his river  town.  And  I will. I know him closely.                          AL  PURDY


SYMBOLISM AND IMAGISM

DuRING A REVIEW of Alan  Brown's  trans­ lation of Anne Hebert's poems ( CL 7 I) G. V. Downes  poses the  rhetorical  question, "But  in this century are we not all except  for  recent  American  (and,  by  seepage)  Canadian poets,  the  children of  Symbol­ ism?  Imagism, Yeats,  Pound,  Eliot,  and particularly the critical work of  the latter, have consciously or unconsciously become part  of our accepted heritage."
For  the  moment I will leave  aside  the
odd  parenthesis here,  and  also the vexing question   of  whether  criticism  or   dead poets can  have  a consciousness.
But surely we are not going to be very conscious of our  heritage ourselves  if we are  going  to  accept the  idea  that   Sym-


95

OPINIONS AND NOTES



holism and  Imagism are mother and  son? The  main  dictum of  the  Symbolists  was that  to name is to destroy. Hence allusion. Hence Eliot.  The Imagists, on  the  other hand, were naming all the time. Hence Pound  and   H.D.   The    Symbolists   said that  nothing was either  interesting or real except  in that  it made  an oblique impres­ sion  upon  the  soul;  it was  a  kind  of late Impressionism. Just   the  opposite, Imag­ ism sought  to  present  reality  that  would exist  as  if  the  human  and   interpreting mind  were  not  there  at  all.
Imagism was a procedure opposed  to Symbolism, though there were of course poets around who could borrow  a little frisson of learning from  either. In  this century we  are   not  all  the  children  or even  great-neices of Symbolism. Some  of us  have  learned  a  little   from   Rimbaud and  a little  from  Fletcher.

E. E. GREENGRASS


FICTION ABSTRACTED

Canadian  Fiction:  An  Annotated  Bibliography by Margery Fee and  Ruth Cawker (Peter Mar­ tin  Associates)  is  basically a  study  guide, and  limited  in  its  application, since   it  deals   only with    Canadian  novels    and    books   of   short  stories   that are   actually  in   print.  It  also  in­ cludes  books   that  provide   general  studies  of Canadian   fiction  and    books -though    not articles-relating  to  individual authors. It is good  of its  kind,  its  comments are  sensible and  its abstracts  well done, but  it has  obvious built­ in  limitations, since  the  "in print" requirement forces   the  omission   of  many interesting works of  Canadian fiction that enterprising publishers may  well  bring  back  in  a few  years,  at least  in paperback.  For   its   length-I 68    pages-it seems  excessively   expensive; the   cloth   edition costs  $I s.oo and   even   the   paperback a  stun­ ning   $8.gs. And   this   defeats the   purpose  of such  a  book,  which should not  be  relegated to the  shelves  of  libraries, but  should  be  on  sale cheaply  as  a  guide  to  what   students  should  seek  when   they  use  the  library.
 ABIDING ANXIETIES


The   Search   for English-Canadian Literature, published  as  a   volume  in   the   University  of Toronto Press's Literature of Canada reprint series    ($5.95),  is   an    anthology  of   critical articles gathered and   introduced by Carl  Ball­ stadt, and  covering the  pre-modern  century of literature in Canada, from  I 823 down to 1928.  Apart  from   a   first   section   on   "The  Early  Realism", the volume is presented thematically, and   one  senses  a  deliberate play  of  hindsight in   this  arrangement, since   many   of  the   sec­ tions  reflect   in  their   titles   and   their   contents the  kind  of  preoccupations that are  still  con­ cerning  those  who   debate  on   the   destination of Canadian culture and  Canadian literature. Indeed,  one   might  say   that  it   is  really   an anthology  of   literary  sociology rather  than of  criticism, for   it  does   not   contain  a  single study   of  an   individual  Canadian   writer.  All the   pieces    are   either   surveys,  dealing  with certain genres  in  a local  context, or discussions of  problems that  arise  when writers in  general encounter  the  culture as  a  whole.   Still,   it  is salutary to  be  reminded that  there is  nothing new  about our  anxieties:  section titles  like "Cultural  Economics and   Canadian  Philistin­ ism",  "The Debate on a  'National' Literature", and  "The Advantage of  Two  Cultures" might  be   used   for   selections  from   the   writings  of Canadian  critics   in   the   present   decade, and even  the  views which   in  these  sections we find expressed   by writers as  varied as  D'Arcy Mc­  Gee,  Sara Jeannette  Duncan,  Goldwin Smith and  Pelham Edgar  have  an  oddly  familiar ring  to those  who  have followed the  cultural debate over  the  past  decade. The   Search  for English­ Canadian   Literature   is  not   only   a   valuable documentation of cultural attitudes in early generations,  but   also,   in   a sense,   reassuring, since  it  shows  us  that the   forebodings of  cul­ tural prophets may not  always be well founded. For  it  seems  that we  have been  enduring for well  over  a  century the   troubles  which   nowa­ days   many   assure   us  will   spell   the  end   of  a distinctive Canadian  literature,  yet,  it  is  evi­ dent   for   all   who   view   the   record  with   any  degree   of  equanimity,  this  has  not   prevented the   appearance  of   an   increasingly  rich   and  varied   body  of   Canadian   writing. It  is  often  argued  that   the  arts   flourish  best  in  circum­ stances  of   political  chaos,  and    perhaps  this applies also  to  the  politics of culture. The arts  in  Canada  may  even   survive Gerard  Pelletier and  Hugh  Faulkner.

A.A. 	L.T.C.

g6
