$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
liTERATURE N°·28


Spring, 1966


POETS	P]IST	]IND PRESENT


Articles
BY GEORGE  WOODCOCK, PETER STEVENS, JEAN LEMOYNE

Translation
BY F. R. SCOTT

Chronicle
BY  NAIM  KATTAN

Reviews
BY GEORGE  JONAS, B. RAJ AN,  MARION  B. SMITH,
A. W.  PURDY, FRED COGSWELL, MARGARET  STOBIE, ANN SADDLEMYER, WILLIAM H.  NEW,  DESMOND PACEY, GEORGE  BOWERING,
IVAN  AVAKUMOVIC



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND  REVIEW








BIOGRAPHICAL FIRST FRUITS





As THE   FIRST  FRUITS  of  what   is pmbably  the mo.«t
massive literary  task ever attempted  in Canada, Volume I of the  Dictionary of
Canadian  Biography has  at  last  appeared  under  the imprint  of the  University of  Toronto   Press.  Under   the  General  Editorship  of  George  W.  Brown,  with Marcel Trudeau as his Associate, the years of preparation since 1959 have already assembled a uniquely monumental archive of Canadian biographical  information, and  the section of the Dictionary  which now appears is an earnest  that  the final work, when its eighteen or twenty volumes have brought it up to date somewhere in  the  197o's,  will be  a  fitting  monument   to  the late  James  Nicholson,  whose original  visionary  bequest  made  it  possible to start  work on  this project  so  im­ portant  to  Canadian historical  and  literary  scholars.
Inevitably,  the  editors  of the  Dictionary of Canadian Biography have  learnt from  the experience  and  the errors of their  predecessors who produced  the  Dic­ tionary  of National Biography in Britain  and  the Dictionary of American  Biog­ raphy, and  also that  pioneer in our own country which actually  bore the title of Dictionary of Canadian Biography when it appeared  in 1926 and  which, by an act of unusual  courtesy and  co-operation  among publishers, now appears as The Macmillan Dictionary of Canadian Biography, and still serves an  excellent pur­ pose as a concise basic reference  book.
The first volume of the new Dictionary of Canadian Biography' appears  under auspices which  emphasize  the  national  character  of the  project.  It  is published by the  presses of the  Universities of Toronto  and  Laval;  the original  Nicholson
•   Dictionary of Canadian  Biography, Volume I, 1000 A.D.- 1700  A.D. University of
Toronto Press. $15.00.

3

BIOGRAPHICAL FIRST FRUITS



bequest has been supplemented by grants from the Canada Council;  and the contributors   are  drawn  from  seven  Canadian  provinces,  as  well  as from  the United  States, Britain, France and Italy.
Wisely, the editors have avoided the problem of out-dating involved in a general alphabetical  arrangement  by giving a period frame  to each volume. The  present initial  volume thus includes the biographies of six hundred  people who played a significant  part  in  Canadian  history  during   the  centuries  from   rooo  to  1700
A.D. The  beginning date is important, since it represents a kind of final admission on  the  part  of  Canadian scholars  in  general of  the  claims  of  the  Norsemen; the  names  of  Bjarni  Herjolfsson  and  Lei£ Erickson  appear   as an  acknowledg­ ment-perhaps convenient in these days of bicultural controversy-that it was neither  Cabot  nor Cartier  who first penetrated  from  the European world to the land  that  later  became  known  as Canada. A  further  feature  which  will please those who like to remember  that  Canadian  history is not all French  and  English is the fact that 65 of the biographies, more than  ro%, are of Indians  who played an important part in the early days of Canadian history.
The   entries  are  usually sufficient,  and  often  substantial,   varying  from  brief
300-word  notes for a few very minor  figures, to biographical  essays like that  on Champlain, which  runs  to  well over  ro,ooo  words.  The   contributors   do  not merely inform;  they also take a critical stance towards their subjects and, in many cases, give useful evaluations  of past accounts  or of available  evidence on  con­ troversial  points.  In  addition  to  the  actual  entries, which  cover every  aspect of Canadian life during  these vital centuries of exploration  and tentative settlement, Volume  I of the biography contains  a whole series of useful  adjuncts, including background  essays on the Indians  of Canada, on voyages to  the North,  on early settlement  in  the  Atlantic  region  and  New France,  as well  as a very useful list of the Indian  tribes at the time of first contact  with  Europeans,  and an adequate general  bibliography.
In  other  words, Volume  I of the Dictionary  of Canadian  Biography must be saluted  as  a  thorough,  imaginative  and  wholly satisfying  beginning  to a  great scholarly  task  whose  unfolding  we  shall  watch  with  interest,   admiration and gratitude.








4



A GRAB	AT PROTEUS

Notes on Irving Layton


George Woodcock





MANYWRITERS  ARE  BEST read out of their own ,.ttrng.. This is so especially in Canada, where the literary world is small and inbred, and
where the self-dramatizing activities of authors are often  unnecessarily forced on one's  attention  by the  publicity  manoeuvres of publishers. To  strike the point of this essay, Irving  Layton  is a poet whom one reads at his best with delight, and at his worst with a puzzled wonder  that so good a poet could write and-even more astonishing-could publish such wretched verse; he is also a rather  boring showman,  and one wishes often that his public self could be shut off like television so that  one  might  have  the silence to listen for his real voice. The  only way to begin to appreciate  such a poet without distraction is to get away from his imme­ diate   presence -even   when  "immediate" means  three  thousand  miles  across Canada, to escape from  the antics of poetry readings and  the shadow  boxing of literary  feuds, and  to read  his poetry where nothing  else  reminds  one of his less attractive  masks.
It  was  by  chance  rather   than  deliberation  that  I  took  Layton's  Collected
Poems'  on a  journey which led me far from the stamping  grounds of the Cana­ dian  literati.  I  carried  the fat  little gilt-covered volume, with its  portrait  of the author  looking tough,  half  across Asia. I read  Layton in  the sweating  humidity of the Malabar  Coast, in the archaically English clubhouses of  tea planters in the Western Ghats,  and  among  Jesuit missionaries in the jungles of  the Wynad Hills, with the tribal  women howling outside like jackals as they danced  to the tapping of monkey-skin drums.  I  dipped  again,  reading  and  re-reading  the  poems that pleased me, in Delhi,  Isfahan,  Shiraz,  Byblos, Tyre, Sidon,  Baalbek,  Rome and in the final village in the South  Tirol where I at last settled  down to outline this
' Irving Layton, Collected Poems. McClelland & Stewart. $6.50.

5

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



essay. The  result was a revelation to me of the  extent  to which  involvement­ however  remote -in  an  author's  world can  limit one's  reactions;  my dislike of the  arrogance  with  which Layton  tries to bully  his  readers  into  acceptance  had provoked  a  resistance  which  I  only shed  when  I  was  able  to  perceive, away from  the  aura  of his public  personality, the  extent  and  character  of his private achievement  as a poet.
"To  have  written  even one  poem that  speaks  with  rhythmic  authority  about matters  that  are  enduringly  important  is something  to be immensely, reverently thankful  for-and  I am intoxicated  enough  to think  I have written  more than one."  So claims  Layton  in  the  Foreword  to  his Collected  Poems, and  for once he is modest.  After  my several readings,  I  made  a list of the  poems which still seemed to me complete and moving achievements;  there were thirty-five of them. The  whole  volume  contains  385  poems,  and   thus  one  poem  in  every eleven aroused  either  my  delight  or  my extreme  admiration; this left  Layton  with  a better  score  than most  of the  poets  now  writing in either  North  America  or Britain.
The  poems  which  have  been selected for  the  retrospective  collection  are, of course, those which  Layton  now, at the beginning  of his fifties, has decided  are worth  retaining; like all such volumes, it is a reckoning  with  time, a summation of  achievement,  a  placing before the  poet's  contemporaries -and,  by  implica­ tion, before posterity-of  the works by which he feels he should be remembered.  Many a shoddy piece of doggerel which astonished one in an earlier volume is left out;  many writers who were the subjects of personal attacks will feel half-relieved and  half-disappointed  that  Mr. Layton has chosen to withdraw  their certificates of vicarious immortality. The mass of poems which will please those who critically admire  Layton  as a poet forms an impressive achievement; many more than half the 385 pieces are sufficiently interesting and  craftsmanly  to be worth preserving, even if they are not among the thirty-odd first-rate poems. At the same time, there are still enough  in judiciously chosen fragments  to provoke  those Layton-baiters  whose comments  will in turn provoke the poet into delighted  reprisals. For all his flamboyance  of  manner,   Layton  is  capable  of  some  extraordinary lapses into mere triteness and  triviality:

To guard her virtue this woman
resorts
to needless stratagems and evasions.

6

A GRAB AT PROTEUS



She doesn't realize
her face is ample defence.

He  can  also perpetuate, with  a coy archness  that  seems out  of character, some of the  weakest  jokes that  can  ever have  been given the shape  of verse:

He lifted up the hem of her dress
but being intellectual
and something of a painter he quickly let it fall
again, saying
with an abruptness that dismayed her:
I never did care for Van Dycks.

It is, of  course,  something that  Layton  should  have  practiced a  modicum of self-criticism   by  making  a  selection  at  all,  but  his  editing   is  perfunctory and eccentric. He  is one  of  those  half-fortunate writers  who  have  a way  with  words and   phrases,   an  almost  fatal   ability  to  make  a  statement on  any  subject in  a heightened rhetorical manner, without necessarily producing more  than  a chunk of coloured   prose  chopped into  lines or  a doggerel  jingle;  when  he cannot write a poem  on  a theme  that  stirs his emotions,  he produces  one of these hybrid  verse compositions. With  the  curious  purblindness that  afflicts people  possessed of such facile  gifts,  he  seems  unable to  realize  that  his good  poems  are  something quite different from  his bad  verse, and  defends  both  with equal  vigour.
By a  convincing exhibition of his ferocity  as a ring-tailed roarer in  the  little
zoo of Canadian letters,  Layton  has in fact  successfully embarrassed most of the critics  into  a  kind  of  numbed evasiveness.  In  the seven  years since  I have  been editing  Canadian  Literature, while two or three  reviewers have  made brief forays with   bows-and-arrows  into   the  fringes  of  Layton   territory, no  critic  has  sub­ mitted   a  complete and  satisfactory study  of  Layton  as poet,  mainly  because  no critic  has so far  relished  the  task of considering a body  of work  by a  notoriously irascible  writer   which   varies  so remarkably from  the  atrocious   to  the  excellent, and   which  shows  a  failure of self-evaluation as monstrous as that  displayed   by D.  H.  Lawrence, who  in  so  many  ways  resembled, anticipated  and  influenced

7

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



Layton. To  grasp  Layton  is rather  like trying  to grasp  Proteus. But Proteus  was grasped, and  so must  Layton  be, for  behind  the  many  disguises an exceptionally fine  poet  lurks  in  hiding.




To BEGIN,  one  has  to  re-unite the  poet  and   the  public  figure whom  I  found   myself dividing  from  each  other  in  my oriental journey  through
Layton's Collected  Poems. When  a writer so undoubtedly good in his better mani­ festations as  Layton   takes a  certain  view of  himself,  and  develops  a life style in accordance with  it, one ignores  the fact  in the  last  analysis  at  peril to one's  criti­ cism's  completeness. "It's  all in  the  manner," as Layton says:

Manner  redeemeth everything:
redeemeth
man, sets him among,
over, the other worms, puts
a crown on him, yes, the size of a mountain  lake,
dazzling 	more dazzling!
than a slice of sun

From   the  beginning,   Layton   shows  a  romantic absorption with  the  poet  as personality as well as with  the  poetry  he produces. He  sees himself  as the vehicle of the  divine frenzy  of inspiration.

I wait
for the good lines
to come ...

When the gods begin
to batter me I shall howl like a taken virgin.

And  the writing  of poetry involves for him not only a kind  of inspirational posses­ sion,  but  also other  elements  of the magical vocation of the shaman; particularly joy and  power:

8

A GRAB AT PROTEUS



And me happiest when I compose poems. Love, power, the huzza of battle
are something, are much;
yet a poem includes them like a pool water and reflection.

Possession,  indeed, gives  the  poet  a  special,  privileged  status; he  is different from  other  men,  and  his  powers  bring  responsibilities  that  go  beyond  the  mere production  of  good   poems.  He  is  the  prophet, the  philosopher, the  leader   of thought,  and   Shelley's   unacknowledged  legislators  of  the  world   are  never  far from  one's  mind   when  one  reads  Layton  talking  in  this vein,  as he  does in  the Foreword to the Collected Poems. The  poet, he tells us, has a "prophetic vocation to lead  his fellow  men  towards sanity  and  light." But it is precisely this vocation which   turns  the  poet  into  the  misunderstood and  persecuted   rebel-martyr with whom  Layton  identifies  himself.

A poet is someone who has a strong sense of self and feels his life to be mean­ ingful.  By insisting on  that  self and  refusing to become the socialized  article  that bureaucrats,   priests,  rabbis  and  so-called educators  approve  of, the  poet  offends the brainwashed  millions who are the majority in any country. His words, his free manner  of living, are  a constant  irritation  to the  repressed, the  fearful,  the self­ satisfied,  and  the  incurious.  His  refusing  to  wear  the  hand-me-down clothes of outworn  philosophies and  creeds;  his resolve to see the world afresh and  to see it from  his own  personal  angle;  his wry,  unsleeping  awareness  of  the  ambiguities, the dark subtleties that  plague the human soul; these will always make him suspect to the conformist  taxpayer  and  his pitchmen  in the universities and  the churches.

I applaud Layton's desire  to flout  conformity and  attack  its supporters, and  if this  were  all  I would  gladly  stand   shouting beside  him.  But  I cannot see  any necessary  connection between  rebellion  of this kind  and  the vocation of the  poet. That vocation, surely, is no more  than  to write poetry, and  a good  poet can even stand   for  insanity and   darkness, as  Yeats  sometimes  did,  can  even  retreat into the  darkness   of  literal   insanity, and  still  continue his  vocation. The social  and moral  rebel  is something different, though  the  two may  be and  often  are  united. Layton takes it for  granted that  they  must be united; this, to be necessarily para­ doxical,  is the classic romantic stance, and  Layton, in upholding it, is a traditional wild  man   according to  conventions laid  down  early  in  the  nineteenth  century. His essential  neo-romanticism crops up in many  other  ways: in his "anti-literary" stance  when  his  poems  are  as crammed with  literary  and  classical  tags and  allu­ sions as the  prose of any  despised  man-of-letters; in his "anti-academic" attitude

9

A GRAB AT  PROTEUS



when,  unlike many  of his fellow writers in  Canada, he is a university graduate who -as  his  poems  about  lectures  and  students  show -has  been lurking  for years in  the  underbrush  of  the  academic  groves. It  manifests  itself also in  the archaic  images  and  phrases which  embellish  even  Layton's  most  recent  poems with an undeniable  tinge of antique  poeticism. In the final pages of the Collected Poems one finds him talking of
The shadowy swaying of trees
Like graceful nuns in a forbidden dance;
The yearning stillness of an ended night ... ;
telling us of his meeting with a faun  (predictably conceived to point up the evils of a conformist  world) ; and  ending  the volume  with  lines that  are heavy with nostalgic echoes from the past of English romanticism:
Meanwhile the green snake crept upon the sky
Huge, his mailed coat glittering with stars that made
The  night bright, and blowing thin wreaths of cloud
Athwart  the moon; and as the weary man
Stood up, coiled above his head, transforming all.
There  is, of  course, nothing  intrinsically  wrong  in  using again  the  phrases and images  I  have italicized;  they belong to the accumulated stock-in-trade  of poets in the same way as Shakespeare and Sheridan  belong to the accumulated stock-in­ trade  of actors, and the way they are used is what  matters most. But the fact that Layton  not only acts but often writes as a latter-day romantic becomes important when  we grapple  with the relation  between  the two levels of  his poetic activity.
The  concept of the romantic poet provides, to begin, a justification for Layton's
Saint Sebastian  attitude.  In fact, it is nothing more than  a logical extension of the illogical idea  of  the  poet as prophet;  if the  poet is really inspired,  if it is really the gods  (whatever  they represent)   who make  him  howl, then  he is one of the chosen, against  whom criticism or even competition  is not merely an act of  pre­ sumption  but  also something very near to religious persecution. Such an attitude  cannot  simply  be  waved  away.  Layton  is talking  with  conviction  and  passion when  he says that  if the poet "offers  his hand  in friendship  and  love,  he must expect someone will try to chop it off at the shoulder." He feels his isolation as a poet  and  a  man  deeply, so deeply  that  it  has inspired  not  only  such  malicious attacks  on his fellow poets as figure in the "Prologue to the Long  Pea-Shooter"
2   "But if you have the gifts of Reaney/ You may help your verse by being zany,/ Or write as bleakly at a pinch/  As Livesay, Smith, and  Robert  Finch;/ And be ad­ mired for a brand-new pot/ If you're as empty as Marriott;/ I'll say nothing about
Dudek:/ The rhyme's too easy-speck or wreck ..."

10

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



but  also such  a powerful vision of the fate of the rebel in the world  of conformity as  "The Cage". More  than  that,  this feeling plays its  ultimate part  in  the  com­ passionate   self-identification  with   the   destroyed   innocents  of  the   animal  and human worlds  which  inspires  those of his poems  that  touch  nearest  to greatness  and  which  pleads  pardon for his arrogance towards  his peers.
But  there  is another side  to the idea  of poetic inspiration. If it is blasphemous for others  to criticize  what  the  poet has written  in the fine fury of possession, may it not  also be an  act of hubris for the  poet himself to reject  or diminish the godly gift?  The  whole  vision of the  poet  as prophet denies not only  the function of the critic; more  seriously,  it  deprives  the  poet  of the self-critical faculty which  in all artistic  activity  is the  necessary  and  natural balance  to the irrational forces of the creative  impulse. Once a  poet sees himself as a vehicle for  anything outside  him, whether he  calls it God  or the  Muse or Truth or, in  Layton's words,  "sanity  and light", he  abdicates the  power  of  rational choice,  and  it  is only  logical  that  he should  cease to discriminate between  his best and  his worst  works, that  he should seriously  publish, in  the  same  retrospective collection,  a poem  like The  Predator, where  pity and  anger  magnificently coalesce in the final verses:

Ghost of small fox,
hear me, if you're hovering close
and watching  this slow red trickle of your blood:

Man sets even
more terrible traps for his own kind.
Be at peace; your gnawed leg will be well-revenged ...

and  a  joking  jingle, like  Diversion, of a kind  which  any  versifier  might  whip  up at two for a dollar.

Whenever  I'm  angry with her
or hold up my hand to slap or hit,
my darling  recites some lines I've writ.

The  crafty puss! She thinks that she diverts my anger by vanity,
when it's her heaving breasts that does it.

If the  lines she  recites are  anything like these, the breasts  of Mr.  Layton's darling must put on a very spectacular exhibition !


II

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



BuT NOTHING IS  so SIMPLE where  Proteus  is involved. The problem  of Layton's  switchback career as a poet, which makes one's reactions to his Collected  Poems  take the form of a wildly dipping  and climbing seismograph,
cannot  be solved merely by suggesting that  he is deliberately  unselective or incap­ able  of selection. That  might  be argued  for  a  poet  whose successes,  when  they came, were obviously the product  of deep irrational urges which  rarely and  un­ expectedly broke into the dull cycle of an undistinguished existence and produced a masterpiece that  astonished its creator;  there have, very occasionally, been such writers, but Layton is not one of them. On the contrary, on reading the Collected Poems, one is left with the impression of having been in the company of a trained and  versatile craftsman  liable to sudden fits of  contempt for his public, in which he tries to palm off on them fragments of worn-out fustian instead of lengths of silk.
Perhaps  the matter  can be made clearer by bringing in an illustration  from an­
other field of art,  and comparing Layton with Picasso. There  is a verse at the end of his poem,  "Joseph  K",  which suggests that  he will not  find  the  comparison
offensive.
Then let him rise like a hawk. Fiercely. 	A blazing chorus
Be, or like a painting by Picasso
Drawing energy from its own contours.

Picasso,  to  my  mind,  connotes enormous  energy,  and  a  flexible  craftsmanship which  has enabled  him to paint  and draw  in many  styles, and  to select and  use ruthlessly from past forms of art anything that might suit his purposes. No modern painter  has spread such magnificent confusion, by the display of his talents, among those academic  critics who originally damned  the post-impressionists with the argument  that  they knew neither  how to draw  nor to paint. At the same time, as the  collection  of second-line  material  enshrined  in  the  museum  at  Antibes  has shown,  Picasso's very energy has led him to produce  a great  many  minor works which  a  more  fastidious artist  would  have  discarded  or  kept  as mere exercises. Finally, there has always been a touch of the clown about  Picasso, as became very evident  in  at  least one of the films in which  he  performed  as the impresario  of his own  art.  He  enjoys mystifying his more  naive  admirers,  and  many  of his works  must  be  regarded  as mere  jeux  d'esprit  carried  out  to amuse  himself or fox his public.  But it would  be foolish to assume that  because of this Picasso is nothing  more than  a mountebank.
In  one sense at least Irving  Layton cannot  be compared  with  Picasso. Picasso


12

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



was the  moving  spirit  in  a  trend  that  revolutionized our  views of art,  and  it is hard  now  to  imagine  what  painting  would  have  been like anywhere  in  the world if he had  not lived. So far there is no evidence of any real revolution  that Layton had led in poetry; his work at its best has its own originality, but it breaks into no really new territory,  and his followers among the younger Canadian poets have  so far  shown  neither  the  vigour nor  the  talents  of  their  master.  In  other respects,  however,  the  resemblances  between  Layton  and  Picasso are  striking. Layton, too, is an artist of great energy-in terms of quantity  alone a formidable producer. And,  like Picasso, he combines the ability to work in a variety of styles and  to borrow  freely from  the past with  a craftsmanship  which  at its best is so good  that  one  cannot   possibly attribute  his worst  productions  to  the  mere  in­ ability  to do  better.  A different  explanation  has to be found.
Let us hold  the comparison  at this point for the moment  so as to consider the versatility which, from the earliest examples published in the Collected Poems, characterizes  Layton's  art. He is adept at the lyrically descriptive vignette:

The afternoon foreclosing, see
The swimmer plunges from  his raft,
Opening the spray corollas by his act of  war­ The snake  heads strike
Quickly  and  are silent.

He can make a compassionate statement in well-turned verse of almost Marvellian grace  and  graciousness,  as in  "Mrs.  Fornheim,  Refugee",  his small  elegy for  a former  language  student  who died of cancer.

I taught you Shakespeare's tongue, not knowing
The time and  manner of your going; Certainly if with ghosts to dwell, German would  have served as well. Voyaging lady, I wish for you
An Englishwoman to talk to,
An unruffled  listener,
And green  words to say to her.

He  presents, on occasion, mordant  examples of epigrammatic wit, quite different from the snickering jokes of some of his later poems; "Lady Enfield", for example:

Be reckless in your loving, Her grace  makes no one poor For  only  bullets  issue
From  such  an iron whore.

13

A GRAB AT  PROTEUS



And  he shows a fine adeptness  in that  admirable practice game of the young poet, the  parody.

Although I have written of venery
(and of men's hates, too, my masters!)
and of the sun, the best thing in the cosmos, for it warms my bones
now I am old and no woman will lie with me
seeing how wrinkled
my hams are, and my bones decrepit ...

In   this  early  Layton   the  craftsmanship is  usually  careful   and  deliberate: at times, even,  almost  excessively precise and  mannered:

The  passive motion of sand
Is fluid geometry.   Fir needles
Are the cool, select thoughts
Of madmen;  and
Like a beggar the wind wheedles
Pine cones from the pines.

Here  Layton appears as a young  man  trying  very hard  and  often  very success­ fully  to  write  well  in  an  idiom  derived  largely  from  the  English  Twenties and Thirties. Later, as he turned  away from  this source  of influence and began  to feel his  place  within   an  American rather   than   a  British  tradition  (in  so far  as  his militant individualism allowed  him  to feel  part  of  any  tradition), he  expressed his  dislike  of  Auden and  presented   Eliot  as something  of  an  anti-poet ("a zeal for  poetry  without zest,/   without marrow   juices;/ at  best,  a  single  hair j from the  beard  of Dostoevsky") . But, though  there  are obvious  temperamental reasons why  he should  in  the  long  run  have  reacted  against both  Auden  and  Eliot,  the lingering-if  diminishing -echoes  of  their  styles which  sound  throughout the Collected  Poems  make  it  clear  that  Layton,  whose  eclecticism  is-though  he might  resent  the  suggestion-one of his  virtues as a  writer, learnt  all he could from  them  before  he rejected  them.  Without such  predecessors,  he would  hardly  have  written lines like these:

Your face
tilts towards the gay edifice through  whose casements birds might go in and out;

A GRAB AT  PROTEUS



and your elbow is,
to be sure,
a gesture that makes known your will-yet hardly more;
the flexures of your breast and skirt turn  like an appetite also there.

Evident from  the beginning, among  the experimental styles and  often  borrowed manners of  the  earlier   poems,  is an  unfailing   vitality  and  inventiveness. When Layton  forgets  to argue,  when  he lets his fancy  go, and  then  holds it to its course with  the  reins of careful  technique, we get his best work.  It can  be as luminously coloured  and  dreamlike as a painting by Chagall.

To the movement then of dark and light
A Byzantine angel slid down from the smoky wall Hovering over me with his wings outstretched - But I saw the shape where the flat tiles were not­ Before I could make a salt out of my astonishment There  was a meadow of surf in the bay at my elbow And while the hungry robins picked at the air
White blossoms fell on their sad faces
Held in a frame of grass and ground for sentimental  poets
Who weep when they are told of such things.

And  at  another time  it  can  combine  those  two strong  Laytonian elements,  the pastoral and   the  apocalyptic, in  a  vision  of  the  natural world  as  concentrated and  intense  as "Halos at  Lac  Marie  Louise".

Presently I heard a stir
Of flying crows that came
And spread themselves against the sky
Like a black plume.

One like a detached  feather, Falling westward, stranded
On the topmost prong of a tree.
The  tree was dead.

It was a white skeleton
Of a tree ominously gnarled; And around  the singular crow
The stark crows whirled.

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



The heaven split, the dark rain
Fell on the circling hills;
The thick gouts dropped beside the oars
Like melting skulls.

The boat fell with the waves
Into a still opening;
The halo of green hills became
A black pronged ring.

With  the growing assurance of Layton's later  phases comes a limbering of the rather  stiff rhythms which mar some of the earlier  poems, and this change is one of the liberating  elements in his more interesting  works, in the sparkling fluency of that  extraordinary erotic fantasia,  "The  Day Aviva Came  to Paris",  and, on a completely different level, in the questioning sombreness of "Fornalutx", a ballad of disappointment with a Spanish town.

Who thought of the heat-stained cobblestones? The damned who shuffled on the street?
And cheeks made pallid by a vile sun, And rotting matter under one's feet.

Even in "Fornalutx" one sees, at least to a degree, the  negative aspect of the greater  assurance with which Layton has written  as the years have gone by. The verse is inclined  to be loose rather  than  limber,  careless rather  than  carefree. A little  more  work, one feels, and  it could have  been  a much  more concentrated and  more effective poem. But "Fornalutx" has still, within  its limitations, some­ thing  to say. Many  of the other  poems which Layton  has written  in  recent years are not merely slipshod; they are also pointless -superficial versicles, empty jests, malicious,  misfiring  jibes. Layton  recently expressed his annoyance with  a critic who had  accused him of favouring  "a  loose, slapdash  style of  writing".  Perhaps he does not deliberately  favour such a style, but  he undoubtedly uses it on occa­ sion. How  else can one describe some of the  bad  poems I have already quoted?
Here  one  returns  to  the  central  comparison  with  Picasso. If we dismiss the Philistine explanations,  that  the  poet cannot  write  any better,  or does not know the  difference  between  good  and  bad  writing,  how  are  we to explain  the  fact that  Layton  persists in publishing verses which he knows the critics will condemn, and  often condemn  with  justification? As in  the case of Picasso, I think  the ex­ planation  is to be found in the relationship between Peter and Petrushka, between the  poet-prophet   and  the  romantic  clown. In  a  fine  poem  which  greatly  illu-

A GRAB AT PROTEUS



minates  his  attitude  towards his  own  role,  he  begins  with  the  title  statement, "Whatever else poetry  is freedom", and,  having  thus taken  license, presents him­ self as the  clown  of such  freedom.
. . . And now I balance on wooden stilts and dance
And thereby sing to the loftiest casements. See how with polish I bow from the waist. Space for these stilts! More space or I fail!
And a crown I say for my buffoon's head ... And I know myself undone who am a clown
And wear a wreath of mist for a crown ...




bE ROMANTIC IDEA  OF  POETRY as "freedom" suggests that  the poet  should  be liberated from  any  limits  his own  conscious  craftsmanship or the requirements of the critics may impose  (thus bringing  us back in a disguised circle to  the  idea  of  the  poet  as  the  vehicle  of an  inspiration which  it is blasphemous to  criticize)   and  it  establishes  the  reign  of Saturn in  which  the  respectable, the acknowledged, the  established shall  all  be  brought   down,  and  all standards of behaviour (poetic in  this case)  shall be disregarded. The  clown  becomes  the king in  this Saturnalia; there  is a curious  fantasy  poem in which  Layton  imagines  two poets entering Toronto at  the end of a Christmas parade and  thinking the cheers and  the  civic welcome  are  for  them.
But the acclaiming thunders
Were all for a clown ...

It is  unnecessary to  identify the  clown-hero; Layton  does  it  in  those  poems  in which  he deliberately exaggerates what  he imagines  other  people  say or  think  of him,  and  in  the  process  presents  the  figure  of  the  traditional comic  ugly  man.

Who is this butcher,  you ask, with his nose
broken and twisted like a boxer's?

Look, you exclaim, at the mat of hair that covers his neck and his heavy gait
like that of a startled bruin's (sic)  ...

I7

A GRAB AT  PROTEUS



In  romantic   tradition  the  clown represents  rebellion  against  human  CQnven­ tions;  he suffers from  his fellows, but  he has  also the  privilege of  flouting  and playing  tricks on  them, and  it is under  this mask that  Layton  presents those of his poems which,  according to any recognizable  criterion  of  quality  must be re­ jected, but  which  he demands should be heard  in  the name of the poet's sacred freedom.
The  figure of the clown is related to two other of Layton's  personae, the lover and  the misanthrope. Layton's erotic poems -which do not compose so large a proportion  of his work as he and his detractors  have conspired to mae
-must be  taken  seriously, but  not  solemnly. For  Layton  sex is a  matter  of comedy, of  joy and  zest and  sometimes of laughter  as loud  as that  of Apuleius or  Rabelais.  He  recognizes the  paradox  of its glory and  its absurdity,  that  the gods have so made  man

... that when he sighs
In ecstacy between a woman's thighs
He goes up and down, a bicycle pump ...

Today  it  is our  older, or  at  least our  middle-aged  poets who in  Canada  write best about sex -Layton, Purdy, Birney. They lack the lugubrious solemnity with which  the  younger  writers cloddishly trample  with  rough  cries in  the obsessive dance of Venus.
This is not to say that Layton's erotic poems-any more than  his other works
-are uniformly successful. Some are shockers, though  Layton has much less of a predilection  for four-letter  words than  his legend suggests; some are boastful ...

Hell, my back's sunburnt from so much love-making in the open air.
But others, like "Song for a Late Hour", have a marvellous singing lyricism: No one told me
to beware your bracelets, the winds I could expect from your small breasts. No one told me
the tumult of your hair.
When a lock touched me
I knew the sensations
of shattering glass.

18

A GRAB  AT  PROTEUS



And  some  of the  best  are  those in which  the eroticism  is not  obvious,  but  which in  tender  sadness  explore  the  complexity  of human relationships that  spring  from the  early  raptures of love.  "Berry  Picking" is a  particularly good  example. The poet  watches  his  wife  picking  berries,  and  reflects on  the  changes  marriage has brought in her  attitude; now he can only "vex and  perplex" her.

So I envy the berries she puts in her mouth,
The red and succulent juice that stains her lips; I shall never taste that good to her, nor will they Displease her with a thousand barbarous  jests.

Now they lie easily for her to take,
Part of the unoffending world that is hers; Here beyond complexity she stands and stares And leans her marvellous head as if for answers.

No more the easy soul my childish craft deceives Nor the simpler one for whom yes is always yes; No, now her voice comes to me from a far way off Though  her lips are redder than the raspberries.

In  poems  like  this  the  comic  view of  sex is suffused  with  darkness,  and  the mood  merges into  the tragic  view which  Layton, clown and  prophet alike, takes of Man, the  creature whose own  flaws destroy  him. Here  moralist  and  misanthrope come  together  in  Layton  as they did in Swift;  the suffering poet,  victim  and  thus exemplar of human perfidy,  joins them.  Beginning  with  the  old  radical ideals of brotherhood and,  to  use  his  own  words,  "sanity and  love",  Layton   suffers  the radical's disillusionment. Man, as he is now, has damned himself by his rejection of life. The  poet,  who  still stands  for life, must  retreat  into  solitude.

Enter  this tragic forest where the trees
Uprear as if for the graves of men, All function  and desire to offend With themselves finally done;
And mark the dark pines farther on,
The sun's fires touching them at will, Motionless like silent khans Mourning serene and terrible
Their  Lord entombed in the blazing hill.

At its height, as in "The  Improved Binoculars", Layton's rejection  of humanity in  his time and  world  reaches  the level of apocalyptic vision, where  he sees a city

19

A GRAB AT PROTEUS



m  flames  and  all  its inhabitants seeking  not  merely  to save  themselves  but  also to profit  from  the delightful fact  that  their fellows are suffering.

And the rest of the populace, their mouths distorted by an unusual gladness, bawled thanks to this comely and ravaging ally, asking

Only for more light with which to see their neighbour's destruction.

In  this  world  of apocalypse,  the  poet  appears as victim, slaughtered by the well­ bred  and  cultured killer in  a scene of Kafkaesque politeness  and  malice  ("The Executioner") .
Here   he  becomes  identified   with  all  those  victims  of  man, and   particularly those innocents of the animal world, for whom  his compassion issues in a series of remarkable poems,  "The Bull Calf"; "Cat Dying  in  Autumn", "The Predator". To  my  mind,  "The Bull Calf" is not only  one  of Layton's best poems;  it is also one  of  the  most  moving  poems  of our  generation. The calf,  only  just  born,  yet shapely,  full  of pride  and  "the promise  of sovereignty", must  be slaughtered  be­ cause,  as the farmer says, there  is "No  money  in  bull calves". A clergyman sighs, and  the murder follows.

Struck,
the bull calf drew in his thin forelegs
as if gathering strength for a mad rush ... tottered ... raised his darkening  eyes to us, and I saw we were at the far end
of his frightened  look, growing smaller and smaller
till we were only the ponderous mallet that flicked his bleeding ear
and pushed him over on his side, stiffly, like a block of wood.

Below the hill's crest
the river snuffled on the improvised beach.
We dug a deep pit and threw the dead calf into it.
It made a wet sound, a sepulchral gurgle, as the warm sides bulged and flattened. Settled, the bull calf lay as if asleep,
one foreleg over the other,
bereft of pride and so beautiful  now,
without movement, perfectly still in the cool pit, I turned  away and wept.


20

A GRAB AT PROTEUS



It is not only the animal  world in its suffering that Layton celebrates with such eloquent  compassion.  He dedicates it also to those men and women who in some way show, in misfortune,  qualities of dignity and feeling that  place them outside the herd of hostile humanity: to the idiot who shames him by showing a pitiful understanding of  a  dog's  suffering  ("The Imbecile")  ; to  an  old  crippled  man defying his fate  as "Death's frail, quixotic antagonist"  ("Ballad  of the Old Spaniard"); and,  in  one  of his most complexly haunting poems  ("Das  Wahre lch"), as a Jew  to a woman  who was once a Nazi.

The terrible stillness holds us both and  stops our  breath
while  I wonder, a thrill stabbing into my mind:
"At  this moment, does she see my crumpled form  against the wall,
blood on my still compassionate eyes and  mouth?"

In  fine,  Layton  is a  poet  in  the  old  romantic  sense, a  Dichter,  flamboyant, rowdy, angry,  tortured, tender,  versatile, voluble, ready for  the occasion as well as the inspiration, keeping  his hand  constantly in, and  mingling  personal  griefs and  joys with the themes and visions of human  destiny. Lately a somewhat nega­ tive element  seems to have entered his poems; he is conscious of time  beginning to sap  the sources  of life, he adjusts  reluctantly  to  his own  aging, he  dwells on the  unhappier aspects of sex, suspicious of the  infidelity of women,  of  the  un­ trustworthiness  of friends. He is obviously at a point of transition, but his vigour will carry  him  over  this  and  other  weirs. Whatever  happens,  we shall  have  to take Layton  as he comes and  wishes, the good and the bad  together;  but that  is better  than  not  having  him  at all. For my last feeling, after  journeying through Asia with  Layton  in  the form  of his Collected  Poems, was  that  of having  been in the disturbing  company  of one of the men of my  generation  who will not be forgotten.














21



IN  THE  RAW

The Poetry of A. W. Purdy


Peter Stevens






La POETJUES  ru-e  now competing, a  cooked and  a mw.... There  is poetry that can only be studied, and a poetry that can only be declaimed, a  poetry  of  pedantry,  and  a  poetry of scandal." So said  Robert  Lowell of the state of American  poetry in 1960  and these remarks  might also apply to the state of Canadian poetry, except that sometimes the raw poets become too involved in dogma and theory, justifying their poetic outbursts  ("the raw, huge blood-dripping gobbets  of unseasoned experience"  as Lowell puts it)  by sweeping critical  judg­ ments and discursive accounts of the ways in which they control their spantaneity,  implying  that  their  kind of spontaneity  is the only and  best way to write poetry. It is as if they want  to show us that  their raw poetry is really cooked as well; in fact,  all we get is often half-baked  poetry.
One  of the  best of our  raw  poets is Alfred  Purdy,  and  he, at least, does not justify his poetry in long articles. There is a fresh no-nonsense approach  to poetry in most of what  Purdy  has written  recently and  his latest volume, The  C ariboo Horses, is one of the best collections of Canadian poetry for some time. It is the result  of  a  long  struggle  on  Purdy's  part  to  hammer  out  for  himself a  poetic idiom, which is used in his latest volume with telling effect.
It has not always been so. There  has been steady development  in Purdy's work over the last ten years, and  now is the time to assess it. His career falls into three main  stages:  a beginning  and  exploratory  stage  (Pressed  on Sand,  1955,  Emu, Remember, 1957, The  Crafte So Long To  Lerne,  1959-I shall deal only with the first and last volumes to show the beginning and  early tentative stages of the exploration), a central  poetic upheaval still retaining  some unresolved uncertain­ ties (Poems  for all The  Annettes, 1962 and The  Blur In Between, 1962), and the emergence of a truly individual  poet (The  Cariboo Horses,I 965) . I realize there is a very early volume The  Enchanted  Echo, published in 1944, but I have been

22

IN  THE RAW



unable  to trace  a copy. In  any case, I believe the poet wishes this volume to re­
main forgotten.
Pressed on Sand  was published  in 1955. At first reading  there  does not seem much  connection  between  the  poet of this volume and  the poet in 1965. This is particularly  true of the technique; most of the poems are written in fairly regular stanzas  with  rhyme or half-rhyme.  The  themes in this volume, however, are the ones  Purdy  develops  throughout his career  and  so it is particularly  relevant  to study some of the  poems in order  to see how Purdy has developed  his methods over the years in dealing with his basic themes.
The  title  poem  is concerned  with  the  transitory  nature  of human  life. Indi­
vidual  man  may  be temporary,  but  the past may give some permanence.  Man has  a  place,  however  small,  in  the  universe and  he must  try  to see himself in relation  to the  past. But as the poet remarks in "Chiaroscuro", the past does not seem very relevant  to life:  "the  past is a dark  country of statues".  Art  and  the artist  try to grasp meaning,  and  we see Purdy wrestling in many poems with the problems of his own art of poetry:  "it becomes a bright danger/To search among the statues." An attempt  must be made  but it is painful  and  very often doomed to failure:

And words are trapped like odd, dead animals
Where dusty villages stand

The  theme of permanence  and art's relation to it, then, is a main  theme in this volume,  and  it  is a  theme  Purdy  returns  to time and  again  in  his poetry. He places it against  love, "Lovers in the Park",  and  this becomes an increasing pre­ occupation  with him. There  is a constant  reference to older civilization and  par­ ticularly their faded glories; for instance, the Indian civilization in "Onomatopoeic People". This theme enables Purdy to indulge his romantic nature, in such poems as "Far  Traveller" and "Mary The Allan", but there is evidence in this last poem that  he is going to set this romanticism  against the realism of the modern  world. He  will set  the  "giant   axmen  in  scarlet  cloaks" against  "the  scientific  men in smoky hotel rooms."
It  is the  balancing  of these opposing forces of romanticism  and  realism that governs Purdy's  development  as a poet. In  the early volumes the emphasis is on the  romantic; from  Poems  for all the  Annettes  Purdy  the realist tends to be to the fore. There  is a  just equilibrium  in The  Cariboo Horses.
In  Pressed on Sand  Purdy  was obviously aware that  traditional metres would swamp him, would commit him, perhaps, too whole-heartedly to a romantic view,

IN  THE RAW



so that,  although many of the poems are written in regular  metre  and stanza, they tend  to break  down.  Exact  rhyme gives way to half-rhyme and  even when  rhyme is used,  its unifying  force is pushed  aside  by en jambement ("Seasonal Malady", "Barriers"). This  conflict gives a rather artificial air to some of the poems which, in fact,  emphasizes  the contrast  between  romanticism and  realism.
There is some  imagery  from  this  period,  particularly that  of the stars,  the sun and  moon,  which  remains  a  part  of Purdy's poetic  equipment. Some  individual phrases  are  reminiscent of Dylan  Thomas (this  kind  of thing  is to turn  up again in The Cariboo  Horses) : "weed-forged letter," "no  men in the tide-walking town of time", "the cupped  pooled  reservoir  of their  blood", "that spend/Gusto like a miser's  purse", "boomerang-sure in the dusk/Of our  fate," "all  the delicate, shin­ ing, dark-vowelled designations."
One   poem  in  Pressed On  Sand, "Meander", is highly  personal and  discusses Purdy's ideas  about   what   he  would  like  to  do  in  his  poetry.  "Meander"  uses rhyme,  but  the  movement of  the  poem  is more  colloquial than  that  of most  of the  poems  in  the  book. The  poet  suggests  he  wants  to write  about  small  things truthfully to show their importance ("The minutiae and  trivia  that  people think/ So unimportant") and  he gives us a portrait of the artist  as

a dirty, unkempt, old man, Creating a drunken row
For no good reason, and chuckling now
And then beneath a greasy coat of tan.


HE GIVES  us  another poetic  manifesto, "Villanelle (plus
1 ) ", in  The Crafte  So  Long  To  Lerne. It is a statement about  being  a  realist;
the  traditional form  is broken  down,  again  emphasizing Purdy's fight  to  break away  from  the  constraints of tradition and  accepted modes.  However, the  poem is spoilt  by  the  apparent contradiction between   theory  and  practice. The poem
begins:

Embrace, my verse, the language of the age

but  continues with  words which  do not  really fit in with  the sentiment expressed in  the  opening line:

Coeval sewers of speech that make a poem
Live argot for the vermifuge of rage.

IN  THE  RAW



The  same  problem  of  balancing  romanticism  and  realism  runs  through  this volume, but  I think  it is more fully realized here and  sometimes tempered  by a note of humour  which is to become more important  later in Purdy's development. We find  romanticism  versus realism and  some humour  in  "On  The  Decipher­ ment  of Linear  B" and  "Olympic  Room  (Toronto  Hotel)" and  humour  on its own in "Canadian New Year  Resolutions".
But the problems are still there. Some poeins are too romantic  and become somewhat  obscure:

Outside, the slow rain
Which I transmute
Variously, open with its blade
Correlatives, equivalents, vaults....

There  is an  admirable conciseness and  directness in some of the poems  ("From the  Chin  P'ing  Mei")  and  some excruciating  puns:  "Oedi-puss", "any  whore­ weary  Ulysses", "men  or  pause".  The  poems about  love seem to come off best, particularly  "Where The  Moment  Is", for here the poet equates love in  a sense with one side of his poetic temperament:

Your climate is the mood
Of living, the hinge of now,
In time the present tense.

This volume, then,  repeats some of Purdy's concerns but it is still in general writ­ ten  in  regular  forms  with  some  rhyme.  The  discrepancy  between  theme  and manner  is probably  best illustrated  by the poem, "Short  History of  X  County". In one sense, this is a poem similar to later Purdy poems, a laconic narrative  full of realistic detail,  but  here it is fatally flawed  by a failure  of  language  because it is governed  too rigidly by rhyme and structure.  It contains some puns  ("men  or pause", "pollen  and  polling")  and suddenly there is an archaic word, "yclept". It is not used for shock effect but for the sake of rhyme, but I wonder why Purdy felt the necessity for rhyme here. "Yclept" is on the fifth line of the stanza  and it rhymes with  the second  line.  Here  are the other second  and  fifth line endings:  Iniddle-puddle,   To ron to-long,  there-air,  land-that,  g6-fixed,  agreeably-flees, guilty-!. This shows, I think, the intrinsic disadvantage of the method for a poet like Purdy  and  he obviously felt dissatisfied himself, for his next volume, Poems For All The  Annettes  ( 1962)  shows a major break with the method, even though the themes remain  basically the same.
Love is a  dominant theme  in  this collection and  it is very often  linked  with


25

IN  THE RAW



poetry. Love is temporary,  just as other experiences in life are. Can  poetry fix it or any other experience? As Phyllis Webb pointed out in a review, the poem, "Archaelogy   of  Snow",  "appears  on  first  reading   an  incredibly  clumsy, even redundant, work. Closer study produced  my present opinion  that it is the central poem in the collection." Purdy is not yet in full control of his method  and some of the poems are indeed redundant and clumsy. "Poem  for One of the Annettes" makes its point in spite of, not because of its technique.  The  poem is a clutter of fragments  not fully realized. The lining is generally arbitrary. Too many preposi­ tions dangle at the ends of lines, but it is full of a language  alive with kicking, not deadened  by rigid structure.
There  are some good poems in this manner  beside the two already mentioned: "Collecting  the  Square  Root  of Minus One", "0 Recruiting  Sergeants",  "The Widower",  "Remains of an Indian  Village" and "Rural Henhouse". Some others are  unbalanced   by throw-away lines or dead-pan  humour, as if Purdy  is afraid to allow his lyric impulse free rein. It seems as if he is trying to consign his lyricism to  the  shorter,  more orthodox  poems in  the  book, and  it  is true  some of these poems work well-"Hokusai at Roblin Lake",  "Jade Stag",  "Elegy" and "Mind Process ReA Faucet".
One  could  not  expect that  all the  poems would  be successful, and  there  are
faults in Poems For All The  Annettes. Some of the anecdotes gain nothing from being put into poetic form. Humour  and words for shock effect too often become a double-headed  sledge-hammer destroying some of the delicacy of the observation. Such  a  poem  as  "Cantos" is a strange  mixture  of the  new method  clinging to some regularity  and  half-rhyme  and injected  with archaic  language.  As a result, there is too much going on in the poem.
Nonetheless, generally  speaking,  the  language  is dynamic  and  an  individual
voice is beginning  to emerge. These poems are Purdy's  first real attempt  to catch the here-and-now  of life and  place it in some context  of permanence. They  are his  re-definitions  of  what  things  are  and  what they  were   previously thought to be. He sees the relation of now to then. This obviously means that  his roman­ ticism (things  as they ought to be or as they might be)  plays no significant part:


the form is HERE
 
has to be must be

As if we were all immortal
in some way I've  not fathomed as if all we are

IN THE  RAW



co-exists in so many forms we encounter the entire race of men just by being
alive here
Ourselves amorous ourselves surly
ourselves smiling
and immortal as hell

The  poems written immediately after Poems For All The  Annettes and collected in The  Blur In Between are somewhat disappointing, for the exuberance of struc­ ture  is replaced  by much  more staid  forms. Only  in  one or two poems  do the language  and  structure  have the vitality towards which Purdy  had been working in the years from  1955  to 1962. But Purdy  dates the poems in The  Blur  In  Be­ tween as rg6o-61.  Were these poems, then, written at the same time as Poems For All The  Annettes?  Did  Purdy see where his poetic strength  lay  and  deliberately exclude  them  from  Poems  For  All The   Annettes?  There  is  still variety  in  the tone and  attitudes  of the Blur poems but there is not the free-wheeling rambunc­ tious mixture of moods Purdy achieves in the Annettes volume. In this volume we can  read  poems of self-deprecation,  humour  and  coolly austere objectivity;  the best poems are those that  most nearly approach the forms and mixtures of moods of the Annettes  volume:  "Biography", "Twin-Heads", and "Bullfrogs".
The  poems in this volume seem to me generally uncertain. They contain  most of the elements of Purdy's  individuality,  but there is something lacking. The live­ liness of his previous volume is in some way buried, threatening to break out every now and  then,  yet lying too coolly within itself except for occasional spurts. But his poetic energies leap to life in his latest volume, The  Cariboo Horses.
The  Cariboo  Horses contains  poetry that  is open in form  but  rigorously  con­ trolled.  Purdy  has  won  his way to  a medium  which  will include  both  realism and  romanticism,  so that  the  poet's oscillation comes across not  as a  wavering indecisive  attitude but  as a  consistent though  varied  voice,  illustrating  his per­ sonal  concerns  and  his individuality.  It is a volume which  holds and  synthesises opposites and variants.  It is poetry that makes:

a jewelled baldric from a sweat shirt and simmering flesh imperishable as grass roots
and a silver bugle from a jalopy's horn.

Purdy shows all his dissatisfaction with what  poetry can and  cannot  do, and  yet he still indulges in "this madman's frenzy/  that  wants to make pretty  patterns".

IN  THE RAW



This  creates  the tension in his poetry, and The Cariboo  Horses is the most mature handling and  balancing for  these  elements  that   Purdy has  ever  achieved. Take the  title  poem, for instance. Here  are the first three  lines:

AtI oo Mile House the cowboys ride in rolling stagey cigarettes with one hand  reining
restive equine rebels on a morning grey as stone ...

These  lines seem to me to be a dynamic beginning to a poem. Notice how "rolling" is placed  at  the  end  of a line, so that  it gives a sense of the  riding  movement of the  cowboys in  the  first line  and  then  adds  the second  action  of rolling  cigarettes to it in the second.  "With one  hand" becomes important, emphasizing their non­ chalant  treatment of  both  the  horses  and   the  skill  of   cigarette-making,  thus throwing weight  on  their  control  of the  horses  in  the  word  "reining". But  their nonchalence is dramatic; their  rolling of cigarettes is "stagey". Nonetheless,  their control  of  the  horses is firm;  they  are  reining  them  with  one  hand  even  though  the   horses  are   not  simply  quiet; they  are  "restive  equine rebels".   With   these straightforward  elements   placed  significantly   Purdy  has  managed  to  show  op­ posites  held  in  tension:  nonchalence with  drama,  and  control with  underlying rebellion. He  has  set  them  against  "a morning  grey  as stone". Notice  how  that short  simile fits the whole context  of tension and control-the unbroken greyness of  the  day  against   which  the  horses  act  in  their  restlessness  and  the  control  of the cowboys over them, firm as stone.
In  the  same  poem  the  horses  and  cowboys  are  seen  against   a  natural  back­ ground, "clopping in silence  under  the  toy mountains" in  contrast to the  "jeeps  and  fords  and  chevvys"  in  the  familiar land  of  "the safe  known  roads  of  the ranchers". The  reader  then  expects  the horses to be seen in a romantic landscape
-even the  horses' dung  is described  as "golden orange" -and indeed  there is a section giving a romantic view of horses:

Only horses
no stopwatch memories or palace ancestors
not Kiangs hauling undressed stone in the Nile Valley and having stubborn Egyptian tantrums or
Onagers racing thru Hither  Asia.

But it is a rejection  of that  romantic and  nostalgic  view that  we get, for instance, in  the  two  poems  about  horses by Larkin and  Hughes quoted   by Alvarez  in  his introduction to The New  Poetry  (Penguin, 1962). Although Purdy's horses  are related  to these different horses of the past, they are "real" horses:

IN  THE  RAW



arriving here at chilly noon in the gasoline smell of the dust and waiting 15 minutes at the grocer's-

Even  this  ending, at  first seemingly  over prosaic,
The   horses  are  "here" and  actual; there  is a  continuation of the  grey  morning "at  chilly noon". They  are in the familiar world of "the gasoline smell"  belonging to  "jeeps  and  fords  and  chevvys"  and  "the grocer's". But  they  are  not  quite  of this world; they are kept waiting.
I have  dealt  with  this  poem  in some  detail  to show  that,  although it  has  the
deceptive surface  of  rather  conversational prose,  it  is a  poem  firmly  rooted  in Purdy's poetic  technique. There are other  poems that  yield this kind  of meaning and  pleasure  on  close scrutiny. "Old Alex"  seems a realistic  portrayal of an  old man   using  tough  language. But  its meaning is gathered up  in  a very  apt  simile at  the end:

Well, who remembers a small purple and yellow bruise long? But when he was here he was a sunset.

Sometimes  the  tension   topples  because  of  an  indulgence m  fantasy, sentiment or  toughness  for  their  own  sakes. This  is true  of a few  poems,  but  generally the poems  are  not  disastrously  harmed.




ERE rs  a  tremendous  variety
 here -humour, tenderness,

social  comment, personal   reminiscence, and  descriptions  of  nature and  people. There is variation in  the  actual forms  of the  poems, even  though  the  technique and  attitude remain generally  the  same.  For  instance, there  is a series of poems about Roblin  Lake  and  Roblin  Mills which  for the most part  use no punctuation (this  is  true  of  most  of  the  poems)   to give subtle  connections between  various ideas,  enabling the  poet  to emphasize simultaneity of experience and  time.  This is particularly effective  in  "Late Rising  at  Roblin  Lake". The  poem  deals  with
the  different ways a day  can  begin for a sleeper waking  at different times:

at dawn with bird cries streaking light to sound to song
to coloured silence wake with
sun stream shuttle threading  thru curtains

IN  THE RAW



and  so on. The  poem closes

one August afternoon once why stumbling yawning nude to front window there on the dock
in noon fog lit
with his own slow self-strangeness stood a tall blue heron
and the day began with him-

Purdy has reached  a poetic maturity in this volume  after  a long and  deliberate struggle   to  find  a  method   for  his  own  poetic   purposes. It  owes  something  to Williams  and  his followers,  but  it is distinctively  his own.  It is mature and  con­ trolled   and  yet shows  that  it  can  be  developed further.  In  the  poem,  "Mice in the House", Purdy describes a meeting between man  and  mouse:

I have the feeling watching that representatives of two powerful races are meeting here calmly as equals-
But the mouse will not be damn  fool enough
to go away and write a poem

We  should  be  grateful that  Purdy  has  been  damn fool  enough to go away  and write  poetry.  Let  us hope  he continues.









SAlNT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY TO HIS TIMES



Jean Le Moyne


ICANNOT   SPEAK  of  Saillt-Denys-Garneau  without   angcr.
Because they   killed   him. His  death was  an  assassination prepared  over  a  long
time. I will  not  call  it  premeditated  because I refuse  to credit those  who  choked his life  with  so fine  a  thing as  conscience. Who  were  in  fact, his closest enemies? The  half-dead,  victims  themselves, diminished  and   sick  with   a  miserable fear  which,  unluckily, was  only   strong in  its  power of  contagion.  One cannot get angry with   mindless creatures, though one  cannot help  resenting the  spirit   that animates mindlessness.
On   February 12,  1935, in  one  of  the  first  pages  of  his  journal, Saint-Denys­
Garneau wrote this  magnificent and  moving passage:

How   dangerous  happiness is, and   all  power,  all  intoxication! It  takes  a  self­ mastery  acquired through a long  discipline  of submissiveness  and  love to resist the danger of happiness. When  the  child  thinks  he is strong  enough to act  by himself, how   joyfully  he  escapes  from   his  mother's watchful gaze  and  guiding hand   to plunge   into  danger; And  for  us, so often  beaten  down  and  torn by misfortune, how completely, even  at  the  instant of emerging from  our abasement, do we forget  all  that  experience of misery,  how  blinded  we are once again  by this  intoxication of being!  You  would  return, my heart, as to a festival, to the same  fire:  and  what  you  knew  yesterday,  what   was so bitterly  learned,  you  know  it  no longer.  To  be, to love, to glow with  the  youth  which  paints  your cheeks like a sunrise,  to embrace all  things,  obey  all  impulse, scatter  around  you  the  efflorescence  bursting within  you! Ah, you soon forget  God  when God  no longer keeps you crushed. You thought you  knew, like a grown  man-and  see, you  are  the  child  who  would  seize every­ thing,  possess everything, and  who,  once those  toys are  given  him,  tires  of them  so quickly  and  then  finds  himself  saddened and  more  avid  than   before.  Learn  to cast  even  your  human joy on  God,  and  devote  it all  to  drawing nearer  to  him.'

' From  John Glassco's  translation of The  Journal of Saint-Denys-Garneau, (McClel­
land  & Stewart, 1g62) .

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



The style of the passage is that of the great classical French moralists. Its special austerity  is that  of the French school of spirituality  with its clearly recognizable touch  of Augustine.  What  we have here is a direct  continuation of our  highest tradition  of humanist  and Christian  thought,  and  we find ourselves completely at home in it. So much so that before we fully realize it something in us assents to this captivating wisdom. Well, that  assent, whether  complete  or partial,  or even if it is only  the  memory  of assent, is a false step  taken  into  the  trap  of alienation. During  his lifetime  Saint-Denys-Gameau had  no more business than  any of the rest of us with the kind of clumsy crass stupidity, incarnate in a Pere Ubu with his hook for  raking  noble living  creatures  into  his pit.  That   would  have  been far too simple!  Ubu  is such a showy villain that  we forget the danger  of having his little switch stuck in our ears or his trampling  on toes. And when one pertinently knows, because it is so advertised, that disembraining  is carried  on every Sunday in Rue de l'Echaude, why, one simply makes a detour.
But change  the setting.  When  the decor is severely plain,  of a most generous and  familiar simplicity, when everything shines with the polish of age and experi­ ence,  and  when  you have  contributed  no little  yourself to  the  wear, or  so you believe, by your frequent  comings and goings, you step out onto the stage with a fine bold gravity. But the planks are not worn, they are covered with a treacherous wax  and  your confident stride  threatens  to tum  into  a  neck-breaking  skid. And what you thought  you had to say is whispered at you from the wings and from the cracks in the floor.
In  this  theatre  the severely plain  is really emptiness  and  experience is really illusion, for the  prompters  as well as for the actor.  True  experience  and severity would  have  said  that  if happiness,  power  and  intoxication  are  dangerous,  un­ happiness,  impotence  and  abstinence are  even  more so. They  would  have  said, right off, that  happiness is difficult and desirable, that  power is indispensable, and that  to feel intoxication  you only have to have thirst and a stomach. They  would have said  that  it  is better, even in your use of images, to shake off supervision, maternal or  other,  in order  to run  the  risk of desire and  to expose yourself to dictates  of  joy. That  after one feast it is well to prepare  the  next. That fatigue is not necessarily an initiation to annihiliation. That  to share in the flowering of the world and  to feel the youth of the universe is not necessarily to lose sight of God. That the man who is utterly crushed is not more conscious of God than anyone else.
Does  this  amount   to  saying  that  Saint-Denys-Gameau's striking  passage  is
radically untrue?  That  depends on your point of view. If you read it according to the letter it is unacceptable.  According to the spirit it is blurred  and  incomplete.

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



If I  make such  a  point  of this, it is to show up what  was lacking in  the  poet's thought.  And  what  was lacking  was not so much something  that  Saint-Denys­ Gameau had not yet acquired,  but a possession-a whole part of  reality, capacity and  possibility-that he had  been deprived of, without  his knowing it. He was robbed  of  his faculty  for  happiness  by being led to  associate the  fact  of being happy with a sense of an unpardonable guilt.
Two  kinds of guilt are involved. The first is subjective and  has to do with that
inevitable  and  normal  difficulty of gradually  assimilating, as we grow older and more  mature,  our  own  potential  for  life. From  powerless and  weak  we must become powerful and  strong  before those awesome persons who seem so enviably favoured: our  parents,  our  teachers and  other  adults, real or symbolic. Nor is it enough to receive certain  rights recognized by authority, or even to take possession by force of rights  which  authority  has refused or denied.  One  must, in a sense, draw  one's  rights  out  of  oneself. It is  not  enough   to  act  because such  and such  an  action  is permitted  or because right  to it has been won, legitimately or not, but only because to do so fulfils a personal imperative. Once the act is seen and accomplished  in  this  light,  there  is no  need  for  concern  if  it  clashes  with  the irreducible  core  of  the  world  with  which  it  must  come  to  terms.  We can  rest assured  that  such  a coming  to tenns, such a compromise,  will be as original as the  first springs  of the  action  itself. The  ability to act  is not  acquired  without discomfort, for it is dangerous  to seize the necessary power to act, and  mortal not to seize it. This  discomfort  easily turns  to anguish which  the  psyche experiences as remorse or a sense of guilt. As long as the difficulty and  its attendant anguish are  not  insurmountable, the  guilt  remains  healthy,  and,  as one element  in  the struggle of life, it contributes  to the formation  of character.
The  other kind of guilt is objective. It remains subordinate to moral considera­ tions. It is healthy  by definition  and subsides before a higher  purpose, human  or supernatural. Though  the two kinds of guilt can only be likened by analogy, they have  several  extremely  dangerous   similarities:   both   are  experienced   through similar  mechanisms;  both  tend  to breed a hatred  of  action,  projected  or under­ taken.
When, so to speak,  the climate  is favourable,  as it is in our French-Canadian milieu,  the  two guilts  coincide,  sharing  motives, exchanging  symbols and  refer­ ences, profiting one another,  mutually perverting each other, widening their range until finally they form, in the eyes of the distracted conscience, a single monstrous guilt,  which  is, at  the  same  time,  paralysing  and  endowed  with  an  irresistible vigour of invention.


33

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



IHAVE  REDUCED this extremely  complex  reality to a sketchy outline,  but  there  is scarcely a sector of French-Canadian life to which  it does
not  apply,  and  it  explains, at  least partially,  the  most basic peculiarities of our society. But let us restrict ourselves to the literary  domain.  I maintain  that if this sense of double  guilt  that  I  have outlined  does not  explain  our  constant  failure in  literature  or,  at  the most our  very fractional  successes, why then  our  writers must  be nothing  more than  a congregation  of dreary  little  jokers. And if that  is the case, they must have passed the word along for centuries, from the solemn innocents  of our  literary  origins to the  angry  young  malcontents  of the  present day.  One  can  imagine  a sort  of plot  running through the  limbo  of  French­ Canadian imagination  from  Laura  Conan  to  Marie-Claire Blais. For  that  old­ fashioned  old  maid  and  this new girl-novelist are  really sisters,  similar  even  to the  point  of sharing  the sisterly characteristic  of choosing the common  theme of disfiguration.
But it is nonsense to speak of a plot between the living and the dead. The truth is that  the  author  of  Angeline  de Montbrun and  the  author  of  La  Belle Bete share the same psychological heredity.
In their works we encounter,  with a maximum  of explicitness, certain constants in Quebec  literature  which can be summarized  as follows: it is forbidden  to love and  be happy  because -guess why -because it is sin. Any means are valid to insure that  this edict is respected:  sicknesses of various sorts, especially TB, noble sacrifice,  ingenious  family   tortures,   circumstances   said   to  be  uncontrollable, murder  by firearm  or by runaway  horse, or simple suicide. All of which  makes these books of the  Laurentian library  considerably  less droll than  Rabelais cata­ logue of titles in  the Saint  Victor Library.
When  I say love, I  mean, first of all, the  most difficult kind, the love of self, and  after  that  the love of others and  love of things.  For  the first principle of all love, of all possession, of all gift of self is this difficult love of oneself. In fact, these distinctions describe only different moments of love, for love moves within us and around  us in a single and  uninterrupted motion.
If, then, we see the critics, in even the most positive cases, taking so many pre­ cautions,  stewing  over our literature,  considering  a  work now from  the  point of view of form, now of content;  if they praise exclusively its introspective power or its spiritual  life or the truth  of its portraiture or the liveliness of the story or the interest  of the subject;  if they continually  bog down  in secondary considerations and  hardly  ever come to the point of dealing  with the  work's internal  necessity,

34

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



it is because the essential element of human  experience is missing. Since they are never  possessed by love, our  literary  works cannot  be creations  that  adequately match  being, which is to say, they cannot be forever nourishing, habitable  and fundamentally beyond question. They can be instructive, or interesting, can mark an  advance  or  a  decline  from  what  has  gone  before, can  stir strong  or  weak emotions, or stimulate  hope, but they are incapable  of awakening  in us that  love that  always lies in  wait,  and  whose true  contact  is never tiring  but  refreshes us perpetually  for  new encounters.
Take  an  example  from  another  literature,  Julien  Sorel, for instance.  He gets his throat  cut.  But  that  doesn't  leave me downcast,  because he has really lived his life, and  his love. He  took what  he wanted  and  what  he loved, and  that ful­ filled him, and  it fulfils the reader, too. As a result Julien  Sorel is immortal. The same is true for Madame Bovary. As miserable and distraught  as she is, she is fully present  in  every  event  in  her  life, and  when  she abandons  herself,  I  am  fully convinced.  It  is the same  for Constant's  Adolphe. Things  go badly for  him, but they go badly  so beautifully  that  we feel a lasting satisfaction.  And if  Frederic in  Flaubert's l'Education Sentimentale  fails, I  do  not  feel frustrated  any  more than  by the death  of Tristan  and Isolde or by the fate of Claudel's Mesa and Yse. One  feels like congratulating such lives, lived out in  the natural  evolution of an initial  mastery  over  oneself and  the world, because the consequences which im­ pinge upon  them  do not arise from anything  exterior to  themselves. In such lives deception, bereavement or joy, hardening  of character, conversion, happiness, un­ happiness, or  death  have  only one source. It is freedom  to love, morally or not, illicitly or not,  for such  evaluations  have  nothing whatever  to do with the heart of the matter.  That is why to deprive us of  these creatures of Constant, Stendhal,  Flaubert,  Wagner  and  Claude!  would  be like severing us from  our souls or our vital  parts.  Whereas  the loss of all our Angelines would mean  no more than  the disappearance of a few pale images  that  only stick in  the memory  because they are cemented there by a few odd theses and a little literary research. And the main reason for  the  insubstantial  quality  of these characters  is that  they owe nothing to what  they basically are,  that  they are not, in any significant sense, in any real contact  with  themselves.
Alienation  of  this  kind  strikes so deep into  French-Canadian life that  Saint­ Denys-Garneau   died  of it  after  giving it its highest expression. If it is  objected that  the novel does not fairly represent this alienation,  add  poetry, add criticism, and  if that  is not  enough,  investigate  the  pastoral.  There  is no shortage  of wit­ nesses there,  and  there are plenty more, among them our thinkers who have only


35

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



their  poor silence to put forward  as recriminating  evidence.
Long before he began his  journal in 1935, Saint-Denys-Garneau began to feel uncomfortable  about  the ambiguity  and  alienation  that  I have tried to define in outlining  the two kinds of guilt and that  I have attempted to verify by analysing the lamentable  failure of our fictional characters.
I go back in memory to the first years of our friendship.  Those were the days when he was one of the group who, in 1934, were to found  the review La Releve. The   preoccupations  of  the  group  were such  that,  when  their  first essays were published,  certain  of us were taken  to  be  members  of  the  priesthood. As for Saint-Denys-Garneau, since his death  and the appearance of his Poesies Completes and  his  Journal, he has been surrounded  by an  aura  of tragic  gravity.  But we were  never  a  chapter  meeting  or  a committee.  We  were  just friends  around  a table  whose only programme  and  intention  was a quest for the absolute, solidly motivated  despite the incoherency of our enthusiasm.  There  was no order of the day,  only  the  disorder  of the  evening  meetings,  especially on  Sunday  evenings when  we exchanged  heated  and tumbling  accounts  of what  we had done during the week, during  those weeks so full of discoveries and  excitement,  shot through with ecstatic perspectives and darkened  with anguish.  Among these friends Saint­ Denys-Garneau   was one of those who was most  fully  present, one of  the  most gifted, one of the gayest. And he was the subtlest  and  the wittiest. His liveliness was that  of one who is intoxicated  with life and  who could expect a liberal and exquisite share  of it, generously divided between  love, art  and  thought.  When  I now hear,  clear  in my memory, through  the  murmur of those distant  conversa­ tions, a phrase thrown out by one of us with a kind of anxious conviction, some­ thing  like:   "Gentlemen, it  is absolutely essential  to  restore  to sin its  proper grandeur and  dignity,"  I  tremble  for him in retrospect.  Not for the others;  for them it was a password to salvation. Such a statement was an obscure but valu­ able  claim  to  an  indispensible  autonomy.  It was  a  refusal  to  accept  that  the question  should  be raised in  a spirit of  fear  or  that  judgment  should  be passed under  the rule of any illusion. It was a  key for the liberation  that  was to come. And,  as far  as the  other  members of  those reunions  are  concerned,  they are all still alive. But as for him, it was already too late. I shudder, in retrospect, at the thought  that already he did not dare assert his instinctive hold on life, that already he was on the verge of  committing  the irreparable error  of mistaking his healthy uncertainty  for the sign of an interdiction,  an interdiction that  was to be studded with  false crosses. And  I  firmly believe that  this confusion  was the cause of his death,  and  that  it  has  killed others  before  and  after  him,  and  that  it goes on

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



killing today.  I  assert that  it paralyses and sterilizes and  prevents and  misguides many, and  that  this poisonous confusion is the most damnable of our official impositions.
I  could  almost  recapture   the  moment  when  the  balance  of forces in  Saint­ Denys-Gameau began  to swing over towards absence and  death.  A long scandal and one which wounded  me deeply began when, with Robert Elie, I undertook  to publish his Poesies Completes  and his  journal. I have never been able entirely to get over this scandal,  and  I understand  now that if I were ever to bury it I would become an  accomplice  of the enemies of life. It is precious and  I  want  to make it public as a humble but necessary piece of evidence in this case.
Why  death  for  him,  why life for  the others? The  question  of relative  merits
has, of course, no bearing. Psychologically his disorder was in no way exceptional. The  same degree of morbidity  is quite common  with us. Not to admit  that  is to understand   nothing  of our society:  a certain  neurotic quality  is part  of our  cul­ tural  heritage.  Saint-Denys-Gameau had  then,  as they say, problems.  Moreover he was gifted with an extreme delicacy of conscience and was possessed by a need to be fully present in whatever  he did, which prevented  him from paying himself out in mixed doses, from compensating,  as many do, for  hindrance in one direc­ tion  by increased  activity  in  another,  for uneasiness in  one matter  by a carefree attitude  in others. In other  words, the Christian humanist in him could accept no local solution.  He  was made  for total presence.
Physically, his constitution  was rather  weak, and he certainly lacked that  brute energy  which  might  have  been,  despite  himself, his saving  grace.  He  did  not have  the strength   that  would  have  let him  disobey those imperatives,  true  and false, which were then so inextricably intermingled in him. He lacked the strength that  might  have let him override them, roughshod, that sly and ruthless persever­ ance of an  animal  fighting  for life. His body was thin, his heart  weak, his walk faltering.  But from  time to time he would get his teeth into something  and  tear it to  pieces without  a  second  thought.  And  occasionally he  would  surprise  us by getting  hold  of something  big and,  whether  it  resisted or  not,  would  devour  it with a savagery  that  was absolved by his hunger.
So much for the natural man. Spiritually there is the question of a vocation and in  this respect  we will see later  that  everything changes value. But before this it was important for him to  have tasted a life free from restraints accepted for God or for men.
Saint-Denys-Garneau  was  the  first  to  disappear  from  our  reunions.  At  that time  we could  not  tell how significant  his absence was, or  how  prophetic.  We

37

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



were ready to accept the general scattering of friends during  the summer,  but we always regretted that he spent his holidays in his family home at Sainte-Catherine­ de-Portneuf. To begin with, he would prolong his Christian visit or leave us earlier in the summer. Then  he would stay on there into the autumn, and so on. Finally he was absent almost half the year, held by this country which was the nest of his childhood and death.
It  would  be wrong  to picture  our  friend  coming  back  to us sad  and  lifeless.
Until  his final retirement  I don't  believe we ever saw each other  without  falling into ecstacies of laughter.  His gift for fantasy had reached an extraordinary height and  subtlety. With a gesture, an intonation, a raised eyebrow, or the inspired use of colloquialism, he could shake the foundations  of reality. And in his daily life, especially when he was alone in the country, he was a bohemian  of the first water. He awarded  himself the temporary  distinction of a beard  many times. And as far as outlandish  accoutrements  were concerned,  or  disconcerting  attitudes  and  all like rebellious baggage, he could have taught  our  little beatniks  a thing or two. He  clearly  surpassed  them  in  versatility, for  the same  hairy  peasant  that  he so readily  became  in  the  country  could  easily have  been  the  most elegant  young aristocrat  at a fashionable  ball two weeks earlier.
But  in  the  midst  of  this  picturesque  behaviour,  so often  carried  to doubtful extremes,  his laughter  frequently  struck  a false note  and  he would  lapse into  a sudden  gravity, would fall silent, would stare intensely like a cat attentive to some reality in the walls or outside them.
If we go back to the year 1935, we find Saint-Denys-Garneau working on the poems that  were to make up the collection Regards et  jeux, published two years later.  It  is also in  1935 that  he began  his  journal.  This  is the  period  when  he began his decisive self-interrogation  and his definitive life's work. For us it marks the start  of an irrefutable  testimony.




HIS SOLITUDE as a poet was complete.  It is scarcely  neces­ sary for me to say that he took our Canadian rhymesters for what they are: exactly nothing. As far as his own poetic genesis was concerned,  his parentage  was purely French.  Verlaine  and  Baudelaire  were  his  breviary:   he  used  them  constantly, absorbed  them  and  passed beyond.  Though   he  was  very  fond  of  Pierre  Jean Jouve,  Reverdy  and  Nerval,  they left no discernable  mark  on  his work. He  ad­ mired  Claude!  but  was on his guard  against  the overpowering old man. Super-

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



vielle perhaps helped him to develop certain formal elements. But on the whole Regards  et  jeux stands  out  in our  literature  as the first product  of an  authentic necessity. It  is the first work to come from so pure, personal and  highly aware a source.
In  evaluating  the  substance  and  the  amount  of concentration and  effort re­
quired   to  produce  Regards  et  jeux one  should  not  forget  the  ghastly  cultural vacuum  of Montreal  in the early thirties. Today  one can contract  heavy debts of humanity  in  this city, dispersed  throughout  a society that  is relatively  rich and diversified, but in those days it was inconceivable to owe anything  to more than a few  friends.  Strictly  speaking  Saint-Denys-Garneau's  intellectual   and  religious milieu was made  up of four  or five intimate  friends.
"I will feed these musings on my own marrow",  he wrote. This is the ultimate material  of every artist,  and  studying  his use of it one can only have admiration to express if he succeeds, and  nothing at all to say if he fails.
The   incredible   poverty  of  his  milieu  forced  Saint-Denys-Garneau  to  draw doubly  on  his own  resources  to  nourish  his work. If only  he  had  been free to spend  his gifts without  keeping  track of how much he had  exhausted.  But such was  not  his  case. He  had  to  compensate  for  what  he  called  a  loss in  volume. Working  against  the clock he had  to make up for a permanent leaking away of life and energy. It is this feeling of ineluctable loss, of ever increasing deficit, that he expresses in the extraordinary parable  of the beggar who carried  all his  pos­ sessions in a sack with a hole in it, and by the terrifying image of the corpse that becomes his double:

There is certainly someone dying
I have decided to take no heed
and  to let the corpse drop  by the way
But now I have  lost my start and  I am myself
The dying  man  adjusting himself to me.

Elsewhere, the fatal  wasting  away is felt as a dispossession in time and space:

The  future makes  us late
Tomorrow is like yesterday one cannot  touch  it
Life lies before one like an iron ball at one's heels
The wind at our back crushes the forehead against  the air.

The irreparable loss of inner content, the rupture of temporal  ties, the invasion of the  living being  by its own  death,  these are some of the most common  and


39

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



original themes.  There is another that  he  has  not  treated explicitly  in his work but  which  was the subject  of countless  discussions among us, the theme  of general misunderstanding.
By the  idea  that  sin had  been deprived of its grandeur and  dignity,  I think  we
expressed,  without knowing  it,  the  depths of our  alienation. Not  entirely  aware of  this,  we conscientiously  sought  to assume  a  just  degree  of  responsibility. The unlimited extension  of guilt  revolted  us but,  on  the  other  hand, the  only  logical and  effective  absolution  -total self denial-seemed inhuman to us, despite  the seductions of  the  cloth.  Seriously  affiicted  by  this  sickness,  the  part  of  us  that remained  healthy  protested   that   there   was   a  total   misunderstanding.  How we struggled with  those exhausting and  ridiculous anxieties! But  in  as much  as our  protests  were  real, our  anxiety  bore fruit  and  became  fruitful question. And obscurely  a decision  was taken  in favour  of life at  any  cost.
It  was  then  that  I had  the feeling that  our  friend  was separating himself from us.  Not  because  of  any  loss of  contact, but  because  he  accepted the  equivocal terms at the heart  of this misunderstanding as the expression of an ultimate reality. There was  some  immediate proof  of  this,  and   two  years  later,  in  1937,  I had come  to  the  heart-rending certainty that  we were  losing him,  that  he was lost to life. That does not  mean  that  as early  as 1935  the debate was closed in his mind, but  that, badly  begun,  it had  taken  a fatal  turning, as illustrated by that  seductive page  on  the  danger of happiness  that  I quoted at  the opening of this essay.
Many times  Saint-Denys-Garneau had  an  intuition that   there  was something wrong  at the centre  of his self:

Identity
Always broken

The knot begins to feel
The turns of the cord that makes it up.

Labouring under the   terrible suspicion that he  had   been  robbed   of  it,  he brooded over  his lost joy:

Now when did we eat up our  joy
All other questions for the moment  have closed their mouths on their thirst
And one only hears that one that remains
persistent and painful
Like a distant memory that tears the heart even now.

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



That promise and, as it were, interview with the promised one
And now that we have torn a furrow this far
As far as we are
This question catches up with us And fills us with its voice of despair Where did we eat up our joy
Who ate up our joy
Because there is certainly a traitor among us
Who sat down at our table when we did sit however many we are
However many we were.

In  his  desolation he saw  himself  blocked  off from  any  avenue  to  the  outside and  questioned where  and  when  the  roads  had  been cut  or had  run  astray:

In my hand
The  broken end of all the roads

When was it that the lines were cast off
How is it that all the roads are lost
The  bridges broken
The  roads cut
The  beginning of all presence
The first step of every companionship
Lies broken in my hand.

Then, faced  with  the scandalous and  all-pervading menace, he began  a metic­ ulous examination, making an  inventory of his limbs  and  articulations, of  all  his energies  and  faculties:

We are going to detach our limbs
and put them in a row to make an inventory
To see what is missing
To find the joint that doesn't fit
For it is impossible to sit quietly and receive this growing death.

But  he  could  not  find  the  defective,  the  missing  part, and  in  his  ]ournal  the theme  of the inventory ended  up as the mutilation of the poor, as reduction to the very  lowest  terms,  to  the  vertebral column,  symbol  of  the  last  vital  obstinacy, symbol  of the  last  evidence of being,  of a man  from  whom  everything had  been taken,  everything stolen,  to the point  where he judged, in all sincerity, that  nothing

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



good   had   ever  belonged to  him, and   accused himself   of  having been  one  of  the unworthy poor.
Nonetheless, in  a  flash  of  anger the  poet  identified his  immediate enemies­
who  are  also ours -and  called  down a terrible accusation on  them:

It is they who killed me
Fell on my back with their  weapons, killed me
Fell on my heart  with their  hate,  killed me Fell on my nerves with their shouts,  killed me It is they in an avalanche who crushed me Broke me into splinters  like wood

Broke my nerves like a steel cable
That breaks clean and all the wires, a mad  bouquet
Shoot  up and  bend  back, naked  points

Crumbled my defenses like a dry crust Picked apart my heart  like white  bread Spattered everything  into the night

They trod everything underfoot without seeming  to Without knowing  it, wanting it, without being able to Without thinking, without heeding
By their one, terrible,  strange mystery
Because they did not come forward to embrace me

One can  recognize those  who  killed  this  living man as  the  same ones  who  had whispered to  him  their  insinuations about the  danger of  happiness. In the  name of  that warm and   abundant life  that he  had locked   up  in  the  self-denial of  mis­ understanding, in  the  name of  that life  which suddenly invigorated him  with  its pure power, he   judged  them  in  the  level  light of  scorn:

There are some who didn't want  to leave
Who  wanted  not to leave, but to stay

One  looks at them one doesn't know
We are not of the same kind.

They woke up as animals  penned there
Who spend their soulless ardours in the brothels And  come back to sleep without knowing it They woke up as book-keepers,  as busybodies
As neighbour-eaters, as sin-classifiers

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



As tax-collectors, as assassins by small dose
Soul-gnawers, the satisfied, the prudent
Ass-kissers, boot-lickers, bowers-and-scrapers They abdicate  long-windedly without knowing it Having  nothing to abdicate

It's a country of little bugs that one steps on One doesn't see them because they are dead But one would like to kick their rears
And see them sink underground  for the beauty of uninhabited  space

As for the others, we are wild, we are all alone
We have only one idea in mind, to embrace
We have only one taste, as pressing as hunger, to leave
We are already no longer where we are
We have nothing to do here
We have nothing to say and we can't hear the voice of a comrade.

When  there  was coincidence between  his servitude  and  his own  springs  of life, Saint-Denys-Garneau grasped  reality with great lucidity and  judged it with an impeccable objectivity. The  same  internal  juxtaposition of forces  which  allowed him  suddenly, and   with  such  energy,  to  name  his enemies  led  him  to  attribute French-Canadian lack  of good  taste  to the  absence of any  positive tastes  whatso­ ever,  and  by going  on  to show  that  taste  is a matter of being  and  loving,  he  un­  covered  one  of  the  major features  of our  alienation. The  same  clearsightedness illumines  his reflections  on  nationalism, which  he denounced as a  usurper of first things. It is true  that  human factors  take  precedence over  national ones, and  that  these  fortuitous  and   secondary national  interests  become  nothing  but  tools  of alienation if they claim  the right to prevent  us from risking our essential humanity. Nationalism has  been  a favourite tool of  the  forces of  alienation in  this country and,  despite  various  corruptions of that  fact,  we are  not  ready  to forget  it. One  could  find  many   other   moments  of similar  ease  and  assurance in  Saint-Denys­ Garneau's  thought,  but   unfortunately they  are  only  moments   and  his  analysis never  goes to  the  root  cause  of the alienation. Instead, his powers of penetration tended   to  turn inward, to  work  against  him,  to attack  him  on  all sides, to strip  him  of  everything. His  analytical drive  led  him  to  undervalue the  worth  of his own  talent and  work,  to accuse  himself of  being an  imposter, to sentence himself morally  and  spiritually with  extreme severity, even to deny  the  presence  of desire in himself  and, the  supreme error, led him  to the conclusion that  he lacked  exis­ tence, that  his own identity was too weak to justify its external reality. His thought

43

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



seems to me to be the most perfect expression of the deadly  equivocation  of the two guilts.


So WE   BEGIN  to see in what  way Saint-Denys-Garneau is a witness for his time  and  his society. He is so by merit of the crucifying scope of
his suffering and  because he gave such an exhaustive account  of it, transposing it into poetry, into critical reflection, into the dialogue of his correspondence  and the self-examination  of his Journal. Better than  anyone  before or since he described all that  had  been done to him  and  what,  at  the same  time, threatens  all of us. But he did not explain it. His mind did not dominate  it. And,  paradoxically, it is due to this deficiency that  his testimony is so complete, so indisputable. By laying himself bare in this unjust fashion, until the tragic twistings of his thought finally led him back to bear against his own identity, he warns us of the dangerous  reach of  the  alienation   that  is  our  constant   menace.  Saint-Denys-Garneau  became exemplary  through  self-negation.
I do  not doubt  that  this destiny was accompanied  by grace, or question  that this  progressive impoverishment  may  have  revealed  itself  as  a vocation  in  the desert. I fully believe that in the depths of a misery visited by Christ Saint-Denys­ Garneau   truly  realized  the  gift of himself that  he  aspired  to.  On  this level his spirit does take on a dominant  dimension, for in God's secret kingdom he triumphs  over  his enemies. I  am certain  of all that.  But I  want  to  confine  myself to the strictly human  aspects of life, to remain  in the human  element-which usually goes so cheap  in this country.  And I will not give up my scandal.  To let that  go would be to run the risk of somehow granting absolution  to complicity in guise of Grace.  Everything  is Grace,  yes, including  the  bad  boss and  starvation  wages as well as union  agitation.  Everything is Grace but  there is no humanly  discernable reason  in heaven  or on earth  that  makes it  permissible, before or after  the fact, to  justify the  filthy, dismembering,  paralysing, killing work of fear.
When  salvation  and  sanctity  are  obliged  to  fulfil themselves in  the  limbless trunk of a man, or in a man  poisoned and ravaged  to the point of not being able to go on living, the only reference one can decently  make to God is to the very time  he  had  in  Gethsemane,  is to  the  loving  responsibility  of love contracted by Christ,  the  creative  and  incarnate  Word.  We have  not  been  removed from the  world  and  the  world  is our  business. And  our  worldly  duty  is to  fight  the misery-makers of this world -for  example,  to prevent  any other  man so richly

44

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



foliaged with genius, so full of creative sap, so made for fruitful fulfilment, from being so mutilated  limb for limb.
But  how can  we do  this? It  is already  an  enormous  help to know, as we do
today, that  hateful  and  authoritarian fear-of  the world, of matter,  of the flesh, of sex and,  by extension, by way of association, the scornful fear of all liberty - comes from the same source:  from the most ancient, the subtlest, the richest and most stubborn  of all heresies, that of dualism. It is this dualism which brings about the  alienating   confusion  between  the  two  guilts, making the  moral guilt  de­ generate  into  neurosis and  giving neurotic guilt the rigid structure  of a code. In this  way  dualism  imposes an  impossible purity,  and  in  this  way it  succeeds in preventing  all fulfilment  by enclosing everything in a false sinfulness to serve the ends of a fallacious spiritual  reality.
To know that  much, instinctively or otherwise, is an immense step towards liberation.   Those  of  my  generation   ignored  it  who  desperately  strained   after remedies  which  only  aggravated   the  evil. This  side  of  Saint-Denys-Garneau's drama  is particularly  painful  to me. All the references that  he had,  and  all the ones we gave him were, of course, bad references and  he came back after having tried them a little more confirmed in his error and that  much more troubled  and discouraged.  When  we finally discovered that  the solution to the misunderstand­ ing lay in  the domain  of psychological techniques rather  than in  religious asceti­ cism, he spurned  our  opinions,  judging  that  an explanation  by sickness was in­ sufficient, or  so he wrote,  which showed  how far his way of  thinking  had  been conditioned.  We certainly  failed to understand  it well  enough  to be convincing, for in those days Freudian  concepts were not current  mental  equipment as they are  today. Due to the fact  that since then they have become commonly accepted in  many  milieus,  and  are  available  as a  perfectly  natural critical  approach   in others, young people today do not exhaust themselves over questions of guilt and authority  as much  as their  elders did. But  how many of those writing  today are left untouched  by this characteristic French-Canadian anguish? How many recent works have  been  written  out  of an  authentic  inner  necessity? How  many  newly created  characters  really determine their own actions and  the events of their own lives? Rare indeed  are those authors who do not exhibit at least some of the grave symptoms  of  our  French-Canadian  alienation,  rare  and  extremely  discreet.  It is not enough  then, that  the principle of liberation be in the air and in our minds; the ferment of perversion must also be held in check. It should never be forgotten that  it  is still  actively  at  work,  well  protected  behind  the screen  of intellectual evolution, and  that,  as always, it attacks whatever it touches. Moreover the trans-


45

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU'S TESTIMONY



mission of the  poison is so linked to the organization  of our  little, probably  too little, society that  it  works  in  a vicious  circle. In  fact,  as free as you may  be, nothing  guarantees  the freedom  of your children.  They  are  in hands  you have no right  to choose.
Well then?  Well, the only immediate  measure to take, the only near means  to
get  out  of this situation,  is to break  the  vicious circle at  the link of education. Unfortunately, one  can  scarcely  say  that  any  progress  has  been  made  in  this sector. And  nothing  is in the offing, since the forces of liberty are neither  aware enough  or  strong  enough  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  find  themselves solicited-perhaps  even  compromised-by  the   permanence of  our  history. Nonetheless something  must be done, for if not we will see the general spread of a solution  that  has become more and  more current: a total  disaffection towards the faith  with which the system claims to identify itself. It is a deplorable solution, certainly,  but  one which no half-measure  will delay, and  it is one which no one here  has the right  to condemn,  because the first need of art,  thought,  truth,  the gift of oneself and sanctity is the free possession of life, because without life those things  are  nothing  but illusion. We cannot  tolerate  that  a single person, in  the name  of any one or any thing whatsoever, should  be cast out into the desert like Saint-Denys-Garneau  in  order  to  fulfil  and  surpass  himself.  A  society  whose internal  dynamics  are so warped  that  it  makes such  extreme  demands  deserves nothing  better  than  to be evacuated.  By the scandalous  cruelty  of his vocation Saint-Denys-Garneau has already  brought  down  a  judgment  on such  a society.

(Translated by Philip Stratford)









AUGUST 1606

Farewell to the Frenchmen returning from New France to Gallic France



Marc Lescarbot






Marc  Lescarbot, author  of  Les  Muses  de  la  Nouvelle  France,  Histoire  de  la Nouvelle   France,  and   other   works,   accompanied Poutrincourt  on   his  second voyage  to  Port  Royal,  on  what  is now  the  Annapolis  Basin, in  r6o6, and  spent the  winter  there.  This  poem  was  a farewell  to the men  under Dupont returning to  France in  August   r 6o6.  Lescarbot's verses  are  probably  the  earliest   poems written in America north  of the Spanish  Empire. The  text  used here  comes from the  pamphlet printed in  France in  r6o6  or  r6o7,  and  published  in  the  Harvard Library Bulletin  XI  ( 1957)   pp. 2 r-39.  I am indebted  to Peter  Dale  Scott  for this reference,  and  to John Glassco  for suggestions  in the translation.         -F.R.S.

Go then, set sail, 0 goodly company
Whose noble  hearts  withstood  courageously The  dreadful fury of both wind and wave The  cruel blows the many seasons gave
To  plant  among us France's glorious name
And  'mid such  hazards to preserve her fame. Go then, set sail, and soon may each attain The  home fires of his Ithaca again:
And  may we also, yet another year
See this same  company returning here.


Worn  with fatigue you leave us, and we share
With  you an equal  weight of mutual care;


47

FAREWELL TO  FRENCHMEN



You, that no dread diseases bring their doles
To make to Pluto offering of our souls: We, that no fitful wave or hidden rock
Strike your frail craft with unexpected shock. But here resemblance fails, the likeness ends,
'Tis you who go to see congenial friends In language, habits, customs and religion And all the lovely scenes of your own nation, While we among the savages are lost
And dwell bewildered on this clammy coast Deprived of due content and pleasures bright Which you at once enjoy when France you sight.

What nonsense! I am wrong ! in this lone land All his soul needs the just man may command And will God's power and graciousness revere If he will contemplate the beauty here.
For should one travel all the earth around
And test the worth of every plot of ground
No place so fair, so perfect will he find
That our Port Royal will not leave far behind. Perhaps you would on open country gaze?
These sloping banks are washed by numerous bays. One hundred hills as well would please your eye? Below one hundred  all these waters lie.
Do you then seek the pleasure of the chase? On every side great forests it embrace.
Are gamey birds desired for your meat? Each season does its ordered flocks repeat. Have you a longing for a varied dish?
The bounteous sea will gratify each wish. Love you the gentle prattling of the rills? They flow profusely from th'enlacing hills. Would you enjoy the sight of islands green? Two city-size within this port are seen.
Do you admire loquacious Echo's rhymes? Here Echo can reply full thirty times,

FAREWELL TO  FRENCHMEN



For when  the cannon's thunder outward sounds Full thirty  times the reverberant boom rebounds As loud  as that  which  Megrera might reverse
To overthrow this mighty  universe.
Would  you survey deep rivers in their course? Three here  pay tribute with their wavy force, Of which  the Eel, that sweeps the most terrain, Bears down  the proudest billow to the main, And  almost  deafens  with her boisterous pace Not the Catadupes, but this wild race.
Would  you, in brief, your enemies withstand?
No fear is here save from heaven's wrathful hand, For with  two bulwarks  nature fortified
Our  entrance road so well, the countryside From  every threat  kept safe, can rest in peace And season  after season live at ease.

Corn  still is lacking,  and  no grapes are found
To  make  thy name  through all the world  renowned, But should  Almighty  God our labours  bless
Thou soon shalt  feel celestial plenteousness
Pour  down  upon  thee like the early dew
That, softly falling, doth  parch'd earth  renew In midsummer.  And though  we do not wrest The  richness of the gold mine from thy breast, Bronze, silver, iron, that  thy thickset woods Guard as in trust, these too are richest goods For a beginning; someday  may be found
The  gold that  waits its turn  beneath  the ground.
But now we are content thou may'st supply Both corn  and  wine, then afterward may'st  try A more  ambitious flight  (the grass that  girds Thy  waters  could supply  a thousand  herds) And  build  the cities, strongholds, settlements, To give retreat to pioneers from France
And  bring  conversion to this savage nation
That has no God, no laws and no religion.


49

FAREWELL TO FRENCHMEN



0 thrice Almighty God whom I adore, Whose sun upon this countryside doth pour His dawn, I pray thee, do not longer wait, Have pity on this people's poor estate,
Who languish, hoping Thy more perfect light
Too long, alas! withholden from their sight.


DUPONT, whose name is graven on the sky For having stood with matchless bravery Against a thousand ills, a thousand  pains, Enough to crush the spirit in your veins,
When you were left here with the governance Of those who, in this country of New France, Sustained with ardour equal to your own
The long and bitter absence from their home -
As soon as you shall come to greet your King Remind him of those days of crusading When his forefathers fought to Palestine
For love of Christian law, and held the line
'Gainst furious Saracen and all his host Offering their lives along the Memphis' coast To whim of wind and wave in that dread land To dripping scimitar in sudden  hand:
Tell him that here with little cost or blood
With which strong arms can taint the murderous sword
He may surround  himself with equal glory
And add a greater grandeur  to his story.


Go then, set sail, 0 Frenchmen of stout heart, While now our sails are calling us to start Toward  the Armouchiquois, past Malebarre, To find another port to serve as bar
To threatening foe, or as a post to tend
A sheltered welcome to th'incoming friend And there discover if New France's  soil Will justify our faith-inspired  toil.


so

FAREWELL TO  FRENCHMEN



Neptune, if e'er thou hast thy favour  cast
On  those whose lives upon  thy waves are passed, Good  Neptune, grant  us what we most desire, Safe berth  in friendly port, so thine Empire
May  thereupon be known in countless regions
And soon be visited by all the nations.


(trans. by F. R. Scott)


NOTE:   Catadupes: people living beside one of the Nile's cataracts.
The Eel river:  now the Annapolis river.











Joseph  Schull  is the  1965  winner  of the University  of British Columbia Medal   for   Popular  Biography   for   his  book   Laurier   published   by Macmillan of Canada. Laurier  is a  noteworthy volume.  It is the  first full-length treatment in  over forty  years of the  man  who  was the  first French-Canadian  prime   minister,   and  who  stands   third   in  years  of service  in  Canada's  chief  political  position.  As such,  it  fills a  long­ standing need  about which  Canadian historians  have frequently  com­ plained  but,  on  the  whole,  done  little.  Mr.  Schull demonstrates a wise use  of  the  extensive  and  available   manuscript  materials, particularly the  Laurier Papers  which  are almost overwhelming in both  their scope and  quantity. Although it  is  not  written   by one  who  would  classify himself  as  an  academic, Laurier  is  a scholarly  work.  The  grace  and succinctness of Schull's  prose  casually  covers the  painstaking research  which  has obviously  gone into this book. It is sure in event and  positive with  character.  The  Selection  Committee was  C.  W.  Humphries, of the  Department of  History,  W.  H.  New  and  D.  G.  Stephens of  the Department of English, University  of British Columbia.




chrdaicle




LETTRE DE MONTREAL

Une saison abondante


NaimKattan

L.JURY  Qm VIENT DE  CHOISIR le lamiat du  Gmnd  Prix de Ia ville de Montreal  avait l'embarras  du  choix. Les annees se suivent et ne se
ressemblent  pas. Quand  on  a decerne  ce prix  de  $3,ooo  pour  Ia premiere  fois l'an  dernier,  on  a  beaucoup  hesite avant  de decider  de  proclamer  Real  Benoit comme gagnant.  Certains membres du jury n'etaient pas convaincus que son petit roman  meritait  une si haute recompense. Mais il eut etc absurde de lancer le prix et d'avouer  qu'on  ne pouvait l'accorder  faute  de laureat.
Cette annee, par contre, Ia moisson fut riche. On avait  a choisir entre un poete,
Roland  Giguere, et deux romanciers, Hubert  Aquin  et Marie-Claire Blais. Claire Martin  etait egalement  dans Ia course avec ses memoires. C'est  Roland  Giguere qui l'a emporte.
Son recueil, Vage de la parole comprend ses poemes de 1949 a 1960. Giguere
est l'un des poetes les plus marquants de sa generation. Son reuvre est considerable mais tres peu  connue.  Peintre, dessinateur, imprimeur, Giguere  a vecu pendant
de longues annees  a Paris. II faisait paraitre  des plaquettes  en edition de luxe. II
en retait lui-meme l'editeur et l'imprimeur. Ses lecteurs formaient un cercle restreint qui  l'entouraient d'estime et d'admiration. Pour  beaucoup de ceux qui  connais­ saient  Roland   Giguere  de  nom  et  qui  avaient  lu  quelques-uns  de  ses poemes disperses dans les anthologies, ce livre fut Ia grande  revelation de l'annee. Ale  lire, on a }'impression que Giguere possede un pouvoir de divination. Malgre son exil volontaire  et momentane,  il est reste un  poete d'ici et  c'est l'homme  d'ici  qui le preoccupait.  Cependant, le Canada, point  de  depart  essentiel, lui permettait  de
rejoindre  l'universel.  C'est  a travers le Quebec  et  non  au-dela  du  Quebec  qu'il

52

LETTRE DE MONTREAL



s'ouvre au  monde. Et  c'est  pour  cela  que  le  drame  de  l'homme quebecois,  les ambiguites de  sa  vie, ses dechirements, sa  recherche d'identite  lui  inspirent ses plus beaux  poemes.
Giguere  n'est  pas  un  poete  social.  Ce qui  importe pour  lui,  c'est  le poids  des forces ecrasantes qui  accablent l'homme d'ici  et l'energie  dont  il fait  preuve  pour s'en liberer:

Un vent ancien arrache  nos treteaux
dans une plaine ajouree renaissent les aurochs la vie sacree reprend ses ornements de fer
ses armes blanches ses lames d'or
pour des combats loyaux

le silex dans le roc patiente
et nous n'avons plus de mots
pour nommer ces soleils sanglants

on mangera demain Ia tete du serpent le dard et le venin avales
que!chant nouveau viendra nous charmer?


Giguere  est sans  doute   parmi les poetes  canadiens celui  dont  le chant atteint un  lyrisme  deploye,   exempt de  sentimentalite. Certes,  on  pen;oit  ici  et  la  des influences:  celle  d'Eluard et  celle d'Aragon. Sa  voix  n'en   demeure pas  moins personnelle. Sa  poesie est celle de l'espoir  et de l'attente:

Plus tard le ciel dechire de cris plus tard les enfants nus
plus tard les bruits legers des belles rencontres plus tard les poignets cernes par !'amour
plus tard la pitie des affames
plus tard le livre comme un oiseau blanc plus tard le culte des innocents

Giguere est  aussi  le  poete  de  l'energie.  11 croit  en  les forces  de  l'homme et  il croit  en  les forces  de  la  nature. De l'union de  l'homme et de la  nature surgit  la vie qui se fait  chant:

et ou sont les champs de ble avec leurs epis bien  droits debout comme des drapeaux?
les hies couleur de nos bras les bles couleur d'homme

53

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



sans nuage de corbeaux sans ruisseau de couleuvres
rien que les bles couleur d'un  regard
sur un corps sans blessure.

C'est  avec  un  plaisir toujours renouvele  qu'on relit le poeme  le plus connu  sans doute  de Giguere, "Roses et ronces":

rosace les ronces
ce printemps de glace dans les arteres ce printemps n'en est pas un
et quelle couleur aura done le court visage de 1\ te?

Le  paysage  que  vit  et  que  decrit  Giguere, au-dela de  l'exil  et  de  l'oubli, est celui de son enfance, celui de sa terre  natale. Dans  cet exil, il retrouve  le sens des "plus  obscures  paroles". Loin du  Canada, a l'ombre meme  des desirs, on revit les chemins  de  neige  et  c'est  a  ce moment-la que  Giguere decouvre son  adhesion  a la vie qui devient  realite:
nous appartenons  a tous les futurs puisque ta n alite
puisque tu es reelle
au coeur des neiges ,eternelles


PR LES VOIES  LES PLUS INDIRECTES et les plus insoupc;onnees, Marie-Claire  Blais  rejoint   Giguere   dans  son  roman  U ne  saison  dans  la  vie
d'Emmanuel. Livre  insoutenable et  d'une  puissance poetique rarement atteinte dans  la  litterature  canadienne. Dans  ses precedents romans,  Marie-Claire  Blais nous  faisait   penetrer  dans   un  monde   de  reves  tourmentes, d'angoissants  per­ sonnages  et d'images infemales. lei, elle atteint le bout  du  tunnel. Son cauchemar revet  une  force  telle  qu'il  se  confond   avec  la  realite, qu'il  se  transmue en  une realite  transfiguree par  une  douleur  inguerissable. 11 est un grand malheur: celui de naitre pauvre parmi  des etres qui  vivent  aux  confins de l'humain. 11 est dur  ce monde ou  les enfants tentent, dans  l',epuisement de  plaisirs  sordides,  de  reculer  le moment ou ils seront  envahis  par  un monde de degradation. Pour  Marie-Clair Blais, les adultes  sont frappes d'une humiliation  telle que  meme  le souvenir d'une dignite  passee leur  est interdit. Ce livre est aussi un livre d'attente, un livre annon­ ciateur. Ses  personnages sont  dans  les limbes.  L'homme d'ici  nait  et  ce sont  les poetes qui  le proclament. On  va au-dela  d'une simple  quete d'identite.
Et  c'est une  telle quete  que  nous evoque  Hubert Aquin  dans  Prochain episode.


54

LETTRE DE MONTREAL



C'est  un  roman  dans  un  roman  et  ce n'est  pas sans  rappeler le  Feu  pale de Nabokov. Un  Canadien-franc_;ais revit Ia revolution manquee. Pour Ia comprendre, il Ia refait en imagination. Aquin  nous entraine  dans une invraisemblable  histoire d'espionnage  qui se deroule en Suisse. "Apres deux siecles de melancolie et trente­ quatre  ans d'impuissance,  je me depersonnalise".
Pour retrouver son identite, ce Canadien-franc_;ais depersonnalise doit surmonter
les assauts de l'ennemi  qui git en lui. Car  l'espion mysterieux qui se nomme. H. de Heutz est un frere siamois du Quebecois en revolte. Une histoire d'amour s'imbrique  dans  ce reve philosophique. Les deux ennemis ont  Ia meme  amante. Chez ce Canadien-franc_;ais, Ia femme et Ia patrie se confondent  dans  une meme image. Ce livre contient  des pages emouvantes  ou !'auteur laisse percer les senti­ ments d'amour pour  Ia femme et pour Ia patrie. C'est  un roman  d'une extreme habilete.  L'individu est confondu  avec Ia collectivite. La realite n'est  pas encore creee  puisque  le  Canadien-Franc_;ais est en  perte  d'identite. Le  roman  ne  peut
done  que  s'annuller puisque  les personnages ne montent  a Ia surface  que  pour
etre assassines. C'est une reuvre d'elucidation. II prend son depart  du point atteint par  Marie-Claire Blais. Chez elle, Ia nebulosite fait place  a Ia vie; chez Aquin, Ia
vie est condamnee  car elle est jugee nebuleuse.


C'EsT  UNE  SEMBLABLE quete d'identite  qui forme la trame du premier roman d'Andre Laurendeau. Nous assistons ici a Ia mort d'une societe.
Tous  les espoirs sont desormais permis puisqu'une  nouvelle societe va naitre. Une vie d'enfer  est l'histoire d'une  chute. Le heros est un journaliste ronge par un mal indefinissable,  une sorte de vide, une attente,  un manque.  II croirait  au bonheur si Ia vie ne lui apparaissait  pas comme un mirage. Ce n'est pas un personnage tourmente  qui se pose des questions. C'est un homme qui se detruit,  qui est habite
par  Ia mort  parce  qu'il  a  peur  de vivre. II cherche  a vaincre  son inaptitude a
accueillir  les dons de  Ia nature  et les joies des rapports  humains.  L'amour c'est le dernier rempart que Ia vie eleve devant lui pour le proteger.
Ce romain  est violent mais d'une  violence silencieuse que se fait  chant,  qui se
fait  musique,  et c'est  pour  cela qu'il  laisse percer l'espoir, Ia promesse des lende­
mruns.
La litterature canadienne-franc_;aise n'en est plus au stade des regrets et des lamentations. Dans ses negations, dans ses refus de ce qui fut et de ce qui est, on decele les germes  d'une  affirmation.  Malgl'e les apparences,  c'est une  litterature qui annonce l'avenir, qui l'accueille, qui le prepare.

55





review articles



EXPERIENCE AND INNOCENCE


George Jonas



sTEPHEN   VIZINCZEY, In   Praise  of  Older  Women.  Contemporary  Canada  Press.
$4·95·


SEx IS FUN.  It does  not  lie in nature either  as a biological  or as a social phenomenon to give us dissatisfaction, complexes  or  pain.   It is  not  a  necessary evil, a social or religious duty  (as some Communists and  many  Christians see it) nor  is it  a compromise we have  to make with  our  animal nature.
Not   only   is  there    nothing  "wrong" with  sex in  any  of  its  normal and  many of  its abnormal manifestations, but  the question should  -and would-not even arise if owing  to our backwardness, super­ stitution  and   plain   unsophistication  we did   not  artificially  create   psychological,  legal  and   social  blocks  that   prevent us, individually and   collectively,   from   the  simple  enjoyment  of  this  uncomplicated and  unequivocally pleasurable thing.  All the  problems   about   sex  are   man-made and   need  not  be.  Indulgence in  sex on any   emotional  or   physical   level   is  no more  harmful  than   indulgence in  fresh air;  and  any  of  the  rituals   we surround it  with,  any  of  the  conditions we set  up for  it,  any  of  the  taboos  with  which  we restrict   it,   serve   only   to   assuage   some
 atavistic,  inexplicable fear  we have of pleasure. If we did not fear the revenge of the  envious   and   malicious  gods,  if  we could  only  believe  that   we  have  a  right to  the  enjoyment of our  existence,  if we did  not  think  that   we  have  to  purchase each   ounce   of   bliss  with   a   pound   of suffering  from  a Supreme Power  that  has a monopoly  on  both,  we could  live  hap­ pily and  make  love freely  in  as  frequent and  varied  a way as we and  our partners have a mind  to.
I should  hasten  to  mention that   none
of  these  things  are  explicitly stated   and none of these terms are used to describe human  relationships in  Stephen  Vizinc­ zey's  novel  In  Praise  of Older  Women. It is, however,  as  good  a  description as I could  render  of the  thoughts it evoked in  me.  And  the  opening sentence -sex is fun-is  a  direct  statement of  Vizinc­ zey's  although it  does  not  appear in  this book.
What  appears in  the  book  is the  view
that  the  blind  should  not  lead  the  blind, the teacher should have more knowledge, maturity and  experience than  the  pupil,

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  consequently young men should learn both   sex  and   love  from  older   women. This view is put forth in a totally straight­ forward  and   unpretentious  way,  within  the   framework  of  the  openly   autobio­ graphical story. The story itself is that  of a young  man  whom  we meet in Hungary at   the   age   of   about   12  and   leave   in Canada at  the  age  of  about   32.  What happens in  between  is an  anecdotal and first  person  account of some of the  older and  younger  women  he knew and  made,  or   tried   to  make,   love  to.  The details are   presented  clearly,   factually   and   at times  clinically.   The tone  is  matter-of­ fact,   mature,  and,   when   the   occasion demands it, satirical. Although the reader  is  not  left  to  draw  his own  conclusions,  he  is not  specifically  urged  to  adopt   the conclusions of  the  writer.
The  reader  would, indeed, find   it difficult   to  adopt all  of the  writer's  con­ clusions   since   one   of   the  main   points Vizinczey  makes  is that  each should find in  sex what  pleases  him  or  her most,  in­ sofar   as  this  is possible  without hurting others. That is why  universal  precepts  of morality  and   general  standards  of  be­ haviour are  both  meaningless  and  unen­  forceable.  The dual   ideas  of  people  as possessions  and  sex as a  conceptual part  of  morality in  and  of itself create  all  the problems there  are.  If we did  not  think that   we  can  own  and  be owned  in  love, and  if  we  did  not  arbitrarily attribute a moral   significance   to  the   fulfilment  of one  of  our  normal  emotional and  physi­ cal   functions,  much   of  the  pain,  con­ fusion  and  suffering  presently  associated  with  the  unavoidable exercise of our  bio­ logical  and  social role as men and  women  would  disappear.
This argument is not  particularly novel.  Whether we  agree  with  it  or  not

ss
 -personally   I  find   it   difficult   not   to agree  with  it at  least  in  part-In  Praise of Older  Women could  not  be  called  a major contribution to  the  subject, or  to Canadian letters  in  general, if it  did  not go beyond  re-stating and  illustrating this view. However, Vizinczey-or rather his hero,  Andras Vajda, student, later  pro­ fessor of philosophy-does go beyond it. He  goes  beyond  it  by several  steps  and  in  several  directions.
First, this novel is an argument for maturity. It  is,  insofar   as  I have   been able to discover, the first non-nostalgic literary reaction against  that  cult of youth that   characterizes our  century. The   key word  here is "non-nostalgic" as Vizinczey does  not  take  issue with  "today's youth" or  even  with  youth   in  general   from  an older    generation's  point    of   view,   but simply  presents  a case for  values  the pre­ requisites of which  are  an  understanding and  maturity that  can  only  come  of age
-or of  experience, which  is its  equiva­ lent.  If we  take  it  into  account  that  the writer  is no  older  than  his  hero-32- and  that  he   writes at  a   time  when novelists  above  the  mass  magazine level are   simply   not   known   to   contrast  age favourably  with   youth,   tradition  with change, experience  with  enthusiasm, and maturity  with  sincerity,   the  importance of this  novel, I think, immediately stands out  in sharper relief.
Secondly,  Vizinczey  argues,  in what  to me is a very convincing way, that  the complexities of life and  even  the essential incompatibility  of   human  beings   need not  fill  us  with   horror or  sadness.  The facts   of  life,   just  as  the  fact   of  death, can be accepted if we have sufficient knowledge, freedom and   courage to  use those  safety  devices  and   analgesics  with which  we  come  physically  and  emotion-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ally equipped. In  sexual  relationships this means   first  education, and   then  experi­ mentation.
Vizinczey  defies  anyone to  show  what is there  to  be ashamed of, or  feel  guilty about, in  love  or  sex.   (He   does  not,  in fact,   allow   for   a  separation  of  two  in most  cases.)   He   defies  anyone to  show the  virtue  of self-denial. The  method  he employs  in  doing  this  is as cunning as it is effective: he shows himself,  his friends, his contemporaries both  male  and  female at  the  most  immature stage  of  their  de­ velopment  trembling  at   the  thought  or sight  of things  that  the  adult  reader  (the  adjective, of course,  is not  purely  chron­ ological)   would  accept  as  natural. How­  ever,  almost   at   the  same  time,  he  tells about  other   things   that   even   the  most
 sophisticated of us cannot quite hear without at  least  a fleeting  sense of shock
-yet  he shows  his characters indulging in these things  as matter-of-factly as we would in a glass of wine with our  dinner. As a result,  we cannot help  experiencing the  relativity  and  arbitrariness of all  the codes we choose  to  live or  choose  not  to live by.
It is not  too surprising that  Vizinczey's
novel  has   been   both   praised   and   con­ demned   for   what   I  believe   to   be   the wrong    reasons.   First,    there   came   the praise  and   condemnation  of   those  who look  for   pornography  in   everything­ whether  because  they enjoy  it or because they  don't  -and  who,  according to  this preference,  classified  the  book  either   as trash  or as a great  work of art.  One  can-





I
He put on dark glasses.

F. R. Scott











Selected Poems
May I $4.75 I Oxford

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



not  really  quarrel with  that; those  who wish  to  look  for  pornography in  Vizinc­ zey's novel  can  certainly find  it.  Pornog­  raphy  in the strictest  sense means material that   treats   of   harlotry   and   its  various manifestations, and  it  is  undeniable that  In  Praise of Older Women deals, at least in  part,   with  such  matters. So  does,  of course,  the  poetry of  Villon,  the  prose of Rabelais,   the  stage  of  Brecht-to men­  tion  only  some  of  the  most  obvious  ex­ amples.  But  the approval and disapproval of  those  who  approve or  disapprove of the  subject  matter need  hardly  concern  us.
Next  came  the  approval of those  who saw in Stephen Vizinczey a new and effective   champion  of   what   is   fondly called  in  their   circles  "the   sexual  revo­ lution". The  fact  that  In  Praise of  Older Women  makes   it   abundantly   clear  on every  page  that  its author is  much  more of  an   aristocrat  than   a   rebel   did   not for  a  moment bother  these sexual  demo­  crats,  and  is not likely to bother  them  in the  future.
Unlike    the   adherents  of   the   sexual
revolution, Andras Vajda, the  hero of Vizinczey's novel, does not look for any scientific  or philosophical justification  for his thoughts or actions. He  does not seek a  mandate  from   the   people,  from   the times, or from the ideas and spirit of liberalism. He  argues  from  a  position  of power: he loves by the grace of God.  He does  not  seek an  affirmation of his right to   sexual   fulfilment -or   his   right   to talk  about  it-because it does not occur to him  that  such  rights  could  be granted or  denied. Least  of all does he plead  for a social  change  in what  he believes to be a  purely   personal   matter. Society's  rela­ tive  lenience  or   harshness   simply   does not enter  into  the problems he has to face.

6o
 No, his problems are individual; they concern the  process  of  growing  up  indi­ vidually    and   of   finding   fulfilment  in­ dividually. "I  was,"  Andras Vajda  tells us,   "a   good   student   of   the   women   I loved,  and  I'll  try  to  recall  those  happy  and   unhappy  experiences which,   I  be­ lieve,  made  a  man  out  of me."  And,  he adds,   "... it  is  (the   reader's)   curiosity about himself  that  I hope  to stimulate." This  to  me  seems  to sum  up  adequately the  social scope  and  aim  of  In  Praise of Older   Women.
Still,  Andras  Vajda is a contemporary
man,  and  at least  psychologically,  he can­ not   help   being  affected   by  his  society's way  of  dealing with   matters  he  has  to deal  with  on  a personal  level. The analy­  sis he offers  in  connection  with  this is as shrewd   as  it  is accurate.  "I'm like  most of my sceptical  contemporaries," he says. "When it  comes  to  love,  we  reject   the distinction  between   moral   and   immoral for  the distinction between  'genuine' and
'superficial'. We're too  understanding to condemn  our  actions; we  condemn our motives  instead. Having freed ourselves from  a  code  of  behaviour, we submit  to a code of motivation to achieve  the sense of shame and  anxiety  that  our elders acquired by  less sophisticated means."
But   why   are   we  so  much   afraid   of pleasure, of beauty,  of love that  we strive by  fair  means   or  foul,  by  new  methods or   old   ones,  continually  to  restrict   our actions and  put  the  stamp  of ugliness on our   most   natural  and   joyful   thoughts and   desires?   Perhaps  because   "... It's less painful to think  'I'm shallow', 'She  is self-centred,' 'We  couldn't communicate,'
'It was  all  just  physical,'  than   to  accept the simple fact  that  love is a passing sensation, for  reasons  beyond  our  control and  even  beyond  our  personalities ... No

REVIEW ARTICLES



argument can  fill the void of a dead feel­ ing -that  reminder of the ultimate void, our  final  inconstancy. We're untrue even to  life."
In  Praise of Older  Women is Stephen
Vizinczey's  first  novel.  Vizinczey  himself is  a   Hungarian  who   came   to  Canada after   the  Hungarian  revolution of  1956. He   was  about  23  when   he   came;  26 when  one  of the  documentaries he wrote for   the   National  Film   Board   won   an Ohio  award; 28 when  he  brought out Exchange in Montreal. When  that maga­ zine failed -dying with  more  of  a  bang than  a  whimper, which  in  itself  is fairly unusual-he came   to  Toronto  to  pro­
duce   radio   documentaries for  Harry J.
Boyle's  Project  series.  He  began  writing his novel at  the age of 30, by which  time his English  was getting to be fairly fluent. When   he  finished,   not  quite   two  years later,  his book put him, in Kildare Dobbs' words, "among the masters of plain Eng­ lish  prose."
The  publishers to  whom  he  submitted his manuscript, first in Toronto and  then in England, did  not  quite  see it this way. According  to   Vizinczey,   the   best  offer he   received   was  from   McClelland & Stewart in Toronto-an advance against royalties in the amount of $250. Offended and   surprised,  ("a   rejection  would   not have bothered me nearly as much ...") Vizinczey  decided   to incorporate  himself as Contemporary Canada Press and  pub­ lish  his  book  himself.   The  venture  was successful:   In   Praise  of   0lder  Women made  the  best seller  list  in  both  Toronto and   Montreal  within   two  weeks  of  its publication.  (Today  it   is  in  its  second printing and   still   going  strong.)  Offers from   the  United  States   began   to  arrive  for  the  American  hardcover and  paper­ back rights,  with  the highest  bidder  turn-
 ing  out  to  be  Ian   Ballantine. The  book went   to  him   finally  for  an  advance  of
$4o,ooo.   Three  weeks  later,   Vizinczey, his  wife and   two  children left  for  Italy.
To  the  experts,  whose  opinion   I  fully share  in this case, Vizinczey's  story seems to  prove  his  utter  innocence rather than his  business  acumen. "This thing  simply cannot   be  done," says  Robert  Weaver, editor  of Tamarack Review, "and  that  is why  more   people   don't   do  it.  If  more people did it it would  not be news, and  if it  would   not   be  news  Vizinczey   could not  have  got  the  publicity ·and  exposure he  did  get  from   various  people,  even  if the  quality  of  his  work  would  otherwise justify it."  And  Ivon  Owen,  manager of Oxford   University Press, sums  it  up  this way:   "Publishing is the  riskiest  business there  is, or  just about. Stephen Vizinczey did  a  very effective   job of  local  promo­ tion,   which   always   helps.   However, I believe that  the  book's short term success, and  the long run  success it may  very well have,  will  be  the  result  of   its  own  ex­ cellence."










61


EN COULEUR  DE ROSE


George Woodcock



JOSEPH  SCHULL, Laurier.  Macmillan.  $8.so.


THE  BIOGRAPHER  of a  politi­ cal  leader   approaches his  task,  if   he  is wise,  with   a  consciousness  of   particular difficulties  imposed   by the  nature of his subject. First,  the  life  of  a  politician is in  a  special  way  historical;  he  has  lived in  the  main  stream of events  in  his time and   has  largely   helped   to  shape   them. This  involves  the  writer  in  a  temptation to  work  as a  historian using a  biograph­ ical pattern, and  to subordinate the essential  core of his subject's personal  life to  what   should   really  be  the  secondary layers  of external happenings.
The  second  difficulty  arises  out  of the
kind  of  myths  which,  even  in  their  life­ times, are  woven  around political leaders by   party   publicists    anxious   to   present  them  attractively, by newspaper men anx­ ious  to  present   them  picturesquely, and,  in  our  own  day,  by  television  producers anxious   to  present  them  with  that  can­ dour   which,   by   concentrating  only   on certain   aspects  of   the  real  man,  creates its  own  special   type  of  falsehood.   The composite  images  which-as a  result  of these   various influences-float   in   the minds  of the average man when he thinks of   contemporary  politicians like  Diefen­ baker  and  W. C. Bennett, and  even com­ paratively colourless  personaE ties  like Lester  Pearson, are  only the public masks of  the  private  men   whose  real  features the  biographer should   be  seeking.  Mere debunking, even  on  so  relatively  sophis-
 ticated  a level as that  attempted by Peter Newman in  his  recent  expose  of  Diefen­ baker,   is  not   sufficient,   nor,   if   we  are seeking  something more profound  than  a polished   and   ironical  essay  in   the   dis­ parity  between  men and  their pretensions, is the  approach of  Lytton Strachey. The role of the biographer of a public  man  is, indeed,  rather like  that   of  an  arch::eolo­ gist  removing the  detritus of  succeeding cultures to recover  the relics of a vanished city   and   by  this  means   reconstitute  its life.   Since   almost   every   aspect   of  the myth contains its fragment of truth, the falsehoods have  to be brushed  away  with care  before  the shape  of the real man  can finally   be  reconstructed. There  are  cer­ tain   Canadian  biographers,  particularly those  concerned  with   that  amiable self­ dramatizer, Sir John A. Macdonald, who in the  process of  reconstruction have  suc­ ceeded   only  in   creating  myths  of  their own.  It is  another temptation to  be  re­ sisted  by  the  political biographer.
Joseph  Schull,  in   his  Life   of   Mac­ donald's  successor   and    rival,   has   not resisted  this last  temptation, and  has only partially  succeeded  in  dealing  with   the other    difficulties I  have   sketched   out.  Sir  Wilfred   Laurier was  one of the  most important and   one  of  the more  sympa­  thetic   public  figures  of   the  first  century of Canadian history;  as a  politician and  as a man  he has  been somewhat unfairly obscured  in  recent years  by the  attention

REVIEW ARTICLES



devoted   to  the   "Fathers  of   Confedera­ tion",  and   for   this  reason  it  was  high time  a  new  and  searching  biography of him  appeared -a  work  as  close  to  the definitive as  possible  in  its  presentation of details,  yet at  the  same time  imagina­ tive  enough   in  its  insights   to  create   a real   and   living   understanding  between reader   and  subject. Mr.  Schull's book is so  near   to   being   completely  successful that  one can only regret  its inadequacies.
One  can,  to  begin,  find  relatively  little fault  with  Schull's handling of the inter­ play  of  the  personal and  the  political  in Laurier's  life.  One  compares  his  treat­ ment  with  that  of  Macdonald by a  pro­ fessional historian like Donald Creighton, and  one  has  to admit that  here Schull has come  nearer  to  the  ideal  of  biographical balance. He  has studied  and  grasped  ade-
 quately   the   political   issues  of  Laurier's time,  and  the  reader  who  knows  little  of the   Reciprocity  controversy  or   of   the battles over a Canadian navy and over conscription in  the  First  World  War  will not be left feeling that  he has been led blindfolded  into   unknown territory; at the same time  every one of these issues is presented  to show its clear  bearing on Laurier's life  and  career,  and  one  never feels  that   the  backdrops are  constructed on  so large  a scale as to dwarf  the  hero. In  biography   of  this  kind  a  convention rather like that  of hieratic scaling  in religious art  has to be observed, and  Mr. Schull  does observe  it; his central figure always   seems  larger   and   more   imme­ diately  present  than  either  the setting  or the  attendant characters.
At  the  same  time,  Laurier is enlarged










DU}JLJTIES	IN
SH}JKESPE}JRE


Marion B. Smith







UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS
 This  sensitive,  lively examination of a number of the  plays shows how Shakespeare studied and exploited  the "dualities" of his age, in ethics, in ideas, and  among  individuals.












6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



on  one's  view  not  merely  for  the  legiti­ mate  reason  that  most  attention  is  being paid  to him, and  that  Mr. Schull supplies us  with  many  more  relevant  facts  than  the  earlier   biographers; he  is  also  arti­  ficially   distended  by   a   process   which, whatever Mr.  Schull's original  intentions, does amount to myth-making.
Like  Disraeli,  Laurier was a  combina­
tion-not   infrequent  among   Victorian politicians-of	the   idealistic   romantic and  the  adept intriquer according to the political   morality of  his time.  He  was  a dandy  of  a  type  comparatively  rare   in the Canadian nineteenth century, and  his Anglophile inclinations-appropriate in a French Canadian named  after  Scott's Anglo-Saxon  hero-combined with a rather sentimental nostalgia  for  the  past in a tendency  towards rosily poetic visions which   make  him  appear at  first  sight  a rather improbable figure to have  presided
so  effectively  over  one  of  the  great  eras of Canadian expansion; but  there  was a hard  core of shrewdness  in Laurier (after all,  if  he  was  a  romantic,_ he  was  a  ro­ mantic lawyer, and  his record  of  patron­ age  alone  would  have  toppled  a  modern Canadian government), and  the combin­ ation  of the  two elements helps to explain  the   charismatic  appeal   which,   over   a long   period,   enabled   him  to   hold   to­ gether   and  to  deploy  effectively  the  un­  comfortably   disparate   elements   out   of which   the  Liberal Party  in  Canada has always  been  formed.
The  charismatic appeal  has lingered strongly enough to have influenced  Mr. Schull  into a favourability towards  his subject  that  goes rather beyond  the sym­ pathy   necessary  in   a  good   biographer. Where  Laurier  might   often   have   been criticized  legitimately for  weakness or for some   especially   calculating  manoeuvre,
 Mr.  Schull  tends  always  to be indulgent, and  if Conservative critics brand  this a Liberal   biography, they  will  not  be  en­ tirely  without  justification.  Moreover, Schull   is  always  intent  on  catching the heart-touching  nuances;  in  his  descrip­ tions   of   Laurier's   childhood,  of   his marriage, of   his   young manhood  in Athabaska,  of  his  declining  years  as  a politician out   of   office,  the  vision  often blurs   out   of   objective  focus  into   senti­ mentality. Laurier appears too frequently as  a  Canadian  Galahad, and  Galahads, it  is  well  known,  do  not  survive  for  de­ cades  as  political   leaders.
If there  is a  tendency on  Mr.  Schull's
part    to   accept    and   embellish   a   party myth    of   Laurier,  he   is  also   ready   to create a  new  myth; one  has only  to read his  sub-title-The First Canadian-to realize  what   it  is.  Throughout his  book there   is a  harping on  what  he  sees as  a constant effort  on  Laurier's part,  unique in  its  time,  to  weld  the  English  and  the French  elements in  his  upbringing and his nation  into  the  Canadian hybrid.  The sense  of  a  Canadian  nationality, so  far as  it  even  now  exists,  has  developed   so precariously  and    so  obscurely   that    to label  any  one  man  "the  First  Canadian" is   biographically   and    historically   mis­ leading.
The  inclination to  replace   insight   by myth  is only one  aspect  of the  essentially journalistic flavour that  permeates Laurier. The  book  began  in  radio  docu­ mentaries  and  articles  for  Weekend Magazine,   and   the   marks   of   its  origin  lie  upon   it   and   can   be  seen  in   many  ways.  The prose  structure, for  example, has  the  monotonous and  colourless  "sim­ plicity"  demanded  by popular magazines; in   one   paragraph  of   22    lines  which   I picked   at   random   there   were   13  sen-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tences, and  this pattern continues through­ out.   Mr.   Schull,   moreover,   can   rarely resist  the  journalist's  temptation to  cari­ cature his  minor  characters, particularly if   they   have   interfered  with   Laurier's career,  or to damn  them  in the  beginning with  hostile  labels;  the  complex  and  tra­  gic   Louis   Riel   is  introduced  as   "that  shabby  figure", and  such  he  is  made  to seem  in  all  his  subsequent appearances. Such   a   method   of   treating  Laurier's
 contemporaries,  if  it  is  intended  to  en­ hance   our   appreciation  of   the   central  figure,  is notably   unsuccessful.
Laurier,  then,  is a book of many  faults. Yet  I read  it  with  constant interest   and often  with  pleasure, for  it  presents  much that is new; it is the most informative biography  of Laurier that  has yet been written, and  will long  be, for  this  reason alone,  indispensable to those  who  are in­ terested. in the political  history of Canada.





TREPIDATION AND EXCITEMENT
 





B. Rajan



NORTHROP  FRYE,  The Return of Eden. University of Toronto Press.  $4-95·


Paradise  Lost is a work which is large  enough, archetypal enough  and some   would   argue,   blurred  enough,  to invite  eager attention by mythological critics.  Actually only  two  substantial studies  in  this  vein  have  been  published
-Werblowsky's Lucifer and  Prometheus
and   a   temperate  book   by   McCaffrey, bred  out  of Jung and  Cassirer.  Northrop Frye  is  undoubtedly the  shaman  among myth-twirlers  and   a   book   by  him   on Paradise   Lost   is  an   event   to  be  faced with   trepidation  and   excitement.  Since Frye  is incapable of dullness  only one  of these  expectations is  satisfied.  Frye  may use   words   like   "topocosm"  where   the uninstructed   mind   would   simply   say "world-picture"; but  basically,  he is  tell­ ing  us what  critics of the  poem  have been telling  us for several  years:  that  Paradise Lost  is a  vast  statement of  order,  of the
 entry and perverting (Frye would say "parodic")  energy  of disorder and  of the terms on which order can once again be restored.  Even  the  language of the state­ ment  is familiar; it is the  chain  of  being, degree,  the  hierarchic principle  and  the macro-microcosmic coupling  that  we are invited   to  contemplate in  different gar­  ments.
When   mythologists,   historicists and structuralists come  together in  their  des­ criptions  of  a  poem,  their  agreement  is refreshing  evidence that  we  are  looking at  the  same  art-object  and   that   the  ob­ ject is sufficiently  formed   to  permit only a   limited   range   of  hesitancy  about   its nature. (The rising generation of numer­ ologists is a  different brood  whose assess­ ments  have yet to be assayed) . Frye how­ ever, is traditional not only in his descrip­  tions  but  in  more  than  one  of his  judge-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ments.  When  he classifies Milton  as a "radical or  revolutionary artist" he is building on  a distinction made by Coleridge, though ironically,  he is apply­ ing it in such  a way as to make Eliot into  a model  of twentieth-century  radicalism. When   he  looks  repeatedly at  the  differ­  ence   between   what   he   calls   the   con­ ceptual and  dramatic aspects of the poem he  is  contemplating  a   road   that   leads from  Blake to Waldock and  which  virtu­ ally  every  English   Miltonist   has  taken.  Frye himself  does not quite  take this road and   his  hesitations  regarding it   (which  will  be  looked  at  later)   are  among   the most  interesting aspects  of his book.
"All  revolutionary myths  are sleeping­
beauty   myths" Frye  observes  in  a  com­ ment  that  suggests  his own  qualities as a radical critic.  His  is  moreover  a  generic  as  well  as  a  mythological approach  and if myth  is a  disclosure  of experience, the genre  adds  to  that  disclosure a weight  of stylization and  ornament, an accumulated history  of  response,  that  becomes  organ­ ically   a   part   of  the  inherited  complex  that   is  offered  to  a  writer.  It is neither  easy  nor  profitable to separate the intrin­ sic insights  which  a myth makes available from  those  insights  which  are  won  from it  or  drawn into  it  by usage;  the  history of  a  form  is  also  its  substance   and   the critic  has no option but to bring  his sense of   history   to   bear   on  his  estimate   of creative accomplishment.
Because   neither  Frye's  approach  nor the  quality of his perceptiveness  excludes historical  understanding, it  is saddening to  find  him  castigating something which he chooses to describe as the "Great Historical Bromide". No responsible  his­ torical critic  would  blankly concur in the assertion   that   the   problem   of   Milton's God  "would not exist for the seventeenth-

66
 century  reader, who  could   not   possibly have  felt such  resentment for a character clearly  labelled  'God' and  talking like a seventeenth-century clergyman." Equally, no  historical critic  is entitled to  suggest that   escape   routes   into   the  seventeenth century exempt us from  the responsibility of coming  to terms  with  the  poem  in our own   time.   The  historical   method  does not   seek  to  eliminate  the   distance   be­ tween  assertion  and  performance  by  put­  ting  forward hypotheses   designed,  justly or  unconsciously,  to annul the difference; it  does  seek  to  persuade  us  that   much  that    is  dismissed   as   assertion   may   in reality  qualify  as performance. The  struc­  tural   propositions  about    Paradise   Lost that  are advanced with  such  confidence and  are  so  widely  endorsed   today,  were not  self-evident  until  scholarship taught us   to   look    for   them.   The  historical method also does not suggest that the seventeenth-century response  is any  sub­ stitute  for   our   own;    but   unless   it   is impossible   to   learn   from   the   past,   to move   through  that   response   is   signifi­ cantly   to  alter  the  manner in  which  the poem  lives in  us.
The  difficulty   with   Milton's  God   is
that  he enters  the epic as an absolute. His point  of view commands the  poem and  is not enveloped by it as are those of lesser agents.  Our acceptance of him  therefore maybe somewhat beyond the acceptance normal to  poetry.  Yet  it  is easy to  make too  much  of this further demand. A cer­ tain    tension    between  the   intellectual knowledge  of  what   we  should   be  and  the   instinctive  pull  of   what   we  are,  is part   of  the  divided   nature of  man; it can   be  said  to  be  expressed  in  the  dis­ crepancy between  the  poem's  conceptual and   dramatic   aspects,   and   operates  as much   in   the   temptation  scene   (where

REVIEW ARTICLES



Frye does not seem to find the tension destructive)  as  in   the   values  expressed at the  summit of  the   ascent to  light. If this  is  conceded  it  is  not   necessarily the poet's function  to  eliminate the  discrep­ ancy,  though, to the  extent that we grow  into the  poem, we  may  succeed  in  alter­ ing   its   impact.  Nevertheless   a   discrep­ ancy  will  remain; it can  be evidence that we are  involved in  the  poem  and  that its moral  concerns are   real   to   us  and  to that degree  disturbing. The education of Adam must  proceed and it is no accident that  nearly  half   the   poem   is  concerned with    formal   instruction  by   archangels, leaving   aside   the  less  tactful   teachings of  experience. Even the  point where the poem starts has  its  relevance. To  hasten into the  midst of  things is  an  epic  con­ vention;  but   if   we   begin   in   a   certain place it  is  also   because  all  of   us  begin there.
 It is good  to see Frye's admirable  essay on  the  typology of  Paradise Regained  re­ printed, though exception should be taken to  its  lurid   rechristening  as  "Revolt  in the   Desert".  Its   inclusion   in   the   book enables Frye  to  pursue  further his  argu­ ment that  the  paradise within is a natural stage   in   the   evolution  of   the   Paradise myth. This  is  a  better explanation than the  view that Milton retreated into quiet­ ism  because  the  revolution had  betrayed him,   not  unfortunately,  because there is more evidence for  it,  but  because it seeks to  ground  itself   on   <esthetic  fact   rather than personal frustration.
The  contrast  between  the    dramatic and  conceptual is particularly disconcert­ ing in  Paradise Regained. Frye  voices  the  exasperations of  many  when he says that dramatically "Christ  becomes an  increas­ ingly   unsympathetic  figure,  a   pusillani­ mous  quietist in  the   temptation of   Par­ thia, an  inhuman snob   in   the  rejection of  Rome, a  peevish  obscurantist  in  the  rejection of  Athens."  Frye   however goes on  to  recognize that  "All  of  us  are,  like Christ,  in   the   world,   and    unlike  him, partly  of  it.   Whatever  in   us  is  of   the  world   is  bound  to  condemn Christ's re­  jection   of   the   world at  some   point  or other."  The discrepancy in  other words, is  not  without a  function; and   because Christ  is Christ and   not  John Milton (a fact   too  often  forgotten  in   reading the temptation of  Athens)  a  moral  recogni­ tion   can   be   pushed  to   an   extreme  of clarity. If the   clarity is  too  harsh there are  grounds for  falling short  of  it.  This, or  something  like  it,  is  the  right frame for  understanding though it  may  be that in  using  literature for  the denial of litera­ ture,  Milton  was   involving  his   readers in  a  paradox that  is  too  large   even  for  poetry.





EXISTENTIAL MORALITY?


BRIAN   MOORE,   The   Emperor   of  Ice   Cream.
McClelland & Stewart. $5-95·

THE   CENTRAL CHARACTER   of   Brian Moore's  latest   novel  is  not  merely  an­ other   lonely  misfit.  He  is  Everyman, or at  least  Everyoungman  who struggles  to define   himself   in   relation   to   an   alien world   with  which  he  is inextricably in­  volved.
For   Gavin   Burke   that   world   is  the Belfast   of   the   nineteen-forties. It  is  a middle-class world  as stultifying as Joyce's Dublin, a narrow, Lilliputian world whose citizens, in the words of the King of Brobdingnag, "have  their  titles  and  dis­ tinctions  of  honour; ... they  love,  they fight,  they  dispute, they  cheat,  they  be­ tray."  And in all they think,  and say, and do,  they  demonstrate their  bondage  to a dead   past,   to  a  morality   (Catholic  or Protestant)  which  stifles  not  only sexual love but  all  natural affection,  to a system of education in  which  learning is always a  means   and  never  an  end,  to  political attitudes  unchanged in  the  twenty  years since  "the  Troubles." Between  desperate and  guilt-multiplying attempts to escape into   sex   and   fighting   and   drink   they serve   the   great   god  Respectability  and are   at   ease   in   Zion.   Destruction  may drop  from  the  heavens  upon  the  Sodom and  Gomorah of Liverpool  and  London but "never on Belfast". This is no country for  young  men.

68
 Gavin   Burke  is  not  only  young,  he  is also  sensitive   and   imaginative.  In   Bel­ fastian  terms   he  is  predestined to  be  a failure,  and   at   seventeen   he   knows   it. If he should  succeed,  however  briefly, in forgetting his inadequacies he is reminded of  them   by  a  sacred   statue  which   sees him   in   all   his  nakedness -the  Divine  Infant of  Prague, "eleven  inches  tall  yet heavy  enough to  break  someone's  toes if he  fell  off  the  dresser."  In  addition  to the   statue,  Gavin  is  endowed   with   the standard  Morality Play equipment:

He   had   two  guardian  angels.  The   White Angel   sat   on   his  right   shoulder   and   ad­ vised   the   decent   thing.   The   Black   Angel sat   on   his  left   shoulder  and   pleased   the devil's   cause.   The   White   Angel   was   the official  angel:  everybody  had  one.... Yet, the   trouble  was,  the  Black  Angel  seemed more  intelligent, was more  his sort.

Gavin's search  for himself is conducted in an  anguish of ambivalence-he  longs equally for escape from his world and for acceptance  by  it.  Knowledge is  not  the last,   but   the   first   of  his   props   to  fall away-he has failed  his Schools Leaving Certificate examinations and  has enlisted in  an  Air-Raid Precautions corps  largely in  order  to get  out  of repeating his year. It is the  A.R.P. Post  which  serves as the microcosm  of  the  microcosm   of  Belfast.
The  rigours   of  experience  divest   the job  of  the  aura of  potential heroism  in which  Gavin's fantasy  had  clothed  it, but he   clings   to   it   nonetheless,  day   after bleak  and  cheerless  day,  for  the  sake  of the  independence  conferred by  three pound-ten  a   week.   He   clings   also   to poetry,  and  especially  to  four  quotations from  The Faber  Book  of Modern Verse. These  "touchstones", from poems of Auden, MacNeice, Yeats,  and  Wallace Stevens, respectively, also signpost the novel's  plot.  They  are:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



You cannot  be away, then,  no
Not though  you pack  to leave within an
hour,
Escaping,  humming down arterial roads ...

We shall go down like paleolithic man
Before some new Ice  Age or Genghiz  Khan.

Things  fall apart; the centre cannot  hold; Mere  anarchy is loosed upon  the world ...

and

Let be be finale of seem.
The   only  emperor   is  the   emperor   of   ice­
cream.

The  anti-hero's isolation  is thus well established  when the novel begins, but it progresses  inexorably towards its  predes­ tined   absolute.  Family,  fiancee,  friends,  religion,  alcohol, sex,  all  external  values are  tested  and  found  wanting in Gavin's  faltering pilgrimage  towards the  meeting  with  Death  which  liberates him  into  life. On   the   night   when   anarchy  is  loosed upon   Belfast,   nature  outworks fancy, reality  rings  down   the  curtain on  seem­ ing,  and  the  emperor of  ice cream  finds himself   sufficient   to  stand   though   free to  fall.
Yet   for   all   its   Morality  theme   and
structure the predominating tone of the novel is comic.  It is less tragic  in its tragicomedy than  The Luck  of Ginger Coffey, less bitterly  satiric  than  The Feast of Lupercal, less despairing than   Judith Hearne. In  total  effect, it has less strength than  these earlier novels, though precisely why this should  be so is not easy to deter­ mine.   In   The  Emperor of  Ice   Cream  Brian   Moore   once   again   demonstrates his ability  to get inside  his characters and take   his  readers with  him  while  doubl­  ing,   at   the   same   time,   in   the   role  of detached  observer.  The  narrative point of  view  is  that   of   Gavin   Burke,   aug­ mented    by   occasional  brief   excursions into  the  consciousness   of  minor   charac-
 ters,   which   serve   to   demonstrate that Gavin's  confusions   are   not   unique   but are  an  element  of  the  human condition. The   petty   shifts   of  petty   man   are  ex­ posed,  but  the  pen  that  strips  away  pre­ tenses  flows  with  understanding   and  humour as well as satire,  as in the hilari­ ous  denouement of  the  Princess  Royal's  visit  of  inspection. This   is  only  one  of what   the  dust-jacket   justly  describes   as "a  succession of brilliant scenes, in which Mr.   Moore's   talents  for   high   and   low comedy   are  displayed."  Fully  displayed also is Mr. Moore's gift for creating vivid and  convincing dialogue. But  in  spite  of the delights  along  the way, Gavin  Burke's pilgrimage leaves  the  reader  vaguely  un­ satisfied.
This  is,  then,   an  enjoyable novel  but
not  a  particularly impressive  one-per­ haps  because  it  tries  too  hard  to impress and   falls,  in  its  final   pages,  into   over­  statement.  The   author   seems   to   trust  neither  himself  nor  his readers; he must tell  all,  leave  nothing implied.   We  are shown  that Gavin  has learned  to do with­  out  both  his  guardian angels  during the bombing of Belfast; we do not need to be told:

He  could  forgive   them  all,  his  father,  his city,  these  people,   this  city,  for,  after  to­ night,  nothing   they  could  say  or  do  would hurt    him   again.    Then    and    there ... he vowed  to  deliver   himself  from ... the  pre­  te,nses and  compromises  which  had helped keep  him  becalmed   in  indecision   between adolescent  and  adult  life.  Tonight, he felt, at  last  that  he  had  grown  up,  escaped....

Nor,  once  Gavin   has  noticed   that  the iron railings in front of his parents' bomb­ shattered house  have   been  removed, do we   need   the   subsequent   confrontation with  his father. That a  new  and,  hope­ fully,  a  better  world  will  arise  from  the ashes of the old world  of war, feuds,  and

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



unnatural death from  which  Gavin, like Romeo,   "awoke   and   was  an  emperor", is a satisfactory if somewhat sanguine resolution  of   the   hero's   conflicts,   but there  is rather too much  sounding of trumpets for  him  on  the  other  side.
MARION B.  SMITH



BLUE TITMOUSE

JOAN FINNIGAN,   A   Dream   of  Lilies.   Fiddle­
head  Books. $ 1.50.

PREvrous BOOKS published  by Fiddlehead Magazine have  ranged  from  mediocre  to just plain  dreadful. This one is a pleasant surprise. Joan  Finnigan colours the house­ wifely spectrum vivid,  makes living  seem genuine.  At  least  part   of   the  time  she endows   her   creations   with   conceptual vertebrae and  rib-cages,  gives the  poems coherence and  a kind of  extempore form.
Particularly  notable   is  one  called   "I
Do  Not  Wish  To  Be A Canadian Poet". The  passage  quoted   below is placed  two thirds  of the  way  through the  poem:

In  the American  Psychiatric  Journal
(which  I read for inspiration!)
Julian   Huxley  records  how a  genius  of the
species
Blue  Titmouse learned   how  to  open  milk-
bottles
of the  English  housewives as the  quarts  sat
in the dawn  on the doorsteps;

Not only this but the genius-
the momentous  number  is always one­
taught  any other  interested  Blue Titmouse
to drink  well in a new way

and  the British  housewife from  London  to Liverpool
was plagued  with half-empty  milk-bottles before her half-opened  eyes
in the half-awake mornings

Take  that  excerpt as a conceptual back­
bone.   It leaves   loose  and   flabby  word-
 flesh wobbling on  top  because of its posi­ tion so late in the  poem. Yet the structure does  not  collapse.  Here's the  ending:

We are  at  the  perilous  moment of Lamarckian break-through
or annihilation,
of choosing  between  the fate of the
dinosaurs
or the  painful  change

Do I make myself clear?
I DO  NOT WISH  TO   BE  A CANADIAN  POET
I wish to be a Blue Titmouse

The poem  is a  fair  example of  Finni­ gan's  method. It escapes failure only very narrowly and  wonderfully. And  comes so close  to  failure perhaps  because  she  had the  "Blue  Titmouse" idea only when  the poem  was  nearly  finished.  And  then,  in­  stead  of  re-writing it, trimming away  the flabby excess wordage, centring Blue Tit­ mouse  so  that   it   joined   smoothly   with the   preceding "I  do   not  wish  to  be  a Canadian  Poet"   proposition, she  left  it right   where it  was,  muscular  but  bone­ less. And  yet still very effective.
Other Finnigan poems exhibit the same weakness  and  strength. I find it madden­ ing,  and  want  to  re-write  many of them myself.  To   which   I   hear   the   poet   re­ spond:  You  keep  your  sticky  hands   off my  poems!  And  she's  right.
Just  the  same,  ma'm, I can't help being an interested busybody. A Dream of Lilies is such  a short  distance away  from  being a  very  fine  book.  In fact  it's  so good  I want  to say:  I beg your  pardon for find­ ing fault.
Of  course  not  all  the  poems  elicit  this sort  of nit-picking. Many  are  good  with­ out   reservations. The  author  is  an  old pro hockey  player's daughter (and natur­ ally  she  has  a  poem  about  that) . I re­ member pictures of her  father, "Fearless  Frankie  Finnigan"  in   the   sports   pages

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



years  ago, so homely  he was  lovely. And she  talks  of his grandchildren :

who yet must  learn,
in smaller forums  and  with less limelight, how· heroes are  really made.

Now   "Fearless  Frankie's"   grandchil­ dren   are   coming  home  from  school  at noon  hour:

'Look, mummy!
We had  Civil Defense  today!
They  showed  us how to do this-
 Isn't  it funny?'

And they go into Arab  positions of prayer on the floor,
the little  snow-flakes
of their hands,
clasped tight  behind  their  heads,
elbows tucked  in about  their  ears,
bottoms in the air
'You should get near  a wall.'
'This  is to protect  the  jugular  veins.'

Congratulations to Fred  Cogswell. And
Dear  Blue  Titmouse: go  ahead and  be.
A. W. PURDY







CJI NJl DIJIN 	LITERJITURE

BACK ISSUES

Important special issues of Canadian Literature  still available include  the   following:

No. 	8.    Special  Malcolm  Lowry Number. Original articles, letters and  poems  by   Ma leo I  m   Lowry,   articles  by  Conrad Aiken,   Earle  Birney,  Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol   Fouchet, etc.
No.   15.    Salute  to  A. J. M. Smith. Articles  on  A. J.  M. Smith  by Earle   Birney,   Roy  Fuller  and   Milton   Wilson,   together with   original  poems  and   a  Self-Review   by  A.  J.   M. Smith.

No.   19.    Special   E. J. Pratt Number.  Articles  on   E. J.  Pratt   by Paul   West,   Fred  Cogswell  and   Vincent   Sharman,  to­ gether with  Ethel Wilson's memoir  on Alan Crawley.

No.  25.    A  Symposium   on  A.  M. Klein. Articles  on  A.  M.  Klein and   his various aspects by M. W. Steinberg, Miriam Waddington, Dorothy  Livesay,  T. A.  Marshall.

$1.25  each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS   CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.



71

BOOKS IN REVIEW



HALIFAX HISTORY

THOMAS  H.  RADDALL, Halifax, Warden of the
North.  Doubleday.

THIS  BOOK  is a  re-issue,  brought  up-to­ date  and  published  in the  United  States, of a book originally  published  in Canada in I 948.  It is  an  admirable  production, combining thorough  and  careful   histor­ ical   research  with  the   best   qualities which  Thomas H. Raddall  possesses as a novelist: the gift of  concrete  visualization and  the ability to communicate that vision in  English   prose  that  is crisp  and  read­  able;  a sense that the primary  importance of   any   time   and   place   lies  in   human beings and  their  responses to human chal­  lenges  that  have   come  their   way;  and,  finally,  an   overall sense   of  proportion that  unobtrusively shapes  the  work  into an  artistic whole.
Halifax, Warden of the North is by far the  most  readable history  of a Canadian city  that   has  yet  been  produced, and  it points to a gap in our English-language historiography. Halifax  has  had  a  long, and  often  picturesque history.  The  same may be said of such cities as Quebec, Montreal, St.  John, Kingston, Toronto, and   perhaps  even   Vancouver;  yet   no work comparable to Raddal's has been produced  about   any  of  these  places   to date.
Out  of  my  own   knowledge   of   nine­ teenth-century Nova  Scotia,  Iam  dis­ appointed by the emphasis,  or rather lack of  emphasis   given   by   Raddall  to  two factors.  It is quite  true that  Halifax from the   time   of  Henry   Alline  onward   was relatively   unmoved   by  the  evangelicism which  was, sociologically  speaking, about the  most important single factor  in Nova
 Scotian  life throughout most of the  nine­ teenth century. All the  same,  the conver­ sion of Crawley  and  the  Grenville Street  Anglicans  to the  Baptist faith  led directly  to  the   foundation  of   Horton  Academy and  the  development  of  a  kind  of intel­ lectualism   that  distinguished the  Baptist  church in  the  Maritimes from  most of its evangelical  rivals.   Moreover, from I 820 to   I88o,  from   an   examination  of  book titles of  local  works of poetry  and  fiction, it  is  quite  clear  that   Halifax must  have been the  principal centre of original  book publishing in  British  North America  and that   as  such   it  possessed a  small   but determined group of  writers  and  readers determined to  uphold a perhaps too pre­ cious  and   unreal   banner of  "culture" in the  midst  of an essentially  philistine  com­ munity.
FRED COGSWELL


SKELETAL NOVEL

ROBERT HARLOW,  A Gift  of Echoes. Macmillan.
$4·50.

"A  BIZARRE, SKELETAL  COMEDY."  These words   describing  a   burnt-out  house   in the  opening  pages  of  A  Gift   of Echoes indicate, Ithink,  what   Mr.  Harlow  in­ tended   to  fashion  -a   novel  about  the tenuousness, the  whimsy,  the  eccentricity of  life,  or  lives,  whose  only  depth is an echo.   The  nature of  the  echo   is  early made  clear in the laughter of a loon. Cer­  tainly   there   are   bizarre  details:  there's  a  trick   that   is  rather   more   specialized than  Tessie  the  Tassle  Twirler's, there  is an   unusual  incident   in   a   graveyard. There is some  light  comedy,  some  horse­ play, some entertaining language from  an

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Irish  remittance man,  some  pretty  heavy irony.  And  the  work is skeletal.
Such  an  intention may account for  the
curious   quality  of  the   places   in  which action  occurs.  The general  setting  is the interior of British  Columbia, around and including  that   of   Mr.   Harlow's  other novel,  Royal   Murdoch, and   the  moun­ tains  form  a backdrop. There are a lum­  ber mill, a teacherage, a couple  of farms,  a village,  and  farther  off, a town.  In  the town   are   Mrs.  Grandy's  second-floor apartment, the barroom of a hotel,  and  a hospital.  Though people  move  from  one to   another  of   these   places,   the   places themselves  are  disparate, and  when  they are  not  the immediate focus of attention, they seem not to exist. They have neither depth   nor  texture. They  are  like sets on a  stage,  to  be  taken   off  into   the  wings and   dismantled  until   the  next  perform­ ance.
Through these  places,  in  the  spring  of
a year shortly  after  World  War  II, moves a  group   of  tenuously   connected  people who have one thing  in common: they are in   hiding  or   in   retirement  from   "the chaos  that   is  life."  There are  the  mill­ owners   from   the  East-Father  Acton, his son Nairn  and  his wife Cora, who are constantly  bitching  at   each   other,   and their   daughter Jenny. There  is  Max,  a maimed   and   befuddled  ex-prize  fighter,  a  giant   of  a  man,   now  turned  lumber­ jack;  there  is Velma,  the  village  Aphro­  dite,  and   there  are  the  Grandys-Mrs. Grandy and   her  son  John, who  has  re­ turned  from  the  war  and   Paris  to  seek tranquillity.
John   Grandy  seems  to   be  the   main subject of  the  book.  He  is one  of  those people   who,   whether  or   not   they  ever really existed, have  been examined rather thoroughly of  recent  years. They  are  the
 would-be  spectators, the  witnesses of life, who  do  not   want   to  become   involved. Of  course,  they  always  come  a  cropper and so does John  Grandy, who is perhaps a little  more  naive  and  stupid  than  most of them.  We are  told  that  "The structure of his history was dismembered"; he complains   that, while   things   have  hap­ pened   around  him,    nothing   has   ever really  happened  to  him.  He  is  without echoes.
In the last fifty-odd pages of the book, which   contain   most  of  the  action,   that lack  is taken  care  of.  In  the  graveyard, at  her  mother's burial, Velma   spills  all about   her   relations  with   Nairn   Acton. As  a  result,  Father  Acton   evicts  Nairn and  Cora   from   paradise, Cora   sets  the fire  that  destroys  the  mill,  and  then  she tries to put the  blame  on the witless Max. Max  attacks  Nairn. To  save  Nairn,  John Grandy   grabs   an   angle-iron,  hits   Max on the head and  kills him. Mrs. Grandy comforts  her son by saying, "If you hadn't happened   along,    someone    else   would have had  to kill Max." Spectator Grandy is now involved and he foresees himself "living  among  the  echoes."  Oh  the irony of it  all.
Apart  from  the matter of involvement,
there  is a  host  of  other   popular  themes. There is, of course, existentialism (Grandy spent  some  time  in  Paris), but there   is  also  good   and   evil  greying   to right and wrong, positive sin becoming depravity, aloneness,  the  search  for iden­ tity,  hero  and  anti-hero,  endurance and self-pity,  innocence and  experience, and so  on.  There are  enough  themes  to  fill several   books,   and   any   one   of   them deserves  more  than   the  desultory   treat­ ment  that  they  get  here.
If the  themes   are   jumbled, so  is  the
writing.  This  is a  matter not  just of the

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ambiguous pronoun reference that  the reader  has to puzzle  through.  It is the purposeless  detail.  John  Grandy  goes out for  the evening: "At  the bathroom he handed her  in  the  towel and  told  her  he was going  for  a walk.  He took his jacket from   the  recess  by  the  apartment  door and  went  down  the  stairs  to  the  street." It  is  also   the   strained    similes.  In   the first few  pages  there  is a set piece on the coming  of spring,  and  the reader  is faced with  this assortment: "like a woman  who has  preened   for  hours  at  her  mirror, it sweeps in, full of surprise that it has kept anyone  waiting ... the sun rises as golden and  nourishing and  warm  as new  bread
... But  spring  is savage,  real."  The  con­
flicts   of  images,   tone  and   connotation here  are  characteristic of the  general muddle.  But   most   disheartening  of  all are  the  long  expository  passages. Instead of bringing his material to life, Mr. Har­ low   writes   about  it  and   about  it.  We are given  the  histories  and genealogies of almost   all   the   characters,  we  are   told about   what   they   are  thinking, and   we are  told about  what they are doing. Even the  crucial  graveyard scene  is  not  real­ ized.   Instead,  the   scene  is  reported­ reported  at   length   and   twice  over.  In effect,   this   novel  is  yet  to  be  written; what  now  exists is a detailed  description of a  novel  with  some of the  scenes filled in.  It is indeed  skeletal.
A Gift  Of Echoes seems to me to be a less mature work  than   Royal  Murdoch, which  Mr.  Harlow published  three  years ago.
MARGARET STOBIE







74
 PRE-RAPHAELITISM DEFINED

WILLIAM    E.   FREDEMAN,    Pre-Raphaelitism: A Bibliocritical  Study. Harvard  University Press. $ 1o.oo.

lT   IS   REFRESHING  at   any   time   to   en­ counter  a   bibliography that   suggests familiarity with  the  material  beyond  the tables  of contents of the books catalogued. When   the  particular  subject  explored   is Pre-Raphaelitism   there    is   even   more cause  for  rejoicing; although  recognized as  one  of  the  most  important  develop­  ments   in   nineteenth-century  ::esthetics, this  movement has long caused  consider­ able discomfort and confusion. William  E. Fredeman's Pre-Raphaelitism: A  Biblio­ critical  Study provides  the  most  compre­ hensive   bibliography  of  the   movement yet available and  in addition  attempts to define   and   illustrate  the  various   stages of that  movement from  the foundation of the    Pre-Raphaelite   group   of   seven, through  the   ensuing   Pre-Raphaelite "school", to  the  final  stage  of  develop­  ment,  Pre-Raphaelitism as a  genre.  The volume   contains  almost   forty   pages   of preliminary commentary and  an  impres­ sive  bibliography  of  over   one   hundred sections,  divided   into  four  major  parts: sources  for  bibliography and  provenance, bibliography of individual figures, bibliog­ raphy  of  the  Pre-Raphaelite Movement, and  bibliography of Pre-Raphaelite illus­ trations. There is  a  great  deal  of  cross­ referencing and   a  very  thorough  index.
Any bibliography involving categories and  assessment  of influences  implies a certain amount of criticism  and  synthesis. Professor  Fredeman has  extended his  re­ sponsibilities further  still  by  introducing even   more   aspects   of  a  bibliographical

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and    critical    nature.  He    has   included descriptions of  the  major repositories  of Pre-Raphaelite materials and  listed cata­ logues  of  notable   exhibitions and  sales. In  addition to  this  lengthy  introduction defining  Pre-Raphaelitism  and  surveying  Pre-Raphaelite scholarship, he has evalu­  ated   the  individual artists,   with  critical  comments  on  many  secondary materials. With  this  tripartite method of definition,  criticism,  and   cataloguing he  makes  an original   and    valuable  contribution  to nineteenth-century  studies.   The  critical distinctions are  clearly  stated and  read­ able;  the comprehensive bibliography, re­ cognizing  the  close  relationship between poetry   and   painting  and   the  impact   of Pre-Raphaelite :::esthetics on later theories, is of immense  value  to  both  scholar  and collector;  the   evaluation  of   secondary sources   will  be   a  special   boon   to  the student.   Inevitably,   however,    such    a method  depends for   unity   of  tone  and achievement  on   the   personal  biases  of
 the "bibliocritic". Occasionally Professor Fredeman  is  guilty  of  an  auctioneering tone  as subjective as the sensational scholarship he deplores; at times, as with William  Morris,  his own  personal evalua­ tion  of  the  artist  suggests  an  unevenness  in   the   selections   noted.   Some   of   the  minor   categories    are   of   value   not   so much  for the  items now listed as for their  indications of  further  scholarship which might   profitably  be  done.   As  Professor Fredeman points  out,  bibliocritical study can  only  be selective,  again  implying  the  use  of   value   judgments  on  more   than  one  level,  and   here  too  the  amount of spadework  involved   is staggering.  How­ ever,   considering  the   extent    of   cross­ referencing, it seems odd  that  the unique Pre-Raphaelite  collection   of   Peterhouse College  should   not   be  included  in  the description   of   Cambridge  University holdings.  There  appear also  to  be some occasional  inconsistencies in  bibliograph­ ical data; some revised editions are noted in full, others,  just as significant  for their additional material, are  not.
But   these  are   minor   criticisms   when
one considers  the extent of Professor Fredeman's  research   and   knowledge   of both   arts   and   letters   of  the  period.   In addition,  as  befits  such   a  memorial to those  artists   who   were   concerned with "an appropriateness" and  "scrupulous fidelity",  the  book  is almost  entirely  free of misprints and  is in  itself  a  beautifully designed  object  with  apt  illustrations.  As the author states  in his opening Commen­ tary,  much basic scholarship remains to be done  on  all  phases  of  Pre-Raphaelitism. Certainly  this  study   is  an  indication  of the  importance of  the  movement and  a promise  of  the  treasure-house yet  to  be explored.

ANN  SADDLEMYER


75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SURFACES AND HEARTS

RONA  MURRAY,  The  Enchanted   Adder.  Klanak
Press. $

IN  ONE POEM in  The Enchanted   Adder,
Rona   Murray writes  of  the  person  who

with rage for order  in his blood hoops words about  bright  images and polishes their  surfaces
until 	kaleidoscopic   mirrors reveal his heart

In a sense, these poems are comparably polished   words,  revealing   both  a  search for  order   and  a  personal  core  of  mean­ ing.   Occasionally  that   polish   manifests itself   as  an   imaginative   precision,   and this  transforms the  words  into  moments  of  lyric  perception, but  such  precision  is unfortunately not  sustained. Three diffi­ culties,   here,   come   between   the  reader  and  the  poet's mind: the central  images, the   structures,   and,   in   some   cases  at least,  a  sort  of  private meaning,   related to   the   experience  that    motivated  the writing,  which   the   poem   does  not  en­ tirely  allow  to  be shared.
There is  a  difference-tangible,  but
not always  easy to apprehend -between unity  and   a  sense  of  sameness.  Both  re­ sult  from  repetition, but  the one will  de­ velop   a   three-dimensional   structure, whereas  the other  allows only a recurrent two-dimensional one. The vulnerable lady in  white   who  figures  in  the  first  poem does  develop,   of  course;  she  can  be  re­ lated  to the white sacrificial birds (xxviii) and  to  Eve  losing  Eden   ( xxx) , and  her problem    is  the   central  one  of  seeking order,   of   finding  exorcism  "against dis­ orders  of  the  mind" (iv). Related to this are   the   situations  involving    disturbed geometrical figures  ( v), pattern intersect-
 ing  with  fire   (vi), the  inability to  con­ tend   with  fire  (xvi), the  desire  to  com­ bine  form  with  form  (xvii). The problem  is both  physical  and  intellectual:

if now
the wound  in the  thigh
will not  heal
if tongue  cannot find the  right  question
mind  the  right  answer
mark  the  occasion

Ultimately resolution is found  in the  last poem:

The  fragments in her shaking  hand drove  the  lady on
until  the fierce wound  dropped  away and  herself and  self were one....

the lady  drew her  tattered gown about  her in the sun.

But  the  reader is never  really involved  in the lady's  predicament, perhaps partly because   the  central images  used  to  con­ vey   it-the    adder,  the   darkness,   the wood -are  so  well-worn.  Though their  connotative richness  is attested to by their  appearance in centuries of English  poetry,  this very recurrence serves to inhibit their effectiveness here.  Sometimes, too, the poetic   structure  becomes   merely   a   lin­ guistic    trick -"the   crotch    of   shame" ( xxvii), for  example-and  the  effect  is again   lost.  But  all  this  emphasizes   only one  aspect  of The  Enchanted Adder.
The  other    side   is   the   enchantment
which  many  of the  words  do  work  upon the   reader.  Rona  Murray  has   drawn from  three  sources  for  the  poems  in  this book:    dream;  personal  experience with skiing,  skindiving, beekeeping, and  Van­ couver   life;  and   poetic   theory.  The   in­  fluence  of the  Black  Mountain  poets  can be  seen  in  some  of  the  verse,  but  tradi­ tional  stanzaic forms,  such  as  the  ballad, are  also  used.  The latter is  employed   in the  finest  poem  in  this  collection, "The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



child  she sang  her  morning song", which beautifully evokes the innocence of  child­ hood  and  tells the  end  of that innocence when  it  comes  into  contact  with  a ruth­ less  but  well-meaning  world.  "We  have been  into  the  water,  we  two"  also sug­ gests  a  moment of  life,  and  its sensitive bright  surfaces  once again  reveal  a heart.
Except  on  the  index  page,  the  typog­ raphy, designed  by Charles  Morriss,  adds to  the  pleasure with  which  one  can  read this  work;   the  type  itself   and   the  two­ colour   print present   an  attractive page. Most  of  the  poems  are  sombre  in  tone, but   the   book  is  not   without  wit.  The  poetry    itself    demonstrates  a   conscious awareness  of  the  techniques of the  craft,  some  linguistic facility,  and,  particularly in    those  poems  about  childhood, an imaginative lyric  talent.
WILLIAM H. NEW


ROMANTIC  OF ROMANTICS

c.   H.   DICKINSON,   Lorne  Pierce, A   Profile.
Ryerson Press.  $3:00.

THIS  BRIEF BIOGRAPHICAL  STUDY  of  the late   Dr.   Lome  Pierce,   for   forty   years editor   of  the  Ryerson   Press,  is modestly and   accurately  called   "a profile"   by its author. It is not  a formal biography, and makes   no  claim   to  be  definitive.   It  is best  on  Pierce's  family  background,  boy­ hood,  and  youth-the very things about  which  most  of  us knew  least.  In  dealing  with  his years  of  maturity, it  is  scrappy,  sometimes   confusing in  chronology, and often  a  mere  catalogue  of  names,  titles, degrees,  societies  and   so  on.  None  of  it is  written    with   any   particular  flair   or imaginative insight,  but  it  is honest,  un­ pretentious, and  affectionate.
 It is to  be  hoped  that  someone some­ day  will  write  a  definitive  biography of Pierce,  for  he was a most interesting and influential  man.    It   might  indeed  be argued   that   he  was  the  most  influential man  of  letters   in  Canada  between,  say,
1925  and    1950:    his   anthologies   were used in practically all the  high  schools of the  country, and  had  an  incalculable in­ fluence on the literary  tastes of  Canadian youth; his publishing house  was  publish­  ing more and  better Canadian books than  any  other   house;  he  "discovered" or  at least   gave   early   encouragement   to   a plethora of   Canadian writers,  including
Marjorie  Pickthall, E.  J. Pratt,  Wilson
MacDonald, Frederick  Philip  Grove, Philip  Child,   Evelyn  Richardson, E.  A. McCourt,   Raymond   Souster,    Dorothy Livesay, Earle  Birney, Louis Dudek, John Sutherland  and   P.  K.   Page;   he  estab­ lished  such  series  as  the  Ryerson  Poetry Chap  Books, the    Makers  of    Cana­ dian   Literature,  the   Canadian   History  Readers, the  Canada Books of  Prose and Verse,  the  Picture Gallery   of  Canadian History,   the   Canadian  Art   Series;   he gathered the invaluable Edith  and  Lorne  Pierce  Collection of Canadian  Literature at   Queen's University and   was  instru­ mental  in securing the Hathaway Collec­  tion of Canadian  Literature for  the  Uni­ versity of New Brunswick; he founded or helped  to  found  a  number of  important organizations,  including   the    Canadian Authors' Association,  the Canadian Bibli­ ographical  Society,   and   the   Canadian Writers'    Foundation;  he    donated   the Lorne   Pierce  Gold   Medal  to  the  Royal  Society  of Canada and  set  up  the  Ryer­  son   Fiction   Award.   In   addition  to  all these  activities,   and   his  editorial  duties  at   the   Press,   he   found   time   to   write  several  books himself, including A Cana-

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dian  People and  A Canadian Nation, his biographies of  William  Kirby  and  Mar­ jorie  Pickthall, and   his  selected  edition  of the  poetry  of Bliss Carman.
The  above  incomplete list would  con­
stitute a  remarkable life's  work  for  any man,   but   when   we  realize  that   Pierce was   plagued    with    delicate    health    all through  his  life,  and   that   in  particular he was almost  totally  deaf and  the victim of  severe  attacks of  angina,  his  achieve­ ment   becomes  almost  miraculous. What  impelled    him,   the   son   of  an   Ontario village  tinsmith  and  hardware merchant, to take up so zealously the cause of Cana­ dian  culture in  general  and  of Canadian literature in   particular?  Mr.   Dickinson does  not  really  attempt to answer  this or other  similar  questions,  being  content to suggest   that    the   interest   in   Canadian literature came  from  hearing  Dean  Cap­ pon   of  Queen's,  in   a  lecture   in   I9I2, dismiss  it   as  not   worth   a   damn.   The  more  complete answer would  have  to be sought   in   psychology  and   sociology,  in the  nature of  Ontario village  life in  the early  years of this  century,  in  the  nature of Canadian  Methodism, the  rise of cul­ tural   and   political   nationalism  in  Can­  ada  during and   after   World   War  I, in the   effect   of   Irish   ancestry   and   Irish traditions-and even  then  Pierce  would remain something of an  enigma.
Mr.   Dickinson   makes  no  value  judg­
ments  about  Pierce, or at least does noth­ ing  except   praise   him.  Praiseworthy  he was, above  all for  the sympathy and  en­ thusiastic  encouragement he  gave  to as­ piring   writers.   He   was  a   romantic  of romantics, who  always  assumed  the  best of people  and  gave  them  a sense of their unlimited capacity. I have  many  letters from  him -and so I am sure have a host of  writers-which I should   be  embar-
 rassed  to publish, so extravagantly did  he praise   me  and   assure   me  that   "all   the honours" (he liked that kind of phrase) awaited me.  In  this  respect,  Pierce's  ro­ manticism was good,  because  encourage­ ment   was  what   I  and  other  Canadian writers  needed; but insofar as this roman­ ticism expressed itself in published literary criticism,  it  limited   his usefulness. Some­ times  his criticism  was so rhapsodic as to become  laughable: he  was not sufficiently discriminating. He  was in one sense a manifestation of that  boosterism which marked Canadian cultural life in the nineteen-twenties, of that  tendency to cry up everything Canadian because  it was Canadian. But  he  never  succumbed  en­ tirely  to  that   spirit:  in  his  concern  for Canada there  was something subtler  and finer  than  boastful nationalism. For Lome Pierce   was  a   very   complex   figure.   He was  a   Canadian  nationalist but   also  a Hebrew  prophet; a  Methodist preacher but also a deep  admirer of Russian litera­ ture; a  moral   idealist   but  also  an  Irish wit.   There is  no  doubt   that  he  was  a great  editor  and  a great  Canadian.
DESMOND PACEY

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SUN, SEASONS,
CITY

RAYMOND SOUSTER,  Ten  Elephants on  Yonge
Street. Ryerson. $3.95.

THIS   NEW SOUSTER VOLUME follows swiftly on the winged heels of the author's Collected  Poems of last year, and adds eighty-six  poems  to the immense produc­ tion  of  one  of our  best  poets.
The opening title  poem  ends  with  the elephants emptying their   bowels  on  one of  Toronto's  main   thoroughfares,  with men  following  with  shovels,  and  already we know that  these will be Souster  poems, not the metrical artichokes of academy. Souster   poems  show  a  great   sureness  of the  poet's   measure,   along   with  an  eye's view  that   seems  to  be  growing steadily more  wry.
There is still  the  obsession  with  dead
and  dying  animals, and  with  the sun, the seasons,  the  poor  on  the  changing streets of Canada's main  city,  the  young  in  one another's arms  and  bodies on the ground, and  the  visions of  machines ripping out trees   and   making  room   for   macadam and  cement, only  to  have  these  smashed by yet further machines:
The  wrecking-ball of Greenspan
of Temperman reverberates
on  King Street, toppling steel,
smashing brick  and  stone
to a levelled-out stretch of waste, on  which  the  sun uneasily shivers.
Through all, Souster  refuses  to bow to sophisticated  readers  (including other poets)   who  tell  him  not  to  write  poems about   birds   with   broken   wings.  If  (a) every  object  of  emotion can  become  per
 se a sentimental concern, and  (b)  poets should  not  write  about sentimental  con­ cerns, then  where  will the  poets  (and the rest  of  us)  be?  Souster's  feelings  for  in­ jured  and  dead  animals is an  honest  one, and   a   good   one.   More   important,  he never  slacks  his  measure in  responding to the  things  he  writes  about.
Another  common objection to Souster
says something about   his  subjects   being too  localized,  and   the  poems  too  short. He  takes  that   objection into  account in his  short  preface on  the  dust   jacket  of this book. He  replies  that  here  the objec­ tors can read  poems that  take place thou­ sands  of miles from  Toronto, and  poems that  cover  two  pages.  But  Souster  knows that  that  is not  the  real  answer.  He  has quoted  the  real  answer  in  the  first  pages of  his  earlier   book,   A  Local   Pride,  in which   he  reminds  his  readers   of  what  Williams said  about universality and  the local.
In   this  book   the   tiny  imagist   poems are  punctuation marks between  the larger ones  that  tell  of  the  poet's  stand  in  the dying  world  around him,  a world  always dying,  filled  with  life.  The  larger  poems treat    that    concern,  and    in   them   the author  goes  far   beyond   the   incidental very  well,  more   than   he  has  ever  done before.
Some   day,   for   the   benefit   of   those
casual  readers   who  think   that   Souster's kind of poem is simply  a  jotting  down  of experience, someone should do a formal study  of the  poetry.  One  short  stanza:

Bond  Street at  noon  hour: kids in  the  St. Michael's school  yard break  the  mood  the  Cathedral starts toward heaven aspiring.

is packed  with rhyme  (noon  hour: school yard)  and  functional pun  (aspiring) and devices   for   which  the  pigeon-holers

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



haven't  yet,   I  hope,   made    up   names (what  happens  with   "kids"   placed   at the  end  of that  first line. See Yeats'  line, "This is no country for old men. The young").
Those   casual   readers   might  find  that
Souster  is more  than  what  he calls  him­
self:

just  the  crazy  poet
well-hooked on  the  past, a sucker for  memories.

GEORGE BOWERING

SHIFTS
IN THE LINE
 Eastern Europe in recent  years, while fellow-experts  will   want   to   pursue   re­ search   along   the   lines   traced    by   him, testing   at   the   same   time   some   of   his more  controversial statements. All  in  all, his  book  represents  a  valuable  addition to  the  literature on  East  European poli­ tics, a field in which  until recently  Cana­ dian   academics  were  more   conspicuous by  their   absence  than   by  the  light  they were  able  to  cast  on  their  subject.   Pro­  fessor  Skilling's   work  is  a  clear   indica­ tion   that    things   are   changing  in   that  area   too,   and   that   Canadian  scholars are  capable of  making notable  contribu­ tions.


H.   GORDON SKILLING,  Communism  National and    Interna,tional:   Eastern    Europe   after Stalin. University of  Toronto Press.  $4-95·

THis COLLECTION  of essays originally published in  learned   journals  is devoted to   various   facets   of  what   is  popularly known   as  "national  Communism". The need  for  a  comparative study  of   Com­ munist    dictatorships  has   been   strongly felt  ever  since  Stalin's  successors  failed to maintain the  unity  of  the  Communist bloc. The successes of Communist regimes in  gaining some freedom  of action  vis-a­ vis the U.S.S.R., and  the introduction of less   crude   techniques  of   government, created  somewhat differing  situations in the  various  countries. Today, as distinct from  the early  rgso's, variety  rather than uniformity is the  rule.
The changes  that  have taken  place are analysed  sympathetically by Professor Skilling   of  Toronto  University. He  be­ longs  to  that   very  small  band  of  Com­  munist   area  specialists  whose  acumen is matched by a limpid  prose.  The  general  reader   will  find  in  his  book  one  of  the clearest   accounts  of   what   happened  in

8o
 IVAN AVAKUMOVIC





ROBERTS IN PRINT


SIR:
In my  article  "The Precious  Speck  of Life", I made   a  statement to  the  effect that    of   Charles  G.   D.   Roberts'  short stories,  only  the  anthology The Last Barrier  is in print. This is quite erroneous. There are  several  volumes  in  print   and I wish to apologize  to the  publishers and editors  of Roberts who must  have been justifiably astonished  by this error. My statement should  have  suggested  that, as far   as  I can   discover,   no  collection   of Roberts'  stories   has  been  added  to  the list of books in  print  since I 958 and  that most   of   his  animal  stories   remain   un­ available. I hope  this statement, at  least, is  justifiable.
JOSEPH GOLD
