$7.50  per copy



CA-NADIAN
l TERATURE





Autumn, 1983


ON DENNIS LEE

Articles
 N°·98


BY  R. D.  MACDONALD, DALE ZIEROTH, THERESE  EVELINE LAFONTAINE

Poems

BY  GEORGE FALUDY, RUSSELL  THORNTON, CATHY FORD, HAROLD RHENISCH, NElLE GRAHAM, ALLAN SAFARIK, RICHARD OUTRAM , R.  G. EVERSON, DAYV  JAMES-FRENCH, ROBERT BILLINGS

Books in Review

BY  CLARA THOMAS,  LORRAINE WEIR, ANDREW BROOKS, DAVID  MACAREE, JANET  M. PATERSON, CLAIRE-LISE ROGERS, EVA-MARIE KROLLER, ADRIAN MITCHELL, RICHARD PLANT, JOHN  J. O'CONNOR, CAMILLE R.  LABOSSIERE, RENATE USMIANI, LARRY SHOULDICE, JANE MOSS, WILLIAM BUTT, MICHAEL GREENSTEIN,  RON MILES, GEORGE WOODCOCK, MARGARET STOBIE, SHERRILL GRACE, ANTHONY JOHN  HARDING, JOHN  ORANGE, JAMES  DOYLE, JACQUELINE  VISWANATHAN, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, ALLISON MITCHAM, R. W. BEVIS

Opinions and Notes

BY  GEORGE WOODCOCK, MISAO DEAN


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







THE FLOWERS THAT BLOOM
IN LA.



THE  RECENT  REPORT  THAT there  are  now  several  hundred thousand  Canadians living in  Los Angeles, making  it  one  of  Canada's  largest cities, is instructive  on several counts. It  testifies yet again  to Social  Mobility  In Our  Time;  it says something about  at least one dimension  of Canadian taste;  it is an  implicit  comment  on our  cultural  flight  from  winter,  echoed  annually  in Miami,  Bridgetown,  and  Honolulu; and  it hints  at  the slow Canadianization of the American  media,  which just may or may not be an  illusion. That  American cliche, the Great  White North, was amply gored by the Canadian ironies of "Bob and Doug MacKenzie" -and one could tell they were Canadian ironies because they were self-reflexive, too, puncturing  the defensive pompousness that the notion of  the  Great  White  North  sometimes  engenders  in  the  Great   Canadian  soul. Totting  up  a list of Great  Canadians  in  the  American   media  has  long  been  a cultural  pastime, of course: from Mary Pickford to Donald  Sutherland to SCTV and  the writers for assorted films and comedy programmes   (Silver Streak, Rosie Shuster), Canadians have managed somehow to affect the speech on centre stage even  if they  don't   always  occupy  centre  stage  themselves.  As  various  Royal Commissions have been told, these successes in the States  (always we must pause to ask ourselves if we consider them successes because they take place in the States) tell of more than  individual  talent:  they tell of the excellent  training-and  the limit  on  recognition -which  the  CBC  and  Canadian theatre  experience  have long been providing writers and actors.
But of course training and experience and even talent  are not enough all by themselves. There  are  dangers  of self-satisfaction  in  art  as in  any  other  human endeavour.  We remind ourselves frequently of the dangers of a "recognition" that comes "too  early," and  of the problems that  derive from  reviewing each  others' books. We insist, too -and  rightly -not on the need to preserve a fixed  Cana­ dian  culture  but  on  the  need  to  preserve  the  opportunity  to  express  ourselves individually,  thereby  to give voice to  the  dynamics  of  the  culture  we  have  in common, and on the need to guarantee  Canadian artists  access to the Canadian

2

EDITORIAL

market.  Such  needs,  given  the  international  dynamics  of  marketing-which would  minimize  choice  to  maximize  profit -require  protective  legislation  of various kinds:  guarantees  of cultural  opportunity  to those Canadians who possess a  cultural  talent.  But  there's  the  catch.  A cultural   policy  has  to  support  and encourage  quality,  not guarantee support  to mediocrity.  And  there  is a point  at which  mechanical   protectionism   encourages  mediocrity,  for  it  erects  barriers against stimulus rather  than  against takeover. Ideas cross borders;  so does talent; so does imagination. And all can cross borders creatively -not to become imposi­ tions on the culture  to which they travel,  but to be absorbed  and  reanimated in the flux of the new.
Collaborating with  L.A.-or  New York or Miami-is of course no more  a guarantee of quality  than  refusing to collaborate  with  L.A. The  fact  of working together is not the issue; access to creative stimulus is, and  a sensible culture  gives its artists  the opportunity to express themselves partly  by not  imposing  on  their freedom  of access to ideas and opportunities. Some of these ideas and  opportuni­ ties do  involve  working  together-actors and  writers,  for  example,  can  learn from each  other,  from  the stimulus of talent  meeting  talent.  It  is through  such creative  collisions, whether  international  or  intranational, that  cultures  prosper. And there is a degree to which Canadians, who are perfectly capable  of recogniz­ ing quality, have still to learn to welcome its presence among us, wherever it comes from. It's always possible the source might not be L.A.
Sometimes,  moreover,  the  mere fact  of coming from  outside  provides an  ex­ tremely healthy  degree of distance  towards  a cultural  pretension;  sometimes  the Great  White  North  needs to be satirized.  And  it certainly  needs  to  be satirized more from within. We have able political cartoonists. And we have John  Metcalf,  whose devastating  send-ups are too often taken for put-downs,  too seldom recog­ nized as the earnest,  impatient  side of a desire for Canadian  culture  to estimate accurately  the qualities it possesses and  the talents it has  managed  to foster. But of satirists in words there are too few; of distance towards ourselves we have  too little;  of distance  between  us, too much. Which  is  another  reason that  creativity in the various  public media becomes yet again so important to us.
This is one of the reasons that of all new television programmes of recent months I  so value  that  collaborative  venture  between  the  Muppets   and  Dennis  Lee, Fraggle Rock.  It  is not  just that  the athletic  versatility  of the  puppets  and  the joyful inventiveness of Lee's lyrics make good theatre;  they are inventive for  chil­ dren and  adults  alike. And cautionary.  Every week telling tales of the  "fraggles" who live behind  warehouse baseboards, the programme  offers us a satiric glimpse of others and a creative distance from ourselves. In one early episode, the central characters,  in  the  depths  of depression, seek advice  from  the  local  oracle,  an animate  gypsy trash-heap named Margerie. Rising to her full height, Delphic, but

3

EDITORIAL


replete with   banana skins,  she  intones:  "For  lonely, you   need  friends" - and the  two  brash rats  that  feed  upon   her  presence pronounce  in  unequivocal  con­ clusion, "The trash heap has spoken." We  might remember that, when  next our  politicians speak. And  it's  advice to  which even  editorial writers have  to  listen. The  trick   is  to  choose  one's  prophetess clearly, to   tell   the   difference  between
Margerie and  Cassandra.
W.N.




THE BJILLJID OF THE HELL-HOUND

George Faludy

translated by Arthur Koestler

It happened last night. Some months ago
the hell-hounds arrived: six monstrous beasts with a sergeant  of the Secret  Police. We couldn't care less. What were to us these creatures

amidst  the camp's familiar features:
watchtowers, pistols, barbed  wire,
machine guns and  flame-throwers to boot? I can assure you we did not care a bit.

The cops selected some of our mates
to impersonate the quarry, while they  taught the hounds how to behave should  any of the convicts
entertain the notion of making for the gates.

"Hold the thief," they screamed and  broke into a run in hot pursuit of the half-crazed fugitive.
On  reaching him they pulled  in the dog's  leash
or else they didn't. On some nights  I woke

on the rotting straw  that  was my nest
to the sound of baying when  they changed the guards. I learnt to shrug it off, like the rest.
It surprised  me nevertheless

that our guards were just as merciless
in treating their savage allies to whip  and  belly-kick

4

POEM

as they were to us. Or  to the squirrels
they killed with stones, or to the salamander whose

graceful legs they chopped  off with an ax. I marvelled at the care they took to spot
far off the road,  and squash  under  their  heels, a single, faintly  blue forget-me-not.

When  I was free, I liked all sorts of dogs,
they liked me too. But here these hulking brutes filled me with  dread. Especially one,
a milk-white bitch  with a calf-like head.

She terrified  me. Whenever I worked in the camp she would  flop down to keep me company, watching me sideways out of blood-shot  eyes - staring at  me steadily.

"Stop staring, bloodthirsty beast,"  I prayed. "I stink and  my legs are like sticks,
a fat  lot of good it'll do you
to feast on a scare-crow for kicks.

My thighs  are those of a skeleton, my buttocks of all meat  bereft, moreover, I told you I am innocent, a loyal man  of the Left,

like most of the blokes in this camp. Enough! I've  had my share!
Stop  goggling at me, disgusting  brute!"
But she continued to stare.

* 	* 	*
Last night, while dreaming, I heard  them  bark savagely in front  of our hut,
the watchman removed  the iron bolts,
I was awake, though  my eyes were shut.

He called  out a name: to be taken
for interrogation. Drugged by sleepiness
a man  becomes  docile. This is the time of night to break  him and  make  him confess

5

POEM

to his part in a fascist plot
the Police Chief dreamt up as a pretext to have his deputy  chief shot
-unaware that  his turn  would  be next.

The gale raged  through the open  door, the hut was nearly  torn apart,
and  suddenly  that  milk-white bitch
was sharing my bunk, heart  to heart,

and  perfectly  still. Only her tongue  was busily licking my cheek, while I embraced the brute  and  whispered to it a silent lullaby.

The watchman became curious where did the creatures hide?
A mocking  voice informed him:
-They've changed to our side.

We roared  with mirth. Across the aisle a dark  behemoth  of a cur
was squatting 'twixt  Zoltan  and  Arpad, my pals, four  hands  were stroking  its fur.

Water is plentiful, but how shall  I feed her, these hounds are not easy to keep -
I mused as, her head on my aching chest,
we both fell asleep.

* 	* 	*
Throughout the long day the miners' brigade was working in the quarry. When  we got back into  the camp  the sun was already setting behind  the mountain. But there  was no petting

of dogs. Five of them were lying on the slope in their frozen blood, only the white one was still trying
to stay alive. On  three legs she staggered

slowly, in circles, along  the barbed  wire, her head hung low,
her coat no longer shining, bespattered with blood and  mire.

6

POEM



From  time to time she stopped  for a moment uncertainly, not knowing what  next.
She raised her head  and  gave out a long howl
directed at the police barracks. A foul

coward I: just a hundred steps between  us-
but watchtowers have eyes. A foam of blood and  air broke from  the flank of the white bitch
where  the bullet  had hit her. They'd do the same to me,

and  bury me with quicklime in a ditch.
So I just stood there. What else could  be done? I sighed: woe to thee, poor country,
and  watched the setting  sun.

* 	* 	*
Once more  I lie on the rotting straw, my hands lying beside me
like parched leaves fallen  from a tree. A bat sits on my knee.

The wound  is inflamed. I fight for breath, blood oozes from my flank.
I know it is only imagined.
I shall imagine it unto  my death.

Red  Camp,  Hungary,  1951





THE D:ziNCER


translated by Eric Johnson

Vain, bold, wild and  warmed  by wool, steel-cable muscles, satin skin,
I make  no sound with  throat or lips: in ronds de jambe en l' air I laugh, words issue from  my fingertips, manifestoes from  my nod,
and  from  my eyes a laser beam shoots down  to cut a heart  in half.
 

George Faludy


7

POEM

Levitation is my whim,
my vertebrae are gyroscopes,
and  when I turn  or jump or leap
I smile at Newton  on the ground;
my thighs do beats like casse-noisettes,
my arms  are branches  in the wind, my legs precision compasses.
Snow-flowers  hover at my nape,
and  in the closed eyes of my navel
a thousand boys and  girls are drowned.

Mother-naked is my body, nudeness pushing through the silk, for when I dress, in truth I strip down  to the essence that  I am:
a Form on which  is pinned  a heart. I'm  the scene you've paid  to see, both the actor  and  the play;
I am the sculptor and  the stone, a statue,  I, of flesh and  bone. Not just the artist,  I'm  the art.

Intrigue cannot touch  me here where nothing in the world attracts: eyes that  burn  with hot desire, money,  things that  money buys.
Sometimes  forgetting, though, the dance
I let my body sprawl  in lust- then ask myself:  Narcissus, fool,
why squander all your force on sex?
Look in the mirror  as you dance and  know where  real pleasure  lies!

The  house-lights  dim,  the world is black, a deep Gehenna, silent till
I Ia hand-grenadeI explode; or
perhaps just float out from  the wings and  blossom slowly on my stem. Lightning feet and  flashing hair  I fly: a comet's  tail against  the night,
pause, preparation, pirouette:
I spin, and dazzled  mortals  stare to count  the facets of the gem.

8

POEM

Every day I'm  something other than  I was. I cannot stop. Whole  galleries  of statues  wait
to breathe through me, to know the strife
of flesh with gravity  and  air.
They  take their  blood, their style from me and  metamorphose note by note, inhabited and  brought to life.
Could  marble dance  if I weren't there?

What will happen to them, to me for whom  the dance  is everything: my days, my nights, my mania, love, salvation, endless goal?
For in my very dreams I dance, trusting even there  in strength. What will happen on the day that  retribution comes to one who has a body for a soul?

'   Fifteen, ten, perhaps five years,
and strings  of muscle come untuned, no one there  to put them  right.
The body that  was all my wealth
will let me down: death will smile contempt, loathing gallop  at my side.
There'll be no peace with others  then, no treaties  with myself.








SEVEN SPECIALIZED BOOKSHOPS UNDER ONE ROOF AT THE NEW UBC BOOKSTORE



6200 UNIVERSITY BLVD. VANCOUVER, B.C. VSY 1W9
 • ARTS & HUMANITIES

• LANGUAGE &  LITERATURE

• SOCIAL & BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCES
• PROFESSIONAL

• HEALTH SCIENCES

• GENERAL

• 	BOOKSTORE



9

LEE'S "CIVIL ELEGIES"

in relation to Grant's aLament for a Nation''


R. D. MacDonald


IN ms ESSAY, "Cadence, Country, Silence: W<iting in Colo­ nial Space," Dennis  Lee describes the  psychological and  political  sources of his poetry. Listening  to a busy inner  voice which  he names  "cadence,"  Lee  appar­
ently makes out  a path  of meaning  and  appropriates a language  suitable  to the expression of this inner voice and meaning. However remote or obscure "cadence" may sound, Lee argues that it is encountered  only through  the immediate particu­ lars of one's own civil space, and he argues that the loss of these distinct particulars  through  the Americanization  of Canada  in theI g6o's has meant  the loss of both cadence and its language of expression. Thus  Lee links his own  reported  sense of inauthenticity, his own lapse into  anxious silence, to the fate  of  a  whole nation transformed  into a colony by the American  mass media:

Canadians were by definition people who looked over the fence and  through  the windows at  America, unselfconsciously learning  from  its movies, comics,  maga­ zines and TV shows how to go about being alive. The disdainful  amusement that I and thousands like me felt for Canadian achievement in any field, especially those of the imagination was a direct reflection of our self-hatred and sense of inferiority.1

Did Canadians loath themselves? Is American pop-culture  the source of Canadian self-loathing and dispossession? Or could it be that  Torontonians like Lee uncriti­ cally absorbed the metropolitan or imperial viewpoint of New York and Washing­ ton only to realize to their chagrin  that  Toronto  (like the remainder of  Canada) is also a colonial hinterland? Whatever  the truth  of the matter, having apparendy seen through  "our" Americanized perspective, Lee now takes on the satiric stance, the guise of the naive ironist supposedly unaware  of a Canadian tradition  distinct from that  of the United  States:

We kept up with  Paris Review  and Partisan, shook our heads over how Senator McCarthy had perverted the traditions of our country; in some cases we went down to Selma or Washington to confront our power structure, and in all cases we agreed that  the greatest blot on our racial history was the way we had  treated  negroes. [italics mine]

Lee attributes  his political awakening and satiric style to the philosopher George
Grant, who argued in Lament  for a Nation that  Canada ceased to exist as a nation

IO

LEE &GRANT


in the mid-twentieth century. Lee's use of "our" and  "we," his ironic  identification of  Americans and  Canadians, works  from  Grant's notion   of  American culture homogenizing Canadian  culture and  is similar  to Grant's ironic  torpedoing of  un­ examined values,  especially  Grant's strategy  of  comparing Canada  present  un­ favourably to Canada past and  then revealing  that  Canada past  (the  British Con­  servative  tradition) had  already passed away  before Canada's beginnings:  as Lee himself says, "This under-cutting of a past  he [Grant] would  like to make exem­ plary  is a  characteristic moment   in  Grant's thought, and  it  reveals  the  central strength and  contradiction in  his  work.  He  withdraws from   the  contemporary world,  and  judges it with  passionate lucidity,  by standing on a 'fixed  point'  which he then  reveals  to  be no longer  there." While  this is a strategy  that  Lee  himself had  adopted earlier   in  "Civil   Elegies,"  Lee  differs  from   Grant because  at  this earlier  stage  he defines Canadians only in terms of Americans and  shows less com­ passion  that  does  George  Grant for  both  the  American and   the  Canadian and shows little love of the  past itself. In "Cadence, Country, Silence" (published two years  after  "Civil  Elegies"), Lee now shows, however,  a fuller  understanding of how  to Grant the  loyalists  and  Canadians differed  from  the  Americans. British North Americans believed  that  man  lived  within  limits;   Americans believed  in man's unlimited freedom:

in refusing the American  dream, our loyalist forebears  (the  British Americans who came north  afterI 776) were groping to reaffirm a classical European tradition, one which embodies a very different  sense of public space. By contrast  with  the liberal assumptions that gave birth to the United States, it taught  that  reverence for what is subject  to sterner civil necessities than liberty or the pursuit  of happiness-that they must respond, as best they can, to the demands  of the good. And  that  men's presence here is capable  of an organic continuity which cannot  be ruptured  except at  the  risk of making  their  condition  worse-that any  such  change  should  be taken with fear and  trembling.  (Grant  would not claim  that  all Hellenic or  Chris­ tian societies used to live by these ideals, only that  they  understood  themselves to be acting well or badly in their light.)  And while our ancestors were often mediocre or muddling,  convictions  like these demonstrably  did  underlie  many  of their  atti­  tudes of law, the land, indigenous peoples and Europe.

Lee's summary does not seem  to set any distance  between  himself  and  Grant, and indeed  like many  others  of his generation, Lee has been amazed and  then  thankful to find his own faint  premonitions spoken aloud  by Grant :

To find one's tongue-tied  sense of civil loss and bafflement given words at  last, to hear one's own most inarticulate hunches out loud, because most immediate  in the bloodstream-and not  prettied  up, and  in prose like a fastidious  groundswell­ was to stand  erect in one's own space. I do not expect  to spend  the rest of my life in agreeing with George Grant. But in my experience at least, the sombre Canadian has enabled  us to say for  the first time where we are,  who  we are-to  become articulate.


I I

LEE &GRANT

To examine  "Civil  Elegies" is to find that  indeed  Lee has incorporated many  of Grant's themes and catch phrases into the tissue of his poetry. Here as in Grant: the nineteenth-century American hope of manifest-destiny  is transformed  into the twentieth-century Canadian fear of "continentalism"; the Americanization of Canada   becomes  the  "homogenization" of  what  could  have  been  a  distinct identity;  the exploitation  of Canada's natural resources by Americans  becomes a "sell out,"  the selling of a "birth  right"; the recovery of any central  authority  or good is assumed to begin from the immediate  particulars of our existence. Finally, Lee seems to pick up Grant's set of contradictory feelings, anger  and  yet  resigna­ tion towards the departure of the potential good that  was Canada.
Grant's "lament" and Lee's "elegies," however, express very different meanings and  faiths.  Unlike  the  Lament  for a Nation, "Civil  Elegies" does not  conclude with a celebration  of a departed  or distant good;  Lee does not in his dismay turn from the dubious authority  of reason to the accumulated wisdom of tradition; he turns instead  to the  promise of the here and  now and  future  of the  human  city "in  the early years of a better civilization,"2  the natural and  human  world which is our only genesis and  home, our only starting  point to a better  world.
This faith  in the future is highlighted by the unusual  nature  of the last six lines
of "Civil  Elegies":  the short  three-stress and  four-stress lines and  the  plain, im­ perative  tone embody  the stripping  of experience  to the  barest  bones of the  par­ ticular and  the barest  bones of wish or prayer.  Lee's last verse recalls the earlier refrain  of "letting  be,"  that  is allowing another  to  be himself,  not  loosely  con­ doning but actively "allow[ing]" (or fostering)  another's goodness. The  final lines then comprise a laconic prayer that our natural and  human  matrix -the "green" and the "grey" -permit us another  beginning:
Earth, you nearest, allow me. Green of  the earth  and  civil grey: within me, without me and moment by moment allow me for to
be here is enough  and  earth you strangest, you nearest,  be home.
While Grant's Lament  for a Nation turns finally in a spirit  of reconciliation  to a distant and shadowy God, the God of eternal  order,  Lee's turns finally to the god or power of green earth, that "nearest" and "strangest" of our daily existence. The new good will begin, if at all, from  the grainy  texture  of the  near -the  mixed matrix  of the human  and natural  world. Not only is the form of their  language different  (Lee  working in  the long, and  loose-limbed  tradition  of elegaic  verse, Grant in the academic  prose of the political philosopher), not only are their Gods different  (Lee's  close and Grant's  remote), but  their  attitudes toward  and  their accounts of Canada's history, the failure of a colonial  people to achieve an inde­ pendent  nation  of their own, are also quite different: Grant  emphasizes our fail-

12

LEE &GRANT

urc to perpetuate what  was good in our  heritage  while Lee, the modem  liberal, makes much of becoming "our own," achieving independence  from an out-moded past. While  Grant  recognizes that  English  Canadians  are  seen  to  be indeed  a "dull  and costive lot"3  (especially when compared  to their more dynamic  neigh­ bours to the south), he argues  that  British  North  America   (and  the  unbroken Europeanness  of  Canada)  exemplified  a  real  alternative   to  the  dynamic  and revolutionary  republican  experiment  of the United  States:   though  the authority  of the British and  European heritage  had  been challenged  and  weakened  by the New Learning  of the Renaissance  and  though  the conservative  centre of British society had already been eroded by the very fact of colonial expansion, nevertheless there  remained  a faith  that  a British North  America  could be built  in the  new world, that  the new could be made continuous  with  the  past.4   While in all this, Grant holds dear the humaneness and the wisdom of our predecessors, Dennis Lee does not show the same loving attachment to the  past. Indeed  Lee's poems con­ tinually  question  the  nature  of love or insist  upon  bringing  airy  notions of love down to earth: love of one's own self and  friends  (see especially "The Death  of Harold  Ladoo"  in The  Gods); love of  one's spouse or generation  (see poem 7 of "Civil Elegies") ; love of one's past or patria  (see poem  1 of "Civil Elegies") ; and love of the ancient  Gods  (see "The Gods"). Lee's Gods  (or, their  absence)  and Lee's past  (or  its absence)  will  certainly seem familiar  to the  reader  of Grant's  Philosophy in the Mass Age. To Grant,  the men of antiquity  did  not "see them­ selves as making  events but  as living out  established  pattems."5  To  Grant,  man achieved his sense of freedom and well being "only so far as he cease[d] to be him­ self, and imitated  and  repeated  the eternal  archetypal  gestures of the divine such as the creation  of the world and  the bringing  forth  of life." Against  this ancient view, Grant  places the modem  humanist view, a view which I find all too close to that of the mid-twentieth-century Dennis Lee:

Man  makes  the  world  and  there  is no overall  system  which  determines what   he makes.  To  act  is to choose what  kind  of a world we want  to make.  In  our  acts  we show what things  we regard  as valuable. We create  value, we do not  participate in a value  already given.  We make what  order  there is; we are  not  made  by it. In this sense we are our  own.  We are  independent. We are  not  bound  by any  dependence on anything more  powerful than  ourselves. We are authentically free  because  what happens in the world  depends upon  us, not on some providence beyond  our control. The fate  of man  is in his hands.

As one discovers from  the same book  (and  from Technology and  Empire), the vast spaces of  North  America,  the  intense energy, will, and  resourcefulness  re­ quired  of the  new settlers by the new land,  the removed  or  hidden  God  of  the American  Puritans  which paradoxically led the Puritans  to seek any proof of  their election including  the "proof" of earthly success-these conditions led Americans  to an "exaltation of action  over truth  and  thought" and  to the  pragmatic   phil-

LEE &GRANT

osophy of a William James who took the expedient,  the profitable  or workable to be the test of truth. Grant makes James into a caricature of the modern American humanist  and  technocrat  by singling out  this  optimistic  declaration  of James: "The  world stands  ready, malleable,  waiting  to  receive the  final  touches of our hands."
Against  this background,  Lee's optimism  could  be seen as an  extension of the
William James of George Grant. Lee's "wisdom" arises from disenchantment with false hopes, the sense of having been deceived by the gods, the demonic forces, the treacherous  passions which have blasted the hopes of his generation.  His "stand" or "measure," however, is really little more  than  the  discovery that  our  earlier beliefs have not worked; therefore there must be something  else:

But to live with a measure, resisting their terrible inroads; I hope this is enough.
And to let the beings be.
And also to honour the gods in their former selves,
albeit obscurely at a distance, unable to speak the older tongue, and to wait
till their fury is spent and they call on us again
for passionate awe in our lives, a high clean style.6

When  Grant  uses the term "measure," he implies more  than  a vague  hope:   he repeatedly  refers to an eternal  order  not subject  to man's  tinkering,  an  order  to which we are subject.  Lee's "measure" is little more than  the quiescent  expecta­ tion that  if we "let ... be," our furies may run their  natural course  (i.e., achieve a purgation), which in turn may permit the restoration  of  "passionate  awe" and a  "high   clean  style."  Unfortunately, "Civil  Elegies,"  "The  Death   of  Harold Ladoo,"  and  "The  Gods" show a dialectical scepticism  with  little sign of "awe"  or a high clean style."
Grant, however,  bases his  hope  upon  something   substantial. He  shows  an
appreciation  of our pioneer heritage, the pioneers' difficult or heroic battle to make a new life for themselves. He shows a respect for the hard  discipline of mind  and body to ensure their survival, and  an  understanding of the "worldly  asceticism" which has been created  in North  America  by "the  meeting  of the  alien and  yet conquerable  land  with English speaking Protestants."7  Yet like Susanna  Moodie in Roughing it in the Bush, Grant  recognized the costs and  dangers  of making  a life in the new world:  "To  know that  parents  had  to force  the  instinct  of their children  to the service of pioneering  control;  to have seen the  pained  and  unre­ lenting faces of the women; to know, even in one's flesh and  dreams,  the  results of generations of the mechanizing of the body; to see all around  one the excesses and  follies now  necessary to people who can  win  back  the  body  only  through sexuality, must not be to forget what  was necessary and  what  was heroic in  that conquest."  Lee's attack  upon the excesses of his own generation, however, seems

LEE  &GRANT

to have emerged almost entirely from his having lived through  those passionate excesses of the present;  Lee shows little historical sense, a sense which might have resulted  in regret  for the  passing of an  earlier  way of life that  had  been good. Again in Lee there  is nothing  like Grant's  sympathetic  characterization of John Diefenbaker as a representative  figure of courage and integrity, a tragic hero who, despite his fight against  the demise of Canada, contributed to the fall or destruc­ tion of the nation.  And Lee does not even begin to consider, as does Grant,  how Canada became  a nation  distinct from any other. Grant  writes of  Canada:
It was an inchoate desire to build, in these cold and forbidding regions, a society with a greater sense of order and  restraint than  the freedom-loving republicans would allow. It was no better defined than a kind of suspicion that we in Canada could be less lawless and have a greater sense of propriety than  the United States. English speaking Canadians  have been called a dull and costive lot. In  these dynamic days, such qualities are particularly unattractive to the chic.
Yet our stodginess has made us a society of greater simplicity, formality, and perhaps even innocence than the people to the south.
(Lament for a Nation, p. 70)
In  "The Death  of Harold   Ladoo,"  something  of this  stodginess,  this  unheroic reserve is attributed to Dennis  Lee himself, the admiring "Wasp  kid"  from  the suburbs,  who as it turns  out,  however, is a cannibal   (though   a quiet  one)  like everyone else ( pp. 46-47). In "Civil Elegies," these dubious  traits  are attributed to the Canadian politicians,  the "honourable quislings,"  the  Paul  Martins  who helped  to further  the American  empire  and  Vietnamese  war  ( pp. 47-48). Lee's undercutting of the virtues of the compliant  or quiescent  way undermines  finally the call for quiet  decency  which he presents at  the conclusion  of both "Harold Ladoo''  and  "Civil  Elegies."  One  is left  asking:  if  the  quiet  Canadian is the source of our  failure  to  be, is Lee's own quietness any  more  legitimate?  Is  the quietness of conclusion merely a strategy dictated by the imperatives of the elegaic convention? If so, why has not Lee avoided this disease of "style" when elsewhere he has  been so self-conscious and  doubting  of the  deceptions  or  distortions  of literary style?

ToANSWER  THESE QUESTIONS one must look more closely at the relation  between "Civil  Elegies" ( 1972)  and "The Death  of Harold  Ladoo''
( 1979). Before that,  however,  I  must  concede  that  even  as  Lee  describes  the "whole  chaotic  gospel"  ("Civil  Elegies," p. 47),  "the  adrenalin  highs"  ( p. 48), the romantic  passion of his generation, he notes that what was really true was their quiet  loving:  men  and  women  who "handled each  other  gently"  ( "Ladoo," p.
48) ; beneath  the rage  to write and  the colossal egotism, "a  deep  tough  caring" ( p. 48) ; beyond  "the  very act  of words ... the  plain  gestures  of being  human

LEE &GRANT

together"  (pp.  48-49). Here as elsewhere, Lee in  retrospect  subordinates  litera­ ture to life, but  his declaration  that there was a quiet  loving centre  to  their crea­ tive fury is not  borne  out  by his main  account  of their  past.  Certainly  Ladoo's monomaniacal drive suggests nothing  of this loving calm. And  Lee's own  words as  they  swing  self-consciously from  celebrations   of  the  supposed   absolute   to negations of those less-than-absolutes, suggest the careening course, the oversteer­ ing and overcorrecting  manoeuvres of a drunken  driver.  It  seems to me that  as Lee pauses in midcourse, in his excoriation of his group  as "god's  hit men,"  cul­ tural revolutionaries who were not in control of even their own lives, he also begins to negate  the small  hope, the "civil words" of  "The Death  of Harold  Ladoo,"  and the "earth you nearest and  dearest" of  "Civil  Elegies" as the starting  points of a  new life. In  "The Death  of Harold  Ladoo," he speaks  "civil"   (public  or civilized)  words from a mere "private space," caught  once again  by "salvations"  that turn  "demonic"-"for  [each salvation]  too gets cherished  as absolute":

Even that glorious dream
of opening space to be in, of saying the real words of that space -
that too was false, for we cannot
idolize a thing without it going infernal....

These words refer (surely?)  to his earlier poem "Civil Elegies," and they undercut the hopeful conclusion of "Civil Elegies," hope for the "early  years of a better civilization,"  the  hope for "new  nouns" to replace  the  withdrawal of our  "most precious Words,"  and the modest hope of honed-down  prayer  that  the "nearest," the "green  of the earth  and  civil grey" be "home." From  the  vantage  point  of seven years ("Elegies" [1972]-"Ladoo"  [1979]), even that  modest  hope now seems extravagant and  the "quietist  fadeout" all too possible ( "Ladoo," p. 57). The escape from the dilemma of neither indifference  or mad  commitment appar­
ently lies in the realization  that  "Everything matters  and  I nothing  matters.  It is
harder  to  live  by  that  on  earth  and  stubborn   than  to  I rise full-fledged  and
abstract,  I and  snag  apocalypse"  ( "Ladoo," p.  47) . The  obvious  weakness of
"Civil  Elegies,"  however, lies in  Lee's tendency  to  overstatement   ("rising  full­ fledged and abstract") which necessitates correction,  but  the main  source of this unevenness  would  then  seem  to  reside in  Lee's  ahistorical  understanding  and hence his comic-strip  presentation of Canada's formation  and  development.8
Poem  1 of "Civil  Elegies" takes place  in  the  April  morning  sun,  a  time  of
beginnings;  but  resting  in  the  city square  and  "brooding over  the  city,"  the speaker is oppressed by the unredeemed, squat  existence permitted  by the city:  it is a place of "gutted intentions," a claustrophobic space in which the  past is experienced  merely  as an oppressive, dead  weight;  the symbol  of the  "unlived life" of the  past  and  present are  the furies or spectres,  the  surviving  vestiges of

16

LEE &GRANT


lives never  fully  lived. Showing the  unreality of those  lives, he  "casts  back"  and presents  a comic  caricature of the  Rebellion  of 1837.  The  cause  of the  rebellion is simply  the  patricians who made  "their compact against the  gangs  of the  new." The  act  of  rebellion  itself  becomes  "regeneration twirl[ing] its  blood" and   the outcome, a silly farce:

Eight  hundred-odd steely Canadians   turned  tail  at  the  cabbage  patch  when  a couple of bullets fizzed and the loyalists scared skinny by the sound of their gunfire, gawked and bolted south to the fort like rabbits, the rebels for the most part bolting north to the pub:  the first spontaneous mutual retreat in the history of warfare. Canadians in flight.

The  past  (our  forebears)  becomes  a  "dead  weight" oppressing our  lives in  the present: "the dead  persist  in  I buildings,  bylaws, porticoes -the  city  I live in  I is clogged with  their  presence." The  excuse that  our ancestors, if not  heroic,  were
at least good men is answered by, "good  men do not matter to history"; moreover the  "good   men" were  merely  quislings  involved  in  the  forceful, criminal and imperial actions  of the  American nation. Against  this  past,  in the  city he  "longs for," men "would complete their origins"; they would discover  and  take possession of their  origins,  achieve  a  genuine  presence  by turning against   the  modern and American empire:

And the people accept a flawed inheritance
and they give it a place in their midst, forfeiting progress, forfeiting dollars, forfeiting Yankee visions of cities that in time it might grow whole at last in their forebears, becoming their own men.

This  is the  hopeful dream. The  nightmare is the  unlived  and  unloved  past,  the "acquiescent spectres" who  "gawk  and  slump  and  retreat" and   who  block  the life-giving  rays of the springtime sun.
While it is all too easy for a Canadian to fall into line with  these "patriotic" sentiments, the  poem and  the feelings are badly muddled. If our  "forebears" were as cowardly  and  comical  as Lee's heroes of 1837 and  if our  heritage were  merely a weight  deadening our life, how could  we "accept  this  flawed  inheritance" and how could  we "belong once  more  to  (our)  forebears" by "becoming (our)  own men"? Lee shows  no  redeeming virtues  in our  forebears and  shows  no  generous sympathy for their  insufficiencies.
Instead then  of coming  to sympathetic terms with  the  human background, Lee in his utopian vision of Canadians coming  into  "their own" turns  to the  physical background-the natural or geographical milieu, the hinterland-of  the metro­ politan  present; but  this  route  to  becoming  "our  own  men" is also unconvincing and  contradictory though it works in a familiar way from  the  pastoral naturalism
of Sir  Charles G.  D.  Roberts, E.  J. Pratt, A.  J. M.  Smith, and   the  Group of
Seven, and  from  the nineteenth-century romanticism of Wordsworth who suggests,

LEE &GRANT

too, that  man  cannot live his cities until  he has lived  the  countryside. Any  Cana­
dian   reader   is likely  to  be  enthralled  by  childhood-summer-vacation  memories recreated as follows:
to live
the land, our own harsh country, beloved the prairie  the foothills­ and for me it is awakened by the rapids by stream-fed  lake, threading north  through the terminal vistas of black spruce, in a
bitter cherished land it is farm after
farm in the waste of the continental outcrop-
for me it is Shield but whatever terrain  informs our lives and
claims us.

Here  Lee substitutes the natural world for the human world, geology or geography for history or tradition. But again  he is unconvincing in offering this source  of "regeneration" because  he does not adequately face  what  it has  meant  to live the Shield, what  has indeed  been the historical  necessity, the economic and  human necessities which have been part of that  experience of the Shield.
While  Poem  3 is a capsule history of man  on the  Shield,  it is little  more  than  a
recycling  of the  polemical  slogans  of  Canadian  nationalists: until  we  own  our means  of production, we shall  remain  the  slaves  of the  foreign  or  multinational (i.e.,  American)  corporation. What the  slogan  overlooks  is the  older  Canadian recognition  (expressed   in  T. C.  Haliburton,  Susanna  Moodie, Sara   Jeannette Duncan, Stephen Leacock, and  Hugh  MacLennan) that the Americans have taken possession  of  our  economy   because   they   have   been   a  more   dynamic,  entre­ preneurial people than  Canadians. Moreover, Lee seems to overlook  the "virtues" of  a  more   cautious, orderly,   and   conservative  people -virtues  suitable  to   a northern geography which  permits  only a small  margin of success and  safety.  He does show the "barren Shield" breaking the settlers  and  "towing them  deeper  and  deeper  each  year." He  does  recognize  a  "despotic land"  where  father "reaped stone" and  sons gave  way to drunkenness and  passivity.  And  he  does effectively foreshorten our  economic  history  from  that   period  of  agricultural failure  to  the modern technological age  where  the  sons of  the  pioneers (their  birthright sold out,  their  mines  owned  abroad, their  ores  refined  abroad) stare  helplessly  after
their future:

now what
races toward us on asphalt across the Shield - is torn from the land and the mute oblivion of all those fruitless lives, it no longer
stays for us, immemorial adversary, but is shipped and divvied abroad though wrestled whole from the Shield.

But what  would  Lee have:  pioneers still attempting to eke out  a pastoral existence on glacial  till? And  in a mining  economy  would  the  Shield  be  any  less "imme-

LEE &GRANT


morial adversary," any  less exploited  or alien  for our  owning  our  own  means  of production and  for  our  refining  and  recombining the  elements  of  the  Shield  at home  rather than  abroad? To quibble  further with Lee's economic history: is not much  of the smelting and  refining  now done in Canada? How  else do we account for  the  moonscape of  a  Sudbury? Lee's  romantic and  literary   nationalism  does not  confront the  complexities and  consequences  of our  own  industrial society  in large   part   precisely  because   the  "enemy" is  assumed   to  be  foreign,   or  multi­ national or American. And  what,  by the  way, is a  "TV mind"? Is it  any  more than  the quick-draw epithet of a "literary mind"? Facile sloganeering of  this kind again  prevents one from  coming  to terms with or rebelling  against  a technological society.
Yet in Poem  3, Lee does attempt to show how a more  dynamic spirit  might  be
achieved; he holds up a "radiant" life against  the "unlived lives" of Poem   I, and attempts an  answer  to the  prayer  of Poem  2  which  asks how  we are  to make  a start  in a world  where  "sometimes a thing  rings true" but  where  that  momentary truth fails to hold:
I know
the world is not enough; a woman straightens
and turns from the sink and asks her life the question, why should she
fake it? and after a moment she
shrugs, and returns to the sink.

Poem  3  answers  the  sense  of  void  and   the  difficulty  of  making a  start   out  of emptiness,  but   the   answers   prove   insufficient.  The   longing   for   a  more   than nominal or symbolic  reality-"Master and  Lord,  there  was a/ measure once.  / There was time  when  men  could  say / my life, my  job, my home  / and  still feel clean.  / The poets  spoke  of  earth and  heaven.  There were  no  symbols" -is answered  through  the   primitivist  works/symbols  of  Henry   Moore   and   Tom Thomson. Both  work  within   or  out  of  naturalistic forces,  which   in  turn   work upward and  outward from  a dark,  uncontrollable primal:  "Great  art" then  is in the service of something much  larger  than  the merely  made-up or individual and is "less than  the necessity which  gave rise to it":
when the monumental  space of the square went slack, it (the statue)  moved in sterner space.
Was shaped  by earlier space and it ripples with wrenched stress, the bronze is flexed by
blind aeonic throes
that  bred and met in slow enormous impact,
and they are still at large for the force in the bronze churns through  it, and lunges beyond and also the Archer declares that space is primal, raw, beyond control and drives toward living stillness, its own.

19

LEE &GRANT

In  the  Moore  sculpture, nature, the  artist  and  artifact "complete their  origins." Similarly, Tom  Thomson's work  is shown  to  complete nature or  the  Laurentian Shield.  But even Thomson's "work  in the shield" is not seen  to be sufficient  for  a new  beginning. Though from  the  darkness  of  the  Shield   the  "radiance of  the renewed land  broke  over [Thomson's] canvas," Thomson or  Moore  or  Christ  or any  of  the  other  "ignition" points  of our  past  are  insufficient   precisely  because they  are  of the  past,  not the  present: to  become  "our own" means  making   our own  beginning. The  difficulty at  this  point,  however,  is Lee's  suggestion  that   as we are in the void we are incapable of answering to a call from  beyond  the  void:

Small things ignite us, and the quirky particulars flare on all sides.
A cluster of birches, in moonlight;
a jackpine gnarled and
focussing heaven and earth­
these might fend off the void.
Or under the poolside arches the sunlight, skidding on paper destroyers
kindles a dazzle, skewing the sense. Like that. Any combination of men and time can start  the momentary ignition. If only it were enough.
But it is two thousand  years since Christ's carcass rode in glory and now the shiny ascent is not for us, Thomson is
done and we cannot
malinger among the bygone acts of grace. For many are called but none are chosen now....

In his opening of Poem  g, instead  of providing premature answers  to how  we are to move beyond  "unlived lives" and  the "void," instead  of now offering  a genuine prayer  to the absolute Lord  and  Master, Lee continues to examine or to "honour the  void." Poem  3 works from  the  Old  Testament stories  of a  wayward  people who sell their  birth  right,  a people  who  have  violated  their  "immemorial pacts" with  the land  by selling it before they lived it, a  people  who  must  then  suffer  the consequences of the violated covenant  by "botch[ing]" their  cities and  filling their city  squares   with  the  "artifacts of  death" -that  is,  the   Moore   statue of  the
Archer.


A REMINDER OF   THE  DIRECTION that   "Civil   Elegies"  as  a whole is taking: the  middle  of the long  poem  (Poems 4 through 7)  continues to
delineate the  course  of the  void.  The  last  two  poems,  8  and   g,  move  from  the state  of void  or  detachment to attachment  redefined and  to  an  annunciation of the  slippery  but  "lovely  syllables"  of  the  world,  "the ache  and   presence   joy of

20

LEE &GRANT


what  is," the world  where  no thing  (not even nothing) holds and  the world which thereby  demands the  human response of "letting be."
Before that, however,  let us consider  Lee's void-Poems 4 to 7. Poem  4 con­ tinues  to delineate a fallen  world,  a wasteland where  things  hold  back  or  fail  to hold  fast.  Lee's  meditation carries  with  it the  dark  pessimism  of the  Old  Testa­ ment,  an  Ecclesiastes-like vision  of a world  where  nothing holds  or is secure.  In the  world  then  where  things  "hold  back"  or  "hesitate to  be"  or  "will  not  come real" or  will  not  "hold," Lee  asks whether our  vocation   might  be  that  of  void itself. In the first verse paragraph he asks whether we "are not meant to relinquish
it all, to  begin  at  last  I the  one  abundant psalm  of  letting  be."  A  long  diverse
catalogue of  transient things,  of  things  not  holding,  does  suggest  that   life  is  a letting  go, but  also indicates the difficulty of willingly "letting be" :

goodbye the lull of the sun in the square, goodbye and goodbye the magisterial life of the mind, in the domination
of number every
excellent workaday thing all spirited
men and women ceaselessly jammed at their breaking points goodbye who have such little time on earth and
constantly fastened how should a man stop caring?
The  point  of the  catalogue, however,  is not  to suggest  the  difficulty  of not  caring but  to take  us through the  "rigours of detachment" -"letting  it  bring  us down till every I itch  and  twitch  of attachment loses its purchase" -so that  we achieve
a state  of emptiness, an  openness  or receptiveness  to a new fullness of being.  The poem's  development seems to conform  to the  recurring pattern of the  Old  Testa­ ment:  having separated ourselves  from  God,  we return to  him  by  means  of  a remorseful  and   willing  acceptance of  the  hurtful  consequences.  Whatever the
source of Lee's  hope,  he abruptly declares  that  "at  last we I find ourselves in  the
midst  of  what   abounds," and  he  prophesies:  "now   they   I move  at  last  in  the
clearness  of  open  space,  within   the  I emptiness  they  move  very  cleanly  in  the vehement enjoyment of their  bodies."  Out  of the  anguish of spiritual alienation and  the willing sacrifice  of all unessential  attachments emerges  something like an abounding grace.
But once again  Lee's  argument turns  back  upon  itself:  how can  this individual salvation  be real  when  the  letting  go or the  "gut[ting]" and  "peddl[ing]" of our nation   (our  collective  soul)   goes on?  He  turns  then  to  those  who  go  down  in "civil   fury" rather  than   in   distant   hopes   of  beatitude -"how   should   they
clutch  and  fumble after  beatitude, crouching for I years  till emptiness  renews  an
elm tree."  And  so though he turns  back  for the  moment to the  ascetic  Hector de Saint-Denys-Garneau who  turned inward  to "nothing but  desert  and  void," the final lines of Poem  4 celebrate the  bloody  fury  of the  few, a civil fury  which  will


21

LEE &GRANT

not forestall the  Modern  and  the American  but  will at  least pennit  the  fullness of "shame  abounding," "a  few good gestures between  the  asphalt  and  the sky," the achievement  of a stand  that  will give a full account  of our situation -"Yet
still they take the world full force on their ends, leaving  the  I bloody impress of
their bodies faced forward  in time and  I believe I they will not go under  until
they have taken the measure of empire."
While Lee has described two alternatives  to the Americanization of Canada  - ( 1 ) the religious alternative  of detachment  from  the  world  for the  achievement of spiritual  abundance, ( 2) the  political alternative  of protest,  facing  the  world and taking "full  measure of empire" -he does not finally suggest what  relation (if any)  there can be between these two alternatives  nor suggest which  course is the wiser. As we have seen, the inwardness and passivity of Hector de Saint-Denys­ Garneau  finally mean spiritual bankruptcy.  How then are we to distinguish  Lee's hope of a trustful openness to the particulars of the world, the awaiting  of a new abundance, of  new  beginnings-how  is  this  worldly  passivity  or  receptivity superior  to  Garneau's passive acceptance  of  the  world   within?  Again,  if  the political rebel is to take "full measure of empire," what base is he to measure from? Will civil fury itself make for clean or pure or authentic gestures? Will fury itself refine or synthesize an adequate  "measure" or understanding of Canada's demise? Are the rebels against the new (like the Tories of  1837) to base their stand  and their understanding merely upon fear of  the new or upon the wisdom of the past? Both these bases seem unlikely, given  Lee's earlier  contemptuous presentation  of the  unlived  lives of our  Canadian  ancestors.  I  contend  then  that  Lee  has  not thought  through  the implications of  his liberal/conservative political philosophy.
Poem 5 continues to examine the contraries of the passionate  and  dispassionate
by juxtaposing the civil fury against the indolent  reverie of the citizen at ease in the civic square  of the noon-day  sun. What  brings  the  two separate  feelings - the uncaring  ease and the indignant  concern -together  are the children  playing in the square  unmindful  of the spectres overhead,  the "fitful" nature  of momen­ tary existence, and  the civil atrocities committed  by imperialistic  Americans  and compliant, colonial Canadians. The  speaker complains  ironically  of the children awakening  the adult  from his indolent,  uncaring  state:
It would be better maybe if we could stop loving the children
and their delicate brawls, pelting across the square in tandem, deking
from cover to cover in raucous celebration and they are never
winded, bemusing us with the rites of our own
gone childhood; if only they stopped
mattering the children.
The ironic signals here are in the "maybe" and  again  in the "perhaps" of  "Per­ haps we should bless what doesn't attach  us, though  I do not  know  I where we are to find nourishment." While the anaesthetic  attractions of the void  are enter-

22

LEE &GRANT

tained, the poem surely presumes the inevitability of human  caring,  the necessary pain of human  caring.  And  so in the midst of a nightmare  vision of "bacterial missiles" released "for the love of mankind" and his sense once again of  "acquies­ cence press[ing] down  on  us from above,"  the speaker  becomes  aware that  the children make us aware of our having "no room to be":  "It is the children's fault as they swarm for we cannot stop caring." The poem shifts again to a haranguing  catalogue  of American  war crimes-"For a man  / who  / fries the skin of kids with burning  jelly is a  / criminal" -and  the criminal  complicity  of Canadians
-"And the consenting citizens of a minor and docile colony / are cogs in a useful
tool, though  in no way / necessary and scarcely criminal  at all and  their leaders are honorable  men, as for example Paul  Martin." The  criminal  act-and-consent refers specifically to  American/Canadian  collaboration  during   the  Vietnamese war. Lee's metaphor  for criminal complicity, the numb indifference  of the modern citizen, becomes a German  civic square  during  the holocaust  of World  War  II. His banal  language  mimics the cliches of modern mass-advertising  and  the dull, inactive disposition of the modern  citizen/consumer:

In Germany the civic square in many little towns is hallowed for people. Laid out just so, with
flowers and fountains and during the war you could come and relax for an hour, catch a parade or
just get away from the interminable racket of the trains, clattering through the
outskirts with their lousy expendable cargo.
Little cafes often fronting the square. Beer and a chance to relax
And except for the children it's peaceful here too under the sun's warm sedation.

So once again,  brought  back to life (almost it seems, despite himself)  by the im­ pingements of the children,  the speaker again  begins a haranguing  catalogue of the sellouts of history, the  "old  story"  of "imperial  necessity,"  of  the tired  and quiet  and   diplomatic   and   "honorable"  men  who  helped   make  the  imperial necessities possible.
The  conclusion provides a political definition of the void -"And  this is void, to  participate in  an  / abomination   larger  than  yourself  ... to  fashion  / other men's napalm  and  know it, to be a / Canadian safe in the square  and  watch  the children  dance  and  / dance  and  smell  the  lissome burning   bodies.... " The ambiguous  syntax  permits  the  children  dancing  to  be  those  in  the  German  or Canadian square  dancing  for  joy or  those of Vietnam   dancing   in  pain  from napalm.  The  close (perhaps even causal)  relation  between  private  pleasure and public pain is caught in the close joining of "dancing" and the "smell of the burnt flesh."  Double-dealing   hypocrisy  is  again  summed   up  in  Lee's  double-edged syntax:  "it  is the sorry mortal  / sellout burning  kids by proxy acquiescent  / still

23

LEE &GRANT

though still denying it is merely to be human." The  line could mean that  our very inability to imagine, or accept or believe the full extent of our cruelty gives proof of our being "merely"  (or at the very least)  humane. It could also mean  that  as we refuse to accept  that  it is our  human  nature  to commit  such  acts, we show ourselves less than  "human."




ONE CAN NOW  DISCOVER the  base from  which  Lee  takes his stand  against  "imperial  necessities," against  the  "abominations" larger  than ourselves, the temptations  of indifference. The  past  merely  records  past  failures but  does not  provide  guidance.  The  alive present,  our  children,  force  upon  us concern, duty, a sense of natural  justice:  the liveliness, joyfulness, and  fragile helplessness of the children awaken us to our need to preserve them and our own humanity  which starts from these beginnings.
Nevertheless, in Poem 5, though conscience is awakened,  the individual  will to resist the slide to "barbarian normalcy"  remains inactive-"numb in my stance I hear  the country  pouring on past me gladly on all sides." Consciousness itself,
his preoccupation   with  the  precedent  of ancient  Rome's  decline,  dislocates  his feelings and  will and disengages him from the ongoingness of life-"the upshot
is not that  I am constantly I riddled with agonies I my thing  is often worse for I
cannot get purchase on life."
Poem 7 brings the experience of the void even more closely home. Just  as the child has brought  the  adult  to an awareness of duty  but  failed  to incite  him  to action, the relationship  of lovers again suggests no easy release from  the general drift to "barbarian normalcy." Indeed  lovers are shown  projecting  and  imposing false roles upon each other and  then  upon discovery of the falsehood, turning  in anger against each other, iconoclasts smashing the false selves. The hope of a new start out of destruction is undercut  by Lee's lovers yet again erecting false images which will yet again  have to be tom down. Only rarely, he suggests, do the lovers achieve the  plain but difficult reality of marriage -"a difficult rhythm  together
around  I their  job and  the kids, that  allows for a tentative  joy and  often  for a
grieving  together." The  iconoclasm of lovers becomes a metaphor of  politics­ "do  we also single out leaders because they will dishonour  us, because they  will diminish  us?" Having  chosen leaders  who will necessarily  enact  failure  ("bull­ dozed  by Yankees, menaced  by slant-eyed  gooks"), the  citizen is as unlikely to come to terms with "our claimed selves" or to terms with the "difficult world" as the lover is to achieve  "the  difficult rhythm" of  marriage. Disillusionment,  the exposure  of falsehood,  does not  here lead  to  the  restoration  or  beginning  of  a genuine private and  public life.
Poems 8 and  g, nevertheless, achieve a conclusion of sorts. Having  considered

LEE &GRANT


various  aspects  of the  void, Lee returns full circle to the  Civic  Square "each  time there  is nothing" and  asks again  what  we can  commit  ourselves  to. The  answer, despite  the dialectical turns  of the poem  (especially  the attraction of  Saint-Denys­ Garneau's ascetic  detachment), resides in the  diverse stir  of the mundane world.  The opening catalogue of Poem  8, like Whitman's catalogues  celebrating the  all in the many, presents  the  various  and  vital  imperatives of  here  and  now:

catching  the news boy's raucous cry of race in the street and the wax
and Confederation  going
smelling the air, the interminable stink of production  and
transport and
caught  once more in the square's great hush with the shopper's,
hippies,
brokers, children, old men dozing alone by the pool and waiting,
feeling the pulse in the bodies jostling past me driving to climax and dollars and blood,
making my cry here quick and obscure among many in transit­
not as a
lyric self in the skin but divided, spinning off many selves to attend each lethal yen as it passed me -thinking of
death in the city, of other's and also of my own and of many born afterwards,
I saw that we are to live in the calamitous division of the world with singleness of eye and there is
nothing  I would not give to be made whole.

Whereas Whitman exhibits a glutton's delight  in the dynamic diversity  of life, Lee shows the  painfulness of diversity  and  shows a desire  to  forsake  the  "calamitous division of the world" in order  "to  be made  whole."  He entertains then  the ascetic alternative of  Hector de  Saint-Denys-Garneau:  in  him,  "the glitter   was  made single"; he retreated from  the nonchalance, the unconscious vitality  of his worldly
comrades to become  the  ascetic,  aristocratic worshipper, "a  man  made   I empty
for love of God,  straining to be only  I an  upright  will in the  desert,  until  at  last the world's hypnotic I glitter  was made  single in the  grace  of annunciation." But
once  again   "the kids"  and   the  vital  particularity of  the  world  itself  recall  the speaker  from  the  ascetic  route  of Garneau, to the  recognition that  modern man has lost the  "lore of emptiness" and  thereby  lost the  bearings necessary  for  sur­ viving  the  "lonely  inward procession."  This  recognition is consistent  with  Lee's  sceptical liberalism, the  disillusionment  with  or  casting   off  of  past  truths  and  consistent   with  his modernist cynicism,  his stripping of  Garneau's  spiritual pre­
tensions  to  uncover false,  ignoble  underpinnings of  motive:  "you  Hector 1 our
one patrician maker, mangled spirit,  I you went  all out  for fame  and  when  you knew  you  would  not  survive  in  the  world  you  turned to sainthood." Garneau's
"detachment," his inward pilgrimage, becomes no more  than  the  "exquisite pene-

LEE &GRANT

tration" of the self, an  onanistic  intercourse or  preoccupation with  the  self-"it was the fear of life, the mark of Canada." In  the last verse paragraph the speaker warns  that  "of  high  detachment there  are  many  counterfeits" and  declares  that his first obligation is to live in and  to construe  the  world  itself:

And I will not enter the void till I come to myself
nor silence the world till I have learned its lovely syllables,
the brimful square and the dusk and the war and the crowds in motion at evening, waiting to be construed
for they are fragile, and the tongue must be sure.

Is it unfair  to answer  Lee by saying that  "Civil  Elegies"  itself does not sufficiently attend  to  the   "lovely   syllables  of  the  world"  and   that   he  does  not   show   a "sure[ness]" of  tongue   that   might   make  one  believe  that   he  has  honestly  en­ countered the  basics of the human and  natural worlds?  As I find  Lee's stance  in "Civil  Elegies"  to be carping and  unsympathetic, I see little  evident  hope  of  his coming  to loving terms with any lovely or benign  basis of life.
The  last  poem  of  "Civil  Elegies,"  however,   promises   reconciliation  with  the less-than-perfect world.  It is not a world remade into  the  remote forms of a "Cold Pastoral," not the timeless world of Keats'  "happy boughs  that  cannot shed  [their] leaves, nor ever bid the Spring  adieu," but  instead  a world  built  out  of a tissue of world-weary detail-"rusty leaves hang[ing] taut  with  departure," "crisp  leaves
blow[ing]  in gusts, tracing I the  wind's  indignant lift in  corners"; it  is a  "dying
civilisation," and  a city of "bare familiar streets." It is a world  of change toward Autumn, to decline  and  fall, a human experience of "void." But  finally  the  void like everything else is shown  to be merely a season  subject to the  passage of time (and  indeed  not truly  perceived  until  past -"we enter  void  when  void  no longer exists") . But even  if void  were  to become  "a  mood  gone  absolute," it  would  be limited:  "we  should   (still)   have  to  live  in  the   world"  making our   lives  "on earth." And  so as  the  departing Autumn leaves  exemplify the  transience of  all things  including the  void  itself,  Lee  records  his  emergence from  the  void  "dis­
abused  of many  things  of the  world  I including Canada and  [I] came  to  know
that  I had  access to them  I and  I promised  to  honour each  one  of my  country's failures  of nerve  and  its sellouts."  In  the  last  poem,  hot  satirical indignation has
been  transformed into  a  dutiful   and  ironic  chronicling of  our  less-than-perfect reality. But even this kind of distanced complaining becomes  a "game" better  left behind  for the  basic business of living the only  world  we have.  Against  his earlier complaints about the  void and  the  distant  Gods,  Lee  celebrates the  unavoidable and  more basic reality  of earth-bound human existence:

But we are not allowed to enter God's heaven, where it is all a drowsy beatitude, nor is God, the realm above our heads but must grow up on earth.

LEE &GRANT


Nor do we have recourse to void. For void is not a place.
Void is not the high cessation of the lone self's burden, crowned with the early nostalgias;
nor is it rampant around  the corner, endlessly possible. We enter void when void no longer exists.

The   overview   or  larger-view achieved   at  the  close  of  "Civil   Elegies"  suggests optimistically that change brings  not only the  destruction of the  old  but  also the beginnings of  the  new-"the early  years  of  a  better  civilisation." Letting go, clearing  out  the  rubbish of the  past,  implies  the  promise  of  renovation; the  an­ thropomorphized  leaves  of  autumn  (like  the  emigrant  settler)   conform   to  a natural law of change and  renovation:

The leaves, although  they cling against the wind do not resist their time of dying.
And I must learn to live it all again, depart  again-
the storm wracked crossing, the nervous descent, the barren wintry land
and clearing a life in the place where I belong, re-entry to bare familiar streets, first sight of coffee mugs.

To  live well then  is to live in accord  with  the God  who "must grow  up on earth" and  to find "a place  among the ones who live on earth  somehow, sustained in fits and  starts  / by the  deep  ache  and  presence  and  sometimes  the  joy of  what  is." The  final  lines  of the  poem  then  are  a  plain,  stripped-down, prayer   to  the  God who is now  Earth. In  a traditional Christian prayer,  Lee's  petition  would  be  for God's  "Grace," but   Lee's  prayer   here  is  worked   out  of  a  studied  pedestrian language, an  appeal to the  natural and  human worlds  "green of the  earth   and civil grey"  and  an  appeal to let be-"allow  me for  to  be here  is enough." The final  prayer   is in  accord   with  the  contemporary liberal   faith   that   change, the destruction of  the  old  truths or  old  order,  allows  a  truer   hold  on  life,  a  truer accommodation to the  ongoing  human condition. As Lee  celebrates the  possibili­ ties of the  immediate present,  he loses any  sense of the  continuity of  time  past, present,  and  future or of the  continuity of space-the connection of  there  here
and  there:

Earth you nearest allow me. Green of  the earth and civil grey: within me, without me and moment by moment allow me for to
be here is enough and earth you strangest, you nearest, be home.

Lee's  concluding poem  is consistent  with  what  has  gone  before.  Throughout, truth or  truism or  preconception has  led  to  disillusionment and  to  a  hope  of  a

LEE &GRANT

more basic truth.  The  "truth" sloughed off is first experienced  as the  void : the deeper truth  now exposed is the  possibility of renovation  or  regeneration  out  of destruction,  an Autumn  which promises Spring.
Despite his many snipings at the "continental drift  to  barbarism," Lee's own
first principles seem to me all too  North  American,  too  naively optimistic,  too unconsciously or thoughtlessly destructive. Can  we trust  that  just as we clear the forests to make new human settlements, we can  also "clear" our  minds  or  clear the past, the heritage of tradition  that has remained  a part of ourselves as we have migrated  from  other  continents and  other  times? Lee's  attitude seems to me all too consistent with  the destructive  inclination  that  D.  H.  Lawrence  saw  in  the Americans in Studies in Classic American Literature  or that  lvor  Winters saw in Maule's Curse, the American assumption that  the old world could be left to itself and  the  new world  transcend  traditional  wisdom. Both  Lawrence  and  Winters characterize  this faith  in the present and future  as murderous, destructive  to any sense of authority  or order. Despite Lee's attack  upon American  imperialism,  the brutal  spirit,  the  violence done by the Americans  against  other  peoples and  the earth,  Lee's own  "Civil  Elegies" expresses a  belief in  renovation  through   void (letting  go and  letting  be)  which verges upon  an anarchistic faith.  He  does not show in  the texture  of his poetry a  close or  loving  concern  for  the  actual  and nearest,  he only indicates  a  generalized  world  of "coffee  mugs,"  "dreary   high rises," and  "people  plodding  past through  the  raw  air,  lost in  their  overcoats." In "Civil Elegies" Lee fails to realize that  the "nearest," the "within  me, with­
out me and moment  by moment,"  the here-and-now  of the  natural and  human worlds are in large part the consequence and continuation of what  is supposedly remote in time and place. Thus  his characterization of Canadians as a "stunted" people because they were never fully "at  home"  (which  means they didn't  suffi­ ciently give up their  past home), his comic caricature of  the  mild  rebellion  of
1837 as non-history because the rebellion failed to become revolution,  his terming the  past  a  "dead   weight"  "oppressing"   the   present -these   presentations   of Canada indicate  to me an all too familiar imagination incapable of appreciating much more than the bold, the novel and the "dynamic." Can we really believe that the man earlier oppressed by the dead weight of the past could muster the vitality and receptiveness to appreciate  the "coffee mugs" and  "dreary high rises" of the present? We are told that  through  the void he comes to a fresh  possession of the "near," but the "near" has not been shown with any  plausible or striking  detail.
I conclude then that Lee's anti-historical  attitude is even more disturbing  than that of the forward-looking Americans, for they at least revere their Colonial architecture, their old towns, their wars and heroes, their wild west and their constitution.  Lee, like a caricature  of Thomas  Chandler Haliburton's American, Sam Slick, seems to say:  if only Canadians  did  not  have such  a stodgy  reliance

LEE &GRANT


upon precedence, law, and custom; if only  we  had  gone  through the  "clearing" of a genuine revolution; if only  we could be less cautious, less worried about  con­ sequences; then surely we would come  into  "our own." Haliburton's Sam  Slick,  however, also  employed the  metaphors of spontaneous combustion and the  mael­ strom to  indicate that the  forward-looking, individualistic dynamism of  America may   lead   to  catastrophe. As  Lee  seems   unaware of  these   implications  or  con­ sequences that aT. C. Haliburton or George Grant warns against, his poem  seems insufficiently thought out  and thereby muddled.

NOTES

1 Boundary 2, 3, no. 1 (Fall  1974),  156.
2  "Civil  Elegies,"  in Civil  Elegies and Other Poems (Toronto: Anansi,  1972), p. 56.
8  George  Grant, Lament for a Nation  (Toronto: Carleton Library, 1970), p. 70.
4  This summary of Grant is more  fully developed  in  my article, "The  Persuasiveness of Grant's Lament for a Nation," Studies in Canadian Literature, 2,  no. 2  (Summer
1977), 239-51.
5  Philosophy in the Mass Age  (Toronto: Copp  Clark,  1959), p. r6.
6  Dennis  Lee, "The Death of Harold Ladoo," in The  Gods  (Toronto:  McClelland &
Stewart, 1979),  p. 59·
7  George  Grant, "In Defense  of  North America," in  Technology and  Empire   (To­
ronto: Anansi,  1969), p.  rg.
8 A reader  has  indicated the  possible  unfairness of this  view of  Lee's  "ahistorical understanding" by drawing my attention to Lee's Savage  Fields:  An  Essay in Litera­ ture  and  Cosmology (Toronto:  Anansi,  1977).  In  this  book  published  five  years after   Civil  Elegies  and   two  years  before  The Gods,  Lee  explores   the  relation of modern man  to history  and  nature.
In  Savage   Fields  Lee  writes  of  the  modern "ontology" in  which  man   (World) sees himself  at  odds  with  nature; in  this  "false  dualism" or  "strife" man  presumes that  he can  turn  the natural world  (Earth) entirely  to his own purposes  while ignor­ ing the inevitability of earth returning all, including man's work, to earth  (pp. 6-8). Beyond  the  "savage strife"  of World  and  Earth, Lee  imagines   Planet, a  "seamless  whole" (p.  g), a holy flowing  unity,  a  magical  state  (p.  64),  a  "luminous  unified field  of  here  and  now"  which  he  finds  at  the  heart  of  Leonard  Cohen's religious vision. In  Cohen, "trees, elbows, radios,  young  ladies-all  are  magic,  are holy, are eternal" (p. 72). Lee argues  that  the movement of Cohen's Beautiful Losers is based on  the  following proposition: "In  the  economy  of  the  whole   novel,  Book  One  imagines   the  possibility  that  the  Isis Continuum [the  seamless  unity] is real  here and  now, and  that  sexual  ecstasy  and  the  dislocation  of  rationality give entry  into it. Thus  the ontology  of savage  fields is overcome  by a  dionysiac  ontology" (p. 82). Cohen's novel,  however,  does  not  complete this end:  Cohen's "demolition job"  on reason  and  technique is so complete that  the "governing consciousness  had  already shot  its bolt  before  the  third  movement  began"; and  thus  as Cohen "took  the  line of least  resistance," his conclusion  became a "cop-out" (p.  94). Lee  is very  under­ standing of this  failure of  imagination. In  the  post-Nietzschean world  where  man  exists in  "radical  freedom"  beyond  a  numinous God  or  history   (pp.  97-100)   and where  man  can only invent himself and  where  all is merely  a matter of construct or

29

LEE & GRANT


technique, the only  possible "conclusion" might  well seem  the  following: "and  yet [we] must  go on spewing  out  new  I's  like a machine gone  amok.  Still  trying,  des­ perately and  pathetically, to cram  itself inside  one-any one-forever"  (p.  ror). At his own "conclusion," Lee admits that  he had  been  working  at Savage Fields for five years and  that  his voice too "kept  sounding false,  excluding too  much  of what [he] was"  (p.  rog). Indeed  Lee generalizes  once  again  his own  sense of  inauthenti­ city  to  include  the  modern   intellectual condition itself:  "Thinking   proceeds   by objectifying and  mastering what  is to be thought. The  process is erratic and  intuitive, yet the  overall  drive  is towards  systematic  clarity of idea  which  takes  possession of the subject  and  wrings  the structures from  it, leaving  behind  the  husk  of one  more object" (p.  110). This  is a dismal  view of modern thought or  criticism or  history and  runs  quite  contrary to the intent of George  Grant in  his  book  upon  Nietzsche,  Time  as History  (CBC  Massey Lectures rg6g,  published  1971) : here  one's  duty  is to think  or "enucleate" the other  man's  thought, not  to objectify and  to dismiss  the dead  structure of  another's thought. Grant  then  presupposes  the  possibility  of  a sympathetic, historical   understanding: "for  myself,  as  probably for  most  others,  remembering only occasionally  can  pass over into  thinking and  loving  what  is good. It is for  the great  thinkers  and  saints  to do more" (p.  52). Lee,  however,  sees little more  than  the possibility of setting  one's mind  against the other  for  the sake of over­  coming  and  mastering the other: "To think  sanely  must  be to think  against thought and  to think  more  deeply than  thought." At best it seems, "thinking can  be faithful to its situation only  by sitting  still,  and  unclenching and  waiting to  see what  will happen" (pp.  rrr-r2).
With  such  complexities it  could  be argued   that  Lee  must  express  more  than   a cartoonist's version  of our  history.  His  "Civil   Elegies,"  however,  is such  a  remote
and  unloving caricature and  so deliberately "ahistorical" that  his concluding specu­ lation   upon  a  better   time,  "the early  years  of  a  better   civilisation," can  only  be looked  upon  with  Lee's  own  amused  disbelief.  One   must  ask  how  such  a  "better
civilisation," such  a "construct," could  follow  and  ask  the  more  basic  question   of whether an  anti  or ahistorical mind  can  truly  think  through the  form  of  an  elegy.





STORY
 


Russell Thornton


Out of the unknowable
Rung centre

Of the dark
Constellations are flung like frigid  sparks.

With  the watery  hammer eye
The precise white fire

Of the desperate suns is struck - A last-ditch light

POEM

A dazzling  story
That the eye of everything must tell

Of containing the dark
Of how the dark  contains

Of how light  sees
Even in the dark.






THREE POEMS



*
(my mother said no)

(she candy fed the stale virgin to her daughters
 


Cathy Ford


the statuesque whiten  their  robes against obscene flourishing ritual)

the peddler is here, mother he's a wanderer, a refugee

he brings  news, mother, his clothes  aren't clean

(the  powdered  root of the gallows narcotic as dampened flowers shrieking

he blocks his black dog's ears)

my mother, see how you spin mother, he says i am a girl of gold
the country  grasping at straws the charms are in his sac
the mandragora bringing riches, mother

POEM

shall  we buy sugar, sugar.
The news is not good, mother
mandrake the same as under the hazel  bush

should  we look for ourselves

*
there are wolves in the timber
hoary  like the demon's oak staff. Our mothers  ask us not to play here
we compromise & twine wreaths for the lady on the hill twist beech leaves into our hair
hang  chaplets & garlands over the well of the thorn we pretend  there are no wolves
we haven't seen them

in the apple  trees from  the flowers
sprout the armagnac heads of men hanging

or whole
bodies weighted  by the feet to be tossed
into  the river

dancing dead  upright

the bowing & swaying visionary

common as salt, the children are  laughing, starving tear a hunk of bread, stuffing
supper & bruised fruit  by the streaming blooded  bridge

we understand wolves, gravediggers. We haven't seen them

POEM

*
together we walk the marshes  to the house of his ailing bride
nearly  a mother-sickle-shaped -she spins, she sews -
& i was taught the same.

The ice on the march like mirrors
dark  broken  mirrors.

He wonders at  the offer to come
he doesn't ask-blood like this frightens him. The birth  of hope. He hopes it's because i know


-these things -
 
i stand over my cold  pelvis viewing from a distance

as if it were an  unheld goblet just tipt with wine
red reflective on a fine damask

i wait i wait
there is nothing

no blood of my own waiting  for morning
tucked  around a hollow stomach

gnawed  at by dreams.


The child  in her arms the simple  habits  of what  to do

*







33

POEM
 

SPRING WOOD
 




Harold Rhenisch


The hills are as blue
as the water  would be
if it did not reflect
the weather, not a reflection but  the earth  seen distant:

clouds of earth
as light as sky, the way the sky would cloud
if light were water,  but not overly distant: how far

a man  could walk
before nightfall, the softly swaying birches that  watch  us
out of darkness.







STONE
 


Harold Rhenisch


When  skies are pale
as the sheen on a stone pulled  from the river, as dry in the sun
and  as hollow
when  rattled  in the hand, the yellow leaves
on the sandbar willows,

stronger than  this late earth, a blow of darkness spills over the valley;
to the river's shadow
I sing my name in alder: moon.

34


RECLAIMING THE BODYI
RECLAIMING THE NATION

a process of surviving colonization in
Dennis Lee's "Civzl Elegies and Other Poems"


Dale Zieroth


lMOST OF  US  TlllNK OF  OURSELVES  as residing somewhe<e just behind  our  eyes, it is surely because we live in  a  time  that  separates  con­
siousness from the objects of consciousness. We are not our bodies, but somewhere in our bodies. In Civil Elegie:s and Other Poems, Dennis Lee takes us on a journey "behind  the eyes." We are introduced  to a consciousness that  is talking  to itself, and more importantly, one that is striving to make contact with the world of actual objects, in which it lives, in such a way that value and  meaning  may be found  to inhere  in  these  objects.  Lee's  world  of objects  ranges  from  the  natural to  the cultural,  from  falling  sumac  leaves to  Nathan  Phillips Square.  But  there  is an even more desperate struggle at hand: the attempt  by consciousness to become at home in its own  body, the  physical surroundings  of its own flesh, the  first of all perceived objects.  The  poet  discovers, as his stance  shifts and  wavers,  as  he  is alternately  attracted to and  repelled  by his life in  his society, that  the  problem with the nation  mirrors the problem with his body. It may seem perverse to focus on this aspect  of "body" in  a poem that  seems so determinedly  "mind," but  I don't  believe so. The  human  body is peripheral  to no thing,  regardless of how it is perceived, and  through  the language  that  conveys the image  of the  body,  we are  drawn  into  the  questions  of colonized  perception,  language  and  meaning.1
Seen from the perspective of the liberal cosmology as defined by Lee, the  body becomes value-free, simply another  objective part of the universe, "raw  material, to be manipulated and  remade  according  to the hungers of one's nervous system and the demands  of one's technology."2   While Lee is aware that  he is part  of this cosmology, he does not share its values; instead, he looks to the social philosopher George Grant  and  the  Red Tory  tradition  that  Grant  evokes, one which  taught that  "reverence  for  what  is is more deeply human  than  conquest  for  what  is."3
Lee is painfully  aware  of  this  conquest  in  the  immediate   terms  of  a  Canada swamped  by an American  Empire,  and  he does not  hesitate to say "we  did  not

35

ClVlL ELEGIES

want to be American at all. Their  dream  was wrong."4  Yet the Elegies move in a field larger  than  the  political  domination   of  one  country   by  another.   Lee  is grappling   with  the   numbness  of  a  colonized  consciousness,  particularly   the colonized writer who has reached that dead point in his work where "words [have] become the enemy. To  use them  as a writer  [is] to collaborate  further  in  one's extinction."5  Colonization leads to isolation, then, from country,  body, speech:  it becomes space-lessness. This is the day-to-day world in which the poet, again and again, circles his despair.
In  the first section of the  book, the 16 shorter  poems of "Coming   Back," the
poet's experience of his body is largely sensual and sexual. While the body inhabits a world of excellent pleasure and after-pleasure, the poet's consciousness is haunted by isolation and  failure.  Sexual  love provides  a larger  unity,  a  larger  frame  of reference, but coming back to the world becomes a return  to the mind-body dichotomy. "Come  over here with your body" 6   is not  the same  as "Come  over here." The  poet is distanced not only from his own body, but also from his lover, and  this tremendous  gap  gets filled -with silence, with  absence  that  nags and irritates  at first, then  negates. Breakdown  results in "testing  the  cutting  edge on your own flesh";  the  "body  slouches," and  there  is "fragile  breathing."  Every­ where the poet's failure is described in images of the flesh, while the consciousness remains trapped  in the prison of itself; as Don Coles suggests,

beneath the conjoined and simple surfaces of the lovers is the complexity of the watching and listening poet, mindful of the past and present joys, seeking to make them last, to fix them in words ... but [he is] finally distrustfuU

In "Sibelius Park," near the end of the first section, the poet comes to a difficult realization:  "in the I bodies we live in we are  I acceptable." The  poem has spent its wrenching  way working toward  this hard-won  starting  point.  It  is a kind  of
reconciliation, and yet the first section of the book ends here with Lee still on the opposite side of the subject-object  fence from  his body:  he is not  his body, but rather lives in his body. Nevertheless the condition of dwelling "in" the body (and dwelling there "acceptably") is a step ahead of the condition  in which conscious­ ness finds itself solipsistically estranged from the body.
It  remains  for  "Civil  Elegies" to follow a similar  trajectory, and  to discover some of the  cultural  grounds  for  this  persistent  dichotomy.  The  poet  does  not "solve" the mind-body  problem, for that  is not his intention, but  he does engage in a  process of examining  and  articulating  some of its aspects  in  the  particular context of a colonized Canada, and  by moving through  several stances, he comes to realize that  a tentative  claiming  and  connection  can  occur.  I  wish to follow that movement, elegy by elegy through  the nine meditations,  many of which start with  the  poet located  physically in  Nathan  Phillips  Square, the  large  plaza  in front of Toronto's city hall.

CIVIL ELEGIES



APPROPRIATELY, the "Civil Elegies" begin with the absence of bodies and  the  presence  of  non-bodies, the  ghostly spectres:  in  their  "fetid descent, they darken the towers," polluting the here-and-now. They occur quite literally as "airborne shapes among the pollution," and at a first level probably are smog and air pollution. They  then become perceived as the ghosts of previous un­ fulfilled citizens of Canada who look for some action  by present-day  Canadians  which  will lay them,  grant  them  a fully-resolved death.  These  spectres are  not merely fabrications of the poet's mind. He registers them  also with his body, per­
haps  there  first and  foremost: "whenever   I the thick  air  clogs my breathing  it
teems with  their  presence."  Thus  these inarticulated  lives of the  past  become a source of physical strangulation. Lee becomes locked in a death  struggle with the process of articulation, and only by speaking the names of the past will he be free to breathe.  This  becomes exceptionally difficult because the language  required  to express such presences does not in fact exist. Living with  a discontinuous  past is living in speechlessness, in the disruption of the very rhythm  of breathing.
There  is even worse news. The spectres not only crave articulation through  the poet  (in fact, so ghoulish  do they sometimes appear  that  I am  tempted  to say "through the poet's blood"), but they are not "citizens of a human  body of kind." At this point in the poem, the body becomes a metaphor  for society:  the body as object-of-consciousness has extended  its boundaries beyond the individual  flesh to the civic body structure called the nation. In its isolation, however, colonized consciousness cannot  distinguish  between  body and  nation,  between  private  and public. Neither  is real, and  immed!ately the  poet finds himself caught.  His body is not just his flesh, it is all the country, but a country that  specializes in depriving itself of both  physical and  communal  existence. For some, this failure  to connect with others in the larger civic body beyond the individual  consciousness is itself a first death,  and  Lee cites Chartier,  the mad  bomber who "blew  himself to bits in
the  parliament   john,  leaving  as civil testament   I assorted  chunks  of  prophet,
twitching  and  I bobbing to rest in the flush." Here, early in the poem, we see the destructive force inherent  in alienation  from the civic body.
Yet just as the poet despairs, he also yearns for connection  and  wholeness with the nation -at the very same time as he needs to reject it as unclean and impure. The  physical body and  the civic state have now become bound  together;  now acceptance of one must include acceptance of the other. Lee will develop this point further,  but at this early stage in the sequence it seems not simply paradoxical  but unresolvable, and in fact much of the poem re-phrases and  re-examines this prob­ lem. The elegy includes, I hasten to add, the vision of what might be, of connected­ ness with the past through  the flesh and bone of one's ancestors, yet the final stance

37

CIVIL ELEGIES

becomes a bitter  unacceptance,  a consciousness alone and  more aware  of the  in­
visible spectres than the actual sun that "does not shine through."
In desperate  retreat  from the world, the  poet turns  to "Master and  Lord"  in what appears  to be a traditional  religious prayer.  But it is an address to no thing and to no one:  "Where are you?" This critical absence creates a despair that leads
us to the central  problem in the poet's life: "I know  I the world is not enough."
Objects themselves do not give him a sense of value and  he knows that  there has to be a larger value to which the world  (and  its smaller  partner, his body)  must yield. If that  could happen,  the result would be the  experience  of one-ness and real-ness: meaning. But the Lord and Master is itself meaningless, gone. The  poet inhabits  a world full of objects that  have no value,  and  without  value, they  dis­ appear.  Now it is no longer a matter  of feeling alienated  from his body:  there is no body, only a despairing will and consciousness hanging  onto its emptiness, the full dead weight of absence. The poet yearns not  just for a past when Master  and Lord was present in its fullest meaning,  but  also for a  different  consciousness, a pre-abstract  shape of mind that  would be greater  than  religion  per se. In such a time there would be no need for symbols because the distance  between flesh and consciousness would not exist: it would be living thought. Recognition  of this loss is, perhaps, the first step toward reclamation.
The  poet's  consciousness pours  out,  and  finds  a  slumber-state   norm  where people are  placidly eating  bag lunches on  the  concrete  benches  by the  pool, in sight of the Henry  Moore sculpture,  the Archer.  He  then  feels his "body's  pulse
contract  and  I balk,"  as if there  were  circles  closing  in  around   him,  driving
toward their centre, his consciousness. The commotion  in the forearms  announces the experience of on-coming void:  all the world goes slack and  begins to recede, and the speaker is without hold or purchase. As this happens, he searches for some point of reality that  will anchor  him, and  as he connects with  the knotted  space generated  by the Archer, there is a corresponding  response in his forearms.  They are not just disappearing into the void, for there is also this simultaneous  discovery that within the void there lies a node of space so charged  that  it is real -austere, primordeal,  even  threatening,  but  real. The  poet  senses bedrock  reality  in  the Moore  because it is the artistic embodiment  of the  landscape  of the  Canadian Shield that  the speaker  (and  his progenitors)  first started  living in. The  void all around  the Archer  is the direct result of the  failure  of these citizens to measure up to the land.
We soon discover how often the landscape  has defeated  Canadians. Like the void, it, too, is vast and barbaric; it, too, tows the bodies under, as void pulls them under, as empire  drags them  under.  The  speaker  is beginning  to attach  himself to these historical realities of defeat and sell-out. He is scarcely able to articulate what  they mean  at  this point since he is still  registering  viscerally the  wash  of

CIVIL ELEGIES

experience  (of both  void and the Archer), and  his nervous system and  its mind have only begun to explicate what his body already knows:  the assault of  Canada­ as-void on the nerve ends, and through  the Archer,  the  implications  of failure.8
The  speaker sees that  the artist, a Christ figure, may enter  this void and  give it meaning, but Lee the poet cannot fully believe this achievement since he sees both Thomson  and Christ collapse into carcasses, finally decaying. The  creative artistic meaning  and  the  creative  religious meaning  are  both  somehow  betrayed  and terribly  undercut by  the  death  of the  body.  Without   recourse  to  the  meaning implicit  in art and  faith,  and  faced  with  the  truth  of  Canada's innocent  greed and  violence, the  poet  has little alternative  but  finally to honour  the emptiness, honour  the void. This  understanding can only come after  the  experience  in  the Square,  which explains why the elegy is so difficult to read:  it has to recreate  the encounter  in the reader  without  the reader knowing what  the encounter  is about until the poem itself unwinds. Through this enactment, we come to the beginning of acceptance.


LEE CANNOT PROGRESS  through  the Elegies in anything  like a linear fashion  towards  self-knowledge. He  moves back  and  forth,  attracted to absence, repelled by absence, drained  of the will to continue,  alternating  between what he feels and what he scarcely dares to hope. He moves in and out of various states of perception, often so quickly that  we have little time to register the shift. It  is these shifts  (occurring often  in  the same  line)  that  collide and  carry  and announce  in us the perceptual  space the poet is in. His is a poetry that moves by qualification,  gliding  on an  interior  monologue of "but" and  "and" and  "yet." As the poet's consciousness examines the world, it comes to the void, and what the poet  does with  this  absence  will determine  his relation  with  his body  and  his country.
A  central  problem  already  stated  as  "I know  I the  world  is  not  enough"
becomes re-phrased  now as "If only I here and  now were not fastened so I deep in the flesh and  good-bye."  By implication  those objects  to which  the  poet says good-bye-the lakes, the earth, the corner stores-these are part of his flesh. The
death  of the lakes becomes then the gutting  of his self-respect, and  the poet feels this as more than  metaphor. The larger civic or national  body is no different from his flesh; good-bye to Canada is good-bye to the flesh. We have seen this con joining before and  while this is hardly a positive connection, it does represent,  I think,  a movement  beyond the purely world-denying,  body-denying rhetoric  of the earlier stances. The  body is inextricably  bound  to the world and  the poet is groping  his way towards  some sense of acceptance  of both,  following  the  tacit  recognition that  the nation  exists first and  foremost in its citizens' flesh and  blood.
Yet the  poet  is hounded  by absence and  returns  there  again  and  agam.  At


39

CIVIL ELEGIES

that  centre  he  becomes momentarily  free to see the  world  anew.  He  discovers within the emptiness there is a regenerative possibility: if he gave up trying to own the elm trees (for example), they might be released into  a valuative  existence of their own, might begin to "move very cleanly in the vehement  enjoyment  of their bodies." Here  is the renewed earth  full of sexual-like energy;  the trees are  wild, clean, un-self-conscious bodies, or perhaps,  phrased  differently,  theirs  is a  con­ sciousness more  vast  than  we can  fathom.  The  emphasis  on  renewal  and  re­ creation  makes the poet aware  that  this power underlines  the void, is co-existent with the void, and  is forever available  to him  by  virtue  of  his  body. The  elms become  evidence  of  the  procreative  power  latent   in  all  of  earth's  "objects," including the body of the poet, and  which mind-consciousness  alone cannot  per­ ceive. This  is the  beginning of reclaiming the  body, for it is a  reclaiming,  a  re­ discovery of the connecting  power between earth  and  blood. But the poet does not trust this new knowledge, so that  it is immediately  undercut, massively rejected:
"What  good is that  in a nation  I of losers and  quislings?"  At  the very moment
when a new perception arises from the contact  between the body and the full force of the all-sexual earth, a perception born of emptiness that  promises a renewal  of the body through a vision of primal energy, the poet rejects all. His reason is clear: any renewal that  does not include the civic body is inadequate. Nowhere  in  the Elegies does the debate  between attachment to, and  detachment from, the  world become so formalized,  so stanza  to stanza,  as here  in  the  Fourth   Elegy. While stanzas 1 and 3 argue that  detachment  is healthy  and  (ideally)   would allow one to be in the world without  constantly grasping  at it, stanzas  2   and  4  (there  is a stanza break at the bottom of page 43)  suspect any attempt  to break from citizen­ ship as pure  escapism. This  debate  continues,  of course,  throughout  the poem, with each side modifying the other.
As frequently  occurs in the Elegies, the poet recoils from  his world, here from the possibility of beginning anew in the world, and  now veers towards the extreme asceticism of the French-Canadian poet, Garneau, who saw "not  lost souls but  a company of lost bodies." Once  again  the  poet expresses his "appetite" for such emptiness, and  for  the  peace it would  presumably  bring.  Unable  to accept  the denigration  of the civic body, unwilling to allow the  earth's power of renewal  to carry him, he yearns once again for the extinction  of the difficult world. He sees now that  he will die on occupied soil, that  the  body  of the  nation  is not  only unclaimed, but virtually unclaimable since it is completely occupied  by the service to empire. Only different levels of sacrifice remain,  and  just as the mad  bomber died, so there are those who "take the world full force on their  nerve ends, leaving
the I bloody impress of their  bodies" on the  underside  of the  mind-driven  ma­
chinery of empire. Once again we have circled back to the most barren  of places, where there are few alternatives but death.

CIVIL ELEGIES

As the poet rallies his strength  to denounce the criminals of sell-out, he attempts to move from a private hopeless stance to an angrier position confronting  war and genocide and  "the  lousy expendable  cargo" of bodies thundering to their deaths. When bodies are value-free, raw material,  Lee is suggesting we are all criminally implicated: our minds become fascists willing to sacrifice our bodies; indeed, they are scarcely able to appreciate any other  possibility. The  poet implies that  we can accept the "lissome burning  bodies" of the Vietnamese  children  because the self we call "we"  is divorced from the body. We do not own our bodies just as we do not own our  nation -and  he calls this a failure of nerve. When  the  body is no longer valuable in its own right, then clearly the nerves have no choice but failure. A consciousness that is without  prime knowledge of its nerves and flesh and  blood ia  totalitarian consciousness in the service of empire. Here,  more  than  ever, it becomes apparent that consciousness cut off from its flesh is death. The  poet passes through  this lethal field without  offering any solutions, but he is slowly coming to understand that the problem of the reoccupation of his own body is central  to this quest to be made whole in a colonial space. At the moment  he is stiff and  "numb in [his] stance," unable  to get "purchase on life."




E                   his failure  tO achieve some first place of solidity, and  by so doing,  begins to  come to  terms  with  his "need  to fail and  be hurt." He shows how the lives of his friends  and  lovers are equally touched,  although  it is occasionally possible for them  to come to "some kind of ease in their bodies' loving." We are reminded of the mind-body dichotomy of "Coming Back,"  but  this goes further: the  poet senses that  a  kind  of  sado­ masochism  "draws  them  together  for love and  the  kill." Love  and  death  fuse; consciousness is now totally cut off from the body's last redemptive quality,  unity through  sexual love. We arrive at one of the most lonely and bitter positions in the poems. Yet, as the  poet  makes clear, there  is some part  of the  man  that  needs to live these "postures  of willing defeat,"  that  lives through  them  in order  to go beyond.  In  these continual  articulations  of the  meaninglessness  and  failures  to connect, he creates a gestalt that  begins to promise a moment  of being "with  our claimed selves, at home in the difficult  world." However ironic  these words may be, however slight their promise, it becomes a step beyond the bitterness and  isola­ tion beforehand. As the poet shifts his stance again, he comes to face Garneau  and his exact solution to all the poet's alienation: the divine void.
We watch  as Garneau's body vanishes. First there  is "the  palpable  void that opened  between  the  bones of your spine,"  then  the ever-continuing death-wish: "feeling inside you the small incessant gush of the cardiac  lesion" until finally the body becomes "sick"  and  "destroyed," and  nothing  remains  of the  man  but  his

CIVIL ELEGIES

"upright will." At the expense of losing the world, Garneau experiences his  (auto­ erotic)  real-ness with God. But Lee cannot  do  this;  he discovers that  his multi­ farious attachments have, in the end, thankfully  prevented  him from  going into the  void  with  a  radical  misunderstanding of  the  process involved;  they  have enabled him to draw  back from this neurotic  version of detachment. He watches as Garneau dies again,  bleeding, watches his "blood  lap  wide on the lake at sun­ set," disappearing entirely "as the ferns come shouldering  up through  [his] body." The  poet knows now what his choices have become:  all the world, or none of it. In confronting  this negation-of-the-world  in Garneau, confronting  it in terms of the death  of the body, the poet comes to see "his own  wrong start."
He is now able to resolve not to enter void "till I come to myself." This sense of journey and arrival is, I suggest, one of a fuller acknowledgement of the body as self; the space of Garneau's void is replaced  by the space of the  body. In  much the same way, the  poet refuses to reject the world  before he learns  its language. This act of resolving to honour  the body and  the world more fully reclaims them from meaninglessness, and this in turn  triggers a wide variety of external particu­ lars to flood his consciousness:  the  "square  and  the  dusk  and  the  war  and  the
crowds in motion  at  I evening."  Through   his body,  he has  come  closer to  the
brimful fragile world;  through it, he has heard  the world and  now must speak it, make it his. In the final elegy, it becomes clear that  reclaiming  the body is neces­ sarily a reclamation  of speech itself.
For the final time, the poet shifts back to doubt: "What if there is no regenera­
tive absence?" and he celebrates those who "do  not salute the death  of the body  I
before they have tasted its life." He now declares that  he himself was guilty of a similar offence, of adoring the void neurotically.  But that  has passed, and  he has reached a point of absolute first beginning, where even the void has "gone  void." He discovers he is able to "honour  each of [his] country's  failures  of nerve" and this is full acceptance of the  body, human  and  civic. He  realizes that  defining what the void is not is a renewed function of the body's speaking,  the attempt  by the poet to articulate  his new perspective, his new claims. Out  of this acceptance  a language  is created, and it is no longer the language  of bitter  acquiescence,  but a new language  which struggles to find new nouns-and one of them  is "body," another  is "land." This final stance, full of green earth  and  civil grey, is the first tentative gesture of wholeness at home.
In Civil Elegies and Other Poems, Lee handles a dual  progression; one move­
ment yearns to complete itself in self-annihilation  while the other  moves towards self-renewal  and  re-birth.  Lee comes first to a  rejection  of Garneau's version of the void and  then  to an acceptance  of the  absence  that  he feels everywhere  so deeply. But it is an acceptance  that  is the courageous  outcome  of a long process of slow, articulated   reclamation.  He  has slowly gained  back  his right  to  be, to

CIVIL ELEGIES

actively live in colonized  space,  a space which deals in the strangulation of speech and  the  disruption of language. The  constant   qualification and  shifting  stances attest  to the difficulty  of first words, particularly first words  that  are spoken  with­ out  the  alliance of  consciousness   to  "motherwit  and   guts." This   quite  literal "bloody-minded" union  asserts the values of the organic and  the  flesh in surviving colonization. Moving  through  colonized  space  becomes,  then, a  process  of  re­ discovering one's  flesh and  the  nation  that  lives through that  flesh;  it becomes  a journey  inward. It becomes  not  only a  journey  that  stumbles upon  this  place  of mapless emptiness, but  also one that  slowly seeks to re-shape such  a place  and  fill in the  blanks  of the  map. By the  end  of the  poem,  Lee is ready  to  begin  his own process  of re-claiming the  world,  moving  out  from  the  isolated  consciousness  to include a larger  frame of reference.  The  journey  behind  the  eyes ends  in  a place quite  different from  where  it began.  With  the  full  resources  of a  new  place,  the poet begins to live in his body and  in his country.


NOTES

1 While  the  ideas  about  consciousness that  emerge  in  this  essay are  derived  from several writers, I would like to acknowledge the work of Owen  Barfield,  Romanti­ cism Comes of Age  (Middletown, Conn.:  Wesleyan Univ.  Press, 1967)  and Shirley Sugarman,  ed.,  Evolution  of  Consciousness:  Studies   in   Polarity    (Middletown, Conn.:  Wesleyan Univ. Press, 1976).
2  Dennis Lee, "Cadence, Country,  Silence:  Writing in Colonial Space,"  Boundary 2,
3, no. I ( 1974), 159·
3 "Cadence,  Country,  Silence," p. 159·
4  "Cadence, Country,  Silence," p. 160. "Cadence, Country,  Silence," p. 163.
6 Dennis Lee, Civil Elegies and Other  Poems (Toronto: Anansi, 1972),  p. 18. p. 18.
7  Don  Coles,  review  of  Civil  Elegies and  Other  Poems,  Toronto  Globe  &  Mail
(April 1, 1972),  p. 23.
8 As readers, we have to be prepared  to accept that "Nathan Phillips Square"  equals "Canada" at  this  point.  The  questions  that  arise  from  this  assumption   deserve another essay.









43

FOUR POEMS
 


Neile Graham


SWUTLJIK  BUILDS FJILSE SPRING

Sky naked  as flesh.    The  air cracked  and cold as stone, chipped like obsidian
into a cunning blade.
These  days strip you
till you're raw as a man who sees just one direction, and  you hold the wind
like ice till it melts
in your hand.   The  river's skin peels and  flakes,
the river bleeds mud from the hills.
Light pours from your flesh:
a scarce, fertile  rain.
Clouds darken  and shuffie in from  the east.    And now
the night  is a bear,
his bulk a shy eclipse. Near  morning his fur
is black, clear as obsidian, his purpose  never blunted. Wind  shaves your hands.



HIGH WJITER

hot wind came  from the marshes
we wade through air thick with  rotting  weeds
fish from the spawning steam in Indian summer, in red leaved shrouds    fleshy anchors our legs weigh us into  the mud

death-chill  from the mountains
we reach  the rock and  begin

44

POEM

to climb  an old stream-bed crevasse  between  mountains shale  and  scree that  run past us like water

a leaf in the current
pushing ourselves the wrong direction leaving  the marsh  for these foreign heights, our hands  fall away
from  each other     there it is the first clue that  we may
be lovers 	wait there's  more

but the eyes and stance between the eyes
love, this is not beauty but trial 	here is a place we can  turn  and look distance spreads  the air
before  us, winter  and summer
meet 	exchange themselves    again

casting but shade beyond the other lights
and  we're  here, hands  held with  touching
the sun fades  with the heat not setting but distant
we wait for the stars to fade in brighten us waiting

sky's clear/ night's sea/ green of the mountain pool
and  now sky is water but clear and  we breathe it to fill ourselves we are not each other
not ourselves 	what  is beneath us is no longer  the mountain



)(NYTHING  YOU S)(Y

Anything you say can and  will be used to make  children uneasy, to make  them sleep.    You tell tales to the children dreaming to the dragon-keep, where all the pale maidens have clear eyes,

45

POEM

modest  hair, and  breasts uncovered only in the struggle  deep in the heart of the hero  (you)  who takes her
from  her scaly, lascivious lover. 	0 the look in their eyes when  they wake to your weeping, keeping sleep away-first
in the magic of your voice
and  then in what  you say.


SJILTSPRING
for Brenda

Early  island light
with characters:	the heron
skimming from rock to rock, just off shore; the crows that  led me far down  the beach, taunting me farther; the sea itself, coming in; my friend  inside, sleeping;  the gulls; the terns; the river otters, who bobbed  their  heads
over the log below me, the last otter, hesitant, stared.

Light  with objects:	the feather
the crows left to take me farther; the shells
I'm  certain are mine, perfect and  whole, yet
still inhabited; the stone whale, beached and  buried, like the plants  on the shore rocks, clinging
certain of soil and  rain; the rock breakwater before  me a path into the sea in all its certainty;
in my hand  the feather, a pink shell found broken for my sleeping friend.




RIVJILS FOR THE SUN
 

Allan Safarik


We who felt the shiver that  is death
watched our lives
spinning like coins cast into a dark  field of wheat  or water

POEM

where  you'll find what  is left of me
as we found  the others who moved  out
over the continent
making fires under the stars ploughing the land for gardens

every high
and  low point
all the landmarks named
order exceeding
order
there  is always some artifact
dug from the soil by the workers
or the foraging beasts

in the fields
of circumstance

the past remains luck against luck
to prove  the future



CR.:ztB
 


Allan Safarik


The crab scurries sideways revving his eye beads
Antennae twinkling
Ultra robot  claws

if crabs could live for long in air
they'd  soon be feeding in the streets

47

POEM

crabs  and dogs fighting  it out all over the city

freeway crabs
fat  with plunder move relentlessly across the continent

imagine the day the first crab scuttles  into Saskatoon





SPRING ]IT THE COTT]IGE

Richard Outram

As once, at pressures that  would serve  to force
Us into jelly, Beebe came  to peer,
Incredulous, through bolted  rounds of quartz, Out  of his cramped, deep-dangled bathysphere

At nightmare lights within  the black  abyss, Fantastic-fired creatures with a need Unfathomed heretofore to luminesce, Coldly encounter, copulate or feed,

We stand  together silently and  watch, Long after  the last chill light has gone, Beyond the rippled  glass, a tracking batch Of fireflies' pulsed spangle  on the lawn:

And have exhaustive knowledge found to prove
Specific-coded, heatless fire to be,
Like truth in season and like other love, But intermittent intermittently.

liLA LE.C...
 ON DE LA VIE DES BOIS"


Wilderness and Civilization in
Constantin-Woer's "La Bourrasque"




Therese Eveline LaFontaine






AN •MPREssmNABLE  YOUNG  man  eager  fm  adventure left France to visit North America at the beginning of this century. His travels ultimately led him to Western Canada and, finding the beauty of the prairies enchanting, he  chose to  spend  the  next  ten  years of  his life in  Manitoba. He occupied  himself with hunting in the north, selling horses and  later settling in a homestead. This Frenchman delighted in observing the wildlife indigenous to the Canadian plains and made friends with many Metis and  immigrants  like himself. However, his life on the frontier  ended abruptly  with the  war;  early in 1914 he returned  to  France.  After  the  war,  this  young  man,  Constantin-Weyer,  began writing extensively about  his experience in the Canadian Northwest.  In  1928, he won the Prix Goncourt  for his novel concerning the dispossessed natives and  the arrival of the immigrants in Un  Homme  se penche sur son passe.
Numerous   novels  and   essays constitute  Constantin-Weyer's "Epopee  Cana­ dienne." These volumes may be divided into two categories:  some of his texts like Manitoba   (1924), Cinq  eclats de silex (1927), and  Clairiere  (1929)  recall the author's encounter   with  a  foreign  and  primaeval  landscape   or   present  vivid vignettes of animal life; his other works on the west, inspired by heroes or explorers of Canada, tell the story of Louis Riel  (La  Bourrasque,  1925;  Cavalier  de  La Salle, 1927; Champlain, 1931;  La Verendrye, 1941 ).
Readers  in France  unanimously  extolled Constantin-Weyer for his probing  of
an innovative subject  matter-the land, the people, the plants and  animals of a new country  and  for  his skill in describing exotic regions and  in  emulating  the dialects of the French-speaking Metis.1 However, critics in French-Canada were outraged  at Constantin-Weyer's denigration  of and contemptuousness  toward  the inhabitants of  Manitoba.  The   author's   irreverence   was  incomprehensible   to Western Canadian and  therefore  was bitterly censured. Since  these readers  were offended, a fierce quarrel  ensued, a quarrel  led by Donatien  Fremont,  a  French

49

CONSTANTIN-WEYER

journalist living in Saint-Boniface. Fremont  violently opposed Constantin-Weyer's abusiveness and  vulgar sensationalism  which  ensured  his literary  success abroad but which insulted the native population in Canada.2
The few contemporary  critics of Constantin-Weyer such  as Roger  Motut  tend
to mitigate  the  quarrel  about  his treatment  of  pioneer  life by arguing  that  his novels would no longer scandalize if compared  to a modern  literary  text like The Studhorse  M an.3   Nevertheless, the sardonic  tone  and  the  "gaillardise" of  Con­ stantin-Weyer   remain  distasteful  to  many   Western   Canadians. The  historian W. L. Morton,  for instance, is touched  by the  poetry  which  emanates  from  his descriptions of the plains yet hastens to reproach  him:

His Manitoba, an autobiographical work, and  La  Bourrasque, a novel with Riel as hero, though starred with brilliant descriptive passages, were highly coloured, inaccurate, and brutal sketches of life among the Manitoba French.4

It is instructive  that  Constantin-Weyer  was much  more respectful  and  restrained in his later historical novels and this can be attributed to the fact that,  as Gerard Tougas notes, his hero La Salle was an illustrious figure known in France  and not a "sauvage" from the prairies:  "Son esprit railleur,  n'ayant  plus de  prise sur des hommes et des evenements entres  depuis longtemps  dans  l'histoire,  se fait  reve­ rencieux."5
A discussion specifying the various accusations  of immorality  and  falsifications of historical  data  brought  against  Constantin-Weyer  may  in  itself  be  very  en­ lightening. But, in our opinion, this type of commentary does not in any  way do justice to the author  and his writings on the Northwest.  In order to go beyond this quarrel,  one should  approach  the literary  texts themselves in  an  attempt   to dis­ cover Constantin-Weyer's true  vision of nature  which  provoked  controversy  and his resulting idea  of the underlying  conflict between  wilderness  and  civilization.
As  hunter  and  trapper,  Constantin-Weyer  gained  firsthand  knowledge  about
the survival  in  the  wild of the  strong  and  the  destruction   of  the  weak.  Such experience  of nature  "red  in  tooth  and  claw"  or  "la  le on
which  the  author  dramatically  objectified in  his novels could  be  related  to  the
biological and philosophical theories fashionable  at that  time in Europe. This interesting connection  or extension between the reality of strife in Western  Cana­ dian  nature  and  the  influential  Darwinian  and  Nietzschean  thought  surely im­ pressed Constantin-Weyer, especially since he had the opportunity to enter Valery Larbaud's select circle. After  the  war,  Constantin-Weyer married  the  niece  of Larbaud  and dedicated Cinq eclats de silex to the cosmopolitan homme  de lettres. Larbaud, most assuredly, imparted  to Constantin-Weyer some of his own absorb­ ing literary  and  philosophical  preoccupations:  the  translator  of Samuel  Butler certainly spoke of his enthusiasm for the discoveries of  Lamarck, his reformulations  of the hypotheses of Darwin, his fascination  with  the  applicability  of Nietzsche's

CONSTANTIN-WEYER


original system and  curiosity  about  Gide's  adherence to the  notion  of the affirma­
tion of man  or "amor fati."6
Understandably, the men  who opened  the west realized  that  in order  to survive the  rugged   frontier environment they  should   become  of  superior  physical  and moral  strength and  attain a  high  degree  of  resilience  and  fortitude. This  latent Darwinism or survival of the  fittest and  latent  Nietzscheism  or  the  will to  power in early Western Canadian life is not often  referred  to or expressed  openly:

Canadians in all walks of life at this time felt that the difficult nature  of Canadian soil which  meant  that  men  had  to struggle  so hard  would  lead  eventually  to  a superior  northern nation  which would rival  those other  democratic  and  northern nations of Europe, from which it had sprung.7

Constantin-Weyer's  daring  adventures in  the   north   encompass  these  types  of struggles  for self-preservation and  even supremacy. In  fact,  these struggles  can  be envisaged  at  two levds: first, the  animal  realm  in nature where  there  is an inter­ locking  chain  of killing  and  being  killed, and  secondly,  the  human world  where some men  strive  to conquer, vanquish, annihilate.




ETHER                      about  the northern lights or  whether in  scenes  focusing  on  Riel's  disillusionment about  the  petitions, the reader  of Constantin-Weyer's La Bourrasque quickly  apprehends that  only a few premisses or syllogisms govern  this world of experience. One  of the  most poignant scenes in Constantin-Weyer's novel depicts  succinctly  how  this  lesson of the  wild prairie nature  is essentially  the  struggle   for  survival. This  scene  occurs   at  the centre  point  of  the  Riel  novel.  Donald   Smith, later  Lord  Strathcona, the  man responsible for the  building of the railroad across the West, and  his personal secre­ tary travel  for days by dogsled and  will soon arrive  at  Fort  Garry to meet with  the rebels. Smith  is confident that  "les anglais" will easily squash  Riel  and  his band. Although happy to converse  at length  with  his secretary  about  his plans to attract immigrants to  this  new  land   once  the  Metis  have  been  suppressed  and   extin­ guished,   he  suddenly stops  his  detailed   explanations to  demonstrate a  perfect  image  of  victim  and  executioner. Far  out  in the  distance  a  coyote  can  be  seen pursuing a  rabbit. Pointing to  the  ravage  left  in  the  snow, Smith   proudly   con­ cludes: "-Pas besoin de metaphysique, mon vieux.... La voila la lec;on de choses toute trouvee."
With   the  composure of  a  huntsman,  Constantin-Weyer relishes  in  drawing
attention to  the  precise  action   of the  merciless  slaughter of  the  feeble.  Nature permits  this brutality and savagery  where "la  clemente  Nature est un monstre  aux griffes rougies de sang !"8

CONSTANTIN-WEYER

[Le coyotte] fit un bond dans la neige, le dos courbe un instant, la gueule deja basse et ouverte. La seconde d'apres il lan tait en l'air le "jack" enorme, fourre de blanc, et qui s'empourprait  deja de sang.... Les pattes  de la victime grifU:rent inutilement l'air, avant de pendre inertes.... Le chasseur, sa proie ala gueule, fila la queue basse.
This  picture  of  the  instinctive  violence of animals  in  nature  leaves  one  in  an emotional and moral quandary; the tender-hearted would have reason to say it is amoral. To witness such a scene of force and carnage  or reflect on such a "le on" or image of power and  powerlessness produces an  extremely  ambivalent  impres­ sion on the mind: on the one hand,  there is the glory of victory and  energy, on the other hand, there is the horror of defeat and death. This mixed reaction  to the laws of nature and the struggle of the fitter encourages in man a dual stance where nature  becomes at the same time serene yet violent, beautiful yet terrifying, "mag­  nifique et horrible"  or in the author's  words "Ce grand  rythme  de la Vie et de la
Mort,  eternellement,  circulairement  encha.lnees l'une  a l'autre, ... c'est le theme
meme de la Nature.  Elle est merveilleuse et terrible."
The coyote ripping apart  the flesh of the rabbit  without  an iota of sympathy  is an ideal metaphor for a stupendously cruel Canadian historical  event. In  fact, to illustrate the strangulation of the uncouth  prairie-born  at the hands of the sophis­ ticated forces of state and army, the Riel rebellion is perfect. The  inherent laws of nature  are re-echoed in the Canadian battle  where the natives  raged  against  the government  or  between  wilderness and  civilization.  In  this  scheme  of  things, Donald  Smith is the powerful figure who dominates  La  Bourrasque. He is char­ acterized  by Constantin-Weyer  as a  builder,  a  man  of  vision and  wisdom  who never falters in his devising and scheming. This autocrat  will "naturally" disarm Louis Riel and  the Metis people and obtain  western Canada for Britain  and  the cast. After his quelling of the first Riel  rebellion, Smith  hurriedly  promotes  cam­ paigns in Europe  to fill the western  plains with  immigrants thereby  driving  out forever the natives and the Metis. Just as it was expected  that  the coyote would destroy the rabbit, it was simple for Smith and the bureaucracy to exile the natives or place them in a marginal position.
Because of  Constantin-Weyer's  unequivocal  admiration for  the  stronger  and the more civilized, the novel La Bourrasque, which concentrates  on the story of the first rebellion, is consequently narrated  in a tone of indignation and disrespect for all characters  except Donald Smith. Of course, this novel deals with victims, a people plunged in disgrace; hence the author  has no inhibitions  about  resorting to vulgar language,  ridicule, sarcasm, and even the grotesque.  We recall that  it was this attitude of scorn for the Metis people which astounded  readers like Fremont and Tremaudan. It is our contention  that  this profound  spirit of irreverence  and amorality  in the novel is due to Constantin-Weyer's demonstration of the law of nature  and  the inner struggle of man towards  the surpassing  of self. With  respect

CONSTANTIN-WEYER


to Riel, throughout the novel, the author resorts to animal imagery  which empha­ sizes the  hero  as victim  and  as dispossessed.  Riel is thus  seen  in  terms of  animal leitmotivs,  first as a defenceless  sheep  brought to slaughter, secondly  as a solitary wolf living on the  periphery, on the  boundaries of civilization. However  resource­  ful in their  apprenticeship of political  warfare, Riel and  the  few men stationed in Fort  Garry could  never hope to impede  the forces of government and  progress. To  his followers, Riel will repeat  the idea that  the government is playing the unheroic role of a wolf in a sheep-pen: "un  gouvernement qui  lui  paraissait  jouer  le role d'un loup  dans  une bergerie." And  to continue his animal imagery  or leitmotiv  of the  Metis  people  as hounded sheep,  the  author will designate all their  harangues and  discussions  as an  ineffective  "bleating": "un  homme  et  deux  femmes  brail­  laient  des choses contradictoires, sur le ton de la plus vehemente colere.  Au milieu des beuglements discordants...." In  order  to underline the reality  that  the  Metis are  no longer  lords  of  the  plain  but  scavengers  on  the  land, the  author equates Riel to a lone wolf:
Tres  loin, vers l'ouest,  ... un loup  hurla,  d'un  ton de defi plaintif.  Riel se sentit frere de cet etre qui reclamait,  dans la nuit, les droits dont les premieres approches de Ia civilisation l'avaient prive! (p. 102)
Riel fut frere des Ioups. En marge de Ia civilisation, comme eux;  habitue  a la libre nature, comme eux; et comme eux, encore, oblige de mendier ou de voler sa subsis­ tance a un quelconque  des poulaillers de la civilisation.... (p. 195)

The opposition between  Donald Smith  and  Louis  Riel  or  the  executioner and the victim  captured in ruthless  animal imagery  is highlighted further by means  of another very  pertinent literary device.  Out  of three  epigrams which  open  various chapters of the  novel,  two  are  taken  from  Rudyard Kipling. These   intertextual references  written by an  advocate of imperialism and  included in  a  novel  about skirmishes   in  an   English   colony,  sum   up  with  clear   precision   the   distinction between  symbols  of power -the  English  flag, and  Constantin-Weyer's image  of defeat  -the bleating sheep:
Qu'est-ce  que le drapeau Britannique? Vents du Monde,  repondez. (p. 139)
(Kipling,  Barrack Room  Ballads)

Nous sommes de pauvres agneaux egares ... Bee bee bee ... (p 201)
(Kipling, Gentlemen  Rankers)

A PART FROM  THE  MACRO-STRUGGLE or the more overt strife of  the  Metis  in  the  west  against the  encroaching  powers  of  progress,  there   is another very  immediate micro-struggle within  the  Metis'  inner  self. When  Con-


53

CONSTANTIN-WEYER

stantin-Weyer  arrived in the Canadian West in the early 19oo's, the image of the native on the prairie had been totally shattered and even reversed. The native indigenous  to the  Northwest  was now labelled  a  man  of vile appetites,  a  man without moral conscience, polish, knowledge, or language. For Constantin-Weyer, the concept of the noble savage as promulgated  by a James  Fenimore  Cooper had degenerated  into the  Metis race.10  The  Metis, by definition,  has in his veins the mixture of French  or other European  blood and  Indian  blood;  therefore,  it is a widely  held  opinion  that  this  inner   tension  of  being  situated   "betwixt-and­ between"  gives rise  to  "the   half-blood's  enigmatic   mediatory  place  as  a  new species between  primitivism and  civilization  [and]  manifest[ed]  at  once  [by] his capacity  for subhuman  depravity  and superhuman  potentiality."11  The  idea  be­ hind  this melange of races or  half-blood  is that  the  Metis  will be engaged  in a perpetual  fight within  himself for the ascendancy of his civilized manners  over his savage instincts. Needless to say, knowing Constantin-Weyer's unbridled  cynicism vis-a-vis the Metis people, the refined manners  more often  than  not crumble  and succumb  to the brutish ways. This notion of the inner  struggle  within  the  Metis where the man  of wilderness fights  the man  of culture  parallels  the  rebellion or the outer struggle in Constantin-Weyer's novel.
Let  us look at a few examples  to distinguish  how  the savage-civilization  state
of inner conflict operates in La Bourrasque. Except for rare instances, Louis Riel, as one would expect, leans towards  savagery  and  barbarism.  When  it  comes to sexual exploits, the hero Riel is the epitome of the savage:  he is always disposed to go out into the bushes and make love to any wanton  Metis girl "et  de culbuter
sur  les feuilles mortes Ia  joyeuse commere,  toujours   prete  a se faire  trousser."
However,  with the respectable wife of Mr.  Hamarstyne, Riel is transformed  into
the most exquisite blushing lover. As he climbs to the lady's chamber,  he loses all traces of his savage ancestry and  enters the room  metamorphosed into  a  perfect gentleman: "A  ce moment,  I'amour  avait  chasse  de  Riel  toute  trace  de  sang sauvage, et il ne restait plus que le Franc;ais."
Constantin-Weyer considers Riel's enjoyment  in stalking  the  fields and  woods
as another  expression of the Metis propensity for the untame.  For example,  while visiting various communities  and  inciting  the  Metis  to armed  insurrection,  Riel meets a  hunter  in  the forest.  Instead  of  pronouncing his  usual  diatribe   about injustices  and  petitions, Riel  helps the  hunter  with  his trap  and  asks questions about  the animals  in the region. Again, Constantin-Weyer explains  this facet  of Riel's character by resorting to his notion of the inner  struggle  or the sheer  pre­ dominance  of the wild over the urbane:
Riel subitement interesse se pencha. Dans cette  minute  Ia chasse seule valait la peine d'etre  vecue. Le sauvage avait reparu en lui. II suivait haletant  la  demon­ stration du vieux metis.... II n'etait plus qu'un chasseur, descendant de nombreux chasseurs.

54

CONSTANTIN-WEYER


More significant instances of Riel's metamorphosis from civilized, educated man to savage  transpire at  critical moments during the  second   rebellion.   When   the grievances and  land   rights  of the  Metis  are  demanded and  when  the  history  of their expulsion  from  Manitoba and exile in Saskatchewan is recalled, Riel becomes furious  and  calls for  revenge. To  understand Riel's  outbursts of  hate  and  vehe­ mence,  the  author again  furnishes   us with  his idea  that   the  savage  in  him  has resurfaced:

A !'entendre parler  tortures,  Riel se revelait physiquement  un fils des Sioux et des
Crees. De la f on	a eux seuls
abolissaient  toute  trace  du  sang  franc;ais. Parallelement,  son  arne  devenait  bar­
bare....

Whenever such  violent  or  extreme  actions  are  planned or  carried out,  Riel  and the  Metis  people  are  always  judged  as having  given  way  to their  savage  nature: "Le  sauvage reparut  immediatement en  eux.  II en  etait toujours ainsi  lorsqu'il s'agissait  de guerre, de chasse ou d'amour !"
Even  with  Riel  on  the  gallows,  Constantin-Weyer will pursue  his thesis of the
inner  conflict  between  savagery  and  civilization.  At the end,  before  being  hanged, Riel  is asked  if he  wishes  to speak.  The  officiant  reminds him  of  his pride,  his immortal soul, and  entreats him to remain  silent. However, Riel  has  a few words to say. This  last  gesture  is interpreted by Constantin-Weyer as  a  visible sign  of the  ultimate domination of  the  forces  of  unrestraint in  the  leader  and  victim :

Comme si le sang Sauvage eut brusquement  reveille sa moitie indienne,  la couleur revint aux  joues de Riel ... 11 haussa les epaules et sourit d'un  air dedaigneux  ...
11 se detourna .a demi, et prononc;a d'une voix tres nette:
-Dites done? c'est  a,



bE METIS   REBELLION  and   its  inevitable  defeat   provided Constantin-Weyer with  an  ideal  story which  had  the  built-in  drama and  conflict between  spheres  of primitivism and  progress. Along with  the larger  canvas depict­ ing skirmishes  between  the  native  population and  the  dreamers of  railroads and  expansionism, Constantin-Weyer imagined the more intimate battle waged  within  the  mind  of the  Metis,  as exemplified  by Riel, where  his inclinations towards the cultivated and  refined  clash  with  his Indian past and  prairie roots.
This  singular vision of "Ia  le<;on de Ia vie des bois"  is not  only apparent in  La
Bourrasque but is at the heart  of most of Constantin-Weyer's novels and  essays on the  Canadian West.  His  more  well-known  novel Un  Homme se penche sur son passe concerns itself with  the same overriding idea as in  La Bourrasque but  from the alternate perspective -the builders  of the prairies  and  not the dispossessed or losers of the land. This  later  novel, which  adopts  the  format of a confession,  pre-

55

CONSTANTIN-WEYER

sents the  demise  of the  adventurous frontiersmen and  the  growth of an  agrarian society and  the settling of the West because of the influx  of immigrants. The hero (like the author) arrived  in Manitoba in the early years of this century and  swiftly learnt  to appreciate the  harsh  existence  of the  hunter and  trapper on  the  plain. Soon this huntsman is constrained to interrupt his life-style  and  become  a  home­ steader. Yet, clinging to the  old frontier  life, the  hero  sells horses  to farmers and  travels to the far north for furs in winter.  His close friends, one after another, leave him  to find  a  place  where  they  can  recover  their  peaceful  primitive ways:   the Metis  Napolt on
Lake  Winnipeg. Although the  French  hero  ( Frenchy)  decides  to leave  Canada, he is not bitter about  his experience nor does he claim  to be a weakling  who can­ not  accept   change and  progress.  He  regrets  the  passing  of  an  old  way  of  life; nevertheless, he is impressed  with the energy and  endurance of those pioneers  who fight to maintain farms and  build cities in the wilderness.  Within the span  of thirty  years, he has witnessed the  complete  annihilation of the  native  and  Metis  people.
This  chain  of events whereby  Riel's nation  was easily destroyed  and  supplanted
by another is not only a remarkable achievement but  also an  excellent  illustration, according to Constantin-Weyer, of the laws of nature. Mter a trip  across the  West and  prior  to his departure for Europe, the  narrator of Un  Homme  se penche sur son passe celebrates the  victory  of  civilization   and  sings  the  praise  of  the  new strong  men  of "the great  lone land":

J'avais  sous les yeux la genese meme d'un  pays magnifique.  Le triomphant poeme de  la reussite  canadienne  chantait  a mes oreilles son  rythme  puissant.  C'etait  Ia
magnifique  conquete de Ia nature  par Ia volonre....

Ainsi, en mains de trente ans, l'effort de quelques hommes, conducteurs  de peuples, avait fait de ce desert un pays riche. Une race  toute  entiere  avait  disparu  dans  Ia lutte, et des Sioux, des Crees et des Pieds-Noirs, qui avaient  jadis domine  ici, il ne
restait  plus que quelques rejetons destines a disparaltre devant  l'effort  continu  de
Ia race blanche....12


NOTES

1 Constantin-Weyer was able  to  approach   a  high  degree  of  similitude  in  his  re­ creation  of the  French  Metis patois. The  following  passage should  be read  aloud to savour the colourful dialect: "Voies-tu  Riel,  j'ai Ia doutance  que si on  attaque
les v'limeux  sans y offrir a s'rend  c;a  va faire  du  vilain!  . . . eune sapree  maudite
affaire ... <;a r'virera  en mal, ere Mausus! ... Et  pis, te comprends!  jangle  moie
un peu tout c;a, y vaut mieux qu'y ait pas de sang verse ... y font  ds bonnes cordes
en Ontario.-J' m'en sacre ben d'etre  pendu,  gronda  Riel."  Maurice Constantin­
Weyer, La Bourrasque (Paris:  Rieder, 1925),  p. I33·
2  The substance of F11emont's argument  in the quarrel  could  be reduced  to this state­ ment:  "Vers l'Ouest  et  La  Bourrasque constituent une  defiguration  grossiere et calomnieuse  de l'histoire  comme il en existe peu  d'exemple. La  malveillance  et le dessein arrete  de denigrement  sont trop  visibles pour  qu'il  soit  possible d'invoquer

CONSTANTIN-WEYER

les  moindres circonstances atrenuantes...."  Cited   in  Helene  Chaput,  Donatien
Fremont:  Journaliste  de l'Ouest  canadien  (Saint-Boniface:  Les  Editions   du  Ble,
1977), p. 148.
3  Roger  Motut, who  has  closely examined the quarrel, reports, for  example, that  in La Bourrasque "if the figure of Louis Riel is not true  to fact,  the scenes that  shocked the  critics  then  would   perhaps appear quite   normal in  today's   modern  fiction." "From  Ploughshares to  Pen: Prairie   Nostalgia," The   New  Land:  Studies  in  a Literary Theme, ed. Richard Chadbourne and  Hallvard Dahlie (Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press, 1978), p. 66.
4   W. L. Morton, Manitoba: A History, 2nd ed.  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto  Press,
1967), p. 4'9·
5  Gerard Tougas, La Litterature  canadienne-fram;aise, 5th  ed.  (Paris: Presses  Uni­
versitaires de France, 1974), p. I39·
6  The  "correspondance de coeur" between Larbaud and  Butler  is discussed by Allison
Connell  in  "Forgotten  Masterpieces of  Literary Translation:  Valery   Larbaud's
'Butlers'," Canadian  Review  of  Comparative  Literature,  1, no.  2  ( 1974), 167-90. And,  the affinity  that  existed  between  Larbaud and  Constantin-Weyer is alluded to
in the dedication "A  Valery  Larbaud," Cinq eclats de silex (Paris: Rieder, 1927),
pp. 7-8.
1 Barbara Thompson Godard, "God's Country: Man  and  the Land  in the Canadian
Novel,"  Revue  de Litterature  comparee, 47, no. 2 (1973), 231.
8  Constantin-Weyer, Un  Homme  se penche sur son passe (Paris:  Rieder, 1928), p.
63. Northrop Frye speaks of the manifest  Darwinism in nineteenth-century Canada:
"the  obvious  and  immediate sense of nature is the  late  Romantic one,  increasingly affected   by Darwinism, of  nature red  in  tooth  and  claw." "Conclusion,"  Literary History of Canada, ed. Carl  F. Klinck, 2nd ed., Vol. n  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto
Press, 1965), p. 355·
9  Un Homme  se penche sur son passe, p. 175.
10  Edward  McCourt  concedes   that   James   Fenimore Cooper's  ideal   of  the  "noble savage" was hard to erase from  the minds of the early  pioneers.  See "Prairie Litera­ ture  and  its Critics," A Region  of the  Mind:  Interpreting  the  Western  Canadian Plains, ed.  Richard Allen  (Regina: Canadian Plains  Research Center,  1973), pp.
153-62.
11 William  J. Scheick, The  Half-Blood:  A Cultural Symbol in 19th-Century  American
Fiction  (Lexington, Ky.: Univ.  Press of Kentucky, 1979), p. 88.
12 Un Homme  se penche sur son passe, pp. 205-06.










57

MY SYMP]ITHY IS WITH THE FISH

R. G. Everson

Beak like a long, thin Austrian cigar, the Great Blue Heron
stands with wings folded on high shoulders
in old-fashioned opera-cloak style.

A man about mangroves, he leans down delicately  into the water  as though stooping for a light at a cigar counter.

Now he straightens crookedly in a tall gentlemanly flourish,  smoking a death-pale puff of fish.





THE DJIUGHTER RECRE]ITES HER MOTHER

Davy James-French

This  rag doll mass
is empty  but prophesies health.   Stuff  the arms,

stuff the legs, with mother's old stockings, remembering

her legs, the veins sluggish and tom from  your weight.

Innocent burden! Did she forgive? Stuff, stuff,

all the way down
to fingers and  toes,
those soft gingham clubs.

POEM

The head  droops  like a breast, absurd!   Fill it with sand, each  grain  a curse.

Now name  it, bless it,
ask it to dance.   And laugh and  laugh  and  laugh.





JIUGUST IN SYDENHJIM WJIRD

Robert Billings

(for  Gail Fox)

No-one  here wants the trees to catch fire
They  grow  hearts  that  are older  than  waiting

Slowly, one dream at a time I have watched porch  lights go on and  off, the blue animal that  paws at  the wind down  Union  Street

Cars     A beach  without footprints   And out  there the lake with its drenched blossom of islands

We have watched ourselves turning grey as this street  in late winter     The wings
we have  tried  to grow is a love for white stone

City    City    All summer I have been in love with the last flowers to close before sunset

On  Bagot Street  the world  opens into the park:
we want  our children to have bodies as alive as the sky








59





INTENSELY ANGLOPHILE

GORDON D. MCLEOD, Essentially Canadian: The Life  and Fiction of Alan Sullivan 1868-1947. Wilfrid  Laurier Univ.  Press, $g.gs.

GORDON  MCLEOD'S  BIOGRAPHY unveils a complex man  and  a  prolific  writing  ca­ reer,  until  now  largely  ignored  by Cana­ dian  scholars  and  critics. Sullivan's Three  Came  to  Ville   Marie   ( I94I)  won  the Governor General's Award, but The  Rap­ ids  (I 920),  now   in   the   University  of Toronto  Press's  Social  History  Series,  is the only novel now in print  of the eighty­ odd  he wrote, some  under  his own  name  and  others under   the  pseudonym,   "Sin­ clair Murray." Sullivan was a constant traveller, spending years at a time abroad, beginning  with   four   years  in  an   Edin­ burgh  boys' school as a teen-ager; he later  settled  with  his family in England, where his  children  still  live.  But  Sullivan  re­ mained "essentially Canadian," as Profes­ sor McLeod argues. His deepest  ties were to Canada, especially  to the rugged  land  of  the  Laurentian Shield  which   he  had known as a boy and  young man  from  the time that  his clergyman-father was made Bishop  of  Algoma.  Sullivan's best  work came from  his wilderness experience; per­ haps  McLeod's most  interesting and con­ vincing  insights  link  him with  the artists  of the  Group of Seven.
Partly  because  of his parents' Anglican loyalties  and   Bishop  Sullivan's frequent fund-raising trips  to England, and  partly because  of Mrs. Sullivan's social predilec­
tions, Alan  Sullivan was brought up in an
intensely  Anglophile fashion. He  married Bessie   Hees    of   Toronto,  equally    in­ tensely Anglophile, socially ambitious and

6o
 wealthy as  well,  so  that   she  could   and did  indulge her  desire  to live in England as the mistress of a country house, Sheer­ lands  in  Berkshire.  Bessie was  never  en­  tirely successful  in making Alan  a settled  member  of   the   squirearchy,  however,  though he accepted  the role  to please  his wife and  played  it intermittently for sev­ eral   decades.  His   youthful  experiences around  Sault Ste.   Marie  and   his  later work  as prospector and  mining entrepre­ neur had  developed in him a strong  strain  of the solitary  wanderer who could  toler­  ate  domesticity,  however luxurious, only sporadically. In  the  Canadian north   he met and mixed with all sorts of men, from trappers and  traders to  adventurers on  a far  grander scale  than  his own, Sir James  Dunn for instance. The most intriguing to him  was  the  glamorous Francis Clerque, a  financier-entrepreneur  of  larger-than­ life proportions of whom he wrote in The Rapids.
Though that  book at  least deserves our interest and  consideration, Gordon  Mc­ Leod's biography is  unlikely   to  spark   a Sullivan  revival,   for   he   was   mainly   a facile   writer    of   adventure   stories,   for some decades a popular author with  Eng­  lish  audiences  who  were   fascinated  by stories  of  the  Canadian north. More  in­ teresting  than  most  of Sullivan's work  is McLeod's picture of the man: he was complex  and   somewhat haunted, part compulsive writer, part charming adven­ turer,   part   country squire,   and  devoted husband  and   father,  much   beloved   by family  and  friends. He  was never entirely easy with any of these roles, however,  and therein lies his  interest for  the  reader.
Not the least factor of this book's charm is its  author's  presence in  his  narrative. Reading  Essentially  Canadian   is  rather like being  treated to an  informed but  in­ formal  lecture  by   Professor   McLeod:
anecdotal, digressive,  and  entirely  pleas­
urable.
CLARA THOMAS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



RACIAL EXCAVATION

REESA  GREENBERG,  The  Drawings   of  Alfred
Pellan. National Gallery  of Canada, $14·95·
ROSEMARIE   L,  TOVELL,   Reflections in  a Quiet Pool-The Prints of David  Milne. National Gallery of Canada, $39·95·

THESE  TWO VOLUMES are  exhibition cat­ alogues, Tovell's  taking  the   form  of  a "coffee table" art  book,   Greenberg's  a more modest paperback.  Both   are  copi­ ously illustrated, handsome books  present­ ing   a   wealth  of   painstakingly  amassed data  on  the  drawings and prints of  these two  major  figures in  modem Canadian painting.  And   both  whet one's appetite for   more,  much  more, especially in  the case  of  David Milne.
A certain amount of art historical work has  already been  done on  Pellan, as Greenberg's study indicates.  His  impor­ tance  to   the   Automatistes,  his  interna­ tional stature and longstanding  commit­ ment to Surrealism, his power as a teacher in  the  years  at the  Ecole des  Beaux Arts  in   Montveal:   all   this    is   already  well known.  Greenberg's   contribution  is   to have drawn attention  to  a  hitherto neg­  lected area  of  Pellan's  work, an area of considerable  interest  as   the   illustrations indicate,   and   her   prose  -exact if  not  elegant -serves  the  purpose of the  cata­ logue  well.  One could wish  only  that the occasion had permitted fuller use  of  her
1979 interviews with Pellan. Quoted from time to time throughout the  book,  these interviews provide some  material of inter­ est  to anyone wishing to  pursue  the ques­ tion  of  the  influence  of  Surrealist poetry as  well   as   painting  on   Pellan, a  study which,  as   Greenberg   notes,  should  be undertaken.  We   learn,  for   instance, of Pellan's  suppression of  the  original titles  of his illustrations for  Eluard's Capital de la  douleur,  fearing  that  reprisals might ensue in Duplessis's Quebec  (as  a  result of  Eluard's Communist sympathies).
 


Out-of-Print

CANADIANA  BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS





HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX 685

ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues  free on request




tA book on a grander scale  than Green­ berg's, Rosemarie Tovell's study of David Milne's  prints,  Reflections   in   a   Quiet Pool, is,  unfortunately,  flawed   by  poor  editing,  cumbersome   organization,  and pedestrian style.  Plodding fact-finding is much in evidence, intuitive understanding not  at  all.   But   the   facts are,   of  course, useful despite the  style  in  which they  are presented, the   data from the  Milne  ar­ chives  (to  which Tovell was granted  free  access)   providing fascinating glimpses of the youthful but  ill-educated  Milne stum­ bling  onto painting while  in  pursuit of  a career as a commercial artist. Later Milne discovered the  aesthetic theories of  Rus­ kin  and Clive  Bell  in  a  similarly haphaz­ ard  fashion  and  embarked on   his  own  aesthetic   statement  in  response to   his reading.  In the  same way  his  reading of Thoreau's Walden seems  to  have  influ­ enced his evolving concept  of  nature but  of   this   Tovell  is  able   to  provide  only

61

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seductive hints.  Particularly interesting is Milne's  statement that  even in his middle period,  well versed  in international Mod­ ernism,  he  preferred to retain  a foothold  in imitation of nature rather than launch­ ing into 'total  abstraction because  the lat­  ter  represented  imitation  of  the  work  of other   men.  Originality was  possible  for Milne    only   in   direct    encounter  with nature.
A Canadian Romantic and  a maverick
(asked  at  one  point  whether he was one of the  Group of Seven,  Milne  responded that   he  preferred  to  be  "one  of  one"), David  Milne  is a  project in search  of an author. Rosemarie Tovell is, alas, not that person  and  one  suspects  that  Tovell  was more  interested in  Milne's   development of the colour dry-point per se than  in any other  aspect  of her  project. On  these technical points  her  book is clear.
But much  remajns to be done as both Tovell's and  Greenberg's books  indicate in   their   different  ways.   Pellan's  work opens  the  complex question   of  the  rela­ tionship   between   the   verbal  and  visual arts  in Canada and, in particular, of the ways  in  which   international  Surrealism has  been   used   by  groups   as  seemingly diverse  as  the  "Magic  Realists," the  so­ called  "phenomenological poets,"  paint­ ers like Shadbolt and  Lemieux  and  Bates, and film-makers from  Norman  McLaren to Michael Snow. One could  go on  com­ plicating  the   question  of   adding,  say, P. K. Page,  bp  Nichol,  and  bill bissett to the  list.  And   in  the  process  of  working  with  names  like  these, one  would,  I sus­ pect,  reveal   a  Canadian  tradition more profoundly  radical than  the  socialist  one which  now,  for  some  critics,  usurps  that  adjective, and  discover  a territory whose boundaries would  stretch  from Milne  to Pellan,  from  Nichol  to Hebert  and  Bros­ sard.  The work  is what Michel  Foucault would   call  an   archeological  endeavour, the excavation of a discourse system. Per­  haps  now  that  Milne  prints have  become
 thoroughly unaffordable and   the  futility of further pursuing the  comparison of poems  with   paintings  (lonely  lands  and jack  pines,  etc.)   evident to  all,  we  can get on with the immense task of thinking through the territory.
LORRAINE WEIR

FORMS, POINTS, DETAILS
CHRISTINA  LOGAN, Selected  Poems of Christina
Logan.  Dreadnaught,  n.p.
SUSAN  MUSGRAVE, Tarts and  Muggers: Poems New  and  Selected. McClelland &  Stewart, n.p.
MIRIAM WADDINGTON,  Summer at Lonely  Beach and  Other   Stories.  Mosaic,  n.p.

WITH    THE   PUBLICATION OF    Selected Poem   of  Christina  Logan   Dreadnaught Press  is, I feel,  doing  a  subtle  disservice to   the   poetry   reader.  Christina  Logan died  of cancer in 1979, and  this slim  vol­ ume  is a  compilation of  presumably  the best   of  her   poems,   "a   mere   fragment of   her   work"   according   to   Wolfgang Schmidt  in   his   preface.  That   Dread­ naught should see fit to note Logan's per­ sonal   tragedy  is  far   from   wrong; what  offends  me  is  their  implication that   her suffering  somehow enhanced  the  quality of the work. The press release  has as cap­ tion "Poetic journal of cancer victim pub­ lished  by Dreadnaught." Here  is how Schmidt concludes his preface: "Many have  suffered   her  fate; some  could   tell the rest of us about it; only a chosen  few have  been able to transform such cruel suffering into  poetry."
To put  it simply, all poetry  is a serious matter, and  great  suffering is not a neces­ sary prerequisite for  the creation of great  art.    While    neither    Dreadnaught   nor Schmidt claims  this  outright, they  make  no attempt to curb  the  implication. And when  poetry is presumed to be of greater interest  because  of  the  circumstances of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



its authorship, and  because  the  reader  is aware of certain events and  circumstances behind  the  poetry,  then  we are  no longer being asked  to consider what  the  printed word  bears.
The sad fact  is that  most of this poetry does not  fully stand  up on its own. There is a strongly  conventional feel  to it,  as if an objective poetry  were somehow  being wrested    from    a   voice   not   yet   strong enough  to create a subjective one. Almost all   of   the   poems   are   uninteresting  in purely   technical  terms.  The forms  they take seem conventional and general, sometimes far too imposed  to have any integral links  to  the  mood   being  estab­ lished.  Not  far  into  the  book, the formal  generality and   looseness  assumes  a  pon­  derous  repetitiveness which  in  turn  gen­ eralizes  the statements  themselves.
You  locked  in  layers of protected pride watch me
like  a  child unmoved calling me  'child'
telling me
'stop snivelling'
While i
with   barefaced  look
and clumsy eyes struggle to make the  appear nce
you  want to see      ("Anger")

The  line lengths  seem arbitrary, the effect is choppy, and   the  use  of  words  is  im­ precise.  The few  moments of  clarity and  vision  in  the  book  serve  merely  to  pale the  rest.
This  is more  of a scrapbook than  any­ thing else.  The  publisher's press  release observes:
[this volume] is  more than  a  collection of poetry:  it  is  a   journal  kept   by  a  young woman who  suffered from  Hodgkins Disease for   19  years   before dying at the  age  of  35·

The  "moreness" is  in fact   "otherness." Paradoxically, Logan's  situation  led  her to put  less of herself  into  the  poetry  than she otherwise might have.  She was taking
 refuge in a poetic  mood -as the conven­ tionality  of the work bears out. There cer­ tainly   could   be   much   more   substance here;  these  are   bright,  fleeting   surface reflections  only  hinting at greater depth. It is none  of my  business  to criticize  Lo­ gan's use of poetry-how could I?-but it is very  much  my business  to say that  I do not feel that  great  or even good poetry  can  come  of such  use. At  best  this book is  an   uneven   document, interesting in other  ways-the work not of a good poet but  of  a  lonely,  frightened soul  seeking comfort  in a medium not quite  her own.

* 	* 	*
I  feel  guilty,  somehow,   that   I do  not understand more  of  what  is going  on  in Susan   Musgrave's poetry,  and   I suspect it is a similar  shortcoming in  the poetry­ reading public  which  has  kept  her  from  having acquired an even more formidable reputation than   the  one  she  now  enjoys. Tarts and Muggers is an enigmatic work, but  not so enigmatic  that one cannot see the  unique   talents  of   the  mind   behind  (within) it.
The most interesting poetry  in the book is founded upon  a fascinating use of  syn­ tax  which   seems  to  tap   sources  in  the reader's mind   of  which   he  or  she  had been  unaware. Each  work  is a  mosaic  of phrases,  a cathedral built  of  verbal  frag­  ments  seemingly  lifted  from conversation. Often the phrases, individually, approach "natural"   speech    (that  ideal   so   often  abused  by poets) .  Yet  the  effect  accom­ plished  by the enjambment of many  such phrases  undercuts any  sense  of  the  na­  tural.  These  seem  to  be fragments lifted from  different conversations.
Musgrave achieves  an  utterly  eloquent poetry  capable of adjustment to any con­ tour,  not  syllable  by syllable  or  word  by word,   but   phrase   by   phrase-in  seg­ ments. Her  poetry  is a dazzling  juxtaposi­ tion of angles -the proverbial infinity  of straight lines forming a curve.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



All  the  animals in  the  forest, all  the  birds are
weeping. I alone can  hear  them-I have
not  been  spared
those  powers.  Yet  look -you  cry  too.  Read a  book,
get  some  work  to do.
("The  Angel-Maker")

Musgrave's ability  to build flow from seg­ ments  closely parallels a basic  perception of reality.  Infinite, discrete  bits of what  is familiar  blend  into   a  continuum  which jolts us with sudden, surprising resonance.  Energy   crackles   in   the   joints,  and   the poems  are  as  valuable for  what  they say implicitly -for   their   tangential  energy
-as they  are  for what  they say directly.
In   addition  to  her   penchant  for  the productive  subversion  of  syntax,   Mus­ grave  possesses a  highly  individual  sense of drama. I say  "individual" because  the drama we  find  here  consists  not  in  that  accumulation of  context which  comprises  what  is  commonly  called  drama-Mus­ grave's use of disjointed (or "rejointed") phrases prevents that. Here,  the accumu­ lated  thrust of a poem  commonly  runs at right   angles   to   that    of  the   individual phrase  which  the  reader  is encountering at  any  given  moment. The  drama comes from somewhere beyond,  or  immediately around, the  actual words.

Animal! Animal!
You  are  nobody! You  cannot  be anyone.
But  I had  known that long   before   your   birth.
So  you  died  then? Only the  dead can  know.  My  lips  revealed  you
and  my  black  heart has  eaten the  hole.
("Entrance of the  Celebrant")

The absence of  the  conventionally  dra­ matic  makes  a mockery  of the  mere  sus­ pension   of  disbelief -we   question  the validity  of disbelief  itself. It  does not  re­ possess us when  we  turn  the final  page, but  remains in  some  fundamental sense revalued.
 The  truths- the   identities-for which  the poet is reaching are reached for obliquely. There  is  little   directly   verbal confrontation here.  There is more  of the quest,  a  hunt through a landscape of  at­ tributes and   relatitonships often  at  cross purposes, or,  tantalizingly, only  partially revealed. At  the  centre  there  is  always the firm "I" giving  a focus which is stable  and  personal at  the  same  time.  The per­  sonality   at   the  centre  is  firmly  enough etched-Musgrave is  really  speaking to us  here-that the  poetry   is  prevented from  becoming  aphoristic or  "clustered" like poetry  by, say, Roo  Borson,  in which all  elements  of   the  writing and   all  the entities it  serves  are  in  a  state  of flux.  I don't  mean  to dismiss Borson-she is as good   a   poet   as  Musgrave-but   Mus­ grave's   poetry    has   a  unique integrity. There is hardly the  slightest  shift  in  real concentration. The poems  remain firmly cemented  throughout   and    lines   more "pithy" than  others are  not  easily  lifted. Each  poem  is a single  point  of  conscious­ ness, the universe  within the atom, relent­ lessly probed  and  opened  up.

* 	* 	*
It's a common compliment used  by reviewers  because  it notes  a common  ele­ ment   of  good   writing, and   it  bears  re­ peating here:  most  of the stories  in Mir­ iam  Waddington's   Summer  at   Lonely Beach are distinguished by an acute sense of  detail.  A  meticulous  perception  cre­  ates  stories so  convincing that  one  can't be  sure  just how much  in them  is auto­ biographical. A  good  deal   I suppose - another truism. Waddington's exercise  of the writer's basic skills draws us with un­ common subtlety and  persuasiveness into her fictional world,  and  belies a consider­ able appreciation of experience and  a tal­ ent   for   translating  it   into   prose.   The boundary between   fiction  as  fiction  and  memoir  as   memoir   is   difficult   to   pin down. She achieves a sense of realism  not

BOOKS IN REVIEW



only  through the  skilful  etching of detail but  also  through an  acute feel for  situa­ tion.  Events  seem  to have  their  own  im­ petus   and    do   not   contour   themselves around  the  characters. But  a  balance is achieved, and  character  frequently inter­ acts  with  situation to  produce great  and  telling  moments. The  closing  paragraphs of  the  title  story  are  a  good  example of how the relentless pressure of events seems to build  almost  autonomously into  a sce­ nario   which   allows   the   fullest   possible expression   of  character.

It was  just  turning dusk,  a  warm, late sum­ mer  dusk.  We  had  boarded the  train, found seats,  and my  mother had  settled us  around her. Just outside the  window  Miss  Menzies and   Dr. Galill stood   waving at  us.  As  the train began to  heave and   creak  out  of  the station,  the   smell   of  lake   water   and   sand  came  to me  through the  glass like something alive. We  were  losing  it, losing  it!
Without  knowing why,   I felt   frantic. I wanted  to  lean   out   of  the   window  and   to shout that I was  sorry   to  Dr. Galill, sorry that I didn't think he  was  handsome. And to  Miss  Menzies I  wanted to  cry  out   that I  didn't  mean to   ask   her   about  George, really, I never meant to  ask!  But  the  train was   moving  and    wouldn't  stop,  and    the weak  light  of  the  sun  hit  Miss  Menzies' hair and   made it  glow   for   the   last   time,  blue­ green like  peacock feathers.

The whole  collection could  have  been this good; unfortunately it is not. Stories such   as  "Day  in   the   Sun"  and   "The Honeymoon" are   less  convincing, more self-consciously  conventional. Here  Wad­ dington  tends    more    to   telegraph   her themes,   allowing  them  less  freedom   to surface naturally  through  the  subtle  play of  situation and   relationship  so  cleanly  mastered in  the  rest  of  the  book.  I  sup­  pose I  might  feel more  generous if these stories  appeared  singly-they  certainly master  the  conventions-but Wadding­ ton has set  herself  a high  standard.
1Most of  the  stories,   in  fact,   bear   at least  minor   touches of  unsureness; this, at  least,  is the  impression one  gains  after
 rereading. Some of these  touches are seri­ ous, but,  incredibly, most  do  little  harm, as if Waddington has actually managed to rescue herself. Take the conclusion of "A Mixed   Marriage"  for  example:

My   mind   put   away   the   images   of  Linda and  David, as  I then thought, forever. But as I grow  older I keep  meeting them again. I often  pass  them  in  the  windows of  down­ town art galleries. Their faces  look out at me from  the  canvases of  Georges  Rouault. And sometimes, to  my  horror, I  meet   them   not in  paintings but  much  closer  to  home.

"Horror" and  references to Roualt simply aren't an  accurate or  suitably   personal way to close this moving story about the decay   of  a  Jewish/Irish  intermarriage. Yet  in its own  inconsistent way  the mis­ fire  is  just slight  enough to  be  forgiven,  and  the story  is not  unduly  disturbed.
This is Waddington's first short  story collection,  and  however wary  one  wishes to  be  about   issuing  fatuous  conclusions as to the unevenness of a major Canadian literary  talent, some  unevenness must  be admitted here.  The good  and  the  bad  in Summer  at Lonely  Beach are  remarkable in their different ways. Fortunately, the good  makes  the  bad  bearable, and   then some.
ANDREW BROOKS


NAVY BLUES

JAMES  A.  BOUTILIER,  ed.,  The RCN  in  Retro­ spect, 1910-1968.  Univ. of British  Columbia Press,  $28.oo.

IN ANY TITLE,  a  term  such  as  "Recollec­ tions" or  "In Retrospect" normally indi­  cates that  the subject, whether individual or institution, is no longer  in being.  That is so in this case, as  the  editor points  out  in  his  Introduction;  James A.  Boutilier  plots like a  tactician the course  of events leading    to   the    1g8o  conference  from which  emanated  the  nineteen  contribu­ tions that make up this handsome volume.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Such a work might have been called "Proceedings of";  the  title  chosen,  how­ ever,  helps   the  reader  to  identify  with Canada's  naval   service  and  with   those who served  in it.
The arrangement of  the  topics  is, by
necessity,  chronological,  with   three  sur­ veys-two on naval  engineering and one on  naval   aviation -serving  as  informal divisions between  groups of chapters deal­  ing  with  more  limited  time  periods.  The  first six papers, then, deal with  the period
1910-39, and  the second  unit-the pivo­ tal one-covers World  War  II, followed by events of the immediate post-war  years to about I 953,  the  end  of  the  navy's  in­ volvement in the Korean War as part  of a United Nations task force.
Thereafter follows  the aviation  survey with a first foreshadowing of the fate that was eventually to befall the whole service. A similar  note  is struck  in the next chap­ ter,  in  which  a  description of  H.M.C.S. Labrador's  services  in  Arctic  exploration ends  with  the ship  being decommissioned and   turned  over  to  the  Department of Transport. In like fashion, the account of the   fortunes  of   one   RCNVR  division from  the  I 95o's on  is summed  up  in the  caption  to  Plate  95  (photo credit, U.S. Navy)   to  the  effect  that  the  reserve  con­ stitutes  "a paper force  fighting  a  paper war." Given  such  a scenario,  it is not sur­ prising -though  it  is  saddening -that the  final  paper laments the  annihilation of  the  Royal   Canadian  Navy-not  in battle  on   the   high   seas-but   by   the manoeuvres of federal politicians.
One  inevitable feature of such  a  com­ pilation is  unevenness in  the  quality of contributions. This  is  exemplified  in  the first  grouping,  in  which  pride   of  place must surely go to Nigel D. Brodeur for his survey  of  events  leading   to  the   navy's coming  into being. In it he amplifies  and  amends G.  N.  Tucker's account in  The Naval  Service  of Canada,  Vol.  I,  using papers  that   had   belonged   to  his  grand-

66
 father,  L.  P.  Brodeur,  to  give  a  more positive   picture of  the  country's  accep­ tance  of the new force than  had appeared in  the  official  history.  The  chapter  just mentioned and  the one following are  en­ livened   by  references  to  the  first  major  units of the new fleet, H.M.C. ships Rain­ bow  and    Niobe,  with   photographs  of these vessels and,  in the case of the latter, her  crew.  Plates  3 and  4, indeed, provide an  interesting  juxtaposition with  the  for­  mally   posed   officer   (not    "officers"   as stated),   midshipmen,   and    ratings    set above  the  insouciant black  squad.
Less satisfying  is the paper on  the navy between  the wars because of its heavy reliance on chapters I5 and  16 of Tucker. Similarly, the contribution dealing with RCN officer  training in  capital ships  of the Royal  Navy consists of a somewhat episodic  account of gunroom life, appar­ ently  personal, but  written from  a  third­ person  point  of view. From  it, one gathers that   the  writer   objects to  "snotty" as  a form  of address,  but  his discussion  of the term's popularization is  curiously flawed by  his  ascription of  it  to  two  pseudony­ mous   writers  of   naval   fiction,   Taffrail (not  "Traffrail" as in  the text)   and  Bar­ timeus.  These  he wrongly  associates  with the  nineteenth  century and   to  them   he gives  the  credit  instead  of  to  Rudyard Kipling, who used "snotty" in a tale pub­  lished  in  I904,  following its  appearance in  a  dictionary of slang  dating from  the previous year.
Undoubtedly the  highlight of  RCN  in Retrospect  is the  group of chapters deal­ ing  with   the  navy's   role  in  the  Second
World  War. Beginning with  details  of the service  rendered by  three  converted CN ships, each  a Prince, the account proceeds to a fascinating analysis  of Canada's rela­ tively  minor  role   in  convoy   pmtection during the  three  months or so in  I943  at which  time the U-boat menace was finally overcome, so  that  credit for  the  victory  went  to  the  Royal  Navy. The diagnosis:

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sheer exhaustion following the savage bat­ tles of  1942,  the  subject of  this  volume's  longest chapter.
Before  that  gripping tale, however,  has come  an intelligence thriller with its story of a deadly  code-breaking game  played by U-boat  trackers operating  on  land,   far from   their   natural  environment. Then follows the actual confrontation in the narration of three  convoys presented in heroic  terms  and  enhanced by quotations from  E. J. Pratt's saga  of Convoy  SC 42, "Behind  the  Log."   In   the  work   under review, the events are viewed from oppos­ ing  perspectives by  the  collaboration of W. B. Douglas  and  Jiirgen Rohwer, but the definitive assessment  is still Pratt's:
Sailors above  the  sea, sailors  below Drew  equally upon a fund of courage. No  one might gamble on  the  other's fear  Or  waning will.
Thereafter begin  the  accounts of slow erosion.  The surviving member of  the Mainguy Commission's inquiry  into  the mutinies in  RCN ships  during the  later
1940's assesses causes and  results, inciden­ tally  sounding a  warning for  all  Cana­ dians  of today  that camouflaging an  ugly truth by euphemism  leads  only  to repeti­  tion   and   aggravation  of   the   original offence. The events  here chronicled, how­ ever, represent only the first signs of dam­  age. Thenceforth the quality of silence on which  the  service  traditionally  prided  it­ self had  a negative effect  on  its fortunes, giving  politicians the opportunity to con­ sign  it  to  oblivion  in  the  name   of  effi­ ciency,  the  point  underlined in  the  final chapter.
Besides   the   criticisms  voiced   earlier, some  slips  in  typography and   usage  fail to be noted: U-boat concentration  "Pan­ ther"  is  given   as   "Panter";   "though" becomes "thought"; and  there are others.  Lack  of a complete index  is a  drawback also,  one   that   is  not  fully  compensated for  by  the  list of ships  and  the  alphabe­ tized abbreviations accompanied by mean-
 ings.  The   latter,  however, totally  omits terms applied to convoys and  their move­ ments; thus  the  reader is left  to guess at meanings  for SC, ON, ONS, HX, TM, CHOP, and  EG or to  search  the  text  for  fugitive  references. More surprising is the caption to Plate  6r  stating that  H.M.S. Duke  of York  is firing  broadsides  when  the  posi­ tions of the  14-inch  gun  barrels  indicate otherwise.
All things considered then, the final summation may be left to the Augustan poet-critic,  Alexander   Pope,   when    he says:  "if  the  means  be  just,  the  conduct true,  / Applause in spite  of trivial  faults is due."  Just  how sustained the  acclama­ tion  is will  depend on  the  reader's will­ ingness to put  up with  human error.

DAVID MACAREE


DEPOSSESSJON &
COMPUClTE

CLAUDE  JASMIN,    L'Armoire de   Pantagruel.
Lemeac, $g.gs.
MADELEINE   FERRON,   Histoires   edifiantes.   La
Presse,  n.p.

RENOUANT  AVEC LA TRADITION amorcee par  Parti-pris du  roman  de la revendica­ tion   et   de  !'alienation,  Claude  Jasmin remet   en   question  dans   L' Armoire    de Pantagruel  la  notion  meme  du  pouvoir. Ce  texte  vi£ et  provocant conjugue pres­ que  sans  heurt  un  discours  dont   l'effet  ultime  est  de  demasquer le caractere ar­  bitraire des puissances sociales.
L'intrigue, qui  est menee  avec  verve, raconte  l'histoire d'un  jeune  revolte  Ri­ chard  Mars dont la depossession le pousse a  la  destruction. C'est-a-dire, a  la  des­ truction   des   forces    sociales   qui  l'ont  d'abord reduit a  la  pauvrete  et  a  la  de­  cheance   pour   ensuite   le   condamner  a
l'emprisonnement  pour   vie  a  cause   de
certaines  activites terroristes. Libere  pen-

CBOOKS IN  REVIEW



dant  trois  heures de  l'hopital ou  il subit un examen  medical, Richard va tuer  tour
a tour  ses parents, son psychiatre,  ]e juge
qui  l'avait condamne et sa maitresse  qui
l'avait trahi. Ces meurtres n'ayant pour but, toutefois,  que ]'acquisition d'une cer­ taine  liberte  "morale" puisque  le  prison­ nier,   en   connivence  avec   un   gardien,
compte retoumer  a  l'hopital avant  mi­
nuit.
Si cette  intrigue reussit a capter !'atten­
tion  du  lecteur, ce  n'est  pas uniquement
a cause  du  suspense -qui  est admirable
-mais  egalement parce  que les actes du
jeune revolte sont motives sur un plan psychologique. Le  theme  de  l'emprison­ nement   (physique et  spirituel)  du  heros est mis en rapport avec son enfance  par le biais de nombreux details  qui s'agglutient dans le motif  de ]'armoire. Ce motif  con­ cretise,  d'une  part, Ia  misere  de  sa  jeu­ nesse:  "Lui,  le  malchanceux du  sort,  le petit   gan;on   qu'on  enferme   dans   une armoire bancale," alors que, d'autre part,  il en  revele la puissance avortee: "II re­ deviendra le petit  gar  on
faisait  sourire  un eveque  dans  une sacris­ tie  a armoire de  chene defectueuse." De meme  lorsque  plus  tard  Richard rencon­
tre des amis  dans  le bar "Le  Pantagruel" c'est pour  tenter de revendiquer !'impuis­ sance par  la force. On  s'aper oit,
que chaque drame propose  une inversion
de sens comme pour  mieux appuyer Ia question   qui  hante le  texte:   "Pourquoi deux  mondes?" Lorsque Richard va tuer sa mere  qui  ne !'a jamais aime, elle erie: "'Tire mon enfant de chienne, t'as  jamais aime  parsonne au  monde! Parsonne!'";
face a la  mort  ]e psychiatre, jadis rempli
de   certitudes   arrogantes,  prend    cons­
cience  de !'injustice rnonstrueuse de  la condition humaine alors que  le juge tout
puissant  se transforme en un  condamne a
mort   "souffiant, suant,  muet,   stupefie." Tout endroit detient a un acte  pres l'en­
vers de ses structures et de son fondement.

68
 
L'enjeu de cet  arbitraire est egalement demasque par  ]e recours  a une  certaine
mythologie. Ce  n'est   pas,  en   efret,   par hasard que  le heros  revolte,  dont  le nom evoque  une  planete et un personnage litteraire, reve  d'etre un  surhomme,  fils d'un dieu,  avatar de l'eveque habille  d'or. Inversement, ce  n'est   pas  non  plus  par hasard que  dans Ia realite  son pere qui est "ce bossu trop gras, sourd, timore, muet" incarne !'impuissance totale.  Tributaire d'une possibilite  de  transcendance, cette dimension mythique permet au recit, de depasser un  aspect  referentiel qui risque­
rait   d'en  limiter   Ia  signification  a  une
seule donnee historique par  les references au  F.L.Q. et  a Carole Davault  (dans le
personnage de Carole Ma!beuf).
En  outre, le  theme  de  Ia possession et de Ia depossession personnelle ou sociale s'articule sur  celui  de  Ia parole. Richard est avide du  desir  de  dire,  voire  de  libe­ rer,  ]e cri  muet  de sa  revolte  par l'inter­
mediaire du  langage. II revient  a Claude
Jasmin  le   merite  d'avoir  su   exprimer,
dans  ce  roman captivant, la  complexite, toujours authentique, de ce cri.
En  comparaison aux revoltes par Claude Jasmin, celles  qui  sont  mises  en place dans  le recueil  de Madeleine Ferron frappent par  leur  nature  particuliere et restreinte. C'est, en realite, tout  un  autre monde  que   l'ecrivain  dessine   en   ren­
voyant   a ses souvenirs de  Ia Beauce.  Or
ces  souvenirs, qui  inspirent Ia  narration
d'anecdotes emouvantes, posent  toujours en sourdine Ia question de savoir ce qui constitue les limites  de  Ia complicite  ou de  la  solidarite hwnaine.  Doit-on  acce­ lerer  la mort d'un ami  pour  lui epargner des souffrances? Dans quelle mesure  une societe se doit-elle de proteger ses faibles? Qui est responsable du suicide d'un jeune
homme  deprime  a  la  suite   d'une   de­
ception  amoureuse?  Finement  axee  sur
une  petite morale, chaque nouvelle  ren­ voie  ainsi,   non  sans  ironic,   au  titre du recueil  Histoires edifiantes.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Curieusement, toutefois, ce  n'est  pas le theme    de   !'edification  qui   constitue a notre  avis  la  plus  grande reussite  du  re­ cueil. On  serait  plutot tente  de privilegier  le  motif  d'"Histoires" parce  que  celui-ci suggere l'activite de la creation artistique. Activite   dont  l'ecrivaine  retrace !'emer­ gence dans le preambule. Et c'est la qu'o? voit, en  premier lieu, s'amorcer une  arti­ culation entre l'etre qui ecrit  et le monde qui la nourrit; monde dans ce cas marque par  la  joie, par  la connaissance et surtout par la prise de conscience de !'importance du  conte,  "Ou  peut-etre n'avais-je, tout simplement,  que   la  nostalgie  des  inter­ minables  recits  dont mon  pere  nous  en­  tretenait." La  fecondation  artistique  de
!'auteur est illustree avec  un  tel bonheur dans  le preambule, qu'on imagine facile­ ment  ce que  pourraient etre  les memoires de  Madeleine Ferron.
Debordant dans  la  fiction,  !'expression du  "je" narratif permet de mettre en rapport le mouvement d'une conscience avec celui  de !'anecdote racontee. Par exemple,   lorsqu'a  la  fin  du   recit  "L'E­ charde"  Madeleine Ferron  affirme:  "11 suffit que  je touche a ce point douloureux
... pour   que   j'entende aussitot   ces  cris epouvantabies qui  nourriront sans fin rna honte " le  sens   meme   de   l'histoire  est amplifie   par  !'expression inavouee d'une matrice  de  l'ecriture. De   meme   quand l'ecrivain s'autorepresente  par   le  theme de la creation artistique dans  l'excellente nouvelle  "Le  Luthier," c'est  la  significa­ tion du livre  entier qui est enrichie. L'en­ treprise   prend  un  sens  plus  large,   plus complexe, un  sens  qui  correspond a  ces "voix  interieures" dont  nous  souhaitons entendre beaucoup d'echos.

JANET M.  PATERSON
 ZEUS ET MINERVE

JOSETTE MARCHESSAULT, Lettre  de Californie.
Nouvelle Optique, $7·95·
MONIQUE  Bosco,  Portrait  de  Zeus   peint   par
Minerve. L'Arbre HMH, n.p.

LE TEXTE DE  JOSETTE  MARCHESSAULT est court  mais  tres beau.  11 s'agit  d'un  hom­ mage  a  Meridel Le  Sueur,  romanciere, historienne,  journaliste,  memoraliste du
	' 	.
beaucoup voyage, et d'un hommage auss1 a   toutes   les  femmes,   minorites   minori­ taires,  venues  d'ailleurs:   "chicanas,  ne­ gresses"  ou  appartenant  a la  terre  d'A­ merique: "ouvrieres de  toutes  nos  tribus  ou autres  sauvagesses." Son  souffle gene­ reux  fait  chanter avec amour les laissees­ pour-compte,  ces  femmes   pionnieres  et meconnues: }es  meres  "invisibles  COlllme le vent,  pesees a la livre de  chair  dans  le jeu  des speculations," "les  nourrices, les femmes  des  hommes,  les  oies  blanches" et   ces   femmes,   ces  deesses,  guerrieres, poetes,  amazones,  anti-esclavagistes, re­ volutionnaires,  humanistes,  amoureuses, anti-militaristes, "semeuses  d'oxygene de notre  tradition." La  poesie  de  Marches­ sault   vous  atteint  par   la   force   de  ses images  qui  ne reculent pas devant !'evo­  cation   de  }a  violence.  Femme,   elle  ne craint  pas  l'emportement  passionne,   la vehemence  de  la  repetition, le  reassasse­ ment  meme,  c'est  son  temoignage, c'est son  empreinte a  celle  qui  "voyage   dans  le  ventre  d'une chienne de  la  toundra." Et  si, venue  de  loin,  venue  de  bas,  c'est
bien   a  la  gorge,   aux   entrailles  que   sa
poesie   vous   saisit,   c'est   pour    s'elever
aussi, fulgurante:
Elies sont  gueule a gueule dans  le temps des
planetes,
jettent leurs  etincelles, ondulent comme des bannieres,
et  cela  fonde Ia  braise,
passe  Ia  fumee au  soufre.

Dans   ce  poeme,   rien   de  ma1s, rien  de mou,  rien  de  gratuit, tout  y est  voulu  et

6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



senti.  Marchessault a  donne  sans  comp­ ter  le  meilleur   de  ce qu'elle  etait, de  ce qui l'habitait.
Ce  poeme   attachant et  fort  est  suivi d'une serie de  belles photographies et  de la biographie de quelques  femmes qui marquerent l'histoire de l'humanite. A l'ubiquite de  la fiction  qui  parle  juste et fort, elle a voulu  joilldre !'irrefutable, l'inoubliable  verite   du   portrait  de  cer­ taines  heroines.
Si  Marchessault s'engage a fond  dans
la  cause  de  la  femme et  de  l'humanite
portee  par le "coyote," ce loup americain, frere  du  chacal, ce ba.tard en somme  qui passe outre les appartenances et  les  dis­
tances,  Monique Bosco, elle,  s'engage  a
raconter  la  lente   et  douloureuse  meta­
morphose de la femme, a partir de ce lieu
ou cUe ecrit,  le Quebec, et de ce moment
qu'elle  vit.
Son  long  poeme   qui  mele  legende  et realite,  histoire  de l'humanite et defoule­ ment   personnel,  tente,   apres  "ce   prin­ temps,"  "ces grandes marees d'equinoxe" maintenant qu'il  "fait beau" de  "recom­
mencer   l'histoire  a  sa  fa on."
pere, le tyran  est demystifie  et nous assis­
tons   a son   obscure   et   penible   agonie.
Minerve, sa fille favorite, deesse de  !'in­
telligence,  protectrice de  la famille,  de la cite, elle aussi se decouvre, se devoile dans toute  son  obscurite, "muette et  gauche," totaJement et  volontairement soumise  au pere,   ignorante,  inutile,  impure.  Mais,
grace  a ce retour sur elle-meme, Minerve
purifiee,  renouvelee "est aJiee au fond des apparences," eUe est  "prete  a affronter
la lumiere crue  du  solei!levant."
Ce poeme  constitue la confession totale, courageuse et  emouvante d'une  femme, de beaucoup de femmes  longtemps aveu­ gles aux  changements qui  se  dessinaient autour d'elles,  "three blind  mice,"  et qui reconnaissent avoir  rate  et freine  "l'heure de la delivrance"; femme, elle a peut-etre ou  plut8t  sans  nul  doute,  joue contre  les femmes, contre l'humanite meme,  "le  jeu
 selon   les   regles   seculaires."  Une   "nil­ nerve,"  n'est-ce  pas  aussi   cet  appareil orthopedique, ce  carcan qui  enferme  le
cou  et  est  destine a maintenir la  tete  en
bonne  position.
Sa  poesie  qu'anime un souffle epique a su choisir  une  palette aux  couleurs vives. Bosco  sait  se  situer   hors  du  mievre, du pleurnichard. Chez elle, rien de passeiste:
"elle   ne  regrette  rien" et  "est   prete   a
s'elancer en  avant." Au  mythe   de  Zeus
perpetue  par   Minerve,  Bosco  substitue "Le  Portrait de Zeus peint  par  Minerve." Alors que  Marchessault tente  de reconsti­ tuer  la  somme  de  ses  memoires  perdues, element precieux de  notre  histoire  et qui s'effiloche, se perd dans  la nuit  des temps,  Bosco  essaie  de  boucher le  trou   en  re­ faisant  le  chemin de  la femme  depassee,
dephasee, a qui  l'on  a impose  le  parfait apprentissage a !'impuissance et  qui  s'est
alienee, s'est  videe  de son corps et de son esprit.  Bosco refait  ce chemin pour  toutes les  femmes,   avec   toutes  les  femmes   car
elle sait  que  ce  n'est  que  si elle reussit  a
"recommencer l'histoire" que  la  femme
s'epanouira.
Avec  Marchessault ou Bosco la femme demeure pour !'instant veuve de l'homme, vierge de l'homme.
Pour  ce  qui  est de  leur  ecriture,  ecri­ vent-elles comme   des  femmes?  C'est   un des dmits qu'elles revendiquent, elles veu­
lent  avoir droit a leur  difference comme
tout  ecrivain a droit  a sa difference, qu'il
soit   homme,  qu'il   s'apparente  par   son
style  et  par  ses preoccupations aux  ecri­
vains de son epoque.

CLAIRE-LISE ROGERS


REVIEWS

Dossiers de  presse, Bibliotheque du  8eminaire de Sherbrooke, n.p.

THE Dossiers  de  presse published   by the
Bibliotheque du Seminaire de Sherbrooke

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



is  a  massive  project including, to  date,
637 French-Canadian authors in 2I  volu­ minous  loose-leaf  folders,  similar files be­ ing available on Quebec film-makers. The dossiers   contain   clippings  from   major newspapers, a  few  articles  from  periodi­ cals otherwise difficult  to locate,  as well as some  radio  broadcast  transcripts. Occa­ sionally,   cross-references   to   periodicals like  Lettres  quebecoises are  provided. Le Devoir, La Presse, and  their  weekend supplements have  been  covered  almost exhaustively since  I 97 5;  there  are  selec­ tions  from   such   publications  as  Action
Quebec  (I 968-Jo)' Le Iour  (I 975ff.)' Le
Quartier    Latin    ( I 938-40) ,  Le   Soleil
(I 975-80), and  others.  In  addition, some clippings  from   English   newspapers  like The   Gazette,   The   Montreal   Star,  The Globe and Mail,  and  Weekend  Magazine are  included  (these   increase   in  number in cases like Roger  Lemelin's Les Plouffe which,  made  into  a film,  played  to  both French and  English  audiences) . Libraries receive updated material twice a year, containing both  recent  newspaper articles as well as older  ones as they become avail­ able. Some of the dossiers can  now also be purchased in book-form for those who are interested in  press  comments on  individ­ ual  authors and  do  not  wish  to  invest  in the entire series. Copyright  is reserved  for all  of  the  material; the  publishers indi­  cate   that   some   articles  have   not   been included  because    rights   could   not   be cleared.
The Dossiers are  largely  organized by author's  name; writers are   classified  as
"chansonnier," "critique," "dramaturge,"
"essayiste," "historien," "journaliste,"
"monologuiste," and  "poete," with  quite a number of them-e.g., Gilles Marcotte and  Fernand Ouellette -occupying sev­ eral  categories at  once.  Most  of  the  au­  thors   included  are   contemporary,  but there   are   also  sections on  older   writers who continue to attract French-Canadian attention  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  e.g.,
 Arthur Buies, Octave Cremazie, Louis Frechette,  Emile   Nelligan,  and   others. The number  of pages available on each author gives an interesting indication of their popularity with  the press and,  by implication, with  a  fairly   broad  reader­ ship.  Michel  Tremblay tops  the list with
267,  followed   by  Gilles  Vigneault  with
226;   the  gap   between   them   and   other
much  discussed authors like Marie-Claire Blais  (2o6), Anne  Hebert ( I38), Victor­ Levy Beaulieu   ( I 38) , and  Hubert Aquin (I 33)  is fairly large; performed literature (theatre, song)   has  a  predictably wider appeal than   the  often experimental and intellectually  demanding writing of  nov­ elists  and   poets.  The  difference in  the coverage   of    Marie-Claire  Blais's    and  Anne  Hebert's work  is, of course,  due  to Blais's  much  longer  list  of  books,  but  it also points  to the  significance of more  or less   sensational biographical data  for newspaper  criticism.    Blais's   personality and  life style have  always intrigued her interviewers  whose   descriptions  of   her range  from  "une petite fille toute  simple, toute  menue,  toute  timide" (Martial Das­ sylva, La Presse, I9  juin  I965), "un ten­  dre petit oiseau tombe  du nid" (L'Action,
30  novembre  I 966) , to  "a mouse   in  a throne  room ... a   cheeky,   out-of-place urchin"  (George Russell  in  Weekend Magazine,  October  25,   I976). By  con­ trast,   Anne   Hebert's   deceptively   bour­  geois  bearing   and   her   unwillingness  to talk about  either  herself  or her work frus­  trates   many   of   her   interviewers.  With studies  in  biography  and   autobiography being  among   the  most popular  fields  in literary   criticism  at  the   moment,  these interviews   with   Quebec  authors  could
provide  valuable source  material for  the study  of an  author's  typecasting through his  critics   over   an   extended  period   of literary   productivity, as  well  as  of   ten­ dencies    toward,   or    refusal    of,   auto­  stereotyping. Such  explorations  might  be of   particular   interest  with   respect    to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



women  authors, as Suzanne Lamy  has suggested  in  her  analysis  of  female  dia­ logue  in  D'Elles.
Of   particular interest   to  an   English­ Canadian user of the Dossiers may be the inclusion   of  such   authors  as  Mordecai
Richler, Leonard Cohen, David  Fennario, and  Jack  Kerouac, all of whom  are con­ sidered   relevant  to  the  Quebec  literary  scene  either because  their  work  has  been translated   into   French   (although  that  alone   does   not  guarantee  attention,  as neither  Margaret  Laurence  nor  Dennis  Lee  is included to this point)   or  because their    work    contains   affinities   to   the French    situation.  Richler    and    Cohen seem  to be almost  considered honorary Quebecois  because    their   Jewish   back­ ground has given  them  a comparable ex­ perience of  physical  and  mental   aliena­ tion,  Cohen's  international reputation as a  folksinger  adding to  his attractiveness. Some  of   the  articles   in  the  dossiers  on English-Canadien authors are of  particu­ lar   interest  to  the  comparatist   because they  contain  discussions  concerning  the co-existence of  the  Canadian  literatures and  of  their  reputation abroad otherwise rarely  found  in  Quebec criticism,  a par­ ticularly penetrating example being Rob­  ert  Guy Scully's "Le  Grand  Romancier quebecois:   un   Juif   anglophone ?"   ( Le Devoir, Ier avril  1972)  with an assessment of Richler's St. Urbain's  Horseman  as a Quebec novel.
Apart  from    the   entries   by   author's name,  there  are  also  28 thematic entries, among them "censure quebecoise," "droits d'auteur,"  "edition  quebecoise,"   "femi­ nisme  quebecois," "chanson  quebecois," "journalisme quebecois,"  "prix  litte­ raires," and   "theatre  quebecois." Again,  performed literature is most strongly  rep­  resented, with  a hefty  545 pages covering  Quebec theatre. Surprisingly little  infor­  mation is  collected   on  Quebec  feminism  (5)  and women  writers (8), as compared to  male  writers  ( 103) . Considering the
 liveliness of Quebec feminism and  writing by  women,   is  one   to  deduce  that   the major  newspapers continue  to  be  dom­ inated by male  critics  writing about male authors?  (A   section   discussing   leading Quebec  reviewers   is  also  available  and  makes  excellent  introductory reading be­ cause   the   dossiers  covering  as  they  do only  a  selection   of  papers  contain, to  a large degree,  the views of only a few crit­  ics like Jean Ethier-Blais, Gilles Marcotte, Andre Major, and  others.) However, in­ formation on  Quebec feminists  also  ap­ pears   under  different  headings  such  as "censure quebecoise," an  impressive  col­ lection  of I 63  pages mostly  consisting  of press  comments  concerning  the  various  scandals  surrounding the  production  of Denise Boucher's Les Fees ont soif.
It is perhaps in  cases where  literature
becomes a political  issue that  the immense usefulness  of  the  dossiers  becomes  espe­ cially  apparent. The  rapid  developments of  a  theatrical  eclat   can   only   be  ade­  quately appreciated  through a  more  or less complete  sampling of  press  reports, especially  if  views from  both conservative and   liberal  sources  are   included. Thus, the  clippings on Boucher's play include numerous letters   to  the  editor, cartoons, and  articles written by authorities in  the fields of theology,  law, medicine, philoso­ phy, and  others.  (An  edition of  Les Fees ont soif published by Les Editions Inter­ merle  includes major  press  comments in such  a way as to make  them  almost  part  of   the   stage   directions.)   Some   of   the articles  attempt to place   the  case  of  Les Fees  ont  soif in  historical  perspective by citing  earlier occurrences of  censureship in Quebec (going  back as far  as the ban­ ning  of  Tartuffe in  New  France),  thus giving  valuable historical information.
Closely related to the politicization of literature  through  a   theatre  scandal   is that  surrounding literary awards in  Que­ bec. Most  major awards like  the  Gover­ nor General's Award  or the Prix F,emina,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Prix  M,edicis, and, above  all, the  Prix Goncourt, elicit extended discussions whether  the   book   thus   distinguished   is indeed  a  book Quebec writers wish to be identified with.  Some  of the  more  heated debates surrounded Marie-Claire Blais's Une Saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel  (ac­ cused  by  both  progressive and  conserva­ tive critics  for misrepresenting Quebec to an international audience) , somewhat less so   Antonine  Maillet's   Pelagie-la-Char­ rette. Quebec authors  have  been  notori­  ous  for  refusing   to  accept the  Governor General's Award;  Victor-Levy Beaulieu,  however,  accepted  the  award in order  to be able  to make  a public  statement in the presence   of  high   state    dignitaries.  His speech   is  included  among  the  clippings  in his dossier.
The Dossiers de  presse is, in  short,  an indispensable  research   tool   having    so many   uses  that   one   wishes   a  similarly time-saving collection were  available for
the study  of English-Canadian literature. The lack of such  material is particularly painful to  critics  working on  authors on whom   (for  one  reason  or  another)   aca­ demic  criticism is not  yet available, or on little-known writers who  are  not  widely reviewed. I, for one, am  grateful to have easy access to  a sampling of  previous  re­ views,  which  help  to  place  more  recent  comments in  a  better  perspective.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER

COLONIAL

R.   A.  DAVIES,    d.,
burton:  selected  criticism. Tecumseh, $7.95.
THOMAS  CHANDLER  HALIBURTON,  The  Old Judge,  or  Life  in  a Colony. Ed. with  intro­ duction  and  notes  by  M. G.  Parks. Tecum­  seh,  $s.gs.
0NLY  THE  SPECIALIST is likely  to be  in­ terested  in Davies's book, and  he will soon give   up   in   exasperation. The   general  reader,  or   the   undergraduate   student, could  well  confine  himself   to  the intro-
 ductions by McDougall and  Watters, and say  the  section   by  Fred  Cogswell  in  the Literary History of Canada. But  for  the specialist  this is an  untidy  and  inexpertly edited   volu111e. Apart  from   the   many typographical errors, a  disordered  table of contents,  and  inconsistencies in  biblio­ graphical detail,  most  of  the  criticism  is readily  available, and  the chief  benefit  is in  having  the  early  reviews gathered  to gether-though  the  real  value  of  these remains  debatable. On the whole, neither publisher   nor  editor  nor  critic   is  well­ served by this publication; not to mention  Haliburton  himself.  It is for  example an absolute   unkindness  to   put   in  such   a garbled   (edited?)  lump  of  Liljegren, so chopped  up  as  to be virtually incompre­ hensible critically. On  the other hand, the editor fails to intervene in printing in full Watters's introduction to The  Sam  Slick Anthology, when  Watters had  lifted some bits  of  it  from   his  introduction  to  The Old    judge,   also   reprinted  in   full.   It doesn't look good.
Most of the essays survey the range of Haliburton's achievement, and  draw  at­ tention   to  the  distinctiveness of  his  ac­ complishment. In  other words,  most  of them  are in essence critical introductions. But  it  is an  odd  effect  to  read  a  whole volume  of these-after I 50 years, Hali­  burton   is  still   being  introduced. Some­ thing  is clearly  very  wrong; but  Davies, in his introduction, does not seem to have noticed.
The  common preoccupation of the  es­
says is with  Haliburton's  reception, and Davies's selection of reviews and notices I837-1855 is yet  another attempt to dis­ cover  just how  to go about reading Hali­ burton. Yet   in   his  introduction   he   no more  than  notices  the  range  of  response. In fact  his real  interest, it  appears, is in Haliburton's missing correspondence. He is not, on the evidence, a particularly sen­ sitive  reader  of  the  texts,  and  he has  no new line to offer.

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  other common feature is a strange hiatus   in   logic,   revealed    (remarkably) most openly in Watters. The  typical argu­ ment  is that  Haliburton devises Sam Slick to  goad   the  Bluenose  "towards greater exertion   of  mind  and  body  in  ingenuity and  industry," in direct competition with the  Yankee.  Yet  it is by no means  clear that  such a  desirable reform  of character would encourage greater union  with Brit­  ain. Rather, by developing habits  of reso­ lution  and  independence, it is more  likely to advance the  political  ends espoused  by Joseph  Howe.  It is not  at  all  clear  how the device of Sam Slick could effectively promote Haliburton's own political  views. Haliburton may  have  been confused,  but so also is that  line  of analysis, and  Wat­ ters  and   company  are   on   much   safer ground  in developing the proposition that Haliburton was by temperament a satirist.  The  terms  and  the  nature of his satirical  achievement  have  still  in fact  to be ade­  quately spelled  out.
The   Old   Judge  is  not   Haliburton's most characteristic work.  It has been largely  disregarded, and   those  who  rec­ ommend it  think  that   the  concentration on scenes of Nova  Scotian  life may  have limited  its appeal, as well as the  absence of Sam  Slick.  Watters  thinks  it  is a  for­ gotten   masterpiece   (by  the  end   of  his essay that  is scaled down  to a minor  clas­ sic),  and  Fred  Cogswell  finds it the most satisfying  of  Haliburton's books, compar­ able  to  Roughing  It in the Bush for  hu­  man insight  and  range  of interest.  M. G. Parks in his introduction does not confine himself so much  to subject  matter, but  in drawing attention  to  the  variety  of  hu­ mour   and   the   variety   of  subjects  and tones, he still leaves  unidentified the pur­  pose  of  all   this.  "Your  story  is  like  a broken  needle, it has got no point," com­ plains  Stephen Richardson  on  one  occa­  sion; and  Milton Wilson has drawn atten­ tion to the fact  that Haliburton's tales all

74
 serve  some  purpose, illustrate  some  pre­
cept.
Reading The  Old Judge right  through, one  can  agree  readily  enough that  this is
much  more carefully and elaborately writ­ ten than  the Sam Slick  tales, but they are only  intermittently entertaining, and  it is undeniably an effort  to read  the whole  of them.  A rather  different version of Frye's rather hurried argument about mask and ego seems  to apply  here.  The  Old  Judge suffers  precisely  from   being  so  carefully  written:  it  is,  if  anything,  overwritten. More than  a series of  sketches of life in a colony, it is a display of narrative virtuos­ ity.   The   "Keeping-Room  of   an   Inn" sequence in particular discusses  the  right  way  to  tell a  story,  but  there  and  in  the other chapters Haliburton too often  con­ fuses narrative effects for  narrative effec­ tiveness, and  what emerges  most strikingly is   that    Haliburton's   self-consciousness here  is not  political ego but  artistic ego. Even    that    might  have   been   tolerable enough; yet  one   sees  that   he  was  not attending to his own artistic instincts,  but writing in imitation of literary fashions­ writing, in  particular,  in imitation of the manner of  Washington  Irving, as in  the various melancholy and gothic  tales which most  captured his  imagination. The set descriptions are  too ambitious to impress,  the   style   is   frequently   artificial   ("the winged   insect   tribe")  and   distastefully precious,  the  sentiments familiar, the ac­ tion  melodramatic. In  contrast  with  the folksy and  the "nateral" of Sam Slick and  Stephen Richardson, there  is much  here that  is literary and  deliberate. Not  Hali­ burton's melancholy, but his vanity, seems to be  the  issue at  this  stage  of  his career
-his inexact self-awareness, his colonial­
ism.
ADRIAN MITCHELL

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TREMBLAY

RENATE  USMIANI,  Michel  Tremblay. Douglas
&  Mcintyre, $5·95·

ONE OF  THE STRENGTHS of this, the first book-length study of Michel  Tremblay's works,  is  its  thoroughness. The  author manages to  comment on  a  range  of  as­ pects -themes, characters, language and structure, among others -in all of Trem­ blay's pieces excluding only L'Impromptu d'Outremont (rg8o),  Les  Anciennes Odeurs  ( rg8r)  and   his   recent   novels. Realizing the lead-time publishers require, one can understand, if lament, these omis­ sions.
Dr.  Usmiani begins  her  survey  with  a
chapter that, through a careful selection of details, traces the history of theatre in Quebec into  the  rg6o's.  Throughout the book she continues to outline the histori­ cal, political, or social context for each  of the plays under discussion, which  may in­ dicate that  the  book is aimed  at an audi­  ence  largely  unfamiliar with  Quebec or Tremblay, the same  one  which  might  re­ quire  the English  translations that  accom­ pany   French   quotations.  The   second chapter proposes  that, overall, three con­ texts,  the  rue  Fabre, the  Main,  and the "Great Beyond" -a metaphorical make­  believe   world   centred  on  a  search   for metaphysical values-control Tremblay's vision. Usmiani contends that  Tremblay's styles,  ranging to fantasy from  what  she somewhat misleadingly calls naturalism, allow him to comment on domestic, social, moral  and  political levels, as well as a metaphysical  one.   This  chapter  is   en­ hanced  by  a  precisely-illustrated,  short discussion  of  the  limitations of   English translations of Tremblay's  works.
On  this foundation, Usmiani is able in the   next   chapter  to  show,   through an analysis of Les Belles Soeurs, the stylistic range  and  levels of meaning she has  just described. Added to this chapter is a brief
 discussion of joual and  swearing  which concludes  that  "vulgarity, linguistic limi­ tation  and limitations in thought" give "a sense  of  the  intellectual and  emotional impotence, which  underlines  the  central theme  of the  play" -that  "Each one  of les belles-soeurs appears condemned with­  out  hope  of  reprieve   to  a  maudite  vie plate indeed."
In "Debunking a Myth" (chapter 4) , stylistically and  thematically we analyze Forever Yours, Marie-Lou, En  pieces  de­ tachees and  Bonjour, la, bon jour to reveal the  maudite  vie  plate  of  the  frustrated, potentially powerful women and  the  im­ potent  men  trapped by the Quebec myth of   the   family.   "Debunking   a   Dream" (chapter 5)  traces individuals in Hosanna  and   La   Duchesse   de  Langeais, among other plays, who have  escaped  the family  and  the  rue  Fabre  only  to  discover  that  their new home on the Main, while a step toward  the  dream of liberation, is also  a ghetto  trap. The real discoveries  here are personal,  so that  Hosanna, for example, emerges  from  hisjher ordeal aware that "I am  a  man." Unfortunately, Usmiani implicitly argues from a stance that homosexuality is wholly unhealthy, which fails  to  take   full  account of  the  meta­ phorical  implications of sexual  liberation in Tremblay's work. She appears at  times to be making  moral  judgments about the characters and  a moralist of Tremblay.
After  discussing  the sublime  height ap­ proached  by  Carmen in  Sainte  Carmen of  the  Main  as  a  movement   "towards freedom  and  ecstasy,"  Usmiani goes on to look  at  Damnee Manon, Sacree  Sandra. In this play, she argues, the  three worlds
-rue Fabre, Main, and  "Great Beyond"
-merge, as do the various  stylistic forms, in an  effective  comment on  the  "absence of true spirituality and ... healthy sexual­ ity" which  Usmiani sees as a problem for all modern life, but one of  particular rele­  vance  to Quebec. The final chapter looks at  Tremblay's  lesser-known,   mythopoeic

75

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



works  which   centre  on  the  previously­ mentioned fantasy   world,  "le  grand   ail­ leurs."
In all of this, the individual looking for
a  comprehensive introduction  to  Trem­ blay will find informative, engaging read­  ing,  and   will  be  directed  in  further re­ search  by a valuable bibliography. Despite  its  many  merits,  however,   the  book  will leave  advanced scholars  still  seeking  an in-depth study  that  expands rather than largely reaffirms their knowledge. The categorizing that  is inherent in Usmiani's approach, which  places each  work in a thematic and  stylistic slot,  tends  to be limiting. As a result,  the  book is less suc­ cessful   dealing  with   Tremblay's   larger issues, stronger when  locating his thought somewhat  restrictively  within   Quebec. One  is left wondering whether this repre­  sents a limitation in Tremblay's vision or Usmiani's,  for   she   never   confronts  the question of why  Tremblay's works,  even his better ones, have  trouble  moving  onto the  metaphysical  level,  and   with   audi­ ences appear less successful  outside Que­ bec than within.
On  occasion,  the  author seems to miss undercurrents. Describing Serge  and  Ni­ cole's relationship in Bonjour, la, bon jour, Usmiani writes, "One can hardly imagine  a more  convincing statement of  romantic love,"  which   leaves  out  the  prickly  im­ plications of  their  incestuousness. On  a few  occasions   the  author's  critical per­  spective   is   questionable;  for   example, when  she  says in  a  hedging   negative  of Forever  Yours,  Marie-Lou, "Because  of its structure, the  play  as a  whole  creates  a sense of  tragic  fatality not  unlike  that evoked by Oedipus Rex," or when she vaguely mentions the "classical  grandeur" achieved by Carmen in Sainte Carmen of the  Main,  or  when  she  calls  Toothpick (in the same  play)  a "man of great imag­ ination." Despite   what   Maurice  says  of him,    Toothpick's   "long    and   involved story" of Carmen's death, no matter how
 theatrically effective, is the kind  that  any petty  criminal could  concoct.
These shortcomings aside   (and   one  is always able  to find problems in serious scholarship) ,  readers  of   the   book   will surely  agree   that   Dr.  Usmiani has  pro­ vided us with a needed  and  valuable work which  will stimulate more detailed Trem­ blay research.                      RICHARD PLANT

TREMBLAY'S TROUPE
MICHEL   TREMBLAY,   The  Fat   Woman  Next Door  Is Pregnant, trans.  Sheila  Fischman. Talonbooks, $8.95.
MICHEL  TREMBLAY, The  Impromptu of  Outre­
mont, trans.  John   Van  Burek.  Talonbooks,
$4-95·
MICHEL    TREMBLAY,   Damnee    Manon  Sacree
Sandra, trans.  John Van  Burek. Talonbooks,
$4-95·
MICHEL     TREMBLAY,    Sainte-Carmen of   the
Main, trans. John   Van  Burek.  Talonbooks,
$4-95·
MICHEL TREMBLAY, Les Anciennes  Odeurs. Le-
meac, $6.95·
IN THE MID-1970's Michel  Tremblay  be­ came  the Quebec dramatist most familiar to   anglophone  readers  and   audiences, largely   as  a  result   of  the   nine  English translations  done    by  John   Van   Burek (four  in collaboration with  Bill Glassco)  for  presentation at  Toronto's Tarragon Theatre  and  subsequent  publication  by Talonbooks.  In the  same  period  a tenth  translation, by Allan  Van  Meer,  also ap­ peared,  and  in   1977  Michael   Bullock published  an   English   version  of   Trem­ blay's  Contes   pour  buveurs  attardes  in Stories  for Late  Night  Drinkers  (Inter­ media). To  these  works  Van  Burek  has recently added  three   Tremblay plays  in translation, Sheila  Fischman a novel, and  Tremblay himself  another play.
,In The  Fat Woman Next Door Is Preg­
nant,  Fischman's English   version  of  La
Grosse  Femme    d'a   cote   est   enceinte
( 1978), Tremblay offers  a Joycean view of one  day  in  the  intersecting lives of an

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



urban society.  These   characters,  several of whom  have  appeared in earlier works, are presented with great compassion and high  comic  spirit.  A loving celebration of fertility   and   hope,   the   novel   concludes with   seven   pregnant  women   sharing a single   balcony   in  a  tour   de   force  that Gilles  Marcotte  has  called   "l'apotheose des  ventres   gonHes"   (Canadian  Litera­ ture, No. 86). In  her  English  translation Fischman has faithfully  retained the  ten­ derness  and  tone  of  the original, for The Fat Woman consistently displays  the sen­ sitivity  and  reliability we  have  come  to associate with the  work of this  translator. While   there   is  much   that   is  excellent throughout the translation, her  treatment of dialogue is particularly good, especially those  sections  dealing with  the  children and   those  that   present angry  confronta­ tions between  adults. In The  Fat Woman one finds much  to admire  throughout.
This is not  to say, however, that  there are  no weaknesses in the  translation. In addition to the omission of a half-dozen sentences and  some  imprecision in  trans­ lating verbs,  we also find  an  inconsistent translation of cursing and  swearing, and  some  inaccuracies in   transcribing  those that  remain in French. Nor has Fischman always been as inventive here  as in earlier  work  in dealing with  puns  like "la  grosse Petit"  (which is also misinterpreted as a place rather than  a person). At times she simply sidesteps  hurdles created by the nature of  the original language (a  com­ ment  on  the  gender of  "hedaine," a dis­ cussion  about the  appropriate  use  of  tu and   vous)    though  equivalent   counter­ parts  can  be found in English. Such  over­  sights  are  very  rare,  for  Fischman is  by no means  careless  in her work.  However, her    diligence  creates   some   difficulties when  her  translations  adhere too  rigidly to the French diction and  syntax: for ex­ ample, de mine   (in appearance) is trans­  lated   as  "in   mien";  and   in   "Tell  her hello," "with serious  aplomb," "He  gives
 me   his  confession,"  and    "disappeared from circulation," idiomatic English equivalents have  not  been  found.  On oc­ casion,  the  English   text  misses  the  full colloquial  range   of  the  French  version, especially in the words of Willy Ouellette, and  fails to indicate where Tremblay has used  English.   Finally,  The  Fat  Woman includes  a  few  misinterpretations of  the original  by  contradicting Tremblay's point  about  ballerinas  (p.  I q) and   by confusing   Beatrice's   feelings   with    the vagrants' (p. 239). Nevertheless, The  Fat Woman  N.ext Door  Is Pregnant  remains,  on   the  whole,  a  very  good   translation (one  of  Fischman's best)   and  a  worthy addition  to  her  many  endeavours in  the field of  literary translation. Let  us hope that  we  may  now  anticipate still  better  work  in   the   translations of  the  second and  third  volumes  of the Tremblay trip­ tych,   "Chroniques  du   plateau    Mont­ Royal."
While The Fat Woman is unfailingly impressive   in  its  handling  of  dialogue, John   Van  Burek's  response   to  the  chal­ lenges  of   Tremblay's  language   in   the plays  considered here  is less  satisfactory. The quality  of these recent  translations is all the more disappointing when  we recall the excellence  of some of  his earlier  treat­ ments of Tremblay's work.  £'Impromptu d'Outremont (I g8o), in  which  the  four Beaugrand sisters gather for an afternoon birthday  party in  Outremont, poses  par­ ticular  difficulties   for  the  translator be­ cause it includes  discussions  of grammar, pronunciation, and  the  most  appropriate French  language for  the Quebec theatre. Additional challenges are  encountered in Tremblay's use  of  joual  and  puns.  As a rule, Van Burek deals skilfully with these matters, finding  good  English  equivalents and,  on occasion,  displaying genuine  tal­ ent    in   transposing  Tremblay's   wit­ notably, his inspired  treatment of Lucille's remarks  about the  pronunciation  of  que­ quette.

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Unfortunately, the quality  of the trans­ lation  declines  as the work proceeds. Lor­  raine's   extensive   use  of   joual is  inade­ quately   reflected   in  the  translation -a serious   matter,  especially   in  her   argu­ ments   with  Fernande, who  deliberately distances  herself  from  her  sisters  by  her speech. Van  Burek  occasionally  adds and deletes  words,   phrases,   stage  directions, and  several  full  sentences,  and   has  un­ accountably overlooked  Tremblay's dedi­ cation.   The   translation   also   contains examples  of   too-liberal    and   too-literal renderings  into  English-thus,  for  ex­ ample,  mains dangereux  (less dangerous) becomes   "no  danger," while   sensibilite (sensitivity)  is  given  as "sensibility" and
Je te voyais venir  (I could  see what  you
were  getting at)   as "I saw you coming"
(pp.  14, 57). There are  a  few  mistrans­ lations  of numbers and  adverbs,  and  oc­ casional  misprints  (e.g.,  canons as "can­ nons") . It is  also  surprising  to  find   a translator  of  Van  Burek's experience mis­ handling  the  translation of  c-h-i-e-r  by suggesting  that   "s-H-I·T" can  be  found in   Le  Petit   Robert.  Finally,   The   Im­ promptu  of Outremont omits six speeches between  Lucille  and  Yvette   (p.  16). In all  fairness,  however,  Van  Burek  cannot be blamed  for much  of the play's wooden dialogue, clumsy  structure,  and  dull  ac­ tion,  for  all  these  faithfully mirror  the substantial limitations of the French text.
In  Damnee   Manon    Sacree   Sandra
(1977)   and  Sainte  Carmen  de la Main
( 1976),  Tremblay explores  a  Montreal territory far  removed from Outremont­ the   Main   and   the   neighbourhood  mi­ nutely  documented in La Grosse Femme; indeed  the  three characters named  in  the titles  of these plays have  all appeared in previous  works  by Tremblay. In the  for­  mer,  he  juxtaposes  monologues   on   the sacred  and  profane to  highlight  similari­ ties in  the  hidden desires of  the  devoted  but  deranged Manon and  the unhappy transvestite   Michel/Sandra.  On    the
 whole,   Van   Burek's  English   version   of this play is somewhat better, for he seldom adds   gratuitous details,   and   omits   only four  full sentences. While Van Burek's tal­ ents  as translator are  in  evidence here­ his handling of Manon's argument on the bus  (p.  13)  and   the  pun  on  dieuxjdeux (p.  16)  -so, also,  is  his  inattention  to levels of language and  particular nuances. The  English   text  does  not   reflect  ade­  quately  the   colloquial   jargon     of   the French  nor  Tremblay's repeated  use  of English   in   his   plays.   Chus   folle  (I'm crazy)   is  given  as "you're crazy"  (p. g), and   some  of  Tremblay's  emphasis  (via capitalization) is overlooked. But  two larger  probleiTIS emerge. Van  Burek  com­ pletely  ignores  the transvestite's recurrent use of  feminine-ending  adjectives to  de­  scribe  "herself,"  thereby overlooking the subtlety of  Michel/Sandra's  self-analysis. Furthermore,  the  translator  has  not  al­ tered  Tremblay's title,  which  will  remain  an  enigma  to  anglophone  readers. The pun   in  "sacree" and  Tremblay's use  of assonance and alliteration should  be con­ veyed in English; Van Burek has certainly demonstrated elsewhere  that  he can  meet such  challenges.
Most   of  the  merits   and  shortcomings in the  translation of Damnee Manon Sacree Sandra  can also  be found  in Van Burek's English  version  of Sainte Carmen de la  Main, whose  singer-protagonist   is Manon's sister  and  a character familiar to readers of other Tremblay plays. Like L'Impromptu d'Outremont this work ex­ amines the role of indigenous culture and its abortive struggle to find  its own  voice and  a sympathetic audience.  Colloquial speech   heavily   loaded   with  English   vo­ cabulary and   joual is  Tremblay's charac­ teristic   idiom,   but  Van   Burek   has   not found   an   adequate   English   equivalent. Words,  phrases, stage directions, and  sev­ eral sentences are  omitted, along  with  the author's   footnote  about  his   "partition musicale"  (p. 34). There are  a few mis-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



translations: piste de danse  (dance floor) becomes "runway (p. 28)' epouvantail (scarecrow)  becomes  "fan" ( p. 49) , etc. On  balance,  Sainte-Carmen of the  Main is a generally   faithful but  unremarkable translation which,  like the other two plays translated by Van  Burek, falls short of his previous achievements with  Tremblay's work.
Given  the extent of anglophone aware­ ness of and  interest in Tremblay's drama, we  will  undoubtedly  soon  see  published an   English   translation   of   yet   another recent   play,   Les    Anciennes   Odeurs ( 1981).  In  this case, however, links with earlier  works   are   established  by  theme and imagery   (especially of smell) , for we are far removed  from  the Main. This  play explores  the lives and  loves of better edu­ cated   and   more  affi.uent  individuals, yet reveals their  fundamental insecurities and lack  of  self-knowledge.  Ironically, Jean­ Marc,   a   conscientious    but    frustrated CEGEP  French teacher, and  Luc,  a  tal­ ented  but  unfulfilled actor  and  formerly
Jean-Marc's lover, know each other better than    they   know   themselves.    Tremblay cleverly  conveys  the depth of this mutual understanding  by  having  Luc   end   the play  with   a  verbatim repetition of  the words  with which  Jean-Marc  begins it­ a  skilful  device  to demonstrate  this  pro­ found  meeting of minds,  and  hearts,  that  has supplanted the  more ephemeral con­ tact   of  bodies.  Theirs  was,  and   indeed  remains, a relationship based  on familiar­ ity, tenderness, and  sensitivity; it is, very often,  a subtle  but  convincing communi­ cation  by  silences,  in  looks  and   smiles. The courageous look into  their  own dark heart  is precipitated by  the  terminal ill­ ness  of Luc's father, which  in  turn  pro­ vokes an assessment of the father-son roles these  former lovers,  to  some  degree,  are still  playing  for  each  other.
In  the play Tremblay gives smells their Proustian due,  illustrating the  sensuality of  this  sense  and   its  role  as  a  nostalgic
 vehicle to carry  Luc and  Jean-Marc back to the remembered past, Luc's  "bon  vieux temps." Still, Les Anciennes Odeurs is, for Tremblay, a more  ambitious undertaking than   Hosanna   or  La  Duchesse  de  Lan­ geais,  primarily  because   it  goes  beyond and   beneath  an  investigation of   homo­ sexual  desire  to  the  more  comprehensive and  profound universal  human need  for love, tenderness, and understanding. Both Jean-Marc and  Luc  undergo epiphanies that  lead them  to a fuller  and  more exact  self-knowledge.  Each  has  needed   to  be free  of  the  other, yet  must  confront the painful  emptiness that  accompanies that independence. As each  acknowledges his limitations he steps closer to a kind of serenity, the final tender release from the paternal-filial bonding  that   has  been  at once refuge and  restraint. By confronting uncompromisingly their  secret  selves and the  hidden fear  of mediocrity, they  sub­ due it and enter  a more honest  and secure phase of their  lives. Having set aside their  masks,  their   role-playing and  their  fan­ tasies, they are  now able  to be more freely and  fully themselves.
It should  also be mentioned that addi­ tional merits of Les Anciennes Odeurs  are  outlined   by Guy  Menard in  his fine and detailed  introduction. For Tremblay, too, has entered a new  phase  of his dramatic art with this play. Because Luc  and  Jean­ Marc  are  so deserving of membership in his distinguished company of fat  women, unhappy sisters, transvestites, and  singers, anglophone readers will undoubtedly be looking forward to a repeat performance, in English,  as soon  as possible.

JOHN J. O'CONNOR






79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



PARADISO, PURGATORIO, INFERNO JEAN-PAUL  FUGERE,  En  Quatre  ]ournees. Le­
meac, $10.95·
SUZANNE   PARADIS,  Emmanuelle  en  noir.  Le­
meac, $13-95·
DENYS  CHABOT,  La  Province  lunaire.  HMH,
$9·95·

jEAN-PAUL FUGERE's third  novel, En Qua­ tre Journees, opens  in  the autumn of the Max Baer/Joe Louis fight. Nineteen-year­ old  Charles Lavigne, a  salesclerk  at  the Regent Knitting  Mills  and  a  student of Gallic  romantics and symbolists, has been advised   by  his   bosses  to   take   a   night course  in  accounting at  Sir  George  Wil­ liams. What to do? The chaste  youth who has always  had  to live in the gannents of others  cannot do  as  he wishes, become  a journalist,  since   he  does  not   have   the Latin   prerequisite  (public  school  taught him  none). He   buys  his  first  made-to­ measure  suit  from  a tailor  on St. Hubert and   decides   to   take   the  advice   of  his employers.
It is now  summer six years  later,  and
Camilien  Houde  is  in  a  concentration
camp.  Having duped the Canadian Army with  a studied  neurosis, Charles is at lib­ erty   to   work   for   a   French-Canadian printer. The man whose great-great-uncle had   participated  in  the   I837  Rebellion recognizes   the  need   "de  se degager   des anciens  modeles  sans  les renier" and  to reconcile his love of culture with his com­ mercial  training. The ritual arrangement for  a second  suit   from  rue  St.  Hubert anticipates his  marriage  and  his transla­ tion  to  a  love-nest  in  English  Montreal.
It is now spring  fifteen  years later,  and the Duplessis  regime  is ready  to fall. Edi­ tor  Lavigne decides   to  vote  for  an  un­  known  new  order. A  third  suit  from  his St.  Hubert tailor   signals  the  prosperous family  man's  entry  into middle age.
And,   finally,  it  is  the  winter   of  civil

8o
 servant  Lavigne's  sixty-third  year.   The Dominican priests  have  gone  and  old rue St. Hubert with  them.  It has been  trans­ formed into  a  covered   mall,  a  "Floride des neiges." The employee of Affaires cul­ turelles has  returned to be  measured for a fourth suit. Made thin  by illness, he will need  a new one  for his burial-but now from  a different tailor, for his old one has died. The street and the changes it reflects prompt Charles  Lavigne to  take  up  "le fil de  sa  vie,"  to  follow  it  back  through the  seasons.  Recollection brings  this  un­ derstanding:  that   there  is an  appointed time  for everything, and  a time for  every affair  under  the  heavens. This  wisdom brings  to his eyes tears  of sorrow  and  joy, but  no glimpse  of the  Infinite.
"II  nous  interesse a ses personnages, .a
leur  humbles desirs,"  Pierre  Gobin  notes
of  Fugere in  a review  of  his  first  novel, Les Terres noires  (Livres et auteurs cana­ diens,  I965). The years have  not changed novelist  Fugere very much  in this regard. The sixty-one-year-old author of En Qua­ tre  Journees continues to celebrate a wis­ dom  and  a humanism in an art  not at all recherche. He  is unlike  his youthful pro­  tagonist, a  reader of  Verlaine who  is at­ tracted by "une  lecture difficile  dont  on doit   longtemps ... chercher  la  cle,  une lecture qui ... ne donne sa  joie, si elle la donne, qu'apres un  long  malaise." Read­ ers  who  prize  such  difficulty,  searching, and  unrest  will not feel entirely  at ease in this book.
Desire  is  not  so  humble or  simple   in
Suzanne Paradis' Emmanuelle en  noir,  a revised  version   of  her   I97I   fiction  with that  same  title. The similarity between Paradis and  Marie-Claire Blais remarked by Michel Tetu in Livres  et auteurs  que­ becois  (I 97 I) -both  plunge the  reader into  an  equivocal and  glimmering world
-continues to   be   pronounced  in   the
Ig82 version  of Emmanuelle en noir. The kinship of these authors goes deep: the epigraph Melroyd Lawrence adds  to  his

BOOKS IN REVIEW



translation of  Blais'  first  novel,  La  Belle Bete -"Descends  the  way  that  leads  to hell  infernal," from   Les  Fleurs  du  mal"
-might also serve as an epigraph to Emmanuelle en  nair  in  either of  its  ex­ pressions.
"Un orage  de  feu  et  de  froid," in  its own words,  Paradis' most  recent  novel unveils the flowering of "!'amour abso]u" in a moral universe  where  "Ia  haine" and "!'amour ... portent  le   meme   maquil­ lage."   Incest,  murder,  insanity,  suicide, and   drug   addiction  are  instrumental in Paradis' enactment of  love's  creative and  redemptive power. "Que la lumiere soit!"  Emmanuelle's  mother  proclaims as  she digs her  way  to the  bottom  of her daugh­ ter's incestuous love and  reviews the "film d'horreur" it  has  set  in  motion.  "L'ai­ mable   et  repugnant  Baudelaire,"  whose poetry   moves  "au  meme   rhythme d'en­ fer,"  has lighted  the  way for  Paradis' ex­
ploration of "[desJ songes noirs comme le soleil d'Afrique." "Quand on  vit  a l'abri
d'un volcan  il faut apprendre le langage du feu,"  Emmanuelle, author of a volume of poems entitled Deep  Magic, records  in her   journal  intime. Like  Faustus, also  a seeker  after  the  "trues du  metier  du CI'eateur  du  ciel  et  de  Ia  terre" in  "la magie   noire,"  Emmanuelle is  plainly   a dark  messiah. Her  maker, too, has learned the    language   of    the    infernal - and teaches   it.   Paradis's  sententia, like   Fu­ gere's,    is   clear    enough   and    easy    to find,  though what  she  teaches,  ironically  enough, is the  tragic  comedy  that  follows on the absence  of a clear ethic.
"II  va de soi que  cela  ne se soumet  en rien aux lois de la logique, ennemie des reticences et de tout  mystere"-so writes Denys  Chabot in  his first  novel,  L'Eldo­ rado  dans  les glaces  ( I978). But  he also has  his narrator express  a  distrust  of un­ reason,   acknowledging   that   mystery   or incongruity  "abrutit   de   meme   que   ]es sciences incertaines depravent Ia raison." This  affirmation,  taken  in  relation to the
 first proposition, formally  expresses  "l'as­ pect   paradoxa!" of  man's  thought  and  being: humanity is governed  by a round­ about   logic. In  view  of  this,  Andre  Va­  nasse's  uneasiness  with   L'Eldorado dans les   glaces   is   understandable  when    he
rightly   and   reasonably observes   that   "a
Ia lecture  de ce texte on eprouve toujours
ce  vague  sentiment  que  l'on   tourne en
rond" (Livres et auteurs  quebecois,  Ig78).
Such  vertiginous proceeding is so  up-to­ date  that  Paul Steuwe's description of the novel    as   a   "post-modern   concoction" (Books in Canada, IO [October Ig8I]) is as unexceptionable as  it is expected. But the  concoction  is ancient, too, as the  fic­ tion's own logic, working  its ironies in the unfolding of  time, makes  inevitable. "La meme  vieille  chanson sans  cesse s'arrete et   recommence.... Tout se  repete.... Aucun ,episode n'est conclu," in the words of  this  fictional   quest  for  the  legendary land  of  riches.  In  accordance with  that conviction,  Chabot's  second   novel,   La Province lunaire, imagines a pilgrimage to mystery, a journey  into  a terra  incognita which  has attracted  map-makers for  the better  part  of a millennium.
La Province  lunaire  is a tale of  travel­ lers in infinity, its imagery  and conception borrowed    from   medieval   and   baroque lore. It evokes "un  sens presque  medieval de  ]',emerveillement,"  as  a  ship  of  fools, its  rudder  unattended,  floats  before   the eyes of  treasure hunters  ("verite ou  ap­ parence"?) ,  as  skeletons   dance   and  ca­ davers  walk   ("prodige  ou  simulacre"?). Warmed  by   "une    gelee   vivante,"  the world of La Province  lunaire  is a vivified irony: here,  "les  flammes  qui  ornent ... les enfers"  coincide with  "le  froid  de  la fosse." This imagery  recalls  the centre of Dante's hell  and  pictures the logic  of the infinite  as  described by Nicholas  of Cusa  in  his  De  docta  ignorantia  ( I440) :  it  is by  way of   the  coincidentia oppositorum that   man  can  come   to  a  "learned  un­  knowing"   of   the   truth  beyond   reason.

8I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Chabot's pilgrims  drift  in a boundless enigmatic universe,  where "l'unisson des contraires" provides  what coherence there is; their  "ignorance savante" is their only guide. These travellers are bound for "l'inconnu," which  has the name  of "Champdove."
The journey  can  have  no  known  des­ tination, of  course,  and  La  Province lu­ naire  can   have   no   known   conclusion. Journey and  novel end  with  a search  for an  old amnesiac woman  lost in  the forest on the outskirts of Champdove. Following
"LA LIGNE BRISEE DU   LYRISME BAROQUE," Chabot's creatures are  free endlessly  to wander in circles. Without the certain guidance of an authoritative revelation­ here  they  part  company  with  Dante and  Cusa-these  travellers  are  at  liberty  to
experience the  delights  of  the  condition
John  Donne had  reason  to bewail. "Tout unite  rompue, tout ordre,  tout  relation" echoes  the famous  cry of The  First  Anni­ versary.  Here    is   ''l'age   des   tenebres," clearly  understood and  playfully,  power­  fully  expressed.  In  the words  of  La Pro­ vince   lunaire,   "queUe   allegresse    dans l'absurde!"  Chabot  has  written  a  book world-class in more  ways than  one.

CAMILLE R. LABOSSIERE

GESTALT REVISITED

LOUIS-MARIE  DANSEREAU,  Ma  Maudite Main gauche  veut  pus suivre. Lemeac,  n.p.
CLAUDE  MEUNIER   et  LOUIS  SAIA, Les  Voisins.
Lemeac,  n.p.
CLAUDE MEUNIER  et  LOUIS  SAIA, Appellez-moi
Stephane, Lemeac,  n.p.

OF THESE THREE RECENT Lemeac  publi­ cations   in   theatre,  M a  M audite   Main gauche veut  pus suivre is by far  the most interesting; the  two  plays  created in col­ laboration  between  Claude Meunier and Louis Saia  not  only suffer from  technical weaknesses, but also leave the reader  with a sad sense of deja-vu.
 ,A gripping statement on  the  human condition, Ma Maudite  Main gauche rep­ resents  the second  part  of a  planned  tril­ ogy;  it follows Chez  Paul-Ette,  biere, vin et nouveautes. The author's progress from the  first  to  the  second   play  follows  the pattern set  by  Michel  Tremblay  in  the sequence from  Les  Belles-soeurs to  For­ ever Yours, Marie-Lou. Chez  Paul-Ette,  like Les Belles-soeurs, uses a family  group  as a starting point  to develop  a full pano­ rama  of a particular neighbourhood with its diverse  characters and  their  problems. Ma  Maudite  Main  gauche  veut  pus  sui­ vre,  like  Forever  Yours, Marie-Lou,  fo­ cuses in  on  one  family  cell of four  char­ acters.  More important, Dansereau's new play  clearly  evokes  the  sophisticated and  complex  dramatic  techniques of  Trem­ blay.  Like  that  author's "string quartet," its  structure  is  based   on   musical   com­ position; it features four  fully static char­ acters,   each   in  his  own  assigned  space; and   the  dialogue cuts  freely  across  time zones. Dansereau's move  away from  na­  turalism also  achieves a  considerable in­ crease  in scope. He  now  goes beyond  the traditional   quebecois  slice  of  life  to  an exploration    of    universal   themes:   the dichotomies  between  life and  art,  dream and  reality,  the  beauty  we crave  and  the vulgarity which surrounds us.
Like   Forever  Yours, Marie-Lou, Ma
Maudit,e Main  gauche  veut  pus suivre is
a one-act play of high emotional intensity. The setting consists of "Quatre lieux dif­ f,erents ou chaque personnage se retrouve dans  son  univers  construit d'imagination, de reve et de musique." The four  charac­ ters  are   Gaetane, the  Mother, aged   45 and    70;   Jean-Fran ois,    her    youngest  child,  now  dead;  and  La  Trousse, a  30- year-old  daughter.  At  the  premiere per­ formance at  the  Quat'Sous in  Montreal, the two Mothers were played  by the same actress,   thus  creating a  further  blurring of the  time  zones.
The entire play  revolves  around  this

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



double mother figure, a modem archetype of frustrated womanhood. Gaetane's heart belongs   to  music,  while   life  has  forced her  into  a  relentless  routine of  domestic duty.   Only   at   night,   after   the  children are  in  bed, can she indulge her  dream of being  a  concert pianist  by "playing"  so­ natas on  her   kitchen table.
The "present" of the  play  is Mother's Day,  with  Gaetane 70 years old. She  has at  last  realized   part  of  her  dream-she owns a real  piano.  But as she  prepares to play her favourite, the Moonlight Sonata, she  must  admit to  herself  that  she  is no longer   able   to  perform:  "rna   maudite main   gauche veut  pus  suivre."
This  theme  of the frustrated search  for beauty serves as the leitmotif  for the play, which opens and closes on the moonlight sonata. The central symbol,  the  echo,  is also  auditory. The echo  effect  also  pro­ vides the  basic structure for  the dialogue,  as  present and   past  reverberate  against each  other.
The two minor  characters reinforce the theme  of the  play. Jean-Franc;ois does not speak,  but  sings  his  part: the  dead  son, once  a musician, has  become  part  of the mother's dream world  of beauty.  La Trousse, a black  sheep  in  the  tradition of Tremblay's Pierrette, seems to be the only one  who  understands her  mother, but  is rejected.
Like  Tremblay,  Dansereau  cleverly  in­ terweaves naturalistic detail  with  styliza­ tion  in  a  gripping play  which  goes  far beyond  contemporary and  local  interest. By contrast, Les Voisins is anything but
a gripping piece,  as  it  piles cliche  upon
cliche  in  its satire of  the  big, bad  subur­
banite. A day in  the life of three middle­ aged,  middle-class couples,  it  follows  the pattern of  a  multitude of  similar   plays (one  is  particularly  reminded of  Dube's Les  Beaux  Dimanches)  in  exposing, once  again,  the  vapidity of  social  inter­ course,   the  lack   of  communication  be­ tween marriage partners, housewife  ennui
 and  middle-age crisis. The authors do go somewhat   beyond   the   Dube   model   by adding to  the  slice-of-life  of  act  one  a second  act  filled  with  dramatic incident. The  characters' response   when   tragedy hits  gives  the  authors a  chance at  some particularly acerbic, if overworked, satire. Appellez-moi   Stephane, by  the  same
co-authors, is a pleasant, if not profound, little  play on  the age-old  theme  of life as a stage,  combined with  the  modem idea of the liberating effect of role-playing. Unlike  many   similar   works  of  the  past decade, however,  it questions the  validity of the Gestalt  theory  and exposes some of its  pitfalls.
Set  in a small  cultural centre, it brings together   a   motley   group  of  characters who sign up  for  a drama class. Stephane is their guru/teacher, who succeeds in getting every  one  of  them   to  take   the plunge   into   his  individual  subconscious and  eventually formulate  previously  re­ pressed desires, hostilities  and aggressions. As they construct a  play  on  the  basis of their   own  experience, then  perform  it, the  work  turns  into  an  interesting triple  play-within-the-play.   The   denouement, however,    is   anything   but    satisfactory. Stephane, a sorcerer's apprentice of Ges­ talt therapy, makes his escape,  leaving  his charges  somewhat  bewildered  and   cer­ tainly  no better for  the  experience.
An entertaining play,  Appellez-moi Stephane  is perhaps significant in signal­ ing  a  trend  away  from  certain  attitudes
and beliefs proclaimed especially by the collective creation groups  of the seventies. Are we moving  towards a demythification of Gestalt?
RENATE USMIANI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



INFORMATION &
VERVE
JEAN-MARC  LARRUE, Le Thelltre  a la  fin de la
XJXe siecle. Fides, n.p.
MAURICE  LEMIRE,  Introduction a la litterature
quebt!coise (1900-1939). Fides, n.p.

IN THE  LAST DECADE of  the  nineteenth century, theatre in Montreal experienced a "boom" that  was as unprecedented and unanticipated as it has been  unparalleled since. From  782 performances of I42 dif­ ferent works in I8go, only nine years later  there   were  I,885   performances of  some
305 dramas, comedies,  vaudeville, operet­ tas, operas,  tragedies, and  others  (in  de­ scending order  of numerical importance) . As Jean-Marc Larrue  points  out  in  his Introduction, words like "dynamism" and "effervescence" are  really  not  adequate to  describe   the   phenomenon:  "ll faut  parler  d'explosion."
Although  the   author  effectively   dis­ cusses   the   background  and   context   in which  this explosion  takes place,  most  of his book is concerned to describe  the phe­ nomenon itself,  and  this  he  does  mainly by means  of  statistical  analyses. Thus  we are  given  chronological  presentations of the number of works performed, the vari­ ous genres,  comparative tables of English and  French offerings, lists of the most popular playwrights, actors  and  plays, tables showing the relative  importance of Canadian productions, and  so on. Quan­ titative assessments are grounded in statis­ tical  evidence and   qualitative  apprecia­ tions seem to be based, whenever  possible, on newspaper reviews by the critics of the time.
Because the study encompasses both English- and   French-language theatre, many  of its most interesting elements  are comparative in  nature.  We  see,  for  in­ stance,   the   astounding   proliferation   of French productions  compared to a  rela­ tively stable  growth  in  the English  scene.
 Differences of genre  are also noted: while the  English  taste  runs  to melodrama and vaudeville (considered by the  Church to be   a  threat  to   public    morality),  the French prefer  their  melodrama with  lyric theatre. Occasionally, the  observations sound   distinctly  con temporary:   despite the preponderance of English-speaking theatre, for  instance, most  of  these  pro­ ductions are British  or American imports,  while on the French side local plays enjoy relatively greater popularity.
If the  comparative method   is to some extent abandoned as the  book progresses, this is for the perfectly legitimate reason that,  while  the  period   under  study  is of little  particular  consequence in  English­ Canadian terms,  it  was vitally  important
for   the   future  development of   French­
Canadian theatre. As the author shows, it was in these final years of the century that theatre first  became  established in  Mon­ treal,  initially  with  amateur societies, col­ lege  productions and   European  profes­ sionals,  and  eventually  with  the  creation of   professional French-Canadian  com­ panies.
The period  is  thus  an  important one, and  the  book offers a great  deal  of  infor­ mation about   it.  We  learn,  for  example, of  a  production  of  La  Fille  de  Roland  performed  entirely  by  men   (for  reasons  of  decency),  and   of  an   Antigone  pre­ sented  in  the  original  Greek  to an  audi­ ence  of  priests;  we  can  even   learn,   by reading  the  footnotes  carefully enough, that  Sarah  Bernhardt liked  mussels  and refused  to wear  glasses.
In  general, though, the  quality of  the information outstrips the  effectiveness of its presentation. This is a scholarly book, dry in tone,  rather technical in approach, academic in  both  conception and  execu­ tion.  One   senses  behind   it  a  university  thesis  left  vaguely  unrevised  before  pub­  lication. With  its  exhaustive  documenta­ tion,  its  bibliography, index,  and  myriad footnotes, those  very  qualities that  make

BOOKS IN REVIEW



it a valuable tool for  specialized research detract from  its appeal for the general reader.
With  its greater scope and  livelier style, Maurice  Lemire's Introduction a la  lit­
terature  quebecoise (1900-1939)  is likely to have a broader appeal. Written with verve  and  inventiveness ("les  terroristes," "la  gangue   patriotarde") ,  the  discussion
ranges  widely  through the  central issues
of  the   period   and   presents   them-in­ telligibly-in the   language  of  current French  criticism.  When   these   concepts  and   categories do  not  apply   to  Quebec literature, as he argues in  his account of the regionalist novel, Lemire convincingly proposes  the  necessary   adjustments and alternatives.
Until  recently, most of the literature produced  between  I goo  and    1939  has been  out  of  fashion   as  a  field  of  study. It is much  to the  author's credit  that  he shows not only the interest of this writing but   also  its  future  importance, since  it was in these years that what he terms "!'institution litteraire" became  firmly es­ tablished  and  the foundations of  modern­ ism were set.
Lemire convincingly views the lopsided battle between   regionalists and  "exotics" as constituting the  essential  debate of the period. Leading the  establishment  offen­ sive were the clerics/critics who promoted a resolutely  nationalist literature: "Cana­ dian" in  setting,  theme,  and  inspiration; Catholic in morality, message, and  didac­ tic intent; traditional and  rural in its val­ ues,  focus,  and   expression.  Opposed  to this "official" culture were  the  relatively few writers  who championed art  for art's sake, international (meaning French) standards, and   the  complete freedom   of the individual artist  to write  however  and whatever he wished. That the latter views eventually prevailed would  no doubt  have seemed  inconceivable  to  virtually all  of the   prominent  literary  figures   prior   to
1 939·
 Lemire's division  of the  book into sec­ tions  entitled  "Production"  and   "Con­ sumption" enables   him  to  present  both the  literature  and   its  economic,  social, and cultural contexts -to adopt the per­ spectives   of   both   then   and   now.  This  variety and flexibility of approach allows, for  instance,  full  discussions  of national­ ism, genre,  and  language, a section  on feminine  writing, an extremely good sum­ mary  of the  criticism-and at  the same  time analyses of the situation for publish­  ers, booksellers, periodicals, and  the read­  ing  public.  Even  radio  and  painting are included, although  the  relevance of  the latter  remains  elusive.
What  emerges,  then, is a broad  and persuasive  portrait of the Quebec literary scene in these years and an engaging criti­ cal commentary upon  it. One might  take issue with  the  occasional  polemical   jibes or   some  questionable   theoretical  state­ ments   or  the  absence  of  footnotes   and bibliography, but  these are quibbles  when compared to the overall accomplishments of the book. Whether he is presenting the arguments of  the exotics  or  revealing the unsuspected importance  of  school  prizes and   secondhand bookshops, Lemire writes  with  economy,  authority, and  wit, which make  for  pleasant and  profitable reading.                             LARRY SHOULDICE

VARIETAS DELECTAT
MICHEL  GARNEAU,  Emilie  ne  sera  plus  jamais cueillie par !'anemone. VLB Editeur, $11.95. FRANCINE  RUEL,   Les  Trois   Gr8ces.  Lemc!:ac,
$7-95·
MARIE  LABERGE,  Ils  etaient   venus   pour. VLB
Editeur,  $6.g5.
RECENT   TITLES   FROM  VLB  EDITEUR    in­ clude  works from  the  two  opposite  poles of  the  dramatic range,  in  theme  as  well as technique. Michel  Garneau's Emilie ne sera plus jamais cueillie par ['anemone is that   poet-dramatist's  latest  contribution to the genre  of "poemes a  jouer,"  follow-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing   V oya ements   and    the   highly   ac­
claimed  Quatre   a   quatre;   Marie   La­
berge's  Its etaient  venus  pour follows the
tradition of  politicized   historical drama, complete with  documentation. Les Trois Graces, a new title from  the theatre series of Lemeac, represents a collective  effort by  four   women-an eloquent  plea  for the  preservation of  that  endangered  spe­ cies, the  Rubensesque female.
1The Garneau volume  owes as much  of its attraction to its visual appeal as to the text  itself.  Square in  format, the  small
( I I I   pp.)   book  attempts to provide the
reader with  a total  aesthetic experience. Each  page of text is elegantly  framed; six full-colour illustrations by Maureen Max­ well, each  one  centred on  an  individual page  of  glossy grey,  beautifully  re-echo the tone of the poems; and even the stage instructions   are   given   in   the   form   of poetry.
Emilie  ne sera plus jamais cueillie par I' anemone is Michel Garneau's recreation of his personal  perception of the character and   work   of   Emily   Dickinson,   in   the form of a dialogue between  Emily and "Uranie," her  sister  (Laetitia). Garneau attempts to capture the essence of his fellow-poet, and  obviously  kindred  spirit, through  every   detail   of  his  work.  The stage  instructions include   a  list  of  "cor­
respondances" - sensual elements which,
to Garneau, are evocative of Emily. These include   colours,   music   ("concerto pour flute et harpe de Mozart"), foodstuffs, textures, and   pungent smells.  The  dia­ logues  are  preceded by a six-page  intro­ ductory  poem   which   summarizes   Gar­  neau's   perception  of   Dickinson,   partly  through  echoes   of   her  own   work   ( "la  petite  ivrogne  de rosee") ' partly through
interpretation  ( "elle  etait   naive  Emily  I
naive  comme  le diable   I et parfaitement
sceptique").  Garneau  uses   his   own
rhythms, diction  and   surprise   effects  in the creation of the  dialogue for  the four­ teen scenes which  make up the play itself.

86
 Each   scene  is  set  into  a  specific  season and   time  of  day; each   one   ends   on  a colour  indication. The only actual change throughout   the   work   occurs    halfway, when   Emily   changes from   a  blue  dress into  a white  one.
The dialogue between   the  two  sisters covers every aspect  of living and dying­ but  most  of  all,  it  is a  rapturous ode  to life:

je connais  l'extase  I parce  que  le simple  I mouvement de vivre I me donne  de l'extase I il me  semble  que  !'exaltation est  l'etat I nature! des  etres  I qui  ont   conscience  du monde  I de  l'univers I !'exaltation l'extase
I sont donnes a tout  le monde I. ...
Emilie ne sera plus jamais cueillie par ['anemone  obviously  does  not  lend  itself to formal theatrical performance; it  is a beautiful  volume of  poetry,  which   may come  to  life  on  stage  in  a  very  special setting, such as the Cafe de la Place at the Montreal Art  Centre, where it  was  pre­ miered in October 1981.
Its  etaient  venus  pour, by  Marie  La­ berge,  represents a  total  antithesis  to the Garneau poem: a  well-documented his­ torical  play, realistic  in tone and suggested  production style, this work deals  with  the ill-fated Val Jalbert plant, which  opened
in  1902 and  closed  in  I927. The author emphasizes the  plight of the  workers  and their  families,  who,  after  having found  a haven   from   misery  and   unemployment, were  eventually  forced   to  abandon  the community they had  created, leaving  Val Jalbert a ghost  town. The author tries to establish a balance between  social  history and human interest focused  on individual case  histories.   The play  is  divided   into six "tableaux," of which  four are  devoted to the  community, two  to personal prob­ lems.  There is  a  strong   political  as  well as a feminist element in  the  play. As she follows   the  fate   of  the  workers  of  Val Jalbert, Marie Laberge underlines the gap between  management and labour, and the exploitation   of	the    French-Canadian

BOOKS IN REVIEW



worker  at  the  hands of an English-Cana­ dian  capitalist class. She  also  underlines the  essential   weakness   of   the  oppressed  working  men,  who must be fired  to even­ tual   protest   and   rebellion   by  their   in­ dignant wives.
The  work  is convincing, in spite of the rather  simplistic division  into  black  and white,  and  the  somewhat naive  idealiza­ tion   of   the   Val   Jalbert   families.   The theme  is nicely  underlined  through a cir­ cular  structure. The play begins and  ends with  a  picnic. But,  whereas   the  opening pi::nic  reflects the  joy and  enthusiasm of the  beginnings  of  'the Val  Jalbert opera­ tion,  the closing scene shows us the same place, now turned into a camping ground, with visiting tourists gawking at the ghost town  that  once  was Val  Jalbert.
While  Ils etaient venus pour deals with a specifically quebecois problem, Francine
Ruel's Les Trois  Graces represents a pro­ test against the obsession with slenderness  which  pervades the  contemporary West­ ern  world.  Aptly  subtitled "une ode  aux natures vivantes," the play carries  its mes­ sage  in   the   pun   of   the   title   (Graces/ grasses) .  The  Lemeac volume   includes the genesis of the work which could be summed up as a case of three  overweight
actresses  in  search  of an  author:  France
Arbour, Manon Gauthier, and  Mireille Thibault originally conceived the project, and eventually recruited Francine Ruel  to create a script  on  the  basic 'theme  of the tragic  fate of the woman  who once would have  been  "a Renoir, a Rubens, a  Botti­ celli,"  and   now  finds  herself  reduced   to the  role  of a  freak  "qu'on  regarde, mais ne touche pas."
In keeping with  the  theme,  the set rep­ resents   a  circus   tent,  the   three   graces taking turns  in playing the traditional fat lady. They are Dame Jeanne, the Mother; her daughter Grace, and  daughter-in-law Rose. The author is careful to emphasize  the  extraordinary  beauty of  their  faces, as well as their  delicate, soft  complexion.
 The play  is divided  into  an  introduc­ tion,  which   calls   the  audience   to  view the  wonders  of the  freak  show;  and  two parts,  which take place inside the tent  and let us follow the events behind the scenes. Throughout the  play,  sensuality remains the leitmotif. Part one centres around the ritual of  food, a ceremony performed by the  three women  with  all  the  concentra­ tion  of  a  strip-tease act.  In the  process, the concepts of "food" and  "hunger" are subtly translated into  metaphysical terms. Part  two complements the food  ritual  by an equally sensuous love scene, performed on top of the  table  (altar, love couch) between  Rose  and  the  "petit  monsieur" who loves all  three  fat  ladies. The end  of the  play finds  the  all-protective mother alone. Both Grace  and  Rose  leave  to find "real   life"  outside   the   cocoon   of  their mother's skirts,  the circus  tent. The little man sadly sums up the situation: "si les hommes  et les femmes  continuent de col­ lectionner de belles images, les petits mon­  sieurs  et  les  grosses  madames  vont etre des chefs-d'oeuvre en  peril. ..."
As the  six  illustrations from   the  pre­
miere  performance at  the  Quat'Sous tes­ tify, the work  can  be most  attractive vis­ ually. While  the  dialogue is not  brilliant, the  verbal  and  stage  imagery  suffices  to create  a powerful impression.
RENATE USMIANI

TROIS GRANDES FETES D'ADIEU
NORMAND CHAURETTE,   Fetes  d'Automne.  Le­
meac, $7·95·
RENE-DANIEL  DUBOis,   Adieu, docteur  Munch.
. . . Lemeac,  $7·95·
FRANCINE  RUEL,   Les  Trois    Graces.  Lemeac,
$7·95·
THESE  THREE PLAYS  from   the   1981-82
Montreal Theatre  season   illustrate the
continuing  trend  of   Quebecois drama away  from  the  socio-political  conscious-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ness of the  rg6o's and  1970's. Normand Chaurette,  Rene-Daniel Dubois, and Francine Ruel go beyond the particular reality  of  Quebec to  the  universal  ques­ tions  of  love,  death, solitude,  and  self­ fulfilment.  Unrestricted   by   time,  space, or  logic,  they  transform the stage  in to a poetic   space   where   past   and   present,  dream and  reality,  human  and  inhuman coexist.  In this  strange  theatrical world where   the   mystical  mingles   with   mun­ dane,  the  visionary  with   the  grotesque, the poetic  with  the absurd,  unusual char­ acters search  for themselves,  for love, and for transcendence.
Adieu,    docteur   Munch ... by   Rem!­ Daniel  Dubois  was first performed at  the
Cafe   theatre  Nelligan on   October 2I,
Ig8I, with  the  author playing  all  twelve roles in  this  "Sonata for one  actor." Sit­ ting  in  front  of  his own  tombstone  in  a public  garden, the recently  deceased Doc­ tor Munch takes stock of the life which  is slipping away  from  him.  His  first  words ("Je  suis    le   docteur   Carl    Octavius Munch. Et  j'ai  faim")  announce two of the  major themes  of  the  play:   the  need to establish  one's identity and  the unsatis­ fied existential hunger for knowledge and meaning.   As  the  anonymous  Voice   at­  tempts  to  establish   the  facts  needed   to fill out  'the death certificate, Dr.  Miinch  begins   the  slow,  bewildering process  of questioning his identity, his past,  and  his beliefs.  In  a  play  with  few simple  facts, Miinch  does  tell  us  that  he  is a  direct  descendant  of   the  potato's premier pro­ moter,  Parmentier. He  is also  a  world­ famous medical  doctor and  the author of major scientific  and  linguistic  texts.  De­ spite    his   fame,    power,    and    fortune, Miinch is a solitary  man  troubled  by the hunger, doubt, and  limp  which  are  part  of  his  being.  As he  searches  for  certain­ ties, he gets frustrated, confused,  and  lost in a verbal delirium. Obsessions,  memor­  ies, ideas, doubts,  and  artistic  images swirl around  him  in a deluge  of words.  As the

88
 monologue becomes  a heated  diatribe against modem life,  Munch loses himself and  becomes  a cast  of others (the  Statue of Liberty, the  Pieta,  Qiva,  Lara,  disem­ bodied   telephone  voices,  laboratory rats, etc.)   who  represent  decadent  humanity. If there  is a  conclusion to  this  play,  it  is that   the   true  cause   of  Munch's  death is  the  existential  anguish  produced  by doubt,   indecision,  and    the   inanity  of modem life.
But  if  the  world   is  monotonous and inane,  Dubois's play  is not.  Although the lack of dramatic action gives it a static quality and  the  verbal  barrage from  dis­ sonant voices makes  it difficult  to follow, the  reader /spectator must  applaud  Du­  bois's virtuosity as  writer  and  actor. De­ spite its troubling message, Adieu, docteur Munch ... has   its   humorous  moments, such  as the  Statue of Liberty's comic  la­ ment  ("Faut que  j'me  r'cycle. Que  jere­ pense  mon  image ... A l'en  peut  pus  la Statue ...")   and   the   legendary Lara's complaints about tourists  at her tomb,  the Taj  Mahal. Rene-Daniel Dubois  belongs to the new generation of Quebecois play­ wrights  who entertain us with  their  orig­ inal  poetic  visions  at  the same  time  they force  us to consider anguishing universal  problems.
Francine Ruel's play, Les Trois Graces, takes  us  underneath  the  big  top   for  a tender but humorous insight  into  the lives of three  circus  fat  ladies. First  performed at  the Theatre de Quat' Sous on January
I3,   Ig82,   the   play  was  inspired   by  the idea  of one  of  the  overweight "Graces," Manon Gauthier, and  written by Ruel  in collaboration with  all  three-Gauthier, France  Arbour,  and   Mireille Thibault. These actresses,  like the play's main char­ acters,  have  chosen  to accept and exploit  their obesity. Dame Jeanne, her daughter, Grace, and   daughter-in-law,  Rose,  have put  together a circus  act  playing  on  all the  cliches   about fat  women:  they  are warm, tender, and  jovial  with  beautiful

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



faces, melodious voices, and  Rabelaisian appetites for  food  and  men.  But  behind the  masks of the  circus  performers, there are  three  women  who  fear  solitude   and need  love. Beneath the grotesque humour of  the  circus  act,   there   is  anguish   and sadness. Grace's laughter turns to sobs as she  speaks  of  her   need   to  be  touched, loved, and seen for herself, not  just looked at as a sideshow  freak.  For  Grace, eating is a way of taking  in  the  whole  universe. As a child  she devoured sand, snow, flow­ ers,  and   leaves;   and   in  her  dreams she gorges herself  on sunlight, springtime air, and    children's  laughter.   Now,    feeling suffocated  by   her   mother's  protective warmth and  hungry for the world  beyond the  big  top,  she  has lost  her  appetite for food. Rose, too, craves understanding and  love.   In   an   erotic   encounter  with   the Petit  Monsieur, she  satisfies  her  need  to be  loved  for  what is inside  of her  as well as for  her  sumptuous exterior. Rose  and Grace leave   the   circus   abandoning  the oral   and   psychological  gratification   of­
fered   by  Dame 1eanne,   willing   to  risk
rejection in the search  for self-fulfilment.
The Mother accepts  their  departure as a necessary  step  in  the  process  of  integrat­ ing  overweight women   into  society.  She also  accepts her  own  solitude  which  she predicted  in   the  parable  of   Mira   the whale  who,  angered and  grieved  by  the
harpooning  of  her   son,  1onas,  beached
herself  so that  all may  marvel at  her  size
and  sorrow.
In   Les  Trois  Graces,  Francine Rue!
uses highly  theatrical scenery,  costumes, language, and  gesture  to create a stylized circus   which   is  both   grotesquely   exag­ gerated in  the  manner of Fellini  and  in­ timately  poetic. The women  perform the songs,  dances,  and   comic  skits  of  their  circus  act; they  eat  a  Gargantuan meal with  ritual and  erotic overtones; they  re­ veal  their  hopes,  fears,  dreams, and  de­ sires.  It is  an  original and   entertaining spectacle which lives up to the  promise  of
 its  subtitle   and   becomes  an  ode  to  the living  figures   who   incarnate   Botticelli's mythic  Graces in  this  "tableau  vivant." Normand Chaurette's Fetes d'Automne was first seen at the Theatre du Nouveau Monde on March 19, 1982. It is an avant­ garde  passion  play  in  which  modern-day
characters  re-enact  1udas    Iscariot's
treachery. Past  and   present,  miraculous
and  mundane, poetic  and  prosaic  blend together in an  imaginary setting  which  is
both  a convent school  and  ancient  1ern­
salem.  On  one  level,  it  is the story  of  a young  convent student named   1oa, who
has  hated  her  mother, Memnon, since  a
childhood accident  years  before.  She  fi­ nally  revenges  herself  by  bringing  about  Memnon's death. On  another  level,  it  is a  revised  version   of  Christ's  passion,  in­ spired by the mysticism and nascent  eroti­  cism of a young girl who confuses Christ's call  to love  and  a  new  life  with  an  invi­ tation   to  death.   From   the   stage   fore­
ground, 1oa  narrates the  drama she  has
written,    occasionally  stepping  back   to play her victimf'heroi:ne role. Too pure, honest, and  innocent to survive in the real world, she falls victim to a conspiracy directed   by  the  powers  that   be  and  led by Memnon, the  convent superior Mere H.  Augustine, and  her  classmate Magali Lange.  Ordinary people  can  neither  un­ derstand  nor   accept  the   extraordinary
1oa; she is the  daughter of Socrates and the twin sister/lover of the Christ-like Roi Septant.  In   her   mystical   fantasies,   1oa sees the Roi Septant nailed  to 'the cross, beckoning  her  to  join him  in the gardens of Paradise where  they will celebrate their love   in   an   eternal  autumnal  wedding feast. When her desire for absolute peace, purity,  and   love  becomes  stronger than her   fear   of  death, 1oa   dies.  With   1oa dead,  the conspirators turn against Mem­ non  and  hound her  to  death.  Once   the compromising  witness   has   been   elimi­ nated, order can  be restored on earth and

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the "fetes  d'Automne" can begin in Para­
dise.
In  Fgtes  d'Automne, Normand  Chau­
rette  deals  with  love, death, and  madness with  the striking originality of a visionary poet.  Abolishing the  line  between  reality and   dreams, Chaurette  lures   the  spec­ tator/ reader  into   his   unique   dramatic universe,  amusing us with  the  humorous antics  of adolescents, dazzling us with sur­ real mystical  images, making us uneasy at the spectacle of society  persecuting those who  do  not  conform,  and  forcing  us to interpret  for   ourselves   a   complicated work.                                            JANE MOSS

EARTHLY RADIANCE
STUART  WATERs,   One  Man's  War.  Potlatch
Publications, n.p.
JOHN GRAY   with  ERIC PETERSON,  Billy Bishop
Goes to  War.  Talonbooks,  n.p.
ONE  OFTEN UNACKNOWLEDGED  founda­ tion  of  Canadian  literature is  the  "local  history"  volume,  the compilation record­  ing  a  township or  town  from  pre-history till  the  present,  full  of lists and  tales  of reeves  and  harvest yields, marriages and  merchants, life daily lived by real  people.  These  troves of  facts   nourish  artists  on their  way  to  works  like  Reaney's Don­  nelly    trilogy,    Kroetsch's  The  Ledger Hood's A New  Athens. Although set dur ing  World  War  II and  in a dozen  coun­ tries  of  Europe and   Africa,  One  Man's War  reminds me  of those  local  histories. The title  is apt: the  book is the  memoir  of  Captain Stuart Waters  of   the  Royal Artillery.  We   get   not   the   overview   of general or historian but-something they must   have   missed -the  view  from   the ground.
One scene has the author monitoring German mail  seized from a Greek  caique in the  Dodeca_•ese archipelago:
One  man  was  written to by mother,  sister, aunts   and   an   uncle.... His  family  had   a small farm  and  their  news revolved  around

go
 it  and   the  difficulties  the  war  had  caused them.    Hitler   received    no   mention     but "Wolf"  the   dog   proved   newsworth;  and so  did  the  pigs!                                      '

Waters compiled, and   his  superiors  dis­ tributed, a biography of  the  man,  to im­ press on military readers "the importance of small  details." The key to One  Man's War  is "small  details." They lie in the text like nuggets  in ore. Not everything Waters tells  us  is  gold,  much  is ordinary rock;  but,  as in those local histories,  we need  it all  to  appreciate any  of  it.  To  read   the book is to watch cartloads of ore-rock pass by, giving  us a  feel  for  gold  no connois­  seurs of finely crafted jewellery can know. On a troopship off Norway, a priest of the French Foreign Legion   with  a  German head  in  his kit-bag; a camel's skeleton  in the  Libyan  Sahara; Barbary apes  on  the roofs of Gibraltar: the  details  pass by in the  book artlessly  undeveloped -as they must  have in wartime real life for soldiers with  a  job  to  do  and   no time  to  linger and  ponder. Characters and  settings  ap­ pear,  then fade  out of range. A lovestruck  Canadian  stowaway   from  Gibraltar  en route to  his  Glasgow  fiancee; an  empty  hunting   lodge  in   Sherwood  Forest, guarded by the Army  nobody  knew  why; a  homosexual   camp baker; a  haunted manor house  in  Kent. No  other kind  of book could  more thoroughly tell someone  who  was  not  there what,  day  after  week after  month,  scene   after   shifting scene, World  War  II waslike.
l't  needs   to  be  mentioned  that   One
Man's War   does  little   else.  It has  the flaws  of amateur prose-too much  pas­ sive   voice,   anticlimactically  structured sentences, imprecise "and"  clausal  con­ nectors,  haphazard paragraph integration. Don't look for shrewd narrative pacing  or psychological insight. It is a book  to read as  a local  history,  for  content,  not  for structure and  style.
But  out  of  this  undifferentiated detail a  myth  emerges,  the  myth  of  a  Captain

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



who  lives  inside  a  tent.   It moves  as  he moves; its size varies; and  its canvas walls are  the  bounds of  the  Captain's  percep­ tion. He  knows only what goes on inside;  beyond   is  someone  else's  province. But he's  taken  on a noble  and  difficult  enter­ prise  that  can  be no one else's:  to articu­ late  what  happens therein, in  the process reminding us  that  everyone  lives  inside such  a tent,  each  in  his own.
'The difference between Stuart Waters's book and  Billy Bishop Goes to War is that between  an  unsung Captain and  a V.C., between   an   essentially   private  memoir and   (whatever New  York  may  have thought)  one  of  the  half-dozen best Ca­ nadian  plays   ever   made. John   Gray's  drama is about a  hero  of  the grand  and public  variety. Like  Findley's The  Wars, Billy Bishop examines two  opposing  ste­ reotypical   realities  - ( 1)    war   is  hell, ( 2)   war   is  glory -whose   broadening and   deepening  and   melding  make   the play's   rhythm  and   structure.  A  typical Bishop monologue from  Act  I:

I got  my  horse  stuck   in  the   middle of  the parade ground. The horse   is  up  to  its  fet­ locks;  I'm  up  to  my  knees.  Mud, sweat  and horse   shit   from   head  to  toe.

The  music becomes  ethereal  and gentle.

Then,  suddenly, out   of   the   clouds   comes this  little si:1gle-seater scout. You  know,  this little  fighter  plane? ... What  a   beautiful picture! I don't know  how  long  I just  stood there watching until he  was  long  gone.  Out of  sight.

But when  Bishop  the naive Canadian colonial   leaves   behind   mud   for  clouds, he discovers  the air  war  to be much  more complex  than  he had  imagined: the play shows  the  zest  and death, splendour and danger, publicity and loneliness.
"Survival. That's the important thing." For  a  pilot  to survive, calculated  profes­ sional  efficiency  must  supersede emotion. And  yet-after  that  interval of  tempor­ ary   necessity,  emotion  does  come  back, deeper  and  richer, because more  earned:
 the warmth of writing  letters  home  to Margaret, later  his wife;  the passion of a night..time tryst with a cabaret singer,  the Lovely Helene; even "that old dry throat, heartthrobbing thrill" when  he shoots down a kill. Thus Bishop grows from Innocence through Experience to a kind of Higher  Innocence till he's awarded, by King  George,  the  Empire's most  coveted medals,  in a splendid ceremonial pageant where Owen Sound meets Buckingham Palace   and   both   are   the   better   for   it. "Hero remains small-town boy at  heart" is  cliche,   but   in   this   play   it's   cliche­ turned-archetype, as McLuhan put  it.
Being Canadian is very much  a part of
Bishop's experience. (The shifts from On­ tario  accents  to  those  of  British  sophisti­ cates are one of the play's many dramatic delights.)  Canadian is rough and humble vigour; British by contrast is bloodless and  circumspect-cliches again, but  brought alive and  grown  to archetypes. The  Brit­  ish  generals   at   play's   end   pull   Bishop down  to  earth,  order  him  home  because  a  living  colonial  hero  is worth   more  in PR  'than  a  dead  one.  Although he  loves flying,  Bishop  understands their   reasons and  necessities;  he is dutiful, responsible; he  is  civilized.  In  one  of  the  play's  wise ironies,   to  be  civilized   is  what  Bishop learns from  war. By facing death, by watching  men   whom   he's   shot   tumble dead  from their planes, he learns a respect
-reverence, even -for life. He's  a sen­
sible  Canadian,  he  possesses-in  their best Jane Austen meanings-sense and sensibility.
The final  image  of each  Act is that  of
the dancer:

In  the  sky, In the  sky,
Just you  and I up  there together,
Who  knows  why?
One the  hunter, one  the  hunted;
A life to live,  a death confronted. Oh, let  us dance together in  the  sky.

Yeats's dance poems come to mind, where

BOOKS IN REVIEW


dance   is  human  life  at  its  noblest  and most articulate-and its most physical, human muscles striving toward  the limits of body and gravity. It happens that  those best moments of life often  occur during dance,  song, story-telling, mime. Billy Bishop exploits all of these. A skilful dramatist is a:t work, one who knows that theatre is  the  composite of  all  the  per­ forming arts.
As John Gray  tells  us in  his introduc­ tion,  something else  that  went  into  this play is months of research in the  Ottawa archives,  reading the sort of concrete de­ tail Stuart Waters writes, the sort  he read in  that  mail  from  a  Greek  caique.  In  a scene   from   One   Man's   War   Captain Waters  enters Jerusalem.
It was  evening as  we  approached  the  city and   I  understood all   I had   often   said   or sung.... Most   revealing and   stunning  was "Jerusalem  the   Golden,"  literally  true,  as the setting sun  lit  the  yellow limestone  build­ ings  with  an  unearthly  radiance.

Up  rises for an  instant the renovated city of William Blake, of John  of Patmos,  not in a holy book but  in the  awestruck  eyes of a  tired  dusty  soldier.  One  Man's  War has  that radiance occasionally; Billy Bishop Goes to War glows all the way through.                           WILLIAM  BUT!'

DECENTRING REGIONS D'ETRE
LAURIER  MELANSON,   Zelika   a   Cochon   Vert.
Lerneac, $g.gs.
REAL-GABRIEL BUJOLD,  La  Sang-m2l8  d'arriilre pays. Lemeac, $I6.gs.
DIANE-MONIQUE  DAVIAU,  Histoires  Entre  Qua- tres  Murs. L'arbre HMH, n.p.

IN THE WAKE OF Antonine Maillet's suc­ cess  with   Pelagie,  La  Charrette    (Prix Goncourt I 979)   is  was  to  be  expected  that   other writers   would  soon  follow  in their   attempts  to  capture  the   Acadian  world  in  their  fiction.  One such  attempt

92
 


occurs in Zelinka a Cochon Vert where Laurier  Melanson offers  a  comical  por­ trayal   of  the  Acadian spirit  during  the thirties  in   the   village   of   Fourche-des­ Deux-Rivieres. This  novel opens  with  the picture of  a  well-endowed  Zelika,   who at the age of  thirteen has spent  four  years in  grade 3· But  her  academic life  ends when  her  old  teacher dies  and   the  new replacement, with  her  religious  views, be­ comes   unbearable  both   for  Zelika  and  her  mother, Ia  Cochon Vert.   A  sort  of regional  picaresque follows, in which  our  young  heroine takes  to  the  road  leading to comic  episodes  beyond  her  village and the  larger  Acadian  region. "C'est par  un samedi matin  frisquet de  septembre que
Zelika  .a Cochon Vert  prit  le chemin  du
Coude en compagnie de son oncle Valen­
tin."
Regionalism has  often  been  defined  by
setting or state  of mind; more specifically, a region  may be defined  in contrast to the external  world   as  characters enter   into and  depart from  this  microcosm. Just  as settings become  decentred, so the  decen­ tred  or  eccentric character  emerges  as  a prominent feature of  regionalist  fiction. As soon  as she  leaves  her  village,  Zelika goes  to  work  for  Madame La  Tour, a woman  of   European  origins:  "Ben   sur que  c'est  pas  un  nom  de  par  icitte.   Ah ben!    Qa   se   comprend.   Coumme   de bonne  raison,   c'est   du   monde   d'en   de­ hors." Linguistic decentring occurs  in the dialect of "ben," "icitte," and  "coumme," set off  against the more  formal  French of Madame La  Tour who  speculates on "la ferveur des ·epoux acadiens en  particulier et sur  celle des maris  du monde en gene­ ral." But  she does not  remain  for long  in Madame La  Tour's service  since  she  is caught in  the  embrace of  Monsieur La Tour. Just  as Zelika  had  reflected  philo­  sophically  on  the  contrast  between   her regional self and the world at large  before  she  entered  Madame La  Tour's, so  she comments on her  departure: "Du  monde

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



coumme nous  autres, c'est  pas  fait  pour la ville.... Austeure, prends ben  garde  a toi, la ville, hein! Tu  me reouerras pas de si tot...." Her  comical  apostrophe to the city points  ironically to the differences between   a  naive,   decentred  perception and  an external urbanity.
If the    region  becomes  decentred
through excursions into  the  outer  world, so too  do characters through their eccen­ tricities. Redolent of Hoda in Adele Wise­ man's Cra.ckp,ot, juicy,  plump Zelika  ap­ pears  in  the  following  manner:

. chapeau cloche terreux et  cobi;
• plume de  coq  estropiee et  dHraichie;
. cotte de  robe  sale  et  peroee;
. souliers crottes;
. parfum: cabane a poisson.
Her   mother  is  caricatured  by  her  long nose and  profile resembling a can opener; the new teacher is called  "Tomahawk"; Monsieur La  Tour looks like an  ostrich; and  Zelika's future husband, Otto de  la Veuve,  is known  as the  "coureux de taouilles."
The focus of the  novel soon shifts from Zelika  to Otto who  works  in  the  general store,  "pas  un  magasin  specialise  comme on  en   trouve  en   ville,"   but   leaves  the region in search of success in the United States.  After  a month of work at the Waltham  Watch  Factory  in   Massachu­ setts,  Otto realizes  how  much  he  misses his  native   village.  "D'abord, il  lui  sem­ blait   avoir   laisse  sa  liberte derriere lui, dans  son bercail  acadien, puis, surtout, il n'arrivait pas  a  se liberer  de  son  nature! d'Acadien."  So   he  returns  to  Fourche­ des-Deux-Rivieres where  he  marries  ZC­ lika.  For   their   honeymoon  they  decide  to  go  to  Quebec  City,   but   once  again  these  regionalists  become  disoriented  as soon   as  they   leave   their   circumscribed territory.  Zelika's sister's  comments  pre­  pare  for  their  farcical dislocation: "Hor­ mis qu'i' alliont  jusqu'a Toronto. Pis en­ core   non!   I'  pourriont  pas   tout   ouere.  Apparence  que  Toronto, c'est  pus grand
 qu'   Ontario.  C'est   ce  que   j'ai   tout   le temps entendu  dire." Indeed, regionalists cannot see   everything  they've  heard about:  beyond   their   limited   geographic setting  they  are  blind.  Thus, the  honey­ moon  coupie   mistake   Levis  for  Quebec City and  they spend  the night  in a brothel which  is raided   by the  police.  After  this decentring experience, they return to their native   village   where  Zelika  gives  birth  to  triplets,  thereby  outdoing her  mother.
The  final words of wisdom  in the novel belong to the heroine's mother, la mere Cochon Vert, who lists among her posses­ sions one imbecile  husband, nine children, four  cows,  two  pigs, and  a  dozen  chick­ ens:   "C'est pas  aise,  tout  le  temps  etre obligee  de  bailler  les  reponses  au  monde  qui  comprend pas  les  questions! Les  vil­ lages  d'Acadie  pouvont dormir  en  paix tant   qu'i'aura   des   parsounnes  coumme moi  pour  ieu fournir les reponses  pis ieu­ z-expliquer  les  questions ..." These   re­ marks  recall Gertrude Stein's last  words and  point  to  a  certain  knowingness and  truth  that  counteract any decentring out­  side  the  region.  Like  La  Sagouine's, this regional  pa.rsounne's wisdom immortalizes Acadia.
Regional    decentring  recurs   in   Real­ Gabriel  Bujold's La. Sa.ng-meli  d'a.rriere­ pays, only  instead   of  Acadia,  the  Gaspe  is   presented    as   the   village   of   Saint­ Antoine-de-Ramelet  is   expropriated  by the  government.  Like  la  mere   Cochon Vert,   the  mother  in  this novel  endures hardships  and   defies   destructive  forces from  the external world. The novel opens with the eighty-eight-year-old woman, the eponymous half-breed, la  Tawaingue, la vieille Epiphanie Innis, or Madame Theo­ dule Baumier, returning after  ten years to the   cemetery   of  her   destroyed   village. Through a flashback  the rest of  the novel outlines  the month-by-month events lead­  ing  to  the  village's  destruction in   r g6g. Only  a few  families and  a group  of hip­  pies remain in Ramelet awaiting the gov-

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ernment's bulldozers  in this lament for  a region. "R,einventer l'histoire" is not only to create the place  but  also to prevent its demolition.
At seventy-eight, la Tawaingue is left with  her  cat  and  her  forty-year-old  dia­ betic  daughter, Bernadette, the  village's schoolteacher whose stamp collection of­ fers  her  through fantasy  the  only  means  of escape  outside  her  region.  Her  micro­  cosm  becomes decentred with  the  arrival of  a  letter  from  an  admirer in  Napier­ ville.   "Bernadette  alia   fouiller   sur   une carte  geographique pour  denicher !'em­ placement exact  du village  de son corres­ pondant.... A la  frontiere des  Etats,  au Quebec! Si loin quand meme. Bernadette n'avait  jamais  voyage  ailleurs  que  dans  son  album de  timbres  et  n'avait  jamais
depasse, en voiture, Gaspe  a I'est et Carle­
ton .a !'ouest. Les Etats,  c'·etait loin!" The
other decentring event  in her life involves
Antonio, one of the hippies  who takes an interest in  her,  and   an  ''agent" for  her escapist  fantasies. "Elle  retourna dans  la Iegendaire  coulee   des  Baumier  sur   un ressort simule  et se vit soudain  devenir la grande fee de sa naissance,  marraine  des lourds sornmeils de la Belle immunisee, encadree dans  la  traditionelle histoire  de tous  les  lutins   auxquels elle  s'identifiait
et a qui  elle apprenait a tenir  crayon  et
a apprecier les pieces dentelees  de la  phi­
latelic  de  ses amours, instructive et  cos­
mique, .a travers  taus  ces arbres  morts  ou
absents, qu'elle trainait dans son envoi sur
la  chevelure ondoyante de  la  princesse d'ou, de  son  trone  dans  l'espace,  elle lar­ gua  une  vaste  corbeille de  taus  ces  tim­ bres depouilles sur les toits qui pleuraient dans  les coulees  de  Ramelet."
In the  summer Bernadette actually leaves the region with Antonio "pour les grands espaces sur  les routes  lactees  dont revait   la   pale   institutrice  depuis   long­ temps,   dans   un  grand   tableau  d'etoiles tirees  au  pinceau  du  grand  Picasso,  un bon  voyage  de sante." En  route  to Man-

94
 treal, the couple pass by Port-Daniel, Gascons,  Paspediac, Bonaventure, New Richmond, Carleton, Amqui, Rimouski, Riviere-du-Loup-the  names unfold along  with  Bernadette's freedom as she is reminded of the  happiness she read  about in  Gabrielle Roy's  fiction.  From  her ear­ lier  Gaspesian parochialism  she  expands to the "C o s m o g o n i q u e !" But once in Montreal she remembers what she has left   behind, for   her   memory  acts   cen­ tripetally   to   counterbalance  her   flight from   the  region.   "A  certains moments, Bernadette  se  perdait dans  le  labyrinthe
de  l'inquiet ;de.... Elle   pensa  a l'insai­
sissable  Tawaingue  qu'elle avait   confiee
a la  jeune  Gisele,  son  eleve assidue, l'in­
consequente Tawaingue. Elle  pensa  aussi au  choeur, a la nef,  au  transept,  reincar­ nant   les  themes  divins  tellement  doux  a
l'oreille, composee  dans  des editions  de grands musiciens classiques!" From Mon­ treal  Bernadette wishes  to  visit  Napier­ ville,  home   of  her   secret  admirer,  but when she arrives  at  the exact address,  she discovers  that  her admirer has been  dead  for  fifteen  years.  Unable to  recover   the original letter, and doubting her own san­  ity,  the  fragile schoolmistress returns  to her village  to die. The mystery surround­ ing  the  letter is  not   revealed   until   the final chapters when  the reader  learns  that Antonio has been working for the govern­ ment  as an agent for destabilizing the vil­ lage.  Though he  ultimately feels  guilty about  his actions, he has been responsible for  the demise  of  Bernadette and  the rest of the  village.
Aside  from  the  decentring setting,  vil­ lage  eccentrics characterize this  "arriere­ pays."  La   Tawaingue  repeats  "chaque­ noix"  after  everything she  utters  and  at seventy-eight she  overindulges in  sexual activities  with   Hildege O'Hara,  a  gro­  tesque  vagabond  who  lives in  his  mem­  ories  of  World   War   II. Each  caricature possesses a nickname. "Ah! bon!  (Un sur­ nom   pour   Mag'rite???)   Pourquoi   pas!

BOOKS IN REVIEW



En  Ramelet, les surnoms faisaient partie du  folklore.  En  bien  oui,  pour  Mag'rite, la  femme  de  Jean-Joseph, c'etait  Chick­ let,"  because  she always  chews gum.  Hil­  degarde Durand  is called  Maman Tro­ gnon   (core)   because  of  her  dexterity in devouring  entire   apples.    (The   author provides a glossary at  the  end  to explain  some  of  the  Gaspesian linguistic eccen­ tricities.)
At first glance,  the  opening short  story
of   Diane-Monique  Daviau's  collection, Histoires  Entre  Quatre   Murs,  seems  to continue with  these  regionalist  concerns in its description of the self-contained vil­ lage of Gourmont, but on closer examina­ tion  one  discovers  a  different  emphasis.  Where the   two  novels  develop  a  broad  picture of  Acadia  and   the  Gaspe,   Da­  viau's  sketches  concentrate  on  creating a more   restricted  atmosphere  of  internal­ ized  regions  or states  of mind  in camera. In  concert with  the seasonal  rhythm that  dominates the agricultural life of the  vil­ lage, two young  lovers work  hard  for half the   year,  and   in   the   autumn  relax   to enjoy   the   fruits   of   their   labour.  This  idyllic   existence    ends,   however,    when Xavier  suddenly leaves  Annie  who  then wanders around Gourmont in despair.  At a Hallowe'en party  the odours  of nutmeg and  cinnamon recall  the smells associated with  her  departed lover. Through a kind of  synaesthetic nostalgia, Daviau's short stories  create a Proustian atmosphere in miniature. In  the  story  from  which   the collection  takes  its  title,  a father tells his son  about   the  history   of  objects   in  his room   before   he   falls   asleep.    In   these chambers of fiction,  the fourth wall  may be  missing  or   it  may   be  pierced   by  a window    that    reflects    the    open-ended structure of  many  stories.  "Une  fenetre,
rouge  poeme.  Une  chambre qui  touche  a
l'infini.... Dans    la   realite,    les   choses
n'ont pas  de  fin."  But  in  regionalist  fic­ tion,  closure   always  competes with  "un  systeme  decentre." MICHAEL GREENSTEIN
 NOT HER STORY

FLORENCE MCNEIL,   The  Over{anders. Thistle- down, $7·95·
AccoRDING  TO MARY  BALF's Kamloops: A History of the District up to 1914, the famous  Overlander Party  of gold seekers bound  for the  Cariboo in  I862  included, besides  220  men,  one   pregnant  woman and  her  three  small  children. They   left Fort  Garry  in June, reached Tete Jaune Cache  at  the  end  of  August,  and   there divided   their   hopes   between the  Fraser and   North   Thompson rivers.  Thirty-six of  them,  including Augustus and  Cath­ erine  Schubert, opted  to drive  I 30 horses and  cattle   down   the  North  Thompson; but  soon  discovering  that  the trail   was almost  non-existent, they  slaughtered the animals,   made   saltless   jerked   beef,  and launched rafts near  the end of September. After  a month of  drownings, portage, re­ building  of rafts, and  near  starvation, the Overlanders   straggled   into    Kamloops. Catherine soon  gave  birth to  a  daughter in the Indian settlement, and  in 1863 the Schuberts  moved   to  Lillooet.  By  I877
Catherine  was   matron   of   the   Cache
Creek  Boarding  School,  and  in  I883  she made her final move  to what  is now Enderby.
No  filmmaker  or  writer could  ignore
the  drama of  the  Overlanders' story,  or overlook  the  particular  fascination of  a pregnant  woman  in  a party   of  daring, sometimes   desperate  men.   But  material alone  does  not  guarantee success.  Tech­ nique  must do that.  Despite the difficulty of  developing   effective  technique, many contemporary  Canadians  have  been  im­ pelled  to write lyric  poetry  based  on his­ torical material. Among  the most success­ ful are Margaret Atwood  and  John  New­ love, whose  poems  about Susanna  Moo­ die, Samuel  Hearne, and others have been good lyrics quite  apart from  their  histori­  cal  interest: condensed in  language; apt in  metaphor and  in form.  Florence Me-

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Neil's  The  Ov.erlanders suffers greatly  by comparison.
The first of a series of complaints to be made  about The  Overlanders is that  it sounds  like prose.
and I hold  my stomach tenderly lurching through
and  hope  the  drenching will  not tell  the  men  what my  thick  skirts have hidden with  success.

The last  three  line breaks here seem arbi­ trary   and   the  diction  ("with  success") excessive. McNeil's line  breaks commonly  do  little   more  than   substitute  for  punc­ tuation,  the  lack  of  which  often  causes either confusion or awkwardness:

The food  is growing scarce
our  expedition announcing its  coming
drives  off game   the  birds  who could  feed  us are  always out  of sight
and ducks that float  on  small  green   ponds become air  or  ripples as we  near
the   children's  whimpering empties out  my
heart
squirrels and   pemmican our  only  food
and an  occasional ox to sacrifice against starvation

Awkwardness results also from  occasional weak rhymes  and  an  overabundance of similes-rather than   the strong  identity of images  conveyed by metaphors. In  ten lines early  in the  book, for example,  Fort Edmonton "gleams like a city in an  Ara­ bian   book"; the  Overlanders wait  "like  withered  hay";   men    are   "like   circus tramps."   Cliches     (wildflowers    stretch  "like   a magic   carpet")   compound  the problem.
Because  The   Ov.erlanders attempts to reproduce the  interior  monologue of  an immigrant Irish  woman-interrupted  by
the  observations of  traders  and  prospec­ tors  encountered  enroute-some of  its stylistic weakness might  be excused on the ground that McNeil represents  Catherine Schubert's level of insight. But this would be  condescending, and  it  would  also  ig­ nore  the  fact  that  good  poetry  has  to be good.  In  any  case,  McNeil  attributes  to

g6
 Schubert  references which  imply  refine­ ment:  Valhalla;  "chaste dark   geishas"  with whom  to compare Indian girls:  curi­  ous  learning  for  a  woman  whose  most urgent  recollections of   Ireland  include  "days  and  nights  when corpses  clogged  / the bare  potato fields." Strange also is the opening comparison  of  the  prairies to  a giant  flat  checkerboard, an  image  surely more appropriate to the  era  of airplanes than  to  r862.
There are  good lines in The Overland­
ers, enough to suggest  that  Florence  Mc­ Neil   could   nave   written  a  strong  lyric poem from her imaginings of the struggles  of a pioneer  woman over  a  century ago, but  not  enough to warrant forty  pages, a
book. This is McNeil's seventh  book. Her
fourth  (Ghost  Towns, 1975), which  ex­
hibits  her  capacity for  wit, condensation,
and  appropriate diction, is probably her best. 	RON MILES

VERSE INTO POETRY

MARILYN  BOWERING,   Giving   Back   Diamonds.
Pom!pic,  $6.gs.
JOHN SMITH, Sucking-stones. Quadrant, $5-95·

BOTH John Smith and  Marilyn Bowering are   competent  verse-writers, yet  one,  in my  view,  has   turned  verse   into   poetry while  the  other, as yet,  has  not.  When  I talk  about competent verse-writing, I mean  matters of  technique-the  ability to write a fluent line, the possession and manipulation  of  a   good   vocabulary,  a sense of structure. When  I talk of turning verse into  poetry, I mean  the inspiring of technique  by   feeling,    the   imagination using  for  its  purposes the  sense  of  pitch and   the   knowledge  of  proportion  that form  the  basic  equipment of  the  poet.  I mean   ultimately, I suppose,  what  is the criterion of  success  in  any  art,   the  crea­ tion of a credible and self-consistent world of the mind.
Such   a  world   Marilyn  Bowering   has

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



created in clear  and  memorable shape. Giving  Back  Diamonds is her  fifth and  in my view her best book of verse. She writes with  a kind  of  absolute pitch, her  use of words spare, accurate, evocative, as in the taut  poems  about sexual  relationships in the title section  of her book, "Giving Back Diamonds."
We  are  a landscape of life  events,
my  memories  are   half-creatures of  floods  and   dryness;
my small  tributary is of no consequence without you.
I imagine us continuing
making a deep channel of sadness.
We  will  leave  our  mark on  the  countryside,
but  when  we  merge with   the  sea will  our   constancy  be  a  virtue, and   being joined,
a form  of deliverance?
I ask  these  questions
as  if  wisdom   takes  sides.
("Life Events")

Marilyn  Bowering's imagery   is as  re­ strained and as transparent as her diction,  yet though density  is not  a quality of her work,  tangibility is. In the section  of her book entitled "The Swan on  the River of Death"  the   recollections   of   places   are rendered with  an  almost  Proustian mem­ orableness, and  so is the painful and  am­ biguous  pleasure of  retuming.

Whatever intervening time  held
has  vanished and  seems  no  more than a night
spent alone in  the  cottage;
returning unchanges, content in  the  lap of  the  valley
but  unable to  remain. This place absorbs life,
hs blotter is river, moor, cliff, brimmed with sun  and  weather, cattle, people: my mother is with  me  and   picks  out  familiar flowers-
yellow  tormentil and  white star- my  father notes   the  ropes  of  flint
in  the  rock.  The wind   makes them  young.
In the  glen  the   rowan berries hang red  as thumbs on  the  pliant branches.
 The river  is full
and  streamers of  waving weeds  lie  back,
smoothing,
tangled  with   cream wool  the  sheep  lose
when  they  drink.
All  who  come  receive   new  names, as  in  fearful, perfect paradise.
("Going Back  to a Former Haunting")

Proceeding through intimate personal en­ counters,   through  the  illuminations  and  darknesses of memory, through myths sar­ donically reconstructed   ("Is  there a choice,  after  all,  / in  the  kind  of beggar the  gods  send?" as  she  ends  a  poem  on Penelope)  one  has  the  sense  not  only of walking  in a fascinating mind  but  also of perceiving   through a  subtle   and   highly tuned  sensibility. The diction is unerring; the  tone  is always appropriate; the  poise is so assured  that  one  longs  for  and  wel­ comes  the  occasional  awkwardness,  the necessary imperfection.
There  is  certainly  an   abundant  and even  clamorous energy  in  the  poems  of John  Smith's Sucking-stones, but the clear shape  and  intention one  finds in Marilyn Bowering's  poems is lacking. Smith  is con­ sciousnessly  workmanlike in  his   crafts­ manship. He  begins  his  volume  with   a well-made sonnet   in  unrhymed  decasyl­ lables,  and   he  leaves  us  in  little doubt of  his ability   to  use  intelligently almost  any poetic  form. It is in the use of words and  images that  his weakness  lies. As first one is swept  along by the dense  tumbling of the words;  then one  becomes  sated  by the  plethora, and  aware of  excesses and  incongruities  that  are   the  result  less  of deliberate artifice than  of a poor  sense of what   goes  on   in  poetry.  Take,  for  ex­ ample,  a stanza like this:
Rich   with   capabilities now,  we think of that  emplaced
where  we have  only  to flick our  minds to
abrogate gravity,
touch 	limitless silent power   to  beneficent circuits,
dissolve  tim ,
exceed  all  measurable velocities, sweep  from channel to  channel

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



through the  spectrum of the  music  of all motions,
and  are  yet  no  closer  than  you  in  the  past
of  desolations,
when  you  were  poor  in  the  face  of  the
sublime
inscrutables of  natural  sense.
("Letter Thirteen" )

Too    many    resounding   abstractions - "abrogate gravity," "beneficent circuits," "measurable velocities," "sublime inscru­ tables,"   etc.,   too   few  clear   and   direct images, and, above  all,  the fatal  tendency to  use  two   complex  words   where   one simple  one  might   do.  The  memory  can grasp  little  of poetry  of this kind,  and  so much  energy  is used  in  the  cerebral act of  inventing conceits   that   there   is little left  for  the  evoking   of  emotions or  the projection of  a  recognizable  poetic  per­ sona.
I remember once  in South  India meet­
ing a surgeon  who was engaged  in reliev­ ing the victims  of elephantiasis by cutting away large pieces of inert tissue from their legs.  Mr.  Smith   should  perhaps  be  the surgeon  of his own  poetry,  cutting away, simplifying,  and  eventually revealing be­ hind  his  current  persona  which  is rather thick  with words  the  thin  man  who may be his true  poetic  self.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


BRITISH WOMEN

susAN  JACKEL, ed.,  A Flannel  Shirt  and  Lib­ erty,  British  Emigrant  Women in  the  Cana­ dian    West,  1880-1914. Univ.   of    British  Columbia Press,  $21.95·

SusAN  JACKEL's BOOK  is one  of the  all­ too-rare  tributes  to  that   vast  and  noble company  of   makers    of   Canada-the housewives,   particularly   the  housewives of the west -for as she says, "The labour  of women  was  recognized  from  the  start  as   essential   to   western  settlement."  Throughout  the  thirty-odd  years  of  the peak period of western  immigration, until

g8
 the  war stopped all immigration, Canada wanted women. The C.P.R. wanted women,   provincial governments wanted women,  bachelors on lonely homesteads wanted women,   harried mothers wanted women.  But the demand was specialized, "women to do  farm   and   household  la­ bour."  Daunting  as   that    may   sound,  women  still came  and  they laboured, cre­ ating homes  out  of  waving grass and  log shacks, supporting their families with  but­  ter and egg money when  times were hard. With  their  help,  the  west grew  and  bur­  geoned.
However, Professor Jackel  is concerned with only one special group of the great company,  that    of   middle-class  women from  Britain. The nineteenth-century population  explosion and   the   resulting
exodus   of  men  seeking  space   and  work
in   far   places   had   the   unhappy   conse­ quene  in   Britain  of   accentuating  the overabundance of  women,  particularly of middle-class  women whose  main   avoca­ tion   had   been  marriage.  Lacking inde­  pendent  means   and   prohibited  by  their class   code   from    taking    the   jobs   that working-class women  could  take,  they faced   a grim   future as  spinsters of   im­ poverished  gentility,  dependent   on   the charity  of  relatives.   For   them,  the  call from  Canada could  be a  godsend.
As Agnes Skrine, one of the ten writers represented in the  book, says, "I like both the  work  and  the  play  here,  the  time out of  doors  and  the  time  for  coming  home. I like the summer and  the  winter,  the monotony and  the  change. Besides, I like a flannel  skirt  and  liberty." That was the lure   and   it  was  genuine,  the  sweeping away  of  barriers, the  social  freedom, the limitless   space,    the   financial   indepen­ dence.
Yet  Agnes Skrine, whose  rather  lyrical article appeared in Blackwood's Magazine in  18g8,  was hardly representative of the women   who  came   and   created   homes. She  had  married the owner  of a prosper-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ous   "ranche"  in   the   Alberta  foothills, where  there was  a  cook  and   household help,   and   they   returned  to   Britain   in I902. Nevertheless, she  was  not  mislead­ ing.  While   she  gloried   in the   Rockies, "high   and   shining, a  rampart  to   the world,"  she  warned that  the life could  be one "of much harder toil than  a common labourer and  his wife would  lead in Eng­ land.... Life  cannot  be  made  easy  for people  without money  anywhere  on  this globe. However difficult it is for a lady to keep  house  without any servants  in Eng­  land,   it  must   be  ten  times  harder  in  a country where  she cannot call  in a char­ woman  to scrub  the  kitchen  floor, or get water  by turning on a tap."
But if Mrs.  Skrine  was not  representa­ tive of those  who  made their lives in  the west,  her  article  is  representative of  the selections   which   Professor   Jackel   chose for  her   book.  Apart  from   replies   to  a C.P.R. publicity questionnaire on the life of  women  in  the  west, and  a very down­ to-earth account  of  that   life  by an  un­ identified Englishman, the excerpts are all from   books  and   articles  by  professional  women writers, only two of  whom seem to have  been  bona  fide  settlers.  They  were visitors, observers, investigative reporters, emissaries  of  colonization societies  or  of the   Department  of  the   Interior, all  of whom  were  conscious  of  the  foreseeable end  to their  western  experience.
Their lack  of involvement may have increased the air of sparseness in the book, which  stems from  what  Susan  Jackel  says is   "a   relative  scarcity    of   documents." Still,  this volume  is thinner than  it  need have been, for although Professor Jackel gives no explanation of the fact, she has limited  her interest to the homesteads and settlements of  the  south, of  the  C.P.R. line,  centring on  Winnipeg, Qu'Appelle, and  Calgary. There is nothing about  the towns  on  the  branch  lines  going  north, about the  Saskatchewan Valley, the C.N.R. towns,   nor  even  about  the  Ed-
 monton  area. Perhaps the most surprising of all  is the  absence  of any  comment or even mention of the Barr colonists who emigrated  in   I903,  and   who   included what  must  have  been  the  largest concen­ trated  group  of   middle-class   English­ women  ever  to  have  arrived  in  Canada. There is another sense of  incompleteness in  that  this  book  is the  book  of exhorta­ tion;  it  needs,  as  Professor  Jackel   notes, its  complement,  the  book  of  experience
-the letters  home,  the diaries,  the  jour­ nals -which, she says, is being prepared by  a  researcher at  Carleton  University. Together, the  two  should  make  a  valu­  able record.
In  the meantime, the  exhortations are in  themselves  revealing. The writers  ap­ pealed  to  their  countrywomen's  patriot­ ism:   "It is  a  great   call  for  women ... giving  their   best  of  mind  and  body  for the   race   and   for   the   Empire."  They  appealed to missionary zeal "to soften  and sweeten  life in the Wild  West."  They ap­  pealed  to compassion-go out  and  save your  brothers -and  of  course   they  ap­ pealed  to romance; marriage was almost inescapable.
Yet,  like  Agnes  Skrine,   though   they were propagandists, they were not dishon­ est. The  desired  freedom could  be bought only  by  hard   work,  the  classless  society meant  "we are  all  working women  here," the  blessed space  could  become  a  prison of loneliness  (bring a musical  instrument if  possible;   bring   return fare).  As  for romance,  "it is still within  the wisdom  of love   to   refuse   to   become    a   married woman on  the  prairie." Two  of the  writ­  ers  conclude  that   the  so-called   "home­ help" -a eupheinism for "hired girl" - was  only  a  household   drudge, and   that educated   women    were   not    fitted    for homestead  life. It was not  their  solution. As  Susan   Jackel   says,  "supply and   de­ mand   were  out  of  joint.... The  gender was right,  but the training was all wrong." In spite of all the hazards, a remarkable


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



number came,  and  the  state  of many  of them is illustrated in the reprint on the jacket, a touchingly  comical scene of maid in  cap  and  apron serving  tea  to her  be­ hatted mistress seated on the prairie, farm buildings  in   the   background;  it   is   the Canadian equivalent of dressing for din­  ner in the  desert, and  a quality that  made  a   notable  impact  on   the   developing country.
MARGARET STOBIE


THEATRE OF ACTION

TOBY GORDON RYAN, Stage Left: Canadian Theatre in  the  Thirties:  A  Memoir. CTR Publications, n.p.

UNTIL  RECENTLY   Canadians  have   be­ lieved   not   only   that   a   native   theatre didn't flourish  here  until  the  late  196o's, but  also that  there  was little or  no Cana­ dian   theatre worthy   of  the  name   until that   time.  As late  as  1977  Brian  Parker could  call  an  important  analysis  of plays by  three  Canadian  playwrights "Is  there a  Canadian  Drama?" and   the  question  seemed  to make sense. But things  are rap­  idly  changing. Since  1974  (and  the  Uni­ versity of Toronto Conference "Canadian Theatre Before  the  Sixties"),  there   has been  a growing  critical interest  in  Cana­ dian  drama, particularly in the history  of Canadian   drama -and   regardless  of what   we   mean   by   "Canadian  drama" (whether  we  are   "localists,"  "regional­ ists,"   "nationalists,"  or   "international­ ists") , the   dramatic  archeology   of   the past  few  years  has  gone  a  long  way  to­ ward  qualifying the  idea  that,   prior   to the 196o's, Canada was a dramatic waste­ land.  That a native  theatre has been slow in developing and  beset by a wide variety of problems is true. It is also true  that  the
196o's  and   197o's  witnessed  an  exciting
upsurge in  the writing and  production of Canadian plays. But  things  were  happen­ ing  in  the  Canadian  theatre  during the

100
 192o's,  3o's,  and   4o's,  and   the  story  of these years is an exciting one.
One  of  the  most  recent   efforts  to  tell this story is Toby  Gordon Ryan's  memoir, Stage  Left:  Canadian Theatre in  the Thirties. Ryan's Memoir of the years from
1929  to  1940 deals  with  the organization of  Workers' Theatres  in  Toronto,  Van­ couver,  Winnipeg, and  Montreal,  and  it explores  the   various  elements   of   these amateur groups which,   together,  consti­  tutes a truly alternative, agit-prop theatre. Stage  Left  is, in fact,  less Ryan's personal memoir than  a collective recreation of the personalities, social issues, and  theatre ac­ tivity   of   the    time.   Interspersed   with Ryan's own  remarks are  the  recollections of  many  people  who  were  active   in  the Workers' Theatres -people such as Har­ old  Griffin  (a founding member of the Vancouver Progressive Arts Club whore­ ported   on   the   PAC   Players'   successful production of Waiting for Lefty in 1935), Joe   Zuken    of   the   Winnipeg   Workers' Theatre  (recalling the defeat  of a govern­ ment   ban  on  Eight   Men  Speak), Rose Kashtan of Montreal's New Theatre (re­ calling   performances  of  Bury  the   Dead and  We  Beg to  Differ  as well as harrass­ ment   from  Duplessis's  watchdogs), and  Wayne  and Shuster, who as students were active   in   Toronto's Theatre  of  Action.  The driving force  behind  all these groups  was  the  belief in a social  theatre directly involved  with  current affairs  and  the  so­ cial   inequities  of  the   period.  Although Irving  Myers   is speaking of   Montreal's New Theatre Group, his remarks are  rep­  resentative of  the  "stage  left"  movement as a whole: "It was inept  in many  places, it  was gauche,  it  was young,  it  was awk­ ward  sometimes. But  it  had   a  dynamic and   it   had   a  goal   that   was  absolutely right. The things  we were fighting against absolutely had  to be fought."
Because she was instrumental in the formation of the Toronto Workers' Thea­ tre  in   1932,  and   its  continuation  in  a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



more  permanent group called  Theatre of Action  (formed in 1935), Ryan  devotes several chapters of her book to the history of Toronto social  theatre. And  many  as­ pects of this history  are fascinating. While studying theatre at  Artef  (Workers' The­ atrical Alliance) in New York,  Ryan  saw the    German   agit-prop   group,   Prolet­ Biihne.   She   was  so  impressed   by  their structure and  techniques that   when  she returned to Toronto in 1932 she and  Jim Watts  modelled   their   Workers' Theatre upon  the German troupe.
Workers' Theatre was  an  informal  or­
ganization in which  all the members par­ ticipated in as many  ways as possible and in  this,  as  in  other ways,  it  foreshadows the    contemporary Theatre    Passe-Mu­ raille.  The later  Theatre of  Action,  how­ ever, had  a director  (imported from  New York) , a  regular  core  of members  and  a summer school.  Its  productions of  plays such  as  Waiting   for Lefty   ( 1936), Bury the Dead  ( 1936), and  the  powerful  Steel
( 1938)   were  staged   at   Hart  House   or Margaret Eaton Hall,  but  the troupe also toured southern Ontario towns  in an  ef­ fort  to bring  social  theatre to  the  people. For   example,  despite   the   strong   union propaganda, Steel  was  well  received  by local audiences and  reviewers who praised the  power  of the  play  and  the clever  ex­ pressionist  sets  of  a  massive  steel  plant. Theatre  of  Action  won  at   the  Central Ontario  Regional   finals   in   1938  with Steel and  took  the  play  to the  Dominion Drama  Festival  finals  in  Winnipeg that  year.  Although  they  did  not  win  in  the finals,  their  work  was  praised, as  Bury the  Dead   had   been  in  the   1937  finals (when  John Coulter's The  House in the Quiet   Glen   received    the   Bessborough trophy). But Ryan  remembers feeling ostracized   by  the  regular Festival  crowd and   it  is  not  surprising, as  Ryan   points out,  that   Betty  Lee  all  but   ignored   the Workers' Theatres  in  her  history  of  the DDF, Love and Whiskey.
 Ryan's  method for  putting Stage  Left together  is appropriate, in  that  the  book (like  the  theatre it chronicles)  is a  joint­ effort  by many  socially  active  and  aware  Canadians.  But   this   collage   approach makes for a fragmented text  which  is not always easy to follow.  What  is gained  by the  sense of immediacy and  the  enthusi­ asm of personal voices remembering is at times  undercut by  the  lack  of  organiza­ tion. Although there is a wealth of infor­  mation   here,   and   although  the  several very fine and  useful  photographs of per­  sonalities and stage sets are supplemented by  Appendices with  press comments and  a  list  of  major  productions, there  is  no index.  Given  the  book's  structure and content, an  index   would   have   been  in­ valuable.
However, I want  to conclude on a posi­ tive note because  Stage Left  is a fascinat­ ing record  of the  Canadian  theatre past. In  addition to recreating the activity  of a unique   theatre of  the  time,  Ryan  sheds light  upon  the  problems facing  the devel­ opment  of  a  Canadian  theatre  in   the
193o's. The plays  performed by Theatre of Action  were  American plays and  their directors  were American because, as Ryan explains,  there  were  very  few  Canadian plays  around, especially  socially  relevant ones, and there were no schools to train Canadian actors  and  directors. When  Syd Banks,  a long-time Canadian  member of the Toronto group,  did  take over in 1939, Theatre of Action  was  reaching the  end of  its  short   but   vibrant  life  because   a new world  war  drew  energies  and  talents in  other   directions.  Nevertheless,  in  its group  structure, social  ideals,  summer schools, and  devotion to  Canadian  thea­ tre,  Toronto's Theatre  of  Action  was  a forerunner of  the  alternative  theatres of today.  If it  did  not  produce a  Canadian repertoire in  five short  years,  it  did  pro­ vide   the   place   for   talented   Canadians (among  them    Lome   Green   and   Lou Jacobi)  to  practice their  art.  It  was,  m

IOI

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Toby   Ryan's   words,  a  unique   and  im­ portant  theatre,  "a   dissenting   voice,  a true  alternative theatre," and  its story is one "that needs  to be heard"  today.

SHERRILL GRACE

IN DEBATE

IRVING LAYTON,  Taking Sides: The  Collected Social  and  Political  Writings, ed. and  intro. by Howard Aster. Mosaic  Press/Valley  Edi­ tions, $ro.oo; pa. $4-95·
Taking   Sides  is  both  annoying  and  em­ barrassing. It is annoying because  of  the careless  way in  which  it  has  been  edited  (of which  mme  later) ; it is embarrassing because  Layton too  often-on  the  evi­ dence   of  the  writings here  reprinted­ wants  to be at  once  the farsighted politi­  cal  commentator or  student of  political theory,   and   the  irresponsible  wearer   of motley,  the garlanded innocent, of whom everything  can   be   forgiven.   There  is every  reason,  of  course,  for  poets  to  be political   theorists and   even  political  ac­ tivists. There is room in politics-indeed there  is a crying  need -for  the  joy, the anger,   and   the  life-affirming  zeal   that Layton   brings  to  every  subject  he  writes on. The poet, at least a poet-prophet such as  Layton,  is  more  likely than   the  com­ pany  director  or  university   professor   to speak fo::- humane values against  the con­ spiracy  of rival  imperialisms which  daily threatens  our    lives   with    annihilation. When  he enters  the  political  arena, how­ ever,  he  must  expect   the  same  rules  of debate to  apply   to  the  poet  as  to other  men   and   women,   and   if   anything,  the poet's    standard  of   conduct   should   be higher  than the politician's. Certainly self­ contradiction, outrageousness, and  verbal abuse  of  one's  opponents cany penalties no  less severe  for  the  poet  than  for  the merest  political hack.
These  observations  sound,   and   are, prissy,  in  an  age  when  "public debate"

102
 consists  mainly  of  television  appearances lasting   anything  from   twenty   to   thirty seconds,   but  Taking Sides  is  calculated sooner  or later  to outrage  everyone's sense of  what   makes  for  a  fair  fight.  It must also be admitted that  in this age the con­ volutions of  history  can  make  a  fool  of the   most   well-intentioned and   circum­ spect  political analyst.  Still,  in  this  post­ Vietnam, post-Watergate era it is disturb­ ing to find  that  in  I965, during the John­ son  administration,  Layton  wrote   this:  "For all  her  mistakes  in   judgment and deed,  I know of no other country that  has so  persistently  sought   to  ethicize   power as  the  United States" (p.  IOI). To  ethi­ cize power?  With  all  that  was coming  to light,  even  then,  about the  activities   of various  U.S.   agencies   in   Asia,  Africa, Latin America, and  the  U.S.A.  itself?  Or this,  also  in  1965:  "[America's] leaders have  again and  again told  the  American people   they  must  resist  the  ever-present temptation to  equate dissent  from   their policies with disloyalty.  When  I read  over the  account of  the  huge   peace   rally  in Washington or of the peace  marches, I'm left wondering what  sort of weed must  be smoked   to  produce  a   judgment  as  ill­ balanced as that" ( p.I 04) . Certain sub­ sequent events,  such  as  the  shootings  at Kent State in  1970,  might  lead  one   to expect  some sort  of  retraction, some  rec­ ognition  from  Layton   that   he  had   not understood  American politics  as  well  as he  thought  he  had,  but  Layton does  not apologize,  still  less  retract.  History   has also cruelly  called  into  question much  of what Layton wrote in his despatches from Tel  Aviv  in   I968.  In   the  era   of  Begin and Sharon anyone who shares  the agony of   Israel can  surely  only  weep  at  this: "Jews  are  too individualistic, too fond  of irony  and   mockery,  and   too  humane  to fawn   on  military  leaders.   The strut of de   Gaulle  would   provide  only   endless laughter to a nation which  was  the  first to  attempt  to   teach   other  nations  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



hollowness  of  military power  and  glory"
(p.  I37) ·
Perhaps it's unfair to continue pointing
out  the  more  obvious  lessons of  history, however.  Perhaps political  commentary is not  a  field  in  which   one  should   expect constant apologies,  adjustments, and  re­ tractions. The  reader should   not  ask  "is this   position    tenable  in   light   of   facts which  are  accessible  to  us now  but  may not have been accessible then?" but rather "however partial this person's  view of the facts  may  be,  do  his  or  her  statements clarify  the  point at  issue?  do they  make a  constructive contribution   to  debate?" Layton   very  rarely   meets  these  require­ ments  either. Consider  the  following  two passages-both from  I967, if the editor's dateg are  to be  trusted:

the   western  democracies  are   under  attack by  the  Soviet Union  and   its  satellites who are  bent to destroy them  by subversion or by starting brush fires in  their vicinity. Russia's championship  of  the   most   reactionary  ele­ ments  in  the  Arab world against  democracic [sic]   and   progressive Israel  shows   up   her humanistic pretensions for  what they  are­ Soviet  propagandistic clap-trap.... Will  the
,western  democracies finally get  the  message?
... Sharing a  moral, political and   religious tradition with   Israel, they   are   menaced  by the  Soviet Union which with   the  assistance of  its  dupes and   stooges  is  striving with  all ts
minds    and    to   enslave  the    human   spirit where it cannot extinguish it.     (pp. 131-32)

Communism  today  is   not    the   monolithic thing that it  was,  or  that it  appeared to  be, several years  ago.... There's a  point where you  have  to  use  your   head and   realize  that Russian  sec:1rity   depends, or   the   Russians think   that   their   security  depends,  upon having a strategic area allotted to itself ... _ what has  happened is  that the  two  powers, the   United  States  and    the   Soviet   Union, are  slowly  working  toward  some  accommo­ dation,  toward  some   kind   of   adjustment. And   all   this   I  find   very   hopeful. ... The present   leadership  of  the  Soviet  Union  is much  closer    to   the   bureaucrats  and    the engineers  that  we  know in  our  own  society.
 ... They  are   not   ideologues  in  the   sense that Lenin and   Stalin were  ideologues.
(pp.  191-93)

It may  be said  that  these  quotations are taken out of context, and so of course they are. But nowhere is there  any explanation of how two such  completely opposed  po­ sitions   might   be   reconciled    with   each other.
The editor of Taking  Sides seems  un­ easily  aware  of  such  contradictions,  and  tries to camouflage them  with appeals to
"tensions," to "layers  of human meaning"
and  "the dialectic of  reality." "Reality" here,  however,  seems to mean  the limita­ tions imposed  upon  us by mortal and  ma­ terial  existence,  for  Aster adds  that  there  are  two  ways  to  "conquor"  [sic] reality
-love and imagination-and continues, as  if  by way  of  explanation,  "Politics  is the manner in which  men and  women  try to seduce reality,  to become its master through power." The limitations of  mor­ tal  existence  apply   equally   to  everyone,
however,  and  a  universal  condition  can­
not be invoked  to excuse inconsistency, or disregard for the etiquette of debate.
After  this  rather  unsatisfactory  intro-­ duction, the  editor decides  to let  Layton speak  for  himself,  and   follows,  Layton's own   principle of  never  explaining  and  never  apologizing, which  leads   to  some irritating problems   with  the  text  which  a  careful   editor  would  have  dealt  with.  On  p.I 89, for example, Layton  refers  to "this   poem," and   later   to  "my   recent poem."   Neither  poem   is  identified. On  p. 177, Layton answers what  is evidently a question  from  an interviewer by saying "I really  don't  know,"  but  the  question itself  is  not   printed.  Typographical  er­  rors abound.  A letter  reprinted from  the Globe  and  Mail  and   dated   "April  I3,
I 97 I" refers  to a letter  that  appeared in that   newspaper on  April   I9,  I97I. The
German  chancellor,  Dr.   Kiesinger,  be­
comes  "Kissinger" on  p. I 23 and  "Kei­
singer"  on  p. I 94;  to add   to  the  confu-


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sion,  the  Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands is sometimes referred   to as the NPD  and  sometimes  as the NDP  (pp.
124-25, 194-95). Allen  Ginsberg  becomes "Alan" (p. 55), the Deity becomes  the "Diety" (p. 171), and  so on. Graduate students wanting to write  theses on  Lay­ ton's political  views would be best advised to  ignore Aster  and   go  to  the  original  sources. For students and academics gen­ erally,  an  accurate  bibliography of  Lay­ ton's  writings  would have  been  far  more useful. Other readers will find here a few valuable  comments on  the  flowering  of Canadian poetry in the 194o's and  195o's, and  an  imperfect but  provocative record of  Layton's considerable achievement as the   nemesis   of  Canadian   complacency and   puritanism.  For   the  rest,  the  time would  be much  better spent  reading  For My  Brother Jesus or  Nail Polish or The Bull Calf.
ANTHONY JOHN HARDING


THE SCRATCH, NOT THE ITCH

GEORGE    BOWERING,    A    Way    With   Words.
Oberon,   $19.95;  pa.  $9-95·
GEORGE  BOWERING,    West   Window: The   Se­ lected  Poetry  of George  Bowering.  General  Publishing,  n.p.

THE ALMOST SIMULTANEOUS  publication of two books by George  Bowering -one a selection  of his critical articles  and  the other a  selection  of  his  poems-affords an opportunity to test his theories  against his  practice. His  essays are  indicators of his  taste,  what   alerts   his  interests,   and indirectly, his  theory   of  poetry; so  one book  can  serve  as  a  gloss on  the  other. His allusions  to Keats  and  Shelley  in the first few essays, for example, attest  to his roots  in  Romanticism, and  his  dabbling references  to Barthes, semiotics, and post­ structuralism in  the  final  essays  demon-
 strate his alignment with some of the vari­ ous  theoretical positions  which  come  un­  der  the  heading of  post-modernism. His choice   of   poets   for   critical  scrutiny   is identical to  those  he  writes  about in  his poetry   collection   (Atwood, Avison,  Da­  vey, Jones, Kearns, McFadden, Newlove, Wah), and  it  is fair   (not  exactly  illumi­  nating)  to compare the  tone  of the  essay to  that  of  the  poem  "on" the  same  poet. There are, in fact,  a number of points  of intersection  between   the  two  books.  His comments on the "self" as process, his re­ jection  of   notions  of  centricity, his  puz­ zling assessments  of versification and  mu­  sic,  to cite  only  a few  examples, all  help  to  locate  the context within which  to appreciate (even  understand) the poems. It is handy, then,  to have  the  poems and essays  collected   together as  they  are   in these  two volumes.
What of the books examined singly? In A Way  With Words  Bowering resembles a  tour  guide  taking   us  through a  green­ house  of  his  favourite  exotic,  albeit   in­ digenous plants. He  points  out a particu­ larly  colourful marking on  a leaf  here,  a cluster  of  blossoms  there,  the  shape  of a flower  over  there. He  mentions root  sys­ tems  in  passing,  lingers  over  an  unusual
hybrid  for  a  minute and  then  hurries us
on,  filling  in  the  time  between  observa­ tions   and    impressions with   anecdotes about how  one  plant nearly died  or how he  cross-fertilized another. His  commen­ tary   is  associative,  selective,   benevolent and,    when    necessary,    sprinkled   with enough  jargon to remind us that  he is an expert.  All in  all,  the  tour  is informative and  we  nod  our  assent  at how  agreeable our  guide  is. Even  the  odd  petulant  re­ mark  only piques our  interest; these kinds of tour guides are supposed  to be a little eccentric anyway.
The specialist  in the  field might be less enchanted with  the  tour  these essays pro­ vide for a number of reasons. They badly need  a scrupulous editor. The  essays are

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



undated, for example, even  though some are  at  least  ten  years old. Does  Bowering still  believe   that   Davey's "Weeds  is  as good  a  book  as  any  that   has  ever  been composed   by  a  Vancouver  poet   [and] one  of the  most  brave  and  beautiful and important  books  of  our   time," or  does that  judgment come out  of a specific his­ torical    context?  The   essays   are   also badly documented so that  when Bowering  writes,  "All   images   are  symbols-Frye says that," there  is no reference given that  would  enable the  reader to verify  the ac­ curacy  of that statement. The book cries out  for  an  editor to  get  rid  of  all  those unnecessary   hyphens,    spelling  mistakes, vague   terms  such   as   "actualities" and "epipsyche," and   to  clean   up  all   those strange  sentences such   as:   "The  poem that  refuses  to keep  its distance in  terms of  space   does  so  in  terms   of  time   too, then,  now." Too  often  Bowering seems to be an  apologist for the Tish  poets in both the  positive  and   negative senses  of  that term.  His criticism is often  far  more elab­ orate   than   the  poems  seem  to  warrant, and  at  times one senses that  he is reshap­ ing  the  poetry   to  suit  his  own  predilec­ tions.
Having said  all  of  that   (mostly  out  of duty), it should  be emphasized that Bow­ ering's  impressionistic approach  to  these poets  is  very  helpful,  because  he  has  a special  talent for  picking  up nuances, ca­ dences   and   subtleties  of   form   that   are often  difficult  to articulate. His essays on Avison, Jones, Kearns, and  Davey are  the kind  that teach us how to read  these poets and  nothing could   be  better  than   that.  His  anecdotes give  readers something of the  flavour   of  a  poet's   personality as  it relates  to his writing, so they are a bonus: "[Fred Wah] does  not  write  fiction  be­ cause  his aesthetic is not  geared   to con­ struction. (Once, trying  to build  a cabin,  he   put   the   hammer  through  his  front  teeth.)"
West  Window is  a  collection of  pre-
 viously published books. Curious  (I 973) is a collection  of poems  which  record Bowering's responses to his meetings with forty-eight poets.  The poems  are  prosaic in   rhythm,  often   polemical  and   man­ nered, but never flat or dull. At War With  The  U.S.  ( I974)  does not seem  to stand  up  very well  and   parts  of  it  are  boring,  while  Allophanes  ( I976)  is beginning to look   better    and    better.    Uncle   Louis (I 980)  is a lighter series of  poems  about  the Louis St. Laurent era and  it carries  a running commentary  which  is even  fun­  nier   than    the   poem;  the   mischievous  interplay  of   the   two  is  the   real   poem which  turns  out   to  be  about Canadian poetry.   The  final   section   entitled  "Be­ tween  the  Sheets" is a  collection of five shorter pieces  (another one mentioned in the  acknowledgements is  missing  in  my copy)   which   seem  to  be  left  over  and dangling at  the  end  of this  book.
In   her   preface, Sheila   Watson   notes that   the  poems  fit  together as  explora­ tions of the meanings of the Greek  word polis, and  in  the  sense  that  Bowering  is studying notions  of  community that  is a fair   3tatement.   His   explicitly  political  stanzas,   however,   are   really   shouts   of moral indignation dressed  up  as political assessments,  but  he  characterizes  himself as an idealist-anarchist so his tendency  to posture  can  be expected and  possibly for­ given  as  poetic  licence.  Taken  together, the poems are samples  of  Bowering's post­ lyrical  phase.  They  are  often  experimen­ tal and  they  hold  all  the  promise  of suc­ cess, and  danger of  failure, that  any  ex­ periment holds. There are  sudden flashes of  insight   and   wit  when   the   language works  for  him  and  long  flat  areas  when he  plays  around  to  see  if  he  can  do  it again.  The  reader must   engage   in   the whole  process.  Sometimes  (too  often?) , the language only half-succeeds when, for example,   a   pun   seems   to   be  too  con­ trived    ( "thru  the   flowing   world   /   of Hera's clitoris" or  "the egg-ziled  gods").


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The line lengths,  rhythms,  spaces and notation also  seem  to  be  struggling for form  most  of  the  time  and  these  things, too,  can  try  a  reader's patience,  but  the rewards   can    be   considerable  for   the reader  who "takes  his time." If to display "mind in  process,"  "language in action," "poetry creating itself"  is the  purpose  of writing,  as Bowering  indicates it  is, then the collaborating reader  will find many delightful passages in this volume. The energy  and   playfulness in  many  sections are  in  themselves enough   to recommend the  poems.  If, on  the  other   hand,  you sympathize with that  little poem about process versus product which  McLuhan used  to quote (it  ends: "So  that  is  reck­
oned    wisdom    which    J   Describes    the
scratch but  not  the itch"), then  you tum
these pages at your  own risk.

JOHN ORANGE


ALL THAT JAZZ

MARK MILLER, Jazz in Canada: Fourteen Lives.
Univ.  of Toronto Press, $18.g5.

THE  FIRST QUESTION  which  occurred  to me when  I was asked  to review this book for  this  periodical  was:   what   does  jazz have   to   do   with   Canadian   literature? Only  a few  direct  connections  come  to mind.  At  least  three  Canadian  novelists
-Malcolm   Lowry,   Michael   Ondaatje, and  Josef  Skvorecky -have woven  their jazz  interests into   fiction.  Miller's  book
has nothing to say about the links between jazz and  other art  forms, but  the fleeting connection with  these  three  novelists  re­ lates  to  a significant point  which  Miller makes  about the  relevance of jazz  to Ca­  nadian  culture in  general.   Jazz,  Miller notes,  is  "one   element of  an  otherwise pervasive   American culture   that  Cana­ dians have accepted with uncharacteristic reluctance." Lowry, Ondaatje, and Skvor­  ecky  were   all   born  and   raised   outside

106
 Canada. Can  it be that  only Canadian writers with non-North American cultural backgrounds  have   the   cosmopolitanism, or  the  detachment, or  the  simple  curios­ ity, evidently lacking  in many native-born Canadians,  to   cultivate  an   interest  in jazz?  For  as  Miller's book  demonstrates, and   as  most   Canadian   jazz  fans  know, there  are  few  cultural  phenomena more  liable  to the  neglect  or contempt of even the  most culturally sophisticated segment  of  this   country's  population  than    jazz. When Canadians listen  to or  write  about jazz, furthermore,  their  attention is most likely  to  be  directed towards music  pro­  duced  in  the  United States.  Miller  deals with  the  much  more  recondite subject of jazz  produced in  Canada by  Canadian­ born musicians.
Canadian  historiography and   biogra­ phy  have  gravitated in  recent  years  to­ wards  narratives of  unknown,  forgotten, or    grossly    misrepresented    personages,  whose stories  have  often  yielded  new in­  sights  into  that  elusive  concept, the  Ca­ nadian identity. As a  biographical study of fourteen unjustly  neglected and  often  misunderstood  Canadian artists,   Jazz in Canada belongs in the  same  literary con­ text   as   Thomas   Flanagan's   revisionist biography of Riel,  or  Charles Taylor's brilliant  biographical  analysis   of   Cana­ dian  imperialism, Six  Journeys:  A Cana­ dian Pattern. As biography, Jazz in Can­  ada is a promising book. "The history  of jazz  in  Canada," Miller  declares   in  his preface, "is not  the history of a music, but of musicians"; "jazz  musicians are  inter­ esting characters, and their lives colourful, often  darkly  so." The glimpses  provided in  the subsequent narratives of frustrated ambitions,    compromises   with    popular taste, frenetic life styles, drug  and  alcohol addiction, and  above  all,  unrelenting de­ votion   to  music,   bear   out   the  author's introductory statements.
Yet for all its potential interest, Jazz in
Canada-as biography, at least-is also

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



a  rather disappointing book.  The  images of psychological conflict  and  zealous com­ mitment promised  in Miller's Preface  and  Introduction are   not  developed  beyond superficial impressions. A recurrent theme in these fourteen mini-biographies is trag­  edy, as the various protagonists move  to­ ward  personal crises,  professional failure, artistic  frustration,  and   in  at  least  five cases,  untimely  death.   But   Miller   has made   very  Ettie  attempt to  develop  the thematic unity  of his material, beyond his introductory  suggestions and   occasional allusions  or  conjectures.  Relentlessly cau­ tious  in  his  treatment of  their  personal  lives, unfailingly adulatory in his analyses of their  music,  Miller sidesteps or  under­ plays the deeper psychological, moral, and cultural  questions which   the  lives of  his subjects  raise.   Why   was   pianist    Chris Gage,  once  hailed  as the artistic equal  of Oscar Peterson, evidently self-condemned to  a   life  of  professional   obscurity   and eventually to suicide? What complex com­ bination of  psychological and  social  fac­ tors has led pianist  Wray  Downes  to walk away repeatedly from  his professional  and private circumstances and   make  a  series of fresh starts? What, if anything, has the zany   behaviour  of   Montreal   drummer Guy  Nadon  to do  with  his self-awareness as  a  French-Canadian  committed to  an art   form   overwhelmingly dominated  by Anglophone  North   Americans?  What drove    the   brilliant  young    saxophonist Brian Park  to drug addiction and an early death? And  finally, comprehensively, why are  all  the  musicians dealt   with  in  the book-including cornettist Trump  Da­
vidson, saxophonists Paul  and  P. J. Perry,
trumpeter  Herbie Spanier,  drummer
Larry Dubin, guitarist Nelson Symonds, drummer  Guy   Nadon,  guitarist  Sonny
Greenwich,  saxophonist Brian   Barley - so little-known and  appreciated either  in Canada or in international jazz circles, especially  if  they  are   as  good  as  Miller claims  they  are?
 Jazz in Canada  raises many  such ques­ tions,  but   offers   few  answers.   Instead, Mark    Miller    has   taken   a   reportorial, documentary approach,  reproducing many  pages  of  excerpts  from   the  inter­ views  which   he  has  accumulated  with commendable  energy  over   the  last   ten years.  In  an  art form  where  the  practi­ tioners are not widely given to the writing  of autobiography or memoirs,  oral histor­  ies obviously have a very important place, as  the  American  jazz critic  Nat  Hentoff  demonstrated some years ago with his col­ lection of  transcriptions of interviews  and monologues    featuring  older   jazz   musi­ cians, Hear Me Talkin' To  Ya. The trou­ ble is that   many   jazz  musicians  are  not given  to  verbal   eloquence,  let  alone   to profound self-analysis or historical  insight.  The  result,  in  Jazz in Canada, is a series of   often  repetitive, often  cryptic,  often frustratingly  guarded  soliloquies   which fail  to shed  much   light  on  the  allegedly dark  lives Miller attributes to the speak­ ers.
But  Jazz in Canada is a valuable book,
because  it  deals  knowledgeably, if rather selectively, with a subject which has been almost  completely neglected. In  Canada, where thanks to our continuing reluctance to  acknowledge  native   talent   or  genius, such a historical record  as this assumes particular importance. I  highly  recom­ mend  this book, in spite of its limitations, to anyone  interested not  only in  the sub­ ject of  jazz, but  in  the subject  of Cana­ dian  culture, which  I  assume includes  all of  us. But  I can't  help  wishing  for  the more  comprehensive   history   of  jazz  in Canada which  Mark Miller  is obviously qualified   to  write.  And   alternatively,  I can't help wishing  for the bolder, more adventurous, more controversial  bio­ graphical  study   that    Jazz  in  Canada: Fourteen Lives might have been.

JAMES DOYLE


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LA LANGUE POETIQUE

GILBERT  LANGEVIN,  Issue  de  secours. L'Hexa­
gone, n.p.
HUBERT  WALLOT,  lntermedes, poisie  et  prose.
Editions  N-unaan,  n.p.
MICHEL  DALLAIRE,  Regards  dans  l'eau.  "Prise de  parole," Les  Perce-neige,  n.p.

PARMI LES POETES de l'Hexagone, Gilbert Langevin a toujonrs un peu fait figure de marginal. Depuis A Gueule  de  jour, son premier recueil  publie  en 1959, le ton revendicateur, les appels a !'insurrection, l'ironie violente de sa  poesie faisaient de lui  un  "paria solitudinaire," image  qu'il cultivait avec  une  certaine complaisance. Langevin n'a  jamais  cherche a ecrire  de beaux  poemes  propres, bien faits, fluides. Pour  lui, l'ecriture est  fulgurance et rage de vivre.
Issue  de  sewurs    ( I98I)   marque  un changement de ton dans son oeuvre. L'atmosphere y est, du moins dans la premiere partie, sourde et feutree. Il sem­ ble que ce volume,  tellement moins agres­ sif   que   les   autres,  marque   une   crise d'angoisse devant  un  tournant  de  la  vie. On  est  cependant loin  d'une  poesie sub­ jective,   tournee toute  entiere  vers  l'in­
terieur. Langevin a  garde  son  gout  pour l'image  qui  objective et depersonnalise I'emotion:

geophase  ascension spheres  conciliees coherence aureolaire autour des larrnes.

Ce  recueil  est  remarquable par  !'impor­ tance   des   rapports  entre   les   differents poemes,  groupes par  deux,  trois ou qua­ tre,  qui se repondent, s'opposent ou s'en­  trecroisent, qui partagent tous, suivant le groupe, une  meme   forme   poetique, un meme   rythme,   des  images   qui  se  font  echo. Chaque "faisceau" de poemes a son titre et son  dessin a la plume,  de la main  du  poete.
Ces dessins non-figuratifs ne constituent

I08
 pas un des moindres attraits de ce recueil: insects   enigmatiques,  en  suspens   sur  la page,  ils stimulent, par  leurs  lignes  ina­ chevees,  les  reves  du  lecteur  comme   le font  les  vers  fluides  et  non-ponctues des premiers poemes.  Le  ton change dans  la deuxieme partie  pour  se  faire  plus  har­ gneux  et revendicatif, echos du  Langevin que  nous connaissons.

II  y  aura  de  Ia  tempete
Ces heredes je vous le predis
grilleront.

Il manque souvent une  pointe  d'humour ou  la  distance de  l'ironie a  ces  impreca­ tions solennelles:

Ecrans  tentaculaires on  crachera bientot
sur vos faces totalitaires.

Mais on  se laisse souvent emporter par  le souffle de  ces  vers  ou  Langevin veussit a
faire  passer  sa colere  avec  les armes  d'un poete   autherrtique  qui   sait   trouver  les mots   qui   siffient  ou   qui   crachent,   les phrases  et les images  qui  eclatent avec  la fulgurance d'un coup  de  revolver.
,Pour Hubert Wallot,  la poesie n'est  pas avant tout  une arme  mais une aventure fascinante de la psyche  humaine, une des activites les plus riches de ce que Merleau­ Ponty   appelait  la   pensee   concrete.  Le dernier  recueil    de   Wallot   reurrit    des poemes  et  des essais qui  refletent l'interet de !'auteur pour !'exploration du  moi  et du  monde a  travers la  poesie.  Ainsi,  les essais,  reeditions de  diverses  compte-ren­ dus  deja  parus dans  des  journaux, abor­ dent   l'art, la  poesie  et  le cinema   par  le biais de leur  fonction ou  de leur  contenu psychologique.
Psychiatre de  son  etat,  Hubert Wallot est fascine par  l'oeuvre de Nelligan ou  il recherche  les  rapports  complexes entre
aventure poetique et psychopathologic. Suivant Wallot, la folie chez Nelligan appara.lt a la fois comme  un choix et  une fatalite.  A  travers  l'oeuvre,  la  maladie cesse d'etre un  fait  absurde pour  devenir

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



une  possibilite  generale de !'existence hu­ maine  quand elle affronte un de ses para­ doxes;    le   point-de-vue   du    psychiihre  transpara.lt aussi  dans  les  compte-rendus de  theatre qui  recherchent les  elements "expressifs" et  therapeutiques de  chaque spectacle. Les courtes chroniques (parues precedemment  elles  aussi  dans  des  jour­ naux)   portent  certains diagnostics sur les troubles  de  la  sante morale de  l'epoque actuelle, par  exemple, la mode retro  "re­
flete  une  population vieillissante  de  plus en plus importante qui  commence a faire
porter !e  poids  de  sa  moindre creativite sur  une  jeunesse  bloquee."
Les  premiers  poemes   du   recueil - "Reve suisse,"  "Arpege," "Je  suis  toi"­ sont  des  poemes  d'amour  agreablement romantiques et sentimentaux:

0 mourons ensemble
demain si tu  veux
Que sont   devenus les  temps
ou  s'egrenaient les  guitares antiques ...

avec des echos du poete admire, Emile Nelligan: "II vente  de  tes  bleus  regards comme   neige   de   lilas."   Les  images   de fleurs et de musique y abondent ainsi que
celle  de  la  poesie  qu'on offre  a l'aimee
comme   un  bouquet. On  ne  peut  cepen­
dant accuser  Wallot de mievrerie, certains poemes  derangent  profondement le  Ian­ gage  quotidien ou  les  poncifs  poetiques par  l'originalite d'images  surprenantes

Les etoiles en  frissons de  fleurs
C!ignotent, papillotent, !'obsession de  tes yeux
radieux ciel  siamois qui  azurent mon delire.
Bien  que  ces poemes  aient  ete  ecrits  a des dates  aussi espacees  queI 959 et I 976, ils manifestent une etonnante unite de ton et   de    coherence   langagiere.   Certains
poemes de circonstance dedies  a des amis,
"Ma.ltre Pierre qu'il  fait  bon  chez  vous"
par  exemple, ne  meritent pas  la  conse­
cration de l'imprime. La derniere serie de poemes,  dediee   a Gilbert  Langevin  (les
 dedicaces ont une grande place dans ce recueil)   qui  s'intitule Scenes  de  quartier
est consacree  a des sujets  ayant une  cer­
taine  portee  sociale: descriptions de mar­
ginaux    "Le    dormeur,"  "Le   veilleur,"
satires de l'epoque actuelle "T.V. dinner," nationalisme   quebecois   "L'avion   fran­ tais,"   "Colonises  volontaires."   On   re­ grette  le patriotisme un  peu  facile  de ces derniers,  notamment de celui qui s'adresse  aux  gens  de  l'air   et  qui  se  termine par cette  pieuse invocation "Puisse  un  jour la voix fran(_taise survoler  notre  beau  pays." On retrouve ici la couleur romantique des poemes d'amour, notamment dans  les re• frains  nostalgiques qui ponctuent les ac­ cusations  contre la societe moderne:

Dans  ce fond  de  cour  ou !es gens
se regardaient, s'aimaient, s'enviaient, s'engueulaient ou  bavardaient.

Regards  dans l'eau  de  Michel  Dallaire est  paru  dans  la  collection "Perceneige" aux  editions   Prise  de  parole  qui  se  spe­ cialise  dans  la  publication de  textes lit­ teraires   franco-ontariens et   qui   donne
souvent  leur  premiere chance a de  jeunes
ecrivains  comme  Dallaire. On  ne  trouve
dans  ce recueil  ni la puissance  de Lange­ vin  ni  le  romantisme un  peu  desuet   de Wallot  mais une poesie qui mele etrange­ ment   le   philosophique   et   le  quotidien pour exprimer un desarroi existentiel par­ fois prenant.

Mon  empire de  Ia nuit est  un  royaume de  reves ou  je suis  roi

Ou  les vers  ne  sont  que
Les citations de soi.

Le monde  des  poemes  de  Michel  Dal­ laire  ne contient que  le moi,  la  matiere, le  temps  et  l'espace.  Etonnamment vide de  toute   autre  presence   vivante que  le regard,   c'est   un   monde  ou   l'eau   et   le temps  se  conjuguent sans  cesse  dans   la solitude d'un moi plus philosophique que  lyrique.  Les  premiers poemes  d'un  jeune

rag

BOOKS IN REVIEW



auteur  pechent souvent par  surcoit  d'e­ panchements, d'effets  rythmiques ou  mu­ sicaux.    Ceux-ci    pratiquent   presqu'une ascese de la langue  poetique recherchant le depouillement a  la  fois  dans  la  forme  et  dans   le  fond.   Le  ton  est  original   et penetrant et  on  attend  avec  impatience d'autres poemes  qui  reussiront  a enrichir le registre  de ce nouvel  ecrivain  de talent  tout  en  preservant son originalite.

JACQUELINE VISWANATHAN


UNE SOURCE

CELYNE  et  RENE  BONEFANT,  eds.,  Petite  An­ thologie    du   Noroit.    Editions    du   Norott,  n.p.
JEAN CHARLEBOis, La Mour  suivi de L'Amort.
Editions  du  Noroit,  $10.00.
MARCELLE  ROY,  Traces. VLB Editeur, $7-95·
MICHEL    GAY,   Eclaboussures.    VLB   Editeur,
$8.gs.
JEAN-PIERRE PETITs,   La  Terrasse   du  roi  U­ preux. Collection sur  parole/Hurtubise HMH, n.p.

L'HuMILITE DE Celyne et Rene Bonenfant ne  doit  guere   tromper le lecteur car  la Petite Anthologie  du Noro'it est un  bijou en son genre.  II s'agit  d'une "presentation de  textes  de  chacun des  auteurs que  le Norolt  a  publies  au  cours  de ses dix  pre­ mieres   annees  d'existence  ( I97I-8I) ." Mais les editions du Norolt etant deja  une anthologie dans  le sens etymologique du mot   ( une  collection de  fleurs), la  Petite Anthologie  est une  anthologie au  second degre.   Et  quel  livre  utile  pour   les  trop rares   professeurs   qui   veulent   vraiment initier  nos etudiants a notre  poesie con­ temporainf"! Car  il est vrai, comme  le dit si bien  Alexis Lefran<;ois ( l'un  des poetes de  la  Petite  Anthologie)   que:

les poetes  de  ce temps se chantent en  silence
le tourment des grands  arbres et  leur  chagrin de  bete.

IIO
 Et  c'est  bien  "les  poetes  de  ce  temps" et de ce lieu que continuent de publier les Edition;; du  Noroit-ce vent, qui comme
!'inspiration, "souffie   ou  il  veut."  C'est
Jean Charlebois qui  avec  La Mour  suivi de L' Amort  confi.rme  la  qualite de  cette maison  d'edition. C'est  d'abord les demi­ teintes  des  paysages  interieurs  que  nous livre  La M our:

un  oiseau  se violace
les arbres  vont  bientot parler
Ia lumiere  est assise par  terre dans  Ia June.

Que d'honnetete esthetique chez  ce poete  qui  a la  force  d'aller toujours plus loin  pour  saisir  une  aube  nouvelle  sur  le vif! Mais c'est surtout L' Amort qui fait de Jean Charlebois un  poete  "de  ce temps." Cette   longue   suite   a  deux   voix  a  une portee   universelle  car   on  peut   y  lire,  a cote  de  l'angoisse et  des  injustices  d'au­ jourd'hui,  le  grand  lyrisme   d'une   arne amoureuse capable de celebrer d'une ma­  niere experimentale la totalite du monde. L'Amort fait  de Charlebois l'echo  discret  du  Baudelaire  de  "Benediction" mais  le lecteur n'a aucune difficulte  a etre  touche  par   la  profonde  simplicite de  !'engage­ ment  du  poete:

Le  South  Bronx  est  grignote  par  les rats d'egout
Beyrouth  hecatombe	les Palestiniens saignent
La  Pologne  se soldiarise  contre  son etrangleur.

Une  autre maison  d'edition qui a le courage  de   publier  "les   poetes   de   ce temps" c'est VLB  Editeur. Traces de Marcelle Roy et  Eclaboussures de Michel Gay  sont   deux   beaux  exemples  corres­ pondant  a  deux   articulations   de  cette  sensibilite    contemporaine   se   traduisant elle-meme par  des ecritures  dont  !'explo­ ration  est   un   veritable  plaisir   pour   le lecteur.
Traces constitute le livre total d'une fenune et si !'experience evoquee  est plu-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tot  commune, la  sensibilite, elle,  est  des plus  touchantes. 11 s'agit, en  effet,  du journal  poetique d'une femme sur le point de ceder  a ]'amour, ou  peut-etre unique­ ment   au   desir   de  l'autre.  Une  femme,  done,   en   perpetuel   devenir  et   tiraillt e entre le cris du  coeur  et  la subtile  medi­ tation  si propre aux  ames  blessees:  "je  ne suis pas  venue  /  j'ai  a marcher encore." La  simplicite de ce vers, qui  clot l'un  des plus   beaux   poemes   de   Traces,   resume l'ambigui:te  des  relations possibles  entre  un  homme et  une  femme. Ce  verts  n'est, en  effet,  pas neutre  si  l'on   en  croit  les connotations familieres des verbes "venir" et "marcher." Mais Traces  c'est aussi l'erotisme du quotidien:

Je  n'a: sur   moi    qu'une  chemise indienne flottante, et   Ies  seins   libres. Au   bas  de  Ia chemise, Ia peau fonoee  de  mes cuisses  vient
,contraster  avec   le   rose   vibrant  du   coton
,egyptien   et dans l'encolure, une   chaine  en or  l·egere chante Ie sombre de  Ia  peau   a Ia
naissance  des  seins.

De  tels passages permettent au  lecteur  de produire sa propre lecture. En  allant au­ dela  de la simple verification referentielle, la  decouverte de  la  fonction  signifiante  est  un  veritable  plaisir.  En  effet,  le sys­ teme  descriptif  de l'erotisme passe ici par  une  isotopie  exotique. Des  mots  comme  "indienne" et  "egyptien" sont  utilises se­ lon une methode qui trouve son archetype textuel  dans   Les  Illuminations d'Arthur Rimbaud. C'est  ainsi  Ia chemise  rose qui permet  a  la  narratrice  d'etre  autre  et d'eveiller le desir  de !'amant. Le  passage peut  se lire  comme   un  renversement du cliche  "!'habit ne fait  pas  le  moine." Ce passage,    comme    d'autres,   permet   une etude  phenomenologique du   corps.   En effet, !'habit n'est  pas simplement une ex­ tension  du  corps  comme  l'a  dit  Marshall McLuhan.  Chez   Marcelle  Roy  le  vete­ ment   devient  plutot  un  instrument  qui permet au  sujet   de  developper  la  con­ naissance  de   son   propre   corps.   Ainsi quand l'amant  exprime son  admiration
 sexuelle pour  la narratrice, cette  derniere repond:

-Je  sais ... <;a me  vient de  I'interieur. Je porte  cette  chemise  pour    sentir  Ie   vent chaud,  ensolei!Ie, explorer  mon   corps   sous Ie tissu. Le  moindre souffle d'air me  caresse delicatement, le  tissu  tendre me  £role.

Qu'il me soit  permis  ici de faire  appel a un grand  poete  pourtant sous-estime: Leon-Paul Fargue. Ce  que   je  voudrais, c'est  souligner  que  Marcelle Roy a choisi la bonne  voie et que l'avenir nous reserve peut-etre,  au-dela   de   Traces,   de   tres beaux  textes. Comme Leon-Paul Fargue, cette  femme  ecrivain a  fait  de  la  sensi­ bilite sa methode. Dans  son  introduction aLe  Pieton de Paris ( I932), !'auteur de
Haute  Solitude   donne  ce  conseil   a  un
disciple virtue!:
Sensible  ... s'acharner  a  etre  sensible,   in­
liniment  sensible, infiniment  receptif.  Tou­
jours   en   etat  d'osmose. Arriver  a  n'avoir
plus  besoin  de  regarder pour  voir. Discerner
Ie murmure des  memoires, le murmure de l'herbe, Ie murmure des  gonds, Ie murmure des  morts.

Certains poetes  contemporains ont  eu le bonheur, comme  Marcelle Roy, de revenir  au  lyrisme  fondamental de Leon­ Paul  Fargue ou celui  de  Giuseppe Unga­ retti.  Revenir  n'est  peut-etre pas le terme  exact.  il s'agirait plutot d'un  renouvelle­ ment  qui aurait assimile  un certain nom­  bre  de  techniques  experimentales. L'on  se rend  compte  d'une telle fusion  d'ecri­ tures  si l'on  compare les passages  que  je
viens de citer  a celui-ci:

naissante je suis en  boule 	je ne veux  que moi  qui
m'entortille dans  un  bienheureux neant
je ne sens rien
oubli  sein  que   j'invente et  que   je  suce
ventre ou  est-il
qui  me  protege et  me  tient chaud.

Dans  le  domaine de  l'ecriture  experi­ mentale, Michel Gay  va,  avec  Eclabous­ sures, beaucoup  plus  loin  que  Marcelle Roy. Cela  ne veut naturellement pas dire


I I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



que  Michel   Gay  est  un  meilleur   poete;
!'idee  n'est  d'ailleurs pas de comparer les
deux  textes. L'importance de Michel  Gay me semble  etre  d'une autre  nature. L'au­ teur  d'Eclaboussures represente une ecole bien definie: celle  de  La  Nouv,elle Barre du  Jour,  une   revue  groupant des  ecri­  vains qui gravitent autour de Nicole Bros­ sard. Eclaboussures se presente  beaucoup plus  comme une  recherche qu'une  ecri­ ture. Les citations, les notes marginales et certains  dispositifs   typographiques  sont la  pour   prouver que  la  decouverte  for­ melle  est  plus  importante que  le  choix d'un contenu thematique selon  des prin­  cipes  personnels. Cela   ne  neut  pas  dire que  nous  ayons  a  faire  a  une  sorte  de neoparnassien  car  !'engagement   ideolo­ gique,    moins   marque  que    chez   Jean  Charlebois, est  cependant bien  present: "pietinement  du  pouvoir," "Discours de la repression."
En opposant La Terrasse du roi tepreux
a  Eclaboussures,  je  voudrais revenir  sur la question des maisons  d'editions qui  me
para.lt aujourd'hui, plus que jamais, etroi­ tement  liee a la productiton poetique. En effet, contrairement au  Noroit  eta VLB, la  maison  HurtubisefHMH  publie   tres peu  de poesie.  De  plus, comme  on  y pu­  blie  les  ouvrages de  Rina  Lasnier,  on  se rend  vite compte qu'un nouveau courant poetique peut  difficilement souffier chez Hurtubise. Encore une fois il s'agit d'evo­ quer   des  perspectives et  non  pas  de  re­ prendre certains prejuges plutot  que d'au­ tres.  Ainsi  La  Terrasse  du  roi  lepreux n'est  pas  un  volume  de Ia regie  mais  un volume  de !'exception. C'est,  en  effet,  la mythologie   du    Cambodge  qui   inspire Jean-Pierre   Petits-un  poete   qu'on   se doit  de prendre au  serieux. La cloture de La Terrasse du roi lepreux permet d'eva­ luer  la  portee  universelle  de  ce  poete:

Je suis  au  fond d'un puits  vertigineux Qui prend figure de  colonne de  lumiere. Je vois  que tris haut danse  la  nuit
Et  s'embrase  la  lueur des  ,etoiles,

112
 Alors  que pour   la  millieme fois
J'escalade ce  qui  me  s epare

La  mythologie exotique n'est  done  pas la  seule  cara.cteristique  de  ce  livre  qui reussit  le difficile  mariage de la  poesie et de !'inspiration mystique.  S'il est un poete de !'exception, Jean-Pierre Petits est aussi un  poete   qui  nous  offre  une  oeuvre   de tres haute qualite que  j'oserai  qualifier de Neo-Classique;  l'ombre  familiere  d'Ho­ mere  hante d'ailleurs ce  recueil.
Plus que tout autre chose, les cinq livres consideres prouvent la haute qualite de la grande variete de  la  poesie  quebecoise, une  source   qui -malgre  certaines  pro­ pheties malveillantes -ne  semble  guere  tarir.
ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ


INSIGHT & INSIDE

DOUG   BEARDSLEY,   Kissing   the   Body   of  My Lord:  The Marie  Poems. Longspoon, $7.50. DANIEL  SLOATE, A  Taste  of Earth, A  Taste   of
Flame.  Guernica  Editions, $s.oo.

THE AUTHORS OF THESE TWO volumes  of poetry are  both Canadian-born, both have lived  abroad for  a good  many  years, and both,  on  returning to  Canada, have  be­ come  university professors. Here the simi­ larity   appears to  end:  their  literary   ex­ pressions in no way resemble one another. Doug  Beardsley's book  is  an  ordered at­  tempt to give new insights  into  the  spiri­  tual   and   practical  life  of  the   "Mother of   the   Canadian  Nation    and   its   first teacher," Marie de !'Incarnation; Daniel Sloate's book is an introspective look at chiefly  personal landscapes -both  inte­ rior  and  exterior.
In  an "Mterword" to his book, Beards­ ley  states :  "These  poems  attempt to  re­ possess an  essential  part of our  Canadian past.  I  wish  to stress  that while  many  of the   events   and   much  of  the   language, come from  Marie's letters,  and  I consider her  to  be  co-author of  the  book,  a  very

BOOKS IN REVIEW



different, fictional  Marie  emerges   from these pages, a Marie of my own making." Despite  this explanation, Beardsley's "Ma­ rie  Poems" by and   large  do  not  breathe life   into   the   remarkable   woman   who helped   to  found   Canada,   nor   do  they heighten  the   reader's   understanding of the natural or social environment of mid­  seventeenth   century   New   France-as
undoubtedly E. J. Pratt's narrative poem
"Brebeuf   and  his Brethren" or  historical
novels  such   as  Willa   Cather's  Shadows on the  Rock  and Suzanne Martel's Men­ fou    Carcajou  do.   Unfortunately  in Beardsley's pages  there are  few  memor­  able or touching manifestations of Marie's strength  of   purpose, of  her  frustrations and  weaknesses,  of  her  originality of in­ sight,  or of her endearing or exasperating words  or  actions. She  emerges  as neither human nor saintly.
In Beardsley's poems  there  is a  wood­ enness  comparable to  the  most  laboured of the Jesuit records covering missions in Quebec and  Acadia during the same  pe­ riod. Yet even in Les Relations ... (which  Pratt obviously  used  as  his  source) , one can sometimes  read between  the lines and imagine    how   a   talented   writer    could breathe life into these dry records  and  the selfless  missionaries whose doings are so painstakingly recounted therein. The same is true  of  the  original writings  of  Marie de !'Incarnation. Yet  in  a poem  such  as the following, even the most imaginative reader would  be hard-pressed to read  be­ tween  the lines :

First  look at the  Indians

A staff  in  his  hand a hand on  his  head how  the  'sauvage' carries my  'sac' from the  shore
to  the  fort

the  French reaching port
with  their baggage piece by muddied piece
 back  & forth up  the  path.

Champlain and  Nicholas  Denys at their prosaic  worst  after  a  long  voyage  could both come up with a livelier account than this-and  Pratt's religious epic seems earth-shaking by  comparison.
Although most  of  the  "Marie  Poems"
tend  to be dull  and  almost  totally  devoid
of colourful or metaphorical language, there  is one  poem   with  a  good  central image  which  gives a  briefly  touching  in­ sight.  The  sister,  on  her  way  to  Canada, sees the  icebergs  looming  out  of  the  fog as cathedrals:

Yesterday

We  were washing well before  four

when  one  of  us saw  two icebergs

looming
out  of the  fog they  were

longer
than the  ship
higher

than the  mast
I might have  said
they  were

cathedrals.

Unfortunately, this poem  is almost  lost among its pedestrian companions.
.Whereas Doug  Beardsley spends  his words  cautiously, Daniel   Sloate's  words pour  out  so that  the  reader  tends  at  first to be overwhelmed by the flow -perhaps even  swept  off  his feet.  But  unlike  great poets such as Walt  Whitman or Dylan Thomas,   who   can    also   inundate   the reader  with  a flood  of words, Sloate  does not  often   bring   his  private  outpourings into  clear  and   sustained focus,  nor  does he  give  them  universal implications. His imagery,  modelled on  that  of the  French


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



symbolists  (on whom  he wrote his thesis), is occasionally  highly  effective  ("The whole night  sky staccato with  ice-light"), sometimes jarringly inaccurate ("or march  with the mushrooms in the Fall"), and all too often simply obscure  ("I saw minds  like suns and  children rising; fall­ ing  flowers as abstract as rain; while  the rock  was turning to  rib  over  rainbow"). But    whether   in    themselves   weak    or strong,   the  images  generally   cannot  be clearly  seen  to illuminate the  poems;  in­ stead,  the  poems  seem  to lead  nowhere.

ALLISON MITCHAM


VILLAGE VISITOR

GEORGE GALT,  Trailing  Pythagoras. Quadrant,
$7·95·
THE FIELD OF Mediterranean travel writ­ ing is fairly  full  of folk needing  no intro­ duction, against  whom  the  latest  peripa­ tetic  is generally measured. George  Galt alludes   to  some  of  his  predecessors,  in­ cluding  Byron-in   many   ways   the founder  of   the   genre -and   his   own great-great-grandfather John  Galt  in the nineteenth  century,   Henry   Miller   and Lawrence Durrell in   this.  D.  H.  Law­ rence,   John  Fowles,   Gwendolyn  Mac­ Ewen,  and   Audrey  Thomas also  tempt  comparison.  Quadrant Editions -prob­ ably  trying to  do  the  author a favour  - states  on  the  back  cover  that   AI  Purdy  prefers Galt to D. H. Lawrence as a ,travel writer.  All  this  is a  heavy  burden for  a young writer to carry,  and  Galt  occasion­ ally seems oppressed even by his ancestor's modest  achievements, as well as intrigued by  the  parallels in  their   lives.  In  truth, the book fares  better when  judged  simply on its own  merits.
Trailing  Pythagoras is a  potpourri of history,  philosophy, current politics,  gen­
eral information of the sort one finds in a
guidebook,  and    a   record    of   personal

114
 travel.  Hence some chapters are a bit of a dog's  breakfast, and  the  book  as a whole lacks a sharp focus, but  Galt's rich eclecticism works  well  for  him  at  times, as  in "A  Valley   by  the  Sea" or  "Kar­ pathos," where  his  own  distinctive  voice
-serious but  flexible, literate but unpre­ tentious -emerges from  the mixture. He must  have   been  attempting  to  preserve  and   transmit the   kind   of   whole   vision that  he attributes to Pythagoras.
1It  must   be  confessed   that   the  title  is rather misleading: Pythagoras is not  the
fixed star of the  book. He is introduced in chapter two, forms  the subject of chapter eight,  and  makes a farewell  appearance at the  close  of  chapter fifteen,  where  Galt tries to justify his title by passing off the "magus-philosopher" as his guru.  I found that   unconvincing:  an   unnecessary  dis­ tortion of  what  I  had  read,  a  straining after  unity.
There is, however, one  idea  associated with   Pythagoras which  is crucial to  the book,  and   that is "centring." In Greece Galt  comes to realize  how fragmented our North American urban existences  are, whereas in "the silence  of Pythagoras" or of   an   Aegean    island   "the  still   centre
holds." The references to Yeats'  prescient
lines in "The Second  Coming" -"Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; / Mere anarchy is loosed  upon   the  world" -is later  made explicit: "For them  [the  vil­ lagers of Olimpos], the centre holds here, and  beyond  these peaks mere anarchy 'tips the world." Notice  that  now the emphasis and   the  saving  grace have  shifted   from classical   philosophy  to  primitive village life:  the  true  centre and guru  of Trailing Pythagoras.
We have been idyllizing village life for even  longer   than we  have  been  rhapso­ dizing  over  the  Mediterranean. The pro­  cess  goes  back   at   least   to  Goldsmith's "Deserted Village" ( I87o); Mary  Russell Mitford's Our Village  ( I824-32) remains a  classic.  To  us, a  village  represents the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



coherent  community  we   have   lost,   "a little  world  of our  own, close-packed and insulated" (Miss  Mitford); it is the Gar­ den we had  to leave because  we knew too much, or the  Happy Valley  that we (like Rasselas)   chose  to  abandon  because  we wanted to know  more,  and now long for. By our  lights,  even  Periclean Athens  or Johnsonian    London    seem    village-cul­ tures:  small,  familiar, with  comprehen­ sible issues and  a human scale.  The  idea of  the  "global village," if it is not  just a cruel   joke,  is  a  piece  of  nostalgia for  a place  where  we  were  not  so alone.  Galt and  his wife, hand in hand, with wander­ ing  steps  and  slow,  try  to  return to  this Eden.
I do not mean that Galt idealizes the village.   He   sets   down   his   experiences there,  for better, for worse, and  finds that his needs are being met  by being rendered minimal: "So  much  is missing  from  this village,  and   still  we  lack  for  nothing." Writing about Lagada is what  Galt  does best, in "A  Valley  by the Sea": his long­ est  chapter and, together with  "The Si­ lence  of  Pythagoras" that  follows it,  the structural as  well  as  thematic centre   of the   book.   Lagada   seems   to   him   .the omphalos, the "heart of things," and "one  enormous domicile."  The great  commu­ nal feast and the Greek  emphasis on fam­  ily-set  against  Galt's  (and our)    root­  lessness -lead directly into  the treatment of  Pythagoras as a philosopher of  unity, "in  tune   with   all  time,"  as  opposed   to Aristotle the  dissecter.  We can  leave  that (Aristotelian!) distinction to professors of philosophy:  Galt's  message   is  that   his Chiot village had  resources and healing properties that  Toronto and  Montveal  do not.  It is really  Lagada, not  Pythagoras, that  he is trailing.
The  village   also  serves   as  a   barrier against  the  outside world,   in  which  re­ spect  it is like an  island.  Galt thinks  that  "many ... have lost faith  in the possibility of islands, a faith  we must  all keep to live
 well. We all need  a haven...." He  finds one-until  his  free-floating   restlessness moves him  along: who  can  say  why?­ but he knows how fragile all such barriers and   Edens   are.   The   great   threat,  of oourse, is tourism, destroying that  which calls it into existence.  The effect  of tour­ ism  on  Greek  islands  and  villages  is the Todmotif  of  Galt's book;  on  Karpathos he feels "It's all  coming  to an  end.... I imagine   myself  the  last  traveller in  old Greece."  Exactly-which  makes  it   al­ most  a  moral issue  to  write  a  book  like this, evoking  the beauties of the Sporades, now that  most of the  Cyclades  have  been overrun.
The book has its share  of minor weak­ nesses. It strikes  me  as  gauche  to  quote  from  "letters home," as  if  they  were  the best  he  could   do,  and   there  are   other awkward   moments. Some   of   the  errata must be blamed  on Galt-"Mr. Argenti seats my wife and  I" -and  some on  his editor; between them  they will not find  a "cyprus  tree," even on Cyprus. Quadrant has granted Galt  a generous type and  for­  mat,  yet  provides no  maps,  no  table  of contents,  no illustrations, and  the  proof­  reading is careless.  Should they  have  in­ vited comparison with  Lawrence? If you set  Trailing  Pythagoras next  to Sea and Sardinia, or  almost  anything by Durrell, it  will  disappoint you;  Galt lacks  their descriptive powers and  intensity and  lyric gift. Yet ,the book has its uses and  he has many  good  moments as  a writer-e.g., his set pieces on bread,  feta  cheese, village cafes.  Moreover, Galt  comes  across  as  a good  traveller, one  who  learns   the  lan­ guage  and  tries  to  merge  with  the  local life,  not  seek  out   his  own   kind.  For   a travel  writer,  that's not a bad epitaph.

R. W. BEVIS





II 5




NOSTALGIC REPETITIONS

IMPERIAL SENTIMENTS can  continue to work  long  after   empires have  vanished, as Mussolini's efforts  to raise the ghost  of ancient Rome  strikingly demonstrated during  tihe  1930's,   and   the   British   re­ sponse to events in the Falklands is show­ ing  as  I  write  these  words.  Seldom,  for­ tunately, does  the  regret  for  lost  glories manifest  itself  in  such  perilous   actions. More   often   it  is  expressed   in  nostalgia, which  can   take  Merary   form  as  it  has done  during the  last  decade and  a  half with  the  publication of so  many  novels recreating  the British  Raj  in India, in its glory and its decline.  Some of these nov­ els,  like  Paul   Scott's  Raj  Quartet   and Staying On,  have  been  works of high  lit­ erary  quality; others,   like  the   books  of John Masters, have been craftsmanly nov­ els  of adventure, plausible  rather than imaginative; yet others, too numerous and in some  cases  too  bad  to  mention, have been florid roinances not unlike  those pro­ duced  by  memsahib  writers  under   the Raj, like  Maud Diver   and  Flora  Annie Steele,   but   swollen  often   to  monstrous length  and  extravagance by the demands of the contemporary best-seller market.
One of  the  elements of  nostalgic  ex­ pression  is an ·almost  irresistible  urge  to repeat and  imitate. John Masters, for ex­ ample,  has   tended   to  repeat   the  kind of  situations  that   first  appeared   in  the boys' stories  of G. A. Henty,  salted  with  a little sex, though this was not immediately recognized since  he  was  not  writing for boys but for adults of  the post-Henty gen­ eration. A more  precise  example of nos­ talgic  repetition  emerges  in  the  striking

II6
 
parallels between  a  little-known Indian work  of  the  Canadian writer  Sara  Jean­ nette   Duncan, and   a  recent  best-selling  novel  about India, The  Far  Pavilions, by M.  M. Kaye.
The  Story of Sonny  Sahib is a  modest
juvenile   'tale  of    I I 2   large-print   pages, which  Sara Duncan Inay  well have writ­ ten a:s a potboiler to bring  in a few  thou­ sand   rupees.   It  appeared early   in  her Indian career, in I 894, the year after  pub­  lication   of  The  Simple  Adventures  of a Memsahib. Sonny Sahib is a well-wrought li:ttle story,  written  wi:th  a  great   deal  of the   au hor's
Sara Duncan as a skilled woman-of-letters anxious to  make  the  best of anything she undertook. It is a charming minor  book, but  not  very much  more.
The  Story of Sonny Sahib develops one of the  legends  that  were commonly heard after    the   Indian  Mutiny;  that   of   the white  dhild  saved  from  the  ferocious sepoys by faithful Indian servants  and eventually restored   to  his  family  or  in  a more  general way to his people.  Sonny  is a baby when  his mother dies,  on her  way down  to  the  river  at  Cawnpore after  the surrender of  the   British   there   to  Nana Sahib. As Sonny   is  being  carried by his ayah  Tooni, she is warned by a sepoy that the people  going to the boats will not sur­ vive. She  slips  into  the  watching  crowd, and  so Sonny  is saved.  The  one surviving token of his identity is his mother's prayer  book  which   Tooni  has  pocketed  before
leaving   the  house  in  Cawnpore  ,because
she believes it to be a magic  talisman. Fleeing northward out of the main  area
of the  mutiny, Tooni ,takes Sonny  to the
Rajput principality of Lalpore. There he is brought up like an  Indian child. Even­ tually  the  Maharaja sends  for  him since his  son,  the  crown  prince  of   'the  little  realm,  wishes   to  have   the   fair-skinned Sonny  as  a  playmate. Since  Tooni can­ not  bear  to part from  him, she is allowed  to live humbly in  the palace, while Sonny

OPINIONS & NOTES



becomes  the companion of the little Maharaja. Once he saves the prince's life because  he suspects  that some  cakes  that have been left for him are poisoned, and indeed   the  fish  in  .the  palace pond   die when  the  cakes  are  fed  to them; it  is a plot by a lesser wife jealous of the prince's mother.
Eventually, when  a  British  missionary has  been  killed  in  the  principality,  Lal­ pore is invaded by a British  force. Sonny decides ·that  he must  join  his people.  He persuades Tooni  to  give him  the  prayer  book that  proclaim:;  his identity, and  then escapes  from   Lalpore  by  letting himself down  on  an  improvised  rope  from  a se­ cluded  balcony. He  does  not  know  that the  commander  of  ·the  invading  force, whom  he  will  meet  shortly, is in  fact­ as the prayer book's inscription establishes
-his father, who  was serving elsewhere in  India a:t •the time  of  the  Cawnpore massacre. The book  ends  with  Sonny  re­ united   to  his  father and  his  people;  we can  assume  ·that  eventually  he  will  be­ come in his tum a servant of the Raj.
In  The  Far Pavilions Ashron  Pelham­ Martyn, called Ash and  also Ashok, loses his  mother  immediately   when   she  dies after  giving  birth, and  his  father sho:r:tly afterwards dies  in  a  cholera epidemic in the  Himalayan  foothills.   The ayah  Sita flees  with   Ash,  intending  to  reach   his father's friends in  Delhi.  She  arrives  just after  the  rising at Meerut, in  time  to see
the bodies  of the  massacred sahibs  in the
capital, and   flees  from   the   area   of  the Mutiny until she reaches  the Rajput prin­ cipality   of  Gulkote. In  her   pocket  she carries a  little  packet  of  documents and photographs Ash's father gave  her  before he  died; the  packet  seems to her  a  kind of  talisman  as  the  prayer  book  did   to T·ooni in Sonny Sahib. Brou ht
Indian  boy,   Ash -like   Sonny-even­
tually  attracts the attention of the Maha­ raja's son, and  is taken into  his household  with Sita,  who  like Tooni lives humbly  in
 a corner  of the  palace. Ash  becomes  the playmate, sometimes petted  and   some­ times  abused,  of  prince  Lajli, and  saves him from being  poisoned  by a jealous wife of   the   Maharaja   through   cakes   Ash throws  to  the  palace fish,  which  die  like the  fish in  Sonny  Sahib. Asih eventually flees from  Gulkote  because he  fears  the anger  of the  wicked rani; he escapes on a rope let down, as in Sonny's case, from  a secluded  balcony. With  Sita he flees north  and,  when  she dies  on 'the road,  finds his way to  the headquarters of the Corps  of Guides   at   Mardan  on   the   Northwest Frontier.  There he  presents the  packet  Sita  has  •treasured,  and   which  identifies him. His father of course  is dead,  and  his uncle,  an  officer  in  the  Guides., has  re­ cently   been    killed,    but    the   regiment adopts  him so that in a sense, like Sonny, he has found  his father.
After this,  Ash goes on  the  kind of  ca­ reer  as  an   imperial  servant  Ash  might  have  followed  if Sara  Jeannette  Duncan had decided to extend her  little ·story into  a  g6o-page   monster of  a  book.  Seldom  have  the  repetitions of   nostalgic  writing been more striking than the echoes of The  Story of Sonny  Sahib that  chime  through the early  ohapters of  The  Far Pavilions.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


DUNCAN'S REPRESENTATIVE MEN

IN The  Imperialist, Sara Jeannette Dun­ can   uses  the   phrase "a   representative man"1  to describe  Octavius Milburn, a praotical manufacturer whose dollars and  cents view of patriotism contrasts with the idealism  of •the novel's  protagonist, Lome Murchison. The phrase causes some con­ fusion;  although Milburn is  "representa­ tive,"  very few of his fellow  townspeople endorse  his selfishly  capitalist views.  In fact,   John   Murchison   and   Dr.  Drum-


117

OPINIONS & NOTES



mond seem much more in tune with ·the balance  of idealism and  pragmatism with which  the  people  of Elgin,  Ontario, face the   issue  of   Imperial  Union.  Milburn is not  "representative" of their  views; ra:ther, the  phrase "a representative man" alludes  to Ralph Waldo Emerson's  pop­ ular  collection of  essays,  Representative Men, and  through that allusion  indicates Duncan's views on  the  quality  of leader­ ship in Canada.
Representative  Men was Emerson's comment on  his friend Thomas Carlyle's
book, On Heroes and Hero Worship, and Emerson's work  recalls  Carlyle's  main ideas.  The  representative man  "inhabits a higher sphere of thought, into  which other men  rise with  labor  and  difficulty; he has  but  to open  his eyes to see things in a true  light  and  in large relations...."
He discovers some  great  truth of  the  na­
tural  or  philosophical world,  and  so  be­ comes  representative "first  of things, and secondly  of  ideas."2   His  clear  adherence to one view offers  a solid reference  point  against  which  the ordinary man  can  test his  own  ideas.  Emerson numbers Plato,  Swedenborg, Shakespeare, and  Napoleon among his  representative men.
Duncan  was  sensitive   to   the   ( unin­ tended)  suggestion of  irony  inherent in Emerson's choice  of ·the word  "represen­ tative" to  designate  men who,  like Car­ lyle's heroes,  are  above  their  peers  mor­  ally  and  intellectually. The   label  deni­ grates  the idea  of  the  hero  by implying that  he  is  merely   representative, but  it also  seems  to  elevate  the  commonplace by   allowing  the   merely   representative man  to take  the  role  of the  leader.  The fact that  Emerson was an American is significant, for Duncan deplored ·the ten­ dency  of  American democracy to  create  an  aristocracy of  the  average and  to  ig­ nore the gifted. She shows how the Amer­  ican  political system  embodies ·the para­ dox  of  the   representative  man   in   His Royal Happiness  (1914): a very average

118
 man,   President Phipps, is treated like  a king,   while   the   truly   great   man,  Lan­ chester, is slandered by the press. Perhaps Duncan  also   noted    (as   Emerson  must have)  •that  American  members of  con­  gress are  called  "representative."
Duncan draws attention to the  paradox of ·the representative man  in The  Simple Adventures of a Memsahib   ( 18gg). The ignorant  British   Labour MP,   Batcham, is  touring India;  he  is  introduced  to  a senior  civil  servant, Mr. Sayter, at  a din­ ner   party  hosted   by  the   heroine,  Mrs.  Browne.

He  shook  Mr. Sayter  warmly  by his slender and  frigid  hand  and  said  he was  delighted to meet  him-it  was  always  a  pleasure   to meet  representative men,  and  his young friends   had   told  him  that   Mr.  Sayter   was very  representative indeed, standing almost at  the  head  of his department.s

The florid  Batcham insults  Sayter  by  im­ plying   that   he  achieved   his  position  by being  merely  representative,  and   under­ lines  his  social  misstep  by  illogically   in­  sisting that Sayter must be "very  represen­ tative." Consistent with his  political alli­ ance,  Batcham  approaches Sayter as  an equal, only  to  be firmly  rebuffed.
When Duncan declares in  The  Impe­ rialist tha;t "Octavius Milburn would  not,  I  think, have  objected to  being  consid­  ered,  with   relation  to  his  line  in  life,  a representative man," she is not describing
Milburn's  relation  to   Elgin   or   to   the
manufacturing community in general, but commenting on  the kind of leaders which American society  produces. Selfish, prag­ matic, unconcerned with  ideas,  Milburn, like Batcham, is merely representative, "a  man  of averages, balances, ·the safe level"  (p.  51), completely opposed  to ·the "con­ structive, fertile,   magnetic"4    representa­ tive  man   he  patterns  himself   after. He demonstrates the power of ·the average to overshadow the heroic in everyday  life, as Mr.  Chafe the British  manufacturer dem­  onstrates the same  principle in  England.

OPINIONS  & NOTES


NOTES

1 The  Imperialist, NCL edition  (McClelland
&  Stewart, 1971), p.  51.



'.JI
,-
sahib  (New York: D.  Appleton, 1893), p.
197·
4   Emerson, p.  7·




LAST PAGE
 
MISAO DEAN
 


On 	,
F.R.SCOTT

ENGLISH POETRY in  the  South Pacific  used  to be  a  little  on   the   dreary  side,   all   academic fustian and distant isolation. It was  hard (adapting Rudy Wiebe's phrase) to hear  where the  voice   was  coming from. In  part this  de­ rived   from   a  curious  reluctance  (CBC  actors please   note)  to  relax   into the   local  speaking voice; an  imitation British   took  pride of  liter­ ary   precedence,  which    incidentally   had   the effect  of making much literature in  both  Aus­ tralia and   New  Zealand  appear  to  have  little to  do  with   regional reality. In  Canada it  was one  of F.  R.  Scott's  accomplishments to  make  a  poetic art  out   of   Canadian  cadences; for many  both  here  and  in  the  South Pacific,  how­ ever,   ratification of  cultural  value appears to have  been  necessary  from the  outside.
Some of this  contrast is apparent in the difference between the  contained and  contain­ ing  rhymes  of an  older poet  like  R. A. Simpson (Selected   Poems)   and   the   colloquial  ironies, the  ecological politics, the  elastic  rhythms of a more  recent one  like  Andrew  Taylor (Selected  Poems,  both   books  from  Univ.  of  Queensland Press).   "The   fountain   tinkled  and    dripped above them   I like   the  love   of  God," Taylor writes; "and the  fish  rose  and  drank its  rain  I gravely like Presbyterians." There are recurrent themes:   love,  silence, the   poetry  to  be  com­ municated beyond silence, and the  U.S.A. Like many of  the   new   poets, Taylor  has  been  in­ fluenced  by   contemporary  American   writing while   at  the  same   time   ("The  ice  fishermen, Lake   Erie,"   "Memorial   day,   USA    1971") offended by  the  perceived  threat  of  American encroachment.
Grace  Perry's  journal  Poetry  Australia  has been   one  of  the   major outlets for  an  indige­ nous   speaking voice;  though  its   pages   have  been  open   to  poetry of  many  kinds and   from
 
Essays on his Contributions to
Law, Literature, and Politics
Editea by Sandra Djwa and
R. St.]  Macaonald
Perhaps more than anyone else, Frank Scott has forged  a conscience and defined  a sensibility for Canada. The summary of Scott's achieve· ments, particularly in the fields of law, literature, and politics, is an index to twentieth-century culture and society. This volume  includes personal recollections of F.R. Scott by Therese Casgrain, Leon Edel, and
]. King Gordon and examinations
of his poetry by Louis Dudek, D.G.Jones, and F.W Watt. There are also discussions of his involvement in the League for Social Reconstruc­ tion, the Co-operative Common­
wealth  Federation, and the Canadian political tradition; essays on his contribution to legal education, constitutional law, and social and civil legislation; on Scott as a trans­
lator; and an essay on Scott and the
'idea of Canada'  by Thomas Berger.
$25.00 cloth, $8.95 paper

MeGill-Queen's University Press Marketing Division: 63A St. George St., Toronto, Ontario M5S  1A6



119

OPINIONS & NOTES



many   places,  its   heart  is  at   home;  a   recent issue,  No. 82,  is devoted to John Millett's Tail Arse  Charlie-a moving account  (by  turns lyrical, dramatic, introspective) of an ordinary World War  I soldier. It is extraordinary  how important that  war   is  for   the   old   Common­ wealth societies.   Findley's The  Wars  responds one  way;  Millett, animating a sense of loss but  at  the  same   time   (lodging it  in  one  man)  a whole  cultural will  to  survive,  connects more  obviously   and   directly  with  the  world   of  the  new   Australian cinema,  reliving  its   sense   of frustration with Empire  in order to  reassert its separate self.
Recent New  Zealand poetry   books  indicate this  same  bifurcation. Penguin's Denis  Glover
-Selected Poems  gives  a substantial tour  of a
renegade  poet   from   an   earlier  decade,  who sought the  poetry of  the  ordinary when others were   seeking  traditions   in   Modernism  (like C.  K.  Stead and  Allen  Curnow, whose  newest books  Geographies and  You  will  know   when you  get  there  respectively, are  available  from Auckland/Oxford)  or  history in  Classical  for­ bears.  Yet  the  tradition  represented by  Stead and  Curnow remains part of  the  national  life, is  not  utterly replaced by  the  new  willingness to  use the  vernacular but  overlaid by it. Read­ ing  the   ostensible  iconoclasts of  the   last   two decades, Sam   Hunt   (Collected  Poems, Pen­  guin),  Ian   Wedde  (Castaly, Auckland/Ox­ ford), is to discover that  (for  all  their allusions to Pynchon  and their  deliberate and  occasional obscenities),  they  are  reaching also  to  Conrad and   Proserpine for  their heritage; Maori  writ­ ers-Keri    Hulme  (The   Silences   Between, Auckland/Oxford),  Hone Tuwhare   (Selected Poems, John  Mcindoe)-draw more  directly on oral  and  matrilineal traditions, while writers like   Elizabeth  Smithers   (Casanova's Ankle, Oxford)  and  Brian  Turner  (Ladders of Rain, John Mcindoe)   have returned  to  Roethkean reflective  conventions. Vincent O'Sullivan, lis­ tening  directly to  Denis Glover  and   watching indirectly  his  society's phlegmatic, dreaming, gruffiy   orthodox   males,   constructs   in    The
Butcher Papers   (Oxford)  a  dramatic  analysis of current social  archetypes (and therefore cur­ rent  sexual  conflict). For  all of  them  the  local landscape remains instructive, if only  inferen­ tially:   "I  read    the   sea's   chronicles,"   writes  Michael Jackson in  "Porongahau," in  an  ad­ mirable  collection   called  Wall  (John  Mcin­ doe) , "walking a beach which  muses I no more
but  gleans I and  whispers I all  night to  ear­
shaped I brakes in inattentive hills, I promises, promises." The ear  has  come  home,  to listen­
and  with  the best of contemporary New Zealand

120
 poets,  Bill  Manhire, to  speak. In Good   Looks (Auckland/Oxford),  Manhire writes   of  song and  talk,  home and reading; joins Old  English with   local   oral forms; plays   riddles with   his­ tory  and  the  present. In "An Outline" his  per­ sona  recalls his  life-the  rejections of  child­ hood, formal English, sobriety, and   death­ till   deaths  around  him   age   him.   "We  were
young   too,"  he   closes:   "we   thought  I that
every  goodbye was  the  last  goodbye I and  that
every  last  word  was  made to be careful.  (We waved  and we waved  of course, and  now  I we find  we don't stop  waving:  believing we see I our  life at  last,  and  thinking it over,  I knowing how  far  the  road  goes  home."
W.N.
