$s.oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·84
Spring, 1980

PSYCHOLOGICJIL FICTIONS MYTH, CJIRR, LOWRY

Articles 	.

BY CATHERIE
GEORGE  RIIYS GARNETT, DENNIS DUFFY, LAURENCE R. RICOU
Poems

BY ERNEST HEKKANEN, ANNE SZUMIGALSKI, CYRIL  DABYDEEN, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, RON  MILES, DOUGLAS LE PAN
Reviews

BY DAVID L. JEFFREY, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, HF.NRY  KREISEL,  MAX DORSINVILLE, T. D. MACLU LICH, GEORGE L. PARKER, GARY A. BOIRE, ALEXANDER GLOBE, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, E. D. BLODGETT, MIRIAM WADDINGTON, RONALD BINNS, SHERRILL E. GRACE,  LINDA H. LAMONT, J · K IERAN  KEALY, MYR IAM  RECURT, C. RUBINGER, RON  MILES, LINDA ROGERS,  STAN DRAGLAND,  J OHN FERNS, J OHN kOBI NSON,
RODERICK   W.  HAR VEY

Opinions and  Notes

BY ENN RAUDSEPP, CAROLE  SLADE, DOROTHY LIVESAY

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







WILDERNESS AND OTHER HIDDEN  FACES




SoME WEEKS AGO,  looking through  a stack of books that  came to Canadian Literature for review, I chanced  upon  one that  from a quick glance at its cover -fairytale prince and conventional  green frog -I took to be a chil­ dren's  tale. But an equally quick glance inside caught  this passage:

Then you place  your left hand  on their  right  knee,  and  ask them  "What is your experience of the  opposite of that?" They  will access whatever is the opposite, for them.  As the changes  occur, again  you increase  the  pressure  as you see the changes until  they  plateau, and  then  lift your hand  off.
Then you have  two anchors. What we want  you  to  do  is use one....  It works even  better  if you distract  your  partner's consciousness with  something neutral. ...

Seeking clarification,  I looked at the cover again: Frogs Into  Princes (Hurtig). But then  the  tell-tale subtitle:  Neuro Linguistic Programming-and I  put  the book down, reflecting petulantly on the swift corruption  that  computer science has spread  through  the language, and on the disparity  between a cover and the book that  is hidden inside.
And  yet something  still nagged. Was there  a connection  after  all between  the world of fairytale  and  the world of programmed response:  response even of the sorts being condemned  (yet in a different way also cultivated) by this book, a tape from  a  psychotherapy  workshop? How  does the  language  we learn  dictate  the faces we put on? How do we transform words into talismans and invest them with magic? Why do we attribute  a power to words, when  the power to associate and understand lies within ourselves? Words generate  responses, we say-such as my own animosity  toward  the  programmer's verb  to access-but clearly words  do not generate  out of themselves:  we are the ones whose minds generate  meaning. The  responses are  associational. And  the attribution of a magical  power to lan­ guage  declares as much  as anything  the  human   desire  to give a  name  and an image to the equally human  capacity to imagine  the unknown  and  to make con­ nections between the hidden  and  the seen.


2

EDITORIAL

The  trouble  with thinking  about  the nature  of association, however, is that  all things begin to associate. Another review book, for example, offered scarcely a challenge  in  this  regard:  Anthony  Hopkins'  Songs  from  the  Front  and  Rear (Hurtig) came complete with a (clear)  plastic wrapper and the publisher's bold disclaimer NOT  MEANT FOR  CHILDREN. The seal, of course, has the effect of associa­ tionally raising  an  item's  presumed quality  ("Everything in a glass  case  is valu­ able,"  thinks  one of Janet  Frame's  characters,  restrictively),  and  the  disclaimer that of heightening  curiosity. This time, at least, the subject is obvious:  Hopkins'  book  contains I 92  pages  of  unexpurgated   Canadian  servicemen's  songs  from World War  II. Depending  on the "programme" one brings to such words as they use, these songs are funny, bawdy, coarse, offensive, degrading,  or all of the above; certainly they offer different  readers a slice of  history, a nostalgic journey, a short course in musical exaggeration. And it would be easy to make either too much  or too little of them. Too much, if one ignores their surface existence: they are soldiers' songs, mostly bawdy, which were sung as rituals, elaborate  jokes, and for entertain­ ment. But too little, if one ignores altogether  the element of ritual  they enact, the fact that  bawdiness  was often a group's only acceptable  outlet for the expression of longing  and  need,  and  that  bravado  and  bravura  often  hide  (transparently here)  many surprising  moments of tenderness and quiet emotion.
Several books of photographs offer yet another  glimpse of the character  hidden behind  public images. Two  in a handsome  regional series from  Oxford -called British Columbia  and  Montreal  and Its Countryside-offer an  interesting con­ trast  with each  other.  Robert  Harlow's  text about  B.C. stresses the  constancy of wilderness, which  he finds both in the place and  in the  (rare)  people Paul  von Baich  has  photographed  against  a  wilderness setting;   Luc  d'Iberville-Moreau stresses the village roots of the Montreal  that  Michel Drummond evokes visually. But the images that recur in each book cumulatively suggest more than such direct themes; they constitute ways of perceiving the world outside, which in turn articu­  late  different  senses of communal  attitude  and  communal  image.  Von  Baich's images are all natural masks:  fog rising against  an "impenetrable" forest, fog in a city park,  high  cloud, low cloud, snowbank, sunset squall,  and  steam.  Drum­  mond's  enact  an  iconography  of flesh and stone:  children  on streets;  women in churches, in windows, on posters; men  over coffee cups, in factories, on bicycles, selling vegetables, working the land; and  whenever no people appear  to be pres­ sent, one finds in these Montreal photographs a statue of the virgin, reminding  the onlooker of the human  and  daily  dimensions of moral aspiration.  In  either  case, surfaces  are  illusory. One  book  asserts,   perhaps,  the  godliness of  aspiration  in human  beings, the other the humanity  of God. One suggests that its idiom is ellip­ tical, the other  that the communal  language is symbolic. (Consider  Jack  Hodgins'  comment: "if symbols don't  work, ... [t]hen eternity  can only be expressed by implication.... " Both books make meaning out of location.

3

EDITORIAL

By contrast,  a  work like Anthony  Hocking's  New  Brunswick   (McGraw Hill Ryerson)  exists for  a different  purpose. It is an  elementary  illustrated  text;  its meaning -like an encyclopedia entry's -lies on the surface;  its value consists in its accuracy.  Providing  little sense of the author  or the  psychology of the  place, however, it also exists for the moment only, and  before long its pictures will seem curiously dated.  But not yet so dated  that  in  a different  context  they  will seem gloriously evocative  of their  time.  Consider  works  like  Graham  Metson's  The Halifax  Explosion  (McGraw-Hill Ryerson)  or Edward  Cavell's  journeys  to the Far  West    (Lorimer).  Cavell's  collection  of  photographs  from  three   decades (I 86o's-I 88o's), happily dovetailed with excerpts from travellers' writings, displays the art of photography  at a time when it was grappling with  moments of  move­ ment. Repeatedly  we see images-of  roads, Indians,  troops, forces, masks-and repeatedly  we catch  glimpses of human  eyes peering  out  of the  masks, of faces that tum  when the camera shutter opens: declaring  the vitality of  the subject, and at  the same time  blurring  our  perception  of external  details. The  book's closing image  of grave  totems,  open-eyed  and  open-mouthed,  becomes  an  enormously evocative symbol, then. The  masks live; they see and speak. But of what  reality? And to what end?
Metson's  Halifax  miscellany also gathers photos,  journals  (the complete text of Archibald  MacMechan's official report,  "The Halifax  Disaster,"  among  them), and public government data, but here, though the photographs document tangible, painful episodes of human  experience, the fascination  is as much  with the almost oral history -the nearness to sources, to voices -- as with  the frozen images. As in Bruce West's revised Toronto  (Doubleday), a popular  history devoted to show ing how the city grew into "one  of the most exciting  ... of the  continent  while living down  various  rather  embarrassing  circumstances  concerning  its birth  and rise to great stature," the merit lies in its evocation  of persons. In Toronto, much direct  quotation  from  newspapers and  other  documents gives life once again  to the city's actual  inhabitants: the Simcoes, the runaway  slaves, the people in local theatricals,  the Americans, the rebels, the famous  visitors on lecture circuits, and the not-so-famous who faced the cholera epidemics and carved  the laconic grave­ stones. Curiously, the closer West gets to the present -to the merchandisers,  the mayors,  and  the  freeway  planners-the more  bureaucracy  overtakes  person. Quotations from life give way to assertions about  stature.  Frogs into princes. But we never learn how the princes really live.
When  Tony  Cashman   (A Picture  History  of  Alberta,  Hurtig)  shows us yet another  picture of a poster, we get a parallel insight into the growth of a culture; it says:  "YOUR  INCOME Would be MIGHTY SMALL if everybody sent away MONEY that could be SPENT HERE. Buy goods MADE  IN  EDMONTON." Economics aside, we perhaps  don't  really  understand   this  declaration  until  we  read  another  of  the books that  are beginning to unroll from the presses to celebrate Alberta's  ( Saskat-

4

EDITORIAL


chewan's is quieter, so far)   75th anniversary:  Tom Radford's splendid anthology of Rudy Wiebe's stories and  Harry  Savage's blue-filtered photographs, Alberta  A Celebration   (Hurtig). However  mercantile  the  poster  is, its  character   derives from its voice, its laconic  passion for place. And this is precisely what Wiebe, at his anecdotal   best here,  tries  to evoke:  the  "innumerable stories"  that  happen every day; stories of the land, from which the people derive their gritty strength; "liar-talk," "chinook  stories,"  "bear  stories,"  that  mask  the  strangeness  of  the imagination   with  the  colloquiality  of the  tale-telling voice;  "quality stories," as one character  puts it, "when  there's  nothing  but the  usual scenery sliding past" (compare that  with Harlow's quest for the spirit of wilderness) ; stories that con­ nect human  lives with pleasure and  the past ("to  en joy life is no crime")  as well as with  change  and  emptiness-because "there's  still the land." And  what  the land  represents is a certain  constancy of human  existence, human  story.
"How  to tell the Story" is the repeated subject in Dick Harrison's lively and in­ teresting set of conference proceedings, Crossing Frontiers (University  of Alberta), with  contributions from  Kroetsch,  Mandel,  and  several others-the  process of story-telling differing, several writers say, on opposite sides of the U.S.jCanadian border. Harrison  himself, in another set of proceedings -Merrill Lewis and L. L. Lee's The  Westering  Experience  in  American  Literature  (Western  Washington Univ.)  -differentiates the American literary pattern, of seeking through  Western myths to find historical fact,  from the Canadian, of  going  back for  the myth in order to find the present.  (In  one of the best essays in the Lewis and  Lee volume, incidentally, Kenneth  Innis attributes  to Pratt  what American  literature attributes  to  Parkman, the  creative  discovery of Brebeuf  and  the  "heroic  origins  of  the country"-Pratt, "by a radical  act of imagination,  reconciling the Jesuit's vision "for all of Canada.") The  contrast  between the process of telling a people's story and the theme of the stories the people tell could not be more clearly revealed than by  comparing   the  Harrison  volume  with  Richard   Chadbourne  and  Hallvard Dahlie's  The  New  Land  (Wilfrid  Laurier  University).  The  latter  book contains the papers from yet another  conference;  these are full of information, but exposi­ tions rather  than  enactments  of narrative  gesture. Still, it is artificial  utterly  to separate  these  two  critical  stances.  We  cannot  perceive  or  articulate a  subject except by some sort of process. And the process connects us with a tradition,  pos­ sibly our  own.  As Henry  Kreisel  observes, in  an  autobiographical essay in  the Annals of the  2nd Montreal  Symposium of the German-Canadian Studies Asso­ ciation, taking on a language  means taking on a world; struggling with a language is part of the individual  process of coming to terms with the world;  failing with a language  is less important than  trying  it out;  and  for  himself, "what mattered ultimately  was the attempt, now and again, to break the silence."
Such "silence," symbolic and  imaginative  as much as substantive  and  rational, impedes  the  mind's  eye as much  as the ear. Unless the  mind  of the  maker,  the

5

EDITORIAL

dancer,  the watcher,  animates them, masks do not speak or see. Animated,  they enact somehow some aspect of the hidden creator.  Which brings me to two further books: The Art  of N arval M orriseau  (Methuen), with an  uneven  text by Lister Sinclair and Jack Pollock, and Coast  of Many Faces  (Douglas  & Mcintyre), photographs by Ulli Stelzer with a lucid text by Catherine Kerr. M orriseau trans­ cends its text and  becomes Norval Morriseau's  own  book simply by the boldness of his acrylic designs and the vividness of the colour reproductions of  them. They are  billed  as shamanistic  visions, but  in  this  context  the  epithet  strikes  me  as romantic  faddishness. It is possible neither  to praise  nor to dismiss the  paintings simply because they are Indian. They are not traditional, though they show a clear appreciation  of traditional  Indian  linear  design. They  are  not  imbued  somehow by Natural  Sophistication  with an inexplicable grace. They  are not religious arti­ facts.  They  do,  however, show an  acute  sense of  self-awareness;  repeated  self­ portraiture, side-by-side with  the  designs from  nature,   constitutes  a  means  of expressing a sense of self; inextricable here from the acknowledgment  of an Indian  heritage  is an acknowledgment  of a Christian  education  and  a phallic conscious­ ness. The  resulting designs as much question as celebrate  individuality  in the con­ text of the organized  culture they emerge from, and  the boldness of execution  is perhaps  a more subtle gesture than hard-edged  acrylic at first suggests.
Catherine Kerr happily draws her text for Coast  of Many Faces from the words
of the inhabitants of the fifty small West Coast communities  she and  Ulli Stelzer visited  and  recorded  here -communities  like  Kincolith,   Klemtu,   Bella  Bella, Kyuquot,  Sointula,  and Telegraph  Cove. The  inhabitants themselves are carvers, fallers, camp  cooks, sawyers, skippers, churchmen, oolichan fishermen, paper  mill workers, and  pinball players; Stelzer's magnificent  photographs catch  their  faces and the sheer pace of their lives, and Kerr has listened creatively for the phrases to match them. "This is a twenty-four hour town," says one person; "I get along good here."  Another: "My  mom used to get me up at  dawn  to see our  people's fish boats going out. Looked like a city going out, with all the lights." And yet another: "What have  we been doing for the last hundred years? We  have  been  drifting away from our culture, our beautiful culture.  Many  times I have gone to Skedans and  gone back in the hills and  looked down  on the village and  considered  what happened  there hundreds of years ago. Was I born a hundred  years too late? Now we see the  mixing  of two cultures.  We Haidas  have  adapted  both,  and  we live very comfortably  here in the village of Skidegate." We  are  beyond  oral  history with words like these, and listening to voices with a story-teller's ear. We also find ourselves piercing the public images of a self-conscious world because the photog­ rapher's art has allowed us to see through them to the wilderness and other hidden faces.
W.H.N.



6


NANCY  DREW AS SHAMAN

Atwood's Surfacing


Catherine Sheldrick Ross


It has  always  been  the  prime   function of  mythology   and   rite to  supply   the  symbols  that   carry   the  human spirit   forward,  in counteraction to  those other constant human fantasies that  tend to tie it back. In  fact, it may well be that  the very high  incidence of  neuroticism among  ourselves  follows  from  the  decline  among us of  such  effective  spiritual aid....  Apparently, there  is  some­ thing in  these  initiatory images  so necessary  to the  psyche  that  if they  are  not  supplied   from  without, through  myth  and  ritual, they   will  have   to  be  announced  again,   through  dream,  from within-lest our  energies should  remain locked  in a banal, long­ outmoded toy-room, at the bottom  of the sea.-Joseph Campbell, Hero With a Thousand  Faces



TE SPEAKER IN "Procedures for Undcrground  (Northwest Coast) " advises that from the spirit in the underland  "you can learn / wisdom and great  power, / if you can descend and  return  safely." The  narrator of Surfacing follows this ritual  pattern  of the descent into a watery underworld  and the return,
as she puts it, "with secrets." The setting is a semi-submerged paradisal island, and the characters -the brother,  the father, the lost baby, the narrator herself-are literally or metaphorically underwater. Conventionally, of course, the fallen world is perceived as flooded, as it is in "After  the Flood, we." In Surfacing, the power dam  has raised the lake level twenty feet and has literally drowned  the island, the trees, and the Indian pictographs  ("My  country, sold or drowned,  a reservoir"). The narrator, already underwater, dives down into even more water in a shaman­ istic ritual  of descent and  return. She is searching for what she calls "the power."  "For  this gift, as for all gifts, [she]  must suffer."
To structure the narrator's quest for "the  power," Atwood draws upon popular romance conventions as well as upon related patterns of ritual  and myth. On one


My acknowledgements and  thanks are  due  to the other  members of the  r38 teaching team  at  the  University of  Western   Ontario-Don Hair,  James Reaney, Richard Stingle-who have  lectured on  Surfacing  and  whose insights  I  have  freely  used  in preparing this paper.

7

ATWOOD

level, Surfacing  is a detective story like Anna's  The  Mystery  at Sturbridge, with the Nancy Drew narrator  a parody of those intrepid  "girls with  jackknives and flashlights."  Surfacing  is also, as Atwood  has pointed  out  in interviews,  a ghost story. The  activities of the narrator  are exercises that  heighten  the chances of the ghost's revealing  himself:  the  journey to a sacred  place,  isolation,  waiting,  and spiritual  preparation. The  ghosts, when they do appear, turn  out to be fragments
·of  the narrator's own psyche that she must reintegrate: her mother  as a bird  ("I
squint  up at [the  jays], trying to see her, trying to see which one she is")  and  her father  as wolf-shaman  ("it  gazes at me for a long time with its yellow eyes, wolf's eyes"). True  Romance  magazines, the fairy tale patterns  of Quebec  Folk Tales, and  the grail legends are  variously invoked  to  provide  ironic  parallels  with  the lives of the central  characters.  And  finally the  structure that  subsumes  all these others is the  narrator's quest for a ritual  that  will give meaning  to her life and restore her to health and power.
The  opening sentence, "I can't  believe I'm  on this road  again," announces  the
journey  motif  and  the  beginning  of the  quest.  The   narrator starts  off  in  the diseased southern  city and travels north to the wilderness and  to health. Her con­ dition at the beginning she describes using the following terms:  "anaesthesia"; a "strangling feeling, paralysis of the  throat"; "feeling  no  emotion"; "amnesia"; amputation ("A  divorce is like an amputation") ; "like  being in a vase";  being "frozen"; a cancellation of the flesh ("A section of my own life, sliced off from me like a siamese twin") ; and  dismemberment   ("we  ...  don't   know  how to  love, there is something essential missing in us ... Madame at the store with one hand,  atrophy  of the heart") . The  narrator  regards herself as dismembered:
after  that I'd  allowed myself to be cut in two. Woman sawn apart  in a wooden crate.... The other half, the one locked away, was the only one that could live; I was the wrong half, detached, terminal. I was nothing but a head, or no, something minor like a severed thumb; numb.
She is "cut in two," split between head and  heart, logic and  intuition, contempla­ tion and action,  between her father's  legacy of reason and  her  mother's  legacy of feeling.
The  rhyme  "severed  thumb; numb"  links the  motifs of dismemberment and anaesthesia  and  seems to echo Marshall  McLuhan's work on  the  numbing  and dismembering  effects of technology. McLuhan argues  in Understanding Media that  each  of our  technologies is an  extension  of ourselves, a self-amputation of some particular part  of our own bodies. Like Narcissus, whose name  means nar­ cosis or  numbness, we respond  to the shock of self-amputation by a  generalized numbness that  prevents self-recognition.1 In War  and Peace in the Global Village,  McLuhan quotes  from  Finnegan's  Wake, "Who gave  you  that  numb?"2    and states,  "We  are  all  robots  when  uncritically  involved  with  our  technologies."3
Atwood is as concerned as McLuhan with the narcotic  effects of our unconscious

8

ATWOOD

involvement  with technology. She aligns her narrator's personal crisis of identity with Canada's crisis, as this nation  is deluged with technology and  Americaniza­ tion. Surfacing  is, among  other things, a political book by a writer who has read her George Grant  ("When one contemplates the conquest of nature by technology
-one must  remember  that  that  conquest  had  to include  our  own  bodies") ,4     her
Harold  Innis  ( "We  are indeed  fighting for our lives.... We can only survive by taking  persistent action  at strategic  points against American  imperialism in all its attractive  guises") 5 and her Marshall McLuhan ("Submerging natives with floods of concepts for which nothing  has prepared  them is the normal  action of all our technologies") .'6   In  Surfacing, health  and  "the  power"  are  sought  as much  for Canada as for the narrator.
The   narrator's  quest  can  convincingly  represent  the  larger   national   quest because the narrator is the artist figure. The artist, says McLuhan, is the one who can  wake us up from  om: somnambulism: "The  serious artist  is the  only person able to encounter  technology  with impunity,  just because he is an  expert  aware of the changes in sense perception."7  At the beginning, admittedly, the narrator  is a false artist, an imitator  of borrowed styles who has been dissuaded  by her "fake huband" from being "a real artist" because "there have never been any important woman artists."  She recognizes, however, that  from the vantage  point of the real Quebec  wilderness the  Quebec  Folk Tales seem inauthentic, alien,  and  lifeless: "The stories aren't  what  I expected;  they're like German  fairy tales";  "this  isn't a country  of princesses, The  Fountain  of Youth and The  Castle of Seven Splen­ dours  don't  belong here"; "there  should  be a loup-garou story in  Quebec  Folk Tales." She cannot  use red for her illustrations of these borrowed legends because "they  have to keep the cost down." But in the indigenous  (and for Canada, it is suggested, the authentic) art  of Indian  pictographs, "the  predominant colour is red,"  which is a "sacred  colour."  By the end, when the narrator burns  her draw­ ings of princesses and  the Golden  Phoenix and  rejects "civilized"  food, she turns to "red foods, heart colour, they are the best kind, they are sacred."




bE STRUCTURE  OF   THE  REJECTED  European folk tales  is similar to that  of Indian  mythology,  just as Christian  patterns  of baptism,  ritual descent and spiritual  rebirth  are similar to the initiation rituals of Indian shaman­ ism that  the  narrator eventually  follows - sickness, descent  to the  water  under­ world, resurrection.  But the  point is that  the Christian  rituals  and  the imported European fairy tales and romance patterns no longer work for the narrator. In the course of the narrator's quest, the novel examines three different rituals:   Christi­ anity, Americanization, and  Indian shamanism. As in any fairy tale, the first two attempts are failures, the third  one a success.


9

ATWOOD

Chapter One  ends  with  a  reference  to  the  "redemption" that  is still  to  be achieved through  suffering and purgation.  But it will not be a Christian  redemp­ tion, and  the "wooden  Christ, ribs sticking out"  on the roadside crucifix is "the alien god, mysterious as ever." Even in the French-Canadian village, Christianity is losing its force:  "the old priest must be gone. What  I mean is dead."  David, the most unregenerate and Americanized  character  in the  book, sold Bibles door-to­ door in the fifties to put himself through  theological  seminary.  For  the narrator and, it would seem, for modern society in general, Christianity  has become a dead ritual:  "no power remained in their bland oleotinted  Jesus prints or in the statues of the other  ones, rigid and stylized, holy  triple  name shrunken  to swearwords."  The  narrator desperately needs a  meaningful  ritual  of the sort  that  Christianity used to provide that  would give significance to everyday  life. The  word that  the narrator uses most consistently for this need is "the  power." As a child, she was fascinated by Madame (at the store)  with one hand-"a great mystery, almost as puzzling as Jesus" -and speculated  that "her  main source of power was that she had only one hand." She was also attracted  to "Jack and the Beanstalk"  and felt that  if she  could  get  some scarlet  runner  beans  from  her  father's   garden  she "would  be  all-powerful,"  although  she "had  no idea  what  [she] would  do with the power once [she]  got it."
The figure that initially blocks the narrator's quest for "the  power" is her father, whose  god  is logic  and  reason  and  who  teaches  his  children   arithmetic  and geometry. The  pattern  involving death and resurrection  is crucial in the novel, but her father  has affirmed that  "You  died when  your brain  died"; "people  are  not onions, as he so reasonably  pointed  out,  they stay  under." Whereas  her  father explained  everything,  her mother  explained  nothing,  "which  only convinced  me that she had  the answers but  wouldn't  tell." The  mother's  last words to the nar­ rator do constitute a cryptic answer of sorts. The  narrator has said, "I'm not going to your funeral." A funeral should function  as a rite of passage to allow the living to come to terms with death. But this ritual  has degenerated  into an empty social form:

"I never enjoyed them," she said to me, one word at a time. "You have to wear a hat.  I don't  like liquor." She must have been talking about  Church  or cocktail parties. She lifted her hand, slowly as if through water.

The  mother  then  makes a further  statement,  which goes back beyond the Chris­ tian ceremony  to an earlier vegetation  ritual  of winter  death  and spring rebirth: "I didn't  get the bulbs in. Is there snow outside?"  Significantly, the father  does get his garden in before he dies, and when the narrator pulls up an onion, "sliding the  loose brown  outer  skin off from  the  bulb,"  the  onion  appears  "white  and eye-like."
The father's  preoccupation with reason is destructive, but his love for his garden


10

ATWOOD


associates him with the life force. His "ritual" exchange  of vegetables with  Paul is an annual  celebration  of fertility. The  parents' original  creation  of this garden in the bush was a labour  of love, of civilizing in the best sense -"the product  of skill and  of compost  spaded  in, black muck dredged  from swamps,  horse dung ferried by boat from the winter logging camps."
A structure of contrasting  images opposes the life force of the garden  to the destructive  power of modern  technology. Composting and  manure  and outhouses eventually  produce  gardens  but "what  used to bother  [the  narrator] most about the  cities [was]  the  white  zero-mouthed  toilets in their  clean  tiled  cubicles.... they roared and  made things vanish." The narrator  has read her father's books­ Edible Plants and Shoots, The  Common  Mushroom, A Field Guide to Birds, and Animal  Tracks  and Signs-and  has a precise knowledge about  plants and  ani­ mals:  "Wintergreen, wild mint, Indian  cucumber;  at one time I could list every plant  here that  could  be used or eaten"; but as for the "Americans" with  their powerboats,  "raygun fishing rods ... sniper eyes," "the  only relation  they could have to a thing ... was to destroy it."
"Americanization" is the second  ritual  the  novel explores. Its  power  is "the power to kill." The  narrator associates Americanization  with the power lines that run into underground concrete bunkers filled with rockets and with the power company that sixty years ago raised the lake level and might do so again:  "Twenty feet up....  The  garden  would  go but  the  cabin  would survive;  the  hill would become an eroding sand island surrounded  by dead trees." Americans do not necessarily live south of the forty-ninth  parallel, of course. The  Americans  in the novel who kill the heron are from Samia  and Toronto. Americans  are those who believe they can solve the  problems of existence by engineering  and  technology and  have  consequently  offended  against  the  deepest sources of life itself:  they have "turned against  the  gods." The  abortion  is the  narrator's personal  experi­ ence with technology as applied  to sex, and she associates it with other scientific ways to interrupt the natural cycle of life: the pill, artificial womb, stirrups, forceps.
So to what  has Americanization brought  the  narrator? It  has brought  her  to
"an evil grail" -the complete destruction of all human life, as represented for her by the abortion:

It was there when I woke up, suspended in the air above me like a chalice, an evil grail and I thought, Whatever it is, part of myself or a separate creature, I killed it. It wasn't a child but it could have been one, I didn't allow it.

Here Atwood  is alluding  to the familiar  pattern  of the grail legends:  a questing knight, in order to restore his own sick society, goes on a journey; after preliminary trials he comes at last to a chapel perilous where he confronts  death; if he proves himself worthy, he is granted  a vision of the Holy Grail which symbolizes power, energy, fertility, and  electric community  with others;  his life-enhancing  return  to


I I

ATWOOD

society culminates in marriage and  universal  renewal. The narrator herself  is just such  a questing figure,  and  her  journey,  at  first  physical  but  soon  psychological, brings  her at last to an underwater version of the  chapel perilous.
Her  dive into  the  watery  world  below the surface is the  key event  in the  book.
She  is descending into  her  subconscious,  into  her  own  past,  and  into  the  unre­
deemed  world.  The horror  that  she confronts there  is death:

It  was below me, drifting  towards me from  the furthest  level where  there  was no life, a dark  oval trailing limbs.... a dead  thing, it was dead.... the lake was hor­ rible, it was filled with death.

She  has seen  her dead  father. But it is also her  dead  baby  and  her  own  spiritual death  that  at  last she can  recognize:   "I couldn't accept it,  that  mutilation, ruin I'd  made, I needed  a different  version."  Ritual death is the  necessary  preliminary to rebirth and  the  reintegration of the severed  pieces of herself.  Earlier  Anna has asked, "Do you have  a twin? ... because some of your lines are double." And  now the  narrator, preparing to dive, says, "My  other  shape was in  the  water,  not  my reflection  but  my shadow." In  the  dive she  recovers  her  lost  twin,  her  shadow. Now she can  re-unite heart  and  head,  feeling  and  rationality. The  vision that she sees is at once  her father, her lost baby,  her own  past,  and  the  Indian past-the rock  paintings which  represent  the  past of this  country, submerged by American technology but still down  there  waiting  to be rediscovered.
Surfacing  turns  out  to resemble the detective stories  that  Anna so avidly  reads.
A body  is missing  and  believed  dead.  The  detective-narrator sets off  to sift  the clues:  "Whatever I find inside  [the cabin]  will be a clue." The map  of the district tacked  to the wall and  the stack of papers  are a "treasure map" with accompany­ ing legend.  "I finally  spotted  the  key," she says. At  first she  thinks  her  father is "Crazy, loony.  Bushed"-''total derangement." But  when  she  reads  the  article  "Rock Paintings of  the  Central Shield," she  is like  Hercule  Poirot, green  eyes aglow, pouncing on a clue and  rearranging the evidence into  a new pattern : "The secret  had  come  clear....  My  eyes came  open,   I began   to  arrange." The re­ ordering of the evidence involves, as so often in detective fiction, a re-identification of the  corpse: "It was no longer  his death but  my  own  that  concerned me  ... alive up to a year, a day, then frozen." She is sure now; but  as early  as the begin­  ning of Part Two she has begun  to suspect that the murderer in the case is Ameri­ can  technology with  its power  to fragment, separate body  from  head,  and  tum people into "robots or puppets":

I'm not sure when I began to suspect the truth,  about myself and about them, what I was and  what  they were turning  into.... it was there  in me, the evidence, only needing to be deciphered.... I hold inside it [time  compressed like a fist] the clues and solutions and the power for what I must do now.

The compressed  time  that  she must  examine for  clues and  solutions  is her own


12

ATWOOD


past. Earlier  she has said about Anna's hand-reading, "I  just wanted to know how long I was going  to live, she could skip the rest." She learns  that  she must remem­ ber the past in order  to predict the future. This  is the  paradox of her father's epi­ gram: "The future is in  the  North, that  was a  political  slogan  once; when  my father heard  it he said there  was nothing  in the  North  but  the past...." The nar­ rator goes north to her  childhood home  to accept  the legacy of the  past  as a gift from  each  of her parents:
I had a talisman, my father  had left me the guides, the man-animals and  the maze of numbers.
It would be right for my mother to have left something for me also, a legacy. His
was complicated, tangled,  but hers would be simple as a hand,  it would be final. I
was not completed  yet; there had to be a gift from each of them.

Her  father's gift gives her  the  power  to see:
The  power flowed into my eyes, I could see into him, he [David] was an imposter, a pastiche ...
. . . More than  ever I needed to find it, the thing she had  hidden; the power from my father's intercession  wasn't  enough  to protect me, it gave only knowledge and there were more gods than  his, his were the gods of the head, antlers  rooted in the brain. Not only how to see but how to act.
Her  mother's gift is also a pictograph, not an  Indian pictograph but  a childhood drawing she had  done of herself as a baby in her mother's womb:
That  was what  the picture  had  meant  then  but  their first meaning  was lost now like the meanings of the rock paintings. They were my guides, she had saved them for me, pictographs,  I had  to read their new meaning with  the help of the  power.

Now  that  she  had  these  two  legacies,  time,  which  was  compressed like  a fist, opens,  and  she can  read  past,  present,  and  future in her  palm :
I unclose my fist, releasing, it becomes a hand again, palm a network of trails, life­ line, past and  future,  the break in it closing together as I purse my fingers. When the heartline  and  the headline  are one, Anna told us, you are either  a criminal,  an idiot or a saint. How to act.

The "funny break" that Anna has noted  in the narrator's lifeline is healed. Heart­ line  and   headline, intuition and  logic,  action   and  contemplation are  now  one. And  now she sees not death but life and she celebrates vital energy flowing through all  nature:  "But nothing has  died,  everything is alive,  everything is  waiting to become  alive."



bE GRATITUDE THE   NARRATOR NOW  FEELS   is not  for  the Americans, whose  ritual  of death leads  to an  evil grail.  Nor  is it for  Christianity which  gave her "so little in return": "no  power remained in their  bland  oleotinted Jesus  prints...." Her  gratitude is all for the  Indian gods who,  "unacknowledged

ATWOOD

or forgotten, were  the only ones who had  ever  given  me  anything I needed, and freely." She now discovers that  her father has gone before  her on this same  quest, looking  for  deeper  sources  of  power.  The  sites  he  has  marked on  the  map   are "sacred places, the places where you could learn  the  truth":
There  was no painting at White Birch Lake and  none here, because his later draw­ ings weren't  copied from things on the rocks. He  had discovered  new  places, new oracles, they were things he was seeing the way I had seen, true vision; at the end, after the failure of logic.

The   father had  begun  perhaps by  making a  scientific  inquiry into  the  rock paintings but  by the end  he has become  a shaman himself,  seeing  and  recording new  visions. The shaman typically  withdraws to a sacred  abode of the  manitous such as a rocky cliff and, by fasting  and  dnunming, induces a trance during which he can speak  with the spirits,  journey to the upper or lower  worlds, and see visions. These  visions he  later  paints  upon  the  rock.  Atwood   includes within   the  novel itself  the  essential  information that  the  reader needs  to  know  about  shamanism and   pictographs. The   three  paragraphs, ostensibly  quoted from  Dr.  Robin   M. Grove's article   on  rock  paintings, condense   material from   Selwyn   Dewdney's Indian  Rock Paintings of the Great Lakes/ 3
Shamanism is the source for many  details  of the  novel. The central incident of diving  and  surfacing is an  initiation ritual   in  which   the  shaman discovers  his vocation. In  Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, Mircea Eliade discusses the sickness-initiation:
More  or less pathological sicknesses, dreams,  and  ecstasies are  ... so many means of reaching  the condition of shaman.... that  is, they transform  the  profane, pre­ "choice" individual  into a technician  of the sacred....
[A]11  the  ecstatic experiences  that  detennine the  future  shaman's  vocation  in­ volve the traditional schema of an  initiation  ceremony:  suffering, death,  resurrec­ tion....
The  content  of these first ecstatic experiences ... almost always includes one or more of the following themes:  dismemberment of the body, followed by a renewal
of the internal  organs and viscera; ascent to the sky and dialogue with the gods or
spirits;  descent  to the underworld  and  conversations  with  spirits and  the souls of
dead shamans; various revelations, both religious and shamanic  (secrets of the profession) .9

As well as dismemberment ("I was emptied, amputated")  and  the underwater journey,  Atwood  uses the shamanic identification of man  with  animals, the multi­ layered  shamanic universe, the shamanic boat, and  the  learning of the secret  ani­  mal language. Throughout, the narrator is associated  with  water creatures -fish, heron, and  frog. During her dive, she is "like  a frog," the amphibious animal that  earlier  has symbolized  unity of body and  head. The dive itself is a  journey  to the underworld that is made  possible because the shamanic universe  has three  levels­ sky, earth, and  underworld-connected by a  central  axis. According to  Eliade,

ATWOOD


"The  pre-eminently shamanic technique is the  passage  from  one  cosmic  region to another-from earth to the sky or from  earth  to the underworld. The  shaman knows the  mystery  of the  break-through in plane."10 The  narrator describes  what this breakthrough must  have  been like for her father:
When  it  happened the  first  time  he  must  have  been  terrified,  it  would  be  like stepping  through  a  usual  door and  finding  yourself in a different  galaxy, purple trees and  red moons and  a green sun.
Compare the first stanza of "Procedures for Underground": The  country  beneath
the earth  has a green sun
and  the rivers flow backwards.

Atwood  typically  perceives things in levels. In her poetry, she is interested in under­ ground   and  above  ground and  in  the  boundaries between   these  levels of  water,  ground, and  air.  The  multilayered shamanic universe  is therefore  already   con­ genial  to Atwood  before  she adopts it in Surfacing.
A related  motif  is the  boat  which  carries  the  gods,  the  spirits,  or  the  shaman
himself  on  journeys  to  these  other  worlds.  The  narrator has  noticed  among her father's stack  of drawings a half-moon with four  knobbed sticks coming  out  of it: "it  became a boat  with  people,  the  knobs  were  their  heads." Later  when  she  is underwater, she sees her  canoe  above  her  floating  "split  between  water  and  air, mediator and  liferaft." Here,  the  canoe  is both  a mediator between  cosmic levels and  an enclosed space  of protection. It is related  to the  ark  image  of the "floating house"  and  the narrator's recollection  of, as a child, being  with  her parents in the canoe: "what stayed  in my head  was only the mist whiteness,  the hush of moving water  and  the  rocking motion, total  safety." The contrast, of course, is with  the murderous powerboat. When, on the third  dive, the narrator again  sees the canoe, it has become  a solar  boat.  Its vital energy  contrasts  with  the death that  she finds in the  lake: "The green  canoe  was far  above  me, sunlight radiating around it, a beacon,  safety." In  Sacred  Art  of the  Algonkians: A  Study of the  Peterborough Petroglyphs, Joan and  Romas Vastokas  discuss in some  detail  the significance of the  boat:
The  soul-boat  becomes also a vehicle of the sun. In Scandinavian rock art  ... the solar-boat ... came "to symbolize everything that arose from the triumphant return of spring:  the renewal  of vegetation  and  the revival of fertility in all its forms."11

Accordingly the  narrator has  penetrated to  the  deepest  sources  of  power  and  is now ready  to share the sun's  energy  and  renewal. "Feeling was beginning to seep back into  me," she says. The renewal  is completed with  the conception of the  new child  which  she feels surfacing within  her, forgiving  her, redeeming the lost child.
The   narrator  completes her  shamanic initiation  by  learning the  new  secret language. Our damaged language of technological death  ("If you look like them

ATWOOD

and  talk like them  and  think  like them  then  you are  them  ... a language is every­ thing  you do") -this language, she says, "divides us into  fragments, I wanted to be whole." Technological America with its machinery and  its hydroelectric towers and  its skyscrapers is a vast Tower  of Babel which  will collapse  in a confusion of tongues.  The   narrator realizes  that  she  must  "immerse   [herself]  in  the  other  language." Eliade, in his chapter on "Obtaining Shamanic Powers," discusses this secret language:
In the course of his initiation  the future shaman  has to learn  the secret language that  he will  use during  his seances to conununicate with  the  spirits  and  animal spirits....
Very often this secret language is actually the "animal language"  or originates in animal cries....
Animal cries proclaim  the presence of the spirits, also proclaimed  by animal-like
behaviour....
All over the world learning the language of animals, especially of birds, is equiva­
lent to knowing the secrets of nature and hence to being able to prophesy....
Imitating animal  voices, using  this secret  language   during   the  seance,  is  yet
another  sign that  the shaman  can  move freely  through   the  three  cosmic zones:
underworld,  earth,  sky....
But  this is not all. In  numerous  traditions  friendship  with  animals  and  under­
standing  their language represent paradisa1 syndromes.... Friendship  with animals, knowledge of their language, transformation into an animal  are so many signs that the shaman  has re-established the "paradisal" situation  lost at  the dawn  of time.12

In  the  last  chapters the  narrator achieves  her  animal form.  A  loon  "accepts [her] as part of the land." She leaves her "false body" in the lake. Logic, geometry, borders  of all kinds are forbidden. Finally  she is ready  for  the  mystical  experience for  which  all  her  previous  initiatory trials  have  prepared her.  She  sees herself  in skeleton  form: "I'm ice-clear,  transparent, my  bones  and   the  child  inside  me showing  through the  green  webs of my flesh."  Eliade comments that  to "reduce oneself  to  the  skeleton  condition is equivalent to  re-entering the  womb  of  this primordial life, that  is, to a complete  renewal, a mystical rebirth." Similarly  the narrator has penetrated to the very sources of power  and  life and  is fused  with  the energy of nature. She is now one with the sacred  place  of the gods:
the trees are  like this too, they shinuner,  their  cores glow  through  the  wood and bark....
I lean against  a tree, I am a tree leaning

I am not an animal or a tree, I am the thing in which the trees and animals move and grow, I am a place.

During her  ecstatic  trance,   the  narrator can  abolish   the  present  fallen  human condition and  recover the original paradise in which  man  and  animals and  nature are  at  one.
The only stage  left in  the  quest  is the  return to society.  Joseph Campbell out-

16

ATWOOD


lines the pattern of the heroic  quest as "a separation from  the world,  a penetration to some source of power, and  a life-enhancing return." He  notes, "The return  and reintegration with  society, which  is indispensable to the  continuous circulation of spiritual energy  into the world, and  which, from the standpoint of the community, is the  justification of the long retreat, the hero may find the most difficult of all."  4
The  narrator's anticipated return to society  is structurally necessary  to complete the  two quests  of the  book-the narrator's personal  quest  and  Canada's quest. The narrator will return to the city to confront "the  pervasive  menace, the Ameri­ cans.  They  exist,  they're advancing, they  must  be  dealt  with,  but  possibly  they can  be  watched and   predicted and  stopped without   being  copied." Uncritical involvement with  our  technologies will tum  us into zombies and  robots.  But with the  help  of the  power,  the  narrator has  brought  the "evil  grail" of technological America to the surface of her consciousness where she can take steps to cope with it. Withdrawal, flight, and  invisibility  are no longer possible. Therefore  her return to the city will not  be a return to the old situation and  to the old  patterns of vic­ timization. She  will remember "the power"  and live now in the  fallen  world,  her energies  released  through ritual from  what Joseph  Campbell calls "a banal  long­ outmoded toy-room, at the  bottom  of the sea."



NOTES

1 "The Gadget Lover: Narcissus  as Narcosis,"  Understanding Media: The  Exten- sions of Man (Toronto: Signet, rg64), pp. 51-56.
2     War  and  Peace in the  Global  Village (New  York:  Bantam, rg68), p. 97·
3  Ibid., p. I 8.
4    Technology and  Empire, quoted in  Atwood's  Survival   (Toronto: Anansi,  1972), p. 48.
5    "The Strategy of  Culture" in  Contexts of Canadian Criticism, ed.  Eli  Mandel
(Chicago: Univ.  of Chicago Press, 1971), p. gr.
6    Understanding Media, p. 3 r.
7    Ibid.,  p. 33·
8    Selwyn Dewdney and  Kenneth E. Kidd,  Indian Rock  Paintings of the Great  Lakes,
2nd ed.  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto Press, 1967).
9  Mircea  Eliade, Shamanism, trans.  by Willard  Trask  (New  York: Bollingen  Foun­
dation, 1964), pp. 33-34·
10  Ibid.,  p. 259.
11 Joan  and  Romas Vastokas, Sacred  Art of the  Algonkians (Peterborough:  Mansard
Press, 1973), p. 126.
12  Shamanism, pp. g6-gg.
13   Ibid., p. 63.
14   Hero With a Thousand Faces  (1949;  rpt.  New York:  Meridian, 1970), pp. 35-36.


THE REVOLT
AGAINST INSTINCT

The Animal Stories of Seton  and  Roberts


Robert H. MacDonald



IN ms  INTRODUCTION  TO   Kind"d of  the Wild-a  chapte<
that  stands  as a succinct apologia for the animal  story -Sir  Charles  Roberts  in
1go2 explained the particular inspiration of the new genre practised by Ernest Thompson  Seton and himself. Animals and  men, he said, were not so separate  as had  been supposed, for animals, far from being mere creatures  of instinct, could and did reason, and  what is more, frequendy  displayed to the discerning observer signs not only of their psychologies, but also of something  which might  appeal  to man's spiritual  self. "We have come face to face with personality, where we were blindly  wont  to  predicate  mere  instinct  and   automatism." The   animal  story, Roberts concluded,  was thus a "potent  emancipator," freeing us from "shop-worn utilities" and  restoring to us the "old  kinship of earth," a spiritual  and  uplifting union with nature.1
These  statements  can  be labelled  "romantic," or  "transcendental," and  dis­ missed as a rather  sentimental  defence of the "inarticulate kindred" of the  wild, who are distinguished from Black Beauty and  Beautiful Joe only by the fact that they live in the woods. I  propose, however, to take  Roberts  at  his word, and  to examine  his and  Seton's  stories in  the  light  of  his crucial  distinction  between instinct  and  reason. The  animal  story, I shall show, is part  of a  popular  revolt against  Darwinian   determinism, and  is an  affirmation  of  man's  need  for  moral and spiritual  values. The animal world provides models of  virtue, and exemplifies the  order  of nature.  The  works of Seton  and  Roberts  are  thus  celebrations  of rational,  ethical  animals,  who,  as  they  rise  above  instinct,  reach  towards  the spiritual.  This  theme, inspired as it is by a vision  of  a  better  world,  provides a mythic structure for what is at first sight, realistic fiction.
At the popular level, the chief implication  of Darwin's theories of evolution and the principle of natural selection had been to diminish the distinction between man and  the animals.  We were descended  from  the apes, and  if the apes were mere brutes,  could  we be very much  different?  All creatures,  it  seemed,  owed  their present  form  to  certain  inherited  characteristics,  which  together  with  environ-

ANIMAL STORIES


mental influences, dictated their  ability  to survive.  Nature was amoral; life was a power-struggle in which  only the fittest survived. Instinct, to a large extent, seemed to govern  animal behaviour; there  was little  place in nature for ethics or spiritu­ ality.  Though man   traditionally had  been  separated  from   the  animals  by  his unique  power  of  reason,  could  it  not  now  be  that  man  himself  was  little  more  than  a brute beast?
ByI goo  one  of the  most important controversies  in the  biological  sciences  was the  question   of  animal behaviour: did  animals act  instinctively, or  were  they capable of  learning? What  was  the  nature of  an  animal's  knowledge: was  it inherited, or  was  it  acquired? Were  animals capable of  reason?  Did  they  learn from  experience, did  they  teach  each  other?  The  weight  of opinion, at least from the  biologists, seemed  to favour instinct  and  inheritance.2  In  their  reaction  to this controversy (and in  a larger  sense to the  whole  impetus of Darwinism), Seton, Roberts and   their   fellow  nature  writers   rescued   their   public   from   the  awful amorality of Darwinian nature. They  reassured  their  readers,  not  so much  that man  was superior to animals, but  that  animals were superior in  themselves,  that they  could  reason,  that   they  could  and  did  educate their  young,  and  that   they possessed and  obeyed  laws  of  their  own.  Judging by  the  commercial success  of their  stories,  this  was  a  popular and  much-needed antidote  to  Darwinian  pes­ simism.
"The life of a wild animal," said Seton in Wild  Animals I Have Known  ( I 8gg),
"always  has a tragic end." By that  he meant  that  all animals die, and  since  most of  them   prey  upon   each  other, they  frequently die  violently.   Both  Seton   and Roberts refused  to evade  this unpleasant fact: kill or  be killed is the  natural law. To  this extent  they  were  both  Darwinians: nature was indeed  red  in  tooth  and claw, and  only  the  best escaped  for a time. Thus "Kneepads," the  mountain ewe who took to kneeling as she grazed,  was an  easy prey for  the  mountain lion,  and Red  Fox's  weaker  and  stupider siblings met  an early death.3   Survival does indeed go to the fittest.
In their  biographies of animal heroes, both men repeatedly illustrate this central fact  of  the  evolutionary theory.  Their  animals are  not  ordinary animals, but superior animals, distinguished by their size, skill, wisdom  and  moral sense. These animals have  all learned to  cope  with  a  hostile environment; they  endure. They are the leaders of their  kind. Thus Wahb is the largest and  most intelligent grizzly, Krag the  noblest  mountain sheep,  Lobo a giant  among  wolves, Raggylugs a most sagacious  rabit, and  so on.  From  the first Red  Fox is the  pick of his litter,  larger, livelier, more intelligent, and, curiously, redder. Seton's  comment on the old crow, Silverspot, will serve  to characterize all these heroes:  "once in awhile  there  arises an  animal who  is stronger or  wiser than  his fellow, who  becomes  a great  leader, who is, as we would  say, a genius,  and if he is bigger, or has some mark  by which men  can know him,  he soon becomes famous in his country, and shows us that  the

19

ANIMAL STORIES

life of a wild animal  may be far more interesting  and exciting than  that  of many human  beings."
Both Seton and  Roberts took pains to establish that  everything  they wrote was
within the bounds of truth. Their animal biographies were frequently  "composite" biographies;  that  is, they included everything that  had  been done, or might  have been done, by a crow, or a wolf, or a fox, but they contained  nothing that  was not possible. Thus  Seton, in his preface to Wild  Animals  I  Have  Known, acknowl­ edges having "pieced together some of the characters," but claims that there was, in at least three of the lives, "almost  no deviation from  the truth." Roberts, intro­ ducing  Red Fox, makes the same point saying that  in the life of  his hero, "every one of these experiences has befallen some red fox in  the  past,  and  may  befall other  red foxes in  the future." He  has been,  he assures his  readers,  "careful  to keep well within  the boundaries  of fact."  We may  take  these  statements  at face value:  by and  large, both men were astute  and  careful observers of nature,  and in most of their writing give realistic, though fictionalized,  descriptions of animal life.4   Both  also claim  that  though  they  have  given  their  animals  language  and emotions, these are,  within the demands  of  the genre,  realistic, and  not anthro­  pomorphized.
However it is not realism that entirely inspires the art of Seton and Roberts, whatever  strength  that  lends to their  work, but  certain  ideas  which  frame  and condition the realism, and which give to it symbolic form. The  animal heroes may live and  die in the wild, being only interesting specimens of their race,  but  their biographies, as literature,  belong in the world of myth. 5  What  matters  is not that everything that  is told could have happened  to a fox, or a grizzly, but that  it did happen,  and  that,  for the author,  the life of the animal  was organized  according to certain  basic ideas, and  that  in its living it demonstrated certain  fundamental truths.  At the heart  of the myth that  gives structure to the  work of both  Seton and  Roberts is their  belief that  animals are  rational  and  ethical  beings, and  that they rise above instinct. This is demonstrated  most clearly in the ways the animals train  their  young to survive, and  the ways in  which  their  young  respond  to the challenge.
Seton's  story of the cottontail  rabbit,  Raggylugs,  will serve  to illustrate.  The young rabbit  Raggylugs is "unusually  quick and bright  as well as strong," and  he has in his mother  Molly an extremely intelligent  and  valiant  tutor, a "true hero­ ine," a devoted mother who finally gives her life so that  her son may survive. Here, as we might expect, are the superior animals,  models of  intelligence and  mother love. Molly's first duty is to train her son, to educate him in the skills of life. His first duty, as a successful and superior animal, is to obey. "Molly  was a good little mother and gave him a careful bringing up ... he did as he was told." Rag learns the essential rabbit  lessons, to "lay low," to "freeze,"  and  to regard  the briarbush  as his best friend. "All the season she kept him busy learning  the tricks of the trail,

20

ANIMAL STORIES


and what to eat and drink and what not to touch. Day by day she worked to train him; little by little she taught  him...." In some of his lessons he shows himself "a veritable  genius,"  and  he even goes on to take a "post-graduate course" in how to use water.  On  the  one occasion  he is disobedient-he sits up  to  watch  his mother  lose a dog-he is severely punished,  being cuffed and  knocked over by Molly.
Throughout this story Seton's  emphasis is on the intelligence  and  skill of the
successful animal,  the "tricks" it uses to outwit its enemies, and the way in which it is able to educate its young. Molly shows her son how to run a dog into a barbed­ wire fence, how to avoid snares, and  how to use water as a last resource. Animals are  not  mere  creatures   of  instinct,  behaving  according   to  a  set  of   inherited responses, but capable,  within  their own terms, of intelligent  reasoning, of teach­ ing and  learning,  and  of knowing right from wrong. Rabbits,  for  instance,  have their own language: they "have  no speech ... but they have a way of conveying ideas  by  a  system  of  sounds,  signs, scents,  whisker-touches,  movements,  and example that  answers the purpose of speech...."




IT IS WORTH PAUSING HERE  to answer some questions: is Seton not right -do animals  not have some very definite ability  to communicate in a language  of their own, and are they not capable of some kind of inductive reason­ ing? Do they not, in fact,  educate  their  young, and is there  not  more  to animal behaviour  than  a set of instinctive reactions?
The modem ethologist would almost certainly approach  these problems with caution, for the whole question of animal  behaviour  has become one of immense complexity.  In  Igoo  there  seemed  to be a straightforward contrast  to  be made between instinctive and learned  behaviour;  now the first point to be made is that rigid alternatives  are simplistic.7    Even the  terms have changed.  The  "nature or nurture" controversy has been replaced by a discussion of innate or acquired char­ acteristics, and  behaviour  is now classified as "environmentally stable"  or  "en­ vironmentally  labile."  The  discovery of imprinting,  the process by  which  certain animals when young respond as a species to certain stimulae,  has been contrasted to "adaptive" learning.  The  mental  processes of animals are not simple, but they are clearly not always automatic, or mechanical, or, in the old sense, simply instinc­ tive. Apes have  been taught  to communicate  with  humans  using  the  American Sign Language: the higher mammals, it has been argued, have mental  experiences and  probably  even a conscious awareness.8
In spite of the complexity of the problems, certain generalizations may be made. Many  animals  are  able  to learn  from  experience. Many  animals  do  teach  their young,  chiefly  by example.9    Some  animals  are  capable  of inductive  reasomng.

2I

ANIMAL STORIES

Some other  animals  may be able to adapt  their  behaviour,  by a  process of trial and error, and though it might appear  that they act rationally, they do not always seem to comprehend  what they are doing. Considered  in general  terms, however, the observations and speculations of the nature  writers are closer in many ways to current  scientific thinking  than  those of their  more  sceptical,  behaviourist  con­ temporaries.  Animals have complex means of communicating with one  another: Seton's description  of rabbit language, a "system of sounds, signs, scents, whisker­ touches" and so on, is not fanciful, though  modem  naturalists  might  argue  with the details. What  matters is not the scientific accuracy  of Seton's nature stories­ although  that  itself is an interesting question -but the ideas which give his work symbolic form. By the lights of his day he played  down  instinct;  his animals are rational  creatures  who educate  their  offspring  to  be  obedient  and  successful. As such, they are intended  to be models for human  edification,  and  nature,  though full of sudden and "tragic" death, is an ordered and in many ways superior  world.
Seton, as a careful naturalist,  frequently  describes instinctive  (or innate)  beha­ viour in animals. In most cases, he regards it as an inherited substratum, a built-in defence against the early dangers of life. He speaks of an animal's "native instincts,"  which are supplemented  by the twin teachers of life, experience  and the example of fellow animals.w The little mountain  lambs in  Lives  of the  Hunted, surprised and chased by a hunter  just after birth, are able to dodge and escape, for "Nature had  equipped  them  with a set of valuable  instincts." Instinct, however, takes an animal  only just so far. Its role in survival is subsidiary to reason. In  the story of the Don Valley partridge, for instance, Seton tells us that the partridge  chicks soon graduate from  instinctive to rational  behaviour: "their  start  in life was a  good mother,  good legs, a few reliable instincts, and  a germ of reason. It  was instinct, that is, inherited  habit, which taught  them to hide at the word from their mother;  it was instinct that  taught them to follow her, but it was reason which made them keep under  the shadow  of  her  tail  when  the sun  was smiting  down...."  And, Seton concludes, "from that day reason entered  more and  more into their expand­  ing lives."11
Roberts  treats instinct in much the same way, as a valuable  though  necessarily limited  body of inherited  knowledge. Thus  Red  Fox, as befits a superior  animal, has an extra amount: "he seemed to inherit  with special fulness and effectiveness that  endowment  of ancestral knowledge which goes by the name of instinct."  At the same time, of course, we are told that he is more intelligent, that he can reason, and that he is "peculiarly apt in learning from his mother." Instinct is, too, a latent skill, which can surface when necessary: in the story of "Lone  Wolf"  (Neighbours Unknown), the tame circus wolf who escapes to the wilds, Roberts  shows us its hero rediscovering "long buried memories" of how a wolf kills. "It was as if all his life Lone Wolf had been killing bulls, so unerring  was that  terrible chopping  snap at  the  great  beast's  throat."  These  are  perhaps  unexceptionable ideas,  yet else-


22

ANIMAL STORIES

where in Roberts'  work there is the definite implication  that instinct is a primitive force  which  must  be controlled  and  subdued  by reason. This  is especially true when applied  to man  himself  (though  as the  highest of the  "kindred" what  is true for man  is also true  for animals). In  "The  Moonlight  Trails" (Kindred of the Wild), we are told of a boy who loves animals and is sensitive to their feelings, who accompanies  the hired man on an expedition to the woods to snare  rabbits. As they set the snares the boy is moved by the primitive lust of the hunter; he feels "stirrings  of a wild, predatory  instinct."  When they return  in the morning  to see what  they have caught  the boy is still at first in the grip of the hunting  passion, but when he sees the cruel tragedy of death  his more civilized feelings come to the surface. "We  won't snare any more rabbits, Andy," he tells the hired man.
The gap between man and the animals, Roberts insists, is very narrow. Animals "can and do reason."12 Red Fox illustrates this thesis: the whole novel is a celebra­ tion of one animal's  cunning  and sagacity. We are repeatedly  told of  Red  Fox's cunning,  his "nimble  wits," his ingenious and  deliberate  schemes for evading  his enemies, his prodigious memory, his ability to study a situation,  to make plans, to reason.  We  hear  how  he outwits  "the  Boy," how  he leads  the  hounds  to  their destruction,  how he fools his enemy Jabe  Smith. His qualities are quite obvious: "look at that  cool and cunning  eye," says one of his American captors.  "He's  got brains."
In  his early education, Red  Fox shows that  instinct  is subservient  to reason. Red  Fox must  learn  both  from  his mother  and  from  experience.  "It is possible (though  some say otherwise!)  to expect too much  of instinct,"  Roberts  tells us, and  explains how a successful fox will learn  his lessons, "partly by example  and partly no doubt  by a simple language whose subtleties evade human  observation." Yet we notice that when instinct gets Red Fox into trouble, it is instinct that rescues him. His nose tells him to dig in a bees' nest for honey, and  when they sting him, he  runs  blindly  for  a  thicket,  and  automatically  cools his smarting  nose in  the mud.  These are inconsistencies:  Roberts'  dominant  theme  is the supremacy  and efficacy of his hero's  reason.  The  vixen's instructions  to  leave  men  alone  have "their  effect on [Red  Fox's]  sagacious brain," whereas his stupider  brother  thinks he knows better, and  pays the price with his life. This incident, one should note, is at the same time an apt illustration of Darwinian  theory, for it is the better animal that survives.
The  intelligent  young animal  is also the obedient young animal.  In  the School of the Woods, obedience is a primary virtue. The child must obey the parent.  "For a young animal," Seton said, "there  is no better  gift than  obedience," 13  and  he demonstrated  this again  and  again by showing us the fate of the disobedient,  the young lambs who do not come when they are called, and  are caught  and  killed, or the foolish partridge  chicks who refuse to stay close to mother. The fate of Red

ANIMAL STORIES

Fox's siblings again  makes the point:  the weak and  the foolish will not survive, but the disobedient  bring trouble upon all.
The essential argument  of this article should be clear by now:  the fiction of both
Seton and Roberts is inspired by their desire to present a moral and coherent order in the life of the wild, which is part of the greater order  of the cosmos. That many of their observations of animal life are accurate  is undeniable -animals do learn, they are intelligent  in their way, and  they are  probably  even capable  of reason. Yet what is important in Seton and  Roberts is the way the details are presented. Animals, we are told, are very much like ourselves. They  obey certain  laws, they demonstrate qualities we would do well to admire,  they are  our  own  kin. They inhabit  what is often clearly a mythic world;  they are symbols in our own  onto­ logical system. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the context of  morality.
Each animal, first of all, must learn to obey the laws of its kind. Morality  is not a human  invention, but an integral part of all nature.  "It is quite common,"  says Seton in Lives of the Hunted, "to hear conventionality  and social rules derided  as though  they were silly man-made  tyrannies. They  are really important laws that, like gravitation, were here before human  society  began,  and  shaped  it  when  it came.  In  all wild  animals  we see them  grown  with  the  mental  growth  of  the species." The higher the animal, the more clearly developed the moral system. The better the animal -the more successful, or superior specimen -the more moral the animal.  Thus  superior animals fight fair, but the weak, the cowards, and  the mean  may  well resort to dirty tricks. Krag  the  mountain sheep,  whose strength, and size, and  curling horns make him appear  like a "demi-god" to his ewes, has to beat off two other  rams to defend his rights to his harem.  One  ram  fights fair and  meets Krag  horn to horn;  the other fights foul, and  attacks from  the side. It is important that  in this moral world the immoral  ram  "works  his own  destruc­ tion,"  running  himself over a two hundred  foot cliff to his death.
These animal  laws would appear  to be somewhat  flexible, coloured as they are by the vision of the human observer, since occasionally even a "good" animal  will break the rule of his kind to preserve himself or another. This is always done for a reason:  the law may be broken in the name of the higher  good. We are told, in "Raggylugs," that  "all good rabbits forget their feuds when their common enemy appears." Rag's  rival, the stranger, ignores this basic rule of rabbit  society, trying to drive Rag  into the reach of a goshawk. This is bad. Yet one sentence later  we find Rag playing the same game to save himself and his mother, as he successfully lures old Thunder the hound  into the nest of "the stranger." This,  we infer, is good.
It is at moments like this that  it is most evident  that  the animal  story belongs not to the world of natural science, but to the world of literature. There are good animals  and  bad  animals, and  we, as readers,  are  always expected  to be on the side of morality. Seton, however, is usually careful not to denigrate  a species: each

ANIMAL STORIES

animal,  of whatever  kind,  has some quality  that  a man  might  admire.  Even the hated  rat  is courageous.14   Roberts, on the other  hand,  lets his sympathies  show: there are some species who exhibit only the worst. Such are lynx. In "Grey  Lynx's Last Hunting" we are shown a portrait  of animal cruelty, selfishness and  marital hatred,  whose appropriate outcome  is the sordid death  of the male, killed by his savage and  mad  mate.  Both writers, in their  desire to make a moral  point, cross from  realism into  romance.  Seton  has a story of wolves who lynch  an apparent cheat and liar/5  and  Roberts  the fanciful tale of a society of animals  who volun­ tarily resolve not  to kill "within  eyeshot" of a sensitive and  disapproving  child.16
Throughout Roberts'  work there  is an  insistence on the meaning,  the vitality,
the harmony  and  the morality of the struggle of life, and in Seton, of the fairness and  ultimate  order  of  nature.   Perhaps  the  most dramatic illustration  of  their essentially similar  moral  philosophy is Seton's short The  Natural  History  of  the Ten  Commandments  ( rgo7), in  which  he finds  that  the  Mosaic  laws are  not "arbitrary laws given to man,  but are fundamental  laws of all highly developed animals." Animals, in their  own way, observe the last six of the  ten  command­ ments, and  in their occasional  willingness to "throw  themselves on  the mercy of some other  power,"  manifest  the beginnings of a spiritual  life. Man, obeying the first four  commandments, acknowledges the Deity;  the higher  animals  acknowl­ edge man.



b:rs rs AN IDEA which, in its implications of a natural cosmic order, testifies to the true symbolic role of the animals. There  is an obvious corres­ pondence  here to the writing of Seton's contemporary,  Kipling,  and  especially to the society of The  Jungle  Books (rgr7). Roberts, in his preface to The  Kindred of the  Wild, praised  the  Mowgli stories, though,  noting  that  the  animals  were "frankly  humanized," distinguished  them  as a different  and  a  separate  kind  of fiction from Seton's and  his own. Yet the difference is one of  degree, rather  than  kind:  Kipling's  jungle animals are also rational  creatures, who live in a balanced and  reasonably  harmonious society, provided  they obey  the  rules of their  kind. There  are good and superior animals such as Bagheera the panther  and  Baloo the bear, and evil animals such as Shere Khan  the tiger and the whole tribe of mon­ keys. The  evil are punished and  the good survive. The laws of the  jungle must be obeyed. Man, in the shape of Mowgli himself, is superior to all the other animals. 17
In  their  insistence on certain  social principles-for instance  the all-important rule that  the young must obey the old, and  that obedience is both a necessity and a duty-Seton, Roberts and Kipling all use their animal stories to exemplify clear and  precise morality. The  first law an animal learns, Seton tells us, is obedience, and  it is with  the Fifth  Commandment, "Against  Disobedience," that  he begins his examination  of the  Mosaic  code of nature.  This  is the  law  "which  imposes

ANIMAL STORIES

unreasoning  acceptance of the benefits derivable from the experience of those over us."18 We remember from Red Fox "how sternly Nature  exacts a rigid observance of her rules," and  how Red Fox himself is always obedient  to his mother, for "it was no small  part  of his intelligence that  he knew how much  better  his mother knew than  he." Obedience for Kipling is the first law of the jungle;  every cub of the wolf pack must learn it:
"Now these are the Laws of the Jungle, and many and mighty are they;
But the head and  the hoof of the  Law and  the  haunch  and  the hump is-Obey!"

It  could  be argued  that  the evidence for the success of this moral  philosophy, and the public acceptance of an anti-Darwinian optimism, can be found in the popularity  of the  nature  writers. Both Seton's  and  Roberts'  nature  stories went through  edition  after  edition  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and  one  would suspect  that  Kipling's  jungle Books were read  to generations  of young listeners. All three  writers supported  the status  quo;  a  child,  if he  paid  attention   to the moral  lessons, would surely be improved.  There  is, however, one other  means of estimating  the  popular  encouragement  given  the  nature  writers,  and  that  in  a surprising  though  socially significant  place -the  Boy Scouts.  The  Scouts  were also trained  to be superior animals, to be brave, helpful, and  especially, obedient. The  third  and  most important  part  of the Scout  Promise  was obedience  to the Scout  Law.  Curiously,  their  founder,  General   Robert  Baden-Powell,  used  the work of the nature  writers, and of Kipling, when he came to write the manual  for his movement,  Scouting For Boys.
"Any  naturalist," Baden-Powell  told  his  scouts,  "will  tell  you  that   animals
largely  owe their  cleverness to their  mothers."19   Older  animals  taught  younger animals,  and  they  taught  them  to obey. Instinct  was  not  half  as important  as training. Seton was closely associated with the scouting  movement  from  the first, having  in fact  organized  a "woodcraft" group  for  the  boys of America,  and  in Scouting  For Boys, Baden-Powell used many of his ideas. Baden-Powell also recommended  several of Seton's  books to  his readers,  but  when  it  came  to  the crucial  questions  of  education,  of  training  and  obedience,  and  the  naturalists' models of good conduct,  he turned  not to Seton or Roberts  but  to the American writer, William Long. Long's work has now sunk without  trace;  reading  him one can  see why he would  appeal  to a straightforward moralist  like Baden-Powell. Much  more sentimental  and  didactic  than  his contemporaries, and,  one  would guess, a less careful observer of animal life, Long made no pretense at Darwinism, but preferred  to see in the school of the woods "no  tragedies or footlight effects of woes and  struggles, but rather  a wholesome, cheerful  life to make one glad  and send  him  back  to his own school with  deeper  wisdom and  renewed  courage."20
He was quite  clear on the unimportance of instinct,  and  he had  no doubt  at all

ANIMAL STORIES

about the necessity for obedience:  "when one turns to animals, it is often with the wholesome, refreshing sense that  here is a  realm where the law of life is known and  obeyed. To  the wild creature  obedience is everything. It is the deep, uncon­ scious tribute  of ignorance  to wisdom, of weakness to power."
In  Scouting  For Boys Baden-Powell  quoted  Long at  some length.  "The  Old Wolf" himself was a military  man, and  he believed in old-fashioned  virtues;  the scouting movement,  though  encouraging  individual  initiative,  was authoritarian, its aim to turn out patriots and model citizens. It was important that  boys be well trained,  and  if, in  the  stories  of the  nature  writers,  they  had  models  of  good behaviour, these were models that would naturally appeal  to boys. Even the scout patrols were named after animals. When it came time to form the junior organiza­ tion, Baden-Powell  went to Kipling, and  with his permission took his inspiration from The   jungle  Book. Significantly, the first "law"  of the  Wolf  Cubs was "the Cub gives in to the old Wolf."21
We have in this last detail the clue to the stories of animal  heroes. Animals are not so much  animals as emblems, symbols of a more perfect world. Baden-Powell called himself the "Old  Wolf," and Seton used the wolf paw mark as his signature. To each, the wolf was a superior creature, a star in an ordered and moral universe. The   animal  stories  thus  are  best  considered  mythopoeically:    Old  Silverspot, Seton's crow, drilling his troops and training his youngsters, could well be a model for General  Baden-Powell.  Red  Fox, in his bravery and  intelligence, might stand as a shining example  to any young scout.
Seen in this light, the lives of the animals  resemble, in their structure,  the life of the mythic hero:  they are born, go through  early trials, win their kingdom and die. Some, like Seton's Krag,  who returns after death  to haunt  his murderer,  even have an apotheosis.  Fate  in the shape of a Darwinian  catastrophe  ensures in the evitable death  of the hero a technical tragedy, though  the prevailing note in both Seton and  Roberts  is one of life ever renewed. Man,  especially in Seton's stories, may be part of a corrupt  and decadent postlapsarian world. In Roberts, man's ignorance and callousness are crimes against nature,  though  innocence and  good­ ness are often represented  by a child or youth, the sensitive girl or boy who knows and  loves the  creatures  of  the  woods. In  Roberts  also,  the  landscape  is  often magical or enchanted.
In  all these details it is clear that  the animal  tales of both Seton and  Roberts take their inspiration  and structure  as much from literature as from life. In  their use of the conventions  of the romance, in their echoing of a mythic  pattern,  and in their quite definite symbolic treatment  of animal character, both men translate the indiscriminate  facts of nature  into the ordered patterns  of art. At the centre of their fiction is their belief in moral and rational animals, which in its extensiveness and pervasive force, takes on the quality of an organizing myth. It is ironic that at a time when the forces of instinct, intuition and the unconscious were being redis-

27

ANIMAL STORIES


covered in  man, the  power  of the  Logos  was  found in  the  kingdoms of the  brute beasts.

NOTES

1 The  Kindred  of the Wild  (I902;  rpt. Boston: Page,  I92I), pp.  I5-29.
2    For  a summary of the history of the concept of instinct see W. H. Thorpe,  Animal
Nature  and Human  Nature  (New  York:  Doubleday, I974), pp.  I34 ff.
3   "Kneepads" appears in Seton's  Lives of the Hunted  ( I90I), "Red Fox" in Roberts' Red  Fox  ( I905). Roberts wrote  over  two hundred stories: I have  chosen  to refer only  to those  that  are  (I) best known,  and  ( 2)  written from  the animal's point  of view, or  (3)  contain some statement on or illustration of the instinct  problem.
4  Both  Seton  and  Roberts were  embroiled in  a controversy on  the  realism  of  their stories,  having, in  I903, come  under  attack from  the  naturalist, John Burroughs.
W. J. Keith argues that  the  problem  of realism  is important: "the  stories are con­
vincing  only in so far as they can  be accepted as at  least  possible within  the  world
of nature" (Charles G. D. Roberts  [Toronto: Copp Clark, I969],  p. 93).  This  is a reasonable view, to which it is worth  adding that  it depends on the genre-if the
author's intention is realism, and  not romance. A difficult  case is presented by, for
example, The  Heart  of the  Ancient  Wood, which,  to  use  Northrop Frye's  tenns, falls  into  the  mode  of  romance. In  this  tale  a  loving,  intelligent, maternal bear
named Kroof  protects the child  Miranda, and  eventually rescues Miranda and  her mother from  a  pair  of wicked  men.  Did  Roberts expect   his  readers to  take  this fairytale as "realistic" fiction?
6    See  Joseph Gold,   "The Precious  Speck  of  Life," Canadian   Literature, No.  26 (Autumn I965), pp.  22-32. In  this important and  provocative article, Gold  argues for an archetypal and  mythic  interpretation of Roberts' animal stories. He  sees the essential  myth  in Roberts as that  of the vitality  and  persistence of life in its cycles. Roberts, he states,  left a body of work "consistently arranged about a clear  idea  of the order  of life itself."
6    These  were  the  very points on which  Seton  and  Roberts were  challenged by John Burroughs, when  he returned to the  attack in  I905, in  his  book Ways  of  Nature. See Keith, pp. gi-92.
7    See Thorpe, pp.  I5I  ff. For  more extensive  discussion,  seeR. F. Ewer,  Ethology of
Mammals (London: Elek,  I973).
8    See Donald R. Griffen, The  Question  of  Animal  Awareness  (New  York: Rocke­
feller  Univ. Press,  I976).
9  See Ewer,  pp. 277-78.
10   "Badlands Billy," in  Animal  Heroes  (New  York: Grosset  and  Dunlap, n.d.), pp.
I24-25.
11  Twenty-three years  later  Seton   retreated  from   this  position,   and   declared that "although an  animal is much  helped  by its mother's teaching, it owes still more  to the racial  teaching, which is instinct...." See his foreword to Bannertail  (London: Hodder and  Stoughton, I922).
12   Kindred, p. 23.
13  Lives of the Hunted, p. 43·
14  See "The Rat  and  the Rattlers," Mainly About Wolves  (London: Methuen, I937),
pp.  I7I-79·

ANIMAL STORIES


15  "The Wolf  and  the  Primal Law," Mainly  About Wolves,  pp.  I2I-3I. Here,  as so often  in Seton, it is man  himself  who is the villain.
16 The  Heart of the  Ancient  Wood, p. I28.
17  For  a discussion  of the educational and  moral  didacticism of The  Jungle Books see
Shamsul Islam,  Kipling's "Law" (London: Macmillan, I975),  pp.  I22-3I.
18   Natural History, p. 7·
19   R. S. S. Baden-Powell, Scouting  For Boys (London: Cox,  I908),  p.  I24.
20    School of the Woods:  Some  Life Studies of Animal Instincts and Animal Training
(Boston: Ginn,  I 902) , p. 2 1.
21  The  Wolf-Cub's Handbook  (I9I6; rpt.  London: Pearson,  I923),  p. 39·








LJIUGHTER OF CROWS
 


Ernest Hekkanen


When my time came  around the  sky filled with  crows,
all  gesturing in  unison
and  beckoning me on.

So I went  the  beating  route, escorted  by my nightmare and  the  howling  tongues
of feathered phantomrey.

I went  into  the  bird  black unknown, hugging my fear and  disdaining the maker
of my inadequate  flesh.

I went  with a swoon of wings, plummeting into  the wide terrain where  flight  became  the law
and  I lost myself in motion.

I went  with  the  beckoning  and  found myself in  the  dark enormity, wingless and  depleted, laughter of crows  consuming me.

29


Jl GJIME OF JINGELS

Anne Szumigalski


"look  at  me"  I say
to your face on the  pillow
to your eyes with  their  straight glossy stare

and  I move my arms  up  and  down  to remind you that  I am  that  woman  who  once  came
with  armfuls of ferns,  with  armfuls of branches, bunched them  and pinned  them  to the shoulders
of your tunic,  trying  to persuade you
to flap and  fly upwards out of this cup of earth between  the mountains

"remember" I say
"those  sundays  we spent in a  tent  of sheets
testing  our  hold  on each  other caressing  with  silky pinions
one  another's  flesh
how  our  mouth's soft  beaks gave off cries like battling doves or other  fierce creatures"

the eagle for instance flying  upwards
until  the sun ached  our watching eyes as it  flashed  between
those specks of wings

when  the  bird  fell
on gopher  or prairie  mouse we could  hear  the  air whistling  through its claws and  you smiled

as you do now grasping the  blankets with  old  talons


UNDER THE VOLCANO

The Myth of the Hero


George Rhys Garnett



IN CHAPTER  SEVEN OF   Und<'  the  Volcano, Laruelle  chal­ lenges the  basic validity of the  Consul's  quest. The  Consul  first defends himself by stating that:
'You are interfering  with  my great  battle ... Against death  ... My battle  for the survival of the human  consciousness.'

"[I] t never occurred to me," wrote Lowry, in a letter  published several  years after Under  the Volcano, "that  consciousness itself could  be of any  aid,  quite  the con­ trary,  and  let alone  a goal...."
For  a moment, the  Consul  is able  to see this goal-the integration of uncon­ scious contents into  consciousness.  Yet Laruelle, although essentially  advising abandonment of this  struggle, nevertheless  points  to what  is lacking in  the  Con­ sul's  method of  conducting his  "great battle." It is,  argues   Laruelle,  "precisely  your  inability to see ... the  things  so important to us despised  sober  people,  on which  the balance of any human situation depends ... that  turns  them into instru­ ments  of the  disaster  you have  created  yourself."
The  Consul  has  indeed  lost -or  failed  to find -"balance," and  puts  fatally
at  risk consciousness  of any sort. The  case Laruelle  puts  is for  normalcy,  a condi­ tion  that  is the  equivalent of defeat  for the  Consul  (as  demonstrated by  Laruelle  himself,  living  in  a  state  of  permanent exile from  his  creative-destructive self). "But  had  they ever led a normal happy  life," the Consul  has asked  himself,  has it "ever  been  possible for  them?" Laruelle's argument is not  likely  to convince  one who  in  the  darkness  of the  shadow has  glimpsed  a  "brightness" infinitely  more alluring than  the  pusillanimous  compromise of Laruelle's normalcy.

'And you forget'  [Laruelle adds]  'what you exclude from this, shall we say, feeling of omniscience. And at  night, I imagine, or between drink  and  drink,  which is a sort of night, what  you have excluded, as if it resented that  exclusion, returns-'
'I'll  say it returns',  the Consul said, listening at this point....

What you  have  excluded, as  if it resented  that   exclusion,  returns -but  what Laruelle fails to understand is that  he is suggesting  only an alternative and  inferior form  of exclusion.  What the  Consul  would  have  to exclude  from  an  attempt at "normal" life  with  Yvonne would  also "as  if it  resented  that  exclusion" return.

UNDER THE VOLCANO

Laruelle's escape-route from  conflict  is inferior because  it  holds  out  no  hope  for growth-growth towards  individuation-of  the  personality, merely  the  sealing off  (in  a  dubiously secure  persona)  of  what   are  for  the  Consul  the  sources  of potential growth. The  fascination and  terror of the  Farolito is that  it  may  offer not only death but  also rebirth  for "the human consciousness."
"'Facilis est  descensus  Avemo,'" argues   Laruelle, "'it's too  easy.'" "'You deny  the  greatness of my  battle?  Even  if I win.  And  I shall  certainly win  if I want  to,'  the  Consul  added... .'' A real danger to the  Consul  is revealed  here  in this too glib and  vainglorious  assertion. The danger -described by Jung as "infla­ tion" -is  the  Consul's presumptuous if intermittent belief  that   he  can  at  any
point  control by an  act  of  will  those  fundamental sources  of  human motivation
and  behaviour of which he has obtained such  confused  and  uncertain yet vital knowledge. The danger  is emphasized by a quotation that  springs  into  his mind  as he makes  this statement:
<Je crois que le vautour  est doux a Promethee et que les Ixion se plaisent en Enfers.'

" 'I love  hell,' " he  declares  later,  " 'I can't wait  to  get  back  there... .' " But between Prometheus and Ixion there  appears to be a crucial distinction in achieve­ ment.
Prometheus stole  fire from  the  gods  and  gave  it  to  man; Ixion  attempted to seduce  the  goddess  Hera,  Jove's  wife, but  was outwitted by Jove  who "shaped a cloud  into a false Hera with whom  Ixion,  being  too far  gone in drink  to notice  the deception, duly  took his pleasure." He  was scourged and  bound  "to a fiery wheel which  rolled  without cease through the  sky."1 Both  were  punished for  their  pre­ sumptuousness, but  whereas  Prometheus' terrible punishment did  not  discredit that symbolic  advance in  consciousness for  man  that   he achieved, Ixion's was  a consequence both  of presumptuousness and  incapacity. He presumed to know the anima in her highest form, yet lacked  the wisdom  and alertness not to be deceived  by the false anima that  Jove created  for him.
The Consul  claims,  in effect, to  have  Promethean ambitions ("My  battle for
the survival of human consciousness") . C. G. Jung provides  his interpretation of the significance of the Prometheus myth -of  the  achievement of this "hero" and of his punishment:

every step  towards  greater  consciousness is a kind  of Promethean guilt:   through knowledge, the gods are as it were robbed of their fire, that  is, something  that  was the property  of the unconscious powers is torn  out  of its natural context  and sub­ ordinated to the whims of the conscious mind. The  man who has usurped  the new knowledge  suffers, however,  a  transformation  or  enlargement  of   consciousness, which  no longer resembles that of his fellow men ... but in doing so has alienated  himself from  humanity.  The  pain  of this loneliness is the  vengeance  of the gods, for never again can he return  to mankind.  He is, as the myth says, chained  to the lonely cliffs of the Caucasus, forsaken of God and  man.2

32

UNDER THE VOLCANO


Elsewhere,  he  adds:   "The crucifixion  evidently  betokens  a  state  of  agonizing bondage and suspension, fit punishment  for one foolhardy enough to venture like a Prometheus  into the orbit  of the opposing principle."3
Here, clearly enough, the punishment fits the crime; and both crime and punish­
ment  are undoubtedly heroic in stature.  The  Consul may, by implication,  claim such heroic stature  for his "battle." But is this claim entirely convincing? In some respects, he is perhaps closer to lxion:

The Consul was gazing upward dreamily at the Ferris wheel ... tonight it would be lit up ... the wheel of the law rolling. ...

He, like Ixion,  is drunkenly  un-heroic when he penetrates  his "false"  anima,  the Maria/Yvonne of  the  Farolito; and  he  too,  like  Ixion,  is-albeit  briefly­ whirled  helplessly round  on  the  giant  wheel of the  "Infernal  Machine" at  the Quanuahuac Carnival.
In a curious passage, he appears  to become aware of this possibility -that his "battle" may be both presumptuous  and futile  (the  passage is curious, because it is unclear whether  it is spoken by Laruelle, by the Consul, or is a combination  of both, merging  within the Consul's mind) :

'To say nothing of what you lose, lose, lose, are losing, man. You fool, you stupid fool ... You've even been insulated from the responsibility of genuine suffering ... Even the suffering you do endure is largely un-necessary. Actually spurious. It lacks the very basis you require of it for its tragic nature. You deceive yourself .... '

He then sees a sign being nailed to a tree:  "Le gusta este  jardin. ..." It is a sign which recurrently  reproaches  his neglect of the garden  of the self, and sounds an ominous warning  of his final incapacity to wrest the knowledge that  he confusedly seeks from "the gods" who, whether he succeeds or fails, will exact their vengeance for the attempt. But how should he respond to this suggestion that  his "suffering" is both self-indulgent  and  self-destructive? That  the Consul's  quest may  well be presumptuous is a warning he ought to heed; and that it is being undertaken  with unbalanced   and  flawed  equipment   he  must-for  survival's  sake -recognize. Yet these signs and suggestions may be acting as do those voices and illusions which attempt  to convince the Grail-seeking knight of his unworthiness  or of the futility of his quest. And  if he is, still, potentially either  lxion  or Prometheus,  only one consequence is at this stage certain -he has invited and will suffer the vengeance of the "gods."
Prometheus,  although  "crucified" in punishment, first returned  with the gift of fire for mankind. But  what  of a would-be  thief of fire who is consumed  by the prize that  he seeks? Is his whole endeavour  thereby rendered  worthless, shown to be both "spurious" and futile? If so, it would be difficult to explain why, and how, such  myths  still  persist  and  still fascinate.  "Man started  from  an  unconscious state,"  wrote Jung,  "and  has ever strived for greater  consciousness. The  develop-

33

UNDER  THE  VOLCANO

ment  of consciousness is the  burden, the suffering, and  the  blessing of mankind," and: "Every advance in culture is, psychologically,  an extension of consciousness," and  the  role of the individual, the "hero," is to cut  "a new  path  through hitherto untrodden territory...."Additionally, he states  that: "The goal is important only as an idea: the essential thing  is the opus which  leads to the goal:  that is the goal of a lifetime."4
It is arguable, therefore, that  the question  of whether or not the Consul's heroic­
tragic  pretensions are  justifiable  need not be answered only in terms of his success or failure  in achieving a "goal" that  he is, indeed, never able to identify  (yet which is imposed  most vividly in his dream-vision of "the mighty  mountain Himavat"). It can  be answered also in terms of the nature and  quality of his "opus." In  these respects, perhaps, he can be shown to be triumphant -not in his "fall," but in the nature and  persistence  of his quest,  in  the  "extension of consciousness" towards enabling "Modern man  ... to know how  he is to reconcile  himself  with  his own nature-how  he  is to  love  the  enemy  in  his  own  heart and   call  the  wolf  his brother." 5
"The myth of the hero,"  wrote Jung, "... is first and  foremost a self-representa­ tion of the longing  of the unconscious, of its unquenched and  unquenchable desire for  the  light  of consciousness."6    Under  the Volcano  embodies such  a myth,  and the  Consul  is such  a hero.  But,  as I have  already  indicated in contrasting Ixion  and  Prometheus, there  are  many  such  heroes, many  stages,  many  paths.  Joseph  Campbell demonstrates this in The  Hero with a Thousand Faces. The full cycle, as outlined by Campbell, takes the hero through three  main  stages:   ( 1 )  separation or departure; ( 2)  trials  and  victories of  initiation; ( 3)   return and  reintegration. However, as he points out, many  tales isolate or concentrate on "one  or two of the typical  elements  of the full cycle."7




h:ESE THREE MAIN  STAGES CAN, broadly, be traced through Lowry's fiction: Ultramarine  can be seen to correspond to the "separadon or departure," Under  the Volcano  to "the Stage  of the Trials," and  "The Forest  Path to  the  Spring," however  ambiguously, to "return and  re-integration." Campbell describes  the  process in more detail:

The  mythological  hero, setting forth  from  his commonday  hut  or castle, is lured, carried  away, or else voluntarily  proceeds, to the threshold  of adventure.  There  he encounters  a shadow  presence  that  guards  the  passage. The  hero  may defeat  or conciliate  this power and go alive into the kingdom of the  dark. ...

If, as can  be argued, Dana  Hilliot  has proceeded thus  far, it is clearly  by means  of
(at  best)   conciliation rather than  "defeat" of "this power" that  he is able  to go

34

UNDER THE VOLCANO


down  with  Nikolai  into  the  "firebright" darkness  of the stokehold, at  the  novel's end.  Campbell continues:
The  hero  may ... go alive into the kingdom of the dark  (brother-battle, dragon­ battle  ...)  or  be slain  by the opponent  and  descend  in  death   (dismemberment, crucifixion). Beyond  the  threshold ... the  hero  journeys  through  a  world of un­ familiar  yet strangely intimate forces, some of which severely threaten  him  (tests),  some of which give magical  aids  (helpers) ....

The  Consul's very  situation is  being  described   here-the  nature of  the  world through which  he now travels,  throughout his final hours  of the Day  of the Dead, and  of those forces which  now  threaten, terrify  (in the  ruined  garden of Chapter Five,  in  Jacques' house,  most  powerfully  and  overwhelmingly at  the  Farolito in the  final  chapter), now  offer  aid,  advice,  comfort-or escape  (the old  woman from  Tarasco, Senora Gregorio, Laruelle, Dr.  Vigil,  Cervantes, the  old fiddler).

When  he  arrives  at  the  nadir  of the  mythological  round   [writes  Campbell],  he undergoes a supreme ordeal and gains his reward. The  triumph  may be represented as the hero's sexual union with the goddess-mother of the world  (sacred marriage), his  recognition   by  the  father-creator  (father   atonement), his  own  divinization (apotheosis), or  again-if  the  powers  have  remained  unfriendly   to  him-his theft  of  the  boon  he  came  to gain  (bride-theft,  fire-theft); intrinsically it  is  an expansion of consciousness  and  therewith  of being  (illumination, transfiguration, freedom). The final work is that of the return.  [My italics.]

The "Road of Trials" may  therefore include  "'The Meeting with  the  Goddess' (Magna Mater) ; or the  bliss of infancy  regained" -a stage  reached, at least, by the  Consul  in  the  darkness of Senora  Gregorio's womb--and-tomb-like  cantina­ and  it may also include a meeting with  "'Woman as the Temptress,' the  realiza­  tion and  the  agony  of Oedipus" -the Consul's devastating penetration of Maria in  the  innermost recesses of  the  Farolito, after  which  no  "Atonement with  the Father" can  take  place-as  Sanabria's  sternly  implacable hostility  so  strongly emphasizes-perhaps because  the Consul  does not so much  perceive  and  possess the  anima, in  this embrace, as succumb, surrender to her, surrender to his ignor­  ance  and  terror of her, and  is thereby  possessed by her.
Even  if the  hero survives  such  tests and  eventually  "re-emerges from  the king­ dom  of the  dead   (return, resurrection)" with  the  "boon" that  could  restore  the world,  he may be seriously damaged by his experiences  and  may, in any case, be so changed by them  that  he  cannot reintegrate adequately into  the  "commonday" world.8  Similarly, the  very  nature of  his  gift-as  something  "unknown," for­ bidden, which  threatens (and if accepted necessitates)  change-may cause it to be  ignored, misunden;tood, mistreated, in  the  world  of  surface consciousness  to which  it has been brought.
Thus the  continuous struggle of  the  protagonist in  "The Forest   Path   to  the
Spring"-who at certain points believes himself to be living in the near-paradisal


35

UNDER THE  VOLCANO

aftermath of just such a struggle as Dana may find himself forced to confront, and as the  Consul engages in and  is overwhelmed  by-emphasizes that,  in  psycho­ logical terms, the "battle" is never definitively won;  or, alternatively, that retreat or escape from  the "battle" (to  a "Blessed Isle," a "Land   Without  Fear")  can never be entirely secure.
" 'You  are interfering  with my great  battle  ... for the survival  of the  human consciousness,' " the  Consul tells Laruelle,  who, in turn  appears  to suggest that this battle is essentially "spurious"  and "lacks" the very "basis"  required  of it "for its tragic nature." Insofar as the Consul fails to distinguish "spurious" from "genu­ ine"  elements in  his "battle," he weakens that  basis; insofar  as he seeks  escape from rather  than  confrontation  with symbols of transformation, as in  his desire to create  and  remain  within  his "Land  Without  Evil"9   and  without  conflict -the white  city of "Tiaxcala" envisioned in Chapter Ten -he  reverts to a relatively preliminary  stage that  Campbell  names the "Refusal  of the Call." In  this condi­ tion, to use Campbell's  words, "All he can do is create  problems for himself and await  the gradual  approach  of his disintegration"; or, as Jung  puts it:  "If the demand  for self-knowledge is willed by fate and  is refused, this negative attitude  may  end  in  real  death  ... he is caught  in  a  blind  alley from  which  only self­ knowledge  can  extricate  him.  If he  refuses this  then  no  other  is open  to  him. Usually he is not conscious of his situation, either, and the more unconscious he is the more he is at the mercy of unforseen dangers....10
"[T] he essential thing is the opus which leads to the goal"; Lowry's achievement in Under  the Volcano  is in the opus which  explores and  so vividly records this modern version of the myth of the hero. Yet the Consul fails, falls -and Laruelle survives, to live on  his half-life of compromise  and  exile from  his own  creative­ destructive inner-self. What  then does Under  the Volcano  achieve? Is it  merely a cautionary  tale,  fatalistic in implication,  and  offering  only the  alternatives  em­ bodied  in  Laruelle's  self-denying  "normalcy" or  the  Consul's  ultimately  self­ destructive  and compulsive rejection of "normalcy"?
If, as Jung  asserts, "The  hero's main feat is to overcome  the monster of  dark­ ness:  it  is the  long-hoped-for  and  expected  triumph   of  consciousness  over  the unconscious"11  [my italics], what value can we discover in a "hero" who so spec­ tacularly  fails in this main task?
As I have already noted, a particular  version of the myth may "isolate  or con­ centrate on one or two of the typical elements of the full tale"; Under  the Volcano  concentrates  upon the second main  stage in  Campbell's  cycle. The  Consul,  part deliberately,  or wilfully, part compulsively, has essentially achieved  the first stage
-"a  separation   from  the  world,''  and  moves, during  the  twelve  hours  of the novel's main  action, definitely into -though  not out of-the second:  "a  pene­ tration  to some source of power,'' the stage of trials, and of crucial encounters with symbols of this source of power. And, as I have suggested, it is arguable  that  what

UNDER THE VOLCANO


"The  Forest  Path  to the Spring"  deals with, essentially, is the condition  of one who has returned  or retreated from this second stage.
The  value of Under  the Volcano  does not depend on the success of its hero in
carrying the myth through  its full cycle, but in revitalizing the myth in its crucial central stage. I quoted  Jung  as stating that "Every  advance  in culture,  is psycho­ logically an extension of consciousness," the role of the individual  being to cut "a new path  through  hitherto  untrodden  territory."  Paradoxically,  this "new"  path may  be a very old  path; the  path  pursued  by the  Consul  has, in a  sense, been trodden   before-by  those  medieval  alchemists  whose  parables  and  formulae  Jung  demonstrates  to  be, at  best, profound  explorations  of the  process of indi­ viduation; and  by writers  such  as Melville, Poe, Baudelaire,  Goethe,  to  whom Lowry pays more than occasional tribute;  and, in innumerable myths and legends, by "the  hero with a thousand  faces."
The important achievement,  Jung argues, is "not  to know the truth,  but to experience it.m2   In this instance, "knowledge" appears to mean intellectual under­ standing,  and  "experience" to  be equivalent  to the  combination  of  intellectual understanding with emotional-with the "feeling value" of the experience. 13 To read Campbell's synopses of myths, to understand  his analyses and categorizations  of stages in the hero myth -this is a valuable  process, but one that  operates pri­ marily at the level of acquiring "knowledge"; to read  Under  the Volcano  and  to absorb  its imaginative revitalization  of the aspects of  the  myth  with  which  it is centrally concerned, this is to move very much further towards "experience." And the value of this experience  depends, crucially, upon the imaginative  vitality and profundity  with  which  the myth is explored.  A  playing with  myth, as a kind of decorative  embellishment  to art, or as a more or less pretentious  assertion of the universality and  (therefore!)  profundity  of the theme that  is treated,  is likely to have the effect not of revitalizing the myth and its symbols, but of trivializing and thereby devaluing  them  (a process that is frequently at work in the "consciousness" of Dana  Hilliot,  and  which can arguably  be seen to operate,  for example, in the drama  of Jean  Anouilh, and the fiction of John  Fowles or John  Barth).
Jung states :
Eternal truth  needs a human language that alters with the spirit of the times. The primordial images undergo ceaseless transformation and yet remain ever the same, but only in a new form can they be understood anew.14
This statement contains  the key to Lowry's achievement  in Under  the Volcano. "Not  for  a moment," declares Jung,  "dare  we succumb  to the  illusion that  an archetype  can  be finally  explained  and  disposed of.  Even  the  best attempts  at explanation  are only more or less successful translations into another  metaphorical language.  (Indeed, language  itself, is only an image.)  The  mo:rt  we can do is to dream  the  myth  onward:r and  give it a modern  dress.m5   In  Under  the V alcano Lowry attempted not  to explain  the  myth  ("knowledge")  but  both  to explore

37

UNDER THE  VOLCANO

and  to reformulate  it, and  by doing so to enable  the  reader  to experience  it­ indeed,  to enable  himself to experience  it.  This  attempt, to  "dream  the  myth onwards and give it a modern  dress" is triumphantly successful.
In this sense, Lowry is the hero who wrests meaning  from the chaos of his life.
In Under  the Volcano  he brings back into "common-day life" a complex yet inte­ grated symbol of the powers of consciousness to penetrate  and discover vital mean­ ings within  the ever-threatening darkness of the  unconscious. That  this achieve­ ment gave meaning to a life otherwise characterized  by a most painful and pathetic inability  to come to terms with a  (therefore)   most hostile and  destructive  libido, is all too evident in his biography. That  the achievement simultaneously exhausted his potential for any further sustained struggle towards conscious-unconscious inte­ gration,  is similarly  demonstrated  both  in  the  life  and  the  work of his last  ten years.16
What Lowry confronts us with in Under the Volcano, if we seriously attempt  to
enter  its world  and  to "dream   the  myth  onwards," is what  Jung  regards  as a crucial moral problem:

The shadow is a moral problem that challenges the whole ego-personality, for  no­ one can become conscious of the shadow without  considerable moral  effort.  To become conscious of it involves recognizing the dark aspects of the  personality as present and real. This act is the essential condition for any kind of self-knowledge. 17 [My italics.]

"Knowledge" of this problem is of strictly limited value;  "experience" is essential if the problem is to be regarded as "real"  rather  than  (merely)  theoretical or sup­ positional. In so far as such experience can be provided  by art -specifically, by literature -it  must be discovered for us, and  by us, through  the symbol -not, as Jung  emphasizes, a symbol reduced to sign and "finally explained  and disposed of," but  a symbol which finds "a  human  language" that  has altered  "with  the spirit of the times," a "new form" in which it can be "understood anew." "Whole­  ness," writes Jung,  "is realized for a moment only-the moment  that  Faust was seeking all his life."" 8 The Consul fails to resolve the moral problem of the shadow, yet Lowry convinces us that  his striving for "greater consciousness," both  in spite of and  because of its all too human  confusion and  limitation, is potentially  the "blessing," as well as actually the "burden, the suffering  ... of mankind";19  and he does so by finding a "human language" that  is able to symbolize not only "the dark aspects of the personality as present and real," but also to realize convincingly and  "for  a moment  only" in  the Consul's  psyche such  a moment  as "Faust  was seeking all his life," the  glimpse of the  beauty  and  intensity  of "Wholeness"  so briefly and poignantly achieved in the Consul's dream-vision of "the  mighty moun­ tain Himavat."
Jung  writes that  "One  does not become enlightened  by imagining  figures of light, but by making the darkness conscious.mo In  an  essay "On  the Relation  of

UNDER THE VOLCANO


Analytical Psychology to  Poetry," he explains how  he  believes  the  writer can  con­
tribute to this  Promethean task:

The creative process, so far  as we are able  to follow it at all, consists in  the uncon­ scious activation of an archetypal image,  and  in elaborating and  shaping this image into  the finished  work. By giving it shape,  the artist translates it into  the language of the  present, and  so makes  it  possible  for  us to find  our  way  back  to  the  deepest springs  of  life. Therein lies the  social  significance  of art: it  is  constantly at  work educating the  spirit  of  the  age,  conjuring up  the forms  in  which  the  age  is most lacking.  The unsatisfied  yearning of the artist  reaches back to the primordial image in  the  unconscious which   is best  fitted  to  compensate  the  inadequacy and  one­ sidedness  of  the  present. The artist  seizes on  this  image,  and  in  raising  it  from deepest  unconscious he  bring  it into  relation with  conscious  values,  thereby  trans­  forming it until  it can  be accepted by the minds of  his contemporaries according to their  powers.21

That  Lowry is such  an  artist as Jung describes here  could   be  established by  the identification of archetypal images that become activated in his key works  and, by a detailed examination of the  elaboration and  shaping of these  images, their trans­ lation into "the language of the  present." Such  an  examination would  show  how this   artist, having seized   upon  these   images-or,  rather, having  found  these  images thrust upon him  -brings them "into relation with  conscious values," how  through language, the  medium of his art, he makes  visible  to  us the inner vitality of those  forces  that live in  "darkness" and  their  "unquenched and  unquenchable desire  for  the  light  of consciousness.m2


NOTES

1 Robert Graves, Greek  Myths (London: Penguin,  1966), Vol.  I,  p. 208.
2    The Basic Writings of C. G. Jung,  ed. V. de Laszlo  (New  York,  1959), p.  rg7.
3  Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious. In Collected  Works ( 1959), Vol. 9, Part
I, p. 2g6.
4  Psychological  Reflections, ed. Jolande Jacobi  (London, 1971), pp.  go8, gr,  gos.
5  Ibid.,  p. 92.
6  Ibid.,  p. gog.
7   (New  York,  1949), pp. go, g6 ff, 246. See also Otto  Rank: The Myth of the  Birth of the  Hero, ed. Philip  Freud (New York, 1964).
8    Campbell, pp. g6-g7.
9   Mircea Eliade, The Quest   (Chicago, r969), p.  ros.
10  Psychological  Reflections, p. ggg.
u Ibid.,  p. g6.
12 Ibid.,  p. 299.
13 "[A] II consciousness  is manifestly founded on  unconsciousness, is rooted  in it, and every night  is extinguished in it ... psychopathology knows with  tolerable certainty what  the  unconscious can  do  to  the  conscious.... This knowledge is an  essential

39

UNDER THE VOLCANO


pre-requisite for  any integration-that is to say, a content can  only be integrated when  its  double  aspect  has  become  conscious  and  when  it  is grasped   not  merely intellectually but  understood according to  its  feeling  value.  Intellect and  feeling, however, are  difficult  to put  into  one  harness-they conflict  with  one another by definition." Psyche and Symbol, ed. V. de Laszlo  (New  York,  1958),  pp.  29, 30.
14  Psychological Reflections, p. so.
15    Ibid., p. 4S·
16  Even  Lowry's last  major  achievement, "The  Forest  Path to  the  Spring," can  be seen  as an  attempt to reconcile  a sense of defeat in this struggle, with  an  inability entirely to repress  recurrent impulses  to re-engage it.
17    Psychological Reflections, p. 219.
18  Ibid., p. 3 IS·
19  Ibid., p. 308.
20    Ibid., p. 220.
21  The  Spirit in Man, Art and Literature. Collected Works  (1g66),  Vol.  IS, p. 82.
22    Psychological Reflections, p. 303.





TWO THINGS FOUGHT
 


Cyril Dabydeen


They held  the day  to a topsy-turvy
They gathered dust  and  hurled it around
With  a passion;  they  gritted teeth  and  swirled
Eyes with  them-contempt for  the  world-watchers.

One  called  upon  the  rodent-underground To  safeguard  territory; the other hissed The reptile's  sense of genesis-
There was no retreat now.

They bruised  each  other  in a frenzy. They  let out  blood  and  chipped bone. They grimaced and  made  the  sun  blink.
In the darkness  they pulverized each  other -

Men on a horse came, men from a dream Spectral but  real,  overshadowing the  pulp. A hoof stood  over, a body leaned across.
Life dragged  along  where  reptile and  rodent

Fought-in an amphitheatre, spectators' loss.


MEMORY= PAIN

The Haunted World of Philip Child's Fiction


Dennis Du.ffy



I wandering down the Road,
... I wandering in and out
Of memory and pain.1





TE LATE  DESMOND PACEY's single-pMagraph d;sm>=t  of the  fiction of Philip  Child   ( 18g8-1978)   in  the  Second  Edition  of the  Lite-rary History of Canada  remains unchanged from its appearance in the original edition. No one can quarrel  with its contention that  Child's "skill as a novelist is not quite commensurate with the splendour  of his ideals," that "he  tends to be too didactic in his fiction" and shows himself "unwilling  to rely upon indirection  and implica­ tion." The  trouble  with the judgment is that it ignores an entire aspect of Child's  fiction of considerable interest to students of the affective and psychological aspects of Canadian literature. An academic often involved in mediating  labour-manage­ ment disputes recently remarked  to a group that in  his job he was sometimes told the truth,  once in  a while the  whole truth,  but  never nothing  but  the truth. So with the Literary History's  judgment, in that its statement  of a single indisputable truth  shunts the reader  away from some far more interesting  ones.
Beyond an occasional  review, an M.A. thesis which ignores  20 per cent of the canon,2  and a brief treatment of Village of Souls (whose setting is New France  in the  164os)  in  D.  G.  Jones'  Butterfly  on  Rock,  Child's  fiction  has  received  no extended critical attention.3  Yet Jones' remarks-stressing as they do the mythic, dream-like, Jungian qualities of Child's first novel-indicate the kind of interest his work could generate  within a literary ambience marked  by The  Manticore  and Surfacing. My purpose in this article is neither revisionist nor rehabilitative. I seek only to point out the presence and significance of certain themes running through­ out Child's novels4  and to demonstrate  the degree to which the works' preoccupa­ tion with such matters as guilt and suffering, psychic fragmentation and sexual dis­ turbance,  provides a literary experience that does not always buttress the Christian humanist   message  of  the  books.  The  optimism  and  rationalism   of  Christian humanism  is in  fact  bypassed  in favour  of a  painful  reconciliation  of  warring

PHILIP CHILD

elements through  the symbolic devices of dreams.  Child's  is a fiction replete with the stuff of dreams, and by exploration attempts  to chart  a nighttime  of confusion, horror  and  attempted restoration of calm which  lies below the daytime  serenity of the novels' overt messages.




hERE ARE  MANY wAYS in which guilt shapes the characters and  their  dilemmas in Child's fiction. His crime  novel, Mr.  Ames  Against Time, gives us Mike Ames, son of the title character, who  has  (wrongly)   been found guilty by a jury of the murder of Sol Mower, a racketeer of Satanic  hybris, himself guilty of all kinds of crimes. Mr.  Ames in  turn  feels guilty  because  he feels his passive behaviour  has been responsible for the  poverty that  may have driven  his son into associating with criminals. Moulton  Avery actually  is guilty of attempting to murder  Mower, though unaware  that  he didn't succeed, while Smoke, an out­ cast and  small-time  crook, begins to feel guilty  not so much  for the  murder  he committed  as for his willingness to let the son of a benefactor  swing for a crime Smoke committed  himself. Of  course, the  reader  expects  to find  objective  guilt (responsibility for misdeeds)  in a detective story, but  what impresses him here is the extent to which characters  experience not only that "true" guilt, but also the guilt of the  psychoanalysts:  a neurotic  acceptance of  responsibility for the  harm befalling others.
Mr.  Ames blames himself for not having  been enough  of a "success" to have
steered  Mike  away  from  hanging  out  with  crooks;  Mike's  sweetheart,  Bernie, suffers agonies of conscience because she uses a sexual come-on to try to worm out of Smoke the admission of guilt that may save her lover's life. Smoke in the mean­ time has been thrown  into agonies of shame not only by his memory of  the lynch­ ing of his father  (for an unspecified crime) , but  through  his discovery  that  he is descended  from  a  notorious family  of degenerates  like  the  Jukes  or  Kallikaks whose miseries gained  the harsh  attention  of social scientists. If this all appears  too elaborate  for  the  bare  necessities of plot and  too sophisticated  for  the  char­ acter  of a criminal  degenerate, then  its presence  demonstrates all  the  more  the story's absorption in the sense of ineradicable  guilt and  dishonour. Like Bill Sykes, Smoke  is  pursued   by  his  dog  (whom  he  has  unintentionally  maimed)   as  a reminder  of his guilt;  he entices the dog into  a  death  by drowning,  and  almost throws himself off a bridge.
The  world in this novel is one of radical  corruption. Even though  Sol Mower remains a brute of Hitlerian  will-to-power, all the major  characters  enmesh them­ selves in  guilt over  his richly-deserved murder. Mr.  Ames,  we are  assured  fre­ quently,  eventually  triumphs  through  a Ghandi-like  force of  personal righteous­ nesss; though  he is old, frail  and  poor,  his faith  in  Faith  enables  him  to  win

PHILIP  CHILD

through  to the truth  in a fallen world. Yet that faith, whatever its efficacy, clearly has little basis for existence in view of the facts of this guilt-ridden  world.
Guilt  permeates  Child's  best works, Village  of Souls and  God's Sparrows, too. For now, recall that Daniel Thatcher, in the latter book, is burdened  with sufficient guilt over an accident involving his sister to run away from home; and Jornay,  in the  former,  is so overcome  by the  knowledge of his cruelty  toward  one  of the women in his life as to accompany  a missionary on his travels. Both are members of fictional worlds reflecting in a less obsessive manner  the guiltiness of Mr.  Ames. But to recall these other novels gives rise to the question:  Can one rid these char­ acters of their  body of guilt?
Though  Pacey has described the ideology of Child's fiction as that  of Christian humanism,   the  frailty  of  that  belief  (even  if  it  actually  exists in  the  novels) becomes manifest  once we consider the means by which guilt can be purged.  For the author  deals with  a post-Christian  world in which  neither  religious liturgies nor private  prayers seiVe any longer as modes of purgation.  A culture's  attempts to come to grips with this problem lie at the very roots of Western literature. (The question  of Aeschylus' The   Libation  Bearers concerns how  Orestes  can  emerge from  the rack of the obsessive sense of sin represented  by the cosmology of the Eumenides and find a rational,  public means for purging guilt.)  Child's characters have to make do according  to the tenets of secular humanism  for their means of release. As anyone  can observe from watching  Dickens engrafting   fohn  XI:  25 on to Sydney Carton's final costume-change,  these secularist  rituals  may  derive their real punch from their resemblances to the religious ones they have displaced, though  they are  not presented  in that  fashion. Thus  Smoke, after  delivering  his confession to a newspaper reporter, finds a burning building and saves a child from it, perishing in the attempt. Lys in Village of Souls expiates her former arrogance by  tending  smallpox-ridden Indians;  John   Wentworth   in  Blow  Wind,  Come Wrack   atones  for  a  period  of  academic  ease  by  getting   himself  involved  in counter-spy activities that  result in his torture  and near-death. While Pratt's Bre­ beuf and His Brethren offers us the ultimate version of the Great-Sufferings-Make­ Great-Nations myth,  a typical  pattern  in Child's  fiction  is to move from  a motif of suffering-as-expiation-for-crimes-and-guilt to a  practice,  as in  Blow Wind, of suffering-for-its-own-sake  ("the smouldering look of one who has a moral ascen­ dancy  through  having  suffered  more"). A brief  glance  at  an  incident  in  God's Sparrows and  a lengthier one at the overall patterns of guilt and expiation  in Day of Wrath  will show the ease with which suffering comes to be its own justification.
At a World  War  I recruiting  rally depicted  in God's Sparrows, a  jelly-bellied­ flag-flapper  delivers a tissue of cliches topped  off by a gem of the colonial men­ tality. He rattles  off the set piece from Shakespeare's  King  fohn  about  England  being true  to itself, and  to the  passage adds the word "Canada" as  prima  facie evidence of the  rightness  of boys from  Hamilton,  Ontario,  signing  up  to fight

43

PHILIP CHILD

Germans  in Flanders. A Victoria  Cross holder follows this speech with an  honest one about  the nastiness and  brutality of the conflict, but  his argument then  pro­ ceeds to the strange  conclusion that  the  hellish sufferings  he describes  demand that  men endure  them  in order  to discover their  capacities  for  enduring them. The  circular  movement  of the logic, which sweeps the  hero of  the novel off his feet, reveals that  beneath  the rhetoric of secular  heroism lies a  primitive  urge to affirm one's identity through suffering and annihilation. In many ways, it resembles all those post-Great-War ideologies of the European Right, demanding toughness, heroism and an eagerness to die from their followers.
To  examine  the  fate of the  principal  characters in  Day  of  Wrath   (which  is about  Nazi Germany  and  a  death-embracing ideology)   is to  find  this  pattern repeated  on a larger  scale. The  novel is parabolic  at  best, set in  a  never-never Nazi-land  where  Jews escape singly from  concentration camps  and  make  their way back to their  home towns.5   The story concerns the doomed  love of a Jewish couple.  Its  use of familiar  romantic  conventions  includes  an  ailing  heroine who later  goes mad  and  kills herself, a  gruff,  kindly  doctor  and  finally an  amiable prostitute. Just as Mr.  Ames showed the wretched  Smoke uplifted  by his love for the good woman, Bernie Avery, so here the SS thug  Froelich ceases for a moment in Anna's  presence to be a brute. However, where Smoke later  redeemed  himself by trading  his life for a baby's, Froelich is killed by the hero, Simon. He expiates his inevitable guilt-though it appears quite far-fetched, since the Nazi had been persecuting  and  torturing   him -in  a  manner   reminiscent   of  Smoke.  Simon rescues a child from a bombed orphanage  and is later shot as a looter since he has been skulking  about  the  ruins.  To  bring  the  child  back  to  life, he  must  crawl through  a long dangerous tunnel formed by the wreckage to emerge finally upon a riverbank. But these images of childbirth  yield to a final graveside scene of the acceptance  of death  and  a trust in the emergence  of some meaning  from  what has happened.
Simon comforts himself by saying his own kaddish beside the grave he has dug; the reader is told that  his sacrifice has truly delivered from death  the little girl  he has rescued. Yet the story has also shown an operatic  pattern  of the wreckage of human  hopes, with the whole cast littered about  the stage. Some quality of  mean­ ing is asserted, but only after Simon's death.  To  the reader  all the suffering may be irreducible  to any  explanation  or  rationalization, and  the  novel  possesses a grimmer  moral than  it explicitly asserts.
Thus  we have seen in the  novels a  pattern  of widespread  guilt;  attempts  to expiate it lead to gestures either pathetic  (the boy in God's Sparrows trying to run off with the gypsies), desperate  (running  into a burning  building in Mr.  Ames)  or schoolboy-heroic  (becoming  a counterspy  in  Blow  Wind). My  object  is not  to ridicule  the  gestures,  but  to  indicate  the  might  of  the  forces  producing   those gestures, as well as the absence of any more convincing or sophisticated  ritual  by

44

PHILIP  CHILD


which guilt  might  be purged  and  the spirit  restored to health.  Even  where  the gesture is genuinely heroic  (the rescue in Day of Wrath, the nursing of the sick in Village of Souls), it appears  to be performed as much to soothe a needlessly angry conscience as to affirm life in the midst of death. We are, it seems, in the presence of great  powers indeed,  which shiver the individual  with extraordinary  ease.




God's Sparrows  offers  a  classic instance  of  literary  form conveying a theme more striking and profound than what the overt message states. Child's  best novel next to Village  of Souls, an excerpt from it formed  the subject of a 1970 TV drama. Significantly, the TV play depicted an over-the-top  moment in a Canadian squad  on the Western Front, and it is the novel's treatment of the
Great  War  that  remains  its most  arresting  feature.  But,  as  J. R.  McGillivray
pointed  out  in an  early review of the novel, the work offers an  uneasy synthesis of family chronicle and  war novel.6  As the hero, Daniel Burnet Thatcher,  grows up and  goes to war  the family material  devolves into a series of obituary  notices and time-outs while the battle machinery gobbles up everything else in sight. The conclusion focusses upon  the near-dead,  shattered  body of the hero  (every  com­ panion he has ever had is now dead, and his last friend  just tossed into a common trench), and   Wellington   (Hamilton)  might  as well  be  on  the  other  side  of the moon.
A family-based  culture  marked  by tenderness and gentility  ("gentleman" and "gentle  folk" are frequently  used terms;  they do not appear  snobbish  or  uncon­ vincing)  has been turned  into an  irrelevant  sideshow by a culture  now  bent  on self-destruction. As the recruiter's  speech showed, that culture  has come to accept violence and  suffering as a moral means test. But the strains of a culture tom  to pieces by its contradictory impulses-Upper  Canadian  civilization  and  its dis­ contents-are best exemplified  in  the  splits apparent  in  the  hero  and  in  the patterns  of psychic division occurring  among  the other  characters  of the  novel.
Daniel Burnet Thatcher's very name introduces us to the first tension within his
personality, the Cavalier Bumets  (Upper  Canada) and the Roundhead Thatchers (New  England). Much  is made  of this in  the  novel;  the  Yankee  idealism  and quest for righteousness of the hero's father provide a constant foil to the easy-going, respectable hedonism of Uncle Charles. Of course, neither  response to experience gets one through  a crisis: the morality of Pen Thatcher, the father,  culminates  in the heart attack  he suffers as a result of his harrassment as critic of the War, while the cakes and  ale, the Burnet  style and flash of Uncle Charles drive him to blow himself up along  with a bridge in order  to deny it to an  enemy who will find a way across the river anyway.


45

PHILIP CHILD

The familial divisions within Daniel's personality are intensified by the cultural barriers  between  respectability and  the  roving life. In  other  words, our  concern shifts from in-laws to outlaws. To be sure, what constitutes a lapse from respecta­ bility on the part of an Upper  Canadian might be taken as a proof of  it in a less­ restrained  culture, but Daniel delights in his conviction that  he bears gypsy blood. It  is all a Bliss Cannan, open-collared  sort of genteel  bohemianism,  but  Daniel does run away to the gypsies as a young boy in an effort to escape from the guilt he feels over an injury he inadvertently  inflicted upon his sister. The gypsies bring him back  (no one in a Child novel gets away that  easily),  though  he encounters one of them  again  as his wartime  batman  (officer's servant). Since Daniel  asso­ ciates the gypsies with  the  Borrovin' life,  the  image  of an  artillery  unit  on  the march  as a gypsy caravan  can only strike the reader  as an odd one. More  to the point is the fact that  Jobey, the last  person  killed, dies protecting  Daniel  from a grenade,  so that  even his lifelong devotion to the  pleasure principle must yield to a spirit of wartime self-sacrifice. Not even bohemians are safe.
If the idea of the gypsy represents a strain  in Daniel's  character  at odds  with the clannish comforts of Ardentinny  (the monumental family pile later celebrated in The  Victorian  House), a more convincing-though no less conventionalized
-alternative  comes in  the  person of Daniel's  cousin,  Quentin. Like  his more
famous  modernist  namesake from  Jefferson,  Mississippi, his leanings  are  aesthe­ tical. An outsider at prep school, Quentin  goes on to alienate  himself  further  from respectability  by writing poetry and later  trying  to pursue  the vocation of a con­ scientious objector  at the Front.  Upset at  the nasty, routine  war  crime of bayo­ netting  battlefield  prisoners, Quentin  manages  to survive  his  harsh  treatment by the military authorities. Daniel continues to own and respect his cousin and at the end of an involved dream  (more on this below)  cries that  Quentin  is "my friend
... part of me." This only confirrns what the reader  has already guessed.
After  all,  Quentin   is a  more  intense  and  passionate  version  of  Daniel,  his literary bohemianism a more convincing evocation of Daniel's  repressed side than Jobey's  footlooseness. Both  Daniel  and  Quentin  are  bullied  at  school,  though Quentin's delight in his own intellectual  powers ensures that  his treatment will be worse than  his cousin's. Quentin's trials as a CO are more intense and demanding than  Daniel's  reluctance-out of  concern  for  his  father's health-to  enlist. Quentin's abuse  for  his peacemongering  is  paralleled  by  Daniel's  receipt  of  a white feather  from  an hysterical girlfriend.  Ultimately,  both  men go back  upon their rebel principles, Daniel because he cannot  resist the recruiter's call to ideal­ ized suffering, Quentin  because he feels that  to continue  not to fight is to separate himself from life itself, from the pain and suffering he views as the universal marks of existence.  For  both  characters,  suffering  serves as  the  bond  holding  human  beings  together.  Thus  the  closest moment  between  Daniel  and  his sweetheart happens when she is almost deathly ill and he due up the line for a final offensive.

PHILIP CHILD


The life force in this novel is simply not very strong, which is why a cousin, after a yes-to-life outburst  that  "people  ought  to spend themselves on others even if it destroys them,"  dies having a baby the doctors warned her against.
Whatever stronger and more passionate an embodiment  of Daniel that Quentin may represent,  that  lively force is never really embraced.  The  reconciliation  that represents  the  attainment of some sort of psychic wholeness occurs only during Daniel's lengthy dream  of Chapter XIX,  which happens the night of his cousin's death.  The  romantic  convention  of reconciliation during  either  dream  or death obtains,  but  the action  continues  and  leaves Daniel at  the end  an  utterly alone, wrecked figure hauled  away  by the stretcher  bearers. We  return  to the familiar paradox that this attempt  to reconcile the family chronicle with the war novel concludes  with  an alienated  figure whose family life and  structure have  become irrelevant  to the world he has to live in.
There  is always something  very tiresome in writing about  the gaps in a hero's psyche. Mter  all, what  culture  worthy  of the  name  has  ever  produced  men so complete in themselves as to feel perfectly at home in this world? Why single out these novels for special attention; why notice one person muttering to himself in an insane asylum full of them?  My  justification is that  the  incidence  in Child's novels of tom  seekers of better selves is almost universal. It isn't merely a case of St. Augustine's  universal  restlessness that  can find no peace  until it rests in God, but  a case of widespread  sundering  and  deprivation.  Recall  Jomay who is tom between  France  and  the  New  France  of the  164o's,  the  Paris  of  the  Court  of Miracles  (the thieves' quarter immortalized  in Hugo's Notre-Dame de Paris) and the  Quebec  of the  pays d'en  haut.  Thus  he must, through  a device familiar  in romantic  fiction  (Ivanhoe, The  Deerslayer), choose between  a dark  heroine and a light one. The dark one, a semi-Christianized Indian  who represents Canada, embodies the creole's dilemma  in the incompatibility  of the  cultures  within  her. The  fair one, a Parisian  demi-mondaine, shares the hero's  dilemma,  though  mis­ fortune,  disease and  death  resolve it for  her. Mr.  Ames'  efforts to save  his son propel him into the unaccustomed  (and  life-shortening)  role of mover and doer, breeding in him a dissatisfaction with (and guilt about)  his old self and a discom­ fort in the new. And so it goes in the other novels, though  none of  them contains the variety of substitute  selves one finds in God's Sparrows.
Something  about  the war experience itself seems to have produced  the intensity of the  pattern  of human  relationships,  for even the author's  purported distance from  his text is shortened.  However  autobiographical it  may  be in  parts, God's Sparrows is told in the third  person. Yet one of Quentin's poems from his note­ book concludes  the  novel. The  poem's message, the gloomy one  that  his  words about  death  do  not  even  assuage  his own  loneliness, so the  reader  should  not expect  anything  different,  suits the  rest of the novel. Yet this poem, along with other  songs from  books, is reprinted  in  Child's  collection of poetry/  though  no

47

PHILIP CHILD

hint is given as to its supposed status as the product  of a literary  persona. It is as if Conan  Doyle had  included in his history of the  South  African  War,  without quotation marks, the comments of Sherlock Holmes. Not only does Daniel's experi­ ence to some degree match  the author's,  he gives Quentin  an  aspect of  his own self as well.
Further evidence  of  the enduring  nature  of the splitting  of the  hero in God's Sparrows comes from the author's  I965  blank verse long poem, The  Wood  of the Nightingale.  It, too, concerns the Great War. Its hero, Hugh  Kingdom  (Matthew XIX:  14 discloses the link between the author's name and  his character's), looks to the  people around  him for reflections of himself. His brother,  Ken  (the  anony­ mous narrator of The  Victorian  House mentions  him as one of the  War  dead)  plays Dr. Jekyll, while his demonic counterpart remains  Spurge  (the  name  of a weed). Ken, the preux chevalier, is hated by Spurge, who surprisingly likes Hugh,  possibly because both  had  a hand  (in  Hugh's case, accidental) in  the  death  of close relatives. Here it is useful to recall the guilt experienced  by Daniel Thatcher over the hurt involuntarily given his sister. Daniel loses his girl to his own brother,  Alastair, while Ken Kingdom loses his to Spurge. Daniel woos and  then saves the life of Beatrice, sister of the girl who  jilted  him  to  marry  his  brother.  Beatrice herself regrets her failure to consummate  her relationship with a former  lover. A similar taint  of death, renunciation  and sexual substitution  hangs over the events of The  Wood  of the Nightingale when Hugh Kingdom  falls in love with the sister of a German  he has slain. This person he terms his alter ego, and  he has perforce embraced  the corpse during  a  bombardment, in a Gothic  realization  of Wilfred Owen's  "Strange Meeting." Hugh  cannot  win the  girl until  he has been  recon­ ciled with her brother in a dream, and here we recall the similar dream  reconcilia­ tion in God's Sparrows.
My list of shadowy  relationships and  motifs argues that  a common  matrix,  a symbolic  vocabulary  of  psychic displacement,   produced   both  War   works  and produces  to an extreme degree in God's  Sparrows what  can  be found  in milder forms in the other  novels. In the same way, the ever-present  theme of sexual dis­ turbance will be best observed through  a close examination  of Village  of  Souls.




SEXUALITY  BECOMES  A   PAINFUL   BURDEN  in  the  world  of Village  of Souls, a strange  phenomenon  in a novel whose message is embodied  in a process of sexual selection. As noted, Jornay's acceptance  of Canadian  realities shows itself through  his union with the Indian  woman in preference to the French woman he first wed. Yet the acquaintance between Anne and Jornay  has not been a lengthy one before he comes upon her castrating an Indian captive with a bone dagger.  Oddly  enough,  Lys, the  refined  French  woman,  has  sat  watching  the

PHILIP CHilD


entire  play with considerable  aplomb,  which recalls Jornay's  first glimpse of her. One  of the newly-arrived   filles du roi in Montreal,  Jornay  spots her as he turns his eyes away  from  the  public  torture  of  two  Mohawk  captives  at  the  Place d'Armes.  The  grim scene has its place in history, the  Jesuit  Relations  assure us, but Child's  use of this horror  as a device for introducing  one of his heroines is an ambiguous  one. On  the one hand,  Lys undergoes shock at  the sight  (though  its newness to her may be overstated: one's chances of viewing official attrocities in the streets of Paris under I' ancien regime were considerable)  and the author  takes care  to underline  the incongruities  of this love-at-first-sight amid  such savagery. On  the other  hand,  we have witnessed a bizarre but still effective presentation of the  death-and-the-maiden motif.  That  the  image  presented  of death  is sadistic rather  than melancholy only renders the moment gamier, more modernist in tone.
This linkage between Lys and death continues. For example, when we are given a flashback to the events which plucked her from Fontainebleau and  washed her up on the shores of New  France,  the story is no ordinary  one  of financial  and social disasters that  might force someone to abandon  the douceur de vie and strike out for the wilderness. Instead, we are told of a girl trained  in the practices of the demimonde by her  gentleman-at-large father.  Her  refusal  of the  advances  of a wicked duke results not only in the stabbing of her husband  by his bravoes, but in a scene almost grotesque  in its sudden violence her father  is tossed out of a high window. Lysis hustled  to the Bastille, branded  on the shoulder  with the  fieur de lys and finally packed off to New France.
If Jornay's   youth  in  the  Alsatia  of the  Court  of  Miracles  recalls  Hugo,  the branded  shoulder  reminds  us of The  Three  Musketeers,  while the  brutalities  of the  artistocrat   denied  sexual  privilege have appeared  before  in  A  Tale  of  Two Cities. Clearly, the conventions of the historical romance are at work here. Inter­ estingly enough,  it is the works just noted that  are most echoed, rather than  such home-grown  grand  operas  as William  Kirby's  The  Golden  Dog or  Sir  Gilbert Parker's  The  Seats of the  Mighty. The  attempts  of the latter  novels-however compromised  by their  operatic  sweep-to get at the larger  drives of greed and self-enhancement  lying behind  the imperial  presence in  North  America  are  not repeated  in Village  of Souls. Rather  this novel-so strange  are  the  bedfellows made  by literary  history -recalls nothing so much  as  Cohen's  Beautiful  Losers. Both books concentrate on sexual conflicts; both  books do so by showing how a number  of characters attempt to come to grips with a colonial reality.
If Lys' appearances have been accompanied  by violence and  death  when  her sexual  attractions are  most apparent, the  presence of death  continues  to enfold her as the story  proceeds. Taken  captive  by the Indians,  she passes much  of the rest of her life attempting to nurse them through an outbreak  of smallpox. Jornay finally catches up with her after their separation  at a splendidly evoked waste land that could have sprung from Childe Roland, an Indian  village destroyed by small-


49

PHILIP CHILD

pox.  Her  final  appearance before  her  husband   after  she  has  taken  poison  to hasten an approaching death  happens  during  a dream  of Jornay's  which D. G. Jones aptly terms "a night journey into the unconscious."
In view of the usual clear-cut distinction between  light and  dark  heroines, and with the light one in this case associated with  a morbid,  decadent  sexuality, the reader  would expect to find Lys' rival linked with  the forces of life and  fertility. However,  this isn't  the case. We have seen that  Anne's  cruelty  is evident  from an early stage. In her wilderness she embodies the monstrous aspects of the wilder­ ness which the novel frequently mentions. Her first sexual experience with Jornay  is a rough, brutal  one which she provokes. Jornay's final reconciliation with Anne happens  after she has Christianized  herself and  grown  closer to Lys, so that  she too goes off to Indian  villages to nurse smallpox victims. Thus  Anne and  Jornay,  once  Lys and  her  spirit  have  departed,  form  a  kind  of  prototypical  Canadian couple, able both  to embrace  and  transcend  the savagery  of their  environment. Jornay's  final  vision is one  of man's  insignificance  amid  the  wild  grandeur   of nature. Sexuality is seen as having the power to make for man "a dust-speck world within  the  infinite  wilderness," but  for  this  to  happen   the  demonic  aspects  of Anne have to be displaced on to another  character.
Such a figure is the Metis Titange,  drunken  and  violent, who tries to carry Lys off and whom Jornay  finally half-blinds in a fight. Titange later drowns himself in despair  at  his approaching total  blindness, but  not  before  he  has  reinforced  a number  of  the  links the  novel establishes between  sexuality  and  the  demonic. Easily the  most sexually aggressive male  in  the  novel-Jornay, except  for  his brief outburst  with  Anne, fills the passive role of the  hero  of historical romance that  has been  with  us since Sir Walter  Scott6 -Titange  sets up  his attempted kidnapping  of Lys during a stormy night suited "for love and  devilry!"  (Jornay's taking  of Anne,  by the way, is accompanied  by "tophet flames"  from  the  fire­ place.)   We are  given a sequence of demonic  images of nature  and  the  Indians  and  Titange's place in that  motif links sexual  aggression with  the infernal.  Sex, death  and  the devil dance together, and account  for Jornay's spasmodic  patterns of behaviour.  His rough taking of Anne precedes a period of  drunken  stupor  and social retreat,  socially a less acceptable  form  of the  passivity  marking  his early romantic  idealization  of Lys. Any expression of  sexuality  knots him in crippling guilt; a rare moment of mutual sexual attraction between Jornay  and Lys happens when  there  is "something  demoniacal  in  the  night."  Married to the  absent  Lys while loving the nearby Anne, he must be released from his captivity by Lys' ghost before he can break from his passivity and choose the woman  who has demanded  this dynamism of him.
Obviously, sexuality  remains  a  mysterious  power  that  can  become socialized only with  difficulty, by the sort  of compromises  Anne  must  make  in  her  bows toward   Christianity   and  through   the  extinction   of  such  demonic   rowdies  as

so

PHILIP  CHILD

Titange.   Nature,  even  when  no longer seen as Atwood's  nature-the-monster, is either  purged into a vast indifference  (the  novel's conclusion)  or made  palatable by an idealized  experience  of mystical union  with it. Just  as Lys becomes purer and  better  the  more  she  disregards  her  life-drives and  immerses  herself in  the deathly reality of the disease-ridden village, so do the characters in GodJs Sparrows thrive best on a regime of renunciation.
Thus   Daniel  Thatcher, after  an  incomplete  encounter   with  an  inoffensive prostitute,  stumbles  out of her room declaring:   "'Women! God  Almighty, how I loathe them.'  He felt as though  he had  been dragged  through  ordure." Shortly afterward, he receives a telegram informing  him of his mother's death.  Of course, Daniel loses his first girl to his brother  and best shows his love for Beatrice within an atmosphere  of impending  death. So also the love between Simon and Anna  in
Day  of Wrath ultimately  causes her death,  while sexual rivalries implicate  Mike
Ames in the  murder  of Mower.  Finally, John  Wentworth of Blow  Wind  allows himself to admit  his love for lone  only after  he has discovered that  she, too, is a counterspy  and  that  they must brave  danger  together.  Even  then  he is ready  to have  her  killed by the  villain  rather  than  accede to  his Satanic  request  to  bow down  before  him.  Oddly  enough,  the  threatened  heroine  supports  this  magical concept  of symbolic  gesture, affirming that,  " 'If he made  you kneel, then  men everywhere would bow to evil and we'd be done for... .' "
Granted  then  that  sexuality  appears  largely as a  destructive  force, something often appearing within a context of violence and death, the paradox  remains that to embrace suffering and  death  purges guilt and legitimizes sex. Jornay  then wins Anne after he has pursued her through  a demonically hostile wilderness, a treach­ erous morass in which he is granted  the vision of a reconciled, etherealized Lys, a pursuit which nearly costs him his life. And Daniel Thatcher, who refused to sleep with Beatrice even after she had offered herself to him, can feel the depth  of his love for her when she appears  to be dying and  he is bound for the next military offensive. As I pointed  out  earlier,  guilt is a  pervasive  force  throughout Child's fiction, and  the rituals by which it may be purged are many. One  of its principal  sources remains  the very existence of sexuality, with  its unruly  kicks against  the goods of civilization  and  its associations with  the  demonic.  (It is the  devilish Spurge in The  Wood of the Nightingale who steals Ken  Kingdom's  girl through  an  almost  magical  device of telling a few lies.)  This  inability  to  accommodate themselves to their  sexual  natures  provides one of the forces producing  the  fre­ quent splits within  Child's  characters.  It produces as well the necessity for having a number of figures, each of whom carries a detached  portion of the hero's psyche. In short, the novels are replete with centrifugal  forces, with  unmediated  energies threatening to tear  apart  the  works' moral  coherences. What  pulls  these forces into some sort of compatibility? That,  in art as in life, comes about through  dreams  and visions which provide symbolic re-enactments of the real events of the novel,

PHILIP CHILD

and  it is to the dreamworld  that  our attention  must  now tum, and  (as  Day  of Wrath puts it)  "The  unconscious mind-where some say deity  does his work with men."




DREAMS PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE in all of Philip Child's fiction, foreshadowing  disasters or  providing flashbacks, granting  both  hope and despair in the many-tongued  speech of symbolism. Even meditative, near-dream­ like states of consciousness provide  havens of peace  and  self-recollection  during stressful periods. However the role of dreams in the two best novels is a structural one. Not only do the dreams advance  the perceptions of  the characters,  but  they bring into a temporary  reconciliation the warring themes of the works. The clear­ est example  of this occurs in God's Sparrows.
The author  once remarked to me that dreams and the ability to dream kept him
sane on the Western  Front even though  nightmares were his bane in the months immediately following his demobbing.9  Daniel Thatcher's major  dream in chapter xix represents the closest the character  will come to grasping  that  psychic  whole­ ness that  has eluded  him.
The  dream  goes on for too long; it owes a little to Kipling's  "On  the Gate: a Story  of '16"  ( 1926). Most importantly,  it offers a very "literary"  (structured, patently referential)  event rather than the more murkily symbolic and a-logical depiction of experience in dreams themselves. Its most striking  characteristic con­ sists in its use of the familiar stuff of military  squalor  and  bureaucracy.  Earlier, the novel has recounted Daniel and Beatrice's encounter  with a spiritualist; while the man  is no charlatan, the advice given Daniel  by a stranger on the  bus does him as well as anything  he heard  in  the  Magic-Flute-Egyptian  confines of the medium's  place of business. So with the dream,  which follows a host of khaki-clad figures as they move through  deathly  parades  to sentencing  by military  kangaroo courts to a glimpse of the celestial machineries  where life is broken and  renewed. The  vision of  reincarnation   comes only  after  the  commonplace frustrations   of military life have been re-experienced.
I mentioned  earlier that  his cousin Quentin  is the most interesting  thing  about Daniel,  and  in  the  dream  Daniel  reclaims  himself  through   asserting  kinship/ twinship with his cousin during a court martial.  In a way he has already done this, since partway  through  the dream  his own consciousness merges for a while with Quentin's. However abrupt  this switch may be, its dream-logic  reveals a significant step by Daniel in his own healing, a process that  will culminate  in the claiming of kinship and the vision of life's process of distintegrationjreintegration. The  death of Quentin  -which we learn  happened  as the dream  took  place -has  become beside the point, and Daniel's taldng of the poetic notebook his cousin left behind

52

PHILIP CIDLD

and  the  poem's  appearance as the  novel's last word  reveal  the extent  to which (on the level of the dreamlike and unconscious)  Daniel's mission has been accomplished. The difficulty holds that the novel still remains split between dream and  waking.  However  exhilarating the look at the vale of soul-making,  however much  the novel's characters  may choose to position their moves for personal inte­ gration within "inner" psychic processes, the fact remains that  a realistic novel­ this  novel -possesses  an  ineradicable  commitment  to  the  "outer"  processes of society and  politics. Our  final  look at  Daniel  Thatcher shows  him  a  shattered wreck barely preserved from  being hurled  alive into a common  grave. This  may not impress a guru, but it is the kind of thing that registers on  novel readers. The ending of God's Sparrows demonstrates  the extent to which the world of dreams and  the unconscious helps to knit together  the splintered  hero, but shows as well the  fissures between  that  world  and  the  everyday one  which  the  novel cannot bridge.
"Don't you know there's a war on?" has been a traditional formula  for snuffing whatever candles of moderation  and decency might have been left burning during wartime. Similarly, the world at war in this novel sucks dry every other value but that of survival, so that the visionary remains of less importance than  the practical. This is not quite the case with Village of Souls; some explanation  of this difference is necessary to understand the more credible role played here by dreams  and  the visionary. The  novel maintains credibility as a somewhat modernist  version of the matter  of historical  romance.  Far  less concerned  with  grand  political  questions than  its predecessors, far  more  meditative  in act and  tone,  it still owes a  bit  to their flair for melodrama, sudden  violence and  shocking revelations.  Its tortured characters,  however, the  wasteland  setting, its journey into the dark  of the soul, its dependence  upon  the  unravelling  of a series of lies and  misunderstandings as its mode  of plot  revelation,  with  truth  thus  made  into  a  private  rather  than  a public matter: all these mark  it as a unique  piece of historical fiction, especially in view of its publication  date  (I 933). Current  critical practice could be tempted into  reading  the  work as the  projection  of a contemporary  existential  dilemma onto a New France  background  ( Yourcenar's  Hadrian's Memoirs  serves as a case in point), but  the  urge must  be resisted. The  novel's historical  sense consists of more  than  its reliance  upon  the  Jesuit  Relations for  certain  incidents   (see the opening  "Note"); it is also a  matter  of the  characters'  dilemmas  between  the realities of frontier  life and  the conventions-sexual, cultural,  religious -of  la douce France ringing true, though  they may not be expressed with word-for-word literality. The  haunted  wilderness, the Gothicism that  Margot  Northey  has found elsewhere in Canadian fiction, presents itself here as well, but as a function  of the cast of mind  which newly-arrived  Europeans  would bring to the scene. For them and for its native inhabitants the country demands that  it be grasped  in terms of the non-rational  and  intuitive,  the dreamlike and the visionary.


53

PHILIP CHILD

We expect the Indian, Anne, to reflect her culture's  reliance  upon  dreams  for the interpretation of experience. From  the start  she possesses some sort of racial memory/ dream of white men in big ships whom she is compelled to seek out  (the source of this is never quite explained,  a weakness in the  novel). Anne  initially shudders at the individualism and introspection  of the whites, since her version of interiority  consists of a  closeness to  a  collective  tribal  consciousness. She  lives within a magical universe which Jornay  (a trifle unrealistically for an uneducated Frenchman of his class and time)  has left. Both he and  Titange are aware of the extent to which dreams through suggestion can be cynically manipulated into rationalizations for fulfilling otherwise illicit desires.
Lys also, as part of the process by which the competing  heroines merge at their edges  (they  both  come to nurse victims of plague), is a flagrant  dreamer.  Thus long periods of time can pass for her "Like a dream" and,  more importantly, she comes to Jornay  as the object of an  idealized  erotic  attachment, someone  who represents the fantastic  ("we are phantoms"). Jornay's bad dreams of a withered Lys (are they wish-fulfillments of the sort Jornay  accuses the Huron of dreaming?) come  true,  and  he encounters  her  finally in  the  surreal  landscape  of  the  dead villages sinking back into the bush. The reader of the novel is more than once told that  the title comes from an  Indian  image of the afterlife:   a village everyday in its appointments but  populated only by the spirits of the dead. The charnel-house where Jornay finally locates Lysis a grisly counterpart of this Elysium (everything has its double), and  the  ephemeral  nature  of  the  humans  contrasted  with  the "everlasting" trees, rocks and water sees to it that  most human  activities come to appear  tissue-like and dreamy.
No wonder  that  Lys, even though  she is white,  recounts  the  patterns  of the
soon-to-be-ended  relationship  between  herself and  Jornay  in terms of an  Indian legend involving magic and  the dead.  Whether  or not the tale is an "authentic" legend or one the author  made up to point a moral doesn't matter.  The important thing  is that  the parabolic  and  fantastic  have become the accepted  mode of  dis­ course, and  that  within that  mode supernaturalism and  surrealism  have come to rule, as if Jesus had  delivered his parables  in terms of djinns  and  afreets instead of sheep and seeds. Through  the same logic of experience, Jornay's quest  for his once-beloved  becomes the  night  journey, a  process of  exploration  of an  almost phantasmagoric landscape.  When  it nearly kills him, the  environment will have then  imposed enough suffering upon  him to have  relieved him of the  burden  of guilt  over Lys. The  remarkable  concluding  section  of the  novel climaxes  when Jornay,  "beaten," "bruised," hobbling  on  "in  spite of the  pain,"  "ill and  trem­ bling," beholds in a dream the spirit of Lys in a grand  apotheosis of swirling cloud. She gazes upon him with love and pity, the whore now a madonna; he views her with terror.  His final perception  notes  her  beauty,  bringing  to full circle his first glimpse of her  and  "the  connected  thoughts  of death  and  of woman's  beauty."

54

PHILIP CHILD


The tragic   (pity   and   terror)  combines   with  the  erotic   to  produce a  ritual  in dream  by which  the  burden of guilt  can  be lifted.  This incident, rather than  the vague,  inconclusive reunion with  Anne,10 resolves the  novel's  principal themes,  of guilt,  its pervasiveness and  its final purging.
It is in Village  of Souls, with  its world  where  the divisions  between  dream  and
reality have  been blurred, that  Child  proves best able to provide  a convincing (not realistic,  but  convincing, the  way The  Magic  Flute is convincing) calming of the storms of guilt,  psychic disintegration and sexual terror  which  affiict his characters. The success of the  integration process in that  novel provides  us with  a heightened awareness of  the  unbridled horrors  existing  elsewhere.  This  helps  to explain   the didacticism, the  flat  declarations of hope  and  rejoicing  that  spot  the  novels. They exist, not  as beauty spots  over  an  unacknowledged fear,  but  as charms against a clear  and  present  sense of danger. The  cruel  and  monstrous shapes  of frustration, which  reveal  the  wrong  people falling in love and  the right  people  under  a steam­ roller,  never  quite  fade  away  from  the  novels, however  intense  their subjection to happy (or  at least hopeful) endings.  This  psychic savagery  makes them  still inter­ esting  to  read  and  of some  significance  in  tracing in  our  culture the  assaults  of modernism upon  the  certitudes of traditional systems of  belief.  In  Child's fiction, those  beliefs are still  there  to  be asserted,  though  they  cannot be integrated fully with  the tangled, more  subversive  realities of the stories. The  clashing  systems can only be accommodated in dreams. But we wake to pain.


NOTES

1 Philip Child, The  Wood  of the Nightingale  (Toronto: Ryerson, 1965),  p. 87.
2   Linzey Kupsh,  "An  Introduction to the Novels of Philip Child"  (M.A.  thesis, Uni­ versite Laval,  1958).  This  work overlooks the wartime  thriller  Blow Wind, Come Wrack, published  pseudonymously  (by "John  Wentworth") in 1945 and  acknowl­ edged by the author  as early as 1951 on the page opposite the title of The Victorian House.
3  See also Wm. H.  Magee,  "Philip  Child:   A Re-Appraisal," Canadian  Literature, No. 24 (Spring  1965),  pp. 28-36. This article deals briefly with questions of literary form.
4  The  novels are:   Village  of  Souls  (Toronto: Ryerson,  1948 [orig.  ed.:  London: Thornton Butterworth, 1933]); God's Sparrows (London: Thornton Butterworth,
1937); Blow Wind, Come Wrack  (London: Jarrold's, 1945); Day of Wrath   (To­
ronto:   Ryerson, 1945); Mr. Ames Against Time   (Toronto: Ryerson, 1949).
5    A similar absence of a firmly-felt sense of place also mars Mr. Ames, where a  num­ ber of references are made to Canadian institutions even though one character asks another,   referring   to  a  brief,  evening  jaunt,  if  there  has  been  much  traffic  in Hoboken.
6  "Letters  in Canada. 1937. Fiction," UTQ, 7 (April 1938),  351-52.
1 "To  a Future  Poet," The  Victorian  House and Other  Poems  (Toronto:  Ryerson,
1951),  p. 52.

55

PHILIP CHILD

8  Significantly, Jornay's  double,  "who  reflected   his  own  moods  grotesquely, like  a twisted mirror," is a deracinated wreck of an Indian whose tribe  has been destroyed by the Yankees,  a very Canadian Last  Mohican.
9   Conversation 3 February 1977.
10  "What had  they  for  each  other -happiness?  tragedy? Perhaps both.  They  were together and  life  would  go on. 'The Metchi-sipi,' he  thought, 'we'll  see where  it flows... .'"






BLUE STOCKINGS
 


Alexandre L. Amprimoz


woman speaks softly laughs  well

thin fire spreading under skin

papers
minutely marked
classes carefully  prepared

allergic  to rye reads  the greeks
and  feels knowledge
as a chain

But  ignorance bound,
he lets her speak of minorities with a perfect CBC accent. His own knowledge
breeding that  stupidity.
The rich,  the poor,  the clever­
all  equal  minorities.


AND, NOW, HE,
WOULD, LIKE, TO,  PUNCTUATE, HER, SPEECH, WITH,
HIS, HEELS.



EYES
 


Ron Miles


(for  the librarian)

I

Mine  pained:
your  desk in  turmoil, paper scraps  escaping to the floor

or settling in your chair  like leaves around two  roots  grown  foolishly above  the  ground.

Yours strained to stay half open,
jostled  by the  half-remembered  images that  drink  made  swim,

your shoulder hunched
to parry  half-expected  blows
and  practise riddles  no one guessed. Your  eyes are  closed.

II

We worked  in separate passages and  when  they crossed
cast eyes, like scraps  of paper

to the  floor. Mine  knew you crumpled, soiled, an  insult. More: a warning.

Yours  knew  long-haired  boys
with  tanned and  tender flesh, a half­
remembered wife and  children left.

Now half-remembering is all I dare, my eyes unwilling in your dark
and  riddled past.

Your  desk is bare.

57


TWIN  MISUNDERSTANDINGS

The Structure of Patricia Blondal' s
A Candle To Light the Sun


Laurence R. Ricou



"If I read till my eyeballs ache I shall eventually get a hint. It's like a mystery story, but the mystery is inside the reader  waiting to be unraveled."





TROUGHOUT THE  GF.NF.RALLY WARM REWF.WS of Patricia Blondal's  A Candle  to Light the Sun  ( xg6o)  runs the  persistent reservation  that the novel lacks discipline:  "reads  everywhere  like the sprawling  incoherent  first draft  of a very promising novel," wrote Miriam  Waddington in Canadian Litera­ ture;  "there  are enough characters  and incidents  for ten novels" observed  F. W. Watt  in "Letters  in Canada." Certainly  Blondal, driven  by the premonition  and then by the knowledge that she would die from cancer, knew she did not have time for ten novels. And the general impression that  the novel consists of nice insights and lyric moments lost in a clutter of eccentrics and unlikely events has apparently persuaded  most readers and students of Canadian literature to ignore it. But the novel should  not be dismissed solely for having  too much  in it. On  the contrary its amplitude should  challenge an examination  of Blondal's structural principles, and  of the  relevance of particular  details to  the  whole novel. In  beginning  that analysis here I hope to show the way to a fuller understanding of the novel's mean­ ing and  achievement.
Blondal's prose in A Candle to Light the Sun is dense with new understandings, surprising  resonances  and  startlingly  right  images.  She  is sensitive to  the  force which will unify her novel:  the repetition  of such images as the wind, the light, the railway, or the sun;  the unobtrusive  motifs, such as the variations  on  "thin­ ness," or on "waiting"; the bristling of allusions, most obviously to the Bible and toT. S. Eliot's "The Waste Land."  There  is, in short, whatever  the imprecisions and  hastiness/ much  evidence that  Blanda!  planned  and  constructed  the  novel with considerable  care. This care is particularly  impressive and  interesting  in the way she makes pairings of characters  a principal  structural and  thematic  feature.

BLONDAL


Blondal was a fascinated  student  of psychology; her  papers2  include scribblers of notes (reminiscent of the scribblers accumulated  by David Newman, the central character  of A Candle to Light the Sun)  on Freud, on Jung,  and  on the history of epilepsy. Her  interest  in  psychology accounts for  her  attempts  to expose the buried lives, the secret selves, in the individual character,  as in Mouse Bluffs (and, indeed, in the world of which Mouse Bluffs is a microcosm) . She is absorbed  by imperfect  man's  lust  for  perfection;  she sees human  relationships  tottering  un­ easily on longtime, deliberately  nurtured  misunderstandings. She creates her char­ acters in pairs and  watches them collide. In outlining  A Candle to Light the Sun her notes describe the plot as "The  Twin  Misunderstanding":

David  in his hunger secretly  believes he is Doctor Ross's son.
Ross believes  David  an  epileptic, if he were  perfect  Ross would  have  to accept him  fully.

Blondal's attraction to this pattern  can also be seen in the more  transparently structured From Heaven With  a Shout  (1963).8  Through a classified  advertise­ ment Alex Lamond  hires Arden Calcott as a wife. The story describes their mutual  attempts  to transcend  the misunderstandings  inherent  in such strange beginnings. Arden must try to understand both Alex and his twin brother, George, a "duality  in one man." The  pattern  of twinning is completed by the introduction of Monica Cosgrove, Alex's first wife, a doctor like him, and a lover to both brothers. Such complicated  balancing is basic to both  novels, and  dozens  of minor  and  major reflections of the design occur throughout  A Candle to Light the Sun:  the novel's division into  two  books, the  tension  between  Mouse  Bluffs and  Winnipeg,  the polarities of valley and  plain, or river and  drought,  of Old  Country  and  new, of "two  societies ... ordinary townsfolk and  the  railroaders,"  the  conflict  between David and Darcy, the harmony  of David and Ian, even the contradictory longings of the  Henderson  Twins.  The  contrapuntal structure,  as old  as literature  itself, has its modern psychological dimension in Blondal's use of the pairings to objectify one person's encounter with himself. According to Derek Crawley, reviewing From Heaven With  a Shout in The  Dalhousie Review, "Blondal  was always impressed by what she saw as Dostoevsky's attempt  in The  Brothers Karamazov to explore the artistic possibilities of fragmenting the various pulls within one individual  into different fictional characters."
Crawley's  suggestion  that  Blondal trusted  the  artist  before the  psychologist is particularly  important. Indeed,  as much  as she was intrigued   by  psychological study, she probably  shared  the view she gives to Ian Ross in her notes:  psycholo­ gists  (their  representative in  the  novel, of course, is Basil  Waterman)  are  the "spiritual  successors to the old puritans, ... who cried deep and strong for a formal method  of  dealing  with  life, a  prescribed  manner   of   reaction  to  all  things." Patricia  Blondal  was not concerned  with working out  a  particular psychological

59

BLONDAL

theory in fiction, but she was serious about  probing  the mind  through  the more reliable -because less prescriptive, less arbitrary-psychologizing of the writer's imagination.
Examination of any of a dozen or more characters would illustrate  her detailed
scrutiny.  The  intricate  relationships  among  characters, by  which  Blondal  chal­ lenges the  questioning  reader,  extend  even  to  quite  minor  figures  (such  as the parallel between Gavin Ross and Matt  Henderson). But four characters-David Newman,  Gavin  Ross, Ian  Ross and Darcy Rushforth-are most central  to the structure  and  meaning of A Candle to Light the Sun. Blondal knows these char­ acters  intimately; whether  or  not she  admires  them,  she  certainly  understands them. I had always felt that Blondal's sympathy for her characters emerged readily enough from the novels, but I found exciting confirmation of it in her papers. In creating eight of her major characters  Blondal wrote sketches of up to eight pages for each. Six of these sketches, including those for the characters  just mentioned,  are written  in the first person. Although  the novel was to be written  in the third person,  primarily  from  David  Newman's  point  of  view,  Blondal  diligently  at­ tempted  to know her characters  from the inside, to imagine  how they would see things from their own perspective. As a result, her characters persist in the memory with an individuality beyond their eccentricity.
A Candle to Light the Sun opens with the  tentative  contact,  in sift of "snow,
salt-fine" and  dark  of night, between the old  doctor,  Gavin  Ross, and  the frail, sensitive ten-year-old  boy, David  Newman.  Gavin's  solemn announcement, "The King is dead," marks not only the town's connection  to an imperial  past, but ini­ tiates a repeated  pondering throughout  the novel on the nature  of kingship. David is at first frightened, partly by the looming figure of Gavin, but more by the magni­ tude of the King's death. But then -it is a key to the dramatic conception  of the scene and apt  to go unnoticed -Gavin sits down on the snowy steps. In doing so he brings himself down to David's  level, and  seems to reveal  a  warmth,  even a humility, which makes his relationship with David  much  more credible. Blondal's analysis of the impact  of the announcement indicates  that  David's  development through  the novel is not so much a wrenching away from all that he has been, but a consolidation  of a change that occurs in Chapter One:
A boy stands in a bucket of syrup, waiting for someone to free him, reach out and touch his hand  and release him, waits and  waits, watches with apprehension  the adults, not wanting to go, yet aching for someone to show him how, free his way, afraid  to leave for the larger place, afraid  of the  night, the  bleak unhappy  old faces:"'

For Blondal the death  of the King marks the end of an era, the symbolic freeing of the town from an old loyalty. But behind  the social significance lies the critical personal significance for David. He is not only discovering adult emotion, but also the sharing of that  emotion. Blondal's emphasis suggests that  David  is here first

6o

BLONDAL


thinking-or feeling -for  himself:  the  sharing  with  Ross is not  so  much  a coming  together,  as it  is an  establishing of his independence  and  individuality, through  his discovery of loss and loneliness.
Already in this carefully conceived opening scene, the  polarities are  peculiarly insistent:  a boy I an old man;  town I prairie;  fire I ice; the King is dead  I the Prince of Wales is King;  joy I disaster; the Family Herald I the Illustrated  Lon­
don  News.  Such  balancing  of images governs the  novel's lyricism, and,  as  the pattern   grows  through   the  novel,  establishes  the  emotional   landscape   within which David struggles for himself. Here is a boy desperate  for his own freedom, and  yet at  the same time desperate  for a father.  His maturing will involve both attempts  to reconcile polarities and, more importantly,  a recognition of the neces­ sity of making a choice, of the time when there can be no more waiting.
David's  fantasy  that  Gavin is his father  is strengthened  when Gavin  gives him a dollar to spend on the Clear Lake trip, and invites him to come and meet Darcy Rushforth  on his return.  The  irony is that  Gavin's gesture is prompted  not by his own affection,  but by Ian's  reminder  of their debt to the boy. This irony demon­ strates  something  of Blondal's  technique  of fragmenting   and  simplifying  char­  acters. The  two brothers  are  acting in concert,  as parts,  in a  sense, of one  per­ sonality. Gavin  may be doing what he wants to do, what  his own yearning for a son urges (he  had  on the first night invited David in, and  asked him to return), but we see the pressure applied externally, by Ian as a sort of alter ego. Gavin, we must remember,  is by profession a doctor, and  he is meeting David here primarily as patient.
It is as doctor, according  to Blondal's note on "The  Twin  Misunderstanding," that Gavin Ross fundamentally misunderstands David. Yet it is clear from Chapter Six that  Blondal's  intention  to  have  David  mistaken  for  an  epileptic  has  been altered-wisely,  I think.  At the worst Gavin  sees David  as a frail  boy of poor appetite; David's  one medical problem, the TB scars on his lungs, is not diagnosed until  he attempts to enlist, and  then  by another  doctor. David's  conclusion that Gavin thinks him "constitutionally inadequate" reveals more of David's  paranoia than  of Gavin's  callousness. The  TB  is mentioned  on  a  Christmas   Eve  when David is home from  Knox  College:  Gavin ensures that  Darcy  is out of the way before he takes David to the homey warmth  of George Lee's restaurant, where he compliments  him on his university work and  dismisses the demerits for late hours as insignificant.  In  this atmosphere,  which hardly seems as patronizing  as David imagines, Gavin  raises the question of David's health, and his comments are terse, it seems to me, mainly  because he has to admit  his own failure  to diagnose the disease. What  David interprets as a "grave" and "indifferent" attitude can equally be seen as concern  and embarrassment at his professional failing. He is so in love with the  dream  of the grand  moment  when  his ideal father  will stand  revealed that he is blind to the actual  gesture when it comes. Gavin's  "misunderstanding,"

61

BLONDAL

then, seems more general and,  therefore, more significant:  he cannot  understand the  confusions of a  growing boy, he cannot  appreciate the  boy's sensitivities or accept  him as a thinker and  potential  artist.
The  next discussion of David's university progranune is not nearly so calm, nor
is David nearly so imperceptive. David announces  that  he is giving up engineering to return  to studying Arts. Gavin argues for a utilitarian education:

My brother had  the humanities and  it did  nothing but  enable him  to spout Lucre­ tius when  he was drunk.... Being a gentleman is no profession  in this country and  that's the end  of it.

Again  we can  just detect Gavin  fighting against  the  other  side of his own  per­ sonality;  his nostagia  for the "old  world,"  and  for  "Old  Country  women" who "bring out the best in men," imbues this conunent  with a note of personal loss. But David  is no longer prepared  to submit to his surrogate  father. Even as he senses that  the idea of Gavin Ross as his natural  father  may be self-deceptive, he knows him to be his emotional father. The  opening scene established  that  a father  must show the reluctant  son the way to freedom. David  now is ready to act according to the freedom he glimpsed on that snowy night.
Gavin  adamantly refuses to support  David  if he returns  to Arts.

David  smiled  into  his own  rage:  we've  never  been  so alike  as we are  right  now. He said softly, "To hell with you then."
As he left,  he heard  Ross roar  with  laughter and  felt  his stomach, clenched up with fury, suddenly burn with joy.... With the harsh  delighted laughter at his back he knew he could  manage. In  resistance  was the strength of challenge, the old man's love of challenge and  respect  for  those who  could  meet  it.

After  this recognition, David,  whatever  his lingering  desire for a father,  always meets  Gavin  as an  equal,  asserting  his own  independence. When  Gavin  calls David  a "stray," David  senses the old man's  loneliness and  becomes more  con­ siderate; when  Gavin  asks David  to work against  Darcy's  insanity  plea,  David makes  his own  judgment  of Darcy  and  embraces  the  very  imperfection  which Gavin  cannot  accept.  In  Blondal's  character  sketches, David  describes  his  own changing  attitudes:

In our  terrible hungers  for him  [Gavin] we became  more  alone  than  we might have  been;  he gave us something of himself in this way,  that  when  it was done  we were more  like him, incapable of loving.

In  the  novel we can follow this same pattern  in David,  from  his yearning  to be like Gavin,  through  his solitude,  to  his recognition  of  their  similarities. As  he becomes a more complete and  independent  human  being, David,  paradoxically, seems to absorb  Gavin's  personality within his own.

BLONDAL

A SIMILAR DEEPENING of David's personality occurs through his relationship  with  Darcy  Rushforth.  No one, of  course, is more  incapable  of loving than  Darcy.  His murder  of Pamela  Green pushes A Candle  to  Light  the
Sun, for a moment,  close to the worst excesses of the  gothic  novel. But,  in  the midst of the bizarre and crudely superficial events, David shows an intuitive under­ standing  of the murder.  The  grimly tense relationship between David  and  Darcy is the most difficult in the novel to comprehend.  Darcy's own  attempt  to under­ stand  it is described  in Blondal's  preliminary  sketch:  "David  and  I,  Yang  and Yin. The  black part  of him is dying, or perhaps now it will be part of him where once  it  was outside  him."  Clearly  many  of  the  dichotomies  of  the  novel  (the country/ city tension is particularly  obvious)  are personified in David  and  Darcy. Yet it would  be a mistake  to associate Darcy  with Yin, and  therefore  with  the female, dark,  passive, negative  principle, and  believe we have him finally classi­ fied. Blanda! moves, on the contrary,  toward  a dynamic harmony,  a balancing  of opposites, within  David  particularly,  but  more generally among  the other  char­ acters as well.
In progressing toward  this resolution, however, the novel has a major  weakness. Although  Darcy  is certainly  the  least  likeable  character   in  the  novel,  Blondal strains  to show us his essential humanness. David is for a long time magnetized and intimidated by Darcy, then resentful and quarrelsome,  until  he begins to try and understand, and so, in a measure, to sympathize. But David and  Darcy have related for so long on a superficial, external  plane that  the depth  and  complexity are  not there  (as  they are,  for example, in David's  discoveries of Gavin)   when Blanda! needs to call on them.
Darcy's  personality, in fact,  tempts people to stereotype him. To Ian,  Darcy is a "little swine," to Christine  he is "gutter"; Gavin sees his nephew as a "scamp," while  his father,   Charles,  imagines  that  he  has  "a  certain  select  place  in  the world." Only David, even in the years when they meet only for a few weeks each summer,  moves  beyond  simple  classifying:  "Darcy  is his  friend.   Companion? Summer  Friend?  What  was Darcy?" His questions reveal the tentativeness of the relationship: not only is David  unsure of himself, he is also almost subconsciously cautious  about  becoming  too intimate  with  this mysterious boy. And,  although David  is awed  by the "wonder of Darcy, so foreign to  Mouse  Bluffs," he only meets Darcy in the first place because of Gavin's request to "show him the ropes." The  small scene is rich with irony. Darcy is no doubt  aware that  David's friend­ ship is motivated  by his sense of duty to Gavin. Darcy, for much of their growing up, will be the teacher  and  leader;  by the time David does begin to teach Darcy it is too late;  Gavin, as much  as he admires his scamp, may recognize that  Darcy desperately needs a solid friend.  Finally, the reference to "ropes"  has a last cruel echo when Darcy is hanged.

BLONDAL

That hanging  brings to a violent end a relationship  which depends increasingly upon crime to hold it together.5  David and  Darcy  are bound  by their setting fire to the Yeates' place. The fire, and the accumulated disasters in the macabre end­ ing of Book I, strike some readers as overdone. But there is good point, and  con­ siderable  care, in Blondal's presentation.  The  brevity of the episodes, the abrupt  changes  of scene, the truncated  monosyllabic dialogue  all reflect  stylistically the psychological turbulence.  Blondal  diminishes  the sensationalism  by focussing on the  boys' motive,  rather  than  on  the  actual  fire. Both  boys,  although  they  are obviously  driven  by the electricity of the storm  and  their  adolescent  desire for adventure, are  at least partly moved by a sense of charity:  "Uncle  Gavin says if that  old store of Yeates' burned  down, the town  would give them a house." But the charity is perverted  by an enormous, uncaring,  adolescent egocentricity:  "We are the only people in the world, David thought."
This self-centredness, however, is as much  externally  imposed by an intensified "everyman-for-himself" outlook,  as it  is internal.   Certainly   the  death  of  Elsie Yeates' baby is as much a community  responsibility as it is David's  and  Darcy's. The  burning  of the Yeates' shack climaxes Blondal's account  of the Depression's effect on the small town, an  account  which  began,  of course, with  the  opening dirge on thinness. In those few paragraphs which  precede  Chapter  One  Blondal created   an  atmosphere   of  emotional  draining   strongly   reminiscent  of  D.  H. Lawrence, the sense of a life which has lost its richness, lost the inarticulate sharing which gave it strength and satisfaction. Now the wind fans the flames, and carries away the sound of the first bell; there is no water to fight the fire because Reese Todd,  the town clerk, had ordered it turned  off to promote  his own perverse lust for power. In  this scene David and  Darcy, then, are to a great  extent the anony­ mous  dark  embodiments  of a social, physical  and  economic  environment. The  sense of overwhelming external forces is confirmed  by the close linking of the fire with the death  of David's mother, who utters at the end of  her feeble claim to the glamour  and  power of a far-off world forever lost:  "Tell  him I was presented."  The  fire, and  the death of his mother, at the end of Book I  bring David  to the verge of manhood.  In Book II the structural dualities become more apparent as they are  inverted.  The  scene shifts from  David's home  territory  to Darcy's  city. But  just as David  had  not been able to show  Darcy  the  ropes in  Mouse  Bluffs, now Darcy  is unable  to guide  David  in the  city. The  more  David  changes,  the more  Darcy  stays the same.  Master  of  Gavin, and  David,  and  world-beater  in Mouse Bluffs, Darcy in Winnipeg  is unable  to control his father,  or David, or his own vocation.  Darcy, that  is, remains the sophisticated  adolescent, the grown-up child,  unable  to  master  the  adult  world.6   As  in  Mouse  Bluffs "the  asking  [is] Darcy's  always," and as David comes to recognize Darcy's  inadequacy  he grows into  his own maturity. Or,  in terms of Blondal's  transparent surnames,  he stops
rushing  forth and becomes a new man.

BLONDAL


Darcy seeks out David at Knox  College, and  although David  is trapped into continuing  the   relationship  by  the   past  and   their   never-spoken  complicity   in crime,  he now  has some  awareness of his own inadequacy:

This is how the old man lives, he thought,  and  was glad he had  learned  so much. Then  knew  he  was only  making  words, implying  a  choice  where  there  was  no choice. It is what everyone does, he thought. Take it and  try to call it courage.  It's what everyone does.

The  imperfect syntax  and  the  unconnected pronouns seem to reflect  David's diffi­ culty in understanding himself. David's sexual initiation with the prostitute Margie comes through Darcy's initiative, but  again  the  complete  picture of the situation exposes Darcy's immaturity. Blondal,  as she does throughout the  novel, reinforces  the  dualism   on  the   rhetorical level  by  withholding information   which,   when revealed, causes  the  reader to  see  an  incident from  a  completely  opposite   per­  spective:

I've never seen tail affect a soph so much.
And I've never seen a guy who liked to watch before.

In such  exchanges David  shows his growing  assertiveness,  here accomplished by a cheap  taunt, but  nonetheless significant. Darcy,  too, is sensing the change. There is a touch  of envy  when  he explains  to  his father: " 'He  has  a hero....  I have none.'  " And  a moment of agony  when  he realizes that  David  can  see Margie as a living  human being,  not  a sex machine. As potential writers,  more  generally as artistic  temperaments, their  differences  become  still clearer.  In  David's mind  his own  writing is a  natural necessity  (only  haltingly  pursued in  the  novel), while Darcy's writing is only  a  means  to  an  end: "'[He]  wants  to  write  because  he likes to read  or  because  he has some compulsive  desire in a thing-directed society to produce something above  the level of things.'  " David, realizing  that  he  must keep something of himself  intact and  private, refuses to show  any  of his writing
to Darcy.


As ENGROSSING AS  THE  NOVEL IS from  this point  on, there is no  doubt   that   pronouncements such  as  these  on  heroism  and   thing-directed
societies diminish the intensity of Book II. In  Mouse  Bluffs the world,  particularly as apprehended by David, is primarily sensuous and  portrayed in precise, yet sug­ gestive images: for  example, the  "bloom" of the street  lights  in the  novel's open­  ing  scene,  parodied as  "grimy yellow pods in  bloated  gray  husks"  at  the  end  of Book I. In  Book II David is moving  into  the intellectual world  of  abstraction and  concept. As  Lilja  explains, in  Mouse  Bluffs " 'they  don't have  to  blueprint and  verbalize  everything they  do or feel.' " Had  Blondal  written  more  she  would,  no

BLONDAL

doubt,  have found  the way to present this aspect of experience  without  the blue­ print showing. But, in this work, the prose often seems less dense and more evasive in the laler  part of the novel. A symptom of the weakness, perhaps,  is the uncer­ tain  manner  in which the imagery, and  the  proverbial  truth,  of the title is inte­ grated  with  the  novel's  theme.  Another  is  the  unnecessarily  long  account   of Charles's  attitude   to  Darcy  in  Chapter   17,  which  does  little  to  interest  us  in Charles,  or to reveal Darcy.  And  perhaps  most disconcerting  is  the  hastily  pre­ pared  and  superficially  presented  acquaintance of  Darcy  and  David  with  the Greens.
No doubt  the haste and lack of detail intensifies the shock of Pamela  Green's
murder. But shock alone is hardly sufficient justification for the vague background and  the uncertain  connections among  the characters. Blondal  explains the cause of the murder  by showing Darcy's pretence to be the urbane  artist/ genius gradu­ ally eroded by his awareness that David has the artist's sensibility and intelligence. Possession becomes Darcy's whole ethic:  "I got me an artist,  a writer," he exults in  Blondal's  sketch.  Lilja  sees Darcy's  possessiveness and  tries  to  warn  David away:

'you've  got it-what  he's wanted. Maybe  he's  known  all along,  ever  since  he first came  to the Bluffs and  latched onto you. What he hasn't faced  yet is that  he hasn't got it, that's going  to be worse. Get  away.'

It  is a sign of David's  maturity  and  difference  that  he  will not  flee. In  his less analytical  (and  more sympathetic)  assessment: " 'He  [Darcy]  needs someone.' " To satisfy that  need Darcy  arranges  for David  to meet  Pamela  Green,  retarded daughter  of a fur tycoon. The apparent plan is that  this liaison will quickly leave David  free for  Darcy.  But Darcy,  again  showing  his blindness,  does not  antici­ pate  David's  simple interest  in  Pamela's  gentle  humanness.  David,  that  is, ap­ proaches Pamela  with the same openness that  he had  brought  to the relationship with Darcy, and  that  he must bring to his relationship  with Gavin. Perhaps  it is some glimmer  of this  parallel  that  reduces  Darcy  to  desperately  open  pleading for David's exclusive attention.  But David fights for his own  unique self:  " 'what­ ever I've got it's mine. Alone.' " David cannot  be what  he is not and  has begun to admit  it. Darcy  cannot be what  he is not, but  refuses to be what  he is. Here lies the  final,  unbridgeable  difference  between  these  two  characters  so  closely paired.  Hence Darcy's ominous final curse when he knows David  to have slipped his grasp:  " 'I'll  kill her first.' "
Not that David becomes a model of blameless perfection; in his continuing  fear
of, and  fascination  with Darcy,  he shares, in a sense, responsibility for  Pamela's murder.  Once implicated  with Darcy by violence he is now, ironically, implicated by his fear of violence. The  murder frees him of Darcy and forces him to be more objective. Gavin  Ross blames David, but as Gavin  must acknowledge  that  Darcy

66

BLONDAL


cannot  be his son  (since he is flawed), so, at the very moment  he spurns  David as a "stray," he is moving closed to him. David senses the new order: Gavin and his family will try to convert Darcy, who has lived and  prided himself on the role of the Devil, into a new Christ:  "Darcy  would go out with the sun darkened  and the  veil  of  the  temple  rent,  sane  but  temporarily  foolish.  My  brother." This thought  marks  David's  acceptance,  his Christ-like gesture, when  Darcy  has been abandoned by  all others.  The  brotherhood   is clearest  in  the  remarkable  scene when  David  imagines  himself  being  cross-examined  concerning  Darcy's  sanity. At each turn  he can see himself in the same situation,  he can recognize the other side of him that is Darcy, and his generous understanding becomes also a mark of his increasing self-awareness. In singing rhythms he makes his half-deranged  dis­ covery of his own fault:

saw my dark brother waiting to do his work and let my mouth close over the warn­ ing, saw him in the shadows as I have seen him now for years, watching, waiting, and did not catch his hand warmly in mine to stay it. I feared that handclasp, told myself that whoever survived it would be a killer.
. . . Pity ... the one who had to destroy Darcy or live forever too near the sucking vortex of Darcy's heart.
Gavin, good man, I give you Darcy, my dark brother. I killed him for you. No! I killed him for myself.

This  passage indicates  David's  knowledge that  he must  be freed  of Darcy.  But that  knowledge is coupled  with the recognition that  the Yin, the black and dark, is now  within  him.  In  reaching  for the  mystery within,  Blondal  risks complete muddle,  as in the strange  connection  between surviving a handclasp  and  becom­ ing a killer. Certainly  the confused syntax suggests that  David's understanding is tenuous  and  incomplete  at  best, more charged  with emotion  than  with  reason. Yet the hints of betrayal,  purity, and even redemption  in her understated  analogy to Christ's  death,  broaden  and  intensify the meaning of this strange  relationship.
David, searching  for a father,  eventually becomes a father,  first to Darcy  and
later to Gavin. Gavin,  yearning for a son and  heir, is disappointed  in Darcy, and unable  to embrace  David. Darcy, frustrated  anarchist,  refuses to be either son or father,  though  he exploits the external  trappings  of both  roles. Ian  Ross, Gavin's brother,  completes  this central  pattern  of pairings  in  the  novel. But  unlike  the other  three  Ian  is primarily  an observer and  commentator, in which  roles he has a significance beyond the relatively few words devoted to him. Ian  in the physical cripple against  which we can measure the various emotional and  intellectual fail­ ings of the other  characters. Ian  also has a public moral weakness (Mouse Bluffs, of course, would  not see it as a disease),  his alcoholism, against  which  we can assess the  moral  adequacy of the others. Among  the other  three  characters, Ian has least to do, directly, with Darcy, though there is clearly some parallel  between his relationship  with  his brother  and  Darcy's  relationship  with  David.  Bound  to

BLONDAL

his wheelchair  and  his drink,  with,  in  a  sense, little  more  to  lose, Ian  can  be cynically frank  about  the world around  him. His detachment makes him a  valu­ able guide to David, a mentor more incisive in his advice and direction than either Gavin or Darcy.
But it would be unlike Blanda! to cast him merely as the  perceptive eccentric.
When  Ian  drops his mask we see unexpected  depths,  particularly in the relation­ ship with his brother. One moment he is boasting defiantly:  "'I'm the only sinner in town;  you should prize me, not thwart  me. What  would Mouse Bluffs do with­ out me? Mothers  would have no bad examples for their sons.' " The  next moment he is weeping brokenly, sharing  with Gavin  the inarticulate distant  memory of a Scottish  home:  " 'all gone. And  the  road  from  Bridge of  Weir.  And  the  frogs and  the  good hot  voices out  of the  hills. Mary  and  it  all  coming  back  and  no good, no good.' "
Ian, then, is no callous comic grotesque;  his feelings and  his sensibility combine
to make him both a soul-mate for David, and a guide who cannot be condescend­ ing. The  two are  first seen together  at  the  beginning  of the  novel  when  Gavin sends David  to the hotel with word of George V's death.  David, struggling  with both sorrow and  fear, hears Ian  expound  on the meaning  of the  monarchy  and the significance of the King's  death.  Ian  knows there  is a  " 'great break' ": he recognizes that  ties are severed, that  a new home must  be  built  in a new place. But  he  knows, too,  that  the  King  symbolizes something  more  general  than   a particular Empire: the King is " 'better  than any of us and the best in all of us.' " This  abstraction, the King as symbol of the best that  man  can be, is very mean­ ingful to David  (though  Blanda! does not suggest that  he  recognizes the signifi­ cance at the time)  and it is the hunger for this ideal that echoes through  the novel as the allusions to the King's death  are multiplied.
Ian's  complexity is also suggested by the extent to which his impassioned babble
contains in concentrated  form the most memorable  features of Blondal's style and approach: the  ripples of allusion and  symbol, the  reaction  against  the  precision of psychological theory, and the note of irreverent  exuberance. It is fitting, more­ over, that  Ian,  determined  to penetrate  the meaning  of Eliot's The Waste  Land, should  find that  " 'It's  like a mystery story, but  the mystery is inside the  reader waiting  to be unraveled.' " For  A Candle to Light the Sun has both  poetry and wasteland in it.

IBELIEVE, THEN, THAT  Blondal's main line of sympathy  runs through  Ian  to David. Ian sees how similar  he and  David  are, especially in their
relationship  to Gavin. He tells David of his own  leaving for university:  " 'That older  brother  was God and  the  Holy Ghost  and  Our  Lord.  Cut  off your arm! The  younger one would have cut away obligingly.' " Ian  is trying to warn David

68

BLONDAL

not to sacrifice his own life and individuality to a pursuit of Gavin'sjGod's appro­ val. Then  he turns on himself, apologizing with one of his memorable enigmatic phrases. " 'It's  the morbidity,  d'you see, the morbidity of the unloved.' " But the comment  is more self-mocking than self-pitying, as if he is suggesting a more uni­ versal gloom, as if he is cautioning  David  against  expecting  love  from  Gavin. David, sensing the  kinship,  confides to  Ian  his darkest secret,  his  complicity  in the murder  of Elsie Yeates's  baby. And  Ian-quite naturally  and  without  pre­ tence it seems to me-grants an absolution and points the way to the future:
'I  did many murders once myself. Deliberately. You don't  stop thinking of them but neither do you talk of them and perpetuate the murder. I absolve you, you need no other absolution. Some day you'll absolve yourself, alone in the clear noon of reason.'
David grows still closer to Ian  after Ian's death. Ian  leaves a letter  with Water­ man in which, irreverent  in his very seriousness, he hopes that  David  has become a man and  warns him never the talk to Darcy about  the night of  murder.  When David eventually  follows Ian's  advice and shares his guilt  with  Basil Waterman, it is not a sign of desperation,  but a measure of his mastery of  the situation.  He leads the conversation, summing  up along the way his own view  (he now has his own view, and is able to give voice to it)  of Ian's influence:
'He taught me to read good things and to distinguish between the King and God, and that the highest calling was not killing wogs for the Empire and that no one would beat the ass off me if I dared to think otherwise. But I was never impressed by his -histrionics?'
So Darcy's  joke at Ian's  death  (crHoly Ghost  gone'')  now becomes David's recog­ nition:   "No  one  has  knowledge  but  Wiseman  Waterman and  Ian-Ghost. And my brother  and  I.''  And Blondal's central analogy, that  the search for a father  is a search  for a King  and  for  a  heavenly Kingdom,  takes  yet another  turn.  Ian, who once saw Gavin  as the Trinity,  is now himself seen  as the Holy Ghost. Ian has shown  David  the way to distinguish God and  King, to seeing the difference between  the  material  and  the spiritual,  to knowing that  Gavin  may  be father,  even a King,  but certainly  no god. David discovers, prompted  by Darcy's  taunt­  ing, that  Ian  is his best source of knowledge, his spiritual  guide,  and  that  Ian's  search for the "best in all of us," as well as Ian's passion for writing,  is his also.
As David  learns  something  of  Ian's  ability  to detach   himself  from  his own
experience  (also a necessity for the writer)  he grows in understanding of his own actions and values. As first Ian, and then Darcy, dies, David is stripped,  in a sense, of possible fathers. From each he takes what he can, and the novel moves by com­ bining several limited  personalities in one complex maturity, and  new man. The break with Gavin is, of course, the most difficult, even though,  as I have described it, the  progress of the whole novel is a deepening and  extending  of a  realization that comes in the opening scene. The break with Gavin is more fundamental, since

6g

BLONDAL

Blondal  presents it as the universal separation  of son from father.  "When  it was done,"  to  repeat  David's  conclusion in  Blondal's  preliminary   notes,  "we  were more like him, incapable of loving." Thus do the inverted  relationships of the characters  bring  their  own  insights. The  dichotomies,  the  opposing  characters, may lead to a twin  understanding: that  reaching  for an opposite leaves one iso­ lated  in his own individuality, and that  within  that  individuality  lies a version of the other  thing  which must be dealt  with.  Hence  the  multiplying  ironies of the novel's resolution:  David begins fathering  the child-like Gavin; Gavin,  crippled, is trundled  about  in  Ian's  wheelchair;  David,  for  a brief  time,  takes  to furious drinking  reminiscent of Ian's  escape. David  is finally able to  write about  Darcy, in elusive metaphors  which  would  have  delighted   Ian.  He  wonders  "Had the double  man,  four-armed,  four-legged beast,  dissolved once  for  all in the  hemp­ woman's  embrace?  Perhaps this was noon, the only noon a man could know, the clear  simple  awareness  that  the  beast  lived still."  His  questioning  contains  the awareness  that  the  double  man  has  not  dissolved  but  has  been  absorbed,  has become David  Newman.
David avoids drink by repairing the suspension bridge, an act which Blondal presents symbolically as gradual  "victory  over  the  rot."  The  bridge  is between David's  present and  his past, or, to use Lilja's  metaphor, he is driving  the wrong way down a one-way street. On this journey, "the  quiestest way forward  I know," he meets Lilja again, and their old love flares up for a moment  before they must admit  that  it can  be no more. Against the backdrop  of Mouse Bluffs' 75th  anni­ versary celebration  of its own past, the last stages of David's awakening take place. Roselee Rushforth  returns to Mouse Bluffs and she and  David  acknowledge their long-unspoken love. So David mal<:es a significant integration  of  past and present: he  vows to  marry  Darcy's  sister, and  Gavin's  now-so-designated  "heir." "She was a Ross, on the line of Gavin or even Ian," as her father  had once concluded. Having  won Roselee, David tries a last time to ask for the most important part of the  Ross estate, Gavin's love, but  the words won't  form  and  he can only say, " 'Do you remember  the night the old  King died?' "
From  Gavin's  opening announcement, " 'The  King is dead,' " to David's  final query,  "'Do you remember  the night the old King  died?'" is a movement  from the end of a political era to the beginning of a personal commitment. Gavin  dies watching  the street-dancing,  which last occurred  in Mouse Bluffs when he  mar­ ried Christine; ironically, as the town celebrates its past, the end of the Rashleigh dynasty is confirmed. Yet David  inherits a new life. After  Gavin's death  he dis­ covers  a  final  note,  block letters  spelling "What King?"  If the  note  is a  last reminder  of Gavin's  abrasiveness, it also marks, surely, his recognition  that  there are many kings. And the richness of the novel implies that the note is saying much more:  that  all is forgotten,  perhaps;  or that  David  must acknowledge  no kings; or that  Gavin's  own reign is over; or, more simply, that  he does remember  his

BLONDAL


first meeting with David most  vividly  and is reaching out  for  the  boy in  his query, just  as  David had used  a  question to  hide  his  yearning. Repeatedly  David  asks himself  the  same question, and  makes this  answer:

I loved you, good man, loved your good imperfections all my life. It's the morbidity, d'you  see, the  morbidity of the  unloved. From  a long way off he heard  Ian's voice, saw  Ian's sick  hands over  the  blanket,  knew  now, acknowledged, that  he too  had not  been  loved.  Long  after  a son's  needs  were  past,  his life  had  been  spent  upon winning, earning a  father's love. Now,  having  failed,  he  had  no  father, only  his own  identity.

The reflection seems  an  acknowledgement that there is yet one  other king,  David himself. As Lilja had once  told  him: "'David, I  always envied   you  your  name. Your royal  name.'" The passage on  identity, or  this  last  allusion, might seem  in isolation too  neat and too earnest. But  the  many versions  of kingship, the  weakness of  Ian, the  evil  of  Darcy, the  reverberating questions of  guilt  and   love,  save  the conclusion from insufferable certainty. David's search is finished and   he  is freed, but  Blondal deliberately turns away  from glib  optimism to a final  paradox more fitting for  a  man who has  grown by  embracing opposites:  David is  "freed ... to  loss."


NOTES

1 McClelland &  Stewart's contract with  Blondal's   Estate  stipulates that   a  sum  of
$soo.oo is to  be deducted from  royalties  as "compensation for expenditures made
by the  Publisher in  preparing the manuscript for the  press."
2   The Patricia Blondal  Papers  have  recently  been donated to the Special  Collections Division,  University of British  Columbia Library, by Stephanie and  John  Blondal, the author's children. Quotations from the papers are  used with  their  generous per­ mission.  Many of  Patricia Blondal's  letters  and  manuscripts remain  unlocated; I would  be grateful for  any  information regarding such  material.
3  The novel was written before  A Candle  to Light  the Sun, and  serialized  as "Stran­
gers to Love" in Chatelaine, 32, nos. 9-11  (September-November 1959).
4   Patricia Blondal, A  Candle to  Light  the  Sun   (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart,
1960), p.  14.  (The New  Canadian Library Edition, 1976,  has  the  same  pagina­
tion.)
5   The bizarre  and  mysterious side of crime  is a favourite Blondal  subject. There is a strange connection in From  Heaven With A Shout  between  Monica's shooting Alex in  the  leg,  and   Alex's   mysterious   suicide.  An  unpublished  non-fictional  novel, "Good  Friday," is based  on  the  murder trial  of a Winnipeg taxi-driver.
5   David's first loves among women,  Lilja  Frank and  Pamela Green, are  also seen as eternal children. And  both,  of course,  are  left behind  as David  comes  to maturity. As he  tells Lilja, in  another version  of the  twin  misunderstanding, " 'You  did  the right  thing  thinking it was the wrong  thing,  most of us reverse  the  process.'"

FRJIGMENT FROM ]I LOST ROM]INCE
Douglas Le Pan

To  the dark  tower  carne, to the dark  wood  came, and  were frightened these children.
One  said, "I'm still afraid  of the dark." The other said  nothing. There should  have  been someone  to guide  them  in
and  there  would  have  been-some dutiful page, or wise old palmer, or peasant  the  colour  of clay, or perhaps a magical  bird  to fly
from  the turret carrying a message -
if the land  had  been what  the  prologue promised. But  this was a blind  bitter  land, as most  lands  are. There was no one. Darkness  deep  and  forbidding. Then one of them  said  to the other, "This is a wood where  we must  find our  own  way"
and  put out  his hand  and  parted the darkness.
In  the morning so surely so safely  they  lay in each  other's arms  in  the leafy  clearing that  birds flew out  of the  tower  in blessing.


]I CLUSTER OF LOVE POEMS
Douglas Le Pan

I

Leaves  protect me, lyrics shade  me from  the  angry  god who made  me.
Birds skim down  with  songs to save  me, sing me back the strength god gave  me.

Nature joins both  power  and  loving, strong  sap's  beating,  leaves' soft moving, fold  me in your green  caressing
twine your veins and  mine  in blessing.

You  are  nature's child  and  minion, strong  your arm  as eagle's  pinion, tender leaves your membranes beating, our  flushed  veins two natures meeting.

I am  yours for  your green  sheathing, strong  because  of your sweet  breathing, new  restored  by your achieving;
a dark  flower opens past believing.

POEM

II

A power-line marching through scrub, that's what  you've  made  me.

A transmission tower
crackling with  messages,  images.

A sunflower
aching sunward with  seed.

A stricken tree
blossoming  into  flower  and  fruit.

Old  limbs
new baptized into  youth.

Passion of
a saviour streaming with  blood.

Strength of
a saviour  in a sheer  white  cloth.


III

Wild  orchid, veined  with  tenderness, that  reaches  down  to glacial  rock
past  moss and  rotting ferns and  pine-cones and  the  droppings of porcupines, raccoons.

This  your  just signet, seal and  impress, a moccasin plant  sustained by rock, pink  in  the  sun-shot  shade  of June, frail  trumpet, satin-smooth, and  clear.

A flower, so fragile, soon will fade.
But  while  it lasts its fine-meshed  membrane both  holds  and  hides a veined  perfection,
a slipper  that  a prince  might  search  for.

This emblem of the sensitive
and  strong, triumphant short-lived song­
for you this emblem  will not fade but  blazoning be and  heraldry.

73





A CRUST
FOR THE CRITICS

JACI<  HODGINs,    The   Resurrection   of  Joseph
Bourne.  Macmillan,  $12.95·

IF ENGLISH-CANADIAN  CULTURE has been significantly shaped   by  the  spirit  of  our founding century, then  it  should  be  at­ tractive to  us  that   Jack  Hodgins'  latest novel is a resurrection -or reification - of some of the best features of eighteenth­ century  literature.  The  Resurrection of Joseph    Bourne,   like   Hodgins'   earlier  work,  occupies  an  indicative psychologi­ cal  territory between   ironic  extremes­ the  tranquil island  seascape  represented on the dust  jacket and  a moonshine mad­ ness of Hogarthian richness and  Swiftean proportions between  its covers.  In  a  va­ riety  of  ways  Resurrection bears  overtly the explicit  imprint of 18th century style.
To  begin with,  Hodgins models his chapter titles,  his  rubrics,  and   much   in his  narrative style  on  eighteenth-century fiction,  most  notably  Fielding.  The  book is  divided   into   three   large   "chapters." The last  and  key phrase  of the  first  per­ ambulatory title  is  "The  Ragged  Green Edge  of  the  World,"  suggesting,  in  the context of Hodgins' last novel, our fallen Eden  and  also his "Dividing Line,"  both a perilous  habitation and perhaps a point of  prospect. The  prospect  is announced in the other two chapter keys:  "The Old Man   and   His  Deeds" and   "The  New Man." The   vocabulary  is  biblical    (St. Paul)   and Christian, but Hodgins' rendi­ tion is everywhere evocative  of the  trans­  lation  of  these same  themes  in  18th  cen­ tury   novels   such   as   Tom  Jones   and Joseph Andrews, and  no less in  the  mat­ ter  of  his  novel  than   in  the  mode  of its

74
 presentation. Resurrection portrays a con­ test  between  charity and  cupidity,  invit­  ing  a pursuit of love which  could  lead  to understanding,  cartooning  some   pitfalls  along  the way, and  warning us of  the dis­ tractions and  distortions of  affection. (As with  Fielding, the affectations of Hodgins' characters usually proceed  from  vanity  or hypocrisy,  and  are the  source  of the  truly ridiculous in  Hodgins' aesthetic.)
The basic humour in this book does not require a great  deal  of subtlety  to appre­ ciate,   and   that,  I   think,   is  one   of  its strengths.  When   a  stunningly   beautiful sea   nymph   (always   suggestively,   never explicitly described) is washed  up  mirac­ ulously  onto   the  grubby   streets   of  Port Annie, her  walking (which is extensively described) creates a narrative trail through  the  characters  of  the   book,  a litter    of   responses    and    interpretations which  tell  the  reader far  more  about the observers   than   the  observed. The  lady herself  remains ineffable, a mystery. Hod­ gins'  other characters are  surely extrava­ gant,   but  still  for  the  most  part  imagin­ able   up-islanders.  Moreover,  their   par­  ticular  manifestations of our  general  cul­ tural  narcissism  create, even  in a Hogar­ thian    overdrawing,   paradigms   for    a much  more  widely  distributed experience of life. This  first mysterious stranger who comes  to town  is an  agent, a catalyst, the expression  of  a force  which  can  best  be understood in  terms  of what  happens to those   who  in  one   way  or  another   en­ counter her  beauty. Principally, the  resi­ dents  of  Port   Annie   are  induced  to re­ capitulate their  own  and  the  town's  his­ tory, almost  inadvertently, as an  accident of trying  to interpret the lady who seems herself  to  be almost  without history,  and it is of the essence of  the book's irony that  in  trying   to  interpret  her  the  people  of Port  Annie  are  always  the  ones  who  are  being  themselves interpreted.
Through   the    resulting   melange    of gentle   character  assasinations, a  theme

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



which  is theological and  political  in Shakespeare, ethical in  Fielding ("Judge not  that  ye be not  judged"), acquires in Resurrection a  new  turn. But   this  turn is actually 18th  century in its inspiration, too, or so one suspects. Early  in the novel, the  shadowy central  figure, Joseph Bourne, anti-hero,  is discovered  to  be  a poet (is there a play on 'Birney'?) and his works  are  recovered by the  zealous  Eng­ lish   teacher-cum-librarian, Larry   Bow­ man.  As if to suggest  that  this  poor aca­  demic  fellow  never  hits  the  mark,  Hod­ gins  has   his  interpretation   of  Bourne's poetry    foiled    against    others   of    Port Annie's  humble   gallery,   including  his most    sympathetic    character,   an    ex­ stripper,  another  would-be  (and   hope­ less)  poet,  and  a  particularly  crass  jour­ nalist.  Each  sees in  the  poetry, of course, only    himself:   For    ex-stripper   Jenny  Chambers the  poem  is about acceptance, and   longing   for   a   true   home; for   the would-be poet it is about frustrated desire for a "pure love"; for the  journalist about  "communication,  baby"; for  the  prurient librarian himself  it's  about obsessive sex, "Copulation. Pure and  Simple.... "
In  Hodgins' world,  like  that  of  Chau­ cer   or   St.   Augustine,  people   interpret according to who  they  are -which  is to say, according to what  and how they love. Charity or cupidity thus  become  key ele­ ments   of  distinction  in   moral   life  and  good   reading  both.  Evil -even  in  the form   of  petty  sin-creates   distortions, and  in  those  who  succumb  to  it  wholly (such   as  merchant Jeremy Fell  and  his wife Cyn,  proprietress of the  Museum of Evil)   the  full  effects  of  the  Fall  are  an active  hostility  to  truth, miracle, or  joy, even  to  the  point  of  wanting to  destroy those  who  attempt to  respond   to  these things happily.
In Port  Annie,  as elsewhere, the real miracle  turns out to be love. While the resurrection of Joseph Bourne is a  trans­ formation of history  (his own history and
 the  town's) , the  agency  of  his  transfor­ mation  is seen  by every  kind  of  observer  to  be  something  to  do   with   love.  Yet Raimey,     the     Jamaican    beauty    who awakens   Bourne   to   "new   life,"   is  dis­ covered  to  us  to  be  more  than  simply  a physical   splendour   which    knocks    the whole  of Port  Annie  (and  especially  the librarian professor Bowman) , off its heels. It is the "other beauty" of Raimey which emerges  as  her   real   gift,   a   quality  of spiritual character  which  is the  means  of her  "raising up  Bourne," just as it seems to  Bowman  she  raises  up  "fish  from  the dark  bottom  of  the  sea."  What the  lady offers, much to the distress of Bowman's licentious imagination, is discerned by literary   indirection  to   be  actually "the noble  yifte  of  his   [God's]  mercy  ... ," something   powerful enough  to  raise  up even Dirty Della  (the  golden  hearted and weary  prostitute)  to a higher standard of love. (At this point  there  is a touch  more of Baudelaire than  St. Luke,  or  Fielding, in the mix.)
Ultimately it is Bourne who carries  this higher  quality  of unselfish love to the citi­ zens of  Port  Annie,  becoming as he  does "the  salvation   of  the  whole  town."  The  restored  poet,  on good  precedent,  refuses to be what  the  citizens  would  first  make of  him,  a  newly  acknowledged  legislator  of  the  world.  To  the  disappointment of many  he even  leaves his radio  interview­ ing and  tireless documenting of mundane life. Refusing above  all to become  a tour­  ist attraction, he becomes  instead  a neigh­ bour,  a  bearer  of grace,  of assurances of forgiveness  and  love  to  those  whose squalor  least  anticipates it.
One of the problems Hodgins clearly wrestles  with  in  this  multi-layered,  com­ plexly  textured  book  is  the  problem   of achieving for  a modern  audience a  form for  belief, or  even  for  the  understanding of  belief.  In the  first  few  pages  we  see that  the boarded-up church in Port  Annie is a  symbol  for  our  modern rejection of

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



one  kind  of  form.  But  this  is paralleled by  another  loss  of  form   which   deeply affects  the  novelist-the fact  that  there can  seem  to  be  no  options  left  for  the creation of belief in modern  fiction  itself. Could  there  be a myth  which  is true?  If so, how could  it be written  down?
Bowman  the  teacher  has turned to reading poems  and   heroic  romances  be­ cause in them "hoping was not considered to be a crime." This  sentence, the last of section    2     ("The  Old    Man   and    His Deeds")  marks  the  point  where Hodgins asks  of  his  readers an  imaginative leap, and  I suspect  it is a  point  at  which  most readers will either leap  into  cheerful  sus­ pension or impatiently part company with Hodgins' more  hopeful imagination. The announcement of section 3 more or less maps  the  territory: "Of the Battle  of Life and Death in its New Disguise; of Mrs. Barnstone's Ambitious Epic Poem and  the promised   descent  of  Fat  Annie   (God  of this  World)  at  last,  with  Calamities Fol­ lowing,  or, THE NEW  MAN."
Port  Annie  is now  shown  to  us  to  be our   world   (Believe   it  or  Not), thus   a world    looking   for   deliverance.   Unfor­ tunately, what  offers itself as the redemp­ tive spirit  of the age  is a slick and  seduc­ tive antagonist. The town is infiltrated by another  mysterious  stranger -this  time much  more  like  the one in Twain's book of  that   title.  With  a  moustached smile, smooth  talk and  a gold stud in his left ear lobe,  Damon  West  is a real  estate  agent who  wants  to  "develop" the  town's  po­ tential, even  at  the  cost of bulldozing  its poor  residents  off the  landscape to do it. Here  we see Hodgins clearly  as he could become  to a wider  audience, a twentieth­ century moral  novelist  wrestling  with  the spirit  of a  decadent  western  materialism. For  Fielding, the  positive  anima  of Tom  Jones'  growth toward spiritual knowledge  was figuratively associated  with  the  West
-"Sophie" Western    [western   philoso­
phia]; in   the   eighteenth  century   there
 was still,  presumably, a general  form  for the spirit  of charity which one could asso­ ciate  with  western  culture. But  the  con­ temporary "war" is symbolized  in  Resur­  rection    by   an   explicit   battle   between  "real" estate  and  spiritual estate.  Damon West's  attempt  to convert   the  townspeo­ ple  comes  in  the  ramshackle church, in­ formally  deconsecrated, where   he  offers them  a "hymn to the  praise  of the future
. . .  a  psalm   to  the  glories  of  progress"
-another, less happy  eighteenth-century legacy.  The verbs  are  seize,  get,  take­ what  is celebrated by Damon  West  is the spirit  of cupidity.
When  the converts to real estate are preparing the disused church for West's speech  we are  given  the bluntest image of "The Battle  of Life and  Death in its New Disguise." There  have   apparently  been Scripture verses painted on the wall. One reads  "For he  that  loveth  not  his brother abideth in death." Mayor  Weins puts over it  his  poster   "Grab  your  chance, don't think    too   small;   the   Future's  coming, with fortunes for all." Then another verse is   covered    over-"For    whatsoever   is born  of God  overcometh the  world" dis­ appears   beneath    "When    opportunity knocks  on  your  door  will  you  answer  the call,  or  hide  your  head  in  the  sands  of lethargy?" In  the coming order  Mammon replaces not only God, but neighbour and  the  world  as well.
Biblical  imagery  abounds in this  novel. The temptation of Damon West is edenic enough, indeed  satanic-we  are  invited to see that  it is the  allurement of  becom­ ing  "self-made men" that   most  perverts the   best  provisions   of  Creation  for   the people   of  Port   Annie.   As  in   the  man­ corrupted gardens described by the  bibli­ cal  prophet Isaiah, island  man's  attempt to seize the land  on his own  terms  makes of  possessiveness  an  idol,  symbolized   not by a  tree  of  life  but  by a  tree  of  man's corrupted    invention,   and    thus    death. (The  "terebinth" here  is a  huge  cactus

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



imported to attract tourists.) In  an ironic reflection  on the  biblical  allusion, this 40- foot  image  of the  mayor's civic presump­ tion  is destroyed  in  a kind  of  divine  joke (which    will   tickle    the    fancy   of   up­ islanders) -it drowns  in   the   incessant rain.
Yet  despite  these  several  "keys"  to our understanding, Hodgins' central  message (if one  can  call  it that) is delivered here pretty  much  like Bourne's to Port  Annie. That is, despite that  this is a richly literary novel, textured with overtones from Field­ ing,  Milton    (Resurrection  is  a  kind  of Paradise Regained to that  which was Lost in   Invention   of   the    World),  Twain, Swift,  Tolstoy,   Chaucer, and  the  Bible, Hodgins doesn't depend upon the modern  reader's aquiescence in a form for under­ standing and  belief  which  he  knows  has been  long  discarded  in  much  western  fic­ tion.  As Bourne  admits, "the old  meta­  phors  for eternity don't work  any  more."  In  consequence, Bourne  puts  it,  "if sym­ bols  don't work-and  what   else  can  a poet  use? Then eternity can  only  be  ex­ pressed   by  implication,  by  the   way  we live our  lives."  Hodgins' own  witness,  as narrator,  to  the   resurrection   of  Joseph Bourne,  is in itself largely  by implication. Some  of  this  works  very  well,  even  for the  casual   reader.  Some  of  it,  as  with Fielding, still  needs  the  help  of  a  closer reading, of  some  acquaintance with  the literary  conversation in  which  this  novel asks  us  to  participate. (In other   words, academician Bowman  may  be a  joke, but he  is still,  for  Hodgins, a  primary  audi­ ence.)
The beginning of the  end  of this story is the mudslide  which,  with  ironic  justice, carries  all of  Port  Annie  into  the  sea  ex­ cept  the shack  district which  the spirit  of real  estate  would   have  demolished  with bulldozers.  The  judgment is apocalyptic, apparently a  response  by Creation to the ultimate  presumption  of  Mayor   Weins, symbolized in his attempt to reinvent (ex-
 hume,   restore,   but   not   resurrect)  Fat Annie   Fartenberg,  the   founder  of   the town. Instead the mountain (berg)  farts, excreting  the whole  fool's paradise of her worshippers into  the  sea.
Yet  Hodgins' instinct  is finally  for charity  more  than  for  judgment. Indeed, that  is the  whole  point  of his  novel, and it redeems something of the  ragged  green edge.  We see that  the  catastrophe,  how­ ever definitive  for  those who have eyes to see and  won't, could  be for others a begin­ ning.  In  the  wake  of  it  all,  some  lives have been renewed. Seen with the eyes of love, true  values emerge:  "those good in­ visible  things  that  can't  be stolen  or  dis­ appear," Bourne  says,  reminding us  that  "love   and   perfect  vision,"  or  love  and understanding, are  finally  the  same.  The  calamitous   conclusion  of   the   novel   is thus not in fact  the end of the story, since, "as  some  of  them  knew,  the  things  that  aren't  seen  never  end."
The  Resurrection of Joseph  Bourne  is, I  think,  a  novel  rich  and  imaginative in its conception. There are  moments in the




Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



execution when  the  burlesque  gets out  of hand and  the  extravagance becomes  un­ tuned. But  unlike  the  poor  poet  Amelia Barnstone and   her  kind,  by  whose  epic poem Jack  Hodgins gently mocks himself and  his own literary enterprise, the novel­ ist knows more of  what  he is doing, and  is developing an appreciable control  on the structure of  his  fiction -much  better  in fact  than  he  displayed  in The Invention of the  World. Amelia,  with  her  Swiftean couplets (d. Swift's  "A  Description of a City  Shower")  concluded her  epic  poem with  the landslide itself, seeing "new  life" only  in  the   pseudo-hauteur of  her  em­ pirical  terms.

But  oh,  what fuss  these  earthbound mortals make
When  asked   to  pull   up  roots,  or  new  life take;
You'd think the  sky  had  fallen on  their heads,
The earth in  ruins, or even  pets  found dead!

Hodgins himself,  by contrast, is cut  more out  of  the  cloth   of  a  Fielding,   and  his "poem" sits in a larger  human context,  a wider tradition of understanding. His humour is not cynical  and  self-distancing
-like Fielding's it  has  more  about  it  of
Chaucer than  of Swift.  By our  laughter, thus,  he  leads  us  to  compassion  for  the folly in which  we,  too, participate.
In   this  novel   Hodgins  does  come   to
some  answers,  I think,  concerning the modern novel and  a form  for belief. The result is "a comic-epic-poem-in-prose" which  Fielding could  have  liked very much,  not only because of its success with the  hilarity   of  our   worldly  affectations, but  because  it  points   us congenially  be­ yond   them,   by   a   charitable   vision   to things  we may  not  yet have seen. Resur­ rection   is,  relative  to  its  contemporary fictions, a lively novel, and will earn much rereading. After  a successful first novel, it is a critic's  cliche  to find  the  second  one something of a disappointment. It would
 be well  this  time  to hold  back  on  the  re­ flex: Hodgins has shown  himself  to be all that   his   first   work   promises: a   major talent, worthy of comparison with the very best  of  our  contemporaries at  home  and  abroad. He  offers  us an  energetic book, attractively textured, if slightly apprehen­ sively written. But  despite  its  preemptive strike  against an  academic audience, it is much   more  than  a  mere  crust   for   the critics.  There  is something better  here  to chew  on.  One  looks  forward to  his  next volume  with  rejuvenated expectations.

DAVID  L.  JEFFREY


ARTS & THE STATE

BERNARD   OSTRY,    The    Cultural  Connection.
McClelland & Stewart, $7.95.

"Goo HELP  THE  MINISTER who  meddles with  art," said  Lord   Melbourne in  I835 when   he  was  approached  by  Benjamin Robert  Haydon with  a  scheme  for  sup­ porting  indigent  painters, and  for  many years  after  Confederation  his  advice was followed  almost  to the letter by successive Canadian  governments.  Indeed, perhaps the   most   telling   passage   of  all   in   the famous report of  the Massey Commission on   National   Development  in   the   Arts Letters and Sciences  when  it appeared in
1951 was a sardonic little note that  the government of the day gave voluntary organizations   connected   with    cultural
affairs  approximately one  seventeenth of the  grants it devoted to Fairs  and  Enter­ tainments.  In   cash   terms   the   portion  given  to  the  arts  in  I949, the  year "when the  Commission began  its sittings,  looked even   more   derisive,   for  it  amounted  to approximately $2 I ,ooo,  just a little  more  than  the  subsidy  given  to the Boy Scouts.  The  Commission  added  its own  pungent comment. "If  national interest in  volun­ tary  effort  in  the  arts, letters  and  sciences were    expressed   by   existing    grants    of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



money from  the Federal Government, Canada could   scarcely   be  called  a  civi­ lized nation."
In  The  Cultural Connection, Bernard Ostry   traces  the  rising  curve of  govern­ mental interest in  the  arts  that  followed the  publication of the  Massey Report, an interest  and   an   involvement   that   have  been  only  temporarily  reduced  in  times of  economic  stress.  The  government  of Louis St. Laurent, vestigially  tainted with Mackenzie King's   distrust  of   the   arts,  responded  slowly  to  the  Report, doubt­ less feeling   that  its  commitments to  the CBC,  the  NFB and  the  National Gallery  were  heavy  enough without moving  into  the  area   of  supporting  artistic organiza­ tions  and  individual  artists,   and   it  was not  until  1957  that   it  fulfilled  the  main recommendation of the  Massey Commis­ sion by founding the Canada Council.
From   that   time   onwards official  sup­
port   for  the  arts  grew  steadily   until  the
 recent  marginal cut  in  funds,  so that   in
1977-78  the  Canada Council was spend­ ing $36,ooo,ooo  on  the  arts,  the National Arts Centre was consuming an additional
$g,ooo,ooo, while in twenty years the operating budget  of  the  NFB  has  grown from  $4,ooo,ooo  to $2g,ooo,ooo, and  that of the  National Gallery  from  half  a  mil­ lion  to $4,ooo,ooo.  All this has helped  to create  a  situation  in   which,  as  Robert Fulford says  in  his  introduction to  The Cultural Connection, "to  choose  a career  in the arts is no longer  the foolish gesture it  seemed  to  many  of  my  generation in the 195o's."
Of  course,  it  can  be  argued that   the
renaissance in  the  Canadian arts  which we have been witnessing  in the past quar­ ter of a century was carried mainly  by its own   impetus,  and   that   the   position  of artists    might    well    have    improv!ld­ though  perhaps  to   a   lesser   degree - without  the  patronage  supplied  by  the






ESSAYS  NEEDED


ECW  PRESS is publishing  a new, twenty-volume series entitled The  Critical History of Canadian Literature. The project  contains   essays on  one  hundred  major  English­ speaking literary figures, organized chronologically.

If you are interested in contributing a section on a specific author, please send c.v. and sample  of writing to:

The  Editors
CHCL, ECW   PRESS  Stong College, York  University Downsview, Ontario M3 J 1P3



79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Canada Council   and  the various  provin­ cial  arts  councils.  I  believe  this, and  also that   the   patrons  in  Canada  have  been perhaps more lucky with  their artists  than  the  artists  with  their  patrons;  think  how wasted  all  that   money  would  have  been if we  had  remained a country  of Wilson MacDonalds and  Nellie  McC!ungs!
Yet  there  is an  official case  to  be put,
and   Bernard  Ostry   is  well  qualified   to trace  from  an establishment point  of view the   changing  relationship between  gov­ ernment  and   the  arts  in  Canada,  since he  is  the  almost   perfectly   rounded  cul­ tural bureaucrat. He  has a staggering list of  involvements with   the  CBC  and   the Secretary   of   State's   Office,   with    the CRTC  and   the   National  Museums  of Canada, of  which  he  was  until  recently Secretary-General.  And  as a  concise  his­ tory   of   the   question,  from   the   inside track,  The  Cultural Connection is a book that  everyone   interested  in  the  difficult question  of  public   support   for  the  arts should   certainly read.  The   key episodes, the circumstances that changed official minds,  the significantly  changing statistics are  all carefully recorded.
But  The   Cultural Connection is more
than   a  narrative of  events.  It is also  an argument that  a healthy  and abundant cultural  life  is  essential   for  a  country's social  and  political  health, and  that-as the past twenty years have shown-this depends on  generous and   judicious  sup­ port  for  the  arts  by the  government, but in   ways  which   ensure  that   there   is  no direct political influence.
This   is a  classic  Canadian small-! lib­ eral   stance,  and  it  is probably   also  held by   the   more   intelligent  big-L   Liberals  who  have  given  thought to  the  matter. It is also a stance  supported  by most arts organizers, and  by many  artists,  particu­ larly  performers, who do  not  want  to see the  lean old days return.
Those  who  look on such  a stance  with
distrust are  a curiously  mixed  group. On

8o
 the  one  hand   there   are   the  reactionary MPs   (not   all  Conservative) , radio  hot­ liners   and   petty   journalists, who  make political  capital by complaining over the spending  of  tax   dollars   on   poetry   they do   not   like   or   painting   they   do   not understand; these were the kind of people responsible  for   the  recent  campaign  in Vancouver  against  Talonbooks and   Bill Bissett,  and  essentially   they  believe  that  if public  money  is to be spent  on the  arts the  public has  a right  to censorship.
On  the other hand, there  are  the artists
who  have  an  innate distrust   of  govern­ ments  and  their  works,  and  who  suspect  that  even  with  the  best of  intentions offi­ cial  sponsorship  will  somehow  curb  their  freedom.  Long    ago   Robertson   Davies  spoke for  them  in his brilliant background paper  on  "The  Theatre" for  the  Massey Commission in  which   he  remarked that  the  only  tolerable  patronage  was  really the  negative kind  that   took  burdens  like taxation off  the  artist's back.  "The artist who  gets  nothing from   his  Government is  not   under  his  Government's thumb," Davies   remarked,  and   added   "Govern­ ment  patronage, unless  it  is of  the  nega­  tive,  unobtrusive sort  which  I  have  men­  tioned, or unless it operates under  special safeguards,  can   become  severely  repres­  sive in its influence."
Bernard Ostry  would obviously deny Davies'  main  point, and  would  argue  that in any  case the  "special safeguards" were embodied in  the  constitution of the Can­ ada  Council. And  indeed   one  can  grant
-one can  even  joyfully  proclaim-that the  Canada Council has  done  splendidly in  giving  artists  time  to work  and  in  try­ ing  to  ensure   that   their   works  are  per­  formed, and  that it has  done  so with  the minimum  of   interference  in   what   the artist  chooses to produce.
But  the  fact  remains that  he who  pays
the piper  is tempted to feel he should  call the  tune.  Once governments get involved in  the  arts  there  is always  the  danger of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



their    being    shaped   to   political   ends, overtly  or obliquely. Even  in western countries  that   officially  sponsor   the  arts the  pressures  build  up,  as  they  are  cur­ rently    building    up   in   Quebec,   where governmental cultural policy is shaped  to favour the separatist frame  of  mind.  Even the   Canada   Council  gives   more   of  its subventions  to  organizations,  which   are reasonably  predictable and  vulnerable to budget   cuts,   than    to   individual  artists  who  are   unpredictable  and   less  depen­ dent, and  to performing artists  rather than to  creative artists   who  by  the  nature of their   activities are  less  conservative and more  innovative. To  me  the  most  ques­ tionable of all  the  actions  of the  Canada Council-certainly the most ominous­ was   the   creation  of   the   Art   Bank,   in which   the  state   ceased   to  be  merely   a patron and  entered the  art  world  as  the leading customer, thus  injecting official taste  massively into  the market for paint­ ings   and    indirectly   militating   against  artists  whose  styles  seemed  discordant in bureaucratic  surroundings.
The  danger is always  there,  under  the best systems of governmental patronage, which    does   not   mean    that    the   artist
should   necessarily   reject   the  help   he  is offered,   since  it  is  clear   that   the  com­ munity benefits  from  the  work  of  artists  and    should    in   some   way   reciprocate, though whether  the  best  way  is through state  organization is not so clear.  Thus all one  can  do  after  reading The  Cultural Connection, Bernard Ostry's record  of the shift   from   government  indifference  to deep   official  involvement  in  the  arts,  is to  repeat  what Virgil   made the  Trojan leader   say:   "I  fear   the   Greeks,   even when   they  bear   the  gifts."   There is  no foolproof  way of excluding political pres­ sures  from  governmental support  for  the arts.   And   so  the   artist   must  always   be cautious,  always   prepared -if   need  be
-to bite  the hand that  feeds.
GEORGE WOODCOCK
 
GEORGINA BINNIE-CLARK




Wheat&
Woman




Introduction by Susan Jackel













The fascinating and true story of one woman's attempt to establish her­ self as an independent farmer in Saskatchewan early in the twentieth century. Susan Jackel's introduction describes the disabilities which Canadian law placed on the woman farmer at the time and traces the history of the homesteads-for­ women movement.

$20.00 cloth, $7.50 paper


University of
Toronto Press


81

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



FESTSCHRIFT

A  Political Art:  Essays  and  Images in  Honour of George   Woodcock, ed. William H.  New. University of British  Columbia Press, $15.00.

I ORIGINALLY AGREED  TO  REVIEW this book a  year   ago,  in  pat t  at  least  because  it would  give me an  opportunity to pay my own  tribute to George  Woodcock  for  his contribution to our  literary  life as writer, critic,  and  editor. I  did  not  get round  to writing  the   review   until   now.  Some  of the  reasons  for  the  long  delay  were  be­ yond  my control. But only some.  Perhaps the  most  important  reason  for  my  pro­  crastination  was  my  inability   to  decide how to come to terms with this Festschrift.
I have  for  a  long  time,  both  as  occa­
sional contributor and reviewer,  been wondering  whether  this  particular  kind of   literary  genre   is  still   viable.   As  its name  implies, it was a German invention. The  desire   to   honour  a   distinguished scholar  or literary personality is of cour5e wholly   laudable,  and   no   one   deserves such an honour more than  George Wood­ cock.  But  what   about   the  contents of  a typical  Festschrift? In the nineteenth cen­ tury  and   on  into  the  twentieth, a  Fest­  schrift   was   essentially   a   miscellaneous collection  of   scholarly   articles,   covering (though  they  did  not  in  fact  always  do so)  the interests of the person  who was to be  honoured. That  pattern has,  by and large,  remained unchanged, even  though the  nature of periodicals has undergone great  changes. The typical  Festschrift has always   reminded  me  of   the  most   old­ fashioned  of  scholarly  publications,  the Proceedings of the  Royal Society,  say, or of the  Modern  Language Association.  In any  given  issue  there  are usually only two or  three  articles  that   really  interest   me, and   the   quality  of  the   contribution  is invariably mixed.
It is clear,   both  from  his  Preface  and his arrangement of the contributions, that
 Bill  New,  the  editor   of  A  Political Art, was aware  of the problems posed by a Festschrift and  that  he  tried  to overcome them.  The central aim  of  the  book  is of course   to  honour  Woodcock, "to   salute the   man,    to   evoke   something  of   the cultural  climate  he   has  fostered,  to pay  tribute, through word  and  image,  to the influence he has exerted through his writings   both   upon   individual lives  and upon  contemporary literary and  political thought." To  achieve this aim,  the editor has  arranged the  material in  three  parts. "The first section -'Person, Place, and Politics' -is  a  series  of  essays  focussing on   topics   which   relate   to   Woodcock's own  work; the  second  section-'Images in  Time' -is  an  independent  tribute  by a   wide   range   of  friends  and   acquain­ tances,   variously   reflecting on  moments in  their  relationship or  responding sensi­ tively and  creatively to the  world  around them; and  the  final  section,  prepared by Ivan  Avacumovic, is as complete a bibli­ ography of  Woodcock's own  writings   to date  as  it  has  been  possible  at  this  time to compile.
Apart   from   the  bibliography, I  found
"Images in  Time" the  most  interesting
part  of this book. Although the contribu­ tions   are   uneven,  this   section   focusses most directly on the personality of George  Woodcock and,  perhaps for  this  reason alone,   it  has  great   vitality.   Above  all  it succeeds   in   giving   us  a feeling   of  the range  of his interests and  of his influence  on others, and it demonstrates very clearly the  different reputations he has  acquired in   Canada  and   in   England, though I must  say   here   that   Julian   Symons' "George Woodcock: A Portrait" is a dis­ appointment.  Mulk    Raj   Anand's   "An  Open Letter  to  George  Woodcock,"  on the other  hand, is touching and  revealing, as is Donald Stephens' "Man as Pattern: Recollections of George  Woodcock." The tribute  of   the  poets   (George Bowering,  Denise  Levertov, Tom  Marshall, Robin

BOOKS IN REVIEW





THE COACH	HOUSE PRESS

401 (rear)  Huron Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 2G5


The Long Poem Anthology
Michael  Ondaatje, editor
Omitted  by most anthologists because of their length, these works represent  important new  directions  in  Canadian  poetry  and  in the  form  of  the  long  or  'serial'  poem.  The  poems  have  been selected  to  show  the  diverse range  of subject  and  method  that nine contemporary poets have brought  to this form.
The   Long  Poem  Anthology  includes an  introduction by  the editor, a statement by each author  about  the poem and its form, a bibliography  of each author,  and suggested further  reading.  In all  but one case  (Nichol's  The  Martyrology)   the complete  texts appear. More than  half of these poems are presently out of print. It is hoped  that  this collection of book-length poems will, for the first time, make  possible the serious study of this form and  these poems in University and College classrooms.


Roy Kiyooka, The  Fontainebleau  Dream Machine
Daphne Marlatt, Steveston Robert Kroetsch, Seed Catalogue Robin Blaser, The  Moth  Poem bpNichol, The  Martyrology Book IV Don McKay, Long Sault
Frank Davey, King of Swords George Bowering, Allophanes Stuart MacKinnon, The  Intervals

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Skelton,  Tom Wayman, AI Purdy,  and Seymour Mayne)  gives a kind of panache to  the  volume.   For   what  it  is worth,   I liked  the  poems  by  Bowering,  Levertov, and   Wayman  best,  and  I liked  also  the reproductions of graphic work by Bob Steele,   Jack   Wise,  Gordon Smith, and Jack  Shad bolt.
The first  section  of the  book  ("Essays
on  Person,   Place,   and   Politics")    is  like the  typical  Festschrift-a miscellaneous collection of  articles. The  thread that  is meant to  tie  them  together  is often  very thin  indeed, because  the attempted focus on   topics   which   relate   to   Woodcock's own  work  is tenuous. For  in  spite  of his valiant efforts,  Bill New could  not change the   basic  nature of  a  miscellany.  Thus Jack  Ludwig's somewhat curious impres­ sionistic   piece  on   Winnipeg is  followed by some  reflections  on  "The  Novelist  as Socio-Political Being" by  Margaret Lau­  rence,  and  that  in  turn  by Arthur Erick­  son's  attempt to  analyse "the  limitations of the  single  view  of reality  by which  an architect ordinarily observes, understands, and evaluates architecture." We get some traditional  critical  essays  on   literature (Robert  B.   Heilman  on   theatre  and society, M.  W. Steinberg on A. M. Klein, and  B. Rajan on  the  Coriolan  poems  by T. S.  Eliot), an  essay  by Ramsay  Cook
on J. W. Bengough ("The Caricaturist as
Social   Critic"), and   two  more   general
essays by Nairn  Kattan ("Culture et Pouvoir")   and   D.   S.  Savage   ("Anar­ chism"). All of the essays are competent; some  are  brilliant. Every  reader  will find something of  interest  here,  but  it  is not likely  that  any  reader  will find all of the essays interesting.
By contrast, I found  all of the items in the second section of the book of great interest, in spite  of the fact  that  they are uneven  in quality.
The  one  absolutely indispensable part of   the   book   is  Ivan   Avakumovic's "A Bibliography  of  the  Writings  of  George
 Woodcock," 37  pages  of  entries,   dating from    I937   to   I976.   It documents the truly  enormous contribution of George Woodcock to literature, politics,  and  cul­ ture  in general. Long  may he continue to enrich us!
HENRY KREISEL


IDEOLOGIES

ANDRE   J.  BELANGER,   Ruptures  et   constantes.
HMH,   NAIM   KATTAN,  Les  Fruits   arraches.
HMH,  PIERRE SEGUIN,  Caliban,  HMH.

S'IL EST UN LIEN entre ces trois ouvrages apparemment fort  differents, il se trouve dans !'apprehension de phenomenes ideo­ logiques  dont )'emergence au  Quebec ne fait  que  caracteriser  leur  constance dans le  monde   contemporain.  Ces  representa­ tions  mentales qui  sont  proposees  comme  autant de  systemes  englobants et  securi­  sants  dans  Ia recherche d'une societe  dite meilleure  s'averent au  demeurant n'etre que  le  temps  fort  ou  faible  d'une dialec­ tique  dont   le  but   est  de  reconcilier  les contraires. Qu'au terme  de ce movement dialectique les oppositions restent  entieres, l'individualite  ne  se  resorbant  pas  dans un  totalitarisme ideologique, nous recon­ naissons  hi une  autre mesure  de  Ia  refle­ xion  suscitee  par  les ouvrages  de  Belan­  ger, Kattan et seguin.
Ruptures et  constantes d'Andre J. Be­
langer   est  une  analyse   de  quatre  "ideo­ logies-carrefours" au  Quebec, c'est-a-dire de systemes  de  pensee dominants recueil­ lant  Ia faveur des "elements progressistes  de   leur   temps."   Prenant  la   revue   La Releve ( I934-I94I) comme  point  de  de­ part,   )'auteur  etudie  le  courant  d'idees qu'elle   vehicule  en   reaction  a   la   crise economique et  qui  pose  le  probleme de l'homme  universe!,   indifferencie, devant les  angoisses   de   l'epoque. En   s'interro­ geant sur  l'echec du materialisme, les col­ laborateurs de  La  Releve  et  de  La  Nou­ velle   releve    ( I 94 I- I 948) , dont   Robert

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Charbonneau, Guy  Fregault,  Robert  Elie et  Roger   Duhamel entre   autres,  recher­ cherent  un   humanisme  qui   privilt giait la vie interieure  comme source de renou­ vellement. LaJeunesse  Etudiante Catho­ lique,    deuxieme    ideologie-carrefour,   a aussi  ses  racines  dans   les  annees   de  la crise.  Mouvement  de  renouveau chretien qui  en  appelle de !'engagement laic pour renforcer  les  assises de  l'Eglise,  la J.E.C. se distingue  par  sa forme  d'action sociale qui  inspirera  de  jeunes  militants tels que Gerard  Pelletier, Claude  Ryan,   Jeanne Sauve  et  Marc Lalonde. Partageant des preoccupations  communes avec   La  Re­
leve   quant  a  une   philosophie  issue  du
thomisme et  des  encycliques   papales,  du
personnalisme et  de  l'Action   Catholique Fran'<aise, la .J.E.C.  se donne pour  fonc­ tion   de   servir   de   "bane   d'essai   de   la lai:cisation,"  dans   une  tentative  de  prise en charge  de l'appareillage social et ideo­ logique  sur  lequel  le  clerge  avait main­  mise.  Pour   la  generation  de  La  Releve et de Ia J.E.C. il ne s'agit pas de proceder
a une  remise  en  question de  la  domina­
tion   clericale    qui   s'est   abattue  sur   le
Quebec  depuis  le   milieu   du   dix-neu­ vieme  siecle.  11 s'agit   plutot  de  rappro­ cher   le  message   chretien   de  la  cite  en
misant   sur  les  encycliques  a  portee  so­
dale. D'ou  !'importance du  terme  "visa"
( "sorte  de   sauf-conduit  qui   permet d'echapper   a   la   sanction  de   l'ortho­
doxie,") qu'utilise Belanger  pour caracte­ riser  !'effort de  ces laics  vers  une  actua­ lisation  de  I'Eglise  qui  menage toutefois les  assises de  la  foi  triomphaliste. Troi­ sieme  id,eologie-carrefour, Cite   Libre (  I950-I965)  prolonge !'action  des  deux premieres   tant    au    niveau    des   agents (Pelletier, Lalonde, Trudeau),   des  ap­
puis   religieux    (Action    Catholique,  en­ cyc!iques  papales)  que  de  Ia  conception de  l'homme  (personnalisme,  humanisme chretien).  Mais  parce  qu'elle a pour  ma­ tiere   des  conditions de  deni   de  liberte  intellectuelle et d'ineptie dans  la pratique
 de  la  politique   ( c'est  l'ere  du  duplessis­ me), Cite  Libre se demarque  des  "ideo­ logies pionnieres" que  sont  La  Reteve  et la J.E.C.  dans  sa prise  sur  le social.  Aux principes  du  christianisme  eclaire  s'ajou­ tent  les acquis  de  la  pensee  liberale   bri­ tannique (John Stuart Mill)   et fran  aise  (Montesquieu,  Rousseau)  dans   un  dis­ cours  dont  les  termes-cles  sont  democra­ tie, liberte  de pensee et d'action, assainis­ sement   des  moeurs   politiques et  respect  des   droits   de   l'homme.  Parce   que   les ideaux  poursuivis  par  Cite  Libre se limi­
taient,  dans   une   premiere  etape,  a  la
mise au  rancart du  duplessisme  et,  dans une   deuxieme,  a  une  conception  fonc­
tionnelle   et  a-ideologique de  l'Etat,  Be­ langer   demontre les  limites  de  la  vision rationaliste et  desincarnee qui  sous-tend son action. Cite Libre se fait fort d'inven­ torier  le social, denonce  les abus clericaux



NEED A LITTLE
DRAMA
IN YOUR LIFE?
Playwrights Canada is the centre
for Canadian plays and Canadian
playwrights.  We represent 120 professional playwrights from coast
to coast. We publish their plays, sponsor reading tours, seminars and workshops, and handle performing rights.
Drama is a fast-growing part of Canadian literature. If you want to learn more about it, call or write to us. We'll send a catalogue of plays, details of all our services and add your name to our mailing list.
How's that for a scenario?
PLAYWRIGHTS CANADA
8VOAKSTRI!ET,6THFI..OOA TOAONTO.CAHAOA  M5.J1R2  (418)363-1581

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



et  les  iniquites chaniees  par  une  ortho­ doxie  nationaliste retrograde.  C'est ainsi que  du   nationalisme  quebecois, en  tant que   phenomime   historique  propose   au nom   d'une   collectivite,  Cite   Libre   ne retient  qu'etwitesse  d'esprit,  intolerance et  regression.  II lui  substitue  l'individua­ lisme de  la societe  liberale: a chacun de concevoir et d'articuler ses projets d'epa­ nouissement personnel. De  sorte  qu'avec la fin du  regne  duplessiste  et l'avenement de   la   "Revolution   tranquille"  (I 960) , Cite  Libre  voit !'issue de son combat. Les insuffisances  de  sa pensee  sociale  et,  sur­ tout,  son  aveuglement quant  a  la  ques­ tion nationale ( qu'elle avait  pourtant fort bien comprise  lorsqu'il s'agissait  du Tiers­ Monde)  lui vaudront d'etre depassee  par la  generation  qui   atteint  la  maturite  a l'aube des independances  africaines. Parti pris   ( I 963- I 968)   vehicu[e  [a  pensee  de cette  generation et constitue  la quatrieme ideologie-carrefour etudiee  par  Belanger.
Dans  la mesure  ou la dialectique Mge­ lienne  qui  sert  de  support a  la  these  de Belanger   est  bien  comprise   (au  clerica­  lisme  qui  monopolise les  representations ideologiques au  Quebec  de  I840  a  I934 environ, monopole ideologique evacue  du social  laisse au  trafic d'interet, s'opposent les   quatre   ideologies-carrefours  qui   de I934  a  I968 effectuent Une reconciliation progressive  entre   les idees dominantes et la pratique sociale)' !'analyse  consacree  a Parti  pris  mene  au  terme  de  la naissance du  Parti Quebecois qui "retablit, semble­ t-il, la jonction  entre  les plans ideologique et   politique."  L'ideologie de   Parti   pris plus que  tout  autre  represente une  rup­ ture   radicale  avec   la  pensee   tradition­ nelle,   tout   en   faisant  echo  a   certaines constantes  historiques. La  ou  les  ideolo­ gies  precedentes avaient  l'apparence de
!'innovation en  se  reclamant du  person­ nalisme   ou  du  liberalisme.   Parti  pris se rattache au  marxisme et  propme la lutte  des  classes comme  cadre  analytique d'un  projet  collectif   qui   recuse   l'individua-

86
 lisme.  Au  nationalisme attarde  et  mys­ tique  dont  le Chanoine Groulx est  l'apo­ tre, il substitue le modele  des mouvements de   liberation  et   de   la   lutte    pour    la decolonisation dans  le Tiers-Monde. Aux avatars des moeurs  politiques et  a la dis­ jonction  elite-peuple, Parti  pris applique le   vocabulaire  de   Ia  de possession  et  de
!'alienation pour  formuler la necessite  de
!'auto-determination comme  correctif. La pensee des animateurs de la revue, Cham­ berland, Maheu, Piotte, s'inscrit en  porte  a  faux   de  l'ideologie  liberale  et  s'avere  reflet  plus  fidele  des  remises  en  question  auxquelles   la    "Revolution    tranquille" donne libre  cours.  Belanger  souligne  que la revue  connaitra des crises dans !'orien­ tation  de ses priorites. Elle  prendra cons­ cience   d'une   distanciation   vis-a-vis   du peuple  qu'elle  s'efforce de reduire en met­  tant  sur  pied  des mouvements populistes. Elle  fera !'auto-critique de  son marxisme et  s'interrogera sur  l'ordre des echeances nationaliste et  sociale.   Mais  tant   par  le public   qu'elle  rejoint  (les  etudiants, les enseignants)   que   par   l'essentiel   de  son message  qui  s'accouple  a  la  montee   du nationalisme petit  bourgeois  d'une classe moyenne  issu  de   la   "Revolution   tran­ quille," du  role  d'intervention  de  l'Etat comme    agent    economique,    l'ideologie partipriste n'en  est pas moins porteuse de contradictions  dont   le  Parti   Quebecois serait   le  mandataire  le  plus   immediat, selon   le  processus   evolutif   analyse   par
!'auteur.
Pris   globalement,  Ruptures   et   con­ stantes  est la demonstration a ['aide d'une methode   et    d'un   jugement    sO.rs    des etapes   qui  menent au  decalage  entre le Quebec d'aujourd'hui  et d'antan. II faut  savoir  gre a !'auteur de ne pas succomber a  l'enthousiasme  piege  que  l'on  trouve  a la   fin   de   l'ouvrage  de   Denis   Moniere (Le   Developpement   des   ideologies   au Quebec)  qui,  par  ailleurs,  complete  par­ faitement le sien.  Et  ce n'est  pas l'un des moindres merites de !'analyse de Belanger

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



qu'elle  s'avere   disponible  a  !'interpreta­ tion multiple a meme  les textes soigneuse­ ment  etudies  et  resumes et  selon  les ren­  vois historiques  ( les constantes)  qui  bali­ sent les avances les plus convaincants (les ruptures) . La  methode est done  faite  de souplesse   et   d'ouverture.  Par   exemple,
!'auteur dit  en  conclusion qu'"avec la fin
des  grands  systemes  abstraits  de   repre­ sentations, surgissent  des  ideologies issues cette   fois  de  la  pratique." 11 mentionne les  syndicats   et   les  comites   de  citoyens comme  nouvelles  pistes  de  recherches. A nous  d'ajouter la  contre-culture, pheno­ mene populaire issu d'une pratique du quotidien nord-americain, pour  repondre au voeu de !'auteur.
Selon la methode retenue par Belanger, les   coordonnees  encadrant   la    contre­ culture    quebecoise   cornrne    ideologie­  carrefour   seraient  les   suivantes:  !'exis­ tence  d'une revue,  M ainmise  ( 1970-
qui  regroupe des  "elements  progressistes
de  leur  temps" (Jean Basile,  Michel  Be­ lair,  Christian Allegre,  Michele  Favreau); elle  prolonge ou  depasse  les idees  domi­ nantes  d'une epoque prccedente ou d'une ecole  de  pensee  parallele dans  le  temps par    des   agents-relais:   la   presence    de Chamberland  et   de   Maheu   parmi  ses collaborateurs et  sympathisants; elle  re­ joint	un	public    fertile:	la    jeunesse urbanisee et  un  milieu  artistique et  intel­  lectuel  avant-gardiste; elle s'interroge sur les    valeurs    dominantes   de    la   societe quebecoise dans  la  mesure  ou  celle-ci  ne se differencie pas  economiquement de  la societe   nord-americaine  de   consomma­ tion.  Mainmise, cependant,  ne vise pas a rejoindre le champ  politique  entendu de fa<;on  conventionnelle; et  c'est  la  qu'elle fait   probleme  pour   le   politicologue.  A l'instar  de   la   revue   Rolling   Stone   aux Etats-Unis qui  succede  a  Ramparts  vers la fin des annees  soixante, elle evacue  un discours  ideologique doctrinaire dans  une releve   qui   mise  sur   les  attributs  de  la culture   populaire   pour    reclamer    des
 changements dans   l'ordre social  et  poli­ tique.   L'enjou  principal  est  la  "qualite de  la  vie"  et  la  demystification  du  pou­  voir   politique  et   economique   qui   l'en­ trave.  Mais l'on  voit  bien que l'intimisme cornme  code  d'ethique, l'hedonisme dans la recherche du  bonheur, l'ideal d'une vie communautaire   faite   sur   mesure   et   le souci   de   l'ecologie  sont   des   aspirations rebelles  a  la  grille  analytique qui  inven­  torie  une  praxis dont l'utopie est irreduc­ tible. 11 n'en  demeure pas mains  que huit  annees  separent la  fin de  Parti  pris et  la prise  du  pouvoir  politique  par   le  Parti Quebecois. L'apparent   vide  ideologique qui  les  accompagne est  comble   par  !'ir­ ruption de  la  contre-culture qui  s'inscrit en  marge  des  "grands systemes de  repre­ entations." Les   racines   essentiellement "arnericaines" de cette ideologic  issue des conditions  de vie dans la societe de masse, dont   le  Quebec  est   tributaire,  laissent croire  qu'avec  la  dimension  nationaliste fecondee  par  Parti  pris il  faille  compter avec sa contradiction.
Que  l'accouplement de l'ideologie et du pouvoir   politique  soit  le  sceau   de  !'in­ tolerance est  une  le<_;on  qui  sert  de  toile de  fond  au  roman de  Nai:m  Kattan,  Les Fruits arraches. Roman de  la  fuite,   Les Fruits  arraches est  le  recit  de  la  vie  de Meir,   juif  irakien etudiant  en  lettres   a la  Sorbonne vers  la  fin  des  annees   qua­ rante.   Celui-ci   frequente  les  milieux  lit­ teraires,   reflechit   sur   ses   rapports  avec son  pays  d'origine  dont  les  nouvelles  de desarroi  lui  parviennent puisqu'avec !'in­ dependance  d'Israel en  1948  la  cornrnu­ naute  juive de Bagdad en subit les contre­ coups.  Meir  retrouve dans  la  compagnie de  ses  compatriotes expatries  a  Paris  la division  qu'il   porte   en  lui-meme et  qui structure sa  vision  du  monde :  il  oscille entre  !'orient et !'occident, le judai:sme et l'islamisme,  la francite et l'arabite. L'alie­ nation seculaire  de sa race  est surchargee par l'angoisse  personnelle du  protagoniste qui craint  pour  sa famille  laissee a Bagdad

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



et  pour  son  propre avenir,  puisque  bour­ sier  il s'attend a devoir  retourner en  lrak  au   terme   de  ses  etudes.  Cette  angoisse, cependant, est  moins  Ia  consequence de deroulements   politiques  desincarnes  par Ia   distance   physique   et   psychologique que   maintient  Meir  tout  compte fait  a l'egard  de   l'Irak   que  I'embleme   d'une recherche d'identite dans un monde  d'exil  ou  les  contraires s'attirent et  se bouscu­  lent.    Un    choix    s'impose:   Meir    doit prendre charge de  son destin  d'etranger. Son   sejour   a   Paris   doit   lui   permettre
d'arriver a cette  prise de conscience.
Les Fruits  arraches est le prolongement
de !'excellent premier roman  de Nairn Kattan, Adieu  Babylone,  qui raconte l'enfance et !'adolescence de Meir  a  Bag­ dad   jusqu'a   son  depart pour  Paris.  Ro­  man    de   moeurs    relatant    Ia    diversite  culturelle  de   Bagdad,   Adieu   Babylone est  surtout Ie  vecit  d'une  vie  dans  l'ap­ prentissage de l'adversite qui  n'arrive pas
a  diminuer  une  soif  de  connaissance et
de  depassement. La   riche  sensibilite   de
l\1eir  s'avoue  dans   l'espoir   d'un  monde meilleur   que   ses  lectures   et  ses  amities
concourent  a  entretenir  en   depit    des
interdits  qu'il    doit   subir   en   tant   que
minoritaire.  Le   depart  pour   Paris   qui clot   le  roman   confirme   Meir   dans  son espoir:  il  quitte  pour   Ia  terre   promise.
Contrairement a Ia richesse eta !'elegance
d'ecriture  du   premier    roman    qui   cal­
quaient   Ies   moindres   nuances     d'une fraiche   sensibilite,    Ie   style   des   Fruits arraches   est   elliqtique,  hache,   et   laisse une  impression desagreable de secheresse et  d'aridite. Le contraste stylistique  entre les  deux  romans est  trop  saisissant  pour ne  pas  etre  voulu.  Puisque  Paris  s'oppose a   Bagdad,  Ia  vie   d'adulte  a   celle   de l'enfance,   !'auteur   a   peut-etre    voulu caracteriser ainsi  les distances  culturelles et 	psychologiques	ressenties. 	L'ironie sous-tend   sans   doute    I'abondance    des dialogues superficiels et !'expression d'une vie  toute   en   surface,  vide  d'interiorite.

88
 Meir   se  meprend  done,  il  est  sous  Ie coup  des illusions de Ia vie parisienne qui ne  saurait qu'etre  transitoire puisque   Ia "terre promise" recherchee n'est  pas dans une  Europe a peine  remise  de Ia derniere grande guerre mais  plutot en  Amerique, continent vers  Iequel  Meir  se dirige  a  Ia fin  du  roman. Tout  comme une  lecture d'Adieu Babylone  s'avere necessaire  pour comprendre  les  etats   d'ame  plutot  sus­ pects  de  Meir  dans   Les  Fruits  arraches, seul un troisieme  roman ayant pour cadre
I'Amerique saura  repondre a des attentes
qui    restent    entieres  pour    !'instant  au
risque   de  masquer !'interet  et  le  merite reels des Fruits  arrachb.
Pris  isolement, ce  deuxieme roman  de
Kattan  ne  subit   pas  avec   bonheur  une lecture tant   soit  peu  critique. La  trame romanesque  se  resume   en  une  serie  de breves  esquisses de Ia vie d'expatrie menee par   Meir.   Pour   l'essentiel,  cette   vie  est scellee  par   des  appetits  libidineux.  Des aventures  amoureuses se  succedent a  Ia maniere d'un  inventaire mecanique et
monotone.  Meir   decouvre  la   femme   a
Paris   et  il  tombe   amoureux  de  chaque
femme qu'il  trouve   sur  son  chemin. II s'eprend d'Anne, une Franc;aise, d'Halina, une   Polonaise,   de   Maxie,  une   Hollan­ daise, d'Erika, une Allemande et decrit  de fac;on fort  puerile ses exaltations. L'essen­  tiel  du  roman  ,etant  Ia  narration de  ces exaltations, il  s'y  degage   une  impression  de sentimentalisme facile qui fait figure de valeur   dominante. Sans   l'ironie, c'est  le ridicule qui  caracterise les activites amou­ reuses de  Meir.  Devant l'invraisemblance des  personnages et  des  situations, Ie lec­ teur  se  surprend a  regretter le  Paris  de Hemingway (The   Sun    Also   Rises;   A Moveable Feast),  Glassco   (Memoirs  of Montparnasse)	ou	Callaghan	(That Summer in   Paris). La   comparaison  est injuste? Elle  ne !'est  pas si !'on  juge que,  par-deJa  le   theme   de  !'alienation  juive qui    le   sous-tend,  Les   Fruits    arraches vehicule  egalement  Ie  mythe   de  Ia  vie

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



parlSlenne   tel  qu'on  le  trouve   dans   les litteratures americaines depuis la  "Gene­ ration perdue" des  annees vingt  jusqu'a  nos jours. C'est  ainsi  que Georges Cartier racontait dans  Le  Poisson peehe  (I 964) une   histoire   semblable  a  celle  de  Meir avec  pour  protagoniste un Quebecois aux etudes  a Paris. Les liaisons internationales qu'entretient ce  dernier  ne  sont  pas sans rappeler  celles  de  Meir   ( ici  le  compte est:    deux   Fran  aises,   une   Americaine, une  Algerienne et  une  Canadienne ang­ laise), mais elles sont exprimees avec une richesse  dans  l'ecriture et  une  vraisemb­ lance  psychologique qui  rendent plus  in­ solite la demarche de Kattan. Paris,  bien sur,  appartient au  mythe  de  la  jeunesse, de  !'universe! et   de   la  femme,  mais  il appartient a  chaque ecrivain qui  en  fait usage de le mesurer a un reel quelconque. Le  Quebecois de  Cartier fuyait son  pays natal. Le  Juif  irakien de  Kattan fait  de meme,   sinon   plus.  Car,   au   fond,   Israel est la grande inconnue qui pourtant scelle le drame de  Meir.  Elle  provoque sa fuite en Europe et bientot en Amerique et c'est elle   ( sinon   sa   mere   qui   se  refugie   en Israel,  pour  les Freudiens)  que  fuit  Meir a  tant  s'eprendre et  a  si mal  etreindre.
Caliban  de  Pierre   Seguin  par   contre
est  de  plain-pied  dans   un  courant  ideo­ logique   qu'il   remet   en  question  et  qu'il  evacue  sous le couvert de la fable. L'eloge  de la folie triomphe de l'echec d'un destin tragique. Avant   de  renvoyer  a Erasme,  cependant, Caliban  evoque  Shakespeare, plus  precisement la  derniere  piece  ecrite par  le Barde  dans son  vieil age,  desabuse  et  sage  a  la  fois,  et  pour   qui  tout  n'est qu'illusion. Le  pouvoir, la  gloire,  la con­ naissance,    la   richesse,   semble-t-il  dire, tout   passe  et  seuls  les meandres du  reve restent pour donner un sens a !'existence. Finalement,   tout   n'est   que   supercherie. Et  il n'y en a pas de plus grande que celle de   la   bonne   conscience  de   Prospero, l'homme de  la  civilisation eclairee, cons­ puant   Caliban,  l'homme  de   la   nature
 arneree, dans  La  Tempete. Seguin  a  lu et  compris   Shakespeare,  mais  il  est  in­ struit  egalement de !'interpretation que les ecrivains   de  la  decolonisation   ont  faite  de  La  Tempete. Selon   cette  interpreta­ tion, Caliban represente le colonise  reduit a l'etat d'esclave,  le "negre" impermeable aux. lumieres  de la raison  que  lui apporte Prospero.    Ce    dernier,   le   Maitre,   le "blanc" se sert  du  "mulatre" Ariel,  sym­ bole  de  la  grace acquise   par  la  civilisa­ tion,   comme    intermediaire  aupres  de Caliban. Ce scheme  classique  de !'aliena­ tion  est  transpose au  Quebec  et  repond  a l'usage  qu'en  fait  Aime Cesaire dans  un cadre  antillais  ( Une  Tempete). La  the­  matique du  "pays"  des  annees soixante  sert   de   precedent   plus   immediat  a   la dichotomisation  colonisateur-colonise dans Caliban. Mais la ou les Aquin, God­  bout,   Chamberland  et   Vallieres,  ne   se souciant  pas de nuances, encadraient leur recherche d'identite  dans  un  trace deter­ ministe    issu   des   conditions   specifiques  prevalent  dans   le  Tiers-Monde,  Seguin  des  le debut   du  recit  invite  le  lecteur   a se  debarrasser   des  idees   r ues
reflexes conditionnes.
La  litterature, pour   Seguin,  n'est  pas un  lieu  d'enseignement doctrinal comme en   temoigne   la  parodie des  commenta­ teurs   du  theatre  de   marionnettes et  la forme  caricaturale  donnee a  la  tradition theatrale  par  Jerome  Bassompierre. Ce dernier,   protagoniste   du   recit,    vit   en marge   de   la   societe   de   consommation dans  l'est de Montreal et monte  des re­ presentations de marionnettes une fois la semaine  dans  un  hangar  desaffecte. Son public,  compose  d'une vingtaine de spec­ tateurs, lui  est  fidele  et  s'emerveille de­  vant    les    comportements   de    Caliban, Prospero et Ariel. De semaine en semaine  le  spectacle  se  poursuit, la  meme  l on est  repetee : le  drame de  I'oppression  et
!'identification de  ses agents et  victimes. Si  l'art avait   pour  mission  de  provoquer
un changement social, semble dire Seguin,

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



celui  de  Bassompierre devrait provoquer la  revolution. Pourtant  ni  le  marionnet­ tiste,   ni  son   public,   ne  se  rendent  aux barricades. Au  projet  didactique de Bas­ sompiere    se   substitue   la   mystification  semiotique.   Les  marionnettes  sont   en­ cerclees  par  la  realite  de  leur  invention. Est-ce que cette  realite  est recherchee par les  spectateurs comme   source   d'evasion  ou  par  souci  d'instruction? Elle est choix impossible   entre  le  reel  et  l'irreel   pour des spectateurs qui sont aussi des marion­ nettes  dans  le spectacle  de leur vie. Bien­ tot  le succes  de Bassompierre est tel qu'il  est poursuivi par  une  blonde admiratrice qui s'installe chez lui. II se trouve  entoure d'adulteurs  et   d'entrepreneurs  desireux de marchander son succes. II connalt une
renommee internationale  qui  l'amene  a
Paris oil il retrouve son mentor, Giacomo
Fiorillo.   Celui-ci lui  reproche de  l'avoir trahi:

Alors   te  voiia   celebre maintenant.  Luigi   a
'ete  te  voir  Ia semaine derniere. II m'a  tout raconte. J'ai  honte. Moi   qui   t'ai   enseigne
notre art  dans Ia  grande tradition des  Fio­ rillo.  Et  toi,  tu  attires les imbeciles  avec  tes stupidibes  pretentieuses  et   revolutionnaires.

Desenchante, Bassompierre  rentre  chez lui,  a Montreal, interrompt sa carriere et
se replie  dans  sa chambre oil il ne monte des  spectacles que  pour  lui-meme.   II  ne
partage plus  ses reves. Tout art  mis  a la
portee  du  public  etant travesti  au gre des
interets, Bassompierre se contente  desor­ mais de la memoire de son enfance semee d'anathemes familiaux et   religieux  . II revoit  sa vie vecue  au pensionnat comme  etape dans  une  evolution vers la solitude  totale pleinement consentie  vers la fin du roman: il  est  gardien de  nuit  dans  une usine.  Bassompierre-Caliban, rebelle  aux lumieres   de   Prospera  dont   il  refuse   la civilisation,  triomphe  dans  !'affirmation de son  individualite. Apres voir  refuse le
suicide  comme   issue  a son  alienation,  il
eclate  d'un rire dementiel:

go
 II  joue  a se faire peur, car, bien  entendu, il  ne  sautera pas.  11 a  trop envie de   rire. Puis,  avec   un  accent epouvantable, il hurle contre le vent:
A  devil, a born  devil, on  whose  nature
Nature can  never  stick, on  whom my
pains
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite  lost, And, as with  age,  his body  uglier  grows,
So  his mind   cankers.

Critique  de   l'art  "engage,"  reflexion sur   W1e adaptation   tiers-mondiste d'un mythe  shakespearien, eloge de la folie, celebration  du   reve  comme   matrice  de l'art, plaidoyer en faveur  de l'individualite contre toute  forme  de recuperation, Cali­ ban  est  un  depassement  dans   le  roman quebecois contemporain.
Si   Caliban  oppose   la   deraison   a  la raison,  la  metaphore a l'idee,  Caliban a
Prospera c'est par souci de demasquer le totalitarisme ideologique qui  reduit la pluralite et  la  diversite   humaines.  Rup­ tures  et  constantes et  Les  Fruits  arraches
font  appel a un  meme  respect  de  l'indi­
vidu.
MAX DORSINVILLE


POPULAR H1STOR1ES

HAROLD HORWOOD, Bartlett: The Great  Cana­
dian  Explorer. Doubleday, $8.gs.

FRANK  RASKY,  The  North Pole  or  Bust. Mc- Graw-Hill Ryerson, $17.95·

PoPULAR HISTORIANS  are  frequently  at­ tracted to explorers, whose  travels  in  the far   regions   of   the   globe   readily   yield marketable  tales  of  extreme  effort   and intense suffering. Moreover, explorers can be seen as a last outcropping of  individu­ alism  in an  age of mass-men and  bureau­ cratic 	organizations.	Certainly   an emphasis  on   adventure   and   individual personality  underlies  Harold  Horwood's biography  of   the   Newfoundland  sailor Robert  Bartlett   and   Frank  Rasky's   ac­ count of  explorations in the  North  Amer-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ican  Arctic  between  1818 and  1918. Hor­ wood  sets out  to  revise  the  conventional picture of  the  man   whom  Leslie  Neatby  tenns "the stolid  Bartlett." Rasky  wishes to  portray the  "human" side of explora­ tion.  Both  authors are more  interested in colourful personalities  than  in  the imper­ sonal  social or geographical factors  which might   be   the   prime  concerns  of  more academic  historians.
Horwood makes  three  major claims. First,  he asserts  that  Bartlett's leadership and  individual heroics  saved  the survivors of the  1913 Karluk disaster; second, he claims  that  Bartlett was really  the leading figure  in  Peary's  1908-09  assault  on  the North  Pole, and  was  unjustifiably turned back  at  the  eleventh hour  by Peary,  who then  faked  a  claim   to  have  attained  the Pole;  and   third,   he  claims   that  between
1926 and  1940 Bartlett became "the  first arctic explorer to place science ahead of exploration." The first  claim  is quite  de­ fensible; the  second   is,  to  say  the  least, an   exaggeration;  the   third   borders   on nonsense.
Bartlett  became  the  central  figure  in the  Karluk   disaster when   the  ship,  part of the Canadian Arctic  Expedition led by Vilhjalmur  Stefansson, was  frozen   into the   ice  of   the   Beaufort  Sea   and   later crushed by ice pressure. In  responding to the   occasion,   Bartlett  became   a  heroic figure  by  necessity.  He  led  the  survivors to   Wrangel  Island,   and    then    himself journeyed   over   the  ice  to  the  Siberian shore  in order to secure  a rescue ship. In the  earlier  Peary  expedition Bartlett was one  of  several  European subordinates  to Peary.  He  may  well,  as  Horwood insists, have  been  the most  useful  member of the expedition, both  as captain of the Roose­ velt   and    as   an   experienced   dog-team driver. But  he  was  not  the  driving force behind    the   adventure;   the   underlying vision was Peary's. Horwood is on solider ground when  he accuses  Peary of entering a  false  claim  to  have reached the  North
 Pole, and  when  he supports the claims  of Peary's  rival,  Dr.  Frederick A. Cook.  But Peary's claims have been cogently assailed before. In fact, recent discussions usually accept Cook and  reject  Peary.  Horwood's account contains nothing new.
Horwood's most  original   suggestion  is to  portray Bartlett as a  leading figure  in the "scientific" opening of the North. But here  Horwood stretches his case beyond credibility. Certainly,  Bartlett  may  have transported scientists  and  collected  speci­ mens.  But   the  scientific  direction  came from  the scientists,  not from  Bartlett, who was  not  a  "scientist"  in  any  real  sense. He  remained what  the Explorers' Club of New   York   had   once   called   him:  "the leading  ice  navigator  of  modem times."  Surely  this claim,  a defensible  one, would have   given   Horwood  a  sufficient   thesis for  his  book.  As it  stands,  Horwood  has weakened  his case by coupling legitimate claims   with    clear   exaggerations.   Hor­ wood  asserts  he is giving  just  recognition to a neglected  "great explorer." Actually, it is clear  that  his argument is motivated primarily  by  Newfoundland chauvinism.
Frank  Rasky's  The North Pole or Bust
is   the   continuation  of   his   The   Polar Voyagers  ( 1976) , in   which   Rasky   de­ scribed   northern  exploration  from   the time of the Vikings  to the early eighteenth century. In  both  books  Rasky's  emphasis is  biographical. He   builds   his  chapters around  major  figures  or  groups   of  ex­ plorers.  As  well  as  recounting the  usual incidents  of  danger, heroism, or suffering, he   chooses   to  recount  incidents  which  reveal character and  attitudes. He  fleshes out  the  account of  an  explorer's adven­ tures and  accomplishments with informa­ tion   on   personal  background.   He   also devotes   considerable attention   to  some figures who were not themselves explorers, but  who nonetheless influenced the course of  events.   Most   notably,   he  focuses   his chapter on the search  for Sir John  Frank­ lin  around the  formidable  personality of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Lady  Jane Franklin, who strove  tirelessly to instigate relief expeditions.
Although  Rasky's   stress  is  on  person­
ality,  he also recognizes  the indispensable role  of  the  native  peoples  who  were  en­ listed  to  guide  so many  of the  explorers,  and   whose  methods of  coping  with  the northern   environment   were    gradually adopted  by European  travellers.  In  fact, the    principal    continuing  story   which emerges  from Rasky's sketches of separate explorers  is  the  European  traveller's in­ creasing   use   of   Eskimo   technology   for dealing   with   the   North.  This   process culminates  in   Stefansson's  outdoing  of the  Eskimos  by  living  off  the  game  he secured   in  the  supposedly   barren  polar ice-pack.   Probably  this  emphasis  on  the native   peoples   and   their   adaptation   to the   environment   constitutes  the   most "Canadian"  element in  Rasky's  outlook. Farley  Mowat, in  his Top of the  World trilogy,  has  preceded  Rasky  in  praising explorers who adopted native  techniques of   coping   with   the   northern   environ­ ment; and  many  historians of  the  Cana­ dian    fur    trade   have   emphasized   the traders'  reliance on  native  methods and native  assistants.
Direct comparison of the  two  books is
possible only in one instance: their treat­ ment   of  the  episodes  involving  Stefans­  son's    Canadian   Arctic    Expedition   of I9I3·I8. Horwood  portrays Stefansson  as the   villain   of   the   Karluk    disaster;  he depicts  Stefansson as a negligent  and  cal­ lous commander,  unfit  for his position  of responsibility.  However, Horwood's  out­  right  condemnation of Stefansson is un­ justified,  and   arises  mainly  from  a  fixed determination to  magnify  Bartlett into  a major  figure  in  the  history  of  northern exploration. Rasky  goes to  the  other  ex­ treme.  He  treats  the  Karluk  disaster only very  briefly,  but  he  does tacitly  side with Stefansson's  assertions   in  The   Friendly Arctic   that   the  shipwrecked  men  could have  survived  easily  had  they  used  Stef-
 ansson's   methods of  northern  living   (as did  Stefansson's  associate,  Storker  Stor­ kerson,  on  a  subsequent ice-drift  journey  over a region  much  like that traversed by the  Karluk  survivors). By  approving of Stefansson  in   this   way,  Rasky   endorses  Stefansson's neglect  of  the facts  of  ordi­  nary  human  nature.  Stefansson couldn't understand why other  men  were  not  like himself.  Because  he  could  survive  on  the ice, living off the seals he killed, he didn't see why other people couldn't do likewise. Hence,  he   felt   the   Karluk    passengers  should   have  been  in  no extreme danger. But  the  power  of  habit  and  prejudice is too  great  to  be  reversed   overnight. The Karluk  survivors  did   not   think   of  the polar   icepack   as  a  "friendly"  place   to spend  the  winter. Stefansson's originality of mind,  which  took him beyond  the orthodox opinion, was  also  the  cause  of his  deficiencies as  a  leader   of  ordinary men,    whose    conservative   outlook    he could  not  understand.
Although  Horwood  and   Rasky   both
focus on  personalities, they have set them­ selves  significantly different   tasks.  Hor­ wood  is attempting a  complete reassess­ ment  of an  historical figure,  using all the available   primary    evidence.   Rasky    is offering  what is  essentially  a synthesis  of other  people's  work,  an  overview  of  the existing evidence from  a slightly  different perspective. Rasky's  book is more success­ ful in carrying out its purpose. Horwood's major  argument  does  not  convince, be­ cause   his  claim   that  Bartlett became   a "scientific"  explorer   rests  on   assertions  rather than   on  hard  evidence.   Horwood does  not   give  accounts  of  the  scientific discoveries   made  on   the   later   voyages captained  by  Bartlett, and  offers  no  evi­ dence   that   Bartlett  himself   made    any discoveries.   On   the   other   hand,  Rasky broaches a  number  of  interesting  topics which    future   students  of   exploration might well follow  up.  His  remarks  about the  social  context of  exploration suggest

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   the  usual  discussions  do  not  go  far enough in seeing  explorers as responding to  the   pressures   of  their   historical era. And Rasky's occasional use of popular accounts drawn from  Victorian  periodi­ cals  suggests  that   someone  might profit­  ably  undertake a study devoted wholly  to describing  the   popular   reaction  to  ex­ ploration, and  to tracing the effect of the prevailing    "image"  of   exploration   in shaping   the   attitudes  and    conduct  of later explorers.
Ultimately, both  Horwood and  Rasky are historians in the romantic mode. They present   historical events  as  a  product of individual personality, rather than  as the result of impersonal historical forces. However, Horwood's analysis of Bartlett's personality  is  finally  disappointing. The portrait  he  offers  is  not   up   to  Rasky's standard either of psychological  penetra­ tion  or stylistic vigour.  Rasky has written a   very   good   work   of   popular  history; Horwood has written a mediocre one.

T. D. MACLULICH


BOOKMAN

JOHN   MORGAN GRAY, Fun  Tomorrow.  Learn­ ing  to be a Publisher, and  Much  Else. Mac­ millan, $14.95·

ON  9 AUGUST  I978  THE  BOOK TRADE  lost one  of its most  respected members, John Morgan Gray,   the  retired Chairman  of the    Board    of   Macmillan  of   Canada. Several    weeks   later    his   long   awaited memoir, Fun Tomorrow, appeared. Sadly enough,  we  will  never   see  his  planned second   volume,    for   his   autobiography closes when  Gray  at age 39 was appointed General Manager of Macmillan in  I 946. What we don't hear  about, unfortunately, are   Gray's   activities  through  the   next quarter century, during which   time  Ca­ nadian publishing changed  dramatically. The  firm  cut  its  branch  ties with  Mac-
 millan  of London, entered the  paperback market, and  developed one  of  the  coun­ try's most distinguished lists. Nevertheless, we do get perceptive vignettes of Toronto publishing  during  the  I 93o's.  If you  be­ lieved the myth that  Canadian publishers were  a  dull  lot  before  I970,  this memoir will undeceive you.
Since   biographies  of  Canadian  book­ men  are  rare  enough, this  one  is  a  gem not  only  for  those  glimpses   but  for  the self-effacing   personality  of  its  engaging narrator.  Like   Donald   Creighton  and Joseph  Schull,  whom  he  published, Gray has the fiction  writer's  talent for succinct  characterization  and   pithy  dialogue. Moreover, as  we   have  come   to  expect  from  Macmillan, this book is handsomely produced    and   free  from   typographical errors.
The  first part  stands  as one  of the  best re-creations of upper-middle-class Ontar­ io  life  in  the  Teens  and  Twenties. Born in 1907 into a respectable Toronto family with  a  factory   in  Cornwall, Gray   grew up  in  these two cities,  and  was educated at   an   English   prep   school   (for   a  brief time  during  World  War   I) and  later  at Lakefield   and  Upper  Canada  College.  His  private-school training nurtured  in­ terests that may have contributed to his success as a publisher, for he was attracted to  both  the  reflective  life and  the  active life. An average student who  liked books, he dreamed of being  a writer. In  fact,  he authored several  works,  and  his  descrip­ tions  here  of the  high-spirited  active  life
-starting a brawl  among lumberjacks in Fort   Frances, living  with  French-Cana­ dian  workers  in Quebec City,  playing  pro hockey  with   Clarence   Campbell  in Europe -are  overwhelming evidence of Gray's  literary accomplishments. He grew up  to be flexible  and  pragmatic.
Those   times   are   recorded  with   such
vigour   that    the   part   which   I   awaited eagerly,   the   years   at   Macmillan,   seem almost   anticlimactic.  It   may  be  that   I

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



expected a  far  fuller  account, something we might have  had  in a later  volume.  As it is, however,  Gray  judiciously selects his episodes,  starting with the day in 1930- by  now  he  was  23 -when Hugh  Eayrs offered   him  a  job,  partly,  Gray  believes, because   Eayrs   was   impressed   with   his bridge   playing.   Gray   marvels   that   "by chance  encounters,  by  blind   luck,   and perhaps guided  by some instinct, I stum­ bled  into  what  was  to be  my career." It was the  typical  career  in Canadian houses in  those  days.  He  moved  from  textbook traveller to  Manager of the  Educational Department within  two years. Besides this official  role,  he  did  the  usual  variety  of jobs in a small firm-design, production, and   editing.  His  first  trip  was  to  Nova Scotia;  later    there    were   many   jaunts across the depression-ridden Prairies. One section   tells  how   in   1930  the   Toronto textbook   houses  competed for  a  new  set of readers for  the four  western  provinces, with   Macmillan  and   Ryerson   lined   up together on  one  side and  Gage  and  Nel­ son  on  the  other  side.  Chapters 7  and  8 recall    the   perils   of   publishing   in   the
193o's,   when   service   was   poor,   prices were   high,   and   Gone   with   the   Wind's success  almost   ruined   every  other  Mac­ millan  book.  Indeed,  original  Canadian publishing  itself   almost   vanished    with other winds.
Macmillan's  activities   from  I 92 I to I 940  were  directed  by Hugh   Eayrs,  the prodigy  of Canadian  publishing who  did so much  to promote Canadian authors in the  192o's. He was at once charming, sociable,  impulsive,  and  arrogant. Here, Eayrs   the  good  friend   comes  off  better than   Eayrs  the  businessman; in  the  end he  is  a  complex   and   ambivalent  figure
-and   he  himself  deserves  a  biography some  day.   His  sudden death   at  age  46 facilitated  a   necessary   shakeup  in   the Toronto office, from  which Robert Huck­ vale   (known   as   "Bob   Harvey"  in   this memoir)	emerged   victorious.    In    the

94
 meantime  Gray   was   off   to   war   as   a Captain with  the  2nd  Battalion Toronto Scottish, and  ended up  in  Counter-Intel­ ligence  from  before D-Day until  the sum­  mer    of	1945·   When    he   returned   to Macmillan, the  wartime managers were reshuffled  on  the  advice   of  Lovat  Dick­  son, and  Gray found  himself  head  of the firm  in  JuneI 946. It  is impossible  not  to compare  Eayrs  and  Gray.  The  older  man relied   on  flair,  instinct, and -near  the end -on   caprice.   The    younger    man learned to back  up  his instinct  with  cau­ tion  and   thoroughness. Perhaps it  is  sig­ nificant  that   Eayrs  did  not  have  Gray's  long   apprenticeship  on   the   road;   cer­ tainly   Gray   understood that  the  educa­ tional  publisher had  to be "at once diplo­  mat,  politician, educator, and  salesman." This    memoir    is   full    of    anecdotes. Grandfather  Putnam dies  upright in bed of  pneumonia. A teenage  Evelyn  Waugh  tells the  younger  Gray  to  buzz off. W. L. "Choppy" Grant does  his  turn   as  gruff Principal of  DCC.  Lorne   Pierce  strides through, a stately yet  worldly  high  priest. Young Marsh  Jeanneret in a Fredericton hotel   room   confides   to  Gray   that   they might  have gone into  publishing together. There's  a  hilarious incident when  Eayrs unwittingly   tells   "Bible   Bill"   Aberhart that  someone  should  shoot  the Premier of
Alberta.
There's far  more  here  than  publishing activities,  however.    Very   few   authors, apart from  Mazo  de  la  Roche and  Grey Owl,   make   their   appearance, and   these only briefly.  Rather, as his title  indicates, Gray  learned  to  be  a  publisher by  play­ ing  games,  listening to friends  on  trains,  and   witnessing   war-torn   Holland.  Like the  first-person narrator in a  novel, Gray shapes    those   experiences   into   another learning process  as  well.  But  he  learned  "much else."  "Fun  Tomorrow" was  his and  his wife's  way of  facing  the  world  in the  193o's,  and  Gray  saw  in  this  motto his  saving  grace  when   things  got  tough.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A most  humane man  has  left  us his own fitting  epitaph.
GEORGE L. PARKER



CULTURAL MUSINGS

Divided    We   Stand, ed.  Gary   Geddes.   Peter
Martin Associates, $15 cloth,  $7·95 paper.

DESPITE THE IMPLICATIONS  of  its  title, Divided  We  Stand  is not merely  one more exegesis on  the  by-now  tedious "Quebec problem." Nor is it another pious example of   the   "tape-recorded-transcript-of-the­ man-in-the-street" mish  mash.  Rather, Gary  Geddes  has  compiled a finely orga­ nized,   heterogeneous  anthology   of   cul­ tural   criticism,   theory,   and   contempla­ tion.  The  book  has  thirty-two  articles  on a wide  variety  of  Canadian topics;  some were  written specifically  for  this  volume; others  appeared  originally in  magazines  or  papers like Maclean's, The Globe  and Mail, The Albertan, or  in  separately printed books  and   journals. In addition, Geddes's list of contributors (poets,  jour­ nalists,  politicians, publishers, and econo­ mists)   reads  like  a  virtual  microcosm of the  Canadian  Who's  Who:   authors in­ clude    Rene    Levesque,   Nairn    Kattan, Margaret  Laurence,  George  Woodcock, Richard  Rohmer, Mel   Hurtig, Atwood,  Nowlan,  Laurendeau,  Gordon,  Kierans, Purdy -the list goes on and  on.
As  anthologies go,  Divided We  Stand
is  remarkable for  its  overall   consistency. From start   to  finish  Geddes maintains a general    level   of  excellence,  a   top-rate blend    of   inte11igence,   perception,  and sensitivity.   Admittedly,   occasional   non­ sense creeps  in:  Robert Kroetsch's "Can­ ada   is  a   Poem," for   example,  detracts rather  than   contributes  with   its  cliche­ ridden  prose;   similarly,  Leonard  Peter­ son's  "Thoughts that  Try   to  Go  Some­ where,  but  Stop  Short:  Canadian  Style"
 seems peculiarly out  of  place  among mature and  thoughtful writings.  But  this is only a minor  quibble; from  Rene Levesque's   "For   an   Independent   Que­ bec,"   to   Reshard  Gool's    "The   Over­ whelming   Question," to  AI  Purdy's wry "Handful of  Earth," the  articles in  this book    are    provocative,    insightful   and  above all, intelligent.
Of particular interest to the academic audience is Rosemary Su11ivan's all too brief  note,  "The City  of  Intellect Found Wanting." Using  Earle  Birney's  infamous remark   that  Canada is a  "land dead  set in adolescence," Ms Sullivan goes on to elucidate exactly  what  this means  for  the throngs  of unemployed Canadian  Ph.D.s who, because of thick-headed University policies, remain unemployed in their own country or  are  forced   to  look  elsewhere for academic jobs. Cogent, well-informed, and  right,  Ms  Sullivan offers  one  of  the most straightforward essays in this volume.
But  Divided  We  Stand  is not  simply  a
source  book  for  Canadian polemicists.  It is a variegated and  rich introspection: an articulate rendition by our thinkers, poets, and  economists  of  how  we see ourselves, what  we do, and  why we do what  we do. Geddes  is a  careful editor who  balances his variety  of articles. Economic treatises are  complemented with  political   theory, political  theory   with  poetic  fiction;  For­ eign  Affairs  is tempered with  Maclean's or   The  Globe,  Kierans,   Rotstein,  and  Groulx with  Purdy,  Nowlan, and  Wiebe. And  this is what  is so attractive about Gary   Geddes'  anthology.  Its   variety   of arguments, its  different perspectives, and  its  assortment  of  tones  make   it  a  most suitable   book  for  all  branches of  Cana­ dian  Studies courses.  Its  interdisciplinary spectrum should  attract not only students (both graduate and  undergraduate), but intelligent readers from  all  walks of  life.

GARY A. BOIRE

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



SEA TO SEA TO SEA
AL   PURDY,  No  Other   Country. McClelland   &
Stewart, $ r o.oo.
THE   SEVENTEEN SHORT ESSAYS in  No Other Country  reprint AI Purdy's decade­ long  diary   of  Canadian  landscapes and inhabitants. Retaining the popular stamp  of  the  magazines  (Maclean's,  Weekend, etc.)  where  they first appeared, the pieces are   here   collected  under   the   rubric   of "Nationalism as  the  knowledge  that  we are   here,   and   reality   begins  here."  Be­ cause  Purdy  sees reality as "what  you can touch ... in the space that surrounds your body,"  the  tone  is anecdotal;  arm-wrest­ ling and  beer drinking figure more promi­  nently  than  abstract manifestoes. Reflect­ ing  his coming  of  age  in  the  depression,  the   book  evokes  the  ethos  of  convivial small  towns  perched on  the  edge  of  the wilderness  or on  the shores of the Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic.
Purdy's apprenticeship began  in  1937, at   17,   with   his  riding   the  rails  out  of Trenton, Ontario, to escape the  boredom of unemployment. At  the end  of the line in  B.C.,  he  found   the  "tremendous exal­ tation" of "country so beautiful  that no­ body  deserves  to die without  having  seen it."  Ever  since,  he has been caught up in the  "joy ... that  stems  from  making  the map  of yourself  on  paper coincide  with  a s,ooo-mile-wide   country."  Like  the Groves   and   Rosses  of  the  twenties  and thirties,  Purdy   is  drawn   to  people  who battle  unpredictable weather in  a  land­  scape  that   resists  settlement.  Himself   a builder of a country house originally with­  out electricity, he admires  the magistrate­ angler-writer  (Roderick Haig-Brown, Canada's  Walton)  who  "has   lived ... a life   nearly   fused   with   nature," or   the poor   Newfoundland  "men   and   women who  can  whittle survival  from  a piece of driftwood [and] may still be living in villages  beside  the  sea ... when  the cities die."  Purdy  knows  the hardship of storms

g6
 that  can  swallow  fishermen's boats  or destroy   farmers'  wheat.  Yet   these   iso­ lated,  self-reliant  people   are   closer   to their  few  neighbours than  city  folk,  and  their  language -usually  concrete, some­ times   hypnotic -has  not  been  debased  by   abstractions.   Fittingly,  the   book   is dedicated to  two  Eskimo  hunters lost on an  ice floe while  making a routine check of their  traps.
Occasionally  Purdy    becomes   overtly
political, "sort  of  radically  conservative, in  the  sense  of conserving what  we have in   this   country."  He   laments  the   fact that   "we   haven't  made   enough   money from our own  resources" and the shortsightedness  that   wastes  millions   on egg spoilage  "but can't scrape  up enough money  to permit adequate Search  and Rescue operations to save human lives." Impatient as  a  friend about the  "recur­ ring  questions of identity ... [which are]  manufactured  by   writers   and  intellec­ tuals,"  Purdy   finds  the  cement   for   na­  tional   unity  in  personal  relationships. In addressing the   French-English  conflict,  he   grapples  not   intellectually  with   the ideas  that humourlessly divide  us farther, but  physically  with  a canadien co-worker in  a  brawl  that  ends  in a men's  john.  As in   his   poem,    "Sizwe   Banzi   is  Dead," where   a  South   African variation  is  de­ liberated,  the   solution  lies   in   spirited toleration, if not conspiratorial respect for the  otherness of  different  human beings. But   this  position   has  limits:  Purdy   be­ comes  ominously  helpless  on  a short  visit to Aklavik,  where  tensions  between  Inuit and  whites  have  erupted in  a number of senseless killings.
Purdy's  "consciousness of  self  as  the
last  link  in  a  long  line  of  selves"  saves No   Other   Country   from   parochialism. Part  of his definition of nationalism, this conception  places  current  experience  in the    humbling,   exalting  perspective  of aboriginal and  geological  time. The  essay on   Aklavik    muses   on   the   coming    of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Asiatics  myriads of  years  before  Homer, let   alone   the   European  explorers, and ends   with   the   speculation  that  "migra­ tions and  explorations might have  deeper motives   than  the   mere  pursuit  of  food and  profit:  because humanity has always been  searching for  itself." Aware  of  the destructiveness that attends so much  racist and   nationalist   thinking,  Purdy   warns that  if humans fail  to resolve  their  differ­  ences, an age may return as irrelevant for mankind   as   the   time   when    dinosaurs romped   beside   the   Bearspaw  Sea   that  covered most of Alberta.
In  the  few essays devoted to literature, Purdy's concern for  how  "the man  lives inside  his  writing, and  outside" leads  to some acute, personal, non-academic criti­ cism  of  Layton and  Lowry.  The  literary importance  of   the   book   lies  elsewhere,  though, in  seeing  a  major  writer   rumi­  nating  in  non-fictional  prose about what­  ever  happens to  interest him.  While  vir­ tually  every  essay  has  its  counterpart in one  of  Purdy's poems,  the  prose does not replace  the  poetry  with  made-to-measure paraphrases. Rather, the  social  milieu determining the  stance in so many  of the poems   is  sharply  focused.   Some   tech­ niques   are   fully   articulated,  as  Purdy's
•'double  view of history,  for then  and  now
merge   somewhat  in  my  mind"  ( cf.  the equine   mythology   of    "The   Cariboo
 Horses,"    which    includes    breeds    from other   continents and   other   ages  as  well the   B.C.  rangelands).  In   the  end,   the poetry resonates more complexly in the landscape  the   essays  chart,  and   one  is struck  by the distance that  separates com­ pelling  anecdotes from  fine poetry.

ALEXANDER GLOBE


THESIS INDEX

Antoine  Naaman, comp.  Repertoire  des theses litteraires  canadiennes  de  1921  a 1976. Editions  Naaman, $15.00.

IF  SOMEONE  ELSE  HAD   ALSO  attempted to  classify  all  the  literary theses  written by Canadians at  home  and  abroad since
I 92 I we  could   compare   Professor   An­ toine   Naaman   and    Professor   Leo   A. Brodeur's  work   with   volumes  by  other bibliographers. But   the   Repertoire   can only  be compared  to  the  previous  bibli­
ographies compiled by the  same scholars. One   can   only   note   the   improvement. And  what  if your  thesis is not  in  the Repertoire?  Write   to  Naaman and   you will   be  listed in  the  I g8 I edition.  As a  matter of  fact,  Antoine   Naaman  is  so concerned with  the  problems  created  by poor  information in  this  field  that  he  is about   to  found   a  Centre  d'information




CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5 /228-4741


97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sur les theses litteraires  and  a Banque  des theses  litteraires.   But   the   Repertoire   is more  than   a  tool  for  graduate  students and  thesis directors: it is a document that speaks  loudly  about our  cultural  evolu­ tion.  Such  a book should  be examined by anyone  concerned with Canadian ideas.
The  Repertoire is extremely   practical. The  theses are numbered and indexed according to their  author, director, writer studied   and   subject   matter. This   latter index  is also  divided   into  theses  written in English, French and other languages (German: more  than  I oo, Spanish: fewer than  100, Italian: I I, etc.). Significance? Most  people  teaching a foreign  language in   our   Universities  didn't   write    their thesis   in   the   language  they   are   "pro­ fessing."
Now,   not   all  Canadian  literary  aca­ demics   write   their   thesis  on   Canadian Literature.  The    theses  are   listed   in   7 chapters, but   there  is  no  special  section for   Canadian  Literature.  Meaning?  In "established" academic circles,  Canadian Literature is still  not  taken  seriously.  We hope    that    the    I98I     edition    will   be divided    into   two   main    sections:  (I) Theses  written  on  Canadian  Literature (including those written abroad, i.e., at Aix-En-Provence, The Bordeaux Centre of   Canadian   Studies,  etc.)    and    ( 2) Theses  written by Canadians on other literatures. Only  humble  suggestions.
Another interesting detail : Canadians have   written  s,6oo   theses  about  litera­ ture  since  I 92 1. All proportions kept  (on a  per  capita basis), we are  writing  more literary theses  than  the French do. Then one  can   be  amused   by  a  European  re­ viewer  commenting  on  the  I970 edition  of Naaman's bibliography: "The produc­ tion of  Canadian academics is not behind continental  erudition."  No,  in   fact   we may  be ahead. However, I would  recom­ mend   that   theses  not  yet  completed  be listed  separately in  the Repertoire.

g8
 The   weak   area   of  Canadian  literary theses   is   Comparative   Literature.   We have   at  least   a  well-established journal in  the  field  (Canadian Review of  Com­ parative  Literature)  and  several  univer­ sities  offering programs in  the  area. Yet only 79 (completed or in progress)   theses are   listed   under  this  heading.  A  closer scrutiny even  reveals  that  simple  thema­ tic  analysis  of  the  kind: "The Feminine Image   in  the  Novels   of ... " are   listed under  Comparative Literature. I am  not sure  we  would   all  agree   with  that. On the  other hand, theses  studying relation­ ships  between   writers, works,  mutual  in­ fluences,   etc.   are   not   all   listed   in   this section.
In as far as Canadian Literature is concerned, a few things  are  worth  noting. On  the  French front: there  are  no theses written on  Pierre  Chatillon, cecile Clou­ tier,   Nicole   Brossard   or   Nairn   Kattan, while  people   like  Gerard  Bessette,  Rina  Lasnier or  Jacques  Godbout have   been studied  in about ten theses each.
On   the   English   front:  there   are   no
theses   on   Pat   Lane,    Susan   Musgrave, John   Robert   Colombo,  Michael    On­ daatje, George   Woodcock. On  the  other hand,  Ralph  Gustafson, Miriam   Wad­ dington and  Fred  Cogswell  are  each  the object   of  a  thesis.  And  there  are I 6  of them   on   Morley   Callaghan,  a   novelist who  is generally not  recognized,  we  are told.
There are  amazing things indeed: only two  theses  on  Margaret Atwood  written in  this  country. I  know  of  at  least  three in  France on  the  author of Survival!
Finally, when  it comes to theses, we are far  less traditional than   other   countries. We  have  moved   into  unexplored areas: literary study   of  journalism, translation, critical editions, indexation, dictionaries and  creative writing-in  this latter specialty, the English  are ahead of the French: 2  to I.
ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



WHERE LAND IS LOVE
n. G.   JONES,  Under   the  Thunder the  Flowers
Light   Up  the  Earth.   Coach  House, $4.50.

FOR A  LONG  TIME  it  has  been  my  belief that  the reason  the  poetry  of D. G. Jones has   not   found   much   retentissement in Canada could  be  attributed to  the  kinds of  distances  it  creates,   its  air   of  spare, offhand intellectuality. Edward Thomas would   have   called   his  manner   specta­ torial.    Thomas,  however,   would   have been  mistaken, as  I  too  have  been.  In a country where   there  is  indeed   a  certain active   interest in  poetry,  Jones' name  is hardly    ever   heard,  for   certain  things Jones eschews, and  foremost among  these is  mere speech,  mere  sensational speech. He has never  believed,  like many contem­ porary   poets,  that   wit  needs  to  be  styl­ ishly  diabolic, nor,  as  many  others,  that  place  is where  sui  generis  poetry  begins. Poetry,  as he  has  said  on  more  than  one occasion,   begins  in   parole,  in  the  word charged  with   mythological  force.   Few poets  in  anglophone Canada, even  those he admires, have  carried the  word  as far as  Jones,  or  have  made  it  carry,  indeed, such  slippery  weight.
Under the  Thunder ... marks  at once a  change  and   a  deepening of  the  pre­ occupations of  his  earlier  collections. If one  considers  the  titles  alone  of the  pre­ vious   books-Frost	on   the   Sun,  The Sun  is Axeman, Phrases  from Orpheus­ one  cannot fail  to  notice  both  an  ironic temper and   a  vertical   vision  of  the  na­ tural    universe   whose   pitch    is   one   of descent.  The  title  of  the  latest  book  re­ verses  the  direction  of  both   irony   and dichotomy:  while  the  flowers  are  under the  thunder, they light  up  the  earth. The new   poems   have   changed  correspond­ ingly. But the changes, both  thematic and stylistic,  because   they  continue to  medi­  tate  on Jones' earliest  obsessions as a poet, give a  new  and  illuminating curve  to his work  as  a coherent whole.
 The  core that  permeates the whole of Jones' work has two faces, and raises one question: How  can  there  be frost  on  the sun? The answer resides in the dialectical theme explored  in his study of Canadian literature, Butterfly on Rock, in which  he developed  Frye's notion  that Canadian culture  is  a   garrison    in   a   wilderness. There Jones  argues   that   "The only  de­ fence for a garrison culture is to abandon defence."  One    might    say   that   Jones'  continual discovery  of  himself  as  a  poet is that  of a man  who thought there  were limits  and  found  there  were  hardly  any. The   obvious   formalities  of   the   earlier  books,   formalities that  would   seem   to respect an order  that  ought  to be evident in  the  world,  are  now  less  evident, but more  persuasive.  What did  he  want?
If I could  write;  Five  Starlings
Splashing in  a  muddy pool,  and
All  around them write a  haze  of sun....
Jones'  style in  Under the  Thunder  puts away  the  old  defences,  and  the  starlings of  The  Sun   is  Axeman  are   no  longer merely formal. Jones has now listened to himself so long  that  he has begun  to hear his starlings  assuming their  own  form.
The  shift  in speech  pattern has gener­ ated  a much  more  subtle development of irony. Juxtapositions of  points  of view are now so carefully treated that it is difficult to distinguish theme  from  style. The most succinct  clue  to  Jones'   understanding of language is  provided by the  third  part  of "Dilemmas":
the  first garden was  the  flesh the  second   mind

there never  was  a  wilderness
The   resolution   of  the   old  antinomy  of garden and wilderness is not merely a perceptual modification of the edenic archetype. Jones  is reminding us here  by implication that  what  we thought was wilderness  was, in fact,  mind,  a direction of the imagination. With  an incredible succinctness  one is reminded of one of the

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



forgotten aspects  of W acousta,  the  foun­ tainhead of English-Canadian literature: the  wilderness  as  terror  is  merely  a  pro­ jection of colonial irrationality. Wacousta, a Byronic  perversion of Walpole's Theo­ dore,  is a wilderness  as much  as any other  romantic hero,  and  no more. This  means that  in  pastoral imagery  the  garden is a metaphor for  the  human being,  and  the ironies  of Jones'  latest  poetry  play on the fact  that  the  human being is two gardens in  the  same  place,  each  perceiving  in  its own  way.  The end  of  their  perceptions, however,  "is  not  knowledge,   no,  but   a
constant I reintegration." The  movement
of style and  the movement of theme  have
become  the same movement; and  the mutual separation and return of flesh and mind  in space as well as in the zones of perception  (the  poem's  structure and pattern of  speech)    plays  with  the  same core  at  the  heart  of Jones'  earlier work, but   its  two  faces,  formerly   so  opposed, now often  seem  to merge.
The first poem,  "A  Garden  of Milne," is a programmatic display of the book's major  preoccupation, and   it  should   be noted  that  both  section  I and  III of  the book take their points of departure from meditations on  the  work of David  Milne and  Alex Colville.  Jones'  sense of poetry as  picture-space  has  been   transformed, and, were  it  possible  to  accuse  Jones  of formerly creating a reader  as a static ob­ server,   one  can   do  so  no  more.  As  he
observes  inI 31I I77,

it  takes
two eyes, bifocal vision, to measure
distance, it  pays  perhaps to  look  at the  view sideways
no  snow,  strange peaks,  sky, every now  and  again to  look  at  the  world upside down

Although such a statement suggests Apol­ linaire's cubism  in  "Zones," Jones'  man­  ner  avoids   the  French  poet's  crosshatch of  interpenetrating  lines  of  perspective.

100
 No longer  exercised  by why there  may  be frost  on  the sun,  the  poet seeks to imitate a  world  that

keeps dismantling the syntax, escaping a final  sentence
Penelope weaving
and  unweaving, night, day,  to avoid  closure

Of course,  the world  of the earlier poems was an  object  of terrible dissolutions  and heroic   restitution,  but   it  was  never  af­ firmed  that  the  numen of  destruction  be­ longed   to  the  same  pattern as  creation, that   their   dance  was  Shiva's, intimately relating both  movements into  one.
The figure  for  the  dance  is the  flower, a  sign  crucial  to  both   pastoral  and  In­ dian   aesthetics; and   as  Jones  ironically suggests  at  the  end   of  "The  Lampman Poems"  (Section IV), "heaven  is a mor­  talflower." In this section, in fact,  the best of Jones' use of  speech  is "anthologized." All are  poems  that  Jones,  in  the  persona  of Archibald  Lampman, addresses  to the latter's friend Kate. They  suggest sonnets, but  are  in  fact  poems  of thirteen lines of a  loose   trimeter  without  rhyme   whose titles   are   acrostically  formed   from   the letters composing the  beginning of each line.  All  the  titles  but  the  last  are  names of flowers, and  the  flowers are  integrated into  the parole  of the poems. Here Lamp­ man   and   Kate  become   a  landscape  of flowers,   and   the   landscape   edges   into word.
Part  of the extraordinary energy  of this whole section  is its realisation of the clues and  possibilities  of  the  rest  of  the  book. The poet  is always  a new  Adam,  writing the new landscape. But to do so, as he observes   in   Modern  Poetry   Studies    in
1974, "it  is not simply  a question of  nam­ ing  what   he  sees;  to  name  what  people  cannot  see,  what   is  not   already  in  the language, he must  go into  the dark." The poet  must,  as he remarks in  "Pictures By Colville,"

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Choose  the  centre  as it  moves

every  shift
is a precise season

Hence, to be disarmed, to be naked,  a situation Jones  frequently gives  voice  to, is  to  be  in  the  dark   and   predisposed to name  the  new  landscape. The seventh Lampman  poem  is specifically   a  "read­ ing"  of  Kate as  an  immortelle,  both  as "everlasting"  and    as   the   little   alpine  flower  that  seems to endure long after  its season  is past.  Dead, she  is still  alive  in language, so ending divisions  of  destruc­ tion  and  creation.
To  see the  beloved  heuristically in  the landscape, to  name   her  as  parts of  the world,  is a  technique as  old  as  Petrarch who delighted in transforming Laura into "!'aura," "l'auro," etc.  The uncentred world, however, Jones shares with the twentieth century. What sets him  apart from  his contemporaries is not only the manner of his constant shifts  of point  of view,  the fruit  of many  years'  meditation on  illusions,  visual  repetitions, and  trom­ pe-l'oeil  learned from  a  great  variety  of artists.  He is also set apart by his uncanny obliquity as  a  speaker:  no  one  engaged  in a monologue with  Doug Jones  is quite the same afterward. He speaks, as he says in    one    poem,     "like    Lazarus   saying,
'What's for  breakfast?'"
One   might   be   tempted  to   say   that Jones'  ironies, his almost  oriental acquies­ cence,  his apparent refusal  to care  about  the merely  dead,  not  to speak  of "justice, guilt,   the  heavy  crust   of   self-deception, carnage  and   its  gods,"  that  this  marks him  as  carelessly  surreal.  It is more  ap­  propriate to say that  Under the  Thunder brings   to  fruition  and   closes  the   brief reign   of   nature  as  terror  in   Canadian letters. The Lampman poems,  by recall­  ing  the  nineteenth  century,  both   short­ circuit  terror and  display  what  so many earlier Canadian poets  knew  intimately: the only unpredictable figure  in the land-
 scape  is man.  To  admit as  much   in  no way  removes  the  horror, it  only  puts  it where  it  belongs; and   fortunately Jones has made  too  many  night  journeys  for  us to believe that Kate and  Archie  are any­ thing  other  than what  they  are,  namely, small, brilliantly lit figures  of the middle, pastoral  distance. Where, in  fact,  Jones'  intellectual courage is to be admired is in his awareness  that  the garden of the mind  and   the  flesh   are   mutually  dependent, and  that  the  horror  resides  in  their  divi­  sion,   as  he   suggests   in   "Sebastien Le
Preste de Vauban" for whom  "a plan  of I
fortification is itself  a medallion, a  man­
dala,  a I multifoliate rose."

E. D. BLODGEIT


THE NEW WOMAN

JOAN   BARFOOT,  Abra.  McGraw-Hill  Ryerson
$g.gs.
ARITHA    VAN     HER!{,    judith.   McClelland &
Stewart,  $ro.oo.
AnRA AND  JUDITH are  both  prize-winning first novels and  both  try  to say something about   the  new  woman   in  terms  of  the ideal  of self-sufficiency,  or as the Chinese like to call it, self-reliance.
At first glance the  novels are  not in the least  alike either in  intention, aspiration, or  theme.  Judith is written according to a  familiar  formula  which   employs   the usual  novelistic  conventions. To  this formula van  Herk  has  added a new  and local  twist.  The new  twist  is pigs.
Judith is a young  farm  girl who goes to the  big city  of  Edmonton, works  in  an office,  has  a  love  affair   with  a  married man,    worries    about  her    hairdos,    her dresses and  her  shoes. Then, after receiv­ ing  a  small  inheritance,  she  decides   to change  her life, buys a pig farm and  starts  to raise pigs. The pigs, and  Judith's love for, and  identification  with  them,  are  the most  original  and  interesting part  of the novel.  Van   Herk   knows   about   pigs  in


101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



depth; she  not  only  describes  them  with knowledge and  love,  but  celebrates the femaleness  of   sows,  and   proudly   pro­ claims   her  heroine's kinship  with  them.  This   is  a   refreshing  change   from   the usual   celebration  of   maleness,   so  tire­  somely   familiar   from   the   writings    of Hemingway, Mailer and  others.
To  reverse a stereotype may be a neces­ sary corrective, but  it is just as lacking  in truth as  its  opposite. I  happen  to  think that  the  philosophical and  social implica­ tions   of  van   Herk's  celebration  of  the female   creature  as   pure   creature,  are questionable, but  she  does  describe  in  a new  and  compelling way,  the  sheer  sen­ suous erotic  pleasure of motherhood, the sense  of wholeness  in  nuzzling  and  nurs­ ing.  She  also  depicts pregnancy  as a dy­ namic process which involves the female creature in  work, as well as in  pain  and pleasure. At the pig level this work is completely physiological,  but  by implica­ tion,   a  corresponding  psychological   di­ mension  exists in  human femaleness.
Yet  van  Herk   does  not  take  this  ex­ ploration very  far  or  deep.  Instead,  she allows  the  strictures of plot  and  formula to  shape   the  major theme  of  her  novel. She  cannot prevent  femaleness  from  be­ ing  the  germinal  theme,  but  the  theme that   emerges  fullblown  is  pure  Horatio Alger  with  a  light  dusting  of CBC  tele­ visionese:  forsake  the  city  with  its adul­  terous relationships, go back to the farm,  raise pigs even if you are the first woman  to  try  it  single-handed. It  will  all  end happily  ever  after, for  the farm  will give you what  everyone  in Canada is earnestly searching  for -roots,   and   a   sense   of identity.
Needless   to  say,  in  Judith, the  farm and  the  surrounding  neighbours alie as good,   healthy, and   helpful,   as  the  city and   its  denizens   are   evil,  sick,  and  de­ structive.  And   magically,    through    the farm  and  its associations, Judith finds not only  a  mate, but  a  suitable  husband.


102
 As fiction,  Judith is a  satisfying  enter­ tainment,  unblemished  by  the   slightest  hint    of   social   interpretation,   let   alone  criticism. The fact  that   the  heroine has, first,  the  capital, and  second, the  entre­ preneurial initiative  to run  a pig farm  by herself,    has   no   real   relevance   to   the feminist  movement or  the  new  woman. Anyone who is even slightly  familiar with rural  life  in  Canada knows  of  the  many competent and  courageous middle-aged widows  who  ran  the  family  farms single­ handedly and  unromantically, long before  the  exhortations  of  the  women's  move­ ment   reached  anyone's  ears.  These   wo­ men  not  only  raised  pigs  and  cattle, but children as  well.  And  it  is only  because they   were   middle-aged  and    could    no longer   be  considered  sex-objects,  to  be admired  and  coveted, that  they  probably did  not inspire  as much  helpfulness in the men  in  their  neighbourhoods as does  van Herk's  Judith. The only  "new" freedom for  women   that  emerges  from  this  book is   the sexual freedom of the creature­ existence  that    men   have    always   been ready  to grant to the women  they are  not married to:  a liberty  that  has  nothing to do  with  being  either human or  free.
Although van  Herk's   novel  says  noth­ ing  very  interesting about  women, it  is wonderful in what  it says about  pigs. Van Herk  writes  about them  with  immediacy, talent  and   a  beautiful  energy,   and   if  I can  not  love  her  pigs  quite as  much   as she  does,  I  will  always  remember  them with  respect  and  admiration.
Abra, the  other prize-winning novel, seems  to explore   the same  theme  of  self­ sufficiency  as  judith, but  is in  every  way more  ambitious, more  complex and  more  disturbing. It  is  a  didactic   novel,   and deals  more   successfully   with  ideas  than  people.   Even   the  name  Abra  is  signifi­ cant, suggesting  as  it  does  Abracadabra, an   ancient   cabbalistic   configuration  of letters that  was supposed to  cure  fevers.
Abra  does  all  that  society  has  planned

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



for  her. She  grows  up  in  a southern  On­ tario  town,  studies,  marries, and  acquires  a  home  and  children. She  lives  the  un­ examined life  of  every  upwardly  mobile junior    executive   wife,    complete  with PTA,  recipes,  bridge  club, and  the latest in decorating. Yet she is unfulfilled. Hus­  band   and   children  are   not  enough   for her,  and  she  somehow lacks  the  energy, discipline,   or   brains,   to   find   satisfying work of her  own.  Always  in a misty state of depression, she  hovers  on  the  brink  of a  breakdown until  she  finally  decides  to run  away.  Like  Judith, she also has an inheritance; enough money  to  buy a  re­ mote   country  property  where   she   can hole up with  garden, books, and  birds. In this way she eliminates all social contact, and  with it, all conflict,  pain,  and respon­  sibility.
Who  doesn't recognize  this fantasy? Every  child  dreams of such  utopian  om­ nipotence.  He   will   run    away   to   the forest, he will build  a hut  of logs and  pine boughs,  he  will  need  nothing  from  any­ one.  He  will  pick  berries  for  food,  trap  rabbits  and  catch fish, and  invent  what­ ever   else  he   needs   for   living.   And   no messy human relationship will ever touch,  dominate, disappoint, or reject  him again.  Even  better  than   Robinson  Crusoe.   He had  a  footprint  to  contend  with.
Abra  finds  no footprints in her  retreat. Her   withdrawal is  complete  and  repre­ sents  the  furthest extreme of  fearfulness, which,  Barfoot implies-unconsciously I think-is    the   inevitable  result   of  the pain  and  horror  we  must   all  endure in the  anonymity  and   violence   of  today's social  living.
I  said  earlier that   Abra  is a  didactic novel.   It   is  also   the   work   of  a  young writer, and  as  such,  speaks  not  only  for
the author, but  for  the  many  people  who
are its readers, and  also its ghostly writers. What does  Abra's long  withdrawal from social life and  her  return to nature really signify?  Abra's abandonment of her  chi!-
 dren,  her lack of guilt,  her  rationalization of her  problems,  are  not  in the least con­ vincing.  We  are  asked  to  believe  in  the cool imperturbability of her nature on the one hand,  and  in her sensitive passion for willow  trees  on  the  other.  Most  difficult  of all is the attempt to understand how a woman   who   remained   unmoved   in  the sensuous  presence   (and  beauty)   of  two real,  live  children  could   so  deeply   love and  identify  with  a  mere  thing,  like  the natural   wood-panelling  in   a   cabin.    I know as well as anyone  that  wood  has  a secret  life  of its own,  and  that  Zeus once saved  Daphne by turning her  into  a  tree when  she  was  fleeing  the  unwanted at­ tentions of Apollo.  But  I  also know  that wood  is somewhat less than  human, and I  can't help  thinking that  it  is a  strange set of priorities that  will allow  a  woman to love wood panelling and  squirrels  more than    children-or  even    husbands  for that  rna tter.
Here   is  how  Abra   describes   her  first
sight  of the  cabin:
I was  inside. The  counters, all  in   natural wood  ... I felt   them, unfinished but  with­ out    splinters,  smooth,  solid.   The   kitchen large  and  warm ... a breeze  coming  through the  broken window panes ... and  into the bedroom . . . the   window  looking  into the willow,   how   good,   I  thought, to  wake   up and   know   the  willow  is  keeping  watch.... and   me  wanting to  just  stay,  to  curl   up  in it  until   I  absorbed it,  or   it  absorbed  me, this   odd   peace   that  was   not   peaceful,  no memories, no  bars,   just  a  holding.
And  about  leaving  home  she  tells  us:
I  wanted to   be  gone,   out   of  this   baffling place  where the  children and  Stephen were just  shadows, demanding that  I  be  one   of them   when  I could not.  The cabin and   the land   were  in  me  now....
So Abra departs on what  can  best be des­ cribed  as a lifelong camping trip. She tells us that  she became  "an  animal," and, "as the  years   [ten] went  on  . . .  I   became part   of  the  wilderness   ...  aware  of  my very minimal place  in it. And  I found it comforting."


103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The   detached  Abra   thus  seeks  union with something; in this case it is the wilderness. Perhaps  this  novel  is simply one  more  actualization in  fictional  form of   the   theological  approach  to   nature which  has so long  been  insisted  upon  by our  most  influential  critics.  When  Abra casts off her social self, her lethargy is miraculously replaced by energy,  and  she yields  without struggle  to  the  limitations of  season  and   weather  imposed   by  na­ ture.   Within  these  limitations  she  finds her   own   internal  rhythm  and   peace. What the  author and  Abra  both  fail  to realize is that  the peace comes more from the  yielding   to,  and   the  acceptance of, limits  than  from  nature. The  acceptance of limits  imposed  by self  and/or society, as long  as it  is chosen  by  the  individual, will bring  the same  kind  of  peace.
In  order  to enjoy  her new-found peace without guilt,  Abra  has to rationalize her leaving:
Was   it  escape I  saw?   I did   not   think   so. Or   if  it   was,   it   was   not   so  much   escape from   this  life,  although I was  dead  in  it,  as an   escape  to  something.  Filled   now   with life,  a sense  of  purity, and, at   last,   belief.
... I was a  different  person.

This   different  person   is scarcely  believ­ able.  Although she  feels  no  guilt  about  abandoning her  children,  Abra  feeds  the birds,   nurses   a   wounded   squirrel,    and lavishes  love on flowers and  plants,  who, unlike   children,  will   grow  without  her assistance.   If such  a  complete   denial   of the  social  self is not escape,  then  what  is it?  As Abra  ponders  this she comes  to a conclusion that  absolves  her  not  only  of guilt  and  conflict, but  more  importantly, of all  pain:

And  it  came  to  me  that all  the  components of   the   old   life  had    . . .  broken down   ... everything outside of  me  had  broken down. I had   been  put   together.

Maybe; but  at  what  cost?  What  kind  of integration is it that  denies all human relationships? Perhaps it  is  the  integra-


104
 tion  of  despair, as  Abra  herself  suggests when  she wonders whether she is sane  or mad,  and  speculates about   the  meaning of   sanity   and   health  in   the   everyday world.
The question of  sanity  is most  clearly dealt  with  after  a visit from  her  husband. She  refuses  to  return and  realizes,  when he  leaves,  that  an  emotional breakdown must  have  brought her  to the  cabin  and the  wilderness. She  believes she  has  now healed   herself,   and   fears   that   she  will break  down  again  if she returns to her old life.
Abra  thus continues to live contentedly alone  for  ten  years,  only  agreeing to  re­ turn    when   her   daughter,   now   grown,  visits  and   begs  her  to  come  back.  Abra agrees,  but at  the last minute changes  her mind,  and  decides  to remain in her  cabin where  she knows she will  never  have  bad dreams; life  in  the  wilderness  is without pain  or dreams.
In    spite    of   the    unconvincing  and flawed  character and   morality of  Abra, Barfoot   presents   the  reader   with  a  very real  problem. It is the same problem that Sinclair Ross  posed  forty  years ago  in  As for Me  and  My  House,  namely:  can  a sensitive,   inward-looking  individual   re­ main   unbroken in  a  provincial,  violent,  society  where  the  cultural  barriers  to sat­  isfying  emotional   relationships seem  in­ surmountable?
I  can't  believe  in  Abra's   premises   or her   solutions,  but   Barfoot's  novel   con­ vinces  me  of  the  reality  of  the  problem. Van  Herk, on  the  other  hand,  does  not attempt to deal  with  psychological   reali­  ties-except for the ones connected with parturition -and   seems   to   ride   along  uncritically  on  the  wave  of  intellectual eup4oria  that  washes  over  all  Albertans with  oily complacency.
At its most  profound level her  message is  the  celebration of  reproduction in  all its glorious  phases; this, in a world  that  is already  dangerously  overpopulated.  Yet

BOOKS IN REVIEW



different as  they  are,  both  of  these  first novels  have  one  thing  in  common:  they deal  with  strategies of  escape,  and  with the  postponement and  avoidance of  the pain  that   is an  inevitable part   of  living as  a  human  being.  One  woman   drowns her  sorrows  in  the metaphysics of nature, while  the other drowns  and  deafens  them in  the  noisy  seductive music  of  the  rites of generation. Metaphysics or  physics­ one  has   no  validity   without   the  other. Both  authors write  with accomplishment, skill and  beauty,  but  only  Barfoot's work has  the  added  dimension  of  being  dis­ turbing.
MffiiAM  WADDINGTON

CARR: MORE THAN MEETS THE EYE

DORIS   SHADBOLT,    The   Art    of  Emily    Carr.
Clarke  Irwin/Douglas &  Mcintyre,  $45.00.
MARIA TIPPETT,  Emily  Carr, A  Biography.  Ox- ford,  $Ig.so.
WHILE READING- and  looking  with  de­ light-at Doris  Shadbolt's  finely written and  superbly illustrated The  Art of Emily Carr, I have  also been involved in a curi­ ous  book  by a  quintessential  English  ec­ centric, Owen   Barfield.   A  barrister and avowed  disciple  of Rudolf Steiner branch­ ing  out  into  talk  about  the  arts,  Barfield is one  of  those  garrulous amateurs with occasional  penetrating insights   who  still thrive  in Britain, and  in The  Rediscovery of  Meaning  and  Other  Essays, he  had  a few  things  to say that  seemed  to me par­ ticularly  pertinent to Carr's  achievement as Shadbolt presents  it.
Now it  is possible  [says Barfield]  to look not  only  at  a  fellow  being,  but  also  at  the world  of  nature . . . not  merely  as  matter but  also as expression.  It is possible, but  for most people it is no longer  normal  and instinctive, to  do  so. It has  been  becoming less  and   less  normal   in  the   course  of  the last  three  or  four  hundred years.  And  the great  discovery  made  by the  poets and  phil-
 osophers  of  the  Romantic  movement   was just this;  that,  although it is no longer  nor­ mal, it is not impossible.

Emily  Carr  was in  many  ways a  natural Romantic, perhaps in  no  way  more  evi­ dently  than  in  her  power  of seeing  "the world  of nature ... not  merely  as matter but   also  as  expression,"  particularly  in the  sense  later   elaborated   by  Barfield, where  "spirit  depends   on  matter, or  on body, not for its being,  but  for its expres­  sion."
So much for Barfield. For if there is anything that  differentiates Emily Carr among  Canadian painters, it is her ability to see the  world  of nature as expression, and  having  in this way overcome the material rather  than   using  it,  to  open  a view  into   the  inner   realm   where   more exists than  meets  the  eye.
The  pace  and  structure of The  Art  of Emily  Carr,  with  chapters of  narrative and  exposition   alternating with  sections
where  reproductions of  Carr's  paintings
alternate with  fragments of  her  writing about  the painting experience, are admir­ ably  arranged to  reflect  this  essential  ex­ pressionist   aspect   of   Emily   Carr  as   a visual and  also a  literary artist. For  Carr was one of those rare  people  in whom  the two  languages -of  vision  and  speech - were  manifest nearly  at  equal   intensity. There  have  been  writers -like Ruskin
-who  were  sensitive  enough visual  art­ ists to realize that  prose  gave  them wider  possibilities   of   expression. There   have
been  painters, like  Van   Gogh   and   ce­
zanne,  who  wrote  admirable letters  dis­
cussing  their  art,  but  who  never  doubted that   their   true   way  of  expressing what lay deep  within  them  was through  paint­ ing.  There  was  D.  H.  Lawrence,  who painted to extend  disastrously inta visual actuality an overflowingly  lush  visual  im­ agination.  And   there   have   been   tragic  lapses of  judgment like that  of Benjamin Robert   Haydon,  that    fine   writer   who drove  himself  to  suicide   trying   to  be  a


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



great   epic   painter  in  the   tradition  of David. But  the  artists  who  worked  with almost equal intensity in the visual and literary  fields   have   been   few   indeed. Blake,   of  course -Dante  Gabriel   Ros­ setti- Wyndham    Lewis.    Interestingly enough,  they  appear  mostly  within   the English   tradition,  where  poetry   has  al­ ways  been  strongly  visual,  and   painting
-from Nicholas Hilliard  onward­
strongly    lyrical,    as   distinct    from    the French tradition, where the  generic bounds between  artists are more sharply drawn, and   visuality  belongs  to  what  is seen  - and  shown  to be -rather  than to  what   is  conceived   in  the  mind   and written.
English  Canada, in this at least, follows the  parent tradition. The  country where
-in the vision of T. E. Hulme  traversing
the    prairies -Imagism   was   originally conceived, has  produced poetry  in which the visual element has always been strong and  where  the links between  painting and poetry,  if intermittent, are often  intimate. Painters  like  Lawren  Harris  and   Jack Shadbolt have  written  creditable poetry, while  P. K.  Page,  masquerading as P. K. Irwin, is a highly  interesting visual artist. And  in  Emily  Carr the  two  vocations  of painting and   writing seemed  to  become virtually  interchangeable,  so  that   when she  was  unable  to  paint  she  turned  very naturally to the  kind  of autobiographical writing in  which  she  was able  to  articu­ late,  in  a  prose  that  was at  once  precise and  evocative, the  "world  of  nature ... not  merely  as matter but  as expression." Doris  Shadbolt not only  recognizes  the interdependence of Emily Carr's painting and    her   writing-the   way    they   sup­ ported  and   elucidated  each   other. She makes  that interdependence a strength in
her   book,   for  The  Art   of  Emily  Carr gains  its  value  as  an  exposition   of  this often   enigmatic  painter  from   a  critical use of what  is said  in  prose to illuminate what  was done  in paint.


I06
 Emily Carr's books and  letters do not reveal  the  kinds  of sharp intellectual  ap­ prehension of  a  painter's  problems  that  one  meets,  for example, in Cezanne's let­ ters  and   which   goes  with   the  curiously logical  and  even  geometric  kind  of  pas­ sion  that   inspired   his  work. It  is  more  often  in other  people's letters-and espe­ cially  Lawren  Harris's -to  her  that  the difficulties  she worked  out  in painting are  likely  to  be  clearly   stated. What  Emily Carr's writings  do is to relate  the thing  in nature   to   its   transfiguration  in   paint, often  by  telling  us  what  she  sees at  the point  of  imaginative  seizure,   and   then  giving  a   sense  of  the   inner   feeling   of movement without being  able  to declare explicitly what in her sets the movement going. Take this passage from Carr's jour­ nals,   Hundreds  and   Thousands,  which Doris  Shadbolt places  beside  a  group   of reproductions  of   intensely   mobile   sky­ and  seascapes.

I woke  up  this  morning with  'unity of movement' in  a  picture strong in  my  mind. I  believe Van Gogh had   that idea. I  did not  realize he had  striven for that till quite recently  so   I  did    not   come   by   the   idea through him.  It seems  to  me  that clears up a   lot.   I  see   it   very   strongly  out   on   the beach and  cliffs.  Now   it  seems   to  me   the first  thing to seize on in your  layout is the direction   of    your     main     movement,  the sweep   of  the   whole   thing as  a   unit. One must   be  very   careful  about  the   transition of   one   curve  of   direction  into  the   next, vary   the   length  of  the   wave   of  space   but keep   it  going, a  pathway for   the   eye  and the   mind    to   travel  through  and  into   the thought. For  long  I have  been  trying to  get these  movements  of  the   parts. Now   I  see there is  only   one   movement. It  sways  and ripples. It may  be slow  or  fast  but  it is only one  movement sweeping out  into space  but always   keeping   going-rocks,     sea,    sky, one   continuous  movement.

The most interesting of Emily Carr's paintings, as Doris Shadbolt clearly recog­ nizes, are  not  the  more  famous early  and  very  late   paintings of  the  decaying and  deserted  Indian  villages   of   the   Coast.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



These  have  their  documentary value  and their  elegiac  power  as records  of a culture whose   very   monuments  were   made   in perishable wood. But  it is the  search  into the  natural world  for  the  echoes  of  her own  predicament that  inspires  the  great paintings of the  last decade in Carr's life
-those dense visceral  paintings of the coastal forests, and the other luminous visions  of  woodlands stripped  to  a  few bare  trees that  rise like elongated umbrel­ las into  a  vast  sky burning in  passionate  rotation.
So many of these are paintings whose surging  colmrrs mount to a passion  that  is visionary  rather than   merely  visual;  one is minded  of the Salish  novice  going  into the   woods   and   driving  himself   to   the point   of  hallucination  where   he  recog­ nizes the spirit  of the land  which  his ani­  mist   insight   endows   with   supernatural form.  There was a  natural  pantheism in Emily  Carr's life  view   that-as  Doris Shadbolt  shows-was    given   definition by contact with  Lawren  Harris' prosely­ tizing  theosophy, and  which  enabled her to release -through  the apprehension of nature as  expression  rather than matter (going   back  to  Barfield) -the frustra­ tions  of  a  passionate and   physically  un­ fulfilled self.
But  always   the   statement  is  oblique; the  personal  is concealed in the  universal, and   in  her   writing   as  much   as  in  her painting Carr leaves us to conjecture knowingly  what  is never  obviously stated. Predictably,  she   was   bad   at   portraits; better  at  interpreting the  stylized  repre­ sentations of  man   on  totem  poles   (and  so giving  humanity at  third  hand); best of   all   in   rendering  the   shadows    that oppress  in  the  forest,  the  fires  that   burn in  the  sky, and  have  their  reflections  in the  human  heart,  which   is  apart  from and  yet dependent  on  that vast  world  of perpetual growth  of  which   Carr was  so perpetually  aware,  as  she  declares   in  a diary  note that Shadbolt sets among three
 paintings   of   young   forests   starting  up again  after  devastation.
There  is   nothing  so   strong  as   growing. Nothing  can   drown  that  force   that    splits rocks  and   pavements and   spreads over  the fields  . . . Man can   pattern it  and   change its  variety and shape, but  leave  it  for  even a short  time and  off it goes back to its own, swamping and  swallowing man's  puny  in­ tentions. No  killing or  stamping  down  can  destroy  it. Life  is in  the  soil.  Touch it  with air   and    light    and    it   bursts  forth   like   a struck   match. Nothing is  dead, not  even  a corpse.   It  moves   into  the   elements   when  the  spirit  has  left  it,  but  even  to  the  spirit's leaving there is  life, boundless life,  resistless and   marvellous,  fresh  and   clean, God.

In  an  obvious  way  this  is  pantheism, but Carr  was not, any more  than  Words­ worth,  the  kind  of simple  pantheist who merely contemplates the world as it is and calls  it  God.  Through  everything-for her-there  moved  a  preternatural force which her works express and  which called on  a  world  of   inner   vision  behind   the merely  visual,  so  that  one  can  say of the paintings  of  her best  period, as she once said of Harris's works, "They seem to have called  to me from  some other world,  sort of an  answer  to a  great  longing." In  the end  there  is a  final  elusiveness  about  her works, about  the source of their fire and passion. Admirably as Doris Shadbolt has guided   us  with   her  great   knowledge   of Carr  and  her  background, with  her  im­ peccable   judgment  and   her   poised   and lucid  prose, she leaves  us at  the gate of a mystery  each   of  us  can   only  inwardly grasp by his own study  of Carr's haunting paintings,  never   before   so   fully   or   so finely reproduced as they are here.
Recent  interest in Emily  Carr has  pro­
voked,   if  it   had   not   entirely   inspired, other   works   than    Shadbolt's.  Recently there  was  a  CBC  television  film  on  her life, insensitively  produced from  Toronto instead   of   being   done   by  West   Coast people  with  a  feel  for  her  work  and  its links with  the  land; there  have also been some  very  bad  books  whose  titles  I see

BOOKS IN REVIEW



no reason  to advertise. But it is fortunate that  the other book to appear at the same time   as   Doris   Shadbolt's The  Art   of Emily   Carr   should    be  a  serious   work which  in many ways complements it. This is Maria Tippett's Emily  Carr,  A  Biog­ raphy.  Tippett does  not generate  the  ex­ traordinary empathy for  Emily  Carr   as painter  that   infuses   the  Shadbolt  book, nor  does  she  write  so  supplely,  and   the few colour  prints  in her book are jarringly  off-key in colour  and  tone. But as a Life her  book  is formidably  researched, dense in  detail,  and   provided  with  an   abun­ dance  of  interesting documentary illustra­ tions,  so   that   whatever  comparisons  of quality  one  may  make  between  the  two books,  they  do  in  a  sense  support   each other.  After  them  there  will  be  no  need for  another  book  on  Emily  Carr for  a long time  to come.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


LOWRY TODAY

ANNE SMITH,  ed.,  The Art  of Malcolm Lowry.
Barnes  &   Noble,  unpriced;   Vision    Press,
£s.so.
THIS  NEW  COLLECTION of previously  un­ published   essays  revives  a  vexed  set  of questions about   Malcolm   Lowry's  trou­ bled   career.  Under  the  Volcano   is  an acknowledged   twentieth-century  classic, but  what  are  we  to  make  of  the  novels and   stories   which   followed?   And   how should  we situate Lowry's  exploitation of his own legend  in his fiction in relation  to often  uncertain  biographical data?
Several    of   the   contributors  to   this
volume correct Lowry's biographer, Douglas   Day,   on   a  number  of  points, most notably Russell Lowry, one of the novelist's    brothers,   who   contributes a breezy preface which dismisses as "sheer nonsense" any  notion  of Lowry  as a  tor­ tured  adolescent genius.  Russell  Lowry  is antagonistic   to    Day    (understandably,

I08
 since  Day  portrayed him  as an  unsympa­ thetic   bully),  but   to  be  fair   the   biog­ rapher did  observe  that "Malcolm's early life was not  nearly  as pathetic as he  pre­  tended   it   had    been."   Russell    Lowry scotches  the  legend  of the  schoolboy  golf champion,  but  I am  sceptical  of his most sensational   suggestion,    that    the   young Lowry   never   voyaged   to  Norway.   The U.B.C.   Lowry   collection   contains what certainly   looks  like  an   authentic  letter from   Lowry   to  Conrad  Aiken   ( unfor­ tunately  undated),   apparently   written from  the  Hotel  Parkheimen, Oslo.
In  a survey of the critical  reputation of Lowry's  masterpiece over the last thirty years,    Richard   Hauer   Costa    observes that  the results of the academic Lowry industry have  scarcely  been  breathtaking. Costa,   too,  takes  the  opportunity to  rap Day  over  the  knuckles,  accusing   him  of being    contemptuous   of    other   Lowry critics  while  himself  having  little  new  to say.   Unfortunately  Costa   hasn't   really done   his  homework either,  and   fails  to cover any but the most famous and easily accessible reviews of I947 or to offer any analysis of the shifting cultural contexts which  made  Lowry  initially  so unpopular in Britain, or such a cult  writer  in the late Sixties.
Moving on from  Lowry's  life and criti­ cal  reputation,  the  volume   offers  seven essays on  the  fiction.  Under the Volcano attracts  three   very  good   commentaries. Stephen Tifft  usefully disposes of the  fal­ lacy   that  an   etiology  of   the   Consul's liquor-sodden  decline   is  discoverable  in the   text.  The  Consul   is  a  victim,  Tifft  argues,  because  he  has  decided   to  be  a victim;  this   paralysing  consciousness   of his  role  as  tragic   failure  pre-empts and  vitiates   all   of   the   Consul's  encounters with  the  contingent world.  Brian  O'Kill uses  manuscript evidence  to demonstrate how  only at a relatively late stage in the composition of Under the Volcano did Lowry  transform his language away from

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



a fashionable Thirties' plain-style  towards a  quite  different long  sentence structure, replete   with   elaborations  and  qualifica­ tions,  and   much   better  adapted  to  the expression   of   simultaneous  perceptions and   the  eddies  of  consciousness.   O'Kill also has many valuable incidental insights into such diverse  topics as Lowry  and  the occult,  the  mischievous influence   of  the famous letter  to Cape, Lowry  as analogist  rather   than   symbolist,   and   the  writer's  failure of nerve  in the  later  fiction. Sher­ rill Grace  examines Lowry's  use of spatial and  temporal distortion in his writing  up to  1947, in relation to German Expres­ sionism and, in particular, expressionist films.  At  times  her  definition of  expres­ sionism   seems   a  little   too   all-inclusive, and  to  my  mind  she  underestimates the naturalistic foundations of Lowry's  fiction (unlike, say, Beckett  in The  Unnameable, Lowry   never   let   his  fiction   completely abandon the real world  for a free-floating realm  of consciousness). Nevertheless, her essay contains a number of illuminating insights  and  marks  a welcome  endeavour to approach Lowry  from  a  new  angle.
It's  when  we  turn   to  the  later  fiction that   the   problems  and   critical  disputes really begin to mount up. The need for reliable  data on  Lowry's life is shown  by George  Woodcock's essay, which  puts  the broader contours of Lowry's  career  into perspective, emphasizing  that   Lowry  re­ versed  the   traditional  progression  of novelists from  the autobiographical to the invented.   Woodcock   sees   "The  Forest Path  to the Spring" as the only truly suc­ cessful  work  of  the  later   career. What, for   Woodcock,  is  this   novella's   "flimsy plot  of  psychic  experiences" is for  Perle Epstein   a  profound  Zen   Buddhist  alle­ gory.  Her   reduction  of  the  text  in   this way is crude  and  over-ingenious,  insensi­ tive  to  the  play  of  Lowry's  irony.  T.  E. Bareham contributes an   essay   on   the Hear  Us  0 Lord  . . .  volume   of  stories, reminding  us   that   much    in   the   later
 Lowry remains  private and inaccessible without a knowledge of the  earlier  texts. His emphasis  on  the  inter-relationship of Lowry's  writings   provides   a  useful  con­ trast  to those  critics  disposed  to  see  only incoherence and  failure  in the later  work.
M.  C.  Bradbrook tries  to  make  out  a case   for   Lowry's    last   novel,    October Ferry to Gabriola, being an avant-garde experimental work  with  a narrative form that  "lies between  oral  forms  of the  bal­ lad  or the seaman's yarn,  with  their mul­  tiple  unstable   versions,  and  radical  new forms  such  as  the  'neo-Gothic novel'  in England, the nouveau  roman in France." This  clutter of  narrative models seems to me  far   too  contradictory  to  be  useful. Professor  Bradbrook scratches arbitrarily at   the   surface    of   the   October   Ferry manuscripts, but  provides  no coherent account of  the  novel's  slow growth, and her argument collapses into a series of undeveloped  points  and   rambling  anec­ dotes  (as well as including an irritatingly gratuitous  quotation  from  Bob  Dylan) . Her essay culminates in the damaging ad­  mission   that    her   quotations  from    the Lowry manuscripts were "made in haste," suffered   in  transit,  "and have  not  been checked." A  random  check  reveals  that  her  quotations  are,  indeed,  inaccurate.
In  its presentation, this anthology fails to match  up to the high standard of  com­ peting  series like Macmillan Casebooks  in Britain   or  Twentieth-Century  Views  in the  States.  There is no  brief  account of Lowry's  life and  career; no bibliography; no explanation why some texts have  been left    largely    undiscussed     (Ultramarine, Dark as the Grave Wherein My Friend Is Laid, the  poetry); the  proof-reading has been careless. With a little more editorial discretion  and  effort  this collection  could have  been much  improved. Anne Smith's terse three-sentence Introduction laments that  critics still don't take Lowry seriously as an  established  novelist,  the  one impor­ tant  successor to Joyce. To a large extent


109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



such  claims  for  Lowry's  significance  rest on  how  we  view  his  development  as  a writer  after  I947;  it seems to me unlikely that  this anthology will persuade such critics  to change their  minds.

RONALD BINNS


CONTINUING STORY

CHRISTINE  PAGNOULLE, Malcolm Lowry:  Vo­ yage  au  fond  de  nos  abimes. Editions  L'Age  d'Homme, 22  francs.
DAVID MARKSON,  Malcolm Lowry's Volcano: Myth,   Symbol,  Meaning.  Times     Books,
$I2.50.

WITH TWO NEW STUDIES devoted  to Mal­ colm   Lowry's    masterpiece,   Under   the Volcano, the  novel  has at  last secured  its position    as   a   major   twentieth-century work of art.  Both studies, one French, the other   American,  treat   Lowry   as  a  one book  author,  but  apart  from   this  they have   little   in   common.   Christine  Pag­ noulle  provides  a  general   description of Lowry's novel with few fresh  insights and little analysis. David  Markson, however, offers a veritable feast for new or veteran Volcano readers.
In  Malcolm  Lowry:   Voyage   au   fond de nos ablmes,  Pagnoulle provides  a close textual description of Under  the Volcano and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  of  the  stories  in Hear  Us  0 Lord.  She  is quick  to dismiss Lowry's  first  novel,  Ultramarine  ( I933) as juvenile  imitation. Lowry's  other post­ humously   published  works  are  similarly ignored.   While  this  is certainly  a  critical  prerogative, in this case it is indicative of a general  failure  on  the  part  of the critic to  move  beyond  an  examination  of  the superficialities  of   theme   and   recurrent image.  Just  as  there is much  more  to be said  about  Lowry's  other  works,  there  is more  to  be  said  about  Volcano and  the stories.
Pagnoulle's main  point  regarding Hear
Us 0 Lord  is that  the vision of hard-won


I IO
 happiness presented there  is false, indeed an evasion of the truth: "Mais la pastorale d'Eridanus, la symphonie de la foi retrou­ v·ee-n'est-ce  pas   une   fausse   veponse? une  reponse  qui  •elude la  question?" Be­ cause  she  is,  a  priori,  interested in  "nos  abimes,"  it   is   "Through  the   Panama" which  receives most of her attention. Her  short  second  chapter is devoted  solely  to this story,  an emphasis that  lifts it out  of its sequential context in Hear  Us 0 Lord where  it  is a  hell  to  be harrowed in  the journey    towards  paradise.  Throughout the   discussion,   Pagnoulle  reiterates  the idea  of  Lowry's    (or  Sigbj0rn's)  'writer being written' complex, thereby  further reducing the  story  to its most ambiguous, if  not  negative, element.
The  next   twelve   chapters  of  Voyage au   fond  de  nos  abtmes  offer  a  chapter­ by-chapter description of Under  the Vol­ cano. There is a sense of  deja  vu  in  this explication de texte  for the North  Ameri­  can  reader familiar with  several  fine an­  alyses  of   the   novel.   Literary  allusions, symbols,   historical   references,  and   the "immediate level"  of  Volcano  have   al­ ready   received  considerable attention - and  in greater depth than  Pagnoulle pro­  vides. What is missing is any sense of how the  novel  works,  its  structure, style,  lan­ guage.   In   her   final   chapter,  Pagnoulle asserts   that,  "La   di:fficulte  quasi   insur­ montable  que   le  critique  doit  affronter quand vient  le moment de rassembler les fils  . . . provient d'abord  de  l'ambigui:te meme   de  notre   rapport  au  roman." If, however,   some  attention  had  been  paid to  the  form  of  the  novel  and  to Lowry's  intentions, an  understanding of  Volcano as a  whole  might be less problematic.
While  my  main  criticism  of  this  book is that  it offers little  that  is new to Lowry criticism,   I  am  also  unconvinced by  Pa­ gnoulle's thesis  that Lowry's  main  works, Volcano and   Hear  Us  0 Lord,  portray collapse  and  utter darkness.  As if in direct  contradiction   of    Lowry    himself    who

BOOKS IN REVIEW



claimed  that, in keeping  with  the  novel's "trochal form," the  reader  of Volcano should  re-read chapter I and  be inspired by the prefacing quote  from  Sophocles, Pagnoulle insists  that  chapter XII is the bitter  end: "Pourtant Au-dessous du  val­ can  n'est   pas  l'histoire d'une  promesse; ce  n'est  pas  l'histoire d'une  resurrection. Au-dessous du  volcan raconte Ia fin d'une histoire."
This  argument is unconvincing because so little  attention is paid  to the  form  and intention of  the  text.  The temptation in discussing   Lowry   is  to  confound   biog­ raphy  with  fiction-always to  the detri­ ment  of the  fiction.  Perhaps it is because she has fallen  into  this critical  abyss that  Christine   Pagnoulle   insists    upon    "les ablmes" in Lowry's  work.
David  Markson's Malcolm Lowry's Volcano: Myth, Symbol, Meaning ap­ proaches Under the  Volcano from  an entirely  different perspective, despite  the fact  that   Markson also  offers  a  chapter­ by-chapter discussion  of  the  text.  Mark­ son argues  that  Volcano is a  mythic  text and   that   "by  its  inherently  'spatial' na­  ture  the mythic novel can  define its terms only   gradually,   and   that    process  itself seems   worth   exploring."  Consequently, Markson's study  is an  "inductive investi­ gation,  from   the  inside  out" of  Lowry's masterpiece; it is also a rich, illuminating examination of the  novel  that  transforms the act of criticism  itself into an exciting voyage of discovery. Reading Markson's discussion  of Volcano is like  reading the novel  in that  one gradually enters Lowry's complex fictional world as the "refiexive configurations  [within  the   text]    come into  focus."
During his analysis,  Markson makes many interesting and  helpful points  about Volcano-from   the    identification   of myth and  allusion  or the description of symbol, to the ways in which myth and symbol  function within  the  text.  Images, for example, are  fluid,  constantly shifting
 from  the particular to a wider  resonance of  meaning.   Lowry's   technique,  in  gen­ eral, is incremental, with  meaning gradu­ ally, imperceptibly, expanding  to embody his vision. As with  Dante,  whom  Mark­ son feels to be a major influence, Lowry's  symbols  have  several   concurrent  mean­ ings:    "where   Dante   writes   on   several levels at once,  Lowry  will  draw  parallels  on  several."  Bringing  this  understanding of  Lowry's   imagery   and   symbolism   to bear   upon   the   prohibitionist  poster   in Laruelle's  bedroom,  Markson  elucidates the meaning of the  entire scene  in chap­ ter VII, and  of one of the  novel's  themes
-the  loss, or  perhaps worse,  the  wilful destruction of children.
Markson's interpretation  of classical myth in Volcano is, for me, one of the highlights  of his  book.  Particularly  help­ ful  is his discussion  of  Yvonne  as  a  De­ meter  figure.  The figure  of  Yvonne   has often  been criticized, but  Markson shows the Yvonne-Demeter association to be in­ tegral  to theme  and  image  on  each  nar­  rative   level.   Indeed,   Markson's  critical  achievement  lies in  this  ability  to see the wood  and   the  trees,   the   part   and   the whole.  Thus, Volcano is  not  simply  "la fin  d'une  histoire." According to  Mark­ son, the  tragic  rite  of "timeless, eternally repeated pattern  of  contest,  sparagmos, and  renewal,  must  surely  be  seen  as  one of Under  the  Volcano's own."
Under  the Volcano-"voyage au fond de  nos  ab!mes"  or  "contest,  sparagmos, and   renewal"?  Pagnoulle's  and   Mark­ son's  differing  conclusions are  indicative less of  the  ambiguity within  Under  the Volcano than   of  the  limitations of  des­ criptive or  narrowly  thematic criticism.  These   conclusions  are   representative of reader  response over  the  thirty-one years since  the  novel's  publication. But  Mark­ son's  book  is  particularly  praiseworthy, for  he  takes one  back  to  the  novel  itself with  all  its inexhaustible beauty.

SHERRILL E. GRACE


III

BOOKS IN REVIEW



NIGHTMARE

CLARK  BLAISE,  Lunar   Attractions. Doubleday,
$I 1.50.

Lunar  Attractions is Clark  Blaise's first novel. His two previous works, A North American Education  ( I973)   and  Tribal Justice    ( I974), are   collections  of  short fiction. Blaise's predilection for the short story  form   is  obvious  in  Lunar  Attrac­ tions:    the   novel   is  loosely   structured, comprising a series of  episodes in  the life of  David   Greenwood.
In  Lunar   Attractions, Clark  Blaise's disturbing vision  is  vividly,  even  shock­ ingly    expressed.     The    novel    develops  several  themes  Blaise has explored  in  his short   fiction-the    isolated  individual's search   for  identity,  the  conflict  between  dream and  reality,  the  power  of creative imagination to impose order  on the chaos of   experience.    Readers    familiar   with Blaise's earlier works will recognize David  Greenwood, a  sensitive,  intelligent,  and  above  all imaginative character. In Lunar Attractions, he tells the story of his child­ hood    and    adolescence. The   narrative viewpoint  is  retrospective:   David,   who has  grown   up   to  become  a  writer,   re­ counts and   interprets  incidents from  his early   life.  This  technique, which   Blaise uses  in  many   of   his  short   stories,  con­ tributes to the impression  that  the fiction is largely  autobiographical.
David  spends  his first thirteen years in central Florida, an  outsider  in a closed society.  His  parents are  "Yankees" whose northern speech  and  lifestyle mark  them as aliens  in the American South. David  is a solitary  child,  who lives more in his im­ agination than  in  the "real" world. He  is intelligent and   curious   and   has  a  great  capacity  for  memorization, but  there   is no  order   in  the  knowledge   he  amasses. The world  he sees is chaotic.  At  the  age of  ten,  he  melts  crayons  so  that  all  the colours  run  together, forming  "a  replica

I I 2
 of  [his]   mind   . . . a  repository of  facts and  textures and  colours."
As a child,  David  perceives  his parents not as personalities, but as "contending principles in the  universe." His father, associated  with  the sun, is vital, energetic, colourful. His mother, aligned  with  the moon, is pale, quiet,  mysterious. David's search  for  his  own  place  in  the  universe is presented in  terms  of these  contending principles. On  the  one  hand, he wants  to identify himself  with  his father, the solar, masculine principle; on the other, his mother's lunar, feminine nature exerts  a strong  attraction on  his receptive imagin­ ation.
At age thirteen, David  moves to the "almost northern" city of Palestra, where he   is  less  isolated,  his   intelligence  no longer   unique. In  school,  he  encounters two  students whose  intellects far  surpass his own. One  is an apparent paragon, unfailingly, logically  brilliant, a model  of piety and  industry. The other is an eccen­ tric,  antisocial, radical genius.  David, by comparison, is  unformed,  his  knowledge merely  an  undifferentiated  mass of mem­  orized   information.  Although  he  senses that  "all  affinities must  converge," he has not  yet developed  his creative capacity to impose  order  on experience.
In  Blaise's  fictional   world,  horror and madness are  part  of  the  texture of daily reality.  David  is peculiarly susceptible to such  lunar influences: he  is "on  the  side of fear,  nightmare and  all unanswered things." The  image  he offers  of his adol­ escent  mind   is a  museum display  which depicts a  Bedouin on  a  camel  being  at­  tacked   by  a  Nubian lion.  The  scene  at­  tracts   David    because   it   possesses  "the  quality of  nightmare."
Nightmare and  reality  converge  in  the central  incident  of  David's  adolescence and   of  the   novel.   In  his  dangerous  in­ nocence, David   becomes  embroiled  in  a bizarre  sex-murder. The resolution of  the mystery  coincides  with  David's  discovery

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  his  own  sexual  and  intellectual  iden­ tity.  His  final  understanding of   the  full truth about   Laurel  and   Larry  Zywotko prepares him  to resolve the contention of solar  and  lunar principles within his own personality.
The final  section  of  Lunar  Attractions
is not completely satisfying. After  the sustained suspense  of the central incident, the  brief  episodes  that  make  up  the con­ clusion    seem    choppy  and    disjointed. Nevertheless, the  novel  is  interesting and entertaining.  Blaise displays  a remarkable eye  for  detail   and  great   skill  in  trans­  forming the details he observes  into evoc­ ative  imagery. At its most intense, Lunar Attractions  possesses the  frightening and fascinating quality of  nightmare.

LINDA H.  LAMONT


CAPER & LEGEND

MONICA  HUGHES,    The Ghost   Dance    Caper.
Thomas Nelson,  $7·95·

CHRISTIE HARRis, Mystery at  the  Edge  of Two
Worlds.  McClelland &  Stewart, $8.95.
YVES TROENDLE,  Journey to  the  Sun. Oolichan
Books, $4·95·

PERHAPS  IT WAS INEVITABLE, given  the increasing popularity of collections of  In­ dian   legends,   that    the   culture  of   the North   American  Indian  would   become an  attractive background for  a variety  of Canadian  children's  books.  Two   recent texts  which  incorporate  this  background are   Monica Hughes' The  Ghost  Dance Caper and  Christie Harris' Mystery at the Edge  of Two  Worlds.
Hughes' book is a traditional boy's ad­
venture  tale   with   an   added  twist:   the hero,  Tom, is a  half-breed, the  son  of a totally  unbelievable social climbing white mother and  a  father who  is ashamed of his  Blackfoot   heritage. Thus  Tom faces the  identity crisis  so  popular in  today's
 children's literature.  His  only  confidant, his elderly Blackfoot grandfather, suggests that   he  needs   to  take   part   in  a  ghost dance,  the  traditional Indian  method of discovering one's place in the world, one's uniqueness.  Unfortunately, the dance  is possible only after  Tom steals a "ghost bundle" from  a local  museum, a task accomplished with  ridiculous ease. The dance  itself,  however,  is somewhat  anti­ climactic,   for  all  that   Tom  discovers  is that  he should  not  have  stolen the  ghost bundle    in    the    first    place.    Although Hughes   suggests   in   her   notes   that   the dance    is   authentically   described,  this reader  gets  no  sense  of  the  mystery  and  wonder   involved    in   such   a   ritual.  It simply   becomes   a   device   necessary   to establish the major episode of the book, Tom's return of  the  bundle to  the  mu­ seum  at   the  exact   moment  when   it  is being  robbed. Not  surprisingly,  particu­ larly  for  those  readers familiar  with  the Hardy Boys, Tom  thwarts the  robbery. He  also discovers  his identity in  the  pro­  cess,  after    a   somewhat   ridiculous  en­ counter with  a  bat,  an  animal that  even Tom   admits   is  "not   exactly   a   kosher spirit  symbol  for  an  Indian."
Christie  Harris, unlike  Ms.  Hughes,  is an author who has, over the years, proven her ability  to present the  Indian tradition in  all  its  mystery   and   uniqueness.  Her Secret  in  the  Stlalakum  Wild   is  justly acclaimed  as one of Canada's most mem­ orable  fantasies.  The title, Mystery at the Edge  of Two Worlds,  promises  more  of the  same,  another  tale  which   examines the secrets  just beyond  the  fringes  of the Western  world,  the wonders of the Indian culture. The  first  sentence  of  the  book firmly   supports   such    an   expectation: "'When  storms  stir  the  deep  cold  waters  of the  Northwest Coast  and  gales set the sea  smoking  with   blown  spray,  it's  easy to   believe    that    the    Great   Whirlpool Maker is lurking down  there  with  other strange beings."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Unfortunately, this is not  to be a story of the Great Whirlpool Maker  or of other strange   beings,  although the  first half  of the  book certainly establishes  the context for such an investigation. As the story begins, Lark,  the heroine,  is about  to take a trip  to mysterious Lucy  Island,  a  jour­ ney which  starts  with  a brief  visit  to her grandmother's home  in a  town  which  is, in  fact,  at  the  edge  of two  worlds.  The  description of this small town is very evo­ cative,  and  there  is a truly marvelous  por­ trait  of Winnie, a local artist,  who is often overcome   by  the  spirits  and   bursts  into dance.
When  the actual trip to Lucy Island begins, the reader is ready for a further exploration of such mysteries, a further understanding of  the  secrets  of  the  In­ dian  world.   Inexplicably, the  story  sud­ denly  changes  from  the careful examina­ tion  of  two  worlds  to  a  traditional girl's adventure story,   replete  with  smugglers and   the   R.C.M.P.   Though  Lark   does learn  a great  deal about  her own abilities as a  result  of her  confrontation with  the smugglers  of Lucy Island,  she learns  little about    the   culture   that   permeates  the place.  Thus,  when  the  story  ends  with  a factual account of the life of Lucy, the mysterious  Indian princess  for whom  the island  was named, it is not  the culminat­ ing step  in the  reader's understanding of this culture at  the edge of two worlds:  it is simply  an  appendix.
Yves  Troendle, in  his  Journey  to  the Sun,  does   not   attempt  to  present   the clash between  the Indian and Canadian cultures. Rather he faces the difficult  task of   presenting  Indian  tales   to   a   non­ Indian   audience.  He   approaches   this problem   in  a   unique  manner, choosing to  present, not  a  collection  of  tales,  but a  novel  based  on  Indian  legends,  more specifically   the  myths  of  the  Iroquoian Indians.  His   "novel" tells  the  story  of four  Indian  children's quest  to find  the Land  of the  Sun.  Their search,  however,
 is not simply for a place,  but for the roots of  their   culture,  to  know   not   just  that Sky  makes  life  and   kills  it,  "but why  it does  all  these  things." Thus  the  tale  of creation, traditionally told first in modern collections of Indian legends, is the object of the  quest,  the culmination of the  boys' arduous  journey.
The quest  of Snake  Boy and  his three friends is, of course, successful, and  the children learn  the origin  of the moon,  the sun,  and  man.  They  wander in  the  land of  the  dead,  and  most  importantly,  they come to understand the pattern which governs  all  living  things.  When   they  re­ turn   after   their   three-day  journey  they find   that   generations  have   passed   and that  they now are the sole means of  trans­ mitting the legends  of their  tribe. And,  as the novel ends, Snake  Boy is beginning to tell  the  story  of his  long  quest.
Troendle presents  his Indian legends in a  remarkably  undiluted  fashion,  includ­ ing  even  a  scene  in  which   the  children are  reborn  after  their  flesh is literally  cut from    all   of   their    bones.   Though  the actual acknowledgement of  sources  is an­  noyingly  brief  and  somewhat inaccurate, Troendle does  use  these sources,  present­ ing  a  series  of  legends  which  suggest  the uniqueness of  the  Iroquoian culture.
The publishers at Oolichan Books have indicated that the first edition of Journey to  the  Sun   has  sold  out   and   that   they anticipate  publishing  a   second   edition with   new  illustrations. If this  is so,  the book  will  undoubtedly be  even  more  at­ tractive than  it already is.

J. KIERAN  KEALY

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



DEUX ENFANCES

THERESE    RENAUD,    Une    memoire    dechiree.
L'arbre HMH.

ALICE   BRUNEL-ROCHE,    La    haine    entre    les dents.  Lemeac.

Une  memoire dechiree  est non seulement un document social interessant mais la confession   touchante d'une enfance  de­ chin  e,   le   cheminement  interieur   d'un  etre  en quete  de son identite et la celebra­ tion  de  ses noces  avec  la  vie  dans  la  lu­ miere.
Ce   n cit,   divis·e  en   trois   parties   qui s'achevent par  un epilogue sous forme d'interview, nous retrace le Quebec des annees  1930-1940  pliant sous le poids des interdits. Nous  y voyons evoluer la societe
ecclesiastique a travers  religieuses,  pretres
et  vieilles  filles  qui,  loin  d'etre  accueil­ lants  et  ouverts aux  autres,  s'adonnent a la  mechancete,  .a  la   haine   et   meme   a
la  jalousie,  detruisant et  ridiculisant l'amour. Dans   cet  univers   de  "bondieu­ series,"  "de  contraintes et  d'inhibitions," Therese Renaud, si eprise  de  liberte,  de curiosite,  d'independence    et    d'amour, souffre  et  se  sent  particulierement frus­ tree.  Ainsi,  malgre  des  elans  et  une  cer­ taine 11evolte envers  ces adultes si hostiles, elle  se  replie  sur  elle-meme. La  presence si  pesante  de sa mere  a egalement ralenti son enthousiasme tout en entravant son evolution psychologique.
La  troisieme  partie nous  relate  sa  libe­ ration. C'est  la coupure avec ce milieu et ce  passe  si  vide  d'amour, si  mesquin,   si avilissant.  Nous   assistons   alors   au   che­ minement de  !'auteur  qui  a  toujours eu comme  "seule 11eelle preoccupation," "l'e­ coute   de   son   demon  interieur."  C'est  ainsi  qu'apres  avoir   traverse des  deserts de  solitude,  d'angoisse et  de  souffrance
elle est arrivee a une  harmonie interieure
Ienifiante.  "Pour aborder .a une  nouvelle rive,  il faut, .a la  limite,  s'etre  noye  etre
sans   reference,"  dit-elle    et   elle   ajoute
 "sauf  le cotoiement de  la  souffrance qui est en soi un maitre, rarement une Devolu­ tion est realisee."  Pour  voir  jaillir l'aurore
il  faut   traverser  la  nuit,   mourir  a  soi­
meme,  changer en  profondeur. Cette quete  de soi amene  .a mieux  se connaitre
et se decouvrir.
Certes  Therese Renaud a fait  des  ren­
contres   merveilleuses   qui   l'ont  aidee   a
accomplir cette  traversee  de  la  nuit  mais
elle  conclue   "le   grand   maitre,  c'est   la
vie." Les relations humaines, en effet,  ont ere source d'enrichissement, de  joies mais ce ne sont  pas les longues  discussions  qui lui  ont  apporte le  plus  de  paix,  ce  sont plutot  ces regards, ces sourires  d'un jour. Ainsi  lorsque  dans  le couvent si  austere de son enfance une inspectrice de  passage lui sourit, elle declare "je me suis sentie comprise,   acceptee. Ce  precieux sourire me  reconciliait avec  moi-meme." De meme,  le regard  que  lui  a  porte un  jour le  medecin  alors  qu'elle   etait  en  depres­
sion:  "Nous  nous  sommes  .a peine  parle,
mais  dans  l'echange de  nos  regards,  ce
medecin a tout  compris  demon desarroi." Artiste,  vivant   pour   l'amour de  l'art, Therese  Renaud  est   aussi   cette  jeune femme  attentive et  enthousiaste qui  s'est
enfin  realisee  elle-meme, ayant  reussi   .a
acquerir  cette    independance   psycholo­
gique  qui  lui  a  permis  de  mieux  s'aimer elle-meme   et  d'aimer les  autres. Certes, les artistes  vivent  souvent  dechin  s,
est difficile d'acquerir une  paix interieure, mais  desormais   Therese est  cette   enfant du  jour et de la lumiere qui  par  la simpli­ cite de son style, la sincerite et la chaleur de ses paroles  entraine le lecteur emu  sur le chemin  de la re-naissance.
La haine entre les dents d'Alice Brunel­ Roche    est   l'histoire   extremement  tou­ chante et  bouleversante d'une  existence dechiree.
Cette  histoire  nous est revelee  a travers
un Journal, celui  de Marie-Noelle. Celui­
ci nous est presente par  l'amie  du  frere de
Marie-Noelle qui, avant de partir pour la

BOOKS IN REVIEW



guerre, a remis  une  partie  du  Journal de sa soeur a Nana.
Ce Journal nous  ressuscite la vie d'une
adolescente issue d'une famille  pauvre de Montreal  qui   essaie   d'echapper  a  ce milieu  si rude  et si ignorant.
Marie-Noelle est l'histoire d'un  etre aimant qui eprouvait "un immense  besoin d'etre aimee  ... beroee  ... consoiee"  et qui loin de recevoir  de I'amour, a ete mas­ sacree,  rejetee,  meprisee,  haie  tant par  les siens  que  par  ses collegues  de  classe  ou ses  professeurs.   Soeur  Saint-Jean  fut   la seule a lui redonner confiance. Le recit de son   annee  dans   ce   couvent  de   riches "bourgeoises" est  dechirant. Les humilia­ tions, la mechancete, la cruaute, le mepris de ses compagnes l'amenent a se mepriser,
a se  revolter, a se  murer   en  elle-meme.
"Je   ne  suis  pas  mechante.  Les  circons­
tances  ont  fait  de  moi  une  Marie-Noelle
pleine  de  revolte,  frondeuse jusqu'a  !'in­
solence."
Parfois  alors  elle  pleure,  seule:  "Si  on savait   que  je  ne  suis  pas  une  exception mais  une  multitude," mais  personne   ne sait.
Lorsqu'a  la  mort   de  ses  parents  son parrain la  prend  a  sa charge  avec  affec­ tion,  elle lui avoue: "Si  tu savais  parrain comme  c'est bon de se sentir aime." Mais cette  affection exceptionnelle est supplan­
tee  par  l'amertume qu'elle  ressent  face a
la   mechancete  et   le  mepris   qu'on  lui
temoigne. Alors cet etre  si tendre, si epris d'amour, si beau,  au fond,  decide  de vepondre   a  la  haine   par   la  vengeance. Depuis son adolescence elle aime  Patrice qui  aime  Rose-Aimee et reciproquement. Mais  Marie-Noelle a decide qu'un jour Patrice serait  a elle. II entreprend sa me­ decine.  Celle-ci  suit ses pas.  "En  choisis­ sant   la  medecine,  j'avais   une  idee  bien arretee: reduire Patrice, m'en faire aimer, me l'attacher pour  la vie."
Alors  la  haine   s'empare d'elle   et  de­ vient   plus  intense   encore  lorsqu'elle  ap­  prend   le mariage de  Patrice et  de  Rose-

116
 Aimee.  Cependant Patrice avoue  son amour .a  Marie-Noelle mais  il lui  est  im­ possible de  rompre son engagement  avec Rose-Aimee.  La    jalousie jette   alors Marie-Noelle  "dans  une    fureur   inex­ primable" et  comme   "la   haine  ne  con­
nait  pas  de  frontieres" elle  attente a la
vie de  sa  rivale  arretee a temps  par  Pa­
trice  qui  condamne son  geste  et  la  ren­ voie. Sa  vie est desormais brisee. L'hallu­ cination, le  vertige   s'emparent  d'elle   et c'est son incarceration en hopital psychia­ trique ou  elle  met  fin  a  "cette jeune  vie de lumiere" en  se suicidant. La  voila  de­ sormais  "plongee dans  le silence d'une in­ terminable  nuit" d'ou  le lecteur  sort  lui­ meme peniblement.
Le  nature!et la simplicite de  l'ecriture
ne font  que  rendre le r·ecit plus  poignant et  l'on  ne  saurait oublier cette  vive  ado­ lescente   morte de  n'avoir  pas  aime,   de n'avoir pas  ete aimee.

MYRIAM  RECURT


MILLENARIAN RIEL

THOMAS   FLANAGAN, Louis  'David' Riel, 'Pro­ phet  of the   New World.'  Univ. of  Toronto Press,  $15.oo.

RARELY DOES THE ENDING of a book SO succinctly summarize  its  author's intent as the  final  paragraph of Thomas  Flana­ gan's    interesting  and   important   book, Louis 'David' Riel:

All  psychiatrists and most  historians who have   written  about  Riel   have   treated   his prophetic mission   as  a  symptom of  mental disorder. Indeed, Dr.   Lachapelle's  original diagnosis of  'frustrated ambition' and  'delu­ sions   of   grandeur'   explains  a   great   deal. But  it  does  not  explain everything. Riel  was acting in  much the same way  as many  other millenarian   leaders.  Faced  with   the   anni­ hilation of  his  people's way  of  life,  he  tried  to  create a  new  identity, a  new  life,  and  a new   future.   His   insanity-if    it   may   be called  that-was  a  message of  hope. Com­ mon   conceptions  of   what  is  normal  may

BOOKS IN REVIEW



suffice for normal times, but  they do not encompass the  range of  human  response to absurdity. We  need  a broader view  of sanity to  comprehend the  actions of  men  in  dark times.

Flanagan's book  differs  from   most  pre­ vious works in its territory by moving the interest   away  from  the  two  Metis  rebel­ lions  on  which  even  biographers of Riel have  in  the  past  tended   largely  to focus attention. He is concerned with  an aspect of Riel-that of  the "prophet" and  mil­ lenia!   heretic -which   up   to   now   has been considered mainly  for its bearing  on whether Riel was actually insane  and how far,  if this  was the  case, his lack  of  men­ tal  balance may  have  affected  his  politi­  cal leadership of the  Metis  and hence  the somewhat irrational course  of  the  North­ west Rebellion of 1885.
Flanagan does  not  commit  himself finally on the actual issue of Riel's  sanity. What he  does  point  out  is that  Riel  did at  times  think  of himself  as a prophet in the   sense  of  a  man   specially   favoured with  divine  confidences, and  that  he  did also develop  a millenarian view of history in which  he saw himself  presiding over a "New   Rome" and   over  the  creation  in the New World  of a "fifth  empire" which would  replace the  decaying "fourth"  or British   Empire,  based   on   exploitation, with  a  promised   realm  of peace  without too   much    freedom;  for,   as   Flanagan points  out:

Today's   left-wing  radicals   may    wish    to claim  him   as   a  spiritual  ancestor  because he  struck  out   against  the   'system', but   his own   political  philosophy was  so  far   to  the right that it has  no place in  the  Canadian political spectrum, even  in  its  own  day.

Riel's  political  master,  in so far  as he had one, was the  notoriously reactionary ultramontanist, Bishop  Bourget.
The  attempt to  follow  the  course  of Riel's  religious  musings  and  of the visions he claimed to have received has taken Flanagan  into  areas   relatively   neglected
 by previous  biographers. He  has  had  the advantage of  studying a  group of  newly discovered  early  poems by Riel  which  re­ flect his besetting youthful guilts  and  the longings that  led him away  from othodox religiosity  in  the  direction of  something resembling  a direct and mystical relation­ ship  with  the  deity.
Flanagan has also investigated very thoroughly the  crucial  years  between  the two rebellions, the years when Riel acted eccentrically  enough   to  be  admitted  to two different mental institutions and dur­ ing  which  he  developed  the  vision  of  a new  world   whose  practical  foundations he  sought   to  establish  during  the  tense weeks in  1885  between  the  beginning of the  Northwest Rebellion  and  its collapse after  the capture of  Batoche by General Middleton's column.  And  he  has  turned  up some clues which suggest  that  Riel, as well as Gabriel  Dumont and  perhaps in­ dependently   of   him,   may   in   the   late r87o's  and  early  188o's  have  been  trying to forge an alliance of Indians and  Metis aimed  at a general uprising  in the  Cana­ dian  prairies.
Such a treatment has inevitably resulted
in  apparent  distortions of  our   view  of events  which  are  in  fact  complementary to  those of writers  on  Riel  and  his times who are more  concerned with  the  politi­ cal  aspects  of his career. This  is  particu­ larly  the case  with  the  Northwest Rebel­  lion  of   r885;   from  Flanagan's  account one gets little sense of  the extent to which the   political   despair   of  militant  Metis  like  Gabriel   Dumont  had   developed  an insurrectionary situation even  before  Riel arrived, and  therefore of the  real  impor­ tance  of the  latter's rnillenarianism as an inflammatory factor. At the same time, Flanagan's arguments do  show  that,  un­ less we regard  all millenarian  enthusiasts as mad,  there  is an explanation for Riel's political  actions  that does  not  require us to assume him to have been insane  as well as exalted.  After  all,  we have  long  given


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



up  the  idea  of  William  Blake  as a  mad­ man,   and   yet  Riel   uttered   few   things more    extravagant  than    the   Prophetic Books.   Riel   may   have   had   periods   of mental  disorder, and   even   of   what   is generally considered  madness,  but  to  try and   explain away  his  public  actions   as those   of  a  lunatic  shows,  as  Flanagan demonstrates,  a   shallow   view   of   both Riel's  crowded  and  fascinating inner  life and  of the  actions  it inspired.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


FANTASY, VOID

ADRIENNE   CHOQUETTE,   La   coupe    vide.  Les
Presses  Laurentiennes.
ALAIN  PONTAUT,   La  sainte   alliance. Lemeac.
THOMAS   PAVEL,   Le   miroir   persan.    Editions
Quinze, $7.20.
ANDRE  CARPENTIER,   L'aigle valera  a travers [e soleil.  L'arbre HMH.

DENYS  CHABOT, L'Eldorado des  glaces. L'arbre
HMH.

La  coupe  vide  by Adrienne Choquette is a classic.  Published originally  in  1948, it tells the story of four  adolescent  boys who are influenced for life by one halcyon summer  when   an  attractive "older  wo­ man" enters   their  little  circle.  This  new edition by Les  Presses  Laurentiennes  in­ cludes   selections   of   the  reviews  of  the book at  its first  publication, a fascinating appendix permitting an evaluation of the novelist's   achievement.  Critics   in   1948 were apparently most struck  by the auda­ city    of    the    theme,    whereas    modern readers are perhaps more impressed  by Adrienne Choquette's wholesome  seren­ ity. Today, when  the search  for  freedom
-literary, political  and  spiritual-con­
tinues to dominate the French-Canadian novel,  it is refreshing to read  the work of an author who continually points  the way to  freedom and  shows  that  she  has achieved it. She  attributes to  one  of her

118
 characters   the    reflection     that     "those whom" he  "admired most  ... were  peo­ ple  with  a definite aim,  capable of  judg­  ing for themselves, of escaping tutelage, of action, in  fact." Such  a  theme  seems  ra­ ther  mild  to have provoked such horrified  predictions as  "Here we are  engaged   on the  dizzy slope  which  will lead  us, unless someone  attempts a  reaction, to a litera­ ture incompatible with  our Christian cul­ ture." Yet,  if one  examines the  contem­ porary    tendency  to  compare   Adrienne Choquette   to   Mauriac,   one   perceives  that  what  appalled the critics of  the  Du­  plessis  era  was  less that   she  showed   the way  to freedom than  than she  revealed  a bondage from   which  escape   was  neces­ sary. Mauriac,  writing of a ritual-ridden, stagnant  bourgeoisie, superficially similar  to that  of  Choquette's novels, writes from  within, showing the apparent inevitability and   permanency  of   his   empty    world, whereas    the   author  of   La   coupe   vide opens   the   door   wide   to  a  life  free   of neurosis,  manipulation, tutelage and taboos.
This is her  most enduring achievement and  the source  of her charm as a novelist, but    her    insistence    on    self-fulfillment partly justifies the fear of her critic who foresaw  "the floodgates  opening" to "a literature  of  the   subconscious  and   the void"; indeed  the  search  for  the  freedom she   and   others   recommend  has   taken many  of her  literary successors, for  better or   for   worse,   in   just   those   directions. Much contemporary fiction  is concerned with   the   act   of  writing,  with   bondage, magic  and  crime,  exploring the limits of reality   and   the  possibilities  for  new  di­ mensions of a freer  reality  in  those  areas  of   consciousness  normally   censored   as illogical,   mad,   fantastic,   dreamlike.  In techniques and  word-play borrowed from  the   theatre and   the  cinema  with   their  devices   of  masks,  mirrors,  masquerades and  doubles, suitable to Hegelian dialec­ tic, all  the  possibilities  of self,  the  simul-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



taneous   might-have-beens and   the  may­ yet-bes,  are  explored  in  a  search,  often tragic,  for  that  vital  space  in  which  the individual and society could breathe more freely,  enter   into   true  contact  with  life freely  lived.
In   La  sainte   alliance, Alain   Pontaut takes the most  enduring of French Cana­ dian  images,  that  of  the  young  girl  who is Quebec, and  recounts the  story  of her marriage  in   terms   of   tutelage, exhaus­  tively  exploring  every  aspect  of  the  alli­ ance-romantic    love,   sexual   relations,  property   settlements,  power    plays   be­ tween  allied   families   and   the  complica­ tions of divorce.  This  is, as Godbout said of  one  of his own  novels,  "the story  of a rupture between  human beings  who love each  other but  who  at  the same  time  are victims   of  a  'situation'  in   the   Sartrian sense of the word." For  Pontaut, they are victims  of  the  essential   brutality and  in­ evitable   alienation  of   tutelage,   applied  here  to an emotional evocation of  the his­ tory of Quebec from  the Duplessis  era  to the  eve  of  the  P.Q.  election. As  in  his previous  novel La Tutelle, madness is the human  condition  of  both   guardian and ward.   During one  of  the  couple's quar­ rels,  the  beautiful  helpless  Kay  looks  at her  husband,  the  fascinating but  capri­ cious John Canne, and  is "staggered, overcome by the  absurd :  not  merely  did she have  a guardian but  a maniac guard­ ian  who  didn't protect her  but  who  de­ liberately maddened her  because he him­  self was mad  ... with  the false serenity  of a  lunatic. Or   was  she  wrong?  Was  she alone   in  hell?"  Books  so  explicitly   and overtly   about   Quebec-Canada  relations  have  become  rarer in  the  197o's  than  in
1965 when  Godbout said  "There are things,  events,  facts  that  a French  Cana­ dian   no  longer   wishes  to  explain"; but whether  this  barely  disguised   "explana­ tion" will  satisfy  anyone  remains to  be seen. It will doubtless please  (but  perhaps bore?)   ardent  P.Q.   supporters. It  will
 probably   infuriate  ardent  federalists. It may well disappoint admirers of Alain Pontaut, for  its imagery  is less universal, its command of word-play less dazzling than   those  of  his   previous   works.  Yet there   are  passages  of  wit  and   humour, there are passages of such skilfully built climax  that   the  reader is outraged, and there  is always the pure  fun  of "spotting" key figures and  events  from  Quebec's history  through the  flimsy fictional  cam­ ouflage.
Thomas Pavel's  hero  of  his first  work of  fiction,  Le  miroir   persan,  reads  in  a secret  library  the secret  thoughts of  Leib­ niz  and  his  pupil   Aloysius,  "un  person­  nage    non    depourvu   de    traits    pitto­ resques." Born  in Hanover in 1665, Aloy­ sius   records   in   a   secret   journal,   dis­ covered   by  Louis  in  a  secret   "coffret," how he discussed with  Leibniz  such prop­ ositions  as  "every individual soul  has  the property of  reflecting the  entire  universe  in   itself,"   and   the   details   of  "possible worlds  and  their  relationship with  God." Aloysius falls in  love with  a girl  who  be­ comes  a  witch  and  disappears in  a  suc­ cessful  ( ?)  attempt to  reach   other  pos­ sible worlds.
In  the  second  story -for  his  book  is less a novel  than  a series of stories  linked by   the   indefatigable  Louis,   reader    of secret   and   rare    documents-Louis   is found  on a modern university  campus in France  at  the  time of the student revolu­ tion.  There he  is encouraged  to  write  a thesis on "what cannot be said" and  the significance  of the  silence which  a Grand Inquisitor used  to interpret as "the  sound of heresy."  Later, he  reads  a  play  about  a head  of state who quarrels with his own mirror image,   and   becoming   jealous  of his  sosie's  subversive  activities, organizes a  plot  against  himself.  The final  story  is Louis' own invention, for  having had  his learned articles  rejected, yet "finding that he still had  a confused desire  to say some­ thing,  he  tried   literature." This  tale  re-

119

BOOKS IN REVIEW



counts  the adventures of a man  who acquires the  persian  mirror  of the title, a possession which  enables  him,  when  torn in  two  by contradictory passions,  to lead two separate lives simultaneously. Pavel thus seriously and playfully explores the logical and  paradoxical consequences  of certain philosophical notions,  perplexing and  entertaining the  reader  by his  intel­ lectual  puzzles, and  by a dizzying attitude to  space   and   time,   taking  us  from   the middle ages in the  near  East  to  Windsor,  Ontario, last  week,  and  from  reality  to pure  fantasy  and   magic,  the  whole  kept under  a  disciplined control  by  a  literary  and  craftsmanlike style. This is a delight­ ful and  elegant book.
Andre Carpentier tells a good yarn. He writes   as  if  he   were   sitting   around a campfire making  up  folk  tales,  to  thrill his listeners  with suspense, violence, black magic   and   dramatic  atmosphere. As  if drunk on  words,  he  invents  fables  from his reading and  his experience of the con­ temporary Quebec  "scene" with  its  dy­ namic  enthusiasms and  its beloved oaths.  The  numerous allusions  to  writers   and painters  give  the   impression   of  having
been  added later,  as do the  last chapters,
 Denys  Chabot's  L'Eldorado des  glaces consists of stories  "dictated" by a "gentle lunatic." The  book  begins  with  specific references to  Nelligan's Le  vaisseau  d'or, its  shipwrecked  crew  of  Degout, Raine, Nevrose.  A densely written novel, with  no dialogue, it recounts, through five succes­ sive narrators, the foundation of  a sort  of ideal  society  or  communal  hell  (accord­ ing   to  the   viewpoint  of  the  narrator), and   its  downfall. The  love  of   Oberlin, "nordic  prince   of  legend,"  for  Julie   Ia Metisse     runs 	lyrically	and 	strangely through the  whole.  Reality   flickers,  the essential  dramas  remain obscure,   as  the narrators with  their  poetic  and  legendary names  pour  out  fears,  fantasies of orgies, sadistic   violence,   and   the   author  (dis­ guised)   makes   numerous  reflections   on writing in  general and   this  sort  of  writ­ ing in particular, contemplating the mar­ gin  between  dreams and reality, endlessly exploring the  literary  possibilities  of  the semi-subconscious. The whole is linked  by some  fine  passages  about the  mighty  sea­ son  of  frost  which  is  both   the  decor  of much  of  the  book  and  the  psychological  climate  of   the   failed   Eldorado  of   the title.

perhaps to give a literary  varnish  suitable to  the  published novel  form.  In  this,  his
second  work  of  fiction,  L'aigle  volera  a
travers  le  soleil,  he  recounts   the  adven­
tures of a French Canadian living in Strasbourg who  takes a detour to a mysterious  village  where  he becomes pos­ sessed by a witch.  The result  is a series of dramatic  episodes   complete   with   innu­ merable cats,  several  motor  cars  (colour  coded  according to magical significance) , and   various    lurid   characters,  all   con­ trolled  in a science fiction manner by the witch.  There  is  much  talk  of reality  and  dreams,  their    opposition,   their    inter­ changeability, the  hero  has a double,  and demonstrative pronouns play their  part  in the  drama.

120
 C. RUBINGER


A RELIGIOUS THING

MORLEY CALLAGHAN,  No  Man's  Meat  & "The
Enchanted Pimp."  Macmillan, $9·95·

DESPITE  EDMUND WILSON's  DESCRIPTION of "No Man's Meat" as "a  small  master­ piece," readers may  question the  reprint­ ing  of  this  1931  story  with  Morley   Cal­
laghan's  most   recent  novella,   The   En­
chanted Pimp.  One  good  reason  is  that both  fictions  treat man's loss of  woman. In   "No  Man's  Meat,"  a   wife   grown weary  of  her  tidy  life  opts  for  non-con­ formity  and    the   companionship  of   a glamorous female friend. This  ending has been  prepared by  early  references to  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



wife's  "boy's   body,"   the  friend's  repug­ nance  at  having sexual  intercourse with the  man   (which she  does in  payment of a rash  bet), and  the  affinity  between  the women -revealed  through bird  imagery  associated   with  both-in  their   need  to fly   beyond    limiting   relationships.  But aside  from  its  subject,  made   impressive by the  original date  of  publication, "No  Man's Meat" contains little  that  deserves Wilson's  praise. Indeed, the dialogue is unconvincing (as in much of Callaghan's work)   and   the   narration often  disturb­ ingly awkward. Witness  the story's second sentence:

Beddoes,  sitting up,  looked  out  of  the  oppo­ site  window over   the  dark  lake  which   was never   blue  from   the  cottage  window in  the morning sun,  even   without  a  shadow from  the  big  rock  across   the  water.

The   Enchanted   Pimp,  which  constitutes the  other  four-fifths of the  book,  poses a complementary  version  of  man's loss of
woman.  Edmund J. Dubuque, who  pro­
cures   affluent   but    temporarily   embar­
rassed   women    for   visiting   professional men,   loses  the   "gentle  golden   whore" Ilona Tomory when she ceases to be suffi­ ciently   non-conformist. Thus  Callaghan twists the thematic premise  of  "No  Man's Meat." He  also  twists  a  cliched  plot  de­ vice:    the   compassionate  prostitute,   so often  used  as a  narrative end  in itself, is merely  the catalyst for  the  real  narrative, the enchanting of a pimp  by a whore  far below his own commercial milieu.  And above  this milieu  and  narrative, as always in Callaghan, the  real  story  hovers.
That story  has  to do  with  materialism and  magic.  The former is conveyed  par­ ticularly   through  a   motif   of  fur.   Du­  buque's first  client   prostitutes  herself  to make  a  payment on  her  fur  coat; Du­  buque  himself  longs  for  a  fur  hat  when he is poor,  and  flaunts his  expensive  hat  and  fur-collared coat  after becoming suc­ cessful.   Ilona's  unique   sensuousness   is largely   associated  with   her   mink   coat,
 which she leaves behind  when fleeing to Mexico  with  Sills, the  disgraced son of a wealthy    family.    Immediately  prior    to that,  she has  used  the  coat  to  warm  her dying  mother, after  all other  attempts at comfort have failed.  The  fact  that  Ilona's coat is really an illusion, a shabby relic frequently taped   underneath to  preserve its facade of elegance,  makes Callaghan's point   about   the   limits   of   materialism, limits which stress the need for magic. Dubuque himself,   recognizing  the  need, has long  been  an  amateur  magician who regrets   his  inability  to   become   profes­ sional.  His  failure, quite   aside  from   the question  of talent, resides in his tie to the material realm.  A sceptic  who knows that  magic  is merely illusion,  he is reluctant to believe  what  he  thinks  he  sees in  Ilona. At one  point  she  calls  him  Caliban, em­ phasizing  both  his  vulgarity and  his mis­ use of extra-material forces. But he comes to believe in her  powers, in the "magnetic promise" associated  with  the coat  she wears:   his loss of  her  at  the  end  is  the loss of an object  of belief.
Much   of   the   preceding  terminology, not   to  mention    the   concern  with   ma­ terialism  and  magic,  encourages a  relig­ ious    interpretation.  Other    encourage­ ments  abound. Many  of  the  characters, unsure   of  life  in  general  and  of  them­ selves in particular, suffer  from  the  lone­ liness that  Dubuque  feels.  Moreover, the central  characters   are   all   crippled  or wounded: Dubuque  has  a right  foot  de­ formed  by polio;  at one point  he is beaten  by  hired   thugs;   Ilona   hurts  her   knee falling  from  a  car  when  she  first  enters  Dubuque's  life;  the  second  distinct  stage in their  relationship begins  with  another hurt knee, when  Dubuque kicks Sills with his   specially   made    (and   heavy)    shoe; Ilona's  mother  dies;   and   Ilona   is   ulti­ mately  murdered, standing, a knife in her back.  Into   this  setting   Callaghan  intro­ duces hints of world  religions. Dubuque's first  sexual   experience  was   with   a  girl


I2I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



named  Eva; his furrier has a dog named Thor; Sills,  a  child   of  luxury,   pursues ascetic   eastern    religions.   Most   impor­ tantly,   Callaghan   gives  Ilona-in  Du­ buque's  eyes-Christ-like  qualities. He has "an illumination" about  her, sees her working "gentle benediction" among  "the  lame,  the  halt,  and  the  blind," forgiving  sins:  "she  could  make  a man  feel that  no matter what   he  had   done  he  could   be excused  and  comforted." In  her absence, he  longs for  her  most  at  Christmas, and he  sympathizes when  her  ancestry  is doubted by  sceptics.  Even  the  image  of her   death  approximates  Christ's.  After her  death, Dubuque's sense of loss  com­ pletes  the  pattern. Without an object  for his  faith, he  is a  lonely  member   of  the economic  middle   class   who   cannot  be comforted  by  his   pseudo-respectability. He  had  sent  money, during  her  earlier  absence,   to  improve some  poor  family's Christmas,   a   charitable  act   performed anonymously so  that-one infers -he would   not   have   to  deal   directly   with those in need. At the end there is no suggestion  that  Dubuque will learn  to emulate Ilona's Christian capacity to deal directly   with   human  suffering, but   at least he has learned to mourn the world's loss.
This  is not new ground  for Morley Callaghan, and  some readers  of The  En­ chanted   Pimp  will  wonder   why  he  per­ sists in  reworking subjects  he has  treated before.  One  explanation is that he is still trying  to get  them  right,  and  at least one reader   believes  he  is getting  there.  This time  around, there  are  complexities and economies   that   seemed  lacking   in  such earlier  books as The  Loved  and the  Lost. There is more frankness  at  the same  time as there  is more human uncertainty in his treatment  of  a  favorite   theme,  the  flesh and  the spirit.  "If fucking  can't be a  re­ ligious    thing,"   Ilona    asks    Dubuque, "what can  be religious?" Out  of context, this  sounds   comic,   but  Callaghan  con-


I22
 veys its  seriousness  and  much   of  its  im­ portance. The co-existence of fleshly  and spiritual demands outlasts youth  and even middle  age.   Upon  finishing   The   En­ chanted Pimp,  readers will  recall  a  not­  ably  gratuitous detail in a  description of the  bar  used  by hookers  to  make  contact with  their  patrons. The  lounge  is popu­ lated  by drug  dealers,  pimps,  undercover detectives, university sociologists, friendly  neighborhood folk, the hookers; and,  "An elderly   novelist  who  had  once  been  fa­ mous  sat  by  himself,  trying   to  overhear conversations at  tables  nearby." Listening to the  main  theme.
RON MILES


GREEK RESTAURANT

GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,  Mermaids and  Jkons: A  Greek   Summer. Anansi, $5.95.
THERE  IS A  NICE  GREEK  RESTAURANT  we like to go to. The walls are  painted white with  bright   rugs  thrown over  them  and the waiters  are alluring with that straight­ backed    sexual    arrogance   of    Mediter­ ranean  men.    The   hors   d'oeuvres  are wonderful but  the  entrees are,  well, a  bit boiled,  a  steamy  reminder  that   it  really is raining  outside.  So  we accept the  first layer  of  hospitality and  go  home  a  little hungry   with   our   small   warm   bulge  of Greece.
This is exactly  what  Gwendolyn  Mac­ Ewen  has delivered in her first non-fiction book, Mermaids and  Ikons, recollections of  a  Greek   summer.  MacEwen is  more  than   a mere  grecophile. But  in  this  slim book she has given  us the  undigested sur­ face  of an  obvious  pilgrimage.
Perhaps MacEwen, l'etranger in  spite of marriage and  obvious  scholarship, has frozen  on the threshold of that  complex eternity, fearing that   the  prerogatives of the  stranger in  a strange land  do  not  in­ clude   the  probing of  its  mysteries.  The
result  is a  succession  of  casual  portraits

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of people, places, and ideas that are so undeveloped that they become almost patronising. "This is good,  this  is good" is almost  a failure of will, and  the absence of critical  judgment leaves  the  characters flat. And we all know, having  suckled  our tragedies,  that   the   Greeks   are   large   in their  virtues  and  their  flaws.

What  particular  systems   that gypsy  wo­ men   worked  out   among  themselves  didn't really   interest  me.   What  had   caught   my attention  was   the   fact   that   although  that particular  tzigana  had   lowered  her   voice in  a kind  of  whine to ask for  my  help,  her head, nevertheless, had  been  held  very  high.

She has perhaps forgotten that  the poet or  historian is never  a  trespasser,  even  in her  own  husband's ancestral house.  The eye, ever  busy behind  the  mask, is always outside and  always burdened with the obligations of observation. MacEwen  tells of her act of hubris in penetrating the exclusive  male  sanctuary of  the  altar  in a small  Greek  Orthodox church and  her subsequent painful collision  with  a  lamp of holy oil:
 absence,  but  somehow fails  to  be.  It is partly   the   handicap  of  a   poet   writing prose. Poetry can  be written with  the skin and  the mind. Good  prose is a lot of guts, on or off the  page.
The  poet's  fear  of falling,  of damaging
words on the stones  of another culture, is best  expressed  in  her  verse :

We  would  paint the  universe the  colours of our   minds   and   flirt   with   death,  but
Whether we  dance or fall  or  kneel,  we fall
On  stones.

She  has  told  us "Greece presents  a  very real challenge  to whoever goes there -a challenge  to do more,  to be more,  to  bet­ ter  the  present  moment in  whatever  way is  possible,  to  improvise, to  expand.  To get things off the ground" and  then  takes us around a closed circle up to those little puffs of Shelleyan  cloud above  the Acrop­  olis, into  the  sea  where Icarus dared to fall, and  back  again  to  the  little  roomful  of  women  knitting. In   this  case,  less is not   more.   We   are   left   with   a   larger  hunger.


My   hair    is   still   quite  oily,   even   after several shampoos, but  it's all  right. God  was not  displeased because I invaded the  Holy of   Holies.  On    the   contrary I  have   been anointed.

But that  annunciation is still only a threshold, and  somehow  she lacks the energy,   the  Greek   energy,   to  take  hold and  make  large  her  own  questions which are  explicit  in  the  title of the  book, Mer­ maids  and  Ikons. It promises  a  physical and   intellectual  free  fall  into  the  com­ plexities   of  a  culture  on  fire   with   the abrasive  energy  of a heathen  past and  an intense  modem Christianity.
For all their  history,  the Greeks  are  the
real existentialists; all that  fire and  beauty is consumed in the moment, now, so powerful  that  the  past  and  future are obliterated  in   the   pure    joy  or   intense tragedy  of being. This  is the energy Mac­ Ewen   perceives,   even   sometimes  in   its
 LINDA  ROGERS











REGINALD EYRE WATTERS
1912- 1979

Scholar, teacher,  friend.

He  left Canadian literature in his debt. We mourn his  loss  and honour his memory.



123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



BONE-STRUCTURES

TOM  WAYMAN,  Free  Time: Industrial   Poems.
Macmillan, $4·95·
PATRICK    LANE,    Albino    Pheasants.   Harbour
Publishing, $2.95.
IF WE GAVE WAYMAN  A CHANCE to change the  world  I  think  it  would  be safe in his hands. He  came  out  of the radical  6o's a radical, though  I think it's more accurate and  less typecasting to call him  a man  of common sense.  The social consciousness, hatred of  inequality, is in  the  bones. So is the  vision -what these poems  uphold and   recommend  (hazy  though   Wayman the   person   may   find   it,   Wayman  the writer   makes  it  clear)  :   the  poems  are hymns   to  family -relations,  union,  na­ tion,  friends. Each  of us is a  member of an alliance whose duty is to share,  to love and  protect and  help  each  other.  When  Wayman gets  bitter   (not  so often  in  this book  as  in  others,   like  For  and  Against the  Moon), it's  often  when  bureaucratic associations, like  government  and   busi­ ness, promote  unenlightened self-interest  and obfuscation.
The   pull  to  particulars is one  distin­
guishing mark  of  Wayman's poems:   "It
is the  detail  of things,  the intricate inter­ locking  activity   here  that  excites  me."  I would  be willing  to entrust  the changing of the  world  to a man  who loves the con­ tents  of his toolbox  well enough  to make a  poem   out   of  them   (though  not  only that:  one   begins   to  realize  that   "Tool Fondle" is  a  sort  of   metaphor, the   job contained in  the  tools).   One  who  loves things   so  much   (and   who  sees  with  so clear  an  eye)  is  bound  to be uncomfort­ able   with  organized  and  abstract  plans for changing society. Wayman  documents his   disillusionment  with   the   left   as   a movement  in  sadly   retrospective  poems like   "The  IndoChina Victory  Celebra­ tion,   April   26,   1975."  The  poem  com­ memorates "a  decade of  protest" on  the


124
 part   of  the  left  that   has  ended   in  anti­
family  faction:

We  have  gathered tonight to  celebrate what the  sponsors of  the  evening have
called  a  victory. But  I see around us
what it  means to  have  lost:   the organizations shattered,
solidarity  broken on  the  shoals of  fantasy and personalities....

The man  who writes  this is honest  enough to look a hard  fact  in  the  face.
Wayman's voice  so appealingly  raised
on behalf  of the common man  and  the ordinary in  life  is a  valuable one.  So  is the  technique, disarmingly simple  and impossible    to   duplicate  when   it   really works.  I'm  aware of few writers  who manage to  be so wide-eyed  and  back-to­ basics   without   sacrificing   complexities. The  technique  that   seems   to  me  most Wayman's own  is the  use of  a metaphor, very  often   for  a  whole  poem,   that   the reader assumes  and  occupies   with  ease. Examples  in   this   book   are   "Saturday Afternoon in  Suburban Richmond" and "Grandmother." In  the  former a woman goes temporarily mad,  haunted by the whispering numbers of her empty materi­ alistic  life.  In  the  latter a TV  set, sadly, occupies the  position  of  paternal grand­ mother  in  a  house   in   Fresno.   In   both cases    Wayman's    distinctive   brand    of metaphor gives  us  a fresh  way  of seeing contemporary  life.
It's  interesting to  hear  Wayman men­
tion  "the house  of dreams / about which I have  written so little." He  is a  poet  of "the country of everyday," but  his every­ day  takes  on a  touch  of the  magical  and dream-like when  everything  in  life  may become  animate. One  thing that  means  is that,   through metaphor,  he  extends   the reach  of the  community  he advocates, to include things  as  well  as  people.
A problem for Wayman must  surely be
how  to  grow  in  his  craft   without  losing touch  with  the  potentially huge  audience

BOOKS IN REVIEW



for  such  accessible  poems.  Wayman  has the  occupational  hazards  of  those  who make  poems  out  of and  into  "shared  ex­ perience": diffuseness, occasional aimless­ ness,  a   tendency  to   make   comfortable prosy  poems.   One   may   like   Wayman's work,  as I do, without glossing over these weaknesses,  and   still  want   to  register  a cordial   caution:  "Tom, your  'first  audi­  ence'   is  yourself.  Good.   Don't give  too much  away  to  the  rest  of  us. Be wary  of our enthusiasm for  your  poems.  Many  of us   are   not   exacting  enough    for   your good."
Albino   Pheasants   is  a  small  book,   21
poems,  only one  poem  over  a  page  long. Also it is a large  book, a book full of resonating  enigmas,  much   pain  and beauty.   The book  of  a  craftsman. The form  of each  poem  and  the  shape  of the whole  book  are  carefully  considered. All this  shaping craft  is in  the  service  of  re­ leasing something: a spirit,  a soul, a bird: mysteries  at  the  heart of  things.
Call  the formal  structures bones:  regu­
lar two, three, five-line stanzas and other careful arrangements,  sound   patterns made  by assonance and  occasional rhyme, the energy of the autonomous single-line unit.  All  of  this  is  very  naturally  done, and knits the poems. Flesh to the bones perhaps is the subject matter of these poems, love, work,  writing, but listing subjects is not  very satisfactory because there  is always  something more  going on in  the  poems  than  the  surface  says. Lane understands this  too. The final  poem, for example, picks  its  title  up  from  the  epi­ graph  (a  passage  from  Wallace  Stevens'  "The Man  with  the Blue Guitar"). "And  Say  What You  See  of  the  Dark" ends  a volume  whose  seasons  have  been  winter,  night,  silence,  solitude.  It develops,  with some  of  the  complementary tensions  of the  volume, an image  that  touches on the relationship  of  surface  and   depth, in  a way that brings  to mind  what  more  there  is than  meets  the  eye in  the  poems.
 Night is the  image of  running water and  what runs  beneath....

My  fire  creates the  night
I am  surrounded by. The image
and  what   runs  beneath.
The silence  following sound.
That which   is  bound and that which  is  undone. This is  the  bond, the  light  and   the  night beyond.

The  poems  are  not  written for  the  sake of  "what runs  beneath" alone; they  are for  the  most  part very accessible,  though highly  mysterious  for  all  that. But  what runs beneath is perhaps most important. The   surface   we  can   see  or  touch ;  the mystery  beneath  we can  only  be  put  in touch  with.
The  spirit  being  conjured in  the  vol­ ume is that  of poetry,  in  whichever of its ambiguous identities:

I have  named you:  blind   one staring through  bars  of  flesh

faceless  one
broken fingers   beckoning

in  poems.

See the spirit,  in the guise of an "I," pre­ paring   to  get   loose  and   "shoulder   the empty  body"  in  "Still  Hunting."
The   poems   (like  life  and   the   body) make  cages,  then,  bone-structures,  regu­ larity  of arrangement and  measure, ele­ ments  which  are  then  subverted. Syntax tightens  or  loosens  to create  ironies,  am­  biguities,  mysteries.

It is said  when you  cross  the  ice
you  can  see  the  seasons  skull  dream sleeping
fish
who  breathe in  the  current your  shadow
below.

There is an  undercurrent of imaginative logic  that   strains at  the  sentence  struc­ ture  and  parts of speech,  pulling  them  a little  awry  and  letting them  breathe, like a living  body,

bone  and the living  bars of flesh
a  cage  made by  the  animal I am.


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Metaphor  helps  too.  It often   takes  the exterior landscape and  population of the poems and  turns  them  inward, sometimes with  the  flick of a word.
Nothing  is  finer,   more  mysterious   in the   book,   than    the   title   poem.   In   an austere season one pursues  the difficult discipline  of  a  waking   dream, to  com­ mune   with   pheasant-spirits   released   as from  his own  interior. They  feel like  his own  silence  and  solitude  made  visible. A silver  danger.
STAN  DRAGLAND



UNSHADOWED SUN

DAVID    MCFADDEN,  On  The   Road  Again.  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart,  $5·95·
PETER  TROWER, Ragged  Horizons. McClelland
&  Stewart,  $5·95·

ALTHOUGH DAVID  MCFADDEN's    world   is Hamilton, Ontario, and  Peter  Trower's is the British Columbia mountains, both ex­ press the  trammelled suffering  and  ambi­  guity   of  contemporary  man.   For   both poets  the  way out  of despair lies through nature and  the  discovery  of  human love and   tenderness. David  McFadden prays "to  be human" and  in  what  is, perhaps, the   best   poem   of   both   volumes,   "The Alders,"  Peter   Trower  speaks   of   the need  to  recover  "the whole  unshadowed sun"  of natural  warmth and  spontaneous fulness  of  being.
The  sun becomes human and  the alders symbols  of  the   regeneration  of  human and   natural  vitality. David   McFadden sees trees in a similar  way  ( cf. "Standing Invitation")  and  records  other  moments of  tender  recognition as  in  "The  Inter­ loper," when  his  cat  and  dog  accept   a stray.  So  on  one  hand   we  have  nature, tenderness and  love and  on  the other  the knotted  (both  poets  use  this  metaphor) , thwarted sense of  alienation, despair  and
 pessimism.  In "The Dairy  Queen" David
McFadden writes:

Is it  just me getting grouchier as I get older or  is  the  world  really  getting   dumber and
dumber
as it gets older,  it seems that  every  day
there   seem  to  be  more  and   more   people
wandering around
in  a  lifeless daze,  dead,  cold,  hollow, with  all  their  lights  out.

And   of  Peter  Trower's  "The   Popcorn
Man" we hear

The   loneliness  broke  free  from  him  like moths.
The  solemn  voice  scratched painful
memory
from  dusty  grooves:
the  warwound-the stolen  wife -the coalmines-
the  heart-attacks-the  doctor's blunt
edict.
His words fell down  the air  like dead  leaves.

The  problem clearly  is how to get beyond sodden  despair and  sustain  the  moments of tenderness, love and  natural  response. Perhaps writing poetry  helps to provide relief   from   misery   and   thus   clears   the ground  for  the   moments  of  affirmation and  communion. One  wishes  there  were more  of these,  but  affirmation can't be honestly  expressed  unless really  felt.
The  strength of  both  poets  lies in  the
honesty   with   which   they   express   their dilemmas, which  seem by extension to be those of contemporary man. Their limita­ tions  can  be  briefly  summarized.  Neither poet  uses rhyme  well. This  is a  besetting weakness  of  contemporary  free-verse poets.  They  only  use  rhyme  incidentally, but  when  not  used  well  rhyme  calls  un­  fortunate   attention   to   itself.   Both   use half-rhyme more skilfully to express effec­ tively their laconic,  jarring, modern-alien­ ated  sense  of  life.  They  would  both  like to reach  a wide audience and  have there­ fore avoided obscurity and  recondite allu­ sion   as   much   as   possible.   McFadden's style is plainer than  Trower's and  he has more  thoroughly his own  voice.  At  times

BOOKS IN REVIEW



McFadden sounds  like Raymond Souster but   there   is  a  real  difference -all  the difference  between  Hamilton   and   To­ ronto.  Yet,  as  with  Souster,  McFadden's plain  style courts the danger of becoming  banal  and  trivial  as it seeks to express the banality  and   triviality  of   contemporary life.
Peter  Trower's work is more  rhetorical and  lyrical  than David   McFadden's.  At times  he  sounds   like  Dylan   Thomas, at other  times  we  hear   the  rhythm of  AI Purdy's "Cariboo Horses" or  Allen  Gins­ burg's  "Howl" in his verse. His authentic, original, personal voice is less  well estab­ lished  than   McFadden's but  it  is  there,  particularly in a poem  like "The Alders."  Essentially  Trower is an  elegist  who  re­ members   more   vital  times:   "I miss our vanished   naive  selves  / young  as spring­  randy colts  and   just  as  frisky."  But  he realizes  too  that  youth  was ignorant; we get a sense that alcoholism has been strug­  gled through and  at least a partial victory won over  it  for  maturity and  love.
The last word,  I think,  should  be given to David  McFadden's "St.  Lawrence Of The Cross,"  for  of  all  twentieth-century writers  it is Lawrence who  has most  pro­ foundly  explored  our   modern   sense  of division,  who  has  expressed   our  anguish and  our  joy most  resonantly and has con­ ducted  the   most  courageous  search   for human  wholeness.   He   helps   us  best  to achieve  the   unknotted   spontaneity  de­ sired  by both  poets  and  provides us with the most  vital  sense of  nature, tenderness and  love.  With   his  aid  and  example we can  reach  beyond  ragged   horizons  for  a road  on which

the   heart burns brighter than  the  sun  and filled   with   arch-angels
climbs   mindlessly through  the   heavens, knowing no  knots,
and   its  cries  are  not   the  cries  of  one crucified
but   the  sweet   cries  of  a  flute
as  gentle puffs  of  wind  pass  through it.
 There is a sense of pleasure  here,  but  the "mindlessly" is troublesome. Lawrence believed  that   the  mind,  too,  had  its  im­ portance and  that  thought  (the  creative interplay  of   mind    and   emotion)   was "man in his wholeness wholly attending." McFadden's  best  signpost   points   us  to­ wards  Lawrence.  He  can  show  us  Peter  Trower's "whole  unshadowed sun"  over and  over  again  and  help  us  to  find  our  own.
JOHN  FERNS


A MYTH-MAKING  BUG

IRVING LAYTON, Taking Sides:  The  Collected Social  and  Political  Writings, ed.  &  intro. Howard  Aster.   Mosaic   Press,  $4-95·

TED  PLANTos,   The Universe   Ends   at   Sher­ bourne  & Queen, Photographs by  Angeline Kyba. Steel   Rail.

"A LAUGHING SCREWING GURU" is how Irving Layton   describes   himself  on  one page of some  1971 ruminations; then,  on the  next  page,  he deplores such  a role as depending  upon   unthinking  herd  emo­ tion. This record of forty-two years (I 935-
77)  of Layton's attempts to make  himself a myth, disintegrates that  myth into many self-contradictions, some statements of conviction  and  wisdom,  and  some  imbe­ cilities.
As  Layton's  political   outlook   has changed  over  the  years,  he  has  unswerv­ ingly opposed  public  opinion. In I 943, in his M.A.  thesis for  McGill  University, he played  the  Marxist  parlour-game of Spot the Liberal  Idealist in  Marxist Clothing: his subject  was Harold Laski. In  the early sixties  he  voiced  the  humanitarian wish that  the Germans not  be eternally burd­ ened  with  guilt  for  the  Nazi  holocaust. Then  he  became   right-wing, defending American  intervention in the Dominican Republic and  in  Vietnam in  1965,  and the  American invasion  of Cambodia and Trudeau's  invocation of  the  War   Mea-


127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sures   Act   in   I970.  He   decried   "hide­ bound   leftists"   and   in  I972  made   this understatement:  "I'm   not   the   callow socialist   I  was  twenty,  twenty-five   years ago."
The best  of  Layton's artistic   criticism
is a series of four  passionate  and perspica­ cious  film commentaries  (Globe  & Mail, I973-77); here,  and   in  his  remarks   on Hamlet and  Nietzsche, as  in some  of his best   poems,   he   is   concerned  with   the dualities of spirit and matter, contempla­ tion  and  action. But  the aesthetic excite­ ment  of his notes on art gives way to un­ explained  bitterness when  he turns  to his critics.  In  response  to one  critic's  article  on himself, he fumes: "I shall not dignify dishonesty, pompous vulgarity,  and smug­  ness by attempting a point  by point  refu­ tation." Yet Layton's self-irony  redeems him; enemies,   he  says,  are  "always   the most  valuable equipment  of  any  poet." In  his poems, this irony conveys his "pro­ found  mistrust of nature, of man, of  God, and  of myself."
Eons  mots  and  betises abound here.  It is  hard  to   believe   that   the   man   who pithily  described  Canadian society's  mix­ ture of idealism  and  materialism as "piety  and    push"  or   "high-minded   gab   and low-minded  grab,"   could   commit  this turgid  self-contradiction: "Right is might,  though   paradoxically   it   is   often    the canon's mouth that  pronounces the  ver­ dict." Or   that   the  man   who,  in   I955, astutely   perceived    that    "a   constricted scientism, lacking  both  a  sense  of  direc­  tion and  a concern for values" threatened liberal   education  in  Canada,  could,   in
I 967,  sanguinely  proclaim   "the  vestiges of the cold war are about  to be buried  on both  sides."  Or   that   the  man   who  said
correctly that  his poems still await the technical evaluation  they  deserve,  could let  impressionism run  amok  in  his  com­ ments  that  his poems  have  "vigour" and "vitality," and  that  Canadian poetry  has


128
 more  "humanity" than  that  written  by contemporary  "stooges"  in  Britain   and the  United States. Spot  the stooge.
The myth-making bug  has  also  bitten Ted  Plantos, though it is not  the myth  of himself,  but  the  exalted  "spirit of place" that  this volume of prose, poems, and photographs  about  Toronto's  Cabbage­ town  evokes.
A  little  of  Layton's irony  would  have been helpful here; instead, Plantos  puts whimsical  humour in the  mouths of his personae, letting the  common folk  speak without imposing any ironic  commentary. Kitsch   collectors may  love  this,  but  for the  "literary guy"  (to use Callaghan's phrase)  in  search   of  meanings, there   is only  dumb  pointless  whimsy  in  the  prose piece   "Cashing  a  Cheque  in   Cabbage­ town" in  which  a  bank  manager dispar­ ages    Plantos'    disreputable   community and  then  tells him  to do up  his fly; or in the epigram  "Dat's Kapital" which  reads "Karl  Marx   knew   /  all   the   Engels'." Despite several  pieces  of this  ilk, whimsy is  effectively  used  in some  poems; in  the pitiful    jokingly-feigned  sincerity   of  the street  wristwatch seller's  spiel  in  "Halle­ lujah, Lady," for  example.
Bathos   is  another   quality  sometimes used well here,  but often  overused, result­ ing   in  sentimentality.  It   is  all   too  ap­ parent in  the  book's  title; in the achingly bathetic  portrayal  of   "The   Old   Grey­  Haired   Men    at    the    Checker   Board Tables" and   their  "leisurely combat" of "pieces   performing  strategies,  grand   or otherwise"; and  in  the  figure  of  ancient oriental  wisdom  ignored   amidst   his  fris­ bee-tossing   North   American  grandchil­ dren   in   "Grandfather  Lee."   Bathos   is used  best  when  lightly; for  example, in the final image  in a swirl of images  titled "Losing  the  Wheel," presenting a  man's fleeting   thoughts  before   sleep,   and   his recollection in a dream of the  truck acci­ dent  which  killed  his  wife:

BOOKS IN REVIEW



For  several  nights  following,
she  appears at  the  door  of  an  empty  room

: third  prize  money  in  her  purse

These poems contain a wide range  of strong  emotions, often  subtly  expressed. Plantas also  demonstrates a fine  sense of rhythm, and   a  good   ear   for   colloquial speech. But what  is absent here is the distancing from  the  subject which  allows a more  complex  treatment of a situation, and  the  recognition of ideas  opposing or complementing the  persona's attitude, which  irony  conveys.  Cogent social  criti­ cism   is  not   made    by   one-dimensional motifs,  such  as old  people dying  in  their beds,  cuddling  bottles; or  gaudy   prosti­  tutes,  symbols  of  bartered youth. Nor  is it  aided   by   bludgeoning didacticism. I hope  that Plantas will re-direct his talents  in  the  future, for  he  can  do  much  more than  make  readers murmur "how  grass­ roots,  how  authentic."

JOHN ROBINSON


PRIVATE  REALITIES

FRANK  PACI, The  Italians. Oberon, $15.oo;  pa.
$6.95.
JOHN  MILLs,  Skevington's Daughter. Oberon,
$15.00; pa.  $6.95.
JOHN    METCALF,  Girl   in   Gingham.  Oberon,
$12.95; pa.  $5.95.
OTHER SMALL PRESSES have   often   di­ rected   their  publications to  a  small  aca­  demic  audience, but  Oberon has  chosen an eclectic  approach to fiction and poetry, stressing   innovative  editorial   direction and   a  fine  artistic sensibility  in  its  ap­  proach  to book design. Critics and readers  will   take   an   interest  in   several   recent  novels   that   show   the   imagination  and diversity    Oberon    Press   has    come    to represent.
Frank    Paci's    The    Italians    explores
what   it  means   to  grow   up   in  a  small
 Canadian town  where  hockey  is both  in­ terest and  escape.  As a subject this has its limitations, particularly  for  readers  who are not familiar with  the political  intrica­ cies that  control the lives of young, aspir­  ing   NHL   players.   But   Paci's   intimate knowledge of the sport-he played  junior hockey  for  several  years -is  combined with  his  sensitivity   to  a  player's   family life  to  produce a  novel  that   is informa­ tive, interesting, and,  in certain passages, lyrically moving.
Paci is basically  a realist,  and  like most realists he tends  to stress detail at  the ex­ pense  of  psychological  introspection;  his young  protagonist,  Aldo,  becomes  a  re­ presentative man whose success or failure  in hockey determines his success or failure  in life. Yet  the  book's  outstanding  quali­ ties  appear in  isolated   vignettes:  Aldo's marriage difficulties,  his  religious  beliefs, his father's accident at  the  local  smelter. At these times Paci's writing rises above realism;   he  seems  then   to  be  less  con­ cerned  with  the  struggle  to  survive  than  with the feelings of those who are trapped by  economic   conditions. For  these  indi­ viduals, existence  holds  only a faint  hope that  the next generation may escape from a life in which  self-knowledge is an  ideal and  happiness  an  illusion.
John    Mills'    Skevington's    Daughter
offers  an   "academic"  variation  on   the same theme  of  journeying from  existence to  meaning. I use  the  term   "academic" because  Skevington's Daughter,  filled  as it is with English  professors, their research interests,  and   their  correspondence, is a highly  mannered fiction,  an  idiosyncratic and fascinating work. The plot details  the experiences of  an  imaginative scholar  of travel   literature,  Professor   Simon   Mot­ tley, as  he  attempts to  write  a  book  on Francis  Skevington, a  nineteenth-century British  traveller  whose  letters   reveal   he was a  "corruptor" and  a  man  of  "illicit sexual   pleasures."   Indeed,    Skevington appears to  be  related   to an  earlier  Skev-


129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ington, "Lieutenant of the  Tower  under Henry VIII, inventor of an instrument of torture known  as the scavenger's  or Skevington's  daughter."
There is, however,  a real  Skevington's
daughter, one Stella  Skevington, and  the novel explores  how Professor Mottley sep­ arates the  myth  of  her  father's  exploits from  reality.  Much  evidence  appears in the   form   of   miscellaneous   letters   and documents, many  of  them  humorous; in the   manner  of  Robert   Kroetsch's The Studhorse Man, the  reader  is given  dis­ connected   dialogue,   reconstructed   his­ torical   events,   and   fictional   characters whose motivations are often  unexplained. Juxtaposed  against  these  fictional  man­ ipulations are  the  comic  adventures of a travelling communal  group  whose values are   in  direct  contradiction  to  those  of Professor    Mottley   and    his    academic friends. The transition from  academic to counter-culture is handled smoothly, yet reads   almost   as  if  Mills  is  determined not  to get  too close  to his material.  Non­ involvement becomes  his fictional stance,  and   the   result   is  a  carefully  structured imaginative work.
In   standing apart  we  laugh   at   our­ selves, but  if we see ourselves  too closely, the  laughter  often   turns   to   tears.  This  much  is clear  in  John  Metcalf's "Girl  in Gingham," and  the  longer  and  more  ex­ uberant   "Private   Parts:   A   Memoir." Both  are  written in  Metcalf's usual  style of  connected  narrative, and   both  are  a blend   of   the   comic   and   the   pathetic. "Girl   in  Gingham" describes  a  recently divorced   middle-aged  man   and   his  at­  tempts  to find  a suitable mate.  We learn of  his  despair after   his  divorce,  his  at­ tempted suicide,  and  his absurd  meetings with the women he discovers through "Compumate," a dating agency. All he wishes   for   is  a   simple,   uncomplicated girl, a "girl  in gingham," but he finds that
 all  who  use  the  dating agency   are  vic­ tims  of  bitterness and   cynicism.  Finally,  through a series of coincidences, a  comic exchange of correspondence, and  various  embarrassments, he  meets  a  girl  named  Anna Stevens  whose  plight  seems similar  to  his  own.  Just  as  their  relationship is about to  begin,  however,  this  ideal  "girl in gingham" suddenly dies. The  novella's resolution has  overtones of  Hemingway: everyone dies  in  the  end.  "Girl  in  Ging­  ham" is a moving story of a man's  search for  the ideal  and  his final  disillusionment.
Although Metcalf  is capable of writing satirical comedy,  his novels  are  obviously more  than  light  entertainments. In  "Pri­ vate  Parts: A Memoir," a university Eng­  lish  professor   recalls  his  traumatic  and  usually  humorous  adolescent experiences with    sexuality.    The   professor's     strict  religious background has made  it difficult for  him  to contemplate sex without feel­ ing  guilty,  and   the  result  is  a  satire   on sexual  awareness in the tradition of Philip Roth's  Portnoy's Complaint and  Morde­ cai  Richler's Cocksure.  Examining what he  calls  the  "ravaged  battlefield" of  his adolescence, the  narrator recalls  how,  in spite   of  his  parents'  repeated  warnings, his  adolescent  life  became   a  search   for "erotic incident." Accordingly, he relates his boyhood  obsessions with  pornography, sex  research, and   masturbation; he  tells of a general uncertainty in sexual  matters produced  by   the   conflict   between    his Methodist   upbringing  and    the   sexual problems  of   puberty.  Indeed,  "Private Parts: A Memoir" uses the  techniques of Jewish    humour  to   explore    the   sexual difficulties of a Gentile world.  The result is a  novel  that  is both  comic  and  serious, lighthearted and  incisive-indeed, a con­ trolled  study  of some  subjects  Canadians talk   about  but   seem   to   have   avoided writing down.
RODERICK W. HARVEY







GROVE & THE WELLSPRINGS OF FANTASY

ALMOST WITHOUT EXCEPTION, Frederick Philip  Grove's major characters are  dis­ satisfied  with  the  conditions of their lives and  yearn  for some sort  of absolute value
-spiritual   purity, fullness    of    under­ standing, or a  reordering of the world  to conform  to   the   highest   intellectual  or moral   standards. In  The  Yoke of Life,  for instance, Len  Sterner avows that  "the  world  as  it  was  did  not  agree  with  the world   as  it   should   be"   and   that   "he,  being  the apex  of creation ... in a moral  sense ... could  have  made a  better  piece of  work  of  it."  Life  as  it  is is unable  to satisfy   his   restless,   questioning  nature, and   he  is  finally  driven  to  despair   and  suicide.
In   Two  Generations, Phil   and   Alice Patterson choose a life of hermit-like scholarship; in  "The Poet's  Dream," Harold Tracey removes  himself  from society  to write poetry and  Frances Mont­ crieff commits suicide; in "The Weather­ head   Fortunes," George  becomes  a  pa­ thetic  nihilist; in The Master  of the Mill, Edmund loses his life  while  pursuing his dream of  utopian  world  order based  on machines; in Consider  Her Ways, Wawa­  Quee   survives   the   treachery  and   epic trek  that  decimate her  ant  followers,  but her  measure of  the  world   is  a  scathing indictment of  the  entire machinery of human   society.   And    in   the    so-called prairie chronicles, Niels  Lindstedt, John Elliot   and   Abe   Spalding  all   chase   an illusory dream of patriarchy, even as they
 uncomprehendingly   watch    their    wives and  children become  estranged and  their families  disintegrate.
Grove's  sense of  the  tragic  foundation of  all  existence   underlies  the   obsessive restlessness  of  his  characters,  but   there is sufficient  evidence  to suggest  that  their impossible  yearnings stem  from   a  more immediate source -the  kind  of   domes­ tic  environment which   nearly  always   is to be found  in GroV"e's fiction and  which,  more  importantly, figured  in his own life. The   connection  between   Grove's  life and  the  pattern of  restless  questing that emerges in his fiction can best be explored through an examination of Grove's child­ hood  as described  in In Search  of Myself. Douglas Spettigue's  identification of Grove  as Felix  Paul Greve  has shed more light  on  this period  and  we can  now dis­ count  as fabrication most  of the  external circumstances  Grove   presents    (the   vast estate  in Sweden, his travels,  and  so on) ; but nothing Spettigue has turned up con­ tradicts Grove's description of  the  kinds of relationships he  had  with  his  parents. The  picture  that    emerges   from   his account  is  that   of  a   traditional  patri­ archal nuclear   family  with  concomitant rigid sex roles. The  father is preoccupied with his business and pleasures,  and  often  absent   from  the  home.  He  is  stern   and  authoritarian,  and, in  the  few  instances that  he interacts with  his son, bullies  the young   Frederick  to  "make a  man"  of him.  Frederick, however, is sickly  and  a dreamer, and  unable  to meet  his father's standards  of  masculinity. The  result   is mutual antagonism and  estrangement. In his mother, Frederick finds sympathy and protection. Both mother and  son fear and resent   the   father  and   eventually  leave him.  Alone  together, their  bond  intensi­ fies:   he  worships   his  mother;   she   be­ comes increasingly  possessive. Of  particu­ lar  interest   is a  passage  in  which  Grove  describes  how  his mother  won  from  him
a promise  never  to marry:

OPINIONS & NOTES



My   worship  of  my   mother  was  still  suffi­ ciently recent to me  to make  me vow, when, in   a   tearful  exchange  of   confidences,  she urged  me,   that  I,  for   one,   would    never marry. . . .  In  women   she   saw   the   great danger to  men; in  men,  to  women. And   I
. . . readily  fell   in   with   her   plans   as  she
painted for  me  her  ideal  of a  happy old  age for   herself, directing  my   household,  ceas­ ing  to  do  so only  with  death. I  should  be  a middle-aged   man     then    . . .    beyond     the temptations of early   manhood.

As psychoanalysts and experts  on the family   have   pointed  out,  it  is  just  this kind  of marsupialism that  is most condu­ cive  to  oedipal  conflicts  and  other child­ hood  traumas, which  in  later life can  be manifested  in  insecurity  of  self-identity, guilt  about  sex, latent homosexuality and an extreme propensity for fantasy. It is as though    the   overmothered  child   never fully  grows  up,  retaining forever   a  de­ pendence  on his  mother and  a  need  for her  approval. He  lacks  a  normal capa­ city  to  recognize   and   critically   test  the reality of situations, complicated by his early supersedence over his father, and continues to relieve anxiety,  renounce in­ stinct  and  avoid  neuroses  by indulging in fantasies,  often  of an absolute or extreme nature.1
Grove's description of  his  youth  indi­ cates a striking congruency with this kind of  pattern. In   In  Search  of  Myself,  he tells us that  once, in  a delirium, he chal­  lenged   his   father  to   a   duel   over   his mother's honour. He   was  troubled  by severe   guilt   over   his  adolescent   sexual stirrings  and  confesses, in rather enigma­ tic fashion, that  he  may have  had  homo­  sexual   leanings.  After   his  sexual   initia­ tion   (with  an  older,  mother figure), he says:   "If I  had  not  always  been  so,  I had   become   definitely,   finally,   hetero­ sexual." Already  present,  too, is a strong propensity to take refuge in daydreams, mostly about  his devouring ambition to master   all   knowledge  and   to   perform great  deeds.
 The  information Spettigue has  turned up  about  Grove's early  manhood  tends to confirm  that this kind of psychological development was not  just a passing phase of youth,  but  was  ingrained in  his  char­ acter. We  know  now  that  from  an  early age Grove  led a double  life, passing  him­  self  off  as  a  rich  young  scholar-poet  in his attempt to  crash  into  a  higher social and   intellectual  milieu   than   his  petty­  bourgeois   origins  would  have  permitted. He   was  excessively  vain  and   fastidious about  his  dress   and   manners,  a  dandy who  everywhere  tried   to  leave   the  im­ pression  of  detached superiority. But  be­ hind   the   bravado  and   pose,   Spettigue says, there seems to have  lurked  "a youth prematurely beaten  down,  a loser in love, an  aspirant to  the  heights  who  so  often finds himself back down on the flats, just going on."2  In  fact,  Grove's  posturing led him into serious difficulties. As his debts mounted  (eventually reaching zg,ooo Marks), he  resorted  to deceitful and fradulent practices, until,  finally,  he  was sued  by an  erstwhile friend  and  creditor and   jailed   for  fourteen  months. A  few years  after   his  release,  unrepentant and still convinced of his superiority over  the common herd,  he finally freed  himself  of his debts  and  disgrace by faking  a suicide and  fleeing  to North America.
Spettigue's findings  point  out  the great extent    of   fabrication  in   Grove's   auto­ biography. This  kind  of extreme  fantasy, as Northrop Frye  has  suggested,  may  in­ dicate that  Grove  was a  pathological liar
-one  of  the  possible  outcomes  of  the kind of overmothering to which he was subjected.3  This  insight  is given further credence by the conversation with Creve­ Grove   recorded  by  And:!'(§  Gide  shortly  after    Grove's  release   from   prison.    In that  interview, transcribed for its "certain psychological   interest,"  Gide   recollects Grove  saying, among other  extraordinary revelations:

OPINIONS  & NOTES



-II  faut que   je  vous   avertisse, Monsieur Gide, que je  mens constamment ... J'eprouve le  meme   besoin   de   mentir et  Ia
meme   satisfaction  a mentir qu'un  autre  a
montrer Ia  verite....
-Quand  avez-vous commence a mentir?
-Sitot  apres Ia mort  de  rna  mere.
Un  silence:
-C'est   le   mensonage  qui   attache  a  moi
rna femme; c'est  mon  extraordinaire faculte
de   mentir.  Quand  e!le   !'a  sentie, elle   a quitte pour   moi  son  mari, son  enfant;  elle a  tout   quitte  pour me  suivre. J'ai d'abord voulu   l'abandonner; puis   j'ai   compris que je  ne  pouvais  pas   me   passer   d'elle:   C'est avec  elle  que   je  mens  le  plus  volontiers.4

This  admission does not  necessarily prove  that  Grove  was a pathological liar, for  it  must   be  remembered  that   it  was made  in the  context of a self-serving interview, and  most  likely  was  meant   to cast   him   in   an   intriguing  light   to  the author of  The   Immoralist, who,  Grove may have  believed,  might  help  him better his social and  artistic fortunes. What  is significant about it is that  the description Grove  provides of his lying and  its effects
-it is  compulsive,  it   began   after   the death of his mother, it is deliberate, it provides    heightened   sensations,  it   re­ quires   a  willing   receptor -fits  in   per­ fectly  with  the  profile  psychiatrists  have  developed of the  psychology  of the path­ ological  liar.
A widely-accepted definition of  patho­ logical  lying  is given  by  W.  and  M.  T. Healy,  who  see it  as
falsification  entirely   disproportionate   to any  discernible end   in  view,  engaged in  by a  person   who,  at the   time   of  the  observa­ tion   cannot  definitely  be   declared   insane, feebleminded,   or    epileptic.    Such     lying, rarely, if ever,  centers about a single  event; it   manifests   itself   most   frequently  over   a considerable  period of  years,  or  even  a  life­ time.  Various  charges  against  others,  and even    self-accusations   are     sometimes  in­ dulged  in  . . .  Extensive, very   complicated fabrications may   be  evolved. This  has  led to the synonyms: mythomania, pseudologia phantastica.5
According to Dr.  Ben Karpman, pseudo-
 logia phantastica "may  be viewed  as verbally  expressed  day  dreams and  as in day dreams  the  patients half  believe their own fanciful  tales."
Theirs  is   an    unusually   rich    imagination prodded into  active expression by  acutely­ felt   psychic    needs.    They   recite    tales    of socially  exalted  backgrounds which  provide the  glamor  for   which   they   seem  to  feel  a strong need,  or  will  recite  sad  stories,   cal­  culated to arouse pity.  This is an  expression of a particular type  of  neurosis, and  a study of the  life  history of  the  patients ... reveals the   presence of   other   trends  indicative  of neurotic    make-up:    marked   egocentricity, high   suggestibility,  unreliability,   a   patho­ logical   need  for  self-assertion, a  precocious sex  life  ... and   marked  emotional  conflicts about these.6
A survey  of  the  literature on  the  sub­ ject shows  that  researchers are  generally  agreed    that    the   roots   of   pseudologia phantastica   are   to   be   found   in   early childhood   anxieties   that  have   not   been adequately   resolved.   Given    the   strong  Freudian bent  of most  researchers in  this area,  these  unresolved  anxieties  are  usu­ ally  seen  in  terms  of   marsupialism  and oedipal   conflicts.  Dr.  Phyllis  Greenacre, for  example,   traces  the  psychopathology of the  pseudolog  to "an  intense  maternal attachment ... as  if  he  were  a  part   of the mother." This
undermines his  sense  of  a  separate self  and the   development  of   his   own   identity.  By placing the child  in a position of definite superiority  to   the   father-either  through the    mother's  attitude   alone,  or   by   fate through   the    death   or    desertion   of    the father-there is set a potentially serious imbalance of  the   oedipal  relationship, the child  being  able  to assume an  uncontested supersedence over  its  father. This inevitable intensification of  infantile  narcissism favors a reliance on omnipotent fantasy in other aspects   of  self-evaluation  to   the   exclusion of  reality   testing.7
What  we  know  about   Grove's  adolesc­ ence  and   early   manhood  tends  to  sug­ gest  in  his  psychic  make-up the  kind  of confusion   and   insecurity  of   self-image  that   Greenacre   mentions. Furthermore,

133

OPINIONS & NOTES



his posturing as a dandy  and  his various shady  activities in  Bonn  and  Berlin  tend to  bear  out  Karpman's  observation that pseudologia  phantastica  is a "type  of  de­ linquency and  leads  to false  accusations and  swindling."8  Above all, there  remains  the  unavoidable fact  that  throughout his life Grove  was  noted  as a  raconteur and teller  of  tall  tales.
In Search  of Myself, with its fabricated
exalted   background and  subsequent sad tale  of  misfortune-mostly  blamed   on others  or  on  unforeseeable circumstances
-is the  major example of Grove's pseu­ dologia. But,  as well, Grove's  letters,  the recollections of his friends and  Margaret Stobie's taped  interviews  with  his former students all reveal  an inordinate compul­ sion to spin  fantastic  tales and  pass them off as true.9
The  fact  that  Grove  persisted  in  lying
to  the  very  end,  taking  his  secrets  with him  to  the  grave,  suggests  that  he  may never   have   fully  resolved   the  anxieties that   gave  rise  to  his  fantasies,  and   that he  may  have  used  his fiction  to explore the  hidden depths of  his own  nature.
All   his   works,   as  Louis   Dudek    has pointed  out,   can   be  seen  as   autobiog­ raphy; not  literally, of course,  but  in  the sense  that   they  are  patterned

according to  the  author's nostalgic  attach­ ments,  guilts,  needs  for  retribution,  needs for  self-justification,  the  gradual   construc­  tion  of an  order  leading  to self-understand­ ing,  or  a  reduction  of   chaos,  and   similar artistic and  psychological goals.w

Grove  himself  argues  in the author's note to  The Seasons  that   "no  book  with  the blood  of  life in  it  has  ever  been  'sucked out  of  the  air.'" Elsewhere,  he says that although an  author may  aim  at  univer­ sality,  "by  the  very  fact  that  he  cannot convincingly represent a  character or  a happening which  finds  no  echo  in  him­ self, he delimits  his work by his own  per­ sonality."11  More  specifically,  he  tells  us in  In  Search  of  Myself  that  after  model-

134
 ling Ralph Patterson in Two Generations after   his  own  father, "I . . . gave  him, among others,  one  son whom  I attached to   myself   by   giving   him   my   middle  name."12
Not  only  is Phil  Patterson exactly  the kind  of  dreamer aspiring to  mastery   of all  knowledge  and   to  great   deeds   that Grove   describes   himself   as   being,   but more  importantly in  terms  of  psychologi­ cal motivations, he feels the same kind of antipathy for his father and close attach­ ment  to his mother. These characteristics link  Phil  to Len  Sterner  in  The Yoke of Life  and   George  Weatherhead in  "The Weatherhead  Fortunes," both  of  whom,  incidentally, like Phil,  place  first in prov­  ince-wide  school  examinations. All  three are  possessed  of  a  questing,  restless  na­ ture  which   the   conditions  of  real   life cannot  satisfy,  and   all  three   eventually tum   their  backs  on  life  to seek some  ill­ defined  spiritual fulfilment.
Although such  links  are  more  tenuous in  the  other novels, most  of Grove's  ma­ jor characters share  this kind of  questing, restless nature and  exhibit signs of sexual maladjustment,  extreme   self-absorption, and  a  tendency to deny  life while  build­  ing  extravagant  castles  in  the  air.  From Phil   Branden,  who  aspires   to   read just "while   improving   upon,    the   creator's work," to Jane Atkinson, Harold Tracey, Edmund  Clark,  Wawa-Quee, and   to  a lesser extent, Niels Lindstedt, Abe Spald­ ing and  John Elliot, all are  unable to find in  life  fulfilment for  their  fantasies.
As in  Grove's  own  life,  the  origins  of this  pattem can  be  traced   to  the  char­ acters'   domestic     situations.    Beginning with   the   rgo6   German   novel   Maurer­ meister  Ihles  Haus  (The  Master Mason's  House)  and   continuing  through  nearly all  the   Canadian  works,  there   is  a  re­ markably consistent  pattern in the domes­  tic   arrangements  Grove   describes.   His typical  family  is patriarchal and authori­ tarian, with   the  kind  of  rigid  sex  roles

OPINIONS & NOTES



evidenced by his own parents. Although more  often  than  not  it is the  male  side of the  story  that  is told,  or  that  of the chil­ dren,   it  is  usually   the  influence  of   the mother or  wife  that   determines  whether or  not  any  psychological  damage  is done to  any  of  the  characters.
Because of the father's preoccupation with   his  affairs   in  the   "public  sphere," the  mother usually  has  no  choice  but  to give up any idea  of a life of her  own and to submerge herself  in  domestic tasks. If she is strong  and  resigned, as is Mrs. Patterson, she holds the family  together through  her   role   as  mediator   between past and  present, between  father and children. She represents the  unifying principle -the  spiritual  and   emotional qualities  that    complement  the   father's (and  the children's) drive  for dominance over   the   external  conditions  of   life­ which  marks  all their  lives whole. As Mrs. Patterson  tells  her   daughter:   "Perhaps those  who  resemble  me  will  see  most  in him; and   those  who  resemble  him  will clash  with  his  will."
In  the  more  typical  households, where there  is no such  understanding, even  this kind  of  unity   is  lacking. There  is  little communication   between    husband  and wife, much  less any  meeting of minds  or spirits.  Years   of  drudgery  and   the  mo­ ther's  increasing isolation  as the  children grow  up  and  leave  home  eventually lead her  to  resent  the  denial  of  her  self, and  she turns  against  her husband. In  at  least three   instances-The   Master   Mason's House, Our  Daily Bread, and  In Search of   Myself-this   resentment is  drama­ tized  by  the  mother's mental  deteriora­ tion  and  subsequent attempt  at  one  last desperate fling  at   the  life  she  has  been denied, followed   by  a  premature death.
The  pathetic  loneliness   and   dissatis­
faction with  their  lives that  even  the  best of these mothers experience has serious repercussions  on  the   lives  of  their  chil­ dren,  especially  the sons. In "The Weath-
 erhead  Fortunes," Ada  Weatherhead, be­ cause  of  her   boredom and   frustration, tries  to fulfill  herself  vicariously  through her  children, in  the  process  spoiling  her two   sons  by   overmothering.  One,   the much-petted and  kissed Gerald, turns  out to  be  a  thief; the  other, her  favourite, the  more  interesting  older   son  George, becomes   a   sexless,   intellectual   nihilist, who  for a  while  plays  at  being  a dandy, but then gives up even that  role for total passivity. He is intellectually gifted,  but lacks ambition and  will. Life  is futile,  he says at age thirty, repeating a familiar Grove  refrain.
Only the daughter Leilah  escapes Ada's clutches,  perhaps because  she  is not  sus­ ceptible  to  the  oedipal feelings  that  are explicit  in the mother's relationships with her  sons.
Idealized  pictures of  their  mothers nearly always loom somewhere in the background of Grove's characters. And because  they  can   never   reconcile  them­ selves  to  her   loss  or  find   an  adequate replacement  (there  are   no  happy   mar­ riages   in  Grove's canon),  they   remain  forever   insecure   and   unhappy. "If  she hadn't died!" John Jr. tells his father in Our  Daily Bread. "You  know,  I  believe mother was  one  of   the  best  women   on earth  ... That's  where  the  whole  family went  to  pieces.  I'd   never   have  left  the old  homestead if  she'd  been  alive."
Another   striking example of  this  kind of maternal influence is found  in Settlers
of the  Marsh,  where  Grove  uses the  de­ vice of dream visions  to  articulate  Niels' inchoate inner   life.  In  these  visions,  the faces of the virginal Ellen Amundsen and the worldly Clara Vogel alternate as sym­ bols of his hopes,  but  more  significantly, his dead  mother also appears to him.  As one of the early visions makes clear, Niels' sexual  inexperience and   his  inability   to cope with women  stem  largely  from  what  can  only be termed a mother fixation:

135

OPINIONS & NOTES



A  lassitude   came   over  him:    a  desire   to evade  life's issues.... He longed  to be with his  mother,  to  feel  her  gnarled,   calloused fingers rumpling his hair, and to hear  her crooning   voice  droning   some  old  tune....
And   then   he  seemed  to  see  her  before
him:  a wrinkled shrunk little face looking anxiously  into  his own....  There was  pity
in   the   look  of  the   ancient   mother:   pity with  him  who  was  going  astray....

Significantly,  this   vision   comes   imme­ diately  after  Niels feels himself  succumb­ ing  to  sexual   temptation  brought on  by Clara  Vogel's   touch.  And   significantly,  too, Niels' mother does not appear to him again  until  the  entire tragedy  of his mar­  riage  to Clara has been played  out. Then she reappears in  a  kind  of hermaphrodi­ tic  fusion  with  old  man  Sigurdsen, who had  been a surrogate father to Niels. The implication,  of  course,  is  that   only  this kind  of sexless, serene  unity  of male  and female   principles  constitutes  wholeness, or  completion in  life.
This  kind  of  unity-apparently miss­ ing in  Grove's own  childhood and  seem­ ingly  sought   after   throughout  his  life­ is  a  primary  image   that   crops  up  over and  over  again  in Grove's  works. It is the motive    behind    most   marriages   in   his novels:    Old   John  Elliot,   for   example,  muses,  "Had he  not  deliberately chosen his wife because  she seemed to be his com­ plement?" And  it is the basis of the fatal  attraction  that   drives   such   of  Grove's  young  male  characters as Len  Sterner to project with  such  tragic  consequences  all their   unfulfilled   longings   on   to   their chosen love interest. Their search  for the kind   of   absolute  security,   purity    and peace of mind that they associate (often unconsciously)   with   their   mothers   be­ comes   obsessive.  But   it   is  all   in   vain. Nothing in  life,  it  seems, can  meet  their expectations, and  they either  give  up the struggle  or  lose  themselves  in  impossible fantasies.
None  of the characters has any great degree    of   self-understanding.  Each    is
 merely   aware   of  being  driven   by  some inner  compulsion that  leaves him dissatis­ fied  with  the  conditions of  his  existence  and    hunted   by   impossible,    inchoate, yearnings. Typically, the  associated   feel­ ings  of  inadequacy,  anxiety,   restlessness or  guilt  are  ascribed  to the  machinations of fate.  As Niels Lindstedt says in Settlers  of the  Marsh, "he was a leaf borne  along  the wind, a prey to things  beyond  his con­ trol,  a fragment swept  away  by torrents." In Freudian terms,  these characters are neurotics, whose  psychic  growth  was  ar­ rested   at  an  early  crucial stage  so  that  they  never  fully  developed the  mechan­ ism   of   reality-testing to   balance    their overactive imaginations. Because of over­  mothering and   unresolved  oedipal   con­ flicts, their fantasies tend  towards omnip­ otent   self-evaluation,  though  with   pro­ nounced emotional conflicts  and   doubts
about the  resultant  self-images.
According to  Erik  Erikson,   such   per­ sons regularly retain  their  ideal  image  of the   mother  as  the  "unconscious  model for  the  world," and   their   actions    (and  the  rationalizations for  their  actions)  are  motivated  unconsciously   by the  need  for their  mothers' approval. 13  They   remain child-like in their  dependence and  unable to  take  full  responsibility for  their  lives. The fate  that  drives  them  is a kind  of superhuman mother figure,  guiding their lives   in   some   way   they   cannot  quite fathom, now  rewarding them,  now  pun­ ishing  them.
Grove  himself,  as the  themes  of his fic­ tion  suggest,   was  more   aware  than  his characters of  the  psychological  and   en­  vironmental factors  that  shape conscious­  ness.  There  is  no  explicit   evidence   or acknowledgment on his part that  he fully understood  these   processes  of  socializa­  tion,  but  there  is every  reason  to  believe that   his  lifelong effort  to  project  a  su­ perior  persona -the  image  in  which  he wanted  to   be   seen-was   a   deliberate attempt to alter  the  normal course  of his

OPINIONS & NOTES



own  socialization  to  bring   it  into  con­
formity  with  his most  cherished fantasies.
In Our  Daily Bread,  there is a most intriguing  passage   in   which   old   John Elliot  compares  the  growth   of  his  chil­ dren's characters to  the  development of photographs. Blank  sheets  of  paper   are immersed  in   a   chemical  solution   and images  eventually  appear. But  only  that appears which  was  "already  invisibly traced" on  the  paper. His  children, he muses, are  similarly  already imprinted in some  mysterious  fashion.  As  they  grow up, those imprints become  visible in their personalities. "We   can  but  become  what we are," he concludes, unable  to see any way out  of this determinism.
But  Grove  does hold  out  the  possibility that  the  imprints can  be  changed.  "Per­ haps,"  he has  Elliot  say, "if a person  had been  able,  with  his imagination, properly to interpret them, he might  have changed  the  picture that was to appear by and  by. But  insight   was  lacking." Neither Elliot nor  any  of   Grove's characters  possesses this kind of  insight,  but  Grove  apparently thought  he  did.   From   an  early  age  he tried  to interpret the  kind  of image  that  was  developing on  his "paper" and  with his  imagination change  the  picture that  was   to   appear  eventually.  More   than once  he altered his lifestyle  and  environ­ ment,  deliberately fashioning  for himself an  identity, parents and  past  to suit  the kind  of image  he had  of  himself.  And his fiction,  which  depicts  the  kind  of  social and  familial determinism he had  to over­ come  to  reach  his mature understanding of self  and  society,  is largely  a  record  of this  most  fascinating odyssey  and  quest.
NOTES
1 See,   for   instance, Sigmund Freud, Three Contributions to  the   Theory of Sex   (New York,   Ig62); Erik   Erikson, Childhood  and Society  (New York,   I963); and   Alexander Mitscherlich, Society  Without  the   Father (New  York,   I970).
2   Douglas   Spettigue,   FPG:   The   European
Years   (Ottawa: Oberon, I973), p.  64.
 3   Spettigue quotes Frye  as saying  "Of  course, Grove was  a  pathological liar." In  The European Years, p.  I 25.
4   Andre Gide, "Conversation avec   un   Alle­ mand," Oeuvres Completes d'Andri  Gide, ed.  L.  Martin-Chauffier, Tome  IX   (Paris, I932-39),  pp.    I38-39. The   influence   of such   works   as  Oscar  Wilde's  "The  Decay of   Lying"  and    of   Nietzsche's   philosophy cannot  be  entirely  discounted, but  it  seems the  more  likely  case  that  Grove found these  figures  congenial  because  of  his  own   pre­ disposition in  that direction.
5   W.  Healy   and   M.  T.  Healy, Pathological Lying, Accusation and   Swindling  (Boston, I9I5), p.  4!2. See  also  Thomas Hoyer, "Pseudologia Fantastica,"  The  Psychiatric Quarterly, 53  (I959).
6  Ben   Karpman, "Lying:  A  Minor Inquiry into   the   Ethics  of   Neurotic  and   Psycho­ pathic  Behavior,"  The   Psychiatric   Quar­ terly, 23  (Jan. I949),  I8.
7    Phyllis   Greenacre, "The  Imposter," The
Psychoanalytic Quarterly,  27   ( I958),  369.
a   Karpman, p. I g.
9  See  for  instance:   Margaret  Stobie, Frede­
rick    Philip     Grove     (New    York:   Grove, I973), pp.  so-si.
10 "The   Literary    Significance  of    Grove's
Search," Inscape, I I, No.  I  (Spring I974),
92-
11 It   Needs   to  be  Said   ... (Toronto, I929), p. 62.
12  P.  20.
13   Childhood and   Society, p.  339·

ENN RAUDSEPP

THE CHARACTER OF YVONNE IN
Under the Volcano

THE THREE CHARACTERS surrounding the Consul   in  Malcolm  Lowry's   Under the Volcano  are   nearly    invisible   in   most studies   of  the   noveL   For   some   critics, Lowry  justified  the  exclusion  of Yvonne, Jacques, and  even  Hugh, when  he  wrote to  Jonathan  Cape  that   the   four   char­ acters  were  intended  as  "aspects  of  the same  man.m  The  use of  complementary

OPINIONS & NOTES



characters to present  a more complex portrait of a human soul than  is possible with  autonomous characters does not, however,   preclude  the  individualization of the supporting characters. James  Joyce employed   a  similar  method   in  the  crea­ tion of his trinity  of characters, the three­  in-one   of   Ulysses.   Joyce   weighted    his characters more  evenly  than did  Lowry, who  placed   Geoffrey  at  the  centre and set Yvonne,  Hugh, and Jacques revolving  around him. Yet in Under the Volcano it is not simply a single character, but rather a  "single  quartet of  characters," as  one reviewer   labelled   them,2    whose  destiny Lowry  unfolds.
Yvonne's  part   in  the  quartet is more important than  the fourth fiddle to which she  is  often  assigned.  Douglas   Day,  for example, subordinates her  completely   to the  three  male  characters, casting  her  as "the eternal feminine ... all things  to all men."3   Day  later   admits   that   she  plays this  part  poorly,  and  perhaps the  reason for  her  faulty  performance as an  eternal woman  is that  she  has  a  different  score, one  more  complete than  has  been  recog­ nized. Back in the letter  to Cape, we find evidence of  the  attention  Lowry  paid  to Yvonne. In  fact,  there  he singled  her  out as an example of his achievement in char­  acterization, asserting, "I  believe in some eyes  the  character  drawing  will  appear the  reverse  of weak.  (What about  female  readers?) "4 In his analysis of Chapter IX he  suggested   once  more  that   in  Yvonne  he  had  created a  noteworthy character: "Readers might disagree  about  flashbacks here-some think  it good, others suspect­ ing  a  belated attempt to  draw  character and  at  that  a meretricious one-though
I   feel   many   of  your   feminine   readers might  approve." 5    And   when Cape's reader failed  to mention "the  very impor­ tant   fact  of Yvonne's death," Lowry  in­ dignantly  accused   him  of   neglecting  to read  Chapter XI.6   Lowry's  references  to female  readers are  an oblique way of say-
 ing that  Yvonne would be recognized  as authentic. He  was  right.  Even  if  Lowry did  develop   her  "belatedly" and  some­ what  artificially, Yvonne  is an individual­ ized,  self-conscious  character,  whose  ac­ tion,  speech,  and  thought contribute sig­ nificantly  to  the  meaning of  Under the Volcano.
Lowry penetrated the minds  of his four principal characters by distributing the narration of Under the Volcano among them,  a  choice  of  technique which  pro­ vides  further  evidence of  his  interest   in characterizing all  players  in  the quartet. Only   through   Yvonne's   own  thoughts could   Lowry   have  related  many   of  the events  of her life, for no one of the others  knows everything about her past. Geoffrey  cannot tolerate the notion  that  she might  have  nightmares  like  his  own,  and   she hides  her  publicity photos  from  him,  for her  story  bores  and   shames  him; Hugh knows nothing of her Hollywood  days and thus attributes the result of her competent riding, that  her  horse  is not  thirsty  after their   gallop,    to   a   miracle;  even   with Jacques, a comrade in the film world, she speaks  "not   always  honestly" about   her career  as a "Boomp Girl." Hugh, whose comments about her  reveal  the  most understanding, sees that  she is essentially alone  even  in  the  company of others.
Primarily through  her  interior  mono­ logues,  then,  almost   exclusively  those  in Chapter IX,  Lowry  presents  a  portrait of Yvonne  in sufficient  detail  to explain her situation on  the  Day  of the  Dead,  1938. Her  mother's death when Yvonne  was six left  her  without either  the  guidance or protection of an  older  person  of her  own sex.  This   early   loss,  Yvonne's   dominant childhood memory,  perhaps accounts for the  "dislocations of  the  functions ... of womanhood   itself"   which  stunt  her  growth  as an  actress.  The  men  who  sub­ sequently dominated her life either  leaned  on  her  heavily  for  support or  demanded she conform to  their  plans  for  her  as the

OPINIONS &  NOTES



price  of assistance.  The  close relationship she developed with  her father may have interfered with  her  ability  to develop marital  relationships. Captain  Constable in  fact   resembles   Geoffrey   in  many  re­ spects:   real  and  imagined  disgraces,  un­ consummated desire  to create, alcoholism, and  consular assignments. More  childlike  than  fatherly, he  allowed  her  to support him  by working  as a child actress  in parts  which  rather than  glamorous were  dan­ gerous   and   exploitative. The  death   of "The Boss-Boss" left her in the hands of a callous maternal  uncle  who  sent  her  to college  but  abandoned her  when  she  de­ fied  his  wishes.  Her  first  husband's  infi­ delities  led to their  divorce,  and  her child from    the   marriage,   "strangely   named  Geoffrey   too,"  died  at  six  months  from meningitis. Then, of  course,  she  married Geoffrey  who, armadillo-like, tried  to pull her  down  with  him  into  his tunnel.
For  this life, marked by relationships to men, Yvonne  might  be classified as a helpmate figure,  a  female   character  de­ fined  by her  role  as wife, daughter, mis­ tress, or mother to the male character ( s) . Yvonne's occasional refusal or inability to play  her  role,  as  well  as  some  degree  of self-awareness,   differentiates   her    from these  often  stereotypical characters.  Al­ though less able  even  than  Hugh to view herself ironically, she can stand  back from herself   and   recognize   that   the  face  she presents   to  the   world   differs   from   the image  she sees of herself.  A shop  window reflects  a  carefree, sun-burnished  figure, but Yvonne  realizes  the disparity between her  external appearance and  the  state  of her  soul:   "But   the  sun   turned grief  to poison  and  a glowing  body  only  mocked the sick heart, Yvonne knew,  if that sun­ darkened creature of waves and  sea mar­ gins and  windrows  did not!" Further, that  demeanour of  gaiety  and  confidence she wears  is consciously  cultivated  to  cover her  pain  and  fear. Perhaps she knows she must  try  to play her role:  when  Geoffrey
 begs for her return, it is her "warmth and merriment" he calls for. That her  bright countenance conceals  terror, however,  is revealed  in  a  scene  in  the  bull-throwing ring  when  an  image  of  the  old  woman with  the dominoes, who in their  morning encounter "chilled  her  heart," seems  to appear in her  mirror.

For  a  second  she'd had   the  awful  sensation that not   Popocatepetl, but   the  old  woman with   the  dominoes that  morning was  look­ ing  over  her  shoulder. She  closed  the  com­  pact  with  a  snap, and   turned to  the  others smiling.
Both  the  Consul and   Hugh were  staring gloomily  at the  arena.

Yvonne  has  reason  to be gloomy  herself, but  she fastens  on  a smile  with  the  kind of deliberate control she often  exhibits. Yvonne may be "all  things  to all men," or at  least  she  tries  to  be some  of the  time, but she also has some sense of her own identity.
Lowry   tailored Yvonne's dialogue to
her   individual  personality,  background, and  emotional state.   Her   speech  accur­ ately   reflects   her   inclination   to   active  rather than   intellectual  endeavours, her limited   education, and   her  intense   pre­  occupation  with   her   marital  problems.  Yvonne  actually speaks  fewer  times, and  usually at less length  when she does speak, than  either  Geoffrey  or  Hugh. She  never uses a literary  allusion  or figure of speech, elements   prominent  in  the  language  of Geoffrey and  Hugh. Both the serious phil­ osophizing  and  the drunken raving of the conversation at the Salon  Ofelia leave her behind.   As   the   three    scan   Cervantes' menu,  Geoffrey  observes that his punning is "mostly over  her head." When  she tries to enter  the discussion about the exploita­ tion  of  Mexico,  she  draws   a  naive  con­ clusion from  the preceding exchanges  be­ tween  Geoffrey and  Hugh and  is advised to "Have another bottle  of beer."  Finally,  much  of  her  dialogue reveals  deep  con­ cern   about   the   fate   of   her   marriage.

139

OPINIONS & NOTES



When  Hugh puts  a question  about Maxi­ milian   and   Carlotta  to  her   in  abstract terms    ("Should  Juarez  have   had   that  man  shot  or  not?"),  Yvonne's  response, although   characteristically    shallow,    is poignant and  moving  when one considers her  involvement in an analogous circum­ stance:  "It's an  awfully  tragic  story."
Part  of the time Yvonne simply remains silent. She arrives in Quauhnahuac with "carefully thought-out speeches,"  but she does not deliver  them.  Her silences, some­ times  indicated by a  dash  within  quota­ tion marks  (as Dale  Edmonds pointed  out in  his 1974  MLA  paper  "'-':  A Top­ ography of the Typography in Under the Volcano") ,  most  often   result   from   her emotional  turmoil or an effort  to conceal it, as when  the  trembling Geoffrey  offers, "Have a drink." Also, some of Geoffrey's behaviour   would    leave   anyone   dumb­ founded. To   his  announcement  that   he has  lost  the  car   Yvonne   begins  a  non­  chalant response  but  cannot continue it: "I'd   far  rather  walk,  only-."  In   one instance,  she  is  simply  unwilling   to  say what  she does not feel:

"Geoffrey, I'm  so  thirsty, why  don't  we stop  and  have  a  drink?"
"Geoffrey, let's  be reckless  this  once  and get   tight  together  before   breakfast!"
Yvonne said   neither of  these   things.

Another time her refusal to speak demon­ strates  remarkable   restraint,   as   when Geoffrey    maliciously    taunts   her  about Jacques  and   Hugh  during   their   walk home.    Yvonne     does    not    monopolize  silence,  however.   Geoffrey  often  tries  to speak  to her  without  success or  imagines he is speaking when in fact  he is not. On  their   final  day   together  they  face  each other   "like  two  mute   unspeaking forts,"  unable  to communicate.
The thoughts Lowry  attributes to Yvonne, unlike  her  speech,  are  often  in­ distinguishable  from   those   of   Geoffrey and    Hugh  with    respect    to   language. Yvonne's meditations  on  "fanciful  geo-
 logic thaumaturgy," the bull'sentrapment, and  the relentless  wheeling  of the galaxies contribute to  the  growth   of  the  novel's forest  of symbols and  reveal  her own concerns. On  occasion  Lowry  assigned thoughts  to  her   which   are   unthinkable from   the  mind   of  any  other   character: "how  delicious,  how good ... to feel  one­ self  part  of the  brilliantly-colored  serape  of existence." Under the influence of alco­ hol,  however,  her  thought  process resem­ bles Geoffrey's. She  maintains an  illusion of sobriety  by transferring drunkenness to objects  around  her:  "Yvonne was sober. It was the undergrowth, which  made  sud­ den movements into  their  path, obstruct­ ing  it,  that   was  not  sober." Thus Lowry initiates her  into  the "Great Brotherhood of Alcohol."
Under the  Volcano is about the  ways in which  guilt,  the  "weight of the  past," 7 encumbers the  human spirit.  Beneath his burden of  real  and  imagined sins,  Geof­ frey falls and  he cannot act  to steer away from  his  downward course.  By  contrast, Yvonne's path  in the novel leads  upward, and  her reaction to her own guilt  provides  an  alternative to  Geoffrey's  self-destruc­ tion, as well as a hope  that  his damnation need  not  be  eternal. Like  Geoffrey   and  Hugh, Yvonne fails to be a good Samari­ tan  to  the  Indian  ("mankind  himself''8 ) dying  beside  the   road,   when   her   weak stomach turns  at  the  possibility  of seeing blood.    Her    insufficiency    there    is   pre­ figured  by an  incident which,  even if  not so  tragic  as Geoffrey's callous  use  of  the Samaritan's   furnaces   or   so   comic    as Hugh's publicity capers  and  seduction of Jewish   wives,   causes   her   similar   guilt.  When  she  knew  that  her  duty  was to re­ trieve  a dog  dying  in  pools of blood  on a Honolulu street,  she fainted. In  addition, as the final survivor of the Constable line, she carries  the  guilt  of the  entire family, that   "mistake  on   the  part   of  nature." Yvonne's response is consonant with Juan Cerillo's belief  that "conscience had  been

OPINIONS  & NOTES



given  man  to regret   [the  past]  only in so far as that  might  change the future":  she strives   to  escape   the   "meaningless   tra­ gedy"  which  has  left  her  relatives in in­ sane  asylums  by discovering the secret  of her  own  meaning.
Yvonne's quest,  which   is  present  only in   barest    outline,  suggests   the   voyage upon  which  Sigbjorn Wilderness embarks in "Through the  Panama," as well as the one Lowry  planned for The Voyage That Never  Ends.  The pattern follows  that  of the  mythological adventure  through  the stages of separation, initiation, and  return or   the   equivalent  stages   in   the   Divine Comedy of hell,  purgatory, and  paradise. Lowry   specified   that   the   path motif  in Under the  Volcano derives  from  Dante, and   thus   here   I  shall   discuss  Yvonne's journey   in   the   context  of  its  Dantean imagery   and   structure. In   Los  Angeles, that    "dark  and    accursed  City   of   the Angels,"    Yvonne   walks    down    Virgil Avenue  alone,  perhaps an  indication that she has no guide  for her  journey,  and sees "as  might  the  Consul" a sign  for "Infor­ mal  Dancing" transform into "Infernal." In   the  same   way   that   Dante's  pilgrim sheds his sins in hell, here Yvonne  discards the  illusion  that  she  might  become  a suc­ cessful  actress.  Even   after   travelling  to New York, "the awful darkness [persists]  in her mind" and she walks among  "faces [in which] all hope  seemed  to have died" until  she sees Jacques' film "Le  Destin  de Yvonne   Griffaton,"  in   which    Yvonne Griffaton,  a  French counterpart of  her­ self, successfully escapes  from  the shadows  of her ancestors. The film fulfills the same function  as  the  representations  of  right action  which  Dante's pilgrim witnesses in purgatory,  for   Yvonne   follows   the   ex­ ample   and  travels   to  Europe where  she meets Geoffrey  and begins a new life. She might    have    found   her    paradise  with Geoffrey,   but,   of   course,   she  does   not. Perhaps the  fault  is  hers.  She  leaves  the theatre  for   a  cigarette  just  as  Yvonne
 Griffaton attains the  "faith in  life itself" which still eludes Yvonne.  Lowry does not specify  where  she should  place  her  faith, but  he does seem  to condemn her  for  not finding  "a faith  merely in 'life' sufficient." At her death, however,  as she is drawn up into the heaven  "through eddies of stars scattering aloft  with ever wider circlings," the imagery recalls the concentric celestial rings of light  in Dante's paradise.
Yvonne's  capacity for  self-renewal has significance   for  the  novel  because  it  al­ lows her  to  retain   the  ability  to act  and to love.  In  spite  of her  failures,  she  sur­  vives to begin  the climb  again.  It is, after  all, her action  of returning to Geoffrey  on the Day of the Dead, r 938, which precipi­ tates  the  action  of  Under  the  Volcano. Many  readers  have  reacted   to  this event  with   the   kind   of   disbelief   Jacques  ex­ presses a year later: "But  hombre, Yvonne  came   back!  That's what   I  shall   never understand. She came  back to the man!" Jacques cannot or will not understand the simple explanation for her attempt to find Geoffrey once more: she loves him. Under the  V olea no  is,  among  other   things,   a story of love. The  torture of separation revealed   in   their   letters   and   their   me­ mories  of a  consummated marriage  "too good,  too horribly unimaginable to  lose" make  Yvonne's  effort  to recover  this love entirely  plausible.
The  desirability of her  return to Geof­ frey  has  been  questioned  more  seriously than  its probability, and  some  critics  be­ lieve  that   Yvonne's presence  in  Quauh­ nahuac harms  rather than helps the Con­ suJ.9 One  reason  given  is  that  the conver­ gence of Yvonne,  Hugh, and  Jacques only reminds    Geoffrey   of   her  adultery,  on which  he  blames  his  alcoholic  degenera­ tion.  He  cannot  forgive  her;  nor  can  she forgive  herself.  She  stumbles and  nearly  falls  because   her  guilty   conscience   has blocked out the scene of her "crime" with Jacques,  and   when   Geoffrey   drops   his news  about   Hugh's arrival, she  "stop [s]

OPINIONS & NOTES



dead."  Although he  reproaches  her  re­ lentlessly,  he  admits  to  himself  that   his marriage, like  his  garden, was  "willfully slaughtered." His  self-absorption,  sexual guilt,  and  self-punishment  syndrome  de­ manded that  he wreck  his marriage, and he  forced   her  away   by  tormenting  her emotionally and   neglecting her  sexually. With    Jacques  she   found    sympathetic affection and  with  Hugh,  consolation in a  troubled time  as well as sexual  release. Her   lapses  in   fidelity   were  temporary, however,  and  Geoffrey  occupies  her  full attention on  this  day.  Although she  ap­  parently still  finds  Hugh attractive, she stubbornly   resists  any   renewal   of   their relationship, and  I  find  no evidence  that  on the Day of the Dead  1938 she has any interest  in him  as  a potential lover.  Both scenes  in   which   she  and   Hugh   might seem  to  be  enjoying each   other's  com­ pany  excessively,  one  at   the  swimming  pool  and   the  other at  a  taco  stand,   are narrated by Geoffrey, who would be liable to suspect,  even  to  welcome,  further  be­ trayal.  Hugh's perception of their  activi­  ties  is that   "[i] n  the  square   too  they'd  talked  of  nothing but  the  Consul."  On Yvonne's agenda  during   their   morning ride  is finding  out  what  he  knows  about  Geoffrey's  condition  ["What do you think about  Geoffrey?  Yvonne  asked  the  ques­ tion  at  last"]  and   testing  on  Hugh her idea   of    constructing  a   new   life   with Geoffrey   in   a   northern  paradise.  The  escape  she  envisions  can  never  succeed,  for  Geoffrey's  demons would  follow  him anywhere.  Also,   the   association   Lowry makes  between   her   pastoral   vision  and Hugh's excursion to sea indicates that  her romantic fantasy  is impracticable. Never­ theless,  her  transformation of  the  shack Hugh imagines into  a home where  Geof­ frey  might   find   the   peace  to  finish  his book reveals  tenderness and sincerity. The  creative power  of her  vision almost  sways Geoffrey  from  his  course  of  destruction: "the   desire   remained -like  an  echo  of
 Yvonne's own-to  find  her,  to  find  her now, to reverse their  doom,  it was a desire amounting almost  to a resolution...." Nearly   every   character  in  the  novel­ not  only  Hugh and  Jacques,  whose  judg­  ments  may be doubted, but also Dr. Vigil and    Senora  Gregorio,   who   are   often  voices of wisdom -expresses the opinion that   Yvonne's  return should   save  Geof­  frey.
Yvonne is  also  thought  to  contribute to  the  Consul's ruin  by not  making suffi­ cient  effort  after  he  runs  into  the  woods toward El Farolito to pull  him back from  the  edge  of the  chasm.10  In  his own  pre­  sentation of Chapter XI,  Lowry  stressed the symbolic  level:  "On the surface  Hugh and  Yvonne are  simply searching for  the Consul,  but   such   a  search   would   have added meaning to anyone who knows any­ thing of  the  Eleusinian mysteries.... "11
Even  on  the  surface or  naturalistic  level, however,   Yvonne's  actions   do   not  sug­ gest neglect  of the Consul.  If anyone lags in  this  "salvage operation,"  it is  Hugh. Yvonne  marches  ahead    of   him,   "pur­ posely  too  fast  for  talking,"  pointing out the  way. She  does  make  the  wrong  deci­ sion on directions, but at a juncture where  both  paths  resemble  the  arms  of "a man  being  crucified," the  choice  of  the  more traveled way is understandable, as well as logical,  since  it  passes  by  two  cantinas. She   blames  herself   for  the  delay   when Hugh   tarries   over   a   drink   at   the   El Petate: "perhaps it was her own fault  for refusing    to   come    in...."   Hugh   and  Yvonne   do  seem   to   neglect   their   task when  they order   beer  and  mescal  in  the El Popo. Their stopping in the restaurant might    be   explained  by   the   fact    that Yvonne  initially thinks  she sees Geoffrey there: "on  the  porch, for  an  instant, the Consul  sat  dining quietly  by himself.  But only Yvonne had  seen him." He has been there  at  one  time,  several  months before, and   their   drinking gives  them   the  time and  opportunity to find Geoffrey's Rech-

OPINIONS & NOTES



nung  and  his poem-giving a clue to his condition and   whereabouts. Upon  deci­ phering it  they rush  out,  and  in Yvonne's  head   resounds   the  line  "who  once  fled north." Yvonne  is alternately determined, nervous,    sad,   and   resigned   but   never frivolous   about  finding  Geoffrey:  "You know   perfectly    well   I   won't    just   run away   and   abandon   him," she  reminds  Hugh.
Much  of  the  meaning ot  this  chapter, however,  does lie below  the surface,  even if not perhaps in the Eleusinian mysteries. Yvonne's  freeing of the caged  eagle is one example of an  action  with  almost  purely symbolic   significance:  her  violent   emo­ tional   reaction would   not  be  justified  if this  were  simply  a  distraction from   the task  of  retrieving  Geoffrey.   This   scene functions as  a  parallel to  Hugh's  rescue of the  seagull  and  as a contrast to  Geof­ frey's  unsuccessful effort  to  free  an "in­  sect of some sort"  from  a eat's teeth.  The flight  imagery  used  in  both  incidents re­ lates  them  to the  ascent  of  Yvonne's soul into   the  stars.   Thus,  the  release  of  the eagle   prefigures her  own  death. At  the same  time,  the  eagle,  "a  little  world  of fierce  despairs  and  dreams," can  be con­ sidered   to  represent Geoffrey's soul  and her  action  to free  it  a  recognition of  the inevitability  of  Geoffrey's departure. In either  case,  the  eagle's  escape  symbolizes her  final separation from  Geoffrey: "She felt  only  an  inexplicable secret   triumph and  relief ... and  then,  stealing over  her, the  sense  of  utter  heartbreak and   loss." Although  she   once   looks   back   for   a glimpse of the  majestic bird,  she knows it is futile: he is gone.  In  the  Aztec  legend Yvonne  recalls  in this chapter,  Popocate­
petl lost Ixtaccihuatl just as he recovered her.
In  a  letter   to  Geoffrey,  Yvonne  pre­ dicted  the cause  and  simultaneity of  their  deaths:  "Never  think   that   by  releasing me  you will  be free.... You  would  only free  something else to  destroy  us both.  I
 am  frightened, Geoffrey." Geoffrey  does definitively  abandon any  hope  of  renew­ ing  his life with  Yvonne  at  the  moment he realizes that  his intercourse with Maria has very likely given him "brutal hygienic reasons."  He  immediately  moves  toward  the   branded   horse,   the  force   which   in effect destroys both Geoffrey  and  Yvonne.  Although Lowry  defended the probability of  Yvonne's  dying  under the  hooves of a stampeding  horse,  the  scene  serves  pri­ marily  as  a  prelude to  Geoffrey's  death  and  thus as an amplification of the power of the final devastating chapter. Yvonne's ascension into  the stars functions not only as an  appropriate  close  to her  life of fas­ cination   with  the  heavens   but  also  as  a contrast to  Geoffrey's  fall into  the  earth. As he plunges into  the barranca, Geoffrey recognizes  that   "succor was  at  hand   all the  time"  and  acknowledges Yvonne's efforts,  as well as his  love for  her,  in  his plea,   "Ah,   Yvonne,   sweetheart,  forgive me!"
Thus,  while  it  perhaps cannot be said that  Yvonne  has a life of her own outside of the novel as, for example, Molly Bloom does outside  Ulysses, she nevertheless has life as a full  human being  within  Under the  Volcano. She  is an  individualized character who  resists easy definition in  a traditional female  role and she retains  her independence and  the  ability  to act  and love in spite of her own burden of the "weight   of  the   past."   As  Lowry   knew, she  proves  that   he  was  capable of  char­ acterization  and   she  is  a   character  of whom  female  readers  can approve.

NOTES
1 Malcolm Lowry, Selected  Letters, ed.  Har­ vey    Breit    and   Margerie   Bonner    Lowry  (Philadelphia:  Lippincott,  1965),  p.  So.
2   "A  Prose  Wasteland," The  Times  Literary Supplement,  11  May    1962,   p.  338.   Cited in   Dale   Edmonds, "Under   the   Volcano: A   Reading   of   the    'Immediate   Level,' " Tulane Studies in English, 16  (1968),  67.
3  Malcolm Lowry (New York: Oxford Univ. Press,   I 973), P· 399·

143

OPINIONS & NOTES



4   Lowry, p.  6o.
5   P. So.
s  P. 83.
7    Lowry, p.  66. s  Lowry, p.  79·
9  Day,  p.  339; Edmonds, p.  74·
1'0   Day,  p.  340; Edmonds, p.  76.
11  Lowry, p.  83.

CAROLE  SLADE


CARR & LIVESAY

CAN MYTHS   EVER BE  DESTROYED?  Ham­ mered  to flatness  by the  hot  iron  of rea­ son?  Edythe Hembroff -Schleicher's book of admirable research into  the "real" life of  Emily  Carr, The  Untold  Story,  is at great   pains   to  demolish   the  mythology  that  has  grown  up  around her.  But  peo­ ple, even  today,  prefer  legend  to history; and  the  reason,  perhaps, is that  legend  is symbolic   and   appeals   to   the   intuitive, irrational side of our being. Once  these images  take  hold, it is difficult  to see how "objective truth"  can  win  out!   An  ex­ ample   is  the  tremendous impact on  the young  generation of  that  very  bad  film, Star  Wars.   Science   is  simply   the   pro­ jector; fantasy   takes  over.  We  are  inex­ tricably  caught in the syndrome  of  Right  Hand, Left  Hand. Emily Carr  knew this well. The extremes of love and  hate  feed the  cauldron. From  this vortex, how  can even   the   closest   friend    sift   out    "the  truth"?
Edythe Hembroff-Schleicher has  taken great  pains to check back on Emily Carr's own statements about her work, her pub­ lic, and  her  friends.  Particularly valuable to  those  who  knew  and  loved  her paint­ ings    is   the    "Chronology"    describing Emily's day-to-day, year-by-year life, writ­  ten  in  brief  note  form  but  with  detailed information as to addresses, dates,  travels,  gallery  showings,  friendships and  health. From  this account  I was able  to  remem-
 her  just  when  I  had  met  her,  on  a  visit with  my  father, J. F.  B. Livesay,  to 3I6
Beckley  Avenue  in  Victoria ... probably
in  the spring  of  I 938.
At  that   time,  following  Emily  Carr's
recognition in  eastern   Canada, the  then curator  of  the   National  Gallery,   Alan Plaunt, enlisted   Livesay's  interest  in  see­ ing the paintings. My father, a newspaper­ man  with  wide  interests,  was quite  a fol­ lower  of the art  scene in Canada. He  was also a close friend of  Plaunt. Accordingly, on  a  business  trip  west,  he  asked  me  to accompany him  to  the  Carr studio.  We were  fascinated  by  what  we  saw:   forest sketches  in  oils, on  brown  manila paper. Emily seemed appreciative of our interest.
In  the meantime, Alan  Plaunt had seen a  portrait of Emily  Carr by Nan  Cheney of Vancouver. It had  been painted  (prob­ ably)   in November I938,  and  was shown in Toronto in the summer  of  I939· Plaunt was struck  with  admiration for  the work, so much  so that  he  bought it for  the  Na­ tional  Gallery  for  $250.00.
As it turned out,  the cramped National
Gallery   at  that   time,   I939,  had  not  the space   for   the   portrait; so  Alan   Plaunt asked  Livesay  if he  would  like to hang  it in  his house  in  the  woods at  Clarkson - on  condition, of course,  that  it  would  be returned to  the  gallery  on  the  old  man's death. Eventually the  portrait, placed  in
a prominent position  above  the mantel of a stone  fireplace, was a great  joy to Live­ say.
As a  background to  my  knowledge of
this  transaction,  I  would   like  to  quote from   J.  F.  B.  Livesay's   report  on   the
proceedings, dated  September  12,   1941 (from  The  Making  of a Canadian, Ryer­ son,  I947):
Brilliant  young  men   in   their  thirties,   de­ voted    to  their  country,  are    scarce.   The death of  Alan   Plaunt  is  a  heavy   loss.  He  was  my  friend. It is  not  easy  for  a  young  man   to  be  the   friend  of  an  old  man.  Our friendship was   formed,  indissolubly,  when  I met  him  on  the   boat  on  my  return  from

OPINIONS  & NOTES



the  Fourth  Imperial Conference in  London and   Edinburgh.
What I  then   liked   about  Alan   was   his
freedom  and   frankness and   the   sense  that as  a  young   man   he  was  following his  way,
thinking  out   and    discarding   ideologies  as they   became  attractive   or   irksome. That was  in  1930. It was  shortly  after   this  that he  became the  protagonist of  public  owner­ ship   of   the   then    upspringing   industry  of radio  broadcasting  by  founding   the   Cana­ dian   Radio League.
In  that   campaign he  and   I had   much  in common, because  I   had    long    been    en­ trenched in  the  cognate field  of  co-operative news-gathering and  distribution. That phase  of  his  public effort,  resulting in  the   report of   the   Royal   Commission  of   those   years,
was   the   prime factor  in   the   establishment of,  first,   the   Canadian  Broadcasting  Com­ mission, and   second, the   present  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, of  which he  was one  of  the  original  Governors....
Even   at the  last  his  one   thought was  of how  he could  be of use  to his  country. With tender   remembrance  the    writer   likes   to recall  what was perhaps the last of these pro­ jects.    It  concerned that  great   Canadian artist, Emily   Carr, of  Victoria,  maybe   the finest   product  of  Canadian   artistic  life  in the  past  fifty years.  Though she  preferred to write her  own  life,  there  was in  existence a valid  statement of Emily  Carr, a  portrait by Mrs.  Cheney, of  Vancouver, a  very  remark­ able  portrait  that perpetuates for  Canadian generations  this  unique artist.
Just   a  few  years   ago -such  long  years,
measured  by  that young   man's life  of   bril­ liant  promise -Alan Plaunt, a  governor of the   National  Gallery of   Canada,  with   the writer,  was   shown    by   the  curator  of   the Gallery,  Eric   Brown, a   photograph of  the portrait mentioned.  Brown  wanted the  Gal­ lery  to  buy  it and  wanted also  to  put  on  an Emily   Carr   show,  inclusive  of  other  B.C. artists....
It was  a  happy chance when we learned
that  the   portrait  was  for   sale,   on   a  basis Alan   could   afford  and   that  made the  Na­ tional  Gallery  residuary  legatee.  Alan  and myself   wrangled  who   should  be   the  inter­ mediate custodian. I am  glad   to  think that  I  won   and    that  this   portrait   was   in   his house  in  his  last  days,  because  it  was  a  fine artistic  testimony  to   the   singleness  of  his devotion  to   what  he   used    to   call    "The Canadian Idea."

After    the    untimely  death   of   Alan
 Flaunt, Livesay  began  his efforts  to have the Nan Cheney portrait displayed  in the Toronto  Art   Gallery.  But   by  October I942, Toronto's curator, Martin Baldwin, was writing:

This  morning  when   I got   to   my  desk,   I found a letter from  Lawren Harris in which he  quotes    Emily   Carr  as  saying   that  she strongly objected  to  having any  portrait of herself  in   the   exhibition. Under  these  cir­ cumstances I don't  see  that we can  do  any­  thing but  defer   to  her  wishes....  You  will be  sorry   to  hear   that Lawren  also  reports that Emily  Carr is now  confined  to  her  bed after  another severe  attack.
J. F. B. Livesay replied:

It's too bad  that   Emily  Carr will  not  let  us hang   the   portrait. My   daughter  writes   to the  same  effect   and   that she  is  so ill, they fear    the    end.    She   was   always    crochety, about  her  art, her  public, her  private life. Something of  this  comes  out  quite strongly in  this  remarkable portrait.

Instead, on Livesay's  death in  I944, Nan Cheney's  "remarkable" portrait was sent to its rightful  owner, the National Art Gallery. But instead of being hung  or sent on tour, it was stored  away in a basement holding.  This   incident  illustrates, I   be­ live,  a  problem   inherent  in  Hembroff­ Schleicher's book,  which  purports to  be "The  Untold Story."  For  there   are  al­ ways  more   details   that   come   to  light, more  aspects,  more opinions.  The  author
says, for  instance, that   "J. F. B. Livesay
bought    the   Cheney portrait."  Untrue.
And  instead   of  using  it  for  the  frontis­
piece  of  her   book   Hembroff-Schleicher has  inserted  one  of  her  own  portraits of Emily  Carr. But  actually that   is only  a copy of a famous  photograph of Emily, taken  by Mortimer Lamb!
All during this period  on the west coast Emily Carr  was known  only as a painter. But her Indian stories that  were to appear in  Klee  Wyck began  to be read  over  the CBC  by  G.  G.  Sedgewick   and   Ira  Dil­ worth, some time  before  their  actual pub­ lication   in  I 941.  These  inspired   great

145

OPINIONS & NOTES



interest   and   led   to  a  "conspiracy"  be­
tween  Plaunt and  J. F. B. Livesay to find
someone   who  could   write   the  painter's
biography before she died. Would  I do it?
I felt the idea  was a rash one for some­ one  inexperienced  with  memoir  writing.  But I had  been doing  journalism for west­ ern  outlets  and  for  the  CBC,  and  it  was wartime: we certainly needed  the money from  my  writing. A toddler  son kept  me at  home.  With   this  situation  in  mind  I wrote   to  Emily  asking   for  a  follow-up  interview, which  was  accorded. By  this year,   I94I, the  painter was  home  from hospital,  living   probably   in   her   newly built  studio  on St. Andrews  St., a part  of the  old  Carr  property. She  wrote  to me, however, from "2 I 8 Simcoe  St":

Dear Mrs.  Macnair:
I remember you  and  your  father coming
to my studio on  Beckley St.  on Sunday. I remember that  you   gave   my  work   a  nice review,  one  that did  not  annoy me  as  most do.  I dislike   publicity. Most   write   ups  are so  insincere. Those  dreadful  little   flappers who  only   use  the   art jargon   they  are   now taught in school  under the name  of "Art Appreciation", these  young  high  school  and college   students pose  as  art  critics and   are very  hard  to  endure as  they  know  nothing about art.  They fill   up  with   personalities, cheap witticisms at  one's   expense,  exploit­ ing    one's    eccentricity-detestable!     The biography  idea   has  been  put  to  me  a  num­ ber  of  times  but  I have  dodged it-always seems  to me  the   time  for  that   is  after one is dead. I had  a stroke last  June and  I have engina [sic]  but  I'm far  from  dead. All summer I could not  work  but  in  November I gave  my  usual one  man  show  (work  done before  my  stroke but  not  before  exhibited) in   Vancouver  Gallery and   now  I'm  work­ ing  again.

I do remember that  afternoon spent  with Emily.  She  was now  bedridden, wrapped up  in  her   grey   mantle. "I  can't  paint much  now ... my heart. But I can write." We spoke  of  Klee  Wyck and  of how  she had  managed to  write  it, between  illness and  painting; a great  accomplishment. I told  her  her  painter's eye enabled  her  to
 use words  with great  vividness. I was ner­ vous, however,  about raising  the  topic  of doing  a series  of interviews with  her,  an introductory  step   towards   a   biography; but   somehow, towards  the   end   of  the visit,  I  managed to ask her  the  question. She  answered, ever  so  bluntly: "I don't need anyone  to do that for me. I am writ­  ing  it  myself!" Crestfallen, I  returned by ferry   to  North  Vancouver  and   to  "my little   Peter."   On   re-reading  it,  Emily's  letter began  to  take  on more  pointed sig­ nificance  for  me.  It revealed   an  extra­ ordinary   person,   determined  to   expose herself   honestly   to  the  world,   whatever the consequences.
I repeat the text here  (although Edythe Hembroff-Schleicher has  printed the main  body of it, in her  book.)

Eric  Brown  mentioned a biography, thought it  might be  helpful  to  other Canadian  stu­ dents  and  said,   he   heard  I  was   writing. Why   not  do  it  myself,  or  let  someone else, and   then it  was  suggested if I  did  not  do  it myself   there were   two  writers  in  Victoria, Mrs.  Legri Shaw   and  Gwen Cash, two  wo­ men  who  know  very  little of  me  and   whose writing I  dislike.   So  I  began, meaning to send   it   to   Eric  Brown  for   criticism later. His  letter  followed very  soon  and   I finished it   afterwards,  parts  need    re-writing. The facts are   there, just   a  story of  the  growth of   my   work.   As  one's  life   and   work   are closely   woven,   it   meant I  was   obliged    to bring  in   my   family's  indifference  to   my work,    and    also   the    severity  of   an   older sister, now  dead. I read  the  first  part of  my writing to  my  only  close  relative remaining (a  sister)  a  couple of  years  older than  my­ self  and   she  was  very   angry   about it.  If I could not  do  it  honestly I could   not  do  it at all  and  the  emotional stress  was very  bad for   the   engina  pains.  My   sister   is  going  blind   and   I felt   she   had   enough   to   bear  without the  other, so  the   M.S.   I  have   not looked  at for  several years.  Some  day  I may re-write it.  Some  day  I may  tear  it  up?   So look  after the  growing of  your  little Peter. Thank you  for  your  interest  but  let  me  die first.
If you  are  ever  in  Victoria I would   like
to  see  you.  I never go  out.

OPINIONS &  NOTES



That  brief  experience  with   the  body and  spirit  of  Emily  became  the  basis for a poem of mine  that  is always  in demand when   I read   to  women's groups: "The Three Emily's." In  it I express some envy, that  Emily  Carr had  the  fortitude to put her creative work first, be it painting or writing.  Of course, in her peak years she received strong support from  men  as well as women.  It has always  been known  that Lawren Harris encouraged her to go on experimenting with her painting; to be followed   by  Ira  Dilworth, who  became her  guiding spirit,   inspiring and  editing her  prose  writing. What  hasn't  been  so forcefully noted  is that, whilst  women artists   and   critics   like  Hembroff-Schlei­ cher,  Nan  Cheney  and  Ruth Humphrey gave  her  everyday moral support, certain  men,  like  Mark  Tobey,   pushed   her  for­ ward   into  finding a  transcendental  rai­ son-d'etre   for   creativity.  Hembroff-Sch­ leicher's   book    makes    this    abundantly clear.  It also reveals  for the first time that for  many  years   Emily   had   a  persistent suitor: William Paddon, whom  she as persistently rejected. She  saw herself,  not as a marriageable woman, but  as a  crea­ tor.  The  energy  that  a lover  demands of a  woman  had  to be  poured,  in  her  case, into  painting. And  when  the  body finally wore   out   and   painting   became   impos­ sible, she  painted with  words.
So, in  the  long  run,  what  does  it  mat­ ter  to literature or  art  whether or  not  in real   life   the   artist    was   unpredictable, irascible?  at   times   overwhelmingly  de­ voted  to someone, at times spiteful? What  does  it  matter  if   the  artist   was  careless about  getting dates in chronological order  and  contradictory about how  events  took place? It is a  truism  worth  repeating, as Derek  Reimer in Sound  Heritage empha­ sizes,  that    "in   examining the   past   ... what  people  thought happened  is just as important as what  actually  did  happen."

DOROTHY  LIVESAY
 JOURNALS
Special    "Canadian"  issues   of   journals that  don't  ordinarily devote  themselves  to Canadian studies  present  a singular prob­ lem  to  readers  who  want   to  keep  up  to date. Yet pursuing them  offers only mixed reward.   Pacific  QuarterlyjMoana,  from Hamilton, N.Z., for example, published a Canadian  literature  supplement early  in I 979,  with   brief  surveys   (one   by  Fred Cogswell)   mostly   intended  for   readers  overseas.   ("One  learns   people   through the  heart,  not  the  eyes or  the  intellect," says W. 0.  Mitchell at  the  47th  Couchi­ ching   conference   [Growth    in   a   Con­ serving  Society, Yorkminster  Publishing,
$6.95], quoting Twain to  the  effect  that foreigners  can  only  photograph  exteriors
-never know  the interiors-of  another nation;  but   then   Mitchell  goes  on   to assert  a  positive   faith   in  the   power   of artists  to construct "bridges" between dis­ ciplines  and  peoples.)   Ecriture  Fran aise (Sherbrooke)  promises  to  provide  essays, profiles,  and   bibliographies  on   French­ language writers   outside  France, and  in its  first  issue   (I 979)   looks  at  everyone  from Senghor to Aquin. Sewanee  Review also attempts  comparisons, with  a  Com­  monwealth   Literature  number  (Winter I979). In it, William  Walsh  tries to evoke the   metaphoric  particularities  of  Klein and   Birney in a context  that involves generalizations about  another dozen mod­ em  poets; from  such nets, he admits,  "the  mackerel   always  escape,"  and  Canadian writing  is perhaps better  served  by some of  the  reviews.  Reviews  also  constitute (emergent from  what?)  in  I978;  as with most  reviewing,  there  is  a mixture of in­ telligent    reflections,    provocative   judg­  ments,   and   the   acid   aspersions   of  the slender   mind,   but  there    are   excellent  notes   on   Hodgins  and   Mandel,  which repay  enquiry.
Coupled with  such  journals  are  several
new ones, in  which  much  of interest  is to

147

OPINIONS & NOTES



be found. Compass, Edmonton's delib ­ ately  but  unrestrictedly titled  "Provincial Review,"  has   since   it   began   in   1977 printed a number of  arresting pieces:  W. L. Morton on  populism,  R. R. Wilson on Borges and  tradition (vis-.a-vis Canadian writing),   David    Jackel's  reviews,   and some   analyses   of   language  and   style. Poetry  Canada   Poesie,  in  a  newspaper  format  edited   by  Clifton   Whalen,  P.O. Box 1280, Station A, Toronto, announces a beginning subscription of II ,ooo, which will arouse  surprised envy in every other editor  in  the  country; its first issue  (Fall I979)  is a small anthology of new poetry, with  an  accompanying feature profile  of Cogswell.  Two  further news  sheets,  des livres   et   des   jeunes   (Sherbrooke)  and Lurelu   (445  St.-Fran<_;ois-Xavier, Bureau
28,  Montreal) , will  be of  great  value  to parents, librarians, and children's teachers
of French, for they supply illustrations, reviews,  interviews, and  commentary  re­ lating   to   new   publications  in   French­ language children's literature. The virtue  of the latter lies in its longer reviews;  that  of  the  former   derives  from  its  brief  de­ scriptive  comparative comments on cate­ gories  of  materials  that  include diction­ aries,  record  albums, stories,  magazines,  and  much else besides.
W.H.N.


REFERENCES

FROM GALE RESEARCH  CO.  come several new volumes   of  useful   reference  books  of  interest to  students  of  Canadian  literature.  In   Con­ temporary  Authors,  vols.  77-88   ($45.00  and
$48.oo), entries include biographical and  bib­
liographical comment on  Ann  Blades,  Seymour Blicker, Lyn Hancock, George McWhirter, C. J. Newman, Ondaatje, Anne Hebert, de Ia Roche, Richard  Wright, David  Watmough, and  Ter­ ence   Shortt. In  their   Contemporary   Literary Criticism  series    (snippets  from   critical  com­  mentary  on   various authors),   vols.   9   to   11 ($45.00  and   $48.oo),  readers  will  find  quick  guides to  Dudek, Wiebe, Glassco, Gray, Oates, Buell,  Munro, and  Gabrielle Roy,  and  a useful
 reminder   of   the    perspectives   on    Canadian writers   that   have     been     published   outside Canada. And   while   the  1978  accumulation of the   Book   Review  Index  ( $68.oo)  is  an  enu­ merative listing of  reviews  that  have  appeared mostly  in  U.S.  periodicals (Maclean's  is some­ what   anomalously  listed    among   them),  the  Canadian Book  Review Annual for 1977  (from Peter Martin Associates), is perhaps more  useful to  librarians who  want an  annotation concern­ ing   content  and    a   quick   evaluation.  Gale's Children's Literature  Review, vol.  3  ( $25.00) follows   the   CLC   pattern, excerpting author's commentary    and    critical  estimates,  this volume  containing  extensive mention of James Houston  and  Dennis  Lee;  Gale's   splen­ didly    illustrated   children's    literature    series Something  About  the   Author  has  added  vols.
13-15   ( $28.oo and $3o.oo), with  a  brief  com­ ment on  Edith Fowke in  vol.  14;  and  two new volumes, Writers   for  Young  Adults:   Biogra­
phies    Master  Index,   ed.    Adele     Sarkissian
($24.00); and   Who Was Who in  Journalism,
1920-28   ( $42.00)   provide  additional   useful
biographical  leads    for   researchers  and   libra­ rians. W.  A.  McKay's  revision,  updating, and  enlargement  of   W.    S.   Wallace's  The   Mac­ millan   Dictionary   of     Canadian   Biography
($49.95)  omits   some   of   Wallace's  names   in order to  add   some  400  others, many  from  the fields  of  science  and   business;  the  entries are brief  and   essentially bibliographic rather than genuinely biographical,  but,  so far  as  one  can judge,   accurate;   and    though  there  are    no references  to  contemporary  persons, the   book remains  an   essential reference until  the   DCB is  complete. Still   other works  strive to  satisfy particular  needs. Don   Rubin's illustrated  Can­ ada  on Stage: Canadian Theatre Review  Year­ book    1978, CTR,   ($18.95),  lists   casts  and  productions  and   will   serve   theatre   historians well; Canadian Books  in Print   (University of Toronto Press,  $35.00)  remains  a  bookseller's prime  support  and  possibly   the  clearest guide  to    the    current    Canadian    publishing trade;   the    1977   volume   in   John   Saywell's always insightful  series   Canadian Annual Re­ view  of Politics  and  Public   Affairs (University of  Toronto  Press, $3o.oo)  disappoints only  in that, unlike  the  earliest  volumes in  the  series, it   ignores  the  cultural scene   entirely. Among bibliographies  of   individual   writers,  W.   H. New's    Malcolm  Lowry:  A   Reference   Guide (G.  K.   Hall,  $18.oo)  annotates  all   critical commentary  on   Lowry's  life   and   work; and several first-rate  guides  to  other  writers have appeared  in   Essays   on  Canadian Writing.
W.H.N.



ON THE VERGE

****   CPHILIP J. THOMAS.  Songs  of the  Pacific Northwest. Hancock  House.   One  finds   out more    about  a   people,  perhaps,  from  their cookery   books  than their history books.  Or,  as Philip Thomas admirably makes  us aware, by listening to  them sing.  Thirty years  of  patient
hunting and  delighted listening have  produced this   marvellous  volume,  which   not   only   pro­ vides   the   texts   for   some   forty-nine folk   and working  songs   (only   a  fragment  of  Thomas' collection),  with    clear    musical  notations   by Shirley Cox,  but  also  places  the  words  and  the events they  animate in  an  illustrated and anec­ dotal context. We  learn of  John Jewitt  ("The Poor   Armourer Boy");  discover the  song  and  stories    about   Governor  Douglas'    son-in-law ("Chief  Douglas' Daughter") ; trace  the  quar­ rel  between the  annexationists and  the  nation­ alists   ("Cheer, Boys,  Cheer for  the  Dominion Nation";   "Then   the    Maple   Leaf    entwined And  the  beaver too,  combined  With   Old  Eng­ land's  flag   shal! float   upon   the   sea") ;  read  Chinook macaronies, and  listen  to   the   songs of   lovers,    lumber   workers,   remittance  men, road  builders, gold  seekers,   sailors   and   many  others, as  they  respond with  gusto to  the  plea­  sures  and  pressures of  their   daily   lives.  Many  of   the   songs   have   been   collected  elsewhere, and  many are  variants of songs  already known; but  brought together here  they  tell  a  different story, of  Upper Canada's  West   Coast   colony ("Said I, I come  from  Canada, you  can't come over  me!"), and   of  people who  have   risen  to their   own  landscape and  sought an   equitable community within  it.  Not   always  successfully, of  course-and this   becomes   a  book  with   a message.   "When the   season   is  over," remarks one    fishennan-singer   plaintively,   "And   you figure  out   what    you   have    made,  you   were better off  working for  wages,   No  matter  how low  you  were  paid. For   the  comforts of  home are  worth something, So  take  it  from   me,  my friend,  Frying-pan  grub  and    no   head    room Will  ruin your   health in  the  end. So  hark   to the  song  of  the  sockeye  Like  a  siren's  call  of old;  When  it   gets   in   your   blood   you   can't shake  it: It's the  same  as  the  fever  for  gold." Thomas must  understand this  fever,  for  it's  the sort   of   thing  that  affects    the   song-collector, too;  but  I doubt he  would   altogether approve the  sentiment: he  reserves  his  greatest enthus­ iasm  for  the  songs  and   stories  of  the  ordinary labourer, and  for   the   equity  of  a   labourers' brotherhood.
W.H.N.
 *****   The   Salish  People:   The   Local  Con­ tribution    of   Charles   Hill-Tout,  ed.   Ralph Maud. 4  vols. Talonbooks, $6.95 per  volume. The   world    of   anthropologists  is   a   strange realm   in   which   men   of  originative  imagina­ tion   like  Sir   James Frazer and  Claude Levi­  Strauss rub shoulders with  some of the  narrow­ est-minded  pedants   in   the   academic  world. Levi-Strauss maintains a  threatened and   pre­  carious ascendancy; Sir  James  Frazer  has  in recent  years   been   shunned  because  creative people, poets  and  novelists, have  found inspira­ tion  in  his work.  Among those  who  have  been damned  with   consistently faint  praise by  the  pundits   is   Charles  Hill-Tout,   the    brilliant amateur  who  settled  in   the   Fraser  Valley in the   r8go's,  was  snubbed by  the   vain  authori­ tarian Franz   Boas,  and   was  virtually  ignored during the last  thirty years  of his life,  after Ed­ ward   Sapir   in  1910  rose  to  power   in  the  Na­  tional  Museum of Canada, which  -as  Marius Barbeau  remarked-"virtually    eliminated Canadian  pioneers, historians, local  archaeolo­ gists    and    dilettantes."  As   a    result   of   the  Gennano-American tradition   that  has   since  ruled  the anthropological field in  Canada, Hill­ Tout's  works   have   been   unobtainable  except in  periodicals that  are  hard to  find; many   of them  remained  unpublished. Now  Ralph Maud as  editor and  Talonbooks  as  publishers  have  performed an  invaluable service   by  collecting all  Hill-Tout's  available papers, including  his splendidly  written versions   of  Salish   tales  and  myths,   and  putting them   together, with   good introductions  and   a  very  useful  bio-bibliogra­ phy,  into  the  four  paper-bound  volumes which  they    entitle   The    Salish   People. It   is   the record of one  of  the  most  interesting of Cana­ dian   native   peoples.  It   is  also   the   first   time the    work   of   a   very   remarkable  man -an acute observer, a  fine  prose-writer, and   a  dar­ ing    if   somewhat   shaky  theoretician-is brought together in  handsome and  convenient form.    Doubtless   the   academic  pundits  will again  ignore  Hill-Tout, but   at least   his  work is  now  available for  those  who  can  appreciate its  value, the  writers and   artists who  still  pay Frazer   the    compliment   of   borrowing   from him.
o.w.

****   J.  L.   FINLAY  and   D.   N.    SPRAGUE.  The
Structure of Canadian   History.   Prentice-Hall,
$g.gs.   There are  now  enough freely  available histories of  Canada for  one   to  approach  any
addition to  their   numbers with  a  certain  scep­ ticism.  Is it  really  necessary? Merely to  repeat the  facts  is certainly not,  after  Creighton and

149

ON  THE VERGE



Morton  and   Careless; and   in  The  Structure of   Canadian  History   Professors   Finlay  and Sprague reveal   little that will  be  new  to  any­ one  who  has  been  reading at all  extensively in the   field   over   the   past   decade.  But   there  is always   room   for   rearrangements  and   restate­ ments, and  in  seeking out  the  main  structural elements in  Canadian  history-the bones  and  arteries  as   it   were-and    relating  them    to human aims and the  social forms  which  emerge as  "inventions" from   these  aims,   Finlay and Sprague  have   produced  a   remarkably   fresh­ tasting and   useful   book.  Lucidly  written, un­  burdened  by  scholarly  apparatus,  it  can  serve either  as  an   excellent   introduction  for   those whose   knowledge  of   Canadian  history is  still slight,  or   as   a   convenient  aide-memoire  for those  who  want  a handy book  beside  them   to refresh their  images  of  the  country's past.

G.W.

***   FRANK  w.  PEERS,  The Public  Eye: Tele­ vision    and   the   Politics   of   Canadian   Broad­  casting,   1952-68.  Univ.   of    Toronto   Press,
$25.00.  A   decade  ago   Frank    W.   Peers   dis­
cussed  the  radio age  in  Canada in The  Politics of  Canadian  Broadcasting, 1920-51. Now,  in The  Public   Eye, he  brings   the   narrative  for­ ward   with   an   account  of  the   television   age, though  he   terminates  his  narrative  in   1968,  and   so  avoids   the   last   decade, which  on  the whole  has  been  one  of general decline in  Can­ adian  broadcasting, both   radio and  television. Professor  Peers,  who  served  for  some  years  as a   high   CBC   executive  before   he   joined   the faculty  of   the   University  of   Toronto,  knows his  subject well,  and   his  two  books  are  useful background sources to  the often unhappy rela­  tionship  between  broadcasting and   politics   in Canada over  half  a century. However, his often  highly  interesting   material  is  mummified  in some   of  the   most   arid   prose  I have   read   in forty years  of  reviewing. The  reader strives for whatever he  learns.
G.W.

***   RENE  LEVESQUE,  My  Quebec. Methuen,
$9·95·   This  book    begins   and    ends   with    a
speech by Rene Levesque. The body  of it  con­
sists   of  a  series   of  extensive interviews with
him.  With   Gallic precision, irradiated  by  feel­ ing,   Levesque  charts  out   the   history   of   his involvement  in  separatism  and   the  separatist ideals. It  is  a   personal  vision  of  a  liberated Quebec  that  he   offers,   justifying   the   book's title-My  Quebec- but  at  the  same  time  it is  an   excellent introduction  to  the  intentions
 of  L,evesque  if  not  of  all  Pequistes.  Astonish­ ing,   in  comparison with   the  writings  of  other Canadian  politicians, is  the  fairness  of  mind  that Levesque applies in  his  accounts of events  and personae alike. Compared with  most  of his opponents,  and   of   his   lieutenants,  he   strikes one  as  an  honourable intelligence, a good  man  fallen  among politicians.
G.W.

***   PETER  a. NEWMAN,  Bronfman Dynasty: The  Rothschilds of  the   New   World.  McClel­ land    &   Stewart,  $ r 7·95·   Defending    Oscar Wilde  against  charges  of    snobbery,  W.   B. Yeats  once  said  that "To Wilde the  aristocrats of  Britain  were   like   the  merchant  princes of Bagdad."  One  might  say   the   same   of  Peter Newman's attitude  to  the  rich  of  Canada. He  sees  them   in  a  romantic  glow,  fortunate and  therefore  in   some   mysterious  way   wise   and  graceful, while  their   life  styles  evoke   in   him an  admiration  that at times  it  is  hard to  dis­ tinguish  from  envy.   In  The  Canadian Estab­ lishment   there   was   none    of   the   element  of moral   anger  that  distinguished  the   writings about   the   rich   of  a  genuine social   critic  like Gustavus  Myers, and   Bronfman Dynasty, the pendant  to  that  earlier book,  is  as  near   to  a capitalist hagiography as  one  is  likely  to  read, comparing  the   Canadian  liquor  lords   to  the great Jewish  banking dynasty which  actually entered the  European nobility. The relish  with which Newman described the  expoits of these dedicated financial raptors is indeed infectious, and, as  an  apologia for  the  lives  and  deeds  of corporate giants, Bronfman Dynasty is perhaps unexampled  in   its   temporary   persuasiveness. But  it  is only  while  reading the  book  that one is  susceptible  to  the   temptation of  admiring; once  it  is closed  the  fascination fades, for  one is out  of  the  magic circle created by Newman's own   obsession  with   wealth and   the   new  aris­ tocracies it  creates. For  as  a  document  Bronf­ man    Dynasty  is   of   dubious  value;   its   most interesting  contents  are   anecdotes,   the   least reliable  material  of   history,  and   the   secrecy  with    which    the    rich    enshroud   their  affairs makes   it   unlikely that  a  complete  and   open  account of  how   the  Bronfmans  built   a  multi­ national  empire  on   smuggling  booze   will   be written,  at  least   while  the   family    runs    the  empire.
G.W.

***  JOSEPH  SCHULL, Ontario Since 1867. McClelland &  Stewart, $r 5·95·  Joseph  Schull made his first  name as a CBC  dramatist in  the

ON  THE VERGE



high   old   radio days.   In  recent years   he  has turned with   distinction to  biography and  his­ tory.  His  Laurier, which   won  the  UBC  Medal for  Popular Biography in  r g66,  is still  perhaps the  best  account of the  Liberal prime  minister, and   he  is also  the  author of  Edward  Blake, a sound  two-volume  life,   and    of   Rebellion,  a book  on  the   r 83 7  uprising in  Lower Canada. His   present  book,   Ontario  Since  r867, is de­  vised,   like  the   books   just  mentioned, to  com­ bine  a  fluent readability  with  scholarly exacti­ tude. It  is  one  of  the  new  Ontario  Historical Studies,  and   is   obviously regarded   as  a  key volume in  the  series.  Its  scope  is  more  limited than its  title  suggests, since  it  comes  to an  end  in   rg6r,  eighteen years  ago,  but  it  does  cover the    crucial   periods   of    Ottawa's   changing growth   from    the    rural   province  of   Upper Canada which  it  was in  the  year  of  Confedera­ tion   to  the  mainly industrial  province with   a population of  six million  which  it  had   become in   r g6 I. Schull  ranges  widely,   including  not only  political and  economic but  also  social  and  cultural  history,  and  giving a  real  sense  of the setting   in    which    successive    generations   of Ontarians  lived.  Yet  one  is somewhat surprised that   the   able   biographer  of   Laurier  should  have  brought to  life  so few  of Ontario's  politi­ cal   leaders.  John  Sandfield Macdonald  and Oliver  Mowat  are   exceptions,  but    the   rest leave   no   deep    impression  on   one's   memory when   the  book  is  read, and   this  gives  a  curi­ ously   impersonal  cast   to   Ontario   politics   as Schull presents them.
G.W.


***  IFATHER JOSEPH  LAF!TAU, ed.,  and  trans. by Wm. N. Fenton and  Elizabeth L. Moore, Customs  of  the   American  Indians  Compared with   the  Customs of  Primitive Times.  Cham­ plain  Society, 2  vols.     First  published  in  r 724, this    work   makes    available  again   an   extra­ ordinary account of the  Iroquois  between I 7 r 2 and    I 7 I 7,  and    their   perceived   views   about divining, dreaming,  shamanism,  politics, mar­ riage,  education,  warfare, games, and hunting. Of   equal  interest   is  the   historical  glimpse   it provides  of   the   intellectual  juncture  between the  old  French Classical reliance on  authority and   the  belief  in  a  "new" rationalism. There are  clear  limitations to  Fr.  Lafitau's responses  to  environment  and   language   (including  his quests  for  sources  among the  wandering  Israel­ ites  and   St.  Augustine), and   he  is  more   illu­  minating when   he  simply   records  the  actions
he   observes.   But   as  a   kind   of   pre-Frazerian search for  a  totality of  Meaning, of  the   sort
 which   Voltaire  parodied,  it   may   have   come back  into  its  own  in  this  current  comparative age.   The book   also   provides  another   oppor­ tunity  to  applaud  the   Champlain  Society   for its  meticulous services   to  scholarship and   the history  of ideas.
W.H.N.


***  Bruce   W.   Hodgins,  Don    Wright,  and W.  H.  Heick,  eds.,  Federalism in  Canada and Australia: The  Early    Years. Wilfrid   Laurier Univ.   Press,  $g.oo.    When  the  separate  Aus­ tralian states   came   to  federate in   Igor,  they possibly did  not  appreciate the degree to which  the    existing Canadian   federation   implicitly shaped their   union. But  nor  should   we  in  the
r g8o's   be   unappreciative  of   the   differences.
Canada,  designed  to   be  strongly  centralized, was  not  what   the  centrifugal  Australian states wanted; they  would   be  satisfied   with  more  or less  an  economic association  which   preserved their   separateness.  Paradoxically  a   "territori­ ally-based diversity"  intensified  Canadian  de­  centralization,  while    a   relative   homogeneity intensified  a  centripetal   politics   in   Australia. The  systems  enact  more  than  territory; they reflect  basic  cultural  desires and   assumptions, which   these  seventeen  historical essays  (while they  do  not  address the  subject directly)  none­ theless  underscore.
W.H.N.


***   HILARY STEWART.  Looking at Indian Art of the  Northwest Coast. Douglas &  Mcintyre,
$6.gs.   rThe  art of  the   West  Coast   peoples  is the  most  sophisticated of  native Canadian  tra­ ditions in  sculpture and  painting, and  one -of the   most   remarkable  among  the   world's  so­ called   "primitive arts." Its  forms  are  intricate and   based  on  quasi-esoteric  traditions that  are  often  understood only  by  the families  to whom a  specific  design   may  belong. There are  totem  poles   and   other   artifacts  whose   iconographic meaning  is  lost   to   everyone -Indians   and  non-Indian   experts   alike-because a  family  has  died  out  or  refuses  to  reveal  its  traditions. At  the  same  time,  there are  general principles of  design   that   can   be  explained, and   Hilary Stewart's brief  manual, Looking at  Indian Art of  the  Northwest  Coast, does  the  explanation well   on   this   basic   level.   She   introduces the techniques,  the   design   elements and   the  sym­ bolic  structure; she  identifies  the  beings  that  recur in  Coast   Indian art and  she  tells  briefly some  of  the  basic  legends. She  starts one  on  a journey of  understanding;  she  does  not  claim  to lead  one  to a destination of  complete know!-

ON THE VERGE



edge,  which  is impossible without crossing  from one  culture to  another.
G.W.

***   JAMES DE MILLE, A  Strange Manuscript Found    in   a   Copper  Cylinder.  A   delightful photo  reprint   has   appeared  in   an   unlikely place:  the  Science Fiction series  published  by New  York's  Arno  Press  {$I6.oo),  though all but   scifibuffs   and   bibliophiles  might   find   the price  prohibitive. The text  is that   of  Harper's I888  edition, complete with  some splendidly romantic  period illustrations by  Gilbert Gaul. The book  itself  is a  quite  fine-and  thought­ fully  written-cautionary tale  involving Ant­ arctic adventure and  public mores.  The purple cover,  however, is ghastly.
 **   MICHAEL J.  GRIBBON,  Walter  j.  Phillips, A  Selection of  His  Works and  Thoughts.  Na­ tional   Gallery   of   Canada,  $8.g5.  I    don't know  how  many  generations of  Canadians sud­  denly  relive  their childhood  when  encountering Phillips'  prints, for   his  woodblocks decorated many   a  textbook.  Though his  cultural role  in shaping  an  imaginative  view  of  Canada  and  Canadians  has  yet  to  be  thoroughly explored, some  of   the  handsomest of  the  prints are   re­ printed  here, with   a  formal, neutral  life-and­ works  account. Here the  woodcuts  themselves are   so   evocative, however-both    in   colour and in  black  and   white-that one  wishes  for more  of  them, and  fewer  words.
W.H.N.

W.H.N.

**   RONALD WARWICK, Commonwealth Litera­ ture  Periodicals. Mansell, £22.00.     One would like  to  praise this  work   more  highly.  It  is  an amazingly  thorough  and   carefully  organized union   list  of  Commonwealth  journals in  U.K. libraries,   provides  addresses  and   other  data, and  so  constitutes an  important source  for  trac­ ing  periodical histories and  simply  locating in­ formation. Yet   I found, checking information on  Canada, that the  entries  for  Canadian Literature, Ariel, University of Toronto  Quar­ terly, and   Essays   on   Canadian   Writing, for example, were  all  in  some  detail  or  other in­  accurate, which   gives  one  pause.  Nonetheless it   remains  a   worthwhile   guide   to   titles   and  locations, to  which the  research  student might wisely  turn.
W.H.N.

**  rA  Literary Map of Canada. Hurtig, $7-95· There  is  a  certain  fascination  about   placing authors and literary works;   somehow  to  have located an  author's home  territory is to acquire a sense-whether accurate or not-of  under­ standing  their  perspective. This  clear,   wall­ size  political map  of  Canada, with  a  selection of authors' names printed regionally  on  it,  will make  a   handy  and   informative  school   class­ room  aid.  Another kind  of map  entirely is that  depicting New France as  cartographers under­ stood   it   in   the   seventeenth  century.  L'Ame­ rique   septentrionale  en   1688,   available  from Editeur officiel  du   Quebec  ( $2.95), is  hand­ somely   designed  and   coloured,   decorative  as well  as  educative, and   would  enliven   a  class­ room  or  any  other wall.
W.H.N.
 **   ROGER  VIETs,  Annapolis Royal:  A   poem
1788.  Loyal    Colonies  Press.        Viets  was   a
Loyalist  refugee who  produced, as  Tom  Vin­
cent   points out   in   his  helpful  editorial   com­
ment, the first  booklet  of English poetry to be published in  what is  now  Canada. The poem, of more  historical than aesthetic interest, is pastoral and   inspirational rather than political or  descriptive; Viets  found in  Annapolis Royal (at  least   for   poetic  purposes)  a  harmony  of nature  that  inspires him   to   appreciate  both music  and   the  divine and  never-ending hymns of Christian grace.
W.H.N.

**   T.  w.  PATERsoN. Encyclopedia  of  Ghost Towns & Mining Camps of British  Columbia. Stagecoach  Publishing, n.p.     This is  almost a model  source  book   of  local   history. It is  the first   of  a  three-volume compendium  of  infor­ mation  on   the   early   life-which   was   often  the  only  life-of  British Columbia  pioneering settlements connected with   the  primary indus­ tries  of  mining, logging, fur-trading, fishing. In this  volume some fifty settlements are  recorded. The  text   is   well-researched  and    densely  de­  tailed and  the  detail is often  fascinating, while  trouble  has  been   taken to  select  unfamiliar as well  as  well-known illustrations. The amateur in  regional history will  find  it  interesting, and even   for   the   professional historian it  has   its uses.
G.W.


NOTE: Canadian Literature will now also be indexed  in   New   Contents, a  bimonthly  from the  University of Giittingen. An  index to  Can­ adian    Literature  Nos.    I   to   77  is   currently available  from    The   Golden  Dog   Press   for
$I 2-95·
