$I .25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·30


Autumn, 1966



Jl  SJILUTE TO E]IRLE BIRNEY


Articles
BY A.J. M. SMITH, MILTON WILSON, EARLE  BIRNEY, DOROTHY LIVESAY

Poem and  Preface
BY WILFRED WATSON

Chronicles
BY  NAIM  KATTAN, WILLIAM H. NEW

Reviews
BY WILLIAM HALL, ROY DANIELLS, MALCOLM ROSS, FRANCES FRAZER, MARYA  FlAMENCO, SEYMOUR MAYNE, LOUIS DUDEK, WARREN TALLMAN, WILLIAM H. NEW, JOAN LOWNDES, HELGA HARDER



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









GEORGE KUTHAN




IT rs WITH   GREAT REGRET that  we  publish  Canadian  Litera­ ture  for  the  first  time  without its customary decorations. The  starkness  of  our pages in this issue betokens  the ending,  through the death of our decorative artist, George  Kuthan, of  an  association   which   lasted  unbroken,  and  with  a  respect which   we  hope  was  mutual, for  more  than  seven  years,  the  whole  life  of  the magazine. During  that   time  George   Kuthan never  failed  for  a  single  issue  to produce  new   and   interesting  designs  which   often  provided   their   own  quiedy ironic  comments on  what  our  writers  had  to say.
Born  in  Czechoslovakia, George  Kuthan began  his studies  at the  University  of
Prague, and   left  his  native  country  for  good  when  the  Germans occupied  it  in
1939.  He  spent  several  years  working  in Paris,  and  in  1950  he came  to Canada, where  he lived  until  his untimely  death  last August.  As those who  have  seen his exhibitions  in  Canada, the  United   States  or  Europe will  remember, he  was  a graphic artist  of great  lyrical sensitivity,  passionately  concerned  with  the interpre­ tation  of natural forms,  and  extremely  knowledgeable in the graphic traditions of the   past-those  of  the  Oriental  miniaturists and  of  the  mediaeval  European woodcut-makers in   particular.  His   book,  Vancouver, Sights  and   Insights,  for which  Donald Stainsby wrote  the  text,  was a great  revelation  of his virtuosity  as an  impressionistic draughtsman. To  the life of Canada he made his own  distinc­  tive contribution, and  from  the surface  of the Canadian land  he received in  turn  much  of his inspiration in later  years.
We know  that  our  readers will join in our sadness that  his designs will no longer be there  to decorate our  pages, and  that  only our esteem and affection  will remain in  place of the  artist  who  worked  with  us from  the  beginning, conscientiously and harmoniously.



3


A UNIFIED PERSONALITY

Birney's Poems



A.]. M. Smith






w.H THE  PUBLICATION t]ll, spring  of  Earle  Birney's Selected  Poems,  a  generous  and  representative  gathering of  a  hundred   poems, many of them long and ambitious and all of them interesting,  we have an oppor­ tunity  to sum up a long, fruitful,  and varied  poetic career-a career which this volume indicates has grown steadily in significance. The  poems from Birney's two most recent books, Ice, Cod, Bell or Stone  and  Near False Creek  Mouth, have a power  and   mastery  that  was  foreshadowed  but  only  occasionally  attained   in David or Trial of a City, the works on which Birney's reputation has been founded and  established. Though  Birney has written two novels, edited an anthology, and published a good many scholarly articles, including an immensely valuable analysis
of the poetic reputation  of E. J. Pratt,  it is as a poet, a teacher  of poetry, and  a
publicist for poetry that  he is chiefly and rightly known;  and it is his poetry only that  I propose to examine here.
I  don't   remember  when  I  first read  a  poem  by  Earle  Birney.  I  know  that
when  Frank  Scott  and  I  were  preparing  the  manuscript for  New  Provinces in
1935  we had  not  heard  of him,  though  we soon began  to  read  the  pieces that appeared   in  The   Canadian  Forum,  of  which  Birney  was  literary  editor  from
1936 to 1940. It was not, however, until the publication  of David & Other  Poems inI 942  that  it became  apparent that  a new poet had  arrived,  a poet who gave promise of being a worthy continuer of the tradition of heroic narrative  established by Pratt  and  perhaps the precursor of a new school of modern  poetry in Canada. Now a quarter  of a century later and  with the present volume before us we can see that  these hopeful anticipations  have been amply  fulfilled. Birney's career - even more certainly  than  F. R. Scott's, which  I hope  to examine  in these pages in  a  subsequent  essay-has been   analagous to  the  development   of  modem Canadian poetry as a whole. Both poets have been leaders in some respects and


4

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



followers  in  others.  From  the  beginning  both  have  been  adventurous and  experi­ mental, and  if occasionally  they have seemed  to be groping or merely wandering, the  occasions  were  remarkably few. Scott,  in spite of ills liberal  and  leftist  point of  view,  has  been  mainly   traditional, while  his  experiments have  been  in  the direction of  new  and  avant-garde techniques. Birney, who  is also  politically  and socially  of the  left,  takes  more  naturally to the  experimental, though in  his case, paradoxically enough, his most  successful  experiment is the  experiment of  being traditional. Some  of  the  best  of  his earlier  poems-"Slug  in  Woods", "Anglo­ Saxon   Street", "Mappemounde", and  parts  of  "Damnation of  Vancouver" as well-while  not  mere  pastiche  or  parody, certainly  owe their  success to the skill with  which   the  poet  has  utilized  his  scholarly  knowledge  of  Beowulf, Chaucer, Piers Plowman, and  Hopkins. To  the  advantages of a  western  mountain child­ hood  and  hard  work  as a manual labourer and  logger in his youth,  Birney  added  those  of  a  thorough  academic  training in  English  literature, cuhninating in  a Ph.D. from  the  University of  Toronto in  Igg6.  With  the exception  of some years spent  in study  and  travel  abroad on  various  fellowships  and  grants, all  his life since  the  end  of  the second  world  war  has  been spent  as a university  teacher of literature and  creative writing. The  rather  touchy  remarks  about  academic critics and   anthologists in  the  "Preface" to  Selected  Poems  should   not  be  taken   too seriously.  They   are  partly   confessional,  for  Birney  has  been  both.  A few  of  the poelllS (I shall  cite instances  later) do suffer because  the literary  sophistication of the  technique calls attention to itself in  a way that  is distracting rather than  ex­ pressive. But  this does not  happen very often,  and  in any  case it is the  price that  has  to be paid  for  the successes.






bERE ARE   SOME THINGS  about  Selected  Poems  I do  not  like, and  my  praise  of  the  poet  would  be less convincing  if I did  not  say  what  they were. Let  me do so at once.  Some of them,  of course, are not the  poet's responsi­ bility. The  make-up of  the  book, like so many  of McClelland & Stewart's recent volumes  of verse, seeins to be pretentious and  flamboyant, while the illustrations, though  good  in  theinsleves,  seem  to be competing with  the  poems.  Poetry  ought  to be left to speak  for itself.
For  me  the  same  criticism  applies-and here  the poet  himself  must  bear  the responsibility-to the typographical gimmicks  and  punctuational nudity  imposed

5

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



on  many  fine straightforward clear  poems  that  when  originally  published  made their  point  convincingly  and  movingly  without the  promptings of visual  aids.  In his "Preface" Birney is facetiously indignant at the expense of provincial journalists and   conservative  critics  who  have  registered   a  similar   objection. Actually  it  is beside  the  point  to cite the  practice  of E. E. Cummings. Cummings is a unique, highly  special,  and  absolutely  consistent  poetic individual. If his influence  is to be felt in  more  than  a superficial  way it has to be felt in the  blood. It will probably be  expressed   by  nothing   more  showy  than   the  slightly  unusual placing  of  an adverb or  the  curious  elongation of  a  cadence. To   put  on  another man's   hat doesn't make  you  that  man.  Birney  is so good  a  poet  when  he is himself  that  he has  no  need   to  seek  a  fashionable "modernism"  in  typographical  eccenticity. Poems  like  "Appeal to  a  Lady  with  a  Diaper" and   "Mammorial  Stunzas for Aimee  Simple   McFarcin", light  and  satirical as  they  are,  have  been  made  dis­ tractingly difficult  to read.  The  visual-aids  have  become  handicaps. The  eye  has to run  an  obstacle  race.
These   are  practical and  specific objections. I realize  perfectly  well that  there
are  many  typographically expressive  passages  that  are  not  confusing  or  difficult at  all. Here  is a passage from "Letter to a Conceivable Great-Grandson":

Now we've got automation 	Our
letters
are set to de
liver them
selves
fast
er than
meteors 	Soon we'll be
sending wholemanuscriptsprepaidtothe planets
But what's crazy for real is we're so damned  busy no
body has time to de 	what cipher
language it is we're 	iting
r
w

This  is clear  enough,  though  a little inconvenient to read; and  its purpose  is clear enough  -to  make  the  reader  experience, physically  and  mentally, just what  the poem  IS   saying  at  this  particular  point,  i.e.  that   we  write  and  transmit so fast

6

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



that  what  we write  is inconvenient to read.  This  of course is the  modern dogma that   Wyndham  Lewis  and  Yvor  Winters  have  attacked-that to  express  con­ fusion  we  must  write  confusedly. My  objection  to this  kind  of  thing  is  not  that it  lacks  clarity  but  that  it  lacks  point: the  device is so childishly  obvious.  How­  ever, if as Birney says in his "Preface" these devices are spells to appease  an inter­  mittent madman within  him  let us be grateful  and  turn  to the true  poet and  the true  poems.





SELECTED POEMS is divided  into six sections. The  first, made up  mainly  of later  poems,  is entitled  after  one of the best pieces in it, "The Bear on  the  Delhi  Road", and  is a  record  of Birney's  travels  westward from  British Columbia to  the  South  Seas,  Japan, India, Thailand and  back  through Greece, Spain, England, and  the Arctic  home again. These poems, with one or two not very important exceptions, date from  the  late fifties and  the early  sixties, and  include half  a dozen  pieces that  are  among  the best things Birney ever wrote-"A Walk in  Kyoto", "Bangkok Boy",  "The Bear  on  the  Delhi  Road", and  best of all, the magnificent "El  Greco: Espolio."  Here  too is one of the  not-so-many light, satir­ ical, gently  comic poems  that  is completely successful -successful I think because the satire  here directed  against the world of tourism and public relations is directed,  even if ever so gently, against the poet himself too. This is the delightful "Twenty­ Third Flight" that  begins-

Lo as I pause in the alien vale of the airport fearing ahead  the official ambush
a voice languorous and strange as these winds of Oahu
calleth my name and I turn to be quoited in
orchids
and amazed with a kiss perfumed and soft as the lei.
Straight  from a travel poster thou steppest thy arms like mangoes for smoothness
0 implausible shepherdess for this one aging sheep -

and  continues to the  tragi-comic conclusion  of the poet so welcomed  being never­
theless soon ruthlessly  abandoned: "Nay, but  thou stayest not?"-


7

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



0 nubile goddess of the Kaiser Training
Programme
is it possible that tonight my cup runneth not over
and that I shall sit in the still pastures of the lobby
while thou leadest another old ram in garlands
past me ...
And that I shall lie by the waters of Waikiki and want?


This  is my favourite among  the comic poems,  but  there  are  many  others  almost equally  seductive, some satirical,  some  whimsical, and  some  with  a wry  serious­ ness, as in  the  brilliant  series of Mexican  poems.  I don't know  where you'll  find anything better  in  modem   North  American poetry  than the  combination of wit and  sentiment,  pertinent observation and  auricular, almost  ventriloquistic preci­ sion  than  "Sinaloa", "Ajijic", or "Six-Sided Square:  Actopan".
These  last poems are in the second section of the book, which  is headed "Trans­ Americana." The   section  begins  with  a  series  of  satirical   pieces  on  certain   un­  lovely  aspects  of  "civilization" north   of  the  Rio  Grande. Most  of   these,  when compared with  the  charm  and  sureness  of  "Twenty-Third  Flight," seem  weak or forced -a defect which may be partly  due to the arbitrary typographical eccen­ tricity  that   has   been   imposed upon  them  since  they  first  appeared in  earlier  volumes.
When  we come,  however,  to the  poems  on  Mexico,  Peru,  and  the  Caribbean islands all such cavilling falls away. These  are not only among the finest of Birney's poems;  they are  just simply and  plainly,  man, the  finest. The new style that  some of  our  West  Coast  poets learned  from  Olson,  Greeley,  and  the  Black  Mountain writers  (and from  Birney himself, I suspect)   has here  been  put  to uses that trans­ cend  the  personal  and  the  purely  emotional. Poems  like "Cartagena de Indias", "Machu Picchu", "Letter to a Cuzco  Priest", "Barranquilla Bridge", and  others sum  up  a  whole  ancient   and  alien  civilization   and  bring  it-and  our  own­ under  the scrutiny  of a sharp,  sensitive, and  discursive  mind.
When  these  poems are  compared with  even  the  best of the  poems of the  early forties  that   make  up  the  next  part  of  the  book  ("War  Winters") we see how great  and  how sure has been Birney's development as a craftsman in poetry,  a development  which  depends   upon   and  expresses  a  development in  intellectual and  emotional maturity. Perhaps   this  growth in  maturity is the  achievement of

8

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



originality, the setting  free of a unique  poetic personality that  after  years of work has  at  last  found itself  and  its  true  voice. This  is not  to  be taken  to  mean  that such  well-known early  poems  as "Hands",  "Vancouver Lights", and  "Dusk  on the  Bay"  are  not  sincere  and  accurate expressions of what  a Canadian felt in the dark  days of 1939 and  1940. But it is easier to see now than  it was then  that  they speak with  the voices of Auden, Rex  Warner, or Stephen Spender, as we feel they might  have  recalled  Rupert Brooke had  they been written  in 1915. They  are true to their  time  rather than to a unique  person, and  they are  not, therefore, without their  own  kind  of historical  significance.  They  do certainly  present  an  attractive contrast   to  the  war  poems  of some of the  aged  survivors  of an  older  generation. Even  today  only a few poems written  later in the war-Douglas LePan's poems of the  Italian campaign and  Pratt's Behind ,the Log-stand higher  than  these as interpretations of  Canada's war.
In  the next  section,  "Canada: Case History", Birney has grouped those poems, some of them  satirical but  most of them  serious and,  indeed, "devout", in which he  has  come  to  grips  with  the  problem  of what  it  means  to  be  Canadian and what  it  is to  be  a  Canadian poet.  Viewed  as a  problem  this theme  has  become something of  a  nervous  obsession,  and  Birney,  like Scott  and  some  others,  is at his best when  he approaches it obliquely  and  allows his hawk's eye and  his adder's tongue  to  do  the  work  for  him.  Everything that  is really  important is conveyed in the imagery and  the diction.  Cadences  like

the moon  carved  unknown  totems out  of the lakeshore
owls in the beardusky  woods derided  him
moosehorned cedars circled his swamps and  tossed
their  antlers  up to the stars ...
*
a marten moving  like quicksilver
scouted  us ...
*
the  veins of bald glaciers blackened
white  pulses of waterfalls beat in the bare rockftesh

-to  give  but  three   brief  samples,  are  simple,  sensuous,  and   passionate. Such indigenous music  and  imagery give  to  poems  like "David", "Bushed", and  the poems of transcontinental air travel,  "North Star  West",  and  "Way to the West",

9

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



a  richness  that  Birney  and  a few other  poets  rooted  in  the  native  tradition seem to have  derived  from  the earth  and  air of Canada itself. This  is a northern style, and  an  excellent  one. Our  sense of its validity  is increased when  we realize  that it is not  peculiar   to  Birney  but  is a  common   heritage. Here  are  some  examples chosen  almost  at  random from  The 0 xford  Book  of Canadian Verse:

No more the slow stream spreading clear in sunlight
Lacing the swamp with intricate shining
channels ...
the mica glint in the sliding water
The  bright winged flies and the muskrat gone like a shadow ...
(Floris  McLaren)
*
The sachem voices cloven out of the hills
spat teeth in the sea like nails ...
(Alfred  Bailey)
*
On the North Shore a reptile lay asleep ...
(E. J. Pratt)
*
Sinuous, red as copper snakes,
Sharp-headed serpents, made of light, Glided, and hid themselves in night....
(Isabella  Crawford)


This  last  passage,  and  the  poem from  which  I have  taken  it, shows better  than  all the  explanations in  the  "Preface" why  Birney  is impatient with  commas   and rhyme.
Of  course  not  every  one  of  the  northern poems  has  the  linguistic  rightness  of "Bushed" or  "David". Sometimes  his Eng.  Lit.  sophistication betrays  Birney into an  overstrained conceit,  as for  example  in  these  lines  from  "Page of  Gasp€'' -

Between over-generous margins between the unprinted  river and the
rubbed-out  peaks
run the human  typelines ...
farms split to sentences by editor death fattening  subtitles of rockfence ...


10

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



In this repetitive prose a sawmill
sets quotemarks after the stone windmill's
period ...


or  leads him  to indulge  in  a sort of metrical  plagiarism. "North of Superior"  is filled with more or less erudite allusions to Scyldings, Excalibur, the Green Knight, the Den of Error,  Azazel, and Roland,  and the metre which recalls Pound's "Sea­ farer" in the first stanza  reminds us of "Evangeline"  in the second.
But these are occasional failures. To  risk making them is the price every alive and  eager  artist  must  pay  for  his successes. One  such  success is surely  the fine reflective poem "November Walk Near  False Creek Mouth", the major  work in Birney's last collection of new  poems. It  is dated  "Vancouver  rg6r-Ametlla, Spain  1963".  "November Walk"  is a rich meditative ode-like poem that  gathers up the themes of the long series of descriptive, narrative,  and reflective poems set in or near Vancouver  from "Dusk  on the Bay" and "Hands" to the present, and finally and  on  a much  larger  scale achieves what the poet had  been groping for from  the  start  of  his career-an  orientation  of himself and  his place  and  his time in terms that are both emotionally and rationally satisfying. This poem stands with the poems on Mexico and  Peru as the high water mark of Birney's achieve­ ment  up  to now.  Most encouraging  of all, it gives promise of fine things still to come, for it shows the  poet  has found  a style commensurate  with  the theme he has approached  in  many  different  ways in many different  poems -man's effort as microcosm  to come to  terms with society, nature,  and  the macrocosm  in the brief moment  of allotted  time.  It is a promise that makes Birney's remark  in the "Preface" -"In  my next work I am thinking of pasting my poems on mobiles"
-seem  like the frivolous  joke it's intended  as.
The  fifth section of Selected  Poems,  headed  rather  journalistically "Letter  to a Conceivable  Great-grandson", is  the  least  successful part  of  the  book.  It  is a somewhat  haphazard collection of pieces on the threat  of atomic  extinction  and the ironies and  confusions inherent  in the world of cold-war distrust and science­ fiction  posturing.  The  point  of view is liberal  and  humane,  and  the sentiments are  those which  all decent  men  must share. The  trouble  with this sort of poetry is not something  that  can be laid at the door of an individual  poet. The  responsi­ bility  is elsewhere.  These  excellent  sentiments  are  shared   (and  expressed)  by politicians, statesmen,  editorial  writers, publicists and generals who find them no bar whatsoever to actions and votes that lead in the practical  world to the aggra­ vation  and  perpetuation of  the  crisis that  they  (hypocritically)   and  the liberal


I I

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



poet  (ineffectively)   lament.  The  result  is a  widening  of  the  gap  between  the poem's  practical  intention  and  the possible achievement  of that  end.  Perhaps  its most successful accomplishment is to demonstrate  the futility of poetry as  propa­ ganda  and  drive home the corollary that  action  alone is adequate. This  built-in demonstration  of its own uselessness is what  vitiates nearly all poetry that takes a bold stand  against sin, and make the social poetry of Birney, and of  Frank Scott too, the  weakest  part  of their  work. Two  of the finest poems,  however, in  this part  of  the book are  translations from  Mao-Tse-Tung made  with  the assistance of Professor Ping-ti Ho, of The  University of British Columbia and  Peking Uni­ versity. Here  the  cleverness and  strain  of some of  the  poems and  the echoes of Spender  and  Rex  Warner  in others give way to a simple direct style that  is very moving indeed.
There is not much that needs to be said here about "Damnation of Vancouver," which forms the final section of this book. Originally  published as Trial  of a City in  rg52,   it  was  recognized as one of  the  most original  and  technically  accom­ plished of Birney's poems, a tour de  force of linguistic virtuosity and  a satire  as biting  as anything  in  Canadian literature.  It  marked  a distinct  advance  on  the simple  and  unified narrative  "David", mingling  as it did  the  colloquial and  the grand  styles and  the satirical  and  the affirmative  modes. It  thus anticipates  the South  and  Central   American  poems of  the  sixties  and  fuses  perfectly for  the first  time  in  Birney's work  the  two  themes  that  Northrop Frye  has  named  as central  to Canadian poetry, "one  a primarily comic theme of satire and exuber­ ance, the other a primarily tragic theme of  loneliness and terror."
For  the  new book Birney has revised what  was originally  a poem or masque and  turned  it into a play, complete with elaborate stage directions, descriptions of actions  (business) ,  and  statements  about  the  emotional  implications  and  tones of voice to be got into some of the speeches. This  is fine for the amateur  actor and  the inexperienced  director,  but  the reader  of poetry, I should  think,  would prefer  to  take  his  poetry neat.  The  development  of  the  theme-which is the rape  of  the  land  of  the  Indians  by the  forces of  commercial  exploitation  and "progress" -comes through  more vividly in  the original  version.




WAT REMAINS TO  BE SAID  in conclusion? Not very much surely. It is quite clear that  Earle Birney is one of our major  poets, perhaps since the death  of E. J. Pratt  our leading  poet. Certainly  he is the only rival of Pratt


I2

A UNIFIED PERSONALITY



as the creator  of heroic narrative  on a bold scale and,  unlike Pratt,  he has been consistently experimental. He  has not always been successful, and  he has some times aped  styles and  fashions that  are unworthy of his real talents;  but without a somewhat  boyish spirit  of adventure  his successes would  have been impossible too. The  real  triumph  of Selected  Poems  is that  it demonstrates  so clearly  and forcibly -as does indeed  the whole of Birney's career -a unified personality of great  charm,  wit, strength,  and  generosity. I recall Louis MacNeice's  description of the modern  poet. I have quoted it before, but it fits the poet I have been  dis­ cussing so well that  I can think of no better words to end with. "I would  have a poet able-bodied, fond of talking, a reader of the newspapers, capable of  pity and laughter,  informed  in  economics,  appreciative  of women,  involved  in  personal relationships, actively interested in politics, susceptible to physical impressions ..." This is the man  I know, and  the poet who rises out of this book.



POET WITHOUT   A MUSE





Milton Wilson







Yu MIGHT SUPPOSE that E,-le Birney was too busy creat­ mg  new  poems  to  worry  about  collecting  old  oneS. But  for  a  writer  whose  old poems  never stop  pestering  him  to be transformed into  new ones,  the first task is hard   to separate from  the second.  These  Seleoted Poems 1940-1966 aren't really a retrospective show; they challenge  us to see Birney  not  so much  plain  as anew.  I've  read  his work far  too often in the  past to make  a fresh  look very easy. What follows is at best a series of notes towards  an  unwritten revised  portrait.



THE  MORE  BIRNEY  you  read,   the  less he  looks  like  anybody else. His asymmetrical, bulky, unpredictable accumulation of poems gathers individuality as it grows.  In  context  even the least distinguished members  start  to seem  unlikely  and  even independent. For  a poet so unmistakably of his own  time and  place,  he is a surprisingly  free  agent.  Certainly no influential contemporary has  ever  taught him  how  to iron  out  any  local  idiosyncrasies and  unfashionable commonplaces that  he  preferred   to  keep.  He  has  learned   only  what  he  wanted and  at  his own speed.  Any inescapable influence  of his generation that  he found irrelevant (T.  S. Eliot, for example), he has managed to escape  completely.  What gives his work  distinctiveness, I suppose,  is not so much  its originality as its mix­ ture  of openness  and  stubbornness, of cleverness  and  provinciality, even  the way it  sometimes  stumbles over  its own  reality,  like  that  half-teachable bear  the  title of whose  poem  Birney sets at  the entrance to this selection.

2

IF THE PROBLEM OF BIRNEY'S  EDUCATION as a poet is worth  a second  glance,  it ought  to  be a very  careful  and  sceptical one,  particularly now

POET WITHOUT A MUSE



that  we have these Selected  Poems, which throw doubt on many of the old Birney legends. Take  the  matter  of  chronology. The  legend  of Birney the  late  starter may have  to give way to Birney the late  publisher, depending  on  how seriously you take the vital statistics of date  and  place with which he has labelled his off­ spring,  some of  them -like "North  of Superior"   (labelled  "1926-1945")   and "Mammorial Stunzas  for  Aimee  Simple  McFarcin"  (labelled  "Toronto  1932- San  Francisco  I934,'' but  first printed  in a Prism of 1959)-apparently twice­ born  or at least held in suspension for a long time. Did Birney draft  a full-scale version of "North of Superior" in  I926 or did the  I945  version just incorporate a  jotted image or two from  the distant  past? Was "Mammorial Stunzas", which seems so characteristic  of Birney's linguistic high spirits in the fifties, entirely con­ ceived in the early thirties or did the young Birney merely give Aimee her graffiti from  Belshazzar's feast and  a pun or two on her name and  then wait twenty-five years for the right  poem to go with them and  justify publication?  The  dating, in this case, seems to insist on a finished product in  I934  (or as finished as a Birney poem  ever  allows  itself  to  be -the  format  has  been  completely  reshaped  for I966). At least I will now stop being puzzled as to why anyone would choose to write Aimee's definitive poem long after everyone else had forgotten  her.
Then  there's  the  legend of a  poetic hiatus in the mid-fifties, of a Birney  un­ productive  because he had  maybe lost faith  in poetry or humanity  or even  him­ self.  But,  from  the  new  vantage  point,  any  hiatus,  if  it  existed, starts  to  look pretty small,  the sort of thing  that  needed little more than  a trip  to  Mexico for its cure. And anyway, if Birney can write and only publish twenty or twenty-five years later, who knows what  piles of unpublished poems lie in his bottom drawer waiting for their public moment?

3
SIMPLE QUESTIONS  OF CHRONOLOGY may be tricky, but the diffi­ culties are multiplied for anyone who ventures to talk about Birney's poetic develop­ ment and its relation to his poetic contemporaries. Most of the obvious half-truths that  used to occur to me, I now find myself wanting to qualify almost as soon as I have  uttered  them.  The  staple  product  of  conventional  up-to-date  British and American  poetry can (very broadly indeed) be described as having moved from a metaphoric and  allusive phase in  the  thirties and  forties to a more  linguistic - idiomatic  and  syntactic-one in  the fifties and sixties, from  the rhetoric  of the image to the rhetoric of the voice. It's  tempting to see Birney's own development following a similar course, with Trial  of a City  ( I952)  as the Janus-faced  turning

I5

POET WITHOUT A  MUSE



point.  Nobody   could  be surprised   at  the  date  of  an  elaborate editorial conceit like  "Page of  Gaspe"  (I 943- I 950)  or  an  even  more  elaborate tidal  one  like "The Ebb  Begins  from  Dream" ( I945-I947) -despite Birney's  difficulty  per­ suading editors  to print  the latter.  Still, although they date,  they aren't just dated. The  slightly  later  "North Star  West"  ( 1951)   seems more of a mere  period  piece, the  sort  of inventive  and  readable exercise in  imagery  that  with  luck  you  might be  able  to  bring  off  in  those  days.  Indeed, if  I interpret a  remark   in  Birney's Preface correctly,  that  may  be part  of the  point  of the  poem.  But, while some of Birney's  poems  could  (and  in fact  did)   fit quite  snugly  into  the  post-war  world of  Penguin  New  Writing, the  philologist  and  verbal  mimic  didn't need  to wait until  Trial  of a City  to be released. Among  the  early  poems for which  obviously no  retrospective indulgence at  all is needed  are  "Anglo-Saxon Street", "Mappe­ mounde" and  "War Winters". Birney is amused by those critics who thought that to write  the  verse of these poems he had  to be an  imitator of Hopkins, instead  of just  a mere  student and  teacher  of  mediaeval literature. Although he is properly  aware  of  the  dangers in  any  academic-poetic alliance, his own  academic niche could  hardly have  been  a luckier  choice.

4
BIRNEY's VOCAL VIRTUOSITY  hasn't seemed  out  of place in the more  recent  worlds  of "articulate energy"  and  "projective verse",  or on  the  p.a. circuit.   But  he  can't be  confused  with  the  new  virtuosos  of  breath and  syntax, and  his academic context  certainly  predates structural linguistics.  There's also something a  bit  old-fashioned about  his taste  for  "phonetic" spelling; it  doesn't help much  for Birney to write "damnear" or "billyuns," when  nobody says "damn near" or  "billions" anyway.  I suppose  that  it all  justifies itself, in that  without it the  "Billboards" and  "Diaper" poems couldn't have  been written at  all, but  they remind   me  a bit  of the easy old  days  when  all a writer  had  to do  to present  his readers  with  a  recognizable substandard  dialect  was  to spell  their  own  standard dialect  as they  really  pronounced it.  Birney's  phonetic technique works  best with an  exotic  like the speaker in that  delightful monologue "Sinaloa". The people who strike  my  ear  most  successfully, however,  receive  no such  phonetic help,  like the two-tongued  Colombian bookseller  in  "Cartagena de  Indias", which   (if  I had to make  a choice)   I would call his finest poem.

POET WITHOUT A  MUSE



5
BIRNEY'S  OTHER NOTATIONAL IDIOSYNCRASIES  interest  me far more  than  his spelling. Except for a few poems (notably "David", "The Damnation of Vancouver" and  the  translations) and a few special places within poems (mainly conversations), instead   of  using  the  conventional comma, semicolon, colon  and period  as rhetorical and  syntactic signposts, he now relies mainly  on spacing  and lineation, and  has  revised  his old poems accordingly.
He  is not  (so  the  Preface tells us)  trying  to facilitate immediate and  accurate
reading or  comprehension by  these changes; on  the  contrary, his aim  is "the  art of indefinitely delayed  communication-Infinite Ambiguity." I don't know  how seriously  to  take  these  last  phrases;  I do  know  that  the  new  ambiguity is  real enough, and  in  a few  cases results in a new  awkwardness. The  chief  problem  is at  the  end  of  a line,  where  the  distinction  between  endstopped and  run-on  lines is  no  longer  visible,  even  when  still  relevant.  One  space  starts  to look  like  any
other  space,  whether it  breaks  or ends a line. In  "Captain  Cook" when





is revised to
 flashed  him a South  Sea shilling;  like a javelin it split the old shop's air.

flashed  him a South  Sea shilling it split the old shop's air
 like a javelin

the  phrase  at  the  end  of  the  first line can  now  look backwards and  forwards in­ stead  of just forwards. It wouldn't be hard  to defend  the ambiguity of that revised version. But in the same  poem when






is revised to
 
First  voyage, mouths burning from  the  weevils in the biscuits, charted New Zealand.


First  voyage 	mouths  burning from  the weevils in the biscuits charted New  Zealand


the  new  syntactic ambiguity of the  second  line is a  doubtful blessing indeed. It
may  be amusing, but  the  joke is at the expense of the  poem.
The   advantages and   disadvantages of  the  new  notation are  worth   weighing not  just from  passage  to  passage  but  from  poem  to  poem.  One  fine  poem  that I much   prefer   to  see  in  its  old  format is  "Wake Island":  the  format in  the Selected Poems seems more  confusing  than  ambiguous. On  the other  hand, while

I7

POET WITHOUT A MUSE



not  a word  of "Late Afternoon in Manzanilla" has been  altered, the  poem  looks twice  as good  and  comes off twice as well in its new format. I had  no idea  until now  what  an  excellent  poem  it is.
Of   course,  the  reaction   against  the  clutter   of  punctuation in  favour   of  the
austerity  of space  Birney shares  with  a good  many  of his newer  contemporaries. But  he  isn't   always  that  austere   (dashes,  apostrophes, question marks,  etc.  are used), or,  for  that   matter, consistent.  In  the  new  space-filled  pages,  even  a few concluding periods  still survive  (I'm glad  that  he kept  the  one  at  the  end  of the "Diaper"  poem), although, so far  as I've  noticed,  only  one  anomalous comma (near the end  of "Tavern by the Hellespont") :

Between the  individual  tables	couples 	uncoupled
by the radio's decision, turn to their true oneness-

and  here,  although I like to think  that  it's an  unexpected attempt to limit  Infinite Ambiguity, it  may  be  just  an  editorial  or  proofreading  oversight, like  the  mis­ lineation  that   disfigures  "The Damnation of  Vancouver" on  page  I 76.

6

NoT THAT BIRNEY  minds  anomalies anyway. Some  of his best poems  are sports.  No one  could  possibly anticipate them,  he has shown  no desire to  repeat  them,  but  once  written they  are  an  inevitable choice  for  his Selected Poems,  no matter how stringent the selection. "St  Valentine Is Past" is an obvious example. One  of the few Birney  poems that  reads  like a pure  gift from  his muse (he is not the sort of poet whom one usually credits  with a muse), it has remained virtually  unchanged since  appearing in  1952's  Trial  of a City  and  Other  Verse. In these ballad  quatrains, while Theseus  is off on his boar-hunt, and  death  seems mercifully   at  a  distance, love finds  late  fulfilment under   a  shadowless  sky. The lovers, like the age-old elements of earth  and  water,  renew  their long-past  youthful fertility,  and,  for  a day at least, seem to have  Time on  their  side.

While he is rooted rock she strikes to foam a loud cascade
that  drowns the jeering gullish wings far crashings in the glade

No more while lizard minutes sleep around a cactus land

18

POET WITHOUT A MUSE



they'll blow their longings out like spores that  never grass the sand

No longer Time's a cloud of cliffs unechoed by her Nile ...

But  these  elemental lovers or  late-coupling birds  or aging  Venus  and  Adonis  (or whatever  you  wish  to  call  them)   are  no  match  for  dusty  Time. And,  as  their elegiac,  unkept sounds  fade  away,  the  pastness of St. Valentine's Day is sealed  by the  return of hunter, boar  and  pack.

And yet and yet a failing rod strikes only dust from rock
while all the tune and time they breathe is never kept in talk

Now water sky and rock are gone the huddled  woodbirds back
and hot upon the throbbing boar comes Theseus and his pack

Although Birney,  in  his priinitive  or mediaeval or modem vein  (sometimes all at  once), is often  a  poet  of myths,  as such  different  poems  as "Mappemounde", "Pachuchan Miners", "Takkakaw Falls",  "Bushed", "Ballad of Mr  Chubb" and, of course,  "November Walk  near  False Creek  Mouth" (with  its updated charac­ ters  from   the  sagas)   make  evident,   nevertheless  the  sort  of  Renaissance myth­  making  that  "St.  Valentine is Past" does superbly  seems to me totally uncharacter­ istic of him.  If I had  to choose a historical  niche for him other  than  his own,  the Age of Spenser  would  be my last choice.
And  yet, in other  respects,  this is a typical  Birney love poem,  typical  at least of his published range.  In  a recent  article  on Irving  Layton, George  Woodcock has praised  our  older  love  poets  at  the  expense  of their  younger  rivals. But  Birney's love poems  have  been  elegiac  and  autumnal from  the start, or, when  not elegiac, at  least  about love  at  a  distance   (e.g.,  "This Page  My  Pigeon" and,  in  a sense, "The Road to Ni jmegen") . The very lovely "Under the Hazel  Bough" (stylistic­ ally another anomaly, but  quite  different  from  "St. Valentine is Past")  is destined
to this end:

but no man sees
where the trout lie now or what leans out
from the hazel bough

POET WITHOUT A MUSE



In some recent poems the autumnal  erotic note takes on a January-and-May form. I'm  thinking not just of "Haiku  for a Young Waitress", "Curacao" and "Twenty­ third  Flight",  but  also of "On   the  Beach"  (which  I miss from  these Selected Poems) , where  the  no longer  agile speaker  cries:

I will follow in a small trot only not whirling
0 girl from the seafoam
have pity

and  even of "A  Walk in Kyoto", where sex somehow triumphs  over "the  ancient discretions of Zen".


7
PERHAPS  ALL THAT I HAVE just been doing is applying to his love poems the cliche that  Birney is in some respects a very Chaucerian kind of poet.  The  cliche deserves its wider  application  too. To  begin  with,  there  is his basic  impersonality.  You can  learn  practically  nothing  about  him  as a  private person from  his published  poems. Self-revelation  or self-analysis is not his  busi­ ness. And  yet, like Chaucer,  and  increasingly with  age, he enjoys offering  us a kind  of  persona  in  the  foreground:  the  innocent scapegoat of  "Meeting   of Strangers", the aging and garlanded  ram of "Twenty-third Flight", the absurdly grateful  initiate  of "Cartagena de Indias". If one of these days somebody writes a Ph.D.  thesis called Birney's  Irony, one person on whom  the irony will not be lost is Birney himself.




















20



TURVEY
AND THE CRITICS



Earle Birney




Ls SUMMER I did some moonlighting as a om-sing aide in the complicated  midwifery  occasioned  by the  rebirth  of Private  Thomas  Turvey  as
hero  of  a  musicale  in  Charlottetown's Confederation  Theatre. In  the  course of these duties, sometimes baffling but always exhilarating, I mulled over a scrapbook of reviews of the original Turvey, a military  picaresque (or "picturesque" as the Monetary  Times had  it). Although some of this material  is now seventeen years old, it contains  patterns  of criticism which seem to me to have relevance still to the  problems  of  the  writer  in  Canada, and  perhaps  elsewhere. What  follows is offered as delayed author's brooding on the judgments of these critics.

1.   Licence, poetic or critical
ELSEWHERE' I have suggested that one of the peculiar and continuing   bedevilments  of  the  Canadian literary  scene is a  tendency  for  the poets and  the  prose fiction writers to exist, or to be expected  to  exist, in  water­ tight compartments. Our  professors of literature  take it in their stride  that many "foreign" poets,  of significance  at  least in  their  day,  from  Boccaccio, through Sidney, Nashc, Samuel Johnson,  Goldsmith,  Poe, to  Hardy, Kipling, de Ia Marc, c. c. cummings,  Lawrence  and  Graves, also made  genuine  contributions  to the development  of  prose  fiction;  but  when  a  Canadian  poet  offers a  plain  prose novel, the  Canadian critic is stopped  in  his tracks. At least  it seemed so to me in the months  following the appearance of Turvey in 1949:
"The   kind  of  book ... that  one  would  not  expect  a  well-known  poet to write ... lurid   language ... decidedly  earthy"   muttered   a  Winnipeg   reviewer, who did  not  cxacdy  approve  of earth.  A Vancouver  columnist, hitherto  one of my strongest fans, confessed himself mystified that "a distinguished poet ... should write  a  288-pagc  book about  a burlesque soldier ... especially when it's obvious


21

TURVEY AND THE CRITICS



that   barrack-room humour  (or  perhaps humour of  any  kind)   is not  his  meat. I  read   it  with   vague  embarrassment." Others,  it's  true,   were  more  agreeably surprised, but  sometimes  their  astonishment  revealed   an  assumption that  poets are  by  definition  humourless,  dull,  and  unrealistic creatures inhabiting the  non­ significant and  depressed  areas  of writing.
It's  an  image  of  the  Canadian poet  which  undoubtedly persists, a  product of the  categorical naivete  of our  critics, and  of an  emphasis upon  outmoded  roman­ tic poetry  by the educators who first formed  our  critics,  and  of a tendency in our poets   themselves   to  accept   such   an  image   and   remain  unventuresome  in  the exploration of  their  own  gifts  as writers.  Layton and  Purdy   live  content in  the valley  that   Carman and  Pratt settled,   MacLennan  and Callaghan in  the  next. The critics, on Black Mountain, watch  both  ways against  cattle  raids.
Indeed  I  think   the  image   persists  even into  that  extremely generous   and thoughtful and  friendly  preface  to the  most  recent  edition of Turvey, written  by the  editor  of Canadian  Literature  himself.•  For  it's  plain  that  my friend  George Woodcock  expects   novels  by  "lifetime  poets"   to  be  "strange, outlandish" and never  "massive   or  major". Such  writers,  he  says,  "don't worry  about   plausible psychology, ... the consistency of timetables, ... the authenticity of medical symp­ toms.... The  fact  they are  poets seems to license  any  break  into fantasy." While Mr.  Woodcock cites many  convincing examples of his  thesis, from  the  roster  of poets'  novels,  I do  feel that,  in  the  case of Turvey, he has let  his preconceptions about  "lifetime poets"  license  him  into  a  critical  fantasy.  Within the  limitations of a satirical  picaresque, I certainly  had  to worry,  like any  novelist,  about "plaus­ ible  psychology" when  I wrote  Turvey, and  a great  deal  about accuracy of time both  in relation  to the acts of the characters and  to the parallel events of the war; and  I have  not  yet encountered a doctor, out  of the good  many  who have spoken or  written to me about  this book, who pointed out  a single instance of inaccuracy in  the  handling of  medical  symptoms. This  is no  great  boast  on  my  part,  since most  of  Turvey's misadventures in  this  respect  happened first  to me,  and  it did not  put  any  great  strain  on  my traumatic memories to pass them  on  to him.
I  am  simply  arguing for  a  point  which  Canadian criticism  of this  book  (and Canadian criticism  only)  still compels me to make,  obvious  as it ought  to be:  that a  poet,  particularly a "lifetime" one,  should  be  conceivably  able  to write  in any form  current in  his literary  milieu,  and  be expected  to  perform in it  as well, at least,  as the  next  man. If he tries and  seems to fail,  the critic  should  perhaps take a second  and  harder look at  the  poetry,  but  not offer  an  argumentum ad poetam about the  prose.

22

TURVEY AND THE CRITICS


2.	The  Professor turned  Novelist
"A  STRANGE  BOOK to come from  a professor  of English", said the  London  Free Press. The  same  Vancouver critic  who  was  embarrassed by a Canadian  poet  attempting  a  novel  of  barrack-room humour  also  "knew" the attempt was doomed  from  the start  because  it didn't "come from  the level of the soldier ... but from  a highly literate, intelligent  and polished  professor of English." Here  is another of our  very Canadian critical shibboleths. I know,  I know-I go about  the  country arguing that  prolonged  sojourn  in Canadian universities,  espe­ cially in English  departments, sets monastic limits to a writer's experience, as well as turning his style to glue. The  fact is, however,  that  most North  American  novelists who  are  now  in  their  forties  or fifties have  taught  English  in  universities. Conse­ quently  in  the  United States  no one is surprised  when  a professor  writes a novel, or  prejudges it as untrue to experience, for if the professor has succeeded  in treat­  ing  "real" life with  veracity,  it may  well be because he has lived for  considerable periods  in other  groves than  the academe, or indeed  that  he possesses an imagina­ tion  particularly resistant  to campus atrophy. In  my case the  world  of the  Cana­ dian  Active  Army,  in which  I spent  nearly  four  years of my life, at least  kept  me sufficiently  on  "the level  of  the  soldier" to make  what  I  wrote  about it look ac­ curate enough   to  pass  unchallenged  by  the  other  old  sweats  (who   have  been, from  the start, the  chief  readers  and  buyers of Turvey). On  the  other  hand, the critics who found  mine a "professor's book" have been, to my knowledge,  precisely those  who   themselves   had   no  personal   experience   of  army  life,  and   probably knew little of writer-professors either.

3. 	If I had a daughter
THE   ALLEGED   SEXUAL   REVOLUTION  has  undoubtedly  put  a more  knowing look  on  the  face  of  Canadian writing  in  the  two  decades since Turvey was written. It is unlikely  that  I would  become involved  today,  as I was in  1948,  in  prolonged  and   tangled   correspondence with  my  Toronto  publisher in order  to preserve  one letter  out  of the four in some of the words  my characters needed  to use.
Let  us  not  have  illusions,  however.  The  sale  of  books  in  the  smaller   centres (where most Canadians live)  is still very much  determined by the  reaction of the lone local  newspaper reviewer,  or a single wire-service  journalist. From  the  treat­ ment  recently  handed out  to  books like Vizinczey's  In  Praise of Older  Women, and   Cohen's Beautiful  Losers,  I  have no  reason  to  think that  the  Windsor Daily 8tar,  for  example, would   not  again  damn  Turvey, surely  a  mild  enough

TURVEY AND THE CRITICS



kitten  among  sex-cats even in his period, as "a  rogue of the dirtiest water". And it  might  be  that  Malcolm  Ross, if  he were  reviewing  my  book for  "Critically Speaking"  in  1966,  would still feel compelled,  as in  1949,  even while  praising the "tang  and  veracity" of its "spoken  language ... fresh to Canadian writing", to add  that  it was "too fresh for Canadian radio.  I shall not risk quotation. The humour  is entirely  physical-even intestinal ... successful so long as he avoids the demands  of meaning  and  morality. Once  these demands  break in, vulgarity is merely vulgar ..." etc. Fun  is fun,  but  as another  C.B.C.  reviewer put it, in that  not so far-off  year:  "I will go so far  as to say that  it is the funniest  book written  by a Canadian that I have read ... yet whether I should want my daugh­ ter to read it ... if I had a daughter ... is another  question."  Those hypothetical daughters   still  languish  in  the  homes  of  some   critics  and  some  broadcasting  governors.
Nor  should  Canadians  be under  the illusion that  the  prudish  reviewer really
helps to increase  a book's sales. The  "shekels" did  not "roll in",  as the Toronto Varsity  perdicted,  when Turvey  was banned  in 1949 by several Ontario libraries, and  described  in  Saturday  Night  as exhibiting  "a  Rabelaisian  reliance  on  the bodily  functions  and  the  Army's  treatment  of  them".  For  the  point  which  the critic  (in  this  case Arnold  Edinborough)   made,  was that  the "Rabelaisian  reli­ ance" made much of the book "an  unamusing  affair".  And when a reviewer tells you a novel is unamusing,  he is influencing  you not to buy it. It  happened  that Turvey, like  many  another  "Rabelaisian" novel-I only wish it  deserved  the unintended  compliment-eventually achieved  a good though  by no means spec­ tacular  sale in Canada,  and continues to have a modest one, but all this has been in despite of the critical Grundies, not because of them. Even in its new form this summer  as a musicale, Turvey, though it had  better  than  average  houses, never achieved the sell-out success of its companion  offering, Anne of Green Gables, for the word  went  round  in Prince  Edward  Island  even before Turvey opened  that the  play's language  was not at all like Anne's, indeed  unlike anything  suited for the  ears  of  Island  females. I've  no doubt  Turvey will  survive  the  Puritan  pro­ vincials, but  I'm  damned  if this will be any reason for  thanking  them.

4. 	Friend or enema?

FROM MY MAIL, and from word of mouth, over seventeen years, I  know  now  who  Turvey's  friends have  been. And  they  are  exactly those whom  many  early  reviewers predicted  would  reject  him. They  are the ex-army medicos,  psychologists and  psychiatrists whom  the  Montreal  Gazette's  reviewer

TURVEY AND  THE CRI'fiCS



predicted would  be the most  displeased.  They  are the rank  and  file who returned, and  did  not  find,  as did  another critic,  that  the  book  was  "a  dismal  synopsis of all  the  dreary conversations they  had  to listen  to so many  times  in  five years of war". They  are  the  fellow Turveys, of both  sexes, and  all services and  ranks  (in­ cluding  one  General), veterans of any war,  hot or cold. They  are Turvey's fellow clowns,  who  never  twigged, as did  the  Saskatoon  Star-Phoenix, that  Turvey was merely  "a  stooge" through whom  I  vented  untimely  undergraduate  sneers  at  a government that  had  done  everything possible for the  returned  soldier. "Perhaps not so warmly  applauded by soldiers as by critics of the Canadian literary  scene",  wrote  a  Letters  in Canada critic  in  rgso. The  reverse was true.
Now  it  is  rg66  and   the  old  veterans  are  dying  off;  but  the  new  critics  have
come  around, and  Turvey is supplementary reading  in some  Can. Lit. courses. I would  be inclined  to accept this as Turvey's death-kiss if I hadn't been in Charlotte­ town  this summer and  watched a new generation of his friends  teaching my old half-track to sing  and  dance, and  confront fresh audiences and  new  critics. He is metamorphosed, but  still  my  wartime alter ego, whom  I  tried  to shape  out  of a need  not  only  to  laugh   at  the  mechanical and  the  life-destroying, but  to laugh with  the  incompetently human and  the  naturally loving  and  the  obstinately life­ preserving. Some  "critics of  the  Canadian  literary scene"  have  indeed  given  me credit  for  such   motivation, and   praise  for  Turvey beyond  its  deserts,  but  there were  not so many  when  I needed  them  most, and  the steadiest heartening for me has  always  come  from  the  other  Turveys, scattered  across  this  country, recogniz­ ing their  kin in my novel and  in me.


' The Creative Writer, Toronto CBC Publications, rg67, ch. IV.
2   George   Woodcock:   introduction  to  Turvey, New  Canadian  Library,   Toronto, McClelland  & Stewart,  rg63.


THE SCULPTURE  OF POETRY

On Louis Dudek




Dorothy Livesay







Now THAT  THE   FEUDS  have  died  down  it  would  no longer  be appropriate for A. J. M. Smith  to cry:  "Layton shall tingle in Canadian air  j And echo  answer  Dudek everywhere." Omitting those polemics and parodies,
salutary as they  have  been in stirring  up the  potage canadien, what  is interesting today  is a  concern for  the styles and  techniques which  have  made  each  poet so differently "an intelligent, imaginative man." •
Of  the  two  it  is Louis  Dudek  who  has  been  most  articulate about  the  poetic art   and  its  relation to  the  spoken  word.   Recently he  has  written   his  own  Art Poetique,  in  a  poem  called  "Functional Poetry: a  Proposal". Here  he envisages poetry  as "having the shape  of clouds."  And  it is this sculptural, visual  approach that   aligns  him  with  the  early  Imagist   movement of  the  century   and   with  its re-development under  the aegis of William  Carlos Williams  and  Ezra  Pound.

But I go back always to the first three moderns
Lawrence, Aldington, Eliot  (then) , Pound  ( 1915)
Lee Masters  (yes!	Sandburg too)
for the beginning of what we need:  straight  language and relevance to our real concerns

i.e. some form of improvised rhythmed  speech

This  "manifesto" establishes  Dudek  as the  contemporary Canadian poet  most consciously  concerned with  shape,  form  and  sound: the  origins  of  rhythm. He feels that   the  widening  scope  of  prose  rhythm has  set  up  an  impasse  for  poetry which  he would  like to break  through:
The problem, it seems to me, is simply
over the centuries

THE SCULPTURE OF POETRY



the loss of ground to prose
in the subject  matter of poetry,

and  the loss of freshness in method as the  residue  of "poetic" substance
became  fossilized in decadent metre  and  form
-and the  coral  reefs.
We want  a renewal 	of substance,   of technique that  goes to the origin  and source :

His   rum  apparently is  to  invade  the  fortress where  prose   has   taken hold   and return it  to  the  rightful owner, poetry:
to write it as they write prose
Lots of it, on all subjects that  call
for  communication


as poetry  of exposition  and discourse

Before   he  reached this  eighteenth century critical position Dudek as  man and poet  went through  many phases. His  earliest poetry  in  East of the City  is lyrical and   imagist:  concerned  not   with   sound  effects  so   much  as  with   pictures in rhythmic arrangement. Already the  clouds and  the  sea  he is so fond  of observing represent his  objective correlative for  the  world  of  poetry: a  world where  recur­ rent  rhythms subject to wind  and  weather, subject to sun  and  moon, are expressed through  language:
The moon  floated  down
a river  between  two clouds melted  the stone banks and  they were gone.
In many of  these  short lyrical pieces  the  poet's "eye" is on  the  object but  in  the background is a subjective, emotional "I" responding to  these  objects. So  we get a "double take" as in  a poem  called  "Revolving Door";
Late, when  near that  waterwheel the treaded doorway  where
no man  is, but momentary water while  outside  the sun points
on hands, foreheads; and  all fluid sharp down spires and  trees
skits the sun's  lightning, drawn an turned, I fall
loud  down  the sounding caves

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY



of the watery  wheel, out, and the light blinds me,
cells burst in trillion  and spill
my mind  of its surprise  and  fear.

Dudek's search for   "straight  language and   relevance" is  certainly to  be  found in  these  early   poems. Nonetheless he  is not  wholly  free  from the  metrical bonds of  the   past.   In   the   above   lines,  for  instance, there is  a  movement outward, a loosening of  the  line :
while outside  the sun  points on hands,  foreheads,

but   he  quickly lapses  into  iambic metre in  lines  such   as

drawn  and  turned, I fall or
my mind  of its surprise  and  fear

Also,  when social  criticism dominates a  poem, as in  "East of  the  City" itself,  the rhythm is reminiscent of  English poets  of the  thirties:  Auden or  Day  Lewis:

So that  someday  we may go, and see the sun rise Outside this world  of rubble.  Drive  out Through factories,  and  brick walls of buildings To  the east, to the fields sweet with  clover
Where  over the heads of trees, in a cup  of the sky,
Laughing, the  earth-warmer comes, making day  warm  for  us.

There is  a  tentative groping  here for   an   individual rhythm  based   on  strong stresses,  but  the  iambic or  anapaestic metre takes  hold  firmly  in  the  last  two  lines quoted. Dudek has  not  yet  found his own   voice.  In a  later  collection, Cerberus, produced  jointly   with   Layton and   Souster, he  is  beginning to  explore theories:

The way  to  freedom  and  order  in  the  future will  be  through art  and  poetry.... Language is the  great  saving  first poem,  always  being  written; all others  are  made of  it.  We  must  prize  it,  protect it  against   the  destroyers and   perverters of  our time ... Anyone  who  understands this  is capable of  assuming a  responsibility, of becoming a  citizen  of  the  world.  Anyone  who,  reads  a  good  poem  with  under­ standing-a poem  that   bites  into  the  evil-or   retrieves a  truth-creates  an order  in himself.

But  as yet the  poems  do not  match the  theory. Stanzas like "Re-visiting Montreal" remind one  of Whitman; poems  on  Greek  themes recall the  voice of Pound (as  in

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY



"For E.P.", "For Christ's sake,  you  didn't invent sunlight").  Occasionally there are   intimations that  Dudek is  experimenting with  strong stress  metre, caesura, and  formal parallelism, as in "A  Drunk on the Sidewalk";

He  has a history  older  than  England
and  no doubt has a future, this Falstaff
He rolled on the floor of a mead-hall tottered through Piers' dreamland

Yet  the  poem  ends, quite out  of keeping, with  a reminiscence of Sweeney:

now let us scatter, having  seen
Christ  escorted  to his limousine.

These overtones of  the  thirties, ironic in  intent, abound in  the  Cerberus  col­
lection:

you'll  walk  home  to roses
leaning on your  trellis, open  the lock of love
with  liberty  in your pocket,  Life under  your arm

It is  unkindness to  Auden! But  one  brief  poem  seems  to  achieve authenticity, "Alba";

As you lay on the bed pale with the humid  breath  of kisses
still moist  on your cheek, openly, like a leaf your  water-lily  limbs,
the river, past the bed, to the sea below, to the city, dragged  down our two selves, slowly, down,  to the sound of
cataracts in the street  below, in humming early morning light.

Every   line   here  carries  three  strong stresses,   balanced  by   carefully  controlled junctures:
....,         ....,	I	....,	....,	/	/	'
,
.....	/  .....	.....	/ .....
the humid/breath/of kisses

Moreover  the   poet   has  emphasized  his  rhythms by  a  happy use  of  vowel   and consonant  repetition:   cheek, leaf;   water-lily  limbs;   below, slowly;   and   down, sound. Because the  lines  have simplicity, grace and  movement, they  are  a preview of  Dudek's later style.

29

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY





EVEN TWENTY  YEARS AGO, then,  Dudek  had  made  his stand known.  He  was  opposed  to "musicality" a la Keats. He  wanted poetry  to reveal
itself  naked, without the  props  and  embellishments of sound. His  best  poetry  IS unified,  of a piece,  and  not  discursive as is prose. It is "articulated music" in the sense  that  Suzanne Langer  uses this term.  Speaking of  her  views, a recent  critic finds that  "a  poem  is like a piece of music in  that  it articulates itself;  and  in thus establishing internal  relations,   establishes   also  relations  of  feeling".  For   Mrs. Langer the  central fact of poetry  as of music is "the creation of syntax, of  mean­ ingful  arrangements." Similarly, in one of his own  metaphors about poetry Dudek
writes:
yes, yes, imagination, if you like
but to steer the log boat, keep it level plumb with the real thing
after all. .. ?

As soon  as  a  poet  makes  "meaningful arrangements" his  main  concern   he  ap­ proaches the  attitude of the  essayist towards his material. Dudek's recent  collec­ tions,  Europe   and   En  Mexico are  examples of  this  tendency. Again,  however,  this approach is justified by Suzanne Langer:

... all poetry is a creation of illusory events, even when it looks like a statement  of opinions  philosophical or political or <esthetic. The  occurrence  of a thought  is an event  in  a  thinker's  personal  history, and  has  as distinct  a  qualitative  character as an adventure, a sight, or a human contact; it is not a proposition, but the enter­ tainment  of one, which necessarily involves vital  tensions, feelings, the imminence of other  thoughts,  and  the  echoes of past  thinking.   Poetic  reflections,  therefore, are  not  essentially trains of logical reasoning,  though  they  may incorporate frag­ ments, at  least, of discursive argument.    Essentially  they  create  the  semblance  of reasoning ...3

The key phrase  in this excerpt  is that  poetry  "is not a proposition, but  an enter­ tainment of one". Thus  Dudek's apparent  philosophizing, his  didacticism,  are  in reality  a consideration of possibilities. His prose  content, like his prose syntax,  is a kind  of disguise.  What  then  transmutes it into  poetry?  We can only come to some agreement on  this if we examine examples.  An early  poem from  East of the City  called  "Basement Workers" is relevant:

Let me give you reminders to keep the image clear, of roofs too near overhead,
of air sharp with particles, like gravel in sand,

THE SCULPTURE OF POETRY



boxes, and tables with torn fringes of metal, blocked doors, stacks

of coffined cribs ready for crouching mummies, paper to wrap around our pale corpses:
so, these dispersed, hang in the air between floor and ceiling,
where we, darker than miners between the hours filter the dust in our collapsing lungs-
and think how noon light up there is rocking buildings, and winds fling skirts about, cooling ankles.

It would  be  a mistake  to assume  that  this simple, straight-forward use of  lan­ guages,  which   never  falls  into  obscurantism or  ellipsis and  which  is  always syn­ tactically  complete, is necessarily  the language of prose. Dudek's poems are rhyth­ mic wholes. One  might  be able to say what  he is saying here, in a few paragraphs or  even  sentences; but  one  would  then  become  aware  of his stricter limitations. Order and  control are  the keynotes to this poet's work: as in sculpture, the whole must  be visible at  a glance,  but  the detail  must  be exact, and highlighted where essential.  Moreover, none  of  Dudek's poems  can  be  accused  of  being  too  short or too long  (for  even  his "epic" poems are a series of  short  apprehensions). Quite frequently the  poems  seem  to lack  drama and  dramatic tension,  but  they  are  a true  rhythmic mirror of  the  poet's  intention.  No  word  or  phrase  can  be  taken away; none  can  be  added. There is, further,  only  the  sparest  use of adjectives; instead   there  is strong   reliance  on  nouns,  verbs,  clauses.
In  the  poem  cited  above  the  poet  begins with  a consideration: Let me give you reminders
He goes on to fortify  this line with  a parallel  list of "objects", much  in the manner of  Whitman; six lines  whose  initial  words  are  all prepositions or  objects  of  pre­
positions:

of roofs of air boxes
blocked doors
of coffined cribs paper

After  this listing,  which  dispenses  with  articles  and  uses modifiers  that  are  nearly
all  verbals   (as  blocked;  co!fined;  crouching)  he  pulls  the  argument back  into

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY



perspective with  his linking  words:   so;  where; and  think   how. By such  syntac­
tical  means  is the  rhythm  established.
Further proof  that   Dudek  is  more  concerned with  musical   articulation than with  onomatopeia-music as "cry" -is to be found in the texture of his vocabu­ lary.  Although he  maintains a  harmony of  vowel  sounds there  is apparently  no effort  towards alliteration, assonance  or half-rhymes (except in a few of the latest lyrics  in  En  Mexico). It is as if  the  poet  had   an  instinct   for  the  right  sounds without consciously  working  to  make  them  so.  A short  poem  from  Europe  will illustrate:

The sea loves to move but it is in no hurry
flops over languidly like an easy animal waiting for storms
never still

The first two lines  play only on the  vowel sounds jijj,  /a/  and   juj, jowj. This This   pattern  continues into   flops over  and   then,   as  the  sea  turns  over,  a  new vowel sound  is heard: the  ja:_j in languidly and  animal. It is then  followed  through with  reverberations and  echoes of all the earlier  vowels. The last line is weak  and fading; so  are  its  vowels.  Note  also  that  the  poem  comes  to  rest  on  the  liquid sound  of still which  is an  echo  of animal. In  addition to  these inner  harmonics, and  supporting them,  this brief  poem  takes its shape  from  the syntactic  arrange­ ment,  the  line  lengths  and  the  balance of primary, tertiary and  weak  stresses. In  additional metrics  the first line could  be said  to have  as its pivot  an ionic  (loves)
no


are  the  pivot  (it  is j in
 " )  with  a  trochee   at  the  end   (hu/ rry). The   rhythmic

reversal  exactly  parallels  the  movement of  the  image:  upward to  the  sea l ves to  m ve
matopeia, but  a kinaesthetic identification with  the object seen and  its flow. One identifies  with  sculpture in  much  the same  way; and  the  metaphor for sculpture is "frozen music" !
On  a larger  scale  "Poem  19", also from  Europe, uses the same  techniques. It is
a  pleasure  to  hear   the  poet  reading   this  poem   aloud   because   his grave   voice emphasizes the  necessity  for  giving  every  word  its  due  stress  and  duration, and every  juncture and  end-line  its due  timing   (besides  internal  junctures, juncture at  the  end  of each  line is an essential  part  of Dudek's patterning). In "Poem 19" the  frame  has  been  widened  to embrace the  whole  of the  sea  and  the sky. The

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY



small  movements  of the  waves are seen as lives tossing against  the fixed eternal laws of "gravity" (or death)   and "just  measure":

The commotion of these waves however  strong
cannot disturb compass line of the horizon
nor the  plumbline of gravity

It is not practicable to "scan"  these lines into prosodic feet; they must be scanned as syntactic  units  with  strong  stresses between  junctures.  To  aid  the  rhythmic pattern  there is, in addition,  a nice parallelism in the imagery between the "com­ pass line"  and  the "plumbline". Later  in the poem parallelism creates the same effect again:   "the  dead scattered  on the stage in the fifth act" who show nature restored to order  and  just measure".
Although  this poem has several ancestors, from Nashe's

Brightness  falls from  the air
Queens have died  young and fair

to Yeats' Lapis Lazuli,

All perform their  tragic  play that's Ophelia, that,  Cordelia- Yet they ........ .
Do  not break  up their  lines to weep ...

nonetheless Dudek  masters the past and  creates something new as he concludes:

The  horizon is perfect, and  nothing can be stricter
than gravity; in relation to these the stage is rocked and  tossed,
kings fall with their  crowns, poets sink with their laurels.

It is a most satisfying poem  because the rhythm  is so completely wedded  to the thought.  Although   "objective" -the  poet simply names  objects,  elements  and avoids  figurative  language   as  assiduously as  he  avoids  musicality -the  poem cannot  escape  from  net  of  metaphor: symbols take  the  place of similes. It  is, indeed,  a characteristic symbolist poem.




33

THE SCULPTURE OF  POETRY



IF THE  EVIDENCE already  presented is not  sufficient  to  prove that   Dudek's rhythms  are  based  on  syntax,  let  us look  at  "Poem 46"  from  En
Mexico. Here  he describes

a magnanimous mother with children dancing towards the shore, in a nightdress her opulent ankles tapering
down to her toes
(behind her the children shrieking) poised, supremely graceful, gigantic­ America, the continent, dancing.

The rhythmic effect  is achieved  by  the  use of  verbals -"ing" words: dancing, tapering, shrieking, dancing-all  of  them  trochaic in  pattern and  therefore in falling   rhythm. In  between  these  metrical (and  syntactic)  phrases  are  upward­ rising  anapaestic rhythms:
- -
-in 'awl    nightdre'wsl s to her to/es

Throughout there  is a  judicious  use of  what   used  to  be  called  the  "truncated" foot,  but  which  may  be more simply  regarded as a strong  stress with  juncture on each side, placed initially in the line:
/
Poised ...
/
down....

This  type  of stressed  unit  is balanced by its opposite,   the  "outrider", where  we find a series of unstressed syllables:
u  / '-'  u	u
America the

The total  impression  is one  of weight,  balanced on  light  feet-Williams'  "vari­ able  foot", perhaps; but  certainly  not  a "foot" in the  traditional metric  sense. It is a  phrasal  foot,  or  unit,  marked  off by  junctures; isochronic in its effect.  The strong  dancing movement  arises from  the syntactic incompletion of the phrasal structures: they  are  all in  a state  of being,  and  make  no  use of the  finite  verb. The   adjectives too,  always sparely  used by Dudek, seem  to be chosen  because  of their  rhythmic pattern, as "magnanimous mother." Out of this  unity  of  rhythm and  syntax  evolves  the  conceptual image  of  a  "continent  dancing." Symbolism once  more!

34

THE SCULPTURE OF POETRY



"Poem 6g" is a final example of the welding of rhythm  (or "beat") with syntax and  concept :
Someday we shall come again to the poem
as mysterious as these trees, of various texture leaves, bark, fruit
(the  razor teeth so neatly arranged so clean the weathered  rent)

This is the art of formal repetition
and the art of singular form -lines, lines like a wave-worn stone

This  poem  falls into  three  parts: first, three lines of three  strong  stresses each  in a falling  rhythm; followed   by  two  lines of  rising  (or  iambic)  rhythm, also  triple stresses;  and  ending with  three  lines which  are  dramatically broken  up,  divided so that  line  7 pulls  a spondee unto  itself, from  line 8. This  pattern maintains the nine  strong  stresses  but  gives  added   "rhetorical" juncture and  emphasis. Much care  is evident  here  in  the  choice  of sound  harmonies. Consider for  instance the
line:
the razor teeth so neatly arranged

where  the vowel repetition is made more forceful by the intervening fricative consonants.
Sound   harmonies then,  together with  a  beautifully   balanced phrasal pattern, enhance the conceptual conclusion  which is the theme of all Louis Dudek's poetry: that  harmony and  order  in  nature towards  which  mankind strives.  All his recent poetry  of the fifties and  sixties, with the exception  of the satirical  pieces of  Laugh­ ing Stalks, repeats  the same  theme:

Beauty is ordered  in nature as the wind and sea
shape each other for pleasure; or the just
know, who learn of happiness
from the report of their own actions.

As a sculptor  takes  a lump of clay and  fashions  it into  varying  shapes  he retains the  essential  element   that  makes  it a work  of art:  rhythm. So in  his cool, grave, lucent  poems does Louis  Dudek  create  and  magnify his world.

' Louis Dudek:  "Functional Poetry,"  Delta, July 1959·
2    The Transparent Sea.  1956.
3  Feeling and  Form.  p. 219


35








I. The Preface: On Radical  Absurdity










MONTAIGNE NEVER  READ    Undmtanding Media  yet
there's a good deal of point to what he says about the relation between our animal
and our human  extensions:

no  use our  mounting on  stilts, for on  stilts  we must  still walk  on our  own  legs ... on  the  loftiest  throne in  the  world  we still are  only sitting  on our  own  rump.

That he  discovered  his metier  in  the  printed  book  seems obvious,  despite  his protesting  his attachment to animal  extensions like legs and  rump. The  question remains, where in the range of extensions do we locate our being? We have only to think of trumpeter  and  trumpet instead of king and throne  to see the problem. Montaigne  often chafes against the unified consciousness imposed by print, and a trumpeter, however  much  his trumpet  means  to him,  might  likewise if his only mode  of awareness  was his trumpet  complain  of limitation.  Our  worry is about freedom.  Twentieth-century  man  has  many  modes  of  consciousness and  with these goes a freedom  not enjoyed by any previous civilization. It is this freedom, so  terrible  a  freedom  that  we don't  like looking  at  it, a freedom  we've  hardly recognized to date, a freedom radically unlike any that  mankind  has yet known, that  I  find myself wanting  to celebrate in  absurdist  plays and  in satirical  verse. Satire is often a ritual of acceptance by which a Swift, a Sterne, or a Percy Wynd­ ham  Lewis castigates the crossing of territorial  lines, while conceding to the future  its power  to innovate.  Or  is it exploration -I  won't  claim  that  in  attempts  at theatre  of  the  absurd  I've  been  engaged  in  exploration;  celebrate  is the  right word.  This  new freedom  I  have been celebrating  is really a very  wonderful  de­ velopment-it  dictates  the  very  unrealistic  settings  I  find  myself using,  and



POEM	AND	PREFACE






Wilfred Watson








these,  involving   the  use  of  multi-environments, determine  the  kind  of  dramatic texture I have  been able to achieve in scripts like Cockcrow  and the Gulls  ( rg62), Trial  of Corporal  Adam ( 1963), Another  Bloody Page  from Plutarch  ( 1963/4), Wail   for Two Pedestals  ( rg64/1965) and  Over  Prairie Trails  (a farcical drama­ tization  of Grove's novel).
In  Cockcrow and  the  Gulls  I couldn't really get started   until  I'd  killed off all the  human  characters and  reassembled  them  in  a sort  of  limbo,  where  I could confront them   with  an  atypical absurdist  impasse,  the  fact  that  when  you  are dead   you  cannot die.  The following  excerpt  is from  the  beginning of  the  play, but   I think   it  adumbrates in  its  non-realistic   realism  the  multi-realism of  the
second half of this work.


GWLADYS HIGGINS GWLADYS HIGGINS GWLADYS
 Kiss me, Cyril.
Forgive me, mate. 	It was an accident.... You'll hang for this mate.
This boy here will testify it was an accident. You should've done it in England, mate.
An English jury would've been lenient.
All yer'd have got would've been life, with time off for good behaviour.
But a Canadian jury will never let you off for killing a wife. Mark  what I say-
These are my dying words to you mate. You'll hang for it.
So yer'd better prepare yer soul to meet yer maker.

37

POEM AND PREFACE




HIGGINS GWLADYS

HIGGINS







GWLADYS HIGGINS
 (bitterly)
So yer dying happy  mother? You'll  never be prime minister.
Not being of an irreproachable character.
Yer might  have been able to hush  up yer whores,  but not murder. And so yer dying happy  mother?
Because in yer last mortal act
You think  yer've ruined  all my political
Intent?   - Cyril, Cyril, mark
Yer mother, mate, she's dying happy, happy  as a lark.
(raises  teapot in his hand  to  strike  her again, but  Cyril  intervenes)
Go on, go on. (to  Cyril) Son,
Don't yer go shining  yer dubious light on us now, son.
(fiings  Cyril  aside)
Now yer can die happy  mate.
(hits her again  and  again  with teapot)
It's  murder now mate.
(Cyril drags  himself  to his  feet, exit) How  right  you were, Sir Francis ... In yer fine essay of friendship!
A friend  can speak to a friend without respect  of persons,
But a husband  can speak only to his wife as a husband, Etcetera, etcetera.	(calls) 	Cyril!
A father can only speak to his son, as a father.
A murderer can speak to no one, except  as a fugitive!
(re-enter Cyril)
Cyril ... where are you, boy? ... I won't  hurt  you!
(Cyril stares at  him)
Mate,  I'm  not a murderer.
Won't anyone  tell me I'm  not a murderer?
Mate,  she poked her finger right  into  the eye of my flaw. She picked at the scab in my soul.
She bitched  at the hangnail of my self-command, when  I had  very little

Reserves, and  defense none at all. ...


In Trial  of Corporal  Adam, which  begins  in  the  medieval world of Everyman, Adam is whisked away  from  occupied Berlin  into a multiple world in  which, at his  trial, Death is  judge,  the  Church, prosecutor, the  devil, defense lawyer, and Noah, Moses,  David, Bathsheba witnesses.

g8

POEM AND PREFACE



HOLY CHURCH 	What sort of soldier was Uriah?
BATHSHEBA	A brave soldier.
HOLY CHURCH 	Was he a better soldier than David?
BATHSHEBA 	Yes.-No.
HOLY CHURCH 	What sort of soldier was Adam.
BATHSHEBA	I don't  know.
David  thought Adam was a good soldier, and said so.
HOLY CHURCH 	I will call the next witness.
(exit  Bathsheba)
ADAM	(to  wife)
Did you see David weeping?
This David honest king does my heart good. He remembered me.    He didn't  forget me. He spoke of me, you see to Bathsheba.
Bathsheba didn't forget me either-what David said of me. God loved him, and he will me, eventually.
I will repent myself to God, as David did.
MEPHISTOFILIS	(to  Adam)
But he doesn't exist. Be re-assured....

In   Another  Bloody  Page   from  Plutarch  the  action takes place in  classical Bononia,  first  of all,  and  later  on  at  Caieta. But  multiple  environments are im­ portant, as in  the  following  song.  Collaged  together  in  it  are: the  world  of  the leopardess,  the  jungle;   that  of the shepherdess, classical pastoral; and  the double  world  of  Lepidus and  of  Mr  Lepidus,  the  triumvirate of Rome  and  its  modern analogue suggestive  of  names  like  Profumo, Christine   Keeler  and  Gerda  Mun­
singer.

DORICAN US CHIRICUS DORICANUS CHIRICUS
 
And as for the wicked leopardess
Who left behind her such a nasty mess She never expected to find a shepherdess In the bed of old Mr Lepidus.


In  Wail  for  Two  Pedestals the  action  is located  on,  off  and  beside  the  two pedestals.  The Godot  who  doesn't  appear in  Beckett's  Wailing for Godot stands on one of these  pedestals.  The daughter of the Lefty who doesn't  appear in Wait­ ing  for Lefty climbs  up on to the other  pedestal.  These two pedestals enable me to whirl  round  them  a large  number of contemporary environments, including those
in the following  excerpts :


CHORUS
m
M
 
Here we go round the thunderstorm. We are the hollow men.
Hollow men, unite.


39

POEM AND PREFACE



You have nothing  to lose except  your telephones.
f 	(kneeling to M)
Father, forgive me, I have sinned.
M 	In what  kind  have you sinned,  daughter?
f	The  sin of the flesh, father. M 	 With  whom,  daughter?
f	I am in love with a married man,  father.
M 	 What  is his occupation, daughter. f	He is my husband, father.
M 	Then  you are in mortal sin, daughter.
Think  of yourself as in danger of damnation. f	What  shall I do about  it, father?
M 	Leave him at once.
f	I can't  help it, father.
M 	God will help you, daughter. f	I want  to love him all
the time, father.
M 	Then  you had  better  get
him to divorce  you, daughter. f	He can't  afford  it, father.
M 	It's all right  as long as you
don't  use those things, daughter.
f	 What things do you mean, father? M 	Those  things.
f	Pills, father?
M 	Those  things, daughter.
(thunder)
m 	Thunder!
f		An electric  storm. m 	A flash of lightning!
(taking f's hand)
Here  we go round  the eye of the storm!
f	Amen!

In Over  Prairie  Trails  the  world   of  the  horses,  Peter and Dan, is contrasted with   the  world of  Grove; Peter and  Dan are  caught in  a sort  of  concentration­ camp environment, which is epicyclic to  the  circle  which Grove  makes between Gladstone and  Falmouth, through cold,  fog, storm and  blizzard  conditions which urge   Grove on  to  heroic  efforts and   impose on  the  horses  the  hell  out  of which they  cannot escape. In this  excerpt Dan wakes  up  the  exhausted Peter and   tries to console him.

40

POEM AND PREFACE




DAN PETER


DAN PETER

DAN PETER
 You understand, don't you?
Yes I understand  all right you've woken me up just to tell me that what's happened  today hasn't
gone unobserved.
I'm sorry I've made you angry, Peter.
(after  a pause)
Daniel, you have an inclination towards the cosmic fallacy. What's that my friend?
Beloved, it's the belief not well grounded that the
tragic affairs of horses and men have cosmic significance.
(gestures)
That  the stars have eyes.



I have   perhaps  g1ven enough   excerpts   by  way  of example to  suggest  that   the collaging  together  of two or more  milieus makes possible a treatment of an absurd­ ist  theatre not  altogether  unlike  but  by  no  means  identical with  that  modern theatre  movement dominated  by  Camus's sentiment of  the  absurd,  where  men and  their  questionings are  answered by the  blank  meaningless  of the world.
As  I  understand the  new  freedom,  multi-media man  has  many   worlds  and
many  modes of awareness -as many in fact as he has media; and  the significant thing is, these modes of consciousness are not unified by language, whether spoken, written or  printed. This  fact  must,  I believe, force  upon  us a new  concept  of the absurd.  Formerly man   could  reason  in  a  mode  of  awareness   which  was  given him  through language, but  today  man  has  many  kinds of awareness, and  to an increasing degree  no  two  men  are  likely  to  have the  same mix  of  the  multi­ consciousnesses  available. Professor   McLuhan has  spoken  of  modern  society  as being  without centres.  Modern man  has  no  centralized  consciousness,  he is off­ centre,  eccentric in a radical new  way.
Comedy in  the  past  has  been  a sort  of oddman affair,  an  affair  of a deviant
within  a group, amusing but  not  particularly disturbing. It is when  all the mem­ bers  of  a group are  uncentred, without centre  in  either  the  group or  elsewhere,  that   the  phenomenon becomes  shattering. The  group  whether family  or  society becomes  little  more  than   the  cardboard carton  in  which  when  we  are moving  house  we  put  plates,  cups  and   miscellaneous  items,  and  discard   as  having  dis­ charged its  function when  the  move  is over.  As men  in  relationship with  each other   become  more  configurative, the  cartons  in  which  they  exist  come  to seem all the  more  obviously  cartons. This  fact  has led  Professor Royce  to write  a book entitled  The  Encapsulated  Man. He  opens  with  this observation:

POEM AND  PREFACE



Modern  movements  such as existentialism  and  the  revival of interest  in  religion point  rather  decisively to  the  inadequacy  of  traditional values. And  the  restless searching  which  is manifest  in  the  major  cultural  outlets,  such  as the  arts  and science, are indicative of the inability of traditional symbols to carry the weight of
a  meaningful  existence. This  book concerns  itself with  this search  for  meaning,
particularly  the search of 20th-century man.

My thesis is that  such a search demands  total  involvement  and  maximum  aware­
ness, but that man is encapsulated.


It is not surprising that  the U.S. military  has had  trouble with its university-trained recruits.  The  army  has become  an  encapsulation, a meaningless  carton,  particu­ larly hated  by university graduates each with his own brand of  multi-consciousness and  not easily brain-washed. Even  the universities  have become  an  encapsulation to many  students and  staff.  Those  who  want  to  condition modern eccentric man  may  discover  that  this can  only be done  by  reducing him  to a feral  condition. It may  not be easy to make a modern concentration camp  work -not nearly so easy as it used to be, when  inmates  had a unified  consciousness, to be peeled off like a skin.  Multi-consciousness doesn't strip  back  easily because  it is acquired by doing  rather than  by seeing. Because he is civilized  not  in one  direction only but  in all sorts  of  directions, modern  eccentric man  has  great  contempt for  the  cardboard carton   type  of   classification.  Jean   Genet   expresses  this  contempt, especially  in The Blacks, a play about  colour of skin as a means  of social classification.  Professor George  S.  Wellwarth discusses this play  as follows:

In The  Blacks  Genet tries to make the Negro's real attitude clear to the whites.... The  action  of The   Blacks  is very simple.  A group  of  Negroes enacts  the  ritual murder  of a white woman.  Another  group  of Negroes, wearing  white masks and dressed in  the  trappings  that  give the whites their  illusory authority,  sits in  judg­ ment on them.  Instead of being judged, however, the Negroes "kill" the "Whites". While  the  Negroes on stage are going through  this mock catharsis, the real action of the  play is transpiring  offstage. A Negro traitor  is condemned  and shot, and  at the end it becomes clear to the white audience  that  the whole play was merely an elaborate,  conscious cover-up  to  disguise an  incident  in  the  war  of  the  Negroes on the whites.
(Theater of Protest  and  Paradox, New York,
1964, pp. 126ff.)

Genet  has no sympathy for the Blacks or for the whites, only a compulsive distaste for  banality of classification.





Ishot a
 POEM AND PREFACE




trumpet into  my  brain  is a  sort  of  manifesto-poem

about  what  seems  to me  the  central  fact in modem  civilization, its multiplicity of
media.  This  is a fact  to which  every artist  and  every writer  must  address  himself. The   unique soul  is out.  Compared to  the  new  psyche,  it seems something of  a fraud. What   is  in,  is  personality  made  up  of selective  configurations of  public modes  of consciousness.  There are numerous options  available to this new human being,  more  by a  long  shot  than  there  are  to a General Motors  car-and  each implies  a mode  of awareness. These  options  are being used. It makes communica­ tion  very  difficult  when  sending station  and  receiving  station   are  incompatible. Massman is  on  the  way  out   (in  any  case,  massman  was  probably an  early twentieth-century myth,  for, as Lewis in part sees in The  Apes of God, broadcast­ ing  creates  broadcasters not  listeners.)   Eccentric man  is  on  the  way  in,  for  the addition of mass media  is like the addition  of electrical resistances  in parallel: the more  media,   the  fewer  the  masses. The  combinations  of  consciousness  possible can  be roughly  realized  if we set down  the 26 letters of  the alphabet, and  starting with  the  mass-media, match  them  with  some common  medium. Thus:  (a)   TV, (b)   radio,   (c)   motion   picture,  (d)   telephone,   (e)   telegraph,  (f)   daily  press, (g)   weekly  news  magazines, (h)   recordings,   (i)  automobile, (j)   jet plane,  (k) railway,   (I)   tape   recorder,  (m)   camera,   (n)   gestettner,  ( o)   xerox,   (p)   type­ writer,   ( q)   fountain  pen,   ( r)   powerboat,  ( s)   bicycle,  ( t)   motor  scooter,   ( u) sewing  machine, ( v)  hairdryer, ( w)  electric light,  ( x)  vacuum cleaner, ( y)  add­ ing  machine, ( z)  credit  card. If we tried  to  unify the  various  consciousnesses in­ volved in this list, we should  need  a language something like Joyce's  in Finnegans  Wake,  "wordloosed over   seven   seas   crowdblast  incellelleneteutoslavzendlatin­ soundscript."  There are  advantages to every man  being  his own  nation, but  the life of eccentric man  is  bound  to be chaotic,  in his sexual,  family,  economic  and political  relations. Shakespeare's Sonnet   II 6  ("Let me not to the marriage of true  minds/  Admit  impediments")  may have  to be re-written ("let's not forget  when contemplating  marriage of  minds  as diverse  as ours,  the  difficulties  of intersub­ jectivity"). But quite  obviously  the radical  absurdity  we face is to be distinguished from   the  absurd   Camus wrote  of  in  the  Myth of Sisyphus during  the  middle

For me, the sole datum  is the absurd ... a confrontation  and an unceasing struggle. And  carrying  this absurd  logic to its conclusion, I must  admit  that  that  struggle
implies a total absence of hope  (which has nothing to do with despair), a continual

43

POEM AND PREFACE



rejection   (which  must  not  be confused with  renunciation), and  a conscious  dis­
satisfaction  (which must not be compared to mature unrest).

What we must explain  to ourselves today is why our  new radical absurdity induces in  us  hope,  acceptance and  complacency. Perhaps  the  reason  is that  what  has produced this new twentieth-century man  is the extraordinary development of the human extensions  of  man.  Consequently though  the  new  absurdity ought  to  be enough  to sober  us, in fact  eccentric  man  causes in us a sense of elation -we are for the moon, come what may.
What we  probably will have  to do is seek  help  from  the  artist  in solving  the problems  of  multi-consciousness. It  could  be  that   the  social  order  of  tomorrow will  depend  on  artists  of  great  talent.  Already   if  we  examine modem art  and literature we find  a  very sharp  distinction  between   a very few famous  men  and the  rank-and-file of artists and  writers whose work is for the most  part  paraphrase and   whose  numbers  tend  to  approximate  to  the  sum-total of  population -it would  almost  seem  as if the  best way  to  understand  eccentric man  would  be to equate him  with  the rank-and-file of creative  talents. What differentiates the  men of great  talent  from  this wider group  of minor  talents is the fact  that  the former­ men  like Picasso, Henry  Moore,  Wyndham Lewis, Corbusier, Marshall McLuhan
-have all attempted to exert an integrating force  of some sort or other on thought and  society.  Common to them  is their  sense of  the  complexity of a special  kind which  multi-consciousness entails  upon  modern society, their  sense of the  problem of  eccentric  man.   The   rank-and-ille of  minor   artists  pride  themselves  on  their discovery  that  they  are different  from  others  and  have  missed the point  that  today the  common man  is  just one  of them.  The great  artists  have  worked  in  reaction to  this  fact   though  without   necessarily  understanding  the  real  problem.  Both Joyce   and   Wyndham  Lewis  for  example   understood  that   multi-media meant multi-consciousness, but  neither  knew  how  to  relate  themselves  as artists  to  the audience of  eccentrics  growing  up  around them. The  fact  of the  eccentricity of modem man  was  clear  to them; but  they  did  not  discover  what  to  do  with  this fact  or  what  was  their  role with  respect  to it.  Perhaps the singular distinction of
Marshall McLuhan is his seeming  ability  to  write  for, not  merely  w th,
eccentric.








44



2. The Poem:

I Shot a Trumpet  into my Brain






I would  not have  you think  that  I am shut out from a sense of what is called by the Japanese "the  Ah-ness of  things"; the melancholy  inherent in the animal  life. But there  is a H o-ho-ness too. And  against  the backgrounds of  their  sempiternal Ah-ness it  is possible, strictly  in  the  foreground, to proceed with a protracted comedy, which glitters  against  the  darkness.
P.  Wyndham   Lewis




I shot a trumpet  into my brain
where it blew out  my brains became a wall.
I shot a 'trumpet  into my brain my skull  bone  grew  into  a tower. I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and  my arm extended into  an  amphitheatre.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my two buttocks became a double bed.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and  my starved backbone became a plough.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my cadaver demanded a lecture hall.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and  my ah-ness became a cathedral farm.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my ho-ho-ness protracted itself into  a monastic town.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my sensorium was infected with  a,b,c's.


45

POEM AND  PREFACE



I shot a trumpet into  my brain
in the lesion festered  a printing press
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
which  began  to print  the Palestrina mass.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
and  my right hand  became  a cannon  ball.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
and  the tears in my eyes dried into gunpowder
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
and  my blood ticked away into a clock.
Madam  Sosostris is dead
Madam Sosostris
is dead

How shall we know what  to do?
 

Madam Sosostris is dead.

She had  just sat down  to close her eyes
in the fortune-teller's throne  beside her bed
and  now the world is at the telephone  telling the news the world is swinging its thin cold knees,
Madame Sosostris is dead!

2.

I shot a trumpet into  my brain my left eye became  a telescope. I shot a trumpet into  my brain
my blasted  eye-socket suffered  a sea-change.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
and  by a conversion  became a navigator's sextant.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
through a fragment of bone I saw a new moon.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
and  my armpit blackened  into a coal-mine.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain
my left testicle becoming  a spinning  machine.
I shot a trumpet into  my brain

POEM AND  PREFACE



and when I blew my nose, there was a blast furnace.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my spilled dreams became a circulating library.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my severed ear became a threshing machine.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my hamstrings developed into a steam locomotive.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my jarred nerves extended into the electric telegraph
I shot a trumpet  into my brain ventilating my conscience in a telegram. I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my thoughts re-arranged  themselves into the morning newspaper
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
jazzing my insomnias up into head lines.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
then my blind third eye opened and became a camera.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my vocal chords were transverberated into a telephone.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my fingers being paralyzed into an electric computer.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my sex became a frozen bank of sperm.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my bowel became a polluted river.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
my delirium became a bottle of champagne.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my fragmented  eye became a motion picture machine.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
collaging my lips tongue and ears into a T.V. screen.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and my bladder was canonized into a gas station.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
all my instincts solidified into a moon machine.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain



47

POEM AND PREFACE



my fart  fathered an intercontinental rocket.
I shot a trumpet  into my brain
and  it opened  a door
which was a means of control the beginning of law
and  you are in and  I am out
and  knock knock knock, I am knock and  you are knocker.
I shot a trumpet into my brain
My excrements became  an underground sewer.
I shot a trumpet into my brain
this was the beginning of egghead  fun,
ho-ho,
look down into the trumpet's mouth  and you shall come to the ah-ah-ness  I am extending from.
ohno,
I shot a trumpet into my brain
I pulverized  my heart  into a contraceptive pill, amen!
I shot a trumpet into my brain!






LETTRE DE MONTREAL

Montreal: ville internationale


NaimKattan





LA MESURE  nu DYNAM<SME  d'une culture, c'est'" volontC
de  s'epanouir. C'est  une  constatation qui  convient  parfaitement pour  decrire  Ia culture canadienne-frant;aise a l'heure actuelle.  II ne suffit pas au francophone du
Continent  americain  de  proteger   son  patrimoine  et  de  preserver   son  heritage pour  sauvegarder son  particularisme. II doit  affirmer  Ia vitalite  de sa culture en multipliant les contacts  et  les echanges.  Ainsi, depuis  quelques annees,  Montreal devient  un  centre  culture! international. Rien  ne fut  decide  au  prealable par  les autorites. Ce  desir  d'epanouissement surgit,  en quelque sorte,  des profondeurs. II est  ne  de  besoins  psychologiques et d'une necessite materielle. II ne fut  pas  con­ certe.  C'est  done  un  mouvement quelque peu  confus  et sans  grande  coherence. Mais  les bonnes  volontes  cedent  vite Ia place aux exigences de !'organisation.
L'une des  entreprises les  plus  reussies dans  ce domaine est  le  Festival  inter­
national du  film  qui  se  tient  depuis  sept  ans  a Montreal. II  ne s'agit  pas  d'un
festival  competitif, mais,  pendant une semaine,  le public  montrealais a l'avantage de  vivre  a l'heure du  nouveau cinema  international. Les  organisateurs de  cette grande manifestation cherchent encore  leur  voie. Comment donner a ce festival
un  cachet  propre, un  caractere qui le distingue  pour  qu'il  soit plus qu'une vitrine ouverte  sur  le  monde au  profit  du  public  montrealais, pour  qu'il  devienne  une veritable rencontre internationale?
Nous  avons  ret;u cette  annee des films de tous les coins du  monde: de l'URSS, de  Ia  Tchecoslovaquie mais  aussi  du  Japon, de  l'Inde. Nous  avons  pu  voir les tentatives des  nouveaux cineastes  aussi bien  de  France, d'Italie que  de  Bresil et des Etats-Unis. C'est  le jeune  cinema  de qualite  qui est en faveur  dans  ce festival,

49

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



non pas seulement le cinema experimental ni les vraies ou fausses nouvelles vagues, mais un  cinema  qui  cherche ses propres moyens d'expression  tout en evitant  les ecueils de l'esthetisme  facile et des tentations  commerciales. 11 faudrait  peut-etre qu'un   jour  l'on  insiste davantage  sur !'importance des  jeunes cineastes et  que le Festival montrealais  leur offre une veritable  tribune.
Depuis  quatre   ans, un festival du  film canadien  se tient  dans  le cadre  de  ce festival international. Un  jury international est invite et decerne des prix aux meilleures  productions   canadiennes.  Cette  annee,  le  jury,  qui  comprenait   des personnes  comme  la  critique  new-yorkaise Judith Crist  et  le  cineaste  tcheque Milos Forman, n'a  pas juge bon d'octroyer  de premier  prix pour les longs et les moyens metrages.
Notons que chaque  annee, le Festival du film attire  un nombre de plus en plus important de  critiques,  de  producteurs  et de  cineastes etrangers.  Leur  presence
a Montreal  donne aux cineastes canadiens une occasion unique  pour d'utiles et de
fructueuses  rencontres.  Mais ce sont surtout  les cinephiles de Montreal  qui sont les grand  beneficiaires du festival. Durant  une semaine, le cinema est a l'honneur
et  constitue  le grand  evenement  de  la  vie montrealaise.  Les amateurs  du  film vivent  longtemps  les experiences acquises et les emotions  eprouvees au  cours de ces journees bien remplies.






NoN MOINS SIGNIFICATIF  est le symposium international de la sculpture.  L'idee d'inviter des artistes a travailler  devant  le public, en plein air, et d'offrir  a la ville qui les convie les ceuvres terminees, est nee en Europe.  C'est
a Montreal   que  revient !'initiative  d'avoir  introduit   une  telle manifestation  en
Amerique du  Nord.  Nous en sommes au troisieme symposium. Les deux premiers se sont tenus a Montreal.
Cet  ete,  c'est  la  Ville de  Quebec  qui  fut  choisie comme  terrain  du  dialogue entre !'artiste  et le public et comme point  de rencontre  entre  l'art  et la cite. Le
Directeur  du  Musee d'Art  Contemporain  a Montreal, M. Gilles Henault, a invite
au  symposium  des sculpteurs  japonais, suisse, fran<_;ais,  dominicain  et canadien. Ainsi, le public canadien  est le temoin de !'elaboration d'ceuvres de tous les pays. C'est l'art  international qui s'implante  a Montreal  eta Quebec.
C'est  la  troisieme  annee  egalement  que  se tient  a Montreal  le Salon  Inter­
national  de la Caricature. Ce Salon est organise par la Ville de Montreal  avec le

LETTRE  DE MONTREAL



concours  du  quotidien de  langue  anglaise,  le  Montreal Star. Cette  annee,  deux cent  dix artistes  appartenant a trente-sept  pays, ont  participe a cette exposition  et a ce  concours  international de  la  caricature. L'Europe avait  la  plus forte  repre­
sentation: seize pays dont  quatre Etats socialistes. L'an dernier, c'est  un israelien, M. Jacob Shiloh,  qui  fut  la gagnant du grand  prix. Cette  annee,  le laureat de ce prix  de $s,ooo.oo vient  de Turquie. C'est  M.  Erdogan Ozer.
La  Ville  de  Montreal, s'appuyant sur  le service diplomatique du  Canada, fait
preuve  d'un grand effort  pour  rejoindre les caricaturistes du  monde  entier.  Les resultats  sont Ia pour  demontrer que  ce travail  est couronne de succes.





LA LITTERATURE  PARTICIPE  a ce surgissement de  Montreal comme  centre  culture! mondial. Un  imprimeur de  Montreal, M.  J.-A.  Therien, vient  de  fonder un  prix  litteraire de  la  "francite". Son  organisation fut  confiee
a M. J.-Andre Vachon, directeur "d'Etudes fran  aises",
par  les Presses de l'Universite de  Montreal. Le montant du  prix est de $2,ooo  et sera decerne  annuellement a !'auteur d'un roman  ou d'un recit. Ce qui  caracterise ce prix,  c'est  qu'il  s'adresse a tous les ecrivains  de langue fran  aise  a !'exception
de  ceux  qui  resident  en  France. Les reglements  du  prix sont  precis Ia-dessus. Le manuscrit  n'est   accepte   qu'a la  condition "que !'auteur  ait  vecu  au  moins  la moitie  de sa vie hors  du  territoire de la France, et au  moins sept annees consecu­ tives  dans   un  meme   pays,  mais  autre   que  la  France; cette  condition  n'exclut cependant pas  les concurrents qui  auraient passe le meme  nombre d'annees dans  les departements et  territoires fran  ais
On   peut  ajouter d'autres  manifestations tel  que  le concours  international du violon  qui  s'est  deroule a la  Place  des Arts cet ete. Notons  egalement que  c'est a
Montreal qu'est nee  l'idee  de fonder  "!'Association  des  Universites  partiellement ou  entierement de  Langue Fran aise"
Mgr  !renee  Lussier,   ancien Recteur de  l'Universite  de  Montreal. Et  c'est  a
Montreal que se trouve le Secretariat International de cette Association  qui  prend de  plus  en  plus  d'envergure.
Une  telle convergence de manifestations et de mouvements ne peut pas etre completement fortuite. Les  Canadiens fran<;ais savent,  d'une part,  que  sans  la cooperation et  l'entraide entre  les divers  pays francophones, la culture fran<;aise dans   chacun de  ces  pays  sera  affaiblie.  Il  y a  d'autre part la  decouverte du

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



caractere  universe} de Ia culture franc;aise. Les instituteurs  canadiens-franc;ais qui vont enseigner en Afrique decouvrent, en depit des distances et des differences de traditions, une communaute linguistique et culturelle.
Les manifestations  et les rencontres internationales depassent  en nombre et en
importance  celles qui se font sur le plan canadien.  L'on  peut facilement remarquer que, dans son epanouissement, Ia culture franc;aise cherche les amities et les alliances en dehors du Canada  et au-dela du  Continent nord-americain. Il n'y a
pas lieu, a mon avis, de craindre un tel ,etat d'esprit.  Au contraire, si l'on accepte
que l'avenir  du  Canada soit celui d'un  pays biculturel  et bilingue, l'on doit sou­
haiter que les deux cultures soient fortes et vigoureuses. La biculturalisme implique
!'existence de deux cultures. Les Canadiens-franc;ais, en elargissant leurs frontieres et  en  renforc;ant, grace  a des amities  internationales, Ia culture  franc;aise au
Canada, permettent  taus les espoirs sur l'avenir  du  biculturalisme  au  pays.
Dans  quelques  mois, avec l'Expo  67,  Montreal  ouvrira  ses partes  au  monde entier. Comme on le voit, les Montrealais sont psychologiquement et intellectuelle­
ment  prepares  a cette grande  rencontre internationale.



THE COMMONWEALTH
IN PRINT


William H. New






IF VIRGINIA  WOOLF's COMMON READER has not been >reduced by  the  television  set  and  is still, in  fact,  reading, then  he still  has  to  make  the frustrating choice  of what  to consume.  More  books surround him  today  than  they did  in  the  192o's; more  translations have  appeared; more  authors from  more countries  have  begun  writing in  English -not least of all in  the  Commonweath itself.  The   choice  among these,  though   frustrating  (the  world  and   time  being still  too  much   with  us,  not  to  mention getting  and  spending), can  yield  ample reading pleasure.
Increasingly within  the last few years, critics and scholars  have discovered  that literature exists in  the  Commonwealth. Many  readers  have  known  about this for some time, of course -Chinua Achebe is immensely popular in his native  Nigeria, but  critics  are  just getting around to acknowledging that  he writes in English  and very  well. Having made the  initial  discovery,  however,  the  criticism  often  tends to  talk  about Commonwealth Literature as though  it  were  a single  identifiable phenomenon. "Commonwealth Literatures" would  be a better  term, for the diver­ sity among  the  nations  has naturally led  to a diversity  in writing. We don't have to  be  told  again   about the  threats   to  the  Commonwealth from  republicanism, racialism, and  so on; the  association  is probably more  of an  historical   accident than  anything else, for  all the sharing of language and  institutions that  may  exist today.  The   countries  (Britain  excluded)  share  also such  intangible things  as  a mentally   colonial  background; some,  such  as Australia and  Canada, for  a  time felt   tangibly   distant-from-the-mother-country; some   of  the   recently  emerged nations  must  share  a sense of contemporaneity, like unidentical twins.  On  top of all  this  are  global   conflicts,  rapid   transport, and  mass  media   communications systems-phenomena of  the  twentieth century  which  have  diminished the  size of the world  and  have  reduced  some of the differences  among  literatures, particu­ larly  those related  to a time lag in literary  fashions.

53

THE COMMONWEALTH IN  PRINT



Joseph Jones and Hartley Grattan, two of the first Americans to foster Common­ wealth  studies,  have  argued  persuasively that  this is one  world  and  that  today we must consider not English literature  but literature in English. Jones's prelimin­ ary and highly selective bibliography of Commonwealth and South  Pacific litera­ tures  has circulated  in a  pre-publication  form  to several  academics  in the field, and  it  is a  useful  basic research  tool.  His  book, T erranglia  (Twayne, I 966), extends  the argument  in a critical and  bibliographical study. The  book itself, of course,  awaits  a  thorough  review; the  basic argument  has  certain  validity, pro­ vided  it  doesn't  lead  us to  perceive  sameness where  there  is only similarity,  or likeness where there is only a proximity in time.
It is refreshing  that  comparative  studies  are  being  attempted. The  petty  na­
tionalism  of so much  Canadian and  Australian  criticism -the  multiple  choice game  of  "It talks  about  (Australia,  Canada), therefore  it  can  only be  (good, bad) " -is  ludicrous  and  justifiably allows writers such  as Mordecai  Richler  to caricature  their  parochial society. Comparative studies do not promise inevitable improvement  of the situation,  nor do  they mean  instant  "universality" for  "re­ gional"  writers, but  they do offer a means for seeing the scope of one literature  by observing its relationship  to another.  R. E. Watters'  "genographic" approach  to the literatures  of Canada, the U.S.A.,  the  U.K.,  and  Australia,  in  Canadian  Literature  No. 7 and in the Proceedings of the International Comparative Litera­ ture Association ( 1962)  offers an interesting example, for it stresses the differences among  literatures   rather   than   their  similarities.  Claude  Bissell's article  in  the University  of  Toronto   Quarterly  ( 1956)   does  the  same  thing  for  Canada  and Australia,  after observing the same source for these two societies. John  Matthews'  Tradition in Exile  (Toronto,  I962)  is perhaps  the best known and most detailed example;  objectively it observes both  the  parallels  and  differences between Aus­ tralian  and  Canadian poetry in the nineteenth  century, but  in tracing  themes it happily does not shrink from making value  judgments  as well.
The  grave weakness of so many preliminary  critical works is that  their surveys, necessarily superficial, avoid making detailed  assessments. Often  they are broadly historical works that essentially acquaint  the reader, common or otherwise, with a host of  names. The  criticism levelled at  Desmond  Pacey's  Creative  Writing  in Canada   (Ryerson,  1952)   illustrates  this. The  same  criticism  has  been  aimed at  A. L. McLeod's  The  Commonwealth Pen  (Cornell,  196 I ) . Here,  again,  the title  implies a  uniformity  which  even  the book itself does not support; a set  of histories  by  diverse  hands,  it  emphasizes,  no  matter   how  unintentionally,  the inequalities  and  irregularities  among  the several literatures.

54

THE COMMONWEALTH IN  PRINT




Ta:Is DOES  NOT NEGATE  the fact that  parallels do exist or that the Commonwealth countries often face similar problems. The  first international conference on  Commonwealth literature,  held in Leeds in  1964, testifies to this. People  came  to it  knowing  their  own literatures,  but  left knowing  more;  more important, they left knowing  each  other,  having  discovered that  problems  with a  language,  an  identity,  an  indigenous  people, a relationship  with  Britain,  and even  with  the  practical   matters  of  publication  were in  some  way  common  to them  all.  Earlier  in  this  chronicle,  I  momentarily  exempted  Britain  from  the Commonwealth. Unfortunately this is something we tend too often to  do. Though the U.K.  has least in common  with many of the other members, it, too, has had to face  the  twentieth  century;  it,  too, has  problems with  economy,  race-and even language, as the recent minor revolution in the English novel would indicate. The  "Northerner" has appeared -in  conflict with London  and  in conflict with himself-and Sillitoe, Braine, Barstow, and Storey, among others, have all had
a go at exploring what he's like. Perhaps this active discovery is one of the reasons why Leeds, rather  than  London,  has become the academic  centre for  Common­ wealth  literary  studies in England.  A recent review of an inter-university  drama festival in Britain  suggested that  if there were ever a revolution there,  the titular leaders might  come from  Oxbridge,  but  all the energy would come from  Leeds. It is not surprising,  at any rate, that since the  I964 conference, Leeds University has continued  to retain  its importance in the Commonwealth  field. The  proceed­ ings of that  conference have been edited by John Press and published as Common­ wealth  Literature   (Heinemann, I965),  and  the  first and  excellent issue of the journal  of Commonwealth  Literature  has  appeared,  edited  by Arthur  Ravens­ croft. Wisely he plans to include an annual  bibliography of primary and secondary sources.  The   Canadian  bibliography  section  ( 1g65, for  I g64)   was  edited  by Carl  F.  Klinck,  and  the  issue also included  John  Matthews'  interesting  article on the work of A. M. Klein, and  Douglas Grant's  review of the Literary History of Canada.
Tied  to all the preceding critical activity, and building upon the interest which
the literature  itself has aroused, is the most recent Leeds enterprise.  Towards  the end of 1965, A. N. Je:ffares headed  the steering committee for the establishment of  the  Association  of  Commonwealth Literature  and  Language   Studies.  This looks like a most worthwhile  organization,  and one can only applaud  its forma­ tion. It hopes to encourage both comparative studies and linguistic investigations­ in the various new uses of English that  naturally stem from  regional dialects and

55

THE COMMONWEALTH IN PRINT



between  English  and  the many  indigenous tongues.  It would  be a mistake  to look upon   this  in  isolation,   however; the  MLA   Commonwealth  section   (the   1966 chairman is  Bruce  Sutherland  of  Pennsylvania State)  is  a  much   more  limited enterprise, but  a  very selective bibliography has  appeared in  PMLA since  1957, a  brief  newsletter  has  been  circulated, and  North American interest  in  the  field has during the last year expanded greatly. Various schools such as Texas,  Cornell, Northwestern, British  Columbia, and  Alberta are  all  concerned with  the  study, and  the  Commonwealth Institute at  Queen's is justifiably  well known.
Such  growth  is remarkable, even if one is concerned only with  the germination and  spread  of an  academic idea.  Casual  references  are  the first acknowledgment; this leads to works which "fill gaps", such as Anthony Burgess's The Novel Today, which  examines Commonwealth writers  provided they  are  published in  Britain. Aftenvards come  monographs like the  Australian Writers and  their Works series, and   more  detailed   studies,  like  Twayne's World   Authors   series.  And  there  are other   publications.  Explanation  of  one  society  to  another still  lies  behind   the "special issue"  concept.  The  New  Statesman's Commonwealth issue  (September ro,  1960)   in  which  Mordecai Richler  appeared, was  a  preliminary survey;  re­ cently  it  has  been  followed  by  the  T LS  in  part   II of  "Sounding the  Sixties" (September 16, 1965),  which  for  all its acumen, still apparently equates "Cana­ dian  literature" with literature which  has Canada for a setting.  "\Vriters themselves have  rid literature of this hoary  attitude-Earle Birney's  poetry on the Caribbean and   Margaret  Laurence's novels  about   Africa   spring   at  once  to  mind -but some of the critics are again  behind.
Tamarack Review's Caribbean issue showed  an attempt to introduce Common­ wealth  literature in Canada by its writers and  not  just by criticism. The Australian issue  of  India's The  Literary  Criterion   had  a  comparable aim,  and  this  latter, edited  by C. D. Narasimhaiah, has since been published in Australia by Jacaranda Press.  The   "International  Section" of  a  new   journal,  Nissim  Ezekiel's  Poetry India, is  again   an  interesting   departure. The first  issue,  for  example, includes  works  by  Roy  Fuller  and  Howard Sergeant as  well  as by such  imagistic  young Indian poets as R.  Parthasarathy.
Howard Sergeant, of course, is a central but neglected  figure in Commonwealth studies,  for  in his status  as editor  of Outposts, he has encouraged young  poets to write  and  also  provided  a  place  for  good  poets  from  anywhere to  publish. Out­ posts was  founded in  1944,  so we  must  admire it for  its  tenacity  as well  as for its quality. The  consistent  quality is one  of the  reasons  for  its survival  of  course;  one  tends  too often  to underestimate the perspicacity of the common reader. For a

THE COMMONWEALTH IN PRINT



work  to satisfy him,  it must  be interesting, and  this quality, when  we come down to  it,  is what   ultimately determines whether  or  not  a work  lasts  more  than  one generation. This   does  not  mean   a  writer  must  talk  down  to  the  public,  but  it does mean  that  his greatest sin will be dullness. A variety  of poets have  published in  Outposts, ranging from   U.K. writers  Peter  Redgrove and   Charles  Causley, through  citizens   of  two   worlds   like  Edward   Lucie-Smith,  to  Commonwealth writers such as David  Wevill, Earle Birney, John  Newlove, Zulfikar Ghose, and Christopher Wallace-Crabbe. That  variety  of experience and  literary  expression does not  necessarily  preclude dullness,  but it does make it rare.
The very  mention of  these  names  and   journals  raises  another  problem   that
bedevils the society  that  has at least discovered,  if not mastered, the  printed  word. It is all  very  well for  there  to  be  the  opportunities for  people  to get  into  print, but  how does the ordinary reader  discover what's going on, except  by indiscrimin­ ately  exploring? Commentators  are  supposed  to  keep  him  abreast  of  his world;  little  magazines are  supposed   to  keep  him  ahead  of it.  And  if  the  voices aren't narrow and  strident, then  perhaps they do. Publishers  themselves have a responsi­ bility here. If they don't take  their wares to market, no one will buy. The  obscurity of small  presses is a  problem in itself, but  the larger  ones, like  naughty children, should  often  know  better   than   to  act  as  they  do.  McClelland  & Stewart has  a fine paperback series in the  New Canadian Library, for example, but  distribution in  England is so haphazard that  even in  Leeds,  the  Commonwealth Literatures centre,   the  books  are  nowhere to  be  found.  Nor  does  Canada have,  as  New Zealand   does,  any  really  comparable work  to  Books  in  Print  to  facilitate pur­  chasers and  booksellers.
In  Canada and  Australia there  are several good series in which  Commonwealth authors appear, including Macmillan's, Clarke Irwin's, and the excellent Australian Poets  series  from   Angus  and   Robertson, which  Canadian publishers  would  do well to imitate. Heinemann Educational's African  Writers  Series is also excellent, and  occasional  works  appear with  imprints from  Three Crowns (Oxford), Fon­ tana, Faber, Foursquare, and   (in  Germany) Seven Seas. Only  the Indo-Anglian and   the  rich  Caribbean  literatures are  badly  out  of  print,  in  fact.  Fortunately
J. M.   Dent   promises   a  series  of  Commonwealth writings   to  begin  appearing
about   1968;   one  can  hope  that   this  will do  two  things: bring  back  works  like Desani's All  About  H.  Hatterr that  have  disappeared undeservedly, and  keep us up to date with  high quality new writing.
The   anthology is  another  attempt  to  keep  up  with  what   is in  print   and  to supply  a sampler for the exploratory reader. Unfortunately anthologists themselves

57

THE COMMONWEALTH IN PRINT



often have difficulty tracking down the raw material.  The  excellent annual Bore­ stone  Mountain Poetry  Awards  volumes, for  example,  survey  poetry  which  has appeared  in  journals  during  the  preceding  year  and  reprint  their  choice of the best. The  editors  have taken poems from Australian  and  British  publications  for some  years, but  strangely  they  have  only  recendy  discovered  that  Canada has journals and  poets too. This is not, in this case, traceable  to a sudden shift in the quality  of  Canadian writing.  The  inability  to  identify  poets'  names,  however, arises much  closer home in one of the two recent  anthologies of Commonwealth poetry, Peter  Brent's Young  CommonweaZth Poets '65  (Heinemann, I965). The "Canada" section of this is edited  by Gerald  Wilson,  who includes some of his own  work.  (Interesting,  some of it, but  who  is  Gerald  Wilson?)  The  choice he makes  to  represent  the work of Canadian  writers  just  coming  into  print  is an odd one, but any anthology tempts a reviewer to a round of name-dropping. Why all  the John  Robert  Colombo and  no Marya  Fiamengo?  Why  David  Cull  and
not Lionel Keams?  Representative anthologies like this one, or like M. J. O'Don­
nell's  An  Anthology of Commonwealth Verse   ( Blackie, I g6g), are bound  to be uneven,  for the editorial inclusion policy must  be complicated  by politics as well as by questions concerning  artistry. The  Penguin  books are similarly uneven, but here simply because of different bases from book to book for the choice of poems. The  New Zealand  volume concentrates on a few writers in depth, whereas Ralph Gustafson's  volume on Canada  surveys the scene from  the beginnings to the date of publication.
One  ends up at this point wondering  where Canadian literature  fits in all this.
Certainly sections are reserved for it in assorted anthologies and series, but equally as certainly the North American environment-cultural as well as physiographical
-has  exerted  an  influence  upon  it  that  makes  it  different  from  the others  in
some ways. We  live in one world,  but  also in  worlds within  worlds, and  these micro-environments overlap, reflect, reverse, lead, echo, and  confront  each other. If this demonstrates  differences, fine. If it shows up parallels and similarities, fine again.  Simply  the  opportunity  to  see the  relationship   among  literatures  is an exciting one, for in allowing the possibility for development,  it augurs health  for the literatures  within the Commonwealth  and  perhaps even for those outside it as well. Inquiring readers may be overwhelmed  by the increasing  mound  of books, but if the books are any good then the reading is enjoyable. One can only suggest that  though  the curious cat died, he probably led an interesting life.



review articles




AUTOPSY ON FAULKNER


William Hall



MICHAEL  MILLGATE,  The   Achievement of William  Faulkner. Longmans. $10.00.


IT   USED TO    BE    THAT   some time  after   an  author's  death  the  critics and  scholars  gathered like vultures  in disorganized  and   competitive  flocks  to pick  over  the  literary remains, that  still were  something of  a  mystery.  The  pro­ cess is now  nothing like  so long  delayed or   disorganized  and   metaphor   from nature seems  out   of   place.   An  autopsy perhaps  seems   more   appropriate; with certain  organs  already   removed   in  life (with   the  subject's  consent),  arranged, preserved,  about the  table,  for  reference.  So it  is  with  Faulkner, whether one likes or  dislikes  the  change.
In  Faulkner  at  the  University  and  in
his  Paris Review  interview of  the  195o's Faulkner was already answering questions (with    varying    degrees    of   seriousness) about  his  novels  and  his art.  Since  1964 there  has  been  in  print a complete cata­ logue of his library; in William Faulkner· of   Oxford   some   forty   of   those   "who  knew   him   on   his  home  ground"  have given  their  impressions of  "the man  they knew"  along  with  some  sixteen  pages  of photographs. And  this  is  only  a  little  of the kind of information that is now avail­  able.   Meanwhile  the   Faulkner  manu-
 scripts are already installed  in the literary banks  (largely  at  the  Universities of  Vir­ ginia  and  Texas)  and,  as Professor  Mill­  gate's  book makes  clear, are already being made   use  of   for   critical   study   of  the novels  and  stories.
Obviously  for  the  critic  of the  modern
novelist   this   rapid    dissemination and availability of material can  be invaluable. The   best  parts   of   Professor   Millgate's book  are   those   in   which   he   puts   thig kind  of material to  use. This  is so in  his introductory  chapter  on   "The  Career" in  which  he  presents  in  a small  compass one  of  the  most  informative and  clear­ headed    accounts  of   Faulkner's   literary life  that  I  have  read.  It is so also  in  the early  parts  of  the  succeeding  chapters in which  he   discusses the   relationships (though sometimes  in  a  tantalizingly in­  complete  way)   between  manuscript and final   text.   These   discussions   frequent!:; bring  fresh  light  to  bear  on  the  meaning of the  fiction and  on  the  development of Faulkner as artist.  This  is especially  so in the   discussions  of  The   Sound   and  the Fury, of  Absolom,  Absolom,  and   of  the short  stories.
The   speed   with   which   Faulkner  has


59

REVIEW ARTICLES



become   the  kind  of  figure  about   whom such abundant material is available mal,e difficulties  for  the critic,  however,  as well as  presenting him  with  considerable  op­ portunities. There are  already established certain cliches and  general  notions  about  Faulkner's  work;   notions  that   have  be­ come  as much  a  part  of  "Faulkner par­  lance" as others  have become of novelists like   Hawthorne,   Melville,   and   James.  Faulkner and  the question of time; Faulk­ ner  as  comic  novelist; Faulkner and  the myth   of   the   South;  Faulkner and   the negro:  these  are  some  of  the  more  ob­ vious   ones.  The   question   that   arises  is whether the  critic,  with  this  great  mass of  material   now  available   to  him,  can ignore   such  general  notions,  already   so obvious,  as casually  as Professor  Millgate tends  to  do.
His  reasons for  refusing  to discuss such notions as notions seem to me completely admirable:

Thus Faulkner's major concerns, like  those of  all  great   artists,  were   ultimately moral, and   there   is  little value   in  abstract  discus­ sions   of   his   ideas   which   fail   to   take   this into account.... Faulkner in  his  best  work is  not  concerned with  ideas  in  any  abstract sense.    His    preoccupations    are   not   intel­ lectual  but   moral;  what   he   offers   is  not philosophy  but  wisdom.

This   puts   the   emphasis   in  the   right place  but  need  not   preclude all  discus­ sion of, for example, Faulkner's  preoccu­  pation  with  time.  While one would  agree with   Professor   Millgate's  general   impli­  cation   that  such  a  question  is too  often discussed    outside    the    context    of   the novels,  where   it   becomes  distorted   and grossly  oversimplified, it  would  seem  to be  over-simplification of another kind  to quote "For was, and  is, and  will be, are but   is"   from   Tennyson's  The   Princess and    remark    that    "Faulkner  used   the

6o
 same   simple   terminology  to  express  his own  conception of time's  fluidity".
It would  have  been  relevant and  pos­ sible  and    (perhaps  one   might  suggest) necessary,  given  Professor  Millgate's pre­ mise,   to   discuss   Faulkner's  concept  of time  in  terms  of  the  action  of  As I  Lay Dying,  in  terms  of   the  structure of  Ab­ salom, Absalom, or in terms  of the imag­  ery  of  The   Bear.
The  same   criticism   might    be  made about    the   superficial  attention   that   is given  to Faulkner's comedy  in the  novels. Professor  Millgate does suggest in his conclusion  that   "it   is alongside   Dickens
... that    Faulkner   must    ultimately   be
ranked." A very appropriate ranking one would  think, but  there  is no  evidence  to indicate  from   the   detailed   examination of the novels in the book that Professor Millgate  sees  them   ranked   together  as great  comic  novelists;  they appear rather as fellows with Balzac-great national novelists.
Thus the  discussions of Sanctuary, The
Hamlet,   and   The   Town  have   little   or nothing  to   say   about   the   comedy,   al­ though   some   definition  of   the   comic quality  of  the  vision  would   seem  to  oe necessary   to  an   understanding of   those works.  Professor   Millgate does  comment on the function of the comedy in Shreve's dialogue  in  Absalom,  Absalom  but  says nothing  about  the   significance   of   the variety   of  comedy  in   the   narratives  of Rosa  and  Mr. Compson. Yet  the  comedy in those sections, one might  argue,  is vital to  the  reader's correct   ironic  stance   to­
wards   the   events.   They   enable   him   co
assess Faulkner's own  control and  under­ standing   of   the    "explorations   of   the nature of  truth" that   Professor  Millgate sees as one  of the  rna jor  concerns of that  novel.  Nothing is  said  either   about   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



comic  tone  of Jason's monologue in The Sound  and the Fury; a tone  that  qualifies the reader's view of Jason  and  hence of Quentin and of the whole novel quite considerably.
There is one  other  curious  lack  in  the book.  Professor  Millgate makes  excellent use  of  his  close  and   detailed   knowledge of Faulkner's milieu  but very little is said about Faulkner's relationship to the more important figures  among   his  contempo­ raries  or in the American tradition. Some­ thing  is said  of  Hawthorne and  Melville,
 by the  way,  but  not  very much.  Perhaps again  Professor  Millgate was deliberately attempting to  avoid  the  obvious,  the cliches,   assuming  them   to  be  only   too well  known  to  the  audience to which  his book is consciously  addressed: "the pres­ ent  generation of Faulkner students." And yet one  wonders if this  generation might  not  profit  from  a  re-examination of  this particular cliche. It invariably sees Faulk­ ner  as  linked   to  this  or  that   strand of the  total  tradition, instead  of seeing  him as  he  might more  profitably be  seen,  as





CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE

BACK  ISSUES

Important  issues of Canadian  Literature  still available include  the  following:

No.    8.    Special   Malcolm  Lowry Number.  Original  articles,  let­ ters  and   poems by  Malcolm   Lowry,  articles  by  Conrad Aiken,  Earle  Birney,  Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol  Fouchet,  etc.

No. 15.     Salute  to A. J. M. Smith. Articles  on  A. J. M. Smith  by Earle   Birney,   Roy  Fuller  and  Milton   Wilson, together with   original  poems  and   a  Self-Review  by  A.  J.  M. Smith.

No. 25.     A Symposium  on  A.  M. Klein. Articles   on  A.  M.  Klein and  his various aspects by M. W. Steinberg, Miriam Waddington, Dorothy  Livesay,  T.  A.  Marshall.

No. 28.     A  long  study  of  Irving  Layton  by  George  Woodcock, together with  articles on  A. W. Purdy  by  Peter  Stevens and Jean  Le Moyne   on  Saint-Denys  Garneau,   and   a new  translation by F. R. Scott.

$1.25 each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS   CENTRE
UNIVERSITY  OF   BRITISH  COLUMBIA,  VANCOUVER 8, B.C.

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   culminating gathering  point   of  the total  tradition of the American novel;  the exhaustion of all its possibilities  as Shake­ speare  was of the  poetic  drama  up to his time.
Nevertheless Professor  Millgate, in  hi avoidance of this tradition, brings to bear on  his reading of Faulkner some illumin­ ating   references from  English  and  Con­  tinental literatures that  American critics, with  their still current over-preoccupation with   the   native  tradition, are   likely  to have  over-looked.  Of  particular interest  in   this  respect   is  his  pointing out   how
 frequent and   how  subtle  Faulkner's  use of  classical  myth  in  his  novels  is.
Professor  Millgate clearly  has  a  great
deal  to  teach  "the present  generation  of Faulkner students" about  the  man   and his   work.   The  directness,   the   lucidity, and  impressively informed treatment overcome  the  perfectionist complaint of occasional  signs  of  haste  in  the  writing and  of superficiality in critical evaluation. The  autopsy,   in   the   hands  of  such   a surgeon, is not of necessity such  a depres­ sing  metaphor.






MICROCOSM
OF OUR MOVING WORLD


Roy Daniells


A   Choice   of   Critics.   Selections  from    Canadian   Literature. Edited   by   George
Woodcock. Oxford University Press.  Cloth  $s.oo, Paper $2.50.


THIS   SELECTION FROM THE critical essays  which   appeared in  Cana­ dian  Literature between   I959  and  1965
has  merits  that   will  attract readers  even
beyond  the  confines  of Canada. One  en­ visages  some   curious    Swiss  or   hopeful  Hungarian  lifting   the   cover   with  the thought that here  is a  conspectus of  the Canadian cultural  order. This   hypothe­ tical  reader   will  turn  the  pages  and  seek for   schools   of   criticism-conservatives versus liberals, Romanticism against Real­ ism, exponents of the  absurd  and  seekers after  the abstruse. Above all, as he moves
 from  critic  to  critic,   he  will  be  looking for an introduction to the masterworks of our  literature, the  classics,  in  which   he can  walk  about,   make   explorations,  re­ turn  to starting points, without encounter­ ing  the  kind of limits  he finds in his own mind.  Such  expectations  on  the  part   of the Swiss, Hungarian or Canadian reader will  not,  however,   be  fulfilled.
He  will find seventeen  essays by twelve critics, three  of whom  learned their  trade outside  Canada. If he  enquires, he  will discover  that  they  live  and  write  for  the most  part  in  the  conurbations surround-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ing  Montreal, Toronto and   Vancouver. A score of poets and novelists is under review. Poetry is the exclusive or main concern of  two-thirds of the  essays. The novel  occupies  the  remainder. Drama is barely   mentioned.  The   works  discussed are  the  product of some four  decades-
192o's to  196o's. There is tentatively claimed   for  one  or  two  of  the  writers  a seat at the same table  where the acknowl­ edged   great   of  the  literary  tradition sit down.  One French-Canadian, whose work has   been   translated,  receives  attention. The critics start  off in all directions,  some pursuing  the historical  record,  others  in­ diting their  personal  impression  of a book or  a  man,  one  or  two enticing  us into  a private  myth   they  hold  dear.   No  work under discussion  shows the magnitude of, say, Moby Dick. It might  be thought that the  editor-whose introduction is a mas­ terly   survey   of  the   complexities  of   the contents-had deliberately avoided  large and  crucial  issues to attack special smaller  problems.  Such   a   conclusion,   however, would  be totally wrong.  This  aggregation of  interlocking  essays is, in  fact,  a  cun­  ningly  devised  scale  model  of  the  Cana­ dian   condition,  a   microcosm  of   our moving  world,  a  complex  of vectors  cor­ responding  to  the   tensions   which   hold our  opposed  components together around the  voids  of our  deficiencies.
Canadian culture is analogous to the C.P.R., in  that  both  have  been  designed to  abolish  discontinuity, to  bridge  spaces and  to subdue distance.  The  problems  of terrain, temperature and transport have their   cultural counterparts.  Disorienta­ tion,  disinheritance and  disenchantment are  common Canadian experiences.  Each society   across  the   globe  shows  its  own variant of the world's  malaise;  the special contribution  Canadians can  make  to  its
 dissipation comes from  their  grapple with Canada itself.  "The most  characteristic­ ally Canadian thing  is the Canadian land­  scape,"   Paul  West  remarks  in  his  excel­ lent   essay  on   Earle  Birney's   expertise; "cities  on the other  hand  merge together." And   anyone   who   has   herded   sheep   in the  Canadian  west  will feel the  conjunc­ tion  of  actuality and  myth  in  a  poem  of Jay  Macpherson quoted   by D.  G. Jones, a  Canadian  variant  of  the   resurrection theme:

Cold  pastoral: the  shepherd under the  snow
Sleeps circled with  his sheep.
Above  them, though successive  winters heap
Rigours, and  wailing weathers go
Like  beasts  about, time  only  rocks  their
sleep.

If in one generation we have passed from enduring  rural   isolation   to  coping   with urban   congestion,  the   problems   are  the same. Gabrielle Roy, as Hugo  McPherson notices, in recording the death  of  Alexan­ dre  Chenevert, that  small  defeated deni­  zen   of   Montreal,  lays   stress  upon   the meaning of  his  name -Green  Oaktree.
One  still  meets  people  in  Canada who
can  remember when  the C.P.R. was com­ pleted  and  we have  not  yet had  time  to celebrate Confederation's  centenary,  re­ minders of the  brevity  of  our  history  as a nation   bound   together a  mari   usque  ad mare.  The  central group of our  novelists, which  includes Sinclair Ross, W. 0. Mit­  chell,  Morley  Callaghan, Hugh  MacLen­ nan,   Ernest   Buckler  and  Mordecai Richler,  are   all   concerned,  as   George Woodcock,  D.   G.   Jones   and    Warren Tallman  convincingly  demonstrate, to lead  us out  of  the  wilderness,  turn  exile into   possession  and   regain   our  lost  love from   the  underworld. The  poets  follow suit.   A.  J.  M.   Smith  argues   that   the writer   of   poetry   in   Canada  enjoys   an







Selections from
Canadian Literature

Edited  by
GEORGE WOODCOCK

This volume  includes seventeen essays; four on the literary land­ scape,  and  thirteen on writers: Margaret Avison,  Earle Birney, Morley  Callaghan, Robertson Davies,  A.  M.  Klein   (two  es­ says), Hugh MacLennan,  Jay
Macpherson, E.  J. Pratt, Gab­
rielle Roy, A. J. M. Smith, Raymond Souster,  and  Anne Wilkinson.




Also   available  as   Oxford in
Canada  Paperback  No. 6. $2.50


OXFORD

REVIEW ARTICLES



informed freedom of choice as regards subject matter and formal models. Wynne Francis shows  where   this  choice  led  in the  years  when  Preview  and  First  State­ ment  sprang up,  confronted one another, and  merged  into Northern Review, which died  with  its  devoted  editor in  1956.  In another part  of the forest, Milton  Wilson, Miriam   Waddington, Louis  Dudek   and James  Reaney  argue  the values of poetry in  the  so's   and  6o's.  All  the  poets  con­ cerned-Smith, Pratt, Wilkinson, Birney, Avison, Souster, Macpherson-evade easy identification. All are struggling with recalcitrant  experience to  achieve  inter­ pretation, whether through  protest  or  by achieving  vision.  All  are  concerned,  in one  way  or  another,  with  the  limitations imposed    on   us   by   our   geography  -a four-thousand  mile   stretch   from   ocean to  ocean,   remoteness  from  yet  exposure  to  other   cultures, a  background of  Cal­  vinism   and   later  of   Victorianism  never adequately  vitalized  by fresh  contact, an uneasy   if   honourable  role  as  a  middle  ranking  power,  a diffusion  in our  psychic effort  which   denies  us  masterpieces.  An Old   Testament  world,  to   borrow  an image  from  Jones,  in  which  redemption is looked  forward to but which  waits  the actual deliverance of spirits  in  prison.
Illumination, throughout this book, is likely  to  dart   upon  special  problems,  as an  extra  bonus.  French-Canadian culture is, by inference, seen as "so truly parallel" to  our  own  that   they  "can  never  meet". Real  interaction between the two cultures, with   enormous  potential of  mutual  en­ lightenment, awaits  some  miracle  of  re­ fraction.
The Jewish  contribution to  Canadian
writing  is  seen   as  both   more   and   less




66
 than  might be expected. More,  far  more, than   the  percentage of our  total  popula­ tion  which  is Jewish  would  seem  to make possible. Less, in that international Jewish sensibility  has  long  ago  overcome or  ac­ cepted    the   problems  that   affiict  Cana­ dians.   Hence  The   Second  Scroll  of Abraham Klein  which,  as  M.  W.  Stein­ berg  and   Miriam  Waddington  agree,  is mature  in  its  understanding  of   despair  and  search  and  hope  so as to subsist in a class  by itself.
The authors and  critics involved  in this
volume  have  been,  each  in  his own  way, rigorously  faithful to the exact  rendering of our  condition. They  have  marvellously resisted  the  temptation  to  inflate  or  the inclination  to  generalize.  They  have wrapped themselves  so closely about   the Canadian problem  that  its contours have become   their   own.   It has   been  argued that   this  world  we  live  in  is the  best  of all   possible  worlds,   though  superficially we  might wish  for  a  simpler   and   more benign   one.  Similarly   we  may  conclude that  Mr.  Woodcock  has given  us the  best of all possible confl.ations of critical  view­ point   about   Canada. We  are  obliged  to join   an   intense,   pervasive,  low-pitched, compelling  but   open-ended   discussion directed  to  the  question,  Who  are  we? And   the   joy  of   this   book  is  that   each of  us  may  derive  from   its  web  of  fact and   fable,   of  exposition and  descrip­  tion,   of   evocation  and   pronouncement, the  answer he is able  to receive.  For  this reader  it  is  the   knowledge   that   beyond the  waste  of  snow  or  the  barbed   hedge of   urban   development  the   land    itself sleeps, awaiting one who will lay his head on  her  breast  and  hear  the heart beating.



MESSAGE  AND MEDIUM


Malcolm Ross




A.    s.  P.  WOODHOUSE, The   Poet  and  His  Faith.  Religion   and  Poetry  in  England from Spenser  to  Eliot  and  Auden.  University  of Chicago  Press. $6.g5.


THE   LATE A.  S.  P.   WOOD­ house's  study  of  religious  poetry  in  Eng­  land  rests on  the  firm  foundation of  the Anglican  principle  of  the  via media, and on   an   unshakable   conviction   that    in poetry,  or  at  any  rate in  serious  religious poetry, the   message  is   not    just   the  medium.
To speak first of the "xsthetic" of these Weil  Institute lectures:  Professor  Wood­ house   is  aware,   in   much   contemporary critical thought, "of a flight from  affirma­  tion  in  favor  of  more  indirect modes  of suggestion" and  "an  assertion  that  where affirmations occur they are in fact pseudo­  statements  to  be   judged   solely  by  their emotive  power  and  with  no  reference  to their   assumed   truth  or   falsehood".  He concedes   that  such   a  theory   in  a  post­ Christian age  may  serve  to  "rescue" the critic   from  any  need  for   religious  com­ mitment.   Nor   does   he   deny   the   rele­ vance  of  an xsthetic of non-committal to our  recent poetry  of calculated pseudo­ statement.  (Let   the   dead   present   bury its  dead!)  "The  mistake is to  apply  the theory   to  the   great   body  of  traditional poetry" -to the poetry  of real statement.
Professor  Woodhouse is at  some  pains
to  remind   the   new  theorists -and   the new  poets-that, inescapably,  the  me­ dium  of poetry  is words,  that  words have (or   used   to   have)    meaning,  and   that
 poetry,  the  high   art  of  words,  occupies (or  once  occupied) "some common ground  with  philosophy, with  history, in­ deed   with   the   whole   range   of   knowl­ edge  communicable by-and  only  by­ words".  In  all  serious  religious  poetry­ in  Auden   as  surely  as  in  Spenser  -the affirmation uttered,   "the  poem   itself",  must command, at least at the moment of utterance, the  poet's  "wholehearted  be­ lief and  response".
Yet  Professor  Woodhouse, with  all  his
concern  for  the  poetry  of affirmation and real  statement, is never  one  to slight  the medium in favour of the  message.  In  his treatment here of poems as unlike as Paradise Lost  and  The Wreck of the Deutschland, he is properly sensitive to image, symbol, pattern, to the total <esthe­ tic  effect  in  which   "message"  and "me­ dium", while  not  the same, are neverthe­ less, as by magic,  one.
Perhaps  it  is  not  entirely   fanciful   to
claim  an   analogy  between  Professor Woodhouse's poetic  theory  and  the  con­ trolling  religious  principle of the  book­ the  principle of the  via media. Following  Paul  Elmer  More,   Professor  Woodhouse refuses to regard  the  via  media "as  just a fine  name   for   compromise",  but  rather (with  More)  sees it "as an  application of Aristotle's   doctrine  of   the   mean".  Of great  importance for  our   understanding

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  Professor  Woodhouse's whole  scheme and  method is his declaration that  in the Arislolelian doctrine "the  mean  does not simply  reject  the two extremes  but reaches out  to comprehend so much  of their con­ tent  as it can assimilate  to itself".
Thus it is that  in his critical  method Professor   Woodhouse is  able  to  "reach out" to  the  technical and  tonal  values of the  new  criticism  without losing his own firm grip on the idea, or without feeling obliged   to  reduce   real  affirmation to pseudo-statement.
But it is in his response to the many varieties  of religious experience in the English  tradition that one observes most vividly  at  play  the  active,  creative  sensi­ bility of the  via media. Now there can  be no  mistaking  Professor  Woodhouse's  al­ legiance  to  those  principles  of a  rational Christian  humanism first  articulated for Anglicanism by Richard Hooker.  For it is clearly  in Hooker that  one finds the principles  of  thought  and   value   which shape   Professor  Woodhouse's whole  me­ thod   and  cast  of  mind.  In  Hooker.  Not in  Spenser.   Not  in  Milton.   Indeed,  Pro­ fessor Woodhouse has been able to discern with  such  astonishing clarity  the  relation  of the  orders  of  grace  and  nature  in  the theology   of   each   of   these   great   poets precisely  because,  in  each,  the  relation  is off-centre,  off  the  centre   as  defined   in The  Ecclesiastical  Polity. Yet  it is in  the spirit   of  Hooker's   via  media   that   Pro­ fessor Woodhouse "reaches out", "assimi­ lates",  and  thereby "comprehends" both The  Faerie  Queene and  Paradise Lost.
Nor  is one in doubt, either, that  for Professor  Woodhouse the truest and sweetest expression of the ethos of the Anglican via media  is to be found  in  the poetry   of  George  Herbert.  Yet  in  this book  there   is  no  rejection   of  Protestant

68
 and  Roman Catholic extremes  but  again a reaching out, an effort to "comprehend" all that  can  be assimilated to the mean­ from   Spenser  as  from   Southwell,  from Cowper  as  from   Dryden, from   Tenny­ son  and  Browning as  from  John Henry  Newman  and   Gerard  Manley   Hopkins. Among  the  unexpected achievements of the  book  is a  warmly  sympathetic treat­ ment of the religious element in the great romantics and   a  just  and  felt  appraisal of  Robert Bridges'  long  neglected  Testa­ ment  of Beauty.
The specialist  will, of course,  recognize
from    earlier   Woodhouse  essays,   ideas which   have  illuminated for  so  many  of us  the   greatest  poems   of  the   sixteenth and  seventeenth centuries. While  we may envy  the  general reader   who  is  now  en­ countering Woodhouse for  the  first  time,  we  must   also  marvel   at   the   skill   with which  the  author has  abstracted  some of his earlier insights  and  deployed  them  in a new  and  expanding context. And  if, as some   have   protested,  there   is   nothing "new"  in  his  reading of  the  Victorians and   moderns, it  must  in  fairness  be  ob­ served   that   Professor  Woodhouse, with­  out straining for novelty of treatment, has discovered (not  devised)    a  meaningful pattern  in   which   Tennyson,  Browning, Eliot,  Auden  and  all  the  others,  brightly harnessed, take  their   place  in  order  ser­ viceable.
In The Poet and  his Faith  Professor Woodhouse  does   not,   like  some  of  his elders,   subordinate  poetry   to  faith.  Nor does  he, like so many  of his  juniors, sub­ ordinate the  faith   to  poetry.  Catholic in reach  and  range,  sane  and serene  in  tone and  temper, this is a  learned   and  a wise book from  the  hand of  the finest human­ ist  this  country has  known,  perhaps will ever  know.


SHAVIAN FAITH


Frances Frazer




J.  PERCY  SMITH,   The   Unrepentant  Pilgrim.   A  Study   of  the   Development  of
Bernard  Shaw.  Macmillan. $4·95·


ON   MAY 26,  1944, BERNARD Shaw  wrote  the  following terse  message to the British  Museum's Keeper  of Manu­ scripts  in response  to a request for manu­ script  material:

For   50  years   past   all  my  works   have  been drafted in  shorthand (Pitman's written  legi­ bly  without  reporters'  contradictions)   and  transcribed  by   my   secretary  on   the   type­  writer. As  I correct a good  deal,  and  dread the  literary ghouls who  dig  up  and  publish all    an    author's   mistakes  and    slips   and  blunders   and     redundancies,   I    ruthlessly destroy every  trace of  the  successive   polish­  ings  the  book  gets  before  I pass  it for  press.

It was a  staggering lie.  The  British  Mu­ seum,  a  major  beneficiary under  Shaw's  will, now possesses reams  of  exhaustively­ revised  Shavian  play  manuscripts, type­ scripts and  prompt copies with autograph annotations,  notes  for  particular produc­ tions,  and   pages  of  additional dialogue.  The   Berg  Collection  of  the   New  York Public  Library, and   the  Hanley Collec­ tion  of  the  University of  Texas  are  also repositories  of vast  quantities of material directly   concerned  with    the   formative stages  of  Shaw's plays  and   other  works. In  addition, all of these  libraries and  the London   School    of   Economics   possess large   collections   of   Shaw's  letters   and business papers-a  large proportion directly  or  indirectly concerned with  the massive   Shaw   canon. In  the   past   few
 years,  "literary  ghouls"  (myself   in­ cluded), anxious  to  absorb  all  the  prim­  ary  material about   even  one  play,  have been  digging   up  more   bones  than   they well know what  to do with.
On  the other  hand, Shavians of the hinterland, without access  to  the  manu­ script  collections or to English  newspaper and  periodical   libraries  where  as-yet-un­ collected  Shavian articles  are buried  have been   alternately  enlightened   and   frus­ trated  by selective, edited collections  from the  seemingly  inexhaustible supply:  en­ lightened   by  previously  unpublished pro­ nouncements  by Shaw  on hitherto murky areas  of his thought, frustrated by their recognition that  the  collectors  have  read far  more  than   they  have  published and that  even the  best-intentioned editor  may unconsciously  reflect his own  biases in his selection.  More  disturbing still are  new critical   and  interpretive  books  on  Shaw that  quote  new snippets  to support theses, for Shaw  was so apt  to overstate and misremember in  the  interests   of  his  im­ mediate cause that  contradictions abound  in  his writing  and  reported  conversation. The  critic can quote  Shaw to his purpose.
These  reflections  are  prompted by Pro­
fessor J. Percy Smith's The Unrepentant Pilgrim.  A Study of the  Development of Bernard  Shaw, which  is  a  book  with  a thesis.   Not   that   it   is  an   objectionable

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



thesis-far from  it. Drawing upon  stan­ dard   and   recently  accessible  material  as well as several  unexploited (by Shavians) biographies and  reminiscences  of Shaw's contemporaries, Dr.  Smith  has  written a lucid   and   often   charming  biography of Shaw's  early  years  to  prove  that  the  de­ velopment of Shaw's  socialism  coincided with   the  development of  his  "religion", which  gave  the  socialism  moral  founda­ tion and  a purpose. The contention seems entirely   probable. The   book's   principal weakness  is that,  in  asserting  it,  it  tends to  set  up  straw  opposition   and  to  mani­  pulate  Shaviana  suspiciously.
For   instance,  on   his   first   page   Dr.
Smith  sketches  the  two images  suggested by Shaw's  public  persona, G.B.S.-the ascetic, objective critic whose apparent otherworldliness  suggests  the  saint,   and the  Mephistophelian figure of the caustic eyebrows,  assertive   beard,   and   mocking eyes suggestive of a devil's disciple-and suggests  that   "we"   are  prone   to  regard the  latter   as  the  more  valid.  "To do  so increases   Shaw's   entertainment  value; and  it  has  the  additional merit  of giving us the soundest  possible reasons for ignor­ ing  anything  serious  that   he  may  say." Dr.  Smith  goes on to assert that although Shaw   was   concerned to   affirm   rather than    destroy   religion,   and   said   so  re­ peatedly,  his  biographers give only  brief, "embarrassed"  or   condescending   atten­ tion to his statements, and  the critics who take  his  mission  seriously  "see  it  almost exclusively in relation to Man and Super­ man   and   Back    to   Methuselah."   Like Shaw's   assertion   in   I900   that   the  first London  critics   of   The  Devil's   Disciple took Dick Dudgeon's diabolonianism seri­ ously,  this  simply  is not  true.  Nor  is the book's   implication  that   in   the   general opinion  Shaw's  religion  of the Life  Force

70
 was  not  evident in  his  plays  until   Man and Superman. Shaw's recently-published correspondence with  the  Abbess of  Stan­ brook  and   Warren S.  Smith's  collection  The  Religious Speeches of  Bernard  Shaw have   surely  convinced   even   purblind readers    of   The   Collected    Works  that  Shaw  was  a  profoundly serious  Creative Evolutionist.  Archibald  Henderson exhi­ bits neither embarrassment nor condescen­ sion  in  his  treatment of  the  Life  Force. And  although the  theologian Dean  Inge,  the  philosopher C.  E.  M.  Joad,  and  the sober layman St.  John Ervine  have  bones to  pick  with  Shaw's philosophy,  they  do not   belittle   it.   Moreover,  I'll   lay  odds that  every  freshman exposed  to Candida has  had  the  poet's  "secret" explained to him  in terms  of the  Life  Force  by textual notes,   his   instructor,  or   both.   Witness M.   W.   Steinberg's  Aspects   of  Modern Drama   (I 959) :  "The play  is important in  the  Shaw  canon   because  it  is Shaw's first  significant attempt  in  his  drama to present  his  philosophy of creative  evolu­ tion...."  The fact   that   G.  K.  Chester­ ton's  biographer Maisie  Ward finds Shaw lacking   in  joy  and   belief  in  God  is  not imposing.
In  plotting Shaw's spiritual history, Dr.
Smith takes pains to explain away young Shaw's noisy claims  to atheism. Elsewhere in the book he exhibits  a fine talent for Shavian paradox: speaking  of the G.B.S. myth,  he says, "the man  who thought himself   free   of  illusion   had   to  turn  to the  devices of illusion  in order  to convey his truth." But  here  he resorts  to needless pseudo-paradox:

You   cannot  freely believe   in  a  god   unless you   are   also   free   to   deny   him; and   how can  you  know  this  freedom fully  unless  you commit yourself  to denial and  face the consequences? Looked at  in  this  way,  athe­ ism   is   not   only   a   dimension  of   freedom,

REVIEW ARTICLES



but   a  dimension  of  faith, since   it  presum­ ably   takes   no  less  an  act   of  the  individual imagination  and   will  to   believe   in  no-god  than   to  believe   in  a  god  or  some  gods.

Granted that   a  refusal  to  believe  in  the Green   Hornet  implies   the   presumption that   there   are  things   to  be  believed- in, where   does  this  passage   get  us?  And  it is  surely  unnecessary, in  view  of  Shaw's own  statement in  Sixteen  Self  Sketches:

I preferred to call  myself  an  Atheist because belief  in  God   then meant belief  in  the  old tribal  idol   called    Jehovah;  and    I  would not,  by  calling myself  an  Agnostic, pretend that I did   not   know   whether it  existed   or not.   I still,   when I  am   dealing  with   old­ fashioned  Fundamentalists,   tell   them   that  as   I do   not   believe   in   this   idol   of   theirs  they  may  as  well  write   me  off  as,  for  their purposes, an  Atheist.

Thesis  also intrudes peculiarly in Dr. Smith's discussion  of Shaw's early  career as  a  critic   of  the   arts.   In  a  strangely slanted  chapter, Shaw  is found  guilty of shallow art criticism and a failure to appreciate the Impressionists, a lapse compounded  by  his  later  claims  that   he had  been  their  early  champion. The  drift of this chapter seems to be that  Shaw's emotionally  impoverished   boyhood   left him  inhibited  and   disabled   with   regard to  the  visual  arts,  whereas   his  early  im­ mersion   in  music   made   him   thereafter responsive  to ideas  and  feelings  conveyed musically,   and   that   this  state  of  affairs  was  fortunate for  his spiritual  potential­ ities:
 The effects  of  the  strange  emotional milieu of  Shaw's  boyhood  were   not   all  admirable ones;   but   in   turning  the   currents  of   his feelings   into   the   channels  of  music,   it  at least  saved him  forever from  the  critical blunder of  valuing style  above  sentiment.

Dr.  Smith  certainly has Shaw  cold  vis-a­ vis the  Impressionists. But do Shaw's first hostility   and    subsequent   self-deception prove  his incompetence  as  an  art  critic? Was  he  really  almost  always  concerned  with subject  matter and  naturalistic tech­ nique?   (Here  selective  quotation comes into  question.)   And,  even  assuming  that  he  lacked  appreciation  of  painting, can this  weakness  be attributed as heavily  as Dr. Smith  seems to attribute it  to an  un­ healthy  fastidiousness and   timidity  born of deprivation?-especially as the depri­ vation  did not, according to Dr. Smith, preclude a  passionate   involvement in musrc.
As  I have  said,  as  a  whole  The U n­ ref!entant  Pilgrim  puts  an   unexception­ able   case,  and   frequently   puts   it   with economy  and  grace.  The  book's  tendency  to psychologize flimsily  and  to fight  with shadows  is a  handicap.  But  Dr.  Smith  is surely  right  in  seeing  Shaw   as  a  funda­ mentally   religious   artist   inspired    by  a joyous  philosophy   and   expressing   it  in dramas  about  beginnings. His  quotations are often  pungent, refreshingly new ones, and   he  can  sum   up  an  argument  with aphoristic succinctness.







CONVINCING CANADIANA

ALAIN GRANDBOIS, Born in Quebec. Palm Publishers.  $3-95· Selected Poems. Contact Press.  $3.oo.

IT IS A  SATISFACTION  to write  that  Alain Grandbois'  Born  In  Quebec   lives  up  to the  claims  of its dust-jacket. The  book is one  of  those  infrequent  instances   when what   appears to  be  hyperbole  turns  out to  be  reassuring fact.  Roger   Duhamel's praise  is  not  an  exaggeration. The  book is distinguished in every way. This  poetic re-creation of seventeenth-century French Canada centres  on  the  life and  explora­ tion  of  Louis  Jolliet,   the  first  Canadian by birth  to contribute substantially to the further  exploration  of   North   America.
The  book  moves  one on  several  levels.
In  terms  of language alone  the English translation  of  Evelyn  M.  Brown  admir­ ably indicates the evocative  power, fresh­ ness  and   intrinsic  poetry  one  would  ex­ pect  of the  original.  Born in  Quebec  is a poet's   evocation  of   history   and   there­ fore moves one in the manner that  poetry moves  one.   It  is  not  a  question  of  lan­ guage  alone,  it  is  essentially  an  attitude towards the  past  and  implicitly   an  atti­ tude   towards  life.  The   essence  of  this attitude  could   be   summed   up   in   the word  "valour". The book  rings  with  the sense of the  courage and  the hardship of the Canadian past, epically conceived. Character  and   event  emerge   with  dra­ matic clarity.  The  portraits of  historical
 personalities, Champlain, the  heroic Bl'e­ beuf,   the   astute  Talon,   Frontenac,  the Indians: the  total  milieu  is precisely  and vividly  realized.
What is delineated even  more  clearly is the country, the  breathless  solitude, the dense  foliage  of the Canadian wilderness, the   sublimely   pristine   lakes  and   rivers, that  sense of  the  north  that  is our  coun­ try. "Our country"-this is what emerges explicitly in  the  accounts of  the  voyages and  explorations described  by Grandbois. He  convinces  the  reader  who  happens to be Canadian that  he  has a  country, and a  past,  and   that   both   the  country  and the  past  are  of  epic  proportion.
Those in  the  mass media  who  are  con­
cerned  with projecting an image of the Canadian identity might  do  well  to look at  this book. It was first published twenty­ five  years   ago   in   Paris   and   except   m Quebec  has   caused    little   stir.   Yet   it affected   this  reviewer   (who  responds   to the   word   Canadiana  with   a  feeling   of guilty  boredom) as the distinguished work of  a  distinguished  mind.   It proves   un­ equivocally that   Canadian  history   has moments of epic exploit and epic achieve­ ment  which  stir  the  heart  and  mind  with their   essential   heroism.   Dollard's  stand against   the  Iroquois is  a  French  Cana­ dian  Battle  of Maldon.
Grandbois'  verse   seems  to   have   met with    a   similar   unanimity  of   response. The   Selected   Poems  reveal   a  sensibility more   civilized   and   more   complex   than is usual among  French-Canadian poets. Grandbois' work  is marked  by a synthesis of theme and  poetic  technique which produces an effect not unlike music, specifically  that   of  organ   music.  Herein lies much  of its cumulative strength and some  of  its  weakness.  For  Grandbois, it is the fact  of death forever  lurking  at the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



core   and   centre   of   human   experience that  gives to life its very cherished  fragil­ ity.  The   same   awareness  of   vulnerable mortality exists  in  Pope's  phrase   on  the game  birds  of Windsor  Forest  who, "fall and  leave  their  little lives in air". Yet for both   poets   it  is   this  very  awareness   of death   that  heightens life,  bringing to  it the  flavour  of  the  rare  and  the  uniquely  precious.
Hence   the   poetry   is  by  nature of  its very  theme  more  universal than  particu­ lar.  It is in  no  way  ostensibly  Canadian or  even  French Canadian  except  in  lan­ guage  and  in  so far  as  both  French and English  Canadians  share   (whatever else they   may   refuse   to  share)  a  common  mortality.
Grandbois' central metaphor is that  of the traveller, the  poet-voyageur; the most frequent device  is  that   of  memory.  The book finally meshes into a metaphorical journal,   a   memoir,  the   record    of   yet another great  excursion of a mysterious, complex    earth.  Grandbois'  images   are those of cosmic vastness, stars, space, the abyss,  water,   the  desert.   The   influences one   can   detect  are   those   of  Verlaine, St. John Perse, a certain surrealist cast, Baudelaire  and   occasionally Rimbaud. The  final  result,  however, that  of an  in­ cantatory, bardic style  is entirely  Grand­ bois'   own.   This   style  is  not   without  a certain monotony, the  constant  tendency  toward    personification   and    apostrophe produces  an   effect   of   abstraction  and vagueness.  The poet's  landscape is often a  mysterious  unspecified one.  Lines  like, "Ah,  c'etait le soir des cris et des violons", which   promptly  evoke   Verlaine's  more precise, "Les  sanglots longs,/ Des violons/ De l'automne," are  frequent.
The    continual  apostrophizing,   "0
Fiancee", "0 beaux  doights", "0 Terre",
 "0 solitude", "0 faiblesse  des  doights", "0 beaux  soir  d'or", robs  the  verse  of much  of its impact. The  over-articulate­ ness is a devitalization  rather than  an in­ tensification  of effect. The  end  result  (as with  Whitman, another poet  with  bardic  tendencies) is that  of an emotional mono­ tone.  Nevertheless,  despite   these  limita­  tions,  the  poetry   succeeds  as  a  totality,  a  distillation  and   summation of  experi­ ence,  one  man's personal  exploration in terms of spiritual time and space. Peter Miller's   English   translation  is  accurate and  intelligent.
MARYA FIAMENGO




LITERARY VENTRILOQUISM

FRANCIS SPARSHOTT,  A Divided  Voice. Oxford
University  Press. $4.00.

!T IS  NOW A  COMMONPLACE  of the  pub­ lishing  of poetry  that  Oxford's Canadian branch is sponsoring  volumes  which  are holdovers  of  an  unchanging  poetic  past. Conventional  concerns,   traditional  for­ malism,  make   A'  Divided  Voice, on  the whole, an irrelevant book of poems. This  has  been  also  partly   true  of  another re­ cent  Oxford   volume,   A  Point  of Sky  by John Glassco. There are literary  consider­ ations  which  justify  the selected  volumes
of  A. J. M.  Smith  and  F.  R.  Scott,  who
grew  out  of  the  formal  traditionalism of the thirties, but there is no reason why competently   stale   verse   written   much later, and curiously in the same manner, should  be encouraged today.  The  interest which  some  may  muster   for  A  Divided Voice   is  not  unlike   archxologists'  cun-

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



osity  in  a  fabricated Roman villa  made of brittle  cardboard.
No matter which  way we may  look at
this  collection -neatly  arranged  in  six sections,  neatly  sanctioned stanzas-it is verse;  brittle   verse  that  exhibits  a  mind which  is far  from  being  one  of a  poet's. The  skimpiness  suggests  a  ping-pong  in­ dulgence-light,  fashionable.   A  glance at  the  titles  suggests  the gaucherie which attempts to  disguise  itself in  the  sombre and   sober  categorical  name-plates.  The  contrivances  in  the  poems,  "The Cate­  gories,"  "Moving  Away,"  or  "Shekaina" are,  not surprisingly, Eliotic and  Yeatsian
-worn out  idioms  by now, at least. "The
Worlds  We  Live  In" has  no sense of any real  presence  though shoes, coalyard  and scum  are  named :
I do not  wish  to reside  in  this  world
Where tonight's lover  may  be last  season's
hat
Or  a pair  of heelworn shoes.
The   language  is  frequently  rhetorical and    the    effects   obvious    in   the   self­ conscious    manner   such   verse    affects. Ideas   not  tested   in  the  bloodstreams of living  echo  falsely  in  the  language. The  etiquette of such  verse becomes irritating, as   in   one   tete-a-tete,  "Conversation Galante".  But  the   refrain   in  this  poem may  be  telling: "A  dumb  echo  ridicules my   speech."   These  poems  are  not "speech" but  literary ventriloquism that hardly   convinces   in  its  kind  of  didacti­ cism.   But   on   some   rare   occasions   the ventriloquy  can   be   delightful.  One   of Sparshott's   poems   which    I   remember  from  a  magazine  anthology in  Pan-ic,  a number of years ago, is probably  the  best of this verse. "The Song of Rolland" :
My  mother called  me a graceless  lump, But  I could whistle, and  fart, and  jump; And  I have  been  to the  courts of kings, Engaged to do  those  very things.

74
 Now  I am  shrunk to bone  and  gristle, But  still  I jump, and  fart, and  whistle, Till, leaping through my proper stink, Into a whistling tomb  Isink.

My  soul  weighs  heavy  in  the  balance, For  I, good  servant, used  my talents; And  if I whistle, and  jump,  and  fart, My  Lord will  take  me  to His  heart.

Is  this  an  allegorical Ars  Poetica?
SEYMOUR MAYNE


POEMS OF TRIVIAL COMEDY

JOHN    s.  MOIR,   ed.,    Rhymes  of   Rebellion: Being  a Selection of Contemporary Verses About  the   "Recent Unpleasantness"  in Upper  Canada,  1837·  Ryerson.  $3·95·

DEFICIENCY   IN  LITERATURE may  be  just as  useful  a subject for  criticism  as great­ ness;  it  only  needs  to  be taken  seriously. We   Canadians  should   have   discovered  this  long ago;  but  we have spent  so much  time  hopefully incubating our  mediocrity that  the  serious  analysis of  non-literature has  never  occurred to us.
Rhymes of Rebellion is a collection  of
very mediocre verse, newspaper poems of the  Rebellion ofI 837 in  Upper Canada. Even  the  Editor, John  S. Moir,  who col­ lected  the  poems  for  his own amusement in the  course  of his researches into Cana­ dian   history,  makes  no  claim  as  to  their  literary merit. The  poems  are   partisan, comic,   and   trivial;  many   of  them   are doggerel; they  were  intended as  ephem­ eral  "poetical  propaganda" for  a  cause, and   so  they  remain. Dr.   Moir   has  pre­ sented  the poems  as documents of history or  as  curiosities  of a  by-gone  age,  not  as poetry. All  this  is taken   for  granted.
But   having said  so  much, is  that   all
there  is to  say?  I  don't think  so. Unless we  consider the  existence  of  art,  at  any


George Johnston

HOME 	FREE

'Veterans of  loving  are  wary-eyed  and  scarred  / And  they  see  into  everything they see,'  writes  George  Johnston in  one  of  the  poems  in  this  book.  These  lines  well  de­ scribe  his own  insights  into  the  human condition, which  are  expressed  in Home  Free with  the  inimitable grace  and  gentle  irony  and  wit  that   have  brought him  a  large and  devoted   audience  (his  first  collection  of  poems,  The   Cruising   Auk, is  now  in its  fifth  printing).  Home Free  confirms  Mr.  Johnston's reputation as  a  remarkable serious  light  poet  and  reveals  him  as a  philosopher who  may  be  disillusioned but  is never  disenchanted. In  addition to the  short  poems  in  this  book,  most  of which  are here  published  for  the  first  time,  Home   Free  contains   two  important long  poems:
'Under the  Tree' and  'Love  in  High  Places'. 	$4.25


Miriam 111adding ton

THE	GLASS TRUMPET

The essence of Miriam Waddington's poetry  is what  one critic  of her work  has called
'the  dream that  outreals reality'. She is preoccupied with  the  relation between  reality
and   illusion-'the inner   vision' -and  with   the   power  to  act  on  and   transform reality.  The idea  of  Utopia as  a  creative   and  determining force,  the  sense  of  the miraculous in  discovering new  connections between  old  and  familiar things,  and  a fervent candour  about  the  experiences   of  love  are  all  richly  present   in  this  book, which  contains the  best  of  the  poetry  she  has  written   since  she  published  her  last book in  r 958. 	$4.50


Robert Weaver (Editor)

CANADIAN SHORT STORIES

This  collection of short  stories,  which  established itself in  the  World's Classics  Series as a most  popular anthology, is now reissued  in  paperback format. It includes  stories by Charles G.  D.  Roberts, Stephen  Leacock,  Thomas Raddall,  Mordecai Richler, Morley   Callaghan  and   many   other   writers,   both   English   and   French-Canadian. Oxford in  Canada Paperback  No. 7·                                                                        $r.g5

Oxford



75

BOOKS IN REVIEW






PJIINTING IN CJINJIDJI

A History

J. RUSSELL HARPER The  great  achievements of
Canada's painters, from  the
seventeenth century  to the
present,  are  traced  for  the first time  from  a  national  outlook,
and  in  the  context  of the country's national development. Enriched with  entertaining anecdotes,  descriptions  of the cultural background, bio­ graphical accounts,  and  critical
judgments, the  text  admirably portrays  the  artists,  their paintings, and  their  environ­ ments.  Nearly  400 illustrations,
70 in full  colour,  including representative works from  all
periods  and  many  works never before  reproduced.
A Centennial project  of the Canada Council and  the publishers.
Parallel  French-language edition  from
Les Presses de l'universite
Laval,  Quebec 2,  P.Q.

$20.00

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO  PRESS
 time,  as extraordinary, and its absence normal.  On  the  contrary, we  know  that artistic  expression  is normal,  even  in savages and  little  children, and it is the absence  of  art   which   is  strange,   which needs to  be explained. Rhymes of  Rebel­ lion  ought   to   be  a  book  of   great   and  moving  political  poetry.  Why is it  not?
Political idealism, the  struggle for liberty  in the  Mackenzie rebellion, should have produced noble and enduring poetry.  Actually  it has produced doggerel and  unconvincing jargon; and the loyalist cause, too, has produced mere  jingoist nonsense:

And  now  that the  rebellion's o'er
Let  each  true Briton sing,
Long live  the  Queen in health and  peace, And  may  each  rebel  swing.

The   question, surely,  as  Raymond Souster  once  put it, is "why we're such second-rate sons of bitches"; and  the answer  to this question, rightly framed, might  be  just as profoundly revealing,  on literary  grounds, as any explanation of literary  genius.
The  failure is a failure of humanity, of true   seriousness   and   moral   conviction. We  find   much   talk   in  these  poems  of "God", "loyalty", "liberty" and  other elevated   idealisms;  but   in   actuality  it must be these and such great convictions which   are   lacking,   and   the   appeal  to them in word must be in some way a deception.  How   else  are  we  to  explain the  hollow  sound   of  these  words  in  the poems?   The   one   passage  in  the  entire book which  rises above  triviality  and touches   the   truth  of  poetry   deals  with death, the authentic lament of Samuel Lount  the  blacksmith, hanged   on  April
12, 1838:

The nights I saw,  the  griefs  I bore, Shall unto me  return no more,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Farewell dark prison, iron  bands,
And  the  sad  cords  that bound my  hands! Farewell to all  that round me stood,
To  all  earth's joys;  'tis  blest  and  good
To  give  my life,  by God's command, Farewell distressed and  troubled land!

If it  is  true,  then,  that   in  all  the  rest the   conviction  has   something  lacking, what  are  we  to  conclude? That  the  Re­ bellion  itself was a farce,  as it  appears to many   readers  of   history,   for   this   very reason?   That all  our   history,  as well  as literature, is  trivialized   by  some  funda­ mental inadequacy? This  Canadian "re­ bellion",  for   instance-referred   to   as the  "Recent Unpleasantness" -in which less than  half  a  dozen  lost  their  lives; in which  a  raid  for  "axes  and  pork"  consti­ tuted   a   major  exploit   of   heroism;  in which even the leaders  were fated  to bear such names as Nils Szoltevski von Schoultz
-surely it  was  bad  poetry  from  its very origins  in  creation!
It  is  not   the   poetry   alone   that   has failed  us, but  something in  the  reality  of life. If the  poet,  or  artist,  is to  "hold  the mirror  up   to   nature"  and   reveal   "the very  age  and  body  of  the  time  his form and  pressure", then  nature and  the  time must   be  true   to  their   highest   potential. If not,  all  art  will  be  as  shoddy   as  the manikins who  pass for  men;  and  all their claims  to  human heroics  will  sound  like the  jingling  of  Petroushka.
Clearly,   we  must   be  critics  of  life  as
well  as  of  art; at  least  that  is one  thing we can  learn  from these Rhymes of Rebellion, sad   poems   of  our   Canadian past  which  fail  to  raise Canadian  history to the scale of genuine drama, or political epic,  and   reveal   it  again   as  the   trivial comedy  it  tends  to remain.
LOUIS DUDEK
 POLITICS NEGLECTED

MORDECAI RICHLER,   Son   of  a  Smaller   Hero. McClelland  &   Stewart. New Canadian Library. $!.75·

DuRING THE rgso's Mordecai Richler wrote fiction very steadily, witness novels published  in  I954,  I955,  I957,  I959· The last   of  these,   The  Apprenticeship of Duddy   Kravitz   established  as  consider­ able  a reputation for  him  as it is possible for  a  serious  young  writer   to  achieve  in Canada where  the literary vistas are rela­ tively  sparse  even  for   the  King   of  the Mountain. Richler   reacted  to  his  fame like   the   bear,   going   over   to   England
\vhere   he  has   been   writing  mostly  for
magazines,   movies   and   television   while producing  only  one   novel,  The   Incom­ parable  Atuk.  Obvious is  obvious,   and the  main  reason  for  much  of the  writing  he   has   been   doing   thus   far   into   the I 96o's  has  to  be money,  an  old  story for artists.  One  goes without  eating in order  to  write,  and  succeeds,  only  to  discover that  one  must  go on  writing in  order  to eat.   Sing  for   your   supper.  But   on   re­ reading the  New  Canadian  Library  edi­
tion   of  Son    of   a  Smaller   Hero  one
suspects deeper reasons for the markedly diminished  output of fiction.
In  his introduction, George  Woodcock spells  out  the  extent which  the  strength of the novel traces  to Richler's acute awareness  of ghetto life in Montreal. And certainly the main drift of Noah Adler's choices turns  on  his attempts to get off a ladder   from  the  top  of  which   the  mad­ dening  power  and  superior  yet  impotent vision  of  the  grandfathers  crushes  down on   and    helps    create   the   humiliating

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



banality of  the  persecuted  and  persecut­ ing  fathers and   mothers   on  the  middle  rungs  as the  whole  weight comes  to bear on  the  badly  rattled sons  and  daughters at  the  bottom. Noah,  the incipient artist,  has  intelligence of  all  this,  so  he  twists and   twists,  trying  to  get  neither   up  nor down   but  clear,  out  from  under,   on  to some  other   ladder.  The  main   points  of Noah's  awareness,   particularly  the   way in  which   his  intelligence  turns   both  to­ wards  and  away  from  the  grandfathers, echo   ahead   to   more   of  the   same   five years  later  in  Duddy Kravitz. But  where Noah   is   sentimental,  vaguely  idealistic,  and essentially  soft though  strong,  Duddy  is tougher, more materialistic, and though less   sensitive, more exuberant. The changeover could indicate a diminishing involvement for  Richler,   no  longer  dear to his heart  those awful scenes of his childhood and  youth.
Yet,  as  Mr.  Woodcock  points  out,  the strength of Richler's writing  is a strength of  involvement. And  if  the  story  of  the two  novels  of  the   Igso's, The  Acrobats and  A  Choice  of Enemies, is also one  of disengagement-from   various   political alternatives-their  strength   is  also  one of involvement, that  ability  to become  so wound  up with  what  one is writing  about that   talent  is released,  the  golden  thread that    transubstantiates  writing   into   art. Certainly the  thread is missing from  The Incomparable  Atuk.  However much Richler may  have  enjoyed  shafting  pat­ handed  Toronto,  his  involvement   isn't there,  and   though the  skill  is the  talent isn't,   his  mouth for  molten  words.
The  arithmetic of  all  this   begins  to read  that  during the  Igso's  Richler  may have   written  himself  out  of  touch   with the  two  chief  sources  of  his  talent:  the old  home  town  and  the  old  corner-store
 politics  (Panofsky's communism in Son of a  Smaller   Hero)    that   once-upon-a-time could  warm  in  him  the  glow  beyond  it­ self  of  human  community,  brotherhood. Charles Olson  has  pointed  out  that  poli­ tics  and  city  stem  from  the  same  word, polis.  And  Olson   has  added   that   "polis is eyes," is individuals, is I. This  certainly is  a  more   possible  politics  than   that   of parties,    governments,   prime    ministers,  premiers and  presidents, who  are  by now no more  than  managers in the  huge  hos­ pital   of   the   world   as  the   atomic   virus continues   to   spread.  Almost   the   only workable  polis   in   our   time   is  words, speech,   language,  because    they   are   a plane    at   which   communications,   com­ munity,   communion  are   still   possible. When   the  city  re-occurs  as  speech,  writ­  ing   becomes  an  office,  and  the  election falls  on  the   man   with  his  heart   in  his mouth. Near  the  end  of  Son  of a Smaller  Hero,    Noah,    having   finally   made    the break   with  his  mother,  is feeling  good:
He  was  immensely happy. He  had  spent the previous evening with   Panofsky. They had sat  in  the  kitchen drinking beer  and  listen­ ing   to   the   music   of  Vivaldi.  Even   Aaron had   been    cheerful.  He   had    given   Noah  his   old   suitcase.  He   had   told   him   stories  about  Madrid.   Panofsky had    had   lots   of beer   and   had   said   that he  might  turn the business  over   to   Karl  next   summer  and  come  to  Europe himself. Aaron had  laughed. He   had   said   that the  old  man  was  getting lecherous  in   his   last    days   and    that  he would  be  fleeced   by  the  first  D.P. he  met  up   with. Noah  had   laughed,  too.   But   he had   known   that  Panofsky would   never  quit City   Hall Street.  A  new  crowd is  arriving, Panofsky had  said.  Perhaps this  time  things will    work    out   better.  What   do   I  need Europe for?  Noah will  write   us everything.

All  this  would  seem  very  close  to  home base:   The music  of  Vivaldi   which   had earlier  caused   Noah   to  feel   "... some­ thing  like  pain.   He   had   not  suspected that men  were  capable of  such  beauty."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Panofsky's  son, Aaron, crippled in the Spanish war, victim of the old politics. Panofsky   himself,  the  man   in  the  novel with   whom   Noah   seems   most   fully   at ease, a true communist, believer in human community,  still   with   hope   that    "this time   things   will  work  out   better."  And Noah,  about to depart for Europe from which    he   will   "write  us   everything," heart  in mouth, the molten words, the golden  thread. But  as of now,  1966, Panofsky   or  some  other  of  those  chid­ ing  elders  whose  superior  humanity got caught  in   a   wrong   place,   might   with some   justice  complain,  "Mordecai,  you haven't  been  doing  your  politics."
WARREN TALLMAN


WORD  GAMES AND WARS

R.  G.  EVERSON,  Wrestle with  an  Angel.  Delta.
$2.00.

GLEN SIEBRAS SE,  The   Regeneration  of an
Athlete. Delta.  $1.50.

GLORIOUS  has become  a word that almost demands "technicolour" to follow it, and perhaps  this  is  why  the   revisers  of  the King  James Version  altered one  passage in  which   it  appeared. The  new   rendi­ tion, however,  is "effulgent splendour"­ which  is  no  more  illuminating and   (for all its abstraction)  makes  the idea  rather less  than   more  tangible. At  times,  con­ crete  precision  can  emerge  from  abstract words,  and  at  their  best, such  writers  as Douglas  Le  Pan and  Daryl  I-Iine wrestle with  the  intellect in such  a way  as to let this  happen. Even  the  ambivalence of  a word  like  "logomachy" in  Hine's  "Dop­ pelganger",  for  example,  is  precise,  for the  word-game/word-war  conflict  is part
 of  the  Doppelganger conflict  and  hence an  inherent part  of the  poem.
Such   control  is  unfortunately  all  too
rare  in  R.  G.  Everson's fourth  book  of poems, Wrestle with  an  Angel.  Portraits and  fragments of remembered experience form  the substance of the book and  the portraits themselves   are  all  right,  but  in too  many  cases -"Outside  Joe  Beef's", "Above High  River,  Alberta", "Mrs. Mallory's  backdoor face"-the  poems shift direction and end in wordiness. Such phrases  as  "man's  ungovernable spirit", "ineffable   meaning",  and   "Moore's  in­ vention   of   reality/conjures   effulgence" are  too  prevalent. The  contrasts which give   many   of   the   poems   their    point,  moreover,  are  too  little  revealed  and,  in­  stead    (too   easily),  merely   announced. The   child's   misapprehensions  of   word meanings  in  "Wonderful Uncle  Roy"  are handled   better,  but  even    they   seem laboured    beside    Ethel    Wilson's    prose treatment  of  the  same  experience. Only in   poems   like   "In  praise   of  the   Saint  John  River  Valley" or  "Bringing home the  baby"  do  the  words   acquire spirit; only   then   does   the   poet   approach  the standard set  by  his  earlier   volumes.
It is,  however,   always  pleasant   to  be
able  to enjoy  the  graphic presentation of a work as well as the  quality of the writ­ ing  (the  sterile  book  covers  of  the  New Canadian Library, for  example, need im­ mediate   attention  in   this  regard), and Delta  is to be commended  for  the  design of   its   series,  in   which   both   Everson's book and  Glen Siebrasse's The  Regenera­ tion   of  an   Athlete    appear.  Colin   Ha­  worth's drawings in  Wrestle are  particu­ larly  evocative,  but   the   roman   type  in Regeneration  is  the  easier  to  read.  The  type   is  not   the   greatest  virtue   of  this book, for  in  spite  of  a  remarkable num-

79






PRISM international
a magazine  of contemporary writing


PRISM  international is among  Canada's leading  journals of creative writing. Its policy is literary internationalism.

Contributors include Cesare Pavese, Umberto Saba,  Joszef Attila,   Amiya   Chakravarty,  Buddhadheva Bose,  Maria Kuncewicz,  Antonio de Undurraga, Robert  Creeley, Earle Birney, and  Irving  Layton.  Of  special  interest  have  been the early stories of Margaret  Laurence,  a newly-discovered story by Malcolm Lowry, verse and  fiction by the younger generation  of Canadian authors, and  en  face translations of poetry.

Forthcoming issues will contain  essays on  the great cities of the world, and prose and poetry from the Soviet Union, England,   Australia,  France,  French   Canada, the  United States, Germany,  etc., by Gaston Bart-Williams,  Khadambi Asalache, Robert Chute, M. K. Hameed, Michael Horovitz, Eli  Mandel,  Al  Purdy,  Charles  Bukowski, Aleksandr  Pis­ mennyi and many others.


SUBSCRIPTION  RATE
$3.50 (THREE TIMES ANNUALLY) SINGLE ISSUE $1.25

Sample copy of the recent issue available  upon  request





So

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



her of cliches, Siebrasse has at times integrated his ideas and his language. Narcissism and aging are the two main themes,  and  in  a  sense  they  are  related: "faith  begins   in   the   mirror",  the   poet says at one point.  Again: "Love  without reason  then,  without pity/  yourself"; "I go/to build  a house/in one of the middle lands"; "I  learned .. ./to know  duration and/the  measure of our  passing."  These are all out of context and so perhaps misleading when  presented in  this order, but  in  the  book  they  do  gradually unite into  one  picture. A  man  in  search  of  a beauty  which  equals  order  finds  time in­ stead,  and  his difficulty,  as the  title poem points   out,   is  that   "regeneration"  must not  become   permanence at  the  expense of vitality.  Ultimately the  animal  in  him remains,   his  love  becomes  his  landscape ("love,  my  city"), and  he  locates  a kind of  order   which,   if  not   perfect,   at  least exists  in  the  present. In  his  own  words, if  it   "please   the   child's   eye:/  that   is enough". The idea is not  a new one, nor is it  presented with  outstanding flair, but any  exploration of  a difficult  country is a worthwhile poetic  task.
WILLIAM H. NEW


ART OF
THE ESKIMO

GEORGE SWINTON,  Eskimo Sculpture. McClel­
land   &  Stewart.  $12.50.

I MUST CONFESS that  I approached this book   somewhat  gingerly.   There  was  a time  when   I longed   to  own  an  Eskimo carving,   and   it  was  most  frustrating  to realize that  these small  but powerfully massive creations could  only  be obtained in  eastern   Canada. Since  then  however,
 with a flood of mediocre work upon the Vancouver market, I have  come  to  feel that  one  walrus  is  pretty  much  like  an­ other.
It was  no  doubt   to  combat   such  dis­
enchantment that  George Swinton under­ took  to  reinstate current  Eskimo  sculp­  ture. He has made  four trips to the Arctic  and  being himself a fine painter, and  pro­ fessor  of  art  at  the  University   of  Mani­ toba, he brings to his subject  a cultivated sensibility.
Before  examining his exposition,  how­
ever,  one  must   pay  tribute to  the  book itself, which  was published  with  the  help of the Canada Council. The high quality of paper, expert  layouts, sixteen pages in colour  and  more  than  two hundred illus­ trations  in  black  and  white,  make  this  a luxurious  production; as far  as art  books go,   the   Gutenberg  Galaxy   has   never burned   more   brightly.
George   Swinton   gets  to  the  heart   of
the  matter in  the  second  sentence  of his main   text.   During  the   past   seventeen years, more  than   half  of Canada's  Eski­ mos  have   become   dependent  for   their livelihood,   either   directly   or   indirectly, upon  sculpture. It  is ridiculous  to expect  that  such a high  percentage of  any people should   be  artists.   Some  make  souvenir  carvings,    some    folk    carvings -which George  Swinton  defines  as  characterized by a collective style -and some works of art.  Even  so  he  maintains that  "propor­ tionately,   there    are   many   more   good Eskimo artists  than  there  are  white artists  in  North  America  or  Europe."
In   his  eagerness   to  destroy   what   he
considers  harmful myths,  he weaves back and forth a little tediously over the same ground. One  myth  is that  all Eskimo carvings  prior   toI 949  were  small.  The other  is that   they  all  had  some  magicQoo

8I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



religious  content. George  Swinton  has undertaken considerable research to prove that   in  the  nineteenth century   Eskimos made carvings as souvenirs for white explorers, traders  and   whalers.  He  thus establishes  an important link between  the economic   motivations of  today's  Eskimo and  of  his  ancestors.
But   why   spoil   a   mise   au   point    by being  so  thesis-ridden?  James   Houston, the  man  who  sparked  the whole  tremen­ dous  development of  contemporary Eski­ mo art  through his trips  on  behalf  of the Canadian   Handicrafts Guild,   wrote   an epoch-making article  in  the  Spring  issue of  Canadian Art, 1952.  George  Swinton quotes   from   it  where   it  suits  his  story, but  omits  other  passages.  I would  like to restore  two  of  them:
"In the   past,  and   to  some  extent   in
the present, the carvings were made as miniature  likenesses  to  bring   good  for­ tune   in   hunting,  to   be  placed   in   the graves of the dead,  to be worn  or  used as protective amulets, and  to  serve  as  toys or games."
And :  "The Eskimo  carver  is inspired with  the  coming  of each  season, and  by the  migration  of  game.   In  some  subtle way it  is thought good  luck  to carve  the animal  one  is about   to  hunt."
At the  time  he recorded  these observa­ tions   Houston  had   made   five  visits  to the  North.
It is true  that  in  a later  section  of the
book   George   Swinton  shades   his  case and  admits  that  magic  was not only asso­ ciated  with  the  old  sculpture but  still is, in a sense, with  the  new. Through it  the Eskimos,  engulfed   in  a  rapidly  changing culture,   with    motor    boats,   motorized  sleds  and  wooden   houses,  seek  to  retain  their   identity.  As they  carve  the  tradi­ tional   hero-figure  of   the   hunter,   they

82
 feel  that   they  remam   the  lnnuit-The
People.
Unquestionably it is when the author comments upon individual pieces, grouped  according  to  motif,   that   he  is most    felicitous.  His   words   caress   the stone,  bringing out  a resemblance now to German  Expressionism, now  to  the  art of ancient Egypt,  now to early Roman bronzes.  Here  the  reader  enters  a  region of  pure   joy.  Not  only  is  he  amazed   at the variety  but  he learns,  through numer­ ous   reproductions  of   the   work   of   the same   carver,  to  distinguish  that   artist's  special  sense of  form.
However,  the   ending  is  sad.   George
Swinton sees the  Eskimo  threatened with spiritual annihilation and  criticizes, quite rightly,  the  merchandising policies which have  encouraged the  production of  Eski­ mo  art  as  an  industry.
Perhaps this  book, with  its magnificent
photographic evidence of the  intense  in­ dividualism  and   high   standards  of   the genuine artists   among the  Eskimos,  will bring   about  a   change  of  thinking.   At least  we  may  hope   that   more  museums  will   consider  assembling   collections   by sculptors of the  calibre  of  Erkoolik,  Tud­ lik,  and   Johnnie  lnukpuk.
JOAN LOWNDES




ANGER ADMIRED

LUELLA BOOTH,   For the  Record.  Fiddlehead
Books.  $2.50.

LUELLA  BOOTH has  defined her  own poetic  statement in  the  first  three  verses of  "Truly":

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



between thunder
and  the  lightning's tooth the  world  is worthy.

A surge of riotous  colour and sensuality thunders passionately through her  "story told as only a poet  can  tell it," intimidat­ ing  the  meek,   but  leaving   a  residue  of positive  assertion   for  the  tough-minded.
In  Miss  Booth's poetry,  anger  belongs to   the   admired:  an   impressive  grand­ father "in  the  pulpit, exorcising", a cour­  ageous   mother  "fighting   my   father's virus-ridden brain/ for  its  castrated bril­ liancy",  and  a  Milton  Acorn  "Because/ when   you   are   not   using   your   eyes  as hammers,  they  suffer".   She   herself  has not "learned to hate". With  a clear vision she   recognizes   the   world   around  her, whose "suburbs do  not encourage Byzan­ tiums".  Yet,   doggedly,    she   does   "not  doubt   the  April  air ... or/ man's   right to dreams". Flowers  in untended gardens,  in   confining pots, in dark corners, but nonetheless  alive, strain  towards the light and, like the poet's senses, "rear up/ to plunge  against  the sun".
Love   is  the   dynamic  motivation  in For   the   Record.  Balancing  perilously close  to sentimentality and  sensuality,  it, nonetheless,  provides both  the centre  and the  periphery of a world  always  lost and always   found. It  moves   "in/  toward dark,   the   flame's   centre,   out   into   life, light   and   the   poem/  bright   round   her shoulders". Miss  Booth's  simple  conclud­ ing   credo   then,    "I  do   believe/  love", asserts  a faith  in  love, life  and  poetry  at
once;  "To love = to  be".
The  somewhat self-conscious  tendency to   write   Canadian  poetry   has   had   its usual  ill effects.  Trite comments like "In a  country without history", "Canadian cradles",   and    "Niagaras  of   prayers", strain    needlessly   against  a   context    of
 genuine  poetic  creativity. Ostensibly  dis­ parate, the imagery fundamentally merges into  a rigorously ordered  affirmation that  "Life  in  all  the  seasons/  is ripe  and  rich and  full".
HELGA HARDER



THE VERGE


EvERY YEAR  there  are  many  books  pub­ lished   in  Canada  which   it   is   hard  to classify,   and    among    them    are   a  fair number  which   have   no  literary  preten­ sions   (or,   if   they   have,   do   not   fulfil them), yet have  something to  say  about  the  world  in  which  the  real  writer  lives, and  therefore deserve  to  go  not  entirely  unnoticed. On  the other  hand, to review them  according to the criteria we seek to maintain would   be  to  impose  standards which such books do not even  attempt to meet,  and   in  any  case  would   encroach on space that should  be devoted  to works which   at  least  make  a  claim   to  artistic  merit.  The  only  solution,   apart from   a completely    uninformative   "Books   Re­ ceived"    list,   is   to   provide  a   regular  column  in which  such  books can  at  least be   briefly   noted.    With    this   issue   we begin.
The Trial  of Steven Truscott by Isabel le Bourdais  is by now  too well known  to need  introduction, but  one  cannot  stress too often  the  services which its author has done  by revealing,  albeit  somewhat  stri­ dently,  a  shocking  series  of  facts  which opens   some   yawning   chasms   of   doubt  about  cherished  institutions like  the  jury system and the courts of appeal and makes one  wonder  whether the  Criminal Code should  not be given  teeth  to bite severely

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



those officers of the law who regard  too lightly  the  rights  of a  man  who  is  inno­ cent  until  the court  has found  him guilty beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt.
In   another  McClelland  &   Stewart
book,  A  Choice   for Canada, Walter   L. Gordon states,  with  none of the indiscre­ tions  one  might   have  expected,  the  case for  a  left-wing  nationalist liberalism; no walls  will fall  to  this flat  trumpet call.
But   dulness   is  no  closed  preserve   of
politicians; there is always enough  to go round, and  particularly in those Gobi deserts   of   the   mind   from   which   uni­ versity   administrators   propound   their views to the public. Information abounds; inspiration is elusive;  literary grace  never puts in an appearance. Higher Education in  a Changing  Canada, a  Royal  Society
symposium  edited  by J. E. Hodgetts and
published by the University of Toronto Press,  and  New   Universities in  the Modern World, a series of statements  by University Presidents and  Vice-Chancel­ lors  of  recently  founded  Commonwealth universities,   edited   by   Murray  G.  Ross and  published   by  Macmillan, survey  the difficulties  of  higher education in a world where   the  young  are  becoming   propor­ tionately  more  numerous and  absolutely  more  demanding. The  problems  are  real, the  concern is earnest, but  the  prose  is execrable. There is a  place  for  the  ghost writer  even  in  the  groves of academe.
One  wishes such  members  of the scho­
lastic  community could  take  lessons from James Eayrs, who makes a silk purse of eloquence out  of an  unpromising subject
 in  his Plaunt Memorial Lecture, now  re­ printed  by   the   University    of   Toronto Press,  on   Right   and  Wrong in  Foreign Policy.   He   brings   wit  and   style   to  the service  of a most  intelligent and  sensitive discussion  of the morality of international relations, and  presents  one with  the  kind of   manifesto  for   civilized   commitment which,  these  days, is so often  needed  and so  rarely  encountered.
Making  of  the   Nation   is  a  pleasant picture book,  a coffee table  keepsake volume  of Canada's Hundred Years published by Weekend Magazine as the first-fruits of their  Canadian Centennial Library, with  some good antiquarian photographs and  a  text  by William  Kil­ bourn  which,   having  no  pretensions  to being   a   real   history,  fulfils  its  purpose  as  a  tasty  but  insubstantial salad  of  tid­ bits   from   the   past,   sauced   with   that  peculiar   flavour   of   provinciality  which one   associates    with    the   well-seasoned Ontario mind.
At   one   point   Professor   Kilbourn  ex­
presses whimsically  the  thought that hav­ ing    no   national   flag   might   have   its advantages, a salutary caution, but clearly not  one heeded  by Dr. George F. Stanley,  who  takes  flags  very  seriously  indeed, so much  so that  in  The Story  of  the  Cana­  dian  Flag he relates  in detail their  history
-national and   provincial-in France,
Britain and  Canada, and  even  adds  an appendix on  flag  etiquette. A useful volume  for  those  who  march  behind banners.
