$5.oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·92
Spring) l982

FICTION  IN THE SEVENTIES

Articles
BY  KLITII  \1  \ILL\RIJ,  Ll CY   :\f. I  REIRERT, DONALDS.  HAIR, JO.\.'\: ( (JJll\\TI.L, \RKOLD  F. DAVIDSON &  CATHY DAVIDSON
Poems

BY   \IICIL\1 L  BRL\.'\: <>U\'FR,  GLEN  SORESTAD. CHRISTOPHER \\'ISE IAN, ROT\'  ClL\RACll, .\1. TRAVIS LANE, STEPHEN  BETT
Reviews

BY  Gl  OR<:F JUIIKSTO:--.:, :\L\RK  ARLEY, :\IARILYN HO\\'ERING,  :\lORTON  L.
ROSS, I·S'H.LLF. l!ANSERr.Al·, ll'RRAY
RIC<ll·,  J>I·TI·.R  :\IITCHA:\1, LISE ROCHr,TTF, l\fl  RH,L \\'HITAKER, K. P. STICH,
:\!Al  RIU· LLHl'.L, AN  X   \fESSFNGFR. RICHARD PLANT.  JOHN H. FERRES, SHERRILL l:RACL, :\IONIQL'E Gl.NL:IST, CAROLE GERSON, \\'AYNE GRADY,
\'ICTOR  HO\\'ARD,  ROSS LABRIE, JANE l\10SS, SHIRLEY NECMAN,  BARBARA
PEL!., CFRALD THO IAS,
cTKNASKI,  PFTFR A.  TAYLOR, LOLA LEl\HRE-TOSTEVIN, JONATHAN  M.
\\'EISS, TERRY GOLDIE, CATHERINE  KERR, GEORGF \VOODCOCK

Opinions and Notes

H't   '\l!CIIFLLE CADPAILLE, ANTHONY  R.  DA \\'SON

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW


e it11rial 	






ANOTHER DECADE




WE ARE  SCARCELY  TWO YEARS into  the  198o's,  and  already the  decade  seems to  have settled  on  its character. Compared with  the  I g6o's, that  age of protest and  plenty, when people accepted  the  myth  of progress and turned  it for awhile  into a temporary  reality, this decade  is marked  by paucity and   plaint.  The  governing  reality-perhaps equally  temporary,  but  not  yet mythological-is retrenchment. The  reaction  to it is instructive : an  anger  on the  part  of ordinary  people at being cheated  out  of an equitable share  in  what is still one of the  world's  richest societies. But  perhaps  Canada is richer  in  re­ sources than  in its responsibility for managing  them,  richer  in expectations than in application, richer in wish than  in will. The  idea of progress in the 196o's was born  of the expectations  of the numbers  of people then  entering  their  maturity, who  still  had  their  aspirations  and  the  rumbling   energy  of   youth;   but  a  lot of that  fades, and  whether  there is real paucity  or not in the I g8o's,  there is at the  very least a disparity of distribution,  born  of hunger  for  power, disappoint­  ment  in  power,  plain  avarice,  and  simple greed.  How  to  react?  Many  people, with nostalgia, are turning now (for confirmation of their strength  to persevere, as much  as  anything)  to the  desperate  unity  of spirit  and  the  erratic  vices and luxuries  of those other socially and  economically  chequered  decades,  the I g2o's andI 93o's. With what result remains yet to be seen. Or felt.
But how can we characterize  that amorphous swift decade of the 197o's, which was In-Between?  Those large numbers of youths for whom society has never been ready found  that society was not ready for them when they turned  twenty, either. They  went to the land,  came back from  the land,  and  suddenly  turned  thirty; their  friends  joined  the  establishment,  their  children  started  school,  and  their several  governments  sold their  land  away.  They  traded  in  their  dream  of  sim­ plicity, many  of them, for a dream  of possession, but  found  that  as hard  as the other  to  achieve;  and  their  younger  siblings,  more  conservative  all,  began  to nudge  them  ruthlessly into middle age. The  decade  was nationalist, for some of the same reasons that  the generation  was self-expressive:  not out of  ego so much

2

EDITORIAL

as out  of  a  determination to  set one self apart  from  the  pack -with  all  the enthusiasm,  rightful  pride, competitive impulse, bias, and  talent  for distortion  of which people in Canada, like people everywhere, are endlessly, repeatedly capa­ ble. During  the 197o's,  years of celebration  and  public  protest  turned  overnight into years of theatre and public mime. Cults acquired  respectability. Superstitions  were enshrined.  Rock  turned  into  punk,  with  all the  cynicism  that  comes from using commerce  as a means of rebellion against  the ordinary, and  both rock and punk  were overtaken  by New  Wave,  which  turned  out  to  be  just another  old wave coming back, another  new-found way of looking backwards  into the future.
Canadian literature during  the decade  gives no clearer  picture  of its time - nor any less composite a picture. Any gallery of characters  has to be able to show a  substantial  range: Hodgins'  caricatures,  Munro's  sketches,  Laurence's myth­ makers, Davies' myth-markers, Atwood's partly liberated  persons, Cohen's  partly liberated  parsons, Beaulieu's  phantoms,  Gallant's  ghosts, Ferron,  Tremblay,  He­ bert,  Hood,  half a dozen split personae, and  a bear.  Looking carefully  at  all of them together,  we can begin to see the patterns of a transitional period develop: the blush of expectation  begin to fade, the lines of a generation's disenchantment (with  its country,  with itself)  set in. In literature,  life stops being  an open  field of possibility and  turns  into  a closed theatre  for role-playing  a:nd role-breaking.  More  and  more,  people  in  books call  attention  to  themselves  as characters in books, re-enacting  tales rather  than  enacting  lives. Repeatedly  Beauty  meets the Beast, draws on, draws back, or draws away. For one writer, men become mino­ taurs  and  all the  world  a  maze  that  defies a  woman  ever  to  find  her  way  to
freedom;  for another,  women are hermaphrodites and  dragons; for a third, sex­
uality is a trap  for the unwary  and  the unready,  a process that  takes the threats and  promises of fairytale  and springs them  alive. /-narratives perform  desperate quests for meaning  and  love in a world where love belongs to a lost past, where meaning  exists only in magic, where only the self is real and the self seems some­ times mad. Reality is terror,  however sublimated,  nothing  more.
Not that  all optimism has disappeared-Davies continues to be unfashionably articulate, Hodgins  to be unfashionably  positive, Gordon  Korman  to be  unfash­ ionably  cheerful: it's  just that  one  has today  to use the  word  "unfashionably" with such epithets.  Perhaps  it's a question  of expectation  still. Dour  realism  has long been a Canadian mode, and  trading  in the old  realism  on  the  magic  new kind has not robbed  it of all its dourness;  in the 197o's it simply takes on a new form. The  reflexive stances of so much  writing of the time  (a  pattern continued  into  the  198o's,  clearly)  mean  that  the severity is often  directed  back  into  the novel form,  back against  the  process of authorship, back against  the I. Whether  it is punitive,  guilefully  playful, or  merely  cautionary,  the stance  calls attention to itself; as the self-consciousness is often an act of deliberate self-deception, willed illusion against  the pressures of insight, roles are in constant  flux, both inside the

3

EDITORIAL

work and  outside  in  connection  with it. Hence  at  one  remove from  the  actual writing,  the author  becomes critic and  the critic becomes author. For such litera­ ture  less shares  its  meaning  than  requires  interpretation, requires  the  reader's  involvement  in  the  act of decoding  its signs-perhaps for  the  pleasure  of the puzzle's challenge,  but  perhaps  to discover only that  the signs  are all that  exist for an author,  that  behind  the tower of verbal  masks and  marks  that  delineates life, there lies no meaning at all.
I am led to these dour reflections in part  by trying to sort out  the enthusiasms
and  disappointments of 197o's literature,  and  in  part  by my response to W. 0. Mitchell's new novel  (and  best book since Who  Has Seen the Wind  in 1947), How I Spent My Summer Holidays (Macmillan) , a tale of childhood and mem­ ory which  the author  has taken some years to write.  It  is set in 1924  and is an apparently straightforward narrative about  the  extraordinary  summer  of a  1 2- year-old  boy named  Hugh.  But appearance lies. Hugh's  happy  home, his many friends, his smalltown  prairie summer, his religious training, his adult  guides:  all are  illusions, acts of make-believe which  his society  performs  for  him -which only  memory  can  sort out,  reinterpret, and  reject.  The  book  comes out  of  the stance  of the  197o's,  that  is; not  merely is  innocence  lost, but  so is possibility, because a generation  of adults  promises what it does not provide, acts by rules it ostensibly rejects, suppresses  information  that  would  enlighten  its children,  and thereby  warps lives that can never quite be young.
There  is much  that  is funny  and  satiric  in  the  book -the  elaborateness  of boys' schemes of adventure  and the hypocrisy of religion are the chief wellsprings and  targets  of Mitchell's  laughter-but there is little that  is gentle. This is not Who  Has Seen the Wind  a  few years later.  Behind  the  upright  masks of  the townspeople there exists a harder  cast of truth,  one which Mitchell's  plays of the
197o's-Back to Beulah, for example-come closer to showing than does Who
Has Seen the Wind or The Kite. Here the rural is not bucolic. In the town's insane asylum,  the inmates  rage or  wander  blindly,  unattended except  by other  mad­ men;  liquor  sales and  prostitution  prosper, among  the  Solid  Citizens as  well as among  the rest;  the  wife of the town's  chief authority  figure makes lesbian  ad­ vances,  both  welcome and  unwelcome,  to other  characters; and  all  manner  of violence  thrives. Though  he telegraphs  his plot  too  clearly  for  the  events  that follow to be a surprise,  Mitchell  brings all of these strains  together -madness, which  12-year-old  Hugh sees as a child's game,  until it  moves too close to him; alcohol, which he sees as an adult  adventure; and sexuality,  which is even more a mystery in himself than  it is in the world he sees around  him -in a climactic scene of murder,  revenge, and wrongful blame. The child's game stops, for it has never in fact been a game;  his world closes; and  the theatre  of cruelty in which he has played his part keeps on, leading to further  madness and  more suppression, all beyond his control.

4

EDITORIAL


There  are a lot of conventions in the book-secret caves, shallow graves, stereotypical  characters and  confrontations  among them-but  Mitchell  asks us to see past  them  all, to see the  way they always persist to disguise the  truth  in life. Even the title is an invitation  to this end. "How  I Spent  My Summer  Holi­ days" -that  wretched  essay topic of everyone's first day  back  to school -is a secret subject  for Hugh,  one he is not allowed to talk about  during  the fact, and not allowed to admit  after;  because of his violent summer, all his youth is wasted, spent.  And  most of his life after,  too. For subsequent  events do  not  modify his society. The innocent  madmen  are killed or left in a state of paralysis; the parents die;  the friends,  who were never truly friends, turn  into  their  parents, with the same sleazy hypocrisies;  war  and  sex become  bitter  games  of  power  and  role­ playing;  and  Hugh  goes away.  But the  novel is cast as a  frame  story, inviting readers  to notice the form  as well as the tale, to read  the  past  methodically,  to enter  with  Hugh  into  a  dialogue  with  memory,  seeking  a sanctuary   he  only thought  he once had, a love he can only hope to believe in still. There  is no order to be gleaned from history, he finds, no comfort in accurate memory, no salvation in recognition; perhaps  all Hugh  can salvage from experience  is enough  under­ standing  to feed the will to hope. That's small, as signs of renewal go. But perhaps it's a message with a little meaning for writers in decades to come.
W.H.N.







NOTICE


While  I was writing this  editorial, "retrenchment" caught up  with Canadian  Literature.  Paper   and   publishing  costs  have   risen-the inflation in paper prices far  outstripping the national average. In April
1982, postage costs for journals take a massive leap. In July 1982, the University  of  B.C.,   which   has  helped   support  Canadian  Literature since   1959,  is  forced   to  reduce   its  grant  significantly. All  of  which means  that  as of June 1982, single copies of Canadian Literature will cost  $7.50.  In  January 1983,  annual  subscription rates  will  rise.  An individual  subscription will  cost  $20.00  a  year,  an  institutional  sub­
scription $25.00  a year,  plus $5.00 postage outside  Canada.




5

POEM
 

BIRDS


Michael Brian Oliver


Growing up
Beside the sea,
I first watched gulls. There  is something


About gulls,
 Feminine

With  their swift cuxves
And their sad cries, Something beautiful,
And I missed them
When I first left home, And long afterwards  too,
Whenever  I lived inland.

Lately
I have taken to watching crows.
Crows
Are philosophers
And cannot  be conned. The  raven Noah sent out
Has still not returned.
I sit at my writing desk
And-often­ Instead of writing
I watch the crows
Who, in turn, watch the beach
For whatever death
And sustenance
The  tide brings in.

And 34 is not so old.
I know several poets, Several lovers
Who would kill to be 34 again.
!But the age of the heart
Cannot  be known,
And on this happy birthday
Mine is stranded.
If it were to  be burned,

6

POEM

Like Shelley's,
Several witches would appear
And  hover  above  the blaze
Like gulls.

The day  before  yesterday
In this fishing village
In a March snow squall
An eagle appeared
With  a gull in its talons
And  landed on the beach
Where it ravaged the pretty  one for breakfast
In a matter of minutes.
And  while  the feast
Was going on, Another-solitary-gull
Flew by to see
What had  happened to her sister.
She cried,  of course,
Then faded  away
Into the storm,
Being flighty
But  knowing an eagle when  she saw one.

Afterwards
I walked  down  to the beach
To  scan  the eagle's  work.
Had  it really been  here?

Yes
 
-Ripped up  the middle,

Legs delicately askew,
Wings intact  but  useless, The gull  was gone,
And  snow
Was already covering up
Her  red nakedness
Like a sheet. In  the meantime,
Slightly  cautious, The crows  were  watching me,
Knowing I would  leave
As soon
As my curiosity  was satisfied.



7

POEM
 

YELLOW WiiRBLERS


Glen Sorestad


This summer  our backyard  has been
enlivened by a pair  of yellow warblers whose pale lemon presence is a first here. They
dart like yellow flashes from  tree branch
to leafy shrub.  The  jaunty  male  sings his one-note  territorial chip,-chip  as he
moves around from  poplar to silver  maple to alder. Clearly  they had  a nest somewhere near
and  my limited  knowledge  of warblers led me to suspect  our  five-foot cotoneaster hedge. Yesterday I received  unwanted confirmation.

I had  the clippers  out to trim  the hedge. Oblivious, I moved  along, shearing and  trimming seeking  to impose order  on  this green  world -
an  unconscious  hang-over from  Edwardian England. I leaned  across the hedge,  just past  mid-way
to lop back some disorder, rule  raggedness even deaf  to the uptempo excitement of warbler cry
that  should  have alerted  me to this impending trespass and  then  disaster  fell. Something in my movement
and  my callous pruning dislodged the  home  in  the hedge and  out fell a drab puff of fledgling warbler
a frightened fluff of down  that  dropped at  my feet and  uttered the bird equivalent of a child's wail. The parents fluttered in agitation around me
the frenzied  male berating me non-stop.

I was appalled. Like that  Scottish plowman
two and  a half centuries before  me, remorse  seized me by the throat at this gross despoiling.
In  the instant I wanted  to set things  right,  yet knowing that  such  matters are  often  difficult, whether in  the realms of birds or men,  I knew  I must  try.
I bent  to pick the youngster  up from  the  ground.






8

POEM


But  the  little  one was now seized with  panic
and  flapped and  hopped across the garden, its confusion of cries an  occasion  for more  alarm  if possible
from  the frantic parents. In ungainly  pursuit
I nabbed it in a row of onions, cupped it in my palm  while it chittered its fright
to all  the world,  and  I stood  there
like a grade eight  bully accused  of harassing the  little  girls in kindergarten. The  parents
were  telling  me and  the neighbourhood what  they thought.

I took  the trembling fledgeling  back to the hedge and  deposited it with  care  back in its sanctuary
then  took  my clippers  and  left the hedge  unfinished. I sat down  at  the patio  table  with my chagrin
feeling  somehow like someone  who has been exposed
in public  for some heinous  act. I wondered
whether the  parents would  desert  the  violated  nest whether I'd  condemned the young one  to starvation or  to the  neighbour's ever-prowling black  feline. The parents worried  around the hedge  while  I sat.

But  this morning as I sit at  the same outdoor table with  my coffee and  my notebook, the male  warbler flies over  to perch  above  me in the poplar tree
and  greets  me with a thorough scolding.  It has somehow a definite  familiar tone, and  I accept it
like a roustabout husband because  I have  the feeling
that  I am  being forgiven,  though the lecture  must  be given  nonetheless, as a matter of propriety.
The female is busy in and  out  the hedge
and  this backyard  world  is for  the moment at  least back  to where  it was before  I took the clippers out. The untrimmed remnant of hedge  may  be an affront to those who put stock in such  things
but  to hell with them,  I say. To  hell with  them.

Saskatoon, July 1981









9

"MIDDLEWATCH" AS MAGIC REALISM

Keith Maillard

IREAD  susAN KERSLAKE's finrt novel, M;ddlewatch,' in the spring  of 1977.  I  found  it  a  book not  without  minor  flaws.  Kerslake's  fragile style, depending  for effect upon  juxtaposition  of intense  lyricism with  a simple,
folkloric narrative  line, was a difficult one to control,  and  she faltered  occasion­ ally. But, after finishing the book, I was ready  to forgive her anything.  Wisps of Middlewatch persisted at the back of my mind for years-the magical shimmer of the  writing,  the  resonance,  the sheer  importance  of what  was being said  in such a quiet way. For me Kerslake had "that voice," as Michael  Ondaatje wrote of Marquez, "whose greatest power is that we trust it." 2
Shortly  after  I read  Middlewatch, I discovered  that  I  had  been labelled,  for the second time, a "magic  realist." My publisher, Dave Godfrey, had done it first in the  dust  jacket  blurb  of Two  Strand  River;  he  had  meant  it  as more  than merely a catch  phrase to help sell books. My  work,  he told  me,  reminded  him of the  painting  of Alex Colville and  Ken  Danby: the  meticulous  detailing  so realistic it reverses into dream.  But then Geoff Hancock, in the Canadian  Fiction Magazine, was claiming the existence of a full-blown  literary genre called "magic realism" with Canadian practitioners who included  Robert  Kroetsch, Jack  Hodg­ ins, and  myself. He  assigned  us  precursors  in  the  South  American   writers - Borges, Cortazar,  Llosa, Asturias, and  Marquez  -and  attempted a definition:

Magic  realism is not surrealism or  fantasy  writing.  Surrealist  writers ... use a linear association of ideas which often dispenses with logic and  the laws of the physical world. Fantasy writers, by comparison, are  often  dependent  upon  the supernatural  and  the absurd, and very commonly place their stories on Mars or Jupiter.  Magic realists place their extraordinary  feats and  mysterious characters in an ordinary place, and the magic occurs from the sparks generated between the possibilities of language and the limitations of physical nature. 3

Although  pleased to find myself placed in such august  company,  I was irritated at  Hancock's  article  for raising  more questions  than  it answered; that  summer I  badly  needed  answers. I  was working on  my fifth  novel, Motet, and  having a hard  time of it; I felt that in writing this book I needed to know,  in every sense of the  word,  what  I  was doing,  and  I  was driven  into  the  analysis of  other people's fiction -and later into literary criticism-as a way of maintaining my

10

KERSLAKE


own  ability  to  write.  By the  time  I finished Motet  two years later,  I  had  also evolved my own definition  of magic realism which was both  broader  than Han­ cock's and  more precise. Most useful was Robert Scholes' notion of  "fabulation" which, he said, "means  a return  to a more verbal kind of fiction. It also means a return  to a more fictional kind. By this I mean a less realistic and more artistic kind of narrative: more shapely, more evocative; more concerned  with ideas and ideals, less concerned  with  things."4    From  his analysis  of the  work  of Durrell, Vonnegut, Southern, Hawkes, Murdoch, and Barth, the outline of what he meant by fabulation gradually  emerged, something not far off the old "art for art's sake"
-fiction  as the  playing of games with structure.  What  Hancock  said  of magic
realism could  apply  equally  to fabulation: "Language and  formal  structure are now  part  of a story, as important as  plot and  character. When  language  and structures are  used as an  end  in  themselves, new dimensions  are  open  for  the writer  of fiction."  Could  magic  realism then  be simply  a style of fabulation? I didn't believe it; I felt, at  the heart  of the work, a difference  in kind from  One Hundred  Years of Solitude  and Giles Goat-Boy.
It  appeared to me essential to distinguish  varieties of post-realist  fiction, not as an exercise in literary  pedantry,  but as a way of deepening  my understanding of particular works and the connections between them. Scholes discussed the difficulties readers  and  reviewers were  having  with  the  books he called  fabula­ tions. "Much of the  trouble  comes from  inadequate understanding of  this new literary  mode,"  he wrote.

The  trouble is aggravated  by the absence of terminology in which to discuss it. Evaluation and appreciation  depend helplessly on recognition of kind, and  recog­ nition requires appropriate  linguistic categories. As long as we expect a  nectarine to taste like either a peach or a plum we are bound to be disappointed. But once we assimilate this new category-nectarine-we  begin to know  what  we are dealing with and how to react to it. We can judge and appreciate.4

Here, then, is my attempt to define a new category, that  nectarine  called magic realism. Throughout the long development  of the novel as a form,  writers have worked  out  a  set of  narrative conventions  designed  to  create  the  illusion  that the  story on  the  page is "real" or "true" and  corresponds  in  some  direct  and substantial  way to the  ordinary world of day-to-day  life. Any  working  novelist knows just how arbitrary and artificial these conventions are, but they have been so long and  deeply established  that  they are accepted  easily by readers as "real­ istic."  Writing  that  does nothing  more  than  work  inside  these  conventions  is, simply, realism,  as in  most of the work, for example, of  Margaret Laurence  or John  Updike.  Fantasy  writing  accepts  these conventions  but  shifts the  location, not  merely  (as  Hancock   says)  to  Mars  or  Jupiter,  but  to  Middle   Earth   or Narnia,  and  attempts to create what Tolkien  calls "a secondary  reality": that  is, a world different from the ordinary  one we see around us but which, nonetheless,


I I

KERSLAKE

must  be  perceived  as "real." Surrealism,  not  the  specific movement  associated with Andre  Breton, but, as Susan Sontag says, "a  mode of sensibility which cuts across all the arts in the 2oth century,"  attacks  realistic conventions  at  the root, not merely, as Hancock says, by "a linear association of ideas,"  but  more usually by what  Sontag  calls radical  juxtaposition-the collage  principle.  "The  Sur­ realist sensibility," she says, "aims  to shock," 5    as in  the  work, say, of  William Burroughs.
Three  characteristics  appear  to me necessary for  magic  realism.  The  first is the acceptance of most or all of the realistic conventions  of fiction. The  second is the  introduction of a "something  else" which  is not  realistic -the  "magic" of the genre -which may be at the level of plot  (the  magic carpets  and  ascen­ sions to heaven  of  Marquez,  the  Doppelgangers  and  resurrections  of  Hodgins) or at the level of the narrative  itself (O'Hagan's direct introduction of  myth into the  text,  Harlow's   bomb-like  author   intrusion   in  Scann,  Marquez's  complex structure that  destroys itself on the last page). The  magic  element  is not  juxta­ posed with the realistic for shock value, as in surrealism, but woven in seamlessly. The  third  characteristic   is that  the  impulse  for  the  writing  of  magic  realism arises out  of the desire to transcend  the form  of the  realistic  novel not  as  form but as expression. This statement  obviously requires clarification.
Fabulation, as  I understand   it,  arises from  a  delight  in  play  with  all  the
accumulated  baggage  of  literature   itself,  Hancock's "language  and  structures used as an end in themselves"-Barth's elaborate  allegory, Nabokov's self-refer­ ring index. The spirit of fabulation  is something like this:  Nothing  important can be said, so why not have fun? The spirit of magic realism, in contrast,  is: Some­ thing  tremendously  important must be said, something  that  doesn't  fit easily into traditional structures,  so how can I find a way to say it? Eli Mandel's comments on the "Child  figure" in regional literature  are useful here : "the  child's vision ... is of home;  and  that  surely is the essence of what  we mean  by  region, the over­ powering feeling of nostalgia associated with the place we know as the  first place, the  first vision of things, the  first clarity of things.  Not  realism,  then,  but  rather what  in painting  is called magic realism...."6   This  nostalgia  for  a lost Eden  is nearly identical to "a suffering native to human beings," that  Ruth  Nichols writes about: "the  conviction that we belong somewhere  else:  homesickness.m And,  as the attempt  to say the inexpressible about  childhood  generates  (Mandel tells us) "magical  clarity,  mistaken  for  accuracy," so Nichols'  homesickness generates  a style of fantasy  which she has  the singular  courage  to claim is more  "realistic" than  realism  because it is more  true  to the  way things  are.  I would  argue  that the  impulse  for  magic  realist  writing  stems  from  the  need  to  convey  a  living experience,  that  the  interweaving  of realistic  convention  with  magical  elements is not done for its own sake but to produce that symptomatic eerie shimmer  which must be seen as an attempt  to express what is nearly inexpressible.

12

KERSLAKE



MIDDLEWATCH now appears  to me to be a work of magic realism. That this genre  is not yet fully understood  would  account  for much  of the  difficulty  reviewers  had  with  the  book. The  surface  narrative is relatively simple. Eleven  chapters  alternate between  a  present  time  and  a  past  time  se­ quence.  In  the  present  time  sequence,  Morgan,  the school  teacher  in a  remote village by the sea, finds a  young girl, Sibbi, abandoned in  her  brother's  cabin. Her hair has been cut off; she's been beaten and left tied to the bed. The experi­ ence has left her mute  and  crazy. Morgan  takes her home  with  him and  tries to heal her. The past time sequence follows Sibbi from birth  to the point she's found by Morgan.  After  giving  birth  to her, Sibbi's  mother  dies. When  Sibbi  is five, her older  brother,  Jason,  takes her away from  her foster  parents  and  leads her out  into  the  wilderness. Jason  builds a cabin  and  carves  out  an  existence as a sheep farmer.  He regards Sibbi as a tool to help him  in his  rigorous pioneer life and  disapproves  of her  desire to go to school. Jason  is hurt  in an  accident  and brought  back  to his cabin  by gypsies who live in the  hills. Sibbi later  goes back to the caravan  with a gypsy boy and makes love with him. Jason  finds out about it, goes mad,  and  destroys  everything.  It is not  until  the  end  of the  past  time sequence that  we understand the full implication of the opening  chapter: Jason left Sibbi tied to the bed to die.
In  the twenty-three reviews of Middlewatch I read,  an  inordinate amount  of ink is wasted  in speculations  on  the  time  and  location  of  the  story.  The  only details that  indicate  a modem  time are the presence of electric lights, trains, and buses; we are  told  nothing  of life in  the  cities far  from  the  village. Kerslake's setting  corresponds  to the  Maritimes  in much  the way Sheila  Watson's  Double Hook  country  corresponds  to the  Cariboo  in British  Columbia  and  for similar reasons:   no  effort  is made  to  establish  an  exact  locale  or  time  because  such specificity would limit  the  possibilities of mythic resonance.  Kerslake does, how­ ever, go to great  pains  to build  us a  real world, describing  the  school  and  the objects  in  Morgan's teacherage, pointing  out  such  mundane details  as  Sibbi's chapped  lips; she observes all the standard narrative  devices of  realism, so much so that,  given  the  romantic clichesa  lonely man  in  a  remote  village, a  hurt young  girl,  gypsies in  the  hills, the  sea,  a  storma  superficial  reader  could
easily label the book a gothic or romance  (as, indeed, many of her reviewers did) .
Beneath  the surface  narrative, however, are additional levels which Kerslake has taken  some pains  to conceaol r at  least to render  as unobtrusive  as possible.
The  tension between  the  realistic surface  narrative  and  the deeper  levels creates the shimmering, multi-dimensional effect symptomatic  of magic realism.
Most  of the  reviewers did,  to their  credit,  notice  that  "something else" was going on in Middlewatch, but few of them had much of an idea what that some­ thing  else might  be  beyond  noting  that  it  was "mythic."  Ironically,  both  the

KERSLAKE

highest praise  and  most vigorous condemnation of the  book came from  writers who  never saw  beneath  the  surface.  Much  of the  difficulty  the  reviewers  had with Middlewatch arises from  Kerslake's elliptical  presentation  so necessary for her magic realist effect. She does, however, supply  plenty of sign posts pointing in toward  the  first level beneath  the surface  narrative, that  of archetypes  from myth  and  folklore. Sibbi is a sibyl; indeed  Sibyl is her given name.  Jason  with his sheep  is seeking  the golden  fleece of crude  capital  accumulation. Morgan, as a young man  on a quest, has "come  to the  ends of the  earth"; his name  in Welsh means "a dweller by the sea."
"When  Sibbi was born under a bush, her mother  died in the effort,"  Kerslake begins the story of Sibbi's origins, and continues in the same matter-of-fact tone, telling us how the children leave their foster parents  to go off into  the wilderness together. The tone is that of a folk tale. Compare  one of Grimm's tales:

Brother took his little sister by the hand  and  said,  "Since our  mother died  we have not  had  one  happy hour.... Come,  we will go out  into  the  wide  world  together." All day they walked  over meadows, fields, and  stony  paths....8

The  motif of a brother-sister  pair wandering  alone in the wild is an  ancient  one and occurs in many  folk tales. As soon as Kerslake  has established  the reference, she gradually  shifts the tone away from folk narrative into that  of realistic  con­ vention  until  we are  being given again  the  careful  detailing  of  day-to-day life which recreates the illusion that  we are reading  a realistic novel.
An example  of Kerslake's elliptical presentation  is found  in the opening  pages of the book. "The crimson geranium," she begins. "Fretted edges casting shadow pools on the softer colour of petals beneath. Dew-fed in the window-box."  Ildik6 de Papp Carrington objects:  "This doesn't seem to have any discernible narrative function.  It  is an  image  described  for its own  sake,  as in  imagist  poetry."11    In the face of such wrong-headed  criticism, I hope I can be forgiven for attempting an elucidation. The  crimson geranium  is not  an  image  like something  William Carlos Williams  would use; it is a symbolist device and,  as such  is not  by now exactly  a novelty.  It  does require  close attention. Sibbi  is tied  to  the  bed;  the geranium  is what she is seeing. Morgan  calls her  name,  and  she shuts  her  eyes. "The name is. The  crimson asserts itself under  her eyelids ... as if someone were calling her name,  gently, and it turned  into colour."  Now Sibbi is the geranium (just  as she is associated  with growing  plants  throughout the  book) . Then  the colour, which is her name, her self, turns to the colour of blood:  "She  is fleeing the ravages of blood, her blood." Sibbi is the blood sacrifice  (like Jason's  lambs) who must  be slaughtered  to be reborn.  At  the  end  of the  book she  returns  to Jason's cabin and finds the geranium  dead: "She  took the dirt and dry roots and crumbled  them in her hands. To dust." Only by the full recognition  of the death of her old self can she begin to live again.

KERSLAKE

Nearly  all of the  crucial  turning  points of the  book are  as carefully  hidden; indeed the references to "hide  and seek" and "lost and found" recur throughout, as when Sibbi and  Morgan  first meet and  he tells her, "It's okay to come here, I came too, just now, and found you." To which Sibbi replies simply:  "Found." Eventually,  as I followed out thematic  connections, I began to feel as though  the author  herself were playing hide and seek with the reader and to hear at the back of my mind  (although it is never mentioned)   that  grand  old  chestnut  hymn: "For  I was lost, but now am found, was blind, but now I see."
Sibbi's  name,  Sibyl, is given  to her  by "a  cold  white  woman."  When,  as a
small  child,  she  begins  to tan,  her  brother  wants  "her  winter-white  skin, pale, elusive, able  to evoke spirits."  She sees Morgan  "in  the grey-white second-hand light  of the  moon."  She  seeks "the  moon ... cold and  blue."  Wounded  by his axe, Jason  sees Sibbi  "pale,  as if she belonged  back in night."  Morgan  sees her as "a  pale skimpy girl"  with "sunless skin."  In all cases, Kerslake's emblematic labelling of her characters is as insistent. Sibbi, then, is the moon, associated with women's  mysteries and  blood. Her mother  dies bearing  her, in a flow of blood; Sibbi,  too,  will die  and  be reborn  like the  moon.  Jason  is the  sun,  associated with gold and  with  predatory  birds-hawks  and  eagles. Morgan,  the nutritive teacher,  is associated  with water  (the sea)  and  growing things;  like Sibbi, he is rooted  to  the  earth.  The  gypsy boy, as Chaviva  Hosek  points out,  "stands  for uncomplicated sexuality....  The  girl's  movement  from  one  male  figure to  an­ other shows the transformation of the child to an adult  and symbolizes the process of coming to wholeness.0010




ONCE wE'vE BEEN  ALERTED  to  the  mythic  level, we  can begin  to  understand how,  in  the  interplay  between  characters   as  people  in  a realistic novel and  characters  as archetypes,  Kerslake's  magic realist style works. Jason,  as  David  Helwig  points  out,  "is  a  Canadian archetype ... and  he  can attain  the discipline he needs to dominate  the world only by destroying things in himself."11    (He  is also an  archetype  older  than  Canadian, echoing  Osiris  who would domesticate  wild nature  and  take his sister to wife.)  He regards Sibbi  as a chattel,  a domestic servant  to aid him in carving  out  property  from the land; in the first image we're given of him, he is standing  in the doorway to the cabin, blocking,  with  his outstretched arm,  Sibbi's  way out  to the  world.  As long  as she  remains  confined,  tied -the  tied  image  recurs : Sibbi  is  tied  to the  bed; Morgan  ties her  to him  when  they enter  the storm;  Jason  not  only  ties Sibbi, he's tied to  her-she  has no existence;  as moon, she shines by reflected light. Like  O'Hagan's Tay  John   at  his  birth,  she  doesn't  even  cast  a  shadow.  Tay John  is given  a shadow  to make him  human; similarly, Sibbi,  after  her sexual

KERSLAKE

encounter with  the  gypsy boy, is forced  uncomfortably into  the  human world: "They"  (the   other   school  children)  "could see  her  shadow, a  betrayal." To Morgan, Sibbi  first  appears as  an  elusive  wild  girl,  cousin  to  Rima in  Green Mansions.  (In this context  it is interesting that  O'Hagan,  perhaps Canada's first magic  realist,  mentions W. H.  Hudson as one  of  the  influences on  his work. 12 ) After she "dies" in the explosion  of Jason's inner  fire, Sibbi  is reborn  as the  mute Sibyl,  and, as Hosek  writes,  her  "silence  is a  constant temptation to  the  reader and  to  Morgan. It teases  us into  reading   her  through our  own  wishes,"  which is as good  a definition as any  of Jung's "Anima." She  is also Morgan's muse,  his child,  and  his potential lover.  The  sexual  attraction between Morgan and  Sibbi is given  in typically  elliptical  fashion.  After  her  sexual  initiation with  the  gypsy boy, "She  considered the  teacher  who was also a man, now  that  she knew some­ thing  concerning men."
By now  we  have  enough  information to  make  clear  sense  of  an  elusive  but crucial   passage  near  the  opening of  the  book.  Morgan has  just  rescued  Sibbi. The black  horse mentioned belongs to the gypsy boy.

He  [Morgan] saw her in the snow that  winter,  in a gypsy shawl  of wann  wool. He saw her  riding a horse, black as pitch  in the  white  hills, but  Jason still came down with the old dun  pony. When she wandered  into school in the rising of the year, he saw in the set of her lips a different  kind  of knowledge and  she seemed to sit more surely in her seat. As if her centre  of gravity  had  shifted;  as if her  pit was no longer where her quick heart  beat, but  had  sunk  to her  womb. Her  body flowed now, was no longer driven about  like the weeds.
Morgan  held  that  body now. It  was as if something  had  to kill her  before she
could be either  captured  or saved. He had found  her, but only after  she had  been trapped  and  tied.

Morgan takes  on  the  project  of  curing  Sibbi  both  out  of  hubris-his  sense of self  as  a  teacher-and out  of  his own  loneliness   which,   initially, he  can't admit  to himself.  He  returns from  the  busyness of  the  village  with  his head  full of plans:

His instinct  was to force her, to shake  that  covering  off, to squeeze some sound out of her. She had cried once; she had  touched  him once, she could do it again.
. . . As he walked home ..., the wind matched  ills own energy.... The  fascination
of order, pattern  and symmetry. His perseverance,  his will to endure  fire and  sur­
vive.

But  when  he tries  to force  her  back  to the  world,  she smashes  the  window  with her  elbows;  later  he finds her  beating her  thighs  with  her  fists. Despite  his good intentions, he is getting nowhere.  And,  as Hosek notes, the narrative style matches the story: "The lyricism,  the lingering over  detail  for  its own  sake,  is like Sibyl's holding  back  in order  to be healed  in her own  time." Morgan's next  attempt to break  through has  an  air  of desperation about it.  A  hurricane is approaching;

16

KERSLAKE


he feels "the  peculiar  tension and pressure of calm," and says to the girl:  "This  is what it's like in your head,  isn't it, Sibbi, this deadly grey, the weight of silence
...?" He  ropes Sibbi  to him and  takes her out  to watch  the storm  come in;  it is an act of sympathetic magic. They're nearly blown away but  manage  to crawl back to the house. Morgan  realizes that  he's overreached  himself;  his reflection is one of the few moments  of humour  in the book : "Morgan was momentarily glad she was still mute;  she wouldn't  tell tales of his foolishness." And  he has learned  "a  secret" from the storm. For the first time he reaches out  to Sibbi, not to help her, but needing  her help:

"Oh, Sibbi,  Sibbi," he said sadly. "What?"
"Sibbi ?"
"What is it?  What's the  matter?" Her  voice held real  concern....

It's  the first time she's spoken since he found  her, and,  as soon as she does so, she's swept away  by a seizure. "Her  voice," just as one would expect  the sibyl's to be, "had  been deeper  than  he had  imagined.  It  wasn't  a child's  voice; ... It was unnerving, the way she spoke; so organized."
Chapter 9 is the  emotional  heart  of the  book and  contains  the  most dense, elliptical, compact,  and difficult imagery, but also passages of Kerslake's most beautiful  writing:

The uneasy  months when  the sickly and  old were watched closely.... The  months when  the  latitudes were  surely  northern, when  the  sun  appeared now  and  again, far away, like the pale flag of a foreign  country on the horizon....

As Hosek notes : "The watch between midnight and four in the morning is called
'middlewatch' ;  the  novel  exploits  the  suggestion of  watchfulness,  waking  and waiting  for light  implicit  in  the title."  It is:  "The lean  lull  at  the  edge of the new year. The  time of the year when the Norsemen had  rolled the wheel of fire, twined  with straw,  from  hilltop to the winter sea," and,  in this frozen darkness, Morgan  sinks to  his  psychic  nadir; all  he  can  do  is wait  and  watch.  "What happens  when  one  lives so close to the sea ...?"  he wonders-so  close to  the dark  waters  of the  psyche-"right there,  at  the edge, you're  lulled,  stunned." He  can't  connect  with  the  people in  the  village;  even  in  the  "warm,  brown, rowdy"  tavern,  he's  a lone  watcher.  Mter  learning  the  secret  from  the  storm, he now knows what  he fears most : that,  when he reaches  down  inside himself "there could be emptiness beneath  the cold smooth stone."  He sleeps and dreams that  he  hears  a  voice:  "Don't please don't,  no,  no,  please  don't, no,  no,  no, please...." The voice is Sibbi's, re-enacting the terrible moment  of Jason's attack on her, but Morgan  claims the voice as his own:  "And  his despair, to which ... he felt a right. He wasn't  one of those who are betrayed from  outside. If he was to be destroyed, it would be from within." Sibbi gets up. Morgan  sees her "sun-

KERSLAKE

less skin"  and  "the two points of her breasts." Here  is Morgan's temptation, and, like Saint  Anthony's, it comes accompanied by demons. Sibbi,  connected to  the underground world,  is directly  aware  of them: "They were  trying  to follow and find  Morgan." But  his  perception is  more  distanced:  "There  were  voices,  or perhaps it was the last whispering of the fire."

Where had she gone; why couldn't  he follow? He was lonely and afraid.
He took her straw-blond head in his hands, caressed her cheeks with his thumbs.
Each  time it began as if he were touching a stranger  and  the stranger  in himself.

Morgan's spiritual task  is enormous. To  save  Sibbi, he  can  no  longer   keep himself  distanced and  safe;  he must  find  a way  to experience her  directly, as in his dream. But  he  can  ask for  nothing in  return, and  he  can't allow  himself  to be dragged down  into  emptiness  with  her.  "Turning her  round, she  lay  in  his arms," Kerslake writes,  and, in fracturing the  grammar of the  sentence, merges the characters as nurse and  patient  merge in Bergman's Persona. And  throughout this dark  night  of the soul, Morgan "held more  tightly  to the only living  thing  in his world."
As  the  present   time  narrative has  been  unfolding, so  has  the  past.  Morgan resists the  temptation of hubris,  but  Jason   does  not.  He  sees the  natural  world only as something to be exploited. His sister is a tool for him  to use quite  as much as his sheep  dog  or  pony: "That she should  want  anything, be separate in  any way, was as foreign  to him  now as it ever had  been." His struggle  is turning him to  ice: "For Jason   the  shape  of  everything had   become   deadly   serious.  Sibbi watched his  hands holding  a  knife-blade against  the  grinding stone. . . . Bears stood  in  his eyes...." But,  as we all know  by now,  those  whom  the  gods  would destroy,  they  first  make  mad.  Jason  accidentally strikes  himself  on  the  forehead with  his axe  ( "labrys," the  two-headed axe,  may  be  the  root  of  "labyrinth"). While Jason is recovering, confined  to the cabin, Sibbi  is freed  to form  her liaison with  the  gypsy  boy  and  grow  into  sexual  knowledge. She  is separating  herself from  Jason; he can  regard  such separation only as a betrayal.

One  night in midsummer  when all the forces of the earth  and  sky were pulling against each other, Jason broke apart.  The  hawk slanted  out of the sky and struck its talons through  his head and heart. There  was no escape; he was almost relieved. He would fight but he would lose. The  hawk would carry him off. But he fought, he fought  by destroying everything he would have to leave behind.




BuT WE  ARE  NOT  FINISHED.  The heart of Middlewatch can­ not  be reached without an exploration of what  might  be called  Kerslake's medi­ aevalism. Hosek  points  out  that  the  novel  appears to  demand  treatment  as  an allegory, that it is possible to read it "in  very schematic terms," but  her statement

KERSLAKE


that  "It is not  clear  what  point  Kerslake  is trying  to  make  by  putting all  these figures  at  the  fringe of the  community," is symptomatic of  her  unwillingness to attempt such  a reading. "Story-tellers," Michael Ondaatje says, writing  of  O'Ha­ gan's Tay  fohn, "are separate from  the source  of power.... In  the superb scene in which  Tay  John fights the  bear,  Jack  Denham, who  witnesses it, is separated by a raging  river  he cannot cross but  which  is only  two yards  wide. He is unable to cross over  into  the  arena of pure  myth.m3  Similarly, Jason  and Sibbi  must  be separated from  the  mundane, civilized order  of the  village;  they  are described  as living "on  the  horizon, in a bank  of fog" -that is, at the  very edge of conscious­ ness where  myth  repeats itself forever.  Morgan, who is drawn  both  outward into  the  mythic story  and  inward to  the  life of the  village,  is a  bridge  across  which  myth  may pass safely back  into ordinary life. In  this role, he is a priest who  must transfer the  numina without being  destroyed  by it. And  the myth  retelling  itself behind  the veil of fog is Kerslake's version of Eden.
The  Edenic motif  is established early  in  the  book  when  Morgan remembers Sibbi  coming  in "a golden  Indian summer's day before school was open," that is, in the golden  dawn of time  before the creation. She writes in a scribbler: "Jason. Dog. Sheep.  Tree. Hill," and  creates  the  world,  then, "Sibbi. I am  Sibbi.  Sibbi. Sibbi," and  defines  herself  in the  created  world.  Later the  Edenic motif  is made fully explicit  in the  Hopkins poem  Morgan reads  to Sibbi :
What is all  this juice and  joy?
A strain of the earth's sweet being in the beginning
In Eden  garden. Have,  get, before it cloy,
Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning....
To  read  Kerslake's Eden  myth,  we must see a third  level beneath those of realism and  symbolism, that  of allegory.  If here  I appear driven   to  an  exegesis that   is nearly  Kabbalistic, I can  only  argue  that   it  is clearly  demanded by  the  text : allegory  is didactic, religious.  To  understand it, we must  treat  the  characters as personifications.
In  Kerslake's version,  the  fall  occurs  with  the  death of Jason's mother, The Great   Mother who  bears  Sibbi  on  the  earth and  dies in  a  wash  of blood.  From the  death of The Great Mother, consciousness  arises and  the  division  into  male and  female,  the sun  and  the  moon.  Sibbi is the female  principle in its tender  and undeveloped form,  Jason   the  male  principle in  its  acquisitive, questing form. Separated from  the  primal union  with  The  Great   Mother, The   Male  Principle strikes out  against the  natural world  (natura), which  is the  body  of the  Mother, and  enslaves The Female  Principle (the  shift from  the goddess  religions  to patri­ archy  at  the  basis of Western civilization). Separated from  each  other, the  Male cannot  love, the  Female cannot act  (shine  with  her own light). When the  Female meets  Innocent Delight   (the gypsy  boy)   and  learns  knowledge,  the  dominant position  of  the  Male  is threatened and  he is driven  mad.  The  acquisitive, con-

rg

KERSLAKE

trolling  force  in  him  is turned back  on  itself,  and   he  must   destroy  the  world because  he  cannot love it.  The  Male  kills the  Female, and  when  she  is reborn again,  she  is mute  and  hdpless. The  only  way  out  of  this  dead-end is for  the Male  Principle to appear in  another form,  as  Morgan, the  Nutritive Male.  He must give up the  attempt to conquer or dominate the  Female, allow  her  to grow in her own time; he must be able to stare  into  the storm  (Untamed Nature), risk being  destroyed  by it, without attempting to own  it or  use it.  He  must  continue with  infinite  patience, expecting nothing;  in  short, he  must  become  a  saint­ which, in this context, can be read  as "feminine." Then the  Female can be reborn  as a whole  person  with  the  possibility that  the  Male  and  Female can  be reunited and  the world  redeemed.
As Borges claimed, "the solution  to the  mystery  is always  inferior  to  the  mys­
tery."14 But the  book still stands  intact. Of  all the symbols  in  Middlewatch, only one,  the storm, cannot be transformed into  anything else. After  the  storm,  Mor­ gan  "shared a secret  with  the  earth   that  he  wasn't sure  he  wanted. He  didn't know  what  to  do  with  this  new  experience. Almost  everything he  had  learned before  had  a  purpose, practical or intellectual. Here  was  an  immaculate  knowl­ edge, an  awe  that  had  involved  bone,  blood  and  brain. Yet  when  he  consciously called  upon  his brain, the knowing  evaporated into  the  translucent sky...." And,  as Gershom  Scholem, writing  of the Kabbalists, tells us:

The  thing which  becomes a symbol retains its original  form  and  its original  con­ tent.  It  does not become, so to speak, an empty  shell into  which  another  content is poured;  in itself, through  its own existence, it makes another  reality  transparent which cannot  appear  in any other  form. If allegory can  be defined  as  the  repre­ sentation of an expressible something by another  expressible something, the mystical symbol is an expressible representation  of something  which  lies beyond the sphere of expression and  communication, something  which  comes  from  a  sphere  whose face is, as it were, turned inward and away from us.15

Sibbi  walks  out  into  the  psychic  waters   of  the  sea.  Morgan follows.  "She mustn't drown," he thinks. She's  crying. She reaches out  to him.  He  touches  her, but she pulls away.  Then she takes his hand. "When you're ready," he tells her. But  "perhaps he'd   been  too  sure  she  was  looking   at   him."  Middlewatch  has eleven chapters. In  a book so carefully  linked  to the seasons of the year, we would expect  twelve.  We  put  the  book  away  on  the  shelf  but  continue to read  it.  Will the  sibyl  speak?   In  the  silence  left  behind   is  Kerslake's twelfth chapter. Such
resonance is the  way, at best, that  magic  realism  works.



1 (Ottawa: Oberon, 1976.)
 NOTES

2  Michael  Ondaatje, "Gacia  Marquez   and  the  Bus  to  Aracataca," Figures  in  a Ground, ed. Diane Bessai and David Jackel  (Saskatoon: Western  Producer  Prairie Books, 1978), p. 25.

20

KERSLAKE


3 Geoffrey  Hancock, "Magic Realism, or,  the  Future of Fiction," Canadian Fiction
Magazine, No. 24/25 (Spring/Summer I977), pp. 4-6.
4   Robert Scholes,  The Fabulators (New  York:  Oxford, I967), p. I2.
5  Susan  Sontag, Against  Interpretation (New  York:  Dell,  I969), p. 271.
6  Eli Mandel, Another Time  (Erin, Ont.: Press Porcepic,   I 977), p.  so.
7  Ruth Nichols,  "Fantasy and  Escapism" (Canadian Children's  Literature, No.  4, I 976) , p. 26 and  passim.
8  The  Juniper Tree   and  Other Tales   from  Grimm, Vol. I (New   York: Farrar, Straus and  Giroux, 1973), p. 42.
9   Ildik6  de  Papp Carrington, "Amor Vincit  Omnia," Essays on Canadian Writing,
No.6  (Spring 1977), pp.  I34-36.
1° Chaviva Hosek, "Middlewatch," Fiddlehead   (Summer 1977), pp.  I34-36.
11  "First Impressions," Books in Canada   (November 1976), p. 38.
12  Howard O'Hagan mentioned the  influence  of  W. H.  Hudson on  his work  in  my interview with  him  of July  17, 1979.
13 Michael Ondaatje,  "O'Hagan's  Rough-Edged Chronicle," Canadian Literature,
No. 6I  (Summer 1974), p. 28.
H Quoted in  Luis  Harss  and  Barbara Dohmann, Into  the  Mainstream (New  York: Harper and  Row,  I 967) , p.I 2 I.
15  Major Trends in Jewish  Mysticism (New  York:  Schocken, I96I), p. 27.



GR:liNDMOTHER'S  DE:liTH ROOM

Christopher Wiseman

High  summer with its sun and  voices and  you withering quickly  now, dissolving  in the great  tree's  shadow,
in the moving  shadow of that  chestnut
roaring its leaves outside your window.

Never  friends, we were forced  together at  the end  and  you had  no choice
but  to let me care  for you.
It was the  closest we had  ever been
in that  room  cooled  by the tree  and  the years.

I thought you would  admit at  last
that  you  needed  me, speak  words of gratitude, confess a long misjudgment.
But  I was wrong,  should  have known  you better. Your  body failed  before your pride.


21

POEM

The  dead  don't care.
We're  left alone  to salvage  what  we can. Your  death  was a convergence
and  we met,  once, briefly,
and  that  is all.



OCTOBER ELEGY
(Judith Sloman I91D-Ig8o)



The sharpness  of it.
The sharpness  in this warm  autumn,

leaves cracking and  falling, the sky mild  and  enormous.

The sudden  sharpness lays it open  like a razor,

like a blade cutting leaves, shredding the sky,

moclcing the ordinary. We are  wide open.

And  winter  waits for us,
to cover  the ground, smother the sky,

bury  the consoling gold.
What we will be tests us now.

Leaves swirl. Wind  rises. There is falling  all around  us

and  we feel it in the  bone. Indifferent, the weather moves,

changing its directions.
The worst is here and  we are  not  ready.

We are sliced beyond  hope,
pared  into small portions of cold.
 



Christopher Wiseman


22


THE ARTIST AS PICARO The Revelation of Margaret Atwood's "Lady Oracle"


Lucy M. Freibert





IN WRITING  HER  TH<RD   NOVEL, Lady  o,ac[e ( •976) , Mar­ garet Atwood earns for herself the title of seer which she applies to her book and to her  protagonist.  Casting  her  work in the  picaresque  mode, she  turns on  end the  myths  and  fairy  tales  which  have succoured  and  seduced  women  for  ages. She satirizes the novels, magazines, films, and cultural  patterns which have served them  as escapes  as well as traps,  and  in  doing  so, reveals  the  precarious  and enigmatic  fate of women in general and of the woman artist in particular. Deal­ ing primarily with those aspects of the culture which affect women most, Atwood shows that,  given  this  chaotic  world,  its  pervasive  romantic conditioning,   and its traditional sexual arrangements, it is almost inevitable  that  a creative  woman turn  into a picaro in order  to survive. Atwood's deftness in conveying her vision of the  perplexity  of woman's  existence  lies in  the  thoroughness  and  originality with which she exploits the conventions of the picaresque  mode.
Since  the  picaresque  novel emerged  in  sixteenth-century Spain,  it  has  been
adapted   in  diverse  contexts.  Representative   works  range   from   Lazarillo    de T ormes   ( I 554), The  Life   of Buscon   (I 626),  The   Adventurous  Simplissimus (1668), and  Moll   Flanders   (1722)   to  The  Adventures of  Huckleberry  Finn (I884), Invisible Man (I952), and The  Confessions  of Felix  Krull: Confidence Man  ( I954). The  accretions  of  centuries  make  a  clear  definition  difficult  to formulate.1  Although  opinions  differ, scholars do agree  on some essentials. The story  is told  from  the  first-person  point  of  view2    by  a  protagonist   usually  of uncertain   origins.  Thrust into  society early,  and  left  totally  dependent on  the whims of Fortune, she or he is cast from one adventure  to another, each of which allows freedom,  in  Guzman   de  Alfarache's  terms,  repeatedly   "to  beginne  the world anew."3  The  resulting story is, therefore, episodic in form. The  protagonist also passes from  one  master  to another.  In  order  to survive  within  the  master­ slave relationship,  the  character learns  to live by her  or  his wits and  gradually develops into a picaro, or rogue -a protean figure who repeatedly changes forms and  disguises to suit the occasion.4   The  picaro consorts with  rogues of all classes and from them learns the fine points of deception. Moving through  various strata

23

ATWOOD

of society, the picaro exposes a panoramic sweep of the culture. The chaotic world thus revealed burgeons with surprises and always threatens  death. Despite the precariousness of the picaro's life, indeed because of it, the narrative is riotously comtc.
Atwood obviously knows and utilizes not only these characteristics  of the pica­
resque but  also numerous  variants  evidenced  in  Spanish,  German, British, and American  works. She organizes  Lady  Oracle  in  an  intricate five-part  structure beginning and  ending in Terremoto,  Italy,  with repeated  shuttlings  to and  from Canada, England, and  Italy. Atwood interrupts the linear  progression with fore­ casts and  flashbacks  which pick up the threads  of various  relationships.  Within this framework  her  protagonist Joan  Delacourt  Foster  meets all the requisites of the picaro: Joan  questions her parentage,  sees herself as an outsider,  becomes a rogue in the midst of rogues-several of whom  she serves in  master-slave  rela­ tionships-externalizes her internal  instability by assuming multiple  roles, some­ times simultaneously,  and tells her story so dramatically that the reader  is vicari­ ously drawn  into  her  chaotic  world. Atwood  intersperses  the  episodic  narrative with  Joan's  dreams,  her fantasies,  her  automatic writing,  and  a  parody  of the gothic  novel  akin  to  Cervantes'  parody  of  the  romance   in  Don  Quixote. In addition, she inserts a series of  motifs which provide  poetic cohesion to the struc­ ture  and  picaresque  surprise  to  the  narrative. Within   this  complex  form,  the protagonist-narrator  appears  as  lonely, disoriented,   and  continually   fearful  of accidents, exposure, punishment,  near madness, and  even death.
Atwood  alters the picaresque form slightly by adding  a touch of the  Kuntsler­ roman. Her  protagonist  gains insights through  each  experience,  as does the  pro­ tagonist of the Kuntslerroman, but realizes it only much later. Atwood also strays from  the  picaresque  tradition  by ending  the  narrative in  the  midst  of an  un­ finished episode  rather  than  in a  period of stasis.  Through these  variations  she suggests that  while woman is coming to see the  roots of her difficulties, her  new role is still in the  evolutionary  process and  the  oracle's  riddle  is yet to be com­ pletely untangled.



ATwooo's MAJOR ACHIEVEMENT  in the novel is the creation of  her  protagonist-narrator. To  some  extent,   Joan   is  another   version  of  the "divided   self"  which  Atwood  developed  in  Marian  McAlpin  of  The   Edible Woman (I g6g), the "I" of Surfacing  (I 97 2),  and  the  personae of some of her poems.5    Like her  predecessors, Joan  sees herself  as a  victim,  an  outsider,  in  a hostile world which threatens  to engulf her; she also senses, as they do, that  there is within  her  another,   capable  self struggling  to  be  born.  She  works  out  her struggle in a series of episodes, trans-oceanic  in scope and  increasingly  threaten­ ing to her psyche. Yet, in picaresque fashion, she lives to tell the tale.

24

ATWOOD

Atwood portrays Joan  as a counterpart of Moll Flanders, a disarmingly honest narrator of a patently  dishonest life. Throughout the narration, Joan  emphasizes her victimization  by repeatedly  referring  to her failure and  her fears, telling the story of her searing pain in an offhand  manner  that makes for great comedy and wins sympathy  for even her wildest schemes.6   Her absolute honesty in confessing her lies, tricks, and  deceptions  becomes, in itself, a confidence game  which lulls the reader into a misguided trust in Joan's  ability to interpret her experiences.
The sense of victimization  which Joan  endures throughout her life stems from three  different  but  interlocking  factors.  Family, fortune,  and  fiction get  her  off to an uncertain  start,  and the instability which results is heightened  by her imag­ ination.  Her  parentage and  home life are ambiguous. She realizes that she is "an  accident," a  child  her  mother  does not  want,  and  during  her  early  years she experiences  her  father   only  as  an  "absence.m   Joan   rather  suspects  that   her mother  was pregnant  before marriage  and  wonders about  her mother's  relation­ ship with the young man in white flannels pictured  in the family album.  Home is a series of increasingly larger  houses which correspond  to her father's  upward mobility.  Plastic  covers keep  the  furniture clean  for  visitors. Bedroom  slippers protect  the  floors. In  this  changeable,  artificial  atmosphere,  Joan  feels isolated and  lonely.
Joan's  sense of rejection  and  loneliness is intensified by a second factor: it is her fortune  to be fat. Joan  realizes that  her ballooning figure is a constant  affront to her mother; yet she continues to eat voraciously to gain weight which will put an even greater  distance  between them.  Joan's  hunger,  unlike that  of Lazarillo de Tormes,  is a hunger  for love; eating,  therefore,  becomes for  her  a means  of psychological survivaP
Although  Joan  sees her  obesity as a formidable  weapon  against  her  mother, she  perceives its two-edge  nature.  She  also realizes that  it  will keep  her  from having the romantic life which the myths, fairy tales, novels, magazines,  movies, and television promise to those who are pretty and proper. By her own admission Joan  is "hooked  on plots." Her fictional world includes the Cinderella  story and Andersen's  mermaid  myth,  her mother's  historical novels and  her father's detec­ tive fiction,  nineteenth-century gothics, good  and  bad,  and  countless  romantic  movies which she sees with Aunt  Lou, her father's  sister.9   Joan  not  only knows the  romantic stories, she also understands  their  basic assumptions  and  implica­ tions. The  great  irony  of her life is that  one  part  of her  wants  to  be  beautiful  and  slim like her  mother,  wants  the  glass slipper  to  fit, wants  the  glamour  of Joan Crawford, for whom her mother named her. The other part longs to achieve something  significant.  Seeing  no possibility of attaining  either  goal, Joan  turns trickster.
Atwood  introduces   Joan   to  roguery  at  an  early  age.  When  Joan's   mother refuses to  hold  her  daughter on her lap,  Joan  turns  to Aunt  Lou  for love and

ATWOOD

understanding. At intervals she attempts  to please her mother,  but these occasions always end in disaster. Gradually,  Joan  begins to associate her mother's  image in the  triple  mirror  of  the  dressing  table  with  the  three-headed  monster  in  the museum.  When  her mother,  humiliated  by Joan's obesity, suggests to the  ballet teacher that Joan  can be changed from a butterfly into a mothball  for the recital, Joan  takes on the role with a vengeance. Having  learned  the dance  to perfection, she is able to cause total confusion among  the  butterflies  and  win the "bravos" of the audience.  The  bittersweet success becomes a turning point  in Joan's life. "Joan the  exploiter"   joins "Joan the  victim,"  putting   the  world  of  romantic beauty  on  the  defensive for  ever  after,  even  though  it  continues  to  maintain outposts in her head.
Power becomes Joan's substitute for the romance  which other  girls and  women seem to  have. Joan  snoops among  her  mother's  things,  not  out  of  curiosity­ she already  knows everything -but merely for  the  sense of  danger  which  the ventures  afford.  She  exploits her  mother  with  a sinister  glee,  cheating  her  out of a life to manage. She watches as her mother compensates  for this deprivation, first, through   work,  and  later,  by  drinking.  Joan   plays  her  last  tricks  on  her mother  by beginning  to lose weight  and  by  leaving  home,  but  not  before  she has pushed her mother to the point of physical violence.
Having  given Joan  this apprenticeship in  roguery,  Atwood  turns  her  into  a Protean  picaro, who assumes many roles and  guises, either  successively or simul­ taneously, and  who eventually  becomes an expert  escape  artist.  It is significant that  throughout her life, Joan  consciously chooses to have other  lives and  recog­ nizes that  she  has  had  many.  Even  in  her  youth,  she  was  "hoping  for  magic transformations." By the end of the  novel, she admits  that  the  real romance  of her life has been that "between  Houdini  and his ropes and locked trunk; entering the embrace  of bondage, slithering out again."
While shifting shape from fat to thin, Joan  Delacourt  becomes an international
'

ATWOOD


meet his, she takes a lover, the Royal Porcupine. When Fraser Buchanan  discovers her  secret  life, she  turns  blackmailer  in  self-defence. Finally,  to  maintain   her sanity, she feigns drowning.  Like the true picaro, although  she lives each of these lives with zest-often  with excruciating  pain-none of her lives seems real.
The  devious world, which  prompts or forces Joan  to assume these many roles and  guises, abounds  with  characters  who  themselves play  multiple,  often  anti­ thetical,  roles. Her  mother  is both  Beauty  and  the  Beast, the  rejector  and  the ubiquitous  astral  presence which Joan  cannot elude. Her  father,  an anaesthetist, acts as a killer during  the  war  and  a reviver afterward. Joan's  companions  in scouting are both protectors  and torturers. The daffodil man, a pervert who gives her  flowers, seems replicated  in the  person who rescues her  when  the Brownies tie her to the  bridge.  Arthur, her  prince, is a  pauper  in  the  realm  of romance. Aunt  Lou, Paul,  and Leda  Sprott  also play dual roles. Exposure  to these roguish figures convinces Joan  that  dishonesty is the norm  rather  than  an aberration. In her  words, "honesty  and  expressing your feelings  could  lead  to only one thing. Disaster.''
Atwood  draws  most  heavily  upon  the  versatility  of the  picaresque  mode  in treating the  central   experiences  of  Joan's  adult  life-those  surrounding   her marriage  to Arthur.  According  to the romantic  tradition, marriage  should  have become a stabilizing factor.  Within  the picaresque context,  however, it becomes just the opposite.  Joan  finds herself constantly forced  to rebuild  her  world,  her chief resource and  means of escape being her literary imagination.
Predictably,  Joan  meets Arthur  by chance, but the circumstances  are far from
romantic. She walks through  Hyde Park, composing Escape  from Love, by which she hopes to escape from  Paul.  As her heroine feels "a hand  on her arm, and  a voice, hoarse  with  passion,"  breathe  her  name,  Joan  feels a  hand  on  her  arm and screams. The next thing she knows, she "is lying on top of a skinny, confused­ looking young man." This inauspicious introduction  and their grotesque wedding portend  the hectic state of their life together.
Joan  tries  to  be  what  Arthur   expects,  but  just as she  could  not  please her mother,  neither  can she please him. Just as she could not communicate with her father, she now finds it impossible to communicate  with Arthur.  In the beginning Joan  pays the  rent  with  the  proceeds of her gothics, under  the  pretext  that  the money is coming from  odd  jobs and  an inheritance -a  minor  dissimulation  in relation  to  her  future  duplicity.  Arthur  follows his "paths" of reform  one at  a time, changing  his theories  constantly.  Eventually,  he returns  to school and  be­ comes a political science teacher,  while Joan  seems caught  in "thickets, ditches, ponds, labyrinths,  and  morasses," metaphors for the picaro's  trail.
Sometimes, Arthur  enjoys Joan's  unpredictability, but  at  others  he complains that  she has no goals. Like  Paul,  who tells her that  she has no discipline, and the Royal Porcupine, who accuses her of having no motives, Arthur  never gives

ATWOOD

her any support. The  irony is that  Joan  surpasses all three  men  in creativity.  A further  irony  is that  Joan  will not  reveal her  success with  the  gothics,  because she thinks Arthur  would not respect her for them.  She is often  irked  by having to hide  her success, but  when even the Royal  Porcupine tells her  that  she is a threat  to  men,  she  realizes that  she  must  hide  the  truth   from  Arthur. She  is convinced  that  the dishonesty of the picaro is the only safe policy for her. Since Arthur  will not let her have children, she turns her entire energy to writing. What was at first a means of economic security becomes a secret career, a substitute  for marriage, and a springboard  to other lives-the taking of a lover and the writing of poetry.
The  way in which Atwood intertwines  Joan's multiple  occupations  heightens the tension  and  speeds up the action.  In  writing  the gothics, Joan  lives out  the romance which her socialization has promised but which reality has not produced. She creates characters  whose appearances  and  personalities are extensions of her own:  both the men and  the women have her fiery red hair,  her green eyes, and her capacity  for deception  and  intrigue.  Charlotte and  Felicia,  the  beloved and the  wife  respectively  in  Stalked  by  Love,  correspond   to  the  antitheses  of  her current  dilemma.  Through struggling  with  their  problems, Joan  strives to work out her own. Like herself, both are active characters: Charlotte repairs  jewellery in order  to  be economically  independent; Felicia  takes lovers to satisfy  herself when  Redmond   is otherwise  engaged.  In  order  to  complete  the  novel  in  the gothic manner,  Joan  must kill one or the other.  She has already  saved Charlotte dozens of times. Now, when she is struggling  to preserve her own  marriage, she wants to save Felicia.
Having  reached  an impasse, Joan  seeks the answer through  automatic writing. Although  the  process does not  furnish  an  immediate  solution  for  the  novel, it does produce the poetry which becomes Lady Oracle. The  poems deal with male­ female relations in terms and images which touch  her life so closely that  Arthur is totally alienated. He is angered that she published the poems without consulting him, and  he is chagrined  at the fame which they have brought  her. Conscious of his frustrations,  Joan  sees herself as a monster  like her  mother. Typically,  Joan finds a temporary escape. Fame brings the Royal Porcupine into her life.
As the writing  helps Joan  work out  her romantic longings and  marital  prob­ lems, so does her subsequent affair with the Royal  Porcupine enable  her  to sub­ limate  her sexual  desires. He is everything  that  Arthur is not.  He  dances  with her eagerly-she  wrapped  in a lace tablecloth  and  he clad  in  only  a  top  hat. He is an  underwear freak, easily aroused  by the sight  of Joan  in  her  bilingual weekend bikini briefs. He is so like Joan  in his romantic  notions and  appearance that  he seems to be one of her fantasies. When  he shaves off  his beard,  scraps his opera  cloak, and  wants Joan  to live with him, she drops him. Faced  with her failure as a wife, the end of her affair, the pressures of  success, the reappearance

ATWOOD


of Paul, who wants to kidnap  her, and the appearance of Fraser Buchanan,  who threatens  to  blackmail  her,  Joan  seems cornered  at  last. She steals Buchanan's notebook to silence him, plans her death by drowning, and escapes to Italy, where in her seaside hermitage, she struggles with the problem  anew. But even in that retreat,  Joan,  like her German  counterpart Simplissimus, realizes that  her  peace may be short-lived.11
Still another  aspect  of the picaresque is brought  out  in Joan's  relations to the men in her life. Paul,  Arthur, the Royal Porcupine, and  Fraser  Buchanan  serve successively as Joan's partners  in the master-slave relationship.  Paul  functions  as her mentor  in the realm of fiction, but as soon as she learns to write the gothics, she escapes his grasp.  Arthur acts as her master  within  their  marriage,  putting innumerable strictures  on  her,  chiefly that  of forbidding  her  to  have  a  child. Joan  eludes his domination at first by continuing  to write  the gothics and  later by taking the Royal Porcupine  as a lover. The Royal Porcupine  in his tum  begins as a benevolent  master,  but gradually,  he, too, becomes so demanding that  Joan needs to escape.  Buchanan maintains  his control  over Joan  only briefly, for  as soon as he discovers her secret, she steals his blackmail  notebook and  turns  him into her victim. The  manipulation which Joan  learns from each of these masters is subsequently  employed  in typical picaresque fashion to obtain  her freedom.



IN THE  FEW BRIEF CHAPTERS of Part  Five, Atwood puts the final touches  on  Joan's struggle  for freedom  and  brings  the  revelation  of  Lady Oracle into focus. She does not work out the solution in a logical narrative. Rather, she draws together  the principal  motifs of the novel:  the mirror,  clothes, appari­
tions, doors, the maze, and the dance, and filters their implications in episodic segments through  Joan's distraught  mind.  Taunted by fear  of discovery and  of isolation, Joan  reaches a degree of tension which almost completely fuses reality, fantasy, and  dream.  Like a true picaro, however, she thrives on even this psychic danger, and finally comes to terms with the problem of illusion and reality. In the isolation of her Italian retreat, she sees the images of her life fall into place like the fragments of a kaleidoscope and offer her a real escape.
All her life she has gazed into mirrors of physical and social composition  and has been influenced  by the images they reflected-her mother,  the  beauty  and the monster;  herself, like Alice in Wonderland, fat and  thin;  herself, in the  cos­ tume gothics and mirrored  in the eyes of Paul, Arthur,  and  the Royal Porcupine. She realizes that  as long as she lived by these illusions, she was  uncomfortable, but, in a sense, protected, like the Lady of Shalott weaving in her tower. But once she stepped  to the  window, looked on reality, allowed  Lady  Oracle  to be  pub-

ATWOOD

lished, risked being  a  public  figure, she was no  longer  safe.  Like  the  Lady  of
Shalott, she had to pay for her freedom with death.
Joan's  next illumination  comes some days later,  when  Mr.  Vitroni  returns  the escape clothes which she had buried beneath the house. She had always recognized the significance of clothes as reflective of the  people  who wore them : she  trea­ sured  Aunt  Lou's  old  fox scarf,  shied  from  her  mother's blue  serge  suit,  and resented  the  disposal of the  clothes of the  dead.  When  she  began  writing  the costume gothics, she studied books on clothes, believing that  if she got the clothes right, everything  else would fit, for clothes were the symbols which  kept  people in  their  places. When  her  heroine's  clothes were slashed,  burned,  and  buried, they would always be replaced  with  more fitting  attire,  indicative  of the  better life to come. The  return  of  her  old  clothes indicates  to  Joan  that  she  cannot really bury her old self. The  picaro does not change  character. Joan  understands that  the  Italian  people see through  her disguise, even  though  she has dyed  her hair,  put  on  dark  glasses, and  donned  a  print  dress.  There  is  no escape  from reality.  In  her  isolation,  the  mirror  begins  to  crack,  the  truth   underlying  the myth begins to emerge.
After a fearful  day, Joan  has a nightmare  in which  her  mother's  astral  body
appears  at the window. Seeing her mother's  tears, Joan  tries to reach her, to tell her that  she loves her. Her  mother's  spirit  has appeared at  important points in Joan's   life.  All  this  time,  Joan   thought   that   her  mother   was  following  and watching  her disapprovingly.  Now she senses that  she, not her mother,  produces these visions. She recognizes her mother's  image  as "a  vortex,  a dark  vacuum" which she could never  please. She realizes that  she  must  not  live to  please her mother or anyone else, that she must "dance for herself alone."  Joan  had  begun to sense this  when she saw  the  fountain  of Diana  of Ephesus  in  Tivoli,  which seemed to symbolize woman's being poured out for others. Now, that earlier inclination  is confirmed.
This experience is central to the novel. Once  Joan  recognizes that  the spirit  is of her own conjuring,  she sees her mother  also as a victim,  the  Lady of Shalott, always looking at  life through  the  mirror.  When  her  mother  finally looked  on reality, she, too, died, or was killed by her husband,  by Joan, by the roles which society expected her to play, but chiefly by the romantic conditioning which made beauty,  wealth,  and  romance  supreme.  When  the  beauty  and  romance  disap­ peared,  the  wealth  did  not  satisfy. All her  managerial gifts were  unused, and,  therefore,  wasted.
Having  shed the illusion of her mother's  vigilance, Joan  understands that  she must stop  hiding  behind  closed doors, that  she  must  pursue  her  own  life  and develop her talents. She cannot expect Arthur  to provide support.  As Joan  begins to dance,  her  butterfly  wings return,  the optimistic  caterpillar of the  "Road of Life" story comes out of the cocoon. But as she dances,  Joan  crosses the  broken

30

ATWOOD

glass and  cuts her feet. She  now  has the  real red shoes of the  movie. Like the mermaid, she knows that  if she wants to dance, or even to walk, she will have to give up something-the comfort  of the traditional  role. Joan  props  up  her feet to stop the bleeding and determines to walk despite the pain. She recognizes the  mermaid   as a female  monster  and  sees herself in  a  comparable role. She reasons that  perhaps  her mother  named  her for Joan of Arc, not Joan  Crawford. Joan  of Arc  heard  voices. She was burned  at the stake and  only  her  heart  sur­ vived.  In  her  pain,  Joan  goes to  pick  up  her  mail.  She  learns  that  Sam  and Marlene  have been accused of her murder  and  realizes that  she must somehow save them. She also discovers that  her gas tank has been drained, preventing  her departure, and that  a young reporter  is on her trail. She decides not to panic but to complete Stalked  by Love and to await the next whim of  Fortune.
At this point  Atwood  once more exploits the Protean  nature  of the  picaro  to
effect Joan's  escape. Having  realized that  she must tum  away from  the mirror, shed her fear, and enter the maze of life, Joan attempts to write the final chapters of the costume gothic. Boldly, she sends Felicia into the maze. There  Felicia finds the astral  bodies of Charlotte, Joan's  mother, Aunt  Lou, and  Joan  herself as the Fat  Lady, complete  with butterfly  wings and  antennae.  When  all of them claim to be Lady Redmond, Felicia understands  that  all wives are one. She opens the door at the end of the maze, knowing that she will find the minotaur of the myth. When  Redmond appears,  he immediately  begins a series of transformations: he turns  first into Joan's  father,  then  the Daffodil man, Paul,  the Royal Porcupine, and  Arthur. Joan's  suspicions are confirmed: the men  behind  the  doors are  all Bluebeard.  Having  fantasized  this incident,  Joan  is prepared  when  the reporter knocks at the door. She opens it and hits him with the Cinzano  bottle. Surprising even herself, Joan  does not  take  his car  and  escape. Mter  all, she, like Joan  of Arc, has a heart.  Steeped  in her nurturing role, she gets him to a hospital, stays around  to see how he is, and  prepares  to return  to Canada to rescue Sam  and Marlene  and  to tell Arthur the whole truth,  even if that  means losing him.  In a pensive moment,  Joan  decides that she will write no more gothics but will tum to science fiction,  The  gothics  are  somewhat  passive and  are  based  on  hope. Science fiction, on the contrary,  is active. Based on vision and  invention,  it can make things happen.
Joan  does not  reason  these things out.  Like a true  picaro,  she slips from  one
episode to another.  In  the end, she admits  that  only through  striking  the  news­ paper  man  did she learn  that  she could defend  herself. Moreover,  only  through fantasizing  the courage  to open  the door of the maze did she get the courage  to open  her own door.
Through the metaphor of Joan's  life then, Atwood suggests that  women must
begin to imagine themselves capable of doing and being whatever they would like. They  must  no longer  look into  the  mirrors  which  society holds  up  to  them  as

ATWOOD


reality.  They  must  no longer  barter reality  for  a  pseudo  security, for  in  the  end there  will always  be  death.  Rather, they  must  face  life  head-on. They  must  no longer  hold  to the  wife-mother role as it has  been  interpreted in  the  past.  They must  exercise  their  autonomy, insisting  that   they,  like  men,  have  paths  to  take, that  they  no longer  wish to be caught like scapegoats in the  mazes,  thickets, and brambles of life. They  must  demand that  men  share the  nurturing role.  When that  arrangement is made,  men  will no longer  be the  minotaurs to whom  women are  sacrificed, women  will be free  to pursue interesting and  challenging careers, and  children will see both parents as autonomous beings, equally  respected within the social framework. She suggests, too, that  women  must  make  paths  for  them­ selves; they must dance  and  try their  wings, even  if their  feet bleed in the process. They   must  face  the  responsibility  of  telling  the  truth, or -and  here  Atwood  leaves the door  open -continue to be picaros.

NOTES

1 Recent  studies of the picaresque include  the following:  Stuart  Miller,  The  Picar­ esqu,e Novel   (Cleveland:  Press of Case Western  Reserve Univ.,  1967); Alexander A. Parker,  Literature and  the  Delinquent: The  Picaresque   Novel   in  Spain   and Europe  1599-1753  (Edinburgh  Univ. Press, 1967); Ulrich  Wicks, "The Nature  of the Picaresque  Narrative: A Modal Approach," PMLA, 89, No. 2  (March 1974),
240-49;  and  the special issue "The  Picaresque  Tradition," College  Literature, 6,
No. 3 (Fall  1979). The latter contains an excellent  bibliographical  article  by John
P. Kent  and  J. L. Gaunt.
2   Claudio  Guillen,  "Toward a Definition  of the  Picaresque,"  Literature as System: Essays toward  the  Theory of Literary  History   (Princeton: Princeton  Univ.  Press,
1971), pp. 71-106. Guillen considers the first-person point of view the sine qua non
of the picaresque.
3  The  Rogue, or  the  Life  of Guzman de  Alfarache, trans.  James  Mabbe,  4  vols.
,(New York: Knopf, 1924), IV, p. 220.
4   I have chosen to use the term  picaro throughout rather  than  to employ  the  fem­
inine form  picara in some instances.
5  John  Wilson Foster, "The  Poetry of Margaret Atwood,"  Canadian  Literature,  74 (Autumn  1977), 5-20, provides an excellent  introduction to Atwood's  work. Also see the special Atwood issue of the Malahat Review, 41  ( 1977).
6  A study  of  Atwood's  generic  use of  the  comic  may  be  found  in  Frank  Davey,
"Lady Oracle's  Secret:  Atwood's C01nic Novels," Studies in  Canadian Literature
5, No. 2 (Fall  1980), 209-21.
7  Margaret Atwood, Lady  Oracle  (New York:  Simon and  Schuster,  1976).
8  Wicks, p. 246, identifies hunger as a picaresque  theme:  "Hunger is what Lazarillo's life is all about."
9  Dorothy  Dinnerstein,  The  Mermaid and  the   Minotaur  (New  York:   Harper & Row, 1976), a study of traditional  sexual arrangements and society's reluctance  to change  them,  provides an excellent  psychological  counterpart to  Atwood's  novel. It is interesting  that  these two books drawing  on the monster myths were published in the same year.

ATWOOD


1'0  Throughout the  novel,  Atwood  seems to  use names  and  images  from  other  pica­ resque  novels  for  parodic effect.  For  example, the  Hermes and   Mercury  figures form  a  significant motif  in  Thomas Mann's Felix  Krull. In  the  same  novel  the protagonist's alter ego is Loulou. Madame Houpfle  writes  under  her maiden name,  Diane  Philbert. In Lady  Oracle, Joan  refuses to identify  any  longer with  the figure of Diana of Ephesus, the  mammalian fountain in Rome. Howard  Mancing, "The Picaresque Novel: A Protean Form," College  Literature, 6, No.3  (Fall  1979), 196, considers  the "consciousness of genre" characteristic of the picaresque.
11 Miller,  pp.   1 16-q, discusses  Simplissimus'  recognition of  the  tentative nature of rest.









]IN]ILYSIS  WITH ]I SWIMMER

Ron Charach


The  albums offend  with  the repetitive goodwill of other people's  families:
look! this one at  the summer-house, that  one  taken  nude,  yet smiling
saying   you were afra.id of being  framed in the  whit,e-tiled  room

and  the  painful brain  would  not let go without them  home;
the sound  of their sedan
crushing gravel  and  lighting  the  hill sent  him  off
till ineffective morning
and  the long day with  the working others,
... children who somehow  work

and  now in the empty  dining-room,
the fireplace too troubled to know the fire, he dreams of analysis with a swimmer
who can  surface  what  was scuttled. Who will refuse  to let a thing  go by,
the  child's voice
calling  all  night  into  the hall?


33

MARIAN ENGELS "BEAR"


DonaldS. Hair



MARIANENGEL's Bear has received a good deal of pop­ ular  attention,   part  of it  from  readers  who  are  attracted  to  the  sort  of  thing promised  by the  blurb  on  the  cover of the  paperback   edition: "The  shocking,
erotic novel of a woman in love." The  promise, one  notes, is, for the most part, kept,  but  the  novel is likely to be of interest  for  a good  deal  longer  than  most books of this sort because it is much more than  the story of a woman in love with a bear.  In fact,  the novel can be read on several levels, and  there  is much  in it to delight the academic  critic as well as the casual  reader.
One  starting  place for the academic  critic is the  classification of a  work,  the attempt  to see it in  relation  to other  works. If we start  in  this way  with  Bear, we must say that it is a romance, and that the conventional action of  romance­ the quest in search of treasure  which is guarded  by a monster -lies behind  the action of this novel. "I don't  suppose you found  any buried  treasure," Joe  King says to Lou, and Lou herself is aware of the pattern  when she thinks of the word "Treasure" in going through the trunks in the basement. Here we have a realistic version of that romance action : a journey undertaken by an archivist to catalogue the contents of a house, material  which may be valuable for historical or literary reasons; the only inhabitant of the estate is a bear. But this external  action is not the novelist's main concern. Indeed,  Lou finds little of  lasting  value in the house, and,  contrary  to expectations  when  the  chief setting  is an  old  and  mysterious house, there are  no surprises to be discovered. At the end,  the  house is "empty" and  "enormous": "She  had  not found  its secrets. It  was a fine building,  but  it had no secrets."
More important than  outer events is the inner  action.  The  story is an account of the renewal of Lou herself, a rebirth, or  (in  psychological terms)  the achieve­ ment of an integrated personality. At the beginning  of the  novel, Lou  is a frag­ mented  individual,  with dried-up  feelings and  a barren  intellect;  at  the end, she is healed  and  whole,  and  she feels "strong  and  pure."   We  are  alerted  to  this pattern,  perhaps  too obviously, by Lou's first postcard  to  the  director: '"I  have an odd sense ... of being reborn.'" But if the reference to the nature  of the action is obtrusive,  the  patterns  by which it is worked  out  are  satisfyingly subtle  and complex.
Some  of  the  patterns  are  familiar  and  central  to  Canadian  literature. One

34

ENGEL


notes, to begin  with, that  Lou's journey is from south  to north, and  that  its nature can   be  defined   by  the   baseland-hinterland  distinction  which,   W.  L. Morton argues,  runs  through every Canadian psyche.1. The  south  is an  urban waste land, associated  with  winter, decay, fragmentation, and  the  colours  brown, yellow, and gray.  The  north is a  bush  garden, associated  with  spring, a lost  childhood, fer­ tility,  and  the  colour  green.  The  specific scene  of Lou's  renewal  is an  island  in the  District  of Algoma, and  one thinks of similar  scenes of rebirth, like the  island in  Shakespeare's The  Tempest   or  in  Atwood's Surfacing.  There is nothing  un­ usual  in  Engel's use of these  patterns and  images.  It is with  the  house,  rather, that the novel begins to take on a special character.
The  fact  that  the  house  is central may  perhaps be traced  back  to Engel's first concept of the  book.  It was, she  told  an  interviewer in  the  Toronto  Star,  to  be a short  story  for  an  erotic  anthology to  be  published   by  the  Writers' Union of Canada:
'I  thought,  "All  pornography takes place  in  an  isolated  palace,"  so I  built  my isolated palace-the white octagonal house-then in walked a bear. I don't know where he Caiile from,  just from somewhere in my psyche.
'Well,  it  was  no good  as a  pornographic  story, but  the  idea  was  too  good  to waste, so it becaiile a novel.' 2

The  "isolated palace" in  pornography represents the  fulfilment of sexual  desires, its isolation  providing the freedom to act out such desires without the  usual social or  moral  restrictions. The "white octagonal house"  retains the  character of  its pornographic  predecessor, but  goes considerably beyond  it  to  suggest  the  fulfil­ ment  of desires that are  wider  in scope and  more admirable in character.
The house,  Lou  tells us, is "a classic Fowler's octagon." Fowler  was an Ameri­ can,  a phrenologist (a  fact  of some relevance to this novel,  as we shall see), and  an  amateur architect, who  championed the  building   of  octagonal  houses.  The title of his book on domestic architecture (first published  in I 848, revised in I 852,  and  reprinted several  times  after  that)  indicates that his  was  to  be  a  house  for the  people: A Home   for All or a New, Cheap, Convenient, and Superior  Mode  of Building. 3   And  indeed  his book became the source  of a  popular movement in American architecture. There are  Canadian  examples of  octagonal houses  and  barns in  Ontario and   Nova  Scotia  and, probably, in  other   provinces as  well. Fowler   argues, largely   in  practical terms,  for  the  superiority of  the  octagonal over  the square or  rectangular house: there  is a better  and  more  economical use of space,  there  is better lighting, and  there  is  a  better  relationship among   the rooms.  Clearly, in  Fowler's view, the  octagon  represents a  more  advanced state  of civilization than the square or rectangle.  (Hence it is significant, I think,  that  the  bear  in  Engel's novel  occupies   the  original log  house,  which  is square or rectangular, and  hence  primitive.) But  at  the same  time  Fowler  argues  that  the octagon  is  more   natural  than   the  square, since  "Nature's  forms   are   mostly

35

ENGEL

SPHERICAL," and since "the  octagon, by approximating to the circle, incloses more space for its wall than  the square...."4
Lying  behind  Fowler's  argument-and behind  the  octagonal  house in  this
book -are the ancient symbols of the square  and  the circle, and  their  union  or synthesis in  the  octagon.  The  square  has long  been  associated  with  earth,  and the circle with  heaven, the old alchemical  problem  of squaring  the  circle being an  attempt  to bring  about  the  marriage  of these opposites.  While  the  problem could never be solved, its solution could be approximated in the octagon, the intermediary form  between the other  two. Hence  the  octagon  was a symbol of unity and  perfection  (though  it was not perfection  itself),  and  was thought  of as showing the way toward  the integration  of all things.5   With  these facts in mind, we begin  to  understand Lou's  early  response  to  the  "incredible house" : "She could hardly believe its perfection."
Its perfection,  we gradually  realize, is to become hers  (since  the house  repre­ sents the wholeness and  the regeneration  that  she is seeking), and  again,  Fowler gives us the key to this pattern. In  the first chapter  of A  Home   for All, he sets out, as a basic principle of house-building, the correspondence between the design of the house and  the characteristics of its inhabitants: "The better  a man's men­ tality,  the better  mansion  will he construct,  and  the  characteristics of the  house will be as those of its builder  or occupant."6    This  identification  of  house  and inhabitant is an  interesting  one, especially for a  phrenologist,  and  Lou's  throw­ away remark  about  the octagon, that  "its phrenological  designer  thought  it good for the brain," is to be taken  more seriously than  she realizes.  For the structure of the  house will come to symbolize the makeup  of her  character. We note, in passing,  that  the  estate  is called  Pennarth, and  that  the  name  means  "bear's head." These  two phrenological  allusions link the  house  and  bear  as the central factors  in Lou's  experience, and  it is her  exploration  of the  two that  will bring about  her renewal. The  transformation is indicated, much  later,  when she turns around  to look at  the house, and  finds it  "no  longer  a symbol, but  an  entity."  As Lou  explores the house, we begin to realize how  closely it corresponds  to
the makeup  of a human  being. The  first floor is associated  with ordinary  waking life;  here  the  parlour,  the  kitchen,  and  the  bedroom  are  located,  and  here  the basic needs of the body are  met : shelter and  warmth,  food, sleep, and  sex. The second floor is associated with  the  intellect. The  library,  representing  "a  sharp and  perhaps  typical early nineteenth-century mind," takes up most of this floor, and here Lou finds the brass and leather  telescope and  the celestial and terrestrial globes, symbols of a  wide-ranging  understanding. The  basement  has links  with the subconscious and  memory:  it  contains  trunks  with  blankets  from  the  First World  War,  and  dresses from  the 192o's  and  193o's.  At  the  very centre  of the house is the staircase;  it is the axis of the  building  and,  because its foundations are in the basement and its top under the lantern, it links all the levels. One notes

ENGEL


that   ascending and  descending this  staircase  are  constant actions  in  the  novel, and  one begins to sense that these movements symbolize  the movements by which Lou  integrates the  various parts  of her character. The  counterpointing of ascents and  descents  has its focus  in two  recurring movements, opposite  in direction but similar  in  that they  both  suggest  integration : the  bear  ascending the  staircase from  below, and  the sunlight flooding  down from the lantern above.
In  this context, the epigraph, from  Kenneth Clark's Landscape into Art, begins
to  make  sense: "Facts become  art  through love,  which   unifies  them  and  lifts them  to  a  higher  plane  of  reality; and  in  landscape, this  all-embracing love  is expressed  by light." Facts  are scattered and  isolated things,  and  correspond to the fragments of Lou's life. Art  unifies, integrates, and  raises such  facts  to the highest human level,  which  is symbolized by the  lantern of  the  octagonal house. Light pervading the  whole structure effects such  integration.
The  epigraph draws  the  reader's attention to one main  agent  of integration in the  novel;  the  title  introduces the  other,  and  more  obvious,  one.  For  the  bear operates at  each  level  represented by the  house.  Lou  must  renew  her  memory, her  body,  and  her  mind, and  each  must  be brought into  a  proper relation  with all the others.  The bear  is central to this process.
Let's  start  with  the intellect or understanding, since this is the faculty that  Lou must  use in  her  job. As an  archivist, she must  catalogue the  books,  and  make  an inventory of  the  contents of  the  house.  Her  task is "to card  and  classify,"  and her  working life is filled with  "things to  be counted" and  "things to  be edited." But  catalogues and  lists  have  inherent limitations; their   order   is a  mechanical order, and  the  connections and  patterns that  are crucial  for  a full  understanding may  be scarcely  apparent. Lou  recognizes  the  deficiences  of her  usual  activities, and  looks forward to  insights  of  a  better  sort: "As  far  as  books  went,  she  was concerned  with  their  externals only.  Here,  she  would  have  time  to  read." But when  new  feelings,  emotions, and  insights  force  themselves upon   her,  she  falls back  on  her  old  intellectual habits: "She  tried  to  concentrate on  externals, on her  cards,  on  her  notes"; "she  always  attempted to  be orderly, to catalogue her thoughts and  feelings...." But at last she asks the crucial question:

What  was the  use of all  these cards and  details and  orderings?  In  the  beginning they had  seemed beautiful,  capable  of making an order  of their  own, capable  of being in  the  end  filed  and  sorted  so that  she could  find  a  structure, plumb  a secret. Now, they filled her with  guilt;  she felt there  would  never, ever, be  any­ thing as revealing  and  vivid as Homer's  story, or as relevant.  They  were a  heresy against the real truth.

I shall  return to Homer's story,  and  try to explain  why  it is "the real  truth," but we must  first try  to define  the  part  that  the  bear  plays  in  Lou's  growing  under­ standing.

37

ENGEL



l:E RENEWAL  OF   LOU'S  MIND might,  one  would  think, in­ volve the recovery of the animal stories she has read, and  the ordering  of  Colonel Cary's  notes on  bears. But in fact  the  renewal  is symbolized  in  more  concrete ways, by the bear's  ascent of the stairs, by his standing  upright  like a  man,  and by his grinning.  The  upright  posture is a  popular  symbol of  intelligence -it  is "that posture  that  leads the bear  to be compared  to the  man" -and  so is the bear's sense of humour.  After Lou  has followed Lucy's advice  ('"Shit with  the bear'"), she laughs, and "He looked as if he was laughing too." Lou laughs again when they are both battling mosquitoes:  "'Oh bear,' she laughed.  'We're a funny pair.'  He  turned  around  and  quite  definitely  grinned." If there  were  to  be  a Canadian bestiary, the laughing  bear, standing  or sitting  upright, would  have a central  place in it. One remembers the bear totem, "every  bit of him ... merry,"  that  Emily  Carr  discovered at  Gittex;7    and  one  remembers,  too,  Roberts'  re­ peated  assertions that  the bear is the most human  of all the  animals,  his intelli­ gence being symbolized by his sense  of humour, and  by his grinning  when  he has tricked man whose senses are less keen than  his.8   In the bear, then,  body and mind  are thoroughly integrated,  and  he is, therefore,  an appropriate creature  to preside over Lou's renewal.
If the  bear's  ascent of the stairs leads to  the  revitalizing  of Lou's  intellectual life, his entry into the bedroom leads to the revitalizing  of her physical life. Like Lou's carding  and  classifying, her sex life has no connections  with anything  else. She has picked up a man on the street;  she has had  a lover who made  her have an abortion; and she has weekly sex-"but  no love"-with the director,  on a desktop spread  with old maps. One  notes that  Lou wants "human contact," and hence it seems strange  that she should  fall so deeply  in love with  the  bear,  and that  the orgasm to which he brings her should  be so powerful.  But it is precisely this experience  which  leads  to the  renewal  of  her  fully  human  self, a  process which  can  be seen clearly in  the  breaking  and  re-establishing  of  the  taboo  of bestiality. The  breaking  of the  taboo  is crucial  since, when  a  barrier  as strong as that  is broken, all barriers  begin to fall, and  a  new unity  can  begin forming itself. But Lhe re-establishing of the taboo is equally crucial. The  barrier  begins to reappear  when Lou becomes aware of the fact that she has broken it. Instinctively she turns to human  contact, and tries, unsuccessfully, to find release with Homer. The  climactic  moment  is Lou's attempt  to have intercourse  with  the bear: "He reached  out  one great  paw and  ripped  the skin on  her  back."  In  terms  of the realism  of  the  novel,  the  bear  is simply  proving  to  be  the  wild  creature   that Homer  has regularly warned Lou about.  But in symbolic terms, the bear  releases Lou  into  her  full human  identity  by marking  the  limits of kinship, and  finally separating animal  from  human.  The  pain  and  the  blood  suggest a  birth,  and certainly  Lou feels that she has been reborn : "she  was different. She seemed  to

ENGEL


have  the  body  of a much  younger  woman." Lying  with  the  bear  beside the  fire, "she  was a babe, a child,  an innocent."
What  had  passed to her from hlln she did not know. Certainly  it was not the seed of heroes, or magic, or an  astounding  virtue, for she continued  to be herself. But for one strange,  sharp  moment  she could  feel in her  pores and  the  taste  of her own mouth  that  she knew what  the  world was for.  She felt  not  that  she was at last human,  but that  she was at last clean. Clean and simple and  proud.

To  know  "what the  world  was for"  is to sense the  relations of all things,  and  to understand one's  place  in that  complex  pattern. The wound, her  birth-mark ("I shall  keep that, she thought"), is the emblem  of that  position: "she  remembered the claw that had  healed  guilt. She felt strong  and  pure."
This  integration of body  and  mind  sometimes  suggests  an  order  of being  that
is more  than either. This  order  is symbolized   by  the  lantern at  the  top  of  the house,  and  manifests itself,  in  the  early  stages  of Lou's life on  the  island,  in  all those things  which,  to her orderly  mind,  seem to go beyond  reason.  Chief  among these  are  Colonel Cary's notes  on  bears.  They  are  not  filed or  organized in  any way,  but  are  stuck  at  random in various  books, and  Lou  finds  them  by chance. Finding slips of paper in this way is exasperating for Lou -"She wanted to pick up  each  of his books and  shake  them  till the spines fell off" -but she  responds, as she always  does initially, by being the archivist: "she  carefully  filed and  dated his  note,  marking its  envelope   with  the  name  of  the  book  it  fell  from." One notes that  there  is no logical connection between  the  books and  the slips of paper, and  hence  it seems  curious that  Lou  should  file the  note  in  this  way.  "Perhaps when  she was very old she would  return and  make  a mystical  acrostic  out  of the dates  and  titles  of these  books and  believe she had  found the  elixir  of life."  The tone  suggests  that Lou  habitually rejects,  or  makes  fun  of,  anything that   goes beyond  reason, but  she  continues to date  the  notes, and  even  to record  the  time when  she finds  each  of them.  "She  wondered, as she  did  it,  why  she  was  doing it; if she were  trying  to construct a kind of I Ching  for  herself.  No: she did  not believe  in  non-rational processes, she  was a  bibliographer, she  told  herself.  She simply  wanted the  record  to be accurate."
The  "non-rational processes" to which  Lou, in spite of her protestations, is instinctively attracted  are  those  of  the  imagination, particularly as  it  embodies itself in myth.  The materials in Colonel  Cary's notes are often  drawn from  myths, legends,  and  folk tales,  and  to each  of the  notes Lou  responds in ways that  con­ nect  the  bears  of the  human imagination with  her bear.  This  making of  connec­ tions  between  the  imagination and  actual experience is as crucial  as  the linking  of mind  and  body,  and  the  notes, seemingly  so unconnected, do in fact  fall  into a  pattern that   Lou  gradually comes  to  realize.  That  pattern is  the  circle.  To  begin  with, Lou's recording of the  time  and  date  suggests  an  attempt to link  the notes  with  the  cycles of the  day  and  the  year.  There are twelve  such  notes  (one

39

ENGEL

is repeated,  so that  anyone  counting  the number  of passages in italics will find thirteen), and  twelve is the  number  of cosmic order.  Like  the  Zodiac,  which divides the circle or wheel of the heavens into  twelve subdivisions,  these twelve notes suggest a cycle which embodies the whole of human  experience, that  whole usually imaged as a move away from primal  unity, and  a return  to it. When  this movement  is embodied in a story, we have the myth of the birth,  life, and death of the hero. Colonel Cary's notes give us fragments  of this myth, with the bear as hero. There  is a miraculous  birth : "The  offspring  of a woman  and  a bear  is a hero"; there is a descent into the ordinary  world, where the  physical characteris­ tics of bears are listed and  classified, where bears are kept as pets or  hunted  and baited,  and  where the bone in the bear's  penis is used as a  coathook;  and  there is a sacrificial death,  and  a return  to a land  of "peace  and  plenty,"  "milk  and honey."
With this myth in mind, we can now begin to see clearly how the bear operates on all levels in  the  book. There  is the  actual  bear,  who  occupies  the square  or rectangular loghouse, which represents the earth  and  physical existence. There  is the  bear  of myth,  who is associated  with  the  circle,  which  in  turn  represents heaven and  the imagination. And there is a middle level, when the bear  ascends the stairs in the octagonal  house, and stands  upright.  The  bear  thus  connects or unifies all levels, and it is Lou's task to realize that  unity  herself. One  can  trace this process by looking at the con junction of square  and  circle, and  the eventual resolution of these opposing designs into one pattern.
The  struggle  is particularly   acute  in  chapters   xvii  and   xviii. When  Lou  is
irritable  and out-of-sorts, she is conscious of squares:

She  did  not  like  the  parlour. It was  full  of wrong-angled, unlivable corners,   the weakness  of  the  octagon. The furniture was squared and  sat  ill and  off-centred. Every  time she went  into  the room, it imprinted on her  the  conventional rectangle and  nagged.

But when she begins to make connections, circles appear. For instance, she invites Homer  to stay for a drink, "Because the wheels were going around  in her head, bells were  ringing,  she was understanding things."  On  her  radio,  she  picks up music coming  from  around  the  globe-another great  circle -and  the  music leads her to dance  with the  bear. The  dance  is a conventional symbol of a  dy­ namic  unity, but  what makes it interesting  here is the fact  that  the music which brings them  together  is a song about  parting.  Two  movements,  coming  together and growing apart,  are thus contained  within a single pattern, and suddenly  we realize that  Lou is acting out the new wholeness which is hers. Hence the separa­ tion at  the end of the novel is not  the collapse of that  wholeness, but  the  affir­ mation  of it. The  emphasis falls on  cycles which  are  being  completed,  like the turning  of the seasons :

ENGEL

Something  was gone between  them, though:  the high,  whistling communion  that had bound  them during  the summer. Where she lookied out the window, the birch trees were yellowing, the leaves were already thin.

Moreover, Lou  returns to Toronto, "taking the long,  overland route," and  thus completes a  cycle of  her  own  life. The  unity  is now  within  her,  and  it  is  sym­ bolized  by the  constellation-the Great  Bear  and  his thirty-seven  thousand  vir­ gins-that she sees overhead, and  that  itself views all the  cycles below.


IHAVE   BEEN  DEALING WITH  the   movement  of  the   novel largely  in  terms  of geometrical patterns, but  there  are  other   patterns which  en­
courage us to come at this same movement in different ways. One  of these is conventional in  romance : the  double  or  Doppelganger. This  convention has  a basis in  psychology,  in  the  individual who is at  war  with  himself.  In  this  novel, Lou  becomes aware of an "awful, anarchic inner  voice":

she could  not  understand why the  period  of redefinition  had  to be accompanied by depression, an existential  screaming inside herself, and  a raucous  interior  voice that  questioned  not  the  project  she was working on, but  her  own self. 'What  am I  doing  here?'  she  would  ask herself, and  the interior   voice would  echo,  'Who the hell do you think you are, having the nerve to be here?'

The  two  voices suggest  that  the  central  character is in  fact  two  characters, and the  division  of  one  by  two  is conventional enough   in  numerology. One   is, of course,  the  symbol  for  the  unity  of  all things;  two is the  symbol  of  division,  of the  separation of all  things  into  two opposing  forces: light  and  dark, good  and evil, life and  death, male  and  female.  The  conflict can  be hostile  and  destructive, or it can  be the  dynamic relation of two complementary forces.  Another way of describing Lou's renewal is to say that, in the course of her summer on the island, two opposing forces are  brought into  a dynamic relationship.
Those  two opposing forces,  in this romance, are  male  and  female.  Again,  the bear  is central, his role  being  understood best if we go  back  to  medieval  besti­ aries.9 There we  discover  that   the  bear  is remembered in  myth  and  legend  for both  his male  and  female  parts,  and  since  the bear  in  this book  plays both  roles, he  is a  symbol  of  the  dynamic union  of  opposing  forces  that   Lou  is  trying   to achieve.  As a symbol  of male  sexuality, the  bear  is associated   with  lust,  fornica­ tion,  and  sensual   pleasure, and   has  a  reputation as  a  good  lover. Lou   reacts  strongly   to  him   in  this  role;  sight  and  smell  are  acutely  conscious  of  him  as masculine : "she  got a large  whiff of shit  and  musk. [The bear]  was indubitably male,  she  saw...."  She  is  frightened, and   then  excited,  by  his  size  and   his strength, and   she  has  an  absorbing interest   in  the  exact   characteristics of  his genitals.  He  becomes,  for  her,  the  ideal  lover,  who  brings  her  to  orgasm  as  no

ENGEL

man  has been able to. These masculine aspects of the  bear  are obvious enough. But, as we read through the novel, we note that  the bear is, on occasion, described as a woman.  Indeed,  that is Lou's first impression  of him. He  has "a  scruff like a widow's hump," and  he seems "not  a creature  of the wild, but a middle-aged woman defeated  to the point of being daft...." And at the end, when Joe King takes the bear away in his boat, the bear is like "a  fat dignified old woman  with his nose to the wind in the bow of the boat."  These images seem casual enough, but they tip us off to the bear's female role, as described  in the bestiaries. There the  bear  is not  just male lust, but  the  nurturing mother.  It  is an  old idea  that bear cubs are blind and formless at birth, and are shaped  by the she-bear, who in this way becomes the symbol of the artist or creator.  What  is crucial to this novel is the way in which the bear shapes her cubs. She does so, according  to tradition, by licking them.  Hence,  all that  licking of Lou  is not  just a  near-pornographic description  of cunnilingus,  but  a symbol of the shaping of Lou, of the  creation of her new self. It is significant that, in spite of Lou's living "intensely and entirely for the bear,"  she fails to have intercourse  with  him.  What  gives her new life is the bear's  tongue -the female aspects of him -and  she becomes a child  pro­ tected  by the  great  mother: "She  realized  he was  watching  over  her";  "That night, lying clothed and tenderly beside him by the fire, she was a babe, a child, an innocent."
In  the  bear,  then,  there is a dynamic  union  of two forces, male and  female, and  the  bear's  wholeness is a  wholeness that  Lou  must  realize in  herself.  It  is for this reason that  Homer's story of the Cary  family  has such a profound  effect on  Lou,  and  embodies a truth  far  more comprehensive than  any she has  been able to obtain  through  cataloguing  and  filing. The  story is a story of male and female fused at last in a single figure. The first Colonel Cary was a man separated from his wife, who chose to remain behind in Toronto; the last Colonel Cary was a woman  who, though  unmistakably female, combined  the characteristics  of man and woman,  and thus made up for the division in her grandfather's life. Homer places considerable  emphasis, in  his narrative, on  the  union  of these  opposing forces in  Colonel Jocelyn  Cary.  There  is the story of her  name: she could  not buy a commission in the army, like her father,  so she was christened  Colonel so she could inherit  the estate. "'She was a fine woman,'" Homer  assures Lou, but he goes on to tell about  her drinking  beer like a man,  and  hunting  and  trapping like a man:  "'She was the first woman to wear  pants  up  here'"; "'She had  big hands  like a man...."'  In  uniting  the maie  and  female  roles, Colonel  Jocelyn Cary  thus  becomes a model for Lou. Lou has already  felt herself to be the heir of the Carys, and  now she is able to define her inheritance more precisely.
The  union  of opposing forces in her comes about  by a process which is con­
ventional  in  romance :  metamorphosis.  The   idea  appears in  the  only  one  of
Colonel Cary's  notes which is repeated,  and  the  repetition  seems to be designed

42

ENGEL

to draw special attention  to it. In this note, we are told that  Norwegians describe the  bear  as "the  old  man  with  the  fur  cloak."  The  phrase  suggests the  meta­ morphosis  of bear  into  man,  and  of man  into  bear.  We have  already  seen  the bear  becoming  man  when he stands upright  and  grins;  and,  in a  parallel  trans­ formation, man-or,  in  this case, woman-becomes bear  by  putting  on  his "fur  cloak."  One  remembers  the number  of times that  Lou  buries her hands  or her feet in the bear's  fur, "finding  it had depths  and  depths, layers and  layers," and  once she begs explicitly, "Give  me your skin." She does take on his musk:  "'You stink of bear,"' Homer  tells her. When  she looks at  herself in the female colonel's  pierglass, she sees a creature  with  brown skin and  wild eyes and  hair. And when bear and  woman lie by the fire, they are "both  in their pelts."
Though Lou does, in these ways, begin to seem like a bear, the transformation
does not take place in the way she expects. She imagines a magic change,  of the sort one would find in fairy tales:

It struck her when she opened the door to him that she always expected it to be someone else. She wondered if he, like herself, visualized transformations, waking every morning expecting to be a prince, disappointed still to be a bear.

The change  which actually  takes place is not of this sort;  rather,  it is the kind of transformation which is conventional  in romance,  and  which involves the  pairs or doubles that  I have already explored. When two figures who represent  oppos­ ing forces are  reacting  to each  other, it frequently  happens  that  one  grows and develops as the other  declines. This rhythm of waxing and waning is clear in the kind of medieval romance  where a pair of jousting knights is associated with day and  night;  it is also clear in vampire stories, where the  vampire  grows stronger as his victim grows weaker. Here, as Lou is healed and becomes whole, the  bear is gradually  fragmented, his wholeness being  divided  into  its various  parts.  At the beginning  of the novel, when Lou feels that she has fallen apart,  she sees the bear as an entity,  and  talks about  him in a way that suggests that  he is the Idea of a bear:

Everyone has once in his life to decide whether he is a Platonist or not, she thought. I am a woman sitting on a stoop eating bread and bacon. That  is a bear. Not a toy bear, not a Pooh bear, not an airlines Koala bear. A real bear.

At the end,  the bear is many things:  "lover, God or Friend.  Dog too, for when she  put  her  hand  out  he licked and  nuzzled  it."  He  is the  fat  creature  sitting solidly in Joe King's  boat, and he is the Great  Bear with his thirty-seven thousand virgins. But  Lou  at  this point is whole. "Clean and  simple and  proud" are  the adjectives she uses to describe herself, and  it is the second in particular which is important in  this  context.  "Simple"  has  both  Greek  and  Latin  roots, the  first element in both  being  (as the Oxford  English Dictionary tells us)  sem, meaning one.


43

ENGEL

In  myth  and  ritual, transformations are  usually  brought about by a sacrificial death and  by  the  ritual  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the  slain  animal. Colonel  Cary's notes  make  two  references  to  this  pattern : one  describes   the  Eskimos'  "taboos and  propitiatory ceremonies" for  the  killing  of  the  bear  and  "the consumption of the  flesh"; the  other  describes  a Japanese ceremony, in which  a  bear  is sacri­ ficed and  its flesh eaten. Lou  vows that  this  will never  happen to her  bear, but,  nonetheless,  eating  has an important symbolic  role in the  novel. The consumption of flesh is, after  all,  the  ultimate metamorphosis, and  this  act,  rather than the putting on of fur,  is the  best indication of Lou's  change. As often  happens in this novel,  its  basis is the  eroticism  of  the  earliest  idea  of  the  story.  Eating is slang for cunnilingus, and  Lou's  plea  to the  bear,  "'Eat me,'" is the sort  of thing one might  find  in  pornography. But  here  it  is  part   of  a far  more  comprehensive pattern. We  remember the  number of times  Lou  eats  with  the  bear,  and  once, when  a spark  falls in  his fur,  she licks it out.  The key  to  this  pattern is one  of her dreams:

She  fell asleep  on  the  grass, and  dreamt   that  Grinty  and  Greedy  were  rolling down the hill in a butter churn  towards her.
'We'll eat her,' Grinty said. 'We'll eat her breasts off.'
'You watch,' said Greedy. 'You watch. She'll eat  us first. Let's  run.'

I  do  not  know  what  fairy  tale  is being  referred   to  here,   but  the  patterns are clear enough. Here  we have a pair,  perhaps twin  imps  or dwarfs, and  their  names are  associated  with  eating  and  appetite (to  grint  is to gnash  one's  teeth) . They threaten to eat  Lou,  but  immediately recognize  that '"She'll eat  us first.'" That is, she will take  the two of them  and, by consuming them, make  them  one. Lou's eating  with  the  bear  has  the  same  symbolic  significance. When  one  recognizes this pattern, it comes  as no surprise  to discover  that, when  Lou  becomes  whole, she feels it "in  her pores and  the taste of her own  mouth."
Bear  is an  unusually good  novel.  The   patterns, which   I  have  been  making stand  out,  are  woven  together  in  a subtle  and  complex way.  We  have  no  sense that  actions  are forced  or details  thrust  upon  us. Everything is carefully  observed and  fully  realized.  If, as Margaret Avison  has  said,  the  devil  is etc.,  there  is no devil  in  this  book.  We  live  "sweetly   and   intensely" with   Lou   and   her   bear, exploring, like her,  the  infinite  richness  of simplicity.

NOTES

My reading of the novel owes a great deal to conversations  with two of my colleagues, Catherine  Ross and Richard  Stingle.

1 "The  Relevance  of  Canadian History,"  in  Contexts of  Canadian  Criticism,  ed. Eli Mandel  (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1971),  pp. 52-53.
2  Quoted  by Roy MacSkimming,  "A writer's  gutsy imagination sets up  a hard  act to follow,'' Toronto Star  ( 15 May 1976),  p. H3.

ENGEL


3  There is a  modern reprint of  the  I853  edition,  entitled The  Octagon House:  A Home  for  All,  with  an  introduction by  Madeline B. Stern  (New  York:   Dover, I973).
4   Ibid.,  p. 82.
5 In  this paragraph I am  deeply  indebted to J. E. Cirlot's A  Dictionary of Symbols, trans.  Jack  Sage  (New  York:  Philosophical Library,I 962), especially  to the  arti­ cles on "Circle," "Numbers," "Square," and  "Squaring the  Circle."
6  Fowler,  p.  I 2.
7  Klee  Wyck  (Toronto:  Clarke, Irwin,  I97I), p. 53·
8 See, for  instance, The Heart  of the  Ancient  Wood   (New  Canadian Library   # I I o;
'Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I974), p.  I2;  or,  better still, a  passage  in  "The
Trailers" in Thirteen Bears, ed.  Ethel  Hume Bennett (Toronto:  Ryerson,   I947),
p.  101.
9 For  the  information on  bestiaries  which  follows, I am  indebted to  Beryl Rowland, Animals with   Human Faces:  A  Guide   to  Animal   Symbolism  (Knoxville:  Univ. of Tennessee Press,  I973), pp. 3I-35·






RO]IO ENDING

M. Travis Lane


At the end  of the road  a hunter's hut boarded all  summer, the  fraying  bush backing against it, a ragged  fringe
of beggars'  ticks, rust  tassels, thorns,
and  boulders pushed  to the water's  edge where  the  graders turned.
There was no one home.

And  no one in the water.  Overhead the  white  thread spidered  from a jet drifted across where  the evening  star was not  yet shining.

What were  the words I could  not use, the thoughts I could  not think  to say? The white  lake shook in the early dusk.

Something was lost we were waiting  for, summer, perhaps, or snow.


45

MEMORY ORGANIZED:

The Novels of AudrThomas



Joan Coldwell






W,ERS ARE  TERRIBLE LIARS,"  begins one of Audrey Thomas'  short  stories, where  the  speaker  is  herself  a  writer,  tussling  with  the nature  of art's  relationship  to life.1   It  is worth  bearing  this  caveat  in  mind  as one reads  Thomas' novels, for it is tempting  to  interpret them  only  as  thinly­ disguised autobiography, where the narrator, whether  unnamed  or  called  Isobel, Miranda, or  Rachel,  speaks  in  the  author's own  voice. The  narrators of  the different  novels are  indeed  haunted  by similar  memories and  concerns.  Isabel's obsessions, and  those of the unnamed  narrator of Mrs. Blood, centre  on having been  jilted  by  the  first man  she really loved,  and  on  a  prolonged  miscarriage suffered in a Ghanaian hospital. Miranda/Rachel is a writer highly conscious of the complexities of her craft,  desperate  to  communicate with  the  man  she loves but finding  neither  words nor deeds adequate to break down  the traditional atti­ tudes to woman's  role. These  characters  struggle  and  endure  in settings  drawn from  the  author's  own  environments: the  New  Yark  State  of  her  childhood,  various parts of Europe and Africa where she has lived and travelled, and  British Columbia  where she now makes her home.
Audrey  Thomas  has acknowledged  that  writing  about  her own suffering  is a form of therapy  and  that  this very fact contributes to the strength  of her work: "Going  back  over my own works, I  reread  my first 'real'  story, real  because  it had to be written,  it seemed to be the only way I could organize the horror  and utter futility of a six-months long, drawn-out  miscarriage in a hospital in Africa."2
This episode forms the basis not only of the early story "If One  Green  Bottle"3
but of Thomas' first novel, Mrs.  Blood  ( 1970)  and the later  work Blown  Figures
( 1974). While it is understandable that  so disturbing an experience  might  have to be relived and  interpreted  more than  once, it is less clear as to why, in novel after novel, apparently identical  episodes, characters and  settings of not so trau­ matic  a nature  reappear.  Being jilted, trying  to lose one's  virginity,  working in a mental  hospital are among the experiences we encounter in similar  form  more than once, reworkings which, however therapeutic for the author, must have some

THOMAS


more  artlstlc   justification  if they  are  not  to  seem  merely  repetitive  and  self­ indulgent.  When  one looks closely at all of Thomas'  novels, it becomes apparent that  the episodes are not in fact repeated;  each telling is in a different form  and for a different artistic purpose, as a painter might give the same model in different poses. Whatever   the  origins  in  real  life might  have  been,  the  experiences  are altered  by their  fictional  contexts and  it is the artistic  shaping  that  gives them universal significance. Rachel,  the writer who narrates  the novel Latakia  ( 1 979), comments  on  the  need  for  such  formal  control  in  art.  Looking  at  a  friend's  painting  she thinks, "Yes, the pain is there and very real, but where is the organi­  zation? She is at the beginning of a long, long road...."4   That  is a road Audrey Thomas  has travelled  in her six novels, where the pain may be very real, with its origins in  actual  experience,  but  where  it is  controlled  and  given  meaning  by fictional organization.
If we look at the novels in the order  of their  publication,  we see that  in each one the organization involves a technique,  variously handled,  that  for  the  time being we might  call "splitting." This is seen most clearly in  Mrs. Blood where the unnamed  narrator sees herself as two figures: Mrs. Thing,  the "acted-upon," fearful, self-conscious wife of a university teacher, and  Mrs. Blood, a guilt-ridden bundle  of memories  and  poetic visions, wracked  by physical and  psychic forces beyond her control.  Instead  of chapters, the novel is divided into sections spoken sometimes by Mrs. Thing  and sometimes by Mrs. Blood.
A somewhat  similar kind of character-splitting occurs in the volume containing the two short  novels Munchmeyer and  Prospero on the  Island  (1971). Loosely related  to the tradition epitomized  by Gide's  Les Faux  Monnayeurs, which is a novel about  a man  writing  a novel about  a man writing a novel, Prospero is the diary  of a woman  who is writing  the novel Munchmeyer, about  a male  writer who keeps a diary.  Although  Miranda says that  no-one could tell from her diary what  Munchmeyer is about,  the two narratives  are  in fact  subtly  related,  both in the  narrator's projection  of a reverse image  of herself as an  egotistical  male writer and in shared  perceptions and images. One simple example of the latter demonstrates  the technique. In  Prospero, Miranda describes being out  with  her child:  "I walk through  the crisp leaves with Toad  and  suddenly  think  of new, crisp  bank  notes. Then  laugh  at  the simile. 'My  mistress' eyes are  nothing  like the sun.' Why must I always search for similarities?"5  It seems here as if Miranda is rejecting  that  simile but  in fact she uses it in Munchmeyer: "Leaves  crisp as bank  notes crackled  under  their feet. .. .''
In  Songs My  Mother  Taught Me  (1973), what  may  appear  at  first to be a conventional  first-person  narrative, split only chronologically  into  the "Songs  of Innocence" of childhood  and the "Songs of Experience"  of adolescence, is in fact a curiously constructed  record of two voices, where the narrator refers to herself sometimes as "I" and  sometimes as a third  person she observes. The  division is

47

THOMAS

not made as one might expect into infant  Isobel, not yet conscious of her individ­ uality  except  as  a  name,  and  the  older, self-conscious  "1."  Sometimes,  a  dis­ tancing  occurs during  a recollection of something  the  older  girl was afraid  of: "At  first Isobel did not dare go beyond the swinging  doors until  the inert  shape beneath  the blankets  had  been wheeled away."6   Sometimes, on the other  hand,  it is the adult teller of the tale who is objectified : "Look  how well Isobel remem­ bers." The  process is described elsewhere in the  novel as a means  of protecting  against  pain,  especially as inflicted  by the mother's cruel  comments: "I learned to disconnect  myself early,  to leave  my  body  and  stand  outside,  above  really, looking downward  at Clara  holding Isobel." This  technique is found  also in the story "Still  Life with  Flowers"  (Ten  Green  Bottles), where  an  adult  distances herself from  painful  encounters with death  by speaking  both  of "I" and  "she."
With  Blown  Figures we enter  a world where  the  technical  word  for  psycho­ logical splitting can appropriately be used, for Isobel is now indeed schizophrenic. The  miscarriage suffered in Mrs. Blood has haunted the narrator with guilt and loss until she has gone mad. She relives psychically a journey to Africa, gradually turning  in her own  mind into a destructive  and  doomed  witch.  She directs  her story  to a  named  but  unidentified  auditor,  "Miss  Miller," thus  providing  the reader  with  a  kind  of double,  someone  within  the  book  who  is addressed  but cannot intrude.
Latakia,  like Prospera on the Island, is a "portrait of the artist"  and  the split­ ting  technique  here  reflects the  crisis faced  by a  woman  who  wants  both love and art, but cannot  give up the second for the first. The split Rachel sees between her  physical/emotional and  her  mental/spiritual needs  is reflected  in  the  time and space pattern  of the novel. In the "present," Rachel  writes from her solitary rooftop  in Crete,  where she endeavours  to capture  as  accurately as possible the total look, feeling, sound, taste, and scent of the place. Interwoven with the vivid colours and  heat of the present scene, where nothing  much  happens  in terms of plot but  where everything  is happening  in terms of  artistic  being and  creativity,  are  the  episodes of the  past  action,  the  full  story  of  the  relationship  with  her now-departed lover to whom she addresses this "longest  love letter in the world." Fully secure in herself as artist, Rachel does not split her own self schiwphrenically as Isobel did.  The  choices sometimes  threaten  to  tear  her  apart,  but  that  is a different  matter  from being in a state of disintegration, and  she is strong enough to withstand  the  threat.  Instead,  the split is observed  as one of the  processes of creative  response to experience. The  artist  lives imaginatively in  two  places at once, or simultaneously  at two different times:  "The artist  almost always lives in a Double  Now. Therefore,  it  is  not difficult for  me to  be up  here on  the  roof, thinking  of you, and  still  very  much  aware  of the sound  of Heleni's  loom two doors down,  and  the  noise of a motorbike  coming  down  that  last spiral  before the village proper, and the moon slowly surfacing  behind  the  hill."

THOMAS



l:E REMEMBRANCE OF  THINGS PAST serves a double  purpose in Audrey Thomas' fiction.  On  the  one  hand, the  deliberate memorizing of  de­ tails, first as a childhood habit and  then  as a writer's  trick-of-the-trade, is a means of triumphing over  time.  The narrator of  Mrs. Blood  compulsively  hoards the little  details  of important days as she did  in childhood : "Thus on the way to my grandfather's cottage I would  try  to  memorize  the  billboards or  the  number of cows in a field in order  to preserve that  day more perfectly  in my memory." lsobel analyzes  the  habit  more  thoroughly in Songs My Mother Taught  Me:

From as far back as I could remember  I was aware-and afraid-of  two things: death  and  the passage of time.  ("Isobel,  you are dying faster than  the day.")  On the way to the mountains  each summer I tried to memorize each  group of Burma Shave  signs we passed, every  new billboard  or  poster  slapped  against  a  bam.  If someone  made  a  remark  and  I  didn't   hear,  I  would  be  driven  nearly  frantic. "What did  you say?" "Please,  oh please." And sometimes I would  say to myself, "Ten  years from  now you will remember  this moment  and  it  will be the  past." If something  truly  unusual  happened   I  tried  to  impale  the  whole  complex  of sightfsoundftouchftastefsmell on my consciousness and memory as though such an experience  was like some rare and multicoJored butterfly.

Memorizing is a  necessary  part  of the  writer's  craft. Miranda keeps  a  note­ book: "I must  try  to  record   important things-the way  trees  look  in  certain  lights,  the  sound  of the  wind  howling  around the  cabin, the  changing  colors of the sea.  How  many  past  impressions, like skillful, slippery  fish, will elude my nets I shudder now  to  think." To  Rachel, memorizing has  become  an  almost auto­ matic process;  whatever she  may  outwardly be doing  or saying,  inwardly she is registering every detail  around her : "And I am a magpie; I pick  up information whenever I can get it."
Memory takes a less conscious  form,  too, surfacing in dreams or breaking from its deep  suppression under stress. Rachel keeps a dream-notebook and  recognizes one  of  her  dreams as  a  warning from  the  subconscious about   the  affair   with Michael. Possibly  all of Blown  Figures is a kind  of  dream, an  inner   journey  of horror needed  to exorcise  a long-suppressed guilt.  The stress of the  long  confine­ ment  calls forth   buried events  and  emotions  from  the  narrator of  Mrs. Blood: "I have  memories preserved intact, like men in peat  to be found  by a later  me."  It is only  when  the  foetus  is expelled  from  the  body  that the  cause  of the  guilt and  fear  is fully  recalled  and  for  Mrs.  Blood the  interior journey  of  miscarriage is an  ironic  parody of the  famous madeleine cake : "Proust had  it  easy  with  his tea and  bun."
Such  literary recollection is an  almost  obtrusive  part  of Thomas' fiction  and one could  make  a very long list of authors alluded  to or quoted in the  novels. The touch  of academic pedantry is, however,  quite  consistent  with  the  characters of

49

THOMAS

the college-educated Isobel or the writers  Miranda and  Rachel. On  two occasions, literature of  the  past  furnishes  an  ironic  framework for  the  entire novel,  with Blake's  titles  used for  the  two  parts  of Songs My  Mother  Taught Me  and  with The  Tempest   providing not  just names  but  a  controlling set of images  through­ out  Munchmeyer and  Prospera on the  Island.  There is also the  form  of literary echoing  where  a  present  experience is implicitly assessed by  comparison with  an earlier   literary  statement.  When,  for   example,  Rachel   recalls   how   skillfully Graham  Greene or  Somerset   Maugham could   create   the  full  "perfume" of  a described scene,  she invites the  placing  of her  own  evocations beside  theirs.  The  process occurs  most often in the three  treatments of  the  miscarriage where,  under physical  and  emotional stress, the  mind  is triggered  into  a schizophrenic pattern of associative  language, the  sound  of one  word  evoking  another apparently for its sound  alone  but  producing highly resonant connections: "Love. L'oeuf. Noth­ ing.  Nothing will  come  of  nothing. Speak  again."  Foreign languages are  often  used to give this  kind  of shock,  as when  charged significance is found in  a  dic­ tionary definition or  when  the  impact  of  orthography  overrides pronunciation and  meaning:  "Avez-vous du  pain?"
One  of Audrey  Thomas' favourite literary reference points  is Alice in Wonder­
land and  Through the Looking  Glass. The  epigraph to  Mrs.  Blood focuses  that novel's concern with  absurdity, futility  and  the  topsy-turvy:

"But  I don't  want to go among mad people," Alice remarked.

"Oh,  you can't  help that,"  said the Cat:   "we're  all mad  here.  I'm  mad.  You're mad."

"How  do you know I'm  mad?"  said Alice.

"You must be," said the Cat, "or you wouldn't  have come here."

At the  end  of Songs My Mother  Taught  Me, this same  quotation appropriately comments on  Isabel's work  in  the  mental hospital but  it  also  points  forward to the kind of experiences she can expect  to find on her European travels.
Echoes  of Carroll's work are  everywhere in Mrs. Blood and  Blown  Figures to
enforce   the  narrator's sense  of  alienation  in  the  strange "mad" land   both   of Africa  and  of her own  mind  and  body.  In  addition to this  psychological level of reference, Through the  Looking  Glass also  contributes to  the  pattern of  mirror images  which  Thomas uses not only to enforce  the  kind  of doubling of a person's image  that  we have  been observing  but  also to explore  the  nature of the relation­ ship  of  art  to  life.  Using  the  old  critical   idea  that   art  "holds a  mirror up  to nature," Rachel in  Latakia  wants  to  capture Crete  exactly  as it  is,  but  has  to acknowledge that  "it's all done  with  mirrors, it's  all  illusion" and  furthermore, that  the  illusion  depends almost  as much  on  the  reader's imagination as it  does on the writer's skill:  "I have to make you believe in the Emperor's New Clothes."

so

THOMAS

If mirrors  give a  reflection  of reality, it is a  reverse  and  therefore  distorted reflection only:  this theme is treated at some length in the stories of the collection Ladies and Escorts  (I 97 7). In  "Rapunzel," a Californian flower-child  wanders through  Africa  looking  for  artistic images and  forms,  "Old   ways of looking at the  world."  Her  notebook  of sketches always shows her  own  face  with  camera lenses instead  of eyes; all her  verbal sketches are set down  in "mirror  writing," except for the one word that  has shocked her out of her dreamy  fairytale naivete. "Initram" is a complex  working out  of ironic  double  images,  where  a  woman writer visits another  woman  writer whose circumstances and experiences she finds to be a striking  and  painful  reflection of her  own. The  title  reverses the  word "martini," seen in the story on a wrongly projected slide which, even if viewed correctly, gives a distorted  picture of the facts:  "that  is to say [it] told me nothing about  the two people who had  taken that  trip."  Nevertheless, martini  does exist in the real world and so did the scenes photographed. One of the more subtle explorations  in this story is of the transformation  of autobiography into  art.  In the  opening  passage,  the  narrator   discusses the  topic  in  terms  of  the  subject­ matter of the preceding story (a situation slightly reminiscent of the way Prospera on the  Island  relates  to  Munchmeyer). Is, then,  the  narrator "really"  Audrey Thomas  herself? Dare  we identify the other  writer as specifically as some of the "facts" in the story seem to invite us to do? There is an element of  playful teasing in the method  of this serious and subtle story, with several  warnings  to keep us from the quicksands  that  would confuse fictional reality with literal fact.
Closely associated  with  the mirror  motif is a set of image  patterns  to do with
vision blurred  by water, as in weeping, swimming underwater, or looking through a glass darkly into, or out of, an aquarium. These blurred  visions invariably  occur when a sexual  relationship  is doomed: they are most forcefully deployed in the fine story "Aquarius," which  opens Ladies and Escorts. In  Latakia,  the images are  perhaps  over-explicit: "Ours was certainly  a relationship  remarkable  for its liquidity!" Rachel  says wryly, as she notes yet once more that  she began  to cry. Despite  the  Mediterranean sun,  much  of the  affair  is conducted   in  torrential rain,  and  it  began  on  a  wet  night  when  Rachel  was  contemplating a  friend's aquarium: "Every  time  I see an aquarium from now on,  I will think  of you." In  context,  the  remark  implies more than  just a memory  of that  encounter: it suggests that  the relationship  has put her in a state of suspension, disoriented  by seeing things  through  a veil of water.  Rachel  is caught  by Michael's "octopus­ love"  for  her,  "suffocating, drowning,  ruthless"  and  caught   too  by  her  own
"octopus-need."
w HAVE SEEN  HOW "SPLITTING"   or  "doubling" occurs
within the individual novels; a larger version of this device is apparent when one

THOMAS

looks  at  the  work  as a  whole.  Speaking in  an  interview of  the  relationship of Blown  Figures  to Mrs.  Blood, the  author suggested ways of reading these  novels either  individually or as a connected pair:

Someone,  probably  Durrell,  talked  about  the  novel  of sliding  panels.  Well, in  a sense, that's  what  I'm  doing.  It's  all one  novel  really-Mrs. Blood and  Blown Figures. But the novel of sliding panels can  be read  separately.  The  panels -like Chinese  panels  if  you like -can  be  read  separately; they  also  fit  together.  It depends  which way you want to do it.7

Since  Blown  Figures  deals  with  Isabel's  attempt to  exorcise  her  guilt  over  the miscarriage suffered  in  Mrs.  Blood,  it is not  surprising that similar  episodes  are found  in  both.  As in  decorative art,  a  repeated motif  may  be set in  a  different context, to catch  a different  light.  Take  just the  simple  example of the  satisfying Saturday  breakfasts of  pre-marriage days.  These   are   mentioned  twice  in  the earlier  novel, first by Mrs. Blood:  "Every Saturday he brought me a brown paper bag full of eggs and  bacon  and  tomatoes. And  we would  have  a huge  breakfast, Jason  cooking,  and  fried  bread  and  coffee to complete it."  Here  there  is nostalgia for a loving,  indulgent past; a few paragraphs later  it is made clear  that  the  past is irrevocably lost,  both  because  the  neighbourhood  has  changed and   because of something eroded  in the  relationship: "Even the street  was gone,  he said,  and we looked  at  each  other,  appalled and  maybe  a  little  frightened." Later in  the novel, it is Mrs.  Thing who now interprets the  breakfasts as something to  resent in Jason, a male  plot  to prepare a sacrificial  victim : "On Saturday mornings he would  bring  me a brown  paper  bag of bacon, eggs, tomatoes and  a loaf of bread. And cook my breakfast for me. Fattening me up." When this is recalled  in Blown Figures, it manifests Isabel's  greater willingness  to sympathize with  Jason, to recognize  his sufferings and  sacrifices as well as her own:
[she]  never asked him how he felt, coming back on the  train  from  the city every day, back from youth and laughter and comradeship, to a dinner  left warming over a saucepan  of hot  water  and  these two women,  so obviously fierce enemies, who wanted  to devour  him.  How  dreary it must  all  have  been.  How  different  from their  crazy Saturday morning  breakfasts of the  winter  before,  he arriving  with  a big bag of tomatoes and eggs and rashers of bacon....8

Songs  My Mother Taught Me   also  forms  a  "novel of  sliding   panels" with Mrs.  Blood.  In  both  books we learn  of an inherited "legacy of fear," of an  early sexual experience with  a lifeguard, called "Trigger" in Mrs. Blood and  "Digger" in Songs, of  celebrating the  end  of the  war  and  a  memento in  a  Japanese  silk parachute, of a summer's work in a mental  hospital. The general horrors  of  meal­ times  in  the  hospital, of  bed-making and   working in  the  operating  room,   are presented in  both  novels and  so are specific episodes: a bungled  taking of blood from  one  of the  patients (called  "old  George" in  Mrs. Blood  and  "old  Harold" in Songs), being  called  whore  by "Eleanor la  Duce" (who  also appears in  the

52

THOMAS


same setting in "Salon  des Refuses" of Ten  Green Bottles)  and being accidentally cut by a possibly infected scalpel. Although  these episodes appear  to be repeated, apart from minor name changes and different phrasings, they are used for very different effects and  are substantially  altered  by their context. In Songs, the men­ tal hospital is the shaping-ground of lsobel's maturity,  her "experience," showing her that  misery and hostility can be played out on far more grotesque battle fields than  she has known  in  her  own  unhappy  home and  social life.  lsobel  emerges with  new strength  from  this trial,  but  that  much  of the  horror  was suppressed and  buried  in the  psyche appears  when the episodes surface  in  Mrs.  Blood, not as in  the  consecutive  narrative of Songs,  where  chronological  sequence  orders events and  makes them  appear  to be logical, but as scattered  fragments  periodi­ cally marking  the narrator's obsession with blood and madness.
If we add Blown Figures to Mrs. Blood and Songs, we have a kind of triptych,
where the story of lsobel  is told from  childhood  through  marriage  and  mother­ hood  to  psychic disintegration. Motifs  from  one "panel"  reappear in  another,  not necessarily requiring  reference back and forth for interpretation, but certainly gaining  new  dimension  when  juxtaposed.  The  greater  amount   of  biographical  material  about  Richard in Blown Figures, for example, is not in any  way neces­ sary  to  understanding the  narrator's mourning  for  a lost  lover  in  Mrs.  Blood, but it rounds out a picture and gives fresh detail. The  very title of Blown Figures is illuminated by reference to another  panel in the triptych. As George Bowering aptly  demonstrated in  his review of the  book,  the  power  of the  title  lies in  its ambiguity:
What are figures, and  what is blown? There  are fly-blown corpses, and  corpses once were figures. Craftsmen blow figures in glass. If you don't have a good figure you'd better tum  the light off if you want to be blown. Bad counters blow their figures. Poets who reach for effects blow their figures up fat. Some flute-players blow outlandish figures. Add you own, and you'll be ready to read....9

Each  of Bowering's  suggestions is appropriate, in some degree  or  other,  to  the experience  of the  novel;  that  the  phrase  has  yet a  further  significance  for  the author  is apparent in a passage from  Songs about  the  ending  of the  war: "the go,ooo killed in Hiroshima, the 4o,ooo  killed at Nagasaki,  the mushroom  cloud, the screams, the blown figures melting in the heat." Here the glass-blowing meta­ phor  fuses with the idea of violent disintegration,  the sinister  pun  on  numerical figures increasing  the  horror.  The  image  relates powerfully  to  lsobel,  her  mind violently disintegrated, as she is blown on her psychic journey through the melting heat of Mrica. But the blown figures of  Hiroshima  were also blasted into  night­ mare  silhouettes,  outlines  of the  human  form  burned  into  walls as  a  perpetual  memento  mori. Thus  the blown figures are part of a pattern  of  memory images, the  people, places and  experiences of Isabel's  past burned  ineradicably  into  her subconscious.

53

THOMAS

Bowering is right  in suggesting  that  the  author intends the  reader to  work  at interpreting the  title,  and  one  of  the  ways of  working is to  remember how  the phrase  was  used elsewhere.  All of Blown Figures, in  fact,  requires unusual  exer­ tion on  the  reader's part,  if only in turning over so many  pages  which  are empty  except  for  a  line  or  two.  Audrey   Thomas explained the  intention  behind  this device:

Partly  so that  these things will have force, like slides or  bullets  or anything  that there's  a slight time lag between-A  plus B plus C plus D-maybe like breath­ ing? It's  up to the reader how fast he turns the pages, but he has to turn  the page; there  has to be a time lag.... They  all relate  just as if you showed  me slides of Greece  or  something  to do  with  Greece.  Occasionally  there's  one  thrown  in, as you might do with friends, that  doesn't relate  to Greece and  that's  to keep you on your toes.1.'o

The   comparison  to  a  photographic medium again  implies   the  illusion/reality theme  but  also suggests the  author's manipulation of the  reader into  "interpret­ ing"  the  novel  as one "interprets" a work of art.  It is not  "meaning," character, or story  one only looks for in a novel, but shapes, textures, and  colour  also.


IHAVE ALREADY MENTIONED  the  way in  which  Munchmeyer
and  Prospera on the  Island are  intimately related, though even  here  each  work
can  be read  fully without reference  to the  other. The  two  novellas  appear to  be set apart from  the  Isabel  series, and  Latakia  to follow,  with  a different name for the  main   character and  a  study  of  an  enriching friendship with  a  male  artist instead   of  the  desperate struggles  of  love  and   guilt   in  the   other   novels.  But Miranda obviously  has  the  same  background as  Isabel: there   are  several  ref­ erences  to  an  earlier  time  in Africa  and  to  the  same  fear  of  blood.  She  has  her youngest  child  with  her on the island  and  when  she  talks  to another  mother, she feels very much  as Mrs. Thing did: "We are  together on an island  of  babies  and  women  with  babies." Even  the  childhood obsession  with  memorizing  reappears, with  the same  advertisement mentioned as in Songs:  "as  a child  I  was desperate to  remember everything; would  stare  hard   at  billboards,  burning  their   inane messages into  my head,  terrified  I would  not  pass that  way again. Burma Shave,  Burma Shave, Burma Shave."
Miranda's name  is chosen  for  all its resonances, both  ironic  and  emblematic, of The  Tempest, as well perhaps of that  poem  of a lost  past,  Belloc's  "Do you remember an  inn,  Miranda?" In Latakia,  the  narrator, fully  fledged  now  as  a writer  and  free at least of a restricting domestic  pattern, if not  of the  longing  for love and  sex, is aptly  and  ironically named  Rachel, she  who  in  the  Bible waited fourteen years  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  destiny.  But  Rachel shares  at  least  one

54

THOMAS


memory   with  lsobel   and   the  narrator of  Mrs.  Blood. Each   recalls  a  deaf  old relative  of her  grandfather's who had  "a black and  silver ear  trumpet" (Latakia, p. 22), "an  ear  trumpet-black, with silver-gilt decorations on it" (Mrs.  Blood, p.  134), "her ornate ear  trumpet, black  with  silver  chasing" (Songs, p.  47). "Aunt Deveena" lived  to  be a hundred, and  in Songs  she is a focus for  Isobel's fear  of  and   curiosity   about death; "Mrs. Blood"  finds  her  to  be  one  of  the "encrusted" memories of death and  dead  babies, for homage to the family  graves was always a part  of the  visit to the old lady. In  Latakia, the self-conscious  writer seeks an  appropriate analogy for  the  distortion of personality she  and  her  lover have  wreaked on each  other and  finds it in the supposedly senile  but  highly sen­ sitive  remark of  the  re-named aunt:  "An  enormous dog,  a  sheepdog, I  guess, came  loping  down  the  road  and  Aunt  Aggie took a look at it and said in her high,  cracked  voice, 'My, what  a small  dog in such  a  big box."' The ear-trumpet and  senility  are  useful images  in a novel that  wrestles with  the problems  of communi­ cation  and  the  world  behind the looking-glass.
Audrey  Thomas' novels,  then,  do in some sense form  a continuous semi-auto­ biographical narrative, a kind  of roman fleuve,  and  it is clear  that  the  narrating voice  belongs  to  the  same  person  at  different phases  of  experience.  The  split  in the  narrator /persona is similar in many  respects to the split  between  Mrs.  Thing and  Mrs.  Blood : Isobel  is  the  girl  and  woman  who  struggles  to  be  defined  in terms  other  than someone's granddaughter, daughter, mistress,  wife,  or  mother; Miranda/Rachel is the self-conscious  artist  and craftswoman who is able to insist on  her  own  identity and   purpose  even  at  the  cost of  losing  the  men  she  loves. As the  author herself  sums it up: "I think that's what  I was trying  to deal  with in  my  writing, the  two  different sides of  me."11  Each   novel  is completely  self­ contained1z  and  very little  is repeated in exactly  the  same  form.  The reader  can respond   to  each  novel  as  a  shape  in  itself  but  may  find  totally   new  levels  of response in remembering the  others while reading  any  one.  The  demands on the reader's memory  are  considerable  but  the  results are  rewarding.

NOTES

1 "Initram," Ladies  and  Escorts  (Ottawa: Oberon,  I 977),  p. 88.
z "My Craft  and Sullen Art ...," Atlantis, 4, no. I  (Fall  I978), I 53·
3  Ten Green  Bottles  (New York:  Bobbs-Merrill,  I967),  pp. 5-I6.
4  Latakia (Vancouver: Talonbooks,  I979),  p. 46.
5  Munchmeyer and  Prospera  on  the  Island   (New York:   Bobbs-Merrill,  I97I),  p.
IOI.
'6  Songs  My  Mother Taught Me  (Vancouver: Talonbooks,  I973),  p. 221.
7   Elizabeth  Komisar,  "Audrey  Thomas: a review/interview," Open  Letter, 3, no. 3 (Fall  I975), p. 61.
8 Blown  Figures  (Vancouver: Talonbooks,  I974),  p. 2I6.

55

THOMAS

9  George  Bowering,  "The Site  of Blood,"  Canadian  Literature, 65  (Summer 1975), p. 86.
w  Komisar, p. 63.
11  "Interview/Audrey Thomas," The  Capitano  Review, 7  (Spring 1975), p. 95·
12 This  is contrary to the view of Robert Diotte, who  argues  that,  of the  Isobel Car­ penter  "trilogy," only  Mrs.  Blood "is  even  remotely capable of  standing  alone." See  "The Romance of Penelope," Canadian  Literature, 86  (Autumn  1980), pp.
6o-68.






POETRY  REJIDING JIT THE VETERJINS' HOME

Glen Sorestad


They are mustered  together in the  lounge
a dozen  veterans,  legions of memories on stiff legs.
The marshall  is a young woman  devoted solely to program some interest  into  their  dying.

She  introduces me, and  I read  to them-or  try. One  silver-haired vet of Vimy  dozes fitfully snapping upright from  the past,  on occasion
lie
Others stare  past  me to distant fields -
past  horrors,  past glories, comrades lost, past  loves ...

I read  a few humorous poems into  a maimed silence profound as the aftermath of battle.
I try a few poems about  old-timers, pioneers
and  read  them  with  the inspired  passion  of second  generation. But  they fall on the floor around and  between us
and  burst  like mock shrapnel, wounding no one. I try pub poems, and  finally one vet stirs
and  announces loudly  that  he is going  to the  john. My  poems collapse around me and  I stop  reading.

"Does  anyone  have any questions?" I implore, prepared for another barrage of silence
and  the ignominy  of my imminent departure.

POEM

One  old warrior finally breaches the wall of hush we have  wrapped ourselves  in. "Have you ever been  to the pub in St. Albert?" he asks.

"St.  Albert,  in Alberta?"

"Yes, in Alberta." "No,  I've never  been  in the pub  there."
"Well,  you should. Then you can  write  a poem  about  it. My daughter
lives in St. Albert.  I would  like to visit her.
I haven't seen her for a long time."  He  lapses back  into  wherever he has  been all this time. But another veteran stirs uneasily  and  fixes me with  a bayonet  stare.  "If I told you about me and  Billy in France, I bet you could  write
a whole  book of poems  about  it." Then he laughs and  is seized in the grip  of a spasm of coughing. "Yes, I probably could.  Would  you like that?"
But by this time his coughing has become entrenched and  he has forgotten having spoken at  all.

The white-haired dozer  bolts awake
and  thumps his cane  twice on the floor for attention. "By God," he quavers, "those were good  poems.
I myself once  wrote  poems ... to my wife ...
when  she  was still alive ..." and  his voice retreats. Then ... "Read us a poem  about veterans," he suggests brightly, imagining the  reading has  just begun.

"I haven't written  one yet,"  I say. "But I will. And  furthermore, you'll  be in my poem."
He  smiles broadly  and  thumps the floor again in approval.

So this poem  is for him,  though he'll  never  read  it. He  never  got  to make  that  visit to St. Albert  either.









57

VERNISSAGE
Ray Smith and the Fine Art of Glossing Over


Arnold E. Davidson & Cathy N. Davidson


Get up in the morning,  pull on yesterday's clothes, instant  coffee in a dirty cup, smoke a cigarette. In other times, other  places, Gussie's acting, his poetry, failed: she became a whore, a druggie, he died young of disease and  failure. But those were other  places, other times.1
WHAVE  BERN REAmNG ""unabashedly romantic  chap­
ter describing the older age and long-continued  idyllic relationship of a renowned
Canadian poet  and  his equally  famous  actress  wife  when  Ray  Smith,  in  the penultimate paragraph of Lord  Nelson  Tavern, interjects  these sad words about what  might  have  been. Then  we are  immediately  returned  to  the same  Gussie and  Paleologue  whose successes we have followed throughout most of the  book, and  the novel concludes with a characteristically  playful, sensual, and  irreverent scene. Yet other  times, other  places-the failed  poet, the  drug-addicted prosti­ tute -exist in the universe of this comic novel, never fully articulated, but there, beneath  the action, the characters,  the dialogue, like the naggings of a nightmare during  an otherwise perfect day.
Evil and failure are obviously important to this author, to any serious contem­ porary  author. So Ray  Smith  does not  present  evil by mostly  glossing  it  over. On  the contrary,  the book alludes to wars, murders,  rapes;  it  portrays  humilia­ tions, hypocrisies, devastating  defeats  (especially in love) ,  and different  deaths. One  main  character, Naseby, is, as  his  name  suggests  (like  Faulkner's more famous  Snopes) , as unsavoury  as any  villain in  contemporary literature. But if the  canvas  has its dark  corners,  Smith  nevertheless  manages  to  paint  upon  it with a refreshing luminosity. Even Naseby, for all his nastiness, displays a certain brio. He  enjoys  his villainy. He  throws  himself  wholeheartedly into  any  black task at  hand,  thereby  avoiding  the  apathy,  the  accidie, which  plague  so many existential and post-existential anti-heroes. And herein lies, we would suggest, the distinguishing quality-possibly even the genius-of Smith's  novel:  his charac­  ters are vital and significant even as the darker  shadings  of his chiaroscuro  seem to suggest that vitality and significance are impossible in this world.

SMITH


Which is why Ray Smith  has created another.  In the universe of Lord Nelson Tavern, time does not rule all beneath the circle of the changing  moon but is itself governed  by the  author's narrative perspective. Smith  can  dwell luxuriously on the moment or race pell mell through a decade. He consequently  has the freedom to highlight  what  he chooses, to mute what he chooses. Set approximately  in the middle  sixties, the  action  reaches  back, incongruously  but  plausibly,  to  World War  II and  ahead  to the twenty-first century.  The  result is a temporally  absurd world, and  more important, Sisyphus in reverse. Through the  prestidigitation  of narrative and  the  selectivity  of art   (both  of which  depend  on  the  mastery  of time), Sisyphus can quickly achieve the top of his mountain. Or,  conversely, his trip down, unencumbered by rock, can be sensuous and prolonged. Moreover, Sisyphus' joy should only be increased by his awareness that  a flick of the author's pen and  life again  becomes the tedious, all-consuming  ordeal  up the  mountain­ side, painful,  pointless, exasperating,  and slow.
Neither  should  the reader  forget that  Ray Smith  presides in this other  world,
ever  able  to  tum  good  to  ill, comedy to  tragedy.  The  continual   authorial  in­ trusions give us intimations of what might, could, or did happen  -what should or would be made  clear -if  only the author  or even one of his characters chose to tell that story :
Paleologue turned on his heel and stomped off to sit on a rock in a field of daisies on a hill overlooking a village where he considered the  problem of meaning in action.... He then considered the problem of whether or not Grilse had been in the drug trade and concluded he had been. He was right.  (Italics added.)
"He  was right." Obviously  there is a sordid tale here-the ever taciturn  Grilse, with  his forged  passports  and  faked  deaths,  involved in  illicit drug  traffic. But we hear  no  more  of  it.  The  Protean  narrator of  the  novel,  unstuck  in  time, assumes the omniscience allowed by his liberated state and  almost parenthetically provides the reader with glimpses of other stories. Another  grimmer  world is there beyond the focus of the novel, out of sight of Paleologue idly contemplating the "problem  of meaning  in action" on his daisy-covered hillside. But except  to be assured that  it exists, we do not see this world:  other times, other places.
Smith  allows his characters some of the latitude  that  he claims for himself as author  and narrator. Most of what we learn of the unusual  Haligonians  portrayed in  Lord  Nelson  Tavern we  hear  firsthand,  directly  from  them,  as  written  in diaries or  journals,  as recited  to friends or other  auditors.  These  characters,  re­ counting  episodes from  their  lives, shape that  tale to the situation  in which it is told, to the interests of their  listener, and to their own need to perceive their life as following a certain  form.  Each  consequently has his or  her own  allotment  of varnish.  They  can  highlight  what  might  otherwise seem  dull;  gloss  over  what might otherwise seem unflattering. They can also omit  that which does not foster the impression they would make. In still other exchanges -other times and other

59

SMITH

places-we may learn  more of the story. So, briefly put,  the novel is structured as a montage. Various  narrations  overlie one another to give the reader  a larger view, although  never the whole picture. It should  also be noted  that  Smith  does not employ conventional  unreliable narrators who simply misestimate the signifi­ cance of what  they report thereby throwing  the burden  of interpretation entirely on the  reader.  Instead  we have  narrators  who are  themselves  artificers  used to shaping the materials of life:  painter,  poet, professor, actress, con man, crook.
The  art  of such  narrators,  deployed  through   the  greater  art  of  the  author, produces a book that  is subtly spacious despite its brevity. Indeed,  even a listing of the  main  characters and  some of their  primary  relationships  can  sound  be­ wildering:   Paleologue  and  his wife, Gussie;  Ti-Paulo and  his  mistress,  Odile Saulara  (and  then  seven imitation  Odiles in a row) ; the  perfect lovers, Dimitri and Francesca; the less than  perfect lovers, Gould  and  Rachel,  with their daugh­  ter, Sarah  (although Ti-Paulo  is Sarah's  biological father) ; Nora  Noon,  who is long posed between  Grilse and  her husband,  Roger  Portable;  Lucy,  who is first Paleologue's  lover  and  later  Ti-Paulo's father's wife;  and,  finally,  Naseby,  who never has relationships  but  who is seldom alone.  But such  a listing  can  hardly suggest the controlled  complexity with which these characters are allowed to play out  their  stable  and  unstable  pairings. Thus  Ti-Paulo's father  marries  the  first lover of Ti-Paulo's daughter's first lover-symmetrical conjunctions that the cas­ ual reader can easily overlook.
We first meet  most of this cast of characters  when  they  are  college students gathered  in  the  tavern  that  presumably  provides  the  book  with  its title.  From Ray Smith's  earlier  collection of short stories, Cape  Breton  Is the Thought  Con­ trol Center  of Canada, we know that  Lord  Nelson Tavern  is located  in  Halifax, near Dalhousie  University. Yet the novel, Lord  Nelson Tavern, never  names the eponymous tavern  nor specifies where it is to be found.  This spatial uncertainty, like the  continual  blurring  and  slurring  of times  past  and  present,  is deliberate  and with a point. The setting is Halifax  and the setting  is also everywhere. Thus  Gussie and  Paleologue  can pursue their transatlantic careers without  ever aban­ doning  home  base -their relationship,  their  work,  and  their  conveniently  iso­ lated country  retreat.  In contrast, Grilse rushes from Tunisia,  to Paris, to Rome, to Finland,  to Sweden;  "here  and  there,"  in  his  own  phrase;  every new  place "the  same only different,"  to again quote  this indefinite  man.  Hopelessly parted  from  Nora  Noon,  he finds that  his destiny  is  always  diverted  and  his  journeys are ever off centre.
But  the  novel itself has a centre,  which is, simply, its beginning.  The  reader can keep all of the characters  and their convoluted  lives straight  because we see them, originally, together, young, engaging in almost archetypal  student-barroom talk, dreaming  of future  careers and ultimate  successes while muddling their way through  the  business of the present mostly by falling  hopelessly in love. Even  as

6o

SMITH

we move away from Lord  Nelson Tavern, in time and  distance, we still retain  a cohesive vision of the group,  as do the characters  themselves who mark  time by how long it has been since they have seen each other.



LET us  LOOK   NOW   AT   ONE   of  these  "reunions," at,  more precisely, the  vernissage with  which Ti-Paulo prepares  to open  a new art  show and through  which Smith fully develops a basic metaphor  that governs the entire
novel. This  gathering is portrayed  in the  third  chapter,  "Breakup: From  the Journals of Ti-Paulo," and  is attended  by Grilse, by Paleologue and  Gussie, by Naseby, and  perhaps  by Rachel  and  Gould  (a  brief comment  later  in the  book suggests they may have been there too).  Oblique  time references, some made  in this chapter, others scattered  throughout  the rest of the novel, indicate  that  the participants in the vernissage are in their mid- to late-thirties,  almost two decades beyond their  student  days at  Lord  Nelson Tavern.  Way stations  on the  road  to death are being passed. Furthermore, in a rational world, Ti-Paulo points out, an artist's  shows should  mark  that  passing; "one at the end of each  period."  But as he  also observes  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  chapter,   "painting periods  are usually life periods. More specifically, woman  periods." ' He soon finds out  how right  he was. The  highlights  shift, and  the occasion designed  to mark  a  profes­ sional triumph becomes, partly because of old acquaintances unforgot who attend it, the beginning  of a personal defeat, Ti-Paulo's break-up  with Odile.
Or  perhaps  that  break-up  is another  victory. The  two, victory and  defeat,  are
not easily distinguished  from one another.  As Ti-Paulo notes in his journal,  the entries of which constitute  Chapter  Three: "A show is an exhibition  of the most painful  failures,  the  ones  closest to  being  successes." And  taken  together,  his journal entries attest  that  the love affair meant  most as it was ending, even after it had ended.  Chapter Three  also illustrates  how metaphors  of life and  art  and love all intermingle.  Indeed, the real "show,"  in the chapter,  the true  vernissage, is not the art show, but the  journal itself, self-consciously literary  with its numer­ ous references to Shakespeare, its exhibition of love's labours lost.
Consistent  with the vernissage which he sees as marking  the end of an affair,
Ti-Paulo will put  a  bright  face on  the  mundane  sorrow  that  he feels. He  does so by becoming, in his journal, a smiling private man, ironically aware of the role he plays as philosophical  abandonee, but  not so aware of his older compensating role as ironic  observer.  Thus  Smith,  with  this  portrait  of the  artist  portraying himself, shows how humans symbiotically shape both their lives and  their  fictions
-the showing  of their  lives. Even  in  a  most  painful  situation,  the  parting  of lovers, there  is some posing. Yet the posing is also real. It, too, becomes part  of the experience,  just as the applied  varnish  becomes part  of the  painting.  More-

61

SMITH

over, it is only through  artful  pose and  honest  pretense  that  Ti-Paulo can  tran­
scend his personal loss and  paint again.
Chapter  Three,  one of the longest !-narratives in the  novel, suggests that  all of the  characters -and  thus  all  humans -create  their  lives, or  partly  create their  lives, or-at  least-can  partly  create  their  lives. Consider,  for example, Odile  Saulara,  the former  fashion  model who leaves Ti-Paulo. Odile  is a great beauty but she is also a woman  with a tortured  past. An orphan who was never adopted,  she passed her childhood  in a "couple  of foster homes where the wives spent  the agency allowance on gin and  the husbands  molested  her."  But that  is all we are told of this model's unmodel childhood. Or equally obliquely, Ti-Paulo once notes that  "Odile  Saulara  is not  her  real  name.  Probably  Mary  Smith  or Betty Grable  Jones or something."  As with  Grilse and  his drug  trafficking,  we have only the shadow  of an  otherwise hidden  story. But  it is Odile's  story and she does not choose to tell it. She insists on remaining  aloof, distant,  a mannequin turned  editor whose polished surface is her own best work of art. Yet glimpses of the  human  woman  beneath  still shine through  the  carefully  maintained fac;;ade that is itself a version of the woman shining through:

I  love  her  for  her  entrances and  exits.  If she  is sitting  in  here  and  wants  an apple from  the kitchen  she gets up and  strides  toward the doorway, not  long steps, but  tall  and  straight, and  with  her  head  up,  perhaps even  turned around to  ask if I want  something. The very form  of confidence, mmrnm-mrnh. Then  she  trips on the door  sill.
Her  whole  life  is like  that.   Not  appearance and   reality because  both   the  tall
and  the  tripping are  real.

Ti-Paulo sees in others what  he does not so fully comprehend in himself-how substance and surface, the human assuming and the mask assumed, intricately combine to rule out easy dichotomies such as the hoary literary  theme  of  appear­ ance versus reality. Appearances  have their reality too.
But even in the stumbling  elegant  Odile,  what  we might  term  "the  seeming­
ness of seems" is not seen completely. Ti-Paulo is too much  an artist to make that mistake.  As  he  observed,  a  painter's  work  is generally  divided  into  "woman periods." His work at that "time  is figure drawing,  the woman is Odile Saulara." He needs her seemingness. The  mannequin turned  editor  must still serve as his model  of what  a  beautiful  female should  be -even though  he actually  paints those who more Rubenesquely  embody  that  ideal.  Her  thin  beauty  inspires him to draw  beautiful  figures of fat  women.  "Metaphysics again," Ti-Paulo says in exasperation,  well aware that  even when the artist limits himself to shading  and line, reality can still take on many guises.
Although  Odile  casts roles for  herself, that  does not  prevent  Ti-Paulo from casting her in other, different roles, as his model and  his muse. Consider  also the journal in which he anticipates  her departure. Is Ti-Paulo here shaping  the living

62

SMITH

woman every bit as much  as he shapes her figure in his drawings-and with as little attention to verisimilitude?  He clearly expects and  perhaps  thereby  precipi­ tates Odile's every move : the special presents, the alternations between sullenness and fawning  flirtation,  the "business" that  keeps her away in the evenings. And do  these  details  attest  to  her  defection  mostly because  Ti-Paulo  sees them  as "proof"? For  example,  when  Naseby turns  up at  the  vernissage  and  Odile  de­ clares that  his glance is "like being handled  by some obscene, slimy swamp  crea­ ture," Ti-Paulo immediately  decides that the two will become lovers:  "Odile  has a strong streak of masochism, self-disgust, and  Naseby is the guy to satisfy her."  Odile  does leave,  but  we do  not  know if she goes to  join  Naseby  in  his mire. Ti-Paulo believes that  she does but Ti-Paulo,  in his  journal,  paints  with a vivid palette, intense contrasts,  Odiles and  Nasebys.
How  much  Ti-Paulo shapes  the  break-up  records must  be a  matter  for  con­
jecture.  We see only  his side of the story. The  problem,  however,  is still more complex. Even the evidence Ti-Paulo presents supposedly to demonstrate  his own good faith  "seems"  (a  loaded  word in this novel)  ambiguous,  and  no authorial intrusions  resolve that  ambiguity.  Thus  Ti-Paulo's  very gestures supposedly  de­ signed to persuade  Odile  to remain are precisely those that  demonstrate, for him, her desire to leave:  "I went over and told her I loved her and she said she adored me ... when  they talk adoration [or love?], it's already  too late."  He  uses chess metaphors  to describe the end game he plays in a match  that  he sees as already lost. After  the opening  move, the gambit  of pretended  gentleness, he  concludes that  "White's game is in its last throes,"  and  White's  game  can  be either  "hers  or mine." He seeks stalemates  in defeat. Or he would find Pyrrhic recompense in the  patterns  established  and  the postures struck as the game  winds  down -the artist's  eye for  grace  under  pressure. One  morning,  he  wakes  her  with  a  kiss, serves her an elegant  breakfast  in bed, bathes and  anoints her  while she applies make-up  to her face.  He  then  sits back to gaze  upon  the  perfect  beauty  he has helped  her  to achieve : the  "sun  streaming  in, ... her  face  turned  quarter  face from  me so I could see the good lines in her  cheek, her  throat." A Vermeer­ or only a Wyeth?  He also notes again that "it's already too late,"  and even hopes that  when  she subsequently  leaves to  go  shopping,  she  will  not  return:  "Per­ fection  would be nice  just once in my life." He has created  a perfect  picture,  a tableau,  and  the artist  insists on the ending that  will hurt  the man. When  Odile returns  for a few days, before her final and  permanent  departure, the man  wel­ comes her back. It is the man who has begun to realize how much  he loves her.
When she does leave, Ti-Paulo even more slowly begins to recognize that  love
is other than  art :

Today  I read  Measure  for Measure, watched  a  ball  game  on TV  and  listened  to some Mozart. While  I was :malci.ng lunch  I listened  to an interesting radio  program

SMITH

about  archaeological  digs in  Tanzania. Then   I went  out  and  got  drunk.  So  I
loved that  woman. So what?

The  "So  what?" shapes  the rest of Ti-Paulo's life: "So  I loved  her, love her.  All right,  I admit it. So? I even admit  I can't replace her." Yet,  as we discover  from a single  parenthetical line  dropped much  later  in  the  novel,  Ti-Paulo tries  des­ perately  to replace her. Ever  the  artist,  he manages to find  seven  close  copies  of the first Odile, but  he never  recovers  the  original. We  need  not  be fooled  by his flippant phrases.
At  the  beginning of the  chapter, Ti-Paulo described how,  for  the  great  nine­ teenth-century exhibitions, "painters would slap  on a new coat  of varnish to make  the garbage look fresh for  the  public  the  next  day." He  continues:  "My  stuff  is drawing under   glass. Just  for  the  fun  of it,  I ought to  varnish  the  whole  lot."  But this is precisely  what Ti-Paulo does with  his life and  in his journal. He creates  the  situation, the  work  of art,  and  then  covers  it  over  with  varnish -with  the varnish  that an artist  would wish to apply,  a thin  coat  that does not at all obscure the picture beneath :

So I went  out  for a few beers. Students  in  the  cheap  bars, ad-men  in  the  ex­ pensive ones. When I got home it was a shock to my eyes to find everything, every light,  every  book, every cushion, even  the  match   I dropped   in  the  hall  on  the way out all exactly as I left them.

Still life, indeed.

w.HAVE  ANALYZED THIS  CHAPTER  in some detail  and  not just  because  it  effectively  illustrates the  subtlety of  Smith's technique. The  ver­
nissage also merits  careful  attention because  it  represents a sustained   exercise  in the  painting metaphors that  run  through the  work.  And  still more  important, the larger  vernissage, Ti-Paulo's glossed-over  portrayal of his failure in love, the  way he  makes  a  fiction  from  possibly  fictional  facts,  serves  as  a  synecdoche for  the whole  novel.  The one  chapter can  be seen,  then, as a key to the  structure of the book.  Furthermore, this  question of structure is  particularly important  because John Moss,  one of the few critics  who  has written substantially on  Lord  Nelson Tavern,  admires the  novel  for  some  of  its qualities but  still  dismisses  it  as  an interesting failure-a work that  sadly lacks any  unifying vision or artistic  unity:

Rather than a plot to the whole, there is a filling in, an almost random  compilation until the picture is complete. But the picture itself is irrelevant,  being so entirely different  from  every perspective. What  in  the  end  are  important are  the  stories that  make it up. There  is meaning in particulars, but  the whole they add  up to is meaningless, the shape of a void.2

SMITH

But  pictures  do  not  become  "complete" nor  stories  "important" through   the process of an "almost  random  compilation." Neither are kaleidoscopic configura­ tions ("different from every perspective")   thus established. Moss obviously over­ looks the  pattern that  informs  Lord  Nelson Tavern. The  shifting  perspectives continually  intersect  and, at their loci, imply meaning. The vemissage, as earlier observed, is one such obvious locus. Against the backdrop  of Ti-Paulo's success at  art  and  failure  at  love, we catch  glimpses of the  other  characters who  are struggling  to achieve in both mediums and who succeed-if  they do succeed­ not by chance  but  mostly through  acts of will, a sense of  design, craftsmanship, handiwork.3   What  Moss sees as a void seems, instead,  to  be an  answer : a  re­ assertion  of one's  power  to direct  the  course of one's  life or-probably  more accurate-to  live, at  least in  part,  the  fiction of one's  ideal  life. Smith's  most admirable protagonists  artistically  gloss over  their  inevitable  human  failings in order to achieve the larger  perspective they have set for themselves. A few imper­ fect strokes need not  ruin  the whole canvas. But  the less capable  characters get stuck in their  own varnish.  Reconstructing a  more flattering  past, envisioning  a more  perfect future,  they make little of the workable  reality of the  present  mo­ ment.
This  contrast  is effectively established  in  Chapter  Three  when  Ti-Paulo  re­ counts in his journal "an  incident  with my father."  That  incident  occurred much earlier,  soon  after  Ti-Paulo was out  of art  school and  probably  while  he  was living unsuccessfully with  plump Sigrid  (he had not yet found  his model  muse) in  a  purple  apartment filled with  Chianti   bottles. But  more  important is the placement  of the  digression.  In  the  middle  of his own  account  of his own  dis­ appointment in love, Ti-Paulo tells of his father's earlier comparable  experience:

He  was  about fifty  then  and  having  his  problems.  My  mother had  finally  taken her  money  and  gone  to Rome  to live among  the gigolos. The old  man  was hitting the  booze, his law  practice was slipping.  Then he started going  with  a  new  typist from  the  architect's down  the  hall.  It was serious. He  called  and  offered  me  the plane fare  home.

The  young artist finds the lovers "ludicrous." But their  relationship  still has a kind of appeal  and Lucy, the twenty-five-year-old typist, shows a certain  class:

She  put   out   the  best  tableware for  honoured son,  was  careful with  it  but   not finicky. Served the  meal  without apologies  (even  if she  knew  about the  old  lady's cooking,  this  showed  a  cool  hand)  and  never  once  called  my  father by  his  first name.  That last was genius.  I could  hardly  wait to call her  Morruny.

For all his glibness, Ti-Paulo admits  to a begrudging  admiration. It  is merited: "The old man  was on his way to recovery." The  "old  man"  also recounts  how he discovered  the route  he is following:  "I was having supper  one night,  if you could call it that. Sitting at the kitchen table with greasy dishes all over the place,

SMITH

eating  a fried  egg with  the  yolk broken." The cat  leaps  onto  the  table  and  starts cleaning off the other  plates: "I keep eating, the cat  keeps eating, we're  watching each  other.  Suddenly it dawns  on me, I'm  fifty years old  and  I'm  going  to spend the rest of my life eating  supper with a cat.  Was  I?  No goddamn fierce I wasn't." It is a  "good  story" made  so,  the  cynical  son  suspects,  through many   tellings. Yet the father does more than  repeat  his compensatory tale. He also chooses Lucy, even though that  choice well might  lead  to his being  abandoned again: "I figure I can  give  her  ten  years  before  she  wants  something more." It  is still  a  wise choice. Ten  years of Lucy is much  preferable to ten  years  with  the  cat.  Yet  then Ti-Paulo (to  his father he is simply  Paul,  and  small  Paul  at  that), at  the  con­ clusion of his account of his abandonment, writes: "Maybe I'll  get a cat like the old man.... A house-trained cat."
Ti-Paulo's  backward glance   at   the  lonely  father  who   solves  his  loneliness through a  pragmatic love stands  in  marked contrast to  his account of  the  aes­ thetically shackled son  who  proposes  a cat  but  will  really  settle  for  nothing  less than an  impossible  ideal,  a  perfect  copy  of  Odile. In  short,  Smith  gives  us  a different version  of  the story  even  within  that  story.  It is in  this  sense  that  the chapter sets forth   the  pattern of  the  book.  The   internal  parallel   also  parallels external ones. For  the  Lucy  Ti-Paulo barely  recollects  when  he  meets  her  as his father's prospective wife is the Lucy  who occupies most of Chapter One, which  is Paleologue's tale  of love lost to poetry  and  another  version  of life sacrificed  upon the  altar of art.  In  that  opening chapter, Paleologue, at  university, writes  poetry  to  his  muse.  Like  Ti-Paulo painting  even  his  plump  models  in  the  image   of Odile, Paleologue refracts  Lucy  through a lens of  Petrarchan romanticism. The  down-to-earth, gum-chewing secretary becomes  "my  pale  Lucy,  pale  Lucia, light and  airy, brave love." Like Odile,  Lucy finds that  unlikely  casting  uncomfortable. Yet  her  love for  Paleologue is apparent even  in  the  way she  leaves  him,  which,  incidentally,  occurs  during a  celebration designed   to  mark   his  first  professional  success-a dinner during which  he intends to propose:

"No,  don't  say it,"  the glitter  on her cheeks now, it  would  never  wor,
to end, to end now, she wanted him to take her home now, she was sorry, she was really, really sorry, love, it wouldn't  work, they came  from  two different  worlds, love, he was a poet, he had  sold a poem, he  was going to be famous,  he should marry someone from his own world, she was only a dumb  typist, no, let's be honest with  each  other,  we always  have  been, love,  we  just  come  from  two  different worlds, a couple should come from one world, ... and  I'll always love you, always, the glittering  tears on her cheeks....

And she is right.  Paleologue does not realize this at  first;  he tries to find  the poet's eternal sleep beneath the waves in the  harbour. But  he is saved  (inexplicably by Grilse)   to realize  that  Lucy  must  have  her  older  businessman, the  secretary her boss. He needs something else, and  not a succession  of imitation Lucys. Paleologue

66

SMITH

learns the lesson of his first love. He finds Gussie and  lives as happily  ever after as any character in serious contemporary literature  can reasonably  hope to do.


BuT WHAT Is  Lord  Nelson Tavern all  about?   We  would suggest that  it is both  a  return  to an  older  type of fiction  and  yet one of the most experimental novels in Canadian literature.4   The  older form is the novel of
manners.  Jane  Austen  presides here. We follow characters through  vernissages, sophisticated  cocktail  parties,  crass student  gatherings,  celebration  dinners,  bar­ room sessions, polite teas, book signing parties, and extended  summer  visits. Yet in these public settings we see private faces too. Again Smith's  narrative technique allows him to transcend  the usual limits of the realistic mode. The shifting I-voice and the playful omniscience of the narrator  results in a continuous counterpoint­ ing  of oblique  views. With  pointillism,  the  blue and  yellow dots  together  and from a distance  seem like green. In  much the same fashion  the  private  perspec­ tives in the novel add  up to a larger  public picture, yet the  constituent  primary pigments remain  distinct and  can be closely examined.
In  exploring  the  discrete scenes, the separate  highlights  and  their  countering
dark contrasts,  we can begin to see more clearly what  Ray Smith  has been show­ ing  us all along.  The  characters in the novel who live best live with  a  kind  of good sense and  decorum,  peculiar  values in a twentieth-century  book.  And  yet their  decorum  is suited  to the age. Note, for example,  how Gussie has an affair with a sleazy actor  while Paleologue fights at the front  in a war  unaccountably past and future. Gould and Rachel are incensed by her behaviour, yet Paleologue, informed  of his wife's infidelity, realizes that  Gussie's temporary escape from the battle  of loneliness has little  to do with him or the  nature  of  their  relationship. Conversely, when Paleologue finally accommodates the precocious Sarah  who has been trying  all day  to seduce  him, it is Sarah,  not  Gussie, who for two decades plays the  betrayed  wife. Sarah,  it should  be  added,  also  imitates  Ti-Paulo,  her father,  in  her extended  search for another  Paleologue and  the lost innocence  of virginity innocently  lost. Only  belatedly, when reading the diary she wrote to her older self, does she realize that  one cannot  live imprisoned in the past. Yet other characters, most notably  Gould  and Rachel,  play out the defeats of their  past in their present, always tormenting each other with what "other  times, other places" might  have  wrought,  neither  one budging  from the  time  and  place  they share, unhappily,  together.  They  lack  Paleologue's  "balance," his ability  to  "see  the good and bad in all things" and to be "neither  impressed by the one nor disgusted by the other." And they all, from Paleologue and Gussie, through  Ti-Paulo, Nora, Sarah,  Rachel,  Gould,  and  even Naseby -like the  Bennet  sisters in  Pride and Prejudice-get pretty  much  what  they deserve. In  short,  despite  the  seeming

SMITH

randomness  of exposition, the erratic  time,  the  displaced  place,  we have  a  bal­ anced  and  symmetrical  work. Lord  Nelson Tavern  looks rather  like  Pemberley Hall after all.
So the novel exhibits a coherent vision, and a clearly moral one at that.  Naseby,
significantly,  never  recovers from  his first mistake.  The  realization  that  he was outmanoeuvred both  financially and  aesthetically  when  he  tried  to  con  Paleo­ logue and Gussie into making a pornographic movie  (pornography  was elevated into art  and  his intended  victims collected most of the cash)  precipitates further  failures.  No longer sure of his base abilities,  he dies a  victim  of his continuing  miscalculation.  Grilse  would  substitute  nefarious  business for  Nora  Noon  yet cannot  live without  her. He saves Paleologue from suicide but, forty years later,  will not  allow  Paleologue  to  return  the  favour.  In  contrast,   Nora  Noon  puts debasement  behind  her and  even transcends  the  "figures in  the  cave,"  the  per­ petual nightmares of her waking world. She, too, becomes an artist,  a better  one than  Ti-Paulo, precisely because she  can  replace  the  figments  of  her  haunted  imagination  with the  pale pigments of her  awesome canvasses. In  love, too, she plays a better  game. With Grilse on his aimless travels, with  her  journalist-lover too drunk  to be her lover, she joins, instead, Roger  Portable:
They  ran  into  each  other  every morning for  a  week.  The following week  they were married.
"Because you found  my bench." "Because you found  me on it."
As good  reasons  as any, they felt, and  a better marriage than  most.
And  meanwhile,  through  all the other  tales of loves lost and  won, the  "perfect lovers," Dimitri and Francesca, stay young forever, bound  only to each other and the present moment,  as vacuous as a soap bubble-and just as self-contained.
The characters  who live most admirably -and most happily  (an  unusual state
in serious  contemporary fiction:  happiness?) -are those  who  recapitulate in their fictional lives the method of the artist who creates them. But their happiness does not demonstrate an easy optimism. Halifax  is not located  in Arcadia;  Lord Nelson Tavern is not romantic  pastoral.  The  numerous  references to Dante  and Chaucer,  particularly  to "The  Inferno" and  "The Wife of Bath's  Tale," are  not bucolic at all. As Dimitri  and  Francesca  especially demonstrate, fortune -luck and riches-is not enough. As all the characters  in the novel show, a certain  art in living is required.  Those who do not  achieve  it are  condemned  to live their failures.  As in  Dante's  "Inferno," they  might  protract   their  limitations-their sins-by insisting they have none. As in Chaucer's "The Wife of Bath's  Tale," they might seek solace in fantasy alternatives  and  the sympathy  of listeners as unconcerned   with  them  as they  are  with  others.  The  sinners  of  Dante  and  of Chaucer  never escape the psychology of their sin, just as the more modest sinners of our secular age regularly re-enact  the neurosis implicit  in their imperfect  lives

68

SMITH


-Jean-Baptiste Clamence, Moses Herzog,  Madame Tassy  Roland, Jake  Hersch, characters Canadian or otherwise, who are trapped in anI-voice of self-conscious­ ness, a  hell  of self-examination, the  tedium of  psychoanalysis.  Smith's shifting  "I's" present  the  other side of other  stories. Contrary to  Moss's assessment,  these intersecting lives  and   chapters offer  a  completeness almost  cosmic  in  its  very human comedy.
We began  by quoting the  penultimate paragraph of Lord Nelson Tavern. With
that  authorial glance  at  "other places, other  times,"  the  reader must  also dearly glimpse  again   the  dark possibilities  that  serve  throughout the  novel  as  mostly hidden underpainting. The final paragraph tben  completes tbe  picture:

In  the  bright  dining  car  almost  empty  at  third  call,  Paleologue  and  Gussie ... leaned  toward  each other  and  kissed over the white linen. A red rose floated in a glass bowl. They  smiled  at  their  reflections in the window  and  could  not see the snow-covered  countryside   they  passed  through.  Gussie  glanced  about   to  see  if anyone was paying them any attention,  then shifted forward  in her chair.
"Higher," she purred,  "Yes, higher."

And  this is the  way  the  novel  ends.  The  train, a symbol   (for  journeys  and  con­ nections) that  recurs  throughout the novel, passes through the  night.  The elderly couple  inside  kiss sedately "over  the  white  linen" but  underneath the  table they are  adolescents still.  Here, too, are  other  places,  other times.  The  world  outside  is  dark, cold,  snow-covered, connotative of  death   (as  all  northern  landscapes regularly are), but  the  window reveals only the bright  reflection  of smiling  faces. As the  red  rose, another touch  of Dante, floats in the  bowl,  two  autumnal lovers re-experience the  fires of their  long  passed spring.  Thus time  runs  backwards to allow,  for those  who  can  achieve  it, an earthy heaven. "Higher ... Yes, higher." Smith toys with  the  vocabulary of mysticism  but  he does so with  serious  intent. Higher is sometimes lower.  Paleologue and Gussie are  happy because  they possess the  ability  to play  with  and  play over the  paradoxes of life, which  are  themselves
-a  basic  point  in  the  novel -the  different shadings that  an  honest  rendering
of human experience must  convey.  And  Smith  gives us an  honest  rendering  pol­ ished to a high art.  With  Paleologue and  Gussie and  their  final  play, he completes a group  portrait that  is strikingly  Rembrandtesque in  the  way  in  which it  high­  lights,  juxtaposes, blends,  and  mutes  both  the dark  and  the  bright  possibilities of life.

NOTES

1 Ray Smith,  Lord Nelson Tavern   (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1974),  p. r6o.
2 John  Moss, Sex  and  Violence  in  the  Canadian  Novel  (Toronto: McClelland   &
Stewart,  1977),  pp. 150-51.
3 Yet Ray Smith,  it must  be emphasized, is not a Canadian version of Ayn Rand. Thus  Gussie, at one point,  talking of how "lucky" she and  Paleologue  have been,

6g

SMITH

observes: "I  was  reading Herodotus again; I  had   forgotten  how  chaotic and accidental life can  be."
4  Moss  does  pay  partial tribute to  "Smith's brilliant formal innovations" but  sees them  as "not matched, quite,  by the quality  of the vision they are  meant to convey."




FROM 7TH  JIVENUE
 


Stephen Bett


It becomes increasingly problematical that  the house is not the place described, but  a
place  enacted.  Having no real features save

those  you make  of it moving  past a window  or throwing open  a balcony door,  it could  easily be reduced to the mimicry
of design.    But surfaces

are  constantly being confronted by your  hand weaving  its own  purpose through the rooms, like a painter who  has inherently consented to his medium.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS /228-4741




HIPPOS  JIND BIKERS
 POEM


Glen Sorestad


Radium Hot  Springs  this August  afternoon
looks the same as any other  summer  mountain day:
a congestion of swimsuited  tourists  that  ring the  government hot springs  pool in a drove.
Half-submerged they bask, pale hippos  sans mud lured  to this concrete wallow  to luxuriate
from  every corner  of the continent, pilgrims in multi-coloured trunks  and  bikinis
hip  to hip  around the oblong  IJQOl.

Inside  the  National Hotel  down  the road
cold beer is spilled into goverrunent glasses as locals offset the  valley heat  with  beaded  brown  bottles:
those  fine brews from  Creston -Kokanees and  Kootenays and  bubbles  rise in the chilled  amber of snowy heads.
In  this refuge  from  the hippo hive we repair -
my wife and  I free from  the  wheel and  the long  drive content to let the cold beer  bring  the sun  down.
The rumble of low conversation surrounds us and  the  punctuation of bottle  on glass.

The door  opens  and  yanks someone  in from  the sun a black-leathered biker, white  helmet  in hand
greasy wind-strewn hair  flung  akimbo.  He  enters with  a second,  third  and  fourth clone hard on heels. The door  has barely  rejected the sun again
when  another group  of four  or five clatter through their  heavy-booted tread  a militant percussion. Each one is bearded, hair  askew or pony-tailed
each  leathered black  back emblazoned
with  its unartistic club  insignia:  Rebels, Kings,  Chiefs,  from  every western  city.
And  as the door swings open  again  and  again the march of helmets  and  bikers garb  grows
and  the  throng is marshalled at the back  of the  pub. The beer flows downhill to meet  the thirst.

POEM

When  the last one is finally seated  at  the  back two bikers take a seat at the front  at a window to survey the street  outside  and  the bike pack at rest now, roars stilled, chrome aglint.
"There are  at  least forty-five  bikes out  there," my wife announces quietly,  and  that's too much
for several  tables of locals in this sudden power  shift and  beers are  drunk in haste,  tables  vacated:
they have heard  wild tales of bike gang  terror. Outside the hotel  six bikers are  deployed
as late afternoon sentinels  over  the silent  machines. A few bikers stroll from  table  to table
and  exchange unheard remarks with  the others. Some  wear headbands, some neckerchiefs, most are  greasy-jeaned, almost  all seem  over  thirty.
The room wears  their  presence  in unseemly  quiet.
A sharp smell of fear  hangs  in the smoke.

Across the street  a lone mountie has materialized and  sits in his car in the service station  lot
talks  to several  locals with  feigned  indifference and  pretends not to notice  just across the  street this gleaming  armada of spoke and  chrome. The minutes  slide by like swallows of draught and  the pub, its tables all occupied now
drinks in wake-like solemnity.  Conversations
are  the low drone of prayer.  There are  no guffaws or high whinnies,  no bellows or gut-shakers
nothing to impart the usual  to the  place -
and  the bikers have  established  the mood  themselves their  air of propriety has deceived  us all.

Inside  an  hour  they rise as one and  troop  away
and  as they pass our  table in a barrage of heavy  heels
I note several  knives in sheaths slung  from  belts that  slap against  their  thighs  as they retreat.
One  by one the motors  catch  and  growl,  the  rumble of Yamaha, Suzuki,  Harley  shakes  the  thin  air. Helmets snap  into  place as bike by bike they  roll
away  to shatter the mountain evening. The cop  disappears.
The young bartender pastes his smile back  on
and  moves among the empty  tables  to pick  up  glasses.


Radium  Hot Springs, August 1981

72





ICELANDIC RHYTHMS

KRISTJANA GUNNARs,  One-Eyed  Moon  Maps.
Poroepic, $5-95·
KRISTJANA GUNNARS, Settlement Poems 1, Set­
tlement  Poems 2. Turnstone, n.p.

A BOOK OF  POEMS  declares its quality  in its rhythms. If their  rhythms are good the poems  must  be good. On  the other hand, many  promising poems  seem  to fail  their promise   because   their   rhythms are   un­ certain. Free-form  poems  are  especially subject to rhythmic flatness and sameness, however ingenious their spacings and line­ lengths  may be.
The rhythms in  Kristjana Gunnars' three  books, One-Eyed  Moon Masks and Settlement Poems, 1 & 2, are  good,  and give one confidence in  the  over-all  good­ ness of the  books. They  are  based on  the Old    Germanic  metres,  though   by   no means  strictly.  These metres  are  current in Iceland yet, though many  of  the  poets now  use them  in  modified  forms,  if they have  not given them  up altogether. Krist­  jana  Gunnars  was  born in  Iceland  and studied there,  and  the  Icelandic content of her  three  books is made  prominent, so it would  not be surprising if their  rhythms  were   Icelandic   too.  Only   in  One-Eyed Moon  Maps, however, are  they  identifi­  able.  Here  is an example, the first stanzas of the poem called  "Bear":

the  ring  of moon changes something
as bearskin changes bear

on  the  floor,  skin looks  half-human what once  was bear
is changed by  slaughter

There are two stresses per line. All but the first  line  of the  second  stanza are  identi-
 fiable types, according to Sievers'  metric, as follows:  B,A,B, -, C,B,A. The uniden­ tified line might  be called  a reverse D.
The poems  in  this  book  are  not  all  to be  scanned   in this  way,  but  many  lines and  whole stanzas are, and  my impression is that  where  they wander much  from  the regular   types   the  rhythms, by  contrast, seem commonplace.
rrhe  collection  is a  unity,   and   makes use  of an  association of  the  moon  with the god Odin to present  a series of  vigor­ ous,  though   not  easily  intelligible,  state­  ments  on  life,  death,  poetry,  and   other  weighty  subjects. The  first  poem  begins with the landing of Armstrong and  Aldrin on  the  moon  in  1g6g  and  then  immedi­ ately  brings  Odin into  the  picture, who, like the moon,  was one-eyed, and  hung  in the World  Tree as the moon  hangs  in the sky.  Odin   was  the  god  of,  among  other things,  poetry; he  hung   in  the  Tree for nine days and  nights, a sacrifice of himself to himself,  in order  to acquire the  runes. The  poems keep Odin and  the moon, and stories about both,  and  several more immediate things,  the  poet's  Icelandic grandfather, for instance, and  her  own wishes  all  in  the  air at  once,  with  great skill.  The   paganism  at  times  reads  like hocus-pocus to  me,  but,  though it  does not  seem  to  be erudite, it  maintains the heroic  stance  consistently, along  with  the posturing that   belongs  with   it  by  kind. Take, for  example, the  following  poem, "Smoke":

burn this  house, all  that's in it send  it  to sea, a blazing ship death by  knife, death
by rope,  death by fire
anything is better than the  slow bed
to sleep  like  maginus, lined
with  craters on  the  brink, struck
by a red  strap of sunrise sunset
place  me in  a large fire surrounded by  high  flames like werner, aliacensis circled  by peaks, place  me

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in clavius the  larger lunar bed ringed with  mountains
higher the  sunrise, sunset faster sooner to ashes

all  is as it ever  was
the  sea  of earth, the  ship
of old & rotting house the  oxygen  we eat

send  back  the  sea-king who said steeper smoke,  deeper honor

The  poems are identified  by runes and some  runic  kind   of  signs,  as  well  as  by titles. I was not able  to make the associa­ tions between  runes,  titles, and poems that Gunnars speaks  about in her  appendix, but  runes   are  magic,   not  rational, and my dictionary, furthermore ( Cleasby, Vig­ fusson, Craigie) , though it gives the Norse runes,  may  be out  of  date.  There  is no denying  the decorative value of the runes, and   the  titles  in  the  old  letters,  nicely done; and  the  book  as a whole  is  hand­ some and free of proofing errors.
The heroic  stance more  effectively,  in my view, sustains  the mood of the Settle­ ment   Poems,  I  & 2.  These  poems  are based on journals and documents that  tell of  the  settlement of  Icelanders north  of Winnipeg during  the  latter   half  of  the nineteenth   century.   The  settlers   were tough  and  superstitious, resourceful peo­ ple who left grim conditions in Iceland to come   to   conditions  almost   as  grim   in Northern  Manitoba.  Here   is  how   one poem  puts  it; Volume 2,  "Johann Briem
2, II":

hannes scheving (dead  I726)
has  been  unearthed
in  the  munkathverar-cemetery inadvertently

jon farmer, curious has them dig  it all  up
the  coffin strung in  black tanned leather, nailed

tight around the  gable­
end  with  brass  tacks
one  side of the  gable-head
loose  where the  corpse is

74
 slipped in
for  a  burial like  that i'd  go  to  new  iceland
(when you're poor  you're buried

without graveclothes, without coffin,  tied  to a  thin  board) though it's  slow  sailing
i can't say

it's  bad,  this  moving over from  old  to  new  iceland
a bit  crowded on  the  boats

& wagons, unusual food,  some  stomach illness,  mainly
for  the  kids,  but  other-

wise  i can't say
it's  as bad  as the  great
smallpox of  1 707
&  I 786,  or  the  famines

of 1756  &  I784 (with starvation on  every farm, no one
had  anything for  any-

one)  only
30 or  40 children are  dead of the  stomach pain
going to canada ( I I

in  the  first  group dead on  arrival in  winnipeg) but  it's  not  as bad

as  I785 (when, without timber, you  were  buried without even  a board, dumped with  everyone else  together

under a cairn
in  the  black-tanned night nailed in  with  brass
stars) not  that

bad

The  writing in   these  two  volumes is excellent. It  is  elliptical, and   the  sense­ connections are  sometimes hard to make, yet  it  is always  vivid  and   gives  one  the sense of being  present at whatever is going  on.  And  something  is  always  going  on. The style reininds one of the  sagas  in  its dramatic immediacy, yet its incidents and  observations are joined  not in a narrative sequence but  by  juxtaposition, as in  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"field" way of writing. I prefer  the narra­ tive line but would  not deny  the effective­ ness  of  the   juxtapositions in  these  two books.
The   metres   of  the  Settlement  Poems are   not   identifiably  Germanic,  though their   rhythms are   reminiscent  of  them. The  rhythms are  good   and,   to  my  ear,
have  a  longer  swell  than those  of  One­
Eyed Moon  Maps. In all  three  books the language is admirably used,  economical,
sparing  of  adjectives,  adverbs,  and   all
forms  of comparison. Poetry  is by nature metaphorical, but  too many separate metaphors  become   distracting and  tire­ some.  Comparisons with  "like" and  "as"  are   still  more   objectionable.  There  are few "likes"  in  these  books,  most  of them in  One-Eyed  Moon  Maps, and  the  com­ parisons  they  draw  are  rather identifica-







"A Better Way  to Buy Books"

The  Academic Book Club has ex­ panded  the  idea   of  a  traditional book  club  into  a  completely new and  unique concept.
Save  20-40% on any book in  print! Save  up to 80%   on selected  titles.
NO  GIMMICKS
NO  HIDDEN CHARGES AND  NO  HARD SELL
Just  low,  low  prices  every  day  of  the year;  unlimited  choice  of  books;  and fast, efficient, personal service on every order.

ACADEMIC BOOK CLUB
Canada: 105 Wellington St., Kingston, Ont. K7L 5C7
U.S.A.: Cape  Vincent, New York,
13618-0399
Europe: Postbus  1891, 1005 AP Amsterdam, The  Netherlands
 tions with mythical or heroic figures than descriptions. The  vocabulary is  predom­ inantly English. In One-Eyed Moon Maps Latin words are  used effectively in a spe­ cial   way,  mostly   as  geographical  place names  on the moon. There are few Latin  words  in  the  Settlement  Poems  but  an exotic tone is given by the many Icelandic names. This tone is deliberately reinforced by including the  diacritical marks  on  the letters, though the peculiarly Icelanclic letters  are  not  used.  The  effect  of  these marks   must   be  mainly   visual,  for   few readers  will  know  the  sounds  they  incli­ cate.
Altogether they are three good books; handsome to  look  at,  good  reading, and full of promise.
GEORGE   JOHNSTON









Out-of-Print

CANADIANA  BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS




HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685

ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues  free on request



75

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



POETS IN PROSE

DERK   WYNAND,   One   Cook,  Once   Dreaming.
Sono Nis, $6.gs.
RALPH  GUSTAFSON,  The  Viuid  Air. Sono Nis,
$6.gs.

POETS WHO RESORT to fiction  tend  to be faced  with  an  uneasy  choice: whether to adapt themselves  to a prosaic medium, or whether  to  shape   that   most   public   of forms to their own needs and their private imaginations. Derk   Wynand has  chosen the latter course, and  in One  Cook, Once Dreaming, his first  book  devoted   purely to  fiction,  he  achieves   a  narrative  style that  is elegant and  rugged  at  once.  The book   is   beautifully  written:   in   other words, the force and  sensuous grace of its language are apt  for the subjects  at hand. These   subjects-the  relations   between art  and  dream, the ways in which  dreams and  waking  lives  illuminate each  other, and  the  difficulty  of  finding  any  sure  or lasting knowledge-are hardly  foreign  to poetry.  Indeed, much  of One  Cook, Once Dreaming   could   be  described   as  "prose poetry" were  it not  for  the  effete, purpl­ ish-pink  connotations that  linger  around that   phrase.  Some  of  Wynand's  fictions (chapters? parables? fables? stories? none of these words  is adequate)   jut  out  from the text like disconnected rocks or slabs of cake, but on the whole he sustains enough  of a narrative current to  make  this book something more  than  merely  the  sum  of its burnished parts.
As the  title  suggests,  the central figure of the narrative is a man  equally adept at making  cakes and dreams. He teaches  the art  of cookery  in  a  school  to  which  ap­ prentices come  from  many  miles around, passing   through  a  landscape   that    (fit­ tingly   for   Wynand)    contains   elements  suggestive   of  both  central  Europe  and British  Columbia.  In  much  of  the  book time seems irrelevant, as it does in numer­  ous fairy  tales and  myths.  We  gain  little
 sense of  the  passage  of months  or  years, and  even  less of characters "developing" through a  series  of  yesterdays,  for  One Cook, Once   Dreaming unfolds  in  the present  tense of all dreams. Wynand uses various  devices  to  make  a reading of his book as near  as possible to a succession of dreams:   the   characters  are   unnamed, their   personalities blur   continually, and sensory images  are  provided with  a  mini­ mum  of  explanation. Such  methods can easily become self-indulgent, but here that  rarely   happens;  Wynand's   tact   usually equals  his audacity. One of  the most pow­ erful   episodes,   however,   deals   directly  with  the  effects  of  time,  for  it  describes the   advent  of   a   virtually  omnipotent cooking  machine  which  threatens to put  all  the  teachers out  of work.  As Wynand evokes the desperate competition between  the   beleaguered  teachers  and   the   ma­ chine,  his prose attains an intensity and  a resonance  which   would   not   have   dis­ graced  Kafka.
\The narrative is framed by passages at the  book's  beginning and  end  which  are specifically concerned with  the act of creation;  Wynand is  a knowing   writer, and  the  simplicity of  many  of  these  fic­ tions is the result of artifice. His ironies are mostly  gentle  and  his attitude  to sex oc­ casionally   verges  on  the  sentimental: if this is post-modernism, it is post-modern­ ism with  charm. Even  though  tl1e cook's dreams often  throw a reflection  back onto  the   original   dreamer,   an   author  who dreams of a cook, they reveal an imagina­ tion  that can  only  be described as whole­  some. One  of Wynand's more surprising accomplishments in  One  Cook, Once Dreaming is to show something of the dignity  of teaching. For  all the novelty  of images  and  style, this is a profoundly un­ worrying book. One  might  even  say  that  Butor  wouldn't melt in its mouth.
,Whereas Wynand modifies the fictional mode  according to  his own  requirements, Ralph  Gustafson  has   been   content  to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



leave the short story much  as he found  it. His  collected stories,  published  under   a slightly strained  title  borrowed from Stephen  Spender's  most   famous   poem, are  a small  disappointment, though   not because  of  any  technical  deficiencies  in the  writing;  Gustafson is  too  alert,   too professional a writer  to  permit  incompe­ tence.   Nevertheless, the   fourteen  short  stories  that  make  up  The  Vivid Air  give an  unfortunate  impression  of  slightness. The suspicion  arises  that  they  were writ­ ten over  the decades more  from  curiosity or  memory  than   from  artistic   necessity, and   that   (unlike   many   of  Gustafson's poems)   they  have  not  been  fully  imag­ ined. They  seem somehow peripheral. Too much  of  the  author has  been  left  out  of his fiction; the  musical, shining  imagina­ tion   behind, say,  Rivers   Among  Rocks and  Fire on Stone  appears only briefly in The Vivid Air.
The  teen-age hero   of  the   title  story learns  "once  and  for all that  sensuousness was   not   sinful,   that    to   hold   richness within  him  was right." It is a  belief  that only a few of the tales exemplify.  Most of them   are   filtered   through  the  wmTied, edgy  consciousness  of  their  central  char­ acters; the  stories  which  concentrate on the  rich  world  of  childhood  are  among  the  most  evocative.  In  two  stories  about  the  boy  Jimmy, possibly  founded on  di­ rect  reminiscence, and  one  about a little girl   called   Deborah,   Gustafson  allows himself  space  and  breath to write  at leis­ ure.  Elsewhere he  seems  cramped,  as  if the  desire  to publish  his fiction  in  maga­  zines  with  very  restricted space  had  af­ fected  the quality of perception as well as the quantity of words.  A few of  his stories offer  the  cold  bath   treatment,  plunging the  reader  fast into  a chilly world but  re­ fusing  to let him stay there for long. Per­ haps  surprisingly, The Vivid Air  betrays a certain fascination with  danger, mutila­ tion,  and  torment-a dark  interest   that  more than  matches the "lyrical  intensity"
 of which the publishers boast, and far out­ weighs  the  promised  "humour." The so­ cially  observant  realism  characteristic of so many  Canadian short  stories  is not  a prominent feature of   Gustafson's work;  the  tones and  themes of his fiction  often recall  instead  the private intensity  of po­ etry. Yet  that  privacy  remains somewhat at  odds  with the  freely  accepted conven­ tions  of  the  form  and   the  demands of narrative. He is by no means a bad writer of fiction;  but it is not for fiction  that  he will he remembered.
MARK ABLEY


BEING AND BEING ABOUT

ALICE    VAN     WART,   Positionings.    Fiddlehead,
$3·50.
MIRIAM MANDEL,  Where  Have You  Been. Long­
spoon,  n.p.
PAT LOWTHER, Final Instructions. Ed.  Dona Sturmanis & Fred Candelaria. West  Coast Review/Orca Sound, $4.95.

DESPITE  WHAT  NON-READERS of the form think,   poetry  attempts to  elucidate and not  bemuse.  Even  though each  of  these books fails in some way (and  to wildly differing  degrees), the  attempts at  least reflect  back a look at  ourselves  as well as the poet writing.
The  sources  of Van  Wart's poems  are dreams and  sex. Although she has  thus succeeded   in  tracking down  this  power­ source  of many  a good  poem, she  hasn't discovered  how to tap directly into it. The  poems  "discuss"   and   "are  about" these things  rather than  being creations arising
out  of  them:  "In  dreams I I fly  I the dark  night  I lights  my way"; and  "here your body haunts I mine,  an  interloper I resent   I the  time  I  spend   examining I your   intentions  I  our  positionings."
There's a  quiet   attention to  rhythm in
these  poems although nothing striking in

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



language or  imagery.  Their lack  of strength is due  in  part  to  dearth of  in­ tellectual line,  and  it's  impossible  to say what   Van   Wart's work  could   be  if  she were to find one:  but seeing oneself at the centre of  a  mystic  process  is   (however characteristic  of  much,   both   good  and  bad,  in our  literature and  visual  art)   in­ sufficient   to   engender   the   myth-magic that Van  Wart desires.
!Vulnerability,  fragility,   and   madness are   the  hallmarks of  Miriam  Mandel's world.  Where Have  You  Been  is a diary arrangement   of   poems    chronicling a journey  to  London and  back  via  tourist stops   and   psychiatric institutions. The poems are  long and  thin on the  page and the  language is simple  in  the  extreme - it skates along  the surface  of thought and feeling, although the emotional chaos that hovers  around the  child-like   naive  tone is inescapable. Again,  this is poetry  about rather than  arising  from  experience; but it does mirror an odd  thing  back, a belief
in reality  as found  in old things: "these  I strange living customs  I all this vast age I pressing  down   I upon  me."  Reality  ap­
pears  to  have  a geometric relation to the
number and  size of cemeteries  in a coun­ try,  and   illusion   to  the  amount  of  un­  occupied  landscape around.  Is   it   any wonder  that  we worry about identity?
Mandel  has   one   lovely   and   simple poem,  however -called  "London, June
15, 1978"-where the naivete  works, rather like a Faulkner faded  belle describ­
ing  herself: "I  will  write  of Coventry  I
some  other   night   I if  the  Lord   I who creates I such  passion  I such  beauty  I in his Homes  I leaves me I sufficient time­ I now   I I have   become   I  the  empty,  beige  sweet  pea  pod  I ready  to  fall  I to earth I and  blend  there  I in peace."
Even
and in some cases unfinished  poems, Pat Lowther's Final Instructions reflect  a complex   mind   engaged   in  looking  at  a world  that  demands a complex  response.
 The poems demonstrate an intellectual curiosity   and   a  willingness   to  risk  and struggle  with  language, thought, and im­ agery that  is compelling. These poems are  philosophical,  much   more   so   than   the  more  familiar poems  of  her  later work, and  deal  explicitly with  the place of man  in  the   universe   and   the  cycles  of  con­ sciousness   found  in   myth.    The  poem "Personae" with   its  lines  "not even  the
pink and  sapping roses I that  are hands I
of human love" is quintessential Lowther.
Some  of the  poems  are  open-ended, fail­ ures  in  terms  of  craft, and  yet  move  in wider, more exciting arcs than others  that  are  more  technically expert.  In fact,  the reach   of   these   poems   surprised  me­ perhaps she'd  been encouraged to tie later  poems  together  too tightly,  to remove  all evidence of the construction. But in some cases, to  do  this  removes  the  link  to  un­ derstanding for the reader.
My one objection to this book is its arrangement. The  editors   explain that they collected  the work in order  to show Lowther's development (the  poems cover a period of 15 years)  and yet they have arranged the poems "thematically" rather than  chronologically, indicating by italici­ zation  in  the  table  of contents which  are the earliest  poems-an irritating device.  The  sections   are   not   that   discrete   in theme and, for this type of book, a chron­ ological   arrangement   would   have   been much  more  to the point.

MARILYN BOWERING


ON EVALUATION

WILFRED cuoE, A Due Sense of Differences:  An Evaluative  Approach  to  Canadian   Litera­ ture.  University   Press  of  America,  $17.75; pa. $g.so.

THIS  VOLUME  IS DIFFICULT to bring  into focus  because  it  is at once a collection of "separate and   self-contained" essays  on

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



four  works   of   Canadian   fiction  and   a framing set  of  definitions and arguments meant  to  justify   the   essays-and  their collection-by reference to the  enterprise of evaluative criticism. There are  eight of these  "self-contained" essays, six reprinted and retitled from previous publication in Canadian literary journals, one  expanded from a  previously published essay,  and one   anounced  as   soon   to   appear  in   a journal; two   are on   Ross's As  For  Me and  My   House, three  on   Davies'  Fifth Business, two on Margaret Atwood's Lady Oracle, and one  on  Richter's St. Urbain's Horseman. I might wish  for  more space to   commend  and  to   quarrel  with    the readings offered in  these  essays,  and such a  response would  be  necessary to  satisfy the author when he characterizes his work as "a style of reading that demands more than  others,  proving itself   only   by  the results it attains: and it is by those  results, rather than the  format of  their  presenta­ tion,    that  this   study's   contribution  to Canadian  criticism  should  finally be  as­ sessed." But  perhaps  these   essays,  since  they  are now  offered as  a collection, are  equally  well   reviewed   by   attention  to their framing format, contained in a long  preface, two  initial chapters, and a  final  one,  because there Cude raises  issues  that go  well  beyond  his  readings of  specific  novels  to  bear   on   his  understanding of evaluative  criticism itself-with   results that colour an estimation of his individual essays.
By means of  his  format, Cude sets out to demonstrate both the  need and  the direction for  the  evaluative criticism of Canadian letters, an enterprise so impor­ tant in  itself  and so  counter to  the  au­ thority  of   Northrop   Frye's   arguments against evaluation that one  has to  begin  by  admiring both Curle's  priorities and his  courage.  Unfortunately  Curle's defi­  nitions of  what evaluation is, and what it does,  work in such  restrictive and finally contradictory  ways    that  they    seriously
 undermine his  case.  On   the  first  page  of his  preface, Cude  uses  Dick   Harrison's Unnamed Country  to  illustrate  his  con­ tention that  (with the   exception,  as  he later makes clear, of John  Moss and  Ed­ mund Wilson) critics of  Canadian litera­ ture "flatly refuse to consider the  literary merits of  the   works  they  discuss." Cude then illustrates one  of  his  own  methods for  such  consideration by  flatly   refusing to concede Harrison's authors any literary merit whatsoever: "Whatever the context of  judgment, the   novels   of  authors  like Joseph Collins, Alexander  Begg,  Ralph Connor, Nellie McClung, Arthur Stringer and Edward McCourt are rubbish." Without  worrying  the   accuracy  of   this comprehensive judgtnent, we  can  marvel at the ease with which it is here affirmed; Cude goes on  to call  such judgtnents "ob­ servable  facts  readily  accessible  to  any  intelligent and careful reader,"  and   pre­ sumably as fact  they   are   beyond   argu­ ment; at least Cude offers none.  No  need  then  for a searching process of discrimina­ tion   here;  the  identification  of  rubbish seems  immediate, a matter of  simple in­ spection, albeit with the  qualification that the  inspector be neither stupid nor  care­ less.  What  then  requires the   effort  of evaluative  judgment?  Curle's  own   con­ siderable efforts are devoted to "the isola­  tion   of  Canadian   works of   excellence, arguing  from  a  detailed  explanation of why   and    how    they   might   be   deemed works  of  excellence."  Proper evaluation, then, "must isolate  the  classics  from the  lesser works." Cude emphasizes again and  again  that  this  kind   of  isolating is  de­  manding   work,   but    once    it  has   been accomplished, critical  discrimination reaches another  kind   of  limit:  Cude is "convinced that criticism will  never  suc­ ceed   in  ranking  the   classics  relative  to each    other."  Adapting  John   Maynard Keynes's "principles  of   uncertain  argu­ ment" as set  out in  his Treatise  on Prob­ ability, Cude rejects any  principle of  dis-

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



crmunation beyond  the distribution of works into two categories, the canon of classics  and   the  rubbish   bin  for  "ephe­ meral   art." As  one  consequence  of  this position,  Cude's claims  for  his  collection  seem modest: "It is highly  probable that  my four selections  are all classics, and it is a waste of time attempting to rank  them relative to each  other." But  there  is con­ tradiction here. If the detection  of literary  rubbish   is,  as  Cude initially  affirms,  so easy, a matter of "observable facts readily accessible," of simple inspection, why does the  identification  of  classics  require   "a style of reading that demands  more  than others" and  why are  classics only capable of being recognized as "probable"; classics are,  aren't they  (given  only  two categor­ ies) , the  good  stuff  left  over  after  we've thrown  out  the  rubbish? If,  however,  as Cude  later  insists,  such  sorting  is so de­ manding,  shouldn't   he   have   been   less abrupt in  consigning Collins, Begg, Con­  nor, McClung, Stringer, and  McCourt to the rubbish bin?
·This contradiction is, however,  less im­ portant  than   one  implication of  Cude's  refusal  to discriminate among classics;  if the  classics can't be ranked  with  respect to  one   another, it  seems  to  follow  for Cude  that  they are  related as equals, or at least  he  relies  heavily  on  making   such equations in order to seek classic status for the novels he is sponsoring. He frequently asserts similarities between  his candidates and "touchstone" works already  and more or  less securely  within the canon  of rec­ ognized  classics.  The  implication is that the  analogy  will continue to hold,  that  if the  touchstone  is  accepted  as  a  classic, then  surely  the analogous candidate must have  equal   status. This   is,  I submit,   a covert  form  of  up-grading or  ranking  in which  the  not  yet secure work is elevated in rank  by means  of its equation with the securely classical work. The strategy is not itself illegitimate, but Cude's  repeated use of  it  seems  to  contradict his  theoretical

8o
 arguments against  the  ranking of classics. Further, his  theory,   because   it  confines him  to equation, poses unnecessary prob­ lems with  his specific  judgments. For  ex­ ample, in  the  last  paragraph of  his first essay on As For Me  and My House, Cude  offers  this:   "Ross  handles  personal rela­ tionships  with   all  the  delicacy   of  Jane Austen; he handles first-person narration with   all  the  sophistication  of  Jonathan Swift; and  he  handles  the  bluster   of  a drought-scourged prairie with  all the awareness of Emily Bronte." Aside from  a reminder that Swift, like Ross, uses an unreliable narrator, this is the  first  men­ tion  in  the  essay of  these  established au­  thors,  so that  the  judgment stands not  as the  summary of  an argument, but  as  an invitation to the  reader to agree.  But  the thrice    repeated    formula   of   equation, "with all  the ... ," makes  agreement im­ possible  because,  as  multiplied, the  odds against three such equations being equally accurate become  astronomical; isn't  it more  probable that  we are dealing with degrees,   that   Ross's  work  may  reveal  a degree  or two less delicacy than  Jane Aus­ ten's,  or  a degree  or  two more awareness than   Emily  Bronte's? In  any  event,   the formula of  equation  imposed  by Cude's refusal   to  rank   the  classics  defeats   any hope   of  precision   in  such  comparisons. Cude is right  to reject ranking if it means undertaking a  strict  hierarchical  place­  ment   of  works  from  one  to,  say,  three  thousand, but  surely  evaluative criticism  works  best not  as it  lumps  classics into  a capacious set  of  equals,   but  rather as  it weighs  the relative merits  of two or more worl{ls that  may  be  profitably   measured against one another.
But even if we grant that  the evaluative critic's job is confined  to identifying clas­ sics, Cude's theories about  how  this  is to be  done   impose   even   more   limitations upon  the  critic.  Cude  believes that  a con­ vincing  argument for establishing modern and  contemporary  Canadian  authors  as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



classic "is to be found in an adaptation of the  scientific   technique  of  predictivity." He  then   undertakes "a  chapter-long  di­ gression   into   the   convoluted  realm   of critical procedures" in  order to  explain. "This  digression   is  completely  unavoid­ able,   since   from   the   days   of   Aristotle  every  attempt to  transform  literary criti­ cism with  the  methodology of science has consistently and  generally  been  adjudged chimerical." Note  first the strength of the consensus   asserted   here;   this  consistent and  general  judgment has persisted  since the  fourth  century  B.C. Cude goes on  to explain that the major  reason  behind  this judgment   is   that   literary  critics   have lacked   access  to  the  kind  of  facts   that  might   verify   their   judgments  and   thus have remained "swamped in subjectivity." Cude then asks two questions: "What, in criticism, constitutes a demonstrable fact?  And  how,  in  criticism, could  such  a fact  be used in conjunction with scientific pre­ dictivity to  develop  a self-correcting and progressive  scholarly  tradition? The  pur­ pose of  this  chapter is to  argue  that  an­  swers to these questions do exist, to argue  that   criticism can   at   last  move  beyond Aristotelian methods."  This  claim  is as­ tonishing on a number of counts,  not  the least   of  which   is  that  Cude   means   to break  from  the  strong  consensus  he  had first described  by offering the existence  of such consensus  as the answer to his ques­  tions. Cude believes  that  undeniable facts of literary  history -like the  facts  which establish  that  Shakespeare has  been  long and  widely  regarded as one  of the  great  poets  of  the  world-are "a   reasonable basis  for  asserting  as  fact   'Shakespeare  was one of the great  poets of the world.'" Curle's  effort   to  collapse   the  distinction between   actually   being  something   and being long and widely regarded as some­ thing works  against his own  dissent from consensus,  for  if  he  is right,  wouldn't it follow  that   actually  being  chimerical  is the  same  as  being  long  and   widely  re-
 garded as chimerical? And wouldn't, then, his  own   argument  be  chimerical?  But such  a collapsing, however  elastically  in­ voked,  is necessary  for  his argument  be­ cause it is the basis of his surprising claims  for  historical  consensus. The existence  of such a consensus of opinion is transformed for  Cude,  apparently  by  simple  addition through time   to  the  number of  people who  hold  the  opinion,  into  the   fact of that  opinion's absolute certitude, the  fact that  will save literary criticism from  sub­ jectivity: "Unlike the value-judgment ad­  vanced by a single person  or group, which would be open to inaccuracies induced by either   misapplication   of   standards  or changing public taste, the consensus that coheres  about a  classic  is not  subject to error." This   statement  is  fallacious  be­ cause  it asserts  no  distinction except  size between  a group  that  is subject to error  and  one that  is not,  but  I can  see its ap­  peal,   for  if it  were  true,   useful   things  might  follow. "Scientific predictivity" be­ comes for Cude  the  use of the  consensus  as a  standard "not  subject to  error" for measuring the  work  of critics.  Insofar as the  critic  confirms  or  advances the  con­ sensus, he  conspires with  "fact" and  will survive; insofar  as the critic  dissents from  the consensus, he is not only wrong,  he is destined   for  obscurity. Armed  with  this measure,  Cude can  prophesy  with  all  the moral  certainty of a Savonarola; in a previously published essay, of which  this digressive  chapter is a  version,  Cude  ap­ plied his measure to Yvor Winters:

Consider, for  example, the  criticism of Yvor Winters:  a   thinker  whose   Johnsonian   in­ sistence   upon   the  pre-eminence of  morality as   a   critical  standard   has   earned   him   a substantial reputation,  Winters  is  uniquely relevant because he  reserved to  himself   the prerogative   of    overruling   the    consensus. When evaluating  the  accepted canon of  lit­  erary   classics,   he   coolly   declared:   'every writer  that the  scholar studies comes  to  him as  the  result of  a  critical  judgment,  single or   multiple ... and    in   fact  many  of   the judgments  have    been   wrong.'  In  making

81

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Jthis chilling  declaration, Winters  was guilty of the  sin of pride: and  the consequence  of his  Faustian error  has  been  that   the  spirit of  his  beloved  labours  now stands  in  peril
of the intellectual perdition  of oblivion.

Curle's   prophecy,   despite    its   splendid rhetoric, does illustrate one difficulty with his  attempt  to   conjoin    consensus   and predictivity. Because  one  mark   of   con­ sensus  is  persistence   through  time,  and because   Winters' -and   Curle's -work is  contemporary, we  will  have   to  wait awhile for a sufficiently large consensus to form   in   order   to  see   whether  or   not Curle's prediction is correct. But whatever else may  be claimed for consensus, it can also be said to negotiate, in a more imme­  diate  way, its own burden of proof; when a dissenter  like Winters  challenges  an  es­ tablished consensus, the burden of proof is on him, and  the relevant question  is "why  isn't  the  work  a classic?"  Cude is clearly less  willing  to assess Winters'  assumption of  this burden than  to prophesy his doom. Let me then, for the record, enter  a coun­ terprediction  that   Winters'  work  as  an evaluative critic  will long survive Curle's  own,  and  let our  progeny  judge  between  us -not  really  very  useful  for  our  pres­ ent  critical  needs,  but  maybe  instructive for them. It is also difficult to see how the measure  of consensus  is  helpful for  con­ temporary critics  like  Cude  who  wish  to argue  for the classic status  of contempor­ ary works, for here and  now the consens s negotiates the  burden of proof  so that  It falls immediately on the initiator, and  the
question becomes  "why  is the  work  a classic?" This  is the  burden that  Cude assumes in his "self-contained" essays, but
while  the  hope  for  a  consensus  that   will
ultimately vindicate his pioneering  judg­ ments  might  inspire  him with confidence, it  will come  too  late  to help  in  actually shouldering this burden of proof.
But  there  is a final  set of arguments in
Curle's framing format which raises doubts  about whether any consensus  can
 emerge  by placing yet another restriction on  evaluative criticism. Despite  his  con­ cession  that  the emergence of a consensus  is "the product of the interplay of critical argument, the  advocacy pro  and  con  in the  light  of  countless  readings," Curle's  tolerance for  the  contrary is  limited   to granting it  the  "very   limited" function of forcing  "those  defending the  work  to explore   its  resources  further and  evolve answers satisfactory to the general reading public."   In   the   first   and   last  chapters of  his  collection,  Cude  undercuts  even this  bare  toleration by mounting a series of attacks on those who engage  in "nega­ tive criticism." The object  of these attacks is, in  Curle's   rendering,  something of  a straw   man,    a   fierce   fellow   intent  on "purging," "condemning," "denouncing," "decrying,"  and   "deprecating," all  with an "intemperate zeal." Curle's  conception of this figure is dictated by the theoretical limits  he has  already imposed  upon eval­ uative  criticism. Because  he  has  already ruled  out  discrimination among  classics, Cude can  imagine no  other  activity  for the  negative critic  than the  detection of trash,  and  since that  act  is virtually auto­ matic,   since  "artistic  garbage  inevitably finds its own  way to the  trash-heap," the work of Curle's negative critic  is bound  to be  pointless.  Thus even  if  the  negative critic   is  correct in  his  judgments, he  is "guilty  of  capitalizing on  the  obvious,  of playing  the  mighty  hunter with  a grand show of bringing home  the easy meat: for it takes no great  skill to expose and  attack the  lurid,   the  inept, the  pretentious and shoddy." And  if these  negative critics are wrong,  they  make  "utter fools  of  them­ selves,"  a  fate,  it  is  interesting  to  note, which  does  not  await the  positive  critic  when  he  is wrong.  In  his  preface, Cude had  asked  "what if, when all the  critical reckoning  is   done,  I   am   absolutely wrong?" His answer  is not explicit, but  in the  subsequent  passage  the  consequences are all honorific; there is certainly no hint

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of any foolishness  that  might  attend being wrong.  Cude  makes  other charges  against the    negative   critics   from  which  he exempts  the   positive   ones.   "The  critic writing in  deprecation sometimes   judges in  error, condemning a  work  of  consid­ erable   excellence   as  an   effort   of  little worth:  and   when  that   occurs,  not  only does  a fine achievement have  to struggle  for  recognition, but  the  study  of  art  itself
-far  from   being   advanced-also re­ ceives  a  temporary  check." Here   Cude would have us feel the literary community as  fragile   and  easily  misled,  but,  in  ex­ cusing  the  positive  critic  from  any  such mischief,  Cude  assures  us  that  this  com­ munity-"the good  sense of  generations of  readers" -is not  fragile  at  all.  Cude  asks "what will happen if  the critics make mistakes  and  start  singing  the  praises  of inadequate  works?" and  he answers  "ab­ solutely  nothing will happen." The truth is that Cude means  to silence all forms  of discriminating judgment save praise:  un­ til the critic  "can  find a work that  is proof against  his most penetrating analysis, until he  can   find   a  work   that   is   rewarding after  his most  intensive  examinations, let him  leave  his  pen  stand  idle." We  must wonder   how,  if  Cude had  his way,  "the  interplay of  critical argument" which  is said  to create consensus  could  exist at all.
Another of Curle's  attacks upon  nega­ tive criticism  might  serve  as a  final  illus­ tration of  the  ways  in  which  Cude   has limited, and  thereby misunderstood, eval­ uative  criticism. Cude  poses what  he calls "a  virtually  unresolvable methodological problem"  for   the  negative  critic.   Since such critics are engaged in arguing inade­ quacy,   in  arguing  the  absence   of  some quality that  should   be in  the  work,  they face  logical   difficulties   which   for  Cude seem  insurmountable. "It is easy enough to demonstrate that  something does exist: it  is an  activity   of  quite   another  logical order  to demonstrate that  something does not   exist."   But,   as  it  is  posed,   Curle's
 problem  is yet another consequence of his earlier  refusal to discriminate among clas­ sics,  for  it  is  precisely   because   of   that  process that   judgments of  inadequacy  or absence of quality can be made. It is pre­  cisely because we do perceive  the achieved  "delicacy" of  Jane  Austen's handling of personal relationships that  her work serves as a proper  measure for  assessing the  de­ gree of such achievement -or its absence
-in the work of Sinclair Ross and others. And   the  probability  tl1at,  after   such   a measuring comparison is undertaken, the two achievements will  be seen as exactly equal   is  infinitesimal  compared  to  the likelihood   that   one  must  be  judged   the greater achievement and, it  follows,  the other   as  the   lesser  achievement-and that  is what  responsible  and  discriminat­ ing evaluation is and  does.
It  was a mistake, I  think,  for Cude  to collect  his "self-contained" essays on  spe­ cific  novels  within   the   embrace  of   the general   arguments  put   forward   by  his framing  format.  The  essays   themselves suggest  that   he  understands  one  half  of the  task of criticism  as it  was  defined  by T.  S.  Eliot  in  "The  Function  of  Criti­ cism": "the elucidation of works of art"; these essays often  do illuminate the works they examine.  But  the  general  arguments in the framing format compromise Curle's authority as a critic  by suggesting  that  he has  misunderstood what  Eliot  defined  as the second half of the critic's task:  "the correction of taste." As I  have  tried  to indicate, his  framing arguments, instead of supporting his title,  A Due Sense  of Differences: An  Evaluative Approach to Canadian Literature, are so contradictory and   so  restrictive  that   to  follow   them would  make  evaluation virtually  impos­ sible.
MORTON L. ROSS





8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



DUPLICITE NARRATIVE

MADELEINE    MONETTE,    Le   Double    Suspect.
Quinze, $12.95·
CLAUDE  BOUCHARD,   La  Mort   apres  [a   mort.
Quinze, $12.95·
"MOURIR ... N'EST PAS  UN ACTE simple" declare  le narrateur de La Mort  apres la mort. C'est  a partir de cette  maxime  que Claude Bouchard et  Madeleine Monette creent  chacun une fiction  dont  la densitk et la complexite soulignent a la fois la duplicite de  la  vie et  de l'ecriture.  Puis­ qu'une telle  synthese   du  fond  et  de  la forme  caracterise les oeuvres de la collec­ tion  Prose entiere des editions Quinze, le lecteur  peut  s'attendre a  une  experimen­ tation  qui,  dans  les romans  en  question,  s'avere   plutot  heureuse  quant a  la  par­ ticularite structurale du recit.
Madeleine Monette, gagnante du  Prix Robert Cliche   pour  son  premier   roman, Le Double Suspect, tisse une histoire ou l'agencement inverse des evenements cede
a la  decouverte entreprise par  la  narra­
trice,   Anne.    Manon  et   Anne,   s'etant
echappees a Rome  pour se detendre et voyager, cultivent une amitie qui sera interrompue par  la  mort  "accidentelle"
de   Manon.  Restant  a  Rome   avec   les
cahiers  de son  amie,  seul indice  du  tour­
ment  de cette  derniere, Anne devient oh­
sedee  par  les evenements confus  et  sche­
matiques qu'ils  lui laissent entendre et elle se lance  a la  decouverte de  la  verite  en
reecrivant les experiences intimes  de son amie.  Et  voici ce qui  nous mene a l'origi­ nalite du recit: se disant  a la recherche de la verite, de "faire vrai a tout prix, meme au   prix   d'inventer  ce  que   j'ignore," la narratrice annonce :

Or  ces cahiers n'epuisent pas,  au  niveau de leur  contenue explicite, toute Ia verite a son
sujet, car   ils  n'offrent  jamais  qu'une  vision trouee, morcelee et  fragmentaire des  evene­ ments qu'elle a vecus.  Et  ce qu'ils  ne  disent
 
pas  je dois !'inventer, ou  plutot le decouvrir, car   ce  que j'ecris n'a rien   a voir  avec  l'in­
ven_tion romane,sque. En  d'autres mots,  mon rec1t  n'est pas  une  pure construction  imagi­ naire, mais  le resultat d'une lecture attentive
qui   cherche  a  devoiler  ce   que   Manon  a
voulu   taire.
Le  lecteur decele  tres  tot  que  ce  n'est pas  la  vie  et  la  mort   de  Manon qu'elle veut  decouvrir mais  sa  propre verite  en­ castree dans  celle  de  son  amie  et,  il  faut  le dire,  son pouvoir d'ecrire, de raconter. Si cette  structure ne mene  pas le lecteur  a la desinvolture totale, elle aura au moins le grand merite de  remettre en  question non  seulement la fiction  meme  mais aussi le moi du discours.
Dans ce recit, tout evenement, tout per­
sonnage a  son  double,  comme  !'intrigue
meme.  Tandis qu'Anne sonde  la  vie  in­ time  de son  amie,  celle-ci,  narratrice fic­ tive  recreee  par  Anne,  explore  l'enfer et le suicide  de son mari; le suicide de  Paul  est repete par  celui de sa femme; les per­  sonnages se ressemblent physiquement; les gestes  s'entremelent;  enfin  l'homosexua­ lite suspecte de la plupart des personnages semble  eveiller  les craintes d'Anne quant
a sa propre sexualite. Serait-ce la quete  de
cette   V'erite  qui   forme   le  pretexte  du
recit?  Enfin,  et qu'on felicite  Monette de ce  double   jeu,  la  narratrice est  a la  fois
Anne et Manon: Anne  explore  et raconte le suicide  de  Manon:  Manon, narratrice fictive  refl.echit sur  les relations entre  les sexes. Discours  a  la  fois homodiegetique, heterodiegetique, et autodiegetique effec­ tue  grace au  pretexte des cahiers, verita­ ble recit dans le recit. La perception limi­ tee est deja  suggeree  par la couverture du  roman -une illustration d'Alex  Colville Vers l'Ue du  Prince-Edouard. Comme le jumelles limitent, tout en precisant l'objet de la perception, la focalisation est neces­ sairement limitee   par  1'obsession  d'Anne ainsi  que  par  une  lucidite fausse  devant une  verite  trop  inquietante.  Comment  le lecteur peut-il s'assurer que  l'apport  du texte  ne soit  pas une  deception fabriquee

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



par  la  narratrice? La  fiction  cache-t-elle la verite  ou est-ce  qu'elle nous la revele?
Si  la structure de !'intrigue est fondee sur la duplicite, il en est de meme pour les personnages. Chacun  trahit  une   nature sexuelle qui  cherche a rompre les COD· traintes traditionnelles: les femmes sont gal'($onnieres, les hommes delicats  et sen· sibles, le desir latent est plutot homosexuel qu'heterosexuel. Comme Manon l'ex· plique  a  Anne,  admettre ce  desir  serait se trahir:

Mais  quand une  femme seduit une  autre femme, on  appel!e ,,.a de  l'amitie, de  Ia  ten­ dresse  ou  du  respect, parce qu'on  s'imagine que  le  desir  n'y  est  pour rien.  Et  d'ailleurs, meme   s'il   y  etait  pour   quelque  chose,   on aurait trop peur de  l'admettre  pour  que  c;a change quoi que  ce soit.

Est-ce la le drame de Manon qu'Anne decouvre a travers les cahiers? Ou Manon serait-elle le  subconscient d'Anne?  Quoi qu'il  en soit, les roles interchangeables des narratrices, des personnages, des hommes et des femmes  nouent une  trame d'une densite  extraordinaire.
Si  le theme de !'incertitude  devant la vie et la mort donne au  recit sa structure, il n'en reste pas moins vrai que !'interet principal se concentre sur  l'ecriture  elle­ meme.  Par  une  meta-narration  qui  s'in·
sere de fac;on vraisemblable dans les Ca· hiers  d'Anne, Monette, tout  en  semblant garantir l'authenticite du  recit,  en double les  doutes.   La  conclusion  ambigiie   sug· gere soit une acceptation resignee de sa propre sexualite, soit  !'interminable de· doublement de personnalite qui mene tOU· jours  au  suicide  car  l'actant ne  peut  ja· mais accepter la verite  et done  brode  une toute  autre realite qui, a son tour, est decouverte par  un  autre  personnage qui l'approprie. En  obscurcissant ainsi le sys· teme   du   decodage,  Monette  remet   en valeur   la  question  fictionfrealite -I'es­ sence meme  du roman.
La   meme   question  d'authenticite  se pose quant au  roman de  Claude Bouch·
 
ard,  La  Mort   apres  la mort. La  preface ecrite   par  le  docteur  s ...' personnage
fictif  du  roman, psychanalyste a  !'allure freudienne, assure  le lecteur  de  l'authen­
ticite  du  recit  de son  patient Leo  Trem· blay qui a vecu !'unique experience d'etre le "premier etre humain a entrevoir L'Au. dela   ( expirer)' y sejourner  ( etre  mort) et  en  revenir   (ressusciter) ." Celui-ci en­ treprend, comme exercise  therapeutique, la  narration de son  propre deces. Le fait  qu'il  cherche a eviter  le sujet  d'abord en decrivant  minutieusement tous  ses maux  et ses therapies et qu'il  retarde la descrip­ tion  de  sa  mort  meme  suggere  qu'il  y a la  soit  un  oubli   (le  patient simule   une amnesic)' soit  une  experience si  angois· sante   que  le  souvenir  en  est  supprime. C'est  dans  la deuxieme partie  du  roman qu'il  decide  enfin,  a !'instigation du  doc· teur   S ...,  de   rapporter  les  choses   de l'interieur; dans   ce  cas-ci,   de   raconter
!'experience de mourir au "paroxysme de l'orgasme" et son experience  ult:ra-terres­ tre vers la cinquieme dimension.
Bien  que  les  evenements meme  man­ quent  d'interet et  de  points  de  repere  et que   les  jeux  de  mots   ("noumenefnous mene,"   "Gomorrhe/Gonorrhe")   et   les banalites philosophiques ("Mourir est au·  tre  chose  que  de  perdre au  ping-pong. C'est  un  evenement  marquant  dans   la vie d'un  humain")  paraissent gratuits, ce journal d'un "schizophrenetique benigne" evoque  chez  le lecteur des questions  im­ portantes quant a la nature de la fiction. Meme   si  on  ne  ressent  ni  l'angoisse   ni l'oubli qui,  on doit supposer, retardent le vrai  sujet   du  roman, la  question d'au· thenticite ne  peut  nous  echapper. Vrai­ semblablement, !'esprit peut-il  revenir de l'enfer et s'en  souvenir? Par  contre, l'ex· perience  serait-elle celle d'un malade qui subit  une therapie fort  originale mais sans efficacite?  L'authenticite du  recit  est  re­ mise en question par le fait que le journal, done  le texte  que  nous lisons, est le resul·  tat  d'une suggestion  faite  par  le  docteur

Bs

BOOKS IN REVIEW



S ...,  qui  plus  tard,  lorsqu'une cure  lui para.itra impossible,  donnera a son patient un  schema  pour  faire  avancer l'ecriture, et  corrigera et  interviendra dans  le texte par   des  notes   ( ou  parfois,  grace   a  des references fictives, il donne encore plus de credibilite a la duplicite narrative). L'in­ consistence  et  le  manque de  fiabilite  du narrateur   nous    inquietent    davantage: "j'oubliais que  je suis  amnesiaque"; "Je  ne fais plus la difFerence entre  une chose Deelle et  un  produit d'imagination." Ces incertitudes font contraste avec le realisme pressant   du  docteur:  "Ce   n'est   pas  du Ferron que  l'on  vous demande, mais  un simple   rapport  personnel"; "'A  aucun moment, Leo, vous ne decrivez  ces choses tout .a fait effarantes dont  vous jugez bon, au debut,  de nous prevenir, ce qui enleve
a  votre   recit,  au   fur  et  a mesure   qu'il
avance,  tout   interet  et   diminue  votre
cn!dibilite en tant  que locuteur."'
Si le but  de Claude Bouchard en  ecri­ vant  ce roman  etait  de nous dissuader du fait  que  la  mort  ait  "la  soudainete d'un  eternuement ou  l'instantaneite d'un hal­ Ion qui  creve," il a fort  bien reussi, carla lecture  de  cette  mort  apres  la mort  nous rappelle   l'eternite.   Si,   par    contre,    il cherche a  representer les ruminations in­ ternes   d'un  malade,  Ia  lucidite  et   les analyses saines  de ce malade ne convain­ quent  guere. Les coincidences, les jeux de mots, les perceptions poussees au-dela du vraisemblable  ne  sont   pas  suffisamment integres  au !'ecit et  done  restent  gratuits. Le lecteur  ne  peut  que  vaguer  dans  !'in­  certitude.  Les  indices  sont   trop   faibles pour  une  mise en signification  reussie,  la forme  trop lourde.
Tandis que  Monette atteint un  degre de densite  et de complexite dans  son pre­ mier  roman ou  la souplesse de  la  forme,  ou  le  mystere  et  les  entrelacements en­ chantent  le  lecteur,  Bouchard,  tout   en concevant   une    problematique   interes­  sante,  ne reussit pas a entrainer le lecteur  dans  une nouvelle  dimension. En depit  de

86
 l'inegalite esthetique, ces deux  romans nous affirment que  la litterature qui pro­ vient  dernierement du  Quebec  s'adresse  a  un lecteur de  plus  en plus sophistique: Monette s'inspire de  Barthes  pour  struc­  turer  son  recit; Bouchard  nous  taxe  par  son lexique  erudit et les conceptes semio­ logiques   pretes   au   docteur  S. . . .  Heu­ reusement pour  nous,  lecteurs,   ecrire   et lire,  comme  vivre  et  mourir, ne sont  pas des actes simples.

ESTELLE DANSEREAU


NEW FRANCE & OLD

MARY    ALICE  DOWNIE,   The  King's Loon. Kids
Can Press,  $2.95.
SUZANNE  MARTEL,  The  King's Daughter, tr. David Toby Home! and  Margaret  Rose. Douglas & Mcintyre, $I4.95; pa.  $6.gs.
VIRGIL  BURNETT,    Towers  at   the   Edge    of  a
World: Tales of a  Medieval Town.  Nelson,
$I2.95·

ALTHOUGH ALL   THREE of  these   books may  be termed historical fiction,  the  first two  are  clearly  children's books. The King's Loon, with its accompanying French  translation  ( Un   Huart    pour  le Roi)  by Jacques Loi'c Lorioz  in the same volume,  is essentially  an adventure story about Andre, an  orphan in  Count  Fron­ tenac's New France. Running away from his  aunt in  Quebec,  Andre   becomes   a stowaway in Frontenac's flotilla sailing  up the St. Lawrence to Katarakouis on Lake Ontario, where  Frontenac plans  to parley with  the  Iroquois. Discovered at  last  by Frontenac  himself,   the  boy accomplishes the  remarkable feat   of  catching a  loon which  Frontenac promises Andre  will pre­ sent  to  Louis  XIV in  person  in  France. While   Frontenac makes  peace  with  the Iroquois chiefs  and   has  Fort  Frontenac buiLt, Andre finally  decides  to  offer  the dejected loon  its  freedom.  Hurt by  the loon's  quick  departure,  Andre   now  rea-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lizes how his aunt must feel at his own running off.  Frontenac approves of  An­ dre's  release of the loon and sends the boy home  to his aunt with  royal fanfare. De­ tailed  drawings in  the  book  by Ron  Berg
-of  Andre discovered on shipboard, the
parley  with  the  Indians, the  loon  diving to   freedom - punctuate  the   narrative which  primarily invites  the  young  reader to  identify with  this  boy who  is on  inti­ mate   terms  with  a  great  historical  per­ sonage  of Canada's past. This  identifica­ tion, as well as the descriptions of the voy­ age  upriver and  of the  Iroquois, contrib­ ute   to  a  good   though  somewhat spare  tale.  Its  characters  are   too  one-dimen­ sional for children in Grades Four  to Six, the  envisaged   audience  for  the  book  in the Kids Canada series. A slightly younger readership, however,  should  enjoy  the book.
Suzanne Martel's The  King's Daughter appears to have  been written for an older, pre-adolescent readership because of its greater  length,  proliferation  of   adven­ tures,  and  psychological  depth of  charac­ terization. Jeanne Chatel, the orphan too boisterous   for   the  convent  she lives  in, and   her   friend  Marie  become   "King's daughters," girls sent out by ship as wives for  colonists  in New France. After  Marie  falls in love with  an officer on shipboard, Jeanne  quietly   takes   Marie's  place   as wife-to-be  of  pioneer Simon  de  Rouville.  Then Jeanne's struggles  with  her  taciturn husband  begin.  Simon   sees her  as  a  re­ placement for  his  previous  wife  Aimee, who  was killed  by the  Iroquois, and  as a female  fixture to  mind  the  children and the cabin  while  he  traps and  builds  forts elsewhere  most  of  the  year.  In  the  series of episodes  which follows, the reader is in for some exciting adventures: an  Iroquois raid  on  the  de Rouville home  in Simon's  absence,   and  Simon's near-death at  the hands of   the   Iroquois  and  recovery through  Jeanne's  healing arts.  The ad­ ventures  also  explore   the  "thawing" of
 their  marriage, as Simon  comes to see his new wife as an able partner in the wilder­ ness, particularly after   he  discovers  that  she  has  impersonated a  coureur  de bois and  gone  on  a  long  voyage  to  sign  his trading permit  in  his  absence.   For  her part,  Jeanne  persists  in  being  her  forth­ right,  able self and  risks loving  Simon  in spite of  her fears  that  she is only a substi­ tute  for  Aimee.  The story  explores   this larger  question   of  men's   and   women's roles in scenes of remarkable emotional depth, while  memorably bringing to  life the local colour of the period and setting. Debi   Perna's  illustrations  further  vivify the  story,  reiterating that  Canadian  his­ tory need not be bland  and  distant for the young reader.
:Virgil Burnett's Towers  at the Edge of a World is a  very  different kind  of book from  Downie's  and  Martel's: its  literary sophistication and  eroticism  make  it suit­ able  for an  adult audience. This "chron­ icle   of  a   high   town   in   some   fantasy France" portrays the  changing faces  of Montarnis,  a   medieval   town,   and   the fates  of  its  inhabitants:  saints,  warriors,  devotees of  the dark  cults, and  passionate  lovers. The stories  unfold  with  a pleasing  variety  of  narrative styles-third-person, epistolary-illustrated by a series  of ar­ resting,  even  haunting drawings. Such  a collection  of stories  could  be diffuse,  but the tales cohere  not  only  by dealing with a  common  subject-matter and  using  nu­ merous   narrative links,  but  also  by  ex­ ploring  a  sense  of  surprise   and  mystery, all   the   more   powerful    for   its   oblique  realization  in  hints   and   signs.  On   one level, there  is suspense  at least prolonged, if  not  unresolved:  in  "King  Folly,"  for example,   we  never   know  who  the   im­ prisoned  (perhaps mad)  man  is, who tells us  of  his  circumscribed   daily   round  of walks  and  cardgames, although the  nag­ ging question  of his identity and  the  rea­ son for his confinement palpably informs  the  whole  story.  On   a  higher level  the

BUOKS IN REVIEW



stories  sometimes  excel in  describing  the "elan   peculiar  to  this  high  place,"  the mystery  which  impinges  on  the  towers at the "edge" of their  world.  In  one  of the longer   pieces  called   "Fausta," an  artist sleeps in his patron's house  after  a  party thrown   in  his  own  honour at  which  he has met  the strikingly  beautiful and  acute Fausta. In  his dream, he guts  a  cadaver in stages, finally  discovering  the  face,  his own.  Awakening in  a  fit of  claustropho­ bia, he finds no respite  in a walk through the  town,  for footsteps pursue  him.  Back in   the   repose   of  his  host's   garden,  he discovers an  almost naked  Fausta, and  in the lovemaking which  follows, on a stone cylinder  in  the garden tempietto  beneath the moon, he sloughs off his role as sexual afficionado;  like  a  priestess  Fausta initi­  ates him into "some  terrifying  miracle  ... a  double  triumph ... for  the  walls of his heart    collapsed    in   the   instant  of   his orgasm,   so  that   a  greater   and   a  lesser death were simultaneously achieved." The mingling of the  mundane and  the mysti­ cal,  praeternatural, or sublimely  erotic  is difficult  to make  credible,  even when cre­ ating  a "secondary world"  of  fantasy.  At their  best,  Charles  Williams  and  D.  H. Lawrence portray, respectively,  moments of incarnate mystical and transcendentally erotic  intensity  in which  the  vehicle  and the  tenor  of  the  imaged  experience  co­ here, and  sustain  in the reader  "that will­ ing suspension  of disbelief ... which  con­ stitutes   poetic   faith." In  the  climax   of "Fausta," however,  the elements  of a rite de  passage into  death  remain   trappings which  do  not  coalesce  with  the  descrip­  tion  of  supreme  sexual  passion.  In  some other   stories  in  Towers  also,  while  rich diction,  admirable  wit,  and   mastery   of pace  are  clearly  present,  the  reader  may not  always find  the  marriage of finitude  and   the   transcendent convincing. Two notable    exceptions  are   "Hughes"  and "Gerardus," where  masterly  suspense and understatement heighten the implied

88
 presence   of  the  supernatural in  the  as­ tonishing repentance  of  a  hunting  lord and  the survival  from  plague  of only one monk  in  a  monastery, the  one  who con­  tinues  doing  his allotted  task. While this adult fantasy, then, does not always attain the demanding goals it sets itself, its other  impressive   qualities  guarantee some  in­ triguing reading.
MURRAY J. EVANS

SJX CHAPBOOKS

JOHN  LENT, Rock   Solid. Dreadnaught  Press.
HELEN  ALBRIGHT, Wheat  Fields. Dreadnaught
Press.  Portmanteaux. Dreadnaught Press.
JAGK HANNAN, For the  coming surface. Dread­
naught Press.
A.    F.  MORITZ,  Music and   Exile. Dreadnaught
Press.
ELIZABETH JONEs,   Nude on   the   Dartmouth
Ferry. Black Moss, $5·95·
CHAPBOOKS  HAVE ALWAYS BEEN a vital part of  twentieth-century Canadian  lit­ erature -the  ground  level  where  most major poets  and  authors first  appear in book form.  The  Ryerson Chapbook series of  the  mid-century is  still  considered the essential   spawning  ground  for   most   of Canada's major contemporary poets. The chapbook has not lost its popularity. It is still  a  medium for  initial  exposure, ex­ perimentation, and  creative energy.
Dreadnaught, a  small  press which  op­ erates  from  an old house on the fringes of the  University of  Toronto  campus,  has caught some  of  that  energy  in  its  most recent  series  of  chapbooks. Dreadnaught has also captured a sense of experimenta­ tion with form  in John Lent's Rock Solid. Rock  Solid is a neatly  packaged series of poem-cards with  prose poems on the out­ side of each  folio and  poems within. The  design  of  Rock  Solid  expresses  an  inter­ esting  idea,  but  to  read  the  book  is like sorting  through a pile of debris. However, the   book   demands  this   sifting.   Lent's poems are unfolded in glimpses of day-to-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



day  events,  and  the  reader must  have  as much   of  a  hands-on  approach   to   the poems  as  the  poet  himself.  It is rare  in literature for  a  reader to  have  a glimpse of  the  poet   chipping  through  the  rock solid  of  experience in  order   to  see  the poem. The process of Rock  Solid  reminds one  of Michelangelo seeing  the  David  in a flawed  piece of marble.
Helen    Albright  has   contributed   two conventional  but  very  exciting books  to the Dreadnaught collection. Wheat Fields is a series of brief flashes of a wheat  field and  the  activities related   to it. The won­ derful   sense  of  things  going  on  just out the  corner  of  the   eye  is  reinforced  by Deborah Barnett's unusual but interesting illustrations. The  full impression of Wheat Fields can  be gained only  by a quick  first reading and  then  a slow second  and  third  reading. The  violent  yet static  motion  of the field caught by gusts of wind  connects the book, impressionistically at least, with the  unpredictability of  a  stormy  sea.  At one  point   Albright  compares the  wheat field   to   a   "dark  ocean  reflected  in heaven." The great  strength of the  book is Albright's power  to observe  the momen­ tary and  to record  it poetically.
Observation plays a role of singular importance in Helen  Albright's other con­ tribution, Portmanteaux, a book of  prose poems  describing life  in  a  small  Belgian village   as  seen   through  the   eyes   of  a school  girl.  The   book  is a  collection  of character sketches   and   portraits of  the townspeople. However, these portraits are never inhumane or removed from the per­ ceptions  of the young  girl.  Without mor­ alizing,  the central character learns some­ thing   from   each   individual  portrayed. The  net result  is a  persona who  is never fully  described in  her  own  right,  but  is a pastiche of the host of characters she encounters. It is rare  to  see such  an  in­ triguing book  and   even  rarer to  read  a chapbook that  is not  composed  solely of poetry.
 There is a  strong   feeling  of   anticipa­ tion  in  Jack   Hannan's For  the  coming  surface. Hannan writes  in a  blurred and  tangled   impressionistic   style   that   often leads the reader away  from the point  of a poem  just  when  the  end  seems  in  sight. Problematic as  it  may  sound,  the  reader  should  just  sit  back  and enjoy  the  trip.  Hannan is not  a  narrator, he is a  feeler, cautiously  edging his way through percep­ tions  often   without  caring  whether  he drags  the  reader  in or  not. One  wants  to anticipate the coming  surface-the con­ crete  visibility of perception in Hannan's work-but the  poet  never  quite  gets around to straightening himself  out. This is the  beauty  of  the  book  for  those  who are willing to indulge themselves  with  the poet.
Music  and  Exil,e by A. F. Moritz  is far more direct and structured in its vision. Moritz  can  be  hazy  but  this  isn't  to  his best  advantage.  His   voice   is  strongest when he speaks in direct  address with concrete  events  and  defined  emotions  at hand.  "Letter Written from  the  Country to One  Engaged in  Charitable  Work" is one  of  the  finest  poems  to  be  found   in recent   chapbooks. The  voice  is  simple, searching yet magnified with  a humanity that  is often missing  amongst those young poets who are treading their ways through the  chapbook  process.  The type  of  elo­ quent  searching of self and  topic  is  very rarely  found   in  recent   Canadian  poetry and  is best compared to some of  the finest poems  written  by  British   poets  such  as John  Wain.
A  British  influence, via  South Africa, is evident  in the  work of Elizabeth Jones. In her most recent book from  Black Moss Press,   Nude   on   the   Dartmouth   Ferry, Jones  displays a very fine hand  for paint­ ing pictures  of other women. Indeed, the strongest  poems in the book are those that  observe women, old  ladies sitting  around at  a  tea   party   or   young  girls  dancing around  a  bonfire,   through   the   percep-

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions of a poet sure of her own femininity. She   underplays  these   portraits  with   a strong   sense  of  place,  and  provides  the work  with  a definition of events happen­ ing  because   of  their  locale.  Jones's   best poems   in   the   book,   such   as   "Women Bathing" or  "Fall  Collage,"  are  an  ex­ ploration of herself  through  the process of observing  other women. A certain  "know­ thyself"  aspect  sparkles  throughout and her  delicacy  of  voice  is balanced   with  a definite perception of her  purpose  in  lit­ erature -a hard  task to accomplish with­  out   dragging  the   reader   through   the quagmire of obscurity. One is quite  capa­ ble of feeling at home in her kitchen or on many of her  poetic journeys.

BRUCE MEYER


PROSE LYRICS

DAVID    HASKINS,  Reclamation. Borealis   Press, n.p.
STEPHEN  HUME, Signs  Against  an Empty  Sky.
Quadrant  Editions, $5-95·
KEVIN   ROBERTS,   S'ney'mos.  Oolichan   Books, n.p.

"PRosE LYRic" is Stanley  Plumley's  useful label  for   the  overwhelmingly dominant poetic  convention of  our  time: "the  in­ tersection  of   the   flexibility  of  the   free verse  rhythm with  the  strategy of  story­ telling ... a form corrupt enough to speak flat  out  in  sentences yet  pure  enough  to sustain  the intensity, if not the integrity  of the line." The taste for the prose lyric has resulted  in  a  proliferation  of poetry  (the  form   is  relatively  easy  to  learn   and   to practise  competently) and, except  for the beginning  made  in   Jonathan  Holden's The  Rhetoric  of the Contemporary  Lyric, in  a  critical   vacuum  (the   form   is  ex­ ceedingly difficult  to write about) .
The  prose  lyric's  attempt at  the  na­ turalness of conversation implies no pros­ ody,  no  literary  allusion,   no   figurative

go
 language. The meaning and feeling  are  to be carried not by elements inherent in the language, but by the subject  seen through a transparent language. The strategy de­ mands extraordinary skill with repetition, lining,  economy,  and  punctuation to give the   poem   some  significance   beyond   its literal   content.  (It's a  talent, for  exam­  ple,   essential   to   Margaret  Atwood's power.)'   The  prose  lyrics in  David   Has­  kin's first book, Reclamation, speak  "flat­ out," but severe  honing is needed  to add "intensity" :

,It's  been  a month since  I've  seen  Timmy
My  car  has  a cracked block
I can't get  to school  to pick  him  up
Gene   phoned
"Would you  like  to  buy  a  picture?"
He's  moving his family  to Florida as soon  as his  bills are  paid.

And so on. Even allowing that  quoting excerpts destroys  the  storytelling, I think the  quotation reveals  the  tedium of  the prose poem indifferently presented.
Perhaps sensing  the  banality of his flat­ test   prose   poems,   Haskins  compensates with  metaphor and abstraction. The terse
description -"two  gulls  I sail  to  silver
water" -which opens  one poem is made
to bear  this grandiose complaint:

,with  predictions of certain  possession and  avarice the  catylist  [sic]
they  thrust into
the  wrenched chemicals
with  single  minded blindness of pioneer imperialists
and  are  consumed the  reaction
a dead city's
non  degradable  boxes
and battery operated toys the  holocaust
minus the explosion waiting for  the  feast of  the  windigos.

As Haskins  writes in "Lake Sociology," surely  these "cloyed  gulls scream  I equiv­ ocation." The  clutter of   metaphor and
muddled concepts is a reflection  of the whole  book:   it  seems  to  be  an  unculled

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



collection  of the poet's  verse, with no apparent shape or  order, the poems crowded together on the  page. Somehow, perhaps, the expansiveness implicit in the prose  lyric  is reflected   in  the  excesses of the book.
Stephen  Hume's  Signs  Against an
Empty Sky  is another first  book, but  one much  more  carefully edited  and  designed than  Haskins'. Hume's poems,  again typi­ cally for  the  prose lyric, are organized  by a narrative line  drawn by the often  ram­  bling  eye of his observer,  rather than   by verbal  or  imagistic dictates. But  no  mat­  ter  how  colloquial  Hume's voice,  he  is never offhanded about  his language. The  single   unusual  word  - "concupiscent," say, in  the  poem  "Flight"-alerts  us  to it, alters our  sense of how we listen  to his language. Hume's collection of forty-eight poems is divided  into  three  sections.  The first  is mainly set  in  the  "echoing  coun­ try"  of the  far  north; much  of the poet's attention is given  to  the  "old  language" of the  Inuit and  Indian. The second sec­ tion  draws   primarily on  Hume's experi­  ences as a journalist (he is a senior editor  at  the  Edmonton  Journal)  and  contains the  book's strongest notes  of concern for society's outcasts. The  third  section  often draws  on  a  west  coast  setting and  shows most strikingly the poet's  ability  to extend  his  narrative by twisting  and  pursuing a metaphor, most  often  elegantly  erotic. Along the way are several  novel visions of prairie   where   Hume studies   its  sounds, and  its mythic echoes.
Hume knows  how  to  exploit  the  con­ temporary format, not  by drawing  back from  metaphor, but  by  an  exact,  meta­ phorically  suggestive   verb,   an   extreme  economy,   a  particular care  with  sound imagery,   and   a  fine  sense  of  repetition. One   result   is  a  moving  six-part  poem, "Gork," which  seeks  to know  the  mean­  ing  of  a  child   born  without a  cerebral cortex.   Another  is   "the  pale   hibiscus"  which  the mind wants to use to symbolize
 the Japanese world  view in  "The Wreck of  the  Indianapolis," the  poet's  impres­ sion of the American ship sunki with  1200 men  a few days before Hiroshima.
Kevin  Roberts' S'ney'mos (Salish  word for Nanaimo) is the poet's  fifth and  most integrated book. This  is a suite of three dozen short  poems on the coal mining era of the Vancouver Island boomtown. Here,   because   of  the  documentary  ele­ ment,    we   can   see   the   problems   and strengths of the  prose lyric at  their clear­ est. The  problems  first:  the second  poem
opens  "1858  and   the  townspeople  I of
S'ney'mos I straining to  hear   the  man­
ager." The  awkward   elisions  are  typical
of  a  writer   trying  to  turn  document (a photograph?) into poem: he leaves his reader  fumbling for  a sense of the  occa­ sion,  the  speaker,   the  angle  of  vision.  A later  poem  awkwardly tries  to identify its speaker  in  the  second  line:  "a  capitalist,
Sir, I Dunsmuir before  the Commission I
is a man thrifty  I enough  to spend  I less I
than  he earns." By inserting the  impera­
tive "consider," or beginning poems  with "and," Roberts tries  to  provide  connec­ tions and framework, but often the reader feels the need of the source book in order  to  appreciate the  shadings  of  the  poet's  perception. But  whatever  the  clumsiness  of  individual lyrics,  the  sequence   makes quite   compelling  reading. If there   is  a frustrating  facelessness in  one   poem, names and personalities gradually emerge  in subsequent poems. Motifs of names and voices,  of  coal  and   Sinekwa,   build  and vary  and  illmninate the  emerging poem. There are  abrupt and  revealing shifts  of tone and voice, as the meditation becomes a restless, dramatically intense  fragment­ edness at  the  height  of  struggles  for  un­  ionization. But  the  ending, which  wants  to be more  compact but  doesn't have  the verbal   energy   to   justify  it,  and   which  offers   a   glib   expression   of  continuing social concern, is a disappointment.
Roberts  is no  more  than  a  competent

BOOKS IN REVIEW



poet, his work  a good example of what  is possible for  a diligent practitioner of the prose lyric. There is only one  poem com­ pletely  successful  in  its  own  right.  But S'ney'mos  deserves   attention   because   it uses its poetic  strategy  well, as it must  be used,  to  compel   us  to  find  meaning, to look  at  the  history  in  the  locality  where we live and  work, to  discover  the  signifi­ cance  of  insignificant lives, to  recognize, in  William Carlos   Williams'   terms,  that  we are growing on the  roots uncovered in this poem.
LAURIE RICOU


MYTH AND
THE MYTH-PROOF

KAREN  LAWRENCE,  The  Inanna Poems.  Long­
spoon  Press.
J. o.  THOMPSON,  Echo   and  Montana.  Long­
spoon  Press.
LESLEY  CHOYCE, Re-inventing the  Wheel. Fid­
dlehead  Books.
KEN  BELFORD, Sign  Language. Gorse  Press.
BARRY  MCKINNON,    The   The.   (Fragments.
Gorse  Press.

PLAIN  SAILING IS SELDOM the  way of the poet's   craft   these   days.  For   one   thing there  are  cross-currents of criticism  to be reckoned  with,  powerful  undertows espe­ cially that  tend  to draw  all  towards dark and  deep   waters.  Also,  whipped  up  by windy  dogmas  of  fashion, even  the  shal­ lows are  given an  illusion of depth. Then there  are  the siren  songs of the  past,  the mermaids  and  misty  headlands of  myth and  legend  ripe  for  rediscovery,  for  re­ casting  in modern dress. It was under  the latter, or  some  such  enchantment, that
Karen  Lawrence and   J.  0. Thompson
slipped  their moorings.
Lawrence's volume  is a product of high erudition that, on one level, charts the underworld experience of lnanna, a Su-
 merian goddess  of unknown date, and  on another plies the inner seascapes of an imagination  overwrought  with   torments of the flesh, thoughts of death, sex, birth, love, rebirth and  so on. Access to these arcane regions -to the brainpan where poems deteriorate "like  a bag of small, bruised   pears" -is  through imagery   of considerable  visual   intensity   relating to medical  procedures and  thereafter to ma­ ladies  and  malignancies of various sorts. But  as  in  a  bad  dream, bits  and  pieces materialize just out of reach and madden­ ingly   disconnected.  More   notes   might  help,  because  while  each  reader  can  per­  haps  be counted on  to have  glimpsed  his own  amended  version  of  hell,  few  have the  poetic  powers  to assume -unassisted
-the lineaments of  mythic  figures,  not without considerable struggle  at any rate: particularly when   the  figures  are  super­ natural. As it stands, academicians famil­ iar   with   the   Ur   tablets   and   other Su­ merian  matters   will   possibly  find   such mythic sublimations more successful  than  elusive, but ordinary readers may feel that  for  an  old  and   obscure story  they  have  been  offered   a  new  and   obscure   poem, one  not  exactly  explicable by any  refer­ ence to form,  style, or content.
Like  Lawrence, J. 0. Thompson  gets
underway with  a good  idea  that  ought  to
have  fared  better  considering the  com­ pany  that  has  been  smuggled  aboard his bark. The idea  is that  verbal echoes from the old world often reverberate mockingly in  the  new,  a  discovery  helped  along  by Ovid   who  provides part   of Thompson's title  and  much   of  his  mythological  rig­ ging. Also supportive in the structural line of   rhyme   and   diction  are  several   later Augustans -English -satirists   princi­ pally. One  of them,  Garth, contributes a highly  ironic  overview  of  the proceedings when   a  much   neglected  couplet   of  his echoes   posthumously   from   the   notes:  "What frenzy  has   of   late   possess'd  the brain! /Though few can  write, yet fewer

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



can  refrain." As for  the others,  it is diffi­ cult  to see how  they  lend  a  hand  at  all. Invisible  throughout the  voyage, most  of them  are  simply  hustled   on  decli
end, exposed like first-class stowaways, an odd  galaxy,  among them  Jeremy  Collier, Karl  Marx, Ezra Pound, Saint Mark, and Douglas  Fairbanks, Sr.  Still  it is not  this exotic   ballast   but  a  narcotic hankering after    joky   wordplay   and    rhyme    that brings  all  close  to  foundering in  bathos and  flapdoodle. It is a shame  that  poems such   as  "Warehouse" and   "Cutter"  in which  thought and expression  find some buoyancy  and  balance, should  be forever supporting pieces composed  of lines like:
"Half  the  time  I  Britishly  say  petrol,   I
the other half  Canadianly gas" or death­
less trimeters such  as:  "Graduate Studies moon,  I 0 shed  your  thesis beams  I over the  paths   I  croon   I  'side  Knowledge's
night-streams."
Thus we see that  the  present  when decked  out  in  hand-me-downs from  the past  can  be made  to  appear diminished, its inhabitants dwarfed as though  viewed through  the  wrong   end   of  a  telescope. Lesley Choyce,  it is a relief to report, runs no risk along  these lines. His work is agreeably mythproof, constituting in a novel manner a resolute  response  to what is going  on  around him  indoors  and  out. The scene  is the  east  coast.  He  cruises  it by car.  Not that  he is unfamiliar with academe.  He   knows   what    is  valuable there,  but  he  does  not  wish  to  perish  in it  ("The Professor  Lectures") or  be bur­ ied  in  "a flurry  of dandruff"  ("Of  Edu­  cation").  Keen eyes,   ears  and   nose throughout, indicate that  Choyce  knows he  is going  somewhere, even  if  occasion­  ally  his headlights fade  "like  sick yellow flowers"  ("Watt Lighthouse"). There are some weaknesses, however: a tendency  to overuse the same voice and stance, to sermonize a bit as in some of the "Mem­ ories  of America" pieces and  to slip into  prose,  usually  when  straining  for  an  off-
 hand  comic  manner as in  "Summer Morning Barter" where   nothing, it  ap­ pears, comes of nothing.
Allusions of various  kinds make it clear
that  Ken  Belford  and  Barry  McKinnon are anchored on the west coast, although not  too  firmly  or  joyfully  it seems. Both have endured the trials and agonies of everyday  domesticity. Both  have  been within  an  ace  of  getting swamped, Ken Belford   so  much   so  that   he  declares:
"The only  place  to  write  I a  book  is in
hospital.   I This   is  an  accident report."
Indeed  it is, and  one calculated to scuttle,
too, all those hearty  rhapsodies of country living found  in Mother Earth  News. Here
snowshoes  break  "both I one  at  a  time"
and  while  plumbing, heating and  chores
of all sorts strain  human relationships, the cat  starves  on  potato peelings,  vomiting up  meat  so  unappetizing  that   only  the dog  seems  up  to  tackling it. Then  there is the endless  bad  weather: "Can anyone
stop  I that  god  I forsaken rain  of no in­
tent?" Still,  what  makes  this  monologue
tiresome  is  not  its  dispiriting  substance but  its tongue-tied and  halting style that may or may not have  been intended to suggest the onset of a near catatonic state, or to sound and look like a very private telegram,   one   not   at   the   end   easy  to decode.
Barry McKinnon's volume  is not a monologue but,  as his title  proclaims and reinforces   with  its  open-ended   parenth­ eses, a chain  of fragments which,  like the life they describe, go on and on and  on. A sprinkle of idiosyncratic punctuation over a scattered typography ought, however,  to surprise   not   boggle  the  mind.   As  it  is, several  readings of   these  fragments left little  impression except  one  image  of sad and   meaningless   pain:   a   child    "who
clutches  her  ass all day  I long, cries,  she
can't go-the obsession  I with constipa­
tion."
Stunts,  tricky effects, and derivativeness mar  nearly  all  the  works  examined here

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



except  those  by Lesley Choyce.  He,  as a poet should,  covers his tracks quite  nicely.

PETER MITCHAM



HEMON ET MYTHE

NICOLE  DESCHAMPS,   RAYMONDE HEROUX  et NORMAND VILLENEUVE,  Le Mythe  de Maria Chapdelaine. PUM,  $19.75·
GILBERT  LEVESQUE,  Louis  Hernon,  aventurier ou  philosophe?  Fides,  n.p.

CONTRAIREMENT  A NOMBRE de mythes quebecois, celui de Maria Chapdelaine est parti  directement de !'oeuvre  pour s'en eloigner  et  en  brouiller graduellement la trame; !'amplitude de l'apres-texte en engloutit la teneur  meme. Deschamps, Heroux,  Villeneuve tracent  minutieuse­ ment  ce cheminement  mythique dans  Le Mythe de Maria Chapdelaine.
Seduits par  les "voix,"  les membres  de la droite et du  clerge franc;ais et  la  bour­ geoisie conservatrice canadienne-franc;aise recuperent de maniere reductrice I'oeuvre
de  Hernon   et  l'adaptent a leurs  besoins
immediats. Grace aux  strategies  de Gras­
set, editeur parisien  de !'oeuvre (lettres circulaires, editions  de luxe, plaque com­
memorative a Brest ...)  et  de  Louvigny
de   Montigny,  promoteur  canadien  de
!'oeuvre, une   sacralisation  de  Maria
Chapdelaine s'opere avec les annees. Gar­
dant  de la lecture  un gout de mysticisme, de  survie,  la  droite   la  consacre  en  objet
destine  a edifier  et a accomplir des mira­
cles, entre  autres a reconcilier  romans  et
catholiques.
La   recuperation  de   la   religion,   qui prend  dans !'oeuvre une saveur  routiniere
et ou les intercessions restent sans resultat, temoigne   de  !'impuissance generalisee   a
lire  Maria   Chapdelaine. De  fac;on  ana­ logue,  la  vie  des colons  suscite  des  reves de  vie champetre idyllique  et  ce  malgre le  quotidien  accablant  des  personnages.

94
 De ceux-ci, on ne garde comme souvenir qu'un profil qui correspond a I'ideal voulu par  l'ideologie a desservir: une mere pro­
lifique,  un  pere  viril,  une  Maria fidele  a
son role trace de femme. La sensibilite franr;aise  au  sortir  de  la  guerre, a la  re­
cherche de l'idylle,  effieure le texte de maniere evasive, superficielle "a la limite,
tout  se passe comme  si ce texte  n'existait pas.  Ceux   qui   en   parlent  semblent  ne l'avoir jamais lu."
Au Quebec, le texte de Maria Chapde­ laine sera  recupel'e  de maniere differente. Louvigny de  Montigny  le  passe  meticu­ leusement au  crible; les  guillemets colo­ nisent  le  texte,  les  canadianismes seront bannis,  offrant un  tableau trop  rustre  de notre   belle  vie  champetre.  L'utilisation abusive   de  citations  qui,   hors-contexte, connaissent I'amplification du mythe, brise l'unire du texte. "Au  pays de Quebec, rien ne  doit  mourir et  rien  ne  doit  changer" (seul   passage   cite   par   Emile   Boutroux dans  la   preface  de  !'edition   Lefebvre)
devient un  hymne  a la colonisation et  au
conservatisme.
En   1927,  !'honorable  J. E.  Perreault
prononce une conference aux visees peda­
gogiques,   inti tulee   Maria    Chapdelaine, l'epouse  et  la mere.  Celle-ci,  representee
en  Demeter, gerbe  de  ble et faucille  a la
main  sur  la  page  couverture de !'edition de  cette   conference, est  assimilee   a des
images  de  fecondite qui  servent  la cause de  la  colonisation. Damase Potvin, a la
recherche des sources de Hernon  associera
Maria  a  Eva   Bouchard, de   Peribonka,
qui  en  profitera pour   mousser  la  publi­
cite. Les temoignages grossiront la realite;
on  associe  de  pres  Hernon   a sa  famille;
Marie Hernon   entretient une  correspon­
dance avec Eva Bouchard.
D'autres  manifestations augmenteront
!'amplitude de l'apres-texte: des films, des chocolats et  des etoffes,  une  bande dessi­ nee, des discours  au  parlement, un docu­  mentaire de  l'O.R.T.F., des  reeditions et des   traductions   innombrables,  suscitant

BOOKS IN REVIEW



periodiquement des soubresauts de  popu­
larite  a I'oeuvre.
La vivacite  du  mythe  se manifeste  jus­
qu'en 1980 par des fetes marquant le cen­ tenaire  de Louis Hernon. A cette occasion, Gilbert  Levesque  prononce   devant  les membres   de  la  Federation  des  Societes d'histoire du Quebec, une communication publiee  sous le titre, Louis Hemon, aven­  turier  ou  philosophe. Hernon  porte  lour­  dement   le  poids   de   la   parole    de   ses personnages dans  cette  oeuvre.  "C'est a Peribonka, au  pays  de  Quebec," en  in­ terrogeant  les   habitants,  en   observant leurs  menus  deplacements que Louis He­  rnon sut declarer ( mais avec queUe assur­ ance!) : "Ces  gens sont d'une race qui ne sait  pas  mourir  (tire  de  Maria Chapde­ laine)."  En   lui   attribuant, a  de   nom­  breuses  reprises  la  parole   de  ses person­ nages,  Levesque  dissimule   Hernon   der­  riere  l'epais masque de  l'ecrivain-reflet­ de-l'oeuvre, le mythifiant en deguisant la realite. Ce mythe, "exorcise" fort efficace­ ment   dans  !'oeuvre de  Deschamps, He­  roux,   Villeneuve,  trouve sa  survie  chez Levesque.
Souvent, Maria Chapdelaine sera quali­ fie de chef-d'oeuvre; ce superlatif  permet  d'evacuer  tout   autre  commentaire.  Le­ vesque, etudiant Hernon, sentira "l'ombre du  genie  r6der  dans  les parages"; Felix­ Antoine Savard, dans  la preface de !'edi­ tion  Fides,  le suite  dans  "l'ordre des plus purs chefs-d'oeuvre," evitant par  la toute etude approfondie du  texte.  La parole  est negligee  au  profit  du  discours  qu'elle sus­ cite.  "Cette fa<;on apparemment  super­  ficielle   d'aborder  une   oeuvre   exprime  pourtant le refus  inconscient de partager une   vision   brutale  de   la   realite  que­  becoise."
Le  mythe, issu  de  !'oeuvre et  rapide­ ment   detache  d'elle,  deviendra   bientot  peripherique a I'auteur eta I'oeuvre. Tout comme  Maria  Chapdelaine  est  assirnilee a Mme Philippe Croteau, femme  modele, epouse  et  mere,  ou  a  Eva  Bouchard, on
 attribuera  a  Hernon   nombre   d'affinites avec Fran<;ois Paradis, son personnage. Ce glissement  ecrivain-heros donnera  lieu  a des multitudes d'inexactitudes dans le foi­ sonnement du  discours  "chapdelainien." Sa mort, surven ue en  juillet et causee  par un   accident  de   train,  sera   rapportee comme suit dans les journaux: "ecrase  un jour  de  tempete de  neige  par  un  train." Le  texte  de  Levesque, truffe  de  lyrisme, deforme  egalement la vision de  l'homme qu'etait  Hernon. Ses relations avec Lydia Hernon, fille de l'ecrivain, impregnent sa vision  d'une sensibilite  qui  detroit  toute objectivite  et   donne    naissance    a   une image idealisee, a fonction  eternisante.
Associe directement a sa farnille,  digne representante de la droite fran  aise,
cree  de  toutes  pieces  un  Hernon  officiel. Au  nom  de ce  qu'il  recusait, s'est  edifiee la celebrite du livre, sur le sentier  du conforrnisme. Maria Chapdelaine est  de­ venu   un  symbole   de  la  survivance  des valeurs anciennes, contre  lesquelles luttait Hernon,  et lesquelles sont denoncees dans Le Mythe.
LISE ROCHETTE



FOR YOUNG READERS

MARGARET ATWOOD  It   JOYCE   BARKHOUSE, Anna's  Pet,  illus.  Ann   Blades.  James  Lori­ mer.
MARY ALICE It  JOHN   DOWNIE,  Honor   Bound,
illus. Joan Huffman. Oxford, $5·95·
BARRY  DICKSON,    Afraid of   the   Dark,  illus. Olena Kassian. James Lorimer.
HEATHER SMITH SISKA, People  of the lee, How the  Inuit Lived, illus.  Ian   Bateson. Douglas
& Mcintyre.

As   RECENTLY   AS     FIFTEEN    YEARS   AGO, there  were few Canadian children's books in print.  "Language Arts" courses and school  libraries relied  heavily  on  Ameri­ can  publications. Little wonder  if Cana­ dian   children  had   an   identity  problem

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



when  they saw the Stars  and  Stripes wav­ ing  over  the  schoolhouse, the  Fourth of July   parade  marching down  the  street,  and  the   Pilgrim Fathers   celebrating Thanksgiving in the  pages of  their  school readers! Now  Canadian children's litera­ ture  is  sufficiently  important  to  receive critical  attention in major journals  and  to attract the skills of  such successul "adult" authors as Margaret Laurence, Mordecai Richler,   Marian  Engel   and   Margaret Atwood.  More   important, a  substantial number of accomplished writers and illus­ trators   make   this   genre   their   primary vocation.
The  five-to-twelve age group  has  been particularly well served  by books present­ ing  the  life  and   folklore   of   our  native  peoples. Heather Smith Siska's People of the Ice,· How the Inuit  Lived is part  of a series, How  They  Lived  in Canada.  In­  formation about  the  land,  people,  cloth­  ing, housing, customs,  arts and  crafts  and  so  on   is   conveyed   in   precise   language complemented  by  detailed   pencil  draw­ ings  that   depict   everything from  Arctic wild life and  the various  steps in building  an  ice-house  to  such  artifacts  as  a  soap­ stone lamp  stand, snow goggles, ulus, and the fastenings of a dog trace. Not only the how's but  also the  why's of  Inuit life are considered :
Sometimes a  man  had   more  than one  wife. There was  much   work  to be done, and  one woman could  not  row  the  large  umiak  when the  family was  on  the  move.  If a wife  was sick   and    could    not   travel, a  man   might borrow a  wife  from   a  friend. In the  harsh climate of the  Arctic a  traveller could  die  if his  garments  became  tom   and   he  did   not have  a woman to  mend them  quickly.

The   harmony between   man  and  nature that   underlay traditional Inuit  life,  art, and   mythology   is stressed;  for  example, about  carving we are  told  that
The  Inuit  believed  there    was   an   image within each  stone  that would  be freed  when it   was  carved, that  its  soul   would   be   re­ leased.

g6
 This book  has  an  obvious  role  as accom­ paniment  to   elementary  Social   Studies units  on  the  Inuit; it  is good  enough to find  a  place  in  a  child's home  library  as well.
Anna's Pet and  Afraid  of the Dark are physically   similar   since   both   belong   to
James Lorimer's Kids  of  Canada  Series,
but there  the  resemblance ends. In Anna's Pet a city child  visiting  her  grandparents in  the  country for  the  first  time  makes
several  misguided attempts to find  a  pet and  place  it  in  a  home.  A  toad  is  con­ signed  to the  bathtub, a worm  to the dust under the grandparents' bed, a snake  to a pail  (after narrowly avoiding  the  oven). Finally  Grandma wades  into a  pond  and captures a tadpole which  Anna  can  take home.  When it  turns  into a  frog,  it  will satisfy  her  desire  for "a pet  I can  hold  in my hands." The story follows the folktale  pattern  of   repetition  with variation, though less entertainingly than  is the case in A A Milne's "In Which  Tigger Comes to the Forest  and  Has  Breakfast," for ex­ ample. Anna  seems  extraordinarily naive and  her  adventures are  less tl1an  breath­ taking. One   wonders why  the  talents of two authors, Margaret Atwood and Joyce  Barkhouse, were  required to produce this simple  tale  with  its obvious didactic end­ ing.
This   picture-storybook contains eight
full-page colour illustrations by Ann Blades. Blades is the kind of artist who responds brilliantly to an imaginative text
-witness her award-winning illustrations for  A Salmon  for Simon  by Betty Water­ ton -but   becomes   simplistic  and   even careless  when  confronted by  the  prosaic.  In  Anna's Pet a feminine visual reference is denied  by the depiction of unisex grand­ parents and   the  drawing of a  child  who could  just as easily be a boy as a girl. The  regular alteration of close-up  and  distant vista  becomes  monotonous and  there  is a general lack  of  animation  which   is  not mitigated by  the  flatness  of  the   picture

BOOKS IN REVIEW



surface   and   the  simplicity   of  form  and colour.   Furthermore,  the   young   reader may  be puzzled  by the  proportions of the human figures  when  Anna's head  is level with  the  grandparents' shoulders. Either she is much  older  than  the text implies or the grandparents are  dwarfs.
Barry  Dickson's Afraid  of the  Dark, illustrated by Olena Kassian, combines bilingualism, adventure,  and   a  common childhood phobia without any sense of strain. An  impression of authenticity  is created  by  using  the  child   as  narrator: "My   name is Allen.  I'm five  years  old. I  used  to  be afraid of the  dark.... The dark  was spooky.  The dark  gave  me  the shivers. I hated it."
The darkness that   inhibits   visual  per­ ception  is skillfully  realized  by  means  of sounds; once  the causes of the sounds are  identified  -a tree   branch   tapping,  the TV    cable   blowing    over   the   window,  father coming  up  the stairs-the  dark's fearfulness  is   diminished.  Furthermore, sounds  in  the  dark  are  used  positively  to facilitate the rescue  of Allen's  new neigh­  bour  Alain when  the  storm  sets his house on  fire.  In  the  end,   Allen  realizes  that  "Being  afraid of  the  dark   is really  silly. There  is  nothing in  the  dark   that   isn't  there when  it is light."
Olena Kassian's pencil  drawings  pro­ vide  a  literal  realization of  scene  com­ bined  with  a  sensitivity   to  mood  as  the scene   changes  from   the   darkness   of  a stormy night  to the brightness of a lighted room  and  as  Allen's  feelings  move  from fearfulness in  bed  to  the  security  of  sit­ ting on his father's knee. Special  relation­ ships  are  varied. The two  boys, leaning  out  of  their bedroom windows  to talk  to one  another, are   presented  horizontally across the top  of two pages. The frighten­ ingly  contorted  branches of   the  storm­  rocked   tree   reach  diagonally  across  the page,  and,  in  the  following  picture, cast their   shadow  on   the   bedroom  wall  as Allen  stretches to  reach  the  light  switch.
 This   apparently simple   book  is  accom­ plished  and   disciplined in  both  illustra­ tion and  text.
In  her critical  guide  to Canadian chil­
dren's literature, The Republic of  Child­ hood,   Sheila   Egoff   dismisses  Canadian historical  fiction  as  "a succession  of fail­ ures" featuring Inanipulated plots, papier­ mache  characters, and  large,  undigested gobs   of   historical    facts.   While   Honor Bound by Mary  Alice and John Downie cannot be described as a great  book, it manages  to avoid  the chief  weaknesses of the genre. The  title involves  a double en­ tendre.  For   the   sa  e   of   honour,   four members  of the  Avery  family  leave  their home in Philadelphia after  the American Revolution and  as Loyalists take up land at  Cataraqui  (Kingston) .  Their  travels first to Albany  and  finally  to Quebec are also motivated by their desire  to find  the older daughter, Honor. Didactic informa­ tion ranging from military background to herbal  medicines is sprinkled with  a light hand. Dialogue is the favoured technique for creating character and  facilitating the plot which is finally resolved  through the fulfillment  of  a  Macbeth-like  prophecy uttered  by   an   Indian  medicine Inan: "'Your sister will return as surely as trees walk, liars tell the truth, and  there  is hon­  our among  thieves.' "
This   unpretentious but  gracefully  ac­ complished romance, with its lively young hero and  heroine, and  its feckless villains, will help  the young  reader  to understand an important aspect of eighteenth-century Canadian history.
MURIEL WHITAKER

w


97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



IN GERMAN
WALTER  E.  RIEDEL,  Das  literarische   Kanada­ bild:  eine  Studie  zur Rezeption  kanadischer Literatur  in   deutscher   Ubersetzung [The Literary Image of  Canada: a  Study of  the Reception of   Canadian Literature in  Ger­ man  Translation]. Studien zur  Germanistik, Anglistik und  Komparatistik, No. 92. Bonn: Bouvier.

GERMAN  TRANSLATIONS of major as well as minor  literature by British and  Amer­ ican   writers   have   always   been   readily available to the general  reader. American authors have  of course  had  the inestima­ ble  advantage of  catering to  European curiosity  about North  American settings and  subjects.  That  Canadians have  until recently  not been able  to contribute much  to the demand for North  American litera­ ture  in  German  translation will  surprise  no one. Still,  the more  than  one hundred translated writers  that  Riedel  lists should impress  anyone   interested in  our  litera­ ture.  In  addition, Canadian  literature in English   and   French   has   been   gaining  some  systematic   critical   attention  since the  197o's  in  a  number  of  German uni­ versities.
Das literarische Kanadabild,  then,  is a timely  book.  Riedel,  a  professor  of  Ger­ man  language and  literature at  the Uni­  versity  of  Victoria, traces  the  history  of German translations of our authors from Colonials like  John  Richardson to  con­ temporaries  like  John Metcalf   and  pro­ vides  a  checklist  of  English  and  French Canadian books in translation up to 1978. This  bibliography is indeed  a useful con­ tribution to the study  of Canadian litera­ ture  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. The  book, however,  is not without weaknesses that  need commenting on here.
In   the  checklist,   for  instance, Riedel gives a  1g6o  translation of Maria Chap­ delaine, whereas  in his text he refers  to a
1951 edition. Why  this casual  approach? Why, above  all,  the omission of the  1922
Zurich and  the  1927  Leipzig  editions? It

g8
 was in the 1 g2o's that  Hernon's bestselling novel appeared in  numerous European languages, and German was no exception. Furthermore, a chronological rather than an alphabetical arrangement of the check­ list would  have  been  preferable  to docu­  ment  the publication history  of  Canadian books in German editions.
Among  the most translated authors, ac­ cording to  Riedel,   are  Leonard  Cohen, Mazo   De  la  Roche, Allan   Roy  Evans,  Grey Owl, Arthur Hailey, Hugh MacLen­ nan,   Margaret  Millar,   Farley   Mowat, Brian   Moore,   Martha  Ostenso, Charles Roberts, E. T.  Seton, and  David  Walker. Such  a  mixed  lot,  of  course,  will  always raise  the  academic   question   of  literary standards; but,  more  appropriately here, it  raises  the  old  nuisance issue of  Cana­ dian  authorship.  Riedel   includes   Cana­ dian-born authors as  well  as  immigrant and  emigrant writers. Yet  unfortunately any principle of selection  for the purposes of   establishing  a   national  literature  is bound   to  be  flawed.  Riedel   is aware   of this  problem, which  is why, for  instance, he  does  not  include Lowry.  Why,  then, include Brian  Moore? Why  Hernon  with his  scarcely  two  years  in  the  country, if other  comparable foreign  sojourners are explicitly left  out?  Why  add  Millar  who, though Canadian-born, is really a popular U.S. writer? There is no simple answer  to these  questions, when  the choice  of  eligi­ ble  authors  needs   to  do   justice   to  the many  meanings of the  term "Canadian." Not all authors are as easy to "national­ ize"  as  MacLennan, and  not  all  transla­ tions  are  as spectacular  as  that  of Anne Hebert's classic,  Kamouraska, which  was serialized   in  a  prestigious German daily. Of   Grove's   work,   for   instance,  which  should  have attracted  considerable atten­ tion  in Germany after  Spettigue's discov­ ery in 1971 of Grove's German past, only two stories  had  appeared by 1978:  the, it seems, inevitable "Snow" and,  alas, "Wa­
ter."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



While  Riedel's broad  use of the term Canadian literature brings  out  the term's metaphoric and  matter-of-fact meanings, his adoption of the  notorious quest for Canadian identity as the central theme  of his  study   is  of  quite   dubious value   to assess  the  reception  of  the  translations. The general thematic ordering of the translated books  under consideration is, nonetheless, convenient. Particularly the sections  on  books about Eskimos  and  In­ dians,  about the  North, and   about  pio­ neers and  settlers  reflect well the popular­ ity  of  traditional  North   American  fare  among  German-language   readers. The section on temporary expatriates like Nor­  man  Levine,  Mordecai Richler, Leonard Cohen, and  Margaret  Laurence under­ lines, not without over-simplifications, the interdependence in  their   works  of   geo­ graphic, historical, and  psychological space.
The step from  themes  to recurring plot
summaries is one  that  Riedel should  have avoided,  though.  He   indulges  in  such summaries as if his intention were  to in­ troduce German-language readers to Ca­  nadian books  available to  them.  Yet  the  purpose  of his study  is, at  least according to its title,  preface and  introduction, not at  all  so narrow. It is  thus  disappointing for  the  Canadian  reader   not  to  find  the promised  focus on the reception of Cana­ dian  literature.  Indeed, with  few  excep­  tions,  notably in  his discussion  of Cohen, Riedel    makes   astonishingly  little   con­  certed   use  of   book  reviews  and   related  sources  such  as  publishing records,  arti­ cles and dissertations. Taking for  granted the  relative  dearth of such  material, one nevertheless wonders  about   the  seeming preponderance of Swiss and southern Ger­ man  reviews.  One also wonders  whether Riedel's caution about the  complexity of Canadian literature does not warrant sim­ ilar  caution about the complexity of Ger­  man-language areas  in  Europe, be  they Austria, Switzerland,  East  or  West  Ger-
 many. The literary image  of Canada is perhaps not   quite   the  same   to  readers from Graz to Bremen. Only  in connection with   the   expected  differences  between West German and  Communist East Ger­ man  views  does  Riedel   present  some  of the ideological  and  multicultural sides of the reception  of our  authors.
The sense  of  literary pioneering that carries  this study  is indeed   welcome,  but
the  manysidedness of  its  subject   clearly
wants  more critical refinement and  more circumspection regarding  bibliographical and  cultural assessments  than  Riedel  has demonstrated. In this context it is not out of place to mention Louis Hamilton's sub­ stantial review articles on Canadian-Ger­ man   literary   relations  in   the  Canadian Historical Review during the  1930's, and  G<>sta Langenfelt's examination of "Kan­ adas Schonliteratur [Canada's Belles Let­ tres]" in the 1926-27 volume  of Englische Studien.  Maybe I am  unduly critical of Riedel's  efforts  from  my perspective as a Canadian specialist on this side of the Atlantic and  as someone  who can  still be annoyed by unnecessary plot summaries, thematic oversimplifications, the hasty shouts  of "Eureka" in  Canadian literary studies,  and  the  praise  of  In  Our  House as a "wichtig [significant]" addition to Canadian criticism.
As it stands,  Das literarische  Kanada­ bild seems either too  short  to let  Riedel accomplish  his worthwhile intentions fully or too long to serve as a critical overview of its appended  checkilist  of  translations. Despite  my reservations, however,  I want  to commend the book for its bibliographic contribution to the study of Canadian literature and for its likely encouragement of further supra-national  perspectives on our  authors. After  all,  the  multicultural complexity of  the  Canadian identity  in­ creasingly qualifies Canada for the role of a Global  Village  whose  literary resources deserve  attention  abroad  as  well  as  at home.                                           K. P. STICH

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



A FAIRE PENSER

JEAN-GUY  DUBUC,  Nos  Valeurs  en  ebullition.
Lemeac, n.p.

JEAN-GUY DUBUC, editorialiste de  La Presse et recherchiste a Radio-Canada, ancien   professeur  et  grand  voyageur  de­ vant  l'Etemel, tient  lui-meme  son  recent  ouvrage, NOS   valeurs  en  ebullition,  paru  a  Montreal, chez  Lemeac  ( rg8o), pour un  essai,  voire  un  "effort  de  rapproche­ ment  entre  bier, aujourd'hui et demain." L'auteur  entend   par   valeurs   la  foi,  la famille, l'autorite, la tradition. Sans doute  peut-il en considerer d'autres comme  l'e­ panouissement personnel,  la liberte  d'ex­ pression  et  la  liberation. Son  livre  com­ prend   quatre parties,  respectivement in­ titulees:  I. La  reference   aux  valeurs; 2. Les deux  cultures; 3· Sensualite; 4· Vers la tolerance. Jean-Guy Dubuc termine par Un demier mot.   Tout au  plus  y  ai-je releve en bas de page deux references au meme volume, Quelle   foi? puis un renvoi a  Maurice  Duplessis  et  son temps. Cela ne  l'empeche pas,  cependant, de  parler des personnes suivantes: Georges-Henri Levesque, Gerard Dion,  Louis  O'Neill, Pierre   ( ?) , Valery,   Marshall McLuhan, sans  indiquer de  renvois.  L'auteur  nous livre  ses reflexions  personnelles  sur  quel­ ques-unes de  nos valeurs,  dont  le  boule­ versement,  !'ebullition,  le   renversement meme  nous preoccupent.
A  mon  avis  il  n'y  a  point  de  valeurs nouvelles; il  existe  sculcmcnt   des  idoles
nouvelles.   Quoi   qu'il   en  soit,  le  temps serait   venu  de  donner aux  futurs  ensei­ gnants des cours  d'education aux  veleurs fondamentales; educateurs et   etudiants devraient aussi commencer par se remet­ tre eux-memes en question avant de vou­ loir tout  remettre en question.  Ces valeurs  dites   nouvelles   sont   nombreuses,   origi­  nales,    seduisantes,   superficielles.    Aussi doit-on faire  un choix, prendre conscience  et reflechir  la-dessus: ce qui demande un

roo
 effort  intellectuel trop  penible pour  la plupart. Mieux   vaut   passer  d'une mode a  l'autre, de  l'anticonformisme au  nou­ veau  conformisme, qui  consiste  a  suivre
!'opinion de la majorite, a accepter de nouveaux maitres et de nouveaux absolus, a  accorder  une   autorite  infaillible aux chefs des partis politiques et des syndicats, a se vetir  et a mal  parler comme  la masse etc.  La  nouvelle  culture de  masse  trans­ mise  par   la  presse -radio -television, par  la disque,  le cinema et !'opera est fort  bien analysee  par l'auteur. Mais Jean-Guy
Dubuc abuse   de  !'expression "maitre  a
penser"; Ia television comprendrait meme
mille maitres a penser; elle embrasse  trop et   trop   vite   pour   etreindre  longtemps; c'est   une  nouvelle fac;on d'apprendre et d'oublier vite. Le  "village global" est de­ venu  incommunicable. La  nouvelle  elite est  aussi detestable que  cel!e qui  l'a  pre­  oedee;  elle est fondee  sur la mode denlli!e de sens. Une  valeur  du  passe n'est pas ne­ cessairement depassee. Je doute forte  que  nos  joumaux contribuent au  rapproche­ ment  des deux  cultures.
Autant  dire   que   l'auteur remue   plus d'une idee  importante dans  son  essai  re­ marquable de  lucidite et  de  plenitude. Que  de gens se rencontrent  sans  pouvoir  se parler, faute d'etre sur  Ia  meme  lon­ gueur  d'ondes! Ce qui divise  une  societe, c'est beaucoup plus l'inculture ou la demi­  culture que  la  culture proprement dite.  On   n'a   que  faire   de  maitres a  penser; mieux  vaut maitre a faire  penser.  A !'ins­  tar des joumalistes, Jean-Guy Dubuc aime les  faits  "brutaux," comme   d'autres  ai­ ment  la  verite  "brutale." QueUe  etrange epithete sous la plume  d'un essayiste! Superbes sont  les pages que !'auteur con­ sacre  aux sens, au voyage, a !'observation, au   gout,  .a  la  sensualite-sexualite, a  la liberation et  a  la  pornographic, aux  va­ leurs chretiennes, morales,  religieuses. La culture de !'esprit n'est  pas  plus  un  luxe que  la  sensualite. 11 est  vrai  que  Ia  con­ fusion   est   generale aujourd'hui,   entre-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tenue  qu'elle est  a  l'envi  par  les moyens de communication sociale,  y compris  "Ia linge ouverte." Les pages sur Ia revolution improprement appelee tranquille, Ia  ra­ pide  transformation des structures et des institutions scolaires, Ia lente evolution des mentalites et Ia nouvelle  intolerance: tout cela meriterait d'etre monte en  epingle,  a tel  point   l'auteur a  le  rare  don  de  dire beaucoup en  peu  de  mots. L'emotion se­ rait  un luxe.  L'intol,erance engendre !'in­  tolerance, comme   la  demesure engendre la demesure. Au dire de Jean-Guy Dubuc,  "les  Quebecois ne  s'aiment  pas."  Com­ ment   alors  peuvent-ils airner  les  autres? Et  ils ne s'aimeraient pas  parce  qu'ils  ne se sentent  pas encore  capables d'affirmer ce  qu'ils  sont  et  ce  qu'ils   possedent.   No gauchistes-la  plupart de  nos  intellec­ tuels  le  sont  par  snobisme   plus  que  par conviction: il faut  suivre  le  troupeau - sont   radicaux,   intransigeants,   condarn­ nent  la droite, ne tolerent ni les images ni les institutions du passe; beaucoup d'entre eux   vont   jusqu'a  mepriser  l'histoire,  le passe.
Jean-Guy Dubuc exprime des idees en ebullition dans  son essai penetrant, qui abonde en vues  justes ou discutables. Cet editorialiste de  La  Presse est un  maitre a faire  penser.
MAURICE LEBEL


POWER PLAYS

DAVID  FREEMAN,  Flytrap. Playwrights Canada.
GEORGE F.  WALKER,   Gossip. Playwrights Can- ada.

SEx AND VIOLENCE,  those staples  of  enter­ tainment, take  radically different forms in recent    plays   by   David    Freeman  and  George  F.  Walker. If you  like  your  sex and   violence   grimly   funny   and   firmly chained to the realistic kitchen sink, you'll like  Freeman's  Flytrap,  though the  play does  have  a  flaw. If you  prefer your sex and violence satirical, intellectually stimu-
 lating,  and  more  ebulliently funny, Walk­
er's Gossip will suit your taste.
Flytrap  is set in a claustrophobic,  run­ down  apartment living  room  with  win­ dows overlooking an alley in which an old man   masturbates  and   is  later  crushed, twice, by a deliberately aimed car. Inside,  the  sex and   violence are  less  overt   but equally real, sometimes squalid  and some­ times   funny.    A   middle-aged   husband (Bobby)   and  wife  (Ruthie), shoe  sales­ man  and  school  teacher, co-exist  in  the trap  of a sterile marriage, short  of money and  seething  with   hostility  and  frustra­ tion. Into this trap  walks the fly, Stanley,  a gormless young  man  whose mother  was Ruthie's  close  friend. He  is to  be  their source  of  additional income,  sleeping  on the couch and  dining on meatballs which Ruthie concocts  according to his mother's recipe. Soon he becomes much  more than  a  lodger,  as  Bobby  and  Ruthie compete for his time  and  attention, she offering shopping  trips  and  the  new  Robert Red­ ford movie, he offering  trips to his favour­ ite pub  and  porno flicks. Stanley  tries  to satisfy both  and  thus satisfies neither un­  til, preparing at  last  to walk  out,  he  un­ wittingly    unites   his   tormentors.  Their combined  force  is  too much  for  him  and  he stays.
The  play is neatly  constructed. The balance of power shifts believably from Ruthie to Bobby  and  back  several  times as they fight for Stanley. They  both  need him:   they  lost  their   only  baby,  they  no longer  sleep  together, Bobby  has  no  pals at work, Ruthie's friend (Stanley's mother) is dead  and  her cat has vanished
-killed, we  discover  eventually,  by Bobby.  Stanley    represents,  disturbingly, son  and  lover  for  them  both,  as  well  as friend, pal,  and  household pet.  His  mul­ tiple role is heavily  charged with sexuality  (Oedipal, homo,  and  hetero), sometimes  distressing,  sometimes   comic.  In  one  of the  funniest   scenes,  Stanley  prepares  to water   Ruthie's  new   hanging   plant, a


101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



creeper   in  a  cage.  Carrying a  watering can, undoubtedly one with an erect spout, he  accidentally heads   for  Ruthie's  bed­ room door instead  of for the caged creeper  and  is challenged by Bobby in a  visually and   verbally   witty  few  moments.  All  is soon forgiven,  and  Bobby invites  Stanley  to sleep in his bed; Bobby, however,  takes to  the   couch,   perhaps  regretfully. The  sexuality,   both  overt  and  covert,  is part  and  parcel  of  the  power  struggle  and  the realism  of the play.
Realism, of course, does not preclude symbolism,   and   Freeman  has   included many   details   which   work  well  symboli­ cally  without calling   undue  attention to themselves.  The dry  caged  creeper,   for instance, is  not  only  Ruthie's  plant   but also  Ruthie. The   dead  eat's   saucer   of milk and  box of kitty litter,  renewed  daily, show  Ruthie's  pathetic  hope  and   focus Bobby's   hostility.   When    real   violence breaks  out at   the  end,  Bobby  drenches Stanley  with  a  phallic   soda  siphon  and Ruthie sprinkles  him  with  the kitty litter; he is reduced to sexual  victim and  house­ hold  pet.  They  follow  this display  of  tri­ umphant power  with  some further  busi­ ness  with   spray   cans   of  air   freshener. Action    and    significance    are   carefully  welded together.
'The  one  weak  spot  in  the  play  is the inconsistent character  of Stanley.  He  be­ gins as nearly  moronic, explaining labori­ ously  in  response   to  a  snide  remark   by Bobby that  the  shoestore where he works has  no candy  bars  in  stock  but  that  they sell shoes-yuk!-by the foot. Later, he delivers  accurate  assessments  of Ruthie's character and   takes   firm  stands   about  keeping  his  dates with  her.  It  is credible that   the  moronic Stanley   would  be suc­ cessfully ensnared in  the flytrap; it is not credible   that   the   analytic   and   decisive Stanley   would   be.  Here,  and  elsewhere, comparisons with  Joe  Orton's  Entertain­ ing  Mr. Sloane   are  inevitable.  In   that  play, a brother and sister compete for the

102
 sexual favours of Mr. Sloane, the sister's lodger.  The sex is all in the open,  with the sister considerably pregnant by Act Two; the violence  too is up front, including the murder of  an  old  man   on  stage  rather than in  an  alley.  And  Mr.  Sloane,   who has been  trying  to exploit  the  brother and sister  while they exploit him,  is believably in their  power  at  the end despite  his clev­ erness   because   they   have  witnessed  his murder of  their  old  father.  Brother and  sister  then   work  out  the  terms  of  their agreement for  sharing :Mr. Sloane  quite  amicably. Both  the  characterization and  the  close-to-Absurd mode are consistent. Flytrap, however, does have  the virtues  of greater realism: one doesn't usually bed one's father's killer;  domestic  power strug­ gles   are   more    commonly   covert   than  overt.   But   Stanley's   inconsistency  is  a serious flaw.
Walker's Gossip  has  no  such   flaw­
and  no  such  realism.  Chris  Johnson  has accurately  described  Walker's  plays   as "B-Movies Beyond  the Absurd," and Gos­ sip  is  no  exception.  In   the  first  scene, which  lasts only a minute or two, a crowd of well-dressed people  is staring at a rub­ ber  tire,  apparently a  piece  of  "minimal art."  The  gallery's  patroness  raises  her wine  glass, toasts  such  art,  and  promptly falls  through the  tire,  dead.  The second scene  begins  with  T. M.  Power   (the  T. stands for Tyrone, and  T. M. might  mean something, too)  sitting at  his desk in  the newspaper office,  brooding. He  says,  "Who killed  Bitch  Nelson?   (pause)  And who  the  hell  cares?" Who  Killed  Roger Ackroyd?  asked   Agatha Christie. "Who Cares Who Killed  Roger  Ackroyd?" Ed­ mund  Wilson  responded. We're   off  and running in a cloud  of allusions,  following Power  in  his efforts  to solve  the  murder and  to get into  Margaret's bed. He fails in the latter but apparently accomplishes the former-apparently, because  the  plot  is so   intensely    complicated  that    no   one could   possibly  follow  it,  in  spite  of  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



classic recapitulation scene in which he spells out  "what we have  so far." There is so much  plot  that  it  becomes insignifi­ cant,   or  rather significant  only  because there  is so much  of it, not because of what  the  story  is. Walker  has  pushed  the  con­ ventions  of the sleazy thriller to their  lim­ its  and   beyond,  exploiting  the  form   as entertainment and malcing it expose both its own  ridiculousness and,  perhaps more important, the sleaziness of some of its component elements.
Most  interesting here  is Margaret. Margaret  lives  in   Ottawa  most  of  the time. She is young  and  beautiful, wears a trenchcoat  and   tinted   glasses,  carries   a rose which she presents to Power, talks endlessly  of her  tensions,  is unhappy  be­ cause  the diplomatic corps prevented  her from  giving  the emperor of  Japan a copy of  her   poems. . . .  Guess   who.  But   this Margaret has  an  incestuous  passion  for her  brother  Paul,  an  important  cabinet minister.  Walker   has   turned  caricature into  B-movie  (almost  porn-movie) sleaze, with  the  implication that  the  model  for the  character belongs  in  a B-movie. The form defines  and  comments on its own contents.
Margaret tempts one  to looki at Gossip
as a  drame  a clef and  search  for  models
for   other  characters:  the   poet  and
prophet,  Brigot   Nelson,   whom   nobody reads  but  everybody  admires; the theatri­ cal director, Peter  Bellum, who announces crisply,  "I'm a British  faggot"; Sam  and Norman   Lewis,   lawyers  with   as  many kinks  in   their  sexual   as  in   their   legal practices. But Walker  is too un-pin-down­ able  to trap himself  and  us in a neat  pat­  tern  of  one-to-one correspondences. In­ stead, he keeps our  minds  hopping, from the   comparatively   simple    irony    of   a tough,   cynical    (but   fundamentally   de­ cent!)   gumshoe/newspaperman   who  should  have been  named Sam Spade but who is named Tyrone Power, to the com­ plex self-reflexive  theatre ironies of actors
 who play characters who are  student ac­ tors who are  directed by other characters to  pretend   to  be  still  other  characters. Walker  calls  the  play  "a sort  of satirical comedy  about   what   happens  to  a  man [Power] when he's taken out of his milieu and  asked to do a job which  he conscien­  tiously  feels  he   must   succeed   at."  It's  much   more   than   that.   Gossip  sparkles with  barbs  aimed  at drama, poetry,  art,  politics,   journalism,    murder  mysteries, law,  philanthropy, and   just  about every other   activity   of  our   world -and   the performers of  these  activities. Walker's steady  intelligence shows  us  a  world  in crazy  chaos  which,  invisibly,  he controls. For all its grim implications, it is wonder­ fully funny.
Both  Flytrap  and  Gossip are  comedies, despite   their   radical   differences. When Flytrap   opened,  the   Montreal  Star   re­ joiced  at  the  appearance of  a  "straight­ forward ... entertaining ... unpreten­ tious"  play;  despite   its  flaw,  it  has  the funny    awfulness,    or    awful   funniness, which   is  Freeman's   trademark.  When  Gossip  opened, the  Toronto Globe   and Mail,  though  puzzled  by the  style of  the production, revelled  in the  play's "absur­ dity"  and  "high  jinks"; it  also  has  the challenging and  mercurial ironies  which are   Walker's   trademark.  In   Comedy's house   are   many  mansions:   dark    and bright, foursquare and  multi-faceted, with and   without  kitchen    sinks.   De   gusti­ bus....
ANN MESSENGER

FOUND PLAYS

ANTON WAGNER, ed.,  Canada's Lost  Plays, Vol­ ume   Three;  The  Developing Mosaic:  Eng­ lish-Canadian Drama to Mid-Century. CTR,
$14.95; pa.  $g.gs.
NEIL CARSON, ed.,  New  Canadian Drama-].
Borealis, n.p.
AT  THE  TURN OF THE  CENTURY,   Cana­
dian  theatres were  dominated by foreign


103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



professional companies out to make money  on  lucrative tours. But since  then a  lot  has  happened, as the  ten  plays  in these  two  volumes  testify.  In  his  admir­ able  introductory essay,  Anton  Wagner, editor  of Canada's Lost  Plays  (vol.  III), outlines the  developments  between   I goo and   1950.  He  singles  out  the  Margaret Eaton School  of  Literature  and  Expres­ sion  (with  its playhouse  donated by Tim­ othy  Eaton)  and  Toronto's Arts and  Let­  ters Club  as  manifestations of  the  forces at  work  changing Canada's artistic   cli­ mate   just  after    rgoo.   Inspired  by  the European "art" theatre model, itself a re­ action  against  commercialism, our  own "little  theatre"  movement  developed   in the  192o's.  It drew  strength  from  the  in­ creased  national consciousness  during the early decades of  the century,  and  grew in popularity as  foreign   touring  fell  into  a decline  by the 193o's. Hart  House Theatre had  opened  in  I gIg  and  quickly  became  an influential focus for the movement.
At  this  point,  Wagner is able  to move to  Merrill  Denison,   the  first  important playwright of  the  century,   and  the  first represented in  the  volume,  for  it  was  at Hart House   that   Denison   got  his  start. With  a host  of historical  details,  Wagner is able  to  show  how  the  play  and  play­ wright  fit  into  the  "developing  mosaic."  He  does the same with  the six succeeding plays  and   their   playwrights,  bringing us up  to  1950  and  the  beginnings of a  pro fessionally-based indigenous theatre. This  lengthy Introduction is supplemented by a valuable  foreword to  each  play,  written by the  playwright in question,  except  for Denison  who died  in 1975.
The Weather Breeder,  Denison's light comedy,   was  staged   at  Hart House   in
1924,  after   amateur  productions in  Ot­ tawa   and   Montreal.  Like  other   of   his plays,   this   is  an   ironic   piece   about   a farmer,  Old   John,  who  is  happy   only when   he   is  complaining:   here,   about  sunny  autumn days  which  he says bring

I04
 bad  weather. When  a  threatening storm passes over without harming his crops, the old   fellow   greets   the   reappearing  blue skies  with   "Grrr,  more   of  them   damn weather breeders." On  that  contrary note, Denison   ends  his  play,  having captured in   a   humorous  vein   the   fatalism    he seemed  to feel  lurked  in comers of rural Ontario.
Lois  Reynolds Kerr's  Open   Doors  is overtly  more  serious.  Winner of the  I930
I.O.D.E. playwriting contest   and  staged
at  the  Little Playhouse in Toronto, it too is  bound   up  in  amateur tl1eatre.  In   an uncomfortable mixture of agit  prop  and social realism, Kerr dramatizes the experi­ ences  of Sylvia  Martin, a wealthy indus­  trialist's daughter.  Secretly she  has  been aiding the  family  of  an  unemployed  la­ bourer, George  Cole,  who  overhears the industrialist's  scheme   of  bringing immi­  grants to Canada to work  for  low wages. In   anger   and   despair,  Cole   bums  the slum  building where  the immigrants stay. Realizing what  Cole  has done,  Sylvia lies to  her  father and  the  police,  then  gives the   Coles   money   to  escapewhere   is never  considered. As the  play ends, over­ whelmed by her  guilt  and  the complexity of  the  situation, Sylvia  kneels  and   asks God to help.
For  a comparatively right-wing author (she  was society  editor of the  Globe  and Mail), Kerr paints a sympathetic picture of the 1920 labourer. At the same time, although the  agit  prop  style  is forceful, the   subject  calls  for   a  more   thorough hearing, which  the evasive ending avoids. Coincidence, the  rapidity with  which things  happen, and  the  often  unconvinc­ ing dialogue also weaken  the play.
The more  experimental drama of  the period  is highlighted by an  effective con­ trast   between   two  of  Herman  Voaden's
plays:    Wilderness  ( 1931)    and   Murder Pattern     ( 1936).  The    first,   a   realistic drama,  centres  on   a   young teacher in  northern Ontario  who  waits  for  her

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



betrothed to  return from a  winter  lum­ ber camp.  As she becomes conscious of his death, her  loneliness  and   feeling  of  en­ trapment give way to a spiritual strength derived from  her  memory of  his faith  in the north. For many  people,  the dialogue  and dialect, to say nothing of the situation itself,  will create only  an  inferior Riders  to  the  Sea.  Yet  Voaden's  passion  for  the north  makes Wilderness worth  reading, as it does the other play included.
Murder Pattern  takes for its subject a famous  Haliburton murder, the details of which  have  Jack  Davis  shooting his dead wife's  brother who  tormented  him  con­ stantly.  First  sentenced to  hang,  Davis  is given life imprisonment because of a pub­  lic  outcry.   During his  jail  term,   he  be­ comes  ill and  is sent  home where  he dies.
Again, only this time in a style he called "symphonic expressionism"-an abstract set,  sculptural  lighting, ritualistic  move­ ment,   Emperor Jones-like  drums,  music, symbolic  characters, narrators and  incan­  tatory  language -Voaden tries to express man's triumph  amid   tragedy.  A  choral  figure ends the  play on these words:

'You  [Davis] have entered the  temple at last.
... Your body  is one  with   the  earth....  In them  [the  winds] your   spirit  shall   brood and pass  endlessly among the  hills ... lonely and enduring as  the  hills.

The language, while  suggestive,  is hardly poetic.  But  a more  serious  problem  exists in the  play's  philosophy. Davis'  victory  is at  best a  pyrrhic one  in  which   the  only laudable aspect  is his dignity in  the  face of inevitable catastrophe. Since lines early in  the  play  state that   the  wilderness  has caused  life  to  move  "backwards  toward the animal, the grotesque, the warped, the evil," Davis'  union  with  the spirit  of such a land  cannot be seen as a triumph. This play does offer, however, a daring stylistic adventure. For   that   reason,   alone,   it  is worth  including, although, since  Murder Pattern  is available in CTR 5, another of
 Voaden's  "symphonic  expressionist" pieces might  have done  as well.
The   House  in  the  Quiet  Glen  is John
Coulter's simple  tale of Sally, an Irish lass whose parents betroth her to the father of her   secret   lover,   Hughie.  When   Sally stands  up for  her  rights,  rejects  Hughie's Da, and  the  truth is out, all ends happily. The  play's  cheery  outlook  and  Irish  dia­ logue gave it enough charm to sweep the
1937 drama awards.
Gwen    Ringwood's  The   Rainmaker
( 1945)  relates  the effect  George  Hatfield had   on   drought-ridden Medicine Hat when  he was hired  in  1921 to make  rain. A wistful air  pervades the  action  as a re­ sult of its being framed by a fifty-year-old  widower,  Tom  Arnold's  memory   of  the night  in question  twenty-four years  earl­ ier.   Margaret,   his   wife,   was  about   to board  a train, to leave him and  his dried­ up land.  Theirs was a painful solution  to the  drought.  Other people  were  equally desperate.  But  that   evening rain   came, the crops were saved, and  Margaret stayed with Tom-for better or worse. Whether the  rain  was Hatfield's or  "His" doing  is left slightly  up in the air.  In  any case, we again  see people  battling the  natural en­ vironment and  themselves.  Certainly heartache is involved, but unlike Voaden's plays, this one has a magical  quality from its  being set  in  the  carnival that  accom­  panies  Hatfield's rain-making. The result of the struggle  is  the  protagonists' clearer  understanding of  themselves,  the  wisdom of  passing  through  a  trying  ordeal. Al­ though loosely constructed, a  little  senti­ mental, and  peopled with characters who are  a  trifle  thin,   the   play's  light   touch with its serious subject is refreshing.
The  most  recent  play of this collection is Robertson Davies'  neglected Hope  De­ ferred  ( r 948), in  which  a witty  and  elo­ quent  Count Frontenac battles  two Que­ bec  clergymen    over   his   plan   to  stage Tartuffe in  r693.  Bishop  Laval  and  the unimaginative Monseigneur Saint Vallier

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



object  with  the usual reasons brought against  such  evil  devices,  and  ultimately are  successful  in  banning the  play.  Fron­ tenac,   however,    aided   by   Chimene,  a charming  Huron  girl   he   has   sent   to France   for  schooling and  who  is to play the  female  lead,  has argued  forcibly  and  articulately. The  result  is that   the  audi­  ence for Davies' play comes away not only with   a   humorous,  entertaining  drama about  a moment in Canadian history, but an  irrefutable argument on  behalf  of the need  for  art  in  the  New  World-or  in any world,  for .that matter.
Hope   Deferred   received  its  first  pro­ duction by the Montreal Repertory Thea­ tre,  an  amateur  group which  contained performers who made  part  of  their  living from  Rupert Caplan's radio drama. This  professional-yet-not  professional  status  is a fair  representation of Canadian theatre at  the  time.  By the late  1970's  when  the plays Neil Carson  has chosen for  his vol­ ume  were  performed, Canadian  theatre possessed a professional  base. In  fact,  the first play in  the  collection was written  to exploit  the commercial aspect  of the con­ temporary professional stage. W estmount, by  Richard   Ouzounian, brings   together three sisters for their  annual reunion. One is the  WASP wife of a wealthy  Montreal businessman; the second  is a pregnant neurotic married  to  a  psychologist;   the third  a gossip columnist who, to spite her WASP  sister,  invites   Big  Bert,  a  Vegas casino owner. Because he has run off with
$soo,ooo, Bert is pursued by Mafioso types who lay siege to the Westmount mansion. Shooting starts, and  after  many  dips and dives,  Bert  is  revealed   to  be  the  sisters' long-lost,   bastard  brother.  Familial  ties unite  them  all in driving  off the Mafia  as
the curtain falls.
As   Carson  points    out,   "Westmount makes  few  demands on  a  reader." Even as commercial fluff  the  play  is no  better than  T.V. sitcom. It consists of a series of improbable  incidents  for  the   sketchily-

106
 drawn characters who spout  one-liners lilre, "Doris, you're  so naive  you  think  a separatiste is something made   by  Won­ derbra." Some  of  the  sophomoric   jokes aim at satire: "The only place you can  be sure  of finding a  dummy nowadays is in the   National   Assembly."   Optimistically speaking, one  can  observe  that  commer­ cial  theatre  exists  in  Canada. But  Ouz­ ounian is a far  cry from  Alan  Ayckbourn or Neil Simon.
The other two plays in the volume  offer richer potential. Tom Cone's Stargazing, which  was done at Stratford's Third Stage in  1978,  is  a  short   play  in  which   two couples  watch falling  stars.  Undoubtedly the play is more accessible to a theatre audience, but  because  the  characters, in pairs,  carry   on  conversations that  inter­ weave,  it takes slow reading to sort things  out.   When   one  does,  he  finds  that the  stargazing is  really  a  metaphor  for  the  characters' everyday  behaviour. Each  fills an empty  area  of his or her life by watch­ ing  various "stars." Eleanor  follows  the singing   career  of  a  former  high  school friend. Ed  is  obsessed  with  the  idea   of contact between  aliens  from  outer   space and  earthlings. The result,  he  repeatedly warns,   will  be  a  revolution  in  religion, culture, and  philosophy. Jan's stars  are  a neighbour couple on whom she spies with binoculars bought  for  meteor watching. Henry appears to be above all this voyeur­  ism. He  refuses  to stargaze, ridicules Ed's  banal apocalyptic  vision,  and  coldly  an­  alyses the others' psychological dependen­ cies.  Ironically,  not  only  is he  shattered when  he discovers  his wife Jan's window  peeping, but  he fails to recognize  his own obsession with plants (bougainvillea, named after the  famous  star-gazer /navi­ gator) as equally neurotic.
Cone  spends  all his time  merely reveal­ ing  the  duplicit lives of  these  dull  char­ acters.  More rewarding for  his audience would   have  been  an  exploration of  the frightening implications of why these peo-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ple, like many others, are forced to seek voyeuristic satisfaction in life. Although promising, this  play  does  not  go far enough.
Set  amid   Russia's glittery  18go's  aris­ tocracy, George  Jonas' Pushkin is rife with political    intrigue,  love   and   adventure. The  jealous  Pushkin  accuses  Lieutenant d'Anthes of paying  too much attention to Natalya,  Pushkin's  wife.   Their  quarrel erupts into  a  duel   in  which   Pushkin   is fatally   wounded. The   tale   abounds  in irony.   A   womanizer   himself,    Pushkin  cuckolded enough men  to lead  him  into thirty duels;  Natalya, an alluring mixture of naive  e,
miscuous  herself,  and  was  eventually  se­ duced  by d'Anthes. She  was rumoured to be the Czar's  mistress,  and  the  main  rea­ son  Pushkin was  retained  at  court  when his  caustic wit  and  outspokenness  were feared, particularly by the Czar's  advisors. For  all  of  that,  Pushkin is disappoint­ ing.  It opens  on  a  static  scene  in  which five  statues   (Jonas  forgets   to   identify  one):, report things  an experienced dram­ atist would work in later. In  addition, the dialogue is often  turgid, the  focus diffuse. At one  point we learn  that  the Czar  has sent  troops  to  Poland  to  quell  a  revolt. The  parallels  with   modern  occurrences hint  at  a  political   focus.  Yet  the  play  is really  a  documentary. In   the  Introduc­ tion  Jonas   says,  "The  following   play  is based  entirely on  the  facts  of  Pushkin's life,"  as if that  in itself  were  justification  for  its writing. But  documentary form  is not  inherently  dramatic. Nor  is the  ro­ mance   of   Pushkin's escapades. However  theatrical  and  exciting, the  real  life  de­ tails  require an  effective  dramatic  struc­ ture as well as a clear  focus. By not estab­ lishing  either, Jonas allows  his  rich  ma­
terial  to falter.
None  of  the  plays  in  Carson's volume had an overly  auspicious beginning in the theatre. Carson's editing, in  contrast  to the  skill  of  Anton   Wagner's,  has  done
 nothing to enhance the plays' reputations. In  1 19 pages  there  are enough  typos and other  editorial gaffs to average one for six pages. Most  are  minor, but  leaving Push­ kin out of the character list of Jonas' play, and   allotting  Stephen  Markle a wrong  role, smacks of carelessness. One  wonders, in fairness  to the  editor, whether he and  the authors saw proofs.
Conceptual errors  are  more  troubling. For example, also about Pushkin, the edi­ tor  writes:  "it is a sign of maturing  that  Canadian  dramatists are  at  last  dealing with historical figures other than John A. Macdonald and  Louis  Riel."  One   won­ ders  what   Canadian drama  Carson   has been reading, for from  the late 170o's on, our playwrights have dealt with historical figures:   Francis  Bacon,   Pope   Gregory, Talleyrand,  Saul,   Hitler,  Churchill, the Kings  and  Queens of  England and  other countries, ad  nauseam.  The trouble has rarely  been  in  the  choice  of subject, but in the handling of it.
Carson's editing aside,  these  two  vol­ umes  provide a  revealing look  at  Cana­ dian  drama in  the  twentieth century. Al­ ready   commented  on   is   the   amateur movement  away   from   the   commercial fare  of 1900  toward plays  with  a serious purpose.  Implied is the  recent   return to commercial  plays  like  W estmount. The differences   between   1900  and   now  are notable.    A    majority   of   contemporary pieces,  like  Jitters, Maggie   and   Pierre, and Mayonnaise, and  unlike  Westmount, are themselves  quite  serious. They  are,  in turn, surrounded by more serious  dramas than   those  at  the  beginning of  the  cen­ tury.   Now  both   the   commercial   works and   those   with   greater   aspirations  are  products  of   a   professional  indigenous theatre -something   that   did   not   even exist in  1900.  Also notable in the  collec­ tions are the preponderance of short  plays and  the dearth of experiment. Almost  all are cast in a realistic  mode.  Yet  the  plays are   entertaining;  most of   them are

BOOKS IN REVIEW



thought-provoking. In an artistic  climate beset with  the financial restrictions of  to­ day,  we can  thank   both  of  these  editors  for making the plays available.

RICHARD PLANT


POETS BEYOND BORDERS

PETER  AICHINGER,  Earle  Birney. Twayne,  n.p.
JOHN  FERNS, A. f. M. Smith. Twayne,  n.p.

PuBLISHED IN  THE  United  States,   the Twayne World  Authors Series has, on the whole,  advanced the  cause  of Canadian literature abroad. Because  it  is a  large, well-distributed critical series, it  has  fos­ tered  a discriminating  foreign  readership for  Canadian  literature,  established   the reputations  of   many   Canadian  writers abroad and,  just as important, developed  new  markets for  them.  In  short,  it  has helped  make Canadian literature a world literature.  Two   recent Twayne volumes by  Canadian scholars,  Peter   Aichinger's
Earle  Birney  and   John   Ferns'   A.  f. M.
Smith, point  up some  important congru­
ities  between   two  close  contemporaries and  leading figures  in  twentieth-century Canadian literature.
.Before Birney's celebrated rejuvenation of the  1 g6o's, his poetry  shared  with  that of Smith's Montreal Group of the  1920's an  interest in  verse  technique, social sat­ ire, and  political  action,  and  a conviction  that   a  lack1 of  national  myths  rendered urban    Canada   boring,   bourgeois,   and  ugly, and  its wilderness  a terrifying mirror of  the  Canadian  unpreparedness for  its challenge. Both  believed   poetry  to  be a socially  useful  discipline,   and   used  it  to criticize  the  bloated egotism  of  the  ma­  chine   age  and   modern  technology.   No doubt   to  their  surprise, both  have  been widely  honoured  by  their  country. Both were "nature" poets, Birney favouring the

IOB
 interaction of man  and  closely observed nature to illustrate political  or social themes,  Smith   the  lyrical  response.  Both were preoccupied with loneliness, old age, and  approaching death (even  when  Bir­ ney  was  36,  his  poetry   had   a  valetudi­ narian note) .
But the differences are  perhaps more revealing. If Smith's poetry   retained  its classical   precision   and   lyric  mode,  Bir­ ney's  became increasingly varied  and  ex­ perimental, with  new forms, such  as con­ crete  poetry  and  found verse, inspired by the  Black  Mountain  poets,  Op  Art,  Pop Art  and, Aichinger  suggests,  by the  gen­ eral  activism and  freedom among Cana­ dian   writers  that  grew  out   of  the  new sense of  nationhood and  the international youth  movement of  the  196o's.  Though Smith  advocated  a  single,  international style for Canadian poetry-partly to in­ crease   international  acceptance  of   it­ his  fifty  years  in  the  United  States   had little  discernible effect  on  his  poetry.  In later life Birney not only left his formative environment  but  embarked  on  interna­ tional   odysseys,  writing  poetry  on  alien cultures to show  that  in an age of nuclear anxiety   Canadians  were  not  sui  generis but  part  of mankind as a whole.
Smith and  Birney admired each other's work for much  the same  reasons. Review­ ing   David   and   Other   Poems   (1942), Smith wrote  that  Birney "combined a cos­ mopolitan sensibility and  an adventurous technique with  a thoroughly native  pride  in  what   is  excellent  in  Canadian  life," adding that  the  book's  favourable recep­  tion  was  due in  part  to  the  "way  it  cap­  tured  the mood  of a nation  going  reluc­ tantly to war." Reviewing Selected Poems in 1g66 Smith went  further, asserting that Birney  was "one  of our  major poets, per­
haps  since  the  death of  E.  J. Pratt, our
leading poet." In Canadian  Literature's
"Salute to A. J. M. Smith" issue (Winter
1963), Birney   paid   tribute to  Smith   as
"both historian and  shaper of our  litera-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ture,   perceptive in  discovering  new  tal­ ents, courageous in reassessing established ones," and  specifically  praised the Oxford Book of Canadian Verse  ( zg6o) as a con­ summate  realization  of   Smith's "consis­ tent  purpose to  discover  and  encourage whatever   uniqueness  in   the   Canadian pattem, either 'Canadian' or  'cosmopoli­ tan,' may be worth  the world's attention." Aichinger's book is a careful, thorough, always intelligent study.  Familiarity with the Birney Collection at the  University  of Toronto, and  extensive consultation with the  subject  himself,  enable him  to  deal authoritatively with such complex matters as  Birney's   constant  revision   of  earlier poems,   the   changing  meanings  of  key symbols   and   images,   and   the   gradual emergence of the  poet  behind  the  poetic personae. His  analyses  of  the  poems  are both   balanced and   sympathetic, urbane yet appreciative of  the  earthy ebullience as well as the  tender lyricism  of the later Birney.  The  thematic organization,  how­ ever,  leads  to  some  repetition,  especially in  discussing   principal  poems  like  "Da­ vid"   and   "Near   False   Creek   Mouth." Aichinger is  more  generous than   Frank Davey   (Earle  Birney,  1971)   toward   the novels,  Turvey  and  Down  the  Long  Ta­ ble, and  less curious about the underlying reasons  for  Birney's  late  start  as a writer  and  for  the seven-year dry  spell  between  Down   the   Long  Table  ( 1955)   and   Ice Cod  Bell or Stone  ( 1962); but such high­  lights as his mythic  interpretation of "Da­ vid," his relation of Birney's  humanism to his  politics,   and   his   nose  for   sardonic anecdote  compensate  handsomely. (The best of these  recounts Birney's  publisher's refusal  to reissue David  and Other Poems in I 943  out  of  a  conviction that   Birney would   be  killed  in  World   War   II  and
write  nothing else.)
The  first  full-length study  of A. J. M.
Smith, John Ferns'  book  succeeds  as  an
introduction  to  Smith's fifty-year  career
as  poet,  critic,   and   anthologist; it  falls
 short  in its  attempt to explicate the  po­ etry, assess the criticism,  and acquaint the reader    with    Smith   the   man.    Though Ferns   frequently  asserts  that   there is  a unifying  vision  linking  all  Smith's work, he   does   remarkably   little    probing   of thematic   relationships   between    poems, groups  of  poems,  and  periods  in  Smith's poetic  development,  as  opposed   to  sim­ plistic  descriptions  and   catalogues. And Ferns' decision to discuss, or at least men­  tion,  all the poems  in  the  order  they  ap­  pear in Poems: New and Collected  ( 1967)
-rather tl1an the more recent  The Clas­
sic  Shade    (I 978)  -curtails discussion and   reveals  no  more  than   the  broadest outline   of   Smith's  lonely   poetic   land. "The Archer," one of Smith's best poems, receives not quite four lines. By his own admission,   Ferns  is  reluctant  to  engage the  poetry's   complexity  (while   insisting
that  Smith  is at  heart a simple  poet)  ; so the  "difficult, lonely  music"  remains just that. Similarly,  Ferns  elects  to let  others analyze  the  fusion  of classical  symbolism and   other   influences   with   Smith's  own poetic voice.
He  believes  that   Smith is  fundamen­ tally   a  religious   poet,  finding   evidence throughout the  poems of  spiritual regen­  eration and  renewal, but  his fondness  for moralizing reduces  Smith's religious  sen­ sibility to the born-again variety.  Though he  may  sound  like a  high-church Angli­ can, Smith  was not  at  all  religious  in  his personal  life.  His   religion   was  literary, much  more  so  than   that   of  his  English models. Though one can  argue  that  a religious predilection drew him to these models in the first place, Smith's poetic idiom, his language of symbolism  and imagery,  is rooted   in  the  Christian and classical ambiance of his training and  the seventeenth-century Metaphysical and modern   poetry -Yeats, Hopkins, Eliot
-in which  he steeped  himself.  Actually, Ferns comes closer to the tnLth about his religion  when  he  notes  that,   for  Smith,

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



poetry  gave permanence to the  transient, and  was itself a way of overcoming mor­ tality.  At its best, his poetry  is in  fact  the kind of "pure" poetry  Smith found  in the work  of  Carman and  Roberts,  "timeless  and  changeless,  dealing with  everlasting verities,  human  love,  human   loneliness, the sustaining strength of the earth, man's  response  to  the voices, fancied  or  real, of nature."
The chapters on  Smith   as  critic   and anthologist,  though    largely   descriptive, document  the   familiar  claim   that    he helped  prepare the ground  for the accep­ tance  of  literary modernism in  Canada, while shaping and  defining  the Canadian literary  tradition itself. Ferns bases his dis­ cussion on Towards A View  of Canadian Letters  ( r 973)  -but not the equally  im­ portant On  Poetry  and  Poets  ( rg77)  - concluding that, while  mindful of  what was unique in  the  Canadian  experience, Smith   was  more  willing  than   Frye,  At­ wood, or D.  G. Jones  to judge  Canadian writers  critically by contemporary  inter­ national standards. In  the best of  Smith's criticism  and  anthologies, as Earle Birney observed,  "both regionalism  and  Canadi­ anism  are  not  so much  adjured  as  tran­ scended."
Its  flaws notwithstanding, the value  of Ferns' study is that  it provides a first overview  of the  nature, significance,  and
diversity  of A. J. M.  Smith's talents  and
achievements. Because  his influence   was
strongest  in the  rg2o's, 1930's, and  1940's, Smith   has  been  somewhat  neglected   in recent years. Any book that increases, as Ferns'  does,  the  present generation's  un­ derstanding and  appreciation of  Smith's seminal   importance in  Canadian  litera­ ture deserves commendation.

JOHN H. FERRES


'm 	0


I 10
 BROOKER
BIRK  SPROXTON,  ed.,  Sounds Assembling: The
Poetry of Bertram Brooker. Turnstone Press,
$].00.

IT WAS  WITH PLEASURE  that  J agreed  to review  this  collection of  Bertram  Brook­ er's poetry,  edited  and  introduced by Birk Sproxton, because  it  is a timely  and  at­  tractive  publication.  The   title,  "Sounds Assembling," is from   Brooker's  stunning abstract canvas  of  I 928,  but Brooker  was not  only a  painter.  As Sproxton explains  in his Introduction, Brooker  (I888-rg55) was  a   journalist,   music   and   art   critic,  business man, editor and  writer  of essays, fiction   (his  novel,  Think  of  the  Earth, I936,   won  the  first  Governor General's Award)  and  poetry.  In fact,  Brooker  also wrote two expressionist plays for Toronto playwright and teacher, Herman Voaden, and  was an  important figure  in the mod­ ernist  movement in Canada.
So  far  we  know  Brooker   through  his
paintings and  Dennis Reid's I973 mono­ graph, but  it  is high  time  that  we  knew more,   and   Sproxton's   intention   is  "to  close part  of the  gap  in  our  appreciation of Brooker." This  he  does very well with a  brief  biography, a  critical introduction and  selection  of  twenty-eight poems  (all but   three   hitherto  unpublished)   inter­ spersed   with   brief   prose  selections   and two  longer   essays by  Brooker.  Although it  is  impossible   to  date   all   the   poems, Sproxton believes they are from the late twenties   and   early   thirties; both   essays were written in 1930. As a whole they provide insight  into  the  ideals  and  style of their  author. In his Introduction Sproxton draws  attention to Brooker's mysticism, his imagist  and cinematic tech­ niques and  the links between  the visionary themes   in  his  painting and   poetry.  He also  offers  a  fine  analysis  of  one  of  the best  poems,  "The Ice  Man,"  which  is a Joycean  exercise  in sound  and  verbal  en­  ergy.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



1Brooker's poetry,  while not a major lit­ erary  discovery, is of interest for its highly visual,  imagist   qualities, open  form  and  energy,  and  it should  be considered along with  F.  R.  Scott's, A. J.  M.  Smith's, or W. W. E. Ross' when the Canadian Mod­  erns are discussed. His themes range  from  the occasionally cynical  portrayal of ster­ ile  modernity  reminiscent of  Eliot   to  a delight in  modern technology, and   these latter  poems,  together with  a  number of his  abstract  paintings, reveal  an  affinity with  the  Vorticists and   the  abstract  ex­ pressionism    of   Kandinsky.  His   central theme,  according to  Sproxton, is  his  un­ derstanding of  mystical   vision  and  spir­ itual   awa  ening,
several fine paintings such  as "The Dawn of Man" ( I927)  and  "The Way"  ( I927), both   reproduced  in  Reid's  monograph. On   the  whole,  mystical  illumination  re­ sists  linguistic    expression, but   Brooker comes  closest, Ifeel,  in  this sharp visual image  from  "The Destroyer":

The sins of those  around me
are  the  oblique angles of their lives
retreating from  the  sharp edges  of their laws

The brief  selections  from  Brooker's prose  reveal  his expressionist view of modern  art   in  which   the  artist   depicts "not so  much   what   he  sees as  what   he feels,"  his  attitudes about the  Group of Seven  with  whom  he had  exhibited, and the  genesis  of his  own  work.  Of  the  two longer  essays, the one on E. E. Cummings is especially  noteworthy because  in it Brooker reveals his own goals such as his preference  for  the  mathematical and musical   qualities  of  metaphysical  verse and  the parallels between such  verse and abstract painting. The review  of John Middleton  Murry's God:  An  Introduc­ tion  to the  Science  of Metabiology, while a   clear   statement  of   Brooker's  under­ standing of  mysticism,  seems  of  less im­ portance   to   me   than    his   introductory essay to Yearbook of the  Arts  in Canada,
 1928-1929 entitled "When We Awake!" This essay is an important modernist doc­ ument  which  should  be  included  in our anthologies and  it  is too  bad  that Sprox­  ton,   whether  for   reasons   of   emphasis  (e.g.,  on  Brooker's mysticism)   or  simply of space was  not  able  to include a selec­ tion from it.
This   last  point,   however, is  a  minor one.  Sounds  Assembling is  a  most  wel­ come volume  for its layout  and introduc­ tion  as well  as for  its sampling of poetry  by a hitherto neglected modernist writer.  Not   only   does   it   provide  information about Bertram Broo r,
more about  Canadian modernism, partic­ ularly   its   interdisciplinary   nature,  for modernism  in  Canada   began   with   the painters  and  then  moved out  through the poetry   of  Scott,    Smith,   and   Ross,  the drama of Voaden, and later  the fiction of Sheila  Watson to  embrace  all  the  arts. And   Brooker   was   one   of   the   earliest  spokesmen  for such Canadian artistic  en­ deavour.
SHERRILL GRACE


CINEASTE, MORALISTE

YVES  BEAUCHEMIN,   Le  Matou.  Quebec-Ame­
rique,  $r4·95·
AGNES GUITARD, Les Corps communicants. Que­
bec-Anrerique, n.p.

EN 1975 YVES BEAUCHEMIN  re oit
France-Quebec  pour    son   premier   ou­
vrage,  L'enfirouape, base  sur  les  ,evene­
ments  d'octobre  I970.  Son  deuxieme  ro­ man,  Le  Matou, malgre ses quelque  6oo pages, sait, comme  le precedent, garder le lecteur  en  haleine par  une  intrigue pas­ sionnante, toujours  renouvelee de  rebon­  dissements  inattendus, et  par  ses person­  nages   excentriques,   engages    dans    des aventures saugrenues, ou se melent  le reel et le fantastique. Il se lit d'un  trait  comme un  bon  roman  policier   auquel   il  man-


I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW


querait cependant la  chef  a la  fin. Dans une  entrevue pour  le magazine  Quebec­ Amerique, Beauchemin se declare  etre  un cineaste frustre  et  son  livre  est  en  effet
construit a la  maniere d'un scenario  de
film d'aventures ou  les personnages sont
sans cesse en action.
L'histoire se centre autour d'un   jeune couple  de Quebecois moyens, Florent et Elise Boissoneault. Ceux-ci  tentent de construire leur   bonheur en  achetant  un
petit  restaurant, grace  a l'aide  financiere
d'un  mysterieux inconnu etranger qui dit
s'appeler Egon  Ratablavasky et qui s'im­ pose  soudain  dans   leur  vie.  Ce  person­  nage  est  la  source  de  tout  le  suspens.  II apparait d'abord comme  le bienfaiteur du couple,  puis se revele de plus en plus mal­  faisant, persecutant  Florent et Elise, leur faisant   perdre leur  restaurant, leur  pre­ mier enfant et leur fils adoptif, surnomme Monsieur   Emile,   pauvre    enfant  alco­ olique, completement delaisse par sa mere prostituee et toujours ftanque  de son chat. Ratablavasky semble symboliser les dif­ ferents  visages  d'une oppression  qui  con­
tinue  a se faire  sentir  au Quebec: attache
a l'eglise dans  son passe, il s'allie a 1'Ang­
lais Slipskin  et exerce  un pouvoir destruc­
teur  qui  repose  sur  la  force  absolue  de
!'argent. Son   nom,   qui   pourrait  n'etre
qu'un faux  pour  un certain Robichaud, laisse  entendre que  Ratablavasky  repre­ sente  egalement  l'inftuence, vue  comme  nefaste,  des etrangers dans  la province  et celle  des  Quebecois qui   pactisent   avec eux. II est significatif  que Florent et Elise, menaces  par  ce  personnage aux  diverses identites, finissent par le mettre hors d'etat de   nuire   quoique, peut-etre, seulement temporairement. S'agirait-il done  encore d'un episode  de l'epopee quebecoise  dans sa lutte  jamais  achevee pour  son  authen­ cite et son autonomic?
A ses meilleurs moments, le roman de­ gage  une  chaleureuse  sensualite  dans ses descriptions de   petits  restaurants  ou  se debitent dans  un  feu  roulant,  tourtieres,


112
 
feves  au  lard,  ragouts de  boulettes, tous mets   prepares tambour  battant  par   un
chef   fran  ais,   Picquot,  reconverti  a  la
cuisine  quebecoise et  drole  dans  sa haine
implacable de la cuisine  americaine en boite. Un autre personnage, l'abbe Jeune­ homme, se  specialise  dans  des  repas  lit­ teraires, tel  celui  ou  l'on  celebre  la  me­ moire de Philippe Aubert de Gaspe par un magnifique pate de Paques, fabrique selon la recette donnee dans  Les Anciens  Cana­ diens.
Le roman de Beauchemin qui prend parfois   des  allures   de  "grande  bouffe" nous  parait etre  le reftet  d'une societe  en mouvement, mue  par !'argent, le miroir d'une jeunesse entravee dans son elan  par d'anciennes chaines.
Autant Le Matou est un livre d'action, autant Les Corps  communicants, premier roman d'Agnes Guitard, est  une  plongee vers l'interieur et les ab!mes du moi.
Agnes  Guitard deroute de prime  abord le lecteur en  le transportant au  domaine
de  la  science-fiction, dans  un  pays  et  a
une  epoque imaginaires dont  elle  donne
les coordonnees et points  de repere  en preface. En  fait,  ceux-ci  se  revelent etre presque inutiles  car  le  paysage  exterieur reste peu important.
II s'agit  dans  ce livre  du  journal d'un certain Joares qui, apres  avoir  ete drogue et opere au  cerveau, relate  la destruction
progressive  de  sa  personnalite a la  suite
de  cette intervention chirurgicale. Cette
experience, menee  par  le couple Valenze­ Xiela  dont  il etait  l'hote, devait pcrmettre
a Valenze de  rentrer peu  a peu  dans  le
corps  et  l'ame de  Joares,   de  vivre  ainsi en  double   et  de  ce  fait  d'atteindre a la
grandeur comme  le celebre  Alcabore qui, quatre siecles  auparavant, avait  dO.  con­ naitre  une   aventure  semblable  avec   le Bariole, son inseparable compagnon. C'est Xiela, en dechiffrant de vieux manuscrits, qui  a trouve le secret de cette  operation,
donnant a un etre le faculte de vivre dans
et par  un autre.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Dans  un  premier moment Joares tente de s'echapper physiquement vers un autre
pays  mais  Valenze   commence  a exercer
son  pouvoir  a distance, le forc;ant a reve­
nir. Il doit  se soumettre .a !'imposition de
Valenze   dans  ses  bras,  dans  ses  jambes,
dans  son corps  tout  entier. Il fait  le recit de ses vains efforts  pour  resister  a cette invasion   de  son  corps,  a cette  atroce   et
graduelle perte  de son identite.
Cependant, lorsque  Valenze tente  l'e­
tape  definitive en voulant s'emparer de la tete  de  sa victime,  il echoue. Peu  a peu,
Joares se rend  compte que  l'autre peut  le posseder  physiquement mais  que c'est lui, Joares, qui  impose  les impulsions de son
propre  subconscient a Valenze. Ce  sub­
conscient sur lequel  il n'a  aucun  contrOle
est  done  la  source  de  toutes  les tortures que  Valenze   lui  inflige.  Ainsi  c'est  a ses
propres  demons que Joares est finalement soumis. Le lecteur  est entraine dans un voyage au  bout  de la nuit,  dans  l'odyssee
kafkaesque d'un  homme   livre  a ses  ob­
sessions sado-masochistes: il s'expose a la
derision  des  gens,  il se ramene de  nour­
risson, se faisant ramper, grouiller comme une  larve  impuissante, il devient victime de  ses envies  inconscientes de  se mutiler et de  s'aneantir. Cette  exploration  revele qu'au niveau  du subconscient les desirs les plus forts de l'homme sont ceux de la captivite, de la cruaute, de la folie et que son  elan  le plus  puissant serait  le besoin de  detruire la  vie  et  de  se detruire  lui­ meme  par  le suicide.
Pres de quatre cents pages de ce cauche­ mar  interieur fait  de  peur, de souffrances physiques    et   mentales,  de   nausee,   de desintegration  progressive   de   l'identire, d'hallucinations   obsessives,  finissent   par devenir  quelque peu  repetitives, lassantes et indigestes.
Il est  cependant  interessant de  noter que,  femme,  l'auteur choisit  le  theme  de la possession d'un etre  par  un autre et en souligne l'horreur. Rien  de surprenant puisque  la femme a  justement ete le sujet
 historique et litteraire privilegie de la pos­
session. Le vocabulaire et l'imagerie du couple  uni  ont  sun:out  servi  a decrire  la
prise de la femme, corps et fune, par l'homme.   Dans la  vebellion  de  Joares  il
nous semble entendre un cri de revolte contre  les efforts  d'un etre  quel  qu'il  soit pour en dominer un autre et le faire sien. Derriere les delires  et  tourments du  sub­ conscient   nous  parait surgir   le  puissant  desir  de  la  conscience   claire  cette   fois, chez chacun et peut-etre plus particuliere­ ment  chez  la  femme,  de  se  garder libre, entiere  et intacte.
MONIQUE GENUIST



THAT DELIGHTFUL CANADIAN

THOMAS E.  TAUSKY,  Sara  Jeannette   Duncan, Novelist of Empire. P. D. Meany,  n.p.
THOMAS E.  TAUSKY,  Sara  Jeannette   Duncan, Selected  Journalism. Tecumseh, $4.g5.

I  OFTEN THINK  OF Sara  Jeannette  Dun­ can as an author without a country. Had  she  written  more  extensively   about her native  land, she would  be duly recognized as  Canada's  foremost pre-1920   novelist. Had   she  been  born   in  England  or  the United  States, critics  of  those  countries would  have   accorded  her  a  respectable (albeit  secondary)  niche  in the  tum-of­ the-century tradition of realistic  interna­ tionalist  fiction.  However, it was her  fate  to hail from  Brantford, Ontario, to leave Canada before  the  age of thirty  to spend the rest of her  life in India and  England, and    to   produce   nearly    twenty   novels (some  comic,  some serious), all  but  two examining   the  responses   of  English   or American   characters  to   foreign   climes and  customs.   In   the   past  six  or  seven years  her  work  has been  the subject  of a handful of critical articles,  but  these  two books from Thomas Tausky represent  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



first attempt to pay Duncan extensive, serious attention.
The Tecumseh Press volume of selected journalism reprints forty-five pieces culled from   Duncan's   remarkably  productive journalistic career, the bulk of them  from her   active   Canadian  years   ( r88s-88), augmented by four   r 8g6 samples  of  her work  for  the  Indian  Daily  News   (Cal­ cutta). The  critical study covers both  her journalism and  her  fiction, moving  more or less chronologically through  her career.  Because  only  one  of   Duncan's books  is currently in  print,  Tausky   has  found   it necessary  to devote  much  of his pioneer­ ing  study  to summarizing plots. As a re­ sult,  Sara  Jeannette Duncan, Novelist  of Empire proceeds  methodically from novel to  novel.  However, when  Tausy
to The Imperialist (which  he groups  with an  Anglo-Indian novel,  The  Consort, in his  chapter  titled    "The  Political   Nov­ els"), he  can   count on  his  readers' fa­
miliarity with   the   text  and   concentrate
on critical analysis.  I was particularly in­ terested  in  two  points  raised  in  this  sec­ tion:   that   The  Imperialist was  written  and  published "at  a time when the fate of Chamberlain's  fervent   crusade   for   im­ perialism   was  completely  unknowable," and  Tausky's  reading of the  book's  "un­ necessarily obscure,  but crucial" final par­  agraph  as  Duncan's assertion   that   "im­ perialism  is good  for  Canada."
Regrettably, the  whole  of  this  book  is not equal  to some of its parts.  Its interest lies primarily in  isolated  perceptive com­ ments and  in Tausky's revelation  of  Dun­ can's  limitations as  both  a  writer  and  a thinker. While  it  does  not  pretend  to  be biography, it  lacks  even  the   basic  bio­ graphical details one would expect  to find in  this  kind   of   introductory study;   for example, the  first  chapter,  "Facts  and  Opinions,"  is  noticeably short  on  dates, the  most  elementary of facts.  In  the  re­ gion  of  literary history,  it  skimps  drasti­ cally with  regard to Duncan's milieu  and
 models,  both  in Canada and  abroad. Ex­ cept  for  numerous references to Howells,  even  passing comparisons are drawn with few writers, and  the concluding brief dis­ cussion  of   Duncan's affinities  with  con­ temporary Anglo-Indian novelists appears almost  as an afterthought. And as literary criticism, it lacls
ment   to  weld  the  separate chapters into a cohesive  whole.
In  contrast, Tausky's critical introduc­ tions  to  the  various sections  of  Duncan's Selected   Journalism are  terse and  fluent,  almost  as if the critic's own style had  been enlivened  by  the  vitality   of  his  subject. The  pieces  reprinted  here   suggest   that  Duncan was  her  own  best spokesperson: witty,  irreverent, and,   as  Tausky points out,   at   times   rather  inconsiderate, she used   her   columns  in   The  Week, The Globe, and   the  Montreal Daily  Star   to expound on  topics  ranging from  Christ­ mas  cards   to  Canada's  position  vis-,a-vis England and  the  United States.  As "the first  woman  to  be  hired   on  a  full-time basis"  by The Globe, she was fully aware of the significance of her position  as both a woman and  a writer. Probably of great­ est  interest to  readers  of  her  fiction  are  the   articles   outlining  her   opinions  on women's   issues  and    on   literature,  her views  on  both   being  rather  radical for Victorian  Canada. The  flexibility  of her thinking is indicated by her  ability  to see several  sides  of  an  issue.  While  she  was all  in  favour  of  careers   and   advanced education  for  women,   she  at   times  ex­ pressed sympathetic interest  in traditional female  roles and  activities; while she ad­ vocated Howellsian realism in fiction, she understood  as  well   the  appeal  of  old­  fashioned romance.
With   this  book,  my  only  regret   is  its brevity.  Tausky's selections  include many of Duncan's best and  most  representative pieces, yet omitted  (among other things) are her  comments on female  suffrage,  a sample of  her  essays on  nature and   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



seasons  (a  topic  more  popular in her day than  now), and  "On Two Wheels  to Lo­ rette," the early  piece which, according to the  autobiographical  sketch  Tawky dis­ covered  in the Stirling Library and  which he  reprints here,  helped   launch her  ca­ reer. However, given Tauskry's unenviable task  of  selecting from   among the  many hundreds of  daily   and   weekly  columns which Duncan produced steadily for more than  three  years  in Canada, not  to men­ tion  her  work  in  India, he has acquitted himself  admirably, giving  us  the oppor­ tunity   to   enjoy   the   views   of  a  young woman  as outspoken, spunky, and  clever as some of her own delightful heroines.

CAROLE GERSON


REAL, SUBTLE, TRUE

TERENCE   BYRNES,   Wintering Over. Quadrant
Editions, $6.g5.
HAROLD   HORWOOD,     Only  the    Gods   Speak.
Breakwater Books, $4-95·
MARTIN H.   MOOSE,  Three of  a  Kind:  Letters from Eden. Prism Books, $4.50.
DONN KUSHNER,  The Witness and  Other Stor­
ies. Borealis Press,  n.p.

THE  EIGHTH OF THE NINE stories inTer­ ence   Byrnes'   Wintering  Over   is  called "Food People." It  is  about a   painter named  Ray  Thompson who,  like his new dinner  friends in  Montreal,  is  an artist  munching precariously on  the spicy edge of recognition. He paints-"but without much  hope" -and his wife works. Their friends  "all  had  projects and  plans. There was a book on early television  advertising, a new and  unperformed choreography, a memoir,  a   basement  photo  gallery,   an unmarketed  invention, cookbooks,  and  a story   forever   waiting  unread  on   some editor's desk."  When  Thompson's  paint­ ings suddenly begin  to attract critical  at­  tention, Thompson  himself  is  ostracized  from  his  group of  elite  failures,   and   is allowed   back  in  only  when   a  promised
 exhibition at  an  important  uptown  gal­
lery seems to have fallen  through.
Byrnes' stories, like Thompson's paint­ ings, are efficient  and  well directed. They are  written  with a kind of  detached com­ passion, and  they reflect a certain amount of  tranquil  reflection.  They  are,  in  fact,  an  excellent  choice  for  the  kick-off set of Quadrant Editions-a  fine  new  discov­ ery for  a  basement  gallery  hoping to  be­ come  an  important  uptown gallery.  But, like the paintings, they seem somehow  to lack  whatever it  is that   elevates  a  good story  into  a  successful  story.  They   end wrong,  for   one   thing.    An   example   is "Coupal Street," about   a  young  couple who  drift  into  Montreal in  search   of  a house.  They  are  offered  one  by a  Mme Girard for  $150 a month (cheap even  by Montreal standards),  on  condition that they oust the  present  tenant, whom  Mme Girard says is "no  good."  We  never  find out  who the  tenant is, or what  "no  good" means.  Craig  accepts  the  condition, goes to the  house, confronts the  tenant-and then  what?   The   story  ends  with  Craig, Mme   Girard, and   the  tenant   (possibly Mme Girard's sister)  yelling at each  other in   front    of   the   howe.  Presumably it doesn't really  matter whether Craig gets the house or not. The  story is about some­ thing  else, about systems breaking  down,  or  how  the  need  for  shelter takes  prece­  dence   over  our   need   for  a  social  con­  science. But  if we aren't  allowed  to  care about  what  happens to the story's  central character, the story doesn't succeed.
One  of the best stories in the collection
-though it,  too, suffers  from  an  incon­ clwive  conclusion-is "Getting the Hang of  It,"  about a   young   Canadian  who moves  with   his  family   to  Florida. The point  of  the  story  is  Paul's sense  of  ali­  enation, both   from  his  own  family   and  from  his essentially foreign  surroundings. The  sixteen  stories and  one  play in  Har­ old Horwood's Only  the  Gods  Speak  are also  about   the  interplay of  cultures, the

II 5

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



clash    between    barbarism   and    civility (with   the   barbarians usually  being   the most civilized). The  book is divided  into two sections: "Ten Tales  from  the Trop­ ics" and  "Seven  Pieces from  the  North." The   tropics   means   the  Caribbean;  the north   means  that  much-trodden land  of the down-trodden Inuit. Horwood is very good  on  the  tropics.  His  Newfoundland­ er's knowledge of island  ways serves him as well in the Caribbean as Jack  Hodgins' does  in  Ireland, and   almost   as  well  as V. S. Naipaul's does in any colonial coun­ try.  In such  stories   as  "The  Sound   of Thunder," in   which   a  group  of  white tourists   sits  out   a  storm   in  a  bar,  and  "The Lady  Who  Fought at  the  Siege  of Jerusalem," about a young American who meets  and  falls  in  love  with  an  English boy and  his expatriate mother, are  sensi­ tive  examinations of   the  subtle   relation between   the  intruder  and   the  intruded. Horwood  belabours   the   subtlety   some­ what,   both  in  the  predominantly sexual metaphor he chooses  to convey  it and  in a rather strident Foreword: '"The Sound of   Thunder,'" we  read,   "describes   the jungle  of  dehumanization,  the  appaling [sic]  waste  land  that   we created in  the mid decades of this century under false banners of  liberation. By contrast, 'The Lady  Who  Fought at  the  Siege  of  Jern­ salem'  is a story about salvation from  this jungle  when  the  alienated 'I'  meets  not one but two 'Thous' simultaneously." This  may  be  what  Horwood intended:  thank  God  the  stories seem  to have  gone  their own ways.
!The northern stories are  also about in­ trusions.  In "Men Like  Summer  Snow"  two  Inuk   boys  smoke   marijuana  while waiting   for  a  seal  near   its  diving  hole. When  the "squareflipper" finally surfaces,  the  descendants  of   mighty  hunters  are too  stoned   to  kill  it.  In  the  next  story, "Love  in a Very Cold  Climate," a young schoolteacher  named   Gail  Emden has  a torrid  affair with a sixteen-year-old native

116
 student named Atka  (the  same Atka  who couldn't kill the seal). The white  council members learn  of it and  ship  her  rapidly back south.  These and  the other northern pieces are less impressive  than  Horwood's island  stories.  Perhaps Mavis Gallant's Gabrielle Russier  has made it hard  for us to feel much sympathy for Gail Emden. Perhaps we have  had  too much  about the "child-like" Inuit and  the  imposition on them  of our  Kablunit "culture." Perhaps, also,   we  suspect    that    we  have   visited worse  things  upon   the  Inuit than  mari­ juana and  pretty young schoolteachers.
Martin H.  Moose's  "philosophical  fic­
tion" seems  to  owe  more   to  philosophy than  to fiction.  It takes  the form  of three "Letters from  Eden,'' one  each  from  the Serpent, Adam,  and  Eve, who try in tum to justify Man's ways to God. Eve's choice of  the  Tree of  Knowledge rather  than the  Tree of  Life  seems  to  Moose  to  be the  ab  ovo  of  woe;  using  that   act  as  a starting point,  each  Letter is a monologue on the nature of Evil  (the Serpent, who expounds his  Theory of  Negativity) ; on the conflict  between emotion and  intellect (Eve,  or Even,  or  Event, who moans  "0 thou   poor  Serpent, how  miserable thou must  be not to see all this; how alone  and how  cold") ; and  on  the  concept of guilt as redemption (Adam, or Adamant: "By sin a man  becomes separate, and  by being separate he becomes his own, alone.... It was guilt  that  led  me  to question, to  try to   understand,  what   it  means   to  be  a man").
The fiction  works,  one  supposes,  as  a kind of sugar  coating to help  the philoso­ phy  go  down.  But  the  philosophy seems inoffensive  enough not  to need  it. And  it isn't  really  fiction  anyway,  at  least  not  in any  recognizable  form.  The three  mono­  loguists  never approach the  status  of fic­ tional characters-they have more life in Genesis than  they do in these Letters.
Donn Kushner, like  Moose  and,  in  a way, like Byrnes  (who once  "mixed  free-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lance    journalism   with    designing  and building electronic equipment for biologi­ cal   research,"  according  to   the  dust­  jacket) , has intruded from another disci­ pline  into  the  realm  of  fiction.  Kushner teaches  microbiology at the  University of Ottawa. His stories  are quiet  and  simple, his  characters-farmers, librarians, real estate  agents-are realistically portrayed and adequately developed, at least as ade­ quately  as such characters are  in real life. The last  two  stories,  "Miami" and  "The Scientist's Wife," are  the best-one sus­ pects  that   the  nine  stories  are  arranged chronologically. There is, however,  some­ thing  of the fire of creation missing from Kushner's prose:  his intent is to trap  a bit of life rather than  to make sense out of it. The  stories  are,  in  a  way,  too  scientific;  the specimens are observed  and  recorded, given  an  illusion  of  reality,  but  there  is no  real  understanding. Facts  are  related, but  no  real  truths are  revealed. This   is also the technique of such writers  as Nor­ man Levine,  but in Levine's case the writ­ ing is good enough to tell the reader that the   truth  is  sequestered   somewhere  in there  among the  facts.  In  Kushner, who is  capable of  such   lines  as "Sarah  felt tears  rise in  her  throat," no such  trust  is generated, and  one feels that  the facts are there   only   to  hide   a   basic  absence   of truth.  Kushner seems  able,  however,   to isolate  the  telling  detail  that  distinguishes appearance  from  reality-his  strength, and  perhaps his weakness, is in siding un­ compromisingly with  the  latter.

WAYNE GRADY

CULTURAL ICONS

VERONICA   Ross,  Goodbye   Summer.  Oberon
Press,  n.p.
HUGH  HOOD, None Genuine  Without This Sig­
nature.  ECW  Press,  n.p.

HERE  ARE TWO VOLUMES of contemporary short   stories,   a  first  collection  and   the
 latest  in  a  succession  of  publications by one of the major writers  in Canada today. Neither  should  feel ill at  ease in  the oth­ er's company. Both  Ross and  Hood make it  clear  that  the  short  story  continues to provide  writers  with a significant and  still lyrical mode of  expression.
Goodbye  Summer: The  title   evokes warmth giving way to chill, sunny skies to leaden clouds, holiday to routine. All eight stories in this collection are set in the Maritimes,  Nova    Scotia    in   particular. And all are about LOSS: loss of love, loss
of home,  loss of place,  loss of energy.  Six
of the  eight  feature women  as  protagon­ ists,  anonymous women,  often  quite   lit­ erally,  first  names  only  if  any  offered  at all, quiet,  quietly  desperate. Here  is one, Magdalena    ("Magdalena")   who   lives with  her mum and  three-year-old daugh­ ter,  who  works  at  the  Moonbeam Motel  and  who  spends  some  evenings  a  week with  her  friend   Goldie  easing  back  and forth among  the  bowling  alley, the Royal Cafe,   the   Capricorn  Lounge,  and   the Clover Leaf Tavern. Unless there  is a bus station   cafe,  these  are  IT. Along  comes Mark  who is seeing the  country, taking  it easy, good-natured fellow,  charming, sin­ cere,  who  likes Magdalena and  Co.  and moves in and  then  moves on.  Magdalena falls  in  love  with  him  but  doesn't, can't  put  up a fight  when  he  leaves, distraught as she is: "He had given her  this wonder­ ful  thing  and  then taken  it away,  just as if it were his right  to do that." "Picnic" is about  an old lady  named Emma ("I'm a character ... which is the way I want it") who  lives in  a  nursing  home  and  who  is wise and witty  and  quick  and  tough  and sad, why not?  And when  they all go off to a picnic, she walks away  for a bit with  an old  guy   named   Henry  who  is  likewise o.k.  And   they   talk,   and   kiss  once   and know it's o.k. to dream, and  then  they go back.   This  is  pretty  much   recited    by Emma in the present  tense. The  unnamed narrator in  "Between Lives"  is separated

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  staying  in  Seaport, N.S.,  where  she runs into Willis, an old high school friend who  is also  separated and  so  they  meet often  and  talk  and  reminisce  and  dream and  tease  and   then  Willis  picks  up  and leaves  for  the  coast.  The  unnamed  nar­ rator of "On the Road" is the confidante of one  Marty who is married  to Harvey. The   narrator is  privy  to  all  of  Marty's terror and  grief and meanness and drunk­ enness  over  a misspent marriage. Harvey  seeks some  advice  and appears not  to be quite   the  bad  news  that Marty   has  de­ scribed.   Harvey  and  Marty  go  off for  a long  trip,   come  back,  nothing changes.  Judy   in   "Accounting"  receives   a   note about a  class  reunion  and   proceeds   to write  a series of letters  (never  mailed)  to Sam, the reunion chairman, in which  she becomes  increasingly personal  and  upset and  confessional  about her  miserable  life with  her  husband and  then  receives  one more  invitation from  Sam and  ends with a  cheery  lie  about how  neat  things  are, sorry she can't make  it.
Persia  ("Persia Awakening") is on wel­ fare  with  two  kids by two fathers and  in comes  this  great  case  worker  named  Jef­  frey Saunders (who  might remind  one of Magdalena's love,  and  Henry   when  he was young  and  Willis)  and  Persia  begins to fantasize and  they get on all right  and then   Jeffrey  Saunders  goes  back  to  the office, makes a phone  call later  that  day, is all  business  and  bursts Persia's  fantasy.
,There  are  two other  stories:  "Once He Started Looking" about Mike, who wants to  do   a  history   of  this  village  and   is thwarted by the  fear  and  indifference of the residents. Tucked inside this piece are two vignettes, one about  a simpleton and the other about a black girl married to a local. The one is gelded, the other  run out of  town.   Finally,   there  is  Jack   in  "I'm Still  Here" whose  family  home  is  being expropriated  by   the   government. Jake won't leave, stays inside, the media and groupies come, stay for a while, Knowlton

II8
 Nash  talks  about him,  they  all  go away. Jake  stays on.
It's  a sure  thing  that  these  folks, Jake,
Magdalena, Persia,  the  whole lot, are en­ dearing, plausible, worth  our  time. They  come  through because  Ross,  the  author, has  the  way with  conversation, or  in  the case of Emma, with a rattling first-person voice. So much  of the stories is conversa­ tion,  show  and  not  tell,  and  the  lilt,  the funny   quirkish way  we  talk,  the  gentle,  sad  wonder, they're all  there.   When  she resorts  to descriptive writing, Ross'  touch  is sound: texture  without being  self-con­  scious  about it.  The one   reservation I have  about  these  stories  is that   they  are all   set   at  the  same   temperature.  The  voices  are  all  muted, private,  the  plots almost  non-existent. The  stories  just ease on  by  which  is to say the  lives here  ease on  by. I guess Nova  Scotia  just does that  to you.
,The variety  of subject, theme, and tech­ nique  across the Hood  collection of twelve stories  may  be  summed  up  by  the  two pieces which  open  and  close the volume. The first is a manic  narrative  by a fellow named A.O.   (AnaliOral?)  who  jangles his  way  through  a  celebration   of   con­ spicuous consumption joined in by his girl friend,  Dreamy.  Both    have   come    to eschew  meals  and  sex  because  they  de­ tract  from  the  time  needed  to watch  ads on TV. There is no plot in this story, only a  succession  of  lists of  products  and  ser­ vices:   MARTIAL  ARTS SUKIYAKI, LE    CAMPING   CHEZ  COLEMAN STOVE, WONDERBRA, punctuated by such  passionate confessions  as Dreamy's: "I  want  the eight-ply steel-belted Polyes­ ter   Radials,"  she   whispers,    "with  the added protection of Hiway-Biway Winter Big Paws." Such  is Hood's ingenuity that one   comes   away   with   his  ears   ringing from A.O.'s braying cries which  end when
he chants "Good taste  is dead  I Marx is dead   I The sixties  are  over   I Freud  is dead   I Keep on  truckin'." That is why

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  story  is called  "God Has  Manifested
Himself  Upon Us as Canadian Tire." "Doubles," the  last  story,  is also about
our  popular culture but  in  this  respect:
the  narrator is a well-known singer/com­ poser  whose  picture is  always  in  the  pa­ pers and  magazines but  who  is yet "your  invisible  star,"  content to  look  ordinary, not  compelled  to  egotism with  one  ex­ ception:  he  continues to  mourn his  re­ jection  by Belle, a girlfriend of his youth. The story weaves  in  time  back  and  forth  from   that  scene  of  disappointment to  a meeting  on  a train   between   his  fiancee, himself  and  Belle  and  Fred   who  are  on their  honeymoon, to a contemporary cof­ fee-date with  Belle, seventeen years after. Rather smug  about his success in contrast to  Fred's seeming  lacklustre career  as an educator, "I  felt  the   meanness ebb"   as he  realizes  that   Belle's  comments about her husband are  "spoken with  such enor­ mous  pride  and  love and confidence that I  was  ashamed." His  temporary aberra­ tion  sent  flying  (for  he is really  a decent  man) , our  narrator  can  ease away  think­ ing  "In music,  in  a song,  you  can  freely mix   vice  and   bliss.  Bliss  has   a   better  sound."
Not since  Lady Oracle have  I  encoun­ tered  such  an  interest by a  writer  in  the icons  and  debris  of our  vast,  mass mere­  tricious   (though  sometimes worthy)  cul­ ture.  Here is  "Crosby," the  biography of one Dom Squatrito who sang  as a kid on amateur nights  at  the local  movie  theatre but  then changes his name to Don  Stan­ ley,  enters   the  Civil  Service and  spends his life there,  trailing after him the legend
of  a  pop  singer   in  the  Crosby,  Cornell,
Cherry, Como  crooner tradition, rises in the  government and suffers through twenty years of Elvis, the Beatles, Dylan, survives, only to confront Bing's death on that   golf  course   in   Spain.  "The   noise forced  itself out again, and  he heard  what it was, a long  howl  of pure  grief."
And  "February Mama" which  is a reg-
 gae song composed by Rafe  Salvidge,  a retired songwriter who  finds  refuge  from his rapacious wife-manager in the Carib­ bean.  The  song  is written as a  welcome  for  his  wife  who  comes  to  see  him  but when  she tries  to tear  the  piece away  for publication and  recording, begins to cor­ rupt  the good intentions in the song, Rafe  rebels. As you  might  infer  from  this  and  the other summaries thus far, Hood is also interested  in  the passage  of time,  the loss of the  past,  the  burden of the  past.  This  is  an  old   theme  but   ever   accessible  to fresh insights.
,we find it implicit throughout "Ghosts of Jarry" in  which  an  Expo  fan  named Mario  foregoes the dubious pleasure of shifting  with  the team  from  Jarry Park  to Olympic  Stadium and  instead  returns to the empty bleachers and  follows the home games   on   his   portable  radio    and    tv. Hood  provides a running account of mar­ vellous  moments in  baseball,  exotic col­ leagues,    righteous   players,    fragrances, sunlight. But  Mario really  misses the  old times,  Jarry   with  "the  world's  crappiest outfield, frost-humped, deceptively grassy, stippled  with rabbit holes, hell to run on."  But,  oh!  it  had  character!  One  night  a young  woman  shows  up  with  her  radio  and  tv:  "Would I be safe with  you?"  she says.  "Would  one   Expo   fan   insult   an­ other?" Rightly so, Mario says that  others will come.  "This is exactly  how  a house gets  to  be  haunted." Sure  enough, they come.
rrhe  sixth  in order  of these twelve stor­ ies, and  thus  possible  a  pivotal  piece,  is called  "New  Country." Brenda  and  Les­ ter become lost driving east from Toronto and  while they  drift  along highways  and  backroads,  increasingly  confused   by .the terrain, their  conversation  turns   on  de­ pressing  recitations of  dead   or  afflicted friends,   failed   businesses,   lost  energies.  And  gradually, of  course,   those  themes become self-fulfilling prophecies as the landscape loses all  familiarity until  they

IIg

BOOKS IN REVIEW



come  upon   a  body  of  water,   a  lake?  a river?   "flat   and   black  and   very  cold." By now  the  conversation and  the  terrain have coalesced, Brenda is hysterical, "Where did  the  middle  of our  lives go? When  we used  to  talre this  trip  what  we talked   about   was  who  was  getting  en­ gaged.  Who  was getting married ... hav­  ing a baby...." "'We'll find a place,'" he said  through  his  teeth.   He  speeded   up heading into  a blind  curve."
,There  is  no  reason   to  like  or  dislike Brenda  and   Lester.  Whoever   they  are, they  have  moved  out  of the  known  and into   the   unknown,  the  "new   country" which  is death. Perhaps they will die around that  curve,  perhaps they  died  on the outskirts of Toronto. This  is a spooky story,  tense,  nervous.  Rather like  the  old Twilight Zone  episodes.  I have  a picture of the  car  sweeping out  of sight  and  the camera turning on your host, Rod Serling, standing beside the road.
Elsewhere, Hood  portrays  the stream  of consciousness of a retarded child, contem­ porary   courtship,  pontificating  intellec­  tuals,  childhood trauma. The  range   of subjects,  the experimentation with forms, and  through them  all, the sensibility of an artist   whose  craftsmanship, whose  good sense,  whose  compassion   and   whose  in­ telligence  make   him   surely  one  of  the most important short  story writers around.
And one more, the title story and its subtitle: "Peaches in the Bathtub." Harry Felker,  salesman, is out of work and stranded in  Sweet  Cream, Manitoba, where   he   takes  a   room  in  a  boarding house  owned   by  Winifred   "Ma"  Hislop and occupied by Peaches Hislop, her daughter and   Peaches' beau,  Tim  Bods­ worth.   Ma  Hislop   has  inherited  certain  recipes   from   her   dead   husband   which produce  natural-flavoured  sweets.  With the help  of Tim and  Peaches,  she is con­ cocting  a  line  of "lotions, shampoos and soaps  with  natural fruit flavours:  apple,  plum,  coconut, peach, pear." Once  con-

I20
 vinced,  Harry joins up as salesman/mar­ keting   director. And  soon  the  Winifred  Hislop  brands are  a  fine  success.  All  of this  having taken  place in Sweet  Cream, Manitoba.
While   this  is  clearly  a  satire   on  con­ sumerism,  marketing,   selling,   hustling, Hood  does not  include the quartet in his assault.  Ma,  Harry, Peaches, and  Tim  are rather  decent  folks,  greedy  sure,  but  not yet  (and   maybe  never)   to  be corrupted. They  are  all courteous to one another, all good   natured.  Harry,  who   might   have been  otherwise, is really  only as innocent as  the  rest. What it is about them  is that they  BELIEVE in  their  product. Except
-that  each   bottle  will  bear  the  slogan "None genuine without this signature" though of  course   they  won't   use  Wini­ fred's  REAL  signature.  A  little   scam, there.  Illusion and  reality.  And  I  am  left pondering: Why  did  Hood  use  that  title for  the whole  book?
VICTOR HOWARD



YANKEES  JN CANADA

JAMES DOYLE, ed.,  Yankees in Canada:  A Col­ lection   of Nineteenth-Century Travel  Nar­ ratives.  ECW  Press, $6.gs.

THE  GNAWING QUESTION  underlying the relationship of  Canadians to  Americans has  traditionally been:  "do   they  realize that   we're  here?" The answer   provided by James Doyle's  collections of  eighteen travel  narratives written by Americans visiting  Canada in the nineteenth century appears to be:  "somewhat."
The appreciation of  Canada by  these American visitors  was  usually  mitigated, if only mildly,  by the wistful  thought that the   country  would   inevitably  be   swal­ lowed   up   by  the   United  States.   Walt  Whitman  put  it  as  blithely   as  any:   "It seems  to  me  a  certainty of  time,  sooner  or  later, that   Canada shall  form  two  or

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



three   grand   States,   equal   and  indepen­ dent,  with  the  rest of  the  American Un­  ion."   Even   W.  D.  Howells,   one  of  the more   favourable  viewers   of  Canada  in this  book,   was  forced   to concede   that  Canada  would   eventually  melt   in   the American  pot.  All  the  same,   he  hoped faintly  that  it wouldn't happen, that  Can­ ada  could,  once  it  had  freed  itself  from its  graceful  and   "poetic" attachment to Europe,  further  those "experiments" which   were   no   longer   possible   in   the United  States but   which   could   still  be attempted in  Canada "to  the  advantage of civilization." With  somewhat greater robustness,    if   a   trifle    vaguely,    Henry James  felt  that  it  was of "good  profit  to us Americans to have near  us, and of easy access, an  ample something which  is not our expansive selves."
Howells'  and  James' scrupulous respect for the separateness of the Canadian iden­ tity is offset in Yankees in Canada by the more  strident voice  of  the  minor  writer,  W. H. H. Murray, who on a trip through western   Canada  in   I888  lamented  the  fact  that  British  Columbia  had  not  been grabbed when  the grabbing was good. He ironically  laid  the  blame  at  the  feet  of James   Polk,  one  of  the  most  acquisitive presidents ever  to  head  the  Union. "No  intelligent American," Murray observed, "ever   visited   this   province  of  Canada, and  saw  what   it  contains,  and   did  not grind   his  teeth  as  he  recalled  how  the miserable, blundering, partisan politics of the  Polk regime, lost  it  to  the  Great Re­ public." Has  the  time finally arrived, one wonders,  for  James Polk  to  be  installed as a Canadian folk hero?
The Americans in  Yankees in  Canada ventured north for a variety  of  reasons­ Henry   James to  do  a paid  travel  piece, Henry  David   Thoreau to  search  for  the origins  of  the  New  World  drama among  the   French  Canadians,   the    Moravian clergyman Benjamin  Mortimer to  serve as a missionary among the  native  peoples
 of  Upper   Canada. Few  of  these  writers came  to feel  any  sort  of  intimacy about their  northern  neighbour, and  most  felt challenged  to  defend   the  path   taken  by their own republic. Even Thoreau, who might  be expected to be hospitable to the idea  of a nation engulfed by nature, suc­ cumbed  to condescension as he looked  at the   unprogressiveness  of   French-Cana­ dian  society, a society that seemed  to him to have  settled  stolidly  in contrast to the nomadic  heroism  of the  first  immigrants from France.
In  this connection Doyle  comments in his general  introduction that  the "tension between  the superficial  attractions of  pas­ toralism  and  the commitment of  progress and  republicanism is one of the most per­  vasive features  of  nineteenth-century American attitudes toward Canada." Per­ haps another way of seeing the matter, at least  with  respect  to someone  like  Thor­ eau  whose  pastoralism was  certainly not superficial,  is to  note  the  underlying dis­ appointment in these American travellers that  Canadians seemed  neither to have caught fire imaginatively at  the  sight  of the  new world  nor  on  the  other  hand  to have  effectively  exploited that  world.  In a  sense, if one  may  read  between  Thor­ eau's   lines,  Canadians  were  simply   not "American" enough. Indeed, as one looks at  these  narratives, it  becomes  apparent that  Canada had  the  effect  on  many  of these travellers  of simply reinforcing their  own national consciousness and buoyancy,  and,  from  an  historical   point  of  view  at any rate, the  reaction is worth  capturing.
There are  moments, though, when  the inhuman immensity of Canada overpow­ ered  the  sensibility  and  accumulated ex­ perience   of   these   American  writers  to bring  them  face  to  face  with  something that  was unsettlingly new. The New Eng­  land Unitarian clergyman and  Transcen­ dentalist, David  Wasson, friend to Emer­ son and Thoreau, had  such an experience in Labrador:


12 I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Above  was  the  coldest gray  sky I remember to have  seen; the sea lay all in pallid, deathly gray  beneath; islands in all  shades of  grim­ mer   and   grimmest  gray  checkered   it; vast drifts  of  gray   old   snow  filled   the  deeper hollows; and  a  heartless atmosphere  pushed in   the   sense   of  this   grayness  to  the   very marrow. It was  as if  all  the  ruddy  and  ver­  durous juices  had   died  in  the  veins  of  the  world, and   from   core   to  surface only  gray remained.

,More  characteristic, though, is the  re­ action   of  the  New  York  merchant  and writer,  Frederick Cozzens,  who on  being confronted by the  Canadian  mosaic  felt obliged   to  assert   the  superiority of  the American melting pot. He wrote off Nova Scotia, for example, as "existence without nationality;  sectionalism without  emula­ tion;  a  mere exotic  life  with  not  a fibre rooted  firmly  in  the  soil.  The   Colonists  are   English,   Irish,   Scotch,   French, for generation after  generation." Once  in  a while one catches a glimpse of a more constructive, cultural cross-fertilization. Trekking from  New York to Upper Can­ ada   in   18g8,  Benjamin   Mortimer   was struck   by  the  fact  that  if  "some  of  the people  of Canada  have  their  complaints to  make   against   the  government,  there  seems upon  the whole to be more  loyalty and  attachment to it, than  we have  been able  to discover among the inhabitants of the States."
While Yankees in Canada richly repays historical interest, the  literary   quality of the  narratives leaves something to be de­ sired.  A number of the minor authors are simply  tedious,  while  major  authors like
Whitman  and  Thoreau  tend   not   to  be at  the  top  of  their  form.  Perhaps this  is why  the  piece  by Charles Haight  Farn­ ham  on  Nova  Scotia  emerges  as such  an unexpected  treasure. One  is  grateful  to James Doyle  for  reprinting  the  writings of  this  forgotten  American  writer  whose limpid  descriptions of  Cape  Breton  pro­  vide  the  most evocative portrait of nine­ teenth-century Canada in the book. There

122
 is the  following account of Cape  Breton courtship ritual, for example:

When  a   young   man   decides that  he   will marry, he  often first  builds  a  house; and  it is no  trivial matter here, where  most  of  the lumber is  sawn   by  hand in   a  pit.   A  man may  be said  to be in  earnest when  he begins his  suit  with   months of  such  hard  labor­ and   that, too,  from   a  disinterested motive, not  having the  faintest  idea, perhaps, as  to who  will  be  the  mistress  of  the   house.   We saw  a  number of  such   expectant  buildings, in   all   states and   of  many ages; for  some, failing to  get   a  tenant, stood   without win­  dows  or  doors,  the  image of a  desolate and  empty heart.

iDoyle's own  writing in  the  various  in­ troductions of Yankees  in Canada is gen­ erally   illuminating  and    incisive,   often more  than   that  of  the  authors he  intro­ duces  to  us. On   the  whole,  one  can  be thankful for  his  unearthing of  these  for­ gotten    works,   which   provide   a   useful chapter  in   the   evolving    biography  of North  American man.
ROSS LABRIE


PESSIMISTS

PIERRE DAGENAIS, Isabelle. Lemeac, $6.95·
LOUIS-MARIE DANSEREAU, La Trousse. Lemeac,
$6.gs.
JEAN GAGNON, Les V aches sont de braves types et trois autres  pieces. Lemeac, $6.gs.

IN A  CONTINUING EFFORT to bring  a wide selection  of Quebec dramatic works to the reading  public   through  its  "Collection Theatre," the  Montreal  publishing house Lemeac brings  up  three volumes  of plays representing three   very  different  phases of Quebec dramaturgy. Pierre  Dagenais' Isabelle, first  staged  in  1966, is an  intel­ lectual tragedy completely divorced from the  socio-political context  of  the  "Quiet Revolution." Louis-Marie Dansereau's La Trousse   is  a   monologue   in   Quebecois French by a whore  who has paradoxically found   liberation  through protitution  on

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"la  Main." Jean Gagnon's four  radio plays, Les Vaches sont  de braves  types  et trois  autres   pieces, are  brief  social  com­ mentaries on life in rural  and urban Que­ bec.  Despite   differences in  genre,   style, and  language, these  three  writers  are  re­ lated  by the deep-seated  pessimism  which shapes   their   thoughts  and   their   charac­ ters.
Dagenais, whose career as an actor, di­ rector,  and  playwright spans  almost forty years, has also written fiction,  poetry, and  an   autobiography. The  reader  suspects that   he  has  now  published  this  fifteen­  year-old  play in hope  of a revival. But so much  has changed in the Quebec theatre since  r g66  that   this  play,  despite  its  ob­ vious  merits,   seems  curiously outdated. During the  late  rg6o's  and  197o's,  a vir­ tual  revolution  took  place  in  the Quebec theatre  with   the  introduction  of   joual, experimental   forms,   poetry,  and   previ­  ously  forbidden political  and  sexual  sub­ ject matters. Isabelle, an existential drama played  out  in genteel  drawing rooms, be­ longs   to   another  era.   The   characters, members  of   the   educated   middle-class, find  themselves   caught up  in  a  tragedy  of adultery, betrayal and  suicide.  Avoid­ ing the emotional explosion  that  the situa­  tion  seems  to  warrant, the  play's   three characters sip champagne and  discuss ab­ stract   philosophical notions in elevated metaphorical   terms.    Dagenais    accom­ plishes  an   interesting dramatic  ploy  by having two  other   key  characters  remain  unseen.  The first  of these  non-appearing characters is  Isabelle  herself.  She  is the wife of  a  bookdealer  named Xavier and  for  two years she was the mistress of their  mutual friend, Jean-Claude. The second missing  character is Jean-Claude, whose suicide sets the drama in motion. Xavier's need  to  understand Jean-Claude's death provokes  a discussion  on truth, falsehood, silence  and  infidelity,  which  threatens to erupt in  violence  when  Xavier  discovers the truth. Eric, a journalist, and  Mathieu,
 an  artist,  knew  about Isabelle  and  Jean­ Claude's  liaison   and   hid   it  from  their naive,  bookish  friend. Xavier  is so deva­ stated   by  the   betrayal  of   his  wife  and  friends  that  his first impulse is to murder Isabelle   and   then  commit suicide.  Eric and  Mathieu finally convince him that,  in her own way, Isabelle  always remained  a faithful wife and  that  acmowledging the truth  about  the   affair   and   suicide  can only  destroy  the  marriage and  the  rela­ tionship  of  the  four  surviving friends.  In order   to  prove   that   silence,   ignorance, and   falsehood   are   often   preferable  to truth, Mathieu reveals  the  terrible  secret which   haunts  his  existence:  his  father was a murderer, condemned and executed for his crime.  Eric,  who passes for a cyni­ cal,  blase  seducer, reveals  a  secret  even more horrible: a war injury deprived  him of his manhood. The profoundly negative  message of the  play  then  is that  in order  to  bear  the  pain   of   existence,   we  must learn  to silence and disguise truth.
La Trousse, produced in October rg8o, is the  first  play  of  a  young  Montrealais actor /singer  who  has  turned to playwrit­ ing  with  promising results.  Louis-Marie Dansereau has created a memorable char­ acter  in SuzelleJLa  TrousseJMinoune, a prostitute on  "la  Main." In  this  mono­  logue  in  seven  scenes,  La  Trousse  anx­  iously  awaits   the   visit   of  her   younger brother,   Jean-Fran(_;ois,  encountered  by chance in a bar  twelve years after  she left the  parental home.  As she  waits,  she  re­ calls  the  accidental  meeting and,  hope­ fully, anticipates a renewed closeness with Jean-Franc;ois. She   also  reflects  on  her unhappy childhood and  her  career  as  a prostitute.  Anger,  resentment,  nostalgia, humour,   vulgarity,   and   pride-a    full range of emotions and  postures  have their moments in la Trousse's monologue. A rebellious child who hated being merely "number eight" in  her  mother's "gang" of  ten  children, she  became   a  trouble­ maker  to  be  noticed. Her  given  name  is


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Suzelle, but  her  mother gave her  the vul­ gar   nickname  "Ia   Trousse"   when   she caught her  sneaking out  of  the backyard with   a   neighbourhood   boy.  To   escape from  home,   Ia  Trousse  married at  six­ teen, only  to be abandoned three  months later  by a  shiftless  husband   who  had  al­ ready   pointed  her   toward   a  career   in prostitution.  Homeless,   jobless  and   un­ educated, she  had   no  alternative  other  than  prostitution. Fortunately, Ia Trousse was   befriended   by   another   prostitute, Lison,  who  taught her  the  tricks  of  the trade and  now at twenty-eight, she is not ashamed of  how  she  earns  a  living.  On the sidewalks  of  Rue  Saint-Laurent, Su­ zellejla Trousse  has  become  "Minoune" and  she has fully assumed  her identity as a   prostitute,  a  marginal  member   of  a society which has never given her a real chance. Being  a  prostitute is a continua­ tion of her rebellion against the repressive conformity symbolized  by her family  and  through her  vulgar  language  and  sexual­  ity she has achieved a form  of liberation. As it  becomes   clear   that   Jean-Franc;ois will not come to visit her, she realizes that  he will never free himself from  the family as she has  done.  The  break  with  the  past is now complete.
La  T rousse  is  a  gripping  monologue, clearly  influenced  by  Michel  Tremblay, to whom  it is dedicated. It belongs to the Quebec of the mid  1970's, when large families, domineering mothers,  beer­ drinking fathers,  the  Church,  and  con­ vent  education were favourite scapegoats for  Quebecois  trying   to  liberate  them­ selves  from   the   past.  Quebec  feminists may well object  to a male writing a mono­  logue  for  a  woman  and  using  the whore  stereotype.  Although  Dansereau's whore has used prostitution as a means of libera­ tion, feminist  critics  may argue  that  pros­ titution is  a  form   of  dehumanizing  ex­ ploitation rather than  a form of  freedom. Before   passing   final   judgment    on   La

124
 Trousse, we should  wait  for  the  next  in­
stallments of this promised  trilogy.
Jean Gagnon, a native  of Quebec City and   a  producer for  Radio-Canada,  dis­ plays  talent  and   originality  in  his  four short   radio   plays,   Les  Vaches   sont   de braves  types  et  trois  autres  pieces. These  social  satires  in  miniature  share  a black view  of  human  nature  and  a  common theme  of  cruelty;  cruelty  toward  non­  conformists,   strangers  and   animals.  In Gagnon's  opinion  people   invoke   public  morality  and  capitalist principles to hide their  own  self-interest, meanness and  in­ tolerance. The  pieces  are  mini-morality plays,  illustrations of  lessons  articulated by narrators, talking cockroaches or cows. "Jean-Baptiste  Poupinot,  insecte   do­ mestique" is the  tragic  story  of a middle­ aged  bachelor living  in a small  village  in the  Beauce   region   in   rg6o.  Falsely  ac­ cused  of  taking  indecent  liberties  with  a young  girl,  he is  ostracized by his  neigh­  bours.   Finally,  he  barricades himself   in his house  where  his only  companion is a talking  cockroach, who  has  also  experi­ enced  unmerited scorn.  At  the  urging of his  insect friend, Poupinot metamor­ phoses  into  a  cockroach, reasoning that since  society  has  treated him  like  a  dis­ gusting insect he may as well be one. Two  weel{]s  pass  before   the   curious  villagers  break  down  the door  of  Poupinot's home,  only  to  be  horrified  l;>y   the  man/insect inside.  A volunteer  steps  forward to  kill Poupinot with  an  ax, a communal crime  which  will  bind  the community together in  a  conspiracy  of  silence.  This  "volun­  teer''  just happens to be a neighbour who  had  coveted Poupinot's property for  the
expansion of his auto repair business.
The second  text is the  title piece,  "Les Vaches sont  de  braves   types."  It is  the story  of a civil servant who, while  stroll­ ing  in  the  countryside, meets  a  militant dairy   cow   anxious  to   complain   about man's  callous  exploitation  of  cows  and  bad  working conditions. The civil servant

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



becomes the press agent  for the Cow Lib­ eration Movement, dramatizing the prob­  lem  by means  of this radio  play.
"La Permanente .a cent  vingt  piastres"
is  the  story  of  a  middle-aged bachelor
who  lives  with  his  mother and  runs  his own small beauty  salon. One  day the wife of a wealthy  butcher enters  his shop, self­ righteously  accuses   him   of   seducing   a young  boy, and  then  orders an expensive  permanent. Although she is  the first cus­ tomer  who ever  ordered  the deluxe  wave in  this  modest  neighbourhood shop,  the hairdresser  is  less than  obliging.  He  kills the  butcher's  wife  and  then  shoots  him­
self.
1The fourth play,  "De  gauche a droite,
en  allant vers  le  bas ou  la  P.M.E. de  A
a Z," focuses on a group of small business
owners  taking  an  evening  course  on man­
agement. The  professor   (a  government administrator) has no plan for the course and soon loses control as class members argue  and  taunt each  other. The market­ ing  problem  presented  by  the  professor remains    unsolved   as   the   students  take turns dwelling on their  own problems  and attacking  government   economic  policy, bankers,  bureaucrats, leftists, intellectuals, unions,  and  immigrants. At  the  end  of the class, the narrator informs us that  all of the business owners  have  failed  miser­ ably except  the Greek  immigrant who has achieved success as a union  official in the United States.  In  this  radio  play  as well as in  the  others, Gagnon reveals  a  talent for  creating character  types   and  situa­ tions with  a few quick  strokes.  It  will be interesting to  see  how  his  dramatic art  develops   in   more   traditional   theatrical forms.
JANE MOSS
 SIGNIFYING SELF

WILFRED  EGGLESTON,  Literary   Friends.  Bore­
alis Press, $4·95·
DAVID MCFADDEN,  A Trip  Around  Lake Huron.
Coach House Press,  $6.50.

DAVID  MCFADDEN,  wondering what  it would have been like to have known Bliss Carman, Charles G. D. Roberts and Ray­ mond  Knister, once  asked  Dorothy Live­ say  what   the   poets   of   his   generation would  have  thought of  them.  "'I think  you  would   have   found   them   boring,"' she   answered.   Livesay's   response    (re­  corded  in A Trip around  Lake Erie)  was surely  a  judgment  about  McFadden  as well as about the "Canadian avant-garde of  the  1920's";  McFadden, in  repeating it, is self-consciously  and  ironically telling a  story against himself as well as about himself.  Such  ambiguity, allowed  to  rest in the accurately observed  object,  the precisely recorded event or remark, quick­ ens  McFadden's work;  a  contrasting ab­  sence  of  ironic  self-consciousness   leaves Wilfred  Eggleston's Literary Friends life­ less.  Eggleston  most  certainly reverences Carman and  Knister, but  his descriptions of them make them as boring as Livesay predicted they would  be.
His is not a failure of literary apprecia­
tion  (for  he has  proved  himself  an  early and   an  informed admirer  of  the   good writing  of his time), but  a failure of  lit­ erary imagination. Both his novels and his memoirs are marked by an unfailing pref­  erence   for   moribund   over   living   lan­  guage: Grove,  in a typically  mixed cliche, is described   in  Literary  Friends  as  both "on  the crest of a wave" and  "at  the helm of a promising  new Canadian publishing house";   Knister   may   "set   the   literary Thames   on   fire";  Eggleston    and    his friends "did  not  miss any of the  bouquet or sachet" of Peggy's Cove. His use of the literary   forms  and  conventions he  finds ready  to  hand without seeming   to  con-


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sider  how  they might  best be adapted to his material, cannot entirely  destroy  a reader's interest  in his first autobiography, While I  Still  Remember; there  the  per­ sonal relation of an active and varied and useful  life  gives  the  narrative  an  energy and   shape   that   compensates  for   many faults.   But  before   the  greater  looseness and   lesser  intimacy  of  the  memoir, his failure to think  creatively about  form and his  inability   to  use  language evocatively produces, in Literary Friends, a book that simultaneously is full of journalistic (and frequently trivial)  detail  and  is fleshless.
'Eggleston's   accounts  of  his   acquain­ tance  with Bliss Carman, Raymond Knis­ ter,  Lloyd  Roberts,  Frederick and  Cath­ arine   Grove,   Ephraim  Weber,   Duncan Campbell  Scott,  and   Pelham  Edgar are all  carefully documented from  frequently quoted  letters, columns from  his causeries for  the  Lethbridge Herald, and  Mrs. Eg­ gleston's  social  diary.  They  are  also  re­ strictively   journalistic:   very  rarely   does the  natural speculation we  all  indulge  in about  our  friends,  a gesture or an expres­ sion,  an  emotion  or  an   undocumented memory,  a passionate opinion  or  the real substance of a conversation, erupt through the superficial narrative of "whom I knew and  what we did  together."
Some  of the  diffuse,  lifeless quality  of these memoirs arises from a fundamental difficulty of the genre,  the question  of the relative emphasis to be placed on the "narrator" as opposed  to the other "char­ acters."   Eggleston's  irresolution   before this difficulty is evident in his inconsistent approaches   to   Raymond   Knister  and  Frederick Philip  Grove. Although he in­ sists that  "Of  all  the  literary  folk  I  met in  my  Toronto  days,  Raymond Knister made the deepest  and moot enduring im­ pression,"  when   he  comes  to  Knister's suicide,  Eggleston  tells us first of the  cir­ cumstances  which   make  a  last  meeting  with   the  poet   "quite  impossible," then that    "his    death ... haunted  Lorne
 Pierce"; he says not  one  word  of his own feelings about Knister's drowning. By con­ trast,   his account of  his  growing  doubts  about Grove's "autobiography" and of his playing   "literary  detective"   is   personal and  energetic, conveying his curiosity  and his  pride  at  anticipating  Spettigue. Part  of  the  discrepancy in  tone  between   the two passages is perhaps the  function of a personality  that  finds  it  easier   to  speak directly  about   activity than   about   emo­ tion; some  of it  may  be due  to the  com­ parative recency  of  the  Grove  research. But  the  second  passage  owes its liveliness largely  to its  focus  on  discovery,  that  is, on Eggleston's mind,  not his character's.
His  unease  about his own  function in his memoir ("observer"? or "character"?) can  be  deduced from  the  plaintive tone with   which   Eggleston  explains,   on   the first  page,  why  his  youthful ambition to be a Canadian writer was  less fully  rea­ lized than  he wished.  In a series of passive constructions that   imply  the  "fault"  (if fault  there  be): was not  his, he  tells us he "was  assigned" to  Ottawa,  "was  lured" into serving  on a Royal Commission, "was coerced" into  censorship during  World  War  II, "was coaxed" into  the School  of Journalism at Carleton. This coy and self­ exculpatory tone  works against  the  mem­ oiristic functions of Literary  Friends, par­ ticularly  since Eggleston's contributions to Canadian  letters   have   been   many   and signal:  a  prominent  journalist,  he  was among  the  first  to  write   appreciatively and  informedly about our  literature and our  intellectual history; he  was also  one of  the  initiating members of The  Cana­ dian  Writers' Foundation. What  will  be useful is his description of the recovery  of the   Montgomery-Weber  correspondence and   of  the  early   years  of   the   Writers' Foundation. But most of  Literary  Friends adds little  to our knowledge of the writers it  describes.  Nor  does  the  form  and   the language of  this  memoir serve  its author or  his  subjects  well.  We  are  no  nearer

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Wilfred    Eggleston's  "friends"  or   their works for having read  his memoir.
What can be done with the conventions of  autobiographical and  documentary forms  is one  of  the  adventures of David McFadden's A Trip around  Lake  Huron, the   second   of  a   projected   five-volume Trips around   the  Great  Lakes.  Notepad on the dru;h, wife Joan beside him, daugh­ ters  Jennifer and  Alison  in  the back  seat and  dog Bruce  in the  rear  of  the camper­ van,   McFadden  sets   off   around  Lake Huron on a trip  he will turn into  a witty "documentary   novel"    of    middle-class America, encased  in  Winnebagos, on  the move  back  to  nature.  McFadden places himself  and,  through himself,   his  "typi­ cally  Canadian family" at  the  centre of his  account  in  a  self-confessed   egocen­ trism which,  like the position  of the cam­ era  lens,  limits  what   he  documents and  the angle from which  it is seen. The  result is situation comedy: it rains; the children clamour for amusement  parks  and  David and   Joan  try  to  avoid   them; Joan gets angry   and    thinks    poems    impractical; Bruce  gets  ill and   bites  Jennifer;  fellow campers are  noisy or  dirty  or  friendly  or aggressive; Americans generalize about Canadians and  the  McFaddens about Americans  with   about  equal   prejudice. But  as this  easy-going,  occasionally  fum­ bling,  and  whimsical narrator  (given  to rowdy  behaviour in  restaurants  and  em­ barrassment in public washrooms) proves tenacious of his own perceptions and  very ironic,   his  "documentary"  acquires un­ usual  restrictions and  possibilities.
Each  "chapter" records   an  encounter, a stretch   of  road,  a  scene,  an  event  wit­ nessed  or  experienced -records  it  care­  fully,   paying   equal  attention  to   every physical  detail, to  each   nuance of  emo­ tion,  but  never  going  beyond  what  Mc­ Fadden himself  noted. The style initially  seems journalistic: direct in its statement, impartial  in   its  emphasis,   denuded  of metaphor. But  we soon  realize  that  Me-
 Fadden's humour and  whimsy  nudge  us out   of  the   passivity   "documentary"  so often   induces   (for   example,  of   empty­ handed fishermen: "And  under  the wat­  ery flatness we could  hear  huge schools of fish, giggling"). Each  chapter comes with a  "title" printed in  bold  type  as a  mar­ ginal  gloss which  reinterprets the  narra­ tive. The  effect  is much  like that  of some of   McFadden's   poems   where    a   flatly stated   observation   acquires  significance  by a sudden  turn  in the last line. Here  the titles stand  poised against the descriptions and comment ironically on  them; by em­ phasizing one detail,  they alter  the signifi­ cance  of all  the  other  details. The  act  of interpreting and  the  act  of  observing  il­ luminate each  other in a binary  structure that   keeps   both   meaningful  and   each distinct  from  the other. McFadden's final restriction  of  "documentary" is that  both acts  should  signify:   they  may  signify  in themselves;   the   fantasies  or   memories  they  trigger  may  signify;  the  present  act of  writing  may  make   them  signify.  Ob­ servation and  interpretation become more real  by having been  alertly, lovingly,  ex­ actly seen, thought about, written.
McFadden frequently refers to Greg Curnoe and   particularly to  his  painting of Highway  401. The attraction of  Cur­ noe's subject  to the  author of  "Travellin' Man," On   the   Road   Again  and   Trips around  the  Great   Lakes  is  obvious.  But the road  and  Curnoe's painting fascinate him   in  other   ways.   In   Lake   Erie  and  Lake Huron the road becomes a principle of contiguity; it emphasizes position  over connection. And  just as the  objects  along  Curnoe's 401,  because  they  are  presented as  contiguous,  not   connective,  and   be­ cause they are looked at intensely, become super-real, so too  do  the  scenes noted  by McFadden. We  suddenly notice  the  hal­ lucinatory quality  of  a  world   in  which there   are  girls  without arms,  men  who give away nineteen wheelchairs, husbands who beat wives in  public  campsites (and


I27

BOOKS IN REVIEW



wives who defend their husbands' right  to do so),  lifeguards who insist dogs be kept on  a  leash  and  let  children drown.  The sight   that, because  of  its strangeness   or the intensity of its perception, seems like a hallucination merges   with  the  effect  of poisonous   mushrooms,  becomes  contigu­ ous with premonitions, dreams, memories,  time-warps and  deja-vus in a  "fabulous" project. In this narrative in which, finally, it is the narrator's consciousness that is be­ ing  recorded  so  matter-of-factly through his  perceptions,  things  take  on  new  pos­ sibilities.  Where  coincidences were  pres­ ent but not omnipresent in A Trip around Lake  Erie,  during which   the  Canadian McFaddens accidentally met  the Ameri­ can   McFaddens,  A  Trip  around   Lake Huron   asserts   coincidence  as  a  second binary   principle  of  the  projected  series (the  dedications of  the first two volumes are to two different men who died differ­  ently in different provinces,  both acciden­ tally,  both  on  January 3, 1979). Coinci­ dence   asserts  the  primacy   of  contiguity over  continuity, of  inexplicable meaning over  meaningful explanation. Its  percep­ tion is one of the  ways McFadden  makes what  he  observes  super-real. The  reader is  asked   to  stand   back  with.  the  writer, to see with  accuracy, with concentration, with  pleasure. Out of such seeing  comes
VISIOn.
SHIRLEY NEUMAN

INTIMATE PRAIRIE

ELIZABETH ALLEN, A Shored  Up House. Turn­
stone Press,  n.p.
LAURA MCLAUCHLAN,  Lacuna. Turnstone Press, n.p.
ANNE szuMIGALSKI,  A Game  of Angels. Turn­
stone Press,  n.p.
LORNA UHER, Humans  and Other Beasts. Turn- stone   Press,  n.p.
READING THESE   NEW  CONTRIBUTIONS to the  current flowering of prairie poetry,  I was struck  by a certain uniformity of tone
 and   theme   among  them.   It is  perhaps heretical to say  that  the inferior Atwood poems  of  sexual  struggle, present  in  all four  collections, are  the  least  interesting. The distinctive virtues  in  these  offerings, for  me,  lie  in  the  extent   to  which  these writers convey   their   vivid,  intimate  ex­ perience of  the  prairie  landscape  as  an imaginative correlative for their emotions. Humans   and  Other   Beasts  is  Lorna Uher's fourth book;  she is an  established prairie poet,  winner  of the Saskatchewan Poetry   Prize  for I 978.  The  first  section, which  gives its title  to the  collection, in­ tersperses  poems which  personify  animals with  portraits of  people  as curious freaks and  grotesque victims. The  themes  of be­ trayal   and   bestiality   appropriately con­ clude  with "Mother Was a Lovely Beast":

mother was  a  lovely  beast she gave  to me a lovely  feast
three teats hanging from  her  chest
I found the  third one  quite the  best.

Unfortunately, in  this poem  as in others, the sensitive  pathos of the  man-woman relationship is marred by an  almost  por­ nographic sexuality.
The second  and  fourth sections  of this book  are  brief  poem  cycles in  two  radi­ cally   different  but   authentic   women's voices-one raw,  violent,  vengeful; the other quiet,  moving,  reaffirming. In  this Uher  demonstrates   her   versatility  and  range of  emotions.  However,  the   third  part, "Letters to a Distant Lover," I think captures the  best of her  work. The poems in  which  the moods  of love are  reflected  in realistic, detailed metaphors of prairie life have  a natural freshness  and  balance:

But  there is no going back
All  the  boundaries have  disappeared:
the  sky spills  over  the  horizon
Even the  trees  are  buried, the  fences, the  paths
we broke  through snow And  every  bird  we create flies from  our  palms
beats  itself
against the  sky that betrays.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Less successful  are  her  poetic  cliches  on male  aggression.
Anne  Szumigalski, another award-win­ ning   Saskatchewan poet,  has  published two  previous  bookis. The  title  poem  and lead   poem  in  A  Game  of   Angels  have already appeared in Canadian Lit,erature. This slim  volume  portrays the  games  of humans aspiring  to  angelhood. The first poem  "A  House  with  a  Tower" defines the   two   interwoven,  and    competitive, strands  of   her  own   creativity-ecstatic utterance:

the  Celt  within
who  likes to stand up  and  sing
ecstatic and  undulating songs
is the  one  who  opens my mouth
and lets the  lies out

and  careful craft :

verse  is a  shelter
of  blocks  that must  be  built
carefully for,  in  the  end, it  may  become a  palace with  electric stars.

Her  poems take  place in an absurdist and surrealistic world, in which  fantastic char­ acters   perform  bizarre rituals,  and  irra­  tional    narratives  are   only   occasionally  given  a reassuring explanation:

well,  my  dear
are  you  wondering
why  I tell  these  bizarre stories? I am  doing  it  to  reassure you for we all  know
that such  strange things
could never happen  twice.

All of which  suggests  that  Szumigalski  is cleverly  illuminating  our   universal  fan­ tasies and  exorcising our  collective  fears. Her  poetic  craftsmanship, on tl1e other  hand, always  ties  the  startling and  idio­ syncratic invention to prosaic  and closely­ observed   fact,   although  her  imagery   is only   occasionally   prairie-inspired.  She deftly  sketches  a  character, tells  a  tale, creates a  mood,  often   garnishing  them  with  wild  humour, or  quiet   irony  as in
"The Weather":
 I have  been  dead all  winter no one  has  noticed it
my bones,  sewed  up in  a cheerful
print sack,  balanced on the  seat  of a chair answers  all  your  questions
I shuffle into the  kitchen to make tea soft  dust  rises from the  floor
I pour  and pour
the  cups  remain empty

Unfortunately, only  a few  poems  inspire the  same  immediate, emotional empathy as this one. Her  surrealistic visions and clever   conceits   too  often   distance, and even confuse,  the reader.
Of these four poets, my favourite is Elizabeth Allen, a New Zealander only recently  transplanted to Saskatchewan. This  is her  first  published collection,  al­ though many of the poems have appeared in   little   magazines and   anthologies.  A Shored  Up  H ous,e is divided  into  five sec­ tions.   The   first   two,   "wargames"  and  "lovepoems,"   deal   with    the    common theme   among  these   poetesses,   the   love that  is war  between   the  sexes. However, Allen  combines  simplicity   of  treatment with exactness of imagery  to achieve some sensitive insights:
my eyes are  cups which  you  fill with  cold  tea
and  daffodils
to give  the  room
an  air  of elegance.

After a brief interlude, the final  two sections  are  again   thematically twinned. "Transplant" movingly contrasts the
poet's  roots in "my  father's land  I where
sea is I the  constant I tide  I moving in
& out  of my ear" with  her  reality .in "my husband's land  I ...wind I a constant clawing  I at   my   throat    breath I torn spittle  threads I dry on cheeks." The final
section,   "dryland  winds,"   contains the
most powerful imagery  and  mythology of the  prairies  that  I found  in  these coHec­ tions. In  both  lyrics and  narratives, Allen vividly conveys an intimate experience of the   land   and   its  inhabitants,  past   and


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



present: "the  prairie's song  I thin  as birdsftight  I against a darkening sky."
Lacuna by  Laura  McLauchlin is  the
slightest  volume  of the four, in size and substance. The  previously   unpublished poems   by  this   Manitoba  native   are   a product of her  travels in Ontario, the Bahamas, the Orient, and  Nova Scotia where  she  now  resides. There are  poems about Haiti, Stratford, Toronto, India, and   Norman  Bethune in  China, and   a hymn for Canada. However, only the first of  these  settings  is strongly  evoked.  Mc­ Lauchlin's poetry  is clever  and  cerebral. She  produces a  delightfully  bitchy  anti­ male   tirade   in  "The  One  About   You"  and  a startling metaphor for marriage in "Teeth." But  several   of   the   poems  are dedicated to individuals and  are  charac­ teristic  of a private self-indulgence in her poetry  that  seems  to  inhibit  accessibility. She  manipulates  words  well  and  creates  some  interesting   images,   but   her   work seems finally ephemeral.
BARBARA PELL


FOLKLORE

ROGER MARTIN,  L'Anguille. Lemeac,  n.p. GEORGES  ARSENAULT,   Complaintes  acadiennes
de  l' Ile-du-Prince-Edouard. Lemeac,  n.p.
GILLEs  LANDRY,   Sept-Iles   Racontee.  Lemeac,
$g.gs.
MADELINE   DOYON-FERLAND,   jeux,  rythmes  et divertissements traditionnels. Lemeac,  n.p.
BENOIT  LACROIX, Folklore de lamer et religion.
Lemeac,  $6.gs.
ALICE   MICHAUD-LATREMOU!LLE,   Chansons de
Grand'mere. L'Universire d'Ottawa, $7.50.

BIEN  AVANT LE REVElL d'intJt':r@t quebecois dans  le patrimoine de  la  belle  province, Les Archives de Folklore de l'universite Laval, fondees   par   Luc  Lacourciere  en
1944,  promouvaient Ia recherche, l'etude et  Ia dissemination des  traditions  popu­ laires  canadiennes. II fallait  pourtant at­  tendre les annees soixante-et-dix pour que
 les editeurs quebecois commencent a cher­ cher  profit  dans  ce dornaine. Depuis dix ans,  tirant avantage de  !'interet du  pu­  blic  quebecois,  les  editeurs fran<;ais  ont  fait  paraitre un  v'eritable  flot  d'ouvrages consacres au  folklore  canadien d'expres­ sion fran<;aise. Malheureusement, de nom­ breux  auteurs, seduits  sans  doute par  Ia possibilite  d'un gain  reel, ont sacrifie leurs penchants savants sur I'au tel de Ia facilite. C'est  ainsi  que  les editions Lemeac, mal conseillees,    peuvent   publier   des   livres d'une qualite tres variable.
Sept-Iles Racontee n'est  autre qu'un releve  d'enquete ethnographique de  cinq mois entreprise en  I 959-60.  On  dirait un memoire de  maitrise  quelque  peu  edite aux  fins  d'une  rapide publication. C'est un  travail competent qui  resume  en  75 pages  les  Lieux  et  Genre   de  Vie   (pre­ miere  partie); les Trauaux  saisonniers  et quotidiens ( deuxieme  partie) ; et  les Di­ vertissements   ( troisieme    partie) ,   mais chaque partie  est  tellement  superficielle qu'on  n'apprend que  des details  tres sees, on   lit   une   poignee   de   textes   de   recits traditionnels  ( ou  l'on   voit   jusqu'a  quel point   on   peut   denaturer  !'oral  par   un souci  de  lisibilite   litteraire) .  On   est  en droit de  se demander pourquoi on  nous donne vingt-deux pages  d'un Inventaire topographique complet de Ia collection Gilles Landry, et  non  une evocation du contexte humain dans  lequel  placer  ses contes  et legendes.  Le  probleme du  livre, commun a de nombreuses publications du genre,  est l'absence d'un cadre theorique qui donnerait une direction plus sure a l'enquete. Car  le folklore  n'est pas du tout une  sorte  d'archeologie de  Ia  parole  ou de )'objet.
Sur  un  autre plan,  l'ouvrage de Made­ leine   Doyon-Ferland,  Jeux,  rythmes  et divertissements traditionnels,  est  un  me­
lange  d'articles parus ailleurs,  de  confe­ rences et communications, publie, peut-on supposer, d'abord  comme   une   sorte d'hommage a cette  folkloriste  qui  fut  as-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sociee aux  Archives  de Folklore depuis  sa fondation  en   1944   jusqu'a  la  mort   de celle-ci  en   1978,  et  ensuite   comme   un debut de reflexion  pour ceux qui s'interes­ sent a ce domaine de la culture tradition­ nelle.  Malheureusement,  corrune  le  pre­ cise Andree Paradis qui collige et presente  les textes, son auteur  n'avait pas songe a publier  Ia plupart des textes qui n'ont  pas, pour  cette  raison, toute la rigueur metho­ dologique qu'on voudrait.
Certaines des  conferences visent  a  at­ tirer  !'attention du  public  sur  les  avan­  tages  de  l'enseignement aux   jeunes  des vieux  jeux  canadiens; si l'on  y  retrouve  un  element de  nationalisme  dans  ses pa­  roles,  on  peut   tout   de  meme  lui  recon­ naitre  d'avoir  ete   une   practicienne  du folklore  applique bien avant la lettre. Son article  sur  les Jeux, Jouets  et  Divertisse­  ments  de  Ia  Beauce,  paru  dans  le vol. 3 des  Archives  de  Folklore   ( 1948)   est  de loin le plus important du recueil,  tant  par sa  longueur que par la description mi­ nutieuse des jeux. Mais en fin de compte, l'absence d'un solide cadre  theorique, qui n'est  certes  pas  Ia faute  de  l'auteur, fait de l'ouvrage rien  qu'un recueil  disparate. On   peut   se  demander si  Mme  Doyen­ Ferland aurait approuve sa publication.
Folklore  de lamer et religion de Benoit Lacroix promet, par  son  titre,  plus  qu'il ne donne. L'auteur est inspire  par sa con­ viction   personnelle autant  que  par  une solide  recherche chez  les gens de  la mer. II semble  trop  porte   a  interpreter, dans  un   langage   quelque   peu  mystique,   un esprit  religieux  qu'a  en  faire  une analyse raisonnee  a  partir  des  textes  qu'il   con­ suite.   En   fait,   corrune   le  demontre  sa typologie  des  sources  et  le  questionnaire qui  Ia suit,  l'ouvrage est  l'esquisse  d'une methode de  recherche plutot qu'une des­ cription ou  une  analyse  des rapports sug­ geres par le titre.  Bien trop  de pages sont occupees  par  des  illustrations et  une  an­  nexe de  vingt-cinq pages  de sorte  que  la
 partie  substantive du  livre  ne comprenne que douze pages.
L'Anguille   de  Roger   Martin  est  par
contre  un livre qui  vaut  le titre  de docu­ ment  ethnographique  valable.  Apn!s un chapitre  consacre   a   l'Historique  de   la Peche  a 1'Anguille, qui  note  les procedes  des Amerindiens et suggere  les influences  de ceux-ci sur  les methodes des pecheurs quebecois, Martin fournit une description claire   et  precise  des  materiaux pour   Ia capture; des  techniques d'installation  de Ia peche;  et de !'exploitation de la peche. Pour   ce  faire,   Martin a  travaille entre
1967 et 1973 chez les pecheurs de Riviere­ Ouelle,  et c'est  ainsi qu'il  peut fournir de nombreux  details   contextuels   qui   nous permettent de  mieux  comprendre le role de cette peche sur le plan social et econo­
mique.  une derniere section  evoque quel­
ques  aspects  folkloriques; c'est  la section
Ia moins reussie, car Martin semble croire qu'un echantillon de  croyances,  de  cou­ tumes  et  de  contes  suffit  pour  completer notre  apevc;u de  la  culture  des  pecheurs d'anguille.
R. Martin a le merite  d'avoir situe  son travail   par  rapport a  une  typologie  eta­ blie.  II fournit une   exposition   qui   est peut-etre  un  modele  a  suivre;  son  livre represente a coup  sur le meilleur des  pu­  blications  ethnographiques inspirees   par  l'ecole  de  l'universite Laval.
,Dans le dornaine de la litterature orale, le  Complaintes  acadiennes  de   l'Ile-du­ Prince-Edouard de Georges Arsenault est certainement  un  des  meilleurs   ouvrages sur le folklore franco-canadien paru  chez quelque  editeur que  ce  soit  depuis  bien longtemps. C'est  un livre ala fois savant, fort bien recherche, instructif  et tres facile a lire. La complainte est une chanson dite de composition locale qui traite d'un sujet d'interet local. Les specialistes de la chan­ son  folklorique ont  longtemps  dedaigne le  genre,  sous  le  pretexte que  les  textes  n'etaient pas assez vieux, manquaient de poesie  ou  de  qualites  litteraires.  lis   ne

BOOKS IN REVIEW

s'adressaient nullement a la  question   de la cn!ativite et de l'esthetique du  peuple.
Georges  Arsenault, acadien, a l'encon­
tre   de  !'habitude  de   nombreux  jeunes
chercheurs quebecois,  n'ignore  pas la lit­
terature de langue  anglaise  sur  ces  ques­
tions, et il reussit  ainsi  a voir le genre  de
la complainte dans  une perspective plus large.  II  examine tour  a tour  l'art  de  la
complainte, les auteurs, la transmission orale:  des  questions  de  portee  a la  fois
theoriques et d'interet humain. II regarde de  pres  ensuite   les  textes  et  le  contexte d'un choix  de complaintes, dont  deux  en profondeur, pour  donner une  etude  qui
servira  sans doute   d'inspiration a de  fu­
turs  chercheurs acadiens.   Mais  des  folk­
loristes ou ethnographes de partout profi­ teront d'une lecture attentive de  ce livre excellent.
II est dommage que le dernier titre presente ici, Chansons de Grand'mere d'Alice Michaud-Latremouille ait  si peu
a recommander au  lecteur.  C'est  en  ap­
parence un recueil  de chansons tradition­
nelles,  mais  !'auteur n'a  aucune  pn!ten­ tion  savante. Sur  1 10 chansons,  dont un certain nombre  sont  des  textes  reconsti­  tues, 24 ont  une transcription musicale  et deux,   nous  dit-on,   sont   "sur   l'air   de."  Nous   apprenons que   les  chansons   pro­ viennent  du   Bas-Saint-Laurent,  qu'elles  datent  pour  la plupart d'avant  le siecle actuel, et que I'auteur a compte  beaucoup sur des membres de sa famille,  et  un peu sur  quelques  personnages agees  "qui   se souviennent de cette  epoque  ou vivait  rna grand'mere," et  c'est  tout.  Le  livre  n'a aucun appareil critique, ni meme  une in­ troduction. C'est le produit d'une maniere de  penser  qui  croit  que  "tout  ce  folklore
tend  a se perdre." C'est en fait un exercise
de  nostalgie   romantique qui  reflete  mal
les  preoccupations de  nos  editeurs  uni­
versitaires.
GERALD THOMAS
 


DRAWING ON

JERROLD   MORRis,    roo    Years   of   Canadian
Drawings. Methuen,  $16.g5.
THE  COMPASS  OF THIS BOOK  is slightly more  than   the  one  hundred years  of  the title. It also embraces the Canadian "Co­ lonial  Period" prior  to 188o. During that  early   time  the   pictorial  record   was  the worof English  army officers, visitors and finally immigrants. Then comes the "Aca­ demic  Era," after 188o, tl1e year in which the    Royal   Canadian   Academy  was founded, that  term  being  used by Morris  to characterize "official" art.
In Europe official art was the art of the Establishment, including various  levels of European governments. "While the acad­ emies  were  supportive of artists  they  ap­  proved  of,  they  were  also  restrictive, re­ sisting  any  changes  which  might   under­ mine  their authority to guide  public  taste, which  was  largely   moulded  by  produc­
tions of their  members." Of course  much
the  same  restrictions were  also  prevalent in Canada.
One  of Morris' primary purposes  is to find  qualities in  the  work  of  nineteenth­ century Academicians "which can  be ap­  preciated  in  the  light  of  contemporary taste." I  suppose  he  means   unrestricted and  imaginative  art,  "art for  art's  sake"  perhaps? At  any  rate, vivid  and  striking pictures which  would  appeal to any  non­  academic age.
The  collection  proceeds   chronologi­ cally, the Colonial Period followed  with a big   chunk    of   Academicians,  then    the Group of  Seven, the  Canadian Group of Painters,  Independents,  war-time artists, Introverts, Extroverts, and  so on until  the modern era.  (I am,  of course,  using Mor­ ris' own caps for the  various terms.)
Early  Canadian Colonial artists  had  a market in Europe with people who wanted to  know  what  it  was  like in  the New  World, some  of whom  probably  re­ garded  Indians  and   rough   frontier  life

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  horrified superiority from   their  re­ mote   cultural  pinnacle.  In   any   event,  market dictated subject matter. The same must  have  been  true  in  Quebec, despite  "early   emphasis on  portraiture and  reli­ gious   painting."   And   yes,  examples  of Colonial drawing  here  seem  to  me  dull and  uninteresting.
The  Academy is crowded with familiar names-familiar at least if you pay even minimal attention to art  galleries  and  art history,  which   is also  part   of  Canadian history.  Lucius O'Brien, first  prez  of the R.C.A.,  with  a  beautifully simple  land­ scape. Daniel Fowler  with  "Man in Door­  way Smoking." Replace the archaic dress in  this  picture and  it  belongs  to any  pe­ riod.
But much  work of this Academic era is still dictated by Europe. T. Mower  Mar­ tin  has  a  log  cabin  in  western  Canada. Alan   Edson   depicts immigrant  children aboard ship.  William  Armstrong,  Indian wigwams.   Although  in  "The Evangelist  Moody," Robert  Harris makes  his  man timelessly  fat  and   pompous. As  Morris  says, "Moody would  have been well quali­ fied  to  join  the   ranks   of  the  fraternity (evangelists, that  is)  of our  own  time."
Up   to  this  point   I can't see  anything that  Morris is looking  for:  art that  would appeal to contemporary taste.  Frederick Challener's Igio "Nude" is a  nude  is a nude.  Frederick Brigden's "Woman Sew­ ing"  is a  woman   sewing.  Looks  a  little quaint and  old  fashioned, so  what! And just  the  sort  of  thing   you  expect   from  C.  W.  Jefferys,   historic  drama. Whereas some of Jefferys' recreations of Sam Slick in a Haliburton book I looked  at  recently are  wondrously  alive  and  lcicking. Clar­ ence  Gagnon  has a  male  nude,  complete with  jockstrap, which  looks like a photo­ graph.
And  the  Group of Seven  drawings are disappointing to  me,  with  the  exception of Jackson's "Maynooth, Ont." which  is so casual it's almost  a doodle.  And Varley,
 his  female  "Head" being  a  reason  why men  fall  in  love.   (But  then,  Varley  has always  been  special  for  me.)   Philip Sur­ rey  has  a  charcoal and  wash  of  "Three Girls"  running into  a  building  at  night,  with  a  motorcyclist   on  the  road  behind.  And it seems to happen  before your eyes. Andre   BiBer's  "Les  deux vieux  St.  Fa­  mille"  looks  exactly  the  way  an  Anglo­ phone  might imagine an old Quebec cou­ ple, in  fact  too  much  so. Surely  the  eye doesn't  want to be unsurprised by the ab­  solutely  typical.  Emily  Carr's "Jacob"­ an  Indian boy with  an  independent  look
-is a great  contrast for  me  with  Carr's massive   rain    forests   and   weird   totem poles.
But  I can't go the  "Automatistes," Borduas,   Bellefleur,   Molinari  and   Rio­ pelle.   My   no-doubt   old-fashioned   eye searches for   something  it   probably shouldn't be searching for. And I like Col­ ville, but  this  business  of  numbering and measuring  all  the  angles  as if a  drawing was mathematics incarnate! Well, maybe it  is. Kurelek'   conveys   the  heaviness  of things.  If he  were  Dutch instead  of Ukrainian, I'd  think  of those super-real Dutch  house  interiors five hundred years ago. And I love Jean-Paul Lemieux, with his  attenuated  figures   like  those  of  El Greco  and  that  pointilliste painter whose name  I can't remember.
It does seem  to me  that  the  later  por­ traits  are  among the  best  drawings  col­ lected  here.  Dorothy  Stevens'   "Portrait" and  Dennis  Burton's  "Portrait of Maika Fry,"   which   looks   like   author  Sandra Martin. And Gordon Rayner's "Self-Por­ trait"  (also  on  the  cover)   pokes  out  of paper   with  real  savagery. David   Black­ wood's stuff  looks  like  illustrations for  a Newfoundland Book  of the  Dead  out  of the   Ancient    Mariner.   Harold  Town's "Vale Variation #2I2" seems merely cute in   this  book;   whereas   I've   seen  many Towns  I like much,  with  an artful/artless simplicity.   John   Newman's  near    full-

I33

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



length   portrait of  a  young  girl   ("Nude About   to  Move")  has  something  defi­ nitely indefinable; someone you know but have  never  known.
It seems useless to keep on listing stuff
I like chronologically, from  the beginning of the  book to the end.  There's too much of it. One  major complaint is that  many of these  drawings were  originally  in  col­ oured   oil  or  ink,  and   black  and  white can't do them  justice.  But I am  thankful that  Morris  doesn't use  the  awful  prose jargon   in  his  commentary,  with   which I've  seen  reviewers  semantically  pollute  the  pages  of  Arts  Canada. Although  I don't think  he's  achieved  his stated  aim, to find  among older  work drawings that  escape  the  bounds  of  their  own  contem­ porary  style  and  historic  slot.  He  didn't say it quite  like that, but it seems a worth­ while objective.
What 100 Years  of Canadian  Drawings does do  is collect  together  a small  range of  hills  from   which   a  few  taller   peaks project.  No  doubt   the  book's  relatively low  price  prohibits colour,  but  I moum its absence. I'm sure my reactions  to many of these drawings would be completely different if the colour  spectrum  was pres­ ent.
Anyway,  Morris' aim and intent  here is
entirely  laudable to  me;  and  presumably he doesn't have my own blind spots of incomprehension sometimes  and  non-ap­ preciation for the obvious. In short, I give the  book  very  high   marks,  but  not  the highest  possible.
ALPURDY


SKELTON'S CANON

ROBIN SKELTON,  The  Collected  Shorter  Poems,
1947-1977. Sono  Nis, $14.95·
ROBIN  SKELTON  WANTS  the  256  poems in this volume,  twenty-five  of them  hith­ erto  uncollected, to  be "regarded  as  the canon" of  his  serious  shorter  poems  for

134
 the  years it covers. Here, as in other  vol­ umes,  the  poet  shows a self-consciousness  about the shape  of his career  that, though perhaps  disconcerting,  befits  his  scrupu­ lousness as a craftsman of verse. But  to dismiss as "uncanonical" poems already collected seems an  empty  gesture.
The title of the new book may mislead. Far  from  comprehensive, it  retains an average of only  eight  poems  a year,  and excludes many  that  were  in  the  Selected Poems of  I968. From Patmos, his first substantial collection, thirty  of the thirty­ seven  short  poems are  omitted, including the  engaging "Advice  From  Sloth" with its ingenious rhyme-play. A group of nine ballads from  Begging  the  Dialect, a cou­ ple    of   which    survived   into    Selected  Poems,  has  now  all  vanished.  Nor  is  it only  the  early  volumes that  are  pruned. Eight  poems  are   gone   from   Timelight
( I974)  and  several  from  Because of Love (I 977), including the whole section called "The Hold  of Our Hands" (now  perhaps thought of  as  a  single  long  poem). In general, the  more  whimsical  pieces, those relatively loose in  texture, and  those  ap­
proximating  to   technical  exercises   (in­
cluding  most   of   the   essays  in   Welsh forms)   have  been  relegated to  the apoc­ rypha, as  well  as  a  few  weal,ish  poems that had  somehow  survived  the initial ex­ ercise  of  the  poet's  intense  self-scrutiny. But  the  reasons  for  omission  are  not  al­ ways  clear.  The  product of  all  the  self­ topiary is a  bookJ of formidable intensity and  concentration, with  no weak  or  cas­ ual spots, strong but  unrelenting. A muse with a migraine must  have  presided.
Why  did  Skelton close the  canon four years  ago?  In  his  preface   to  Landmarks ( I979)  he writes, "Only now ... do I feel that  I have made  a true  beginning," writ­ ing  not  as  exile  or  immigrant but  from within   a  Canadian  experience.  The  ob­ servable division  is not  sharp, but  in  the new  work  there is less gratuitous artifice, the  texture of  thought  is looser, the  link-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



age  of imagery is relaxed, and the rhythms often  achieve a  beautiful, inter­ locking, melodic  movement. In this peace something is lost, and  the  long title-poem of  Landmarks is  perhaps  weakened  by the  consciousness  of  belonging. One  who proclaims that he feels at home  is not  at home  yet.   (Both  reviewer   and  reviewed are  55, were  born  and  educated in  Brit­ ain,  ended  military service  as  sergeants,  since  arriving in  Canada have  settled  in one  town  and   taught in  one  university,  and  have  hairy  faces;   but   the  reviewer immigrated twelve years earlier than  his victim, and thinks he recognizes an earlier phase  of acclimatization.)
For  the  new  collection Skelton  adopts a  topical  arrangement, though the  order of  time  is partly served  by  having  some of  the  sections  relate to  successive  times of  life.  He   argues  that   a  chronological ordering  would   scatter  poems   that   are thematically related. But  the  preface   to his  Selected   Poems   argued  that   only  a chronological grouping  would  serve,  be­ cause  events  in 1957 and  1962  (marriage and   migration)   "fundamentally  altered my  way  of  life  and   my  poetry." Again, the  book  Timelight was  said  to  have  an "overall   plan" in   which   the   poet   had "attempted to create a whole  that  is more than   the  sum   of  its  parts"-but  only three  of  its  sections  retain their  identity in the  new collection, and  they are  not in sequence  and  have  had  their  contents and arrangement changed. One  therefore sus­ pects  that   the  present   contents  and  ar­  rangement of  the  "canon"  have only  a provisional inevitability.
Skelton   has  respected the  integrity of his earlier  work. Most of the few textual changes  are  in punctuation and stanza division.  In two places,  a period  has been changed to a comma but  the following capital retained:  whether these  are  in­ complete changes or ordinary misprints  is unclear.  A  few  poems  are  newly  titled.  Casual  comparison has revealed only thir-
 teen  changes  in  the  wording, mostly  mi­ nor.  A  whole   section   is  dropped   from  "The Voices,"  but  perhaps .this could not be thought of as a change within a poem. At least two changes  are restorations. The  interlocutor  in   "The   Slickensides,"  fe­ male   in  Selected   Poems,  is  now   male again,   and   the  essential   third  stanza   of "A  Ballad   of   Despair," omitted  in  Se­ lected   Poems,  is  restored.  In  "Cat and  Bird,"  what   was  "indecent" in  Begging the  Dialect and Selected  Poems is now, regrettably, "erotic." Some obscurities are corrected: the opaque "rise from ashes' rhyme" in "Nursery Wallpaper (Patmos) is now "risen  up  from  rhyme," and "bell­ tongued" in  "At  Tutankhamun's Tomb, Thinking  of   Yeats"   is  more  explicitly "bells'  tongued." Other  changes are  sim­ ilar  in scale and character.
What kind of poems are here collected? One  notices  at  once an  intense  power  of vision.  Many  poems  read  like  transcrip­ tions  of something stamped  indelibly  on the  inward eye. Some  of  the  visions  are recollected (many  from childhood) , some imagined;  of  the  latter,  some  are   day visions and many  (like the haunting "The Doors") belong  to the  night.  This obses­ sional  intensity of realization goes with  a persistent    personal  involvement.  More  than   most  poets  of  comparable  stature, Skelton  is  present   to  his  poems.  When  not  reminiscing or  recalling,  he is palpa­  bly there  as seer or writer. This  brooding presence  combines with  the  omission  of the more  casual  poems  to give the whole book  an   oppressive   and   claustrophobic air.
In  "The Fence," Skelton  envisages lan­ guage  as a fence built  to keep a beast out.  As immediately as one senses the visionary force,  one  notices  in  his  poetry  what   a strong fence he has built. He wields a fine, unfailing, sober, sonorous eloquence that  at  first is  intoxicating in  its mastery-a Yorkshire  hwyl,  if  such  a  thing  can  be. But  sometimes,   as  in  "Walden  Pond,"

I35

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



though   no one  word  is wrong,  there  are too  many  words.  And  consider   the  end of  the  very  fine  "Virgin  of  Torcello": "The water  silts  with  mud. / Our   boat
must  bear  us west  I upon  the  stale canal
I between   the  withering vines  I of  our
disquietude." Do the words here italicized
add  as  much  as  they  take  away?  But  it may  be  that  the  silting  of  the  diction  is meant  to re-enact that  of the canal.
Skelton  makes  much  use of traditional versification. He  uses  and  varies  rhyme and   half-rhyme  to  produce rich  effects and   make   precise   points,   with   unpar­ alleled  inventiveness and  virtuosity.  One  must   applaud.  But   it   is  one   thing   to rhyme  when  rhyme  is almost  a  necessary part   of  versifying; it   is  another  thing  when,  as nowadays,  the  choice  of rhyme is itself  a  conspicuous art.  Rhyme   then  risks  obtrusiveness and,  if  cleverly  used, obtrusive  cleverness.  This  sometimes hap­ pens   here.   In   "Among  the   Stones,"   a splendid  poem   not  previously  collected, the  movement from  roughness  to  rhyme and  order  is a controlled achievement of the  first  ran.
predictability of "certain" as a rhyme  for "curtain" may  make  the  reader  wince­ until he notices that  the inevitability itself is the  point  of the  rhyme.  At  that  point,
the  excess  of  cleverness  may  make  him
wince  again.  But  what  a  rare  pleasure  it is to be able  to  carp at  the  obtrusiveness of  a  poet's  skill!  Consider, for  instance, "The  Pretence," which   consists  of  one nine-lined and  one ten-lined  stanza.  Each line  rhymes  with  one  other,  except   that in the first stanza  "lift" is left  unrhymed. This  may  bother  us  until  we notice  that the second  stanza  is all about  acceptance, and  we realize  that  the ostentatiously avoided  rhyme-word has to be "gift." Re­ markable!  Even   so,   Skelton's   tact   in rhyme   (as  in  metre)  is not  perfect:  in the  same  poem,  the  rhyme-word "stick" obtrudes gracelessly,  and  there  are  other  such  lapses.  In   the  days  when  rhyming

136
 was second  nature, accomplished writers avoided  such   things   without  having   to think.
Besides the intense vision and the rich language,  a   third   thing   one   notices   in Skelton is the  dense  interweaving of thought and  imagery. Almost every poem is highly wrought, with interlocking themes and  a tight  argument. The  quality is covertly  celebrated in "An  Uncertain Meaning," and   overtly   displayed   in  "A Piece of Orange Peel."  Brahms comes  to mind.   This  persistent complexity,  how­ ever,  and  the  concomitant loss of  a sense of spontaneity, combine with the thematic grouping of  the  poems  to  produce one effect  that  cannot have  been intended. In the section  called  "The Climbing Wave," which   consists  of  love  poems   in  which thought  and   feeling  are  for  once   (and  fittingly)  simplified, the contrast with  the rest  of  the  booyields  the  impression of
an  affected  naivete, as  though  the  poet were  talking down  to a teen-aged inamo­
rata.   By  contrast, one  assumes   that   the pieces   in   the   erotic    section   "Amores" were kept in because they seemed to hold some  irony  or  insight,   either in  the  ex­ perience or in the  relating of it; but their effect  in  collocation is that   of  a  porno­ graphic "naming of the parts" that would be acceptable from  most  poets but  seems out   of  keeping with   the  controlled  de­ corum of this one.
The  worked-over character prevailing in  the  poems  gives  the  whole  collection a peculiar steadiness of movement. Though metrically varied  (less so than seems:   "Bread," for  instance, is  regular blank  verse  chopped  up) ,  and  rhythmi­ cally deft,  an  iambic  measure is never  far away.  An  insistent  pulse  throbs   through the  whole  book,  and  becomes  deadening if one  reads  too  much  at  a  time.  An im­ portant  part  of   this   effect   is  that   the poems  lack  psychological incident.  Each has an unbroken movement from first line to  last.  The voice  never   turns   back  on

BOOKS IN REVIEW



itself,  everything has  been  foreseen.   No other   poet  of  such  excellence writes  in such a lifeless way. If Skelton has a weak­ ness as a poet, it is perhaps that his splen­ did  control is itself out  of  control.
Skelton   has  been  too  prolific  to  keep up with,  and  the magnificence of his achievement  will  surprise  most   readers. His collected  poems make a daunting monument. His  careful  cultivation of his splendid, if rather unfashionable, gifts has enlarged the boundaries of what  is known to be achievable in the art  of poetry. Why, then,  do we know  so few of his poems by heart?  Why,   when   we  name   Canada's leading  poets,  does  his  name   not  come first to mind? Perhaps the excess of  com­ petence creates an  illusion  of  facility,  or perhaps the  unfaltering  eloquence seems to   be  impersonating   its   own   integrity. Perhaps  we   feel,   ungratefully,  that   in poetry  as in  prayer  one  should  somehow betray  one's  weakness.  Is it  possible  that  poetry,  at  least  here  and   now,  is some­ thing  one  can  be too  good  at?  If so,  it seems rather unfair.

FRANCIS SPARSHOTT


LOST DREAMS

MYRNA  KOSTASH,    Long     Way  From    Home.
James Lorimer, n.p.
JOHN   KETTLE,  The Big  Generation.  McClel- land  & Stewart, $16.g5.

WoRLD WAR n ENDED in  1945. And  ever since, some  have  talked  of two  things­ the   war   babies   and   the   postwar   baby boom.  John  Kettle's  futuristic  vision  is informed by  the  image of  an  anchoring reality,   the  "tidal  wave"  of  6Y2 million  babies  born during the  postwar economic boom   between  rgsr   and    rg66.  Myrna Kostash's book concerns, as the subtitle states,  "The story  of  the  Sixties  genera­ tion  in Canada." Both  books are  well re­ searched  (a  vision  that  also grows out  of
 thorough documentation) . They  are  also almost  hopelessly ponderous. Either one will wear you out  (portents of Jacob wrestling with his God) . Read both books, and  the  info-sensory  overload may  prove to be lethal.
SUPA,  AFL-CIO, SNCC, ERAP, SDS,
CUCND, UGEQ, CYC, and  GUS. If you remember  what   anywhere  from   one  to three of these mean, then you lived in Kostash's Sixties  when  those  letters  were your very synapses.
Reminiscing about  the  Sixties  revolves around a single question that  has become a pastime steeped in good wine or beer: "When did  the  Sixties  begin  for  you?" The  question  borders  initiation rites  (and the generation's heroes'  rites  of passage). It is a question  on  the  nebulous margins of a coming  of age -as Kostash clearly articulates in her foreword:
I wrote   this  book  because I  am   in  love with    the    Sixties,    with    the    passions and ideas,    friendships   and    loves,    music    and dance and  poetry, stoned highs  and  sorrows the   period generated. I  "came of  age"  in
1965: I turned twenty-one, and   threw  my­ self  into   the  great learning about  camara­ derie,    war,   imperialism,  rock'n    roll,    the Godhead, vagabonding, lust,  appetite  and  woman  power; and  I consider myself  blessed to  have  been   young   in  a  period  when   the vision  of  the  good  and   the  true  was  up  for grabs. In  seeking   our   revision,  thousands and  thousands of us wandered very  far  from  "home," from   our  families,  our   communi­ ties,  the  values  with   which we  were   bred, the   ideals with  which   we  were   entrusted, the  country  we  were  to  inherit. Along   the way  we  experienced corruption,  disillusion, pain   and  death, as  well   as  joy,  but   these  were tracks to  another "home," lives  of our  own  construction. It is  the  vision  and   mil­ lenarian dream of  one  born   when   the  War is ending and  another generation (and era) begins.  It is the  beginning of  a chronicle of quantum leaps   in  human  consciousness for the  next  three decades.

What fascinates me  most  about  Kos­ tash  is her  clear  perception of  that  two­ fold  sense of "home" -the latter  finally rooted  in psyche as place mirroring what


137

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  old  blues  players  always talked  of as home:  "Man, home?   Home's  the  open road,  man,   only  thing  I ever  known - sangin' these las foety yees...."
I  was  born  a  war  baby  in  I 942.  My Sixties   began   back  in  Wood   Mountain in  1955  when  SASK  POWER and  tele­ vision  arrived  in  the  sou them  hills.  Us punk,  town  kids did  the  rounds -tuned into    Country  Hoedown,   Zorro    (good Mexican  machismo)  and   Ed   Sullivan  (the wholesome,  orthodox, American Dream).  The   radio's   top   twenty  from "CKXL-Wahtahloo, Iiiwah!" was fin­ ished,   man ... ah   dat   remain    weh   da dehville's musezak  from  Lexington, Ken­ tucky!  An,  man,  it  was da  worrld  incar­ nate -an  we  din  need  da  Mahshall ta tell  us  weh  the  hot  oh  cold  began   (we wahz it). And I failed grade  nine because of  it  and  Kerouac's  On  the  Road  I dis­ covered  in 1957. For those last few Wood Mountain  years, as dropout, I listened  to the local Metis, a migrant seasonal worker  high  on  Kerouac  and  Hemillgway, Buzz Ogle  who  was  the  hitchhiking  medium message eternally moving  between  Squaw Valley  and   Sun   Valley   (where he  was befriended by Hemingway)  winters,  un­ requited loves, and  summers  as  assistant  parks  warden in Banff  National Park.
Unlike Kostash, I "came  of age" when Buddy   Holly   and   Big  Bopper   fell  like some  fabled   Icarus  from   the  sky.  The spring   of  1959  I took  the  Metis  hitch­ hiker's advice   to  heart   and   decided   to leave home.  I landed  a potwasher's job at Lake  Louise  in  the  neverneverland thick of all  those  students  with  so many  ideas so new to me. In  the evenings some talked of some  fabled  professor,  George  Wood­  cock, in the English  Department at UBC.  ("Like, man,  you don't take  notes-too much  to miss -man, this cat  pumps  yer head  so fulla  ideas  about  myth,  anarchy, politics and  archetypes that  wen  the  bell rings, you simply float outta  the classroom  on  a  cloud  of  helium. Guy's  incredible!
 Doesn'  even  have  a degree!") The  image and  model  stuck  like a burr  in my mind. That  movement from   a  single  book  to professor  always fascinated me. However, I went  back to school in Nelson, B.C., the autumn  of I 960   (after  a  second   Lake Louise    summer) .   I   was   magnetically lured   by "the tidal  wave" and  the  myth bearing the  seed  of  disillusionment that John Kettle points  to:
The school   explosion  triggered  an   edu­
cational revolution.
* * *
The pressure to expand the  school  system
arose  from several sources, although one predominated-the   "human capital" theory, the   idea that  public investment in education would   bring economic benefits   to society   as  well  as  the   individuals who   got more  education.
* * *
Slightly extending  the  metaphor, parents
told   their children, "Education pays." The generation that  had   gone through  the  De­ pression  had   not  failed  to  notice that  edu­ cated people  survived best.  "Stay in  school,  you'll  get   a  great  job,  you   won't   have   to worry   about  your   life,  everything  will  fall into  place," the  parents said.

Yes,  even  your  student friends told  you that. The teachers reaffirmed the lie they unwittingly believed.
ByI 969,  I was  at  Simon Fraser   U ni­ versity.  I had  already been  bowled  over by Allen  Ginsberg reading Howl  in  SUB  at   UBC.   Had    already  witnessed,   with jaundiced eye, the  antics and  charade of that   sham   called   Jerry   Rubin  and   his aspiring  acolyte.  Vancouver's town  fool was better  theatre the night he, with flute, led  the  procession  out  of  the  Allen  Watt  talk   to  demonstrate intimations of  Zen and  the  Journey into  Void in an  indus­  trial area  where  he  was arrested for  dis­ turbing the  peace   (to  be  jailed  and  re­ leased the  next day) . Yes, I too witnessed the torn  student body and faculty at SFU  during that   PSA  tragedy  of  the  waiting  game  where  contracts  were not  renewed  for   the   dissident   professors.   I was  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



student  scab   who   crossed   the   activists' picket  lines  at  the  doors  to  some  of  my classrooms. I had  always believed  the uni­ versity  was  a  neutral place  of  refuge  (a world  apart from  the so-called real world at  the  bottom of  the  mountain) . I  had read  about that  fire  and  pillaging of the computer centre at  Sir  George  Williams  University. Colin  Wilson  and   the  myth of  the  strength  one  gets  from  destroying  another's possessions were familiar to me. Behind   me,   the   lower-class   war   baby, were  nine  mountain  summers of  hard­ earned  money   (non-union  wages)   that saw  me  through high  school,  art  school, and  a few years of university. Now some of those activists  and  their  groupies were sitting  in  the  SFU  Registrar  (their  sit-in in face of some nebulous issue I could  not understand) ;  but,   I  recall   there   was  a single   gnarled  idea   serpenting  through my mind ... those  little  bastards!  If they start a  fire there  and  burn  my  transcripts, I'll  muddlfuckin' club  down  with  a piece of  deadwood  the    first   one   that   comes scurrying  out!  A reverie a tad demented, I confess.  However, those  who  taught  me had  their  lapses too. I remember him, the Victorian  Prose   and   Poetry    professor, shackled  and  bilboed  to his own century. It was an ozone, clear,  early  morning. He was  nervously   pacing Victory Square at SFU. I stopped to say good  morning;  he scratched  his  grizzled   head,   then   mut­ tered: "This place-it was perfectly de­ signed for  revolution! Look at this square
-they  can  all  gather in  a matter of  a few  minutes. But,  note  the  architectural irony!  Note  that   thin   horizontal at  the bottom  of   all   those   verticals  on   The Quadrangle. Just  imagine how many ac­ tivists could  hang from  it!" I avoided  his shadowed, wild  eyes-walked  on,  reas­ sessing the  lethal magnitude of  my  own confused   feelings    ( ... what   does  New Left,  Marxist  Revolution  of  the   youth have to do with  poetry written in the  pro­ found illusion  of freedom  this  side of the
 Iron  Curtain?). I dropped out  again  in
1970.  Asked my last  question of a young lady  on  top  of  Burnaby Mountain:  "A B.Ed. at the  end  of this year?  But  where will you go? I mean  there  are already  too many  teachers." Slightly   bewildered, she replied  in  a  wispy voice:   "I don't kmow
... maybe North." There were no jobs on the West Coast  (few  jobs anywhere-as Kettle graphically points out). I retreated to  Banff  to  what   Kettle snidely  defines as the "lazy sojourn under the UIC's auspices   until   the   payments  ran   out." What  Kettle, for all his statistics and doc­ umentation, forgets  is the economic spin­ off from a North American reality where the   student  and   the   migrant   seasonal  worker  keep  a certain amount  of  money flowing  (be it UIC, or the money  a tour­  ist  spends  on  an  airplane  ticket,   steak, bed, or  a gallon  of  gasoline) . Like  man,  a  Iotta  those  "lazy"  UIC freaks  worked  long  summer  hours  for  scandalously low wages  nudging  in  overtime at  mountain resorts  or  elsewhere.  So   don't  tell   me where ripoffs begin, or end, Kettle (I had sixteen mountain summers of them).
Anyway, at the end of the Sixties I no longer  dreamed of  that moiVement from book  to professor.  My  last  few summers at  Lake  Louise   were  spent   as  a  night­ watchman. I was bewildered  by the  New Left's   talk  of  some   incredible  sense  of global   community   anchored   in    tribal  memory.  By  the  mid-Sixties I  had   wit­ nessed the  death of the  folk  era and  the young  people's  oral  tradition.  Once   you could go to a weiner roast with a hundred people   from   three   different  mountain lodges -you  could   sing songs (that nearly everyone remembered)· for a whole night  till sunup. By the  mid-Sixties it was
-"Like man,  if you  wanna kill a party, jis bring  yer  Afghani ... or  a  bag  of  Ja­ maican  Brown!" The party was one's own head.   Twelve people   in  a  small  cabin; twelve  parties   reeling   in  the  colours   of bannered  light of one's  own oblivion. The

BOOKS IN REVIEW



nightwatchman picked up the morning roaches  in front  of the chalet.  When  the freaks  were out,  they knew exactly  where to go. So much  for the Sixties and tribal memory.  The mountains were still there, but who climbed  them  anymore? So were the  fish,  but   who  could  cast  anymore? The mountains and  fish only  existed  in the  resinous shadows of  the  mind ("Oooooh ... there  goes another one!"). Who  could  remember a stanza  from  Five Hundred  Miles, let alone get straight a couple lines from Bobby D.? Who ever remembered Crosby, Stills, and  Nash at Woodstock  when   that   one   line-"It's bin  a  long  time  comin ..."-rang like a  coin  on  a  marble floor.  Who  ever  re­ members one's  own dream?

ANDREW SUKNASKI


ROMANTIC MODES

TILOTTAMA RAJAN,  Dark  Interpreter: The  Dis­ course of Romanticism. Cornell  Univ. Press, n.p.

TILOTTAMA RAJAN ARGUES tlJat Romanti­ cism anticipates "the recognitions  of exis­ tentialism and  radical  modernism" and  iliat   those   recognitions  can   provide  a framework    for    interpreting   Romantic poems. Her central premise is the conten­ tion of  modern ilieorists like Sartre, Der­  rida,  and  De  Man  iliat  language cannot mediate between   man's condition in ilie world and  his desire for a better one. Building on iliat  premise, Rajan reassesses ilie main  Romantic genres, displacing, as the  most  important, romance  with  trag­ edy. She argues  for a development in Ro­  mantic aesilietics which  moves from quest romance, through irony, to rest in ilie sort of  tragic   vision  detectable in  The   Tri­  umph  of Life and  The  Fall of Hyperion.
Rajan's theoretical scaffolding  takes is­
sue with  the  reigning orthodoxy which claims   iliat   Romantic aes.tlietics can  be
 best  traced  in  Schelling and  Hegel,  who posit a ilieodicy which records a romance journey  from  a primal unity,  ilirough an alienation from  nature and society, spiral­ ling   back   again   to   a  higher,   renewed  unity.  Supported by the  post-modern de­ nial  of such  a  unity  because  of  ilie  very nature of language,  Rajan traces  instead  another tendency  in  German Romantic theory  which  begins witli  Schiller, passes through Schopenhauer, and  culminates in the early  Nietzche of The  Birth of Trag­ edy. In iliese iliree  phases of Romantic aesthetic development, she detects  a series of  dichotomies iliat  struggle   within  Ro­ mantic consciousness: ilie  naive  and  ilie sentimental, will   and  representation, Apollo  and  Dionysos. She associates  each of iliese phases  witli  enabling genres  iliat  best    accommodate    its   preoccupations, finding in  Keats and  Shelley  the  clearest exemplars of this development.
In so doing,  she argues  that  botli  begin witli   quest-romances  (Alastor   and   En­ dymion)    which   fail   partly  because  the rhetoric demanded by  ilie  genre  fails  to provide a language that can insulate "ilie  enclosed  space  of  romance" from  ilie de­ mands of  the  actual and   ilie  temporal. The result  is a repression  of "insights iliat  are  nevertheless acknowledged," iliat  is characteristic, Rajan  claims,  of  ilie  sen­ timental text.  The second   phase  of   the development of Romantic aesilietics turns  to a form  of skeptical irony that  is openly,  even aggressively, aware of ilie limitations of its own  mode.  This sort  of irony   (as­ sociated   witli  Schopenhauer's reluctance to abandon idealism  of the  beautiful aes­ ilietic  surface  to  a  voracious,  pre-con­ scious  will)   results  in  poems  like  Keats' late   romances   (including  Isabella  and Lamia)   where  ilie  reader detects irony, but  cannot be certain where  ilie poet's sympailiy falls.  The difficulties  of  inter­ pretation that  result  from iliis uncertainty (can  we really  condemn  Lamia?)  derive  from  a  vacillation  between  ilie  claims  of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  real  and  ideal,  the  claims  of the  will against  the power  to represent.
In a poem like Mont Blanc, Shelley's skepticism  might seem  to propel  him  to­ ward  just such  an  irony,  but  Rajan  sees that  poem as saved  by the tendency of  the Romantic lyric  to convert the  vacillation of the ironic  second  phase  into a genuine  synthesis, one  which  respects the  inevita­ ble  undercutting of  the  aesthetic surface  by the demands of a Nietzchean Dionysos, while  at  the  same  time  allowing   the  as­ pirations  of   the   Apollian  ideal.   Rajan concludes that  Shelley  and  Keats  found  an  accommodating vehicle  in  the  dream vision, a mode  which  allows  the  narrator to  see  "the dark   course  of  history  in  a dream and  through the mediating eyes of a surrogate figure  such  as Rousseau  or Moneta." Such  a narrator thus avoids not only  the  sentimental aloofness  from  the pull  of  the  actual, but   also  the  inward misery  of  Keats' Titans which  can  lead only  to the  bitterest sort  of irony.
It  is asking  quite a lot  to pull  together the  aesthetics and   metaphysics of  three quite   different German  Romantic  theo­ rists,  together with  the  current  formula­ tions   of   what  Rajan  calls   "existential phenomenology" to produce a new align­ ment    of   the   major   Romantic  genres. While  she  acknowledges  that   her  main purpose   is  not  interpretation but  rather the  theoretical framework for  interpreta­ tion,  Rajan's book  retains many  of  the signs of its origin  in her Toronto disserta­ tion  (albeit  a provocative and  important one)',  with  too  many  of  the  most  impor­ tant  explanations and  qualifications rele­ gated   to  footnotes   (which,  fortunately, Cornell   has  allowed  to stand  at  the  bot­  tom  of  each   page) . It would  make  for smoother reading if Rajan had integrated these  notes  into  her  finished   text.  And, while  readers  might agree that  such  an elaborate theoretical framework is neces­ sary,  they  might still  object to the  style; too  much   of  its  syntax   and   vocabulary
 has  been  taken  over  undiluted from  the post-structuralists,  who  in  turn,   exhibit much  of the  gracelessness  of  psychoanal­ ysis and  the  social sciences. Poeins are  set adrift  from    their   authors   to   become  merely  "texts,"  which then  suffer  them­ selves  to  be  continually "deconstructed" by   "sub-texts"  or   explained  by   inter­ texts."  And  it  is  sometimes   difficult   to know whether a text suffers more if its contradictions  are   repressed    or   subli­ mated.
Even so, Rajan's book can be read  and admired not  only for its courage  in  chal­ lenging  the current orthodoxy of  Roman­ tic theory, but  also for a revisionist  theory  which  allows a coherent account of  those cruxes  in  familiar  Romantic poems  that  continue to pose difficulties in interpreta­ tion. Among these cruxes are the puzzling  frame  of  Alastor, the  two Demogorgons, the  function of  the  "shape all  light" in The  Triumph  of  Life, the  problematic ending of "The Eve of St. Agnes," as well as  the   superiority  of  "Tintem   Abbey" over Coleridge's conversation poems. De­ spite  its scaffolding, a method that allows a  competent and  consistent  explanation of  these  puzzling  matters  deserves  to  be considered with  care  and, as Rajan pro­  poses in her conclusion, applied  to a wider variety  of Romantic texts.

PETER A. TAYLOR

TEXTURES
PAUL  DUTTON,   Right   Hemisphere, Left   Ear.
Coach House, $4.75.
GEORGE MCWHIRTER, The  Island Man. Oberon,
n.p.

IN  Of  Grammatology, French   philoso­ pher  theoretician Jacques Derrida refers  to nonlinear writing as "suspense  between  two  ages."  He  contends  that   while   the smooth  linear  text  may  satisfy  our  need for  thematic  synthesis  pointing to order and  Truth,  it  does  so at  the  expense   of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pluri-dimensionality-nonlinear wntmg where  meaning is  not  subjected  to  suc­ ccssivity  or   the   order  of  logical   time. While  nonlinear writing does  not  neces­ sarily   interrupt  the   solidarity  of   linear  thought, it  corresponds to  another  level of experience adding  another dimension  to  writing. It can  restore  what   psycho­ analyst   Jacques  Lacan  defines  as  "dis­ course  of  the  other: the  self lost  to  the self."
"Let's liberate poetry  on  and  off the page," writes  Paul  Dutton in his note introducing right  hemisphere left  ear. Dutton is a  member of the  performance group, The Four Horsemen, with  whom he  has  collaborated on  two  albums  and one book, Horse d'Oeuvres, but this is his first  full-length collection   of "poems," a collection inviting the  reader  to not  only read  but sing, play, contemplate and  "act on  it."  It focuses  on  "texture" with  the generative  idea   that   diversity   of  forms will  map  new  modes  of  perception both for  the  writer  and  the  reader. Two con­ crete   poems   using   the  words  "texture" and  "true text"  launch the text. Intuition and   the  senses  become  the  main guide­  lines leading the  poetic  impulse  towards  its  most  appropriate  form  of expression. "Uncle  Rebus  Clean  Song"  exemplifies very well the "suspense between  two ages of  writing."  Uncle   Rebus  recalls  Uncle  Remus,   narrator  of   childhood   stories, while the rebus, a representation of words by  pictures of  objects   whose  names   re­ semble  the  intended word,  is not  unlike the  hieroglyph which  lies at  the  root  of most writing systems.
The  coherent structure of  speech  has been  subordinated in  "Uncle Remus" to a structure of digressions,  phonic connec­ tions,  word  and  thought associations,  re­ sulting  in a very scenic chain  of represen­ tations   as  they   register   in   the   writer's mind.  Where  old  time  bawdy songs were cleaned up by avoiding "naughty" words, Dutton's   coming   clean   is  achieved    by
 avoiding censorship of controlled thought and  speech.  It's a  demanding but  imag­ inative    "poem"  following the   Steinian "method of the  mind." My main reserva­  tion  is  that   many   of  the  sexual  images come  very  close  to  being  sexist.  Dutton refers  to the  piece  as "locker-room fluff." Derrida  would   probably  call   it   "phal­ logocentric." Ironically Derrida connects phallogocentric thought with  the acquisi­ tion of linear  speech  in a patriarchal cul­ ture.  It obviously  exists at  other levels of speech  as well.
In  his attempt to liberate the sentence, Dutton has used no punctuation through­ out   the   text,   except   in  the   "mondrian boogie woogie" pieces which consist solely of  punctuation marks  literally punctuat­ ing  the  pages.  Mondrian was  much   in­ fluenced  by   jazz.  He   believed   that   de­ construction  of  melody  led  to  more  dy­ namic rhythm, a view Dutton shares  and  has applied to his poetic  language.
There is ample evidence in right  hem­ isphere left  ear that  Paul  Dutton possesses a  finely  tuned   left  ear  although  I  have seen  him  perform and  feel  that  some  of these  pieces  would   be  more  effective   in performance.  As   for   "the  right    hem­  isphere  of the  brain controlling the intui­ tive    functions"   it    is   most    effectively  tapped  in  his  Visionary Portraits,  espe­ cially Visionary Portrait 2 where  the  poet longs  for   the   restoration  of  something lost,  something  repressed   and   which   is embodied by his sisters.
I don't know  whether Dutton is famil­
iar   with   the   new   feminist   writings   in France and  Quebec  (Kristeva, Brossard) which  claim  that  the restoration of the repressed  female unconscious can  be achieved  through   experimental   avant­ garde writing. It is a  goal  which  is not restricted to women, and with  this collec­ tion  Dutton gives  the impression that  he is well on his way.
While  George McWhirter's The Island
Man cannot be  considered experimental

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in  the  same  sense as Paul  Dutton's  book, it does contain excellent examples of writ­ ing  "between  two  ages."   Much  of   the book   revolves   around  the   writer's  di­ lemma created  by  different  forms,  cul­ tures,  traditions.  The result  is an  inter­ weaving   which   could   be  compared  to Roland  Barthes'  definition  of  "texture" where  the  "spider dissolves  in  the  con­ structive secretions of its web"   (The Pleasure of the  Text). Images of the poet enmeshed in a spider's web recur  at  least twice in The Island  Man.
The first poem,  "A Journal for Don Caamaiio," a  dream-vision  unfolds  in  a series of exotic  Rousseauistic "tableaux." It tells of  the  initial  impressions  of Don Caamaiio, a  Spanish Odysseus  who  has just sailed  upon  the  shores  of Lotusland, or more  precisely  Vancouver Island. It is a highly  visual  poem  where  imagery, lan­ guage,  the  noble  simplicity  of its  inhabi­ tants,  all  prove  to  be  an  illusion  where Odysseus  "can   no  more stay ... than  co­ habit  with a spectre...."
The  next   poem,   "7   AM," stands   in sharp contrast to  the  previous  one.  The over-abundant imagery  and  dream-like quality have  been  replaced by a precision and  economy   (and  humour)  which  cap­ ture  perfectly a dreaming Odysseus  wak­ ing  to  the  stark   reality   of  a  Canadian morning. It is a delightful poem and  per­  sonally   I  wish   MeWhirter  would   write like  this  more  often.  At  times,  in  his at­  tempt to  capture the  richness  of his lan­ guage   and  his   environment  he   has achieved the  exact  opposite. You  can hardly see Lotusland for  the lotus.
Generally,  however, the  imagery   and the  formal variety serve McWhirter's po­ etry  very  well. The two  cut  across  each other, resulting in a redistribution of  lan­ guage.  Mythical, heroic  figures  are trans­  formed    into    everyday    and   sometimes  comic  people.   Prophetess  Cassandra has become  a  shapely teasing  Cassie  and  he who  lusts  over   her   "minimum  of  fat"
 (minimalism)  must  tango "over   turnips and  cold curlicues of cauliflower ..." ( al­ literative  and    metaphorical   overload) . These  alternations, plus the healthy  irrev­  erence  towards  literary  origins,  not  only help   to  assimilate the  great   archetypes but   also  create a  compromise  between  languages,  people,  places,  where  the  au­  thor  establishes his own individuality, his own island.
It is within  this  textured background/ foreground of measuring differences, dis/ covering,   naming  that   Odysseus   traces and  weaves a circuitous path home.  It is a   sensuous   path     ( Barthes  would    say erotic)  permeated with details about wife, children,  friends,   animals,  the  new  na­ tural  environment. "Hangdog" Odysseus may  have  had   to  trade  his  sails  for  an old  car,  his lotus  food  for  chocolate and  cigars,  but   he  has  created  and   claimed  his  own  space.  For  the  island  man,   the mark  of utopia is the everyday, but  it  is the everyday  which can still  be measured against  dreams and  aspirations.

LOLA LEMIRE-TOSTEVIN


NEW THEATRE IN QUEBEC
RENE-DANIEL    DUBOIS,    Panique  a  Longueil.
Preface   by   Normand  Chaurette.   Lemeac,
$5·95·
NORMAND CHAURETTE,   Reve   d'une  nuit  d'ho­
pita{. Preface  by  Jean-Cleo Godin.  Lemeac,
$5.95.

NEW AUTHORS, FIRST PLAYS. In  the cases of Dubois  and  Chaurette, lack  of  experi­ ence  was  no  handicap. Within  the  con­ fines of relatively simple production tech­ niques  (the  cafe-theatre Nelligan, and  the Theatre  des  Quat'sous)   these young dramatists  (Dubois  is 26, Chaurette 27) have  written  surprisingly  rich,  complex works  which   stack! up   well  against the

143

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



recent   efforts  of  more  established  play­
wrights.
Dubois' Panique  a Longueil  is, to  me,
the  more  interesting of the  two,  perhaps
because  of the  multiplicity of  interpreta­ tions it invokes.  It is essentially an actor's play   (Dubois  himself  studied   acting in Montreal and  in Paris), and  uses a small but  skilled  cast  who  can  play  numerous roles  requiring substantial improvisation. It is also a very  literary play, one  which makes bows to Dubois' dramatic baggage and inspiration, from Sophocles to Racine to Vian  and  Ducharme.
Ducharme seems  the  major   influence on  this  play,  though  Dubois   never  ex­ plicitly  refers  to him.  But the mixture of comedy  and  real  anguish  we  see in  Ines Peree et !nat Tendu is reflected  not only in  the  title  of  Dubois'  play   (the  serene bourgeois    suburb  of    Longueil    hardly  seems the  place for panic)   but also in the play's  structure,  where  one  young  man,  like so many  of  Ducharme's protagonists, confronts a  nightmarish series of adven­ tures while looking for a home  port,  some sort of security. There is even the charac­ teristically  Ducharmian revenge taken out on   a   representative  of  the   established order   by  a  youthful  hero.  Dubois' debt to Boris  Vian  is more  specific  (a  quota­ tion from  L'Ecume des  jours prefaces  the play) .  The  dramatic   structure  of   Les Blitisseurs  d'empire  seems to have  served
as a model  for Panique  a Longueil  except
that    where    Vian's   characters  flee   to
higher (and  more  claustrophobic)  apart­ ments only to jump out the window at the end,   Dubois'   Monsieur   Arsenault   de­ scends   a   multi-storey   dwelling,    going from  apartment  above  to apartment be­ low,  until   he  reaches  a  basement  from which   he  takes  an  elevator back  to  the top.
But despite these (and other) literary debts,  there   is  nothing derivative about the   play   itself,  for   Dubois'   message   is neither that   of  Ducharme nor  of  Vian.

144
 The plot is deceptively simple. One  wee ­ day  evening,  M.  Paul   Arsenault, a  28- year-old  high  school  teacher of zoology, is preparing dinner in his ultra-modern 3
on the seventh floor of a high-rise  in Lon­
gueil. The phone  rings;  it is his wife call­ ing to say she'll be late for dinner-traffic is  blocked   up  on  all  the  bridges  out  of Montreal. M.  Arsenault  goes  out  to  the balcony  to see if a  parking space  will be available  for  her,  closes  the  glass  door behind   him,  and,  as  he  is  about   to  re­ enter the apartment, finds that  the handle has  fallen  off and  that   he is locked  out. He  then   begins   a  series  of  adventures which  take him  to every apartment  below his in a frantic (and  fruitless)   search  for the key to get back  to "chez  nous."
The panic   M.  Arsenault feels  during his descent  is not merely  the fear  of never again  being  able  to  find  a  home  port.  It is also-and especially -a metaphysical panic,  a growing  doubt, as he goes ever lower,  of who  he  is or  whether he exists at  all.  Ghislaine, in  the  apartment  just below his, takes him for a gluttonous gymnast;  the   building's  owner,   in   the next apartment, takes him for a plumber; the  psychiatrist takes him  for a homosex­ ual, and so on until,  in the mezzanine, the robot-like, computerized information lady reveals  to M. Arsenault that  he is no one at all:  "La  direction, faute  de preuves  de votre  existence, se  voit  dans  !'obligation
... d'aviser tous  les organismes l:ucs,  ci­ vils, et  rnilitaires concern,es  de  votre  dis­ parition."
As the  play  progresses  it becomes  clear that  M.  Arsenault's profession  is the  key to understanding his predicament. As a zoology  teacher he specializes  in  the  dis­ secting   of  sheep's   brains,   teaching  stu­  dents   how  each   part,   despite   its  resem­ blance  to something else (the cortex  looks like  yoghurt and   the  meninges like  ba­ loney)  plays a specific role in the animal's consciousness.  Similarly,  the  entire play can  be  seen  as  a  dissection  of  M.  Arse-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



nault's brain, and  each  floor in  the high­ rise,  despite   appearances, is  yet  another level in our  probe  of M. Arsenault's psy­ che. As Normand Chaurette points out in his excellent  introduction, M.  Arsenault, despite  his  desire  to  return home,  is fas­ cinated by and  drawn to the  levels below him. These levels  (each  of which  implies one  of  the  seven  capital sins)   are,  in  a very   real   sense,   the   foundations  upon which  M.  Arsenault's character is built; there  is the homosexual in him, though it isn't  on the surface, as there  is the gigolo, the  greedy   capitalist,  the  drunkard. As M. Arsenault goes ever deeper into  the basement of  the  building, he  meets  the Rat,  guardian of  the  elevator which  can take  him  back  to  the  land  of  the  living. In  the deepest  circle of Dubois' hell is the intellectual(teacher, for  the  Rat, a  hid­ eous mirror-image of  M.  Arsenault,  likes to  cultivate  young   minds   and,  Sphinx­ like,  poses  three  questions  before he  lets anyone   into  the  elevator.  M.  Arsenault, unable  to  answer  the  third  (and  franlcly unanswerable)  question, turns  on the Rat  and  easily vanquishes him  (the  Rat  is all words and  no substance) . He  then  enters  the  elevator  for   the   long   awaited  trip back  to  the  seventh   floor  where  he  will meet  his apocalypse in  the  form  of a vio­ lent  battle  and  a  written, truth-revealing message from  his wife who is waiting  for him on the  (non-existent) eighth  floor.
The return of Ulysses? A Freudian nightmare? A religious  allegory?  Panique
a Longueil is all  of  these  and  more.  But
above  all  it  is a  play  which  shows  that,
in the words of the author, the  true panic of all mortals is "l'angoisse du  vide."
Normand Chaurette's Reue  d'une  nuit d'hOpital  is, like,  Dubois' play,  a  drama of the imagination. But where Dubois' nightmare  is  purely    theatrical,   Chau­ rette's dream world  is  essentially  poetic, for he has chosen,  as inspiration and  sub­ ject  of  his  play,  Quebec's  poete  maudit, Emile Nelligan.
 The   title   of   Chaurette's  play   is,  of course,   the   title   of   one   of   Nelligan's poems,  the  one  where  he  imagines   that angels  will bring  him  out  of the  hospital into   which   he   was  interned  from   age twenty  until  his death. But  the  title  takes on  a  more  universal meaning for  Chau­ rette.   The  hospital, a   metaphor   for   a prison   (the   prison   of   the  mind)    is  the final destination of  those  whose imagina­ tion takes them  a bit too far  (for  the rest of  us) ; or,  as  the  dramatist says in  his preface,  "au bout  du  reve, il y a toujours le risque d'un hopital."
Chaurette has chosen  to portray the in­ evitability   of  the  hospital  by  using  two theatrical conceits.   The   first  of   these  is the establishment of an  artificial, theatri­ cal time which  replaces  the chronology of the poet's life. Three moments in time are presented   simultaneously:   Cacouna, where   Nelligan   led  a  seemingly   idyllic childhood surrounded by his mother and two  sisters,  the   Ecole   Olier,   where   his silence  and   daydreaming,  coupled   with his evident  brilliance, were a threat to his teachers,   and  the  hospital, a  living  hell. But  we do  not  see  these  time-frames in that   order;  rather, Chaurette shows  us how Nelligan's folie and  his poetry can be understood only when  the  past  meets  the present,  and   when   the  imagination  dic­ tates which  events  preceded others. Thus  the  play  begins  and   ends  in  the  Ecole O!ier  because   it  is  here   that  Nelligan's imagination ran  wild  as he  was exposed to the forbidden fruit  of  Baudelaire, Flau­ bert,  and  especially  Rimbaud  ( "Si  Rim­  baud  n'avait  jamais  exisre,  il  l'aurait in­ venue," says  Nelligan's mother; it  is also here  that society's  reaction to the  poet  is the most evident, both  in the  punishment he  must  endure  and,   ironically,   in  the way his teacher tries, much  later,  to bask in  the glory  of the  bad  pupil  become  fa­ mous  poet.  In  contrast to  this essentially masculine world,  the  scenes  at  Cacouna are  dominated by women  and  it  is here

145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that  the  seeds of poetry  are sown in  Nel­ ligan's  mind  as  he  reads  Baudelaire  and recites  it  with   his  sisters.  But  it  is also here  that  we see  Nelligan's early  refusal of  the  world  as  others   have  defined  it; "Emile n'a   rien   mange,"  laments  his mother, and  the metaphor of eating   (re­ fusing  to eat, being  force-fed)  is pursued  throughout  the play. The  hospital  scenes are  the  most  pervasive  of all -they  in­ trude on Cacouna and  on the Ecole Olier
-and  though  they  are,  like  the  child­ hood  scenes,  essentially  feminine  (Nelli­ gan's  two nurses,  La  Grande and  La  Pe­ tite,  remind  us  of  his  sisters) ,  it  is  far more  menacing. No  punishment  here,  as in  the  Ecole  Olier,  but  a continuous tor­  ture   of  the   mind   made  worse  by  the cruelty  (real  or imagined?) of La Grande and  only slightly alleviated by the sympa­  thy  of   La   Petite   who,  sensitive   to  the poet's  imagination, will  quietly  edge  to­ wards the twilight  of insanity. The  pivotal scene  here   (and   the  only  verifiable  au­ thentic scene)   is  the  day  in  I932  when Nelligan  was  taken  from  the  hospital  to Gonzalve  Desaulnier's house in Ahuntsic, there  to hear  (but apparently in total  in­ difference)  his poem, "Le Vaisseau d'or," read  on  the  radio.  "Ouvre un  peu  cette fenetre," says the mother shortly after  the poem   is  heard,  but   Nelligan's   mind   is already shut  up within  itself, as the hallu­ cination scene will show, and  the poet's windows  on  the  outside  will remain  for­ ever closed.
To  further unify  the  motion  of time in his play, Chaurette has used another con­ ceit,  that  of a single  moment  during the day which appears in all the scenes. Noon, or even  more  precisely  the  time between the tenth  and  eleventh chime, is the sum­ mit  of the  day,  a  privileged  moment for the   poet   who   needs   no   midnight  to dream. It is, as Jean-Cleo Godin  remarks  in  the  introduction, the  hour  of  the  an­  gelus,  not  Millet's peaceful  scene but  the ambiguous meeting of  the  day's  equilib-
 rium  and   the  disordered imagination of the poet.  As the play advances towards its end -one scene  for  each  time  the  noon bell  is  struck -the  sense  of  time  as  a destructive force  becomes  oppressive. "Si nous essayions de ne plus jamais conna.ltre l'heure," says La  Petite  in  a  moment of lucidity which   enables   us  to  escape   the notion of  a  beginning and  an  end,  or  to see  Nelligan's life  defined   by  its  impor­ tant  moments, limited  by his internment. Arsenault's play is, as Godin points out,
a  celebration  both   of  Emile   Nelligan's
works  and   of  the  maturity of  a culture which  can  look  back  upon  Nelligan as a grand  poete without any prejudice to liv­ ing   poets   who   (like   Miron,   Lapointe, Giguere)  may  one  day  also  be  labelled  great. As  a  celebration,  Reve,  d'une   n:uit d'h8pita1 is in the tradition of  Ferron and  Germain; it  is the  occasion  for  a collec­ tive   reflection  on   a   common heritage.
Panique  a Longueil, on the other  hand, is
in  the  tradition of  Michel Garneau and
Michel   Tremblay -explorations  of  the mind   which   denounce  received   values and  fight  with  the  phantoms of the  past and  present. But  these  plays further con­ firm  that  the  new Quebec theatre is any­  thing  but  a passing  phenomenon. Chau­ rette  and  Dubois have entered the fold.

JONATHAN M. WEISS


TALKING  CLEARLY

ALAN TWIGG,  For Openers. Harbour, n.p.

THE   INTERVIEW    ARTICLE   or   interview book  seems  to  many  to  be  a  pretty  easy publication. You  don't actually need  to write  anything. You  just  arrange a  nice lavish  expense   account and   go  visiting. After   your   sumptuous breakfast at  the Four  Seasons  you take  a cab to  the home of a famous writer, walk  in and  turn  on your    tape    recorder.  When    you   have enough  material and/or you have finished

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



off his or  her  scotch,  you go  back  to the hotel  for  dinner and  some  shopping  be­ fore flying on  to the  next subject.
One   immediate  problem  with   this  is
that  bit about the  tape  recorder. Even  if you  can  convince someone   to  pay  your way  and   even  if  you  can  convince   the writer   to   receive   you   (often  two  very large  "ifs"), you have  to be able to inter­ view him. First you have  to know enough about  the  writer  and  his  works  to avoid appearing a  fool.  This  is much  easier  in a critical article, in which intimate knowl­ edge of one  novel and  a quick  glance at a few dust  jackets might get you through.
Then you  must   be  able  to  strike  the right  "tone." That may sound  vague  but it is probably the most important element. One  author might  like a bit  of a debate. She  talks  best with  a sparring partner. Another might find the slightest  hint  of criticism   enough  of  an  offence   to  clam up  permanently. Then there  are  the vari­ ous  other   subtleties. Author  A  feels  her private life is her  own  affair,  thank  you. Author B loves to talk  about his first sex­ ual  experience and   talks  best  about   his novels when  making analogies to various  girlfriends. Then, of  course,  there  is Au­ thor  C, who might  best be left alone. She doesn't speak  about  her  private life, her books, or  other  writers.  There are  some subjects  on  which  she  is happy   to  hold forth  but  do  your  readers care  about   a marxist analysis  of parking meters?
I  write from experience, although much  less than Alan  Twigg's twenty-four experiences  in   For  Openers.  My  inter­ views  were  for  videotape,  which  meant I could  do  less editing than Twigg but  it also meant that  my audience might blink during my more  idiotic moments whereas  Twigg's  questions  can   be   dissected   in cold   hard    print.   But,   luckily,   Twigg  stands   up  well  to  such  an examination. He  is  invariably  well  prepared, with  a good knowledge of  both primary and sec­ ondary  sources.  To  accomplish this  for
 twenty-four writers  is no small feat.  Also, he  seems  very  able  to  adapt himself   to specific  writers.  Thus the  interview with Matt Cohen   is  very  personal and   quite rapid,   with  few  instances   where  Cohen speaks  for  more   than   about four   lines without a  comment from  Twigg.  In  Co hen's case this approach leads to a variety of interesting revelations.
The  interview with  the other  Cohen, Leonard, is similarly successful.  In  this, Cohen  is treated as a normal person. Ab­ surd  though it  may  be,  I have  come  to think  of Cohen as a "rock  star" figure, for whom   Rolling  Stone  would  be  the  best venue.  Twigg  treats  him  as  just another writer,  who  requires the  usual questions. He neither  emphasizes nor avoids Cohen's "Bohemian" lifestyle. In  return, the latter likes Twigg's questions and  gives as clear  and  full  answers  as  possible. Sometimes his comments are  very revealing:

For   instance, I  just    read    an   analysis  of Beautiful  Losers   in   a   book   called   Savage Fields  by  Dennis Lee  which   is  pretty good. It's  certainly better than I  could   do.   His approach is so comprehensive and   brilliant. Once every  couple of  years  I get  that  bril­ liant.

At  other  times  Twigg   provides  openings for  the  black  joke that  Cohen  is so good at:

T:    As a matter of fact, Errol Flynn finally died  of an  overdose in  this  very  hotel  ...
cOHEN:     Yeah? It gets  risky,  I know.  But I'm too  old  to  commit suicide. It would   be unbecoming.

With the successes, there are naturally failures.  Not  in  the  sense  of  the  break­ down  in communication that  can lead  to some  inverted insights,  but  simple  medi­ ocrity.  Twigg  wasn't able  to  get  on  the same wave length  with Robertson Davies,  which  perhaps isn't surprising. Similarly, Margaret  Laurence,  usually  one  of  the better  interviews around,  comes  out   as banal,  and   her   position   at   the  end   of For Openers, while it fits her stature as a

I47

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Canadian writer, makes for a let-down  in the  book.
Even  in these cases, however,  there  are
usually at least a few insights to be gained, even  if indirectly, as when  Twigg's ques­ tion  to  Laurence inadvertently  informed me that  Settlers  of the Marsh was banned from  public  libraries inI 926. The inter­ view with  Margaret  Atwood  perpetuates her  image  as  someone who  plays  things close to  the  vest,  avoiding personal  and  creative  revelations, but  it  also  provides  her  comments on the  fear she  inspires  in many   readers   and   critics.   Her   analysis may not  be absolutely correct  but she has certainly recognized  something important. Many  have  commented on her  sensibility as paranoid but few have noted that the reaction is no less so. Whether it is simply to cut  her  down  to size or  to  reject  her dark  view of contemporary reality  is hard to determine. The  way she would like her work to be seen is probably  summed  up in her  final  comment, after  her  assertion  of the likely destruction of literary culture in Canada: "This is not optimism or pessim­ ism.  It's   just  looking  at  things  that  are there."
I have my arguments, as anyone would, but  on  the  whole  the  interviews  are  val­ uable. Twigg tends  to be too positive with his writers,  at  times suggesting  that  a cer­ tain  work  was  too  this or  too  that  to  be accepted by  the  critics  when  most  of  us would  agree  it was simply  too  bad. Still, Twigg is probably more  honest  than most of us would  be in  that  situation, as  when he tells Marian Engel  that  he didn't like The  Glassy  Sea   and   Rudy   Wiebe   the same   about   The   Blue    Mountains  of China.
The choice  of subjects  might  be  ques­ tioned. Some, such as Hugh MacLennan, have  been  examined  so often  that  there isn't  that  much  more  to be  brought out. Others, such  as Peter Trower, are  rather strange to find  in  a  select group  of only twenty-four. Their inclusion  leads  one  to
 reflect  on  many  much   more  major  wri­ ters  who  are  not  included, such  as  Tim­ othy  Findley, the  most interviewable au­  thor  I personally have encountered.
A partial explanation for  this choice  is
that   Twigg comes  from  Vancouver and his book was published in B.C. Thus wri­ ters like Trower and  Bill Bissett probably seem much  more  important than  they do to those of us in the east. The most inter­ esting  thing  about the interview with  Bis­ sett  is that  he is revealed as just as much  of an  anachronistic hippie  as many  of us suspected. But  then  again,  maybe  that  is an  eastern perspective.
That is East. Which brings me to the really   infuriating  aspect    of   the   book. Twigg feels forced  to  title  his interviews with   pretentious  and   reductive  phrases like   "What  Is"   for   Alice   Munro  and "What Can  Be" for Jane Rule.  This  is unnecessary and off-putting but a small point.   However, it  reflects  a  larger  issue when  he turns  to Jack  Hodgins as "West­ ern  Horizon" and  Matt Cohen  as "East­ ern  Horizon." All  right  for  Hodgins but where  the  hell  does  Twigg  think  Cohen  lives?  Last  time  I  looked  there  were  five provinces east  of  Cohen.  You  would  be hard-pressed to  guess  that  from  Twigg's choice  of writers. Quebec gets some  rep­  resentation but  afterwards  what?  John Gray   and  Hugh   MacLennan might   be seen as Nova  Scotia  writers  but  not in the way that Hodgins and  Wiebe  are  western writers. What about Alden  Nowlan? Or AI Pitman? Or  various others  at  least  as important as Trower.
The answer  of course  is the old western alienation blinkers.  Twigg's comments show him to be a committed westerner, which  is fine, but  any  regionalist  must recognize  the  existence of other  regions. And  most  of the  western  writers  are sim­ ilarly  myopic.  When you are reading this book,  and   enjoying it,  and  yelling  three  cheers  for  the  west, remember: "Ontario

BOOKS IN  REVlliW



is not  the east, Ontario is not  the east, Ontario is not  the east...."

TERRY GOLDIE


SUBURBS & SHAMANS

ARITHA VAN   HERK,  The Tent Peg. McClelland
& Stewart, $14·95·
DAVID  WILLIAMSON, Shandy. Queenston House,
$rs.gs; pa. $6.gs.

ARITHA VAN  HERK's  The Tent Peg is likable  because  its tone  is intense,  its for­ mat  is crisp, and  the  edge  of  mischievous  intrigue in  the  opening  chapter is  gen­ uine: a young  woman  has disguised  her­  self as  a  youth  so  that  she  can  be  hired as cook  for  an  all-male summer geologi­ cal survey crew.
David  Williamson's Shandy lacks these virtues: its style is gabby, its protagonist prim  and  its opening action implausible. However, such  a  high  level  of  suspense goes into introducing the main  female character  that   it  propels one  well  past the  point   where   she,  like  the  hero,  has proved  charmless.
Both  novels draw  their  readers in with the  bait  of  a  powerful female  character. I wonder   which  feels  more  duped:  the reader of The Tent Peg, in which  the woman's importance  becomes  unrealisti­ cally   inflated,  or   of   Shandy,  in   which women  are  obliquely belittled?
Shandy purports to  look  with  humor­ ous detachment at  the  mid-life  crisis of a reasonably sophisticated male  suburban­ ite. This  man,  Richard Page, is inventive in his work and  dutiful in his private life. Yet   before   the   novel   even   establishes  these  credentials it  has  him  treating his secretary like furniture and  expressing  no moral   reservations (only  aesthetic ones) when  asked  to  market  the  canvases  of a callous  painter who  has posed  his obese wife for  his nudes  and  then  has  left  her, to  live  with  a  willowy  younger   woman.
 "Woman  as   contemptible  object"   be­ comes a theme  that  continues with Page's witless sex fantasies and  positively  jumps out mid-novel  when  Page, annoyed by his dog's  whining,  opens  the  door  and  spits, "Come in, bitch."  If Williamson supposed that  the  humour of this  pun  would  save his hero from seeming  borish and  misogy­ nistic,  he  was  wrong.  From  chapter one he underestimated the  care  that  must  go into establishing the essential benevolence  of a comic figure.
Shandy sets out  to show  that  both  the urban  and  the suburban worlds are full of perils  for  the  man  who  has  surrendered the  caution  of his years. However, Rich­ ard  Page's  second  youth  is not  the  youth of innocence but  rather a  reversion  to  a seventeen-year-old  self   who  was  already  inclined  to bargaining with  life.
The sociologist  Richard Sennett has something to say about the nature of suburbia and  the survival  style of such adolescents.  In The Uses of Disorder: personal  identity and   city  life,  Sennett shows  that   the   youth   who   chooses  the refuge of social cliches and comfortable norms is like the householder who chooses the homogeneity of the suburbs. Both are unplayed   social   instruments.  More  im­ portant, the  suburbanite neglects  the  de­ velopment of his city's  character and  the youth neglects his own.
If this  thesis  is correct and  suburban living can be equated with  adolescent compromise, then   the  failure of Shandy is  to  take  the  man  out  of  suburbia but not suburbia out  of the  man.  When  in a retrospective  chapter   we   see   Richard Page  at  seventeen, his idea  of adventure is to be seduced  by a  vapid  stranger. At forty-two his  idea  remains the  same   (if his fantasies are any measure) and though he takes on a more  mentally assertive sex­ ual  partner he  seems  more enthralled by the  role  of  lover  than  by  the  impact of intimacy.  Sweetheart,  advertising model, prostitute, wife-in his charade of desire

149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



there  is only  one  mannikin, making  cos­ tume  changes. And  there  is only one  ad­  olescent,  whether forty-two or seventeen,  striking poses with her.

Van   Herk's protagonist-a   woman named  J.L.-is more consistent,  more complex, more  admirable; it  is  not  her fault  but  the  narration's that  before  long she  becomes  something of a  juggernaut. She starts  off well, boldly abandoning the city  where  she  has  found  only  one  frail bright  light during a year of unconvincing university   studies  and  uncommitted  sex­ ual  liaisons.  The beacon  in  her  life  is a woman,  and  as the story progresses we see what   qualities  this   woman   represents: celebrative strength,  freedom  of  feeling, and  faith  that  men  can  love these  traits.
Over  the summer  J.L. tests her own share
of these qualities.
This  is not  to say  that  J.L. surrounds
himself  with  nine  men in order  to inspire
someone's love for her  life-embracing na­ ture. On  the contrary, as much  as possible she  leaves  them   to  their  own  company and  quietly attunes herself  to the wilder­  ness. Van  Herk  presents  this active  medi­
tation   skilfully  so  that  one  can  see  J.L.
entering into  a  sort  of spirit  quest,  then
realizing  the  nature of what  she is doing
and  taking  pleasure in the process.
There is much  potential in  the idea  of a  young  woman   tapping shamanistic  in­ sights  while  actively  absorbing a  modern milieu  of geological  survey grids, helicop­  ter  flights,   and   assay  results.  However, two flaws deprive this story of full success. One  is an intrusive submotif:  the bibli­ cal story  of J.L.'s spiritual forebear. This
was the Kenite woman Ja-el, outwardly acquiescent   and    inwardly    fierce,   who felled  the  Canaanite general  Sisera.  The motif  works  well at  first;  it  is reasonable to  think   that,   having   been  named   after
her, J.L. would  ponder the significance  of
this  figure,  particularly since  the  woman
she   loves   has   an   appropriate   biblical
 counterpart. But  nothing in the  novel suggests  that  the  geologist  Mackenzie would  know  this story, so a very odd  note clangs   when   he  intones, "Ah,   Sisera,   I
would  trade  with  you ...," as if J.L. has
taught him  the  myth  by psychic  transfer.
Intuitive teaching has limits.
The second  major shortcoming of this novel  is that, except  for  the  hostile  rela­ tions   that   grow   around  Jerome,   J.L.'s antithesis, nothing builds  in  the story  ex­ cept  a ponderous awareness of  J.L.  Spiri­  tual,   social,   sexual   and   even   aesthetic hopes  are  vested  in  her-the  photogra­
pher  decides  that  the  proper shot  of J.L.
will yield him  "the perfect photograph.''
Inevitably the  men  begin  to  appear  stu­ pidly   idolatrous  and   the  woman-de­ spite the author's stalwart efforts  to intro­ duce  brisk,  light  action  and   dialogue­ seems  more  and  more  wrapped up  in  a sanctimonious idea  of  her  pure  Jungian femaleness. "We can  all rest  now"  is her last  thought in  the  book,  as  if she  held the gavel  on all of  life.
I  dislike  pat  endings, but  perhaps van Herk   is  entitled  to  one,  since  she   has shown  us a genuine moral  struggle -a struggle about how  to live. Williamson garnered himself  a very tidy ending, and he  only  gave  us  a  clumsy  scuffle in  the broom  closet of suburban gossip.

CATHERINE  KERR






**  WILLIAM  REYNOLDS, Point  Pelee. Oxford,
$15.95·   Another in  Oxford's series  of  photo­
graphic  portraits  of   Canadian   regions,  this book   takes   a   naturalist's  approach,  defining
place by  means of  flowers,  birds,   reptiles, but mostly  butterflies. Butterflies in  the  pictures appear  to  grow   on   trees,   bushes   to   leaf   in wings.
W.N.





A NOTE ON "BEAR"

"You DO   NOT COME to Northern Ontario to  study  London in  1825. Or  do  you?" The question arises  in  Bear,1 when  Mar­ ian  Engel groups  Blake, Wordsworth, By­ ron,  Shelley  and  Capability Brown  into the "perfect library for its period," houses it  in  a  "classic   Fowler's octagon," and isolates  that   on   an   island   in Northern Ontario:  the  scene  seems set for  yet  an­ other satirical  swipe at nineteenth-century cultural colonialism.  The founder of the library,  Colonel  Cary  (owner of the orig­ inal  bear), appears  as a  misplaced  Beau Brummel,  one   of   a   nineteenth-century tribe  of  "landscape  nuts," who  came  to Ontario intending to "make watercolours and  have Robert Adam  do their  drawing­ rooms,  Humphry   Repton  their   facades  and Capability Brown  their gardens." But Engel  also  provides an   informed c tic, the  librarian, Lou,  whose  researches  mto Colonel   Gray   and   his  library   gradually reveal  that  the  carefully-chosen composi­ tion of the library  and  shape  of  the house should   be  more  to  the  reader  than   an­  other   "ho-hum"  patch  of   sociocultural criticism  serving  an  overall indictment of "immigrant idiocies." By  the end  of  the novella,  what  Lou  brings  back  from  her sojourn   on  Cary's island  has  at  least  as much  to do  with  the  library  as with  the more  spectacular  bear.
Lou   does   not   always   judge   Colonel Cary's romanticism in  the  negative  light of the landscape nut.  After  immersing herself  in Trelawny's book on  Byron and Shelley, Lou  can see that

All   the   Victorians,  early  or   late  ... were morbid geniuses. Cary was  one  of  them  and bought  himself   an   island  here.  He   didn't have  Ackerman's Views, or  Bartlett's prints
 to  go  by.  He  sensed   what   he  wanted  an came  and  found it.... He  came  to find  his dream,  leaving  his   practical  wife   behi d him   in   York.  He   was   adventurous,   big­ spirited, romantic. There was  room  for  him  in the  woods.

Though Lou  uses the word "morbid," she uses "genius," too, and  her feeling for the worth  and  strength of  the  romantic  im­ pulse  pervades  the  passage. Significantly, this accolade to Cary's romanticism ("He came  for some  big dream") directly  pre­ cedes  her  first  love-scene  with  the  bear. Lou's  first glimpse  into  the seriousness of the romantic soul paves the way for a de­ scent into her own.
But there is another aspect to Cary's romanticism which  seems  awkwardly  al­ lied  with   these  Shelley-esque  depths  of the pioneer  soul. This  offshoot of roman­ tic thought is represented in Cary's library  by Capability Brown,  the "more practical philosophers," and  the  Penny Cyclopae­ dia, published, as  Lou  tells  us, "by  the society   for    the    Promotion   of   Us_eful Knowledge."  It   is  a strongly   practical, common-sensical   vein   of  mid-Victorian thought, linked  to its predecessor,  true  ro­ manticism, by its unshakeable faith  in the perfectability of  the  human experiment.
What  makes this practical, idealistic romanticism directly   relevant to  Cary  is the design of his house. Lou notes at once that   it  is  a  "classic   Fowler's   octagon," a species with  which  she, as librari  nd archivist, obviously has some fam1hanty. Orson  Squire Fowler  ( I8og-1887)  was an American natural philosopher, whose spe­ cialty  was phrenology -the determining of human character from  the  configura­ tion of the skull -a "scientific" practice based  upon  the  tidy  division  of the  brain  into spheres  of  control. The  copious  titles of  a  few of  Fowler's books  should  illus­ trate  the breadth of his interests  (a scope typical of his era) , and sufficiently suggest his   connection  with   the   common-sense idealism of his day:

OPINIONS & NOTES



Education Complete. Embracing Physiology, Animal and  Mental; Applied to  the  Preser­ vation and   Restoration of  Health  of  Body, and    Power   of   Mind; -Self-Culture,  and  Perfection of  Character, including the  Man­ agement  of   Youth;-Memory  and   Intel­ lectual  Improvement;  Applied to  Self-Edu­ cation  and  Juvenile Instruction.
Matrimony; or, Phrenology and  Physiology Applied to  the  Selection of Congenial Com­ panions for Life; including Directions to the  Married  for  Living  together  Affectionately and  Happily.
Religion.   Natural  and    Revealed;  or,   the Natural  Theology  and    Moral   Bearings  of Phrenology, including the  Doctrine Taught, and   Duties  Inculcated   thereby,  compared with   those   enjoined  in  the   Scriptures,   to­ gether  with   a  Phrenological   Exposition  of the  Doctrines of  a  Future  State, Material­ ism,  Holiness, Sins,  Rewards, Punishments, Depravity, a  Change  of  Heart, Will,  Fore­ ordination, and  Fatalism. By 0. S. Fowler.2

Designing houses was a minor, though obsessive, interest  of Fowler.  His manual, A Home  For All:  a New, Cheap, Conve­ nient,  and  Superior  Mode   of  Building, had  such  success when  first  published  in r 848,  that   it  was  revised,  enlarged and
re-issued  in   1854  as  A  Home   For  All: or the  Gravel  Wall   and  Octagon Mode of Building. The work  proves  by a  posi­ tive  torrent  of  figures  and   calculations that  the most  practical shape  for a house is octagonal. Fowler  applies  the same ob­ stinate common-sense and  cheerful  faith in figures to the  division  of the space for the  body as he does  to the division of the space   within   the   mind.   The   octagonal form  is chosen,  after detailed  mathemati­ cal calculations, because it is "more beau­  tiful  as well as capacious, and  more  con­ sonant   with  the  predominant or  govern­  ing   form   of   Nature-the    spherical."3 "Its phrenological designer," Lou  tells us, "thought it good  for  the  brain."
In Fowler's octagon the occupant  lives
out  the  rational, ordered existence  of the mid-nineteenth-century scientific  mind, with each  function allotted its own space, and  each  space  contributing to  the  well-
 being and  happiness of the occupant. Fowler  enthuses:

How   much  fretfulness  and   ill  temper, as well  as exhaustion and  sickness,  an  unhandy house  occasions. Nor  does  the  evil  end  here. It often, generally, by  perpetually irritating mothers,  sours   the   tempers  of   their   chil­ dren, even   BEFORE BIRTH,  thus  render­ ing  the   whole   family  bad-dispositioned BY NATURE, whereas a convenient one  would  have rendered them constitutionally amiable and  good:

He  is  particularly sanguine about the benefits  of an  exercise  room,  or  a  "gym­ nasium  room  for females" in every dwell­  ing, as well as a space  for "private danc­ ing  parties," the  effects  of which  Fowler feels to be of special importance to human mental and  physical  health: "How many hopeless  invalids,  now  dying   by  inches, would such  rooms in our buildings  restore to life, health and  happiness! How  many  a  child  save  from  a  premature grave !"5
As Lou  concludes, "He   was  the  sort  of
American we are all warned  about." Beyond   Fowler's enthusiasms and  ex­
clamation  points   lies a  determined  par­
titioning of human space; a  corpus  of philosophical and   pseudo-scientific ideas is implicit in his design  for a house. Col­ onel   Cary   chooses   this   model   for   his house-must have  chosen  it consciously, owning,  perhaps, a well-thumbed copy of Fowler's book.  We  have  it  on  good  au­  thority   that  his  adaptation of  the  model was   successful.   On   her    first   morning there,  Lou  describes the   "incredible house":

Its  faceted white bulk  gleamed in  the  early sun; its   black-roofed  verandahs  hung  like an  apron over   the  first  floor.  The  windows of the  second storey were  broad and  shining. From its roof, two chimneys and  a windowed lantern  rose  like   the   crown   of  a  hat.   She could hardly believe its  perfection.

But,  as Lou  quickly  realizes,  the  house is neither as perfect, nor as self-sufficient, as the contained bulk of its form on the landscape   suggests.    Immediately  after

OPINIONS & NOTES



conunenting  on  its  perfection,  Lou   re­ members  the bear,  and  goes on to explore  the area  behind  the  house :

From the  front, the  house  looked  single  and solitary, but  there was  a fungus of  outbuild­ ings  behind it:  a  broad and  batten wood­  shed, and  a   tumble-down   log   house   con­  nected  to  it  by  something  that looked   like a  corncrib and was  perhaps  a  wood  shelter or  the  remains of a chicken house. Together they  formed a fenced compound.

This fungus  of outbuildings behind  the house  would  have  been  anathema to Or­ son Squire Fowler. He spends  pages of his work  detailing the  evils  of  separate  out­  buildings, and  urges  the simplicity, econ­ omy, and  suitability of  centralized dwell­ ings.6 How  did  the  Cary   who  built  the incredible house  so far  forget  his Fowler as  to  allow  this  fungus to  flourish?  The outbuildings  were  built,  presumably, be­ cause  they  were  needed  -a  com-crib, a hen-house,  an   out-house,  a   bear-house. These  structures grow  up  behind  Cary's house because  there  is no  room  for  them in  Fowler's  carefully-planned  space.   In the gap between Fowler's plan  and  Cary's reality  lies  one  essential  dilenuna of  ro­ manticism, and  the rationale behind Lou's  exploration of Cary's library.
Moving from   the  library   to  the  out­ buildings, Lou  is  immediately  conscious that  she is taking a step  "from the known to   the   unknown"   whereas,   navigating around Cary's octagonal house, she knows exactly  what  to expect in each  room. Not only  has  she  an  inventory of  the  rooms and  their  contents, but  she is knowledge­ able  about Fowler's traditional divisions of  the house space, and  notes approvingly that the  kitchen "took  only  one  plane  of the  octagon, as opposed  to  the  parlour's two."
For  Lou,  the  "perfect library" formed by the "typical early nineteenth-century mind" is  also  an  aspect   of  the  known. But  it  is out  of  the  books  in  this  library that  Cary's cryptic  notes on bears periodi-
 cally fall. Informative, yet mystifying, trivial,   yet  disturbing,  they   are   to  the books  that  contain  them   what   the  out­ buildings  are  to  the  house -not  simply because  of  their  shared   character  as  the unknown,  the  secret  fungi,   but  because they  are  Colonel   Cary's  creations. The outbuildings and   the  bear-notes qualify  Lou's   experience  of   the   "typical  early nineteenth-century  mind" as  housed   in the octagon,  and reflected  in the  library.7
Both  the  practical-idealistic octagon and the  typical  nineteenth-century library  are inadequate receptacles for whatever mode of life and  thought Colonel Cary  created on his island -an inadequacy which Lou strives to understand.
Lou feels closest to the  brink  of  under­ standing during her  reading of  Trelaw­ ny's book on Shelley  and  Byron. Marian Engel has been heard  to dismiss the prom­  inence  of Lou's  researches in  the  library  as   "my   fascination  with   the   Regency  bit."8   It is nevertheless difficult  to ignore  the  genuine urgency  of  Lou's  search  for meaning in her reading. She exhibits  both a genuine  need  to discover  meaning, and a strong sense of its reciprocal need  to be discovered.  She mentions a "mystical acrostic," and  even an  "!-Ching," as pos­ sible forms that  such a construction of meaning could   take.  But  her  librarian's soul always  undercuts the  validity  of  the irrational avenue to  meaning: "She did not   believe   in   non-rational   processes." Still,  her  intimations of significance  per­ sist: "There's some connection there," she says while reading Trelawny. "Trelawny. Colonel  Cary.  The bear. There was some connection,  some  unfingerable  intimacy among   them,  some  tie  between longing  and   desire  and   the   achieveable." Here  Engel allows Lou  to isolate and  articulate an  essential romantic dilemma, the un­ bridgeable gap between  desire  and  the achievable -the   same   sort   of   gap   as that  between  Fowler's octagon whole and indivisible,   and   Cary's  octagon  with   a

153

OPINIONS & NOTES



bear on its back step. She reaches the conclusion  after   the   sudden   realization that   the  worth   of  Trelawny  is  the  fact that  he speaks  with  his own  voice. "Tre­ lawny's  good. He speaks in his own voice. He  is unfair, but  HE  SPEAKS IN  HIS OWN VOICE.... Colonel  Cary  had  left her   tiny,  painful,  creepily   paper-saving notes.  She  was  still  searching the  house to find his voice."
Lou  cannot recognize  that  the creepily paper-saving notes  are Cary's  voice. Tre­ lawny's  comes  across  with  greater clarity  precisely  because  it  is  biographical, pos­ sesses a  measure of  detachment  (is  not, as Lou  notes, required to be "fair") . Tre­ lawny  talks about  poets, and  about  vision, without  having to  be  a  poet,  to  convey the  vision. Cary's problem   is one  of  vis­ ion-conveying-a basic romantic  di­ lemma again. How  do you speak  of  vis­ ions   to  a  sane   world   without  seeming  ridiculous, stilted,  fulsome,  insane?  How do you tell of bears and retain  your voice, or  your   credibility?   (A   problem  Engel herself  has  encountered.)  The  great  ro­ mantics in Cary's library  added  their  own bear-notes and  outbuildings to the  world of articulated human experience by virtue  of   their   visions  of  the  human  subcon­ scious. Even for Blake, Shelley, and Wordsworth, a central problem  was the translation of the  moment of vision  into apprehensible human experience. Apart from   the   bear   itself,  the  only  evidence that   Colonel   Gary   had   anything other than   that   pervasive  typical  nineteenth­ century mind  is that   of the  notes.  They  record  a fragment of his vision, whatever it  may  have  been.  And  though   Lou,  in the  middle of  the  novella,  cannot hear  Cary's voice, she does hear  it eventually.
Response to Engel's  Bear indicates that the  average  reader  sees  the   novella   in much  the same way as Lou initially sees Cary's notes  on  bears.  The  truncation of Lou's character, and  the cryptic  nature of the  book's  style, are  suggestive of an  elu-

154
 sive  inner logic  which  is as informative, and    as   mystifying,    as   the   fragmented notes.  In the  same   way  that   the  notes seem trivial,  irrelevant glosses on more "significant" works, the novella has struck many   (critics as  well  as  casual  readers) as trivial,  a badly-executed exercise in symbol-mongering, demanding, as  the notes  do,  an  effort  of faith  and  !-Ching to  release  a  dubious significance. But  in the same  way that  the  notes and  the  bear are  necessary qualifiers of the Victorian vision embodied in house  and  library, the novella   is  a   valuable  extension  of   the world   of  articulated  human  experience right  here  in the  twentieth century.

NOTES

1 Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1976.
2    Orson  Squire  Fowler,  A  Home  For  All:  or the  Gravel  Wall  and  Octagon Mode  of Building   (New  York:   Fowlers  and   Wells, I854), in its appended "List  of Works on Phrenology,  Physiology,  Hydropathy, Etc.," pp. 2-4·
3  Fowler,  p. 88.
4   Fowler, p.  I4. s  Fowler,  p. 65.
6   Fowler, pp. 66-8 I.
7  Cary's   note  is  a  particularly apt  qualifica­ tion  of  its  containing book  in  the  case  of the  note  which  falls  from  Milton's Poetical Works.
B   In  conversation with  Prof.  Frank  Watt  and his students, at  the  Univ.  of Toronto,  De­ cember  I g8o.
MICHELLE  GADPAILLE

DAVIES, HIS CRITICS, & THE CANADIAN CANON
RoBERTSON   DAVIES'S  TRILOGY, especially Fifth  Business, has  proved  to be a mecca for critics. Canadian literature has at last been blessed with a puzzle, a seemingly unbounded web of magian intricacies and mythological allusions, which unwary

OPINIONS &  NOTES



critics  have  wandered into,  like flies into the  spider's parlour. And,  of course,  they (we)  have  done  so in response  to Davies' arachnidian  invitation. However, in  en­ tering the parlour, what  have  we done  to ourselves  and  what  have  we  done  to the text?  Such   are   the  questions  I want   to ask. The two questions are  related, since how we see  the  text depends on our sense of  what  we  see  as  our  task  and   that  in turn conditions our sense of what  the text actually is.1  If we want   to  see a  puzzle, that  is indeed   what  we  will  see. And  if we value  the  puzzle,  then  we  will  value the  text that  projects it.
In  the  most  recent  foray  into  the  Da­ vies  web  (Studies in  Robertson  Davies' Deptford  Trilogy,  ed.  R.  G.  Lawrence and  S. L. Macey), several more puzzling strands are  isolated   and  described.2   We learn,   for  example, that  the  initials  ME
+DR  (appropriate mirror image  of RD)
= Robertson  Davies3 ; that   Denise  Hor­ nick's  first  name "recalls" Dionysius and her  last  name   links  her  to  "female de­ votees   [of  Dionysius]   wearing  horns"4 ; that  Diana  Marfleet  is linked  not only  to her   hun tress  namesake  (and  Ramsay "therefore"  with   Actaeon)   but   to  the Pieta   and   the Great  Mother  (Ramsay, still  horned, is metamorphosed from  stag to sacrificial  ram) 5 ; and  that  the stone in the  snowball   is,  variously,   the  philoso­ pher's   stone,  a  sacred  symbol  of  Cybele (the  Great Mother), and  a  covert  refer­  ence to Jung's childhood secret  and  long­ hidden stone.6  Davies himself,  in a some­ what  disingenuous  preface, speaks  of the "allegorical element" in  the  story  which, he suggests, "is for others  to discover  and determine" and  thereby make  him  "seem cleverer  than [he]  really   [is]."7    Indeed it does! There are, to be sure, some useful insights to be gained  from  this volume­ for  example, Merivale's convincing case for   MacLennan's  influence  on   Davies, Patricia  Monk's  tracking  down   of   the curious  bear-cult lore behind  The Manti-
 core, or Samuel Macey's  intricate clock­ ing of time and  watchmaking in  the tril­ ogy;8 But  even  these  seem  usually  to  be moving  away  from  the  novels instead  of toward  them,   pursuing  allusions,  myths, background, in a flurry of what  might  be called  polymathic perversity.
Now,  texts  that   lend  themselves  to  a
certain  kind of analysis current at a given time,  tend  to  be raised  to a high  level of value  by  the  very  fact  that   they  can  be studied,  and  their  secrets  "revealed," ac­ cording    to   a   particular    methodology. Thus,  during the heyday of  new criticism,  Donne,  whose  explosive  rhythms,   juxta­ positions, and ambiguities were especially open  to the formalist and  organicist  ide­ ology of  that movement, was overvalued at  the  expense  of  writers like  Jonson  or Pope. Davies'  texts  (like those of Fowles and others)   are  highly  self-conscious  and clever, alert  to their  own  allusiveness  and somewhat   coy  in  their   relation   to  their readers.  These qualities, as is evident  not only  from  the  commentary  cited  above but from much  of the work done so far on Davies, lend  themselves to a scrutiny em­ inently  suited  to current  critical  practice and  hence  to the  production of  scholarly discourse in the form  of articles which,  in ways very different from  the  "new  criti­  cism," pursue  allusions  and intricacies be­ yond   the   text   or   chase   them   around within  it.  The  Deptford  novels,  written by a highly erudite professor of literature, who,  despite  his  protestations, may  very well have  been  able  to predict the  effect his writing  would  have  on  the  academic community, offer a gold mine of allusions and  relations  to sift  and  examine, or,  to alter  the  metaphor, a  dazzling  array   of clues to follow up, puzzle over, and finally tie  together  in  a  unifying interpretation. Fifth  Business thus  teases our  critical ap­ petites. What, over  the past several years, has emerged  in relation to it and  the tril­  ogy in general,  is an  abundance of inter­ textual and  comparative  studies  (Davies

OPINIONS &  NOTES



and    the   Faust    tradition,  Davies   and Heine,    Davies   and    Mann)/  scholarly and for anagrammatic trackings of names and  allusions/0   and,   especially,  Jungian
mytho-psychological probings.11 Teaching
the novel  generates the same  kind  of  ac­
tivity. Who has not decoded Libby Doe, Gloria  Mundy, and  Agnes Day to duly impressed   students  (has  anyone,  by  the way, looked into Davies' relations with Nabokov?)?
The textual element which  I regard  as central to  most  of  these  investigations  is the  clue.  The text  is to  be de-ciphered; the clue is raised to the level of special signifier. What it signifies may begin as a mystery,  but  the critic  sees it as his func­ tion  to  unravel that  mystery. The  name (Denyse  "recalls" Dionysius)  is the para­ digmatic clue, setting the stage for a com­ plex   performance,  based   on   a  specific mise-en-scene. The  text,  that  is,  is seen and  read  in a particular way:  it provides clues.  Behind   the  clue,  there  is  the  as­ sumption that  it can  be followed  up and fitted  into  a pattern; a meaning can  then emerge  from  the  pattem. The  search  for meaning thus  inevitably  becomes the  search  for clues. But what  is not acknowl­  edged  is  that   the  meaning thereby   pro­ duced   is  dependent  on  the  assumption that the clue is the key signifier.
What I said  before  about  Davies' arachnidian invitation comes in precisely at  this  point.  For  Davies  underlines  his clues, invites  the reader  to follow and ultimately unravel them, even, at times, provides  an explanation himself. A well known  example of this is Liesl's taunting challenge to Dunstan Ramsay: "do  you know  what  my name  really  means, Lise­ lotte  Vitziputzli? It sounds  so funny,  but one day you will stumble  on its real mean­  ing"  (Fifth Business, p. 227) .12 The ques­ tion  is not  answered  till  near  the  end  of the  final  volume  and  even  then  it  is an­  swered mockingly, incompletely-the in­ vitation to  explore is still  open  and  has
 been  admirably accepted by  F.  L.  Rad­ ford.13 Again,  the  re-naming of  Dunstan, itself  part of a  pattern of  re-naming ex­ plicitly   pointed to  by  the  author, is ex­ plained by Diana  Marfleet in terms of its legendary  appropriateness; and  there  too the  explanation is incomplete. Dunstan's new  name becomes  a clue  to  his  "saint­ hood." Much later on,  we are invited to see its applicability in the fight scene with  Lies!.   If we  have   failed   to   make   the structural connection, the next scene with Padre Blazon  makes  it for us. Even  then,  as Wilfrid Cude suggests, the associations
are  far  from  complete.14 Critics,  then,  in
seeking  to  explain  Davies'  texts,  are  in a way doomed to  perform  them,  to act  out in their analyses the very gestures made within the  text.
The role  of the  clue as signifier  is con­ sistent  with  the status of the  book, or  the whole  trilogy,  as a mystery. The cry at the end  of  Fifth   Business,  "Who  killed  Boy Staunton?" echoes  through  the  next  two volumes and  is only answered definitively in  the  final  pages  of  World   of Wonders. Hence  the  central  mystery,   that   of  the plot,  is solved  for  us, as it  is in  the  con­ ventional  detective novel.  Its  clues  fall into  place.  But  those  other  clues,  which exist  on   the  level  of  "meaning" rather than plot,  are  left  for  us  to  investigate. And   these   clues   are   weighted    with   a promise of  significance that  I  doubt can be delivered.
It might fruitfully be argued that  there is a structural connection between  the process the  reader (or  critic) goes through, of spying clues, identifying them, and   assigning  significance  to   the  series thus  constructed, and  the  process of  solv­ ing a mystery  in this, as in any "ordinary" mystery  story.  Thus an  account of  Fifth  Business,  say,  could   be  written  concen­ trating  on   these   structural  connections and    suggesting   that    at   a   metatextual level,  Fifth  Business  is "about" the  pro­  cess  of   investigation  and   interpretation

OPINIONS & NOTES



itself-it  sends   us  chasing  after   clues, not  so  much   for   the  sake  of  what   the clues signify, but for the sake of the chase itself, for the processes which looking for clues and  following them  up involve us in. After  all, each  of  the  three  volumes  is a kind  of  autobiography which  presents  a man  tracking himself  down  (The Manti­ core, because  of  the  psychoanalytic con­ text,  being  the  most  explicit   in  this  re­ gard) .15
A  reading like  the  one   just  sketched would  hence  surround those  readings which  are derived from  the specific signi­ fieds that  the clues refer  to, and subordin­ ate,   or  bracket, or  deconstruct, all  at­  tempts  to construct a particular meaning for  the  puzzle.  The  text,  it  would  assert, is operating on  a  different level  of  dis­ course,   that   of   signification  itself.   Re­ garded thus,  the  text  dissolves  the  very meanings it encourages its readers  or crit­  ics to construct. Such  "meanings" would then  be  seen  as  simply   the   result  of  a calculated  effect  that   the  text  has  on  a reader, rather than a "true" rendering of what  the  text is "about"; and  hence  to perform the  text  would  be the  only thing that  one could  in fact  do with it.
Whether  such   a  meta-reading  would be  "valid" or  not,   I  am   not  concerned with  here.  (It would,  no doubt, be  fash­ ionable!) My purpose is less to assert than  to  question. The  text  certainly  involves us in  clue-tracking;  but  to  assert  that  it is about that  process is to take  (for the key to  its  meaning)    not   the   clues   that   it proffers  but  the fact  that  it proffers  them.  How  can  we claim  that  the latter is prior to  the  former, or  vice  versa?   Whether, and  on  what   basis,  we can  assign  a  pri­  ority  to  one  particular vehicle  of  inter­ pretation is  a  complex theoretical  ques­ tion. But let us at least be clear about  our  assumptions.
This brings me back to my original question  - what,  in   accepting  Davies' arachnidian invitation, have  we done  to
 ourselves  and   to  the  text?  We  may,  in­ deed, have  trapped ourselves  through our  very  attraction to  the  web,  i.e.,  through our  unexamined love for our own critical methods. As for  the  text  itself,  we  have  canonized it   (an  appropriate metaphor, I think, given Ramsay's interest  in saints)  because  of its susceptibility to the sorts of analyses  in  which  the  clue  is central. We hold  it up for  admiration because  it con­  tains  all  the  meanings which  we have  in fact  put there.
In  an  essay  on  As  For Me  And  My House, Morton L. Ross employs the same metaphor as I do and  makes some similar points.16 Ross traces the history of the criticism of that novel, showing how the introduction of critical concepts like "am­ biguity,"   "unreliable narrator,"  and   the like,  has  led   to  a  concomitant   rise  in evaluation,  to the extent  that  As For Me is now often  classed  with  the best  novels in  English.  Ross's  essay  corroborates the point  I am  making  here, although I  dis­ agree  with  his  apparent assumption that  there  is a  simple,  readily  available  mean­ ing  of  this  or  any  other   novel,  which  is being  distorted  by  overemphasizing  the  role of  the  reader. He  fails  to show  why he  thinks the  newer  critics  are  wrong  in their  readings or  to indicate what  actual features of  the  text  they  are  responding to,  though he  is extremely trenchant  in mapping out  their assumptions and mock­ ing  their  conclusions.  Another  thing  that  I want  to emphasize in  the present  essay, which Ross does not discuss, is the power­  ful presence  in today's academic circles of the  need  for  discourse. This leads  natur­ ally  to  the  production of  discourse  and,  again  naturally, part of  the  function of such discourse is to reassess and  ultimately replace  earlier discourse.   Hence,   in  the case of As For Me, the production of new
interpretations  and   hence    the   making
ambiguous of what  was earlier  thought to be  perfectly  clear.  With  the  Davies  tril­ ogy, later   discourse  seems  not  to  be  re-

157

OPINIONS & NOTES



placing,  but  rather corroborating and complicating, earlier  work.  The  obvious has been  taken  care  of, and  the dark cor­ ners are  now being peered  into.
In  his critique of the morality of the trilogy,  Stephen  Bonnycastle argues  that it "sets itself against the ideals of liberal education in an  uncompromising ... way and  promotes  a fierce aristocracy of the spirit." To  be  really  educated, to  really possess one's  spirit  is to enter  into  a tiny elite-culture and  education are seen as private  property. 17      Critical   fascination with  the erudition and  allusiveness of the novels seems to me  to reinforce this view
-in   the   sense  that   knowing   all  these things puts  us there  too. We can enter  the
select circle by catching the allusions, rec­ ognizing  the clues. This suggests that the basis for our "canonization" of Fifth  Busi­ ness might   go  beyond  the  critical   issues raised  earlier. To  examine  what  lies be­ yond,  we must  veer  temporarily into  the realm  of  sociology.  What interest, what  stake,  we  may  ask,  do  we  have  in  the canonization of  texts at all?
I think  it is fair  to say that  the  Cana­ dian  academy is on  the  lookout  for mas­ terpieces; and   it  is  understood  that   the critical establishment  will  ordain the  priests, or guardians, of these works, once they  are  produced. But  this  is only  one, and   perhaps  the  least  generous,   of  the motivations behind  the widespread desire for Canadian masterworks, a desire which found   its  reductio  ad  absurdum  in  the vote  taken  not long ago to establish  Can­ ada's  greatest   novels.  Masterpieces  are,  after  all,  a  delicious   temptation -they are like Falstaff, "not only witty in [them­ selves],  but  the cause  that  wit is in other men." By  the  challenge they  offer,  they can  disturb and  enrich  our discourse.  But this fact  does not in itself justify the pro­ cess of canonization that  is currently go­ ing on,  nor  does  it  explain  our  desire  to canonize  certain texts.
At  the   Ig8o   meeting  of  ACUTE  in
 Montreal, Robert Kroetsch proclaimed in public  what  people  teaching Canadian literature have  known  for  quite  a while: that there does indeed exist an unofficial canon  of "central" Canadian texts which looms  behind  the  making of reading  lists from first year English to graduate school.Hl   It is  now  possible,  even  likely, that  a new  M.A.  graduate from  a Cana­ dian   university  will  have  studied   Fifth  Business,  As For  Me   And  My  House, or The  Stone   Angel   four   or  five  times  in herfhis five or six years at university. As I suggested   above,  there  are  many  causes for this situation. What I want  to empha­ size is that  the desire currently felt in Ca­  nadian academic  circles  for  great   works derives  not  only  from  literary and  quasi­  literary   considerations  but   from   unac­ knowledged   ideological  needs   as   well. From an  ideological standpoint,  the  es­ tablishment of a canon creates  a mythol­ ogy which asserts that  Canadian literature exists, that  it is legitimate and successful, that  it is worth studying and  worth  writ­  ing  about. Masterpieces,  then,  have  not only  literary value,  but  ideological   value as  well -they  proclaim  Canada's com­ ing  of age  and  they  legitimize,  even  val­ orize, a wealth of literary investigation. If we look  at  the  actual canon,  we can  see too   that  these   ideological  pressures   are linked  to a conservative ethos, manifested not  only in the  existence  of the canon  it­ self  but  also   in   the   form   and   content (narrative structure and  overt  morality) of the canonized texts.
If then  we have  overvalued Fifth  Busi­ ness, there  are powerful incentives to have  done  so. But  these  incentives  themselves  need  exposure and  examination, and  our critical strategies need  at  least  that  meas­ ure  of clarity  that can  be  achieved   by a close scrutiny of assumptions and  aims.

NOTES

1 See  Stanley   Fish's   two  articles,   "What  is
Stylistics   and   Why   are   they  saying   such

OPINIONS &  NOTES



Terrible Things about it?"  The first   part appeared in   Approaches   to  Aesthetics, ed. S. Chatman  (N.Y. 1973), pp.  109-52, and the  second part  in  Boundary   2,  8,  No.   I (Fall 1979), 129-45. In the  latter, he argues that  the   recognition  of  "formal patterns" in   a  work   of  literature is  necessarily the product of a "prior interpretive act."
2   Studies  in Robertson  Davies'  Deptford  Tril­ ogy, ed.  Robert G. Lawrence and Samuel L. Macey. English Literary Studies,  # 20  (Vic­ toria, 1980). Cited hereafter as SRDDT.
3   Patricia Merivale, "The  (Auto)-Biographi­ cal   Compulsions  of   Dunstan  Ramsay," SRDDT, 64.
4   F. L. Radford, "The Great Mother and  the Boy:  Jung, Davies, and  Fifth  Business," SRDDT, 73·
5   Radford, op. cit., 69-70, 72.
6   Terry Goldie, "The Folkloric Background of Robertson  Davies' Deptford  Trilogy,"  SR­ DDT,  28,   Radford,  op.   cit.,   71-72,   and  Merivale, op. cit., 59, respectively.
7   Robertson Davies, "The Deptford Trilogy in
Retrospect," SRDDT, 11.
B   Merivale, op. cit.,  Patricia  Monk, "Davies and    the   Drachenloch,"   SRDDT,   100-13, and   Samuel L.  Macey, "Time, Clockwork, and   the   Devil   in  Robertson Davies'  Dept­ ford  Trilogy," SRDDT, 32-44.
9   The connections with   the   Faust tradition, and hence with  Goethe and  the  "old  play," are  clear enough and  are  referred to in  the text   itself,   as  well  as  by  several  commen­ tators;  those    with    Heine   (also   following from   the  Faust hook-up) have  been  traced by  F. L.  Radford in  ESC, 4,  no.   1  (Spring
1978), 95-100; those  with  Mann mentioned by  Radford, have   been   developed  by   Pa­ tricia Merivale, op. cit.,  62-63, who  argues that Davies has  designed each of  the  three Deptford novels  after specific  texts of Mann. See  also  Nancy Bjerring, "Deep  in  the  Old  Man's   Puzzle,"   Canadian   Literature    62 (Autumn 1974), pp.  49-60.
1o  In addition to  those  already  mentioned, see Wilfred Cude, "Miracle  and  Art   in   Fifth Business,"  ]CS, 12, no. 4  (November 1974),
3-16,   as  well  as  Radford's article in  ESC
(see  note   9). Ronald Sutherland's  allegor­ ical  reading of  FB  (see  The  New  Hero and  his  article in  ]CS,  12,  no.   I,  75-81)  fits  in here  too.
11 See Gordon Roper, "Robertson Davies' Fifth
 Business and That Old   Fantastical Duke  of Dark  Corners, C.  G.  Jung," ]CF,   1, no.   1 (Winter 1972), and   Goldie, Merivale and Radford. Patricia Monk, in  "Confessions of a Sorcerer's Apprentice: World  of Wonders and  the  Deptford Trilogy of Robertson Davies," Dalhousie  Review, 56   ( 1976-77),
366-72,  goes   beyond Jung  to  Spengler  in linking   the  careers of  the   four   major  pro­
tagonists of the  trilogy  to quest  myths.
12  The text  I have  used  is the  Penguin edition
(Harmondsworth, 1977).
13  In  "Heinrich Heine, the   Virgin,  and   the Hummingbird:   Fifth   Business-a    Novel and  its Subconscious," cited in  note  g. See also  Gertrude Jaron  Lewis's "Vitzliputzli Revisited," Canadian  Literature, 76 (Spring
1978), pp.  132-34·
14  See  "Miracle and  Art  in  F B" (cited in  note
10)  and  "Historiography and those  damned saints: shadow and  light  in  Fifth  Business,"
]CS, 12, no. 1 (February 1977), 47-67.
15  The function of  the  law  as  a correlative  to the  psychoanalytic process, studied by Peter Brigg  in  "The  Manticore and   the   Law," SRDDT, 82-gg, would  also  fit into  this argument, since  the  legal  process  is above  all a way of  knowing, or getting to know.
16  Morton L.  Ross  "The  Canonization of  As For Me And  My  House:  A Case  Study," in Figures in a Ground  (Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books, 1978), pp.  189-205.
17   Stephen Bonnycastle, "Robertson Davies  and the ethics  of monologue," ]CS,  12, no. 1 (February  1977),  38.   See   Ralph   Heintz­ man's   reply   in   the   editorial  of   the   same  issue for  a different view  (as  well  as Cude's articles mentioned above). The  Heintzman piece  offers  a good  example, I  tilink, of the  tendency to  overvalue,  based  not  so  much  on  the  intellectual framework  of  the  novels as  on  the   moral claims they  make,  claims
which   are   in  a   sense   the   flipside   of   the aspects  of  the  trilogy I have  been  consider­ ing.
1a  Kroetsch made the  point during the question period  following a  reading. Some  of his remarks might easily  be  interpreted, and hence  rejected, as  nothing more   than sour grapes. But  the  general point about the canon itself,  and  the  further argument that most of the canonized texts are relatively "straight," easily  accessible, non-experimen­ tal  ones, seem  undeniable.

ANTHONY B. DAWSON

159


ON THE VERGE

***lC·   s. E. D.  SHORTT, ed.  Medicine   In  Ca­ nadian Society:  Historical Perspectives. MeGill­ Queen's  Univ.  Press,   $23.95·   Prof.   Shortt's introduction, entitled "Antiquarians  and Ama­  teurs," remarks on  the  low  visibility  and   high  value of  medical history in  Canada-a value  more   philosophical than  pragmatic in  that it seeks  to  "reunite with   a  common heritage an  increasingly fragmented  discipline." One  could  write  the  same  sentence for  the  history  of  sci­ ence  generally. In  Canada, with  our  history  of political  histories,  we  stand   in   need   of  sub­ stantially  more   analyses  of  the   relations  be­ tween  the sciences  and  our  broad  cultural heri­ tage  than  we  have,  and  Shortt's book  is there­ fore   a   doubly  welcome   contribution  to   our understanding of ideas.  "Doubly," because the essays  it  brings  together are  themselves fascin­ ating to  read. They range in  stance  from  the  solemnly statistical  to  the   wryly  amused, and  they  range in  topic  from  the  impact of partic­ ular  diseases   (influenza,  cholera, smallpox)  to attitudes towards  insanity, antisepsis, abortion, and   public   health.   Connecting  most   clearly with  intellectual  history are  essays  by  Michael Bliss on  Christian beliefs  about  sexuality in  the nineteenth  century, and   by  Veronica  Strong­ Beag  on  medicine and  feminism.  With  an  ex­ cellent guide  to  further  reading  in  the  field,  this  is  a book   that  thoughtful   readers of  lit­ erature will  find  well  worth  reflecting upon.

W.N.

****   Gathering  What  the Great Nature  Pro­ vided. Douglas & Mcintyre and  Univ. of  Wash­ ington Press,  $18.95·   This  book-about the  food  traditions of  the  Gitskan peoples, assem­ bled  by  the  residents of 'Ksan village-is  un­  usually  rich  with  information. Not  only  does  it contain  details  on  the   foods  available  to  the Tsimshian  before and   after   the  European ar­ rival,   it   also  explains  cooking methods,  and  offers  indirect  glimpses of  the  code   of  ethics which   related  food   to   the   human  place  in Nature. The illustrations by Hilary Stewart are basic,  but  clear; the  photographs would   have been  more  instructive in colour.
W.N.

***  WILLIAM MANSELL & GARY  LOW, North American   Birds  of  Prey.  Gage,  $29·95·    "I have  seen  exactly twice  as many  merlins in  the past  twenty years  as  I had  in  the  same  period preceding,"'   writes   Mansell,  the    Globe   &

160
 
Mail's  nature columnist; then he adds the  kind of  phrase that  lifts   his  text   from   descriptive copy   into delightful essay:    "But statistics do not   say   why,   and    that  is  what I'd  like   to know." He   enquires  beyond   surface  informa­ tion,  in  other words,  and reflects  on  the  habits of  birds   and    the   habits  of   falconers   besides. The fascination and  the  nature of  the  fascina­ tion   with   birds   of  prey  are   both   his  subject. Low's paintings, all   in  colour, are   handsome designs, but  static-pictured against a  back­  drop rather  than in  nature.
w.N.

***    BELL, 1.   WILEY,  ed.   Slaves   No  More: Letters  from Liberia  IB33-186g. Univ. Press  of Kentucky, $21.50.   During  the  three decades before   the   American  Civil   War, many   slaves were  purchasing their  freedom; others were granted it; still  others fled  to freedom-many of  them   to Canada, where settlements became established  in   Nova   Scotia  and   on   the   Gulf Islands. A  large   group returned  to  a  part of Africa they  had  culturally scarcely more  to do with  than they  did  with  Canada:  Liberia. But at  least   they   were   "free."  This  collection of
1173 letters back  to  the  Old  Country (i.e.,  the U.S.A.)  records many of  the  problems of  cul­ tural dislocation. "I  take   this  opportunity of droping these  few  lines  as  a  man of  much   re­ spect," writes  one  man.  "We  land   on  the  fare  shores   of  Liberia  safe  and   with   a  little diffi­ culty. Sence   the  attack  of  the  African fever  I have  enjoy good  health, so have  father. Mother had   several   severe   attack. . . . Both   of   them  send  there  love  to  you  both  hopeing that your  latter  days  may  be  more  prosperous than your  former  has  been,   glorous, honable, and   inde­ pendence."   Such   sentences-and  those   that follow, pleading for  "good chool  Books"  to  be sent-convey   the   pressures  and   the   aspira­ tions   of  a   time   more   vividly than   scores   of formal histories.
W.N.

***   OSCAR WHITE   MUSCARELLA, Ladders  to Heaven. McClelland & Stewart, $4o.oo.   This is a handsome book-a coffee  table  book  with meaning, a catalogue with  information in  it,  a visually  clear  and  scholarly introduction  to  the "art treasures from  Lands of the  Bible." As the foreword avers, the   catalogue  (for   an  exhibi­ tion  originally presented at the  Royal  Ontario Museum) is a  record of  ancient  artifacts and  also  an   exploration  of  the  collective art   and
-in   large    degree-shared    culture  of   the lands and  religious systems  of the  Middle East.
The writers intend it  to be consequently a trib-

ON  THE VERGE



ute  to  the  unity  of  the  spiritual aspirations of mankind. Perhaps more  directly it is a reader's guide-with  maps, transcriptions,  interpreta­ tions,  and   illustrations. Those in  colour make  one long  for more  in colour. But the  black-and­ white ones  serve  scholarship,  and   the  scholar­ ship  throughout  is substantial.
 takes over.  Influenced by Angkor Wat  and Japanese  gardeners,  Erickson has   revelled   in the  impact of  intersecting planes. Now  if only he   could   become  fascinated  by   texture and colour as  well. ...
W.N.

w.N. 	***  D.   J. HALL,  Clifford   Sifton. Volume I: The Young Napoleon, z86z-zyoo. $27.50.

***   REBECCA  SISLER,   Passionate  Spirits:   A
History   of the   Royal   Canadian  Academy   of
Arts,   z88o-zy8o. Clarke  Irwin,  $35.00.   In
r88o   the   Marquis  of   Lome  established  the
Canadian  Academy, in   response  to   the   im­
pulses  of current Canadian artists and  his own enthusiasm  for   an   establishment  that  would give  public recognition to an  essentially private cultural endeavour. Academics, as sculptor Re­ becca  Sisler  observes, have   become  symbols  of Establishment since  then-certainly  the  Ca­ nadian Academy's various internal  tensions and  its initial lack  of  warmth towards the  Group of Seven, for  example, have marked it  as  a  con­  servative   structure -yet   the    Academy  has helped  grant respectability to the  leading edges of   modern  art   as   well.   Simply  by  being   an institutional  rather  than  a   cultural   history, however, this  book  pales  too  often into lists  of bureaucratic officers. There is information here, undoubtedly, for   future  art  historians -and the  work  is  handsomely  illustrated-but  one longs   yet  for   a  Canadian  equivalent to  Ber­ nard Smith's European  Vision and  the  South  Pacific,  a  work   about  ideas   and   attitudes  as well  as about the  politics of  membership.
W.N.

***   EDITH IGLAUER, Seven  Stones, A Portrait of  Arthur   Erickson, Architect. Harbour  Pub­ lishing/Univ.  of   Washington  Press,   $29-95· Richly  illustrated,   with     architectural   plans and   drawings as  well   as  photographs  (many in  colour)  of  Erickson's remarkable  buildings, Seven  Stones  is  a  quietly  insightful  study,  by a   journalist  and    enthusiast,  of   the   shaping mind   behind  Erickson's shaping  style.  It  pro­ ceeds   by  interview  and   reports  by   means of much     quotation.   Hence   Erickson    himself: "Concrete is as noble  a material as limestone." And   Erickson again:  There  must   be  a  "dia­ logue" between  form  and  site.  And   Iglauer: he is "a witty,  semi-mystical, not  at  all  humble man  in   his   mid-fifties." And,   revealingly,  a fellow  architect: he  "designs  [buildings] as  a visitor. The kids  at Simon  Fraser do  get  tired  of  being part  of   a   designed  experience,  no matter  how   Zen   and   open-minded...."  Re­ peatedly,   however,  the    force  of   the   designs
 There are  figures in  Canadian history   whom
one  looks back  on  with  about the  same  degree of  affection as  one  might accord a  sixteenth­ century  condottiere.   They  were   there;  they were   powerful;  they   profoundly  affected  the country's history; they  were  in  some  ways  ad­  mirable and  in  most  ways  unloveable. William Van  Home was  one  of  them  and  Clifford Sif­ ton  another. Sifton  deserves a  biography, and  D.  J. Hall   is  providing  it  as  a  massive   two­ decker. The  first   volume,  to   1900,   contains much  of the  important part of Sifton's career: his  period  as  a  provincial  minister, his  entry into  national politics, his  immigration  policies which drastically changed  the  ethnic and  cul­ tural  makeup of  Canada, his  entry  into   the newspaper world. It  is  full   of   public   detail and  skimpy  on  private, for  Sifton  was  in  some ways a  reticent man. It is good  at  spotting the main   trends and   the  connections,  but  written in  a  kind  of  utility prose  whose  outbreaks into  eloquence tend   to  be  disastrous.  Eg. :   "A   re­ markable iron   will  asserted itself,  a  fierce  de­  termination  to   overcome  the   handicap  and  prove  himself."
o.w.

***  CLAUDE BISSELL,  The  Young  Vincent Massey. Univ.  of   Toronto  Press, $22.50. There are few Canadians whose image has tarnished  so   rapidly  after  death  as   that  of Vincent Massey.  Once he  was valued as giving a  lustre to  the   image of  Canada abroad and as  one  of  the  fosterers at  home   of  a  distinc­ tively  Canadian culture. More  recently  he  has been  seen  as  a  social  snob,  a  cultural elitist, a political  opportunist,   and    even    a   religious climber who  ascended out  of   the  Methodists, not  into  the   Anglican  Church of  Canada but  into   the  Church  of   England, where he  man­ aged   to  be  confirmed  by  the   Archbishop  of Canterbury   himself.  An   aura  of   the   pettily ambitious  now   hangs  over   his  name, and   a suspicion  that  his  desire  to  turn himself   into an  untitled aristocrat made him  betray Cana­ dian   democratic traditions. The time  has  cer­ tainly   come  for  an   adjusting of  the  balance, a  new   recognition of  Massey's real  contribu­ tions  to  the  making of  modern  Canada, and

ON THE  VERGE



also  perhaps an  admission that if a man  is not gifted   in  the  arts, a  civilized   dilettantism  like Massey's   may   well   be   the   next   best   thing. Claude Bissell attempts this  task in The Young Vincent  Massey, which takes  Massey's  life  up to  1935,  when he  became High  Commissioner in  London. Thus some  of  the  most  interesting years  of  his  life  are yet  to come,  including the period  of  the  Massey  Commission. Bissell bases his  book  "primarily on  Vincent Massey's  pri­ vate  papers," and  rarely shows  Massey through outside views  except his  own,  which  is  favour­ able.   He   writes    with   his   usual   fluency   and  grace, and   there is  a  blandness   to  the   book which    comes   partly  from   its   consistency  of approval,  but   is  partly  also  a  reflection, one feels, of  his  subject's nature.  We still  need  the balanced  study  of  the   heir  to new  industrial money   seeking  his  way  into  the   preserves  of old  aristocratic wealth, and  serving his country remarkably on  the  way.
G.W.

***  THOMAS  BERGER, Fragile  Freedoms: Hu­ man   Rights  and   Dissent   in   Canada.  Clarke Irwin,  n.p.     Thomas  Berger   dropped  out   of active  politics  to   become   a   Supreme   Court Justice, but   in   a  very  important  way  he  has never   been   other   than   political,  since   he   is deeply   concerned for   the   freedom and   rights  of  the  minorities in  Canada's avowedly  plural­ ist society, whether  they  are  native  peoples, or ethnic groups, or  people   who  hold  unpopular opinions.  His    great   single   contribution  was Northern  Frontier,  Northern   Homeland,  the
1977  report of  his  one-man commission on  the Mackenzie Valley  Pipeline in which  he showed a  clearer recognition than earlier official  rep­ resentatives of  the   fundamental  rights  of   the  native peoples of  the  North. Fragile  Freedoms is  an   extension  of  this   concern to  other mi­ norities  whose    rights  are   or   have   been   en­ dangered in  the  process  of  developing a Cana­ dian unity which  politicians have  perhaps too often seen   in   nationalist  rather  than  confed­ eral   terms.   He  writes  of   the   Acadians,  the M·etis, and  the  francophones in provinces other than  Quebec, of  the  Japanese  banished from  the  Pacific  Coast in  World War   II, of  perse­ cutions  of   Communists  and   Jehovah's   Wit­ nesses, of the  implications of the  1970 invoking of  the  War   Measures Act,  and  of  the  struggle of  the  Nishga Indians  to  win  their  aboriginal rights   to  land. Surprisingly, for  a  British   Co­  lumbian,  he   neglects  one   of  the  other  great civil  liberties struggles in  Canada,  that   of  the Doukhobors to  be  allowed to live  according to their beliefs.  These essays  were  originally  lee-
 tures   for   a  civil   liberties  seminar,  and   those familiar with  Canadian history will find  little original research in  them. What is fresh  and important is  the   way   Berger   holds   a   mirror before us, showing how  often the  majority has in   our   country  oppressed  the   minority, and stressing  the   fact  that  only   if  the   minorities are  safeguarded can   we  think of  ourselves as truly democratic.
G.W.

**   CECIL J.  HOWTON  &  WILLIAM J.  SMITH, The  Sash    Canada  Wore.  Univ.  of   Toronto Press, $15.oo.   The Orange Order, like other fraternal organizations, has  long  had  an  appeal in   Canada.  Such    organizations  were    partly social,   partly  ideological, and    they   had   the effect  of institutionalizing various social  norms. To trace the  growth of the  Orange Order is therefore to  trace the  spread of a set  of  ideas; for  students of  Canadian  writing possibly  the most   useful function  of  this  book  therefore  is its  revelation of  the  interrelation between  cul­ ture  and   historical   geography.   Contrary   to popular  belief, geography is  a  person-centred discipline  as   well   as  one   enamoured  of   the  land.  The  authors,   literate   social   scientists, make  ample use of  statistics and  maps; if  their generalizations  about  the   spread  of  Loyalism seem  perhaps  overinclusive, their methodology is instructive.
W.N.

**   JANE   CORKIN,  Twelve Canadians:  Con­
temporary Canadian Photography. McClelland
& Stewart, n.p.     "In order to create a legend," says  photographer  John  Reeves, "you   have   to photograph and   talk  and write and   talk   and photograph ... with   care ... and  ... often." "Often" isn't   shown   much by  this  slim  book, but  it does  demonstrate "with care" some select examples of  the  current art  of  Canadian  pho­ tography.  Reeves himself, Robert   Bourdeau, David  Hlynsky,  and   Volker   Seding   are   the  most  impressive practitioners,  their work  rang­ ing from Bourdeau's delight in visual  texture to Hlynsky's  holographic   magic,  from    Reeves's revelations  of   personality   to  Seding's  techni­ cally  contrived  images of  revelation. Sensible commentaries accompany the  sharp plates,  al­ though-if  they  are  invitations to a  legend­ the  legend itself  remains unclear.
W.N.

**  WAYNE  BARRETT &  ANNE MACKAY, The St. fohn River Valley. Oxford, $15.95;  JOHN   DE VISSER,  Upper Canada Village. Oxford, $15.95· The latest in  Oxford's visual  glimpses of  Ca-

ON THE VERGE



nadian regions look  at history arranged in Ontario and   history ill-at-ease in  New  Bruns­ wick.   De   Visser's  photographs  are   the  more consistently  fine:   crisp    glances at   artifacts, trades, and  people in   costume.  But  Barrett's and   Mackay's portray  a   region   doing  battle with   its  own   image:   nineteenth-century  pas­ toralism  and   an   apparent  industrial  reliance seem   to  counter  each   other. It's a  more   dy­ namic view  of  history than De  Visser  is able  to provide, and  to some  degree an  illumination of the  differences between a  static region-by-defi­ nition and  an active region-in-space-and-time.

W.N.

**  GABRIELLE ROY et aJ., Chapeau bas. Les Editions du   B!e, n.p.     This book   is  a  set  of six   memoirs  by   people   associated  with    the
Manitoba  French  theatre  and    the   world    of music.  Illustrated and  fragmentary, it  is there­ fore best  seen  as a kind  of scrapbook, in  which  Gabrielle  Roy's  own   piece   is  central.  It  pro­  vides   a  glimpse of  her  amateur  theatrical ca­  reer  with  Le  Cercle Moliere in  the  late I 93o's,  but   more   than   that, her   essay  is  a  personal testament;  theatre became for  her,  she  writes, a  porte  ouverte-to "life" and  to  wider  hori­ zons.
W.N.

*  PETER  DESBARATS,   Canada  Lost,  Canada Found. McClelland &  Stewart, $oo.oo.     Can­ ada  Lost, Canada Found  is perhaps as good  an example as  one  can  find   of  how   lost  and   be­ wildered even  Canadians who  think  themselves informed  have   become. Peter  Desbarats is  an experienced journalist with   a  series  of  reason­ ably   perceptive  books   to   his   credit.  But   his latest, a  passionate tract  for  the  times  of  con­  fusion, is itself  an  example of what it criticizes. For  Desbarats is  no  more  able  than any  of  the commentators  who   cling to  outworn  political orthodoxies  to  offer   a  timely   solution  to  our  ills. He complains that we are indeed the  most over-governed country in  the  world, and  goes a long  way  towards proving it  with  his evidence regarding  the   growing  power   of  the   various bureaucracies-federal, provincial, municipal
-- who  roost   upon our   backs.   Yet,  failing to see  that  Macdonald's  National  Policy   is  the J..:" oric
ments, and  that Pierre Trudeau's drive  for "unity" has  produced  merely deeper divisions, he still seems to find  the  possibility of a solution in  some  new  centralism that  would   curb  pro­ vincial autonomies that  would   turn   them  to positive use.
o.w.
 Among  recent reference books  are  several with narrow but  particular uses, including  Contem­ porary   Authors,  102   (Gale,  $66.oo)    with   a
9-column sketch  (by  B.  H.  May)  and  inter­
view   (by  C.  H. Gervais)  concerning Gordon Sinclair; it  is of  interest primarily for  its  por­ trait of Sinclair in  the  1920's and  193o's, when he  was  a  political journalist with  remarkable energy,  and    for   Sinclair's   connections  with  Hemingway. Something  About the  Author, 24 (Gale, $44.00)  also  has  a  9-column commen­ tary,  this  time  on  Archibald  Belaney, and   pri­  marily of  use  to  those   who  see  Belaney  as  a children's author-biographical material, with  quotations  and   references for  further reading. The  24-column entry   on  John Galt, in  Nine­ teenth  Century  Literary  Criticism,  1    (Gale,
$ss.oo)  contains "excerpts from  contemporary criticism," by  which    (this  new  series   advises us)   is  meant  quotations  from  nineteenth-cen­ tury   journalism; the  promise  and   the  fact   are  curiously different:  the   Galt   excerpts  date from   1805  to  1976,  and  the  additional  bibli­  ography unaccountably  omits   all  reference to Elizabeth Waterston's  valuable commentary on Galt   in  Canada. The  Directory  of  Canadian Plays  and   Playwrights   (Playwrights, n.p.)   is a  catalogue list  of  plays  available from  several different  publishers,  but  is more   than that; it contains  brief   biographies, indications of  run­ ning  times,  lists  of forthcmning plays,  and  still more data-and  is a handy resource for  thea­ tre   historians  and    dramaturges.  Of   another dimension  in   reference  books   are    Frank J. Wilstach's A Dictionary of Similes ( 1916; Gale rpt.,  $gg.oo)  and   Metaphors We   Live   By,  by a  linguist, George  Lakoff, and   a  philosopher, Mark  Johnson   (Univ.  of   Chicago, $13.95). Wilstach's Dictionary indexes various writers' similes   under  a  series   of  keywords,  for   what purpose is difficult to  know; looking up  shine, florid,  and   beard, we  can   discover Kipling's "pile of  fish"   which   "shone  like   a  dump  of fluid  silver," Anon.'s "florid  as  a  milk-maid," and  Sheridan's "beard like  an  artichoke,  with dry  shrivelled jaws":  memorable phrases, all. The Lakoff   and   Johnson book  is  more   of  an enquiry into  the   process   of  human  thought, which   the   authors  take   to  be  largely   meta­ phorical, indicating that metaphor  means con­  cept, and   that an  empirical fear  of  metaphor derives  from  a fear  of subjectivity.  Some  of the metaphorical clusters it  probes include notions of future (involving virtue, the  rational, "up") and  past  (involving gravity, the emotional, and
"down"),  containers, conduits, creation,  cau­ sation, etc.  Burdened  by  its   jargon, the  book is  more   seriously  flawed   by  its   cultural   bias,

ON THE  VERGE



of which  the  authors seem  unaware; repeatedly they  talk  of "human" resources, when  in  prac­ tice  (as a wider  grasp of world  literature would teach them)  they  mean  "Judaeo-Christian" in broad terms  and "American" in  narrow.
In some ways, books of humour are  reference books  also; we  read   them   in  fragments, and usually   find   only   parts of  them   to  be  funny. So  it  is  with   The  Maple  Laugh Forever, ed. Douglas Barbour  and   Steven Scobie   (Hurtig,
$18.95; pa.  $7.95), a  salutary reminder that Canadians do  laugh; Maple is a kind  of update of The Blasted  Pine, and  gives every  indication of a shift  in  what  the  society  finds  funny. This book   is  full   of  contemporary   ironies,  mostly about sex  and  language (as  in  works  by Gom and    Ondaatje),   often  more    pointed  than funny; it   also  seems   to   presume that  196o's rebelliousness  is  intrinsically  funny,  which   is true   often   enough  to   cause   one   to   wonder. Duncan Macpherson's Daily  smile  Sourire  quo­ tidien (PAC, $12.95) is an  exhibition of  Mac­ pherson's  newspaper  cartoons-good   on  in­ ternational  figures, superb on  Dief  and  Pierre, less   persuasive   in   its   moralist   moods,    and  downright bad  on people  (Bennett, Lyon) who are   clearly sketched  from  imagination rather than  life;  significantly,  Macpherson  says  it's  the  cynic  in  him,  not  the  moralist, that  reacts to situations.
Two recent reprints are  of interest. Laura Goodman  Salverson's Confessions of an  Immi­ grant's    Daughter  (Univ.  of   Toronto   Social  History of Canada Series, $go.oo; pa. $15.00), with  an  introduction by K.  P. Stich, is "a rare  first   person   account of  growing up  Icelandic in  the  New  World"  between 1890  and   1923,  and   is  of  interest  to  readers  concerned  with autobiographical and  fictional  method, ethnic history, feminism, and   Salverson alone. The "confessional nature" of  the  book, Stich writes,  imparts an   "authenticity"  to   the   book,   but never  tells all. Indeed not.  But  it  does  tell  you about childhood, school, religion, and  homelife, in sufficient detail to  depict   a place  and  a cul­ ture  and  a  time.  I like  the  conversational  con­ trol   Salverson manages  here -the  "fictional­ izing" of  her  past,  which  paradoxically brings  it  to  life.  Another  voice  from  the  past  is  that of  Captain John Knox,  not  the  theologian but an  Irish-born army officer  in  the  North Ameri­ can  campaigns of  the  mid-eighteenth century, whose   journal is  a  source book  for  details on the  life  and  times  of  a  soldier. First  published in    1 769,   the   journal   reappeared  from    the Champlain   Society  in   1914,   then  from   the Folio Society in  1976; with  an  introduction by Brian  Connell, it  appears again from   Pendra-
 gon  House  ($5.95)  as  The Siege   of  Quebec. Maps and  lithographs illustrate the  work; but it is most  vigorous in its  records of sights  at sea, its  accounts of  rations and  comparative  prices in  Nova   Scotia and Ireland, its  details about the  animals of the  new  world  and  the  pressures of  moving camp, its  list  of  the  army orders at the   siege   of  Quebec,  its   portraits  of  Wolfe, Murray, and  Montcalm, and  its documentation of  the   British   consolidation  in   Quebec after the  Battle of the  Plains of Abraham. A  source­ book,  it  remains an  account of  one  man's war,  however, a testament to duty and  the  watchful soldier's eye for  significant detail.
W.N.
