$r .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·4



Spring, 1960


PAl"L \\"EST:
Ethos  and  Epic

Hl7GO :\iCl'llERSO.:-f   on
Robertson Davies


JOH"' \\1.  BIL LAXD
Wilfred  \Natson

PIERRE  BERTON  on
Gold  Rush  Writing

:\fARGUERITE A. PRI:\1£,\U  on
Gra tien  Gelinas

:MICHAEL R.  BOOTH  on
Pioneer Entertainment


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








ON THE CULTIVATION OF LAURELS



IN CERTAIN couNTRIES literary  prizes are major  events in  the  world  of letters  and  in the lives of individual writers.  The  Prix Goncourt, for instance, carries such prestige among the middlebrow read­ ing public in France that it can multiply many times the sales of a winning book. The  effect of this situation on literary  manners had not always been edifying.  Some  writers  stand  proudly  aside;  the  best are  among  them.  Others are swept  into the currents of competition and intrigue that  swirl each  year  around the  awarding of the  major  French  prizes. Whatever else  the  Prix Goncourt and  its rivals  may  have  done  for  literature in France, they  have  not encouraged dignity  among writers.
In Canada we have our own literary  prizes -and they are surprisingly
numerous when  one comes to investigate  them-but up to now we have been  saved,  perhaps by public indifference, the  worse  hazards of the French system. The  winning of a Governor-General's Award  makes com­ paratively little  difference to the sales of a Canadian book, and, so far at least as our  better  prizes are concerned, their  most negative result seems to have  been a little  mild envy among authors.
Of course,  there  is a good case to be made  against  any kind of annual
literary  award. For  the  best of  juries are  all too fallible,  particularly in short-run  judgments of this  kind. Two  y,ears ago  a  Monaco  bookseller showed me a complete set of books that  had  won the Prix  Goncourt. To look at the titles was a salutary  experience; the number of honoured and justly  forgotten books was only less impressive  than  the number of  un­ honoured  masterpieces written   during   the  same  period.  And  France, manifestly, is not  the  only country  where  such  errors  of  judgment can occur.

3

EDITORIAL



Yet, with all their faults, literary  prizes have existed since those distant days when Sophocles and Euripides competed for the Athenian dramatic laurels,  and  their  incessant  proliferation makes  it seem  likely that  they will be with  us as long as nuclear  fission permits. In  these circumstances the best we can do is to make sure that  they become as effective a means as is humanly devisable of recognising good work.
The  recent  revision of the system of Governor-General's Awards  repre­
sents at least a move in that  direction, though  there  is much  to criticize both  in  the  changes  that  have  been made  and  in the  manner of their making.  Let  us first consider  the latter  question.
The  Awards  were started during  John  Buchan's term  of office at  the
suggestion of the Canadian Authors'  Association.  At first the Association administered the  awards; later  it  tactfully  handed over the selection  of the  winning  books to a virtually  autonomous Awards  Board,  though  it continued to  pay  for  the  medals-unaccompanied by cash  prizes­ which  were  given  to  the  winners.  Some  time  ago  the  Awards  Board, apparently without  formally  notifying  the  Canadian  Authors' Associa­ tion, approached the  Canada Council  for assistance  in reorganising the system of awards and in providing cash prizes to accompany them. There was no suggestion, it should be emphasised,  that the Canada Council itself might  actually  "take over" or administer the Awards; at the same time, the  Council  clearly  had  a considerable say in the  changes  in procedure and in the reorganisation of the Awards Board.  During the negotiations, it appears, the Canadian Authors' Association was not consulted; an edi­ torial  in the  February issue of its magazine,  The Canadian Author  and Bookman, states  categorically  that  "neither the  Awards Board  nor  the Council  people  bothered  to let the CAA know what  was being discussed or contemplated." One does not have to be a partisan of the CAA to be perturbed by the lack of courtesy and tact shown in this instance  towards  the  organisation  which,  whatever  its merits  in other  respects,  first sug­ gested  the  Governor-General's awards  and  then  had  the  good sense to set up a virtually  independent Awards  Board.
The  Awards  themselves  have  been changed radically under  the  new
dispensation. The  number  of categories  has  been  reduced, and  separate prizes are now granted within each category for both English and  French works. There is no longer an obligation  on the Board  to make awards un­ less books of sufficiently high quality  are submitted to them. And, finally,

4

EDITORIAL



a cash prize of $I ,ooo is now a part  of each Award.
All these  changes,  while  they  do not create  an  ideal  system,  are im­ provements. At first I had doubts about  the abandonment of the five past categories of fiction,  poetry,  creative  non-fiction,  academic  non-fiction and   juvenile  literature in  favour  of  three  new  categories  described  as "poetry and  drama, fiction and drama, and non-fiction". A review of the awards over  a sample  decade ( 1948 to 1957)  convinced me of the wis­ dom  of this change. The  poetry  awards  had  indeed stood up very well; only one out  of ten  went  to a book which  now appears worthy  of little attention. Of  the  fiction  prizes, at  least five were  given  to books which still seem of more than  ephemeral importance. But, with few exceptions, the  thirty  books honoured in the other  three  categories  now present  an intimidating array  of  earnest  second-rateness.  In  other  words,  perhaps twenty  good books were granted awards in ten years, and  thirty books re­ ceived awards they did not deserve just because the prizes had to be given. Yet,  at  the  same  time, a number  of good authors  and  good  books went without recognition  by the Awards  Board during  this decade.
The  new arrangement at least ensures that  second-rate books will not be honoured merely  because  there  is nothing  better,  and  the  prestige  of the  Awards  should  rise accordingly.  But there  is still no guarantee that the  judges will be any more  adept at spotting  real talent  than their pre­ decessors have been, and  what  seems lacking in the programme is a pro­ vision  for  recognizing  the  author who  has  produced work  of  acknow­ ledged  excellence  over a number  of years, yet has never been granted an Award.
The  addition of cash  awards  is certainly  to be welcomed.  If one pre­ sents laurels,  there  is everything to be said for gilding  them. What sur­ prises one in this case is the thinness of the gilt. It is true that the $1,000 presented by the Council  should prevent  a recurrence of  those past occa­ sions when  impecunious authors could  not afford  the  journey  to receive their cashless awards. But, as Sally Creighton insisted in a CBC discussion a year  or so ago, a cash  prize should  be substantial enough  to help  the writer  as a writer-in other  words to give him time to write  or ruminate peacefully  upon his craft. $1,ooo pays for little writing or rumination, and Mrs.  Creighton argued very reasonably  when, on the same occasion, she suggested  $s,ooo as  an  amount that  would  give a  writer  not  merely money, but  that  much  more  valuable commodity,  leisure-a period  of

5

EDITORIAL



freedom from the teaching or radio or TV or whatever other way of earn­ ing a living keeps the writer in question, like almost all Canadian writers,  from  concentrating on the books he really wants to write.
One result of the new arrangement for the Governor-General's Awards has been a temporary banishment to the wilderness of a number of other awards sponsored  independently but  presented at  the same  time  as the major prizes;  no place has been found  for them  within  the new scheme. They  include the Leacock Medal for Humour, the Beta Sigma Phi award for  the  best first novel of the  year,  the  University  of Western  Ontario's medals  for articles,  short stories and  poems published in periodicals, and the  UBC  Medal for  Popular Biography. As I  write  in  late  March the future policies of the sponsors for  these  awards still  appear undecided. There is, of course, no reason why they should not continue independent­ ly,  and  perhaps do more individual good  by moving  away  from  the shadow  of the Governor-General's Awards.  If this happens, their  judges might   with  profit  adopt  the  procedure of  withholding prizes  when  no first-rate book or  article  appears; most of  these prizes have  on occasion been given to works which could not possibly have been honoured except on  the  basis of a  better-than-nothing attitude.
Not  all  awards, of course,  are  given  for  published work.  There are others,  which  may be the most useful, connected with  contests  that  aim at  encouraging the  production of specific kinds  of writing.  One  of the more  interesting is the play-writing contest  started by the Stratford Foundation last  year. The  results of the  first competition have  been en­ couraging, particularly since  so  far  in  Canada  dramatic writers  have tended, through lack of theatres, to work mostly for radio  and television. Eighty  plays were submitted. Ten  were worthy  of serious consideration, and   the  judges  had  no misgivings in  awarding the  three prizes.
These   are  our  Canadian laurels.  They  are  growing,  considering the climate, into a  respectable  little shrubbery, but  they still need  trimming and  training before  they become as handsome as they might  be. Let  us hope,  however,  that  they never become so handsome as to make us forget that  no award of a year's  end is more than  a provisional  token of  excel­ lence, and  that  no official accolade  replaces  the long testing in the minds of readers and writers by which a book is finally crowned with the laurels  that  do not wither.



6



ETHOS
AND	EPIC

Paul West



ASPECTS OF   CONTEMPORARY CAN ADIAN POETRY

AN OUTSIDER  who has read  no  Canadian poets might  justifiably expect  them  to supply something  rather American: the frontier rather than  the sophisticated, the blunt rather than  the subtle, the
heroic  rather than  the  maisonette, the didactic  rather than  the oblique. He  might  add  something about the  unlikeliness, for  a  long  time, of aestheticism and  preciosity; and  there  he stops. Not all that  is distinctly Canadian bears  upon  poetry written  by Canadians. Much  that  is Ameri­ can  does. The  outsider  deserves some sympathy,  as well as licence to get as personal  as he  likes. For  (and  here  I must  judge  by  my own experi­ ence)  there  are  many  subtle  differences from the European and Ameri­  can  traditions. With  those I cannot  be concerned here. But I do want  to examine three  aspects  which  seem reasonably  obvious:  the first two go together-the sharply  visual quality  of much Canadian poetry, and the unpoeticised bluntness  of tone;  the  third  is a  potentiality which  I hope will come to something like an  epic of  heterogeneous daily life.
Canadian poets writing now seem to have at their disposal most of the
European modes. The  Parnassian keeps pace with the Whitmanish when one might  have  expected the latter  to dominate  the scene with  barbaric yawp,  rambling exposition  and  asymmetrical shape.  There is a strong tradition of it in the United  States, sustained  in varying  ways by William Carlos  ,Williams, Robinson Jeffers, E. E. Cummings and  such  poems as Allan Ginsberg's Howl. It is the sort of thing produced when the picares­ que sensibility tries to write  poems; it is far from the lapidary, but it does not seem to predominate in Canada any more  than  it does in America.

7

ETHOS   AND  EPIC



At  one  extreme we have  something  like Louis  Dudek's Europe; at  the other,  the  Parnassian  (Robert Graves-like)  poems of Jay  Macpherson. It  would  be idle  to propose  a  dichotomy: obviously, at  times,  the  two modes  mingle; obviously most poets attempt both  modes  of expression, although they  usually  manage  one  end  of  the  formal  spectrum better than  the other-Dudek and Raymond Souster the Whitmanish, Miss Macpherson and  R. A. D. Ford  the Parnassian.
But having  proposed the extremes as points of reference  at least, let me
allude  to them  at once by saying that  I think  the Whitmanish mode more suited to what  I find the essentially Canadian manner of utterance. There is a  brusqueness,  a visual punchiness  about  this  utterance which  might seem to evoke, say, Carl Sandburg or Carlos Williams,  but which is in fact less literary and  less overlaid  with allusions. Take  Irving  Layton's magni­ ficent poem, The  Bull Calf, for instance:


Struck,
the bull calf drew in his thin forelegs
as if gathering strength for a mad  rush  . tottered . . . raised his darkening eyes to us, and  I saw we were at the far end
of his frightened look, growing smaller  and  smaller till we were only the ponderous mallet
that  flicked his bleeding  ear
and  pushed  him over on his side, stiffly, like a block of wood.


This is the mallet  rather  than  the lyre -for good reasons:  the poem has to suggest  the  brutality of a necessary  indifference. But,  just as in  this instance  it is particularly true,  so it is true  generally  that  the  thumping, emphatic and  non-iambic quality  of Canadian poetry  lingers in the ear and  prodigiously  enriches  its moments  of tenderness. (Norman Levine's reading  of this poem on the BBC Third Programme made  this even more evident: Mr. Levine's deadpan voice, which  Canada made, seemed to fit the poem extremely well. An Englishman reading the same poem would sound  stagey  and  would  probably  force  upon  the  lines rhythms of  the wrong  kind.)   The  curt context  has no sound  of the literarised, and  that explains  why an  etiolated  and  almost  hackneyed word  like 'beautiful' is restored  to an astonishing,  pre-Tennysonian power:

8

ETHOS   AND EPIC



Settled, the bull calf lay as if asleep, one foreleg  over  the other,
bereft of pride and  so beautiful now,
without movement, perfectly  still in the cool pit, I turned away  and  wept.


In that,  the poem's conclusion, 'bereft' comes to us from an archaic world of 'poesy'; but instead  of sticking out like a sore muse, it is subsumed  by the regenerated word  'beautiful'. Regeneration in poetry is always an art of context.  That is why the sudden  self-exposure  of the last line escapes the  trite; we can  think  of other  lines which might  have preceded it and would have degraded it into a conventional trope. For example:

I strayed through the midst of the city On,  through the  lovely Archipelago; That night  I felt the winter  in my veins; Was it a year or lives ago
I turned away  and  wept?


That doesn't  quite  make  sense:  the  first line is Lampman, the  second Charles Sangster, the  third  Wilfred  Campbell and  the fourth  Bliss Car­ man.  But the lines' connotations might evoke, say, James Thomson's The  City of Dreadful  Night or certain  parts of In Memoriam. The  tradition­ ally poetic  voice, with  its usual images,  terms  of grief and  approbation, rhythms,  rhymes  and  calls to attention,  renders  certain words  impotent and  creates  a monotony  of tone. It is the singular  asset of the Canadian voice that  it can  manage potent contrasts  by giving its utterances a dis­ hevelled,  unsystematic look:  there  is little  concern  with  attracting the reader's eye to the  maintenance of form.  Life and  meditation are  pres­ ented  in a manner  no more  symmetrical  or homogeneous than  that  of a newspaper page. But this manner  can make the trivial arresting, make us look thoroughly at things over-familiar. Here is an example of this typic­ ally  haphazard,  disjointed way  of  writing;  the  excerpt   is from  Jean Arsenault's Canada  Canto, published  in Delta Number Eight:

And  poor suckers  bring their  pennies to upstairs
office, "bring coppers on time", shouts  Joe

9

ETHOS   AND EPIC



As Riel wrote  to Grant, but that's all past & ever}'lthing west of Ontario went Canadian, with  its black  oil,
& rushing  gas
So, it's  penny interest  now,
each copper  counted, added, subtracted, multiplied, divided  to make
principle, all added  to Joe's acct.

The  Poundian gimmicks  and  money-mania apart,  not  to  mention   the signs of a faltering parody,  this passage does bring  into relief some of the dull data  of living. An old decorum  is being broken: there  is nothing that cannot  turn  up in such a medium. And in this respect  the poetry of indis­ criminate cataloguing fulfils  Santayana's demand for  attention  to  the world  about  us-as well as Berenson's fastidious plea for sheer physical impact.
Of course, it also opens the gate to all kinds of charlatanry, messy mus­
ing  and  feeble  posturing.  But, for  all its incoherence, it makes  easier  a poetry  that  seems to enact the very muddle it describes. This is the poetic method  of a booming, over-busy world;  it is omnivorous rather than exi­ guous, a satchel  rather than  a form.  It appears to be what  Louis Dudek has in mind  in his Functional  Poetry:  A Proposal, which appears in the same issue of Delta:

Williams of course
did the right  thing, so far as rhythm and  language go
He simply did  not have a lot  (enough) to say.
Williams  is a joy to read-the senses live
in his lines -the senses
are  a good  beginning
with  which to breach  the wall
of prose.

Such  a scattered presentation may  well be  an  excuse  for  not  trying  to write  either  prose or verse; but it may equally  well be an attempt to re­ place a useless dichotomy with a rich and flexible medium. True, it has so


10

ETHOS  AND EPIC



far  (in Pound  himself,  as well as in its Canadian practitioners)  released a torrent of self-conscious flippancy.  But perhaps this only indicates  that such a method, so close to rubbish, so apparently undisciplined, must oper­ ate  by means  of irony-its principal device being that  of ironic  juxta­  position  in  order  to convey  the  exact  impact  of a kaleidoscopic  world. Only time will show; and we should not expect from this method an abso­ lute of any kind, whether of lyricism or starkness, whether of  reportage or fantasy. The  synoptic, which is its aim, is a genre apart. And there are not likely to be any rules.




l:E PREREQUISITES  for  such  a  method  are  principally two:  a robust,  matter-of-fact tone  (which  I think  many modern Canad­ ian  poets  already  have)   and  a complete  view-of  worlds  pastoral, in­ dustrial, urban  and  commercial -which  most  of them  seem  to  lack. What  of the  tone?  It appears in the following, from Raymond Knister's The Plowmanas  a rural  factualness:

For Danny whistling slowly
'Down in Tennessee'
A fat  white shoat  by the trough
Lifts  his snout  a moment to hear,
Among  the guzzling  and slavering  comrades, Squeezing and  forcing   .  . .  .

It turns  up in this:  Train Window by Robert  Finch. The  ostentatiously impassive  sensibility  retails  the prosaic:

The truck  holds eleven cakes of ice, each  cake  a different size and  shape.
Some  look as though a weight had  hit them. One, solid glass, has a core of sugar.

Finch's  poem is every bit as 'poetic' as the world it depicts: the point is, if you are  sufficiently  attentive to the world, a straight account  will suffice. What  is poetic  is not in  the  technique, but in the object  contemplated. Finch seeks  to  intensify a deeply felt  perception; so does Raymond Souster's  Drunk: On  Crutcheswhich is boozily lyrical  in its hardboiled vernacular :


I I

ETHOS  AND   EPIC



Simply  being drunk  makes it
Tough enough to get around,
But a guy hobbling  on crutches­ How does he figure it at all?

There is in the Canadian voice, in this un-English voice that  I am notic­ ing, a matter-of-factness which is vocally what imagism  is visually. There is a reluctance to make the conventionally  poetic sounds and lilts:  this is it, says the poet, take it or don't. He isn't going to beguile us with euphony,  with rhythms  that  guide us like banisters, with images that  make the new familiar. Here, he seems to say, is a specimen-like a chunk of newspaper fitted  into  a  collage.  And  from  the  nature of the  presented object,  the "form" and  the  tone proceed.  W. W. E. Ross's The saws were shrieking shows this:

From  the  revolving of the saw
came slices of clear wood, newly sawn,
white  pine and  red,
or spruce  and  hemlock, the sweet spruce,
and  the sweet hemlock.

Wallace Stevens  would  have  turned  this into  a frenzied  baroque on the lines of his Bantams in Pinewoods. But Ross's lines could have come from Carlos Williams, with his creed of "No ideas but in things". Take  this:

so much  depends upon
a red wheel
barrow
glazed  with  rain water
beside the white chickens

That is Williams-the child's  innocent  and  undifferentiating eye, one stage before the elated wonder of Cummings. What  we are given, by both Ross  and  Williams,  is an  ideogram which  celebrates. This  is the  raw material chopped  up into assimilable  pieces, each of which  is a cause for wonder  and  a  good  reason  for lingering  longer  than  usual.  It is a sans

12

ETHOS   AND EPIC



culotte  mode,  seeking  to  restore  us to a  sense of  primal, unelaborated things.  There is a  perfectly  justified  (although perhaps naive)   attitude which  says:  if you  want  to  present  unmanipulated specimens,  you are more likely to get away with it if you write in the Whitmanish mode;  that is, if you compile  a collection  rather than  design a device. And, for me, what  is distinctive in modern Canadian poetry is the mode in which  the poets equal  their  French and  Modern  Greek counterparts, in which they do differently  from  the Americans (for even Carlos  Williams  and  Pound build  their ideograms into a larger fabric), and which is just not attemp­ ted  in  England: the  mode  of spiritual geography  in terms  of  emblems. The  whole process tends towards  an attempt at modern  epic.
This is why I find nothing specifically different about Jay Macpherson's poems,  nothing specifically  Canadian; she is a  transatlantic  Elizabeth Jennings,  composing  hermetic paradigms that  don't  really  make  poetry out of the modern scene. I don't  think that  is true of Ronald  Bates, Fred Cogswell,  John   Glassco,  George  Johnston,  Alden  Nowlan   and  James Reaney.  Miss Macpherson seems nearer  to European sophistication and sophistry, and is therefore in greater danger of composing cerebral riddles in  the  manner of  the  English  "Movement". Her  little  paradigms are nearer  to ballad  than  to Whitman: she is at once more  traditional and more  avant-garde than  her  contemporaries. Their stand  is quite  often rawness,  the  unfancy,  the  unpoeticised.  Take,  for  example, Fred  Cogs­ well's poem about  Lefty:


There was Lefty and  there  was the hen. He had  her hung  up with a cord
round her  neck too tight  for a squawk, and  he was sawing  off her  legs
with  a dull  jack-knife. Sawing  and  whistling  .

He  heard me as I walked  in and  turned, standing there,
and  you could  almost  have  heard
the blood dripping off the end
of the knife-blade for  a minute.
'You  son of a whore', I said.
'You  son of a whore'.
And  Lefty broke and  cried  like a girl, And  I left.

ETHOS   AND EPIC



The  logical outcome  of this is raw vision in raw form  for subtle  reasons. But mere use of the speech of everyday cannot  ensure the achievement of an  illustrious  vernacular: only the old tricks of word-juggling can  effect that. The  poet is a reporter, yes; he is also a verbal  artist. And where  the sheer  magic  of the  object  contemplated fails  to enliven  the  words,  the result  is likely to be an ordinariness that  only verbal  magic  can  redeem. The  laconic  tone  is not enough  in itself:  it has  to be subtly  interwoven with other  tones and other techniques-as it is in Pound's Cantos, James Reaney's A Suit of Nettles and Dudek's  Europe.



AFTER TONE, the complete  view. Few Canadian poets seem rounded  enough. The new industrial landscape doesn't  seem to have caught at  the  poets' imaginations, whereas  the pastoral in its literal and literary senses seems ineluctable. Milton  Wilson, writing in The Canadian Forum  (June, 1959), puts some pertinent questions  apropos of John Glassco's The  Deficit Made  Flesh:

What are   (he  asks)  the  typical  images  and  attitudes of  the  typical  Canadian poem?  Ralph  Gustafson provides us with  a  list  in  the  introduction to  his  new Penguin anthology. Among  the  things  included are  the  primal sea,  a  good  deal of diving, green  out  of the  white  of winter, antagonistic hills,  and  symbolic  eyes and  fishes.  It's  a  good  list.  It  fits a few  poets  frQIIl a few  parts of Canada, and what  more  can  we ask?  But  there  are  plenty  of alternatives. What about a vision of  the  collapsed   mine  or  barn, the  soiled  and  discarded virgin, the  ghost  town, grey  snow,  roads  that  peter  out  or lead  to a dead  structure, fruit gone  soft  before it ripens,  parricide before puberty?

I can't really say how pertinent Mr. Wilson's answers are-they do seem Audenish, and  tempt  me to think  up an eclecticism  of my own which in­ cludes the national prurience, the seedy schoolroom on the Indian reserva­  tion,  Old  British  Fish  and  Chips,  sleazy  beer-parlours,  desolate plains, blue  lakes, "plaid" shirts,  the  cult  of virility  and  Scottishness, picture­ windows,  gaudy  and  finny cars,  galoshes,  "homes" rather than  houses, dead  moose  and  pure  cold.  A slightly  fey  list,  yes;  but  a list  that  one should  be  able  to compile  from  Mr.  Gustafson's anthology. One  can't, however,  because  many  Canadian  poets  see  their  country as idealised  pastoral. For  every  George  Johnston, with  his Cruising  Auk,  the  pub­  lishers provide  a dozen vaguer  visions.

ETHOS   AND  EPIC



But there  are signs of epic method,  as a careful  reader  of the Gustafson and  Smith  anthologies can see:  Pratt's broad historical vision; Ross's imagistic pungency; blunt Knister and the Scott of the satirical reportage; Finch's  matter-of-factness; Birney's own Perse-like  vision of history and exploration (as in Pacific Door) ; Layton's concern  for the delicious, tart variety  of life;  Anne  Marriott's feeling for prairie and  Le Pan's invigor­ ating  piece-of-an-epic, Canoe-trip:

What of this fabulous country
Now  that  we have reduced it to a few hot hours
And  sunburn on our  backs?
On  this south side the countless  archipelagos,
The slipway  where  titans sent splashing the last great glaciers; And then  up to foot of the  blue pole star
A wilderness . . . .

One  would like to see something  such as Neruda  has done for Chile. My own guess is that  it will have  to be done in the  Whitmanish, capacious, untidy mode; in the Canadian voice and in visual terms. Life's quality will have  to be transferred to poems. Perhaps Canada is the  country  where young poets might  find some use for Eliot, who has had next to no follow­ ing in England and has exerted most of his influence in Greece, India and France. His method  of the disjointed  epic is perhaps just what is needed: something comprehensive without  the sheer bulk of Pound's Cantos. After all,  in a country  that  is more  of a myth  than  of a  conurbation, the epic writer  is the  man  most  likely to succeed. When history's  magic  and  the modern scene  have  been  brought subtly, grandly and  colloquially  to­ gether, the  epic  of a "fabulous country" will be a dignified  reality, and  not-what it may seem at  present-another figment  of right-minded, chauvinistic humbug.
One  young  Canadian poet  who  seems to have  epic  intentions or an
embryonically epic mind  is Ronald  Bates, whose first volume, The Wan­ dering World, appeared recently.  Mr.  Bates is a conventionally serious poet, examining his world in terms of histories, myths, interiors and land­  scapes. There are  really  two poets in him:  one is rhetorical, requiring  a good deal of elbow-room and long fluent lines; the other seems to arrive  by way of Yeats  and  Auden: a little cramped, a little too self-conscious and  rather too dispassionate. But in his rhetorical role Mr.  Bates is out-

ETHOS   AND EPIC



standing: he creates  a massiveness of colloquial flux in which everything appears relevant. He  thinks  in  large  units-in fact,  units  which  seem appropriate to the wandering  world of his title. These units, or deep poeti­ cal  breaths, are  just right  for his celebration of the Canadian continent, of the  vast hinterland of his own memory,  for the flight of gull or goose, the  leap  of salmon  or even of the enthralled watcher's heart. Surely the following is magnificent  without  being in any way magniloquent:

And  so spring comes, it may  be after
One  year, or two, or five ,
But Spring must come at last, and  one must  hear Above  the sounds  of traffic in a sun-drowsed square, The  crack  of spring-ice breaking on a thousand lakes, While,  in the  blue, behind  a Gothic spire,
A wild goose arrowhead spears north. And the  pull of the outbound tide at last Goes with  the  sun.

That suggests  great  things  to come. But  when  Mr.  Bates  attends to the paraphernalia of the  modern  scene, he seems to be forcing  himself:  he gets off-hand  and  takes all kinds of cliches on trust; many of his combina­ tions are  wilful and  cerebral. For instance: "We  cannot escape.  Blood is thicker  than  / Transmission oil or octane  gasoline." Yes, it  is;  but  my assent  to  that   is not  assent  to  a-truth-turned-into-poetry. Or  take  this stanza from  Overheard in the Garden:

Don't let him in. Your last clue: Avoid  the  garden; shun the dark; Shadow the  suspect in the park. You may find out  that  he is you.

Most of Mr. Bates's suspenseful paradoxes evoke the glibbest and emptiest stunts of Auden-which is a pity, for the attempt to cope with detectives, Palm  Beach suits, cocktail bars and high heels is laudable. It seems to me that  Mr.  Bates  makes  this attempt in much  the same spirit  as he might take a cold  bath; he keeps slipping  back  into  the  elegiac  mode.  In  that mode  he is astonishingly  good. What  he needs now is a texture that  will carry  all kinds of mixtures. Somehow, I feel, he hasn't  yet found  out how to fuse  the  trappings of industrial society with  the  lyricism  of the  great outdoors.

16

ETHOS  AND EPIC



But he is certainly either  a signpost or a weathercock. He encourages us to believe that Canadian poetry may yet handle a national theme  robustly, subtly, vividly and  above all in modern  terms. If poets such as Mr. Bates keep on looking with their own eyes instead of those of their  predecessors, we might  not  have  to wait  long. It is a  measure  of Canadian poetry's promise that  the best of the younger English poets-Elizabeth Jennings, Ted  Hughes, Dom  Moraes-suggest quite  different  and less exciting maturities.  Confronted  with,  involved  with  Canada, the  coy  colossus, poets will have to be ambitious and bold. It is hard  to see how one or two of them,  already on the right lines, can fail to make an epic about  a coun­ try already (and still)  mythologised.




llVDEX. A' arlic\l;S  allll  reviews appearing in  Cana­ dian  Litoatzm· arc  regularly listed  in  tlw Canadian Index to  Periodicals  and  Documentary Films,  we  kt\·c derided to  print  our  own  index  once every twelve  issues instead  of once a y•:ar.  Th<·first index  will therefore he sent  out  to those  re::1dcrs who  requPt
issues of  rg62.





PLANS  AND  PROjECTS. In shortly forthcoming issuewill appear a <;ympr>-;ium on aspects  of Canadian literature by Ethel
\Vilson,  Eric  Nicol  and  George  Woodcock, and  a  long  two-part study of isolation   in  the  Canadian no\'lcl hy  Warren Tallman. R. E. 'Vatters  will discuss  the  Canadian  character of  Lcacock's humour, Chester Duncan will  assess  the  radio  programme Anthology. Robert Fulford will  analyse the  appmaches of popular Canadian periodicals and  Ruth McKenzie will discuss  the  immigrant  in  Canadian  literature. There  will  be  individual studiPs  of  Morrlccai Rirhler  hy  Nathan Cohen, of  Irving Layton by Robert  Weaver, of  A.  M.  Klein's poetry   by Milton Wilson.  Hugo  Mc­ Pherson, Jean-Guy Pilon,  Louis  Dudek, and  Philip  Stratford  will  contri­ bute   articles discussing   aspects  of  the  contemporary literary  scene  in Canada. Finally. in the  Autumn will appear the first of a series of  articles assess inachievements in Canadian  writing 'for children.





17



THE	MASK OF
SATIRE:

Character and Symbolic Pattern in
Robertson Davies' Fiction



Hugo McPherson






Y....v WELL, if you  wish it,  I shall  talk  to someone else," says Samuel  Marchbanks to one of his many  vacuous  dinner part­ ners.  "I do not  believe in  wasting  good  talk  on people  who are plainly unable  to appreciate it."  This  testy, Johnsonian pronouncement  might  stand  as the key signature  of Robertson  Davies' writing. In the past dozen years he has produced fifteen volumes of drama, fiction and discussion of the  theatre. Many  of  them  are  very good  talk  indeed,  yet  Davies'  re­ viewers -like Marchbanks' dinner  partners-have  generally  failed  to grasp  the  full  import  of his astringent and  irreverent  statement. They  praise  his  wit,  ribaldry  and  invective,  and  even  join in  his laughter at Canadian conformity and stodginess;  but in  the end  they label him as a clown-ubiquitous and erudite to be sure, but scarcely a serious thinker.
Unquestionably Davies is the enfant terrible of Canadian letters,  but
behind  the puckered  mask of the satirist lives a serious writer  of romance. His novels study in symbolic fashion a problem  that has concerned Canad­ ian  writers  since Susanna  Moodie: the  plight  of the imagination in this chilly cultural climate.  This central theme in his work has generally  gone unrecognized  because  the  genre  of  satirical  romance  is  unfamiliar to Canadians (Davies  is its only native practitioner), and  because, having  come to the novel from drama and the essay, he has had difficulty creating characters who live on the  page. As a result he has been judged  upon the most prominent features of his work-his explicit ideas and his burlesques  of Canadian manners.  In  this  essay, therefore, I propose  to redress  the

THE   MASK   OF   SATIRE



balance  by going  back  to the  beginning  of his fiction-to  the irascible Samuel  Marchbanks-and examining  the symbolic structure and state­ ment  of his novels, and  the  problems  of characterization which, until  A Mixture of Frailties, have  plagued  him.




ROBERTSON DAVIES had  been  writing  plays, studying the theatre and writing for newspapers since Neville Chamberlain's great umbrella-waving year,  1939,  but  he did not publish  a volume  of fiction until  1947;  and even then  his approach was oblique.  A few years earlier he had created in the columns of The  Peterborough Examiner a dyspeptic gentleman called  Samuel  Marchbanks -a disaffected  Canadian whose attacks on  contemporary  manners borrowed  heavily  on  the  capital   of Pepys, Addison,  Swift, Samuel  Butler, Shaw and,  in desperate moments, H. L. Mencken  and  Sinclair  Lewis. Marchbanks was at once the apostle of intelligence, the champion of live-and-let-live eccentricity and  the de­ fender  of the  principle that  ideas,  like mothers-in-law, are  to be enter­ tained   rather than   maintained. So voluble  was  his  talk  that   it  finally overflowed the Examiner and filled two book-length volumes-The Diary of Samuel  Marchbanks (1947), and The  Table Talk of Samuel March­ banks  ( 1949).
These informal essays or "confessions" gave Davies most of the advant­
ages of the novelist with almost none of the responsibilities. He could dis­ regard  plot;  a simple  day-to-day chronology sufficed. He had  no need of consistently-developed characters; the persons of the diary are clever cari­  catures who  perform their  antics  on  the stage  of Samuel  Marchbanks' observation. As in Davies'  models, the ruling principle is the play of idea and  opinion; nothing is sacred,  and  Marchbanks  wastes no opportunity, trivial or profound, of whacking the provincial  backsides of his Canadian and  American compatriots. By turn  self-pitying,  ironic, antic,  savage or sweetly  reasonable, he  applies  his  lash  impartially to  Hollywood  films ("the apotheosis  of the Yahoo" ) , to pious politicians and  salesladies, to medical  fads,  and  to  chocolate-stuffed children  who  allow  balloons  to "disembarrass themselves  of their  wind"  in adults' faces. But above all, Marchbanks fights  the  glum  sobriety  of Calvinism, the  morality which calls any bovine female a Lady so long as she is "Good", and  the mentality

19

THE  MASK OF   SATIRE



of "young  fogies ... fellows who, at thirty, are  well content  with  beaten paths and reach-me-down opinions;  [whose]  very conservatism is second­ hand,  [because] they don't  know what  they are conserving."
Mixed in with all this is a dash of ribaldry. In parodying the synopsis of a French play, for example, Marchbanks gives the characters such names as Alphamet, Feenaminte, Flanalette, Clitore, Merde  and  Vespasienne. This  particular example  is unfortunately juvenile;  nevertheless  Davies uses crude  humor  deliberately,  for he will not indulge  readers  who would like to think  Marchbanks "proper". To  l'homme  moyen sensuel, every­ thing  is proper-in its place. Marchbanks' all-encompassing complaint, then,  is the  narrowness  of Canadian thinking and  the reflection  of this narrowness in Canadian manners.
Marchbanks' talk is very good medicine. Canadians, who "don't like to be kidded  or mimicked,  though  they are  extremely fond  of kidding  and mimicking others", might take a course of the tonic every spring and fall. And  yet the impact of the  Marchbanks chronicles is not nearly  as great as it might  be. It is tempting to argue  that  their  weakness is a malady  to which  even the  best journalism  is prone. The  newspaper columnist, con­ stantly  under  pressure to say something bright  or challenging, almost  in­ evitably   descends  to  well-worn  formulas or  wit  or  impudence, to  the superficial glance  at people, or to controversy  for its own sake. However,  Robertson Davies  seldom  falls  into  these traps.  His  problem is that  Samuel   Marchbanks, for  all  his energy,  never  really  comes  alive  as  a character. Davies knows that:

Every  man  and  woman  is a mystery,  built  like those Chinese puzzles which  consist of one  box inside  another, so that  ten or twelve boxes have  to be opened before  the final solution is found.

Yet he shows us little more than  the bows, the gaudy  seals and  the tissue of ideas  that  conceal the  deepest reaches of Marchbanks' character. Hence,  far from  emerging as a mordant critic in the vein of Swift, John­ son or Shaw,  Marchbanks appears as an  essentially  theatrical  creation who strikes attitudes instead of expressing convictions; who screens ident­ ity instead  of revealing  it. And  the  reader, lacking  some glimpse of the "final solution" to his character, sees him as a pastiche of earlier  and more assured diarists. Thus, even before Robertson Davies began writing novels, characterization became the bete noire of his art.

20

THE  MASK   OF  SATIRE




IN TURNING to this problem of character creation I am not  abandoning my  original  intention  of examining the  statement and structure of Davies' novels, for both their content  and form are contingent upon  his conception of character. From  what  we have  seen of Samuel Marchbanks it is clear that  his temper is neo-classical rather than roman­ tic;  he is confident that  he can  take care  of his own soul, and his prime demand is the  freedom   to enjoy  his own  private  labyrinth  without  the pious  intrusions of do-gooders  and  well-meaning acquaintances. But he will not attain this freedom  and privacy until his community has achieved  a measure  of urbanity and  sophistication. The aim of Marchbanks' talk, then,  is to reveal  the  deformity or atrophy, the folly or self-deception  of individuals as they  present  themselves in society.
Unquestionably Robertson Davies shares this general view of character. Unlike  Hugh  MacLennan, who has sought to discover what our national character is, and  why  it  is, Davies  rejects  altogether the  introspective search  for identity. The  last thing  he wants is to delve into  the  recesses of Calvinist  or Catholic hearts; in their  Canadian habiliments they are too pinched and  regimented to warrant close attention. On  the assump­ tion, then,  that  everybody  has an identity,  however mean,  he focuses his attention on the conflict  of ideas and on the spectacle  of  manners in the community. Character, in short,  is a private  affair   (its privacy  guaran­ teed-or violated-by the manners of others); and it is properly studied  through its public manifestations.
Now this conception of character works very well in the theatre, where
we watch  an  action  from  the outside, or in the essay, where  we are con­ cerned  with ideas and opinions, but it raises serious problems in the novel. If the characters are  to be observed from the outside, then we must have a narrator like the  author-impresario in Tom   jones whose judgment  we know and trust; or alternatively, as in Hemingway, we must be left entire­ ly free to judge  the facts on their own merits. In his first novel, Tempest­ Yost  ( 1951), Davies, still very much the playwright and essayist, was un­ able  to adopt either  of these narrative  methods.  Precisely  because of his unwillingness  to create anything but "public" characters, he gives us no counterpart of Fielding's intimate narrator to direct  our responses, yet he will not,  like Hemingway,  withdraw entirely from  the scene. Instead  he gives us a group  of externally observed  characters and  a narrator  who,

21

THE  MASK  OF   SATIRE



like Alice's Cheshire  cat, has disappeared, leaving  only a savage March­ banksian  grin  and  a disembodied  voice that   makes  acidulous,  intrusive  comments  on the  action.
In consequence Tempest-Tost is rather like an elaborate puppet show
with interminable stage directions describing the setting,  and the appear­ ance,  background, and  motives of the characters; at  the  same time,  an offstage M.C. urges us to see the stupidity of the performance. The  story presents for our  inspection  the kind of people  who organize Shakespear­ ean productions in the Little Theatres of provincial Canadian cities-in this case Salterton (or Kingston) Ontario. Almost everybody concerned is so hopelessly second-rate that we are not sorry to see their pretensions ex­ posed. But because the characters are never more than caricatures we are not  inclined  to look for  any  meaning  beyond  their  surface  absurdities. Tempest-Tostwe decide,  is a  frequently trivial  and  generally   heavy­ handed jibe at the parochialism of Canadian Little  Theatre.
Having  reached such a comforting conclusion we might,  like March­ banks'  dinner   partner, turn  indifferently   away  from  Mr.  Davies'  talk. But one nagging thought deters us: surely it is inconceivable that a man of Davies'  talent  and  experience  in the theatre could  produce so banal  an account  of a Shakespearean production. The play itself, moreover,  is not discussed at  all.  Why  not? Surely  Davies  regards it  as a  great  work  of literature? It  is when  we ask this question about  The  Tempest  and  its meaning that  the whole strategy of Davies' novel suddenly flashes upon us. Its action-so slight when viewed as a topical satire-is really an ironic off-stage re-enactment of Shakespeare's allegory, with a cast of Canadian characters. Robertson Davies  not  only  understands the  full  import of Shakespeare's play, but he has looked about in a long-established Canad­ ian community for  the nearest equivalents he can find to the characters of the ageless romance.  The result is a series of chilling  ironies.
The  Tempestwe  recall, dramatizes the  conflict  between  the humane
powers  of Duke  Prospero  and  the  grasping rna terialism  of the  King  of Naples. Prospero  lost his power because he neglected the practical needs of his state for the delights of his library. On the desert island to which he was banished, however,  he learned  to control the  forces  of imagination and  intellect   (Ariel)   and  the  physical  forces  of the  body and  of nature (Caliban) . And  because Prospero  mastered the  "magic" of these forces, the play ends in a happy marriage between  Ferdinand and Miranda-a

22

THE  MASK  OF   SATIRE



creative   union  of the  imaginative and  materialistic forces or "families" which  had  so long been in opposition.  In  sum, The  Tempest  is Shakes­ peare's sweetest  affirmation of faith  in the imagination and  its power to make man  a genuinely  humane and enlightened creature.
In  the  jejune  and  complacent community of Salterton, however,  it is almost impossible  to find people who might  be appropriately cast in the various roles of The  Tempest. Everybody  agrees that  the production is a daring enterprise; it could  not be undertaken at all without  the aid of an American-trained director, Valentine Rich  (Davies' names are often sym­ bolic) , and  a despised composer  and organist  of the Church of  England, Humphrey Cobbler. Nevertheless  the casting does take place, with pierc­ ingly ironic  results. The  person  who is determined to play Prospera, the learned  nobleman and loving father, is Professor Vambrace, an egotistical  and  cloistered  pedant  from  the classics department of  WaverleUniver­ sity. Naturally the Salterton Miranda is Vambrace's daughter Pearl, who, unlike Shakespeare's heroine,  has had  a narrow and ignoble  upbringing, and who-though potentially beautiful-can only be described  as glum and  repressed.  Ferdinand, the gentle  prince who loves Miranda at sight, is an egocentric young officer from Salterton's military college who prides himself on a long list of  seductions.
But if the leading  characters of the Salterton "Temptest" suffer a sea­ change  into  something gauche  and  strange,  the  transformation  of  the secondary  characters is even more ludicrous. The  wise old councillor Gon­ zalo becomes Hector Mackilwraith, a Salterton mathematics teacher  and  son of an  ineffectual Presbyterian minister; Hector's greatest  wisdom is thrift, orderliness, and  a slavish reliance  on the Puritan logic of Pro and Contra. Salterton's Caliban, not unexpectedly, is a crude  practical joker who works in the  local store of  the Liquor  Control  Board of Ontario.
The  greatest casting  problem,  of course, is Ariel, the ubiquitous spirit
of intellect, imagination and  beauty.   (For  Davies,  as for  Shakespeare, music is the symbol of these qualities.) After great  deliberation, the Salt­ erton  thespians  award this role to Griselda  Webster,  a pretty  girl whose singing  voice and  I.Q. are  acceptable though  not exceptional. The real reason for their  decision is that  Ariel's father is the richest man in town;  morever,  he will lend  his garden  to the  Little  Theatre for  its Tempest. Thus  the community's unacknowledged but slavish worship of  wealth  as the "highest good"  is revealed  in the casting of Ariel.

23

THE   MASK  OF  SATIRE



From  this point on, the ironies of Tempest-Yost multiply and prolifer­ ate.  In  Salterton nobody  but  Valentine Rich  (the  Canadian artist  who must make her living abroad) recognizes the potential of Pearl Vambrace, the  Canadian Miranda. Instead, the  three  bachelors of the story  yearn foolishly after Ariel, the affluent "impatient Griselda": Lieutenant Tasset (Prince Ferdinand)  covets  the  physical  pleasures  which  she  promises;  Hector  Mackilwraith ( Gonzalo)  worships her as a pure and chaste ideal; and Solly Bridgetower, an indecisive young English professor at Waverley  (who is the best assistant-director that  Valentine Rich can find in Salter­ ton)  moons after  her weakly. None succeeds in his suit, however, for this shrewd Canadian Ariel is aloof to them all.
In Salterton's eyes, of course, the whole production of The Tempest  is
a frivolous  affair.  Mrs.  Caesar  Augustus  Conquerwood, the leading  pa­ tron,  departs in  the  middle  of  the  first  performance. What  Salterton society really values is revealed  in two long episodes which at first appear extraneous to the theme of the novel: the great  ball at the military college, and  the  distribution of the  library  collected  by Valentine Rich's  father. The  military  ball is an overpoweringly stuffy  affair,  replete  with  major­ generals,  MPP's, civic officials, ageing representatives of Loyalist families,  Waverley  dignitaries, and  whoever else can  procure tickets  (from  what­ ever source). In Salterton people must  be cajoled  into seeing a play, but everybody wants to be seen at the ball and  to have his status confirmed  in the  social  columns  of the  Evening Bellman. The  ball,  with  all its gold braid  and  medals,  is an anti-masque within the Salterton "tempest".
The episode of Valentine Rich's inherited library  is more complex. The will of the late Adam Savage,  Valentine's father, bequeaths his library  to the  clergy of Salterton; they may choose from  it what  will be useful  to them.  On  the morning  when the books are made  available there is a near riot at  the Savage  home;  more  than  two hundred black-clad gentlemen invade  the library  and strip it like a horde of army ants.  In the confusion, rabbis  find themselves with commentaries on the New Testament, and  a shovel-hatted priest ends up with ten volumes of a Scottish  metaphysician. Even  for Canada's second estate,  books are  impressive  per sewhatever their  contents.  But there is a final irony:,  Professor Savage  willed to Val­ entine  a wrapped bundle  of books which  inadvertently fall into the auc­ tioneer's hands and are sold to a New York dealer  for the astounding sum (in Salterton commerce) of fifty dollars.  As collectors' items  the  books

THE  MASK   OF   SATIRE



anworth  several  thousands; they are  the  main  asset of the  Professor's estate. But Valentine-intent on the riches of art  rather than  the market
-has  failed  to  discover  their  dollar  value.  The  Canadian heritage, it
would  appear, is chiefly valuable as a collection of marketable antiques; Professor  Savage's legacy of ideas is exactly nil. Salterton's best hope is that  people like Valentine may kindle the cold Canadian imagination.
Robertson Davies  is clearly  not  optimistic  about  Salterton's cultural
future. As the  novel  ends,  Canada's Puritan Gonzalo,  Hector  Mackil­ wraith, attempts suicide,  believing that  he has lost his gilt-edged Ariel to the  lustful  Ferdinand. Ariel's  younger  sister   (Shakespeare's messenger Iris)   attributes Hector's despair  to  the  oppressive  influence  of "cheap religion", and  proceeds  with her youthful project  of brewing  champagne in Canada. Cobbler, the  musical director, warns  her  that  it  cannot  be champagne-"Just good  cider  with  ideas  above  its station". And  the badly-shaken Hector-Gonzalo decides  (God help  us!)  to accept  a job in the  Ontario Department of  Education, a decision  which  Ariel  rewards  with a formal  kiss.




kE FOREGOING, I believe, is the  essential  statement of Tempest-Yost. Beneath  the  surface  satire,  Robertson  Davies  has devel­ oped  a  major theme; but  his  external handling of character  and  his failure to get  beyond  the  dramatist's impersonal method  has so  muffled his statement that  the book must  be accounted  a failure.  In  the Preface  to his drama At My  Heart's  Core  (1950), Davies recognized that a play loses a great  deal on the printed page. "The playwright's work",  he says,

... is completed by the  actor; the reader is not often  so imaginative as to be able to discover  in  the  text of the play ... the qualities  which  would  be revealed in it by a group of capable actors  and  an able director who had  worked  on it for a month.

In Tempest-Yost he lacked the aid of a "group of capable actors" but had not yet reconciled  himself to the novelist's need for some means of  reveal­ ing more  than  the outer  layer of the Chinese puzzle of character.
Leaven  of Malice  (I 954) , a tightly plotted satirical romance, is a much
better   work.  It is not  surprising to learn  that  Mr.  Davies  has  already adapted it as a play which Tyrone  Guthrie will produce  in New York, for

25

THE   MASK  OF  SATIRE



the hand  of the dramatist, carefully  building  up scenes and climaxes, still dominates. There is as yet no genuinely living character, but the citizens of Salterton are more sharply observed, and the satire  has the therapeutic bite of a mustard plaster.  (An academic party,  replete  with  games, vile punch, and an overweening sociology instructor as host, is one of the most uproarious chapters in  Canadian fiction.)   The  author-playwright  has now withdrawn almost  entirely  into  the  wings and  distributed his ideas among  Humphrey Cobbler,  Gloster  Ridley,  editor  of the  Evening  Bell­ man, and Dean Jevon Knapp of St. Nicholas'  Cathedral. And finally, the action  reveals more clearly than in Tempest-Yost the complementary ele­ ments of surface satire and symbolic implication.
Regarded as a waspish satire  with a healing  moral,  Leaven  of Malice
tells of a crude practical joke. A false announcement that  Pearl  Vambrace is engaged  to Solly Bridgetower  sets aflame a ready-laid fire of animosities in  Salterton. Ultimately the  culprit  is unmasked, but  not  until  his false charge has led Pearl and Solly into each others'  arms, and allowed  Dean Knapp to point a moral. Malice, he says,

... works like a leaven;  it stirs, and  swells, and  changes all that  surrounds it.... It may  cause  the  greatest   misery  and  distress  in  many  unexpected quarters. I  have even  known  it  to have  quite  unforeseen good  results.  But  those  things  which  it in­ vades will never  be quite  the same again.

But exactly  what  are the things that  malice  has invaded, and  how has it changed them? If we look again at the persons of Robertson Davies' story and consider  them as representative of various "forces" at work in Salter­ ton society rather than mere satirical  butts, we see that  the author is once more  talking  about  the  failure  of Canada's imagination; in contrast to Tempest-Yost, however,  this  action  ends  in  a  "marriage" which  may portend a new era.
Gloster  Ridley,  though  not  the hero of the  romance, is its main char­ acter. A self-educated intellectual who  takes  himself  a few  degrees  too seriously,  he has nevertheless  transformed the Evening Bellman  from an unprofitable and  provincial  curiosity  to an alert  and  thriving newspaper which serves all segments of the community intelligently. But in achieving this  revolution   he  has  antagonized  Salterton's "old  guard"-the smug, sentimentally Anglophile, tradition-bound antiques who regard themselves as the community's social and intellectual arbiters. This group,  which in-

THE  MASK OF    SATIRE



eludes  granddaughters of  Brigadiers,  widows  of  Waverley  Deans,  and persons claiming distant  kinship with British nobility,  would not demean themselves to fight Ridley openly, but all are privately  delighted when the spurious  engagement announcement exposes Ridley,  Pearl  and  Solly to ridicule.  Nor is it surprising that  the person who secretly performed this malicious act is a toady to the "old guard". He is Bevill Higgin, a madden­ ingly genteel old country  "artist" whose writing, acting, singing and piano­ playing epitomize  the "old  Guard's" worst failings in taste and education.
But Riggin's essential shoddiness does not pass undetected everywhere:
a girl  whom  he imagines  to be Pearl  Vambrace refuses  him  university library  privileges;  Solly Bridgetower  rejects  his impudent offer to recite Shakespeare to students; and Ridley refuses to print  his precious essays in the  Bellman. Riggin's spiteful  hoax wounds the three  victims, but it also drives  them  to self-assessment  and  positive action.  For  example, Pearl's father (the  egotistical  Prospera of Tempest-Tost) regards  the hoax as an attack on his personal  honor,  and  in the family  rows that  ensue Pearl  is freed from  the tyranny  and coldness of her home. She even adopts  a new name-Veronica. Solly, whose department head has advised him to "jump right  into Amcan" and  publish  a work on the great  Canadian dramatist Charles Heavysege,  recognizes that  he wants to create some Canadian literature rather than  study its relics. And Ridley, who had hoped for an honorary degree  from  Waverley  as visible proof of his achievement,  re­ alizes that  he needs no such external reassurances.
As is usual in romance, the maligned  parties  are aided  by benign  and
intelligent friends-particularly  Dean  Knapp and  Humphrey Cobbler, who represent the genuine  humanity and  taste of the British tradition as opposed to Riggin's pseudo-culture. Since music is equated with imagina­ tion in Davies, it is the happy  Cobbler  who counsels Solly to defy his "old guard" Mother, marry  his Pearl-Veronica, and  begin to create. Finally, then, through the working of malice, the creative intelligence of Salterton finds its independence, or at least seems about to find it.



T.IE STATEMENT OF Leaven of Malice  is hopeful,  but de­ spite the great  ingenuity of its action  and the sharpness of its observation it is not a warm  book. In Gloster Ridley we meet a character who is highly lifelike,  yet not  entirely  alive.  Robertson  Davies  has not  yet penetrated

27

THE   MASK  OF  SATIRE



beyond  the second or third  box of the Chinese  puzzle. His point  of view is still the "public", wide-angled  perspective of the dramatist, and  though we watch  Leaven  of Malice with pleasure,  we do not live in it.
In  A  Mixture of Frailties, however,  Davies  finally  takes the  step-so
alien  to the  Marchbanksian side of his sensibility-which makes  him  a novelist, as distinct from a playwright. Here for the first time in his fiction he creates  a protagonist whom we know fully and  through whose eyes we see the action  unfold. Now, instead of looking across the footlights,  we are on stage  and  at  the center  of the action.  The  career  of Monica  Gall-a Canadian Cinderella who becomes a great singer-is our career; we suffer and learn  with her. Because Davies it not entirely at home with this tech­ nique  of characterization, there  are  many  awkwardly-handled moments  in  Monica's story,  but  the  access of  warmth and  intimacy  which  the method  makes possible far outweighs these defects. There is no doubt  now that  the  author intends  much  more  than  a  topical  satire  of  Canadian provinciality.
Davies' symbolic theme is still the struggle of the Canadian imagination
to free itself from second-rateness, parochialism and  dulness, but it moves beyond the situation of Leaven of Malice. He  has explored  the prospects of the  educated Canadian intellectual, Solly Bridgetower, as far  as he is able. Solly will "produce" if he can. The  question  now is: What  happens when  a gifted  but  completely  untutored Canadian is exposed to the best that  Europe  can offer? The story of Monica  Gall is Davies' answer.
The  machinery which sets Monica's story in motion  is farcical though
not, as a sequel  to Leaven  of Malice, improbable. The  first year of Solly Bridgetower's marriage  is blighted   by  the  shadow  of  his  "old  guard" mother. The  newlyweds live in her forbidding Victorian house, and even her death does not release them from the "Dead Hand" of her tradition. They  will inherit her fortune  only when they produce a male heir-a new Solomon.  Until  then a board  of trustees is to spend  the income from  the estate on the artistic education of some talented young woman from Salter­ ton. Monica Gall, Humphrey Cobbler's candidate, becomes the beneficiary.
As Monica's experience  unfolds, we become aware that  Davies' char­ acters,  while  still as much  the  targets  of satire  as the caricatures of the earlier  novels, now have a new relevance.  Such persons as Monica's col­ leagues in the  Heart and  Hope  Gospel Quartet, her callow, rna terialistic  lover at the Glue Works, her wistful confidante Aunt  Ellen, lost in a never-

THE  MASK  OF    SATIRE



never world of music-these people reveal to us dramatically, existentially, what  Monica  is. Chief among them is Ma Gall, an image of the repressed Canadian imagination-of what Monica  might have been:

Ma,  when  she  told  tall  stories,  when  she  rasped  her  family  with  rough, sardonic jokes, when  she  rebelled  against the  circumstances of her  life in coarse  abuse,  and when  she cut  through a fog of nonsense with  the beam  of her insight, was an artist
-a  spoiled   artist, one  who  had  never  made  anything, who  was  unaware of the
nature or genesis  of her  own  discontent, but  who nevertheless possessed the artist's temperament; in her  that  temperament, misunderstood, denied  and  gone sour, had become  a poison  which  had  turned against  the very sources of life itself. Neverthe­ less [Monica] was like Ma,  and  she must not go astray  as Ma-not wholly  through her own fault -had gone.

In the same way, Monica's training  in England  is at once a highly absorb­ ing narrative, full of humor, action and brilliant  talk, and a symbolic study of the forces  which  the artist  must recognize and  learn  to control  if he is to become a genuine creator. Monica's director is Sir Benedict Domdaniel, a great  British  conductor. He sends her first to Murtagh Molloy, a voice coach who teaches her technique-the control of her physical resources­ and  then  to Giles Revelstoke,  a composer who initiates her into the mys­ teries of passion and  joy which are the sources of art. The tension between  these  two aspects  of her art,  between technique and  content, are worked out dramatically-even melodramatically. Monica  soon falls slavishly in love with Revelstoke who, as befits the representative of the bardic  spirit,  comes from  a  primitive part  of Wales, wears  a signet  ring  bearing the image of  Orpheus, and  publishes a little magazine called  Lantern. But as we might expect,  though  Revelstoke takes Monica  as his mistress, he can­  not be harnessed in marriage, nor can he be mothered; true to his nature, he is an isolated, brilliant, absolutely candid, and easily exacerbated force.  But if Monica cannot possess the creative  spirit  whom she loves, she will not become the  mistress of technique. At a costume  ball her voice coach, Molloy, attempts to seduce  her  and  is rebuffed.  "He can't  resist a good pupil," says Mrs.  Molloy;  "wants to run away with 'em all."
Finally,  after  a violent  quarrel, Revelstoke and  Monica  separate, and when she returns to him in the belief that  she must accept  his weaknesses along  with  his strengths, she finds him  dead.  On the surface  level of the narrative this chapter is complex and awkwardly-contrived melodrama; but  Revelstoke's  death, seen as a final step in Monica's artistic develop-

THE   MASK  OF  SATIRE



ment,  is inevitable. The  artist  cannot  remain indefinitely in servitude to an  undisciplined creative  spirit.  Yet  Monica's love for  Revelstoke  does not  die;  though  she is freed from his domination, she inherits  the files of his Lantern, and  his talismanic  Orpheus ring. Now her education is com­ plete: she can  return to Canada a free, self-determining individual. But the voices of Revelstoke and  Ma Gall, though  no longer dominating, will always counsel her;  she will be "as one that  hath  a familiar spirit."
This  account  of the structure of A Mixture of Frailties does no justice to the subtlety  and  richness of its execution,  but that  is the subject  of an­ other  essay. In  typical  fashion,  the  romance closes with  a  rite.  Davies gives us a daringly  executed fugal chapter in which fragments of a sermon  on the Magi  are interwoven with Monica's thoughts and with passages of a letter  in which Sir Benedict Domdaniel asks Monica to marry him. It is St. Nicholas'  Day,  the second anniversary of the Bridgetower Trust, and just  before  the  memorial service  begins  we  learn that  Solly's wife has given  birth  to a healthy  male  heir. At last the "Dead Hand" of the Vic­ torian  past  has  relaxed  its grip. The promise  extended at the conclusion of  Leaven  of Malice  has  been  fulfilled.  As the  congregation leaves the church, the  irrepressible  Cobbler  plays  "For   unto  us a child  is born". Monica, we suspect, will accept  Sir Benedict's  proposal, but this is a mat­ ter  of small  concern,  for  Monica -a  symbol of the  Canadian imagin­ ation  reaching its maturity-is now a citizen of the world.
Robertson Davies,  I think,  will yet  write  even  better  novels  than  A Mixture of Frailties, for he has learned  that  though  the novelist may not lay bare the contents  of the Chinese box, he must at least find a means of suggesting its contents.  He may never abandon his role as Peterborough's Bad Boy (indeed  I hope that he does not)  but his most important achieve­ ment  is his imaginative insight into the problems  and  the prospects  of his culture. That insight,  combined  with  his unfailing wit,  bespeaks  a gift that  is all too rare  in Canadian letters.



GRATIEN GELINAS

ET LE  THEATRE  POPULAIRE AU CANADA FRANCAIS



Marguerite A.  Primeau


EN 1914 PARAISSAIT le premier   roman  d'inspiration canadienne destine  a enlever  les suffrages du public, et son auteur, Louis Hernon,  prenait sa place  de chef  de file dans  la litterature du  Canada
fran  ais.                                           a Maria Chapdelaine un pessimisme  de
circonstance et  certaines exagerations  qui  semblent   doter  le  pionnier
canadien d'un  esprit  plutot  simpliste; il n'en  est pas moins vrai que  par sa formule  romanesque, cette  reuvre marque le jaillissement  d'une nou­ velle source  d'inspiration, source nettement canadienne qui se nourrit de la substance meme du peuple canadien-fran<;ais. L'impulsion donnee, tous les aspects  de  la vie au  Canada deviennent des lors exploitables comme sujet  de roman.
Trente-quatre ans plus tard, !'apparition de Tit-Coq sur la scene mar­
que  a son tour  les debuts  d'un  theatre national au Canada fran  ais.
Une comparaison s'impose entre  Gratien Gelinas et Louis Hernon,  car l'un  et  l'autre se sont abreuves  a la meme source. Pour  l'auteur  drama­
tique  quebecois  comme  pour le romancier  fran  ais,
qui est le principe fondamental de toute nation; c'est l'homme du peuple qu'il  convient  d'abord d'etudier. Roman psychologique et populaire, theatre psychologique  et populaire: telle est en effet la formule romanes­ que  de Louis  Hernon  et la formule  theatrale de Gratien  Gelinas.
L'auteur de Tit-Coq a emprunte sa formule  a une piece de Claude!.
Dans  la premiere version de L'Echange, l'actrice Lechy Elbemon expli­
que ce que c'est que le theatre:

LECHY ELBERNON:
11 y a la scene et  la salle. Tout  etant  clos, les gens viennent  13. le soir, et ils sont

31

GRATIEN  GELINAS



assis par  rangees  les uns derriere les autres, regardant.

Que  regardent-ils?

LECHY ELBERNON:
Ils  regardent le rideau  de la scene.  Et  ce qu'il y a derriere quand il est leve. Et  il arrive quelque chose sur la scene comme  si c'etait vrai.
Pourquoi viennent-ils?

LECHY ELBERNON:
L'homme s'ennuie, et !'ignorance lui est attachee depuis  sa naissance.
Et  ne sachant de rien comment cela commence ou finit,  c'est  pour  cela qu'il  va au theatre.
Et il se regarde lui-meme,  les mains  posees sur les genoux. Et il pleure  et il rit, et il n'a point  envie de s'en  aller.'

Selon  Gratien Gelinas, le nceud du  probleme est  tout  entier  dans  ces paroles  de Claude!: "11 se regarde lui-meme ... et il pleure  et il rit ..." Si,  dans  le genre dramatique, c'est le  grand public  qui  en  derniere
analyse  donne  a l'ecrivain  sa place  dans  la litterature, il doit  pouvoir  se
reconnaitre dans les personnages  qui evoluent  sous ses yeux. La forme dramatique la plus pure sera done, ainsi que l'a decrite Gelinas lui-meme, celle  qui  exprime  aussi intimement que  possible l'ame  du  public  auquel ce  theatre s'adresse.  Voici comment  il expliquait dans  La Nouvelle Re­ leve de decembreI 947 cette conception du drame:

Le  theatre, comme  le mariage, est  l'union de  deux  elements essentiels,  l'acteur et le public.  Sans  l'acteur, il ne saurait y avoir  de  theatre; sans  d'auditeur non  plus. Vous  pouvez  seul  dans  votre  salon,  jouer  du  piano  pendant deux  heures  et  vous dire  ensuite: j'ai fait de la Musique, avec un M majuscule. Mais cinquante acteurs sans  public,  peuvent repeter, meme  dans  un  theatre, une  piece  pendant six mois, sans avoir  fait  plus  que de se preparer a faire  du  theatre. Pour  qu'il  y ait theatre, il faut  deux  parties, l'acteur et le public.
En I 952  Louis Jouvet declarait que :

Le theatre n'existe que dans l'acte du theatre, ace moment unique ou les elements, les  participants-acteurs,  spectateurs, auteurs-entraines, depossedes   d'eux­ memes,  dessaisis de leur caractere et de leur  choix,  restitues a une sensibilite  neuve, a  une intelligence souveraine, se fondent et se dissolvent  peu  a peu les uns dans  les autres, ace  moment ou ils perdent leur  person.nalire,  ou toute  faculte consciente et raisonnante ne  resiste  plus  a la  chaleur de  l'acte meme. 2

' PAUL CLAUDEL, Oeuvres completes, Librairie Gallimard (Paris, 1954), VIII.  p. 29.
2  Lours JOUVET,  Temoignages  sur le theatre, Flammarion (Paris, 1952), p. 192.

32

GRATIEN GELINAS



C'cst  afin d'obtenir cette  communion  totale  entre  acteur et public, et qui  est l'essence  de l'art dramatique, que  Gelinas se met en quete  d'une sorte  de denominateur commun pour aboutir  avec Tit-Coq a unperson­ nage  appartenant non  seulement  au  meme  milieu  que  la  majorite des spectateurs, mais issu de ce qui pourrait s'appeler "la moelle du peuple".

Ils m'ecoutent et ils pensent ce que  je dis; ils me regardent et j'entre dans  leur arne comme dans  une maison  vide  ... Et quand je erie,  j'entends toute  la salle gemir.3

Pour  Gratien Gelinas,  le cri qui souleve l'auditoire est d'autant plus sin­
cere que la creation litteraire se rapproche du peuple.
Le succes extraordinaire obtenu  par  Tit-Coq   (300 representations en fran  ais,
le grand  public  aime se reconnaitre sur la scene; il aime se regarder lui­ meme,  et  apres  avoir  ri et pleure  avec Tit-Coq, son sosie, il n'a  plus du tout "envie de s'en aller".
Qui  est done  ce Tit-Coq qui a su vaincre ce qu'on  s'est plu a appeler
!'indifference du  peuple  canadien en face du theatre? Enfant illegitime sans  famille  et  sans  amis,  gavroche  tour  a  tour  gouailleur et  emporte, d'ou  le nom  de Tit-Coq, ce jeune homme  ressent dans sa chair  la honte d'avoir  ete rejete  parses parents. Il traine  avec lui comme  une defroque lamentable !'heritage du  peche;  !'humiliation d'etre venu  au  monde  a la Misericorde, parmi des etrangers, est toujours  presente  a son esprit; il n'oublie  pas  un  instant ce qu'il  est ni d'ou  il vient.  L'enfance sans  ten­ dresse  qu'il  avait  re ue
sans lendemain d'une  jeunesse sans ideal: il est soldat  parce  que l'armee
represente un gite et une solde. Il n'y a pas lade quoi etre fier, et cepen­ dant, ce Tit-Coq qui crane  pour cacher  le vide de son existence, ale don d'emouvoir les spectateurs. Son  exterieur mediocre cache  un  coeur humain, et ses aspirations, si ordinaires soient-elles, rejoignent les espoirs des hommes  de tout  temps  et lui conferent  un caractere  universe!.




GRATIEN GELINAS disait  recemment que,  pour  com­ battre la  grande popularite  du  cinema et de  la  television,  les auteurs dramatiques doivent  de nouveau  faire appel  aux sentiments. C'est  le but
3   PAUL CLAUDEL, OUV. cit. p. 30.


33

GRATIEN  GELINAS



qu'il  s'est propose d'atteindre avec Tit-Coq. 11 nous semble inutile d'insis­ ter  sur  le fait  qu'il  a  reussi au-dela  de  ses esperances.  Ayant  admis  ce point  de vue, il est tout  nature! que Gelinas  ait  recours  a la passion, au rire,  au suspense et au pathetique pour  faire  de son personnage un heros populaire. 11 fait done connaitre a Tit-Coq un amour total et exclusif qui pourrait a  lui seul balayer  tout  le passe. Lejeune homme  sans attaches saura  ce que c'est qu'un  foyer, pauvre peut-etre au point de vue materiel, mais riche en affection et en joies simples, et qu'une famille, mi-paysanne mi-bourgeoise, empruntee aux petites gens des villes et villages canadiens. De  plus, le desir de purete qui le tourmente deviendra realite  le jour ou il epousera  celle qu'il appelle  "Mam'zelle Toute-Neuve", car il n'y aura  plus alors de situations irregulieres, ou comme  ille dit lui-meme dans son langage  pittoresque: "Le  batard tout  seul dans la vie, ni vu ni connu !" C'est  apres  avoir  entrevu  un  bonheur   qui  peut  nous  sembler  modeste  mais qui suffit amplement a !'enfant abandonne d'autrefois, qu'il connait  la desillusion.  Plus grand  aura  ete le bonheur anticipe, plus profond  sera le desespoir de Tit-Coq. Attendri par le denouement sombre d'un  drame dont les assises sont ala fois la vie contemporaine et les moeurs du peuple canadien-franc;ais, le public  est force  de  reconnaitre que  le malheur de Tit-Coq aurait bien pu etre le sien, et que le probleme religieux  pose par le divorce  est bien un peu son probleme tout  comme  l'est aussi celui des enfant illegitimes.
A  l'exemple de  Louis  Hernon, Gratien  Gelinas a  fait  de Tit-Coq
l'etude psychologique  d'un  type populaire profondement humain; !'ele­ ment  principal est le personnage,  !'intrigue ne sert  qu'a  l'eclairer. Mais alors  que  le  conftit  psychologique  chez  Maria  Chapdelaine consiste  a choisir  entre  la fidelite a la terre  canadienne representee par  les voix de la patrie, et l'exil  volontaire  aux  Etats-Unis, le combat entre  la chair  et
!'esprit qui  dechire  le personnage  de Gelinas  est beaucoup plus vaste et bien plus fertile  en consequences. Tit-Coq et Marie-Ange doivent  choisir ou  de  rester  fideles a  leur  amour  malgre la  tare  qu'ils  transmettront a leurs  enfants,  ou d'accepter comme  un fait  accompli, irremediablement et pour  toujours, le mariage de Marie-Ange avec  un autre.
Tit-Coq rappelle aussi par certains cotes les heros de Mauriac. Comme
eux  jeune  et  vulnerable, et obsede  par  un desir  de purete  qui  semble  a certains moments   presque  pathologique, il constate l'effrayant heritage transmis a  l'homme par  le peche. 11 en souffre  comme  d'une  infirmite;

34

GRATIEN  GELINAS



1c  pech,
("Quand on se sent crotte," dit-il, et encore:  "quand on veut sortir de sa crasse".)  Chose  digne  de  remarque, c'est  que  son premier   mouvement apres  avoir  appris l'infidelite   de  Marie-Ange sera  de  chercher sa  re­ vanche  dans  l'alcool  et  le peche, comme  s'il pouvait  etouffer  par  la  son desir  de renaissance morale.
Cependant, si le drame de Tit-Coq est en  premier lieu  sa repulsion
physique  a  l'egard du  peche,  il est base aussi sur son sentiment tres vif d'avoir   ete  lese dans  sa  dignite  d'homme par  la  faute  de  ses parents. Parce  qu'on  aura  oublie  de lui accorder  en naissant  sa part  de dignite humaine, il se voit condamne a etre dedaigne  et rebute  par  la societe a laquelle  il voudrait s'identifier. Tout  etre  humain  a droit  a la tendresse et a l'appui d'une  famille; tout  enfant  a droit  a un pere et a une mere, se dit  Tit-Coq. L'absence de liens fait  de lui une epave fiottant c;a et la au gre de sa destinee.
Il dira au Padre:
Je  ne  connaissais pas  mieux,  alors j'etais tranquille,  tout  seul  dans  mon  coin. Comme ce clou-la, tenez: il rouille en paix au fond  de son trou, sans se douter qu'il pourrait @tre une  belle vis en cuivre.
Et plus tard sur le bateau qui l'emporte:
Ce  qui  est  triste,   je m'en   rends  compte, c'est  de  (ne)   pas  s'ennuyer ... et  (de n'avoir)  personne qui  s'ennuie de toi. Si je ne l'avais  pas  rencontree, elle,  (Marie­ Ange)    je  partirais aujourd'hui  de  la  m@me fa on,
bateau. Je  prendrais le large,  ni triste  ni gai, comme  un animal, sans savoir ce que j'aurais pu  perdre.
Desir d'etre rec;u sur un pied d'egalite avec les autres,  d'etre juge selon les regles,  desir  enfin  de  dignite  humaine, et  espoir  de  recommencer a zero, de  devenir  un  homme  nouveau,  sans tache,  voila  done  les mobiles de  Tit-Coq. Que  ses actions  le conduisent  a  l'impasse  ou il lui faudra choisir  entre  un amour charnel, sans issue pour lui, pour  Marie-Ange et pour  les enfants qu'ils  auront, et le renoncement au  bonheur  de se voir comme  Monsieur Toutle Monde en tramway  un dimanche soir, son petit dans  les bras  et  sa femme  a ses cotes,  rend son  dilemme encore  plus pathetique. S'il  avait  voulu,  il aurait pu  epouser avant  son depart celle que  dans  sa soif de purete il appelle  "Mam-zelle Toute-Neuve"; il ne l'a pas fait,  parce  qu'il  ne  veut  pas qu'un enfant  a lui naisse pendant qu'il est au loin.


35

GRATIEN  GELINAS



Epouser une  fille, pour  qu'elle  ait  un petit  de moi  pendant que  je serais au  diable vert?  Jamais en cent  ans! Simon pere etait  loin de rna mere  quand je suis venu  au monde, a  la  Misericorde ou  ailleurs, {$a  le  regardait. Mais  moi, quand mon  petit arrivera, je serai  la, a cote  de rna femme  .  . . Cet  enfant-la, il saura, lui, aussitot l'ceil ouvert, qui  est-ce qui est son pere  ... J'ai manque la premiere partie de rna vie, tant  pis, on n'en  parle  plus! Mais la deuxieme, j'y goO.terai d'un bout  a I'autre, par  exemple!

Ce desir d'en  finir une fois pour toutes avec le peche et cet espoir d'etre un jour un pere  de famille comme les autres,  font  de Tit-Coq unperson­ nage  avec  lequel  le grand public sympathise  facilement,  surtout au Canada fran<;ais. Demeure  profondement attache aux  valeurs  familiales et  a sa religion  en  depit  des tourmentes  du  vingtieme siecle, le peuple  canadien ne peut  s'empecher d'etre emu a la vue du  jeune  homme  qui, comme  dans un miroir, lui renvoie sa propre image.  Et il faut  reconnaltre que,  grace  a ses dons d'ecrivain et de comedien, puisque  c'est  lui-meme  qui  jouait  le role de Tit-Coq,  Gratien  Gelinas  a su projeter sa creation dramatique jusque dans l'ame de ses spectateurs. Ces derniers  se retrou­ vent sous les traits  de Tit-Coq; ils comprennent son dilemme et ils souf­ frent  avec lui.
Les personnages  secondaires  incarnent a leur  tour  la mentalite de leur milieu. Gens peu instruits-ils parlent cruet dru comme Tit-Coq-pas "superieurement intelligents" au dire  du pere  lui-meme, leur vie est une suite de jours tous pareils qui paraltraient surement monotones  n'etait-ce le grand  attachement qu'ils  ont  l'un  pour  l'autre, et  qui  pourrait faire envie. Si leur  bonheur  est simple et leurs aspirations plutot  mediocres,  ils n'en  sont  pas moins  un exemple  de stabilite dans  un monde  changeant. Doues  a  la fois d'un  bon sens pratique et  de sentiments sans complica­ tions,  ils peuvent  fort  bien  rappeler au  citadin canadien  d'aujourd'hui I'existence  paisible  d'un temps a jamais revolu. La aussi se revele le talent  de Gelinas,  car cette  famille  d'ouvriers qui  vit au fond d'un  petit  village ou tous les jours se ressemblent,  su:ffit a  jeter  le trouble dans d'ame pas­ sive de Tit-Coq. Pere, mere, frere et sreur, sont les rouages du mecanisme qui declenche l'action.
Le  personnage secondaire  le  plus  important est  Marie-Ange. Jeune
fille elevee au  sein d'une  famille  affectueuse  et  "parmi des parents pris
les uns dans  les autres  comme  des morceaux de  puzzle",  selon Tit-Coq, elle represente tout  ce qui  jusque-la  a ete refuse a ce dernier. Elle est a

GRATIEN GELINAS



la  fois un  "petit mouchoir de  fantaisie", qu'il  faut  prendre garde  de salir,  et  "Mam'zelle Toute-Neuve" qui  reussira  a transformer le  jeune
homme.  Ce  sera  elle la depositaire de  toute  la  tendresse  accumulee au cours  des  annees  solitaires,  et c'est  en elle que se realiseront le reve de purete   de  Tit-Coq et  son espoir  de  dignite  humaine. Il  explique ainsi cette  transformation:
La  fille que  j'aimerai au point  de lui glisser un jonc dans  le doigt,  je lui serai fidele de  la  tete  aux  pieds  et  d'un dimanche a l'autre, laissez-moi  vous  le dire! Encore
une  fois, faudrait pas me  prendre pour  un buveur d'eau henite; mais  les situations im gulieres,
fesses dedans!

Et plus loin:
Moi,  je ne  m'imagine pas  senateur dans  le parlement, plus  tard, ou  ben  million­ naire   dans   un  chateau. Non!   Moi,  quand  je  reve,  je  me  vois  en  tramway,,  un dimanche soir, vers sept  heures  et quart, avec mon petit  dans les bras, et, accrochee apres  moi,  rna femme . . .  Dans  le tram, il y aurait un homme comme les autres, ben ordinaire avec son chapeau gris, son foulard blanc,  sa femme et son petit.  Juste comme   tout  le  monde. Pas  plus, mais  pas  moins!  Pour  un  autre, ce serait  peut­ etre  un  ben  petit  avenir, mais  moi,  avec  c;a, je serais  sur  le pignon  du  monde!

L'amour de Marie-Ange est un amour  sincere et realiste.  Elle accepte son fiance  tel qu'il  est, sans nom, sans famille, et sap.s autre situation que la  presente,  celle  de soldat  de Sa  Majeste. C'est  peu de garanties pour toute  une vie, mais la  jeune fille, pratique comme  le sont d'ordinaire les gens du peuple,  fait aussi preuve d'une certaine sensibilite en comprenant
!'importance du  contexte familial pour   Tit-Coq. C'est sur  cet  atout
qu'elle  compte etablir leur  mariage.

.  . .  mon   mari   a moi,  tout   l'amour qu'il   aura  dans  sa  vie, c'est   a moi  qu'il   le devra; a moi,  Marie-Ange Desilets,  et  a la  parente que   je lui  donnerai! Si une femme est  heureuse de  se  sentir indispensable a un  homme,  je serai   loin  de
m'embeter en menage!

Sure  de  lui,  Marie-Ange laisse  done  partir   son  fiance.  Mais  elle  a compte  sans sa propre faiblesse, car si son amour est sincere, illui manque la  profondeur des  sentiments de  Tit-Coq. D'un  caractere plus  frivole,
adorant la danse et les sorties, elle se lasse de la fidelite  juree a l'absent et,
encouragee parses parents qui aiment  bien le jeune soldat  mais qui pre­
fereraient un meilleur  parti  pour leur fille, elle epouse pour son malheur le pretendant jadis econduit.

37

GRATIEN  GELINAS



Si Tit-Coq se rapproche du peuple par son attitude de gavroche comi­ que  et  pathetique, Marie-Ange represente les  joies de  Ia famille et son attachement aux  us et coutumes.  Son erreur peut  etre imputee en partie a son milieu.  Le raisonnement qui Ia pousse a epouser  l'homme riche  et
respecte  au lieu d'attendre le soldat sans nom et sans situation qu'est Tit­ Coq,  est ici le defaut  de sa classe sociale. Reconnue pour son bon sens et son  esprit  pratique, celle-ci,  en general,  manque d'imagination.  II faut  admettre, cependant, que  ce meme sens des realites  aidera  Marie-Ange
a comprendre a Ia fin que leur amour  est condamne, qu'il  n'a pas d'autre
issue que de donner  Ia vie a un second Tit-Coq, tare  comme  son pere.

MARIE-ANGE :
Le  jour  ou  tu  te debattrais contre  Ia tentation d'aller chercher ailleurs  ce que  tu voulais,  ce  que  tu  voudras toujours, qu'est-ce que  j'aurais, moi,  pour  te  retenir?
... Qu'est-ce qui  resterait  de notre  bonheur, ce  jour-la?

TIT-coQ, desespere:
II resterait I'enfant  ... I'enfant que tu peux  me donner!

MARIE-ANGE, se cac hant la  figure:
Non!  Pas  a,
pas, de cet enfant-Ia ... parce  qu'il  serait,  comme  toi, un  ... par  rna faute.

Grace  aux  canadianismes et  aux  expressions  non-academiques que
Gelinas  n'hesite  pas a mettre dans Ia bouche de ses personnages, leur lan­
gue est non moins pittoresque qu'authentique.  D'origine paysanne-on
pense en effet aux paysans de Maria Chapdelaine-ce langage populaire, touchant par sa naivete et en meme temps d'une  drolerie irresistible, pos­ sede  une  grande puissance  evocatrice.  Si l'on  tient  compte  des  images precises qui abondent, il est impossible de ne pas accepter Tit-Coq comme  une  tranche de vie emouvante et veridique, creee  de toutes pieces, mais basee sur de solides qualites d'observation. La vulgarite du vocabulaire est
peut-etre parfois  a deplorer, pourtant, en pla  ant
cadre,  elle ajoute  encore a Ia verite de Ia creation.
Quelle  conclusion  reste-t-il  a tirer  de Tit-Coq? Tout d'abord, que son
apparition sur la scene canadienne a inaugure un champ d'action nou­
veau  en  ce  qui  concerne  le  theatre au  Quebec. A la  suite  de  Gelinas, d'autres ecrivains  dramatiques dont  Marcel Dube  avec  Le Temps des lilas et Zone, ont fait du peuple  canadien leur source  d'inspiration. II est encore  trop tot pour  juger de l'ampleur du mouvement ou de son merite,

GRATIEN GELINAS



mais si l'on  considcrc  les pieces de theatre des dernieres  annees  ainsi que Ia  creation de  nouvelles  troupes  telles que  Ia Comedie  Canadienne­ fondee  et  dirigee  par  Gelinas  lui-meme  et  qui  joue  surtout des pieces d'inspiration canadienne-et le Theatre  du  Nouveau Monde, l'art dramatique est en renouveau  au Canada fran ais.
piece comme  Bousille et les justes de Gelinas  (qui a deja  a son actif plus
de II o representations), tenir  l'affiche  pendant des semaines,  pour con­ stater   que  le  theatre  populaire est  reellement  installe  parmi  le  grand  public.
Pour  ce qui est de Gratien Gelinas, il faut lire son credo  professionnel si l'on veut comprendre comment  cet homme  qui est a Ia fois auteur dramatique, directeur, acteur et  metteur en scene, obtient   aujourd'hui avec Bousille et les justes le meme succes qu'il y a douze ans avec Tit-Coq.
Travaille pour  les tiens,  tu  n'auras pas  perdu  ta vie.  Ecris  pour  l'homme de  ton pays, de  ta ville, de  ta  rue.  Si tu ,ecris pour  lui, il viendra cet  homme oublie  de ta rue, s'asseoir  devant ton  reuvre  ... Et,  les mains  posees sur  les genoux, il rira  et pleurera. Et il n'aura point  envie de s'en  aller, car-comme  jamais  jusque-la-il se verra  lui-meme et pas un autre en toi.4

II faut  esperer que ce theatre national naissant, s'il reste populaire pour le moment, verra  d'autres ceuvres durables,  et que l'exemple de Gratien Gelinas  stimulera chez les jeunes auteurs  canadiens l'enthousiasme crea­ teur  indispensable a leur  realisation.
4   La Presse, Montreal, 13 avril  1959.








39


VISION	OF	CLARITY

THE POETRY OF WILFRED WATSON


John W.  Bilsland





WFRED WATSON is a person of highly developed sensibilities. One cannot  listen to him talk for any length  of time without being  struck  by the  keenness and  intensity  of his response  to the  world
around him.  Whether he speaks of  French lettuce, spring  sunrises  in Edmonton, the funeral  of Utrillo,  Mozart's Requiem, or the shape of an automobile, he constantly  reveals himself as one vividly aware  of his sense experiences. Of all these experiences-if  one can  judge from  his poetry
-those which  affect  him most deeply  and  lastingly  are  those which  he knows visually:  with notable frequency  the imagery of his poems is drawn from   effects  of  colour,  form,  light,  and  darkness.   It is not  surprising, therefore, to learn  that  Watson  has at  various  times tried  his hand  as a painter, nor is it surprising  to find among  his poems a number of pieces reflecting  his interest  in painters  and  their  work.  In  the  course  of these he makes some profoundly  perceptive comments not only on the particu­ lar effects of individual paintings,  but also on the nature of art in general,  and on the strength of these comments  one can move towards some under­ standing of Watson's  essential nature as a poet.
The  central claim  which  Watson  makes  for  great  painting is that  it
illuminates. In the lines on Emily Carr, in Friday's Child, he writes of the painter:

... down  the valley you looked  and saw All wilderness  become  transparent vapour, A ghostly underneath a fleshly stroke,
And every bush an apocalypse of leaf

VISION  OF  CLARITY



And  in an  unpublished poem  on a still life by Stanley  Cosgrove  he de­ clares  that  in  the  formal  balance  of the  finished  painting the  beholder  finds



Claritas
 
The  palpable

Till  the difficult mind sees
Clear'

The  artist  is one who  initially  sees deeply and  clearly  into  the nature of things,  and  who  then  has the capacity  to reveal his insight  to others.
Nowhere  does Watson  demonstrate more fully his faith  in the illumi­ nating  power  of great  art  than  in his meditation on Rembrandt's Bath­ sheba." Through this painting of Hendrickje Stoffels as Bathsheba, Wat­ son's  own  response  to  the  biblical  subject  has  been  both  enriched and clarified,  and  therefore heightened. By a complex emotional, intellectual, and  imaginative  process the  poet  has  moved  to a  grasp  of all  that  is caught in  Rembrandt's  curiously  suggestive  treatment of Bathsheba as she waits,  proud  yet saddened, for the royal David: Hendrickje's fleshly beauty  exerts  its strong  sexual  attraction, and  in so doing  brings  a new sympathetic understanding of  David's  lust  for  similar  beauty  in  Bath­  sheba; the attractiveness of  the painted  figure gives rise to the idea  that  Hendrickje, impressed   by  her  own  beauty  as  revealed  by the  painter, must  have felt a pride  in her loveliness akin to the pride  of Bathsheba in hers;  this idea  in turn gives way to the thought that  perhaps Hendrickje also knew something of the sorrow of Bathsheba  when as a result of her own beauty Bathsheba learned the frailty of kings; and this thought leads to the  tragic foreshadowing implicit  in Bathsheba's sorrowful  expression and  in  the  surrounding darkness  which  ominously  closes in  upon  the magnificent central figure:

This  canvas darkens
Upon the  terrible poetry of our clay;
But I forget Rembrandt and  his Hendrickje, And  only see King David's Bathsheba,

Who  knew her husband done  unto the death; Who  bore  that  dead  son from King David's loin; And then  bore to the king at length  forgiven
The wise and  sorrowful man,  Solomon.

VISION  OF   CLARITY



Watson's conception of the function  and  value of painting is essentially religious-the painter, like the prophet, reveals things which have hither­ to  been  hidden to men  of limited  vision -and  when  one  turns to  his actual practice as an artist in another  medium, verse, one is not surprised  to find  that  he implicitly  conceives of poetry  as having much  the same function and  value. The  poet,  too, perceives  and  reveals. The  only sig­ nificant  difference  between  the  painter and  the poet  is one of means.


kE WORLD which  Watson  the  poet  tries  to reveal  is for him both simple and complex. There is an almost primitive simplicity in his concern  with the natural processes of copulation, birth,  and death;
in  his  recurring interest  in  the  contrast between  the  cruel  violence  of human behaviour and  the  perfect peace of  total love;  and  in his sad recognition that  man often seems determined to pervert, and  even deny, the  greatest values of life-beauty, light,  mercy,  pity, and  love. But in his treatments of these matters Watson  is sharply conscious of the com­ plexity of the world in which they play a part: ours is a world both beauti­ ful and  terrible, full and empty, brave and fearful; a world in which birth  implies death, love engenders  hate,  blessing leads to curse; a world where time  itself  is but  a misleading,  though  useful, illusion. And so it is that  when, in the "Love Song for Friday's  Child", Watson turns to the moment  of the first human act  of love, he offers a passage like this, simple in its essential  matter, but highly complex in its handling-its clarification­ of that  matter:
Then nor
Any day nor
Any moment neither
But now-ever and  ever
It was, and  the Garden of Eden was
The  day before. The first Love of the world,  the curst First  marriage poured
Into my veins its heaven.
And centuries of birds sang  laughter
Into my heart  of rafters
Till the tomb egg broken
A bell rang  and  swung  its thought

42

VISION  OF  CLARITY



White in the pulse and stanch
Of my black blood's  branch

Life  is itself simple,  but  the  living of life is an infinitely complex experi­
ence.
In  that  experience-if  it is to be full and satisfying -.Watson insists that  man  must recognize the fundamental importance of two forces, both centered in  the  individual being. One  is the will;  the other,  love. With great  frequency Watson  stresses his belief in the need for a positive exer­ cise of the  will if human endeavour is to prove fruitful. Ours  is a world grown  tired  and  sick, and in our world-sickness we have lost the capacity  for thoughtfully determined action:

Our shrouds are sea-rotten; and our  keels Are rust and weeds; broken  is our limb; Our winded oar is master  of our wills.3

When  we  act  we  do so on  impulse,  often  with  tragic  results.  Like  the Ancient  Mariner we destroy  what  we cannot  understand, and  we do so not with any particular end in view, but because we are baffled and hence disturbed:

And  what  was the use, now  you've shot the bird dead?
There was no use at all
To  shoot  the bird dead.
Now get me a drink, for I shot the bird dead.4

As Marlowe's Faustus knew  not what  to do with  the  powers he gained, and  frittered them  away  in trivialities,  so the  twentieth-century Faustus wastes the  capacities of his civilization  and  knows no greater happiness, no greater sense of fulfilment, than  did his predecessor:

Drift we and sift we Into the ftourcloth sourcloth cities, silent Or mumbling dumb.s

So  highly  does  Watson   value  the  conscious  will  as  essential  to  the human spirit,  that  when  he offers up a hymn of praise  to God's mankind he  takes  as  the  particular object  of his praise  an  old  woman  who has nothing left but her will. Stripped though she is of almost all bodily bless­ ings, she still  burns  with  the  fire of her  own determination, the  fire of her  will-full nature, and  although it is true  that  this may reveal itself in

43

VISION  OF  CLARITY



"the  flash and strife" of hatred, and that  it may lead her into the parched deserts of sinfulness, so long as it blazes within  her she is one of God's mankind and deserving of praise:

I praise God's  mankind in an old woman: I hear  him rattle  the body of an old wife Dry and  brown, and  bitter  as bracken,
Her  stalk womb-cancelled, sere with seedgone;
With shrivel fingers clutching upon  her life, Wrestling for the empt)1 pod and  the dry leaf.
But still in her mildewed  eyes moist's  last token­ But oh, ever in her eyes the flash and strife,
Husk edge, cruel  and sharp as an,y knife
Which  not God's  death itself can  unsharpen.6

The  will alone,  however, is not sufficient in itself. If man is to achieve his highest  fulfilment  he must subject  his will to the power  of love. The first poem in Friday's  Child, the "Invocation", makes  clear  the import­ ance Watson attaches to this power:

0 love, teach  us to love you, that  we may
Through burning Carthage take our  way.

And  in the  course  of  the  poems  which  follow  the  "Invocation" the values and  the  demands  of love are constantly held  before  us. Watson  is obviously deeply aware  of himself as a member of a social whole:  the I is always seen as part  of a larger  We to whom  he extends  his words of con­ solation,  and for whom he offers up his prayers.
The  title  of  Friday's  Child  gives, of course,  a clear  indication of the emphasis  ,Watson  places on love:  "Friday's Child", in the  words of the nursery  rhyme,  "is loving and  giving",  and  this collection  of poems can be read  as a set of variations on the theme  of love. Some of these varia­ tions consist  of  re-workings  of traditional romantic  material-Aeneas' desertion  of  Dido,  Orpheus' fatal  glance  at  Eurydice-but Watson's concern  is not primarily with  the raptures and sorrows of romantic love. This  love is to him  chiefly  important in so far  as it  becomes  part  of a universal  love-force. Love is both  the source of life and  the law of living. The  Creation itself was an act of divine love in which  love decreed  all:

.  . .  love which sang, the first light  commanded, The  waters  divided, the earth parcelled out

44

VISION  OF   CLARITY



For flowers, beasts and  creeping things, The air given for birds,
The sun made  round  and  warm, The moon  mild as milk  . .  . .7

And  although man  has long since lost the  primal  joy of Eden,  his great hope for its restoration lies in yet another act of divine love:

.  .  . the  singing
Rose sang in the lap of Mar). Darkness
Sang  to the light and  the kiss of love was peace.B

Only when  man accepts  his place in the divine scheme of love, however, and  recognizes  that  this  scheme  demands that  he love all other  beings, can he know the full blessings of life :

Do not begin loving
To  dumb  now
Your  prayer  but pray now even For  the old woman  of the waters The gull galls, and  the heron, For the old woman  crossing
And  breeding  all creatures
In  the weathers
Of her waspnest  brow

So may the Lord  bless
Your  loving
And  have all merc)l upon  your soul
And wrap  it in the white  lamb's  wool
And bind
It white  to the world's  end.9

In  the "Love  Song for  Friday's  Child" Watson  offers his fullest  con­ sideration of the nature of love and its place in the divine plan. The poem takes  the  form  of a  series of seven  meditations, and in  these  Watson imaginatively suggests some of the various forms of love, their attributes and  their  values. Here  one finds the love of man and  woman in its bridal  rapture, the love of mother for child, and the innate love of man for what is good.  And  all  these -like all  varieties  of love -are  one in  essence. All find  their  source in the love of God, that  love first made manifest in the Creation, and  later  reaffirmed  in the Incarnation:


45

VISION  OF   CLARITY



0 Mother of Sorrows, standing
By y,our Son hanging,
The love that  began again
Ask for us, and again  and  again
World  without end
(V,  I3-I7)

Watson's  concern  with  love as the great  power  in life has persisted  in his  work  since  Friday's  Child. One  finds clear  evidence  of it  in such a passage as this from an unpublished poem, "The Harrow of Love":

Forgive us the flesh of fires, the city
Fleshed with fire, our sin undone
That our flesh must  breed burn  and  bleed
To break  this heart  to pity. Forgive  the nail re-driven. Forgive  the harrow of women.
Forgive this hand  because  this hand  cannot bind In peace the peace  this hand in war must  find Forgive this blood's spill
Of blood till all
Our  blood is pity,, this harrow
Of love, till all our love is sorrow

But perhaps the  most striking  evidence of it is to be found  in a quite re­ markable short  story, also unpublished, "The Lice".  In  this the central character, a bishop, performs a sublime  act of love, taking  upon himself the  sins of his flock. The  all-embracing nature of this love, its fusion of the  human and  the  divine,  is revealed  at  the  moment of the  bishop's deepest  agony  when, rising above  the suffering  of the flesh, he calls out, "My  God I love thee".
As a result of his belief in the all-importance of love Watson  is a poet very  conscious  of "the  pity  of  things".  Running through his work is a warm  humanity which  keeps him constantly aware  of the suffering,  the tragedy, of human existence. The  death  of an aged prostitute moves him to comment:

The  worth  of better  people Teaches them  how to die But we must bring a candle
And on our  knees must  pray
For  her on Judgment Day10

VISION   OF  CLARITY



He sees a woman  in a graveyard, and despite his conviction  that  even in death  love offers the great  hope of the world he still is deeply  moved by man's  pathetic inability  to accept  the  brute  fact of death:
0 mother grieving
The grief that  is common  and human
0 woman  wonderful In your small miracle Of faith and  loving-
Quiet y:ou, that  another miracle
Must  come and  the wind  blow Into the troubles  of the sky The dust  you place
On  the upraised hand
Of this high cliff  .  . .   "

And even in his satiric  moments-and they are frequent-his attitude is never entirely  devoid  of pity. In the "Ballad  of Faustus" he comments sharply on the emptiness  of a number  of persons' lives, but sharp  though his comments are he cannot  conceal his pity for the human beings doomed to live  those  lives. A lone spinster  whose virtue  is entirely  negative  sits smugly thinking of her goodness while a dripping tap makes its suggestive comment, both cruel and pitying:
Day after  day adds up, she thought
To  a clear  and  perfect  chrysolite
And she folded  her hands  in her lap - Perhaps, said the tap, drip  drip
(V.  1-4)

The  very audibility of the small sound in the room is more  than  enough to suggest the bleak emptiness of her life.



CoM WATSON's  WORK emerges,  then,  a  vision of life governed  by responsibility  and  love. The  tragedy  of human existence has resulted  from  man's  failure to accept  these as the  basis of living. Only when he restrains his impulse to kill the white bird, and acts as love directs him can man hope for happiness.
Quite evidently  this is an almost sublimely simple intellectual basis for living. But, as I have already suggested, despite the simplicity  of Watson's

47

VISION  OF  CLARITY



themes  his  poetry  reflects a  very  realistic  appreciation of  the  complex nature of the moment  of human  existence. In the poetry, therefore, Wat­ son establishes a certain  tension between  the simple idea on the one hand,  and  the packed  image on the other,  the image  which conveys with some­ times  startling vividness  the  mingled   experience in  which  the  idea  is revealed.
In  his  imagery  Watson  gives clear  evidence  of his strongly  sensuous
nature. Some of the most striking passages in his work are those in which he conveys a  particularly vivid sense experience. In  the  brief lyric "For Anne,  Who  Brought  Tulips" he  recreates the  effect which  the  sight  of full-blown  tulips has had  upon him:

Let  these trumpets tongued with dust  blow their  magnificent
Brief music;  not for the exigent
Last  moment, when the creature at last comes home
To  reason, order,  proportion, doom; But in a period of disordered haste Let  them blow their blast
To  mark  the ceremony of season
When  all the weather  is unreason.

Similarly, in  "Ghosts", he evokes the  mood  into  which  he passed  when struck by the beauty of hyacinths:

Purple and  red hyacinths
Before their  fading
Are bells tolling
The sleeper to the apparition
Of beauty;, the angel  in the room
Which  like a ghost
Comes  and departs
Leaving  a wonder  and  a horror
In  our unspeakable hearts

But  Watson's imagery  here,  as elsewhere,  seeks to do more  than  simply call  up corresponding sensory responses in his reader. To speak of tulips as  "trumpets tongued  with  dust"  is to  suggest  directly and  vividly  the physical  nature of the  flowers, but  to  move  on  to suggest that  those trumpets may  even sound  is to introduce something beyond  the  simple sense impression.  And then to declare further that  they will not, however, sound  at  the  Last  Judgment, announcing the  completion of the  divine

VISION   OF  CLARITY



plan,  is to  introduce something yet once  again  removed.  But  all  these elements  fuse into  an  imaginative entity  when  in the  last four  lines the poet  establishes  his central contrast  between  the  graceful  stateliness  of the  tulip-itself  the very symbol of "reason,  order, proportion"-and the  tumult  of the  unsettled spring  weather in which  it blooms. And,  in much  the same way, in "Ghosts" the hyacinths  are seen first as "bells"­ a simple  visual image -but then these bells are  described as calling  the sleeping  soul into  the  presence  of beauty  which  comes and  goes like a ghost,  leaving  "a  wonder  and  a horror" behind.
Watson  almost  never  presents  a simple  sense impression  for  its own sake. He recognizes that  in the actual moment of sensory excitement a multitude of feelings and  thoughts,  like a complicated counterpoint, play around and  condition the  central  response, and  in his poetry  he tries to suggest this mingled  richness. Even in such a simple  poem as "The Juni­ per Tree" one can  recognize  the poet's concern with  this mingling. Here two lovers arrange to meet  beneath  the  juniper  tree,  but when the time of meeting  arrives  the  man  finds his beloved white  as death, and  when he seeks to claim a kiss,

0 never you will, said she
0 never you will, said she

The  interest of the poem lies in the development of a mood of heavy fore­ boding  into  which  the  maiden's almost  flippant  reply  cuts like a  sharp knife.  To  suggest  this mood  Watson  makes considerable use of  colours, establishing in the course of the narrative a most suggestive tonal pattern. When   the  lover  first  comes  to  the  juniper  tree  the  juniper  cone burns  blue:  all is soft and  tender. But as he waits, "the black  minutes  go by", and  an ominous foreshadowing is suggested. He hears a "red fox cough", and  the  first  hint  of blood  appears, a hint  which  is  to  be left fearfully  ambiguous at  the  end  of the  poem. Always" the  black  minutes  go by", and  when  rain  comes  the  ominousness deepens  for  the  rain  falls in a "black wet sleet".  And  then, when the maiden appears and stands  before her love in the blackness,

As white as death was she
As white as death was she

And now the mood  is established  for the climactic question  and  answer:


49

VISION   OF  CLARJTY



Then  why are you so long my; love, my love
As I waited  at the juniper tree? But now I will kiss our
0 never  y;ou will, said she
0 never  y;ou will, said she

Much  more, of course than  the little narrative and  the colour sequence enters  into the total  experience  of "The Juniper Tree" -a cow laments the  loss of its calf;  an  owl flies low through the  juniper branches; and the  wind  blows rattling seeds in the  dead  weeds-but all  that  plays a part  has this in common  with  the narrative and  the colour sequence: it bears in some way on the central  experience, and at the same time it realistically  enriches  the  experience.  And  the  more  of Watson's poetry one reads,  the  more one appreciates his ability  to reveal comprehensible form  in a moment of life without  stripping that  moment  of its richness.
Probably  the most striking  examples  of this ability  are  to be found  in
some of Watson's briefest images. In the "Love Song for Friday's Child", considering the  first act  of love between  man  and  woman,  he speaks of "the tomb egg broken", and in so doing rouses a great  complex of feelings, images, and ideas, all relevant  and illuminating. (In  the egg life normally develops,  but  in  this  egg-although  life  will  come-death is also to develop; birth  comes now for  men  who  must  die;  from  the  moment  of conception, in life we are  in death; this act  will lead  ultimately to two tombs-that of  mortal man, but  also  that  of Christ-and from  the entrance to the second tomb the stone shall be pushed  aside.)  In such an image  as this, clear  and  strong in its immediate effect, yet inexhaustibly suggestive in its implications, one finds the medium in which  Watson,  at his best, speaks. Here  in his own poetry  is the  equivalent of what  he so highly values in painting:



Claritas
 The palpable

Till the difficult mind  sees
Clear

In  vividly  sensuous terms  he offers his own clear  vision of life, and  lets that  vision affect  us by becoming part  of our own experience.
When  Northrop Frye reviewed Friday's Child he concluded his review with these words:

50

VISION  OF  CLARITY



How  postrrity will sort  out  and  rank  the  poets  of today  I do not  know,  nor much care; but  in such  poems  as "In the Cemetery of the Sun," the "Canticle of  Dark­ ness" and  perhaps the  title  poem, one may; catch  a glimpse  of the  reasons why, in the course  of time, what  the  poet has to say about his culture becomes  so important and  what  everyone else has  to  say becomes  so much  less so.'•

What  Wilfred Watson  offers in his particular vision of life is almost child­ like in its essential simplicity,  but the vision of the child is not to be under­ valued: it often  has a directness  and  a courage  beyond the command of the  knowing  adult. And  at  its most searching it  has  the  claritas which Watson  so highly values.




NOTES

' "The Simple Cup: Lines  on a Still Life by; Stanley  Cosgrove". For  permission to use  this  and   other  unpublished material, and  for  g,enerous  assistance  given  in  long conversations, I gratefully acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr.  Watson.
2   "Of  Hendrickje as Bathsheba".
3  "Invocation", 4-6.
4    "The White Bird", I 8-2 I.
5   "Ballad of Faustus", VII, 5-7· (In  Delta, July  I958,  I-5.)
6   "Lines: I Praise  God's  Mankind in an Old Woman", I-Io.
7   "Canticle of Darkness". 13- I 8.
8  Ibid., 59-6r.
9    "A Valediction for the End  of the Year", 48-62.
'
11  "Graveyard on a Cliff of White  Sand", I4-24.
•• "Letters in Canada, I 955", University of Toronto  Quarterly, XXV, I 956, 294·



















51


PIONEER
ENTERTAINMENT

Michael R.  Booth


THEATRICAL TASTE IN  THE EARLY CANADIAN WEST
Ta.PIONEERS  who began slowly to encroach  upon the vast, unsettled  regions of the American 1West brought with them a hunger for theatrical entertainment. Primitive  theatres or "opera houses" sprang
up  everywhere in  the  new  mining  towns  of the  Pacific  Coast  and  the Rocky  Mountains. The  need for drama and  theatrical diversion  was no less evident  in  the  Canadian pioneer to  the  north, where in British Columbia theatrical activity  followed  immediately upon  settlement. Of original drama there  was virtually  no trace   (for  reasons which  will  be apparent later),  but  theatres multiplied. The   first  Canadian theatres west of Ontario were built in Victoria, New Westminster, and Barkerville in the I 86o's, and  well before British Columbia joined  Confederation in
I 87I it had  a flourishing  theatrical life.
Victoria's first theatre, the Colonial,  was opened  in 186o, although professional  and  amateur performances had  been given previously in converted halls and on board  naval vessels in the harbour. By 1865, four theatres had catered  at various times  (often  competing) to a regular population of  about  5,ooo.  Victoria could not  accurately be called  a frontier town. In some respect it was, especially with its large floating population of  miners;   theatrical activity  increased greatly   during   the winters  of the  Cariboo gold  rush,  when thousands of restless miners waited  in Victoria  for the coming of the spring  thaw  which would permit them  to rush northward and work their claims. However, the core of the community was a sophisticated and conservative circle of British settlers: civil servants,  Hudson's  Bay Company men, naval and military  personnel. Their tastes  were  plainly  reflected in the plays they went to see.

52

PIONEER  ENTERTAINMENT



Not surprisingly, then, the most popular  dramatist in Victoria  was Shakespeare, although the 49 performances of his plays form only a small part  of the  repertory of  I 86o-6s.  Hamlet  (I 1 ) , Macbeth ( 8),  Othello ( 6), Richard  III, The  Taming of the Shrew, and  Romeo  and  juliet  (5 each) were the  most often  acted.  There were scattered performances of
I  Henry  IV, Henry  VIII,  Richard II, King  Lear, The  Merchant  of
Venice, and  As You  Like It. The only other Elizabethan play was A New Way  to  Pay Old  Debts, which  owed  its  nineteenth-century revival  to Edmund Kean's powerful  Sir Giles Overreach.
The  Daily British Colonist's attitude to Shakespeare was one of awful
respect  and  reverence,  and  can  best be summed  up in its description of Hamlet as "the sublimest  production of the  pen  of the  immortal Bard of Avon".  However, it censured  a performance of As You  Like It for the retention of "several  objectionable passages which  have  long since been discarded as ill suited  to the present  age of refinement". Doubtless it was relieved  by an Othello "pruned of certain  passages and  phrases  offensive to the modern  ear".
Shakespeare did not always receive the most competent acting or production. Victoria   depended on San  Francisco  for  dramatic  troupes. Their usual  professional circuit  was San  Francisco-Portland-Victoria, with tours in Washington and Oregon and the odd side-trip to New West­ minster,  where  a theatre had  been opened in I86o. However, the length of the  journey  by sail or steam  from  San  Francisco  certainly  kept com­ panies  away  from  Victoria, and  sometimes it went without actors  at all. Those  who  did  make  the  trip  were often  mediocre,  a  truth  attested by one witness who  has  left an eloquent  account  of a  Macbeth  in the Vic­ toria  Theatre, a  "commodious and  elegant  temple of Thespis", as the Colonist called it.
The  curtain rose on  a cotton  plantation set, which  had  done  service for Octoroon, backed  by a door and parlour  windows draped with claret curtains, "a  preposterously free  rendering of the  'blasted heath'".  The company  laboured under  a poverty of actors and acting  talent. The mur­ dered  Duncan kept  reappearing, first as a supplementary witch and then as the queen's  physician.  One  of the witches, a bearded six-footer  with a glass screwed into one eye, sang his part  from the score in his hand  as he leaned  against  a tropical tree.  (This  was still  Davenant's semi-operatic Macbeth  with Locke's music). The cotton plantation gave way to "much


53

PIONEER  ENTERTAINMENT



tattered and  very extraordinary mountains and  water", but  the  parlour and  curtains  remained,   now  changed into  wings.  The   banquet  tables were  totally  bare,  and the four actors  at each  table  remained motionless during the banquet scene, except for one who peeled an apple while Mac­ beth  was  distracted by Banquo's  ghost.  Macbeth and  his  queen  were enthroned on  shabby  horsehair   chairs  placed  on  a  large  packing-case which  bore  in  large  letters  the  name  of  the  ship  that  brought it.  The  climax  came in the conjuration scene, where  there were only three  actors to  represent the  line of eight  kings. Each  could  be  perceived,  after  one appearance, crawling  hastil}l under  the  back scene to join the procession from  behind,  each  king "enveloped from  head  to foot in a sheet". Un­ fortunately, one of the sheets caught  on a nail, and  the actor's struggles to free  himself  could easily be seen through  the dilapidated back-cloth. No  kings  came  forth; the  performance  stopped. At  last  the  breathless actor  appeared in tatters,  the lower half  of his sheet torn away  to reveal tweed  coat  and  trousers.  The  audience  "broke  into  a  perfect  shout  of uncontrollable laughter".'
Not  all  Shakespeare was performed like this in Victoria. One  of the
high  points  of its  theatrical history  was  the  visit of Charles and  Ellen Kean  in  1864.  The  Keans  presented   Hamlet, Macbeth, Othello,  King Lear/   Richard  II, Henry VIII, and  The  Merchant  of Venice, all  rap­ turously  received  by both  the Colonist and  crowded  houses. In his fare­  well speech,  Kean  said that  it was gratifying "to  find in this remote  part  of the world  while efforts were put forth  to develop the natural resources of the country   ... Shakespeare and  the  poets could find a response".
The  staple  dramatic fare, aside from Shakespeare, was nineteenth cen­ tury melodrama, comedy, and farce.3 As almost every evening's entertain­ ment  consisted  of a double bill concluding with  a farce, farce was easily the  most popular of these categories.  Eighteenth century comedy,  out of fashion  in the Victorian age, was represented by only the occasional  per-


' N. de Bertrand Lugrin, Pioneer Women of Vancouver Island,  1928, pp.  219-222.

2   In which  Ellen  Kean,  portly and  58, played  the  Fool. The Colonist called  her "no less successful   .  . . . . than  in her female  characters".

3  Opera did  not  come  to  Victoria until   r867,  when  the  Bianchi Company from San   Francisco  presented  Il  Trovatore, Norma, L' Elisir  d' Amore, and   Lucia  di Lammermoor.


54

PIONEER  ENTERTAINMENT



formancc of  Colman's The  jealous Wife, Moore's  The  Gamester, and Centlivre's The Wonder. The  most commonly  performed plays were the dramas of Boucicault  (including eight performances each of The Colleen
Bawn  and  The Octoroon), the farces  of Buckstone  and  J. M.  Morton,
and  the comedies  of Tom  Taylor.  Bulwer-Lytton's dramas, The Lady  of
Lyons  ( I 2) and  Richelieu ( 6), Jerrold's nautical play, Black-Eyed  Susan (I I), and  Tobin's comedy,  The   Honeymoon  ( IO),  were  also standard repertory pieces. Eighteenth century  tragedy  was confined  to Sheridan's Pizarro and  an  English  adaptation of Schiller's  The Robbers.
The  more  sensational melodramas were  also popular. From  r86o  to I865,  Victoria   saw  several  moral  treatments of drink  and  crime: The Drunkard, Ten  Nights   in  a  Bar-Room, The   Drunkard's Progress  (in eight  tableaux, and  The Six  Degrees of  Crime, wherein  "a  young man starting out  in life with  a large  fortune  at  his command, squanders the same on wine, women, and gaming, and becomes a thief and a murderer, and  finally  dies  by the  hands  of the  public  executioner". Other  melo­ dramas included The  Spectre  Bridegroom, The  Somnambulist, The Floating  Beacon,  or The Norwegian  Wreckers, and  The Sea  of Ice, in which  a mother and  her  baby are shipwrecked in the Arctic,  the mother murdered, and  the  baby,  brought  up by savages, reappears in the last act as a Parisian lady with  a savage and  untamed  spirit  beneath her super­  ficial refinement.
Entertainments lighter  than  the legitimate drama also formed  a part of  Victoria's theatrical life.  In  I86I, the  San  Francisco Minstrels and Buckley's  Minstrels visited  the  Colonial  and  Moore's Music  Hall,  and later  several  semi-professional minstrel  troupes  were formed. The "deli­ neation  of  Ethiopian eccentricities" was popular; one  theatre,  the  Ly­ ceum,  was  largely  given  over  to  minstrel  shows. The  Orrin  family,  a group  of acrobats and  gymnasts,  played  at the  Victoria Theatre, which earlier  had featured Miss Ella Cadez in a "Terrific Ascension on a Single Wire from the Stage  to the Gallery!"


kE CONDITIONS  OF   theatrical  activity in  Barkerville were  quite  different from  those in Victoria.  Barkerville was very much
a pioneer  town, a frontier community. Gold had  been discovered  on Wil-


55

PIONEER NT RTAINMENT



Iiams Creek  in 1861, and  two years later  Barkerville was a crudely  and hastily constructed boom town, the centre  of the great  Cariboo  gold rush. Its  population fluctuated, but  at  the  height  of the  boom has  been  esti­ mated  at between 5,ooo and 1o,ooo.4
The  Theatre  Royal opened in  May,  1868,  and  burned   down  four
months  later  in  the  fire that  destroyed  Barkerville. A new building  was erected  to serve  both  as a  theatre and  a fire-hall  for  the newly-formed Williams  Creek  Fire Brigade. The  combination is probably  unique in theatrical history.  The  new theatre opened  in January, 186g. Records  of the Barkerville  theatre are available  until  1875, when  the Cariboo Senti­ nel ceased publication.
Three main  factors  determined the  dramatic life of Barkerville.  The
first was the nature of the audience.  Miners  and storekeepers formed  the town's population; there was nothing of the sophisticated elite to be found in Victoria. As a result, entertainment was much  lighter  in character. It may also have  been lighter  because of Barkerville's dependence on ama­ teurs,  who  are  not  always capable of serious  drama.  Furthermore, the theatre's physical  resources were very limited, even for the staging  of the more  spectacular  melodramas seen in  Victoria.  Barkerville  was  a  long way from  the regular  professional circuit,  and five hundred miles by river and  road  from  New Westminster. There  were no other  large  audiences on the way to make the return  journey profitable. In the seven years from
1868 to 1875, only three professional groups visited the town. Thus enter­ tainment was  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  Cariboo Amateur  Dramatic Association, formed  in 1865.
The  third  factor  affecting  the Barkerville stage was the fluctuating economic  prosperity of the  area.  The  theatre was built  at  the  height  of the  boom;  the  following  years constituted a  period  of steady  economic decline.  Businesses were  advertised  for  sale,  and  miners  and  merchants left town in increasing numbers.  Leading  amateurs in the C.A.D.A. were among  them,  and performances had to be cancelled for the lack of a cast. The  amateurs were always in financial  difficulties, and reports of poor attendance at the theatre were frequent. By r873, the Theatre Royal was in a state  of disrepair, and performances had virtually ceased.
Barkerville's repertory was much  the  same  as the  lighter  side of Vic-


4   Gordon Elliott, Quesnel, 1958, p. 26.

PIONEER  ENTERTAINMENT



toria;  farces  by  Bucks tone,   Morton, Craven, Oxenford, and  Charles Mathews formed  the greatest  part  of it. The amateurs tried nothing  more serious than  Taylor's comedies, Still Waters  Run  Deep and  The Ticket­ of-Leave  Man.  The  professionals  exhibited  farces  and  minstrel  shows. There was  no  Shakespeare, and  nothing  earlier  than  Charles Dibdin's ballad  opera,  The Waterman ( 1 7 74) . Even  straight  melodrama was rarely  performed. No professionals visited Barkerville after  r871, and the doldrums of  the  Theatre Royal  were  enlivened  only by an  evening  of Chinese   theatricals whose  strange  conventions  greatly   bewildered the Sentinel reporter.
One  play  of local  origin  was  A Trip  to Peace River, or, The  Road
Agents Abroad, "a new melo-drama, written for the occasion by Augustus
Frederick Funghoid, Esq.," its dramatis personae comprising Clem John­ son, a road agent; Steve Simmons, a hungry traveller; Jefferson Washing­ ton, landlord of Buckley House;  and  two Chinese  travellers. Acted  only once in  186g, A Trip  to Peace River does not survive,  but  it  appears to have  been  a good example of the immediately topical  play. On  the very day  it  was  performed parties  of miners  were  racing  northward to the Peace  River  area  in search  of new, reputedly rich gold fields. There had been much  rivalry  and secrecy along the route, and the event had already  stirred Barkerville. "Augustus Frederick Funghoid" was probably James  Anderson,  a Scottish  miner  and  author of Sawney's Letters, a collection  of  poetical   epistles  describing  a  miner's  life. The   Sentinel  called  him "foremost in the  rank  of Cariboo poets",  and he wrote songs to be sung at  dramatic performances as well  as the  prologue  read  on  the  opening night  of the second  Barkerville theatre, which  told the audience:

And  here  tonight, within  this spacious  hall
Built by kind labour  volunteered by all,
We meet  again -and by; your beaming  eyes
You're pleas'd  once more  to see the curtain rise.

It concluded elegantly:

Be you the laughing brooks 'mid sunny  beams, And  we the fountains that  supply the streams; And may the current, bright, unsullied, flow
In  rills of pleasure  to the house below.



57

PIONEER  ENTERTAINMENT



A coMPARISON of the  theatrical life of Victoria  and Barkerville reveals definite patterns of theatre-going. Firstly,  the charac­ ter   and   circumstances of  each   town   determined the   nature of  its entertainment. Victoria,   a  logical  terminus for  San  Francisco  touring
companies, depended almost entirely  on professionals; Barkerville,  far removed  from  the  regular  circuit,  on amateurs. The  differences  between the sort of plays produced  were in part created by the differences between the  audiences who  saw  them.  In  both  places  light  entertainment  was popular, but  only in Victoria  existed  a certain degree  of sophistication which  enabled  regular  support  to be given to Shakespeare. The  theatres in both towns were physically limited, but Victoria was at least able to reproduce the stage effects necessary for the success of sensational melo­ drama, whereas  this was impossible on the tiny Barkerville stage. Finally,  it  was  economic  prosperity  and  an  expanding population that  enabled  both  towns to have  a theatrical life at  all, but  in Barkerville the end of the  gold  rush  meant  the  end  of the  theatre. Victoria's theatre survived in  spite  of  the  economic  decline  because  the  town  was  not  completely reliant on gold for its existence.
When  we come  to examine  the  kinds of drama popular in the  early
West, we quickly realize that  there  was really no difference  between Vic­ toria's repertory and,  say, that  of any small  British provincial theatre of the  period.  Native  drama  could  not exist in a community dominated by elements  so close to Britain  in ancestry,  time, taste, and cultural outlook. In the case of Barkerville-a real frontier  town-there is a single example of a local piece produced; in Victoria, none. The distinctive  character of the  early  Canadian theatre comes from  its local environment, not from its  repertory; it  is a character all  the  more  marked in a community, which,  like Barkerville,  was closer  than  a  more  sophisticated town  like Victoria to the  pioneer  spirit  of the West.











ss



GOLD	RUSH
WRITING

Pierre Berton


THE  LITERATURE OF THE  KLONDIKE






WEN 1 FIRST BEGAN seriously  to study  the avail­ able literature dealing  with the Klondike gold rush in all its ramifications, I was struck  by two things : first, the astonishing number of  books -well over a hundred-that had  already  been written  on the subject   (not  to mention  several  hundred magazine  articles)  ; and, secondly,  the  dearth of books viewing  the  phenomenon as a whole.
This  should  not  have  been surprising.  The  great  stampede,  especially
in  its  latter stages, was  one  of the  best-covered news  events of the nineteenth century, coming  as it did in the first fine careless rapture of a popular and  personal   journalism   that  had  just  been  dubbed "yellow". There must  have  been  several  score of newspapermen in Dawson  City at  the  height  of the  gold  rush.  The  New York  Times, naturally, had  a man  there and  so did all the papers in New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, San  Francisco and  Seattle. The  Globe of Toronto had  a girl reporter on the scene and  so did  the Times  of London.  (She  later  became  a Lady.) The  Manchester  Guardian  had  a correspondent who  was to emerge  as one of the  great  tycoons of Klondike  gold mining.  (He  had  been a don at  Oxford.) Hearst's shrill  New York  journal sent a platoon  of five men to the Klondike, including the aging Poet of the Sierras, Joaquin Miller. All the leading  magazines, such as Harper's, Scribners, The  Century and so on,  had  their  own  men  on  the  spot.  Many  of these  later  committed their  experiences to hard  covers.
The  Klondike was  to  make  some literary  reputations. Jack  London, who  was in  Dawson  City  only briefly but  who certainly took a leading role in  the  rush  (he  piloted  boats on the  Whitehorse Rapids in 1897),

59

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



made  his name  several  years later  with  a Saturday Evening  Post serial titled Call of the Wild. Rex Beach was also part  of the stampede, though he never  actually reached  the Klondike. He  wrote  about  Nome, Alaska, but  is thought of as a "Klondike" novelist.  Robert  Service,  who did not go  near  the  Klondike  until  ten  years after   the  rush and  who  wrote  his first  book  before  he  actually  got  there,  extracted more  gold  from  the region than  99 per cent. of those who made  the trek in '98.
Yet  none  of these people  saw  the  Klondike  whole.  I  do not  wonder,
since this would have been a physical impossibility  in the days before the airplane. The  stampede sprawled  over an area  as large as India  and  half as big  again; the  stampeders,  one hundred thousand strong,  were scat­ tered  over  a wilderness  region a million  and  a half square  miles in size. It was like a war, with a dozen campaigns going on simultaneously. And thus,  in  the  hundred-odd books that  deal  directly  with  this glittering moment  in history  there was  (until  I wrote Klondike) only one that  at­  tempted to assess the full phenomenon. This was Kathryn Winslow's  Big Pan-Out', and even it did not try to detail several of the minor campaigns.
If I were to recommend only two eye-witness books about  the gold rush I  should  have  no hesitation  in naming  William  Haskell's  Two Years  in the  Klondike and  Alaska Goldfields2   and Teppan Adney's The Klondike Stampede of 1B97-9B\ which  meet  the  tests of readability and  authen­ ticity.
The  first is by a miner who was on the ground  before George Washing­ ton Carmack's famous strike changed  the face of the North. It is written with  clarity  and  perception. Adney's  book, written by the correspondent for  Harper's Illustrated  Weekly, takes up where  Haskell leaves off. Ad­ ney, a quite  remarkable figure not only in the Klondike but also, later,  in his adopted New  Brunswick, was one of the  first  reporters to reach  the goldfields  after   the  news of the  strike  reached  the  outside  world.  Any reporter who covered  the stampede had  to be more  than  a mere  casual observer; he became  part of the rush itself. To reach  Dawson Adney had  to trundle his ton of supplies over the passes, construct a bateau  on Lake Bennett, shoot  Miles Canyon  and  the  Whitehorse Rapids, and  navigate
400 miles  of  unknown  river.  On  arrival he  had  to build  himself  a  log
cabin.  He  writes  of the stampede, therefore, not as an onlooker  but as a participant. He  took his own photographs, made  his own sketches  and interviewed many of the original sourdoughs. As a result, his is one of the

6o

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



few authentic accounts we have of the Klondike Odyssey in its first phase. Adney  did  not  publish his  book  until I 8gg ; by this  time  the  literary marketplace was glutted with volumes about the stampede, many of them hastily contrived. The  public appetite was sated-indeed the very word "Klondike" had  taken  on a certain  tarnish-and so the book was poorly received.  It has since come into its own.
There are a few other  books that stand apart from the run-of-the-mine
reminiscences.  Near  the peak stands William  Ogilvie's  Early Days on the Yukon\in whose pages we sense the instincts of a born raconteur at odds with  the tight-lipped traditions of the civil servant.  Ogilvie was a govern­ ment  surveyor  who witnessed many of the memorable events of  I8g6. He was one of the  few men  on the spot who realized  that  history had  been made  that  August  evening  on Rabbit Creek (shortly to be  re-named "Bonanza"). He  took  affidavits  from  the  four  participants in the ironic drama of discovery:  from Robert  Henderson, the proud  and touchy pros­ pector,  from  Carmack the squaw-man, from  Skookum Jim and  Tagish  Charley, the  Indians. He  questioned  them  separately  and  together, not once but twice, with an interval between to see if the stories had changed. As a result we have a clear picture of what occurred. In addition we have Adney's  research  plus an interview  that  Henderson gave to Mrs. William  Campbell Loudon of the  Alaska-Yukon  Magazine  (Summer, I go8) , to­ gether  with  Carmack's own  memories,  posthumously published  in a pamphlet by his widow5•  This is a florid account, highly colored, for Car­ mack  was a romantic and a poseur. For all that,  it bears the stamp  of the man  who was there.  It was Carmack, after  all, who found  the gold and his description of his own emotions on that  memorable day,  which  was to change  the lives of one hundred thousand  men, cannot  be duplicated.
There are three  other  books that  might be described  as coming straight from  the horses' mouths. Colonel Samuel  Benton Steele's  autobiography6 contains  a thick  section on the stampede, and as Steele was the Mountie who  ran  the  stampede on  the  Canadian side, keeping  the  casualty  rate surprisingly  low, it is of more  than  casual interest. Arthur Treadwell Walden's A Dogpuncher  in the Yukon7  is a fascinating story told  (with a  ghostwriter's help,  I suspect)   by the  most  mobile  man  on  the scene. Walden  was in the  country before, during,  and  after  the stampede, and his mail beat took him from Circle City, Alaska, to Dyea on the seacoast, a distance  of more  than  one thousand  miles. There are  exaggerations in

GOLD   RUSH  WRITING



his story, but  then  a dog driver  ought  to be forgiven  an exaggeration or two. The  third  book of quality  is Frederick Palmer's In  the  Yukon8,  a general account  of the stampede with a particularly good picture of Daw­ son in the summer  of 18g8 by a special correspondent of  Scribner's.






kE REMAINDER of the  scores of books on the subject fall into three general  categories. There are, first, what  I call the "curiosi­ ties".  There are,  second, the  biographies of  the  great  figures of the stampede -the  saints,  villains,  heroes,  rogues  and  comic personalities who  put  flesh on  the  Klondike  saga.  There are,  third, the  personal  ac­ counts of several dozen men and women who survived the great trek north  and in later  years were persuaded to set down  their  memories on paper.
Among  the curiosities you will find some dozen or so books rushed  into
print  a few months  after  the first news of the strike burst upon the world. These were published  in the fall of 1897, or early in 18gB. They are rather like  scrap  books, filled with  warmed-over newspaper accounts  of those who  have struck  it rich, crammed with  geographical background,  pep­ pered  with  anecdotes,  full of advice for would-be gold seekers. They  are studded with  inaccuracies, fabrications, exaggerations and  enthusiasms. Reading them  today, one basks briefly in the  reflected glow of a period when almost  everybody  believed the streets  of Dawson to be paved  with gold, and  men talked of nuggets big as hen's  eggs strewn about  the Klon­  dike valley waiting  to be picked  up.
The  most entertaining of these volumes, from  a curiosity-seeker's point of view, are  The  Chicago  Record's  Book  for Gold  Seekers9  and  Charles S. Bramble's Klondike:  A Manual for Goldseekers10 •  The  most accurate is A. E.  lronmonger Sola's Klondyke: Truth and  Facts  of the  New Eldorado''.
Mrs.  lola  Beebe's  little  book The True Life  Story  of Swiftwater  Bill Gates' 2 is a curiosity of a different kind. How much of it is strictly true one cannot  tell, but as Mrs. Beebe was Swiftwater's mother-in-law for a year or  so, we must  accept  her  eyewitness  accounts of  her  erstwhile son-in­ law's  adventures, both  marital and  financial. It makes  lively  reading. Mrs.  Beebe is often  horrified  at  the carryings-on of her teen-age daugh-

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



ter's  strange husband but  she  is never  horrified enough  to ignore  his blandishments or  to beware  his perpetual requests  for  money.  Reading between  the lines, one cannot  escape the conclusion that  Mrs. Beebe, like so many  other  women,  was herself in love with the engaging  Swiftwater Bill.
Louella  Day's The Tragedy of the Klondike' 3 is remarkable only in one
sense-that it should  have  been published  at all. Miss Day was a lady doctor  who  visited  the goldfields and  labored  under  the firm conviction that  the  Canadian authorities, under  the  personal  direction of Clifford Sifton,  were  attempting to  poison  her  to death.  She  sets out  this odd thesis in this very odd book.
I find  C.  H.  Hamlin's Old Times  in the Yukon'4  curiously  engaging,
perhaps because  he  so obviously wrote  it  under  his own steam  without aid  from  the  ubiquitous ghost  writer  who has clouded  so many  Klon­ dike  memoirs  with  the  murky  varnish  of professionalism.  This is a pre­ Klondike   book  about   Fortymile,  the  strange  gold  town  that  existed  on the banks of the Yukon long before Dawson City. A similar book of scat­ tered  anecdotes, many  of them  quite  amusing,  is W. S. Dill's The  Long Day' 5 •  These,  too, are footnotes  to the main tale, but interesting ones.
But  the  cream  of the  curiosa  is Mary  E. Hitchcock's Two  Women in
the  Klondike' 6 •   Mrs.  Hitchcock was the  widow of a  U.S. admiral; her companion, Miss Edith  Van  Buren, was the niece of a former  president. They  were wealthy  tourists who each  year struck out for foreign  climes: Bath, Shanghai, Paris. In 18g8 they  chose  Dawson City; they  felt, vaguely, that  it was the place to go. The fact that they were the only bona fide tourists in the Klondike  that  summer  bothered  them not at all;  they carried on as they might  at Biarritz,  and when they returned they wrote a book about  it. The  writer  peruses it with a growing sense of frustration and  awe: frustration because of the author's nineteenth century  habit  of disguising  names  with  initials   (Big  Alex  McDonald, the  King  of  the Klondike, is simply M-------in this book); awe, because of the bizarre circumstances of their  visit. While  others  lugged  beans, bacon  and  axes into Dawson  the ladies arrived with a variety of luggage  which contained two Great Danes, an ice cream  freezer, a parrot  and several canaries, two cages  full  of pigeons,  a  gramophone, a music  box, a  zither,  a  coal  oil stove,  a  portable bowling  alley, a  motion  picture  projector  (newly  in­ vented), a mandolin, several air mattresses, the largest  marquee tent ever

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



pitched  on  the  banks of the Yukon and  several  hundred pounds  of rare foods, ranging from  pate de  foie gras to mock turtle  soup. Their tale, be­ sides  being amusing,  is quite  useful  to Klondike  researchers.







,

,
 and  his wife"o,

both have had  their stories told. So has Father Judge, the Roman Catho­ lic "Saint of Dawson""' and Jefferson  Randolph "Soapy" Smith, the devil of Skagway"".  (The  Skagway  section  in  the  latter's biography is, in my opinion,  incomplete and  not  too accurate). The  personal stories  of the brothers Mizner  have twice been chronicled by third parties"3 while Addi­  son Mizner  (he  later  became  architect of the great Florida  land  boom) has  written his  own  account of  their trek  over  the  Chilkoot"4 •   Tex Rickard's biography has  appeared"5  and  so  has  Klondike Mike   Ma­  honey's"6. Capt.  William Moore, discoverer of the White Pass and founder  of Skagway,  has had his biographer"7 and so has Eugene Allen, the color­ ful  editor  and  publisher  of  the  famous  Klondyke Nugget"8• There are several  biographies of Jack  London"9,   though  none  devotes  much  space to his Klondike  period, perhaps because it was such a short segment  in a crowded life. Rex  Beach has written  his autobiography30  and  it contains  a good account of his days on the Yukon river.
Several  of the  giant  figures of the stampede, alas,  have  not had  their
stories  committed to hard  covers,  and  it  is doubtful now  that  this  will happen. There ought  to  have  been  a  book  on  Robert Henderson, the original  explorer  of the  Klondike  watershed, and  another, certainly,  on Big Alex McDonald, the richest  man in Dawson.  Belinda  Mulroney, the famous  Klondike inn-keeper, deserves a book to herself and so does Clarence Berry,  one of the  few  Eldorado millionaires to hang  on to his gold.  These  familiar faces, and  many  others   (Nellie  the  Pig,  Diamond Tooth Gertie,  One-Eyed  Riley,  the  Oregon Mayor, Silent  Sam  Bonni­ field,  Nigger  Jim  Dougherty, Gussie  Lamore, the  Otaley  Sisters,  Big-

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



Hearted Torn  Chisholm, to name  a few)  all stride  through the pages of the  various  personal  accounts  which  have contributed to the folk lore of the period.
Space  does not allow me to detail  all the bona fide personal  accounts
here,  though  each  holds  its own fascination  for the  Klondike buff. The most harrowing of all is the grisly tale set down by Arthur Arnold  Dietz3•
-the story of the few men who survived the foolhardy attempt to reach the  goldfields  by crossing  the  Malaspina -the largest  piedmont glacier in North  America. Another harrowing saga, lightened by periods of high

•,
 which  tells the story

of  the  famous  steamboat Yukoner and  the  only mutiny  on  the  Yukon river.  Thomas  Weidemann's  Cheechako Into  Sourdough, is  the  third Odyssey in  this trilogy  of hardship; it tells the almost  unbelievable tale of the ill-fated Eliza Anderson  expedition  to the Yukon by way of Bering Sea.
Oddly  enough,  the great  stampede, for all its literary by-products, pro­ duced  no really  great  work of fiction. It is true  that  Jack  London's Call of the Wild 33  is a classic of sorts. I read it as a boy, while still in Dawson, and was thrilled by it; yet it seems curiously naive and sentimental today. Certainly Robert Service's  reputation does not  rest  on his one novel of the Klondike, The Trail  of Ninety-Eight 34 ; it's hard to believe now that  his publishers  tried  to make  him  water  it down  because  they  thought it was too "raw".
Most  Klondike   fiction  has  been  of  the  potboiler   type  and  the  most
interesting stories  seem  to me  to be those based on fact.  The  best tales in Jack  London's Smoke Bellew collection35  are  simply true anecdotes masquerading under  the  guise  of fiction.  The  most  interesting novel  I know from  this period  is W. H. P. Jarvis's  The  Great  Gold Rush36 which gives the details  of a plot to overthrow  the Yukon government and  form a "Republic of the  Midnight Sun".  It, too, is based on an actual though little-known incident and  its hero  is simply a thinly  disguised  portrayal of the great Sam Steele.
It does not  really  surprise  me that  there  should  be such  a paucity  of good fiction about  the Klondike, for here, if ever, was a classic case where the  truth was far  stranger. The  facts  themselves  are  gaudy  enough  for the  wildest  melodrama or  the  most compelling  Odyssey.  It  is foolish to try to improve  upon  them,  and  he who attempts it does so at his peril.

GOLD  RUSH  WRITING



NOTES

' WINSLOW, KATHRYN.  Big Pan-Out. W.  W.  Norton & Company, Inc., New York,
1951.
0   HASKELL, WILLIAM B.  Two Years  in the  Klondike and  Alaska  Goldfields. Hartford
Publishing Co.,  Hartford, Conn., 1898.
3  ADNEY,  TAPPAN. The   Klondike  Stampede  of 1897-gB.  Harper & Brothers, New
York, 1900.
4   OGILVIE, WILLIAM.  Early  Days on the  Yukon and  the  Story  of its Gold  Finds.  John
Lane Company, New York,  1913.
5   CARMACK,  G. w.  My  Experiences in  the  Yukon, privately printed by  Marguerite
Carmack, 1933·
6   STEELE, COL. s. B. Forty  Years   in  Canada. McClelland,  Goodchild  & Stewart,
Toronto, 1918.
7   WALDEN, ARTHUR T. A  Dogpuncher on the  Yukon. Louis Carrier & Co.,  Montreal,
1928.
8  PALMER,  FREDERICK. In  the  Klondyke. Charles Scribner's Sons,  New  York, 1899.
9   CHICAGO  RECORD. Klondike, the  Chicago  Record's Book  for Goldseekers. Colonial
Publishing Company, Philadelphia, 1897.
'0    BRAMBLE, CHARLES  s. Klondike: A Manual  for Goldseekers. R. F. Fenno & Com­
pany, New York,  1897.
" SOLA, A. E.  1.  Klondyke: Truth and  Facts  of the  New  Eldorado. The Mining and
Geographical Institute, London, 1897.
'" BEEBE, MRS. lOLA. The   True  Life  Story   of Swiftwater Bill  Gates.  Lumbermans
Printing Co.,  Seattle, 1915.
13 DAY, LOUELLA.  The Tragedy of the  Klondike, privately printed, New  York, 1906.
14   HAMLIN, c. H. Old  Times in the Yukon. Wetzel Publishing Co.  Inc., Los  Angeles,
1928.
'5 DILL, w.  s. The Long  Day. The Graphic Publishers Limited, Ottawa, 1926.
'6  HITCHCOCK, MARY  E. Two Women in  the  Klondike. C.  Arthur Pearson Limited,
London, 1899.
17   BEATTIE,  KIM. Brother, Here's  a Man! The  Saga  of Klondike Boyle.  The Mac­
millan Company, New  York, 1940.
18  CUNYNGHAME,  FRANCIS. Lost Trail. Faber & Faber, London, I953·
'9 CODY,  H.  A. An  Apostle  of the  North, Memoirs of the  Right Reverend William
Carpenter Bompas, D.D. The Musson Book  Co.  Limited, Toronto, 1908.
00  ARCHER, F. A. A Heroine  of the  North: The Memoirs of Charlotte Selina  Bompas,
Society for   Promoting Christian Knowledge, London, 1929.
21  JUDGE, REV. c. J. An American Missionary: A Record  of the Work  of Rev. William
A. Judge, S.J.  The Catholic Foreign Mission Society, Ossining, New  York, 1907.
2° COLLIER,  w.  R.  (AND WESTRATE, E.v.). The Reign   of Soapy  Smith, Monarch of
Misrule. Sundial Press  Inc., Garden City, New  York, 1937.
>3    JOHNSTON, ALVA.  The   Legendary Mizners. Farrar, Strauss &  Young, New  York,
1 935·
SULLIVAN, EDW. DEAN. The Fabulous  Wilson Mizner. The Henkle Co.,  New  York,
1935·
24  MIZNER,  ADDISON. The  Many Mizners. Vere Publishing Co., New  York, 1932.
>5   SAMUELS, CHARLES. The Magnificent Rube, The Life  and  Times of Tex Rickard.
McGraw-Hill Book Co. Inc., New  York, 1957.
•6  DENISON, MERRILL. Klondike Mike, An  Alaska  Odyssey. William Morrow and Co.,
New  York, 1943.

66

GOLD RUSH   WRITING



o7   cnAsE,  WILL n. Rcminiscenses of Captain Billie Moore.  Burton Publishing Com­
pany, Kansas City, Mo.,  1947.
oS  BANKSON, RUSSELL A.   The  Klondike Nugget. The  Caxton Printers Ltd.,  Caldwell,
Idaho, 1935·
29  GARST,   sHANNON.  Jack  London, Magnet  For  Adventure. Julian  Messner,   Inc.,
New  York,  1944.
LONDON, JOAN.  Jack  London and  His  Times. Doubleday, Doran and  Company.
New York,  1939.
STONE,  IRVING. Jack  London: Sailor  on Horseback. Doubleday & Company, Inc.,
New York,  1947.
3o   BEACH, REX.  Personal  Exposures. Harper & Brothers,  New York,  1940.
3'  DIETz, ARTHUR ARNOLD. Mad  Rush   for Gold  in Frozen  North. Los Angeles  Times­
Mirror Printing and  Binding  House,  1914·
32   CURTIN,  WALTER  RUSSELL.   Yukon Voyage, the  Unofficial  Log  of  the  Steamer
Yukoner. The Caxton Printers, Ltd.,  Caldwell, Idaho, 1938.
33   LONDON, JACK.  The Call of the Wild.
34   SERVICE, ROBERT w. The Trail  of Ninety-Eight.
35   LONDON, JACK. Smoke Bellew. The  Century Co.,  New York,  1912.
36  JARVIS, w.  H.  P.  The Great  Gold  Rush, a Tale  of the  Klondike. The Macmillan
Company, Toronto, 1913.











fohn  Gounod Campbell-THE  BLEEDING HEART OF WEE JOHN Gwen Pharis  Ringwood-THE COURTING OF MARIE JENVRIN Roland Goodchild-THE  GRAND DUCHESS
Jan  Malcolm-A MOMENT OF EXISTENCE fohn  Hughes-THE SHIP  OF DREAMS Edwin Procunier-VOICES OF DESIRE E.  P. Conkle-LAVENDER GLOVES Catharine  Brickenden-ZANORIN Robertson  Davies-OVERLAID
W i/frid   W erry-BREAKDOWN

CANADA 	ON 	STAGE
THE ONLY COLLECTION OF CANADIAN ONE-ACT PLAYS

Edited by STANLEY RICHARDS
$3.50 at your bookseller


CLARKE IRWIN






TO BE PUBLISHED  SOON
 = ="""
[AJ(!JDIAN LITE1(ATURE

More Letters  of 	Fiction -  Poetry - Essays
Canadian  Art
Duncan Campbell Scott 	New and  out-of-print r8oO-I959
(2nd series) 	8 nglish- French

Selected and Edited by 	 We   own a  most extensive stock of Arthur S.  Bourinot	Canadian  fiction  and  poetry  and shall be  pleased to  submit lists   and
(with some personal	supply wanted  titles.
'



PROBABLE PRICE $2.50
 
7JAVIES

LIMITED EDITION	'BOO!( COMPANY
'


ADVANCE  ORDERS TAKEN  NOW  FROM:
 3468 MELROSE AVENUE MONTREAL, QUEBEC

'
'


ROCKCLIFFE, OTTAWA
 )J	We   are  always  interested  in   pur-
chasing collections of   Canadian

books and scientific libraries. 	'
)J	......
-..::::,.

68



review articles



"CRITICALLY  SPEAKING" CRITICIZED


Tony Emery



MosT  CANADIANs  of  my  ac­ quaintance  are   loy;al  to   their   national institutions, some to the  point  of chauvin­ ism,  but   there   is  one  institution  which seems to rouse mild  and gentle stevedores, taxidrivers,  journalists  and  garagemen to unreasonable fury: I mean  the Canadian Broadcasting   Corporation.  For    many  ordinary  Canadians  the  CBC   stands   for all  that  is  tedious   and   pretentious  and  stuffy;  they   cannot  bear   to   think   that  they  are  forced   to  contribute to  its  up­ keep.
Perhaps  this   animosity is  confined   to
Western Canada. I  personally hope  that this  is the  case, since  it seems  to me that the  CBC  is defensible on several  grounds; it is the only cultural link between  the provinces;  the   only:  regular  patron  of music  and  drama; the  only  national  in­ stitution which  encourages people to criti­  cize it.  It not  only  encourages  criticism; it  provides  a  regular weekly  opportunity for  critics   to  plunge their  harpoons into  the   monopolistic  leviathan,  and   it  pays them  a fee for  doing so.
For  eleven   years  a  programme called
Critically Speaking, organized nationally by Robert Weaver, has  been  a regular Sunday:  feature on  CBC  radio. The half-
 hour  programme usually incorporates three  separate critical contributions, on films,  books  and   radio - TV  respectively; and  one of these  items-Clyde Gilmour on   the   movies -is  constant. The  pro­ gramme  originates from   one  of   half   a dozen different  centres  each   week, (Toronto,  Montreal,  Winnipeg,  Van­ couver,  occasionally  Ottawa or  Halifax) partly  to provide variety  for  the  listener, and  partly  to ease the  burden on any one production centre.
Weaver  has  recently   handed over  the
programme to  Robert McCormack, but the  format  is unlikely  to change, since it appears to  be  ideally  suited   to  the  task it was created to perform. Like  any regu­ lar  weekly  programme, it  has  good days and  bad,  but  the  one  rarely  varying  ele­ ment  is the consistent and reasonable tone  of  Clyde  Gilmour's  movie  criticism.
Gilmour, doubtless, is not  the  most sensitive  and   intelligent  man   alive,  but he  seems  to  me  to  answer   the  needs  of this  programme in  a  manner that  is  al­ most beyond criticism. He  approaches the movie   under    review   in   an   adult   and  sophisticated way;, but his judgments have a  blunt   and  sensible  downrightness  that  makes  short  work  of  the  chi-chi  on  the

6g

REVIEW  ARTICLES



one  hand, and   the  trashy, on  the  other. He   makes  his  points,  which  are  usually based  on  a sound  knowledge  of  the  pos­ sibilities   of  the   medium, with   a  simple lucidity that  is an object  lesson to all who use  the  microphone for the expression  of ideas.  For me Gilmour stands as a symbol of  that   intelligent and  educated middle­ class  audience that  is  our  chief  lack  in Canada  today.   We  could   do   with   two million   like  him.
Turning  to  the   book  reviews,  I  note that in  the  last six months  of 1959 some
70   books   were   reviewed,   of  which   30 were   Canadian  and  40  or  so  American and  British.  The reviews, to  judge  by the scripts   I  have   in  front   of  me   are   ex­ tremely uneven. With  certain  exceptions those   of   Canadian   works   seem   to   be motherly  and   protective  and   dull,   and  those of British  and American works tend to  be  neutral,  grey,  obtuse  and   dull.  A partial  excuse  can  be found   in  the  fact that   frequently   the   reviewer   has   been asked  to  deal  with  more  books than  can conveniently be discussed inside eight and and  a half or nine minutes.  On  one occa­ sion,  I  see, a gallant lady  set  what  must surely   be  an   all-time  record:   12  books in  eight  minutes and forty seconds.  Small wonder, then,  if  nothing very memorable emerges.
But  there  were,  as I mentioned earlier, exceptions  that   relieved   the   monotony. On occasion there were reviews that rose above   the   level  of  mere  "noticing"  to achieve the status  of criticism: Blair Fraser's perceptive treatment of  Miriam Chapin's  Contemporary Canada, for  in­ stance; Hugo McPherson's  sharp   and  acute criticism   of  Edmund   Carpenter's Eskimo,·  John   Peter's  comparison of  two books   on   Africa;   George   Woodcock's penetrating   analysis   of   the   weaknesses

70
 and   strengths  of  Koestler's The  Sleep­
walkers.
On   the   whole,   the   liveliest  moments on  Critically Speaking come from  the weekly  reviews  of  programmes on  tele­ vision  and   radio. I  think  this  is  because none  of the  reviewers takes  the  media  or himself    ("herself" in  several   bright   in­ stances)  too seriously.  For  most  listeners,  too,  there  is more relevance in the  radio/ TV    reviews  since  they   are   dealing  with matters on which they have views of their own,  however inchoate or  unformulated.
Since Critically Speaking is a national programme, the  reviews tend  to deal only with  the  shows  that go  out  to  the  whole nation, and  this is a limitation to the cri­ tic,  who   may   spend   much   of  his   time listening  and   watching  shows   that  ori­ ginate from  his home  production  centre. Of  the  national shows  several  are  hardy  perennials,  and   there   is  a   limit   to  the number of  times  one  can  discuss  Close­ Up   and   Fighting Words,  Rawhide and  Front  Page  Challenge. There appears to be   a   disproportionate  amount  of   time devoted to dramatic features compared to the   infrequent   comment  on   the   music which  is  one  of  the  chief  glories  of  the CBC  for  the  excellent reason  that, while everybody   feels   qualified  to   carve    up actors  and producers and  dramatists, only Chester   Duncan  knows  anything  about
mUSIC.
I  drew   attention  earlier  to  the   pro­ tective  attitude towards Canadian  litera­ ture  adopted  by  book  reviewers   (Is  this because   writers  and   reviewers   are   fre­  quently  academics,   and   so   solidarity, affection  for  old   students,  and   fear-of­ hurting-X's-feelings- because-he- may- be­ reviewing-your-book-next-month all play their   part?)  and   I must  point   out   now that   the   radio  / TV    reviews  are  entirely

REVIEW  ARTICLES



free   from   this   inhibiting emotion. The reviewers  lay ahout  them  with  a will, and do  not  scruple to  draw  comparisons  be­ tween   American,  British   and  Canadian programmes. This  gives   a   liveliness   to utterances  that   is  all  too  often   missing from   the   prim,    grey,   heavily-qualified book reviews.
The need  for  regular and   responsible
criticism of music  and  the  plastic  arts  is one which  might  well be met  by an occa­ sional   review   on   Critically  Speaking.  Chester Duncan, it is true, pays attention to  the  musical   component  of  radio   and TV   programmes, but  he  is  the  only  one who does out  of a dozen  or so fairly  regu­ lar   critics.   All  who  heard   Alan   Rich's  broadcasts on the musical offerings  of the Vancouver   Festival  would   surely   agree that   they   were   rewarding, even   if  one had    not   attended  the    concert  under  review.
Similarly, a notice,  from  time  to  time,
 of  art  exhibitions  across  Canada  would provide    an   opportunity  for   those   in­ terested  in   painting  and   sculpture, whether domestic  or  foreign,  to compare opinions.  At the moment, the onl}! vehicle for  this  sort  of  evaluation  on  a  national scale is provided by Canadian Art, which reaches   only   7,ooo  subscribers. I  don't  know  how  large  the  audience for  Critic­ ally  Speaking  is-Robert  Weaver  des­ cribes   it   as   "small  but   loyal"-but   I would  guess  that   it  must  be many  times as  large  as  the  circulation  of  Canadian Art.
Yet,  in  summing  up,  I  would   affirm that  Critically Speaking, even  as it  now functions,  helps   to   fill  a   void   in   our national  life.  Outspoken  criticism is  all too  rare  on  this  continent, and  to find  it sponsored   by the  institution which  is  it­ self under  attack is a shining example  to all  who  are  concerned with  freedom   of the  intellect.




TRADITIONS REJOINED: RECENT FRENCH CANADIAN  POETRY

G. V.  Downes


ALAIN  GRANDBOIS,   L'Etoile Pourpre. ALAIN   MARCEAU,   A   la   Pointe  des    Yeux. OLIVIER MARCHAND,  Crier  que  je Vis. FERN AND  OUELLETTE,   Sequences  de   ['Aile. JEAN-GUY PILON, L'Homme et  [e  jour. PIERRE   TROTTIER,   Poemes de   Russie. MICHEL  VAN SCHENDEL,  Poemes   de    l'Amerique   Etrangere.   La    Poesie    et   Nous (collection). All  published  by  Les  Editions  de   l'Hexagone, Montreal,  at  $1.00 each.


ONE   OF   the   strangest   phe­ nomena in  the  history  of  the  arts  is the time-lag. I do  not  mean  the  time  which so  often  elapses  between   the  creation of a  work  of  art  and  its  public  acceptance (which  can   be   tragic   enough  for   the
 artist  as everyone  knows)   but  something just   as  unfortunate. I  mean    the   gap which,  through  geography or  ignorance or a barrier in  language, ma}l separate individual  artists,   or   whole   generations of writers,  from  the  very  works in  which

71

REVIEW  ARTICLES



they should  find their sustenance. The adventures  of   others   in   one's   natural world,  the  record  of experiments in one's own  medium, are  all vital to artistic maturity, even   if   they   only   provide   a point  of  reference.
I can  remember during  the war, nearly
twenty  years  ago, how surprised I was to find   that   modem  French    poets   whose work  I  took  for  granted seemed  to have had  no effect  at  all on the French-Cana­ dian   verse   I   was   reading. There  were honest  romantic renderings of Lamartine, solid,  pedestrian,  and   full  of  admirable sentiments. There  were,  transposed   into French, the  patriotic themes of the Cana­ dian  Authors' Association,  and  though  it is  impossible  to   write   French   poetry which   is  as  bad   as  really   bad   English poetry, I felt  (haviQg come to these poets after  Baudelaire and Valery  and  the Kra  Antholog)
and  sunset  school  a  pretty  close second. By an ironic twist in the loop of time, it seemed  to be their  English-speaking con­ temporaries who  were  profiting,  though at   second-hand  through  Pound,   Eliot, and  the  Imagists, from  the  richly experi­  mental nineteenth century   in  France.
Let  me  saat   once  that  the  situation has  changed; and  not  only changed, but reversed  itself to the point where  I should like to see La Poesie et N ous, a collection of  talks  on  poetry  given  at  a  conference in  Quebec in  September, I957, made re­ quired  reading  for  everyone  submitting English   verse  to  any  of  the  little  maga­  zines. For  these  are  the voices I  expected  to  hear   twenty,ears  ago,  and   they  are saying   what  they   want   to  say  both   in poetry  and  in  prose  with  a maturity and a dignity  which would  be hard  to match in   English-speaking  Canada   without bringing in  academic critics  a generation

72
 



older  than  themselves.
Because  there  is no language barrier between  these young French-speaking Canadians and  Lautreamont, Valery, St. Jean-Perse,  Aragon,  Eluard   and   Rim­ baud, they have  been able  to drink at the source,   to  take,  both  in  critical  thought and   in   poetr,
laire  to the  Surrealists straight, and  to interpret their  personal experiences in fresh    and   vivid   works   which    are   not copies of French originals,  but whose language could  not  possibly be what  it is without the experience of reading those originals.  The  first   thing    one   notices about the  speeches  in  La Poesie et N ous and    the   poems   in   the   accompanying chap-books is the  acceptance and  under­ standing  of  the  fact   that  poetry  is  the conscious  use of language,  that   language is a vital  part  of the  psyche's  experience, and   that   even  the  surrealist looking  for new  juxtapositions of images  must  recog­ nize   that   he  is   working   in   a   medium whose   possibilities   must   be   understood and   respected. The  word,   the  creative, created, creating word,  is all-important:
"Car la  poesie  ne  peut  agir  sur  autre
chose   que  sur   le  langage; et   quelque soit  le  pouvoir   du  verbe  a produire  les

REVIEW  ARTICLES



n:!sultats  que  desire   la  conscience  poeti­ quc,   cc  pouvoir  n'cxistc   qu'a  l'intcricur du  chant."  (Michel van  Schendel).
"Le  monde du  langage fait  partie aussi du  monde   reel,  et  les cr,eations  de  l'ana­ logie peuvent devenir, deviennent en fait les objets  poetiques reels,  tout  comme  la pierre    taillee    et   sculptee   s'integre  au monde des humains."  (Gilles Henault) .
Modern poetry  in  English  has  become international in  its  scope  and  sty,les. The same  is  true   of  a  good  manpoems in these chap-books, which  could  have  been (and    possibly   were)    written  in   Paris. But  the  French-Canadian poet  is acutely aware   that, strong   though the  linguistic ties are  which  bind  him  to France, he is not himself  part  of France. "Nous voyons surgir  devant nous  ces etranges ftoraisons
sans   participer :reellement   .a  l'esprit   qui
les  fait   naitre."  (Gilles  Henault). He  is not  French, but  Canadian. He  has strug­ gled  to free  himself  from  a  narrow  paro­  chial  milieu,  to find  what?  Isolation in  a materialistic environment where  even the intellectuals would hesitate, most of them, to describe  themselves as bi-lingual? The  word  "isolement" has, it  seems, a special meaning for  him; it is a constant refrain in  the  discussions.
Diversified  though their tones and styles  are,   these  poets  manage to  speak with  a certain dignity, an  impersonal  ar­ tistic  seriousness   which,   no  matter  how personal   the    material,   disciplines   raw experience into  art.  Alain  Grandbois, for example, handles his cosmic imagery  with the  skill and  joy of  St. Jean Perse. Jean­ Guy   Pilon,  editor  of  the  series,  uses  to excellent   effect  that  mixture of  abstract and  concrete  terms  which  is so  effective in French, and yet so impossible to trans­  late into English.  Pierre  Trottier's images, rh thms,
 songs  yet  modern,  bring   so  manana­ logics  to mind  that  one  is baffied  by the conflicting  cross-currents.  For   example, the  poem  "Ce   bois de  mystere" with  its changing echo  "Oh les os de  rna  mere", "Oh la  peur  de  rna  mere", seems  to  me an    emotional  counterpart   of   Wilfred Watson's  "Ballad  of  Mother  and   Son" where   a   similar  pattern,   repeated throughout  the  varying  stanzas,  has  the same  cumulative emotional effect.
Judging  the  quality  of  poetry   in  an­ other  language is always a tricky business, because   the  thousand  echoes  which  are  awakened  in  the  subconscious  mind   (as one  reads)   by  the  words,  and  combina­ tions  of  words,   are   either   not   there   at all,  or  quite   different from  those  of  the poet.   One   can   recognize   the   deliberate use,   for   example,  of    Baudelaire   and  Valery  quotations, but  how  much  is one missing?  However,  with  this  reservation, I should  like to record  my conviction that  these  young  French-Canadian  poets  are  writing  verse  of consistently high  quality, that  their mature consideration of aesthe­ tic   problems   has   enriched  their   poetic practice, and  that  the cultural life of the country  will  undoubtedly  be  the  better for  their  efforts.







73


MOUNTAINS WITH LEGENDS
 





Inglis F. Bell


WILMA   PITCHFORD   HAYS.   Drummer Boy   for  Montcalm.  Macmillan. $2.75.
MARION  GREENE.   Canal   Boy.  Macmillan.  $2.75.
JOHN   CRAIG. The Long   Return. McClelland &  Stewart.  $3.50.
FRANCES  FRAZER.  The Bear  Who Stole  the  Chinook, and  Other Stories. Macmillan.
$2.50.


IT IS  NOT  perhaps widely enough   realised  that  an  increasing  num­ ber of excellent  children's books has been published during  recent   years  in   this country,  particularly  since  the   194o's, when   an   important   event   in   this  field was  the  commencement  by  Macmillans of   their   fine   series,   Great  Stories  of Canada.
Discussing   some   of  these  books  in  a recent  review, Sally  Creighton said: "To write   a  juvenile   which  can   people  any part   of  our  magnificent  emptiness   with an   unforgettable   story   and    characters who go on living  after  the  book is closed is a rare  and  difficult  feat." Nevertheless, many   of  our   present   children's  writers are  doing  just that. Our  landscape seems no longer so empty  as it appeared when Rupert  Brooke commented on  our "mountains  without  legen,ds".   Parents, and  indeed  all Canadians, should  be grateful to  the  storytellers who  are  call­ ing  back  out  of the  mountain  mists, dark forests  and lonely prairies  the great chiefs, trailmakers,  fur    traders,   rebels,   raiders  and  settlers.  Indeed, the  point  I  wish to make  is that   the  wild  lands  that  stretch  across  a continent  were not empty  at all, but  were  rather a  kind  of North Ameri­  can   Valhalla  waiting   for  the  twentieth century scop  to  call  its  heroes  up.  And now -I   am   sure -the   children  who

74
 read   such  books  as  Raiders   of the  M a­ hawk, Trailmaker, The Great  Chief, Bay of the  North, The Rover  and  Revolt  in the  West   are  as enthralled as  those  who in   the   past   read   the   stories   of  Robin  Hood, King  Arthur and  Siegfried.
The most  recently   published historical
novel  for  y,oung  people  is Wilma  Pitch­ ford  Hays'  Drummer Boy  for  Montcalm. It is quite  unlike  others  since  the struggle  is seen from  the viewpoint of  the harassed and  ultimate!defeated  defenders in  the
r 759  battle for  Quebec and  through the eyes  of  the   drummer  boy  Peter   Demo. Peter,  at   the   opening  of   the   story   a twelve-year old stowawaon a ship bring­ ing recruits to Montcalm's forces at Que­ bec,   was   in   real   life   the   great-great­ great-grandfather of  the  author  and actuallserved under  Montcalm during the   siege   and   battle.   Miss  Hays   spent  several  years  in  research  and  in  the writ­  ing   of   the  book,   and   she  does,  as  she states   on  the  dust   cover,   follow  closely the  true  incidents of  the  battle.
And   here  is what   is becoming a  con­ sistent   mark   of  Canadian   historical  fic­ tion   for   young   people.  The   storytellers
do  not  rewrite history  a Ia "swamp-fox"
as   do   many    children's  writers    in   the United States. Nor  do their  historical characters bear  any resemblance to the unbelievably inflated  and   distorted  Dis-

REVIEW  ARTICLES



ney-like   creations -the  Davy Crocketts, Kit  Carsons and Tiuffalo  Tiill Coclys-so familiar  across   the   border.  For   this   let us  be  grateful. Writers here may  indeed choose  as  source material  the   kinder of two    interpretations,  and   occasionally even  bend slightly back, but  never so far as   to   lose   balance  and  never for   long. No   other  liberties  are   allowed,  and    I strongly suspect  that  this   is  not   due   to an    unshakeable   devotion  to    historical accuracy but   to  the   native propensity to deprecate  all   things Canadian.  Perhaps this   is  just   as   well.   Since  we  live  in   a land so recently wrested from the  Indians perhaps  our  heroes,  like  their  gods, should be invested with defects as well  as virtues.
Miss  Hays' historical characters are  in this   tradition.  Montcalm  bears his  full share of  the  blame for  the  loss of Quebec as do  Bougainville and Vaudreuil and, of course,  Bigot   and  Cadet.  Wolfe if   any­ thing  escapes too  easily,   but   Miss  Hays' book   was   no   doubt completed   before C.  P.  Stacey's recent Quebec  1759:  The Siege   and   the   Battle   removed  some   of the  gilding from this  romantic  figure.
Indeed,  the    characters  in   Drummer
Boy  for Montcalm are,  in the  main, ably portra}led. Peter Demo is  a  well-realized boy   of   twelve, and  his  friends  Philippe and  Bomazeen  are    presented   convinc­ ingly. The  book's only   major  shortcom­ ing,  for  younger children at  least,  is the diminishing  of   excitement   as   the   siege draws   towards   its    conclusion.   Events overshadow  the   hero,   and  he   becomes primarily a   narrator.  However, even   if at that point  the  younger reader's interest may   flag  somewhat,  I   do   not   think  he will   wish  to  put  the   book   aside.
For precisely the   opposite reason, the readers  of   Marion  Greene's Canal   Boy
 will  not  leave   the   book   unfinished. The story  is swift-paced and  exciting. Seon O'Dare, a  sixteen-year old  bo}l, is one  of the  labourers helping, in  1828, to cut  the Rideau Canal through the  wilderness in order to give  gunboats, in  the  event of renewed hostilities with the United States,  a    protected   route   from   Lake Ontario at Kingston through the  Canal and   the  Ottawa River to  Montreal.
The story  concerns Seon  O'Dare's attempt to exonerate himself  from a false charge  of   stealing  two   pistols    and   in­ cludes a chase from Ottawa  to  Kingston and  Montreal  after  the   vital   evidence needed to  bring the   true thief  to  justice  and  to  clear  Seon.  The   action  evolves against  a   colourful   background  of   the times   which  gives  what  seems   to  be  an  accurate historical  picture of  Canada in the  182o's.
On   these   counts  I  would give   Canal
Boy full  marks. Unfortunately,  an  other­ wise  good  story is weakened  by  awkward and strained dialogue, and   by  characters etched  so  deeply  in   blacks   and  whites that  they  come very  close  to  being mere stereotypes. Indeed,  the  dust  jacket des­ cribes  two   of   them  as   "the   despicable Sergeant Grassly and  the  villainous man Sailor". If blurbs  could   be  accepted  as frank and  open  appraisals one  could only commend  so  honest an  assessment; when one  considers  that  whoever wrote  these words felt  he  was  bestowing praise  it  is cause for   alarm.
John Craig, author of  The Long  Re­
turn,  navigates  easily    and   confidently through  the    rapids which threaten at times  to swamp Drummer Boy  for  Mont­ calm and Canal  Boy. The material he has  chosen to mold into a  story  is a  rich  and  satisfying substance for  the  young reader. Thad  Cameron, a  twelve year   old   pio-

75

REVIEW  ARTICLES



neer   boy,   living   with   his   parents   on Upper Canada's western frontier in I807, is  waylaid  and  taken  captive  by a  party of  Ojibwa}: Indians.  He  is  taken hundreds of  miles  over  the  Great  Lakes to   the    country   of   the   Ojibway  and adopted  by   Kiniwa  Sipi,   an   Ojibway chief  who  has  no  son  of  his own.  Thad has   one   clear   resolution;  he   is   deter­ mined, no matter how long he must  wait,  that   he  will  escape.
The author now  has  his  raw  material and   his  plot.  How   successfull}: does  he exploit  them?  Here I can  be  unqualified in  praising  such   a  truly  excellent  chil­ dren's  novel.  Thad's is  a  colourful  and convincing story  and   he  is  a  real,  flesh and    blood   character.   During  his   two
}:ears  in   the   Ojibway camp  Thad   de­ velops  and   matures. When   he  had  first arrived, he  had  made  a  foolish  and  un­ successful  attempt to  escape.  He  accepts  his   defeat    for    the   present   and   with courage and  resolution sets out to become an  apt  and  determined student of Indian woodcraft, fishing  and  hunting.  In   the process  he  develops   a  real  affection   for his  Ojibway foster  parents. By  the  time he   decides   that   he   is  prepared  for   a second   attempt   to   escape  across   the wilderness  and  makes  his successful  flight he has developed into  as real  a character as   one   can   meet   in   a   story   and   the reader's  identification with  him  is com­ plete.
Thad's adventures, too, and  his life in the  Ojibway camp will keep  the  young reader   spellbound. He  participates  fully in   the   life  of  his  captors,  receives  the same  education as  the  Indian boy,s, goes on  hunting parties  and  even,, finally,  on a  counter  raid   against   the   Sioux.   But the  action  is credible, Thad's is a  reason­ ably   proportioned   heroism,    and    the
 author is obviously  competent in his knowledge of  woodcraft and   the  details of  Indian life. It is a good  book.
The Bear Who Stole  the  Chinook is a collection of fifteen  Indian myths  told  by the  "author-raconteur"  Frances Frazer. Among  others  in the collection are Black­ foot  versions  of  aetiological  myths,  such as the  title  story,  which explains  why, the owl  has  big e es,
trickster   myths   telling   how   Na-pe,   the
Old  Man, tricked  the  deer  into  jumping over  a  cliff  and   the  ducks   into  closing their  eyes so he could  wring  their  necks. The tales  will  be  all  the  more   enjoyed by children because  of the  air  of  authen­ tic  Indian  atmosphere Miss  Frazer, who speaks  Blackfoot, has  been  able  to  cap­  ture  and  maintain.  An imaginative intro­ duction sets  the  stage  for  the  tales  and forms  a link  between  the  Indian of today and  his  ancestors of long  ago.
The Bear  Who Stole   the  Chinook   is quite   unlike   the  other   three   books  but, in  the  context  of  this  review,  more  re­ lated   than is  first  apparent. It is  one  of several  collections of Indian myths which,  together  with   our   historical   novels,  fic­ tion  heroes,  and   the  extraordinary myth cycles  of  Catherine  Anthony  Clark,   are creating for   Canadian  children  moun­ tains  with  legends.








DYING
CULTURES

FARLEY MOWAT.  The Desperate People. Little, Brown. $s.oo.

Anerca. ed.   EDMUND  CARPENTER. Dent. Hard cover  $2.75: soft  cover  $2.00.

The Desperate   People  is  an   account of the  decline   of  a  primitive culture; it  is the   story   of  adversity  wearing away   at the  surviving remnants of the  inland Eskimos,  and  behind  this  human tragedy lies  the  equal   tragedy   of  the  destruction of the great  caribou herds, on which the Eskimos   fed,   by  man's  unthinking  dis­ location of  Nature's balance in  the  Bar­ ren  Grounds of  the  North.
Farley   Mowat, whose  The People   of the   Deer   described  the   culture  of   the inland Eskimos  as he  found it  surviving in  the  mid-194o's, re-tells  the  story  in  a less personal narrative, in which  he traces the   history   of   these   neolithic  hunters, once  the  most  prosperous people  of  the North, and  follows  their  decline, through white   men's   diseases,   through  the  des­ truction  of   the   caribou  herds,  through official  neglect,  until  in 1958 a few dozen survivors left   their  ancestral  hunting grounds and   started   a   new   life  in  the Keewatin  Rehabilitation Centre on Ran­ kin   Inlet.
Mr.  Mowat's The  People  of the  Deer had,   despite   its   detractors,  the   ring  of truth, and  later  events  in the Barren Grounds have proved him essentially
 right. In the same way the facts he brings forward in The Desperate  People speak loudly for themselves-or would if Mr. Mowat  let  them.  But  he  has  not  the  art which  allows  the  starkness of  telling  to reveal  the starkness  of tragedy. He strives constantly to strengthen his point  by arti­ fice; he embellishes,  he poeticises, he coy­ ly  circumlocutes.  The   outbreak   of   an epidemic   he  describes   thus :
It  was   in   the   year  I 9I 2  that  the  de­ fences   which   the   land   had   built  about  its people  were  suddenly and  ruthlessly pierced by   an   enemy  that   could   not   be   denied. The  assailant  was   brought   into   the   land hidden within a   man  of   the   people   who was  returning  from  a  trading trip to  Rein­ deer   Lake.   When  it   reached  the   heart  of the   plains,  it  burst   out   of  him  and   ran  an untramelled   course along  the   river   routes. It leapt  from camp  to   camp  with  an appalling  swiftness, and,  as  it   passed,   the camps stood   desolate  and   still.   It had   no name,    this   unseen   nemesis, for   it   was   a stranger.

In the end we learn  that  what has been described  variously as an enemy, an assailant,  a nemesis, a stranger and-by implication-a  runner, is  really  an  epi­ demic   which   may   have   been  influenza.  Later   Mr.  Mowat spends  a  whole  pa,ge on   an   "unexpected gift",   "an  unseen gift",   which  in  the  end  turns  out  to. be the  polio  epidemic that  struck   the  Eski­ mos  in  1949·  Such  contrived  writing   is out  of place  anywhere, but  most  of all in a tragic narrative.
Yet  one  may  forgive   Mr.   Mowat  his style and take  his facts  to heart. The story they  tell  is  the  old  and   terrible one  of what  happens to  a  happy,  primitive  cul­ ture  when  the  frontier of  modern  civil­ isation  impinges on  it.  The inland  Eski­ mos are  only  the  last  of  the  long  parade of  victims  whose  memory   should  haunt us with  the recollection of how much  has been   destroyed    that   our   way   of  life-

77

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



such  as  it is-may  flourish.
The conditions of other  Eskimo groups have   changed  in  ways  less catastrophic than    those   that   reduced   the   people  of the  Barren   Grounds to  a  tiny, remnant. But everywhere their ancient culture is disappearing, later than that of the Indians because  of a longer isolation,  but, now  that   the  North  is opening, no  less surely.  For  a  little  while we shall  doubt­ less still  be able  to obtain  their  beautiful stone   artifacts,  but   as  the  Eskimos   be­ come   more   and   more  absorbed   by  the exploitation of Arctic Canada they will­ again   like  the  Indians-become steadily  more  detached from  the culture that  ori­ ginally  encouraged such  work.
A  keepsake  of  the  Eskimo  past  is  pro­ vided  by Anerca, a little anthology edited  by the anthropologist Edmund Carpenter and   containing  a  selection  of   examples of  Eskimo   poetry   (translated  by  various hands)  and   a  group of   pleasant   rather than    extraordinary   drawings    done   for Robert  Flaherty   more  than   forty   years ago  by  a  Baffin  Island   Eskimo,  Enooe­  sweetok.
Some  of  the  poems  convey  very  mov­ ingly  the  sense  of  the  running  together of  joy and  sorrow, of fear  and  exaltation in  that   hard   life  of  the  cold  but  some­ times  abundant North. It is  the  joy and  exaltation, the sense of small men defying a great  wilderness  and realising  the glory of  the  struggle, that  are  really  predomi­ nant.  "Glorious it  is/ When   wandering time  is come," sings  one hunter, and  the women  chant in  another song, "Joyfully/ Greet  we  those/Who brought  us plenty!" "I  will  go  towards the  day,"  says a  tra­  veller,  a dy,ing man   cries  to  the  hound  of  death, "Away! Or  I  will harness  you to  my  team," and  a  dead  man  rejoices:
Here joy fills me
 When daylight breaks
And  the  sun
Glides silently forward.
There are,  indeed, other poems  which lament the pitiful  inadequacy of man  and the   poverty   of  his  land,   but   these-at least   in   this  collection-are in   the   mi­ nority,  and  the  prevalent impression  one gains   is  that    of  a   people   who   found  happiness in  the  hardest  things  this side of  starvation.
My  main  criticism  of the  collection as a   whole  IS     its    lack    of   informative material. A brief  introduction on the character of  Eskimo   poetry  would  have been  helpful; certainly there  should  have been    notes   on   the   places    and    tribes among  which   the   various   songs   origi­ nated and  some indication of their  ritual  function  where   such   existed.   There  is room,   in  fact,   for   a  good   modern an­ thology; of Eskimo  poetry, provided with all  the  necessary  background  facts,  and  I hope  Professor  Carpenter will  eventu­ ally  give  us  such  a  volume.  Anerca   is a pleasant  appetiser,  but it makes one  anxiOus   for   a   more  abundant   main course.                            GEORGE WOODCOCK

TALES
OUTSIDE TIME

MARIUS  BARBEAU.  The  Golden Phoenix. Retold by   Michael  Hornyansky.  Oxford.  $3.00.

JAMES   MCNEILL.   The  Sunken City. Oxford.
$3.00.

THE   FAIRY  TALE belongs,  of  course,  to the  bright world  of comedy  where  the impossible is only a matter of fact,  where "all the best kings have three lovely daughters," where  the  ogre  takes  a  prat­ fall,  and   where  Jack  is always  the  hero.  Its   delight  is  clear   in   these  two   small

BOOKS  IN   REVIEW



collections, The   Golden  Phoenix  and
The Sunken City.
Delight  is clear  too  in  the  illustrations to  the  stories.  Theo Dimson   of Toronto, who  did  the illustrations for  The Sunken City, and   Arthur Price  of  Ottawa,  who did  those  for  The  Golden Phoenix, have not   only  caught  the  spirit   of  the  fairy tales,   but   they  have   also  added  to  the fun.   Each   artist   has  a  different style - Mr.  Dimson's is vaguely  Byzantine, while Mr.   Price   has   based   his   on   medieval illuminations -but in  the  suggestion  of an  indefinite past,  and   in  the  combina­ tion  of  simplicity  and   artifice, of  vistas and   flat  planes,   both   men   bring   to  our sight   the   "once  upon    a   time" - or Chaucer's  "whilom" -of   the  world   of Romance that  never  did  exist  but  which is  always  present.
Both   the   timelessness    and    the   per­ vasiveness of Romance are  evident in the backgrounds of the stories,  for  they  reach into  the  antiquities of  Egypt  and  China, and  they  range  in  space  from  Iceland to India.  Yet   their    immediate   expression comes    from    this    country.    The  eight stories  of  The Golden  Phoenix, here  re­ told   by  Michael  Horn ansky,
the  collection of  tales  that   Marius  Bar­
beau made along the lower St. Lawrence, while  the  beginning of  James  McNeill's The Sunken City  came  from  stories  that he  told  his children.
Not surprisingly, the stories in the two books have  many  things  in common. The same   plots   crop   up,   though  from   dif­ ferent places.  The same   details  appear, as in  the  fife or  bugle  that can  call  up  a sudden arm,
figurement  of  the   long   nose.  Most   re­
markable, though, is  the  humour of  the fairy  tales  that  keeps them--or  Romance
-from being  sentimental and  that  gives
 light  and  shade   to  their  brilliant colour. And  it  is  here  in  great   variety.   It may be in the handsome nonchalance of a sentence  like this from  The Sunken City: "He  travelled  so fast  that  he came  to the sea in a minute and  made  himself  a boat from   his  cap   and   a  sail  from   his  shirt and   reached   the   eastern   world   in  five hours." Or,   as  in  The  Golden Phoenix, it  may  be  in  the  resignation of a  prince who  has  failed   at  his  job -"Oh,  well, there  goes the  crown" -or in  the plain­ tive query of the hero  who has  just bested a  lion,  "May I  pass,  or  must   I  do  it again?"
The   basic   formula  of   the   tales,   of course, is the triad, which  has been the formula of comedy  from  Dante's three eternities to  the  latest  comedian's  build­ up  for  his  punch  line.   In   the  tales,  it appears as  three   fairies,  or  three  magic  gifts,  or  three   questions and  answers,  or three   trials.   The  other   basic   device   is that   of  incongruity, or  the  upside-down of  surprise,   and   this  element centres  on Jack  himself.  Whether  he  is a  prince  or a peasant, and whether his name  is Jack, Jacques,  Petit   Jean, or  Ivan, he  begins humbly.   As   one   mother  puts   it,   "All people  are  people,   but  you,  Ivan, are  a fool."
The difference between  the  two  books comes  from   the  quality of  the  prose  in which  each  is written, and  the difference is considerable.
There are   many   good   things   in  The Sunken City, but  while  Mr.  McNeill shows that  he  enjos
tale,   and   that    he   can   savour   a  good
phrase,  too  often  his  own  writing  is ponderous. In the  title story, for instance, he  commits   the   grave   sin  of  adding  a moral    tag.   Now   while   fairy   tales   are highly  moral-the good   people   always

79

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



wm,   and   the   bad   ones  are   made  un­ comfortable-like any; other  form  of  art,  they  do  not  use the  moral  as a bludgeon. They  trust  the reader -or the listener­ to  get  the  point.  The  ending of another story  sounds   as  though  an   agricultural economist had  wandered in:   ".  .  .  their black-and-white   descendants   [of   sea­ cows]  are  valued   all  over  the  world  for the quality of their  milk."  The awkward­ ness  is  not   only; in  the  endings,   unfor­  tunately; it permeates the writing. People never  say things; they; suggest them. They don't agree; thyy; are  "content with  this arrangement''.   They   don't   welcome someone; they  "give  him  the  hospitality: of  their   roof".  There's a  real  doozer  in the description of a ruined  castle: "when the  last  assault  of  time  had  laid  its ram­  parts   low."   Such   rather  silly  solemnity has  no  place  in  good  writing  anywhere, but  especially; not  in  fairy  tales.
There  is  no   such   cloudiness   in   the
writing  of  Michael  Hornyansky. The prose   of  The  Golden Phoenix   has   the good   taste  and   the  skill  of  fine  art.   It has  a  lambent quality that  reminded me of  the   music  of  the  harpsichord, clear, deft,   and   complete.  It can   be  lyrical: ". . .  and  above  their  heads  the  Golden Phoenix  sang   in   the   jasmine   tree."  It can   be   daringLy: simple;   "An   old,   old woman  looked  out  at  him."  The  imagery is  light-"It was  as  smooth   as  ivory, and  cool as the night"-and the laughter bubbles   close  to  the   surface.   Here   is  a supple  prose  that  is gay and  firm.
Marius  Barbeau  says  in   his  note   to The  Golden Phoenix: "Mr. Hornyansky and   I   aimed   at   achieving  in  our   own way a literary uplifting similar  to that  of Grimm,  Andersen, and   Perrault  in   the tales of  their people." They have succeeded.                 MARGARET STOBIE

8o
 POLITICS
AND THE PRESS

J.  M.  s. CARELESS, Brown of the  Globe, vol. 1, The  Voice of  Upper Canada, I8I8-I859· Toronto.  $6.oo.

To   STUDENTS  of  Canadian  history   the name of George  Brown  is thoroughly familiar. And  rightly  so. Was  he  not  one of the  country.'s  really  great  Liberals, the founder of the influential Toronto Globe, a thunderous writer of editorials, and  a Father of Confederation? Yet Canadian histories  tell  us little  about the man  him­ self.  We  see  him  fleetingly   on  this  page as  a  Clear   Grit   politician, on  that  as  a supporter of  "rep. by;  pop.", and  on  an­  other  as   one   of   the   architects  of   the federal structure now  known  as  Canada. But   was   he,   as   Leacock   once   wrote,  "...  as  straight  as  a   figure  in   Euclid  and   about  as  attractive"?
To  date  there  has  been  no satisfactory answer  to that  ambiguous question. Little has  been  written about him,  and  the one biography available-John 	Lewis's George  Brown, in  the  Makers of Canada series  (I gog)  -was, at  the  best, a super­ ficial surve,y; of Brown's life, written with­  out  brilliance, and-if  the  style  reflects the  author-without  feeling.
Professor  Careless, Chairman of the Department of History at  the  University of  Toronto, was fulLy aware  of this  neg­ lect  when  he  started work  on  a  new life of  Brown   ten   years  ago.  The  Voice  of Upper  Canada,  IBIB-IBS9   is   the   first volume of  a  projected  two-volume  bio­ graphy, the  second   of   which  will follow Brown's career through  the  anxious  days immediately preceding  Confederation to his  tragic   death in  188o,  when   he  was killed   by  a  discharged  employee of  the

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



Globe. Will the completed portrait show Brown   as  a  convincingly  l111rnan hr\ing, standing firm  and  alive  in  the  new  light of  modern  research, or  will  the  mists of the   past   still  cover   the  real  features of the   man   whose   voice   was   heard   with such  clarity in  the  Canada of a hundred years  ago?
It  is  perhaps  unfair  to  prejudge an incomplete  work;   yet   a   review   of  this volume    cannot   be   delay,ed   until    the second  appears. Its  importance demands comment,  though  comment  tempered  by the   reminder  that   the   canvas   has   not yet  been  filled.  What then  can  be said? To   begin   with,   it   can   be  said,   and with  good  reason, that   this  is a  work  of the first magnitude in the  realm  of  Cana­ dian    scholarship.   With    the   true   and persevering  patience  of   a   research specialist,  Professor  Careless has  not only examined  works   well   known   to  earlier  historians,  but    he   has   uncovered  new primary material, including a "trunkful" of  private  papers  hitherto  unexamined. His   trail    of   study   has   taken    him   to Canadian   archives   and   university li­ braries,  as  well  as  to  the  home  of  some of  Brown's   descendants,  now   living   in Scotland.  Moreover,  he  has   marshalled his  facts  with   great   skill,  and   presented them   in  a  style  that   is  clear   and   con­
trolled,  though at  times  slightly  arid. The  present volume   opens   with   the
arrival of the  Browns -Peter  the father and  George  the  son-as Scottish  immi­ grants in  New  York  in  1837.  It  closes in
1859,  by which   time  George   Brown  had so grown  in  stature and  in  fame  that  he overshadowed most  of his Canadian con­ temporaries, with  the  notable  exception of his old foe  and  nemesis,  the  mercurial John  A. Macdonald. The six  New  York years are  disposed  of quickly and  lightly;
 but   with   the   year  I 844,   when   Brown, tlwn    tw( nly-six,   founded  the   Toronto Globe  as a Reform paper, the pace of the narrative   changes.  What   follows   is   a minute and   detailed  political history  of the    many-and   at    times    stlrnng­ events   that    occurred   during   the   next sixteen  years in party caucuses, in govern­ assemblies,  and  on  the  hustings. Brown,  of   course,    is   the   central   figure,    but around  him    swirl   hundreds  of   other figures-Conservatives, Reformers, Clear Grits,  "Bleus," and  "Rouges." At  times, he seems lost in the whirlpools of politics, but  he always comes to the surface, grow­ ing  steadily  in  prestige   and  power,  and  surviving  even   that   tragicomical  day when  he  climbed   to  the  peak  of  power only  to be violently tripped by the  astute "double-shuffle" of  the  wily  Macdonald and  his backers.
But  the  figure  that   Professor  Careless gives  us is nearly  alway,s that   of  George Brown,  politician. We  hear   his  political speeches,   in   essence  at   least;   we  learn much    about    the   causes   for   which   he fought; and  we are  given  many  extracts from   the   blistering  editorials  that    ap­ peared   in  the  Globe.  Yet,  somehow, we don't get inside  the buildings that  housed the  Globe.  We smell  no ink;  we hear  no compositors  at   work;   we  get   little   im­ pression   of  the   paper  as  a  newspaper,· and  we rarely  see Brown  at his desk. And as  for   meeting  George   Brown   en   pan­ toufles- we don't, except  for  a few arti­ ficially  contrived  moments, such   as  are found in  the  book's  closing  pages  when we  are  permitted a  brief  glimpse  inside "...  the  wann parlour ... where  the lamplight  and   the   firelight  softly   con­ tended    on   the   ceiling,    where    George Brown  sat  as ever,  hands  in  pockets,  legs thrust straight out  before  him-talking,

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



as  ever,  in  happy   contentment with  his father, his family  and  good  friends."
In  brief,   Careless,   the   historian,  has so   far   pushed    his  alter   ego,   the   bio­ grapher, well to one side. Though he has treated Brown,   the  politician,  fully  and  most  sympathetically,, he has  left  Brown, the man,  lurking  in the shadows.  Perhaps volume   two  will  change the  picture.
S.  E. READ


A WOMAN SUBMERGED

MARGARET STEWART  AND DORIS  FRENCH.   Ask No  Quarter: The Story of Agnes  Macphail. Longmans, Green. $4.50.

THE  EYES  of  the  public  were  on  Agnes Macphail, first  of her  sex to sit in  Cana­ da's    Parliament,   during  much   of   her nineteen years in  the  House  of  Commons and  her  briefer  career  afterwards in  the Ontario  Legislature. It  is not  surprising that    a   gulf   should   have   continued  to widen,  until  her  death in  1954,  between  her    public  and   private  selves:  raw  farmer's daughter  and  great  lady;  quick­  witted, sarcastic and  aggressive in debate, yielding   to  tears  of  mortification in  pri­ vate; feared  as a politician and  sometimes  wooed as a woman  by members  of parlia­ ment  whose  politics  she despised.  In Ask No  Quarter Margaret Stewart and  Doris French  have   recreated  the  vitality   and complexity of their  colourful subject, but perhaps understandably, they  have  found it  a difficult  task to bring into  clear  focus either  or   both   of  "The Two   Lives  of Agnes Macphail" (their alternative title).
Agnes   Macphail would   not  have  ap­ proved  of any  more  personal  interpreta­ tion   of  her   life  than  Ask   No   Quarter
 provides; she would  have wielded  her parliamentary knife: "Cut out  the cant". A mere  ornament to  the  short-lived  Pro­ gressive   Party    in   1921,   she   put   down roots  and  thrived in  her  new-found  ele­ ment, becoming in  time  a  truly  effective  independent member, a  strength to  the Ginger Group, a disconcerting but valued  ally  of  the  C.C.F.  Personal suitors   and  political seducers continued to attend her, but   she   had   married  the   public   good. Look  for   the  fruits  of  the  marriage in that  "new   kind  of  society,  based  on  the concept of  public   responsibility for  pri­ vate  misfortune" for  which  she laboured, and  which  is still  to  be  born.
Important  as   her    contribution  to Canadian public  life  was,  however-her homely,, irascible, independent monologue on  behalf  of humanity and  social  justice in general and  farmers' rights  and  prison reform in  particular-Agnes  Macphail was  not   a  great   stateswoman. It  is  not by accident that  her  biographers so often court tedium and   repetitious disorder in their   narrative of  her  political   life.  The "real  Agnes"   emerges   now  as  an   early type   of   the   "modern   woman",  whose problems  are   still   with   us,  though  like the  brave  ladies  of Ibsen  she  herself  may seem  a little  archaic. I am  not  forgetting her determined efforts  to ignore  and  have others  ignore  the   fact   that   she  was  a woman. She  "asked no  quarter" on  that account,  as   her    biographers   proudly verify.  At the same  time  her whole  public life  was  a piquant, sometimes  ridiculous, sometimes charming, sometimes courage­ ous  display   of  femininity and  its  ways. (The contemporary account of  her  hold­  in,g hands with  R. B. Bennett were  based, we  discover, on  no  mere  political meta­ phor.)   Her   real  shortcomings  stemmed from  the fact  that she never overcame the

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



intellectual provinciality which  the oddity of her  position  entailed. She did not want to  be  odd  or  eccentric  (though  she  en­ joyed and  even  demanded the limelight). She  wanted, in fact,  a larger "normality" than  women were  and   perhaps  are allowed. "It  was  a  deep  sorrow   to  me that    I   couldn't  do   all   that    I   expect  women   to  do;  to  be a  wife and  mother, but  also  an  untrammelled  active   person finding  outlet for  her  ability  in  the fields of   learning,  agriculture,  industry,  busi­ ness, the arts  or government". Here  surely is  the   key   to   Agnes   Macphail's   story. What were  the  costs  (to  both)  when  the woman was submerged in  the  politician? Her   biographers  give   us  only   hints   of the  answer, though  their   lively  portrait is  drawn  with   frankness  and  honesty as   well   as   with  warmth,  colour   and enthusiasm.
F.  W.  WATT


PHILOSOPHER IN THE GRAND MANNER

GEORGE P. GRANT. Philosophy  in  the Mass  Age.
Copp  Clark.  $3.00.

IN  AN   AGE  of  minute philosophers  Pro­ fessor Grant cogitates in  the  grand  man­ ner.  His  book  is a  true  miracle of  loaves and  fishes;  its  I I 2  pages  include  discus­ sion  of the  myth  of the  "eternal return", the  Judeo-Christian idea  of   history,  the natural law  theory  of  morality, the  con­ cept  of progress,  Marx and  the  Marxists, and    pragmatism   as   the   last   phase   of American  Protestantism-all this  inter­ spersed  with  obiter dicta  on modern edu­
cation, Hegel,   the  novels   (sic)   of  J. D.
Salinger, the  Hol}i" Trinity, the  Stratford
Festival, the  systematic elusiveness  of the
 "I". Many  of the  opinions expressed  are highly  implausible,  but   all  arc   asserted with  breath-taking self-assurance. When one sets aside the erudition with  which Professor Grant has ballasted his thought, however, it can be seen that  his central concern  in  all  of  this  is a  moral  one;  in his own words: "Are we truly  and  finally responsible  for  shaping what   happens in the  world,  or  do  we live  in  an  order  for which  we are  not  ultimately  responsible, so that  the  purpose of our  lives is to dis­ cover and  serve that  order?"   The  enormous vistas which  occupy  so much  of the  book are  called  up  to give content to this question.
Human  history,   we  are   told,   divides into   two  great   epochs:  that   of  modern man   on  the  one  hand   and   that   of  the traditional religious  cultures on the other. "The main  distinction is between  modern scientific culture and  all societies which existed  before  the  age  of  progress."  An­ cient   history  can   be  further  subdivided into   a  "mythic" stage   and   a  more   ad­  vanced    religious   stage.    In   the   mythic  stage men regarded themselves as puppets acting  out, in  endless repetition, a drama pre-ordained   by  the   Gods; "They  saw events   as  the   pale   shadows  of   divine  realities,  the  temporal as the  mere  image of the eternal." This vision  of history  has received  its clearest statement in the philosophy  of Plato but,  if Grant is to be believed, it was subscribed to more or less unconsciously  by Ancient Man in general.
In   the  second   phase   of  pre-scientific culture the  puppet theatre is replaced by the  law  court-man  is  free   to  go  the way of his own  choosing, but  the way he must  go, if he is to  be a man  rather than a beast,  has  been  laid  out  for  him  in  the eternal statutes of  the  natural law.  Men are    reasonable  creatures   and    through

BOOKS  IN   REVIEW



reason  are capable of knowing right  from wrong; knowing   our   duties   we  are  still free   to  obeor  disobe,
through   obedience  to   a   moral    order which   we  did   not  create   that   we  can bring  meaning and  rational purpose into our  lives.
The crucial transition now takes place,
in  Grant's account, from  man  trying  to conform to  a  superhuman order  to  man regarding himself  as maker of history and measure  of   all   things.   Somewhat   sur­ prisingly  Grant  attributes  this  change to the  Judaic idea  of history,  at  work  with­  in  Christendom.  But  although the  Jews may  well  have  been, as Grant claims,  the first people  to have had a sense of history this  does  not  appear to have  had  much  to do with  the concept of man-made pro­  gress.  In  the  Judeo-Christian view  God makes  history and  man is merely expected to   hold   the   line.  The idea   of  progress originated,  in  the  West  at  least,  in  the scientific  revolution of the  r6th  century; it  is  then,, in  the  writings  of  the  proto­ scientists   and   their  admirers, that   belief is first  expressed  in  the possibility of  end­ less  progress    through  the   co-operative accumulation  of  useful  knowledge.  Had  Greek  science  lived  to  produce the  kind of technological  revolution that  was  evi­ dent    in   the   r 6th   century.   the   ancient Greeks   would   presumably  have  en­ gendered the idea  of progress  themselves.
The idea  of progress  permeates both Marxism, in  which  form  it has been car­ ried   to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and   the pragmatism  which   characterizes  Ameri­ can  civilization. Grant's   account  of Marxism does  not  encourage  confidence in  him  as  a  historian; in  keeping  with  a current   fashion   he  locates  Marx's  pro­ foundest thought in  his Hegelian  juveni­ lia  and   then,   by  exaggerating  and   mis-
 interpreting the concern with  religion in these  writings, displays  Marxism as a lat­ ter   day   version   of   the   Judeo-Christian conct;pt  of  history.  Marx  the  revolution­ ary socialist  is swallowed  up  by Marx the prophet of  Judah; one  can  only, attempt to  imagine   the   towering  invective   with which  Marx  himself  would  have  greeted  this  revelation.
Marxism  is  a  philosophy  of  progress
but,  as Grant points  out,  it is not a philosophy   which    adequately   acknow­ ledges  the  freedom of  the  human spirit.  Only  pragmatism fully expresses  the con­ ception of man   as  the  maker  of  history. Here  no limit is placed  on man's freedom; progress  is  all,  and   what   is  to  count as progress is itself  established by man.  "The right  is only  the  expedient in  the  way of our  acting."
In  spite  of  the  many  original opinions
vigorously  expressed  throughout this book it  is only  in  its final  chapters that  it  be­ gins  to  come  to  life;  here  at  last  Grant has   a   serious    philosophical    purpose. Briefly,   he   believes   that   certain   moral  principles  are   absolutely   true   whatever men  may  think   about  them; if so, then  man  is not  the  measure  of all  things  and there  is a limit  to  his  authority, and  any philosophy  which,  like  pragmatism, im­ plies  the  contrary  is false  and  iniquitous. But   what   account  can   be  given   which acknowledges both   man's moral  obliga­ tions   and   his   freedom-which,  while recognizing the existence  of absolute obli­ gations,  does  not   reduce   them   to  some species   of   coercion,  natural   or   super­ natural?
The problem is a  real  one,  but  unfor­
tunately Grant contributes nothing to its solution. He  is aware that  neither  tradi­ tional    theology   nor   traditional   natural law   theory   meet   the  case  and  that   any

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



moral law  compatible with human freedom  must    be   in   some   sense   self­ legislated. But  all  this  has  been  said, and said  better, long ago. And  beyond this, in spite   of  much   huffing  and  puffing, he makes  no advance.
This  is  the  kind  of  book  that  is likely
to  be  hailed  as  a  profound and  reward­ ing  contribution  to  something  or  other. Regrettably, notwithstanding  the  moral  earnestness  and   all  too  evident  learning of  the  author, it  is  nothing of  the  kind.
PETER  REMNANT



CRAFTSMEN AND OTHERS

ALFRED  PURDY.  The Crafte so  Longe to  Lerne.
Ryerson. $ r .oo.
R.  E.  RASHLEY.  Moon Lake   and  Other  Poems.
Ryerson. $r.oo.
THERESA E.  &:  DON.  W.  THOMSON.  River   and
Realm. Ryerson. $r.oo.

IN "Villanelle (plus  1 ) ", one  of the bet­ ter  poems  in  his  volume, The  Crafte   so Longe  to  Lerne, Mr.  Purdy  states  his in­ tention  of  employing in   his  verse  "the language of  the  age":
Of   matched  mechanic's  tools   include  the spade,
The  crowbar words, the  sputnik slang ....
A worthy  intention but,  as borne  out  by the deliberate archaism of the collection's title,   and   the   contradictory  content  of other of  his  poems,  one  which  he  is  un­ able   to  consistently realise. If,  as  in "Driftwood Logs",  his tone  is of his time,  one  of  quiet, ironic  understatement, his language  is   a   long   way   off   "sputnik slang"; while  when,  as  in  "Love Song", he  does  use a spade  to  dig  up  his words, he  at  the  same  time  buries  poetry:
 But  I can   be  two  men   if  I have   to, Unlike  the   man  delivering beer  from  Por­
lock's  Grocery
(When you  sniff  the  acoustics of  your  nose are  delightful).

He is more successful  in other poems; particularly in  "Waiting  for   an   Old Woman to  Die", in  which  such  lines  as
"I can  only be sure  that  I lack I All filial
feeling  about the  wet I Eyed  old  person
of dubious gender", are  contemporary enough  to have  been written by Jimmy Porter.
There are  phrases  which  bubble  to the surface  of a writer's mind  and  heave  and splutter there,  threatening each  moment to  explode;  the   only   way  to  deal  with them  is to  trap   them  in  the  pipette of a poem.  Discrimination comes  later; when the Inind's  marsh  is quiet  again,  each captive image may be weighed and found worthy    or   wanting.   Mr.    Purdy's   un­ conscious   eructs   admirably,  but   he   has not   the  necessary   judgment to  prevent inferior  imagery condensing in  his work, which  is of  a  consequence  spotted   with such  non-poetry as:
"Nouns that ache  on  human skin", "Vaguely sink",
"Live  argot  for  the vermifuge of rage". Punning in  poetry   can  be  most  effec- tive,  since  it  is an  economical device  for obtaining two or more  meanings at once. But,  misused,  it  will  reduce the  poem  to a comedian's script; and  Mr.  Purdy mis­
uses it.

small   holders ... Opening themselves in fertile air To celebrate no men  or  pause  -

and,  from  "At  Roblin Lake", describing the  post-inseininatory movements of fish: "non- judicial  separation".
Nor is the technical standard of these poems   well-sustained.  "Villanelle   (plus

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



I)", apart from  the fault,  implicit  in  the title, of a stanza  too many, fails to rhyme each  middle line; in addition, the rhythm of  the  second  line  is clumsy.  Poor  metre spoils   "Where  the    Moment  Is"   and "Oly;mpic   Room",  and,   in   most  other poems,  rhythm is  remarkable for  its  ab­ sence.  In  "For  Oedi-Puss"  (first  punned, surely,  by  Malcolm  Lowry?)   occurs  an inexcusable   abbreviation,   "From   the
Med.  Sea  and  the  Red  I Sea"; in "Short
History  of X  County" one finds "g6" for "ninety-six", and, in at least one instance, an  awkward  inversion, "No   flicker  over the  featureless message  runs".
If Mr.  Purdy would  or  could  tighten
and  tidy  his  verse  up,  he might  produce more   poems   of  the  quality   of  "waiting for an Old  Woman to Die" and  "If Birds Look   In", more   lines  as  good   as  "the
dusty  Cretan sibilants  I Rustling  delight­
edly  on  scholar  tongues". Unfortunately, one  leaves  his  book  less conscious  of his minor  triumphs than  of his many failures, of a certain wooliness of thought and expression  best seen, perhaps, in "About Pablum, Teachers and  Malcolm  Lowry":

Aching to  believe
In a felt  and  almost experienced
Meaning, somehow untrue,

which leaves one feeling (and almost experiencing)  the resigned  despair  of one who  sinks  in  quicksand.
The boggy imagery finds further appli­ cation   in   Mr.  Rashley's "Moon  Lake". "It  is  too  late  to  run  like  children after
the   muskrats I Into the   sucking   mud",
cries   the   poet,   and   one  briskly  agrees, "Thank God!" This  is a  prime  example of   the   kind   of   line   mature  judgment should  keep out of print.  He does it again in  "Harvest", but  in muted  manner, and luckily  at  the  poem's  end:

86
 An  Indian queries, "What is  man?
The  breath  of   the  buffalo  hangs for   a moment
White in  the  frosty  air
And   is  gone."

Mr.  Rashley's verse  is not  uniformly damned by ringing  emptiness and  Cana­ dian   culture  coyness.  "Marianne", pos­ sibly   the   best   of   the   bunch,  contains delicate observation and  insight:

It was  difficult enough without the  bird, Difficult enough to conform ... "Marianne", one  might imagine oneself   to
say,
"Marianne" -beginning -
But  there was  the  bird  fluttering,
And  Marianne turned away.

"Insomnia",  "Snowfall", and   "Spring" are  all  mildly  attractive series of images, few,  it  is true,  original, but  all  harmless.
Not so harmless is the work  of Theresa
and  Don  Thomson. River  and Realm consists of seven poems, all paeans of propaganda to perpetuate the Lie of  His­ tory and  praise  the Crimes  of  Commerce. This    indigestible  mess   of    jingoism    is served  up to a jingling  metre on the chip­  ped  china of outworn  imagery;. One  had thought  that   verse  as  unrealistic as  this no  longer   found the  light  of  day,  even through the  dormer  of  a  Ryerson  chap­ book.  But  one,  obviously,  had  been  mis­ taken:

in  clear Elizabethan  tones
a  comely  monarch dedicates an  epic  dream, a lustrous age.
DAVID   BROMIGE

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



FRONTIER SONGS

MARGARET   ARNETT    MACLEOD.   Songs    of   Old
Manitoba. Ryerson Press.  $2.50.

THE   EXPLICITLY  stated  purpose of  this unpretentious,  pleasantly  executed little volume  is  to  make  some  contribution to the  cultural history  of Canada in general and   of  Manitoba in  particular. This   is an   activity    which   holds   an   important place   in   Canada  to-day:,   and   perhaps criticism   of  the  intrinsic merit   and  his­ torical  importance of the collection would be  ill-timed. The volume   is the  work  of a dedicated amateur in  the field, but  her acknowledgments testify  to  assistance  by a  formidable  band   of   historians,  poets and  musicians, so that  it  is reasonable to conclude that  the  quality  of the  text  and music  are  fundamental  to  the  material.
 There has  been  no shaping or  polishing into beauty by a poetically endowed editor.
"The author's object" says Dr.  Morton
in  a  preface,  "came to  be to show  what songs  a societ)l, which  almost  to the  end lived  side  by  side  with  savage, produce,  and   to  reveal   each   phase   of Manitoba's history  by a song with a com­ mentary as setting." This  is a most  laud­ able   aim,   and   to   devoted   Manitobans Mrs.  MacLeod  has  succeeded. She  has given  the  music  and  French orig nals
the   words,   and   English   versions,  occa­
sionally contributed by a poet, but regret­ tably  sometimes  by others  who  were  not poets. The  French songs by: Pierre Falcon  generally   have   a  fine  rollicking   lilt  and rhythm,  and   "The  Marching  Song",   a parody  of "Johnny Cope" admirably cap­  tures   the   spirit   of   the   Scots   original,







POW !  JPOETRy










by GILBERT HIGHET.  "What use is poetry?"  asks the  author in one of  the  essays in  this volume. An answer  can  be found  in each of these thirty-nine essays on poets and poetry, all of which brilliantly display  Professor  Highet's characteristic  urbanity and  breadth of  knowledge.  $6.00. OXFORD  UNIVERSITY PRESS.

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



particularly in  the  chorus:

0 Hey,  Riel,  are  ye waking yet, Or  are  yer  drums a-beating yet? If y're  nae  waking we'll  nae  wait,
For  we'll  take  the  fort  this morning.

The English  songs at  the end of the  book composed by ardent lovers of Manitoba show  the  devotion which  the  prairies  can inspire.
M. L.  MACKENZIE


CANADIANA CATALOGUED

A  Bibliography of  Canadiana- First  Supple­ ment.  Ed.   Gertrude  M.  Boyle,  assisted   by Marjorie  Colbeck, with  intro.  by  Henry C. Campbell. Toronto  Public  Library.

IN   1934   the   Toronto  Public    Library made    known   its   holdings    on   Canada from   1534 to  1867 by publishing, in chronological   arrangement,   A    Biblio­ graphy  of Canadiana, under   the  editor­ ship  of Staton and  Tremaine. Now, with assistance   from   the  Canada  Council, its First   Supplement,   "which   the   present  Board  hopes  may: be  the  first  of many", has   been   printed  by  the   University  of Toronto  Press.
As in  the original compilation of 4,646 entries,  the  supplement  contains  works
generally written   contemporaneously with   the   events   they   record,   many   by the  actors  on  the  historical stage  them­ selves.  But   the   supplement,  with   1,610 entries,  goes further. Apart  from  adding books  omitted  previously  through  space limitations  and,   as  in   the   case  of   the Clergy    Reserve    documents,   those   ac­ quired later, it  also  introduces classifica­ tions    like    verse,    school    readers    and  sermons.  However, because  the  Toronto Public   has   relinquished   its   lofty   pre-

88
 eminence in  the  field  of Canadiana since the growth of other collections in Canada and   elsewhere, newly  acquired material is more  local,  with  the  emphasis on  im­ prints  from  York,  Toronto,   Upper Canada and  Canada West. On  the other hand,   holdings  on   Newfoundland   are  here  included, and  properly so now  that  the  old  colony   has  become  a  Province. Moreover,  more   effective   use   may   be made   of  the  supplement  as  a  result  of an  improved  index  which,  besides  show­ ing  titles  and  subjects, lists proper names appearing  on  title  pages  of  imprints.
Although more clearly  divided chrono­ logically,   this   new   work   is  identical in format with  the  original bibliography. As before,  the  books, pamphlets, broadsides, sermons   and   governments'  publications are  described generally;;  like its "parent", too,   it   is   illustrated  with   facsimiles   of title  pages,  of  a  proclamation and  of an entertainment  broadside. On   the  whole, this   First   Supplement  should    be   wel­ comed   by  students  who  found   the  old "Staton  and   Tremaine"  so  useful   and,  indeed, by  anyone  interested  in  a  port­ able  card  catalogue of Canadiana.
GORDON R. ELLIOTT


CANDLE FLAME

PETER   c.  NEWMAN.   Flame    of  Power.   Long­
mans,  Green. $4-95·

IN  THE  GREAT age  of  the  muckrakers, Gustavus Myers  wrote  a  massive  and  in some   ways  fascinating  History   of  the Great  American Fortunes. Now, in Flame of  Power, Mr.    Peter   Newman  has  at­ tempted something like the  same  task for the  men  in  control of wealth  who, in his

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



opmwn,  have   played   the   greatest part in  changing  Canada's  economic destiny. He  claims,  in  his prologue, that  he is undertaking "an examination in depth of the  compulsive drive  for  business  success that  has been  a major shaping force in Canadian history", and  one expects  from such a promise two things at least-an examination of  the  psychological  moti­ vations   of  individual  capitalists  and   a mature study   of  the  economic  structure they represent. On  both counts one is dis­ appointed.  Mr.  Newman's  plane   is  that  of  provocative journalism;  he  presents  a series  of  profiles  in  which  the  lives  and personal idiosyncracies of  his subjects  are considered  on  a  tantalisingly  superficial level;   rarely   does   he  descend   very  far  into  the  real  depths of the  Balzacian ob­ sessions he  records.
Perhaps some of the disappointing flat-
 ness  of  the  book's  general  impression is due to the drabness of the subjects. Myers in his book presented a range  of financial rascals   who  rivalled   in   their   own   field the Renaissance condottieri; Canada has had   few  of  such   colourful  Great  Cap­ tains,  and  the  most  dramatic  energumen of them  all-William Van  Horne of the Canadian  Pacific-was  reared among  the  Titans south  of  the  border. It seems almost  as though, from  a combination of French Jansenism and  Scottish  Calvin­ ism, there  has issued  a  strain   of puritan­ ism in our  national  makeup which  makes the   joyous  display  of  wealth  an   uneasy matter for  Canadians.  I  am  sure  this  is a very good  thing,  but  it  makes  the  lives of our  financiers  pretty dull  reading un­  less the hidden  demons of motivation are revealed.
LOUIS  CORNELIUS









COMING   SOON



"We hear  her  called  a very  intellectual poet,  but she  begins   (and often ends) with  the  perceiving eye ..." Milton Wilson
in  Canadian Literature.







UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO  PRESS
TORONTO 5, ONTARIO.
 Here is the  first  volume
of Miss Avison's poems  to
be  published although  some of  the  selections have appeared  previously in periodicals. The poems  for this  volume were  selected
by Miss Avison  from
a much larger collection, some  published and
some  unpublished. g6  pages
5%  X 8%. $2.50.








8g

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



SHORT NOTICES

On  Understanding Russia  by F. Cyril
James  (University  of  Toronto  Press,
$2.95)    is   a   brief,    rather    journalistic account of an  economist's month in  Rus­ sia;  its  details  are  interesting, its  conclu­ sions  sketchy.
*  *  *
In  Civil  Liberties  and    Canadian
Federalism (University of Toronto Press,
$2.00)  F. R. Scott  examines  the relation­ ship   between   our  civil  liberties  and   the development  of  the  Canadian  constitu­ tion.   Originally  given  as  a  Plaunt  Me­ morial Lecture,  it  is discursive  in  form, but  often  penetrating in insight.

*  *  *
Perhaps all that  one need say of Songs
from Kawartha by Flornie  Baxter  Young
 (Vantage Press,  $4.25)  is that  quotation is here  sufficient  criticism. The Mournful Frog is t ical
presents, literally   by  the  hundred:

A frog  sat  on  a lily  pad
All alone and  very  sad,
He  thought, I should have  stayed  a tad, And  then life wouldn't seem so bad.

*	*  *
The title  of  Some  Letters of Duncan
Campbell Scott,  Archibald   Lampman and   Others  explains  the   scope   of  this small   volume   edited   and   published   by Arthur S. Bourinot (I 58, Carleton Road, Rockcliffe, Ottawa, $3.50). It contains a miscellany of hitherto unpublished corre­ spondence which  will  interest  those  con­ cerned   with   the  Canadian   poets  of  the earlier   years  of  this  century.

*   *   *







The Waterloo view


A semi-annual pub- lished   by faculty members at Waterloo University College and McMaster  University. Send   subscriptions
and   contributions to J. A. S. Evans,



Waterloo University College, Waterloo, Ontario. CON-
TENTS OF FORTH- COMING ISSUE. A Symposium on  the future of  liberalism in  Canada, with articles by  Ernest
Watkins, Jack Pickers-
gill  and   Douglas Fisher. Ageing and Memory, a study in gerontology, by D.  C. Fraser. The  Fifties,
an  Ottawa Retrospect,
by Michael Barkway. When He  Arrived Home, a short  story



by  Arthur Hammond. Poetry by James Reaney, Alden  A. Nowlan, and  Miriam Waddington.
Art  and  Drama
reviews by  Elizabeth Kilbourn and  A G. McKay, book  reviews by D.  C. Savage,
W.  M.  Kilbourn, J. A. S. Evans, J. B. Sanders, Goldwin French, and John Robert  Colombo. Subscription per  year:
$I .50. SPECIAL I-YR. TRIAL SUBSCRIPTION:
$1.00.






go

BOOKS  IN    REVIEW



Covering the same period  is Tributes through  the    Years   (Ryerson  Press,
$r .oo), a pamphlet gathered by; Elsie M.
Pomeroy   to  celebrate  the   centenary,   of the  birth   of  Sir  Charles G.  D.  Roberts. It  is  a   garland  of  faded    compliments from  which criticism had  been carefully excluded in  the  cause  of  adulation and which   leaves   one   with   about  as  much sense of the  living  man  as a wreath of everlastings in  a  cemetery.

*  *  *
These  are  the   Maritimes by  Will.  R. Bird  (Ry,erson, $4.50), though written in the  form   of  a  travel   narrative, is really a disguised  guide  book.  It has  a  depress­ ing  repetitiveness; in  all  too  many  places the  author arrives,  meets  a  suitably,  gar­  rulous  inhabitant who  tells  him  a  potted  history   of  the   locale,   and   then   traipses  around  the   recognised   tourist  traps,  which  he  describes   with  a  breathless in­ terest  whose  tone  varies little  whether he is telling  of a chocolate factory;, a potter's establishment,  a   workshop  for   hooked rugs  or  a scrappy smalltown museum. In a negative way  this book emphasises that  guide   books  should   be  concise  and  easy to  follow;  Baedeker  reigned   so  long  by fulfilling  these  requirements.

*  *  *
Church  and   State   in  Canadian  Edu­ cation  by C.  B. Sissons  (Ryerson, $6.50) is an  interesting study  of a  problem that  has assumed  acute forms  at various  times in Canadian history,. It is exhaustive and,  though without any  literary  pretensions, clearly  enough  written to hold  the  atten­ tion  of  those  who  have  some  initial  in­  terest   in   the   history    of   education  m Canada.
 ------------------------------------
1
NEW
CANADIANA

Spring 1960


THE  REST  TO  FORTUNE the life  of major-general JAMES  WOLFE
A superb portrait by Robin Reilly. "This  book evokes admiration,
praise   and    excitement. The  Rest    to
Fortune  is  a   very   impressive  affair
indeed.
"Mr.  Reilly  skilfully    turns  facet after facet  of  Wolfe's character  in  our direction  ..."     THE  SUNDAY TIMES The  first   biography  of   Wolfe    since
I 929. 	Illustrated  $7.oo

A PLACE OF  MANY WINDS
BY    MARGARET SHARCOTT
Author of  Troller's  Holiday
An important contribution to the social   history  of  British    Columbia, a splendid picture of the life, past  and present, of  the  white communities and the  Indian tribes  of  Vancouver Island.
Illustrated  $4.50

THE  WATCHING CAT
BY  PAMELA  FRY
Montreal is the setting for this brilliant suspense story  of  a  prairie schoolmistress who moves  east  to take possession   of  an   inheritance.  A  house of mystery, an atmosphere of evil and imminent  doom,  and   a  murder   con­ tribute to  the  mounting horror  which  is  skilfully   sustained  to  the  very  end.
$3.50


I
I
I
I
1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE 	I
I
I
I

------------------------------------!





WHO  IS PROVINCIAL?
Two  FELLOW-AMERICANS  have  objected to  my complaints about  provincialism in Canadian magazines on the grounds that I  wrote   for   "a   provincially1-titled   and provincially-directed  magazine  called The  New   Yorker."  Without going  into the  quality of  The New  Yorker, may  I say  (a)   that   my  objection to  the  Cana­ dian  magazines I  reviewed  was  not  that  their   interest   was  local  but  that  it  was provincial, i.e.  that  Canadian  culture, on their   own  evidence, is not  wide  enough or  rich  enough   to  sustain  such  concen­  trated attention; and   (b)   that   I  find  it hard   to  think  of New  York  as a  provin-
 
cial   city.   Like   London  or   Paris,   New York  seems to me to be a centre of world culture, and,  indeed, I  must  confess  that it is precisely  the  rest of this country that strikes   me   as   provincial  compared   to New  York.  I  say this  with  no exultation, for  although I  have  always  lived  here,  I have never much liked the  place. Furthermore,  I  think   the  concentration of cultural activit)\ in one city deplorable; it  would   be  much   better   to  have  half  a dozen   rivals   of  comparable  importance in   each   country.  But   the   brute   fact   is there    aren't.  Paris,   London  and   New York  are the overwhelmingly dominant centres and  so the  adjective "provincial" can  hardly be attached to  them,  and  the name   New  Yorker, while  it  may  be  ob­ jected  to as a  bit  snobbish, cannot  really be  called provincial.
DWIGHT   MACDONALD




J. M.  DENT  & SONS (CANADA)  LIMITED
IOO SCARSDALE ROAD, TORONTO.
1300 ROBSON STREET, VANCOUVER.





















92
