$2.00 per copy




·cANADIAN l TERATURE N°·52
Spring, 1972'




N71TION71L	ORIGINS




Articles

BY  MARY JANE  EDWARDS, WILLIAM H.  NEW, ANN YEOMAN, H. H. MOWSHOWITZ, RUDY WIEBE, LESLIE MONKMAN



,      Review Articles and  Reviews

BY  DOUGLAS BARBOUR, PETER STEVENS, CLARA  THOMAS, CHRISTOPHER XERXES RINGROSE, GEORGE BOWERING, NEIL CARSON, CLAUDE RACINE, LAWRENCE RUSSELL, P. G. STANWOOD, ROSALIE L.  COLlE, ELIZABETH WATERSON, STEPHEN  SCOBIE, JOSEPH  PIVATO, GEORGE WOODCOCK




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










GIVE THE CORPORATION A COMPASS!







I  SHALL  NEVER FORGET A  CURIOUS, rather  sad incident  at one of those almost pointless conferences of artists and impresarios  that  preceded the Centennial of  1967.  It  was Seminar  '65.  From all  comers  of Canada we had gathered  in a pine-smelling ski hotel at Ste. Adele, to drink indifferent  wine and food at government  expense, and  to talk about  the kind of money we might ex­ tract  from  the  Centennial budget.  The  members of the literary  panel-bitterly divided  because  it included  publishers whose interests were quite different  from those of the  writers  with  whom  they sat-realized  from  the  beginning  that  it stood little chance in comparison with the noisy extroverts of the performing  arts. We therefore spent little time formulating  our modest demands for the small pro­ portion  of the funds that  would be available for those who create  works in com­ parison with those who merely interpret  them, and devoted most of our energy to a  series of thunderous resolutions  intended  to  call to  order  all  those  Canadian institutions which claimed to be dedicated to cultural ends.
Our  most  eloquent  resolution-a veritable  Jeremiad-was  a  denunciation
of the  Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation  for the decline in quality  of its  pro­ grammes  since the  beginning  of the 196o's.  (Had  we known  how much farther  they  would  have  declined  by the early  197o's we might  have  held some of our fire for a later skirmish!)   At the final plenum of the Seminar my fellow chairman  of the panel-Jean-Ethier Blais-read it with savage relish from the platform;
it  was  (in  terms  of popular  acclaim  though  not -alas -in  results)  by far  the


3

EDITORIAL



most  successful  resolution  of the  day,  received  with  a thunder of desk-pounding and  floor-stamping that  for the  only time  at  Ste. Adele  united  actors  and  artists, conductors and  editors,  writers  and  composers,  architects and  museum  directors, French-speaking and  English-speaking. There  was only  one  man  who  appeared not  to appreciate it, and  he sat in a gallery  reserved  for visitors. I saw  his face go pained  and  blanched; after  a decent  interval he withdrew. I later  learnt  that  he was  the  incumbent President  of  the  CBC; he  had  heard the  men  and  women whom   he  regarded  as  his  ultimate, hardcore constituency, turning  against   the Corporation in  condemnation. I  felt,  at  that   moment, rather guilty  at  having had  such  an  enthusiastic hand   in  the  resolution, since,  however   just  our  com­ plaints  may  have  been,  by framing it  we might  appear to  be aligning  ourselves with  the  philistines  who  habitually attack  the  CBC  because  it offends their  ideas of free enterprise and  their hatred of anything truly cultural.
I  have  since  realized  that  such  guilt  was  pointless  and   unjustified, since  the
ambivalences of the situation have  been created by the failure of the  Corporation itself and  of successive governments to define clearly  the  role of a national broad­ casting  service.  Among  the  artistic  and  intellectual community there  is no doubt  that  it should  fulfil  a cultural, educational and  informative role, leaving  market­ able   popular entertainment-including   hockey-to  those  stations  and   net­ works  which  are  in  the  business of selling broadcasting as a commodity. (Such a decision  would  largely  defuse the  philistine  attack on the CBC  in any  case, since it  would   eliminate the  element  of  business  rivalry.)   With this  view  Canadian  Literature  has  always  agreed,  since  it  has  seemed  to  us so limpidly   reasonable. Not  so,  however,  to  politicians,  whose own  motives are rarely  limpid  and  whose actions, even  when  expedient, are  rarely  reasonable,  and  not  so, unfortunately, to  many  of those  high  Ottawa bonzes who make  the  final  decisions  in the  CBC, and   who  regard   themselves  not  as  trustees  of  a  cultural heritage, but  as  mere mundane business  executives,  as  frenetically concerned with  ratings as any  pri­ vate station boss who depends on advertisements for his Chivas Regal. The power within   the  Corporation of  these  business-minded bureaucrats  has  unfortunately grown  so much  of late  that  even  the  improvement in content and  quality which  we  were   recently   promised   when   it  was  decided  to  reform   programming  by establishing Radio  r   and  Radio 2   and  has  not  yet  been  properly  implemented, and  one  wonders whether  the  delay  in  restoring intelligent programmes will not be continued indefinitely.  While  a few national network  programmes-Tuesday Night,  Anthology, etc. -have sustained   a  reasonably high  standard, there  has been  a steady  and  regrettable decline  since  the  early  rg6o's-when  Vancouver

4

EDITORIAL



for example had  a first-rate staff including Robert Harlow, Peter  Garvie,  Gerald
Newman and  Robert Chesterman who produced first-rate local CBC  programmes
-in the  quality and   scope  of  broadcasting originating in  the  regions;   in  an intensely  regionalized country like Canada such  a condition is disastrous.
There are  many  men  and  women in the lower ranks  of the CBC  hierarchy who have  worked  and  still work  hard  to provide  first-rate cultural and  educational programmes, but  indecisiveness about  the  true  role of the  CBC  has long afflicted the  professional  administrators who populate the higher  echelons  of the Corpora­ tion.  It has  resulted   in  the  erosion  of any  sense of  responsibility that  may  once have  exi'3ted towards the  role  the  CBC  has  played  and  might  still  play  in  the national cultural  life.  In  the  past  the  CBC  has  encouraged  writers,  as  well  as many  other   kinds  of  artist,  and  was  responsible  not  only  for  saving  them  from despair  in  the  lean  years  of the  past,  but  also for encouraging the  production of many  works  of considerable merit,  especially in the fields of  drama and  historical  documentary.  However, once  a  work  was  created, the  CBC   has  always  been inclined  to put  it out  in the cold to find its own way in life, and  this usually means  that  a very  good  play  may  be written  and  superbly  produced -once! (Though radio  plays  are occasionally revived,  it is rarely  indeed   that  they  are  performed more  than  twice.)
We are  grateful that  radio  kept drama alive as a literary form  in Canada dur­ ing  the  long  years  before  the  recent  revival  of live theatre; even  today  far  more  new  Canadian plays are  performed on radio  than  on the stage.  But  radio drama is a  genre  with  which  even  scholars  are  not  really  familiar, because  radio  plays are  very  rarely   published. At  the  least  one  would  have  thought  that  the  CBC could  have  sponsored  the  publication each  year  of  a  volume  of  the  best  radio  plays;  such  anthologies are published  in Germany, and  they  are  very successful. But  the  CBC  has  always  been  hesitant in its publishing; it has never  established a  regular   periodical like The  Listener in  England   to  publish  the  best  broadcast material, and  its  few  pamphlets of collected  lectures -while  often  excellent  in themselves-are much   too  scanty   to  be  considered an   adequate  publication programme for  a  Corporation so  much   concerned  with  the  commissioning of literary  works.
However, one  at  least  lived  under  the  illusion  that at  the  CBC  material of cultural importance was  protected even if it was not  published, and  that  it would be  available if  some  day   its  publication  were  to  become   possible.  One   heard rumours of a  CBC  archive -though scholars  seeking  access to material showed great  signs  of  frustration-but one  did  not  realize  that  no  adequate rules  had

5

EDITORIAL



been drawn  up  to  protect  important  material  before it reached  the archive.  A recent incident  in one of the regional headquarters of the  CBC has dramatically demonstrated  the extent to which invaluable  documents  are still at the mercy of irresponsible petty bureaucrats.
In  the  Vancouver  studios, early in  1971,  a collection  of more than  two  hun­ dred  tapes of important lectures, first performances  of Canadian plays, first  per­ formances  of Canadian translations of foreign plays, first Canadian performances of  musical  works, and  first performances  of  valuable  historical  documentaries, had  been  put aside for transmission to the archives.  Under circumstances  which are  obscure  but  which  the  President  of  the  Corporation  assured  me  several months ago  were under  investigation, more than  one  hundred and  fifty of these tapes were destroyed  by a minor official and the remainder would have been lost if one of the  producers  had not learnt  what  was happening and  vigorously inter­ vened. We have not  yet heard  the result of the investigation,  but so far, though dubbings  of some of the items destroyed in the studios are said to exist in private hands,  no effort  appears  to have been made  by the  Corporation to reconstitute this important national  cultural  material, which includes the first acting  versions of nearly thirty original Canadian plays.
Such  an  incident  is scandalous  in itself, but  even  more  disturbing  in general terms is the way in which this episode reveals that  the CBC is not living up to its responsibilities as custodian of the literary  (and  also musical)  works which -let us give credit  where  it is deserved -were  written  only because  dedicated  pro­ ducers and  programme directors in the CBC commissioned them.  We hope that the  high officials of the CBC will pause for a while in their obsessive  pursuit  of ratings  and  in their  undignified competition  with  commercial  networks to make provisions ensuring  that such official vandalism  cannot  again  be perpetrated and that  the lost material  will be reconstituted  and  placed  in an  archive  adequately  staffed  and  open  to scholars who have up to now  had  very little opportunity to study  intensively such  interesting  forms as the  radio  drama.  Perhaps  we should do more  than  call on the officials of the CBC;  perhaps  we should  demand  that M.  Pelletier,  the  Minister  of State,  pay more  than  his  usual  lip service to  the cultural   needs  of  the  country,  and  ensure  that  special  funds  are  allocated  to establish  a  Public  Library  of Broadcasting  designed  to safeguard  documentary material  of historical and cultural  value which exists in the various centres of the CBC  under   perpetual   threat  of  capricious  destruction;  perhaps  we should  go farther   and  suggest  to the  government  in  general  that,  for  once and  all, it be established  that  the  CBC  dedicate  itself  not  to  entertainment considered  as  a

6

EDITORIAL



commodity, but  to fulfilling  the  cultural, educational and  informational needs of the country. Give the Corporation a compass!

* 	* 	*
After   twelve  years  we  have  decided   to  discontinue the  annual checklist  of books  and   critical   articles.   When  Canadian  Literature  began  in  1959  no such list appeared in either  English  or French. Now there is an excellent  annual bibli­ ography  of  English-Canadian  books  in  Commonwealth  Literature  and  one  of French-Canadian books  in  Livres  et  Auteurs  Quebecois.  There is no  need  for competition, and  since  our  original  function   is that  of  a  "Journal of  Criticism  and  Review", we have  decided  to devote  the space formerly allocated to the list to more  reviews  so as  to  keep  up  with  the  increasing  flow of Canadian  books.  In doing  so we  thank those  bibliographers who over  the  years  when  it  was needed  worked so patiently and  disinterestedly at providing  the checklist.

G.W.
































7



ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN



Mary Jane Edwards




IN "The   Fourth  Separnti="  (Canadian  Literature  45) ,'
Ronald   Sutherland  discusses five  recent  works  of  Canadian  fiction:   Hubert
Aquin's  Prochain  episode  ( 1965); Jacques  Godbout's  Le  Couteau  sur la table (1965); Claude   Jasmin's   Ethel  et  le  terroriste  (1964); Hugh   MacLennan's Return  of the Sphinx  ( 1967); and Ellis Portal's  Killing Ground  ( 1968). Suther­ land   uses  these  works,  all  about  some  aspect  of  English-French   relations  in Canada, to  analyze  "four  kinds of Quebec  Separatism" and  to argue  that,  "in the  light  of  the  psychological problems  discussed in  all  the  novels",  a  "special status" for Quebec "within a confederate system makes sense". "The Fourth Separatism'' is, on the whole, an eloquent  plea for the need to create "a genuine feeling  of cultural  security ... once and  for  all in Quebec". Two  issues Suther­ land raises, however, need further comment.
One  is his definition of a "distinctive  Canadian  literature".  Sutherland  thinks
that  its "main  distinguishing feature  would have to be dependent upon the main distinguishing  feature  of the Canadian Nation-the co-existence of two major ethnic  groups.  To  be in the ... mainstream  of Canadian literature, therefore,  a writer  must  have some awareness of fundamental aspects and  attitudes  of both language  groups  in Canada". He argues that  Aquin,  Godbout,  and Jasmin,  "by virtue  of  a  broadening   awareness  which  includes  English  Canada to  varying degrees, are moving definitely towards the Canadian mainstream" and that Mac­ Lennan  "is  already  there".  Most other  writers  in Canada, he explains,  "are  in the  tributaries rather  than  the  mainstream".  English-Canadian  writers like Sin­ clair  Ross, Morley  Callaghan,  and  Stephen  Leacock  are,  in fact,  "in  the tribu­  taries of American  literature". "The  great rna jority" of  French-Canadian writers have  "until  recently  been caught  up in the various  Quebec  tributaries of Cana­  dian  literature". Some more  recent  ones "have  embraced  spheres  of conscious-

8

ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN



ness which,  like those of many  of their anglophone  colleagues, are  more or less extensions of spheres already defined in the United States".
The  main  purpose  of this article is not  to argue  with  Sutherland's  definition
of a "distinctive  Canadian" fiction.2   Since an acceptance  or rejection of it, how­ ever, does affect  one's  views of the importance  of the  theme  of  English-French relations in Canadian fiction, some observations about  it are necessary. Canadian fiction in both  English and  French  has always been strongly  influenced  by both the  form  and  content  of  non-Canadian fiction. Frederic  Houde's  "Le  Manoir mysterieux"  (I 88o), plagiarized  from Scott's Kenilworth  (I 82 I), and Charlotte  Fuhrer's  The Mysteries of Montreal  (I 88I ) , based on Eugene Sue's Les Mysteres  de  Paris   (I 843-I 844), are  two  obvious  examples  of  this  fact.  Yet  both  are adapted to some extent  to  their  Canadian  settings.  "Le  Manoir  mysterieux"  is partly  concerned  with  moral  corruption  in  New  France  shortly  before the  Eng­ lish conquest.  In  "Among  the  Fenians",  one of  the stories in The Mysteries  of Montreal, Mrs.  Schroeder,  the  narrator,  describes  her  experiences  with  a "sick woman  at Point St. Charles" whose husband she suspects is a Fenian.  Convinced that  the  "long,  coffin-shaped  boxes" in the lady's room "contain arms and  am­ munition  ... sent  here  from  the  Fenian  headquarters in  New  York ... for the destruction  of the  peaceful inhabitants of Montreal", Mrs. Schroeder  calls in the police, and,  the Fenians arrested,  prides herself on helping to "break  up this den of ruffians". Corruption in New France in the eighteenth  century  and Fenianism in  Montreal   in  the  nineteenth   century  are  themes which,  like that  of English­ French  relations  in  Canada, are  based on Canadian history and  therefore  con­ tribute, like it, to the development of a "distinctive Canadian" fiction.
Even if a writer swims in Sutherland's "mainstream" of Canadian fiction and shows "some  awareness  of fundamental aspects and  attitudes of both  language groups  in  Canada", usually  he does not stop swimming  in Sutherland's  "tribu­ taries".  Motifs of Gothic fiction help shape both the form and content of  Willian1
Kirby's  The Golden Dog  (I 877), the most popular  nineteenth-century work of Canadian fiction in English, which Kirby wrote after a careful study of the works of such  French-Canadian authors  as Fran<_;ois-Xavier Garneau, Philippe  Aubert de  Gaspe  ( pere), and  Joseph  Marmette.  Balzac is cited  and  some of his tech­ niques  are  used  in  probably  the  best  novel about  English-French  relations in Canada published  in the  nineteenth  century,  Mrs. Rosanna  Leprohon's  Antoin­ ette  de  Mirecourt  (I 864). In  fact,  most authors  of  Canadian fiction in  both English  and  French   have  not  tried  to  cut  themselves  off from  non-Canadian fiction but  have tried  to adapt  the form and  content  of this fiction to Canadian


9

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



themes.   Thus,  while   the   influence   of  foreign    fiction   may   have   sometimes weakened   both   the  artistic  and  cultural significance of their  works,  it  has  not prevented them  from  dealing  with  Canadian themes  or from  developing a "dis­ tinctive   Canadian" fiction.  Sutherland's image   of  a  main  stream   and  several tributaries in  Canadian fiction  should  be  changed to  an  image  of  one  river  of Canadian fiction  with  several  currents, one  of  them  foreign  influences,  another the theme  of English-French relations in Canada.
While,  however,  the  theme  of English-French relations in Canada is only  one current in  the   river  of  Canadian fiction  and   only  one  characteristic that  dis­ tinguishes  it  from  other  national fictions,  the  theme itself is in some  ways  more significant   than   Sutherland implies.  In  "The  Fourth Separatism" he  not  only confines  his main  comments on this theme  to recent  novels, but  he also states that  it is only  now  "emerging" in Canadian literature. Hugh MacLennan is an early champion:
Provided  that  Canada  continues to exist as a single nation,  he may well be creat­ ing for himself a special status. I suspect that  the day will come when Hugh Mac­ Lennan  is considered  to occupy a position much  like that  of Mark  Twain  in the United  States,  as  the  prime  mover  in  the  emergence  of  a  distinctive  Canadian literature.

Hubert  Aquin,  Jacques  Godbout, and   Claude  Jasmin  are   moving   Canadian fiction in French towards this theme.
These  statements are  not  true.  MacLennan has  made  important contributions to Canadian literature. But he is not the  first author of Canadian fiction  in  Eng­ lish  to  show   "some   awareness   of  fundamental  aspects   and   attitudes of   both  language groups   in  Canada".  Aquin, Godbout, and   Jasmin have  presented in their  novels  important  contemporary views  on  the  province of  Quebec and  its future in Canada. But they  have  not  invented this  theme in  Canadian fiction  in French. The   theme   of  English-French relations in  Canada  is not  an  emerging theme   in  Canadian fiction  in  either  English  or  French. It has  been  present  in Canadian fiction  from  its beginning. The  main  purpose of  this article  is to discuss some  contributions made  to  this  theme   by  some  early  writers  and   to  compare some  characteristics of their  handling of  the  theme  with  its  treatment by  more recent  Canadian writers.



FIRST  NORTH  AMERICAN  NOVEL,  Frances Brooke's  The
History   of  Emily   Montague   ( q6g), introduces the   theme   of  English-French


IO

ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN



relations in Canada.  In this epistolary  novel, the chief characters living in Canada are  British  men  and  women  associated  in some  way with  the  military  personnel occupying New  France as a result of the  English conquest. They  are all interested to  some  extent   in  the  French-Canadians and  in  their   role  in  English  Canada. Arabella Fermor, the  coquette of the story, writes to a friend  in London that  she has  been  "rambling about amongst   the  peasants,  and  asking  them  a  thousand questions"; she reports:

The  Canadians live a good deal like the ancient patriarchs; the lands  were origi­ nally settled  by the  troops, every officer became a seigneur, or lord of the manor, every soldier  took lands  under  his commander; but, as avarice  is natural  to man­ kind,  the  soldiers  took  a  great  deal  more  than  they  could  cultivate,  by way of providing for a family:  which is the reason so much land is now waste in the finest part  of the  province: those who had  children,  and  in general  they  have a great number,  portioned  out their lands amongst them as they married, and lived in the midst of a little world of their descendants.

Her  father, William Fermor, writes a series of letters  about "the Canadians" and advocates  ways  of  reforming them   into  loyal  "British subjects". One   method strikes  a  particularly familiar note: "It were indeed, my Lord, to be wished  that we had  here  schools,  at the  expence  of the  public,  to teach  English  to the  rising generation:  nothing is  a  stronger   tie  of  brotherhood  and   affection, a  greater cement  of union, than  speaking one common  language". The chief male charac­ ter,  Edward Rivers,  meets  some  Canadians in  Montreal and  briefs  his sister  on them:

tho'  I have  not seen many  beauties, yet in general the women are handsome;  their manner  is easy and  obliging, they make the most of their charms  by their vivacity, and  I certainly  cannot  be displeas'd with  their  extreme  partiality  for the English officers; their  own  men,  who  indeed  are  not  very attractive, have  not  the  least chance for any share in their good graces.

We  may  not  like  some  of  these  ideas,  but  we  must  admit that   Mrs.  Brooke  is aware of some  "aspects and  attitudes of both  language groups  in  Canada".
It might  be argued that  neither  Mrs.  Brooke, an  English  lady  who only lived
in Canada from I 763  to  I 768,  when  her  husband was chaplain of the garrison in  Quebec City,  nor  The  History of Emily Montague, which  was first  published in  England, belongs  to  Canadian fiction.  Many  stories,  however,  written about Canada  in  the   eighteenth  and   nineteenth  centuries  were  written  by  English,  American, and  French writers  who at most lived only for a short  time in Canada.


II

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



One  of  the  recurrent   themes  in  this  fiction  was  English-French  relations  in Canada. In  Ann Eliza Schuyler Bleecker's The History  of Maria  Kittle   ( 1781), Mrs. Bratt, who has been captured  by Indians  in New York and  delivered to the French in Montreal,  announces at a tea party that  her reception in Montreal  has made  her  "reject ... all prejudices of education.  From  my infancy  have  I been taught  that  the  French  were a cruel  perfidious enemy,  but  I  have found  them quite the reverse".  Although much of Mrs. Bleecker's information  about  Canada and   Montreal  is inaccurate, this  American  writer  does  present  the  latter  as a place  where  "prejudices  of education", particularly  those about  national  differ­ ences, can  be overcome. On  the other  hand,  in Henri-Emile Chevalier's  Poignet d'acier  ( 1863), M. Villefranche, lying on his death  bed, makes his grandchildren swear  to continue  the revenge he already  has wreaked  for 53 years on the Eng- lish:   "Et   pourtant, moi,  je n'ai  jamais  pardonne  ... je ne  puis  pardonner .. . aux  Anglais ... Ah!  le froid  me gagne ... ta  main  sur  man  coeur,  Alfred ... la votre,   Victorine ... Adieu,  mes  enfants ... Adieu ... Vivez pour   arracher   le
Canada   a l'odieuse  tyrannie  anglaise!"  Chevalier,  a  Frenchman who  lived  in
Montreal  from  1853  to 186o, wrote a series of Drames de !'Amerique du  Nord featuring   the  revenge  of  M.  Villefranche,  a  Montreal   lawyer  whose  wife  or daughter3 had been seduced by an English officer.
Most stories published  about  Canada in  the  nineteenth   century  were written
by Canadians; that  is, people who were born andjor brought  up in Canada or who made Canada  their permanent  home. Some of these writers, however, either left Canada as adults  and  pursued  their  literary  careers  elsewhere or, living in Canada, published  their  works abroad.  Thus,  there  is a group  of stories written primarily  for  a  non-Canadian  reading   public.  Even  in  these  stories  English­ French  relations in Canada are discussed. A Comedy of Terrors  (1873), written by James  De  Mille, a  Nova Scotian  who taught  at  Acadia  and  Dalhousie  and produced  a large  number  of stories for  American  publishers,  comments  on this theme.  Set in  Canada and  abroad  in 1870,  A  Comedy of  Terrors describes the courtship  of  two  English  ladies by two  Americans.  These  love affairs  begin in Montreal  where  Mrs. Georgie Lovell is pursued  by Seth Grimes and  where  Miss Maud  Heathcote i<>    duelled  over  by Paul  Carrol  and  the  Count  du  Potiron,  a Frenchman. Although  the setting  of Montreal  is not  particularized -De  Mille implies at one point that  it is an American city -the grouping  of the characters  in Montreal  for their  initial  meeting suggests the author's awareness of the bilin­ gual and  multinational character  of the city. The love triangle  developed among Maud,  Paul, and  the Count;  the victory over the Count  both in the duel and  in

12

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



love designed  for  Paul;  and  the  name  Potiron,  a  bilingual  pun  (pumpkin and potjiron) given to the Count: all imply De Mille's awareness of cultural  tensions in  Montreal  and  his conviction of the superiority of the English and  the  Ameri­ cans to the French.
One  of the  first short  stories published  in  Canada was John  Howard   Willis' "The Fairy  Harp" ( I 824).4    A very simple  tale strongly  influenced  by Gothic motifs, its subject  is music  heard  by a  platoon  of soldiers encamped   on  "the Lower-Canada frontier" during  the War  of  I8I2-I8I4. Almost every night  they hear strange  music coming  from a nearby  valley. When  they cannot  discover its source, the French-Canadians in the party call it "la harpe de la fee";  the Indians think it is the spirit of the Manitou.  The  mystery is partly resolved in I 8I 5 when the  narrator, an  English  soldier stationed  in  Montreal,  goes on  a  hunting  trip  with  an  Indian chief from  Caughnawaga to the same area  where  he has previ­ ously been encamped. Remembering the music, he enters the valley and discovers in  a  clearing  a  deserted  log cottage.  Inside  it are  the  "mouldering remains" of books and  elegant  women's  clothes. Beside it is a  grave.  Although  the  narrator never solves the mystery of the lady, the source of  the music is explained.
There  are  several  Canadian motifs in "The  Fairy  Harp", but  the  most  rele­
vant  for the theme  of English-French  relations in Canada is Willis' indication of the different  reactions of the French-Canadian and English soldiers to the music. The  former  dub  it  "la  harpe  de 1a fee",  and  accept  it as magic. The  narrator, representing  the latter,  seeks to find a natural  cause for it and,  through  an enter­ prising act, finally solves the mystery of the music. Willis does not imply that  these different  attitudes are  sources of  conflict:  all  the soldiers are  fighting  together against   the  Americans;  the  English  soldier  gives  the  music  the  same  name,  although  anglicized,  as the French-Canadians. But he does suggest his awareness  of  a  fundamental difference  in  emotional  response to  the  unseen  between  the French-Canadians and the English.
Another  early  short  story  published  in Canada  is Pierre  Georges Boucher  de
Boucherville's  "La   Tour   de  Trafalgar" (I 835). Like  "The Fairy  Harp" it  is strongly  influenced   by  motifs  of  popular   non-Canadian  literature,  but  it  too comments  on  English-French  relations  in  Canada.  "La   Tour   de  Trafalgar" describes the  adventures of a  hunter  who becomes lost and  spends a day  and  a night on Mount  Royal.  During  the night he takes shelter in a tower. While there, he sees blood on the wall and a hand in the air. Frightened  by these apparitions, he leaves the tower and  continues his search for a way down the mountain. Early in  the  morning,  he finds a  cabin  and  asks its inhabitant for food. The  man  re-

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



fuses to give the  hunter  food, but  he does read  him a story from  a worn manu­ script. The  story concerns the double murder  of Leocadie and  Joseph, two Mon­ trealers, at the tower many years before. Leocadie, in love with Joseph, is courted by  a  handsome  stranger.  When  Leocadie  spurns  him  for  Joseph,  the stranger murders  them  both  one day  when  they are  in  the  tower.  Having  achieved  his revenge, he disappears, presumably to the cabin on the mountain.
Several motifs in "La Tour  de Trafalgar" are relevant to the theme of  English­ French  relations  in  Canada.  The  two murders  in the tower,  the  past  cruelty of the  stranger,  and  his present  rudeness  are  connected  through   the  title  both  to Nelson's victory over the French  at Trafalgar and  to the  monuments erected  in Montreal  to commemorate  that  victory. Thus,  de Boucherville, like Willis, shows his awareness  "of both language  groups in  Canada". Unlike  Willis, however, he seems  to  insist  on  the  destructiveness  of  the  English  both  in  Europe  and  in Canada and  in the  past and  present.  It  is interesting  to note that  the story was published  only two years before the outbreak  of the  Rebellion  of I837  and  that de Boucherville, a Montreal  lawyer, went into voluntary  exile in Louisiana  from
I 837 to  I 850 because of the part  he had played as a Patriote. In the light of his political  activity,  "La  Tour  de  Trafalgar" might  be read  as a  thinly-disguised warning  by de  Boucherville to  his  compatriots  that  English-French relations  in Canada were disintegrating once again into violence.




IN  THE  YEARS FOLLOWING THE  I 83o's, the Rebellion became a popular subject for writers of fiction. Frequently  they used it to explore English­ French  relations  in  Canada. Some  of  the  earliest  stories  with  this  subject  and theme   were  published  in  the  Literary  Garland   (I 838- I 85 I ) ,  itself  partly  an attempt   by  John   Lovell,  its  publisher,  to  increase  Canadian  "prosperity"5    by encouraging    tolerance   among   English-Canadians  for   the   French-Canadian Patriotes. The  most significant stories about  the  Rebellion,  however,  appeared later  in the century. These include Jean-Talon Lesperance's "Rosalba; or, Faith­  ful to Two  Loves" (I 87o) 6   and  Fran<;ois-Ben jamin Singer's Souvenirs  d'un  exile canadien  ( I 87 I ) .
When  "Rosalba; or, Faithful  to Two  Loves" opens, two friends, an American
and  a Canadian, are discussing Canadian life, particularly  the French-Canadians and  the Rebellion. The  Canadian eventually gives the American  a manuscript to read about  this event. The  manuscript, "Rosalba", takes place over several years.

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



It opens  on  April  5,  1837,  when  the  ice is breaking  up  on  the  St.  Lawrence. Rosalba  Varny,  a  wealthy  farmer's   daughter,   who  lives  near  Montreal,  goes down to the river, hears a cry for help, launches a boat, and  rescues a man from drowning.  The  man  is  Walter   Phipps,  a  wealthy  English-Canadian merchant from  Montreal. By the time he leaves the Varny's farm  for the city, Phipps has fallen  in  love  with  Rosalba,  but  she  is already  unofficially engaged  to  Edgar Martin,  a French-Canadian lawyer educated  in Montreal  who is practising in a nearby village. In August, 1837, they are about to announce their official engage­ ment  when  M.  Varny  demands  that  it be delayed because of Edgar's activities with  the  Patriotes.  In  a dramatic scene, M. Varny  reveals that  he is a "bureau­ crat" and supports the government.
The story then switches to events during and after the Rebellion. In November,
1837,  Edgar  joins the  rebel forces at St. Denis and  St. Charles.  When  they are defeated,  he tries to flee to  Montreal,  but  he is warned  by friends  to go to the United  States. On  the way he is captured  near Lacolle by Phipps, who is serving with   the  government   troops.   Phipps,   however,  remembering  that   Edgar   is Rosalba's  fiance,  helps him  escape. Eventually,  Edgar  goes to France.  Rosalba, obeying her father,  refuses to join him. When her father  dies, she and  her mother move to a small cottage  near  Montreal.  In 1849 Walter  Phipps  is on business at the docks in  Montreal  when  he hears that  one of the  people on a newly-arrived immigrant  ship is a Patriote  coming home to die. He goes to see the Patriote  and recognizes Edgar.  Phipps  immediately  takes him to the Hotel-Dieu, sends for a doctor,  and  goes for Rosalba. She and  Edgar  are married  just before he dies. In
1852,  when  Rosalba's  cottage  burns  down, Phipps finally proposes to her. They marry, move to a splendid  home "at the foot of the mountain", and have one son. In  1867 they are still living in Montreal.  At the end of the story, the Canadian promises to introduce the American to them.
Thus,  in "Rosalba", Lesperance not only shows his awareness of "fundamental aspects and  attitudes" of both English-Canadians and  French-Canadians, but he also makes several points about  their relationship. He shows that strife in Canada is not  just between  different  cultural  groups. Varny  rejects Edgar; Phipps  helps him. He demonstrates,  however, that when violence between cultural  groups does occur,  it  leads  to  loneliness, exile, and  death.  Rosalba,  Walter,  and  Edgar  all remain  unmarried for several years; Edgar's exile helps bring on his sickness and, ultimately,  his early  death.  He  suggests that  French  Canada can  achieve both wealth and  happiness in a union with English Canada.  Rosalba finds both in her

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



marriage  to Walter.  Finally, he implies that  this union is the most suitable way to preserve  the  traditions  of  French  Canada. The   Phipps'  son  is named   Edgar Martin.
Jean-Talon Lesperance, born in the United States of French-Canadian parents, educated  there  and  in France,  and  at  the time of the  publication  of "Rooalba", living  permanently   in  Canada,   appears  hopeful,  then,  that  the  "romance" of French   Canada  can  be  preserved  in  a  union  between  French-   and  English­ Canadians.  Fran ois-Benjamin
optimistic.  In  Souvenirs  d)un exile canadien,  the  Canadien, Hamelin,  dies  sor­ rowing over  his exile from his native land.  But  this land  is presented  as a  place where  English-Canadians, chiefly in  Montreal, rob,  betray,  and  torture  French­  Canadians. They  deprive  them  of their  language,   religion,  and  customs;  they encourage  them  to rebel; and they destroy them  when they do. Hamelin's  father is ruined  by an  architect,  "un  anglais  du  nom  d'Henderson",  who comes from Montreal  to help M. Hamelin construct  a building on his farm. Hamelin  himself has been imprisoned  in Montreal for his activity as a Patriote in the Rebellion of
I 837,  found  guilty of murdering  an  English officer, although  he is innocent  of
the  act,  and  condemned  to death.  Hamelin,  however,  has escaped  from  prison and run away to Chile. His final advice to Canadians is that they should continue to fight for a nation  which is French-speaking,  Catholic,  and French  in tradition, but  eschew  open,  armed  rebellion.  This  message is written  on  his tombstone:
"Q, mes bien-aimes  compatriotes, fuyez les seditions; SOUtenez VOS  droits, eela est
juste, mais soutenez-les par des moyens qui ne vous mettent  pas dans la triste alternative de  choisir  entre  la  mort  et  l'exil.... Fuyez  done  la  revolte,  car  la
rebellion conduit a l'exil ou a l'echafaud".
Souvenirs  d)un exile canadien concentrates mostly on the more melodramatic events  of Hamelin's life and  death  in  Chile.  Nevertheless, the  cause of his exile and  the  message on  his tombstone  are  worth  noting.  In  the  Rebellion  Hamelin has been both a criminal and a scapegoat.  He has been guilty of sedition. He has been wrongly  accused and  convicted of murder. And  he has been  punished  by exile. Thus,  Singer  presents him as a man  whose advice is based on experiences of violence, injustice, and loneliness. His message is that  while French-Canadians must  preserve  their  culture,  they  must  choose  peaceful  methods.  The  circum­ stances which led to a choice between the "scaffold"  and "exile"-Hamelin's in
1837 -must never  again  be  created.  Souvenirs  d)un  exile  canadien  seems to
warn French-Canadians against both the English and themselves.

J6

ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN




SOME WRITERS chose to discuss English-French  relations in Canada in  stories  about   the  Rebellion  of  I837· Others   used  earlier  events in Canadian history to explore  this theme. Of these writers of fiction set in Canada before  I Boo,   Mrs.   Rosanna  Eleanor   Mullins  Leprohon,   the   Montreal-born daughter of an  Irish  immigrant and  the  wife of a  French-Canadian doctor,  is one of the  more significant.  Her  historical novel Antoinette  de Mirecourt  opens in  "November ... in the year I 76-" and  ends about  two years later. Antoinette, the  beautiful  I 7 year-old  daughter of the seigneur of Mirecourt,  has just  arrived in Montreal  to spend some time with her cousin, Lucille D'Aulnay, and her hus­ band,  another  aristocratic,   wealthy  French-Canadian. The  purpose  of  the  visit is  to  introduce   Antoinette   to  Montreal  society, which,  while  aristocratic   and military, is now, on the male side at least, mostly British and Protestant.  Antoin­ ette's introduction to society is a resounding success. She is admired  by all, courted by several, and  loved  by two English officers, Colonel Evelyn and  Major  Audley Stemfield.  When  her father  hears of her success,  however, he fears that  she will be lured  into  a  hasty,  unsuitable  marriage.  Thus,  he infonns  her  that  she must marry  Louis Beauchesne, a childhood friend. Antoinette,  encouraged  by Lucille, refuses to obey her father  and  secretly  marries Audley in a Protestant  ceremony.
The  result  of this  marriage is many  sorrows. Audley  is a  passionate,  moody
man  who has married  Antoinette  partly  because she is a rich heiress. Antoinette regrets her disobedience  of her father,  her apostasy in marrying  outside the true faith,  and  her choice of husband.  She discovers that she is really in love with the reserved  Colonel  Evelyn.  These  sorrows are  brought  to  a  climax  when  Audley and  Louis meet in a duel.  Audley is mortally wounded.  Antoinette,  told this by Louis, who is about  to escape to France,  rushes to the  Major's  quarters  and  an­ nounces that  she is his wife. Antoinette  is thus involved in a great scandal. But Audley dies; Antoinette  is too ill to know of the gossip about  her; the revelation of her  marriage   and  widowhood  allows Colonel  Evelyn  to  forgive  her for  her previous mysterious attitude to him and to marry her a year after these events.
In  Antoinette   de Mirecourt  Mrs. Leprohon  uses several  melodramatic  motifs
of  popular   nineteenth-century fiction.  Like  many  of  her  contemporaries who used historical settings, she includes quotations  from  historical  works to provide background  material.  But she is skilful at  character  analysis and  dialogue. And she presents much  of the history through  character  and  action. The  result is that Antoinette  de Mirecourt  is both a good novel and  an important contribution  to a study of English-French relations in Canada.

I7

ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN



In  the  opening chapter, Mrs.  Leprohon sets the  stage,  introduces the  charac­ ters,  begins  the  action,  and  announces the  main  theme of her novel in  a manner reminiscent of the  comedy  of manners. In  the  first  paragraph the  time,  the  set­ ting,  and   the  theme of  the  story  are  introduced. Their reality  is  enhanced by precise  descriptive details  and  two  metonymies: "The feeble  sun  of  November, that  most  unpleasant month  in  our  Canadian year,  was streaming down  on  the narrow streets  and  irregular buildings  of  Montreal, such  as it existed  in the  year
I 76-, some short  time  after  the  royal standard of England had  replaced the fleur­
de-lys  of  France". The  concreteness of  the  setting   is further  developed in  the second  paragraph where  Mrs.  Leprohon focusses  on  the  D'Aulnay's house  and chooses details  about it that  create  the  vivid image  of "unmistakable wealth  and refinement" for  which  she  is striving.  In  the  next  three  paragraphs more  objets d'art  are  mentioned to introduce M. D'Aulnay, to explain his motives  for staying in  New  France  after   his  "country  has  passed   under a  foreign   rule", and   to describe  one  method of dealing  with  English-French relations: living among, but in isolation from,  the "proud conquerors":

In  vain some fiery spirits indignantly  asked him how he could brook the arrogance of the  proud  conquerors  who had landed on their  shores? how he could endure  to meet,  wherever  eye or  footstep  turned,   the  scarlet   uniforms  of  the  epauletted heroes who  now governed his native land in King  George's  name. To  their indig­ nant  remonstrances  he sadly but calmly rejoined  he should  not see much of  them, for he intended  establishing himself henceforth  permanently  in his beloved  library, and going abroad as little as possible.

The  conversation which  comprises  the  rest of Chapter One  repeats  the  theme  of English-French  relations   and   enunciates another  attitude  to  them.   Lucille  has decided  to entertain the  British. She announces to her  husband that  she proposes to end  the  "cloister-like seclusion"  in which  they  have  been  "vegetating" because of the defeat  of "Levis and  his gallant  epaulettes" and  re-enter society.
In  the  rest  of the  story, the  theme  is further developed, various  attitudes to it
are  explored,  and   their   wisdom  is examined. The  most  extreme  anti-English attitude is held  by Antoinette's father, Arthur de  Mirecourt. Having spent  some time in "that gay sunny  land  of France, that  polished  brilliant Paris", he returned to  his native  country, "fonder and  more  devoted to it  than  when  he had  left its shores". Living  a quiet,  retired  life in rural  New  France, he had  a great determi­ nation   to  retain that  life both  for  himself  and  his daughter. He  tells Antoinette that  he  will  never  allow  "any  secret  love-engagement with  those  who  are  aliens alike  to  our  race,  creed,  and  tongue". When  Arthur comes  to  Montreal, a  hint

IS

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



that  Antoinette  might be involved with an Englishman  throws him into a violent rage:

"Listen to me, daughter Antoinette, and  you, my too officious niece,  bear witness," he  resumed, after  a  short  pause,  which  had  been merely  a lull in  the  tempest. "I must  be plain, explicit, with  you both.  I forbid  you, child,  to have any intercourse, beyond  that  of distant courtesy,  with  the  men  I have  mentioned; and  if you have entangled yourself  in any  disgraceful flirtation or attachment, break  it off at  once, under  penalty of being disowned  and  disinherited."

The  price of this attitude is made clear in the story. Antoinette's  knowledge that her  father  will not  allow  her  to marry  Audley is one  reason for  her  hasty  and secret marriage  to  him. Her  father's  threat  to disinherit  her prolongs the secrecy of the marriage. Her  suffering over her disobedience to her father  is one cause of her serious illness. While  by the end of the novel, de Mirecourt  has learned  that not all Englishmen  are  villains, and  has allowed his daughter to marry  one, the cost of this lesson has been high. Mrs. Leprohon thus rejects the idea that French­ Canadians can preserve easily or successfully a Roman Catholic, French-Canadian life in complete isolation from English-Canadians.
De  Mirecourt,  unlike the  other  French-Canadians, almost succeeds in his iso­ lation by remaining  on his estate and by making only quick visits to Montreal and Quebec.  The  other  minor  characters,  Louis Beauchesne, Lucille, and  M. D'Aul­ nay,  have  to  come  in  contact  with  the  English in  Montreal. Louis, sharing  de Mirecourt's  views, is prompted  to duel with  Audley. The  price  he pays for this act is permanent exile from  Canada.  Lucille, determined  to have warm relations with  the  English,  entertains  them,  encourages  Antoinette to marry  Audley, and announces  that  her father's attitude  is a "mere  prejudice". The  remorse she feels when the marriage is so unhappy  teaches her that  her flippant  acceptance  of the new order  is  dangerous  and  impious. Even  M.  D'Aulnay  has to learn  that  his way of handling the new government  is  potentially disastrous, for his disinterest in  the  affairs  of  Antoinette   and  Audley  is partly  responsible  for  their  "secret sorrows".  Thus,   Mrs.  Leprohon  implies  that  all  these  attitudes  are  imperfect,  limited  responses.
In  Antoinette  de Mirecourt, only two English characters, Audley and  Colonel
Evelyn, are fully developed. Of the two, the less sympathetic  is Audley. Although he is partly sincere in his love of Antoinette,  he is presented chiefly as a penniless, proud  gambler  and  flirt  who  is interested  mostly in  marrying  and  exploiting  a rich heiress. His desire for money and  his treatment  of Antoinette suggest that  he is materialistic  and  sensuous  and  that  he  has no spiritual  values. Although  he

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



dies  "peacefully",  Mrs.  Leprohon  carefully  avoids  an  explicit  statement   about his  acceptance   of  God  and  the  afterlife.  The   manner   in  which  his  death   is described  suggests, in fact,  that  she felt it a fitting end  for a man so lacking in respect for people from a different cultural background.
While there are similarities between Audley and  Evelyn, the latter  has money, family  connections,  and  a latent  Roman  Catholic  faith  which  allow him finally to  accept   and   to  be  accepted   by  the  French-Canadians.  Although   Evelyn's Catholicism   permits  Mrs.  Leprohon  to  duck  religious  differences  between  the two groups, his marriage  to Antoinette is clearly meant  to symbolize the union of the old and  the new orders in Canada  and the emergence of a new society. When Antoinette  marries  the  Colonel, she  has  openly  confessed  her  sinful  marriage, been purged of her evil through  her illness, and  been forgiven  by her father  and her  church.  In  her  marriage  to Evelyn, she unites this heritage  to his. The  new society, bilingual  and  binational-if  not  interdenominational-is  one of hap­ piness and  "unclouded domestic felicity".  Mrs.  Leprohon, then,  after  exploring English-French   relations  in  Canada  from several  points  of view and  after  can­ vassing various solutions to their  problems, opts at least emotionally  for a  bicul­ tural  Canada. She claims, moreover, that this choice is "essentially Canadian".



IT IS  EVIDENT, then, that the theme of English-French  relations in  Canada  does not  emerge with  the works of Hugh  MacLennan in English or those of Aquin, Godbout,  and Jasmin in French,  but that  it is a seminal theme in Canadian fiction in both languages.  It begins in the first novel about  Canada. It continues  in  the  fiction about  this country  published  in  the  nineteenth  century and  written  by  both  non-Canadian and  Canadian authors.  It  recurs  today  in Canadian fiction. Thus,  while it is not  the only theme  which  makes this fiction "essentially Canadian", it does help to distinguish  Canadian fiction from that  of other  countries. There  are, moreover, similarities in the way the theme is handled by the writers.
In  the  stories the  theme  of English-French  relations  in  Canada  is often  con­
nected  with  other  dominant  themes in Canadian fiction. One  of these is  Cana­ dian-American relations. In "Rosalba; or, Faithful  to Two Loves", the Canadian makes  his longest explanations  about  English-French relations  in  Canada to an American  who has come to "Montreal purposely to study  the history and  condi­ tion of the country"; Edgar flees to the United  States to avoid arrest. In Ethel et le terroriste, Paul  escapes for  the same reason  to New  York City. In  Return  of


20

ESSENTIALLY CANADIAN



the Sphinx, Alan  Ainslie goes into  politics and  to the  Ministry of Cultural Affairs partly  because  of his anger  at  Americans exploiting  Canada. In  Killing Ground, it  is American intervention in  the  Canadian Civil  War  that forces  the  English­ Canadian federalists and  the  French-Canadian separatists to work together again  to prevent  "a complete American takeover".
While  the  settings  of the  stories  vary,  the  locale  of  Montreal is used in some way in  them  all.  Antoinette  de Mirecourt is set chiefly in Montreal. In  Souvenirs d'un  exile canadien,  Hamelin ponders  events which  occurred in Montreal. Often these  events  are  crucial  for  the  characters and  their  country. In  Ethel et le  ter­ roriste, the  lives  of  Paul   and   Ethel  become  extremely   complicated  because  of Paul's terrorist activities  in  Montreal; the  bomb-throwing and  killing force  him to  continue to  work  for  the  revolutionaries. Montreal, finally,  is often  the  place where  the  English-Canadians and  the  French-Canadians have  the  most sustained  relations  with  each  other.  In  Lesperance's story, Walter and  Rosalba marry  and  live "happily ever after" in Montreal.
Two  stylistic devices help  to create  the reality of bilingualism in this fiction and to  suggest  the  complexity and  confusion  of English-French relations in Canada. One  is the  habit  of mixing  English  and  French. Mrs.  Leprohon uses French ex­ pressions  like mon  cher in  Antoinette  de Mirecourt. Godbout includes  such sen­ tences  as  "Je ne suis  pas  une  raciste  moi,  mais  les seuls  negres  que  j'ai  connus
etaient   porteurs a bord  des  trains,  I  can't  get upset like  you". The  other  is the
terminology used  to describe  the  national origins of the  characters. The  narrator of "Rosalba" calls the  French-Canadians both  "French Canadians" and  "Cana­ dians". The   English-Canadians are  usually  called  les  Anglais  in  the  stories  in French, even  though the  term  is often  inaccurate. The  narrator of Le  Couteau sur la table considers  Patricia une  Anglaise, although her  father was  a  Czecho­ slovakian   Jew,   her  mother Irish.   It  is difficult  to  say  whether the  plethora of terms  used  to  differentiate Canadians and  the  tendency  of one  group of Cana­ dians  to categorize another in simplified  national terms  is a  result  of, or a cause for,  the  ambivalent relations between  English-Canadians  and  French-Canadians that  the fables of the fiction  reveal.
Actual   political  events  frequently help  to shape  their  fables.  The  fall of New France to  the   English  is  the  starting point  of  Mrs.  Leprohon's Antoinette   de Mirecourt. The  writing of  Ethel  et le terroriste was, according to  Jasmin, "one manifestation of the acute  examination of conscience which seized French Canada in the spring  of I g6g ... when  a terrorist  bomb  exploded  in a Canadian military recruiting centre  in  Montreal, killing  the  night  watchman". The last  chapter of

21

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



Godbout's  Le  Couteau sur Ia table  is mostly taken  up  with  two reports, one in
English, one in French, of this same action.
One of these events, the Rebellion of I837, links closely some of the nineteenth­ and  twentieth-century stories. Chevalier's  character,  Villefranche,  pursuing  his revenge against the English, becomes a leader in the Fils de la liberte. Lesperance weaves "Rosalba" around  events related  to the  I837 crisis.  In  one of the most moving passages in Aquin's Prochain  episode, the narrator dreams of a house on the  Nation  river  and  links his crisis and  that  of  present-day  Quebec  with  the battle  of Saint-Eustache and  Papineau.  In  Killing  Ground, the headquarters of the "P.D.Q." at the beginning of the Civil War is the Seigniory Club, "a site ... of great  historical significance" for the separatists since "it was the home of Louis Joseph  Papineau".
Violence,  death,  guilt, and  loss are  often  the  result of  both  group  and  indi­ vidual   confrontations   between  English-Canadians and   French-Canadians.  In Antoinette de Mirecourt Louis duels with Audley, kills him, rushes to Antoinette  to confess, and  leaves for exile in France.  In  Ethel  et le terroriste  Paul throws the bomb, escapes to New York, and suffers guilt  pangs about  the death  and  home­ sickness for  Canada. These feelings are often  associated with a reluctance  to kill and   a  recognition   of  brotherhood.   In   "Rosalba",  Walter,   fighting  with  the government   against  the  rebels, spares  Edgar's   life and  later  helps  him  marry Rosalba.  In Prochain  episode the narrator  hesitates to murder  Heutz when Heutz repeats  the narrator's alibi to him. Although  he does not believe Heutz,  the nar­ rator finds himself identifying with him.
The   same   ambivalent   feelings  that   exist  between   English-Canadians and French-Canadians are  shown  in  another  frequently   used  motif:   a  love affair. Mrs.  Brooke, Chevalier,  De Mille, de Boucherville, Lesperance,  Mrs. Leprohon, MacLennan, Aquin, Godbout, Jasmin, and  Portal: all use a version of this motif. Sometimes deception and misunderstanding are involved. Mme Des Roches, misinterpreting Rivers' sensitivity for sentiment,  is partly tricked into loving him in The History  of Emily  Montague. In  Prochain  episode  Aquin suggests that  K, the  narrator's blonde mistress, is also Heutz's  and  that  she has betrayed  the nar­ rator  to him. Even in Antoinette de Mirecourt, which is most optimistic about  a union  between  the two cultures. Antoinette  is tricked  by Sternfield  into a secret marriage and  betrayed  by him, when he courts other  women. Yet the characters  continue  to be fascinated  by members of the other group. Antoinette, despite her unhappy   marriage  to one  Englishman,  marries  another.   In  Le  Couteau sur la table, the  narrator, despite  Patricia's   affair  with  the  rich   Anglais  from  West-

22

ESSENTIALLY  CANADIAN



mount and   his  own  affair  with  Madeleine, continues to love  Patricia and  later returns to her,  although he admits,  "je  ne suis pas chez moi ici" and  he says, "le couteau restera sur la table  de la cuisine".
"The knife  on the  table": this image summarizes the theme  of English-French
relations in  Canada as it is presented  in  Canadian fiction  from  its beginning to the  present  day.  These  stories reveal that  there  is a knife, composed  of real acts of violence,   between   English-Canadians and  French-Canadians. They   reveal  that the  knife  has  been  used  periodically  to  cut  more  wounds on  the  bodies,  minds, and  souls of  members of  both  groups.  But  they  also reveal  that  the  wounds  are the kind  that  one member of a family inflicts on another. For the image of a knife on  a table  implies  a house shared  by people in a domestic  relationship with each other.  Wounds which   result  from  the  cut-and-thrust of  "domestic felicity"  are often  more  damaging, it is true,  than  injuries  from  mechanical objects  or foreign instrusions. On  the  other  hand, a family  breakdown after  200 years would  prob­ ably  be even  more  destructive. Perhaps, then,  instead  of wondering if we should  "let  Quebec go''  or  "free  Quebec from  the  English", we should  examine  more closely the  rules of this family  game  which  we have  played  as a nation  for such a long  time,  expose  them, as some  Canadian writers  have  traditionally done,  and  change  them,  if we choose, not with a knife but with a pen.


FOOTNOTES

1 "The   Fourth  Separation" has since been reprinted  with  only a few changes as a chapter  in Ronald  Sutherland's Second  Image, I97I.
2   Although  he speaks of "literature", Sutherland's examples are drawn  from fiction.
3 The  reason for  M. Villefranche's  hatred  of the English differs in the novels where he is the chief character. In  Poignet  d'acier, his hatred  is attributed to the fact that his daughter has  been seduced  by an English officer. In  Les  Derniers  Iroquois  the woman seduced is Villefranche's  wife.
4   John  Howard   Willis, "The Fair  Harp"    Canadian Review  and  Literary  and  His­
torical Journal, I, 2 (December (I 824), 3 I I -348.
5  Mary Markham Brown, An  Index to the  Literary  Garland   (Toronto:  Bibliographi­
cal Society of Canada, I g62) , iii.
6   Jean-Talon  Lesperance,  "Rosalba; or,  Faithful  to  Two  Loves",  Canadian  Illus­
trated  News, I, 20 (March rg, I87o) - I, 24 (April I6, I87o).



FRANCES BROOKE'S CHEQUERED GARDENS



William H. New








-THIRDS              thmugh Voltaire's  Candide, the naive  Candide and   his cynical  but  ostensibly  realistic  companion Martin learn about  the  Parisian stage from

a  little  abbe  from  Perigord,  one  of  those  eager  people,  always  alert,  always obliging,  brazen,  fawning,  complaisant,   who  lie  in  wait  for  strangers   passing through,  tell them  the history of the  town's scandals,  and  offer them  pleasures at any price....
"Sir,  how many  plays do you have in France?" said Candide  to the abbe, who replied:  "Five or six thousand."
"That's a lot," said Candide. "How many of them are good?" "Fifteen  or sixteen," replied the other.
"That's a lot," said Martin.

The  sardonic view of literary  values ought  frequently to restrain  our  enthusiasms more  than  it does,  and  force  us to temper  mercy  with  a little  justice when  we set out  to assess a work.  Deciding  what  criteria to use in the  process, however,  is even more  of a problem than  agreeing  that  assessment is necessary  in the  first place.  It is a  problem that  is particularly difficult  with  a  provincial literature, where  the temptation to  extol  regional  fidelity  and  verbal  felicity  as automatic indications of  profound talent is matched only  by the  insistence on  a work's  "historical im­ portance" -a  convenient escape from  the  harsh  judgments one might otherwise have  to  make.  In  Canada, the  latter  approach has  the  fortuitous  by-product of providing us  with  the  history  we seem  to  be  constantly in  search  of  and   thus  offering   glimpses   of  the   national  attitudes  we  have  since-perhaps  uncon­ sciously-come to accept.  To  re-examine Frances Brooke's The  History of Emily

FRANCES BROOKE



Montague (the  "first"  Canadian novel, dated I 769) is not only to catch at some of those attitudes but also to look at the way they are presented, to grapple  with the potentially disparate  scenes, events, and characters, and with the words them­ selves, in order  to comprehend  the effect that,  taken  together,  they can  exert.
As Voltaire's  character  Martin  should  remind us, being the "first" of a kind is
not  a  literary  virtue,  and  Mrs. Brooke's epistolary novel suffers from  a  certain repetitiveness of style and event that no amount of exegesis can excuse. We are told so often how "lively'' and  "tender" things are that the adjectives lose their mean­ ing,  for  example,  and  the  characters  of  Emily  Montague   herself, and  of  her patient  wooer Ed Rivers, are so pallid and  priggish as to be almost indistinguish­ able. Yet they, like the other characters-Emily's long-lost father Col. Wilmott, her friend  Bell Fermor,  Bell's father  and  her erratic suitor Fitzgerald; Ed's sister Lucy and  his rakish friend Jack  Temple;  Sir George Clayton  (Emily's  unaccept­  able  fiance)   and  Ed's  enigmatic  Canadian  confidante,  Mme.  des Roches-fit into a definite  pattern  in which some repetition is good. The  three sets of lovers, with two threats  to happiness and  two parents, are arranged  with a neat sense of balance that  follows faithfully  the eighteenth  century taste for symmetry. As Carl Klinck points out in his introduction  to the New Canadian Library edition of the novel, it also displays the aphoristic  wit and  the analysis of sentiment  that  make it characteristic of its time, and it is, in other words, an English book.
To what extent it is Canadian, too, then, is a moot point. But if we look further we see that  though  the pattern  is English, much of the energy in the book derives from  the author's contact  with  Quebec  during  the period  q6g-q68, and  that, as a result, there is a tension established between nature  and society that is never wholly resolved. On  the surface Quebec is simply an exotic setting for an English comedy  of manners,  which  Lionel Stevenson dismisses in a left-handed  compli­ ment  as being quaint, and  which B. G. McCarthy  values because scenic descrip· tion, up to this point, had been rare in English fiction. Both estimates seem to me to miss the  point: that  the setting, with all its resonances, is built into the book's use of imagery, therefore attached  to the structure, and therefore used deliberately to establish  the  tension  through  which the author  conveys her ideas. For as one ought  to  expect  from  a  character   as  forceful  as  Mrs.  Brooke  appears  in  the Murray   Papers  to  have  been, she  does  have  ideas, and  her  novel is no  mere sentimental   exercise.  Drawing  some  of  her  characters'  expectations   from  the fashionable  ideas of Pope and  Rousseau, she (and  her mouthpiece  Bell Fermor)  are more at  home in the  brittle ironies of Voltaire's Candide, which they cannot resolve and  so  must  instead  contend  with  as  knowledgeably  as they  can.  That

FRANCES BROOKE



Mrs.  Brooke's  knowledge  also  allows  her  to  take  Candide  subtly  to  task  would probably be an added irony for the coterie in which she moved.
Voltaire's satire,   published   in  1759,   would   be  readily   available  to  Frances Brooke,  who  read  French  fluently,  and  she  would  no  doubt respond  to the  view of the  Seven  Years'  War  that  he expresses in it. At the  beginning of Chapter  23, Candide and  his friend are aboard a ship in the English channel:

"You knaw England;  are they as mad there as in France?"
"It's another  kind of madness," said Martin.  "You  know that  these two nations are at  war over a few acres of snow out around  Canada, and  that  they are spend­ ing on that war much more than all of Canada  is worth."

The   image  stuck  in  the  European imagination, and   quelques  arpents  de neige (glossed  up  with  the  occasional  trapper, Mountie, or  coureur-de-bois)  is what Canada has  been  ever since. For  Mrs.  Brooke's  characters, actually experiencing the  Canadian winter, however,  the snow is only a partial truth. Their descriptions of climate  and  scenery  form  part  of the author's distinction between  illusion  and reality   and   thus   (while  giving  the  novel  all  the  flavour   of  the  Commonplace Book)  contribute to its dramatic conflict  between  the natural wilderness and civilization.
When  Ed  Rivers  comes to Canada, he does so on  half-pay with  the anticipa­ tion of running an estate larger  than  any he might  acquire in England. Sir George  comes  as a "civil  but  cold" social  butterfly, directed by his mother as to the  time he shall  marry   Emily.  Emily  is with  chaperones at  Montreal, Arabella with  her father on  a farm  at  Silleri  (attached to the  garrison),  Fitzgerald is in the  army,  and  Mme.  des Roches,  being  Canadian and  having land to sell to Ed, lives alone "in  the  wildest  country on earth". The  differences between England and  Canada start  to  multiply; observed  initially  in  the  surface  landscape, they  are  extended rapidly into  social  customs  and,  aphorism  by aphorism, into  the  intellectual dis­ tinctions between  romantic North America and  ordered Augustan England. Ed's  initial  reaction  to the country displays something of this:

My subjects indeed  at present will be only bears and elks, but in time I hope to see the  human face divine  multiplying a!'ound me;  and, in thus cultivating  what  is in the  rudest state  of nature,  I shall taste one of the greatest of all pleasures, that  of creation, and see order and beauty gradually rise from chaos.

When  he  adds  shortly,  "one  grows tired  of meer  scenery", the  author advises  us almost   directly   that   his attachment to  the  country -and   by  extension  to  the

FRANCES BROOKE



aptly-named   Mme.  des  Roches-will  be  short-lived.  His  own  name,  Rivers, suggests the  paradox  of his stance;  he seems part  of the scenery, after  all. But when  Arabella's  father  later  writes a descriptive commentary  of the  breakup  of ice on  the  St.  Lawrence,  he indirectly  clarifies Ed's  relationship  with  Canada. Frances  Brooke  uses the  imagery  to  tie  landscape  with  character   once  more. William  Fermor  had  anticipated, he says, that  the break-up  would  be  unexcep­ tional,  a melting  by degree  that  would  go largely unnoticed: "But  I  found  the great  river, as the savages  with  much  propriety  call it, maintain  its  dignity ... and  assert  its superiority  over  those  petty  streams  which  we  honour with  the names  of rivers in  England." The  neat  distinction is one  which  only Bell really appreciates.
She, too, arrives  with  certain  built-in  expectations and  prejudices,  and  as the coquette  with the literary name she epitomizes many of the socially acceptable attitudes  of her  day.  Behind  her  prejudices  lies an  independence of  judgment, however,  and  behind  her  flirtatiousness  a cool and  reasoned  assessment of the people she meets. When, after  being in Canada, she changes her mind about it, it is that apprehension  we should therefore try to gauge. As Bell is by far the liveliest character  in the book anyway, the style inevitably focusses attention  on her rather than  on Ed or Emily, but this seems to be part of the author's intent. Convention will solve all discord  for  Emily, while Bell is more shrewd;  the  Nature  that  she recognizes  in  Canada forces  her  to  re-examine  the  conventions  she starts  with. When  we first hear  from  Bell, that  is, she is describing  Chaudiere Rapids  and Montmorenci Falls in conventional  terms, which she employs with fluent energy and apparent easiness of mind:

The former [speaking of Chaudiere] is a  prodigious  sheet  of water,  rushing  over the  wildest  rocks, and  forming a scene grotesque,  irregular, astonishing: the latter, less wild,  less irregular, but  more  pleasing  and  more  majestic, falls  from  an  im­ mense  height, down  the  side of a romantic mountain, into  the  river  St. Lawrence, opposite the  most  smiling  part  of  the  island  of Orleans, to  the  cultivated charms  of which it forms  the most striking and  agreeable contrast.

The  important distinction  here is that between irregularity and contrast. Contrast, by implying  balance,  fits into  the conventional scheme of things and  into Bell's scale of  values,  whereas  an  irregular  landscape,  being  unpredictable, is at  this stage  unacceptable. As Bell herself admits, the conventional  plan of the natural environment is "a  little  world  of enchantment". It is one  which in Canada the forcible realities of winter will soon alter.
To  demonstrate her developing change of attitude,  Frances  Brooke then makes

FRANCES BROOKE



Bell write several  letters over the winter  to Lucy Rivers,  which seem at first simply to describe  the  weather and  the land. The  notations about the  very cold tempera­ tures  and  the  freezing  of the  river  are  those  of the  acute  observer,  but  gradually, by a sardonic competition between  herself and  the  beavers  as to who is the  better  judge  of the  climate, Bell comes to participate in the  Nature that  to this point she has  only  described. As  long  as she  separates herself  from  Canada, it  is merely "one undistinguishable waste of snow"; she is one then  with  Voltaire in the  Eng­  lish Channel, judging  from  afar  with  trenchant fancy.  But such division from  the local landscape, as she finds out, does not mean  she can  retain the old conventions with  comfort. The  freezing  of the  river forces  her  to recognize the intellectual as well as the physical distance she has come. In November she writes:

I have been seeing the last ship go out of the port, Lucy;  you have no notion what a  melancholy  sight  it is:  we are  now left to ourselves, and  shut  up from  all the world for the winter....

Another note is introduced only when she reveals that  being  cut off from  England does  not  mean   being  cut  off from  the  landscape; she  enjoys  the  carriole trips, which  "fly  along  at  the rate  of twenty  miles an  hour", and  late  in  February she confirms  her  change  of mind.  Returning to Montmorenci to view the Sugar Loaf and  the  partly frozen falls, she writes:

Those  who  have  heard  no  more  of  a  Canadian winter  than  what  regards  the intenseness  of  its  cold, must  suppose  it  a  very  joyless season;  'tis,  I assure  you, quite  otherwise....

The river  ice  that  she  thought severed  her  from   beauty  turns out  to  create  its own  kind,  and  she  adds,  "all  together give a grandeur and  variety  to the  scene, which  almost  rise to enchantment." But not quite. This  time the scene stops short in the  reality  of the  cold, which  must  be acknowledged and  met. The new  world can then  be appreciated.
The difference in attitude that  close acquaintance brings demands an appropri­
ate  change in  action   as well.  In  February Emily  breaks  off  her  engagement to Sir  George   Clayton  (of  which   Bell  has  never   approved),  distinguishing civil coldness  from  the  natural kind.  And  when  in April  Bell has heard from  England that    Lucy   and    Jack   Temple  have   married,  she   writes   with   characteristic posturing:

Our  beaux  are  terribly at a loss for similes: you have lillies of the valley for com­ parisons;  we  nothing  but  what  with  the  idea  of whiteness gives that  of  coldness too.

FRANCES BROOKE



Underlying her  whimsy  is her  new knowledge. She is as WlSatisfied with  conven­ tional  relationships among people as with conventional attitudes to the wilderness. The whole complex of ideas related  to the landscape image  is thus tied to love, or, looked  at  from  another angle,  the  love story  which  provides  the simple  plot for the  book can  be seen  as a vehicle to allow  the  author to explore her ideas about nature and  society.



RRALLELING  THE REASSESSMENT of climate  and  landscape, the  novel's  examination of the  "Noble Savage'' concept also relates to the theme of  love.  Once again   the  conventional attitudes are  put  into  the  mouth of  Ed Rivers:

If the Epicurean definition  of happiness is just that it consists in indolence of body and  tranquility of  mind,  the  Indians  of  both  sexes are  the  happiest  people  on earth; free from  all care,  they enjoy the present moment,  forget the past, and  are without  solicitude  for  the  future: in summer, stretch'd  on the  verdant  turf,  they sing, they laugh,  they play, they relate stories of their  ancient  heroes to warm  the youth to war; in winter,  wrap'd  in the furs which bounteous  nature  provides them, they dance, they feast, and despise the rigours of the season, at which the more effeminate  Europeans  tremble....

Later, observing that  the  almost   exterminated Hurons  preserve  their  indepen­ dence   inside  the   European colony,  he  affirms  of  what   he  calls  "his" savages: "other  nations talk  of  liberty, they  posseit". He  quotes an  Indian as saying
" 'we are subjects to no prince; a savage is free all over the world' ", and  he adds:

He  spoke only  truth; they  are  not only free as a  people,  but  every individual  is perfectly  so. Lord  of  himself,  at  once  subject  and  master,  a  savage  knows  no superior ... ; 'tis  the species, 'tis man, 'tis his equal he respects, without  regarding the  gaudy  trappings,   the  accidental  advantages,  to which  polished  nations  pay homage.

The distinction between   the  European system  and   the  local  one  rests on  the question of social  status, the  latent  irony  of the  observation appearing when  we place  Ed's  apparent respect  of the  classless society beside his motives  and  actions in the sphere of love. We have  learned  already  not to expect  either  logic or depth from   Ed -he grows  tired  of  "meer scenery" -and  true  to form, when  he  is faced  with  the  prospect of marrying Emily,  he momentarily backs away,  finding it impossible to  marry her  either  in Canada, where  he will have  an estate  but  be

29

FRANCES BROOKE



exiled,  or in  England, where  he will have  too small  an  estate  to be permanently at  leisure.  His  consciousness  of  class is built  firmly  into  his sense  of acceptable position,  and  his taste  for  classlessness seems  in that context the  casual  whim  of the  uninvolved aristocrat rather than  the  zealous  intent  of the  revolutionary.
His  view  is one  which  finds  its analogue in  Pope's Essay on Man,  published
over  thirty  years earlier.  In  the  first epistle  of that  poem,  Pope  chides the  proud, who  presume to  judge  God  and  censure  Nature, and  in a passage  of remarkable condescension contemplates the lot of the noble savage:

Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind; His soul, proud Science never taught  to stray Far as the solar walk, or milky way;
Yet simple Nature to his hope has given,
Behind the cloud-topped hill, an humbler  heaven; Some safer world in depth of woods embraced, Some happier island in the watery waste,
Where slaves once more their native land behold, No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold. To Be, contents his natural  desire,
He asks no Angel's wing, no Seraph's fire; But thinks, admitted  to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.
The  conclusion  of the epistle affirms with absolute certainty: All Nature is but Art, unknown to thee;
All Chance, Direction, which thou canst not see;
All Discord, Harmony  not understood; All partial Evil, universal Good:
And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite, One truth is clear, WHATEVER IS, IS RIGHT.

And  indeed, in the  pleasure  they take in order, balance, symmetry and  decorum, Ed  and  Emily-and even  Arabella, at  first-accept that  solution  implicitly.
Bell's response  is, admittedly, tinged  with  an  intentional irony  Ed  is incapable of, as when she writes to Emily:

I believe I shall set about  writing a system of ethics myself ... rural,  refined, and sentimental; rural  by all means;  for  who does not  know that  virtue  is a country gentlewoman?   all  the  good  mammas  will  tell  you, there  is no such  being to  be heard of in town.

FRANCES BROOKE



But she is wholly genuine in her first estimation of the noble life of Indian women. Ed had  written somewhat ponderously that

The  sex we have so unjustly excluded from power in Europe  have a great share in the  Huron  government  ... In  the true sense of the word, we are the savages, who so impolitely  deprive  you of the  common  rights of citizenship, and  leave you no power but ... the resistless power of your charms.

Bell's reaction  is lighter but equally  admiring:

Absolutely, Lucy, I will marry a savage, and  turn squaw ... : never was any thing delightful  as their  lives;  they  talk  of  French  husbands,  but  commend  me  to  an Indian  one, who lets his wife ramble five hundred  miles, without  asking where she is going.

In  short  order  the  illusion  is overturned and  an even  more  vigorous  letter  is sent off to Lucy Rivers:

I declare  off at  once;  I will not be a squaw;  I admire  their  talking of the liberty of savages;  in  the  most  essential point  they are slaves:  the  mothers  marry  their children  without  ever consulting  their inclinations, and  they are obuged to submit to  this foolish tyranny.  Dear  England!  where liberty appears,  not as here among these odious  savages,  wild  and  ferocious like themselves, led  by the  hand  of the Graces.  There  is no  true  freedom  anywhere  else. They  may talk of the  privilege of  chusing  a  chief;  but  what  is that  to  the  dear  English  privilege of  chusing  a husband?

That last  utterance becomes  structurally ironic  when  Frances Brooke  develops the  relationship between   Emily  and  Sir George,  for the  privilege  of English free­ dom  is inherently denied  by the  loveless arrangement of marriage and  by the set of social rules that  makes  it so uncomfortable for the arrangement to be changed. The question  of freedom rapidly  also acquires  political  overtones, especially  in a novel  concerning the  English  garrison  in  Quebec in  the  176o's,  and  when  Bell says "I think  no  politics  worth  attending to  but those of the little commonwealth of woman", her  words,  rather than  deny  the  issue, simply  extend  its force  into  a still larger sphere.
The independence of the  Huron in  the colony, in other  words, is matched  by the  independence of the  "Canadian" (a  word  reserved  in this  book  entirely  for the   French community),  and   thus   begin  a  number of  parallels   between   the savages  and  the  colonials, both  of whom  are  closer to nature and  so supposedly closer  to  virtue  than the  civilized  British -which  does not  prevent  the  civilized

FRANCES BROOKE



British,  af   course,  from  judging themselves  still superior. Ed  Rivers,  writing from
Montreal early on in the story, announces with a nice sense of contrast:

The  peasants are ignorant,  lazy, dirty, and stupid  beyond all belief; but hospitable, courteous,  civil;  and,  what  is particularly  agreeable,  they  leave  their  wives and daughters  to  do  the  honours  of  the  house:  in  which  obliging  office they acquit themselves  with  an  attention,  which ... must  please  every  guest who  has a  soul inclin'd  to  be  pleas'd.... Their  conversation  is lively and  amusing;  all  the  little knowledge of Canada is confined to the sex....

The power  of  women  in politics  and  love  is  thus  reaffirmed   in  yet  another quarter; furthermore, the  ascription of knowledge only  to the  women  underlines the  importance of  Arabella's viewpoint   to  the  book  and   the  importance that Frances Brooke  attaches to intellectual as well as domestic freedom. The implicit and  explicit  attacks on Catholicism -and  on  the  unnaturalness of the  nunnery
-combine  the  issues of  women's freedom   and   moral virtue,  and   through the
tacit  suggestion  that  locking "knowledge" away  in the  convent may  both  weaken the  colony  and  put  power  in a dangerous place,  they  reach  into  politics  as well. William    Fermor's  interpretive  commentary  takes   up   the   point   again    with Protestant astringency:

there  is a  striking  resemblance  between  the  manners  of  the  Canadians   and  the savages....

From  all  that  I  have  observed, and  heard  of  these  people,  it appears  to me an undoubted  fact,  that  the  most civilized Indian   nations  are  the  most  virtuous;  a fact which makes directly against Rousseau's ideal system.
Indeed  all systems make against, instead  of leading  to, the discovery of truth.... That  the savages have virtues, candour  must own;  but only a love of paradox  can
make any man assert they have more than polished nations....

the  Canadians ... are  simple  and  hospitable,  yet  extremely  attentive  to  interest, where it does not interfere  with that  laziness which  is their  governing  passion.

They  are rather  devout  than  virtuous; have religion without  morality, and  a sense of honour without  very strict honesty.

Indeed  I believe wherever superstition  reigns, the moral sense is greatly weakened; the strongest inducement  to the practice of morality  is removed, when  people are brought  to believe that  a few outward  ceremonies will compensate  for the want of virtue.

His  point  is strictly  the  religious  one.  Mrs.  Brooke's  goes further, for  in  jousting with  ceremony she  is taking   on  the  whole  social  acceptance of symmetry and

32

FRANCES BROOKE



decorous  balance to see if it proves acceptable. It does not. Pope and  Rousseau do not.  The  noble  savage  is not  noblest  when  most savage,  and  as Rousseau's Emile (I 762)   suggests,  it  is difficult  to know  whether education should  serve to  make the learner more natural or more civilized.
Bell, committed to  neither of these  positions  in exclusion  of the  other,  rejects
not the nature of the savage  Canadians but their want of sensibility.

If my ideas of things are right, the human  mind is naturally  virtuous;  the business of  education   is therefore  less to give  us good  impressions, which  we have  from nature, than to guard  us against bad ones, which are generally acquired.

No society  exists in  a state  of nature, in other  words;  all are  civilized  in  their way. The difference lies in the  degree  of freedom  accorded to individuals and  the sympathetic understanding they  in  turn   have  of their  environment. Fitzgerald, whom  Bell finally marries, echoes his wife's observation:

Nothing  can  be more false than  that  we are naturally  inclined  to evil:  we are m­ deed  naturally   inclined   to  gratify  the  selfish passions of  every  kind;  but  those passions are not evil in themselves, they only become so from excess.

The  malevolent   passions  are  not  inherent  in  our  nature.  They  are  only  to  be acquired  by degrees, and  generally are born from chagrin  and  disappointment....

Having thus  confirmed Bell's  respectable independence, Frances Brooke  goes on to  probe  the  solutions  that   Ed  and  Emily  arrive  at,  to examine the  implications of their  marriage, the  fortuitous and  dramatically artificial  appearance of Emily's wealthy  father, and  their  subsequent comfortable settlement in the  English countryside. In so doing  she approaches the intellectual climax  of her book.


EMILY AND  ED,  installed  in their country estate,  have different responses  to  it,  but  in  neither case are  they  the  responses  that  would  have  been possible  in  Canada. The  landscape image  is revivified,  and  the  English  garden
serves as a balanced contrast to the savage  wilderness. In  that  garden, Emily even contrives  to recapitulate the  contrast by constructing wild areas.  The balance she seeks and  the  self-congratulatory eminence Ed  acquires display  all the  attributes of Pope's Augustan Man :
Emily  is planning  a  thousand  embellishments for the  garden,  and  will next  year make  it  a  wilderness  of  sweets, a  paradise  worthy  its  lovely inhabitant:  she  is already  forming   walks  and  flowery arbours  in  the  wood, and  giving  the  whole scene every charm  which taste, at little expence, can bestow.

33

FRANCES BROOKE



I, on  my side, am selecting spots for  plantations  of trees;  and  mean,  like a good citizen, to serve at once myself and the public, by raising oaks, which may hereafter bear the British thunder  to distant lands.

I  believe we country  gentlemen,  whilst we have spirit  to keep ourselves indepen­
dent, are the best citizens, as well as subjects, in the world....

In short, and  I am sure you will here be of my opinion,  the man who has compe­ tence, virtue,  true  liberty, and  the woman  he loves, will cheerfully  obey  the laws which secure him these blessings, and  the prince under  whose mild sway he enjoys them.

All is for the  best, in other  words, in the best of all possible worlds.  But Ed Rivers notwithstanding, neither   Voltaire nor  Mrs.  Brooke  nor  the  chastened Candide are so sure. Says Voltaire's philosopher Pangloss to his former pupil:

"All events are linked together in the best of all possible worlds; for after all, if you had  not  been expelled from a fine castle with great  kicks in the backside ... , if  you had  not  been subjected  to the  Inquisition,  if you had  not  traveled  about America  on foot, if you had  not given the Baron a great  blow with your sword, if you had  not lost all your sheep from the good country of Eldorado,  you would not be here eating candied citrons and pistachios."
"That is well said," replied Candide,  "but  we must cultivate  our garden."

And  at  the  end  of The History  of Emily  Montague, Ed,  pontificating as usual  to Bell, suddenly interrupts his letter  to anticipate the  reply she would  undoubtedly give  him: " 'Cela   est  bien  dit,  mon  cher   Rivers;  mais  il  faut   cultiver   notre jardin.' You  are  right,  my  dear  Bell, and  I am  a  prating coxcomb." Which   is true,  despite   his  own   (and   even  Arabella's)  earlier  statement to  the  contrary. The sudden intrusion of  reality  into  the  flow  of  his  words  works  reflexively  to illuminate the  rest  of the  book;  the  direct  quotation from  Candide throws  per­ spective  from  the  resolvable  upsets  of the  mannered romance to  the  continuing tensions  of  irony.  Though  Ed's  final  words  suggest  equanimity-"I  hope ... to  have  nothing to wish, but  a continuance of our  present  happiness" they  can­ not,  in the  light  of the author's obvious  warnings to the  contrary, be accepted as a sign of permanent peace.
Through  Ed's  glimpse  of  himself  we  are  advised   back  to  the  end  of  Pope's
Essay on  Man :

For Wit's false mirror held up Nature's  light; Showed erring Pride, WHATEVER IS, IS RIGHT; That  REASON, PASSION,  answer one great aim; That  true SELF-LOVE and SOCIAL are the same;

34

FRANCES BROOKE



That  VIRTUE only makes our Bliss below;
And all our Knowledge is, OURSELVES TO   KNOW.

It  is not  a  doctrine that   Frances Brooke  accepts  without a  thousand qualifiers; wit's mirror in her  book reveals the  pretensiousness  of much  English  "cultivation" and   the  need  to  recognize   reality.  Ed's  English  garden of trees  is certainly  co­ existeritsdf-and social-love  in  his mind,  but  if  his love  of self is  confounded  by his  not  accurately  recognizing his  identity,  is the  society  not  ill-served?  Are  his trees  and  Emily's  artificial wilderness  a true  cultivation of  Candide's human gar­  den?  Their estate  at  the  end  is called  Bellfield, which suggests  at  once  the  possi­ bility of acuteness and  energy  (possessing Bell's name as it does)  and  the enervat­ ing factitiousness of not  actually being Bell. For it is she who throughout the book cultivates her  landscape and  she  who  recognizes  Canada for  what   it  was-a wilderness  garden with  its own  pleasures,  its own  advantages, its own  prospect  of danger and   development, not  a  simple  balance  to  cultivated  civilization, nor  a few  acres  of snow  to  be summarily dismissed. In  Canada, Ed  says, "contrary to what  we see every  where  else, the  country  is rich, the  capital poor; the hills fruit­  ful,  the  vallies  barren." Bell, garnering information around her  too, adds:

You will judge how naturally  rich the soil must be, to produce  good crops without manure,  and  without  ever  lying fallow, and  almost  without  ploughing; yet our political  writers  in  England   never  speak of Canada   without  the  epithet  barren. They tell me this extreme fertility is owing to the snow....

Don't  you think  I  am become an excellent farmeress? 'Tis  intuition; some people are  born  learned: are you not all astonishment  at my knowledge?  I never was so vain of a letter in my life.

The tone  is characteristically flippant, but given its eighteenth century pronuncia­ tion   ("farmer")  her  name indeed   is  Arabella  Fermor,  which  contains   enough  punning  to  be  suitably  witty   and   enough   literary   association   to  be  seriously ironic.  There may,  for  the  independent feminist author, be another irony implicit  in  the  fact  that  Bell gives up  that  name  on her  return  to England and  her  mar­  riage to Fitzgerald. In any event,  Ed points out that

Tame,   cold,  dispassionate  minds  resemble  barren  lands;  warm,  animated   ones, rich  ground,  which,  if  properly  cultivated,  yields the  noblest  fruit; but,  if   neg­ lected, from its luxuriance  is most productive of weeds.

It  seems  at  first simply  to  distinguish himself  from  Sir  George  Clayton. But  the energetic realities  that   demand cultivation are  to  be found  in  Canada. In  Eng-

35

FRANCES BROOKE



land  Bell is afraid above  all else of "sinking into  vegetation", and  it is only  Ed, relying  on  his  father-in-law's money  to  allow  them   to  follow  inclination rather than  rule,  who  contradicts her.  He  is a gentleman farmer there  as he had  hoped to  be  in  Canada, but  by  being  the  gentleman foremost  he always  stops short  of the real thing.  As usual, it is Bell whom we should  trust.



CANCES BROOKE makes  her  point  clear  by drawing attention in a number of the  closing letters  to a symbolic  gathering of the  main  characters. Emily  and  Ed  hold  a masquerade, at  which  Lucy  goes as a sultana and  Emily, following   Ed's  choice  of costume,  dresses up  as a  French paisanne.  Bell, signifi­ cantly,  does  not  attend. In  other  words,  the  others  in  happily  accepting  the  life they  are  living  as the  best of all possible worlds  are  living with  masks across their  eyes, while  Bell, living in the same  community, remains conscious  of  the  rigours they  choose  to ignore.  As Ed is the imitation farmer, Emily is the imitation peas­ ant  girl;  they  have  the  appearance without the  reality  and  the  rural  state  with none  of its inconveniences. Bell's knowledge leads  in  another  direction. Quoting Montesquieu, she approves  his admiration of the amiability of surprise: "Magnifi­ cent  habits  have  seldom  grace, which  the  dresses of  shepherdesses  often  have."  It is what  appeals to Ed on his first arriving in Montreal, in fact:

I am arriv'd, and  have brought my heart safe thro'  a continued  fire as never poor knight  errant was exposed to; waited  on at every stage by blooming country girls, full of spirit  and  coquetry, without  any of the village bashfulness of England,  and dressed like the shepherdesses of romance.

But the Canadian is real. By later turning Emily into  the same mould, he contrives a  wilderness   that   he  will  never  be  forced   to  fight.  Knowing the  wilderness  to remain   uncontrolled  outside  such  a  balance,  Mrs.  Brooke  recognizes   that   the "best  of all  possible  worlds"  that  rests on  a  masquerade must  itself be a fiction. To  recognize that, however,  is to enter  a kind  of disorder, where  resolutions  seem arbitrary and  ironic,  and  where  only  irony  itself  seems  a legitimate response  to man's estate.
From  a vantage point two centuries later,  it is possible to see the latter years of
the  Age of Johnson as an ideal  breeding-ground for such  a disposition. The revo­ lution  of the  Common Man  was in the  offing, and  the  Great  Democracies were shortly  to spread their  culture around the  world. Still,  it is not  possible to assert that  The History  of Emily  Montague exerted  any  direct influence whatsoever on

FRANCES BROOKE



the  revolutionary movement or  on  the  course  of literature in  either  England or Canada.  (Even Fanny Burney's Evelina  [1778] looked  back  to  Richardson for its model,  and  the  epistolary form  was soon absorbed  into  other  structures.)  But it is indicative of the tension  of the  times. In  his impressive book on the relation­ ship  between   art  and  ideas  between  1768  and  1850,  European  Vision and  the South  Pacific, Bernard Smith  shows  how  the  conflict  resulted  largely  because  of the opposing pulls of neo-classic order and scientific empiricism:

In  the  year  r 768 the  Royal  Academy was established and  the Royal Society  pro­ moted  Cook's  first  voyage  to  the  South  Seas. The  two events  fittingly  represent two influential  attitudes to nature  current  in English eighteenth-century  thought.  The  formation  of  the  Academy  constituted  the official recognition  in  England  of those neo-classical theories of Italian  origin which had  been transmitted  to Britain through  French  theorists like de Chambray  and de Piles.  Nature,  it was said, was to  be rendered  by the  artist  not with her imperfections clinging  to her but in her perfect forms; what  those perfect forms were the artist could only learn  by a close study  of  the  masterpieces  of  the  ancients  and  their  Renaissance  disciples. The  Royal Society, on the other  hand, approached  nature in a different  way, appealing to travellers, virtuosi,  and  scientists to observe carefully, record  accurately,  and  to experiment.

He  goes on  to  examine in  detail  the  shift from  the  Arcadian view  of the  South Pacific  to the  empirical one,  and  to note  how  the triumph of descriptive realism meant the death of paradise.
The  relationship between these  observations  and   Mrs.   Brooke's   Quebec  is quite  clear.  Ed  and  Emily  are  the  Arcadian pair,  and  when  Emily  seems irrevo­ cably  doomed to Sir George  Clayton, Ed wanders  "about like the  first man  when driven  out  of paradise". Contrarily, when  he has hopes of winning her, he writes:

I already  fancy  my  own  settlement  advancing  in  beauty:   I paint  to myself my Emily adorning those lovely shades:  I see her, like the mother  of mankind, admir­ ing a new creation  which  smiles around  her:  we appear,  to my idea, like  the first pair in paradise.

It is a  world  he  finds  only  in  England's pretty  ordered gardens and  miniature woods  and  streams, or  what   he  calls "enamelled meadows" and  "every  elegant art". Here, as  anywhere, it  depends for  its existence  on  universal  acceptance of the  same  convention, and  if the  company changes,  so does the  world.  Bell is the last  to  leave  Canada, and   even  she  is  by  then  happy to  return to  the  English garden, but she accepts Arcadia as basically ephemeral:

37

FRANCES BROOKE



Not  but this is a divine country,  and our farm  a terrestrial  paradise;  but we have lived in it almost a year, and one grows tired of every thing in time, you know....
When,  then,  she feels a regret she had  not anticipated at  having  to leave not only the scenes of remembered pleasure  but  the scenes themselves, it is only her  jaunty tone  which  prevents her  attribution of naiads to  the  falls  of  Montmorenci from seeming  like a  break  in character. They  are  part  of her  guise as coquette, which she  wears  as the  occasion  demands and  always  recognizes  for  what  it is. Behind it is the strong  sense of change and  empirical truth which  forces her into her ironic role and  gives the novel its increased  dimension.
It is not that  Canada for some geographic reason  could  not support indigenous nymphs, swains,  satyrs,  and  the  like, but  that, by  the  time  the  English  came  to settle  Canada, the  European vision was largely  unwilling to invest  it with  any. If it did,  it did so with  little conviction, and  as a result  the  books we remember from nineteenth-century Canadian literature are  the  diaries,  travel   journals,  emigrant guides, scientific  commentaries, and  exact  descriptions of the life actually being encountered in the  new land.  Paradise does not last long in such an environment,
and  in  fact  the  tension  implicit  in  the  two  meanings of the  word  cultivation - mannered elegance vs. rigorous  tillage -lies not  only at the  heart  of The History of Emily   Montague  but  also,  because  of  historical accident rather  than   direct influence, at  the  heart  of Canadian literature as a  whole.  As Douglas  Jones  has pointed   out  in  Butterfly on  Rock, the  pervading myth  of Canadian  writing has not  been  one of finding  Eden  but  of accommodating oneself to the expulsion. As Sandra  Djwa   has  added   in  her  computer  analysis   of  Roberts and   Pratt, the dominant source  of  their  imagery  is Darwinian theory. What this adds  up  to is an  attempt to  combat  the  equivocal tension   that   Frances Brooke  exposed,  to gather knowledge about  the land  in order  to meet  the  land -and frequently for the  sake  of  the  knowledge itself.  For  the  equivocation  has  never  entirely  dis­ appeared. The   preoccuption  with   Emile's   dilemma-whether  it  is  better  to become   more   civilized  or  more  natural -has  become   a  perennial  syndrome, leading   to  greater  and  greater   literary   complexity  and  sometimes  to  art.  The  problem  is one which  Frances  Brooke's articulate glimpse of England and  Canada can  enlighten at  little,  but  not  resolve.  The  gardens of  both  remain  chequered with shade.







g8



TOWARDS A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY:

The Poetry of Isabella Valency Crawford



Ann reoman



We  must  enter   the  new  period  for  our­ selves, because though  truth,  the radiance  of reality, is universally one and  the same, it  is mirrored  variously  according  to  the mediums  in  which  it  is  reflected.  Truth appears  differently  in  different  lands  and ages according  to the  living materials  out of which its symbols are hewn.1

HEINRICH  ZIMMER




HEINRICH ZIMMER;, here spealdng of the development of Occidental religious  philosophy and  the  need  for  the  Western  world  to  evolve within  its  own  structure, reaching its own,  rather than borrowed, solutions.  He emphasizes   the  need  for  every  age,  as  well as  every  civilization, to  bring  forth its  own  symbols,   rituals   and   images.  This  theory  would  seem  to  apply   to  the growth  of any  nation, or group of people, in their  desire  to assert themselves  as a significant  entity  in  the  eyes of the  world. It follows that  the  process is paralleled in  the  development of  a  nation's literature and  must,  to the  extent  that  art  ex­ presses and   defines  a  given  culture, grow  partly  out  of its conscious  art  forms.  C.  G.  Jung alludes  to a similar  process when  he speaks  of the  collective level of the  consciousness,  the  contents of  which  belong  to  a  nation, or  whole  group of people,  rather than just to one individual. He  points  out  that  the contents of the collective  consciousness "are  not acquired during the individual's lifetime  but  are  products of innate forms and  instincts."2


39

A NATIVE  MYTHOLOGY



If these ideas are applied to the growth of an emergent  nation and that nation's literature, there  appears  the  need for  basic, characteristic symbols and  a native mythology-a mythology  which  both  grows  out  of  the  evolving  culture  and clarifies it, thus  preparing  for still further  growth.  Mythology,  and  consequently the  symbols and  images  which  derive from  a  mythology,  is seen  by  Northrop Frye as the  "matrix of  literature" in that  it defines "a  society's religious beliefs, historical traditions,  cosmological speculations."3    In  the early,  pre-Confederation days  of  Canadian  poetry,  it is not  difficult to  understand the  need  to  impose European   standards  and  literary  ideals  on  an   unknown,   uncultivated   land: religious  belief,  historical  tradition,   etc.,  had  to  be  brought   to  Canada  from Europe.  Heinrich  Zimmer,  in the  passage quoted  above,  implies the  difficulties that  arise  when  foreign,  or  preconceived,  ideas  are  imposed  on  a  land  whose basic "living materials" are so different.
These  difficulties are evident  in the earlier Canadian poets, such as O'Grady,
Goldsmith  and  Sangster.  O'Grady's reaction is one of helplessness in the face of a hostile "barren  waste". In Goldsmith's  poem, "The Rising Village", the Indian and the wild beast are equated,  in that peace only comes to the settler when both "Have fled to  wilds beneath  the  northern  star".  Charles  Sangster  also refers to the  Indian  as a race that  has "passed away",  and  suffuses his verse with the in­ appropriate trappings   of  nineteenth   century  English  pastoral  poetry.  It  is  not until  the  poetry of Isabella  Valancy  Crawford  that  there  appears  to have  been any serious attempt  at the creation of a purely native  mythology, or language  of symbols. And, both the formal structure  of her  poetry, and  the knowledge of the classical education  she  received from  her  father, point  to  much  of Crawford's work as being a conscious attempt.
In  his article  on  Crawford,  James  Reaney  refers to the  poet's attempt  to use
"images  grammatically  rather  than  intuitively",  and  to re-use an image over and over again, with each use adding  to the symbolic dimension  and  thus carrying an infinitely "larger" symbol on to the next poem. 4 This implies the essential "private mythology" of every poet, which Frye believes to arise out of that poet's own "spectroscopic   band  or  peculiar  formation  of symbols."5    If this  "extension  of symbol"  is insufficient, it can  either  fail, being  unnoticed  by the reader,  or can serve to render  the  poetry extremely personalized.  Crawford, however, draws on the  immediate   "living"  material   of  Pre-Confederation Canada  for  her  initial image,  and  works it extensively and  sympathetically  within  the structure of her own  society,  but  she  also draws  from  primitive  and  classical mythologies  and their basic, underlying archetypes.

A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



This process, of the careful  development  of a symbolic language,  can be better understood  by tracing  certain symbols that  appear  throughout Crawford's poetry. The  image  of the  water-lily  occurs frequently,  gathering  in significance  until  it points  to  Crawford's own  poetic  conception  of Eternity  and  freedom,  both  of which  will be discussed later.  In one of the earlier poems, the lily appears as an adornment  of  Laughter's gown-"Laughter  wears  a  lilied  gown". 6    At  this point, and  with  the further  image of Laughter's  eyes being "water-brown,jEver glancing  up and  down",  the effect seems merely to glorify Laughter  through  the association  of  Laughter   with  the  pied-beauty  of   a  pond  of  lilies  reflecting  a summer sun.
In "The Camp of Souls", the image appears again:

As the calm, large stars in the deep sky rest,
The yellow lilies upon them
[the lakes] float.

Here,  the  lily is associated  with  the stars,  heavenly bodies, and  with  Manitou's happy  hunting-ground beyond the River of Death:  the association, then,  is with Eternity  and  life-after-death. In  "Said  The  Skylark",  the lily reflects an  ideal  to which  the skylark  aspires, for it is associated with the "fair,  small Cloud,  grown small as lily flower", which the skylark cannot  reach. However,  the image  of the lily is here also evolving as a symbol for freedom, the lily-flower cloud being some­ thing  far  beyond  the attainment of a caged skylark. If the skylark is seen  as the traditional image  for man's  soul, trapped  by the cage of the  body, then another dimension is added -one of human spiritual aspiration.
Finally,  in  "The Lily  Bed",  the  previous symbolic  levels of  the  lily  image, reflecting  freedom,  aspiration,   the  Eternal,  etc.,  are  combined.  The  lily  pond becomes a  bourne,  a sanctuary, and  the  canoer  is "Locked  in  the  arms  of the placid  bay".  There  is the sense of a particular  and  ideal moment  in time  being sustained.  From  the time in the poem when the cedar paddle enters the water  to the time when it is withdrawn, there are many references to "the  freed soul", - to  love  and   the  unity  of  opposites  ("With voice  of  eagle  and  dove"), -to Manitou, and  Eternity  in  the  heaving of the far shore to  join with  the stars, - to the Evening Star,  traditionally  a star symbolizing rest, and  hence, death.
The  lily-bed, then,  becomes a symbol for the moment  of peace and  transcen­ dence,  when  the soul is free  and  such  polarities as the  eagle and  the dove,  love and  death,  are  contained   within  that  one  perfect moment.  The  assimilation  of

A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



essential polarities and dichotomies within a single vision appears  to be the basic theme of most of Crawford's  work. This returns us to the discussion of mythology. For  Frye, "the  central myth of art  must be the vision at the end of social effort, the  innocent   world  of  fulfilled  desires,  the  free  human   society."  This  would appear  to  be a  unified and  essentially simple and  ordered  world, and  is usually reflected in literature  as a heaven or Eden. This vision, then,  must be a "vision of innocence  which sees the  world  in terms of total  human  intelligibility",7   and  is therefore   a  vision  constructed  of  primitive  image  or  basic  archetypes  ("com­ municable symbol ... typical image").8




IN  HER  owN  ATTEMPT  to  create  a  vision  of  primal  unity, Crawford  often  returns  to the  primitive  concept  of a  world  populated  by gods, mostly nature  gods, or a God or gods other than  the omnipotent Christian  deity (see "The Camp  of Souls", "The Lily Bed",  "Gisli  the  Chieftain" ... ) . This, the  primitive  world,  is a world  in  which  there  is no division between  the gods and  nature,  or man  and nature,  for itonly the concept  of an all-powerful,  yet all-benevolent  deity,  leaving  no  natural   place  for  evil in  the  universal  system, which  leads  to  the  dualities  that  Crawford   attempts to  reconcile  through  her poetry.  "The Christian  concept  of  the  Devil is unique,  marking  a  total  break with  all  polarized  ideas of light and  darkness, life and  death,  good and  evil, as aspects of a single reality that  transcends  and  yet expresses itself through  them."9
In building a vision of a universe which contains both good and evil, black and
white, love and  death,  etc., Crawford  is not only going beyond the constructs of literature and  mythology  to  the  fundamental archetypes  from  which  primitive ritual  and then mythology arose; she is also clearly working with the environment she discovered in a then  undeveloped  Canada. Rather than  rejecting  the Indian and  the  wilderness as the earlier  poets had  done,  Crawford  embraces  both and, in  the  attempt   to create  a  working mythology, arrives  at  the  necessary stage of
'humanizing'  nature.   This  "absorption   of  the  natural  cycle  into  mythology"
Frye  sees as essential:  "The total  form  of  art ... is a  world  whose content  is nature   but  whose form  is human; hence  when  it  imitates  nature  it assimilates nature  to  human  forms." 10  Reaney  sees this  process as the necessity to evolve a symbol in which mind and nature  become the same thing so that  the "unknown" world  can  be absorbed  into the  consciousness. Such  an absorption  would  eradi­ cate any possibility of a dualism arising between the concepts of man and nature.

A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



The  assimilation of nature  and the Indian  culture is clearly seen in "Said  Th.e Canoe".  The  first symbol which strikes the reader is, of course, that  of the canoe itself, which  is personified  and  also deified-"Now she shall  lay  her  polished sides/ As queens do rest, or dainty  brides"  (p. 67).  Referring  to the discussion on the  evolution  of a symbol,  the symbol of the canoe has specific significance. In "The Camp  of Souls" the canoe appears as the bark which transports the soul to and  fro  between  the  after-world  and  the earth;  in "The Lily Bed"  the canoe is the  means  whereby  the  centre  of the  lily bed  and,  symbolically,  freedom  and unity  of soul,  are  attained, -the  image  of the  canoe,  then,  is associated  with transportation of the soul, both as a means of passage from life to death  and as a vehicle of transcendence.
Similarly, after  a reading  of "The  Camp of Souls" the line "My  masters twain their  camp-soul  lit"  has religious and  spiritual  echoes which emphasize  the  ritu­ alistic atmosphere  of the stanza,  the  process of burning  incense and  lighting the fire. The  camp-fire  assumes  human  qualities-"Thin gold  nerves  of sly light curled ... " -and other parts of nature are seen in terms of fire -"and ruddied from  new-dead  wars,/Blazed in the light the scaly hordes".  Opposing  images of death  and love, cold and  heat, etc., are placed side by side, and are united in the songs of the  two  masters,  who sing both  "Loud  of the  chase and  low of love". Read  in  the  context  of the  other  poems, "The  Lily  Bed"  and  "The Camp  of Souls",  it seems possible that  the  poet is expressing  these dualities  in the figures of the  two  masters,  who simultaneously  "rule", and  exist within,  the soul  (the canoe). If this is the case, it is interesting to note in the final stanza  that  "Dark­ ness  built  its  wigwam  walls/Close   round  the  camp",-these  images  of  total darkness  and  the  circle occur  throughout  Crawford's  poetry and  appear  to sym­ bolize the primal state, the swirling black state of chaos out of which the primitive gods  were  born  and  in  which  good  and  evil are  necessary  energies  working towards  the  reconstruction  of  Eternity;  the circle, having  neither  beginning  nor end, signifies the totality of such a vision, and Eternity itself.




bE FIRE  IMAGERY, a unifying image in "Said  The  Canoe", also  appears  in  many  other  poems. In  "The Lily Bed",  Crawford   refers to  a "burning soul";   in  "Gisli  the  Chieftain",  flames  escape  from   both  sun  and crater; the Goddess Lada  weaves a tapestry of flame  ("Warp and  weft of flame she wove") ; but more important is the stanza:


43

A  NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



To the Love Queen Gisli prayed. Groaned far icebergs, tall and blue, As to Lada's distaff slim
All their ice-locked fires blew.

In  a later  stanza  "all  the subtle  fires of earth" are  referred  to. Fire  is certainly used as a symbol of duality, being both constructive,  in that  it warms the  body, and  destructive,  in that  it can consume man  as well as nature.  More  than  this, however,  I feel that  Crawford is using the image to express the essence of nature as a whole and  the particular essence of everything  within nature: the gods seem to inhabit  Crawford's natural  world. This is seen in "The Ghosts of the Trees", where the ghost, or spirit of the tree, the tree-god, appears  to rule and  be a part of the things of man as well as the things of nature:

I have pushed apart, The mountain's heart,
I have trod the valley down; ...

When I reared my head
From its old-time bed,
Shook the pale cities of man ...

I built men's graves
With strong-thewed waves.

This might be paralleled with much of the work of Gerard  Manley Hopkins, who explored  the innermost  fire, or essence of every part  of nature  as it appeared to him  to be a manifestation  of God:  the essence, or quality  of God within  a cold grey ember,  for  Hopkins,  was that  last flash of fire when  the ember  falls and  is dashed  open  on  the  ground  in a final burst of light  (see Hopkins'  "The  Wind­ hover"). So, too, for Crawford,  the essence of the iceberg is that last flash of fire before it is destroyed -the union of two opposites, cold and  heat, in death.
To  return  to the recurring image of the circle and  darkness:  in "Between  the Wind  and  Rain", the archetypal  garden  is depicted  as a retreat  from impending evil, the storm. The  eagle is naively seen by the narrator as possessing that free­ dom which allows him to ride above the storm, above evil, "to some great planet of eternal  peace".  However, as the gyre, the spiral  which  points to Eternity  and order,  turns  back  on itself at  every tum,  so the  eagle only attains  real freedom when  he "beats  the wild storm apart  that  rings the earth", afterwards  returning  to his haven  in  the  wind-dashed  cliff. Love is seen here  as a transcendent force

44

A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



(as  in  "Malcolm's Katie")  enabling the  lover  to transcend the  reality  of "good versus evil" and  reach  a level of peace in his love.
In  "Old Spookses'  Pass",  the  force  of evil is represented by the  stampede of
the  cattle  in the  night. The cowboy, however,  does not  resist the evil  (he  believes in  no  devil  but  that  evil is the  working  of God's  "own  great  plan") . Instead, he descends  into  the  stampede and  rides with  it  until  the  herd  "mills" into  a large, black  circle  of calm,  and  the  cowboy  finds his own  peace.  Again,  the  descension into  evil points  the  path  to God,  or a glimpse of Eternity, in that  a spiritual unity is  understood. The  opposing forces  of  good  and  evil  working  together towards the  reconstruction  of  Eternity, both  essential  forces,  are  nowhere more  clearly stated  than  in "Gisli, the Chieftain":
Said the voice of Evil to the ear of Good, "Clasp  thou my strong right hand,
Nor shall our clasp be known or understood
By any in the land.

"I, the dark giant, rule strong on the earth; Yet thou, bright one, and I
Sprang  from the one great mystery-at one birth
We looked upon the sky.

In   "Malcolm's Katie", this  mythological concept  of  a  primal god, -of the need  to assimilate  evil in order  to attain the  promise  of Eternity, an  understand­ ing  of  Paradise and  re-capture  innocence, -of  love as a  transcendent force, - is worked  out  in  the  narrative structure of the  poem. The two lovers,  Max  and  Katie, are  parted; a selfish father and  an evil force in the  person  of Alfred  comes between  them; Max  is forced  to overcome  the  evil in  nature and  man  through his  love  for  Katie before  this  love  can  be  realized  and  the  two  lovers  attain a paradisal innocence at the end.
I would not change these wild and rocking woods, Dotted  by little homes of unbarked trees,
Where dwell the fleers, from the waves of want For the smooth sward of selfish Eden bowers, Nor-Max for Adam, if I know my mind.

The emphasis here  is on  the  return to a higher  state  of innocence from  a fallen world,  which  necessitates  the  completion of the  circle and  the  total  assimilation, or  knowledge, of  evil;  the  mythological rebirth   after  the  apocalypse into  a  yet higher  state  of  innocence; the  power,  through  knowledge of  evil,  to  overcome that evil and  pass beyond  it, as in the poem "Who sees a Vision":

45

A NATIVE MYTHOLOGY



Who sees a vision foul and dim Hath  seen the naked shade of sin; A1,1d say its grim masque closeth When morn himself discloseth
Thy soul hath seen the colour
The anguish and the dolor,
Of her whom thou hast haply only seen In fair attire and feasted as a queen; But now thou dost her know,
She may not fool thee so Sin may not ever be Again a queen to thee.

This  vision  of  triumphing over  evil through knowledge and  assimilation of evil, and   through  the  ritualistic   process  of  death/rebirth  (as  in  "Malcolm's Katie" when  Max  is struck  by the falling tree), points toward the "apocalyptic world,  the heaven   of  religion"ll -revelation. This  is a  vision  which  Reaney   believes  will help  to "translate our  still mysterious  melancholy dominion into  the  releasing ... dominion of poetry.""
That Isabella  Valancy  Crawford's poetry  is not  ultimately successful  is, in this context, irrelevant. What  is important is that  she  tried  to develop  a native myth­ ology and, in her own  understanding that  Eternity may  only be glimpsed through the  transcendent power  of love,  through the  perfect   moment of  assimilation in the lily-bed, -and  in showing  God  as a life-force  (fire)   in a humanized nature, she has largely  complied  with  what  Frye considers to  be the essentials of a myth­ ology-"Every  developed   mythology   tends   to   complete  itself,  to  outline  an entire  universe  in  which  the  'gods'  represent the  whole  of  nature in  humanized form,   and  at  the  same  time  show  in  perspective man's  origin,  his  destiny,  the
limits of his power,  and  the extension  of his hopes  and  desires."13  Jung states  that
the  "union of opposites  on  a higher  level of consciousness is not  a rational thing, nor is it a matter of will; it is a process of psychic development that  expresses itself in symbols."14   Isabella Valancy  Crawford has understood this need for a unifying and  identifying language of symbols as necessary  to the  development of a native culture and  literature, -and this alone makes  her  an  important literary figure in Canadian art.


FOOTNOTES

1 Heinrich  Zimmer,  quoted  by Joseph  Campbell   in  The Masks  of God: Creative
Mythology (New York: The Viking Press, 1968), p. 625.

A NATIVE  MYTHOLOGY



2     From  C. G. Jung, The Structure and Dynamics  of the  Psyche, pp.  3I0-3I I, quoted by Campbell, Ibid., p. 652.
3   Northrop Frye,   Fables  of  Identity: Studies   in   Poetic   Mythology   (New   York: Harcourt, Brace and  World, I963),  p. 33·
4    James  Reaney, "Isabella Valancy  Crawford", in Our  Living  Tradition, ed. R. L.
McDougall (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, I959),  p. 278.
5   Frye, op. cit., p. I I.
6   All quotations of Isabella Valancy  Crawford's poetry are taken  from  The Collected
Poems, Edited by J. W. Garvin (Toronto: William Briggs,  I905).
7    Frye, op. cit., p. I9.
8   Frye, Anatomy of Criticism (New York:  Atheneum, I968),  p. 99·
9   Alan  W. Watts, The Two Hands  of God:  The Myths of Polarity  (Toronto:  Mac- millan  Co.,  I969), p. I34·
1° Frye, Fables of Identity, p.  33·
11 Frye, Anatomy of Criticism, p. I4r.
12  Reaney, op. cit., p. 288.
13  Frye, Fables of Identity, p. 32.
14  C.  G.  Jung,  Alchemical Studies  (Princeton University Press,  I967), Volume I3
of The  Collected Works, Bollingen Series XX,  p. 2 I.
































47



L'ADOLESCENT VAINCU





H. H. Mowshowitz





QNE SAURAIT mv.R  que le thbne principal  d'Un. saison
dans la vie d'Emmanuel  est !'adolescence:  ses breves reftexions sure le passe, son
optimisme   pour  l'avenir,  ses  hauts  et  ses  bas,  ses fantaisies  dechirantes   et  sa realite cruelle. Et pourtant  le monde adolescent de Marie-Claire Blais ne signifie pas  une  periode  privilegiee ou  tout  souci  materiel  s'eloigne  et  ou !'adolescent baigne  dans une chaude  lumiere. Au contraire, !'adolescent  dans le livre de Blais se trouve  emprisonne  par son milieu et  par  les exigeances  d'une  vie difficile. Il doit lutter  contre une grande pauvrete sans les armes de l'adulte  pour son combat. A cet egard, les jeux et les mauvais tours d'enfants nous laissent ici avec un senti­
ment  d'amertume. Tout  est vu  a travers  l'oeil stoi:que de l'individu  qui  accepte
la  misere du  monde  sans  jamais reussir a la  dominer.  Il  ne s'agit  pas d'adultes
mais  de  jeunes qui  ne deviennent  jamais adultes  et qui  savent  au fond  de leur coeur ce que la vie peut leur offrir. Parmi ces jeunes se distingue le personnage de Jean-Le Maigre, protagoniste du roman.
Une  question se pose immediatement si l'on  considere !'attitude pessimiste des personnages de Blais: comment  peut-on etre vaincu  par la vie a I'age de quatorze
ans sans l'etre d'une  fa<;on artificielle? Les adolescents dans ce roman ne viennent pas de cette haute  bourgeoisie proustienne  qui  envoie ses enfants  au  bord  de la mer  pour  passer l'ete. Heloise, le Septieme et Jean-Le Maigre  combattent  inces­ sament  la misere materielle. Le peu de contact  qu'ils ont avec leurs parents prete au  milieu  paysan son ton:  un  pere qui  raille inlassablernent  les livres malgre les sinceres protestations  de la Grand-Mere Antoinette. Comme Gerard  Boivin l'a si bien  rernarque: "Le  pere est mort  ou absent  moralement ... La voix d'homme n'est  qu'un   murmure."1   La  mere  nous  montre  ses  epaules  courbees,  sa  mine eternellement  triste, son sein epuise par les enfants qui ont  "tout  pris d'elle."2   Les

L'ADOLESCENT  VAINCU



parents  foumissent  aux  enfants  une image de la vie sans toutefois en parler.  lls ne sont conscients que  du travail  difficile et long, des enfants qui viennent  regu­ lierement,  d'une  vague pratique  de la religion, de la mort qui est leur ami intime. Les enfants  qui  imitent  facilement  leurs parents, et qui saississent la signification des silences, ne pourraient  guere echapper  a une telle resignation devant  la vie.
D'une  part  le milieu, sa pauvrete et sa misere, determine  la resignation qui caracterise  toute  la famille  et Jean-Le  Maigre en particulier. Ce sentiment  reste constant   pendant   que  d'autres emotions  tournent   autour   de  lui.  A  plusieurs reprises Jean  est domine  par  une  fierte d'artiste  qui  manque  toute  proportion. Ou  bien il est saisi par  une grande  incertitude  et se croit aux  bards  de l'abime. A un  autre  moment  une grande  tendresse envers son frere l'enveloppe.  A la fin cependant, la  resignation   persiste:   Jean-Le   Maigre,  poete  maudit, est  vaincu et c'est sa defaite  qui donne  au roman le droit de se dire international et etemel. Il nous reste de voir comment.
Les deux  grands  themes qui se degagent  d'une  etude sur Jean-Le  Maigre sont colores tousles deux par I'obsession de la mort. Le premier, c'est-a-dire !'influence et !'acceptation  du  milieu  paysan,  ne  traite  que  du  cycle trop  precipite  de la vie et de la mort.  Les enfants  naissent et meurent  avec une rapidite  effrayante. Ceux  qui  arrivent   a  la  vieillesse, Horace  ou  la  Grand-Mere, n'y  arrivent  que grace  a  une  tenacite  feroce.  Le second  theme, le role du  poete-Ccrivain devolu a  Jean-Le  Maigre,   illumine  et  souligne  la  resignation  fondamentale  du  pro­ tagoniste.  I1 accepte  et  poursuit  sa  vocation  d'ecrivain  en  restant  conscient  de sa propre  mort.  Il devient  artiste  malgre les obstacles du milieu, malgre sa sante chancelante, et malgre !'incertitude du succes de son oeuvre.
L'influence  du  milieu  sur  Jean  est presque sans limites. Meme  avant  !'intro­ duction  du  personnage  dans le roman,  une confrontation  entre lui et la  mort  est suggeree  a  travers  son  petit  frere  Emmanuel.  Apres avoir  termine  le  roman  ou meme  avant   (Voir  la  page  go), le lecteur  reconnait  que  le bebe  qui  vient  de naitre  represente  Jean-Le   Maigre  en petit;  il suivra les memes  chemins  que ses aines  intellectuels,  Jean  et  Leopold.  Comme  eux,  Emmanuel  obtient  la  faveur speciale  de  la  Grand-Mere Antoinette  et  il se  revelera  tout  aussi  determine   a vivre que Jean. Des le debut  Blais lui impose !'acceptation de sa tache: "11 a su que cette misere n'aurait pas de fin, mais il a consenti a vivre."
Entoure  d'une  telle famille, Jean subit un par un les echecs que connaissent ses semblables.  Toutes  les  possibilites de  leur  vie toument   en  experiences  cauche­ mardesques.  Les  routes  leur  sont  bloquees:  le  refuge  qu'ils  cherchent  dans  les institutions  les detoument de leurs buts au lieu de les y guider. Heloise commence


49

L'ADOLESCENT  VAINCU



par vouloir devenir religieuse, mais tourmentee  par ses desirs finit par devenir prostituee, sans aucun  Abelard  pour la reconforter.  Le Septieme se lance vite sur la voie du crime, passe par un "job"  en ville et finit presque etrangie  ( ou voile) 3 par  le  meme  frere  qui  avait  seduit  Jean-Le   Maigre.  Chaque effort  des autres re::mlte  dans  un echec total.  Seul Jean  qui  pousse le plus loin est conscient  des echecs.  Mais pour  lui aussi, la vie est trop  vie epuisee et il meurt  fatigue  de sa
lutte.


IL   ARRIVE QUELQUEFOIS   aux  personnages  modemes  nes dans des conditions  semblables  a celles de Jean-Le  Maigre,  de considerer  les  institu­
tions  comme  lieux  de  refuge  contre  la  vie et  contre  les maux  infliges par  leur famille. Jean Genet, a la fois auteur et personnage, est l'exemple qui vient immediatement a !'esprit: pour lui la prison prend  laplace du foyer. Pour Jean­
Le Maigre il y a plusieurs lieux de refuge: les jupes de sa Grand-Mere Antoinette, les livres, le  noviciat,  la  maison  de  correction.  II  n'y  en  a  pas  un  seul  qui  le protege  contre les blessures infligees par ses parents.  Tous  les elements du milieu
conspirent  a sa fin et malgre  ce fait  il se montre,  lui, optimiste  devant  chaque
nouvelle experience.4   II entretient  par exemple  de grands  espoirs quand  il entre au  noviciat.  Finalement  on  aura  du  respect  pour  son  intelligence.  II  pourra  se
devouer  entierement  a son travail  et "renoncer a jamais  a l'oi si ve te de  [sa]
vie."  Ses espoirs sont  vite  de us
Crapula-"entrait par la fenetre du dortoir ... avec sa robe noire, son chapeau de  fourrure sur  le front,  ses souliers  boueux  a la  main." Le  noviciat  devient,
dans une phrase que l'on cite souvent "ce jardin etrange  ou poussaient, Ia comme ailleurs, entre-melant leurs tiges, les plantes  gracieuses du  Vice et de la Vertu." L'episode  du  noviciat  est suivi  par  celui  de  l'ecole.  La  deuxieme  institution
n'offre  non  plus ni soulagement  ni encouragement  pour  le ga on
Jean  s'attend symboliquement  a se rejouir  de la  chaleur  autour d'un  poele en meme  temps  qu'il  se met  a faire  la  cour  a la  ma.itresse, Mile  Lorgnette.  Ses tentatives  n'aboutissent  a rien;  ses emotions et son intelligence  restent  enfermes
sans aucun contacte humain pour les assouvir.
Le va-et-vient  d'espoirs et de deceptions se reflete egalement  dans les reves de Jean-Le Maigre et les realites qui les dechirent.5  Les fantaisies d'une  conquete sexuelle echouent  dans  une  masturbation entre  freres.  La  precocite  des enfants
n'a  rien d'etonnant si, a nouveau,  on revient  a !'influence  du milieu. Les enfants
entendent chaque  soir "l'ennemi geant"  qui  "viole"  leur  mere et ils sont quatre

L1ADOLESCENT VAINCU



ou cinq  dans  un  meme  lit. Tout  est etroitement  lie aux  besoins physiques et un autre  reve de Jean  le prouve aussi. Dans son imagination  il conc;oit des banquets enormes, de veritables orgies de nourriture.
II y a une image  centrale  du  romain qui contient les deux aspects du  person­
nage que nous avons esquisses. C'est l'image du poete au front couronne  de poux qui   commence   l'autobiographie.  Lorsqu'il   entreprend   son  oeuvre   principale, Jean  constate:

Des rna naissance, j'ai eu le front couronne de poux! Un poete, s'ecria mon pere ... Grand-Mere, un poete!

Et  peu de temps  apres,  Heloise ajoute: "IL  EST VERT   IL  EST  VERT: ... vert comme  un celeri." Toute  l'ironie tragique  du personnage se degage de cette premiere  phrase  de  l'autobiographie. Le  milieu lui  envoie  des  poux,  une  bien triste couronne  pour  un poete, mais le melange d'images est clair. Un vrai poete aurait  le front  couronne  plutot  de lauriers. La salete du milieu aussi bien que la salete des enfants  est rapelee  par les poux. Et puis, c'est le pere qui  prononce le mot  poete. Rien  de  plus ironique  si l'on considere le role du  pere qui  consiste a toujours  s'opposer  aux  ambitions  intellectuelles et  artistiques  de ses fils.  Finale­ ment,  Jean-Le  Maigre  ajoute  sa propre  couleur ala serie des leitmotives. Ce ne sera  pas le vert des lauriers  qui  couronnera  son front, mais celui du celeri, de la paleur  lunaire,  de la  maladie  et de la mort. La fait qu'il s'agit  de celeri, legume de  la  cuisine  quotidienne, nous  rattache  encore  une  fois  au  milieu  et offre  un contraste  net avec les elements poetiques qui le suivent. La couleur s'identifie  au
poete tuberculeux  a tel point que Grand-Mere Antoinette aper(_;oit "le vert reflet
de la lune sur la neige" aux funerailles de Jean.6
Avant  d'examiner de plus pres le role de Jean-Le  Maigre en tant  qu'ecrivain, il convient de dire un mot sur les procedes litteraires de l'autobiographie.7   Comme nous venons de le voir, cette  partie  d'Une  saison met en valeur !'oeuvre  princi­ pale  du  protagoniste.  Au cours du "roman  dans le roman", Jean  retrace fidele­ ment  le deroulement  de sa vie des sa naissance jusqu'a quelques moments avant sa  mort.  Dans  le microcosme  on reconna.it une technique  chere aux  romanciers franc;ais  modernes.   Or   la  vraie  fonction   de  l'autobiographie  se  trouve  dans l'approfondissement et l'intensifaction  du monde suggere dans le reste du roman. II y a recapitulation de tous les themes:  le vice, les poux de la pauvrete,  la mala­ die, !'evasion   possible dans  l'art.   Cependant les visages  presentes  d'abord   par
!'auteur elle-meme acquierent une autre  dimension lorsque nous les confrontons
a travers le poete-adolescent.  Le cure en fournit  un bon exemple. Mile Blais avait

L'ADOLESCENT  VAINCU



deja  suggere les tendances gourmandes  du  cure quand  elle decrivait  son arrivee au  noviciat  avec  Jean:  "II  avait  tant   bu  pour  se  rechauffer,   d'un   village  a l'autre, qu'il  pouvait  a  peine se tenir  ses longues  jambes  mobiles."  Bien sur,  le cure  assiste a  la  naissance du  poete  (en  meme  temps  les funerailles  d'un  autre enfant)  mais on a !'impression  a travers  le rapportage de Jean  que sa presence ajoute  a l'ironie  de la scene. La  mere se lamente  les enfants  morts et ceux qui viendront  tandis  que le cure s'en  rejouit:  "Dieu  benit les nombreuses  families." Par  un  effet de  contraste  avec !'auteur, Jean  jouit d'une  plus grande  liberte  et d'une   plus grande  ironie dans  ses interpretations des autres.  Aussi !'intensifica­ tion  est-elle  reprise  au  niveau  stylistique.  L'autobiographie  represente  la  partie la  plus  experimentale   du  roman  pour  ce qui  est de  la  typographie, les lettres majuscules, les mots divises en syllabes, !'absence de ponctuation.8
La  vocation  de  Jean-Le   Maigre  avant  l'autobiographie est  impregnee  d'un humour   noir  profondement   moqueur.   Son  premier   poeme,  compose  dans  les latrines  (autre  lieu de refuge),  dcmontre  une conscience de sa propre  mort:

Combien funebre Ia neige
Sous le vol des oiseaux noirs ...

Ce  que  l'on  voit  dans  cet effort initial  c'est  le cote  pathetique du  romantisme avec  des  symboles  un  peu  trop  evidents.  On  a  tendance   a  oublier  que  Jean meurt  en effet dans la neige9  et que !'auteur revient aux corbeaux  dans les arbres du  cimiticre  aux  funerailles.  "Un  hiver  moral  et  physique"  affirme  Mile Blais,
constitue  le  message de l'oeuvre.1° Cependant le lecteur  n'a  gucre  le temps  ici
d'aller   jusqu'au   fond  du  pocme  en  question.  L'auteur  y  juxtapose  un  autre compose  par  le  Septieme  qui  en  detroit   tout  le  serieux:   "Mon   coeur  plein d'ordures."
A  part  sa  resignation  envers la mort,  Jean  revele d'autres aspects importants du  roman   a  travers  ses efforts  littcraires  debutants:  la  sexualite  naissante  du poeme  "A  LA CHAUDE MAITRESSE" et !'effort  consequent  du milieu  pour le detruire,  ou  bien les observations sur  sa soeur  dans  le  Portrait  d'Helo'ise qui deviendra  le "roman" d'Heloi:se. En plus, le jeune poete se preoccupe  de l'avenir de  toute  son oeuvre  et la creation  est done  souvent  liee a la destruction  mena­
<;;ante du milieu. Le tuberculeux se tourne  vers son art  pour echapper  a la misere
actuelle  et  pour  affirmer sa  revolte  contre  son  pcre.  Seule  la  grand-mere qui enlcve  les  poux  !'encourage   a  perseverer  dans  sa  vocation.  Par  ailleurs,  Jean craint  la  mort  qui  le guette  aussi bien que  les personnes qui guettent  ses ccrits.

52

L'ADOLESCENT VAINCU



Pour  se  proteger  contre  cette  eventualite  dans  l'avenir,  il confie  au  Septieme dans la cave:  "Si tu crois ... que  je m'en irai au paradis  tout doucement  comme
<sa,  avec  benediction ... J'ai   une  idee ... je vais faire  man  oeuvre  posthume !" On  voit  des debuts  litteraires  que  la  vocation  arrive  a Jean  en  riant  et  lui, il l'embrasse  avec de !'humour, mais il y tiendra  avec autant de force qu'il  tient  a
la vie elle- meme.
Jacques   Lamarche  en  parlant   de  !'alienation   chez  Marie-Claire Blais  con­
sidere  la solution  de la mort  comme un signe fondamental de cette alienation.11
Or  ce que l'autobiographie nous decouvre surtout ce sont les efforts de Jean  pour trouver  d'autres solutions  a la  vie. Il se resigne finalement   a la  mort  tout  en restant  conscient  qu'il  va  a sa  rencontre.  Les institutions  qui  doivent  servir de
refuge contre la famille et contre le froid sont developpes de l'interieur  dans l'autobiographie. Le  lecteur  ressent directement  la  terreur  d'un  gan;on  devant la  maison  de  correction  au  bien les reservations de ce meme  gar<son avant  son depart   au  noviciat.  L'auteur ne  nous  eloigne  pas par  l'emploi  de  la  troisieme personne; ce n'est plus "il" mais "je" et "nous".
L'autobiographie  detruit   systematiquement   les structures   sociales  du  milieu. Jean-Le  Maigre  critique  ouvertement  le matriarcat  en vigueur  a l'ecole a travers
les personnages  de  Mile  Lorgnette  et de la veuve Casimir.  Avec les nombreuses caricatures  du  cure  et des freres au noviciat, la religion cesse d'etre  une consola­ tion pour les adolescents.  La vie en famille forme le cadre  de l'autobiographie et son echec se reproduit  en reve impossible apres la fin du "roman dans le roman.m2
En  suivant   un  plan  circulaire  pour  ainsi  dire  qui  relie  famille,  institutions, religion,  et  famille,  l'autobiographie montre  la  vocation  de  Jean-Le  Maigre  en train de s'epanouir. Bien que le role du poete ne se detache  jamais completement de la mort, c'est un  role qui a plusieurs aspects. D'une  part  l'ecrivain  est depeint comme  prophete; Jean  prevoit les tristes fins de sa soeur et de son frere. Pour le petit  Emmanuel  il envisage  une  mort  comme la sienne. D'autre part  il est  tou­ jours solitaire et meme ses bien-faiteurs  ne peuvent  jamais lui apprendre suffisa­ ment:   "Monsieur le cure  ne put  jamais me renseigner sur les grandes verites de la vie." On  retrouve  un  autre  aspect de ce role dans  le sentiment  assez roman­ tique  que  Jean  eprouve   d'etre  incompris  par  le monde.  Il  ne  s'agit  pas  d'un  isolement total  mais d'une  alienation  du monde non-artiste.  Tout en admirant le style de Jean,  le directeur  de la maison de correction dechire ses lettres. Selon le gan;on,  "il [le  directeur]  me  reprochait  de  vouloir  attendrir  les  grandes  per­ sonnes sur mon malheur."

53

L'ADOLESCENT  VAINCU



LE POETE EST IMMORTEL, affirme Jean. Si seulement il arrive a  preserver ses oeuvres intactes des vautours  avant  la mort.  A mesure que Jean
se heurte  contre  les portes fermees de la vie, sa  conscience de la mort s'appro­ fondit.  Il semble que le feu mis a l'ecole par le Septieme  (en collaboration  avec Jean)   marque   une  demiere  etape  dans  la  lutte  du  poete  pour  la vie contre  la mort.  Les adolescents chez Blais sont obsedes par  le  pouvoir destructeur  du feu. C'est  un  effort  desespere et  anarchique pour  satisfaire  leurs  desirs et  physiques (la  chaleur)   et  spirituels  (l'amour).  L'acte  antisocial   provoque   une  reaction severe de la part  des autorites et cree une experience  des plus penibles pour Jean et le Septieme. Ils finissent a la maison de correction qualifiee de "jungle". Quand  Jean  y arrive  pour  la premiere fois il  reagit  a l'irrealite  de sa situation  et a I'in­ justice du  monde  adulte:   "Les grandes  personnes ne mettent  jamais les enfants en prison." Il aura  un sentiment pareil devant la mort.
La  maison  de correction  n'est  rien a cote de  Notre  Dame  de la  Misericorde ou  regne  "la  delinquence  en fleur."  La  violence sous la forme  de massacres et de vengeances  provoque  la terreur  chez Jean.  Il est toujours  sur d'etre  immortd mais il  reste incredule  devant  l'idee  de mourir,  tout  comme  il le fut  devant  le fait d'etre en prison. L'humour devient de plus en plus noir:

J'etais malade. Je  craignais   de  mourir. Mais  aussi,  je savais  que  cela  n'etait pas possible puisque la mort  n'est que pour les bebes et les vieillards.

Neanmoins,  une fois arrive au noviciat, il reconnait  sa fin:  "Le  Noviciat est mon tombeau ... je  pense  a  m'evader."  Les  poses  romantiques  disparaissent  et  le lecteur  commence  a se reconnaitre  dans la lutte  de Jean-Le  Maigre.  Le gar on voit approcher la  mort et il en a  peur.  En  meme  temps  il veut la refuser en se moquant  d'elle.
De toutes les parties du roman, la mort de Jean  reste l'une des plus saisissantes.
Le  jeu est termine.  Si l'on  lui  reproche  sa  precocite,  ses idees romantiques  sur l'art,  son  melange  d'adolescent  et  d'adulte, il exige qu'on  le prenne  au  serieux lorsqu'il  meurt.  Les images passent d'un  manque  d'appetit aux fruits  pourris et ala mort  des fleurs, a l'hiver et ala mort.  L'autobiographie s'acheve sur ce ton.
Si le role du  poete cesse avec la fin de son  roman,  c'est en  partie  parce que Blais se  reserve  l'apotheose  de  Jean-Le   Maigre.  Pendant le reste  du  chapitre, elle peint une vision qui a toute la grace et les rythmes d'un  ballet ou Jean  revoit les visages familiers  de sa courte  vie. Ses freres et soeurs le hantent  par  des cris mysterieux:   "Jean, viens  jouer avec  moi ... Jean,  viens me  rechauffer." Som-


54

L'ADOLESCENT VAINCU



nambule il quitte le noviciat  pour  partir vers Ia neige. II y apen;oit sa famille  et le  Septieme !'invite  a  patiner  jusqu'a Ia maison  sur  des  patins  aux  lames  d'or. Dechire   pour  Ia  demiere fois  entre  Ia realite  de sa  toux  au  des saignements de nez  et  Ia  grande fantaisie de  patiner "sans   jamais  l'avoir appris", Jean  pense trouver Ia  liberte. Le  patinage signale  le  triomphe de !'enfant sur  Ia glace,  sur l'hiver, et  sur  Ia mort.   Mais  Ia solitude  l'accable a nouveau et sur  "Ia  patinoire craquelee, tout  un  tribunal de Jesuites,  avec leurs dossiers sous le bras." Le cercle ne  serait   pas  complet sans  les representants des institutions qui  lui  refusent   un refuge   pour   Ia  demiere fois.  Eux,  ils  viennent   annoncer  "Ia  bonne   nouvelle: cette  nuit  vous  etes condamne a mort  ... Toumez-vous maintenant et baissez Ia tete."
Jean-Le  Maigre  suit   les  ordres   et  son   geste  final   de   baisser   Ia  tete,   de s'agenouiller dans  Ia neige, resume  en une phrase  l'histoire de !'adolescent vaincu. La  mort  ne  peut  pas etre  une  solution  comme  Lamarche l'a  constate parce  que "Ia  bonne  nouvelle" est  une  expression  profondement ironique. La  mort  ne fait que  supprimer les problemes sans  les resoudre.  Les visions du  paradis (famille  et amour)  aussi  bien  que  celles  de  l'enfer   (institutions et  jugements)  cessent  tout simplement d'exister.
Le   Frere   Theodule  avait   remarque  dans   Jean-Le  Maigre  au   mains   deux attributs: "sa  laideur charmante" et  "son  exquise folie".  Or  ces attributs carac­ terisent  bricvement les pales  de !'adolescent vaincu  que  nous  venons  de  degager  de ce personnage romanesque. La laideur reftcte Ia pauvrete du  milieu et Ia folie engendre d'hesitantes creations litteraires. Sans  aucun  doute  une  pareille descrip­  tion  d'un   milieu  paysan  appauvri suit les traditions du  roman  naturaliste a deux differences pres:   le salut  temporaire dans  I'art et le niveau  de  Ia bataille  contre  Ia mort.  Apres  tout, dans  le roman  haturaliste il s'agit  d'adultes chez  lesquels  Ia bataille  de  resignation et  de  lutte  se livre  entre  egaux. L'homme fait  face  a son
destin,  a Ia nature cruelle  et indifferente, a ses propres  adversaires humains. Une
saison dans la  vie d'Emmanuel decrit  une  bataille  ou les combattants ne peuvent pas  etre  egaux les  uns  pour   les  autres; !'adolescent n'est   pas  a Ia  mesure  de
l'homme. Dans  Ia demiere phrase  du  roman, Marie-Claire Blais nous  rappelle le resultat   du  combat entre   son  protagoniste et  Ia  mort:  "Oui, ce sera  un  beau printemps, disait  Grand-Mere Antoinette, mais Jean-Le Maigre ne sera  pas avec nous cette  annee ... ".

FOOTNOTES

1 Gerard-Marie Boivin, "Le  Monde  etrange  de  Marie-Claire  Blais ou  Ia cage aux fauves," Culture  XXIX, n° 1, mars 1968, p. 7·

55

L'ADOLESCENT VAINCU



2    Marie-Claire Blais, Une saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel, 6e edit.,  Editions du Jour, Montreal, I 965,  pp.  I I' I 2, 2 I. Toute reference suivante a ce texte  sera  indiquee entre  parentheses.
3   Le  passage a Ia page  127  reste  un  peu  ambigu: "Le  Septieme se reveilla  a l'aube
... 11 n'etait pas mort  comme  ill'avait cru. Ses vetements etaient a peine  dechires.
Mais  passant  Ia main  a son cou, il sentit  une  marque qui  brulait encore ... "
4   Voir  Vincent Nadeau, Le Nair et le Tendre: Une  saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel,
these  de  D.E.S.  Departement d'etudes fran aises,
de  Montreal, 1967.  Le  cote  optimiste correspond  a  ce  que  Nadeau appelle "le
tendre" chez Jean-Le Maigre.
5  A cet egard,  nous  ne sommes  pas d'accord avec !'analyse de  Nadeau (Note  3)  qui constate que  le reve  n'est  pas en conflit  avec  Ia realite  parce  que  le reve se definit en termes  de cauchemar. Nadeau, p. 46 ff.
6    Selon  Jean, le Septieme  lui  ressemble en  ce qui  concerne Ia verdeur: car  lui aussi souffrait d'une  maladie presque  fatale:  "Non   seulement  je faillis  mourir de  rna verdeur, mais  le Septieme  en herita en naissant. Preparez sa tombe,  dit  rna grand­ mere  qui  sentait deja  courir  Ia meninigite sous  ce front disgracieux,  tour  a  tour  jaune,  gris et vert, ... " (51).
7    Une  etude  est en preparation .ace  sujet  par Yvon  Morin, Le Style de Marie-Claire Blais  dans  Une   saison dans  la  vie  d'Emmanuel, Doct.,  Montreal,  1970.  II  ne serait  pas possible d'indiquer ici Ia signification  de tous les procedes  stylistiques  du roman. Les lettres  majuscules  signalent  parfois  le ton  de Ia voix  (IL EST  VERT) ou  bien les cliches  (IL  FINIRA TRES MAL) ; elles marquent egalement !'impor­ tance  de  Ia sexualite   (LORSQUE LES  LITS CRAQUENT JE  SAIS CE  QUI SE PASSE). Bref, Ia liste est a peine commencee.
8  Ce  sont  en  partie   ces procedes  stylistiques  "faciles" que  Robert Buckeye  critique dans  "Nouveau Roman Made  Easy,"  Canadian  Literature, n° 31, hiver  1967, pp.
67-69.
9   Voir  Ia derniere phrase  du  chapitre devolu  a  l'autobiographie: "Jean-Le Maigre ouvrit le col de sa chemise.  II baissa Ia tlhe. II ne lui restait  plus qu'a s'agenouiller dans Ia neige et attendre ... " ( 76) .
10   Gerard Boivin  (Note  1, pp.  16-7)  cite  une  intervue avec  Mile  Blais ou  elle parle de  ses intentions dans  Une  saison: "Ce  que   j'ai  voulu  faire  sentir,  c'est  l'hiver. River moral, hiver  physique,  Ia misere  materielle et Ia misere  morale, Ia prison  du gel et des prejuges."
11   Jacques-A. Lamarche, "La  Thematique de !'alienation chez  Marie-Claire  Blais,"
Cite libre,I 6e annee,  no" 88-89, juillet -aout  1966, pp. 29-30.
12  Ce reve avait  ete prevu sous une forme  bien plus abregee a Ia page 35·



SONGS OF THE

CANADIAN ESKIMO




Rudy Wiebe









UTHINKING ADULTS sometimes   "'k' why   bothe<  with writing or reading  poetry? After all, poetry has no real use, like developing a hog with more bacon  meat  has real use. Neither small children  nor  primitive  peoples ask for reasons to enjoy music, or dance, or poetry. They  recognize what  western adults  seem to  have  had  drilled  out  of them:   that  human  beings must  and  do live as much  by  rhythm   and  symbol  as  by  the  tangible  things  that  surround them.  Man  does  not,  like every other  animal,  merely gorge  and  rest  and  pro­ create;  he also has ideas, feelings for friendship  and community,  sometimes even beliefs. These,  rather   than  merely  eating  and  being  comfortable, make  him  a human  being.
Sixty years ago the Eskimos of northern  Canada  were still a primitive  people. They  had  developed  great  skill in  finding  food and  staying  warm  in  an  over­ powering,  ruthless  land,  but,  much  more,  they had  survived  as human  beings. This,  not simply  their  animal  survival  in  a dreadful  climate,  impressed  anthro­  pologists like Franz  Boas (I 88o's)  and explorers like J. B. Tyrrell  (I 8go's). They found  that  the complete  Eskimo man  was not only a skilful  hunter  but  also an accomplished  singer  and  dancer; to be continually  outsung  and  outdanced was as shaming  as to be continually  outhunted. This  paper  is intended  to be a brief introduction  to  such  classic  Eskimo song  and  poetry-"classic" in  the  sense that  it was unaffected  by western rhythins and  images, as Eskimo song since the record  player  and  particularly the transistor  radio is not.
Between  I9I2 and  I925 both  Knud  Rasmussen of  DenmarP and  Diamond
Jenness  of  Canada2    lived  for  years  with  the  Eskimos of  Greenland   and   the


57

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO



Canadian Arctic and, among other activities, wrote down many of their songs. Jenness'  work is particularly  useful to someone  who knows no Eskimo;  not only does his printed  report contain  line by line phonetic  transcription, English  trans­ lation,   and  musical  notation  by  H.  H.  Roberts  of  some  one  hundred  songs collected from the Coppermine  Eskimos in I 9I 4-I 6, but in the National Museum at  Ottawa are  preserved the wax cylinders he made  of the  people singing these very  songs.3    These  invaluable   recordings   (somewhat   scratchy,   but   amazingly clear considering Jenness's stories of trying to record in snow houses while his wax kept  hardening  prematurely)   are  vivid  examples  of   primitive  song;   they  are strange,  beautiful  in words, rhythm,  melody.
The  recorded  songs are not difficult to follow if the Jenness-Roberts  report  is studied;   this  is so  even  if  one  does  not  understand  any  Eskimo.  Indeed,   as Rasmussen  explains   (his  mother  was  Eskimo  and   he  spoke  it  as  his  native tongue) ,  understanding the  language  is no  necessary  help  in  understanding  a song  because,  as  with  all  primitive  peoples,  the  subjects  are  their  day-to-day activities. Eskimo groups are very small;  members know everything  that  happens to everyone included, so the Eskimo poet may with one key word recall a striking occurrence   for  his  group,  and  an  outside  listener,  though   he  knows  Eskimo perfectly, will not understand  the overtones that  echo to give it depth.  For Eskimo poetry,  like our  own,  tries to convey the  most  vivid sensations  with  the  fewest words possible.
For  us, then,  appreciation  of Eskimo song must  be based on its rhythmic  line and its repetition of word and refrain;  this appreciation  is helped by the fact that, as with all primitive songs, the verse was composed in the mind  alone and  not in writing.  Further, songs were carried  about  in  the  memory,  not on  paper, some­ times for generations.  Like all unwritten  poetry, they work for  immediate  rhyth­ mic and  sound  effects:  they need  not  be studied  for  complex inter-weaving  of image, though strangely enough, that too is there  more often  than  not.
Very simply, we could speak of two kinds of Eskimo song:  prayers, which are private, and festival songs, which are very much  public. To speak of prayer songs first:  Eskimos believe that  the first songs of  mankind   were spirit  songs; 4   when an Eskimo sings, he is attuned  to that  great  primeval song and  his prayer  draws power  from  it.   If petitioned  correctly  through   private   prayer  songs,  certain familiar  spirits  will help  humans  in specific  trouble.  The   prayers  to  call  them are  private  property -sometimes passed on  to an  heir at  the  moment  of death
-and are  used only by the  person to whom  they have  come, often  in  a  great
moment  of  vision. Jenness  records  a  three-part  weather   incantation5    sung  by

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



Hagunjag, a Coppermme woman;  it begins with the singer speaking of herself in the  third  person  (he)   pleading  with  her familiar  spirit  (thou)   to come to  her
aid:

Come,  he says, thou outside  there; come,  he says, thou  outside  there, Come,  he says, thou  outside  there; come, he says, thou  outside  there. Thy  Sivoangnaq he bids thee  come,
Telling thee  to enter  him.
Come,  he says, thou  outside  there.

With a slight variation  of tune,  the prayer becomes more personal:

Only  come,  only come, Only  come,  only come.
I stretch out  my hands  to them  thus.
Only  come,  only come.                     (repeated)

Finally, with another  variation  in tune, the spirit answers through  the voice of the one  praying:


I come  again, I again,
I come  again, I, dost thou  not know?

I come  again, I again.
 

(repeated)


Rasmussen gathered  some more complex prayer words, though  his translations must be accepted  with  the  knowledge that  he tends  (in  contrast  to Jenness)  to "fill  out"  the  prayers  in  terms  of  what  he  considers  more  intelligible  poetry. Words to make heavy things light  (that  is, on the trail) :

I will walk  with  the leg muscles which  are  strong
as the  sinews of the shins of the  little  caribou calf.
I  will  walk  with  leg muscles which  are  strong
as the  sinews of the shins of the  little  hare. I will take  care  not to go towards the  dark. I  will go towards the day.

Words  to a sick child:

Little child! Your mother's breasts are  full of milk. Go  and  be  nursed,
Go and  drink!
Go  up  to  the  mountain!


59

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO



From the summit of the mountain you shall seek health, You shall draw life.

Words to stop  bleeding:

This is blood from the little sparrow's mother. Wipe it away!
This is blood
That  flowed from a piece of wood. Wipe it away!6

The  latter  prayer  demonstrates  the  poet's  absolute  faith  in  the  power  of  the word  (Eskimo is an  agglutinative language  and  most of the lines consist of only one  word,  despite  the  necessary translation   length) : he  must  be  capable   of believing that  a piece of dry wood, the driest thing  he knows, can  actually shed warm  red blood. Only if he believes will the spirit  come and  the bleeding stop.
These are the prayer songs:  simple, repetitious,  beautiful; one cannot  listen to the Jenness recordings without feeling the fervent  depths  to which the prayer,  in chant  melody and  rhythm,  carries the singer. But the glory of Eskimo humanity is their  great  festival songs. Rasmussen  describes  the  most  beautiful  custom  in a land of darkness and cold:  when in their wanderings  one group  meets another, they  build  a  festival  house, and  sing  and  dance.  Everyone  has  a  song;  to  be outsung is as bad  as to be outhunted. Though  there  are several modes of  perfor­ mance,  the  most  common   is  that   the  men  form   a  circle,  the   women   and ohildren kneel on the snowbench at the back, the singer  (either  man or woman)  holds the huge sealskin drum  in one hand  and,  beating  on its rim,  dances slowly around  the circle in time to his own beat, composing on the spot as he moves and sings. The  audience  sways as the emotion and  rhythm  mounts in the tight snow­ house, joining in after  every verse on the refrain  of  "ayayaya-ayaya". Under  the long oppression of polar night, Eskimos say these festivals are what keep them sane.  Rasmussen  tells how they  may continue  for  twelve  or  sixteen  hours  at  a stretch;  as soon as one singer is exhausted, another leaps into  the ring, seizes the drum,  and breaks into his or her song and vision. Here  is one by Aijuk, "A  Dead Man's  Song",  composed from a dream  by his friend  Paulinaoq:

I am filled with joy
Whenever the dawn rises over the earth
And the great sun
Glides up in the heavens. Aja-aja-ja

6o

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO



But  at  other  times
I lie in  horror and  dread
Of  the  creeping numberless  worms
That eat  their  way  in  through hollowed  bone
And  bore  eyes away.

In fear  I lie, remembering:
Say,  was it so beautiful on  earth? Think of  the  winters
When we were  anxious For  soles to our  footwear Or  skins  for  our  boots: Was  it  so beautiful?

In fear  and  in  horror  I lie,
But  was I not always troubled  in mind, Even  in the  beautiful summer,
When   the  hunting failed,
And  there  was dearth of skins For  clothing and  sleeping? Was it  so  beautiful?

In fear  and  in  horror  I lie
But  was  I not  always  troubled   in  mind
When  I stood  on the  sea ice Wretched  beyond  measure Because  no fish would  bite? Or  was it so beautiful
When  I flushed  with shame  and  dismay
In the  midst  of the  gathering, And  the  chorus  laughed
Because  I forgot  my song and  its words? Was  that  so beautiful?
Say, was it so beautiful on earth? Here, I am  filled with  joy
Whenever the  dawn  rises over  the earth
And  the  great  sun
Glides  up in the  heavens.
But  at  other  times
I lie in  horror and  dread
Of  the  creeping  numberless worms
That eat  their  way in through hollowed  bone
And  bore  eyes away.7
Aja-aja-ja.

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO


Or  this dance  song by Nitanatciaq, reviewing  all the  things  that  give her  joy: He was in a state of rejoicing,
The  fishing-line jigging it properly. ai ye yai ya

Refrain:
i yaj ai ye yaji ya
ai ye yaji yaj i yai ya

The  fishing-line when it sank right  down, His line too he pulled it right up.

(Refrain)

He was in a state of rejoicing,
The  caribou  weapon  [arrow]   flying straight.

(Refrain)

The  arrow when it flew, The  arrow  it struck  home.

He was in a state of rejoicing,
The  weapon for getting broth  [sealing harpoon] being hurled  down.

(Refrain)

He was in a state of rejoicing,
The  weapon for getting broth being let down.

(Refrain)

The  weapon for getting  broth  when it was hurled  down, His stinking seal he drew right  up.
Ai ye yai ya i yai ya8




IN THE  FESTIVAL HOUSE Eskimos  find  not  only  joy, but  also
social  release. If someone  has  angered   you, here  you  insult  him  to  his face  with
a  satiric  song;  then  he leaps  into  the  ring  and  insults  you.  Everyone laughs  as the abuse  piles higher,  and  in the laughter hard  feelings vanish. This custom  may help  explain   why  the  subject of  war  is unknown in  Eskimo   poetry:  they  work out   their   hatred in  songs,  not,  like  "civilized" peoples,   by  mass  killings.  The subject of  love  between  man  and  woman  is also entirely  lacking, which  under­ lines  again  how  totally  non-western Eskimo  song  is.

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO



Their songs  tell of their  daily  life:  hard  travel,  hunting, building snow  houses, the  festivals  themselves. Using   a  kind  of  kenning,   they  sing  of  hunting "the bearded one" -the seal,  or  "the careless  dweller  of  the  plains" -the  caribou. The greater his feat  of hunting, the more modest the singer  can  be about  it  (since everyone  knows  the  actual facts)   and  only  brief  words  are  thrown out  to allow the chanting chorus' imagination to work. So Aua sings his bear song of a struggle that lasted  an  entire  day  and  in the  last verse takes a poke  at  the  braggarts who everyone  knows  have  less to sing  about:

It chanced  that  I caught  sight of one wearing  the skin of a bear out in the drifting  pack ice. ajajaija  aja  ajaija.

It came not threateningly. Turning about
was the only thing that  seemed to hamper  it. ajajaija aja  ajaija.

It wore out  its strength  against  me, And  I thrust  my lance
into its body. ajajaija  aja  ajaija. ajajaija  aja  ajaija.

I call this to mind
Merely because they are ever breathing self-praise,
Those  neighbours  of ours to the south and  to the  north.9

Examining  many   Jenness  songs  shows   that   a  basic  song   technique  is  to compare two  differing activities   that   raise  the  same  emotion.  In  the  following song  by Kunana the  fear  of  not  being  able  to  build  a  snow  house   (a  life-and­ death matter on the barrens) is compared to the fear of having  to dance  (i.e. lead in a song)  and  not doing  it skilfully;  the two belong together in a further  aspect: both  seem  to share the  added physical  difficulty  of taking  place  in  too  crowded
a  circle:

It terrifies me here
On  hearing  the loud sound, that one, Of Singittoq's  drum.
ai yai ya hai yai yai ya he yai yi ya qa
ye yi ya qa

THE  CANADIAN ESKIMO



How I am I going to move about  [in  dancing]?
A greater space than  this one it being hard  to find? It terrifies me here
On hearing the loud sound, that  one. Qingaloqana and  Katuttaq.

(Refrain)

How I am I to move about? Just  think.  That   thing,
My lower circle of snow-blocks I hardly
know how to build it.
I continue  nevertheless without  stopping.
Here, too, on the  floor here.

(Refrain)

How am I to move about? It terrifies me here
On  hearing the loud sound, that  one. Tamarsuin and  Iviutaq.

(Refrain)

How I am I to move about? Just think. That  one, that  one,
My lower circle of snow-blocks I hardly
know how to build  it.
I continue  nevertheless without  stopping.
Here, too, in the  tent  here.

(Refrain)

How I am I to move about ?10

A slightly  more  elaborate use  of such  comparison is found in  the  following Copper Eskimo  song;  the  difficulty of drawing the  heavy  horn  hunting-bow and shooting the  arrow  straight is compared to  the  difficulty  of pulling  a song-theme
into  place:

He constantly bends it, he constantly  sends it straight; So the big bow, he constantly  sends it straight. Refrain:  He  constantly  bends it,
He constantly bends it.

Just as he seeks well for words in a song,
The  big bow, he constantly  sends it straight.

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



He constantly bends it, He constantly bends it.

He constantly bends it as he walks along, In summer as he walks along.
He  constantly bends it,
He constantly bends it.

It is clearly easy to shoot big birds, As he carries his pack walking along. He constantly bends it,
He  constantly  bends it.U

Some  of  the  songs  are  more  philosophic,  as suits  the  nature of  the  individual singer.  Rasmussen tells  how  at  Repulse   Bay  an  old  Iglulik   man,   lvaluardjuk, "whose   joyous  days  of  life  were  long  since  over  and   past", sang   his  song  of remembrance while  his  wife  chanted in  the  background  a  few  notes  repeated again  and  again:

Cold  and  mosquitoes, These  two pests
Come  never  together.
I lay me down on the ice,
Lay me down  on the snow and  ice, Till  my teeth  fall chattering.
It is I,
Aja-aja  ja.

Memories are  they, From  those  days, From  those  days, Mosquitoes swarming From  those days,
The  cold is bitter,
The  mind  grows dizzy As I  stretch  my limbs Out  on the ice.
It is I,
Aja-aja-ja.

Ai! but  songs
Call  for strength
And  I seek after  words. I, aja-aja-ja.

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



Ai! I seek and spy
Something to sing of,
The caribou with the spreading antlers!

And strongly I threw
The  spear with my throwing stick. And my weapon fixed the bull
In the hollow of the groin
And it quivered with the wound
Till it dropped
And was still.

Ai! but songs
Call for strength.
And I seek after words.
It is I,
Aja, aja-haja-haja. 12

However,  when  Rasmussen tried  to question  the  patriarch about  his view of the world,  he  found  reserve. Men,  Ivaluardjuk felt,  knew  so  little  of  things  apart from their food and sleep and  rest; it might  easily seem presumptuous  if they endeavoured   to form  any opinion  about  hidden  things.  Happy  folk should  not worry  themselves by thinking.
Such  complete  surrender  to  joy is found  in  a  dance  song  Jenness  records, composed and sung by Higilaq, a Coppermine  woman.  If a record were possible with this essay, this is the song I would include;  it is as beautiful,  as enchanting as any song  I  have  ever heard,  and  the  hundreds  of  people  for  whom  I have played  it  have  invariably  agreed.  The  song  describes  the  points  of  travel  the composer  and  her  husband  touched  in  making  their  yearly  round  of living. It begins in  a strange  surrealism,  moves to  a  refrain  whose  burden  syllables help you  catch   the  basic  song  rhythm,  and   at  several  points  crests  an  incredible ecstatic  cry  of sheer  happiness  which  only  a  natural  (or  highly-trained   opera singer)  could  physically produce.

Wishing to begin to walk Wishing to begin to walk e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e yana
Wishing to begin to walk
To Kuluksuk I proceeded to walk. e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e yana

66

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



My stomach [ ?] when  it was empty  within  me
To  Kuluksuk I proceeded  to walk. e ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

[Lake]  Uluksaq when  I reached   at  last
The lake  trout I pulled  out  one after  another. eye ye yane  (hu  hu hu  hu  hu hu)
e yana

Wishing to  begin  to walk Wishing to begin  to walk. e ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

Wishing to begin  to walk
To  the  Kugaryuaq [river] I proceeded to walk. e ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

[Mt.]  Aptaloq on  the  road  that  seemed  to lead  to it
To  the  Kugaryuaq [river] I  proceeded  to walk. e ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

To  the  Kugaryuaq [river] when  I reached at  last
To  Utkusiktaq too  I  reached  at  last e ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

To  Utkusiktaq when  I  reached  at  last
Thoughtlessly I did  not  go and  finish  them  [the  stone  pots]. eye ye yana  (hu  hu hu  hu hu  hu)
e  yana

Wishing to begin to walk
To  Asiak  I proceeded  to walk. e  ye ye yane  ye ye ya
e yana

Bull  caribou, though thinking I should  see many, Because  I had  no bow  I  was  unable  to  do  anything. e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e  yana

Wishing to begin  to walk
Wishing to  begin  to walk.

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



e ye ye yane ye ye ya e yana

Wishing to begin to walk
To  Aqoviyaq I proceeded  to walk. e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e yana

The  sealers though  they hauled  up many seals,
The  one seal I obtained  I could  not procure  a companion  to it. e ye ye yane ye ya
e yana

Wishing to begin to walk
To  the land  behind  [northward] I proceeded  to walk. e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e yana

The  thought  entered  my mind,  Apiana  [man's  name?] Expecting to meet him I proceeded  to walk.
e ye ye yane ye ye ya e yana

What  is this, this here,  the  thought  that  enters  my mind?
His sled it caused him  to be exceedingly angry  [because it  upset]. e ye ye yane ye ye ya
e yana

And I then having  no possessions [on  the sled]
Since I did  not become angry  I laughed  aloud  at  it!
e ye ye yana e ye ye ya.13

The   word  "inspiration" does  not,  apparently, exist  in  Eskimo; lvaluardjuk 14 was astonished  when Rasmussen explained to him that only certain  persons were considered poets  in  the  white  man's  world.  For  the  Eskimo  to  be  "inspired" is simply  to "feel emotion", and  therefore all human beings  are  poets in the  Eskimo sense  of  the  word.  But it  is true  that  sometimes  special  people  are  visited  by  a truly  great  emotion   (Rasmussen gives an example of a woman seeing a meteor); these  people  (for  the  rest of their  lives)  are  then  capable of composing especially memorable songs like Higilaq's quoted  above.  Perhaps the  most  profound  state­ ment  on  Eskimo  song composition  comes from  the  Nesilik man  Orpingalik :

Songs are  thoughts,  sung out  with  the  breath  when  people  are  moved  by great forces and  ordinary  speech no longer suffices. Man  is moved  just like the ice-floe sailing  here  and  there  out  in  the  current.  His  thoughts  are  driven  by a  flowing

68

THE CANADIAN ESKIMO



force  when  he  feels  joy, when  he  feels fear,  when  he  feels sorrow.  Thoughts can wash  over  him  like a flood,  making his breath  come in gasps  and  his heart  throb. Something like an  abatement in  the  weather will keep  him  thawed up.  And  then it  will happen that  we, who  always  think  we are small,  will feel still smaller.  And we will fear  to use words.  But  it will happen that  the  words  we need  will come of themselves.  When   the  words  we  want  to  use shoot  up  of  themselves-we get  a new song.1fi

It is time, I feel, that  we began exploring this Arctic heritage  of "new songs".


FOOTNOTES

1 Rasmussen's findings  are  published in many  articles  and  books. Those most readily available are:  Across  Arctic   America, New  York,   I927; The  Netsilik   Eskimos, Copenhagen, 193I; Report   on the  Fifth  Thule Expedition 1921-24, v. VII, #I: Intellectual Culture of the  Iglulik   Eskimos, Copenhagen, I929; and  a  collection of poems  drawn from  these  sources:  Beyond  the  High  Hills,  Cleveland, Ig6I.
2   Diamond Jenness: Canadian Arctic  Expedition 19I3-I8, v. XIV: Eskimo  Songs, Ottawa, 1925;  with  H.  H.  Roberts.
3   The Folklore  Division  has  now  transcribed these to  tapes  and  makes  copies  avail­
able  to bona  fide researchers.
4    Rasmussen (lglulik,  p.  234)   conjectures that  originally  all  Eskimo  song  was  for magic  purposes, quoting  as  evidence   the  special,  ancient,  vocabulary sometimes used in song  that  is never  used in daily  life, and  also whole  song  fragments of  no intelligible meaning passed  on  as legacy among  the  lglulik Eskimos.
5   Jenness: Songs  #g6 (IV,  C, 63a), #97 (IV,  C, 63b), #93  (IV,  C. 63b).
6   Rasmussen, Iglulik  ... , p.  I66-67.
7   Rasmussen, Across ... , p. 264-6.
8   Jenness,  Song  # 25  (IV,  C,  goa).
9   Rasmussen, Iglulik  ... , p.  237-38.
10  Jenness,  Song# g  (IV,  C, g6b).
11  Ibid., Song  #52 (IV,  C,  33).
12  Rasmussen, lglulik.. , p.  18-19.
13  Jenness,  Song  #I (IV,  C, 8o).
14   Rasmussen, Iglulik  .. . , p.  233-34.
15  Rasmussen, Netsilik  ... , p. 321.












6g



COYOTE AS TRICKSTER IN THE DOUBLE HOOK


Leslie Monkman


EA  SMALL  BOOK, Sheila  Watwn's The  Double Hook con­
tains so many  implications  and  allusions that  some readers  have come to regard
it as a prose-poem.1 Some elements in the book's structure have already  been examined2  but the figure of Coyote, one of the most intriguing  sources of mystery and  meaning,  has  been  relatively ignored.  Yet it  would  appear  that  Coyote  is based  upon  an  ancient  and  widespread  mythic  personality  serving  as the  very focus for the establishment of a new moral and social order.
In  The  Trickster: A Study  In  American  Indian  Mythology, Paul  Radin  has
noted the prevalence  of a trickster-figure in the myths of both Eastern and  West­ em  cultures.  In  discussing the manifestations  of this figure in  Amerindian folk­ lore, Radin  says:

In what  must  be regarded as its earliest  and  most  archaic form,  as found  among the  North   American Indians, Trickster is at  one  and  the  same  time,  creator and destroyer, giver  and  negator,  he who dupes  others  and  who  is always  duped  him­ self ... He  possesses no values,  moral  or social,  is at  the  mercy  of his  passions  and  appetites, yet  through his actions  all values  come  into  being ... Trickster himself is,  not  infrequently, identified   with  specific  animals such  as  raven,  coyote,  hare,  spider, but  these animals  are only secondarily to be equated  with concrete animals. Basically, he possesses no well-defined  form. 3

Watson's  Coyote  embodies  many  of  the  qualities  outlined  here.  In  his role as amoral  "giver  and  negator"  he has driven  the  community  into silence and sub­ mission. Yet Coyote, "plotting to catch the glory for himself is fooled", and in the face  of  the  seduction  and  death  which  he  has inspired,  comes a  new  sense of meaning and integration.
In  the  opening  lines of  Watson's  book, each  character is introduced   "under Coyote's  eye".  However,  his presence  does  not  rest  at  the  level of  an  unseen divinity;  indeed,  the whole landscape  is presented  as embodying  his immediacy.

THE DOUBLE HOOK



A harbinger of sterile east winds, "Coyote made the land  his pastime.  He stretched out  his  paw.  He   breathed on  the  grass.  His  spittle  eyed  it  with  prickly  pear." While  such  a stringent environment where  "the men lay like sift in the cracks  of the  earth" has  excluded the  concept  of a loving  and  compassionate deity  for the inhabitants, they  have  easily adopted the Indian's belief in a force which is mani­ fested daily in the blood-curdling howls of the prairie-wolf.
Initially,  Mrs.   Potter is the  figure  most  closely associated   with  Coyote.  The
thoughts of  fear  and  death which  she  inspires  before  and  after  her  murder are linked  with  the  community's adoption of a belief in the  Indian deity. Thus, when Ara  investigates the  river  bank  where she saw the old lady's  spectre, she finds the paw  mark  of a coyote.  In  a similar  vein,  the  passive herd  cows "turn their  tails to her and stretch  their  hides tight."
Mrs. Potter has rebelled  against  the will of God:

If God  had  come  into  the  valley, come holding out  the  long finger of salvation, moaning  in  the  darkness,  thundering down  the  gap  at  the  lake  head ... asking where,  asking  why, defying  an  answer, she would  have  thrown  her  line against the  rebuke.

In  her  defiance, she  unwittingly allies herself with  Coyote,  who functions here  in
Satanic opposition to Old  Testament Jehovah.
The parallel   operating between   the  defiance   of  the  old  lady  and  Jonah  is clearly  developed. Ara  reflects  the  dejection  of the  community as she  recalls  the history  of  Nineveh :

Even God's eye could  not spy out  the men lost here already, Ara thought.  He had looked mercifully  on  the people of Nineveh though  they did  not know their  right hand  and  their  left.  But  there  were not enough  people here  to attract  his  atten­ tion. The cattle were scrub cattle.

She  later  envisages  "the old  lady, lost like Jonah perhaps in the cleft  belly of the rock,  the  water  washing over  her."  After  his penitence in the  belly of the  whale, Jonah  accepted  God's  will  and   warned   the   people   of  Nineveh.  A  merciful Jehovah decrees :
I spare  Nineveh, that  great  city, wherein are more than  sixscore thousand  persons
that  cannot  discern  between  their  right hand  and their  left hand; and  also much cattle.4

Similarly, Mrs.  Potter could  have  effected  the salvation of the  community if she had  allied  herself  with  God's  will and  functioned as a benevolent matriarch and

THE DOUBLE HOOK



spiritual guide.  However, she  defies the  light  of  God  with  her  own  lamp, and her fish bring neither sustenance nor salvation to the community.



ALTHOUGH COYOTE po._<;sesses the  power  to incite individuals against  God,  he is clearly  lower  on the scale  of deity  in The  Double  Hook.  Kip comments that   neither James   nor  his  mother realizes  that   "Coyote, plotting to catch   the  glory  for  himself  is fooled  and  everyday fools  others." The   old  lady forgets  that   her  defiance  does  not  alter  God's  control over  life and  death, and thus  Coyote  carries  her away  "like a rabbit  in his mouth." Coyote,  of course, will be  fooled  when  suicide,  seduction and  matricide lead  not  to  despair   but  to  an affirmation of faith  and  love. Even the old lady shares  in the changes  which  come to the community. Felix describes her last appearance by the creek:

I saw James  Potter's old mother  standing  by my brown pool, he said. I was think­ ing  of  catching  some fish for  the  lot  of us.  But  she wasn't  fishing he said. Just standing like a tree with its roots reaching out to water.

As the  rest of the  community undergoes  renewal, water  assumes  its proper sym­
bolic value for Mrs. Potter  as well.
Although Kip  recognizes  both  the  power  and   weakness  of Coyote,  he  too  is finally  "fooled". Mrs.  Watson's short  stories offer  a  possible explanation of Kip's crucial  vulnerability in spite  of his unique  awareness. At  the  end  of "The Black Farm", Uncle  Daedalus announces:

Ghede  has already  chosen me, he said, the eternal  figure in black ... death  at the cross-roads. He  stands  at  the  intersection  of time  and  eternity.  He is corpse and phallus,  king and  clown. He introduces men to their  own devil. He is the last day of the week and  the cross in every cemetery. He sings the song of the grave-digger.5

The   reference   here  is to  the  Guede  figures  of  Haitian voodoo.  As  this  passage indicates, the  members   of  the  Guede  family  are  represented as spirits  of  death and  guardians of cemeteries.  Although they  inspire  fear  because  of their associa­ tions  with  death, they  also serve as obscene  jesters:  thus,  the  reference to  phallus  and  clown.
Just  as  Coyote  and  God  both  play  a  role  in  the  spiritual landscape of The
Double  Hook,  practitioners of Haitian voodoo  have  no  difficulty  in assimilating beliefs in their  gods with  the  creed  of the  Roman Catholic church. The  Christian God  is regarded as the supreme deity  while  the  voodoo  gods  provide  simple  ex-

72

THE DOUBLE HOOK



planations  for  daily   occurrences.  The   conception  of  these  spmts is  anthropo­ morphic as seen in the  description of Guede. "By conceiving his spirits as in man­ ner  and  desires  resembling himself, the  Haitian can  understand  his little  universe  without subjecting himself  to  the  bewilderment  which  faces  a simple  Christian, trying  to reconcile  an all-loving Father with the obvious evil he allows on earth."6
The  parallels  with Coyote's role in The  Double Hook are evident.
The  power  of these  voodoo  gods to possess their worshippers has special appli­ cation   to  Kip's behaviour. "When  a  god  seizes a  man,   he  'mounts'  him;  the possessed  person   forthwith  becomes  the  god's   'horse' ... The   person  mounted does  nothing of  his own  accord  while  he is possessed."7   This  concept  is  alluded to in  Watson's "Antigone":  "My father ruled  men  who  thought they were  gods or  the  instruments of gods  or  at  the  very least,  god-affected and  god-pursued."8
Kip's  role as an  agent  for Coyote's  designs is made  explicit  when  Ara and  Felix hear  Coyote  crying  through the  thunder, "Kip, my servant, Kip." Although he is aware that  Coyote  practises  his duplicity by "reaching out  reflected  glory. Like a  fire  to  warm. Then shoving   the  brand between  a  man's teeth  right  into  his belly's pit," Kip  is drawn to attempt to seduce  Lenchen  and  to deliberately taunt and   antagonize James. Later,  Kip   justifies  his  behaviour by saying: "The  old white  moon  had  me  by the  hair." This  comment is closely related  to an  earlier description of Kip  just before the crucial events leading  to his blinding:

He stood on the  doorstep  looking at  the moon. Stood roped  to  the ground  by his weight  of flesh. Reaching  out  to the white  tongue of moonlight  so that  he might swing  up  to  the  cool mouth.  Raising  his hand  to  the  white  glory for  which  he thirsted.

Kip  seems  to  have  no  more  control  over  his faculties  in  this  scene  than  the possessed victim  of the  Haitian voodoo  god.  In  his uncontrollable thirst  for  the illusory  "reflected  glory"  of  god-like  perception and  control, Kip  is  victimized by  Coyote,   just  as  Mrs.  Potter was. When  he is alone  in  the  barn with  James, Kip  thinks: "He's only  to loose the force  in  his own  muscles", but  his prudence has  deserted   him  and   by  mis-judging James, he loses his sight.  Kip's  complete forgiveness  of James can  also  be accounted for  by his recognition that  an  extra­ human power  was  operating: "I keep  thinking about  James ... I kept  at  him like a dog till he beat around the way a porcupine beats with his tail."
While  James is the  cause  of both  his mother's death  and  Kip's  loss of sight,  he is also  the  principal victim  of these  agents  of Coyote's  will. Images of eyes and seeing  are   used  to convey  the  intimidation  which  moves  James and   Greta to

73

THE DOUBLE HOOK



desperation.  "Eyes. Eyes and  padded  feet. Coyote moving in rank-smelling." The link  between  James'  fear  and  this  constant  surveillance  is reiterated  in  his cry when  he  blinds Kip:   "If you were God  Almighty, if you'd  as many  eyes as a spider,  I'd  get  them  all."  Like his mother,  James  defies both  God  and  nature. However,  while the old lady's defiance and denial ended  in death,  James lives to share  in the community's  renewal.  Coyote's song extolling the peace of passivity and  death  only reminds James  of the confinement  of death  and  like Europa  in "The Black Farm", he realizes that  "no  one ever found  abundance of life in a six-foot plot."9
Greta  believes that she has been freed of her mother's  bonds by James'  revolt but she learns that such vicarious release is impossible. When she finally comes to defy her  mother's  spectre as she prepares for her suicide, she sacrifices herself to Coyote:

And Coyote cried in the hills I've taken her where she stood my left hand is on her head
my right hand embraces

The  sexual innuendo  in these lines is linked not only with Greta's  repression but also with a recurring image of Coyote's excessive sensuality in many Indian  myths. He functions as the great seducer both to sex and death.
In  the  destruction  of Greta's  suicide,  Ara  sees new  hope  for  an  end  to  the purgatorial existence of the  community.  Earlier,  she envisages God:   "the  glory of his face shaded  by his hat.  Not coaxing  with a pan of oats, but coming after you with  a whip  until you stand  and  face him in the end."  William is quick to point  out  that  this  conception  "sounds  only a step  from  the  Indian's Coyote." While  William,  like Theophil,  is sufficiently sophisticated   to  reject  the  god  of Indian  myth, his self-enclosed mind cannot admit  any higher conception of deity. "I've never seen God, he said, but if I did, I don't  think  I'd  be much surprised." Mter  Greta's  suicide, however, Ara has a vision of a renewed  world conveyed in Christian  symbols:

Everything shall live where the river comes, she said out loud. And she saw a great multitude of fish, each fish springing arched through the slanting light.

Coyote delivers a typical benediction  on the attractiveness  of death  but now Ara sees him as a simple prairie-wolf "on  a jut of rock calling down over the ledge." Thus,  she  conclusively  reduces  the  power  which  the  crippling  superstition   of death-dealing Coyote has had over her.

74

THE DOUBLE HOOK



The Widow Wagner, with her many invocations to God, shares Ara's earlier conceptions of a deity of vengeance and justice:

Dear God, she cried. Then she stopped. Afraid that he might come.
Father of the fatherless. Judge of widows. Death and after death the judgement.

Finally,  maternal instincts  mingled  with  a  strong  fear  of  the  judgement  after death  move  her  to  participation in the  redemptive  process centred  on the birth of her grand-child.
Angel interrupts one of the  Widow's many  profane invocations  with "There's no use wailing on God."  She views the latter's  conceptions as inapplicable  to the way of life imposed on the community  by the stringent environment and replaces these ideas with a stronger  belief in Coyote than  we see in any other individual. Her  meaningful  role in the community  is maintained  by relegating Coyote to the status  of "meddler'' where  the  Indians  originally placed  him.  Angel's  world is not  particularly   complex,  and  when  she  has  problems  or  doubts  she  assumes Coyote as the cause. Like the voodoo gods, Angel's Coyote offers simple explana­ tions  for  daily  occurrences.  The  daily frustrations  imposed  on  her  in  the  com­ munity  are  viewed as "spirits  let out of a sack ... by the meddler  Coyote." The reference  here  is to  Indian   myths  which  relate  that  the  world  was  originally created  as an Eden until Coyote released from a sack the spirits of fatigue, hunger and  disease. In  spite of her  pessimism regarding  a benevolent deity or the  possi­ bility of communal  action  and  responsibility, Angel will  provide  the  pragmatic  element essential to the achievement of those same concepts.

IF ANGEL  stands  as the  epitome  of positive practicality,  her husband  Felix  clearly  engenders  the spiritual  affirmation  evident  at  the  end  of her book. Felix rejects the oblivion offered by Coyote's promise of forgetfulness in
retreat  and  death   by  reiterating,   "I mustn't  forget."  Instead,  having  accepted Lenchen  and  Kip  into  his house, he assumes his communal responsibilities and asks Angel to return. Thus,  he picks up the troubles which William accused him of  leaving  on  other  people's  doorsteps. As he  comforts  Lenchen  in  childbirth, Felix reflects that  he may begin again with the help of remembered  phrases from the Christian  liturgy. Kip's  pain and the birth of his namesake break through  the "huge  indifference" in which Felix previously cloaked himself. The  other charac­ ters, conditioned  by their  sterile relationships with each  other  and  with the land can only conceive of God in terms of either Coyote or the just but cruel patriarch

75

THE DOUBLE HOOK



of the  Old  Testament. Felix functions as an  illustration of the  Christ-like love of the New Testament which can bring others into peace and  harmony.
Although Theophil is implicitly   damned for  his  refusal  to  participate in  the renewal of the  community, there  is no instant nirvana for  those who  do share  in this  development. In  the  midst  of the  joy of birth  and  re-birth surrounding the arrival of young  Felix, Coyote cries:

I have set his feet on the soft ground
I have set his feet on the sloping shoulders of the world.

Ara  foreshadows this final pessimistic note  when  she thinks  of the  baby  Felix: "I never  see baby-clothes ... that  I don't think  how  a child  puts  on  suffering with them."
Even  in  their   moment   of  triumph against the  fear  and   passivity  which   has crippled  their   lives,  these  people  must   remember  that   their   environment  will continue to  place  the  same  stringent demands upon  them. Only  through a  con­ tinued   affirmation of the  human spirit  and  of  the  essential  worth of all  human existence  can  they  continue the  renewal   process  into  a  reconstruction  of  their  lives  in  a  more  meaningful way.  The   figure  of  Coyote  will  always  be  present  whether manifested as  the  Satanic tempter of  Felix  and  Ara,  the  fear of  life in the  Widow  or  the  mystical  force  which  can  drive  the  passions  of  men  like  Kip and   James to  such  desperate  heights.  Yet  out  of  the   recognition of   the  dual aspects   or  "double-hook" of  glory  and   darkness  in  human  existence  rises  the promise  of a  benevolent deity,  implicitly  affirmed  in the  character of  Felix  who will supersede both  the  malevolence of Coyote  and  the  cruel  justice  of the  Old Testament Jehovah.

FOOTNOTES

1 Philip  Child,  "A  Canadian   Prose-Poem",  Dalhousie  Review  39  (Summer,   I959), pp. 233-236.
2   Margaret  Morriss,  "The   Elements  Transcended", Canadian   Literature   42   (Au­
tumn,  I 969),  pp. 56-7 I.
3 Paul  Radin,   The   Trickster:   A  Study  In   American   Indian  Mythology   (London, I 956),  pp. ix-x.
4  Jonah   I:I  1.
5  Sheila Watson, "The Black Farm",  Queen's  Quarterly, 65 (Summer,  I956), p. 2I3·
6  James Leyburn, The  Haitian People (London,  I966), p. I45·
7  Ibid.,  p. I5o.
8   Sheila Watson, "Antigone", Tamarack  Review, I I (Spring,  I959), p. 22.
9  Sheila Watson, "The Black Fann", p. 209.




review articles


PLAY IN THE WESTERN WORLD


Douglas Barbour


KEN  BELFORD, The  Post Electric Cave Man.  Talonbooks,  $g.oo.
JIM  BROWN,  Towards a Chemistry  of Reel  People. Talonbooks, $g.oo.
FRANK  DAVEY, Four Myths For Sam  Perry. Talonbooks,  $2.00.
BARRY MCKINNON,  The  Carcasses of Spring.  Talonbooks.  $2.50.
DAVID   PHILLIPs, Wave. Talonbooks,  $2.50.
DAVID   PHILLIPs, The  Coherence.  Talonbooks,  $r.50.



IN  THE  LAST YEAR OR SO, Talonbooks has emerged as a major force in creative publishing on  the  West Coast. Its  books,  designed   by  David   Robinson and  Gordon Fidler, has  been  consistently handsome. Talon  also  represents a  par­ ticular  editorial  stance:   its   publications are  the  result  of the  editor's  involvement with  his writers,  and  a  certain real  com­ mitment to those writers' visions. I suspect it is this involvement with  the writers  that  makes it possible for Robinson and  Fidler to  work  so  creatively  with   them  in  the creation  of such  lovely  books.  Moreover, their tastes in poetry  are  not  too narrow: as  well as the poets under review here, Talonbooks has  recently   published   plays by James  Reaney  and  George  Ryga, poet­ ry by bp Nichol  and  others, including the masterful Selected Poems of  Phyllis Webb. The   five  poets  under  review in  no  way present  a single-minded approach to their art.
The   title  of  Jim   Brown's Towards   A
Chemistry  of  Reel  People  reveals  a  lot about the  contents. The  book  is  full  of
 wordgames  that  are  serious;  they  are always interesting and sometimes very moving.  Puns  in  spelling  abound, for,  as the preface  asserts, "spelling, the magic power of language / cast, mould, the spell works for a time  but  if applied again  and again,  absolutely  the  language becomes  a dead   spelling". It  is  this  almost   magic awareness  of  language that  Brown  seeks in  these poems.  He  is yet another recent poet who is attempting, through a variety of means,  to become,  in Jerome  Rothen­ berg's  telling  phrase,  a "technician of the sacred". And, like certain shamans of old, Brown  seeks  communion  with   the  gods through   ecstacy,    through   drugs.    This  whole book is drenched in acid,  and  other  like substances.
A very real  problem  emerges  as a result of  this:   there   are   many   poems   in   the book  to which  I did  not  respond, but  I have  been  told  that  I  would respond  if I had   experienced  acid   myself.  Surely   a poetic mode that excludes certain readers merely because they did not undergo "chemical change"  is  too  exclusive?   At

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



any  rate,  I feel this problem  vitiates some of the  very real  vitality  of this  book. For it is very vital  in spots, and  contains  some fine poems. "fog woman tangles with the demonic fog  machine" is primitive in  its awareness,  and  attains a kind of mythic splendour in its chant section.  And  there is the  way Brown  uses certain key words and    ideas,    like   "reel".  In    the   poem "words" the metaphor of the turning reel is  very   powerful    in   its   suggestions   of people   as  mere   actors,   and   in  dealing, rather  negatively, with  the  idea  of fate. The  "spellings" of many  poems,  and  the somewhat mad  humour of a number of them,   despite   the   tendency   towards  ex­ clusiveness   mentioned  above,  provide  a good  deal  of  pleasure.  Finally,  the  title poem  and  "war   babies"  are  both  longer attempts  to   come    to   grips    with    the personal  search    for   roots,   history,   and meaning, which  seems to be a major con­ cern  of so many writers today. These  may be acid  poems,  but  they so clearly  reach out   to  every  reader  they  transcend  any narrow  sub-culture.  "notes   for  an  end­  ing",  the  final  section   of  "war  babies", appears to be a devastatingly honest reflection    of   a   single   summer's   living among  a small,  tattered, group  of heads. It has a kind of power which derives from that  honesty  more  than  from  any artifice, but  the rest of the  poem is so carefully articulated for 'spelling', the contrast only furthers our  awarenes of  the  poet's  par­ ticular  problems   of  vision  and  voice  in the  whole  book.
Jim  Brown  was chemical, and  used an electric  typewriter to compose  his poems. I'm not sure how Ken Belford writes his poems,   but   the   title   of   his  new   book implies a kind of progress. The  Post  Elec­ tric Cave  Man  is a  tough  little  book, in which  Belford  has moved  out  of  the  pos-
 sible   straitjacket  the   three    line   stanza form  of his first book might  have  become. The  tone  is often  one of cool  understate­ ment,  and  he shares,  with  Barry  McKin­ non, an emotional affinity with  the poetry  of  John  Newlove.   Neither  writer    is  a disciple  of the  older  poet,  but  they  often share  the  same  emotional space.  All  the major traits  of  Belford's  poetry,  coolness, understatement, wry precision,  a hesitancy to use too 'poetic' a language, can  be seen in  "I Found, In  You":

There was  a
small  red  wetness sometimes a
hole  in  the
night. Wherever
I didn't look, curved. I could best  describe
it,  I found
by not.
The  book's  title implies  a turning away from  the  city,  from  technology, and  most of  these  poems  are  about people  outside the city limitations. Yet 'post-electric' does not   mean   without  cars,  for   cars  are   a major image/metaphor in these poems, partly  because  Belford  is so aware  of distance and  the need  to cross it, a very Canadian concern. As in  Newlove,  there is something dumb-animal-like  about many  of the characters in these poems. Belford   is  writing  stories   manque:  the story  is deliberately left  untold, the  char­ acters   are  deliberately  left  undeveloped. The  effect  is of  eavesdropping on  a  pri­  vate  conversation between  strangers: we know  nothing about them,  not  even  who they  are,   but   we  are   involved   because  they  are  human, they  are  like  us.
The  fine  photographs of Soloveoff  and
Clarke become  abstract patterns on  grey paper, and  match the  mood  of  the  book perfectly.

REVIEW ARTICLES



As I suggested  above,  Barry  McKinnon shares   certain  emotional  attitudes  with Ken    Belford,    and    The  Carcasses   Of Spring  demonstrates this. There are some rna jor  differences  though,  and   for   me they  mark  McKinnon as the  more  inter­ esting,   and   potentially  more  rewarding, poet. This  is because  he is more personally present   in  his  poems  than  is Belford  in most   of   his   (Belford   telling   stories   of others,  McKinnon, of  himself) . He  puts his case  well  in  what  could  be  taken  as his ars  poetica,  "the  apology":

often  there  is pain

when I do  not  write  poems its as if I do not love
for you    there  are  my bad poems today
(all  love is by degree)

and  often  there  is pain when  things  are  not perfect

That poem  is followed  by "pages  from  a prairie journal", a  series  of  prosejpoem confessions  in   which   "the   prairie   night still  has  a  way  of  touching  the  deepest conscience", and  in  which  the  desire  for perfection contrasts  with  a  far  reaching awareness   of   its   impossibility. Another search-for-roots  poem,  it  is  the  kind  of poem  McKinnon is best at, going back to places  he  once  knew.  As John   Newlove has said: "Remembrance is a foolish act", but  also, by implication and  the  presence of the  poem,  a necessary  one.  It is neces­ sary  to  McKinnon  anyway,  and  out  of such   necessity   he   creates   these   poems. Throughout this book is imagery bespeaks a  unified,   if  very  stark,   vision :   broken record   players,  guitars, etc.,  carcasses  of broken  bones,  are  strewn  throughout. If the   tone   and   approach   remind  one   of Newlove's    poems,    this   is   not   because McKinnon is copying  the older  poet, but
 because such poets as Purdy  and  Newlove broke   trail   in   an   area   which   is  very pertinent to the concerns of many younger poets. But McKinnon speaks in his own voice in the  best of these  poems,  such  as "his  wife",  "the   war'', "short story  of  a gentle man" where the third  person   allows for a certain  wry wit, and  the centre-piece of the collection, "letter 11 : for  my wife". This  is a  powerfully   felt  attack  on Romantic 'lies' about  "the first time". Remembrance hurts   here  especially,  but the  memory  is only  too clear:

and  you I remember had  trouble  your
eyes squinted  shut as if in pain
and  my eyes squinting in  the  pain
I knew you would  suffer from

and  it  is a  lesson, cut  in  stone,  fully  felt in the heart. Yet it moves to a positive conclusion   that   is  not  an  escape,   but   a result  of having  recognized  and  accepted all the pain, of having seen "it was not beautiful / but  I had come  / to love you". It is for such  powerful  poems  that  The Carcasses Of Spring  deserves  to be read.
Frank  Davey's Four Myths For Sam Perry is divided  in four sections: amulets; sentences of welcome; a light  poem; sam. It is a  deliberate division,  and   the  book moves to the final poems about/for Sam Perry  with  all the  accumulated weight  of meaning Davey  can  provide. It should  be read  as a whole then, and  in proper order, yet  I find  that   certain   poems  excite  my interest, while  the  rest fail  to  hold  it. So I don't  accept  the  total  book, despite  my interest  in  its  purpose, but  only  respond fully to a few separate poems.
In  "amulets", the  lovely first  poem  "A Song  to Mary", with  its  personal  reflec­ tions, repetitions of phrase  in  articulating

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



the growth  of love, remains  with  me long after  some  of  the  later  poems  have  been forgotten.  But   immediately,  with   "The Making", a  poem  about  poetry  and  an­ cient   politics,  Davey   moves  away  from the  kind  of personal  and  private vision of "Song  to Mary" to embrace a public  and political poetry  of  wide  implications. In "sentences of welcome" he attempts such a poetry.  "Sentences of  Welcome" itself is a  pollution poem,  and  a  very  good  one, for   it  is  obviously  deeply  felt,  and   the lamentation  plus  somewhat hopeful   pro­ phecy   of   its   tone   moved   me.   But   in "Watts,  1965",  "Hill 488"  and   "Torrey Canyon"  he  fails  to  move  me  poetically  even   though  I  agree   with   his  political sentiments. Those  who disagree  with  him politically   would  probably  find  even  less in  these  poems  than   I do,  which  is  pre­ cisely   the   inescapable  danger  of   such poetry.  "Amchitka", however,  is a  rather successful  concrete poem,  the  artifice  of its form  effectively  distancing it  as "art". "When" is  a  quiet   and   reflective   post­ apocalypse poem, and comes across nicely through  its  use  of   understatement  and  refusal   to  invoke  political   rhetoric. The  last   poem   in  this  section,  "For  her,  A
Spring", is a self-conscious  "fuck  poem", and   I'm   not  sure  why  it's  placed   there. As  a   possible   response   to   all   the  des­ truction  and  death imaged   forth  in  the preceding poems?  Possibly, but  the  con­ nections  are  not  clear.  "a  light  poem"  is a   long    reflective,    personal,   historical, political   poem  in  nine  parts  which  suc­ ceeds   as   the   poems   in   the   preceding section  did not, moving strangely  through
historical f political     allusions    and    dis­
cussions   to   the   image   of   new   life   in his woman's belly seen as an answer. Throughout,  the  sharply   defined  oppo­ sition  of  light/darkness serves  the  inter-

8o
 esting  thought that  there  is a greater darkness  in   those   whose  minds   do  not want   to  know   darkness  at  all,  than   in those  who  accept   the  eternal  opposites. On  re-reading the  poem  reveals  a mature complexity of thought and  emotion: it is Davey's best attempt yet to create  an argumentative poem.
All  these   poems   lead   up   to  the  last section,   "sam". Sam  is  myth,   and   these poems  celebrate his mythic  sacrifice  cum martyrdom. Sam   is  seen  as  a  magus  of sorts;  in  the  first  poem  he  ritually   fucks "his   girl"   in   the   basin   at   Hot   Spring Cove. This  first half of the poem  is ritual­ istically  fascinating, but  it  does  not,  for me, make  Sam  the  mythic figure he must be if the  rest  of the  sequence  is  to work. Sam  is  anyone,   the  name  is  meaningful only to those who knew him  (in the poem that   is,  and   that's  where   Davey   must succeed  in his attempt to apotheisize Sam Perry,   or   else   he   fails,   here,   as   poet, though  not  as  friend  and  follower   per­  haps). So  that   in  the  second   poem,  we must   take   the   poet's   word   for   it   that  Vancouver  was "Sam's city"  in  the  more important sense that  it somehow  belonged to him.  I  am  not fully  convinced by the poem  that  this was so. These  are interest­ ing  poems,  with  many  small  beauties  in them,   but  they  fail  precisely  where  they are   meant   to  succeed. Don't  take   my word  for it  though, for  this is a vexatious  area  of  criticism,  and  the  book has much  to offer  the  interested reader, both  in  its successes and  its failures.
David   Phillips   writes  a  poetry   I   just enjoy,  without  being  able  always  to  say why.   His   work    strikes   a   sympathetic chord  in  me,  and   I find  I do  not  really read  him  as critically as I do many  other poets.  So it is obvious  that  I shall  recom­ mend  both Wave  and  The Coherence. I'd

REVIEW ARTICLES



like to try  and  give some  reasons  though, just  to  fulfill  my  duties   here.  I like  the shape  his poems  take: he uses short  sharp lines  mostly,  and   the   words  connect   in both   directions,  so  that   the   (pseudo)­ statements   he    is   making    accumulate meaning as the  poem  progresses. Another result  of  his  formal  games  is  a  kind  of
'rational' ambiguity which  is  always  in­ triguing. This  can  be seen in the relatively  simple  "Reply":


I'm sorry
for  the  wrong reasons

what
in  Christ's name

are
the  right

reasons
she  asks  me

to  zip  up her  dress

the  blue  one her  skin

seems  darker with

such  cloth next  to  it

what reasons  are my hands

fumbling to  answer


He  titles  one  of his  best  poems  "A  Con­ fessional  in Five  Parts", but  all his poems are  confessionals,  although  very  different from    the   poetry    of   the   "confessional school", and  they deliberately short-circuit the  normal  orders  of speech  in  order  to somehow   communicate   the    'real',  the emotional sub-stratum syntax  often  hides. One   section    of   Wave   is   titled    'Real
 dreams  & other touchings', and  that  word
'touchings' is the  real  clue  to  his power: his  poems  are   attempts  to   touch   both their  subject  matter and  the  reader.
David  Phillips  and  bp Nichol  are  close
friends and their poetry evinces a common sense of the  importance of language, the Word.  Many  of  the  poems  in  The  Co­ herence are to or for bp, and  are interest­ ing to anyone  who likes either poet's work because they do not share lifestyles despite their   agreements in   poetry.  So  Phillips reaches  out  to  bp,  tries  to  communicate with  the other  poet, or with  other  people, in   his   poem/letters.   This   might   make these  poems  too  private,  but   Phillips  is always careful  to speak  so as we not only overhear the  conversation  but  recognize its  general  importance. There are  other, more obviously public poems, however, which  also succeed  admirably in  render­ ing Phillips's  vision. The best of  these are his poem for Malcolm Lowry, the exciting  "The New Eyes" where  he takes off from a Cezanne  still-life  to investigate the  pos­ sibilities  of  vision,  and  "Four Dreams in that  Language"  where  "dream" is not  a private  state   merely,   but   a   part   of  a shared, visionary, experience.
Both  his books are  of interest, then,  as, it  appears,  I think  all  these  books  are.  I don't   want  to  sound   too  positive  about them   because   I  do   not   like   them   all equally,  nor do I think  they are all equally worth the interested reader's money and time.  Moreover, in  certain cases  I found the  books interesting not  merely  despite, but  because  of,  their  flaws.  But  they  do make a good, beautifully packaged, intro­ duction  to one range  of West Coast poetry at  the  beginning  of the seventies  and  the Phillips,   McKinnon,   and   parts   of   the Brown,  books  especially,   are  more   than  just  interesting,  they  contain true  poetry.

81

REVIEW ARTICLES


SHAKING THE ALPHABET

Peter Stevens


PHYLLIS  WEBB, Selected  Poems. Talonbooks, $8.oo  hardcover, $5.00  paper.


FROM THEIR VOLUMES of selec­ ted  poetry  most  poets  reject  those  poems they have  become  dissatisfied with. Phyllis Webb   has   been   very   rigorous   in   this refining   process;    these   Selected   Poems contain only  about a  third  of the  poems which  appeared in  her  first  three  books. Naked  Poems is published  in  its  entirety  though this  book  misleadingly  titles  the section   'From  Naked   Poems'.  It   seems that  John  Hulcoop was largely responsible for  the  selection  but  evidently  he worked in conjunction with  the poet.
Hulcoop has also contributed a long introduction to  the  volume,  an  introduc­ tion   which   gives   a   brief   biographical outline  but   which   is  mainly  devoted   to an  analysis  of  some  ideas  and  images  in the   poetry   itself.   It  is  very  sound   and illuminating, perhaps somewhat excessive in   its  praise   of   certain   poems   but   ob­ viously   written   out   of   a   careful    and meticulous  reading of the  poetry.  A pity it is spoiled by a glaring error  (a confusion about  Preview and  First Statement) and a strange puzzle associated  with a Conrad quotation,  arising,    I think,    from   bad proofreading.
Hulcoop   summarizes  Phyllis   Webb's
 roughly,  pacing  the  walls of her  cell until she  discovers  that  she  has  been  pacing

for  the word,  and  I  have  heard
curiously,  I have  heard  the  tallest of mouths call  down  behind  my veil
to limit  or enlargen me as I or  it prevails.

The poet,   then,   measures   out   her   own small compass  in order  to create a cosmos, or  more  exactly,  she  allows  a  cosmos  to take   shape, largely   or  minutely,  within the  walls set  by herself.  Her  mind  focus­ ses  within   limits,   and   her   thoughts  are given  weight  by filling  the  space  and  by opening the  possibility  for  extension, an interdependence  of   self   and   the   seirs deliberately   circumscribed   choices.   She herself  says  she  is "shaping the  world  in the  intimate/terms of self".
She  fills her  poetry  with  large  themes : love,  history,  time,  public   life,  and   they are  expressed  in images  of bones   the sea open  landscapes and  nakedness. But para doxically  she  also  tries  to  enclose  in  the poems images of defined areas such as gardens, momentary scenes, brief private affairs.  The   poetry  vibrates   between  ex­ tremes: words  such  as "everything"  and

poetic  career  as a movement from "obses­
 "nothm'
 g",  "yes" and  "no" keep croppm· g

sive subjectivity to self-objectification". Certainly an early  poem such as "Poet" shows  an  almost  morbidly  subjective  in­ sistence   on  the   poet   and   her  desire   to retain for  herself  a  withdrawn  and  con­ fined  space  in  order  to  examine it  tho-
 up,  and   what   she  shapes  in  her  poems
can  be seen  as being  similar  to what  she says about  the  shape  of prayer:

curved  and  going  nowhere,  to fall
in  pure  abstraction, saying everything
and  saying nothing at all.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The   essential   irony  at   the  heart   of  the poetry  is that  her  remoteness that  centres on  accepting life  within  limits  drives  her towards  contemplation of suicide(  one of her  best poems  is on  this subject)  just as her  search  for  a  pure   poetry   drives  her towards   silence.   The   last   poem   in   the book  is a  simple  "Oh?" isolated  on  the page, a zero that  opens  up  another irony, for  it  is a  nothingness that  is a  question in  itself  as  well  as  being  a  nothingness that  is questioned. It opens  up  the  pos­ sibility of a continuing search  for "the No beyond   negation"  which   can   be   trans­  formed  at times into  the positive "Yes" at the end of "Poetics Against  The  Angel Of Death" or even  the ambiguous nothing in "I Can  Call Nothing Love" in which  love and   poetry   are   equated,  as   "A   smile
shakes   alphabets  over   my   belly Iand   I
bend  down  scrabbling 'Yes' from  a young
Adam."
A  tension   develops   as  the  poems  be­ come   more   disciplined,  for   underneath that    deliberate  and   measured   surface  there   seem   to   be   cries   for   unfulfilled  desires  to be  considered. Love  can  create  its own  enclosed  world,  "withdrawn/into the  well"   and   it  can   also  create   "that place   of   perfect   animals   and    men", though the  poet  knows  that  such  a  place can   never    permanently   exist.   Always, then,   there   is  the  desire   to  love,  for  in
the   "quivering I instability  of   love I we
shake  a  world   to  order", but  also  there is  the  knowledge  of  the  impossibility  of love. Love can  catch the moment but not an   Eden.   We  can   wall  ourselves  inside our  privacies  but  we  wall  out  too  much and  there  is too  much   we can  never  al­ together  wall  out.  Desire  and  unfulfilled desire,  privacy   in  isolation  and   the  de­ mands of human love achieve equilibrium
 only  momentarily, and   the  poet  accepts her solitude  even  as she  regrets  it:

leaving brothers, lovers,  Christ outside my  walls
where  they  have  wept  without
and   I  within.

Still,  "two  bodies  are  better   than  one for  this  quiltingjthrowing into  the  dark a this-ness that  was not",  so that  "a grace is made" even  though  it is of "dubious value".  The  value is in the making. These ideas  culminate in  Naked  Poems. Naked­ ness is our  shelter" she says in  an  earlier poem   and   the   five  sections   of   Naked  Poems  try  to abstract the shelter for  two at  the level of minimal  or  bare  necessity. The  first  two suites  come  across  distance to   a   small   room   with   little   furniture where  a world  of love through particular­ ities of body  and  mind  exists. Two  come together,  create  scars  and  bruises  of love as well as  elements  of clarity  and  perfec­  tion  for  a  time.  No  permanence  results but  the  act  of love flowers in  the  cluster of  poems called  "Non  Linear" suspended at   the   centre    of   the   sequence. These poems are complete moments of made grace,  "an  instant of white  roses",  "a stillness in jade", "a  new alphabet", "pale
Idelicates  at  peace".
The   two  closing  sections  of  the  series try  to  weigh  in  the  mind   what  was  em­ bodied  in the  flesh through love, for  it is the  senses, "the five gods of  reality" that  "bless  and   keep   [her]  sane".  Ironically the  titles of these  last  two sections  throw  the   equilibrium  of   mind    and   body   in doubt-"A  Suite  of   Lies"  and   "Some  Final  Questions". Desire  is both  satisfied and  incapable of  satisfaction, for it goes/  out  of  the  impossibly /beautiful". Life  is enclosed and  "diminished", yet the senses can  lift a reality  into  the  mind  and  make it a balance of sensuousness and  intellect:

REVIEW ARTICLES



want  the  apple  on  the  bough  in the  hand  in  the  mouth  seed planted  in  the  brain  want
to think  "apple".

Love  has been  abstracted, the  poet  has removed  herself in  a search  for  an  open­ ness in  a closed  world.  Her  reclusiveness seems  a negation of love -some  readers  find  Naked  Poems too  arid,  too  much  a denial  of the sensual. Yet she is too much  aware  of pain  and  evil and  death in  her other  poems ever  to accept  anything pas­ sively.  There  are  degrees  of  acceptance and  rejection:   "The degree  of  nothing­ ness/is  important'', she says in  "Sitting'', yet this poem still contains "fire"  and  her state   at   the   end   is  still   human,   even though it is "only/remotely human".
All this makes the poetry sound deadly serious   and   bleakly   intellectual, and   at
 times   certainly  the   convolutions  of  her poetic  thought are  tortuous and  tortured, but  the  poems  also contain ironies,  a  de­ light  in  word   play  and   in  some  of   the later   poems  a  kind  of  undercutting  self­ mockery.   On   occasions  she  uses  grating and   grotesque diction,  and   I  find   very annoying  her   use  of   colloquialisms  and  slang,  for  it draws  too much  attention to itself in  the general context  of the  poetry.
Phyllis  Webb  has  created her  own  dis­ tinctive world   through her  poetry.  It is good  to  have  this  selection  not  only  as a measure against which  to set contempor­ ary   sloppiness,   anti-intellectual  hysteria  and   private  triviality but  also  as  a  con­ sidered    body    of   work    with    its   own clarity,  intellectual toughness  and  verbal precision.




NOT THRONES AND CROWNS BUT  MEN

Clara Thomas


CLAIRE PRATT,  The Silent   Ancestors.  McClelland &  Stewart, $7.50.


METHODISM was a dynamic, missionary  religion; its  converts  were equally   assured  of  their   stature as  men and  their  shortcomings as sinners. Their preachers exhorted  them   to  repent and be  saved   and   they  did   not  hesitate, in their  hymns,  to exhort their  God,

When  wilt  Thou  save the  people? Oh  God  of mercy,  When?
The  people,  Lord,  the  people,
Not  thrones  and  crowns,  but  men.
 In   the   rgth   century, they  spread  across the  earth and  in  Newfoundland, an  emi­ grant  methodist minister was  the  father
of E. J. Pratt.
The   Silent   Ancestors,  subtitled "The
Forebears of E. J. Pratt" is a special  kind of  adventure story.  For  five  years,  from
rg64  to  rg6g,  Claire Pratt travelled, fol­ lowed  up  clues  and  unravelled  mysteries of   the   past   on   a   treasure-hunt   whose constant characteristic, she says, is,

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  it  always  seems  to  be  just  a  little  too late  to find  the buried  treasure. Each  of the scattered gems, however dust-covered  and rusty,  must  be stored  and  saved  against  the day  it can  be properly   polished  and  placed in  the mosaic.

Her   patience  and   her   zest   have   both formed    and    livened    her   book.   Many readers  whose   interest  centres  solely  in E. J. Pratt and  his work, will be captured by the three-continent panorama of the Pratt settlements and  will see her family's story  as Claire Pratt sees it-an  adven­ turing river,  of which  her father's life was one  tributary and   whose  course  is, ulti­  mately,  the  journey  of man.
"The search  for  Joseph," she  calls  her quest:
It is  to  lose  the   present,   the  comparative physical  ease of the  20th century and  return to  a  rougher, simpler,   and   in  some  ways happier  time,  to claim  kinship  with  the  toil­ ers of the  earth. It  is to become  acquainted with  the  suffering,   the  darkness,  the  spon­ taneous  and  irrepressible gaiety  that  breaks through   the  darkness,  and  the  love that  has fashioned  and shaped   us into  the  creatures we have become.  It  is to reach  back in time and  take  hold  of  the  ages  as  they  in  their endless variety keep pace with the circling seasons,  ringing   the  changes   from  birth   to death, to death to  birth  again.
The Pratts were  dales  people  from  the North Riding of Yorkshire, leadminers in a network  of mines  that  had  been worked since  long   before   the   Romans came   to Britain and  exported lead  to Rome.  They worked  in underground darkness and  they lived  with  poverty,  but  in  the  18th  cen­ tury   John  Wesley   rode   "like   a   spring  wind" into  their  valley and  brought them a joyful sense of the dignity of man  in the eyes of God.  An  "earnest,  loving,  simple people," he called  the dalesmen, and  they flocked  to  Methodism.  Claire Pratt sket­ ches  in  a  valuable social,  cultural  and  religious   background  to   illuminate  the history  of  her  family.
 In  the course of one decade of the  rgth century,  "catapulted by change and lubricated by Methodism," the Pratts spread  out  to  India,  America, New Zealand, and   Newfoundland. John,  the father of  E.  J.  Pratt, had already  been trained as a Methodist preacher. In 1873 he left the dales for Newfoundland, chan­ ging   his  familiar  Yorkshire   circuit   for Western  Bay, Bona Vista, Cupid, Fortune and  Grand Bank,  at  the  far  end  of  the inhospitable sea."
E. J. (Ned) Pratt, the third of his sons,
was  born  in  1882. It is important to  re­ member, as Claire Pratt reminds us, that  "he  was brought up in the middle days of Queen  Victoria  and   in  many  ways  re­ mained  a Victorian all his life." Pratt was nearly  forty  before  he settled  in  Victoria College  as a  Professor  of  English  and  he was in his forties  when  he became  known as  a  Canadian poet.  His  attitudes were not established  by the events  of the twen­  ties, the thirties or of  the  war  years;  they had   been   established   long   before,   in  a Newfoundland youth and  a variegated young manhood as draper's apprentice, teacher,  preacher, travelling salesman and scholar.   Until  now,   his   formative   ex­ periences  have  best  been  told  by  Henry
Wells and  Carl  Klinck  in their  E. f.Pratt.
Its  biographical chapter vibrates with  the warmth and  the  zest of Pratt's own  voice and  one  has  felt  on  reading it,  that   the authors were setting  down  the poet's  very words.
The  Silent  Ancestors  culminates in a chapter on  the  abiding  qualities of  the Pratt family  and   one  on  the  poetry   of E. J.  Pratt. "The Pratts, along  with countless  other families  in  England and throughout the world  were born, suffered, and  died  in  an  ambience of poverty  and religion."   Gentleness, conservatism, cau-

ss

REVIEW ARTICLES



tion and  courage are  the traits that  persist and  prevail in all the family's branches­ these  and  the  strong  and  recurrent ten­  dency    towards the   aesthetic    and    the artistic. It is striking that  in the far-flung ramifications  of    four   generations,   the Pratts have  produced so many  artists - and,  of  course,  one very great  distinction of  this book  is that  it  is the  story  of  an artist   by   his  daughter, who  is  also  an artist.   Claire   Pratt  works   usually   with paint,  pen  or  stylus;  her  father worked with  words:   but  surely  the  basic artistic quality in each  one  of them  is an  expan­ sive visual  imagination. It operates on an epic  scale  in  Pratt's  poetry and  it is able to encompass the epic quality of a family's  migrations  in  his  daughter's  work.  She expands the vision of the critics who have seen  Newfoundland  and   the  sea  as  suf­ ficient  answer   to  Pratt's own  expansive­ ness:

... back   of  that is  an  entire area, harking back  to a  time  long  out  of memory  in  which forces   are   inevitably at  work   forming and composing the  sinews  of  thought and   habit that ran   as  inevitably  through his  life  and writing as  did  those  of  the  sea.  Out on  the remote  hills   of   Yorkshire  is   a   quality  of expanse, of hugeness, in which  man,  like the incidental characters in a Japanese mountain landscape, is in  his  place, of  nature as  well as  in  it.

The element of  "hugeness" which  she sees as coming down  to her father through his Yorkshire heritage, Claire  Pratt  cate­ gorizes into  two parts: "the struggle from which  emerges   the  hero;  and   the  wind, giving rise to the mystic. In discussing the various   elements  of   my   father's  work, these two elements will be seen to run  like interweaving threads." The mystic quality she  links   to  Methodism, or,  more   pre­ cisely, to  Pentecost,  "and I use the  term in  what  may  be called  its aesthetic sense

86
 -the sense in which  we speak of the Descent of the Dove or of the  Holy Wind that   'bloweth where  it  listeth'." To  her, the poem where the mysticism of the Methodist may be most clearly seen is Brebeuf and His Brethren:

Here, the  raptures of Swaledale have  been transmuted  into    the   religious  zeal   of   the Holy  Fathers....
The poem  is filled  with  suffering beyond  the realm  of  mortal  imaginings ... it   is   maso­ chistic suffering at  its   most   intense   level. But  beyond  this  there is  a  grace above   the  explanation of  the  psychiatrists, and   I think  it is this  that gives the  poem  its melody. The Pentecostal wind  blows  through it  from  first to  last,  the  wind  that blew  the  missionaries to  the   far  corners  of  the   world, and   that  carried  with  it  the  song  so familiar to  those whose   lives   have   been   conditioned  to   the broad  sweeps   of  nature such   as  are   found among  the  moors  of  Yorkshire.

Claire Pratt  regards the  world  which her father created in his poems both as extension of himself and  the "medium wherein his character with  all  its  contra­ dictions,   seeming   or   real,   is   resolved."  The wind   of  grace   quickens  his  poetic universe   to  life,  and   laughter  makes   it bearable-"laughter   in   its   two  parts,  delight and  humour, often, but not inevi­ tably   intertwined." There  was,  she  tes­ tifies, a high  degree  of  euphoria in  Pratt's poetry,  and   in  his  writing of  poetry.  In every   way,  the  very  act   of  writing set Pratt free;  the shaping power  of the artist  gave him dominion over  the  paradoxes in man's  experience  that   he  knows   to  be unresolvable and  accepted as such:

If he   did   ,not  write  about  his  heroes  per se, their qualities appear and  again in  such poems   as  "The  Dying Eagle" or   "Putting Winter  to   Bed."  It is  the   great  one   put down, finally,   by  forces  beyond   his  control. It is in  these  where the  need  for  humour is most  urgent,  the  need   for  accepting life  as it  is, on  a plane where humour becomes  one with  compassion. Life  is what life  is.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Nothing  in   this   book   will   close  the doors    to   critical  inquiry   into    Pratt's poetry, nor  does  Claire Pratt intend   so to do.  There is an  important sense, how­ ever,  in  which  it  will  now  be imperative for  any  critic  of  Pratt to  read  her  work, for  she  explores areas  that  only  she  can know, and  her  research has opened  vistas that  inevitably add  an  extra dimension to our  perceptions. She  has  broken  the  sil­ ence  of "The Silent  Ancestors" to add  to our  understanding  of  her  father and  his
 work and to reaffirm  the continuing won­ der  that   inspired  and   informed   all  his poetry.  Pratt's  imagination  encompassed and,  in  fact,   revelled   in  the  immensity, the   power   and   the   complexity  of   the universe.  But  his respect  was most deeply  engaged   by  the  strength of  the  human spirit   against   all   odds   and   his  central concern   was  always,  like  the  Methodist hymn-maker's, "Not thrones and  crowns, but  men."




FIDDLEHEAD'S ENERGY

Christopher Xerxes Ringrose


JOHN  ROBERT COLOMBO, The  Great San Francisco Earthquake and  Fire. Fiddlehead
Poetry  Books, $2.50.
LEN  GASPARINI,  Tunnel Bus to  Detroit.  Fiddlehead Poetry  Books, $1.00. BRENDA FLEET,  Bullets  and  Cathedrals.  Fiddlehead Poetry  Books,  $2.00.


THE RANGE   OF    WORK   avail­ able in Fred  Cogswell's Fiddlehead Poetry Books is now  considerable. 197I  has seen the  publication under his  imprint of  the revised  Plainsongs of so venerable a figure in  Canadian poetry  as  Dorothy Livesay;  of the  three  books  under review,  two are by relatively young and  little-known poets, while  Mr. Colombo, if not  exactly  vener­ able,  has  an extensive list of  publications behind  him.  The  Fiddlehead Books  are thus  more  than   a  series  of  pamphlets by writers  of  promise,  though they  do  con­ sistently  attempt to encourage new  talent,  and  with  striking results:  in  this  trio  of Fiddlehead   Books,  for    example,   Miss Fleet  can  fairly  be said  to have upstaged  Mr.  Colombo.
The  Great  San  Francisco  Earthquake
and   Fire   consists   of   fifty-eight  found
 poems  which  John  Robert  Colombo has constructed  from   published   eye-witness accounts of  the   Igo6  disaster.   It  differs from  Mr.  Colombo's earlier experiments with    "redeemed  prose",  such   as   The Mackenzie  Poems and   John Toronto, in being  taken  from   prose  ostensibly  inter­ esting  for  its  subject-matter  rather  than its   original   expressiveness.   While    The  Mackenzie  Poems set out  to heighten the effect   of  Mackenzie's  rhetoric,  the   San Francisco  poems arrange statements from various  sources -some flamboyant, some restrained -and  have  the  "poetic" form  sift   interesting  effects   from   the   prose. Interesting  effects   there   are,  and   more striking  than in  The   Mackenzie   Poems. Those  who found  less than impressive  the effect  of  Mackenzie  discoursing  in  free verse  on   "The  Removal of  John  Col-

REVIEW ARTICLES



borne" or "A  Corrupt Administration" might  pause  at  the  quietly  balanced phrases  of  an  anonymous spokesman  ob­ serving  the  unfortunate San  Franciscans:

They  told  each  other
in the most  natural tone
that  their  residences  were destroyed
by the flames, but  there
was no hysteria, no outcry,
no  criticism,

Not   surprisingly,  the   eye-witness   ac­ counts  contain a  good  deal  of  cliche - "girls  in the  bloom  of youth",  "gruesome scenes",  "the ravages  of the  fire"  and  so on-as  well  as  terrible sights  described in  simple  terms.  The two  kinds  of  lan­ guage  sometimes lie side  by side, and  in such  cases  the  facts  seem  to  redefine  the cliche;  one  of the  "gruesome scenes", for example,  was   that   of  "scores   of   half­ starved   dogs/ [...]  found   eating   human bodies".
The "poetic" arrangement on the  page invites  us to contemplate such effects, but it does  more: it  supplies,  if not  a  metre, a rhythmic scheme  for  the prose passages. In  casting the  accounts into  verse  form, Mr.  Colombo usually  proceeds  in  one  of two  ways.  He  sometimes   uses  the  line­ endings  as  a  kind  of  punctuation,  or  to emphasize existing  punctuation:

On  the step  of one  bank,
with  the  fire only  a  block away
I see a man  wringing  his hands and  crying  aloud:

But  often   he  makes   a  more  serious  at­ tempt   at  rendering it  into  free  verse  by seeing  the  prose  as  composed  of  "feet", each  with  a  heavy  or  light  accent  and  a number of unaccented  syllables, and  then writing  the  poem  with  one,  two or  three  such  feet  per  line :

88
 During the  day
a  blast  could  be heard in  any  section
at intervals of only a few minutes
and  buildings
not  destroyed   by fire were  blown to atoms

The  first   method  is  innocuous, if  not particularly  enlightening;  the  second alters  the pace of the original prose, its speeding and  slowly, by making the  units of its composition shorter. But  the rhythm of  the  new  poem  is  repetitious,  because the play of the unstressed syllables is not sufficiently   varied   and   continuous;  and the   syntax,   chopped  into   shorter  units, has the hiccoughing effect  of a translation from  morse code.
In   Tunnel  Bus  to  Detroit  Len   Gas­
parini  sometimes has  his  poetry  skirt deliberately close to the  rhythms of prose, or  those  of  the  found   poem.  Unfortun­ ately,   the  flatness   of  the  conclusions  to some   poems -the   girl   who   after    an abortion  "... vowed/ That  she'd   never become  pregnant/Again.", or  that   poem which  ends   "GET OUT! WE  DON'T SERVE INDIANS!"-issues in bathos rather than in subtle  effects.  In  fact,  the general  standard of the  poems  in Tunnel Bus to  Detroit  is lower  than  in  Mr. Gas­ parini's first  collection, Gutty  Sark,  pub­  lished  in  1970.  In the  earlier  book,  the poems seemed  to grow from  two different stances: the  romantic, as in  the  touching "The   Photograph  of    my   Grandfather Reading Dante", and  the "knowing real­  ism"  of,  say,  "Greasy  Spoon   Blues".   In Tunnel Bus  to  Detroit,  knowingness has the   upper   hand:  many   of   the   poems assume   the  tone   of  one   who   has  seen enough  (of  lust,  crotches, graffiti,  £arts, and  other phenomena) to be indefatigably frank. "Nursery Rhyme" gives us a moth-

REVIEW ARTICLES



er copulating with  the  milkman while her child  cries  in  its  crib.  The poem  com­ ments:

Getting  laid  means  extra  milk
For  this  divorcee  and  her  ilk

Baby she goes about  it gaily
Inflating your economy  daily

Doubtless    the   restriction  of   awareness here is deliberate, but  I find  the pose repellant to  no  particular end; nor  do  I respond to the title poem's invitation to compare  erotic    fantasies.   Occasionally Mr.    Gasparini  cuts   through   his   own "horny   truckdriver"   paraphernalia   to give us something finer, as in his response to  the  "Woman  in  Labor":   "For  your sweet sake/  The world  should  be a streamlined womb/ With  chrome-plated parts". But  the  total  impression is not  of fineness at  all, and  I am  rather surprised that  Fred  Cogswell  encouraged Mr. Gas­ parini   to  publish   his  second  selection  so soon after  Gutty Sark.
Bullets  and Cathedrals is rhythmically most subtle of these collections, as, for example,   in   the    onomatopoeic   meter which  opens  Section  II of "Discord":

Afternoon's melting  frost,  dripping from  rooftops,  sound  a  monotony that  evening  freezes in  silence.

Many  of the  poems  in this, Brenda Fleet's second   collection,  are   elegiac   in   tone, even  when   they  are  not  obviously  so  in subject  matter; this  derives  in  part  from the   rhythms  of   her   work,   which    are halting, careful, somehow  defensive.  The imagist  poems she writes  so well give rise to  the  form  of  her  longer  poems,  where, as in "Tribute to Paul Erlich", a sequence of images works alongside a more  abstract statement to  give  the  sense  of  a  spoken voice in  search  of  accuracy :
 We  will remember
a few rituals
rain  on the  green  leaf
the  whole ocean
when  the  snail  moves


we have  philosophized
on  the four  elements brought  values  to  birth
recognized  beauty now, when  we are  still  able
to speak of delicacy

Miss  Fleet's  ability  is apparent in  the way in  which  her  lines are  made  to  bear convincingly   the  tenor  of  the  poem  and to  evoke  the   precise  emotional  response she   requires   - as   the   cockroaches in "Tribute to  Paul  Erlich", sole  survivors of    ecological    disaster,    are    envisioned "glaring at  the  universe". In "Quebec", too, we are carried  beyond what  is bland­ ly  regarded   as  "the  antique   trade"  by Miss  Fleet's   insistence   (which  is  at   the heart   of   the   view   of   modern   Quebec which    informs    the   poem)    that   these objects  have  a  human past:  "in  my  city where  they sell the  old  people's!rocking chairs  and/  crosses".
Here  the  emotion  we are  made to feel subserves  the  poems'  themes; the  reser­ vations  I have  about  Bullets  and  Cathed­ drals  arise  from   those  poems  where   an emotion is strongly  evoked,  but  in  excess of  the  presented cause:  when  we  share  feeling   but   cannot   understand  it.   We see  this  in  "Pictures", the  poet's  indict­ ment  of  the  circumstances of  her  child­ hood.   The    accusation,  or   inability    to accuse, seems important:

Though   I cannot   blame
my parents  or  their  parents
the  same error  is perpetrated with each generation

and   the  vignettes which   support  it  are charged  with   feeling,   but   that    "same

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



error" remains  indistinct; we sense its power, but the poem does not allow us to understand  it.  Certainly  the  offered  ex­ planation  ("... they  forgot  to  let  go/  so I am  never  alone")  does  not  carry  suf­ ficient  weight.
It  is   because    the   poem    affects   us
powerfully that  such  an  objection   arises. The  problem    is   not   confined    to   one poem; from  its  presence  throughout the book  I suspect  that  it stems from  a  view
 of poetry as self-expression (in the more limited, emotional  sense  of  "self") .  But one is grateful for  what  is good in Bullets and   Cathedrals,   and    for   having    such work   brought  to  one's   attention. I  see that    Miss   Fleet   thanks   Fred    Cogswell "for   his  constant  support  and   belief'; one   might   add   in   conclusion  that   the writer's friend is the reader's too:  we owe a good deal to Mr. Cogswell's energy and judgment.





























RIChaRb aBel & company, 1nc..


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN  FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



go





GET USED TO IT

MARGARET   ATWOOD,    Power   Politics,   Anansi, paper $2.25, cloth $6.oo.

MARGARET ATWOOD the poet generally operates on the  basis of a tactile  world hallucinated  and   at   the  same   time  en­ gineered  by her imagination. Thus a bowl of fruit  or  a  photograph is never  simply discovered   "there", but   rather  arranged so  that   the   form   is   understood   to   be wrought for  its greatest intensity. That is, all phenomena, all we are  allowed  to see, mean, and   the  author is always  behind,  leading,  pushing,  but   never   giving,   the meaning.  Or  at  least  not  giving  it  away (Margaret  Avison's  distinction).
Working that   way,  Margaret  Atwood
gives you  just  what  she wants,  and  while that    is   usually    enough   for    beautiful poetry,   you  often   want   to  know   more, maybe  more  than  you should. Power Politics  is a  book  of  beautiful poetry.  It offers  lots  of  refracted material  for  the sense   and   opinions,  and   it   remains    a puzzle, or maybe  a mystery.  Probably  the author wanted it  that  way.
If there's one  thing   Margaret  Atwood
is on top  of it is the  current sense of love as a  political  struggle. The success of the writing in this book depends on the composition's  being   attended  to  in  the same perplex  (see Doris Lessing's Golden Notebook). I  think  that   the  verse is the best  that   Atwood   has  done,   because   it takes itself seriously as subject, not as conveyance. Consciousness  is how it is composed, as  Miss  Stein  said.  Read   the
 
following  quatrain  aloud, for  nme   and line:

You  take  my  hand and
I'm suddenly in  a  bad  movie, it goes on  and  on  and
why  am  I fascinated

The  book is a sequence of lyrics on the state   of  affairs   which   tend   to  become affairs  of state.  The episodes  are  violent often,  and  usually  inflated  in imagery,  all the while couched, as they say, in quiet detached voice. Atwood  trademarks, but here centrally  located, focussed relentless­ ly. "I raise the magic  fork/  over the plate  of  beef  fried   rice,"   and  she  plunges   it into    him,    whereupon    he   escapes   his mortal  head  to become a comic-or-comic­ book  superhero  flying  over  the  heads  of the  town.  In  bed  she  arranges his  body into  the  shape  of  a  crucifixion and  then  a  pieta.  One   finds  it difficult   to  decide whether she is feeding his fantasies or her own. Such  is the  nature of politics or  the power  of  poetry.
The images  are  often  like that,  people turned into   their   ikonic   representations. He   becomes  a  statue  of  a  general, she the  hanged   ( wo) man  of  the  tarot   pack. He  becomes  for  a while  a saint's   effigy she  has  set  up  so  that she  can  pray   to him,  and  she  en joys the  power  that  that gives to the artist; then  she expresses fear when  he "cheats," becoming a real person demanding the  vote  she  owes:

These days  my  fingers bleed even  before  I bite  them

Can't play  it  safe,  can't  play at all  any  more

Let's go  back  please
to  the  games,  they  were more  fun  and  less  painful

But she breaks  the  rules  too, fracturing the artificial  construct, turning the "I" of

91

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  poem ( s)  into  Margaret Atwood  the poet   in   political    trouble.   For   instance (and   here   I  refer   to  the   "more"  one would    like,   ex-poetica,  to   know)    one often  hears  that   the  lover  may  be  using the established poet for gain in his own, presumably artistic,  career.  She  accuses him  of  "giving me/   a  hard   time  again for  the  funj  of  it  or  just  for/ /the  pub­ licity."  Just   before  turning him  into the super-hero she  says,  "the   real   question  isj  whether or   not   I  will   make   you immortal." But  she  knows  the  game   if it  is there: "Please   die  I  said/ so Ican write   about  it."   Politics  makes   strange bedfellows.  Politics  is a  dirty  game.  But politics  is everywhere, at the  table,  in the study,  inside  every  closet  you open.  This  is  another way  of   saying  that   the  trail of innocence fades when  you gain  know­ ledge   and   skill.  ""Do you  want   to  be illiterate?/ This is  the  way it is, get  used to it."
But  the  experienced one  longs for  the ideal:

A truth  should exist,
it should not   be  used like  this.  If I love  you

is that in  fact  a weapon?

When  she  is in  this  mood  she  resorts  to the simplicity of the body, in heat,  naked, making   a  noise  to  smother   thought.  Of course  it  doesn't work:

The earth doesn't comfort,
it only  covers  up
if you  have the  decency to stay  quiet

At times  she is utterly bitter:

Next   time  we  commit love,  we ought to
choose  in  advance what to  kill.

One  senses  that   yes, the  old  story,  these two  lovers  will  burn   themselves,  destroy

92
 each   other   with   their   relationship; but more   broadly,  that's  the   only   kind   of man-woman  relationship there   is. Some are  only  more  intense than others.  Death is,  after   all,  inevitable, whether slow  or fast,  whether of a snail  or the  sun.
With   that   as  the  inescapable fact  one is not satisfied. One wants  at best to know the  variations of encounter in the heat  or decay.  That's the  body of this book. It is also the  purpose of the  form,  a sequence, as  I said,  of  lyrics  that   do  not  diverge from  one  another in  subject, but  present the  subject   and  say  to  hell  with  it,  you are  going  to  get  it  all,  with  as much  art and  event  as possible in the  time covered. This  book of  poetry  does something that few  of  them  do  nowadays.  It hurts.

GEORGE BOWERING

A DAMP  FUSE

GEORGE  RYGA,  Captives  of the  Faceless  Drum­
mer.  Talonbooks.

GEORGE RYGA  seems rapidly  to be gaining a reputation as a sort  of wild-eyed  apolo­ gist for  the  new revolution. His first play, The Ecstacy   of  Rita   Joe,  made several patrons of Vancouver's Playhouse Theatre uneasy.  Grass  and   Wild   Strawberries, a raucous   celebration   of   youth    and   the  drug  culture, confirmed those  suspicions. (Some  5,ooo   season   ticket   holders   de­ cided   not   to  renew   their   subscriptions to the  theatre the  next season.)   His latest play,  Captives of the  Faceless Drummer, provoked the establishment to retaliation. The  Board   of   Directors  of  the   theatre announced  that the  production originally scheduled  for   February  I97I  would   be "deferred."  The reason   given   was  that the  play  was  based  on  the  FLQ  political kidnappings  in   Montreal  and   therefore

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



(presumably) too inflammatory to present in potentially explosive  Vancouver.
The play is now  available in print  and even  a cursory  reading of the  text  shows that  Ryga  is anything but a revolutionary. The play  is  set  in  the  future and  deals with    the   confrontation  between    some Paul  Rose  of  that time  and   his  hostage. In the  few  brief  hours  before  the  release of the  diplomat and  the  violent  death  of the young  revolutionary, the  two men confront one  another across a gap  that  is wider  than  the generation which separates them.  During the encounter they come to understand each  other better. But  neither changes.  Both  remain captives of their particular temperaments, prejudices, and ideologies.  Both  continue to march to the rhythm of  an  alien  drummer  whose colours   they  may   wear   but   whose  true face   they   do   not   discern.  The  young radical, who  is known  only as The Com­ mander, is a sort  of Marxist who  justifies his hatred by recalling the murder of his Uncle Steve,  a  union  organizer of  bush workers   in   Northern   Quebec  who   was killed  by company  goons,  and  the  death  of  a  revolutionary  girl  friend.  His  pro­ gram,  however,  seems  less political   than  existential,  aimed   not   at   changing  go­ vernments  but  at  altering people.  In  the play   he   comes   to   realize   that   he   has failed  and  that, in  a  way,  he  died  when he  first  set  eyes  upon   his  hostage.   Al­ though Ryga  is not  explicit, he seems  to be  saying  that   violence   puts   an  end   to any possibility of constructive revolution because "a bomb  planted by a revolution­ ary has the same size and explosive  power as a  bomb  planted by a  hired  criminal." In  the  end,   The  Commander  is  alone, unable to  trust  his  lieutenants, a  mystic and   a  criminal  who   represent  the   two extremes  of  revolution.
 In opposition  to The Commander, the diplomat  Harry  is  the   embodiment  of those  qualities of  compromise,  gradual­ ism,  and   gutless  liberalism  which   Ryga sees as being responsible  in different ways for   much   social   injustice   and   spiritual barrenness.  Harry calls himself a "realist". He  lives  by  regulations  and   tactics.  His belief  in  reason  is so blinding that   he  is incapable  of   understanding  or   dealing  with  violence  even  when  it  threatens his family. His career  has followed  a carefully planned  course   and   he  believes  himself to be happy. Yet his discussions with The Commander make  him  aware  that  there is something he  has  missed.  He  becomes conscious of his life as a long waiting for the    "opportune   moment"   that    never came.
If the  two men  differ  in their  attitudes towards   politics,   they   are   even   farther apart in  their  response  to  life which  for Ryga   is  often   the   same   thing   as  their response  to women.  In  Captives this fact is  recognized   by  The  Commander who says "We'd destroy  the  world  if it wasn't for  the  women". Harry's basic  responses in  the  play  are  presented almost  entirely in terms  of his relationships with  his wife and  his mistress.  His  life  of  careful  pro­ priety   and   intellectualized  sex  with   his wife  Adrienne  is  threatened   by   his  at­  traction to  Jenny, a  young  student who symbolizes  a  simplicity   and   naturalness he   cannot    achieve   himself.   But   while Harry's women  bring him  to the  brink  of awareness,  he cannot gather up the  cour­  age  to  leap  into  the  darkness.  Thus like so many of Ryga's characters, he remains suspended   "between  two   heights ... the cliff  above  him  and   the  safe  levels  be­ low." Therefore Harry cannot escape  his captivity  and  his "rescue" at  the  end  of the  play  is  a  defeat. He  returns to  the


93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



passionless level of intellect, habit, and compromise from  the  heights  of intuition which   he  had   glimpsed   but   could   not scale.
Interesting  as  Captives  is  as  a   theo­
retical   exploration  of  the   dilemmas   of power  and   revolution, it  fails  to  satisfy as  a  play.  This   is  largely  because  Ryga has here  been  unable to create believable characters to give utterance to those  pas­ sages of  lyric  intensity  which  are,  in  my opinion, his principal strength. For Ryga's vision  is  essentially   humanitarian  rather than  political.  His  imagination  takes  fire when  he is describing moments of ecstacy, suffering   or  defeat.   In  Captives  of   the Faceless  Drummer  he  has created   char­  acters  that  are  too  symbolic  to  allow  his lyric   talent   full  scope.  The   result   is  a morality drama  in which,  unfortunately, the  troops  are  as devoid  of feature as the drummer.

NEIL  CARSON


LA QUETE
DE BONHEUR

L'oEuvRE  de Jean  Simard  peut  se definir comme une longue et perilleuse quete de bonheur. Ce  besoin  d'etre   heureux, chez
lui,  repond  a son  gout  d'etre et  de  vivre
pleinement en  harmonic avec  la  nature,
Ia vie, les etres  et  les chases qui  l'entour­ ent.  Son  amour de  la  vie  n'a  d'egal  que sa  haine  de  la mort parce  que  celle-ci  le prive  d'aimer.
Ne dans  une  province  ou,  depuis  trois
siecles,  Ia  religion   nous  a  enseigne   que "Ia  terre  est  une  vallee  de  larmes",   cet ecrivain s'est engage  a demystifier  ses concitoyens  ensorcel1es par  de fausses valeurs.  Essayiste-romancier, il s'est  part-

94
 iculierement efforce   de  degager !'amour des  entraves de  l'atavisme, de !'influence du   milieu   et  de   tous  les  dcterminismes qui   nous  ont   jusqu'a maintenant  fac;on­ nes.  L'amour fait  !'objet  essentiel  de  sa derniere oeuvre, La  Separation.
Ce    roman   reprend	avec    force    et
ampleur  tout   ce  que   son   auteur  avait deja  exprime au  sujet  de !'amour. S'agit­ il  pour  l'ecrivain de  relever  le  defi  d'une generation, Ia  sienne,   en   mal   d'aimer? Peut-etre ... Mais  cette  oeuvre  se devait  de  naitre. En  conciliant  tendresse et  sen­ sualite,    dans   son   Nouveau  Repertoire, Simard avait  fait  l'unire theorique de ses idees  sur  !'amour.   II  lui  restait   done  a concretiser ses vues idealisees.
La Separation met en scene  un  homme
et  une  femme qui  ont  atteint le faite  de la vie et qui, a Ia faveur d'une separation, se disent,  longuement et sur  tous les tons, qu'ils  s'aiment.
Que  Anne  et  Carl  se soient  jetes  dans
les  bras  l'un   de  !'autre, un  certain   soir, en   depit   des  "lois  sacrees  du   mariage" qu'ils  n'osent adjurer, malgre  l'amitie qu'­ ils  temoignent  envers   leurs  conjoints  et nonobstant !'amour  qu'ils  ont  pour  leurs enfants, ceci n'etait  pas, en soi, de  nature a   nous   etonner.   Le   romancier  nous   a deja  bien montre le faible  pour  "le  peche  du  Quebec",  chez  les gens frustres.  Mais voila qu'aujourd'hui il nous presente  une femme    et   un   homme  qui   bravent    les interdits de  la  morale religieuse  et  tous lcs tabous  traditionnels pour  s'aimer  ten­ drement  et   passionnement   comme   des tourtereaux. L'auteur  leur  fait  faire  un pas  vers  le  bonheur, mais  voici  qu'apres trois ans d'ivresse  et d'exaltation, le destin vient  ,eJoigner ces deux  etres  qui  s'aiment tou jours.  Anne,   Ia  maitresse de  Carl,   a quitte  Montveal  avec   son   mari   et   ses deux   enfants  pour   aller   vivre,  pendant

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



une   periode   indeterminee,  au   Portugal. Lui,  journaliste pres  de  la  cinquantaine,
reste a Montreal et s'ingenie aupres  de sa
femme  et de son  grand  fils a cacher  qu'il
se meure  d'ennui. Si Anne eprouve une grande nostalgic,  elle en souffre  beaucoup moins  que  son  amant. Plus  jeune  et  tres peu  sedentaire, elle  s'adapte assez  facile­ ment  aux  differentes situations  de la  vie.
Remplie d'effusions romantiques et sensuelles,  leur   correspondance  cherche,
sous   l'effet    prodigieux   de   l'amour,  a
reduire les distances qui  les separent. "Il faut,   ecrit, Carl,  nous  cramponner  des­
esperement a l'idee  que  nous  ne sommes
pas  reellement separes,  en  depit   des  ap­
parences,  que  l'amour  supprime la  dis­
tance  et le temps,  comme  il supprimait ici les obstacles". Les appels  des rendez-vous,
a Mont11eal, a !'occasion desquels  ils nour­
rissaient secretement leur besoin d'aimer ravivent  le   bonheur   desormais  a  leurs
faits  et  gestes  quotidiens-ce qu'ils  n'­
avaient jamais  eu !'occasion de faire auparavant-et  les  forcent   a reflechir
serieusement sur  la  nature de  leurs  sent­
iments.
Leur  liaison  amoureuse resulte,  en definitive, d'une attirance physique spon­ tanee.  Ce  fut  et  c'est  toujours la  source
 de leur  amour. D'ailleurs, c'est  une evid­ ence  que  Carl   n'essaie  pas  de  dissimuler  sous  le  sens  voil'e des  mots;  parlant de leur    "commun  bonheur"   et   de   leur "commune  joie",  il  supprime  tout  amb­ igui:re sur la  nature  de  l'un  et  de  l'autre lorsqu'il ecrit:

Et  appelons  les choses  par  leur  nom,  notre commun
plaisir charnel.

L'essentiel  de  leur  bonheur tient  done dans  ce dialogue des  corps  qui  entra!ne un  sentiment de  parfait accord, de  plen­ itude  et de paix.  Dans  cette  ambiance de comprehension  et  d'affection, dont   Carl  se  fait  l'interpd:te,  leurs   relations  phys­ iques  ont  atteint une  qualite exception­ neUe.
Cette   intimire  et   ce   rapprochement
furent  pour   eux   la  plus  grande  source d'un bien-etre jamais eprouve auparavant. Mais  il n'en  demeure pas  moins  un  bon­ heur    passager.    Pour   le   cristalliser,   ils voudraient   bien   vivre   ensemble,   "Oh comme   ils  s'aimeraient,  s'exclame  Carl,  en y revant, comme  ils seraient heureux! seulement   ils  ne sont  pas  libres.  Ils  sont meme  separes  en ce moment."
Carl  et  Anne,  pour   ne  pas  ternir aux




CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA VANCOUVER 8, B.C.	228-4741


95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



yeux  de  leurs  enfants !'image  du  pere  et de Ia mere, ont choisi de ne rien detruire autour d'eux   tant  que  Ia chose  demeur­ erait    possible.   S'ils   sont   conscients   de leurs  faiblesses  reciproques,  ils  sont   par contre "incapables de  briser leurs  chaines  [et]  envient   presque  les personnes  assez fortes, assez dures,  assez courageuses  ou assez cyniques  pour  trancher dans  le  vif
et vivre  leur  vie."  II leur reste a s'apitoyer
sur  le mariage qu'ils  condamnent. "C'est du  reste,  constate Carl,  !'institution  elle­ meme   qui  est  a  blamer; surement  plus, en taus  cas, que Ies personnes, qui seraient  plutot  les victimes  du  systeme."  A  partir de leur  experience personnelle  et  de celle de  tant   d'autres couples,  l'un  et  !'autre multiplient Ies raisons qui les  justifient  de condamner  un  11egime qui  semble  avoir ete  invenre   pour  securiser  Ia  mediocrite; car  eux,   ils  ont   Ia   preuve  que  !'amour veritable, Ie vrai, a  besoin de Iiberte  totale pour   naltre,   croitre   et   se  fortifier.   La monotonie c11eee par  les liens du  mariage tue !'amour et scMrose Ia vie en Ia privant de  liberte.   Pour   eux,  aimer   c'est   vivre pleinement, sans contrainte et en toute Iiberte.  Leurs  echanges ne  se prolongent qu'a Ia  condition  d'etre   gratuits,  spont­ anes  et  sinceres.
Mais,   a  Ia  suite   d'un   cauchemar  qui
semble  avoir   confirmer ce  qu'il   redoute Ie  plus,  !'indifference de  sa  jeune  mait­ resse, !'amant eplore  ecrit:

Advenant  le   pire  ... ce  n'est    pas   en   me disant
Ia  verite que  tu  me  ferais  Ie plus  mal,  mais en
me   Ia  cachant  par   pitie.   Laissons   Ia  pitie aux
epoux, Ies amants n'en ont  que  faire

Carl   n'est   plus,  helas,  ce  que  !'on   peut appeler un  jeune  homme.  La  rapidite du temps  qui fuit, les ravages de Ia conscience

g6
 exarcerbee  par   Ie  doute,   Ia  tension   qui nait  de  !'absence et  de  I'esseulement, provoquent, chez  un  homme  qui {ranch­ ira  bientot  Ie cap  de  Ia cinquantaine, un V'eritable cauchemar.  Leur   "eternel  am­  our" plus  ancre  dans  Ia  chair   que  dans
!'esprit  ne  peut  resister  aux  outrages du temps.  Dans  le  monde   de  Ia  volupre   et des sens ou ils se trouvent, vieillir  devient tragique. Bien  que cette fatalite n'atteigne que  superficiellement Anne,  elle sais  tres bien que  sur  Ie plan  physique  elle ne fera
plus de  gains." Quant a Carl,  a !'age  des
"ultimes amours", il ne lui reste plus qu'a persuader sa maitresse qu'il  craint  plus, desormais, les rides de !'arne que celles du corps.
Depuis I'annonce du retour, Carl oscille
entre Ie  "doute et  !'inquietude". La routine epistolaire  des  derniers  mois prend  !'allure  d'echanges conjugaux  en­ nuyants, mievres  et  coutumiers. De  plus en  plus,  les missives  palissent.  II  est  vrai que  Ia fin  du  voyage  approche et  peut­  etre  aussi,  Ia rupture eventuelle  que  !'on pressent ...
Carl  et  Anne  se disent  qu'ils  s'aiment.
Suffit-il  de  le  dire  et  de  le 11epeter sans cesse pour s'aimer vraiment? Simard Ie premier refuserait d'y croire. II sait bien, j'imagine, que  trop  vouloir  prouver ne prouve   souvent  rien.
Simard  serait-il   idealiste   reveur   .a  I'­
instar   du  Felix  d'autrefois, qui  se  creait "un   bonheur  de   toutes   pieces   par   un prodige  de !'imagination-cette folie du logis-qui etait Ia richesse et le tourment de  sa vie."
La  Separation   Iaisse  entendre que  !'­
amour vrai,  Ie plus  beau  et  Ie plus grand est bien souvent  celui  que !'on  imagine et non  celui  que l'on  vit. Simard aime  rever avec   ses  personnages,  ne   serait-ce  que pour  oublier  que  !'amour est  une  longue

BOOKS IN REVIEW



quete  de  bonheur dont  la  poursuite dure toute    une   vie.   On    se   demande  si  le
moraliste-romancier   n'insuffierait  pas   a
ses  personnages,  une   vie  inrerieure, qui ne  serait  en  definitive que  la  projection de  ses propres conflits  emotifs?

CLAUDE RACINE


INTERNATIONAL IDEAS

MIKE  DOYLE, Earth  Meditations. Coach  House
Press, $6.oo  hardcover, $3.00  paper.

MIKE DOYLE is a  New  Zealand poet  now
 An image can take the  place of a :word in a proposition

Doyle then goes on to develop  his stanza using a visual  image; i.e., the  drawing of an  ear  in place  of  the  word  "ear" itself. Thus  we have  an  excursion  into  the area of  concrete poetry; the  book  is actually a  deliberate collage  of many  such  styles. The  syntax  is often  Joycean, these "new" words  ambiguous in  meaning and  ono­ matopoeic in sound; there  are even  some pop-art  reflections.

Feel
that  FIST as Clark  Kent  uppercuts
slob villains,  the  balloon
detonated:

living  on  the  west  coast and  is becoming well-known   in  the  business  as  the  editor of Tuatara, a poetry  magazine which  sees its  fifth  issue  coming   out   this  summer. Earth    Meditations  is  his  first   book   to appear in  Canada; several  sections  have previously  been  printed in  New  Zealand and,  although Doyle  has carefully written section  I to have  a Canadian flavour,  his poetry  lacks a firm  roothold in either country. The landscape Doyle  inhabits is international :

Native and immigrant live in  different places in  the  same  location.

Which   is  to  say   (I must   suppose) that space  has  nothing to do  with  where  your head  is, that  poetry  knows  no nationality, that   the  imagination is the  common  de­ nominator.
The  main    preoccupation   of   Earth
 WHAM!!!!

In  the  main,   however,  Doyle  is  acad­ amese;  he  pulls  most  of  his  images  from  the history of intellectual awakening. The pages  of  Earth   Meditations  are   loaded with  references to the subjective giants  of western consciousness:  Jung, Stevens, Jef­  ferson,   Burke,   Locke,   etc.;   continually, too, we are confronted with  the  names  of acquaintances, people with whom the poet has had  intellectual or emotional contact. "Meditations" is perhaps the  key word in the  title, since  this  is exactly  what  Doyle does:  he meditates, he  propositions, he theorizes, he speaks his mind in one long humorous catalogue  which  finishes  with the  cabbalistic cry  of  "Shekinah!  Shek­ inah!"   (which    I  believe   approximates the  final  vision  of delight).  And  reality?  The  solution  is Zen-like  in  its simplicity:

to  be one self


Meditations,  suitably    enough,  then,    is with  the  nature of reality.  Doyle  prefixes
 
a  love
a
 fully

many  sections with  fascinating quotations from  the French surrealist painter Rene Magritte. For  example:
 (life  like music)

You  could  not  call  Earth  Meditations
avant-garde-not unless  you accept  the

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW


Black  Mountain  aesthetic as such.  Most of  Doyle's   lines  are   projectivist   (deter­ mined   by  the  poet's   breathing  pattern) and  the  fondness   for  intellectual  discus­ sion is something we have  all seen in the work  of Olsen. Personally,  I still have  to be  convinced   that   subjective   argument, in  so far  as it  depends upon  a  scholarly backdrop, is a good  thing  in art.  I might  know  the  names   of  Jung,   Wittgenstein, Spinoza,   and    the   others;  however,    it narrows   the    field   within    which    your imagery   can   be   understood   and   more often  than  not  becomes  a  self-indulgent chant  whereby   you  hope  to  impress  the reader  with  your  education. An old  trap.
Still,   the   book  is  an  interesting  one,
particularly in  its  dramatization of   Ma­ gritte's propositions, and, should  you  buy a  copy,  you  will find  yourself  treated to some  beautiful photographic  illustrations by the  Victoria artist  Jack  Kidder. Doyle is  an   auctioneer.  He   sells   ideas.   You might   not  agree   with  his  philosophy   of acceptance, but  in  a scene that  has  been clogged  with  High Seriousness  Negativity  (witness all the poetry  titles incorporating "dark" or  "night" into  their  metaphor) Earth  Meditations comes  as  a  welcome change.
LAWRENCE RUSSELL



THE MOB OF GENTLEMEN

The    Cavalier   Poets,   chosen   and   edited   by
Robin  Skelton.  Queenswood  House,  $10.00.

ROBIN SKELTON's interesting  anthology of seventeenth-century poetry  reveals his continuing interest in that  "group" of writers  whom  he calls the Cavalier poets.

g8
 The  slight    introduction  very   properly urges   us  to   look  more   closely  at   that "mob of  gentlemen that  writ  with  ease" (thus Pope,  in  his  well-known  dismissal of  some  of  his  predecessors), and  to  re­ cognize  their  very  real  "capacity for  self­ mockery,  for scepticism  ... combined, fre­ quently, with  a moral  directness destruc­ tive  of  sententiousness  yet  productive of dignity". Mr.   Skelton   understands  Cav­ alier  poetry  in  rather  ample  terms:  it  is the  poetry  not  merely  of  those  who  were loyal  to Charles I, who were  attached to his Court and  to his  various  struggles  to retain authority. The  poets  in  this  mode  present   "social   man":    "The   Cavalier man  ... is not  a  polemicist. He  may  well
... allude  to   political   events,   or   write epitaphs upon  notable figures  or compose wry elegies, but  he does not pamphleteer. Indeed, the  mode  is a little  suspicious  of public   fame;  the   epitaphs ... emphasize individual  mortality  rather  than   public loss".   Their  poetry    is   "candid,   witty, subtle,   observant,   sardonic,   passionate, affectionate, and  clear-headed ... a mon­ ument   to  human dignity  largely  because  it  chose   to   avoid   pretension   while   de­ lighting  equally  in   both   simplicity   and sophistication". There is  an erotic  strain in  much   of  the  poetry,  too,  but  that   is part   of  its  careless  gaiety  and   sophisti­ cation; erotic  themes help  to tie together the   generation   of   Etherege-Rochester­ Sedley-Dorset, of  the   Restoration   years, with  the  generation of Lovelace-Suckling
-Carew, of the  time  of Charles I.
Mr.  Skelton's very generous  notions  of what   constitutes Cavalier  poetry   enable him  to  include a wide  variety  of authors who flourished between 1625 and 168g. Milton's "Epitaph on  the  Marchioness of Winchester"  is  here    (written  in   1631 ) , but   why  not   "L'Allegro" and   "II   Pen-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seroso" which  are  as much  in the Cavalier mode,  one  should   have  thought, and  far more successful examples of it? There are the  familiar  poets -besides  those  men­ tioned   already-including   Cotton   and Herrick,   and    the   unfamiliar:   George Daniel, Thomas  D'Urfey,  'Ephelia',  Pa­ thericke Jenkyn,  and   more.   Indeed, the chief  strength of  this anthology lies in its bringing   together    of   so   many    poems which  are  otherwise difficult  to  come  by and,  in  any  case,  known   mainly   to  the specialist.    The   'common  reader',   for whom  this book seems intended, may well think,  however,  that  he has missed little: the  four  line  epigram  by  Thomas  Hey­ rick,  for  example, is  an  inelegant  trifle, and    Samuel    Pordage's   contribution   is unlikely   to  offer  anyone  much pleasure  (a  word   which   he  rhymes, in  his  final stanza   of   "Corydon's  Complaint", with Treasure    and    Measure).   Might    Mr.  Skelton  not  have   been  wiser  to  call  his collection  "Minor  Poetry   of  the  Seven­ teenth  Century"?  He   would   thus  need not  have  stretched  his  category  of  "Ca­ valier" to  embrace  so  many   poets  who had  so  little  in  common  except   a  small and  unknown  body  of work,  or  poets  of stature like  Milton and  Dryden, or  Cra­  shaw   and   Marvell,  who   can   surely   be described  in  a variety  of more  telling  and typical  ways.  And  he would  not  have  left one  worrying  over   the  omission  of  Ben Jonson, who   was,  by  Mr.  Skelton's  ad­ mission and  the  general account of others,  the  progenitor of  all  this  verse-or  of John  Donne, who was widely imitated by such   men   as  Carew  and   Suckling   and Lord   Herbert of   Cherbury  (who   unac­  countably  receives no mention) .
Mr.   Skelton gives  his  poets  in  alpha­ betical  order, in  old  spelling  texts,  with biographical  notes  appended  at the  end
 of the  volume.  There is no  further  com­ mentary. For  his texts,  the  editor  has de­ pended  almost  wholly  upon  the  work  of his  predecessors,   described   in  the  intro­ duction as "the authoritative  editions  of recent  scholars". Although  Mr. Skelton's collection  affords  many  delights,  I think  it   is  ultimately quite   disappointing. It gives a very  strange impression of seven­ teenth-century  poetry,   for  it  is  really  a gathering of   one  man's   favourite minor  poems from a particular period  of literary  history.
P. G.  STANWOOD



MORATORIUM ON MILTON

Paradise  Lost.  A Tercentenary Tribute. Papers Given  at  the  University of Western Ontario. Edited   by  Balachandra  Rajan.  University of Toronto Press. $5.00.
Approaches to Paradise Lost. Edited  by C. A. Patrides.  University  of Toronto Press. $9.50.

IT   IS     FITTING   that    the   University   of Toronto  should    produce   two    of   the several   volumes   of   essays  on   Paradise Lost  marking its  three  hundredth  birth­ day.   As  Arthur  Barker   points   out,   in Balachandra   Rajan's   collection,   Cana­ dians  have  made   major  contributions to twentieth-century Milton studies, and  the  centre of  that Canadian  study  has  been Toronto, which   has   produced, trained, or  exasperated into  Miltonic comments critics  both  fit  and  numerous. Professor Rajan, now  busy  making the  University of  Western  Ontario the  chief  Canadian centre for  Milton studies,  has gathered a fine example of Canadian (or any other!) scholarship and   criticism   into  his  book. Roy  Daniells'   essay  on  Eden   leads  off,

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



followed by Northrop  Frye's thematically similar piece on "Eve" and the female principle  in the poem;  by Barker's study of Milton's  peculiarly poetic treatment of regeneration in the poem; by Hugh MacCallum's careful study of Milton's Christology   as  seen  against   the   back­ ground  of  conflicting  interpretations  of the Son; and, at the last, by Rajan's  own serious,  dense  study  of  the  relation  of responsibility  to  freedom   in  the  poem, with  emphasis  on  the special  emotional, intellectual,  and  ethical  implications  of Milton's handling  of this theme.
All the  essays have  something  to say,
overtly or covertly, about the poem's apparent "distance" from present-day readers,   especially  student-readers, and in their  very different  styles demonstrate how  that   distance   may  be  diminished. Mr.  Barker's  eloquent  interpretation  of the  poem  as a  record  of the  poet's  pro­ found  frustration   and  profound  hope  is analogous, he thinks, to our similar frus­ tration  and  hope  over  the  plight  of the humane   studies   just  now.  Notably,  all five  pieces, even  Mr.  MacCallum's,  by all odds the most austere, stress what  we as readers are to learn, by recreated  ima­ ginative experience,  from the poem;  Mr. Daniells  and  Mr.  Frye  point  to  the  ex­ periential  normality  of paradise;  Mr. Barker   and   Mr.   Rajan    insist  on   the reader's identification with the action of Paradise Lost, so that we can finally "understand" what  it  means  to  be  sin­ free and  what  it means, having  been  so, to become and  to be mortal.
I will put  this another  way:  these  es­ says are concerned, all of them, with how typology  can   mediate   experience,  even to twentieth-century  non-Biblical readers. In  this sense, Mr.  MacCallum's work on the Son is "typical" of the book's method;


100
 he  points to  the  contemporary setting  of doctrinal   disagreement   over  trinitarian­ ism and  unitarianism in  interpreting the poetic  role  of  Christ  in  the  poem,  and shows   how   notions   of    typology   and mediation,  now  considered  so "literary", offer solutions  to the problem of Christian  salvation.  The question  of grace is crucial in  the  metaphoric interpretation  of  the Second  Person:  is Christ  an  exemplar,  a type, or  the  Mediator? In  an  epic  deal­ ing  crucially  with  these questions,  poetic devices serve in  the end  to suggest, even to  define,  doctrine.   That Milton   works this way, with exquisite balance among doctrinal  positions and  poetic choices, should  not surprise  us.
Mr.   MacCallum's  essay  is  the   most
precise of the five, and the one most concerned to offer for our consideration material   outside   the   poem:   his  is  the only study, in  this collection, of ideas in their  historical  setting.  Mr.  Daniells and Mr.  Frye  offer  richly  mythopoeic  inter­ pretations,   and   Mr.  Barker  deliberately sets himself across that  grain.  Mr. Rajan  is concerned  chiefly with  the choices the poet  made  among  his  craftsman's alter­  natives, and  why  he  made  them  just as he did. Since Christopher Rick's influen­ tial  study  of   Milton's  style, critics  have felt   justified   in   noting   how  exact   the poet's   diction   is:   Mr.   Rajan   offers  a parallel  reading,  one  which  concentrates on poetic devices "larger" than word and phrase.
These  essays, are,  in an important way,
humble:    Milton   means   more  to  these critics than  their  critical  reputation. The essays assume  the  poem's  excellence and our  inability  wholly  to grasp  that  excel­ lence. In  various  ways, these authors  ac­ cept  the  poem  as it is and  have made  it their  job to show us just  why it is as it is.

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



They know the poem inside out, and whatever the variation in their critical viewpoint, one feels that they know the same poem and  come to the same general conclusions, if not about what its chief marvels are, then  about  its poetic means and  its effect  upon  readers.
Not  so  Mr.   Patrides'   collection,  far
more varied  in all ways. I am sorry that Patrides'   modesty   restrained   him  from printing   his  own  lecture   in  this  series, given at the University of York, since his contributions to Milton studies have been impressive.  The   thirteen   essays in   this volume,  save  for   Mr.  Trapp's, are  all quite  short, and  read  like the ceremonial comment  they are.  Their  variety  records some disagreement: F. T.  Prince  stresses the  theatricality  of  Paradise  Lost  over those pieces by Milton  officially in dram­ atic  form;  after   teetering  a  bit  on  just how dramatic the  poem  is, John  Arthos decides  against  its significant  theatrical­ ity. For  Professors Huntley  and  Samuel, the  poem  is  an  epic  and  makes  use of epic   resources,  drawing  into   that   epic reservoir some materials  thitherto not so considered;  for  Professor  Spencer,  Para­ dise  Lost  inverts  epic  values  and  prac­ tices to such  an  extent  as to deserve the title of  anti-epic-indeed, it is the anti­  epic,  which  necessarily  killed  the  genre in   England.    Professor   Summers   is   a gentle  American   interpreter  of  the  de­ cade  just  past,  discussing  the  degree  to which  the  poem  subverts,  not  just  epic standards, but  establishment  values then and  now. Mrs.  Radzinowicz  defends  the meaning   and   poetic   value  of  the   last two books, wherein  man as mortal  is pre­ pared  once  more  to  receive and  achieve the   immortality   just   forfeited;  Merritt  Hughes'  commentary   reinforces  a  v1ew he  has  expressed   earlier,   that   "obedi-
 ence" is central  to the poem and  that  to pass  beyond  obedience   is  to  enter   its reward, or love. Professor Broadbent, fol­ lowing Ricks' lead, shows how  delicately diction  indicates  and  fits the  divine and mortal   environments;   Professor  Brock­ bank discusses vicissitude, mutability, and diurnal  life in  Paradise  Lost. Three  in­ teresting lectures are on topics peripheral to   the   poem   itself -Bernard  Harris' comment   on   Dryden's    version,   Brian Morris' notes on musical settings to  Mil­
tonic works, and  J. B. Trapp's long study
of the iconography  of the Fall from "the
beginning"   (here   located   in  Dura)    to
Milton's  own  time.
The  Canadian   volume  is harmonious, the  York volume  less so. Oddly  enough, the  concord  of  the  one  and  the chanci­ ness of the other forced this reader to the grim view that  perhaps  it really was time for  us to  give  poor  Milton   a  rest, and instead to think  about  defining  problems of interpretation and  crticism of his great poem. As Joseph Summers points out, ex­ cept for a flurry  over Empson's  naughti­  ness, there  is   no  "Milton  controversy" any more;  in  spite  of the  stylishness dis. played here,  a  good deal  in  this volume is either  what  we have  known  before of ourselves   or   what   these   very  teachers have  taught  us earlier. One  can see that the  lecturers  all  tried  to  say something "new"   (Summers   has  humourously  put the plight of the "expert" invited  to lec­ ture); often  the  effort  to  do  so  has  re­  sulted  in  some  new  words-"syntasis," for  instance -covering   fairly   common ideas; or a new use of an old word, as in Miss Samuel's essay on "mimesis." Again, topics are yoked which  promise a "new" context-"Milton, Andreini,  and  Gali­ leo" made my heart  lift,  but  the skimpy notions pressed into concubinage  did not.


IOI

BOOKS IN REVffiW



I think of my own sins as I note national styles of saying nothing gracefully:  the Englishman  shows his sensitivity as a reader  (or, his sensitivity to diction) , the American  his sensitivity as a public  citi­ zen in  moral  realms.  Englishmen  prefer to ignore the mass of scholarship on  Mil­ ton, some Americans  to recapitulate it all.
It is consensus  on  the one  hand  and triviality  on   the  other   that   makes  me think Milton  might  be spared for a little. I know that  no such moratorium  can be achieved,  because  we  need  Milton  and think  he  needs us. My reasons for  wish­ ing  it,  though,   are   (a)   that   the  con­ sensus now leads to increasing refinement of received opinion  (or, busywork) ; (b) that  with  Mr.  Fish's  book  (admired   by several of  the  writers  in  these volumes) "Milton" has at last  become inextricably fused  with  his  readers,  in  true  Poulet­ style,  those  readers  dissolving consensus by  their   idiosyncrasy  and   number.   It seems  that  we  need  time  to  get  out  of the  consensus-ruts  and  to work  through our   solipsistic  obligations   to  this  text. The  Variorum   edition  will  insure  that (a)  is kept available to scholars;  (b)  will last  only so long as the present academic affluence lasts.  Meanwhile  we might   (a la  MacCallum, perhaps)   try  to  under­ stand   a  bit  more  what  went   into  the poem, to measure  it against  things other than  its own content  and  our own sensi­ bilities:   in   short,   we   might   begin   to learn  a  little something,  instead  of play­ ing  word-games   (which,  it  is  true,  we can play  beautifully), about so hard  won a poem.
For  Milton   is  a  considerable  writer­ abrasive, soothing,  socratic, Jehovan,  di­ dactic,   persuasive,  dictatorial   and   per­ missive, patient  and  critical. He has a lot to  say,  about   more  than  we  now  con-


102
 sider.  To  use Mr.  Rajan's lovely phrase, Milton's  "web  of responsibility'' involved his own  commitment to life and  to art; we  have  some  responsibility  to  his  re­ sponsibility,  expressed  in  his  forbidding,  inviting,   imperious,   perilous   poem.   If this  sounds   ungrateful,   after   my  own considerable  pleasure from these volumes, I can  only  admit   brutishness-not  so much  chicken-heartedness  (if  that   des­ cribes   someone   fearful   of   the   Poulet­ implications  for  literature)  as  sheepish­ ness. I looked  up  and  was  not  fed  suf­ ficiently.  I  ask for  pastures  new-and, if  I've  got  to feed  in  pastures  old,  then Imust  express  my  hopes for  the  green and  told Canadian  spaces over  the Eng­ lish enclosures  and  the  dustbowls  of my own country.
ROSALffi L. COLlE



NEW-FOUND EYES


IRVING  LAYTON,  Nail  Polish.  McClelland and
Stewart, $2.95·
IRVING  LAYTON,  baring  his talons  of cruelty, lewdness, vulgarity, has always presented  those claws in a brilliant polish of cadence  and  rhyme.  He  may scoff at "civil   polish"-ethical   or   aesthetic­ but  how nicely he enamels his scoffing!
The  Layton  talons  may be blunting  a
little.   In   Nail   Polish  the  old  scorn  is here:  scorn of Marxists, of Christians, of fellow poets, of the "merciless  pinheads" of the twentieth  century. But the vituper­ ation   is  turned    lower   now,   when   he writes  "For  Some  of  my  Student   Milit­ ants",  or mocks the  pimpled  self-absorp­ tion   of   "Easy   Rider".  The   old   dark vision,  still  here  in  epigrams  like  "Pith

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  Vinegar", is converting into  a  grim pragmatism, as  in  "Short Sermon ... by the   Rabbi   who    survived    Auschwitz". Even the old bawdiness turns a bit rueful. There are still erotic  songs, but Layton sardonically recognizes his present self (in "The  Haunting")  as  "a   poet  shouting love as if it  were  a  bomb",  and  he  adds a note  on  himself  turned happy  husband ("Legend")   and   another  note -more wry-on  himself as poet-in-residence, "famed for  making  lovefat the drop  of a bra/but no sweet  girls came/only the president/of the  student's council/the cleaning women/smelling of detergent/ and  the  campus psychiatrist."
This   whole  volume   has  less fire  than
earlier   ones,  more  mist.  Less green  and gold, more grey and white. Fewer snakes, more worms-"passionless worms/that slide their fearful  grey formsfover this astonishing earth".  Fewer  pin wheels and somersaults and  revolving  suns, more bubbles  and  foam.

Bubbles,  nothing  else the  intellect   looses from  our  genitals
and  death  proves
foam  or  scum.

The bubbles  in  Nail Polish may  be mere silliness,  like  the   "insignificant  bubbles" (in  "Through a Glass Darkly") "that break/on coming  to  the  top/without the expected  pop". But  others,  fragile  poems like "Eternal Recurrence", have a casual delicacy  and  shapeliness.
Why is this cooler manner  emerging? Layton is fifty-nine of course. Yet the brevity of these poems sounds less like the mark  of attrition in  the  singing  man,  or the  swinging  flesh, and  more  like a  deli­ berate attempt at the  throw-away style of (for  instance)  Cohen's  songs.  This  cool style, like the  pale  sheen  of  modern   nail


104
 polish,   is  a  long   way  from   the   bloody brilliance of  the  earlier Layton.
The  new   style  emerges   in   "Kilmur­ vey": muted  colours, dimmed shapes, and quieter stance:

Low  are  the  hills,  a  mere  rise
in  the  ground, grey with stones and  green; Stand  anywhere and  you can trace
outlines  with  your  new-found  eyes of stone  fences  delicate as lace:
Stand  anywhere and  you can  be seen.

And  here  is the  other source  of  novelty: Ireland,  where   Layton  in   rg6g   found "man-humbling cliff and  shattering sea"; fences-of  spite  and  pride; men fighting for  no cause; love-making brief in "secret ache  and  turbulence" ( "Inishmore") .
In "Kilmurvey Strand" he  structured his   Irish    experience  into   a   vortex    of whites:  old   man,   white   foam,   seagulls, clouds,   toning into   sand,   brown,   black, and  back  to  the  whiteness  of clouds  and the  blankness of "lustreless aeons". "Un­ helpful", he says "for  myself at fifty-seven
/still   capable of  hope/and  anger".  But the  poem  moves  from  the  vortex  of  dis­ solution into  a  sudden flight  of  thought, neither  hopeful  nor   angry,   nor   happy, but aware. "One had  not noticed  before".
Irving Layton has  always  been  one  to
notice-and  to  notice   his  own  aware­ ness.  "The  Bull   Calf',  "Cat Dying   in Autumn",   "Keine  Lazarovitch" - so many    of   the   memorable  early   poems celebrate a  moment of  awareness: "and then  I saw...."  Such  moments come  in Nail Polish, mostly from  confrontation  of the  question Frost   posed  in  "The Oven
-Bird": "What to make of a diminished thing". Layton makes  at  least one  perfect song  of  his  own  diminution in  "Epitaph for  a  Poet". There is a fine  fall  of  near­ rhymes    and    alliteration:    shoulders - wilder -older;  petals -wrinkled;  soft-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



soot-song-sage.  There is witty  placing  of body-words:   thighs,    breasts,    shoulders (wait   for   it!)    lips   (wait   longer,   then look, hidden in mid-lines) wrinkled  loins, forehead. There is a nice  anti-increment from  "I sang  of thighs" to  just "I sang". This   is  the   song  of   Frost's   "mid-wood bird."  Appropriately, a pale  polish, opal­ escent  as  a bubble,   gleams  on  this  par­  ticular  nail-the   unbreakable  claw   of ageing.
ELIZABETH  WATERSTON




EXUBERANT SURREALISM


LAWRENCE    GARBER,   Circuit.   Anansi,    cloth
$7.50,  paper  $2.50.
LAWRENCE GARBER's Circuit could be described   as  a  "brilliant"  book,  though the trouble with  brilliance is that  it is sometimes  merely  superficial. There is no denying  what   the  blurb   describes  as  the book's "stylistic dazzle." Garber's writing certainly does not  aim at any transparency to  reality;  it  insists   throughout  on   the artifice  of the  narration, and on the super­ reality   of   the   events   described.   These  events  are  startling, bizarre,  and  touched  by a wild  sense  of  humour. The  impres­  sions  are  conveyed   with  great  vividness, and  reinforced by an overflowing  abund­ ance  of detail. The effect  is like a dream, or  a comic  nightmare; perhaps even  the fact   that   (for   me  at  least)   each  of  the three novellas  goes on  just a little  bit too long is part of this  effect.
The    narrative  images   presented are very densely textured, yet, again  like the super-reality  of   dreams,  them   seem   to
 exist entirely  in  their  own  world,  making no contact  with what is normally  called normality.   The central concepts of  each story establish  their  own systems of insane logic;  but  outwith these  systems  there  is no reference  to realism  or probability. In "Death by Toilet", the Count undertakes a grand  tour of Europe, but the writing makes  no attempt to convey  any sense of the unique  character of the cities and countries he passes through. Barcelona, Paris,  and  Ravenna exist,  it  seems,  only as aspects of the characters' minds  (or bowels.)
The  stories, then,  by virtue of the force
of the writing,  the wealth  of comic detail, and  their  exclusion  of all  other  senses of reality  apart from   their  own  closed  sys­ tems,  impress  themselves  on  the  reader's mind  with the intensity  of a hallucinatory image.  This  in  itself  may  be  felt  to  be enough,  and   certainly it   marks   a  very individual Canadian writer. But the read­  er, and/or the  critic, is perhaps tempted to ask more,  to ask, for instance, whether these   images   have    any   "significance", whatever   that  is. The  previously-quoted blurb   certainly  encourages  this  with   its proclamation   that  the   stories   "explore the  decadence  of our  literary sensibilities  and  of our  civilization."
Without wanting to  hold  Garber  res­ ponsible  for  a  blurb  which   he  probably didn't   write,   one   is   entitled   to  some doubts   here.  Is  it  seriously  the  purpose of his book to explore  how  much  or  how little  "shock"  is aroused  by  a story  whose primary image  is human  excrement? Or  is "These are  the Sacred  Places"  seriously intended as a satire  on  the  movie  indus­ try?   Mr.   Garber   seems  to   be  far   too intelligent a writer  to have  aims as facile as these.
So  consider   the   possibilities   for   an


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"interpretation" of "These are the Sacred Places."  The first step  would  presumably be to identify  Reynolds  Hall  as an image of the  artist: a point  which  Garber  rein­ forces  by  his  reference to  Kafka's  "The Hunger Artist" and  simultaneously under­ cuts   by  putting  the   reference  into   the mouth of his most pretentiously arty char­ acter.  Hall  sets out  to expose the "reality" behind  the  carefully manufactured image of a superstud filmstar called Bruce Karle. But  this  "reality", as seen  through Gar­  ber's  writing, appears more  floridly  and lustily  unreal   than   the  camp   unrealities of  Karle's costume-epic movies;  and  Hall records  it  in  a style which  Garber  accur­ ately  describes   as  laughably  overwritten shit  - though    again    the   reference  is undercut by being  attributed  to  a  rather bizarre  nun  who wages a continuous war against    Hall's  attempts   to   record    his insights  on toilet-paper. Hall's  reaction to events  is, physically,  to become  more  and more  diseased,  while  mentally he  resorts to viler and  viler imprecations against  the subjects  of his writing. He finally regresses to complete paralysis  and dumbness,  with his  words  being  spoken  for  him   by  an impersonator,  Shirley   Azfal,   who   also dubs  in Bruce Karle's voice so consistently that  the  two cannot be told apart. The pretentious director dreams of filming Paradise Lost  with  Shirley  dubbing not only God,  but all the other  voices as well, thus  giving  a  supreme illusion  of Divine Control. But  Shirley,  who may  then  per­ haps  be seen as the ultimate artist, has no personality or existence of her own, living only  as a  series of impersonations.
Etcetera.  The  ramifications of   such an  interpretation would  have  to  be  pur­ sued much  further into  the multitudinous detail  of Garber's image;  neither in  this nor  in  the  other  two stories  is there  any

106
 clearcut "statement" to be extracted. Rather, Garber's exuberant surrealism  is continuously evocative, suggesting  exten­ sions  of  meaning and  application  which the  reader   is free  to  follow.  That is, his narrative operates as image rather than  as statement, and  the  reader  may search  for the  "significance" of  these images  at  any level he chooses. There is, it seems to me, nothing superficial to  Lawrence Garber's brilliance.
STEPHEN  SCOBIE




MOUTH EXHAUSTED SILENCE


SEYMOUR  MAYNE, Mouth. Quarry Press, $2.50.
STEPHEN   SCOBIE, Jn  the  Silence  of the  Year.
Delta  Canada, $r.oo.

OFTEN  WITH THE CREATIVE ACT,  possibly more   than   with   any  other   act,   the  re­ sulting  reality  falls short  of the  ideal  and of  our  expectations. Though  they  come close,    and    despite   their    entertaining qualities, this  is  the  case  in  some  ways with  the  recent   books  of  Stephen Scobie and  Seymour Mayne.
Scobie's  In  the Silence  of the Year, by
using  the  metaphors of  silence  and   the word, deals with  aesthetic and  human questions:

I love the things  between - like silence between  two words;

the  Hopi  Indians based  their  numerical system on 8, because  they  counted, .not their  fingers, but  the  spaces  in  between.

When many young and old men are uncreatively  dabbling  in   concrete  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sound    poetry  - forms    exhausted   fifty years  ago in  Europe-it is refreshing to find   a   young   poet   affirming,  implicitly and   explicitly,  the   value   of   the   well­ placed   word  in  the  craft   of   writing.  A commitment to  the  anguish  of  art  is not for  the  faint-hearted.

Words cling
in  notches of  the  mind, to  wait  for  senrice. They are   masters....

A  word   is  pilgrim, has   a   thousand  homes but  seeks one  shrine.

Thus in these  poems Boris  Pasternak's classic litotes, "Writing consists of placing one word  after  another," is poetically asserted  in the interplay of words and silence.  The ancestry   of  the   religion   of poetry  in modern times goes back  to Mallanne  and   the   other  French   sym­ bolists.  Scobie   seems  to  profess  a  faith  reminiscent of theirs in the deeply moving  poem  to  his father:

No gap  is greater  between us than    this-my  inability
to share your  faith.   My  "Word"
is different, though perhaps
I worship with   no  less  devotion.

In  addition to the Scottish  background of this  poem  Scobie  demonstrates  classic themes  in  "Old Daidalos" and  "White swimmer   in  green   water."  Most   of  the poems  are  terse,  untitled and  technically well  written.
The one  disappointing thing about the book  is that  it  is so slight.  Like  so many other   thin   books  of  verse,  it  has  barely enough  poems   ( I 2  in  all)   with  which  to make   a   fair    evaluation  of   the   poet's talents   and   range.   Are   many   of   these young  poets  intentionally brief  and  witty or  just short-winded, or is the  blame  with the  publishers? What  Scobie  has given  us, though, shows  enough  promise   that   we
 should  look  expectantly for  his  next  vo­
lume  of verse.
In   contrast  to  the   purity   of  thought and  diction  of Scobie's  verse Mayne  gives us  an  earthier  vision  of  life.  As  in  his earlier  books, in  Mouth Seymour  Mayne is  primarily    concerned  with   sexuality: the loss of virginity  and  love-making. But to these rather hackneyed themes  the poet has brought  his craftsmanship, the added perspective   of  painful  separations,  sick­ ness and  death, and   has  thus  saved  the book   from   being   simply   titillating  ju­ venilia.  One  of  the  most  deftly  handled and    stimulating   poems,    "Rising  with anger", deals  with  illness and  death. The  dramatic  quality  and   the  use   of   the imagery   in   this   poem   suggest   a   very sensitive poet.  Mayne  is at his best in the  more  ambiguous poems  that   treat  eroti­  cism subtly  and  he  is  at  his worst  in  the unimaginati;:t>  ones.  Compare the  pithy,  delicate  and  evocative:

After  the  storm
your  moist   eyes glisten

with  the  heavy-handed and  prosaic:

you  feel  the  lurch, that  funny feeling in  the  belly;   buzz  of  blood,
neuralgic pain.

The   poorer   poems,   though  clever   and entertaining celebrations of eros,  become tedious  as the  book  progresses.  The  puns on "head" and  "third eye"  are  over-used and  begin to lose any suggestive  qualities. Though the  recurrence of  the  subject
of  love-making  and   the   images   of   vir­
ginal blood give the impressions (possibly justified)     of   an    undue   preoccupation with  sex, the  positive  result  of  this  tech­ nique   is  the   continuity  of   mood   and theme  from  one  poem  to  the  next.
With   the  mature facility   that   in  the


IO]

BOOKS IN REVffiW



better    poems    Mayne   demonstrates  to create moods and to elicit emotional responses from the reader, I am looking forward to  seeing  this  poet  try  his  hand at  the  treatment of more  than  nocturnal sexual  fantasies and  the concavities  of the body.  I  think   it  is  below  his  talents  for him  to  publish   even  one  poem  that  ap­ pears  as little  more  than  an  extension  of his "head." Let  us hope  that  both  Scobie and   Mayne  will  fulfil  the  great   expec­ tations   which    they   have   aroused   with these  books.
JOSEPH PIVATO




REPRINTS


THE TWO MOST RECENT titles in the Cana­ dian   Reprint  Series   of  the   Edmonton publisher, Mel  Hurtig, are Samuel  Strick­  land's  Twenty-seven   Years   in   Canada  West, or   the   Experience   of   an   Early Settler    ($8.so),   and    George    Heriot's Travels  through  the  Canadas   ($23.00).
Samuel  Strickland  came  of  a  famous
literary family,  and  his sisters, Catharine Parr   Trail! and   Susanna  Moodie,   were the  great  blue-stockings  of  pre-Confeder­ ation  Canada. Samuel  preceded  them  to Canada, arriving in 1825, and his Twenty­ seven Years in Canada  was the distillation of  half  a life  as  a  gentleman settler  and for  some  years as  a  servant   of  the Canada    Company.   As   a   personality, Strickland    pales    beside    his   associate, Tiger   Dunlop; as  a  writer  he  was  over­ shadowed  by  his  sisters.  His   book   has neither  the   fluency   and   understanding of Catharine's The Backwoods  of Canada nor  the idiosyncratic charm  of Susanna's

108
 Roughing it in the  Bush, which  appeared in  1852,  the  year   before  his  own   book came  off  the  press.  Undoubtedly a sense of family  rivalry  drove  Samuel  to take  up the  pen; the  result  was a  pedestrian  nar­ rative   whose  main   virtue   is  its  humble objectivity   in    comparison    with    Mrs. Moodie's prejudiced  eloquence.
George Heriot was  of  an  earlier  gen­ eration of  visitors;   he  came  in   1792  to Quebec  as  a  civil  servant,  stayed  until r8r6, and  travelled as far  west as Detroit at  a  time  when  Upper  Canada was  still in  a  most  primitive  stage  of  settlement. He    was    a   fairly    good    topographical draughtsman,  and   his   illustrations  are perhaps  the   best  feature of  his  Travels through the Canadas, which is a curiously  hybrid  production; the  first  volume  is a rather  detailed account, written without inspiration   but   with    a   great    deal    of observed   detail,   of   the   waterways and communities of Canada more  than  a century and  a half  ago, while  the  second goes  completely away  from  its  predeces­ sor,   and   also  away   from   Heriot's  own experiences,  to   describe obviously         at secondhand -the  manners and  customs of the  Indian  peoples  of North  and South America, a subject that  evidently aroused  some  passion in  Heriot.
From  Oberon Press comes a new translation by Michael Macklen, with  an introduction  by   Marcel  Trudel,  of Samuel de  Champlain's Voyages to  New France, r6rs-r8  (paper, $2.95). The work  has long  been  unavailable, and  Dr. Macklem's translation  presents   it  agree­ ably,  bringing out  not  only  the  details  of Indian   life   as   Champlain    so   clearly observed   and   recorded  it,  but  also  the largeness  and  humanity of  this great early Canadian.
G.W.
