$1.25  per  copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·29


Summer, 1966



JIPPRENTICESHIPS IN DISCOVERY



Articles
BY GEORGE  BOWERING, Wll..LIAM H. NEW, LILA  STONEHEWER, DESMOND PACEY

Controversy
BY WARREN TALLMAN


Reviews
BY HILDA THOMAS, JEAN-ETHIER  BLAIS, E. B. GOSE, C. H. MOORE, D. G. JONES, ELDON GRIER,  A. W.  PURDY, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, NORMAN SHRIVE, R. W. DUNNING, J. A. MACDONALD,
CARL F. KLINCK, AUDREY HAWTHORN



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







PAPERBACKS AND RESPECTABLE PICKPOCKETS






UASSUMINGLY, BUT suRELY, the  softcover  movement has been working its way into Canadian publishing. It is true that  in the paper­ back cellars of our bookshops there are long shelves packed densely with American and  British publications,  and  small comers thinly filled with Canadian. But this is due largely to the fact  that  all the broad  fields of general interest  are encom­ passed much more economically by the mammoth  and well-established publishing houses of the larger countries. Who would sell the paperback  rights for a book on, say, Carthage or the Lost Land  of Mu or the rackety life of Mrs. Aphra  Behn to a  Canadian publisher,  when  Penguin  Books  or, even  more  profitable,  Signet is there, with  Meridian  in  the  background  for  the esoterica and  Evergreen  for the erotica?  The  Canadian paperback  trade  is, generally speaking, a trade  in Cana­ diana,  literary  or  historical,  and  this is  what  makes its survival  and  its growth such  interesting   phenomena.  Obviously  there are   enough readers  now  not merely  to  make  it  profitable  to  publish the  regular  hundred  or  two  hardcover  books of "Canadian interest" that  appear  with native publishers every year, but there  is also -which  there  was not a decade  ago -an  increasing  middlebrow and  middle-income  public  ready  to buy  cheap  editions  of books  by  Canadian authors.  Admittedly, libraries buy up a large proportion  of the hardcover  copies, and students  are often captive customers for paperbacks in Canadian history and literature.  But  neither  of these concentrations  of customers is in itself enough  to sustain not merely the ordinary  book trade along traditional lines but also, parallel with it, a  whole variety of paperback  series and projects.
The  most vigorous of all the Canadian paperback publishing houses is McClel­
land  &  Stewart.  They  run,  to  begin,  two  of the  four  real  paperback  series in


3

PAPERBACKS AND RESPECTABLE PICKPOCKETS



Canada. The  New Canadian  Library, devoted  to nineteenth  and  twentieth  cen­ tury  literary  classics, with  a few anthologies of criticism  and  verse, now  has 59 titles.  The  most  recent   batch   of  six includes,  almost  predictably,  an  inferior Stephen   Leacock  (there  are  already  seven  others  in  the  series) ,  but  also two modem  novels of the richest excellence, Sheila  Watson's  The  Double  Hook  and Mordecai  Richler's Son of A Smaller Hero, together  with one work of The Ham­  handed  Master,  Frederick  Philip Grove, Settlers of the Marsh,  which  makes one wonder,  as always  with Grove,  how a novelist  with so much  sensibility and  so much  power  could  write so uncouthly. The  other  McClelland  & Stewart  series, the  Carleton  Library,  run  in  collaboration  with  Carleton  University  and  subsi­ dized  by  the  Canada Council,  has  a  solid look and  is  designed  with  a  rather deceptive  dulness;  it  is mostly  devoted  to  reprinting  works of  Canadian his­ torical,  economic or sociological scholarship  with, once  again,  a few anthologies thrown  in,  and  it  has now reached its 29th  volume. Some of the books are ex­ cessively specialized; some, like 0. D. Skelton's Life  and Times  of Sir Alexander Tilloch   Galt,  are  merely bad-in  this case the  model  anti-biography. But  the series must not be dismissed as all academic dryness; some of the books it includes are sparkling examples of their own type of scholarly or repertorial  writing. I, for one, am  grateful  that  the six most recent  volumes include  Andre Siegfried's bril­ liant study from a continental French viewpoint of The  Race Question in Canada,  John  Bartlet  Brebner's  North  Atlantic Triangle, a massively impressive study of Canadian-British-American   relations  over  the   past   two  centuries,   and   Tom McFeat's Indians of the North Pacific Coast, an ably done anthology of normally inaccessible writings on  the most fascinating  of all Indian  cultures, from  part  of John   R.  Jewitt's  story  of  his imprisonment  by  the  Nootka,  through  the  classic accounts  by Franz  Boas of Kwakiutl ceremonials, to the records of mid-twentieth  century  anthropologists.
McClelland   & Stewart  have  notably  furthered   the  paperback   movement  in Canada not only  by such series, but  also by adopting  a very considerable  pro­ gramme   of simultaneous  hardcover  and  paperback   publication.  This  has  been done  with  topical  books like The   Comfortable   Pew  and  The   Case  of  Steven Truscott, which  by this means have run  into what  in Canadian terms are enor­ mous editions,  but  also with less rapidly selling items like books of  new poetry, so that  it has been possible for readers to buy the works of our most vital contem­ porary  poets immediately  on  publication  at  ordinary  paperback  rates;  this, no doubt,  has contributed  greatly to the relative popularization of  modern Canadian verse  among  the  students,  whose predecessors ten  years ago  were almost  com-

4

PAPERBACKS AND  RESPECTABLE PICKPOCKETS



pletely ignorant   of  what  was  being  written  or  what  had  been  written  in  this country.
I confess I have not gone deeply enough into the question to say who in Canada originated  this custom of publishing expensive and inexpensive editions of a book simultaneously,  but it is spreading  quickly and other publishers than  McClelland
& Stewart  are taking it up. Some of them-often small new houses-are using
the  technique   to  attract   readers  to  quite  experimental work.  An  example  is John  Robert  Colombo's  The  Mackenzie  Poems, published  by the Swan  Publish­ ing  Company; the  paperback  editions costs only 75¢. These  are  what  Colombo calls "found  poems". The  idea  arouses among those of us who lived  through  the Surrealist age the same feeling of nostalgic deja vu as did the neo-dadaist construc­ tions  which  were  the  fashion  among  young  painters  two  or  three  seasons ago. The  surrealists  were always looking out for "objets  trouves",  and  Mr. Colombo is doing precisely the same, "finding"  poetry in unlikely places, in this case in the speeches of William  Lyon Mackenzie, reproduced with even their commas intact,  but rearranged  into verse patterns on the page so that their rhythms and relation­ ships are more evident. A game no doubt, but an intelligently played one. Perhaps before long we shall go all the way back to the telephone directory  poems.
To  return  to the generalities of paperback  publishing, most established houses are  now,  in  a  rather  sporadic  way,  bringing  out  in  soft  covers the  Canadian classics for  which  they  still  hold  copyright,  and  there  are  at  least  two  notable series in  addition  to  those  I  have  already  noted. The  Clarke  Irwin  paperbacks started  off encouragingly,  as pleasantly designed books with a varied list of titles; the last batch  we received included  Emily Carr's  Klee Wyck, Robertson  Davies' Tempest-Tost and Bruce Hutchison's  well-researched but desperately over-written The  Fraser. Recently no more books in this series have been reaching us; we hope it has not come to an  end.  Certainly Toronto's Canadian University Paperbacks is very much  alive, reaching  up to a total of so  titles. The  virtues of this series, unexpected  in  a  venture  by  a  University  press, are  its  variety  and  unpredict­ ability, and  particularly  the inclination  of its editors to turn  up  just  the kind  of half-forgotten  works which interest an omnivorously voracious reader. The series includes such  memorable  works as The  Gutenberg Galaxy and  George Stanley's The   Birth  of Western  Canada, and  at  least one of  this  age's most  unreadable books, Innis' The  Bias of Communication, but every now and again there appears one of those modest works crammed  with the kind of  information which sustains the  inveterately  curious  mind;   the  most  recent  of   these  is Edwin  C.  Guillet's  Pioneer Travel  in Upper  Canada.

5

PAPERBACKS AND  RESPECTABLE PICKPOCKETS



The  paperback   revolution seems to have  dug  into  permanence, and  one can only  welcome its survival. It  benefits publishers;  otherwise  they would  not  con­ tinue  to follow it. It  benefits readers, and  in some ways it benefits writers, who earn  a  little  extra  out  of  their  paperback  royalities  and  are  doubtless  helped, mentally  as well as materially, by the atmosphere  of heightened interest in litera­ ture  and  in books as objects-to-be-possessed, that  it arouses.


SoMUCH  FOR WHAT IN  GENERAL we must regard  as a posi­
tive trend  in the world of literature.  Now, from  the writer's  point of view, for a
just complaint.  Last year, when artists and entrepreneurs of the arts laboured to­ gether  at Seminar  65 under  the genial eye of Mr.  Maurice  Lamontagne to pro­ duce  a group  of resolutions intended  to foster the arts  in Canada and  to  better the situation  of artists, the literary sub-committee  drew the government's attention  to the  fact  that,  under  present Canadian laws, libraries  can  pick the  pockets of authors  with impunity.  A book is sold, let us say, for $5.00, and the author  earns, under   normal   contracts,  50¢ in  royalties. He  expects  that  the  purchaser  and perhaps  only one  or  two friends or  members  of his family  will  have  the use of this copy of his book, at  least until it  passes into  the second-hand  market.  But libraries  make nonsense of such calculations, and  it is always a matter  of chagrin for a writer  wandering  along the stacks to pull out one of his books, to find that thirty or forty people have taken it out, which means that fifty people have prob­ ably read it, and  that  he has earned only the same 50¢, just about  1¢ per reader. The  publishers  do  nothing  to curb  this  imposition  on  their  authors,  since  they themselves are not losing and  the libraries are good customers. The  only solution lies with  the government.  Sweden  has passed a law obliging all libraries to com­ pensate  authors  for  the royalties they lose through  the circulation  of their books, and  has worked  out  a satisfactory way of collecting and  distributing  the dues. I gathered  when  I was last in  West Germany  that  a similar  scheme is going into operation   there.  So  far  the  Canadian government  has  done  nothing  to correct this injustice  to  authors,  which might be remedied  either  by legalizing a levy on libraries,  or  by  making  the matter  a public charge  and  allowing authors special deductions  for  tax  purposes from  their  book  royalty income.





6



AND THE SUN GOES DOWN

Richler's First Novel



George Bowering



One  generation passeth away, and  an­ other generation cometh: but  the  earth abideth  for  ever.




IN MORDECAI RICHLER's    FIRST  NOVEL   thue is  a  Jewish American  businessman who has changed his name from Lazarus to Larkin. That leaves no  Lazarus  to  be  raised from  the dead;  he will go about  the  process of mouldering  along with  nearly everyone else he meets in America  and  Valencia, the sad worn-out  sacrificial portion of Spain,  Europe,  and  the world  that  is the setting for The  Acrobats.
In I 957, an interview with Richler appeared in the Tamarack Review,in which
he referred  to people "living  in a time ... when there is no agreement  on values
... there has been a collapse of absolute values, whether  that value was Marx  or God  or Gold  [All three  treated  disconsolately in the novel.]  We are living in a time when superficially life seems meaningless, and we have to make value judge­ ments all the time, it seems in relation to nothing."  Richler is here talking about  his  problem,  and  the  problem  of Andre  Bennett,  the  young  Canadian painter acrobat  adrift  in  the  city of Valencia  during  fiesta time, AprilI 95 I, a decade and a half after the bell tolled for Robert Jordan, alone and dying on a mountain trail soon be be trod  by Franco's  fascists.
Andre  sits at the cafe tables in the Lost Generation  of his mind, stuck behind the  wrong  World  War  that  he was too young  to enter  or  understand, "so  he came  to Spain- Valencia,  where the killing had started  in a way and  maybe they  could  explain  it."  But  Ernest  Hemingway is  not  there;  neither  is  the Spain  of Hemingway's books. Through the  work of Hemingway,  from  the  be­ ginnings in the first short stories to The  Old Man and the Sea, there is a growing

7

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



sense of commitment, not necessarily of man  to cause,  but of man  to men. This  is the  painfully   learned   realization of  the  constantly aging  Hemingway hero,  that as  the  world  of  the  twentieth   century   becomes  more  huge  in  its  anti-human machinery, the people under  the machines must  reach  out  more generously  to one another. "No   man  is an  island" is  the  motto  set  to  Hemingway's novel  of  the Spanish war,  where  the members  of the  Lost Generation find  at least each  other under the  bombs  of  the  twentieth  century's least  human machine-Fascism. In  1951 Spain,  Richler's anti-hero demonstrates the disappointment in the notion that  such  a  painfully   made  commitment was  to  be  invalidated by  the  ensuing victory  of the  World  War,  and  the subsequent transformation of men  to smaller machines, servants  to the master robot.
In fact,   Richler sometimes  seems  to  sacrifice  his  art   to  a  love-hate   attitude
to Hemingway's works, especially  to For Whom the  Bell Tolls. In  the  beginning of The Acrobats  there  is a noticeable  Hemingway influence, in the artificial dia­ logue,  in  the sentence  order  and  length:

In  the summer they would take us out in the boats, and we would jump overboard and  swim. The  water was very cool, and  there  was always the taste of salt in our mouths.  The  priests said it was evil because we all swam and  played together and we were  often  naked.  My father  laughed  at  the  priests. He  said they had  filthy minds.  At night  there was always dancing on the quays, especially when there was a good catch. That  night there was only the noise of the shooting.

Sometimes Andre  Bennett  thinks,  perhaps consciously,  as if he  were  Frederic
Henry:

Love,  he  thought.  That  is one  of  the  words   that  is no longer  any  good.  Like courage, soul, beautiful,  honour,  and  so many  others.  Words  that  have  become almost obscene because of hack writers.

Doubly  sad for Andre, because at least Frederic Henry had  a world war to blame. It is  not  only  Richler who  has  Hemingway on  the  mind. At  least  part  of  the time  Andre's resentment, his feeling of being  trapped in  the  wrong  disillusioning time,  is turned  against Hemingway's Spanish  experience:
"As a matter  of fact,"  Andre said, "I'm  not really a painter  at all. I came here to study life in its entirety. One day I hope to write a book about  it. You know, like that Who  do the Bells Toll  For."

But  this  is Richler's first  book,  and  as often  happens in  first  books,  the  young author's literary  ghosts are difficult to allay. So that later, when Andre is preparing in  his  drunkenness to poke  his fist at  the  Nazi  Kraus, Richler sees him  through

8

AND  THE  SUN  GOES DOWN



the  literary  trick   (Hemingway's word)   that  comes via  Hemingway's "Up  in
Michigan" from  the advice of Gertrude  Stein:

Andre laughed. He laughed and laughed and laughed. He laughed because Chaim was a  useful man and  he laughed because Kraus was a brute. He clutched the banister and  doubled  up  laughing.  He  laughed because Ida  was dead  and  he laughed  because probably  he did  not love Toni. He  laughed   because  he was drunk.  He  laughed  and  laughed.  He  laughed because he was feverish and  he laughed because the doctors said he would go mad. Tears rolled down his cheeks, and he laughed.

All the  directionless  bar  scenes of The  Acrobats are  like expatriate The  Sun
Also Rises scenes, but without even the desperate gaiety of the Jake Barnes crowd
-rather with a soft and aimless self-hate. When Andre is invited into a tryst with Jessie, the wife of sad American tourist Larkin, he goes along, saying only, "Okay, I guess," and  again, "Okay." Later, when Jessie tries to get his clothes off in the hotel room, he simply mopes around  till her embarrassing  husband  appears, and it is too late.






E            are also sad clowns, wearing sad faces under  their sad  faces of make-up.  The  world is a big-top  where the same tired music grinds every day, and the variety act appears monotonously every afternoon,  every night.  In  Valencia,  it is festival time, the loud drunken  blaze of colour  and  fire that  comes every year to use up whatever  small flames may still lick in  the  bellies of  the citizens, inheritors  of the worn earth  tramped  for  cen­ turies  by armies  of Araby,  France,  the Vatican,  and  latterly,  Franco,  and  now the also defeated foreigners from two continents.
In Richer's  eyes, the place where the killing began is still an ugly disaster area, where the centuries-shattered survivors pick their way among  the rubble of each other.  The  wanderings  of  the  foreigners  take  place  among  constant  images of beggars, cripples, forced  prostitutes  taken  by police for  protection,  not only the war-blighted  of Spain,  but  of this focus of Europe  and  the  world.  This  is the post-Hemingway  world,  the post-For Whom  the Bell Tolls world,  where the ser­ mon from  Donne  takes on a grim cast. The  language of Richler  and  his charac­  ters  is also post-Hemingway,  with  all rapture  gone, all romanticism  sifted out. The   (anti)hero's girl  is not  brave  Maria  in  a sleeping  bag,  but  the  pregnant


9

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



prostitute,  Toni,  not the rebellious Pilar of the mountains,  but  the city-slum girl tired of revolution and war, who can say of Spain only:

"-pooh! There has always been poverty. You can do nothing, do you understand? Nothing!  Why? Wh-- What is the use of talking? Kill and kill and kill. Me, I would rather live on my knees. Now I have said it!"

Almost all the people in the novel are tired and disappointed. Andre is a man in his twenties, a young artist, with little responsibility, but his disappointment is the largest. It  is enough to bring him  to his own miserable end. His disappoint­ ment  is the largest, and  the least understandable -it  is a kind of  symbolic dis­ appointment, where the figure of the man stands  head-bowed between the stories of the pre-war  West, and the actual bomb-broken  buildings of  1951.
The  young artist's opposite number is the ex-Olympic athlete,  Reinhold Kraus,
the Nazi for whom the present Spain is another  kind of disappointment. Fascism is not  the success it had seemed to be after  the Civil War  in which Kraus  had been  Hitler's  man  there. Now the country  is lax, disorderly, semitic, effeminite, undermined  by the Communist  underground.
In  the  triangle  of Andre- Toni- Kraus  there  is a kind  of allegory. In  many instances  Toni,  the  postwar  girl of  the  bars  and  streets, speaks  for  war-weary Spain,  expressing the desire to get out of the ideological war, and seeking means to survive. When Andre says that  he is in Spain  to find out what  mid-century  is all about,  he knows that his attempts  to make a loving relationship  with Toni are infibulated  by the guilt he carries about  the abortion  death  of the Jewish girl he had  slept  with  in  college-Montreal  recent  past.  For  Kraus,  Toni  is important because she is carrying his child. At one point Kraus  is seen writing in his diary, linking in his thoughts the rebirth of Nazism and  the child of infiltration in Toni's womb.  Eventually  the two rivals meet on a bridge over the tired Spanish  river, and worn-out  old athlete kills worn-out young artist, and a group of impoverished postwar  citizens descends on the loser, stripping  him of his raiment,  and  hiding the naked body in a cave.
Barney  Larkin  is the disappointed  Jewish  American  tourist,  who began  as a poor boy, got rich in a kind of mid-century  American dream,  and has now found out  that  riches have  not made him charming  and sought-after, especially not by his wife, Jessie. Jessie, a Gentile, married Barney (Lazarus) Larkin for his money, and  in  her  disappointment, finds that  money  cannot  buy back  her  time, or  his virility.
Brooding  behind  all the  personal disappointments is the failure  of the social


10

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



revolution,  the shock that  came with the victory of tyranny  and poverty. Though some revolutionaries like Guillermo still wander about Spain, in and out of Valen­ cia, and Andre's  life, they are bitter, as if regretting the failure of the revolution, not looking forward  to its coming. Pepe and Maria  are seen at times in the novel. Pepe,  the  poor  husband  out  of work, has seen the failure  of the  revolution,  has still the simple faith  to admire  Andre's paintings -he has not been entirely em­ bittered by the failure. He is married to the Catholic Maria, who is at last pregnant  after  many disappointments. Pepe is a nickname for Jose, so they are Joseph and Mary,  an  example  of Richler's  early obvious attempts  at  symbolism. But Pepe is cynical about  the chances for the child of Joseph and  Mary:

"... Why should I be pleased, ... If he is any good, they will get him like they got the others. And if he is going to be bad I do not want him."

In  A Farewell to Arms, those who oppose their humanity to the great machines of  gods and  men  perish  young.  In  The  Acrobats, those characters  who  try  to struggle for a cause that  is perishing or is hiding within  them, die (Andre, Guil­ lermo), while the ones who accept defeat and disillusionment live on and pass to new times and  places  (Chaim, the wise and  hounded  Jew;  Juanito, the gentle­ man   turned   pimp;   Derek,  the  Civil  War  Republican   poet  become  dissolute alchoholic and homosexual) .
Pretty obviously, Richler  intends in this first novel to show his own disillusion­ ment in a postwar world he never made nor even had  a hand  in destroying. The  form  of the story shows that.  While Andre Bennett, self-exiled  young Canadian artist  in  Spain,  is  the  character  with  whom  the  author  most  closely identifies, The  Acrobats is not his story alone. The  book is made  up of  shuffied scenes, the searching  spotlights  shift  from  acrobat  to  acrobat,  lighting  now  Barney  in  his frightened  New World foray into a blunt Spanish whorehouse,  now Andre lying in his rat-infested  room  beside an unfinished  painting  of woe, now Kraus  in his Nazi sex-problem,  unable  to cope with  women or intellect. The  lights probe all over Valencia in the present, but also into the past of Montreal and  Madrid  and Businesstown, U.S.A. The different people cross each other in different places, the whole  acrobatic  routine,  and  snippets of knowledge  are  exchanged  with  hand­ holds. We watch  not the performance  of one man's life, but the tumbling pattern  of the human  condition. Each  player hides his own version of guilt, secret from the rest. The  recent  past in each case haunts  the present, and  promises no good future-for any of the characters of the novel, for Spain, for mid-century  World.



II

AND  THE SUN GOES DOWN



Doggedly, the Valencians  burn  their traditional  exorcistic  fa/las, and  Derek says of that futile diversion :

"Perhaps in all of us there is some evil, and we're just too weak to burn it. So we build evil toys and dance around them. Later we burn them, hoping, perhaps, that it will help."




BuT STILL WE   RETURN to Andre.  He is not the centre of the world, but  his disillusionment and failure are special, of a particular kind. He is the only character  whose experience does not include  the war of the Thirties  and
Forties,  except  in  the  way  he  remembers,  the  child's  participation in  wartime mottos  and   propaganda formulas.  If somehow  Toni   represents  Spain,  Andre represents the postwar consciousness of the West.
Chaim,  the  Jewish  bar-owner,  is a kind  of  wandering  Jew,  and  like Jung's wise old  man,  he offers the wisest words on  Andre's  problem.  Chaim  has been hounded  from country  to country, various ideologies at his heels, and fully under­ stands  that  no "cause"  holds the promise for  (a)   man's  salvation.  It  is curious to  note  that  his name  may  be a pun.  Mahavira, the  founder  of  Jainism, said, "Within   yourself lies salvation."  Chaim,  the  founder  of  Chaimism,  says, "But there is no cause that saves us all. Salvation is personal."
Andre  realizes the hopelessness of the war-fraught twentieth-century causes:
Often it appeared to Andre that he belonged to the last generation of men. A generation  not lost and  not unfound but sought after  zealously, sought after so that  it  might  stand  up  and  be counted,  perjuring  itself and  humanity, sought after by the propagandists of a faltering revolution and the rear guard of a dying civilization. His  intellectual  leaders  had  proven  either  duds  or  counterfeits­ standing up in the thirties to cheer the revolution hoarsely, and in the fifties sitting down again to write a shy, tinny, blushing yes to capitalistic democracy.
Nobody could quite believe again that he had grown up to find all gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in men shaken. There  was going to be another war all right-their  war. The old gods, newly cleaned and pressed, were being gleefully handed down to them.

But he is, despite his sophistication, a product of the middle of the twentieth cen­ tury, and the inheritor of its debts. Chaim,  a man who seems to have seen all gen­ erations, knows, that, "The fun will be for Andre's and Toni's generation.They will have  to pay  the  unpaid  bills of the  past, account  for  the  dishonesties, the vag-

12

AND  THE  SUN GOES DOWN



rancies...." But  Chaim knows  also  (as Andre  seems not to)  that  there is always a time after  the  wars;  and  now  that  it is fifteen years after  the Spanish war,  and six years after  the  World  War, it is time  to quit  looking  over one's  shoulder:

"It is that  he knows and  understands  all the things that  he is against  but  he still doesn't  know what  he is  for. Andre has the temperament  of a priest, but  none of the present  churches  will do. That  makes it very difficult."

Andre, walking  around Valencia, the scene of dogged  celebration of the  past, the  ancient peoples of Spain, is also haunted by his own  past, his share, perhaps, of a  world  guilt.  There is an  implied  connection between  Kraus' Nazi  past  and the  guilt  carried in Andre  -he  made  a  Montreal Jewish  girl  pregnant, and  she died  after  her  abortion; and  when  Andre  went  to see her family,  the father told him  to go away  and  leave  them  alone,  ethnically.  Andre  hit the old  man, knock­ ing  him  down,  carrying away  with  him  that  added  guilt.  At  the  point  when  he finishes  telling  this story  to  Toni, he finds  himself looking  into  the  Nazi  eyes of Kraus. Now  the  dead  girl  stands  or  lies always  between  Andre  and  Toni. (As Nazi  Kraus stands  in  the  shadows,  watching them.)  Toni, the  traditional pros­  titute  looking  for love, knows  that  Andre's ability to love is smothered by guilt:

And she felt fear, because she loved him with a hopeless beautiful love, knowing­ always knowing-that he could  not love, that  something  ugly and  bitter  within  him would always stifle any love he felt for her.

And  it is Andre's inability to love that  is his grief and  failure, because  an inability to love is an  inability to believe. Guillermo, his Communist friend, refuses to be­ lieve  that  Andre's salvation is personal:

"I remember  when you were ill,"  he said, "when all you knew was despair, and  all you did  was drink.  Do  you know why, Andre?  Not  because of the  girl and  her father.  That is only incidental.  It is because you are  without  hope or  reason  or direction.  You are  s£n centimo. If you are a humanist  there is only one place for you. You must join us."

Andre   has  at  least  the  sell-knowledge  required   to  refute  Guillermo's solution. But  that  leaves  him  looking  into  a void:
I guess my crime is that  I haven't  chosen, he thought. I wonder what  my punish­
ment will be. And who will be my judge?

Further, he knows that  which  Chaim suggests:

"It is the  man  who is unusual-the man  who rises above the  restrictions  of his own  class to  assert  himseH as an  individual  and  humanitarian. It's  pretty  damn

13

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



elementary to be aware of social injustice and poetic truth  and beauty, but to be capable of empathy, to unde  tand
you condemn him, well-Look, every human  being is to be approached  with a
sense of wonder. The rest is crap, or incidental."

Empathy-the quality of being able to feel another's joy or woe; Andre  knows that  his great  sin is in not being committed  to anyone outside  himself. He still hears  the old man  saying leave us alone. But Andre  is not in love with himself. In fact he seeks his own destruction. He is disgusted by his own failure of commit­ ment-it is with disgust towards his own failure  that  he allows himself   to say to Guillermo,  "Everything  is a  joke. It  has to be." And  he feels uneasy  before his father-figure  when Chaim asks him what postwar youth believes in, and he replies with  the  facile formula,  "I guess more  than anything else we  believe in  not believing."
However,  Andre  is more interesting than  that.  At least his is an odyssey, slow­ moving  as it may be. He is looking for a grail without  knowing what  a grail is. We see him  trying  to make some act of commitment, even if it is an  unsavory sexual  one  with  Barney Larkin's  wife, or  a shameful  drunken  one in  which he fecklessly punches  Kraus  and  gets beaten  up by that  reluctant destroyer. Chaim at one point recognizes that in his wish to be committed, Andre carries at least the potentiality  of his salvation. In  fact,  at one point  Chaim  speaks perhaps  like an indulgent  father  who does not care to discourage his son:

"But  I like you, Andre, because you are not bored. You are not intellectual and uncommitted. You are always taking part,  even if not always intelligently. The earth is in your hands and you are dirty."

It is not the truth,  of course, but it is a recognition of Andre's  predilection to­
ward  goodness.
But in his search, Andre gets lugubriously drunk,  glamourizes his situation somewhat  by calling his drunkenness  madness,  and  walks through  the Valencia streets of sordid escape. On his way towards whatever he is approaching, he hears a drab  and drunken  hopeless Spanish song of patriotism, love, and religious faith:

Por mi patria y por mi novia y mi Virgen de San Gil
y mi rosario de cuentas yo me quisiera morir.

-traditionally honourable  things to die for  (and  we know by now that  Andre is on  his  way  to  dying),   but  all  three  things  already  dead  inside  Andre.  In  his

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



pocket he has a thick wad of Chaim's  money, money that  promises to buy them escape, freedom  in Paris,  but  he meets a mad whore, and  throws the wealth on her bare belly, feeling a mysterious release as he does. This is one of the best real­ ized scenes in the novel, largely because it is one of the few that  cannot  be well interpreted  or understood,  because the manipulating  intellect of the author is not obvious; it is like most good parts of a novel-only the feelings respond, the wish to intervene,  the shock of sympathy for Chaim, whose chances seem to flutter to the  floor with  his Spanish  money.
At the same time, we see Andre's growing haze of what he feels is insanity, and it wars for his mind against  his desperation  to be committed  to anything,  as long as the man  can make an act, a gesture that is not escape or evasion. Once again it is a confrontation with  Kraus  that  seems to give him that  chance. And once again  Kraus  pummels  his antagonist,  finally picks him up and  hurls him off the bridge they meet on. Andre  lies smashed on the rocks below, and in his last con­ scious thoughts, is trying to be committed at least to his own death:

He felt a lump in his throat  but only dimly, as consciousness was slipping from him. He was sobbing. No.  No. All  I  ask is that  I  know  what's  going on. That's all. Never  mind  the  cigarette. Just knowing. Or  feeling.

But at  the moment  that  Kraus  threw  Andre from the  bridge, the  big final  falla was exploding, so that  we are reminded that Andre's way out is as much an eva­ sion and  a mollification as the Spanish indigent's yearly dazzlement.






SoME CRITICS have pointed out  (and  correctly, to a certain extent)   that  the  people  we meet in The Acrobats  are  stock  characters.  Andre is the young aesthete, lost and in exile, searching for meaning in a confused world. Toni  is the innocent  prostitute,  the traditional  wry comment  on a whole society that  has sold its innocence  for quick, mortal  and illusory rewards.  Chaim  is the perennial  wise old  wandering Jew  and  father  figure to those who  have lost all their own fathers. Barney is the rich boorish American abroad,  hiding secret fears of his own sexual inability  behind  an aggressive social manner.  And so on.
Probably  more to the  point  is that  in this first novel, Richler  has not  yet, as he has in his later  books, submerged  the techniques of writing below the surface of the story as we are  allowed a look at it. A reader  notices this in the first few

AND  THE SUN GOES  DOWN



pages, in which Andre is introduced  to the Americans. The scene-setting conver­ sations around  the sidewalk tables of Valencia  are filled with obvious attempts  to show that  the writer  is not simply reporting  dialogue. Someone says something;  then someone lights a cigarette;  then someone says something. Or:

Derek lit a cigarette. He tossed his head back with studied abandon and blew a big puff of smoke into the still air. I shouldn't have come back, he thought. It was wrong.

Or  "Jessie smiled brightly," then said something. "Jessie puckered  up her cherry lips impatiently," then said something. "Jessie applauded," then said something.
On  the  other  hand,  or  perhaps  still with  the  too-obtrusive  first hand,  when Richler  attempts  some impressionistic writing, he is usually clumsy. An exception is in the scene of Andre's death, but this may be because few people are prepared to offer their  knowledge in criticism of an experience  they have not come away from  yet. But  when  Richler  offers an  "impressionistic" picture  of  the  festival streets, his plan is so obvious as to render the familiar  techniques inadequate to the goal, the pen of the writer scratching in the ear.
Much more authentic and accomplished are the lyrical catalogues, of Andre's childhood  experiences,  of  the  political  evils  of  mid-century,   or  of  the  sordid Valencia  streets.  Once  Jessie loses her  way  in  the  backstreets  of  the  Valencia markets,  where :

The heat was redolent of rancid food, children with soiled underwear, uncovered garbage, venereal diseases, sweat and boils, pimpled adolescents with one leg and a stump for another,  remedies exchanged across washing lines, cheats, cross-eyed whores, dirty persons, and no privacy.

Richler  has  a  very good reporter's  eye, and  an  equally  good ear, especially for the individual  rhythms  and  accents of speech. The  wise, kindly, ironic Chaim  is very well realized -Richler's best moments  come when  he gets Chaim's  speech down, or the dialogue of any of his characters, American or Spanish, Nazi or Jew. Conversely, he is weakest, usually, when he goes after  interior  monologue;  there he tends to go maudlin  or hokey, sometimes unconvincingly  cliched.
Another  point  for  Richler is his ability to take a basically negative character
and  to draw  a sympathetic  picture of him, as of the bourgeois Barney. This is a feat that  Arthur  Koestler rightly said should be accomplished by the good novelist. Critics will say, and  have said, that Richler's  characters  are portrayed  to be "un­ deserving  of  compassion"   (Nathan  Cohen  in  the  Tamarack   Review,  Winter
1958), but I believe that the young Richler scored a coup in this novel, in arous-

16

AND  THE  SUN GOES DOWN



ing compassion  for characters  who would superficially seem to be the enemy­ Barney and  Kraus  the best examples. In this way, Richler speaks not to the smug liberal  intelligence,  but  to the  compassionate human  being who  may  be lurking behind  that  mask. No author  who speaks that way can hope to write an "accom­ plished"  novel.  But  the  book  reaches at least determinedly  beyond  accomplish­ ment toward  the place where a man is forced to ask himself  where he is, and how he feels. And there the sun also rises again.






A Choice of Critics: Selections  from Canadian  Literature, edited by George Woodcock, will be published this fall by the Oxford University  Press.

The  270 pages of A Choice of Critics begin with a new, specially­ written essay by GEORGE WooococK on the development of criti­ cism in Canada, followed by 17 of the best  and  most substantial  contributions in the first 7 years of  Canadian  Literature -essays which have changed  the nature  of  criticism in Canada.

Four monumental studies  of  the  Literary Landscape by D. G. Jones, A. J. M. Smith, Wynne Francis and  Warren Tallman:

Thirteen  studies  in depth of individual Canadian writers: Milton  Wilson on A. J. M.  Smith and  Margaret  Avison, A. J. M.  Smith on Anne Wilkinson, Paul West on E. J. Pratt  and  Earle Birney, Hugo McPherson on  Gabrielle Roy and  Robertson Davies, James Reaney on Jay Mac­ pherson, Miriam Waddington  and  M.  W. Steinberg on A. J. M. Klein, Louis Dudek on Raymond  Souster, and  George  Woodcock on Morley  Callaghan  and  Hugh  Maclellan.

A Choice of Critics will be published at $5.00. As a SPECIAL PRE­ PUBLICATION OFFER,  We are  making  this 270-page, doth-bound volume available  to any existing or new subscriber  AT THE SPE­  CIAL RATE OF $3·95·

PLEASE  SEND YOUR   ORDER  IMMEDIATELY




17


THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



William H. New


L PUBLICATION  of  Monlecai Richter's  The   Apprenticeship
of Duddy Kravitz and Hugh  MacLennan's The Watch that Ends the Night make
I 959 one of the important years for recent Canadian fiction. The  two works seem at  first to  be strangely  paired.  One  is a  pungently  ironic  comedy,  the  other  a serious metaphysical study that  verges at times on the sentimental.  Richler  relies on  a sprawling  picaresque method,  and  MacLennan on  a muted  allegory. Even their  flaws  are  different.  The  tendency  to  verboseness that  aHiicts the  end  of MacLennan's book is nowhere found  in Richler's,  but  Richler  will sacrifice the overall  balance  of his novel for the sake of big comic set scenes. Fortunately  his novel survives because his wit is successful, just as MacLennan's work succeeds because  the  reader  becomes sympathetically  involved  in  the  reality  which  the author  has  created.  Yet for  all their  differences, the  two works have  the same basic situation. The  discovery and habitation  of a new land  becomes a metaphor for  an  attitude  of mind,  and  that  attitude  is at  the forefront  of present literary thought.
Richler's  novel is concerned  with  the  apprenticeship, the  voyage, as it were, that  ultimately  takes Duddy  to a  new world and  gives him  the power to create there  a recognizable individuality.  His childhood  position is analogous to that of Jerome   Martell  in The  Watch  that Ends the Night.  While  Jerome  has known no father,  Duddy  at the age of fifteen has been  unable  to find in his father  the qualities  he wants  to admire,  and  he invents an extra  brother  Bradley to satisfy this  need. While  Jerome  has  not  experienced  the  ordinary   expressions of  love from his mother, Duddy has not known his mother and is therefore unsure of ever having  experienced  that love himself. He "couldn't bring  himself to risk" asking about  this, a key phrase, considering what  he will  risk, for his incomprehension either  of love or  of relationship  awaits his discovery of an  acceptable  self. Like

18

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



Jerome  he  has  a  journey  to  go  through part of life,  not  only inevitable  but necessary.
Exactly  where  the  journey  should  aim  and  should end  is Duddy's  problem.
When  he was only seven, he had  been told by his grandfather: "A man  without land  is  nobody.  Remember that,  Duddel."  To  find and  own land  becomes in time,  therefore,  equated  in  Duddy's  mind  with  the  identity  for  which  he also seeks. But to be a somebody is more than  this; to be a somebody is to be adult, not only in the self, but also recognized as being adult by a world to which the self bears  some  relationship.  Maturity  does not  occur  with  the  discovery of a  new world, for this tends not to be a satisfactory end in itself. The  dimensions of the new  world  are  greater  than  the  old identity  can fill out,  and  there  must  be a realistic  matching   between  an  individual's  potentialities  and  the  place  he  can occupy. Duddy  notes that  "South  America ... could no longer be discovered. It had been found." But in re-enacting not only the Canadian but also the twentieth­ century conflict, he can find a smaller niche elsewhere.
The  humour  that  pervades the book is not gentle, and it serves a quite different purpose from  that  in, for example,  Mitchell's Who  Has Seen the Wind; there is no  necessity here  to  prevent  sentimentality  from  repelling  the  reader.  Duddy moves  through   a  complicated  but  essentially extra-human sequence  of  events which, because incongruous,  excites laughter. The laughter  is directed  at an out­ sider to the ordinary  human  predicament  whose conflict is yet typical of  it, and because he  can  surmount  his difficulties in unorthodox  and  cumulatively extra­ vagant  ways, he wins, like Donleavy's Ginger  Man, a sort of admiration without respect, a sufferance  without  approval,  an attraction  without  sympathy, and  an attachment without involved concern. At once more than the conventional society and  an inherent  element  in it, Duddy  follows a course of life in order  to locate an appropriate pattern  for it. Though  this is pursued in iconoclastic-but inno­ cent, and  therefore  laughable-terms, it illustrates a growth  to maturity which is fundamentally parallel to the serious situations involving MacLennan's George Stewart.  The  changes  that  take  place in  Duddy  prepare  him for  the  discovery of Lac St. Pierre, and  the discovery is an essential step in his growing up.
Duddy  is a comer;  he pushes his way to success not by having  any idea of a
reasonable means to do this, but rather  by not having any idea and so using every means  as  though  it  were  a  reasonable  one. The  losses he incurs  in  a  crooked roulette  game  stem  from  his naivete,  and  they  recall his earlier  loss of a much smaller  capital  invested  in  a stock of obscene comic books. His earlier  reaction had  been to bum  the stock for fear of being caught with it; the reaction  at Ste.

I9

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



Agathe  is to run  away;  yet both are childish in a way that  Duddy  cannot  be if he is to emerge from his apprenticeship in his own terms. The novel has its limited success because the reader will let Duddy have those terms;  they reverse standard values, but they become values in themselves.






BECAUSE HE IS a comic figure, a sort of latter-day  picaron seeking ruthlessly and  ultimately successfully for social promotion,  Richler  must not cultivate for him the reader's pity. If there were a total identification  between the reader  and  the central character,  the comic effect would be destroyed, for it is the sense of apartness,  of differentiation  between  the character perceived and the concept  the reader has of himself, that is part  of the ironic  comedy. Duddy, that  is, must  remain  innocent  even in success, even  though  he  moves through his failures to a triumph  that he does not fully comprehend. The  identity that he
finally achieves, successful in spite of its disregard  for social convention, is both typical  of  the society he has  been scorning  and  yet beyond  it. The  "maturity" he reaches by the end of his apprenticeship  is a recognition of a place in relation to society that  will probably  through  time generate  social acceptance  as well; at that  time,  perhaps,  reader  and  character  could  move  closer  together,  but  not until. His solution is distinct, then, from that found within a social code by George Stewart,  though it is related to the individual  one formulated by Jerome  Martell.
Duddy's  childishness concerning  the comics and  the roulette  must  be avoided
not  because it  is socially irresponsible  but  because it  does not  contribute  to the self for which he aims. Because he has been reared in the St. Urbain Street world of Montreal, a sort of Jewish enclave of low average income, he has been brought up  to expect  defensive protection  as necessary. Several  choices are open to him as routes  to success: immersion  in  the  Gentile  world  with  concomitant   loss of identity,  continuation  of the St. Urbain  Street  world of his childhood, participa­ tion in the establishment of the new Jewish state of Israel, or the achievement of an  independence that  will let  him  be  himself in  any  situation. An  attempt  to achieve independence,  however, makes Duddy  uneasy and suspicious because he
is insecure. The very defences that  protect against any envelopment  by the "alien"
culture  preserve the St. Urbain  Street childhood identity as well. Duddy's  brother Lennie  removes those defences in  his contact  with  the  Westmount  Gentiles, but that society only consumes him. He thinks he finds there a freedom  that his own

20

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



deliberate   childhood   existence  did  not  supply:   "They're  just  themselves  and glad of it. Nothing  scares them.... They're  young." But Duddy  voices the truth later  when  he says:  "It's hard  to be a gentleman-a Jew, I mean-it's hard to be. Period."
To  achieve  independence in  the  Gentile world, Duddy   assumes he  needs money. When he was a child, the identity he had wanted  was bound  up with his appraisal  of Jerry  Dingleman,  the Boy Wonder, the Mr. Big of a narcotics under· world.  "Duddy wanted  to be a somebody. Another Boy Wonder  maybe. Not a loser, certainly."  But the Boy Wonder  is exactly that,  a boy wonder,  because in spite of his power in a localized area and in spite of his wealth, he does not achieve recognition  by the Westmount  world. Before Duddy recognizes that  the Wonder is "only  famous  on St.  Urbain  Street",  he is used, unaware,  to smuggle heroin. Dingleman  says of  him:   "The boy is innocent.  He's  perfect." The  innocence that  Dingleman  sees in  Duddy  is a naivete perfect for  being exploited.  Because the boy seeks to masquerade in an imagined sophistication, he will avoid question­ ing  what  he does not  understand when questioning would  be the very act that would  bring  him  real knowledge. To  come out of apprenticeship, Duddy  needs not only to discover truth  in the world in which he wants to live but also to know what  to do with  truth.  Dingleman  can be defeated not by confronting  him with fact  (which  he has known  and  disregarded  all along)  but only by an indepen·  dence  that  can  afford  to disregard  him. Duddy's  various schemes for achieving the  wealth  to purchase  Lac  St. Pierre give him a measure of the experience he needs to be independent of Dingleman; what he needs also, in the way of position, achieved through  a recognition  by self and by others, he has yet to find out.
Duddy must both extend trust and be extended trust before he can achieve recognizable adult status. For this to be part of any development  in him in Rich­ ler's comic terms as well, it must be his extension of trust that  brings him knowl­ edge of the  nature  of this relationship  but  the extension of trust  to him  that  in fact brings with it the success that is maturity and mastery. Duddy's grandfather, Simcha, is an adult  of the old order;  he merits trust in his neighbourhood  and is given it, and it is a measure of his position. But for Duddy the estimation of that world  is insufficient, and  though  one of his  plans in  securing  Lac  St. Pierre is to please his grandfather, this must ultimately give way to the more basic need to fulfill himself. He cannot  live in Simcha's world; no more can Simcha live in his. The  final  recognition  of their  separate  identities is prefigured  when early in the novel Abramovitch  says to his father: "this is modem  times."
When  Duddy  trusts  others,  his comic naivete  takes  him  into  situations  that


2I

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



more experienced  persons would avoid, but  it is simply because he is naive that he  can  emerge  unscathed,  though  more  knowing,  developing  cunning  in  the process. He  lets Dingleman  use him for smuggling  heroin,  for example;  he  un­ knowingly lets Peter John  Friar  make avant  garde films of a bar mitzvah  cere­ mony for  him;  he purchases Lac St. Pierre in Yvette's  name, saying, "A friend is a friend. You've got to trust somebody...." But it is his central and significant relationship   with  his  brother  that  the  difference  between  intelligent  trust  and foolhardiness crystallizes for him, that he learns he must make a choice of enemies. Lennie  had  tried  to  become  part  of  Westmount  society  and  in  so  doing  was gulled  into  foolhardy  action;  he is a promising  medical student,  and  yet he jeo­ pardizes  his  career  by  performing -and  botching -an  illegal  abortion,  and then  running  away  childishly, to hide  from  the  act.  Duddy,  however, can  not only  diagnose  the  cause but  also prescribe  the  cure:   "Don't  you know  better than  to  go  bareback?"  If mature  life is a  healthy  self-possession, then  the  life lived prior to maturity  must be based on self-protection.  When Duddy  then takes Lennie's  problem from him and solves it, earning  Lennie's  trust, he has achieved part  of  the  relationship  that  will  ultimately  give him  his final  position. Lennie finds  his  own  identity  by  breaking  with  Westmount   and  participating in  the building of Israel, by taking his doctor's capacity  for healing to a new world that he can inhabit; but Duddy's place remains in the Gentile world. His is therefore different  from  Cohen, who says: "We're two of a kind, you know.... A plague on all the goyim, that's my motto." He is different  because, for Duddy, this is not a satisfactory  guide;  he cannot  choose to align himself on religious terms. When his film of Bernie Cohen's bar mitzvah shows "the  pregnant  moment,  the meeting of time past and  time present, when the priest and his initiate  reach the ho'mat", and shows it, in a hilariously funny scene, by techniques  of symbolism and  mon­ tage,  the  orthodox   apprenticeship  to  position  within  the  religion  is  contrasted with  Duddy's  unorthodox  but vigorous apprenticeship to an identity all his own.




l:ouGH THE STORY is related  in  terms of a Jewish  boy's rise to adult status, its implications go beyond the strictly racial-religious extension. Duddy's  Uncle  Benjy is wrong when his estimation  of the boy begins and  ends here:  "Because  you're a  pusherke. A little Jew-boy on the make."  What  Duddy comes to and  in fact must come to if his apprenticeship to life is to be successful is a self rather  than  the self. He  cannot  accept  an  order  that  is established for

22

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



him by race or religion or duty or family, and when Benjy leaves him a letter­ which Duddy  must be ready to read, somewhat like Nick Adams or Ike McCaslin having to be ready to fish or hunt -the warning it contains to the boy must even yet undergo seachange  within him before he can become a man: "You've  got to love  [the  family], Duddel. ... A boy can  be two, three, four  potential  people, but a man is only one. He murders the other." The  relationship of family love is only valid  for  him  up  to a  point. Inheritance of family  ties-in individual  or even in  political  terms, for  the  "ghetto", for  Montreal,  and  for  the  Canadian society of  the  story -must  not  interfere  with  the  establishment  of individual  identity.  Lennie  and  Riva  find their  "God's  Little  Acre" in  Israel,  but  though this satisfies them, it cannot  become ergo a necessary reason for Duddy's embrac­ ing the same solution.  His own little acre lies at Lac St. Pierre, neither  in Israel nor in St. Urbain Street, and  love that  enmeshes him elsewhere than  in that self deprives him of his full potentialities and ends by being no love.
He has to become a Somebody, and for this to occur, the demanding love that had  attempted to form  the child's identity must be exchanged  for a trust in the identity  that  the adult forms for himself. Lennie has to trust Duddy in the matter of the abortion; Max  has to trust him with a thousand  dollar loan;  Benjy has to show his trust  by willing Duddy  his house. Duddy's  particular  personality causes a change when the comic reversal of intent takes place; not only does he avoid all other  selves in  his master  of one, but  he also turns to his own development  the trusts that  are  placed  in him by others. The  abortion  affair leads to his business ventures  with  Hugh  Calder  of Westmount,  for  example;  the house that  Benjy leaves him,  tied up  as it is by legal limitations so that  Duddy  can only own the legacy and  not  profit in his own cash terms by it, he empties of its furniture in order  to  raise  money  anyway  and  invest it in  the  acquisition  of his own land. What  Yvette will not willingly give him is the opportunity  ultimately to be adult; she  wants  a  cessation  of imaginative  investment  and  practical  energy  which is objectified in  her  care for  the  paralytic  Virgil. Whereas Duddy  finds himself by expending,  Virgil  remains  fearful  and  in  need  of  protection  by trying  to save intact  a bequest  that  has been left to him. When Duddy  sacrifices that  tradition to  his own  effort,  he  brings  the  traditional   world -albeit  weak  and  by  now impotent: Simcha,  Dingleman,  Virgil-into  opposition against  him. But when he is recognized as the Owner  of the new world, his apprenticeship  of discovery is over. He is given a trust that  makes him at last the Somebody he wants to be ("That's all right, sir. We'll mark it.")  adult,  individual, and  master in his own terms in his own land.

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



Success is therefore  possible in Richler's fictional world,  though  his ironic eye builds it only out of breaking traditions. This seems at first to be so partial  as to deny adequate  scope to the novel, and in Richler's  other  works this is essentially true.  The  acrimony  of The  Incomparable  Atuk, for example,  makes that  work merely repellent instead of provocative. A Choice of Enemies and Son of a Smaller Hero offer only fragmentary  views of society, and  hence  the reader  never quite believes in  their  reality. But the world of Duddy  Kravitz  is whole, and  Duddy himself, while  not  particularly  likeable, is very much  alive. He  wins readers  to his side, moreover, because his reaction to traditions  is a positive one. The con­ trol he wants, the mastery to which he is apprenticed, is a valid aim. His icono­ clasm is of value not for itself, but because it is a route towards inhabiting a new world and  fulfilling a social individuality.  As he is a comic figure, his apparently  destructive  tendencies can paradoxically  be a means for constructing  life, but the fictional  tone and  technique  are necessarily different  for depicting  this than  they are for showing a comparable  process of discovery in The  Watch that  Ends the Night. MacLennan's study is of the crossing of political and metaphysical frontiers and it ends in peace, whereas Richler's novel, of a different kind, ends in a comic
triumph.








Krav  tz,
 BY THE  END of  Richler's  The   Apprenticeship  of Duddy

land  that  he  has  yet to inhabit.  Though  the  novel implies  that  Duddy  is both highly individual  within society and  yet highly typical of it, the concept is made by no means as explicit as it is in Hugh  MacLennan's The  Watch that Ends ·the Night.  Each  man  here must be exactly that: each man.  The  separation  of  indi­ viduality  is basic to  both  these works. For  MacLennan, however, each  man  in fulfilling himself as an individual  becomes Everyman  as well, which is a tenable position only as long as the fundamental separation  is acknowledged and accepted. Inevitably  this moves into  metaphysical spheres, and  that  the conflict should  be resolvable  here  in  a  profound  and  moving  peace  is an  indication  both  of  the health that the author sees to be an achievable end, and of the human and humane  balance  possible for  the individual  even though  conflict  and  illness  persist. Part of  the  contrast  between  the  peace  discovered in  this  book  and  the  iconoclastic volatility in The   Apprenticeship  of Duddy  Kravitz  can  be related  to  the age of

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



the authors  in  1959,  the year both  books were published. Richler  was 28, Mac­ Lennan   was  52. That they  should  vary  in  their  approach  is an  indication  of markedly different  backgrounds; that they should be concerned with such similar questions,  however,  is an  indication  of  the  attitudes  and  interests  that  by this time had become the focus of the twentieth century. Both of the two men who are central  to MacLennan's work, Jerome  Martell  and  George Stewart, must make voyages of  discovery,  and,  when  they  have  found  their  new  lands,  they  must continually  modify  themselves in  order  to shape  an  appropriate life and  order for their  place and  time. The  book equates the mature life with creative separa­  tion,  and  it differentiates  this from  defeatist  resignation, from  aimlessness, and from  apathy.
The  Watch  that  Ends the Night is a large  and  complex book, by no means
flawless, which I nevertheless regard as one of the finest accomplishments in recent fiction in  English.  One  of  the flaws is paradoxically  one  of the great  strengths of the book-a set piece concerning the boyhood and  the first voyage of Jerome Martell   that  is superlatively  written  in  itself and  yet seems insufficiently  sub­ ordinated  to the whole work. It is, however, thematically and structurally related to the concerns of the  novel and serves as a key to an understanding of  the de­ velopment  that  takes place. Jerome  is the fatherless son of a loose-moralled cook in  a  New Brunswick  lumber  camp.  When  he flees this  environment, his action is typical of that  which  people in search of a new land  undergo,  for  the search itself begins in escape. Yet in escaping, Jerome  is  moving from  the scene of his mother's  murder  to a life elsewhere, and his motive is therefore distinct from that of  the  killer,  whose aim  in  flight is merely to  avoid the  responsibility  that  the murder  has placed  upon  him. In escaping, too, Jerome  becomes aware of a new life that  is almost  like  resurrection;  it  comes  when  all the skills which  he  has developed  in  boyhood  are  brought  into  a  concerted  effort  to  achieve  an  end beyond  that  boyhood.  But  the new  innocence  is not yet an end, for it does not make  use of Jerome's  full  potentialities.
Jerome  serves as a sort of catalytic agent in the novel, for the characters  with
whom he comes into contact  are allowed to mature  because of their relationship with  him, and  yet he, too, changes through  time. His initial  journey down  river becomes a microcosm for the development in both of the major characters  in the novel. Immaturity precedes the change, for Jerome's  first canoe is boy-sized and he is not allowed into the main current which would sweep him irrevocably away. But here  there  is no father  to give him  a name, and  he must ultimately  move. The  "entire  world"  seems to open  up as he heads towards  Moncton, but  when

25

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



he  is found  there  and  adopted  by Giles Martell,  his world  is still childish and prepared  for  him.  No matter  how well he fits it, he cannot  merely inherit  it if another  part  of his nature  remains in conflict with it. The  two pictures that  are hung  on his bedroom wall in Martell's Halifax  home foreshadow further  change, therefore;  one is Reynolds' "Age  of Innocence  and the other  was a sailing ship in a storm."  The  contained  metaphor  indicates  that  Halifax  is only  a  temporary harbour in the quest for a larger new world.
The  Martells'  world is one of faith,  an  acceptance  of accepted  religion, and it satisfies Jerome  only until the First World War. Religion then seemed to sanc­ tion  hate,  and  when guilt after participating in the war only forces him to seem hypocritical  to himself, such a religion as a guide for life is no longer valid. That innocence  is comfort  for  an  older  order -exemplified  here  by the  people and towns of the Canadian Maritimes-an order  that  has grown  "old  without  ever growing  up".  His own child life is like part  of a nameless and  half-asleep  New Brunswick  town.  Jerome  says:  "'Kids who  looked like me  were a  part  of the landscape'." When Giles Martell then says to the boy he has just adopted, " 'You'll be proud  of Halifax, for it's a fine town, a fine place to grow up in and -well, even for a grown man it's not too bad a place,' " he merely underlines the content he feels in his life and  which he offers the boy. The war  changes  Halifax,  how­ ever,  a  phenomenon  that  MacLennan  was  concerned  with  in  his earlier  novel, Barometer  Rising, and  unless the old order adapts  to the change, it has nothing to offer  the  new generation.  The  innocence  that  has  been known  before is dis­ rupted; for  the  young  people,  therefore,  the old  identity  no longer serves, and out  of the world  they then  enter, intending  to inhabit,  they must fashion a new self. Jerome  is hollow  after  the  war-placeless  and  Godless-and hope  lies only in finding a self  that will relate him both  to infinity and  to mortality.






E     that  George Stewart  takes to find God  and  self, from  childhood  to full maturity,  is the major  development  of the novel. Because his background  is different  from Jerome's,  he is not forced  as early into feeling a need to escape. Born into an old order, he has an identity  ready-made, waiting for him  merely to inhabit  it. But like the Halifax  establishment,  this, too, is only a boyhood in which his age of change will not allow him to remain. The summer he  meets  Catherine,  for example,  is the  time  of his first attempt   to move in  a

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



pattern  distinct  from  the established one. Childhood  "is a garden", but  they are both from then on outside it. Both belong to the "English-speaking garrison of Montreal ... in  the  heart  of the  French  island in  North  America", but  neither of them fit it. They  must leave if they are to come to terms with the island of self in the midst of an  apparently  foreign world. Their  "Fern  Hill" of childhood,  as it were, and  the "dappled green" of youth, must be exchanged  for a world that lies, as it  does for  Steinbeck's  Adam  Trask,  east of Eden.  Together  and  alone, they are apart  from the old order of innocence that instinctively knew its God. Catherine has said to George:  "Grow  up and go", but he has not yet the ability to  withstand   tradition. Unlike   Duddy  Kravitz  with  Yvette,  he  cannot   bring himself  to  love  Catherine  physically  and  thereby  discover  a  new  world.  The "frontier" of knowing that  love is related to death awaits his crossing, and in his overlong adolescence his role as a news interpreter is ironic when he has no recog­ nizable identity  himself. By the implications  of allegory, George is  Canada, but he is not limited to this; MacLennan's control over his method here -as opposed to its control over him in such bad novels as Two Solitudes or The Precipice­ gives  the  work  a  much  greater  scope  than  a  rigid  one-to-one  correspondence  would  allow.
Like Duddy  Kravitz,  George  and  Jerome  must grow  around  the  restrictions imposed  by a past culture.  As Duddy  also has to strive against  his social income level, so George and Jerome  must fight the world-wide depression of the nineteen­ thirties. Each of them is at once part of this phenomenon  and yet not typical of it;  attitudes  of the time become theirs, yet this is only a transient stage in the develop­ ment  of their  selves. It  is during  this period that  George and  "millions  of other young  men"  undergo  the  change  that  came  to Jerome  during  the  First  World War:  "I lost my faith in religion;  I lost my faith in myself; I lost my faith in the integrity  of human  society". The  initial change, however, must take place not in the social system, but  in  the self. Jerome's support  of schemes of social union is merely a charade  of life. He is trying to escape his guilty self, and  when he heads to the Spanish  Civil War  as a doctor, he is trying to expiate his  participation in the earlier one. But it is also part of  the encounter  with death  that  is apparently  necessary for his coming-of-age. His daughter  Sally cannot  appreciate his action, for it has not been necessary for her, and later she says to George:

... he really fitted in  and  symbolised that  whole awful period. Those  appalling adolescent he-men like Hemingway and all those naive idealists thinking they were so terrific because they went to bed with each other to prove the capitalist system stank.

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



To a large extent she is right, for it is only after the depression is over that George and  Jerome  can  grow up completely.
During  this period,  they and  their generation  had  reacted  in varying degrees
inwardly  upon themselves even when they seemed most to move outwards into the world. Knowing  themselves to be alone and  empty, they sought  love desperately and   futilely.  Hence  Catherine  ultimately  says to  George:   "Love  can  be such a terrible torment.... People break loose into sex because it's so direct and simple". Like politics, it is an escape. When  a minor  character, Norah  Blackwell, invites George  to  join  the  Communist  Party-" 'stop  running   away. Become one of us!' " -she unknowingly invites him only to further  flight. Immersion  of the self in a political system becomes a sort of suicide, an attempt  to substitute  a theoreti­ cal  responsibility for others for an  actual  responsibility for self. Because Jerome can  never be fully absorbed into political activity, he must ultimately face himself and  either accept his identity or find a means of  destruction. "The canoe in which he had  issued from  the forest had  now taken  him out into  the ocean ... with a hurricane rising. Jerome, Myself, Everyone." Only years later when George must go through  a comparable  discovery is the problem  formulated  rationally.  When a  child  has grown  to middle  age, he  writes, the father's  role of approval  is left vacant.  In  the  Thirties,  "we  tried  to  make  gods out  of  political  systems, and worship  and  serve them";  like logic, ability, success, wife and  children,  they do not  abide,  and  then  "comes the Great  Fear". Such  thoughts  relate both  to indi­ vidual  development  and to social history during  the twentieth  century,  and  they read  like a commentary upon Lord of the Flies.
For  George,  Catherine  and  Jerome  are  the  parent-substitutes and  the escape
from  the self:

I have  never seemed mature  to myself. The  young seem more so because they know  nothing  of  the 1930S. The  young have the  necessary self-confidence and ignorance to feel mature, and that is why I like them so much better than I like my  own generation. Was there ever a  crowd like ours?   ... Was there  ever a generation  which yearned to belong, so unsuccessfully, to something larger than themselves?

George is behind  both Catherine  and Jerome  in his development; his adolescence is prolonged  beyond the time when both the others have perceived their relation­ ship  to a reality  they find unpleasant,  and  yet have  chosen  to accept. George's teaching   job  is  an  attempt   to  regress to  the  stable  world  that  existed  before change: "Nothing in this world is so permanent as a school. ... Forty years on is

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



today when you return". Even Catherine is attracted  by such a view: " 'It would have been so much  simpler  and safer to have kept the old rules.' " But to avoid progressive change  is like suicide, and  when George accepts his move, he begins "to  grow up.  The  depression  was over at last so far  as I was concerned,  and  I came out of its deep freeze... .'' His marriage  to Catherine when Jerome is pre­ sumed dead, however, is not yet a facet of maturity. A necessary reappraisal of his position in relationship  to others he only gets from his next contact  with Jerome.







JEROME  IS A  DOCTOR,  and  it is allegorically suitable  that  it should  be  through  contact  with  him that  George should  find the health  that  is maturity.   The   muted   allegorical  implications  that   run  beneath   the  story  are specifically Canadian, and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  concept  of  the  Frozen North  should  enter  into  the imagery of the book. The  imagery is patterned,  not random,  and  it  contributes  to a comprehension of the concept of identity. The winter  imagery  is  connected  with  youth   and  innocence, and  the  snow  of  a northern   land  is a  sort  of  primeval  and  almost archetypal  childhood  that  any person encountering twentieth-century  life has long since left behind. The  passing of this former  time must be admitted,  just as George must accept that the winter world  of his own  childhood  has gone. George is a  product  of old  Montreal  as well as of the depression, and it is the old order of the city that appears as a child­ like world,  a  child's  dream  society, the embryo of a utopia  never  realized. This must give way before adult health can be achieved.
Even after  the depression is over, the old order still attracts  George. The  cold air "had  come down from the germless, sinless land",  and George enjoys it. Torn by the desire  to retain  the  memories of his youth, by a feeling that  it would be better  to forget  and  merely  to live in  the present, and  by an  apparent inability to forget, he is faced  at this time with Jerome's  return.  In  disruption  he realizes that  his happiness  with Catherine is only a temporary  new world, and his insight takes him into another  discovery. Even his city becomes the potentially threatening environment,  and he writes:

I kept  staring  at  that  ocean  of light  that  was Montreal. Then  fear  came  back tome....

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF DISCOVERY



Then  a man  discovers in dismay that what  he believed to be his identity is no more than a tiny canoe at the mercy of an ocean.... Little man, what now?


To  show an  empty  man where fulness lies becomes Jerome's  task as friend  and as doctor. His medicine aims not, like Richler's  Virgil, to preserve life, but rather to help  people to look at life more as Duddy  Kravitz  does and "to  get the most out  of what life they have".
Through the course of the novel, Catherine  is slowly dying, and as George recognizes his relationship  to her  he feels that  he is dying  as well. Jerome,  too, exists in him, but Jerome has been as it were resurrected from the dead. In recon­ ciling these identities George comes to find that death is a part of life just as decay is a part of new growth or as mortality is a part of immortality. Jerome had once said:  " 'The  only immortality  is mankind.' " When  he comes back and ministers to George,  he extends  the idea. Full acceptance  of the self involves  acceptance of both  the infinitude  and  the edges of self;  to be equal  to individual fate is to be equal  to the knowledge that  the limits of individuality are the limits of fullest meaning  and  yet that  because the  patterns  of identity  are  common  to all, indi­ viduals can know love. In  the self lies the potentiality of combating  the forces of negation.  As George  can  at last write:  "I say again  that  this mysterious thing, which  creates, destroys and  recreates, is the sole force which equals the merciless fate  binding  a  human   being  to  his  mortality.'' In  conversation  with  George, Jerome  brings  him  to an  acceptance  of the self that  can  be vital,  the self that through  passion comes to know both creation  and  destruction  and  can,  because of this, face time and  yet live. Tragedy is wrought  to its uttermost only when the individual  accepts that he is living his own death. If he thinks of his life "as lived", then  there  is nothing  left to fear.  He  can  be  aware of a relationship  with  men without  this being  an  escapist union;  he can  know  the  continuity  of self in all mankind  in spite of mortality  and  the end of  fear  because of the knowledge of immortality.  He  can  then  emerge from  isolation  with  a sufficient separateness. Any struggle necessitates endurance,  but endurance alone will not satisfy human  dignity,  will not  be a vital mode of  existence, until  the struggle  appears  worth­ while. George says: "All of us is Everyman and  this is intolerable  unless each of us can also be 1." When  the struggle moves within,  the capacity  to endure  becomes the ability to face time knowledgeably and  to achieve  peace thereby, forever.
For  Richler's  Duddy  Kravitz,  the discovery of a new land  and  an individual tradition  is not specifically related  to a Canadian search  for identity.  For  Mac­ Lennan's George Stewart it is. But it is more than  this; it is struggle of  men any-

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



where, beyond  the boundaries  of politics but not beyond the boundaries  of time. In  a land  that  changes in  an age of change,  the search for identity, for the dis­ tinctiveness of self, becomes a search for an emerging maturity,  and  the converse quickly becomes true  as well. Such  a poem as Earle  Birney's "Case History"  is based upon  the concept of Canada being an adolescent land, the child of a love­ less wedlock, struggling for maturity in an unstable home. What MacLennan does with the theme is to take it beyond the regional borders, to apply it to the universal question  of  man  experiencing  change  in  the  twentieth  century.  His solution  is not  to accept  the  traditional source of stability;  nor  does he sanction  flight into union  with  another.  Maturity  lies in the ability to  remain  one self, yet know the self at the same time to be not less than the whole world. Change  that happens to the self, therefore, is not merely part of a greater change but in fact is that greater change,  and  mature  man  is both self and all.
George's  childhood  had  been that  of a winter city, but  as change  takes place
in the century, so it takes place in the city itself. In spite of the old controls exer­ cised over it, it is turning  "into  a real world city". Only this will make it mature.  No longer controlled from outside its own rules, no longer hiding from the world behind  the  isolating  mask of an  identity  only as a land  of snow,  the  land  can reveal what  makes it individual  and  what makes it vital. The  rules that  the city knows itself, that  govern its intricacy and have kept it alive, that give it cohesive­ ness in spite of the variegation  within, that make it one and yet many at the same time, can at last be accepted  as a feature of life germane to itself and necessary to its own  continuance. Like  man  discovering he is  Everyman,  the  city  and  the society discover that  their comfortable security is taken from them and  that  they are still apprenticing. The  masks of tradition  or even of  isolationism had seemed to satisfy a  need,  but  they  were only artificial gods in  a  time of change.  Then  comes potential  dissolution, the great  fear,  and  George  writes:  "in  the last two years  of  the  1940s ... the  whole  world  went  over  a  frontier.... In  the  bleak years we at  least  were  not  alone.... The  bell which  only a few years ago had tolled  for  all,  now  tolled for  each  family in its  prosperous solitude." Obviously the apprehension  of rules by a society of  individuals is an ideal, yet it is an ideal within  the capabilities of man to achieve. Though  the mosaic pattern  may not be any more difficult to create effectively than a monochrome  perceived in isolation, and  though  it is subject  to much  greater  chance  of disintegration,  it is a more pleasing art  form.
What  remains  in  man  to combat  the  potential  disruption  is the  will  to live, and to love life is to love in the face of time and in the knowledge of separateness.

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



Though  every man  livin his solitude, in his individual  identity,  two solitud can  (to  use, as MacLennan  does, a quotation  from  Rilke)   protect,  touch,  and greet  each  other.  In  this, love consists. The  solitudes must  remain,  but  because man  knows  himself to  be  Everyman  as well, he  can  approach another  not  as supplicant   to  god  but  as lover  and  friend.  Knowing  immortality  in  mortality, George can accept death  because he can accept his own life, and he can write of Catherine at  the  end:  "What if the  ocean  of time overwhelmed  her?  It  over­ whelms us all." The  boy in the canoe has at  last grown  up and  can inhabit  his last  new  world.






1 E APPRENTICESHIP  OF 	DISCOVERY  is a  recurrent  theme  in recent  fiction, and  though Richler's comic treatment of it in The  Apprenticeship of  Duddy  Kravitz differs in  many  respects from  MacLennan's use of it in The Watch  that  Ends  the  Night,  the  two  novels  can  still  be  fruitfully  compared. MacLennan's work lacks the vivacity of the other, but it aims for and achievan entirely  different  tonal  effect. It  has been criticized  for  being  autobiographical, yet, if so, it goes far beyond this to create an independent world of its own. George Stewart   has  been  called  ped  trian,
author  has been called old-fashioned,  but his ideas and  his allegorical technique are  abreast  of fictional trends elsewhere in  the world. One  must admit  that  the ending  of the book is weak. Catherine's  tum  to painting  is a sentimental  cliche, and  a tendency  to wordiness accompaniMacLennan's difficulty in voicing the paradox  of which he has become aware. Yet the novel is outstandingly  successful partly  because that  paradox  has meaning. The  author  has at last blended a con­ trol over technique  not only with the reality of credible characters  but also with a pattern   of  thought   that  gives substance  and  dimension  to  his book. Its  people and ideas refer both to Canada and to the twentieth-century world, and its scope will let it  therefore  be as readable  and  as involving  outside  Canadian  national boundarias it  is  within.  For  both  MacLennan and  Richler,  the  mastery  to which  the apprenticeship  leads necessitates a recognition  of the self  both  by the individual and  by others. Where MacLennan's book goes beyond  that of Richler is in  the equally emphatic  insistence on the recognition  by the self of its identity as Everyman.  This donot deny the other self, the I, for John Donne's  concept
of man  as a piece of the continent is no longer applicable. For MacLennan, man


32

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF  DISCOVERY



remains  an  island forever,  but  an island in position, as it were, as a part  of an archipelago; the  experience  of  the  one is  the  experience of all,  and  each  part functions  both  as an entirety  for all and as an entirety in itself. It is here that he captures  the essence of contemporary  thought  and shows himself at  last to be a novelist of substantial  merit.
























33


ANATOMY  OF CONFUSION

Jack Ludwig's Evolution




Lila Stonehewer







TSAY THAT   ouR AGE  ;, confused ;, a truism. Authors  have been saying it with depressing frequency since the  rg2o's. Generally speaking, the consensus of opinion seems to  be that  civilization is damned  and  that  our guilt­ ridden  despair will drive us to inevitable destruction-and the sooner the better. Jack  Ludwig denies this negative approach  and sounds the cry of  positivism both in his short stories and in his first novel Confusions. He is an unashamedly didactic  writer  and  his problem centres on evolving a vehicle to express his point of view. While  most of his work deals with a specific segment  of society, the American­ Jewish  community,  his view has been gradually enlarging  in scope until in Con­ fusions he includes all of North American society. This expansion of view is bound up  with  the evolution of his style, which is best seen by relating  his short stories to his novel.
The  evolution  of Ludwig's style is closely linked  with  the development  of his leading  themes.  He  asserts that  the  prime symptom  of this century's  malaise is confusion. The  source of this confusion constitutes the two major  themes running through  the stories and  the novel. The  first is the double condition of man, who wishes and  pretends  to live by a moral code while in reality behaving  according to the law of the  jungle. This condition leads  to the second theme, which is the universal  tendency  to confusion as to the nature  of reality. The  North American manifestation of  this type of confusion is the  pursuit  of "success",  which is  re­ garded  as synonymous with material  wealth. Once  material  success is  achieved, the confusion becomes more acute than ever, for then one is brought face to face with the problem of what purpose such materialism  serves.
Often  it ends only in waste, as is shown in Ludwig's  story, "A Woman of Her
Age", whose central  character,  Doba Goffman,  is a crusty 75-year-old ex-radical


34

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



turned   Orthodox Jew.  Using  the  setting  of  the  Montreal  Jewish  community, Ludwig  juxtaposes  the immigrant  district of St. Lawrence  Main  and  its inhabi­ tants,  who cling to the old traditions  and  customs, with  Westmount, the district of successful second-generation tycoons who lack tradition  and reject old customs. It is evident  that  something  of basic importance  has been lost in  the long climb up the mountain. Doha  Goffman, set in matriarchal splendour  atop  Westmount by her devoted sons, is in reality a captive shut away from the teeming life of St. Lawrence. Each  week she makes a trip back to the markets of  this area, searching for what  she has lost. As we follow her movements through  the day, we realize that  she is haunted by the sense of a continuity in which  she has no part,  and which  is expressed in  her  frustrated  hope for grandchildren. One  of her sons is sterile, the other dies childless. It is on Jimmy, the dead son, that Doha's  tragedy centres. He  was a clever lawyer, personable and virile, but he lived according  to the creed of waste, and  his mother characterizes his life in these words:

America's imbecility, galloping after success while life runs off right under his feet.

Doba  sums up  her  view of what material  success without  purpose  means by  re­ flecting, "how  easy it was in America to buy everything you didn't want". What does she want? She wants to continue the line, to have grandchildren and perhaps even great-grandchildren to mourn  her when she dies; she wants to feel part  of life, to feel that  she has contributed  something to humanity. In short, she wants to  justify her existence. Yet she shows a touch of heroism, for, fully conscious of the waste of her life, she sti11 exhibits a kind of jaunty tenacity and humour.

As Josef turned into the driveway Mrs. Goffman touched her sulking nose with  a powder puff, dried her eyes, made her old face smile. When there was hope it was o.k. to despair, but now hope was gone, what was the point of it? She winked at herself.

The  structure  of "A  Woman  of her  Age"-with  the  narrative  divided into eleven short and largely self-contained parts-tends to limit the author's mobility. At  the same  time,  the story illustrates his moral values and  also exemplifies one of his recurrent  devices, the domination of the action by an anti-heroic figure. Paradoxically, in Ludwig's  hands such figures in the end  reveal a human  dignity of heroic proportions.  They  take positive attitudes,  as in Doba Goffman's resolu­ tion to live -even  beyond  despair -her  wasted life to its full realization. This kind of positivism is "living" in the ful1 sense, as opposed to "existing". It derives from  the  attitude  of the  protagonist  to the situation  in  which  he finds himself.

35

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



The  exploration  of such an attitude  sends Ludwig  in search of a new style and form for his work, and the search takes him back in time. Thus,  in another story, "Requiem for Bibul", we observe the emergence of a picaresque hero and of a structure  echoing the chivalric conceptions of the middle ages.
"Requiem for  Bibul"  is a  nostalgic short  story  set  in  Winnipeg  before  the Second  World  War.  Bibul,  the  picaresque  central  character, is a  high-schoo] student  who  tries  to earn  money for  rabbinical  training  by sdling  second-class fruit  and  vegetables after school hours to the  rapacious  housewives of the slum district known in Winnipeg as "The  Island". Here we encounter again the themes of man's  duality and of his confusion as to the nature  of reality. Bibul is sincerdy religious, yet he is not above disguising his over-ripe and bruised produce in order to make a sale. He  will serve Mammon  for a time in order  to devote his life to Jehovah.  His forays into the "Island" to do business with the life-scarred matrons of the slums are described in the terms of mediaeval  warfare.

Bibul was a lone guard defending his fortress from desperate pillagers; ubiquitous as Churchill, many-handed as Shiva, he had  to be compassionate at Schweitzer.

The  battle  takes place on two levels. Foremost is the physicallevd, with Bibul trying to defend  his imperilled produce which the housewives try  to pocket or to pinch and  bruise in the hope of making meagre  budgets go farther. But counter­ pointing  this is a spiritual  battle in which  the  housewives pour  out  their  hearts to Bibul, unfolding  every type of human  failing, eliciting Bibul's  compassionate tears while at the same time he "would free an apricot  from a fist already stained with cherry." The housewives

prayed God to give Bibul good enough ears to hear out their incriminating bill of particulars against the human  race, bad eyes to miss seeing what their energetic hands  were doing;  and  they cursed fate  when  Bibul's unaffected eyes snapped them from filching.

The  theme  of the confusion of reality is exemplified in this story by the  con­ trast  between Bibul and  his fellow students. Bibul is linked with a group known as "the  kings" of the school because of their academic  prowess. This group, with typical  adolescent fervour, fed  they can save the world  by dealing with abstrac­  tions.  The  opposition  between  Bibul  and  "the  kings"  pivots  on  the  nature  of reality. "The  kings" see reality as centred in the world of  abstraction.

. . . . we sharks, all hot for culture, oozing idology, long on  judgments, short on facts, turned our abstract faces toward Bibul.

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



Bibul sees reality firmly rooted in "The  Island" and the ancient laws of an ancient creed.  The   difference  between  them  is stated  succinctly;  "the  sharks  vaguely yearned for a Higher  Life; Bibul alone had a concrete goal." There is an affinity between Doha and  the high school "kings", for they both yearn for abstract "suc­ cess". Doha  learns  too  late  what  success means. Bibul is never  in  doubt  of it. "Peddling had  forced  him to  see, hear  and  judge." He represents a middle  way between the concrete  world of suffering common humanity  and  the world of in­ tellect  and  abstraction.  He  accepts  life as he finds it, neither  condemning   nor praising.
From  "Requiem for Bibul" two elements emerge which will be taken  up and
expanded  in Confusions. The  first is the structural  pattern  which binds the story together.  This  echoes the  mediaeval  chivalric  code. The  street  urchins  are  des­ cribed as "knights" carrying on "jousts" with pilfered garbage can lids as "targes". Bibul's goal can be likened to the prize of the tournament.

Every knightly thrust-parry with an unqueenly schnorrer, every cull of orange he sold, every bruised apple brought him that much closer to Yeshiva.

To  reinforce  the  mediaeval  parallel,  Bibul, his horse and  wagon,  are  described in Quixotic  terms. Bibul, of course, is analagous to Quixote, and in the same way as the Knight  of the Sorrowful  Countenance he represents a vanishing breed.
The  mediaeval  structure  is supported  by a deliberately heightened  diction. "I
write  this  requiem  for  Bibul, for  his face, for his Cause,  his tic, his wave,  his
'Aaaa'." "In love and the joy of remembering, I sing you this Bibul and all that's past and passing but not to come." In the same way as the structure is nostalgically mediaeval, so the diction at times assumes a lyrical quality. There  is of course an implied  humour   in  the  ludicrous  contrast  between  the  mediaeval  and  lyrical elements  in  the  story  and  the  substance  of  the  plot,  which  is immigrant  and Jewish. It is here that  the story's weakness lies, for the contrast  seems contrived rather  than  organic,  and  the analogy is not wholly convincing.




IF "A  WOMAN OF  HER AGE" introduces  the two major  themes of  Ludwig's  work,  and  "Requiem  for  Bibul"  heralds  the  emergence  of  a  new structure,  it still remains to discuss the third important  quality of his work which reappears  in Confusions; that is the element of mythic dimension. "Orlick  Miller and  Company" illustrates  this quality  very well. The  setting  is vague,  but  it is

37

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



clearly  both  lower  class and  Jewish.  Ludwig  once  more  tackles a  world  which claims to live by one creed, but which acts according  to another; this time, how­ ever, the implications  are on a cosmic scale. "The world talks about  soul, spirit, but what  means truth in the world is body and face." Orlick deals in "remnants". His "remnants" are human  beings, ungainly women who have been  by-passed in the  matrimonial  scramble. Orlick  Miller is a match-maker; his  business is crea­ tion, and  his partner  in creation is, of course, God. Ludwig suggests that creation is an evolutionary  process which is unending  and  vital,  but  that  the divine plan needs human  assistance. "His  Creation  isn't  finished. It's a foundation; it's four walls, all  bare. Finishing is for Orlick  Miller." Because man  and  his world are essentially dualistic,  the process of creation  requires  adjustments and  "patching up".  Just  as Bibul disguised his second-class fruit,  Orlick  Miller must sometimes resort to lies to patch up his raw material. "But  Orlick Miller's lies are full of the highest  truth-who sees that?"  The  highest  truth  is, as in  "A  Woman  of Her Age",  the  continuance  of the human  race as the raison d'etre of existence.
In  this story the plot is less important than  the character. Orlick  mysteriously
appears out of the night to suggest a marriage  to Solomon, who has been deserted and  divorced  by his beautiful wife. Orlick describes himself as "a guardian angel
-working at  night."  The  sad  truth,  he informs  us, is that  marriages  are  not made  in  heaven  "except for those who are  born  rich, tall and  beautiful.  Orlick Miller & Company  looks after  the remnant." There  is no real climax or solution to the plot; Orlick consumes quantities of Scotch, philosophizes about life and dis­ appears  into  the  night  with  the  promise  that  he  will return  with  a  match  for Solomon.  The  important factor  is the  character   sketch  of  Orlick.  While  he is conscious of his divine mission as an agent of God, he is not above maudlin self­ pity, telling  half-truths,  and  a little cheating  on  the side. He  is given a mythic quality by his appearance-
Tiny  in stature-wall-eyed. Water stained brown derby, wing tip collar, heavy satin paisley tie with a diamond stick pin, suit (inherited from a dead cousin) too large and bulging at every pocket with address books, greying envelopes.... Rich brown goatee....
-but even more by the manner in which he lives. "No one has ever seen him eat. He is rumoured  to exist on tea and Scotch. Tea  by day-Scotch  by night." The author  does not, however, fully draw out the story's mythical implications. Orlick has feet of clay. He is neither fully whimical or fully farcical, but a strange hybrid somewhere  in  between. It  remains  for Confusions  to provide  a genre  where the mythic qualities come to fruition.

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



In  the three stories under  discussion we have seen Ludwig experimenting  with various attitudes; the tragi-comic based on emphatic  characterization, the frame­ work of a past age through  which one can say something pointed about our own, and  the mythic  approach. These directions lead Ludwig  quite naturally to a re­ appraisal  of an  old genre,  the mock epic. One  element of  the mock epic which must undoubtedly  have appealed  to Ludwig is its particular emphasis on the cen­ tral character. As we have noted, strong characterization has dominated  Ludwig's work, and all the characters  have one quality in common; they perform the func­ tion  of a middle  man.  For  example,  Doha, the living projection  of the malaise of a materialistic  society, is half way between the poor immigrant and the second generation  tycoon,  and  in  this way she  tragically illustrates  the  cost of success. Bibul stands  between the abstract-minded intellectuals of the high school and the realistic  world  of  the  slums. Orlick  is a  middle  man  in  creation.  He  takes the human  remnants  and  patches  them together so that  they become part  of society. In Confusions the protagonist follows the pattern of middle man, but his function is expanded  to that of an epic hero, whose fate mirrors to some extent the fate of a  nation  or  race.  In  the  mock epic, however, the  protagonist  tends to be anti­ heroic, and  the projection  of the anti-hero on the implied image of the epic hero gives the work its satiric flavour. Joseph Gillis/Joe Galsky is not only a middle man but  also  a  kind  of Everyman  as well. A lecturer  at  Harvard, he is the epitome of the human  race in its academic guise. He states specifically, "My  confusions are the culture's schizophrenia." The  confusion in Gillis's case is the antithesis of two cultures. They are the Jewish-American culture which stands for individualism, emotion  and  joy, and  the Ivy-League  culture which represents an abstraction  of individualism  in  the interests of general conformity to the  hierarchical  structure of society.  In  this  coupling  of  the  Jewish-American  and  Anglo-Saxon-Puritan cultures, Confusions differs from  Ludwig's other works and  demonstrates  the ex­ pansion of his viewpoint to include all society.
A further  element  of the mock epic which appears  in Confusions is contained
in  the ludicrous  contrast  between the novel's trivial situation  as a university lec­ turer  pursues his adventures in the wonderland of Academia, and the grand frame of North  American  society in the twentieth century. This  contrast is particularly suitable  to Ludwig's style because it allows him to be didactic,  while at the same time giving free rein to a satiric bent which he has not fully unleashed in his short stories. The  expansion  of viewpoint, mirrored  through  Gillis-Galsky  in the guise of epic hero  ready  to save  mankind,  tends to involve the  reader  and  thus bring him  face  to face  with  the  recurrent  twentieth-century  problem  which  we have


39

ANATOMY OF CONFUSION



seen exemplified  in  Ludwig's  short stories and  which  in  the  novel is succinctly described as the credo of "Second Things First". These are such things as "status­ establishing,  career-making  and  image  projecting." This  is  the  credo  that  led Doba  to her  plight;  the credo that  made  the world  of abstraction  in  which the high school "kings" existed at a mediaeval distance from the cold real world of the slums; it is living by the credo of Second Things  First that  creates confusion and results in the inability to separate the real from the unreal.
The  plot of Confusions modernizes the Faust  myth. Joseph  Gillis/Joe Galsky is being tested. At Harvard  he meets the Devil, who makes him a proposal. Gillis is to write a satirical expose of human weakness and viciousness, and in return the Devil will assure him "endless weeks and  months  on  the Best Seller lists." Op­ posed to the force of evil is the force of good in the person of an old Hasid. The  Faustian   theme  of good versus evil is played  out  against  the  background  of a California  campus,  for in true epic tradition,  in order  to be  tested GillisjGalsky must leave the Parnassian  heights of Harvard. In California he meets the dragons of the faculty who incorporate  all the twentieth-century failings, and he is drawn  into a game of one-up-manship.  The ensuing struggle comes to a climax through a student's  illness; faced with real tragedy, Gillis-Galsky realizes that man's  prob­ lems with  confusion amount  to mere  play-acting.  This  revelation, in turn,  leads to another  when he realizes that the Devil is really himself at his worst, and that,  further,   he is "this  age's  worst  self.  Paranoid, full  of  Either/Or." That is, he discovers that  the worst part of  man is nihilistic, wanting  to reduce the world to utter  chaos-its state before Creation. The  Hasid, on the other hand, symbolizes all  that  is best on man, focussing on his creativity,  through  which  he is able to impose order on the chaos around him. The hero is thus "saved" by the realization that  man's capability for good or evil lies within  himself.




WEN WE RECOLLECT some of the standard characteristics of a mock epic, we realize how suitable they are to Ludwig's style of writing. The mock epic must  begin in  medias  res. This  beginning  in the middle of the action allows Ludwig  the mobility for his free-wheeling rhetoric  which the short stories tended  to cramp; the epic hero suits Ludwig's  bent for strong  characterization; the epic journey, battle and  trip to the underworld  present a ready-made frame­ work  within  which  he can  use his talent  for  allusion,  pun  and  satire;  and  the intercession of supernatural machinery allows him to introduce the mythic dimen-

ANATOMY OF  CONFUSION



sion which gives the work universality. The most interesting facet to emerge from this new version of an  old genre, however, is the style. The  diction  mirrors  the duality of theme,  high and  lyric for the abstract  vision of our existence, and  low and  colloquial  for  the  cold reality of everyday life. Ludwig  uses a combination of  traditional epic  diction   ( "0, ye Brooklyn muses, who  inspired  the  higher theme, abandon me not in Royce unreality! Hail, Urania, and thy daughter, California,  sustain  this my sad  return  to second  things  first!")   and  colloquial language  which often descends to vulgar expletives. This is the culmination  of the style which appeared  in embryonic form in "Requiem  for Bibul". The  language now, however, is crisper, surer and often brilliant in the use of allusion and  pun; it tends to delight,  to titillate and  to shock.
Ludwig's  highly developed  sense of the ludicrous comes into its own in  Con­ fusions, where it serves a didactic  purpose. There is, for example, Tim Jolliffe,  a Greek scholar,  who is brilliant,  handsome  and  elegant;  yet worries about  atomic  fall-out  and  insecticides in consumer goods, and  propagates  the thesis that  this is the  "worst  of all  possible worlds".  The  hero  himself has  grand  pretensions,  he wants to be "the  prophet  of the computer age", the saviour of mankind,  but all he can  tell  us is that  our  confusions have  nothing  to do  with  reality.  We should change  what  we can  change  and  not worry  about  those things over which  we have no control.  We should get on with the business of living.
One  thing  that  is clear  from  Confusions is that  satire  is Ludwig's  particular forte. The  light  humour, with  mere overtones of satire, of the short stories now emerges  as  hard-hitting crisp  satire,  and  it  is almost  classic in  form.  Ludwig wants to change  us, and  he leaves us with hope.

Desire nothing in  this world but time to do your work, love, kisses, serious talk, laughter, great works of art, and a white Jaguar so you can get these things more quickly.

Ludwig's  novel is the  culmination  of an experimental  technique  which  looks back in time and  which leads him to attempt  the re-establishment of a traditional genre,  the  mock  epic.  But,  however  freely one  may  borrow  the  characteristic devices of  the  mock  epic, such  as the  journey, exile and  battle,  the success or failure of the form depends on the narrative style. We have seen in the short stories foreshadowings  of a lyrical expression which in Confusions breaks forth  in  pro­ fusion. The  language   tends  to  sweep the  reader  along on  a wave of  rhetorical bombast  reminiscent  of  Ben  Jonson.  Jonson,  however,  could  achieve  a  great variety of effect in  the  medium  of verse, while Ludwig is shackled  to the more

ANATOMY OF CONFUSION



pedestrian  pace of prose. His problem is how to sustain  a heightened  prose style without  becoming  tiresome, how to achieve variety  without  bathos. But, though he uses all the tricks of the writer's craft-allusion, pun, simile, hyperbole-he does not always succeed in sustaining the necessary tension. It is possible that  the novel is too unwieldly a vehicle for mock epic; on the other hand,  the short story is not  substantial  enough.  Jack  Ludwig,  it  would  seem, is still reaching  for an effective and distinctive style.





















42



ETHEL WILSON'S FIRST NOVEL



Desmond Pacey



Heuy Dorval is the kind af Mt novel we might have ex­
pected  its characteristically   modest author  to write. It is short-only  just over
a hundred   pages, the  pages small and  the  print  comfortably  large;  it is, on the surface at least, simple and straightforward in both plot and characterization; and its tone is one of gentle wonderment  at the vagaries of human  nature.  Above all, it  is a  book  that  can  either  be read  in  a few hours as a  pleasant  diversion, or studied  intently  as a subtle consideration of some of the more profound  questions of psychology and  ethics.
Read  merely as light  entertainment, Hetty  Dorval commends itself to us as a
mystery story. It records  the  reactions of a young girl, Frankie  Burnaby,  to an older  and  reputedly  wicked woman,  Hetty  Dorval. Frankie  is only twelve years old when  the novel opens, and  Mrs. Dorval appears  as a strange new inhabitant in the small British Columbian town of Lytton where Frankie goes to school. At first Frankie  is dazzled by Hetty's beauty, but gradually she begins to have doubts about  the woman's  character.
Wherever  Frankie  goes-in Vancouver,  where she is sent to a private school, on shipboard  on the Atlantic Ocean, in London-she keeps encountering Hetty, and  on  each  encounter  she is both  attracted  and  repelled. Always in  the  back­ ground  are  vague  rumours  of some horrible  secret in the life of  Mrs.  Dorval, and  it is only  near  the  very close of the novel, when she appears  to be on  the point of marrying  the young  Englishman  whom Frankie  has come to  love, that we learn of her illegitimate birth  and of her involvement in a series of  unsavoury affairs with  rich and  powerful  men. Enigmatic  to the end, Hetty  at  the close of the novel gives up all claim to Frankie's  young man in order  to marry a wealthy German,  Jules Stern.  Whether  she does this out of concern for Frankie's  feelings or Rick's welfare, or out of pure selfishness, is left to our speculation.

43

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



Even  if we look no deeper  than  this, there  is much  to admire in Hetty  Dorval. As a thriller  of the less sensational variety it is very well managed. Almost  always we  are  shown  rather than  told: we get  a series of dramatic scenes, each  clearly lit in the foreground but with intriguing shadows in the background. The opening scene shows us Frankie and  her girl-friend  Ernestine watching the arrival of Mrs. Dorval's furniture at the railway-station, and  mistaking Hetty's housekeeper, Mrs. Broom,  for  Hetty  herself. The second  main  scene  describes  the  first  meeting  of Frankie and  Hetty; the third  the arrival  of the supposed  Mr. Dorval; the fourth the  town  fair; and  so  on,  until  the  final  confrontation of  Frankie and   Hetty when   the  latter   decides  for  Jules  Stern   rather than Rick. The   point  is  that each  of  these scenes is a  unit  in itself, a satisfying  and  self-contained encounter, and  yet  that  each  points  forward to  the  next  and  backward to  its  predecessor. There is a closely linked sequence  of dramatic episodes in each of which  a moment of time is clearly and  perceptively  limned, and  in each of which  the level of  narra­ tive interest  or suspense  perceptibly rises.
An  example may  make  clear  how effectively  Mrs.  Wilson  manages this narra­
tive level of her  work. Here  is part  of the opening scene:

The  day  that  Mrs. Dorval's  furniture arrived  in  Lytton,  Ernestine  and  I had gone  to the  station  to see the  train  come in.  It was a  hot  day.  The  heat  of the sun  burned  down from above, it beat up from  the ground  and  was reflected from the hot hills. Mr.  Miles, the station  agent, was in his shirt-sleeves; the station  dog lay and  panted,  got up, moved away, lay down  and  panted  again;  and  the usual Indians stood leaning against the corners of the wooden station  (we called it "the deepo")   in  their  usual curious  incurious  fashion,  not  looking as though  they felt the heat or anything else. The  Indians  always looked as though  they had  nothing to do, and  perhaps  they had  nothing  to do. Ernestine  and  I had  nothing much  to do,  school  was out  and  supper  wasn't  ready  and  so we had  drifted  over  to the station.  Neither  of our  mothers  liked  us to do  this every day;  but  we were  not absolutely forbidden.
When  the  train  clanked in, a number  of the stifling passengers got out seeking coolness in the bright glaring heat of the station  platform. Ernestine and I watched these passengers with experienced  eyes and  saw that  there  was no one interesting to us. We did  not find grown-ups interesting,  but were always on the look-out for other  children  or for dogs. And sure enough  there  at  the end  of the train  was a large  dog, perhaps  a Newfoundland,  hot in  his hot coat.  The  train  men  had  got him out of a freight  car, and  then  they heaved  and  pushed  and  lifted out a huge crated  object  that  might  be a  piano,  and  then  they  got  out  packing  case after packing case.
Directly  the great  dog stood  upon  the platform,  looking sadly and  nobly about
him, a woman moved up to him and said casually, "Well, Sailor," and  you might


44

ETHEL WILSON's FIRST  NOVEL



almost say the dog smiled. His thick bell-rope of a tail swung and he moved up to the woman who patted  him lightly but gave her full attention to the crates and packing cases that the train hands and station hands deposited upon the platform. Ernestine and  I had  seen this woman before in the Lytton main street, but she was really the kind of woman that you don't notice. You might see her in a village, or in  a  big city, or in a street-car, or on a train, and  you would never notice. Nevertheless, we now saw that she had authority. She was dressed in dark grey. Her  hair  was dark  grey too,  and was taken straight back from her plain strong face. Suddenly she began to be interesting to Ernestine and  to me, because she belonged to Sailor the dog and to all the new packing cases.

The  very first sentence  of  that  passage suggests one of the strongest dements in Hetty  Dorval's  appeal  for Frankie: Frankie is a girl living in a town so small and  so isolated  that  the arrival  of the daily train is an event,  and  to her simple mind  Mrs.  Dorval  represents  the  exotic, the sophisticated,  and  the  mysterious. The  whole of  the  opening  paragraph suggests oppressive boredom -the  heat, the  panting  dog pointlessly moving from place to place, the leaning  Indians,  the idly drifting girls -and makes us long for something to happen. The last sentence of the  first paragraph prefigures what  is to be one of the  main  tensions in  the plot-that between the innocent freedom of a child's response and the suspicious restraint  of a parent's.
In the second paragraph, the appearance  of the Newfoundland dog and of the piano  crate  and  other  packing  cases heightens the  effect of something  strange, mysterious  and  almost  monstrous  intruding  into  this  sleepy  little  way-station. And when, in the third  paragraph, we see the woman go up to the dog and call him  Sailor,  we  at  once  jump  to  the  false conclusion,  as do  the  girls, that  this woman  is Mrs. Dorval  and  that,  having a huge dog with such  a name, she is a woman of the world and a woman of strong will.
There  are other  things in these opening paragraphs that  might  be commented upon -they  reveal, for example,  Ethel Wilson's talent  for selective and sugges­ tive  description  of  landscape,   her  fascination  with  animals  and  with  people's gestures, and  the  deceptive  simplicity of her style-but what  I wish  mainly to remark  here is the sheer  cleverness of them from the  point  of view  of  arousing suspense. Almost every sentence  makes a statement  but  at  the same  time raises a question.  Who  is Mrs. Dorval?  Will she be on the train?  Is this dog hers? Is that  a  piano?  Her  piano?  Is  that  woman  Mrs. Dorval?  Why  had  the girls not really noticed her before? And so on.
To initiate and sustain suspense on this level, and yet never to deviate into melo­
drama, is not easy. There  are, it is true, in this first novd  one or two scenes that


45

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



come near to melodrama, the chief one being that in which the housekeeper, Mrs. Broom, introduced  as the woman in dark  grey, reveals that  she is in fact Hetty Dorval's  mother. If one is reading  the novel merely for its lively plot, that  scene may  be accepted  as a melodramatic  fragment  coming  appropriately enough  at the climax of the action;  but if one is reading the novel a little more seriously, one may see that  it is a cunningly constructed link in the whole narrative  chain. It is, in fact, one of those scenes from which we get the shock of recognition. For, from the  very first, we have seen Mrs. Broom  protecting  and  directing  Hetty  with  a truly  maternal  solicitude, and  it has only been Mrs. Wilson's narrative  skill that has diverted us from asking why a mere housekeeper should so long and so stoutly defend such a woman from the world. Mrs. Broom's dark grey has been a shade in the background  which has been waiting all along for Mrs. Wilson to illuminate it. And what  prevents the illumination from being really melodramatic is the very steadiness of the beam when it finally does shine out. There  is no vague rush of uncontrolled  emotion, but a disciplined delineation of physical detail denoting psychological strain.  There  is no wild waving  of  the  arms,  but  rather  "fingers short  and  square-tipped  pressed down hard  upon  the table."






BuT THERE IS  MORE  to  Hetty  Dorval  than  a  plot which is intricately  woven  and  cunningly  controlled.  First  of  all,  there  is evident  here, as in all of Ethel  Wilson's work, an inspired sense of place. I do not mean only, although  this is part  of it, that  Mrs. Wilson is a superb  regionalist. Certainly  she does give us a very vivid sense of what it is like to live in the British Columbia which  has  been her  home since childhood.  She is not one of those authors  who are afraid  of naming  their places, who seek to give a kind of vague  universality to their settings. When she wants to describe the Thompson River she calls it the Thompson  River, and proceeds to describe it as she has seen it:

Anybody looking out of the front  windows of  Mrs. Dorval's  bungalow could look down on to the racing Thompson River. Perhaps the water was emerald, perhaps it was sapphire. It is both. It is neither. It is a brilliant river, blue-green with lacings of white foam and spray as the water hurls itself violently along in rapids against hidden or projecting rocks, a rapid, racing, calling river. The hills rise high and lost on each side of the banks. These hills are traversed hardly at all. There  is no reason to climb, to scale the top, to look  down. In  the sunlight the

ETHEL WILSON'S FIRST NOVEL



dun-coloured  gorges of  the  blue-green river look yellow and  ochreous, and  in some places there are outcroppings of rock that are  nearly rose red. Large dark and solitary pine trees give landmark and meaning. As evening comes on, the hills grow dove grey and purple; they take on a variety of surprising shapes and shades, and the oblique shafts of sunlight disclose new hills and valleys which in daylight merge into one and are not seen.

That is good  regionalist  writing,  for it catches  the  distinctive  qualities  of that region:  the speed of its rivers, its high, lonely hills, its dark and solitary pine-trees. But it is more than  that: the description is an organic  part  of the atmosphere of the whole novel. The  tumultuous  river is symbolic, to the young girl Frankie, of Hetty  Dorval  herseH - something  powerful,  mysterious, almost  monstrous,  but at  the same  time  very beautiful.  And  the mysteriousness of the hills at evening, their  "variety  of surprising  shapes and shades",  "the  oblique shafts of  sunlight"  disclosing  "new   hills  and  valleys",  suggests the  multifaceted  mystery  of  Mrs. Dorval,  whose  effect  upon  Frankie  is slightly different  if  equally  bafHing every time that she sees her.
Mrs. Wilson's  descriptive  gifts not only extend  to the  landscape  of her home region. In  this novel she makes us feel the reality not alone of British Columbia but  also of the  Atlantic  Ocean,  of the Cornish  coast, of London,  and  of Paris. And  she  can  catch  the  essence of  a  human  scene as accurately  as that  of  an inanimate one. Here, for example, is her description of a country fair:

I went to  the fair with Ernestine and her father and mother. We walked through the dark quiet Lytton street under a night of stars towards the garish lights and music. The  prancing excitement that Ernestine and I felt was all mixed up with the greasy smells from the hot-dog stand; the sudden light and the sudden dark­ ness; the  cacophony of sound;  motion revolving horizontally, vertically,  passing and  repassing; drifting town and country people; darting children; barking dogs; all happening together, noise, flare, smell, motion, and the small  crowds standing with upturned  faces gazing at the picture in front of the lighted booth of Torquil the Lobster Boy.

That conveys very  well the  excitement  that  a  youngster  of twelve feels at such an event. And  again  it does not stand  alone, but is cleverly woven into  the total fabric  of the novel:  having  been warned by her parents to stay away from Hetty Dorval, Frankie  is "much subdued"  when she leaves for Lytton,  but the "pranc­ ing excitement" of the fair gives her the courage to call again upon the mysterious stranger.
A sensitivity to landscape  and to human gatherings is not unusual in a novelist.


47

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



A rarer  gift, which  Mrs. Wilson possesses, is the  ability to convey the essence of animal  and  bird behaviour. Hetty  Dorval is not as distinguished in this respect as some of her  later  novels, but  even here we see signs of unusual  perceptiveness. Perhaps  the  most striking  description  of animated   life in  Hetty Dorval  is this account  of the flight of wild geese:

She could not see as quickly as I could that out of the north came a thin long arrow, high in the sky. Then her eyes picked up the movement of the fluid arrow rapidly approaching overhead, and  the musical clamour of the wild geese came more clearly and loudly to us. The valley of the Fraser lay broad below, lit by the September  afternoon,  and  the  geese, not  too high, were  now nearly overhead, travelling fast. The fluid arrow was an acute angle wavering and  changing, one line straggling out far behind the other. It cleft the skies, and as always I felt an exultation, an  uprush within me  joining that  swiftly moving company and  that loud music of the wild geese. As we gazed, the moving arrow of great birds passed out of sight on its known way to the south, leaving only the memory of sight and sound in the still air. We drew a long breath.

Even if this were merely a set-piece of description, it would be highly effective, for so often  the  phrasing  strikes us as  just right:  the  "fluid  arrow", the  "musical clamour", "an  acute  angle wavering  and  changing" all reveal that  Mrs. Wilson has looked and  noted and  found the exact word in which  to record her  percep­ tions.  But  again  we  must  notice  that  the  passage is not  merely  a  set-piece of description.  The  wild geese are a symbol of Hetty  Dorval,  who like  them longs to be free to move without encumbrance. The  flight of the wild geese, indeed, be­ comes one of the chief thematic  motifs in the novel. When Frankie is first told by her  parents  of Hetty's  notoriety, she cites Hetty's  love of wild geese  "as  a proof of her  innocence".  Later,  when  Frankie  tells Mrs. Dorval  that  her  parents  will not  let her see Hetty  again,  the latter  says that  she had  thought  she could trust Frankie  because of their mutual  love of wild geese. When  they meet  again  in a London  restaurant,  Hetty  reminds Frankie  of "the  wild geese going  overhead"; and in their very last scene together Hetty recalls the flight once more.
The  wild geese symbolize not only Hetty's  own love of wildness and  freedom, but  all the redeeming features of her character: like them she is a kind of  spon­ taneous  natural  force, with  her own way of being. And  the character  of  Hetty, together with the complementary  character  of Frankie,  constitutes the core of this novel. In  one sense, Hetty  Dorval is still another  version of the classic confronta­  tion of innocence  and  experience. It  would almost  be possible to  treat  the novel as an  allegory, in  which Innocence  meets Evil in  the disguise of  Beauty, is tern-

ETHEL WILSON'S FIRST NOVEL



porarily   enchanted  thereby, is  made   wise  by  Parental  Wisdom,   and  succeeds finally  in  cheating Evil  out  of another victim.  But  although there  is just enough of  this  element in  the  novel  to  make  such  a  summary possible,  and  to set  up interesting  analogies with  Spenser's   Faerie Queen  and  Bunyan's Pilgrim's  Pro­ gress, the summary grossly oversimplifies  the  moral  and  psychological subtlety of the book.




IHAVE   ALREADY MENTIONED that  one  of  the  chief  thematic motifs  is the  flight  of  the  wild  geese. The  other,  slightly  more  important, is the
well-known   quotation  from   Donne's  meditations  which   serves  as  the   novel's epigraph:

No man is an Iland,  intire of it selfe; every man is a peece of the Continent, a part of the  maine;  if a Clod  bee washed away by the Sea, Europe  is the lesse, as well as if a  Promontorie  were, as well as if a Mannor  of thy friends  or of thine owne were; any mans death  diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankinde.

This  epigraph is picked  up  at  intervals  throughout the book. When  Frankie is in
Cornwall, she thinks  about Hetty  in these terms:

Any positive efforts  that  one could discern on the  part  of Hetty  were directed towards  isolating  herself  from  responsibilities to other  people.  She  endeavoured to  island  herself in her  own  particular  world of comfort  and  irresponsibility.  ("I will not  have  my life complicated.") But "No man is an Iland,  intire  of it selfe ;" said  Mother's poet  three  hundred  years ago, and  Hetty  could  not island  herself, because we impinge  on each other, we touch, we glance, we press, we touch again, we cannot escape.

And  that  last  phrase, "we  cannot escape",  of course, calls to mind  the other con­ trasting  thematic motif,  that  of the  wild geese-who can,  it seems, escape, who can  leave  for  the  south  whenever it gets unpleasant in the  north.
The  novel,  in  other  words,  seesaws between  two opposed  views of the  human condition, views which  we may  label  responsibility  and  irresponsibility, discipline and   license,  communalism  and   individualism. Swayed   by  her   admiration for Hetty, Frankie leans  to the  wild goose view of life; reproved by her  parents, she veers to the sense of communal responsibility. Responsibility triumphs in Frankie: when  she  becomes  aware of  the  destructive influence  which  Hetty threatens to

49

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



exercise on  her  Cornish  friends  Rick  and  Molly,  Frankie  rejects  Hetty  (sym­ bolically trying  to push her out of her bed). But though  responsibility  triumphs  in  Frankie,  Hetty  clings throughout  to the wild goose way, and  Frankie cannot  quite eliminate a rebellious, reluctant envy of her freedom:

Although I had fought her and driven her off, and would fight her again if I had to and defeat her, too, she was hard to hate as I looked at her. She made a gesture of good-bye and went down the stairs. (Mrs. Broom, to what a bleak morn­ ing  you awoke  all alone.)
As  I  watched  with satisfaction Hetty  going down the  narrow stairs, I  knew that before she had taken three steps she had forgotten me, and she had forgotten
Richard. She was on her way.

The  italicized sentence, reminding  us of Hetty's  callous desertion of her mother, is there to call to our minds the suffering to others which is involved in the indi­ vidualist's  relentless search  for  personal liberty.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is no mistaking  the slightly envious tone of the last sentence:  "She  was on  her way." The  only words that follow that sentence, which comes on the last page of the
novel, are these:

Six weeks later the Germany Army occupied Vienna. There arose a wall of silence around the city, through which only faint confused sounds were sometimes heard.

This  final  paragraph makes  intelligible  another   quotation from  Donne  which occurs in  the  epigraph,  below the Island  passage:  "And   makes one little  room an everywhere." The story, in its modest way, is being held up as a microcosm of the whole human  world prior  to the Great  War. The  rampant individualism  of Hetty  Dorval, multiplied  a million times, precipitated  that  conflict. And since no man  is an island,  that  conflict destroyed not only the individualists  but the com­ munalists as well.
The  foregoing  discussion, however, suggests that  the  novel is much  more  ab­ stractly  moral  than  it really is. Moreover Hetty  Dorval is most satisfying  not on the  moral  but on  the psychological plane. The  seesaw of conflicting  moral phil­ osophies is there,  but  it is not  nearly as fascinating  as the seesaw  of conflicting personalities.




AT FIRST   READING, the  most  interesting  character  in  the novel is Hetty  Dorval  herself. The  process by which she is gradually  revealed to

ETHEL WILSON'S FmST NOVEL



us  through the  eyes of  Frankie is subtle  and  delicate.  At  first  merely  a strange visitor, she  comes  to seem  in  time  a beautiful and  gracious hostess, probably the innocent victim  of malicious gossip, a wicked  temptress,  a weak  woman grasping at  happiness, and  a  femme fatale. She is elusive and  chameleon-like, and  Frankie is never sure  just what  she  really is:  to the very end she remains an enigma, dis­ appearing for reasons which  she alone knows into the silence of war-time Vienna.
Frankie's first sight  of her  comes when  she meets her on horseback, when  they are  both  riding  towards Lytton on a Saturday afternoon. What impresses  Frankie on  this occasion  is Hetty's beauty,  kindness, purity,  and  innocence:

... Pure is perhaps  the  best word, or spiritual, shall  I say, and  I came  to  think that what gave her profile this touching purity was just the soft curve of her high cheekbone, and  the faint  hollow below it. Also the innocence of her slightly tilted nose, which  afterwards  I called in my mind a flirt's nose, and  the slight droop of her  mouth  whose upper  lip was perhaps a little over-full.

But  the  first  little  crack  in  this  image  comes  a  few  moments later, when  Mrs. Dorval   uses  the  word   "God" as  an  expletive.  To  the  child's  mind, this  spells wickedness:

I was brought  shockingly to earth.  I was quite  used to hearing  the men round Mr.  Rossignol's stable, and  other  men too, say "God"  for  no reason at all. And it goes without  saying that  the Rev. Mr. Thompson said "God" in church,  as it were officially, and  that we all sang about God with nothing more than ordinary church­ going emotion.  But  never, never, in our  house  (except once or twice, Father)   or in  Ernestine's  house or  at  Mrs. Dunne's  or in any of our  friends'  houses  (unless we were saying our  prayers)  did people ever mention God.

Hard on  the  heels  of  this  perception comes  the  realization that   Mrs.  Dorval  is literally  "two-faced":

We  remained  standing  there  and  gazing at  the empty  sky. Then  Mrs. Dorval turned  her  face on me and  I realized all of a sudden  that  she had  another  face. This  full face was different  from  the profile I had been studying, and  was for the moment  animated. Her  brows, darker  than  her fair hair, pointed  slightly upwards in the middle  in moments of stress and became in appearance tragic, and  her eyes which were fringed with thick, short, dark lashes opened wide and  looked brilliant instead of serene. The emotion  might be caused by pain, by the beauty of flighting geese, by death,  or even by some very mild physical discomfort, but the impact on the beholder  was the same, and  arresting.

When,   during Frankie's first  visit  to  Mrs.  Dorval's bungalow, the  Reverend
Mr.  Thompson comes  to call, Frankie realizes that  Hetty  is also two-faced in the

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



moral sense of that  phrase. She is gracious and apparently  friendly to the minister while he is there, but once he has gone she tells her housekeeper, Mrs. Broom ("Mouse"), that she will not have callers:

"Now Mouse," said Mrs. Dorval, "I will not be called upon. I will not have my life complicated here ... people coming in like this! I do not propose to spend my time paying attention to all kinds of people. You know perfectly well that I can't have people running in, and you must stop it." (It  might have been Mrs. Broom's fault.)  "All I ask of anybody is to be left alone and not be interfered with. I'm sure I always leave people quite alone and interfere with nobody."

Frankie  leaves this first interview with  Mrs. Dorval  with  mixed feelings. Her beauty  of face  and  voice (Mrs.  Dorval sings for  Frankie  after  the minister  has left)  charm  the girl:  "As for me, a country child, I had come under a very fancy kind  of spell, near  to infatuation." And  yet she cannot  help feeling that  "there was  something  somewhere  that  was  not  quite  right",   particularly   when  Mrs. Dorval's  last admonition  to her is to  keep the visit secret:

Whatever she had asked me, then, I would have agreed to do, and this seemed a small thing to promise, so I did. But it passed through my mind that it would be a funny thing if I came to this house and my mother couldn't come, that is, even if she wanted to. But I was only twelve, and was under a novel spell of beauty and singing and  the excitement of a charm that  was new, and  I  went away almost in a trance.

We have followed the development of Hetty  Dorval's  character  far enough  to make clear the subtle and  delicate way in which it is managed. What  makes the process  doubly  interesting  is the  interplay  of  Frankie's  character   with  that  of Hetty:  it is not so much  what Hetty is that  intrigues  us, as what she appears  to be  to  the  innocent  but  perceptive  beholder.  Frankie  serves the function  in  this novel  of  the  innocent  eye in  whose gaze  everything  has  its  own  wonder  and mystery of  being.  Indeed  on  a  second  reading  of  the  novel one is apt  to find Frankie's  character  even more intriguing  than that of Hetty. Whereas the develop­ ment in Hetty's  character  is of the sort that  consists only in the growing  realiza­ tion of what has actually been there all along, Frankie's character  does change as the  novel progresses. At the beginning she is a completely innocent  and  ignorant  country  girl of twelve, so naive that  a visit to  the station  to watch  a train  come in is an event;  by the end of the novel she is a young woman of nineteen who has been to  school in Vancouver and in England, who has lived in London and Paris, and who is sophisticated enough to  entertain her friends in a fashionable  London restaurant. But  the  change is not merely  this  relatively commonplace  one, from

52

ETHEL WILSON'S FIRST NOVEL



childish  naivete  to  adult  sophistication.  Frankie's  innocence  is not quite  spoiled but  it is certainly  strained  by her  relationship  with  Hetty.  Frankie  indeed  takes on some of the  characteristics  of the company she keeps. She hides her visits to Hetty  from  her  parents;  on one occasion she plays the part  of a peeping Tom, spying through  Hetty's  window;  and in the last scene of the novel it is suggested that  Frankie  has  become almost as selfish and self-indulgent  as Hetty.  In  words which  inevitably  recall  Mrs. Dorval's speech  to  Mrs. Broom after  the minister's visit, Frankie  says to Hetty:

"I  don't want you here again! You muddle up my life too much. Please, Hetty, look after your own affairs but keep away from me. I've got my own life to live and I don't  want ever to see you again-ever."

As if to underline  the similarity of attitude,  Mrs. Wilson lets Hetty reply.

"I  understand  exactly.  I feel for you. It is preposterous the way other  people clutter up and complicate one's life. It is my own phobia, Frankie, and I under­ stand you ... so well."






E STYLE  of  Hetty  Dorval,  apart   from  a  few  passages  of brilliant  landscape   description,  is simple  and  unobtrusive.  There   are  very  few metaphors  and  similes, although  the few that  do occur are characteristic  of  Mrs. Wilson  in  that   they  draw   analogies  between  human   and  non-human  beings. Frankie  thinks of herself as a goldfish: "But  I lived in a glass goldfish bowl where the behaviour  of each fish was visible to all the other fishes, and also to grown-up people outside  and  in  the  vicinity of the glass bowl." Hetty  appears to  Frankie as a cat:

Hetty Dorval was a human cat in some ways, and yet cats have sometimes malice, and  they sharpen  their claws. But Hetty had no malice. She was as incapable of bearing malice as of bearing resentment. She simply shed people, and I only once caught a glimpse of her claws.

A group  of  Indians   at  the fair  are compared  to birds:  "The Indians,  in small groups, moved  always together,  as by some inner self-protective compulsion, like certain birds, with their own particular  kind of awareness."
The  most outstanding characteristic  of the novel's style is its clever modulation of tone. Sometimes  the modulation  is so subtle as to be scarcely noticeable, as in

53

ETHEL WILSON'S  FIRST NOVEL



this  scene  where   the  Reverend  Mr.  Thompson  has  called   upon  Hetty   at  her bungalow:

"Then you are English," continued  Mr. Thompson. "Well ... no," said Mrs. Dorval.
"Is your husband English? Or I should say, was your home there?"
"No," said Mrs. Dorval. There was a pause.
"I hope your husband will be able to join you here," said Mr. Thompson.
"Oh, I do  hope  so," said Mrs. Dorval. She spoke little,  but  her words did  not come snubbingly as Mrs. Broom's would have done, but gently.
"A reader, I see," said Mr. Thompson.
"Yes," said Mrs. Dorval.
Mr. Thompson  got up and evidently went over to the bookshelves where I had seen a lot of yellowish paper books.
"Ah, you read French!"
"Yes, I read French."
"I should  like you to meet my wife. She would  be very glad  to call upon  you, she is a reader too."
"Call?" said  Mrs. Dorval vaguely and sweetly. "Oh, not call, you have no idea
... Oh,  you  are  so  kind,  but  at  present ..." and  she  looked  tenderly  at  Mr. Thompson.
Mr.  Thompson   murmured   something  about  "restored   health" and  then  after
a  little  more  unsatisfactory  conversation,  said  what  I had  been waiting  for  him to say, "And  now shall we have a word of prayer?"
"Oh," breathed  Mrs. Dorval, sitting motionless.

Almost  every sentence in  that  scene is ambiguous and  ironic,  and  we are  invited to  react  to each  remark  and  action  in  three  ways  at  once-to sympathize with the  curiosity, shock, and simple piety of the minister, to sense Mrs. Dorval's desire to fend  the minister  off and  yet not truly offend  him, and  at the same time respond to the scene with  all the bewilderment that  Frankie feels as a spectator of it. There is an  intricate interplay of piety, sophisticated boredom, and  childish  innocence, so that  what  seems at first glance so simple a style of utterance is actually function­ ing in a very complex manner indeed.
Sometimes the  modulation of  tone  is more  obvious.   In  the  last  scene,  Hetty spends  the  night  in  Frankie's room,  and  goes to sleep in  her  bed. As she looks at the  sleeping  Hetty, Frankie is once  more  impressed   with  her  tender  innocence, and  feels for  her  a rich  compassion :

There   is  that  in  sleep which  reduces  us all  to  one  common  denominator of helplessness and  vulnerable  humanity.  The  soft  rise and  fall  of the  unconscious

54

ETHEL WILSON'S FIRST NOVEL



sleeper's breast is a miracle.  It is a binding symbol of our  humanity.  The  child in the lost attitude of sleep is all children, everywhere, in all time. A sleeping human being is all  people,  sleeping,  everywhere since time  began.  There  is that  in  the sleeper that  arrests one, pitying, and that  makes us all the same. The  rise and  the fall  of  the  frail  envelope  of skin that  contains  the  microcosm of wonder,  is the touching  sign. If one  had  an  enemy, and  if one saw  that  enemy  sleeping,  one might  be  dangerously  moved  in  pity of spirit  by what  lies there,  unconscious.  I looked  at  Hetty,  sleeping;  but  that  did  not  prevent  me from  prodding  her  and saying, "Hetty, move  over, I've  got to get to  sleep!" There  was a murmur, "Oh, poor  Frankie,"  and  she  moved  luxuriously nearer  to  her  edge of the  bed and  I lay down and turned off the light.

Just  as the  passage  is threatening to become sentimental, Mrs.  Wilson  modulates the  tone  to  one  of  natural human irritation, and  the  scene  is saved.
But  the  passage  just quoted  may also serve to illustrate  another feature of Mrs. Wilson's  style,  and  this a less laudable one. She is rather too prone  to adopt  the old-fashioned device of authorial comment, to intrude into  the flow of her narra­ tive little chunks of personal philosophy.  Usually  there is a flavour of irony in these remarks which   helps  to  make   them   palatable, but  they  do  sometimes  offend.  However, there  is very  little  that  is offensive  in  Hetty  Dorval. It is  quiet  and unpretentious, but  for  all its apparent simplicity,  it offers us contrasting '\iews of the  human condition and  embodies  them  in two extremely interesting characters.







55


review articles




LOWRY'S  LETTERS


Hilda, Thomas



HARVEY BREIT  and  MARGERIE BONNER  LOWRY,  Editors.  Selected  Letters  of Malcolm
Lowry.  McClelland  &  Stewart.  $uz.oo.


THOSE READERS "who  esteem the   work   of  Malcolm   Lowry"  and   to whom   the  volume  is  in  part   dedicated, will surely find it impossible to open the Selected  Letters of Malcolm  Lowry with­ out  a feeling  of hope: hope that  Eridanus has  withstood   the  flames,  and   that   the Consul  has been saved, after all, as Lowry intended that, finally, he should be. For although the protagonist of Under the Volcano   can  stand   alone   as  an  auton­ omous  creation, it  will never  be  possible to  see  Lowry   without  seeing  too  some aspect  of his daemon-haunted  hero.  And Geoffrey   Firmin  was  indeed,   it   seems clear  from  the letters,  a projection of the spirit   which   possessed  Lowry,  and   with which    he   wrestled   in   all   his   creative  work.   In   a  letter   to  his  editor,   Albert Erskine,  dated  1953, he wrote:

I have   willed  one  thing  and   the  daemon has decided  another.... I can master  booze, my bad temper, my self-deceit, and to some extent   my  other   myriad   bad   habits,   but I  have  not  yet  learned  how  to master  that bugger.  And  if he was a good  one it  would be different.  But he is slow, confused, para­ noiac,  gruesome  of  mind,  as  well  as  being completely   implacable,  and   he   seems   to have  some vices unknown  even  to  me. And
 in  Gabriola   [the   novel  which  Lowry   was in   process  of  revising   at   the   time  of  his death) he has turned what set out to be an innocent   and    beautiful   story   of   human longing   into   quite   one  of  the  most  guilt­ laden  and   in  places  quite  Satanically  hor­ rendous   documents  it   has   ever   been   my unfortunate lot  to  read,  let  alone  have  to imagine  I  wrote.
The letters  provide an  intimate view  of Lowry's   continuous  struggle   to  survive, both  physically  and  "in  that  part  used  to be  call:   soul."  They   are  filled  with  the noise of weeping and  wailing  and  break­ ing  of  bones  which  attended the Lowrys in   their   battle  against  poverty,  against  the  elements ("the  elements  are  follow­ ing  us around," he wrote, after  a particu­ larly   appalling winter at   Dollarton), against   a  nearly  incredible  series of  per­ sonal   misfortunes:    lost   letters,   crossed wires,  disastrous falls  and  fires, and   the ever-present threat of eviction  ("We  evict those  who  destroy!")   from   their  home.  And  in  the  background  that  other   dae­ mon,  fittingly   christened  by  Paracelsus
( al  kohl-alcohol)  sounds  its  sardonic
"ha ha".
The  Selected  Letters of  Malcolm
Lowry  (which, according to  the  Preface

REVIEW  ARTICLES



by  Editor   Harvey   Breit,  contains   two­ thirds  of  the  available  letters,  "selected with  an  eye  to  creating  a  continuity") is divided  into  twelve sections, arranged  in  chronological  order.  A  Biographical Chronology, an  Appendix  of supplemen­ tary material and an Index  of names and titles  are   also  included.   In   the  letters, the growth of Lowry as a man and as an artist, which was not achieved, however, without  some  plummeting   in  the  abyss, is clearly  recorded.
Part  One covers the period  1928-1940, beginning  with  the  naive  and  touching letter   to  Conrad   Aiken:   "I have  lived only nineteen years and all of them more or less badly." This section is understand­ ably  rather  skimpy,  but  it  does  offer  a glimpse of the Mexican experience which provided   the   material   for   Under   the Volcano. Part  Two  marks the  beginning of the  Dollarton  period,  which  was ren­ dered less than auspicious by the burning down  of the  Lowrys' first house and  the rejection  by  no  fewer  than  twelve  pub­ lishers of  Under  the Volcano. By the fall of  1945,  however,  the  house  had  been rebuilt -"I  feel  somewhat  like  a  Pro­ metheus  who  became  interested  in  real estate  and  decided  to  buy  up  his  Cau­ casian  ravine"  Lowry  wrote  to  Conrad Aiken -and  the fourth  and final version of  the  novel was completed.  Part  Three  ( 1946)  contains  the  invaluable  letter  to Jonathan  Cape,   written   from   Mexico, in  which  Lowry  defends  the  underlying structure and  offers a chapter-by-chapter
analysis of Under  the Volcano; a letter which  is of the  utmost importance to all students  of Lowry's  work. Also in this section  is the statement made  to a  Cali­ fornia   attorney   in  connection  with  the Lowrys'  disastrous  encounter  with  offi­ cialdom  during  their  "holiday" in  Mex..
 ico. The  wisdom of including thio; statement is questionable, for it is not properly a  letter  at  all, and  although  it does convey a sharp and lucid impression of the bureaucratic horrors which Lowry loathed so much, and which, like the elements, seemed  to follow  him  around, it adds little to the portrait  of Lowry himself. This  last criticism might  also be levelled at the long letter  to Maxwell Perkins, then  chief  editor  at  Scribner's, in  connection  with  Mrs.  Lowry's  detec­ tive novel The  Shapes That  Creep. The extraordinary  confusion which resulted in Mrs. Lowry's work  being  published  sans final  chapter   is   an   interesting   tale  in itself, but  the  letter  interrupts the  con­ tinuity  of  the  far  more  vital  correspon­ dence between Lowry and Albert Erskine, the  editor of Under  the  Volcano.
Lowry was captivated   by the  thought
which  he  found  expressed  in  Ortega   y Gasset that  "man  is a sort of novelist of himself." This  idea, which  seems also to have invaded  the mind  of many  another modern  novelist-vide   Proust,   Gide, Kafka-accounts for  the  fact  that  the cycle  of  six  or  seven  novels  which  he planned,  of  which  the  Volcano   was  to have been the pivotal piece, was continu­ ally  being  revised  and  expanded   to  in­ clude,  by  a   kind   of   back-stitching   or spiralling   process,  the   author's  experi­ ence. The  letters  written after  the publi­ cation of Under  the Volcano, and  up to the  end  of  the  Dollarton   period  (I 947-
1954)  reveal  not  only something  of the
basis in fact of the material  later  used in Hear Us 0 Lord, but  something  also of the   struggle  Lowry   underwent    in   his effort to perceive the tragic, and comic, structure  beneath  the  chaotic  surface of his existence, and to invest it with a more than   personal  significance.   But   Lowry

57

REVIEW  ARTICLES



was  not  entirely   preoccupied   with  his own artistic  problems. Another  aspect of his  character-his  deep  humanity  and generosity of spirit-is  displayed in the long  appreciation   of  Conrad  Aiken,  in the  perceptive  discussion of Ralph  Elli­ son's The  Invisible Man and in the warm and  encouraging  letters to Downie Kirk, David   Markson  and   others.   Oddly enough  there is little to suggest  the pas­ sionate   feeling  he  had  for  "Eridanus", the  beach house on the shore of Burrard Inlet, which is so beautifully and tenderly conveyed  in   "The  Forest  Path   to  the Spring". That feeling appears only later, in  retrospect,  in  the  letters written  from the  White  Cottage  just before his death to  Harvey  Burt  and  to Jimmie  Craigie,
 the  Manx  fisherman  from  whom  Lowry learned  the  hymn "Hear Us 0 Lord".
The Selected Letters of Malcolm Lowry are a welcome addition to the catalogue of Lowry's published works. In addition to their intrinsic merit and the contribution  they make to the critical biography of Malcolm Lowry, they serve, as  they  were  undoubtedly  meant  to do, to whet the  reader's  appetite.  The  list of Lowry's unpublished  works is still far too long, and it is to be hoped that  the letters will be followed speedily by a Collected Poems, and by an edition of the novel "October Ferry  to Gabriola"  which is so tantalizingly   held   up   to   view  in   the Selected  Letters.





THE ROLE
OF LITERATURE
 




Jean-Ethier Blais


GERARD TOUGAS,  History  of French-Canadian Literature. Ryerson.   $10.00.


PROFESSOR GERARD TOUGAS' History of French-Canadian  Literature i not  the  first  one  of  its kind  to  appear. But  it  is  the  first  which  has  been  con­ ceived  in  a  true  academic  fashion  and not  entirely   along  the  drab  lines  of  a mnemotechnical   textbook.   This   is  the reason,  I  suppose,  why it is at  the same time the  best History of its kind and the best  textbook.  I have used it myself as a reference volume; it has never misled me. On   the   contrary,   after   having   found what  I was originally  looking for, I  real­ ized that  I was reading some of  Professor Tougas'   literary  or  historical  discourses,
 for the sheer pleasure of discovering what he thought. This does not mean that one should agree with all of Professor Tougas' pronouncements. But they are worth their while in  themselves, in  the  continuity  of an  exceedingly  readable   narrative,   and as the expression of an intelligent and perceptive   man's   thinking.   It is  politic that   Professor  Tougas'   analysis  should now appear  in English. There is no other way   of   discovering   who   the   French­ Canadians are,   and   what   a  French­ Canadian is, except through some knowl­ edge of our literature. We have produced not a single towering author  (except per-

REVIEW  ARTICLES



haps,  debatable   as  it  is, for  Nelligan) ; but   there   exists  a   continuous   flow  of writing, at a certain level of artistic desire, in  French  Canada, which  has served as a  permanent   catalyst  for  our  emotions, our   dreams,   the   realities  of  our   un­ convincing  historical  life. In  that  sense, our   literature  is  premonitory.  French­ Canadian writers have been motivated in depth   by  the  certainty   that   they  were speaking for  the  whole of  their  inarticu­ late  people.  There  is  not  a  single  one who  does  not  write,  as  it  were, from  a pedestal.  The   role  of   literature in  our national  life has  been to try and  fill the psychological  and  spiritual   void  created by  the  absence,  over  two  centuries,  of truly   representative  French-Canadian elites.  Our  poets,  our  novelists, our  his­ torians have reacted  to this absence, how­ ever unconsciously, by themselves serving as  guides. They  were,  and  still  are,  the French-Canadian elite. I stress this point because  it  does  not  appear  as  such  in Professor  Tougas'   book;  but  it  will  be­ come evident to those who read it through in order  to find out the dynamic orienta­ tion of  French-Canadian literature. This is also  why I do  not  think  that  "a  new, even revolutionary  approach," to French­ Canadian literature was necessary at this stage  of  our   development.   The   novels, essays, poems  written   by  French  Cana­ dians today are but the normal continua­ tion of a tradition. Frechette knew Victor Hugo   about   as  much   as   Miron   Pilon knows  Rene  Char; we  do  not,  on  the whole, write  better,  or  more  worthwhile things,  than   did  our   predecessors.  But we think we do, and  there  lies the rub.
One  thing   which  comes  out  well  in
Professor Tougas'  book, is the  inner  co­ hesion of French-Canadian  literature. It exists as  a  whole  and  French-Canadian
 writers have viewed themselves, from one generation  to  the  other,  as  taking  part in a collective opus. This is especially significant  with  regard  to  the  "novel  of the  soil".  Professor  Tougas   writes  that, after Maria Chapdelaine, "Laberge, Rin­ guet,  Germaine  Guevremont   and  Felix­ Antoine  Savard,   each  in  his  own  way, have   carried   on   from   this  success  of Hernon: Laberge and Ringuet in furnish­ ing  the  second   part   of   the   habitant'5  dyptique,  that  of  his slow  and  complete disintegration; Germaine Guevremont  in choosing  among   the   great  number   of daily doings which  make up the life of a farmer  those  which  clearly  define  him; Felix-Antoine  Savard  in forging  a  prose of his own by grafting a selected French­  Canadian   vocabulary  on  to  a  style  al­ ready  personal."  To  my mind,  this con­ clusion is not nearly enough. Here, in a single generation, we can witness the workings of the global French-Canadian literary  mind,  each  writer,  according  to the  needs of  his personality,  adding  an­ other  aspect  to  the  total  image  of   the French-Canadian peasant.  However,  we are   not   necessarily   confronted   with   a system, or even a school of writing. Pro­ fessor  Tougas  well  underlines   the  fact that  each  writer sought in the art  of the novel  to   define  a  personal  experience. But again, we cannot  help witnessing the emergence  of  a  solid  literary  bloc in  a given  domain.  Today,  a similar example can   be noted among young  French­ Canadian  poets. Ariadne's thread is again apparent. Whether this phenomenon be conscious or  not  is immaterial. What counts  is this inner  conception  of  litera­ ture  as symbol  (and  agent)   of  national  self-expression. I might add  that it is also a very French  view of  literature.
Whether  rightly  or  wrongly, this con-


59

REVIEW  ARTICLES



ception is intimately linked in the French­ Canadian mind to  the notions of  religion and  patriotism.  I have  the  distinct  im­ pression   that   Professor   Tougas   would prefer   these  two  realities  to  be  absent from  our  literature.  He  takes a  particu­ larly dim  view of nationalist  writers and adopts   the  fundamentalist  one   that French-Canadian nationalism and racism are  by  definition  twin-brothers.  In   the case of Abbe Lionel Groulx, this amounts to gross unfairness,  an  unfairness  which can  have  nothing  whatsoever to  do with literature. The  first  duty  of  a  historian (and  this, I suppose, applies to historians of literature)  is to look at  facts. And it is a fact  that  French-Canadian literature is, on the whole, of nationalist origin and outlook.  It  is possible to construe it into something   else.  But  I suggest  that   the present  nationalist  poetical  explosion could   have  been  better  interpreted  by Professor Tougas if, in a general fashion, he  had  not  let  himself be carried  away by preconceived views about the meaning of  nationalism   in  French  Canada.   For example,    Professor   Tougas   writes   of Jules-Paul  Tardive! (who appears  in the Index   under  the  name  Jean-Paul  Tar­ dive!): "Jules-Paul Tardive!(x8sx-xgos) was  the  first  novelist  to  prostitute  these two  sources  of  inspiration   (religion  and patriotism)  and  may  be regarded  as the precursor   of   the   racist   and   separatist novel." This cannot  do. It is flightly. Es­ pecially, since Professor Tougas adds:  "It will be necessary to wait for Abbe Lionel Groulx  for  the  nationalistic  novel to at­ tain  the  refinements  of which  it  is  cap­ able."  Surely, Professor Tougas  does not mean  that  L'appel  de la race is a direct continuation   of   the   reactionary   anti­ French   visions of   Pour  la  patTie. It  is sheer nonsense to harp forever on pseudo-

6o
 


definitions of the  word "race"  according to the  gospel of Gobineau,  or  Chamber­ lain,   and   then   to  apply   them   to   the works  of  Abbe  Lionel  Groulx  and  end with the usual appropriate denunciations.  It  is worse  than  nonsensical. It is petty. Literature and  ideology  (especially when it  appears  to  rest on  scanty  knowledge) are separate domains. One does not neces­ sarily  have  to  be  a  separatist   to  think that  Jacques  Renaud's Le casse is a novel of great  brilliance  and  profound  insight. I wish Professor Tougas had subtracted from this revised edition his feverish con­ cern  with  political  and  ideological  prob­ lems, especially since  they are  irrelevant  in the context  of resthetic historiography. If somebody  agrees  with  Professor Tou­  gas'  views  about  Canada  and   religion, does  he  not   stand   a  better   chance  of being  a fair  writer  than  if he does not? Translations  are  also  meant  to give  the occasion of  eradicating such examples of human  failure.  I find  it disturbing  that Professor  Tougas  has  not  taken  full  ad­ vantage  of  this one.
Finally,  two remarks. It is the current
fashion (imported no doubt from the Americans)   not  to  refer  to  authors   by their  pseudonyms. For  instance, Pro-

REVIEW  ARTICLES



fessor Tougas  does  not  introduce  Fran­
ois
Rodolphe  Duoo;  Claire  Martin  as Claire Faucher; Bertrand  Vac as Aime Pelletier. This  practice  might  be  useful  to  polke officers. In   the  French   reahn,  one  can imagine  a  reader  ironically  asking  in  a library for the works of Emile Herzog or for those of Louis Farigoule; is this con­ ceited finickism really useful? I  doubt it. From a purely literary viewpoint, I think it  is  being  rather  nasty  to  the  authors. They,  after  all,  have  chosen  to  become either   Fran tois   Hertel,   Claire   Martin,  Andre   Maurois   or   Jules   Romains.   I understand  that even passports recognize this fact,  which  is part  of the imaginary world of writing. There  is such a thing as historical preciosity and  this insistence on birth-names   is  a  typical  example  of  it. My second remark  is this. It might have been a worthwhile  venture  for  Professor Tougas  to  use the  circumstances  of this
 translation  to bring his book perfectly up to date.  Is it enough  to say that  one has written  a  work  of  "Heraclitian  concep­ tion"?  For example, it is not a debatable  point  whether  M. Guy Robert  is a "dis­ tinguishable  manifestation"  in  the  field of literary criticism. He is not. The  same, to  a  large extent,  applies  to  M.  Gerard  Bessette. But such  instances of amity  are touching;  so why  not bow to them?
Be  that  as  it  may,  Professor  Gerard
Tougas'   History  of  French-Canadian
Literature  more  than  serves  a  purpose.
Undoubtedly,  Professor Tougas  meant it as a self-sufficient intellectual unit. He has succeeded in writing  a book which a lot of people will enjoy, even if they do not  necessarily agree  with  him  on every count.  But then,  I suppose Professor Tougas  would not necessarily agree with them.  I think  that,  as an introduction, it is a masterly book; as a symbol, it will endure.




OF BEAUTY
AND UNMEANING


LEONARD COHEN,  Beautiful  Losers. McClelland  & Stewart. $6.50.
 




E. B. Gose



THE  FmST THING to  be said about  this novel is that  it is well written. The  style is various,  authoritative, com­ pelling.  The  second  thing  to  be  said  is that  many  middle-class  readers  will not get past the first dozen  pages; these con­ tain  a  slightly above-average  number  of the  four-letter   words  and  deeds  which are  one obvious indication  of the  book's colloquial and  down-to-earth, up-to­ heaven aim.
 The  three  large divisions of  the  novel are traditional   (a long section in the first person, another  long  section  which  is a letter to the first person, a short final "Epilogue   in  the  Third   Person"),  but within them are such recent devices as reproduced   advertisements,  stream-of­ consciousness passages, a  series of poems (to  the Virgin,  composed  from  a Greek conversational  phrase-book), a  separate footnoted   poem,   several  sections  of

REVIEW  ARTICLES



"pointless" monosyllabic  dialogue,   and several  - how   shall   I   say?  - drama scenes.  The latter include  an  expression­ istic  rendering of a  popular  song, and  a charming verbal   rendition  of   a  Charles  Atlas   advertisement,  the   cartoon  strip Hero  of the  Beach.
These devices give the novel vigour, interest, and often  humour or excitement. They  are  not  Cohen's discoveries,  but  he uses  them   well,  just  as he  uses well  his two most obvious borrowings-Allen Ginsberg's exaggerated fantasies, often in­ tended  as ironic  overstatement, and  Wil­ liam   Burroughs' homosexual  fantasies (again  exaggerated to   humour),  both aiming to condemn a nightmare America  at  the  same  time  as  they  hopefully  work out  their  authors' incipient paranoia.
The  first-person narrator  has  appar­ ently  known  his friend  and  mentor, later cuckolder, since  the two were homosexual  partners in  a  Catholic  orphanage. The  difference in  their  natures  is evident  al­ most   from   the   beginning.   The  friend,  called  F., sends off for the secrets offered by Charles Atlas; he cultivates the  physi­ cal  in  his efforts  to cope  with  reality.  As an  adult  he accuses  the  narrator of "the  sin  of  pride" for  not  having  followed  his lead, for  having  preferred mental  fantasy  to  physical  fact.  Twisting the  narrator's arm, F.  insists,

-You wanted   to  be  the  Superman  who was   never  Clark  Kent.... You   wanted SOCK!  POW!  SLAM! UGG!  OOF! YULP! written  in  the  air  between  you and all   the  world.  To  become  a  New  Man  in just fifteen minutes a day meant absolutely nothing to you. Confess!
-The pain!  The   pain!  Yes, yes, I  con­ fess.  I  wanted   miracles!  I didn't  want   to climb  to  success on  a ladder  of  coupons!  I
wanted    to  wake  up   suddenly   with   X-ray
Vision!  I  confess!

F.   has   pursued    into   adulthood  the
 implications of physical strength and potency   implicit  in  the  strong-man  ad. He has loved  an endless stream  of women, muttering "Who am  I  to  refuse  the  uni­ verse".  He  has  gone  to  Parliament  as  a French  Separatist.  He   has   by   various  devices  of  physical  manipulation,  made Edith, an  offspring  of  the  nearly  extinct Indian  tribe   of   A-, into   the  desirable  creature whom  the  narrator marries  but cannot find  happiness with.
F.  has  at   the  same   time   encouraged the  narrator's interest in  Catherine Tekakwitha (I 656-1 68o), an   Iroquois convert of the Jesuits  who achieved saint­ hood  after  a life of self-sacrifice and  self­ scourging.•  Advising  the  narrator to  "go  down   on   a   saint,"  F.   also  keeps   him baffled   and  frustrated   by   continually undercutting their  own relation, by keep­ ing  the  narrator  continually off  balance on  the  high  wire  of  life. The immediate result  is that  the  narrator is a loser  (pre­ sumably   along  with  Catherine and   per­  haps  Edith,  one  of  the  Beautiful Losers of the  title).  The long  range  aim  of F.'s programme is evidently that  the  narrator should  somehow   break  through into  his own   reality,   into   some   sort   of  control over  experience.
Such   a  break-through is  denied  to Edith and  F.,  who  are  over-mastered  by the  Danish  Vibrator  they   had   thought to  make  minister to  their  exhausted  sen­ sualism.  But  a  break-through  is achieved  by  Catherine in  her   death  and   by  the narrator at  the end of the novel. His rela­  tion   to   Catherine   is   not,   however,    so simple  as  it  sounds. She emerges  as  part religious  dupe, part  triumphant  loser.
·Although individual Jesuits  are  treated

I. Cohen   appears  to  have  introduced  some incidents of  his own  into  a fairly  accurate historical   picture of  her  life.

REVIEW  ARTICLES



sometimes  with  superiority, sometimes with  sympathy, the  values  of the Church emerge   as   the   prototype  of   the   white man's wilful  and  violent  appropriation of the  continent." The latter is humorously characterized in the  rape  of Edith: as an Indian, at  thirteen she  is  taken   by  five whites   to  "a stone   quarry or  an  aban­ doned  mine,  someplace very mineral and hard, owned  indirectly by U.S. interests." Cohen   seems  to  be  saying  that   Western  institutions have ruined  man's relation to nature,  the   universe   and   God; at   the same  time  he  leaves  room  for  the  indi­  vidual   somehow   to   triumph  over   the faulty  patterns for  living  charted by our culture.
Early  in  the  book  Cohen has  F.  repu­ diate the  liberal   humanists of the  192o's by  insisting   that   the   narrator  "connect nothing." The narrator's state  at the time provides  an   important  context  for  F.'s repudiation:  "my   needle  pierces  it  all, and  I  myself, my greedy  fantasies,  every­ thing   which   has  existed  and   does  exist, we  are  part  of  a  necklace  of  incompar­ able   beauty   and   uruneaning.  Connect nothing:  F. shouted. Place  things  side by side  on  your  arborite table,  if  you must, but  connect nothing."
I would  like to push  the  opposition be­ tween   the   two  further  (though  with   a consciousness    that    I  may    distort   the novel :  F.  and   the  narrator  are,  in  fact,


2.   Or  the  Nazi  rape of  Europe (seep.  196).
The  man  whom    I  have    called  Charles Atlas,    Cohen  refers  to   as   Charles   Axis. Hitler, in  hiding in Argentina, takes  over at the  end  of  the  depravity scene  between F.  and  Edith.
 alter  egos who  coalesce  at  the  end). :F. with  his reality sense is a little  like Freud, just  as in  his insistence  that  he "showed it happening!" he is also like certain contemporary poets  who  insist  that  there are  "no  ideas  but  in  things." The  nar­ rator  with  his indulgence in  fantasy  is a little  like Jung,   just  as  in  his  sliding  off into   rhetorical flights  he  is  like  certain other   contemporary   poets   who   believe that   the  imagination  does  not   have   to limit  itself to dealing  with  sense data. As a  contemporary  saint,  a  holy  loser,  the narrator is  finally  pushed   to  the  edge  of physical existence.  Perhaps as a result,  he suddenly breaks  through to mastery  at the end of the book, in a few pages which marvellously  blend mundane reality  and fantasy.
Not  wanting to  give away  the  ending, I will add  only that  it moves into  Science Fiction,    as   did   the   important   earlier scene  with  the  Danish Vibrator,  humor­ ous   and   disgusting   in   the   Burroughs' manner. Although Burroughs  does  good vignettes,  his  novels  do  not  come  off for me, because  they  are  too obsessive or  not integrated into  enough  of  a  plot.  Since Burroughs  is  one   of   the  originators  of F.'s  advice  to  "place  things  side  by  side
... but  connect   nothing," it  is  perhaps
unfair, and   certainly old  fashioned,  for me   to   complain  that    his   fiction   lacks unity and coherence. Nevertheless, I do complain and  consequently praise  Leon­ ard  Cohen who deals with material almost as  upsetting, who  is  often  as  funny and  disjointed,  but   who  finally   is  affirming something  in   or   behind    the   pain   and chaos  of   experience.


A CRY TO BE  HEARD


C. H. Moore



HUBERT  AQUIN, Prochain Episode. Le Cercle du Livre de France.  $2.50.


WHEN   THE  AUTHOR of  a "first"  novel has already been as active a writer  as Hubert  Aquin, it is difficult not to  situate  his  novel among  earlier  writ­ ings such as his political essays in Liberte, of  which  he  was a  founder  and  editor, or  his  memorable  film-script  propound­  ing  a   philosophy  of   dangerous  sports, which  appeared  on  CBC-TV.  When  the author   has  been as  prominent  a  revolu­ tionary   Separatist   as  Aquin-briefly leader  of a political  party, panelist  tour­ ing Canada to present the separatist view­ point,  and  more  recently inmate  of  the Montreal  Prison  because of  his  revolu­ tionary  activity-it is impossible not  to consider   his  novel's  social  background and  implications.  As the narrator  of this story  says of the confessional monologue which  he is writing  in prison and  which forms  the  present  novel:  "Sa  significa­ tion veritable  ne peut etre dissociee de la date de sa composition, ni des evenements qui   se  sont  deroules   dans  un  laps  de temps   donmS entre  mon  pays  natal  et mon  exil".
That is to say, the story has documen­ tary  actuality   in  spite  of   the  narrator's romantic  idealism, social  alienation,  and revolt,   echoing  the   literary   "mal   du siecle"  of   the   Byronic  and   Balzacian heroes  with  whom  he frequently  identi­ fies  himself.  His  own  sense of  maledic­ tion and force is authentic.  He belongs to that   post-war   generation   of  Quebecers
 whose   youthful   anxiety   and   ferment, doubled  with doubts of national  identity, found  in  Europe   not  the  land  of  their roots or  aspirations,  but  a  third  state of exile. Here, their  dreams of freedom and self-identity  took  the  painfully  nostalgic form  of  a  homeland   like  themselves - suffering, powerless, incomplete: Quebec. Within  themselves  they  soon  knew  that the  convenient,   traditional  image  pro­ posed to them  by compatriot "poetes  du terroir"  was a strip  of their  own flesh to be torn off, if they were to find their true selves. Even as they heard  the bitter song of revolt sung by a handful  of illustrious compatriots  already  in  permanent  exile, some  of  them   knew  within   themselves that  they could pursue their dreams only in  what  the  narrator of this story terms "la   terre   meurtrie   et  chaude   de  notre invention  nationale". On  their  return  to Montreal   or  Chicoutimi,  offspring  of  a "peuple   inedit", their  escape  from  eth­ nical  anonymity  appeared   as a  personal imperative  to invent,  in the  present void of their lives, the movement, rhythm, and style  of  their   own   nonexistent   history. "Cracher le feu, tromper  la mort, ressus­ citer cent fois, courir le mille en moins de quatre  minutes, introduire  le  Iance­ flamme  en  dialectique,   et  la  conduite­  suicide  en  politique,  voila comment  j'ai etabli mon style," says the narrator of his own   invention.  Inevitably,   such  self­ genesis risked becoming a programme  of

REVIEW  ARTICLES



action for its own sake and, hence, of wild violence, excluding the revolutionary ideals  of  absolute  love  and  freedom  in the new-born nation which itself justified the  action.  Condemned   to  the  ever  dis­ tant   future,   the  absolute  ideals  of   the revolutionary  dream  in  turn  condemned social and  political  action  to  gratuitous­  ness and sterility, its proponents  to terror­ ism  and   isolation.  The  inventors of identity  became  prisoners  of  their  own invention.
"Ou es-tu revolution?"  "Ou es-tu mon
amour?"  What   has  become  of  liberty? The  prisoner-narrator of  Prochain  Epi­ sode,  recalling,  reliving,  and   recording memories  of  the   revolutionary   dream, adventure,  and  failure,  writes  his novel. Through these daily, interrupted sessions of    self-nourishment,   examination,  and embellishment,  the mind  in  confinement keeps itself alive, drugs its despair, walks the   narrow   line  between   lucidity   and hyprocrisy,  and  seeks, gropingly,  a  way out  of  the  past  and   present  into  some future   beyond  defeat.  "Voila  un  roman d'action," advertises  the  book-jacket. To be sure,  the  characters  seem to be from the  world  of  James  Bond  and  the  plot
 races through Switzerland  at the speed of an international sports-car  rally;  but the pursuit  of  "H.   de  Heutz,"   a   counter­ revolutionary   of  unknown   identity,   by the  narrator,   a   revolutionary   agent  of the  FLQ,  winds  and   unwinds  in  con­ centric  circles  around   a  single,  forever unaccomplished  act:  the assassination of the elusive "H. de Heutz"  in time for the narrator's  rendezvous  with  "K", blond muse of  the revolution, "femme  absolue" with  her   promise  of  absolute  love  and freedom. Although  the symbolical nature of  characters   and   plot   permits,  by  its very mystery, the  most outrageous  turns of events, the  action  takes  place less in the cloak and dagger chase around moun­ tain  curves  than  in  the  involved  spiral patterns  that  whirl  the  narrator's mind in  and  out  of  the  luminous   waters  of Lake  Leman,  in  and  out  of  the depres­ sing darkness of its Montreal  prison, back and   forth   through   merging   decors  of childhood, literary  recollections, real and imaginary  travels, fears and  compulsion, mental  and emotional worlds preceding, accompanying, and following defeat.
As  the  action   of  this  "spy  story"  is
situated  in   these  repeated   attempts   of the  narrator-prisoner's  mind  to  save  it­ self by the spontaneous recomposition on paper  of all  the  lines  of  his life and,  in this intricate  design, to decipher  the sign of his own identity, so too the mystery of the  story  lies in  the  unravelling  of  the Gordian  knot of  his own  personality. In that  sense, whether  waiting  in an empty castle to kill the mysterious enemy named "H. de Heutz"  or waiting in vain for "K"  to  come or waiting  in an  empty  cell for the day of his own judgement, the narra­ tor can say as he composes his story:  "Je  n'ecris  pas,  je suis ecrit ... L'imaginaire est une cicatrice.  Ce que  j'invente  m'est

REVIEW  ARTICLES



V'ecu; mort  d'avance ce que  je tue".  For, all along,  "H. de Heutz," vague enemy of the   revolution-to-be  who   escapes,   and "K" who  disappears, taking  love and freedom with her, existed-so  the reader  may  deduce-as obsessive figures invented by the narrator's mind  to people the  sterile   world   of  action   for  its  own sake   and   to   incarnate  the   destructive goals of a revolutionary dream. Extended to the level of "notre invention  nationale," the  programme of action  and  revolution mask the equally compulsive wishes for national self-genesis and self-destruction. Here is  a  "spy   tale"  in  which   the  de­ feated  hero  triumphs by courageously un­ masking himself  and  his own  cause.
Through the  narrator's constant  iden­
tification of himself  with  his "peuple in­ edit" and  its search  for identity   ("Je suis le  symbole  fracture de  Ia  revolution  du Quebec"; "Je   suis  un  peuple  defait"), his story dictates an autobiographical and historical interpretation. However, it can­  not   be  confined   to  that   dimension. At the   outset,   the   narrator  states:    "Rien n'empeche le  deprime po!itique  de  con­
£erer  une  coloration esthetique  a cette
secretion verbeuse; rien ne lui interdit de
transferer sur  cette  reuvre  improvisee  la signification dont  son  existence se trouve depourvue et  qui  est  absente  de  l'avenir de  son   pays".   That is  not  to  say  that Prochain  .Episode in  any  way  resembles a  traditional novel.  The  narrator's syste-












66
 matic   exploitation  of   his   own   "inco­ herence  ontologique"  gives  to  the  story the   intemporel  scope   of   Lautreamont's Chants,  Kafka's  Castle, Camus' Fall, or Robbe-Grillet's   Marienbad.  As   in   the "nouveau   roman,"  time   divisions   col­ lapse  before  the  onslaught of  the  narra­ tor's   dream  and    memories;  external realities    and   relationships  fade   into   a universe   of  things,   "cette  galerie  d'em­ lemes  oniriques" described and  quizzed at   length;  words   dissolve   along   with casual   logic  into   the  dynamic language of  baroque imagery.  However, if  we use Moravia's   definition   of   the    "nouveau roman" as "a  programme novel, a plani­  fied  solution"  of  the  post-Joycean crisis, the originality of Prochain Episode would seem to  be in  its very  refusal  of external organization and  technical structure. Its originality is  to  be  found   in  the  narra­
tor's   resolution:  "Infini,  je   le  serai   a
rna  fac;on et  au  sens  propre".
This novel, like the story of Quebec's unquiet revolution, lacks  a final  chapter, a  next  episode.  Unfinished, it  is a living page  of a young  generation's history  and of  its  author's  paraliterary career. From the   novel,   from   the   past  of  unfettered action, from  the  silence  of the  narrator's isolation, and  from  the dream  of the absolute, future event, arises  the  same, intensely  eloquent, convincing cry:  "Mon pays  me  fait   mal." It should   be  heard across  the  country.







LANGUAGE OF
OUR TIME

GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,   A  Breakfast  for  Bar­
barians. Ryerson   Press.  $3-95·

THE  LANGUAGE  is strange, but  as  much the  language of our  time as pop art. With A  Breakfast   for  Barbarians  Gwen  Mac­ Ewen  has presented us with  poems whose originality, coherence, and  representative range  or power  are  unmistakable.
What   might   appear to  be  an  unholy
mixture of peanut-butter and  dragons, motorcyclists and  strange gods, is in fact a kind of Grimm picture of man  in a consumer's society.  Thus, even while Miss MacEwen tells  us she  is concerned  with a hunger that  is not for food, she suggests it  is to  be answered by "an  arcane salad of spiced  bibles" and "tossed dictionaries." Everything, intellectual as  well  as  mate­ rial,  has  become  a  consumer  good.
Of  the  ideal  of  such  a  society,  Hanna
Arendt has  remarked:

Painless  and   effortless  consumption   would not change but would only increase the devouring character  of  biological  life  until a mankind altogether 'liberated' from the shackles  of  pain   and  effort  would  be  free to  'consume'   the  whole  world....

Miss   MacEwen's  picture  is  more   dra­
matic:

we will sit  around our  hewn  wood  table until  our hair  is long and our eyes are feeble, eating,   my  people,  0 my  insatiates,
eating  until  we are  no  more  able to  jack  up  the  jaws  any  longer-
 to  no  more  complain   of  the  soul's  vulgar cavities,
to gaze at  each  other  over  the  rust  heap  of
cutlery, 	. drinking  a coffee that  takes an  eterruty- till  bursting,   bleary, 		.
we laugh,  barbarians, and  rock  the umverse and  exclaim  to each  other  over  the  table
over  the  table  of bones and  scrap  metal over  the gigantic junk-heaped table:

by God  that  was a meal

The  Gargantuan laughter here  is  am­ biguous,  for  the  object   is  ultimately  to escape  from  the  table,  from  the  endless devouring  process   of    nature.  For   the vicious   character  of   life   conceived    in terms   of  that   process  becomes  clear   as the  poems  proceed, as is suggested  in the epigraph to  "The  Sperm   King," which comes  from   Moby   Dick,  "That  mortal man  should  feed  upon  the  creature that  feeds his lamps ..." or,  most  universally,  in   the   title   of   the   prose   poem,   "Ulti­ mately,  said  the  Saint, we  are  all  of  us devouring  each   other."
But Miss MacEwen is not satirical; she
addresses  herself  to  these  colossal  break­ fasts   with   something  of   the   spirit   of Blake's  aphorism that   the  fool  who  per­  sists  in  his  folly  will   become  wise.  No ascetic,  she  insists  that  the  "intake, the refusal  to starve"  is  important, but  it  is the  way  the  world  we consume is trans­ formed  and  works its way out  "into  fan­ tastic  things"   that   is  finally  significant.
The  magician, like the poet, appears to be  a   master   of   transformations  but   is finally  trapped in  the  prison  of  his own flesh.  The   escape   artist,   Manzini,  gives the  appearance of a victory  over  his own body  as  the  ropes,  like  his own  entrails, are  left  "white upon   the  floor."  But  it is a  victory  more  emblematic than   real. Only  through the  Messiah,  the  mythical third  man, "a  wild and white chaperone,"

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



do  we escape from  ourselves and  find a communion  with others.
We  are  led  from  the  groaning  table into  an  almost  bare  landscape.  "Finally left in the landscape  is the dancer."  He is the "cipher of movement/ a terrific code." He belongs in "The Garden  of Square Roots," where things grow from inside  out.  It is in  that  garden  that  we escape  from  the  natural   cycle and  dis­ cover  instead   the  "unspeakable  wheel" which  keeps us "green  with  sleep." It is there  rather  than  in the  natural  process
 that   we  shall  discover  the  pattern   for the specifically hwnan  city.
Without   the  third  dimension  of myth, men  "cannot  breathe   or  speak  because they are too/  close together, because their bodies  occupy/ the same dark and troubled   area."  In that  third  dimension we discover ourselves, those "natural aristocracies"  that  are not of nature.  And it seems less a question of discovering the self than  of being discovered  by the self
-as by some blue-limbed god.
It  is  a  question   of  participation  in





CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE

BACK  ISSUES

Important special issues of Canadian  Literature  still available include the  following:

No.    8.   Special  Malcolm  Lowry Number.  Original articles,  let­ ters  and   poems by  Malcolm   Lowry,  articles  by  Conrad Aiken,  Earle  Birney,  Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol  Fouchet,  etc.

No. 15.     Salute  to A. J. M. Smith. Articles  on  A. J. M. Smith  by Earle  Birney,  Roy  Fuller  and  Milton   Wilson, together with   original  poems   and  a   Self-Review  by  A.  J.  M. Smith.

No. 19.     Special   E. J.  Pratt Number.  Articles   on   E. J.  Pratt   by Paul   West,   Fred  Cogswell and  Vincent   Sharman,  to­ gether with  Ethel Wilson's memoir on  Alan  Crawley.

No.  25.     A Symposium  on  A.  M. Klein.  Articles  on  A. M.  Klein and his various aspects by M. W. Steinberg, Miriam Waddington, Dorothy  Livesay,  T. A. Marshall.

$1.25 each

ORDER YOUR COPIES   FROM
THE PUBLICATIONS CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF   BRITISH  COLUMBIA,  VANCOUVER 8,  B.C.




68

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



some mythical body of man. As reluctant to  give  up  the  sensual  as she  is anxious to embrace the  mythical, ideally  Miss MacEwen would  like to be able  to say to her love, "The body of God  and  the body of you/ dance  through the same diagonal instant/  of   my   vision."    These   poems, often   circular  in   structure  and  invoca­ tional   in   mood,    are   exercises   in   that  double  vision. And  it is in this spirit  that  Miss MacEwen has  gone  to Egypt,  liter­  ally  as well as symbolically.
D. G. JONES



EMOTIONAL POSTCARDS

GEORGE BOWERING,  The  Man  in Yellow  Boots.
Ediciones  El Corno  Emplumado.

AFTER Points on the Grid,George Bower­ ing's  first  book  of  poems,  a second  book should  be something of  an  event,  and  a second   book   with   collages  by  Roy  Ki­ yooka, complete Spanish translations, ex­ cerpts  from  eight  of  the  writer's letters, specially designed  jacket, etc., would seem to  be  headed for  artistic  breakthrough. The   Man  in  Yellow   Boots, however,  is neither an  important book  of  poetry  or a    significant    collaboration   between    a painter and  a  poet.  The  fact  that  it  was printed and published in Mexico for Mexicans  is,  for   me,   its  most   exciting aspect.
I liked  Points on the Grid. Reading it
I had   a  physical   impression  of  size,  a bear-like   strength stretching  cheerfully in  the  latest  and   roomiest   of  poetic  zoo cages. Here  was a poet  with  lyric and dramatic power,  a  technically articulate poet  not  through erudition but  through
 a  kind  of  pressure  to  be avant garde - to expand.
It now appears that  Bowering  has lost
a   great   deal   of   that    first   drive   and energy, at least temporarily, and  that furthermore there   has  been  a  consider­ able  shift  in  the  direction  of   his  work. Says  the  Editor's  Note,  "Points  on  the Grid  was  written  when  the   poet's  con­ cern  was largely  involved with  the  tech­  niques  of  poetry,  handling the  language
. .. this new book deals with  more mean­ ingful  concerns ... with  direct emotions: politics,   love,   etc."   Now   "direct  emo­ tions:    politics,   love,   etc."   has   a   very familiar sound.  It  most  surely  defines  a great  mass of  Canadian poetry  produced in  the  last  twenty   to  twenty-five   years, liberating,   but    because  of   emotional shallowness, debilitating at the same time. No  real   poetry   I  contend is  primarily concerned  with  direct  emotion. It is only (sometimes)    triggered  by  it.   We   have been  writing  emotional postcards rather than  poems.
The   fifteen   or   so  smaller   poems   in
The   Man  in  Yellow   Boots are  inclined to  be  slack  and  diffuse.  Bowering's  lyri­ cism  separated  from  "Black  Mountain" influence  is still  a  most  viable  quality as in  the  fine  mirror  image of  the  eyes  in "Poem   For  My  Wife  Angela" or  in  the gently   Layton-esque "After  Breakfast." The  casting  of the  old  lady  in  "Her Act Was  A  Bomb"   is  an  expert  touch   and  there  is  something  genuinely disturbing in the last four lines of "Canadian Cafe":

The  lonely Canadian cafe at four in the morning

is where I sit
long after  the second coffee,

six cents in my pocket,
wind  blowing snow round  outside.

6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I keep coming back here anywhere  in the country,

looking for a dead friend
who pretended to love this place.

Alas for  a squib in  the Canadian  tradi­ tion,   "The   English   Teachers",   and   a poem on a Renoir painting, "The Swing", which  is an  affront  to "direct  emotion" as well as to Trager,  Sapir  and  Charles Olsen. If there is any common character­  istic to this group it is due to those stub­ born  native variations  on the sound and intention  of  William Carlos Williams.
In   "Vox Crapulous"  (ten  stanzas)
Bowering lets himself go with great effect over the frog-like figure of J. Edgar Hoover.  There  is richness and  nostalgia in   the   rather   predictable   long   poem, "The Descent",  but  there  are  also  mo­ ments   of  horrific   sentimentality.  For instance in stanza twelve he asks wonder­ ingly, "What  happens  to old cars?" Old cars,  as  everybody  knows,  end   up  on pedestals   in   the   Museum   of   Modern Art.  "Old  Time  Photo  of The  Present" has  a  sharp  staccato  line  which  almost
 convinced me that  the poet meant  to

... clamber  out  filthy from  the wreckage
of collapsing  universities!
The  poetry must have posed few prob­ lems  for   the   translator,  although  such specialized  Americanisms   as   "I'm  on" can't   be   adequately   expressed  by  the Spanish "me libero." Just how the Span­ ish  version  will  be  received  is  hard   to say. The  social emotion  of Latin  Ameri­ can  poetry  with  its  surrealist  base  is a long way from  the spare individualism of The  Man  in  Yellow   Boots.
Kiyooka's  collages are  witty and  visu­ ally  articulate in  themselves.  But  Lord, those  horrible  black  ovals on  the  white page. There  must be another way ...
ELDON GRIER


lEVElS  OF EXCITEMENT

FRANK  DAVEY,  Bridge  Force.  Contact  Press.
$2.00  softbound, $3.00  hardcover.

EUGENE   MCNAMARA,   For   the   Mean    Time.
Gryphon  Press.

SEVERAL  YEARS  ago  Milton  Wilson said of an earlier Frank Davey book that he (Wilson)  did  not look forward  to seeing the  author's next  book. At  that  time  I agreed with Wilson: but through sheer dogged   persistence   Davey   has  left   his out-and-out bad poems behind, and writes very capably  now in  this latest  book.
Not  that   he  has  broken  free  of  "in­
fluences" and found  his own distinctive voice, even if a "distinctive  voice" is thought  desirable. Besides, the Black Mountain "method" he champions  tends to produce  poems that  look as if each of those poets were peering over all the other

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



poets' shoulders while  they were writing their  agreed-on  masterpieces.
As will  be  evident, my  feelings  about him are  mixed. His  new poems  make  use of geographical environment, mountains, Vancouver,  the   people   he   knows   and their  inter-related  reactions. He  states  in the   blurb:  "Thus I  tell  what   I  know, and  speculate, never". Yet  in  the  book's first poem,  referring to the Lion's Gate Bridge,  he  says:
does  it know  anything of loyalty to whom?

And  more  in the same  obviously specula­
tive  vein  in  the  same  poem.
Sometimes indeed  Davey strikes me as being   primarily  a  speculative  poet,  one who   takes   pleasure   from   quiet   reverie and  contemplation. The   paradox is that he uses actual "things" in a speculative manner. Look  at  this  second  verse  from "Ross   Bay   II" -referring  to  a   previ­ ously mentioned seascape:
Watch
that scene that is think about around it:
each  wave's trough
sucking from  the  ocean floor yards of water to  the  crest smashing them  at  the  blinded RIP's

(To be  niggling,  that  last  word  looks to me  like  the   plural, not  the   possessive.) He says "think about/around it".  And in the  next  poem  he  refers  to  people's thoughts:  "Poetry/they  might  say"­ again    speculation. I   don't    deny    the "thinginess",  but   he's   actually   making  "things" perform the function of thoughts (quite  a  feat),  and  that   I term   specu­ lative.
There is  no  single  moment of  excite­
ment, compulsion or  any  very strong emotion  in   the   book.   This I  think   is
 lamentable. As if a man  lived a life with­ out   raising   his  voice  above   a  whisper; or,   as  Layton   does,   rarely   lowering  it beneath  a  shout.   I  think  Davey   would play  down  any  emotion:
and  darling
I would  walk  a white  line  for you

Gee  whiz,  the   girl  must   be  thrilled to death   at   this   ardent  demonstration  of undying   passion!  But  whatever  else  he may    be,   Davey    has    a   self-deceiving honesty.  I'm  not  sure  that's enough-in fact  it  isn't  enough. But  it  will  have  to do for  the  present.
Eugene  McNamara is obviously  a  dif­ ferent    kettle   of   boiled   mackerel   from Frank  Davey. Compare this bit about his feelings  towards  a girl  to Davey's on  the same   subject    (though   presumably  not the  same girl) :
or your  hands
curved to net  sparrows
or  hawks or  touch
my raging heart
mean the same

At  least  McNamara's heart   manages to rage,  though I don't find  that  particular passage  very  believable.   It's   nice,  how­ ever,   to  note   that   some  of  us  are  still volcanos  of emotion.
This   book   seems   to   have   deliberate
organization. The first  poems  talk  about love  and   all  that. But  in  the  end   Mc­ Namara swings around to  time  and  con­ templation of death. Though love makes him "fierce  as eagles",  he is considerably tamed  in  the  book's  last  poem:
All we are  given  is now
All for  this  time or any  other.
this  space  between two silences.
This is enough.
I will not  have  more or less.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



McNamara seems to  me a rather  eru­ dite  poet, without  that  quality  being too intrusive. He ranges from  Marilyn  Mon­ roe   to   Botticelli,   which   is  ambitious foraging.  One  poem  called "Fish  Story" has a wonderful idiomatic tone and free­ dom,  about  a  whale swimming into  the poet's   kitchen.  "Sort  of  an  Epiphany" describes a rebirth  in a bar, which seems a good  place for it.
But  I find  it  difficult  to  talk  about these  poems. I think  they are  good  but I'm  not wildly interested or vastly enter­ tained,  and  I doubt  if  McNamara was when he wrote them. I have the impres­ sion  that   he's  walled  into  a  university somewhere, teaching the things he writes about.
A. W. PURDY

CONSOLATORY CRITICISM

PAUL  WEST,   The   Wine   of  Absurdity:  Essays on Literature and Consolation. Pennsylvania State   University   Press. $6.oo.

PAuL WEST, who for several years taught at the Memorial University of Newfound­ land  and  contributed  often  to Canadian  journals,  including Canadian  Literature,  has  now  published  his  fifth  volume  of criticism.  In  the  past, in  his books and essays, West has  ranged  over wide fields
-Byron and Robert Penn Warren, Canadian poets and  modern  novelists in general. In The  Wine of Absurdity he gathers,  under  the sub-title "Essays on Literature and Consolation", a group of studies which  consider how the works of various contemporary authors reflect a desire to come to terms with the absurd, considered  in  more  or  less existentialist terms.

72
 The  selection seems at  first rather  un­ systematic; alongside  Camus, Sartre, Mal­ raux,  Greene  and  Simone  Weil,  the  ex­ pected  chest-beaters of modern times, we find T. S. Eliot, as a representative  of the philosophy   of    "Knowing  the   Worst", Yeats and  Lawrence  as the apostles of a "New Religion"  drawn  through  the sieve of literature and, in unexpected combina­ tion as the prophets of a "New World", George Santayana and  the Myth  Critics, who, according  to West, come "from a confident society" and find "meanings everywhere". But as one reads on through the volume, one realizes that it is a sensi­ bility  rather   than   a  system  that  unites the  subjects;  considered  for  themselves, these are  merely  a  group  of  largely  un­ related  writers, admittedly all given to a certain   sombre   earnestness,   who   have aroused   West's   interest,   and   in  whose works   he   has   found    something   that touches  his  personal  anxieties as a sensi­ tive   twentieth-century  man.   It   is  this personal  element,  the  strand  of  interest on the part  of the writer,  which cements the  essays into  a  book.  It  emerges  not merely  in  a  recognizable  style, but  also in an idiosyncratic treatment in which always appears, without obtruding, that peculiar   combination   of  passionate  in­ terest and  amused  common-sense,  which is West's tone, a tone  that  for me echoes the  author's native  North  Midlands as I heard  it over  the  border  from  the  Salo­ pian marches in my youth.
There  are  times when, in summing  up
another  writer, critics reflect a great deal of themselves, as Orwell  did in the pero­ ration  of his great  essay on Dickens, and some  sentences  at  the  end  of  the  essay on  Lawrence  in  this  book  tell  us, I sus­ pect, much  about  Paul West.
And   that   anxiety   for  man   to  face  life,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



stemming perhaps from some streak in Lawrence  of  working-class   doggedness,   is what   his  writings  express  most  of  all.  For he  saw life, as he  saw  himself, in its paradoxical, processional  roundness ... From him   we   learn   that   passion   and   intellect must   be  generous   with   each   other   while fighting their common war against lack of awareness.  For,  in the  end,  the  fiercest stupidity a  man  can  commit  is indifference, and  that  is what  Lawrence is all  about.

The  desire to face life, to see it in all its roundness, to live without indifference, emerges abundantly from Mr. West's essays. If I write  on  them  in  this  bio­ graphical   tone,  it  is to  set  the  point of view  that  shapes  his final  evaluation  of all  the  writers  he  considers.  The  point of view is valid, for  West is not professing to write  as a  neo-critical  analyst,  but  as a moralist commentator, considering how the   various   author.;   he   discusses  have made   terms   with   their   recognition   of what Camus called "the  division between the mind  that  desires and  the world that disappoints," and how the best of them transcended  it to  the  ultimate  benefit of their  art: thus  in the  long  run  his  criti­ cism   adds   to    the   moral   an   .esthetic dimension. While West points to the limi­ tations  of  Malraux's search  for  consola­ tion   through   art,  he   never   denies  the use of art  in this search  to give meaning to one's life when  no meaning  is certain beyond  it.   Indeed,  he  grants   that   the very act of  trying to describe  the human predicament   already   mitigates   its   ab­ surdity, since to trap  even  the  meaning­ less in words is to humanize it.
In  the end,  in  his final  essay, "An 1st among  the  Isms",  Paul  West  completes his book and  gives it a kind  of ultimate honesty by putting himself forward for examination. He  emerges  as one  of  the kin  of  Camus  in  his stress on  "modera­ tion",   or   perhaps,   to  give   an  English
 affinity which he himself justifies by con­ stant   reference,   of   the   kin   of   Pater, properly understood.  "If we  respect  man at  all  it  is  for  his  capacity  to  live  in tension  without  disintegrating"; that   is not far  from  the  burning  "with  a  hard, gem-like  flame"  which,  for   Pater,  was "success in life". It is an  attitude that  is not  merely  hedonistic,  that  can  have its moral  dimensions  "on   the  levels" -as West   remarks-"of  love,   friendship, shared  interests, principles stood by com­ munally";   by dissolving  the  "foolish  di­ chotomies" it can embrace  action and its repercussions, which, as the Lord Krishna in  the  Bhagavad Gita  long ago insisted, the  nature  of our  destinies on  this earth will not allow us to avoid.
The  Wine  of Absurdity  is fine eclectic criticism, but  it is a great  deal more, an examination  of the very sources of  meta­ physical courage  in our  age, and  a final statement  of  personal  philosophy  which impresses  one   by   the   simplicity   with it is expressed by a man whose gifts tempt him elsewhere always to eloquence.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


THE LADY HERSELF

MARCUS   VAN    STEEN,  Pauline    johnson:   Her
Life  and Work. Musson. $6.oo.

SwiNBURNE, upon  hearing  of  the  death of  Pauline  Johnson,  is said  to  have  re­ marked:  "We can never forget Pauline", a  tribute  sincerely  expressed,  no  doubt, and one which he did  not imagine could be voiced wryly sixty-odd  years after  by a later  generation  of  readers,  Canadians  at  that.  No,  evidently  we cannot  forget Pauline,  as  this  book  valiantly   proves.

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Nor,  indeed, should   we.  But   (said  des­ perately), let  us stop  proclaiming, or  at the  least, strongly  implying,  that  she was much  more  than  a minor  versifier whose fame  actually does  not depend  upon  her literary  efforts   at   all,  despite   the   kind pronouncements of  critics  ranging from Theodore Watts-Dunton,   Swinburne's friend, to  (more  recently)  George David­ son, the federal politician, and  of  course, Mr.  Van  Steen,  the  maker  of  this  book.
Mr.   Van   Steen,   indeed,   realizes  the extent   of  his  problem   in  offering   what the  dust-jacket describes  as "a  fitting tribute to Canada's best-loved poetess" when   he   asks  if  we  can   separate  the "vibrant personality of the  Mohawk Princess"    (the   half-truth  is  thus   con­ tinued)  of  the  public  platform  from her material.  And   although  the   book  pro­ poses  to  set  "the  story  aright", to  give "an   intimate portrait  unclouded   by Ed­  wardian   sentimentality", we  are   by  no means  convinced.
The selections  of Miss Johnson's poetry and  prose seem familiarly typical enough; the  former is either  mellifluously  empty, if  pleasant, or  heavy  and  melodramatic
-particularly when  the   themes are
Indian:
What  dream you in the night-time
When  you whisper  to the moon?
What  say you in the morning?
What  do you sing at noon?
When  I hear  your voice uplifting,
Like a breeze through branches sifting,
And your  ripples  softly drifting
To  the August  airs a-tune

Lend  me your happy  laughter
Ste Marie,  as you leap;
Your  peace  that  follows after
Where  through the isles you creep. Give to me; your splendid  dashing,
Give your sparkles and  your splashing, Your  uphurling waves down crashing,
Then, your aftermath of sleep.
or

74
 Up  the long trail of fire he boasting goes, Dancing a war dance  to defy his foes.
His flesh so scorched,  his muscles burn  and shrink,
But still he dances  to death's awful brink.


One  savage  yell
Then loyal to his race, He  bends  to death-but  NEVER  to
disgrace.

And   the   prose  selections   are   as  simple and  innocuous as ever  you would  find  in an  elementary school  reader, which,  if memory   serves,  is  where,   once   upon   a time,  some  of  them -or  similar, were.
Most  interesting to  me,  however,  was Mr.  Van  Steen's forty-page biography of "our  Pauline". Rather clumsy  at  times, it  nevertheless  holds   the  reader's  atten­ tion-as  so  it  should,  considering  the subject, who,  if not  a  very good  poetess, surely   had   a  fascinating life.  But   here again  the  myth  is perpetuated. Did  Miss Johnson's mother really  "read Keats  and  Byron  rather than   Mother Goose  to  her babies   in   their   cradles"?  Had   Pauline herself  "read every line  Scott  ever  wrote,  every line of Longfellow, much  of Byron, Shakespeare and   Emerson" by  the  time she  was  twelve?   Perhaps that   was  part of  her  problem.
Mr.  Van  Steen  promisingly begins  his
final  section   ("Her Lasting Memorial") by stating that  it is now  possible to assess Pauline Johnson solely  as  a  writer. But then  we are  informed of the  Institute of Iroquoian Studies, the  commemorative postage  stamp, "Chiefswood", and  of the Johnsonian relics to be found in various museums across  the  country. Perhaps to remove  any awareness from  the reader's mind  that  he has been duped, there  is introduced in  the  final  lines  the  sugges­ tion   that   certain  lost  documents  might affect   "the  reputation  of  our  dear   and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gracious Pauline" -and then we realize that,  after  all, we are  on  the  right  track again -the  lady  herself.
NORMAN SHRIVE


TALES OF AN INDIAN PEOPLE

NORVAL  MORRISEAU,   Legends  of  My   People the  Great   Ojibway, with  illustrations. Ed. Selwyn Dewdney.  Ryerson.

THis  VOLUME is a collection of legends written  by a  young  Ojibwa  artist.  Mor­ riseau  has  travelled  widely  in  Northern Ontario    and   questioned   many   of  the older  people.  He  has  included  sufficient stories  to  present  the  traditional  philo­ sophical system of  this  hunting and  col­ lecting  culture.  Whereas  a  technological system was  well  adapted  to  provide  an economy  through   the  changing  seasons and   animal  cycles   of   migration,   the whole   area   of   uncertainty  was  coped with  if  not  controlled   by  a  philosophy of gaining power from the supernatural. Some  obtained   power  from  their  ado­ lescent   fast   and   dream -hence   their guardian   spirit.   Others,   less  fortunate, sought   the   help   of   professional  drum­ mers,   seers  and   conjurors.   And   these persons had  achieved  relatively  perman­ ent  powers  which  were  used  to  advise and  prescribe  for  the  unfortunate. The cost of enjoying the good life was to pay heed  and  deference   to  each  benevolent spirit. To offend any of these was to call forth supernatural sanctions of illness and death. Many of the fears of man were expressed  in  the  magical  powers of  the great cat, the red-bellied sturgeon, the Windigo cannibal spirit and the giant thunder  birds.
Both the  power inherent  in the drum-
 mer  or  conjuror as  well as  that  of  the spirits themselves might  also be used for evil purposes. Some men downed their rivals by means of these powers, the vic­ tim  often  suffering  a  paralysed   face, crippling disease or death.
Morriseau  has  written  almost  at  ran­
dom  of  these  stories  he  has  heard.  But taken together  they give a reasonable picture of the non-material  world of the Ojibwa  people. These  legends are, how­ ever, well known, having been  published several  times  in   the   past.   What   gives point to the present work is the curiosity of its author.  Having been raised a Catho­  lic and  apparently  travelled  a good deal on  the  margins  of  the  industrial  world, he is trying  to  understand   what  he  has heard  of  the  traditional world.  The  re­ sult is refreshing.
Instead  of an  antiquarian folklore, his
stories show an adaptiveness to modem experience   which   make   them   original and valuable. Thus  electricity could most convincingly  be  understood  as  the  cap­ ture  by engineers  of  the  power  of   the thunder  bird.  The  European  folktale  of the  race  between   hare   and   tortoise  is understood   because the   turtle  could travel  magically  great  distances  between sentences.  There  is   an   interesting   de­ velopment of myth  about  the afterworld.  First  it  was  actually  situated  on  earth near   Fort   Frances, Ontario.  As  the "whiteman"   populated   the   region  the afterworld was transported to some place in  the  sky.  Here  there  appeared   to  be several strata,  the topmost being peopled by  spirits, the  next  one  by "whitemen", and the lower ones reserved for Indian people. In  another   myth  this  hierarchy of social difference is rejected by man's return  to earth  after  death  in  the  form of reincarnation.

75

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The   Ojibwa  trickster   or  culture  hero has been all but passed over and this is unfortunate. There are  many  stories  ex­ tant.  They  are  earthy and  full  of  bawdy humour, illustrating  man's   precarious position  under  a capricious natural world.
R. W. DUNNING



CANADIAN SCOT

JOHN  KENNETH  GALBRAITH, The Scotch.
Macmillan.  $g.gs.

"I  MEAN TO   GIVE    a  true   picture," says the  Harvard economist   John   Galbraith, "of   life  in   the   Scotch-Canadian   com­ munity   [of   Dunwich,   Elgin    County, Southern Ontario]  in  the  early  decades of  the  century. I  am  writing   it  largely to   amuse   myself   and   because   it   is   a story  I  can  tell  from  memory."  And  he adds   that    it   is   "an   exercise   in   social anthropology   principally   for   my   own benefit." Mr.  Galbraith whimsically  anti­ cipates    the   offense   his   narrative  may cause   old   friends   and   neighbours  who may  feel that  the  native  son "could  have spared  the  reader some of the less agree­ able   scenery   and   ignored   some  of  the less   enchanting  personalities."  But   the author reminds them  that  "As Oliver Cromwell instructed for himself, portraits are  best done  'roughness, pimples,  warts, and  everything'."
Good-humored irony  ripples across the pages of Mr. Galbraith's remembrance of things  past.  He  recalls  the  report  of the judge's  wife, "a  Frances Trollope of her time  and  place", who, having  visited  the Scottish  settlements in 1837 reported  how impressed  she was by "Their clannish attachments and  their  thrifty, dirty habits
-and also   their   pride   and   honesty."
 The native   son  dryly  notes,  "They had not  changed appreciably by my  time."
Aldous   Huxley   once   wisely  remarked that  anthropology, like charity, should begin at  home.  In  a chapter entitled "Of Love  and   Money," Mr.   Galbraith  sub­ jects  the   rural community in  which  he grew  up  to  bemused  anthropological an­  alysis.  In  commenting on   the  "uncom­ promising  Calvinism" of  his  upbringing, he  says:

We  were  taught  that   sexual  intercourse was, under all circumstnces, a sin. Marriage was  not   a  mitigation so  much   as  a  kind of   license   for   misbehavior    and   we   were free from  the countervailing influence  of movies,  television  and  John   O'Hara....

In fact,  sex  education among the Scotch  according to Mr.  Galbraith, "de­ pended  largely  on experience, instruction by  the   learned  of  one's   own   age   and  informal  deduction   based   on   the   be­ haviour  of   breeding   stock."   Here  the reader   may  wonder if  such  a  reprehen­ sively  casual  system  of  sex  "education" could   in  any   sense  be  regarded  as  pe­ culiarly Scottish.
Against   a  background of  urbane gen­
eralization  the    author  has   engagingly high-lighted many  of the  "characters" of that  sturdy Scotch  community. Of  these undoubtedly the  most  formidable for  the young  Galbraith was "Old Tommy", the tyrannical schoolmaster, "who  carefully combed  his sparse gray hair, which had something  of   the   appearance  of   crab grass in a dry autumn, over  his bald spot with    an   increasing  absence   of   plausi­ bility."   In   the  dreaded  schoolroom, the dozen  or  so  pupils  "quaked in  fear  but
... struggled to  learn."
Many  readers of The  Scotch will be especially  interested in  the autobiograph­ ical   details   revealed    by   this   Canadian

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Scot  Who   Made   Good  in  the  States; who was to become an adviser to Adlai Stevenson and to John F. Kennedy. Mr. Galbraith   tells  us  that   his  introduction to  politics began  when  he was a boy in Dunwich:
My father was a prodigious orator and from the age of six or eight,  I began accompany­ ing  him  to  meetings. It  was  of  some  edu­  cational  value,  and  I  learned, among  other  things,  the  uses of  humor. Once  at  an auc­ tion    sale,   my    father   mounted    a   large manure  pile   to   speak   to   the   assembled crowd.   He   apologized    with   ill-concealed sincerity  for  speaking   from  the  Tory  plat­  form.  The  effect  on  the  agrarian audience  was electric.
The  chapter  on  the  Scotch  as  "God­ fearing  but  Unfrightened" gives  a  clue to  the  author's  thinking.   With  evident admiration  for  the  self-reliance  of  the Scotch, he claims that  they "did  not ask God  for  anything   they  couldn't  do  for themselves  and   didn't  expect  to  get done." He adds:

Some   will   deplore  such   a   secular   com­ munity,  will say  that  something  of  spiritual  importance was  missing.  Perhaps.  But  this could  be  a  parochial and  inaccurate view. As  matters  are   regarded   in   heaven,   the proper   vantage point,  there  must  be  some merit  in  people  who  look  after  themselves, do  not  request   the  impossible  and  keep  to an  absolute minimum the  number  of purely ritualistic  and   ceremonial  petitions.
 The   Scotch   is  a  thoroughly  good­ natured   book,  one  which   has  a  place beside Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town by  that  other  humorous   economist, Stephen  Leacock.  It's  a   book   that merited,  it  must  be  said,  much  livelier illustrations  than  those it  has  been  pro­ vided with.
J· A. MCDONALD


TASTE IN LITERATURE

REGINALD  EYRE   WATTERS    and   INGLIS  FREE· MAN BELL,  On Canadian  Literature, r8o5- rg6o. University  of Toronto. $7.50.

RAILWAY   OR    AIRLINE   TIMETABLES    and telephone   directories   can   be   read   in several ways. At first glance  these  hand­ books  appear   to  offer  only  regimented trivia;  closer  acquaintance is  needed  to reveal  them   as  storehouses  of   detailed and   varied  information   about  techno­ logical and social  patterns. Bibliographies meet  the  same  initial  response from  the public, even in  our  age of bibliographic cults. Professor  Watters'  A Check  List of Canadian   Literature    and   Background Materials,  I62B-1950  was received  with incredulity and sarcasm by certain super­ ficial reviewers when it appeared  inI 959, but  it  quickly  became  the  basis for  his­ torical  studies  in  English-Canadian  let­ ters.  Clues  to  Canadian  intellectual  life can  be found  on  every  page.  And  now this supplement, On Canadian Literature,  I8o6-1960, compiled  by Dr. Watters  and Mr. Inglis Bell, Assistant Librarian  at the University of British  Columbia,  provides clues  to   the   development   of   English­ Canadian  taste in  literature.
The  sub-title, "A check list of articles,

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



books, and theses on English-Canadian Literature, its authors and  language," should  bore no one who likes a frank advertisement. All  who  deal  with  Cana­ dian   writing  will  need  it  on  their  desks; students  will  see  it  as  a  volume   which takes  some of the search  out  of research.  Those    who   have    used   Lewis   Leary's  Articles  on  American  Literature,   Igoo­
I 950   will   bless   the   compilers   of   this Canadian  counterpart for  providing an invaluable aid  to study;  there  has always been  more  academic worth  in  intelligent finding   than   in  laborious   looking.  Any­ one  who  insists  on  hardship as  good  for the  soul  can  go  a  step  beyond  this  new bibliography and  make his own vast com­ pilation of  book  reviews,  which  Watters and   Bell  have   understandably  omitted. This    kind    of   penance  is   not   recom­ mended.   What   has   been  accomplished by  these  pioneers  is sufficiently  valuable  and  impressive.  They  have  included ar­ ticles on  culture and  background,  Cana­ dian   English,   general   literature,  drama and  theatre, fiction,  poetry, literary criti­  cism and  history, regionalism,  songs, folk­ songs,   folklore,   journalism,   publishing, libraries    and    reading,  censorship    and copyright,  all   of   these,   together    with works  in  books  and   periodicals  on  indi- vidual  authors.	CARL  F. KLINCK


INDIAN  ART

BILL    HOLM,  North   West  Coast  Indian   Art.
University  of  Washington Press. $7.50.

THis  IS    A   truly   pioneering  work,  long awaited  by  those  concerned  with  North
 West  Coast   art, and   by  other   students of  tribal  culture and  of  art.
Hitherto, the  subject of  art  style  has been treated by using photographs merely as illustrations of the  theme  which  being necessarily  non-visual is necessarily  non­ precise.  Holm   has  surmounted this  diffi­ culty   by  devising   new   units   of   design, line,  form,   space-filling and   proportion which  appear in  North West Coast  carv­  ings,   and    producing  a   new   form    of analysis.
Selecting  characteristic carvings  and paintings of the  North West Coast  region (between Yakutat and  Bella Coola), Mr. Holm  chose  392  of  the  most  representa­ tive  pieces  for  intensive  analysis.  Using key  sort  cards   marked  for  a  number of technological  and  stylistic  traits,   he  ar­  rived   at   a   summary  of  basic,  essential characteristics  of   this   Northern  North West  Coast  art:  dynamics of form  line, space arrangement, symbolism and  realis­ tic   representations,   relations   between  carving  and  painting -these  all  make  a significant study  in  style  analysis.
Bill Holm, a Seattle art  teacher, has a
wide   background   in   scholarly   ethnog­ raphy.  In   addition,  he   is  a   uniquely knowledgeable practitioner of  the dances  and   other   arts   of  several  tribes.  Not  a false   Indian  nor   a   dabbling  amateur, but   a   dancer  and   carver   whose   tech­  niques   have   been   schooled   by  the   best teachers  and   critics   extant  in   today's  Indian  villages,  Mr.  Holm  has  produced this  unique and  permanent major refer­ ence  book for  teachers, artists,  and  all students of tribal  art.
AUDREY HAWTHORN







CREATIVE WRITING: REALITY AND MYTH

IN "BASTARD BOHEMIA"  (Canadian Liter­ ture   27)    Robert  Harlow   suggests   that  creative writing  programmes  at   univer­ sities  should  provide young  writers  with freedom  from  "the need   to  conform   to specifications created  by one  managerial system   or   another."  I   think   that    Mr. Harlow intends this  less as a  claim  than as a  plea  or  hope  that   universities more fully   recognize   the   need  for  such  free­ dom.   He's   right,   but   I  feel  that  in  his eagerness  to state  a  case for  good  condi­  tions   he  does  overlook   the  unfortunate fact   that   such   conditions  scarcely   exist at  all, either at  the  University of British Columbia or  at  universities elsewhere  on this continent.
Writing talent is at  least  as elusive  an item as is talent in music, sports or mathematics. Often enough it is easy to recognize  yet  impossible   to  explain  why it  occurs  or  just  how  in  a given  instance it  can  best  evolve.  Some  of  the  greatest writers have done some of the damnedest things   which   only   later  turned  out   to have been perfectly  consistent with the development of  their   abilities.  This  fact that  writing talent often  has maverick tendencies is sometimes  used  as a  reason for  excluding writing courses  from  uni­ versities.   Why   even   pretend, the  argu­ ment  runs,  to teach the unteachable. But such  an  argument  could   be  applied  all over  the  place.  It never  has been possible
 to teach someone  to be talented but our universities have long since demonstrated that  when  talent occurs  training is  pos­ sible.  And  this  goes for  writing  as  fully as  it  goes  for  music,  hockey  or  mathe­ matics.
But   at   present    in   universities    there are  difficulties. Most accomplished writers would agree that  the secret of their  talent is an inner secret and  that  the intimations which  lead to the forms the talent eventu­ ally  takes  are  also  from  within.  Part  of the  dragging  pain   and   yet  the   intense pleasure  of  the  writing  life  derives  from the  fact   that   it  emerges  from   a  do-it­ yourself  kit.  At  ages  18  to  22  the  inner  waters  tend  to  rock  on  up  to  the  writing  surface  with  great   force  and   turbulence but  to swirl  about  in  an  almost  formless form  of  sheer  skill at  pushing, pulling  or slinging  words  about. Which  means  that  the  talent can  be conspicuous-a  word­ slinger for sure-but the writing chame­ leon, today poems, tomorrow a play, next week,  the  novel.   Yet  when  the sorting  out finally does occur  it  usually turns  out that   the  particular  talent does  have  its particular   corresponding form.  Many  gifted  novelists  are  utter  dubs  at  poetry, many  gifted   poets  incapable of  writing plays, and  some of our  finest  critics  have written novels their own mothers couldn't have   finished.  The man   whose  writing talent   moves  with  equal   ease  in  all  the forms  is  as  rare   as  Picasso.  Hence the need for that  "freedom from  specification by  one  managerial  system   or   another" that  Mr.  Harlow stresses. The true speci­ fications are inside the kit. But by stressing the  freedom   he  overlooks   the   network  of  distracting  and   conflicting  specifica­ tions which  both  universities and  creative writing  departments  impose  that   nag  at the  talented  student from  the day  he sets

79

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



foot  at  almost  any North  American  uni­
versity.
During  his first two years U.B.C., for instance,  requires  that  the  student  take
10 courses in all, only one of which can be in creative writing. If he opts to plunge right   in  during   the  first  year,  he  can take Creative  Writing 201 in which the department specifies attempts  at,  "the familiar  essay, column, character  sketch, vignette,  short  short  story and  the  dra­ matic  skit."  Or,  if  he  holds  back  until second  year, he can  take Creative  Writ­ ing 202 in which such  presumably more advanced  forms as the "autobiographical sketch, short story, short play forms (stage and  radio)  and  lyrical and satiric verse" are  specified.  I'm  doubly  bothered.  One part  creative writing  to nine parts other courses  makes  for  a  pretty  weak  drink. More, some high school students  writing for interested  teachers or for student pub­ lications have already tried their hand at more sophisticated  writing levels than are specified for either of these courses. How­ ever  unformed   talent  may  be,  it  does have strong  instincts for distinctive ways in which  to wear itself  and I doubt  that a  column,  a  vignette,  a short short  or  a skit  meet  the  need.  Particularly  because Ifeel  that   the  need  is otherwise  than any  of  these  forms  could  satisfy. How­ ever,   that   one-to-nine   ratio   is  so  un­ satisfactory   in   itself  that   questions  of what  can  happen  in the one course are, as  they  say, academic.  Strange  that  the word  should   have  become  synonymous with pointlessness.
During    third   and   fourth   years  the
specifications seem to relax somewhat, though actually they only take different twists. During  this periodI o courses are required  but five of these can be in "crea­ tive  writing  and   related   disciplines."

So
 Five-to-ten  is certainly a better ratio than one-to-nine. But notice, in the Ig66-67 calendar  there are only five creative writ­ ing  courses  listed  for  third   and  fourth years:  (I )  plays for radio, television and screen   ( 2)   stage  plays   ( 3)   novella  or novel  (4)   short  story   (5)   poetry.  And only three of these are offered in I g66-67. Given the initial distraction of five courses in other departments, the five listed seem to me to  force an  even more distracting  scatter. I can't  believe that  the  talented writer  either  wants  to or can  ride off in five different  directions  at the same time. Yet  as  of  next  February  or  March  the letter  home  would  have  to  read,  Dear Mom,   I'm   busy  writing   a  stage  play, another short story, a term paper for my Shakespeare   course   (related   discipline) some poems, and a term paper for my Philosophy  course   (other   related   disci­ pline) . Dear  muse ...
If such  a  scheme  sums  up  into  four
years of considerably  less than  what  Mr. Harlow   touts  as  quasi-bohemian  "free­ dom  from  specifications",  it  should  be emphasized  that  Mr.  Harlow  is scarcely to blame for the arrangement. He isn't to blame   because   it   was   contrived   circa
1957 by a creative  writing  committee  of which  I was,  I regret   to  say,  a   non­ dissenting   member.   Thinking   back,   it seems to me that  we planned  on  a basis of ignorance,  precedent  and compromise. Creative  writing  is a  study  still  so new in universities that  teaching methods  are at  a  relatively rudimentary  stage. That's ignorance. Consult  the calendars of other universities  where  the  scope of offerings is comparable and  you  will discover that the  form  of the offerings is very similar. That's  precedent.  Sit  in  on  a  commit­ tee  that wants  very much  to establish a creative  writing  programme   yet  realizes

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



a  certain  reluctance  among  other  mem­ bers of the academic  community. Notice how  soon  the  pattern   of  the  offerings will  begin   to  resemble  the   pattern   of other   offerings  at  the  given   university. That,  worst effect of all, is  compromise. All  wrong,  I now  believe.  Mr.  Harlow would  be  well advised  to  tum  arrange­ ments  contrived  by the  original  commit­ tee  to  the  wall  and  to  strike  out  for  a new beginning.
Sadder  isn't  necessarily wiser, but  sug­
gestions do seem in order.  Mine  all stem from  a  belief that  talent  is the clue and key;  that   it  works  by  a  paradoxically blind  yet sure-handed  osmosis as the in­ ner waters of the writing life swirl or seep on up toward appropriate forms; that the field  in  which  this  groping  and  growth take place is that of the present-day writ­ ing idiom. Not  that  past usage isn't  rele­ vant,   but   it   is   relevant  in   terms  of present uses. The best way to provide the beginning  student  who  has  a  way with words the opportunity to begin to develop his talent  is to show him  all  those ways with words that other writers in our time have  made  possible. And  the  best  way to  do this is to offer the first year student a reading and writing course that presents the best modem  instances. These tend  to sort  out  in  the  writing  world  as quickly (and  slowly)  as  say  impressionism,  ex­ pressionism,  surrealism,   abstraction,  as­ semblage,  collage  and   pop  in  painting. In   fiction,   for   instance,   Ford   Madox Ford's  impressionism   (his  critics  called it  lying),  Gertrude Stein's  modifications of  traditional  grammar,  James   Joyce's fabulous  word-play,  William  Faulkner's  rhetorical  accumulations, Franz  Kafka's dream  techniques,  Dylan  Thomas'   and John   Hawkes'  surrealism,  the   jazz­ inspired  improvisational writing  of Jack
 Kerouac  and  Robert  Creeley,  and  Wil­ liam Burroughs'  brain-wave fantasies are only some of the available  uses to which talent  can tum.  Poetry  and  drama  offer a similar  bewilderment  of  riches as op­ portunity for the young person who hap­ pens to have  a gift  for  the  writing  gab. So  wide  a  range  that  students  coming from  even  the  best  of  our  high schools can  have only  fleeting chances  for  close acquaintance.  And  so  wide  that  I can scarcely imagine  adequate acquisition  of the  possibilities in  question  short  of  a two-year course. The  writing side of the coin would consist not of columns, auto­ biographical sketches, or short shorts but of some reasonable volume of words writ­ ten  in  response  to   the  reading-exer­ cises, imitations,  variations  or extensions of some one, other or several of the possi­ bilities, with  the choice  depending  upon student  inclination.  This  does specify an area  of  study  and   instruction,   Modern Writing  Idiom,  but  it  does  not   specify what  the student  will write  in  response. Just that he write. Responsively.
From my view it would be difficult to overstress the  need  for  such  a  course at the outset. That which emerges as unique when  talent   finally  does  arrive   at   its




8r

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



appropriate form   is beyond  prior  verifi­ cation.   But  as  an  "X" factor, it  cannot  take  root  and  achieve growth  except  in terms   of  available  idiom.   In  some  few instances  a writer  may pioneer new possi­ bilities,  but  to do  so he will  have  had  to explore  the  known  territory. Now, as al­ ways  before,  nothing  will  come  of  noth­  ing.  And  even  the  newest  new is rooted in  that   which   is  known.  Which   is  why the   student   during  his  first   two   years should   also   receive   instruction  in   two even  more  basic  subjects,  Linguistics  for Writers and Language for Writers. Idiom,  the  way  in  which   the  thing  is handled, traces   to   the  magnificent thing   itself, LANGUAGE.   Nothing can  happen  in  the field  of   idiom   that   is  inconsistent   with the  nature  of  the  given  language. Ezra Pound  said  it,  "there are  laws,"  and  the student needs  to  know.
Consider  poetry.   It is  now  some  400 years since the Elizabethans established syllabic  patterning as the basis and  norm for   poetry    writen    in   English.   But   in North  America it  is now  some  50 years since   Pound, T.  S.  Eliot  and   William Carlos  Williams  turned away from this emphasis   upon   the   syllable  to  a  more ranging emphasis upon stress, juncture, duration and  what  Charles  Olson has named   "composition by field."  Evidence that   this  new  emphasis   is  remaking the art  of poetry  in our  time is close at hand. During  the   past   five  years  Vancouver has been an  active  centre  for young  poets and  some I o of the  I 2  or so most talented do  write   in   the   newer  mode,  almost   a clean  sweep,  a  new  idiom.  Which  means that    the   student  who   wants   to   write poetry   needs   to  know  what   is  implied and  demanded by four  degrees  of stress, four  degrees  of juncture, the tone leading
 of   vowels,  composition  by  field,  and   a host   of   other   practices  which   call   for linguistic definition of what  is happening in  the  poem.  Ten  years  ago  there  would have  been  no  one  around to  teach  such a course  because  the  split  between  poetry and  linguistics was  too  wide.  At  present there    are   at   least   three   younger   men with  M.A's  from  U.B.C.  (Lionel  Kearns, George  Bowering  and  Frank Davey)   and three   other young  men  with  B.A's  from U.B.C.  working on M.A's  or Ph.D's  from other   universities 	(Fred    Wah,    David Dawson, Robert  Hogg),  all  sufficiently versed  in  the  poetry   (which   they  write) and    the   linguistics    (which    they   have studied)  to  teach  such  a  course.  Which would   bear  close  analogy  to  the  kind  of music   course   in  which   the   theory   and terminology become  valuable only  when accompanied  by  practice. One   of  the truly   encouraging signs  on  the   creative writing  scene   in   Canada  comes   from Simon  Fraser  University, where  the  Eng­ lish Department has recently  hired Robin  Blaser,   a   San    Francisco  poet   deeply versed   in  the   new  practice, and  Lionel  Kearns, the  young  Vancouver  poet  and  teacher whose chief academic interest has been  linguistics.  Interestingly  the  depart­ ment   chairman  who   hired   them,   Ron  Baker,   previously taught   a   linguistics  course  at the  University of British Colum­ bia   which   was   taken   by   almost   every young   poet   of   note   in   this  area.   And despite   the  fact   that   it  was  an  English course  with   only  partial  emphasis   upon the   linguistics  of   poetry,  many   of   the poets  consider  it  the  most  valuable part  of  their   university  training. This  kind  of course  is so  important, I feel,  that  there  should   be  an  introductory course  for  all writing students, and  an  advanced course

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



for   those   who    incline    toward   poetry where   both  the  theory  and   the  practice are  crucial.
A similar  rationale applies  to the Lan­ guage  for  Writers course.  Mother  tongue  is like dear  old  mum,  taken  for  granted, nothing  quite    so  indiscernible   as  that  which  is most familiar. Although English is  a  qualitative  language, which  means that   when   we  speak   we  tend   to  place more   emphasis   upon   stress   than  upon duration ("To be, or  not  to  be,/  That is the  question") , many  poets have  empha­ sized duration ("The  lowing  herd  winds slowly  o'er   the  lea").  And   two  masters in  our  century, Pound  and  W.  B. Yeats chanted their  poems in an effort  to renew durational   values.   Nonetheless,  anyone raised  in English  is subjected to the stress emphasis  day-in  day-out at  expense  of a relatively  starved  ear  for  duration. This  is  one   reason   that   a   stress-writer  like Shakespeare  is  easily  accessible  while  a durational-writer like Edmund Spenser goes begging  for  readers despite  magnifi­ cent  beauties.  And  it is a reason why any talented  young   writer  should   be  intro­  duced  to the possible liberation of a dura­ tionallanguage-say French for Writers.  What  happens in   both   the  speech   and the  literature  would  constitute valuable  insight   into   what   happens  in   English speech  and  writing. Such  a course  would be analogous to that kind  of travel  which broadens and  intensifies  awareness. One  scarcely   needs   to  point   out   all  the  in­ stances   in   which   such   travel   has  been the  making  of  artists.  For  the  man  who writes  in  English   at  least  one  such  trip into   a  foreign   language  territory  could be  equally  illuminating. While  it  is true that talent  turns  upon  individual capacity for feeling, vision, response and thought, these  can  eventuate only  in  terms  of the
 medium   in  which   they  are  cast.  When Henry  James  was  criticized  for  cultivat­ ing   his  art   at   the   expense  of   life,  he replied,  "more art." And  was  right.  The life  can  only  eventuate in  the  art.  And writing  is a language art.
Which  carries  to  the  student's writing
during third  and  fourth years. I feel that the   present   arrangement  which   forces him to sample  up to five different modes should   give  way  to  an  arrangement  in which   he  could   concentrate on  fiction, poetry  and  drama and  yet,  when  so  in­ clined,  shift  from  one  to  another.  Some students still  casting  about for  forms  ap­  propriate to  their   talent  might  want   to play   the   field.   Others   more   definitely inclined   might    choose   say  fiction   and stay  with   it   until   the  inner   voice  de­ murred. Credit  under  such  an  arrange­ ment  could  be  determined by volume  of work  appraised  in  terms  of the  teacher's awareness   of   the  student's writing   ten­  dencies.  Some   work  fast   and   volumin­ ously,   others   slowly,   and   it   would   be absurd  to  expect   the  same  volume  from fast   and   fancy   as  from   slow  and   in­ dwelling.  Here,   as  elsewhere,  the  objec­ tive  is  an  arrangement  flexible  enough  to   accommodate  those   inner   impulses  which  derive  from  the  peculiar  nature of the student's abilities.  Should some seem­ ingly  obsessive  student  choose   to  write  fiction  throughout third  and  fourth   year it  might   just  be  because  the  form  hap­ pened  to coincide with  his talent. Should  another   vacillate  back   and   forth,  this might   be  consistent  with   inner   vacilla­ tions which  can  be so much  a part  of the process.
I would  like to close out  these  sugges­
tions   by  mentioning  one   other   much­ needed  form  of instruction for  third  and  fourth  year   students,  Literature  for

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Writers. English departments  focus atten­ tion  upon  the  background  and  interpre­ tation   of  literary   works.  Because  he  is focused   upon   the   art   of   writing,   the creative   writing    student   should   have available,   in  each   main   form,  genre courses that  trace  the twists and  turns of the  writing  down  through  the centuries. These   courses   would   complement   the course  in   modern  idiom   mentioned earlier.  It's  amazing  how often  the  man who is deeply dipped  in the idiom of our time finds echoes in the past. But let me sum  up  what  I have  been suggesting. A "course"  is a path  after all, a channel or way. Talent  is the  true  traveller,  a way with  words.  As waystations for  the  pro­ gress  of   the   talented,   universities   can provide  training  in  the writing  medium. Available  idiom,   all   those   present-day ways in which words are being used, can be  taught   and   practiced.  Those   inner
 workings of  the  English  language  which make  up  the  actuality  of writing  can  be taught  and   practiced. A  heightened awareness  of  English   through   contrast with  another  language  can  be acquired. And the story of each main  writing form down  through  the  years can  also be  ac­ quired.  Most  important of all, the  writ­ ing  mode  to  which  inclination  prompts the student  can be left open, left change­ able, as is consistent  with the chameleon nature  of  the  writing  life at  ages 18 to
22. These suggestions argue for an earlier beginning of extensive study  than  is now possible and for more extensive offerings. The  art  of writing  seems as important a pursuit  as  the  art  of  music or  architec­ ture.  Yet one  need only  consult  the  uni­ versity  calendar   to  notice  the  disparity. Which causes me to feel that  Mr. Harlow has his work cut out for him.
WARREN  TALLMAN









