$1.25   per copy




CANAD  AN l TERATURE N°·18








THE WRITER'S WORLD




Articles
BY ROBERT L. MCDOUGALL,  MORDECAI JIUCHLER, NAIM  XATnM, JOAN  SELBY, BRUCE  H. NESBIT!'


Reviews
BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, GEORGE BOWERING, S. E. READ, GEORGE WOODCOCK, FRANK DAVEY,
DONALD STEPHENS, MARYA F1AMENGO, AND OTHERS






A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







A COMMONWEALTH OF LITERATURES


THE  IDEA OF A COMMONWEALTH   of literatures, paralleling the political   Commonwealth, gathers substance   from  the  kind  of  writing which  is now  being  published in the  countries that  formerly  belonged  to the  Empire. The pattern, which  was examined in a volume of essays-The Commonwealth Pen­ noticed  some issues ago in these pages, is deepened by the growing differentiation as well as the growing achievement of writers  working  and  publishing outside  the literary  metropolis of  London. Thirty   years  ago  anthologies of  verse  from  the Empire had  a curiously  blimpish tone  and  a foggy mediocrity that  made  Charles G. D. Roberts and  Adam Lindsay  Gordon look like considerable poets. The situa­  tion  has changed radically in a generation, and  a recent  collection  like Margaret
J. O'Donnell's Anthology   of Commonwealth Verse,  distributed in  Canada  by
Ryerson  Press,  leaves  one  with  the  conviction  that,  since  last  war's  end  at  least, the  English-writing  poets  of  Canada and  Australia, of  South  Africa   and   New Zealand, are  competing on equal ground with those of Britain. In  fact,  when  one reads  the  tired,  dusty  verses of the  English  poets of the  195o's  "Movement", it seems evident  that  nowadays Canadians and  New Zealanders at least  are singing with truer  poetic voices.
An  anthology bringing together a  number of  literatures, using  variants of  a
common language, is always  a difficult  project, and  Miss O'Donnell's  collection is saved  mainly  by the  intrinsic merit  of the  better  verse it includes. In  planning and  arrangement the  anthologist has made  most of the  possible mistakes,  so that her  collection  can  at  least  on one  level be read  as a manual of examples of what not  to do. She starts  with  the early Victorian age, when  no colonial  literature was other  than  derivative, and  the  result is that  poor old Heavysege and  Sangster  and their  contemporaries elsewhere  are  made  to perform  beside  Wordsworth, Brown­ ing  and  Clare. On  the  other  hand, the  attempt to be fair  by  containing  English

3

EDITORIAL



poetry  in  spatial limits equal  to those devoted to other  countries means  that  the anthology appears without  most of the best English  voices of the period  covered  - Byron,  Shelley,  Keats,  etc. etc.
It would  surely have been better  to have  restricted the anthology to a period­
say  the  last  thirty   years-in  which  the  various Commonwealth literatures,  in­ cluding the  British,  could  have  been  presented on something approaching equal terms.  But  instead   Miss O'Donnell has  tried  to  extricate herself  from  the  diffi­ culties  created by  the  legion  of British  poets  writing during the  past  century by dividing them  into  English,  Welsh, Scottish  and  Irish,  using place  of  birth  as the main   criterion  of  selection.  This  has  led  to  some  curious  combinations -and divisions.  Since  MacNeice and  Day  Lewis are  presented as Irish  and  Auden  and Spender as English,  the Thirties movement is split  down  the middle  and  half its leading figures appear in the odd company of Padraic Colum  and James Stephens. Those   delightful nature  poets  of  the  English  countryside, Andrew Young   and Edward Thomas, are  presented  respectively  as Scottish  and  Welsh  poets,  though Wilfred   Owen, who  was  born  much  nearer to  Wales  than   Edward Thomas, is mysteriously  classed  as English.  The  fact  is that, except  for clearly  regional  poets like Huw  Menai in Wales and Hugh MacDiarmid in Scotland, most of the writers  represented  in  the  British  sections  of  the  book  came   together   in  the  inclusive atmosphere of the London literary world; they formed that  world.  Miss O'Donnell recognizes  the irrelevance of  origins in such circumstances when she includes  T. S. Eliot  among  the  English;  but she does not  carry  the  implications of this sensible decision  to their logical conclusion.
But outside  Britain  origins do take on meaning. Poets living out their  lives away
from   Europe, enjoying   local  experiences,   speaking  with  local  accents   in  local variants of the  common  language, slowly produce their  own  idioms,  and  we can observe  their  distinctive  poetic traditions emerging, New Zealand developing a characteristic strain of nature-sensitive lyricism,  and  Canada  producing -to  its own  surprise -the most sophisticated verse of all during these last years, varying from  the  ironically astringent to the metaphysically involuted.
The kind  of rapid  sampling survey  which  such  a volume  permits  is enough to point  up some interesting facts  about  poets in the Commonwealth. One  can  note, for  instance, how  deeply  poetry  depends on  the  writer  using  a  native  language spoken  from  childhood. The  least  satisfying  poems  in  the  volume  are  those  by Indians,  Pakistanis and  Africans,   and  this  comparative failure  in  verse  is given particular point  when  one  remembers how  many  good  English-writing  novelists India, for  example, has  produced. No  Indian poet  stands  so high  among con-

4

EDITORIAL



temporary  writers in English as prose writers like R. K. Narayan, Aubrey Menen and  Mulk  Raj  Anand.
And  then  there  is the  curious  case of South  Africa,  which  for  decades  has
been sprouting  excellent writers from among its English-speaking  population,  yet has never produced  a really characteristic  local literature  for the reason that  the good  South  African  poets  all seem to  find  their  way  as  quickly  as possible to London,  where  they  have  taken  over  the  role of the  brilliant  expatriate   once reserved  for  the  Anglo lrish.
R.  N. Currey,  F. T. Prince,  David  Wright;  it is astonishing  how many  of them have fled from  home  and  how few have gone back. Obviously the social stresses and  strains  that  exist in  a country  like South  Africa  are  not  conducive  to con­ tinued  literary  creation,   and  those  writers  who  are  wise escape  to  fulfil  their literary  destinies  elsewhere.  Perhaps  there  is a  warning  here  for  Canadians­ both  French  and  English-that a country too sharply divided against itself may be culturally  no more healthy  than it is politically.















5



THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK

Class in Canadian Literature






Robert L. McDougall





LsIS   A  PAPJm  about  om  society and  our  litemture, and  it assumes a correlation  between the kind of society which has evolved in this country
and the kind of literature  it has produced. It is substantially the paper which I gave almost  a  year  ago  to  an interdisciplinary  seminar  sponsored  by the  Institute  of Canadian  Studies  at  Carleton   University  for   the   purpose of  examining   the question  of "Class  in Canada". Since the paper  then  took its place in a context of studies made of the same subject by my colleagues in other  disciplines, I must reactivate enough of that context now to make clear my point of departure. Before I do  this, however,  I should  like to say that  the  intervening federal  election  of April last has shown very plainly the extrapolation of the argument you are about to hear into the field of politics. I was and am concerned,  as many were to become concerned  in the  period leading up to the election, with the negative image pre­ sented  by many  aspects of the life of our  nation.  Mr.  Pearson  has  offered  the electorate  his "Sixty  Days of Decision" as the way out of the wasteland  of Cana­ dian  political inertia.  My interests for  present  purposes  are  literary:   I have ex­ amined  the  deficiencies of the  literary  imagination  in  Canada and  have  asked by what  means a Dodo can become at least a Cruising Auk.
My point of departure is supplied chiefly by the work of Professor John  Porter of our  Department of Sociology at Carleton,  who has written  extensively about social class in Canada and who will publish soon an important book on the power

6

THE DODO AND  THE  CRUISING AUK



elite  in  Canadian society.  Professor  Porter  is not  happy about our  society,  and I must  now  tell  you  briefly  about  some  of  the  features of  the  Canadian  social profile  which  he  brings  to  my notice  that  are  at  once  unusual and  unattractive. At the level of the  distribution of economic  wealth,  for example, he shows me not a pyramid (which, he tells me, is what  I should  see)  but something which,  like a space-capsule, is narrow in the up-ended neck and  dumpy at the base. The  design, good  for  space   travel, does  not  in  this  context  reflect  a  free  flow  of  economic opportunity. Other inhibitors darken  the  picture. The  powerful  groups are subtly but  adamantly exclusive  in  terms  of the  training of their  members, their  ethnic origin,  even  the  religious  faith  they  profess. So subtle  are  they  that  they  spend  a good  deal  of their  time  hiding  their  true  colours  and  are  therefore, despite  their power,  a  dull  lot.  Too   few  bright  birds  hatched in  other   and  lower  orders   of society get in from  the outside  to liven things up;  too many  bright  birds stay more or  less where  they  are  put,  and  in  doing  so fail  to realize  the  creative potential that  is in  them. What is worse,  they seem content  to stay  put; indeed  the  entire community congratulates itself daily  on the superiority of its social  arrangements over  those  made  by neighbouring communities. This  much,  oversimplified, from Professor   Porter. His  message  seems  plain:  Canadian society  is moribund and doesn't know  it; it is a flightless bird  that  preens its vestigial  wings.
Now  I  have  asked  myself what  our  literature, and  especially  our  fiction  (since fiction  is the  form  of literature most directly  concerned with  the image  of man  in society)   has  to  say  about this  message.  And  I  must  tell  you  immediately, with mixed  sadness  and  elation, that  it  seems  to  me  to say  that  the  message  is true. Professor  Porter and   I differ  on  many  points,  and  we  are  of course  looking  at different bodies  of evidence; but  as far  as that  part  of his thesis I have  just  ex­ amined is concerned, we see eye to eye. I shall  ask you to detect  in our literature a  climate  of thought and  feeling  that  is frigid  and  constrained. The  air is cold;  hostile  forces  threaten; hope  is deferred. In   this  environment,  man's  stance   is static,   his  mood  introverted, his virtues  stoic.  More  directly,  I  shall  ask  you  to conclude that   our  literature shows  what  can  only  be  described  as an  abnormal absence  of feeling  for  class and  of concern  for what  the  class structure can  do in a  developing society  to  make  or  mar  the  life of  the  individual. I shall  ask  you to regard its silence  on  the  question  of class as ominous.  I shall say that  it is due partly  to the  existence  within  our  culture  of  inhibitions so strong  as to all but  rule out  the  possibility  of a  dynamic theory  of  social  mobility,  and  partly  to  the  fact that   most  Canadian writers   belong  to  a  single  social  group identifiable with  a university-based Establishment.

7

THE DODO  AND THE CRUISING AUK



I have begun to speak metaphorically  because metaphor is the language of literature. In  my examination  of the social implications  of our  literature,  I have thought  it wise to avoid the use of direct comments  which our writers have made in fiction or in  poetry about  Canadian society. I  could offer you a collection of such  comments  quite  easily. Navel-gazing  on  a  national  scale is something  our writers do very well. But I believe, as you must, that  when writers are being most self-consciously sociological they are being most marginally literary.  I see no point in  asking  our  writers  to  testify as amateur  sociologists. Fortunately,   poets and novelists have  another  manner  of speaking  which  is truly  their  own and  which involves the use of language to create a work of art rather  than,  primarily, a social document.  As it  happens,  since the way in  which  their  imaginations  character­ istically work  within  the  books or  poems they write  are  themselves social facts, we can listen to them when they speak the language  of literature and still remain within  a sociological frame  of reference.
I have said that  metaphor is the language of literature. I mean by this that men
and  woman  who write novels or poems discover in doing so what  R. W. B. Lewis in The  American  Adam has described as the "representative images" and "stories" for  the ideas  and  attitudes  of the society in  which  they live. Taking  a long and broad  look at American  literature,  Mr. Lewis has concluded  that "a  century ago, the image  contrived  to embody  the most fruitful  contemporary ideas was that  of the authentic American  figure of heroic innocence  and  vast potentialities,  poised at  the  start  of  a  new  history."  Hawthorne's description,  in  a  fantasy  of I 844 called "Earth's Holocaust",  of a huge bonfire built on the western prairies, "upon which was piled all the world's 'outworn'  trumpery," becomes in this context the complement  of Thoreau's representative  image  of the  "busk", a  New  England custom which entailed  the replacing of old things with new in village homes and the ritual  burning  of the past on the village green. Such images and stories, says Mr.  Lewis, considered in relation to the anti-types  which inevitably develop from them,  help  to define  the  characteristic  debate  or  dialectic  of American  society. My only departure from this form of inquiry  into  the basic metaphor  of a body of literature is to insist (in company with Miss Bodkin in her Archetypal  Patterns in  Poetry and  Wilson Knight  in his Shakespearian  criticism)  that  as much, per­ haps  even  more,  validity  attaches  to  the  representative  image  produced  by  the writer  when he is unaware  of the implications  of what he is doing as to the repre­ sentative  image  he produces as a "conscious" literary  artist.
As we might expect, neither the subsuming form of the representative  image or
"story"  nor  the debate  or dialectic  which is the sign of its vitality is as apparent

8

THE DODO AND  THE CRUISING AUK



this side of the  border as it is to the south.  No simple myth  or ideology is available within  whose field the separate symbols can find their orientation. The  Americans took over the only ones truly  appropriate to this continent some centuries ago:  the Adamite myth  and   the  ideology  of  democratic egalitarianism. Urged   partly  by our  history  and  partly   by  sheer  perversity,  we have  been  looking  fruitlessly  for alternatives ever  since.  Nevertheless, a  pattern exists  here,  even  though, as  we shall  see, its organizing principle is negative.





IN  1946,   Northrop Frye  contributed  to  the  periodical  Gants du Ciel an  article  entitled   (the  piece was translated from  the  English) "La Tradi­
tion  Narrative dans  la Poesie Canadienne-Anglaise". In this article  he pointed  out that  the  Canadian poet,  though he might  be younger  than  Eliot  or Yeats,  wrote in an environment for which  it would be difficult to find a counterpart in England without going  back  to a  period  prior  to the  age of Chaucer. Our poets,  he said, shared   with  the  authors of The  Wanderer  and  The  Seafarer  a  certain attitude or feeling:

a  feeling  [he  said]   of  melancholy  inspired  by a  sparsely  settled  and  northern country,  a feeling of the  terrible  loneliness of the creative spirit in such a country, a feeling of resignation  to misery and  isolation as the only means of achieving, if not serenity, at least a sort of stoic calm.

He  noted  a family  resemblance between  on the one hand  the defeat  of the English at  Maldon and  the  heroism  of the  French at  Roncesvalles, and, on the other,  the archetypes of  our  national  history: the  martyrdom of  the  Jesuits  in  Huronia; Dollard's stand   against   the  Iroquois at  the  Long  Sault; the  desperate  courage of  the  Indians who  died  beside  Tecumseh  and  Riel; the  stirring yet  abortive winter  of our  discontent inI 837; the hopeless struggle  against  gas at Saint-Julien in World  War  I; the sacrificial  raid  on Dieppe  in World  War II. The  images and "stories" of  the  literature which  emerges  from  this environment, Professor  Frye goes on to say, reflect  a consistent  view of the human  situation: man  is a beautiful but  frail  creature encompassed by forces beyond  his ability  to control which  strike out  repeatedly and   blindly   to  destroy  him.  Max,  the  hero  of  Isabella Valancy Crawford's A1alcolm's Katie, at the very moment  when he is defending the march of civilization  and  an  idealistic  view of human nature, is struck  down  by a falling

9

THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK



tree.  In  Lampman's At the  Long Sault,  as the  image  of the  defeat  of Dollard's band   merges  with  the  image  of  the  magnificent  bull-mouse attacked  and  des­ troyed  by  a  pack  of wolves, we see the  ritual destruction of the  higher  forms  of life by the lower.
Professor  Frye's  feeling for this part  of our  literature seems to me so absolutely
right   (his  accounting for  what  he finds is another matter, for  I think  he is  mis­ leading when  he  says that  the  northern environment is the  cause)   that  I  have only  to go on from  where  he leaves off. Within the field of the description he has provided lie,  and   lie  all  one  way,  the  central themes,  certainly the  mood and
spirit,  of  the  main  part  of our  poetry  and  fiction.  E.  J. Pratt is in  many  ways
our  most  vigorous  and  affirmative  poet. Yet  the  dominant linear  image  of Pratt's poetry   is the  image  of the  parabola, of  the  line  moving  obliquely  and  curving back  upon  itself. In  his "Come Away,  Death", after  the  obliterating blast  of the bomb,   "human  speech  curved   back  upon   itself/Through  Druid  runways and Piltdown scarps,/Beyond the stammers of the  Java  caves."  Evolution and  rever­ sion  are  two  functions of the  same  graph. More obviously,  the  central  image  of Pratt's long poem  on the sinking of the Titanic  is that  of an iceberg whose colossal strength, two-thirds hidden  beneath the  surface, rips  through the  bowels  of the ship  that is man's  pride  and  joy. In  D. C. Scott's poetry,  which  E. K. Brown  has called  a  poetry  of "restrained intensity", there  is the  image  of the  Indian crone who  had  once  baited  her hook with  her own  flesh to catch  fish for  her child,  but who  now,  cast  off by her  tribe  to die in  the  wilderness,  sits  mantled with  snow, her  breath a thin  meerschaum of vapour in  the  white silence. Jay  MacPherson's Adam  is  the  fallen  Adam   barred from  re-entry into  Eden   by  the  Cherubim's flaming sword  until  the second Adam  come. Even  the titles of collections  of poems are  emblematic:  Margaret Avison's  Winter  Sun;  Patrick Anderson's The  White  Centre;  A. M.  Klein's  The  Rocking Chair  ("symbol of this static  folk"); James Reaney's A Suit of Nettles.
Turn to our  fiction,  which  is perhaps more  telling  in its evidences  because  it is more  dependent in  its form  on a total  human situation, and  we find  images  and "stories" consistent  with those of the poetry. The representative figure of Canadian fiction  is not  the  innocent Adam, nor  yet the  Adam of the  fortunate fall  who  is triumphant even  in defeat  at  the hands  of the  alien  tribe-as, for example, are Melville's Billy Budd  or the Joads  in Steinbeck's The  Grapes of Wrath. Nor is he, like Dorothea Brooke in George  Eliot's  Middlemarch, the figure  made strong  and capable of extended life by voluntary renunciation. These  are positive; our arche­ type is negative. Grove's  heroes inhabit the world  of the dark  tragedies, the world

10

THE DODO AND THE  CRUISING AUK



of  Lear  and  Othello.  Morley  Callaghan's protracted study  of  the  nature of  in­ nocence  in  a  fallen   world  ends  with  the  identification, in  Harry Lane  of  The  Many   Coloured   Coat,  of  innocence  with   presumption  and   guilt.   His  Father Dowling, in Such Is My  Beloved, unable  to see a solution  either  in conventionally Christian or in  Marxist terms  to the  problem  posed by the  two prostitutes he has befriended, steps  back  over  the lintel  and  the door  closes on the dark  room  of his insanity. In  Hugh MacLennan's Two  Solitudes, two  race  legends  touch  but  do not  join,  and  Athanase Tallard, at  the  point  of the  novel's  real  climax,  dies an immolation to unappeasible gods. Tallard's son Paul, ostensibly  the man  in whom the  two worlds  become  one, does not rise Phoenix-like from  the ashes, and  we are to  be consoled  with  the  image  of oil and  alcohol  in  a  bottle  which,  we are  told, "had not  broken   yet."  The real  hero  of  MacLennan's earlier  novel,  Barometer Rising, is the  chance explosion  of 3000  tons of T.N.T. in Halifax harbour which removes  from  the scene,  in addition to 6ooo  Haligonians, Neil MacRae's enemy,  Colonel  Wain. In  Sinclair Ross's As For Me and My  House, Philip  Bentley  with­  draws  so  repeatedly behind  the  slammed door  of his  study  that   the  image  be­ comes  an  organizing principle of  the action; and,  in the same  novel,  the  Puritan­ ridden town  of  Horizon,  from which,  we feel,  the  railway  lines  run  out  only  to other  and  quite  as empty Horizons, is a frontier town  which  has known  no youth but  only old  age.  Milton  Wilson,  reviewing  a recent  collection  of Canadian short  stories,  writes:  "In  the  end,   when  the  long  line  of  dead   birds,  animals, and  children, of frozen, inarticulate sons and  lovers, of crucified  hired  men  and  farm  boys has  filed  past,  one  is both  appalled and  impressed"; it  is a world,  he con­ cludes,  of  "sacrificial chilliness"  in  which  man's responses  are  "passive  and  in­ articulate".
Can  one escape  conclusion? This  is a negative  rather than  a positive literature. I was on  the  point  of saying  that  it is a literature of the  Everlasting Nay, but  the Everlasting  Nay,   as  Carlyle and   Melville  testify,  is  deeply  affirmative. In  our literature,  heroic   action   remains  possible  but   becomes  so  deeply   tinged   with futility   that   withdrawal  becomes  a  more  characteristic response  than  commit­ ment.  The  representative images  are  those of denial  and  defeat rather than  fulfil­ ment  and  victory.
In  the  presence  of these  images  it seems superfluous to ask whether our litera­ ture  embodies a dynamic view of our social arrangements or supports a  vigorous  debate on  the  problem of freedom of  movement for  the  individual  within   the mosaic  of the  class structure. Still,  to round  out  my argument, the question  may be put  and  an  answer given.  I shall  confine  my attention to the fiction.

II

THE DODO AND  THE CRUISING AUK



One  has  the  impression, in  reading  our  fiction,  that  the  social  environment  is in sharp focus.  I presume  it was this fact  which  led  M. Falardeau, in the  Plaunt lectures for  1g6o, to attempt a distinction  between  English-Canadian and French­ Canadian literature.

If one compares  the English and  French literatures of Canada, one discovers that the former expresses itself along an axis which I would see as horizontal  while the latter  has a more vertical axis ... For most English-Canadian novelists, the novel as artistic  expression is more the description  and  analysis of a social situation  than a plunging into the depths of an individual  soul. ...In the French-Canadian  novel, with  Langevin,  Elie, or  Charbonneau, the  characteristic tension  is one  between man  and  himself.  More  exactly,  it  is a  tension  between  the  individual  and  his destiny.

I think  M.  Falardeau is right  up to a point: the  English-Canadian novel,  less lyric  and  "romantic" than  its French-Canadian counterpart, belongs  to a  tradi­ tion of realism  in which  the horizontal dimension is clearly  displayed as part of the requirement for  what  Henry  James  called  "solidity of specification".  Moreover, as I suggested  at  the  beginning of my paper,  it is a novel  notable for  the  at least superficial evidence it gives of social awareness. Hugh MacLennan, for example, is most  accurately aware  of Professor  Porter's tight  little  circle  of  corporate elite. Huntley McQueen, in  Two  Solitudes, is a  modest   member of  the  pack  which  daily  rides the elevator  of the Bank Building  in Saint James Street:

The  elevator  continued  with  McQueen   to  the  top  floor. The  thought  crossed his mind  that  if an accident  had occurred  between  the first and  second floors, half a million  men  would  at  that  instant  have  lost their  masters.  It was an  alarming thought.  It  was also ironic, for  these individuals  were so remote  from  the beings they governed,  they operated  with such cantilevered  indirections,  that  they could all  die  at  once  without  even  ruffling the  sleep  of  the  remote  employees on  the distant  end of the chain of cause and effect. The  structure of interlocking director­ ates  which  governed  the  nation's  finances,  subject  to  an  exceptionally  discreet parliament, seemed to McQueen  so delicate  that  a puff of  breath  could make the whole edifice quiver.  But no, McQueen  smiled at  his own  thoughts,  the structure was quite  strong  enough.  The  men  who had  ridden  together  in the elevator  this morning  were so sound  they seldom told even  their  wives what  they  thought  or did  or hoped  to do. Indeed,  Sir Rupert  Irons  was so careful  he had no wife at all. They  were Presbyterians  to a man,  they went  to church  regularly,  and  Irons  was known to believe quite literally in predestination.

Similarly, it would  be possible to derive from English-Canadian fiction the material for  a demographic map  which  would  show  plainly  the  difference, let us say, be-

12

THE DODO  AND THE CRUISING AUK



tween  the  social  environment of Mort,  in  The  Equations  of  Love,  who  lives on Powell  Street  in  Vancouver, and  that  of Mr.  H.  Y. Dunkerley, the  lumber  mag­ nate,  who lives in the British  Properties in West Vancouver; or between the social environment of the Carvers, in The  Loved and the Lost, who live on the Mountain in  Montreal, and  that  of Peggy Sanderson, who frequents the St. Antoine district of the  city,  just north of the  tracks.  Is this not  to say that  M. Falardeau is right,  then?  And  is this  not  to say  that  English-Canadian fiction does indeed  present  a dynamic view of class in Canada?




bE FACT rs  that  class is not  a central issue in any  significant part  of our  fiction.  The  social  awareness  of which  I have  spoken  remains almost
everywhere a social  awareness marginal to the  purposes  of the  novel.  Character­ istically,  it is the  awareness of  a detached observer  who says what  he has  to say about a social  problem in a sequence  of mildly ironic  comments which  leave him,  as the device of irony permits, uncommitted. Irony is of course an excellent  literary device.  But the  use of it on a national scale, and the use on a national scale of that  particular form  of it  which  conceals  position  rather  than  reveals it, seems  to  me to have disturbing implications. Some years ago, Malcolm Ross was astute enough to identify  irony  as the Canadian way of doing  things in literature. The difference between  us is simply  that  Professor  Ross thinks  the ironic  mode  a good  basis for a sense of identity while I do not.
I must  answer   M.  Falardeau further by saying  that  even  where  the  question of class appears to  be  a central issue in our  fiction,  in  the  end  almost  invariably it  is not.  Morley  Callaghan, for  example, who  is on  the  surface  a  novelist  pre­ eminently concerned with  the  social structure in Canada, on  closer  examination turns  out  to  be  a novelist  preeminently concerned with  personal  values  and  "in­ scape". In  They  Shall Inherit  the Earth, published in  I935,  the conclusion which  Michael Aikenhead, on a hunting trip, draws  from the spectacle of the apparently wanton slaughter of deer  by a  pack  of wolves virtually  kills the  debate on social justice  which  the  novel  has  sponsored. The  lesson which  nature  supplies  is am­  biguous,  it  would  seem,  and  in  the  face  of this  ambiguity  we must,  for  the sake of unity, suspend judgement on the question  of  justice in society. It is a defensible position.  It is nevertheless a peculiarly static and negative  position  in the  context of the  thirties.  The effect in the novel is to drive the emphasis squarely back  upon

THE DODO  AND THE CRUISING AUK



what  has  been  its central  issue from  the beginning, the  personal relation between Michael and  his father; and  this issue is then  cautiously resolved  in terms  of the cautious conclusion  of the book's social debate. And  They Shall Inherit  the Earth is perhaps the  most "horizontal" of Callaghan's novels. Elsewhere, and  especially in  the  more  recent   novels  such  as  The Loved   and  the   Lost  and  The   Many Coloured  Coat, the  "vertical" is unquestionably the  main  dimension of the work.
Callaghan is of  course  not  the  English-Canadian novel,  but  since  my  time  is limited   I  must  ask you  to  believe  that  what  we find  and  do  not  find  in  him  is representative  of  a  wide  spectrum  of  Canadian fiction.   Ernest Buckler's   The Mountain and the Valley  ( 1952)   is a novel  locked  in  space  and  time,  its theme one of containment, its mood  retrospective, its emphasis, as Dr.  Bissell has pointed out,  "not so much  on movement forward as on exploration below." Hugh  Mac­ Lennan's The  Watch That  Ends  the  Night   ( 1959), despite  its  brilliant  recon­  struction of the  ferment of the  thirties  in  Montreal and  the  presence  in it  of the rather unrepresentative Life-Force  figure  of Jerome Martell, is a spiritual odyssey of  the  search  for  the  meaning of  pain  and  life  and  death in  which  the  action  folds progressively  inward upon  the  private  worlds  of the narrator and  his invalid  wife.  Consistently, in  Sinclair   Ross  as  in  such   unlikely  quarters as  Robertson Davies  and  Mazo  de  la  Roche,  the  "horizontal" tilts  to  the  "vertical". English­ Canadian  writers  have  more  in common  with  French-Canadian writers  than  M. Falardeau would  lead us to believe.
And  as  the  private worlds  enlarge, of course,  the  worlds  of social  relationship diminish. Nature and  puritanism and  the illiberal  mind  are  forces to be reckoned with  here,  and  any  combination of these  can  act  in  a social  context  to frustrate the  individual  and   nourish   his  self-doubt.  But  the  class  structure itself  is  not, apparently, a  challenge. There are  exceptions. I  believe  some  of our  minority­ group writers,  as  they  might  be  called,  have  had   (and for  obvious  reasons)   a genuine feeling  for  the  problem  of social mobility-John Marlyn,  for example, in  Under  the  Ribs  of  Death,  and  Mordecai Richler in  Son  of  a  Smaller  Hero.
I think  also of Ethel  Wilson's "Lilly's Story", though Ethel  Wilson writing  "Lilly's
Story" is Jane Austen  writing  Sister Carrie.  But  the  exceptions are  too  few  to be significant.
Indeed it is quite  simply the  monolithic uniformity of the  picture  that  disturbs me.  I concede  that  Morley  Callaghan has done  well in his inquiry into  the  prob­ lem of faith  and  guilt in a fallen  world, and  I can  tell you that  I was his champion long before  Edmund Wilson took him up, and  still am.  I concede that any novelist worthy  of his calling  will see any individual as being  in a sense in a class by him-

14

THE DODO  AND THE CRUISING AUK



self, that  all good novels are concerned  with the inner life, and  that  the probing of man's  consciousness and  conscience at the expense of external  social reference has been increasingly  the mark  of fiction in the western world over the past fifty years. But  where in our  literature,  early or late, do we find the infusion  of that bold  concern  for  placing  the  individual's  problems in significant  relation  to the structure  of his society which is so clearly to be seen in the literatures  of England and  the  United  States?  Dickens knew about  class in a society well advanced  to­ wards industrialization, and  Dickens wrote about class in Hard  Times and Bleak House  and  Great  Expectations. George Eliot knew the class structure  of a town like Middlemarch as well as she knew the palm of her hand  and  could  use  this knowledge to illuminate  the action and discourse of her characters. Henry James thought  the  principle  of exclusiveness so important  to the  art  of  fiction that  he went  to Europe  where  he could observe it in its purest form and  where he then proceeded  to write  novel after  novel in which  (with  no sacrifice  of inwardness, be it noted)   he  juxtaposed  New World ideas about class with  those of the Old. Within  a few years of James's  departure, the American  novelist  W. D. Howells had  satisfied his own Jamesian  concern for the principle of exclusiveness by writ­ ing, in The  Rise  of Silas Lapham, a full-length and artistically satisfying study of the issue of class that  had  arisen  with the pressure of the new economic elite of industrial  America  upon  the  Brahmin  class of  Boston society. Theodore Dreiser in Sister  Carrie  and  Horatio Alger in  Struggling  Upward made  a literary  image out  of the sociological concept  of  upward  mobility. Lady  Chatterley's lover is a gamekeeper,  and  this simple fact  stands  close to the heart  of what  Lawrence  is trying  to say in that  novel. Steinbeck in The  Grapes  of Wrath sees the class issue with  the hard  clarity of a  Marxist.
Here  in Canada we seem to have had no feel for this sort of thing-or, if we
had  a feel for it once, we have lost it. Susanna  Moodie looked with a shrewd eye on what  she called  the "mixed  society" growing up along the "front" of the St. Lawrence  River  in the 184o's  and was well aware of the implications  of the new kind of class structure  she saw taking shape in the new environment. Later,  Sara Jeanette Duncan   was able,  in  The   Imperialist, to do with  excellent  insight  for the small  Ontario town  of Elgin  (her  Brantford)   what  George  Eliot  had  done for  Middlemarch. But thereafter  the record diminishes. It is true that  the thirties produced  a spate  of socially directed  poetry in this country,  and  I have no wish to question the sincerity of the convictions which led F. R. Scott and Earle Birney and  others to write it. But the voice of the poetry of these years is ambiguous,  as a glance at the volume New  Provinces  (published in I936)  will show. Above all,

THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK



I see in  it litde  evidence of what  I should  call a genuine  feeling for class. It is academic.  One  has the impression that it is a poetry written  neither by Brahmins nor  by prols. And  if we turn  to the fiction of the depression  years, the essential lack  remains.  Irene  Baird's Waste  Heritage,  whose setting  is hobodom  in  Van­ couver  during   the  riots and  sitdown  strikes  of  the  thirties,  is a  genuinely  pro­ letarian  novel, and  it is a piece of work that  has a good deal  of  the quality  of gusto and  authenticity  of approach  to the social scene that  I am looking for. But it is the only one of its kind. In the post-war  years, evidence of  the feel for class in  our  literature  all but disappears.
The  record,  I repeat,  has been different  elsewhere. Scott Fitzgerald  hated  the privileges of the  high "with  the smouldering  hatred  of a peasant", while at  the same time coveting the freedom and beauty which, it seemed to him, only wealth provided.  "Gatsby", we read in  Fitzgerald's  famous  novel of the twenties, "was overwhelmingly  aware  of the youth and  mystery that  wealth  imprisons and  pre­ serves, of the freshness of many clothes, and of Daisy, gleaming like silver, safe and proud  above the hot struggles of the poor." Waiving the question of  which of our novelists can  write  like that,  which  of them  gives us any  reason  to  believe that he can   feel like that  about  the ceremonies and  attributes  of  class?  None,  to my knowledge. And if you think  (wrongly, as I would believe)  that  the social condi­ tions  which  sparked  Fitzgerald  in  the  twenties  have  no  counterpart in  Canada today,  which  of our novelists can answer in kind  to the energetic  vision of class and of individual  problem seen in relation to the class structure  which is embodied in Alan  Sillitoe's Saturday  Night  and Sunday Morning  and John  Braine's  Room  at the  Top?  Again  none, to my knowledge.
I  do  not  propose  to  explore  the  reasons  for  this gap  in  our  literature. The reasons  are our  history and  where and  how that  history has evolved, and  if you really  want  to linger  lovingly over how difficult it has  all been  you can  do  no better  than  to take a Great  Books course of reading  in the Reports  of our Royal Commissions  of  Inquiry.  There  is, however,  one  probable  reason  for  the  gap which  seems  to  me  worth  looking into  for  a  moment  before  I  close because it involves the  kind  of evidence that  my friend  Professor  Porter  likes to use in his analysis of Canadian society. It has to do with  the question of recruitment to the ranks of authors in this country.







r6

THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK


IHAVE SAID  THAT our poetry of the thirties gives one the feel­
ing of having  been written  neither  by Brahmins nor by prols. I have said that  it
has an  academic  flavour.  The  same observation can  be made  of poetry written before and  after  the decade  of the thirties and of almost the entire  run of  Cana­ dian fiction. Had  I had  time, I might have prepared  for you a set of  statistics to show that  the  representative hero of Canadian fiction has a  university degree or its  equivalent,   and  that   the  representative  setting  for  Canadian fiction  is one which  links the  action  directly  or indirectly  to an  institution  of higher learning. What  I  have  been  able  to  do is to gather  a  few  biographical  facts about  our authors.
Observe the common denominators  in family background  and education. Hugh
MacLennan, the son of a surgeon, was educated first at Halifax Academy, then at Dalhousie University where he was winner of the Governor-General's Gold Medal and  where he took his B.A. in  I929. As a Rhodes Scholar he attended  Oriel Col­ lege, Oxford,  where he took his M.A. in I932. He went next to Princeton, where he became M.A. squared  and where he took his Ph.D. in I935· He was a Guggen­ heim  Fellow in  I943-44  and  is currently  a Professor of English  at  McGill  Uni­ versity and  an  Associate Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. Morley Callag­ han  took his B.A. at St. Michael's  College, Toronto,  in  I925 and  later attended
Law School at Osgoode  Hall.  E. J. Pratt,  the son of a clergyman,  is E. J. Pratt,
c.M.G.,  M.A., PH.D.,  D.LITT., D.c.L.,  LL.D., F.R.s.c.,   and   Professor  Emeritus  at Victoria  University,  Toronto. F. R. Scott, the son of Archdeacon  F. G. Scott and the  grandson  of Professor  Scott  who for forty years taught  anatomy  at  McGill University, is F. R. Scott, LL.D., B.A., B.LITT.,  B.C.L., F.R.s.c. He too was a Rhodes Scholar  and  attended Magdalen  College, Oxford.  He  has been  a High  School teacher  and  a teacher  at Bishop's and  at Lower Canada College. He is currently Macdonald Professor  of Law  and  Dean,  McGill  University.  Robertson  Davies, the son of Senator  William  Rupert  Davies, was educated  at Upper  Canada Col­ lege, Queen's  University,  and  Balliol College, Oxford,  where he took his B.Litt. He  is to be  the  first  Master  of Massey House,  the new graduate  centre  at  the University  of Toronto. Earl  Birney, PH.D., F.R.s.c.,  pursued  higher  education  at the  universities of British  Columbia,  Toronto,  California  and  London,  and  has been  a  scholar  and  teacher  all  the  days of his working  life.  Dorothy  Livesay, journalist  and  social  worker,  attended  Glen  Mawr  school in  Toronto and  took her  B.A. at  Trinity   College,  Toronto,  in  I93I. She took her  Diplome  d'etudes superieures  at  the  Sorbonne   in  1932  and  then   returned to  the  University  of

THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK



Toronto to  complete her  studies  in  the  social  sciences  in  1934. She  is currently a lecturer in  creative  writing  on the staff  of the  Department of Extension  at  the University of British  Columbia. A. M.  Klein  took  his B.A. at  McGill  University in  1930, studied for  a time  to become  a rabbi, then  took  a degree  in law  at  the Universite de  Montreal in  1933. A. J. M.  Smith, M.A., PH.D.,  n.LITT.,  has  been for many  years Professor of English  at Michigan State  College.  I note that  besides being  a poet,  Professor  Smith  is our foremost  anthologist and  therefore in a sense the  custodian of our  poetic  tradition. James Reaney holds  an  M.A. degree  from the  University of Toronto and  has been  a  university professor  all the  days of his working  life. Mazo  de Ia Roche,  the descendant of United Empire Loyalist  stock and   the  daughter of  a  professor  of  classics and  letters  at  Baltimore University, was educated at  Parkdale Collegiate  Institute and  at  the  University of Toronto. Ethel   Wilson  was  educated at  private  schools  in  England and  Vancouver and attended the  provincial Normal  School  in  that  city. She  was a teacher for some years prior  to her  marriage in 1920 to Dr. Wilson.  There is more of the same,  but I think  the pattern is plain.
There is no law  which  says that  a  university  man  cannot have,  as a writer,  a feeling  for  class. Scott  Fitzgerald and  many  of his fellow  writers  of the  twenties were  graduates of one or other  of the  Ivy League universities. Yet surely  there  is something unusual and,  I  think,  even  alarming in  the  overwhelming uniformity of the  picture I have  presented. In  most cases the  formative years, to say nothing of entire  lives, have  been spent in academic circles. T. S. Eliot, in his introduction to  the  Cresset  Press  edition   of  Huckleberry Finn, has  this  to  say  about  Mark Twain's grip  upon  his subject:
There  are, perhaps, only two ways in which a writer can acquire  the understanding of environment which  he can  later  turn  to account:  by having  spent  his  child­ hood  in  that  environment-that is, living in it at  a  period  of life in  which  one experiences  much  more than  one is aware  of;  and  by having  had  to struggle for a livelihood  in that  environment-a livelihood  bearing  no direct  relation  to any intention  of writing about it, of using it as literary material.

I believe this to be true.  For  the great  bulk of Canadian writers  the environments of childhood and  of "the  struggle  for a living" are  uniform in kind; professional, relatively  well-to-do, "genteel", above  all, academic. Is one  to expect  from  these closed,   circumspect  and   intellectually  sophisticated  ranks   a  dynamic  view  of society?  It is not  surprising that  our  literature lies all one  way,  and  it is not sur­ prising  that  within  this literature the  concepts of class are  dim  and  the  response to the  problem of individual freedom  within  the social structure negligible.

THE DODO  AND THE CRUISING AUK



If it  is not  surprising, it  is, for  me  at  least,  deeply  disturbing. The  dead  cold air,  the  uniformity of assumptions, the lack of commitment are  oppressive.  I am not  here  concerned specifically  with  the  way out  of the  wasteland, but  in so far as the  way out  is implicit  in all that  I have said  you will see that  the  path  I look to is a different path  from  the  one  favoured  by radical  sociologists like Professor Porter. I am  not  interested in  what  the  sociologists call  "class  abatement";  we shall  always  have  classes in the  broad  sense in which  I have  understood the term, and  I am  content that   this  should  be so. I think  the  heart  of the  matter is the question  of  individual liberty   and  of  the  vital  relation   which   the  principle of individual liberty  must  always  bear  to  the  life of a  democratic nation. It is not the  reinforcing of  the  class struggle  that  is wanted, not  the  triumph of the  pro­ letariat nor  of  John Birch  societies,  for  this  would  simply  be  to  substitute  one form  of fixed  response  for  another. It is rather  turbulence that  is  needed-the kind  of  turbulence that  encompasses the  whole  of the  social  mosaic  and  in  the end  makes  possible  within  it  that  freedom   of  choice  and  of  movement for  the individual which,  from  a secular  point  of view, is the  best  means  open  to us of enabling him  to  realize  the  creative   potential within  him. The station   to which it has pleased  God  to call us is not always the station  to which  it has pleased  man to  call  us.  We  have  an  obligation to  debate  perpetually the  credentials of  the social plan.
I doubt   whether the  opening up  of the  routes  to  higher  education, as we at present   conceive  of  higher  education, is the  panacea. Professor  Porter seems  to think  it is. Ezra  Pound, rallying  American writers  of the twenties  to take  a stand against the  political  and  social  platitudes of the  Old  Gang in  this  period  of low ebb  in the  nation's life, diagnosed the difficulty  in plain  terms: "Anemia of guts on  the  one  hand," he said,  "and anemia  of education on the  other." I mistrust our  universities.  I mistrust, from  the  point  of view of literary  criticism,  the  mob they  house  of gentlemen who  write  with  ease, who are cosmopolitan and  urbane to  the  last  drop  of sherry  that flows in their  veins. I mistrust,  from  the  student's point  of  view,  the  levelling  and  debilitating effects of our  universities.  In  their growing  role as a fifth  estate  of the  realm,  they seem to me to be creating a new and  pernicious dimension to  the  problem  of the  class structure. I mistrust  their hold  upon  writers  and  writing  in  this  country. The  fault  is not  of course  in the nature of  the  institutions themselves,  but  in  how  we conceive  of them.  I merely think  that  aspiring writers,  for  the  time  being  at  least,  would  be well advised  to stay  away  from  them.  The  present  state  of our  society considered, I think  a  por­ tion  at  any  rate  of those  who intend  to write in Canada would  do better  to learn

THE DODO AND THE CRUISING AUK



elsewhere what  they need to know about  life, and, in their spare  time, as Whit­
man  demanded, "go freely with powerful uneducated persons."
I  shall end  as I  began, with  metaphor. About  a  year  ago I saw a television play  based  on  the  death  of  the  Avro-Arrow  project,  and  the  title of the  play was The  Day  of  the  Dodo. The  Americans  have  their  eagle;  our  emblem  may well  be  the  wingless, flightless Dodo.  We,  and  especially our  writers since it is theirs to make as much as it is to reflect the national  will, must get off the ground. And  the beauty  of it is that  the kind of wings we need are made at the sole cost of  the  mind  and  heart.  Energy  and  a  positive  thrust  to  the  imagination  can accomplish  all.  We  can  become  at  least  a  cruising  auk,  the  cruising  auk  that George  Johnston's Mr.  Murple  saw:  " a  splendid  auk/Flying across the sky." Can you not see him?

Surely his eye belittles our despair, Our unheroic mornings, afternoons Disconsolate in the echo-laden air­ Echoes of trumpet noises, horses' hooves.

Splendid, however, we can Rejoice in him, cruising there: He is our uncle and lo,
0 Mr. Murple, 0 beloved friends, Airborne!
















20



The Writer's World (1)

THE WAR, CHAVERIM AND AFTER





Mordecai Richter









ONE SATURDAY MORNING Duddy took me to Eaton's. In­ stead  of trying  to lift stuff in the  toy department we went  directly  to Lingerie and when  nobody  was looking  darted into  a hall with changing rooms.  Duddy pushed  open  a door  just in time  for us to gawk at a gorgeous girl stooping to snuggle  into a black  lace  brassiere.  A fat  saleslady  let out  a shriek.
"I was only  looking  for  my Aunt  Ettie," Duddy  whined, retreating.
The  saleslady  snatched Duddy by the arm.  "I'm going  to get  the manager and have  you sent  to reform  school  for life. Filthy  things!"
"Aunt Ettie," Duddy hollered. "Oh, let them go," the girl said.
"This one's  been here before,  you know." "AUNT ETTIE!"
Doors inched  open,  outraged women  glared  at us. Duddy  stepped on the sales­ lady's   foot  and   we  were  off,  scooting  between   shoppers, and  flying  down  the escalator. Outside, Duddy said,  "Did  you see her bazooms, but?  What a handful!" We  found  some  butts,  lit  up,  and  went  to the  mountain to search  for  couples
in  the  bushes.  "Everybody's doin'  it,  doin'  it,"  Duddy  sang.  "Pickin' their  nose
and  chewin' it,  chewin' it."  He  told  me  that  once  he had  found a couple  stuck together, just like dogs,  and  had  had  to summon a St. John's ambulance man  to get  a kettle  of boiling  water  to  break  them  apart. I didn't believe  him.

21

THE  WAR,CHAVERIM AND AFTER



Duddy  hated  Mr.  Blumberg, our fourth  grade  teacher  at the Talmud Torah. One  day  he  looked  up  Blumberg's  address  in  the  telephone  book  and  led  me through  the snow to his house. While I waited,  my heart  thumping, Duddy  peed in Blumberg's  letterbox,  rang  the bell, and  ran  off.
Blumberg was a militant Zionist.
"How   did  we get  arms  for  Eretz?  Why,  we  bought  them  from  the  British. We'd  pretend  somebody was dead, fill a coffin with rifles, and bury it against ... the right moment."
If we responded  to this tale of cunning  with yawns or maybe two fingers held
up  to signify disbelief, it was not that  we weren't  impressed.  It  was simply that Blumberg,  a  refugee from  Poland,  heaped  a vengeful  amount  of homework  on us and  we thrived  on putting  him down.  Blumberg fed us on frightening  stories of anti-semitic  outrages.  Life would  be sour  for  us. We were doomed  to suffer the  malice  of  the  gentiles. But  I  wasn't  scared  because  I  had  no  intention  of becoming  a Jew  like Blumberg was, with a foolish accent,  an eye for a bargain, and  a habit,  clearly unsanitary, of licking his thumb  before turning  a page of the Aufbau. I was a real Canadian and could understand  people not liking Blumberg, maybe  even finding  him funny. So did I. Blumberg  had  lived in Palestine for a while and  despised the British army. I didn't. How could I? In Which We  Serve was in its  umpteenth  week at  the Orpheum. Cousins and  uncles were with  the Canadian army in Sussex, training for the invasion.
War.
"Praise  the  Lord,"  my father  sang, demanding more baked  beans, "and  pass the ammunition." My brother wore a Red Cross Blood Donor's badge. I collected salvage. At the Talmud  Torah  we gave up collecting hockey cards for the duration and  instead became experts on aircraft  recognition.  I learned  to tell a Stuka from a Spitfire.
One  of  the  first  to  enlist  was killed  almost  immediately.   Benjy  Trachtstein
joined the R.C.A.F. and the first time he went up with an instructor  in a Harvard trainer  the airplane  broke apart,  crashed on the outskirts of Montreal,  and  Benjy burned   to  death.  At  the funeral  my father  said,  "It's kismet, fate.  When  your time comes your time comes."
Mrs. Trachtstein went out of her mind  and  Benjy's father,  a grocer, became a withering  reproach  to everyone. "When  is your  black-marketeer of a son going to  join  up?"  he  asked one  mother  and  to another  he said,  "How  much  did  it cost you the doctor  to keep your boy out  of the army?"
We  began  to  avoid Trachtstein's grocery  the  excuse  being  he  never  washed


22

THE WAR, CHAVERIM AND  AFTER



his  hands any  more,  it  was  enough   to  turn  your  stomach to  take  a  pound   of cottage cheese from  him or to eat  a herring  he had  touched. It was also suspected that  Trachtstein was  the  one  who had  written  those anonymous letters  reporting other   stores  in  the  neighbourhood to  the  Wartime Prices  & Trade Board.  The letters   were  a  costly  nuisance. An  inspector   always  followed   up  because  there could  be twenty  dollars  or maybe  even a case of whiskey in it for him.
Benjy's wasted  death was brandished at any boy on the street hot-headed enough to  want   to  enlist.  Still,  they  volunteered. Some  because   they  were  politically­ conscious,  others  because   boredom made  them  reckless. One  Saturday morning Gordie Roth, a  long  fuzzy-haired boy  with  watery  blue  eyes,  turned up  at  the Young   Israel   Synagogue  in  an  officer's  uniform:  his  father broke  down   and  sobbed  and  shuffled out  of shut without a word  to his son. Those  who had  elected to  stay  on  at  McGill, thereby  gaining an  exemption  from  military  service,  were insulted  by  Gordie's gesture. It was one  thing  for a  dental graduate to accept  a commission   in  the  medical corps,  something else  again  for  a  boy  to  chuck  law school  for  the  infantry. Privately   the  boys said  Gordie wasn't such  a  hero;   he had  been bound  to flunk out at McGill  anyway. Garber's boy, a psychology major, had  plenty   to  say  about the  death-wish. But  Fay  Katz   wrinkled   her  nose  and  laughed spitefully  at  him.  "You  know  what  that  is down  your  back," she said,  "a yellow stripe."
Mothers who  had  used to brag  about  their  children's health, making  any child­ hood  illness seem  a  shameful show  of weakness,  now  cherished nothing  in  their young so greedily  as flat feet, astigmatism, a heart  murmur, or a nice little rupture. After  a month in camp with  the university army  training corps my brother limped  home  with  raw  bleeding feet  and   jaundice.  A Sergeant  McCormick had  called him  a hard-assed kike.  "Why should  we fight for them, the fascists?"  my brother said.
"The poor boy, what  he's been through," my mother  said.
Hershey  had  a  brother overseas.  Arty's  American cousin  was in the marines. I
was bitterly  disappointed in my brother.
One   evening   my  father read  us an  item  from  the  front  page  of  the  Star.  A Luftwaffe  pilot,  shot  down   over  London, had  been  given  a  blood  transfusion. "There you  are,  old  chap," the  British  doctor  said.  "Now you've  got some good Jewish  blood  in  you."  My  father scratched his head  thoughtfully before  turning the  page  and  I  could  see that  he was pleased,  flattered.
Only  Tansky, the roite who ran the corner cigar & soda, questioned the integrity of Britain's war  effort.  Lots of ships were being sunk in the Battle  of the Atlantic,

THE WAR,CHAVERIM AND  AFTER



true,  but  how  many  people  knew  that  U-Boat commanders never  torpedoed  a ship  insured   by  Lloyd's  or  that  certain  German factories were  proof  against air raids,  because  of interlocking British directorships?
If Tansky was concerned about  capitalist treachery overseas the truth is French­ Canadians at  home  gave  us  much   more cause for   alarm.  Duplessis's Union Nationale  had  circulated a  pamphlet that  showed   a  coarse  old  Jew,  nose  long and  misshapen as a carrot, retreating into the night  with sacks of gold. The caption suggested  that  Ikey ought  to go back to Palestine. Mr. Blumberg, our fourth grade  teacher  at  the  Talmud Torah, agreed. "There's only  one  place  for a Jew.  Eretz.  But  you  boys are  too soft. You know  nothing about  what  it is to be a Jew."
Our   principal was  a  Zionist  of a  different order. His  affinities  were  literary. Ahad  Ha-am, Bialik, Buber.  But I managed to graduate from  the Talmud Torah uncontaminated. In  fact  I  doubt   that   I ever  would   have  become  a  Zionist  if not for Jerry.
Jerry, who  was  in  my  classroom  at  Baron  Byng  High  School,  ignored  me for
months. Then, on  the day our report  cards  came  out,  he joined me by the lockers, bouncing a mock punch  off my shoulder. "Congrats," he said.
I looked baffied.
"Well, you're  rank  two, aren'cha?"
Jerry  represented everything I admired. He wore a blazer  with JERRY printed in  gold  letters  across  his broad  back  and  there  was a hockey  crest sewn  over  his heart. He  had  fought  in the Golden  Gloves for  the  Y.M.H.A. and  he was a high scorer  on  our  school  basketball team.  Whenever Jerry   began  to  dribble shiftily down  the  centre  court  the girls would  squeal, leap  up,  and  shout,
X2,  Y2,  H2 S04,
Themistocles, Thermopylae, the Peloponnesian  War,
One-two-three-four, Who are we for- JERRY, OLD  BOY!

Jerry   went  in  for  rakishly  pegged  trousers  and  always  carried condoms  in  his billfold.
"How would  you like to come down  to Habonim with  me tonight? If you like it, maybe  you'll  join."
"Sure," I said.
The   Habonim meeting  house  was on  Jeanne Mance Street, not  far  from  my grandfather's house,  and  I recalled  that  on  Friday nights  the  old  man  glowered as the  chaverim passed, singing. The  fact  that  it was shabus, however,  was all that

24

THE  WARJCHAVERIM AND  AFTER



restrained my  grandfather from  calling  the  police  to  protest  against   the  racket the  chaverim kicked  up.  My grandfather was uncompromisingly orthodox. Turn­ ing  on  lights,  tearing paper, were  both  forbidden on  the sabbath. So late  Friday afternoon one  of  my  aunts   tore  up  enough   toilet  paper  to  see out  shabus. One  of  my  uncles  had   devised  a  Rube   Goldberg apparatus,  the  key  part  of  which was  a  string  attached to  a  clock  that  turned off the  toilet  and  hall  lights  when the alarm  sounded at midnight.
Now  I would  have  to risk passing the house with the others. Shoving, throwing snowballs,  teasing  the girls, singing.
Pa'am achas  bochur ya'za,  bochur v'bachura....
Jerry, chewing on  a  matchstick, picked  me  up  after  supper and  on  the  way we called  for  Hershey and  Stan. I was flattered that  Jerry  had  come  to my house first, and  in  the  guise  of telling  him  what  fun  Hershey  and  Stan  were,  I let him understand that   I was  a  much  more  desirable  boy to have  for  a friend.
Walking to  Habonim with  Jerry, Hershey,  and  Stan, became a  Friday  night
ritual  that  was  to  continue unbroken through four  years of high  school.









ing home.
 TE WAR WAS DONE. Cousins  and  uncles  were gradually com-

"What was it like over there?" "An  education."
We  read  in  the  Star  that  in  Denver  a veteran  had  run  amok  and  shot  people down  in the  street; the  ReaderJs Digest  warned us not to ask too many  questions, the  boys had  been  through hell;  but  on St.  Urbain Street  the  boys took off their uniforms, bought new  suits,  and  took  up  where  they had  left off.
IS  HITLER  REALLY DEAD? was what  concerned us all. That, and  an end
to wartime shortages. These  were rapidly  overcome.  Sugar, coffee, and  gas, came off the  ration list. The  Better  Business Bureau  warned  housewives  not to buy soap or combs from  cripples  who claimed  to be disabled  veterans. An intrepid reporter walked   the  length   of  Calgary's main  street  in  an  S.S.  uniform  without  being stopped once.  HAVE WE  FORGOTTEN WHAT THE BOYS  DIED FOR? he  wanted to  know.  Ted   Williams  was safe, so was Jimmy   Stewart. McKenzie King  wrote,  "It affords  me much  pleasure  both  personally  and  as Prime  Minister to  add  a  word  of tribute to  the  record  of the  services  of Canadian Jews  in  the

THE WAR, CHAVERlM AND AFTER



armed  forces  in the  recent  war." Nice, very nice.  Pete  Grey,  the  Toronto Maple Leafs'  one-armed  player,  was  made  a  free  agent.  A  returning veteran took  his place  in the  outfield.
Harry, our  group leader  in Habonim, had  been  in the  R.C.A.F., where  it had
been  his  job  to  show  returned fighter   pilots  the  combat films  they  had  taken. Each   time  a  pilot  fired  his guns,  Harry explained, a  camera in  the  wings  took pictures. This   way  it  could  be  established   if  a  pilot's  claim   to  a  kill was  true. Some  of  the  films,  he said,  showed  enemy  aircraft bursting into  flames.  But on the  flight  home  most of the  pilots swooped  low over  German streets  to shoot  up cyclists for sport.  These  films would  end  abruptly- just as the  cyclists crumpled.
Hershey's father, gone into  the war  a scrap  dealer, a rotund good-natured man whose  sporting life had  once  been  confined  to cracking peanuts in  the  bleachers at  Sunday afternoon double-headers, now  flew  Army  Ordnance Corps  colonels and  their  secretaries by chartered airplane to his hunting and  fishing cabin  on a lake  in northern Quebec. He  emerged  as a leading  dealer  in army  surplus  trucks, jeeps, and  other  heavy equipment. Hershey's family  moved  to Outremont.
Duddy Kravitz drifted  away  from  us too.  Calling himself  Victory  Vendors he bought four  peanut machines and  set  them  up  on  what   he  had  clocked  as  the busiest  corners  in the  neighbourhood.
Jerry  and  I became  inseparable, but  his father terrified  me.
"You   know  what  you  are," Jerry's father was  fond  of saying.  "Your father's mistake."
Jerry's father was  a  widower-a wiry  grey-haired man  with  mocking  black eyes. He  astonished me because  he didn't eat  kosher  and  he drank. Not  a quick little  schnapps with  honey  cake,  head  tossed back  and  eyes immediately tearing, like my father and  the other  men  at the synagogue  when  there  was a bar-mitzvah.
-This is quality stuff;  the best.
-It warms  you right here.
-Smooth.
Jerry's father drank  Black Horse  Ale, bottle  after  bottle.  He  settled  in sullenly at  the  kitchen   table,   his  smile  morose,  and suddenly he'd   call  out,  "Pull  my finger!" If you did  he let out  a tremendous burp. Jerry's father could  fall asleep at   the   table,   mouth open,   a  cigarette burning  between   his  stubby   blackened fingers. Sometimes he sat with  us on Saturday nights  to listen to the hockey broad­ casts.  He  was  a Canadien fan.  "You  can't beat  the  Rocket  or  Duman  when  the chips   are   down.   They're money   players,   real money  players-Hey,  here  it comes."   He   lifted   himself  gently  off  his  chair.  "SBD."  A  self-satisfied  pause.

THE WAR,CHAVERIM AND  AFTER



"Know what  that  means,  kid?"
Jerry, holding his nose, went  to open  a window. "Silent but  deadly."
Jerry's father ridiculed Habonim.
"So,  little  shmedricks, what  are  you gonna  do? Save  the  Jews?  Any  time  the
Arabs  want  they  can  run  them  into  the  sea."
On  the occasional Friday night  I was allowed  to stay overnight at Jerry's house and  the  two  of us would  sit up late  and  talk about  Eretz.
"I can  hardly wait to go," Jerry  said.
I can  no  longer  remember much  about  our group  meetings  on  Fridays or the impassioned general  meetings  on Sunday afternoons. I can  recall catch-words, no more.  Yishuv,  White  Paper, emancipation, Negev, revisionist,  Aliya.  Pierre  Van Paasen was our  trusted  ally;  Koestler,  since Thieves in the  Night, was despicable. Following our  group meetings  we all clambered down  to the damp cellar  to join the  girls  and  dance  the  hora. I seldom  took part, prefering to puff  at  my newly­ acquired pipe  on  the  sidelines  and  watch  Gitel's  breasts  heave.  Afterwards we spilled  exuberantly onto  the street  and  usually went on to one of  the girls'  houses to  dance to  the  music  of  Sammy Kaye  and  Arty  Shaw. Spike  Jones  was  very big  with  us;  so were  Frank Sinatra, Danny Kaye,  and  the  Andrew  Sisters.
On  Saturdays we  listened   to speeches  about  soil redemption and  saw  movies
glorifying  life on the  kibbutz. All of us planned to settle in Eretz. "What's there  for  a Jew  here?  Balls all squared."
"Did  you  hear   about Jack  Zimmerman's brother? He  came   third   in  the province in  the  matrics and   they  still  won't let  him  into  pre-med school."
Early  Sunday mornings we were out  ringing  doorbells  for the  Jewish  National Fund,  shaking tin   boxes  under  uprooted sleepy  faces,  righteously demanding quarters, dimes,  and   nickels  that   would   help  reclaim  the  desert,  buy  arms  for Hagana and,  incidentally, yield thirty-five  cents each off the top-enough for the matinee at the Rialto. We licked envelopes  at Zionist headquarters. Our choir sang at  fund-raising rallies.  And   in  the  summertime those  among us who  were  not working  as waiters  or shippers went  to a camp  in a mosquito-ridden Laurentian valley, heard more speakers,  studied  Hebrew and, in the absence of Arabs, watched out  for  fishy-looking   French-Canadians. Our   unrivalled  hero  was  the  chalutz, and  I can  still see him  as he stood on the cover of God knows how many pamph­ lets, clear-eyed, resolute,  a rifle slung over his shoulder  and  a sickle in his hand.
After  the  meeting  one  Friday night  Jerry  pulled  me aside.  "If my father calls tell him I'm staying  over at your house tonight."

27

THE WAR, CHAVERIM AND  AFTER



"Sure," I said,  delighted,  and  I offered to invite Hershey,  Stan,  and  some of the  others  over for a poker game.  Then,  looking into Jerry's  apprehensive  face, I suddenly  understood. "Oh. Oh,  I get you," I said. "Where you going, but?"
Jerry  put  a finger to his lips, he gave me a poke. For  the first time I noticed Selma  walking slowly and satisfied ahead  of us down  the street. She stopped  to stare into a store window.
"Go to hell," I said vehemently to Jerry, surprising myself. "You'll  do it, but."
"Sure,  sure," I said, hurrying off in the opposite direction.
Selma  was reputed  to be hot  stuff-crazy  for it-but  all I saw was a shy dark  girl  with  long  blue  black  hair,  a manner  that  was somewhat  withdrawn, and the loveliest breasts imaginable.
"You  know  what  she told me,"  Hershey said,  "She  broke it  jumping  over a fire hydrant  when she was a kid. Oi."
Even  Arty,  who  was as short  as me with  worse pimples, claimed  to have sat through  The   ]olson Story three  times with  Selma.
One  Friday,  having  managed  to walk all the  way to Habonim  without  once stepping  on  a sidewalk crack, I  asked Selma  to come to a dance  with  me. But she said she was busy.


0N  THE  NIGHT of Nov. 29, 1947,  after  the UN  approved the partition  plan,  we gathered  at Habonim  and  marched  downtown  in a group,
waving  Israeli  flags, flaunting  our  songs in  Anglo-Saxon  neighbourhoods, stop­ ping  to blow horns and pull down streetcar  wires, until we reached  the  heart  of the city where, as I remember it, we faltered briefly-embarrassed, self-conscious
-before we put a stop to traffic by forming  defiant circles and dancing  the hora in the middle of the street.
"Who am I?" "YISROAL." "Who are you?" "YISROAL." "All of us?"
"YISRO-YISRO-YISROAL."
Our  group leaders, as well as several of the older chaverim, went off to fight for
Eretz.  And  in  the  febrile days  that  followed  the  proclamation of  the  State  of

THE WAR,CHAVERIM AND  AFTER



Israel  we gathered nightly  at  Habonim to discuss developments in  Eretz  and  at home.  A distinguished Jewish  doctor  was invited  to address the  Canadian Club. To  the astonishment of the community, the doctor said that  though he was Jewish he was, first of all, a Canadian. Israel,  he said,  would  make  for divided  loyalties, and  he was against the establishment of the new state. The Star  printed the com­ plete text of the doctor's speech.
-If Ben Gurion speaks  maybe  they can fit in a paragraph on page  thirty-two, but  if that  shmock  opens  his lousy mouth....
Punitive action  came  quickly.  The  editor  of the Canadian   jewish Eagle wrote
that  the Star  of David  will long outlast  the Star of Montreal. We collected  money door-to-door so that  A. M. Klein  could  reply to the doctor  on the  radio. We also, I'm sorry to say, took to phoning the doctor  at all hours of the night, shouting ob­ scenities  at  him,   and   hanging up.  We  sent  taxis,  furniture removers, and  fire engines  to  his door ... then, as one  event  tumbled  so urgently  over  another, we forgot   him.   Harry,  we  heard, had   been  interned   in  Cyprus.  Lennie, another chaver, was a captain in the army.
One   day  we  opened   our  newspapers and  read  that  Buzz  Beurling, Canada's most  glamorous war  ace,  had   joined  the  Israeli  air  force.  At  Habonim it  was whispered   yes, it's  true,  but  the  price  was a thousand dollars  a  month. We  had outbid the  arabs.
Beurling  never  got as far  as Eretz.  His fighter  plane  crashed near  Rome. Abruptly, our  group began  to disintegrate. We had  finished  high  school. Some
of  the  chaverim actually went  to  settle  in  Eretz,  others  entered university,  still
more  took   jobs.  We  made new  friends,  found  fresh  interests. Hershey   entered McGill. My marks  weren't high  enough  and  I had  to settle  for  the  less desirable Sir  George  Williams  College.  Months later  I ran into Hershey at  the Cafe  Andre. He  wore  a  white  sweater   with  a  big  red  M  on it and  sat  drinking beer  with  a robust  bunch of blond  boys and  girls. Thumping the  table,  they sang  loudly

If all the girls were like rabbits,
and I was a hare I'd  teach them bad habits.

My  companions were  turning out  a  little  magazine. I had   written my  first poem.  Hershey   and  I waved  at  each  other,  embarrassed. He  didn't come  to my table,  I didn't go to his.



BRIAN MOORE





Nairn Kattim










LF.s PRINCIPAUX  PRRSONNAGRS d"quatre  romam de Brian Moore sont  lrlandais. Que  !'intrigue se  deroule a  Montreal, comme  dans  The Luck  of Ginger Coffey,  a  New  York,  comme dans  An  Answer  from Limbo, ou
a Belfast, comme dans ses deux premiers ouvrages:  judith  Hearne et The  Feast of Lupercal, !'atmosphere demeure la meme  car  elle ne  tire  pas ses caracteristiques des  elements exterieurs. II s'agit  plutot  d'une certaine vision  du  monde  et  d'un
ensemble d'attitudes  envers  les evenements, les  hommes et  la  societe  ambiante. Et  c'est  cela  qui  donne  a l'univers de  Moore son  unite  et  a  ses romans un  sens
de  continuite malgre  les peregrinations de  ses heros.
Tous  les personnages principaux de Moore  ont  connu  la securite de l'enracine­ ment. lis  sont  nes  dans  une  societe  ordonnee avec  ses conventions, ses lois et ses traditions. Plus  tard,   ils supportent mal  le  poids  de  ce  cadre bien  delimite. lis etouffent au sein d'un groupe qui, a force de les accabler de son esprit communau­ taire  et  quasi  tribal, finit  par  etrangler tous  leurs  elans. Voila  le leitmotiv qu'on retrouve dans  tous  les romans  de  Moore.
Judith Hearne pour  qui la religion est une  assurance, eprouve le drame de l'enracinement  defaillant, de  la  terre  qui  lui  glisse sous les pieds.  Si elle  perd  la foi,  elle  perd  aussi  cette  grande chaleur du  foyer  nourricier, quelque despotique qu'il soit.

Si on ne croit pas, on est seul. Moi, j'etais d'lrlande, au milieu des miens, membre de mon  Eglise. Maintenant je n'ai plus la foi -et sans foi, pas de prochain.  Non, non,  je n'ai  pas  renonce.  Je  ne peux  pas.  Parce  que  si j'abandonne cela,  je suis obligee d'abandonner toutle reste.

BRIAN MOORE



Dans  ce premier roman on voit deja  se profiler un autre genre  d'Irlandais non mains   typique, James  Madden,  l'expatrie errant qui  a  voulu  s'affranchir d'un pays ou "taus les reves etaient calculables", mais qui n'a  trouve dans le New York Iibre  qu'un monde  de  durete et,  comble  de  paradoxe, d'irrealite, monde  dont  Ia seule force tient  dans  Ia puissance des reves qu'il  suscite.


II se rappelait New York, il se rappelait qu'a dix heures et demie du matin l'enorme agglomeration  vibrait  deja sous !'effort de millions d'etres  en train  de faire des for­ tunes,  des  reputations, des  constructions, toutes  les affaires,  toutes  les  astuces imaginables.  Alors que  lui, il  tra!nait  dans  une  ville  morne  et  bete  ou  les gens faisaient  de !'argent comme  les bonnes lavent  les parquets,  betement, seuls, a une allure de corbillard.


II a toujours porte  en lui son  Irlande natale. Et au  terme  d'une existence  faite d'une suite  ininterrompue  d'echecs, il est de  retour  au  pays. Des lors, New  York redevient le domaine lointain et proche  ou tout est possible puisque  dans le second exil, celui du  retour au  pays natal, Ia metropole accablante recouvre  ses sortileges et, perdant toute  attache avec Ia realite,  redevient  le royaume radieux de !'illusion, du  possible et du reve.
C'est  le meme  monde ferme, Ia meme societe repliee sur elle-meme, impitoyable a l'egard de tous ceux  qui  transgressent ses lois, qu'on retrouve dans  The Feast of Lupercal. L'Irlande que  connait Diarmuid Devine, est ce pays "ou  les protestants representent le  monde hostile,  ce sont  eux,  avec  leurs  noms  anglais  et  ecossais, qui  tiennent les  renes  du  pouvoir  et  qui  vous  refusent   un  emploi  quand  vous declinez  le nom  de !'ecole  ou  vous avez fait  vos etudes."
lis  ne  connaissent que  deboires  les heros de  Moore  qui  tentent le grand saut, traversent !'ocean  pour   vivre  au  large,  dans les  vastes horizons   du  Nouveau Monde. Ginger  Coffey  ne tarde pas a decouvrir que le Canada ou il emigre  n'est pas  uniquement Ia  terre  de  l'avenir et  de  Ia fortune mais  aussi  un  pays  dur  ou lui,  un  etranger, se  rend  chaque jour  compte  qu'il  est irlandais et  que  les pays lointains ne sont  que  le vaste  empire  des virtualites,  des contingences, des realisa­ tions  futures et  possibles,  du  moment qu'on n'en  foule  pas  le sol et  qu'on n'en  hume  pas I'air glacial ou torride.


Tout  le monde  est tellement  presse ici, on vous pousse de tous les cotes. Les Cana­ diens n'ont  pas de manieres.  Pays dru, glacial, avec ses hommes cupides, arrivistes, qui saisissent tout  ce qui  leur tombe entre les mains et vous repoussent. Pays plein de promesses! A d'autres.

BRIAN   MOORE



C'est  a  New  York  que  la  mere  de  Brendan Tierney, fraichement debarquee d'Irlande, dans   An  Answer   from  Limbo, se  demande  comment il se fait  qu'a New York "seuls ces pauvres et indesirables immigrants, prisonniers de leur langue et de leurs coutumes etrangeres, ont  une vie avec  le sens reel de la communaute." Moore  n'a  pas  fait  de l'Irlande un  vert  paradis de l'enfance ou !'innocence et
la purete sont  des qualites  communes et non  des vertus  inaccessibles.  La distance qui  le separe  des scenes familieres  de son adolescence n'est  pas si grande pour  que la nostalgie  vienne  embelleir  sa  jeunesse passee et l'amener a releguer  une societe ecrasante au  role d'un  simple omement et la transformer en  un scintillant decor. S'il  existe  une  realite  irresistible  dans  l'reuvre  de  Moore  c'est  bien  celle de  cette Irlande ambivalente, situee  a egale  distance entre la  chaude securite  et l'aveugle certitude. Tous  les personnages  qui  tentent de s'en  echapper ne tardent pas  a se rendre  compte qu'aussi enserres  qu'ils   aient   ete  a  l'interieur de  leurs  pesantes frontieres, les murs   protecteurs de  leur  societe  les empechaient de  se trouver en face de leur solitude. Leur  petit  monde  abondait en maintes consolations. A force de se bercer  dans  l'espace  restreint  d'un ordre rigoureux et de conventions rigides, ils reussissaient  a ecarter au-dela  de leur  horizon  la terrifiante menace de !'aliena­ tion.  IIs  n'etaient pas  assaillis alors  par  la  realite   de  leur  denuement  et  par  la conscience  de la fragilite  de leurs moyens de defense.
Dans  un moment de lucidite, le heros de The Feast of Lupercal, Devine,  parlant d'un autre   Irlandais, s'exclame  avec  severite:  "II  est  comme  de  tas  d'Irlandais que  je connais. II  pretend  qu'il  est un  Celte  dechaine mais  il est terrifie  par  ses voisins  et  ne  ferait  rien qu'ils  n'approuveraient."






BERCES  PAR    LA   MONOTONIE  des  rites  sociaux   dont   ils  ne mettent en doute  le bien-fonde que  dans  les moments de crise, les personnages de Moore   ignorent la  solitude  fonciere  dont  leur  destin  est  charge, solitude qu'ils reussissent  parfois  a  apprivoiser par  l'oubli. IIs n'ont jamais  la  temerite de  pro­ darner leur  revolte  car  ils ressentent  profondement le  poids  de  leur  mediocrite. Ne  possedant que  peu  de ressources interieures, ils savent  qu'a l'exterieur de leur coquille  protectrice ils se trouveraient dans  une  terrifiante et  inexorable detresse.  Ou  puiseraient-ils l'energie de crier leur refus, de faire entendre leur  protestation? judith Hearne  est un recit direct  et peu complexe. La mediocrite du personnage principal  eclate   telle  une  evidence.  C'est  l'exemple  parfait de !'anti-heros dont

32

BRIAN MOORE



abonde le  roman moderne. La  vie morne,  la desolation  de  Judith  Hearne sont inscrites  sur  son  visage.  Elle  a  toujours  vecu  en  serre  chaude. Son  existence  est faite  de  l'alternance entre  le malheur et  la  resignation. Son  denuement est total des qu'elle perd  graduellement toutes ses certitudes, des qu'elle  decouvre !'illusion et la vanite  de ses espoirs.  La foi, l'illusoire  amitie  d'une famille  qui  lui entrouvre ses portes  par  simple  charite, s'evanouissent et  la  laissent  dans  l'abandon. 11 lui reste  une  passion  secrete: la  boisson.  Comment eviter,  cependant, !'humiliation de perdre contenance, de se departir de son masque  de respectabilite et de dignite? Elle ressent la veritable irrealite de toutes ses assurances. Son petit monde s'ecroule. Une   rencontre la  sort  de  son  engourdissement, de sa  resignation a  cette  vie de seconde  zone. James Madden, cet lrlandais qui a vecu la realite  du  reve dans  un New  York  impitoyable et qui  est revenu  a la  ville de son  enfance, est  prodigue en details  sur ses succes et sur  la grandeur de !'Amerique. Judith Hearne a pense qu'il  l'aimait tandis que  lui  ne pensait  qu'a soutirer  les economies  de cette  vieille fille dessechee.  Elle s'accroche a cette  promesse de bonheur, a l'espoir  de se hisser au-dessus  de son inexorable mediocrite et ne realise que  plus durement  les dimen­ sions de son isolement.
Le  heros  de  The   Feast  of Lupercal, Devine,  est moule  dans  la  meme  forme. lnstituteur sans  prestige,   vieux  gar  on
monotonie d'une vie sans gout  et d'une existence au passe eta l'avenir indifferents quand l'amour passager  de la niece d'un de ses collegues suscite en lui le gout  du bonheur. Pourtant, a-t-il  le droit  d'echapper a sa mediocrite, lui  qui  n'en  a  pas la  force.  L'amour de  cette   jeune  fille  protestante, dont  le  passe  est  le sujet  de murmures et  de  chuchotements (n'avait-elle pas eu  une  aventure a Dublin avec un  homme   marie?)  et  de  ce catholique ne tarde  d'eclabousser la  tranquillite de cette  petite  societe.  Devine  etait   pret  a  la  braver.  Son  echec  n'est  pas  du  a  un manque de  courage mais  a sa secheresse interieure, au  tarissement de ses sources vitales.  11 a  tout   simplement perdu   !'habitude de  vivre.  Le  bonheur, l'amour l'ecrasent car  il  a  trop longtemps appris a  batir sa  demeure dans  le  vide  et l'absence. 11 etait  deja  vaincu. 11 ne  peut  pas satisfaire  l'amour de  la  jeune  fille qui  lui fait  don  de son corps.  Cette  crise, cette volonte  soudaine de bifurguer, de cheminer dans  une  voie inconnue, de suivre  le sillon de l'aventure, de faire  face a son destin,  d'opposer la temerite a son humiliante mediocrite, tout  cela finit  par le demasquer a lui-meme, impitoyablement.
Aux  ames  mal  nees, il n'y  a que  la resignation pour  partage. 11 n'a  meme  plus l'espoir  d'un bonheur possible  et son  humiliation n'en  est que  plus  lourde. 11 ne soffit pas d'avoir la volonte  et le courage de changer  pour  y arriver, il faut  posseder

33

BRIAN  MOORE



la force  de le faire.  Et puis, etait-ce  vraiment du  courage cette  impulsion aveugle de la passion?
Pour   modifier  son  destin  il faut  etre  en  possession de  soi.  C'est  le sens  de  la tentative avortee  de  Ginger  Coffey.  En  changeant d'espace, il essaie de  prendre en  main  son  destin.  Il croit  que  les des ne sont  pas  jetes une  fois pour  toutes  et que  les echecs  qu'il  a essuyes dans  sa  ville natale   n'ont   pas  definitivement  scelle son  avenir. Sous de nouveaux horizons,  il pourrait peut-etre effacer  un passe peu glorieux  et  par  de convaincantes preuves  de sucd:s,  faire  taire  le constant rappel de  sa  mediocrite passee et  presente.  Ceux  qui  revent  d'une terre  promise,  d'une realite  glorieuse  qui  redresserait  les torts  du  present  ne recoltent que  les fruits  de leurs  illusions.  Dans  cette  poursuite  d'une dignite a laquelle leur  faiblesse  ne leur permet pas d'aspirer, ils perdent, chemin  faisant, les demieres lueurs  d'espoir  qui leur  restaient en  meme  temps  que  le semblant de  respectabilite qu'ils  ont  reussi a sauvegarder.
Il  ne suffit pas de toumer le dos au  passe pour  devenir  maitre de l'avenir si on n'a  pas la force dele conquerir. C'est  au Canada que  Ginger  Coffey decouvre que sa  mediocrite est encore  plus profonde qu'il  ne pensait. Son  immigration est une tentative qui  lui  coute  cher  puisqu'elle se  solde  par  la  perte  de  l'amour de  sa femme et par  la desorientation de sa fille. Il apprend a son corps defendant la douloureuse le on
Il  n'y aura  pas de victoire pour  Ginger Coffey, ni grande  ni petite.... La vie fut elle-meme  la victoire, n'est-ce pas? Continuer, poursuivre,  fut  la victoire.





RR GINGER COFFEY  tout  autant que  pour  Judith Hearne, la reussite,  la conquete du destin  doivent  mener  a une  plus grande victoire: 1'acces­ sion  a  la  liberte.  C'est  un  bien  precieux  charge de  tous  les prestiges dont revent ceux  qui  veulent  echapper a  la  geole  de  leur  mediocrite et  qui  sont  prisonniers d'une  societe  dont   ils ne  partagent pas  les valeurs,  societe  qui  a  atteint un  tel niveau   de  petitesse  et  d'etroitesse qu'elle  ne  peut  meme   pas  offrir  !'illusion   de grandeur et  de  noblesse en  recompense a ceux  qui s'astreignent a suivre  sa dure  discipline  et ses tristes  rigueurs.  Rien  ne compense  leur  abandon de la liberte.
Aux  mediocres, a ceux qui ne peuvent  aspirer  au depassement, les murs qu'erige une  societe fermee  et sourcilleuse  dans  sa severite  leur servent  d'abri et de refuge. Au-dela du  mur,  de l'autre cote de la frontiere, la promesse  de liberte  se mue  en

34

BRIAN MOORE



une suite de deboires. Les fugitifs qui transgressent les lois rigides sont doublement demunis puisqu'ils perdent la chaleur  du foyer sans pour  cela  jamais s'affranchir. N'existe-t-il done  aucune issue, aucun espoir, pour  ceux  qui  ne sont  pas nes pour la  gloire  et  la  grandeur?  Peut-etre. A  condition qu'ils  acceptent au  depart d'y mettre le prix.  Et  d'abord il faut  qu'ils  acceptent lucidement !'hypothese que  la liberte  ne soit qu'une equation de !'illusion.  Les reveurs  qui se pressent  de quitter leur  ile de securite  et qui  prennent la route du depart afin que l"'ailleurs" lointain prenne   le visage  vivant  d'un monde  nouveau ne  tardent pas  a decouvrir que  le Nouveau Continent  est  plus  impitoyable que  leur  petit  monde. La  liberte  qu'il fait   miroiter  n'est   qu'une  monstrueuse illusion.  Le  petit   homme   frustre, ne  se contentant ni  de  l'exil  ni  du  depaysement, veut  se perdre dans  !'illusion, y faire corps  pour  la  transformer en  conquete. S'il  est ecrivain, la  liberte  ne lui semble pas hors d'atteinte. Par  la mediation des mots, elle est a sa portee.  Pour  la meriter, il  doit  immoler en  sacrifice  les dons  gratuits de  Ia vie des  communs: I'amour, l'amitie, les  petites  joies quotidiennes. Tout est subordonne a  cette  grande  con­ quete. Et  au  bout  du  compte, il faut  consentir  au  supreme sacrifice:  I'abandon du contact et de I'accord avec le reel.
Voila  l'aventure de  Brendan Tierney qui  finit  par  ne  plus  eprouver de senti­ ments  au  premier degre.  La  litterature devient  un  gouffre  et  tout  y  passe. Tout se  transforme en  matiere  premiere pour  cette  a:uvre   hypothetique.  Il  ne  peut meme  plus ressentir  la douleur de la perte de sa mere et de l'infidelite de sa femme.
Le  long  itineraire suivi  par  Moore  aboutit a cette  conclusion vieille comme  le monde: le seul  antidote a  la  mediocrite, le seul  remede  a  l'exil  et  a la  pression sociale,  c'est  l'art  pourvoyeur de  l'unique  depassement possible  et  qui  compte. Mais  c'est  sur  le ton  de !'interrogation et de !'hypothese que  Moore  enonce  cette idee.  Vaut-il la  peine  de  sacrifier  les  joies et  les bonheurs d'une vie identique a mille  autres   pour  une  liberte et  une  gloire  incertaines?
Pris  dans  l'engrenage de  leur  faiblesse fonciere  et de la conscience  qu'ils pren­ nent  de  leur  mediocrite, les  personnages de  Moore  ne sont  pas  assez  forts  pour  se revolter. Tout au plus leur est-il donne  de se cabrer. Leur  refus d'obeissance leur est  presque  impose  par  des circonstances exterieures. Leur  desir  de  liberation est precipite par  une  crise:  I'amour dans  les deux  premiers  romans, l'exil  dans  The  Luck   of Ginger  Coffey, !'exaltation litteraire dans  An  Answer   from  Limbo.
La  crise se prepare de  longue  date  avant d'eclater. Les heros de  Moore s'exa­ minent, s'analysent, se  jaugent. Ils font  le poids  de leur  reussite  et de leur echec. Ils  affectionnent les miroirs. L'image qui  s'y  reftete  c'est  le visage  de  l'autre, de l'etranger.  Cette   epreuve  du   regard   n'est   jamais   concluante,  elle  est  presque

35

BRIAN MOORE



toujours negative. Elle indique toutefois l'etat  second dans lequel evoluent ces personnages.  Membres d'un  groupe  minoritaire,  ils ont !'impression  que les yeux du monde entier sont braques sur eux et que chacun  de leurs gestes fait l'objet  de maintes deliberations. Une certaine formation  janseniste accentue cette propension a 1'examen  de conscience. Mais il y a plus:  Moore sait fort  bien que sans cette
disposition  a  contempler  le  reflet  de  leur  image,  ses personnages  ne  pourront
jamais  opposer  de  refus  a leur  destin.  Prototypes  de  l'anti-heros, ils peuvent
difficilement darner leur revolte encore moins en assumer les consequences.
Nous savons qu'ils vont ruer dans les brancards et qu'ils seront vaincus. Autre­ ment,  tout mediocres qu'ils soient ils auraient  eu conscience du tragique et un net sentiment  de l'absurdite  de leur condition. Moore n'a  pas la puissance de pousser aussi loin son investigation. Son ceuvre se situe sur un autre  plan:  celui du drame.  Pour  eviter les ficelles et les conventions du genre  et afin de ne pas succomber  a
un  certain  sentimentalisme du  roman   a  quatre sous,  pour  eviter  finalement
l'apitoiement sur soi qui est la tentation  constante  de ses personnages, il introduit dans  ses romans  deux  elements qui  font sa force, son originalite,  qui  fait  qu'on reconnait  sa griffe:  la compassion et le sens du ridicule qui confine au burlesque. C'est ainsi que la profonde compassion dans laquelle baigne le recit des malheurs de Judith Hearne  a sauve cette ceuvre de 1'ecueil auq uel se heurte  ce genre:  le miserabilisme.
C'est  au  burlesque  que  Moore  fait  appel  dans  son  second roman.  Dans  le troisieme il devient  plus ambitieux. 11 essaie d'arriver au melange du burlesque et de  la  compassion.  Si on  ajoute  l'aspect  realiste  de  ce  roman  puisque  l'auteur
decrit a travers les yeux d'un  immigrant  diverses facettes de Montreal, on decouvre
qu'on  a affaire a un melange de trois genres.
L'auteur pousse parfois trop loin le ridicule pour qu'une certaine affectation  ne se glisse pas. Deja, dans The Feast  of Lupercal, on decelait certains signes de cette exploitation  de  l'effet.  Le comique et le burlesque  ne sont  qu'une maniere,  fort efficace et  quelque   peu  facile,  d'exprimer   le dedoublement du  personnage.  Le regard  fixe sur le miroir n'est pas qu'une contemplation narcissique. C'est la conscience qui,  par la connaissance, tente de saisir le visage. Acte de liberte et de raison et tentative  de s'insurger  contre les forces obscures d'une  fatalite qui s'abat sur nous, nous creant des etres ordinaires sans possibilite de depassement grandiose.
Le reflet du  visage renvoye par le miroir offre a l'homme du  troupeau,  !'illusion
d'etre  en possession de soi. De plus, saisir la realite du visage c'est accepter l'aven­ ture  humaine  dans  ses dimensions et ses limites reelles. Voila  une victoire qui est a la portee de celui qui accepte de jouer le jeu.

g6

BRIAN   MOORE



Ginger  Coffey  c'est  Ia negation du  tragique. II s'agit  Ia d'un parti-pris et non de  Ia  consequence d'une  faiblesse.  Le  heros  est  capable d'un  regard tragique. L'anti-heros saisit  Ia  vie dans  sa  negativite apparente. Pour  lui  Ia  reponse  n'est pas  dans  un  au-dela ou  dans  le depassement mais  dans  Ia vie elle-meme,  dans son va-et-vient quotidien et monotone. La grandeur surgit  du fond  de Ia banalite
apparente et  a travers  le  parti-pris du  refus du  depassement. On  en  arrive  a en
ecarter le  besoin.  Au  bout  du  compte,  le mediocre  se transforme en  heros  dans Ia mesure  ou I'on  pen;oit  le grand  drame  non pas dans Ia transcendance du quoti­ dien mais dans son approfondissement.
Ginger  Coffey  n'a   rien  d'unique et  c'est  justement  cela  qui  devrait faire  son
originalite.  En  scrutant  une   vie  ordinaire,  un  destin  comme   tant   d'autres,  le dessein de Moore  etait  d'en  faire ressortir Ia merveilleuse  richesse et !'intangible singularite. Projet  ambitieux et gigantesque intention.
Apres  tant  d'autres, Moore  a tente  d'ecrire le grand  roman de I'homme aliene dans  Ia  masse  urbaine. Sa  reussite  n'est  pas  complete. Cette  tentative de  trans­ mettre une  vision  du  monde   est  aussi  l'ebauche d'un renouvellement  du  genre
romanesque.  Moore   a-t-il  reussi  a transformer Ia  defaite   de  Ginger   Coffee  en
victoire?  En  apparence seulement, nous semble-t-il.  En verite, les dernieres phrases du roman  expriment davantage une sorte de resignation aux lois invincibles plutot que  Ia grandeur de Ia vie ordinaire. N'ayant pas !'ambition d'accomplir un destin unique, Ia singularisation du  destin  commun sert  de consolation.
Une  telle  consolation ambigue ne suffit pas a Brendan Tierney qui  ne se  con­ tente  pas  de  saisir  son  destin  par  le  regard, a  travers  Ia  conscience  lucide  mais fuyante. II veut  aller  plus  loin.  II essaie de  prolonger quelques moments fugaces  de lucidite, de  scruter  Ia signification  de son destin.  Son  dedoublement  est  beau­ coup   plus  tranche car  il est  intentionnel, voulu.  Pour  lui  l'ecriture  est  acte  et contemplation. On   a  !'impression que  les intentions de  !'auteur  se  confondent avec celles de son personnage puisque  ce dernier  est egalement romancier. Moore  pouvait  difficilement ne pas s'apercevoir que le destin de Ginger Coffey ne devient  singulier   que   dans   Ia  mesure   qu'il   devient   exemplaire. II  y a  Ia  un  choix,  un examen de  !'evolution d'une conscience.  Le  regard  n'est  plus  uniquement celui de  Ginger   Coffey  mais  egalement celui  du  romancier.  L'anti-heros, symbole  de I'homme ordinaire,  devient   lui-meme romancier.  Pour saisir  son  destin,  il  le recree.  II faut  revivre  le moment pour s'apercevoir qu'on le vit ou qu'on l'a vecu.  Cependant l'acte createur n'est  convaincant que s'il aboutit a l'reuvre.  Le createur participe a  l'reuvre dans  Ia  mesure  ou  le  heros  et  le  romancier  reussissent a depasser  Ia  mediocrite de  I'instant. Cette  participation nous  est deniee  dans  An

37

BRIAN MOORE



Answer  from Limbo. On  ne croit pas beaucoup dans le roman qu'elabore Brendan Tierney puisqu'il nous  faut  le subir  comme  projet. Ses sacrifices  semblent vains car  on  n'en  voit pas !'objet. Ce destin  ne devient  singulier  que  par  l'acte  createur qui le transforme et le transmue, mais cet acte  n'est  present  qu'en etat  d'intention.
II se reduit  dans  Ie roman  a une  ambition et  a un  desir  de  reussite.  II n'est  plus
le  moyen  d'une possession de  l'etre.   L'homme ordinaire se  profile  devant  nous dans  sa  vulnerabilite. Et  l'art est  un  supreme mensonge, !'illusion  Ia plus  vaine. Les sacrifices qu'on immole  sur cet autel sont inutiles.  On  se deleste du  reel quoti­ dien   en  faveur   d'une realite  superieure  mais  insaisissable.  Ainsi  on  perd  et  Ia realite  et ce qui Ia depasse.





DE TousLES ROMANS de  Moore, An  Answer  from Limbo, est sans  doute  le plus  pessimiste. Aucune compassion ne  peut  apporter Ie baume consolateur a l'echec.   II  est  impossible  de  concilier   Ia  resignation et  Ie  refus,
I'acceptation et Ia revolte.
An  Answer  from Limbo  est une suite logique  a Ginger  Coffey  meme  si elle en
est  Ia  contre-partie. L'art ne  peut  etre  le  prolongement du  destin  ordinaire du fait  qu'il  en est Ia negation. L'anti-heros ne peut  scruter sa  mediocrite et en faire une  ceuvre  de  creation  puisqu'il doit,  au  prealable, Ia  surmonter. Sinon, il est I'homme de  transition  qui   refuse  d'assumer sa  veritable  condition, de  voir  sa situation en face. II ne peut en faire le point de depart d'une conduite dynamique, d'un  eternel   recommencement  et  d'un  renouvellement constant. Ayant   voulu
passer Ia main  a son propre  heros dans son dernier roman, Moore  ne domine plus
le  monde   dont  il  declenche  le  mecanisme. Malheureusement, Brendan Tierney peut   difficilement se  substituer  a son  createur car  il  faut   accepter l'ambiguite fonciere et  existentielle  du  monde  et  des etres  si on  veut  a Ia fois etre  le miroir
et !'image que  ce miroir  reflete. Brendan Tierney ne l'accepte pas. D'autres desirs et  d'autres desseins le sollicitent.  II veut  vaincre, il veut  laisser sa marque sur  le monde, transmettre son experience. II convoite  reussite et succes.
L'aspect le plus  convaincant de  l'ceuvre de  Moore  n'est  pas  ce qui  exterieure­
ment  semble  en  constituer l'essentiel.  Get  ecrivain   qui  a  voulu  dresser  le  bilan dramatique de  l'homme ordinaire reussit  davantage et  surtout a comprendre et a exprimer le destin  de  l'homme partage entre  deux  univers: entre  une  enfance
protegee par  des  traditions vetustes  et  qui  s'effritent et  l'age   d'homme qui  est

BRIAN MOORE



aussi  l'age   de  I'aventure et  de  la  responsabilite;  homme partage entre  cette responsabilite qui   pese  trop   lourd  sur  ses epaules  et  la  nostalgie  si legere  et  si passagere  soit-elle  d'un passe que  sa conscience  et sa volonte  recusent  et rejettent dans  les heures  de lucidite. Homme partage aussi entre  deux continents: l'Irlande et le Nouveau Monde. Au  lieu de les confronter en une opposition sterile,  Moore tente  de  definir  le destin  de l'homme qui  se transforme dans  cette  terre  d'attente
a mesure  qu'il accepte de  toujours naviguer entre  deux  eaux,  de  reprendre un
voyage  jamais  termine, ballotte entre  l'exil  et le royaume; homme  partage entre la certitude de l'enracinement et l'aventure incertaine de la liberte.
Il  n'est  done  pas  surprenant que  son  personnage le plus  convaincant soit  un immigrant. Mais  des que  !'immigrant cede  la  place  a l'exile  et  a !'artiste, on se
trouve sur  un  terrain glissant  et  moi.ns sur.  Partir  de  la  mediocrite quotidienne pour  aborder la di:fficulte d'etre, pour  toucher du doigt la complexite de I'existence, ne s'est  pas  aventure dans  des sentiers  aussi obscurs  et il n'avait ni la  puissance implique une vue cosmique du monde et des hommes. Gigantesque gageure. Moore creatrice ni  l'angoisse   pour  le  faire.  Il  aurait ete  dans  ce cas  l'un   des  ecrivains les  plus  importants du  siecle.  Cependant, dans  un  registre  moindre, sa  reussite est grande et son reuvre garde toute sa signification.















39



BALLANTYNE  AND THE FUR TRADERS




Joan Selby




A nov's  CANADA, o<, Recollections of a Company Man
in Retirement, might be the facetious title of an essay on that  "young  fur-trader"
turned  writer,  R.  M.  Ballantyne.  But, amusing  and  tempting  as it is to dismiss Ballantyne  with  a shrug,  there  was something  more  to him  than  a hack  writer cutting  a great and exciting land down to a boy's size, or a thorough-going "com­ pany  man"  bringing  an  unthinking  loyalty to the service of an  empire-building enterprise.  An author  of boys' books he was, and  a Hudson's  Bay man  he was also, but a fool he was not. It is easy to read his stories on one level only; to mark the seeming unsophistication  of his prose, of his plots and denouements; to point to his mannered  sentences, his adherence  to the conventions of his day, and, then, to  dismiss him  as a literary  curiosity. He  calls  for a much  fuller  appraisal  as a writer  with  limitations,  but  also with  potentiality,  with  a  power  to express not only the  trite  and  the expected, but  also the fresh and  unexpected.
To  bring  the expected and  the unexpected  in Ballantyne into  perspective, it is helpful  to know something  of the man  himself. He came  of a family  with  con­ nections  in  literary  and  intellectual  circles. His  uncle  James  was Walter  Scott's printer,  and  his eldest  brother,  another  James,  was a  distinguished  Orientalist. A  certain   literary  competence  and  expressiveness  (perhaps  more  genteel  than lively)  might  well be expected  of a  younger member of such  a  family.  And, according  to  the  style and  idiom  of his day,  Ballantyne  displays  precisely such competence.  But he generates also the occasional intensity and excitement  which ensure that  even today his Coral  Island  is read and enjoyed  by a generation  that thinks in terms of jets and light years.
Perhaps  this other element in Ballantyne  was engendered  by the adventures he

BALLANTYNE AND  THE FUR TRADERS



undertook at the  age of sixteen  when  he came  to a virgin  land  under  the auspices and   tutelage  of  the   Hudson's Bay  Company.  From   sixteen   to  twenty-two  he worked  as a  Company clerk  and  finally assumed  a position  of enough authority to  be  able  to  refer  lightly  to  a  veteran  woodsman -his  companion and  guide, undoubtedly many  years his senior-as "my  man". In such  a position  he cannot have  been  entirely ignorant  that  his was  not  a  common fate,  but  his view  was not  much  broader than  that. There is little  indication that  he was aware  in  any historical  sense of his time and  place in Canada's development. In  the early nine­ teenth century it  would   have  taken  a  visionary  to see  beyond  the  circle  of  the Company's  activities, and,   while  Ballantyne may  afford   us  the  unexpected, he never  affords  us  the  insights  of deep  vision.  Yet  it is  inconceivable that  a  sense of  power  entirely   passed  him  by;  from  his own  writings  one  realizes  how  much Ballantyne and   his  fellow  clerks  and  bourgeois  of the  Company saw  themselves as lords of the earth.
During his  six  years  in  Canada,  Ballantyne kept  a  diary  of  his  journeyings and  sojourns at  Norway House,  York Factory, and  Tadousac. This  diary  formed the  basis of his first published book, Hudson's Bay ( 1848). Purely autobiographi­ cal,  and  not  intended entirely  for  boys, Hudson's  Bay projects  a certain robust  charm and  joy-in-life  that  presage  Ballantyne's later  writings. Humour is an  im­ portant element, as it  remains through his works;  it  is the  leaven  to  his  rather heavy  prose. It is the  humour of youthful  high  spirits, sometimes  used  merely  as relief,  but  at  times  taking on  a life and  an  artistic  purpose of its own,  as in  the strange, compelling mixture of  humour and  brutality in  the  description of  the seal-killing  in  Hudson's  Bay. A little tailor, new to such slaughter, falls down  and, thinking all  the  seals  in  the  herd  are  upon  him,  rolls over  and  over,  striking in terror   at  his  imaginary  adversaries.  His  utter  incompetence is balanced by  the fearful competence of  his  companion, a  veteran   of  the  deadly  game,  who  kills with  every  stroke  of his  club.  In  this passage  Ballantyne demonstrates admirably his  ability   to  combine  the  horrible with  the  comic,  the  expected with  the  un­  expected.
In  Hudson's  Bay Ballantyne writes  in the  conventional style of his age.  Nine­
teenth century conventions permeate every aspect of the  book-diction, sentence construction, characterization, feeling. The  sentences  meander like midsummer streams,  and  their  meaning is often  obscured  by their  grandiose construction.


So, under  the  influence  of  these favourable  circumstances,  my spirits  began  to rise, and,  when the cry arose on deck that  the steamer containing  the committee  of

BALLANTYNE AND THE  FUR TRADERS



the Honourable Hudson's  Bay Company  was in sight, I sprang  up the companion­ ladder in a state of mind, if not happy, at least as nearly so as, in the circumstances, could  be  expected.

This  is the  long  way  round  to making  the  rather inconsequential observation that  his mind  was settled.  But a closer look at Ballantyne's involuted writing sug­ gests that  its complexities do  not  always  cover  such  banalities:

My future companion  and  fellow-clerk, Mr.  W----, was parading  the deck near me. This  turned  my thoughts  into  another  channel,  and  set me speculating  upon his probable  temper,  qualities, and  age;  whether  or not  he was strong enough  to thrash  me, and  if we were likely to  be good friends.

Here  there  are  no wasted  words;  the construction is economical and  the mean­ ing  evident. The sentence  reveals the  many-sidedness of a boy's  mind:  his need to measure  and  compete,  his defensiveness  and  self-doubt, and  his tentative grop­ ings towards a new friendship. It is small wonder that Ballantyne became a writer  for boys; he understood them so thoroughly.
Ballantyne's descriptions are  most effective  when  he is least  conscious  of what seemed  to him  the serious  task of imparting information to his young  readers. At the  moment when  the  unexpected takes  over,  and  he  is no  longer  "on  guard", his  descriptions capture  a  fleeting  spontaneity, as  when   he  portrays the  solemn gracelessness of Indian women  at the Christmas dance.

There  is no rapid  motion  of the feet, no lively expression  of the countenance; but  with  a slow, regular,  up-and-down  motion,  they stalk through  the figure with extreme  gravity. They seemed to enjoy it amazingly, however, and scarcely afford the  poor fiddler  a moment's  rest during  the  whole evening.

These  Indian women  are realized  instantaneously-unsmiling and  awkwardly bobbing. On  the other  hand, and in the same Hudson's Bay, Ballantyne's informa­ tive  chapter on  the  Indian, dutifully  presented, is a set  piece  with  little life and no sparkle: a painstaking account of customs,  ways, food  and clothing, but  with only  a  summary insight  into  the  social  organization or  the  spiritual aspects  of Indian life.  This  is hardly  surprising when  one  remembers  that  Ballantyne was after  all a "company man", and,  with  rare  individual exceptions, the  contact of company men  with  the  Indians was  primarily  commercial.
Ballantyne is at  his best  when  he describes  with  a  boy's  glee some  mishap  at campsite or on the  trail.  He  tells, for instance, of gathering gulls' eggs with  eager anticipation at the end of a long day's  journey  and  popping them  into the cooking

42

BALLANTYNE AND THE  FUR TRADERS



pot.  The  first sign  of impending disaster  was a "loud  whistling  sound" and  then, upon  the  breaking of one  of  the  eggs, the  appearance of a  "young gull  with  a monstrous head  and  no feathers, squeaking and  chirping in a most  indefatigable manner!" He continues:

We  did  not  despair,  nevertheless,  of finding  a few good  ones amongst  them; so,  after  they  were  well  cooked,  we all  sat  around   the  kettle  and  commenced operations ... [but] the greater  part  contained  boiled birds. The  Indians were not nice, however,  and  we managed  to make a good dinner  off them  after  all.

Once  again  Ballantyne balances a rather unattractive incident with  skill and perception upon   the  point  of  a  true,  wry  humour.




IT WAS NOT  UNTIL SEVEN YEARS after  his first book, Hudson's Bay,  was  published-years spent   by  Ballantyne working  for  the  printing and publishing firm  of Thomas Constable of Edinburgh-that Thomas Nelson,  the publisher, suggested  to  him  that  he write  for  boys, embodying his experiences in the  "great lone land". In  r 856  Ballantyne wrote his first book for boys, Snowflakes and  Sunbeams, Or, The  Young Fur-Traders,  and,  thereafter, managed to tum out  upwards of eighty  novels. The  settings  vary-Canada, Norway, Algiers, and Cape Colony  to  mention only  a few-but,  basically, in  character and  incident, the  novels  are  similar. It would  be repetitive to scrutinize closely and  separately even  all  those  which  concern Canada. It is enough  to glance  at  three  of them, The  Young  Fur-Traders, Ungava, and  The  Wild  Man of the West. The first two, along  with  the  still popular Coral Island, are  possibly his best-known works and are  associated  with  his name  when  many  of his other  works  cannot be recalled. The  Wild  Man  is, in some  ways, less vital  and  less real  than  the  other  two,  but it does attempt the complexities of a developed  plot. The  Young  Fur-Traders  and U ngava  are  completely and  unashamedly innocent of such  a device.
Hudson's  Bay, his book  of reminiscences, is the archetype of Ballantyne's later
novels:  the incidents they tell are similar,  but heightened by a certain romanticism and  a considerable sense of drama. In  essence, these books  are  not  novels  at  all, but   accounts of  joumeyings in  the  wilderness  forming a  simple  framework in which  to set a series of happenings calculated to hold a boy's interest. Fights  with Indians, bear  and  buffalo hunts, shooting dangerous rapids,  are  common  ingre­ dients.  Ungava  attempts to hold  suspense on a higher  level by recounting the dis-

43

BALLANTYNE AND  THE FUR TRADERS



appearance of the  little girl, Edith, but  the  reader  is in no doubt that  she will be found and   returned to  her  mother's arms.  This  book  also  attempts the  compli­ cations of a sub-plot  with  the  parallel  separation of the giant  Eskimo,  Maximus, and  his bride,  but  once again  the  happy  outcome is obvious  from  the  beginning. The  Wild  Man  of the West  makes  use of a slight  mystery  in  the search  for  the identity of  the  Wild  Man.  It remains  a  poor  attempt, however,  and  for  critical  purposes it can  be said that  Ballantyne does not attempt any  but  the most simple structure in his novels.
One  of Ballantyne's very real strengths-and one  that  has already been  men­ tioned   in  the  analysis  of  Hudson's  Bay-is  his  knowledge of  the  mentality of boys. In  his first book this asset brought depth to a charming self-portrait; in his novels, it brings authenticity to quick, deft characterizations of  the  juvenile  heroes. The  mercurial personalities  of  Charley and   Harry in  The  Young   Fur-Traders are  a  delight  throughout the  book.  They  laugh, joke,  tussle,  romp  and  gambol like  game   dogs.  They   are  ruled   by  the  spirit  of  adventure.  Charley daubs   his face  with   paint-blue  nose  and  red  chin -before  going  to  the  Indian feast, and  his action  is entirely  boyish and  entirely right.  He  leaps  upon  a half-broken horse  and  revels  in  the  wild  dangerous ride  that  ends  in  a head-first somersault into  a snowdrift. March  Marston, hero of The  Wild  Man  of the West, is declared by  his  trapper friends  to  be  as  mad  "as  a  grisly  bear  with  whooping-cough." His  madness takes  the  form  of displaying "an  insane  tendency, at  all times  and in all manners, to break his own neck."
There is another side to Ballantyne's portrayal of boys; they are not all entirely mad  in spirit  and  in action.  Hamilton in The  Young  Fur-Traders is a gentle, un­ assuming boy in sharp contrast to Charley and  Harry. His only  response  to their wild  ways  and   practical  jokes is a  quiet  smile.  Thought "soft" by  the  others,  Hamilton does  prove  his courage and  resourcefulness in  a crisis. Despite the  fact that  Ballantyne too often  indulges,  as he does here,  in  the  trite  and  the expected in terms  of action,  his sense of contrast and  balance in the initial characterizations must  be recognized. His novels are  not  one-dimensional adventure stories only.
Ballantyne's keen  ability  to  characterize is  at  its  best  when  he  is  portraying men  and  boys,  rather   than  women  and  girls.  The former are  always  vigorously created  (almost   "splashed on")  but  the  latter   are  mainly  lifeless stereotypes of nineteenth-century idealized  womanhood. Relationships between  men,  friend  and friend, father and  son, are  particularly well treated. Charley in The  Young  Fur­ Traders  and  his father, Frank Kennedy, present  an  excellent  example of  Ballan­ tyne's  ability  to render  the  mutual competitiveness, coercion  on the  one side and

44

BALLANTYNE AND THE  FUR TRADERS



rebellion  on the other, and  the underlying tenderness implicit in the father-son relationship. Indeed,  Frank  Kennedy, the  "old   fur-trader", is  skilfully  drawn with  his irascibility, his human  misjudgments, his perplexities over  his son. There is  no  doubt   that   here  Ballantyne is  portraying a  common and   authentic  type among the  Hudson's Bay  men; Kennedy is  the  company man   who  has  main­ tained   the  independence of  mind  and  personality which  have  suited  him  to the country and  ensured his success. He  has acquired a half-breed  wife and  a family of  quarter-breed  children  and   he  shows  true  devotion   to  them.  The   inherent pathos   and   emotional  complications of  mesalliance   and  cross-breeding is  not touched  upon.   Ballantyne was  writing  adventure  stories  for  boys,  not  problem  novels.  Such  themes  were  beyond  his scope  and  intent,  and  even,  one  suspects, beyond  his comprehension and  literary  ability.
In  contrast to  his  happy handling of  relationships between   fathers and  sons, and  in  line  with  his  inability to  portray   women  convincingly, Ballantyne  over­ sentimentalizes the  tie  between a  mother   and  a son.  In  The  Wild  Man  of  the West  March Marston and  his mother  mutually suffer  (and the reader with them) through some  particularly coy passages. The  ultimate  in lack of realism  is reached in an exchange between  the  child  Edith  and  her mother  in U ngava. When  Edith  expresses  hatred for  a  man  who  has  hit  her  dog,  her  mother  remonstrates with her.  "I wish  I didn't hate  him,  but it won't  go away," says the child.  "Well, my pet,  you  must  pray  for  him,  and  speak  kindly  to him  when  you  meet,  and  that  will  perhaps put  it  away," she  is told.  Unreal and  false  as  this  is, it is no  worse than   much   of  the  writing of  the  same  decade. The   r 85o's   brought a  heavily moralistic and, often,  rankly  sentimental note  to children's books, and  Ballantyne was very much  a man  of his age in this respect.
Indeed, individualistic in  many  respects  as his men  characters are,  they  have one  trait  in  common. They  are  all homespun philosophers and  moralists. Ballan­ tyne  was  quite  unable to deny  his didactic tendencies, and  his young  heroes  are always  supplied with  companions who  are  guides  in  both  the  physical and  the spiritual sense.  Yet  he managed to bring  a surprising variety into  these  mentors; Irishmen, Indians, French-Canadians, Americans-in  short, all  the  many  kinds and   types  that   were  employed by  the  Company. There  is  no  doubt that  these were  derived  from  men  with  whom  Ballantyne had  hunted  and  trapped, whom he  had  known   and   liked.  Their talk  is authentic, their  camaraderie real.  The  banter around the  campfire, the  give-and-take of  personal  relationships, the  un­ stinted  sharing of both  danger and laughter are fully realized  and sustained. These  characters are  not  simply  types.  Bounce  with  his quiet,  well-defined humour, or

45

BALLANTYNE  AND THE  FUR TRADERS



Baptiste, quick in word and deed, or Jacques, struggling with the philosophical argument of means and ends, are certainly  individual.
Ballantyne's  characterization breaks, however,  in his portrayal  of the Indians,
who are apt to be the stereotyped "noble redskins" of his century's  misconception. This  fault  is curious, since it is obvious from Ballantyne's  own reminiscences that his attitude   towards  the  Indians  was both  perceptive  and  realistic. Presumably the literary convention  demanded  this sublimation  and  Ballantyne bowed. Conse­ quently  the  Indians  who travel  with  Ballantyne's  young  heroes are  benign  and noble,  while  those  whose sole function  in  the  story  is to chase  and  attack  are satisfyingly horrible. At curious variance with his treatment of the Indian, Ballan­ tyne gives a rounded  characterization of the Eskimo, Maximus, in Ungava. Noble Maximus  undoubtedly  is, but  he has also a disarming naturalness  and  flexibility. Ballantyne   summarizes  perhaps  rather   revealingly  the  difference  between  the Indian and  the  Eskimo, the former  being much  more withdrawn  and  less open in  his contacts  with the  white  men. This  difference,  and  the  projection  of it in his  novels,  as  much  as  the  literary  convention,   may  account  for  Ballantyne's  greater  success in  portraying  the  Eskimo.
In  his own  day, Ballantyne was a writer  of boys' adventure  stories of enough force and character to hold his own against such popular  contemporaries as Verne, Henty  and  Kingston.  In  our  day,  he  appears  dated  and  rather  pompous,  but one  is still  aware  of his vigour,  of his ability  to deal  with  the  complexities  of boys'  characters, and  of  a  touch  of the  fey, even  of the  macabre.  As a  writer concerned  with Canada, his greatest contribution is his portrayal  of Hudson's  Bay Company life in the 184o's, and of the adventure of being young when Canada was also young. On  this level we can  still read  him  with  nostalgia,  mixed  with the  regret  that  he  was not  a  better  writer,  that  despite  his vivid re-creation  of the buffalo  hunter  and the woodsman, of camp  fire and  camaraderie, he was not able  to  afford  us a  completely convincing  picture  of  the  Canada he knew  a generation   before  Confederation.







THE SEASONS

Grove's Unfinished Novel

Bruce H. Nesbitt




EDERICK PHILLIP GROVE  regaffied  llli< unfmished  novd Th' Seasons as his masterpiece. In a series of letters written  to Desmond Pacey, printed in  Canadian  Literature for  Winter, 1962,  Grove  wrote, "I  have  the  deliberate purpose  in  mind  of making it my magnum opus... . It is by far  the  best thing  I have  done,  as it  is certainly the  most ambitious." Through the  kindness  of Mrs. Catherine Grove,  a  MS  and  a  typescript  copy of the novel  now form  part  of the Grove  Papers in  the  Elizabeth Dafoe  Library of the University of Manitoba, and for  the  first  time   we  are  able  to  see whether Grove's   comments to  Pacey  are justified.
The   basis  of  the  first  section  of  the  typescript, "Summer",  is contained in  a notebook  hastily  titled  "Democracy or Peasant Revolt or Town and  Country". Although  Grove   was  able  to  finish  both   "Summer" and   "Fall" and  to  start "Winter" before  ill-health crippled him completely,  it is thus  evident  that  he did not  at  first  conceive  The   Seasons  as the  regular  exploration of an  "extension in space". In  fact,  the  469-page typescript  is an  integrated amalgam of what  may originally  have  been  three  separate novels. Grove  apparently blended two of these sub-novels  to form  "Summer", then  proceeded  to write "Fall", and  later  inserted into  "Fall" a third  sub-novel.
The  connecting link  among these sections,  and  the  central figure  of the  more than  1 oo characters in the novel, is Arnold  Brewster, a former  political  economist at  the  University of  Toronto. Divorced  from  his wife and  separated from  their two  children, he  has  come  to  farm  outside  "Rivers", Ontario, to escape  "from the nightmare of the city into some sort of reality".' As the novel opens in August,
1940,  Brewster  is  approached by  other  farmers in  the  district  to  help  alleviate


47

THE SEASONS



obvious injustices  forced on them by Hugh  Grainger, owner  of the canning factory on  which   they  depend. Brewster  sees two  solutions:  either   to  adopt a  form  of primitive self-sufficiency,  or  to  form  co-operative factories. "The  moment  you want  anything beyond  the peasant's needs, you hand  yourself over to the industrial machine". Although he realizes that  political  action  will only  provide  a forum  for their  grievances, he agrees  to head  an  "Independent Agrarian Party" formed  to contest  an impending provincial election. It is significant that  Grove  himself both worked  in a canning factory  and  ran for the  Ontario legislature as a CCF candi­ date  after  he moved  to Simcoe!
Brewster  has  been  attracted by  Margaret Grainger, wife  of the  owner  of the canning plant. Daughter of a French Canadian and  Roman Catholic mother, Margaret was  totally  unprepared for  her  marriage to  Hugh, and  their  wedding night  was  a devastating fiasco. But  now,  nearly  thirty, she  appears to have  been awakened by  Arno!d  Brewster  as they  are  "thrilled by  the  common impulse" of certain   landscapes. Wilfred  Tracey, a  sculptor visiting  Rivers,  senses that   there is something self-contradictory in  Margaret:  "she  was  a  madonna strayed  into this  commonplace world." In  Tracey's terms,  the  love  of Arnold  and  Margaret "was   entirely   platonic; which   meant   that   in  each  other's presence,  they  could never  be  entirely  natural." Eventually Margaret takes  a  trip  home  to  Montreal to  consider  a  divorce  from  Hugh, whom  she  has seen  coming from  his mistress' house,  but  concludes that  her  religion  will not  permit it. "It seemed  their  fate  to desire and  to abstain."
Margaret's  husband leads  "the   life  of  a  shadow". "To him,  his  wife  was  a social  asset;  and  his final  aim  was social."  He  continues the  frustrated love-play of  his erotic  dreams with  his latest  mistress, the  wife of an  army  officer who  has been  posted  overseas.  As a type of the  irresponsible and  parasitic capitalism that Grove  detested, Grainger votes himself  a raise  while  he  slashes  crop  prices.  And in the  end,  he self-righteously decides not  to instigate divorce  proceedings against Margaret and  Arnold  because  of his fear  of scandal.
Arnold's mind  has attracted one  other  woman:  Dorothy Straker, daughter of the  district's incumbent MPP. While  her  sister  Agnes  has  gone  to Toronto and becomes  the  mistress of her employer,  Dorothy stays to care  for her ailing  mother and   dying  father. Her  sensitivity  to  nature strikes  Arnold, and  they  go walking together in  the  woods  around Rivers.  Here  she  confesses  that  she wants  a child, but  not a husband. In  an attempt to broaden her  universe,  Arnold  introduces her to  Phil  and  Alice  Patterson. Phil  has  fulfilled  his ambition of Two  Generations and  is now  a lecturer in  astronomy at  the  University of Toronto, and  Alice is a

THE SEASONS



doctor. Watching Phil  clear  brush  around the  cottage  that  he and  Alice use as a refuge  from  the  city, Dorothy feels that  she is "discovering the human body, and she found pleasure in it."  Eventually she accepts  Phil's  madcap proposal of  mar­ riage  made  in  the  middle  of a snow-covered  hemlock  grove.
Probably  the  most  powerful character  in  The  Seasons is  Wilfred   Tracey, a
fifty-two  year  old sculptor and  former  professor  of Greek  at  McGill.  He  has been brought to  Rivers   by  Barbara  Carleton, ostensibly  to  teach  a  group of  British refugee  children. Barbara and  he had  met briefly twelve years ago, and  since then the  memory   of each  had  become  an  obsession. Their  relationship turns  around the symbol  of a statuette of a girl that  Wilfred  had sold to Barbara's late  husband, a wealthy  judge thirty-five  years her senior. Although Wilfred  hadn't seen Barbara before   doing   the  statuette, which   he  calls  "Absence", "what  her  features  ex­ pressed, and  what  the marble expressed, were essentially the same thing." Margaret Grainger had  already realized  that  "in  this woman  there was something elemental, something that   gave  her  glimpses  into  unrestrained  possibilities."  For  Wilfred, Barbara "was  his  fate -his,  the  sculptor's, as well as the  man's"; she  becomes not  just  a  woman, but  Eve.  And  for  Barbara, Wilfred  will provide  fulfillment: "I want  my very existence  to be justified." Wilfred  has also carved  a monk's  head,  which   Barbara suggests  is  Arnold   Brewster.  Tracey says  that   the  head,   which he secretly calls "Surrender", is based on
a  monk  whom  I watched  for  several hours, in a railway station  in  Montreal. A bearded  monk whose every feature spoke to me of the sadness of things, of his own surrender,  of the cruelty  of his fate  which he yet accepted,  so that,  to me, he  be­ came the quintessence of tragedy nobly born.

Thus while  Margaret can  say  that  man  "was  created  of sacrifice", Arnold  sees in Barbara and  Wilfred  echoes of Heine:

Sie Mussten beide sterben
Sie hatten  sich vie] zu lieb.
(From  "Es War ein Alter Konig".)

The tragedy of the  monk  could  only be affirmed  by a consummation beyond  the reach   of  Margaret  and   Arnold. And   as  Barbara and  Wilfred go  to  bed  at Barbara's cottage, a storm  rages at the trees outside:

The  wind  tore  and  burrowed  through  their foliage, worrying it as a dog worries sheep;  and  every now and  then  it detached  a handful  of leaves which  it hurtled against  the  panes  in a sodden state, with little noises as of a hand  slapping  naked flesh. Their  laughter  was a defiance thrown  to the elements; and  at the same time

49

THE SEASONS



it  held  a  note  of  apprec1at10n, for  the  trees  stood  humped,  like cattle  huddled together  to let the fury  of the weather expend itself upon  their rumps.

In  the love of Henry  Baumert and  Irene  Valentine, Grove  explores  a relation­ ship  dictated by  externals. Children of the  depression, Henry  is  working  on  his father's farm  to save for his and  Irene's marriage, and  she is employed as a maid in  the  Grainger's home.  Irene, however,  is  impatient  to  be  freed  from   their dependence on  economics,  and  to make  Henry  jealous responds to the  courtship of Stewart Butt,  a wealthy  contractor twice her age. Henry fails to take  her when she offers herself, and  she decides  to run  away  to meet  Stewart Butt.  Inexplicably she  is drawn into  the  fields surrounding Rivers:

It was pitch-dark  now; and  there  was no moon.  Looking back from  the far edge of the field where she had come up against another  fence, it seemed to her as if the night,  a giantess  in  black, trailing  draperies,  were stepping  out  from  among  the trees of the park, drawing the hem of her garment  over the furrows while she grew up  with  the  sky, above  the  clouds  which  were  forming.  Not  a  star  was visible overhead.
And suddenly her purpose defined itself: she must see Henry.

She  finds  him,  and  in a deserted  hut  they finally  consummate their  love.

In  the  dim  light  from  the  cloud-tent  they  seemed  suspended  between  the  milky whiteness above and the dark, damp  earth  underfoot.  Between the two, they were an  invisible flame. All about,  the night day distended,  as if in a swoon.

The next  day  Irene marries  Butt,  true  to  her  dictum that  "the only  thing  that counted was whether one  rebelled." It is a final irony  that  at a forced  auction of the  Baumert farm, of which  Butt  is the  mortgagee, Irene reveals  that  their  last night  together   has  resulted  in  her  becoming pregnant.
The   Seasons  not  only  represented  for  Grove   a  massive  continuation of  the
themes  of most of the fiction  he had  published before  his death, but  also indicates to  us  a  certain shift  in  emphasis  in  those  themes.  In  the  earlier   pioneer  novels man's fate  lay  partially  with  economic pressures  beyond  his control; his soul was eroded as quickly  as the  plot  of land  he had  to own.  In The  Seasons, however, Grove  sees in the  principles  of the CCF  party  a path  for  justice to become opera­ tive  again  in  the  economic  sphere.
If the sexual  instinct  is another aspect  of our  fate,  then  Grove  presents  a more subtle  view of his tragic  vision than  he has before.  In  It Needs to Be Said Grove comments  on  the  eternal  conflict   between   man's "beast-hood" and   his  "god­ head", a conflict  Margaret and  Arnold  are unable to resolve. They  both "abstain"

50

THE SEASONS



and  "desire" each  other. While  Amold_is  the  "monk" to Barbara Carleton, and Margaret is a "madonna" to Wilfred  Tracey, Barbara becomes  Eve, and  Wilfred, Adam. In  their  world,  however, there  can  be no original sin;  it is interesting that Grove  sees Tracey, the  creative aspect  of a man  whose other  half is Brewster,  as able  to  resolve Arnold's and  Margaret's self-contradictory realm. Nature has not only sanctified, but  has  also ordained the fulfilment  of Wilfred and  Barbara.
We  are  continually aware of  the  face  of  nature as  the  web  of love  is spun. Moonlight bathes  the whole  novel, and trees frequently take on an almost  religious quality at  meetings  of the  various  lovers. And  just as Arnold can say that  "God is growing", so the characters of The  Seasons grow as the complexity of the imagery expands. Both  Arnold and  Wilfred, for example, come to accept  Grove's particu­ lar  fatalism, but  by the  end  of "Fall", affirmation appears to be the dominating mood  of  the  novel.  In  The  Seasons, moreover,  Grove  presents  perhaps his first consistently  sustained portraits of believable  women.  Only  after the land  has been tamed can  an  "iridescent  play  of  desire and satisfaction"  emerge.3  Had   the novel  been  completed, I  believe  it  would  have  been  Grove's  richest  and  most competent expression  of the  "response of the soul to  the fundamental  conditions of  man's life  on  earth".4  It is ironic  that  Grove  died  before  he  could  complete  his statement, for in The  Seasons he was his own greatest tragic  hero.


NOTES
' University  of  Manitoba, Elizabeth  Dafoe  Library,  Grove  Papers,  Box IV  7  (b), typescript  p. 13. All references are to Grove's own pagination.
2     Contesting   Haldimand-Norfolk  constituency  in  1943,  Grove  received  only  2577 votes, nearly  5000 less than  each of his two opponents.  In  The Seasons  Grove in­ tended Brewster to lose the election.
3  In Search  of Myself  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1946), p. 224.
4   It  Needs  to Be Said  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1929), p. roo.



Across	the 	span

of 	nearly	three 	centuries ...



























and 	from 	sea 	to  sea



Ours is a  tradition	of  service to  Canadians








52



review articles





THE MAKINGS OF A MYTH
 





George Robertson



GEORGE F. G. STANLEY. Louis Riel. Ryerson, $8.so.


AN IDEA, HOWEVER  IMPROB­ ABLE,  if  clothed   with  power  can change  the course  of history.  Had the metis been more  than  a temporary genealogical exer­ cise in  the  racial  history  of North  Amer­ ica,  we might  have  had  on  the Canadian plains  a nation speaking French and  pro­ fessing a variety  of heretical Catholicism, and  Louis  Riel,  the  dreamer of  this  un­ likely  vision,   would   have   been   its  first spiritual  and   temporal  leader.  But   the metis, a race  that  sprang of union  between Indian  women   and  French-Canadian hunters and  trappers, were  doomed   to a short  passage in history; and  Riel's role­ and   his  tragedy-was  to  be  bound   to his people  and  not  to some more durable cause.  His  story  is both  a  political  and  a personal  drama without  precedent in this country.
I   have   already  written  in  Canadian
Literature  (in  a  review  of the  play  Riel, by John  Coulter)  of  the  appositeness of Riel's  life  to  theatrical drama; and  now a  book  which   we  can  call  the  definitive biography of Riel  has  appeared, and  the justness   of   the   parallel  is  even   more apparent. It is  a  fascinating  story.  Pro­ fessor  Stanley   has   rendered  better  than
 anyone  else the  pietistic  background out of  which  Riel  emerged, understands  the conflicting   forces   at   work   at   the   Red River   in  the  186o's   (including the  con­ stant  pressure  of an expansionist America to  the  south)   and   again  on  the  Saskat­ chewan  River  in  the  188o's, and  has  had  access,  I  believe,  to  the  widest  range  of documents yet  concerning  this g,reat and  tragic   figure.   I   use   the   word    "great" advisedly,  speaking   not  of  his  place   in the  patriotic myth  of Canada but  of his capacity  for  illuminating, as  great   men do,  the currents of their  time,  of his test­ ing   and   changing  those   currents,   and  ultimately, since  I  have  also  written  the word  "tragic", failing.
The  life  of  Riel  was indeed a  drama, with  its first and  last  acts  the  two  rebel­ lions  of  r86g-7o  and   1884-85,  and with perhaps the  most  intriguing  phase  of  his career, about  which  little  has  been  writ­  ten   to  now,  the  strange  years  of  semi­ darkness   in  between.  In  that   period   he was  at   the  same   time  an   outlaw   with
$s,ooo  on   his  head   and   a  Member  of
Parliament who  dared   not  take  his  seat (but  who, on  one splendid day  and  with the help of sympathetic French-Canadian

53

REVIEW ARTICLES



MP's,   managed  to  sign  the   register   in the  parliament buildings  at Ottawa with­ out   being   apprehended) ;  it  is  also  the period   of  his  exile  in  the  United  States  and  of  his madness.   He  was confined  to asylums  from   March   I876,   to  January I878.  Following  his  recovery,  he  became  an  American citizen and  dabbled in poli­ tics.  In  this, as in  everything else he did, he  was working for  the  betterment of his own  half-breed  race,  the  race  which,  he saw,  would  one  day  become  the  "New  Nation" of  the  Northwest.
There are  two things  especially  fascin­ ating  to me about  the career  of  Riel. The  first  is  his  handling  of  the  situation  at Red  River  in  I86g  and  1870.  Riel,  only twenty-five  years old, was able  to hold in alliance  both   French  and   English   half­ breeds,  and  more  important, the  Catho­ lic clergy,  to gain  the  terms  of entry  into Confederation   that   he  and   his   people thought  fair.  His   ability   to  manipulate events,   to   anticipate  opposition, to  act decisively and-with one  terrible  excep­ tion-shrewdly,  makes  this  part   of  his story  almost  a  primer of political  action. He  had  the  will  to  act  when  action  was needed, but  he was always conscious  that to act  boldly was to risk alienating the moderates, and  it  was  his  triumph that in the end  he was able to take  the moder­ ates  with  him.  Given  his youth,  his race, and  the measure of the men  he was deal­  ing   with,   this   was  a  superb   personal accomplishment.
The second  thing  is that  this  story  of pure  politics  becomes, after  his exile and his  illness,  complicated  by  strange  am­ biguities   of  motive.   It   is  here  the   his­ torian   finds   himself  on   more  dubious ground-Professor Stanley allows  us our alternatives-and  the imagination is en­ riched   by   possibilities.  He   was   un-

54
 doubtedly "cured" when  released  from asylum,   that   is, able  to  be  released   into society,  but  he  was  just  as certainly  pos­ sessed  by  a  growing conviction  that  he had   a  divine   mission.   He   was  able   to write  in  one  year   ( I878)   to  the  doctor who   had   been   attending  him,   "I   was treated there  as charitably as any  lunatic could  be,"  thanking him  for  his forbear­ ance,  and  also to confide  to a friend  that  he  had   only   been   feigning  madness   in order   that   the  government  should  cease persecuting  his  people.   He  was  able   in I884   to  accept  an   invitation   from   the half-breeds of the Saskatchewan valley to help   them   obtain   their   rights,   and   not long   after   to   attempt  to  bargain  with the government for a payment to himself which   would  guarantee  acquiescence of the  metis  to  any  settlement  the  govern­ ment    would   propose.  These   were   un­  doubtedly  the   extremes  of  a   disturbed mind, and   it  is  true  that  Riel  set  about his   second   agitation  in   the   Northwest with  such  moderation that  he gained  the confidence  not  only  of  the  French  and  English   half-breeds but  of  many   of  the Canadian settlers  as  well.  But  only for  a time.  Critically, he  lacked  the confidence of  the  clergy,   and   as  the  church  with­  drew  from  neutrality into  opposition, he supplanted  it   with   wilder   and   wilder visions  of  his  own  destiny:  he  was  the prophet  of  a  new   nation,  gathering  to himself   all   the   Catholic  peoples  of Europe. In  the end, his paranoia left him only  those  simple  enough to  believe  that  he  might,  after   all,   be  a  god,   and   his pitiful  rebellion was put  down  by a cum­  brous  Canadian  militia.
It is impossible  in  the  space  of a short review  to  trace  more  than  an  outline of Riel's  career. But it is possible to say this: if   ever   history   were   enshrined  in   the







THOUGHT


from


THE LEARNED SOCIETIES OF  CANADA


I96I


THOUGHT  I96I contains nineteen papers from the Conference of The Learned Societies of Canada held  at Montreal in  June, I961.  The   papers  were  selected  by  the eleven  associations represented: Humanities, Classical, Philosophical, University Teachers of English,  University Teachers of French, Linguistics,  Political Science, Historical, Geographers, Psychological, and  Professors of Education.

$5.00


STRATFORD PAPERS ON  SHAKESPEARE


I  9 6 2


Delivered   at  the  1962  Shakespeare Seminar sponsored   by the  Universities of Canada in co-operation with  The Strat­ ford  Festival  Theatre and  the  Department of  Extension of McMaster  University.




Published   by:
W.  J. GAGE LIMITED
I 500 BIRCH MOUNT ROAD, SCARBOROUGH 4, ONTARIO





55

REVIEW ARTICLES



life  of  a  man,  it  is enshrined in  the  life of Riel, and  it is impossible, I think, to understand Canada in the second  half  of the  nineteenth century   without   knowing both  Riel  and  his distant  antagonist, Sir John A. Macdonald. What  might  the old politician and  the  young,  personable  re­ volutionary from  Manitoba have  said  to each   other   could   they  have  met -and but for  the murder of Thomas Scott,  they might have  met-as fellow Conservatives. For  it  was  the  execution  of  Scott,  by no means   Riel's   only  mistake,  but   his  one crucial mistake, that set in train  the price on  his head,  his exile, and  very likely his overbalance into madness. The  line separ­ ating  the   nonconforming  and   in   time beloved  statesman from  the  failed  revo­ lutionary is, as we know,  drawn   by such chance  acts   as  this.  Drawn   respectably into  national politic,
tact   with   his  French-Canadian  brothers
in   Quebec,  saved   from   the   extremism which  was  always  part  of  his  character, Riel  might  have  become a towering  figure
 of French Canada, instead of a desolated fanatic tied  to  an  impossible  dream.
Professor   Stanley   does  not  attempt  to push  speculation too  far.  His  picture of Riel  is fair: he  has  avoided the  aura  of hero-worship  found   in  other  works  on Riel, but has also dealt fully with the grievances of  the  metis  which  gave  Riel his   mission.   Without  him,   they   would have  been  scattered so much  the  quicker like  chaff   across  the  prairie. With   him, they had a voice. On  trial for his life, he pleaded their  right  to God's  lands: "We are   not   birds,  we  have   to  walk  on  the ground." His   lawyers   pleaded  insanity, but  Riel  refuted them,  and  convinced the jury   he   was  sane,   and   so  went   to  his death  with   dignity.   He   had   embraced the  true  Church at  the last and  his priest, a   former  opponent,  wept.   "He   shall hang," cried  Sir John  A. Macdonald, "though every  dog in  Quebec bark  in his favour." In   English   Canada  the  myth­ making of  Riel   has  not  yet  begun,   but in this book the materials are all at  hand.





PROMISES, PROMISES

George Bowering


R.  o. EVERSON. Blind Man's  Holiday. Ryerson,  $2.75.
MICHAEL  MALUS. Flaming City.  McGill.  $r.so.
HARRY HOWITH.  Burglar Tools. Bytown Books, Ottawa. $r.oo.


IN Blind Man's Holiday, his third book, and  his first since  I959, R.  G. Everson emerges  as  a minor  disappoint­ ment. When   he  published  Three  Dozen Poems in  I957, and  followed it two years later    with   A   Lattice  for  M amos,   he
 entered the  Canadian poetry  scene  with a   voice   as  fresh   as  lovemaking  in   the snow,  the   subject   of  one  of  his  poems. Only   Montrealers  in   the   know   would have  realized  that  he  was a middle-aged man   and   a  newcomer in  the  guild.

REVIEW ARTICLES



But   now,  in  a  time   of  the  country's greatest activity  in the arts,  and  especially in  poetry,   Everson seems  to  be  drifting away.   His   earlier   brilliance  of  imagery has   given   way   to   a   notion    that   ideas strung  on  lines  and   pinned  with  meta­ phor   will  reach   the  reader's  mind  con­ vincingly   enough.  Of   course,   some   of them  do,  but  this  reader  was left  with  a desire  to  see  more,  to  sense  more,  to  be persuaded  less.
Everson's  most  notable  metaphor
works   on   a   system   in   which   the   poet figures   himself   as  a  distant  city  or  his­ toric   personage,  investing  himself   for  a moment with  all the  remembered charac­ teristics   of  that   referent, but  creating a muddle in  which   the   poet  can  be  seen only  with  difficulty.   In  other  words,  the poet is not recording personal experience, nor  even   wrapping  it in  musical   form, but   rather   reaching   for   whimsy   in   a highly  civilized  game.
Or  am  I knuckle-headed Douglas Haig?
or  Champlain, losing   all  the   main  events?
Napoleon, bedeviled by staff  and  tired from   ulcers  or  too  much work  or  those  hot
baths,
delayed until ten  his attack at Waterloo,
and  Caesar put  off seeing an  eye doctor
-anyway, failed to spot  the  bulging knives.

Perhaps it is just that  Everson  uses the mask,  a method currently out  of favor  in Canadian poetry  at the  present time.  But I  don't think  it is as simple  as that.  The mask of Pound or Yeats was never  (or seldom)  used to disguise the immediate concerns of the  poet  as he  reacted to life at  his  nerve  ends;  in  fact,   the  contrary is true.  I think  R.  G.  Everson  is talking about  his former poems  when  he says
My  brain is a roller coaster of convolutions, curlicues that mainly comprehend
fiat-out fact.
I  see   and    know    belatedly,  long    after
feeling.
 I  think  it  would   be  a  mistake   to  say that  Everson  is lost  to us, though. (That "us"  being,  perhaps, ambitious.)  He  has shown  great  capabilities. I would  prefer to say that  Blind Man's  Holiday  (for it is that   rare   thing,   a   unified   book,  not   a random collection of four  years'  poetry) was an  excursion  into  far  lands.
The  McGill  Poetry Series is a unique institution in  this  country,  presenting as it does interesting young  poets from the Montreal campus. Former presentations have included Leonard Cohen and George  Ellenbogan, for instance, and  the latest  is Michael Malus,  a student in medicine  at  McGill.
Most of the poems in the book form a composite  portrait of the  poet's  city, and they  are accompanied by Stephen Roth's photographs of  night-time Montreal. Malus  sees his city in a way that  is not particularly original, as a great  animal, brooding  in  the  shelter  of  Mount Royal. This  is the  poet's  abiding metaphor, and he  plays on  it  through seemingly  endless variations. Unfortunately  this simplest  of romantic conventions  seems contrived when  it is worried  over  so often.

Deserted city hibernating beast pulse  slowed barely  breathing

Heard thus,  Malus  sounds  like any  num­ ber of student-poets. In  a poem like "Bus Stops",   in  which   the   poet   sits  between  two  priests  and  ogles  a  girl,  and  tells  of his  ogling  in  sacramental   jocular   terms, he  sounds   like  Layton  of   fifteen   years ago.   (A  great   danger to  the   Montreal poet.)   In  fact,  it will not be until  at least his next  book  that  Malus  will sound  like his own  voice.  At  the  present  time  he  is too  caught    up   with   amusing  simile   to listen  to  himself,  it  would   appear. Too

57

REVIEW ARTICLES


many times a poem begins:  "Like a (something) , the   (something)   (does something.)"
And  I  think   that   in  his next  book  he
will not  say anything  like

In  this  age  of  republics and  democracies
I choose  to dwell
on  the  anachronism of an  Absolute Ruler
and  by many
he is called  Death:


Bytown   Books  are   the   product  of  a lately seen swelling of poetic activity in Ottawa, and  Harry Howith's offset folios promise  to produce inexpensive  books by some  of  the   country's  more   prominent poets, including, they say, AI Purdy. Meanwhile,  Howith's  own   book,   pro­ duced  with  two  different types, shows in itself   a   microcosm  of   what   has   been happening in Ottawa.
In   Part   I   of   Burglar   Tools   Howith
speaks in curious stanzas of unrhymed iambics that  cause a strange nagging separation from  the  poet's  emotional activity.  His  responses  are  ironic  or  cere­ bral  rather than  sensual.  He  has a  tend­  ency,  furthermore, to  address  the  world on  the  behalf   of  some  seemingly  agreed social  "we."
Part   II switches  from  the  stanza  pat­
tern   to  a  kind  of  action   painting  with words,  in  slang   and   conversational  ad­ dress  of  the   "modern"  variety.  Howith imitates the  typographical ideas of  earlier












ss
 





liberated poets, but seemingly with more caprice  than   intent  to  clarify   the  read­ ing.   The  language,  however,    is   more  direct   than   that   in  Part   I, and  imparts more  life  and  movement.
To  this  time,  though, Howith seems to get  terribly   involved   in  minor  situations that  would  take a Souster  four or six lines to  crystallize,  and   often   he  wanders  in witty  Ferlinghetti-like irrelevancies.
But   Howith  seems   to  have   read   an amount of  modern poetry,  and  he seems to  have  come  across  the  fact  that  poetry is  a  vocal  art.  If he  will  listen  more  to his voice, find out for instance  if he really does speak  in inversions, he may  produce some  very  interesting poetry  in  the  years ahead.



OF LOVE
AND POLITICS
 





S. E. Read



J. M.  s.  CARELEss,  Brown   of the  Globe, vol. 2, Statesman of Confederation, r86o­
r88o. Macmillan, $7.50.


WHEN  I REVIEWED the  first volume  of Brown  of the Globe (Can. Lit., No.  4,  Spring,  Ig6o)    I praised   it  as  a "work  of first magnitude in  the  realm  of Canadian scholarship," but  said   that though Professor  Careless  "has  treated Brown,  the politician, fully and most sympathetically,  he  has  left  Brown,   the man,  lurking  in the shadows.  Perhaps volume  two  will change the  picture."
Now  the  work  is done,  the  task  com­
pleted. Volume Two  traces  the  career  of this extraordinary man  through the agon­ izing days prior  to Confederation; follows his decline  as a mighty  force  in Canadian politics; and  brings  him  to his tragic  close as he slowly dies from  a  festering wound received  at  the  hands of  George  Bennett, a   disgruntled,  drunken   workman  who had   just  been  discharged  from  the  ranks of  the  Globe.  Does  Brown,  the  man,  still lurk   in   the   shadows? The  answer   is  a definite "No". The finished  work is much more  than   a  political  history   of  Brown and his times.  It is a fine biography, writ­ ten   with  warmth, understanding, and sympathy,  as  well  as  with  an  indefatig­ able  attention to the continuing political intrigues and   manoeuvrings  that   some­ what  overshadowed  Brown   as  a  person in  the  earlier   volume.
The reason  for  Brown's  emergence in
this  volume  as a  warm, human  being­
quite  apart from  Brown  the  politician-
 is a  simple  one.  "Suddenly, surprisingly, the confirmed  bachelor of forty-three was falling  very  much   in  love."  The  Brown of  Volume   One   had   had   no  love-no Tetty, no Fanny Brawne,  no Countess Guiccioli,    no   Delilah  even-to    draw him    from    politics    or   from    the   ink­ odoured office of the Globe.  At least, Mr.  Careless  mentions none.  But  in  I862,  in Edinburgh,  Brown    met   Anne  Nelson, sister  of  William and   Thomas  Nelson, the  sons of  that   famous  Thomas Nelson who   had   founded  the   publishing  firm which  still proudly bears the family name.  Younger than  Brown  by  some  ten  years, "she   was  light-hearted,  lively,  and   en­ gaging,  yet  no  less intelligent and  firm­ minded for  that." The courtship was quietly  ardent and  swiftly successful. The wedding followed  quickly  on the  heels of the engagement. And before Anne could fully   realize   what    had    happened,   she found   herself   in   colonial   Toronto,  the centre of a cheering crowd of five thousand, who  escorted  "the  Chief" and his  bride   through  the  muddy streets   of the  city,  to  the  accompaniment of  "hun­ dreds  of hissing  torches,  Roman  candles,  and  rockets".
From  this  point   on  (and   the  account
of the marriage comes early in the book), there are numerous quotations from Brown's letters to his beloved wife, and numerous  references  to  problems,  small

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   large,   inextricably  connected  with the   existence   of  a  thoroughly  domesti­ cated    politician.  He   is   worried   about  baby   "Maggie",  he   enjoys   "the   most agreeable  chuckles   when   I   think   how perfectly   lovable  and  loving my  Anne is,"  he  is  concerned about   the  choice  of chandeliers, china, silverware, and house­ hold   furnishings  in  general. He  regrets leaving  his wife when  he goes on political  commissions,   even   the  most   important, and   he  frequently  arranges  for   her   to travel  with  him-to  Montreal, to Que­  bec, to New York. And  at  the end,  Anne and  the children watch  by him as he slips into   the   final   coma   that   heralded  the coming  of  death. From  love and domestic happiness  emanates  a  warmer  air  than  from  politics  alone.
Yet   politics   are   by  no  means   thrust
entirely   to  one  side.  They  still  play  the major role in the work, though Brown's devotion  to  the  Globe   and   his  venture into  the  scientific  breeding of fine cattle loom large also from time to time. The political  portions of the canvas  are  broad and  exciting.  Great events,  seen through Liberal  eyes, are described in vivid detail: the  brief coalition of Macdonald and Brown preceding Confederation;  the Charlottetown Conference; the junket through the Maritimes; the Quebec Con­ ference; the  negotiations with  the  British Government; the  Fenian  raids; the com­ ing  of Confederation itself. "In  Toronto, to  the  midnight peal  of  church bells, as bonfires   were  set   blazing  in  the   down­  town streets,"  Brown  works  steadily through  the  noisy  night   as  he  writes  a massive editorial in honour of "the  birth­  day  of  a new  nationality".
Crowding the  scene  are  scores of  sha­ dowy  figures -Sicotte,  McGee,  Dorion, Mowat, Blair, Sandfield  Macdonald,

6o
 Wall bridge,   Alexander   MacKenzie, George  Etienne Cartier, Tache, and  hosts of others-who come and go. But John  A. Macdonald   is   an    almost    omnipresent figure-the	arch-opponent  and   arch­ enemy  of  Brown.  With   the  exception of the  brief  interlude of  coalition these  two men    carry    drawn   daggers    when    and  wherever  they  meet.  And  in  the  closing page   of  this   vast,  panoramic  work   the daggers   are    still    drawn,   though   the clutching hands are  now  those  of elderly women.  "As  for  Anne  Brown,  she  often  spent  summers at Oban in her later  years, where   in   time   the   widow   of   another noted   Canadian   appeared,  Lady   Mac­ donald. It was  said  that   the  two  elderly ladies   ignored   each   other   as  their   car­  riages  passed,  staring stiffly ahead, faith­ ful  to  their  husband's [sic]  old  enmity." Not  being  an  historian I am  reluctant
to  comment  on  the  accuracy of   Profes­
sor  Careless's  assessment  of Brown.  I am sure,  however, that  he  has  searched  dili­ gently   to  gather his  materials,  that   (to paraphrase Dryden) he has been a nimble  spaniel,  beating over and ranging through the   records    of   Canadian   history,   and  springing  quarries  with  subtle  skill. The Brown  that finally  is given  us  is  a  man  of  awesome  stature-a devoted husband, a  loving  father, a  superb   journalist, an astute and  skilful politician, an able statesman, a  foremost architect  of  Con­ federation, a great  Canadian.
Some  there   may  be  who  will  say  that this  portrait of Brown  is the  work  of  an hagiographist. I prefer, myself, to believe that  Mr.  Careless  has attempted to draw his  lines   and   use  his  colours   with   the utmost    objectivity  and   honesty.   Yet   it must   be  admitted  that   the  Brown   who appears on  occasion   in  Donald  Creigh­ ton's  memorable two  volume  biography,

REVIEW ARTICLES



John A. Macdonald, does not always look rwr    behave    like    the    Brown    of   Mr. Careless.
For  example, the  Brown  in Creighton, "an  awkward, red-haired, extremely seri­ ous  young  Scotsman of firm  views, great  ambitions,  and   superabundant   physical energy," is seen  by Careless as a  man  of "tall, commanding presence, kindly  good nature, quick   laugh, and  eager,   voluble  conversation  that   would   reveal  high ideals  and   sensitive  dreams to  the  right  kind  of  woman." Or  look,  if you will, at the   events   of   Saturday,  3   September,
1H64, at  the  Charlottetown  Conference.
In   Creighton  this  is  Macdonald's  day. He  addresses the  gathering on  the "general character of the  proposed feder­ ation", "was  full  of his subject", and  his speech   was  "probably  the  longest  given at  the  conference". He  was  also  a  "con-
 vivial host", and "at three o'clock in the afternoon, all the delegates-thirty-three in number-adjourned to  the Queen Victoria  for an  elaborate luncheon. They were   still   there,  talking  and    drinking toasts,  until  late  in  the  evening."
Careless's  account of  this  same  Satur­ day  differs  in  detail   and   in  tone. Galt,  Cartier, and Brown soar into prominence. It  was  Galt   who  held   the  attention  of the conference that  morning (Macdonald, says  Careless,   had   spoken   on   Friday), and  "then it  was  the  Canadians' turn  to play  hosts"-not    specifically  Mac­ donald's.

All  the  delegates were  invited to  an  elegant luncheon  aboard   the    Queen  Victoria. ... The mood   could  not   have   been   more  cor­ dial,  as  Cartier and Brown seized  the  glow­ ing  moments after  lunch  to  win   a  psycho­  logical   victory  for   Confederation.  "Cartier and  I  made eloquent speeches-of  course-




ARTHUR 	MEIGHEN
A BIOGRAPHY by ROGER GRAHAM

VOL. 2:  AND FORTUNE  FLED,   I920-I927


The clash   of  personalities and  the  polit­
ical  duelling of  Mackenzie King  and  his
predecessor in  office  provide high  drama for  the  second volume of  this   brilliant  biography. Of   the  first  volume  Eugene  Forsey wrote:  "Everyone who   reads   this  first  volume will  wait  eagerly and   confidently  for   the   sequel. For   even   this   volume  is  proof that  Professor Graham is  one   of  our
very  few  first-rate political biographers." At  all  book  and department stores.  $8.oo

CLARKE	IRWIN
TORONTO	VANCOUVER



6I

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   ... the  ice  became completely broken, the  tongues of  the  delegates wagged  merrily, and    the   banns  of  matrimony  between  all the   provinces  of   the   B.N.A.   having  been formally proclaimed and  all  manner of  per­ sons  duly   warned  then   and   there  to  speak  or  forever after  to  hold  their   tongues -no man   appeared to  forbid   the  banns  and  the union  was   thereupon   formally   completed and   proclaimed!" There, in  the  chief  state­ room   of   the   Queen  Victoria  .  . .  twenty­ three  men   had   warmly  agreed   to  found  a new   nation.

The Monday following  is no  less  con­ fusing.   In   Creighton,  Brown   and   Galt  spoke  "at length   on  the  economic  and financial  aspects  of  the  proposed  feder­  ation", and   "the  conference had  almost ceased  to  be a meeting  for  the  consider­  ation   of  a   Maritime  legislative union: it   was   becoming  a   conference  for   the promotion  of   British   North  American federation." In Careless,  however,  "Mon­ day  was  Brown's   own  day  at  the  Con­ ference.  He  spoke  on  the  constitutional framework  of  the   proposed   federation, the structure of the central and  local governments, the  division  of  powers  be­ tween  them,  and  how   the   judiciary should   be  constituted. In  short, he  had the   all-important  task  of   outlining  the constitution of  the  new  union,  and  took the  whole  day  in  doing  it."
I do  not  intend here  to promote  con­
troversy,  nor  do  I wish to insinuate that one of these excellent biographies is more excellent   than the   other.   But  I am  re­ minded  of   Dr.   Johnson's   well   known essay  (Rambler, No.  6o)  on  the  almost insurmountable  difficulties  confronting the  writers of  biography.  ("For the  inci­ dents  which  give excellence  to biography  are   of  a   volatile  and   evanescent  kind, such  as soon escape  the memory,  and  are
 rarely   transmitted  by  tradition.")   And after   all  is  said  and   done,   the  business of Creighton is Macdonald, that  of  Care­ less,  Brown.   The reader   of  either  WOI'k should   not  really   seek  for  or  expect   to find  a detailed drawing of  any figure save the   primary  one,   who  fills  the   central portion  of  the  canvas  and   overshadows all   others   who   crowd   around  him   in varying attitudes of  scorn, admiration, or indifference.
But  let  me  not  end  on  a  note  of  con­
fusion.   In   the   last   analysis,   I am   sure that  this now   completed portrait  of George  Brown  will long  remain  a classic study  in  the gallery  of Canadian  political figures.  True, Mr.  Careless  is no Boswell, for  he  did  not  walk  the  dirty  streets  of Toronto town  with  his hero,  nor  journey or; horseback with  him  through the Lack­ woods of Upper Canada, nor roister with him  in  the  taverns of  Montreal and  old Quebec.  The    task   he   set   himself   was therefore  more   difficult   than    the   one undertaken by Bozzy, for  Brown  had  also been  dead  some  eighty   years  before   his biographer  began  to  breathe life into  his lifeless  bones.   And   the   bones   do  come alive. By  the use of correspondence (per­ sonal   and   official),  by  snippets  of   re­ corded  conversation,  by   extracts  from speeches   and   editorials,  by  a  carefully controlled chronological pattern,  by  the application of painstaking scholarship, by a  clear   and   frequently  a  brilliant   style, and, finally,  by an  unwavering devotion to his subject, Professor Careless in Brown of the  Globe  has  made a rich  and  living centennial gift  to all Canadians. It really should  be "required" reading, the assign­ ment   to  be  completed  by  I July,  1967.







TITULAR CONFUSIONS

w.   L.    MORTON.   The  Kingdom of   Canada.
McClelland  &  Stewart.  $Io.oo.

SELDOM  HAS  THE TITLE of  a  book  hung on  a  slenderer hook  than   that  of  W. L. Morton's new  history,  The  Kingdom of Canada. Observe the  scope  of his  narra­ tive. Cautiously ignoring the possibility of Irish   forerunners,  he   begins   with   Leif Ericson  almost  a thousand years ago, and ends  with  John Diefenbaker in  rg6o. For a mere  eight  years  out  of that  millenium Canada  has been  a kingdom, and  in Pro­ fessor  Morton's  narrative  the  affairs  of that  kingdom   occupy   precisely  25 pages out  of  5 r 8, while  the  transition from  the larval  state  of dominionhood is accorded a single paragraph on page 494· Surely, if the   point    of   the   whole   book   lies   in Canada's  development into   a  constitu­ tional  monarchy, an astonishingly weighty prelude has  been  written to  a  tiny  play, and  one  can  only  regard Professor  Mor­  ton's  achievement  as one  of  magnificent anti-climax.
In  fact,  The Kingdom of Canada  is a
straightforward and  adequate history  of the  European occupation of British North America from  the earliest  known landings; once  its title  is disregarded as irrelevant,  the   book   stands   as  a  good general account to put  into  the  hands  of the  reader   who  desires  a competent  sur­ vey of Canadian history  as  a  prelude to further  studies.   It  is  an   account that
 demonstrates  clearly   how  from   the  be­ ginning the  development of Canada  has led  towards   the  emergence of  a  nation markedly  different in  both  political and  social  terms  from   the  other  half  of  the North  American sub-continent.
Professor Morton has carefully  avoided
those semi-mythical approaches to Cana­ dian   history   which   see  it   in   terms   of dramatically  magnified   movements.  He  has been cautious in laying  stress on  par­ ticular   regional  developments as  "keys"  to  national  development; the  images  of the  St. Lawrence and  the  north-west are alike  reduced   from   the  gigantic  dimen­ sions  certain other  historians have  been tempted to accord  them.  Indeed, Profes­ sor  Morton   has  tended to  over-diminish some of the  significant currents of Cana­ dian   history,  and  British  Columbians in particular may  feel  with   justice  that   he has  unduly   neglected  the   role  of  their  province  in  the  general record.   Yet  the shift  from   baroque excess  to  classic  re­ straint   is  to be  welcomed, and  Professor Morton is  to  be particularly commended on  his  refusal  to  create heroic  imag,es of the  men  who  shaped the  Canadian past.  His dry and  sometimes  ironic  observation of   figures   whom   other   historians have over-dramatized  helps   to   place  person­ alities  in  a  true   relation to  events,  and  gives  a  refreshing sharpness  to  the  nar­ rative.  In  the  very straightforwardness of the  telling,  what  grandeur exists  in  our  history  is more  convincingly rendered in The Kingdom  of Canada than  in  many of  the  flamboyantly ambitious  accounts that  have  appeared in  recent  decades  as the   expected symptoms of  dawning nationalist  pride.
GEORGE WOODCOCK

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



DEFENCE  AND ESCAPE

MILTON   ACORN.  Jawbreakers.   Contact   Press.
$2.00.
ELDON   GRIER.   A  Friction   of  Lights.  Contact
Press.   $2.00.

ONE THING OF  WHICH Milton  Acorn's Jawbreakers has convinced me is that political   poems   frequently  embarrass.  I have  found   that   a  poet  debases  himself in  propaganda - especially  in  political propaganda pronounced at  thousands of miles remove from the particular political event. Acorn in the poem "Lumumba Arrested" tries   to  sketch  an   unfamiliar scene  (the  Congo  during rebellion), fails to do  this convincingly, but  then  goes on to  declare that   the  U.N.  intervention in the  Congo   was  selfish  and  tyrannical­ was   motivated  only   by   its   hatred  of Lumumba's "individuality."

It was  a  serious grief   that made him  stand yet  he  laughed for  the  joy of standing;
and  after  him another  stood ... ten thousand others
in  all  their tropical colors
stood  laughing,  danced  and    sang-even their   curses   were   good-humored:
but   more efficient   than  vultures the   white men   gathered
with   clubs,   machine guns,  sabre   jets, and   shouts of  how   unselfish   they  were.

It is not  my  purpose to  decide  what  the U.N.'s motives  were  in  the  Congo; only to say  that  Acorn  does  not  even  attempt to persuade the reader  that  they were malevolent. Not  to  prove  is to imply  the impossibility of proof. Hence  propaganda. And  Acorn  goes  on  in  this  poem  to  use his unsubstantiated claim  as the basis for an  extended and  cliched  attack on North American  oppression  of   unconvention­ ality.

... they've got  measuring tapes,  calipers, black   books  for   names.
 They  want  everyone  who   isn't  cut    to   a specific   pattern,
and  nobody is -not  even   themselves. It's a  matter of  disguise.
I advise you  to  wear  a  grey  flannel suit.

Acorn's defensiveness permeates much of  Jawbreakers. He   begins   ranting and bragging:

If this  brain's over-tempered consider that the  fire was want and  the  hammers were  fists.
I've  tasted my  blood   too  much
to  love  what I was  born   to.

And  by page  17  he has finally  discovered and  is bravely  assaulting LIFE editorials. Wow.
That the  defensiveness often   prevents
his poems  from  becoming art  is a shame, for  Acorn   is  the  author of  some  of  the most  vivid  images  in  Canadian  poetry.

But   my  mother's  look
was  a field   of  brown oats,  soft-bearded; her   voice   rain   and   air  rich   with   lilacs : and   I loved   her   too  much to  like
how   she  dragged her   days  like  a sled  over
gravel.

And   when   the  defensiveness grudgingly allows  his image-making talent the parti­ culars   with  which  to  build  a  real  poem, Acorn  does comes through with a memor­ able  one -in  this  book  the best seeming  "Ordinary  Story",  where   for   once   the compassion and  anger  are  real,  credible, and  communicated.
In  all  his  poems  Acorn  is robust, and next    to   this   robustness  Eldon    Grier's poems  seem pallid  and  lifeless. His A Friction   of  Lights begins  with  "An  Ec­ stacy", a very  unecstatic poem  in  twenty­ one  parts. Unlike Acorn,, Grier celebrates his   world.    His   lines   are   spotted    with  words   such   as   "fantasy",   "revelation", "joy",  "quivering  gold",   "sensational", "vitality",  "serene",  "magical",   and "beauty". Always  optimistic, he  says  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  new  buildings that  are  replacing old familiar ones:
We  cannot as  yet  recognize the expression of our  happiness contained in  the  clean new  shapes.

But  it  is there and  more.
It is probably the perpetually smooth rhythm  of   these   twenty-one  stanzas   of praise   that   most  make  them   dull.  Grier once  in  Stanza XIV advises  that
Our poets  must  give  themselves to a kind of unsensible madness;
they  must  hear  music  not  meaning as they
write.

Words must be clear bells,
or  sound gravely along like  horns.
They  should  detonate,  explode  like   light- ning  under the  sea, ...
A laudable ambition, but  there  are  few, if any, explosions  in  this work.  Grier  tells us the  truth earlier in  the  stanza: "As  a poet  I  need   to  experience ecstacy."
 But Grier's  poems certainly approach being   art   more  often   than   do  Acorn's. And  they  are  quite   pleasant  near-art­ harmless  reading for someone who would like to  be  comfortable on  a winter  even­ ing.   They   are   pleasant  almost   to   the point   of  being   escapist;  even   the   few disturbing scenes are  made innocuous by the  ever-gentle rhythm, as in  one  of  the best poems, "View  From  a Window."

And   her  brother whom   she  holds  shyly  for me  to  admire . . .
the  mess of mucous and  the  clinging feeding
flies ...
awake, a  toxic  film  covers   his  eyes
shifting mechanically in  patterns of  escape.

Here,  with  characteristic dignity, he con­ cludes   that   he  is  upset   "that  dozy  flies can  travel  here  without  restraint/in the gentlest  of  hatchures."
Acorn,  then,  usually  appears bold  and




COLLECTED  WORKS  OF    JOHN	STUART MILL

The  Earlier Letters of  John Stuart Mill
1812-1848

2 volumes, edited  by FRANCIS E. MINEKA Per set, $2o.oo

Introduction by  F.  A.  HAYEK. All  personal letters available, including 537  letters and   excerpts of  letters  (238 hitherto unpublished, and  72  published only  in  part). Invaluable for   the  study of  the  formative years  of  Mill,  before publication  of  the Principles of  Political Economy  ( r 848).
These Letters, which   will  form   Vols.  XII and   XIII of  the  Collected Works  of
John Stuart  Mill,   now  in  preparation, are  the  first  to  be  issued  in  the  Series.
UNIVERSITY OF 	I::,J!I  TORONTO PRESS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



clumsy,   and   Grier    as   a   shy   aesthete. Acorn's  "Ordinary   Story"   is  the   best poem,  but  on  the  whole  neither of these contrasting books of poetry  shows a poet anywhere near  greatness.
FRANK DAVEY




NUANCES
OF HISTORY

w.  s. MACNUTT, New  Brunswick,  A  History:
1784-IB67, Macmillan, $B.so.

STEWART  MACNUTT, Professor of History at  the  University of New Brunswick,  has now filled an enormous gap  by presenting an excellent history of the province  where he lives and  teaches.  I say "teaches", for the book has that  rather awesome and authoritive quality present in Professor MacNutt's lectures-even his conversa­ tion-which   tends   to  hold    suspended even  the most uninterested in historical background.
There  are   many   facts  here,   and   the
book  reveals  a great  deal of work on  the accumulating of material on early settle­ ment   and   early  government,  but  never do  these  facts  weigh  the  book  down.  For Stewart MacNutt has  both  an  analytical and   a  creative  mind,   and  for  him   the roles  are  inseparable in  this  book.  There is  an  impeccable command  of  the  lan­  guage,  and  awareness of  the  nuances of history  here -all  matters  that,  depend­ ing on how  they are handled, could easily make  or  break  the entire  undertaking. It is largely  because of  Professor  MacNutt's writing   that   readers   will  find  the  book one of the most interesting studies of pro­ vincial  history  in  Canada.

66
 For the material itself is not so very interesting. The   struggle  of  New  Bruns­ wick   toward  provincehood  has   always been   contrasted  with   the  strugg,les  led by such  figures  as Howe  in  Nova  Scotia  and    Mackenzie   in    Ontario,   and    the makers of  New  Brunswick   history   have  come out  poorly in the contrast. Here, for the  first time, comes  an  understanding of people  as well  as events,  from  which  one may   conclude   that    without  the   strong  leadership  from   New   Brunswick   Can;L­ dian Confederation would  not have come about. My only  disappointment was that the  book  did  not  go  on  until  I 88o  when there  seems to be a more  obvious  change in  New  Brunswick  history   and   temper; but  I867  has its own  logic as a date  with which   to  end.
It is, however,  in the  writing  that  New Brunswick  excels. It is impressively  fluent and  there  is a practiced feeling for local history's  more  dashing, rhetorical aspects. It is the  teacher-speaker who comes forth in  this  history's pages.  MacNutt's use of facts  is at  times economical, at others sweeping, but  never repetitious or routine, and  his writing bespeaks  an  ease in the writer's role and  a deep  knowledge of the  function of the  historian. His style shows  a   sensitivity   toward  shifting   dy-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



namics in a rather ordinary historical context.  Beyond   this,  he   has   a  special feeling  for  poise,  repose,  and  majesty­ often  seen  in  his  lectures -and  such  as is not  often  found  among  Canadian his­ torians    who   deal   with   the   nineteenth century.
DONALD STEPHENS




THEM  AND US

KENNETH   ORVIS.  The   Damned   and  the  Des­
troyed. McClelland  &  Stewart. $4.50.

LUBOR  zlNK. The  Uprooted. Longmans. $5.50.

THESE  TWO BOOKS  bear  strong  similar­ ities  that   belie  their  apparent  difference in  theme.   The Uprooted  deals  with  re­ fugee  camps   and  resistance-from-within to   the    present   Czech  regime;   The Damned And  The  Destroyed  is about  the narcotics trade in  Montreal. Aside  from this,  they  are  both  chaff  from  the  same mill:   both  are  them-and-us books,  both recommend   violence as  the  only  viable solution  of  our social ills, both  are written in  a  style  that   suggests  a  rapid  thumb­ through of  several  dozen  movie  scenarios.  They are not novels, dealing with charac­ ters;  they  are  "treatments" dealing   with types.
The    them  in   Lubor    Zink's   book   is
anyone  who  is non-Czech, or  Czech  and part   of  (or  sympathetic to)   the  present regime.   The  apparent  hero   is  George Urban,  a  Czech   refugee   who   occupies much  of the  book like a senior-matricula­ tion  Socrates,  expatiating upon   History,  Man,  Responsibility; unlike  Socrates, he leads  himself  to  no  conclusions. Eventu­ ally, his motivation grows  so confused  by degenerate  flirtation  with    the   porcine
 society of American Occupation  Officers, and  Officers'  wives,  that   he  manages to fail   a   lie-detector  test   and   is  doomed again  to the life of the  politically  suspect, this time in the West.  Not so the political underground and  just plain  folk he left behind.  In  a  wave  of  violence  and  self­ immolation they manage to: smuggle out George's  innocent and  right-thinking re­ latives,   incriminate   several   commissars,  kill several  political cops,  blow  up a rail­  way  tunnel. The   short   fuse  to  all  this action  is George's  wife  Tanya, a  movie actress   and   an   exact   double  for  Hedy  Lamarr in  all  those  is-she?-or  isn't-she? intrigue films made  twenty-five years ago. She  has become  too  intimate with  them, you see,  and   to  become  again  one  of  us she must destroy  herself.  Taking as many of them with  her  as possible, of course.
Maxwell  Dent, Kenneth Orvis'  hero, is definitely  one  of us;  he is a hero  because he has fought the good fight and won for himself all the good  things  of this world: wall-to-wall stereo,  the  black  belt in judo, a beautiful, sensitive  girl  friend,  with money, connections, and  a sports car. Cer­ tainly   he  is  in  a  position   to  solve  our social problems.  His solution  to the social ills of the  narcotics trade is  very simple: shoot   the   traffickers,    and   the   addicts whom    the    resulting    cold-turkey   cure  doesn't   kill  will  be  cured, because   they cannot obtain  drugs. Dent's only flaw, in fact, is that  he drinks rather a lot. Perhaps Mr.  Orvis'  next  book, which  he describes as  "controversial", will  suggest   burning the distilleries  to cure  alcoholism.
BARRIE HALE

BOOKS IN REVIEW



COMMUNICATION WITH EFFORT


Mass  Media   in  Canada, ed.  John  A.  Irving.
Ryerson.  $s.so.

CoMMUNICATION  has  always  been  vital to  Canada's existence.   From   the  lonely times  of  the  fur-traders' canoes  through the expanding era of the railway and tele­ graph  to  the   present   troubled  times  of television,    communication   has   been   a chief  factor in  keeping  Canada  going  as a   nation.   It  would  seem   important, therefore, for us to know something about the  means  of  communication in Canada. A  first  step  in  studying   them  has  been taken  with  the publication of Mass Media in  Canada, edited   by John  A. Irving.
The book  is really  less a study  than  it
is a panel  discussion  in which  the moder­ ator,   Mr.   Irving,  introduces  the  topic, learned  specialists  present various  aspects of   it,   and   Mr.   Irving   then   sums   up, rounding  out   the   conversation.  And   it suffers  from  the  virtue  and  vice of panel discussions;   the   main   theme   is  tackled  from  a variety  of  angles  by a number of experts, but  the  whole  issue tends  to  be clouded in  an  excess of words.
The contributors include  Arnold Edin­
borough on  the  press, Robert  Weaver  on books,  J. R.  Kidd   on  films,  Bruce  Ray­
mond on radio, Eugene Hallman on television, George Elliott on advertising, Marshall McLuhan on the electronic age and  John R.  Seeley  on "communication, communications and  community," an essay  which,   perhaps  inevitably,  comes out  almost  as murkily as its title.
There seems  to  be a general  preoccu­
pation among the  contributors with  the

68
 inevitable struggle  Canada's systems of communication face against  American intrusion. As  is  almost   always  the  case, the  problems are  recognized, their  effects described, and  practicable solutions  are found wanting.
The book is of value,  however,  in  pro­ viding   a  concise  resume  of  some  of   the most  important fields of  communication. Mr.    Edinborough   on   the   press,   Mr.  Weaver on  books and  Mr. Kidd  on films are   particularly   valuable  in   describing the   situation in  Canada  today   and   ex­ plaining why  it  is  that   way  in  their   re­ spective   fields.   Mr.   Elliott's  essay  on advertising  is   unfortunately  more   of  a short  course  in  the  operation of advertis­ ing  than   it  is  an  explanation of  adver­ tising's  important  role.
Marshall McLuhan's attack  on  the electronic age  is potentially the  most  im­ portant section  of the  book. Instant com­  munication has  shrivelled   the  world to a village,  and  requires adjustment by all of us,  but  particularly  by those  involved  in the  more  traditional  fields such  as news­ paper  publishing-far more  adjustment than   they   show   signs  of  making.  One  could   have   wished,   however,  that   Mr. McLuhan's  message   had   been   itself   a better example of communication.




®
®

BOOKS IN REVIEW



For   that   matter, one  could   wish  the same   of  the   whole   book,   the   physical thing.   For  if  there   was  ever  a  book  de­ signed  to thwart reading, this surely is it. Printed in  thick  black  type  on  slate-grey paper   it  offends   and   wearies  the  eyes. Chapter  titles   (coyly,   and   thirty   years late,  without capital letters) are sprinkled  across  the  page  in  sense-defying blots.
It is about  as ugly a book as one could
imagine, which  is supremely ironic  con­ sidering   its  subject.  Its   subject  remains  an  important one,  however,  particularly to  Canadians, and   the  persistent  reader can  find  in  this  book  much of value.
DONALD STAINSBY

THE SURVIVAL OF HOPE

The Plough  and  the  Pen.  Ed.  Ilona Duczynska and  Karl  Polanyi. McClelland  &   Stewart.
$6.so.

The  Plough and the Pen is a selection  of Hungarian prose  and  poetry   written  be­ tween   1930  and   1956.  One   moves  as  a reader  from  a sensation  of abstract indig­  nation at  the  social  injustice of  a  semi­ feudal society  into  the  brief  hopefulness  of  the  period   of  reform,  and  then  to  a final  human  involvement  for  Humanity betrayed. Named in  honour  of the Hun­ garian  Populist  Movement, the  book  be­ gins  with  selections  describing the feudal  condition   of   the   Hungarian   peasantry and  ends  with  Ferenc Juhasz's powerful  poem,  "The  Boy  Changed  into   a  Stag  Cries  out  at  the  Gate of Secrets." In  his foreword   W.  H.   Auden   calls  this  poem one of the masterpieces of our  time. Such it  unquestionably  seems  to  be.  It  reads like  an   impassioned  elegy  for   deceived human  nature.  Juhasz's poetry   displays
 an extraordinary imagination, and  a pas­ sionate,  spawning imagery  evolved  from biology and  modern technology.
The   poets  represented in  The  Plough
and  the  Pen  were  translated with  great care  by Canadian poets  as disting,uished as  A.  J. M.   Smith,  Margaret  Avison, Louis Dudek and Earle Birney. Bilingual work sheets were used as well as tape recordings  as aids for the translators. This gives  the  translations a  definite  sense  of the   poetic   experience recreated intact. These   poems  combine  a  direct   lyricism with an insistent, social protest  as in Attila Jozsef's   lines,   "Yet   the   doves   that   live within him,/star-feathered, carolling pure,/will swell to griffons avenging/the raven-crowd's deeds  on  the  poor."  Gyula Illyes'  Odes   hold  the  heroic  sweep  and tone of the folk epic. The  poems of Laszlo Benjamin, Zoltan Zelk, Lajos Tomasi  and Peter  Kuczka express a painfully honest moral  degradation and  a despair  both private and  political.
The   prose   selections   present   an   ac­ count  of a  groping struggle,  not  only  for a   basic  social   justice   but   also   for   the definition   of  an  insistence   on  a  funda­ mental   human dignity   denied  a  people.  From   the   psychological   penetration  of Zsigmond  Moricz's "To  Eat  One's  Full" to  the  final  poignant  self  accusation  in Laszlo  Nemeth's   drama  "Galileo'',  this collection   passionately insists that  a society which denies its members political freedom and   social   justice  denies   them their  basic humanity. This  is the point  of Illyes' graphic portrayal of what  was vir­ tually  a life of serfdom  in  "People of  the Puszta." By  contrast  Aron   Tamasi's "Pinions of  Poverty" more  lyrically  and poetically    evokes   landscape   and    pea­  santry.
Those   pieces   documenting  the   hope

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



born  of  land   reform   are  written in  the style and from the point of view of strict social   realism.    But    the   work   of   Pal Szabos,   Peter   Veres,   and   Tibor    Dery avoids any trace  of the didactic or crudely propagandistic. Tibor Dery's  "Odysseus" is the  most  memorable. A description of the release after seven years of a political prisoner, it  is  a  masterpiece of  restraint and  conveys  with  spare  severity  the  ter­ rible  impact   of  totalitarian  injustice  on human lives.                    MARYA  FIAMENGO



DESERT MISSION

E.  L.  M. BURNS. Between Arab  and  Israel.
Clarke,  Irwin.  $6.so.

LT.-GENERAL E.  L.  M. BURNS, now  the Canadian  government's adviser   on  dis­ armament, was appointed in  I954 as  the Chief   of   Staff   of  the   United   Nations Truce  Supervision Organization  in  Pal­ estine.  He   was  the   senior  officer  repre­  senting  the  United  Nations in the Middle East  at  the  time  of  the  Suez  crisis, and was asked  to take over  as Commander of the  hastily created United Nations  Emer­ gency   Force.  His   contribution  during these   years   was   to   attempt  to  find   a peaceable solution  on  the ground for  the many  warlike   incidents which   occurred before  and  after   the  dramatic events  of October-November   I956.
Following    the   United  Nations'   de­
cisions  on  the   partition  of  Palestine   in I 948,  the  Jewish   population set  up  the independent state of Israel and at once engaged   in  military measures  to  expand the  frontiers beyond  those  laid  down  by the  United  Nations General Assembly.
After  several  months  fighting,  and  the
murder of the  United Nations  mediator,
 Count Bernadotte, a general armistice agreement was  reached and  demarcation lines  agreed   upon.   In cases  of  violence across   these   lines,   or   other   contraven­ tions   of   the   armistice   agreements,  the United Nations Truce  Supervisory Or­ ganization and  its military observers were to  effect   a   peaceful settlement and,  if possible,   reconciliation.  But   as  General Burns  soon   found,  this  was  a  hopeless task.  Neither  the  Arabs   nor  the  Israelis wanted peace. Israel  surrounded by four Arab  states  was determined to prove  that she could  exist  despite  military  pressures, a  non-viable economy, and  a  mixed population. The Arab  states,  while  never achieving  a  co-ordinated  strategy,  were all  agreed on  the  need  to suppress  Israel and    restore    Palestine  to   Arab   hands. Raids  and  counter-raids across  the  fron­ tiers  and   demarcation lines  were  there­ fore  undertaken for  political  reasons, and  the   violence   and   bloodshed   which   en­ sued  was  to  show  the  opposite   side  the perils  of continued  hostility.  Not  surpris­ ingly  the  United  Nations Truce  Super­ visory   Organization  had    a   frustrating task,   especially   as   it   had   no   physical forces  of  its  own   to  interpose  between  the  parties on  the  ground.
The situation was made  worse after Nasser received  arms from Czechoslovakia in  I 955·  This   weakened  the   pressures brought  by  the  United  States  on  Israel  for  maintaining peace.  And  when  Nasser proceeded to nationalize the Suez Canal, the  Israelis seized  the  opportunity to ex­ ploit   the   quarrel  for   their   own   advan­ tage.  Their invasion  of Egypt on October
29,  I956,  was   designed   to  remove   the
military  threat  to   the   Israeli    southern border and  offer Israel the chance for expansion into  the  Sinai  Desert.
General Burns  naturally welcomed  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



creation of a United  Nations Emergency Force,   and   was  happy   about  the   part Canada played  in its formation. He gives an excellent outline of the conditions both political   and   physical   under   which   the United  Nations   Emergency Force   has operated. But  he  agrees  with  Mr.  Ham­ marskjold in  not  seeing  this  force  as  an example of a  permanent  United Nations  peace  force.  The  circumstances were  too special  and  too  limited. He  is pessimistic about the  possibility of maintaining peace  for  long  in  the  Middle East,  because  he believes   that    economic  conditions  will force   Israel   to  seek  expansion  and   she can  only  do  this  by  war.  In the  mean­ time  the   United  Nations   Emergency Force  still  guards the  arid  wastes  of  the Gaza   strip   to  keep   the   peace   between Arab  and  Israeli.	JOHN   s. CONWAY


THE POINT OF FERMENT

RICHARD JOLY.  Le  Visage de  l' Attente. Centre de   Psychologie  et  de   Pedagogie, Montreal.
$2.60.

RICHARD  JOLv's Le Visage  de l' Attente, has several  levels of interest: it  is an im­ pressive  achievement in  novel  structure, an  examination of the sociological  forces which   continue to   mould    "Les   Cana­ diens," and  a  psychological study  of two men  searching  for  the  meaning of  truth and  life in  a special  context.
The  book   begins   in   the   office  of  a
notary,  Fran ois   Cadieux,  who   is   just receiving   the   news  that   his  old  friend, Pascal  Fabre, a priest,  has died of a heart attack. Cadieux, the  appointed  executor of   Father  Fabre's  will,  must   now  take out  the  document and  consider its  pro-
 VISIOns.  As he  does  so, he  reflects  on  the circumstances connected with  each of the articles of the will, permitting the story to unfold  in  a  series  of flashbacks  and eventually   to  arrive   at  the   point  where it  began.  Taking full  advantage of  the final testament as a unifying  device, the author handles  these flashbacks  with con­ siderable skill; the   reader  is  kept in suspense  yet  is always  aware  of  the  for­  ward  movement of  the  plot.
M. Joly's style is idiomatic, at times almost  poetic  and  at  times  strikingly simple,  suggestive  and  flowing:
Tu   n'aurais pas  compris, Pascal, la feene des   bals  de   la   Faculte,  ni   la   douceur  de
ramener  a  ton   appartement,  quand  elle  a
trop   bu  et   toi  aussi,   la  pauvre  petite folie
qui   joue  sa  grosse  carte, ce  qu'elle appelle
sa  meilleure carte,  pour   l'enjeu de  devenir ta  femme,  la  femme du   voyou   qui  la  ren­ verra  au   petit   matin  avec   une   couple  de baisers    ennuyes  qui    n'ont   pas   meme    la decence d'etre  un  "Merci" poli.
The  characterization in  Le  Visage  is not  as  effective   as  the   book's  structure and style. M. Joly plays the two main characters,  the   notary    and   the   priest, against  one another to bring  each  to life, but  the  priest  comes  out  as far  more be­ lievable   than    the    notary.   Lucile,   the female   protagonist,   does   not   seem   to come  to  life  at  all,  perhaps  because  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



author  depends too  much  upon  abstrac­ tions such  as "Ia femme splendide," "une femme  magnifique,"  "une   femme   mer­  veilleuse," and  the  abstract in  a  woman  is hardly  the  thing  which  arouses  a man  in  the  way  Lucile can  apparently arouse  Fran<;ois.
Le  Visage   de  l'Attente  has  appeared
at  a  time  when  many  Canadians are wondering about the  ferment in  French Canada. It provides insight  into  some of the  least evident yet most important elements of this ferment, in the field of education, in  the  field of lay-clergy  rela­ tions,  in  the  area  of  personal  and  group  raison d'etre. Without becoming bitter, it explores the  kind  of  thinking  responsible for   certain  inadequacies  in  seminary teaching,  inadequacies   which   in   turn  have  been  the cause of extreme  bitterness.  It explores moreover from  the  inside, the author   obviously   having    an   extensive  knowledge of the seminary  system, as well as an unwillingness to ascribe every short­ coming  in  Quebec to external forces.
RONALD SUTHERLAND


CELTIC CANADA

PATRICK    SLATER.    The    Yellow   Briar.   Mac­
millan.  $1.65.
ORLO  MILLER.  The   Donnellys  Must  Die.  Mac­
millan. $5.00.

IT   rs   SURPRISING,  when   one   considers how  great   a  part   the  Irish  immigrants played  in  the  formative years of Canada, and  how large  a proportion of our  popu­ lation   their   descendents  now  comprise, that   we  should   have  so slight  an  Irish­ Canadian literature. In  our own  genera­ tion   we   can   count    a   number  of  fine writers  of Irish  descent or birth-Morley Callaghan, Brian  Moore, Kildare Dobbs,
 but   these,   when   they   have   written  on the   Irish   in   Canada,  have   been   con­ cerned either with  recent  immigrants or with  second  or  third generation city Irish seen as victims  of  corrupting urbanism.
The  two   books   I   am   reviewing are concerned with  rural   Canadian  Irish­ with  the  generation of  immigrants who, in  the  mid-nineteenth  century,  brought with  them  to Canada their  outlooks,  their customs  and  their  bloody feuds.  The Y el­ low  Briar  by  Patrick Slater   (Macmillan,
$1.65), which   was  first  published thirty years  ago,  has  now  been  reprinted in  a paperback edition. It  is  one   of   those plausible and  well-documented  first  per­ son  period  novels  which  reviewers some­ times  take,  as The Yellow  Briar  has been taken, for straight autobiography. It tells, through the  recollections of  an  old  man,  of  the  experiences of  a  boy  who  came from  "drippy Donegal" in  the  age of the great  potato famines. It is  a  book  with two   faces,   for   the   author  combines  a stage  Irishness   of  nauseating   mushiness (Little   People   in   the  depths of  Upper Canada and   "Sure an   Irishman  gets  a lot  of  fun   watching  the  world  go  by") with  an  extraordinary power  of evoking the  physical  shape  and  feel  of the  immi­ grants' world   of  the  184o's  and   I85o's.  There  are   magnificent   descriptions of Toronto in  1847  and  of  the  plague   that  swept   the  city  in  that  year;   of  pioneer  farming and  its methods of land  clearing and   stump   farming; of  the   raw   settle­  ments    in   the    bush   with    their    toping schoolmasters and   cadging   circuit preachers; and, best of all, of a wild wake in   which   the   corpse   was   propped  up among the  celebrants and  the  girls  curt­ sied  and   asked  him  to  dance. But  when the  author drifts  from  statement to senti­ ment    the   novel   falls   apart,   and   one

BOOKS IN REVIEW



wishes  Patrick  Slater  had   merely   given us the  scene  and  the  chorus  and  left out the  hero.
In  The  Donnellys  Must  Die Orlo Mil­
ler   documents  a   darker  side   of   Irish Ontario, the  bitter   partisan  resentments carried  over   with   the   immigrant  ships from   Tipperary, and   the  brutal,  vindic­ tive  violence  they perpetuated. The  Don­ nellys Must  Die is not  fiction,  though at times  the  deeds  of which  the author tells can  strain  one's  power  of  belief.  It  is the careful reconstruction of  the  mass killing of   a   family   of   Irish   settlers   in   rural  Canada  of   I88o.   Mr.   Miller   has  con­ vincingly  investigated  the eighty-year old crime.  He  dwells  no more  than  necessary on   the   horrors  of   the   deed   itself,  and  develops  most  effectively  the  extraordin-
 ary pattern of popular conspiracy which, by silence, evasion  and  terror, saved every one  of  almost   forty   people   involved   in the  slaughter of the  Donnellys from con­ viction  or   even  real  exposure.  That Ontario as late  as  I88o  could  breed  and  conceal  such a brutal mass lynching  serves to remind  one  how  long ancient patterns of violence can  persist in situations where they  no  longer   have  any  meaning.  For the   Donnellys    died   in   a   conflict   that  sprang  out  of  the  divisions  of an  oppres­  sed  and   starving  Ireland, yet  they  met their  end  in  a  prosperous Ontario farm­ ing area  at  the hands  of neighbours who, in  many  cases,  were  respectable and  re­ spected  members  of their  community.
L. T. CORNELIUS






NEW  CANADIAN  NOVELS

COLMAIN BY   SIMON  GRAY
"This is  Mr.   Gray's first   novel   but   he  is  already a  professional  at   the  quiet, malicious comedy of  manners." Times Literary  Supplement.
"...  a  superior  comedy of  manners ... the   unusual  combination  of  impish gravity  and    humorous  restraint  about  both   his  situations  and   his  character­ izations ... a  fine  comic sense  ..." David   Legate, The   Montreal Star.

THE FAVOURITE  GAME  BY   LEONARD COHEN
Throwing aside  conventions and  propriety in  his search for  values and  principles and   the   meaning of  life,  Leonard  Cohen's central figure   delights and   dismays us  in   turn  as  we  follow   his  social   and   amorous contortions. "Leonard  Cohen clearly has  the  stuff  of  an  ingenious writer." David   Legate, The  Montreal Star "It is  the   beauty and   rhythm of  the  words,  the  grace  of  his  writing that make this  book  worth noting and   an  author worth   remembering." Lome Parton, Vancouver Province.

KEEP IT SIMPLE BY   LEE JOHNSON
A special for  mystery lovers,  with  a tangled web of murder spun in  the  Canadian
North.

BRITISH  BOOK   SERVICE (CANADA) LIMITED
1068 BROADWAY AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO


73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



PACIFIC
MYTHS

CHRISTIE    HARRIS.    Once  Upon  A   Totem.
Woodcuts  by John Frazer  Mills. Atheneum,
$3·50.

THE  INDIANS  of  the  North Pacific  Coast have an  unusually rich  store of myth and legend. In  their days  of  lordship, the abundance  of   the   sea   and  forest  gave them leisure to organize a highly  complex social  structure, to raise mighty and hand­ some  cedar lodges and   to  decorate them with   symbols  of   their  past  and  present greatness. The  gifts   of   nature led  them  to  hold   the  sumptuous  potlatches which became  the   heart  of   their  tribal, social and commercial life. They had   time  for son,g, time  for  the  dance -and  time  for the  telling of  tales.
Once  U pan A Totem is a  retelling of
five  stories directed  mainly towards chil­ dren.  Mrs.    Harris  came  to   the   West  Coast as the  wife of the Officer in Charge of Immigration for  British Columbia. Her interest  in   the    Indian   tribes  was   first aroused  by  the   so-called  totem  poles - "monuments to  a  people  unique among the   Indians of   North and  South Amer­ ica".  She   began  to  search  ethnological reports   and   in   so   doing  turned  up   a wealth of  stories related to the  poles. She  then  mingled with the  Indians as  much as possible  in their villages, in  their  homes and   at   their  gatherings.  Her   five  tales have been  handed down  from generation to  generation by  word  of  mouth.
The transition from the  spoken   to  the written word   has  not  spoiled these  tales. They have   their own   freshness and  ori­ ginality and, as  is  true   of  all  traditional literature,  have  also   their   parallels  in stories from other  countries.  "The One-

74
 Horned Mountain Goat" is an  expression of   the   same   reverence  for   nature  as  is found in  the  Greek myths; "The Boy and the   Sea   Monsters" is  another  version of the   success  story   in  European folk  tales, where the  despised weakling finally  finds himself  and proves his worth; "The  Wild Woman of  the  Woods" has  overtones of Hansel and  Gretel, and the  young hero of   "The   Giant  Ogre,  Kloo-Teekl"   be­ longs  in  the  same  ranks as Jack the Giant Killer. The  fifth   story,   "Fly  Again   My Proud Eagle" is based  on  historical fact. The author  tells  us  that  Princess Da-ul, who   escaped massacre at  Kitsum-galum (on   the   Skeena River)   to  preserve  the  Eagle dynasty, was  as  real and romantic a  figure as  Bonnie  Prince Charlie. This story   has  something  of  the   sorrow and yearning  of  the  great Irish legend, "The Children   of   Lir"-but    a   far   happier ending. These are  by no means the  myths of a primitive people providing for  them­ selves   crude  explanations of   the   world around them. Rather they  illuminate the manners and mores of a proud and gifted

BOOKS IN REVIEW



race  who  had  to  face  often  in  their  lives the  choice  between  good  and  evil.
In  style, these  tales  break  away  rather sharply  from  the  traditional Indian tales which  tend  to be leng.thy, leisurely, form­ less and-to  this reviewer-rather bor­ ing. Mrs. Harris' style is clean-cut, almost staccato, with  a  considerable use of con­ versation,   somewhat  too   colloquial   at times. Traditional literature must  be told anew  for   each   generation  and   perhaps Mrs.  Harris' most  outstanding  contribu­ tion has been to preserve the  authenticity of   her  material  while   casting   it   in   a mould  to appeal to today's children.
SHEILA  A. EGOFF



CURRENT  REPRINTS

THE GROWING CROP of Canadian reprints is spreading, particularly in the fields of history and  biography, to which  we are becoming  increasingly addicted. A paper­
covered  edition of J. M.S. Careless's Can­
ada:  A  Story   of  Challenge, bright   and informative, though  not   very   original, has   just   been   published  by  Macmillan ( $2·95) .  The first  titles  in  the  Carleton Library-four  in    number-include Morris Bishop's  Champlain ($2.35), and
J. W. Dafoe's Laurier   ($1.95), which  is
not so much  a biography as an illuminat­ ing  commentary on  a  politician's career  by a  newspaper man  who  observed  it  at close  quarters;  the   Carleton  Library is published  by  McClelland & Stewart.
In French there  is also the excellent paperback series, Figures Canadiennes, published by Editions HMH of Montreal; the  most  recent   titles  are  Lord  Durham
by Roger   Viau   and  Frontenac by W. J.
Eccles.
 UNE HEUREUSE INITIATIVE

ST-DENYS  GARNEAU  ET   ANNE  HEBERT:    trans­
lations  by F. R. Scott,  Klanak Press. $2.50.

MoNSIEUR  F. R. scoTT nous presente recueil  de  neuf  poemes  de  St-Denys Garneau et neuf d'Anne Hebert avec sa traduction en  regard. Deux  de  nos  meil­ leurs  poetes sont accessibles dans  la meme  plaquette aux  lecteurs canadiens  anglais et  franc;ais.  De   plus   la   plaquette   n'est  pas  commune. Le  papier  est  de  qualire, la  disposition   du  texte  et  la  couverture attrayante  montrent  un   gout   qu'on    ne rencontre   generalement    que    dans    les grandes editions de  luxe.
F.  R.  Scott   a  choisi  les  poemes  qu'il
considere comme  les plus  beaux  des deux poetes. Sa traduction est absolument litrerale. II justifie sa traduction en disant qu'il   veut   alterer  le  moins   possible   le texte  original  et le laisser s' ex primer  dans
!'autre langue.  II  preft re
en  deux  langues  que  deux  poemes  sem­ blables  et  cette  fac;on d'entrevoir  la  tra­ duction   est,  toujours d'apres   M.  Scott, appropriee  aux    deux    poetes   p11esentes d'autant que  ceux-ci  usent  du  rythme  du language  ordinaire  plutot   qu'une  ma­ niere   plus  formelle. Cette  fac;on  donne quelquefois  du   drole   d'anglais  mais   le respect  du  poeme  original qui  anime le traducteur  excuse   facilement  ces  tour­ nures,  et  meme,  on peut  dire  que  cette  traduction  est   d'autant   plus valable qu'elle  nous  donne  vraiment !'impression qu'un  canadien-franc;ais est  en  train   de nous   parler    dans    sa   langue    seconde.  Gilles  Marcotte dans  deux  pages  de  pre­  face  nous apporte quelques details  sur  le lien de parenre entre  ces deux  poetes, sur

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



leur   v1es et  leurs  'ecrits.  Non  seulement est-on   heureux  d'avoir  entre   les  mains un  tel recueil,  mais  de plus il nous  vient le  desir   de  voir   d'autres  plaquettes du genre   presentant  des  auteurs  canadiens­ fran-.ais  avec  traduction  anglaise  en  re­ gard   comme  des  auteurs  canadiens ang­ lais avec  traduction fran<;aise.
LEANDRE BERGERON







A KIND OF INCONSISTENCY

THERE IS A   PECULIAR KIND  of  inconsist­ ency   in   McClelland &   Stewart's  New Canadian  Library series; nevertheless  the Canadian reader  should  be thankful that  the   series   exists.   There   are   lapses   in organization  of   the   books,  the   printing style   changes   frequently,  and   there   is little originality in cover  design. But  here they are on the market in this inexpensive edition, and   though there  may  be  ques­ tions   about   the  choice   of  some  of  the novels  reprinted,  McClelland &  Stewart should   be  congratulated   for   producing the  series  and   for   contributing, on   the whole, excellent  introductions to  the  works.
In  the  four  new  numbers of the  series
-Earle Birney's  Turvey ($1.50), Stephen Leacock's Nonsense Novels ($1.25), Robert J. C.  Stead's Grain  ($1.50),  and Thomas H.  Raddall's The  Nymph  and
the   Lamp   ($1.50)  -there are   details which  catch  the reader's eye immediately. The  thickness  of the Raddall, the Birney, and  the Stead  contrasts strongly  with  the
 thinness  of the  Leacock. The  type for  the first three is almost  too small; for the Leacock, it  is  too  big.  Why  not,  instead of  having  five  Leacocks   in  a  series  of thirty-eight, have  three,  with two small works  in  one  volume   (Nonsense  Novels with  Literary Lapses,  for  instance)?
The fifth  Leacock selection  obviously points   to   the   problems  with   copyright that  the  publishers must  be having. Why not  a few Richler novels? Why  not a few collections   of   short    stories?   Why   not Adele  Wiseman or  David   Walker? One hopes  that  this  thinness does not  indicate that   there  will  be  fewer  of  the  series  in the future.
With  regard to the present  selection, Turvey should   of  course  be  there; it  is a Canadian classic and  Birney did an excellent job,   both in  comedy and characterization. Raddall's position  in Canadian  letters   is  secure,   though  his short   stories-some of  which   have   al­ ready  appeared in the New Canadian Library  (No.   g)  -are better   than  his novels.   Why   Stead  was  chosen   I   will never know! Why not the better prairie novelists?    How    about    one   of   Niven's books? -even  Grace Campbell?
The  perceptiveness of the introductions continues to be the most important aspect of  this  series.  Everyone  has  been  good; even the elaborate hysteria  of the editor himself in his introduction to Sunshine Sketches  has   its   place.   George   Wood­ cock's   introduction  to  Turvey  is  a  fine essay  on   Birney   and   the   poet's   novel;  John Matthews clearly examines the con­ tribution  of   Thomas   Raddall;  S.  Ross Beharriell   gives   another   dimension  to Leacock; and  Thomas Saunders capably extends Grain  beyond  the  point  where  it, perhaps,  should  go.  Literary criticism  in Canada  has  been  added to  by the  series,



















The Perfect Christmas Gift:
a subscription to
Canadian
Literature

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



which,  despite   its  weaknesses,  continues to  be  the   best  series  of  publications  on the  Canadian  scene.
D.S.



CANADIAN TRANSLATIONS

0F  RECENT   CANADIAN  translations the best  by a  long  shot  is George  Johnston's version  of The Saga  of Gisli  (University of Toronto, $3.50). This  prose rendering of the  Icelandic outlaw's story evokes admirably the  feeling  of an age  hovering between  Nordic paganism and Christian­ ity,   an   age   of  open   violence   and   the stark   codes   that   accompanied  it.   The  translation  is accompanied by an interest­ ing essay by  Peter  Foote on the Saga and its  background in  the  rough,  simple  re­ public  which  arose  in  the  sub-arctic valleys  of  Iceland and  sent  its  explorers to Canadian shores as harsh  as their  own land.
The  millenium of  Poland,  which   is
due in  1g66, is the occasion for Watson Kirkconnel's translation of the  great Polish    mock-epic,   Adam    Mickiewicz's Pan   Tadeusz   (University  of   Toronto,
 $6.50).  Mickiewicz's poem,  like  his  life, is   Byronic    in   quality,  with   the   same double    vision,   ironic   and   idealistic at once,  as one  finds  in  Childe   Harold  and Don   Juan. Yet  one  cannot  dismiss  this great   poem,  any  more  than  one  can  dis­ miss the  writings  of Mickiewicz's Russian  contemporary   Lermontov,   as   a   mere transplantation of  belated  Romanticism, with  all  its elements of  self-mockery and  ambiguous  heroism,  into an   Eastern  European   literature.   For    the   physical texture of  the  life  of   Polish  landowners in Lithuania is re-created in sharply  indi­  vidual   tones,  and  the  characters take  on life as beings of a specific time  and  place.  Of   the   major   irony   of   his  poem   the author seemed  unaware, though it reveals one  of  the  tragic  flaws of Polish  history; he   celebrates  the   rural  valour of  the Polish   gentry   in   a   region   where   their patriotism  was  misplaced,  since   in   the Lithuanian land  they  were  just  as much conquering intruders as the Russians they hated. The   translation  has  its  moments of  strength  and   humour, but  Dr.  Kirk­ cannel, having  chosen  the  heroic couplet as  his  metrical form,  fails  to  make  ade­  quate use  of  its  possibilities;  he  appears to lack either the  power  of  sharp,  concise expression  in verse or the ability  to create a really flexible and varied rhyme pattern.
The  Forehead's Lyre    (University  of
Toronto, $2.50)    is  a  volume   of   trans­ lations   by Doris  Huestis  Speirs  of  poems written  in  Swedish   by  the  ornithologist Lars   von   Haartman.  This   is  pleasant minor   poetry, but   little  more-best  in the  brief  imagistic  verses  that  catch  with a bird-watcher's sharp eye the flicker and mood  of  transient  experiences and  states of  nature.

G.W.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



HISTORICAL EXCURSIONS


Navies   in   the   Mountains  by  Harrison Bird    (Oxford,  $7.oo)    is  a   painstaking study   of  a  series   of  episodes   in   North American   history -the   various   battles on    Lake    Champlain   from    the    early forays  against   the  Iroquois to  the  end  of the    I812-14    war   between    the   United States    and    Britain-which 	have   not been   neglected  by   previous    historians, but   have   never   been   considered  in  the kind   of  continuous  naval   history   which Mr.  Bird  has  now  compiled. In  a  sense this  is  American rather  than   Canadian history,   since   Lake   Champlain   has   re­ mained United  States territory ever since the   War   of  Independence;  yet   all   the
 campa1gns   that    were   fought  across  its water and its winter ice affected the development  of  Canada in  many  direc­ tions  during the  turbulent  two  centuries between   the   arrival  of   Champlain  and  the   final   defeat  of   the   British   at   the battle   of  Plattsburg   Bay.   Moreover,  if Lake   Champlain   had   not   been   there,  Johnny   Burgoyne    would    never    have  taken   this  tempting  road   to  defeat,   and  Bernard  Shaw  would  never  have  written The  Devil's  Disciple,  and  in  this  respect Mr.   Bird's   account  becomes   the   back­ ground  to  events   of  more   than   merely North  American interest. He  presents  it as  a   rather  level   narrative,  but   in   as complete a telling  as will ever  be needed of this fragment of the  past that  is shared by  Canada  and   the  United States   and, at  some  distant  removes,   by  the  litera­ ture  of  the English-speaking  world.




At Christmas it snows
hard in the Himalayas

Thousands of Tibetan Refugee  children desperately need  food,  clothing, medicine. You  can  help  them by using Christmas Cards designed  by leading Canadian Graphic Artists.

Print  by ALISTAIR BELL, 6/'4" by 4%"
$1.30  per dozen, postage included

Print  by GEORGE KUTHAN, 4¥4"  by { 11
go¢  per dozen, postage included

Please   send  your  order   to  Tibetan  Refugee  Aid Society,  c/o Mrs.  William  Dunning, 3929  W.  13th Ave., Vancouver 8, B.C. Telephone CA 4-1512.




79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



In  The  Judgments of Joan   (Thomas Nelson,  $5.50), Charles Wayland  Light­ body  discusses in  just over I 70  pages  the vast   Joan-of-Arc literature   and  the  changes  in the image  of Joan  that  are  re­ vealed  by such  a  study.  He  is brief  and prolix at the same time; much more could be said on the subject, and  said less word­  ily.  In   particular,  Mr.  Lightbody never gets down  to that most fascinating core of the Joan myth-how far  she in fact  was involved in that  primitive religious move­ ment   which   men   of  the   Middle  Ages either   embraced  or  dismissed  as  witch-
 craft. Were  her  judges  substantially right in  regarding her  as a heretic? Was she in fact,  as recent  writers have  suggested,  the high   priestess  of  a  pre-Christian  pagan cult?    On   these   points   Mr.   Lightbody gives  us no illumination. Nor -which  is more germane to his subject-does he really   attempt  to  show  what   people   in Joan's own  time  actually believed.  He  is much  more  concerned with  that  infinitely duller Joan,  the   political   symbol  of  the most  tedious  aspects  of French  national­
lSm.

















8o
