$r .25  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·47

Winter, 1971


DOROTHY LIVESJIY-
POETRY OF POLITICS JIND LOVE


Articles

BY DENNIS DUFFY, PETER STEVENS, SANDRA DJWA, STANLEY S. ATHERTON

Poem and Chronicle

BY DOROTHY LIVESAY

Review Articles

BY MARGARET  ATWOOD, RALPH GUSTAFSON, A. W. PURDY, PETER STEVENS, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, NEIL COMPTON, W. H. NEW

Reviews

BY FRASER SUTHERLAND, ROY DANIELLS, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, DONALD  CAMERON, KEATH FRASER


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







NEW DIRECTIONS IN PUBLISHING	(1)


THE DECISION OF  ITS CHURCHLY OWNERS to sell Ryerson Press to  an  American   publishing  empire  is as great  a  blow  to  letters  in  Canada  as politically  motivated   commentators   have  claimed  it  is  to  Canada's  dwindling area  of economic  independence.  One  can  only admire  the  public  gesture  with which A. W. Purdy,  one of Canada's leading  poets and one of Canadian Litera­ ture's  most  valued  contributors, made  the  matter  an  issue for  writers.  It  is, of course, for every writer  to decide precisely what action  he shall take when such things  happen; the  important  thing,  as  Purdy's  protest  emphasises,  is that  he should not remain  indifferent,  that  he should recognize he has action to consider.
For this is not  merely an ordinary  business deal, a routine  merger  of  corpora­ tions. It  represents  something  far  more disturbing  in its implications:  the aban­  donment  to foreign  control,  after  a period of generations,  of a native  publishing enterprise that  had  become an institution in Canada's cultural  life. Perhaps Ryer­ son Press had  fallen  behind  in the quality of its publication  programmes  in com­ parison with the great  days of Lome  Pierce; we have often felt it. Perhaps it was not  a  very  profitable  enterprise.  Nevertheless,  it  did  represent  a  tradition   of independent publishing  which  had  a symbolic as well  as an  operative  value.  It not merely provided  Canadian writers with a place where they could publish;  it provided them also with a place where they could be published by Canadians and hence feel -in  the difficult literary times of the past-that they were part  of a community  in which  the writing,  production  and  reading  of books were in some measure organically linked.
It  is long  since  anybody  worried  about  the sectarian  ownership  of Ryerson
Press;  what  mattered   a  great  deal  more  was that  a  Canadian institution,  the
United  Church, should support such a press and allow it to exist and operate with
-in recent years at least -a notable and laudable freedom from editorial inter­
ference.  Perhaps  the  United  Church  did  find that  the activities of the  Ryerson


3

EDITORIAL



Press had  moved  outside  the sphere  of its own  religious functions  (though  one might consider anything  cultural  as having a direct  relation  to the spiritual  life), but it had a responsibility to sustain the Canadian tradition, and we remain unconvinced   that   every  possible effort  was  indeed  made  to  find  a  Canadian purchaser   or  sponsor  before  the  offer of  a  foreign-controlled   corporation   was accepted.
At  the  same  time,  though  we must  deplore  what  has  happened to  Ryerson
Press, and  demand  that  urgent  measures be taken  to ensure that  no other Cana­ dian publishing house is similarly absorbed, we insist that the position in Canadian publishing  is not nearly so imperilled as some commentators have suggested. We have  seen  statements   that  only  two  truly  Canadian  publishers  are  now  left: McClelland  & Stewart  and  Clarke  Irwin.  With  due  respect to these two houses, whose services to Canadian writing over the years have been invaluable,  to regard them as our only completely Canadian publishers is to fail to recognize the revolu­ tion that  has taken  place during  the past few years in  publishing in this country. Not only have vigorous regional houses, like M. G. Hurtig  in Edmonton, begun to challenge  the  centralization  of publishing in  Toronto. We have also seen the emergence  of  a  formidable   publishing  underground  (pioneered   by  Raymond  Souster with the Contact  Press and by Louis Dudek and  his associates at the still flourishing Delta Press) whose activities not only represent a change in the nature  of book production  and distribution  in Canada but also coincide, as I suspect the next few years will finally demonstrate,  with a change in the character of writing in Canada at least  as important  as that  which took place between  the Twenties and the Forties.
In  editorials for the coming year I intend  to devote attention  in some detail  to
this  movement,  which  tends  to  bring  publishing  and  writing  closer than  ever before.
The  most striking single phenomenon  is of course the emergence  of that extra­ ordinary  alliance,  confederation,  symbiosis-call it  what  you  will -House  of Anansi  and  New  Press. I am  not sure of the  exact  relation  between  these two houses, or  whether  any  formal  link even  exists between  them; perhaps  indeed there  is no link except  the fact that  the originating inspiration  for both of them appears  to have come from Dave Godfrey, himself  the best of the younger fiction writers as well as a university teacher of English and the editor for McClelland  & Stewart  of  the  Canadian  Writers  series of  monographs in  the  New Canadian Library.  Recently  the editorial direction of  Anansi appears  to have fallen mainly to  Dennis  Lee;  at  New  Press, Godfrey  works in  collaboration with  two  other

EDITORIAL



young writers  who  have  had  experience in  trade  publishing,  Roy  McSkimming and Jim Bacque. The  really important  facts about Anansi and New Press are that the  people who run  them  are young, that  they are themselves dedicated  writers, that  they  are  experimental  in  their  approach  to  writing  and  radical  in  their approach to social change,  and  that  they have been able to use cheap  printing methods to bring out lists of new titles each publishing season which compare remarkably  well with those of the regular trade houses.
The  territories  chosen by Anansi  and  New Press appear  only vaguely demar­
cated  from  each  other.  New  Press devotes the  greater  part  of its attention to various aspects of the New (but not necessarily New Left)  Politics, and to related social questions,  but it does occasionally publish verse and fiction; in fact its most recent publication  as I write this editorial-and its most ambitious  book to date in size and  format-is  Dave Godfrey's  remarkable  novel, The   New  Ancestors. Anansi has been inclined,  particularly  since the emergence of New Press, to con­ centrate on verse and especially on experimental fiction.
It  is on  this  role of House  of Anansi  that  I shall  concentrate in the  present editorial.  In  the next issue I hope to write at length on the role and  activities of New  Press.  Essentially,  under  the  sensitive editorship  of  Dennis  Lee,  the  role of Anansi has been to publish the experimental  fiction of the writers who at this moment  seem  most  likely  to  produce  the  significant  Canadian  novels  of  the relatively near  future.  The  good books of verse Anansi has also published  would certainly  have appeared  without the House, since by the time it began operations the  facilities  for  publishing  poetry  in  one  way or  another  had  already  greatly exceeded  the  production of good verse, as any conscientious  reader  of the  new poetry knows to the  depths  of ennui. It was Anansi's  resolve to  publish  experi­ mental fiction, regardless of the potential market, that was important. In the event, the public interested  in such fiction showed itself to exist, so that Anansi has been not merely courageous but also successful.
At  this  point,  Anansi  has  reached  its thirteenth   volume  of  fiction,  and  the
record  is a good one. I do not suggest that  every title has been a great  success; indeed, two of the first three, Graeme  Gibson's Five Legs and Ray Smith's  Cape Breton is the Thought-Control Centre of Canada, were poor experiments  because the  authors  had  obviously failed  to realize that  the  cardinal  law  of the literary quest is to know one's destination; it is the way there  that  experiment  discovers.
On  the other  hand,  the third  of the initial group of Anansi fiction was one of the  best volumes  of stories to  be published  in Canada for  many  a  year,  Dave Godfrey's Death Goes Better with Coca-Cola, sportsmen's sketches with an ahnost

5

EDITORIAL



Turgenevian sense of environment  and a mercilessly cynical way with the human fauna.
It  was  after  this  initial  trio  that  Anansi  announced last  year  the  project  of
Spiderline   Novels, a  series devoted  to  the  first  novels of  young  experimental writers.  The  series continues, for  there  have  been  at  least two  Spiderliners  this year, and  it appears  still to be restricted  to first novelists; but  at the same time Anansi has published three works of fiction by writers who have already published before and elsewhere. This amounts, for I g6g andI 970, to a publication schedule of five or six novels a year, together  with all the other  books and  booklets that come from  Anansi, and it represents as much new fiction as any Canadian  pub­ lisher except Jack  McClelland  brings out annually.
The  authors  of the first group of Spiderliners may be said to have a just griev­
ance  against  Canadian  Literature, though  it would  be due to one of those acci­ dents  every  editor  dreads  and   regrets  once  it  has  happened.  An  apparently  conscientious  reviewer accepted  three  of the  books with  enthusiasm,  and  never delivered  the review. The  consequence was that  at  the  time of their  publication only one of them,  Peter  Such's  Fallout, received in  this  journal  the  attention  it deserved. At least this omission gives a reason to say something  by  way of after­ thought  about the rest.
Having reviewed the whole group-Such's Fallout, Russell Marois's The Telephone  Pole,  Matt  Cohen's  Korsonilo!J, John  Sandman's Eating  Out  and Pierre  Gravel's  A  Perte  de  Temps, in  a  Toronto   paper   when  they  originally appeared  -I shall largely be repeating  what  I have already said, though  Dennis Lee has persuaded  me that The  Telephone Pole is in fact a more interesting novel than  I  thought  on first reading  last year. However,  I still cling to my view that A  Perte de Temps was far and  away the best book of the group,  and  that  does tell  us something  important   about  the  difference  between  young  Francophone and  Anglophone  novelists.
A  Perte  de Temps, Anansi announced  at  the time,  was the initial  work in a plan to publish, in the original French, books by young Quebec  writers who other­ wise would  probably  not  be read  by Anglophone  Canadians until  at  least five years after they first appeared, and then doubtless in bad translations. The experi­ ment  has not been repeated, and  I suspect this is because Anansi has been unable to find another  novel written in a French  as limpid  and  as comprehensible  even to the laziest bilingualist as that  of Pierre Gravel,  who  writes in  the lucid  tradi­ tion of Gide and Camus.
A  Perte  de Temps, which  was  published  simultaneously  by the  avant  garde

6

EDITORIAL



publishing house in Quebec,  Parti  Pris, is, like all the fiction which Anansi has so far  published, a recit or novella, rather  than a full-sized novel, and  in this way it follows one of the evident  inclinations of young Canadian fiction writers in both languages-brevity accompanied by a  drastic cutting  away  of the  naturalistic detail and elaboration  of dialogue that characterize the generation  of novelists represented most prominently  in Canada  by Hugh MacLennan.
Read  again  in 1970, A Perte de Temps  has even more immediacy  than it had last year when  it appeared, for it tells of a crucial day in the life of one of the Quebec terrorists of the early Sixties. Robert, the protagonist,  receives a telephone call on a foggy night  from  one of his political comrades  to say that  an associate has  been caught  by the police; if the arrested  man sings, they will all be picked up. Robert  leaves his home  to meet in a cafe the man  who has called him. His friend  does not  arrive; Robert  telephones and  learns that  the  police have inter­ cepted  him.  Knowing  that  sooner or later he will be picked up, he walks, sleeps in  a  park  until  the  rain  drenches  and  wakes him,  dries off in  a  truck-drivers' eating house, and then, in the middle of the night, goes to his girl. In the morning he leaves her, and is arrested in the street.
The  action  is as simple as that,  totally without  melodrama, without  even the
violence one might expect in a novel of terrorists. What  makes the story absorbing, apart  from  the supple  and  extremely evocative prose, is the way in which, recol­ lecting incidents  and  conversations during  his life as a terrorist,  Robert's mrntal  walk on that  night reveals, quite unsensationally, the mental attitude-or rather the  variety  of  mental  attitudes -that  lie behind  the  actions  of the  terrorists. There  are those who think  only of the end, and those who seek meaning entirely in action;  those who merely drop  out and those who, one suspects, betray.  Most important, Robert is brought, on this night when a whole phase of his life seems to be ending,  to consider how his past shaped  his actions, how the feeling of a need to be decisive rose out  of the consciousness that his father,  a suicide, had totally failed in his life.
Gravel belongs to the same generation as the terrorists active in the early Sixties,
but  he writes with an assurance  that  makes his age as irrelevant  as his Canadian origin. He  has, of course, the local knowledge that  gives the action  authenticity, but  otherwise  it  is in  no  way incongruous  to think  of him  merely as a French writer in the larger sense. There  is nothing in the least provincial about  his hand­ ling of the language,  and his whole attitude  has a maturity  lacking in most Anglo­ phone writers of his age. His attitude  to experimentation is especially healthy;  he resorts to it only when it can further  the purposes of his novel, and  never for its

7

EDITORIAL



own sake. The  consequence is that he has used a rather  conventional  linear form, but has broadened  it by a very subtle use of memory and -on one occasion only
-by a particularly  effective use of dream as a revelatory device.
By contrast, all the Anglophone novels in the group -three by Canadians and one by an American -are immediately recognizable in terms of locality of origin (none,  quite  obviously, could emerge out  of an  English  background)  and  also marked  by a dogged experimentalism of form. There  is a passionate rejection - even where it might  be the best way of getting something  into the reader's  mind
-of  the  conventional  linear  pattern.  And often  the manipulation of time shifts and  of correspondences  between apparently  disparate  threads  of event and  per­ sonality looks like apprentice  work, by which I mean  that  it seemed to be done for practice, for effect, rather than because it is essential to the work in hand.
One  has, of course, to take into account currently  fashionable  aesthetic stances. The  idea of a finished work, even the ambition  to compete in Stendhal's lottery of being read  in a hundred  years, have both lost a great deal of their appeal  in a century when one wonders whether there are a hundred  years to go for mankind. The  unfinished  texture  that  characterizes  some  of  these  books, which  look as though  a good  working over would  have vastly improved  them,  is obviously to some extent deliberate.
Questions of finish apart  (if one can ever put them apart) there is a great deal that  is interesting  in  Spiderline's  first four  novellas in  English.  Russell  Marois explores  perhaps  most thoroughly  the  possibilities of the  non-linear  novel in his complex fantasy on the remotely interweaving  lives of four marginilians  in urban society; there are moments of brilliant  hallucinatory fantasy, passages of great linguistic  virtuosity, signs of a talent  that  may one day  profoundly  influence  the character  of Canadian fiction in general.  Peter  Such's  Fallout, a novel in which the component  and  parallel elements are  not nearly so well managed,  as he tells of  the  collapse  of  a  boomtown  society, is perhaps  most  memorable  for  a  very moving  interpolated short story of an  Indian  and  a  white  girl going to a lake
island and  making love. Matt  Cohen's  KorsoniloIf is probably  the most polished
of all the novellas, and it shows an interesting shift away from the campus obses­ sion  which so recently  gripped  young Canadian and  American  writers;  though Korsoniloff is a university teacher, it is his off-campus  self that  we observe, as he drifts through  his curiously passionless relationships, and  he is meant to interest us as a psychotic rather  than  a professor -unless his alienation is itself a comment on our sick educational system. In  all these novels the middle-class life of which MacLennan wrote is avoided;  new Canadian  fiction has shifted its interest  into

8

EDITORIAL



the lower depths  and  the fringes of society. The leading  characters  in Fallout are Indians  and  construction  workers, in The  Telephone  they are denizens of a fan­ tastic underworld; in Eating Out a burlesque game of cops and robbers in a New York hamburger joint is enacted  through  the eyes of a half-witted rubbydub. It is the kind of world that  fascinates young writers at times of social breakdown,  as it did in the  French  Nineties, in Russia before the Revolution,  in  England  during the  Thirties.  In  Quebec  the  literary  rebellion has been more sharply  related  to the  political rebellion, and  for this reason it has felt less of an obligation  to seek experimentation for its own sake; doubtful  though the political success of separa­  tism may  have  been,  its literary  success is an  accomplished  fact,  and  there  are more good Frencophone than Anglophone fiction writers.
Not  that  it  is impossible  to  produce  in  English Canada a  novel as good  as Perte de Temps. Indeed,  Anansi has proved in its 1970 publications that it can be and  is being done. Apart  from a translation  of Roch Carrier's remarkable  novel, LaGuerre, Yes Sir!  (reviewed in its original version in Canadian  Literature some issues ago)   these  include  three  novels, all of greater  substance  and  complexity than  the  earlier  Spiderliners,  and  all nearer  to life, less conditioned  by formal imperatives.  They  are  Rachel  Wyatt's  The   String  Box  and  Michael  Charters' Victor  Victim, both  first novels by writers out of their  twenties who came from England,   and   Marian Engel's  The   Honeyman   Festival, a second  novel which more than  fulfils the  promise of her first book, No Clouds of Glory. Perhaps  the great test was that,  while one read the 1969 Anglophone Spiderliners with a con­ stant  awareness  of  effort  not  too  well concealed,  and  therefore  remained  con­ stantly  the  critical  observer  looking in,  one  enters  The   String  Box  and  Victor Victim and  The  Honeyman Festival; they are microcosms that  absorb one. They will  all  be  reviewed  in  Canadian  Literature,  but  must  be  mentioned  here  to emphasize the extent  to which, in three years of courageous publishing and good editing,  the  House  of Anansi has revealed new possibilities in the arts of fiction, of whose health the literary diagnosticians had so often despaired.

G.W.











9


GRACE

The Novels of Hugh Hood


Dennis Duffy






If  I  were  a  poet, I  would  write  about how  things  are  full of the  Holy  Spirit, without   reference  to  the  Spirit,   just  to the  illuminations in  the  things.  Now  I think   of it, that's  what  I  try  to  do  in fiction, give  the  sense of how things  are inflated  like   footballs by  the  indwelling Spirit.1



IN THE   NEARLY TWELVE  YEARS  followhlg llli< lm.t  publica­
tion,2 Hugh  Hood has produced a body of fiction including some fifty short stories
and, as of Spring,  1970, three novels. The range, vigour and  richness of his writ­ ing grows with every publication.  His latest novel, A Game of Touch 8,  confirms him as the steadiest viewer of ourselves, in Canada, now.
The  ultimate  concern  of Hood's  fiction is the  presence  of grace that  the epi­ graph  alludes to; it is as a chronicler of the Higher  Things  (to the exclusion, it is assumed, of the Here and Now)  that he is generally viewed by the literary public. It is no accident that  when his White Figure, White Ground came to be taught  at my college, it appeared  in a Religious Knowledge course taught  by a psychologist rather  than  an  English syllabus. There  is some danger  in  interpreting the whole of a writer's  work in tenns of his deepest concern;  it can lead to the obscuring of the means and  the various strengths of those means by  which a writer asserts his profoundest  thoughts.  To  find in Wordsworth  only the secularist  mystic, and  to overlook  that  delineation  of the  English landscape  linking  him  with  Constable and  Turner is to  miss out  on some pleasurable  readings.  Hood's  fiction is ulti-

10

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



mately "spiritual" and  "religious"  in its thrust;  I wish neither  to deny or  under­ value that.  In  a decade that  has seen such prose fiction as Beautiful Losers, Place D' Armes,  Cocksure  and  The   Edible  Woman, Hood's   fiction  r emples Lenna.n's  in  its  sense  of  a  larger  backdrop   against   which  everyday   human activities,  tragic  and  otherwise,  are  played.  This  larger  vision accords  to  those activities  a meaning  and  value beyond  the quotidian. Perhaps  I am  just saying that  Hood  is not  a  post-modem  in his sense of life -he sees it as grim,  joyous, brutal,  peaceful,  but  never as merely silly or absurd.  His characters are haunted  by  the  past,  they  are  prone  to  fantasizing  their  way  around  reality,  but  they possess minds  and  bodies which struggle, at times successfully, to live really and presently. It is not  that  they or their  creator  are  unaware  of  the  Horror  or the Void;  it is that  they do not often dwell there. Yet they are as real, their feelings and  responses as true,  their lives as representative  of the tenor  of their  times as those  of  the  deranged   and  fragmented   who  stalk  the  pages  of  the  narratives  mentioned.
It may be-the returns are not in yet -it may be that the entire post-modem element  in  our  cultural  experience  is the truth  about  living in the  present, and that  life is surreal,  delusional, macabre  and absurd. Yet it is also possible that  the post-modem  fiction of the sort  I  have mentioned -the  fiction born  of Beckett and  Burroughs  rather  than  Joyce -has ignored too many of the facts of life to be in touch with most times in the lives of most people. To invoke Joyce as I have may  appear   perverse,  but  a little  reflection upon  the love lavished  upon  Poldy Bloom and  the  mythic  resonance  granted  the  Earwickers  intimates  that  behind Joyce's  formal  experimentation lay  that  bedrock  of  humanist  culture  that  has sustained  the  West since its beginnings. To  be petty,  perplexed  and  often frus­ trated  is not  to be contemptible,  but human.  The  presence of a larger humanity enfolding  with  sympathy  the figures who strut  and  struggle in the foreground  is the mark  of our century's  greatest novelists, Joyce and  Faulkner, however attrac­ tive it may be to mark in these writers only misery and despair.
If Hood's  work belongs so obviously in the camp  of the ancients, it is also the case  that   his  fiction  exhibits  a  grasp  of  the  present,  especially  the  Canadian present, matched  by few other writers of his native land. My object in this article is to demonstrate that  his sure purchase on the present, so evident in A Game of Touch, is wholly  compatible  with  his  ampler  vision of a  process of grace  and redemption   illuminating  that   present.  Hood  is an  imaginative   analyst  of  our society to no less a degree  than  the producers of satiric and  nihilistic fiction, yet his rationality  has not cut  him off from sensing the limitations of the rational  in


I I

NOVELS OF  HUGH HOOD



appreciating the world we live in. That  linear narrative, straightforward descrip­ tion and concretely  (rather  than symbolically)  conceived characters  can still con­ vey the  tang  of reality  is the  implicit  message of the  "traditional" form  of his fiction.
As a means of establishing the particular  virtues of A Game of Touch,  let me
make  an  arbitrary distinction  between  Hood's  first  two  novels, White  Figure, White  Ground and  The  Camera Always Lies, which  will be treated  in  reverse order.  I am characterizing  the latter as a novel of society, and  the former as one of grace in order to make apparent the presence of both strains in his latest work.




T.rE CAMERA ALWAYS  LIES  is Hood's  weakest  and  least understood  work  of fiction, yet any  consideration  of his knack  of catching  the world we live in must begin there. The novel's weakness lies in its characterization, which fails to support  a theme more complex than  the psychology of the charac­ ters. While the book is a detailed  portrait  of the  post-Hollywood  film industry, it functions  also as a  parable  on the  public cannibalism  surrounding our gods, the celebrities. Alongside this are a series of reflections on the nature  of contemporary art,  a pre-occupation  of Hood's fiction, and the subtle temptations to fakery that it  offers  to  its successful practitioners.  Clearly,  this  is not  a  Hollywood  novel, whether in the realist mode of John  O'Hara or the surrealist of  Nathanael West, yet the  book was generally reviewed in terms of its "predecessors"  and as a result of such assumptions  came out looking rather  bungled. The  narrow  psyches of its characters  are forced  to channel  too broad a  stream  of thought  and  feeling, but this is an  error  of the too purposeful writer  rather  than  the  unskilled. My own dissatisfactions  with  the  novel  will appear  in  detail  a  little  later,  but  for  the present let me convey its strengths.  Its greatest is its sharply  etched  picture  of a film industry  which may not be a microcosm of our society, but which is assuredly one  of  the  matrices  of  our  collective mythologies,  a  mythical  business whose realities are somehow ours.
The  Camera Always Lies brings this society across to the reader  by giving both
a  densely-detailed  treatment   of  the  nitty-gritty  of  its subject   and  an  allusive probing of its inner  drives which mesh with those of the larger society. The com­ mon  reader  will always find diversion in observing the way his neighbours earn their  living. The  occupational   novels of Arthur   Hailey  attest  that  readers  will endure  any  degree  of stereotyped  characterization and  unreal  psychologizing in

12

NOVELS OF  HUGH HOOD



order  to find out  how airports  and  hotels function. Jobs  are important to all of us,  however  frequently  we are  lectured  on the obsolescence of the  work  ethic. They can offer the one period during the day when the reality principle is wholly and objectively present, when our own fantasies and gaps in feeling bump  against an unyielding external  reality. This is not the case, however, when the job involves the  manufacture and  marketing  of the  mythical,  evocative  yet ephemeral  stuff that appeals to our appetites for power and security without  really satisfying them.
The  world  of  Hood's  fiction  is a  job world,  his writing  an  encyclopedia  of
trades   and   professions.  Stockbrokers,  psychologists,  road   repairmen,   priests, painters,  musicians,  athletes,  actors,  academics,  storekeepers,  bankers,  grocers, cameramen,  campers,   corsetieres-this  procession,   this   Whitman    catalogue troops  through  his pages  not  in the  guise of names with  occupational titles  at­ tached,  but  as people seen and  magnified through  the  technical  details of their jobs. This  Balzacian  gift is one writers dismiss at  their  peril, since the world  of \ their  readers  is largely  determined  by those occupational  boundaries  which  the
novel of sensibility-from Richardson  to Cohen -largely ignores. The  Camera    1
r--
Always Lies shows film people at work; the audience learns what it is to choreo-
graph  a musical number  so as to underplay  the star's  dancing  disabilities, how a costume designer compensates for short-waistedness in his subject, how an "indie" production   is financed  and  promoted,  and  so on. These  are  not  little  technical excursions, but  areas  of living which fill in a character  and  advance  a story line the same as interior monologues and symbolic happenings.
There  is more  to  society than  jobs, though,  as two  contrasting  giants  attest.
Middlemarch gives us society with  jobs-medical experimentation, the  politics of the  rural  gentry, scholarly  pursuits-and Vanity  Fair does not. Thackeray's grim  fathers,  Sedley and  Osborne,  are  both  bankers,  and  the  most we know  of their  trade  is that  Osborne's  finances are solid enough  to withstand  the  disturb­ ance  of  Napoleon's   return  from  Elba  and  his friend's  are  not.  The  vision  of society in Vanity Fair, while not as real, is surely as true as that  in Middlemarch. Thackeray  shows how a society functions, how it handles the matter  of who is in and who out, how it provides opportunities  for the hungry  to carve  the sated.  He achieves this  not  by depicting  a world at  work but  through  establishing  a con­ tinuum  in which the puppets may act out their representation.
The  continuum  consists of real elements-Waterloo, John  Company's India,
the  Prince  Regent-and those of the novelist's creation - The  Washerwoman of Finchley  Common, the  Collector of Boggeley Wollah,  the frontispiece  of the Osborne  family Bible. Thackeray's creations blend with God's to produce  a sense

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



of society as men experience it, a small world, as we self-consciously mutter,  where our  paths  intersect  with those of others in ways initially improbable but in  retro­ spect neatly determined.
So  with  the  characters  in Camera:   their  lives intersect  in a credible  fashion with  those in other  Hood stories. A character  buys an Alex MacDonald   (White Figure,  White  Ground)   canvas,  mention  is  made  of  the  film  editor  Kitcheff ("The End  of  It,"  Flying a  Red  Kite), and  Hood  steps  into  the  frame  long enough  for a character  to praise Around  the Mountain. Perhaps  this is a sort of in-j<;>kery, though  it could as well be the first small step in the creation  of a long sequence  of interconnected   works. But  novels don't   become  portraits  of society because they contain  an allusion or two to figures appearing elsewhere; they suc­ ceed because they construct that continuum  found in Thackeray. In Camera, the heroine Rose meets her rescuer Jean-Pierre because her producers are negotiating  for  his  North   American  distribution   rights,  while  her  involvement  with  him follows an  initial  occupational  encounter  disguised as a  social event. The  ailing marriage  of Rose and  her husband  Seth is shattered  by  the  producers'  normal/ abnormal manner  of  promoting  the film. Characters  intersect  through  booking agencies,  health  spas  and  filming locations  in  the  way  people  do  through   job connections in the real world.
There  is more to a sense of society than  this, as Thackeray saw. Somewhere,
the scattered  people with  their scattered  interests are  pulled together  by a social matrix  that  is more than a departures  and arrivals lounge, but a context of mental habits  and  associations as well. Thus  Thackeray's controlling  image  of the  Fair and  the common  attribute  shared  by most every character-overpowering, raw appetite. Since,  as  I  noted  earlier,  every  job  does  not  deal  with  the  real,  the figures in  Camera  share  an  involvement  in  the  delusive and  deceitful.  The  in­ volvement isn't  always intentional,  yet the process by which Rose undertakes the suicide  attempt  that  opens the  book starts  because  her sense of reality  has been dulled  by a career  devoted to burnishing  her image.  Repeatedly,  the characters  practise  the  grossest deceptions upon themselves and  each other; let  one acutely observed  detail stand  for the corruption  of a society:  "[The security guard] was supposed to keep the photographers in line, but did nothing except bum cigarettes off them."
As is fitting for a novel about films, the deepest symbolic probes into the inner
drives  of  society  are  made  through   movies,  one  real,  King  Kong,   the  other planned   by  Jean-Pierre, Feu   fames  Dean.  In  his  hotel  room,  the  late-movie addict  ponders what he has just watched:

14

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



Images swam in his brain, of rape, murder, betrayal, of King Kong at the top of the tallest building in the world, swatting biplanes out of the air like flies. You want  to marry  the  girl and  settle down, but you can't  because you're a guilty beast. This  coupling of monster and  innocent woman was a staple in  the slick American cartoons, a comic theme or a grotesque one, not tragic.... Treat horror comically ... that  is what  they do. King  Kong, Count  Dracula,  Frankenstein's creation, the Addams cartoons, the Teen-Age Wolf Man, the Munsters, the sting drawn  progressively with each step toward  the trivial-the monster was really lovable and just like us.
The  author, through  his character, the sort of cerebral  French  film-maker given to  meditations   upon  King  Kong,  reveals the  outlines  of  his novel's  myth,  the escape of the girl Rose from the innocent-through its total ignorance of moral habits or considerations-monster of big-time filming.
The other  movie, Feu ]ames Dean, is one the 1970 reader either swears he has seen or is shocked that  no one has yet filmed it. It tells of a quiet young French­ man  fascinated  by America-as-power,  the owner of a Chevrolet  with an interior decorated  with "Pictures  of motorcycles and folk singers, the Beatles, racing cars, movie stars, shots of crimes with people lying dead on the streets, pictures of guns and of cowboys." In  a familiar enough  pattern of behaviour,  he first charms and then strangles an  American  girl he meets. The  cluster of images gathered  by the two films, real and  imaginary,  is not another indictment  of America or the movies or  American  movies, but  a representation  of a culture  in  the grip of strong feel­ ings it cannot  express realistically. Either paranoia  and aggression are fantasized into  the  stylized  hysteria  and  violence of  the  mass  media  and  its charismatic superstars   (Feu   ]ames  Dean)   or  else it  conceals  through  stereotype  (at  times comic, at  times grisly)  the  primitive horror  of  feelings it cannot  acknowledge in any  other  manner   (King  Kong). The  movies are images of the  post-modem  or the  technological  society or  whatever  term  may  be current; they ally themselves with a number  of thoughts  and associations demonstrating the congruence of the novel's  film-making  society  with  the  larger  grouping  supporting   it.  From  the glimpse of the negligent doorman  to the articulation  of a culture's deepest imagin­ ings, Camera  gives both  the inside and outside of its society, showing it as some­ thing more than  a collection of  people or a melange of mythic associations, show­ ing it as a combination of both.
Yet the novel does not succeed; though this is not my greatest concern here, let
me briefly outline  my dissatisfaction. The  problem with Camera  is Rose Leclair, a  heroine  whose personality  is too simple and  observed  too superficially to bear the weight of the social themes she embodies. A Becky Sharp  puppet  would have

NOVELS OF  HUGH HOOD



done  better,  for  it  is in the  handling  of what  people do  rather  than  how they think that the novel excels. The tour-de-force opening the novel, Rose's attempted suicide, is a masterly presentation  of a psycho-somatic organism  in revolt against death.  The  intermingling  of mind  and  body is handled  with great  skill, but it is somewhat of a disappointment for Rose to be revealed, not as some tortured  movie queen  in the  manner  of  Monroe,  but  as a wholesome, healthy  girl saved at the last moment  by her  basically sound  mind-body.  It  is not that  simple  people are uninteresting,  but  that  Rose is. References to  a  fairly  ordinary  girlhood  and  a fairly  ordinary  climb  to stardom  do  not  deepen  her  character, and  in  her  the ordinary  becomes the banal. While she is probably  made so insensitive to the skulduggery around  her in the first section for the purpose  of showing the dream world stardom  forces her to live in, the reader  does become impatient with her stupidity.  Yet  Rose  has  to  carry  the  story;  she  is not  portrayed   as Aimee  in Waugh's The  Loved One, a distanced figure who is the object of pity rather  than sympathy. And there is not enough to Rose to carry her own story.
Finally, the morality of the novel becomes confused. The  work has dealt,  both
in the implicit manner  I have described and in explicit fashion  as we1J,4 with the falsity of film and  its world. Yet Rose is rescued by the French  Director and flies off to Europe  to marry and  make beautiful  films with him. One's  first impulse is to see the  book as the sort  of Billy Wilder slick and  cynical  diversion analyzed with such acuity during the novel.5   But that kind of reaction  tears the book apart, for  its tone  throughout has been one of concern  and  involvement  and  not  the detached  contempt  of, say, Kiss Me, Stupid, a Wilder flick discussed in the novel. Perhaps, one reasons, the novel is out to show that there is no escaping the hollow values of the world Rose makes her living in, and that  the best she can hope for is a cleaner version of the game she must play. Well, if this is so, then how ultimately boring and frustrating a story we have before us. Raw cynicism would have done better.
As I have pointed  out, Camera is most interesting  in its realization of a society
in being. It falters when it attempts  to get at the insides of the people composing that society. Hood's  problem then was to create either a portrait  of  society-as-or­ ganism that  did not require  portraying individuals in depth,  or else to try harder  to  present  the  characters  fully. Around the Mountain,  the second  collection of short  fiction and  a  very well-planned  and  interconnected  collection at  that,  dis­ played  his sure grasp  of a landscape -man-made,  natural, urban,  rural -and his gift for blending  these various views into subtle expressions of states of human  feeling. As he put it, "I don't think the Romantic Movement  failed," 6  and  Around

16

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



the  Mountain is as Romantic a  view of Montreal  as is Wordsworth's poem  of Tintern Abbey.  That is, the  city defines and  re-defines the  author-observer, its majesty and  vitality confinning  and enlarging his own powers. With ease and assurance,  Hood   moves  through   quasi-journalistic  vignettes  of  city  life -"Le Grand  Demenagement," "Starting Again in Sherbrooke Street" -to beautifully realized  evocations  of the  reality  beyond the landscape,  as in "A  Green  Child" and  "The River Behind Things."



IF Around  the  Mountain showed  how  the  trick  was done without  in-depth  characters   (beyond  the faceless narrator), the work preceding
Camera- White  Figure,  White   Ground-displayed the  sureness  with  which Hood could depict a character  and show the changes life put him through.  What he had done in White  Figure he did not choose to do in Camera, but a look at his first novel reveals the  resonance  he is able to give his characters.  It should  also demonstrate  that  the success of A Game  of Touch  is no fluke, but the confident use of talents-for capturing society, for showing individuals-displayed earlier in isolation but now combined within a single work.
White  Figure is a novel about  painting and the boundaries of art, abounding in demonstrations of painterly  technique  and intense meditations  on the possibilities of catching  life  within  a  canvas.  It offers also something  close to a  Canadian poetics, an  examination  of the stresses peculiar to artistic life here. Such  a  pre­ occupation   is  perhaps  to  be  expected  from  a  novelist of  English-and  French­  Canadian parentage, and the reader searching for the allegorization of  the tension between  the two strains in Canadian life could find it in this novel, though  only after some violence had been done to the text.
For my story is first of all about a painter, an artist in the middle of the journey, enjoying  a  measure  of comfort  and  reputation, who is on the verge of gaining fame in the great  world. Alex MacDonald,  a leading Montreal  artist awaiting  his first New York opening,  travels with his wife to Nova Scotia both  to paint  in a light  he  has  never  experienced  and  to  discover the  past of his father,  who  left there  as a  young  man.  It is the  virtue  of W kite  Figure to sustain  the  reader's interest  not  merely in Alex the painter,  but to make his personal search credible also, so that  a productive  tension arises from the two poles of experience.  Alex's two searches -for a mood in his painting he has never caught before and for the true  reasons why his father  left the family-are successful, but in a limited sense

NOVELS OF HUGH  HOOD



only. He never discovers exactly why his father  was rejected  by his relatives, but he does come to some understanding of the  hatreds  and  misunderstandings still festering in Barringford,  Nova Scotia. This understanding reveals itself on a non­ rational  level in  Alex's canvases. This  breakthrough into  understanding  rather  than analysis is conveyed in Chapter  Four of the novel's second section, a novel in a nutshell where his struggle to accept his father and complete his canvas produces a single narrative  thrust that gives us the whole man, painter and child.
This  is Alex's first illumination  in the novel, the first glimpse into the conflicts of the  past and  their  resolution in the present. If this process is localized around the figure of his father,  the other search, the search more directly concerned  with his professional life, gets embodied in the two women in his life and the personal­ painterly  forces they  represent.  His  wife Madeleine,  of a  distinguished  French­  Canadian family,  represents the claims of society, the familiar, the assured, the possible, all of the bugaboos of the Romantic  artist as our  age has defined him. His cousin Ellen, a Barringford  girl, represents solitude, the exotic, the unattain­ able.  Hood  displays a sharp sense of the ironies of social observation  in locating the solid matron  in a soignee Montreal female and the Lillith in a sheltered  Nova Scotian  virgin.  From  one  point  of  view, the  painter's  final  choice of wife and success in  New  York  is a  cop-out.  It offers another  instance  of the  Canadian penchant  for taking the low road. Hood makes no attempt  to soften or evade this possibility, but prefers to present the problem it offers directly to the reader.
One need not be devoted to the stereotype of the poete maudit to be disquieted
by the  choice of Madeleine.  For  all her  chic  and  sensitivity, she is a scheming bitch  who is extremely interested  in making  it  both  with  and  for  her  husband, and  the two canvases he completes in the book are done either  without  her or in her despite.7    He is aware of her anxieties about  the possible unprofitable  nature of his painting  and  of her schemes with his dealer to prevent  him from reaching too far in his work, yet remains with her and does so contentedly. " 'I'm no mystic; I'm  a flesh man'," he declares near the end of the novel, and  this remark discloses his reasons for cleaving to his wife. The chapter  on their love-making  (Chapter 7 of the second section)  is the most intensely written  in the novel, not to work up a sizzling sex scene, though it is as "hot" as any piece of pornography, but  to con­ vey the  power of the  MacDonalds'  sexual relationship.  In  a very direct  fashion, the chapter  conveys the satisfaction  husband and  wife give each other. It is more than  a matter  of four legs in a bed, though that is where it starts. It is a matter of being  present.  This  presence is what  marriage  is about,  and  the  existence of it compensates for Madeleine's  fundamental lack of sympathy  with the sort of new

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



work her husband  is struggling  to realize. He knows his wife and  her drawbacks;
he can live with that knowledge and handle the problems as they arise.
The  alternative  female  is Ellen,  a  sea-girl  associated  with  green,  the  "dark female shape"  behind  Light  Source  # 1 and  #2,  the  paintings  occupying  the time of the narrative. The  first is the title-painting of the book, a white-on-white which attempts to reach  beyond  painting,  beyond even perception,  to the region where  it  all  begins,  wherever  that  may  be. As Madeleine  sensibly  assures her
husband,  " 'You can't  paint  what's invisible. You can't  paint what doesn't exist'," and  yet the  oils in the  painting  possess greater  brilliance  and  variety  than  ever before. Alex  puts  the  dilemma  squarely:  " 'How  can  it  be  so good  if it  isn't true?'" How  can  it, indeed?  Ellen has been with him since the inception  of the painting,  when  the  idea  of it came  upon  him in the  holy dread  he experienced during  his initial  exposure  to the  white light and  solitude  of the  seashore. The sexual encounter  between  Alex and  his cousin is unplanned, clumsy and  incom­ plete, far different from the assured sensuality of the married  couple. The thought of sex between Alex and  his young cousin is faintly off-colour, faintly incestuous; like that  painting,  it would  be an attempt  to reach through  the senses what the senses cannot  reach. In choosing wife over cousin Alex really chooses between the marital  and  the  mystical,  opting  for  the  centre  rather  than  the  more exciting, more frustrating margin.  But the painting  has been completed,  a proof that  that  while the painter  can reach there, he is not out to dwell on the margin. The  busi­ ness of rejecting what you could have in favour of  the richness you already possess is too complex to be termed  a cop-out. It is instead a matter  of learning  from an experiment   that  did  not  come  about  through  methodical  planning,  but  which
came nonetheless and is there to be admired and used:  Light Source #I.
If this painting, with the feelings it absorbed and evoked, represents one portion of the  illumination   Alex  receives in  the  course of the  novel, Light  Source  # conveys the  other side of this vision of light. Chapter  3 of the first section rings the  changes  on  black and  white as the  MacDonalds  first reach  the Atlantic.  In the course of this Alex asserts that " 'you have to have the double vision' ", that is, you need  white  to  know  black, and  vice-versa:  " 'God,  but  a really white man would be a frightening  thing to see.' " By the end of the novel, he has executed a
horror-filled, turbulent canvas which he presents-unviewed by the public -to Ellen. It is his way of showing  her his black and  white colours. He has painted into  the  magnificent  abstraction  of Light  Source  #the green  associated with Ellen,  completing  a  painting  as good as he'll ever  get  but  which  is "the  most aggressive violent turbulence of paint imaginable ... discordant, jangled, riotous;

NOVELS OF  HUGH HOOD



after  a  while it got on your nerves." The  audience  of Alex's aged aunts  fails to spot "the  comical  hints of green"  (always the double  vision),  but the total effect of the work is to get on to canvas the violent, brutal  Alex who battered  his father in his youth and  in maturity  came to see and  absorb  what  he had done. It is no coincidence,  as Madeleine  points out, that  he made  love to her after  crating  the painting  and shipping  it to Ellen. He has had his exposure to the double vision in its extremest form -a schizoid split-and  realized that  there is no way to have both  women  and  all  they represent simultaneously  in his life. All such attempts develop in him a split between artist and husband,  painter and man which he will not  endure,  even if it for a moment  widens the  reach  of his art.  The  choice he makes is to go on to the New York triumph  and  abandon the work which would restrict his drives to the lonely and unsatisfactory.
In  considering  White  Figure, I have tried  to display the dexterity  with which
Hood  has intertwined the personality of a man  with his artistic production,  mak­ ing the one as real as the other. Therefore,  the grace, the understanding that falls upon  Alex MacDonald  is not a blinding  revelation  of the sort recalling a hypo­ thetical  Beethoven  crying to a  thrush,  "Run   through  that  again;  it sounds like what ought to be the opening bars of my Sixth!" The grace is instead the illumina­ tion  that  occurs during  a  job, the grace commanding the artist  to cross out that word,  put in that note, go heavy on that brush stroke. And through  this aesthetic grace Alex's personality is revealed, so intimate  is the novel's sense of the identity between  artist  and  man.  For  the  human  soul also learns  through  re-examining that  incident,  recalling  that  person, placing  a  new  construction  on  that  mood. This  surefootedness  amid  the traps  of the ambiguities  of the human  personality gives Hood's  fiction the strength  to show in a credible fashion how human  beings experience  crisis. The  assumption behind  the fiction is that  the ordinary  is fairly miraculous  and  the trick of the artist is to catch that  miracle at its most visible - say, at the mid-point  of a painter's career.




No ONE  WITHIN   CAMERA RANGE is unaware  that  countries have their crises as well as do individuals, though  the camera  that informs us also dulls our  perceptions. The camera  watches confrontations and  riots, parades  and manifestoes, ignoring  the very down-to-earth  fashion  in which our society's state
,        of permanent  crisis is blended into the fabric of our daily lives. The  novel, an art form which more than  any other celebrates the quotidian, is one device by which

20

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



society can see itself as it digests major issues in humdrum  fashion. No more useful truth  was taught  writers  of fiction than  when Sir  Walter  Scott  used the  melo­ dramatic plot of The  Heart  of  Midlothian to show how in troubled  times sons first lose, and  then  they slay their  fathers.  This may  appear  too  heavy a meta­  physical  burden   for  the  incident  of  the  killing of  Staunton-Robertson  by  his unknown  outlaw  son,  but  then  Scott  has  been  under-rated  for  better  than  a century. Miss Doris Lessing's The  Four-Gated City, so wretchedly reviewed, offers an instance  of the  way in which a novel can still capture  the meat-and-potatoes fashion in which our planet is being destroyed by a bored and violent civilization.
The  title of A Game  of Touch means what it says-touch football is a game
played  by all the  male  characters.  But sex and  politics are  also games of touch, and  the commonplaces  of boys and girls together in their little sports throws into relief the  conflicts  threatening to destroy a society. Sports,  as Hood  knows, are excellent activities in which to locate men at work. The opening piece in Around the  Mountain, "The   Sportive  Center  of  St.  Vincent  de  Paul",   give  as  much insight as one is likely to gain from years of reading anthropology  into the impor­ tance  of the  male  bond  and  the tenacity  of the informal  conventions by  which men govern  their  affairs.  A Game  of Touch shows the way in which a series of unspoken  assumptions  shape  the Higher  Things,  especially politics, and  the  way in which  the laws of the tribe  pass sotto voce from generation  to generation.  It also shows how  an  age  of relentless publicity  is dissolving those  conditions  and leaving very little to replace them beyond the vagaries of  charisma.
To repeat,  the sport is touch football, and the novel gets under way when Jake Price,  newly-arrived  in  Montreal  from  Stoverville, Ontario (Hood's  country  of the  mind  near  the  Quebec  border), casually  joins a  touch  football  game  in  a park. From this comes his acquaintance with Roger Talbot, a wealthy Quebec intellectual  of  English  and  French  parentage; Marie-Ange  Robinson,  who  first made  her   appearance  in  "Bicultural   Angela"   (Around   the  Mountain),  and Duncan   McCallum,  Establishment-educated and  now  a  house  psychologist for a large corporation. Jake, the hard yet innocent outsider bewildered by the gentle­ manly conventions  of the crowd he has fallen in with, is an excellent observer of the folkways of the Montrealers.  For the present, what  happens  to Jake  is not as interesting as what happens to Roger, a Trudeau who neither can nor will succeed in the gTeat world.
The first thing the reviewers will say of A Game of Touch is that nothing much
happens,  which  is to say that  the novel rearranges  the insides of the  characters without  anything too  dramatic happening  to their outsides. Roger  works out  a


2I

NOVELS OF HUGH  HOOD



complex   federal-provincial  health   services  scheme,   negotiates skilfully  with   his fellow  Quebecers on  behalf  of  Ottawa, is  denounced  as  a  vendu, and   leaves Ottawa to  return to the  academy. Clearly  no tale  of derring-do, but  a chronicle which  accurately conveys the tone of Canadian politics.
What  could  be duller  than  a novel about  taxation and  the responsibility for it? Well,  in  a  materialist society such  as ours  taxation forms  the  chief  link  between subject  and  government; it  becomes  the  badge  of citizenship. " 'Funds, not sex, are  at  the  root  of human motivation,' " Roger  wryly observes, and  this is the first ironic  hint  of  the  importance to  the  novel  of economic questions. Debates  over where   the   money  is  to  go  reveal  the  passions  behind   politics,  as  well  as  the strengths of various  groups  and  alliances.  It  is the  passion  that matters, and  not the   pennies,  and   this  the  cerebral   Roger  comes  to  see,  though too  late  in  his career  for  his  cold  image  to  thaw.  During a  day  of  wearying  negotiation, the "blinding insight" comes to him that :
these bloody money matters  were symbols of great  unconscious  tides in the life of millions of people, who might never consciously consider tax percentages from one year's end  to the next. Millions who were suffering from a bottomless, humiliating wound in the unspoken darkest reaches of their lives. People who had early learned to say things like, "nous  autres, on n'e' pas instruit-la,"  or perhaps  on n' e' fait que pour des petits pains chez nous." . ..
He  realized  that   the  words  he  thought   in,  "economic   community,"   "taxing
source,"  "administrative means,"  were a bloodless, denatured, foolish and  heart­ less screen  over  his feelings. He  saw suddenly  that  what  people  said  about  him, TRAHISON DE  ROGER TALBOT, was partly  true  and  deeply felt.  I have no people, he  realized, and  I  never will; instead  I  have  the  international economic community.

This   moment  of  grace  comes  too  late  to  shelter   him  from   the  drumfire of criticism  coming  from  his native  province,  and  his minister, relieved  at  finding  a scapegoat, allows  him  to  resign.  Roger  is a  figure  who  has  been  with  us since Ford's Tietjens tetralogy, the  man  born  into  a  ruling elite  whose  integrity  dis­ qualifies  him  from  exercising  power  in  the  devious  fashion  in  which  it  must be wielded.  Fortunately, Hood  doesn't  impose  on  his character the  quasi-saintliness Ford  lavished  upon  his hero,  but in a very effective scene near the novel's conclu­ sion   brings   home   Roger's dignity,   solidity   and   loneliness.  As the   novel   has proceeded, Marie-Ange, the astute  practitioner of bedroom biculturalism, switches  her  allegiance from  Roger  to Duncan, whom  the  narrative reveals to be locked in his  Anglo  world   of  jobs,  connections and  speedy  promotions in  the  motherly  embrace of the  multi-national corporation. The  final gathering of the  triangle is

22

NOVELS OF HUGH  HOOD



m  Grandma's Antimacassar,  a "swinging"  place featuring campy  decor, rotten music  and  a swingless clientele. Roger  is appalled  by the  pseudo-sophistication and  hard-sell rottenness of the place, Marie-Ange  (who we can sense will go back to being Angela, the exec's wife from Stoverville who tried the French thing a few years back)  and Duncan  too intent on being young and with-it and like now baby to examine  the scene they are a part of. Roger, in his forties, is dismissed with a few nasty remarks about  youth and age and leaves, still his own man, but only his own  man.
With a few adaptations, the story could have come from one of Peter Newman's political chronicles. The  novel contains  a genuine feel for Canadian politics, for the way the  public  business gets done and the vocabulary  our rulers bring to the execution  of their  tasks. It is a fine thing  to write a novel so true  to the milieu from  which  it springs  as this, but  it is a finer thing  to write a  novel plain and simple. What  gives A Game  of Touch the requisite literary virtues is the manner in  which  the doings of Jake  Price, the artist as a young layabout,  reinforce the political theme and unify the public and the personal.
Very  simply,  Jake  wants  to  live rent-free,  as Roger  notes.  In  fact,  he  does exactly this, staying in a studio flat atop a building Roger's family owns in a warehouse-light-industrial  district  empty  at  night.  When  the  building  goes up in flames as the result of a fire in the electroplating shop on the lower floors, and he barely escapes death,  Jake  realizes that  "there  was a catch  to living ... rent­ free ... nobody  around  to help you when you got into trouble."  In  other words, no one can safely opt out of the social contract, whether  the contract  be signified by taxes or rent. Jake's  romantic  vision of la vie boheme cannot  be sustained, and he takes a job with Duncan's firm as a personnel evaluator. He brings no profes­ sional qualifications  to the position beyond a great deal of  common sense and an absence  of  illusions  about   himself. He  becomes engaged  to  a  sturdy  French­  Canadienne, not  abandoning his  art  but  realizing that  earning  a  living comes before it.
Perhaps   the  saddest  of  the  principal  characters  is  Marie-Ange,  so  close to
achieving  maturity  during   his  liaison  with  Roger  but  now  thrown   back  into dreary  games with Duncan. The novel is, after all, about  the two most interesting subjects  life offers, sex and  money, and  the choices facing  Marie-Ange  are best illustrated   by  the  novel's  treatment   of  her  sexuality.  With  Roger,  everything becomes  sexually  charged,   with  the  activities  of  an  entire  day  bathed  in  an eroticism  conswnmated in bed at the end, but which differs in form  rather  than in tone from what has gone before ( Ch. 13). Contrast with this the body-painting

23

NOVELS OF HUGH  HOOD



of Chapter 16, in which her body is garishly decorated  by Duncan and his drunken pals in a manner  ultimately expressing a great deal of contempt  for the flesh and for the  female  in  particular.  The  act is sexual,  but  of such a nature  as to deny any  power and  beauty to sex and  tum  it instead into a nasty little game. In the fashion of our time, the rhetoric of permissiveness and liberation  conceals despair and  hostility. It  is Duncan  that  Marie-Ange  marries,  and  all their  determined swinging cannot  hide the weaknesses they bring to their union.
A  Game  of Touch: Jake  leaves his self-centred  existence and  joins a  world populated  largely by others. The  game of Touch: a pastime  played  " 'for sport and for exercise, with the violence taken out of it'."  Canada as a game of Touch: "a  religious idea ... man acting out the instinct to justice, without war."  Keeping in  touch: Roger's  failure to do so diminishes his political effectiveness. Sex, the oldest game  of touch : the  contrast  between  Marie-Ange,  once  Roger's  woman and  the  Marie-Ange  now the creature  to be painted  by Duncan  in a parody  of sex. Can  you follow how the strands interweave, and  how the personal and com­ munal  levels of the book fuse into a representation  of a culture that  is deadening  and  which  must  recover  its tactility?  Can  you see how  the  theme  of  touching widens into a vision of a world touched  by an opportunity for greatness, a people on the verge of breakthrough if only they would speak with honesty to each other and acknowledge their mutual needs?
In  Strength   Down  Centre,  his portrait  of Jean  Beliveau,  Hood  finds in  his
subject  a  communal  hero who is more than  an  athlete.  Beliveau receives gifts, advice and Miss-Lonelyhearts-type pleas for insight and comfort from his fans. "'It isn't simply that  I'm  a hockey player; people need to touch somebody.'" We live at a time when more and more people cannot  do this in their personal lives, when religion no longer offers a sense of touch, and when inevitably the larger-than-life figures of sports,  politics and  entertainment come  to fill this function.  Camera was about  the way we devour these figures, from Rose Leclair to Marilyn  Monroe to the Kennedys.  A Game of Touch is also about  this society of ours, about  it in the down-to-earth way we all experience it. Satire, surrealism  and symbolism are all  effective ways of  dramatizing  our  world,  but  to  most  of  us  they  offer  the escape hatch  of "Well,  that's  a little too exaggerated.  Now if he had only looked at the other side ..." That  escape is not available to Hood's readers. He has shown us where we are in terms no one can fail to recognize.
Taken  collectively, are not Hood's  novels an achievement  one searches widely to match  in English Canada?  Has he not given us an ordinary,  recognizable world in which extraordinary things nonetheless happen?  On the levels of nature and of

24

NOVELS OF  HUGH  HOOD



grace,  of expertise and  illumination, has he not demonstrated a skill and  a sense of feeling  illuminating our  present  and  our future? The graces  of his short  fiction have  been apparent since the  publication of Flying a Red Kite; is there not some­ thing  to the  novels as well? They  offer a panorama of our society and  the fate  of the  individual within  it. Balancing between  a sense of the  real  and  a glimpse  of the  visionary,  they  bring  to us a picture of this world  and  the  grace that  is there  for  anyone  who  would  reach  out  for  it.


FOOTNOTES

1 Hugh Hood in a letter to the author, undated.
2   "The Isolation Booth," Tamarack  Reuiew, #9 (Autumn, 1958), 5-12.
8 A Game of Touch, Longman,  $5·95·
4   See the Director  Max  Mars's philosophical reflections on the camera's lies, pp. 73-4·
5  The  Camera Always Lies, 195-6.
6  Letter  to the author, 23/XII/66.
7  This equivocal female crops up again in Hood's fiction, most obviously in "The Tol­ stoy Pitch," Fiddlehead,  #79 (March-April  1969), 44-59· There, however, the wife­ who-only-wants-what-is-best  is drawn  with less subtlety, the story being an attempt  to convey the sort of sellout that  does not in fact take place in White  Figure, how­ ever much  the novelist may toy with the possibility.
8 For example, see the oft-reprinted "After  the Sirens," Flying a Red Kite  (Toronto: Ryerson, 1962),  125-35.


DOROTHY  LIVESAY

The Love Poetry



Peter Stevens






IN HER soCIAL  POETRY of  the  193o's Domthy  Uvesay
concerned  principally  with  human fellowship  and   the  poems  call  for  freedom
from  capitalist tyranny. There is no mention  of the  problem of freedom for  each individual: the  question  of the  roles played  in society  by man  and  woman is not raised.  I suppose  that  she had  tackled  the  problem  indirectly in the  long  poem  in Signpost, "City Wife" but that  poem seems more concerned with  the personal relationship of  husband and  wife, not  with  an  examination of  woman's role  in contemporary life and  not in any large sense with  aspects  of the  relative  freedoms and  responsibilities of man  and  woman  in  modem society.
Her  later  poems,  however,  show  a  greater interest   in  woman's individuality, her  need  for  freedom, her  right  to  exist  in  her  own  way.  Woman as  herself  is very  much   a  part  of  her  love  poems  as  we shall  see  later.   The   love  poems  in The  Unquiet  Bed are  preceded  by a section  of personal poems in which  the  poet concentrates on  various  aspects  of herself  as woman. In  "Woman  Waylaid" she sets up a contrast between  the opposing  sensitive and  practical sides of her  nature. In   this  poem   the  sensitive  side  wins  out.  She   prefers   to  pick  flowers,   not   to
collect  wood  for  the  cool evenings. So she  returns



handed to face
 empty-

pot-bellied stove its greed.

She makes  her choice  as individual woman  and  she is free  to make  the choice. Although it  may  mean that  she  will be  uncomfortable in  "the cool  evenings/by

DOROTHY  LIVESAY



the lake," at least she has herself made the decision. Too much must not be made of this poem but  in the context  of the whole book  (and  the arrangement of the poems and  sections  of The  Unquiet   Bed is an  important aspect  of  the  book) this poem, and  most of the others in the second section, are directly concerned in an  unpretentious way with  the problem of woman's  position in  modem  society. Dorothy Livesay still insists that woman is involved in the natural cycle of growth. In  "Sunfast" she sees herself as part  of the  whole life force symbolized by  the sun. She  takes  in  the sun  like food;  the sun  refreshes and  re-orders  the  world just as human   beings try  to establish patterns.  But  the  poet seems released  to some higher  mode of life than suburban  pattern  and  order

I am one
with rolling animal life
legs in air green blades scissoring
the sun.

In  a general  way the image of a 'sunfast' is close to images used by Gwendolyn MacEwen,  particularly  in Breakfast  for Barbarians. And it is perhaps significant in this context to remember that Dorothy Livesay has written a poem "For Gwendolyn'' in which she expresses her feeling that  the younger poet could have been her child.
The  feeding on  nature,  the immersion in it as well as the recognition  of one's place in it, is expressed in several poems in  the second section of The  Unquiet Bed, for instance,  "Process".  "Pear  Tree"  has the same notion at its centre. The tree  in  this  poem  becomes  almost  a  symbolic  mother,  for  it  hears  "children chugging  on  the  chains/of   sound/practising language."   But  the  reference  in the  poem  takes  on  a  wider  significance,  for  the  tree  connects  daylight  with darkness,  and  so  perhaps  foreshadows  the  idea  of  union  and  communication achieved  through  the man-woman  relationship in the love poems:

Lucky this pear tree seeped in sun shivering the air
in her white doldrums

taps with her roots
 
the worms' kingdom.


The  question  of individuality  in relation  to the male-female  principle  Dorothy
Livesay herself finds so prevalent in her poetry crops up humorously in the poem

DOROTHY LIVESAY



"Flower  Music",  particularly  in the section titled "Peony." The  male neighbour grows peonies easily -the language suggests something  rather  brutal  and  violent about  the  male's  bringing  forth  these flowers, an  attack  perhaps  on  the  nature of the peony itself, its virgin purity. The  poet herself peevishly resents his success. She has tried to make them flower by using the  brute  power  perhaps  associated with  the  male  principle.  She  has been a  tyrant  to  the  flowers but  they do  not blossom. The  poem ends ironically, for she suggests that  the  man's  masculinity, his power brings forth beauty "so light/so silken." This sense of opposition and contradiction between  male  and  female,  expressed  somewhat   obliquely  in  the poem, is very much  a part of Dorothy Livesay's view of human  love, and it turns up in the  next section of The  Unquiet  Bed which is devoted  exclusively to love poems.



BuT THESE   LOVE POEMS  were  not  the  first that  Dorothy
Livesay wrote. There  are quite  a  number  of love poems in  Signpost,  and  it  is
interesting  to look at them now to see how her views on the role of woman  have changed. The love poems in Signpost are attempts  to express the changing  moods and emotions of a love affair. They are personal poems but  they are also objecti­ fied to  make  more  universal  statements  about  love,  as  Robert  Weaver  in  the Fall, 1948 issue of Contemporary  Verse suggested. He said  that  the poems were poems

about  love; about  the  paradoxical, even tragic  desire to  lose oneself wholly in passion and love, at  the same time retain something essential of oneself. The per­ son, invaded, often resisted successfully, or fled. But already, in this  microcosmic human  relationship, Miss Livesay was being strongly drawn towards identification with something outside of the self.

Obviously,  these  remarks  in  some sense could  apply  to  her  later  love  poems, although  I think that  Dorothy Livesay is much surer of herself as a woman in the later  poems so that she can afford to be more open, direct  and  honest, make the poems in fact much  more personal. The  early poems still have some romanticism clinging  to  them,  although  some of the  poems are  admirable statements  of the wayward  passions, misgivings, deceits and  contradictions of love. And  certainly they  are  the  first attempts  in  Canadian   poetry  to  express  a  modern  approach to love, even though  they are not always successful.

DOROTHY LIVESAY



In  "Song And   Dance," Dorothy   Livesay  suggests  some  of  the  literary   and philosophic    (if  that   is  not  too  pedantic  a  word  in  this  context)   motivations behind  these  early  love poems:

Through my twenties  an  experimentation with sex ... was simply  [a]  search  for the  perfect  dancing  partner.  I had read Havelock Ellis's The  Dance of Life and  I believed of [sic]  the consummation  of two bodies into one, the merging of the self in other  self. Also, it goes without  saying, I had read  Lady Chatterley's  Lover.

The partners in love try to keep each  his own individuality, in order  to prevent being  overwhelmed and  overpowered by the other  partner. The  poet  attempts to protect   herself   by  keeping   herself  close  to  natural  things.   This   she   uses  as "armour"  ("Weapons")  because  in  love  she  feels  vulnerable but  if  the  other merges  with  her  own  essential  faith  in nature, then  she is defenceless.  Thus, love can  become  a  kind  of struggle  for  power; it  may  be  impossible  to  wall  oneself in, for  love demands openness  between  partners. This  idea  is reminiscent of that expressed  in  other  early  poems,  in  which  the  poet,  in  talking  of  the  immense external reality  in  terms  of an  outer  darkness,  often  used  the  image  of enclosed space  within   which  she  kept  the  darkness   at  bay.  But  even  in  erecting   a  shell around one,  one  senses  that  it  is futile.  In  the  same  way,  love  seems  to  be  an enormous force  in  the love poems in Signpost  and  defences  against  it are  fragile, particularly as love demands frankness  and  searches  out  the  private sanctities  of personality. Even if one of the partners takes refuge in nature, as the  poet suggests in "Sun," recognizing the  naturalness of love, then  the other  partner can  uncover the  whole,  can  see  everything open  to  his eye as  he  looks  at  nature. The   poet expresses  her  love as a  purely  natural phenomenon:

I am as earth  upturned, alive with seed
For summer's silence and for autumn's  fire.

Caught in  the creative urges implicit  in  nature, she  feels unified  with  nature but does not wish her  partner to recognize  her surrender to these primal promptings: "I am all things  I would  not let you know." But this natural development beyond words  is still  apparent, so even  as she  thinks  she escapes  with  a  retention of her own  self, she  is caught by a lover  through his acceptance of  her  implicit   union with  nature:

I may escape-you hold my body still
In stretching out your hand to feel the wind.

29

DOROTHY LIVESAY



Love is all-encompassing in these poems, so the  poet, surrendering to it  com­ pletely with candour  and honesty, lays herself open to attack. The full knowledge of another  individual  as a necessary part  of a complete  love leads  each  partner  to  be  at  the mercy of the other.  Thus,  love is not  all sweetness  and a bringing forth  through  union;  it can  be ruthless. In  "Ask  Of  The  Winds" the  poet  uses details from spring  to suggest the  awakening  of love  within  her,  but  she senses the  power  of  her  lover,  a  power  which  so  shakes   her  that   in  spite  of  the emergence  of  new  life, she  realizes the  ruthlessness  and  coldness  in  his  love. Indeed,   so  overwhelming  is  his  strength   that   often  she  feels  left  outside  his
experience:
What was it, after all,
The night, or the night-scented phlox? Your mind, or the garden where Always the wind stalks?

What was it, what brief cloak
Of magic fell about
Lending you such a radiance, - Leaving me out?

What was it, why was I Shivering like a tree, Blind in a golden garden
Where only you could see? ("Alienation")

The   notion,  then,  of  distance,  a  notion  that   crops  up  time  and   again  m Dorothy  Livesay's poetry, a distance between people, in this case between lovers, is  part  of  the  poet's  concept  of  love. She  seems  to  be  suggesting  that   union through  love is only momentary  and  that it includes struggle for dominance.  The release  from  individuality   through   complete  union  seems  to  be  too  open   a position, may bring  about such a thorough  nakedness of soul as to threaten  the very basis of the  personality. In  "Blindness" Dorothy  Livesay uses the image  of dancing  as a symbol of this ecstatic release but within the poem she expresses the idea  that  that  release is too dangerous  if seen  by  the  other  partner. It  might lead to a destruction  of individuality:

You did not see me dancing, Even then!
Your blindness saves my soul's integrity.

Perhaps  the poet is even suggesting that  the blindness is an effect of love and so paradoxically  the  power  of  love capable  of  dominating is  denied  that  power

go

DOROTHY LIVESAY



because of the ecstasy of love itself. But the paradox  within  love becomes more complex in  the context  of such a  poem as "The  Unbeliever", for  here the  poet takes up the problem of individuality again. The poem poses the question of commitment. It suggests that  there must be total involvement,  no holding  back, the state  that  might  menace  individual  integrity. Yet at  the same  time anything less than  complete  commitment  leads  to  failure  and  lack  of  communication. As if to stress this  aspect,  "The   Unbeliever"  develops by a series of  questions. The  poet  asks why she  put  no  trust  in  the  words of  her  love;  seemingly, she believes that  she could  retain  her own self this way. But it  has led  to a  break­ down. The  voice she did  not believe is now silent so she is "Quiet  now in these lonely places."
In  fact,  three or four  of the poems in Signpost  are concerned  with  the loss of love,  the  moving  apart   of  the  lovers.  In  "Consideration",  for  instance,  the opening stanza suggests how words become weapons, destructive with "biting analysis/Of  one another." "A Song For Ophelia"  is a simple lyric about  loneli­ ness, the sense of desolation after love has broken down. Yet love persists, if only in  the  memory;  sometimes, in spite of the  deliberate  attempt   to forget  it,  love returns,  somewhat   shadowy,   after   its  "cobweb   image"    ("Dust")   has   been brushed  from  the  heart.  The  ghost  of love returns,  seen  in  objects  associated with it-and  at such  times the anguish of the loss of love returns  as well:

Whenever I passed the house
At far, rare intervals
Memory stabbed,
The tree at the gate griefed.

But now, passing it daily, I scarcely remember­
Pain has a too familiar look
To need the averted head. ("Neighbourhood")

The  same  kind  of  feeling  is expressed in  a  poem  "Time" which  does  not appear  in Signpost  but from its position in Selected  Poems  was probably  written
at the same time:
I opened wide a furnace door
And hot flame seared my face:
I was surprised, that after breach of time
I could not love you less.

Perhaps   this  discussion  of  the  early  love  poems  has  suggested   an  overly schematic  approach on  the  part  of  the  poet. This  is  not  so.  The   poems  are

DOROTHY LIVESAY



attempts  to express the varying moods occuring during  the course of a love affair with  images  pointing  to psychological states  and  conflicts.  Not  all  the  poems dealing  with love in this volume are successful. Some retain  a kind of adolescent vagueness  of  romantic  feeling, some strive  for  ambivalence  of  meaning  which results  only  in  obscurity  or,  conversely, over-simplification.  But  on  the  whole, Robert   Weaver's  summary   of  these  poems  quoted   earlier  is  accurate.   They convince as personal statements; they are believable as notations on personal experience.  At  the same time, however, they reach  a certain  objectivity  because of  the  tone  of  directness  amounting  in  most  cases to  a  starkness.  The  images are not often over-developed; the poems themselves are generally short and to the point, as if the  poet-and  this is somewhat  surprising  considering  both  the  age of the  poet  when  she wrote these poems and  the  general  poetic  atmosphere  in Canada when  these poems were published -as if, then,  the  poet is determined to get to the root of her emotions in order  to express them as openly and  frankly as  possible without  making  them  too  private  in  their  connotation. Indeed,  the closing  poem  in  the  volume, "Protest," is in  its series of  questions  a  kind  of manifesto  about  honesty, a pledge of openness and  candour:

Can I help it, if the wind
Catches crows and holds them pinned

Across the skyway in a row, Scaring off the rain and snow?

Can I help it then, if I Seize forgotten exstacy-

Give away closed thoughts of mine, Hang my secrets on the line?

In  view of the  association of crows and  flight  in  her  poetry  with  re-birth  and release, she may  even be suggesting in  this  poem  that  a  poetry  of real  honesty is a defence  itself against  the loss of love, that  by expressing it  accurately,  the poet can  retain  a good deal of the meaning and  joy of the experience  of love.




HONESTY AND CANDOUR are essential components of the poems she wrote about her later experience of love in The  Unquiet  Bed, and Plainsongs. These  poems, stemming  as they do from  her  maturity  as both  poet and  woman, taking into consideration  her wholehearted  concern  about  the posi-

32

DOROTHY LIVESAY



tion of woman in society and  therefore the integrity of woman in a love relation­ ship,  are obviously for  the most part  more compelling statements  than  those in Signpost.
The  poet prepares  us for the section devoted to the love poems in The  Unquiet Bed  by closing the previous section, which as we saw earlier concentrated  on  the individual   liberty  of  woman  in  personal  life,  with  two  poems  about   the  re­ awakening  of love within  woman. And  again she expresses this in  an  intensely personal  manner.  The  first of  these poems is "Eve". The   poet  notices  an  old apple  tree, "the  last survivor of a pioneer/orchard" which is "miraculously  still/ bearing".  She stoops to pick up one of the fallen apples, to  possess it, to taste it "earth-sweet". And the tree she now recognizes as a symbol of herself:

In fifty seconds, fifty summers sweep and shake me-
I am alive!	can stand up still
hoarding this apple
in my hand.

She feels this  earth  sweetness developing  within  her  as an  "unwithering"  in the second of these poems, "Second  Corning". She thinks of blossoms in autumn, colours of growth  and  purity. Through  love she grows to another  vital existence, "coming  be/coming". This  poem prefigures perhaps  the insistence on  physicality in  the  love poems  which  follow. But  the  titles of  both  these  poems  with  their general religious implications  also suggest that physical manifestations of love, however  momentary,   may  include  some spiritual  meaning  and  revelation,  and in some of the love poems the spirituality  does arise from  the  physical presences of  the  lovers themselves, so that  the  ideas of separation,  darkness,  silence  and distance in these poems take on weightier values because of the context  in which they have been placed.
An insistent demand  runs through  the love poems, a demand  that  comes from
her  essential  individuality   but  also a  demand   that  comes  from  the  masculine opposite  partner. "Be  woman", is the  opening  line  of  "The Taming" and  in this poem being a woman  means being submissive in sexual union  but  paradoxi­ cally that  basic femininity  has its own strength  which will take away some of the mastery  of the  male.  In  a  way "The  Taming" is a  poem  that  emphasizes  the give-and-take  of love in the  strictest sense. The  sexual  experience  puts  her  at the mercy of the partner:

33

DOROTHY LIVESAY



Be woman. I did not know the measure of the words until that night
when you denied me darkness even the right
to turn in my own light.

The  language  here suggests that  love must  be fully acknowledged  in  the  open; woman  must  give  herself in  order  to  release her  own  womanhood.   Although this sounds like the  passive feminine element  as described  in  "Bartok  And  The Geranium", the closing lines of "The  Taming" indicate  that  this release through sexual  union  in  fact  gives the  woman  at  least  an  equality  of  mastery  in  the experience:

Do as I say, I heard you faintly over me fainting:
Be woman.

Thus,  the sexual  experience  makes her  face  her  essential self, her  womanhood with both  its submissive qualities and  its strength.  Through the  physical  experi­ ence  comes a  release from  physicality. Woman  is not  to  be  considered  merely as a  physical piece of property.  Love must  give her  freedom  to remain  herself even  within  the  gestures of submission. "I'm not  just  bones/and crockery," she says in "The  Unquiet  Bed". She wants the freedom  to  be part  of a unity, a loss of one kind of freedom  in order  to release a true individuality. She has  held to the idea  that

love might set men free yet hold them fast in loyalty.

So love must always "make  room for me",  the "I", the individual  human  being, even in the act of union.
In spite of the ecstasies and freedom of love, in spite of the joy she experiences in rediscovering love at this point in her life-see particularly  "A  Letter" which repeats  the image  of the tree used in "Eve"  and  "Second  Coming" -the  poet acknowledges  the  terrors,  failures,  and  paradoxes  of  love. She sees its creative joys but also its abysses, gaps, and silences. "And  Give Us Our  Trespasses" can be seen as a poem about  the dark  kingdom of human  love.

34

DOROTHY LIVESAY



It is a poem coming out of darkness, involving the darkness and  the silence in itself. Love is the swaying form;  the first section shows the room of love shaking and  quaking.  This  movement  dispels the darkness "at  midnight":

a socket
was plunged in the wall and my eyes sprang open.
Love is beyond  words,  perhaps  a  parallel  with  poetry  which  tries to catch  the
more complex  beat  beneath  ordinary  language.  Speech in love is "out  of turn". One  must listen. "I heard  only your heartbeat." The  poet recognizes her  inade­ quacies,  a sort of  recognition  of the  impotence  of language  even  in  the  act  of using  words.  The   movement  and  the  image  of  light  breaking  returns  in  the poem's fifth section:

quivering water
under the smite
of sunlight

But after this epiphany  there is the return  to words, to make sense of the silence and  darkness.  "The   telephone"  is "always  available/for transmitting   messages" but to make the effort to speak is like trying "to push the weight/  of a mountain" so the poem closes with an  acceptance  of that  large area  of silence "between  the impulse  to speak/   and  the speaking"  for in  that  area  "storms  crackle".  So we are  finally apart  in  love because of our  inadequacies   just as we finally have  to rely on the silence beneath  words because our use of words is always inadequate. There  is distance  between lovers; there is distance between silence and speech :

Forgive us our distances.
Images  of  dream   and  sleep  figure  a  great  deal  in  the  love  poems  in  The Unquiet   Bed. The  poet sees the  experience of love as something  other-worldly and  dream-like  ("A  Book of Charms"), something  beyond words as in a dream ("The Dream"), but at times sleep and dream  represent loneliness and  distance, as in "The  Vigil".
Some poems in The  Unquiet  Bed and Plainsongs attempt  to describe the momentary  blisses and  fearful  transient  qualities of human  love. "Old  Song",  in The  Unquiet  Bed, expresses in controlled  and  resigned tone  the  passing of love, the impermanence of a human  relationship even though  it may achieve harmony

35

DOROTHY LIVESAY



and  union. "You  cannot  hold/what vanishes."  Humans  must  accept  transience in love, "Your  bones may melt/in me/or  in another  woman"  but that  acceptance of momentary  things is of the essence of love, for  "the  essence isjto  catch  the bird  in  season."  In  a  later  poem  in  Plainsongs, "Con   Sequences",   Dorothy Livesay uses images drawn  from  nature  to suggest  the  distances  between  lovers and  also the growth  and  violent surge of love. When  there  is no desire in  the lovers,  then  a  face  "is  stone/carved  bone"  but  this  hardness  can  crack  and disintegrate  through  love:

I wait for lightning an avalanche
to tear  the hillside

Underneath the  placid surface, love rests, waiting  for growth:

Kick  the leaves aside
yellow roots
cry for greening.

So love is a kind of undersurface  that  rises through  the union of sex. Love, paradoxically,  is there, both in lack of desire and in passionate response:

The sun shines
on the bald hill
or the lush valley equally 	fiercely.

"Four  Songs" (The Unquiet Bed) expresses Dorothy Livesay's personal explan­ ations about  her need and desire for love as a mature woman. She assesses frankly her indulgence in sexual love, trying to counter superficial arguments:

People will say
I did it for delight
you -for compassion

but she establishes in the first song that it was indeed  a matter  of give-and-take:

Give me the will, you said
and in return take  from my  fill of passion.

DOROTHY  LIVESAY



In  those terms, then,  people's opinions about  this affair were wrong, for

You did it from design
I -from compulsion.

She recognizes the dangers of mere indulgence in passion but she cannot  reject the passion, even though  it may be quenched for both  herself and  her lover. The fire  of  her  desire  "envelops"  her  lover;  "attracts the  mothjand  the  murderer too". She  realizes the  double-sidedness of insistence on  passion:

Dido knew this fire and chose
that funeral.

She finds her  passion urgent  and  insistent, a "hunger." Her  body  is "blunt" and  needs "the  forked lightjning of tongues." Her passion is assuaged but "thirst remains"  for  the  gentleness  and  calm  of  love. In  this  third  lyric  there  is  an indirect  return  to  the  idea  of words in  "tongues"  and  the  fourth  lyric gathers together  the  images  of  fire,  thirst  and  words. The  inexpressible  experience  of human  love is cooled to the level of words, giving a taste of the sensual pleasure just as a poem in a way gives a sense of the ineffable experience  which may give rise to the poem:

I drink now no fiery stuff burning the mouth
I drink the liquid flow of words	and taste song in the mouth.

"The  Touching" is another  series of lyrics which describes the sexual experience more explicitly. The  image  of coldness and  warmth  is repeated  as love is seen as a protection  against  coldness. Love as a kind of violence, a union  of entrance and  submission,  ("pierce  me again/gently")  leads to completion,  to a  merging in  new life. The  joining  of man  and  woman  in  the sexual  experience  enlarges the individuality  of woman, for  the "steady  pulse" of the penis she feels as "my second  heart/beating".
The second lyric plays with concepts of light and dark, revelation and darkness,
submergence  in warmth  "under  the cover" so that  love lightens that  darkness.
The  third lyric repeats the notion of growth, for the poet acknowledges a kind


37

DOROTHY LIVESAY



of  re-birth  beyond  words  through  love.  It  releases her  into  new  elements;  she becomes "part of some mystery". She is swallowed within  her lover but although she loses her own individuality, she feels herself within  a larger,  more basic and
elemental self:


I drown
 

in your identity

I am not I
 
but root
 

shell
 



fire


so that  at  the moment  of climax, that  moment  of completion  and  union, she is somehow  alone, deep in some underworld  of darkness  from  which she struggles to be born  anew.  At  this epiphany  she becomes  both  mother  and  child  at  the moment  of birth:

I tear through the womb's room give birth
and yet	alone
deep in the dark earth
I am the one	wrestling the element re-born.

Here again is the image of isolation in a dark world, the image of violent struggle leading  to  a  break-through   to creation.  This  same  image  is  repeated  in  "The Woman" (Plainsongs), in which she cries for relief, for "the fearful knot of pain" to be untied. She wants release through  the climax to the urgency of love:

When you make me come
it is the breaking of a shell
a shattering birth

how many thousand children we have conceived!

Through love she lives on the tips of her senses. Through submission to her lover her whole sensual life is opened, even though  she recognizes that  she is in some way held and lost to herself:

never thought me bound
until one night all night I lay
under your will and mind

DOROTHY  LIVESAY



and heard  you play my secrets
over and over in your hand  ("The  Cave," Plainsongs)

so that

over all my body's fingertips
day breaks
a thousand  crystals ("At Dawn,''  Plainsongs)

The   idea  of  loss  of  self,  of  complete   submission   in  order   to  reach   to  the elemental life in  which  a  new  self is released  opens  "The  Notations Of  Love" (The Unquiet  Bed). The poem  moves into  the  area  of silence  in  the  sense that at  one  point  the  poet  is accused  of being  unable  to speak  of love. There is only cruelty  but  she  sees love  as being  hard  in its strength and  asks her  lover  to take love  "the hard   way". Then in  "facing the  rock"  he  will  feel  "the fountain's force". This  force  of  love  goes beyond  age  and  time.  Of  the  senses it  is  touch, the  joining  of  flesh  that   offers  its secrets.  A finger  may  trace  crows'  feet  round
the  eyes but

the lips stay fresh only the tongue
unsheathes  its secret skin and  bolts
the lightning in.

Thus, lovers  come  to  union  through experience  beyond   words;   they  are  joined across silence  and  darkness, and  even  when separated by distance, the substructure of their  love can seem  to  join them  at  almost  a physical  level:

especially around these absences
our minds are twins they circle and unite
my left arm is your right arm bound 	even in flight

The physical   union   of  lovers  continues even  after   the  act  of  love  and   "The Notations of Love"  closes with  the  idea  of continuance beyond  sexual  love. Out of  "the dead/of night" comes  light;  she  has  lost  one  kind  of  individuality but has gained  a new understanding of her essential elemental self:
day or night, I
am undressed


39

DOROTHY LIVESAY



dance differently.

Paradoxically,  the  poem  following  "The   Notations   Of  Love"  which  closes on the idea of new release and a kind of continuance is a poem that  hints at the break-down  of love. "Moving  Out" uses the dismantling  of a house as a symbol of the paring  away of love. The  physical features  of the house make  the house, just as the physical love of the lover makes the love so that  now she can only

find an upright bed between your bones-
without the body of your house
I'd  have no home.

The  poem, then,  contains an allusion to the possibility of parting,  to the disinte­ gration  of love and  indeed  in  Plainsongs  there  are  poems  which  offer  a  bleak statement  of the gradual  collapse of love. In  "Auguries" the  poet drops into  the darkness, perhaps  that  darkness  that  love can  lift her  from.  Here,  however, she waits in  the  dark  and  has ominous  dreams,  waiting  perhaps  to  be  broken  by love like "a  shell in  your hand". She finds herself alone  in  a  dark  garden,  the trees shrouded   and  black  around   her.  After  the  presentation  of  these  dismal dreams,  there  is a stark  statement  of  the denial  of  love:   "you  have  said  no." The  poem ends with  a series of questions, listing her  hopes for a return  to love. In the future she wants the dark garden of her dream  to become "a  green place", where she  will be  held  again  in  a landscape  where  "your  hands  were the sky itself/cupping my body". She waits hopefully to be lifted "on girders of sunlight" out of the gloom of her present state.
Two  other  poems in  Plainsongs  give indications  of the  loss of love. In  "The Sign"  there  is a  reference  to separation,  though  there  is "yet  touching". The progress of a log rushing  along with  the  flow of  a  river,  whirled  and  battered against  the  banks, sucked  under  the surface,  then  swept  out  of sight  represents the vicissitudes of their love, so that, even though  the poem ends in a  joining of hands,  the emphasis in the poem has been on separation, distance  and  disappear­ ance. "The  Uninvited" also suggests that  the shadow  of a third  lies  between the lovers, and  the poet is conscious at the end of the poem of "another voice/singing  under  ice."
The  closing pages of Plainsongs seem to concentrate on  the separation  of the lovers and  the attempt  by the poet to assess her situation,  to come to terms now with the absence of love. In  "Another  Journey" she sees herself as escaping from

DOROTHY LIVESAY



the captivity of love. She recognizes signs around  her in nature  that  might  make her cling to the  past:  a switchback trail that  almost turns back on itself, but  she moves steadily  upwards,  her  eyes fixed resolutely in  front  of  her.  She  may  be moving in a darkness, but the poem closes with a glint of light, a return  to life:

Night spills stars
into the valley
I am  aware
of cedars	breathing turning 		the trees
move with me
UP 	the mountain.



l:ROUGHOUT  THE LOVE    POETRY m The  Unquiet  Bed  and Plainsongs  Dorothy  Livesay emphasizes the  physical aspects of human   love, so it is not surprising  that the poem "The  Operation" (Plainsongs), connects  her experience of love and  her recovery from it, together with a general  reassessment of her situation  of her life as she found  it at that  time.
"The Operation" opens with a sense of crisis. The  poet has reached  a crucial point in  her  life, this crisis made  all the  more emphatic  in her  mind  because  it happened  after  her tremendous  experience of love:
And I too
after the blaze of being
alive faced the wall
over which breath must be thrown.

Her  view of  the  doctor  corresponds  to  her  view of  her  lover.  He  is one  who uses violence, a knife, to save her. She is a "victim/grateful to be saved,"  so she gives herself completely to him.
After  the operation  the doctor  watches over her  with  "silent  white  precision"
and with solicitude until there grows between them an "intimate flashing bond". So far in the poem the hospital experience is a kind of parallel with her experience of love, so  that  her  emergence  from  the  hospital  is in  a sense  a  re-birth.   She must  learn  to live again;  she must  learn  to face  the  world  of external  reality: "I have to breathe  deep here/to be alive again".
The  second section is devoted to a meditation  about  her response to love. She

DOROTHY LIVESAY



tries to evaluate it. Just  as she has to rely on herself to effect a complete  physical cure after the operation,  so she must assess her chances in the aftermath of love, which she now sees as "a sickness" which the lovers attempted to cure in  many ways:  by separation  or even  by  physical indulgence.  The  disease racked  them and at times their sexual union was an effort to effect a cure. Eventually, their separation  has led to some kind of cure, at least for her lover, as she now watches him "a  well man",  though she herself is still trapped  in gloom:  "rain/  smirches the pain." This image suggests that  she cannot  face her new situation  in a clear­ sighted fashion and  the  poem adds further  details of poor  vision:

I face

wet pavement mirrors
 distorted


A picture of her lover suddenly breaks into the poem but she dismisses it by the choice of an act of violence:
I decide to complete the operation tear myself into four quarters scatter the pieces.

This  will lead  to  re-creation,  a  new life, in  "uncoiling/animal sun -/another kingdom."
The  last section  of  the  poem  returns  to  a  key image  in  Dorothy  Livesay's poetry-a doorway-used  generally  as an  entrance   to  new  experience,  as  a release, a revelation or emergence into some new world. Here,  as she stands in a doorway,  she  takes stock of herself in specific physical  terms.  She  realizes that by an  acceptance  of what  she is now she can  rebuild  a  life. She  can  now see her lover in an objective light, enabling her to concentrate on her own life:
for now the he 	the 	you 	are one and gone
and I must measure me.

Thus,  she imperatively  exhorts herself to grow again,  to stretch  for the life force of the sun, "reach  a dazzled strangeness/sun-pierced sky."
The   process of  recovery  and  the  stoic  insistence  on  individual   growth  are expressed again in two poems as yet uncollected in book form. Both appear  in a magazine  First Encounter,  which  appeared  in  1970. It  is significant  that  both poems  repeat  images  that  have  been  part  of  the  love  poetry.  "Rowan   Red Rowan" takes up  the  tree image  previously used in  "Eve", "Second  Coming" and  "A  Letter". She sees herself here somehow like a tree

DOROTHY LIVESAY




winter enclosed pale mouth
 
stiff
 crystal

and the smile
 frozen


But there  are  bright  berries on the tree. Still, the numbness she feels is perhaps a kindly numbness  because spring, like a time of new growth,  may  release her
frozen tears :

I cannot cry till the far green time when the hills loosen
and the tears in streams rove through my veins into frenzied blossom.

The  long hard  look she has been forced to take at herself is the subject of the other  poem, "Fancy!". Her self-regarding has revealed some undesirable  features to her. It has made  more aware of her "burdened  body/the shrivelling eyesjthe withered  chin".  Yet the poem closes with an image of life:

Yet still I live! move with the dancer stamping within.

So she has emerged from crucial experiences not unscathed  but with knowledge and  with  a stoic evaluation  of her own life. The  sequence  of the love poems in The   Unquiet  Bed  and   Plainsongs  are   the  most  candid   revelations   of  the experience  of love as seen  by a  woman  in  Canadian poetry.  Some  poems fall short  of their  aims because the  poet seems more concerned  with  poetic  theories about form and lining. Sometimes the structure of lining seem arbitrary,  although in  most  cases the  use of  broken  short  lining  together  with  rhyme,  half-rhyme and assonance mirrors the changing and breathless quality of the experiences themselves, as well as rendering  some sense of the spirituality  of the experience, for  the  best  poems in  the  sequence  seem enclosed in suspension,  caught  in  an ecstatic  calm.  At  other  times  the  poet  mars  a  poem  by making  the  reader  too conscious of an image, so that  it  becomes for him  a conceit, a  rhetorical  device that  militates  against  the  tone  of honesty and  directness in  most of the  poems. There   is  occasional   over-emphasis   and   repetition,  even   (though   rarely)    an indulgence  in  romanticism  and  sentimentality.  But  these are  only  minor  blem­ ishes on an otherwise distinguished set of poems.. They  are examples of  the very best in  Dorothy  Livesay's later  work in which she is not  afraid  to  be  intensely personal and frank  because she is able to express her feelings immediately and yet objectively so that she herself is subjected  to the appraising and critical apparatus she uses in her own  poetry.

43


CATALONIA



Dorothy Livesay










l:E FLAG  of darkness lowers at half-mast blotting the blood-stained hieroglyphs from eyes strained  from the smoke, the flares, the rat-tat-tat of guns' incessant bark. A sudden  lull
fans wind on brow, recalls from far off hills
the ones who rest ... oh unbelievably
a girl who rests tired head on easy arm
and sleeps encircled by her own heart-beat.

But we, grey snakes who twist and squirm our way from hump to sodden hump, roll in a hole
of slime, scarring our knees to keep awake
(earth's fermentation working overtime). Horizons reel, groping for an axis,
stars burn in whirling rockets overhead -
we wrench ourselves over the last trench,  down down, down in scurrying scramble tossed towards lost lines, lost outposts, lost defence ...


l:E CAPTAIN of the third  brigade sprang  from a hillock where he peered into  the flare-lit dark. He crouched
and  doubled up, ran to a gunner's nest.
"They've quit"  he hissed. "They've left the ridge and swarmed to cover, in the wood ...

44

CATALONIA



Thirty   years ago the  last  great battle  of the   resistance  by  the   Loyalist   Govern­ ment   of   Spain    and   the   International Brigades against the  invasion of General Franco  took   place  in  Catalonia.  Short news  reels of the  battle,  newspaper  re­ ports, letters   from  Mackenzie-Papineau Brigade    volunteers   from   Canada   pro­ vided   the   background   for   this   poem, written  in   spring,   1939.  It   was  never published,  probably  because  in  Canada there  were  no  magazines  or  quarterlies interested.
Background  information  on  the   poli­
tical events which stirred those times has been  admirably   documented   in  "Una­ muno's  Last  Lecture", by  Louis  Portillo, published in Cyril Connolly's Horizon.
D. L.




The  tanks? they've left the bloody tanks defenceless ... wounded  men will be inside." Then  Sorensen came up. He'd seen
the tired  retreat  from our right flank.
Tall, lean-as a stripped  tree-
he hung  above the captain,  panting  words. "What's that?" The captain  thrust a fist
in the man's  face. "You  mean it, Sorensen?"
"I'll go" the lean one said ... and down
he slithered  on his knees, towards the tanks.


INSIDE a tank  the smoky darkness lurched and stupidly  the air, acrid with oil,
clutched  at a face. It shoved his nostrils in, clung  to his palate with a gritty clamp, branded  his lungs. He choked and coughed
tried to restrict his chest from heaving rasps -


45

CATALONIA



crouched  on the floor, head thrust  against steel wall. And now again pain stung his shoulder-blade
his ann, still bleeding, hung beside him limp - a stranger's  arm. He looked at it, and saw himself the same, inertly cut  away
from  human contact,  blood of brotherhood.
The  sweat broke on his brow, the blood closed down against all sound of guns. He swayed, and fell.


l:E BOY he fell upon stirred  from  his dream, moved, and felt out the knife-wound  in his side.
The soggy bandages were now a wad
of blood, clotted and  warm;  the quivering  flesh
throbbed  like a heart-beat  pounding through  the room ...
his room at home so clear now in his mind shuttered  with slanting shafts of light, the chinks of day on rosy plastered wall, his chairs
hunch-backed,  the cool tile floors with candle-grease scattered in silver coins beside the bed ...
But 0, that  voice ... what  voice sang out  to him
screaming in siren tones, Arise, awake, stand  up and strike, strike back and shoot,
shoot till the last strip fumbles in your hand -?
till silence huddles in the muffled tank.

The  tank! He rose up, leaning on one arm then crawled away from his companion's side.
The fumes, the oily fumes, spluttered  within his brain but dragging himself up, he reached  the slit
and peered outside. The earth  still seemed to heave
with showers of fire still bursting  from its bowels.

Then  something moved, a shadow  writhing low upon the ground;  and Sorensen burst in
upon  the tank, gasping and  hurried,  thrusting  bandages towards  him,  helping him stand  up and  breathe.
"The other soldier's dead." They  took his gun

CATALONIJ\



and letters spilling from his pockets, these
the two remembered.  Then  ploughed on to find the next tank, and the next, where other  men lay trapped  and helpless, ammunition  gone.



Now WE RETREAT in better order,  confident of gun   on shoulder, captain  in command.
The  wounded  swing in swift-made  hammocks, safe from  guttering  death  or prisoner's assault.
And as they move others are marching  down,
people are shuffling down the roads of Spain bundled  with babies, chattels, cooking-pots
a donkey-load  of warmth; a basket, light
with bits of bread, dried beans, remains of other  hasty meals, swallowed between the zoom of air-raids over village streets. People are marching with all song
gone out, all sunlight flattened grey upon their faces; now in steady haste
pushing  ahead  to valleys where the mountain  shade leans kindly down, where snow
looks good to sleep upon. No winds can  blow more fiercely than  a bomb, and winter's  frost will pierce steel needles lighter far to bear than  thrust  of shrapnel  splitting under  skin.

People are marching, marching, and they meet
the tattered  tunics of the soldiers, some of whom walk bare-backed  in the cold. A woman stops
and gives a shawl, a skirt for covering
for soldiers on ahead, who march to make a further  stand.
Though  darkness fall once more, a tattered  flag, the men will stand  upright
spirit sustained, the floor of Spain
a ground  not tilled in vain with blood


47

CATALONIA



with bones of young men scattered  far; not fertilized in vain, 0 grey-green gloss of olives, wind-bent on a hill, of earth
supported  by the vineyards' yield, and  wheat crisp in the sun. No more sterility
or drouth  or barrenness is yours
0 rolling plains; who make a covering now for breath  and bone; for growing hands
whose fingers work beneath  the roots, to burst
out of the earth  again, another spring!
1939



NO OTHER WAY

Sinclair Ross's Stories and Novels


SandraDjwa


This is a fundamentalist town. To  the letter it believes the Old Testament  stories that  we, wisely  or  presumptuously, choose to accept only as tales and allegories.

AsA  NEWFOUNDLANDER, I have alwaY" felt a great fond­
ness for the writings of Sinclair Ross. I do not quite understand  the nature of the
attraction, whether  it is his concept  of a prairie  nature-hard, with  overtones of fatalism-which corresponds  to my own view of Newfoundland, or whether it is simply  his wry observations  of the circumlocutions  of the  Puritan  way-a sensibility which also strikes a familiar note. In any event, whenever the term "Canadian novel"  comes to  mind,  I  find  myself gravitating towards  Ross and particularly  towards his sometimes puzzling first novel, As For Me and My House.
Reading  through  Queen's  Quarterly  of the late  3o's and  early 4o's, it is not too difficult to recognize branches  of the novel. Here are the familiar  characters and  concerns of Ross's world:  the Steves, the Philips, the Pauls, the young boy with the horse  ("A  Day with Pegasus," 1938) ; the chance intrusion  of the artist into the prairie town  ("Comet at Night," 1939) ; the paralyzing lack of communi­ cation  between  husband  and  wife ("The Lamp  at  Noon,"  1938, "The  Painted Door,"  1939); or,  for  that  matter,  between  friends  ("Jug and  Bottle,"  1939) which leads inevitably  to further  betrayal;  the "unappetizing righteousness" and pansy-embroidered motto,  "As For Me and  My House We Will Serve the Lord"  of "Comet at  Night.m  Here, too, in the short story, as in "No  Other  Way," first published  in Nash's magazine  (London,I 938), is the unmistakable  silhouette of Mrs. Bentley. Older,  more haggard  than  the protagonist  of As For Me  and My  House, Hatty  Glenn  is equally dependent  on the love of her still-elusive husband of over twenty years.
Reviewing  the  short  stories and  novels, I seem to find that  character  recedes
into the emotional  landscape; the primary impression is of those short paragraphs


49

SINCLAIR ROSS



which establish the natural landscape and its relation to a perceiving consciousness. Throughout Ross's work, there  is a sense of a bleak,  hard  nature -the loneliness and  isolation  of the  prairie  winter, the indifferent sun  which  scorches  the summer wheat. Against  this  nature, man  is insignificant:

In  the clear bitter  light the long white miles of prairie  landscape  seemed a region strangely  alien  to  life. Even  the  distant  farmsteads  she could  see served only  to intensify  a  sense of  isolation.  Scattered   across  the  face  of  so  vast  and  bleak  a wilderness it  was difficult to conceive them  as a  testimony  of human  hardihood and  endurance. Rather  they seemed futile, lost, to cower before  the implacibility of snowswept earth and clear pale sun-chilled sky. (Lamp at Noon.)

Mrs.  Bentley,  looking  across the  open  prairies  and  towards the  Alberta foothills, recognizes  both  man's insignificance  and  his need  to project  human meaning into the  natural landscape:

We've  all lived in a little town too long. The  wilderness here makes us uneasy. I felt  it  the first night  I  walked alone on the  river  bank-a  queer  sense of  some­ thing  cold  and  fearful,  something  inanimate,  yet aware  of  us. A Main  Street  is such a self-sufficient little pocket of existence, so smug, compact,  that here we feel abashed  somehow before the hills, their passiveness, the unheeding way they sleep. We climb them,  but  they withstand  us, remain  as serene and  unrevealed  as ever. The  river slips past us, unperturbed  by our coming and going, stealthily confident. We shrink from our insignificance. The stillness and solitude-we think a force or presence into  it-even  a hostile presence, deliberate, aligned  against  us-for  we dare  not admit  an  indifferent  wilderness,  where we may have  no meaning  at all. (As  For Me  and My  House)

This  is a nature against  which  man  must struggle  -not  just to become  a man
-but simply  to exist and  perhaps, if he is particularly fortunate and  determined, to exist in some meaningful way. Most of these stories are a legacy  of the drought years  of the  thirties  on  the  prairies-the depression  moving imperceptibly into the  war  years.  Even  in  Ross's  second  novel,  The  Well,  where   the  protagonist, Chris  Howe,  is given  an  urban  childhood, the  primary emphasis is still placed  on the  essentials  of survival: "to  outwit, score,  defeat, survive-Boyle  Street  had permitted nothing else." However, as is later suggested in this novel and  throughout the first novel, existence  of some meaningful way  becomes  the  ultimate goal.  For Philip  Bentley  this  search  for  meaning involves  the  attempt to  find  dignity  and purpose  in nature and  in himself through his art:

Tonight   Philip  made  a  sketch  of  Joe  Lawson.... He's  s1ttmg at  a  table,  half­
hunched  over it, his hands lying heavy and  inert  in front  of him  like stones. The

SINCLAIR ROSS



hands  are  mostly what  you  notice. Such  big, disillusioned, steadfast hands, so faithful  to  the  earth  and  seasons that  betray them. I  didn't  know before what drought  was really like, watching a crop dry up, going on again. I didn't  know that Philip knew either.

In  many  of the short  stories and  also in some of the entries in Mrs. Bentley's journal,  human  action  is presented  as the reaction to natural events. The young farm  boy of "One's a Heifer"  is sent out into the open  prairie because a blizzard has caused the cattle to stray;  Ellen, the young wife of "The Lamp  at Noon," is driven to madness by the incessant wind and dust beating against the walls of the house and  stable,  "as  if the  fingers of a giant  hand  were tightening  to collapse them."  This  reaction  to the  natural event can  precipitate  a quarrel, most often between husband  and wife, sometimes with a young boy as the interested bystand­ er,  and  the  development  of the  plot quite  often lies in  the  working  out  of the emotional tension that has been generated by the conflict.
Because this conflict is intimately  connected with the struggle for survival, the
tragedy of these stories is that  there is often no possible reconciliation of any kind. When an author's horizon is composed of "the  bare essentials of a landscape, sky and  earth," there  are  no compromises open:  if land  and  weather  fail man,  the struggle for survival can only end tragically, the extent of the tragedy  being largely determined  by the strength  of the  person concerned.  Will, the young farmer  of "Not  by Rain  Alone",  has a moment of bleak recognition when he suddenly sees the future  which must surely lie ahead of himself and  his sweetheart,  Eleanor:

He  was  thinking  of  other  dry  spells -other  wheat  that  had  promised thirty bushels and  yielded ten. It  was such niggard land. At the best they would grub along painfully, grow tired and bitter, indifferent to each other. It was the way of the land. For a farmer like him there could be no other way. (Lamp at Noon)

As in the poetry of Pratt, this struggle against nature  becomes a test of  endu­ rance in which only the very strong such as Paul of "The Lamp at Noon" survive, but  with  such  heart-breaking self awareness as to make it almost  unendurable, while those who are  weaker, such as his wife Ellen, are destroyed. As Laurence notes, Ross's  men  seem  to  know  by instinct  and  by habit  that  strength,  if not actual,  at least apparent, is demanded,  and each of them refuses to communicate  to his wife those admissions of failure and of helplessness which would undermine  the  appearance of strength  until  the  final, irreversible  betrayal. John,  the good but stolid farmer  of "The Painted  Door,"  is simply  unable  to communicate; his wife's tragedy  is that  she can see but not accept the fact  until it is too late. Paul

51

SINCLAIR ROSS



of "The   Lamp  at  Noon"  cannot  accept  his wife's anguish;  even after  the  final devastating  betrayal  when he realizes that  compromise  with the land is no longer possible, when his crops are completely destroyed and he is stripped  of "vision and purpose, faith  in the land, in the future, in himself," he is still attempting to find a  way  to  withstand  his wife and  to go on:  "For  so deep  were his instincts  of loyalty to the land  that still, even with the images of his betrayal  stark  upon  his mind,  his concern  was how to withstand  her,  how  to go on  again  and  justify himself." For a farmer such as Paul or Will or the John  of "A  Field of Wheat," there  is "no  other  way" than  to go on, and  this continued  struggle  against  tre­ mendous  odds  becomes  a  revelation  of  the  real  self, as is suggested  in  Ross's description  of the stripping  down of Paul's  character to "a  harsh  and  clenched
virility ... at  the  cost of more engaging  qualities ... a fulfillment  of his inmost and essential nature."
For  other  characters  of Ross's fictional world, the stripping  down  which leads to self discovery is equally important. Often  made in terms of a sudden  discovery of one's  essential  nature,  it delimits the  path  that  this nature  must follow. For the country  boy of "Comet  at Night," a chance meeting with a musician, Philip, makes him  aware  of his vocation as an artist:  "This  way of the brief lost gleam against the night was my way too. And alone I cowered a moment, understanding that  there could be no escape, no other way."  (Queen's Quarterly, Winter  1939-
40). For  the  Bentleys, the gradual  stripping  away  of  the  "false  fronts"  of  dis­ honest life leads to the realization that they must get away from the kind of  world that  the small town of Horizon imposes, to a community  where essential self can be safely revealed:  "I asked him didn't  he want  to get out of the Church, didn't  he admit that saving a thousand dollars was the only way".
Ross's earliest references to the "way" which character and environment impose
are found  in his first published story, "No  Other  Way." Hatty  Glenn,  the female protagonist  of this story, is a simpler character  than  Mrs. Bentley, as she is most strongly  motivated   by the  habit  of  parsimony.  Mter  a  lifetime  of "grubbing" while her husband  "schemed," she is weather-beaten while he is still comparatively attractive; to make matters worse, he now ignores her. In a moment of insight, she recognizes that nothing in the world can better her relationship  with her husband, and  that  for  her  there  is "no  other  way"  than  to  continue  along  in  the same tragi-comic  fashion:


She glanced over her shoulder and saw the half-chewed turnips  being slobbered into the dirt. December-January-a pail a day.

SINCLAIR ROSS



And then in a flash she was clutching a broom and swooping into the garden.
'Get out, you greedy old devils! After them, Tubbie!'
Butter twenty five cents a pound. There was no other way. (Nash's, Oct. 1934)

In Ross's more sober stories, character and environment  can combine like a vise to grip a character and set up a course of direction that even repeated failure does not  change.  His  characters appear  to be driven, like those of Grove in Settlers of the Marsh, to act as they do until one or another of a partnership is destroyed. When  Paul  is finally willing to make some compromises with the land,  he finds his wife mad  and  his child  dead.  Having  betrayed  her  husband,  Ann  of "The Painted  Door"  has a revelation  of his intrinsic strength  and  determines  to make it  up  to  him.  He,  however,  has already  walked out  into  the  blizzard  where  he freezes to  death.  Coulter,  the  inept  recruit  who has been repeatedly  befriended by the soldier narrator of "Jug and Bottle," is accidentally let down by his friend. Crushed  by an  overwhelming  burden  of guilt and  despair,  and  with  no one to tum  to, Coulter  kills himself:  " ... caught  helpless in some primitive mechanism of conscience like a sheaf  in the gear of a thresher,  borne on inexorably  by the chain of guilt to the blade of punishment." (Queen's  Quarterly, Winter 1949-50). Many such scenes of human  despair and futility suggest that  the President of the Immortals  also has his sport  with the people of Ross's prairie.  Mrs. Bentley com­ ments  on this when  observing  the work-tom  country  congregation  which  is still waiting  and  praying  after  five years without a crop:  "And  tonight  again the sun went  down  through  a clear, brassy sky. Surely it must be a very great faith  that such  indifference  on  the  part  of its deity  cannot  weaken -a  very  great  faith, or a very foolish one."


0N  THE  WHOLE, despite the suggestion of naturalism, par­
ticularly in the metaphor used to describe Coulter, Ross is not a naturalist  in the
sense of  Norris's  The   Octopus  or even in  the  modified  sense of Stead's  Grain. There  is a strong  streak  of determinism  running  through  Ross's work, but it is most often kept firmly within a Christian context through a respectful address to "Providence," albeit  with  some  irony  as suggested  by  the  title,  "Not  by Rain Alone,"  of one short  story  where  the crops fail. Philip  of As  For Me  and  My House " ... keeps on believing that there's a will stronger than his own deliberately pitted against him ... a supreme being interested in him, opposed to him, arrang­ ing with tireless concern  the details of his life...." The  good man of  "The  Run-

53

SINCLAIR ROSS



away" finds himself troubled by God's justice, especially when the scales are eventually  weighed  in his favour: "What  kind of reckoning  was it that  exacted life and innocence for an old man's petty greed? Why, if it was retribution, had it struck so clumsily?" (Lamp at Noon).
The  whole question of the ways of the Old Testament God to man is an impor­
tant  one for the characters of Ross's fictional world and  particularly  in relation to the first novel, As For Me  and My  House. Here  this question carries with it that latter-day  Puritanism  of the psychological search for self, often expressed in terms of the "way"  that  must be taken. As in Rudy  Wiebe's novel of the prairies, Peace Shall Destroy Many, Harold Horwood's description of Newfoundland, Tomorrow Will  Be Sunday, or Margaret  Laurence's  A jest of God, the novel presents a world in which the outward representations of Christianity are without  real meaning - simply empty fonns  without spirit -and in which characters must learn to reject the false gods without  before it is possible to ?nd  the true  God within and,  as a sign of this, an authentic sense of direction.
Ostensibly, the "way"  of As For Me and My  House is the Christian  way indi­ cated  by  the  title.  But  this  structure  is steadily  undercut   through  the  central metaphor of the  "false-front"  and  through  explicit  statement until  we  come to see the Bentleys metaphorically  as pagan priest and priestess ministering to an Old Testament World.  It  is not  until  the  novel  has  moved  full  cycle  through  sin, sacrifice, and  repentence,  that  there is a pulling  down  of the old  false gods and a  revelation  of the  true  self. In  this sense the  novel is, as is  suggested  by Roy Daniells in his fine introduction  to the New Canadian Library edition, the struggle of the Puritan soul to find the way. At the beginning  of the novel, Mr. and  Mrs. Bentley, the new clergyman and  his wife, are  hanging  out their shingle, "As  For Me and  My House ..."; at the end of the book they are taking it in. In between, the  process of the  novel has involved  a shedding  of  their  defenses, a  breaking down of the hypocritical  "false fronts" behind which they have hidden both from each other and from the townspeople.
The  metaphor of the "false front"  is probed  in basically psychological terms.
Philip  Bentley, aware  that  his new role as minister  is hypocritical,  is tortured  by his own  dishonesty.  Unable  to  draw  or  paint  constructively,  he is reduced  to turning  out drawing  after drawing  of self-analysis: Main  Streets with their false­ fronted  stores, all  "stricken  with  a  look of self-awareness  and  futility."  In  the journal  entries which make up the novel, his wife admits  that  there is something in  Philip's  art which  "hurts," but  as she finds it  easier  to  live in  Horizon  she refuses to sympathize: "False fronts ought to be laughed  at, never understood  or

54

SINCLAIR ROSS



pitied. They're such outlandish  things, the front of a store built up to look like a second  storey."  Yet  when  she  erects  her  own  false front  against  Main  Street, she discovers that she is just as vulnerable as Philip:
Three little  false-fronted towns  before  this  one  have  taught me  to  erect  a  false front  of my own, live my own life, keep myself intact; yet tonight again,  for all my indifference to  what  the  people  here  may  choose to think  of me, it was an  ordeal to walk out of the vestry and  take my place at the organ.
The  Bentleys also erect  facades  to hide  from  each  other.  He  has  attempted  to mould himsell into the ordered life which she considers practical and in so doing, is alienated  from her, while she takes up the role of the hard-working  woman of the manse, inwardly  chafing but outwardly content with her husband's  meagre tokens of affection.  Without  any hope for the future  other  than  a parade  of Horizons, each like the one before, Philip turns on his wife as the major  instrument  of his imprisonment, punishing  her through the withdrawal  of his love. The  novel is orchestrated   by  Philip's  emotional  withdrawals,  "white,  tight-lipped," and  the closing of his study  door which shuts out his wife while she, in turn,  escapes into the night,  the granaries,  and  the railroad  tracks.
There  is a strong emphasis on the build-up of emotional tension throughout the
novel. In  comparison  with the suffocating atmosphere  of the house with its ever­ present aura  of sexual  tension, even the bleakness of the prairie landscape offers a kind of freedom.  We are  told again and  again that  one or the other attempts  to escape the claims of intimacy by pretending to be asleep when the other finally comes to bed. This situation  continues until finally they make up and the process begins again.  It is this heightening  and release of emotional tension which  would seem to characterize  the novel's form:  the first half  develops  through  a cycle of wind  and  drought  chronicling  Steve's coming and  going, and  the eventual  rains where the Bentleys are  reunited; the second part of  the novel works through  the darkness  and  despair  of winter,  ending  with  the  death  of Judith   and  the  birth of her child in April.
In the first chapter, we are introduced  to the Bentleys' ostensible Puritan  ethos:
the shingle, the statement of Philip's creed, and the bargain  by which the Bentleys co-exist with  the townspeople:  "In  return  for their  thousand  dollars a year they expect  a  genteel  kind  of  piety, a  well-bred  Christianity   that   will  serve  as  an example  to the little sons and  daughters of the town."  But we soon discover that this "well-bred  Christianity" is form without spirit, the false front of a behaviour without  belief; it is a modem  form of paganism in which the forms or conventions of a faith  are  perverted  into a substitution  for faith  itself. This is explicit in the

55

SINCLAIR ROSS



extended metaphor at  the  conclusion  of  the  first  chapter where  the  clergyman and  his wife are  ironically  identified  as the  "priest  and  priestess"  through whom the  people  make  offerings  to the small  town  gods of Propriety and  Parity:
... the  formal  dinner  of a  Main  Street hostess is invariably  good. Good to an  al­
most sacrificial degree. A kind of rite, at which we preside as priest and  priestess
-an offering, not for us, but through us, to the exacting small-town gods Propriety and Parity.

In  this  metaphor, they  are  revealed  as handmaidens to the  Puritan false gods of behaviourism-the mechanical acts of behaviour which  remain after  the true religious  spirit   has  gone  out  of  action.   "Propriety," the  well-bred   Christianity which   Mrs.  Bentley  cites,  is  the  outer   form   of  circumspect  behaviour  which replaces  spontaneous action  grounded in  love;  "Parity", social  prestige,  is that form  of behaviour which  results  in the  establishment of a  village  elect  (notably the  trinity  of Mrs.  Finley,  Mrs. Bird, and  Mrs. Bentley)   and  the exclusion  of the damned  (such  as Judith and  Steve)   on grounds of social  elitism  rather than  in terms  of the  true  Christian love which  results in  brotherhood and  justice.  In  this schemata, everything is turned upside-down; consequently, when  justifying the adoption of the  Roman Catholic orphan, Steve,  to the  Protestant church elders, Mrs. Bentley can see herself as the devil's advocate:
So I parried  them, cool and  patient,  piety to my finger tips. It was the devil quot­ ing scripture,  maybe, but it worked. They couldn't  answer.... He  [Philip]  looked on, flinching for me, but I didn't  mind. I'm  not so thin-skinned  as he is anyway. I resigned myself to sanctimony years ago. Today  I was only putting  our false front up again, enlarged this time for three.
Philip, Steve, and I. It's such a trim, efficient little sign; it's such a tough, deep­
rooted tangle that it hides.
And none of them knows. They spy and carp and  preen themselves, but none of them knows. They can only read our shingle, all its letters freshened  up this after­ noon,  As For Me  and My  House-The House of Bentley-We  Will  Serve  the Lord.
In  this  context, the  supposedly   Christian structure of  the  novel  is ironically reversed.  In Joshua, the source  of the original  quotation, a choice  has been made by the  Israelites. They  have rejected  the pagan  gods of the Ammonites and  chosen the  true  God, Jehovah. In  the  first chapters of Ross's novel,  it would  appear that the  Bentleys have  chosen  the  pagan  gods, but  the  development of the  novel leads to some  new  possibility characterized by a new  honesty,  a child,  and  "a  stillness, a freshness,  a vacancy  of beginning", suggesting  a movement from  the Old Testa­ ment  to the  New.  In  the larger  metaphoric framework of the  book, this develop-

SINCLAIR ROSS



ment   is characterized  by  the  storm  that  sweeps  through the  town  of  Horizon, demolishing most of the false-fronted little stores on Main  Street.
Philip's first sermon  in a new town  is always "As  For  Me and  My  House  We Will  Serve  the  Lord." Mrs.  Bentley  explains  that  it  contains   Philip's "creed": "The Word   of  God  as  revealed   in  Holy  Writ-Christ Crucified -salvation through His  Grace-those  are  the  things  Philip  stands  for." However, soon  it becomes  clear   that   Philip   does  not  believe  the  Christianity he  preaches. As a young  man, he was sure  that  "he  was meant  to paint", and  had  used the Church as a steppingstone to an  education. Had  he succeeded, he might  have  lived  with his conscience, but  a  wife,  the  depression,  and  a rapidly-mounting sense of guilt and  despair anchor him  firmly to the  false fronts of Main Street: "having failed he's not a strong  or great  man,  just a guilty one":
He made  a compromise once, with himself, his conscience, his ideals; and  now he believes that  by some retributive  justice he is paying for it. A kind of Nemesis. He pays in Main  Streets-this one, the last one, the Main  Streets still to come.

As  this  reference   to  retributive  justice  would  indicate,  Philip's strongest  in­ stincts  are  towards a kind  of pagan  Nemesis or fatalism. Mrs.  Bentley, observing  the  country people  of Philip's charge, senses this same  primitive  response in the "sober  work-roughened congregation" :

There  was strength  in their voices when they sang, like the strength  and  darkness of  the  soil. The  last  hymn  was staidly orthodox,  but  through  it  there  seemed to mount  something  primitive,  something that  was less a response to Philip's sermon and  scripture   reading  than  to  the  grim futility of their  own lives. Five years in succession now they've  been blown out, dried out, hailed  out;  and  it was as if in the face of so blind and  uncaring  a universe they were trying to assert themselves, to insist upon their own meaning and importance.
'Which  is the source of all religion,' Paul discussed it with me afterwards.  'Man
can't  bear  to admit  his insignificance. If you've ever seen a hailstorm,  or watched a  crop  dry up --his helplessness, the way he's ignored -well, it was just such helplessness in  the  beginning  that  set him discovering gods who could control  the storms  and  seasons. Powerful, friendly  gods -on  his side.... So he felt better - gratefully  became a reverent  and religious creature. That was what you heard  this morning-pagans singing Christian  hymns ... pagan,  you know, originally  that's exactly what it meant,  country dweller.

The   primary Old  Testament  distinction between  Israelites  and  pagans  is the monotheism of the  chosen  people.  God's  covenant given  to Moses states  that the Ammonites and  other  pagans will be driven from the  Promised Land, but that  the Israelites must  guard themselves  carefully  from  the  "images" of the  pagans: "for

57

SINCLAIR ROSS



thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods before  me."  This association  of image  or  idol­ worship with paganism is also suggested in Ross's novel. There  are early references to  Mrs.  Finley, the  "small-town  Philistine"  who  would  like to mould  the  town "in  her own image." If Philip had a child, Mrs. Bentley tells us, he would mould it "in  his own image."  Philip is also the product  of his own twisted image of his dead  father.  From a photograph,  a trunkful of old books, and  the discovery that his father  wanted  to paint, he has developed himself by emulation: "They  say let a man look long and devotedly enough at a statue  and in time he will resemble it."  Similarly,  Philip's concept of the Church  is an  unhappy  child's  picture  modeled on the image of the Main Street Church: "Right  or wrong he made it the measure for all churches."  And, as he has moulded his own character on that of his father,  so he attempts  to mould Steve:  "For  there's a strange arrogance  in his devotion to
Steve, an  unconscious determination  to mould him in his own image ..." When Steve is removed from the household, Mrs. Bentley's primary  regret is that  Philip has never seen through  to the real boy, "fond  of bed, his stomach,  and  his own way":

An idol turned clay can make even an earthly woman desirable ... he's one idol tarnish-proof.  Philip will forget the real Steve before long, and  behind his cold locked lips mourn another of his own creating. I know him. I know as a creator what he's capable of.




b:Is WHOLE   COMPLEX  of  Old  Testament  idol,  image,  and paganism,  suggests a framework  of ironic illusion supported  by the names of the characters.2   In each case there is ironic reversal, Eliot-fashion, in which the novel character can be seen to be acting in a manner similar to, yet opposite from, that of his Biblical counterpart. Philip, deacon  and  evangelist, did  preach  "salvation through  His Grace"  and did convert from idolatry; the apostle Philip is rebuked by Christ because of his request for material proof of the existence of God:  "Lord, show  us the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us."  In  Ross's  novel,  Philip  the  preacher substitutes  the image  of an earthly  father  (the  photograph) for a heavenly  one and,  as he has modeled himself upon that image, succumbs to the new paganism, the idolatry  of Self.
There   are  also suggestions throughout   the  text  that   Mrs.  Bentley  has  been
raising up her own images, in particular that  of Philip, the sensitive and impres­
sionable  artist  who must be mothered  along in the direction  which she best sees

SINCLAIR ROSS



fit. She does not come to see how wrong she has been in her  wilful attempt  to   t structure  her  husband's life until after  her encounter  with the  prairie  wilderness and  Philip's raging attempts to catch the strength of the land on canvas:  "Water gets dammed sometimes ... it seeps away in dry, barren  earth. Just as he's seeping away  among  the false fronts of these little towns." She also realizes that she has attempted  to mould her husband's  life largely because she has a false image of his real nature: "I've taken  a youth and put him on a pedestal and  kept him there." With the recognition that  the Philip she has known for twelve years is little more than  the false front  of their single and  joint romantic projections, comes the more difficult  and  sometimes  whistling-in-the-dark  formulation   that  Philip's  periodic thrashings-out  against  the  hypocrisy of his own life are  not  as contemptible  as she has previously, and somewhat smugly, assumed:
And if it's finer and stronger to struggle with life than  just timidly to submit to it, so, too, when you really come to see and understand them, must the consequences of that  struggle be worthier  of a man  than  smug little  virtues that  have never known trial or soiling. That is right. I know. I must remember.

Mrs. Bentley must remember  because her whole life is posited on her husband; although  he is her creation,  he is also her god and  ground  of being:  "I haven't any  roots of my own  anymore.  I'm  a fungus or parasite  whose life depends on his." Like Hatty  Glenn, for her there is no other way than  to keep going on: "Somehow  I must  believe in them,  both of them.  Because I need him still. This isn't the end. I have to go on, try to win him again ... It's like a finger pointing." But unlike the earlier struggle which borders on the trivial, Mrs. Bentley's struggle is often  admirable because  there  is a strong  sense of discipline  and  the  larger good in her sense of direction.  There  is no doubt that  her motives are often self­ interested, but it is a self-interest which acknowledges its own presence and which makes some attempt  to modify itself.
In  the first cycle of the novel, she is threatened  by Philip's  affection for Steve and  in the second by his affection for Judith. As a result, she begins to admit  the self-destructive  nature   of  their  marriage  and  to  probe  her  own  motives:  "For these last twelve years I've kept him in the Church -no one else. The least I can do now is help get him out again." In this conclusion there is some positive choice and  her feeling that  "there's still no way but going on, pretending  not to know" modulates  into  the  discovery that  there  is one way  out  of Horizon: "saving  a thousand  dollars was the only way." Mrs. Bentley's "only way," the bookstore in the city, in contrast  to the "no other way" of many of Ross's characters, suggests an  intelligence  capable  of  choice.  Realizing  that  the  foundations of  her  own

59

SINCLAIR ROSS



morality   have  also  been  modelled  on  the  untried virtue  of a smug  Main  Street, Mrs. Bentley gropes, with lapses, toward  some other way.
As  in  the  short  stories,  nature has  a  relation to  human action; Mrs.  Bentley is often  impelled  towards the  way she  must  follow  by the  force  of the  wind.  At the   beginning  of  the   novel,  the  wind  establishes  the   emotional  lands-capof Horizon:

It's  an immense night out there, wheeling and  windy. The  lights on the street and in  the  houses  are  helpless against  the  black  wetness, little  unilluminating  glints that  might  be  painted  on  it.  The  town  seems huddled   together,  cowering  on  a high, tiny perch, afraid to move lest it topple into the wind. Close to the parsonage is the church,  black even against the darkness, towering ominously up through  the night  and  merging  with it. There's  a soft steady  swish of rain  on the  roof, and  a gurgle of eave troughs running  over. Above, in the high cold night, the wind goes swinging  past, indifferent,  liplessly mournful.  It  frightens  me, makes me feel lost, dropped  on this little perch of town and  abandoned. I wish Philip would waken.

The   wind  makes   Mrs.  Bentley  aware   that   she  has  been  lost  and   abandoned, dropped, as it were,  on this point of Horizon, the  place  where  land  and  sky meet. In  a real sense, Horizon is as much  a psychological  state  as it is a town; it is the place  where  one is lodged  when it is impossible  to go either  forward or backward, the  stationary  perspective. The  Bentleys are  caught in this self-destructive stasis, and  it is in the  first few chapters of the novel that  Mrs. Bentley is forced  to recog­ nize her alienation from  Philip: "I wish I could reach  him, but  it's like the wilder­ ness outside  of night  and sky and  prairie,  with this one little spot of  Horizon hung up  lost in  its immensity. He's  as lost, and  alone." But she too is lost on the same  horizon:  "There's a  high,  rocking  wind ... and   I have  a  queer, helpless  sense of being  lost miles out  in the middle  of it, flattened against a little  peak of rock." Philip,  listening  to  the  wind, slips away  from  his wife and  closes the study  door between  them: "Not that  things  between  us tonight are much  different from  any other  night  ... [but]  tonight, because  of the  wind,  we  both  seem  to  know." In Philip's  next  painting of the false-fronted Main  Street  the wind  sets itself against the  town  and  Mrs.  Bentley  reads  there  her  husband's state  of mind: "The false fronts ... are  buckled  down  in desperation for their lives ... And  yet you feel no sympathy ... you wait in impatience for the wind to work its will."
The  power  of the  wind  in the  painting suggests  the  destructive force  rising  in Philip.  In  the  first half of the novel, the Bentleys sat together in a little ravine  and watched the  railway   go  by,  each  knowing it  was  the  way  out  which  repeated Horizons  had  denied  Philip; the second  part  of the  novel  would  appear to begin

6o

SINCLAIR ROSS



at  this same  ravine  where  Philip  takes stock  of himself  and  determines to shape his own  way,  to  "take things  as they  come-get  what   you  can  out  of them." His  decision,  "if  a man's a victim  of circumstances he deserves to be," inevitably leads  to Judith West.  Now  aware  of Philip's  infidelity,  Mrs. Bentley despairs  in a closed horizon:

I stopped  and  looked  up  Main  Street  once, the little  false fronts  pale and  blank and  ghostly in  the  corner  light, the night encircling it so dense and  wet that  the hard  gray wheelpacked  earth,  beginning now to glisten with  the  rain, was like a single ply of solid matter  laid across a chasm.

This suggestion  of a closed world in which  there is only one bridge of solid matter, the  road  which  is also  the  way  of Horizon  itself and  which  ends  in  darkness,  is repeated in  Mrs.  Bentley's  next  visit to  the  ravine.  There, cloud  and  earth   join together to form  an  impenetrable horizon,  mirroring her emotional state.
But  the  novel  has  already moved  to  an  anticipatory upswing,   Mrs.  Bentley watching the  night  train  go out  is for  the  first time,  like  Philip  and  Judith, and old Lawson  of The  Well,  at one with  the quickening train  wheels:  "It was like a setting  forth, and  with  a queer  kind  of clutch  at my throat, as if I were  about  to enter  it, I felt the wilderness  ahead of night  and  rain." At Christmas, she continues this  journey  to  venture over  the  high  prairie  snow.  From  this  real  horizon,  the small  town  of  Horizon is seen  in  perspective.  It is no  longer  her  whole  mental horizon,   but  simply  "a rocky,  treacherous island" in  the  snow.  When  she  next visits  the  ravine   with   Paul,   her  perspective   is completed. Near  the  end  of  the novel,  when  the  wind  nails  her  against  the  grain  elevator, she is still feeling  lost and   abandoned  but  there   can  be  no  question  that  she  will  go  on  with  Philip. Similarly, Philip   visits Judith West  to  tell  her  that   the  Bentleys  will  adopt   the coming  child  and  then  move  to a bookstore  in the  city.  Both  decisions  pave  the way  for the  final  confrontation between  husband   and  wife  when  the  great  wind storm  blows  down  most  of the  false fronts  on  Main  Street.
This  novel  raises several  disturbing critical  issues including the  death  of Judith
West,  the  character of  Mrs.  Bentley, and  the  validity  of Philip's claim  to  be an artist.3 I am  inclined to believe that  Mrs. Bentley is no more  or less culpable than she might  be expected to be under  her circumstances. Through  her own stubborn­ ness  and   pride   of  possession,  she  contributes to  her  own  betrayal,  but  there  is sufficient  evidence to indicate that  she  also suffers  toward her  own  redemption. Judith West's  death does seem painfully unnecessary, particularly when juxtaposed to Mrs. Bentley's  cruel  remarks:

SINCLAIR ROSS



For me it's easier this way. It's what I've secretly been hoping for all along. I'm glad she's gone-glad-for  her sake as well as mine. What was there ahead of her now anyway? If I lost Philip what would there be ahead for me?


Yet, on further  consideration,  it would appear  that  there  was, in fact,  no other way for Judith, either  in terms of the deterministic  nature  of Ross's art  or of the
.I novel's mythic structure.  Her  sacrifice, like that  of Steve  and  El Greco,  can  be
f  seen as the last sacrifice required  by"'the pagan  gods of  Main  Street.  And,  as in the short stories involving a betrayal, her death is accomplished  through the forces o£ nature-the soft, spring mud  which exhausts  her,  precipitating the  birth  of her  child.
There   is  a  somewhat  similar  deterministic  situation   involved  in  the  melo­ dramatic death  of the old farmer  Lawson in The  Well.  Betrayed and shot by his young  wife, he  is stuffed  down  a  well almost  despite  the  efforts of the  rather  unattractive narrator, Chris Rowe, who appears to be swept along by the currents of destiny. What is most interesting about As For Me and My House in comparison with Ross's other  work is that  a more sophisticated  third  person is added  to the central  tragic situation-a Mrs. Bentley whose evolving consciousness is capable of compromise so that  the total catastrophe of the stories and the near catastrophe of The  Well  is averted.  Chris Rowe is also groping towards  a sense of direction, but  he is much  cruder  a character  than either of  the Bentleys. In fact, the novel itself has the kind of jagged relief which causes the reader to wonder-hopefully
-if  perhaps The  Well is not the earlier of the two novels.4
Philip,  the  "non  artist"  as Warren  Tallman  calls him,  "unable to discover a subject  which  will  release him  from  his oppressive incapacity   to create," does seem to find a subject  from the moment he attempts to catch the elusive whiteness of Judith West's face. From this point onward  his sketches move from the stasis of despairing Main Streets to the real horizon of galloping stallions, the country schoolhouse, the "strength  and fatalism" of the prairie  hills. But it is my impres­ sion that  the real issue here is not whether or not Philip is a successful artist, but rather  that  he is motivated  by some inner sense of direction  which is other  than  the way of Main  Street.  Like Judith  West, and  to a lesser extent  like  Mrs. Bent­ ley, Philip has a dream  of an expanding  horizon. And, as in the short stories, it is on the process of realizing this dream or of finding the way that Ross is focusing, rather  than  on the  character  Philip or on the  artist  Philip.  In  this sense, Philip is the abstracted  principle and  Mrs. Bentley the active process of  the Puritan  way; the two, as Roy Daniells notes, are part of a larger whole.

SINCLAIR ROSS




Ts:E SIGNIFICANCE  of  Ross's achievement,  and  I  fully  agree with those critics who suggest that As For Me and My  House is in the mainstream of the  English  Canadian novel, is that  in nature,  ethos and  hero, Ross has cap­ tured all of these qualities which we attempt to invoke when we want to talk about Canadian writing.  It  is Ross's hard  nature  given tongue  by Mrs. Bentley  when she observes that the wilderness frightens us:

We've all lived in  a little town too long.... We shrink from our insignificance. The  stillness and  solitude-we  think a force or presence into it ... for we dare not admit  an  indifferent  wilderness, where we may have no meaning at  all ...

which also recurs in Bruce Hutchison's  book, The  Unknown Country5  and which is given the status of a literary myth in Northrop  Frye's rationale for the "garrison mentality" of Canadian writing. 6
Yet, in significant difference from the nature  which leads to the formulation of Frye's  "garrison  mentality" or, for that  matter,  from  the mental  "pallisade" of William  Carlos  Williams's  In The   American  Grain/   Ross does not seem to  be
'suggesting  that  there  is no  god in  nature  if for  no other  reason  than  that  his
people would not allow it. It may very well be the Old Testament  vengeful God, the  Nemesis of  Philip's  guilty conscience, or simply the  psychological projection of the will to believe. Nonetheless, the people of Ross's prairie appear  to keep on waiting  and  believing  that  beyond  the individual  tragedies  of such  as "Not  by Rain  Alone,"  such  endurance does  have  value.  And,  certainly,  in  the  larger structure  of the  first novel,  there  is a  kind  of grace  bestowed:   Mrs.  Bentley  is supported  in her struggle to find the way by the Old Testament  metaphor of the pointing  finger:   "It was like a finger pointing  again,  clear  and  peremptory,  to keep on pretending  ignorance  just as before." Ross gives an explicit psychological basis for  this  metaphor; yet, as it springs from  the  inner  recesses of self and  is associated with  her  desire to find the "way,"  it is not  without  implications  of a transcendent function.  Then,  too, Philip  undergoes  a kind  of salvation  through grace.  He  does find  other-directed  subjects  for his art  and  he is given a  child which he so desperately wants. Most importantly,  it is a child with all of the New Testament  implications  of "a little child shall lead them."8
It would appear  that  the religious frame of reference, even if only in terms of
residual response, is still a very important part of the Canadian novel. It was with considerable  surprise  that  I realized recently that  a surprisingly large number  of our twentieth  century  novels refer to specifically moral,  often explicitly religious

6g

SINCLAIR ROSS



concerns, as is suggested in the following titles:  Grove's  Our  Daily Bread, Fruits of the  Earth;  much  of   Callaghan,  including  Such  is my  Beloved,  They   Shall Inherit  the Earth, More  joy in Heaven, and The  Loved  and the Lost; Mitchell's Who  has Seen the Wind?;  Klein's The  Second Scroll;  MacLennan's Each Man's Son  and  The   Watch that  Ends  the  Night;   Buckler's  The   Mountain and  the Valley;  Wiseman's The  Sacrifice; Watson's The  Double Hook;  Laurence's  A ]est of   God;   Wiebe's  Peace  Shall  Destroy  Many;  Horwood's Tomorrow  Will  be Sunday  and Kreisel's The  Betrayal.
Why  might  this be so? There  does not appear  to be a comparable  movement
in the  American  novel of the last twenty  years, although  a successful argument might  be made for the preceding three decades.9   There  is the obvious fact of the
/  unpopulated land  itself:  Canada,   particularly  the  prairie,  is still  largely  open
\space. In  the  midst  of land  and  sky, as is explicitly  suggested  at  the  start  of
1   Mitchell's  Who  Has Seen the Wind?,  it is difficult not to feel the cosmic setting. Then,   too,  the  country  is still  basically  regional;   in  the  smaller  communities religion still remains a strong force. Furthermore, our great  wave of immigration was at  the  tum  of the  twentieth  century  rather  than  in  the  late  eighteenth  or nineteenth,  as it was in the United  States. This  turn-of-the century  immigration, particularly  of Scotch Presbyterians and European  Jews, has greatly strengthened the Old Testament  concerns of our literature.
Another  possibility may be inferred  from the fact  that  naturalism  did not take hold in Canada as it did in the United States. R. E. Watters, in an address to the Third  Congress of the International Comparative Literature Association (Utrecht,
1g6 I ) , gives a  convincing  rationale  for  this  fact.10    He  further   notes  that   as
Canada experienced  no wars of emancipation  and  liberation,  Canadian fictional characters  do  not  usually see existing social conditions  in  Zolaesque  terms,  nor are they particularly  concerned  with leaving established communities  for a place where  they  might  be  more  free,  as is suggested in  the  American   myth  of  the journey west. Rather, as the historical fact of the United  Empire  Loyalists would suggest,  and  as Frye  and  Watters  both  note,  the  Canadian  hero  is concerned basically with maintaining  his own integrity within a chosen community.  I would add  to this that  the works of Ross would suggest that  naturalism  cannot  flourish where  there  is even  a  remnant  of divine  providence.  Religion,  even  if  largely residual or seemingly converted to demonism as it is in As For Me and My  House, invokes  another  set  of  values  which  even  if psychologically  internalized,   still supports  the individual  in his struggle:

SINCLAIR ROSS



A  trim,   white,   neat-gabled  little  schoolhouse,   just  like  Partridge Hill.  There's a stable  at  the  back,  and  some  buggies  in  the  yard.  It stands  up  lonely  and  defiant on  a  landscape like  a  desert.... The  distorted, barren   landscape makes  you  feel the meaning of its persistence  there.  As Paul  put it last Sunday  when  we drove  up, it's  Humanity in  Microcosm. Faith,  ideals,  reason-all  the  things  that  really  are humanity -like Paul   you  feel  them   there,   their  stand   against   the   implacable blunderings of  Nature ...
And  it was  just a few rough  pencil strokes, and  he [Philip] had  it buried  among some notes he'd  been making for next Sunday's sermon.
Unlike Huckleberry Finn, the  characteristic American hero  who  determines "to light  out  for  the  territory" when  civilization becomes too pressing,11  the character­ istic  Canadian hero  is the  one  who  stays  and   endures-the  farmers  of  Ross's  prairie. If  and   when there is  to  be  some   way  as  there is  for  the   Bentleys  of Horizon,  it   must    be   an   honourable  way   and    one   which   is  sanctioned  by community.12



FOOTNOTES

1   Margaret  Laurence has  also  noted   this  motto in  her  introduction  to  the   New Canadian  Library edition of Ross's  short  stories,  The Lamp   at  Noon  and  Other Stories.
Stephen, a devout  Christian, was the first martyr; Paul  (formerly Saul)  witnessed the  stoning of Stephen by the  mob  and  was converted to Christianity; Judith, in the  Apocrypha, gave her  body to save her townspeople and  was honoured by them. Mrs.  Bentley,  unnamed in the novel, would  appear to have many  of the character­ istics  of  the  Rachel of  Genesis.  She  has  no  children, receives  a son  through a maidservant and  finally does have a son of her own. This  Rachel is also associated  with  the  successful  theft   of  her  father's household   "images"   (gods)   which   she brings  to  her  husband. Added  to  these  references  is the  suggestion  of  the  "bent twig"  implicit in  the  name  "Bentley."
3    See Roy  Daniells's "Introduction"  to  As For Me  and  My  House;  Cf.  William  H.
New, "Sinclair Ross's  Ambivalent World," Canadian Literature, No. 40  (Spring,
1969), p. 26-27;  Cf.  Donald  Stephens, "Wind, Sun  and  Dust," Canadian Litera­
ture,  No. 23  (Winter, 1965), p. 20-23;  Cf. Warren Tallman, "Wolf  in the Snow,"
Canadian Literature, No. 5  (Summer, 1g6o), p. 15.
4      In  author's  remarks appended to  "No  Other Way"  in  Nash's  magazine, Ross  is quoted  as saying  that  he has written two  novels:  "failures, which  publishers write me are  interesting and  compelling, but of small commercial possibilities.  I am  now starting to  work  on  short   stories,  hoping   gradually  to  build   up  a better  tech­ nique ..."
5    Bruce  Hutchison, The Unknown Country, p. 3:  "Who can know our  loneliness, on the immensity of prairie, in the dark  forest  and  on the windy sea rock? ... We flee to little  towns  for  a moment of fellowship  and  light  and  speech,  we flee into  cities or log cabins,  out  of the  darkness  and  loneliness  and  the  creeping silence."

SINCLAIR ROSS



6     Northrop Frye,  "Conclusions," Literary History  of Canada,  p.  8go.  "I have  long been impressed  in Canadian poetry  by a tone  of deep terror  in regard  to nature.... The human  mind  has nothing but  human and  moral  values  to cling  to if it is to preserve  its integrity or  even  its sanity,  yet  the  vast  unconsciousness of  nature in front  of it seems an  unanswerable denial  of those  values."
7       Cf.  Warren Tallman, Canadian  Literature,  No. 6, p. 43· "The continent  itself­ the grey wolf whose shadow  is underneath the snow-has resisted  the culture, the cultivation, the  civilization   which   is  indigenous  to  Europe  but  alien  to  North America even  though it  is dominant in  North America." Tallman's thesis  in  this article would  appear to  rest on  the  premises  of  William  Carlos Williams's In  the American  Grain.
8    Ross,  As For Me and My House. "In our lives it isn't  the church itself that  matte but  what  he feels about  it, the shame  and  sense of guilt  he suffewhile remaining
a part of it. That's why we're  adopting Judith's baby. He'll  dare  not  let his son see him  as he sees himself:  and  he's  no dissembler."
9    Cf.  Faulkner, Steinbeck,  Warren.
10  R.  E.  Watte,
Literatures of  Great Britain   and   the  United  States," Proceedings  of the  Third
Congress of International  Comparative  Literature  Association.
11 Ibid,  p. 237.
12   "Last Friday   they  had  a  farewell  supper  for  us  in  the  basement of  the  church, made speeches,  sang  God Be With  You  Till  We  Meet  Again, presented us with  a handsome silver  flower  basket.  It's  the  way of a little  Main  Street   town-some­ times a rather nice way."




























66



THE KLONDIKE MUSE


Stanley S. Atherton




L.KLONDIKE  TRAIL OF   18g8, symbol of the last great gold rush  in  history, captured   the  imagination  of  a continent.   By the  time  Robert
Service reached  the Yukon  in 1904 as a teller for the  Canadian Bank of  Com­ merce,  public  interest  in  the  area  was widespread.  Well  before  Service  himself began  to  record  his impressions,  a  "Klondike  literature" was  already  rapidly accumulating from the numerous eye-witness reports, the travellers' accounts, and the  books of  advice  to  prospective  gold-seekers. For  the  most  part,  however, these works emphasized  factual  events and  situations,  and  only  those  that  were specifically connected  with  the  Gold  Rush.  While  there  was  plenty  of  action recorded,  little  of  a  meditative   or  reflective  nature   could  be  found   in  such accounts.  The  way was open  for a writer with talent  enough  to  take  advantage  of the happy  coincidence  of event and  location to mythologize  the  north.
Service, stimulated  by the recent and contemporary  events in his new surround­
ings, began  to produce  both  poetry and  fiction in an  imaginative  reconstruction of this world.  What  fame  he has achieved  continues  to rest chiefly on  the  few volumes his eight  years of residence in  the Yukon yielded. These  include  Songs of a Sourdough (also published as The Spell of the Yukon) ( 1907), Ballads of a Cheechako (1909), Rhymes  of a  Rolling   Stone   (1912), and  the  novel,  The Trail   of  Ninety-Eight (1910). This  body  of  work,  rarely  examined   critically, deserves attention  as one of the earliest attempts  in Canadian literary  history to mythologize the  environment.
In  his early  poetry  Service  used  the  subject  matter  of  the  Gold  Rush  as  a point of departure for his comments on man's  relationship  to the land.  In  "The Spell of the  Yukon",  for example,  the  Gold Rush is dispensed  with  in  the  first stanza.  From  here the  poet  moves to a description of the  physical environment, using  the  Klondike  as  a  representative   northern  landscape.  The   third  stanza, and  the remaining  six, catalogue  the varying responses and  attitudes the narrator takes towards  the  North.

THE KLONDIKE MUSE



A number of these reactions had been articulated  a few years earlier by Hamlin Garland. In  a McClure's article in 1897 he had  termed  the Yukon  "a  cruel and relentless  land,"   and  a  "grim  and  terrible  country." Service  made  these  and similar reactions the subject matter for a number of his best-known poems. The untitled  prefatory  poem to Song  of a Sourdough is characteristic.

The  lonely sunsets flare forlorn
Down  valleys dreadly  desolate: The lordly mountains soar in scorn,
As still as death, as stern as fate.

The  lonely sunsets flame  and  die; The  giant  valleys gulp  the night;
The  monster  mountains scrape  the sky, Where  eager stars are  diamond-bright.

So gaunt  against  the gibbous moon, Piercing the silence velvet-piled,
A lone wolf howls his ancient rune, The  fell arch-spirit of the Wild.

0 outcast  land! 0 leper  land!
Let  the lone wolf-cry all express­ The  hate  insensate  of thy hand,
Thy  heart's abysmal  loneliness.

Here  one finds a number  of key concepts which  recur  with varying degrees of emphasis  in  the majority  of the Klondike  poems:  a sense of loneliness, hints  of the  supernatural,  hostile  nature,   an   intense  and   meaningful   silence,   and   a reminder  of man's  mortality.
Service is rarely content simply to describe the  North.  A number  of his poems provide  effective  illustrations  of  the  constant   perils  to  human   life  in  such  a desolate area,  perils which evoke a continual  fear in man  of the hostility implicit in  the  environment. He  achieves his effects in  various  ways, often  by  utilizing the supernatural element  found  in  indigenous  Indian folklore.  In  "The Ballad of the Black Fox Skin", for instance, he recounts an Indian  belief that a particular fox was invested  with supernatural powers, and  that  any  who  attempted to do it harm  would surely suffer. The sceptic who laughs  at  the superstition  and  kills the fox is later murdered,  and the poem traces a trail of death  marked  out by all those who  possess the cursed skin. By the corpse of the last  possessor hoofprints are  found,  and  the skin  has mysteriously disappeared.
References  such  as  this  to  specific supernatural occurrences  are  set  against

68

THE  KLONDIKE MUSE



a wider background  of mystery and  other-worldliness which  often  characterizes the  North  for  Service.  The  narrator  of "The   Ballad  of  the  Northern   Lights" views the  aurora  "as  one  bewitched"  and  describes its mystic beauty  as "wild and weird and wan". In "The Ballad of Pious Pete" the presence of witches and frost-tyrants  is recorded,  adding  a further  dimension  to  the  supernatural world, and  relating  it  through   the  image of "cadaverous  snows"  to  human   mortality. The   language   of  death   abounds   in  the  work,  often  coupled   with  Service's characteristic  sardonic  humour.  This  pre-occupation  with morbidity  may account partly  for  his poetry's  continuing  appeal.  In  an age  when  the  threat  of violent death  is more  than   ever  man's  constant  companion,   the  macabre   humour  of Service takes on a contemporary relevance. Intriguing examples of this "northern gothic"  can  be found  in  many  of his better-known  ballads.  Besides those  ment­ ioned,  they  include  "The Cremation  of  Sam  McGee",   "The Ballad  of   Blas­ phemous  Bill",  and  "Clancy  of the  Mounted  Police".  In  these  ballads  Service creates a nether  world of terror in which men are driven  mad or  to their deaths. In  "Clancy  of the Mounted  Police" the land  terrifies and  threatens: "Corpselike and  stark  was  the  land,  with  a  quiet  that  crushed  and  awed,/   And  the  stars of the weird  Sub-arctic  glimmered  over its shroud."  And  in "The Ballad of the Black Fox Skin" the threat  is personified in a frightening and archetypal fairy-tale situation: "The Valley's girth  was dumb  with mirth, the laughter  of the wild;/ The still sardonic  laughter  of an ogre o'er a child."


IF SERVICE  HAD continued to react imaginatively to the North in  this fashion,  he  might  have created  a valuable  mythic  vision. As it was,  he
became  a  magpie,  randomly   picking  up  physical or  climatic  characteristics  of the  North  and  using  them  as they suited  his fancy  at  the  time.  The  result  is confusion, with one poem contradicting  another;  and  it is this inconsistency that marks his failure  to create  a coherent  Northern  myth.
The   point  is easily  illustrated  by  comparing  "The Ballad  of  the  Northern Lights" with the well-known "Call  of the Wild".  The  silent North,  a "land  that listens", was described  by Sir Gilbert Parker  as a land  where the silence led man to meditate on the divine power that created the universe, and which guided man in his worldly struggles. Service treats this theme in "The Ballad of the Northern Lights",  where  in  a  terrifying  world  "purged   of  sound" three  half-demented men  hope  to  gain  brief  respite  from  the  elemental  forces  harrying   them   by meditating   on  the  things  they  "ought   to  think".  In  the  world  of  the  poem,

6g

THE KLONDIKE MUSE



however, the  North  refuses to allow such  meditation; two of  the  men  die, and the third is driven mad.
The  ambivalence  of Service's responses is seen clearly  when  the reader  moves
to "The  Call of the  Wild",  for in  this poem  the silent  north  is revealed  as the repository  of  truth : "Have  you known  the  Great   White  Silence,  not  a  snow­ gemmed  twig a-quiver?I (Eternal  truths that shame our soothing lies.) I ...Have you seen  God  in  His splendours,  heard  the  text  that  nature  renders? I (You'll never hear it in the family pew.)" Here Service says that  only through  intimate  contact  with  the  natural  order  can  man  come  to  a  decision  on  the  values  he should  use as a  guide  in  life. The  contrast  with  "The Ballad  of  the  Northern  Lights" is striking:  in  that  poem the  North  is judge  and  executioner, resolutely condemning  man to death for his weakness; here the north is teacher, benevolently aiding man  to a more meaningful existence.
The  conflicting  attitudes  toward  the  Canadian North  which  Service  presents in  his poetry  are  echoed in  his novel of the  Gold  Rush,  The  Trail  of  Ninety­ Eight. The  novel is first of all a chronicle of a particular time  and  place, for, as the  title indicates,  it  was the  product  of a specific historical  event.  Service, like Ballantyne and  other  writers on the North,  found  the subject  matter  for septen­ trional  fiction in  an  event which  had  already  stimulated  widespread  interest  in the  area.  In  one sense he  was simply exploiting  interest  which  the  Gold  Rush had created  by producing  a work of fiction to order,  and one for which he could expect to find a favourable  reception.1
The  Trail  of Ninety-Eight dramatically  retells the story of the struggles of men to reach  the  Klondike  gold fields and  their  trials  after  arrival  in  Dawson.  The hero, a romantic  Scottish fortune  hunter  named  Athol  Meldrum,  is introduced to  the  other  characters  on  the steamer  which  carries  him  north   to  Skagway. Meldrum  meets Bema  Wilovich,  the girl he  eventually  marries,  and  he  comes into contact  with  the  domineering  and  greedy  Winklesteins,  her  guardians,  and with  Jack  Locasto,  the  coarse  brute  who later  intrigues  with  the  Winklesteins to make Berna his mistress.
The  terrible  crossing of the  mountains  and  the  often  tragic  hardships  of  the trail from Skagway to Dawson are recounted  in a series of illuminating  instances which bring  the trail  to life in a manner  reminiscent  of Zola.2

It was an endless procession, in which every man was for himself. I can see them now, bent under their burdens, straining at their hand-sleighs, flogging their horses and oxen, their faces crimped and puckered with fatigue, the air acrid with their curses and heavy with their moans. Now a horse stumbles and slips into one of the

70

THE KLONDIKE MUSE



sump-holes by the trail side. No one can pass, the army is arrested. Frenzied fingers unhitch  the poor brute and drag it from the water. Men, frantic with rage, beat savagely at their beasts of burden to make up the precious lost time.

Service's peculiar sensibility required a complete fidelity to fact, yet at the same time  he was striving  to  realize his world  imaginatively.  But  the  conventions  of popular  fiction demanded  a dramatic  contrast  (and  conflict)  between  a sterling hero  and  an  unregenerate  villain.  So  although  Meldrum   becomes  thoroughly infected with the gold-fever on his arrival in Dawson, he is untouched  by the easy virtue of a town where the "good old moralities don't  apply".  Aware of the mass appeal of exposure, Service made much of the immorality of those in positions of power. When  Meldrum  is cheated out of a claim he staked, for example, he makes a vehement  denunciation of the official corruption  which was widespread  at  the time. While such  passages help to make The  Trail  of Ninety-Eight valuable  as a social record  of the  Canadian North  seventy years ago, the  plot is all too often unduly  contrived  to admit  them.
The  intrigues of the evil Locasto with the guardians  of the virtuous  Berna are melodramatically portrayed  in a sequence of incidents which take  place while the hero  is out  mining.  Meldrum's   return   to  find  that  Berna  has  been  forced  to become Locasto's mistress, and has since been leading the life of a dance-hall  girl, results in his own fall into the world of sin and debauchery  about  him. At length he is rescued  from  his self-destroying debauch,  and  he and  Berna  live together in a love-sanctified union. The unexpected arrival of Garry, Meldrum's brother, complicates  the  idyllic  existence  of  the  couple.  Shocked  and  disgusted  by  the common-law  union, Garry  attempts  to seduce Berna to show his brother  her true character. The  attempt  fails, and in a final climactic scene Meldrum  and  Berna (since  quietly  married)  are  caught  together  in  a  burning   Dawson  hotel  with Garry  and  Locasto. Only  the lovers escape the blaze.
Although  it is obviously a contrived  pot-boiler, The  Trail  of Ninety-Eight is
nevertheless  a significant  contribution  to literature  about  the  Canadian  North. It  is one  of the  earliest  attempts  to  make  a  myth  of the  north,  to capture   the spirit  of the  land  and  make  it comprehensible.  To  do  this, Service comes  back again  and  again  to the idea of the North  as battlefield where man  tests himself by contesting  with  the  natural environment.  While  the idea of man  and  nature in  conflict  is conventional enough  to  be  a  cliche, Service  might  have  used  it freshly and  effectively in the  Northern  setting. He failed  to make  it work, how­ ever, because he was unable  to decide whether such  a conflict brings out  man's nobler  or  baser  qualities.  In  a  number   of  passages,  of  which  the  following

THE KLONDIKE MUSE



evocation of the spirit  of the  Gold  Trail  is typical,  the  North clearly  brings  out the  worst  in man.

The  spirit of the Gold Trail,  how shall I describe it? It was  based on that  primal instinct  of  self-preservation  that  underlies  our  thin  veneer  of  humanity.  It  was rebellion,  anarchy; it  was ruthless, aggressive, primitive; it  was the  man  of  the stone  age in  modern  garb  waging his fierce, incessant  warfare  with the forces of nature.  Spurred  on  by the  fever of the gold-lust, goaded  by the  fear of losing in the  race;  maddened   by  the  difficulties and  obstacles  of  the  way,  men  became demons of cruelty  and aggression, ruthlessly thrusting  down  the weaker ones who thwarted their program.

Yet elsewhere,  when  the  North  is described  as a new frontier, conflict  with  the environment  calls  forth   nobler  instincts.   The   challenge  of  untamed  nature  is met,  the  battle  is  joined  until  "overall ... triumphed the  dauntless spirit  of  the Pathfinder-the mighty   Pioneer."
Similar contradictory reactions  to  the  Northern landscape were  noted  in  the poetry,  and   these  are  also  evident  in  the  novel.  On   the  one  hand, the  North is  repellent  to  man,   its  inhospitable nature   an   unwelcome  reminder  of  his mortality.

On  all sides of the frozen lake over which they were travelling  were hills covered with  harsh  pine,  that  pricked  funereally  up  to  the  boulder-broken snows. Above that  was a stormy and fantastic  sea of mountains  baring  many  a fierce peak-fang to the hollow heavens. The sky was a waxen grey, cold as a corpse-light. The snow was an  immaculate  shroud,  unmarked  by track of bird or beast. Death-sealed  the land lay in its silent vastitude, in its despairful desolation.

On  the  other  hand  it is alluring, a compelling presence  which  casts  its spell  on the human imagination: "Who has lived in the  North  will ever forget  the charm, the  witchery of  those  midnight skies.... Surely,  long  after  all  else is forgotten, will  linger  the  memory   of  those  mystic  nights  with   all  their   haunting spell  of weird,  disconsolate  solitude." But  here,  as in  the  poetry,  Service  seems incapable of bringing the  conflicting views together  to create a consistent and  meaningful vision  of  man  in  the  north.  The   reader  leaves  his  work  aware of  contradiction rather than   ambiguity.
In  the  Gold  Rush   and  the  Northern setting   two  elements for  myth-making were  ready  to hand. The  event  and  the  land  in  which  it  happened combined to provide  the  first significant  opportunity for  mythologizing the  north.  Unfortun­ ately for  Canadian literature the  talents  of Service  were inadequate  to cope  with the  challenge, and  the  opportunity was  lost.





POETS IN CONCLAVE

Dorothy Livesay




W-N THE  CANADIAN AUTHORS' ASSOCIATION was  fin;t proposed in  I92 I  with Sir Charles Roberts at its head,  the aim was to make it a body of professional writers who would battle to represent their case with the government, especially on matters of copyright. To a large extent  they were successful, but  in  time -all  too soon -the organization  became  one  of  lion­ hunting    amateurs   and   regional   self-admiration   societies.  Thus,   the   C.A.A. activities became  the  object  of ridicule  to poets in  the Thirties  who  drew  their inspiration  from  the  metaphysical  tradition  and  from  contemporary  movements abroad-poets like A.J.M. Smith,  F.R. Scott, Leo Kennedy  and  Robert  Finch.
In a parallel way, the League of Canadian Poets, which has just concluded  its second   biennial   conference   in  Ottawa,  was  first  promulgated  in  I g66  as  a professional lobby. One  of the founders,  Louis Dudek,  has told  me that  he saw the organization  as a  body  which  might  make itself felt  in  the  area  of setting standards for Canada Council grants,  literary awards, publishing  aids and stand­ ardization  of fees paid  by public institutions  such  as the  CBC.  Indeed,  Dudek went so far  as to speak  of "an  academy  of poets".  When  Dudek  resigned  last year, the League of Canadian Poets appeared  to some to have  become, if not  a group  of lion-hunters,  at least a narrow  group  of poets, in-grown  Ontario style. Within  their  range,  during  this past  year, they seem to  have  been successful in setting  up local poetry-reading  circuits and in publishing an anthology  of current poetry,  Made  in  Canada   : new  poems of  the  seventies. The  latter,  edited  by Raymond  Souster and Douglas Lochead, is national in scope and is a contribution  to the encouragement of Canadian  poetry  and  poets. But because of the energy required  to set up local Metro-Toronto  and  Ontario  poetry-reading  circuits, the national  scene was  neglected.  The  League  ignored  the  fact  that,  quite  outside itself, Canadian poets  were  getting  travel  grants  from  the  Canada Council  in order  to  give readings  on  university  campuses across  the  country.  Only  a  few

73

POETS IN  CONCLAVE



well-known poets were on this roster, and their fees as paid by universities have varied,  it is said, from  $5o.oo  to $2oo.oo.  It  could  be said  also, that  although the  CBC  has  encouraged  poetry  broadcasts  and  especially  the  work  of  young poets, its range  is also limited.
I only mention  these practices to illustrate  the  need for clarification  and  con­
sistency.  It  was  precisely to  remedy  some  of  these  disparities  that   Raymond Souster  and  his small  executive called  the  poets'  conference  on  October  g-12. The  Canada Council generously furnished  the wherewithal  and  Carleton  Univer­ sity acted  as host for some 40 poets from  Vancouver  to Fredericton.  Would  this we wondered,  be  merely  a  social event,  interwoven   with  poetry  readings  and (high)  spirits, and  never really getting down to the question  of  re-organizing  the League on a national  basis? The  agenda left much  to be surmised:  Poetry Read­ ing  Circuits;  Poetry  Publishing in  Canada; The  Canadian Poet  as Translator. These  turned  out  to  be workshops  where  great  good  sense  prevailed.  Out  of them  came  resolutions on  the  establishment  of  a  Booking  Agency  for  poetry­ reading  circuits  (possibly to  include  prose and  drama); the  encouragement of regional  circuits  co-ordinated  with  high  schools  and  universities;  the  setting  of fees, royalties from anthologies; the need for a Canada Development  Corporation  to promulgate  Canadian books; ways and  means  of getting  libraries  and  book­ stores to distribute  books on a regularized basis; the paperback  drugstore  menace;
-in short,  professional concerns!
It is true that there were some very hot issues: those centring  around  Canadian sovereignty  and  its literary  repercussions;  and  those  centring  on  the  status  of translators  and  books of translation.  Here  there  was a great  divide  between  the West Coast, eagerly careening into the international translation field with demands for recognition  and  aid from  the Canada Council,  and  the eastern  and  Quebec delegates  who saw  the  primary  crisis as one  of  lack of  understanding  between French  and  English Canada. All priorities, all aid, they felt, should go to French­ English  and  English-French  translation  of  prose,  poetry  and  criticism.
But are we too late? Already, as we sat deliberating  and wrangling,  the Quebec explosion was beginning. If Quebec must go, then the deliberations of the English­ speaking  poets who are  now actively seeking ways and  means  of  reaching  their French  counterparts have come far too late. We should  have heeded, long before this, the warning  of Hugh  McLennan.  His voice has been  the only one amongst Canadian writers which has pleaded, all through  the sixties, for urgent  action on the  cultural front.  Without  French-Canadian  literature   we  shall  be  much   the poorer.

74




review articles


THE MESSIANIC STANCE

Margaret Atwood

West   Coast  Seen,  edited   by  Jim  Brown  and  David   Phillips.  Talon Books. $3.50 paperback, $5.95  hardback.


THE  MESSIANIC   STANCE  has long been indigenous  to the  West Coast, and  West   Coast  Seen  does  not  fail  to adopt   it.  The   anthology   opens  with  a sermonistic piece by Jim  Brown in which dogmatically-formulated snatches of  anti­ dogma  are  interspersed   with  hymns  of praise   (to  Vancouver   as  a  "source  of energy,"   to  Tish   magazine)   and   with mystic quotations  from  Words  and  else­ where.   Mter    being   told   that   we  are "moving  through   the  mystery,"  though, it's a slight letdown  to turn  the page and find  the  editors  going  on  about  money, publishing  and   Canada  Council  grants just  as  though  they  were  Torontonians. Despite  the  naivete  of  this  juxtaposi­ tion,  the  introduction  does  make  some valid   points.   Vancouver  is,  as  Brown claims, an open city, which may account
for   the   collection's   extreme   diversity.
Phillips is quite  right  in stating  that  the book's   relevance    is   "immediate":   he seems to fear that  these poems won't stay representative of what's going on in Van­ couver for  very long, and  indeed  several of  the  poets  are  already  elsewhere.  All anthologies  are  necessarily  retrospective, but  this one is a little more so than,  for instance,    T.O.   NOW	or    CANADA FIRST:  the  poems  date   roughly  from rg65 to  rg6g. They're no doubt a reason-
 
ably fair cross-section of what  was being done in those years among  new  (though not always young)  poets, if one chooses to  skip  the  customary  quibbles   (if  X, why not Y, if Hulcoop  and  Jungic,  why not Yates, where are Jamie Reid, Daphne Marlatt,  etc.?). On  this point Brown de­ fends himself in advance:
Our  conception that  the  scene here  has  not been  easily  defined  since  the  early  days  of Tish  is even  more  true  today.  There are  so many   people    writing    here    now   that    it would  be  impossible  to say  that   this  is  a
complete  or  absolute  statement of  the  we
thing/scene in  Canada.
This comment underlines one of West Coast Seen's  problems:  its attempt to contain a sort of poetic urban sprawl. Vancouver   is  a  city  that   poets  go  to rather  than   come from;   the  result  is a book  that  can  either  be  praised  for  its range  and  inclusiveness or  reprimanded for  its  lack  of  focus. Stylistically, WCS has something  for everyone:  for  an  edi­ tor   whose  "whole   conception   of   pub­ lishing  is  centred   around   the   personal aspect,"   Brown's   taste   is   surprisingly eclectic. But he seems aware of this too, and the shifts in typeface are perhaps in­ tended  as a comment  rather  than  simply as a decorative  device.
West  Coast Seen's variety makes it un­
satisfactory  for  trend-spotting  purposes,

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



but  a  reviewer  is honour-bound to make the  attempt. The   cover  provides  a  clue of sorts:  on  the  back is an alphabet with some  of  the  letters   replaced   by  images (a  clock,  people  walking)  ; on  the  front is something that  looks like a geological strata diagram  (reflecting perhaps   the editor's  intention  of   presenting  simply what   has  happened, with  critical   judg­ ment   kept   to  a  minimum)   until   it   is turned sideways, when  it becomes a series of  thin  pictures: trees,  houses, telephone  poles.  Here   then   are  two  concerns   im­ portant to West Coast  poets  (though not altogether  unknown  elsewhere)  : the con­ cern    with    image    as   physical    object stripped  of   rhetoric,  and   the   concern with   language as  visual  and   aural  me­ dium,  stripped of  what  Brown  calls  "in­ tellectual meaning".
The  first   direction  was   taken   some years ago by, for instance, George Bower­ ing,   Lionel   Kearns,  and   some   of   the other   early   Tish   poets,  and   (less   pro­ gramatically  but   sometimes   more   pro­ foundly)  by John Newlove. It is followed here  most  notably   by  Ken  Belford,  Pat Lane  and  Barry  McKinnon.  Belford  is a delight: he  has  his  language  well  under  control,  and    such   poems   as   "Carrier Indians",  "Stove"   and   "Omega"  read with   the  kind  of   inevitability  of  image and  rhythm that  makes  other   poets  grit their  teeth  with  envy  once  they  have  re­ covered   from   the   poem.   Pat   Lane   is finally  discovering  his  own  voice;  some of  the  selections  here   lack  the  austerity  and  condensation of the  best work in his recent collection, Separations, but one outstanding poem,  "Last Night  in  Dark­ ness", appear in  both.  Barry  McKinnon's most  impressive  poem  here is the roughly­ finished  but  powerful "Letter I 1 : for my wife".
 The second   direction  is  rapidly  gain­ ing   adherents,  but   the   local   source   of energy   is  undoubtedly  still   Bill   Bissett. At  their   best,  his  poems  transcend  the technical peculiarities and  conventions of much   "sound"  poetry-phonetic spell­ ing,   distortion   or   abolition  of   syntax,  serial  repetition, and  a childlike preoccu­ pation   with  sounds   for  their   own  sakes and   with   the   fact   that   two   words   of different   meanings  can   be  pronounced alike   (producing what   would  be known in  other circles  as "puns") . Such  poems as  "the   tempul  firing" are   invocations, conjuring (as opposed  to descriptions) of the  ecstatic  vision, and  Bissett does them better   than   anyone. Siebun, Tan  Trey, Mayne    (sometimes)  and   Phillips   (in  a much    cooler   way)    are   somewhere in the   vicinity   of   the   same   wave-length. "Image" poems   usually   concentrate  on the  outer  world, describing things   (and the  poet's  reaction to  them) as they  are; "sound" poetry  leans  toward  the magical, the   inner,    toward  the   evocation  of   a world  transfigured. The  difference is  il­ lustrated by  the  work  of  Brown  himself, which  moves from  earlier "image" poems such  as  "Poem  to  my  father" to  later  "sound" ones  such  as  "th breath".
But  these  two  kinds  of  poem-making are  not  the  only  ones  going  on  in  West Coast Seen. Some  poets,  such as Stephen Scobie, are exploring the visual type of concrete poetry, though this area is not adequately  represented. Others,  such  as Pat  Lowther, are  happily  unclassifiable: they  are  simply  writing good  poems. Others are  either  very versatile or still searching for a personal style. Another group, if group they  be, are  trending  to­ wards   neo-surrealism ;  among these  are Andreas Schroeder, the  interesting Zoran  J ungic,    and    Pierre    Coupey-a    more

REVIEW ARTICLES



ambitious poet  than  many  in  this collec­
tion.
Is  Vancouver special?   Is  it  really,  as the introductory letter  of David  Phillips implies,  that   much   different from  Mon­ treal   or   Toronto  as   a   place   to   write  poems,   that  much    better?   Does   West Coast Seen have  a distinctive flavour not found  in, for  instance, T.O. Now? There is certainly a  difference in  editorial atti­ tude:  anthologizers  further  east  at  least pretend  that   they  are  cool,  semi-profes­  sional  and  semi-objective; they  are  more willing  to  comment, less willing to preach. The  isolation  of Vancouver and  its con­ sequent  cultishness result  in  a gleeful  do­ it-yourself  attitude towards  publishing­ a  kind   of  "I'm doing  this  for  me,  my friends  and  the  rest of  the converted, but you  can  watch   if  you  like"  posture.  It's  as much  of  a  pretense  as the  other  one, but  it  does  produce a  different kind  of grab-bag. If  cultivated   maturity  results m   quality  control  and   a   certain    uni-
 formity   and  dullness   (like  a  convention of Iowa  Writing School  old  boys), culti­ vated   youthful   enthusiasm  obviously  re­ sults in sloppiness. West Coast Seen is too long   and   too   undiscriminating:   it   in­  cludes  a  number of pretentious, silly and trivial   poems   as  well   as  a   number  of good  ones.  But  children,  though  some­ times tedious  and  aggravating (to others: never  to  themselves)   are  also  refreshing and delightful, and the Vancouver poets often seem more willing to take the more obvious  risks,  to  branch  out,   to  experi­ ment  and  fail,  than   their  more  cautious eastern  counterparts. On  the other  hand, wit  seems to  flourish  better  in the  East: the  WCS  poets,  though  they  play  word­ games,  do   not   as  a   rule   turn   phrases.  However,  making  final  judgments about  poets, cities or  regions  on  the  basis of an anthology  is  always  dangerous:  antholo­ gies are  mirages  created, finally,  by their  editors.



ITS OWN  TYPE OF FLEA
Ralph Gustafson

Contemporary Poetry   of British  Columbia, Volume   r, edited  by  J. Michael  Yates. The  Sono Nis Press. 252 pp. $7.50.


THIS  ANTHOLOGY of  contem­ porary  poetry  out  of British  Columbia is a  very  large,  a  very  handsomely printed  book,  generous  enough to give a  page  to a  poem  of  even  three   lines.  The   cover design   by   Tony    Hunt,  carver   for   the Provincial  Museum in  Victoria, is strik­ ingly  attractive. The  design  is of a raven in  flight.
I was glad  not  to see Pegasus  in flight. Here, I thought, is a  hope  of  poets  with its  own   transcendent  symbol.   The   bird
 
was  B.C.  in  geography and,   so  the  title informed   me,  A.D.  in  climate. A  clutch of  54  poets  springing from   the  roots  of a   region   known   to   itself   up   into   the universal  air. That figure  of 54 was a bit dizzying.   Is   it   possible,   I  asked,   that instead   of   twelve   or   thirteen  in   good baker  fashion   there   can   be  over  half  a hundred poets  in only  one-tenth of  Can­ ada?    Surely   then,    we   are   renowned, Canada  is  a  burgeoning  cornucopia  of immortal   wounds    and    saving    graces.

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



Well, it still isn't.  This  book is witness  to other, lesser quotients. Excellent  it is; but not  transcendent. Competent and  vastly encouraging in its craft  and  preparations it  in  summary is;  intolerant of  anything but  poetry  it  is not.  There is much  that is tentative; there  is much  that  is engag­ ingly   pretentious;  and   there   is  a  great  deal  of  verbal  overkill.  But  the  52 stand  together with  hardly an  egocentric twid­  dler  among them.  The conglomeration is personable and  significant.
I am  as convinced as nails and  buckets that    poetry   is  of   its   place   and   time: regional  and   personal.    Just   as   surely, poetry  transcends its locality  and  is  uni­ versally   human.  But   first   of   all   it  is Warwickshire  or   Squeedunk.   Lack   of local   stride   is  what   is  wrong   with   the spate   of  stuff   all  over  Canada  seeking Canada  Council  crutches. Such  stuff  as was  tossed  up  in  the  collection  Canada First. This  present anthology  is way ahead  of   button-button-who's-found-the-button folk-gath-erings. And, thank god, this anthology at  last  not  only supersedes  but puts in its place any more such field pros­ pecting as  was  the  advocacy  of  Tish   or however  you make  up  the anagram. This anthology  is  an   anthology   of   integrity and  there  is  hardly a  group  therapeutic bellyache in it. But  you won't  find British Columbia.
Michael Yates,  the editor,  openly states in  his short  introduction that  he  doesn't want  us  to  find  literary  boundaries. "British Columbia poetry,"  he writes,  "is not unlike the poetry of other  regions in Canada,  nor   unique   in  the  rest  of  the world.  What is truly  significant  in  these pages  would  be  significant   in  any  other place,   translated  into   any   other   lang­ uage." Poetry  is kin  to  the  whole  world.  Of course. But Mr.  Yates' stance  is erron-
 eous.  It is not  true  that  poetry  unlike  in region  is less significant-which is what the   statement  implies    (let   alone   that terrific  misstatement that  a language does not   confer   absolute  uniqueness  on   its poetry) . Poetry  should  be regional  while it  is universal. Mr.  MacLulich in  a most informative  poem,   "Reflections  on  The Naked    Ape",  assures   us  that    the   ape when  naked  "has  its own  type  of flea."  I am  sure  that   the   native  British  Colum­ bian  has.  What is more,  once  in  a circus  I saw  a  trained  flea  carry   the  globe  on its back.  That wasn't in  Vancouver how­ ever.
If I am  going  to  praise  this anthology (and  I do)  should  it  not  then  have  some timber   and   rocky   mountains in  it?   At some   of  its   best   moments  it   does.   At other    best   moments  where   it   "is   not unlike  the  poetry  of other  regions in Canada" it  has  subsumed its  special  en­ vironment  (when   the   native   is  writing. The   anthology's  non-indigenous  contrib­ utors    and    its   translations   from   other  tongues   add   to  its  feel  of   eclecticism). This  identity business  is  notoriously diffi­ cult  to handle when  the  landscape turns  to  inscape.  Some  say,  "Good   Lord,  give it  up.  What  does  it  matter?" You  can't give it up. The whole  world  is protesting that  you can't.
The present   contributors have  all  had
something  to  do   with   Canada.  Let   us stretch a point  here  and  there  and  regard the  book  as  Canadian. At  this  point  in time  and  within  the  limits  of this antho­ logy  what   does  "Canadian"  mean?  (I trust  we are  agreed  with Sir Philip Sidney that  of all  liars, poets  are  the least  liars.) According to these present 54 seers and diagnosticians,  first   of   all:   we   cannot deal   with   ourselves   except  atavistically. We  must  watch  out  for  Pratt's prize  cat.

REVIEW ARTICLES



As  George   Amabile   warns   us,  darkness
"flows  and  pulses  in  the  room,"

Outside,
Thunder crumbles,  a  faint  catastrophe
In  the  far  sky. Somewhere  a  cave-man
Is  crouching among   giant   ferns.
T.D.  Ma.cLulich  also warns  us not  to be too hopeful about man:

the  hair  on  his  head   (of  which  he  is vain)
the  hair  at  his  armpits and  genitals
(of  which  he  is ashamed)
remind  him  he  can  never  alter  history

Canadians read  history.  Our  reversion to  primitivism  is  bad  enough.  But  they are despondent on almost  all scores  (take the  dust- jacket  off this anthology and  see for  yourself). The  discouraging thing about    this   Canadian   despondency,  in both  young  and  old,  is  that it  proceeds from   ourselves;  not  from   Vietnam  and Biafra  and  Kent   State   University.  New­ love  is memorable in  the  mood:   "every muddy  word  I write   j  cries,"  he  points out   to   us.   "Life  continued   before    it occurred." Frederick  Candelaria  tells  us that

The  clock  has  no  hands: it  is always checkout  time before  you  can  leave - too  late   -
charged  for  the  extra  day
you  never  had.

And  poet  after  poet  nods  in  crepe-hang­ ing  approval, even  that  vast  wit, Stanley  Cooperman:
Birds
are  freezing
in  mid-flight.

Now  really,  Stanley. The Canadian win ter  is after   all  only  nine  months of  the year.  The  young  too:  David  Summers is preparing the  manuscript for  a first book of poems, yet already  he informs us with­ out  an  active  verb:
 Inscribed on  my pyjamas  lapel,
a miserable  hallelujah.
In   Ken   Belford's   room   the  furniture doesn't  fit either:
An ice octopus  drapes  one  more ann  down­
ward.
The melancholy thing about this chill is that   it  is  never   relative   to  elsewhere's suffering.    It's   solipsistic.    Except     for Dorothy  Livesay  you  won't find  out  that there  is a war  on.  Not  that  we are with­ out   one  or   two   resolutions to   general  misery. We  have  Lionel  (Charlie  Chap lin)   Kearns:
the  answer  will turn  up in spite of the  difficulties
and  confusions  of dead  cats rotting  roses and  discarded
automobile   parts perhaps  one  day  slipping
unobtrusively   into   the  room.
(Kearns also happily gives  us another of his miserable  parables, this  time  about  a man   caught   in  a  telephone  booth.)    If you    search     hard     through   the     252 pages  of  this  anthology, here  and   there you will be able to eliminate the universal "perhaps".  Bogdan   Czaykowski   has  ac­ complished  it:
I reverse the  hourglass
and  time  grows  eloquent once  more.
But    then    Mr.    Czaycowski    is   Polish. Poland   has  a  different set  of   circum­ stances  to  Canada.
We have a sort of cerebral, class-room metaphysical wit,  but  a  sense of comedy (and  I don't mean  funny entertainment) is, alas, largely  lacking.  That is partly because   Earle  Birney   in   this   book   is largely  lacking   (for  goodness  sake  where is he, the father of so much  and  founding father  of   the   U.B.C.  Creative   Work­ shop?).  We   have   Cooperman   and   the younger  Pat  Lowther with  her

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



Prometheus with  ants up  his  pantlegs.

But   hardly  a   glimmer  of   a   sense   of humour in  the  younger:

I am  an  onion,

says David  Summers.
According to this book what we are without is transcendence, religious or inspirational (except Dorothy Livesay; it always seems to be "except  Dorothy Live­ say") .  Furthermore,  we   are   practically without  sex.
Fortunately,  the   day   is  saved.   Take
down  the  crepes.  We  have  love.  In  the book you will find lyrical love lyrics by Skelton, Livesay,  McWhirter, Hulcoop. How  easy  it  is to  celebrate  misery.  How rare   the   celebrations  of  joy!  But  these poets    (can't  the   young   go   joyfully   to bed?)     do   it.   Robin    Skelton's    "Night Poem" is the  finest  poem  in  the  book.
 And   so,  is  all   that   Canadian?   One­ tenth   Canada?  And   I  must  remember, Volume 2,  I deduce, is  a-coming.
So much  for  content. Form  too is meaning.  And    here    this   anthology   is varied   and   skilful.   The   undergraduates and  the graduates from  the  U.B.C.  and Victoria  workshops tend  to  write  in  the same  mode   (lantern celebrations and sagging prolixities) but group feel-ins are absent, few  creaks  are  heard, the  rhythm is mostly under  control (that hiccough "breathing" marking the Tish  school is beautifully absent; perhaps they got frightened), and   the  syntax  is  not  only there  but  flexibly  (and  necessarily)   used. The  known  names  continue to command their  craft-and  welcome  to  P.K.  Page who  again  observes

a  high
point  on  a  twirling  spindle  which
spun  and  hurled   great  gilded  lariats.




ATWOOD'S MOODIE
 


A. W. Purdy


MARGARET ATWOOD. The  Journals of Susanna Moodie. Oxford,  $1.95·


SusANNA MooDIE was an English  emigrant to Canada in 1832. She settled  with her husband in Douro Town­ ship,   near   Peterborough, and  her  book, Roughing   It  in  the  Bush, is  one  of  the basic pioneer  documents of  Canada.
Margaret  Atwood   says  in  the  After­ word  to her own book that "These poems were  generated  by  a   dream. I  dreamt that    I  was   watching  an   opera   I   had written  about   Susanna   Moodie.   I   was alone  in  the theatre: on the empty  white stage,  a  single  figure  was  singing."  And later, about her  poems: "I suppose  many

Bo
 
of these were suggested by Mrs. Moodie's books,  though  it  was  not  her  conscious voice,  but  the  other  voice  running like a counterpoint through her work that  made the  most  impression on me."
Well, that  "other voice" is also the one
that  makes  the poems impressive.  Perhaps it is Atwood's own  voice, or  perhaps it is Susanna Moodie herself singing  Atwood's opera. The  duality is there.  But  I think Margaret Atwood  has always had  this duality in  herself,  a  quality  that  she sug­ gests  is  Canadian, a  kind  of   "paranoid schizophrenia" which  enables her  to be a

REVIEW ARTICLES



ghostly  observer  peering over  the  ghostly shoulder of Susanna Moodie. In  spite of hard   physical   details  (fire   and   plague, dead    children,  trees,   emigrants, etc.), these  poems  make  a  strange  slightly-off­ from-reality impression on   the   reader: and  browsing  through  Roughing It in the Bush, I don't think Moodie's 1gth century  prose   has   this   ingredient. The  poems' impact is in this strangeness: as if Atwood were from  Mars and  Moodie an  English­ woman   of   "gentle" birth.   And   Atwood is not  talking to  a  possible  reader; she is an  entirely   subjective Martian.
The Journals  of Susanna Moodie  has many   of  the   qualities  of  fictional   bio­ graphy: the  reader knows  very well  (the  Canadian reader, anyhow) that  Moodie  was a real person,  and  reading the poems both   the  Moodie and  Atwood  personae are inescapable. John Berryman did some­ thing    similar    in   Homage   to   Mistress Bradstreet,   assuming  the   persona   of  a long-dead   American  woman   of  pioneer days.   A   similar   authoritative  and   un­ deniably once-actual personage takes over in  both  books:   Moodie   and   Bradstreet, with  Atwood  and  Berryman as shadow manipulators coming   to  life  in  the  pub­ lishers'   blurbs.    The  puppets   steal   the show   (but   not  the   royalties):   and   this to me, is fiction.
Another  advantage  of  using  a  once­ living   protagonist  is  the   cohesive   and intensive  quality  that   a  single  viewpoint
-or  time  or  geographic area-gives  a book 	of	poems. 	(Bowering's  Rocky Mountain  is   another  example  of   the latter.) But  there is a sub-basic  quality  in the  poet's  self  that  cannot be  conveyed by  speaking   in   another  person's   voice. Because, in its finest expression, the poet's voice  is for  everyman, not   just  a  single person.  And  I  think  it's  a very debatable
 point  whether a poet can  occupy  another body  and  mind  and  still  retain  the  sub­ basic qualities of himself  or  herself. That is,  Atwood    as   Atwood    strikes   me   as authentic,  but   Atwood   as  Moodie  is  a very  fine  tour  de  force.  But  the  latter is entirely  legitimate,  valuable and,  in  this case,  rather   marvellous  fiction.
Peggy Atwood  said  to  me  about  three weeks  ago  that   a  reviewer    (that's  me) should seek to fathom the author's (that's her)   intent, implying   that   marks  should be  given,   according  to   how   close   the author  came   to   achieving  that   intent. This  I disagree  with in Atwood's absence, almost  completely-unless the  reviewer, knowing  the  intent, feels it was achieved and  is, in  addition, impressive  as  hell.
Re  intent, I  prefer  Earle  Birney's opinion  (also verbal, though maybe he's written   it  somewhere  too) :  that   what­ ever  meaning or  levels  of   meaning the reader   "extracts"  from   the   work,   this meaning is legitimate  and  valid.  Because (my  own  comment  as  well  as  Birney's)  there   is  something   in   a   writer's  head which  causes  him  or  her  to  incorporate meanings  and  possible  interpretations he (or  she)   doesn't  even  know   are   there.  Writers  are generally  a  bit  stupid-and
I cite my own case particularly-feeling that   too  much   knowledge and  accumul­ ation  of literary debris  in  their  heads  can be a  handicap: this  apart  from straight intelligence. Of  course  that's an  alibi  on my part,  as I'm  aware.
What  I'm  getting at: I'm  not really interested in what  Atwood  is trying  to do in  her  opinion:  I'm   interested in  what she  succeeds  in  doing-in  my  opinion. The  two may be identical. I think  they probably   are   in  this  book,  but   I'm   far too  cautious  to  say  what   I  think   she's trying  to do, even though she more or less

REVIEW ARTICLES



says what  that  is in the  book's Aftexword. And  I guess that sounds pretty convoluted and  involved.
Well,  I've  held  certain opinions about
writing poems  for  a long  time,  but  these opinions  have  changed recently.  For instance: consistency  of  tone  and  metre. I've  thought previously  that  inconsistency was the  best way  to write  poems, in fact the   only   way   for   myself.   Part   of   the reason   for   that   opinion  has  been   that critics   seemed   to   demand   consistency. Well -well, I still hold  to the  view that consistency of tone  and  metre  would be a bad    thing   for   me,   for   me -but   not necessarily  for  others.   Particularly  in  a book   like  the   Moodie  poems   where   a related  and  integrated outlook  on the author-persona's part  appears to  make the   poems   more   believable.   In fact,   I think   Atwood's book  has  caused  me  to change  my  mind   on  this  point.   And   I do think  the Moodie poems are that impressive.
But  looking  aAtwood's books,  I be­ lieve   they   all   have   this   consistent   and distinctive tone.  And  that's okay for  her: what's sauce  for  the  goose is not  for  the gander, and   the  difference in  gender   is not  unintentional. For  I believe  that  my personal  outlook   on  life  is markedly  in­ consistent: I may  be temperamentally  up one  hour  and  down  the  next;  I may  be happy,   I may  be  sad; I  may  be in  love with   life  and   all  women,   I may  not.  I want   to  convey  these   human  inconsist­ encies in poems, and  I  try. But of course, I  say  all  this  after   I look  at   my  own poems  and  know   (think)  that   they  do reflect  these attitudes.
In  Atwood's poems  I see  no  humour other  than  satire,  very little  love for any­ thing     (except     possibly    the    Atwood­  Moodie  dead   children  in   Death   of  a
 Young Son  by Drowning); I do see sub­ jective    navel-watching  and   analysis,   a hard   cold  look  at  the  human  condition. In  the  past  I've  said  these  shortcomings were  a  bad  thing  in  any writer. But  now I cannot transplant my own hangups into  Atwood. If she  lacks  these  things   (and  I think  she  does), it  does  not  in  any  way lessen  her  poems.  I  would  say  they  were just short  of  magnificent-except, that's another   quality I  don't  think   she   has. One   can  cite   a  mixed   bag  of  poets­ say   Yeats,  Eliot,    Layton  and    Birney: Yeats   has   magnificence,  satire   and   no humour: Eliot,  satire,  magnificence and no  humour:  Layton the  same: only  Bir­ ney has  genuine selfconscious  humour as well.  But  I should   add   joy  to  this  cata­ logue,  for  Layton does  have that.
In  John Glassco's  Memoirs of  Mont­ parnasse,  here's  what   Ford  Madox  Ford said  about joy:  "All  modern  effusions  of joy are  definitely  unbalanced. Very  well. Now,   if  poetry  expresses   the   reality   of existence -as    I    believe,    along    with Willie   (jesus!)   Yeats,  it  does,  and   as  I hope  you  will  too,  my  young  friend-it follows  that  the  experience of  joy  is  in the  nature of  a fever, of hysteria,  and  not a  well-founded natural human experience or  condition. Therefore we can  say:   joy itself  is  hysteria, a  drunkenness, an  un­ natural state."
It doesn't follow   at  all:   joy  isn't   an unnatural  state,    even   in   the   human­ animal.  And   add   that  drunkenness  (of the   spirit,  not   artificially  induced)   is natural.  Joy   is   part    of   the   condition humaine, which  isn't  all  terror  and  fore­  boding,  can't  be that or we'd  all collapse damn  quick   under  the   psychic  weight.  Three  of   the   people   mentioned  above whom    I    know    (Layton,  Birney    and  Atwood)    all  have   joy   personally,    but

REVIEW ARTICLES



Atwood  has  not  communicated the  feel­ ing in poems and probably has not wanted  to. Again,  I must  not  read  my  own  pre­  occupations re  how  to  write  poems  into  Atwood.  For  I think  she is a  marvellous poet,  perhaps the  only  one  right  now  in Canada whose  poems  I  look  forward to reading   with    tremendous   anticipation each   time  a  book  of  hers  appears. And she is what  she  is, without what  I say to be    shortcomings or weaknesses  being shortcomings or  weaknesses.  Therefore, I say  I have   been  wrong  in  my  opinions that    certain  hwnan  life-qualities are necessary  poem-qualities.  (They  were pretty   naive  opinions anyway.)   At  least, not  for  her,  as  not  for  Yeats  and  Eliot.
Having  said   what   Atwood   does   not have,  it  devolves  on  me  to say what  she does. And,  sticking  to the  Moodie  book, I believe  in  Atwood-Moodie. I  think   the Moodie  conveyed  by Atwood  is scared  to death of life, but  is nevertheless a real person. Moodie is also afraid of the rough and  tough  pioneer forest of early Canada, but  what  nice sweet well-bred  and bedded English  gentlewoman wouldn't be?
In The  Wereman:

My  husband   walks  in  the  frosted  field an  X,  a  concept
defined  against  a  blank;
he  swerves,  enters  the  forest and  is blotted out.

Why,  that   Moodie bitch! I  say.  There isn't  a scintilla, not  a  jot or  milligram of affection for  anyone  but herself  (Moodie) in the  poem  (in  Roughing  It in the Bush she  calls  her  husband "Moodie"!) . This I say, knowing Atwood  meant to convey something quite  different. I  think   she meant to say  that  humans are  undefined as  such,  that   they  waver   into  hate   and love  like  ghosts   and   things   of  mist   in other   people's  minds.   She   meant    (per-
 haps)   to  convey  human inconsistency, as I have said  her  writing did  not.  Whereas I, becoming  a vicarious  female while reading    the   poem,   growl   soprano-bass that   Moodie   should   have   rushed   after her  husband  into  the dark  forest,  at  least she  should   have   if   she   gave   a   single damn.   But   she  didn't,  and   that's  one reason  why  Moodie is not  quite  human, was  only  worried   about  herself   in   the poem,  was  absolutely  solipsistic.   (Which is one of Atwood's  strengths.)
On  the  other  hand, I guess most  Vict­ orian  women  felt  themselves to  be  only sexual  objects   (or  so  books  tell  me,  and also  certain   Victorian female  survivals) , individuals only  privately  and  partly, in their  fears  and  hates  but  not  their  loves.
However,  the  Atwood-Moodie persona crosses me  up  in  Death of a Young  Son, about  whom  shejthey say:

I planted  him  in  this country like a  flag.

The  line  has multiple meanings, none  of which   I  intend   to  mention.  Unless   to say  that   sons  were  loved   but   husbands were   not,   which   interpretation   should come  from  the  whole  book,  not  this  one poem.
Here's  an  example of Atwood's verbal virtuosity:

After  we  had  crossed  the  long  illness that  was the  ocean ...

No  ordinary  pioneer   woman would   say that, and neither would Victorian-literary Moodie: but  Atwood-Moodie might and did.  Here   I believe  both. And   briefly  I see  hundreds of  mile  of  ocean  vomit. I see sickness of the spirit  and  endurance. I believe.  (Hallelujah!)
For the first few years in Canada the historical  Susanna Moodie hated  the  new country   (Canada), hated  it  like hell  and

REVIEW ARTICLES



the devil:  but in later  yecarne up with phony-sounding eulogies  for  the  country that   don't ring  true.   Along  those  lines, Atwood  makes  Moodie  come to  love the country as well. But I don't  think Moodie every  really  did.  But  Atwood  does,  and that's  probably the  most  love  lifting  out of these  pages  of  print.  For  the Moodie­ Atwood   persona   becomes  some  kind  of primitive  corn-mother-spirit  that  sits in a modern   bus   along    St.   Clair    Ave.   in Toronto,  embodying  the  ghostly  citified barbarism  of this country. I don't  believe that  double-love, only  Atwood's.
Well, I could  go on and  on with  these
poems,  tearing them  apart, figuring  them out,  the  radar echoes  between  them  and me  bouncing back  and  forth,   back  and forth, hypnotically boring.  But  if I'm talking  to anyone  here, I hope  they carry this  review  farther than  Iam  energetic enough  to  take  it.
I disagree  with  most of Atwood's view­ points   wholeheartedly,  and   the  circum­ stances  will  never  arrive  when  I can  say
 the  rest  of  this  review  to  her  personally (besides,   she's   a   woman,  even   though very  intelligent),  because   she  wouldn't listen  to such  confused  and  partly  intuit­ ive  arguments.  I've   said   here   that   she lacks many  things  in  her  poems  which  I think  desirable  (and   Iretract  nothing), such  as  magnificence which  she  has  not got  in  single  poems.  Taking the  whole book  though, she  mysteriously does  have that   quality. Also  clarity   of  intellect   (if the  reader will  read  hard), and  give  the poems at  least the  attention of a personal monetary transaction). The country itself
is the  Atwood-Moodie children  (hail, corn-mother!)  who  never  had  a  chance to grow  to  adulthood  and   be  what   the actual country too may  never  become.
What I'm  saying  is that  this  book will stand   in   any  company,  despite   what   I call   shortcomings  that    are   not   short­ comings  in  Atwood.   Ican  think   of  no comparisons for  the  book.  Which  seems to  me  a  high  compliment. Atwood  may even  deserve  it.




CRITICAL ODYSSEY
 


Peter Stevens


GEORGE  WOODCOCK,   Odysseus   Ever  Returning.  McClelland  and   Stewart, $1.95; Hugh   MacLennan,  Copp   Clark,   $1.95;  Mordecai    Richler,  McClelland and Stewart,  $.95.


THE BEST CRITICISM includes "the   analytical approach and  the  philo­ sophically creative insight",  according to George  Woodcock. Analysis should  avoid the  pedantic aridity  of the  academy, and insight   should   steer  clear  of  the  circui­  tous   semantics  of   professional    philoso­ phers.  Critics  who  travel  this  tricky  path  are  few  and  far  between -one thinks  of Orwell; and   the  best,  perhaps   the  only
 
Canadian example we have, is Orwell's biographer, George  Woodcock.
William   New,  in   his  introduction  to
Odysseus Ever Returning, Woodcock's collection   of  essays  on  Canadian  litera­ ture,    stresses   that    Woodcock's   critical  spectacles  are  "fairly freed  from  any  rose tint  and ... it is upon  the  idea of  'reality'  in    literature   that     George    Woodcock  focusses."  He  is concerned, in  fact,  with

REVIEW ARTICLES



literature as  a  social  force  and   as  a  re­ flection   of   social   forces   in   the   widest sense, so that  perhaps he is best described as  a  moral critic,  a  critic  who  works  in the  same  area  as  Orwell. In  fact,  in  his book   on   MacLennan,   Woodcock    com­ pares  the  Canadian  novelist  with  Orwell  in  his  respect  for  the value  of  decency, his  search  for  some  meaningful scale  of verities  which  has  disappeared from  the depressing  jumble  and  standardization of modern  life.  It is  apparent,  then,   why Woodcock  would   feel   drawn  to   Mac­ Lennan-"one of  Canada's  most  con­ siderable novelists  of  any  kind", he  calls him-and  why  he  would  devote,  as  he does, almost  half  the  book on the  novelist to  an  analysis  of   MacLennan's ideas  as he expresses  them  in  his essays. Not  that  his  comments on  the   novels  are  secon­ dary   in   his   study   of   MacLennan.  He makes  very  sound   sense  of  most  of  the novels  but  he has  summarized  his  ideas about   MacLennan's  novels   so  well   in the   essay   "A   Nation's  Odyssey"    that  the  book's  statements merely  expand the ideas  in   the   essay.  His   greatest  insight into   MacLennan's  novels-one I wish he  would  develop  further-is  his belief that   the   novelist   relies   "on   the   move­ ments   of   the   unconscious   mind";  the novels  reveal  a  mind  "so  greatly  moved by intuition, so sensitive  to  collective  im­ pulses,  so  much   more  inclined  to  pessi­ mism".    He    prefers   Each    Man's  Son above  all  MacLennan's novels because in that   novel  "the   novelist's   own   fatalism accords   with   his  subject";   Woodcock's comments on  this  novel  in  his  essay on MacLennan  are   brilliant  but   somehow he does  not  develop  them  to any  further depth in  the  book -and  this  is a  great disappointment.
Woodcock, in  fact,  may  be best at  the
 perceptive  summary, something he brings off time and  time again  in his essays; the survey of  Canadian literature in  the opening  essay  of  Odysseus  Ever  Return­ ing   is  probably  the   best   example,   but there  are  good  summaries  of  Canadian criticism   and   of   Callaghan's  work.  But his book  on  Richler  (a  survey  that  con­ tains  only   about  2o,ooo   words)    is  too limited  in  space.   It  contains some  valid insights  and summarizing -he  makes  a very  good   case   for   The  Acrobats   and  there  is  a  very   revealing  comment  on Canadian minorities in the context  of Canadianism in  the  chapter on Son  of a Smaller  Hero- but  this Canadian  Writ­ ers  series from   McClelland and  Stewart is  far  too  cramping  to  allow  the critic  room  to  do  little   more   than  give  plot outlines  and  a general  discussion of prin­  cipal  themes.
Like   Orwell,  Woodcock  has   no   pa­ tience   with   sloppiness,  deceit   and   eva­ sion.  His  attack on  Callaghan  really de­ rives  from   his  belief  firstly   that   Calla­ ghan's  early  bare  prose  is  rather charac­ terless and  anonymous, and  secondly  that  Callaghan's later  novels  are  over-written, pretentious and  empty  at the centre. This  opinion  that  Callaghan has  written  some of  the  best  but   also  some  of  the  worst prose  in  Canadian  literature leads   him to  castigate   Edmund  Wilson   for  failing  to  distinguish between   the  good  and  the bad in Callaghan. Wilson's  views he calls idiosyncratic, because   Wilson  is  an  out­ sider  and  remains a stranger to Canadian identity   and   feelings.  Woodcock  himself in his criticism  often  reverts  to Canadian problems     and     Canadianism.  In   the course  of   various   essays  he   throws   off statements    about   Canada   and    Cana­ dianism  that   elucidate certain trends in the  writers  but  also  carry  weight  outside

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  immediate subject   under  discussion; for  instance,  he  talks  of  Canada's  "in­ grained  distrust of  the  exceptional," he maintains that   "nationalist  movements, indeed, can  often  frustrate and  paralyse cultural   traditions" and   a  remark   from MacLennan he  agrees  with  makes  a splendid appendix to  the  Gospel  accord­ ing   to   St.   Mathews -that   movements like  communism, fascism,  and  national­ ism  "are, in  their   appeal  to  the  masses and   even  to  intellectuals,  aberrations of the  religious  impulse".
It should   be  obvious   from   these  re­
marks    sprinkled   through   his   criticism that   George   Woodcock   is  not  narrowly chauvinistic in his approach to Canadian literature. Literature is his concern wher­ ever  it  is written. He  is prepared  to  set our  literature in  the  widest  possible  con­ text,  as  can   be  seen  by  the  many   and different authors from  other  countries he brings   into   his   arguments,  although  he does  not   seem   to  agree   wholeheartedly with   A.  ].  M.  Smith's  concept   of  cos­ mopolitanism.  Unless  he  is convinced  of an  author's  worth  he will not  agree  with the  critics  outside  Canada who  praise  a Canadian   author.  His   critical   reserva­  tions about Callaghan are  a case in point.  His  other most  severe  attack   is levelled at   Leonard  Cohen.  He   finds   Cohen's poetry "languid, distant, stylized", Beauti­ ful Losers "a tedious  book"  and  his later  poems   "glib,   shallow   and   self-imitative statements of loneliness". Clearly  he con­ demns   Cohen  for   vague   expression   in poetry    divorced   from   reality;    Cohen's world  is too  bound to  a  non-committed attitude to  life,  and   for  Woodcock   this might  mean  a sloppy  amoral  attitude.
The   attack on  Cohen is significant  in his  criticism   in   other   ways.  Woodcock seems  to  want   to  make   a  clear  distinc-

86
 tion   between   the  closed  concept  of  art and   life  itself.   He   very  obviously   does not  condone an  ivory  tower  attitude, for he  insists  on  the  quality of  life  around the  production of literature. "Books,  like men,    are   better    understood  when   we know    the    mental   environment   from which   they   have   arisen." But  we  must not   confuse   art   with   life,  he  seems  to suggest,  so  he  is  perhaps  unsympathetic to the kinds of modern literature which present  themselves  as part  of a  very self­ conscious   process.  This   accounts  for  his somewhat grudging admiration  for  Mal­  colm   Lowry.   He   feels  Under  the  Vol­ cano  is  an   "imaginative   transfiguration of real  life",  whereas Dark  as The  Graue has a "depressingly linear structure". The novel  has no reverberations, no real  artis­  tic life for "art made out  of art  is always sterile".  Yet  even  in  this  respect  Wood­  cock    shows   a   surprising  openness    of mind,   for   he   praises    Layton's   poetry  highly, even  though in general  he detests "the  romantic cult  of the  artist". And  he accepts  Birney's  continuous process of creation as represented by his Selected Poems, although perhaps his acceptance comes from what  he calls Birney's use of experience  "seen   in   its   moral   dimen­ sions".
Woodcock's  distrust  of   the   self-con­
scious  process  in  literature explains  per­ haps   why   the   essays  in  Odysseus  Euer Returning deal  with  figures  who  are gen­ erally  well-established. There is a  curious  lack  of critical discussion  of the more  re­ cent  developments and  figures  emerging in  the  latter part   of  the  rg6o's  in  Can­ ada.  Ifor  one  would  like to  see  his  in­ cisive  critical  intelligence focussed  on  AI Purdy, Gwen  MacEwen, John Newlove, Margaret   Avison   and   the   West   Coast Movement of the  rg6o's.

REVIEW ARTICLES



In  an  article in  a  recent  W ascana  Re­ view  Woodcock   predicts that   there  will soon  be  a  return  to  more   regular  and traditional  forms   in   literature.   Perhaps  beneath   the  critical statements  made  in these  three  books may  be a  kind  of  nos­ talgia   for   a  firmer   basis   for   literature than   that   current  at   the   moment,  the kind  of nostalgia  that  again  links Wood­  cock    with    Orwell.   He    is    constantly  searching for  it  in  the  Canadian litera­ ture   he  reads   and  criticises,   just  as  he seems to be searching for  a firm  basis for life in his travels  through other  countries  and  other  cultures. He  describes  himself as   "an   incurable  moralizing  traveller". These  books are  a  report on  his  journey through the literary plains of Canadian literature in search  of the worthwhile destination.  He    quotes    with    approval D.  S.  Savage's definition of  the  critical task:  "to  interpret, elucidate and  evalu­ ate   our   literature ... to  define,   defend and    expound   the    tradition."    In   the course  of his  remarks on  Smith,  he says, "We  are  in  the  middle of what  tradition we  have."  If criticism   is  essential to  the formation  of   a   literary   culture,  then  Woodcock  is in  the centre of our  critical  tradition,  not   veering  to  the  fringes  of mythic  generalization or  mystic  outpour­ ings  but  expressing   a  genuine unflinch­  ing  view  of  our   real  achievements illu­ minated  by  a  density  of  reference   from his  own  wide-ranging interests. In  a  re­ cent   essay   Eli   Mandel   called   George Orwell   "astonishing". It  is  obvious  that  Woodcock  is close to Orwell  and  we can expect   him  to  continue to  astonish  and delight   us  through his  editorial acumen, his travels,  his full-length studies  and  his criticism,    of   which    these   three   books give  a  representative  sampling.
 


west coast  review
a quarterly  magazine  of the arts
celebrating its 5th anniversary


publishes

poetry 	 fiction	drama muszc 	photography drawings		essays		remews bibliography
and notes on new books





SUBSCRIPTION RATES, PLUS EXCHANGE:
$    1.50  0 single copy
6.00  0 one year
15.00  0 donor (one year)
30.00  0 sponsor (two  years)
150.00  0 patron (five years)
The names  of our  Patrons, Sponsors and
Donors appear in  each  issue.

NAME   .......................................................... ADDRESS   ---·--·---······-·······--··--··-·····-·-------·------


Address  all  subscriptions, correspondence and manuscripts to

The  Editor, West Coast  Review, Simon Fraser  University
Burnaby    (Vancouver)  413,  B.C. Canada.

A SWAN AMONG GEESE


(;eorge ft'oodcock


ADRIENNE  CLARKSON,  Hunger  Trace. McClelland &  Stewart. $5.95. JOHN  CORNISH, A World  Turned   Turtle. Clarke   Irwin. $4.50. PERCY JANEs,  House of Hate.  McClelland   &  Stewart. $7-95·
RUTH  NICHOLs,  Ceremony  of Innocence. Queenswood House.  $6.oo.


WHILE  EXPERIMENTAL,   NON­ sequential fiction  comes  more  and  more frequently from  Anansi  and  other  Cana­ dian  independent presses, the  old  fiction that   sustains   a  chronological  continuity and  keeps  to  at  least  a  pretense  of  nat­  uralism   still  flourishes  in  a  considerable variety  of forms,  and  probably,  book for book,  maintains  as  high   a  level  of  in­ terest   as -and  often   a  higher   level  of craftsmanship  than-the new open-field  novels  in  which,  as  in  vers libre, success is  difficult  precisely  because  it  seems  so easy to  the  neophyte, who too  often imagines that he has merely to open his typewriter for  the  unconscious   to  direct his fingers  into  greatness.
In any  period,  of course,  the art  which
breaks   barriers    is  that  of   the   experi­ menters -a   tiny   minority  of   them­ and   it   is  these   few   master   innovators who seem  in later  ages to represent  their ages  most  splendidly.  In  fact,  of course, they  represent  the  future,  the  age  that  appreciates  them.   Joyce,   for   example,  belongs far  more  to  the  world  culture of the  I 970s  than   he  did  to  the  Dublin   of
1910,  and   Picasso  far   more  to  the  cos­ mopolitan art  scene  of  the  decades  since World   War   II than   to  the  Paris  thirty  years   before   from    which   he   and   his associates  launched  the   guerilla  war  of cubism.  The artists  who  really  represent

88
 their  age most  intimately are  men  whose reputation  inevitably wanes  as  the  time to which they belong dies away; Arnold Bennett  and  Augustus John  are  examples from  the  past,  and  I  suspect  that, when our  successors  look  back  a generation or so ahead, writers  like  Hugh MacLennan and    Morley    Callaghan  will   have    the same   appearance  of   receding   into   the age   that   bred   them   and   will   be  read mainly  as  period  figures.
The secret  probably is that  those  who are   really   more   deeply   concerned  with forms  and   philosophies of  art -and  so rise above  their  actualities as James  and Proust   and   Joyce  did-are  more  likely to  be of  significance after  they  are  dead than  those  who  have  been  unable  to  de­ tach  themselves from  the fascinating grip of  their  environment. Tolstoy  may  seem the   law-proving  exception,  but   in   his case   a   great    historic  vision-as    with Dostoevsky  a  passionate moral   vision - enabled him  to  transcend the  mere  pat­ tern  of  living  he  portrayed  so  radiantly, and  this  vision  became  the  equivalent of the   Jamesian  aesthetic  and   of  Proust's dream   of the  marriage of  time  and  art.
The four   novels  I am   reviewing   all appear to fit into what one may call the fiction   of  actuality; they  deal   with   the world of here and now in terms of the preoccupations  that    concern  unexperi-

REVIEW ARTICLES



mental  and  Gutenberg-addicted people of the  late  6os and  early  7os. For  reasons  I shall  later  give,  I suspect  that   with  one of these  books appearances are  deceptive and  that  in  its  author we  may  be  meet­ ing   one   of   those    destined    to   be   an originator.
But  let  me  deal   first  with   the  three that  seem to me  to be written mainly  for this  day   and   at   most   for   this  decade. Each   has  its  own   kind   of  competence, yet all are  the  kind  of novels that  usually find  their   way  into   the  basket  most  re­ viewers   keep  for   books  they  can  safely take  round to  the  bookseller  to  earn  an extra    perquisite  because    they   are   not likely ever  to  look at  them  again. Which is not  to say  they  are  not  worth  reading  once.
Consider  Hunger  Trace   by  Adrienne
Clarkson.  It   is  topical    indeed,  in   the sense  that   its  theme   is  the   position   of woman    in    an    acquisitive   world.    Its author  is  too   intelligent  to   follow   the orthodox  Women's Liberation  line,  but the   idea   of   the   constricting  nature  of woman's lot  in  our  society  is clearly  de­ veloped,   and   rather  naively  symbolized in  the  hawk  with  its  marred  claws  who in an  ambiguous way  represents both  the heroine   (Regina)  and  her  lover  (Tiercel who  bears  a  hawk's  name), and  yet per­ haps  projects the  force   that   holds  them together rather   than   imaging  either   of them  individually.  It  is  a  fluent   book, with  a  brightness of  tone,  but  the images it   arouses   in   one's   mind-those   of  a Peter  Newmanish  political   society-are cinematographic in  a rather passe Holly­ wood  style.  Yet   it  is  just  a  shade   too clever  and   too  sensitive   to  be  standard pablum  for  the  housewife. I  found  Hun­ ger Trace  pleasant to  read, in  the  way a Noel Coward play was pleasant to watch,
 but  at  the  same  time  an  experience of little  moment.
There  was  a more  solid  feeling  to  the experience of  reading John  Cornish's A World  Turned   Turtle. Cornish, who  in one   of  his  novels   amusingly   travestied the  Doukhobors and   in  another gave  a rather   Balzacian  peep    into    Montreal middle    class   life,   now   turns  back   to World   War   II for  a  setting and   to  the romance  of pursuit for  a form.  The com­ bination  is one of dangerous possibilities. Such  a novel-set  mostly in the  London of  the  blackout and  of  the  first  days  of peace  in  May,  1945-might  easily  have taken  on  a  Graham  Greenish  tone  or,  if it veered  too  strongly  to  the  comic,  have looked like another Turvey. Mr.  Cornish has  quite  successfully  avoided  both   pit­  falls  in  this  tale  of  an  Esthonian, natur­ alized  into  a  Canadian and   turned into  a  military   policeman,  who   during  the course  of   his  duties   encounters-as   a fugitive   from   the   Continent -his   old schoolmaster  from   Tallinn.  Tief-the schoolmaster -is interned on  the  Isle of Man,  but   Koort-the    MP-becomes obsessed  with  the  idea  of  rescuing   him. Later, when   Koort is ordered to  act  as an  armed  guard  on a train  taking Estho­ nian   D.P's   from   Liverpool to   Tilbury, where  they  will be embarked on  a Soviet steamer   for   a   journey   to   an   unknown fate,  it  is obvious  that   the  situation has become  urgent. With  Tie£,  he  jumps  the
train  and -as  his  world  turns   turtle - becomes the  policeman's opposite, the fu­ gitive,  and  his counterpart, the  criminal, for  to survive  and  disguise  himself  prop­ erly  he must  steal  and  threaten violence.  The two  fugitives  live  for  a  while  on  a deserted   bombsite,   but   Tief   is  caught, and  handed over  to  the Russians. Koort, his   reason   for   rebellion   gone,   behaves

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  increasing foolhardiness until, one evening, he is trapped by his fellow  pro­ vosts on  the  baroque facade  of a London mansion and   falls  to  his  death.  It is a tale  told  with  fine  restraint,  never  veer­ ing  into   melodrama,  never  allowing   its comedy  to  run  out  of  hand,  and  admir­ ably   condensing the   atmosphere  of   a period   that, for  half  the world's   people, is  already  history -a  time  before   they were  born.
Percy  Janes' book, House of Hate, also straddles  the   frontier  between    present and   past; its  action   is  mostly  set  in  a pre- Confederation Newfoundland that has   largely   vanished,  but   at   the   same time- like  A'  World   Turned  Turtle­ it cannot be called  a real historical  novel, for   it   is  not   reconstructing  something outside  the   writer's   experience.  Janes  lived   through   the   world   and   times   of which  he  writes,  just as Cornish lived  as a  soldier  in  wartime London; indeed, in the case  of  Janes   there  is a  peculiar  in­ timacy  to  the  link  between  the  man  and the   book,  for   he   admits   with   unusual frankness that   this  is  a  novel  based  on his own  life. We  are  told  that  the  family split  by mutual detestation  which  figures in  House  of Hate  is a  projection of  the author's own family;  yet the  work  is not in the  strict  sense an autobiography, since Janes   has  changed  and  shifted   and   in­ vented   to  give  it  the  character of  what  he  calls  "a  work  of  art". Art  is a  broad  word,  but  my  definition of it  would  not include  House  of  Hate. It is  a  moving  book  at  the  points  where   the  author is obviously  still  feeling  with  intensity   pas­ sions  that  were  his  own  and   that  shad­ owed  his life,  but  there  is too  much  un­ resolved   raw   material  for   it   to   carry  conviction as  a  novel,  though the  obvi­ ously  autobiographical elements  do  con-

go
 vince-as  autobiography, and  the  book, hybrid   and   clumsy   as  it   is,  has   some value  as a portrayal of a society that  has rarely  yet found  its way into  literature of any  kind.
Now  I  come  to  the  book which  seems
to   me   the   swan   among  this   flock   of worthy   literary geese.  It is Ceremony of Innocence by Ruth Nichols. Ruth Nichols is  a  young   Vancouver  writer   whose   A Walk   out   of  the   World,  written  when she  was  eighteen, was  reviewed   by  Au­ drey  Thomas in  Canadian  Literature 43· According to  the  dust-jacket, Ceremony of Innocence,  though published   later,  is her  first  novel. Whether this  means  that  it  was  written  even   before  A  Walk   out of the  World, or  whether the  latter was classed  as a  romance  and  in  fact  written previously,  is   not   made clear,   but  it  is obvious  from  the   publisher's statements that  both  are  the  works  of a  very  young writer. Yet,  like  its  predecessor   in  pub­ lication, Ceremony  of  Innocence   is  far more    than    a   work   of   promise.   It is achievement -a  work  of  remarkable in telligence,  sensibility  and  formal   power.
Barely   described, Ceremony  of   Inno­ cence  is  the  story  of  a  fantastically pre­ cocious    twelve-year-old    girl,    Marjorie Baldwin,  child  of  a  cold,  vain  and  wid­ owed  father, who  sets  off  to  spend   the summer with   him  on  an  archaeological dig  he is directing on  the  Atlantic coast. She enters a world  of adult strife, for Baldwin's academic associates  on  the  dig are   former  colleagues   and   friends  who now  despise   him.   As  Marjorie  pursues her own literature-drenched fantasy life, writing  her   novels-talented   juvenilia
-and  identifying herself  to  the  pitch  of morbid  horror with  Lady  Jane Grey,  she becomes  aware  of the  complexities of the conflicts   around  her.   She   observes   her

REVIEW ARTICLES



father's moral  degeneration when she is witness  to  his seduction of  an  unwilling girl  student working  on  the  dig;  she  is present  alone with  him when  he collapses and  dies  of  a  heart   attack. And  in  the weeks that  follow  she  gradually and painfully breaks free of her obsessive identification   with    him,    and    accepts, with  fate  only knows what  complications in  the  future, the  surrogate  parenthood of his best pupil  and  most  bitter  critic.
It is all superbly  and  truly  done, with­
out  the  rot of sentimentality, without the acid  of  youthful  cynicism.  Standing on the  divide  between  childhood and  adult­ hood,   Miss  Nichols  has  seen  into  both
 lands  with  an  extraordinary clarity,  and has  brought  them   together into  a  won­ derfully  consistent continent of the mind, credible   in  its  own  terms  and  portrayed with  a  lyrical   delicacy   of  the  kind  one has  rarely  encountered  since  Alain  Four­ nier wrote  Le Grand  Meaulnes.
There is no need  to ask where  Miss Nichols   is  going.   She   has   reached   her own  country of  literature, and  what should interest us now is how she will colonize it. Ceremony of Innocence is a book I shall keep, for I have a strong premonition  its  successors  will  lead   me to read  it again.




OUT OF ORBIT
 


Neil Compton


The   Interior  Landscape: The   Literary  Criticism  of Marshall   McLuhan. Selected, compiled  and  edited  by Eugene  McNamara. McGraw-Hill. $6.95.
Counterblast, by Marshall   McLuhan. Toronto, McClelland and  Stewart. $5.95.


MARSHALL McLuHAN's career as   a   super-celebrity   may    have    been slightly  briefer  than   that  of  the  Beatles, but  it  was  no less spectacular in  its own way. He  rocketed  into astral  eminence as the  top  prophet of  pop  in  1965,  largely on the thrust exerted  by his gnomic handbook Understanding Media   (1964). After  three  or four  years in highly visible orbit   round   our   global   village,   he  has now successfully re-entered the normal academic  atmosphere  and   settled   back into   what   many   of   his  erstwhile   pro­ moters   no   doubt   consider   the   obscure  gravity  of  life  as  a  teacher and  scholar.
A lesser man  than  he could  never  have
carried   it   all   off  so  imperturbably.  It would  be  fascinating to  learn  from  Mc­ Luhan  himself   what   it   is   like   to   be caught    up   in   such   an   uncontrollable
 
cycle  of  events.  He  would   probably  de­ scribe   it   with   the   same   detached   but energetic   interest   that   he  brings  to  bear on  everything  he  writes  about.  Not  for nothing   is  his  favourite hero  the sailor in  Poe's  "Descent into   the  Maelstrom", who  saved   his  life   be   remaining  calm amidst    the    overwhelming    destructive force of the whirlpool.
Though McLuhan seems  to  have  en­ joyed his  celebrity  status,  he is  (as  Tom  Wolfe  discerned) incorruptible. Who can forget  the  vision  of  McLuhan  speaking  for  a  fat  fee  at  a  packagers'  convention and   telling   his  appalled   audience  that  packaging  is on  the  way out  (housewives of  the  future  will   resent  anything  that  inhibits  their  tactile  pleasure  in handling what  they intend  to buy) ? Perhaps auto­  biography   is  also  doomed  in  the  cool,

91

REVIEW ARTICLES



tribal     McLuhanite    tomorrow,   but    I should  at  least  like  to  hear  what  instant fame  amidst   the  lonely  crowd  meant   to a man  whose whole  career  expresses such
 


and
 



BLESS ...
 TIME
&
LIFE

a  longing  for  community.
McLuhan's almost   lustful   urge  to  in­ corporate all  earthly  phenomena in   his theories   has  made him  vulnerable  to  at least one  temptation of intellectual super­  stardom. Publishers   vie  for  the  privilege of  immortalizing  the   least   effusions   of the great  man's  brain. McLuhan's recent books-The  Medium   is  the   Message (with   Quentin  Fiore,   1g67), War  and Peace in  the  Global  Village  ( 1g68)   and Through   the    Vanishing    Point    (with  Harley    Parker,    1g68)  -all suffer    in varying   degrees  from   the  vices of  slick­ ness,  superficiality and  excessive general­ ization.   These  would   be serious  flaws  in books  on   any  subject,  however   trivial; they  are  all  but  fatal   to McLuhan's  cur­ rent   theme,    the   electronic   apocalypse.  Counterblast  is  not  immune  from   these faults,  but  it  is certainly a  cut  above  its immediate predecessors.
The book  has  a  curious  history.  Back in 1954, I paid twenty-five cents for an eighteen-page  fotoprinted  booklet   with the   same   title,   signed   by  the   author. (The  jacket   blurb   of  the   new  volume says Counterblast was conceived twelve years  ago,  but  this  is  clearly  an  error.) In  the  tradition of Wyndham Lewis' famous   magazine,  it  BLASTED and BLESSED a variety  of contemporary phenomena:


Oh    B
L
A
s
T
The   MASSEY  REPORT damp  cultural
igloo for  canadian devotees of

92
 MASSEY-HARRIS farm  machinery,
Canada's
REAL  contribution to  CULTURE.

The   last  few  pages  were  given  over  to a  few  score  short,  pithy  paragraphs  ex­ pressing  what   by  now  have  come  to  be McLuhanite  commonplaces.
I  remember thinking at  the  time  that there  was a conflict  between  the  implied moralism  of Lewis'  BLAST  and  BLESS formula  and   McLuhan's insistence   that a fixed moral  point-of-view is inimical  to good   judgment.  Counterblast  ( 1969)   is ingeniously 	designed 	and 	beautifully printed,  and   costs  twenty-four  times  as much  as  its  modest  predecessor,  but  the discrepancy is still there,  even  though  the text  has  been  brought  up  to  date   (We are  now invited  to BLESS  culture  shock as  dislocation   of  MIND  into   MEAN­ ING; and  BLAST  Sputnik for  enclosing terrestrial NATURE  in  a  MAN-MADE ENVIRONMENT  that   transforms  the evolutionary   process    from    biology    to technology) .  The  commonplaces are  all to  be  found,  better  and   more  fully  ex­ pressed, elsewhere  in  the  master's  works. Old   hands   will  find  them  over-familiar while  newcomers  will probably  find  them merely  confusing.  If the  medium   is  the message,  it  seems  odd  that   McLuhan  is so  keen  on  subverting  most  of  the  ad­ vantages  offered  by the  book form -its orderliness, its capacity for  detail  and  its logical  articulation. He  would  be  the first to  BLAST  someone  who  used  television as  though it  were  only  an  audio-visual book.  Nonetheless,  Counterblast,  (1g6g) is fun   to  glance  through  briefly,  and   is particularly   recommended   for   doctors'

REVIEW ARTICLES



waiting rooms and  ad-agency reception areas.
The fourteen essays  reprinted in  The Interior Landscape belong  to  a  different world.   They   are   a  selection   from   Mc­ Luhan's  best   critical   work   during   two pre-orbital decades, from  1943 to  I962: eloquent  testimony   not  only   to  the  re­ markable consistency  of  his thought since the  earliest  days,  but  also  to  his mastery  of the one essential  art of a good  literary  critic-the  loving  elucidation  of  texts. Those  who,  like  me,  are  sometimes  out­  raged  by  McLuhan's habit  of  using  out­ of-context  bits  of  Shakespeare or  Joyce to support the  most  dubious  propositions will find  the  well-known essays on  Keats (I943),  Hopkins  (I946)   and   Tennyson
( 195 I )  as scrupulously scholarly  as  they
are  textually illuminating.  Only   the  ex­ cerpt  on  Pope's  Dunciad   from  The  Gu­ tenberg   Galaxy    (I 962)   dilutes   its   real insights  with  interpretations wrenched  to fit   the   McLuhanite   dogma,   like   Holy Writ   in  the  hands   of   a  Jehovah's Wit­ ness.
This  is not  the  place  to show  the  con­ tinuity   of   McLuhan's  conservative  and  Catholic principles  throughout his aston­  ishing  intellectual  journey  from  Jacobite and   Chestertonian   agrarianism  to   be-
 come  the  prophet of the  cool  revolution. McNamara  wisely  reprints  the   seminal essay  "An   Ancient Quarrel  in   Modern America" ( 1946)  which  interprets  west­ ern   intellectual  history   in   terms  of   an enduring   opposition   between    "rhetori­ cians"    and    "dialecticians",    from    the  Sophists   and    Socrates  in   fifth-century Athens    to    South  and    North   in    the  twentieth-century  U.S.A.   Few   contem­ porary    readers    well    share   McLuhan's passionate  partisanship  on  behalf  of  the rhetoricians.   On    the   other  hand,  the article  makes  it easier  to understand  how he   came   to   embrace  electronic   tech­ nology so eagerly,  after  Innis  had  shown  him  the role of media  in shaping human culture. In   any  case,  the   only   justifica­ tion a literary  critic  needs  for  his ideas  is that   they  help   him  to  write  good  criti­ cism.  The  superb  essay  on   John  Dos Passos ( I95 I), comparing him  justly  but unfavourably  with   Joyce,   triumphantly demonstrates the  usefulness  of  this  par­ ticular ideological framework to Marshall McLuhan.  Similarly, one  does  not  have to be convinced  by the mild pro-Southern polemics    of   "Edgar  Poe's    Tradition" ( I944)    and    "The   Southern  Quality"
( 1947)  to  appreciate the  way  in  which





RIChaRb asel &  company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW  YORK




93

REVIEW ARTICLES



these  essays clarify  two  main  varieties  of
American experience.
Until I  read  through this collection,  I had   not  realized   how  central   the  meta­ phor  of landscape is in  McLuhan's criti­  cal  vocabulary. He  uses it  to  epitomize six centuries of  literary history:  from  the microcosmic,    analogical   and    symbolic landscapes of   medieval   and   early   Ren­ aissance   literature   (and    some   modern Catholic  writers), to  the  scientific  New­ tonian  particularity of  Thomson, the  in­ terior  psychological landscapes of Words­ worth and  the later  Tennyson,  and  the fragmented   discontinuous  universe    of New  England literature and  the  modern newspaper. Even  if one  rejects  the  Pem­ edy  prescribed by Understanding  Media
 and its successors, this description of our intensifying cultural  incoherence at  least offers  a  basis for  accurate  diagnosis.
According to  The   Gutenberg   Galaxy,
"Schizophrenia may  be  a  necessary  con­ sequence of literacy". It also seems to be a consequence of admiring Marshall  Mc­  Luhan. I  am   not  alone  in  having  pil­ fered  his work  for insights, while  remain­ ing   uneasily  conscious   of  disagreements so  powerful  as  to  be  moral in  their  in­  tensity.    An   inveterate  reviewer    of   his books, I  have  written a number of grudg­ ing  or  ambiguous  notices  over  the  past five or  six years.  It is a  relief  to  be able to end  this one  with  an  unqualified trib­  ute  to  a major literary critic.




QUELQUES ARPENTS DE PAPILLONS
 




W.H.New


D.G.  JONES.   Butterfly  on  Rock.  Toronto.  $7.50.


INSTRUCTORS of  Canadian literature are  occasionally  asked  to name a book that  does for Canada what  The American   Adam   does   for   the   United States,   and   until   recently   there   hasn't been  one.  Now  there   is. That  by  itself could    be   a   short    and   complimentary review  of D.G.  Jones'  Butterfly on Rock. His essay "The Sleeping Giant" has since its  publication in I 965  been  a  standard reference for students, an  illuminating mythopoeic glimpse  of some of  the  tens­ ions that  Canadian writers have expressed in  their   inability  to  define  the  national culture.  Adam,   ark,  and  mountain lurk in Canadian writing as they do in Amer-

94
 ican,  says Professor  Jones,  but  they are  in exile  here; Voltaire's few  acres  of  snow have  expanded  into  more  acres  of  rock and  more  acres  still  of  barren  ground in which  to wander. Canadians have  been colonial   not   just  by  necessity,  he  adds, but  by  choice  too,  and   in  such  a  land­ scape   Adam    has   sought   independence less than  a knowledge he can  never  quite  grasp.
After     the    heavygoing  introduction,
which  is repeated bit  by bit in  the subse­ quent chapters, anyway, the  book  begins with  this  essay and  explores  from  there.  One  of  the  first  propositions is so accur­ ately  simple  that  it sounds like a shout  in

REVIEW ARTICLES



an  empty   room,   but   there has  been  so much  brouhaha about the  Canadian identity void that  shouting is perhaps necessary:

A ... study  of    Canadian   literature ... re­ veals   not    only   the    anxiety  which   results  from  the  lack  of any  clearly defined identity, but   also,  and  sometimes  simultaneously, a confidence that  such   an  identity exists  and  is  to  be  realized.

The "duality reveals  itself in a number  of recurring images" -which  describes  the methodology   of   this    book -and    one therefore   discovers    what    is   Canadian about    Canadian  literature  by   reading what  Canadian  writers have  written.  So far  so good. It is at  the  boundaries where identities always get hazy. Canada has no corner on the  Old  Testament Imagery market, so can  imagery-or anything - specify identity without becoming  rigid? One  of the  certain deaths of literature  is to  enlist  it  in  the  aid  of  political  defin­ ition.   Chinua  Achebe,   for   example,   is least  successful  when   (in  A  Man   of the People)   he  gets  caught up  in  the  abuses and  allegations of  the  Nigerian pre-war  political   scene.  Similarly,  though  Hugh  MacLennan's    aims    are    laudable,   the weakest   parts   of  Barometer  Rising   are those  that  self-consciously   celebrate nat­  ional   unity   and   do   not   subjugate the sentiment in the interests of the particular characters.
To  exploit  separatism in fiction  for the sake of the cause  rather than the idea, to arouse   a  specific  political  action   rather than  to explore  a situation, risks a parallel literary  disease;    good   political    science may  result,  or  possibly  an  astringent utopian satire,   but   the  chances of  good social  fiction  are  remote. War and  Peace of  course  renders society  admirably, but it  transcends it  as  well.  It is  not  bound
 by  the  political   framework  in  which   it finds its source.  And in Canada, where traditions  are   built   by   absorption, the wilful imposition of a  boundary on  iden­ tity  seems strangely paradoxical.  By  this I mean  that in the  past  there weren't any Canadians;   Canadians    became.  That ought   to  be  an  ongoing  thing.   Susanna Moodie has become  part of  the Canadian literary  tradition not  in  what  she  wrote, but  in  the  subsequent  response  to  what she wrote.  (Margaret  Atwood's poems  in The   Journal  of  Susanna Moodie are  the  most  accomplished literary expression   of that  response  so  far-and  are  "Canad­ ian". A subsequent "Canadianism" would presumably absorb  Moodie  AND  Atwood and   possibly  something  else.)   Mrs. Moodie's sense of discovery-both of Canada  and   of  exile -was   that   of   a dispossessed  Englishwoman.  In   Butterfly on Rock, observing Moodie in the context of writing  since Confederation, that ambi­ valent   discovery    has   also   become   the  classic Canadian  syndrome.
Douglas  Jones  offers  comments on  lit­ erature, not  politics,  and  interpretations of   imagery   rather  than   judgments   of literary  value.  Adam  in  the  waste  wood,  Irving  Layton  marking   "The  birth    of tragedy",   Duddy   Kravitz   shouting  "I don't care", and  Margaret Avison's  "Ex­ porters.     Glutting     us:      with     Danish spoons"  are   all   in   his  view  images  of exile, demonstrations that  Eden  was never apprehended in Canada. It is an  import­ ant  observation, for  it  helps explain why utopian visions  are  so  rare  in  Canadian writing   and   why  fiction  here   (as  com­  pared   to   the   freewheeling  imaginative movements of   Australian  novels,  say)   is so cabined  in scope and  so constrained by uncertainty.    If   we   accept    the    book's premises,  the  limitation on  vision  occurs


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



because  our  communal imagination  dic­ tates it. Condemned into  a world  of  harsh realities,   our   minds   (enlivened   outside Eden)  are  dimly  conscious  of a diff·erent world  now  in  need  of  being  named, and characters  and   personae -all   in   their own  little  worlds-try to locate  it.
Jones  takes  his initial idea  in  five  re­
lated   directions. First:  given   Adam   in exile,  where   is  Eve?   Living  in  Canada, too,  and dejected, apparently-disguised as Hagar Shipley  and  Mrs. Bentley. They await  arousal but  guard  against  it. They fear  the  wilderness. They  exude  the "garrison  culture"  they   represent. The "world  of   appearances"  is  in   conflict with  the  "world of spontaneous feeling"; man   finds   himself   in   competition with land,  not in harmony with it, and  a sense of exile is the  natural outcome. It is both the  "condition and  reflection"  of his "unconscious", "irrational",  and   "dem­ onic"    yearnings.  As   Patrick   Anderson puts  it:  "the   land   was  and  the  people did  not  take  it."  Our souls thus remained unclaimed,  and   the  Jungian possibilities of such  a dilemma  become  manifest.
For   a  pursuit  of  the  implications  of such   an  antagonism  between   heart   and mind, between  love and  law, Jones  turns to  Leacock,   MacLennan,  Pratt,  Grove, and  Cohen. He  finds  again  what  he calls an  Old  Testament insistence  on  control­ ling the  impulsive wilderness through the force  of  will  and   law.  In  "Brebeuf   and his Brethren" he finds  North America  as "a  spiritual challenge" to Europe's Chris­ tian  idealism. European culture extended into   North  American  therefore is in  its way  utopian -and  Canadian  "utopias" thus   appear as Presbyterian garrisons, commercially - conscious   bishoprics,   and the  industrial splendour of "The City  of the   End    of   Things".  They    ironically

g6
 invert  the intent of the  utopian vision, reducing the  ideal  into  the  "reality" of material "success". The mind  that  dicta­ ted the "ideal" reveals  its limitations, and  the   man    s·eeking  his   identity  through reason  must  tum to seek out  the  shaman to find  "a  new  language of prayer". The irony  of  D.C.  Scott's "Onondaga Mad­ onna",  showing  by means  of a Christian icon    the   destruction   of   a   people    by Christian culture, evokes exactly  this kind of situation. Perfection turns  out  to seem imperfect; Eden  still  hasn't been  appre­ hended.
For   Roberts and   Lampman the  diffi­
culty  then   was  to  enunciate the  appre­ hension    they   did   have.    If  earth  was ambiguous, often  hostile,  how  could  one love   what    wasn't  even   liked,   without appearing at  least  to .escape into  evasive reminiscence or  linguistic evasion? Some  surrender  seems  mandatory to  reach  the next  plateau.  Pratt, says Jones,  managed to   delight  in   Leviathan;  Birney   could not; Roberts  in  his  animal stories  found  "natural   law"   rigorously    positive    and beautiful;  Macpherson  recommends joy:


The  Lord   that  made  Leviathan made  thee Not  good,  not  great,  not  beautiful, not  free, Not  whole  in  love, not  able  to forget
The   coming  war,  the  battle  still  unmet.

But   look:   Creation  shines ...


In  the  "But" is the  heart's response  to negation, the  mind's arbitrary erection of alternate possibilities,  and  the  stoic  insis­ tence  on  stubborn endurance. It  carries  all  the  force  and  all  the  weakness  that  it does in  life;  there  is little  logic to it, and  it  always   proves  effective.   "To  fish  for the   glory",  says   Jones,   drawing   upon  Sheila  Watson's The  Double Hook, "is to catch the  darkness too."  Or  in  the  terms

REVIEW ARTICLES



Layton  uses, in  the  poem that gives Jones' book  its  evocative though cryptic  title:

There  is no  death in  all  the  land, I heard   my  voice  cry;
And   I   brought  my   hand    down   on   the butterfly
And  felt  the  rock  move  beneath  my hand.

The  Hidden  Mountain, The  Sacrifice, and   The   Watch   that   Ends  the   Night strive  to  explain a  similar   situation. In death is life;  in  sacrifice  is discovery;  in the   reality   is  the   shadow  and   in   the shadow  is reality.  Such  paradoxes are the stuff  of  myths   and   exactly   the  kind  of conundrum  that   myth   criticism   happily expounds. Butterfly  on  Rock  is a fascin­ ating  book, but  like the ideals it describes, it possesses actively  the  limitations of its method. Jung  makes   it  into   the   book, Freud  is inferentially acknowledged, and Darwin is  left  out  in  the  cold,  yet  it  is Darwinian theory   (as  Sandra Djwa   has recently  argued in  her  work  on  Roberts, Pratt, and  Birney)   that  has furnished the imagery   and   the   outlook   of   so  much Canadian  poetry.    The  book   of   course does  not  attempt to fasten  every  door;  it aims  if  possible  to  open  them  instead - to suggest  ways of  reading further rather than   the  way   to  read.   It explores   the imaginative  life   of   a   people,    not   the historical framework in which  they lived. And  it  looks  at  the  recurrence of  parti­ cular   image   patterns as  the  key  to  that  life.
 What   a  reader should   not  go  to  the book  for,  then,  is  a  historical survey  of Canadian writing; it  isn't   there.   Nor  is there  mention of every  significant writer, and  it is extraordinary to find that  Lowry, Livesay,  and   W.W.E.  Ross  go  unmen­ tioned  altogether, and   that   Richter and P.K.  Page  get  the  scant   reference  they do.   But  for   the   writers  that   the   book mainly   does  consider-Anderson,  Avi­ son,  Birney,  Bowering,   Buckler,   Callag­ han,  Carman, Cohen, Grove,  Lampman, Layton,  Leacock,  MacEwen, MacLennan, Macpherson,   Newlove, 	Pratt, 	Purdy, Roberts, Sinclair Ross,  Roy,  D.C.  Scott, Smith,  and  Souster  (a substantial list)  - there  is ample  recompense.
As it  is not  a  book  of explication, the reader never gets to grips with individual novels and  poems as separate entire units. Except  in  the final chapter -so curiously tentative, compared to the  others,  and  so like   an   essay  from   a   book   yet   to   be written rather than  the conclusion of this one -the author discusses imagery with­ out  investigating an  author's  success  or failure in  his  use  or  his  technique. But that  is not  his intention.  The fragments of  prose  and  verse  are  integrated into  a different  kind  of  scheme that   strives   to elucidate the  sensibilities  that   motivated them   in  the  first  place.  It is  a  difficult  rock   to   enliven,    and    Professor    Jones' arresting   attempt  to   do   so  will   prove continuingly suggestive  to readers  who touch  it  with  their  minds.











97





INVISIBLE EDITING

Canada  First. Ed. Peter  Anson. Anansi.  $1.95·

THE EDITOR of Canada First; A Mare Usque  Ad  Edmonton does his best to be invisible. In  his introductory  note to this collection  of   19  new  Canadian    poets, Peter  Anson  says, "An  anthology,  as  I see it, is much  less like a collage than  it is like a Tarot pack, intelligible only in terms of one's relation to the individual cards.  My suggestion therefore  is to give each poet his territory  and let the borders evolve as they will."
It is all very well to let the reader  re­ late  to individual  cards  but  one  expects some  order   to  the  deck.  Canada   First lacks even alphabetical order. An anthol­ ogy needs a theme, or a subject, or at the least   a   chronology.   Anson  says,  "The  poems in  this  book  have  been  handled, not  processed, i.e.  they are  here  because a  human   being,  eminently   fallible,  an editor,   laid  them   here."  But  it  is  not enough  to collect a group of poets east of Edmonton  and  expect  us to  be  grateful their  work  has  been  touched  by human hands.
To  use Anson's metaphor,  the borders
of  the  poems are  to evolve as they will, or  to  be more  apt,  willy nilly. Leaving poets to their  border  defences sometimes amounts  to  editorial  desertion.  With Robert  Flanagan's  poems, for example, it is difficult to tell where to begin and end. If the anthology is to be a pack, it might

g8
 be useful to identify  the  cards. There  is no clue in the display of poems on white space -or  for  that  matter  in the  poems themselves. The  reader  deserves to know when to stop and start.
Each poet's work is prefaced by a brief
self-portrait,  "edited  for space,"  the  edi­ tor  says. They  should  be  edited  for  lu­ cidity.   Consider   Jon    Whyte's:    "Born Banff,  Ides   March    1941;   reborn  June
23,   1968.  Attended    U.   of   Alta,   dis­
tended Stanford. Columnist Summit News,  Banff."  The   "reborn" and  "dis­ tended"  smack of an  inside  joke. Added to    disorganization,  inside   jokes   might have made  Canada  First a full-scale dis­ aster.  Fortunately, the  poems themselves avert  calamity.
Dave  Solway  celebrates  "The   Crystal
Theatre," a decrepit  movie-house with "sprung rhythm seats" and a "cargo of visceral nightmares." Along with Coca Cola,   the   Theatre  dispenses  "mustard and relish images." A run-down movie house, then, is our age's Crystal Palace. "God   knows  it's  the  best  we  can  do," Solway concludes.
William Bauer's amusing series of nine
poems deals with Everett Coogler, a greengrocer   "on   Highway   43"   near   a place called Hamsterville. The series sug­ gests  Edgar   Lee  Masters'  Spoon   River Anthology  but Coogler's  vantage point is in life, not death.  In  "Modern  Fame  As She Is Known  In Hamsterville," Coogler chases   some   vandals    who   have   just wrecked his vegetable stand, "A half mile down the highway/ Shrieking like a ghost indeed,/'Aphids!' /'Aphids!'/'Aphids!'"
Frederick  Louder's  fine  poem "Creve­
cour"  reads like some Celtic  legend with its sea and  fog, young  girls, and  "eagles that  hide in the mist." But Louder  is also capable  of  perpetrating a  poem  with  a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



title  like  "Diaploos:  III   Pre-Cambrian
Vortices."
In  his two poems, Victor  Skretkowicz, Jr.,  creates  a  kind  of  Alice in  Wonder­ land.  Alice is called Annie and  her won­ derland  an  orphanage  peopled  by char­ acters like Thomas Trouble,  Lily Laugh, Mr.  Lion, as well  as  ju-jube  and catalpa trees.  Since  catalpas   have  heart-shaped  leaves and trumpet-shaped flowers they're good to  have in poems.
D.  L.  Lamothe   is,  says  his  preface, "trying   to  steer  poetry  away  from  the written  page, into  a sound  thing  with  a light  jazz background." Some of his lines do sing, but is hard  to tell what  the first line of "Triangles for  Grace"  has to do with sound,  or  jazz, or  poetry.  "so 2nite
i  dru  rations  but  triangularly   2 say the least."  It may  be  Canada  First's worst line.
The opening group of poems in the anthology   may   be  the   best.  They   are written by the only woman included, Paulette  Jiles. She has cunning  and  con­ trol.  Married   life  does  not  fare  well in "He  Beats  Her  Off  With  A  Rake,"  in which   a   husband   introduces   his  wife thus:

She's  loving,  she's  cultured, she's  true! She always  knows  just what  to do!
Her  idea  of a good  time
Is  to go out  and  dine
With  Carmichael and  Georges  Pompidou!

Almost  alone   among   the   poets,  she knows how to use rhyme. At times the images  come  on  with  the  white-hot  in­ tensity  I associate  with   the   late  Sybil Plath.  In  "Dallas":

I am dirty,  I am  comfortable, I have  my boots  on.
Sliding  down  onto  the  blank  and  shadeless plains
That burn  and  burn  like chili  peppers,
We are  deadheading for  murderous Dallas.
 Miss Jiles falters  when  her images  be­ come  too   congested   as  in   "The   Tin Woodsman."  The  woodsman  decides  to "settle/In the  shadow  of  this red  rock/ and  be metal."  T.  S. Eliot  managed  the red  rock  image  better  in  "The Waste­ land."  But  it's  to  Anson's  credit  as  an editor that he puts her poems first. Apart from his own note  and  the  act  of selec­ tion, it's the only sign of his presence.
Next year House of  Anansi will bring out an anthology to include the West of British Columbia. Its editor should realize he's  not  a  Council  of  Versailles  meting out "territory," but a force in making poems  cleaner,  stronger,  clearer.  Along with  respecting  poems  as  parts,  he  will pour  them  into  a  greater   mould.  That will be a book.
FRASER SUTHERLAND


A KINGDOM
OF PRIESTS

JOHN  eosiN, A  Collection  of  Private   Devo­ tions.  Edited   by  P.  G.  Stanwood  with  the assistance  of  Daniel  O'Connor.  Oxford.

DEVOTIONAL WRITING is not, at present, a form of literature standing  high in public esteem. All the  more  reason  to welcome this scrupulously edited and  beautifully produced  volume.  Succinctly  and  mod­ estly, without  calling attention to its ap­ paratus, it furnishes everything the reader needs for full understanding and appreci­ ation   of  the   text.   Between   them,   the introduction  and  notes point us back into the  history of  devotional  writing,  estab­ lish Cosin as  a credible  historical  figure, and  show  how  in  later   years  his  book influenced  the changing  text of the Book of Common Prayer.


99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



John  Cosin was born in 1595 and died in 1672. The  period of the Civil War coincided  with  his prime  of life and  he felt the full force of Puritan disapproval. While  Master  of Peterhouse, he was  im­ peached  by  Parliament  and  had  to  flee from   Cambridge.   He  appears   to  have gone  into  hiding  but  is known  to  have reached  the safety of Paris by  I645· Here he  served  as  chaplain   to  the  Anglican Royalists. Soon after  the Restoration,  he became Bishop of  Durham and as one of the  most  able  survivors of the  Jacobean Church, he exercised great influence.
In  coming  to grips  with such  a work as this, we must remember that prayer, in the  seventeenth  century,  could  be a way of  life  as  well  as  a  form  of  worship. Defoe, whose fiction is more real than actuality, has his Puritan Crusoe compile reflections which  read  like responses:  "I am singled out and separated, as it were, from all the world, to be miserable. But I am  singled  out,  too,  from  all  the  ship's crew,  to  be spared  from  death; and  He that  miraculously  saved  me from  death can deliver me from this condition."  And further on  we find  Crusoe, in  the  midst of his labours, engaged in prayer and meditation almost as a matter  of course. If such was the attitude of a solitary inde-
 pendent  of  the  period,  it  is easy to  see that in England, in the context of the Established    Church,  a   work   such   as Cosin's could simultaneously embody the warmth  and  flexibility of private  prayer and   the  immemorially   accepted  frame­ work of canonical  hours  and  feasts, and that, far from being a piece of  ecclesiasti­ cal  manipulation or  anti-Puritan propa­ ganda,  it  could  be,  and  in  Cosin's  case was, a labour  of  love, a willing offering.
It is not easy, by any intellectual  or analytical   process,  to  arrive   at  the  ra­ tionale  of such  a work  as this. It visibly embodies  several   kinds  of   overlapping  sequences:  the canonical hours carry one through  the cycle of day and  night; fixed and  movable feasts account  for the cycle of the year; the life of Christ is condensed into  a  single  annual round.  In  addition  to  these  cyclical  celebrations,  natural  or imposed,  there  are  saints'  days  that  ap­ pear  to  follow  no  natural   pattern, and such  a  wild  oddity  as  Powder  Treason Day on  November 5th,  to commemorate  the foiling of Guy Fawkes.
There  is, rather  surprisingly,  no logical
progression, no progressive revelation or arrangement of ideas from simple to complex.  At the same time, this book, in common  with  others  of  its  kind,  has  a




Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever  you need

BOOKS


100
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



function  beyond   that   of  reminding the user  at  intervals of  what  he  is supposed to  believe.  To  the  unsympathetic reader, the pages may seem stacked  with tedious formulae: "Let thy merciful ears, 0 Lord, bee open to the prayers of thy humble servants.... "
But  all  such  considerations are  super­
ficial,  like  the  belief  that   Tudor  prayer books  were  designed   simply  to  keep  the lower   orders    in   their    proper   stations. What really emerges  from  John  Cosin's pattern of  devotion is the  desire  to  wait upon   God,  in  a  purposeful rather than spasmodic way.  In  this  context, the  for­ mulated petitions and  confessions become a   means   of  conducing,  by  a   common  wording,  to   the   communion   of   saints. Private devotion, on  the  same  pattern as public  devotion, gives access to an eternal  world,  to a kingdom  of priests.
From   linguistic and   literary points  of
view, the  book is important as part  of the stream  that  flowed  into  the  Book of Common  Prayer.   The spoken   language was enriched with  phraseology from  pro­ phets,   psalmists   and   evangelists.   These  have    echoes    into    our    own   usage   in Canada, "from sea  to  sea  and  from  the river to the ends of the earth."

ROY  DANIELLS


A NARROW RANGE

JOHN   METCALF, The   Lady   Who   Sold   Furn­
iture. Clarke,  Irwin. $4.95

ON  THE DUST-JACKET of  this  collection of  six  stories,   the   publisher  has  repro­ duced  the somewhat hyperbolic comment by  Saturday  Night, that  "John  Metcalf  is as brilliant a  master of  the  short  story form  as  Maugham or  Chekhov." Such  a
 comparison is unfortunate, for  it  implies the  possession of wit,  ingenuity and  nar­ rative   power   to  a  degree  certainly   not achieved  in  these  stories.  Metcalf's range is   much    more    limited,   and    there    is nothing  in  this  book  to suggest that  he is a writer  of great  vision or originality. But within  his  narrower  range,  Metcalf  does have  something to  say, and  says it  quite  well.
The  title story is the best one of the collection,  and  through a series of lightly comic  episodes  it  examines the  fears  and frustrations  attendant   upon   love.   The plot  follows  the  stages  of  a  love  affair between a professional housekeeper in her early    forties,     and     a    young    English teacher.  Jeanne is insecure,  moody and irritable; she is conscious  of the encroach­ ments  of  age,  of  her  boniness  and   her sagging  breasts,  but she struggles to main­ tain  her  freedom, even  though that  free­  dom is only an illusion. Her lover, Peter, is also unhappy  and  unsure of himself,  and  through his relationship with Jeanne finds temporary  relief  from  the  horrors of  his elementary   school   and   its   mad    head­ master.   Their  affair  is  punctuated  by Jeanne's abrupt departures from  her  job;  when  she is short  of money,  or when  the law seems about to catch  up with her, she sells   all   her   employer's furniture  to   a dealer,  and  breaks  open  the  meter  before she leaves. Then she adopts  another alias, and applies elsewhere for a housekeeping position. Her  life is one continuous flight; and  in  this  precarious mode  of existence the  author has  found   an  apt  symbol  for what  most  people  experience in early middle  age,  the  fear  of physical  and spiritual stagnation. In  contrast to  this rather sombre  theme, the tone of the nar­ rative  is light  and  ironic throughout, and  sometimes  there  is a note of high  comedy

101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of a characteristically English  kind,  such as in  the  scenes  describing the  activities of   Mr.    Arkle   and    his   crew,   as   they remove  everything saleable  from  a house. The   humour  of   these   episodes   resides primarily  in  the   language; like  Harold Pinter,  John Metcalf   has  a good  ear  for the  peculiarities of  the  English  working­ class  voice,  and   he  uses  dialogue   effect­ ively as a means  of  emphasising a comic situation. While  his  henchmen are  load­  ing the  van  with stolen  chairs and  tables, Mr.  Arkle  lectures Peter  on  the  decline  of quality workmanship and the dishonest  methods   of    modern   furniture-making. " 'You  remember,' said  Mr.  Arkle, prod­  ding  Peter  in  the  chest,  'you  just keep  it in mind.  Your  soft woods comes and  goes but  your  mahogany goes on  for ever.' "
The five  stories   which   make   up   the second   half   of  this  book  are   all  much shorter  than  the  title  story, less ambitious and   less  interesting.  Here   Metcalf   also deals with  fear  and  insecurity,  mainly through a study  of the experiences of children. In  "Early Morning Rabbits" he explores the feelings of a young boy who shoots his first  rabbit, and  is suddenly confronted by the  violence  and  brutality of  life  in  nature. "The Tide  Line"  is a story on a similar  theme, also conveyed through  the  consciousness  of  a  child; a boy wandering alone  by the  cliffs suffers nameless fears when he comes upon the decaying   corpse  of  a  seagull,  and   hears the  "iron  cry"   of  a  live  bird   wheeling above  him.  These and  the  remaining stories  are  all  well  executed, and  can  be praised  for what  critics like to call "craftsmanship"; but  they lack impact, perhaps because  too much  of the author's energy  has  gone  into  the  e::>cecution,  and not enough into  developing the substance of the  story.  The last  story  of the  coiiec-

102
 tion,   "Dandelions",  is  a  case  in   point. It presents a  day  in  the  life of an  aging bookseller   whose  early   dreams  of   anti­ quarian romance have  petered out into  a dull,  routine existence.  The  scene  moves from   the   monotony  of  his  shop  to  the  monotony  of   his   home.   However,  the boredom of  this  life  is  perhaps too  weii conveyed, for   the  reader  is soon  bored  himself   by   what   turns  into    a   tedious character  sketch,  which   seems  to  hover on  the  edge  of  significance without ever achieving it.   Chekhov  and   Maugham, different as  they  may  be,  both  give  the reader   good  stories,  and  hold  our  atten­ tion  as  much by  narrative interest   as  by skilful  composition. The   trouble   is  that  too  many  of  Metcalf's stories  are  merely skilful.  Only  in "The Lady  Who  Sold Furniture", with  its  witty  plot  and  per­ vasive  irony,   does  he  really  succeed  in engaging  our   interest   in   his  characters and   arousing  our   curiosity   about  their  fates.
HERBERT  ROSENGARTEN



STARRING LEACOCK

ELIZABETH  KIMBALL, The  Man  in the  Panama Hat:   Reminiscences of My  Uncle. Stephen Leacock. Toronto:  McClelland and  Stewart,
1970.  $6.so

ELIZABETH KIMBALL's The  Man in the Panama  Hat  promises  a very  special interest: subtitled "Reminiscences of  My Uncle, Stephen Leacock", the book seems likely   to   provide  the   kind   of  intimate detail which has always seemed to me conspicuously absent from  the published material on Leacock. Oh,  we know about his tattered gown,  his classroom  manner, his  passion  for  bass fishing.  But  we have

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



not  known   how  he  felt  about   his  ne'er­ do-well   father,  how   his  marriage  func­ tioned, what  sort  of  relationship he  had with  his son. On  his intimate relationships in  particular, the  record  is oddly  silent.
In a sense these  things  are  none of our damn business  anyway: but  in Leacock's case  the  work  is so enigmatic and  tant­ alizing  that   one  can  hardly avoid  curio­ sity. When  he fiercely  denies  that Charles  Dickens   philandered-despite  evidence  to   the   contrary  which    he   must   have known -one   senses   a   note   of   special pleading. Leacock felt  strongly  about  his father, but   he  says  only  that   his  father  left home  in 1887,  never  to return. Other sources   report   that   Stephen  drove   his father to  the  station, telling  him  that  if he  ever   came  back  Stephen  would   kill him.  What  caused  this  depth of feeling? What was Leacock's childhood really like? We  have  had   only  the  rumours-and, worst  of   all,  the   rumours are  rich  and provocative.
The strength of Mrs. Kimball's book is that   she  does  cast  some  light   on  these matters. Here is the  only  published   hint that  Leacock's sexual  life was in the  least irregular, for  instance, and  perhaps the finest  passage  in  the  book  is  Mrs.  Kim­ ball's  reconstruction, based  on  the family memories  and   other  evidence, of   Peter Leacock's  last   days  at   the  family  farm
-days when  young  Stephen saw  his brothers, his sisters and  even his beloved mother subjected to  physical  abuse,  cul­ minating in  a  horrible night  when  Lea­
cock pere threatened to stab  his wife, and
young Stephen had  to drive her to the security  of a neighbour's house. Here  is Leacock  in  a furious temper, roaring for
 a  bottle  opener and,  when   provided  by little  Betty Burrowes  (later  Kimball) with a corkscrew,  hurling it  the  full  length  of the verandah while  bellowing  to his sister "Daisy, you have  raised  an idiot."
A good deal of such material makes  the
book required reading for Leacock enthu­ siasts,  and   Mrs.   Kimball  also   provides  considerable background on  the  Leacock family,  its  character and  its  values.  Un­ fortunately,  however,    the    amount   of family material distinctly overshadows the reminiscences of   Stephen   Leacock,   and  Mrs.  Kimball's excessive attention to  her own  feeling  about   the   family   and   her own  childhood seems at once sentimental and  self-indulgent. The reader  suffers  at times from  an  uneasy fear  that  he has blundered into  a family  reunion in which few   of   the   participants  are   known   to him,  and   all  of  them   are   engrossed   in topics  of  little  interest   to  him.   Leacock was a member of what  is evidently  an interesting  and   mildly  eccentric  family, no doubt. But the details  of the life of the extended Leacock  family are of limited relevance   to  the  character and  achieve­ ment   of  Stephen   himself -and,   to   be blunt,  of  limited  interest  to anyone  out­  side the family  circle.  A good  deal  of the book  is  a  kind   of   print   equivalent  of home  movies.
Nevertheless, for  all its flaws, the  book does cast a more intimate light on our greatest  humorist than anything else available; it will continue to be an invalu­ able  source.  Home movies,  yes:  but  how many   home   movies  star   Shephen  Lea­  cock?
DONALD CAMERON

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE PARADOX OF LIFE

JANE  RULE.  This Is Not  For You. Doubleday.
$6.95
As   DID   The   Desert  of the  Heart,  Jane Rule's second novel portrays homosexual love, the possibility and morality of its fulfilment.  It   investigates the    conse­ quences  of  a  choice  made   by  Katherine George,  the narrator, to resist an intimate life  with  Esther  Woolf,  whose innocence leads  her  progressively  into  unsuccessful relationships with  men  who  fail  to  offer either   heterosexual    balance    or    moral reality.    In    the   end,   Esther    enters    a cloistered  convent  and  Kate,  resigned  to her  own  tenuous martyrdom, accepts  the limited  "concept of self-sufficiency"  as a welfare  administrator in  Greece.
Before  I flesh out  this  synopsis  let  me say that  This  Is Not For You  is an  excel­ lent  novel  written with  classic  talent  and  intelligence. What obsesses  the  author is the  theme  of paradox, and  to appreciate that,  one   has   to   value   the  subtext   as much    as   the   supple   style   it   enriches.  What is  morality?  Can  the  paradox of life  be  resolved  by  anything other   than  truth to one's  own  feelings?  But  how, in what   circumstances,    are    these    to   be trusted? And  will they  then  conflict  with morality?
Consider  Kate,  a   half-breed Indian and  a lesbian.  Not too close a look reveals the  extent  of  her  paradoxical nature: a name   half-way  between   two  genders,   a racial    background  at   once   divided, a female  sex male  in  its  appetite. She  is a bastard, moreover, raised  by a family  not her  own.  As does Evelyn  Hall  in  the  first novel,  Kate uses the  image  of Cain  and Abel to contend (in a sermon  she delivers


104
 with Esther before her graduation from college   and    the   Church)   that    within each  of  us is both  "the betrayer and  the betrayed", in  other words,  both  initiator and  victim  of  an  inescapable destiny.  At the same time, however, that destiny paradoxically requires a choice: in it lies the frustration of being  human, and  a lesbian,  in  an  illogical  world.
Importantly, Kate's choice  is  one  she must   continue to  make   throughout the years  of   the    1950s   her   story   recounts. Since  their   days  as  roommates together at  college,  Kate has  consistently   chosen not  to admit her  love to Esther,  let alone fulfil  it  in  a  physical  way.  In  this  refusal rests  her  central story,  addressed to,  but not  meant  for,  Esther. Certainly Kate's reluctance as "a  moral  primitive" would scarcely justify her choice when she is pragmatic  elsewhere in  satisfying  her sexual    needs    with    either    a    married woman, an  aging   spinster, or  a  Negress in   London  who   breaks   her   nose   and knocks out two front teeth. Rather the character of Esther is the  key to the complexity of  Kate's  sacrifice.
From  Kate, Esther earns  the  nickname "little dog"  because  of  her  blind  loyalty, her  tendency to  walk  a  step  behind, her penchant for  dragging home   junk.  Out of  Kate, she  fashions   rather  a  goddess figure during their  college relationship, translating "unkind satire  into  good judgment ... bad   temper  into   righteous indignation ... defensive arrogance into natural  superiority." Throughout  the novel,   in   America   and    England  and Spain, Kate lays bare  for  us Esther's inherent innocence and  therefore  imper­ ceptiveness.   For   the   most   part,  Esther  chooses  to  express  herself  as  a  sculptor, to offer  herself  up  to  a  bohemian life, to men   like   Christopher   Marlowe Smith,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fond  of obscenities and  father of two children; or  Charlie, a  drug addict with three   wives   and   a   "creative  morality" which   justifies  anything including theft. From  these she enters  into  marriage, then divorce   from   a  man   she  discovers  im­ potent, until  a final  choice  lifts her  from a   disordered   life   of   messy   flats   and tangled   affairs,  into  a  religious  order  of nuns.  More or  less a  failure in  the  eyes of her  friends and  wealthy family, Esther  becomes,  at   least  in   her   own   innocent and   naive   vision,  fulfilled.
I think  the  ultimate paradox of Rule's first  novel  somewhat limited   her  success in   r 964.  That  homosexual love  was  a doubtful means  to salvation because morality appeared  relative to  convention rather than  to  love:   this  didn't convince me  as  altogether  inevitable in  terms  of the choice  made  by her liberated main character, Evelyn  Hall.  The nature of the paradox  in   her  second   novel  is  funda­ mentally different and  involves  free  will. Although  convention  might   appear  to limit   Kate's  morality in  the  same  way, here  it gets beneath a superficial  concept, until   one   realizes  what   motivates Kate isn't  the ingrained morality of society and  religion    (more   important  in   the   first novel), but   an  archetypal  morality, re­ fusal  of  one  human being  to  risk injury of  another   (yet  in  this  novel  a  paradox because  the  injury is an  inevitable one). I believe  the  tension  and  success of This  Is Not  For You  lies in  the  artistic inevi­ tability of Kate's choice  tempered by this morality.
In  regard to  Esther's happiness,  "risk­ ing  failure  is  less  terrifying"   for   Kate "than   risking    success."    Although   she realizes she has only  to ask for  the other's love, she  chooses  never  to  force  her  will upon    Esther  who   must   establish    "the
 freedom   to  choose"   her   own  salvation. That the  latter expresses  her  willingness on  one  occasion   to  let  Kate have   her, only  sharpens  our   awareness  of  Kate's self-denial.   In  Esther's impulse to  con­ tradict her established heterosexual nature rests more  an  overture of  generosity  than  a  choice  true   to  her  own  character : to take  Esther   for  her  own  would  involve a   responsibility   Kate   hasn't  a   human right  to  assume.  And  so she  damns two ways, frustration gives way to resignation. Her   refusal  to  accept  Esther is  her   be­ trayal  of  that  woman   to  a  world  she  is incapable   of    handling,   but    also   the betrayal   of   herself  and   love  to  a  sterile martyrdom.
While  the  first  novel  seemed  too  auth­ orial,   and   lacked   humour  to  undercut situations not  effectively  conceived, Jane Rule's  latest  work  leaves author in  wings (the   first   person    being   ideal   for   this writer),   and    weaves   an   adroit   irony which   cauterizes   theme.   While   I  have done  slight  justice  to  the  secondary rela­ tionships  which  counterpoint the  princi­ pal  one  here,  I·  hope   at   least   to  have suggested  a  little  of  the  novel's  profun­ dity,  its  acute  humanism.
KEATH   FRASER


ON THE VERGE

***** ERIC ROss.  Beyond  the  River  and  the Bay.  University  of  Toronto Press. $8.50.  This is a book by an  imaginary author-Ian Alex­ ander   Bell  Robertson-who  lived    (the   real author will have  us accept)  in  the  early  nine­ teenth  century  and  prepared  from  documents then  available   a  description  of   the  Canadian Northwest  that  would  be  useful  to prospective settlers   interested   in   the   Earl   of   Selkirk's  colony on  the  Red  River.  One  doubts  if many settlers  would  be  as  sophisticated as the  read­  ers for  whom  fictitious  Mr.  Robertson   writes, since he  discourses  in  depth on  the  peoples  of


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the   Northwest,  on   fur   trade,   transportation, the geographical regions, as well as on the prospects  for  agriculture and  other  industries; one  would  think  his readership more  likely to be  among  daring speculators  or  roving  schol­ ars   than   among   the  Hebridean   crofters  and Swiss  ex-soldiers  Selkirk   collected.  But   such pretensions aside,  the  idea  is an  original  one which   enables   real   author  Ross  to  assemble in  interesting  form  all  the  information  likely to  be  available   to  an  enquiring man  in  Lon­ don   at   the   time.   He   achieves   a  creditable pastiche   of   the  Regency  expository  style  and projects  convincingly   the  contemporary  utili­ tarian  attitude. But  Beyond  the  River  and  the Bay  is  not  merely  a  virtuoso  work  of  recon­ struction; the notes and  bibliography  make available   to  other  scholars  the  wealth  of  Mr. Ross's  research,  so  that  in  all  respects  this  is a notable  if curious addition to the historical literature of  the  Northwest.

**** DENNIS  REID. The Group  of Seven.  Na­ tional   Gallery   of  Canada, $8.oo  cloth,  $s.oo paper.   This   is  the  catalogue   raisonne  of  the fiftieth   anniversary exhibition   of  paintings   of the  Group   of  Seven.  It is at  once  a  formid­ ably  useful  and   a  visually  repulsive  book.  It sets  out  to  be  more  than  a  catalogue:  to  be, in fact,  "a  basic reference  book" and  "a  thor­  oughly  documented   history  of  the  Group   of Seven".   It  succeeds  in  both  aims.  Mr.  Reid has  gathered  and   arranged  in  chronological patterns  an   amazing  amount   of  information on  the  Group, its  origins,  its  members,  their lives,  their   practices   as  painters,   their   public careers,  their   mutual   relationships, and   from this   time  onward   anyone   writing   on  any  of the  painters concerned  will find this volume indispensable. But the other  function  of a catalogue should  be  to  attract viewers,  while even a basic reference  book should present its material in  a  way  that   does  not  impede  un­ derstanding. The   designer   of  The  Group  of Seven  fails  on  both  counts.  203  paintings  are reproduced, all  in  a  dismally  grey  half-tone; of  these  artists   whose  glory  was in  their   use of  colour   not   a  single   painting   appears  in colour.   As  for   the   layout  of  the   book,  it  is execrable-each  wide page  divided  into  four broken    narrow   columns,   jagged-edged    and further  broken   by   dense   irregular  wads   of footnotes   in  a  smaller  type;  to  read  is  tiring  on  the  eye  and  even  more  tiring  on  the  pa­ tience.  Design  in  a  book  should  be an  aid  to understanding; this  design  is an  impediment. One   is  told  the  designer   is  Frank   Newbold; one  can  only  express  astonishment.

I06
 **** PIERRE   BERTON.   The   National   Dream: The   Great   Railway,  1871-1881.   McClelland
&   Stewart.  $10.00.   Canadian  history   is   dis­ tinguished,   perhaps    in    event,   certainly   in treatment, by a  peculiar   mingling  of  the  epic and   the  farcical   which,  so  far  as  I know,  is unique   among   the   nations   of  the  world.   As Robert   Fulford   had   recently  asked,  in  what  other   country   of  the  world  is  the  Founder of the    Nation   regularly    presented,   even   to schoolchildren,  as  a   brilliant  but   outrageous drunkard?  It  is  perhaps  this  peculiar   nature of  the   Canadian   historical   outlook   that   ex­ plains  why  Pierre  Berton,  our  great  pierrot  of journalism,   should    also   be   a   historian   of prowess.   Berton's   Klondike  is,  in   my   view, the  best history  yet written  of the  Yukon  gold rush.  Now, with  the  first  volume  of his history of  the   Canadian  Pacific   Railway   (telling   of the  political   struggles   before  the  railway  ever came  into  being)   there  seems every  possibility that-when  the  book  is completed   next  year
-we  shall  be able  to  hail  at  least  a  compar­ able   achievement.  The   National    Dream    is eloquent   but  econmnical, vivid  but  accurate; it  combines  a  fine sense  of  the  drama of  that  crucial   decade   when   the  fate  of  the  railway
-and  hence  of Canada -remained in doubt,
with  a  proper   sense  of  the   human   elements that  combined  in  this  vital  stage  of  the  effort
to create  a nation  out  of what  seemed a geographical impossibility.  The  one flaw that makes   it   less   than    a   five-star   book   is   an addiction  to  the  echoing   cliche.

**** JAMES   A.      JACKSON.    The    Centennial
History   of Manitoba. McClelland  &  Stewart,
$7.95.  James  Jackson  takes  the  history  of Manitoba  from  prehistoric  Urnes  to  Ed Schreyer's  premiership  in  a  book  whose  rest­ raint   and  proportion make  it  almost  a  model of local history.  The  full interest of  Manitoba's long  and  eventful  history,  and  the  significance
of  its  geographical and   historical   position  in the  development and -indeed -in  the  very creation of Canada as we know it, are revealed without    any   sacrifice   to   the   sensationalism often  bred  of  a  local  sense  of inferiority. Mr. Jackson   is  sure  of  his  facts,  and  equally  sure of  the  interest of  his story;  he  is never  there­ fore susceptible to the temptation to exaggerate trivia  which  besets so many  regional  historians,  and  he  maintains a  pleasantly  ironic view  of Manitoban  pretensions  wherever   they  depart from   reality.

**** Navigations, Traffiques and  Discoveries,
1774-1848:  A   guide   to   publications   relating

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to  the  area  now  British  Columbia. Compiled by Gloria  M. Strathern. University of Victoria,
$18.50.   This   is  the   companion  bibliography to  Barbara   J.  Lowther's  Laying   the  Founda­ tions,  published   in   1967,  which   covered   the
period  of British  Columbian history  from  1849 to   1899.  Like   its   predecessor,   Navigations, Traffiques and  Discoveries  is the  model  of an exhaustive  bibliography, covering  the area  and the  period  so widely  as  to  include any  publi­ cations  on  Oregon   or  Alaska  that  may  have bearing   on   the   history   of  British   Columbia,  and   amply   annotating all   the  entries.   What  this   volume   does   reveal   is   the   richness   of material   that    exists,   for,    avoiding   such  ephemerae  as  newspaper   articles,    some  631 titles-most  of them  books and  not including translations and  new  editions-are presented.  This  is an  exhaustive,  indispensible and  long­ needed  aid  to  the  study  of  the  early  history of our  Pacific  province.

*** FRED LANDON.  An  Exile   from Canada. Longman, $6.95.  Elijah  Woodman was one of the  martyrs   of  Canadian  radicalism. He  was not   involved   in   the   Mackenzie  uprising   of
1837, but  the circumstances of its repression influenced   him  profoundly,  and   he  took  part in  one  of  the  abortive Patriot  raids  of  1838; he  was  captured at  Windsor   and   transported to Van  Diemen's Land, dying  on  his way back across  the   Pacific  after   seven  years  of  exile. In   letters    to   his   family   he   presented    the record  of  his  experiences.  They   remained  un­ published,   the   last   of  the   narratives  of   the transportees  of   1837-8,   until    the   late   Fred Landon decided   to  use  them  as  the  basis  for retelling    the    story   of   Woodman    and    his companions.  For   An   Exile   from    Canada   is more  than   the  story  of  one  man.  The  earlier part   of  the   book  is  really  a  retelling   of  the Mackenzie   rebellion   and   particularly  of  the Patriot  attempts  to   invade   Canada  in   the following  year,  but  from  the  point  of view of the  followers  who  took  the  punishment rather  than   that   of  the   leaders   so  prompt   to  flee when  the  movement  collapsed.  The  latter  part  combines  Woodman's experiences in  exile with a   background   landscape   of   the    conditions under   which   the   transportee&   travelled   and lived  in  the  early  days  of  the  Victorian  age. It  is  a  moving  and   rather  terrible   document which   leaves   no   doubt   of   society's   role   in raising  up  rebels  against  itself.

*** The  Norse Discoverers of America: The Wineland  Sagas,  translated  and   discussed  by G.M.  Gathorne-Hardy. Oxford, $1o.so. This pioneer  work in Scandinavian-North  American
 history was first published  in  192 1, one of  the earliest  books  to  discuss  intelligently and fruitfully  the case for the Norse discovery of America. Now, with an introduction by Gwyn Jones,  and  a  preface  by the  author, still  alive and  still  actively  interested  in  recent  discov­ eries   that   have   confirmed    so  many   of   his arguments,  it  is  at  last   republished,  and, in spite  of all  that   has  appeared  since,  remains an amazingly  fresh  and  useful book. It contains a  translation of all  the  relevant  saga  material, but  the  greater  and  perhaps the  more  import­ ant  part  is the  reasoned  justification  of  belief in the Norse presence  in North  America. Much  that   Gathorne-Hardy   argues -including   his guess  of  the  approximate  locality  of  Vinland
-has been  confirmed; his  belief  that   the Kensington  Stone  is authentic and  suggests  a Norse   penetration   into   the   present    United States as late as the 14th century,  when the Greenland  colonies were abandoned, remains conjectural.

*** STEPHEN   FRANKLIN.  Leacock.    MICHAEL CRAWFORD   and   KENNETH    ARMSTRONG.   The Fenians. Clarke   Irwin   Jackdaws. $2.75   each. The    Canadian   Jackdaw   series   is   growing rapidly,  and  with  these  two collections  reaches its  twenty-fourth title.  Like  their  predecessors, these   are   albums    each    containing  a   long historical   essay  on   the   subject   chosen,   plus facsimile  reproductions of  contemporary  mat­ erial  - posters,    newspaper 	reports,    other actualities,  including  a   record    of   Leacock.  Very effective in dealing  with  historical events, which  they  can  bring  vividly  into  the  reader's present,  such  collections  do  seem  less effective  with authors-Leacock in  this case-perhaps because  the  writer's  work  does live in  a world of its own  and  the  actualities are,  in  the  final run,  somewhat  irrelevant.
*** J.  W   PICKERSGILL and  D.  F.  FOSTER.  The
Mackenzie   King  Record. Vol.  3,  1945-6,  Vol.
4, 1947-8. University  of Toronto Press, $17.50 each,  $3o.oo   the   pair.   Mackenzie  King,  un­ comfortably   perhaps,  but  ineluctably,  is  part  of  our  Canadian  past,  and  it  is  possible  that  this  strange,   fantasy-ridden introvert,  expert at  getting  and  wielding  authority  yet  inwardly plagued  by a  sense  of  being  the  mere  tool  of higher  powers,  was  the  most  potent   architect of  modern   Canada  after   Sir   John   A.  Mac­ donald.  The   two  volumes  noticed   here   com­ plete  The   Mackenzie   King  Record, an   elo­ quent    non-biography   which   consists   of   ex­ tracts  from King's  hitherto unpublished diaries  united   by  bridging  narratives. This   is  in  no sense a  work  of  literature; it  is, however,  an


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



invaluable  historical    source   book,   and   one may  even  think  of  it  as  the  material   of  art. The   only  factor   that   might   make  King  in­ eligible  as  the  subject   of  fiction  or  drama is the   sheer   banal   improbability  of   the   inner  life  of  this  man   who  looked  like  one  of  the mediums   whose  lore   he   respected   and   who ruled  a  country by  the  dictates  of  an  uncon­ scious which  he  regarded as the  projection  of another  world.

***  RONALD SEARLE  and  KILDARE DOBBS,   The Great   Fur   Opera:  Annals   of   the   Hudson's Bay  Company, I670-1970.  McClelland  & Stewart. $4·95·  To  celebrate  its  tercentenary, and   to   emphasize    a   deliberate  attempt   to emerge from the cocoon of its history into the swinging present, the Hudson's  Bay Company commissioned  that  fine  caricaturist Ronald Searle  and  that   notable  wit Kildare Dobbs  to compose  a  comic  history.  Humour  is the  ignis fatuus of Canadian literature, pursued  often, rarely  trapped. Searle  and  Dobbs  have  strug­ gled  manfully  with  its  Protean  substance,  and have  produced something that  is a  great  deal better  than  most  of our  national  funny  books, touching every  stop  on  the  organ  of  laughter from   the   belly  burster   to  the  dirty   snicker. There  are  inevitably  flat  jokes and  stale  jokes, but  let  him  who could  keep it  up more  amus­ ingly  for  124  pages  cast  the first beaver  stone. As for  the  HBC,  no  gesture  could  be more  in keeping   with   its   British   traditions  than   this act  which  celebrates  its final  naturalization as a  Canadian  company. For  to  invite  laughter is   surely   the   ultimate  Anglo-Saxon   sign  of secure  superiority.

***  R.  c.  MAYNE.  Four  Years  in  British  Co­ lumbia   and   Vancouver  Island.  Johnson   Re­ print,  $22.00. Commodore Mayne came  to  the West Coast  of what  later  became Canada on a naval  survey   expedition in  1857 ; he  left  in
1861.   The   account  of   his  experiences   was
published   in  the  following  year,  and  now,  as
part   of   the   project  of   the   Toronto  Public
Library  and  the  Johnson Reprint Corporation
to   re-issue   two   hundred   pre-Confederation
books  of  historical   interest, it  appears  in  its first edition  for  more  than  a century.  It  is not
a  classic  of  travel-writing,  and   on.e reads   it with    the   feeling    that    Mayne   never   really caught   the  excitement of  his  time,  when  the gold  miners  were  streaming up  from  San Francisco to take part in the Fraser River and Cariboo rushes, and the warrior Indians were streaming down from  the north to sell their daughters  on   the   beaches   of  Victoria,    nor,

ro8
 obviously,   does   he   realise   the   historical   in­ terest  the  events  of  the  period  might  have  for people  a  hundred years away.  He  is  too  much the  naval  man  reporting home,  too  little   the young   Englishman  who   must   have   felt   far more   than   he  was  able   to  express  when   he led    his   expeditions   across   the    untravelled spine  of  Vancouver  Island   and  into   the   un­ climbed   mountains  from  the  coastal  inlets  in search  of  possible  routes  to  the  goldfields.  So much  is  thrown   away,  but  even  what   is  left is worth  reproducing; there  were  so few  good writers  about  in  the  West  at  that  time  (com­ pared   with   the   abundance  of  amateur  and professional  authors who  found   their   way  to Klondike)   that  almost  any  report  which  adds to  our   knowledge   of  the   time  is  to  be  wel­ comed.

**  JIM  LOTZ. Northern Realities:  The   Future of   Northern   Development   in   Canada.  New Press.   $8.oo.   This   is  a   somewhat   mis-titled book, since Jim Lotz is not talking about  the Canadian  North   as  a  whole  but  really  about the Yukon. Occasionally he generalizes about northern  people   and   the   northern  outlook, but  one  feels he  has  little  direct  knowledge  of
-say-Keewatin  or  Baffin  Island,  and   all his  facts  of  any  significance   concern   the  Yu­ kon.  Out  of  them  he  builds  a  realistic  assess­ ment  of  its  value  to  Canada. It is  not  as  an overflow  area   for  population that  he  sees  it, but   rather as  a  permanent  wilderness   whose exploitation in  terms  of  raw  materials  would be  down-played  and   which  would   be  valued for  its spiritual as much  as its physical  advan­ tages:   as  a  learning area  and   a  recreational complement to  the  rest  of  the  country rather than   as  an  extension  of   the  south   to  b.e  sub­ ordinated  to  its   industrial  needs   and   domi­ nated   by  its  social  norms.  A  serious,  slightly impenetrable   but   important   contribution  to the  study  of   that   near-half   of  Canada above the  6oth  parallel.

** HARRY GREGSON.  A History  of  Victoria. Victoria  Observer. $10.00. The   nearest   thing we  have  yet  had   to  a  comprehensive  history of  Victoria. It  has  its   faults   of  proportion, and   Mr.  Gregson  is  liable  to  get  trapped at times   in  complications  of  cliche   and   trivia, but   he  has  put   together  much   highly   inter­ esting    information,   and    future   and    more polished   historians   will  have  a  great  deal  to thank  him  for.  A History  of Victoria  is  useful to  students of  the  history  of  the  Pacific  Coast for  its  assembly  of  facts  obtainable  only  with difficulty  elsewhere.
G.W.
