$2.50  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·70
Autumn, 1976


THEMES 	ND IN CRITICISM

Articles

BY  FRANK  DAVEY, MARGOT NORTHEY, ELIZABETH BREWSTER, ROBERT GIBBS, T. D. MACLULICH, BARRY WOOD, M.G. PARKS

Poems

BY  JOHN  NEWLOVE, PETER STEVENS, JOYCE CAROL  OATES, RON  MILES, TOM   WAYMAN

Review Articles and  Reviews

KATHY MEZEI, CLARA  THOMAS, GEORGE WOODCOCK, LINDA SANDLER, D. G. STEPHENS, ANDREAS SCHROEDER, EUGENE MCNAMARA,
. GORDON P. TURNER, ANN P. MESSENGER, DANIEL LENOSKI, PETER THOMAS, JOSEPH  PIVATO

Notes

BY  JANIE  WAGNE:R


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








HISTORIANS
AND BIOGRAPHERS






THE RELATIONSHIP between history and  biography is far from simple. The  historian  is concerned  with external  and  collective manifestations  of human  existence. The  biographer  is largely concerned  with  its inner  and  indi­ vidual  manifestations.  The  two worlds of course are interdependent, and  history that  ignores  the  psychology of its actors is likely to be as deficient as  biography that  ignores  the  role  of external  events in  shaping  its subjects'  lives.  Yet  the disciplines are different  enough  for historians not always to be good biographers, and  vice versa;  the  eye that  is attuned  to the  broad  sweep  of  historical  events cannot  always weigh accurately  the minutiae  of one man's life. When  that  man is a public figure, the problem is inevitably compounded.
I was reminded  of this when I read C. P. Stacey's A Very  Double Life, whose
second  title  is The   Private  World  of Mackenzie   King.  Colonel  Stacey's  book cannot  fail  to be interesting,  since it offers the first lengthy  presentation  of the hitherto  inaccessible private diaries of Mackenzie King. Much,  of course, is what one  had  expected.  We  have  known  for  decades  that  King  frequented  seances and  regarded  himself as inspired  by his dead  mother;  we have had  hints of his belief in  a  curious  kind  of metempsychosis that  turned  his dogs into  guardian spirits.   (There   were,  significantly,  no  spirit  cats  in  his  world.)   But  it is still strange   and  interesting  to  read  King's  own  words,  almost  to  hear  that  eerie voice, talking  not only of insubstantial  spirits but also of the notably  substantial ladies  with  whom  he  sustained  apparently   platonic  attachments and  the  less­ than-ladies  whom  he attempted   to rescue from  prostitution  while,  according  to Stacey's reading of the diaries, sinfully enjoying them.
Much  of Stacey's  reading,  in fact, is highly conjectural.  When  King goes out on  "strolls"  and  returns  with  the  thought  of having  wasted  his time sinfully, it is carrying   matters  far  to  assume  that  he  had  really  been  involved  in  fleshly

3

EDITORIAL

commerce  with  prostitutes,  a  sin  to  which  he  never  in  fact  confesses. Given King's  defensive  nature, the  thought  of  his taking  a  physical initiative  with  a prostitute  seems completely  out  of character; far  more  plausible is the  idea  of his having  wandered  about  on a summer's  evening  to look at the girls and  lust after   them  and   then   return   to  the  guilty  enjoyment  of  what  his  generation called "the solitary vice".
The pushing of conjecture  to extremity, thus presenting King's life in harsh contrasts,  is extended  in Colonel Stacey's book into other  areas than  the sexual, and  with equally questionable  results. Was there really such a division as Stacey suggests between  the  man  who  consulted  the  spirits and  the  man  who  framed high  policy? Were  King's  political decisions in fact unaffected  by the "insights" which other men regarded as superstitions? Certainly he looked for political reassurance  to the spirits, and  found numerological significance in the times and dates of events; is it likely that  he did not on occasion conceive it possible to use such means to the  actual  influencing  of events? Once private  fantasy  takes hold of a mind, there is no logical limit to its manifestations.
It  seems to  me  that  Colonel  Stacey  has in  fact  been writing  biography  as a
historian, accustomed  to the chiaroscuro of history, whose high lights and deep shadows  contrast  so sharply  with  the  degrees of half-light  in  which  individual lives are  mostly lived. One  might  even, to turn  one of Stacey's methods  against him, conjecture  a little on the extent to which the fact of his being specifically a military  historian  has led him to see individual  lives as patterns  of opposed and warring  forces, with  the public pursuit of virtue opposed to the private  following of vice, and the "real" world of politics opposed to the "unreal'' world of psychic phenomena.   A  military  historian,  accustomed  to  dealing  with  events  in  their most concrete  forms,  might  also be led to assume that  acts must  be  physical­ as  crimes  are -to qualify  as sin,  whereas  in  fact  the  most  torturing sins are those of the mind.
To suggest that  the historian  cannot  be a biographer-or vice versa -is far from  the intent  of the historian-biographer who writes these lines. In the face of such  a splendid  historian's  biography  as Margaret  Prang's  recent life of Rowell, it  would  be  absurd   to  insist.  Nevertheless,  there  are  limiting  elements  in  the craft of history to which the writer must be sensitive when he moves from narrat­ ing  events to examining  the individuals  out of whose actions these  events arise. What  has  happened is never  ambiguous;  the  motives of those  who  precipitate  happenings  always  are,  and  the  biographer  must steep himself  in  the  shadows that  would only blind  the  historian.  In  the process he discovers that  there is no such  thing  in  reality  as  a  "double  life".  All lives are  unities,  and  Mackenzie King's  private  superstitions  permeated  his public life as surely  as Hitler's mania shaped the collective life of all Europe in his time and in ours too.
GEORGE  WOODCOCK


4

SURVIVING
THE PARAPHRASE


Frank Davey





IT rs  A  TESTIMONY  to  the  limitations  of  Canadian  liternry criticism  that  thematic  criticism should  have  become the dominant approach to English-Canadian literature. In its brief lifetime, Canadian criticism has acquired a history of being reluctant  to focus on the literary work-to deal with matters of form, language,  style, structure,  and consciousness as these arise from the work as  a  unique  construct.   It  has  seldom  had  enough  confidence  in  the  work  of Canadian writers to do what  the criticism of other  national  literatures  has done: explain  and   illuminate   the  work  on  its  own  terms,  without   recourse  to  any
cultural   rationalizations  or  apologies.  Even  the   New  Criticism's   espousal  of autotelic  ana:lysis did  not  move  Canadian   critics in  this  direction.  Instead,  in every period  they have  provided! referential criticism:  the evaluative  criticism of Brown and  Smith  looks away from Canadian  writing toward other national achievements;   the  anti-evaluative   thematic   criticism  of  Frye,  Jones,  Atwood, and  Moss looks away  toward  alleged cultural  influences and  determiners.
With few critics interested in writing as writing, it is not surprising that Canada has in  recent  years seen  the emergence of a large  number  of writer-critics.  For unlike much  earlier  Canadian work, the recent writing has been engaged for the most part  at  the  level of form  and  language  rather  than  theme. Rudy  Wiebe's journey  from  Peace Shall  Destroy Many  to  The  Temptations of Big Bear has been an  odyssey in  novelistic technique  about  which  thematic  criticism can say very little. bp  Nichol's Two  Novels speaks only through  its formal  complexities, and  until these are  illuminated  the  thematic  critic has to remain  silent -as  he has. At the moment it is Canadian writers who appear  to have the greatest under­ standing  of the  technical  concerns  and  accomplishments  of their  fellows,  and  it is these-Mandel, Waddington,  Geddes, Barbour,  Scobie,  Bowering,  Livesay
-who  are  writing  most  of  the  periodical  criticism that  in  any  way comes to terms  with  the  writing.   Many   of  the  academic   critics   (and   I include   here Douglas Jones and  Margaret  Atwood because of their acceptance  of the thematic approach)  appear  almost  as ignorant  of movements in contemporary Canadian writing  as their  colleagues in  the  1920's  were the  £ormal experiments  of Eliot, Pound, and Joyce.

5

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

Most of the weaknesses of thematic  criticism stem from its origin in Amoldian humanism,   a  tradition   in  which  both  the  critic  and  the  artist  have  a  major responsibility  to  culture.  In  this  view, the  artist  speaks, unconsciously or  con­ sciously, for the group. Says Jones, "[artists] participate in and help to articulate
... a supreme  fiction ... that  embodies the dreams  and  nightmares  of a  people,
shapes  their  imaginative   vision  of  the  world,  and  defines, as it  evolves, their cultural  identity''.1   Language   here  is a  tool employed  not  for its own  intrinsic qualities  but  for  the  expression of ideas  and  visions. The  critic's  role is not  to attend  to language,  form, or even to individual  works of literature  but to some­ thing  called by Jones in Butterfly on Rock  "our  imaginative life", by Moss in his Patterns   of Isolation   the  "national being"/  and  by Frye in  The  Bush  Garden "cultural history".3
At  best these assumptions  are  extra-literary; at worst, anti-literary.  The  focus of such criticism invariably  rests outside the writing-on "literature", "culture", geography,  history, and ideas. Books which begin ostensibly as attempts  to illumi­ nate separate  instances of Canadian writing become messianic attempts to define a  national  identity  or  psychosis. The  critical  process produced  by these assump­ tions is reductive.  A novel is reduced  to its declared themes and its  plot outline; a  poem  to its declared  themes;  the  Canadian culture  ultimately  to catch-words  such  as Atwood's  "victimization" and  "survival". Critical  analysis is  performed mostly to derive new catch-words and formulae.
The  movement  here  is towards  paraphrase -paraphrase of the  culture  and
paraphrase of the  literature. The  critic  extracts  for  his deliberations  the  para­ phrasable  content  and  throws away the form. He attends to the explicit  meaning  of the  work and  neglects whatever  content  is implicit in its structure,  language,  or imagery.  Thus  Atwood  discusses the overt  attacks on  puritanism  in Marian  Engel's The Honeymoon Festival,  but  makes no comment about  the novel's two most  arresting   technical  features:  its low-key style  (common  to all  of  Engel's fiction)   and  its  unlikely,  perhaps  incredible,  conclusion. Douglas  Jones  quotes lengthy  passages from  F.  R.  Scott  and  Patrick  Anderson in order  to integrate  into  his thesis their explicit statements on Canadian  culture, but has no comment a.bout their  direct  and  largely  denotative  use of language. My objection  here is based on a principle formulated by Frye:  "the  literary structure  is always ironic because 'what  it says' is always different from 'what it means'." 4  Thematic critics in  Canada have  been  interested  in  what  literary  works "say",  especially what they  "say"  about  Canada and  Canadians. They  have largely overlooked  what literary  works "mean" -for  the  attempt  to establish meaning  would take them outside thematic criticism. As Robert  Greeley has remarked,
... it cannot be simply  what  a man  proposes  to talk about  in a poem  that  is inter­ esting-this is like going  to hear  an  after-dinner speaker.  His information will be interesting just  to the  extent  that  it exists, but  after  that  we are  through with  him

6

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

and  through with the information in the form that he has given it to us. But the poem has this informational character ... in such form that we don't  throw away the poem. In  other  words, after  we've read a play by Shakespeare, let's say, we don't throw away the play. We continue to define what is said/happening in how it is said.5



SINCE FRYE's GENUINELY THEMATIC  CRITICISM of Canadian literature  constitutes a small body of work (less than  half of The  Bush Garden), since  Moss's  criticism  is  largely  derivative  of  Frye  and  Jones,  and  since  my opinion  of Atwood's Survival  is on record elsewhere,6   I will restrict  my detailed comments  about  thematic  criticism  here to  Douglas  Jones'  Butterfly  on  Rock. One  of the first characteristics of thematic criticism that one notices in this book is the humanistic  bias. To  Jones,  culture is a gentleman's  club inside which any member can speak piously on behalf of the rest of the group.

. . . our westward expansion is complete, and in the pause to reflect upon ourselves we become increasingly aware that our identity and our view of the world are no longer determined by our experience of Europe....

Apparently  no one is allowed by Jones to detach  himself from this rather  arro­ gant  humanistic  assumption  of corporateness of society. The  assumption leads to further  difficulties when  extended  to  writing;  the  literary  work  comes  to have little significance outside the body of the national literature. It can be valued not for its unique or idiosyncratic qualities but only for what it shares with the larger body. This  means,  in  effect, that  the  derivative  and  the  mundane can  receive the critic's attention  while the unusual or original do not. The  eccentric  Robert­ son Davies, for instance,  does not get even a mention in Jones. Such a situation parallels the effect of humanism  on society and culture where whatever  coincides with mass-values is tolerated  and  whatever conflicts is rejected or ignored.
A  second  feature  of  thematic   criticism  evident  in  Jones  is a  disregard  for literary  history. Atwood  develops her thesis that  victimization  is a characteristic theme of Canadian literature  by ignoring its ubiquity in contemporary world literature. Moss develops his thesis that isolation is the major  theme of Canadian fiction  by  overlooking,  as  George  Woodcock  has  noted,7     the  fact  that  in  all literatures  the traditional subject of the novel has been the person who is "isolated" by  his  not  being  able  to  fit  comfortably  into  society. Similarly,  Jones  tries  to advance  on  the  basis of  work  by the  Confederation   Poets  the  thesis  that  the Canadian landscape  has been seen as "a  savage place ... holy and  enchanted"
-ignoring the  documented  fact  that  the  ghostly presences in  Carman,  Lamp­ man,   and   Roberts  were  inherited   from  English  Romanticism   and  American Transcendentalism rather  than  gained osmotically from the  Canadian condition. In each case the critic is forced into ignoring literary history by a paradox  unique

7

SURVIVING THE PARAPHRASE

to his critical approach. Thematic criticism in Canada  seeks above all to define a national   culture   but  chooses  to  work  with  materials-literary themes-that are,   because  of  their  limited   number,   international in  nature.   The   paradox creates a dilemma  from  which  there appears  to be no scholarly escape.
A  third  feature   is  thematic   criticism's  tendency  toward  sociology-usually bad sociology. While  the social scientist is content  to describe society and  predict the effects of specific events or interventions, Jones attempts both to describe Canadian culture  and  to  prescribe  how it should  change.  His  sociology is not only extra-literary,  it is normative  and  polemic. His declared  aim  is to locate a culture  "in  which  the  Canadian will feel at  home in his world"  and  abandon his "colonial  mentality".

The weakness of the colonial mentality is that it regards as a threat what it should regard as its salvation; it walls out or exploits what it should welcome and cultivate.

This  unscholarly  approach  leads Jones eventually to cast himself as a Canadian Adam  who  can  announce to  Canadians the  end  of exile and  the  discovery of "the first days of Creation".
A fourth  feature  is an  attempt  at "culture-fixing'' -something very common of late in  Canada in such  books as Purdy's The  New Romans, Kilbourn's  The Peaceable  Kingdom, Redekop's   The   Star-Spangled  Beaver,  Frye's  The   Bush Garden, Fulford, Godfrey, and Rotstein's Read Canadian, and Atwood's Survival. To  Jones,  Canadian culture  is in  transition  from  an  Old  Testament  condition of exile and  alienation  toward  a  New Testament  one of affirmation,  discovery, and community.  This  metaphor for the Canadian experience dominates  Butterfly on  Rock   and   becomes,  much   like  Atwood's  victim/victimization  concept,  a formula  for Canadianism. Like all formulae, it is a restricting and  potentially paralyzing  thing. It  restricts the writers which Jones can discuss; they are neces­ sarily selected by their suitability  to the thesis rather  than  by the quality of their writing.  It is potentially  paralyzing  in the  way that  any  attempt   to  define the Canadian  subject  must   be-it  serves to  intimidate   future  Canadian  writing into  taking  as its own  the  particular concerns that  have been  declared  officially Canadian.
A fifth feature  which  Jones  has in common with other  thematic  critics is the fallacy of literary  determinism.  The  artist "embodies the dreams  and  nightmares of  a  people'';   his work  can  be "explained" by reference  to the  geography  and climate  of  the  country,  to  western  intellectual  history, to  his culture's  religious heritage. Jones is much less guilty of this fallacy than is Frye in The  Bush Garden with  his reference to  the "bleak  northern  sky" and  to the St. Lawrence  River's swallowing  of  travellers  into  "an  alien  continent", but  he  nevertheless fails to make  clear  that  the  writer  is in  some small  way free,  that  the  writer  chooses among  influences  and  traditions rather  than  being  passively formed  by  them,

8

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

and  that  this process of election is more important to an understanding of  litera­ ture  than  the influence or  tradition  itself. As Gaston Bachelard  has obseiVed, to "explain" a  work  by its sources is tantamount to explaining  "the flower by the fertilizer".8   But  of course thematic  criticism  is not  principally  interested  in  the artistic  progress, in  the artist,  or in the literary work -its interest  lies, as Jones states,  in   things  "cultural  andl  psychological  rather   than   purely  aesthetic  or literary".



-r:E MOTIVATIONS  OF   thematic  criticism strike one as essen­ tially defensive in respect to both the culture and the literature.  A declared motive has  been  to  avoid  evaluative  criticism,  which  Frye  has  claimed  would  reduce Canadian criticism to a "huge  debunking  project".  An even more important but undeclared  motive  appears  to  have been to avoid treating  Canadian writing  as serious  literature. For  there  are  many  kinds of  non-evaluative  criticism  which these  critics  could  have  practised  other  than  the  thematic.   It  seems  that  the thematicists  believe Canadian literature incapable  of sustaining  analytic,  pheno­ menological,  or  archetypal  inquiry-of  sustaining  any  kind  of criticism  whose existence  is  not  also  supported   by the  ruse  of sociological  research.  Another declared  motive  has  been to articulate  a cultural  identity  to a nation  which  the thematic  critic  believes convinced  of its lack of one. It  is noteworthy  here that the  thematicists'  concerns-Jones' quest  for  "the  obscure features  of our  own identity",   Moss's for  "a  coherent  body of Canadian fiction",  Atwood's  for  "a single unifying and informing  [Canadian] symbol"9 are not those of critics of more mature  and secure literatures.  One cannot  imagine a British critic being worried about  what  constitutes, in one word or less, the essence of his literature. Instead, he goes about  its illumination,  writing books with such titles as New  Bearings in English Poetry, A Key to Modern  English Poetry, Four Metaphysical  Poets, The English Novel. Much  more effective than  Butterfly on Rock,  The  Bush Garden, Survival,  and  Patterns  of Isolation in asserting a Canadian identity  would  have been  books of  this  British  type -books  which  assumed, rather  than  argued,  a national identity's existence and a national literature's significance.
It is extremely important that  Canadian  critics not forget that  there are indeed alternatives  to thematic  criticism, and that most of these do not involve a return to that  bete noire evaluation.  Further,  these alternatives, like thematic  criticism, do allow the writing of overviews of all or  parts of Canadian literature. But unlike thematic  criticism, they attend  specifically to that  ground  from which all writing communicates   and  all  themes  spring:   the  form-style,  structure,   vocabulary, literary  form, syntax -of the writing. One such alternative,  historical criticism, could  provide  a  history of  Canadian poetry -a  history not  of its themes  and concerns  but  of its technical  assumptions, the sources of these assumptions,  and


9

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

the  relationship   between  the  prosody  of  Canadian  writers  and  that  of  other Western  writers.  While  the  prosody  of  Canadian poets  has  undoubtedly   been mostly derivative,  there  have  been shifts in the ingenuousness of the  borrowing, in  the  time lapse
models, and  in  the amount  and  significance of the modifications contributed by the borrower.  All writing is to some extent derivative,  but there would appear  to be  a  clear  division  in  Canadian  poetry  between  obsequious  borrowing-for example,  that  of Mair  or  Roberts-and the intelligent  combining  and  expan­ sion of borrowed  forms. Needless to say, one by-product  of such a  non-thematic study would be an implicit statement  about Canadians, Canada, and its evolution.
Analytical   criticism   could   yield  such  works  as  "Modernism  in   Canadiian
Poetry"  or  "Discontinuous Structure  in  Post..modem  Canadian writing". The former would not only address itself to the late appearance of the modernist movement   in  Canada-some  thirty   years  after  its  appearance in  Hispano­ American  literature   and  fifteen  years  after  its  appearance in  Anglo-American literature-but inquire  into  the  formal  characteristics  which  distinguish  Cana­  dian  modernism  from  its sister  movements.  Hispano-American modernism  was anti-colonial  in spirit;  its rejection of  European  models in favour of native forms led  artists eventually   to   primitivism,   Anglo-American   modernism   was  anti­  Georgian  and,  from  an  American  point  of  view, also anti-colonial.  Canadian modernism, in the work of Smith, Scott, Gustafson, and Finch, copied the Anglo­ Americans in both  theory and  practice;  it proposed, un'like the South Americans, "cosmopolitan"  models  rather  than  regional  ones, and  to this  extent  seems to have  been  a  colonial  movement.   My  point  here  is that  a  colonial,  imitative modernist  movement  is not to be deplored or  rationalized  into something  other. It  is itself  an  intrinsically  interesting  literary  phenomenon,  and  in  an  absolute sense worthy of analysis and study;  such a study can be done in terms of Cana­  dian literature  as successfully as it can in terms of any other.10
The   second   analytical   project,   "Discontinuous   Structure   in   Post""illodem
Canadian Writing", could  directly  attempt  on the  basis of  Canadian literature an  elucidation  of  the  problems  and  advantages  of  discontinuous  literary  struc­ ture.  Such  structure has  been  at  the  core of  most significant  new  writing  in Canada in the last decade: Rudy  Wiebe's The  Blue Mountains  of China,  David McFadden's The   Great  Canadian  Sonnet,  Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful  Losers, Gerry Gilbert's  AND, bp Nichol's The Martyrology, Juan Butler's The  Garbage­ man,  to  name  a few. While it would be absurd  to  argue  that  Canada has had any  kind  of monopoly  or  "lead" in  such  writing,  the  opportunity nevertheless exists for  a literary  problem  important to  all  literatures  to be usefully discussed strictly  in  terms  of  Canadian writing.  The  literature  would  provide  the  critic with  a  rich  stock  of  relevant  writing  and  a  compact,  clearly defined  area  for investigation.


10

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

Were genre criticism to attempt a work such as "The Polemic Novel in Cana­ dian  Literature", the same  procedure  would  be involved;  that  is, of  discussing on the basis of Canadian writing  a literary issue of paranational interest. Here  I am not asking for a repetition  of thematic criticism's numerous discussions of the ideas of  these novels, but  for  an  examination  of them  as examples  of a literary form -for an examination  of their language, usual methods of characterization, narrative techniques,  etc. The  polemic novel exists throughout Canadian litera­ ture in abundance, with Kirby's Chien d'Or, several of Connor's  works, Duncan's The   Imperialist,  Callaghan's Such  Is My  Beloved, McLennan's Two Solitudes, Wiebe's  Peace  Shall   Destroy  Many,  Atwood's  Surfacing,   Clarke's   Storm   of Fortune,   and   Richler's   The   Incomparable   Atuk   being  among   the  stronger. Having   had  such  an  unusually  large  hold  on  Canadian fiction,  it  could,  like derivative  modernism  or  discontinuous  form,  be studied  as thoroughly  through  Canadian literature  as  through  any other  body of national  work. Such  a claim does  not  imply  that  these  Canadian novels are  "great" novels; only  that  they form  a more  than  adequate basis for serious literary study  and  deserve to be so treated.
Phenomenological   criticism  is  another   alternative   non-evaluative   approach which  could  do much  to replace  the present sociological perspective  that  domi­ nates  Canadian  criticism  with  a  literary  one.  Again,  the  essential  assumption would  be  that   Canadian  literature   is a  highly  useful  frame  of   reference  for approaching particular literary  problems. One  title  which  the  phenomenologist could-and here  no derogation  would be intended  by the word  "colonial"­ produce  is "The   Colonial  Writing  Experience". From  Mair and  Heavysege  to Smith and  Richler our writers have given literary form to the experience of living and  writing in terms of values imposed by non-native cultures. The  phenomeno­  logical critic  could  study  how  this  experience  is  projected  by  the  form  of  the writing, could participate in the consciousness of  the artist as it is betrayed  by his syntax, imagery, and diction;  ultimately the critic could give the reader a portrait  of  each  writer's  psychological world.  Another  possible project  for  this  kind  of criticism  is  "The Regional   Consciousness in  Canadian  Writing". In  regional literature  too, Canada has a more than sufficient body of work for the study of a particular,  intrinsically  interesting  literary  phenomenon.  In  fact, it is not unfair to say  that  the  bulk  of  Canadian  literature  ·is  regional  before it is national - de>pite whatever  claims  Ontario  or Toronto  writers  may  make  to represent  a national   vision.  The   regional  consciousness may  'be  characterized  by  specific attitudes  to language  and  form, by specific kinds of imagery, or by language  and imagery  that  in some way  correlate  with the geographic  features  of the  region. The  analyses in Atwood's  Survival,  for example, despite the  book's ignoring  of regional  factors,  imply  a  possible pre on


I I

SURVIVING THE  PARAPHRASE

Ontario writing and  with  the closing of space in Prairie writing. These leads call for further  investigation.
A  final  type  of  criticism  which  might  profitably  be practised  by  Canadian
critics is archetypal  criticism  which, despite the eminence of Northrop  Frye, has never  been  applied  in  its  pure  form  to  Canadian writing.  Frye's  "theory   of modes" would supply an especially interesting approach  to a literature  which has seen in recent years a curiously large number of attempts  at high-mimetic art­ including  Newlove's  "The Pride", Gutteridge's  Riel,  Cohen's  Beautiful  Losers, Nichol's  The   Martyrology, MacEwen's King  of Egypt,  King  of Dreams,  and Wiebe's  The   Temptations of Big  Bear. Possibly Frye's  theory  of  an  evolution from  high  mimesis  to  low  mimesis  to  irony  does  not  fit  Canadian  literature; perhaps  in  literatures  which  lack  a  native high-mimetic inheritance writers  are stimulated  to attempt  such  writing  despite living in ages in  which international writing is overwhelmingly low-mimetic or ironic. Only an archetypal  examination  of the  language  and  structures  used in  Canadian and  other  recently-developed literatures  could confirm such hypotheses.
Unless these or similar  critical alternatives are taken up, there is a danger  that the shape  of the  literature could suffer  long-term  distortion. Thematic  criticism does not  use, or need to use, literary  criteria in selecting writers to document  its arguments.  It selects writers  not in terms of literary competence or talent  but in terms of how well their work fits the critic's particular  thematic  thesis. While one may agree  with  Frye that  evaluation  is the "incidental  by-product" of criticism rather   than  its  end,  one  finds  that  the  by-product  of thematic   criticism  is to create  the illusion that  palpably  inferior writers are somehow more important­ at least to loyal Canadians-than obviously superior ones. Thus Atwood makes Dennis  Lee  appear   more  significant  than  Irving  Layton  and  Graeme  Gibson more  significant  than  Margaret Laurence; Jones  makes  Patrick  Anderson  and Phyllis Webb appear  more significant than  Dorothy Livesay; Moss makes Charles Bruce and Thomas  H. Raddall  appear  more accomplished than  Robert  Kroetsch, Hugh  Hood,  or  Robertson  Davies. The only criticism which can  yield the kind of  critical  by-products  which  Frye  has  in  mind  is one  which  focuses not  on sociological  issues but  on  the  writing  itself. Here  no  writer  can  be  excluded because of his attitudes  or subject matter. All competent uses of literary form can enter  into  the  deliberations  of  the  historical, analytic, genre,  phenomenological, or archetypal  critic. The  more profound! uses rise to prominence  because of their power, complexity, and  ingenuity. Thematic criticism searches for apples among oranges  by looking  for  cultural  seers among  men  and  women  whose principal task is articulation  and  whose principal  loyalty is to their language; these alter­ native  kinds  of   criticism  would  turn  the  critic's  attention   back  to  where  the writer's  must  always be-on  literature  as language, and on  writing  as writing.

12

SURVIVING THE PARAPHRASE


NOTES

1 Butterfly on Rock  (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1970), p. 4·
2     (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, 1974), p. 7·
3    (Toronto: HouseofAnansi, 197I),p.2I5.
• Anatomy  of Criticism  (Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 1957), p. 81.
5   Tape-recorded lecture  at  home  of Warren Tallman, Vancouver, B.C.,  August  29,
1962.
6    "Atwood  Walking Backwards," Open  Letter  (second  series)   5  (Summer 1973),
74-84.
7    "Isolating a Theme in our Fiction," Maclean's, April 1974, p. 96.
8  The  Poetics of Space, tr. Maria Jolas  (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969), p. xxvi.
9  Survival  (Toronto: House  of Anansi,  1972), p. 31.
1° For  another example of the analytical approach to colonial  writing see William  D.
Gairdner's article,  "Traill and  Moodie: the Two Realities," The  Journal of Cana­
dian Fiction, I: 2 (SpringI 972).




EVEN WISDOM
 


John Newlove


He  is the nervous  hunter.
Words, women,  whisky, even wisdom, are  his game; he admits
to no favourite order.

He follows any road, looking  at  everything.
No tree escapes his inspection, and  horses are  not safe either.

This  week his baldness assaults  the  radio; next,
his wine rusts an island, a junta
feels the weight  of his cigar.

Back and  forth  he wanders,
asking questions. He ought  to have a greasy grey felt hat
pushed  back on his head. Perhaps he has.

I can see those shoes of his plumb in the middle of a forest; that  hand  grabbing a beer
at the north  pole;  that  wet cigar shining,  just like a bloody star.

13

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE





Margot Northey





L THE  MIDDLE OF   La  Gume, Yes  Si,!'  the  young  nun Esmalda  returns  to her  home in the village to pay homage to her dead  brother, the  soldier  Corriveau.   Obeying  her  religious order's  strictures  against  entering
the house, she views the mourners  around  the coffin through  an opened window and  asks:  "Qui est mort?  Qui  est vivant?  Le mort  peut etre  vivant.  Le vivant peut etre mort."  Despite the unthinking,  almost mechanical quality of her speak­ ing, the question  is important, underlining  the complex and  problematic issue of death  in  the  novel.  In  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!  the  coffin sits in the  centre  of the house as it remains  in  the  centre  of the characters'  consciousness, and  it is the symbolic focus of the story's meaning.
Roch  Carrier  has referred  to his writing as "a  funny adventure", and  we can
readily see the  humour  in  his first novel.2   Varieties of humour  can  be found in almost  every  section,  from  the  farcical  fairness  of  Amelie's  every-other-night policy with her two husbands,  to the sexual jokes unconsciously contained  in the prayers  of  the  villagers,  to  the  satirical  bite in  the  depiction  of  Berube's  first sexual encounter  and  in  the  priest's eulogy. Using John  Ruskin's  terminology, it can be said that the novel moves away from the terrible towards the sportive grotesque.  In  other  words, in Carrier's  grotesqueness play or  jest is more domi­ nant than, for example, in Marie-Claire Blais' grotesque writing.
However  it is also clear  that  fearfulness is always present  in the  playing and that  Carrier's mockery carries with it an almost constant  undercurrent of horror. The  bizarre  and  amusing  actions of the characters  have much  in common with the type of black comedy  found  in Le Chercheur de tresors, a novel by Philippe Aubert  de  Gaspe  (fils)  which  Carrier  admits  he was much  influenced  by and whose motifs he obviously borrowed  from. Moreover, as in so many other gothic and  grotesque  works,  in  La  Guerre,  Yes  Sir!  images of  death  are  a  primary source of the fearful or horrifying aspect.
The  sense of death  on  a  personal,  physical level is of primary  concern to the characters,  a reality brought  home to them by the returned  body of one of their

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

own  villagers.  He  is  treated   as a  hero,  although  we  learn  that   he  has  been ungloriously killed in action  while relieving himself behind  a hedge in the army camp.  Mother  Corriveau  questions the  purpose of a life which  leads inevitably to the grave:

A quoi servait-il d'avoir  ete un enfant aux yeux bleus, d'avoir appris la vie, ses noms, ses couleurs, ses lois, peniblement comme si cela avait ete contre nature?  A quoi servait-il d'avoir ete un enfant si malheureux de vivre ...
Tout etait aussi inutile que les larmes.

Where  Mother   Corriveau   weeps in response  to  death,  her  husband  Anthyme rages; where she attempts  prayer he can only swear.
The  menacing  fact  of individual  physical death  is a metaphor  for other  kinds of death  and  dying which spread  in widening circles of implication  through  the story.  The   unconscious  blasphemies  of  the  mourners'   prayers  emphasize   the spiritually  moribund  condition of a people for whom their religious teaching  is ironically  itself a kind of death  force. The  priest tells his parishioners  that  life is unimportant except as a prelude to death  and final judgment,  "que  nous vivons pour mourir et que nous mourons pour vivre." His Jansenist sermon portrays a vengeful  God,  and  warns  of  the  torments  of  Hell  awaiting  mankind   with  its "nature pecheresse et  voluptueuse"  and  especially awaiting  those  people  who stray  from  the  prescribed' devotions. The  narrow  emptiness  of his message is a bitter satire  upon the whole Church,  with its glorification of war and  admonition to overburdened  women to produce  more children -the latter  a grotesque  and deadening  distortion  of the  life force. The  nun  mouths the  platitude,  "Qu'il est doux de revenir parmi les siens!",  while remaining apart in the cold outdoors. The decayed  teeth  in  her  wan  thin  face  suggest  that  submission  to  the  Church's dictates results in a withering of humanity.3
The  characters  in LaGuerre, Yes Sir! also face a cultural death in which their sense of identity as individuals and as a community is being increasingly repressed. The villagers are powerless against the authority  and force of the English-speaking soldiers, and  in the  end  are  thrown  out  of their  own  house by these strangers. The  uncomprehending sergeant  disdainfully  views the "pigs" who do not  even speak a civilized language, and  whose behaviour  throughout  the night is proof of the  truth  of his old history lesson on French-Canadian animality.  Berube,  who attempts   to  bridge  both  French  and  English cultures, is caught  in  the  middle. At the conclusion he faces the prospect of his dismal future;  considered by both sides to be a traitor,  he is condemned  to be a perpetual  outsider. Thus  the  novel repeats the  pattern  of fear found in John  Richardson's  Wacousta  and Jules-Paul Tardivel's Pour la patrie in which the notion of cultural annihilation is a primary anxiety;  it reinforces the idea that  collective social menace as much as individual menace is a recurring  motif in Cana:dian gothic fiction. Yet there is a difference

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

between Tardivd's nineteenth  century, French-Canadian version and Carrier's contemporary  novel. In  Pour la  patrie, the enemy is clearly defined as the non­ Catholic,   notably  the  Freemason   and  English-Canadian Protestant,  while  the French-Canadian  ideological  fortress  of  religion  and   patrie  is still  intact.   In La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!,  by contrast,  the garrison  has all but  fallen,  having  been undermined from within as well as from without.
The  enemy  is  also  more  nebulous,  wearing  many  faces  besides  that  of  the maudit  anglais. Despite the dominance  of the soldiers and  the subsequent resent­ ment  of them  by the  villagers, the  awareness of menacing  cultural  annihilation  is more than  the  threat  of English masters overriding French-Canadian victims. Margaret Atwood  takes  too  limited: a  view  of  the  menace  in  her  analysis  of LaGuerre, Yes Sir!,• when she emphasizes the two opposing cultures. The  threat is also a matter  of modem  technological society stamping  out indigenous cultural  mores  and   desires,  of  massive,  impersonal  forces  acting  against   the  villagers' feebler  human  particularities and  peculiarities. As the railway station  employee observes, "c'est  la guerre  des gros contre les petits. Corriveau  est mort. Les petits meurent.  Les gros sont eternels."
There  is a gradually surfacing fear that even the big guys are on a path to destruction,   that   humanity   as a whole  will march  to  a  mechanical  doom.  In Henri's  nightmare, Corriveau's  coffin enlarges and  all the  people in  the  world march  into  it  "comme  a l'eglise, combes, soumis".  Significantly the  last to  dis­
appear   are  the  armies  of  soldiers,  "a la  discipline  mecanique" like  the  group
around  Corriveau's bier. The  latter  stand  like automatons,  rigid and  impassive,
and  even the girls noticed "il  n'etait  pas humain  qu'ils restent ainsi tante la nuit figes, raides, immobiles." Thus there is a warning that technological society with its will to power will not only tum  man into a desensitized, impersonal robot, but will eventually  draw   him  ordered  and  submissive to  his doom.  The  train,  roaring through  the snowy wastes into the little village with its mechanized  soldiers, is a technological engine  of death  not unlike the train  which intrudes  into  the woods in Faulkner's  "The Bear".
The  horror  of  technological  society, with  its  reduction  of the  spontaneously human   to  the  automatic, is one  more version of  the gothic-grotesque  motif of mechanism,  found  in Canadian gothic fiction as far back as W acousta. Carrier's soldiers, who seem to function  without  feeling and  to move without  motive other than  obedience   to  orders  or  the  fulfihnent  of  a  mindless  drill,  represent  the ultimate in dehumanization. In this as in other modem grotesque works, the technological  automation suggests something  demonic  beyond  the logical impli­ cations of a powerful system. It invokes fear of a world which is actively menac­ ing  as  well  as  incomprehensible.   In  Henri's   nightmare,   the  soldiers  are  like mechanical  toys drawn  by a central  control in a little box, which  marches them back into its depths and shuts the lid on them.

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE



DESPITE THE  IMPORTANCE of  death   as a  symbolic  focus, Carrier's  novel is not simply a tale about  death,  but, as Nancy  Bailey points out, it presents a  battle  between  life and  death 5   in  which  the  two forces are  often surprisingly  confused.  This  confusion  and  the  resulting sense of  both  death-in­ life and  life-in-death  is a  key to  much of  the  grotesqueness in  the  book.  The  nun's  question  reveals  her  uncertainty   as  to  who  is  really  alive,  despite  the Church's  teaching  that  life after  death is the only valid life. Henri senses that  life on earth  has become a living death,  that "l'homme est malheureux partout," but like the other  villagers, he fears the truth  of an  afterlife in  which  the  flames of Hell and purgatory torment  all sinners.
Despite  the  forces  of  death   which  threaten   to  squash  their  humanity,  the villagers have an irrepressible desire for life:

Les villageois vivaient, ils priaient pour se rappeler, pour se souvenir qu'ils  n'etaient pas avec Corriveau, que leur  vie n'etait pas terminee  et, tout  en croyant prier  pour le  salut   de  Corriveau, c'est  leur   joie de  vivre  qu'ils  proclaimaient en  de  tristes prieres.

Corriveau   underlines  their   life-in-death  desire  when  he  complains   that   "s'il fallait  passer devant  des cerceueils et s'arreter  a un cercueil, il n'etait  pas  juste
quI'on eut en soi I'amour si evident de vie."
Many  of the activities  of the villagers are a mixture  of life and  death  forces. Although  the eating  and  drinking  bouts lead  to a  brawling,  destructive conclu­ sion, they are in themselves a defiant display of sensuousness. Mother Corriveau's  cooking becomes an almost savage attack on death in which she sweatily beats at the pie dough, sensing that  the perfume of the golden baked  tortiere is the essence of living; she explains that  "quand on a un mort dans la maison, il ne faut  pas que la maison sente la mort." In  this role she becomes a kind of earth  mother,  a characterization  which  Carrier  explores more  fully in  the  second  novel  of the trilogy, Floralie, ou es tu?
Sex is both an instrument  of death  and of life. On the one hand,  the Germans
are  described as killing women  by raping  them  and,  to the sleeping  Molly, the attacks of her loveless husband  cause dreams of a knife tearing  her stomach  open. On  the other  hand  Molly, a  prostitute,  represents the  happiness  of living to all the young soldiers who  used to come to her. For Berube, the initial  thought  of sex outside  a  Church-blessed  marriage  leads to visions of damnation; yet with Molly in  bed with  him  as his wife, "c'est  la mort  qu'ils  poignarderent  violern­ ment."
The  pervasive violence also represents a confusion of life and  death  forces. In
the story we find father  beating up son, husband  against wife, neighbour  against neighbour, English against  French,  and the omnipresent spectre of the world war

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

itself. The  war  beyond the village acts only as a catalyst for the war within. The violence is an expression of the villagers' intellectual  and spiritual  isolation from each  other,  of the  decline  of commonly  held cultural  values  and  the  resultant profound  ignorance  and  misunderstanding of each other. The  violence is d  c­ tive, but  it is also a positive response to repression. It is a sign  "of  vitality badly used,''6   of  upsurge  of life in  a society where  there  is no common  language  of meaning but body language.
The   recurring   images  of  blood  and  snow  suggest the  dual  implications  of violence. At various  points in the book, blood spills on the winter snow, whether it is the  blood of the  amputated hand  or the  beaten-up  faces of the villagers in their  battles  with  each  other  and  with  the soldiers. Snow is a traditional image of purity  and  innocence.  In  French-Canadian literature  it 'is  also  an  image  of isolation and  the inward  looking naivety or sterility it produces. Maria  Chapde­ laine  comes to mind  as do  the  words of the familiar song  by Gilles  Vignault: "Mon pays, ce n'est  pas un  pays, c'est l'hiver."  The  French-Canadian  garrison is built  of snow and  ice as much  as it is reinforced  by religious and  nationalist principles.  The  bloody  brawls  are  obviously  disfiguring, cruel  and  destructive. At the same time the blood that  spills on the snow as well as on Molly's virginal, white  wedding  dress  may  suggest  a  human  sensuous response which  overrides traditional  "bloodless"  ideals.   Carrier's  concluding  statement   in  the  novel­ "La  guerre  avait  sali la neige" -has ironic rather  than  tragic  overtones.
Whether  violent  or not,  many  of the activities and actions in the story relate to a selfhood  not  fully realized,  to a society where it is increasingly  difficult to feel at  home. At  the  beginning  of the  book Arthur  tries to  persuade  Henri  to accept  the  war  and  his soldier's  role as a  defence of traditional social values: "Les  soldats  ont  comme  devoir  de  proteger  les fermiers  peres  de  famille,  les enfants,  le  betail,  la  patrie." Yet  increasingly Henri  realizes his true  position: "Sa  femme n'etait  plus la sienne, sa maison n'etait  plus la sienne, nri ses animaux, ni ses enfants."  The  characters' bizarre  actions reflect their  estrangement,  their inarticulated anxieties about an alienated life.
Sherwood  Anderson  has  related  the  quality  of grotesqueness in  people to a single-minded  pursuit  of  partial  truths.7   Ronald  Sutherland   has  also  suggested that   Carrier's  characters   are  grotesques  because they cling  to  outworn  truths.8
Thus   Mother   Corriveau's desperate  observance  of  religious  practices  becomes
grotesque in its distortion,  and  Berube's reflex-like response to the values implicit in  the  soldiers' way of  life makes  a  grotesque out  of him,  as when  we see his frenzied  and  inhuman attempt  to make  a good soldier of Arsene. At  the same cime the  characters  may reflect D. W. Robertson's  definition  that  the grotesque "is  a  monster  because  of unresolved  conflicts in his makeup."9   Sometimes "the grotesque  pretends  to be one thing  but is actually something else,"10  as is the case with  Esmalda  in  particular. The   unresolved  conflicts often  have  to  do  with

x8

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

spiritual values  or  social  attitudes which  the  character has  ostensibly   accepted, and  another reality  which  he actually  practises.  The  source  of humour as well as of fearful  meaninglessness or absurdity partially  comes from their divided  response.
In  a  more  formal   way,  the  grotesque quality  of Carrier's writing relates  to a
constant   juxtaposition  of  extreme  incongruities. Repeatedly  he  combines the extreme poles of  the  sacred  and  profane  in Quebec life, a characteristic similar to  that  found   in  the   late   gothic   phase  of  medieval   art,   and   which   Charles Muscatine associates  with  a loss of purposeful  direction  in  the culture:

Its  religion  is incongruously  stretched  between  new ecstasies of mysticism and  a profane,  almost  tactile  familiarity  with  sacred  matters.  Its  sense of  fact  is often spiritless or actually morbid. For all its boisterous play, the age is profoundly pessimistic;  it  is  preoccupied   with  irretrievable  passage  of  time,  with  disorder, sickness, decay and  death.11

In   La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!  we  find  the  twin  "spiritual" values  of  patriotism and religion   are   incongruously  yoked  with  the  mundane practica1ities   of  everyday living; the  flag is a table  cloth; the image  of Christ  on the cross merges  with  that of a stuffed  pig;  Mother Corriveau's prayer  becomes an  unconscious blasphemy when   her   Hail   Mary   invokes   a  picture   of  the  pregnant  virgin.   Similarly  in Mireille's dream, her  toes become  transformed into  waxen  votive  candles. Some­ times the  grotesque incongruity is achieved  by yoking something tragic  or horrible with  something comical.   Thus Joseph's amputation of  his  own  hand  to  avoid going  to  war  is horrifying, but  it  becomes grotesque when  the  hand   is  casually substituted for  the  frozen  turd  and  used as a hockey  puck, that  commonplace of Canadian life.  Disruption or  confusion  of our  usual  single  response   (the  comic laugh   with  the  tragic  cry  and  the  gothic  gasp)   reinforces  our  awareness of  the confusion  of the traditional world views and values.
There is a literary  resonance  in this latter  image  of the amputated hand  which Carrier seems  to  be  playing  upon.  As Madame Joseph  snatches the  hand   from the  child  and  tucks it  under  her  coat  before going on  her  way, one  immediately recalls  that other  grotesque occasion  in  Le  Chercheur  de tresors when  Charles Amand snatches  the  main-de-gloire from under  the noses of the medical students. The   act  of  dismemberment is yet  another variation on  that  recurring motif  of bodily  disfiguration in  French-Canadian  literature. Joseph's self-mutilation may be seen as a parody  of the motif  by a kind of reductio ad absurdum; Carrier may also be extending the  gothic  death motif by a symbolic suggestion of cultural masochism  or suicide.
In  other  ways  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!  plays with  or  disturbs  our  literary  expec­
tancies,  further providing a sense of strangeness  or estrangement. The view from the  window  in  which  a  captive   being  (usually  a  woman)  looks  out  from  her isolated   imprisonment  is  a  repeated motif  in  gothic  literature, but  also  has  a

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

special  place in  Quebec  literature, where the "captive" spirit  often symbolically represents the isolated containment of French-Canadian society, cut off from participation  in  the  larger  outside  world.  One  remembers,  for  example,  the image  of Maria  Chapdelaine looking outward  both  longingly and  in fear, from the  confinement  of  her  backwoods  house,  upon  the  forest  and  its avenues  of escape.  In  the opening  scene of La Guerre, Yes Sir! Joseph found,  after  cutting
off  his hand,  that  "cette  fenetre  embuee qui le separait  de  la vie peu  a peu fut
transparente, tres claire."  He  had  a brief moment  of lucidity, in contrast  to the image  of Isobelle-Marie  in  La  Belle Bete's opening scene, where she presses her face against the train  window  but soon sees nothing outside it. In nearly all cases there  is a  sense  of  a  claustrophobic   confinement  behind   the  window.  In  La Guerre, Yes Sir! it is a nun standing  outside in the cold who is cut off and who is left  to  gaze  through   an  open  window  at  the  bustle of  activity  within.  In  this image  Carrier  does not seem to imply a reversal of customary  meaning,  that  is, he does not seem to suggest that  the inner group  rather  than  the outer  world is the source of vitality. After all there is death  inside the room as well as without, in  the  coffin as  well  as in  the  decayed  teeth  of  the  nun.  The  nun's  puzzling question  as to  who  is alive and  who is dead  would  rather  suggest that  Carrier means  simply  to  disrupt   or  disturb   the  customary  image   and  its  cluster  of associations.




hKEN AS  A  WHOLE, the effect of La Guerre, Yes Sir!'s strik· ing  images  is to  startle  the  reader's  thoughtful  response rather  than  direct  it; despite the visual clarity and  dramatic  impact,  the images are most often ambig­ uous and  paradoxical  in their symbolic implications, unlike Carrier's later Flora­ lie, ou es tu?, in which  the allegorical push is stronger  and  more insistent. Thus in this first novel in  the  trilogy, the grotesque alliance of horror  and  humour  is essentially disruptive.  Yet  despite  the sense of estrangement  or  absurdity  which the  disruptive  grotesque  usually expresses, La Guerre, Yes  Sir!  does not  project a vision of annihilation but of cultural alteration.
Critics such as Ronald  Sutherland have been quick to point out the similarity between Faulkner's  As I Lay Dying and LaGuerre, Yes Sirf 12  Both stories revolve around   a  coffin, and   describe  the  grotesque  behaviour  and  attitudes  of rural characters  in response to the death  of one of their own. The  American's  novels, like Carrier's,  reflect what  he regards as the moral confusion and social decay of his society, and,  as  Malcolm  Cowley remarks,  Faulkner  is "continually  seeking in  them  for violent images to convey his sense of outrage.ma  Faulkner's charac­ ters, like Carrier's,  have  a double  meaning  besides their  place in the  story, also serving as symbols or  metaphors  with a general application.  In  both  novels, the

20

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE

incidents  in  the story  represent  forces and  elements in society, although  neither As I Lay Dying nor LaGuerre, Yes Sir! can be explained as a connected,  totally logical, allegory.
However,  I think there  is a fundamental  difference in emphasis  between  As I Lay Dying and  La  Guerre, Yes Sir! In  the  former  novel, the  smell of  putre­ faction,  both  literal  and  symbolic, hangs  heavier  in  the air.  Although  some of the  characters  occasionally  show signs of Faulkner's  later  statement  that  "man  will not  merely endure: he will prevail," 14 survival seems an individual  achieve­ ment in the face of a general social decay. In LaGuerre, Yes Sir!, by comparison,  the collective assertion of life is as pronounced as the smell of  Mother  Corriveau's cooking.  What  one  senses in  the  grotesque  distortions  and  inversions  of  dying values is the  presence of change  as much  as of destruction;  it is less a story of death  than of metamorphosis. The general sense of confusion -in the character's attitudes,  in  the symbolic values which issue from the story, and  in the response of the reader-are signals of this process. Old shapes and images shift;  patterns  dissolve  and   the   disparate   elements  come  together   in   startling   vivid  new associations.
Carrier's   reference  to  his  trilogy  as  a  depiction  of  "the   Middle   Ages  of Quebec" reinforces this notion of change rather  than doom as his central  theme. In  Carrier's reference, the Middle  Ages stretches from a period before the second world war to the middle sixties, and encompasses the end of the parochial  period, the discovery of the outer  industrial  world and  the passage from  country  to city life. The  medieval analogy is apt, since the twentieth century decades in Quebec, like those of earlier  times, present  an inward  looking, church-dominated  world, in which the old ways are no longer life-giving forces. It marks a time in which the  gap  between  ideal  and  real,  seen  by  many  critics as  the  essence of  late medieval "decadent" gothicism, becomes an abyin  which the traditional  beliefs and  social values are  to  tumble.  Yet society did  not  collapse at  the  end  of the Middle  Ages, but  was enfused with a new life; the Renai ance
mation of the old into new modes of activity and awareness.
In La Guerre, Yes Sir! the Renaissance is not yet accomplished, but the process of change has begun. The novel is disruptively grotesque, not because of any overriding feeling of futility, but because there is no specific moral or philosophic framework  against  which the grotesque distortions may be judged. Carrier  gives no real hint of the shape of things to come, but the undying energy of his charac­ ters and  the  constant  upsurge  of humour  against  horror,  precludes  a  vision of total  despair.  In  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!, as in  the  later  Floralie, ou es  tu?, the process of metamorphosis is one in which the old grotesque encasements of society must be broken through,  or overturned  and  discarded,  before a new, freer being will emerge. In  this sense, then,  the wooden box carrying  the body of  Corriveau  and  by implication  the  whole of  Quebec society is less a coffin than  a  cocoon.

21

SPORTIVE GROTESQUE


NOTES

1 Roch  Carrier, La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!,  trans.  Sheila  Fischman (Anansi, 1970). First published by Editions du Jour (Montreal, 1968).
2   Writing about La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!,  Rene  Dionne  states  that  the  humour largely lies  in  the  disproportion  between   the  characters' psychological  or  social  stature and  their  actual situation. "LaGuerre,  Yes Sir!"  Relations, 331  ( 1968), pp. 279-
281.
3  When   discussing   the  base  or  false  grotesque in  which  "grossness,  of one  kind  or another, is, indeed, an  unfailing characteristic of  the  style  (Vol.  III, p.  137) ," Ruskin   mentions, as an  example of abominable detail,  a  carving  at  Santa Maria Formosa in  which  "the teeth  are  represented as decayed."  However, the decayed teeth   of  Carrier's  "saintly" nun   do  not  indicate  the  diminutive  power   of  the author's mind, as Ruskin  would  have it, but  rather indicate the unhealthy attitudes of  the  purveyors of religion,  while  possibly satirizing  the  vacuous  pink  and  white statuettes ensconsed   in  households and   in  whose  image  the  villagers  attempt  to place  Esmalda.
4    Margaret Atwood, Survival: A Thematic Guide  to Canadian Literature (Toronto,
1972).
5    Nancy  Bailey,  "The  Corriveau Wake: Carrier's Celebration of Life," Journal  of
Canadian Fiction, III (Summer 1972), pp. 43-47·
6    Carrier used this phrase  in a seminar at York University.
7    Sherwood Anderson, Winesburg, 0hio  (New York, 1947), p. 25.
8   Ronald Sutherland, "La Guerre, Yes Sir!," Canadian Literature, 40  ( 1969)  pp.
8s-86.
Q     D.  W.  Robertson, Jr.,   A  Preface  to  Chaucer: Studies  in  Medieval  Perspectives
(Princeton, 1 969) .
10   Ibid., p. 253.
11  Charles Muscatine, Chaucer and  the  French  Tradition  (Berkeley,  1969), p. 246.
12   Ronald Sutherland, "Faulknerian Quebec," Canadian Literature, 40  (1969), pp.
8s-86.
13   Malcolm Cowley,   "Introduction" to  William   Faulkner, The  Portable   Faulkner
(New York,  1967), p. xxi.
14  William  Faulkner, "Nobel Prize Address,"  The Portable  Faulkner, p. 724.
15  John   Ruskin, The  Stones of Venice, 7 vols., 1851-53  (London, 1906), Vol.  III, p. 141.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS /228-4741



22

MEMOIRS OF
A ROMANTIC IRONIST




Elizabeth Brewster







w.EN R.G.BALDWIN  pub];,hOO an article about  Edward McCourt  a dozen years ago in Queen's  Quarterly/   he commented  on how little critical notice had  been taken of McCourt's  work. In  1976 Baldwin's  complaint still remains substantially  true.  For an author  who published during  his lifetime six  novels, a  biography,  three  travel  books,  a  work of criticism,  two  books for children, and numerous short stories and articles, McCourt  has created singularly little stir, even in a period  when people w:ho have done much  less quantitatively and  whose work  does not  appear  remarkably  superior  qualitatively   have  been praised and  discussed at  length.  To  my knowledge, no substantial  articles, other than  book reviews, have  been  published since Baldwin's.  McCourt is not  men­ tioned in such notable thematic  studies as Jones's Butterfly  on Rock  or Atwood's Survival,  nor  is  his  work  represented  in  such  recent  anthologies  as  the  new edition   of  Klinck   and   Watters'    Canadian   Anthology,  Brita   Mickleburgh's Canadian   Literature:  Two   Centuries  in  Prose, or  Mary  Jane  Edwards'   The  Evolution of Canadian Literature in English.
Perhaps  a  part  of  this  neglect  is caused  as much  by  McCourt's  somewhat
retiring  personality as by the  unassuming  nature  of his work. He  once wrote to me jokingly, at a time when  I was having difficulties in getting a book of poems published   (December   r8,   1967), "The trouble  is,  I'm  sure,  that   you  don't project  the  right image. And  you must remember  that  the right  image is much more important  lilian the  quality  of your  poetry. Can't you head  up  a militant campaign  of some sort?  Get  yourself arrested?''  McCourt   himself was certainly not one to head campaigns,  get himself arrested:, or otherwise  provoke comment on himself as a human  being. Yet to his family, friends, colleagues, and students, his personality was an attractive  one, not without its mysteries. Both as a human being and a writer, he aroused more interest on the second look than  on the first.
More  attention,   I  am  sure,  will eventually  be  paid  to  McCourt's  writing.
Music  at  the  Close  and  The   Wooden   Sword  are  now  available  in  the  New

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

Canadian Library.  A book on McCourt is being written by Winnifred  Bogaards, and  this will provide  much  information  on the man  and  his work. It is also to be hoped  that  sooner  or  later  some of his unpublished  work will be published.
This  unpublished  work,  now in  the Special Collections of the  Library  of the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, includes three novels, Ragged Regiment, The  Coyote  Hunt, and  No  Snow  on the Mountain, a collection of short stories, and  an autobiographical work, The  Long Years. It might even be suggested that his most important work has not yet been published.
All three  of  the  novels are  interesting,  although  somewhat  untypical  of  Mc­ Court's  published  work.  Ragged  Regiment, which was written  directly after  his last published novel Fasting Friar, is an academic novel set in a fictional Atlantic university  with  distant   resemblances  to  the  University  of  New  Brunswick. It perhaps   owes  more   to  an  odd   combination   of  Kingsley   Amis  and   Angela Thirkell  than  to actual  observation  of the Maritime  scene. Yet it has some effec­ tive comic  passages, especially those involving Lewis Otterburn, a movie mogul who is given an honorary  degree in the hope of  benefactions to come, and whose resemblance to Lord  Beaverbrook seems more than coincidental.
The  Coyote  Hunt  is a  much  grimmer  work. It is set in  an  ugly little  prairie
community  named  Sunlight,  a later  version of Sinclair Ross's Horizon.  Bypassed by  the  "new  super-highway", Sunlight  is a ghost town  inhabited  by the living dead,  full of boredom  and  hate.  The  coyote hunt  of the title, a desperate effort of the community  to amuse itself, turns into something more sinister as the novel progresses, a "hunt" of the outsiders in town, the local school teacher, the minister, and  the  community   hermit.  McCourt   has  preceded  Heather   Robertson  in  his picture  of the  decaying  prairie  community.  Indeed,  he was already  doing so as early  as Home  is the  Stranger,  although  in that  novel the modified hopefulness of  the  ending   tended   to  distract   the  reader  from  the  picture  of  community breakdown.
Of  the  three  novels, The  Coyote  Hunt  is perhaps  the most currently  interest­
ing, in spite of some unevenness, though  some readers might  prefer No Snow on the Mountain.
No  Snow  on  the  Mountain is a strange  romantic  and  symbolic work which
would probably  have more appeal  now than  it might have had at an earlier date. It is in part a retelling of the Hippolytus-Phaedra story set in the Canadian West. Perhaps  Jones  and  Atwood  would  have  been interested  in  this novel if it had been available  to them.  It  includes a true  Canadian Venus, in the form of a girl named  Rachel  Lowe,  rising from  the waters of the  river after  a  picnic. And it ends  with  the  death  of Roy  Bothwell, the  modern  Hippolytus,  part  way up  a mountain which  he thought  would make him divine if he reached  the top. As a capsule  summary,  this  may  sound  fairly comic, but  actually  the  novel has con­ siderable  power. The  classical plot gives the book a sense of inevitability, and the

A ROMANTIC mONIST

voice of  the  first-person  narrator, Roy's  friend  Rick  Warner,  has an  authentic ring. It  is the only one of McCourt's novels to be written  in  the first  person­ unless one  considers  the  autobiographical The   Long  Years  to  be  a  species of fiction. McCourt  might  not  have gone along with the term  "non-fiction  novel." He  was too well aware  of the long tradition  of biography and  autobiography as an  art  form. But the line between a novel and  an autobiography as aesthetically conceived as The  Long Years is certainly thin.
The  Long  Years  seems to me  (although  I  may be wrong)   to be the  best of McCourt's works, better  than  anything  published during  his lifetime. The type­ script  ( 267  pages double spaced)   is a fair copy which appears,  except for a few typing  errors,  to  be  ready  for  publication.  The  typescript  is not  dated.  Some chapters  clearly belong to the last year or so of McCourt's  life, touching as they do on  the old age and  death  of his father,  whom he mentions  as being alive in I970.  (McCourt himself died  in  January I972.)  "Our Hired  Man" appeared  as a short  story in  the Spring   I97I   issue of Queen's  Quarterly,  and  must  date from  I970. (He  mentioned,  in a letter written  to me December  9,  I970  that  he had  been  doing  "a  good deal  of writing"  including  "a  short  story  for Q.Q.­ and  various odds and  ends." This must  be the story he means, and  I would guess that  some of the "odds  and  ends" later became chapters in the book.)  However, some chapters  are definitely of earlier date. These include "A Man for the Drink" and  "The Maltese  Piano,'' both  published in the M ontrealer in the early sixties, and  both  also included  in his unpublished  collection of short stories, Cranes  Fly South, which  he submitted   unsuccessfully to a  publisher  in  I968. One  or  two others may  possibly also date  from the sixties.2   I would  conjecture  that  he wrote the larger part of The  Long Years in 1970-7I   but incorporated a few more highly fictionalized  chapters  which  he had  written  earlier. Mrs. McCourt also believes the date  to be approximately   I 9 70-7 I, and  considers it his final work aside from unfinished work in progress, a novel and  a biography of Sir William  Gregory of Coole which were never completed.3
The  Long Years is not a complete autobiography. I would conjecture  that  the work is the first volume of what  would have been a longer work if he had  lived; but it is self-sufficient in itself. It tells the story of McCourt's life from his earliest memories  until  the  time  when  he  wrote  the  Provincial  examinations  which opened  the  way to his attendance at the  University of Alberta.  The  concentra­ tion  is on  the first  ten years of his life, the  period,  before and  during  the  first Great   War,  when  he  was  growing  up  on  an  isolated  prairie  homestead  near Kitscoty,  Alberta.  The  setting  is one which,  in spite of its  later  time, seems as harsh  and  primitive as that  of Mrs. Moodie's  Roughing  it  in  the Bush, and  one remembers  that  McCourt's sympathy  with  Mrs.  Moodie  (as  expressed  in  his
article  on  her  reprinted  in  A. J. M. Smith's  Masks  of Fiction)  is greater  than
that offered to her by younger readers such as Atwood.

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

IREAD The  Long Years last summer with interest and recog­ nition  and some surprise.  I was a student  of Edward  McCourt's for two years at the  University  of  New  Brunswick in  the 194o's. The  background   I  came from
was,  in  spite  of  the  difference  in  regions, amazing  similar  in  some  respects. Perhaps  because  of  that  similarity,  he  had  treated  my own  early  attempts  to write poems and short stories and one abortive undergraduate novel with a great deal  of  sympathy.  He  had  impressed  on  me the  importance  for  the  writer  of being  faithful  to  his  local  background,  of lOdking at the  people and  places he knew best. And  he made  it clear that  a writer ought to be honest with himself, face his own personal demons, not soften or sentimentalize or smoothe over the harshness and  absurdity  and  clumsiness and dullness of life. His novels, it seemed to me, had  worked in the direction of these ideals, but they had not always come up  to them  as completdy as had  the autobiography. Many  novelists begin with autobiographical  fiction   and   proceed  to  do  something   more  objective   and external.  McCourt  seemed to reverse the procedure and work up to the personal and  subjective.  But,  by the  time  he had  completed  The  Long  Years,  he had  a lifetime's practice in writing fiction behind him. He had also written a highly competent  biography,  Remember Butler. What  he produced was not the amateur narrative which  a  beginning  writer  might  have  provided,  but  an  aesthetically
satisfying whole.
Autobiographical material  is, of course, present in  his  published  novels. Neil Fraser's  schooldays, in Music  at  the  Close, for  instance,  bear  a  strong  resem­ blance to McCourt's own schooldays as described in The  Long Years. No doubt the  account  of  Neil's  university  days owes something  to  the  young  McCourt's own  experience  on the  University  of Alberta  campus. Charlie  Steele, the remit­ tance  man of Music  at the Close, whom the young Neil idolizes, is clearly based on  the young Englishman, Charlie  Hayward,  of The  Long Years. But there are great  and  significant  differences. Neil enters the novel, perhaps conveniently,  as an orphan, so that  the crucial  relationship of father  to son need not be analyzed. Charlie  Steele is presented  as a more romantic  figure  (although of course some of the  romance  is in  Neil's imagination) than  Charlie Hayward. And  Neil is a weaker  figure  than   his author.  Neil as a  central  character  is in some ways an interesting  failure.  One  suspects  a  certain  ambiguity  in  McCourt's intentions. No doubt  he partly wished to present, as Baldwin suggests, a character  led astray by "escapist"  romantic  dreams.  But then McCourt  is not unsympathetic  to these romantic  dreams.  There is a great  deal of Edward  McCourt  in  Neil Fraser. If Neil Fraser  is  not  always presented  with  approval,  one may suppose  that  Mc­ Court did not always approve of himself.
Home  is the Stranger,  my own favourite of the published novels, is not in any

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

obvious way autobiographical; but the sensitivity, the romanticism  of Norah,  the protagonist,  is present  in  all  his principal  characters.  She is a  prairie  Madame Bovary, observed less coolly than  Flaubert observed Madame Bovary. It is a pity that  McCourt  softened  the  ending.  Some of his sympathy  with  Norah's  home­ sickness for Ireland may  come from his memories of his awn  mather's struggles in adjusting  to life on the prairie,  though certainly her character as it is revealed in The  Long Years seems to have been very different from that  of  Norah.
The  Wooden  Sword  also makes use of autobiographical background  only in a
general  way. Steven  Venner,  the  protagonist, has a childhood  far different  from that  of Edward  McCourt. Yet, like the  young McCourt, he was a  bookish boy who loved the  poetry of Lord  Byron and  wanted  to be heroic like St. Paul and Robin Hood and  King Arthur.  And much of the novel is concerned with Steven's sense of worthlessness as a  teacher,  symbolized by his impotence  as a  husband and  lover. Behind  the  occasionally  melodramatic  plot  is a serious discussion of the  role of  the  university  teacher,  of what  is involved  in  a sense of vocation. Steven  Venner's  doubts  of the  value of his  teaching  must  be doubts  that  every teacher, including McCourt, has shared.
Michael Troy,  the youthful  protagonist of Walk  Through the Valley, is prob­ ably  closest of  these  fictional  characters  to  the  young  McCourt   of  The  Long Years. As a matter  of fact,  McCourt  wrote  to me a>bout  the  book  (in  a  letter dated October  r8, 1971), "I think I liked  the book very much indeed when I was writing it-perhaps because the youngster and I seemed to be the same person."  It  is the  personalities of the two boys that  are  alike, their  boyhood dreams  and youthful romanticism. But there is a great difference in the father-son relationships in the novel and the autobiography. McCourt's  own father,  although like Dermot Troy  he was an Irish immigrant, was otherwise almost Dermot's complete oppo­ site. It is as though  McCourt  found it necessary to create for his fictional counter­  part  a  father  who  had  the  charm  and  romanticism  and  gaiety  which  his  own father  lacked, but  who also had  weaknesses not present in his own father.
These four  novels have, as Baldwin points out,  main  characters  who live to a certain  extent in  the world of romantic  illusion. Michael Troy  is the only one of these protagonists  whom Baldwin sees as being genuinely "triumphant'' because, after an initial disillusionment,  "he has ... found an invulnemble  romance in the heroism of life itsel£."4    Is the  McCourt  of The  Long Years  also "triumphant"? Perhaps.   But  then   there   are  two  McCourts   present-the ironic,  somewhat detached  observer  who is the adult  narrator  and  the  romantic  child  and  youth whom the narrator  remembers.
Much of The  Long Years is less about  the young McCourt  himself than  about the  community,  the  neighbours,  and  his  parents.  Immigrants from  Northern Ireland who had! come  to Canada when Edward  McCourt, the youngest of the three children,  was only two years old, the elder McCourts  found  the pioneering

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

experience  difficult. Even  though  he himself could not remember  the  move, the immigrant  experience  bulks large in  the  McCourt  novels, including  the  unpub­ lished  No  Snow  on  the  Mountain. William  McCourt  was  a  stem,  undemon­  strative  Calvinist  whose  nature  was  made  harsher  by failure.  McCourt writes, "I have  rarely observed  a companionable relationship to exist  between  a funda­  mentalist father  and  his offspring. Our  family was no exception. My father  lived in fear of God, his children  lived in fear of him."5  Yet he is not simply a stereo­ type of the  rigid father,  for  McCourt notes his good qualities-his love of the countryside,  his "intellectual curiosity" -and is aware of the  harsh and  narrow upbringing which,  together  with  his  later  hardships,  prevented  a  flowering  of his   personality.6     A  complex   personality  is  suggested,  and   the   personality  is revealed  not  only in  McCourt's direct  comments  but in  the father's  relation  to the  foils  pmvided  for  him,  the  hard-drinking Charlie  Hayward   or  the  gentle hired man, Sandy.
Although  McCourt's father  did  not  model for  any  main  characters  in  Mc­
Court's   novels,  his  mother  as  presented  in  The   Long  Years  is  not  unlike  the mother  of Walk   Through the  Valley, whose first name,  Elizabeth,  she shares. She too had a strong  religious faith,  but she held it less grimly than  her husband held  his.  A  woman  who  yearned  for  more  beauty  and  more  demonstration  of affection  in  her  life, she obviously  won  her son's  pity as well as his love. The account  of her early homesick days in the new country is especially effective and is similar  to the  account  of Norah  Annstrong's yearning for Ireland  in Home is the Stranger.
The  dreamy,  introspective,  romantic  personality that  appears  in some form or other  in most of the  published  novels (and  also in Colin Jarvis of Ragged  Regi­ ment  and  Roy Bothwell of No Snow  on the Mountain) makes perhaps his most
convincing  appearance in The  Long Years. Here is the small boy growing up in a setting  where  his imagination could wander  as he wiHed it to.  A slough "two hundred   yards  long  and  three  feet  deep"  becomes for him  all  the Seven Seas. One day the Creek

might be the Amazon or Congo, I an explorer battling my way through the dense menacing  jungle that  lined its banks; the next the Rubicon, with Julius Caesar, wooden sword in hand,  waving his legions across; the next the Rio Grande, the cattle grazing on the hills beyond the far bank a rustled herd I had  trailed all the way from Canada to Mexico and was now set to recover at gun-point.

In  "the  poplar  bluff on the ridge above the east pasture"  he played Robin  Hood with a bow and arrow.
Much  of his imaginative  life was nurtured  by books. One  chapter   (Chapter
12) is entitled  "Books  of  my  Boyhood."  The  book heroes of  his boyhood  are similar  to those he gives to Steven  Venner  and  Michael Troy-that  is, Robin

A ROMANTIC IRONIST


Hood, D'Artagnan and  the Three Musketeers,  Wild  Bill Hickok,  Girt John Ridd, Buck  Duane. AH heroes  appeal to a romantic imagination. Like every  book lover brought up  on  a small  supply  of books, he read  whatever he could  get  his hands on,  from  the  poetry  of Byron  to  Creasey's  Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World and  Horatio Alger's  Only  an Irish Boy. And  he placed  the  characters from old­ world  books in his own prairie surroundings:

Girt  John  Ridd  stands forever on the manure  pile down at  the edge of the slough and  from  that  lofty eminence  hurls  Carver  Doone  into  the  murky  slime below; Pugh  the  blind  man  comes tapping  along the trail  winding  past our shack door; Ivanhoe  and  the  Knight  Templar face each other  from opposite ends of the cow pasture   (when  Wellington  and  Napoleon  aren't  using it); and  in the dark  hours the Hound  of the Baskervilles still bays from the hills on the far side of the Creek.

As a  romantic adolescent, although he did  not  have  the  sexual  adventures of which  a later  generation would  inevitably have  written, he cherished a schoolboy crush   on  the  thirteen-year-old niece  of  Colonel  Buckland, the  aristocrat of  the neighbourhood -the  teasing   Peggy  McKinnon, on  whom   Janet  Maitland of Walk  through  the Valley  seems to be based. But it is the comedy  of the  romantic attachment, and  the  boyish ineptitude of his youthful  self, that  the adult  narrator emphasizes, along with his disillusionment at Peggy's hands.
Our last  glimpse  of  the  young  McCourt occurs  when  he travels  to Vermilion, Alberta ("a town  so big you might  as well call it a city") to write  his university entrance examinations. Obliged   to leave  his first boarding place  because  of  the sudden heart attack of  his  disagreeable landlady, he  delighted!ly  jogs off  to  the local   hotel.   Here   he  thinks   of  himself  as  leading   the  life  of  an  independent sophisticate for  a  week,  in  whatever time  he  has  free  from  writing exams.  He spends the  early  part  of  his  evenings  alone,  walking  the  two  intersecting main streets  of Vennilion, "a gawky  fann lad  projecting a lot of wrist and  ankle  from a mail  order  suit several  sizes too small for him."  Later  in the evening he attends the  movies  (going  twice  in succession  to the same  movie)   or  listens to  the  town band  when it takes over the movie house for an evening:

Viewed  in  the  hard  clear  light  of common  day  I spent  my evening  in a shabby little  movie house listening  to a  small-town  band  play tired  old  numbers  in and out  of tune, and  to two semi-professional artists who would never make it to any­ where  within a mile of the top. But the truth  for me was something  far different. The  pianist symbolized the union, on the highest level, of art  and  romance,  and I fell deeply in love with her. And  the trumpets  and  trombones of  the  town band, played  mostly  by paunchy  middle-aged  business men  who  tended  to run  out  of wind in sustained passages, were the authentic horns of elfland ...

This  glimpse,  however  secondc.rate it might  be, of the larger world  beyond  the homestead and   the  small  town,  was  the  beginning of the  change from  boy  to

29

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

adult.  "I had begun  moving inland  away from the immortal sea into a world far different  though  not less splendid  than  that  in which I had spent  the long years of childhood  and  early  youth." There  speaks the eternal  romantic  in  McCourt, triumphing for the moment over McCourt  the ironist.
The  young McCourt of The Long  Years  may thus be viewed  (if he is histori­ cally  true)   as  the  original  of  McCourt's romantic   protagonists;   but  he  may equally  well be viewed  as their  cumulation,  for as a literary  creation  he  comes later  than   Neil  Fraser  and  Steven  Venner  and  Michael  Troy.  If  he  is more appealing  than  Neil and  Steven and Michael, it is perhaps because McCourt the narrator sees his  younger  self with  saving  irony  and  unsentimentality, and  yet with sympathy. The  book is full of droll touches of  comedy and also of a kind of stubborn  refusal on  the  part  of the narrator  to sentimentalize  or soften what  his younger self might  have sentimentalized. "Splendid" though  he might  think  the world  of childhood,  for instance,  he will  not sentimentalize  his schooldays. The  school was uncomfortable. He learned little, he said!, from his teachers. "I disliked my  schoolmates  and   they  me.  About  all  I  remember  of  my schooldays  with pleasure  is being  left  alone  to  read  in  peace."  Perhaps  the only  way  he could bear  to view some of the  unpleasant incidents of childhood  was to view them in the light of comedy.
The   double  personality   which  emerges  from  The   Long   Years   is  complex,
sometimes  contradictory. It  seems doubtful  if  McCourt  ever  completely  recon­ ciled his romantic,  idealistic,  hopeful self with his cool, ironic, stoic self. But the tension  between these contradictions is what,  for one reader  at least, makes The  Long  Years  more  compelling  than  his published  novels. The  authenticity  of the first-person voice and the  easy polish of the style no doubt also help.
McCourt did  his most  ambitious  writing  in  his novels, his most immediately
popular  writing in  his travel  books; but, if one work of his more than  any other is likely to last, I would  predict  it to be The  Long  Years. Provided, of course, it is published.


NOTES

1 68 (Winter 1962), 574-587.
2     "A Man for the Drink," Montrealer  35 (December 1961), 36-42; "The  Maltese
Piano," Montrealer, 37 (June 1963), 29-31.
3  This conjecture is supported by other evidence, such as the inclusion of a note on The   Long  Years  in a notebook devoted to material for the unfinished biography of Sir William Gregory, on which McCourt was working in 1971. A partial hand­ written first draft  with the title "Remembrance, Bk. 2, Draft  1," exists in an un­ paged scribbler. This includes the original of several chapters of The  Long Years, including "The  Hired  Man."  There  is a not too legible note after  one chapter which looks like "Work  in stories I have." Also a typescript in the  possession  of Mrs. McCourt, an intermediate version, includes a handwritten note: "The Long

A ROMANTIC IRONIST

Years.  First  draft of autobiography. Very  rough  in  spots.  Into it should   be  inte­ grated two stories-A Man  For the Drink & The  Maltese  Piano-both  in short story collection."
4    Baldwin,  p. 587.
The  Long Years, p. g. This and  all subsequent references are  to the  typescript in the  Special  Collections of  the  University  of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. Permission to quote  from  unpublished material has been obtained from  Mrs. McCourt.
6  In  a  few  pages  of  loose ms tucked  into  the draft  Remembrance, McCourt  writes about  his impressions  of the  Ulster  relatives,  and  says of his father, "Measured in terms  of emancipation, he moved  a long  way. The  blight  of a narrow, hate-filled evangelism  he never  escaped  from."





STEPPING
OUT OF WJITER
 




Peter Stevens


The sensation  is acid.

In it,  the  feet feel ice;

then  out, flesh seared  away.

Bones in bright  air
burn  white  coiled clear:

filaments
in a bell jar.

The sun shines outside
not  wanning. Feet  will hiss
into  steam
if you step  into that  enticing glitter
again.

POET OF APOCALYPSE

Robert Gibbs

AN APOCALYPSE  ;. an  uncovering  of  what   has  been
covered. The  disclosure takes the form of a dream  or vision, revealing in a  psy­
chological  sense what  is subliminal  to  human  consciousness. Any  work  of  the imagination  is a kind of apocalypse, but  we generally reserve the label for those that  have  the alpha-and-omega scope associated with the last  book of the  New Testament. We might easily call a poem like Pratt's  "The  Cachalot" apocalyptic since it explores hidden  places and depicts a leviathan  big enough symbolically to encompass the whole of creation. Yet "The Cachalot" 's symbolic strength  resides in  its physical solidity. To  release his imagination  the  poet  has  not  had  to  go beyond the bounds of possibility; he has created the illusion of being wide awake and  objectively faithful  while suspending  as much  as necessary his literal  aware­ ness. The  works I  wish to examine  are  two which  allowed a  more  overtly free play of imagination  and  a  more  conscious removal from  everyday  reality. The poet  has cast them  as dreams,  visions or fantasies. Perhaps  the  chief  source  of irony in these poems lies in the fact that  their inherent significance-what they disclose imaginatively-varies inversely with  their  conscious intent-what  the poet set out to disclose. Of the two, The Witches'  Brew and  "The Great  Feud",  the first is richer in ironic and symbolic  possibilities largely because in writing  it Pratt  was as free from conscious designs on his readers as on his own imagination.
What  he did set out  to do in The  Witches' Brew he described  in  a letter  to
Desmond  Pacey:  "I must confess that  the only didacticism I had  in mind  when I scribbled  that  fantasy  was to get away from  the dead  seriousness of much  of Newfoundland   verse. . . . I wanted   to  strike  a  new  vein  which  generally  has persisted til the present with sufficient variation  (I  hope)  to break the monotony of tone.m Such a disclaimer will not prevent any reader from seeing in the poem much  more than  a refusal to be serious. What  Pratt  was turning  from  was not seriousness but  "dead  seriousness," and  what  he was trying  to strike  was not  a new vein for a  particular work  but  a new direction for  himself as a  poet. The conscious rebellion behind  the poem is not against the mechanics of the universe but against the mechanics he had too often geared his imagination  to in the early poems. The  poem, then,  is itself a rebellion and  an effort toward  self-discovery,

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

a releasing of the poet's imagination  so that he himself might know it better. The apocalyptic  aspect of the  poem  comes from its exploration  of the  limits of  free­ dom and  control within the poet himself as poet, an exploration  that  the  reader will inevitably extend.
Compared   as a  total  form  to  "The  Cachalot" or  "The Great   Feud", The
Witches' Brew lacks solidity of body. This is apparent from  the  physical appear­ ance of its ten sections on the page -the free breaking in of dialogue, inventory and  prose description.  Even the  passages of continuous  narrative vary  greatly in pace and  procedure, for the poet allows himself room for asides, gratuitous scraps of erudition   and  generous  catalogues.  The  importance   of   pace is particularly noticeable in the opening sections, where the poet is taking his time in laying the table  for  his banquet-binge.  He  savours every detail for  itself and  expends  the same  care  here as with  one of his famous stag  dinners.  The  one constant  that gives the form its true elasticity is the tetrameter measure. Although  Pratt  works it with all possible freedom,  and  although  it is not as portentously  present as the "great  consonant"  of "The  Cachalot", it is still there in the poem as an  unremit­  ting regulatory force. The  tetrameter  measure, as it does in Hudibras, effects an ironic  detachment,  which  allows for a full  imaginative  engagement   and  which asserts its own irony against  the thematic material  of the poem. In  this way, the rhetorical  pattern,  while it allows for  elasticity of shape-giving  the  poet  room to do all that  he desires-demands,  as  true elastic does, a return  to  order.  It is
a forming agent and an informing force. The limits of freedom and  control assert themselves in the poem as a poem first, so that  the "brew" and  its dispensing are not  just matters of the poem -they are  the poem.
The  poem as an "apocalyptic dinner"  is a submarine  counterpart of the mar­ riage supper  of the  Lamb.  As such,  its burlesque  character   is not  so  much  a mockery or  take-off of the  biblical  picture  of final  things  as an  effort  to  tum  inside out the arbitrary  order  imposed on creation  by dogmatic  restrictions. The witches complete their concoction  according  to a formula  which  seems to reflect the divine view of things when they add to the alcoholic base-

Cold-blooded things yet not marine, And not of earth, but half-between, That  live enclosed within the sand Without the power of locomotion,
And mammal breeds whose blood is hot, That  court the sea but love it not,
That  need the air but not the land,­ The Laodiceans of the ocean.


33

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

There  is a judgment here against half-way creatures, but unlike the Divine Judge, who spews Laodiceans  out of his mouth,  or Dante,  who allows them  no place in heaven  or hell, Pratt's generous  vision includes them  in the  feast, if  not  as  par­ takers, at least as food.  But  the  witches, once started,  stick to  no  formula. The catalogue  of actual  ingredients   departs  freely from  the  sanctioned  recipe  and includes  anything  from  an  Ungava   bull  moose to  Zulu  hams.  This  generous refusal to make a separation between sheep and goats is typical of a poem which develops expansively to test any limits it asserts.
One  of the  more  obvious  ironies of the  poem is that  the  creature  chosen to maintain  order,  to act  as sentinal  over the  brew and  the  elect, is Tom,  the cat from Zanzibar,  himself an  archetypal  rebel. Yet the choice is appropriate to the experiment,  which  is to  bring  total  release from  natural   discipline  to  a  whole order  of creatures.  In  depicting  Tom,  Pratt  clearly sees him as a  cosmic force, a Lucifer in the natural order:

No leopard, lynx or jaguar
Could match this cat from Zanzibar
For whiskers that from ear to chin
Ran  round to decorate his grin. And something wilder yet than that Lay in the nature of this cat.
It's said that mariners by night,
When near a dangerous coast-line, might
Recover bearings from the light
Of some strange thing that swam and gleamed; A Salamander it might be,
They said, or Lucifer that streamed
His fiery passage through the sea.

He is a solid creature  of Pratt's imagination,  clearly a close relative to the omnis­ cient ironist of Alice in Wonderland, but he is just as clearly the embodiment  of that  free force with which the poet himself is moving. He is the central  figure of the poem, its most Prattian creation. As such, he symbolizes an imagination  freed to rove through  the  cosmos, to illuminate  its dark  places with  his fiery tail.  He electrifies the  poem  and  its readers  as he electrifies the  banqueters.  For  all  his identification  with Lucifer  and for all the poet's carefully kept illusion of detach­  ment  from his poem, Tom  is the creature  with whom  his creator  clearly identi­ fies, since he bodies forth  the very spirit which is the poem's impulse.
The  identification  of Tom  with  Lucifer is not,  at  this point  in the  poem, a moral one. Tom  in the expression of his own nature  is as free from moral blame as any of the lower creatures.  The  poet in his imagination,  then,  enjoys a moral

34

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

freedom that  he does not otherwise enjoy. This irony is at the heart  of the  poem and  at the heart  of Pratt's  poetic vision. Poetry itself becomes a means of release from the order  of nature  and  from the moral order,  to which man  alone is sub­ ject. A work of imagination  which gives the  poet's alazon  spirit  free  expression, while by its nature  keeping an ironic check upon that spirit, embodies the central paradox  of man's  place in nature  as seen by a rational  mind and  in a  moral  uni­ verse as seen by a Christian humanist. The imaginative embodiment  of an insoluble riddle effects a release from it. Tom's presence at the banquet  is itself  a guarantee for the electrified revellers of a final revelation.
The  "Inventory of Hades"  reinforces the  central  theme.  The  spirits  released through  Hell's  Gates  are  not  escaping  the  bonds  of individual   moral  respon­ sibility but are breaking from  the restricting, artificial masks that  they  have  had to wear  in  life. The  poet sees them  as such  roles and  not  as  individiuals.  The  comic tone effected by the cumulative  play of rhythm counters any sense of their release with a good-humoured acceptance of their bonds. After all, they come not to partake  of the brew's releasing force but to observe rather enviously. The  dis­ tinction  between  them  and  the other  creatures  lies at  the  poem's  moral  centre. The  mock-epic question  that  the poet set out to explore was "The true effect of alcohol/  Upon  the  cold  aquatic   mind."  This  is  really  another   assault  on  the "monologue  of silence", another  confrontation  with mechanical  necessity and  the creatures subject to it. But here, the poet's imagination  is intent  on releasing them from what  they are.
The  fishes' release is not from  moral inhibitions;  from  them  they are  already free. Yet their  moral  innocence is conditional  upon their being mechanically determined.  The experiment  that the devil, the witches and the shades will watch with such interest  is to see what  effect mechanical  freedom  will have  on  crea­ tures  already  morally  free. The  destructive  chaos  that  results answers  the  epic question and brings the circular argument  around  to its beginning. Moral freedom and  mechanical  freedom  are mutually  exclusive, just as moral  responsibility and mechanical  necessity are  mutually  exclusive. That   man  sees  himself  as simul­ taneously under  both  conditions  is a dilemma  from  which  only his imagination  can free him.
The  mechanism  by which the witches dispense their brew is hierarchical, care­ fully calibrated  and adjustable to every need. The  mechanism  by which  the poet dispenses his brew to slake his own "vast Elizabethan  thirst" is equally well regu­ lated.  Just  as the  volume  of traffic in  the sea  threatens  to  wreck  the  witches' mechanism, so Pratt's almost  breaks under  the  force of his  imaginative indul­ gence. The  choral comments  by the Shades on the chaotic events by their  ironic

35

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

detachment maintain an  order,  a  rational  superstructure  over the  drunken  riot. The  pace  and  the  threat  of  complete  collapse  heighten  when  the  cauldron  is breached. At this point, when a more cautious poet might have drawn  back satis­ fied with the extent of freedom asserted and  realized, Pratt  chooses to push on to an ultimate stage.
"The Supreme  Test"  is, then,  one for the poet as well as for the witches and Satan. Tom,  the archetypal  rebel, the embodied assertion of imaginative  freedom, will receive enough  of the liquor  to release his full force into the poem's universe and  into  the  poem. He  becomes with  the  hundredth  flagon  "... Hell's  darkest
fiend -f A sea-cat  with  an  awful  jag-on",  the archetypal  fighting  Irishman, at
war with everything  and everyone including  himself. He is all natural and  meta­ physical energy at war with itself, the very spirit of chaos. As the poem is Pratt's means of releasing  this  infernal  and  celestial energy into  his  universe,  it  also is his means  of controlling  it, of subduing  it to creative  ends.  As the  poem  must come  to  an  end,  Tom's  luminous  trail  must  disappear,  driven  back  to  some "mystic goal",  the occult source of its creative and  destructive being.
The  energy and freedom that  the poet found  here would persist as imaginative
potentials for release in later  work. No other  poet among those published  before
I 930 expresses as fully and  as distinctly Pratt's  own  peculiar  vision.
"The Great  Feud", published with "The  Cachalot" in I g26, differs in several important respects from  The  Witches'  Brew. Fundamental to  all  differences is the greater degree of conscious intent  that  controls the poem's narrative and imaginative  development. Pratt  cast it  as an  allegory, an  animal  fable  having clear relevance to human  affairs.

I have called it a Dream though it might appropriately be termed a nightmare. What might happen in a Second War or a Third,  though naturally the A-Bomb and the Hydrogen type were not forming their terrible mushrooms. It is an Arma­ geddon between the inhabitants of the land and those of the sea. It is an attempt to give a picture of some stage in the evolutionary struggle for existence, of  how near extinction a race might come if the instinct of aggression were given absolute rein.2

From  this  statement in  retrospect  of the  poem's intent,  we can see that  Pratt's mind  was working in at least two directions:  one, from the contemporary situa­ tion  back  to  an  imaginary  situation  which  would  effectively allegorize  it;  and the  other,  from  the  remote  past  to  a  forward  view of the  whole  evolutionary struggle.  This  twofold  perspective  enriches  the  poem's  imaginative  possibilities and   allows for  several  valid  interpretations,  such  as  those  which  Sutherland examines.3  Yet  the  poet's  seriousness of  purpose  cannot  help  but  circumscribe the possibilities that  the  poem offers for  interpretation.

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

The  release that  Pratt  allows himself in "The  Great  Feud" manifests itself as a  release of the  violence  which  he consciously abhorred. The  freedom  he  dis­ covered in The Witches' Brew lies behind this release, but it comes now closer to the release of nightmare  anxiety  than to one of wish fulfilment. The ambivalence  of attitude  toward  violence cuts more radically into this poem, effecting at times a greater  tension than  it can  bear. Between what  the poet  consciously wishes to depict as horror and  what  he less consciously reveals as self-indulgence,  the poem generates an irony that  calls into question the deliberate ironies of the allegorical conception. The  poem seems to ask the reader to take it both  more seriously and less seriously than  he is willing or able to do. The  result is a fluctuating response, which carried  throughout a reading may  result in fatigue  or frustration.
The  poem begins securely enough. The  tetrameter  measure  with  its frequent enjambements and  interlocking  rhymes gives sufficient impetus  at the outset and at the same time effectively expresses the slow, inevitable  uncoiling  of the evolu­ tionary  scroll, which  forms  the  basis of the  fable.  The  poem  does, in  fact,  as effectively as it does anything,  capsulize in a single episode the whole evolutionary struggle. On  this level, it is a vision of all struggle as one struggle, the gathering  of all biological time into one time and  uncovering there  the cumulative magni­ tude of an endless expense of violence. This revelation is perhaps  the most original of its apocalyptic  aspects, since it  places in the  Darwinian   principle  the  fearful possibility that  cumulatively  it  may  prove  more  destructive  than  creative.
Jurania  rises in  the  poem  as  a  freely  imagined  and  spontaneous   creation, though  obviously she has a place in the allegorical scheme.

]urania, with  her  crater jaw,
Her  slanting forehead ancient-scarred, And  breathing through her smoky maw, Lay  like a dragon left to guard
The  Isthmian Scarps  against  the climb
Of  life....

Clearly,  Jurania in  the  context  of  biological evolution  represents  forces  more primitive than  those at  work there.  It  is fitting that  this geological dragon  will later release into the poem a biological one, who will link the most primitive  and the most developed manifestations  of mindless force. The volcano's backward  ties become clear at the end of the poem when it erupts "... as if to meet/  Its own maternal stellar fire." Jurania in herself contains the central  irony in Pratt's  view of evolution.  As a  link  between  cosmic and  biological impulses,  her  energy  is creative;  as a check on the upward  "climb of life", her energy is retarding.  But when she releases her energy into  the poem, it is to check, not  life, but  life run

37

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

wild in destructive  violence. Her  release has also the effect of saving the life most significant  to evolution,  as though  an  ultimate  purpose  behind  her  insentience were directing  her force to that  end.
The  "fear  of  racial  doom"  induced  among  the  fish by changing   conditions leads  to  futile  anger  which  is self  destructive-
turns  his tetrameter  line to good advantage  to make mock of this malaise:

It broke their hearts and crushed their wills,
It thinned the juices of their maws, Left them with gnashing of the jaws And deep prolapsis of the gills.
And hitherto  unsuffered pains,
A ghastly brood, came in by legions, Rheumatic tremors in the veins,
And palsy in the ventral regions.

Clearly any movement  that  turns  upon  itself, any whirligig motion,  such as this vertigo, takes on in Pratt's imagination  the symptoms of psychosomatic  disease. Health   requires  a  forward  and  outward  and  free  expression  of impulses. The question  that  rises now  is whether  or not  the  tendency  of the  poem  to assume the character  of its matter,  which we noted in The Witches' Brew, applies here. Does  Pratt's  imagination tum   in  upon  itself? Does the  impulse  of  the  poem become a "consuming  vertigo"  under  the constricting force of the central  fable? Pratt's own answer at this early point in the narrative  is a clear no, although  he too raises the questions  as horrors  in the fishy consciousness.

But worst of all the horrors which Enmeshed them was the galling sense That  never would the recompense
Of battle come; the primal itch
For vengeance would expend its force, According to an adverse Fate
Running a self destroying
Down the blind alley of their hate.




l:E FREEDOM which the  poet looks for in  himself he finds as a saving grace in nature,  a quirkiness that  keeps her like her fish from "Run ning  a self-destroying course/  Down  the  blind  alley...." Subsequent  events do release the fish by providing  suitable  objects for their  destructive  impulses. But viewed from a higher vantage  point, and the poem as it moves forward  demands

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

such a perspective, the Armageddon  that  comes is as self-destructive,  as much  a matter  of "consuming  vertigo," as the fish's earlier malaise. The  quirk  has altered "the  settled scheme of things" only by universalizing it. I am not at all sure that the  poet  does not  hoist himself and  his poem on his  own  petard.  The  forward impulse  in  the  poem  is almost  lost in  the  display of self-destructive  energy.
If Pratt  prevented  such anomalies from doing the  poem irreparable damage,
it was done by a strict adherence  to his own role as the irreverant observer of the twists and  doublings back and struggles for escape in the evolutionary  mechanics of  the  universe.  His  poem,  which  moves  with  these  movements,  never  quite becomes a pointless self-indulgence, since it continues to body forth  a distinctive vision.
The  female ape holds the centre of the stage through  the remainder  of the first half of the poem. Her position in the scheme is quite clear. She represents the glimmerings  of  reason  and  of  moral  responsibility. The  freedom  she  enjoys  is clearly the freedom  to be wrong.  Even the reasoning that  has brought  about  in her the birth of ethics is spurious, since she has taken an event of pure chance as manifesting  a universal moral  principle. The  "raw j Material  of the  moral  law" which she has "sniffed"  holds no promise of enlightenment  beyond a concept  of mechanically   retributive   justice.  She  assumes  leadership  of  the  land   animals before she is able to lead, except toward chaos. Yet her freedom mirrors in its essentials the kind of freedom man enjoys in Pratt's  universe, freedom  to act with only a glimmering  of moral insight, freedom to work out  his own destruction  as well as  his  salvation.  Pratt's   "anxiety-dream" for  mankind   is implicit  in  this image of limited freedom  with moral responsibility.
Bloated  with  a sense of her own enlightenment,  the  ape  becomes an  alazon figure, guilty of hubris in presuming to pass judgment on a whole order of beings. Her  epic address  of the land  creatures  occupies almost  a  hundred   and  seventy lines of verse, and  although  it  advances  the  narrative  somewhat,  it  allows  her self-indulgence  to spill over into  the  poem. The  poet  lets  his material   expand beyond his slender fable's capacity. A similar expansion occurs in "The Muster". Captivated by his own conceit regarding the effects of vegetarianism  on carnivor­ ous animals,  the poet gives himself the long leash of a hundred  and  twenty  lines to work it for all it is worth. The  material  of these lines contains the most Prat­  tian humour  of the poem, but again it distends the total form. The  critical irony here is that  where the poet has, in fact, more limited freedom,  he has chosen to take greater  liberties.
Tyrannosaurus Rex  comes into  the poem  as part  of the  poem's  process. He represents  a  doubling  back of evolution  on  itself and  so symbolizes the  entire


39

POET OF  APOCALYPSE

movement  of the  poem. He is to this poem what Tom  is to The  Witches' Brew, the most original and Prattian creation in it as well as its central symbol. The laborious  machinery  by which the poet brings him to birth  is appropriate to the poem  as  are  his  ponderous   bulk  and  movements.  He  represents  the  kind  of imaginative  energy that  Pratt  is generating  here. He dominates  the latter  part  of the  poem, though  he remains  like his creator  essentially apart  from  the  rest of creation. He is not as clear a centre of sympathy as Tom. By his very nature,  as a mindless creature,  impelled by purely mechanical instincts, he remains something of  an  abstraction. He  has  none  of Tom's  vitality  and  individuality.   Only  his dumb  confusion  at  being  thrust  out  of his time  into  a  conflict  that  he  cannot understand brings him near his end closer to the poet and his readers. From being an  incongruous  and  ridiculous  figure laying  about  him  indiscriminately  in  the battle scenes, he takes on a kind of pathetic stature in the long climb to his death:

He  cleared the base, his body fagged And  clambered on from shard  to shard, Pausing, jibbing,  breathing hard.
Under his weight  his knee-caps  sagged; Bleeding fast  from  fissures tom
By tiger  fang  and  rhino  hom
He  groped and  stumbled up  until
He  reached a level granite sill; Raw fillets hanging from  his thighs He sank  a moment faint  with  pain;

As a symbol which  gathen;  in  the whole force of the  poem,  apart  from  the moral and rational glimmerings manifested in the ape, Tyrannosaurus Rex has become the object, the victim as well as the repository or sleeping potential  of destructive energy. At this point, he appears  to symbolize the whole creation  and its suffering. The  voice of the sea-god who laments  his passing is mourning  for all  "blind   wanderers" caught  in and  destroyed  by  the  evolutionary  struggle. Tyrannosaurus Rex  achieves  a  certain  Christ-like sublimity  here,  but  since  no choice, no moral decision, no glimmering of love or sympathy has motivated  him, he cannot  be taken  as Sutherland takes him4  for a Christ-symbol. His victimiza­ tion lies in  his mindlessness; Christ's,  in  the supremacy  of his  awareness.  He  is the  "dark  unreason" that  reason  has unleashed,  yet his  presence as a  "mutual enemy" of land  and  sea creatures  has kept their  conflict  in abeyance.  His death allows in them a total release of violence, which is as primitive and undiscriminat­ ing as his own.
In its conclusion, "The Great  Feud" re-establishes the poet's vision as primarily

POET OF  APOCALYPSE


ironic.  Jurania, a primal source  of destructive power,  in  her  eruption saves crea­ tion from self-extinction. The  female  ape does not deserve  to escape  by any virtue  other  than  the superiority of her  perceptions.  She, in  relation to Jurania  and  the whole   evolutionary  process,  represents   the  involvement  of  reason   and   moral awareness with  fate  or necessity in the unleashing of destruction. She is no tragic  figure, since  her survival involves  no self-discovery  or  assuming of  responsibility. She  is a  new  and   unpredictable element  in  the  ironic  mesh.  Pratt  manages to leave  her  a  more  sympathetic creature than  he  finds  her  at  first:

She found her lair, and brokenly She entered  in, cuddling  her brood To withered  paps ...

What  is to the  fore  here  is the  instinct  of mother-love, more  primitive and  more universal  than  reason  or moral awareness.  The  primal powers  that  have  worked in the  poem  to preserve  the  highest  being  in creation manifest a similar  concern. The  poet  continues to see nature as controlled  and  driven  by impulses  that  con­ tain  their  opposites.  His  own  imaginative indulgence uncovers the  paradox in himself  as creator. When  the  violence  in  the  poem  is at  its  height,  the  rhetoric exercises its power  to detach the  reader  from  it; when  the  violence subsides  or is in  abeyance, the  rhetoric allows  for  a closer sympathy between  the  creator and his creation. In  this  respect,  the  form  is admirably suited  to  the  conception and can  be  justified  in all its bulk  and  ponderousness  as a natural  growth. There is, however, the matter of a deliberateness which is at odds  with  the freedom that  the poet  needs to work  best within  the  hyperbolic  convention. That  the  poem  brings forth  Tyrannosaurus Rex  is a triumph of the  poet's imagination. That Tyranno­ saurus Rex has not the vitality  of Tom,  the Cat from Zanzibar, points  to a limita­ tion  that  shows  up  elsewhere  in  those  distortions   which   are  distortions of  the total  form.


NOTES

1 Letter  to Desmond Pacey, November  1 r, 1954.
2  Letter  to Desmond Pacey, October  29, 1954.
3 " ••• The  Great Feud can be viewed with almost equal  validity from at least three distinct standpoints: as ... a poem of social comment,  as an  essay in psychological analysis, or as a  work of  religious vision." John  Sutherland, The   Poetry of E.  f.
Pratt; A New Interpretation, (Toronto; Ryerson, 1956),  p. 8r.
4  "In  fact, as in the case of the whale, it is impossible not  to associate  the dinosaur with the figure of Christ." Ibid., p. 105.

NOVEL AND ROMANCE



T. D. MacLulich







RECENT THEMATIC STUDIES  have  brought a com;iderable degree  of  order   into  discussions  of  the  main  intellectual concerns  of  Canadian literature. In  particular, the  thematic critics  have  specialized  in  unearthing the hidden patterns of fiction -a form  which  appears to yield more  readily  to their analysis  than   does  poetry.  But  the  more  traditional picture of Canadian  fiction, obtained  by  defining   the  chrono  ogical
the  formal   literary "kinds" of  writing, has  not  advanced  significantly beyond
the   state   reached  in   those   two   monuments  to   critical   orthodoxy,  Desmond Pacey's  Creative   Writing  in  Canada   and   the   collectively   authored   Literary History of Canada.
These  books  propose  a simple  hypothesis  about  the  development of fiction  in Canada: the  movement they  project  is basically  a straight-line progression  away from   romantic and   unrealistic treatment  and  towards  a  realistic,  socially  com­ mitted   fiction.  In   presenting their   argument, the  authors make  the  traditional identification of the  mainstream of  Canadian fiction  with  the  realistic  novels of Grove,  Callaghan, MacLennan, and  Davies.  But this analysis may be misleading. When  all the  works  which  fall outside  the  central  tradition  are grouped together
-the isolated  anomalies like Howard O'Hagan's Tay  fohn and  Sheila  Watson's
The  Double  Hook,  as well  as the  best of the  many  works usually  described  in a somewhat  dismissive  manner  as  "regional" -the mavericks   seem,  in  fact,  to outnumber the mainstream.
The   theory   of  a   development  towards  realism   has  gained   wide   credence largely  because  critics  have  started with  a  built-in  bias in  its favour; they  have felt,  on  what   appear  to  be  fundamentally moral  grounds, that   a  progression towards realism  ought  to  have  taken   place.  The   writer  should   face  up  to  his social   obligations;  fiction   should   depict   the   actual   world,   not   some   escapist fantasy-land:   these   have   been   tacit   critical   axioms.   Therefore,  critics   have equated realistic  with  "serious" fiction  and  non-realistic with  less serious,  more "popular"  fiction.   Realism    and    non-realism    have   been   turned  into   value­ judgments rather than  simply  being  used as descriptive  categories.


42

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

It  was Pacey's  work  which  gave  canonical  form  to the  idea  of a  movement towards  realism.  His  division  of fiction into  historical  romance,  regional  idyll, and  realistic novel has haunted  Canadian criticism ever since the first publication of Creative  Writing  in Canada.  To  the first two of these forms  he attributed a lower  intrinsic  value than  to the  last, and  he argued  that  the  trend  away  from historical romance and regional idyll was an upward climb towards a higher incarnation as realistic fiction.
The  Literary  History of Canada  repeats what is essentially Pacey's  theory. Its authors  trace  with approval  the  way Canadian literary geography  has gradually caught  up  with  the  country's  actual  physical and  human  geography.  A limited number   of  critically  respectable   writers  are  praised  for  the  way  they  "have confronted  their  experience  with  critical  independence  and  have  recorded  their insights  with  a  new  subtlety  and   technical  power."  The   great   mass  of  less reputable  or merely popular  writers are  condemned  or patronized  because  they "still  inhabit  romantic  worlds which  have very little to do with  the  realities of Canadian life.m Only  Frye's "Conclusion", which is largely thematic  in method, implies a reservation about  this easy dismissal. In the eyes of most Establishment critics,  realism  seems to  be  the  natural  form  of  prose fiction  in  Canada,  the condition  towards  which  it  has  evolved by a  sort  of literary  natural  selection.
What  is  needed,  I  suggest,  is  a  different  analysis, one  conducted   in  terms
which are both less biased and  more fundamental. The  Literary History is strewn with   a   bewildering   variety   of  terms  resulting  from  the  critics'  attempts  to describe the kinds of writing done by Canadian authors.  In  the end  these terms serve  to disguise instead  of to reveal the larger  overall pattern  of development. However,  a  terminology  which  describes in  a  neutral  way the  basic distinction the  critics  have  made,  that  between  realistic  fiction  and  fiction  which  is  not realistic, is already  well-known  to criticism. A revealing picture  of the  develop­ ment  of Canadian fiction, a picture  which is closely in accord  with  the trend  of the  work actually  produced,  can  be obtained  by using the  conventional  distinc­ tion  between  the  "romance" and  the  "novel".  This  distinction  avoids the  con­ fusing  multiplicity  of  ad  hoc  terminology  which  has grown  up,  and  helps  to explain some of the developments, especially in  new fiction, which upon occasion have troubled the critics.
Rather  than  a steady  progression towards realism, the development  of  Cana­ dian  fiction reveals a tension between the romance and novel, between  "roman­ tic"  and  "realistic" ways of  portraying  the  world.  The  basic  elements  in  the pattern  are quite simply stated: the emergence in the nineteenth  century  of the romance  as  the  dominant  fonn; the  degeneration  of  the  romance  around   the tum  of the century into  more sentimental  popular fonns;  a reaction  during  the first  part  of  the  twentieth  century  away  from  the  romance  and   towards  the realism  of  the  novel;  a  brief  period  at  mid-century  when  the  novel  was  the

43

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

prevalent  form;   and  most  recently  a  reappearance of the  romance  in  modern guises. Most of these stages can  be traced in the consciously held attitudes  of the writers, as well as in the fiction itself.
The  first fiction, in the usual sense of the word, written  about  Canada is The History  of  Emily  Montague, published in 1769 by the British authoress  Frances Brooke.  The  first  full-length   fiction  written  by  a  native-born   Canadian is St. Ursula's  Convent; or, the  Nun  of  Canada,  published  in  1824.  Mrs.  Brooke's work,  despite  its romantic  subject  and  attitudes,  is arguably  the first Canadian novel;  St.  Ursula's  Convent   is  undoubtedly   the  first Canadian  romance.  But these books, and  the few scattered  works which appeared  before the great influx of  immigration    ('and  thus  of  potential  readers  and  writers)   which  occurred during  the  middle  years  of  the  nineteenth  century,  did  not  establish  any firm literary  tradition.



l:E TRUE  PARENTS of Canadian fiction are the early maga­ zine editors, such  as John  Gibson of the Literary Garland, and  the writers, such as Mrs. Moodie  and  Mrs. Traill,  who helped to fill the pages of  these magazines. Of  course, the  books for  which  Mrs. Moodie  and  Mrs. Traill  are  best remem­ bered  are  not fiction in  the  usual sense. Nonetheless,  considered• as proto-fiction, Roughing   it  in  the  Bush  and  The   Backwoods  of  Canada  illustrate  the  two opposing  attitudes   to  the  fictionalizing  of  experience-what W.  D.  Gairdner  has   aptly   called   "the   two   realities"2  -which   give  birth   to  the   two  most common  forms of fiction,  the  romance  and  the novel.
Mrs.  Moodie's  heightened  emotional  aspirations,  her distaste for  mere  physi­ cal  things,  and  her  fascination   with  the  extreme  and  the  grotesque  in  human behaviour,  are  all characteristics  which are found in the romance.  Mrs. Traill's  matter-of-fact   vision, her  concern  with  real objects and  with  comfort,  and  her view  of  the  social  niceties  as  an  evolving set  of  customs  are  concerns  which underlie  the  novel-the form  of literature  most closely allied  with  bourgeois materialism.  Mrs. Traill's  actual  fiction, such as The  Canadian Crusoes, although romantic  in outlook, is more novelistic in form than is Mrs. Moodie's. Mrs. Traill includes  the  realities  of Canadian life, albeit somewhat  softened  and  sentimen­ talized,  within  the  framework  of  her fiction;  but  when  Mrs.  Moodie  turns  to wholly  imaginative   writing,   her  sense of  what  an  educated   British  audience would  expect,  her  sense of what  is  conventionally  correct  in fiction, takes over completely.  As a  result, she  produces a series of sentimental  and  genteel love­ stories set in elegant English manor houses.
In   the  fiction  of  nineteenth-century  Canada,   it  is  Mrs.  Moodie's  impulse towards  the romance  which carries the day. Major  Richardson  exploits the hair­ raising  aspects of frontier  Indian  warfare  to provide appropriate action  for his


44

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

gothic   romance,  Wacousta.   In   The  Golden  Dog  William   Kirby   views  exag­ geratedly   emotional  events  centring on  love,  cruelty,   and   greed  as  the  proper  subject-matter of fiction; as  characters he  favours  the  aristocratic  personages of the   ancien  regime,  preferably  those  rumoured  to  have   had  secret   vices  and weaknesses  of  character. Both  of  these  writers  have  at  times  been  praised   for their  literary  skill, but  neither could  be held out  as a model  of  historical  accuracy or of fidelity to everyday  life.
Although writers  in  nineteenth-century Canada believed  their  task  was worth­ while,  being  "literary" made  them  feel isolated.  Through their  art,  they  sought  to  raise  audiences to  a  higher  level of cultivation, and  thereby  to  re-establish  a sense of social  solidarity. Mrs.  Moodie  had  an  elevated  conception  of  her  role, and  a high  ideal  of the  level at  which  writer  and  reader should  meet.  But gradu­ ally, as a  larger  and  less educated reading public  appeared in  the  later  years  of the  century,   writers  lowered  their  target  and  came  to  pursue  a  wide  readership at  the  expense  of standards. Perhaps it would  be more  accurate to say that since there   were   no   established  standards  for   them   to   uphold,  Canadian  writers allowed   themselves   to  accept   popularity  as  a  measure   of  merit.   Had   not  Sir Walter Scott  and  Charles Dickens  been  popular in  their  day?  And  in  Canada, had  not  Richardson and  Kirby  imitated  Scott  and  produced works of acknowl­ edged   worth? Then  the   popular  writers   of  their   own   day,   many   Canadian writers  seemed  to feel, provided  appropriate models  to follow. Novelists imitated American  local   colour   writers   or   popular  British   novelists   and   romancers, especially  those  of  the  Kailyard  school;  poets  were  influenced by  Kipling. The  way  was soon  prepared for  Robert Service,  with  his shamelessly  popular sort  of verse.
In  Canada, then,  at  the  tum   of  the  century,   the  distinction between  serious
art  and  the  merely popular was not a clear one. The same  writers  could  be found publishing  poems   in   magazines  with   intellectual  pretensions,    and   stories   in magazines    aimed   at   a   broad   popular  readership.  The   Confederation   poets yearned   for  a  renewed   union   of  artist  and   audience, and   in  their   pursuit   of readers  they  produced much  work  which  today  appears little  removed  from  the level   of   the   hack.   Roberts  and   Campbell  both    wrote   several   sentimental romances; Roberts produced his patriotic  odes and  Campbell his Sagas of Vaster Britain.  Even   D.  C.  Scott   turned out  stories  of  French-Canadian  village  life which,  although on  a  higher  level than  the  romances of Roberts and  Campbell, are  still  notable   excursions   into  sentimentality and   bathos.  And   Bliss Carman pandered  to  the  popular  taste  for  his  brand   of  romantic  escapism   combined with vague spiritual uplift.
Like  the  earlier  movements in Canadian fiction,  the  emergence of the  realistic
novel was also based  on  the imitation of foreign  models.  In  this case the  inspira­
tion  was those later  nineteenth<entury British  writers,  such  as Meredith, George


45

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

Eliot,  or  Hardy, who  wrote  for  a  smaller  and  more  exclusive  public  than   the great   Victoria  novelists  had   reached, or  the  American  novelists,  like  Howells and  James, whose  work  was  critical  of established  social  values  and  sometimes wilfully "difficult" in style.
In  Canada the chief spokesman for the new critical  realism was Sara  Jeannette Duncan. Under her  own  name  and  as "Garth Grafton" she conducted columns in   the   pages   of  Goldwin  Smith's  The   Week   which   frequently attacked the middle-class  values   of  those  she  called   (by   analogy   with   Matthew  Arnold's British  Philistines)  the  Canadian "Maoris". Miss Duncan described  the  Maori's favourite reading in terms  which  leave little doubt  she was describing the  popular romance:

In  fiction he likes a story with a good deal of incident and  accident-though  he condemns sensationalism -and  he likes it to end well. He is particular about  the ending,  and  it  not infrequently  determines  the whole merit of the book for him.8

During  recent   years,  she  said,   fiction   had   undergone  a  great   transformation, which the Maori seemed  totally  unable  to appreciate:

The  novel of to-day may be written  to show the cumulative action of a passion, to work out an ethical problem of every-day occurrence, to give body and form to a sensation of the finest or of the coarsest kind, for almost any reason which can be shown to have a connection  with  the course of human  life, and  the development of  human  character.... The  old  rules by which any  habitual  novel reader  could prophesy  truly  at  the  third   chapter   how  the  story  would  "come  out"  are  dis­ regarded,  the  well-worn  incidents  discarded,  the  sine  qua  nons  audaciously  done without.  Fiction  has become a law unto itself, and its field has broadened  with the assumption.4

The   outstanding early  example of  a  full-realized   realistic  novel  is also  from the  pen  of  Miss  Duncan. The   Imperialist  provides  a  rounded  and   perceptive anatomy of  life  at  the  turn   of  the  century   in  a  Canadian small  town.   Elgin, Ontario, is populated chiefly by Maoris, with as light admixture of the colonially­ minded, and  a  very sparse  leavening of free spirits  like Advena  Murchison. The book  shows  how  the  materialistic values  of the  town  defeat  the idealistic  Lome Murchison  and   uneasily   reject   the   intellectually..;inclined   Advena.  However, criticism  of established social  values  was  not  a  thing Canadian  audiences could readily   accept. Miss  Duncan's  barbed  comments  were  not  always  appreciated by  the  conservative-minded among her  readers -a  not inconsiderable class. At only  a  slightly  later  date,  another Canadian  with  a considerable gift  for  social criticism,  Stephen Leacock,   allowed  his  talents to  be frittered away  in  meeting  the  reading public's insatiable appetite for "further foolishness"-or so Robert­ son Davies has persuasively  argued.5
A  book  which  strikingly   illustrates the  Canadian writer's uncertain grasp  of

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

literary  forms is Ralph  Connor's  The  Man  from Glengarry. The  first part  of the book, in  keeping  with  Connor's  stated  intention  "to  so picture  these men  and their times that they may not drop quite out of mind,"6 memorably depicts the Glengarry   backwoodsmen   in  terms  which  magnify  but  do  not  destroy  their humanity.  The  tensions within  the community, centred  on its strict  Presbyterian religion, are  convincingly  portrayed,  and  the conflict within  Ranald  Macdonald is well-developed.  But  in  the second  portion  of the  book  Connor  sidesteps the intense   psychological  tension   he  has  created   by  releasing  Ranald   from   the ingrown  and  repressed east into the free and honest west. In  the process he shifts his book from a novel to a romance. From a human  being facing difficult moral and  social choices, Ranald  changes to a peerless embodiment  of Christian  man­ liness and  virtues-a combination  of the Redcrosse knight  and  the local scout­ master.  The  change  is  more  than  the  book can  bear.  Conviction  is  lost and Ranald  becomes a cardboard figure. Romance, in its most abased fonn, triumphs  over the initial novelistic impulse.
Although  occasional  examples  of the  realistic  novel  continued   to  appear   in the  years immediately  before  and  after  World  War  I,  it  was  not  until  a  new post-war  generation   had  grown  up  that  the  critical,  realistic  attitude  became the  nonn  in  serious Canadian fiction. The  change  from  romance  to novel was not  complete  until  the  works of Morley Callaghan  and  Frederick  Philip  Grove began  to appear  during  the late  twenties and  the thirties.  Callaghan   began  his career  with  novels which  contain  traces of the theories of environmental  deter­ minism  held  by  earlier  European and  American  writers.  He  progressed  to  a series of parables which criticize society by comparing  it with  an ideal standard, derived from  a literal application of Christian  ideals. Grove deliberately  created a series of novels which record  the opening of the west during the early years of the  century,  and  analyze  the  upheavals  in  moral  values  and  social  structures which took place during those years.




AFTER  WORLD   WAR    II the  realistic  novel  continued   to dominate,  reaching new heights in the work of Hugh  MacLennan and Robertson Davies,  as  well as  in  the  continuing  work  of  Callaghan. MacLennan's  ideas about  the writer's  task can  stand  as representative of the views of this group  of writers.  Like  Grove  and   Callaghan,   MacLennan  sees  himself  as  a  "serious" writer,  as  opposed  to  a  merely  popular  one.  He  and  other  serious  Canadian writers, he says in  one  of his articles, intend  to record  aspects of social reality. In  so doing  they are  following in  the  tradition  of the great  nineteenth-century British  and  European   novelists  who  attempted   to  d pict
nature in an accurate, realistic manner:

47

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

The  serious novel of modern  times has usually concentrated  on what I have called social symbolism-on man  in  his relation  with  organized  society, with  politics, war, economic conditions, and with the local morals of a specific group.7

In  the  works  of Grove,  Callaghan, and  MacLennan, the  triumph of the  novel might   seem  to  be  complete. Certainly, in  their  critical   theorizing, the  novel's urge  towards realistic  social  comment is the  dominant element. Yet  Callaghan and   MacLennan,  in  many   of  their   books  display   a  longing   for  heroism,  an impulse   towards  the   romance.  Many   of  Callaghan's  heroes   meet   their   fate because  they  have sought  to pattern themselves on divine  perfection. MacLennan has  a  strong  affinity  for  the  heroic  and  primitive  Odysseus  figure,  although  he habitually,  but   with   great   reluctance,  destroys  him.  Even  if  we  believe  Mac­ Lennan's  disclaimer   of  deliberate  intent,  the  fact   remains   that   the   repeated mythic   pattern traced   by  George  Woodcock  is present  in  MacLennan's books, providing a strong   pressure  towards the  romance form,  within  the  conventional novelistic framework of MacLennan's fiction.8
It has  been  said  that  the  action  of the  romance proves the  protagonist "to  be
what   he,  and  the  author, and  we  the  readers  knew  from  the  start he  was-a hero." On  the other  hand,

the  protagonist  of  the  novel  is likely to discover, with  Falstaff,  that  there  is no future  for heroism, that  he himself is a perfectly ordinary man, with the experience and knowledge that suit his station.9

In  these  terms,  both  Callaghan and  MacLennan lean  towards romance themes, for  they  depict  small  men  yearning to be great  or pure. It is more  from  flaws in the  arrangement of the  world  than from  flaws in  their  own  nature that  Callag­ han's  heroic  idealists  perish;  the  world  ought  to be different,  Callaghan seems to imply.  Moral   heroism  ought   to  be  possible. Grove  is more  purely  the  novelist;  he  depicts  men  who  yearn  to  be  great  or  pure,  and  learn  they  are  only  men, with finite, mixed  natures.
The pivotal  chapters in  D.  G.  Jones'  Butterfly  on Rock  and  Ronald  Suther­
land's Second  Image  agree  in  basing  their  argument on books in  which  a strong romance strain   can   be  detected. Most  notably,  the  two  critics  concur   on  the thematic  importance  of  MacLennan's The   Watch   that  Ends  the  Night  and Colin  McDougall's  Execution. The   crux  of  Jones'   and  Sutherland's argument is that   Canadian writers  attempt to present  solutions  to the  dilemma of the  man who  feels  the  world  is  not  a  fair  or  a  reasonable   place  in  which   to  live. The Canadian  protagonist asks:  how  can  I believe there  is a  purpose  and  meaning to the seemingly  arbitrary events of the world?
The  solution, Jones   and   Sutherland  argue,   is  proposed   in  individual and existential terms.  Canadian fiction  takes a personal  viewpoint; not  a social view­ point.   Grove  is our  most  consistently  socially-minded  novelist,  and   his  outlook

NOVEL AND  ROMANCE

can  be  explained  as  being  the  result of his wider  European   background.  Abe Spalding,  who resolves his quarrel  with the universe by finally returning to a full participation in his immediate local community, is not a typical Canadian protago­ nist. But MacLennan, to take a more representative  example,  provides romantic  resolutions to the national political issues raised in Barometer Rising and Two  Soli­ tudes, as if love could transform  political realities; and in The  Watch  that  Ends the  Night  the social issues raised in  the  book's first portion  are  quietly  shelved in favour  of a general consideration of human  mortality. McDougall's Execution  turns  away  from  the  larger  problems  of meaning  and  justice  presented  by the events of World  War  II,  and  focuses on a  redeeming  act  of personal sacrifice.
Another  way of saying  that  Canadian fiction chooses a  personal viewpoint  is to say that it prefers the romance  to the novel. Frye has said that  "the  romancer does  not  attempt   to  create   'real   people'  so  much  as  stylized  figures  which expand  into  psychological archetypes."  In  the romance, he says, "we find Jung's libido,  anima,  and  shadow  reflected  in  the  hero,  heroine,  and  villain  respec­ tively.mo Many  of  the  best-known  "realistic"  Canadian novelists have  written late,  mature  works, recognized  as being among  their  best, which  contain such characters.  MacLennan's The  Watch   that  Ends  the  Night  gives  us the  heroic Jerome  Martell  and  the  ethereal,  saint-like  Catherine.  Callaghan's The   Loved and  the  Lost  centres  on  MacAlpine's  pursuit  of the  lovely and  idealistic,  but not-quite-real  Peggy Sanderson,  who represents all that is best and  most innocent within his own soul. Robertson  Davies, whose first three novels were the epitome of social dissection, has turned in Fifth Business and TheM anticore to the theme of inner  self-discovery, and  has filled his pages  with hints  of intangible  powers, and  with  characters  or dream-visions who seem  to be projections  of the central character's  psyche.
Recent  writers,  those who  began  publishing in  the late fifties and  the sixties,
have  turned  away  from  literal  realism. Books like Cohen's  enigmatic  Beautiful Losers, Robert  Kroetsch's  The  Studhorse  Man, or Sheila  Watson's  The  Double Hook  are  essentially modern  versions of  the  romance.  In  this modern  fiction, the  mythic  underpinnings  of fictional structures  are  again  being  brought  close to  the  surface.  Although  Mordecai  Richler,  when  he is not  writing  satire  or journalism,  turns  out  traditional   novels,  he  is  an  exception  among  post-war writers. In general  the writer has retreated  to, or perhaps simply reoccupied,  the ground  which he alone  can  best inhabit.  Literal  realism has been abandoned to the writers of non-fiction and to the moviemakers.
Although it may be true, as Frye has suggested, that "of the general principles of cultural  history we still know relatively little,'m  it is possible to suggest an explanation  for  the strength  of the  romance  strain  in  Canadian fiction.  Cana­ dians have traditionally  lacked confidence in their own country and in its culture and  institutions.  The  studies  of  Jones  and  Sutherland,  along  with  Margaret


49

NOVEL AND ROMANCE

Atwood's Survival, suggest  that  English-Canadian writing  (and  Sutherland adds French-Canadian fiction) is characterized by a profoundly negative outlook, by insecurities and  feelings  of  victimization. Canadian  writers  cannot with  convic­ tion  base  their  faith  in  life  on  an  analysis,  much  less a  celebration, of  a  society they  see as a trap or  a cage.  Instead, writers  have  turned  to inner experience in their  attempt to  rebuild   the  fabric of meaning lefrt in  tatters by  the  decay  of all fixed systems.
Like  writers  the  world  over,  Canadian writers  have  decided  that  in  a  world apparently gone  mad,  sanity  must  be  sought  within  the  self, if anywhere. The romance, rather than  the  novel, is the most suitable  vehicle for such introspective explorations of inner  space.  But  there  is also a uniquely  Canadian  predisposition to this form,  for  the  romance is a better  vehicle  than  the  novel for exploring the pastoral  vision   which   Frye   suggests  characterizes  the   Canadian  imagination. The   "peaceable kingdom" is an  inner  and  self-contained realm; it  is not  com­ patible   with  the  world  of  assumed   public  masks  and  social  intricacies  which  is the   realistic   novel's   supporting  ambiance. If the   peaceable   kingdom  is  to  be found   anywhere,  its  home   is  not  in  the  novel's  harsh,  uncompromising land­ scapes, but somewhere within  the gentler world of the romance.


NOTES

1 Hugo  McPherson, "Fiction:  I 940 to  I 960,"  Literary  History  of Canada, ed. Carl
F. Klinck  (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, I965), pp. 694, 722.
2    "Traill and  Moodie: the  two Realities," Journal  of Canadian Fiction, I.3  ( I972),
35-42.
3   "The Maori," The Week, III  (July 22,  I886), 548.
4    "Outworn Literary Methods," The Week, IV  (June 9, I887), 451.
5   Stephen Leacock   (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, I970).
6   "Preface," The Man   from Glengarry, ed. S. Ross Beharriell   (Toronto: McClelland and  Stewart, I965), p. xiii.
7    "Do  We Gag our  Writers?" MacLean's, XXVI  (March I, I947), 52.
8   "A  Nation's Odyssey:   the  Novels of Hugh  MacLennan," Canadian Literature IO (Autumn I96I),  7-I8;  reprinted in  Odysseus   Ever  Returning  (Toronto:   Mc­ Clelland and  Stewart, I 970) . McLennan's rejoinder appeared in Canadian Litera­ ture  I3  (Summer I962), 86-7.
9   Maurice Z. Schroder, "The Novel  as a Genre," in The  Theory of the  Novel,  ed. Philip  Stevick  (New York: The Free Press, I967), p. IS.
10   Anatomy of Criticism (New York: Atheneum, I968), p. 304.
11  "Conclusion," Literary  History  of Canada, p.  822.

THE EDGE
OF ETERNITY



Barry Wood




MLCOLM LOWRY',  "Forest  Path  to  the  Spring'" is a story without a plot but rich in detail. Thirty  thousand  words in length, it revolves around   Lowry's  life  with  his  wife  Margerie  at  Dollarton   ( Eridanus),  British
Columbia-a rich shoreland  of ocean  tides, wind  and  fog, dripping  pines and rugged  mountains,  an  Eden-like  motif which  recurs  throughout his other  work. Eridanus  appears  as a kind of distant  paradiso in Lowry's three  major novels­ Under  the  Volcano  ( 1947), Dark  As  the  Grave  Wherein My  Friend  is  Laid
( rg68), and  October   Ferry  to Gabriola  ( 1970). The  importance of Eridanus  in
all  these works hinges on its mystical associations for  Lowry,  and  in fact  "The Forest  Path  to  the  Spring" is  perhaps  best  understood  as  the  unfolding  of  a mystical experience. Such  an approach  explains its lack of plot, provides impor­ tant  keys to its wealth  of imagery  and symbolism, and  accounts  for  one  of the major themes in the rest of his works.
A  close reading  of "The Forest  Path" reveals a subtle  relationship  between
"the  forest path" and  "the  spring".  Each evening, the narrator tells us, he went through  the  forest to  the  spring  for  water,  "walking  as if eternally  through  a series of dissolving dusks down  the  path".  And, while the canister  was filling, he "watched  the gulls corning up the inlet or gazed up the trunks of the trees to the highest pinnacles of the smallest branches trembling like a moonsail, and breathed the scents of evening". His habit at the spring was total involvement with his surroundings.  But one evening  he finds himself filling the  canister  without  look­ ing  at  or  smelling  anything:  from  that  moment   "very  different  seemed  the journey back''.  First  the  canister  became heavy; then  he began  to have doubts, fears, and  feelings of insecurity  about  the future;  finally he began  to dread  the chore.  The  daily  walk  became  terrifying  because of  thoughts  of  the  past  and future-thoughts which  began  to  arise at  exactly  that  moment  he  failed  to surrender  himself to experience at the spring.
It seems clear that  the spring is a symbol for the present and  the  path  to and from  it is a symbol for  the  past  and  future.  Life in  the  present  is destroyed  by

THE EDGE  OF  ETERNITY

dwelling in the  past or future.  As he says of the ladder  which forms part  of the path:  "this vermiculated  old ladder, stinking with teredos and sea-worms, washed down  from  the sawmill, this sodden snag,  half awash when  I first saw it, is the past,  up  and  down  which  one's  mind  every night  meaninglessly climbs!'' Later he  notes  of  his  experience  on  the  path:    "This  much  I understood,   and  had understood  that  as a man  I had  become tyrannized  by the past, and  that  it was my duty to transcend it in the present".
The  quality of the present moment in which the narrator  "transcends" his past is revealed in the meaning  of the spring. Just as the spring is "a source of water, a source of supply",  where the water of life perpetually bubbles forth, the present moment  is the  instant  of  real  life, the  only  place  where  living occurs.  It  is a moment  sandwiched   between  those  past  and  future  times which  can  tyrannize over  it.  Life  in  that   moment  is life "between  the  times"  or,  as  the  narrator describes  their  life  at  Eridanus,   "an  intermezzo".  The  decision  to  live in  this present is therefore  synonymous  with the decision which comes when  they "saw spring.  And  that  I  think  was  when  we really decided  to  stay".  The  narrator makes  this clear  when  he says, speaking of the water source,  "it is a nuisance, but  not insignificant  that  I have to use the same word for this as for the season".
In   conventional   fiction  we  usually  find  a  sequential   time-structure   which
arranges  and  unifies the  story  around   a  chmnology.  "The Forest  Path" lacks such  a  chronology, so that  the  story seems to brim with unassimilated  imagery. But rather  than  lacking any  time-structure  "The  Forest Path" displays an organization   around  the  present  moment,  and  it  is this organization, enhanced by the mystical qualities of that  moment, which finally unifies the story.
In  mystical traditions,  Eastern  and  Western, eternity is met in the  present, in
the eternal  now. The  now has no duration,  no beginning, no ending;  put another way, its beginning  and  ending  correspond. Too small to grasp,  too fleeting to be "timed'', the  present  moment  is the inlet to  the  time-less. This  is the  world of "The Forest Path". Like Thoreau, who lived at Walden in "the  nick of time ... the meeting  of two eternities,  the  past and  future,  which is precisely the present moment,"2  Lowry's narrator writes that "sometimes we could scarcely see beyond the porch, so that it had been like living at the edge of eternity".
To  the extent  that sequential  time is imaged by a line, present time is imaged by a point. But since the present moment is itself timeless, it is a point apart  from the line of sequential time. From  the standpoint  of the timeless, all time is equally "now", which is to say that sequential  time bends amund  the point called "now" as a circle bends around  a centre. The  image of circle-and'-centre is a suggestive one, indicating  that  sequential  time of before-and-after  is less important for the mystic than  cyclical time.  Indeed,  cyclical time is a "reflection" of eternal  time
-a circle  which,  symbolically,  has  no  end  or  beginning.  This  approach   goes
back  at  least to Bonaventura, who found  the whole temporal  world  to contain

52

THE EDGE OF  ETERNITY

traces  (vestigia)  of the eternal.  It was Bonaventura,  too, who came  up with the inspired  idea  of God  as a circle whose centre is everywhere  and  whose  circum­ ference  is nowhere. If there is a medieval analogue  to "The Forest  Path  to the Spring" it is Bonaventura's Mind's Road to God.
In  "The Forest Path" many  important images centre on the cycle of life:  the cycle of the tides in the inlet,  the rising and setting of the sun,  the daily walk to the  spring,  the  circling  constellations,  and  the  perpetual  march  of  the seasons. Yet  in  every cycle there  is a  moment  of rebirth  or renewal,  a  reflection  of the renewal taking place every moment: "the swim at high tide [suggesting baptism], and  love at  high  tide  [the  very  act of creation]", the  brilliant  disc of the  sun seen  through  the fog, the fiery disc of the rising moon turning  the  pines into a vision of a  burning  windjammer, the replenishing of the water supply  each  day at  the spring,  and  the arrival  of the season of new life -spring. The  passage of cyclical time  becomes, for the narrator and  his wife, another  form of the death and  renewal  that  is part  of every moment  of time -the continual  death  of the past and birth of the future in the undivided now.




l:rs CIRCLE-CENTRE  PATTERN  recurs  through  several  other layers of imagery.  The  symbolic present moment  is the spring,  a  place, and  the temporal  circle-centre  is thus  repeated  in  the spatial  organization   of  Eridanus. The  whole  world of the story-the  world of nearby  Vancouver,  the  ranges of the Rockies and  Cascades and  Cordilleras, the distant European war-scape, even the wheeling constellations-is treated  as a vast circle whose centre  is Eridanus. Yet, in  a very real sense, Eridanus  is a  place which, like the  present  moment, is impossible  to locate,  for it is not  even on  the  map,  as  people  from  the  city complain.  It  is not a  real  "place''. At the same time Eridanus,  like the  present moment  which is all moments, is everyplace. It is a shack on the  beach;  it is a collection of shacks with strange  names;  it is "two  hamlets, like interpenetrating dimensions,"   and  it  is  "yet  another   town,  or  sort  of  town,  by  the  sawmill round   the  northward   point".   Moreover,  it  is  a  sunken  ship  from  the  other side  of  the  world  with  a  strange,  exotic  cargo;  it  is  the  whole  inlet  beside which  they live; and  it is a constellation  "dark  and  wandering  beneath  Orion". Dark  and  wandering:   mysterious and  placeless. In  the streets of the  nearby  city "streets  and  houses are mere soulless numbers"-a collection of distinct, identi­ fiable, numbered  places-whereas Eridanus  is ubiquitous,  nowhere  and  every­ where,  a part  of the  eblb and  flow of the inlet, a part of the  rising and  setting stars.  Even  its  population  is  in  flux,  consisting of  people  who  come  only  in summer  and  fishermen who come only in winter. Like the now which is timeless and  therefore  every-time,  Eridanus  is placeless and  therefore  capable  of  being

53

THE EDGE OF  ETERNITY

anyplace  and  everyplace-an infinite "here" which is eternally  "now," the still point of the turning world.
The   basic  structure of  circle-and-centre -of   the  measured,   numbered   city and  Eridanus; of  "civilization,   creator  of deathscapes",  and  the  "holophrastic brilliance"   of  Wywurk,  Doo-Drop-Inn,  High-Doubt, and  Dunwoiken-func­ tions at  a  new level of symbolic meaning.  Just  as the death  and  renewal of the present  moment,  the  "now", finds its echo in the cycle of time, so too does the image of the still point of the "here" find its traces in the things of the surround­ ing world. The  typical image of the still point is the brilliant light in the midst of darkness.  The  night  is full of such  lights "like  a  great  Catherine  wheel",  but there  are  also  the  lights  in  Quaggan's and  Kristbjorg's  shacks  reminding  the narrator of the  Isle of Delight  "where  an absolute stillness reigns", the "blazing gold" of the rising moon against  the blackness, the gleaming white lighthouse on the  point,  and  the  brilliant  vision when "the struggling sunlight  turned  a patch of black water into  boiling diamonds". One of  the most beautiful  images in this sequence occurs when  the  narrator  writes  that  "sometimes too, on the seaboard of the  night,  a ship  would  stand  drawn,  like a  jeweled dagger,  from  the dark scabbard  of the  town"; and  again, in an image that  links the eternal  now with the still point, "in  the morning  when one got up to make the coffee, with the sun blazing through  the windows ... it was like standing in the middle of a diamond".
Eridanus  is the  temporal  and  spatial  centre  of the  universe,  but  at  a  higher
level of meaning  it  is the  spiritual  centre  too. At one  point  the narrator writes that  "we  too ha:d grown  unselfish, or at least different,  away from the tenets of the selfish world''. If there  is such a quality as ec-centricity, it is man lost in the tangles of egoism, man  confusing  his "mask"  (persona)  or "role"  with his true spiritual  centre. "The Forest  Path" portrays a place where the false persona-lity, erected  to  perform  the  fragmenting  work of the  city, is finally stripped  away, where the original  innocence  of Paradise-"something that  man had lost" -is recovered. By the  act  of  "renouncing the  world  altogether" the  false values of egoistic man are  stripped  away and the inner spiritual  "I" is recovered.
Both  wealth  and  poverty  are  things  of  the  selfish ego:  they  are  COilditions
which  man  loves or  hates  because they enhance  or destroy the  private  "image" he has of himself, or the  public  "image'' he wishes to present to the world. But an  "image" of  the  self is not  the  real self, and  when  the  dwellers at  Eridanus discover  their  still  point  and  decide to stay,  they simultaneously  discover their real selves. From  that  point  forward  neither  wealth  nor  poverty  is of concern. They  can  live with  nothing  because they have everything;  in losing themselves they  have found  them-Selves. Egoistic man in the city divides off his world into numbered  lots, fenced and  labelled, effectively isolating him from a world which then  confronts  him as an  alien reality. But at the still point, where consciousness is spiritual  rather  than  egoistic, there is no circle to divide and  no reason to try,

54

THE EDGE  OF  ETERNITY

for the spirit "possesses" all things. The spiritual  centre in man is the integrating perceiver  of  the  world,  giving  itself to  the  universe  andi, in  turn,  finding  the universe giving itself to him.
The spiritual integrity of life at Eridanus is portrayed through  numerous images
of reflection, refraction, and sympathetic correspondence, suggesting the harmony of the inner  and  outer  worlds. The  inner  world is an abyss reflecting the world, like the dark  water  of the inlet  reflecting the universe in "an  inverse moonlight geometry,  beyond our  conscious knowledge".  Like Emerson  who sometimes saw the  world  as the  externalization  of the  Soul,  the  narrator  (following  Ortega) suggests the world is a "fiction'' made up by man as he goes along. At first there is a symphony in the air-"the thrilling diatonic  notes of a foghorn in the mist, as if some great symphony had  just begun"-but it soon becomes the "singing'' of their lives at Eridanus,  and  finally bubbles out of the depths of his own spirit. The  young lovers in their boat discover that  the objective world revolves around their  own  subjective  states,  as  when  they  notice  that   "these  great   peaks ... seemed to move along with us ... a whole mountainside or ridge of pines detach­ ing  themselves and  moving  as we rowed".  "When  they spoke of  damming the inlet ... cutting  it off from the cleansing sea altogether, it was as if  for a moment the  sources of my own  life  trembled  and  agonized  and  dried  up  within  me". Eventually,  having  completely escaped from  the circle of the ego  to  a spiritual centre,  the  narrator  discovers  that  mystical  illumination   in  which  the  centre expands to encompass the whole world:

The experience seemed to be associated with light, even a blinding light, as when years afterwards recalling it I dreamed that my being had  been transformed into the inlet itself, not at  dusk, by the moon, but at sunrise, as we had so often also seen it, suddenly transilluminated by the sun's light, so that  I seemed to contain the reflected sun deeply within my very soul, yet a sun which as I awoke was in turn transformed.

There  is one image  in  the story which links together all these levels of  mean­ ing:  the image of the Tao,  or  the "way"  of all things. Set forth  in the ancient Chinese Book of Changes,  the I  Ching, and  Lao Tzu's  philosophical  poem, the Tao  Te  Ching, the concept of the Tao is symbolized by a perfect  circle divided into the  yang  and  yin,  the  bright  and  the dark.  Originally signifying  the sunlit and  shaded  sides of  a  mountain,   yang  and  yin  came  to  represent  interrelated  opposites:  hot and  cold, strength  and  weakness, active and  passive, positive and negative, male and  female, good  and  evil, life and  death.  Sometimes  described as two fishes in eternal  intercourse,  the diagram  of the Tao is so constructed  as to suggest that  each of these opposites grows out of the other, or is defined by its opposite. Moreover,  the  yang-yin  symbol suggests rotation  in the same way that a  photograph  of a  galaxy  clearly  reveals motion  in  the  far-flung  trailing  stars. This  rotary motion implies that  the universe is not an absolute dualism of oppo-

55

THE EDGE  OF  ETERNITY

sites but  rather  a  unified process resulting from continual  interaction, from each polarity  continually  yielding to-or  dying to-its opposite. Together  yang and yin  evolve a  unity -the  seamless robe of nature,  the everlasting  flux, the ebb and flow of life.
The  yang-yin Tao  symbol may be regarded as an extension of the circle image which  we have used as a metaphor  for the structure  of "The  Forest Path  to the Spring". If the circle of the Tao  is visualized in rotation,  the  exact  centre  not only  remains  motionless,  but  also rides on  the  point  where  yang  meets  yin  in perfect  harmony.  In  terms of time, the still point at the centre is the everlasting "now" containing  yang and  yin in equal  measure-a single birth-death process in  which  the moment  is always being created  and  destroyed. In  terms of space, the still point  is the infinite  "here" which focusses every "there"; and  since this "here" rests where  yang  meets yin,  Eridanus  is inevitably a place where the bliss of heaven  is forever  threatened   by the tides of hell  (The  oil refinery across the inlet,  with  its missing S, is symbolically called HELL); where the  possession of the  All is threatened   by  the  shadow  of eviction;  where  the  life-giving inlet  is "known  as the  River  of Death  and  the  River  of Life". And, in terms  of man himself,  the  still  point  is that  inner  "I" which  unifies the  perceived  universe within itself; and  because that  "I'' stands where yang meets yin, the spirit of man must continually  face "the  fearful  wrath ... sweeping the world" and, above all, "those  nameless somnambulisms,  guilts, ghouls of past delirium,  wounds to other souls and  lives, ghosts of  actions  approximating to  murder ... betrayals  of self
... ready  to leap  out  and ... to destroy us, and  our happiness".  Life at the still point  may bring  the mystical identification  of bliss, but even that  experience can be terrifying:  "in  my agonized confusion of mind, my hatred  and suffering  were the forest fire itself, the destroyer, which is here, there, all about".
This  total fusion of opposites at the still point is conveyed by dozens of images
and symbols. The  narrator tells us that "a tide which to all appearances is coming in may be doing so only at the surface, that  beneath it is already going out",  that "here  in the inlet there was neither sea nor river, but something compounded of both",   and  that  this is  "the  Tao ... something  so still, so changeless,  and  yet reaching  everywhere,  and  in  no danger  of being exhausted".  At this still point, be it "now" or "here" or "I", all things are joined together:

It was there  that  our  life had  come into being and  for all its strangeness and conflict, a  pang of sadness struck us now. Longing and  hope fulfilled, loss and rediscovery, failure and  accomplishment, sorrow and  joy seemed annealed in one profound emotion.

It  is out  of  this  rich  texture  of experience  at  Eridanus,  experience  which is fused at  the still point, that  true  creativity  arises, the symphony of life which is in turn  a focus of death  and  rebirth-"my whole intention  seemed to be to die

THE EDGE  OF  ETERNITY

through  it, without  dying of course, that I might become reborn". And when the little  shack  on  the  beach   burns  down  carrying  into  ashes  the  score  of  this symphony, it is reborn as the opera which is called The  Forest Path to the Spring; and  the narrator  tells us that  "the  fire was [both]  a dramatic incident  and  our own  life, with its withdrawals and  returns,  wha:t I had  learned  of nature,  and the tides and sumises I tried to express".
It is highly significant that  music forms so large a part of the narrator's consciousness, that  he  writes first a symphony  and  then  an  opera,  and  that  he feels their  life at  Eridanus  to be "a  kind of singing".  In  music  more  than  any other  of the arts a fundamental truth  is imaged forth  about  reality as a whole. As the narrator  puts it, "in  some composers I seem to hear  the very underlying beat  and  rhythm  of  the  universe  itself".  The  very sounding  and  silencing  of musical notes captures  directly the fundamental  living/dying rhythm of existence, for no other art form captures  change as completely as music does. Indeed,  music only exists as change:  as moving melody and harmony.
Yet music-even though it is constant change, indeed, because it constantly changes-presents us with an image of time itself, and especially that  time  now which encompasses eternity. Victor Zuckerkandl has noted that

... hearing a melody  is hearing, having  heard, and  being about to hear,  all at once.
. . . Every  melody  declares to  us that  the  past  can  be there  without being remem­ bered,  the  future without being  foreknown.... What  a melody  is on  a small  scale, the  total  course  of  a  musical  work  is on  a  large  scale-a  whole  that  unfolds  in time  and  is so constituted that,   though  its  individual members appear  one  after  another, the whole,  in order  to be present, does not  have  to wait  for member to be added to member, but is, so to speak, always already there." 3

Music,  then,  is the  appropriate vehicle of  expression for  a  life existing  simul­ taneously  in  the  temporal  world  of constant  change  and  the  still  point  of  the eternal now.
The  "singing"  life captured  in the narrator's opera  turns out  to be a "strange magnificent  honeymoon  that  had  become one's  whole life''.  The  symbol is not entirely  strange,  however,  when  the  honeymoon is understood  as a  withdrawal from the demands of time and  place and  the individual  ego, and  a discovery of the  union  of opposites in the  "here" and  "now".  Yet this life, they discover, is not  built  by clinging to their own  past, nor to the luxuries of things, nor  to the selfish ego, nor even to one another.  And it is not even built out  of  clinging to the  still  point:   "one  could  not  make  a  moment  permanent,  and  perhaps  the attempt  to try was some form  of evil". It is built out  of totally  yielding to  the "eternal   flux  and  flow".  The  narrator   and  his wife come  to  realize  that   the person they each loved ten years ago is not the same person today. Only  the past is stable  and  secure, and  the  past is dead. The  present is the changing  frontier,

57

THE EDGE  OF  ETERNITY

the  point of rebirth.  Life has its final meaning "here" and  "now," "on  the very windrow  of existence"-on the edge of a sunlit fog, at the edge of eternity.
"The  Forest Path  to the Spring'' was intended  to be the final piece in a cycle of six or seven books which  Lowry called The  journey That  Never  Ends. Under the  Volcano, Dark  As the  Grave,  and  October  Ferry to Gabriola  were to have their  places in the  cycle. Lowry did not live to complete this task, nor did he see more  than  Volcano  into  print.  But  the place of "The  Forest  Path" at  the end, and  the  recurrence  of  Eridanus  as a  powerful  motif throughout the  books we have,  indicate  that  The  Journey  was an  exploration  into  that  eternal  moment which is now,  that  infinite  place which is here, that  unknowable  but  knowing I who is the spirit of man.  Perhaps  Lowry's failure to complete his]ourney is itself symbolic of  the  voyage  that  can  have  no ending,  precisely because  every now is a new beginning.

NOTES

1 The final story in Hear  Us  0 Lord   from Heaven Thy Dwelling  Place  (Philadel­
phia: J. B. Lippincott Company, rg6r), pp. 2 rs-283.
2    The Portable  Thoreau, ed. Carl Bode (New York: Viking Press,I 947), p. 272.
3  Victor Zuckerkandl, Sound   and  Symbol: Music  and  the  External  World,  trans. Willard R. Trask  (Princeton  University Press, rg6g), pp. 235-237.  Italics added.







TWO POEMS





)(FTER SUNSET

Broken walls of waves said to be the Atlantic sweep toward  us

Wave upon  wave
so much is breaking
so much  is happening
 Joyce Carol Oates

TWO POEMS

For centuries, here,
so much  has happened unrecorded
irretrievable


Droplets of water bubbles of bright flesh we stand  here hypnotized
again and always
and once again, again, hypnotized out of flesh jarred by the earthquake of the sea

We are waiting for something

We are waiting
for something to record


How  icy the shock on our  bare feet!


A hundred  yards away a vendor sells stickers for the bumpers of cars:
the proclamation  of the achievement of the replication of -
The recording of -


We are waiting again and always and again, again, stalkers of meaning
human and cold







59

TWO POEMS

THE NOISY SORROWFUL ONES


They  cut  their  flesh into inch-long strips they tottered  above us on stilts
their eyes were black with pupil their  teeth were wetly white their  ecstasies soared to giggles their  pain stretched  to yawns


It cannot be borne, they claimed
they seized us by the shoulders and  claimed to wish that  we might be delivered
from the Garden  like themselves delivered soaring in ecstasy
transformed  by bleating heedless breaths
they had wished to be aborted
were instead brought cruelly to birth
You  cannot bear it either, they cry


stilted above us smirking with wisdom
hot-breathed as if brotherly


You  dare not bear it, they whispered in baffied derision 	m uniSon
ennobled  now by granite  and  newsprint lonely in posthumous  pride














6o

STRANGE TO STRANGERS ONLY


M.G. Parks






JAMES DE   MILLE', intdguing romance of  a "range and macabre   civilization  near  the  South  Pole,  A  Strange   Manuscript  found  in  a Copper  Cylinder, is at  last becoming recognized as a minor  classic of  Canadian fiction. For a long time it was  a forgotten  book, known  and  admired  by only a few bibliophiles and literary men who bothered to explore what was commonly regarded  as  the  prehistoric  era  of Canadian letters. During  the  last  few years, however, it has shared in the general expansion of interest in Canadian literature. An  extended  notice of the  novel in the Literary  History  of Canada   ( 1965), its reprin,ting in  rg6g,  and  the efforts of a few writers to demonstrate its  consider­ able stature  have  all helped  the  novel to ,its proper  place in our  literary  canon.
While A Strange  Manuscript is now becoming appreciated and  understood  as it  never was before, the short  history of critical rather  than  merely appreciative comment on the novel has been marked by some unfortunate errors as well as by perceptive insights. As the novel appeared  posthumously in 1888, the errors have primarily  been over the  date  of composition and  have led to some dubious and even misleading a.'lSumptions about  De Mille's sources, purpose, and  meaning. A brief sketch  of De  Mille criticism  will explain  this rather  ungracious  assertion.
Fred  Cogswell set in  motion  the first misconception in, of afl places, the pres­ tigious Literary  History  of Canada by citing Rider  Haggard as an  influence on De  Mille, somehow  forgetting  that  the  death  of De  Mille in  188o  made  such influence impossible. This was a rare slip of which that  astute  critic of  Maritime  literature  must by now be thoroughly  tired of hearing. The  next in chronological order,  R.  E.  Watters,  in   1969  corrected  Cogswell's error  and  dragged  in  no fresh red herring,  although,  having no evidence to establish  when the novel was written,  he assumed that  Samuel  Butler's Erewhon ( 1872)  was probably one of De Mille's sources.1 Then  in 1972 the third  critic, Crawford Kilian, in the course of  drawing  heavily  upon  D.  E.  MacLeod's  unpublished  M.A.  thesis of  1968, brought into print much-needed  evidence for a date of  composition no later than the  186o's  and  consequently  helped  to  clarify  the  hitherto  confused  matter  of De  Mille's indebtedness  to  writers  of the  187o's.2    At  this  point,  with the  novel

61

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY


placed  at  least in  its proper decade, it seemed  that  criticism  could  proceed  more confidently. But  that   wa:s not  to  be.  Again,  as in  1 g65,  one  of our  best  critics brought confusion   into  the  picture.  Apparently unimpressed by  Kilian's  article and  its  important  evidence, George  Woodcock  wrote  just a year  later  an  article which   conjectures a  composition date   of  1879  and  then  proceeds  to  trace   the influences upon  De  Mille's novel  of three  British  novels of the  187o's.3  In  spite of  its  perceptive analysis  of other   aspects  of  A  Strange  Manuscript, this  article of  1973  can  only  be  confusing in its  resumption of what  is pretty  clearly  a false scent.  At  the  moment, therefore, a  reader  following  the  chronological order  of critical  commenrt is more  than  likely to wonder  what  is fact  and  what  is fiction.
Much of  the  confusion   is  resolved  if Kilian's report  on  MacLeod's thesis  is
taken  seriously. At the  risk of some  repetition of what  already  appears in Kilian's article,  one  can  outline the  matter as follows. The  crucial  evidence  is contained in  a letter  of March 6, 188o,  written by James  De Mille's  brother, Alfred  Henry De  Mill,  to  the  Reverend Dr.  John Pryor,  James's fa:ther-in-'law. The   relevant paragraph of this letter  runs as £ollows:

The  "Copper Cylinder" MS is one of the first stories ever written  by James, and he was  never  able  to make  a  satisfactory  denouement to the  plot  in it,  and  conse­ quently I do not think he ever offered it for sale. I read it over some years ago and told  him  that  the concluding  chapter  could be re-written  with  advantage, and  he entirely  agreed  with  me. Ido  not  know whether  he has ever  touched  it since, or not.... I think that  a purchaser  might be found for it among the publishers of the great  monthlies  and  when  Iheard  from  Willie  [James's  son]  that  you intended offering  it to Lea  and  Shepard  Ithought  that  possibly  you were not alive to the fact  of its being a work of considerable  merit. It might  be changed  a little at  the end with advantage  and offered either to Houghton [ ?] or in England.4

Here  is evidence  from  the  very  person  who  knew something about James De Mille's life as a  writer. There is absolutely  no reason  to doubt Alfred  De  Mill's knowledge or  veracity. "Some years  ago",  though frustratingly indefinite,  estab­ lishes  the   existence   of  the   completed  manuscript  of  the  novel-without, of course,  the  "satisfactory denouement" De  Mille  never  achieved-no later  than  several  years  before  188o.  Even  more  revealing,  of  course,  is the  testimony  that  the   novel  was  "one   of  the  first  stories  ever  written  by  James". The  remark  eJliminates the  187o's completely and  places  the time  of composition  somewhere  in  the  186o's,  when  De  Mille  began  his short  but  prolific career  as a  published author of fiction.  A brief survey  of  James De Mille's  activities  in  the decade will serve  to  place  A. H.  De  Mill's statement in  context  and  make  it less vague  than  it appears to be.
By 186o  De  Mille  was  dashing off serial  fiction  of the  Sunday School  variety for  the  Christian Watchman, a Saint  John  magazine edited  by his elder  brother, Elisha  Budd  De Mill.5  It is probable that he also wrote The  Dodge Club in 1861,

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

although   the  work  was  not  published  until  I 866   (or   I 868?)   as  a  serial  in Harper's  Magazine  and  not  until  I 86g as a book.6   These  very early endeavours, however,  are  almost  certainly  not  what  A. H.  De  Mill  means  by his  brother's "first stories".  That  he is thinking  of book publication  as a definition of  author­ ship  is  made  clear  by  another   sentence  in  the  same  letter.  In  the  course  of remarking  on the gross inaccuracy  of a recent newspaper  report  on  James's  life, especially "the  assertion that  all the profits of his books went  to  pay  his father's  debts and  that  his father  was a bankrupt", A. H. De Mill  remarks  that  James's only  contribution   to  the  settlement  of their  father's  esta:te  was his  payment  of
$I IOO to release a bank  note «in  1865 or 1866 long before he began to write".7
As De Mille's first published book,8  Helena's Household  (I 867), was what A. H. De Mill must therefore  have considered, like A Strange Manuscript, "one  of the first stories"  written  by  his brother,  his testimony  places the  composition  of A Strange  Manuscript  in the latter  half of the  I 86o's-more specifically, in  I 867 or  I868.
The  known  facts of De  Mille's  life in the  decade support  a date  of composi­
tion  no later  than   I 867  or  I 868.  After the  flurry of serial writing  in  I 86o-6 I, De Mille produced  nothing  more for several years. From September   I 86 I, until the summer  of I86s  he held the  post of Professor of Olassics at Acadia  College. While his work as an energetic and  popular teacher would have kept him busy in this period, it is quite possible that  he also continued to write, and  he may indeed have spent some time in these four years on A Strange Manuscript. His resigna­ tion  from  Acadia  was foUowed by his appointment  as Professor of  History  and Rhetoric   at  Dalhousie  College,  but,  according  to  the  testimony  of   his earliest biographers,  he did not step directly from one set of duties to another  but spent the next academic  year ( I 86s-66)  preparing for his new post. It is likely that  he also wrote  (or completed)  Cord and Creese and Helena's Household  during clUs interval, as both were published in I 867, the first as a serial.
From the fall of I 866 to the end of the decade his teaching a:t Dalhousie  would have  at  first  curtailed   his  writing,  especially because  the  new  post  required preparation  of  material   he  had  not  taught   at  Acadia.  Nevertheless  he  found time  to  prepare  two  manuscripts  in  I867  and  I868-The Cryptogram,  pub­ lished in serial form in  I86g, and The  B 0 W C, published as a book in the same year. Around  the end  of the  decade  his tempo increased,  for in  I 870 five titles appeared-The American  Baron  (as a serial),  The  Boys of Grand  Pre School, The  Lady  of the  Ice, The  Minnehaha Mines  (as a serial), and  Lost  in the Fog. Thereafter, his brother's  testimony  makes speculation  unnecessary,  and  at  any rate  De Mille's steady grinding  out of pot-boilers and  juvenile fiction  at the rate of  two  to  four  per  year  until  the  middle  of the  decade  and  his  work on The  Elements  of Rhetoric  would  have  left little  room for  A  Strange  Manuscript. It appears,  then,  that  there  were two  periods in the  I 86o's  when  De Mille  would

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

have had  the opportunity to write his masterpiece -during the years at Acadia (late  I86I  to mid-I865)  and  in  1867 before he began The  B 0 W  C and The Cryptogram. Therefore A. H.  De Mill's testimony makes good! sense in terms of De Mille's  activity  as a  writer  in  the decade, and  I 867 appears  to be a highly probable  terminus  ad  quem  for  A  Strange Manuscript. Certainly,  as MacLeod notes and  Kilian agrees, De Mille may well have conceived the idea for the novel as early as the 185o's,9   and quite  possibly he worked on it intermittently for years before  I 867. Such  careful  and  prolonged  attention  would account  for the  pro­ fessional polish of the  novel and  its manifest superiority  to every other  work of fiction  he  produced -qualities  of  the  novel  which  have  led  critics to  assume mistakenly  that  it  must  therefore  be a  late  work  belonging  to  the  187o's.  De Mille's  usual  practice  was to  write  rapidly, even in a slapdash  manner,  a habit which he cultivated  after  Helena's  Household in a deliberate attempt  to tum  out manuscripts  for a quick  cash  return.  But even in  the 186o's  he was capable  of writing  the  kind  of  prose one  finds in  his  best novel, as  passages of his  early serials and  Helena's  Household  prove. There  is no foundation  here for doubting  A. H. De Mill's evidence. 10
This   relatively   early   date   of  composition -or, more  accurately,   line  of
demarcation-naturally affects current  conjectures  about  De Mille's indebted­ ness to  other  novelists  of  his  time.  Obviously, the  novel could  not  have  been influenced  by Mallock's  The  New  Republic  ( 1877), Butler's  Erewhon  ( 1872), or even Lord Lytton's  The  Coming  Race ( 1870) .11 As Crawford  Kilian observes, "A  careful  exa:min:ation of Strange  Ms,  a:nd of the  facts of De Mille's life, wiH show that  the author's influences are far earlier than Haggard or Butler" -and he  rightly  singles out  More  and  Swift  as  two  of the  general  influences  upon De  Mille's  novel. Both  Utopia  and  Gulliver's Travels  depict  imaginary  societies which reflect back upon  the actual societies in which they were written; both are anti-Utopias in  which  the  good  elements of  the imagined  societies are  counter­ balanced  by the bad and in which utopianism as a:n ideal is implicitly repudiated; both  are  presented   by   narrator-characters,  Hythloday  and   Gulliver,  who  are more  or  less naive  and  imperceptive  of  the implications  of  what  they see and experience. Simil1arly, De  Mille's imaginary society is a distorted  reflection of his own, his Kosekin have evolved a society that is at first glance better but ultimately as bad  as actual  Western  society, or even worse, and  his narrator, Adam  More, like  Hythloday  and   Gulliver,   brings  an  ordinary  and   relatively  imperceptive  mind  to  the  task  of  understanding and   judging  his strange  hosts. A  Strange Manuscript   is  therefore  squarely  in  the  "classic"  line  of  English  anti-Utopias, and   its  general  conception   need  not  be sought  for  in  minor  fantasies  of  the nineteenth  century.
Various more restricted influences have been pointed out by George Woodcock,
all of which-except, of course, the  three novels of the  187o's-are certainly

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

possible. Among  these are the novels of Peacock  (or imitations  of their form)  as models for  De Mille's frame  discussion by the yachtsmen, Prescott's  Conquest  of Mexico   ( I 843)   for  the  idea  of sacrificial rites performed  atop  pyramids,  Mel­ ville's Typee   ( I 846)   for  the  notion  of gentle  and  seemingly benevolent  canni­  bals.12  The  suggestion  that  Jules  Verne's  earlier  novels in  their  original  French would have been known  to De Mille is plausible, but their bearing on A Strange Manuscript   is less likely. By the  I 86o's, Verne  had  not  produced  much  that  is relevant.  The  only  possibility would seem to be A  journey  to the  Centre  of  the Earth,  which  first  appeared   (in  French)   in  I864.  As will  be  argued   below, however, De Mille did not need Verne's help to envisage a subterranean entrance to an unknown land.
All of  these  writers  may  have  contributed  to  De Mille's  novel in  such  very minor ways. Others  equally deserving of passing notice have not been mentioned by Watters and Woodcock.
One  peculiar  notion  picked up by De Mille was the brainchild  of an eccentric army  captain,  John   Cleves  Symmes,  who  in  I8I8 issued  and   distributed   a circular  propounding the  thesis that  the earth  is hollow and  open  at  the  poles. In  I823  he went so far as to petition  the American  Congress to support  a polar expedition  to test his theory, and  actually received twenty-five supporting  votes. Three  years later,  in  I826,  Symmes and  his collaborator,  one James  McBride, published  Symmes  Theory  of Concentric  Spheres, a full explanation  of his thesis that  there are enormous  openings at both poles through which the sea flows into a series of hollow, concentric spheres. Circles of ice and  volcanic peaks surround the openings,  but  within  these barriers  the climate is tropical.  Not surprisingly, the  notion  first  publicized  in  IBIS  was picked  up  very quickly  by a  writer  of fiction.  In   I82o  appeared   Symzonia,  by Captain  Adam  Seaborn-possibly  a pseudonym  for  Symmes  himself.  This  fantasy  tells  the  story  of  a  voyage  of discovery  to  the  South  Pole  undertaken   under  the  guise of sealing.  The  ship follows ocean  currents  through  a ring of ice and  is borne imperceptibly  over the ocean  rim into the interior  of the earth,  where Seaborn  and  his men come upon the  continent  of Symzonia. They  land at a city, where they are  welcomed  by a friendly  white  race. This  new civilization  turns  out  to be Utopian  in  both  the adinirable  nature  of the people and  their institutions. Fearing  to be contaminated by their visitors, the  Symzonians subsequently ask them  to depart,  and  Seaborn
and his crew retrace their course, eventually returning  to New York.18
One  cannot  be sure  that  De Mille had  read Symzonia, although  it fits one of Adam  More's  remarks:  "As a boy I had read wild works of fiction about  lands in the interior of the earth,  with a sun at the centre, which gave them the light of a perpetual  day".  A few other  possible echoes come to Inind:  Adam's  seal hunt which  leads  to  his separation  from  the ship,  the strong  current,  the  approach through  a  subterranean passage, the friendly  strangers.  Obviously, if De Mille

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY


had  read  this fantasy, it did  not govern  his imagination to the  point of suggesting the  core  of  his  novel.  What is  certain, however,  is that  De  Mille  knew  a:bout Symme's eccentric theory.  Adam More  is made  to refer to the  possibility  of "an opening  at  the  South   Pole"   and   his  companion  Agnew  is  made   to  deny   the theory  by expostulating "Do not  imagine  that  the surface of the earth  is different at  the  poles from  what  it is anywhere else",  and  by advising  More  that "Theories about openings  at  the  poles, or  whirlpools,  must  be given up." A little later  More refers directly  to Symmes'  theory:

I  recalled  that  old  theory  which  had  been in my mind before this, and  which  I had  mentioned  to Agnew. This  was the  notion  that  at  each  pole there  is a vast opening;  that  into  one of them  all the waters of the ocean  pour  themselves, and, after passing through  the earth, come out at the other pole, to pass about its surface in innumerable  streams. It was a wild fancy, which I had laughed  at under  other circumstances, but which now occurred to me once more ... "

Symmes'  theory  was in fact  widely  known.  Among  writers  who made use of it was  Edgar   Allan   Poe,  who  in  turn  supplied   De  Mille  with  a  few  ideas  for  A Strange  Manuscript. Poe's  fragmentary story,  "MS Found  in  a  Bottle"  (1883), probably  suggested   the   copper   cylinder.   Incidentally,  the  story  tells  how  an unsinkable ship  is drawn irresistibly  toward  the South  Pole and  goes down  into  a whirlpool, presumably through  Symmes'  opening  into  the  interior of the  earth. The same  author's "Narrative of  Arthur  Gordon Pym"   ( 1838)   has  a  closer bearing   on  De  Mille's  novel.  In  this  tale  of another voyage  to  the  South   Pole, various  points  look ahead to De Mille: details  of the approach to Antarctica, the Arabic   carvings of  a  strange race  discovered  by  Pym,  the  distortion of latitude near  the  Pole  (a detail  which  Poe had  borrowed from Symzonia), the separation of  the  narrator from   his ship  when  he  goes  ashore  (Poe  has  the  collection  of heche-de-mer  as  the  purpose, but  Adam   More  intends  to  shoot  seals,  precisely the  same  motive  given  to  Adam   Seaborn in Symzonia), the  southward-flowing
current, the  semi-tropical climate  of the  polar  region. It is noteworthy that  J. 0.
Bailey,   whose   Pilgrims   Through  Time  and   Space   unexpectedly includes  A Strange   Manuscript in  its  survey  of  "scientific" and  "utopian" fiction,  has  no doubts at all that  De Mille borrowed such details from Poe.14


kESE BORROWINGs,  however,  are  not significantly  germane to  an  interpretation of  A  Strange   Manuscript. They  attest  to  De  Mille's  wide
reading, but  the  more  of them  one finds the more  it becomes  clear  that  the vital aspects  of  the  novel,  particularly his ingenious creation  of the  Kosekin,  are  very much  his own.  Where, then,  are  we to look for some insight  into  the cast of mind which   produced  the  Kosekin   and  for  some  external   aid  in  understanding  the

66

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

relation  of De Mille's strange  civilization to the real world  of theI 86o's?  The general  Victorian  context of the novel naturally suggests various relationships,  as Watters and Woodcock have observed, but there remains at least one unexplored means  of  getting  closer  to  De  Mille's  mind  and  consequently   understanding more  about  his meaning  and  purpose. What  remains is what  can  be learned  of De  Mille's life and  thought,  especially what can  be established  about  his moral and   religious  convictions  and  interests  fmm  the  scattered   evidence  available. That evidence is not  abundant, but  there is enough of it to save interpretation from mere conjecture.
De  Mille's  family  background,   and  what  is clearly  his  significant   reaction against  one  element  of  it,  are   the  first  relevant  clues  to  pursue.  His  father, Nathan  Smith  De :Mill, was a prominent  shipowner and merchant of Saint John
-a man of integrity and strong social conscience who seems to have been highly
respected  by  his sons, James  De  Mille included.  Certain   other  aspects  of  his character, however,  have  more  negative  connotations.  Archibald MacMechan, who  worked  hard  to  piece together  an  accurate  biography  of James  De  Mille, judged  Nathan  De Mill to be a man of "unbending Puritanism". 15 Certainly  he was a  pillar of the total  abstinence  movement in Saint  John,  being  president of the local society from 1832 to 1845 and a dedicated  member  thereafter. Accord­ ing  to MacMechan, he was known,  presumably among  the  more  "liberal" citi zens of Saint  John,  as "Cold  Water  De  Mill", a name  supported  by the story that,  having found a barrel of rum in one of his ships, he set it rolling to oblivion in  the  waters  of Saint  John   harbour.   MacMechan   also  deduced  that  he  was inclined  to anti-intellectualism. He is said to have burned a package  of novels he discovered  in  a  cargo,  and  "seems  rather  to  have  disparaged   book-learning." His support  of Acadia  College in  Wolfville wa:s not,  MacMechan thinks, based on  any  admiration  for secular  learning  but  rather  on  approval  of its dominant  atmosphere  of evangelical  Christianity  and  strict  morality. The  picture  emerges of  Nathan   De  Mill  as a sternly  upright  and  unbending  puritan, a  man  to be respected  but not necessarily emulated.  One other fact about  him is important: although  the De Mills were all Anglicans, in I 842 Nathan  De Mill, at the age of thirty-eight,  joined the Baptist church.  The reasons for his break with the family religious  affiliation  are  not  on  record,  but  it  seems obvious  that  at  least  one motive lay in his militant  crusade  against  the demon rum. Long  before 1842 he must  have  found  the  Anglican  position  on  temperance  a  weak  and  ultimately immoral  compromise.  He  may,  of  course, have  been  moving  towards  a  more pietistical form of Christianity  in other  ways as well before he made his decision to turn his back on the via media of the Anglicans.
The father's  influence on James  De Mille can be only glimpsed here and there in the  records of the early years. From the age of nine, when his father  changed the religious affiliation of the family, James was a Baptist;  he was sent to Baptist

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

institutions -to Horton  Academy  in  I 848 and to Acadia  College in  I 849, and was baptized  while at  Horton. After a year-long tour of Europe  with his elder brother,  he was sent  in  I 852  to  Brown  University,  another  Baptist  institution, graduating in I854· He seems to have been marked by no particular religious zeal during  these years. At least he did  not follow his elder brother,  Elisha Budd De Mill, into  the Baptist  ministry,16   and  he was very: active at  Brown in the secular pursuits of public-speaking  and  debating,  and  in the production of comic verse, being  elected  class poet  in  I 854· There  is no question  of any  departure  from normal  Christian  devotion  in all af   this, but merely no indication  of him follow­ ing his father's  austere  bent or of revealing the evangelical zeal common to many of his fellow Baptists.
There  is also no  evidence  of  a  change  in the  picture  in  the  next  few years. James  De Mille  remained  within  the Baptist fold, and  by  I 86o, when "Horton Sketches" was written,  was even expressing approval  of religious revivals. During his  Acadia  period  (I862-I865), however,  a  change  in  his  attitude may  have been gathering  force. He approved  publicly of non-sectarian education  (Inaugural Discourse,  I 86 I ) ,  which  Acadia  upheld  in  theory  but  hardly  in  practice -a choice of emphasis that  may have carried deliberate ironic implications  but may, of  course,  have  been  seriously  made  in  the  belief that  the  institution   he  was about  to join exemplified his own ideal. Much more significant, indeed  markedly so, is the well-known remark  of one of his students at Acadia,  which gives us the first glimpse of another  side of De Mille. Herbert  C. Creed,  in a letter  to Mac­ Mechan,  recalled  that  although   De  Mille  was "doubtless  a sincere  Christian", he "took  delight  in  ridiculing  everything  like cant, and  even the ordinary  words and  actions  of the  'pious' sort  of people often brought  to his  keen eye and  thin curling lip that  peculiar sarcastic smile of his.m7  It is hardly necessary to observe that  such  a  marked  disdain  for  evangelical  piety strikes  an  alien  note  in  the Acadia  of  the  early  I 86o's,  which  contemporary  accounts  depict  as intensely conscious of its duty  to oversee the spiritual  and  moral condition  of its students. Certainly  it  is not  what  one  would  expect of  an  ardent  or  even  a  moderately committed  Baptist.
Then,   in   I865,   De  Mille   made   two  surprising  moves:   he  resigned  from
Acadia  in  August, and  not long afterwards  left the Baptist Church  and  became an Anglican. His resignation  was not engendered by dissatisfied students or administration; in  fact,  he  was  much  admired  by students  and  was earnestly requested  by the college to reconsider his decision.18 The  most reasonable assump­ tion  is  that   he  had  become  uncomfortable   within  the  confines of  the  Baptist faith  and  its  academic  centre  at  Wolfville. His  move to  Dalhousie  College in Halifax  was not  a step  upward  in  the academic  world, for at  the  time Acadia had  emerged from its earlier struggle for survival and Dalhousie was  just getting on  its feet financially  and  academically.  One  other  fact  supports the inference

68

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

that  for some time he had  been approaching a spiritual  crossroads and  at last in
1865  felt free  to take another  direction:   his father  had  died  on  December  26,
1864,  removing  a  serious  obstacle  to  his  change  of  religious  affiliation.  One assumes that  De Mille had no desire to wound his father  by an act which, how­ ever blameless, would  probably  have been taken as a tragic  betrayal.
One  can find few signs, besides Herbert  Creed's evidence, of the cast of mind that  led De Mille to his decision. His first published novel, Helena's Household: A Tale  of  Rome in the First Century  ( 1867),  would seem to be a likely source of evidence,  but in fact it does not reveal the "sarcastic smile" at overt  piety of which  Creed  writes.  This  interesting  but  uneven  novel, in  which  De  Mille  is generally  strong  in  description  and  historical imaginaton  and  weak in  the  craft of  the  novelist, has  much  to say  about  the  Christian  doctrine  of love and  the supreme  example of Christ in the context of a pagan world desperately  requiring spiritual  sustenance.  Yet the evangelicalism, insofar as it is coloured  by authorial bias, is broadly Protestant  in its emphasis on the Word of God in the New Testa­ ment  and  in  its interpretation  of  the  Eucharist  as  a  symbolic  sacrament. De Mille's depiction  of conversion and  the converted,  though sometimes  rather  sen­ timental,  would  agree  well with  Anglicanism.  There  is one odd omission in  his account  of  early  Christianity.   Historians  are  generally  agreed  that   two sacred ceremonies or sacraments  of the early Christians,  baptism  by immersion  and  the Eucharist,   were  firmly  established  by  the  time  of  Paul.   Yet  De  Mille  never mentions  or  depicts  baptism  in  the  novel. As a  former  Baptist,  he would  have been  keenly  aware  of  this  sacrament   and  of   the  running   battle  in  his  time between  Baptist  defenders  of total  immersion  and  their  less literalist  Protestant  opponents.  The  omission is therefore  surely  deliberate  and  perhaps  is a sign of his special sensitivity on an issue so much a matter  of contention  between  his old and his new church.
Although   Helena's  Household  furnishes  no  plain  evidence  of  its  author's
opposition  to sectarian  Protestantism,  it  does demonstrate  his  keen  interest  in the  religious and  philosophical  currents  of  the ancient  world  in  the infancy  of Christianity.  As we shall see, this aspect of the novel has a bearing  on A Strange Manuscript.  De  Mille's  interest  in  church  history-MacMechan says that  he specialized  in  the subject-appears clearly in  Helena's Household. He  is bent on  bringing  together  and  comparing  various strains  of thought  in  the  Rome  of Nero-the  Platonism  of Socrates,  Roman  moral  philosophy, militant  Judaism, and  Christianity.  Indeed  his tendency to examine at length the interplay  of these forces slows down  the action of the  novel. His method  is to invent  characters to express, in intellectual  terms and  in their lives, the beliefs they uphold:  Cineas, the Greek rationalist  and  Platonist,  whose conversion to Christianity  is a gradual and  soul-searching  process;  Helena,  who  embraces  the  new  religion  with  the quick  ardour  of intuition; Isaac,  the honourable  but  fanatical  Jew  whose zeal

6g

STRANGE TO STRANGERS ONLY

for  his  nation   and  faith  aligns  him  against  Christians   as  weB as  against  the Roman  overlords of his homeland.  De Mille's  understanding of what  Matthew Arnold  calls Hebraism   and  Hellenism  is displayed  fully,19   though  simplified in the interest of the fictional context.  Cineas'  resistance to accepting  the Christian doctrine  of sin  suggests both  the  tendency  of beleaguered  early  Christianity  to over-emphasize  human  depravity  and  the  Greek  genius for  appreciation  of the palpable  glory of nature  and  man:   "It is a good and  a pleasant  world that  we see around   us",  Cineas  affinns,  "and  to apply  the  name sinners  to the  'kindly race of men' seems like saying  that  the world is all dark,  even in its bright  day­ time.mo Though  Cineas eventually  develops a sense of sin, throughout the novel De Mille's  emphasis  is not  in fact on the depravity  of man  but  on the  boon of divine  love.  Furthermore,  his  admiration   for  Greek  thought   and   culture   is reflected in  the  sympathetic  portrayal  of Cineas, in  the  presentations of Platon­  ism as the highest  reach  of unaided  human  wisdom, and  in viewing Socrates as in some measure  a precursor  of Christian  truth.  In short, while Helena's House­ hold  leaves one  with  no  doubts  about  De  Mille's  Christian  point  of view  and dedication   to  Christian   belief, it  reveals as well his  knowledge of the  historical context  and  his understanding of basic principles of  the Hebraic,  Hellenic, and Christian  positions.
De  Mille's  conversion  to Anglicanism,  as has been suggested above, fits what is  known   of  his  interests   and   attitudes-his  love  of  classical  learning,    his scholarly  interest  in  the  early  history of  Christianity,  his  distaste  for  outward shows  of  evangelical   piety,  the  moderate  tone  and  philosophical  emphasis  in Helena's  Household.21    One   might  also  mention  his  unswerving  support   of   a humanistic  education  based on a study of the classical world  and  his opposition to denominational education,  convictions which  are expressed unequivocably  in his  Inaugural Address  at  Dalhousie  in I 873.  One  other  related  point  remains to  be  noted -that of  his acceptance  of  the  official Anglican  position on  the apostolic  succession  and  the  relation  of the  Roman  and  English  churches.  Al­ though  there  are  no signs in  De  Mille's works, early or  late, of the fierce  anti­ pathy  to Roman  Catholicism  expressed by many  Baptists of the day, he seems to have  found  in  Anglicanism  a  satisfactory  compromise  between  Rome  and  sec­ tarian   Protestantism.  His  faith  in  tradition  and  his  sense of  history  were both satisfied by Canterbury. This  is what  one assumes would  have  influenced  him, and  the  assumption  is supported   by  his only known statement  on  the  subject, "The  Early  English   Church:  A  Paper   read  before  the  Church   of  England Institute" (Halifax: Nova Scotia Printing  Co., 1877). This address is an histori­ cal sketch of Christianity  in  Britain  from  the second  century  to the  time of the Venerable  Bede  ( 672-735). De Mille's treatment of  the subject  is flatly matter­  of-fact  and  not  at  all  polemical,  but  his conception of a distinct  British church adhering  to  primitive  Christianity  and  resisting as  best it  could  the  dominance

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

of highly organized  Roman  authoritarianism indicates  tha:t he saw his church  as an  indigenous  entity  as venerable  as the Roman  and  Greek establishments,  not as  a  Protestant   schism  from  Catholicism  dating  from  the  Reformation of the sixteenth century.  In other  words, De Mille agrees on this point with that  earlier staunch  Anglican,  T.  C.  Haliburton, who had seen the Reformation in England as  reactionary   rather   than  revolutionary,  the  English  church  as  regaining  the purity of doctrine  which  had  long been sullied by Roman  domination, and  the Anglicanism  which  emerged  from  the  purging  away of long-established  Roman heresy and  corruption  as the best and  truest form of Christianity.  What  is more to  the  point,  De  Mille  had  by  1865  aligned  himself with  the  theological  and ethical climate of the Anglican  via media, with the tradition  of Hooker, and  had formally repudiated  the more uncompromising temper of sectarianism.  It is noteworthy  that,  when  he settled in Halifax  and  became an Anglican,  he chose High-Church St. Luke's  rather  than  Low-Church  St. Paul's  as his place of  wor­ ship. Moreover, he took his new allegiance seriously, becoming an active member of the Church of England  Institute.




l:E BEARING of all of this upon  A Strange Manuscript  is of course one's  prime  concern.  The  following paragraphs attempt   to suggest some ways in which De Mille's biography, mundane  and spiritual,  comes to our aid in understanding his novel.
First it should  be noted  that  De Mille calls on his knowledge  of ancient  and biblical  history  for  his conception  of  the  Kosekin.  His  general  intention  is to depict  what  has happened  to an  Eastern  Mediterranean people who have  been utterly   isolated  from   their  original  milieu  for  a  very  long  time,  and   have developed  their  religious  and   moral  beliefs in  ways contrary   to  those of  the civilization  from  which  they  have  been  separated.   It  does  not  much  matter whether   the  original   Kosekin  were  the  Troglodytes   (Red   Sea  cave-dwellers described  by Agatharchides of Cnidus)  or one of the lost ten tribes of Israel,  as Melick facetiously suggests. The  important  point is that  they were Hebrews  (or at  least a  Semitic  people speaking  the  Hebrew  tongue)   who  left  the  Mediter­ ranean  world long before Greek civilization ha:d affected them. According  to the Old  Testament,   the  lost  tribes  were  transported   to  Assyria  when  Israel  was
conquered in  734 B.C., and  it was of course nearly 300 B.c. before the Jews as a
nation  came into  contact  with  Greek culture.  The  Kosekin, then,  are a  people
from what  one might  call an  Old  Testament  background  who have  never been touched  by the later  developments  which took place in the  world  they had  left
-in particular,  they have  lived completely unaware  of Greek  rationalism  and
humanism,  and  of  the  Christian  tradition  centred  on  the  New Testament and

71

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

enriched  by Greek and Roman  philosophy. In one way the development  has been directly  opposite  to  that  of  Western  civilization,  for  the  Kosekin  adhere  to  a pervasive  other-worldliness  and  denial  of life, while Western  civilization,  as De Mille knew well, has tended  to develop an equally pervasive worldliness despite the  transcendental idealism  of its  philosophical  and  Christian  heritage.  At  any rate,  the  Kosekin  have  driven  the spiritualism,  fatalism, and  contemptus mundi of the ancient  Hebrews  to gross extremes that  are believable within their isolated confines, untempered as  they  have  been  by Hellenism or  Christianity.  Indeed, they  have  even  reached  the  utter  absurdity  of upholding  other-worldly  fanati­ cism  without  any  raison  d'etre,  any  ultimate  religious belief, for  as  Crawford Kilian  has  rightly  pointed  out,  the  Kosekin are a godless race. Their  departure from  their  Hebraic   origins  is  consequently  degenerate  to  an  alarming  degree.
While  the  Kosekin, seen in  this light,  have developed in a direction  opposite to that  of Western  civilization/2  in another  way they may be seen as pushing to logical conclusions extreme religious and moral tendencies in Western religion, tendencies  that   may  be  traced  either  to  Oldl Testament   times or  to  qualities inherent  in Christianity.  Previous commentators  on the novel have  noted  this in passing, but it would seem reasonable that  it should be given much  more weight in view of De  Mille's  experience  of sectarian  extremism, his rejection  of it, and his embracing of the via media of Anglicanism.
In  effect, the Kosekin embody in extreme ways what De Mille would consider
as  pernicious  tendencies  in  the  history of  Christianity.  Thus  what  Adam  calls "their  strange  and  unnatural love of death" is an  intensification of the  pietism which looks upon  life solely as a preparation for death, in effect prefers darkness to light, exalts poverty, and  regards love of the beautiful, indeed all the pleasant elements of life, as sinful and  degrading.  De Mille did not need to look back to the  most dour  exemplars  of New England  Calvinism for models. The  tradition of Alline in Nova Scotia,  though  softened in many Baptists by the middle of the nineteenth  century,  still persisted among the more rigorous and  uncompromising members  of  this  particular holy community,  and  was vigorously supplemented by similar  "unworldliness" in  the most fanatical  wings of the Methodist  and Presbyterian  churches.
The  Kosekin  drive  to  literal  extremes  positions which  such  religionists, and
perhaps  De  Mille's  own  father,  held as articles of faith.  It looks very much  as though  De Mille  reveals the  absurdity  and  even the depravity  of such  attitudes by pushing  them  to their  logical conclusions. The  central  Christian  tradition  to which  De Mille  adhered  has never regarded  what is natural as sinful or vile; it
has  never  made  such  a  sharp   division  between  body  and  soul,  between  the
natural   and  the  divine.  Adam  is given  a  moment  of  insight,  although   he is unaware  of the implications,  when  he declares that  the Kosekin "lived  in oppo­ sition  to  nature   itself".  According  to  the  Kohen,  it is  "unnatural" or  against

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

human  nature  to fear death,  to detest and  avoid poverty, to seek the  requital  of love.  These  are  all  animal   rather   than  human  instincts,  says  the  Kohen.  In effect,  the  Kosekin  deny  that  man  shares  any  instincts  with  the  animal;  their totally  uncompromising   position  is to  segregate  man  from  animals,  man  from nature.  They  have built up  a body of ideas which denies any connection  except the  common  need  of animals  and  man  for  nutrition  in  order  to  remain  alive. Even more than  the most extreme  Calvinist, the Kosekin have cut man  off from nature,  and  have  defined  nature  as evil. Then,  to rationalize  their  own  denial, they  name  the  artificial  the  "natural". For  De Mille,  as for  Hooker,  the great apologist  for  his church,   nature   is  part  of  the  divinely-ordained   and  ordered universe, and  what  is natural in  humanity  is not  by definition  unclean  or  evil but  morally  neutral,  capable  of  being  used for good  or  evil  purposes.  But  for Christian  extremists  and  the  Kosekin,  much  of life is indeed  in  opposition  to nature  itself. Both  devalue  life as something  to be  released from  as quickly  as possible so long as the  release is honourable  (suicide is a sin for  both). More­ over, the whole symbolism of light and darkness in the novel applies to Christian extremists as well as to the Kosekin -both are blind to the glories of  the natural  life and  try  to live in  the  darkness  and  gloom  associated  with  death,  with  a denial  of life. Both  are so suspicious of pleasure and  enjoyment  as occasions of sin that  the most envied people are those destitute of worldly goods and  worldly pleasures. The  only  difference  between  the  Kosekin  "aristocracy" and  the self­ styled  aristocrats  of Christian  grace is that  most  Christian  extremists  hold such ideas  as  convictions  without   putting   them  into  indiscriminate  practice.   The Kosekin,  by carrying  their  convictions into  uncompromising  action,  reveal  just how abominable,  De Mille seems to be saying, the convictions are. The  leading paupers  of  the  land  are  filled  with  blood  lust  and  are  actually  the  worst  of murderers.  Such  is the logical  outcome,  De Mille implies, of an  utter  denial  of the goodness of life. He  may even be implying too that  the distorted  conception of God  held by life-denying  Christians  is actually  akin  to the godlessness of the Kosekin,  that  a  caricature  of  God  amounting  to blasphemy  is not far  removed from utter unawareness of God.
Another aspect of Kosekin life is closely related and equally an ironic comment on  Christian  extremism.  In  their  system of  ethics  the  Kosekin  are  completely ignorant   of  the  Aristotelian   principle  of  the  golden  mean   that   has  been  so influential  in establis·hing the  via media of liberal Christian  ethics. The  Kosekin drive  the  virtue  of  temperance   to  its  deficiency of  abstinence  in  denying  the beauty  and  pleasure of life rather  than  simply avoiding its harmful  attractions. They  drive  the  virtue  of courage  to its excess of foolhardiness  when  they seek death  in  battle  with  fanatical   persistence. They  drive the  virtue  of liberality  to the  excess of  prodigality  when  they strive  to give away  all  possessions in the attempt   to  attain  the  poverty  and  worldly misery that  they  deem  necessary to

73

STRANGE TO STRANGERS ONLY

their  "salvation". Their   perverted  extremism  is well summed  up  by their  first citizen when  the Chief Pauper  tells Adam of his almost ideal condition: "I have poverty,  squalor,   cold,  perpetual   darkness,  the  privilege  of  killing others,  the near prospect of death, and the certainty of the Mista  Kosek."
The  subject  of love in  the  novel is a  perfectly integral  part  of the  Kosekin
philosophy.  The   Kosekin  notion  of  love  is  forced  to  the  point  where  lovers remain  apart  because it would be "selfish" for them to act otherwise. They deny love as they  deny life itself. They  reject any compromise between  the  flesh and the spirit.  Selflessness is not for  them  a  relative force in a fallen  and  imperfect world  but  rather  utter  self-denial.  Kosekin "love"  is not  really love at  all, but rejection of love. No one can receive love any more than any other "commodity". The  love which the  Kosekin say is so strongly felt has nowhere  to go, no object upon  whioh to act or fulfill itself. It is entirely abstract,  never real or  realized­ in fact, inhuman. One  can hardly fail to notice how closely the Kosekin resemble Swift's  Houyhnhnms on  this  point.  Both are  distinguished  from  human  beings by their impervious rationalism,  the main difference being that  the Houyhnhnms, being  horses, simply  have  no  human  emotions, while  the  Kosekin,  being  men, have  smothered   their  human   instincts  in  the  name  of   an  absurd  ideal  which seeks to deny their humanity.
To  interpret  the  Kosekin  ideal  of love and: Adam's  total  opposition  to it as
basically an amusing  satire on romantic love in Western society, as R. E. Watters does,  would  seem  to  be  a  distortion  of  De  Mille's  intention.  Certainly  Adam More echoes the sentimentalities of romantic love in Western culture, and in this as in most ways is an impercipient extremist in his own right  and so an  uncon­ scious satirist  of the  values  he  holds. But  De Mille's emphasis  is surely  on the absurdity   of  the  Kosekin  position  on  love, as  it  is on  their  uncompromising  extremism  generally.  Adam's shocked  incomprehension  is no  more  and  no less marked  or significant on the subject of love than on any other Kosekin article of belief. What  is involved  here  as elsewhere is a more complex  meaning  derived from De Mille's basic principle of moderation. Satire there is, but it works in two directions  simultaneously,  and  depends  just as much  upon  the  inadequacy  and extremism of Adam as upon those qualities in the Kosekin.
The   novel  makes  better  sense if De  Mille  is seen  as  opposing  two  sets of
extremes  rather  than  one-extreme self-denial and  consequent  life-denial as in Kosekin society, and  extreme  self-indulgence and  consequent  denial of  transcen­ dence  and  moral  idealism  as in  Western society. Adam  is not  really  De Mille's spokesman  but  a  simple-minded   and  naive  representative  of  Western  culture, propounding values  as they  are  commonly  practised  in  his  corrupt  society. His resemblance  to  Gulliver  is close enough  to  put  us on  the  alert.  Like Gulliver, Adam  is not  utterly  depraved,  not  really extreme,  for  example,  in  his espousal of self-indulgence, but  he is at best no more than  a unreflective humanist  of the

74

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

shallow  sort  and  at  worst,  perhaps,  "a   prig,  a  ninny,  and   a  hypocrite",  as Crawford  Kilian declares him to be. He is primarily, however, an impercipient representative  of a materialistic  and  es<>entially godless society-so impercipient that  he does not  even realize that  the selflessness and  self-denial of the  Kosekin are  in fact self-indulgence. There  is little in him of the idealism of De Mille, of De  Mille's  declared  disapproval   of self-indulgence  in  his own  society.  Conse­ quently  the  arguments  he opposes to the Kosekin ideals are  not the ideals of his culture  but  the  imperfect  realities all too common  in its practice.  His attitudes  are  the  counterparts not  of  Kosekin "high-minded" ideals  but  of  the ordinary  Kosekin  citizen's  imperfect  realization  of those ideals. The  idealism  of Western culture,  De Mille's idealism, is far below the surface of the novel, implied  rather  than stated. The  outward  conflict is between two extremes, irreconcilable  because they are seemingly poles apart  and because their chief spokesman, the Kohen and Adam, are only vaguely touched by the principles of  moderation  that  woud
them  closer to the  golden mean-the  Kohen  by the  touch  of humanity  which has  made  him  a  failure  by Kosekin standards,  Adam  by the  basic decentnes<> which  partly  belies and  relieves his materialistic  and  pragmatic   outlook.  The ultimate of Kosekin idealism is of course represented by the Chief Pauper, and the ultimate  of Western materialism, ironically enough, not only by Adam  but by the Kohen  GadoJ23   and  especially Layelah,  whose daring  iconoclasm  makes  her  "a new Semiramis-one who might revolutionalize an empire and introduce a new order  of things"  ( p. 168). Layelah's statement  of her principles, which amount merely to  the substitution  of extremes opposite  to those of the  Kosekin,  places Adam's  extremism  in  clear  perspective:  "The  rich shall  be  esteemed,  the  poor shall be down-trodden; to rule over others shall be glorious, to serve shall be base; victory shall  be an  honor,  defeat  a shame;  selfishness, self-seeking, luxury,  and indulgence  shall be virtues;  poverty, want, and squalor shall be things of  abhor­ rence  and  contempt'' (p.  167). Here  is the  imperfect  and  of course  depraved practice of Western society, as extreme and  as far from the mean as the Kosekin values  Layelah  rejects. Similarly,  Adam's  view of love in  his own  society is as limited  as his other  conceptions.  His philosophy of love is tritely  romantic,  even sentimental,  and no doubt  unconsciously satiric of love as practised in our culture. The missing element is of course the highest ideals of his civilization. The opposition of two defective extremes defines the mean only by implication. Moreover, the two extremes, ironically enough, are "ideals" in another  way:  just as very few of the Kosekin are able to live up to their ideals and  become paupers, so few people in our  civilization are  able  to  become self-indulgent  and  wealthy  despots. Most of the Kosekin and  most of us are  back-sliders, incapable and  even sceptical of the single-minded  zeal necessary for attainment of either imagined  summum  bonum. From  De  Mille's  point  of view, the extremes are  equally  heinous, and  Adam's  judgment  is as inept  as the  Chief Pauper's.  Like Swift in Book IV of Gulliver's

75

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY

Travels,  De  Mille  makes  his  narrator impercipient of the  ironies  involved. The main  difference is that  De  Mille  did  not  follow  Swift  to the  point  of converting Adam  to  an   acceptance of  Kosekin   life-denial   in  a  movement analogous to Gulliver's total  acceptan·ce  of the  Houyhnhnms' inhuman rationalism.
The satire  of  the  novel  therefore is double-edged, an  assault  upon  extremes of opposite  kinds.  It is as crucial  to see Adam  as the impercipient and  unwitting apostle  of  Western materialism as  to  recognize  the  painfully  obvious  imperfec­ tion  of  the  Chief   Pauper. Both   put  forth   recipes  for  the  death   of   the  spirit.  De  Mille's   position  in  the  midst  of  this  ingeniously  confusing  welter  of ironies  and  cross-purposes  is far  from  obvious.  Like Swift in his creation of  Houyhyhym­ land,  De  Mille  has  kept  his own  point  of view so completely  behind  the  scenes that he runs  the  risk of mystifying  the  reader  or leading  the critic  into  irrespon­ sible  interpretation. In   both   cases  an  appeal outside  the  literary work  to  the  nature of  the  creator is the  likeliest  means  of keeping  one's  feet in the  slippery  mazes  of ironies  and  counter-ironies. The self-effacing irony  of both  satirists  can easily be a trap  for the  unwary. While  the  personality, convictions, and  ideals of De  Mille  can  be  only  partially  understood at  our  present  stage  of  knowledge, what  is known  or  can  reasonably be deduced is of  the  utmost  importance for  a judicial interpretation of A Strange Manuscript.


NOTES

1 " .ntr<? uction",
Vll-XVlll.
2    "The Cheerful   Inferno  of James  De Mille",  Journal of Canadian  Fiction, I,  #3 ( I972), 6I-67.
3  "De  Mille and  the Utopian  Vision", Journal of Canadian Fiction, II, #2  (I973), I 74-I 79·
4    The  manuscript letter is in the De Mille Manuscript Collection, Dalhousie Univer­ sity. The credit for unearthing this uncatalogued  letter and realizing its importance must  go  to Douglas  E. MacLeod,  who quoted  part  of it in  his  M.A.  thesis, "A Critical  Biography  of James  De  Mille"  (Dalhousie  University,  I968). As Craw­  ford  Kilian's  article  reveals, Mr.  MacLeod's  thesis contains much  information  on De Mille's life that will not be found in existing published accounts.
A. H. De  Mill  (only James's  branch  of the family adds  an "e"  to the name)
was a  younger  brother  of James.  He had  graduated from Acadia  with  B.A. and
M.A.  degrees,  had  studied  law,  and  at  the  time  of James's  death  in  I88o was
practicing  law in Saint  John,  New Brunswick. As James's sudden  death  had left his wife and  children  in serious financial  difficulties, A. H. De Mill was working with  other  members  of the family to raise money by publication  of several works still in manuscript. Lea and  Shepard  of Boston had published many of De Mille's
books for  boys, but  were rightly  regarded  by A. H. De Mill as not suitable pub­
lishers for A Strange Manuscript.
5  These fictional pieces were "The Missionary's Son" ( I86o-6I)  and "Andy O'Hara" ( I 86o-6 I ) . At   the  same  time  his  sketches,  "Recollections  of  Rome"   ( I 86 I ) ,

STRANGE TO  STRANGERS ONLY


"Recollections  of   Naples"  ( I 86 I)   and   "Horton  Sketches"  ( I 86 I ) ,  were  also appearing serially  in the  Christian Watchman. See MacLeod, p. I4I.
6   Archibald MacMechan testifies  to  the  early  composition  of  The Dodge   Club, saying  that  it "was  written before  going  to Acadia" ("De Mille,  the  Man  and  the Writer", Canadian Magazine, 27 [Igo6], p. 4I3.)
1 The  italics are mine.
8   The  bibliography of  De  Mille's  fiction  is still  somewhat uncertain.  According to some bibliographies, his first novel was The Martyr  of the  Catacombs (a "Sunday School  Book",  according to MacMechan) , which  is said  to have  first appeared in I858   (perhaps  in  serial   form)   and   again   as  a  book  in   I865.  Although R.  E. Watters was  unable to  locate  a  copy  for  his Check  List  of Canadian Literature, this rare item  has surprisingly turned up in an undated, modern paperback edition published  by the  Moody  Press of Chicago.  The  paperback edition clears  up  none of the  bibliographical problems   (it does not  even bear  the  author's name), but  at least it proves that  the book exists.
9   See D. E. MacLeod's description and  reproduction of the  drawings in De  Mille's notebook  of  I853  (thesis,  pp.  I04-ro7), and  Kilian's remarks ("Cheerful Inferno", pp. 66-67).
10  The  "arguments for  a  late  composition date" mentioned by Crawford  Kilian­ that   A  Strange   Manuscript  "shows  a  skilled  writer   in  complete  control of  his material" and   that   De   Mille's   ironic   reference   to  authors  lacking  prestige   in Kosekin  society  (SM, p.  I4I)  reads  like  the  remark   of  a  seasoned  professional writer-seem  of little  account, and  indeed  are given merely  passing  notice  in the article  (See "Cheerful Inferno", p. 67) .
11 These  are  the  three  works  discussed  by George  Woodcock  as influences  upon  De Mille.  See "De  Mille  and  the  Utopian Vision",  JCF, II (I973), I74-I79· It must be added  that  the "significant echoes" cited in the article  strike  this reader  as much more   tenuous   and   unconvincing than   the  confident  tone   of  their   presentation makes  them  appear-even  if one  examines  them  with  A. H.  De  Mill's  evidence dismissed  from  the  mind. Is there  really much  resemblance between  the conversa­ tion  of  Mallock's sophisticated characters in  The New  Republic and  that  of De Mille's  yachtsmen? Then  the  fact  that  Butler,  like De  Mille,  "begins with  a criti­  cism of moral  and  philosophical attitudes" rather than  focussing  on  political  and social  institutions  seems  to  be  a  weak  indication of  De  Mille's  indebtedness to Erewhon, simply  because  De  Mille's  basic interest  in men  rather  than  institutions needed  no encouragement from  Butler. More  and  Swift  would  have  confirmed his inclination just as well. As for  Lytton's  The Coming  Race,  the  very minor  resem­ blances  between  it and  A Strange  Manuscript are easily accounted for by the  two authors' common   knowledge of earlier  works  recounting  the  discovery  of strange and  contemporary civilizations.
12    It  should  be noted, however,  that  the idea  of having  the  Kosekin  perform canni­ balistic  rites  comes  from  De  Mille's  knowledge  of ancient history-the supersti­ tious  belief  current among the  first-century Romans that   the  Christians in  their midst  practised  cannibalism at  their  religious services. The following  passage from Helena's  House hold suggests the connection: "They [the Christians] met in secret assemblies,  where  it was  reported that   they  indulged  in  the  worst  vices  among themselves.  The  mysterious repast  which  they celebrated in memory  of their  dying Lord  was particularly suspected. A report  prevailed  that  at  this repast  they fed on human flesh and   drank   human  blood -a strange   perversion of  that  symbolical rite  which  represented  by  bread   and  wine  the  body  and   blood  of  the  Saviour'' (p. 27 I).

77

STRANGE TO STRANGERS ONLY

18  For   notice   of  Symmes'   theory   and   a  summary of  Symzonia, see  J.  0. Bailey,
Pilgrims  Through Space  and  Time  (New  York:   Argus  Books, 1947),  pp. 40-42.
14  See  Bailey, pp.  64-65, for  his summary of De  Mille's  novel.  Unfortunately,  Bailey is not  as  perceptive in  interpreting the  meaning as he is in  noticing some  of De Mille's  sources.  He  concludes that  "no  satiric  purpose  is clear  in  the  book"  and reads it merely as "a yarn  of strange adventure."
15  This   and   subsequent  references  to  MacMechan  on  De  Mille   are   drawn  from
MacMechan's article, "De  Mille,  the  Man  and  the  Writer", Canadian Magazine,
27 ( 1906),  404-416.
16  Elisha   Budd  De  Mill  was  unquestionably a  Baptist  minister-not, as  Crawford
Kilian  says ("The Cheerful Inferno", p. 61), an Anglican.
17  The letter  is in  the  MacMechan  Collection, Dalhousie  University. The remark  is quoted by  Allan   Bevan  in  "James De  Mille  and  Archibald MacMechan", DR,
35 ( 1955), p. 205, and  is picked  up by later  commentators.
18  See MacLeod, p. 41.
19  No influence  of Arnold  on De  Mille  is implied,  for Arnold's Culture and  Anarchy
was first published in 1869, two years after  Helena's  Household.
20    Helena's Household, p. 233·
21  It is  possible,  in  fact  probable, that  the  doctrinal and  theological flavour  of this novel  was originally even  less evangelical than  it is in the  published version. D. E. MacLeod ("A  Critical Biography of James  De Mille",  p. 42)  quotes  the following tantalizingly suggestive  passage  from  H.  L. Koopman's "Literary Men  of Brown, III: James  De Mille", The Brown  Alumni Monthly, VIII  (July  1907):
He   [De   Mille]  had   difficulty in  finding a  publisher for  Helena's Household, and, to  his chagrin, the  one   that   he  had   at last  secured  insisted  on  important  changes in  the  treat­ ment to  conform  to  the   theological taste  of  the  day.  It was  not  a  question of  truth, but of  trimming. De  Mille  resisted stoutly; but  he  needed  both  the  money  and  the  recognition which  the  book  would   bring; so at  last  he yielded, and  rewrote the  obnoxious  chapters.
One   assumes   that   "the  theological taste  of  the  day"  refers  to  the  predominent evangelicalism of the  popular audience the publisher  had  in mind -in  particular, the  tastes  of Baptists,  Methodists, Congregationalists who  would  have  formed  the greater part  of  the  potential readership for  such  a novel  in  the  United States  of
1867. As for "trimming", the mere cutting down of long theological discourses may
have  been  meant. It   is  much   more  likely,  however,  that   the  word   means   the
modifying of opinion according to  expediency-in this context, presumably the simplification  and   evangelization  of  theological   doctrine.  Mere   cutting  could
hardly  be described  as "important changes  in the treatment."
22     One  could  also say  that  their  godlessness is a satiric  analogue of Western godless­ ness, and  that  in  this, as in so many  ways, the Kosekin  are  caricatures of  Western  man  rather than  his opposite.
23  It is worth  noting that   the  Kohen Gadol  is seen  to be much  more  contemptible, much  less "virtuous", than  the  Kohen. The  latter  knows what  is "right" and  tries to live up  to his ideals,  but  fails because  he is genuinely  human. The Kohen Gadol lacks  Kosekin  "virtue" almost  entirely,  being  greedy  and  selfish, embracing riches by deliberate choice.  The Kohen tries  to be a "good" Kosekin,  but  is victimized by less scrupulous people  who  take advantage of him. In  a sense the Kohen  is not unvirtuous, even  by  Kosekin  standards, because  generosity  causes  him  to  accept what  others  offer.  He  is self-sacrificing, by Kosekin standards, in accepting wealth at  his own spiritual expense.


review articles



COMMANDS AND DESIRES



Kathy Mezei



ANNE HEBERT, Les  Enfants du  sabbat. edition  du Seuil.  $B.so.


IN ANNE HEBERT's latest novel, Les   Enfants  du  Sabbat*  we  again  en­ counter  the   archetypal  Quebec  literary  experience; a  precocious  adolescent be­ comes    the    battleground    between    the commands of  the spirit  and  the desires of the flesh. Les  Enfants du  sabbat seems to be  a  logical  development  of  Anne   He­ bert's  earlier   novels,   Les  Chambres  de bois   (I 958)    and   Kamouraska   (I 970) . The fable-like, implicitly incestuous  world of  Les Chambres de  bois and  the  roman­ tic,   implicitly  demonic  northern   land­ scape   of   Kamouraska   develop   into   a much  more explicit, earthy, "experienced" version  of incest, mortification and  sacri­ fice in  this tale of the  devil's  struggle  for the  soul  of  the  heroine, Julie.  This  "en­ fant  du  sabbat" is in  the  line  of  Hebert heroines  who  struggle  between  the  stric­ tures  of  a repressive,  closed and  macabre tradition  and   the  promise   of  liberation through  violent   defiance.   Anne  Hebert, in  this  novel,  pulls  away  the  veils of an impotent  religion   and   the  hypocrisy  of faith,   just  as  in  her  earlier  ones  she  at­ tacked   the  decadence and  impotence  of
* 'sabbat' in  French   may  also  imply  a  black sabbath.
 
the seigneurial breed.  It is the dynamic possession of a soul that  interests  her here, not   the  shrivelling  of  a  soul.   Yet   the struggle  she  depicts  seems  contrived and romantic.
Hebert, as  her  earlier  works  demon­ strated, is not  interested in  character or action,  but  in mood,  and  in  states  of be­ ing  shaped   by  the  peculiarities of  Que­ bec's  social,  historical and  religious  veri­ ties.  This  novel  takes  place   against  the backdrop   of  the   depression    years   and World  War  II, a  fact  which   enters   the novel only infrequently and  does not alter  its aura of timelessness.
Julie  de la Trinite, with  her yellow eyes and  strange pupils,  finds herself in the convent of  "le  Precieux-Sang"  alternat­ ing  between   two  states  of  consciousness  signifying  two  forms  of  being.  Trapped within  the  false  piety  of  the  rarefied air of the convent   (the mother superior for­ bids  windows  to  be  opened; "on  ne  sait jamais  ce  qui  peut   nous  venir   de  l'ex­ terieur, cache  dans   une   poussiere,   dans une  escarbille.  Le  demon   est  ruse,  insi­ dieux,  comme  un  grain   de  sable") , she flees, in a dream state,  to the  release  of a cabin "dans la montagne de B ..." where

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



she  relives  an  earlier  period, "Ia  source de  rna vie perdue". She  and  her  brother Joseph, dirty,  full  of  lice,  assist  in  black sabbaths, steeped   in  drugs,   illegal  alco­ hol,  and   sexual  orgies,  hosted   by   their sorceress   mother,  Philomene,   and   de­ monic     father,   Adelard.    This    couple "souriant  de  leur  grande  bouche   rouge aux  dents  blanches" are well  matched in their  lust  and  malice and  their  ability  to carry  on a three  day sexual  performance.
The  novel  moves  through the  unfold­ ing  and  contrasting of evocative  images. The closed  world   of  the  convent  con­ trasts  with  the  cabin  open  to  the  luxuri­ ance   of   nature.  Blood,   the   "precieux­ Sang", becomes  the  pervading image  of the  dual  aspects  of  being.  The  anaemic pallor   of  the  nuns  counterpoints Julie's  exultation  in  the  blood   that   marks  her violation   by   Abelard. The  frail   Soeur Gemma's  queasiness  before  slabs of meat in  the  convent  kitchen is set  against the ecstatic worship  of the slaughtered pig's blood that drips into basins held by the children at  black  mass.
The novel  begins  with  Julie  succumb­ ing  to  a  vision  of  the  cabin  which  she had   resisted   to   this   moment.   But   the demonic lures  her,  "Elle est  affamee   de cela  qui   est  cache  dans   la  montagne". What  alternative does the holy life repre­  sent  to  the  call  of  Satan? "E t  pourtant, c'est  le meme  depart Ieger  de  soi-meme,  Ia  meme  envolee   vers  les  delices  etran­ geres".  Just  as  the  black  mass  is  the  in­ verse  of  the  eucharist, so  too,  the  con­ vent  inverts   values.  The  celebration of corruption and  the corruption of  celebra­ tion  are  everywhere. All  that  can  stem the   growing   malevolent   power   of  the possessed Julie  from  destroying the  sanc­ tity  of  the  convent  are  prayers-"Vous pouvez  toujours  prier, rna soeur. Cela  ne

So
 peut  vous faire  de mal". The  sketches  of the  mother superior, Marie-Clothilde de la  Croix,   the  lustful  Dr.  Painchaud, the decrepit  Leo-Z   Flageole,   eager   to   per­ form  an  exorcism,  the  cigarette-smoking "soeur  econome" whose haywire  business deals  almost  bankrupt the  convent, are  quite   diabolic.   Other  writers,   such   as Marie-Claire Blais, have  already painted the hypocrisy and vice of the religious community with a black and ironic  brush. Hebert, like Jacques Ferron and  Victor­ Levy Beaulieu  in  his Manuel de  la  petite litterature  du  Quebec  seems  to  suggest there  is a  magic  of  myth  and  legend  to be  woven  out  of  the  popular  lives  and  despairs    of   the   people.    She,   in   fact,  lingers  over  details  of  the  kitchens   and  magic  brews  and  beds,  drawing out  the poetic   possibilities  of  the  commonplace, the  gruesome  and  the  perverse.  To  fur­  ther  cement  the relation  between  art  and  authenticity, Anne  Hebert has  appended a  short  list  of  works  on  demonology  she has consulted.
Philomene   and    Adelard,   and    later
Julie   (the  unholy  trinity)  reaping panic throughout the village and the convent, nevertheless   fulfil   a   need.   As  Adelard says, "La plupart des gens ont  un  besoin effrayant de fete!"
The  life  of  the  convent   teeters  on  the
brink  of hysteria  and  absurdity amid  the continual  shuffling  and   praying  of  the nuns.  The  life on  the  mountain  becomes an  invitation into  the  demonic for Julie, though  not  for  Joseph  whom  Julie  loves as a god. Both worlds move  towards dra­ matic  climaxes,  and  Joseph,  somewhere out   in   the   world,   "somewhere  on   the front", is the link  and  the sacrifice.
The  narrative by association   (that also marked  the style of Kamouraska), where-

REVIEW ARTICLES



by  the  past  flows  into   the  present   until past  and  present   merge,  gives  us  a  pic­ ture   of  the  cause,   the   nature   and   the necessity of the possession of  Julie. It also attempts to diminish the division  between  past   and   present,   demonic  and   godly, dream  and   reality.   For   example,  the steam  of the  convent laundry room  sud­ denly  transports Julie  into   the  mists  of the  mountain. The  line  between  associa­ tion and  artifice  is sometimes  a fine  one.
The need to exorcise "l'enchantement pervers" has haunted the work of Anne Hebert. "L'enchantement pervers", framed  in   Kamouraska  by  an   historic crime  of passion, is less effectively  framed by demonology  in  this  tale  of  two  inno­ cents.  Sorcery   does  provide the   precise
 formulas for  the  macabre rites  and  rela­ tionships  Anne  Hebert likes  to  describe  and  roots  the novel  into  a  particular cul­ ture.  But  "l'envers du  monde" is not  an alternative to existence  or  to an  affirma­ tion  of  life,  but   an  anti-existence. The  trouble   is  that   Julie  is  simply   not  very interesting. We are caught up in the  bat­  tle waging within her soul, but  not in her.  She   is   neither    sympathetic  nor    anti­ pathetic. There is little  in the sketches  of the   twilight   realm    between    God   and  satan,   mountain  and    convent,  or   the "states  of  being"  of  Julie to  suggest,  as Julie  claims,  "que l'atroce se change en bien".   Therefore,  Iam   puzzled   as   to where redemption lies and  which form exorcism  must  take.




SEPARATE AND MULTIPLE WORLDS
 




Clara Thomas


NEW, WILLIAM H.,  Among  Worlds.  Press Porcepic. $6.g5.  NEW, WILLIAM H.,  Critical
Writings  on  Commonwealth  Literature.  Pennsylvania    State   University   Press.
$Is.oo.

PROFESSOR  NEW's two  publi­ cations  mark  a  giant   step  forward-to coin a cliche-for Commonwealth Liter­ ary  Studies  in  Canada. Those  of us  who have been attracted to the field, who find a   compelling  common   denominator  in the themes  of the literatures of the Com­ monwealth, have  had   to  accustom our­ selves  to   constant,   nagging  frustration about  our  lack of  critical resources  for its teaching. Our  students do  bibliographic exercises on  the work of major writers­ Achebe,  Soyinka,  Naipaul or  Lamming, for instance. The  Commonwealth field is recently    cultivated,   the    master-works
 themselves  have  all  been  written  within the  last  fifteen   years,  our   libraries are often  poorly equipped in critical resource material, and  the  harvest  is both  meagre and   too  often   marked  by  critical  and racial  condescension or  prejudice.
Some of the available works are fine -
Kenneth Ramchand's The  West   Indian Novel  and  its  Background, or  Margaret Laurence's  Long   Drums   and  Canons­ but   these  are  specialized  studies   of  the writers  of one geographical area  only and the speedy rates of change in literary pro­  duction  and  in social  and  political  situa­ tions within developing nations  make them

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



quickly insufficient. Since Laurence wrote, for  instance, the  balance of Wole  Soyin­ ka's work has shifted  with  the publication of  the  novel,  The  Interpreters and   the memoir,  The   Man   Died;   since   Ram­ chand wrote,  V.  S. Naipaul's canon   has been  enlarged  and  his remarkable talent extended  through The  Mimic  Men  In  A Free  State  and  Guerilla. Gerald Moore's The Chosen Tongue  is a book  to read,  to savour, and  to learn  from; the  acuteness of  his  critical  judgments, the  sensitivity of  his  reading, the  depth  perception of the  societies  whose  writers  he  treats,  and the  grace  of his own  writing are  entirely to be admired. But Moore  deals only with English  writing in the tropical world; furthermore in  his  introduction his  con­ sideration of the  beginnings of  American Literature, without so much  as  a  nod  in the  direction of the  northern  part of this continent, its colonial  history and  its pre­ sent  Commonwealth   place,  leaves a slightly  bitter  flavour  with  the  Canadian reader.
Now in  Among  Worlds  we have  a col­
lection   of  essays  on   the   fiction   of  the Commonwealth including Canada.  Sub­ titled:   "An    Introduction   to    Modem Commonwealth and  South  African Fic­ tion,"  Among  Worlds   has  chapters  on "The West  Indies:  Patterns  of  Disloca­  tion";  "South   Africa:  The  Politics   of Freedom";  "East  and   West  Africa:  In Search of Tomorrow's Traditions"; "New  Zealand:  Escape  Into Distance"; "Aus­ tralia: In Response  to a New Old  Land"; "South Asia:  Fastidious Antitheses"; and "Canada: Home  Ground,  Foreign  Ter­ ritory."  Each   chapter  is,  in  its  general  plan,  a wide-ranging survey of  the fiction of the  area.  But  Professor  New  has  been well aware  of the  possible dwindling into catalogues of  such   vast  surveys  and   he
 has  organized   each   chapter  around  the themes  of its title.

This   book  offers  a  guide to  fiction written by modern Commonwealth and  South  Afri­ can  writers; it describes the  thematic  paral­ lels   that  mark    the    literary    contempora-
111eity  of  each   Commonwealth culture, and
it  examines some  of  the  ways  in  which   the writers have  used  their  cultures'  preoccupa­ tions    to   construct  separate   and   multiple worlds.

New is very far indeed  from  the regret­ table,  lingering  Imperial assumption that  in  r 964, following  a Conference of Com­  monwealth  Literature at  the  University of  Leeds,  led  to   the   publication  of  a group  of  papers  entitled Commonwealth Literature: Unity and Diversity in a Common  Culture.  Instead, he  perceives the sharp divisions between  cultures as providing both internal tensions  for the writers  themselves  and  external interests for their  students and  general readers.

While   the  separateness reflects   their  some­ times  sharp, sometimes clouded  insight into  both   their   own   and   their  society's distinc­ tiveness,  the  multiplicity  demonstrates their  unrelenting awareness   of   the   distance  be­ tween   themselves and   traditional  ways   of life.  They   are  conscious  almost  always   of trying   to  make  sense   out   of  the   chaos   of the  modern world, a chaos  which  their  local history  seems to  intensify.

Professor New does not deal with poetry or drama, but  he does use prose  writings other  than  fiction, sometimes  to fine effect as in his considerations of Naipaul and Wilson Harris, and  sometimes  rather less effectively as in his discussion  of B. K. Sandwell's "The  Privacity Agent" as  a point  of reference  in his Canadian chap­ ter. His discussion of the literature of the West  Indies  inevitably  suffers  most from his  exclusion   of   poetry,  since   Edward Brathwaite's  The   Arrivants   and   Derek Walcott's  Another  Life  are  such  major

REVIEW ARTICLES



contributions  to  the   literature,  both   in their  themes  and  in  their  artistry.  Simi­ larly,  the drama, A Dance  of the  Forests, is central to Soyinka's themes and  talents  and  major in its position  in West African  literature.  However, given  the  scope  of New's  project and  the lurking catalogue­ nemesis  of  all  such  ventures, some  con­ siderable selectivity was forced  upon  him
-and  his  essays have  not  become  mere lists of names  and  references. The  reader is most  apt  to be impressed, of course,  by the chapters about  which  he knows least, and  most  intensely  critical   of  the  treat­ ment  of his own literature. By this exact­  ing standard the work  is a signal success, for   "Canada:  Home   Ground,   Foreign  Territory" is  a  perceptive and  compre­ hensive  essay, one  which  will  be as valu­ able  to literary studies  inside  the  country as outside  of it.
Among Worlds   is offered   to  us  mod­ estly  as  "a guide   to  fiction   written  by modem Commonwealth and  South Afri­ can  writers." This  function  it  fulfils  ad­  mirably.  The   reader-student   will   not come   away  from it  with   any  sense  of finality    in   literary   canons    or   critical  judgment. He will certainly emerge  from a reading of the work  with questions and challenges  which   both   Among    World's useful  bibliography and,  much  more  ex­ haustively, Professor New's Critical Com­ mentaries on Commonwealth Literatures, are  designed  to aid  in  answering.
I  would,  however,  question the  effec­ tiveness   of   the   illustrations in   Among Worlds. They  are  reproductions of  nine­ teenth-century prints  and  they  have  not been   reproduced  particularly   well.   In many  cases  they  are  both  too  dark   and too  blurry   to  please  the  eye or  to  be  of any   particular  interest.  Furthermore,  I very  much   doubt   that  the individual or
 collective sense of humour of former colonial  peoples is yet ready  to appreciate them  for  the  ironic  visual  commentaries that  they  must  have  been  meant to  pro­ vide.
Critical   Commentaries  is  a   selective bibliography  of  Commonwealth   Litera­ tures  to  I970. It  is 3I2  pages  long,  with an  excellent   index.   Its   text  is  arranged under    section-headings   beginning  with Commonwealth General  and  proceeding through  Africa   (East  and  West),  Aus­ tralia,    Canada,   New    Zealand,   South  Africa  and  Rhodesia, South Asia, South East  Asia, The  West  Indies, and-this a very valuable  addition-Theses and  Dis­ sertations, similarly  divided   into  sections by geographical area. Each  section  is sub­ divided  into  three  parts: Research  Aids, General,  and    Individual   Authors.   All items  are  listed  by number,  to  a  total  of
6576.
This   work  is  the  first  comprehensive bibliography we have  had  in  the  field - it  is  correspondingly  priceless   as  a  re­ search  and  resource  tool. If we wonder at New's  particular selections   or  omissions in any one  of the  areas,  we have  only  to remember the magnitude of the  task, the need  for  a  volume   which   was  portable and  of  reasonable price,  and   the  heavy funding   which    comparable  Canadian projects   have  received, but  which   New, except  for a University of British  Colum­ bia  grant  in  aid  of  the  project, did  not have  to  draw  upon.  His  Foreword, out­ lining   his   rationale  for   the   work   and setting  forth  some of the special  problems it presented, gives ample evidence of the
magnitude of  the  bibliographic  task  he
undertook. His text  is the  evidence of its successful completion. Furthermore, using the   critical   bibliography  of  one's   own

REVIEW ARTICLES



literature as a yardstick, New's  selectivity has  been  well  exercised. The section  on Canada is a brief,  but sound  bibliography of our  literature by any standards -as a listing  of the works  by which  other Com­ monwealth scholars  might   most  handily  become  familiar with  our  literature, it is excellent.
These two works provide us with major
 sign-indicators  toward   the   multiplicity and  richness of Commonwealth and South African  literatures. Having now  given  us the  tools, I  hope  that  Professor  New will be free to continue his own work on the writers   who,   in   Among   Worlds,  seem most   to   fire  his   imagination -Harris, White,  Armah, Naipaul and  Godfrey  are pre-eminent among  them.




PLAYING WITH FREEZING  FIRE


MARGARET ATWOOD,  Selected Poems.  Oxford. $6.95.
 




(;eorge oodcock

ANDREW SUKNASKI,  Wood Mountain  Poems, selected and  introduced by AI. Purdy.
Macmillan.
ANDREW SUKNASKI,  On   First  Looking Down   from  Lions Gate   Bridge. Black  Moss
Press.
SID STEPHEN, Beothuck Poems. Oberon. Cloth $7.95, paper $3.50.
PATRICK  LANE,  Unborn Things: South American Poems.  Harbour Publishing.
RICHARD OUTRAM,  Turns & Other Poems.  Anson  Cartwright Editions. $4.00.
DOUG FETHERLING,  Achilles' Navel. Press  Porcepic. $3-95·
DOROTHY LIVESAY, Ice  Age. Press  Porcepic. $3.25.


IT IS TEN YEARs-just-since Margaret Atwood  published her  first book of verse, The Circle Game, though there  had  been slim  pamphlets leading up  to it; for once critics  were  alive  to  the  fact  that   a poet of more  than  promise  had  appeared. The verse  collected   in  The Circle  Game   had an  extraordinary assurance of  tone,  and the kind of sharp laconic  discipline which few  poets  achieve   until   mid-career, and most  not even then.  I967, when  Margaret Atwood  received  the  Governor-General's Award  on  the strength of that  book, was one  of  the  few  recent  years  when  critic­ ism  of  the  Canada  Council's  choice  for the  poetry  prize  did  not  seem  necessary.
Now, after five more books of verse, Margaret Atwood   has  published a  mas­ sive  Selected   Poems  of  240  pages  which not  only keeps  the  promise  her first  book seemed  to make,  but  also establishes her,
 
at  the  age  of 37,  as a major poet  in  the Canadian tradition. It  is  almost   a  Col­ lected,  and  one  feels  that  only  Atwood's sense  of  being  still  in  the  full  swing  of creation has  prevented it  from  being  so. The whole  of  The  Journals  of  Susanna  Moodie  is there,  and  this is a  good  deci­ sion, since in fragments the work  loses its mythic   impetus; it  is  essentially   a  long poem   on   the   Canadian  sensibility   re­ fracted  through  history.  The other books are  almost  as completely reproduced.  Of Atwood's  most recent  collection, You  Are Happy  ( 1974), for  example, I  find  only nine   poems  that   are   not  transferred  to the Selected; the  two major  suites of that volume,    "Songs   of   the   Transformed" and  "The Circe/Mud Poems",  have been reprinted  whole,   which   is  appropriate, since  in  each  suite  the  individual  poems take  on  full  resonance only  in  context,

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  "The Songs of the Transformed" acquire complete stereoscopic depth only when  read  with  the  "Circe-Mud  Poems" that take off from the encounter between Odysseus  and   the  legendary witch.
As what   I  have  just  said  will suggest, the  Selected   Poems  reveal  admirably the consistency   of  Atwood's  preoccupations and the unity of her work. I suppose the adjective that  might  throw  most  light on that  consistency  is "shamanic". The  am­ biguous   relationships  between   man  and the  animal world  and  the  curious  spirit­  ual  emanations of such  relationships; the awareness  of the  mythical universality of transformation,  which   can  move  in  any direction,  so  that  men   behave   like  ani­ mals  as  popular  metaphors suggest,  but animals in their  turn display  qualities we had  thought of  as  a  human  monopoly; the war  that  is love:  such  factors  domin­  ate a verse-sequence like the "Circe-Mud Poems",    but    they    also   dominate   At­ wood's  fiction,   in  the  shamanic  anthro­ pophagy of  The Edible  Woman  and  in the    equally     shamanic    regression-and­ rebirth  theme   of   Surfacing, while   they are  present  in  a  work  outside  fiction  and poetry  like Survival.
One  can  even  draw  minutely  particu­ lar comparisons. For a preview of Surfac­ ing,   look   at    the   very   first   poem    of Selected, "This is a  Photograph  of Me",  published  and  presumably written a good six  years  before  the  novel;   the  setting  is that  of  the island  in  Surfacing, and  the narrator  of  the  poem   (not  her  father as in  the  novel)   is drowned and  floats  sus­ pended in the lake,  just below the surface. The  next poem, "After the Flood, We," concerns   disaster   and   survival;  for  the flood of the poem substitute the flood of American culture  into   Canada, for  the two  people  of  the  poem   (one  unaware and  the  other  aware)  substitute Atwood and  the readers  and  writers  she has  tried to  awaken   to  the  deluge, and  you  have the  basic  framework of  Survival. There
 is  nothing  unusual  in  such   creative  re­ cycling;  the best writers,  indeed, are often those   who   remain    attached  to   a   few essential concepts  and  percepts and effec­ tively permute them  in a variety  of  forms and  genres.  To  do  this  one  must  possess great   virtuosity,   and   there   is  no  doubt that   Atwood   has  it; she  is  among  our most  precise  and  exacting  literary crafts­ men.   But   to  avoid   tediously   repeating oneself,  an  inventive  kind  of imagination is also needed,  and  this  too  Atwood  has. Each   of  her  works -even  the  shortest poem-creates	when   one   reads    it   a circle,  if not  a world, of  its own; only on later  reflection  does  one  remember other  works   and   realize   that    something-a theme  or  at  times  merely  a cast  of mind
-has remained constant.  In  sum, Selected  Poems is to be welcomed  as confirming one's  sense  of  Margaret  At­ wood's  status  as a  poet  and  a  woman of letters; on   a  more   practical  level,  it  is satisfying  to  have  almost  all  of  those  six separate   indispensable   volumes    within  one set of covers.
In  most literary  times and  places  there is one  figure  who expresses  with  peculiar felicity  the  spirit  of the  age.  That writer is not  always  in every  respect  the  best of his time, as the examples of Samuel John­ son and  Ben Jonson  (a truer mirror of his
specific  time  than   Shakespeare)   clearly
show,  yet he not  only reflects in his work the  significant  themes  of his era; he  also elucidates  for   other    writers-and	for their readers-the   nature of   those themes.  In  Canada today  when  we  pick such  a writer  for our  time  and  place,  we have  to choose among "shes"  rather than "hes", and  Margaret Atwood is my choice and  probably the  choice  of many  others. In  Survival  she   isolated  the   proper themes   of  our  place   and   time  with   an accuracy that  has  made her  imitators in thematic criticism  quite  superfluous, and her  work  in  other   genres-quite apart from   its   individual  merit-has    taken

REVIEW ARTICLES



shape   as  a  kind   of  prismatic mirror in which  many  attitudes are reflected  that otherwise might  seem irreconcilably vari­ ant,   such  as  those  of  the  geographical­ historical  poet,  the  mythopoeic poet,  the wit  poet.  All  of   them   are  there,   in  her work  and  in  her  view of Canadian writ­  ing  as  it  is  and  might   be,  and   reading through the other  books  I  shall  mention in   this  article,  I   realize   that   though   I cannot   effectively   relate,    say,   Andrew Suknaski to Richard Outram, or Doug Fetherling to Patrick Lane,  or Dorothy Livesay  to  any  of  them,   I  can  in  some way   or   another  relate   all   of   them   to Margaret  Atwood.   I  am  not  suggesting she  is  the  head   of  a  movement  or  the Great Queen Bee of Canadian Literature. But I am suggesting  that  she is something of a polymath, with  antennae sensitive  to whatever may be currently important in Canadian writing. Having said  so much, let   me   pass  on   to   the   others   without further mentioning her.  For  whatever Atwood's role  as  an  interpretor of  con­ temporary themes  and  of the writers who express them,  it remains her role.
Preoccupations  with   place   and   time
have made  much  recent  Canadian  poetry read  like a gloss on  the  writings  of those historians  who   have   been   conscious   of the  effect  of  our  environment, as it  was originally and  as we have  changed it, on the   Canadian  collective    consciousness. Much   of  Purdy   and   John   Newlove  in­ clines  in  this  direction. So do  the  poems of  Andrew  Suknaski, yet  as soon  as one begins   to  approach  a   real   poem   with historical   generalization in   one's   mind,  the   situation   becomes   changed  by  the nature of the glasses through which, dark­  ly or  clearly,  it  is  seen:   the  poet's  sensi­ bility  and  his  experience. It is true  that  on  one  level  Suknaski's Wood  Mountain Poems are  elegiac  records  of  Saskatche­ wan's  past;  of  the  Indians, Sitting Bull and  all  the  others,  who  were  only  mem­ ories  in  Wood  Mountain by the  time  he

86
 grew  up  there;  of the  pioneers,  including his father, who broke  themselves  in the process  of  breaking  an   ungrateful land and who survived to populate the poet's youth.
There  is  thus   a  great   deal   of  sheer history  to  be  sifted  out  of  these  poems, and   no  prairie   archivist worth  his  salt would fail to note it, but Wood Mountain Poems  has   other   dimensions. It  is,  to begin, not merely a record but also a judgment, of  white   rapacity  that   killed the  Indians' culture, of  urban  indiffer­ ence  that  allowed  the  way of  life  replac­ ing the Indian way to expire in its turn  of neglect.  For  Wood  Mountain, as a white  village,  is dying  as  the  nomadic Indian villages died  before it. And  Andrew  Suk­  naski,  in  the  flat  eloquence of  reproach and  regret,  laments alike  the  Indian life that  drained  away  into  survival, and  the wasted lives of European immigrants who gave  their  manhood and  often  their  san­ ity   in   the   thankless   task   of   taming  a region-the south  Saskatchewan prairie
-that should  never  have  known  the plough.    "Indian  Site   on   the   Edge   of Tonita  Pasture" is  a  haunting example of  the  poet's   attempt, as  he  traces   the stone circles of an old Sioux encampment,

to chronicle the  meaning of these  vast  plains in a geography of blood
and  failure
making them  live.

And make  them  live he does, for if the Indians  have   already   become   wronged ghosts,  the  old  pioneers  are  there  in  all their   individual  idiosyncrasy,   from   the poet's father, unpredictable violence turn­ ing  his life into  five decades  of  terminal solitude,   to   the    farmer   who   madly threshes Russian  thistle when his land  has borne  no wheat  for  years. A smaller  Suk­ naski collection, On  First Looking  Down from Lions  Gate  Bridge,  just  published  by  the  new  Black   Moss  Press,  consists largely of items already  included in Wood

REVIEW ARTICLES



Mountain Poems;  the new poems  have  a transitional  feeling,   for   they   follow  on the  poet's  departure from  his omphalic village and  his search for an imaginative hitching post in a new setting.
By now one could probably compile  a thick  anthology of  poems  about   Indians by non-Indian Canadian poets, poems compounded of admiration, of regret,  of nostalgia, of  guilt -all  the  varied  emo­ tions  we  experience when   we  recognize the irreparable harm  our forebears did in destroying viable ways of life and-often
-highly creative   native   traditions.  Sid
Stephen's Beothuck  Poems  is a rendering of the worst episode of all, the complete physical  destruction of the  native  people of Newfoundland. Even  in  plain  prose it is an  appalling story;  Stephen's chopped, inelegant verse brings out  yet more  of the unbearable  pathos,   the  terrifying  point­ lessness of this hunting down  of a people.
In   his Unborn Things: South  Ameri­ can   Poems,   Patrick  Lane   moves   on  a quite   different  level  with  his  threnodies of the  Inca  past and  his appalled presen­ tations  of the  here-and-now in which  the descendants   of   those   who   created  the Andean    civilizations     survive.     Patrick Lane's earlier  poems  have  already shown his  exceptional quality as a  poet  record­ ing with mingled  delight  and anger  the splendour of the  world  and  the  shame  of what  man  has done  to it and  to his fellow inhabitants. I  had  read  already with  ad­ miration the main suite of Unborn Things when  it  first  appeared in  an  issue  of the west  coast  poetry   journal,  Black fish; en­ titled  "Machu Picchu", it evokes the  past of   that   lost  final   fortress   of   the   Inca  realm,  perched   on   its   splendid  crags above  the  jungle  and  the  river: the  de­ parture of  Manco Capac, the  last  Inca,  to  die  in  a  Spanish   ambush; the  dying out  of  the  deserted   Virgins  of  the  Sun;  and  the fate  their  refuge  now shares  with other tragic  loci of history,  with  Mycenae and  Elsinore,  with Taxila and  Persepolis:
 


"Anyone  who follows the fate  of new and older  literary reviews  will admit that Canada equals,  and  in  many  cases leads, the  English  speaking countries in  excel­ lence.  The  Ontario Review is no  excep­ tion ... "               LIBRARY  JOURNAL

Contributors include:

DONALD  BARTHELME SAUL BELLOW HAYDEN CARRUTH
STANLEY COOPERMAN MARIAN ENGEL
DAVID IGNATOW MAXINE KUMIN IRVING LAYTON TOM  MARSHALL W. S. MERWIN
JOYCE CAROL  OATES PHILIP ROTH
PETER STEVENS WILLIAM STAFFORD W. D. VALGARDSON TOM  WAYMAN THEODORE WEISS RICHARD WILBUR SALLY WILDMAN COLIN WILSON GEORGE WOODCOCK J• MICHAEL YATES


The ONTARIO  Review
a North American Journal of the Arts

6000 Riverside Drive  East
Windsor,  Ontario  N8S 1B6

$5.00 per year, two issues

REVIEW ARTICLES



Today we lay in  the  Temple of the  Virgins As centuries filled  our  mouths with  moss. They have  stripped away  the  jungle.
They have  tom the  winding cloths. They have  scattered bones  to the  wind.

Strangers walk  through the  ruins. They  talk  of where they  came  from, Where they  are  going.
As we lay in this  roofless room
They stoned a snake.

It crawled out  of the  earth
To  lie in  the  brilliant sun.
Coils  of its  body like plaited hair,
Eyes of cracked stone. They  left  it
Broken, draped on  a fallen wall.

The kind of transference that  equates modern   man's   brutality to  a  snake  with the  Spaniards' destruction of  a  ci iliza­ tion   they  could   not   understand,   IS    ex­ tended  to other  poems in Unborn Things, which   is  not   unexpected  when  one  re­ members   the  indictments of  man's abuse of  his  will  and   power  over  other   beings in  earlier   Lane   poems   like   "Mountain Oysters" and  "The Black  Filly".  "At  the Edge   of  the   Jungle" is   a   poem   about  disillusionment with  a  place  romantically anticipated, and   the  narrative of  horror  begins with  a dog burying its head  in the Amazon    mud    to   evade   the   flies   that  swarm   on  his  sore  eyes;  it  ends  with  a tethered   rooster    whose    beak    children have  cut  away  so  that  he  cannot eat.  It is a  fine,  appalling  poem,  whose  truth I recognize from  having  made  that   journey myself, over  the Andean sierra  and  down to  the  Amazonian  head waters.   It  ends:

Diseased clouds  bloom  in  the  sky. They throw down  roots  of fire.
The bird  drags sound  from  its skin.
I am  grown older than I imagined: The garden I dreamed does  not  exist and  compassion is only  the  beginning of suffering.    Everything deceives.

A man  could  walk  into this  jungle and  lying  down  be lost
among the green  sucking of trees.
What reality there is resides
in  the child  who  holds  the string

88
 and  does  not see
the  bird as it  beats  its blunt head again and  again  in to the  earth.

South America has provoked Canadian poets  to  remarkable work.  It gave  Earle Birney   the   hints   for   some   of  his  best poems,  and  the  same  is  true  of  Patrick Lane,  whose  recent   work -this  volume and  Beware theM ouths  of Fire, establish him clearly as a poet  unusual in his direct and  telling response to experience, whether   that  experience is a  memory  of the  collective  mind   or  an  episode  indi­ vidually  lived.
Doug  Fetherling and  Richard Outram both  strike  one,  after  Suknaski  and Stephen and  Lane, as  poets  both  urban
and  urbane.  Outram's Turns and  Other
Poems is a collection  which  illustrates the fastidious   sparseness   of  his  work.   Pub­ lished   in   the   Phoenix   Living   Poets,  a series intended mainly  for British readers,  it  is only  48 pages  long,  but  a  fair  pro­ portion   of  its  contents  has  already   ap­  peared   in   two   brochures  printed  over quite   a  long   interval  by  two  different Canadian small presses.
Outram is one  of  those  traditionalists
who  talk  in  what  sounds  like  a  voice  of the  past,  but  whose  message  nevertheless can at times seem disconcertingly present. There  are  quite   a  number  of  them   in Canada: John  Glassco and  George John­ ston,   Roy   Daniells   and   Robert   Finch, and even, in his own quasi-Jacobean way, Ralph Gustafson. Such  poets are  nimble, very  clever  at  wordplay, able  in  exploit­  ing  the  incongruity between   the  archai­ cism  of   their   manner  and   the  contem­ poraneity  of   their   matter.  At  its  best, when the vein of satire runs clear as in Johnston, or when  the irony masks a deep philosophic  seriousness, as in Daniells  and Glassco, this kind of mixture can be extraordinarily effective, and some of its practitioners are  among our  most  impor­ tant living poets.
Outram, I think,  is not,  yet it is hardly

REVIEW ARTICLES



from  a lack of virtuosity in his verse. The craftsmanship is almost  faultless; the  wit is  smooth; the  cosmetician has  done  his job  with   total   dedication,  but   where  is the  heart? I confess  I  have  not  found  it. And  perhaps I would  not  have  searched for   it   if  someone-and   I   suspect   the poet  in  this  case-had  not  blurbed   on the  cover  about   "a  continuing  preoccu­ pation   with  evil;  with  the  intransigence, terminal or  heroic,  of  man;  with  passion and  with  compassion;  with  the  ordinary of   life,   which   shall   prevail,   and   with graceful  necessary death." All these things are present,  I  suppose,  as subject  matter, but  they  never dominate the poems, since Outram  is  always  seeking  that   felicitous and   fastidious  pattern   of   words,   that twisting  and   witty  end,  and  so, while  I found  these poems  highly  amusing, I was at  no time  moved  by them  to any incon­ venient  emotion.
Doug   Fetherling is, it  seems,  a  some­
what   different  type  of  the  urbane  poet. His   Achilles'    Navel:    Throbs,  Laments and Vagaries, makes no pretensions to eschatological aims.  It  is content to be a collection    of   poems   that    observes   the world  sardonically and  allows the  morals to fall where  they will. Much  of it comes from  a  wry observation of what  goes on in  the  quotidian  world,  given  emphasis by isolating  it  from  its  context. E.g.  the poet finds himself earning a few necessary dollars  working  on the resiting of a ceme­ tery;  his predicament provides  the excuse for  some  grim  reflections  on  death and on life also:

No curses  on these  dirty bones we  transplant,
they  did  not  believe in  magick  to the extent
they  believed in  ignorant money and were  anxious about the century ending
:the past  getting longer the  future near and  the  present
a device  to  measure transition in a comprehensive way ...
 All around it are
the  well-off  plots,  the  monuments continue to show  their  cost, the  caskets brought up  tightly sealed,
the  remains
inside  still largely intact but
placed unopened in another larger box, money  having guaranteed them everlasting
freedom from  human hands

Or,  having  read   the  narratives of  ex­ plorers,   he  pauses  to  consider  how  the natives  must  have  considered these  men
who  would  "move  too  quickly J  to  notice
life best viewed/  standing still ... " Their
conclusion  is gentle,  unjudging in  its yet devastating irony.

Soon  they  will  return to wherever it is they  are  from talking as though they  invented what  we show  them   now
and  encouraging others to come
in truth they invent only  new  names never  content with  the  old ones  we use We who are  only willing to help

The  complementary poem,  "Western Manitoba", is that  of the traveller who recognizes  he  is dead   to  the  country he travels through at top speed:

... The sky in  the  west

grows  progressively bluer, we are  led to expect some  large  celebration
when  cement air  and  earth end  together

in a point.   Until then  we are  rotting in speedless  time  and  distance
two skeletons with  maps  in an old Chevrolet

The  easiest  poets  to  write  about are  al­ ways those  who  deal  in  implication;  one can   always  diverge   into   some  game  of interpretation.  Fetherling  is  one  of  the explicit  poets;  everything is  clearly  there  for  whoever  wants  to  follow  it,  and  the critic  finds himself  tempted to write  what  the   poet    has   already  said.  So   read Achilles'  Navel, not  just this  review.
Dorothy  Livesay's   Ice   Age   is  all   its title suggests, a collection  of poems whose basic theme is the process of ageing  which

Bg

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  the  outsider seems  like  the  cooling  of a  hearth but  to  the  experiencer can  be more  like  eating   every  day  one  of  those chef's  concoctions in  which  hot  and  cold are combined miraculously. In a poem actually called  "Aging", Livesay  talks  of her  body  that  "haunts mej thieves  in on me at night/ shattering sleep/ with name­ less pointless  paint", and  yet, while every night  "my  fingers  search  the  wound,  the old/  spine curvature, the creaking knees", something else is also at work:

but  tongues, the  darting tongues lick  elsewhere, fan  desire
until  all  yesterdays are  gulfed in freezing fire

"Freezing fire",  indeed, is as good an epithet as one  could  find  for  this  collec­ tion,  where  the  facing  up  to  whatever is proximate is done  boldly, seeing,  in mer­ gansers  watched, a paradigm of existence
-"We Jive/ only  to submerge", and  in a
 poem  to P. K. Page,  "The Other Side of the  Wall", stating  explicitly  enough  the realization about  which the whole book revolves.

I have  climbed
put  my foot  in the  rock looked  over.
That tangled secret garden
weedful, with  fallen  trees thistles and  thrusting flowers is not  fearsome ...
would  welcome  a clean-up a lover.

Beyond,  sky is secure song  lulls  the  air
all things once living  have  changed but  live  on
there.

The  wall  is death.
My death.   Not  to be climbed
yet.
I have  no fear.

Dorothy Livesay is 67; her first book of





BEAVER




BITES READ US ... WE'RE FUN

50  cents  per newsstand copy

$10  for  a yearly subscription
( 26 issues)

Beaver  Bites, 344  Bloor  Street West,  Suite 506,  Toronto, Ontario



go

REVIEW ARTICLES



verse was published 48 years ago. Like all of   us  she   has  had   her   intermittencies, periods  of silence,  of the  muse's  meagre­ ness,  but  always  she  has  come  back  not merely  renewed,   but  with   her  view  en­ larged   in  scope  and  expressiveness, and more  than  any other poet  she has  been a constant   creative   presence    throughout the   period   in   which   we   can   think   of Canadian  poetry  as  a  tradition  distinct  and  of its own. For the last ten  years now she  had  been  writing  better   poetry  than  she  ever  wrote  before,  which  is only  one of the  many  current examples disproving the  old  legend  that   the  best  lyricists  are those who die young. And  Ice  Age shows, in my view, no slackening from  her recent upsurge.  The  speech  is strong  and  firm, the  empathies are  wide   (e.g.  the  aston-
 ishingly penetrative poem  to Alan  Craw­ ley, "To be Blind"), there  is a good  deal of the liberated cantankerousness of those to whom  age  brings  a further clearing of the eyes, and there is a haunted conscious­ ness that  we  advance towards death in a dying   world,   that   the   ice  age  may   be universal.

We, born  to flourish
in a heyday of the  sun
and  tumble to  ruin
when  the  ice age  comes.

That ice age  may  be  final,  but  the  book called lee  Age has no air  of finality,  even if that  is partly its subject. It is immensely vital,   celebrating  life  in  every   sentence that  talks of death, and, one  can  be sure, is no last word.





SHEILA WATSON AS LEWISITE CRITIC
 




Linda Sandler


Sheila   Watson:  A   Collection.  Published  by   Open   Letter, Third  Series,   No.   1
(Winter  1974--75).

THE PUBLICATION of the short wntmgs  of  Sheila   Watson  is  a  literary event  of  no  mean  importance. And  that it  should  have  been  the  editors  of Open Letter   (the  Toronto-based, West  Coast­ derived  quarterly devoted  to avant garde writing)  who  personally   solicited   Wat­  son's manuscripts, is especially  interesting. The academic  journals,  I think,  show up less well.
Watson   is  not  a  writer   who  commits herself  lightly  to paper or  to publication. Sheila    Watson:  A   Collection  contains four    stories,   six   essays   on   Wyndham Lewis,  four  additional studies  of satirists (Swift, Carlyle, Ondaatje and  Stein) and a transcript of  Watson's introduction  to
 her  first  public   reading. I   believe   that aside from  her  novel,  The Double  Hook, this is the  sum of her  published writings. (There remains her  unpublished doctoral thesis, "Wyndham Lewis and Expression­ ism,"   written  under   the   supervision  of Marshall  McLuhan.)    Yet   Watson  has had a considerable influence  on Canadian literature, far  exceeding  the   number of her   readers -perhaps   even   exceeding the number of students who attended her classes at  the  University of  Alberta. Her ideas have become  current coinage.
What kind  of critic  is Watson?
She  is part  of  the  line  of  critics descending from  Wyndham Lewis  (who passed    World    War     II  in    Canada) ,

9I

REVIEW ARTICLES



through Marshall McLuhan, to Hugh Kenner and  herself,  to Frank Davey, George  Bowering  et al. And as Watson implies  in her  review  of Lewis's  letters,  it was Lewis who taught them  all to observe how  machines and  mass  media  were altering human perceptions.
It's easy to see why Watson belongs in Open  Letter,  and    why   Frank   Davey, when  I asked  him about  this, should  have said that  Watson's position  during the Fifties   parallels  0 pen   Letter's   radical stance  in relation to the Seventies. I have no space  to examine this assumption, but I'm  not  sure  how  Watson  would  take  to being identified too closely with  the "post­ modernists"   who,   Davey    has   written, "seek  to participate in  anarchic  coopera­ tion with  the elements of  [their]  environ­ ment."
Watson   is  a  difficult   critic   to  review because she is seldom  visible during the critical  process.  One   has  the  impression on reading her  that  a train  of ideas, associatively    linked,    is   passing    before one's  eyes. Watson says of Lewis  that  he "trained his mind  to be a delicate instru­ ment  for  recording the gestures of  minds around him  and  of  relating  them   to  his own."  This  is even  more  true  of Watson  than  of  Lewis,  who  was,  as  he acknowl­  edged,  often  fiercely partisan. (I'm think­ ing  of  his  political  blindness   during the Thirties.   Watson-and   I   don't  blame her!-doesn't deal  with  that  here.)
In Watson's two studies of Lewis's painting, "The Great War:  Wyndham Lewis and  the Underground Press," and Canada and  Wyndham Lewis  the Artist," we  see  the  critical  process  in  its  purest form,  without intervention of personality. Watson  studies  the  complex interrelation of  Lewis's  ideas  and   his  icons  in  fiction and painting; her grasp of her subject is second  to none.
There are clues to Watson's critical method lurking behind  the ideas she elucidates.  Her   intellectual  portrait  of
 Lewis, "A Question of Portraiture," is particularly  relevant. Lewis  was  techni­ cally a Canadian by birth  and  an English­ man  by education, but  he fought  to over­ come the mechanical ascendency of birth  and  environment, to develop  his mind  as an   impersonal   instrument  of   research.  Conscious  personality  as  opposed   to  re­ ceived   identity.  With   this  finely   tuned instrument he investigated the cultural metamorphosis in Europe after  the Great War;   he    explained   to    his   favourite reader,  Everyman, the forces that  were controlling his life.
Believing satire  to be a surgical instru­ ment,  he laughed loudly  at  all  the mani­  festations of fashion  and  reaction that  he knew  were  at  odds  with  social  realities.  In   his  fiction   and   in   his  polemics   he played the hangman, executing poets pre­  tending  to   be   communists,  politicians pretending  to  govern,   artists   pretending to imitate the  revolutionary experiments of science, men and  women  behaving like mechanical  puppets,  while  England moved towards  war.
Throughout  his  life,  Lewis   held   the now  unfashionable belief  that   the  artist
-the one   who   sees- has   certain   re­ sponsibilities.  He  must  remain  detached from  fashionable creeds  and  dogmas,  he must  communicate reality  as  he  sees it, and  in  this  way,  prepare  people  for  the future which  is rapidly  being  realized  in the  present.  As Watson  points  out,  Lewis offered   his  art  as  a   blueprint  for   the future. Lewis  was  one  of  the  last  of  the great  literary pedagogues.
The   ideal   Lewisite-and  Watson   is one-is concerned with  the cultural con­ text of an artwork, its form and language, and  its philosophical  implications. She  is a   species  of   meta-critic,  aware  of  the limitations  of   traditional  criticism,   who engages in dialogue  with  her reader. Wit­  ness  Watson's essays on  Swift  (who,  like Lewis,  satirized  satire  itself), Carlyle (whose  quest  for  the  natural man,  Wat-

REVIEW ARTICLES



son says, was a symptom  of romantic confusion) and  Ondaatje (a serious artist who  understands how  profoundly  mech­ anical   the   "Freudian"  unconscious  has become).
These  essays are  hard  to read  because
they  are  explorations rather  than  argu­ ments.   They   proceed   in  leaps  and  tan­ gents,   not   in  lines.  As   Watson  says  of Lewis, it  is the  "complex interrelation of [his]    statement  which   often   baffles  a reader."
Watson's  stories  are   modern  reenact­
ments of old myths, written in formal, stylized  language, very  like  the  early Lewis.  "Brother Oedipus" features an anti-modern thinker who  spends  his time cultivating roses and  listening to the whispers  of his unconscious.

"I have,"   he  said,   turning   from   his  rose bushes, "superannuated social consciousness and  sent  it  to  hook  mats  in  the  home  for senior  citizens.  The   individual  unconscious is in tune with  these [roses]."

Oedipus  has  an  uncle   called   Daedalus, an   energetic entrepreneur  bent   on  fur­ nishing  the world  with  up-to-date labour­ saving artefacts and  selling them to reluc­ tant    buyers.   Oedipus   comments   (and here  he sounds  like the early  McLuhan) :
 He's  tried  to  persuade   the  world  that   he's made it  jab-proof and  hole-proof and scratch-proof, that  it's  crush-resistant and heat-resistant and stainless; but he ignores lemon  juice and  the Siamese  cat.  He  forgets the catechism  and  original  sin.
("The Black Farm")

Daedalus,  it  seems,   is  Puss's   antimask, and he tries to turn him back to a simple pastoral existence,  to persuade him to pursue  truth and eternal varieties. The project  backfires.  Daedalus gets  hooked on black magic,  turns  his farm  into  a fake (black)  emblem  of a vanished  past.
The   comedy   of  the  stories   resides  in
the tension  between  formal  language and structures, and  an  ultra-modern frame of reference. They  satirize  modern myths - they  are,  if  you  like,  meta-mythologies. Listen  to  Watson's comments on  Lewis, and  you'll see how she conceives  her  own satiric  enterprise.
The  function of satire,  she  suggests,  is not  to undermine civilization, hoping, as Carlyle   did,  that   you'll  uncover natural or "metaphysical" man.  Nor should  the satirist  replace  outworn dogmas with "a dogmatic return to inaccessible  primitive ritual." The   function of  satire   is  to  ac­ commodate people  to the  present,  to  the future which  is already here.





LOOKING HOMEWARD
 


D. G. Stephens


NORMAN LEVINE,  Selected  Stories. Oberon,   I 975· $6.95 and  $3.50.


FoR SOME TIME now the Can­ adian  writer    has   been   a   considerable traveller. Adventure, war, desire  to estab­ lish  a  reputation   abroad   and   hence  at home,   a  more   traditional  education,  a wish  to go away  and  then  come  back  to Canada  with  fresh  eyes, sometimes  com­ plete  curiosity  to see how  the  rest of the
 
world  lives, have  all  sent  Canadians out from  their own country. From  these series of  travels,  Canadian  literature  has  fre­ quently   profited, emerging with  new  ex­ periences    and   on   occasion   with    fresh insight.  Two  main  streams can  be seen in this literature. The  most obvious  has been in  the  statements  about  new  lands   and

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



experiences in writers  otherwise as differ· ent  as Callaghan and  Glassco and  Wood­ cock. The  second  appears in those writers who, placed in another country, tum  their eyes  and   thoughts   determinedly  home­  ward.   Norman   Levine   belongs   in   this category,  and  his  Selected  Stories  reveals again  that  in  Levine  the  Canadian short story  has  a  master  craftsman,  a  writer  who looks back to find the meaning in his past yet without the sentimental nostalgia  usually   associated   with   the   writer   who looks back.
_Levine has  been  living  in  England for th1rty  years,  and   though  he  does  write about  his life in England he is chiefly concerned  with   writing  about   Canada. He  does not live in  the literary capital of England,  if  London  can   still  be  called that; instead, he lives in St. Ives in Corn­ wall, a centre  for artists  who in  the main go  their  own  way,  who  put  up  with  the to rists
enJOY the  wet and  fog of the  winter,  and get   down   to  work.  And   work  is  what Norman Levine has been doing all these years. With care, with grace, and with elegance,   he   has   astringently  given   to short  fiction  a  new  nuance in  the  magic of  memory.  He  investigates, in  vignette, the  past, a past  that  his mind  has  almost of  its  own,  recollected for  him.  There is no doubt  that  Levine  knows  that  he can­ not   go  home   again,  and   he   seems  to wonder   why.  What  happens is  that   his memory  can lead him into something new and  valuable. He discovers a new dimen­ sion  as  he  searches   for  meaning in  the past; like  Phyllis  Webb,  he wonders  who can  tell  the apparent from  the real?
The  rhythm and  sound  patterns of the Levine   prose  are   noticeably  intrinsic  to his   meaning.  He   can,   in   a   few   deft strokes, sketch a complete scene and its mood:

Murray Street looked  drab, empty, frozen. Solemn   boxes    with     wooden   verandahs. Brown   double  doors   and   double  windows.

94
 Not   a  soul  was  outside. On   King   Edward the  snow  heaped in  the  centre had  a frozen crust.  It   glittered  underneath  the    street lights.   And   the   houses,   on   either  side,   in shadow, appeared  even   more   boarded up as  if you  would  have   to  go  through severai layers  before  you  found something living.

The   scene  is  compacted  here;   the  sen­ tences  are  as stark  as  the  landscape  they d scribe.
w1th detruls that  are  precise, sharp, clear;
yet  the  words  have  connotations, yet are not  diffuse  within   the  scalpel-like  effec­ tiveness of the figurative language. Here,  too, the sounds evoke the scene, the crisp­ ness of that  winter  night. Levine  not only forces  his reader  to  fasten  on  the  clear­  cut  primary  picture that  he presents,  but also  makes  the  reader's mind   push  onto another  level of meaning. He  aims  for  a texture in  his prose, and  the  reader  must participate in  recreating the  experience.
This   process  is  done   by   the   reader filling  in  the  gaps.  Levine  has  said  that he  can  "always  tell  a  bad  writer  by the words  he leaves in"; with  him,  we know he is a good writer  by the words he leaves out.  In  "Quebec City", the  narrator has just left the bed of a girl who has sneaked him into  her  parents' house  to make  love in   her   bedroom,  and   for  a  moment   it appears as  if  the  girl's  mother will  dis­ c_over them; yet again,  there  is the sugges­ tion  that  the  parents of the girl  know all about  it, and  almost  encourage  the  girl's liaisons,  of  which   this  is  the  fifth.   He leaves  just after  five in the morning:

It was  snowing. Everything  was  white and quiet.  It  felt    marvellous   walking,   flakes slant, very  fine.  I didn't feel  at  all  tired. I heard  a  church  bell  strike   and   somewhere further the sound  of a  train whistle   the  two notes  like  the  bass  part of  a  mouh
	. 	.
a  convent, came   m  and   out   of  the  falhng
snow.

Levine  suggests so much  in this. And  it is so  Canadian,  not   just   because   of   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



landscape,  but   he  captures  that  under­ statement that  is so oral  about  the Cana­ dian   as  he  does  describe   a  scene.  The  Canadian does  not  wax  and  wane  when he reacts to his natural world; instead,  he describes  and  lets  the subtleties gauge  in on their own so that the reader's response is individual and  never  stereotyped. It  is much  more  than  it  appears to be on first glance.
The characters that  Levine  introduces to his readers  present  a similar  situation. At  first  they  appear  to  be  stereotyped: the  narrator who  is often  a young Cana­ dian  airman, on his way to England after or  during basic  training,  a  young  man, often  Jewish,  on  the  make.  There is the father, a  typical  Ottawa peddlar; there are  the father's friends, all trying  hard  to make  ends  meet. There is poverty,  there are  slums. Yet something unexpected oc­ curs   with   these   characters,  who   could very well be the stereotypes so popular in stories   preceding  and   during  the   war, characters  emotionally  stunted   by   the force  of poverty  and  the  desire  for  mak­ ing it at the expense  of someone else. Yet, they  do  not   turn   out   that   way.  These people may be faced  with  all the tempta­ tions and  acquisitiveness of a materialistic society,  and  for  a  while  it  appears that their  capacity  for happiness and  love, for becoming    mature   and   enlightened  in their   feelings   toward   others,   is  warped and  poisoned  in the bud.  But they do not turn   out   that   way;  life  is  not   joyless, hardship is  not  hopeless,  premature old age   is  not   a   natural   outcome.  These people for the most part  are able to reach out  to  the  true  natural world  that   con­ tains  their  own  identity. When  one  reads all  of   Levine's   stories,  it  sometimes   ap­  pears  as if he  were  writing them  from  a political  point of view, that  the characters portray  general   types  of  social  victims. Like  Zola, Levine  does use the  technique of "realism" to dramatize a social  condi­ tion.   He   does   focus   on   representative
 faces  in  the  crowd   to  bring   the  whole social  condition into  clearer perspective, but  the  types  that  Levine  creates  live, in the  imagination, as individuals.
Nowhere  does Levine strangle the char­ acters   because   of  some   kind   of   social consciousness   he   wants    to   put   across. Never    are    the   characters   forced   and  manipulated;  never   do   I   feel   that   the narrator's insights,  or those of some of his characters, are  obviously  those of Levine.  These   are   characters   who   are   at   once blameless  and   to  be  blamed, victims  of society but  of their own  making, yet they are  never  lifeless automatons. We are  not so much  moved by what  happens to them as we are exhilarated by their  reaction to what   happens.  Levine   appears  to  have added a greater depth in characterization than the short  story form  usually  dictates. The  characters are  often  memorable, as the  three  Mendels-Constance, Frieda, and Mr.  Mendel-in "In Quebec City".
Levine  has been accused  of being closer to   the   English    than    to   the   Canadian idiom, and  of an increasing tendency to rework  the  same  themes.  Though I  feel that    Levine   does   not   need   a   defense against  these  criticisms,  I also feel  that  it is important to disclaim  them,  mainly because some readers would get such impressions from some critics-and from general  statements about   his  work,  as in the   Supplement  to  The  Oxford   Com­ panion  to  Canadian History  and  Litera­ ture.  In  Western  Canada  we seem  to be less concerned  with  whether  a  writer   is too English  or  too American  or not Can­ adian  enough   than  we are  with  what  he does  as  a  writer.   It  is  the  universal  in Levine's   themes,   the  art  with  which  he writes  that  is  important. He  may  set  his characters in  Ottawa, Montreal, Quebec or  in  England, but  their  experiences are world wide, could  happen to anyone  any­ where.  He  takes the  ordinary, and  makes the  reader   see  the  ordinary in  it,  unlike


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



so  many   writers   who  look  only  for   the extraordinary in human experience.
There is, too, a strong  poetic  quality in the writing of Norman Levine.  He  writes the   short   story   frequently  with   the  re­ sources  and   the  intention of  the  lyrical poet.  The stories  should   not  be  read  as simple    narratives   in   the   usual    sense, though  there   is  much   narrative  move­ ment   in  many  of   them.  Instead, Levine conveys   the   feeling  of  a  situation,  the humanity of  what   is going  on,  the  idea that    this   is   happening  to   people;  the stories  have  all  the  unity  and  shape,  the concentrated diction  and  implied  emotion of a well-finished  lyric poem.  As with  the lyric,  the  stories  yield  their  full  meaning only  upon   re-reading, when   the  reader can link the implications of section with section, implications that are not always obvious  upon  first  reading. For  this  rea­ son,   I   do   not   feel   that    the   criticism  against  Levine  that  he reworks old themes is  valid;   instead,  by  similar   themes   in these Selected  Stories, separate stories illu­ minate each  other. What  may  be a frag-
 mentary moment   in  one  story  is lighted by  another  fragment  in  another  story; even  the characters may  be different, but the emotion  is similar,  and  its significance is  apprehended  more   fully   when   it   is implied  again  another way.
The   diction   of  Levine's  short   stories,
with its evocation  of mood  and  scene and its  poetic  use of  implication is the  most important part  of the  fabric of his work. Yet,  there  is nothing vague  about  these short   stories.   Levine   is  assured   in   his craft,  very knowledgeable in his composi­ tion;  he always uses the right punctuation mark  in  the  right  place.  He  writes  with a  precision,   knowing   full  well  what   he intends,  and  achieving it in his best stories with  an  accuracy  and  rightness  that  puts him  with  the  best  of  short  story  writers.  And   without  ceasing   to  belong   to  the country where  he was born,  he is a writer who  has  branched  out  into  his  contem­ porary   world -he   has   been   translated into   both   German   and    Dutch-and become a man of his time as well as of his country.





TOWN OF HOPE



The cedar, fir  (and mountains under)  touch and  enter cloud  as thick as drugs. 	Cattle fatten
patiently, tracing spongy fields again, their  blunt  legs
baffled by the wait.

Only  river, dirtier than  cloud, folds and  brushes  itself
around bare spruce, beyond the box that  settlers  chose against the wrath of sun
the chance of sky.
 


Ron Miles


g6





CAVIAR AT
THE BARRICADES

D.  M.  FRASER,  Class  Warfare. Pulp  Press.

I RECALL, as a child,  the first  time  I ever saw someone  make  an  utter  fool of  him­ self; how excruciatingly embarrased I felt merely  at  having  been  a spectator  to the incident. Much later  came  my  discovery that  the  reverse is also possible, and  that  someone    else's   fine    performance   can sometimes    make    one    feel    almost    as pleased   as  if  one  had  had,   similarly,   a hand  in it oneself. Reading D. M. Fraser's  first collection  of  fictions,  Class  Warfare, was  for  me  much  the  latter kind  of ex­ perience; it's been  a long  time  since  I've  so  thoroughly  enjoyed   reading a   book. (Much, I  might  add, to  the  disgruntle­ ment  of  my  cat  which  was  spilled  from my knees each  time  I swung  in my chair with  a delighted  hal  or goddam! or simi­ lar   perspicacious observation.)   Unques­  tionably,    Fraser   has   come   up   with   a superb  performance, much  of  it satire  of the  highest   order   and,   taken  in  its  en­ tirety,  a remarkably acuminate legend  of the  sixties and  seventies.  Or,  in  a  larger sense, a virtual study of entropy. The sort of  book  which,  just  before  we've  finally blown  ourselves  up  or  smoked  ourselves out,  I'd  want  to  be  certain to  have  in­ cluded   in   the  time  capsule   we'll   leave behind   to  explain   ourselves  to  whatever follows. A  collection  of stories  about two young  idlers walking  night   streets; four young adults  living dutiful lives in an old
 mansion; a  bemused   university  professor sitting   guard   over   a  roomful  of   exam­ writing   students; Santa  Claus  after   his retirement; a  young  woman  revolution­ ary's   tale;   an   eccentric   executive  who refuses  to  answer   his  mail; an  absurdly flawless  and  sophisticated  male   culture­ vulture;  a   political   kidnapping,  and   a tired  man's  journey   down   to  Lonesome  Town.
Given   its   title,   the   first   assumption readers  tend  to  make  about Class  War­ fare is that  it's a political treatise of  some kind,  but  this is only obliquely  true.  It is certainly not  a  political  harangue, nor  is it  thinly  camouflaged  political pamphle­ teering.  Fraser's observation of the  politi­  cal  machinery  clanking and  clattering at the hub of the world  has made him parti­ cularly  aware of its effects  on  the society he lives in, and  his awareness necessarily adds  that dimension to his tales, but  only two of  the  fictions  actually deal  directly  with   political    issues.   The  first   is   the account  of   "Marie  Tyrell",  a   revolu­ tionary  jailed  by police  and  subsequently executed, whose  Nachlass  (a  letter  writ­  ten  from  her  prison  cell  to her  confede­ rates,  excerpts  from  her  childhood diary, her   description  of   a   dream,  and   the account of her  meeting  with  a  priest)   is set down alongside  the institutional report  on her  prison  behaviour and  the  rumina­ tions of her lover-the whole story there­ by  becoming,  in  effect,  a  set  of  en   face court   record   of  the   trial   of  an   epoch. The  other  is the  title  story,  "Class  War­ fare", an account of a political abduction narrated  by one  of  the  members of  the revolutionary "cell"   which    committed the  act.  It is in  fact  very  reminiscent of the    1970  FLQ   kidnapping  of   James  Cross, and  is one of the  most  lucid  expli­  cations  of  the  inner workings  of  such  a

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cell and  the  minds  of its members that  I have ever encountered. Unfortunately the sections  which  demonstrate this  are  far too  long   to  quote,   but   there   is  Marie Tyrell's letter  in the former story which demonstrates a  similar insight:

Comrades, there is less to  tell  you  now  than I would  have  thought, less to say, evidently, than  you  are   prepared  to  hear.   Often   my mind   is  wholly   empty, quiet,  a  room   va­ cated  in  anticipation  of  some  catastrophe, which will  come   soon   enough.  I  apologize to  my brothers and  sisters, for  this.  I under­ stand  what  you   expect  of   me,   what  you deserve,  in   this   darkening   of   our   history. You   need   something   usable,  a  Statement, to  ennoble our   cause  and   shame our   ene­  mies,   words    to   engrave,   soberly,  on   the monuments you  doubtless will  not  forget to erect to  me.  There was  a  time  when I knew the   words.  I  remember  how   they   rang in our  meeting-rooms, at our  rallies, how  they shone  in   my  mind,  when   we  spoke   them
'together. I remember how  I repeated them,
!for comfort's sake,  again and  again through
the  nights I lay  in  hiding, and  when  I was discovered  and   taken away, how   joyfully   I spat  at  my   tormentors.  They  were    good rwords,  and   I do  not   regret  them,  nor   the end    they   led   me   to.   Be   certain  of   that. Now  they  have  left  me,  as  so  much else  is leaving  me,  and   I  have   not   the   strength, nor   the   wish,   to  call   them   back.   Let   my memorial  be  silent, if  you  would   build   it.
,More  blood  than mine   will  be  shed,  before
you  do.

The  rest  of  the   stories   incline   more toward the socially satirical, and  here  the narrative voice  is  articulate, urbane, lightly  understated-I was  reminded of
a  carefully  adjusted  phonograph   tone­ arm   set  at   precisely   the   right   tracking force   and   pitch.   Yet   it  irarely   self­ indulgent  for  all  that,  and  when   it  is, tends  to be so with  a self-mocking grin:

In   any  event, our   work   is  apparently  seri­ ous,  and   we  take   it  seriously. We  are  con­  strained  to   be   outlaws,   desperadoes,  the stuff   of  an   incipient   mythology.  My   own weakness is  that I am  small   and   squirrelly, much  given  to moony  brooding, inchoate in-

g8
 Epirations (to violate the  boundaries of our monumentality, embrace  the   poetic  ladies, bare   myself  before  the   multitudes), and   a not always  manageable disposition to tears. Such    behaviour  is  not    respected  here;  I must  dissemble often;  I await, with   dread, the   inexorable  moment  of  self-betrayal.  I am     unworthy    of    Masterpiece    Avenue. Spiffy  knows: I catch in  her  cool  Angioid eye, in passing,  a glint  of-what? Recog­ lllition?    Commiseration? Warning?  And: We  must  all be  careful, Ambrose whispers, polishing  his  glossy   blade,  nibbling  wisely at his moustache. And  whose  toothpaste was it that spelled  out, on  the  bathroom mirror
,one  midwinter morning,  the   words   of  our
sentence?-THIS IS  A GOOD LIFE, WE ARE   CONTENTED THEREWITH.

In the story ("Masterpiece Avenue") from  which  the above  quotation is taken, Spiffy, Janey,  Ambrose  and  the  narrator live in an  old mansion of obscure histori­ cal significance,  "on  sufferance", thenar­ rator   informs   us,  "by   the  grace of  the Landmarks Commission, to provide  'con­  tinuity,   the  sense  of  a  still-viable tradi­ tion,  an  ongoing  ambience'." The   four live   together   gravely,    tactfully,  trying  earnestly   if   not  always  entirely   success­ fully  to  live  up  to  the  stylistic  demands of their  historical  landmark; to be gentle anachronisms in gracious tableau. Similar mockery   carries   the  story  "The  Sweet­ ness  of  Life",   in  which   an  insufferably accomplished young  man

... is  having   supper tonight with   the  Em­ press   of   India.  They  will   fry   prawns   in exotic  sauces;  the   table  will   be   set   with linen,   rough-textured    stoneware,  candles, dried reeds  in  a  brass  bowl.  They will  drink a virtuous red  wine, in  moderation, sniffing the  bouquet  critically; he  will  tell  her,  not rwithout  irony,  about his  childhood, his  first car,   his   early   sexual  terror,  now   happily abated.  "What an   oaf  I was,"   he  will  say,
:eminiscently. Later,  he  will  play  his  guitar for   her.   There  will   be   muffied   applause, cries   of   "Bravo!"  and    "Wow!"  The  sun
,will  set  discreetly behind  the   grape arbor;
elsewhere  the   moon   will   rise.   Everything
;will partake of  the   sweetness of  life.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



As  is characteristic of  the  best  litera­ ture,  the  best stories in  this book  are  also the  most  difficult  to  talk  about,  possibly because   they  address   themselves  so  per­ sistently    to    that	chameleonic    puzzle known   as   the   human  condition;  such stories  seem  never  to  be  precisely  about  this  or  that,  but  somehow   about it  all;  the  kind  of  story  one  has  the  initial  im­ pulse   to  describe   as  being   nothing  less than  "about itself".   "Marching to  Pre­ toria" is such  a  piece,  its approach  pris­ matic, 	purposefully	ambivalent;	the theory    of    relativity   demonstrated   on Main  Street  (or any street)   by two young men  drifting  through wet  evening  neon, looking for anything to change their luck. A lone woman  approaches. The narrator of the  two speculates; the woman  is who she is, they  are  who  they  are: the  possi­ bilities   are   endless.   Perhaps   they   will accost  her,  perhaps she  wants  to  be  ac­ costed,  perhaps she  does  and  they  won't  or  she  doesn't and   they  will-the  con­ tingencies  build,  become elegant  formulae in  ontological   ambience,   just  as  anger  and  misery can  be geometrically endlessly intriguing-but   possibly,   just   possibly, the most fascinating ideas are only fascin­ ating  because  we're  still  too  cold  in  the world,  still  too  uncomfortable  here,  and to   maintain   at   least   a   modicum   of warmth, have  to keep  throwing fascinat­ ing  ideas  on  the  low  fire  before  us  and rub our  hands and  foreheads in continual puzzlement   to  keep   the   blood   moving along-for what, finally, does it all mat­  ter  the moment these  two can  manage to come  in   out   of  the   rain,   to  surround themselves   with   the   far   more   efficient warmth  of  love,  power,   acceptance or peace?  But that, of course, isn't  what  this story  is about, not  entirely   at  least;   the lady  passes, unaccosted, and  how  is that
 to  be  valued?  Is  the  incident  (or  non­ incident)  more  important than  the  eve­ ning,  the  street,  the  purpose of  the  eve­ ning walk or the second  lone woman now approaching  the   two?   And  if  she,  too, passes  them  by,  has  anything  been  lost? Not  sophistic  questions, these,  but  ques­ tions  of  orientation; how  can  we  know where   we  are   if  we  don't  even   know where  we've   been?   What  do  we  really want,    and    how    do   we    discern    our options? The  second  woman passes, with a kindly smile.
The   most   ambitious  story   in   Class Warfare, entitled "Lonesome Town",  is unfortunately also  the  most  ungainly - a 14-part  saga of Jamie Mcivor's journey down  to Lonesome  Town, that  place  on your   interior  roadmap   to   which    you temporarily retreat when  youthful energy and  optimism, the fascination with world, wife, and  dreams,  and  your  confidence in your  own  invulnerability finally  sag.  It's to Fraser's credit  that,  having established the   basic  metaphor  in  the   first  several sections, he virtually ignores  it for the rest and  proceeds  simply  to build  and  popu­ late  the  town  with  all  the  streets,  hotels, beer parlors  and citizens one might expect  to  find  in  any  of  a  thousand  depressing small  North  American  communities that  have  somehow  managed  to  acquire only the worst  byproducts of the  technological age.  However,  in  order  to make  this  70- page-long    and   generally    unhappy  tale digestible,  Fraser  finds  himself  having  to shift   tactics   often,   coming  at   his  story from  as  many  different directions as  he can   manage,  trying   to   keep   the   story from  dragging. While  he  does  this  with admirable  skill,  the   final   result   is  not entirely   satisfactory. The  last   four   sec­ tions of the saga contain the most trouble­ some spots, these generally  being  the ones


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in  which  Fraser  steps  back  slightly  from his story  and  speaks  to  his  reader  about it  rather  than   through   it; the  effect  is that  of a  storyteller somehow  lost  in  his own   tale,   a  tale   that   became   at   some point   too  long  and   consequently  some­ what  unmanageable.
But   there's    certainly  no   doubt    that Class Warfare wins its stripes  despite such relatively   minor   difficulties.  There's  not even  any  need  to give  it  the  special  con­ sideration  first   books  often   get   at   the hands  of reviewers; Class  Warfare  holds its own quite self-sufficiently.
ANDREAS SCHROEDER

SCREAM  OR SPEECH?
BP    NICHOL,   love:   a  book   of  remembrances.
rfalonbooks.
BP   NICHOL, Konfessions  of an Elizabethan  Fan
Dancer.  Weed Flower.  $3.50.
STEVE  MCCAFFERY, Dr. Sadhu's Muffins. Press
Porcepic.  $4.95·
IN AN INTERVIEW  with  bp nichol  (Alpha­ bet,  No.  I8  & I9,  I97I)   George  Bower­ ing  alludes   to  ". . . a   poem   by  Lionel Keams in  which  he  talks  about the  long scream   the  Indian  in  the  movies  makes as  he's  going   off   the   long   cliff.  While Lionel  talks about it, you seem to be pro­ ducing  ..."  And   nichol   answers,   "... producing  the  long  scream! Right!"
Donald  Hall   recently   said   ( 0hio  Re­
view,  Spring  I974,   p.  68)   that   a  poem "uses  language and  the  unconscious does not  talk:   sometimes   we  speak   of   sur­ realist   poetry   as  if  it  were   the  uncon­ scious  actually  speaking.  Language and syntax   are   cerebral,   coming   from   the cerebral cortex.  Language is  not  some­ thing  bears and alligators use. Once some­ thing  speaks,  that   thing   is  not   the  un­ conscious  ...''
OK.  My   problem    in   attempting  to


100
 evaluate, to deliver,  to make  more acces­ sible  these  three  collections is to  try  for a   balanced  perspective   somewhere  be­ tween  the  two  positions  posited  above  in nichol  and  Hall.  I am beginning to think  that  there  isn't  one.  Either   you embrace one  or  the  other.  I  find  myself  annoyed by the  necessity to  take  an  extreme posi­ tion.
Raw   or  cooked.  Unbuttoned  or  but­ toned   down.   Dionysian or   Apollonian. Traditional  or  experimental.  Linear  or exploded.   Sequential  or   simultaneous. Ideational or spontaneous. As I look over these contrasted positions,  I can  see how the  impulse is to favour  the bold, new, revolutionary, free  approach. Even  these words   seem   pale   by   comparison:   ra­ tional,   limited,   straight,  barriers,  boun­ daries,  traps   (as  in  "language"  traps  or "logical"  traps) . Lie   to  us!  Dance  us back  to the  dawn? Naked! Primal!
Above  all the  attraction is to newness,
against   staleness.  Take  chances! Dare! Away  with  the  usual,  the  everyday,  the safe.  Of  course,  these  language  experi­ ments  are  not all that  new. Dadaist anti­ rationalism is at  least  as  old  as  the  cen­ tury.  Gertrude Stein's  experiments with automatic writing  date back  to the  same era.   For  some  reason,  each   generation seems  to forget  this  fact  and  treats  each new  experiment  as  if   it   were   pristine.  Welcome  to the barbarian who will shake us out  of our  comfort and  complacency! If we fear  the  barbarian, or suggest  that  it  isn't  all  that  radical, however,  we are self-condemned to the realm of stuffy formalism.
Let  me make  an  attempt anyhow,  and try for a neutral position. Approaching Steve  McCaffery's Dr Sadhu's  Muffins as if  it  were  a  stone  found   on  the  beach. Never  seen one  before  like this.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



No  use, I know  too  much. Besides, he reveals   his  method   in   a  "note  on  the method of  composition" at  the  back  of the book. Primarily, he uses a random method. "in   most  cases,"  he  says,  "the word selection for any one poem was determined by a non intentional reading among   a  supply-text chosen   at  random from  whatever happened to be on or near my  desk when  i was  working: a  concise oxford   dictionary, the  works  of   shakes­ peare,   the  poems  of  john  donne, an  i­ ching,  newspapers, life magazine, scienti­ fic american, abandoned drafts of several of my own poems etc ..."
The emphasis  is on  random  selection
and  unconscious  composition, or  at  least a  kind  of  low-level  involvement,  process in the making,  and  a collaboration in the creating of  the  poem  between   poet  and reader.
bp  nichol  offers  nothing in  either  love
or  fan dancer  in this manner as a clue to his method   of  composition such  as  Mc­ Caffery  has.  But  he  has  often  spoken  in favour   of   random  creation   elsewhere.  ("George Bowering: Would you be satis­ fied  if  we  ran  this  tape  backward? bp:  Maybe,  maybe.  It  would  depend   how  it sounded."  Alphabet  interview.)  He  has also  spoken  elsewhere  of  the  "language trap".
nichol's  love:  a book  of remembrances contains "ghosts" which  are  pencilled ap­ proximations of forms,  like doodles, some
almost  becoming  letters of  the  alphabet,
 miliar  format. The book ends  with "alle­ gories"   which   are   like   Robert   Crumb cartoons gone serious, hallucinatory, even menacing.
Konfessions of an Elizabethan Fan Dancer    originally   appeared    in    1967 under  the Coach House  logo. It is a col­ lection    of   typewriter   poems,   concrete poems.
I notice   that   I am  concentrating on
forms  and   strategies. This   is  because   I think  it  is  fraudulent for  a  reviewer   to look for meaning in a poetry  which  takes such  pains  to  avoid  ratiocination.
Also,  the  end   results  of  language  ex­ perimentation, such  as these  three books, are impervious to coherent  review, in the sense  of  ideational  language  which  at­  tempts  to make  literature more available. Going  back  to the  polarized  positions: they  are  equally  self-defeating. The  ra­  tionalist,   or   traditionalist  or   rhetorical stance,  if  tough,  will  not  admit that  the experiments  should   be   allowed   out   in public:  let   the  experiment  stay  in   the lab. And  a hard  experimental line would keep  rhetorical poetry locked  up  in  an­ thologies. There is a little  too  much  em­ peror's   new  clothes   about a  lot  of   the experimentation,  a   bit   too  much   hard  sell,  snakeoil   salesman   pitch.   There  is equally  too  much  snide  elitism  in  ignor­  ing  or  attacking  experiment. What  we need, and  lack, is a method, a position,  a strategy. And that's where  I began.  I still
haven't found it.

but not quite, others approximating test patterns on tv. These are  followed  by "frames" which are surreal  comic  book panels which could be read sequentially, although I suppose  it is perilous  to do so. The  book  goes  on   with   "love   poems" which  are in nichol's  typewriter composi­ tion  style,  probably   his  most  widely  fa-
 EUGENE   MCNAMARA

NORTHERN POEMS

JIM GREEN, North  Book. Blackfish Press, $4·95·
UNTIL   RECENTLY there   have   been   few books of poems from  the Arctic.  The tra­ ditional Eskimo  songs  (collected  initially


101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



by Knud  Rasmussen and  Diamond  Jen­ ness)    have   been   brought   together   by several  editors,  although the  most  impor­ tant   edition is Lewis'  I  Breathe  A  New Song  ( I97I). Only  a  few modem  Eski­ mos  have  written  poems  in  English  and as yet none  of  them  has  produced a col­ lection.   Published  poetry   by   southern­ whites  about  the  Eskimo-North has  been appearing in  D.I.A.N.D.'s  North  maga­ zine for fifteen  years, but  only  two  books of note  have  appeared: AI Purdy's North of	Summer 	(   967)	and    J.   Michael Yates'  The  Great Bear  Lake Meditations
( I97I). To this, now has to be added Jim
Green's North  Book which,  like its prede­ cessors,  taps   the  experience  of   a  white man  in Canada's Eskimo-world.
Green's northern poems  are  not  of the sort  that  present-day literary theorists would  consider  "modernist". To  be sure, they  do  utilize  most  contemporary  tech­ niques,  but  Green  is not  concerned  with the breath-stop lines and the  journey  into  the interior of the mind essential  to mod­  ernists   like  Newlove  and   Atwood. This  poetry  utilizes the external world as some­ thing   visualized  and   felt  for  itself; like his mentor, AI  Purdy, he begins  with  the outdoor  experience  and   only  comments upon   the  inner   mind   in  an   associative fashion.  In   fact,   in   many   ways   North Book  reads   like  an   updated  version   of Purdy's North  of Summer, including the "Postscript"  rationale  which   each   poet has felt necessary for southern readers. Nevertheless, Green's  poems   move   into new  areas  of experience, and  he  extends our  understanding of the  North in a way that  Purdy, a brief  summer visitor,  could not.
Green  has two strong points  as a poet. First,  he  has  the  ability  to  create  evoca­ tive sense impressions  of the  land  and  its


102
 inhabitants that  are  almost  wholly imag­ istic   (and   thus,  similar   to  most  of  the traditional Eskimo  poems) . In  fact,  one of   the   longer   poems   is   subtitled  "ten  images  from  a  seal  camp"  of  which  the following  is an excerpt:

Dog  opens  eyes
one 	then  the  other in  bright  light
of false dawn stands 	shakes in the  cold wind. He  yelps
is silenced 	stunned when his cry echoes once 	twice
II'ight back at  him,
lies down curls  up mumbling.

The   second   strength  Green   has   is  his ability  to handle the  colloquial language of  people  around him,  and   to  deal  col­ loquially  with experiences that demand a less formal  language. In  the  poem  called "TDI" that  outlines a  white  man's   at­  tempt  to discover  an  older  Eskimo's  age, Green  captures the following:

then  he starts 	slow at  first
a  steady  flow of sound 	then  faster he gets  his arms  swinging
'eyes flashing 	and  really  talking abruptly he stops
looks to the young  guy  to translate he does

"That man 	he  say he  born  round  here and  that  same day  he born
his father  kill two  white  bears  that  time
that  man 	he say he old as that"

The poems in this volume are divided about evenly between imagistic evocative poems and social commentary; the evoca­ tive poems are the  best. Green's empathy with  the  Eskimo  way of life  and  his bit­ terness  about  southern-white  impositions is  evident  throughout. One   of  the  best poems re-interprets the  Eskimo  legend  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



how  the white  man  was created when  an outcast Eskimo woman  mated  with a dog. This  poem  concludes  as follows:

But  the  girl mated  with  the dog whelping  two  ordinary dogs rtwo dogs with  men's  heads
,two men  with  dogs'  heads
and   two  men with  white  skin.

·At best the  dog is an  animal. Beware  of  the  dog.
Other poems  are  more  directly   political as  Green  laments the  white  man's  arro­ gance   as  he  builds   his  "dreams  on  the blade  of a  bulldozer."
Alden  Nowlan  once  commented about poetry  that

the  best you can  do
sounds  like  a cheap  trick  when  you  re-read
it.

The  chief  fault  of  the  poems  in  Green's book is that  many of them  employ "cheap tricks". One short  poem of this kind runs:

HOW  TO  DO  IT OUTSIDE
IN  THE   WINTER

quickly.

Other poems set up ice-men  in order  to shatter them  abruptly by the  ending.

I  was frozen
1>haking,
wet  to  the  waist,
with  another   hour
of open  water
still  to go.

The  old  man  sitting legs straight out
on  the  canoe  ribs,
eyes loving  every inch
of grey coastline
"good  day"
he  shouts  over the  engine  roar.
 and  I  think  "Yea" "Well  me,
I'm  new  here."

These  endings  sometimes  work,  but over­ use of the  device  weakens  the  impact of North  Book.
The  illustrations by Nauya, an  Eskimo artist,  though excellent, are  not  integral to  Green's book.  The drawings  empha­ size a mode  of life shifting into  the  Eski­ mo  past,  and  are  thus  romantic in  con­ ception;   in    contrast,    Green's   poems, though on the romantic fringe,  deal  with a  contemporary  reality   in  which   Cole­ man  stoves, oil drums, and  pop  cans intervene.
Because  he  has  made a  home  in  the North, Green   is  more   visually  involved than  any previous  southern-white writing about   the  North   with   the  environment around  him.   He  doesn't  have   to  reach back  into  his white-cultural bag of  meta­ phors, but  utilizes  the  North as it  is, and,  therefore, doesn't impose  sluggish  words upon   an   alien   landscape.  Like   Patrick Lane,   whose   poetry   his  sometimes  re­ sembles, Green has lived the land  and  the life  he  dynamically describes.

GORDON P. TURNER


MIXED BAG

West Coast  Plays, ed. Connie  Brissenden.  New
Play  Centre-Fineg!ow.

WHAT IS a "West  Coast  play"? The New Play Centre's anthology of one-act plays inevitably raises  the  question by  its  title and   its  Introduction  by  Pamela   Haw­ thorne, managing director of the Centre, with  its claims  to  be  fostering  "a  strong  Canadian  identity" and   "the  excellence  of  B.C.  writing". The  answer,  however,  is  far   from   clear.   The  five   dramatists

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



represented in the collection come from various  parts  of  Canada and  from  other countries; their  plays are set in Paris, London  (England) , Western Ontario, a mansion, and  a  room; their  subject  mat­ ter has nothing at all to do with the West Coast. A reader  coming  to this volume  in search  of indigenous material will be dis­ appointed. But a reader looking  for inter­ esting  short   plays,  original  in  style  and yet clearly within the main  stream of con­ temporary  theatre, will  find  here,  if  not God's  plenty,  at  least  some  quite  stimu­ lating work-written by people  who happen to be currently living in or near Vancouver. Most  of  these  plays  are,  to some    extent,    derivative;   the    authors know and sometimes echo Beckett, Pinter, and  Genet. Some  of  the  playwrights  ex­ periment  with   form   while  others  tread  familiar paths.  They vary  in verbal  and theatrical  skill.  But   they   are   certainly worth  paying  attention  to.
Leonard  Angel's   "Forthcoming  Wed­ ding" is a  sophisticated soap  opera or  a drawing room  comedy,  according  to  its
director,  Jace   van   der   Veen,   and   the
Centre's Pamela Hawthorne, whose "Dia­ logue"  with  the  author is printed  before the   text   of  the   play.   They   find   much that  is sinister  in  the  play,  in  the  appar­ ently incestuous  relationship of father and daughter  and   in   the  murderous  attack  by  the  father on  the  daughter's fiance. Angel himself sees the characters as noth­  ing   more   than   "perfectly  frank"  with each   other.  Such   disparate  views  raise important theoretical questions about the interpretation and  production of plays as well as aesthetic questions about a  play's quality. The  New  Play  Centre has  done its readers a valuable service  by including for  each   play  various introductory  ma­ terials  by the  author or  director,  though
 they  would  possibly have  done  better  to print  the introductions after  the plays instead  of  before,  where  they  tempt  one to read  them  first.
Thomas Cone's  "Cubistique" shows, as the  title  suggests,  multiple facets  of  its two female  characters as they  reflect and interlock    and   trade  places   with   each other.  Tom Grainger's "The Helper" has a dedicated anarchist printing paper money  on  his old  hand  press, true  to his faith  in the League, while an intruder accidentally discovers and  then  cleverly exploits  the  printer's faith  and  skill. Mar­ garet   Hollingsworth's  "The  Operators" experiments with  flashback  techniques as three  women  eat  lunch  together during the  night  shift  in  the  factory  and  try  to discover or avoid truths about  themselves and   each   other.  Sheldon   Rosen's   "The Box," in the wittiest language to be found  in this volume,  pits  the  fantasies  and  the realities, the different compartments of mind,  of  two very  different men  against each other in a verbal and psychological dance.
If these  plays  have  anything in  com­
mon  it is a general  concern with  the  na­ ture  and  presence  of illusions -illusions the   characters  have   about   theinselves, about   each   other, about  their  relation­ ships,  about whatever  else they  may  be­ lieve in. From  the strongest  plays  ("The Helper" and  "The Box")   to the  weakest ("Forthcoming  Wedding"), surfaces   re­ sist and  crack,  truths appear and  disap­  pear-some  illusions  shatter and  a  few hold firm. It's the  modem world.
In this volume the New Play Centre, despite  its  claims,  has  done  little  to  ad­ vance  the  Canadian or  West Coast sense of identity. But  the  Centre does  provide  the most valuable of services to the  prac­  ticing  dramatist -the chance  to be seen

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  heard. All  the  plays  in  this  volume have  been  professionally produced under the  Centre's  auspices,   presumably after going through their  exhaustive process of criticism,   dramatic  reading,  and   other workshop  testing. The Centre itself, then, is partly  responsible  for  the  revised,  final form of each  play as it reaches  the  public in the theatre. And it is good  to see some of  these  plays  reaching the  wider  audi­ ence  and   greater  permanence  provided  by  publication. West  Coast  playwrights, however  defined,  deserve  this added  form of  encouragement  offered   by   the   New Play  Centre.	ANN P.   MESSENGER


BETWEEN THE LAKES

w. D. VALGARDsoN, God  is Not  a Fish  Inspec- tor.  Oberon Press. $3.50.

WITH  HIS  FIRST COLLECTION   of  short stories, Bloodfiowers, W. D. Valgardson established  himself as a careful craftsman who writes with sensitivity, power and sublimity. God is Not a Fish Inspector has the same subject  matter-the life of Man­ itoba's  inter-lake region,  the same themes
-the passage  of  time,   the  imperman­ ence  of  human  existence,  and   it  is  as good as Bloodfiowers, if not  better. Once again,  the carefully  written description of landscape and  of  characters  establish  an atmosphere that  is  cold,  hard, bitter, al­ most  primeval.  The  imagery is  precise, accurate, and  yet rich  in  meaning. Near Fusi   Bergman's   house   the   breakwater "loomed  like  the  purple spine  of  some great  beast guarding the land  from  a lake which  seemed,  in  the  darkness, to go on forever." The  image suggests the ominous force   of  land,   water    and   life   against which  Bergman  struggles. Man's  role  in this struggle  is expressed  by the  compari-
 son   of   the   town   to   images   cut   from
"purple construction paper".
These are not merely a series of short stories about  a small  group of people liv­ ing  in  Manitoba. Their  excellence  con­ sists in the depth of their  descent into  the archetypal patterns that   flow  through a truthful  chronicle of  an  insular   way  of life. The title  story,  for  example, is both an  account of  Fusi  Bergman's condition and  that  of man himself, struggling feebly against   time   and   environment  to  con­ tinue  with  dignity. Man, like  Fusi,  and so many  of Valgardson's other  characters, is  old,  selfish,  weak   and   ultimately de­ feated  and  deflated. Indeed, few of Val­ gardson's stories  in  either book  end  with hope. Even when  a character returns to religious  faith, like  Melissa  in  "Saved", the story ends  with  a sense of loss and in­ hibition. Melissa  is  separated  from   her husband  by  the  locks  and   laws  of   the Church.
Furthermore, an extraordinary number of the inhabitants of God is not a Fsh Inspector  are  crippled.  Bergman  has  a bad  leg  and  shoulder; Hermann has  no legs;  Valdi  has  a heart   condition; Elliot has mental problems in addition to being an  Indian, and  Albert  is retarded. Other characters are incapacitated by poverty, environment, emotional  sterility,   or  old age. When  Darlene Melouish, in "A  Pri­ vate  Comedy", says:  "We're all  cripples,  I guess.  On   some  it  shows   more   than  others",  she  is  not   referring  merely   to herself  and  Hermann.
Still, though time and  environment are victors   in   Valgardson's  stories,   man   is very often  the hero.  Fusi Bergman's resis­ tance   to  old   age   and   his  attempts  to maintain his dignity  elevate his stature to heroic  proportions,  despite  his  deflation  at  the  end  of the  story. The same  might

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



be said  of Carl's practicality in  "A  Busi­ ness Arrangement". There is little  laugh­  ter  or  overt   happiness in  God  is  not  a Fish  Inspector; there  is often  joy, of the
kind   that   has  ancient,  tragic, glittering eyes. And  there  is love as well. One  story, "The  Novice",   even   provides   the   bare essentials   of   hope.    Obviously  ignoring Darlene  Melouish's assertion  that  "No­ body can save you except yourself', "The Novice" shows  us  three  men  clinging   to a   foundering  raft -in   the   archetypal situation-coping  with  the  brutality of life  and   death  by   means   of   love  and mutual help.  Bloodflowers  was  an  excit­
ing  piece  of  writing, and   God  is not  a
Fish Inspector is no less so.

DANIEL LENOSKI


CONTRASTING VIRTUES

JOSEPH  SHERMAN, Chaim  the  Slaughterer. Oberon Press. JOE ROSENBLATT, Dream Craters,  Press Porcepic.

THERE rs  an  impressive intensity and coherence in  Joseph   Sherman's first  ex­ tended  collection. The poems  move from a  quizzing   and   uncertain  "I"   ("I   am Jonathan/ Or  could  have  been  ...")   to the   passion   and   real   eloquence   of  the long   title-poem,  with   which   the   book concludes. In  this  movement the  uncer­  tainty  of familiar  roles  (Jew,  Jewish  boy, Poet/Observer,   Husband,  Father)   dis­ solves in  the  externalized ritual   persona. There are  less  directly  self-illuminatory poems,  such  as  "The Hired   Help  Hotel  Indian" and "Changeling", while "Poems for My Unborn Child" rehearses  the  role of   father  and   husband  Sherman  fulfills in  "Faces" and  the  fine  love-poem  "Not

106
 the  Horned Flesh".  "Chaim the  Slaugh­ terer" finally  bows the  head  of  man  and  boy before  a powerfully felt  religious  im­ perative  never  wholly  masked   by  Sher­ man's  sometimes obliquely  sardonic man­ ner.
Sherman  will  suffer   badly   from   the­ matic   criticism.   His  opening  poem  has already  been  quoted   by  reviewers: "Ask a   jew/  to   define   a   Canadian/ he   will laugh" ("Problems of  My Own"). But a certain  inevitability  of   theme   does  not necessitate predictability of effect:

for anyone  I know, certainly for  me
he had  no words wise or other,  no secrets no expressed or implied  regrets
no  skeletons  or  ghosts  save  one,  though   it was Sam
and Sam only who remained  in the intervals of following
the  ablutions  of each  game  and  each departure of the man,
only   he   to   whom   the   darkness   and   its urinous diffusions
formed   a  complete   and   never-changing world,
a world intact  with  its own single sun moon and  star  all in one.

("What We Look  For,  What  We Find")

Control  of  the   verse-paragraph  is  a rare  skill;  here Sherman moves  from  the simplistic  and  anecdotal to denser  feeling and  dark  finality  with  an elegant rhetoric of repetition and  phrasal variation ("no
... no,"  "Sam  ... Sam," "only  ... only," "world  ... world")  concluding with  the entirely  symbolic  "all  in  one".
I must  neglect  the  title-poem, which deserves reading  rather than  summary. It is a sustained  and subtle  work in which Chaim's introspective dignity  enriches  the personal  anxieties  of autobiography. In itself it ensures that  Sherman will be read again by those who experience this first collection.  I would like to end by illustrat­ ing the  flexibility and  precision  of which

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



he is capable. ("semiticelt"-Sherman's wife  is Welsh)  :

Diminutive semiticelt horseshoe  of life
you breathe  already in such  a way
as to send  fish scurrying to an  unexplored sea
little  fish yourself kicking  when we forget and  consider  ourselves
with a whale's  cry of loneliness going  nearly  unheeded
lost
in the throat-parching ocean
its beaches
the  rind  of your world
("Poems  for My Unborn Child")

Generically, Joe  Rosenblatt is a very different kind of poet from  Sherman. Dream Craters works with fantasy  and personal obsession, image breeding image:

0 sleepwalkers walk  carefully back
into  my poem into
the zero
the clean zero
of blue
flames
 I  hear  the scratching of rat  feet
& and  teeth grinding on fake  protein.

("Free Travel to Soya Fields or the
Inflated Price  of Meat")

Above all,  Rosenblatt is at risk  in  this volume; at worst the  images  rot at  birth:

around  a lake of sunny  mood  singing offshoots
of deeper  hues  of  mood,  of  wooden  mood,
dried
toadstool  mood on  a mound  of dead  moods,
or
mood  rotting  into  forests  of  green
pornography.

But   the   risk  is  amply    justified   else­ where. So much  surprise, so much energy,  and  lest I give the impression only of wild profusions  it  should  be  said  that  a large proportion of  these  poems  satisfy  by  an unsentimental delicacy  of  statement:

Love is deep as a freshly killed  bird
stroked  by scimitars,  measured by a whisker.
On  everybody's  doormat there  is a  sleeping  bird.

We want  to forget
but still feel the warmth. It hops on one leg or hangs on a branch
with a broken wing.

("Love Poem for  Faye")

PETER THOMA:;;

("Sleepers  Walk Carefully")

It is poetry  of process,  the  poem  itself often  the subject.  But Rosenblatt achieves many  lucid  ironies:

the cat wears a face
a kind face for the  birds
("Suicide Notes")

There is  a  characteristic transformation of primal  organic  images into technologi­ cal  horrors which  give  a  consistent cen­ tral  logic  to many  poems:
When  the ether  of the psyche rises in the  blanched  house of my skull,
 
PRAIRIE AND POEM
E. D.  BLODGETT,  Take away  the  names. Coach
House Press, $3·95·
DEsPITE their  surface simplicity, E.  D. Blodgett's  poems  are  examples of a diffi­ cult,   intellectual  kind   of   writing   that  requires   close  attention.  While   a poem, like  "River", can   be  read and   enjoyed by  a  child,  we soon  become  aware that  we  are  in  a  realm  of  complex  artistic creation and  of a poetic  vision more  cere­ bral  than   much  of  the   prose-like   verse written  today. I am suggesting that  Blod-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gett's   verse  is close  to  the  purity   of  an absolute poetry,  a lyric of the word. Mal­ larme  comes  to mind.
The  book  is prefaced by a  Latin  epi­ gram  from  the Christian apologist, Minu­ cus  Felix,  "Take away   the  addition  of names  and  you will  perceive  its clarity." The  title of the collection, then,  is meant to suggest  the  problem of  the  ambiguity
of   language. The  poem,    "Je   suis   un
renard, dit  le renard," is a  further hint of this idea.  The  French is an  allusion  to the  foxy fox in Saint Exupery's fable  Le Petit  Prince.  The  multiple meanings of speech and  our  perception of reality  is questioned again  in  "L'alouette  nous ment." If the  lark  who  announces dawn is  lying,  is  the   alba  we  see  real?   The Italian  verse  at   the   end   of  this   poem implies  that  only  time  will  tell  us if alba is false. In "Albespis" the  hawthorn, and the  pun  on  thorny dawn  bring   us  into the  double  reflections  of springtime. The Greek  quotation from  Sappho, "The her­ ald  of spring  is the  lovely-voiced  nightin­ gale,"  may  again   be  proclaiming a  false start.  Canadians,   especially   in   Alberta, are  familiar with false springs. There are several  spring  poems  and   alba  or  dawn poems  in  the  book  which   use  these  an­ cient  conventions to  explore   the  double entendre meanings of language and  per­ ception.  The   harbinger   bird    appears and   re-appears metamorphosed  as  swal­ low, crow,  dove  and  phoenix.
"Se  dall'inferno arrivo a  qualche  qui­ ete"  is an  allusion  to the Italian hermetic poet,  Ungaretti, and   reminds  us  of  the spiritual transformations that  the  poems also  explore: the  twilight  zone  between  death and  resurrection in  "Easter even", dead  waters  in "Doors" and  "Alba", and  madness in  "Flowers". But  the  words  of Heraclitus, "Change is a kind  of rest," in

108
 "Places", make  us ask if we are progress­ ing  along   the  "cammin  di  nostra   vita"  or stagnating like "aigues-mortes"? Blod­ gett   perceives   a   world   reified   by   the artistic   act.  Within  this  aesthetic trans­  formation   the    ambiguous   abstractions are  anchored  to  concrete  objects:  the chair, the mirror, the window,  a bird,  the tree,  the wave of water,  the  prairie grass. But is not our perception of these objects also writhing with  double  vision?
From   these   objects   there   emerges   a sense of place. This feeling  for a physical locus  is  not  regional   or  so  distinct   that one  could  say  that   "Margins of  Marin­ ville"   reminds   us  of  Georges   Bugnet's  French  Alberta. Rather  this  sense  is  a merging  of past  and  present, the  prairie, the   Atlantic  coast   and   Provence,  the New World  and  the Old. Part  four of the book  begins  with   the  trappist epigram, "It  is important  to  know  where  you are put." Here  we have a poet  who, struggl­ ing  with  the  ambiguities, has  reached   a profound  sense of history,  a sense of our place  in  time  and  space -most  unusual in English Canadian letters.
This impression  is the result of the juxtapositions of a mind  immersed in the traditions  of  western   civilization. From the   bones  of  Egypt   in   the   first  poem, "Voice", we  later move  to  the  Alberta bush   in   "Anne",  where    "poplar  trees slant  toward  the  lazy window," and  still later  to the Albigensian fortress  of  Mont­ segur  in  the  poem   by  that   name.  The simultaneous perception of different loca­ tions   reaches   a   climax   in   the   poem, "Places",  where   the   landscape  of   the prairie  is super-imposed upon scenes from the Trojan war:

now is the long withdrawal of birds
where  winter  mounts   the  watch   upon  the
towers.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



no word  upon  prairies  for brides:
hanging  upon  a northern wind.

The  birds'  withdrawal echoes  the  earlier scene of the departure of the Greek  ships and   the   towers   suggest   the   towers   of Ilium. With  the repetitions of history  and the  seasons we remember Heraclitus' ob­ servation on  change and  rest.
Blodgett is a Mediaevalist by inclination and   training and   his  references   to  Pro­ venc;al literature in  "Song" and  "Mont­ segur", to Dante's Inferno in "Alba" and to Petrarch's sonnet  320 in  "Sento l'aura mia  antica," are  all  natural  to the  poet's sense  of  history,   the  way  he  perceives, thinks  and  writes.  The  verse shows  us a mind  with  a  breadth  of  knowledge un­ common   in  our  world  of  specialists.  In many  ways  the  poems  remind us of  the work of Ezra Pound who also begins with the   ancient   culture  of   Provence  and moves  freely  within the  other  literatures I have mentioned.
In  Take away  the  names  the  vastness of the  prairie  comes  to  represent the in­ comprehensible expanses  of time  and hu­ man   history :  Arabic    culture,   classical literature, Canadian   landscape. The prairie, like time, demands the intellectual perspective since  it  cannot be  physically tamed   but   rather,   like   time,   must   be transcended  by the creative act,  the  deli­ berate  placing   of  the  word.   The word may  be  ambiguous but  its  power  lies in its function: to name and give new reality to  the  thing.  In  the  poem,  "Names", the poet    addresses    the    first   name    giver, Adam:

o the wind, adam, the spring lies
speechless in your hand.

The  measureless silence  is ended  with creation; this  process  is  repeated in  re-
 creation, the  ntual of  the  poet.  In  "Or­ feo",   addressed   to  the  father  of   music and  the lyric, the  poet  recalls  this prime­ val  period,  empty  of word  or  note:

brave  boy,   your  hushed
horizons,   bright birds of no name, and dim water  where waves where sand and  the deep fall of fish contend.

But while Orfeo  comes to represent the creative   drive   of   man   in   art   Achilles comes  to  symbolize  the  destructive  one in  war.  Thus  we are  plunged again  into the  ambivalence of  man's   activities: the war dead  of the  Kriegsgraberstatte or the sanctified  lovers in "Trio".
The  Latin  quotations, the Greek  script, the  Provenc;al epigrams, the  French titles and  Italian verses all reach  back into  the ancient impulse  of the  word,  an  impulse as  old  as  that  of  music.  The rhythm of the poems captures this impulse  too. If we are  not always able  to follow  the imagin­ ative  leaps  of  the  poetry   we  can  enjoy the   verses  for   their   rhythmical  sound.  The   lyrical  movement  of  "A   mountain air"  is  just  that. I  find  though  that   in these  musical  qualities Blodgett  is at  his best  in  the  longer,  more  elaborate poems rather than  the shorter, more sparsely worded   ones.  Thus  "L'alouette  nous ment" and  "Epilogue" are  more  appeal­ ing   to  me   than   "Other   actaeon"  and "Windflower''.
The   success  of   such   hermetic   verse does not  rely on sound  alone  but  also on sense. To  achieve  comprehensibility Take away  the  names  depends on  the  knowl­ edge and intelligence of the reader. While the     reader   may   easily  respond   to  the rhythms  he must  share  with  the  poet  an eclecticism  not  always  found among the enthusiasts of  Canadian  letters.

JOSEPH  PIVATO


109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



TISH IN PRINT

IT rs  THE  DESTINY of  magazines whose  name outlives their   time  to  appear in  more  resplen­ dent guises  as  the  desires of collectors  overtake the   secondhand  supplies  of   back   issues,   and  now Tish, which  little more  than a  decade ago seemed   to  end   as  a  falling  rocket  of  student high  spirit, appears-published by Talonbooks of Vancouver-in  a handsome  volume and  in actual letterpress, so  that  it  is  hard, unless  one has  the  copies   on  file,  to  remember  just  how rough and  at the  same  time  exciting the  origi­ nal    mimeographed    sheets,  with    their   faint residual smell  of  Gestetner ink,  seemed   at  the time  when   they  appeared in  the  early   196o's. Since   then   Tish   has   been   incorporated  into  the  hasty  historiography of  Canadian  writing,











for Grover
 partly  because   several  of  its  contributors  re· mained practicing poets  and  became somewhat tendencious critics-Frank Davey  and  George Bowering  in   particular.  And   the   legend  has been  built  up,  notably fostered by Warren Tallman, of  the  powerful  way  in  which   Tish brought to  bear  on  Canadian  poetry the  influ­ ence  of  American  post-modernism. Not  every­  one  will agree  with  such  a historical  placing of this  very  lively  magazine; we do  not  ourselves. But    it   remains   one   of   the   vital   Canadian poetry   journals,  not  so  important   perhaps  as Contemporary Verse, but   having  its  place   in the    tradition   more    through  the   continuing productivity of so  many   of  the  poets it  intro­ duced  than  because   of  the  poetic  theories its editors somewhat heavily  enunciated.

o.w.














Tom Wayman



Someone let the wind into  the City in the night
like a big old Dog that  usually has to stay on the porch and  it bumped into  the house coming  in
so the building shook and  rattled the windows
and  it pawed  at the vents at the top of the airshaft so they banged,  and  pleased at being inside
it swung its tail back and  forth
and  cleaned  off the top of a coffee table
-in this case, the street: old tin cans
went  jouncing  and  rolling down the pavement
together with scraps of paper  and  a few of last fall's leaves.

The last I saw of it was in the morning standing on its hind  legs in a phone  booth
-though it didn't have a coin-
ruffling the pages of the open  telephone book looking  for somebody  to call.

110





THE TIN FLUTE: A NOTE

IN HIS INTRODUCTION  to the  New  Cana­ dian   Library  edition   of  The  Tin  Flute (the   English   version  of  Gabrielle  Roy's Bonheur  d'occasion)    Hugo   McPherson makes  the  statement,  "The focus  of  the story   is  the   Lacasse   family   (the   name means   'box'  or  'locker')." He  considers he
Illustrates  the   point   that   the   family   is
"trapped" by the  poverty  of its existence and its inability to escape beyond the boundaries of  the  harsh  St.  Henri  slum.
Naturally,  the   name's  suggestion   of en_t apment         attractive  to   a   literary cntic who  wishes  to  interpret  accurately the  spirit   of  the  book  but  one  wonders if McPherson possibly confused  "la  casse" with   "la caisse"  which   is  the  word   for "case" or "box." It is true  that  a French­ English  dictionary will tell you  that  "une  casse" is, among  other  things,  a composi­ tor's  box, but  it is unlikely  that Gabrielle
oy
Ized  meanmg  of  the   word   in  order   to
create a symbolic effect.  There is a much more  obvious significance  in Roy's  choice of  name  which  McPherson  ignores; one of  the  novel's  important episodes  makes that  significance  explicit.
In   the   second   chapter  of   The  Tin
	. 	'
 
her  name  on  a  piece  of  paper and  con­
templates   what   he  sees:

Jean  turned  to   his   work   once   more     but after  setting down   an   equation  or  to f?und his  pen  tracing the   name of  Floren­ tme.   Then,  hesitantly, he  added   the word  "Lacasse" and   almost   immediately   crossed it   out  .angrily.   Florentine  was   a   youthful name, Joyous,  spring-like, but  her  last  name had  a  common  turn, an  air  of  poverty that ruined  all  the   charm of  the  first.  She  her­  self  was  like  her  name no  doubt, half  com­ mon,    half    gracious   springtime    a    short springtime, quickly faded. 	'

f
tau_on  of   the   name,  ]ean    Levesque's actiOn here  would  be  puzzling  if  not  in­ comprehensible. What Hugo  McPherson seems to overlook is the "common" mean­  ing   of  the   word,   the   one   which   Jean  Levesque  without  a  doubt   had   in  mind and   which   prompted  him   to  obliterate Florentine's  unfortunate surname.
In    common    parlance   or   slang    "la casse", which  literally  means  "breakage" is used  to imply  wreckage of an  unplea sant   type.  It can,   for  instance  refer  to "viande  mediocre" ;  "etre  bon'  pour   la casse" means"tob e readyf or the dump". There are  other   distasteful  connotations when  the verb  "casser" is  used:  "ne  rien se  casser"  means   "not  to  amount  to  a row  of  beans"; "casser  du  sucre" means "to  fall  on one's  butt".  No  wonder  Jean Levesque  wanted   to  concentrate on  the name  "Florentine"  which   he  considered "joyous,   spring-like"   and    ignore    "La­ casse"  which  "ruined all  the  charm".
This  understanding of  the  significance of the surname "Lacasse" is essential   for Gabrielle   Roy's   use   of   the   word   'illu­ minates  the  novel  and  makes  the  reader  aware  of the  richness  of its  texture. The sociological  commentary,  for  example, is clear.  The  entire  St.  Henri area  is "bon  pour  la  casse".

A   few   minutes'   walk    brought   her    to
Workman Street,  so  appropriately  named.


I I I

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Work, man,  she  thought, wear  yourself  out, suffer, live in filth  and  ugliness.
Rose-Anna picked   her  way  past  the  gray­
brick  tenements, a solid  block of houses  with identical   windows  and    doors    at   regular
1ntervals.
A swarm  of ragged children were  playing on   the   sidewalks  in   the   midst  of   refuse. Thin, sad-looking women   appeared at  evil­ smelling doorways, blinking at  the  sunlight that  lay   among  the   garbage  cans.  Others with  listless  faces  sat  at the  windows, giving  suck  to  their  babies.  Everywhere there were shrill   voices,  the  wailing of  infants, or  cries of   pain    coming   from    behind   tight-closed shutters.

Monique  Genuist,  in   La   Creation   Ro­ manesque  Chez   Gabrielle   Roy    ( rg66) puts  it  this  way:

Dans Bonheur d'occasion, Montreal  nous montre  un  autre visage   [from  the   one  re­ vealed   in   a   later  Roy    novel,   Alexandre Chenevert], Ia ville  apparait  plus  en  detail, batie sur  un contraste. En  haut, les quartiers riches,    salubres  et   paisible   autour  de   Ia Montagne;  en   bas,  de   plus  en   plus  serres  pres  du  Saint-Laurent,  les quartiers pauvres, populeux  et   lepreux,  et   parmi  ceux-ci   en particulier, Ie  quartier  Saint-Henri ...

The  underlying social causes for the wreckage  which   characterizes  the   area and  its inhabitants are  clear  as well. Azarius,  whom  some  critics  dismiss  as  a kindly though garrulous, irresponsible dreamer, once  experienced  pride   in  his work  as  a  carpenter  ( "un   menuisier") ; Rose-Anna had  been  a  competent  seam­ stress   ( "un   modiste") . Changes  in  eco­ nomic  patterns and  a period  of  economic  depression have  broken  the  lives  of indi­  vidual   artisans.  People  like  Azarius   are forced   to  work  at   jobs  for  which   they have   no   skill  or   inclination  or,   as  an










112
 alternative, to  be  idle  and  go  on  relief. In  the  novel the  stench  of economic  and social  decay   is  as  strong   as  the  stench from the smoky, soot-covered St. Henri streets.   (It   is ironic   that   war,  the  most powerful   of  all  destructive  forces,  pro­ vides  for  many  St.  Henri  citizens  their only  hope  for  survival.)
The   Tin Flute,   however,  is  primarily a character novel  and  when  one  looks at the members of the Lacasse family, the author's choice of name  demonstrates her subtle   stylistic  deftness   as  strikingly   as her precision of description illustrates her skill  as  a  naturalistic  novelist.   As  indi­ viduals,  all  the  members of  the  Lacasse family  are  wrecks -all,  that   is,  except Rose-Anna who,  strictly  speaking,  is not a  Lacasse  at all.  Some  of them, the chil­ dren   especially,   are   pathetic   wrecks­ Daniel,   who  is  too  young  to  have  any sense of values and  who  does  not  under­ stand  the  depth  of  his  mother's unselfish love;  Yvonne,  who  compensates for  ma­ terial   deprivation   by  being   abnormally obsessed with  penance and  self-sacrifice. Florentine, Azarius,  even  Eugene,  arouse the reader's pity; some of their  character­ istics-- Florentine's determination, Aza­ rius's   gentleness -are   admirable.   But compared  with   Rose-Anna  (and   surely this is the  main  point  of the  novel)   they are   all   "trash".  Hugo   McPherson  sees Rose-Anna  as "a truly great  figure ... absolutely committed to a way of life in which  compassion  and  love are  the fund­ amental values."  In  this  statement  he  is absolutely   correct. The   Rose-Annas   of this  world  will never  be  "bonnes pour  Ia casse."
JANIE  WAGNER
