Sr.25  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·41




TENTH  JINNIVERSJIRY ISSUE


Writers on their Work

BY  MARGARET LAURENCE, P. K. PAGE,  MORDECAI  RICHLER, HUGH MACLENNAN, DOROTHY LIVESAY, NORMAN LEVINE, JAMES REANEY, A. W. PURDY

Critics on the Decade

BY A. J. M.  SMITH, GERARD  TOUGAS, WUIS DUDEK, W. H. NEW, DONALD  STEPHENS, PETER STEVENS, GEORGE  WOODCOCK

Documentaries

BY  MIRIAM WADDINGTON AND GEORGE  ROBERTSON


Poems

BY A. W. PURDY, MIRIAM WADDINGTON, DOROTHY LIVESAY


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW



GETTING  AWAY

WITH  SURVIVAL



George Woodcock







IT IS UNDOUBTEDLY  a  fiction  that   birthdays are  occasions when one sums up the past and tamps it down as a good foundation for the future. Most  adult  birthdays,  if they ever get beyond an attenuated ritual,  are  times of mild  regret or  mild  relief;  regret that  another  set of seasons has slipped so fruit­ lessly away, relief that  it has slipped away without  disaster. There  are especially traumatic birthdays -as  one hurries  past  thirty, as one  races past  forty-five, as one  pants  up  towards  the  great  climacteric,  but  there  are  few  birthdays  after one's teens that are the occasion for anything more joyful than the shared geniality that confirms a place in the world.
And  perhaps  this is the first reason for celebrating the birthday of that animate creature  of paper  and  print  called a magazine. It has not merely, like its writers and  readers, got away  with survival; it has also established a place in the world. And, if it has lasted as long as ten years, which is now the life span of Canadian Literature, and  has shown the least sensitivity to the time in which it exists, it will have become one of many  possible versions of that time, a symphonic version, as it were, with the writers as performers and the editor in the conductor's  podium, striving to mark out a shape in a music in which each violinist and bassoonist and tympanist is bent on giving a solo performance.
In  this sense Canadian  Literature can  be regarded  as having  been, up to this
point  near  the end  of 1g6g, a kind of interpretation of the Canadian Sixties. It has been concerned mainly with a single activity during that  period -writing and the criticism of it-but  writing  brings much  else in its train,  and it is probable that  a concern for the literature of an age will teach more about it than any other specialized  viewpoint,  for  the  historical,  the  psychological, the sociological, the political, the artistic  manifestations, as well as the changing  physical background,

5

GETTING AWAY WITH  SURVIVAL



all find their way into the eye of the writer and hence into the mind of the critic.
With  this thought  in mind,  I decided to mark  the fin;t ten years of Canadian Literature with a symposium whose fin;t aim would be to celebrate, not the maga­ zine itself, but  its time in literature.  This is the aim  of the  two main  groups  of articles. In  the fin;t, eight Canadian writen; -four novelists and four poets (one of whom writes as a dramatist)  -talk of their own writing over the past decade, or in some cases over a lifetime. In  the second, five Canadian  critics give their views of ten yean;' achievements in the main categories of  Canadian writing, both English  and  French-the  novel, the  short  story,  poetry,  criticism. Two  other items evoke an earlier decade in celebrating the Canadian literary  journals which expired in the early Fifties and whose place was in a measure taken at the end of the decade by Tamarack Review and Canadian Literature. One, a documentary, commemorates Contemporary Verse in the voices of its editor, Alan Crawley, and of some  of  the  poets  who  worked  with  him.  The  other,  an  essay by  Miriam Waddington, brings  to  light  for  the  first time  the  unpublished  poems of John Sutherland, editor of the Northern Review. Many  of us, editors and  writers, still feel strongly  our  debts  to  both  Crawley  and  Sutherland, who  carried  on  their magazines  under  considerable  difficulties  at  a time  when  there  was no  Canada  Council to assist them, and this seems an appropriate occasion to acknowledge in some way their achievements.
As for Canadian Literature itself, A. J.  M. Smith in another  essay speaks of its
record  with  a generosity and  a perceptiveness that  leave me little to say; in the court of opinion, as in the court of law, it is best to let a good advocate speak for one and  to keep one's own peace. What  does remain  is to strike a historical note, talk briefly of the origins of Canadian Literature, and  acknowledge the contribu­ tions which many people have made to its development.
Canadian Literature had a double origin, as a notion that began to form in my
own mind  round  about I 954, and as a scheme for a journal of Canadian  studies which  had  been  developed  independently  by  a  group  of  faculty  members  and librarians at the Univen;ity of British Columbia.
In  London during  the 194o's I had edited a literary  review called Now, which
one  of the  reprint  houses has  just re-issued, and  had  played  a minor  part  in  a number  of other periodicals at the time. Now came to an end in 1947, I returned to  Canada   in  1949,  and  very soon afterwards  I  began  to  feel that,  if a good enough  reason presented itself, I would like to edit another  magazine.  I enjoyed, as  a  change  from  writing,  the  kind of intellectual  carpentry that  goes into  the making of a good journal. Soon I realized that in Canada there was no magazine

6

GETTING AWAY WITH  SURVIVAL



devoted  entirely  to criticism. By 1954  I had  developed  my ideas  on  the  question far  enough   to write   an  article,  which  the  Dalhousie Review  published   in the autumn of  1955,  in  which  I surveyed  the state  of critical writing  in Canada at that  time, and  ended  with  these words:

... and  it seems to me that  a Canadian journal devoted specifically to the critical consideration  of native  and  world literature  is a goal to be aimed at, a minimum beginning.  For  now,  more  than  ever  before, we should  foster  that  critical  spirit which  can  bring  Canadian writing out  of the hesitations  of adolescence and  into the self-consciousness of maturity.

That, so  far  as  I was  concerned, was  the  beginning of Canadian Literature, though the  magazine that  eventually appeared was to be somewhat different from my  first  conception. In   1956  I joined  the  faculty  of  the  University of  British Columbia, with  an  understanding that  there  might  be a possibility of my eventu­ ally  editing  a  magazine sponsored  by  the  University. In  1957  I went  to  France on  a  Canadian  Overseas Fellowship (one  of  those  grants from  blocked   francs which  preceded the  Canada Council  awards) and  when  I returned in 1958  I was approached by  Inglis  Bell, of the  U.B.C.  Library,  on  behalf  of an  ad hoc group which  had  been  considering the  publication of a  journal of  Canadian studies at the   University,  but   had   narrowed  the  idea   down   to  a   journal   dealing  with  Canadian literature; other  members  of the group,  I remember, were Neal Harlow, then  University Librarian, Geoff Andrew, then assistant  to the President, and Roy Daniells  and  Stan  Read  of the  English  Department. There was enough  common ground  between   my  original   idea  and  theirs  for  me  to consider   the  proposal seriously.  I had -as  my  Dalhousie  Review article  indicated -envisaged  some­ thing  broader in  scope  than  a  journal  of Canadian literature, but  I realized  that for  me  the  important question  was not  the  actual  area  of writing  that  would  be under  study,  but  the  development of a critical  attitude among Canadian writers, and  the fostering of a  tradition of criticism  as one of the  attributes of a maturing literature.
So  I accepted the  task  of editing  the  new  magazine, and  by the  beginning  of
1959  the  University had  agreed  to sponsor it. My condition for accepting editor­ ship  was that  I should  have  a completely  free hand  in selecting  material, and  this was  granted without question, so that  the  committee which  existed  in the  early days  of Canadian  Literature advised  and  assisted rather than  directed, and  dis­  creetly  faded   from  existence  once  the  first  practical difficulties  of  founding the  journal  were over.  The narrowing of the field of reference to Canadian writing I

7

GE'ITING AWAY WITH  SURVIVAL



never found a real limitation; it was a subject that  turned  out to have endless ramifications,  surprises  and  possibilities, doubtless  because  Canadian  Literature started  out at a time when writing in Canada was going through  a series of very interesting changes in outlook and technique. The main thing was to avoid getting caught  in the trap  of a narrow  nationalism. The  study  of Canadian literature  is merely the study  of writers who happen  to live and  work in  Canada; it has no greater  political implications than  they choose to put into their works.
I will not pretend  to be exhaustive in mentioning  those who have helped in the many  tasks of running  Canadian  Literature  during  its first decade,  but  I thank everyone collectively before I acknowledge the  particular debts that  the  journal owes to those whose contributions  were vital to its very existence. Inglis Bell took on  at  the  start,  and  continued  for several years with  great  resourcefulness, the direction  of the  journal's  business affairs. It was he who suggested that  Robert Reid  be asked to  give his  advice on  typography,  and  it  was Robert  Reid  who created  the classic design we still use, a design so simple and  harmonious  that its appeal  has been remarkably durable.  Reid also suggested that  Charles Morriss of Victoria was the only possible printer to do justice to his design, and so started  an association which has given us ten years of splendid  craftsmanship in the produc­ tion of Canadian  Literature.  Reid furthermore introduced  George  Kuthan, who provided  the linocut  decorations for the first seven years of  Canadian  Literature until his death  inI g66; we reproduce in this issue a selection of the best of these designs.
On the editorial side, Donald Stephens joined Canadian Literature in 1960 and William  H.  New in  1965. I am indebted  to them  for good ideas, good writing, good and creative discussion, assistance in the humbler  tasks of putting a magazine together   as  a  physical  whole,  and   particularly   for  conducting   the  affairs   of Canadian  Literature with skill and tact on the occasions when my writing commit­ ments have taken me for months on end to Asia and elsewhere.
Anyone who searches the mastheads of past issues of Canadian  Literature  will encounter  the names of many other people who have helped for shorter or longer periods in  the circulation,  advertising  and  financial  sides of the  journal.  Among these I would  particularly  mention  the contribution of Basil Stuart-Stubbs, who acted  as first circulation  manager,  using a dark  comer  of the University Library as office and depot, and of Joan Symons who later took up the task and sustained it for  most of magazine's  life, resigning a  year  ago, and  the  equally important contributions  as advertisement  managers of Rita  Butterfield and Dorothy Shields.
Like the conductor  who, without  his orchestra,  can only wield his baton in si-

8

GETTING AWAY WITH  SURVIVAL



lence or at best attempt  a disconsolate solo, an editor is nothing without his writers. When Canadian  Literature  first appeared  there were many who found incredible the suggestion  that  a magazine  devoted to writing in Canada could  possibly last more than a year. There  would not be enough subjects, they claimed. And, if there were,  how  could  one  find  the  writers? The  subjects  have  never  been  lacking, because the literature  of our  country is constantly growing and thrusting  up new manifestations. By the same token, the writers have been found, and by now they run into the hundreds,  with new names appearing in every issue. They  appear be­ cause Canadian Literature itself was launched  at a time when the cultivation of a critical  view of Canadian writing  had  become necessary; it is a natural stage in the maturing  of any literature, and  in this sense the magazine  appeared  when it was needed.  In  its way, I think, it caught  the spirit that  was afoot in Canadian writing during  theI g6o's, and that has accounted for its modicum of success.
"This  money  certainly  is a devilish thing!" said Aphra  Behn. "I'm sure  the want of it had  like to have ruined my dear Philibella ... " The want  of it would ruin  also most literary  magazines, since I have yet to meet one that  did not rely on  a subsidy  to  meet  its deficit. For  having saved it from  the near  fate  of dear Philibella, Canadian  Literature is indebted to the University of British Columbia, to the  Leo and  Thea  Koerner  Foundation, and  to  the  Canada Council,  all  of which have contributed  to its sustenance and, in the case of the Canada Council, to an expansion to the present size.
So much for history -and now for the Seventies . . . !








9


TEN YEARS' SENTENCES




A1argaret urence








ALMOST EXACTLY TEN  YEARS  ago I was sitting in the study of our  house in Vancouver,  filled with the black celtic gloom which some­ times strikes. I had  just received a letter from an American  publisher which said, among  other  things, that  their chief reader  reported  himself to be "only  reason­ ably nauseated" by the lengthy interior  monologues of the main character  of my first novel, This Side  jordan. If I could see my way clear to  reconsidering  parts of the novel, they would be willing to look at it again.  More revision, I thought,  was out of the question. I had already rewritten  half the book from scratch  when I decided, after leaving Africa and getting a fresh perspective on colonial society, that  I'd  been unfair  to the European  characters. More  work  I couldn't  face. A quick cup of hemlock would be easier. However, as we were a little short on hem­ lock just then, I got out the manuscript  instead. I hadn't looked at it for months, and  I  saw  to my consternation  that  the gent  with  the  upset stomach  was un­ deniably  right  in some ways. I  managed  to cut some of  the more emotive prose (although not enough)  and lived to bless him for his brutal  criticism.
Ten  years ago I was thirty-two years old and incredibly naive about writing and publishing.  I had  never talked with  any publisher  face-to-face.  I  knew only one other  writer  as a  close friend -Adele Wiseman,  whose letters  throughout   the years had  heartened  me. I  had  had  one short story  published  in Queen's Quar­ terly a few years earlier, and  had  been encouraged  by Malcolm  Ross, the then­ editor.  I had  also recently had a story published in Prism, and  Ethel Wilson had graciously  written  to say she liked it -that  meant  more to me  than  I can ever express and  began a friendship which has been one of the most valued in my life.
Can  it  only  have  been ten  years ago? What  has changed? Everything.  The world and  myself. In some ways it's been the most difficult and  most interesting decade  of my life, for almost everything I've  written  which has been publishable


10

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES



has been written  in  these years. I've  mysteriously managed  to survive the writing of six more  books, after  that  first novel. It's  been said that  for some writers the only thing  worse than  writing is not writing, and for me this is nearly true, for I don't  write  any  more easily now than  I  did ten years ago. In  fact,  I write less easily, perhaps  because as well as the attempt  to connect  directly with the char­ acter's  wavelength,  there is now also a kind of subconscious monitor  which seeks to cut  out  the  garbage   (the  totally irrelevant,  and  the  "fine" oratorical  writing which I have come to dislike more and more)  before it is written rather  than after, and  the two selves sometimes work in uneasy harness. Simultaneously,  of course, it's had  its exhilaration, the feeling that  comes when the writing is moving well, setting its own  pace, finding its own form. I've learned  a few things I needed to know -for  example,  that  the best and  worst  time is when  the writing  is going on, not when the book is published, for by that point one is disconnected from that particular  thing. I've learned  that  my anxieties and difficulties with writing aren't peculiar  to  myself-most  writers  have  the  same  kind  of  demons  and  go on having  them,  as I do.  (This  seems so obvious as to be hardly  worth stating,  but I didn't  really know it ten years ago.)  I've lived for the past six years in England,  and  although  I've  picked  up  a lot of  peripherally  useful information about  the publishing aspect of books and a sense of the writing going on in many countries, I don't  really believe my being here has influenced my writing one way or another,  certainly not to anything like the same extent as Africa once did.
This  Side  jordan and  the  two other  books I wrote which were set in Africa,
The  Prophet's Camel Bell and  The  Tomorrow-Tamer,  were written  out  of the milieu of a rapidly ending colonialism and the emerging independence of African countries. They  are not entirely hopeful books, nor do they, I think, ignore some of the inevitable casualties of social change, both African and European, but they do  reflect  the  predominantly optimistic  outlook  of  many  Africans  and  many western liberals in the late 1950's and early 196o's. They were written by an out­ sider who experienced  a seven years' love affair  with a continent  but who in the end  had  to  remain  in  precisely that  relationship, for it could  never  become the close involvement  of fainily. The affair  could be terminated-it was not basically for  me a lifetime  commitment, as it  has been for some Europeans. On  Africa's side, in its people's feelings towards  me, it was, not unnaturally, little more than polite tolerance,  for white liberals were not much more loved  then  than  they are now, and with some considerable  justification, as I discovered partly from listening to myself talking  and  partly  in writing  This Side ]ordan. Another  thing all my African writing had in common was that the three books were written by a person


II

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES



who had lived in Africa in her late twenties and early thirties, and it all therefore bears the unmistakable  mark of someone who is young and full of faith.  In This Side  ]or dan  (which  I now find out-dated  and superficial and yet somehow retro­ spectively touching)   victory for the side of the angels is all but assured. Nathaniel  holds up his newborn  son, at the end, and says "Cross Jordan, Joshua." Jordan the  mythical  could  be crossed; the  dream-goal  of  the  promised  land  could  be achieved, if not in Nathaniel's  lifetime, then in his son's. This  was the prevailing spirit, not only of myself but of Africa at that  time. Things  have shifted consider­ ably since then.






AFTER r CAME  TO  ENGLAND, in  rg62, I picked up some of the threads  of a relationship  with Africa, although  this time only as an observer and  amateur friend,  for I  had  had  to abandon every ism except  individualism and even that seemed a little creaky until the last syllable finally vanished of itself, leaving me ismless, which was just as well. I became extremely interested in con­ temporary  African  writing in English. It had seemed  to me, a few years  before, that  if anything  was now going to be written  about  Africa, it would  have to be done  from  the inside by Africans themselves, and  this was one reason  I stopped writing  anything  with  that  setting.  In  fact,  although   I  did  not  realize it  then, already  many  young African writers were exploring  their own backgrounds,  their own societies and  people. In  a period of hiatus  after  finishing  A  ]est Of God,  I read  a great  deal  of contemporary  Nigerian  writing and  even rashly went so far as  to  write  a  book of commentary  on  it. This  book, called  Long  Drums  And Cannons  (the title is taken from a poem by Christopher Okigbo) I now feel refers to a period of history which is over-the fifteen years in which Nigerian writers created  a kind of renaissance, drawing  upon  their cultural  past and  relating it to the present, seeking links with the ancestors and  the old gods in order  to discover who  they  themselves were. This  exploration  and  discovery ended  abruptly  with the  first massacre  of the  lbo  in  the  north, some  two  years ago.  When  Nigeria finally emerges from its present agony, it will be in some very different  and as yet unpredictable form,  and  its writers may  well find  themselves having  to enquire into  themes  they have so far  hardly  touched,  such  as the  appalling  grip  on the human  heart  of tribalism in its hate aspect.
In London, in rg65, I got to know a few Nigerian writers when they visited this


12

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES



country.  I  remember  especially the  times I  met  Christopher   Okigbo,  and  how surprised  I was at his external  ebullience, his jazziness, so much in contrast to his deeply  introverted   poetry.  And  I  remember,  after  having  read  Wole Soyinka's plays and seeing The  Road  performed  here, having lunch with Wole and hearing him  talk  about  the  travelling  theatre  company  he hoped  to get going  (he  had already set up two theatres in Nigeria, the first contemporary  theatres there). How much  everything  can change  in a couple of years! Chris Okigbo is dead, fighting for Biafra. Wole Soyinka, undoubtedly  the best writer that  English-writing Africa has  yet produced,  and  one  of the  best anywhere, has  been in  a  Federal  jail in Kaduna for more than  a year. Chinua  Achebe, that  excellent and  wise novelist, isn't writing for himself these days-he's doing journalism for Biafra, and all one can hope at the moment is that he manages to survive.
I guess I will always care  about  Africa. But the feeling I had, in everything I
wrote  about  it, isn't  the feeling I have now. It  would be easy to convey the im­ pression that  I've  become disillusioned with the entire  continent, but  this would be a distortion.  What  has happened,  with Africa's upheavals, has been happening  all over the world. Just  as I feel that  Canadians  can't  say them  when we talk of America's  disastrous  and  terrifying  war in Vietnam, so I feel we can't say them  of Africans. What  one has come to see, in the last decade,  is that tribalism is an inheritance of us all. Tribalism  is not such a bad thing, if seen as the bond which an  individual  feels with  his roots, his ancestors, his background. It may or may not  be stultifying  in  a  personal  sense, but  that  is a  problem  each  of us has to solve or not solve. Where tribalism becomes, to my mind, frighteningly dangerous is where the tribe-whatever it is, the Hausa, the Ibo,  the Scots Presbyterians, the  Daughters   of  the  American   Revolution,  the  in-group -is  seen  as  "the people,"  the human  beings, and  the others, the un-tribe,  are seen as sub-human.  This is not Africa's problem alone; it is everyone's.
When  I stopped  writing  about  Africa and turned  to the area of writing where I most wanted  to be, my own people and  background,  I felt very hesitant. The character  of Hagar  had  been in my mind for quite a while before I summoned enough  nerve to begin the  novel. Strangely enough, however, once I began The Stone  Angel, it wrote itself more easily than anything  I have ever done. I experi­ enced the enormous  pleasure of coming home in terms of idiom. With the African characters, I  had  to rely upon  a not-too-bad  ear for human  speech, but in con­ ceptual   terms,  where  thoughts   were  concerned,  I  had  no  means  of   knowing whether  I'd  come within a mile of them or not. With Hagar, I had an upsurge of certainty.  I wouldn't go to great  lengths to defend the form of the novel, at this

13

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES



distance, for I know its flaws. The flashback method is, I think, a little overworked in it, and  I am not at all sure that  flashbacks ought  to be in chronological order, as I placed  them  in order to make it easier for the reader  to follow Hagar's life. But  where  Hagar  herself is concerned,  I still believe she speaks and  feels as she would have done. She speaks in the voice of someone of my grandparents' genera­ tion, but it is a voice I know and  have always known. I feel ambiguous towards her,  because  I  resent her authoritarian outlook,  and  yet I love her, too, for her battling.
I  didn't know  I  was changing  so much  when  I  wrote  The   Stone  Angel.  I haven't  ever decided beforehand on a theme for a novel (I know that  where This Side  jordan  is concerned,  this statement  sounds  untrue,  but  it isn't). The indi­ vidual  characters  come first, and  I have often  been halfway  through something before I  realized  what  the theme was. The  Stone  Angel fooled me even when  I had  finished  writing  it, for  I imagined  the  theme  was probably  the same  as in much  of my African  writing -the  nature  of freedom. This is partly  true, but  I see now that  the emphasis by that  time had  altered.  The world  had  changed; I had grown older. Perhaps I no longer believed so much in the promised land, even the  promised  land  of one's own inner  freedom.  Perhaps  an obsession with free­ dom  is the  persistent  (thank  God)  dance  of the young. With  The  Stone  Angel, without my recognizing it at the time, the theme had changed  to that of survival, the  attempt   of  the  personality to survive  with  some  dignity,  toting  the  load  of excess mental  baggage that everyone carries, until the moment  of death.
I think  (although I could be wrong)  that  this is more or less the theme of my last two novels as well. A  fest of God, as some critics have pointed out disapprov­ ingly, is a very intumed novel. I recognize the limitations of a novel told in the first person and  the present tense, from one viewpoint only, but it couldn't  have been done any other way, for Rachel herself is a very intumed person. She tries to break the handcuffs  of her own past, but she is self-perceptive enough  to recognize that for her no freedom  from the shackledom of the ancestors can be total. Her emer­ gence from the tomb-like atmosphere of her extended  childhood is a partial defeat
-or, looked at in another  way, a partial victory. She is no longer so much afraid of herself as she was. She is beginning to learn the rules of survival.
In  The   Fire-Dwellers, Stacey  is Rachel's  sister  (don't ask me  why;  I  don't
know;  she  just is).  Her  boundaries  are  wider  than  Rachel's,  for she is married and  has four  kids, so in everything she does she has to think of five other  people. Who  on  earth,  I  asked myself when  I  began  writing  this  novel, is going to be interested  in  reading  about  a  middle-aged  housewife,  mother  of four?  Then  I

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES



thought,  the hell with it-some of my best friends are middle-aged  housewives; I'm  one myself, but  I deplore  labels so let's  just call one another  by our proper names. I  was fed up with the current  fictional portraits of women of my genera­ tion -middle-aged  mums  either  being presented as glossy magazine  types,  per­ fect,  everloving  and  incontestably  contented,  or  else as sinister  and  spiritually cannibalistic  monsters determined  only to destroy their men and kids by hypnotic means. I guess there are some women like the latter, but I don't happen  to know any of them.  There  are  no women like the former;  they don't exist. Stacey had been in my mind for a long time -longer than Rachel, as a matter of fact. She's not  particularly  valiant   (maybe  she's  an  anti-heroine), but  she's got some guts and some humour. In various ways she's Hagar's spiritual grand-daughter. When I finally got going  at  the  novel, I experienced  the same feeling I had  had  with The  Stone  Angel,  only  perhaps  more so, because this  time it  was a question  of writing really in my own idiom, the ways of speech and memory of my generation,  those who were born in the 2o's, were children in the dusty so's, grew up during  the last war. Stacey isn't  in any sense myself or any other  person except herself, but we know one another  awfully well. She is concerned with survival, like Hagar  and  like Rachel,  but in her case it involves living in an external  world which she perceives  as  increasingly  violent  and  indeed  lunatic,  and  trying  simultaneously within  herself  to  accept  middle  age  with  its tricky ramifications,  including  the suspicion, not  uncommon  among  her  age-peers, that  one  was nicer, less corrupt  and  possibly even less stupid  twenty years ago, this being, of course, not only a comprehension   of  reality  but  also a  mirage  induced  by  the  point-of-no-return situation.
With  this last  novel  (which  interests  me more than  the  others,  because  I've just finished it and  am  not  yet disconnected)   the  writing  is more  pared-down than  anything  I've  written  yet, but the form itself is (or so I believe)  wider, in­ cluding  as it does a certain  amount  of third-person  narration as well as Stacey's idiomatic  inner  running  commentary  and  her somewhat  less idiomatic fantasies, dreams, memories.
A strange  aspect of my so-called Canadian writing is that  I haven't  been much aware  of its being  Canadian, and  this seems a good thing  to me, for it suggests that  one has been writing out of a background so closely known that  no explana­ tory tags are  necessary. I  was always conscious that  the novel and  stories set in Ghana  were about  Africa. My last three novels just seem like novels.




I5

TEN YEARS' SENTENCES




OvER TEN  YEARS, trying to sum up the changes, I suppose I have become more involved with novels of character and with trying to feel how it would be to be that  particular  person. My viewpoint has altered from modified optimism  to modified  pessimism. I have  become  more  concerned  with  form  in writing than  I used to be. I have moved closer (admittedly, in typically cautious stages)  to an expression of my own idiom and way of thought. These are not qualitative  statements,  of course. I  don't  know whether  my writing  has become better or worse. I only know the ways in which it has changed. Sometimes it seems a peculiar way to be spending one's life-a life sentence of sentences, as it were. Or  maybe not a life sentence, because one day I won't  have any more to say and I hope I'll  know when that  time comes and  have the will power to break a long­ standing  addiction.  (How is that for mixed metaphors?)
I've  listened to the speech of three generations-my grandparents, my parents and  my own, and maybe I've even heard what some of it means. I can listen with great  interest  to the speech of a generation  younger  than  mine, but I can't  hear it accurately  enough to set it down and I have no desire to try. That is specifically their  business, not mine, and  while envying them  meanly, I also wish them gad­ speed.
At  the moment,  I have the same feeling as I did when  I knew I had finished writing about Africa. I've gone as far as I personally can go, in the area in which I've  lived for  the  past three  novels. A change  of direction  would  appear  to be indicated.  I have a halfway hunch  where I want  to go, but I don't  know how to get there or what will be there if I do. Maybe I'll strike it lucky and find the right
compass, or maybe I won't.







·



r6



QUESTIONS AND JMAGES




P.K.Page




1:LAST TEN  YEARS span three distinct places -and phases
-in my life:  Brazil,  Mexico,  Canada, in  that  order.  All countries  of the  new
world.
Brazil  pelted  me  with  images.  Marmosets  in  the  flowering  jungle;  bands  of multi-colored  birds  moving  among  the  branches  of  the  kapok  tree  outside  the bedroom  verandah; orchids  in the kapok tree, cucumbers  in the kapok tree, the whole tree bursting into cotton candy. Flamboyantes in flaming flower against the sky as one lay on one's back in the swimming pool. Doric palms waving green plumage,  growing antlers  and  beads. Cerise dragon  flies. Butterflies as large as a flying hand  and blue, bright blue.
Drums  from  the  favelas  beat  like one's own blood, accompanied  by the deep
bass viol of frogs in the lotus pond; volleys of rockets shattered  the black night air, air  wet  as  a  sheet  and  rank  with  the  smell of decaying  jackos. Insistent,  less obtrusive, the tiny fret of tropical vegetation, the sibilance of bamboos.
Churches, golden as the eye of God, were so miraculously proportioned that one wondered  if proportion  alone might actually alter consciousness. Enormous quan­ tities of gold leaf. Entire interiors of it, changing space, vibrating strangely; at one moment  flashing to blind  you, at another  reverberating  on and  on like a golden gong. Moorish designs in tiles and lattices created infinities of  intricate  repetition.
My first foreign  language-to  live in, that is-and  the  personality  changes
that accompany it. One is a toy at first, a doll. Then a child. Gradually,  as vocabu­ lary  increases,  an  adult   again.  But  a  different  adult.  Who  am  I,  then,  that language can so change me? What is personality, identity? And the deeper change, the  profounder understanding-partial, at  least-of  what  man  is, devoid  of words. Where  could  wordlessness lead? Shocks, insights, astounding  and sudden walls. Equally  astounding and  sudden dematerializations; points of view shifting

17

QUESTIONS AND IMAGES



and  vanishing.  Attitudes  recognized  for  what   they  are:   attitudes.  The  Word behind the word ... but when there is no word ... ?
("Why  did  you stop  writing?"  "I didn't. It  stopped." "Nonsense,  you're  the master."  "Am  I?")   Who would not, after all, be a poet, a good poet, if one could choose? If one could choose. Most of one's life one has the illusion of choice. And when that is removed, when clearly one cannot  choose.... Blank page after blank page. The  thing I had feared most of all had happened at last. This time I never would  write  again.  But  by some combination  of factors-co-incidence, seren­ dipity-the  pen  that  had written  was now, most surprisingly,  drawing.  ("Why did you start  drawing?" "I didn't. It started." "But  why start something you know nothing  about  and  chuck up all the techniques  and  skills.... ?")  Why, indeed, why?
What  was that  tiny fret, that wordless dizzying vibration,  the whole molecular dance?  Is that what Tobey's white writing wrote? What was that golden shimmer, the  bright  pink shine on the anturias,  the delicately and  exactly drawn  design of the macaw's  feathers?  Why did I suddenly see with the eye of an ant?  Or  a fly? The  golden -yes, there it was again-web spun by the spider among the leaves of the century  plant? Surely the very purpose of a web demands  invisibility? Yet this was a lure, a glistening small sun,  jewelled already  with opalescent  victims. Victims of what?
The  impotence  of a marmoset in a rage, pitting itself against me, its fingers like the stems of violets, unable to break the skin of my hand.  How quickly one learns about  scale with  a  marmoset for companion.  Man  in  a  rage  with  his gods, or, equally  superficially,  pleased  with  them.  The  glorious  macaw,  the  flesh of  his Groucho   Marx   face  wrinkled  and  soft,  his  crazy  hilarious  laughter   and  low seductive chuckles making him kin until one looked into his infinitely dilatable eye and  was drawn  through  its vortex into a minute  cosmos which contained  all the staggering dimensions of outer space.
I  wonder  now if 'brazil'  would have happened wherever  I  was? As to where it pointed  I hadn't the least idea, nor, I think, did I ask any questions beyond the immediate  ones. But I drew as if my life depended  on it -each tile of each house, each  leaf  of each  tree, each  blade  of grass, each  mote  of sunlight -all  things bright  and  beautiful.  If I drew  them all. ... ? And  I did. Compelled,  propelled by the point of my pen. And in drawing  them  all I seemed to make them mine, or  make  peace with  them, or they with  me. And  then, having  drawn  everything
-each drop of water and grain of sand-the  pen began dreaming.  It began a life of its own.

18

QUESTIONS AND  IMAGES



Looking back with my purely psychological eye through  the long clear topaz of that  day, I appear  as a mute observer, an inarticulate listener, occupying another part  of myself.
If Brazil was day, then  Mexico was night. All the images of darkness hovered
for me in the Mexican sunlight. If Brazil was a change of place, then Mexico was a change of time. One was very close to the old gods here. Death and the old gods. Their  great  temples  rose all  around  one. Temples  to the  Sun.  Temples  to the Moon.
Objects  dissolved into  their symbols. All the pyramids and stairs, plumed ser­
pents in stone, masks of jade, obsidian knives, skulls of crystal-or sugar.
In  the  rain  forest stood  the  bone-white ruins of buildings -tangible remains of a  whole  mythology.  Buildings so intricate- (tarsal,  metatarsal) -one was tempted  to believe they were skeletons from which the flesh had long since rotted. Motionless. Beautiful.  Great  ivory kings and  queens beneath  their  lacey cranial combs. Palaces and gardens of the Sleeping Beauty.
The  villages seemed  unchanged  since the beginning of time. The  same adobe
huts, the same fields of maize, the same ancient languages of clicking consonants, and surely, the same gods. Gods hungry for human  blood. (Too much Lowry and Lawrence?)  The  plazas of Catholic churches were stages for the old rituals of costumed dances, stamped out to the music of conch shell and drum.
In  Oaxaca  the women  of Yalalag wear triple crosses which led Cortes' priests to the mistaken  belief that  Christian  missionaries had  preceded  them. Oaxacans perhaps understand the symbolism of the cross: time passing, time eternal -"the intersection of this world with eternity."  In Chichen  ltza  the Caracol or Snail­ an  observatory  dome  from  which  the  Mayans  probed  the  heavens - has four small openings exactly  pointing  to the cardinal  directions. Temples of the Cross. Temples of the Foliated Cross.
Coming  as I do from a random  or whim-oriented culture, this recurrence  and interrelating  of symbols into an ordered and significant pattern -prevalent too in the folk arts  of pottery  and  weaving-was curiously illuminating. One  did  not feel restricted  by the enclosed form of the 'design';  rather,  one was liberated  into something  life-giving and larger. I could now begin to understand  how the "little world is created  according to the prototype of the great world."
Great  or little, for me it was still a night world-one into which the pattern was pricked like a constellation -bright, twinkling, hard  to grasp, harder  still to hold.  A dreaming world  in  which  I continued  to draw  and  to dream.  How  to

rg

QUESTIONS AND IMAGES



make a noumenal  doll; how to fly; the man with one black and one white hand
- (Hari-Hara?); Osiris- (The  Seat of the  Eye); the room  with  the invisible walls; the circular dance beside the sea-(Initiation? Into  what? A non-religious Christian?  A religious non-Christian?) Poetry was more than ever now in the perceiving. My only access to it was through the dream  and the drawing.
I had  my first two shows during  this period. The  age of my graphic innocence was past. I had acquired another mask, another  label. Each additional  one seemed to  move  me  further   from  my  own  centre.  I  was  now  suddenly  and  sharply reminded  of  the  young  Rilke,  bored  on  a  rainy  afternoon, coming  upon  the clothing  and  paraphernalia of disguise in  the  wardrobes  of a spare  room;  and how, masked, turbanned   and  cloaked, he had  struck  a pose before a mirror.  "I stared," he wrote, "at  this great,  terrifying unknown  personage before me and it seemed appalling to me that I should be alone with him."
Which is the mask and which the self? How distinguish, let alone separate,  two
such seemingly interpenetrating matters? As if pursued  by the Hound  of Heaven I raced back and forth among the Collected Works of Jung, The  Perennial Philos­ ophy, The  Doors of Perception, Zen, C. S. Lewis, St. John  of the Cross.
"See  how  he who  thinks himself one is not one,  but seems to have  as many
personalities as he has moods."
"Understand that  thou  thyself art  even another  little  world,  and  hast within thee the sun and the moon, and also the stars ... "
I began to suspect, in what would once have been near-heresy, that drawing and
writing were not only ends in themselves, as I had previously thought,  but possibly the  means  to  an  end  which  I  could  barely  imagine -a  method,  perhaps,  of tracing  the  'small design'. And  the very emergence  of these ideas began to clear a way, remove the furniture and provide a new space.
But when something one has thought  opaque  appears  translucent,  transparent
even, one questions whether it might not ultimately become entirely invisible. Solid walls dissolved disconcertingly into scrims. For the moment  I was uncertain  where to lean.
The  dark  Mexican  night  had  led me  back  into  myself and  I  was startlingly aware of the six directions of space.
A day and  a night had  passed. My return  to Canada, if the pattern  continued, should be the start of a new day.
The  culture  shock of homecoming  after  many  years abroad  is even greater,  I think,  than  the  culture shock of entering  a  new country.  One  returns  different, to  a  different  place,  misled  by  the  belief that  neither  has  changed.  Yet  I  am

20

QUESTIONS AND IMAGES



grateful for the shocks. The conditioning  process which turns live tissue into fossil is arrested by the earthquake. Even buried strata may be exposed.
I  had  a small  retrospective  show shortly after  coming  home, followed by the
publication  of a  book of 'retrospective'  poetry. The  shutting  of twin doors. Not necessarily on drawings and poeins but on those drawings and those poems.
The  questions  had  now  become  more  pressing than  the images. Some of the questions were retrospective:  had the move from writing to drawing been a return to the primitive in myself-to the 'first man' of Vander Post? Was it a psycho­ logical starting  again from the pre-verbal state? If in the life of the individual  and the life of the race, drawing  precedes written literature,  was this step back really a  beginning?  Certainly   the  varied  scenes through  which  I  had  journeyed  had provided no lack of subject matter.
More urgent  however, were the questions raised by Alan McGlashan: "Who  or what is the Dreamer  within us? To whom is the Dreamer talking?" What, indeed, is this duologue, so like an effortless poem? Can  projected images be manifested as dreams? Are all drea1ns projected? Or some? Is the Dreamer  active or passive? Initiator  or  recipient?  Sometimes one, sometimes the other?  And what  about  the waking Dreamer?  Are thoughts the invisible dreams of a daylight world? Projected by what, or whom? Jung's collective unconscious? Rumi's angels?
I  don't  know  the  answers  to  these questions  but  merely  posing them  moves more furniture. I begin to sense another  realm -interrelated -the high doh of a scale in which we are the low. And in a sudden and momentary  bouleversement, I realize that  I  have  been  upside down  in  life -like a tree on  its head,  roots exposed in the air.
The  question  of the mask which confronted  me with such violence in Mexico has subtly shifted.  In  our  popcorn  packages when I was  a child, along with the tin  rings,  jacks, marbles  and  other  hidden  surprises, one was  occasionally lucky enough  to find  a small coloured  picture  complete with strips of transparent red and  green  celluloid.  The  picture,  viewed alone, was of a boy with an  umbrella and  a dog. Seen through  the green filter, the umbrella disappeared. The  red filter demolished the dog. My subconscious evidently knew something about the tyranny of subjectivity  years ago when it desired to go "through to the area  behind  the eyes/where  silent, unrefractive  whiteness lies". I didn't  understand  the image then but it arrived  complete.  It was not to be denied even though  only half-glimpsed, enigmatic. It's pleasant now to know what I was talking about!
Whether  or  not  the handful  of poems written  recently means that  writing  has
'started' again,  I do not know;  whether there is any advance  over earlier work, I


21

QUESTIONS AND IMAGES



shall have to let others decide. For the time being my primary concern is to remove the filters.
Meanwhile the images have begun again and the questions continue.
"What do I sing and what does my lute sing?"


















22



THE UNCERTAIN WORLD




Mordecai Richler








EQUENTLY, I FEEL I'VE LOST sometlllng somewhere. Spon­ taneity  maybe,  or  honest  appetite.  Now I'm  harnessed  to this  ritual  of  being  a writer,  shaking  out  the  morning  mail for cheque-size  envelopes-scanning the newspapers-breakfast-then downstairs to work. To try to work. This morning I'm  breaking off on a novel I'm still attempting  to finish after five years, shirking it by making a start on this piece.
If I get stuck, I can switch to a book review, already overdue.
If it turns out an especially sour, unyielding morning, I can return, in my mind's eye, to Paris,  the  innocent  days, or  recite a lecture  to myself that  begins:  Your father  had  to be out at six every morning, driving to the junk yard in the sub-zero dark,  through  Montreal  blizzards. You work at home, never at  your desk before rune.
And then, if I'm  not even up to a book review (What do you mean, not up to it? It  pays more  for a day's work than  your father ever earned, hustling scrap, in a week.), I can stroll downtown. St. Catherine  Street. Montreal's  Main Stem, as the doyen of our  gossip columnists has it. A time-consuming walk while I await, as the columnist recendy put it, the Last Big Deadline In The Sky.
Pretending  to browse for books by lesser novelists, I can surreptitiously check out the shops on stacks of the paperback edition of Cocksure.
Or I can take in a movie maybe.
Ego dividends.  Possibly, I  can  pick a  movie that  I  had  been asked to  write myself, but declined. Whatever  the movie, it is quite likely I will know the director or the script writer, maybe even one of the stars.
Gee whiz.
Say the star,  delicious, twinkly-eyed heroine, wronged  in her  cinema  time  by
all  the cads ever contracted  to J. Arthur  Rank,  who turned  to me between takes

THE UNCERTAIN  WORLD



one   afternoon   on   a   restaurant   location  in Bradford,   indicating   the  crowd assembled  since  seven  a.m.,  rehearsed -spun into   action-shushed -spun into action and shushed again and again -only so that she, the camera  tracking after, might sweep through them, making a poignant exit:  turned  to me, her smile entrancing, and said, "Aren't  they marvellous?"
"What?"
"The  faces he chose."
The director, she meant. "C>h."
"Are they real people," she then inquired softly, "or only extras?"
So there  you have it. In  London  and  New York, I skitter on the periphery  of festooned circles, know plenty of inside stories. Bombshells. Like which Fabian cabinet  minister is an insatiable pederast. How Jack  Ruby came to die of cancer. What  best-selling novel was really stitched  together  by a cunning  editor. Which wrinkled Hollywood glamour queen is predisposed toward gang shags with hirsute Neapolitan  waiters  from  the  Mirabelle. Yes, yes, I'll  own  up  to it. I  am,  after eighteen  years as a writer,  not  utterly  unconnected  or  unknown,  as witness the entry in the indispensible Oxford Companion to Canadian Literature.

Richler, Mordecai (1931---) Born in Montreal, he was educated at Sir George Williams College and spent two years abroad. Returning  to Canada  in 1952, he joined the staff of the Canadian  Broadcasting Corporation.  He now lives in Eng­ land, where he writes film scripts, novels, and short stories.

The  key to  Richler's  novels is-talent.  Hard  work.  Canada Council  grants. Favourable  winds.
After  eighteen  years and  six novels there is nothing  I cherish so much  as the first and most vulnerable book, The  Acrobats, published in 1954,  not only because it marked  the first time my name appeared  in a Canadian newspaper,  a prescient Toronto  columnist writing from London, "You've  not heard of Mordecai  Richler yet, but, look out, she's a name to watch for"; but also because it was the one book
I could write as a totally private act, with the deep, inner  assurance that  nobody would  be such a damn  fool as to publish it. That any editor  would boot it back to  me,  a  condescending  rejection  note  enclosed,  enabling  me  to quit  Paris  for Montreal,  an honourable  failure, and get down  to the serious business of looking for a job. A real job.
Don't  blame  me,  but  Andre  Deutsch.  To  my  astonishment  (and   I say  this
without false modesty),  the novel was published in England  and the U.S., and translated  into five languages. Now, when somebody asked me what I did, I could

THE UNCERTAIN  WORLD



reply, without  seeming fraudulent to myself, that I was indeed  a writer. If I still tended  to doubt  it in the early hours of the morning, then The  Acrobats, in shop windows here and there, was the proof I needed. My novel on display side by side with real ones. There is no publication  as agonizing or charged  with elation as the first.
Gradually,  you assume  that  what  you write will be published. After  the first
book, composing a novel is no longer self-indulgent, a conceit. It becomes, among other things, a living. Though  to this day reviews can still sting or delight, it's sales, man-sales,  that's  the stuff-that  buys you the time   to get on with the next. Mind  you, there  are a number  of critics whose esteem I prize, whose opprobium can sear, but, for the most part, I, in common with other writers, have learned  to read reviews like a market  report. This one will help move the book, that one not.
Writing   a  book,  as  George  Orwell  has  observed,  is  a  horrible,  exhausting struggle. "One would never undertake such a thing if one were not driven by some demon  whom one can neither resist nor understand." Something  else. Each novel is a failure, or there would be no compulsion to begin afresh. Critics don't help. Speaking as somebody who fills that office on occasion, I must say that the critic's essential relationship  is with  the reader, not the writer. It is his duty to celebrate good books, eviscerate bad ones, lying ones.
When  I first published,  in  1954, it was commonly assumed  that  to commit a film script  was to sell out  (Daniel  Fuchs, Christopher  Isherwood,  Irwin  Shaw), and that the good and dedicated life was in academe. Now, the inverse seems to be the Canadian case. The  creative young yearn to be in films, journeymen retire to the universities. Seems to be the case, because, happily, there are exceptions.
All of us tend  to romanticize  the world we nearly chose. In  my case, academe, where, like all good spellers on tenure, I would own a Ph.D. Instead  of having to bring home the meat, I would only be obliged to stamp it, rejecting this shoulder of beef as Hank  James  derivative,  that side of pork as sub-Jimmy Joyce. I saw myself no longer a perplexed free-lancer with an unpredictable income, balancing this magazine assignment, that  film job, against the time it would buy me. No sir. Sipping Tio Pepe in the faculty club, snug in my leather wing-backed chair, in the cherished  company  of other  disinterested scholars, speculating  on the significance of the comparable Frederick  Philip Grove, I would not, given the assurance of a monthly cheque, chat about anything so coarse as money.
-Why don't  you, urn, write a novel yourself this summer,  Professor Richler?
-Well, Dr.  Lemming,  like you, I have too much  respect for the tradition  to sullv it with my own feeble scribblings.

25

THE  UNCERTAIN WORLD



-Quite.
-Just so.
Alas, academe,  like girls, whisky, and  literature, promised better  than  it paid. I  now realize, after  riding the academic gravy train for a season, that  vaudeville hasn't  disappeared  or been killed by TV,  but  merely retired  to smaller circuits, among  them,  the universities. Take  the poets, for instance. Applying for Canada Council grants  today, they no longer catalogue  their publications  (the accomplish­ ments of obsolete linear man), but, instead, like TV  actors on the make, they list their personal appearances,  the campuses where they have read  aloud. Wowsy at Simon Fraser  U.,  hotsy at Carleton.  Working  wrinkles out of  the act in the stix, with  a  headliner  coming  up  in  the  veritable  Palace  of  the  campus  circuit,  the U.ofT.
If stand-up comics now employ batteries  of gag  writers because national  TV exposure means they can only use their material  once, then  professors, playing to a new house every season, can peddle the same one-liners year after year, improv­ ing only on timing and delivery. For promos, they publish. Bringing out  journals necessary to no known audience, but essential to their advancement.
Put  plainly, these days everybody's in show business, all trades are riddled with impurities.  And  so, after a most enjoyable  (and  salaried)   year in academe-a reverse sabbatical,  if you like-I  now return,  refreshed,  to the uncertain  world of the free-lance  writer, where nobody, as James Thurber once wrote, sits at any­ body else's feet unless he's been knocked there.
Why do you write?
Doctors are seldom asked why they practice, shoemakers how come they cobble, or baseball players why they don't  drive a coal truck instead, but again and again writers, like house-breakers, are asked why they do it.
Orwell,  as might  be  expected, supplies  the  most  honest  answer  in  his  essay,
Why  I Write.
"I. Sheer egoism. Desire to seem clever, to be talked about,  to be remembered after  death,  to get your own back on grown-ups  who snubbed  you in childhood, etc. etc." To this I would add egoism informed by imagination, style, and a desire to be known, yes, but only on your own conditions.
Nobody is more embittered  than the neglected writer and, obviously, allowed a certain  recognition,  I am a happier  and  more generous man  than  I would other­ wise be. But  nothing  I  have done  to win this recognition  appalls  me,  has gone against my nature.  I fervently believe that all a writer should send into the market­ place to be judged is his own work; the rest should  remain  private. I deplore the

THE  UNCERTAIN WORLD



writer  as a  personality,  however  large  and  undoubted  the  talent,  as is the case with  Norman   Mailer.  I  also  do  not  believe in special licence for  the so-called artistic  temperament. After  all,  basically, my  problems,  as  I  grudgingly  come within  spitting  distance  of  middle  age, are  the  same  as anybody  else's. Easier maybe. I can bend my anxieties to subversive uses. Making stories of them. When I'm  not writing, I'm  a husband  and a father of five. Worried  about  air pollution. The population  explosion. My sons' report cards.
"2. Aesthetic enthusiasm.  Perception of beauty in the external  world, or, on the other  hand,  in  words  and  their  right  arrangement." The  agonies  involved in creating  a novel, the unsatisfying draft  that follows unsatisfying draft,  the scenes you never get right, are redeemed by those rare and memorable days when, seem­ ingly  without   reason,  everything  falls  right.  Bonus  days.  Blessed days  when, drawing  on sources unsuspected, you pluck ideas and prose out of your skull that you never thought  yourself capable of.
Such, such are the real joys.
Unfortunately, I  have  never  been  able  to sustain  such  flights  for  a  novel's length. So the passages that flow are balanced with those which were forced in the hothouse. Of all the novels I've written, it is The  Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz and Cocksure, which come closest to my intentions and therefore give me the most pleasure. I should  add  that  I'm  still lumbered  with the characters  and ideas, the social concerns,  I first attempted in The  Acrobats. Every serious writer  has one theme, many variations to play on it.
Like any serious writer,  I  desperately  want  to write one  novel that  will last, something  that  will make me remembered  after death,  and so I am compelled to keep trying.
"3. Historical impulse. Desire to see things as they are ... "
No matter  how long I  continue  to live abroad,  I do feel forever  rooted in St. Urbain  Street.  This  was my time, my place, and  I have elected myself to get it exactly right.
"4.  Political  purpose-using the word 'political'  in the  widest possible sense.
Desire to  push the world in a certain  direction, to alter other  people's idea of the kind of society that they should strive after."
Not an overlarge consideration in my work, though I would say that any serious writer is a moralist, and only incidentally an entertainer.


REFLECTI 0NS

ON TWO  DECADES



Hugh MacLennan





IF SvsrPHUS WERE A  SAINT  he could serve for  my patron,
and  perhaps  for  a  good  many  others  of my generation   whose oldest  members
passed the barrier of childhood amnesia during  World War I and whose youngest joined  the  ranks  immediately  after   the  Hitler   War.   We  now  find  ourselves assaulted  and  blackmailed  by the  Youth  with  unprecedented   contempt  as The Establishment-a word,  incidentally,  coined  by one  of  our  own  members  to describe  a  still older  generation,  the  one on  which  we threw  all  the  blame  for World War I and the Depression.
We seniors, more naive and idealistic in our youth than our later adherents, are the ones who have made the whole trip. To mingle our mythologies, we embarked on a lifelong Odyssey that took us through more than one cave of the winds, under the les
conscious aim, which was to  recreate the old Victorian  patrist world in the image
of an indulgent  mother wearing pants. Now we find ourselves cursed by the young for all the things we were proud of, for our voyage did not end in the Ithaca we had  deserted,  but in the land  of the Lotus Eaters. Out  of nowhere came a com­ bined earthquake and hurricane  and we had to take once again to our ships. And only now does it become apparent  that our captains  were not like Ulysses after all. Those in politics turned  out  to be Macwhirrs,  those in  command of universities Chamberlains and Mackenzie Kings.
As this piece is mainly about  my own reflections as a writer over the past two decades, it is only fair to admit what has been for some time an heretical attitude toward my trade. A true child of my epoch, I believed that  a writer should also be a citizen. I am disturbed  by the kind of detachment that  enables some writers to rub their hands  over the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind  because they

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO DECADES



furnish  such  exciting  materials  for literature.  This  attitude  seems pretty  poor  at any time, but now it is just plain stupid. In this field no writer has a chance against television, not even with the professionally angry men who have established them­ selves in the medium as professional lovers of The People.
What  most worries me now is what has always worried me:  the disastrous rise in  the  price  of  personal  freedom  which  has  become  almost  prohibitive  in  the Affluent Society produced  by the unions, the corporations  and  the Welfare State, the latter being the biggest corporation of them all.
To  be free is surely  to be able to do what  you like doing and  do best;  to be
able to  tell the  truth  to somebody even if that  somebody is only yourself; to do this and stay sane. I have craved this state of being as a claustrophobe  craves fresh air. With  me it may even be an addiction  interesting to a psychiatrist, for I slept summer  and  winter  in a  tent in the family back yard from  the age of eleven  to twenty-one. This  kind of freedom has always been costly, and  the collateral  of it is security.  By the  time  I reached  my fiftieth birthday  I was less secure  than  I had  been in 1932, for my youth was over and I had less than  a thousand  dollars to show for  thirty-five  years of hard  work, no steady  job and  no pension. But  I was still free in the sense that I was doing what I liked and owed no man a penny.
Free, but  edgy and  worried  deep, for I knew this couldn't  last much longer.  I had  the guilty anxiety of a gambler, my own bet being that  at some time one of my books would make a financial breakthrough  big enough  to keep me and  those dependent  upon  me off relief when such talent and energy as I possessed ran out. My novels had  earned  me a certain  reputation, but the most successful ones had been published in the days when the Canadian  book trade was almost entirely controlled  in England  and  the Canadian mentality was so colonial that  if a book were published only in Canada it was automatically regarded  by our own reading public as insignificant.
For  the  writer  in  those  days such  a state  of affairs  was almost  fatal.  If you
signed  with  a  Canadian publisher,  you lost your essential rights abroad.  If you signed  with  an  American  or English publisher, and  your work was successful in the  home  market,  the  kind  of contract  you drew  meant  that  your royalties  on Canadian sales were minuscule.
Any Canadian writer of my age knows all this by heart,  and  I believe Morley Callaghan   has  told  the story  more than  once. I'll  make  my story as succinct  as possible. My Barometer  Rising sold  I 1o,ooo copies in all editions in the first two years in  Canada and  earned  me barely $6oo. My Two Solitudes sold 68,ooo  in hard  covers in  Canada in  approximately  the same time  and  this Canadian sale

REFLECTIONS  ON TWO DECADES



netted  me slightly less than  $5,000. This was ruinous  economics in a time when there was no Canada  Council, when even the Governor General's Award was only a medal with no cheque attached. So I lived without  vacations, without even rest­ ing  on  weekends,  and  supported  myself by  writing  sometimes  thirty  essays or articles  a  year  for  very small  prices, because  even  in  this  area  I  was  too self­ protective to write to order. But by the time I reached my fiftieth birthday  I don't  mind admitting  that I was groggy.
It was shortly after  this that  the breakthrough came,  though  it was not a very large  one  and  far  from  sufficient to  protect  a  pension-less man  in  an  AfHuent Society of rising costs. So here begins the next chapter of my little tale. The fashion of its coming, no less than its aftermath, is ironic. It may also be instructive of the mentality of publishers and critics in the psychic earthquake which began rocking civilization shortly afterwards.


ONCHRISTMAS  DAY   1957, at 6:42 in the evening, I typed
"The  End"  on the final page of the novel which was offered to the public a year
and a quarter later under the title The Watch That  Ends The  Night. It had taken me five years to reach  those two little final words. After  a few weeks of revision I mailed one copy to Toronto  (by that time I had separate  contracts) and another to Boston. Weeks passed before I  had  any  news of it and  my experienced  nose smelled that something was going wrong. It was past mid-March before one of the Boston firm's senior editors came to Montreal on what for both of us was a painful IDISSlon.
This very kindly man had to tell me that his firm believed my book was such a total  failure  that  no amount  of rewriting could salvage it. He knew I had  been under a long period of personal strain and supposed that this had affected my judgment.  We parted  friends and  I wondered  what  the matter  was, because the book he had  been describing to me was so unlike the one I thought  I had written that  we both seemed to be talking of different  things.  I guessed there was some­ thing wrong technically, and there was, but it was so slight that  a few days' work cleared  it  up.  Another  American  publisher  not  only  rejected  it,  but  rejected  it flatly. It was not  until  mid-summer of 1958 that  Scribner's  accepted it with en­ thusiasm  and  my worries with  that  particular novel  were over. But  I still won­ dered,  and  wondered  for some time, why it had  run  into so much trouble  at its birth.

REFLECTIONS ON TWO DECADES



Now that  this book has been with the public for ten years, has sold more than half a million copies in English and is again being reprinted; has sold a quarter of a million in German, has done well in Sweden, has been translated  into French, Spanish,  Esthonian1  and  Norwegian,  I think  I can account  for that  initial resis­ tance.  There  was something  in  the  book's atmosphere  which  evoked it  at  that  particular  time at the end of the 195o's.
If a serious novel lasts even as long as five years in the mid-twentieth  century,
its author  must have been in some kind of extrasensory relationship with a few important feelings in  the world around  him. Feelings, not ideas;  as D. H. Law­ rence put it, ideas never bother  anyone, but  what he called "art  speech" usually does if it is in  any  way off the norm. I have never been particularly  intelligent, and abstract ideas are usually incomprehensible to me. My brain is far slower than  my intuitions  and  in  every novel I  have written  my brain  has  hung  me up be­ cause it  keeps refusing  to accept  what  my intuitions  shout  at  it. That is why I have taken so long to write my novels, especially the last two.
When  I  was writing  The  Watch  That  Ends The  Night I did not  understand
until the last few months  that  I was like a snake shedding its old skin. If it is not stretching  the simile, the skin I was shedding  was the intellectual  skin most men of my generation  had  been wearing since the beginning of the Thirties.  So long as I wore it  myself, my novels had been essentially optimistic. I had believed the barometer  was  really rising;  I  had  believed  (and  in  this I  may have been  par­ tially right)   that  the two solitudes were bound  to come together in  Canada. But my last two novels have been tragic. My original title for The Watch was a dead give-away:  it was Requiem. Requiem for one I had loved who had died, but also for more:  requiem  for the idealists of the Thirties  who had  meant so well, tried so hard  and gone so wrong. Requiem also for their courage and a lament for their failure on a world-wide scale. My intuitions knew this before I began writing the novel in 1952, but my intellect did not know it until 1957.
What  The  Watch  was trying to say in the atmosphere of its story was that  the
decade  of  the  195o's  was the  visible proof of my generation's moral  and  intel­ lectual  bankruptcy. For  the  195o's  was  the  decade-remember?-when  the students,  our  own  children,  were known  as  "The  Silent  Generation." Many  of them  married  the moment  they graduated, had their first child ten months later and  their fourth  within  five years, and  the beginnings of most of these marriages  were subsidized by fond  parents  who were determined  that  their children should not suffer the  privations  and  inhibitions which had affiicted themselves. It  never occurred  to them,  and  it still doesn't, that they had encouraged  their children  to

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO DECADES



give hostages to something  far  more implacable  than  fortune.  In  a word,  their hostages were given to The  System and  in the  195o's The  System was an inter­ national  version of Henry  Luce's American  Way of Life. In  that strange inter­ lude it  was virtually  unchallenged.  Communism  had  been discredited  by Stalin, who himself was discredited in Russia after  his death. Technological  democracy had destroyed Hitler, had stopped communism in Berlin and Korea, had recovered a devastated  Europe  and after a time had even rid itself  of Joe  McCarthy. What  else was there, what else could there be in the 1950's, but The  System?
Perhaps  because The System had done nothing for me except increase the cost of my freedom, I was unable to believe in it with my heart  and feelings, though  I accepted  it with  my brain  as one accepts the inevitable.  In  the Fifties I worried a lot  about  the explosion that  might come from  the sky, but  my intellect  never grasped  that a far more imminent explosion was gathering heat underneath us all, that  it  was buried  in  the  trauma  of little  children  who  had  been cheated  of a balanced  childhood.  The  incontestible  public  fact  was that  the depression  gen­ eration  had come through  on all fronts. It had discarded  the puritan hairshirt. It fancied  that  it  had  emancipated  itself sexually from  the  Victorians. It  lavished luxuries on its young including  what  it believed was the greatest  of  all luxuries, the freedom to choose as adults before they had reached  their 'teens. We softened the discipline of the educational system. We summoned  up the new Social Sciences to counteract  the authority  of the physicists, chemists and engineers who had fur­  nished the armies with weaponry including the H-bomb. So thoroughly did we put our faith in the good old liberal notion that man cannot but choose the better path when it lies open to him that our hubris in its own way was as staggering as Hit­  ler's.  We came  pretty  close to accepting  that  technology  "controlled" by liberal democrats would bring in the millenium.
In  The  Watch  That  Ends The  Night my intuitions  were forcing me to utter
something socially blasphemous in those years. They  were asserting that  God had not been outmoded  by the Christian Church,  Bertrand  Russell, the social scientists and  modem  education.  My brain  did not grasp  this, and  that  was why I had so many hang-ups. Not even when I finished the novel had I reached the place where I could say, regardless of whether anyone laughed  at me or not, "I believe in God
-and that is what scares me." In the God manifest in evolution, which I am told some geneticists now question?  Yes. In  the  God  of love? The  existence of that One surely depends  upon the individual.  In the God of the Book of Job?  Watch out for Him, everybody. But there is no point these days in discussing what cannot be scientifically proved, so let it pass. Speaking personally, I am at least telling the

32

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO  DECADES



truth  when  I say that  the  papier-mache intellectual armour  I had  picked up in the Thirties  contained  more built-in obsolescence than  any shiny new model you see advertised on the TV screen.
For  the  chief  delusion  of  the  Depression Generation  was that  it  was  revolu­ tionary.  By now it is obvious that  we never were that  because our  "revolution" was nothing  more than  the climax of a philosophy which had  been consolidating itself for a century  and  a half. We had swallowed all the way down to the small bowel of our  digestive tract  the materialistic notion that  the quality of a civiliza­ tion depends upon its living standards,  together with the concomitant  that a man's  morality can  be satisfactorily  judged by his political opinions. To think otherwise was to be reactionary, if not an outright fascist.
Let's  look  History  in  the  eye and  ask ourselves an  embarrassing  question­ what was our famous quarrel  with the capitalists based on? Their assumption that man's chief end is the production,  consumption and distribution of goods and ser­ vices? Their  faith  that  if afHuence does not necessarily create happiness, happiness cannot  exist  without  it?  Surely  these questions answer  themselves. Our  quarrel  with them was merely this, that  under their laissez-faire control the economic sys­ tem  wasn't  distributing   justly and  in  the  rggo's  was  hardly  distributing  at  all. Therefore,  so we believed, let us change  all this. Let  us  plan and  make it a real System. Above  all-for  we had  dragged  Freud  into  it  without  understanding what  Freud  had  really been telling us -let us change  the whole tone of educa­ tion so that  it will not torture children with the repressions that tortured  us. I have often thought  that the main reason why the post-war capitalists climbed aboard  the reformer's  bandwaggon was their instinctive understanding  that  if you remove a child's inhibitions  the chances  are pretty good that  you will tum  him into a com­ pulsive consumer.
We  can  see  now-or  can  we?-that  we  so-called  revolutionaries  of  the
Thirties  were no more and  no less revolutionary than  Henry  Ford, Mikoyan and Walter Reuther, the latter of whom in the late 194o's persuaded the Detroit manufacturers that  it was in their own interests to accede to the unions' demands. The  result of that  historic decision is now clearer to Asiatics, Africans and South Americans  than   to  the  new  bourgeois workers of America.  It  has  produced  a unique  brand  of Imperialism  which hunts  the globe not only for raw  materials, but  for hundreds of millions of new consumers who then  must be brain-washed
-no difficult feat to accomplish on brains filthy with poverty -into keeping the
American  Way of Life from dying of its own surfeits.
No, this revolution of ours was never for real. A genuine revolution cares noth-


33

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO DECADES



ing for the repair, enlargement  or take-over of an existing way of life. It happens by some mysterious alchemy in the soul of millions of people who reject without argument, regret or  thought  for  the future  not only the values of centuries, but even the apparatus of living which those centuries have accumulated.
In  recorded  history there have been few revolutions of this kind, probably be­ cause the evolutionary process cannot  tolerate many of them. In the West  (what  happened  among  the Greeks between Homer  and  the invention  of the alphabet  is unrecorded)  I  would estimate  that  there  have  been only three. The first was begun  by Ikhnaton of Egypt and  perpetuated  by Moses. The  second, of  course, was the work of Christ and St. Paul and destroyed the Roman  Empire by giving a rationale  to its death-wish. The  third is somewhat  more blurred,  but it centred on the replacement  of "faith" with "reason" and over the past few centuries has triumphed in  the technological society which in our time has replaced  the wings of the dove with the thrust of the rocket and sent men around the moon and back with  the soul-stirring news that  the Sahara  would  be as desolate as the moon if it had no atmosphere.
Compared   to  these  psychic and  moral  revolutions,  the  French  and  Russian affairs  were  mere  political  spectaculars  accelerating   the  triumph   of  a  life  of materialism  founded on reason and  know-how. The  recent revolution in China is exactly comparable  to this last recorded one in the West, with the difference that with western help it has managed  to produce in a century  the psychic change that took the West some three hundred  years. Today  the Chinese are as convinced  as we were in  the Thirties  that  the combination  of politics and  technology is just what  the Doctor of History ordered. "When  you grant  priority  to politics, actions and  people become good. When you do not, people and  their acts become bad." Who said this-a French or American intellectual of the late eighteenth century? An activist professor of Political Science in a modern  multi-university?  Of course they all said it, one way or another, but this actual quotation comes from Marshall Lin Piao.
I don't  want  to stray too obviously from  my subject,  which is supposed  to be my own state of mind as a writer and my own feelings about  my profession at the present  time.  But  before crossing the  Great  Divide  into  what  the students  are calling  "the  modern  age",  let me not leave my generation  entirely desolate. We were fake revolutionaries sure enough, yet nevertheless the directions we encour­ aged  politics and  science to take have  produced  some  notable improvements  in the world we inherited.
I am old enough to have known men who had witnessed floggings in the armed


34

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO  DECADES



services. In  World  War  I, thousands  of shell-shocked British soldiers were shot under  the authority  of Field  Marshal  Haig for "cowardice" pour encourager les autres. It must  be nearly  twenty  years since the press has reported  the lynching of an American  negro and  twenty-five since one was burned  alive. It may sound corny,  but it  remains  true  that  in advanced  western countries  poverty no longer excludes  a  man  from  good  medical  care  and  very seldom  excludes him  from education. Science has virtually obliterated  the terror of venereal disease which haunted  the West for centuries. The employer who dismisses an employee without cause  does so  at  his  peril.  In  Canada  an  artist  no longer  has  to apologize for wasting his time, and  EXPO '67 was certainly not created  by the activist students who sneer at the men who had the courage and ability to make it possible. Chief of  all-though  whether  or  not  this  is an  improvement   in  human   happiness remains to be seen -we have witnessed the average human  life-span so enlarged and  the  average  sexual  potency so prolonged  that  men in  their fifties now look younger  than  men  in  their  late thirties did forty years ago and  a good many  of them can act like men in their late twenties and get away with it.
These are colossal improvements  by matrist standards for which, of course, our well-meaning  generation   has  received  no thanks  and  should  expect  none from children  who  have  been  raised to expect much  more than  this. But our  matrist triumph  has been purchased  at a price which has only recently become apparent. The  price has  been something  mankind  has never been able to endure  for even a  short  length  of  time  without  becoming  hysterical if not  destructively  insane. That something  is the validity of the father, the idea accepted throughout human history  that   the  word  "father" implies  trust,  reliability,  a  certain  valiancy,  a deserved  authority   and  continued  respect when  he is old. And  this, of course, brings me over the Divide into the 196o's.


Lis PRESENT  DECADE is too immediate  for  me  to  trust  my inferior  brain  with  many  generalizations. Trying  to write novels while swimming
in the broth  of several  hundred  students, I have become so closely involved that detachment is impossible. But one thing at least must now be clear to everyone. The  most important feature  of the 196o's is the phenomenon that John  Grierson, that  perennially  youthful  observer  of  what  is and  not  of  what  somebody says ought to be, calls The Children's Crusade.
From  China  to Peru,  from  Montreal  to Buenos Aires, Youth is on the march,


35

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO DECADES



but in so many different external directions that  not even a sociologist would ven­ ture to claim that  he has found a single common denominator for their behaviour.  Our obsession with the Youth has made the moon-race as corny as Batman. At any rate, I claim no authority  beyond my own personal observation for anything  I am going to say about  this-which is something  that  obsesses me especially because I am not only a teacher but am still a writer.
Of all the cities to live in, Montreal has probably  been the most mentally con­ fusing  during  these  years. Here  the  revolt of  Youth  has  not  only been  against their  own  parents; it has also  been against one  of the  toughest  Catholicisms  in the  modern  world.  This  double-barrelled  revolt  has  been  an  agony  to  French Canadians. To  put  it simply, where can an  angry  young French  Canadian find a  rock to stand  on?  He wishes to realize his own  potential above all else. He is against  his  traditional Church,  which has  traditionally instructed  him  that  close association with the Protestant  Anglais will not only destroy his soul, but annihilate his identity  as a French  Canadian. He loves Quebec  passionately. He  wants  the good  things  of  the  Affluent Society,  but  at  the same  time  he is told  that  if he separates from Les A nglais he will not obtain them. The history books he has read have fed his paranoia, just as the student  press all over English-speaking America feeds the paranoia of those who read it.
At any rate it was not in Berkeley that the first post-war student  riot occurred. It  was in  l'Universite  de  Montreal,  and  it  happened well before the Viet  Nam War  or  the  Cuban  crisis. The  revolting students  expressed  the  usual separatist sentiments, yet their particular  target was not Les Anglais, but the clergyman who was their Rector,  and  this at a time when many  Catholic  priests were preaching separatism,  one  even going so far  as to write a letter  to the  press claiming  that Les  Anglais  were treating  the French  Canadians as Kikuyu  and that  the suitable response  would  be  Mau-Mau. In  retrospect,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that  in Quebec  as elsewhere hatred of the paternal  role was the dominant force, but that here it was unconsciously projected onto what had been a really tough parental authority,  the  Church.  For  the fathers  of nearly  all these boys belonged  to the new Affluent Society of Quebec, and had been just as permissive with their sons as their English-speaking counterparts.
I was no quicker  than  anyone else to adjust  to the 196o's, for the usual reason that  my brain  was so much slower than  my intuitions.  My last novel, Return Of The Sphinx, took four  years from  my initial  notes in  1962  to its completion  in the fall of 1966. My mental hang-ups ceased only when I realized that the separa­ tist movement,  its external  theme, had no more to do with the real theme than  a

g6

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO  DECADES



revolver with  the  mind  of a man  who uses it to shoot somebody. The  real story was the destruction  of a well-meaning father by an unhappy,  ambitious, confused, guilt-ridden,  idealistic son. It was not until well after the novel was published that I learned  that  even while I was writing it this had been the fate of a prominent French-Canadian statesman,  or  that  a  little  later  the  son  of  Willi Brandt  was arrested  as one  of  the  ringleaders  in  the student  riot  which selected  him  as its prime  target.  This  novel was so savagely attacked  by Canadian reviewers that it occurred  to me that  I had quite unwittingly written something that had enraged them in the secret places where the most important  parts of them live. But as this is a frank  essay, I  would be hypocritical if I pretended  that  the reception of this book in Canada did  not stun  me for a time and  make me want  to  find a mental tent  that  would serve me as the actual one did when I used to sleep in it during my 'teens in Halifax.
A year and  a half has passed since Return  Of The  Sphinx  was published and during  that  time  I have  been reading some of the new novelists of the 196o's. I must admit,  not caring  how old-fashioned it may make me appear,  that  the work of some of them is alien to any literary tradition  I have known or respected, and that  it seems to me a symptom of something terribly serious. I can't  believe that this present  tide  of pornography, self-hatred,  self-contempt  and  boring  drug-fed egoism can last indefinitely, or even much longer, and  this I infer from the tastes of my students,  with whom, incidentally, I have managed  to get along very well. As they  are  the  readers  of the  future,  their  tastes and  values interest  me more than  those of the neobourgeois of the age-group between mine and them.
We are  told  by many  observers, and  by some spokesmen for the young,  that they detest  the  technological  system. Some certainly  do  detest it, but  not  many detest it for aesthetic reasons. They fear it, and with good reason, because it is part of the knowledge explosion which threatens  to outmode  within a decade not only the little they have learned,  but even the techniques they have acquired, including the technique  of student  leadership. But no simple over-all judgment can be made here. College administrations are making  fools of themselves because they judge the  student-bodies  by  the  activists who corral  student  societies and  the student press. These  young men  may or  may not be on a wave of the future,  but  their avowed aims are certainly archaic. These latest converts to Marxianity are all disguised  puritans,   and  as such  are  symptoms  of  what  may  well  be  a  patrist reaction.   But   because  they  speak  in  the  language   of  Political  Science  and Sociology, this means they are speaking in the language of the past, and of course this is the great bond they share with their dear enemies, the college administrators.

37

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO DECADES



To  anyone  with  eyes in  his head,  the most anger-making aspect of the  present
Generation  Gap is sexual.
When  we look back on the past forty years, what  else are we viewing but the most  colossal explosion of  the  libido  in  history?  In  an  age  so permissive and luxurious,  its  intellectual  leaders  permissive even  with  the  truth,  the  father  is beginning to appear  as the sexual rival of his son on a scale seldom seen since the Stone  Age,  while  the  mother,  rejuvenated   by  the  cosmetician,  the  pharmacist and a college education,  has in the cities become a most potent rival of her inexperienced  daughter.
When  I use the word "sexual"  I am not thinking  entirely as a Freudian; I am
thinking  also in the context of the new biology with its emphasis on the inviola­ bility of "territory" among all living creatures,  including  man.  I am  thinking  in terms of rivalry for admiration  and  the kind of power that  accompanies  it. Not for  nothing  was  South  Pacific the  most successful and  popular  musical of the
1950's, for it gave a veiled public endorsement to a code of social behaviour which is inimical  to man's  survival. When  I was young the good old Oedipus  Complex was just as valid as it is now, but the naked Oedipal  conflict was seldom prolonged in the form of open war when the son was in college. The  only area of an earlier society sufficiently affluent to afford  this kind of thing  was the high aristocracy, as Shakespeare carefully noted when he made Hamlet  both a prince and a student, and  put into the mouth of the unimaginative  Marcellus the familiar sentence that something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
I  am  not suggesting, for it would  not  be true,  that  this  crossing of territorial
boundaries  between generations is in practice  large on a percentage  basis. I am, however, stating  the obvious when  I say that  many  members  of today's  parent generation  appear  to  the  young  as potential  rivals on  a scale  wider  than  ever before. Madison Avenue lost no time in foUowing up the success of South  Pacific. For years it has flooded the advertising market with pictures of lovely young things dining  out,  yachting  and  conspicuously consuming  with  well set-up,  confident, rich, exciting men with steel gray hair. It takes no genius to understand that these men  are  either  divorced  or  two-timing  their  wives, which  means something  far more  important in  the sense that  they  are  also two-timing  their  own children. What  can you say to the student  activist who shouts, "There's no decency here!" Here, surely, is the explanation of the outlandish  hair-dos of young males in the late  rg6o's  and  of clothing styles among  students  which so affront  their  elders. These   say,  with   perfect   unconscious  symbolism,   "Older people-keep  off! Daddy, go horne!"  I may be guessing in many things these days, but it's not much

REFLECTIONS ON  TWO  DECADES



of a guess that  at  the close of the 196o's we are in the last stage of a dramatic fin de siecle, and that the cycle that is ending is the matrist-pennissive one, together with its archaic  faith  in  politics based not upon biological science, but  upon  the naive rationalism we inherited  from the eighteenth century.
How to close this without completely tailing off?
All Ihave known  about  myself as a writer is the live feeling that  comes when I know I must and can continue  writing. For two years, the first time since 1932, this feeling left me and  left me pretty desolate. I did little but work with students and listen more to what  they didn't say than to what they did say. But two months ago the old feeling returned  and I began a new novel. Whether  this one will be stalled as others have been I don't  know, but the feeling is there that I can write it. I can still say, "I  believe in God and that is what scares me", for it does scare me when I look at  the mayhem  the commands of  evolution  are making and  are going  to  make  of  the  dearest  illusions of  intellectuals and  the  costliest plans of politicians and  organizers.  But it also fills me with awe and  wonder  to know that once  again  the  species to  which  Ibelong  is stubbornly,  blindly  determined  to remain  human  and  not  be  converted into an abstraction  in the super-mind  of a computer.

1 The  Esthonian  edition  was  published m  Canada  by Esthonians  who had  lost their country.










39


SONG	AND	DANCE



Dorothy Livesay







BEmNn ALL   POETRY is the song: what  E,-a Pound  called melopeia-melody. And sometimes it is very hard  to write a poem without hear­ ing, in  your mind,  the music behind  it. Take  a few simple copula-type  English sentences:  "You  are a woman. You are a man." Now link them with a preposi­ tional  phrase  that  is, in itself, an archetypal  image:  "under the moon, under  the sun." As you say them over they begin to re-align themselves, thus:

under the moon under the sun
you are a woman you are a man

The  accentual  stresses here are extremely simple;  one secondary  and one primary stress create the phonemic phrase that is basic to the English language: under the moon,  under  the sun.  In  each  phrase  there  are  two stresses, one  being slightly stronger.  You feel this as a beat, so you pause to stress it; but you also hear it as a melody. Perhaps  a tune insinuates itself amongst  the words, and  you begin to
hum:

under the moon under the sun
you are a woman you are a man

rise up the woman rise up the man you are a moon you are a sun

Immediately the stress pattern  has become more  complicated; so has the vowel assonance; and so has the thought. They build on each other.

SONG AND  DANCE



Now I  do not  know how it is with other  poets, but as far as I am concerned I am always hearing this other beat behind the ordinary spoken language and I'm always hearing the melody. Perhaps this consciousness developed in me quite early, for of course we had  no radio or television in those pre-World  War I days; but we had a piano. While my mother  played nursery rhymes or songs like "Little  Brown Jug"  my sister and  I sang the words. During and after the war Ukrainian immi­ grant  girls came successively to live with us and act as mother's  help, until they knew  enough  English  to  get  a  better  job. They  sang  rollicking or  melancholy ballads in Ukrainian, songs which so interested my mother  that she began strum­  ming them  on  the  piano,  and  asking for their "story."  Soon she was learning  to read  Ukrainian herself, so as to translate  the folksongs into English. 1   Thus it was that  as a small  child  I  "felt"  words as being linked with  music. In  my mind  a poem was a  tune;  and  I  began  to make up  tunes before I  found  the words for them.  Always I  loved to hear  poems read  aloud;  but soon  became independent of my mother's  voice, and would take Robert  Louis Stevenson's A Child's Garden
of  Verses, or Irish ballads, and say them over to myself, sotto voce. By the time I
was ten I was trying to write a few such verses, myself. By the time I was thirteen they began  to flow easily and  freely, so that  a day wasn't  a day unless I found  a song in it.
At that  young time it never worried me that I could not sing beautifully or keep my voice true;  when alone, in the garden or the woods, I just let go and sang. In the same way I  accompanied  myself in a dance, my body moving and swinging as I sang. In  the teens, however, my real problems began to come to the fore.To dance! the  most primitive  creative expression. But what happens  if you are born clumsy? I wrote about that, much later, in "Ballad of Me":

Misbegotten born clumsy bursting  feet first then  topsy turvy falling downstairs: the fear of
joy of falling.

Butterfingers father called it throwing the balls
which catch as catch can
I couldn't.

SONG AND  DANCE



When I was a child in wartime Winnipeg there were no ballet classes and no one had  heard  of "Modem Dance,"  a style that  might  well have suited  my tempera­ ment. Instead,  in winter when the wind waged its battles around the frame house, I trembled; outside, I whirled with the snowflakes. But for the first mad "letting  go" into  dance  I had  to come to Ontario.  At "Woodlot" in Clarkson  the spring winds  running  through  naked  birch  trees called  me  to  run  alongside.  In  deep summer  at Lake Simcoe I preferred to avoid the family outings and run along the beach  alone, or fling myself into green  meadows:  no one around, anywhere,  to hear! I was free to whirl about and shout.
In  school,  learning  to  dance  was a  different  story.  I  remember  vividly the agonies of a dancing  class where a stout  woman  bellowed at  us from a platform whilst we, straggly little girls with hair  clipped  back to bounce  down  our backs in a  pony tail  were each given a chair  to push:  a chair  to waltz with ! Most of my companions in that girls' day school graduated to the level of having a dancing partner, prim  arm  upon rigid shoulder. But I never managed  that.  And  though there  were later  lessons, in my final high school year, I never did learn  to waltz. The  formal  imposition of having to memorize where your foot went next seemed to paralyze me. Only once did I get a glimpse of how music could relate to natural bodily rhythm; and  that  was at university when I registered for a course in Dal­ croze  Eurythmics.  Even  at  that,  the  technical  knowledge  required  seemed  for­ midable. Once or twice perhaps, in those varsity years was I sufficiently abandoned (because  in love)  to be able to 'follow' unselfconsciously without  treading  on my partner's shiny  black  patent  leather  toes. Mostly, I  remained  a wallflower. Yet how I longed  and  longed to  dance  all night!  At home, I bought  fo:xtrot records (for by now we had got a gramophone). I flew around  the room in my own way,
alone.


Ws rr AS  A COMPENSATION that  I wrote poetry, more and more? Most prolifically, at eighteen. Recently an English student  of mine who has
since become a teacher of Canadian literature  gave the following assessment of the mood of my personal poems. As I cannot say it better  than  he did, I set it down herewith:


This clwnsy, awkward child will be with us throughout the poetry. She can't catch
("butterfingers"); she  can't   keep  her  playmates  when  the  fire-engine  comes

SONG AND  DANCE



("games fall  apart")  ; she is only a "shrunken, bowed and  heavy-bellied form"; and in bed, as wife and woman, she feels "inadequate."  This sense of inadequacy is always there, and one way of exorcizing it is to set it down in verse.... Thus it is that  word play and  puns haunt Livesay's poetry.... Her wit and punning are experimentation with what words will yield; they are part of her intellectual grow­ ing pains, and are therefore linked with her hesitancy and lack of self-confidence.2

Early  on,  then,  the  mood  was set. A good many  quatrains or  loose couplets emerged, in the metaphysical manner:

One day's sorrow is not much
When there's grief still to touch

or

I shall lie like this when I am dead
But with one more secret in my head

But  I  was  happiest   breaking  into  free  verse  (encouraged   by  reading  Poetry: Chicago  which my mother subscribed to).  This free expression was suited to my own  rhythmic  sense and  was dictated,  no doubt,  by my own breath  groups  (for I  always said  the  poem aloud;  or if that  was not possible I heard  myself saying it in the mind's ear).

I remember long veils of green rain
Feathered like the shawl of my grandmother -
Green from the half-green of the spring trees
Waving in the valley.

It seems evident  now that  the free verse poems were all solitary, myself talking to the wind;  whereas the more structured  lyrics envisage a partner. Through my twenties an experimentation with sex (since called "the  sexual revolution"!)  was simply this search  for  the  perfect dancing  partner.  I had  read  Havelock  Ellis's The  Dance of Life  and  I believed of the consummation  of two bodies into one, the  merging  of self in other  self. Also, it goes without  saying, I had  read  Lady Chatterley's  Lover!  But the dance, I found  (when I came back from the Sorbonne in 1932 to discover a changed  social scene),  the dance  could extend to an identi­ fication with a community, a nation, a world. I threw myself into the struggle for peace, "against  war and fascism." The  results, in 1935-36, were the socially com­ mitted poems such as "The Outrider" and "Day  and  Night"  and a bold attempt  at  narrative poetry  based  on  the Spanish  civil war  called  "Catalonia"  (never

43

SONG AND  DANCE



published). E.]. Pratt  gave me a great  lift when  he printed  "Day  and  Night" in the first issue of the Canadian Poetry Magazine, in 1936. Mine must have been the first Canadian poem to ignore maple leaves and to concern itseH with the des­ perate  condition  of people caught  in a technological  revolution. Here, the dance became ironic :

One  step  forward Two  steps back Shove  the lever Push  it back

A sense of deep  frustration  followed, as the Spanish  war  led into  world war. But by the forties marriage and the rearing of children compensated for external frustrations.  The  social commitment  became integrated  with my own personality, as in "Lorca":

You breathe. You be. Bare, stripped light Time's fragment flagged Against  the  dark.

You  dance.  Explode Unchallenged through the door As bullets  burst
Long  deaths  ago, your heart.

And  song outsoars The bomber's  range Serene  with  wind­ Manoeuvered cloud.

And  I began  to write  poeins about  children or about  my own childhood.  These appeared  in the volumes Day and Night  ( 1944)  and Poems  for People ( 1947).
The  story has been told elsewhere of the encouragement I received during  the
war years from Alan  Crawley's critical listening and from his editing of  Contem­ porary Verse. This litde quarterly gave western poets an opportunity to appear in print which was denied us in the east. Patrick Anderson did write more than once to ask me for material  for Preview, but soon that  magazine  developed a very defi­ nite Montreal  slant.  (John  Sutherland's Northern  Review  did, however, publish short  stories of mine,  and  Louis MacKay  reviewed my social  poetry there, very sympathetically.)
From  1939 to 1946 I wrote some fifty poeins, many of them still unpublished.


44

SONG AND  DANCE



Right  after  the war  I went  to England  for the Toronto  Star  and  wrote my  re­ sponses to the post-war world, its hopes and doubts. On my return, encouraged by Malcolm  Lowry, I worked  at  my most thoroughly documented  "public" poem, "Call  My People Home." I feel that  this poem for radio managed  to combine a sense of personal  poignancy  and  alienation  with a sense of social purpose. Many of the dance  routines in this poem are perhaps simple to the point of being banal, but  I insist that  the  nursery-rhyme  and  ballad  pattern  are  essential elements in poetry, not to be ignored. I suppose that  all my life I have fought  against obscur­ antism! For me, the true intellectual is a simple person who knows how to be close to nature  and  to ordinary  people. I  therefore  tend  to shy away from  academic poets and academic critics. They miss the essence.
The  essential remains:  Song and Dance. During one period of my life I almost lost these talismen. For someone who believes in man, in his potential  for growth and change, no more depressing period occurred than theI gso's.  Everything that we believed  might  come out  of the holocaust of war: free independent nations living in harmony  of economic and cultural exchanges, moving from competition to co-operation -everything was shown to be a mockery. Man  was not capable of social  intelligence!  He  was a  ravager.  The  Korean  War  proved  it.  Despair, almost an existential despair, took hold of me in those years. The  resulting poems were alienated,  groping,  as in the little chapbook Jay  Macpherson  published for me, New  Poems. From  the gaiety of "Bartok and the Geranium" I moved to the confusion of "The Dark Runner" :

Around the circle of this light, This self, I feel his nudging nerve,
His prying finger seeking the concealed
Small crack where my intent might swerve.

He's sensitive to softness; hurries out The all-too-eager love; the willingness To let a fault grow large in wilfulness Until it swings a window upon doubt.

The integer is I; integral while
I'm centred in sun's round;
But 0, how swift the door is swung
And fumbling darkness found.

In  poems such  as this I  came  closer to  mystical experience  than  heretofore;
and also closer to despair. I was reading Simone Weil.


45

SONG AND  DANCE





IT REQUIRED  a  tremendous,  traumatic break  before  I  could escape from  the defeatism of the Fifties. The  opportunity came when I won an
educational fellowship from  the Canada Council,  for a year's study in London. Ironically,  the stimulation  of that  environment was countered  by deep  personal loss ... the sudden  death  of my husband  and  the growing  independence of my children -one  working, one away at  boarding  school. Yet, for the first time in some twenty years, I was a free woman. I took off for Paris, where a former pro­ fessor of mine, Felix Walter, was stationed  at Unesco. He helped me to get a job there, and from that  vantage point I applied and was accepted for a teaching post in Northern  Rhodesia.
The  experience of three years in Africa was so intense and fascinating it cannot be set down in a few words. It needs a book. Lacking the time to write that, I made jottings for  poems. And when  I  returned  to British Columbia  at the end of my Unesco  tour,  in July  1963, I  was a changed  person. The  great  developments  I had  hoped  to see in Canada  towards a just society had  not materialized.  Instead I had  participated in a sudden  and  traumatic changeover  from  a tribal  society
(in  which  there  was much  of goodness and  beauty)   to an  industrial  society in
which  the  people  were to a large extent  participating intensely. All the evils of capitalism   and  automation   were  rearing  their  heads  in  the  new  Zambia;   but opposed  to  these  destructive  forces  were  human   beings  who  commanded   my deepest respect. Such a one was Kenneth  Kaunda, the new president. After hear­ ing him address his people from an anthill on the Copperbelt  I was moved to write that part of "Zambia" tided "The  Leader."
And so Africa set me dancing  again!  My students,  I discovered, woke up sing­ ing; no sooner was their breakfaSt of "mealie-meal" over when they would cluster in a common  room, turn on the record  player, and  dance.  Most of their dances were unsophisticated, jive and  jitterbug; it was easy for my feet to catch the beat. Best of all, you didn't need a partner.  You could dance opposite a girl student  as easily as opposite a youth. Not a dance of touch, but one where the rhythm itself created  an  unseen wire holding two people together  in the leap of  movement.  I had never been happier!
My  poem "The Colour of God's Face,"  later  revised and  published as "Zam­ bia," is a documentary, presenting an impersonal  view of a country wresting itself from  a  tribal  way of life into the modern  world. It is not a documentary in the sense that  the  Japanese-Canadian "Call  My People Home" was: a presentation

SONG AND  DANCE



true to the "found" facts. It is rather  a white outsider's appraisal,  interpretation, of what was happening to the blacks. (The section "The Prophetess", however, is based on  historical  events.)  It seems to me therefore  that  "Zambia," written  in
1964, is a freer expression of the impact of socio-political events, written in a more contemporary style. The  music and dance is there, but more subtly conveyed.
At first I was extremely  hesitant about showing this poem to anyone, for I had
long been out of the Canadian literary scene. I scarcely believed I was a poet any more. However, one afternoon  my old friend Anne Marriott, the poet from North Vancouver,  came over for lunch. On the back lawn, sitting in the sun, I had the courage  to read  her  a section, "The  Prophetess." "Why," she said, "it's  fine ... exciting! You've really got the feel of it."
I was most grateful. One has to be believed in, or perish! From then on I began to write, stirred  also by contact with the Black Mountain group and by discussions with Milton  Acorn. The  next year I fell deeply in love and  poems "sprang  from my loins," as it were. All the yearning to sing and dance  revived  again;  but this time I did so with  more confidence. This time I spoke out of  immediate  experi­ ence. I disguised nothing. The result was the book, The Unquiet Bed.
If Iwere  asked  now  to relate  these new poems to my earliest lyrics in Green
Pitcher  and  Signpost  Iwould  find  many  elements in  common: music;  dance rhythms  (metred   and  free) ; speech rhythms;  and,  in  tone,  a sense of isolation leading  to a game  of wry  wit, a play on words. Behind it all a belief in love, in communication on all levels; and a sense of grace, a call to praise. Two lyrics illustrate these interrelationships. Here is one, written about 1929:

Now, I am free
but  prejudice
will creep like moss on an olding tree

Soon shall I be my parents'  child a desperate  grasp towards  fixity?
and another, the tide poem to The Unquiet  Bed (written  1965): The woman  I am
is not what you see I'm  not just bones and  crockery

47

SONG AND  DANCE



the woman I am knew love and hate hating the chains that  parents make

longing that love might set men free yet hold them fast in loyalty

the woman I am
is not what you see move over love make room for me

Although  it has been said that  my most intense  poems are the private ones, I myself believe that  the public poems contain  the same elements, mentioned  above. Between the types, however, it is the intention that differs. Some critics will prefer one genre, others another; but I believe them both to be valid, as poetry. In forty years I have written  over a thousand  poems ... many  unpublished.  But whether "public" or "private" each poem is a part of me and  belongs as my skin belongs. Good, comfortable old clothes in which I sink or swim.
Recently I read in a New Republic review of my admired  critic, Herbert  Read,
that  although  he had  achieved  the modem  techniques  sufficiently to be a great poet, he admitted  failure  because he lacked  the necessary modem  concomitant, "a sense of the tragic."  Perhaps that sums me up also? We are optimists, Blakeian believers in the New Jerusalem. We cannot  see man's  role as tragic but rather  as divine  comedy.  We  are  alone-so  what?  We  are  not  always lonely. Laughter heals, the dance  captures, the song echoes forth from tree-top  to tree-top. I won't stop believing this until every tree in Canada is chopped  down! I thumb  my nose at those who say that  nature  and with it, human  nature,  is becoming "obsolete."

NOTES
1Florence Randal Livesay: Songs of Ukraina. Toronto; Dent, 1917.
2 D.  A.  Yarrow:   "Dorothy  Livesay, poet;  towards  an  assessment." Unpublished
article.



THE GIRL

IN THE DRUG STORE



Norman Levine



IMUST   HAVE BEEN about  ten  or  eleven  when  my  p=nU.
arranged  for my sister and me to spend the summer holidays at Markovitch's farm
on the outskirts of Ottawa. I was a city kid -but that summer  I was taught how to pitch horseshoes, drink water out of a tin ladle, gather corn, ride a horse, throw a  lasso, listen  to cowboy songs on  the wooden verandah  from  the gramophone inside. There  were five other  Ottawa  kids on the farm  for the summer.  One  of them  was a girl called  Mona.  I liked her. And I decided  to write a play for her. We  put  it  on  in  one  of  the  barns  and  charged  the  adults  a  button  by way of admission.
Then  later in High School  (I went to the High School of Commerce)  they had a magazine  called  The  Argosy. It  carried short stories. I  wrote a short story for it, about  a hangman who has to hang his own son. I called it "A  piece of string." When  I showed  the story  to Mr.  Benoit, our  English teacher  who was also my basketball coach, he said :
"You can't  use that  title. Maupassant  has a story called that."
I didn't  know  who  Maupassant was. For we had  no books in the house. My main home reading  was the funnies. My uncle, who lived on the Driveway, used to get American  newspapers  and  he would save me the funnies. Once, a second­ hand  book did get in the house. It was a novel. All about  Vienna.  I read the first chapter-about the hero wandering through  the streets of Vienna with his coat­ collar  turned  up. And  that  was enough  to make me do imitation after imitation in exercise books.
As soon as I could  leave High  School legally I did  and  went to work for the
government  in the  Department of  National  Defence.  One  of  my  jobs was  to operate   the  duplicating  machine,  running  off specifications.  Some  evemngs  I


49

THE GIRL  IN  THE DRUGSTORE



would  come  back  and  do stencils of something  I had  written - short sketches, mostly descriptions -like going out fishing very early in the morning near Ottawa in  a boat  on  a river with the mist close to the ground. I would  then give these mimeographed  pieces to my friends.
In  1942,  when  I was 18, I joined the air force  and  eventually  ended  up on Lancasters  with 429 Squadron  in Yorkshire. When  the war in Europe  was over, and  while waiting  to go back to Canada,  I went  to Trinity  College, Cambridge on a special leave course. There  a lecturer gave me a thin wartime  production of Pound's  Selected Poems. It was the first modern verse I had read.
Four  months  after  returning  to Canada  I went  to McGill. And it was at Mc­
Gill that  I started  to catch up, and how, for my lack of good reading. Perhaps it was because I read  too many classics too quickly. Or  perhaps  I read these books knowing I had  to pass exams on them. Whatever  the reason -I have only the haziest notion of those books today, unless I have re-read them since leaving Mc­ Gill. The  only book, from all the reading lists, that  has left a definite memory is The  Sound and the Fury. And the reason is not entirely because of  the book.
I began  to  read  it one evening in  the  basement  room, on  the comer  of Guy
and  Sherbrooke,  that  I rented  from  the  Dean  of  Christ  Church  Cathedral; he lived with  his family  above. I read it right  through  at one sitting. And  when  I finished it  was early in  the  morning  and  I was far  too  excited  to go to sleep. So I put on  my black winter coat and  went out.  It  was very cold. Hard-packed snow on the ground, icicles from the roofs. The  only place open at this time was the  drugstore  on  St. Catherine  near  Guy. I walked  down  the few blocks. And went in. The  place was empty except for a woman sitting on a stool by the counter having a cup of coffee and smoking a cigarette.  She was in her twenties. She had on a fur coat  that  was undone. She had  her legs crossed. She wore galoshes. We both looked at each other. Then  she crossed herself. I turned  and  walked out.
After  twenty-two  years The Sound and the Fury has become vague and  hazy.
But  that  girl in  the  drugstore crossing herself has remained  vivid and  there  are times when she haunts  me still. Later, I was to find out in writing that this is the way things emerge.
At  McGill  I had  some flying war-poems,  full of bad  alliteration,  published in the McGill Daily. And for a year I edited Forge, the university's literary magazine. I also took  Professor Files' course in writing. This meant  going to see Professor Files once a fortnight with something new I had  written.  In  this way I started  to write  what  I called  a novel, which  turned  out  to be The  Angled Road. Every second Saturday morning  I would go into his office and  show him a chapter  or

so

THE GIRL IN THE DRUGSTORE



part  of a chapter. Often  I  wrote it  the night  before. And  he would go over it, sometimes correcting  the grammar  of a sentence. Sometimes suggesting parts  to leave out.
I am unable  to read The  Angled Road today. But at that time Files' encourage­
ment  was vital. He helped  to build up confidence on the shakiest of foundations.
My wartime stay in England  was very unliterary. But when I returned in 1949 with the manuscript of The  Angled Road in my Gladstone  bag and  a chapbook of juvenile poems that Ryerson had brought out, and a promise from McClelland to look after  my books in Canada if I could get them  published in England - I thought of myself as a writer and headed for literary London.
I had  no letters of introduction nor did I know anyone. But it wasn't  the kind of time when you needed these things. A lot of people had come to London from different  parts  of Britain  and  the Commonwealth.  Writers  and  painters congre­ gated  in certain  pubs. And  there was still a hangover of the war in the loosened class barriers,  the romanticism,  the idealism. Wanting  to be a painter  or a writer was equated  with  wanting  the good life. The  rationing,  the  bomb-damage,  the general seediness, also helped. And because of the wartime boom in reading it was still, comparatively   speaking,  easy to find  a  publisher  for  one's  work. Literary standards were, on  the  whole, not  high. What  I  didn't  know, at  the  time, was that  I had come in on the end of something that was in the process of breaking up.
I spent  the summers  down  in Cornwall. And while St. Ives, then, was an out­ post of what  was going on in  London,  especially in the painting-the physical impact of Cornwall  was another  thing.
I had come straight  from city life. And to be exposed, unexpectedly, to so much
varied  nature  gave me an exhilarating  sense of personal freedom. I spent most of the time outside  just walking and looking. For much of what  I was seeing I was totally ignorant.  The  names  of the birds  (apart from  plain gull and  sparrow)   I didn't  know. I didn't know the names of the flowers or what was gorse or bracken or  heather  or  blackberries  or these stunted  English trees. The  fish I saw up for auction  every morning  at  the  slipway with  their fat  human  lips and  small eyes were anonymous. A hard  and new physical world seemed to have suddenly opened before me, and  in such splendid  colour. I'd  get up before six in the morning and go out.  And  late  at  night  I'd  be sitting by the window,  just so I wouldn't  miss anything.
Then  it was seeing the painters go among the beached boats with a sketch pad
and  do sketches that  probably  made me go out with a pencil and  notebook and
try  to describe what  I saw. I would spend a whole morning on a beach trying to


51

THE GIRL  IN  THE DRUGSTORE



describe the way a wave broke, how the far-shore fields changed  colour with the passing clouds. Then  in the harbour: there were the boats, the gulls on the sand bar  facing  the  wind, the sand  eels swimming  by the harbour wall, the way the sunlight fractured  like fishing nets on the sandy bottom.
The  physical presence of Cornwall ani these exercises stopped me from writing the self-indulgent  prose-poetry in the prose. And  cut  out  all those inflated  rhet­ orical bits in the verse. The  writing became much  more simple and direct.
But I still had to come to terms with something else.
At  McGill I  was running  away from being a Jew.  It sounds silly now. But at the  time it was mixed  up  with  coming  from  Murray  Street,  Ottawa, with  the peddlers'  horses  and  sleighs, and  going  around   with  boys and  girls from  rich parents.  I made-up  so many identities. It  all depended  on who I was with. This helped  to give my life there a certain  dangerous  edge. But it was to  prove near fatal  to the writing. For at that  time I was writing The  Angled Road. And in it I cut out the fact that my characters were Jewish. And by doing this, a whole dimension is missing; I made them smaller than they should have been.
Then,  when I came over to England I was running  away from Canada. All my early stories, which  were to do with Canadian life, I set in England.  The  result was the same sense of paleness and unreality. And  I find that  none of that  early writing means anything  now to me.
A couple more years had  to go by before I was able to recognize my material and  use it without  trying to make it more acceptable.  And the first book to come out after that  was Canada Made Me. My writing begins with that book.
It seeins a complicated  and  long way to have to go in order  to come to terms with  one's  material.  But then some people  take longer  than  others  to  grow  up. And  perhaps it also took longer because I had  to recognize that one of the condi­ tions of my being a writer is of living in exile. I felt it in Canada, as the son of orthodox  Jewish  parents in Ottawa; then as the poor boy among the rich at Mc­ Gill. And now I feel it as a Canadian living in England. It's not the way I would have  planned  it. And  I still have  fantasies of some  day  living in  a  community where I will take an active part in its everyday affairs.










52



TEN YEARS AT PLAY



James  Reaney



ISTARTED OFF writing plays at a desk in an office, one of the
English  Department offices at  Acadia  University, Wolfville, Nova  Scotia  when
teaching summer school there about eleven years ago.
My  latest  theatre  has  been  working on  the  Book of  Genesis with  no script, simply  a list of images  and  turning  points nailed up  on  a  post where  both  the actors and myself go occasionally to see what is coming next. On the floor (it's the loft of an old Legion Hall)  are strips of coloured tape put there for organizational purposes;  also a drummer, a pianist, and  a prop table filled with the things you need  to put  on  Genesis with.  For example, mailing tubes for the angels to beat Adam  and  Eve out of Eden  with;  a long strip of cheesecloth to hold in front of the Eden scenes to give that effect of dream. Cardboard  boxes to build the Tower of Babel with,  and  a green  garden  hose for the serpent. Anything  else we need can  be suggested with the human  voice or body, and in my Listeners' Workshop at  London,  Ontario, I usually had  25 of these ranging  in height from  two feet to six, and in age from  three  to sixty. Every Saturday  morning  at  ten.
I started  off eleven years ago in the midst of marking essays writing a play for
a contest  (the  Stratford  Festival-Globe contest as a matter  of fact)  -completely innocent  of what  actors, directors, producers could do. And might  not be able to do. I was out to tell as strong  a story as I could devise, as richly as possible. You end up, of course, giving everybody too much -four hour  play with thirty in the cast and a plot that needs a hallful of detectives to unravel; also with no idea how to get help with the monster-child  you are trying to bring into the theatre. But everything written down on paper.
Right  now, probably  I couldn't write down what happened on those Saturday
mornings  of  March   1968,  when  we finally in  the  Workshop  broke  through  to doing  the  Babel sequences  with  all the  rest of Genesis behind  us. Just  lately I repeated  some  of Genesis at  a  workshop with 50 kids and  25 spectators  at an

53

TEN YEARS AT  PLAY



Oak  Bay school gym in Victoria, British Columbia.  The  B.C. kids came up with some  new solutions  as to how you show the sun  or  the creation  of stars -I'm glad  someone  videotaped  it because otherwise  there's  no  record;  impossible to write down, only try it again and see what it's like this time. There  are certainly disadvantages  to the no-script evolvement of plays, but  one thing  they do force the  people taking  part  to do is to remember,  and  where memory fails to make it up again-new.
In  a moment  I'll give the list of Genesis things that  is the core of an hour and more of stage action, the list taking up one normal  ditto page:  right now I'd  like to talk some more about my first play The Sun and the Moon which in its original script  ran to close on 200 typed pages. In  1965 Keith Turnbull started a Summer Theatre in London,  Ontario; I was invited  to submit  a play, and  to co-direct it, a  totally  new  experience for me. Playwrights  are  eager  to see their  scripts  per­ formed and I agreed to this. By this time the script had been slinuned to 75 pages, the plot cleared up, and the cast decimated. "Why does Reaney always write about Witches?"  Marigold  Charlesworth is reported  once to have said, with I think the implication  that  I should get over my witch fixation. The  plot of the play does indeed  involve  a  strolling  witchlike  abortionist  who  comes to a  small  Ontario hamlet  pretending   to be the  local minister's  first light-of-love.  His early  diaries were tossed out to be burnt and fell into her hands instead. There is a denouement  with  real identities  and false identities sorted  out  and  a  young  man  who works at the local Chicken Hatchery  discovered to be the minister's real son, etc. What­ ever else it is, at least it tells a story and those who gave into it a bit found enjoy­ ment. My first time directing I found myself completely paralyzed. I did not know what to tell people, how to move, how to make things flow. Now I feel that given this kind of script  the all-important  person is the bookholder. I hardly knew there were such  people;  nor stage managers  who  took  down  blocking, nor  producers who managed  the casting, in short all the organization that  lies behind  even the least expensive amateur  Little Theatre production. Besides meeting my own pain­ ful ignorance  and shyness, I also met situations that  recur in the world of amateur  theatre  around  colleges and schools, and  little theatres. One  wild idea I had, for example, was to drop the script, get everybody together and run through  the whole story in mime and improvising it as if we were making it up among ourselves. This idea  was pooh-poohed  by a really good actor  in  the cast, who just was not used to thinking  of plays in that  way; no, there had  to be a script and  you followed it word for word. What  I wanted, of course, was for them and  me to get a physical feeling for the  design of the  play, the sort  of thing  you do get when  you think

54

TEN YEARS  AT PLAY



about  Macbeth after having seen it, or watch a ballet version of Hamlet. I have a feeling that Twelfth  Night started with thinking about a clown with a little drum: and  that's  the way I would direct it. Gather  the cast around, listen to the drum, improvise along the main lines of the Shakespeare plot and  then start  adding  the text.  Well. Amateur  theatre  is more frequently  obsessed with such goods of this world  as lighting,  physical  production  and  the private  ego:  all that  these things could support-the meaning  of a play, the feel of souls, words and  their magic
-gets forgotten.  It  can't  be bought, so it can't  be of much  value. Some typical scenes go like this:   (I) Mr.  Reaney, when are we having  a technical  rehearsal? Reaney  replies, "We're not."  Gasp of shock, disbelief this play is really a  play. ( 2 )  Bertram  is not going to show. Why? Well, he'll come to the rehearsals, but I doubt  very much if he'll  make any of the performances.  ( 3)  Listen, stop bug­ ging me about  the way people used to act in church when you were a kid. I know pretty  well, and  I'll  do it the night of the performance.  ( 4)  Edwina  likes to get
inside a  production and  destroy it from within.  It  goes without  saying that  this was, even at the very first, when my inexperience let it flourish, not the total pic­ ture, and eventually what  I have described either disappeared  or ceased to matter  under  the influence of actors who could forget themselves, and of technical things that  worked with  the play. I  remember being particularly  grateful for the know­ how behind  the costumes which re-created the very difficult world of the thirties. The  shoes (from  Segal's)  were good enough to fool my mother. What  I learned most, however, was not to avoid writing scenes that  come on top of one another as in  a  movie  (someone  pointed  this out  to me as a fault  when  I  could see a thousand  directional  ways around  the crack in the play's performing surface), but to get away from that  backstage mystique of the bunch of ego atmns, some bitch­ ing, others suffering  gladly,  and  all for the sake of My  Fair  Lady or Lil Abner. The  tendency in the society in which I lived was to see drama as, first, something somebody  else wrote  thousands  of Iniles away, and  as something  that  you could evolve physically, as out of a can. I wanted a society where directing a play is not equated  with stage managing,  where the important rehearsal is not the technical rehearsal,  where  the  lighting,  costumes, all  that  money  can  buy disappear  and what  we have instead  is so much  group skill and sense of fun  in imagining out things that  richness re-appears all over the place for nothing.







55

TEN YEARS AT PLAY



HERE IS THE LIST I promised earlier: REVOLT OF THE  ANGELS: WAR IN HEAVEN
SING: "Jacob and  the Ladder"-spiritual-everybody comes in "climbing ladders."
(a)   Let's all go to Sunday School-hum, drum  fingers on the floor for the rain on the roof.
(b)   the Minister reads the first verses of Genesis.
(c)   the  People  suddenly  start  chanting   those  verses, each  word  repeated three  times!
CHAOS! 	CHAOS!
(d)   the  people divide into  the hands  of God,  or  the colours tapd floor.
"WE  ARE THE HANDS OF GOD" "ON THE
FIRST DAY -let there be light and there was SECOND DAY-he divided the waters THIRD DAY-dry land and grass
FOURTH DAY -sun, moon and the stars
FIFTH DAY-fish, great whales and birds SIXTH DAY-animals and man SEVENTH DAY-he rested"

Before going on  I  think  I should  do some sketching  in of what  is happening because of this list:  The  revolt of the Angels starts  when  a young child is raised by the  oldest  person  who generally plays God.  Some  angels bow, others  retreat and  mill and  then  attack.  Groups  menace,  press force fields of presence at each other,  topple  over  at  invisible signals to  do so and  then  the  Christ  Child  on  a chariot  of shoulders  with whirling arms for wheels pushes the evil angels over a cliff. Don't  ask questions-just do it. The  room  is empty,  then  people coming in with their Bibles on their heads and that  unearthly quiet of Sunday  Afternoon. Get a score of people quietly drumming  their fingers on the floor of an old Legion Hall  and  you'll see what  I mean.  All of this splits open  in the chaos sequence. Everybody  making  strange  sounds. Out  of this come  ten  people who mime  the hands of the Creator. With skill and work you can get an effect of thumbs, index fingers, hands  moulding  planets, only it's a finger  with  a waist, not a  joint. Get

TEN YEARS AT  PLAY



the people in  the hand  group  to make up songs about  being the left little finger of God  and  so on. Then  these hands  chase the chaos people around  until they have kneaded  them into a ball of human  mud -like a football scrimmage which then slowly starts revolving and we're about at the second day already. Here some lie down and  ripple;  others create a fountain,  endlessly lifting infants  up, up into the clouds. For the fourth day several balls of people: sharp hand rays for the sun; blunt  the  hands  for  moonlight,  and  wink the hands for starlight.  Or  talk to the actors-they  have  their  own solutions;  for example  a kid in Oak  Bay did  the sun  by simply crouching  down  as if in worship, whereas in London,  Ontario the hands flared out. For Fish two bigger people propel a smaller person around  who agilely "swims"  while  being  held  in  mid-air.  For  birds  a  band  of  people have earlier  withdrawn-what for?-well  now we know. They  have  been  making
a host of paper  darts  which now come floating over our heads as that  part of the list gets chanted. For  the  making  of man,  actors lie down  on  the  floor as the various parts  of Adam : a whole body for a limb. The  Hands  of God command various  actions  such  as "Beat  your  heart"  and  "raise  your arms."  The  various bodies  making  up  Adam  generally  work  together  to  make  the somewhat  eerie illusion that  there is a huge giant out there on the floor, struggling to get up. Have a big discussion here about  Frankenstein  and are we a monster or are we Adam etc. There's  been piano and drum going all the time here and over a month or two of Saturday  sessions the whole group of Listeners evolved chants and imagery and sounds.

( r)   SING  THE BIG ROCK CANDY  MOUNTAIN ( m)  Adam and  Eve get tangled with the Serpent
( n)   they are banished from the Garden
( o)   Cain  and Abel-a big session here doing scenes with parents  and chil­ dren, improvising  out one's past sulks at parental  favouritism. Abel can be some infuriatingly  sweet child.
( p)   the story of Lamech -to  go with the curse on  Cain; Lamech  shoots someone  by mistake  and  again  fascinating  conversations  about  justice with  the cast. Also  about  the Bible, since no one seems to know about Blind Old  Lamech  and  the naughty  boys who gave him  the bow and arrow to play with -just invented.
(q)   Adam,  Seth,  Methusaleh  and  Enoch:  Adam  lived for  930  years and he died

57

TEN YEARS AT PLAY



Seth lived for g I 2 years and he died
Methusaleh lived for g6g years and he died
Enoch lived for 365 years and was taken to heaven on a chariot of fire! This  is done with  a mime that  involves four  people walking  across the room, getting  older  as the  rest of the cast chant  off the  centuries. The  chariot  of fire involves a monumental  group of people bunched  together  with whirling anus for
wheels.
( r)  SING THE OLD ARK'S  A-MOVERING
( s)   everybody gets drowned except the good people and the animals. Again, a group of people form an ark, and other actors get inside the ark. This ark glides around  the room, occasionally trampling some strong swim­ mer in his agony.
( t) sacrifice -the colour lines make songs about  the new rainbow
(u)   Nimrod the Tyrant/Tower of BabelfUr of the Chaldeesj
Abram  escapes.
We  build  a  tower out  of cardboard  boxes. Then  every one starts speaking  a different language-whole mornings are spent in finding out just how many languages  the cast knows. In  the Ur scenes, all put  paper  bags over their heads and  answer roll calls by numbers they have made  up. Break them up into groups and  let them  discuss regimentation  etc. Abram  refuses to answer by number, in­ sists that  he is Abram  and escapes from paper  bagville.
One  morning in June  1968, I watched the Listeners' Workshop do Genesis be­ fore an invited audience. There had been no dress rehearsal, we were not worried about  forgetting,  there were lots of people in the group  who were directing  from inside  the  mass  of  actors. And  it unfolded,  like some  homemade  thing  out  of brown  paper  with  all sorts of fascinating  rough  edges and  accidental  effects. In the Babel sequence the ingredients of the tower engulfed anything  moveable in the room  the  audience  wasn't sitting on. I  think  there  were some participants who had  just arrived  that  morning, but it made no  difference -they  were folded in to the goings on.



MY EXPERIENCE  IN   MAKING UP  PLAYS then  lies between the two poles I have been describing, and  I would now like to list some tides so arranged: Three  Desks, Killdeer, Easter Egg, Sun and Moon ...and ... Listen to the Wind, Colours in the Dark, Names and Nicknames, One Man  Masque, Geography Match, Donnelly, the Genesis I've been talking about.

sa

TEN YEARS AT  PLAY



If I  were to tell the story fully of the first group of plays, what  would a few peaks be? First of all, the finding of a director who was interested in new plays, encouraged  me to finish Killdeer, and who really gives in her productions a sense of listening, and this director was Pamela Terry who at the time was working with the Toronto Alumni.  Secondly,  just watching  rehearsals in  class rooms, factory lofts, renovated  synagogues, green rooms, and then waiting for audience reactions on opening nights in a gamut of places -lofts again, university auditoriums, little theatres and  big theatres. This particular  group of plays are constructed like rivers in  voyageur  journals.  You go smoothly along in an  apparent realistic way, and then there is this big leap -which director, actors and  audience have got to take, or is it  just bad  dramaturgy? and  are they going to take it? Let me give an ex­ ample.  At  the end  of Easter Egg one night some one came  up  to me and  said, "But  no one  ever feels he has to get married  just because he killed a bat." The  murder  in  Desks, the  circle dance  in Killdeer  (well, the whole trial scene), the recovery of the  "idiot" boy in Egg have all at one  time or another  produced  a feeling of  "rapids" with  audiences  and  the occasional muttering  actor.  I'm  still working on  this; one solution  is to declare  myself mad-I  don't  think  the way other  people do, and  what  to you seems melodramatic, surreal, arty, e ., 	to me seems utterly verismo and Zola. An interesting case in point:  Killdeer first had a really wild scene where the old judge had a heart  attack,  caused in a Richard III way by the  villainess suddenly  revealing a lurid scene from  his past. After  I wrote  that  out,  Margaret Avison came  up  to me and  said, "I liked it  the first way-more  poetic."  There   are  signs that  maybe  if I  hold  on  eventually  the audiences  will be also impelled  by ripples from  the  zeitgeist, i.e. the imagery in the new pop music and  the uprush of sympathy for dream  visions. This was most apparent in a recent  production  of Egg at Simon Fraser  with music from  a Big Pink track  (the  pianist is from  my home town, by the way)  and,  with Kenneth imprisoned  in  a  polyethylene  bag for  most of the evening,  what  I  would call a Strawberry   Fields  approach. And  I  didn't  feel that  scrunch  feeling, "here  we come to the rapids," that  I had with earlier audiences, sometimes, and, of course, back in the age of the Johnny  Mercer lyric.
But it's  tiresome waiting  for either the audience  to catch  up, or for one's own
imperfect  self to mature  and  steady, so after  watching  the Peking Opera  at the Royal Alex one evening I decided to try writing a different kind of play altogether. That is, a  play where it's  all rapids. In  Masque,  Names  and  Geography  Match I  proceeded  with  mostly lists of names  which are  chanted; well, Masque  isn't like that, but you should see the list of props. In Names, the words are all shouted

59

TEN YEARS AT  PLAY



eventually  against  somebody.  Here,  a  director   whose  production   of  The  En­ chanted  I had  seen many  times with the feeling again  that  here was somebody who listened-John Hirsch, midwifed the script  with  the additional  mime and movement  I hadn't quite  realized  would  be  necessary  and  a  group  of  actors appeared   at  Manitoba  Theatre Centre  who  caught  on  beautifully  to  the  bare stage,  just words and  you approach.  Then  I  was ready  to write a script so odd that  nobody seemed  willing to chance it, and  I had  to direct  it  myself-Listen to the Wind. Here was a play about young people putting  on a melodrama. Their  predicament  throws light on the inner  play;  the inner  play  throws light on their tragedies. The  big thing was a chorus of youngsters who were on stage sitting or kneeling most of the time, and  a prop table  presided  over  by a girl who became almost the  pivot of the whole production,  also a book  holder in a rocking chair, also a  piano,  a  drummer   and  a  guitarist.  Whenever  a  sound  was needed  the chorus  provided  it;  whenever someone needed  a prop  they walked over and  got it. The  miming of the coach scenes is an example of the whole method: whenever the actors  had  to go from one manor  house to  another, a  boy appeared  with a wheel which  he coasted  along, they following  him  behind  running  in time with him. Before they get into the coach they walk  or limp  or whatever; once in the coach  they glide along  with it. Cocoanut  shells for hoofbeats  and  gravel sounds are  provided  by the chorus. Someone in mathematics remarked  to a friend  that the  longest  distances  took the shortest  coach  rides, whereas  the shorter  the dis­ tance the longer the ride. I have been thinking about  that  remark ever since. Out of this play which  broke with reality completely, used shorthand for everything, forced  the audience  to provide lighting and  production and sets and even ending (on a Saturday  morning  after the Hamilton  performance, I met a student  on the street who said, "That's the first play I've ever seen where there were six or seven endings") -out of this play sprang all the rest of recent activities-the Listeners' Workshop  came  out  of  the  young people in  the  chorus  who  wanted  to go on. From  their activities were devised embryonics for Colours and  Donnelly. The  key word, so far as I am concerned, is "listen."
So,  out  of  the  development  between  the  two  theatres  I've  been  discussing,
eventually-came my first commissioned play  Colours  in  the  Dark  (Stratford
1967, directed by John  Hirsch). There should be a discussion of it, but aside from the fact that it has been described elsewhere,' the best thing  to say is that Colours is all the other  plays and experiments I've been talking  about.  With its 42 scenes, multiple  characterization, improvised music, bare stage, magic lantern images­ it almost couldn't  help be all the other  plays as well as a re-tell of  the Bible. In

6o

TEN YEARS AT  PLAY



the sabbatical  year  I  am  now enjoying I've  been working on  Donnelly, or The Biddulph  Tragedy, an attempt  to apply what techniques I've  collected to a story in the  past  with  all its longhand  archival detail. When  I started  this play about an Ontario family who were massacred by their neighbours on the night of  Feb­ ruary  g,I 88o,  I could  tell that  a lot had changed since the English  Department office at Acadia.  I kept seeing all the Donnelly events in terms of  two viewpoints that  cross-some tell it  this  way jsome tell it  this way:   the  Donnellys were at heart  decent  people who were persecuted/the Donnellys were mad dogs who had to  be  destroyed.  This  resulted  in stage  movement, scene settings, speeches that form St. Patrick's  X's. Listen and Colours also had patterns behind them. I won­ der if this sense of design I didn't  have I Iyears ago comes from the intervening workshop experiments.  There  I've got used to eliciting flows of power and move­ ment,  got  used to watching  for the currents of these flows as they come out of people playing with other  people the game of  mimicking reality. This is the way Hirsch  and Terry  direct  and  this is what I want my plays to be wrapped  around
-the delight of listening to words, the delight in making up patterns  (scribbling with your body/bodies) of movement for fun and in play.

' The Stratford Scene 1958-Ig68. Clarke, Irwin, Toronto,  rg68.  Alvin A. Lee's book on Reaney  (Twayne,  New York, rg68)   contains accurate  maps of most of the plays mentioned.









61


THE TIME  OF

YOUR LIFE






A. W.Purdy












CHILDHOOD- when toads and  frogs rain  down  the sky, and  night is velvety as under the skirts
of a goddess, where it's always summer­
In winter water pours from gardenhose and  turns to ice in town backyards;
coal-shovels clear a hockey rink for boys
to play war, mothers  watch  anxiously:
King  Arthur's court, with Eaton's catalogue for breastplate, a hockey stick for lance -

The later legend has a big league scout sitting  in smoky small-town rinks, watching the local flash, signing him
to a contract for those fabulous arenas
whose heroes remain  boyish, emotions public,
and  women they sleep with are always their wives, as money grins green and freckles fade -

Begin before the beginning,
shortly after birth,  even before school, with ice luckily thick or drowning thin:

THE TIME OF  YOUR LIFE



Within five days this poem assumed as many  different  shapes. At  first it  was only  about  kids  playing scrub hockey in  my  home  town  forty years ago. Then I  copied it to send to a  fr end
poem will get lost or I will die in the night of bubonic  plague-there­ fore I send a copy away so that at least one will survive), and re-wrote it completely. Next  day I copied it again and again re-wrote. This happened  until the poem assumed its present form. For those five days, sitting in a Greek hotel in Athens, I scarcely went outside or did  any­ thing but r.e-write this poem. Someone drank the two bottles of brandy
I had there, and someone ate the  food. Eventually  I was driven outside from hunger and  thirst, and the sun was shining. I suppose the  poem is about the  first awareness in children. It's also about the darker shapes in the mind, and about time. Obscurely and  for no reason I can think of, it seems to me also about writing poems.




the painted backdrop of snow and dingy houses, fades, only the shouting children are real:
and sometimes on hard-crusted  river snow
I've seen the game escape its limits,
and leap the width and breadth of things, become a mad chase going nowhere, out past dangerous places where the current
nibbles cheese holes-out to the wide wide bay: where iceboats leave their tracks to race with birds, and fishing shanties are lost castles beyond the town, and slow clouds lift their bodies like giant goalies-

Miles out in the far country of Quinte  the child stands
- senses he is being watched,
glances down at his feet, which seem supported  by black glass above nothing, where shadows with eyes, green shapes look at him:

THE TIME OF  YOUR  LIFE


"We  know about you ... " Motionless as a waterfall.
he stands in no-time,
where sequence is tangled in creation, before possible things converge
to be trapped in the inevitable:
the boy's deep sub-self becomes aware of what looks like a small hockey player
reflected on ice watching him -
or else a boy with raw cold nose
-or else a complete stranger, standing inside the high blue barn: and yet this four-foot two-thirds man-size carbon of himself is not
himself no matter what it looks like -
And order from somewhere makes one arm lift up, holding the stick high;
the pinched face smiles grimly;
the body above mirrored ice is instructed to bend down in order that the owner's eyes may permit a glimpse of the owner hhnself, clothed in flesh but aloof
from flesh, remaining hidden:
politely the boy's mouth opens, his lips slowly carefully form the words:



After which a whoof
of expelled breath shrieks
 "Thank you -"

a sudden "YEE-OUWW" at the sky, and black ice with a mile-wide spasm
over somewhere beyond the world's edge cracks -

He skates wildly back to town
with long swooping twenty-foot strides, batting an old tin can ahead of him :

THE TIME OF  YOUR UFE



a cold moon hangs above the town clock tower that strikes hard iron of sky;
the elderly pumpmaker  in his shop crowded  with pine smell, tugs his ear; the blacksmith in his smoky cave
yawns hugely and nailed horseshoes tinkle­ On either side the river lie
dark cubes of houses drowned in snow:
the boy dashes excitedly to one
of them, aching with news of an event real or imagined, bursts
the door open, "Hey, mom (and forgets whatever it was), I'm hungry-" Weather  turns colder, the house shudders and rocks, frost creeps
on blind white windows: and under its patchwork  quilt time moves
in a drift of birds a dream of horses, and sticky buds breaking out of snow, premeditations of flowers and lifting tides, the sleep of men -

Even the shadow shapes inside their black prison stay where they are, surviving the night, and have been known occasionally to sleep -

Revised  june 18, 1969


A. W. PURDY

An Interview



Conducted by
Gary Geddes



GEnnEs:  Somehow your poetry manages  to be domestic and  historical at the same time. Is this what  critics mean  by calling it epic?
PURDY:  "Rooms  for  rent in the outer  planets."  Yes, but  I don't  think  it's epic.
Epic sounds grandiose to me; and I don't  think  I'm grandiose. I certainly hope
I'm  not.
GEDDES:  In  "The Country  North  of Belleville" there  is a sense of beauty  and terror in the description. Do you find the Canadian landscape hostile?
PURDY: Landscapes  hostile to man? I think man is hostile to himself. Landscapes, I think, are essentially neutral.
GEDDES: But you travel a lot, as do many Canadian writers, and  write about  the places you visit. Is this because it is easier to control  the elements of a newer, smaller  area?
PURDY: Easier than  Canada,  you mean? No, it isn't that.  I have the feeling that
-before  I  worked  at  jobs and  described  the  places  where  I was and  the people that  I met, etc.-that somehow or other one uses up one's past. It isn't that when one goes to another country one is consciously seeking for new poems, because it would get to sounding as goddam self-conscious as hell. For instance, if you go to Baffin Island  to write poems (which  I did, incidentally) ... well, I  don't  like to  look at  it  that  way. I'm  interested  in  going  to Baffin Island because I'm interested in Baffin Island.
GEDDES: And the poems just happen.
PURDY:  I  write  poems like spiders spin  webs, and  perhaps  for  much  the same reason:  to support  my existence. I talk, I eat, I write poems, I make love -I do all these things self-consciously. The  "new  area" bit ... well, unless one is a stone one doesn't sit still. And perhaps new areas of landscape  awake old areas

66

A. W. PURDY



of one's self. One has seen the familiar landscape  (perhaps) so many times that one ceases to really see it. Maybe it's like the expatriate  writers, Joyce and so on, who went to foreign countries in order to see their own.
GEDDES:  You have been called the great Canadian  realist (to drag  one from the
bottom  of the  bag). Do you write any poems which don't have some base in actual experience?
PURDY:  Aren't  you talking  about  poets like Mallarme?  Very few poets do that.
I've  written  poems  about  things, even doorknobs, but  generally  speaking  it's out of my own life.
GEDDES:  Do you feel at ease to "cook" your experiences for the sake of a poem? PURDY: After  you've lived your whole life writing poetry  (and  I started  writing at  thirteen), I  think  you've  always got one ear cocked,  listening  to know if you're good enough  to put it into a poem. Do you mean, to be wholly involved
in  the experience  without  seeing it as something else? No, I don't  think so, if that's  what you mean.  I always know what I'm doing or feeling or seeing. I'm self-conscious about  being self-conscious about being self-conscious.
GEDDES:  In  your "Lament for Robert  Kennedy"  there seems to be a qualitative
difference between the first part of the poem, where you are dependent  for the most part upon rhetoric and abstraction, and the second part, where the images and  language  become personal and concrete. Do you think that  your poetry is strongest when it is attached  to images from your own landscape?
PURDY: Yes, I think so. I was being pretty propagandist  in the early part of that poem;  but,  also, when  you say there's  nothing  concrete  in it, how about  the skidrow  losers with  the  bottle of good booze in their  hands  like a lily? Yes, I generally stick to the concrete or get to it pretty quick. You can start  from the concrete, but I don't  think you can take off from no stance at all.
GEDDES : I especially like your poem, "Portrait", about  Irving  Layton.  What  did you mean in the last line?
PURDY: I don't  remember the last line, frankly. What is it?
GEDDES: "And  then again I'm  a bit disappointed."
PURDY: Well, I think the thought on my mind was that somebody had fixed themselves, pinned  themselves down,  taken  a stance, identified  themselves far too  fully. I don't  think ... in my own case I like to think of a continual becom­ ing and  a changing  and a moving. I feel that Irving takes such positive stances that  I'm  a little disappointed, because I think he could have done much better. For  instance,  now he's writing  poems in The  Shattered  Plinths about  various new  events, about  violence. Violence is a damned  interesting  subject,  but  not

A. W. PURDY



the way he's treated it somehow. Everything about Irving is positive; if you were to argue with him on any of these points, he'd defend them all vehemently. You wouldn't be able to win the argument,  but he'd still be wrong.
GEDDES:  Is  it  a  general  characteristic  of  modern  poets  to  find  themselves too quickly?  Creeley,  for  example,  seems  to  have  established  a  voice or  a  style which  he  exploits; one  wonders  whether  the style reflects or  directs  the  life­ rhythms.
PURDY: I only know a bit about Creeley. I don't  like his style very much;  I don't
like the deliberate  ambiguities at the ends of his poems. But style is something that  I was very hung up on a few years ago, when I kept noticing, or thought I did, that  all the critics were insisting that  you find your voice, that  you find a consistency, and  that  you stick to it. Now  this, of course, is what  Creeley has done;  and  it's apparently something  the critics still approve  of. I disagree with it all along the line. I don't  think that  a man is consistent;  he contradicts him­ self at every turn. Housman, for instance, takes a very dim view of life for the most  part,  is very depressing -but  human  life isn't  like that  all of  the  time. You wake up in the morning, the sun is shining and  you feel good; this also is a  time  when  Housman  could  have  written  a  poem.  I  can't  believe  he never felt  good  once  in  his life. Anyway,  I  disagree  with  this  consistency bit very strongly.
GEDDES: Would  you not say that the success of The Cariboo  Horses has something
to do with your having finally found some kind of voice or consistency?
PURDY:  As far  as I'm  concerned,  I found  a  voice  (not  necessarily a consistent one), but  I  thought  that  I  was at  my best beginning  about   xg6x-62, when Poems   for all the  Annettes was first published;  I was sure I had  hit a vein in which I  could say many more things. I'd  been looking for ways and  means of doing it; and finally, it got to the point that  I didn't care what I said-I'd say anything -as long as it worked for me.
GEDDES:  How  consciously are  you concerned  with  technique?  Do  you share  the recent  technical  interests of Williams and  Olson, such as concern  for the line, the syllable, the process of breathing?
PURDY:  My  technique,  I suppose, takes a bit from  Williams, a bit from  Olson;
for instance, I agree for the most part with using the contemporary, the modern, idiom.  On  the other  hand,  if I  were writing  a certain  kind of poem  I might avoid colloquialisms, idiosyncrasies, slang, and so on. It  just depends;  it all has to do with the poem. No, I pay no attention  to the breathing bit;  and I never compose on  a typewriter, as Olson is supposed  to do. Most of the time when

68

A. W. PURDY



I'm  writing  I don't  think  of how to write the thing at all, consciously; some­ times I do.  When  I wrote a poem about  hockey players, I deliberately put  in swift rhythms  to simulate  the players going down the ice. And  there are times when  I've  mixed  up  rhythms  deliberately.  But other  times,  whatever  rhythm you get in there seems accidental; though  I don't  suppose it is, because a poet writes  a  lot  of  poems. I'm  concerned  with  techniques,  yes,  but  I don't  con­ sciously spend so much time thinking of them as Williams and Olson do.
GEDDES: What is it that makes a poem work?
PURDY:  Technique? The  language itself is part  of that,  also the various methods used to write a poem. But somehow saying that is not enough. There  ought  to be a quality  in a good poet beyond any analysis, the part of his mind that leaps from one point to another, sideways, backwards, ass-over-the-electric-kettle. This quality  is not  logic, and  the result may not  be consistent with  the rest of the poem when  it happens,  though  it may be. I believe it is said  by medicos that much  of the  human  mind  has no known function.  Perhaps  the leap sideways and backwards comes from there. At any rate, it seems to me the demands made on it cause the mind  to stretch, to do more than it is capable of under ordinary and different circumstances. And when this happens, or when you think it does, that  time  is  joyous, and  you experience  something  beyond  experience.  Like discovering  you can  fly, or  that  relative  truth  may blossom into  an  absolute. And  the absolute  must  be attacked  again and  again,  until you find something that will stand  up, may not be denied, which becomes a compass point by which to move somewhere  else. I think that when you put such things into words they are liable to sound like pretentious jargon. Such things exist in your mind with­ out  conscious  thought,   perhaps  in  that  unknown  area.  And  sometimes-if you're lucky-a coloured fragment  may slip through into the light when you're writing a poem.
GEDDES: How do your poems generally take shape?
PURDY: Well, that's  tough. I wrote the title poem of The  Cariboo Horses in about twenty minutes,  revised it a little, and that was about it; and I took about eight years to  write  another  poem in  the same  book, which still isn't  as good as it ought to be. In the hockey player poem, I wanted a strong contrast  between the metrics  and  prose;  and  I tried  to  make  several  passages about  as  prosy as possible in order to contrast with the swift metrical rhythms.
GEDDES: Could you describe the evolution of a single poem?
PURDY : Well,  there  used  to  be an  old grist mill  in  Ameliasburg  village -four stories high with three-foot-thick walls of grey stone. In 1957-58 I explored that

6g

A. W.  PURDY



mill from top to bottom,  trying to visualize the people who used to operate  it. Marvelling  at the 24-inch wide boards from nineteenth-century pine forests; peering curiously at wooden cogs and hand-carved  gears, flour-sifting apparatus, bits of rotting silk-screens, and so on.
My interest in the mill grew to a strong curiosity about  the people who built it-what were they like?-those old farmers, pioneers, dwellers in deep woods, men  who worked from dawn  to day's end, so tired  the whole world wavered and reeled in their home-going vision. Most of the old ones were United Empire Loyalists, come here to the wilderness after  the American  Revolution  because they had no other  place to go. The  man who built the village mill in 1842 was Owen  Roblin.  He  lived to be 97,  and  lies buried  in  Ameliasburg  graveyard near  the  black millpond,  with wife and scattered  brood  of sons nearby.
I questioned  the old people in the village about  Owen  Roblin. It seems ... well, out of it all came my poem, "Roblin's  Mills".
GEDDES: More than  30 poems in The Cariboo  Horses are open-ended,  concluding with a dash or some other punctuation suggesting incompleteness. Is this simply a device?
PURDY: The  open-endedness is both device and philosophy, but it doesn't bar formalism if I feel like it: i.e., I reject nothing.  No form, that  is, if I feel like it and  the poem agrees. I was doing it a good deal at the time;  maybe that owes
something to Olson's "in the field" bit -a line is as long as it's right for it to be. But I don't  like periods very much; if I can work a lot using commas and semi­ colons I will. It should just be taken as the reader takes it: I don't attach much more to it than  just dispensing with punctuation. Its effect, of course, is different from  punctuation, but  I haven't  gone into  that.  My own  poems without this give me a peculiar feeling I can't explain.
GEDDES:  The  experience that  goes into a poem is changing  even as the poem is
written; in fact, the poem changes the experience.
PURDY: You mean  fixes it.
GEDDES: No, I mean that the open-endedness works against the final fixing of the expenence.
PURDY:  Well, yes, you said it. I have thought  of that,  but not in connection  with these poems. One  thinks of poems as little bits of life cut out, except that  they are  as one sees life with  one's  mind.  You have  the odd  feeling that  you can reach  back and  pick a poem that  will take the place of that  experience in the past. It does in one's life of course, but there are so many ifs and buts that when I say a thing I'm  never sure if I'm right.

A. W.PURDY



GEDDES: Is poetry a way of exploring experience for you?
PURDY: Jesus Christ, that's  an awful question! I've no idea. I like to write poetry; I get a kick out of writing poems. I suppose to a limited degree it does explore my own experience;  but if anybody else was looking, they would deny that  the poem described it, I expect, particularly  my wife. I write poetry because I like to write poetry. It's  much  like getting drunk  once in a while, especially if you write something  you like. Exploring one's experience sounds like such a terrible way to describe a simple thing like writing a poem. Doesn't it though?
GEDDES: As a descriptive poet, what is your response to external objects?
PURDY:  In  the  first place,  I  don't  consider  myself any  particular kind of poet.
About  objects in relation  to myself, this is as subjective as hell. Any time any poet writes about  an object, he's got to be subjective, no matter  how objective he appears.  I've sometimes thought  that everybody sees the same colour differ­ ently. One  isn't  always able to express these differences in words, since words are so limited and have such large potential at the same time. No, I'm  far more interested in objects in relation to something, in relation to people.
GEDDES:  You once asked Stephen Spender what he thought  of Kenneth  Patchen.
Is Patchen  a favourite? And which of your contemporaries do you admire?
PURDY:  Did  I ask that?  That's a tough one, there are so very few. No, Patchen is not a favourite  of mine. I like his "Dirge"; that's  about  all I can think of. I like a lot of those poets who are producing in a consistent line, exactly as I said I would not like to do. Robert Bly has adopted a particular style and is writing pretty  decent  poems; but  this style becomes very monotonous if he keeps it up
-and  he  does keep it  up. Charles  Bukowski is writing  in a style in which I also write;  but  that's  just about  his only style. I hope to get out of it once in a while.
There  are so damned  few. I like some of James Dickey, for instance, quite a bit;  but somehow  or other,  he lives at such intense white heat so much  of the time that  I don't  believe he can possibly exist; he must burn up. He keeps being confounded,  rivers keep boiling through  his veins, he keeps becoming  exalted all of the time.
In Canada? I like Newlove; I think he might have a chance to do something pretty  good.  Ian  Young,  George Jonas, - maybe. Who  else? They  all seem to me -when  they adopt  some special way of writing, like bp nichol and  the concrete  boys, or the Tish imitators of the Black Mountain-to be travelling down a dead end.
But in the world there are several, some living some dead, that  I like:  I like

71

A. W. PURDY



Pierre  Superveille very much  and, of course, Pablo  Neruda  and  Cesar Vallejo and  one  or  two others. Modern  World  Poetry  (in  translation) is an  awfully good book.
GEDDES: What about earlier writers?
PURDY: I hope to find other poets to expend the same enthusiasms on as I did on Dylan Thomas  and, to a certain extent, Robinson Jeffers; and also John  Donne at  one  time.  But enthusiasms pass. I was tremendously  enthused  over Layton about  I955;  that  enthusiasm has pretty well passed. I agree with my own line on Layton,  that  words no sooner said become cliches, though  Layton is not all cliche. Somehow the immortal claptrap  of poetry is a cliche.
GEDDES: How much "research" went into your poems in North of Summer?
PURDY: Actually,  I didn't  do a helluva lot of research. In  fact,  when  I  was up there  I  was reading  E. M. Forster's  Passage to India  and  about  fifteen other pocket books, including that one I mentioned in "When I sat down to play the Piano", William Barrett's Irrational Man. The  point at which books you read, or  information from  books you read,  comes into  your  head  is not  when  you are reading them, but some time later. I always take off from any point or fact that  seems relevant to the situation  (in the North, say); I always take off on a personal expedition from there, though I may not know where I'm  headed.
GEDDES: I think  of your "In the Wilderness" as a Canadian "Easter   I g I 6". Do other poems trigger you off to write?
PURDY : Yes, sometimes.  Oddly  enough,  one  poem  called  "Dark   Landscape",
which will be in Wild  Grape Wine, I twisted around  to mean something other than  what  Vachel  Lindsay  means in  "Spring  Comes on  Forever".  That  was almost a direct steal, except that  I used it differendy.  Most of the time, when you read someone else's poem, it will give you your own thoughts  on the same subject,  which is much more valid, I think. This is why and  how I wrote the bird  poem in North  of Summer. I  think  it  was some  Cuban  poet  that  had written  a poem about birds, so I started thinking about  birds. And, incidentally, "The Cariboo  Horses" was written  because I read in the Introduction to New British Poetry two quotes about  horses by Ted  Hughes  and  Philip Larkin  and I thought  they were terrible and  that  I could do better;  so I started  to write a poem. I think that if you write poems, your mind  just knowingly or  unknow­ ingly casts around  for subjects all of the time;  I don't  think  a poet is ever not looking for subjects.




72



ALL NATURE INTO MOTION

John Sutherland's Poetry



Miriam Waddington




... as if the sun
Were singing to the world, he lay and heard
His alter ego serenading him :
At dawn tomorrow he would rise again
And, by the force of arms, enforce the cold.
{The Warrior)

It is the lack of a vital tradition that explains how, in Canada, a die-hard  conservatism acts as the counterpart  of a desire to ape the latest fashion.
John Sutherland, editorial in
First Statement, April 1944.







JOHN SUTHERLAND published [e&< than a do,en  poems during his lifetime;  none  of them  aped  the latest fashion and  neither  did  any of them belong to the tradition of die-hard  conservatism. His language  is still as fresh and personal  today  as when  he wrote the poems, and his themes of human  loneliness and  anxiety  and   the  search  for  a  stable  identity,  are,  if anything,  even  more relevant now than  twenty years ago.
When Sutherland died in 1956 he left a manuscript of 43 poems:t which he had indexed and  given the title of First Poems. Like the shoemaker  and  tailor of folk legend  who  cobble shoes and  sew clothes for the whole world while they  them­ selves go barefoot  and  naked, Sutherland  was too busy editing and publishing the work of his companions to pay much attention  to his own. He was only 36 at the time of his death,  and  had suffered from illness (which he chose to ignore) 2  since

73

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



early  adolescence, yet during  his short lifetime  he  managed  to edit and  publish two little magazines,  First Statement  and  Northern  Review, and  he participated in the editing of a third one, Index. He wrote innumerable essays, put together a highly individual  anthology of poetry, Other Canadians, and, during the last year of his life, published a critical book on the poetry of E. J. Pratt.
When  I look back to 1943, the year I met John  Sutherland, I am struck by a very obvious fact  which had  little meaning  for  me at  that  time. Sutherland did not simply drift into becoming a writer and critic. He was not a university teacher, so it had  nothing  to do with making  his way in  the  world, nor was he a failed novelist, or, as I intend  to show, a failed poet. He simply had  one of those rare vocations for criticism, and since he felt himself to be deeply of his country and his time, he devoted  himself to criticism of Canadian writing with authority  and conviction.
It is tempting  to look back and say we didn't  deserve him; we certainly didn't
give him the recognition or help he deserved; he was poor, and until his marriage, lived in the same room where he kept his hand-press  on Montreal's  Craig Street. But we must have deserved him or he wouldn't  have happened to us at all.
It isn't  my  purpose  here  to  recall  memories  and  impressions of  the  literary personalities of the forties. Nor is it my purpose to discuss the relation between the events of Sutherland's life and  his poetry with  nostalgic sentimentality; enough error has already been committed in that direction, and I hope, by looking at Sutherland's work, to correct it.
It would be interesting to know whether Sutherland felt himself to be primarily a poet or a critic. According to his sister Betty Layton,3  he felt himself to be first of all a poet, but  was discouraged from poetry by various influences around  him, whereas his critical activities met with an immediate  response. He was surrounded by other writers -Louis Dudek, Raymond Souster, Anne Marriott, Irving Layton and  myself, among  the  poets, and  by William  McConnell,   Ethel  Wilson, and Mavis  Gallant   among  the  novelists. Writers  need  editors  and  publishers,  and speaking for myself, I needed Sutherland to be an editor and critic, and not a poet. I did not even pay much attention  to his poetry. I recognized the individuality  of his poems whenever  I came across them, but I did not seek them out, or  under­ stand  them  when  I found  them. And it was only by chance,  when I came upon some of them  again  in old issues of Poetry Chicago  and  First  Statement, that  I decided to look more closely at all of them.
The  two  qualities  that  impressed me most in  the  poems  I  came  across acci­
dentally  were, as I said earlier, the freshness of the language,  and  the timeliness


74

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



of the themes. Sutherland read Thomas, Auden, and Spender  just like the rest of us,  but  he  consistently  avoided  the  luxurious  or  topical  metaphor.  In  fact  his language  is seldom quick or colourful and rarely energetic. It is, on the contrary, stubbornly  persistent, slow, tough  and  vaulted.  Underneath  Sutherland's poems one feels great  intellectual  power, for in his poems as well as in his criticism, Sutherland is concerned  with ideas. I know it's the style for poets to be inspired liars, insane  prophets  and  tormented  human  beings. Poets are supposed to have only  revealed  ideas  as opposed  to rational  ones, yet a  quick  reading  of any  of Milton's  poems or of Shelley's Triumph of Life will convince the reader that one's own spit, a quick  fix, astrology, and  a soft heart,  never were, and  never will be enough for poetry.
Sutherland's poems remain  timely because they are about  the problem of iden­
tity. How does a person become aware of himself as a self, a separate  being in a world where everything  is not only constantly moving, but  where even time has an  impatient and  indifferent  quality and  threatens  to destroy all those who can­ not  move  within  its rhythms?  How  can  the  individual  find enough  stillness to define himself even momentarily?  How can he hold off the assaults of  the world? Should  he escape the empirical  world or try to make peace with objective reality?
If he is an authentic poet, the poet's self is never just a private self. His arrxieties
speak for all our anxieties. He may, as John Stuart  Mill pointed out in one of his essays on  poetry,  be engaged  in a dialogue with himself, but  if he publishes his poems, he wants us to hear and overhear him.
Sutherland devotes  many  poems to the situation  of being alone in the world, but  he does not stop  there.  His poems are poems of anxiety, but  not of despair. Unlike many poems written  today which reflect and helplessly accept anxiety and fragmentation, Sutherland's poems contain a critical response to these feelings. In the  group  of four  poems  which he published in Poetry in  19464   the anxiety he expresses is distinguished  by the fact that Sutherland does not stop at the point of expression.  His  language   is  not  incantatory and  contains  none  of  the  hysteria which is now so greatly  admired.  Hysteria is admired  because, while it challenges nothing in the social status quo, it still supplies the reader  with a vicarious experi ence of looking into a tamed  (and  sugary)  wilderness of the soul, and the -by now -domesticated existential abyss.
In   an  essay,  "Psychoanalysis  and  Literary  Culture   Today"/ Alfred  Kazin
suggests that  hysteria is the mode of expression of writers who no longer have reaJ feelings but  wish that  they did. It is only an age like ours which has used up its capacity  to feel  (because  it has lost the objects and institutions  which can arouse

75

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



passionate anger, grief  or love),  which  begins to  worship  violence  and  lust. Both violence  and  lust  are  unilateral expressions of either  the senses, or the  mind,  and neither   requires  the  human capacity  to  feel.  Pornography is another intellectual mode which serves as a substitute for feeling.
But Sutherland's problem,  as expressed in his poems, is not the inability to feel.
His  is not  so much  an  exhausted sensibility  as a  threatened one. The dominant feeling in the  poems is a fear of loss of identity. Yet it is a fear  which  Sutherland constantly subjects  to  thought  (not  necessarily  analysis), and  to the  striving for more, and  not less, consciousness. The  fear therefore does not emerge in the poems as  either   nightmare or  grotesque, but  as highly  patterned and  controlled  meta­ phorical  language:

Then  slipping from him in the room, the walls Rose towering above him. Craning  through The crannies of the ceiling, carved and lean, Dark  judges, with their beards like icicles Stared  at his body, suddenly as small
As a seed crouching underneath the night.
(Before Night  Came) And here is Sutherland's description of a face:
One day, in shock or indecision, all
The  particles will riot in the face:
They'll crack the bony haloes of his cheeks; Or tear at one another till they roll
In sudden harmony like smoke that seethes
About a hollow eye, then pours away. (The  Face)

There are  also the  following  lines at  the  end  of  a long  poem  about the  dangers that   beset  the  self  which,  in  spite  of  disguises,  is  always  discovered   and   taken unawares:







Or:
 For suddenly
Comes the boughs' tapping on the pane, And then, like glass splintering on the teeth The  burr and splinter of the drill.
(The  Wavering  Circle)


When we start up to walk abroad
Fears work and knead us like a crowd
(Fears)

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



And  the  worst  thing  about these fears is, that  no matter how you hunt  and  try  to destroy  them, they  remain impervious. Shots  do not  "challenge them" and,  like sailboats,  they "still tack about  upon  the blood".
The poet  isn't   the  only  one  who  suffers  from  fear  and  ambiguous identity:

He hunts his listeners: but when he peers
Over a shadow solid as a wall
Only his vanished shadow is visible­ Crawling ant-sized across an air of glass Whose dancing surface fuses with the sun.
(On  a Theosophist Friend)

Thus all  the  people  in  Sutherland's poems  are  isolated  even  when  they  are  in groups.  In  an early  untitled poem  we find the following description of people who are afflicted with  loneliness in a world whose nature forces them  to adopt strategies for mere survival. The  mere  fact of survival  makes gods out  of martyrs and trans­ forms   defeat  into   victory.  The   victory  is  that   those  invalids,   by  dissembling, manage to retain  their  wholeness:

Who knew or saw them when, as invalids Remote within their twilight rooms, they lay Like purple shadows clothing sticks of bone? Or guessed that in the altared  pure recess Lighted  by the faint tapers of the flesh,
Those shapes that seemed like dimly-figured nuns
Were the eyes' shadows in their niche of bone
Kneeling in daylong prayer to the eyes?

... But they knew how,
By being martyrs, to be gods, and how,
By taking blindness on themselves, to pluck
The eyes out of the forehead of the day. (Untitled  Poem)

In  another very striking poem  the individual's fear leads him to seek protection from  a  most  unlikely  source-his  own  shadow.  This  theme  of  protection and renewal  of one  part  of the self through another part, occurs  over  and  over  again as the individual is driven  to create  something new out  of the  materials at  hand, which  will not  only  protect and  shield  him, but  which  will supply  something life­ giving  which  the self lacks. In  the  poem  "Triumph" it is "a prescience  of  rain":
Not lulled by sleep's pretenses when I see
The star above me in the cave of night

77

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



Wink dimly at the zero sign of being, I rise to force my image on the room.

Glad as I walk to feel my blundering form
Trample  on shapes of things that, during day,
Like snakes raise threatening  heads to strike and now
Drop their defenceless shadows on the floor,

Striding in might across their heaps of dead, I pull a hidden cord, and seem to hear
The loud bulb shatter silence with its peals
And fill the darkness with the noise of light.

Afterwards iron stillness. But I stand
Not moving, while unceasing swarms of light Crawl slowly on their heavy wings, and hive Their  honey in the white comb of the walls.

Brooding all-powerful above their work, I let my shadow, humid over them,
Tilt like a weighted petal, or a cloud
That fills them with a prescience of rain. (Triumph)

Not  always is the fear  objectified  so directly; at  times it is expressed  only through images   which,  in spite  of  their  precision,  still  leave  the  reader to  deal  with  a disturbing kind of inwardness:

A whistling bird of sun Sang in the lock of selves And opened folding doors On shining inner drawers.
(On  a Wet Day)

Or  else the concrete image  of a boat sailing on the water becomes  a metaphor for the unsuccessful  attempt to escape from some deep and  obscure distress:

It [the boat]  turns tail until its spear-tip
Meets a shadow's wedge
That's driven like a spade
Slant-wise through  the waved bed of sun.

As it spurts this way and that
And gains its noisy force,
Still louder and darker grows the shadow. (Combat)

ALL NATURE INTO MOTION



The  poems  that  were  published  in  Poetry deal  not so much  with  undefined fears like the  above, as with  the strategies which the self must adopt  in order to keep the  dangers  outside  and  under  control.  "The  Aquarium" is a poem about barriers, and like all barriers, they prevent the self from moving in its own chosen direction. The  problem is clearly stated in the first stanza:

When sentries, tall as mountains on the roads, Refused him entry into any place,
He planned to change identity with clothes; A surgeon he would make another face.

And not only will the 'I' of this poem play surgeon, but he will use a mirror as his cutting  and shaping  instrument. Besides being sharp,  the mirror  is an instrument for creating  illusory images;  by using a mirror  to  sharpen  a disguise we get the proliferation of illusion-a brilliant metaphoric touch:

And with the glass of mirrors where he saw His preening image glossy with aplomb, He'd cut the self till its perfected flaws
Could strike the worst of his accusers dumb.

Thus  one illusion helps to shape another. All the same, the disguises and improve­ ments cannot  save the speaker in the poem who, shaped  by mirrors, is still cut off from the world by a double layer of glass:

Hugging his future he had troubled dreams. A glass knight on a horse of glass, he rode And threatened like a tower of the good: Locked behind glass, in an aquarium,
Bared his deception to the public eye
And showed his virtue shining with the lie.

The  glass knight  is locked not only into his armour, transparent and fragile as it is, but into  an  aquarium, a sort of glass cage, glass within glass, where he is not only on show, but where his virtue is shown to be a lie.
There  is a curious combination  here of sensory perception  and  idea, and there
is also  the  obvious  paradox   of  "the  virtue  shining  with  the  lie".  All common enough.  But  what  is the seeming  virtue  that  turns out  to  be a deception?  The pretended   virtue  is  bravery -the  knight  "who  threatened   like a  tower  of the good" -knows  himself to  be  really a  coward  who  underneath his  masks and

79

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



disguises, and  beyond  the ornamental glitter  and  apparent transparency of the glass which composes him, is a man who was never there.
In  "The Double  Man"  we have another  poem about  the separated  self, who, upon  seeing  "his  life-like figure in  the  mirror" seeks to  learn  how  to  live like everyone else, how to act in ways which the average man knows about instinctively but which the artist has to learn painfully:

Departing, he would learn the parlor trick
Of living like the average individual:
Get life by heart and then be free to travel
Slick and amphibious on different levels.

In the next stanza  the speaker discovers that it's more than  a parlor trick, because no matter  how slick you are, a million external  matters  always take up the living space which the self needs:

When the one pipe that he built specially
For his communication with the world
Is filled by shifting interest like silt,
He clears it so he'll have a little room
In which to chatter, strut and parody
The boring, hackneyed art of being human.

Apparently   the  task  of clearing  away  the  silt from  the  pipe  through  which  he hoped  to channel  his exchanges with the world is so tiresome, that  by the time he completes  it,  the  speaker  finds there  is no self there  anyway -only  an  empty cloak with a capacity to imitate and parody human  gestures.
This  emptiness and sense of being driven  back upon  a self, which, like Ibsen's Peer Gynt, has no real core, but only various layers, leads to a further  retreat from the world. In the poem With  Expert Tailoring, the poet finally barricades  himself into  a  house  where  everything is altered  to fit his needs. He  suddenly  gets the feeling that  if he can do this to objects he may also "Rule  out of doors, and take a step and kill/A stranger when he passed him in the street."
This  is a cheerless omnipotence  of the  kind  most children  experience,  except that  most children  don't  write poetry about  it. There  is another  very daring  and original  poem in Sutherland's manuscript  about  omnipotence and creativity. The poem is called The  Creator and  grows out of a disturbing  concept. The  central image or metaphor is disturbing because it concerns God or some other figure masturbating, and in this fashion, creating the world out of himself and by himself.
Sutherland's image is logical, his tone is serious, and  the  poem is not intended

So

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



to startle  the  reader  in  any  way. The  poem shows, more  dramatically than  any­ thing  else,  Sutherland's habit  of  pursuing an  idea  logically  to  wherever  it  took him, even if the path  happened to be an untravelled one:

In desperation,  as a last resort
He chose that love-act, which like suicide
Drags all the world down with the drowning lover. Gripping  his sex-his life-line, his unseen Umbilicus  that stretched out to the earth-
He leaned his whole weight back; and  [as he] 6  felt
His passion like a groundswell in the room
Cant  upward,  taking him along with it,
As the light broke upon an answering wave, All the world's images came tumbling back.

Those two waves meeting with an equal force
Were for a moment one; he and the world
That rode their crests, and, meeting like two lovers, Melted together  at the very top,
Became as one, were joined in all their parts, Till with the saddening swift recoil, he fell Back on the sharp trough into emptiness;
And down away from him, the scattering world
Littered  the beaches of the afternoon. (The Creator)

The  last two lines seem to me very beautiful and  memorable; yet the whole poem grows out of an image  which  most people would find repugnant. The  poet himself finds  it  distasteful because,  although "that love-act" results  in a  new  world,  the creator is ultimately thrown back "into  emptiness".
Sutherland comes  to a similar  conclusion  about  the  aridity  and  pointlessness of self-sufficiency in a poem of that  title. The  character described  in this poem attains self-sufficiency.   He   has  successfully  sidetracked  his  fear   and   defended  himself against  it, but  the  price is terrible suffering  and  a deathly silence in which  all will
is atrophied:

And so his thrifty tongue is motionless And rusted like a bell-tongue, never new; His white hand, locked in palsy as a winter, Sheds flesh in snow, and cannot put a halt To plenty when it pours itself away
Or soothe the hollowness that's like a pain.
(Self-sufficiency)

8I

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



In fact nothing can "soothe the hollowness that's  like a pain" except union with something  or someone outside the self. Sutherland concludes  that  the individual has to find, as an antidote  to his fear and loneliness, not more retreats or increas­ ingly effective disguises, but a moment of stillness where one self can  unite  with another,    and   through   that   other,   experience   himself  differently.   "Snowless Moment" is such a poem:

Our stiff poles Held up  the sky, Warning any snow-flake
That it would splinter and divide
And shatter into pieces against us.

We seemed made of very little­ Two or three rope-like arteries, Occasionally waving
To keep the snow suspended
And the space clear above our heads So no crust of time could form on us; And constant watchfulness
Made us perfect mirrors for ourselves. (Snowless Moment)

Union  with  the other  is depicted  in  terms of a rigidity and  stillness which must be won from a fluid and chaotic world. The  poet creates a protective space where "no crust of time could form on us". The lovers are thus timeless but not spaceless. They  keep the snow suspended and  themselves too. They  are made of very little, just  two  or  three  rope-like arteries, so in  this sense they  personify the channels through  which blood (and life) must flow.
This  need  to find  a point of stillness in the confusion of a moving world also underlies  a twelve-line poem called "The Boat".  It concerns  the fragmentariness of  reflections seen  in  water  and  the  distortions  of seeing  which such  changing water   images  invite.  Against  this  randomness   of  vision,  Sutherland   opposes rational   vision as something  intelligent  and  wilful, -the  kind  of  vision which seeks to encounter  something real and concrete like "the solid ground" instead of the illusory reflections to be found on the water's surface:

The eyes, through open portholes, letting vision Fall like leads through the creased folds of water, Graze, at the ultimate bottom, over dark fields, Foraging in pockets till they nod to rest.

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



Union  can  take  place between  two people but it can  also take place between people and  objects,  as often  happens  in Sutherland's world and  perhaps in our own  too. All of us must have  noticed at times that objects seem to have a life of their own. They  are elusive, contrary, secretive and often malevolent. In Suther­ land's  poems, objects share  the speaker's fondness for disguise and  deception. So objects  which  were  "obsequious  when  he walked among  them" later  "crouch" and  "hide   in  the  twilight  safety  of  their  skins" or  even  seed  themselves like dandelion  parachutes:

Or with a counterfeit  of motion gained
From his scythe limbs, that, mowing the taillight, Shed them like thistles on the travelling wind, They seeded in a farther  valley for him....
(Untitled  Poem)

Finally, these objects which move when he moves, and are still when he is still, (because  in some way man  and  object are related)  pull the whole world into a beautiful  sweeping  motion  at  the very moment  when  the  man  begins to move:

The  natural objects did not move or stir
Until  his limbs moved like a clock's hands pulling
All nature  into motion after them. (Untitled Poem)

I said earlier that  Sutherland's poems are about loneliness, but I also indicated that they offer at least two ways out of the situation of being alone: one is through a spiritual  union  with another  person or object, and  the other is by confirmation of the individual  through  the existence of some objective  reality outside the self. This recourse to outside reality is especially evident in the satirical poems, notably, "The   Snake  Machine".7   The  latter  poem  takes the  form  of an  ironic  parable about  art and  reality, but apart  from what it tells us about  transformation and the shifting  nature  of reality, it also demonstrates Sutherland's fondness for the con­ junction  of  the  natural biological image  with  the  mechanical  one.  His  poems abound  with the mixed-up  paraphernalia of a technical world-clocks, mirrors, sewer  pipes, cameras,  wires, poles, anchors, light bulbs and  locks of  every kind. Sutherland  was  not  as interested  in  producing  a  beautiful  poem  as  he was in producing  one  that  corresponded   to  what  he  considered  reality:   "The Snake Machine" is about  the difficulty of getting at reality through  poetry or the imagin­ ation  alone.  For  reality,  like  the  Snake  Machine  " ... is  moving,  but  always

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



moving in the same  place, I shedding an old skin with each  rippling motion  I And becoming a new snake exactly like the old one." The poet ends by reacting against the  one-sidedness of imagination and  art  with  a plea  for  some  concrete reality:

"0 for a real snake shedding a real skin!"

But  Sutherland's devotion  to  reality  is not  always  so complex or  didactic. He is often  contented with an image  which  conveys some surface reality, attractive or not. "Girl in Spring" is a closely observed portrait which  ends:

Her lips distended In a huge pout, Partly opened
With the beautiful ugliness
You have noticed if you have beheld
The swan when drinking.
(Girl in Spring)

But  the  poem   which   I return to  most  often,   and   which  states  the  original dilemma of loneliness  and  also combines  Sutherland's two  ways of meeting  it is the poem about Thomas Wolfe: 8

Wolfe, on the bed, was struggling to remove The  bandage of the dream around  his eyes; His hands, unconscious, hunted  for the feel Of objects thrusting  up their wicker veins To build the framework of reality.

Caught  in the web, but planning  to restore All things in proper place upon the shelf, He held the fallen earth and tried to roll The play-hoop of the planet with a spin Starting it on its orbit once again;

But as its shape swung by him like a scythe Cutting  a swathe of sky, he saw the world All moving in the river of his eyes-
He saw half-wakened objects, caught like wasps, Fuss in the glowing amber of the air.

In  this  poem,  although the dying  writer  "hunts for  the feel of objects" so he can "build the  framework of  reality", they  elude  him.  The world  is too  much  "all moving", so  that  even  the  objects  are  caught up,  "half-wakened" and  resistant in "the fallen  earth's" inevitable movement. The artist  cannot start  the world  "on

ALL  NATURE INTO MOTION



its orbit once again", nor can he restore us to Eden. But he can go a long way in transfonning  the  world  which  exists, with  all its buzzing  and  busy objects  as Sutherland's own  life demonstrated. Perhaps  when  the  "half-wakened objects"
-whatever  they stand  for -are  fully awakened  to critical  consciousness, they will no longer  need to be imprisoned in "the  glowing amber of the air", but will fly free and help to build the framework of the larger more spacious reality which Sutherland envisaged.

1 This was made available  to me by his widow, Mrs. Audrey Sutherland.
2  Sutherland's mother  died of TB when he was 6 years old, and when he was 13 he was found  to have TB of the kidney. When I met him in 1943 he told me that  he had  been  hospitalized  at  the  age of 18 or  19, and  seeing no end  to his cure,  he simply left the hospital and never returned.
3  In conversation  with me.
4 In the Aquarium, The  Double Man, With  Expert Tailoring, Self-Sufficiency.
5  In  The   Partisan  Review   Anthology  edited  by William  Phillips and  Philip  Rahv;
1962. London,  Macmillan, pp. 238-246.
6  I have added  the two words in the brackets.
7 First Statement, September/October 1948, Vol. 2, No.3, pp. 21-22.
8  First Statement, August 1944, Vol. 2, No.8, p. 15.









]I L]INDSC]IPE OF JOHN SUTHERL]IND

Miriam Waddington


we are in flight we are
a space of
dreamed-of light
autumn canyons crevices

A LANDSCAPE OF  JOHN  SUTHERLAND



we are the blue between
the sliding doors
of sky

we fall
among the shells the molluscs
of our concerts on the earth our bones
are toys
and  trumpets for the wind our song
sand
on a shore

our eyes are owls who scold the lit-up
winter night
our skeletons snow animals prowling through  the quiet moment of landscape

that  is what I like best    to find
the quiet moment shadowless
in the roar
of landscape to be the landscape








86



ALAN CRAWLEY

AND CONTEMPORARY VERSE



Prepared by
George Robertson



The  symposium  that  follows was  prepared by George Robertson  as a radio documentary and broadcast by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation  in its Anthology  programme. We  are indebted  to the Canadian   Broadcasting  Corporation   and  especially  to  Mr.   Robert Weaver   for having  made it available. The  script has been edited with the   permission  and  assistance of  the  participants,  so  that  in  some slight respects it is different   from the version broadcast. "Nocturne", the  poem by Dorothy  Livesay, is included  with  the  permission of the
author and of Ryerson Press.

ROBERTSON: A man  and  a young girl are walking by Second Beach in Van­ couver. The  time is the beginning of the war, the man is blind, the girl is a poet. The  man  knows many  poets, though  he has never written  verse  himself. His name is Alan  Crawley, and he is soon to become the editor of a little magazine called Contemporary Verse. The poet is Dorothy Livesay.
LIVESAY: Alan  had  a little spaniel called Roddie -I  think that was his name
-and  he liked  to take  him  for walks, but  of course being blind  he couldn't go alone. And  I needed walks because I was carrying a baby, so we used to go out  arm  in arm,  he with his walking stick and the dog. We would walk along Second  Beach,  through   the  park  several  times in  a  week,  talking  and   just enjoying  the  air  and  so on. Soon  I  began  to write  again,  I think  under  his influence;  then  I began showing him  the poems, getting  his criticism of them. He  helped  me  a  bit -he  tried  to  make  my language  more  what  he called "modern."
ROBERTSON: In those days, there were few places a poet could send his work: Canadian  Forum,  Saturday  Night  (if the poem fitted the required  space)  and of course The  Canadian  Poetry Magazine, as conservative in its format  as in its

ALAN  CRAWLEY



contents. Here  and  there a group of poets would create  a magazine to publish their work, but they rarely looked outside their own group. One Easter weekend in I 94 I, four  poets met in  Victoria  to discuss their  plight. They  were Floris McLaren, Dorothy  Livesay, Anne  Marriott  and  Doris Feme.  That occasion is remembered  by Florence McLaren.
McLAREN: Dorothy Livesay said we could start  a poetry magazine ourselves. I said,  "That's a nice pipe dream." Dorothy said why? Then  we began to talk. We knew nothing about the publication of a poetry magazine, we knew nothing about  the financial  problems involved, but  we talked of it. Someone said who would edit, who would be an editor for such a magazine,  and  the three of us answered  together,  "Alan  Crawley!"  Dorothy  agreed  to talk  to  him when she went  back  to Vancouver  and  tell him of this suggestion, and see if he would consider  being the editor if it could be done. We wrote  to him of course and explained  a  bit  more, although  we had  no definite plan  then,  but  I'd  like to read  the paragraph from the letter he answered  because it ... this was in I94I of course,  at  the  beginning  of the  war.  He  wrote  and  said:   "This  is to the conspirators  who started  all  this in spite  of the  distress of the  times and  the prospect of unsettled days to come. I feel that  the publication  of the magazine of Canadian poetry is a worthwhile  and  a  reasonable  venture  and  should  do much  to  help  modern  Canadian writers, for I know  of no other  publication that  is giving this possible help to writers. I am willing and  enthusiastic  to do what  I can for it." The  next step was to investigate the practical  problems of financing.  We  talked to printers  here and  found  that  a lithographing process could be used and the cost of the sixteen-page issue would be $25. We decided that  four issues a year would be satisfactory-that  would  be a quarterly,  and
if we could sell 25 subscriptions at $I  a subscription,  we could put out the first
issue. So  we  proceeded  to sell 25 subscriptions  to  people  who  knew  nothing about  what  was going to happen,  had  our  $25,  and  published  the first issue. ROBERTSON:  Letters  were  sent  to  Canadian poets,  those  with  reputations, those without. A young poet in the Maritimes  had a few things published:  her
name was P. K. Page.
PAGE: I was living in New Brunswick at the time, by the sea. It was wartime, and  we  were  in  a  fisherman's  cottage,  and  Iwas  writing-Ithink  Iwas probably  writing the novel I was talking about  a minute  ago and had had very litde  published. And then  this letter arrived  by  pony trap -the sounds of the horses' hoofs coming down the road, and this letter from Caulfield, I suppose it was, where Alan lived at that  point. And I opened it and  it said he had  heard

88

ALAN  CRAWLEY



from Anne  Marriott that she had met me, that I wrote poetry and would I be prepared  to send in something  for Volume One of Contemporary Verse. This was a very revolutionary  sort of thing to happen because ... well, to begin with, there  weren't  poetry  magazines  much  in  those days -this  was the dim dark ages-and people preferred  to not write poetry rather  than  to write poetry, I suppose, if they  preferred  anything.  It wasn't  a  thing  you talked  about  very much  and  certainly   nobody  ever  asked  you for  a  poem.  So  this  was quite exciting.
ROBERTSON: Alan  Crawley is now 81, his voice is still youthful, his step firm.
His  blindness dates  from  1933-the result of an  illness. Before that  time he was a successful corporation lawyer. After  the illness, he learned  Braille and came  west and  began  to feel, hear  and say poetry, because poetry was life to him. He sits now in his home in Victoria,  his head  lowered, his eyes watchful as he listens to a question and  then  talks about his days as editor  of Contemporary Verse.
CRAWLEY: You know, we were all perfectly unskilled in the art of bringing out
a magazine.  I  had  a few people who knew we were doing this and  they sent some letters to writers in different parts of Canada, and  I had a stack of MSS from Mrs.  McLaren, Dorothy  Livesay, Mrs. Feme and Anne Marriott  to start with. I wrote  a few letters and was very frightened  that  we were not going to get enough subscribers to sell a decent first issue, or even to have the material to make up this issue. But I remember one morning in my mail I got manuscripts from P. K. Page, Earle Birney and A. J. M. Smith, which added  to the others, and  I thought  now we can start. But I wasn't  at all sure how much we could afford, nor how much  there should be in the first issue; so I cut a pack of cards to see what  number  came  out, hoping that it wouldn't  be a king because that would be I 3, and  I turned  this pack up and drew out a seven (which had been through  my life a rather  lucky number). So I got seven poems together, seven writers'  poems  together,  and  put  them in  the order  in  which  I  thought  they should go into the first issue, and sent it off to Mrs. McLaren  to deal with.
McLAREN: We simply did it in the hope that the contributions would come to Caulfield  to  Alan  Crawley,  and  his  wife Jean   (who  was  never  listed as  a member  of the committee,  but certainly was one of the hardest  working mem­ bers  the  committee  had)   read  the selections, read  the  poems to  him;  those which he wished to go over more carefully he put into Braille so that he could go over them later. And then when he had made his selection for each issue, he sent that  by mail to me in Victoria, and I typed the dummy for the printer.

8g

ALAN  CRAWLEY



ROBERTSON: The  first issue was mailed  to 75 subscribers.  In  his Foreword, Alan Crawley said that "truth and beauty are not all told, that there are many writers of our  own time who can speak to us in words and  images and  forms that interest and appeal;  and that for most of us their writings are hard to come by." Those  were days, unlike the  present, when  what  was new was not auto­ matically  considered  good or  important. The  contents  of the  first  issue  were described  by  the  Globe  and  Mail  as "experimental." The  Vancouver Daily Province more generously said : "The  younger  poets of  Canada, chiefly those who wish to break away from the binding tradition  of  their elders, have made for themselves a new outlet for their thoughts." And, best of all, Northrop  Frye in Canadian  Forum  said:  "If you buy this little  pamphlet   you will get  wit, satire, music, imagination,  and where else can you get all that for two bits?"
LIVESAY:  Because  Alan's  sole interest  was  poetry  and  modern  poetry,  and because he knew a lot of it, we felt that  he knew what  he was talking about. He never told us, you know, change this, but he would just say:  perhaps that's a little redundant, you know, just casual things. But actually  the strange  thing
about Alan, and  no one's really talked about it ... I suppose it is just by chance, but  there  must be at least seven Canadian women  poets who went to him for help, sent their material  to him and got a great deal of encouragement. I think of Anne  Wilkinson, who is dead  now, or Jay  Macpherson, a very young girl, as well as, out  here, Anne  Marriott,  Floris McLaren, and  myself; and  it was when she was in the east that  Pat Page first sent poems to Contemporary Verse and  got to know Alan through  that, and  he again  would give little comments. He  always wrote  letters to people who sent  poems, you know, either rejecting or accepting,  but  he just didn't  write a prim  note of rejection;  he liked to say something  about  the poem. And  Miriam  Waddington was another-I mean, it's  just amazing  how particularly  the  young women seemed to get a stimulus from  him.  I  do  think  that  Alan is the  type  of man  whom  women  find  rare because he has all the sensitivity of a woman,  and  yet a very objective kind of masculine mind, and this sympathy he has I think is rare. Women don't  find it very often in men.
PAGE: I  remember  that  he would  write back  and  tell you that  he  just didn't think  the  poem  was good enough.  I have  no idea  how  he went  about  doing what  he did. He certainly communicated  with you. I think probably the thing that  one needed  more than  criticism was encouragement, because, in my own case any way, I wrote rather  for myself, and  when  I suddenly  found  that  you could  write for somebody else too, you could  write for  a response -it  was a

go

ALAN  CRAWLEY



very curious  experience. This  may sound  ridiculous, but it's true  nevertheless. Alan as far  as I was concerned  had  a facility to tum  on the tap,  but  how he worked critically, I've  no idea. If he didn't  like what came out of the tap,  he'd send it back quite ruthlessly, at least ruthlessly isn't the word, but quite direcdy. He was always very direct in all his dealings with you. If he liked the poem he told  you;  if  he  didn't   he  told  you. But  the  main  thing  was some kind  of  a contact,  some  kind of a tension between two people, some  kind of a polarity. LIVESAY: There were I think three poems in the volume Day and Night which came out in '44, which Alan had sort of worked over with me, or at least I had read  them  aloud  to him. He wasn't  particularly  interested in social poetry  like my poem Day and Night. I think  he admired its techniques but he wasn't  very
... he liked a  poem  that  revealed the inner  emotion. So that  he liked Lorca,
when  I read  the  poem in sections and  he said, "why  don't  you link them  up more-couldn't  you  put  in some  kind  of  phrase  which  would  link  each section?"  So I went  home and  that  night  I think I did  write  just a few little lines where there was a common theme or a common music :
"While  you, you hold the light unbroken," and then
"You make the flight unshaken," and
"You hold the word unspoken,"
and then at the end, "light, flight and word be unassailed, the token." Well, I wouldn't have done that if it hadn't been for Alan.
ROBERTSON: Alan  Crawley  heard  poetry spoken by his wife, felt it  through
his fingers in  Braille, and  said it aloud over and over. But even if he had  not been  blind,  Crawley  would always have insisted that  poetry is not melody for its own sake, but the combination of sound and sense.
CRAWLEY: I have  always felt that  a poem read  aloud  by a person who  had previously  been  affected  by it,  and  could say it  without  having  just  read  it, made  a very much  better impression; ... the listener had a better communica­ tion from  the  poem  than  by reading  it from the print  itself. And  I have  had this more or less confirmed  by people who have listened to poets reading  their own  poetry,  which  of course now is being  much  more  done  than  it  was  30 years ago or 25 years ago even in Canada.
McLAREN: He  reads poetry beautifully. I remember one writer listening to his
reading  of her  works said at the end of it: "You  make a person a poet  when you read  their  writing."  He  would say that  he didn't  make  anyone,  that  he read  what  is there.  He  was very aware  of course of the meaning  of the  verse and  gave full  balance  to that,  but also very aware of the pattern  of sound  in

91

ALAN  CRAWLEY



the verse; ... because he looked for it himself, he made  other people hear that. ROBERTSON: The  magazine  prospered  after  a fashion;  it  was never able  to pay  poets, and  truthfully  poets never expected  to be paid.  Costs were rising, but Contemporary Verse was reaching a wider audience  with every issue, and it was undoubtedly  publishing the best verse being  produced  in Canada,  poems
by A.M. Klein, Louis MacKay,  Earle Birney, F. R. Scott, Roy Daniells, Ralph Gustafson,  Anne  Wilkinson, Irving  Layton,  Louis Dudek,  Raymond  Souster, James  Reaney,  P. K. Page, Dorothy  Livesay, Margaret Avison, Robert  Finch, Miriam  Waddington  -the  list could  go on.  Most  of  these  were established poets, and then later there were the discoveries, the younger ones. Alan Crawley cast his net wide, and he made his selection, this amateur-become-editor in his mid-fifties, on the basis of one thing only, on the basis of his own taste.
LIVESAY: In  Canada  we've been rifled by cliques, and  we still are you know.
Every city has its circle and its fans and its ... self-adulation  going on, but Alan was completely free of this. And he did get people from all parts of the country writing ... I mean  the Montreal group around  First Statement was a fascinat­ ing  group,  but  it  was a clique. For instance,  I  never  got into  any  Montreal magazine,  but anyone from there could and did write for Contemporary Verse and get published; so I would say it was due to his impartiality and universality. CRAWLEY: I believe of course that  C.V. did a great deal to help the writers of poetry at  that  time. It  had  quite a wide circulation  in  the last few years and was quite  widely read and gave poets a good deal of encouragement, not only from  me but  from  the other  members of the group  whom  they got to know.
I am not at all doubtful of the effect and the good and encouragement that was given to young writers by C.V. in those ten years.
PAGE: He was a very emotional man, Alan, an undemonstrative emotional man.
You saw very little of the emotion, but you felt a great  deal of it, and  you felt that  he was very much in touch with you in some way. That he had  a strong empathetic  quality, is the feeling I had about  him. As a result of this, one had no shyness with Alan and  this was his great strength  for me -I was a rather reticent person and to suddenly find somebody with whom one was not shy, someone in an editorial  capacity, that is-because after  all one did find one's own individuals  with whom one wasn't shy of course -but to find somebody in  an  editorial  capacity  to  whom  you could show  a  poem  that  you thought maybe  was simply awful, "but  it doesn't  matter,  if it's really awful, Alan  will tell me it is; and if it isn't awful, well, we can talk about it."
ROBERTSON: Outside  the window of his home in Victoria,  there is a garden


92

ALAN  CRAWLEY



and  flowers. I looked out  at the flowers he couldn't  see but  nonetheless knew better  than  I, and  tried  to imagine what he would sound like speaking verse. I asked him if he would read something for me, but he gendy and firmly refused, claiming  that  his memory is no longer as good as it was. So we must imagine that  voice, precise yet musical, unfolding the words, making sense of sound as he used to do in earlier days.
LIVESAY: There were two kinds of evenings. There  were those with the Craw­
leys, Mr.  and  Mrs.  Crawley  and  perhaps  their son, Michael;  he drove them about  and  helped  them  in every way. Then  we would  invite other friends in and have an evening, you know, a social evening with plenty of drink and talk, and  this was always a most lively occasion, full of wit and  humour  and  jokes. You saw  Alan  there  in  a very social light, and  you saw  him  as a man  who simply adored  the pleasure of human  contact and conversation  and exchanging wit, not gossiping in any malicious way, but just amusing  things about  people, because there's nothing ... there's never been anything in his attitude  to writers that  is partisan  or suspicious or critical of them as people. He enjoys them and doesn't  gossip at  all. But then there would be a different  kind of session when Michael  or perhaps  his wife Jean  would drive down  to my place for an  after­ noon of poetry, when he might come for lunch and then we'd sit out under the cherry tree or whatever  tree happened  to be around  (and  this was particularly in  North  Vancouver). I would  read  to  him  any  new and  interesting  poems that  I had  come across or letters from poets -this sort of  thing;  or he would bring correspondence for me to read and  discuss. Always he would have some kind  of  comment  and  some insight into  what  was being said  or written.  He was very interested, so the time flew by until someone came and picked him up. Sometimes  I would  go  to  Caulfield  and  do the same  thing,  stay  there  while the  family  would  go  out  on  their  errands.  We would  sit and  converse, for a couple  of hours  reading.  He  loved talk-we'd  talk  for  about  a half an  hour and  then  he  would  say,  "Well,  let's get  down  to  some  reading." We would read and comment  and  he'd say: "Now  what have you got, any new poems?" He'd  ask me  to  read  something  of mine, and  always he was very thoughtful  about  them. "Yes, I like that, I like that" ... "No, I don't  care for that."
PAGE: I remember  this marvellously Spanish looking man.  He looked as if he
might have come out of ... or he might almost have been an El Greco painting with this extraordinary alive quality about  him, and  a tremendous  capacity to know  where  everybody  was in the room and  to be following and  with you in your conversation.  Periodically  I used to stay with Alan and  Jean  in Caulfield

93

ALAN CRAWLEY



where  they  were  very generous  to  poets,  I must  say ... long  suffering  and generous and we'd get mildly drunk in the evening and quite bawdy, and laugh a  tremendous  amount.  I think  it  was the  laughter   I remember  as much  as anything.  I don't  know whether he was dominating the room he was in but he was on top of the room he was in;  he was everywhere in the room he was in; he missed nothing in the room he was in; and seemed a good deal sharper  than most of the rest of us, which indeed he was, I think.
ROBERTSON:   John   Sutherland,  editor   of   the   Montreal   little   magazine, Northern  Review, once wrote  to  Crawley:  "I envy your knack of catching  all the promising young poets."
CRAWLEY: In  1946 I think it would be, I was in Toronto and Ottawa and  I met  Jay  Macpherson. She  came  to a talk  I was giving, and  we had  a little talk  and  she said she would send me some manuscripts  which she did and  I published  a  lot  of  her  poems and  came  to  know  her  very well. Her  writing is very different  from  what is being done  now -it  is very good poetry and  I think  she  got  a  lot  of  encouragement   from  being  in  Contemporary Verse. Another  occasion  later  on in  the years of Contemporary Verse,  I had  a  tele­ phone  call  asking if  a  man  could come and  see me  when  we were living in Caulfield, and  I said "Yes, indeed, if you want to come and talk about poetry," and  when  he  came  he turned  out  to be Daryl  Hine  from  New  Westminster. He was just about  15 and  he had a sheaf of manuscript in his hand; we went down  to my room  and  he read  to me for  about  two  hours,  most remarkable  writing for a boy of that  age, and  he has written  some very fine poetry and is still doing so, has published a couple more books-he is now teaching, I think, at  the  University of  Chicago, but  he's  a  Canadian  who  started first  in Contemporary Verse.
ROBERTSON: If you were still editing Contemporary Verse  now, who are the
Canadian poets you would like to publish?
CRAWLEY: I would very much like to have  been able to publish some poems by Leonard  Cohen,  whose earlier writing, not  just the last writing particularly, but  his earlier  writing  I liked very much,  and  some of his later  poems now that  he reads and  accompanies on his guitar  I like, but I think a good deal of that  comes from  the guitar  accompaniment; and  I also like some  poems by Purdy  and  Newlove. I do not  read  a great  deal of contemporary poetry-I find  that  I've ... I don't  get as much satisfaction  or pleasure out of it as I do out  of reading  the  poems that  I knew or by writers  that  I have known some years ago.

94

ALAN  CRAWLEY



ROBERTSON: There  came  a time when Alan Crawley  no longer felt able to carry the burden  of Contemporary  Verse. In 1951 in the 10th anniversary issue, he announced that  he was considering bringing it to a close. He had hoped to find money to extend its circulation;  he had hoped to pay contributors; he was unsuccessful, and,  more  important,   he  began  to feel  that  the  magazine  was losing its vitality. In spite of pleas from readers and  poets, he wound  up Con­ temporary  Verse  with  the issue of Autumn  of 1952.  In  it he said, "We have a strong belief that  the work of a little magazine under the same editor's direc­ tion declines in time from its peak of usefulness. With this conviction we close our files and  write the abrupt  and final statement: this is the last issue of CV."  And thus the magazine ended, without fanfare or grace notes. It had been born in a near-vacuum. When it died new magazines were already springing  up. In the decade of its life, the climate of Canadian letters had improved  remarkably,  not least because of the  influence of magazines like Contemporary Verse and Northern   Review. Others   were  to  take  their  place,  and  the  man  who  had worked alone retired  from  publishing but not from thinking and talking about poetry.
CRAWLEY: I was talking to a young man a couple of years ago, he was in his
early  twenties,  and  in  the  course of conversation  about  literature  he said  to me:   "Well,  I've  written  some  poems;"  and  I  said,  "Would   you let  me see them?"  And  he said:  "Oh, no, I don't  think so." I said, "Don't you want  to know, have  any  idea  what  other  people would get from  them?"  And  he said "No,  I tore them  up. I know they're good poems-I don't  want anybody else to have anything  to do with them."  Well that  to me was something_quite new because most  of the  poets that  I've  known have  wanted  to  make some com­ munication   to some  person  and  not  to keep their  writing  to  themselves, but that  probably  is part  of what's going on now in many  ways. I think that some of the young writers are like a number of the young people who are not actually writing but who have the feeling that if it doesn't communicate to you then it's your fault,  not  their  fault,  and  until  they learn  that  they  have  to say things so that  they  are  intelligible  or  can  be felt  by the  person  they're  speaking  to through  verse or  otherwise,  why they're  never going to  turn out  to be able to create anything  worthy.
ROBERTSON: Alan Crawley would call the eleven years of Contemporary Verse a modest achievement; he would count as its greatest benefit that it had made him  many  friends.  But it is much  more than  a modest  achievement,  and  his friends the poets have not forgotten.


95

ALAN  CRAWLEY



LIVESAY: There is a poem I wrote for him when  he was living in the Okanagan, after  he had  moved  from  Caulfield  in the  Fifties.  I don't know  whether Alan knows it was written for him, but it does mention the blindness.




NOCTURNE

Dorothy Livesay

Countries are of the mind
and when you moved upon my land your darkness ringed my light:
0 landscape lovely, looped with loping hills, wind-woven landfall of love.

All my frozen years
snow drifting through bare birches, white-cowled cedar
and  the black stream threading  through  ice -

All sultry summers run
barefooted through  the crackling wood flung upon rocks made skeleton
x-rayed by the raging sun-

All springs, wild crying with the wood's mauve bells anemone,  hepatica
trembling to feel the fanning leaf: breast against bark, the sap's ascent burning the blood with bold green fire-

All autumns, solitary season
treading  the leaves, treading  the time:
those autumns stripped deception to the bone and left me animal, alone -

All seasons were of light stricken and  blazing - only now the shout
of knowledge hurls, amazing:
0 bind me with ropes of darkness, blind me with your long night.

g6



CANADIAN LITERATURE

The First Ten Tears




A.]. M. Smith





I FIND IT  HARD to  remember the  time-only  ten  years ago, was it?­ when  "there was  no literary  magazine in Canada that  devoted itself  entirely  to the  discussion  of  writers   and  writing in  this country." There was,  it  is  true,  the  an­  nual  survey  of  letters  in  Canada in the University   of Toronto  Quarterly  and   a few occasional academic papers or appre­ ciative  essays in  the  university quarterlies published at  Toronto, Queen's, and  Dal­  housie,  and  sometimes  some  livelier  and  more contemporary articles  in The  Cana­ dian  Forum  or  The   Tamarack   Review. But  for  something  that   could   not  only stimulate a  lasting   interest, satisfy  curi­ osity,  and  at  the  same  time  demonstrate the  interconnections  between  our  writers  and   their   writing  on  the  one  hand   and  the cultural, social and  intellectual milieu on the other, we had  to wait for a journal  that    could   concentrate  on   the   as   yet hardly academically respectable "field" of Canadian  letters and   could   do  so  in  a broad, inclusive, unpedantic, many-sided way. When  George  Woodcock was invited by the  University of British  Columbia to edit  the magazine he approached the task very  deliberately as a  professional writer rather than an academic critic,  and  while demanding  always  a  certain  quality of
 style and cogency of argument he was careful   to  seek  out   a   wide   variety   of points   of  view  and   to   represent  many schools  of  thought. The  contributors to the magazine included academic critics, professional  writers,  poets,  novelists,  his­ torians,  publicists,  journalists,  people ac­  tive in the theatre or the mass media, and perhaps a few plain  amateurs or lovers of literature. The variety extended also from old well-established names  to young prac­  ticioners  of  the  new  in  poetry  and  criti­  cism  and   to  all  the   modes  of  criticism  being practised today.
The  magazine got off to an  impressive
start.  Typography and  design  were excel­ lent;  print   was  clear   and   the  margins wide. The  contents of the  first two issues set  the  pattern of  variety   and  inclusive­  ness and  announced a  standard both  of style  and  substance  that  it  would   be  a challenge  to  maintain. Each   number in­  cluded  a  personal essay by  an  author on his own art  and  his literary aims  written in  a  personal  and  familiar manner that seemed to  underwrite its sincerity  and authority. The writers   were  Roderick Haig-Brown and  Ethel  Wilson.  Essays of this kind were  to appear quite frequently in subsequent issues, not all of them as informal as these,  but  among them  were

97

THE FIRST TEN YEARS



some as important as Hugh MacLennan's account of the composition of The Watch that Ends the Night, some letters of Frederick  Philip Grove, edited by Profes­ sor   Pacey, a  translation of   Malcolm Lowry's  preface  to  a  French  edition  of Under  the  Volcano,  and, more  recently, Wyndham  Lewis's "On Canada" and  his sketch  of  an   unwritten  historical  novel set in the days of the French  regime.
The   first  two  numbers  contained,  of course, articles  on  poets and  novelists - ancient  and  modern:  on Duncan  Camp­ bell   Scott   and   Ralph   Connor;   Major Richardson,  A. M. Klein, as novelist, and Margaret Avison; on Gabrielle Roy and on French-Canadian poetry (in French), labelled   here   by  Gilles  Marcotte  "une poesie d'exil". The  writers (including the present one)  were all academics-F. W. Watt,   Desmond   Pacey,  Milton   Wilson, and   Hugo   McPherson-and  the   per­ tinent  liveliness and  all-round good sense and  intelligence  of  this group  of  essays alone reconfirmed my opinion that "Our best criticism, like our best poetry, today is in  the  hands  of the  'university wits'."
The   juxtaposition   of  critic  and  poet has  often  been  fruitful,  and  for  me,  in spite  of  the  brilliance  and  learning  dis­ played in the seminal studies of Steinberg on Klein and  Wilson on Avison, the gem of the first two issues was poet Eli Man­ del's penetrating study of the criticism of Northrop  Frye.   In   later  issues a  good many  poets were  to contribute  criticism, some in papers as outstanding as Reaney's on  Jay   Macpherson,   Louis  Dudek's  on Raymond Souster,  Ralph  Gustafson's on the  New  Wave,  and  George Bowering's on  Reaney  and  Macpherson.  Every one of  these  poets,  however,  holds  an  aca­ demic   post  and   can  be  claimed   as  a "university  wit."

g8
 One  other   portent -this  in  the  first issue -was the turning over of Canadian books to well-equipped but unsuspecting English  reviewers.  Here  George  Wood­ cock  was  able  to  draw  on  some  of  his friends   from   his  years  in   the   literary circles of London during  the thirties. Roy Fuller,  now  Professor of   Poetry  at  Ox­ ford,  reviewed with candour,  discrimina­ tion, and  unpatronizing fairness books of verse  by   Irving   Layton,  John   Glassco, and  Ronald Bates. More recently Julian Symons, in  a  review  of  my Oxford  an­ thology  Modern   Canadian   Verse,  pre­ sented   a   point   of  view  that   I   found curious  and  very surprising,  but  which, coming  from  an  experienced  and  com­ pletely  honest  English  poet  and  editor, must  be given  the  closest  consideration. Symons wrote:  "This collection contains a  great  deal  of  talented  verse which ... cannot   be  called  parochial  or  narrowly nationalistic.... What   Canadian   poetry most lacks (and what  Larkin, Lowell and some other  writers by contrast  have been able to use profitably)  is a truly national style."
By the end of the first year perhaps, certainly  by the end of the second, it was clear that the high quality of the early numbers was to be maintained  and the usefulness of  the  magazine  as an  index and  critique  of the  literary  and  cultural life of the dominion had been established. It may  be, as the editor  suggested in his Introduction to A Choice of Critics, a selection of essays from Canadian Litera­ ture  published  in  rg66,  that  part  of its success was  due  to  the  fact  that  it  ap­ peared   at   a   moment   when   Canadian writers,  particularly  poets  and  novelists, were   entering   upon   a   new   phase   of maturity and accomplishment. The circu­ lation  of  their  books -as well as that  of

THE FIRST TEN YEARS



the  writers  of our  past -was  becoming much larger and more widely diffused through  the  inauguration by both  com­ mercial  and   academic   publishers  of several series of paperback  reprints.  The books our critics were writing about could now be obtained  by everyone, easily and cheaply,  and  it  became  possible, almost for  the  first  time,  to   conduct   practical undergraduate courses in Canadian liter­ ature. And   now  a  quarterly  devoted exclusively  to  the  criticism  of  letters  in Canada   and  its  impact  upon  the  social and  cultural   milieu  that  formed  it  and that it expressed made it possible to draw together  the thinking  of  all critics, schol­ ars, creative writers, and thoughtful read­ ers  in  a  kind  of  continuing   symposium that  I for one have found extremely fruit­ ful and immensely exciting.
This   usefulness  was  assured  and   in­ creased  by a  number  of special  features ranging  from  the  annual  bibliographical  check lists of Canadian writing in French as  well as  English  to  poems  that  might be considered  for any one of a variety of reasons to have some particular historical or  critical   relevance.  Special  issues de­ voted to writers of  unusual significance­
E. J. Pratt,  Malcolm Lowry, A. M. Klein,
and  some of  the  poets-offered a  bal­
anced view of their contribution to our literature through  the juxtaposition of essays by a number of scholars and critics.
The  critical  essays which  make  up the bulk of the  material  published  in  Cana­ dian   Literature   fall   into  several   cate­ gories: historical and  contemporary; scholarly and  informal;  appreciative, critical,  or  controversial; general  or par­ ticular. And almost every school of criti­ cism  has been represented: sociological, analytical,  biographical, and  psychologi­ cal. ... I break  off  as  I  begin  to  sound
 like Polonius. Instead  of generalities and classifications, let me cite some particular examples of success in different  kinds of criticism. I am  a compulsive  anthologist, and  perhaps  the  best way to do this will be  to  make  my  own  "choice  of critics" as a kind of supplement  and sequel to George   Woodcock's.   There   is  such   a wealth and variety of material to choose from that there is no need to take any of the essays Mr.  Woodcock  already  had chosen,  though   I feel  a  pang  at  being denied such outstanding examples of mythopoeic criticism as the poet D. G. Jones's  "The   Sleeping  Giant: The  Un­ created   Conscience   of  the   Race"   and Warren  Tallman's study  of five  modem Canadian    novels,   "The  Wolf    in   the Snow." I would  choose to  represent  this kind  of imaginative  theoretical  criticism (which demands  for its success, however, sensitivity, learning,  practical  experience and  taste)  Paul  West's "Eros  and  Epic: Aspects of Canadian Poetry" -a remark­ ably  useful document  because it presents a  general view of what is unique and traditional   in  our   poetry  seen  through the  eyes of  a  young  English  poet  and writer who spent a number  of years at Memorial   University   in  Newfoundland and took the opportunity to examine our literature from a new, unbiassed but not unsympathetic  point of view.
As examples of more conventional  but even  more  essential   criticism  I  would choose, as a kind of general introduction to  the  state  of  letters  in  Canada   now, Desmond Pacey's "The  Outlook for Canadian  Literature" in no. 36; Professor F. W. Watt's  study  of left-wing  political magazines in the  twenties and  thirties - though  this is available  also in the monu­ mental  Literary History of  Canada;  and Ronald  Sutherland's   two   long   and

99

THE  FIRST TEN YEARS



thoughtful  studies of the French/English dialogue in Quebec  as seen in the poetry and  fiction of the two languages:  "Twin Solitudes"   in   no.   2 I    and   "The   Body Odour  of Race" in no. 37.
The   essays  by  Professors  Watt   and
Sutherland are concerned primarily with the social and  political aspects of  litera­ ture. These have always been close to the centre   of  George   Woodcock's  editorial intention   and   practice.   The   economic conditions under which professional writ­ ers  must  work  and  their  relations  with publishers,  editors,  the  public,  and  the law have been dealt with passim in editorials,  articles,  discussions, and  sym­ posia. One  of the  most practically  valu­ able   issues  (no.   33  on   "Publishing   in Canada") featured answers to a question­ naire sent  to  authors,  publishers, editors, and   critics,   among   them   Hugh   Mac­ Lennan, Roderick Haig-Brown, Earle Birney,   Robert   Fulford,   Arnold   Edin­ borough, Kildare   Dobbs,  and  Professor Carl  Klinck.  Mr.  John  Gray,  of   Mac­ millan's,   and   a   bookseller,  Mr.  W.  J. Duthie,  gave  the  point  of view  of  their respective   callings.   Their   authoritative essays  were  followed   by   John   Robert Colombo's youthfully enthusiastic account of his adventures in the publishing game. In  the  same  issue  was the  first  of  two informative and  completely objective (non-critical  rather  than  uncritical)   re­ search  jobs by Wynne Francis on the part played  in  the  development  of Canadian poetry since the forties by the small inde­ pendent   presses. The  second, a  comple­ mentary study of the little mags, followed in the next issue.1
For  my  examples  of literary  criticism
dealing   with  social  or  economic  back­ grounds  I would  choose none  of  these, however -mainly   because  pieces   of  a

100
 more general  application  are available  in abundance -among  them  two  or  three essays that  would  be outstanding  in  any context.   One   of  these  is  Thelma   Mc­ Cormack's  "Writers and the Mass Media"  in the Spring I g64 issue, a well-reasoned and  fully  informed  essay  that  comes  to grips  with  the  McLuhan syndrome  with a  refreshing  firmness  and  coolness. An­ other   is  Paul   West's  fashionably   titled "Pastoral   with   Ostriches   and   Mocking Birds."  This  is  a  carefully  thought-out attack  on the ineffectual games played by Canadian  intellectuals  and  aesthetes  re­ sulting   in   sterile  conformity   and   false optimism.  The  ideas  expressed  by J.-C. Falardeau in  his  Plaunt  Memorial  Lec­ ture  at   Carleton  University   and   by Northrop Frye in  By  Liberal  Things are considered  in some detail  and  the  paper concludes  with  a spirited  defence  of the humanities in education. While asserting that  it is "a  mistake to think  the study of Swift or Johnson  is less relevant  than  the study  of Orwell  or  Snow"  he has praise for  the  adventurous  modern  like Layton

THE FIRST TEN YEARS



or Town. And finally I should  be tempted by Professor R. L. McDougall's (also fashionably titled)  "The  Dodo   and   the Cruising Auk", a  witty  controversial  ex­
pose  of  what   the  author  believes  to  be
the enervating effect  of academicism and their upper-middle-class origin upon many  of   the established writers and critics.  Along  with  this I should  have  to include Professor  Earle  Birney's sharp re­ joinder   that   followed   a  couple   of  issues later.  While  unable  to deny the possession of a  well-earned Ph.D.  or  many  years as a  university   teacher,  Birney  indignantly refused   to   be   labelled  anything  but  proletarian.
When  we come to the section of my hypothetical anthology devoted, like  Mr. Woodcock's, to "Some Writers" I feel some classification of the material is necessary.   I  shall   content  myself   with listing my own  personal choice among the essays in each  of the groups  I distinguish. First   there   are   the   historical studies  of writers   of  the   past,   most   of  them   pre­ senting  a fresh  point  of view or attempt­ ing  a new evaluation or  rediscovering an author  unjustly   neglected  or   forgotten. The  novels   of   Major  Richardson,  the poetry  and  politics  of  Charles Mair, the writings  of  the  fur-traders and  explorers,  and  the  nature books  of Ernest Thomp­ son  Seton   have   all  been  the  subject   of investigation by such  accomplished schol­ ars  as  Professors  Pacey,  Shrive, Daniells,  Hopwood, and  S. E. Read. From  among these  I would  choose  V.  G.  Hopwood's long overdue  appreciation  of  David Thompson in   the   Autumn  1968  issue; Norman  Shrive's account  of  the  career  and    reputation   of   the    once    popular Indian authoress, Pauline Johnson, in "What Happened to Pauline?" in no. 13
-though an  earlier, more  informal essay
 by  Ethel   Wilson  on  the  Victorian  miss who was a poetess rather than a poet  has great    charm;  and    finally   an   unusual paper  on  Isabella Valancy Crawford  by J. B.  Ower-unusual, and   particularly valuable,  because  it  is devoted largely  to a   close   reading  of   one of   the   most intriguing  of   Miss   Crawford's  shorter poems  "The Canoe".
But it is in the  papers  on the literature of  the  last  twenty   years  or  so  that   the greatest  variety  and  distinction is found. Here  I would cite first as tops in cogency and usefulness the three long definitive surveys   by   George    Woodcock   of   the literary development of the  novelists Morley Callaghan and  Hugh MacLennan and  the poet Irving Layton. The first two are  in  A Choice of Critics, but  I am  well content  with   the   more   recent   Layton piece,  "A  Grab   at   Proteus", surely   the most  just and  most  discriminating of the many   efforts  to  separate the  gold  from the  dross in  Layton's astonishing output. Even  Mr. Layton liked it.
Some of the best articles on particular writers  appeared in special  issues devoted to an examination of their  work from a number of viewpoints. The  numbers  de­ voted  to  A. M.  Klein,   Malcolm  Lowry,
E.  J. Pratt, and   to  some  of  the  other
poets,  have   been  especially   valuable to students and  general readers alike.  From these  I would  want  to single out  Vincent Sharman's questioning of the  accepted view of the orthodoxy of Pratt's religious convictions   in  "Illusion and   Atonement
-E. J. Pratt and  Christianity"; Robert
Heilman's placing of Under  the Volcano
in the  perspective of modern European novelists, particularly the  Thomas Mann of  Dr. Faustus, in  "The Possessed Artist and   the   Ailing   Soul";  and    from   the wealth  of material on  A. M. Klein  I find


101

THE FIRST TEN YEARS



it  hard   to  choose  among  the  essays of Steinberg,  Waddington, Livesay, and  the young  Kingston  poet  T.  A. Marshall.  I believe I should settle for the last, a well­ worked-out   analysis  of   Klein's   Jewish themes entitled  "Theorems  Made Flesh." Two  or three critiques on more or less important contemporary  poets and  novel­ ists  have  appeared   in  every  issue -the editor  seems to have a genius for match­ ing  the  critic,  expositor,  or  appreciator  to his subject. I am thinking, to give some examples, of the work of  Helen Sonthoff on   Phyllis  Webb,  of   Peter  Stevens  on Raymond  Knister, Louis Dudek on Ray­ mond Souster, or Nairn Kattan  and J.-G. Pilon  on  some  of   the  French   novelists and  poets. Again it  must seem invidious to make a choice, but I shall select two: an essay on a French  poet and one on an English  novelist. Each  is an outstanding  example  of  criticism  that   uncovers  the significance of what has been overlooked, either  in  the  work  itself or  in  its social and   psychological  sources and  impacts. These  are  Jean  le Moyne's essay in  no.
28, "Saint-Denys-Garneau's Testimony to
his  Time"  (translated   by  Philip  Strat­ ford), and  D. 0. Spettigue's informative and  brilliant  study of the  literary  career of  Ernest  Buckler entitled  "The   Way it Was" in no. 32.
I am assuming world enough and time, plenty of money, and  perfect freedom, so I can  represent  also some of the  special features   that  have  contributed  much  to the magazine's interest and usefulness. Among these I would cite the essays and reviews written  in French -not  enough of  these,  I think,  to  reflect the  true  bi­ culturism  of  Canada,  but  the  substance has been inclusive and  the quality  good. In addition  to Kattan, Pilon, and Jean le Moyne, the critics have included  Gerard


102
 

Tougas, Gerard Bessette, Jean-Charles Falardeau,  Gilles   Marcotte,   Adrien Therio,   and  others;   and  many,  though by no means all, of the leading poets and novelists who  write  in  French   have  re­ ceived the attention they deserve. Another of  the  services Canadian  Literature  has provided  for  the  entertainment and  in­ struction of its readers has been a number of  controversial engagements  and a num­ ber  of   (usually)   well-deserved   castiga­ tions.  I am  thinking  of  Ralph  Gustaf­ son's craftsmanly  distaste for  the verse of the   New  Wave  school,   Louis  Dudek's review  article   labelled   "Trouncing  the Younger  Poets", Frank Davey's dismissal of  Layton's   Periods  of  the  Moon,  and John   Peter's  much  earlier  denunciation of   the   academicism   of   Robert   Finch. George   Bowering,  Lionel   Kearns,   and Frank Davey, however, have spoken well in  defence  of  the  new schools, and  the air   of  lively  debate   that   enlivens   the reviews of recent poetry is all to the good. Another   debate,   not  unconnected   with the reception  of the youngest poetry, was the  full  and  very knowledgeable  discus­ sion  of  the  teaching  of creative  writing in   the  universities  in  Robert   Harlow's "Bastard   Bohemia:   Creative  Writing  in

THE  FIRST TEN YEARS



the  Universities" in  no. 27 and  Warren Tallman's rejoinder two  issues  later, "Creative Writing: Reality and  Myth."
The most unusual and  by no means the least  interesting feature of  the  magazine has  been  the  inclusion from  time  to time of  poems  or  verses.  These ranged   from F.  R. Scott's translation of  a  descriptive poem  written by Marc Lescarbot at  Port Royal   in   16og   and   John  Glassco's   of Louis  Riel's  bitter address to Sir John A. Macdonald to unpublished poems of Malcolm  Lowry,  a  couple of short  lyrics by myself, some Found Poems of Frank Scott,   and   an  experimental verse  mani­ festo  by Wilfred Watson.
I cannot bring  this survey to a close without  a  tribute to  the  editor  himself and   to  his  two  learned  and   lively  col­ leagues,   Donald   Stephens  and   W.   H. New,  whose  articles,   reviews,  and  occa­ sional  editorials have  been  invariably of the   highest    standard.  It   is   to   George Woodcock, however, that   I  think   the  great   success  of  the  magazine  must   be
 mainly   due.   His  dedication  to  his  task and  the  skill  with  which  he  has  carried it out  derive  from  a lifetime's experience as a man  of letters  and  an  active partici­ pant  in the  political  and  moral life of his time.  This  has  been  quite  explicitly  de­ clared  in the  editorials he wrote  for most of the  issues, but  it  has found  active  and  practical expression   in  the  firmness  and  direction with  which  he fixed and  main­ tained  the course  of  the magazine during this  first  ten  years.  In  the  Introduction to  A Choice  of  Critics  he stated  his pur­ pose.   It  was   to   avoid   the   sterile,   the foregone,   and   the   established,  and   to seek with a kind of "eclectic detachment" for excellence through freedom. "My  own approach as a  critic," he  wrote,  "has al­ ways been  that  of the  professional  rather than  the academic: an  eclecticism which  accepts   as  valid   any   method   that  may throw light on the intentions of an author and   on   the   nature  and   quality  of  his achievement. This has led me to welcome  any  critical  essay whose  arguments seem well  supported  and   well  presented :  the unacademic but  naturally  informed atti tude  of  the  practising writer   as  well  as the more systematic attitude of the schol­ arly critic whose  insights  spring  from  the accumulation of knowledge."
That George  Woodcock has succeeded
for  the  past  ten  years  in  bringing these two streams  of knowledge about  literature together  in  a  single  national  journal  is an achievement for which all Canadians ought  to be grateful.
1To appreciate the  catholicity of the editor's choices and  the variety of approach in the magazine's critical articles the reader is recommended to compare, with Mrs. Francis' essay, Ethel  Wilson's  warmly  personal  appre­ ciation   of  Alan  Crawley   and   his  influential Vancouver  poetry   magazine   Contemporary Verse.  Both  are  good,  but  in  very  different  ways.


103


THE  WRITING

OF THE  DECJIDE



I. La Litterature Canadienne-Fran{aise


Gerard Tougas



PAR UN   HEUREUX HASARD, les dix annees qui  ont  suivi Ia fondation  en
1959 de Canadian  Literature auront cor­
respondu  a Ia mutation de  Ia litrerature
canadienne-fram;aise. D'une   litterature de   province,   a  peu   pres   inconnue   a
l'etranger, elle est passee au rang des litteratures  mineures  en pleine expansion
dont  on parle a New York, a Londres, a
Paris  et  a  Francfort. Sur  les  marches
internationaux on scrute desormais les derniers  livres parus a Montreal.  II suffit
maintenant qu'un  roman  canadien  rem­ porte  un succes au Canada  pour  que ses chances d'etre  traduit en plusiers langues soient excellentes.
Que s'est-il passe depuis 1959 pour permettre  aux auteurs  canadiens-franc;ais de se faire connaitre  modestement en dehors  des frontieres  de leur  pays, alors qu'il  y a peu de temps encore, le silence le  plus  absolu  recouvrait   leurs  oeuvres les plus meritoires?
L'internationalisation relative de Ia
litrerature  canadienne-fran aise
ble,  en   tant   que   pMnomene   de  com­
munication, a cette phase decisive dans Ia
vie  des  pays  en  voie  d'industrialisation
qui  leur  permet  d'atteindre, apres  quel­ ques faux departs  prometteurs,  un vegime de croissance continu  et assure.

104
 Le  Canada Fran ais,
tion litteraire, avait  vecu une vingtaine d'annees sur Ia lanoee de Maria Chapde­ laine,  roman   qui  connut   une  celebrire mondiale   entre  les  deux  guerres.  Cette ouverture sur  le monde  avait  ere le fait d'un   etranger,  Louis  Hernon.  C'est   en
1938 seulement  que  Ringuet,  par  ses 30 arpents,  revelait  Ia presence d'un  monde tout   autre   que   celui  qui  avait   inspire l'idylle  de  Peribonka   et  qui,  en  meme temps,  suggerait  }'existence d'une  tradi­ tion litreraire  vivace et originale.
L'holocauste de  193g-1945 vint  inter­
rompre le mouvement  qui s'amovc;ait avec
Ia  publication   a  Paris  de  30  arpents.
Depuis,  le  nombre   d'auteurs  canadiens
qui se font editer  en France et dont Ies oeuvres ont  paru  en traduction n'a  cesse d'augmenter.  Toutefois,   il importe   de distinguer  deux phases distinctes dans ce mouvement.
Dans   un   premier   temps,  les  auteurs
canadiens  ont  trouve  un editeur  parisien en  ordre  disperse.  L'attribution du  Prix
Femina    a  Gabrielle   Roy   en   1948  a
marque  le haut  point des annees qui s'eche}onnent  de   1945 a  1960  pendant
lesquelles Yves Theriault, Gerard  Bessette et  d'autres encore  ont  tenre  leur  chance en   Europe.    A   ces   noms   il   convient

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



d'ajouter  celui  de  Leo-Paul   Desrosiers qui, apres ses Engages du Grand  Portage (I 938),   publiait  chez  Gallimard  L'am­ poule d'or  ( I95I). Si ces  romanciers  ne devaient  guere retenir !'attention des cri­ tiques et  des lecteurs fran ais,
chercher  !'explication  dans   le  contexte
sociologique et historique.
Depuis   I 76o, il s'est  toujours   trouve en France  un petit nombre  d'esprits curi­ eux  du  Canada. Au  dix-neuvieme  siecle Xavier   Marmier,   Jean-Jacques  Ampere et  Alexis de Tocqueville s'etaient  rendus sur les lieux et avaient suppure  les chan­ ces de survie de ce groupement fran ais, detache   du  courant   de  la  vie  interna­  tionale.   Au   debut   du   vingtieme  siecle, Andre   Siegfried,   dans   deux   livres  re­ marques, renouait avec cette tradition et analysait les composantes de la spiritualire canadienne-fran aise.
et   analystes   s'adressaient   a   un   public
restreint.  La  vaste majorire  des Fran ais et  des  Europeens  cultives  vivaient  dans
!'ignorance du Canada Fran ais.
Or   il est  indeniable   qu'en   Ig6g   la realite est tout autre. Depuis quelques annees  le Canada Fran  ais
tion  dans  la  presse occidentale.  Pour  ce
qui   est   de   la   litrerature   canadienne­
fran aise,
decisif, correspondant au  deuxieme temps, se situe aux  alentours  des annees I g6o- I g65.   L'impulsion  donnee  aux lettres  canadiennes   a  permis,  en   Ig66,
que   quatre   romanciers   canadiens,   taus
publies  a  Paris,  participent a la  course aux  prix litteraires.  Si, en fin de compte, Marie-Claire Blais se vit attribuer le Prix Meclicis, Rejean  Ducharme, Jean  Basile et  Hubert  Aquin  ant   trouve  eux  aussi leurs supporters  et  ont  contribue a faire de cette annee  un  tournant dans !'evolu­ tion des lettres canadiennes-fran aises.
 Aujourd'hui, e'en est fait de l'isolement des ecrivains canadiens.  Ils sont assures, pour peu qu'ils aient du talent, de faire parler d'eux. La preuve, c'est qu'un livre aussi  demode   et   precieux   que   Mater
Europa  de  Jean  Ethier-Blais  ait  retenu
!'attention  complaisante de Pierre-Henri Simon  dans   sa  chronique   du   Monde. Parue  en   I958  au  lieu  de  Ig68,  cette fleur fanee efit passe inaper  ue.
Aucun facteur  n'explique  mieux l'essor
de la  jeune litterature que la montee  de la   bourgeoisie canadienne-fran aise. Longtemps les auteurs  n'ont  pu exercer d'influence  sur  leur  milieu, faute  de  lec­ teurs.   Le   manque    d'un    public   lettre freinait  l'industrie  du  livre,  representee jusqu'a  une epoque  relativement  recente par deux ou trois maisons d'edition,  telles que  la librairie  Beauchemin  a  Montreal  et la librairie  Garneau a Quebec.  Insen­ siblement, cet etat  de choses a commence a changer. Avec la fondation de plusieurs maisons   d'edition   a   Montreal   pendant
la derniere  guerre,  le depart  etait  donmS
a  une evolution  qui  devait  aboutir  a ]a
trentaine  de maisons d'edition  qui assur­
ent  aujourd'hui ]a  production   litteraire du Canada  Fran ais.
population   de  cinq  millions  de  franca­
phones  (je  fais  abstraction  des  franco­ phones vivant  a l'exterieur du  Quebec)' les editeurs  canadiens-fran ais
nombreux  que  leurs  homologues  amen­
cains, britanniques  ou fran ais.
Le mouvement nationaliste aidant, les lecteurs ne font plus defaut  aux ecrivains.
Les  plaquettes  de  poesie  sorties  par  les
Editions   de   l'Hexagone  tirent   a  deux
mille  exemplaires  et  sont  epuisees  tres
souvent  en  une  seule annee.  A Toronto ou a New York ces resultats  forceraient
le respect. Les insolences  du  frere untel,
parues  en   xg6o, ont  largement   depass6


105

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



les cent mille exemplaires. Pour les Etats­ Unis, une reussite comparable se situerait entre   quatre   et  cinq   millions   d'exem­ plaires.
En  meme  temps  qu'un  public  et  une
industrie  du livre se constituaient,  la litterature  canadienne-fran aise,
nee dans  quelques  genres, se diversifiait.
De nos jours les poetes et les romanciers se comptent   par  centaines.  On  assiste a
la naissance d'une  dramaturgie nationale. Montreal  s'enorgueillit  de plusieurs salles ultra-modernes, ou Dube, Ferron, Loran­ ger  attirent les foules. En I g68,  Michel Tremblay,   en  faisant   jouer  ses   Belles­ soeurs, piece ecrite inregralement dans la langue  du  ern  (le "canayen" d'autrefois,  baptise  "joual")  et  done  incomprehen­ sible  pour   les  etrangers,  fussent-ils  de langue   fran aise,   a   donne   une   l on d'independance  litreraire  qui  pourrait faire tache d'huile.
De  plus  en  plus  nombreux  aussi sont les ouvrages qui paraissent en economie politique, en philosophie, en histoire, en sciences.1  Pour  la premiere fois dans son histoire,  le  Canada   Fran ais
a alimenter  le marche  fran ais
national  en  livres scientifiques. C'est  un




106
 signe des temps  qu'un  maison  montreal­ aise,  les  Editions   HMH,  ait   assure  la traduction fran aise
shall  McLuhan  et  que  ce  soit  grace  a
l'intermediaire de  cette  derniere  que  la
France  et !'Europe apprennent, en  ver­ sion  fran aise,  a distinguer  entre  "mes­ sage" et "massage".
Bref,  la  societe  canadienne-fran aise, par  ses ecrivains, ses editeurs  et son dynamisme   trouve   moyen   de   se  faire
conna1tre a l'etranger.
Dans quelle mesure le nationalisme est­ ille  moteur  de cette activite?  Quoi qu'on  pense  des  revendications  politiques  des Canadiens   fran ais,
sont  profitables  a la  litterature. Par  un
processus   qui   n'est   pas   sans   rappeler
!'evolution   des  pays  du  tiers  monde,  le
Canada Fran ais,              a la  conscience
collective   de  son  originalite,   s'exprime
par le truchement de ses ecrivains. Poetes, romanciers, dramaturges et  historiens
participent a ce mouvement  vers !'affirm­
ation de soi. Terre  Quebec du poete Paul
Chamberland, Prochain episode et Ethel et  le  terroriste  des  romanciers   Hubert Aquin   et   Claude   Jasmin,   Les   grands soleils et  Le  chemin  du  roy des  drama­ turges   Ferron   et  Loranger   et  enfin  la refonte  des  themes  historiques  tradition­ nels operee  par  Fregault  et  Brunet  refle­ tent fidelement !'effervescence qui carac­  terise  aujourd'hui la societe canadienne­ fran aise.
Ces dix  demieres  annees  auront  mar­
que  aussi la reintegration au  moins  par­
tielle du Canada Fran  ais
francophone. Pour l'avenir des lettres canadiennes-fran aises,
revetent  une importance qu'on  ne saurait
exagerer.
Pendant  deux siecles, le Canada  Fran­
ais

THE WRITING OF  THE  DECADE



que  le reste du  Canada entretenait avec les Etats-Unis  et  la Grande Bretagne les mille  liens  qui  constituent la  vie  inter­ nationale,  liens d'autant  plus  importants
qu'ils correspondent a une meme famille
d'esprit.  Le "Vive  le Quebec  libre!"  de
Charles  de Gaulle  n'aura ere que !'illus­ tration sonore et dramatique d'une neces­ sire ressentie des deux  bords de 1' Atlan­ tique   pour   l'etablissement    de  contacts suivis et  permanents  dans  le domaine de
la  culture.  11 etait   anormal, a l'epoque
de  la  television  par  satellite  et  des  cos­
monautes  qu'une communaure de langue franc;aise restat dans !'ignorance des quel­
que trente pays qui participent a la meme
culture  que la sienne.
Si ces demieres  annees  resteront mem­ orables  parce  qu'elles  auront  marque  la fin de l'isolement  linguistique  et culture! des ecrivains  canadiens,  elles auront  per­
mis aussi a ces derniers  de  mieux  com­
prendre   leur   situation    privilegiee.  Car
les  Canadiens   franc;ais  n'appartiennent pas qu'au  monde francophone: ils sont enracines en Amerique  du Nord.
Les ecrivains,  et  avec  eux  les editeurs montrealais, apprennent,  parfois avec surprise,   queUes  sont   les  limites  assez
etroites  qui  sont  imposees  a  leurs  rap­
ports  avec  le  monde  francophone,  rap­
ports qui se resument  essentiellement aux maisons d'edition  parisiennes. On a assiste ces  dernieres  annees  au  lancement,  sur le marche parisien, de plusieurs auteurs canadiens.  Se  qu'on  ignore-parce  que les  jeunes  auteurs   sont  nalfs  et  taisent leurs deconvenues-est  le  caractere retrograde  de   l'edition   franc;aise. A l'epoque de Matthew Arnold, le celebre critique anglais exhortait  ses compatriotes
a prendre  exemple  sur  les editeurs fran­
c;ais, modeles du  genre. Aujourd'hui,
!'edition   franc;aise,  apres   avoir   ete   la
 premiere d'Europe, est tombee si bas que meme un  pays pauvre  comme  l'Espagne est devenu  plus productif  que la France. La Suisse, les Pays-Bas et la Suede  pub­ lient proportionnellement trois ou quatre fois plus de livres que  la France. Quant
a l'Angleterre  et l'Allemagne  de !'Ouest,
elles ont  laisse la France  si loin derriere elles qu'il  n'y a  plus aucun  espoir que la France  les  rattrape  jamais.2     Les  jeunes ecrivains   canadiens    qui   fondent    leurs espoirs sur Paris finissent par s'apercevoir que  l'edition  franc;aise, par  ses methodes de travail, n'est pas encore sortie du dix­ neuvieme  siecle.  Trop   souvent  l'editeur  parisien  est  un  monsieur  qui  ne  repond pas aux lettres,  qui verse aux  auteurs  les droits qu'il  veut bien leur accorder  et qui se prend au serieux.3  Dans ces conditions, il  n'est  pas  surprenant  que  le  Conseil Superieur   du   Livre,  conduit   par  Leon Patenaude,  ait  mis  cinq  annees  d'apres
negociations  a faire  accepter  le principe
que le Canada Franc;ais, qui achete  pour plus de dix  millions  de  dollars  de livres
par  an  a  la  France,   puisse  a son  tour
ecouler ses livres le marche  franc;ais. 11 a
ere consenti au Canada un seul debouch!!, la Librairie  de !'Ecole, a Paris. Ce maigre
resultat  explique  mieux  que  les  retentis­ sants  communiqUJes emanant  de  !'Elysee la   nature    de   la   cooperation   franco­ quebecoise.
L'internationalisation de la litrerature canadienne-franc;aise s'est accompagnee d'un   vaste  mouvement  d'approfondisse­ ment  dans  les  universites. En  1959, lors de la  fondation  de Canadian  Literature,  il  n'existait,  hors  du  Quebec,  que  quel­ ques  cours  de  litterature  canadienne­
franc;aise professes a Toronto, a London
et  a  Vancouver.   Lorsque,   a la  fin  de
1968, les specialistes en  litrerature  cana­
dienne-franc;aise se sont rendus a Ottawa


107

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



sur !'invitation de  Paul  Wyczynski et de son equipe pour faire le point de leur discipline,  ils ont  constare  avec  satisfac­ tion  que   peu  d'universites  canadiennes restent en dehors du  mouvement.
Pour  la  premiere  fois aussi, des cours de  litterature  canadienne-franc;aise  ont ere institues  a  l'etranger.  En  Angleterre, le  professeur  Fraser  MacKenzie  mettait
sur   pied   en    1963  a l'Universire   de
Birmingham  une   section d'etudes
canadiennes-franc;aises. Chaque annee, un conferencier  venu  de  la  Delegation  du
Quebec  a Londres   vient  entretenir   les
etudiants  britanniques de quelque aspect
de la societe canadienne-franc;aise. En France,  des  chaires  de  litrerature  cana­ dienne-franc;aise  ont  ere creees  aux  uni­ versires  de  Caen   et  de  Strasbourg.  La litrerature   canadienne-franc;aise,  totale­ mente   absente   des   principales   revues franc;aises jusqu'a  une  epoque  toute  re­ cente, retient  aujourd'hui !'attention  des journaux  et des revues les plus connus.
Concurremment a cette  activioo a ete
entreprise   depuis   1959  !'indispensable
prospection des ressources litreraires du pays. Lorsque les livres de base ont fait defaut,  ils ont ete  crees de toutes pieces. C'est ainsi que depuis la parution demon Histoire de la litterature canadienne-fran­ aise
telles que  les toutes  recentes anthologies
publiees sous la direction de Pierre de Grandpve  (Histoire  de la litterature  fran­ aise
Geslin et  Parent   (Histoire  de  la  littera­
ture  canadienne-fran  aise
1968).  Parmi  le.<;  travaux  qui ont enrichi la litterature canadienne-franc;aise il con­ vient  de  mentionner  !'exhaustive  etude de  Paul  Wyczynski, Emile  Nelligan, sources et  originalite  de  son  oeuvre,  et la penetrante analyse de la poesie de Rina

108
 

Lasnier  publiee  en  1964 par  Eva  Kush­ ner.  Depuis  1961, Adrien  Therio  publie Livres et auteurs canadiens, bibliographie  critique  annuelle  de tous les  livres parus pendant  l'annee.   Cette   revue  dont   la formule  s'est  constamment  amelioree, est devenue   la   plus   utile   des   repertoires  annuels.4
II nous reste a poser la question essen­
tielle  concernant  la  litterature  canadi­
enne-franc;aise de ces dix demieres annees. Est-elle  devenue  une  litterature de  qua­ lire,   apte    a   prendre    rang   parmi   les litreratures occidentales  dont   l'avenir tiendra  compte?
Seul  l'etranger  peut  repondre  a  cette
interrogation. Deux reactions recentes, l'une  americaine et l'autre  franc;aise, semblent  indiquer  que  pour  la  premiere fois des ecrivains  ayant  atteint  la  oeleb­ rite   internationale  se  toument   vers  le Canada pour  y chercher  du  nouveau.
Aux Etats-Unis Edmund Wilson a pre­
faoe !'edition  new-yorkaise d'Une  saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel de Marie-Claire Blais. II ne s'agit  pas ici d'une  complai­ sance mais  bien du  desir de la  part  d'un  des  principaux temoins  de  la  monree  de la litrerature americaine au  premier  rang des litreratures occidentales de faire  con­ naitre   un  ecrivain  etranger  a  ses com­ patriotes.  Edmund Wilson a-t-il ere tente de  faire   sentir   son   influence   dans   un

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



domaine-en l'occurence la litterature canadienne-franc;aise-ou il ne risquait pas, dans son pays, de se voir contredire? Apres  tout,  c'est  le meme  critique  qui a ern  voir en  Morley  Calaghan, le roman­ cier  torontois,  l'egal  des  plus  grands  ro­ manciers   russes. Quoi   qu'il  en  soit,  ce qu'il faut  retenir  est l'enchevetrement des influences  qui  ont  conduit   la  jeune  ro­
manciere canadienne a la notoriere.
Remarquons des l'abord  que c'est !'ini­
tiative  americaine  qui  a incite  la maison
Grasset  a lancer  Une  saison dans la vie
d'Emmanuel en France.  Le Prix M'edicis,
qui  est  venu  couronner   cette  oeuvre  a jere dans l'ombre-du moins au Canada Franc;ais -les origines americaines de ce sucres. En  fait, c'est le concours de deux parmi   les  trois   capitales   litreraires   de
!'Occident-Londres, New York et Paris
-qui a rendu  possible ce a quoi peu de
critiques canadiens  eussent cru:  le talent
exceptionnel  de Marie-Claire Blais. Les ecrivains candiens se rendent  bien compte que  les  puissants  leviers  de  la  publicire ainsi qu'un  concours  heureux  de  circon­ stances ont  permis a une romanciere par­ mi  d'autres d'arriver  premiere   dans  la
course aux "honneurs". On s'est aperc;u aussi que dans !'orchestration des moyens utilises par  les editeurs  a  trouve  place la typographie trompe-l'oeil, faite pour metamorphoser les minces nouvelles de Marie-Claire Blais en "romans". Le plus caustiques ajouteraient que d'un "roman"
a  !'autre  !'inspiration  ne  se  renouvelle
guere et la gamme des effets demeure restreinte.
Mais Ia n'est pas la question. Ce qui importe  pour  comprendre !'evolution  de la litrerature canadienne-franc;aise est que New York et Paris ont impose aux Cana­ diens une valeur internationale qui n'etait
 pas coree en  tete  de liste a la bourse de
Montreal.
Passons au  second exemple, plus frap­ pant  encore.  Pour  la  premiere  fois  dans l'histoire  de  Ia  j.eune  litrerature  canadi­  enne  un  romancier  franc;ais se  declare concerne   par   les   ecrits   d'un   confrere  canadien.  Le  4  janvier  rg6g, Le  CJ,ezio, auteur  du  Proces-verbal, du  Deluge,  de Terra  amata, s'est reconnu,  en une page entiere  reproduite par  Le  Monde, dans son  frere  en  desesperance,  Rejean  Du­ charme.   Pas   plus   que   pour   Edmund Wilson il n'a  ere question pour Le Clezio
de "presenter" un  romancier  canadien  a
ses lecteurs.  Sa  reaction,  plus spontanee,
a ete oommandee par une oeuvre jugee puissante,   oeuvre   suffisamment   connue deja pour etre dispensee des honneurs  du cicerone.
Or  au Canada, la critique, apres avoir
admire  L'avalee  des a vales pour  sa  vir­ tuosire verbale  et sa fra1cheur  d'inspira­ tion,   a  boude  Le   nez   qui   vogue   et L'oceanthume. L'auteur  ayant  publie ses
romans a rebours, c'est-a-dire dans 1'ordre
inverse de leur conception, on estime que cette  tactique   a  desservi  la  cause  de  sa reno . Apres  l'reuvre   achevee,   ce sont   les  tatonnements  des  debuts   qui sont proposes au Lecteur.
A Paris, la nouveaute  de cette prose et
sa marque  d'origine  nord-americaine ont seduit les esprits. Peut..etre aussi Rejean Ducharme, avec Marie-Claire Blais,  pro­ fite-t-il  de   la   vague   contestataire   qui deferle  sur   Ia  plupart   des  pays  indus­  trialises. Mepriser, ha1r tout ce qui semble emaner  de !'establishment, c'est abonder  dans  le  sens  d'une   nombreuse  clientele.
11 est   sans   doute   significatif   que   La
jument des mongols et Le grand khan de Jean  Basile et ['Incubation  de Gerard Bessette n'aient   pas  attire  !'attention de


109

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE







la  cntlque etrangere au  meme  titre  que les oeuvres  de Marie-Claire Blais et de Rejean   Ducharme.  Basile   et   Bessette,
parce que cerebraux et descriptifs,  plus attaches  a  comprendre et  a decrire  le
monde  contemporain qu'a  le  vomir,  ont paru  moins "canadiens" que leurs deux concurrents plus  jeunes.
Arriver  a cette  conclusion,  n'est-ce  pas
repondre a la question formulee plus haut
concernant !'aptitude de la  jeune littera­
ture  canadienne a franchir les frontieres
du  pays?
Ces dix dernieres annees marquent l'entree  discrete   de   la  litrerature  cana­ dienne-fran aise
tal    des    li tteratures.   Cette  nouvelle presence   est  symbolisee  surtout par  Re­
jean Ducharme et Marie-Claire Blais. Rebelles  touts  deux  a leur  milieu  comme
le sont tant  de leurs confreres fran ais, britanniques et americains, ils beneficient de surcroit d'une mysrerieuse  specificite canadienne-fran aise,
"difference".
Des  deux romanciers, Marie-Claire Blais est de beaucoup la plus accessible en traduction. Rejean Ducharme ne peut vraiment  etre   gouoo  que   dans  sa  prose fran  aise.

I 10
 
quelconque ayant a se situer  par  rapport
a Marie-Claire Blais.  Par  contre on  con­
oit
une  corde  de  sympathie chez  un  roman­
cier europeen.
C'en est  done  fait  de  l'isolement de  la litrerature canadienne-fran aise.
tacts  avec  le  monde exterieur ne  pour­
ront  qu'etre profitables aux  ecrivains qui apprendront  a  rnieux    s'accepter  et   a
prendre leur  place  parmi  ceux qui les ont juges de la meme famille qu'eux.

1 On   consultera  avec  profit  La  recherche  au Canada  Franfais, textes  presentes  par  Louis Baudouin  (Les  Presses de  l'Universite de Montreal, I 968) .
2  Le  drame   de  !'edition  fraru;aise  est  inscrit dans   l'annuaire  statistique de  !'Unesco,  ou sont  publiees  les donnees  relatives  a !'edition internationale. Ceux  qui desireraient lire une elegante analyse  de  !'impasse   dans  laquelle se trouvent les editeurs de France  pourront consulter  le rapport du  directeur des Presses de l'Universite Laval,  M. Andre  Vachon, L'edition   universitaire  en  France    (I 967). Desireux  de  ne pas  choquer  ses confreres  de France, M.  Vachon distribue   les  chrysan­ themes,  en  posant,  c;a et  la,  quelques  ques­ tions  innocentes  de  ce  genre:    "La   France  intellectuelle vivrait-elle  un  peu  trop  repliee sur   son  glorieux   passe?"  Ou   bien  encore,
''On s'etonne que  la  production de !'edition franc;aise  soit  composee  en  majorite de  re­ impressions   (53%), quand   les   nouveautes,  aux    Etats-Unis   et    en    Grande   Bretagne representaient  respectivement, en  I96o,  80,3 et   74,3%    de  !'ensemble   de   la   production nationale."  (p. 23)
3 Consulter le  temoignage  de   Georges   Bor­ chardt: "A  Report   on  French  Publishing", Publisher's    Weekly, New    York,   May    3I,  I965,  pp. 27-29.
4  Guy   Sylvestre   a  resume   les  principaux  in­ struments  de   recherche  en   litterature canadienne-franc;aise  dans   La  recherche   au Canada  Franfais, op.  cit.,  pp.  I49·I6I.


2. Poetry in English




Louis Dudek







THE  MOST  OBVIOUS   develop­ ment   in  the  last  ten  years  in  Canadian poetry   has  been  the  change in  audience relationships: the multitude of  new poets coming   out   in   recent   years,   and   the sudden rise  to  popularity of a  few  poets as  a   result   of  new   conditions.   "Poetry Finds  a  Public" was  one  of  the  last  sec­ tion  headings in the book The  Making  of Modern   Poetry   in   Canada   edited    by Michael Gnarowski  and  myself  in  1967, and   this  is  still  the  main   fact.   But  the search   for   an   audience  was   always   a crucial issue for  modern poetry,  in  Eng­  land   and   the  United  States,   as  well  as in  Canada, since  modernism represented a  break  with  Victorian middle-class taste and   the   setting    up   of   powerlul  elitist standards  (vide   Eliot   and    Pound)   in order   to  re-establish an  art  of  intensity, high craftsmanship, and  relevance to con­ temporary  reality.   The  shift   from   this resistant  modernism, then,  to a  new  type of  popularism, touches  on  the  very  core of modern poetry.  We say in The Making of Modern  Poetry that "finding a public" is  an  ambiguous  good.  How  ambiguous we may  now consider.
The three  Canadian poets who have emerged as popular "stars" in this decade are,   of   course,   Irving   Layton,  Alfred Purdy,  and    Leonard   Cohen.  Layton's A Red  Carpet  for the  Sun,  the  first of a
 series of "Collected Poems",  appeared in
1959;   Purdy's  obscure  Ryerson   Chap­
book  The  Crafte  so Longe  to  Lerne,  in
1959, followed  by Poems  for All the Annettes in 1962. Leonard Cohen's first book  had  been  published locally  at  Mc­ Gill  in  1956  (Let  Us  Compare  Mythol­  ogies),  but  the  next,  The  Spice  Box  of Earth was brought out  by  McClelland & Stewart in  1961  (wrongly  given  as 1965 in Selected Poems).
All  three  poets  came  into  prominence at   the  beginning  of  the  sixties,  though Layton  was well ahead of the  other  two. The moment and  the  milieu  were signifi­ cant: Layton had  been  on  the scene for nearly   twenty   years   without   attracting much   attention, and   Purdy  was  already  past  forty  when   the  Ryerson  Chapbook appeared.  Only   Cohen  was  fresh   and  new, and  he soon  outstripped the others; he was much  more  in  tune  with  the  pop situation.  ("All I ask  is  that   you  put  it in the hands  of my generation and  it will be recognized.")
The key to  this  business  of  popularity
and   sudden  stardom  lies  in   the   mass media: T.V. and  the  new  promotional publishing. Stardom is not achieved with­ out  a good deal  of promotional engineer­ ing.   The   poets,   of   course,   were   quite  consciously   building  their   own   reputa­ tions,  but   that   was  because   the  oppor-

III

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



tunity  suddenly  presented  itself. It had never been there  before, not in the days of   Scott   and   Smith,   nor   in   the   be­ leaguered  Forties  (Gelinas' Tit-Coq  and Klein's   Rocking  Chair).  We  live  in  a blow-up culture.  Mass media are magni­ fiers of personality,  as we can see in the sudden rise to fame of the Pierre Bertons, Patrick  Watsons  and  Laurier  LaPierres. This  new  expectation  carries  over  even into  poetry, especially if  poets appear  on T.V.,   on   film,  on   radio,  and   on  LP records;  and  so we  find poets becoming T.V.  stars  and  idols  in  the  new literary business.
In  Canada, the  process was escalated by an enterprising young publisher who saw  an  opportunity and  exploited  it  to the hilt:  Jack McClelland  of McClelland
& Stewart Limited. The fact that business
opportunity  is  the  key  to  this  can  be shown by other  publishers who have jumped  on  the  same  promotion  band­ wagon:  Jacques  Heb.ert   in   French Canada,   and  recently  M.  G.  Hurtig  in Edmonton.  Publishing   is  a   matter   of economics,  we  know,  and   the  lure  of profit   (or  fear  of   bankruptcy)   has  in­ spired  the  art  of   publicity  and  image­ building  even in  such honest-to-goodness "sacred"  precincts  as  poetry;  the  recent promotion by posters, advertising, T.V. interviews and window-displays, of one or two poets of total insignificance is very much a case in point. It must also be granted, however, that  McClelland  & Stewart have published many outstanding Canadian poets  over  the  past  ten  years, and they have launched the valuable New Canadian Library  series; in fact, the role of  the  publisher  is  very complicated  in the  current   literary  scene, and  deserves much  closer study.
It's been interesting  to watch the poets'


I 12
 resistance to the blandishments of crass popularity, since that's written on our escutcheon,  while at the same time yield­ ing  to  the  delightful   seductions  of  the businessman  and  the  promoter.  Here  is Leonard   Cohen  writing  on  the  rewards of fame in a poem about  Irving Layton:

The  town saluted  him with garbage which  he interpreted as praise
for his muscular  grace.  Orange peels, cans, discarded guts rained  like
ticker-tape ...

Yet at the same time, in typical Laytonian fashion, he writes about himself on the jacket of one of his books: "This book mov.es me from  the world of the golden­ boy poet into  the dung  pile of  the front­  line writer.... I say there has never been a  book like this, prose or  poetry, written in Canada."
One   imagines  such  things  should  be said  by someone else, rather  than  by the poet  himself.  But  in  Canada, once  the poet has praised himself enough all the critics follow suit. In  any case, this is an age of "Advertisements for Myself".
So  then,  we  have  the  new  publisher,
the   self-promoting   poet,   and   the   new media   to  account   for  stardom   among poets.   Apart   from   this  there  has  also been a radical change in the audience for poetry, at least in a certain  part of it, the teen-age  and  hippie  group.  Allen  Gins­ berg's  Howl    appeared  in  I 956;  in Canada, Leonard  Cohen, Canada's Mes­ sianic  hippie,  published  his first book in the same year. It could be argued  that by the 195o's the aesthetic of modern  poetry had at last reached a wider audience  and had  penetrated the  consciousness of  the young.  But  it  was  only  one  particular strain  of poetry  that  did so:  in America, the   open   rhetorical   line   of   Ginsberg charged   with   hysterical  sensationalism;

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



and   in  Canada  street   language  in  free verse and  the slapstick  sex bit. Essentially it is  the   moral  release of  the   young that   poetry   helped   to  back   up.  At  the same   time,   poetry   readings,  prizes  and grants, university  invitations and  articles on poet personalities in big commercial newspapers and  magazines played  a  role in  creating a  new  audience and  making it  possible  for  a  few  poets  to  emerge  as popular idols.
Since   poets   have   long   hoped   for   a
larger  reading public,  and  many  have laboured  hard   to  spread   poetry   abroad and  build  an audience for good poetry, through mimeo  magazines, lectures, and small-press  book distribution, the sudden materialization of  huge  audiences and successful   poets   has   taken  them   very much  by surprise. Blatant vulgarity, sick humour, exhibitionism, have suddenly be­ come a popular glut on the market, where  twenty  years ago sentimentality and smug decency  were  the  stock  concealments of the  establishments and  power  blocs. Pro­ fumo,  Sevigny  and  Madame  Munsinger have   done   their  work,   letting  Prufrock
 and   Bloom  take  over  from   the  bureau­ cracy   and   the   bourgeoisie.   They   have brought in   Louis   Ferdinand  Celine, Henry  Miller,  Norman Mailer  and  Allen Ginsberg as the new spokesmen  for litera­ ture. Canada is only a peripheral stage in this   great   shift,   and   our   little   theatre rocks  as the  great  auditorium topples  or leans to one side.
What   our   three   most   popular  poets have in common, for instance, is not diffi­ cult   to   define.   All   three    are   popular comedians,  entertaining   cynic   jokesters who  succeed  with  young  audiences and with  young  readers. The comic  element became  dominant as  each  poet  reached the  popular level. Lionel  Kearns, reading at  McGill,  pointed  out  with  perfect  can­ dour  that  the  poetry-reading circuit  en­ courages   the  writing of  comic  gag-type poems  because  these always  go over  well, whereas serious  poems tend  to  drag. Cohen, Layton,  Purdy-to  rank   them by  their  rating -are  all  three  generous exploiters   of   sex   as   an   entertainment come-on,  very much  like the skin movies and   advertisements  that   play  for   gross audience response. They're  the   Belly Dancers  of  poetry,   with   Layton  as  the star  attraction. Sex,  in  fact,  is the  sum­ mum bonum and  the  source  of all  posi­ tive  feeling,  such  as  there  is, in  each  of the  three   poets:   a  very  odd  conclusion  to  reach  in  the  history  of  poetry  and  of human thought. Many a quizzical  reader must  feel,  as  I have  felt  occasionally -

Why  should we praise the  poet  in you
For  doing  what any  dog  can  do?

However, all three  top poets are gifted, and  each  one  of  them   has  his  own  dis­ tinct  character. Though they've played  to the  gallery  they  haven't quite "sold  out" in any real sense and  they have developed

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



their own energies immensely under the powerful   stimulus   of   public   acclaim. Each  of  them  has become prolific under pressure:  Layton, who used to turn out about   six  poems  a   year  for   the  first decade  and  a  half, suddenly  began  pro­ ducing a book a year; Cohen has written hundreds  of  recitation  pieces  and  songs, as well as two  novels, within  ten  years; Purdy   has  gone  travelling  on   Canada  Council grants, to Cuba,  to the Canadian  north, and  to Europe, to find material  to meet  the  new  demands.  It was  Layton who was first lauded  as a "prolific poet";  but  by  now  it  should   be  obvious  that popularity  makes  poets,  no  less  than stand-up  comics and movie stars, terribly prolific. (Bliss Cannan was prolific in his time, turning out more than fifty titles in a  short  lifetime,  most of  them  now  un­ fortunately  forgotten.)
Integrity,   we  should   remember,   has been  the  prime  virtue  of the  great twentieth-century poets. The  entire mod­ ern  movement   was  a  retreat  from  the idols  of  the  marketplace   to  the private household   gods  of  art  and   knowledge. They wanted, as Pound said, -

Some circle of not more than  three that  we prefer  to play up to,
Some few whom we'd  rather  please
than  hear  the whole aegrum vulgus
Splitting its beery  jowl
a-meaowling our  praises.

So that any flirting with popularity runs counter  to these principles. But of course the  present  generation  is willing to erase the distinction between art and popular entertainment, an  error  that  none of the great moderns could conceivably have tolerated.
If we  take  Purdy  and  Layton  as  the gauge,  our  star  poets  belong  essentially to   the   frontier    branch    of   Canadian


114
 poetry:  the school of direct speech, direct relation   to   life,  and   reductive   realism. The   parallel   recognition   of  Raymond Souster in this decade, more modest than the others  but still remarkable -discour­ aged  as it  is by the  poet's  unwillingness to play the personality game and to go on tours  and  readings -confirms  the  gen­ eral  ascendancy  of  a  school.  (  I should know, since I  have  always favoured  this kind  of   poetry;  but  victory  is  fatal   to some  revolutionaries. We must  have  op­ position,  or  we  may  be  obliged  to  suc­ ceed.)  Leonard  Cohen, a  temperamental romantic,  affiliated with the young gener­ ation  of feeling  and  flowers, has simply been   drawn    into   the  orbit:   see   his "Cuckold's  Song"   and    "Homeward Thoughts of a  Tourist  in Havana". The  main  drift  of   this  group  of  poets  is to­ ward   primitive  realism -even   "stupid realism," as Northrop Frye once called it
-a  nostalgia  for the mud  mixed with a
hankering  for lost divinity. "A mixture of sacred  oils and  sewage water,"  was once my description  of Leonard  Cohen: it's always a question of which predominates, the oil or the water.
(As for  the  new Leonard  Cohen,  who
has "given  up  poetry"  for  Rock singing, the  idol  of  little  children  dressed  up  in Cecil B. De Mille costumes, who "rank Cohen  right up there with the other great poets of the day, with Bob Dylan, John Lennon,  Jim  Morrison of The Doors and Peter Townshend  of The Who" -he has gone   completely  out   of   our   range. The  Quod  Erat  Demonstrandum of absurdity.)
Looking at Purdy and Layton, more specifically, we must  observe that  Cana­ dian  primitivism  comes very  late  in  the day.  Poets like Bliss Cannan  and  Archi­ bald  Lampman, at  the  end  of  the  last

THE WRITING OF  THE  DECADE



century,  were  far  more  cultivated,  both intellectually  and  in their  view of poetry, than  our  own  Purdys  and  Laytons  are. The  present  crudity  is in fact  a reaction to the refinement  of our predecessors; its vigour  and  vulgarity   is  a  working-class rejection of the  manners  and  sensibilities of the late-departed bourgeoisie. On  this score, I am  myself more  sympathetic  to the  poetic  drive  of  a  Souster,  Layton, Purdy  or  Nowlan  than   I am  to  Daryl
Hine,  Glassco  or  A.  J. M.  Smith.  But
then, as critical  reader  I am aware of the
dialectic involved, and  I can see the devastation that a one-sided primitivism might work in poetry. The  results are already   apparent  in   the  sequel  to  the Tish  school and  the  prolific publications of some of  the  new  presses -House  of Anansi, Very Stone House, Coach House, Weed/flower,   Island,  Ganglia,  Gryphon and so forth -more presses than  there were sometimes poets in the past. The degeneration  of poetry to a teeny-bopper fad is, in fact, a further aspect of this barbarization.
Because the  paradox  follows-or is it
a mere  correlative?-that with  the  rise of  a  few  star  performers  and  idols, the crowd  of minor  poets, small  presses and magazines has increased phenomenally, blurring all literary distinctions. In 1958, writing  in the  Quebec  quarterly  Culture on "Patterns in Recent Canadian Poetry" I opened   by  saying  that   "In   a  recent count of book-publishing  poets writing in Canada   in  English   I was  able  to  put down  no  less than  fifty  names."  It was easy to do then. Repeating the same count today, and using only the poets published within the last ten years, I find more than a  hundred   names.  But  there  are  scores of additional ones in the little magazines and   on   the   campuses,   intense   young
 people wntmg and publishing poetry. Reciting  poetry,  composing, singing poetry to the guitar has now become a sociological phenomenon  much more than a  literary   art,   and   the   flood  of   new writing   has   dramatically  changed   the entire  literary  enviroiUilent.
Three   years  ago,  several  of  us  con­
ceived an association of Canadian poets, consisting perhaps  of  two  dozen  names, to  represent  poetry  before  the  founda­ tions, international conferences and other official  bodies,  or  on  formal  occasions. We  were  to  help  young  poets,  stand  as surety  for  certain  standards,   encourage  worthy  support  for  poetry.  As the  asso­ ciation  came to  be organized,  and  as its objectives  were   defined   and   redefined over  the  months,  it  finally  emerged  as the  League of Canadian Poets, already numbering over a hundred  members, and promising many  more -representing, in short,  the  whole  miscellany  of  the  cur­ rent literary explosion.
I don't criticize the League;  I only cite
this to illustrate  the change in the poetry scene,  from   a  situation   where   twenty poets or so might  be thought  to represent all  the  reputable   poetry  of  the  country,








I 15

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



to one where more than a hundred poets aspire  to the laurels.
So  much  the  better,  and  the  more  the
merrier, one  might   say.  But  democracy is not without its handicaps. The  new presses, with generous Canada Council grants,   produce sumptuous books,  some of them specifically subsidized for de-luxe design and  production-not shoe-string first  books  such  as  John   Sutherland  of First Statement or the early Contact Press used to bring out. The latest poets get themselves  translated into Spanish  in Mexico,   into   French  in   Quebec;  they win  luscious   grants and   prizes,  get  ap­ pointments as "Poets-in-Residence", con­ tract   in   advance  for   the   sale  of   their worksheets  and  papers  to   generous libraries; they  appear at  readings  before packed  houses before they are weaned: in general  the scramble goes on for the great  prize,  which  is to  be  the  next  Cohen-of­ the-land, whether one writes good  poetry or  not.  Prophecies are easy to make: one can  predict that  the popular will become more    mediocre   as   time   goes   on-a highly  desirable change, since the distinc­  tion   between  art   and   mass  appeal  will again   become   clear -and   that    good poetry  will  return to  its  minority audi­  ence,  perhaps  a  smaller   audience  than  ever   before.  The  "new barbarism" will have its reaction, just as Victorian senti­ mentalism did,  and  the  retreat will  be to a more  esoteric  refinement.
In  the  meantime we have  the  sad consequences of the present  dislocation. Looking at  the  list  one  can  see  twenty­ one  books  by  poets  of  rank  which  have come  out  in  the  past  ten  years. But  most of these books have  been neglected  by the general  reader   and   by  the  critics,  since the   star   system   imposes   an   inevitable penalty-all  others   must  suffer  a  tern-

116
 porary eclipse as failures in the great  race. Books  have  appeared within   the  decade by Earle Birney,  A. J. M.  Smith, James Reaney, Phyllis Webb,  Eli  Mandel, Daryl Hine, John  Glassco,  F.  R.  Scott,  R.  G. Everson, Raymond Souster, Eldon  Grier, Roy  Daniells, Dorothy  Livesay,  George Woodcock, Alden  Nowlan, Miriam Wad­ dington, Philip  Child, Fred  Cogswell,  D. G. Jones,  Robert Finch, P. K. Page. With  poets   of   this   calibre-Birney,   Smith, Hine, Page-it's  not  a question whether they will emerge as stars, or whether they will  become  "major poets"  with  the  next book,   but    what    line   their    individual development has taken, outside  all move­ ments   and   parties,   and   what  their total  conception  and   achievement   has   been. Each  of them  deserves some serious study.  Of  this  they  have  been  deprived  by  the confusion  of  standards   in   general,  the misplaced   emphasis on  popular  success, and   the  absence  of  any  serious  criticism  in   Canada.  Young  critics   do   not   turn their  sights  on  these  poets  to  give  them  a close reading and  a  clear-sighted intel­ lectual   interpretation;  the   reviews   are  skimpy and  ignorant, while the bread  and  circuses  game   continues. This  is  one  of the side-effects  of frontier cultural condi­ tions,  or  to  quote McLuhan -"Canada as a borderline case".
Some  of these  poets  in the  past  decade
have  brought out  their  Collected   Poems, rounding out  a full  career: Smith, Scott, Souster, Birney.  The opportunity is excel­ lent   now  to  study   in  full  and  in  detail  the work of these poets and several others,  Ralph Gustafson, Dorothy  Livesay,  John Glassco.  Layton and  Purdy are  not  to be excluded, of  course;  though  one  would have  to ask, if Purdy can  now do nothing but   write,  what   he  had   been  doing   for the   first  forty   years   of  his  life.  As  for

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



Cohen,   his  Selected  Poems,  the  fruit   of ten  short  years, is a  bit  premature as the harvest  of a life's work.
The  great  boom  of young  poets  began in  I964.  Look  at  the  list,  year  by  year, of new names  appearing on the scene (usually  the first  book of a new poet)  :
I959: Peter  Miller,  George Walton, AI Purdy.
I 960:  Kenneth McRobbie,  Milton Acorn,  Paul  West,  Mike  Strong, Richard Outram.
I96I:  Gwendolyn MacEwen, Margatet Atwood,  Phyllis Gotlieb  (first small books of each  poet) .
I962: Alden  Nowlan, Robin Mathews, Frank Davey,  Padraig O'Broin, G. C. Miller.
I 963:   Dave Solway,   Michael  Malus, Harry Howith.
I 964 :  The list  jurn ps to eight  names : George Bowering,  Gerry  Gilbert, Roy Kiyooka,  John Newlove, David  Wevill, Steve Smith, Pierre  Coupey, Seymour Mayne.
I965: Now  twelve new  additions: Francis Sparshott, E. A. Lacey,  Joan Finnigan, Luella  Booth,   Bryan  McCar­ thy,   Michael   Parr,    Tom   Eadie,  Tom  Marshall, William  Hawkins,  Fred  Wah,  Lionel  Kearns, Anne Kekes.
I 966 :  Sixteen   new  poets : Bill Bissett, Henry Beissel, Rona Murray, Michael Gnarowski, Glen  Siebrasse,  Lakshmi Gill, Eugene McNamara, Richard Clarke, John Grube, David   Cull,  Renald  Shoo­ fler, Mervin  Procope, Ivan Burgess, Doro­ thy   Farmiloe,  Jim   Brown,    Cyril   Mc­  Colgan.
I 967 :  Seventeen  new  names:  Dennis Lee,   Michael  Ondaatje,  George   Jonas, B. P. Nichol,  Michael Collie,  Chuck Carlson, David   McFadden, Nelson  Ball,
Barry   Lord,    Ken   Belford,   J. Michael
 Yates,   Victor    Coleman,  Joy   Kogawa, G.   S.  Buri,   George   Farkas,  Len   Gas­ parini,  David  Phillips.
I 968:  A  partial list  only :  Red  Lane, Richard Sommer, Raymond Fraser  (his third  book), Heather Spears, Gerald Robitaille, Peter Stevens, Robin  Skelton, Stanley Cooperman, David Weisstub, Schoel Shuster, Sandra Kolber....
Simply  to  list  these  names  in  series  is
to  realize  the  kind  of  problem   involved. There is an  escalation in  progress,  and  it has  not  yet  reached its  peak-although our  pocketbooks  may  have  reached   their limit.   Bookstores,  reviewers,   grants  offi­ cers   are   bewildered   by   the   confusion. The   publishing of  poetry  is  strapped by over-production and  problems of  distri­  bution  and  sales. A collapse  of this South  Sea  Bubble   is  no  doubt   inevitable and  eventually  the  run  for  poetry  will lose its interest.    Many    of    these   are   one-book poets  who  will  perish  in  one  season  like the  spawn  of  the  Nile;  but  a good  num­ ber  will   keep   reproducing,  so  that   for some  years we  may  expect  a  cumulative effect. The  list of poetry  books published in  I967  came  to  over  45 items,  while  in
I 959 the  number was only  I 8. There has
been  a  threefold   increase  within the  last ten years.
So   this   is  how   the   scene   has   been
changed and  transformed :  by the  rise of a  trio  of  poets  to  unprecedented  popu­ larity   and   by  the   rapid   influx  of  new poets  (and  publishing groups)  with  tastes and  attitudes very much  at variance with the  past.  The  critical job  is to  discrimi­  nate,  if  this  is still  possible,  and   to  dis­ tinguish  the worthwhile trends in all this confusion,  if  any exist.
Behind any such criticism there must remain  one  overriding question:  What was the grand  objective of the  twentieth-


117

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



century revolution in poetry, and how far is  any  new  development  getting  ahead with this main objective? In other words, modernism,  the discovery of the modern art  form and its content;  are we advanc­ ing  (as Stephen  Spender argues we must continue,  with  constant  reaffirmation,  to do)   or  are  we  backtracking  and  getting snarled again in the by-ways of exhausted or irrelevant technique?
I said  above  that  Layton, Cohen  and
Purdy   have   much   of  the   naturalistic primitive   in   their   style  and   attitude. They're  primarily   reductive   and   anti­ traditional. Of the senior poets who have been  cowed  by  their  success,  many  are decidedly   traditionalists:   George  John­  ston  is an  extremely  clever verse-maker (New Yorker style)  who writes in routine mechanical  meters; Roy Daniells, George Woodcock, Fred  Cogswell, Robert  Finch write  dully  and  in  depth  in  traditional forms;  Ralph Gustafson and John  Glass­ co  try  radically  to  renew  the  old  with bravura  and  experiment.  All this stands in  polar  opposition  to  the  Ameliasburg style of Alfred Purdy or to the rhetorical bombast  of   Irving  Layton. Modern poetry,  as  in  Eliot  and  Pound,  worked out  of a  combination  and  opposition  of these two elements, the profoundly tradi­ tional  obsessions and  the  new  energies of the twentieth  century. To separate the two  is  to  destroy  the  balance  and  the tension  of  high  acrobatics:   to  produce barbarism  on  the  one  hand,  and  sterile




118
 formalism  on  the other. This  is, to some extent,   what  we  are  tending  to  get,  in recent years.
In  contrast   to  Purdy  and  the  primi­ tives, consider  the  very tight  intellectual poetry of Daryl Hine. The poems in The  Wooden Horse  (I g65)   are  far  superior in  poetic  conception  and  craftsmanship  to anything  in the popular  poets: "In  the Museum  of  Science  and  Industry" is a complex  work of .art:  "The Lake"  is a lyric  that  would  put  Leonard  Cohen  to shame. The  same may be said of certain poems  of  Margaret  Avison  and   James Reaney; they are sophisticated  and  com­ plex  in  a  way  that  Layton  with  all  his major  claims can  never hope to be. Lay­ ton's   critical   prefaces   reveal   that   his poetry  is  based  on  a  vulgar   romantic misconception   of   the   poet's   role   and method: it  never  occurs  to  him  to  ask if  Virgil  or  Horace   wrote  that  way;  if Dante  roared;  or if Spenser and Chaucer  had the prophetic fury. The truly superior poets  are  free  of  this  kind  of  nonsense; but  they,  on  the  other  hand,   lack  the visceral vitality of the wild man.
It pains me to take this point of view, because  I am  temperamentally  on  the side of the naturalists. But the New Barbarism  in Canadian poetry, especially among the young, demands this kind of criticism.  The  vast  majority  of  the  new poets  belong  to  the   junk-heap   school; they are for the most part self-repeating products, inferior derivatives of Robert Duncan,  Robert   Creeley,  Gary  Snyder and   other fifth-run epigones of  the modern  derivation. Never before, in fact, have poets been influenced  by mediocre contemporaries to the extent that these poets  are:   Pound  at  least  went  to  Pro­ pertius, and Eliot to Dante.
Consider,  for  contrast,  the  variety  of

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



sensibility and  technique  in four  poets of a   preceding   generation,   Phyllis  Webb, Eldon  Grier,  James  Reaney  and  D.  G. Jones.  All  four  are  aesthetically  aware, freely imaginative, experimental, knowl­ edgeable. Compare  these to  any handful of poets from the recent multitudinous progeny, or take only the most active and prominent: George Bowering, John  New­ love,  Michael  Ondaatje, George  Jonas. All the  new  poets are  pretty  much  of a kind, and not exceptionally well-trained. Souster's collection New Wave Canada, which  represents  these poets  in  breadth, is really incredibly boring in its sameness. The  new Anansi anthology  Canada  First is not a whit  brighter  or better-skilled.  I think  the  reason  lies in  the  one-dimen­ sional flatness of the  modern  strain  pre­ sented;  it  lacks  mind, it lacks tension, it lacks  intellectual  contrasts.  It represents only one-half of the modern  complex:  in derision of William Carlos Williams, the simple democratic  line.
This   is  not   to  dismiss  all   that   has
appeared  within  the last ten years. Peter Miller is one of our most valuable and neglected poets; he has stopped writing (discouragement?),  but   his  three  pub­ lished  books show  a  beautiful  skill  and ease, and a cultivated  "Old World" mind at   work.  The   inoculation  of  the  New never  took, and  he  is  always something of an  exile in  the  Canadian world,  but he is a most  rewarding  poet  to read, and to re-read.
Eli  Mandel  has  continued  to write in
this period;  he is worth some close study. Milton  Acorn  has written  some passion­ ate  and  powerful  poems.  Alden  Nowlan is  a   poet   of  major   interest   who   has emerged  in the Sixties; the current  num­ ber  of   Fiddlehead   is  dedicated   to  his work.  Eldon  Grier,  too, is very fine;  his
 poem  "Kissing  Natalia"  (in  A  Friction of Lights)  jg  more  truly  human  than  all the   love  lyrics  and   sighs  of  Leonard
Cohen. (The  contrast speaks for itself: Cohen's  women  are   mere  abstractions, sex objects without character  and without identity, merkin pleasures.)
On   the   negative   side,   I  find   the Cassandra-like  pretensions  of Gwendolyn MacEwen  tiresome;  and  Phyllis Gotlieb much  too clever-and trivial-for  her own  good.  (She  is a  constructivist,  and deserves  some   kind   of  award   in   this category.)  Margaret Atwood  is sensitive but  she lacks strong  rhythm; those  inti­ mate broken lines, sometimes one word in a line, are hardly  the art  in excelsis. We must  distinguish   between   psychological documents and   poetry.  John  Robert Colombo, again,  is a  stimulating  littera­ teur,  a  non-poet  who  also  writes  non­ books (sometimes called  Found  Poems) ; a definite ornament on the literary scene.
Other  poets? Frank Davey has promise, perhaps; so does Kearns, more likely perhaps.   I  enjoy   the   work   of   Harry Howith immensely. I hope to see more of Renald  Shoofter, of Gnarowski and Sieb­ rasse, of Raymond  Fraser,  and  of  several others-even   those   I  have   criticized harshly. Poetry is an experience in novel­ ty, like eating  strange  foods,  before one becomes  committed    to  preference   and admiration.  We should  be  able  to enjoy it  all,  a  little,  at   least   while  the  first reading lasts.
The  crucial  question  remains:  are  we
advancing in the live modern direction? Modern  poetry  was to be an authentic expression  of   twentieth-century  life,  a new kind of  poetry  achieved  by  experi­ ment and radical innovation.  It was to be deeply rooted  in  reality  (the  domestica­ tion of romantic  idealism) , and it was to

119

THE WRITING OF THE  DECADE



be a vital  renewal of poetic traditions. Finally, it was to express the vitality and freedom of a new-,emancipated humanity.
It is easy to be critical. But for all our
multi-media   experiments  and    novelty­ chasing,  our  life-realism  lacks  range  and objectivity (especially among the young) ; our  traditionalism is either  excessive  (in some  poets)   or it is nothing   (in  others)  ; our  freedom  (teeny-bopper, teen-age, middle-age)  is  a  waste  of  breath   and  a waste  of  life-it  has  no  direction and no  value.  Leonard Cohen,  for  example, has  wasted   his  talents  in  wilful  excess; he  is  a  sad   and   tragic   figure,   not  the triumphant success  one  would   imagine. But consider  the alternatives: DarylHine, in  the  opposite camp, is much  too secre­ tive,  much   too  enigmatic,  closed  within  a  system  of  traditional  gestures;  Ralph Gustafson, also  a  fine  craftsman,  lacks visceral   drive,   committed   passion:   his
 best are artificial poems, polished mantel­ piece decorations, like his "Row of Gera­  niums" in  Sift   in  an  Hourglass. In  the best  poets   the  experiment  is  too  timid,  there's  a   lack   of  vigour;  while   in   the worst   there's  only  mindless  energy,   un­ controlled release.
Earle  Birney, perhaps, is the most satisfying modernist  of  them   all,  and   a very big figure still;  also F. R.  Scott, who resembles him in this. But these are "old moderns"  who   knew   what    it   was   all about; where  are  the  new  moderns who are equally  gifted,  equally  intelligent, and equally  well-informed, to take on the task of  continuing the  making of modern poetry? The  job  is  only  half  done,  or  a quarter done.  We  have  a  very  long  way to  go,  and  the  world  is changing much faster  than our  poetry  is changing. Shall we begin?














120


3·  The Novel in English





W.H.New







WHEN Canadian  Literature began  in  1959,  Canada was  happily  ex­ periencing a trawnatic publishing season. All   at    once    appeared  an    impressive collection  of  books:   Richler's  The   Ap­ prenticeship   of   Duddy   Kravitz,    Mac­  Lennan's  The    Watch   that   Ends   the Night, Sheila   Watson's  The  Double  Hook, John  Buell's  The  Pyx, Callaghan's Collected  Stories, and  others.  They  carne at  the  end  of  a curious decade, one  that  for  all  its  wars  had  been  basically  hope­ ful,  enjoying affluence while its people remembered the  Depression, and  empha­ sizing the need for at least the appearance of security  at  a time  when World  War  II could  not  yet be spoken  of  with objective  dispassion.  But  1959  began  a decade too, a  rather less satisfied  one,  certainly less overtly   stable,   and   these   books  contain within   them   a hint   of   the  disappoint­ ments  that   writers in  the sixties  were  to worry over and respond to.
Some  indication of  this  changing atti­ tude  can  be  seen  in  the  direction  taken  by   Richler  and  MacLennan   alone. Whereas The  Watch that Ends the Night had  ended  in  a metaphysical  peace,  with the  promise  that Montreal's  winter  iden­  tity   would    be   subsumed   in   its   inter­ national  role,  MacLennan's  later   novel Return  of the Sphinx ( 1967)  denies that
 peace. Seething with  political  disruption, it  discovers  a winter  not  of discontent so much  as  of  a  humourless determination to  protest.   Like  Ronald Hambleton (to use  the  title   of  his 1959  novel),  Mac­ Lennan  has   insisted   in   the   past   that  "every  man  is an  island" -a  canoe,  on the  ocean,  with  a  storm  rising.  By indi­ vidually  accepting this, his earlier  charac­ ters, George  Stewart,  Catherine,  and Jerome  Martell, could  survive  the  threat of  disintegration. They  could  accept  their selves, in  effect,   and   "living  their   own death", let others live theirs.  But  the characters  of  Return   of  the  Sphinx­ Alan   and   Daniel   Ainslie-    so  much  more  bound  by a  preconceived notion  of a  world  order,  so  much   less capable of understanding  any   other,  cannot  com­  municate. Failing,  they  locate   the  fault  outside  themselves:   the   one,  defensive, finding  threat in  "winter" rebellion; the  other,   rebellious,   and   in   his  own   way equally   narrow-minded,   trying    to   an­ nounce  the  "winter" as the  only  truth.
Richler's The  Apprenticeship  of Duddy
Kravitz  similarly  closes on  a "dark"  pos­ sibility, though the ironic  treatment makes  it  seem  less  foreboding. Duddy, a triumph  both   because   and   in  spite   of himself,  threatens  to  become   an   extra­ ordinary  kind   of  conservative  when   he

121

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



buys land and so acquires a bourgeois position in the eyes of society. It's  hardly what  he expected,  but the irony is a nice touch  at  the  end  of  his comic progress. The implications are more astringent, however. What happens when  rebels, achieving  power, turn  into inverted con­ servatives?  What  can  the mild  conserva­ tive  do  when  he  starts  to  look  like  a dangerous  liberal?  Richler's  comic  gifts turn  these possibilities into high camp in the  interrupted  scenarios  that  make  up Cocksure  ( Ig68), but  again in this later work  the  characters  lose their  identity rather   than  find  it.  They  live lives de­ signed for them  by  Madison Avenue and the  movies so  much  that  real  emergen­ cies cannot  break their  stance; humanity disappears  along  with  naivete, and  only the brittle would-be sophisticates remain. In   another   context   entirely,  Northrop Frve notes:  "A provincial society will produce a phenomenon  like the tea party described  in   F.  R.   Scott's  well-known satire, 'The Canadian Authors Meet'. A metropolitan society would turn the tea party  into a cocktail  party, and  the con­ versation  would  be  louder,  faster,  more knowing, and  cleverer at rationalizing its pretentiousness  and  egotism."  It doesn't mean  it will be more  worthwhile,  and  it nicely describes Cocksure.
Frye also points out in The Modern Century   what   is  a   favourite   Blakean theme  with  him:   "The child's  vision is far behind  us. The  world we are in is the world  of  the  tiger,  and  that  world  was never  created  or  seen  to  be good.  It is the  subhuman   world  of nature,  a  world of  law  and  of  power  but  not  of  intelli­ gence or design." This sensibility, with all its attendant frustration, is what charac­  terizes the  writing  of  the  sixties. A few works  do  escape,  often   through   irony,

I22
 into  happiness-Mitchell's The Kite (Ig62), Elliott's The Kissing   Man (Ig62),  Moore's   The   Luck   of  Ginger Coffey (I g6o), St.   Pierre's  Breaking Smith's  Quarter  Horse (Ig66). But often a  "peace"  that  is discovered  at  the  end of  a  book is possible only  after  denying a way of life that  had been apparently peaceful. Rudy  Wiebe's Peace Shall  Des­ troy Many  ( I g62)  is an obvious example. Set in a prairie  Mennonite community, it explores   the   nature    of   repression:    in young  people  who  are  coming  to  sexual maturity,   and   in  a  society  that   by  at­ tempting  to deny violence actually breeds it. Yves Theriault's Agaguk  (tr.  1963)  is comparable:  the  title  character, if he is to find contentment, must leave his band and relinquish  to his wife some of the traditionally  male prerogative of making family  decisions. David  Walker's  Where the   High    Winds   Blow    (Ig6o),  Jane Rule's  The   Desert of the  Heart  (I 964), Brian   Moore's   The    Emperor   of    Ice­ Cream   ( Ig66),  Margaret  Laurence's   A Jest of God  (Ig66), and Robert  Hunter's Erebus  (1g68)  supply  further  examples; all  five of  them,  showing  crises of  con­ science  that  lead  to  violence  or  disrup­ tion, also suggest a hesitant and uncertain  but basically positive future.
In   the   popular   formula   books,  too
(written  with varying degrees of  imagin­ ation  and  skill) , where one might expect saccharine  solutions,  we  find an  accom­ panying  kind  of muted  terror.  This  per­ haps  has always  been  true,  from  Gothic novels  to  detective  fiction,  so  it  is  not surprising  to  find  it  in  Arthur   Hailey's In  High  Places  ( Ig6I), Charles  Israel's The  Hostages  ( 1966),  or in other  works by  these   prolific  writers.   Though  too often   the   terror    can   itself  become   a stance, a stylization  exploited  for its sen-

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



sationalism  or  indulged  for  its  commer­ cial value, it will sometimes be more than this. It  will pervade  a whole work, as in James  Clavell's   King  Rat   ( 1962),  and not so much  characterize  its  tone, or  be in conflict  with  even a  comic  tone, as it will  underlie  the  situations  and  provide the  sensibility  by  which  we  understand  them.  A   Victorian  example  of  all  this would be Edward  Lear's "The Jumblies", which  for  all  its  comic  surface  presents us with  a frightening world. The  decade of  the  196o's is not so far  from  the Vic­ torians as it has often liked to think, and its  conflicts involving identity, order, chaos,  religion  and   science  have  their roots in an earlier time.
The  works of  Marie-Claire Blais, one
of  the  best  of  the  new  writers  of  the decade, illustrate this exploration of the "psychology" of the present day. Mad Shadows   (tr.   1960),   Tete-Blanche (tr.
1961),   and   A   Season  in   the   Life   of
Emmanuel    (tr.   1966)   all  present  "ab­
normal"  families  wending  their  way  as
 quickly  as  possible  towards   decadence. But as writers around  the world in the previous decade had  shown-The Aunt's  Story  ( 1948),  Catch-22   ( 1955), etc. -"madness"  in  a  mad  world  that fancies itself sane comes to be a kind of sanity. Leonard Cohen's now famous lyric "Suzanne takes you down" is a perfect extension of this. Cohen,  George  Bower­ ing  (Mirror   on  the  Floor,  1967),   and Gwendolyn MacEwen  (julian the Magi­ cian, 1963) have all been concerned  with developing new  techniques  for Canadian fiction, and with  breaking down not only the barriers between poetry and prose but also  those  between  the  sensual  and  the spiritual.  It  is  one  of  the  things  "Su­ zanne" is  about,  and  one  that  the  mad­ ness /holiness/innocence/guilt complex tries to evoke.
Political  protest  is a  different  kind of
extension of this same problem  of chaos, and  (also characteristic  of the 196o's)  we see  the   psychology  of  it   examined   in Robert Kroetsch's  The  Words  of My Roaring ( 1966), and David Lewis Stein's fine  first  novel  Scratch   One   Dreamer ( 1967) . We  see  the  political  encounter between youth and age, Quebec and les Anglais, raised vividly in MacLennan's Return   of  the  Sphinx   (1967), but  ex­ tended  into  violence more  frequently in French-Canadian  works,   as   in  Hubert
Aquin's   Prochain   Episode   (tr.    1967),
Jacques  Godbout's   Knife   on  the  Table (tr. 1968), or Gratien Gelinas's play, Yesterday   the  Children   Were   Dancing (tr.  1967).  Fortunately  there  are  more and more French-Canadian works being quickly and artistically translated  into English, which  may  not  serve  the  cause of bilingualism, but does give aid to understanding,  so there is at least some interim value. And if the translations  are

123

THE WRITING OF THE  DECADE



themselves artistic,  the more reason  to appreciate their  existence.
Also translated have  been works which inform the  literature with  a political background:  Jean  le  Moyne's  Conver­ gences (tr.  1966), or Jean-Paul Desbiens's  The   Impertinences  of Frere  Untel   (tr.
1965), which  should  give English-speak­ ing   writers  a  new   perspective  towards  their    land.    The   venture  into   political  spheres  is interesting in Canadian fiction, unusual   enough   to  be  noteworthy and noteworthy enough   for  Edmund  Wilson to  pick  up  and  even  overstress  in  his 0
Canada   ( 1965), for   the  political   books
still  work   as   psychological   studies.   To ignore  this aspect  of the recurrent exami­ nations  of self, in  emphasizing the politi­  cal, is to ignore  what  has by now become the  typical  Canadian mode. The number of  works  one  could  list  in  illustration is not  endless,  but  so long  as  to  be  biblio­ graphic rather  than  discursive.   Writers  like Peter  Taylor, Diane  Giguere, George Ryga,  Margaret Laurence (in a beautiful
1964  novel,  The  Stone  Angel, recreating
in  retrospect  the  life  of  an  old  woman during her  dying  days as she strives for a freedom  she  has  never  quite  realized  she has) , and  Henry  Kreisel  (with  his second novel, The  Betrayal, 1964)  all have come into  print. And all are  concerned  not  just with   broadly   political   relationships, but with   the   individual  reasons   for   them, which  is something different.
Freedom has been a key word in the fiction  of the decade, a freedom  variously defined  in  political   terms,  or  as freedom from   the   material  minutiae of  modern life, or as freedom to act as an individual, or as freedom from  the self and  the sense perceptions that  limit its understanding. How individual a person can  be in an age of causes and  moral  imperatives is exactly
 the   point   taken   up  by  so  many   of  the partly  political books, like Scratch One Dreamer; the hero, here, would prefer to avoid   committing  himself   to   anything, but   he  finds  himself   drawn into   action until   he  finally  chooses  to  act.  Whether or not this is freedom is another question. As Alden  Nowlan  writes:

In  those days, the  vanquished
surrendered their  swords  like  gentlemen,
the  victors  alone
surrendered their  illusions.
The  easiest thing  to do for a cause
is to die for it. ....

And  in  Nigel  Foxell's  Carnival   ( 1968), with its German setting, we find  just such a  choice  examined. By choosing  to leave the  country rather than fight  a duel  that could  only strengthen other people's posi­ tions,  Walter Phalts  gains  a kind  of  per­  sonal  liberty  at  the  expense  of a  possibly ephemeral fame.  That he  still  looks like a loser  is natural in  a world  like the  one
Foxell  shows  us, but  what  it  feels like -
from  inside  Walter Phalts,  for example­ is what  more  and  more writers  have  tried to express.
In the  process, subjects  for fictional examination have widened -particularly with  censorship retreating into  the  back­ ground-and expression has  become freer; characters do  and  say  things  that  earlier  writers  might have known  but  not written  about, heard  but  not  said.  The  result,  as one  might  expect, is a melange of  license  and   art,  and   the  license  is as much  an impingement on freedom  as it is freedom  itself. But  readers r.etain the  choice  of   which   books  to  read,  so  ulti­ mately  we  are  better   off.  This  does  not defend   all  recent   Canadian  novels,  for many, despite their  vivid details, are  rude  rather  than  revealing; they exploit  rather than  attempt to  understand. If Stephen

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



Vizinczey's   In  Praise  of  Older  Women ( I965)   begins  delightfully  comically,   it ends  up  a  sort  of  "Rake's Digress", repetitive  and   in   the   long   run   boring. And  Harold  Horwood's Tomorrow Will be   Sunday    ( Ig66)    or   Scott    Symons' Place  d' Armes   (I g67), the  one  embar­ rassed,  disguising  itself in  sympathy, and the   other   militant,  displaying  the   nar­  rator's  wilful  self-degradation,  both  en­ courage not  understanding so much  as a commercially successful  snigger.
Leonard   Cohen's   Beautiful  Losers
( Ig66), on  the  other  hand, is a different quality of book entirely. It is written  well and  it has something to say-all too rare a combination, but  welcome  when  it  ap­ pears. The  narrator, trapped in a triangu­ lar   affair   involving  both   his  wife  and  their   male   lover,   is  both   satisfied   and  desolated by his  relationships and  is any­ thing   but   free   because   of   them.   Con­  stantly   losing   himself   and   being   made beautiful  by   his  experiences,   and   con­ stantly  recognizing and  losing  respect  for himself, he is torn  in opposing directions, seeking   at   last   in   metaphysics  for   an answer  to his dilemma. But  in  seeking  a spiritual communion with Catherine Tekakwitha,  a   I 7th   Century   Iroquois saint,   he   discovers   not   the   peace   that MacLennan's  characters  could   find   in metaphysics in The  Watch that  Ends the Night,  but  brutal sensuality and  the  kind of accompanying doubt of saintliness, the suspicion   of  pride,   that   one  finds  in  an earlier  work  like Callaghan's The  Loved and   The   Lost   (I 95 I) .  Rejean   Duch­ arme's brilliant The  Swallower Swallowed (tr.  Ig68), raises a comparable dilemma. The  young  girl  narrator, caught in  Arab
 crossfire in  Israel  at  the  end  of the  book, deliberately sacrifices  her  companion in order to preserve  herself. Is this sense or cowardice? Is amorality possible? The questions   stand    unresolved.   People   at large, not aware  of the 'facts', consider Bernice  a heroine, and  she  complacently accepts   the   tribute. It  was  "what  they needed", she adds,  and  if the sentiment smacks of condescension, it is also honest. Honesty has become callous, and the underlying  bitterness  shows  through. It isn't  disillusionment particularly; it's  just disappointment, made acrid  by a kind  of anarchy  when   love  itself  seems  insular and   values  dead.   When  Austin  Clarke, in  his  third   novel   The   Meeting   Point (I g67), examines the  prejudice and  vio­ lence  that  face  West  Indian  immigrants in Toronto, we are  still  not far  from  this feeling.  After   its  wry  comedy   the   book turns  "sour", and   the  central character, Bernice  Leach,  becomes  less angry  than  hollow. She ends  up  listening to "talking and   talking" -to words-which    are meaningless   beside  her  knowledge of  in­ justice  and    her   more   and   more   futile  ache  for understanding.
There  is  no   immediate  or  easy  exit from   problems   like  these,  no  peace  un­ tainted  by a kind of corruption, no beauty  undisturbed by  the  very  existence  of  the self, which  at  once  allows  an  individual identity and  limits  what   it  can  do.  Like Cohen's  poems   in   Flowers   for  Hitler ( I964), Clarke's  novel  and  Ducharme's speak  to their  generation of commitment and  emptiness.  The ironies  are  dark,  the humour is  brittle, and   any  affirmations are  a little  wistful  in an  uncertain world.






125


4· The Short Story in English





Donald Stephens







AROUND 1955  there  arose among Canadian writers a creative quest for new approaches  to literary expression. A gradual  but firm attempt  was made to break away from the established forms of writing,  beginning  firstly with the  novel, then  with   poetry,  and  finally  with  the short   story.   There    were   Hugh   Mac­ Lennan  and  the other  innovators of new approaches  to narrative within the novel; there was the inception of a more modem voice in  poetry  which  was to flourish in Leonard  Cohen and other, often younger, poets;  and,  more  important for  our  in­ terests  here,   there  was  the  short  story which  was to  become at  last a  separate development  in  Canada   with  standards distinct   from   other   literary  forms.  No longer  was  the  story  to be  a  sketch  or studied  episode  which  reflected  a  sense of  a  purely  Canadian landscape.  Until
1950 or so, the story in Canada  appeared to  be  machine-made,  with   two-dimen­ sional characters solving  artificial dilem­ mas; there was a tendency to regionalism and  to oppressive details of the depression and  of  poverty,  little  poetry  within  the style, and  no experimentation. It seemed that    the   short  story   in   Canada    had stopped   growing,  even  after   the  surge given  to  it   by  Morley  Callaghan   and Ethel   Wilson.  The   majority  of  writers
 seemed  content  in  reflecting  merely  the
Canadianness of their art.
There was  little  or  no  hint  that   the short  story  would  gain  new  delicacy  in the fine hands of Mavis Gallant or Ethel Wilson in her later stories, or would be reshaped  by others like Hugh Garner  and Alice Munro. Soon the story was not one told by a carefully engineered plot, but by the subtle implication  of selected isolated incidents. Arrangement began to play a greater  part, and significance lay in what appeared, at  the outset, to be casual epi­ sodic  moments.  On  the  surface,  the  life depicted  in the short stories of  the sixties may  seem  to  be  trivial  or  unimportant. It is, however,  put  in  such  a  way as to interpret the  individual  life  below. The  constrained  plot was replaced by a record of  life  seen  at   first   hand; this  was  a realism without the Canadian artificiality associated  with  the  thirties  and  forties.
Obviously  the writers of the late fifties
and  the  sixties felt that  their  time was a vital age with something  new to say. Literary  techniques  needed innovation; a different  means of  communicating modern   values  and  ideas  to  the  reader was  justified.  The   predominant  charac­ teristic  of  the  time  was one  of  puzzled and   anxious   confusion.  It was  not  the first age to feel this in Canada, for many

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



late  nineteenth-century writers had found disillusionment in things  around them and had  eased  themselves by  the  contempla­ tion of the  past  and  of  nature. It was the first  age, however, to  be  pervaded by an uneasy  and  nameless guilt  concerning its situation. There seemed  to  be nothing to save  mankind  except  an  examination of the unconscious reasoning behind  its con­ fused state. Every writer became more conscious of himself and of the reasoning behind  his actions; men  began  to search to  know  themselves more  than   they  had in  any  age before  in Canada. The differ­ ence between  Canadian writing and  writ­ ing   in   Canada  was   made.   The   focus changed  so  that  the  Canadianness  dis­ solved  into  the  periphery of  the  writer's world   and  voice. Since  literature surely reflects  the  problems of  its  age,  writers created  their  stories  with  an  undisguised  interest  in  the  characters'  reaction to  a specific  situation  until   the  focus  of  the story  was  no  longer  on  the  situation but rather on  the  characters themselves.  The aim  of  literature now  was  not  to  tell  a story or to describe  an episode,  but  rather to  reveal  the  individual reactions to it.
Since  writers were  becoming more in­ terested  in  their  own  thinking, this intro­ spection  became an  intrinsic part of their stories.  Characters began   to  be  revealed by the  thoughts regarding their  reaction  to   a  specific  situation;  they,  too,  were looking inward just as their creators were. The reader  was called  upon by technique to become  a part  of  the story, and  rather than    associate   himself   with   something which  could easily have  happened to him, he  was not limited to identifying himself with   the  character.  No   longer   did   the reader   question   the   authenticity  of   a story   because   of  its   universal  situation which   could   have    implicated  anyone;
 rather,  he   was   concerned  because   he could see the individuals reacting as he himself would react. His own mind was identified  with  the thinking of the charac­ ter,  and  the  story  lived  for  him  because he was  taking part  in  it. The  era  of  the reader   sitting   on  the  outside  looking  in on  the  action   was  gone; he  was  now  a part  of that action.  The  short  story  was no longer  an entertainment for short  bus rides  and  longer  trips  across  Canada by train, but  rather was  an  emotional and  intellectual  experience for  the  reader. In the space of  a few years the short  story in Canada  was  radically changed. It  had the   tradition  of  Canada  behind   it,  of writers   who   tried   to  record   their   time; but  it also had  the  tradition of the  novel and  poetry  in the  thirties and  forties,  of writers  who  had  worked  out  the focus on the  Canadian  identity into   the   frame­ work   of   their    own   writing.   Outward action  was now fused with the character's inner   sensations. Because  the  focus  was now  on  character  portrayal  rather than  on plot, the short  story in Canada rapidly changed.
In  the late  fifties the  move  began,  and in  1g6o, as  though to  clear  the  way  for the   new   movement  to   get   completely under  way, Robert Weaver  edited, for Oxford, Canadian Short Stories. This collection  was in a sense a comprehensive presentation of  the  growth of  the  short story  in  Canada  beginning with  E.  W. Thomson, Duncan  Campbell Scott   and Charles G. D.  Roberts, and  ending with a story  by  a  younger,  and   perhaps even wiser,  Mordecai  Richler.  It settled   the historical  position  of the story in Canada, and  showed  clearly  that  writers  were,  for the  most  part, interested mainly  in  plot and  action  usually  within  a rural  frame­ work.   It   was  saying  quite  plainly   that


1'27

THE WRITING OF  THE  DECADE



"this  has  been done; now we move on to other   things". What was  happening  was that  though some writers  were inclined  to use an obvious Canadian setting, many of the   stories   could   have   happened   any­ where  and   were  not  restricted   by  place in sacrifice  to a sense of time.  It was the first  resounding contemporary  voice  that  was  heard  through the  land.  Mavis  Gal­ lant   in  Green  Water,  Green  Sky  indi­  cated    that    the   change   was   occurring. But   since   no   change  is  abrupt,  there  were  still   traces  of  the   past  interest   in action,  as  in  Nicholas Monsarrat's  The  Ship   that   Died   of  Shame    and   other stories,   and   Thomas  Raddall's  At   the Tide's  Turn and  Other  Tales.  It was  a year,   too,  for  Canadian publishers  to acknowledge work by Canadian writers working on subjects outside the Canadian context: the most obvious example was Margaret Laurence's This  Side Jordan, which  brought a new and  pure voice to contemporary fiction.  It made  Canadians aware  of their  own  contemporaneity.
By  I g61  the  dam  burst,  and  all  kinds of collections  of stories were printed. Was it  because   Canadian  publishers   realized the value of short stories for a public interested in doing  their reading quickly since there  were so many other  things available  to   consume  time?   This   may be  partly   the  reason,  but  there  was also an  interest in  and  a  demand for  stories of  many   types.  Desmond  Pacey  revised his A Book of Canadian Stories that  year, augmenting Weaver's book of Ig6o, in showing  the development of the tradition within  Canada. Other books of historical interest  appeared, too, like Pauline John­ son's  Legends  of V,ancouver, and  W. 0. Mitchell  recording  the   pastness  of  the past  with  his Jake and the  Kid. But  the subtle  shifting sands  of  taste  were  mois-

128
 tened  by  Norman Levine,  Ethel   Wilson, and  Malcolm Lowry.
Levine's One Way  Ticket  showed  the interest in  people   rather than   plot,  and this  was  strengthened  even  more  so  by Mrs. Wilson's Mrs. Golightly and other Stories which  brought a sense of  quality to  short   fiction   in  Canada. But  though people  superseded plot,  it is the  sense of idea   and   philosophy,  of  intuition  and sensibility,   that   particularly  marks   Ig6 I with  the  publication of Malcolm Lowry's Hear  Us 0 Lord  From Heaven  Thy Dwelling Place. Though these stories were written at  least a decade before  they were published in  Ig61, they show quite directly the influence of Canada on Low­ ry;  the  interest in  place  was  not  new  in Lowry's   work   but   the  Canadian  setting gave  him  a sense  that  his quest had been achieved. "The  Forest   Path   to  the  Spring" is superb in its handling of place, and   in  its  understanding of  the  human spirit; it  is  undoubtedly the  best story  of the decade.
There is then  a gradual shift  from  the

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



rural  to  the  urban, but  this shift  is more marked in  the  sensibility  revealed  than  it is  in  the  settings  employed. The  writers are   obviously   much   more   sophisticated in  their  view  of hwnan nature; traces  of sentimentality are  gone; the  language  is more  precise,  and  more  astringent. These qualities  are   evidenced  in   the  work  of Hugh Hood   (Flying  a  Red  Kite,  1962, and  White Figure, White Ground, 1964) and  Hugh Garner  (Hugh   Garner's  Best Stories, 1963;  Men  and Women, Stories,
I 966) . Both  these  men  manage to retain
on  occasion   a  Canadian flavour-be  it a   kind  of   backwood's humour,  or whimsy?-and 	still   inject  their   work with  contemporary modes  and considera­ tions.  This direction is  also  seen  in  the stories by two women  writers who, though they  write  within the  Canadian context, set   their   stories   often   outside Canada; both   Margaret  Laurence  (The   Tomor­ row Tamer, 1964)  and  Audrey  Callahan Thomas  (Ten Green  Bottles, 1968)   use the  sophistication  of  outside  experience to   portray  nuances of  character.  I  say "sophistication" because  this is the quality which  had  made Canadian writers  of the short  story  universal in  their  appeal and effect; it  is  also  what   accounts for  the fact  that  they  are  speaking in  a modern voice. The world  is smaller and  Canadian writers   are   heard  elsewhere aside  from within   the  unknown country. The  sensi­ bility   behind   the   writer,  the   Canadian writer, has  enabled  him   to  move  easily into  the  contemporary fluidity   of  litera­ ture.  The mosaic  which   marks  so  obvi­ ously   the   Canadian   heritage   has   also made   it  easier   for   Canadians   to  work with  the contemporary problems of alien­  ation,  compassion, and  love, which  makes up so much  a  part  of the themes  of con­ temporary fiction.  Again,  Mavis  Gallant
 reveals this quality; though she lives in France and  writes  for  The   New  Yorker, she  is particularly Canadian, if only  be­ cause of the  very natural way she belongs to the contemporary scene.
In the  past  five years  there  has  been a definite  interest  on  the  part  of  the  read­ ing  public  in short  stories, and  Canadian publishers   have  satisfied   the  need  com­ mendably. It is a genre  that  is appealing to more people,  not only for light  reading but  also for serious thinking. The master  of  the  short  story  in  Canada -and  still the   best-Morley  Callaghan, has  been reprinted. His  followers   have   moved   to the   works  of   others; there   are   quite   a number  of   good   short   story   writers  in Canada   who   have    published   recently  aside  from  the   ones  mentioned  above: Dave  Godfrey, Shirley  Faessler, and  David   Helwig. It  is  objectivity  that marks these writers,  an  ability  to  remove themselves as writers  and  Canadians from the  scenes they  present, to  be external in approach, and   yet  be  able  to  select  de­ tails  that  are  at  once  precise  yet  cosmo­ politan.  Their  humanity   particularizes their  work,  and  at  the  same  time  carries  them    into    universal    themes    that    are  appreciated  by  the  whole   of  mankind. This  may  appear to  be a mundane com­  ment,   but  as  I  looked  over  the  volwnes  of short  stories  that  have  been  published over  the  last  ten  years  I was  constantly reminded  that  here  was a group of good writers,  no  longer  stilted   by  a  desire  to be  Canadian  writers,   but   willing   to  be world    writers    and    to    be   writing   in Canada, though undoubtedly they  could write  anywhere, as  many   of  them   have done.   And   behind   their   often   excellent work   lies  the   background  of   Canada, reaching  toward    a   significance  that    is beyond the only national.

129

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



When   I look  back  over  the  last  ten years of the short story in Canada, it is obvious that  as long as there is synthesis and  refinement,  a  successful attempt   to modify  a  traditional form,  an  achieve­ ment of artistic  visions of  experience and of beauty, and a constant search for truth  in  experiment,   what  has  been  accomp­ lished in the short story form in Canada  has  added  diversity  and  richness to  the literature   of   our   time.   Art   is  always changing;  it  neither  accepts  conformity nor  does  it  like repetition.  The  last  ten years  has  seen  a  growth  that  has  been quick, a rapid change from a story whose focus   was  on   plot   and   the  Canadian setting, to one of character  synthesis and
 compelling   philosophies.  It   has  been  a time of introspection, and  one where interest has been in immediacy. Perhaps more than any other genre, the Canadian short  story  in  the  last  ten  years has  re­ flected very well the problems of its own society.  It  is  a  rich  and  widely  diverse period;   today,   to  all  outward   appear­  ances,  the  short  story  in  Canada  is con­ fident  of  its  own  vitality  and  resources, produced   by   writers  who  question   the assumptions on  which  the  national  short story   had   been   constructed,   and   who search   for  forms  and   techniques   more closely  in   touch   with   the  problems  of their  day, and  are  more  realistic in their treatment of them.








130


5. Criticism




Peter Stevens








THE   FACT THAT Canadian Literature  has flourished  during  the  last ten  years  suggests that  criticism in Canada   has  also flourished.  One  of  the main  thrusts  in  Canadian criticism  dur­ ing the last decade  (and  I think  this has been both one of the reasons why Cana­ dian Literature  has survived and also one of  the  influences  it has  exerted  on criti­ cism)  has been  towards  a description  of a  Canadian  literary   tradition,  and  this interest   has  stimulated   a  gathering  to­ gether  of  writing  about  the main  figures and  their  work  as it  is seen  as shaping Canadian  literature.  This  is  evident  in the  appearance of the checklists of Wat­ ters   and   Bell  and   of   the   indexes   to various small magazines of the past. The survey of our  literary  heritage  and  tradi­ tion had  been made earlier, most notably by Desmond  Pacey, and  he found it con­ venient to revise and enlarge  his Creative Writing   in  Canada  in  1961.  The  same author's  Ten  Canadian  Poets was reissued as a  paperback  in  rg66. Various  collec­ tions  of  essays have  also  contributed  to
this  trend,  the  two  edited  by  A.  J. M.
Smith,   Masks   of   Poetry    ( 1962)   and
Masks of Fiction  ( 1961)  being significant examples. The literary tradition has also been seen in a wider context  in the series of lectures  delivered  each  year at Carle-
 ton  University  and  published  under  the title of Our Living Tradition.
I  suppose the  biggest attempt  to map
and  measure  the  growth   and  develop­ ment of Canadian literature is the Liter­ ary History of Canada  ( 1965), edited  by Carl  F.  Klinck,  including   contributions from some of the best scholars and critics in Canada. However  much  I sympathize with  the  effort   behind   this  book  (and certainly it contains  a great  deal of valu­ able  information),  finally   I find  it   a rather dull book. There  is not much sense of excitement  behind  the writing and  no real  idea  of  achievements   in  Canadian literature   permeates  much  of  the  book. It is a solid and generally well-researched collection  of  factual   information   about the development  of Canadian literature, but I could have wished for more incisive critical writing in it. Perhaps the aim was to be merely descriptive  but  the over-all impression the  reader  gains, particularly in  the  section  devoted  to  the  twentieth century, is of a somewhat  bland  plateau of  descriptive  statement   with  little  en­ thusiasm for  individual authors showing through  the  scholarly  surface,  no  down­ right  zest  for  a  living  literature   being communicated  to  the  reader.  There  are some  interesting   revaluations   of  travel writing  in  Canada  and  of  some minor

THE WRITING OF THE  DECADE



poets, and some sound critical  judgments on Confederation poetry, but the greatest failure in the book is its lack of perception about  modern  writing and, in particular, its absence of any expression of the qua­ lity of poetry since the 1920's. The book explores  many  areas  of our  whole span of  tradition   and  growth  but  the  map  it draws  is only a faint  tracing of the  real topography.
In  the past ten years we have also seen
a  broadening  of the context of the study of Canadian literature  in the newer magazines such as Mosaic, Malahat  Re­ view and West Coast Review all of which place  Canadian writing  and  criticism in the setting of world  literature. Articles by such critics as R. E. Watters, John  Povey and  John  Matthews  see certain  aspects of   Canadian writing in relation to the literature  of other  countries in the Com­ monwealth and there have been contribu­ tions  by Canadian  scholars  and  poets to the  recently-established  Journal of  Com­ monwealth  Literature.
A certain  amount  of interest in  Cana­
dian  literature has  been evinced outside Canada.   Edmund  Wilson  has  given  us some   of   his   thoughts   in   0 Canada ( 1965).  The Twayne  University series on Canadian authors  is another  example  of such interest,  and  as we come to the end of  this  decade,  we can see our  attempts to describe our literary heritage are mov­ ing  into  a  more  critical  (as  opposed  to the  Literary History's descriptive)  phase, as  three  Canadian  publishers  have  an­ nounced series on individual  authors  and movements. Ryerson's Critical Views  are collections of  critical  reviews and  articles in a more permanent format, Copp Clark are  well  under  way  with  their  series of critical surveys of Canadian  authors, and McClelland   &  Stewart   have   just  pub-
 lished  the  first four  books in  their  series entitled   Canadian   Writers.   All  in   all, then,  the  last  ten  years  have  been  very much   a  period   of  reassessment  of  the whole sweep of our tradition.
The other main thrust in criticism over the last ten years has been in the field of synthesis, a widening  of critical  response to include material from other areas of modern  culture.  A principal  practitioner of this criticism of synthesis is Marshall McLuhan who has received world-wide recognition   in   the   last  few  years  and whose criticism, like Northrop  Frye's, has been the subject of a collection of critical essays, M cLuhan, Hot  and Cool  ( 1967) .
In The  Gutenberg  Galaxy  (rg62)   Mc­
Luhan   starts  from  a  discussion of  King Lear which leads him into the exposition of his general thesis about  the detribaliza­ tion of man  as a result of  the abstraction  of  meaning  from  sound  in  the  develop­ ment  of  the  alphabet  and  its  use in  the printing press. This in turn led to special­ ization,  bringing  with it schizophrenia  in man, a split between thought  and  action, arising  from  the  breaking  apart   of  the magical  world of the ear and  the neutral world  of   the  eye. The  extension  of  our senses   fostered   the   disturbance   of  our senses.  (It  seems to  me that  McLuhan's view  of  schizophrenic  man  and  the  im­ balance  of  sensory  perception  is  related to  some  of  the  ideas  of  R.  D.  Laing whose views, together  with those of  Nor­ man   0. Brown,  are  beginning  to  loom large in this criticism of synthesis.)
This explanation of what has happened and  is happening in our  whole culture  is expressed in a very crabby and convolute style  but  McLuhan has  since  that  time tried to popularize his ideas. Understand­ ing Media  (1964)  is a very good descrip­ tion  of  modernism,  and  his concepts  of

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



total field  and our "revulsion against imposed  patterns" are  interesting insights into  recent  developments in literature. McLuhan is, in fact, a thorough-going modernist and   even  though  he  tends  to avoid  value  judgments, he does on  occa­ sion  let  a  kind   of  evaluation  drop:

Our    unified   sensibility    cavorts   amidst   a wide  range   of  awareness   of  materials  and colors which  makes ours  one of the greatest ages  of  music,  poetry,   painting and  archi­ tecture  alike.

The  Medium Is The  Massage (rg67), "a collide-oscope of interfaced situations", is McLuhan's presentation of his content as  a  form   in   itself,   his  message   as  its medium. It is  probably the  most  amen­ able  of his  books, well-suited to  his pen­ chant for categorical statements, many  of which  are presented with  an air of invinc­  ible  rightness  without so much  as  a  nod in  the  direction of detail to  prove  them.  Such   statements  are   often   stimulating but  just as often  leave  the reader  baffled: for  instance, to  prove  his  assertion   that  TV commercials have influenced contem­ porary  literature, he  cites  In  Cold  Blood as  an  example  without any  kind  of  an explanation.
For  such  a  committed modernist  Mc­ Luhan shows  a singular blindness to  cer­ tain   elements  in   modern   culture  that  seem  to be specifically made  to prove  his thesis.  He   has  never  mentioned, to  my knowledge,  concrete   poetry     (surely   a splendid  example of form  as content) and the movies of  Jean-Luc Godard.
For   some  readers  McLuhan's  style  is a barrier and  I must  confess I find  some­ thing  undergraduateish about his twisting of  certain literary quotations to  suit  his purpose. His   use  of  lines  from   Romeo And  Juliet  as  a prediction of  the  effect of TV  is an  example of this kind  of writ-
 




ing.  His  books  abound  in   puns  but   in fairness  to  McLuhan it must  be said  that he  appears  to  be  trying   to  emulate  his own  concepts  in  this  matter, for  he  tells us that  a pun  derails  us from  the uniform progress of typographic order  and,  like Arthur Koestler to a certain extent, he regards humour as a probe of our environment.
McLuhan has  undertaken an  analysis
of  the   total   field  of  modern  awareness and  in spite  of his exasperating habits  of style and  argument he  is a  key figure  in this area  I have  labelled  the "criticism of synthesis".  Perhaps the  best way to come to  grips  with   his  ideas  is  to  reverse  the linear  progression  of his books by reading The  Medium Is The   Massage first  and then  moving   back  through  Understand­ ing Media  to The  Gutenberg  Galaxy.
Despite  Irving Layton's assertion  that we   have   no   real   critics    (like   George Steiner  and  Michael Hamburger)  in  this country, most   students of  literature  re­ gard  Northrop Frye  ("a  sterile idealogue" according  to   Layton)  as  a  real  critic,  indeed  as a  critic  in  the  largest  sense  of the term.  Perhaps "aesthetic philosopher" might  be a better  term.  Over  the last  ten years Frye seems to have  been attempting

133

THE WRITING OF THE  DECADE



to collect the variety of his comments centring  around   his  Anatomy   of  Criti­ cism.  He  published   a  collection  of  his earlier   essays   in  his  volume   Fables  of Identity (I 963)  and  over the last six or seven  years  he  has  been  applying   the general  thesis  of  his  Anatomy   to  indi­ vidual  authors  and  areas. He  has  pub­ lished  books  on   Shakespearian   tragedy and  comedy, Milton  and Eliot as well as on  the  function  of  criticism,  the  nature of the  imagination, and  modernism.  All these   books  with   the  exception  of  his study  of  Eliot  were  originally  oral  pre­ sentations  and  it  is for  this  reason  that these books seem more approachable than the  Anatomy. They  are lectures in book form,  lectures  as  vehicles  to  popularize his ideas about  myth and the nature of literature.
Of   his  work  devoted   to  individual
authors  I find his book on Shakespearian comedy,  A  Natural  Perspective  (I 965), most  helpful.  He  is very explicit  on  the structure  of   the   comic  world   and   its autonomous nature expressed through conventions,  but  in the later  lectures  in this   series  his   argument  becomes  too abstruse and complicated in its paradoxes and  at no time does he suggest that some things happen in comedies on the grounds of sheer dramatic expedience. He repeats the general  thesis that  myth in its primi­ tive sense is an  "Imaginative experience for   the   untrained";  that   word   "un­  trained" is uncomfortably  connected  in my mind  with  a whole world of cultural snobbery,   a   snobbery   I   suspect   runs through much of The Educated Imagina­ tion  ( I963), especially in the last lecture in which  he seems to present to us some rarefied ideal of "highbrowism". Popular culture  for  Frye  means  the  kind  of  art that  appeals  to the  primitive  myths that

I34
 reside in the unconscious of all men, and he seems to have no conception  of  popu­ lar culture as a natural growth out of the whole  life  of  a  society,  including   the lower levels of the "untrained".
Although Frye makes  some  good generalizations about  modern  movements in his series of lectures published in 1967, The  Modern  Century-the   self­ consciousness of the modern  and the way in  which   it  "is  concerned   to  give  the impression  of  process rather  than  prod­ uct",  for  instance -there  is  no real  ap­ preciation    of   new   modes   of   thinking  which  have developed within recent years. Howev.er provocative and stimulating his generalizations  are,  I  think  that  some of them   are   dropped   into  his  lectures  as deliberate  statements  to  show  how  his ideas have kept abreast of modern  devel­ opments but they only serve to emphasize, to  me  at  least, a  lack of comprehension  about certain  elements in modern culture.  For  someone  who  has shown  a  remark­ able grasp  of Canadian poetry earlier  in his career, it is strange  to find him saying in The  Educated  Imagination that Cana­ dian writers "produce imitations of D. H. Lawrence   and   W.  H.  Auden".  And  I find  meaningless  his statement  that  cer­ tain  poems are  "dreamlike and  witty  at once,  a  kind  of  verbal  blues or  pensive jazz".
Perhaps  it  is churlish  to criticize  Frye on these grounds,  particularly  as one can sense  a   real   urge  behind   his  work  to establish  the  primacy  of the  v.alue of literature in our society in his application of his critical theory to such a wide range of  writing.  It is  when  he  turns  to  the critical  task itself that he shows his real insight.  For me, his best work during  the past  ten  years is the  first lecture  in The Well-Tempered Critic  ( I963), an attack

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



on sloppy expression rising to an almost Orwellian fervour. He maintains that all language  exists on an oral  basis and  that poetry is a prime expression of that  basis, a very significant  statement  of an impor­ tant  idea in modem  poetics. He closes by making a plea against  specialization  and for   real  criticism,  that   is,  for   literary criticism as opposed  to scholarship.  It is here   that    I   recognize   Frye's   genuine humility  about  the  role  of  the  critic,  a humility  that  tempers  the  hints of snob­ bery in some of his other  works.
Over  the  past  decade  Frye's  criticism
has been, in general  terms, a populariza­ tion  of  his ideas. Recently  his theory of myths and  archetypes  has  been attacked but  he  has  come  to  be  seen  as  one  of the  most  important  modern  critics,  the subject  himself of a  collection of critical essays, Northrop  Frye  in  Modern  Criti­ cism  ( rg66), edited  by Murray  Krieger. Not only  that. His ideas have stimulated some   Canadian  poetry   which   has  de­ veloped  beyond  the  barren  academicism he  is  so  often  accused  of:   witness  the recent work of James Reaney. And in the poetry and  criticism of one of his follow­ ers, Eli Mandel,  his ideas, among others, have  helped  to  produce  what  I consider to be the most original  aesthetic criticism during  this decade in Canada.
Eli Mandel's  criticism can  be found in
one or two articles  published  in  journals in  the  rg6o's  and  in  talks  given for  the CBC, principally in a series called Novelty and   Nostalgia   ( 1967)   and   in  another series later  published  in  rg66, Criticism: The   Silent-Speaking Words. Like  Frye, Mandel  sees modem   literature as  being essentially  about   process  and,  like  Mc­ Luhan, he  makes  much  of  the  idea  of instant   awareness   and   instant   obsoles­ cence. He even connects his discussion of
 these ideas to tradition by saying that contemporary   literature  works  towards "a renewal, not a denial, of old forms". Literature in our  time,  according  to Mandel, has gone beyond practical value; it has ventured into a world of pure experience, so that  "aesthetic form  con­ fers   the   only   value that   endures". Modem   literature  is  full  of   regressive images, becoming  a  literature  that  con­ stantly calls attention  to itself. Because of the growth of inter-media forms, Mandel seems to suggest that  we try to synthesize all our aesthetic knowledge and the func­ tion of the critic is to help us make that synthesis.
Everything  in  art  is  now  much  more open  in  form,  and  criticism  must  make an  attempt   to  become  more  open.  The "New  Criticism" is now no longer valid, for it cannot cope with the contemporary, being able to deal only with closed structures.  Mandel  also tackles the  prob­ lem  of  social  criticism.  In  his  view art creates  a  completely  autonomous world divorced from society and external  reality so that  the social critic is really incapable of   coming   to   an   aesthetic   judgment. Mandel finally sees the critic as a savage, appreciating  and  passing  on  his knowl­ edge of art  by means of "direct  percep­ tion rather than intellectual  analysis". He sees the dangers  in such a theory;  that  it may be impossible to  judge art  on anar­  chic and irrational  grounds, that this kind of  response is too dependent on subject­ ivity, that  it is too open  and  impression­ istic. But he insists on the notion of total sympathetic  participation in art,  an  idea that  surely links  him  with  McLuhan, as his idea of the autonomous  world of art  connects him to Frye. Mandel  goes much further  into  a  concept  of  a  much  more open  synthesis of these ideas by drawing

135

THE WRITING OF  THE DECADE



also on  the  ideas of Norman  0. Brown. In fact, he suggests that  McLuhan's idea of the extension of our senses is really an expression  of a  Brown idea  in that  "art is the language of the human  body". Finally, Mandel  summarizes art as "the human  form  of desire, ... it is the vision of  our  complete  humanity  and  an  affir­ mation of love."
I may  have  done  Eli  Mandel  an  in­ justice by summarizing  his ideas in  such bald terms but in the series of talks I have outlined  as well as in  some single  radio talks he seems to me to have formulated a new, open and almost visionary concept of  criticism,  synthesizing, as  I  have  al­ ready  suggested, much of what  Frye and McLuhan state, and adding much of the thought   of  some  of   the   new  culture heroes, most  notably  R. D.  Laing,  Her­ bert  Marcuse   and   Norman  0.  Brown. Mandel's   plea  for  a  criticism  of   total participation leads him to involvement in a concept stated  by Brown: "The  proper response  to  poetry  is  not  criticism  but poetry.''
 Of  course,  in  Canada at  the  present time many poets write criticism. One can read   poetry   reviews  in   many   of  our literary  reviews by practicing  poets. This has always been the case but I think this practice   has  been  encouraged   over  the last ten years. In the pages of small maga­ zines poets preach polemically about their own poetic theories. One such publication is The  Open  Letter  which is specifically designed  to be  a forum  of critical  ideas about  poetry.  Since  its  foundation Tish also has included defences of its special mentors, and Quarry gives a good deal of space to long reviews of poetry by poets. Tamarack Review generally puts  its "Poetry Chronicle" in the hands of a poet and  it occasionally includes  an article  of a literary-critical  nature, such as Frank Davey's view of the Black Mountain phenomenon and Miriam  Waddington's study  of  the   radical   poems  of  A.  M. Klein. At one time it seemed as if Tama­ rack had  set itself the critical  mission of saving Canadian theatre.  It ran two issues devoted   to  the   problem   but   more   re­ cently, apart  from  an  occasional  review, it has not revived that particular mission­ ary  quest.  And  I  should  not  omit  from this discussion the highly valuable  practi­ cal  criticism  of  Milton  Wilson as editor of Canadian Forum. His choice of poetry for  that  periodical  has  been  consistently astonishing  in its catholicity,  its  recogni­ tion  of  new  talent  and  experimentation and  its  personal  concern. He  has in  this way contributed  a great  deal to the con­
tinued  growth  of poetry  in  this country. We  are  also  greatly  indebted   to  the CBC for  its encouragement of criticism. It is possible that  without  radio  and  the FM  program   I deas we might  not  have had  Eli  Mandel's   criticism.  More  than that.  The  CBC  has  given  time  to  poets

THE WRITING OF  THE  DECADE



and  critics alike, allowing  them  to elabo­ rate  critical  ideas. In  the  two series The  Creative  Writer   ( 1965)   and  The   First Person In Literature  ( 1966)  Earle Birney and Louis Dudek respectively contributed  interesting surveys in the field I am call­ ing  the  criticism of synthesis. They  both took   a   large   topic   and   allowed   their imaginations  and critical acumen to roam at large in the area of the topic, drawing the specific details for discussion from a wide  variety  of  sources.  Other   writers who have attempted this kind of synthesis in CBC talks are Michael Yates, John Hulcoop, George Woodcock and Jack Ludwig.   One   of   the   most   interesting series, which attempted a comparative study of movies and  modem  novels, was Murray  MacQuarrie's The  Allegorical Style  ( 1967) . MacQuarrie sets his talks in a framework of ideas stemming from McLuhan and Frye, suggesting that the decline in realism had re-awakened our interest  in  the allegorical  and  the mythi­ cal. Within  these terms he discussed such writers  as Golding,  Heller  and  Grass in relation  to   the   movies  of   Bergman, Godard   and   Antonioni.   (Incidentally, MacQuarrie's remarks  on   this  director constitute   for  me  one  of  the  best  de­ fences of his movies I  have  read.)   Mac­ Quarrie's criticism is sound and straight­  forward   although,  like  McLuhan, he  is prone  to  the  categorical   and  dogmatic generalization.  Nonetheless,  this series is a  significant  contribution to  inter-media criticism in Canada.
The  CBC also continued  other  aspects
of  criticism  in  series  perhaps  related  to the trend of assessing tradition and estab­ lishing order  I have mentioned  earlier in this article, although  these talks were not devoted  to specifically  Canadian subject­ matter.   I  am  thinking of  talks  by John
 Carroll  on  the  contemporary novel and by Roy Daniells on some religious and Puritan  poets. There  have also been some rather  experimental  kinds of critical exe­ gesis  on   the   CBC :  Louis   Dudek   on chance  in   poetry,   Eli   Mandel   talking about  Norman  0.  Brown  and  also  in­ dulging  in  a  kind  of  prose  poem  about celebration.
There  is no doubt  that  in recent years
the  CBC  has  encouraged   not only  crea­ tive writing but also creative criticism. It has also published  a fair  sampling  of its series of  critical  talks  so  that  they  will reach  an  even  wider  audience,  but  it  is unfortunate   that   these   new  and   often exciting  expressions  of  developments  in modern thinking  do not reach those of us who are  not served by the  FM  Network of  the  CBC.  Perhaps  all  of  us who are interested  in literature and  ideas, should make a plea for the availability of these programmes in all parts of Canada.
Sound academic  criticism continued  in
such journals as the Dalhousie Review (which seems to have published more literary criticism than any of the other intellectual   quarterlies   in   the   last   ten years),  Culture   and  Queen's  Quarterly. The  University of Toronto Quarterly has published each year its very useful survey of "Letters  in  Canada". Book reviewing has   steadily   improved    and   has   even caused a few hackles to rise in recent months: witness Irving Layton's diatribe against  a  reviewer  in  Canadian  Dimen­ sion  and   Alden   Nowlan's   outburst   in Canadian  Forum.  There  have  been col­ lections  of  some  of   the  better   general critical  journalistic  pieces, such  as Rob­ ertson Davies'  A'  Voice  From The  Attic ( 1960)  and  Robert   Fulford's  Crisis  At The  Victory Burlesk  ( 1968).
One  rather  surprising  shortage  in  re-

137

THE WRITING OF THE DECADE



cent Canadian criticism has been in the field of  comparative studies of our  own two literatures.  There  have been tentative attempts and  one very good essay, "Twin Solitudes"  by  Ronald   Sutherland,  pub­ lished in this  journal,  but in view of the centrality  of the Quebec question in con­ temporary  Canada  it seems  strange  that very  little   critical   writing  on  the   two literatures  has emerged.
In   general,   criticism   has  been   con­
cerned  on the one hand  with attempting to establish some order and on the other hand   with  exploring  the  possibilities of total involvement  in and participation at the  frontiers  and  even  beyond the fron-
 tiers of modem  chaos. There  has been a gathering and  a  broadening  during   the last ten years, leading towards a loosening of strict  academicism  away from special­ ization. In  the developments arising from Frye  and  McLuhan and  related  to  new and  emerging  ideas in  the  work of such a critic as Eli Mandel, Canadian criticism promises  to  stretch  into  more  and  more fascinating areas in the future.
NOTE

In  preparing my discussion of Eli Mandel's criticism  and  the contribution of the CBC to Canadian criticism   I was  helped   inestimably by  Phyllis  Webb  who  made   available   to  me material and  information to which I would otherwise  have  had  no access.












CRITICAL  VIEWS ON  CANADIAN WRITERS
A New Anthology Series  of Selected Criticism from The  Ryerson Press.
MICHAEL GNAROWSKI, Series Editor

This  Series is intended   to  bring  to the interested  reader  carefully  selected criticism and  related  materials  on Canadian writers, literary movements and important themes in Canadian Literature. The  Series will not only bring together  in unified collections material  which is frequently  not easily or readily avaliable,  but it will also emphasize new and evolving critical  approaches to Canadian letters.
Each volume will provide a selection of representative  and essential critical writings bearing  on  its  particular subject.  It  will consist of reprint articles,  essays and  key reviews, and  in  some  instances,  coherent  portions  of  book-length  works. It will be introduced  by an interpretive essay by the volume Editor.
Books in this Series will be available in cloth and paperbound editions.

Forthcoming Titles*
(1969)

On the McGiU Movement: A.].M. Smith, F. R. Scott & Leo Kennedy
edited   and   with  an  introduction  by  PETER STEVENS, University  of  Sas­
katchewan.
On Mordecai Richler
edited   and   with   an   introduction   by  G.  D.   SHEPS,   Sir   George  Williams
University.
On E. ]. Pratt
edited   and   with   an  introduction   by  D.  G.  PITT, Memorial   University  of
Newfoundland.
On Archibald Lampman
edited   and   with  an  introduction  by MICHAEL  GNAROWSKI, Sir  George
Williams University.
On the West Coast School: TISH  and the Vancouver Poets
edited and  with an introduction  by WARREN TALLMAN, University of British
Columbia.
*titles and contents of individual  volumes subject to change


THE  RYERSON PRESS

299 Queen St. W., Toronto  2B, Ontario






ON THE VERGE


*****  Catherine Parr  Traill.  The  Canadioo
Settler's  Guide. McClelland & Stewart, paper,
$2.95.  Cookery  books and  books of household
hints   are  invaluable  aids  to  social  history.  I
have a couple  from  late  18th  century  England
whose naive revelations of class bias in their discussions  of  how  to  treat  servants  and  suc­
cour  the  poor  help  one  to understand the labourers' revolt and  the Chartist movement which  followed  closely. Catherine Parr  Traill's Canadian Settlers  Guide, now  reprinted, is a
book of  this  kind,  and  a careful  perusal  of its
hints  for  living  in   the   backwoods,  its  rustic recipes,  its  directions for  building  shacks  and
improvising  furniture and  using wild herbs for medicine,  leaves one  with  a clearer  picture  of rural   Ontario  a  century   and   a  quarter  ago than  any  modem history  of  the  times  I have
yet read. An invaluable reprint.
****  Harold  Horwood.  Newfoundland. Mac­
millan,  $6.95.  The  most  recent  of Macmillan's
"The Traveller's Canada" series, and  perhaps
the  best. After  a lame  start  which  makes  one expect  a  warmed-up guidebook,  Harold  Hor­
wood  settles   in   with   zest  and   eloquence   to describe  his  native  province,  and  brings  in  so many  fascinating historical  narratives and accounts   of  natural  phenomena and   ways of
human   life  that   one  is  not  merely  absorbed
 
to   the   end,   but   urgently   converted  to   the need   to   explore   intensively   the   remarkable and   late-arriving  province  of  Newfoundland.
****  Anne   Wilkinson.   Lions   in   the   Way.
Macmillan,  paper,   $2.50.   A  reprint  of  Anne
Wilkinson's "discursive history  of  the  Osiers",
of  which  family  she  was  a  member   by birth. Apart from  t!Ie intrinsic interest  of the  Osiers as a  talented group  of people,  it  is a  remark­ ably  sensitive   study   of  the  formative  age  in Canadian  history,   written  with  a  fine  poet's eye   to   the   nuances  of   private    and   public personality.
****  Reginald Hargreaves. The  Bloody­
backs:    The  British    Servicemen   in    North
America: r6ss-r783. General Publishing,
$10.95·  The   title  is  misleading,   since  it  sug­ gests  a  social   history   of  the  British  soldiers and  sailors  in  Nort!I  America   up  to  the  end of  the   American  War   of   Independence.  In fact,   The    Bloodybacks   tells   relatively    little about   the   actual  lives   of   serving   men,   and turns  out  to  be  a  rather  good  history  of cam­ paigns.  Canada plays  its  varying  role,  first  as the  base  of Britain's  enemies,  then  as the  base of   the   British   themselves.   It   is  unfortunate that   the  history  does  not  carry  on  to  1812;  perhaps that  will be another volume.
****  Lewis  S. Feuer.  The  Conflict  of  Gene­
rations.   General  Publishing,  $14·50.   This   is
the  most important book  to date  on the move­
ments  of student revolt.  Professor  Feuer  traces
the   history    of   such   movements   from   early
nineteenth  century  Europe,  shows  their   re­
semblances,    emphasizes    their   tendencies   to­
wards  elitism.  He  is perhaps too dependent on
a   Freudian  interpretation  of  t!Ie  conflict   of
generations, but   his  account  of  youth   revolt,
as   distinct  from   his   explanation   of   it,   is
admirable.






"Richaab asel & company, 1nc


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES, DENVER,  CHICAGO,  NEW  YORK




*"**  Peter Varley and  Kildare Dobbs. Canada.  Macmillan, $3·95· A reprint of the volume   of  photographs  by  Varley   and  com­ mentary    by   Dobbs   published    originally   in
1964  and  now  revised  and  brought  up-to-date so  far  as  the  facts   used  are  concerned. The photographs-urban  and   rural-are  splen­ did,    and    the    commentary  intelligent  and packed  with  curious  as well  as essential  facts. A good  and  enlightening gift  for  anyone  con­ templating a visit to Canada.
•••  Francis  Parkman.  The  Oregon   Trail, edited   by  E.  N.  Feltskog.  University  of   Wis­ consin   Press,   $15.00.   In   the   travels   of   this classic book Parkman never  entered  Canadian territory,  nor   even   the  Oregon  country   that  might  have  been  Canadian if  history  and  the British  had  moved  a  little  differently. But  the book  does  interest  us   because   it   shows  the background  of   wilderness  living   and  contact with  Indians  which  became  so useful  to Park­  man  when he wrote  his great  work on the wars between   the   English   and   the   French   which bears  the  same  relationship  to  Canadian his­ tory  as  the  Decline  and  Fall  to  classical  his­ tory.   Professor    Feltskog's    introduction   and notes   are   impressive;  they   represent  many years'   checking    into    Parkman's  movements and  the  people  he encountered.
n•  John   C.  Ricker   and   John   T.  Saywell. The Story  of Western Man: The  Emergence of  Europe.    The  first   volume   of  a   two-part history of western  civilization,  told, as far as possible, pictorially, with  an astonishingly  good selection of mainly contemporary illustrations, supported  by  a  basic  text  rather  too  meagre for  its subject.  But  to  get  the  feel  and  colour of  the  times,  rather than   the  musculature of events,  it  is  a  book  to  be  recommended,  par­ ticularly   for   those   who   hate   the  reading   of history.
"""  William   Rodney.   Kootenai Brown:  His Life and  Times. Gray, $7.50. Kootenai Brown  was an  interesting minor  figure  in the development of the Canadian and  American West. A former British officer, he went to the Cariboo,  then   Inarried   a  Metis  girl  and   took part  in  the  annual buffalo  hunts  of  the  half­ breeds,  later  became  a  courier  for  the  Ameri­  can   army   and   a   guide   for   the   Mounties,  killed his man  in a Montana brawl, and  ended as   guardian  of   Waterton   Lakes.   He   never acted   a   historically  dramatic   role,  and   was less in life than  his legend,  but  he  represented a   type,   and   Professor   Rodney   has   used  his adventures to portray an  interesting era.
 BOOKS IN  REVIEW

---------- ----------

John Strachan
1778-1867

J. L.  H. HENDERSON

This highly readable, well  researched biographical essay describes  the life of the man   at  the  centre of  the   political   and religious struggles  in 19th  century Upper Canada. It  is   the   first   biography   of Bishop  Strachan since  Bethune's  Mem­ oire appeared in 1870.

$4.50


Wordsworth as
Critic

W. J. B. OWEN

A comprehensive account of  the  growth of  Wordsworth's thinking  about  the theory  of poetry  is given  for the first time in  this volume.  Based on  his formal criti­ cal   essays  as   well   as   on   unpublished material, the  discussion  traces  the  devel­  opment of  Wordsworth's ideas  and  gives a  subtle  and   rewarding  account of  the psychology of his literary creation.

$7.50


University of Toronto Press

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



**  R.   D.   Hilton-Smith.  Northwestern   Ap­ proaches.   Adelphi,   $6.50.   A  useful,   though staggeringly  expensive,   brief    bibliographical essay on  the  writings  of  explorers  and  travel­ lers on  the  Pacific coast  during  the eighteenth and   early   nineteenth  centuries.   Its  price   re­ tricts   it to  libraries  and   wealthy   specialists.
**  Affectionately Yours:  The   Letters  of Sir John  A. Macdonald and his Family. Ed.  J. K. Johnson. Macmillan, $6.gs.  Sir  John  A. may
have  been  the  principal  architect of  Canada
and  the  Commonwealth, but  he was no spark­ ling   writer,    and    the   same   applies   to   the members   of  his  family  whose  personal  notes to each  other  accompany his in this volume  of correspondence. None  of the letters  is of great value   except   for   its   associations;    the   best things in the book are the lengthy biographical introduction   and   the   very   useful   prefatory notes   provided    by   A.   K. Johnson    on   the periods of  Macdonald's life.
o.w.

**  The Golden  Dog by William  Kirby,  Mc­ Clelland  & Stewart   (NCL#6s), $2.95. Derek Crawley   has  cut  Kirby's   1 877  romance  sub­ stantially  for  this   edition,  thus  speeding   up the  story  while  maintaining  its  Gothic  atmos­ phere.   New  France in   1759  gave  Kirby   his subject, but   the  novel  was  written   less  as  a Gallic   compliment  than  as  a  political   exem­ plum.  Witchcraft  and  intrigue   became  meta­  phors  to  show  that   corruption  weakens  from within.  The didactic function is plain  enough,
 but  it  is primarily   as  an  exotic  entertainment that  it is offered in its present  form.
**  Behind  the  Beyond  by Stephen Leacock, McClelland & Stewart (NCL #67), $1.50. A reprint  of  the  1913  volume   containing  such well-known  pieces  as  "Homer and  Humbug" and   "The  Retroactive Existence  of  Mr. Jug­ gins".   Also  welcome   back   in   print   are   the delightful  "Parisien  Pastimes",   which   show Leacock   playing  at  his  best  with  the  naivete  of  travellers  and   the  absurdities in  language. Unfortunately  the   first   half   of  the   book  is wearingly  dated.
*  Tomorrow  is   Yesterday   by   K.    Akula, Pahonia, $s.oo. Interesting more  as a  literary curiosity than  an accomplished book, this first novel   in   English   by   a   Byelorussian   author (now living in Toronto) betrays too much inexperience with  the language. Dressed and began  are  never  used  when  attired  and  origi­ nated  can  be employed, for example, and as a result   the  novel  is stilted.  Also  overburdened with  mawkish  euphemisms, it  would  seem  to have  little  to  recommend it,  but  its  subject  is extraordinary.   Rape,    pillage,    murder,   and deceit  on  the  part  of  both  the  Red  and  Nazi armies  in  the  Russian  provinces  during World War   II become  not  only  part   of  a  plea  for Byelorussian  independence but  also  a  way  to give   tribute   to   the   clemency   of   Canadian judges.    Though  its   sentiments  are   unques­ tionably  sincere,  its  method  is drawn  too imi­ tatively  from  that  of  television  serials.
W.H.N.
