$5.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·82
Autumn, 1979

JOURNJILS: SELF & SOCIETY

Articles

BY  JUDITH  KENDLE, M. W. STEINBERG, ELSPETH CAMERON, ZAILJG POLLOCK, FRANCOISE IQBAL AND GILLES DORION

Poems

BY  AN NE SZUMIGALSKr, G. RIPLEY, J.D. CARPENTER, SUSAN  LESLIE, TOM   WAYMAN,  LORN E DANIEL

Reviews

BY  W. H. NEW, LINDA HUTCHEON, LEON SURETTE, CATHERINE ROSS,
ERIC  P. LEVY,  MICHAEL DARLING, HELEN SONTHOFF, ANN P. MESSENGER, WENDY ROBBINS KElTNER, ALEXANDRE AMPRIMOZ,  UTA  WILLIAMS, GRAHAM GOOD, ROD WILL MOT, JERRY WASSERMAN, JOHN  RIPLEY, PEGEEN BRENNAN, CAROLE GERSON,  LINDA SHOHET, LINDA LEITH, JEAN WILSON, R.  W. INGRAM, CATHERINE MCLAY, ROSS LABRIE

Opinions  and Notes

BY  LOUISE  VANH EE  NELSON , MICHAEL BENAZON, LEONARD W. SUGDEN, HENRY MAKOW

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW











FREEDOM TO CHOOSE







"I DARE SAY, ouR LIVES will be Pindaric," writes self-satisfied Ed Rivers towards  the close of The  History  of Emily  Montague. And  after  penning several more cheerful apothegms,  he realizes what  his friend  Bell Fermor  would likely interrupt to say:  "Cela  est bien dit, mon cher  Rivers, mais il faut  cultiver notre  jardin."  All our lives have been tempered  by these two attitudes: the cate­ gorizing  impulses of the idealistic optimist  have  recurrently  met  the  dampening realities of the pragmatic  ironist. We have grown, individually  and as a state, and we find ourselves with each  new experience deciding  whether  to be  "liberal" or "conservative" in our reaction to it:  to embrace and  accept or to reject and  deny, to aspire towards a prospect or to hold to an accomplishment, to live for the cer­ tainties of possession or to live for the dreams of future  and  past.
There  are, of course, "liberals"  and "conservatives" of both  persuasions, which
suggests that  the way we see problems (as propositions requiring  and  supporting either for answers)  is less an article of belief than  a habit  of mind.  Unfortunately such habits have lately affected more than  just the persons who have them. Cer­ tain  brands  of nationalism,  for example,  must  be held suspect  precisely because the habits of mind  that  produced  them are insupportable. The  Blimpish English academic  who refuses to read or recognize American  scholarship  on the grounds of its national origin has long been a figure of ridicule. How much  more ridiculous must be any efforts on the part of Canadians  to limit the scope of their own lives - and  yet how many efforts lately there have been!  Why is it that  so many  people should wish to deprive themselves of any positive encounter  with  possibility?
Consider  the  question  of further  immigration  into  an  immigrant society. To
read the newspapers is to encounter outcries against it, both plaintive and vitriolic. Yet  often  these  are  based  on  the  fear  and  ignorance   that   combine  to  equate

2

EDITORIAL


"Nation" with  "Purity of  Racial  Stock,"  which in  multicultural Canada  must always seem an absurd  notion. The  desire to maintain  the status quo -whether in language,  economics, religion, or  politics-compounds the  problems.  What, for example, does one make of the outcry of the landed immigrant  against further immigration? The  only  answer  is another  question:   in  what  magic  year  did Canada stop allowing other  alternatives?  Clearly the  place would not  have been culturally  the richer for refusing to allow Leacock, Layton,  Skvorecky, or others to come, let alone the  parents  and  grandparents of other  generations  of writers and  readers  and  literary  laymen.  Adhering  to the values of the  past  has  many virtues. Trying  to transform  the  present into a measure of security  is an  under­ standable human  impulse. But  closing the  border  against  the  future  is  patently blind.
Closing  the  border  against  information  can be equally  debilitating.   Nothing
appears  to protect a provincial  society better -yet  in actuality  strengthens  both the limiting  biases of its provincialism  and the autocratic  potential  of its govern­ ment -than ignorance.  Yet only ignorance is served if we or anyone else were to deny ourselves the  freedom  to choose among  options and  the  freedom  to know about  even those events and  ideas and  developments that  we  choose in  the long run  to reject. The  CRTC must  therefore  not be allowed  to cut  off information  from  elsewhere-hence to  control  both  the  amount  of  information   receivable and  the perspective that  will then inevitably be brought  to information  -in  the name of resolving an economic problem. "Either/or" will not do.
There  are  other  pressures currently  affecting literature-and through  litera­ ture the fabric  and  potential of Canadian life. There  are citizens who cannot  dis­ tinguish  between satire and  slander,  and  who would seek legal  restriction  placed over the art of cartooning. There are citizens who identify state support for publish­ ing with state control over ideas and expressions, who would require  that  art serve the  dictates  of the state  rather  than  the aspirations of the  individual  heart  and mind and the commitments  of the private conscience. There is a passive assump­ tion that  all is right  with  the world, and  that  all  that  is right  will automatically continue to be so. But all will not be well if there is no reflection, no discussion, no privacy,  and  no  choice.  The  garden  that  others  in  hope  have  cultivated   can quickly in neglect dry out.
This  is one  of the  reasons  that  the  twin  arts  of  journalism -reflecting  and reporting-are so  important  to  cultural   continuation.   They   provide  us  with public  and  private  avenues for enquiring  into self and  society, and  some of the cultivation   that  our  mental  and  social  gardens  require.  The  letter-writer, the diary-keeper,  and  the newspaper  journalist alike weigh the  "facts"  they perceive against the "truths" they know; they try to be faithful to both, and in the personal balance  they achieve between reflection and  report  they develop their  individual styles. One  we will find  to  be  reliably objective, another   to  be  enjoyably  and


3

EDITORIAL

deliberately subjective;  one  will  be  passionate, another  neutral;  one  analytic, another discursive,  still others satiric,  argumentative, witty,  and  emotionally com­ pelling.  No single  one is more  valuable than  another and  all  are  necessary  to  us. What  we  fundamentally  appreciate  are   the   respective   values  of   information, enquiry, and   individuality itself. If we  close  the  borders of  the  mind   we  will put  a stop  to  instruction as well as to imagination and  invention,  and  if we  do that  we will begin  to wither.  If our  culture warrants our  watchful  trust, then  our writers  also deserve the freedom  of their own tradition: which  is to say, a freedom  born  of options -a freedom  to  choose  for  themselves and  to  follow  their  own minds.
In  The   Other  Side  of Hugh  MacLennan (Macmillan),  Elspeth   Cameron's
admirable selection  from among  MacLennan's "essays old and  new," we can fol­ low not  only the  development of a fine essayist  but  also watch  how  a  responsible  writer  tests his own  imagination and  intellect. Ranging in subject  and tone,  Mac­ Lennan's writings  draw  us repeatedly into  contact with  his world:  into  nnder­ standing how  the  mind  and  the  world  connect. "I think  of  a  man," he  writes, "whose  temperament compels  him  to involve  himself  in  his time, to live with  his antennae naked  to the stimuli  of his time  because  he  belongs to it." He  describes  himself, of course, the writer  engage. Idealist  and ironist  at once,  he also describes  the  challenge of remaining free in an  age  when  private choice  and  public  policy
collide.
W.H.N.











Jl HOUSE WITH  Jl TOWER

Anne Szumigalski

the  Celt within
who  likes to stand  up  and  sing ecstatic  and  undulating  songs
is the one who opens my mouth and  lets the  lies out
they buzz like a hum  of flies their  flight  fills the air

4

POEM

with  the  beat  of gauzy strips, and Angle,  that  indwelling cousin, cannot understand
how  all  the  world  is listening
says:  "verse  is a shelter
of blocks that  must  be built carefully for, in  the  end
it may  become a palace with  electric  stars"

and  together we walk solitary
by a muddy  puddle-edge
(call  it a slough)
looking down into water that  returns no reflection a blank  die
shut  eye

hidden  by the dusk
that  creeps  up from  behind my shoulders
smoking  out  of the  back  trees

not  hoping for daylight not  for a long  time yet

but  at  morning here  we come here  I come
cry  of  throat
and  twist of tongue
while  it has  taken  Angle years to build  his house hammering beams  and  attaching tarpaper tacking it on so carefully

now  the liar,  I stand on  the  tower shape the  sky
with  deceiving  fingers while  green  damsel  flies on  their  glassy wings  rise infesting the  upper  air



5

CALLAGHAN  AS COLUMNIST,
1940-48


Judith Kendle



EMMARCH  1940 THROUGH to February/March 1948, Mor­ ley Callaghan  wrote a monthly  column for  the ill-fated  national  pictorial,  New W orld.1  Billed originally as an Editorial Associate (Sports), Callaghan  began  his
career at the magazine as a sportswriter but gradually  widened  his interests until by July 1943, a date which corresponds with his assumption  of the chairmanship of the CBC radio  program,  "Of  Things  to Come,"  he was writing  what  was, in effect, a personal opinion column, general commentary  of a social or philosophical nature on the contemporary  scene. Although his column always appeared  under a by-line, it was not formally recognized as a regular feature  until October  1946 and from  that  date  was published along with a  photograph of the  author  under  the title, "This  Month  With Morley Callaghan."
Much  of this work has gone unrecognized. Although  his career as a columnist spans the entire  lifetime of the magazine  and  comprises some  ninety-five pieces, only two of these are  regularly cited,2    and  while  his sojourn  as a  journalist  has been noticed, attitudes  towards it have been incurious  or dismissive. Undoubtedly some of this disregard has been due to the nature of the magazine  itself. Edited  by
J. K. Thomas  in blatant  imitation  of Life, New World  was frankly  populist in its
appeal and not likely to appeal to highbrow tastes. It was, in fact, unindexed  until
1948, just two short months before its demise, and complete  runs of the magazine are difficult to obtain. Callaghan's articles themselves are open to charges of "hack work." Uneven in quality to be sure, and at times frankly trivial, they undoubtedly reflect in their  discursive quality  and  casual  conversational   tone, the ephemeral world of radio  and  television broadcasting  which  he was to find increasingly so attractive  during  the 194o's and 195o's.
And  yet they  deserve to be read.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  they  represent  a
hitherto  unexplored  record of what the author  was thinking  and feeling through­ out what  he has referred  to as "the  dark  period  of [his]  life" during the second world war,3  the pieces provide an opportunity  to study  the  relationship  between the didactic  and the creative impulse in his work. Containing in embryo many of the themes and ideas he was to develop in his later fiction, as well as echoes from his earlier  works, the essays possess the advantage, at  least as far as the critic is

6

CALLAGHAN

concerned,  of being  written  in  the author's own voice. As such  they frequently illuminate   (and  always  highlight)   the  unfathomable  ironies  and  puzzling  am­ biguities of the author's fictional world. Moreover, they reflect a greater range of mood and of styles than  is usually associated with his work.
Not that one is surprised at what one finds. Constituting, in effect, an 1mporrant
link between  the  two distinct  phases of his literary  career,  Callaghan's  columns reflect, in  both  their  content  and  their  style, a  broadening  of his canvas  and  a strengthening of conviction as opposed to either radical doubt or change of  direc­ tion. Although  satire largely replaces irony as the essays' dominant mode, world events, social, philosophical, and  political trends continue  to be viewed  from  the vantage  point of theI g2o's and the individual life, and the author proves himself, both in his stubborn  insistence upon his own insights and  his constant  debunking of other philosophies, to be faithful  to his original views. In particular he remains loyal to art.  Despite what  was to prove a period of  spiritual dryness for him per­ sonally and  a fallow period in his career, he continues to speak with authority  as a man of letters completely convinced of the efficacy of art. Indeed,  the pieces are remarkable  for  their  self-confidence.  Written  in  the  interests  of  plain  talk  and sanity,  against  a  background   of  cataclysmic  events  in  Europe  and  conflicting rhetoric  at  home, Callaghan's columns continue  to reflect an old-fashioned  faith in  common  sense and  Christian  virtues and  the importance of the  independent  point of view.
A word first about  his role at the magazine:  although  Callaghan  was probably in sympathy  with  the  general  aims of the  journal,  notably  with  its attempt   to "portray the special genius of the Canadian spirit,"4  and a few of his pieces were written  to order,  his arrangements with the editor were very casual, and  he con­ tributed  little, if anything,  to editorial policy. As he himself explains it:

I  was not involved at all in the management of New World. The  editor,  J. K. Thomas, was a personal friend of mine. So he had me write about sports while I was interested in doing so, then I gradually shifted to doing the monthly piece on whatever amused me. If sometimes I wrote on a theme that touched the theme of
an article in the same issue, it came about as a result of J. K. Thomas phoning me,
asking me what  I was thinking about, or perhaps he would ask if the theme he
was handling  interested  me. I  knew the staff, yes, but  I  never sat  in  on  staff meetings.5

Not surprisingly  his pieces were often tangential  to the magazine's  central con­ cerns. Focussed as they were, for the most part, upon the apparently insignificant personal event, they were, in particular,  out of step with the highminded, exhorta­  tive character of the magazine. Doubtless some of this was by design. Growing as they  did  almost  spontaneously  out  of  Callaghan's  original  brief  (Sports), they were obviously intended,  at least in part, as a counterweight  to more serious mat­ ters. But they reflected the author's prejudices as well. Convinced  as he was that

7

CALLAGHAN

it was small things and  not great  principles that  often  determined  the  course of human  events, he adopted  quite naturally  an Olympian  pose. Schemes for social reform, post-war reconstruction, and international political arrangements were all viewed with ironic  detachment,  and,  in  a sense, the  magazine  and  its contents provided the material for his pen. Thus while New World  conducted  with increas­ ing seriousness a variety of campaigns,  advocating among other  things closer rap­
prochement  with  Quebec,  world  union  a Ia Clarence  Streit,  and  an  open-door
policy with respect to immigration,  Callaghan's columns,  in their  abrupt  swings
from the  utterly  frivolous to the serious and  back to the trivial  again,  tended  to mock such earnestness, and indeed, on more than  one occasion virtually  contra­ dicted that  which the magazine proposed.'6
Not that  Callaghan  was depressed by what  he saw. Evidently  convinced  that
the best antidote for doubt, disillusionment, and despair was a healthy dose of scepticism with respect to political slogans, he possessed great faith in the humanity of the common  man.  Thus his pieces were addressed  to the ordinary  reader,  the man in the street, who shared, Callaghan  obviously believed, the author's irrever­ ence for "great  men" and  professional opinion,  and  who was in any  case more interested  in the daily round  of human  existence and  the vicissitudes of his own personal life than the march of great armies or public affairs.
His message was clear. In no sense "war  effort" columns, but  reflecting never­ theless a shrewd sense of civilian hopes and  fears, Callaghan's pieces spoke to a population  attempting to live the good life in the midst of anarchy  and  fear. As such they offered advice and frank opinion on a whole range of  activities dear  to the human  heart.  Homely observations about  sex, love,  women,  and  family life were  mingled  with  speculation  about   popular   culture   (radio,   music,  movies, fashion, and sport) , the nature  of the Canadian character, education,  philosophy, democracy, and art, and the whole was leavened  not only with warmth,  wit, and gaiety, plus a wry kind of delight in human foible and fancy, but also with righteous indignation  and scorn. Throughout the author  proved himself to be a shrewd ob­ server of character and men, and his articles reveal not only a little of what it was like to be alive during the war years in Canada, but also a great deal about himself.




OF THE  NINETY-FIVE  COLUMNS Callaghan wrote  for  New World, more than  forty are devoted to sport. The  majority  of these were written at the beginning of his career, between 1940 and  1943, and  do not represent  the best of  his work.  They  do,  however, reveal  an  interesting  side  of  Callaghan's character, one that  is generally overlooked, and  they  provide  fascinating  insights into his fictional technique.
In the main seasonal articles, the pieces cover a wide variety of sporting activities.

8

CALLAGHAN


Although baseball, about which he writes with affection and authority, is obviously the author's first love, he does a journeyman's  job with football  and  hockey and also provides us with a couple of interesting pieces on golf. He is not above reveal­ ing himself as an ignorant  newcomer to a sport (in particular, skiing and bowling) and  often makes an interesting  column out of his attempt to get a story. A good piece on horseracing, for example, entitled "The  Man Who Loved Horses" (June
1941), amounts,  in  effect, to the  tale of his  disillusionment  with  the supposed
expert,  Joe, and  he lends colour to an otherwise lacklustre interview  with an  in­ articulate  boxer, "The Man  From  Montreal" (May  1941), by concentrating  on the hangers-on.
His pieces are not, in fact, the more usual kind of sportswriting  in the sense that
they emphasize statistics  and  personality. Apart  from a couple of pieces devoted to forecasting  and  another  three defending  the legitimacy of sport,  they  concen­ trate in the main on little known aspects of a game or on homely details which will permit the author  to speculate on the social significance of an athletic endeavour.  A piece on "Women  and  Wrestlers"  (February 1942), for example, stresses not only the sexual but also the melodramatic  implications of the art,  and  Callaghan  is often just as interested  in an analysis of the spectators as he is in the event itself.
Of  particular interest  is the series of personal  portraits  he devotes to sporting personalities. The  exact oposite of mythmaking,  Callaghan's portraits  stress small details of dress and  personal appearance which will humanize  the heroes of whom he speaks, and  while he is always generous in his recognition  of talent,  his effort is to make his subjects seem like ordinary men.
An important article entitled "Colour  Blind" (June  1942), written in the guise of advice to a would-be sportswriter, explains his aims in this regard.  Containing a brilliant  definition of "colour," the piece has relevance for his fiction as well. It speaks in  particular to his habit  (especially in  his short  stories)  of choosing his characters  from  the ranks of ordinary  men and  to his vision of "a  businessman's world":

Maybe  I'm  colour  blind,  I said  to  the  young  fellow,  who  wanted to be a  writer, and  who  was turning to sporting characters in search  of colourful material, but  if you can't find  entertaining lively and  colourful characters among drug  clerks, and bankers  and  drain diggers  and  advertising men and  musicians you are  certainly not going  to find  them  among ball  players  and  hockey  players  and  fighters.  The  days of  the  roistering, swashbuckling brawling, laughing  professional performers  are over.  It's  a  businessman's world  now.  The performers are   just  people  like  any­ body else:  they  are  romantic when  seen against  the  background of the game  they play.  But  people  will  always  be interested in  them  if  they  are  touched  by a good writer  because  he will  make  them  living human beings, maybe  a little  comical  or pathetic or  bewildering as Ring  Lardner made  them,  and  the  writing about  them  will be eagerly  read  by the  spectator because  it  will seem  to  bring  the game  that  he loves  to watch much  closer  to him.


9

CALLAGHAN

Many of Callaghan's columns are not very far from his short stories, and  three in particular  are only loosely related to sports:  "Sport  on the Waterfront" (August
1942), "At  Night  in the Field"  (September  1942), and  "A  Sporting  Establish­ ment"  (October 1942). Written during the summer of 1942, such pieces fall half­ way between reportage  and the art of his short stories in their straightforward re­ cording of conversation and subtle delineation  of character, a fact  which may in part be due to the nature of his scriptwriting duties at that period and the start of a new novel.7  In any case, the quality of his pieces falls off  dramatically during  the following year, and  with the exception, perhaps,  of a  piece entitled  "The Game That   Makes  a  Nation"   (February   1943), a  classic  defence  of  hockey as  the national sport,  his interest in pure sport as such  begins  to flag. Although  he will later  write  three  more  pieces on  a  sports  theme, his official career  as a  sports columnist is over;  in July  of 1943, with  a  piece appropriately enough  entitled "Things to Come,"8  he begins to write general commentary on the contemporary  scene.
There  is a new confidence and depth  to Callaghan's pieces as he moves to the wider scene and it seems appropriate at this point to analyze their style. Unhurried, leisurely, and spacious, the pieces combine the arts of argument with the relaxed informality  of the  radio  talk, and  reflect not  only in  their  looseness of structure but also in their casual conversational tone a new sense of intimacy with the reader.
Couched  variously in either long rambling  periodic sentences making  frequent use of the conjunction "and," or a string of simple sentences joined by semi-colons, the pieces rely heavily on rhetorical devices whose appeal  is to the ear and not the brain, and  they have a tendency to make a great deal out of little. Hard  analysis, for example,  is regularly  eschewed in favour  of personal  opinion  and  anecdote, and  an entire  essay not infrequently  is devoted  to the making  of a single, simple point.
The  diction,  too, is relaxed  and  informal,  combining  in  roughly  equal  parts sports analogy and slang;  jargon drawn  from  (frequently to mock)  the worlds of the professional educator,  publisher, and politician; and apparently verbatim transcription  of apparently  insignificant conversations.  There is also a residue of a liberal  education  in  the  arts,  and  the  pieces combine  street  talk  with  casual references to the Classics, great works of literature, and  art.
Above all one hears the author's  voice. Indeed,  in marked  contrast to the novels and short stories where his practice is careful self-effacement, here one is exposed to the full force of Callaghan's personality. One  finds him in a variety of moods. Waspish and  truculent, bitter and  mocking, half-serious  and  whimsical by turns, he mixes bluntness  and  assertiveness with the sentimental, mischievous, and  fey. It is, in fact, the vices and virtues of the personal essay that  one sees chiefly mani­ fested here, and  in examining  them one is struck  by the similarities between  the author's  style in his essays and that of his fiction.

10

CALLAGHAN

A favourite device, for example, and one which illustrates in a particularly strik­ ing fashion  the strengths  and  weaknesses of his prose, is his use of the interview technique.  More  common  in  his sports  pieces, Callaghan's use of  dialogue  fre­ quently smacks more of total recall than it suggests the creative evocation of a scene
-which points to a serious defect in the novels. Too often Callaghan attempts  to
convey by dialogue  what could best be done by other means and  one is reminded of George Woodcock's strictures  against  long passages of "undifferentiated, sub­ standard" Canadianese.11
A happier  ploy, and one which is used in the essays several times, is the author's adoption  of a Polonius-like pose. Related  in kind to the didactic  impulse in all of his work, particularly  in his novels, such a strategy permits him to offer advice in either a straightforward or satirical  vein and  is employed with  particular success in pieces such as "Advice  to Fathers" (August  I94o), and  "How  to Become a Great  Man  in Canada" (February I945).
Less common,  but even more successful, is his use of the cautionary  tale. Ob­ viously related  to the  element  of fable  and  parable  in  his work,  pieces such  as "Young Suffer War's Aftermath" (August I 945), "A Dilemma for the Dissenters" (May  I946), and "Too Much Tolerance Dangerous Thing" (June  I946), remind us of his habit of using characters  to illustrate a moral or point of  a tale, and one in particular of them, "This  man couldn't  find a fresh angle on Xmas, but he did find peace and  good will" (December  I947), is in effect a short story.
Callaghan's use of  personal  experience  is also worth  mentioning  here.  Often beginning  a column  with  the  phrase, "I  have a friend,"  he reminds  us that  his alone is the recording eye, and while his use of his own experience in his fiction is more  distanced,  he  proves himself in  both  instances to  be  a  man  upon  whom nothing  is lost. The  essays remind  us, in their  patient  exploration  of the smallest event and almost total reliance on examples drawn from life, that  for Callaghan, at  least, writing out  of personal experience is at once a moral  act and  an act of creation.  Callaghan   does not  so much  manipulate  the  element  of  true  story as celebrate it;  his own experience is the beginning and  the end of his art.
Other  characteristics of the essays point to the weaknesses of his art. The way he resorts to rhetorical  questions, for example, typically reflects flabbiness of thought. So, too, does his use of extended  metaphor.  Pieces such  as "The Corpse  in  the Parlour" (July 1944)  or "What makes a shirt stuffed?" (October I945)  are heavy­ handed  and  overdone  and  remind  us in  their  tendentiousness  of the  excesses of novels such as TheM any Coloured Coat  ( 1960). His style of  argument is equally inflexible and in pieces such as "Hockey at the Whipping Post" (November  I 94 I ) , "Pros  and  Cons"  (March I 943), and  "The  Censors are Smiling at  Last"  (April I946), he resorts to reductio ad absurdum  when all else fails.
Callaghan is not a "thinker" in any profound or original sense of the word, and although  he does a creditable  job of poking holes in the logic of others' arguments,


I I

CALLAGHAN

his own observations are frequently  banal. Thus  his best pieces tend  to be those that  are peopled with brief bright caricatures  or contain  evocative descriptions of the  contemporary scene, pieces such  as "What makes  us afraid  of  New  Year's eve?"  (January 1948), or "Boom, Violence, Mark  Post-War  Manhattan"  (Jan­ uary  1946), and  he is always better at identification  than  analysis of a trend  or mood. Which is not to deny the interest of his ideas or arguments; they are worthy of consideration  on their own.




1EFIFTY-ODD  PIECES	devoted to general commentary  can be divided  into several categories, and  it is useful to examine  each of them  in turn. Although  by far the largest number  feature a Canadian theme, articles of a more serious nature  also include speculations about  the meaning  of justice, problems of conscience, and the post-war world, and  as well there  are isolated pieces devoted to education,  discipline, and  democracy. Pieces devoted  to family life, love, and women, or those occasioned by specific events such as Christmas, tend to be written in a lighter mood, as do a number  of frankly whimsical pieces on the significance of moustaches and black hombourg  hats.
All of them  reflect a similar philosophical stance.  Insisting on "looking  at the world out of his own eyes and thinking  his own thoughts," Callaghan holds him­ self rigidly  aloof from  intellectual  fashion  and  in  doing  so  proves, as  Brandon Conron has pointed out, to be "a natural  iconoclast" in opposition to almost every­ thing  anyone  else has ever proposed.10   Not  that  his opposition  is simplistic. Al­ though  he tends to rely on classic formulations of human behaviour  (if not overtly religious, at least implicitly so) in preference to narrow-gauge professional opinions in order  to explain  the phenomena  he explores, his real motives are  other  than explanatory. Constantly  probing beneath simple surfaces in order  to expose com­ plexity, Callaghan's forte is the analysis of confusion, the exposure of pomposity, self-importance, and silliness. He is particularly good at the psychology of rational­  ization  and,  as his articles on  problems of conscience invariably  prove, adept  at illuminating  the  vagaries, self-deceptions, and  illusions of supposed  intellectuals confronted  with a difficult choice. Ultimately  his pieces are of interest less for their verdicts  on contemporary  issues, than  for  their  fine sense of irony  and  satirical skills; they do not reflect specific events in the sense of "charters," "conferences,"  or "great  principles," and the bulk of his arguments are ad hominem.
One is struck immediately by the detached, Olympian  pose. Although Callaghan is barely in his forties when he begins his columns on the wider scene, he adjusts readily to the role of senior sage. While it is clear that  several of his pieces have grown out of his increased participation in the public sphere, out of his association, for example, with the Adult Education  Council in conjunction  with his chairman-

12

CALLAGHAN

ship of "Of  Things  to Come," or his membership in the Civil Liberties Union,  he obviously feels himself to be out of step with the prevailing social ethos of the day.
Indeed,  the list of his targets is legion. Armed with  little  more than  common
sense  (and  a  naturally   critical  intelligence),  he  attacks  all  merely  fashionable theories of childrearing and  human  personality, and delights in debunking  expert opinion  and  those  he refers to as "false  prophets."  "Muddled educators,"  poli­ ticians, and  professors are all subjected  to his scorn, and  although  he reserves his principal  shafts  for  "progressive-progressives," he dismisses "bogus scientists"  as well. This last category is a particularly  large one and  includes not only psychia­ trists,  psychologists, and  economists,  but  also  what  Callaghan  refers  to  as  his "earnest  sociological friends."
Callaghan's own views tend  to be traditional. Whether  defending  the sanctity of the nuclear  family, looking askance at new-fangled public opinion  polls or the "cult  of the teen-ager," or urging upon  women their  traditional roles, he proves himself a natural conservative profoundly skeptical of political slogans and change. In particular he resists the contemporary  emphasis on "mass movements" and "regimentation," which he sees as part and parcel of the war-time ethos of social consciousness and  "nobility," and  himself defends an old-fashioned  philosophy of personal priorities and love.
An article entitled  "In His Image"  (January 1944)  explains his views. Written in defence of personal relationships, the article deplores the tendency apparently prevalent  amongst  public  men  to  think  in  terms  of  "national objectives"  and "world  goals," and  holds up to ridicule an Ottawa  friend,  a man  of strong social purpose, "who long ago stopped thinking of people as persons":

Nowadays he  thinks  of  the  "masses."  And  since  he  is interested in  education he deals  in  mass education. Sometimes he breaks  down  a  bit and  concentrates on  the community, but  that's about as far  as he will go. There was a time  long ago  when a  personal tragedy could  break  his heart, but  now  he  regards that  part  of his  life as a shameful adolescent period,  a time of decay and  intellectual corruption.... Naturally my friend has  no  time  to read  novels.

Callaghan himself declares  his colours in the piece and  there  is a strong sense of self-justification. Arguing  that  "in the rest of the human  race in these times there is a great  hunger  to discover the essential humanity  of someone against  the  tre­ mendous backdrop  of armies in motion, of thousands of deaths, of the daily reports of cities in flames," Callaghan cites "the  universal fascination  with the story of the general  [Patton] who slapped  the soldier, or the airman  [Lonergan]  who  killed his rich  wife" as evidence  for  his case. Convinced  for  his part  that  "an   heroic willingness to sacrifice  personal  relationships ... produces  an  abnormal  way  of thinking and feeling," Callaghan  points to the Bible as a useful corrective, and  it is clear that  he has his own stories in mind:

The Bible is full  of similar stories  packed  with  human interest: the  stories  of Cain

CALLAGHAN

and  Abel, of the woman  taken in adultery,  of Salome,  and  St.  John  the  Baptist, of Ruth,  of David  and Jonathan, of the Good Samaritan, of Samson  and Delilah, of Paul on  the road  to Damascus, of the conscience of Pilate,  of the suffering of Job, of the prodigal son, of the woman with  the  box of precious ointment, of the kiss of Judas.  These  are the stories that  have  haunted the  heart  of man  for  cen­ turies, of the  virtues  and  vices of men and  women  created  in  His Image,  not  in the image of the Mass Man.

A strong sense of self-vindication informs his social criticism  as well, but whereas his general  pieces show him  to be something of a reactionary, here  he flies in ad­ vance of public opinion. The  two postures are related, of course. Always the cham­ pion of the free spirit  and  critical  inquiry, Callaghan is as anxious to escape social conformity as he is to attack  the dictates  of "fickle  fashion."
Callaghan devotes some seventeen  pieces to his analysis  of Canadian society and it readily  becomes  a major  "theme." Although his concern with  things  Canadian can  be  dated with   precision  from  his association  with  the  radio   program "Of Things to Come," there  are signs of it much  earlier in his sports  pieces. Undoubt­ edly encouraged in his preoccupation by the editors of New World, who themselves  once ran a public  opinion  poll on "What is a Canadian?'m  he returns to the ques­ tion again  and  again  and  it is clear that  it is of more  than  passing interest  to him.
It is the  cheerlessness  of the  puritan tradition which  Callaghan chiefly  tackles here, and  as he investigates  that  phenomenon, one  is struck  by the  complexity of his views. Time and  again  bringing historical  perspectives to  bear  in  an  attempt to understand the  national character, he continually exposes paradox and conun­ drums, and  one  is impressed  by the  tentativeness of his opinions:

Again  and  again  trying in words to give a  portrait of a Canadian, I have  tried seeing him in turn  as an inarticulate country  boy, a shy self-deprecating fellow, a split personality, a heavy drinker, a man who goes about  his business industriously in sober garments,  six days a week and  lets himself  go with  great  boisterousness one day a week among the boys in the back room. But the portrait I conjured  up never seemed to be satisfactory:  some index of character was being missed -there was something  that  ought  to be said that  wasn't  being  said. Only  the  other  day did  I stumble  upon  what  might  be the  missing index  to  the  national  character. Some  friends  were  talking  about  poetry.  One  of  them  said  dreamily,  "Do  you realize that  nearly everyone you know writes a little  poetry?"
("Does  the true  Canadian  lead a respectable,  colorless life clinging to a dream
he can't  express?" June 1947)

Of  particular interest  is the  portrait Callaghan paints in the same  article  of the
Canadian poet as professor:

And come to think of it, how perfectly the poet as a professor fits into  the pattern of the national character. Outwardly a good average Canadian living a solidly respectable  life, utterly  unbohemian,  watching  his step  in  fear  of distressing  the parents  of his students, even watching  what  he says publicly in fear of distressing his employer;  never the less [sic], in the fastness of his lonely room, he sits with

CALLAGHAN

his eyes rolling in frenzy, and bursts his bonds in the discipline of poetry on the page.

A prototype for Jim  McAlpine,  perhaps?
Simplemindedness,  not complexity, is the keynote of many of Callaghan's other views. His defence, for example,  of romantic  love tends to be based on nothing more substantial  than  a  reading  of superficial cultural  signs  ("pop" music and movies),  and  there  is a tendency to extol virtue rather  than  explain  it. Not that Callaghan  is unaware of what he does. An unrepentant kind of sentimentality in­ forms his Christmas  pieces, as well as those devoted to the family, and  he is every­ where the  champion  of mystery and  feelings. In short,  Callaghan  celebrates  the heart.
His columns on women are typical of this tendency in his thought.  Tending  to
view women, as he does in his novels, as the natural  repository of instinctual wis­ dom and grace in opposition  to reason and utility, Callaghan  extols the virtues of "charm," waxes poetic about their beauties of form and face, and urges upon them the  joys of "submissive love." He is particularly  hard  on intellectual  women and those who would pursue an independent  career:  women are meant to complement their  men.  His  portraits  of movie stars  are  especially revealing  in  this  regard: always they are seen in terms of prospective mates:
Ingrid Bergman is the dream of a woman a man wants to keep beside him. She has to satisfy a man because of what she is in herself. Always being there beside the man, at least in the popular dream, is no small task, because she has to offer a world in herself, a delight that comes simply from knowing her, and which will be absorbing enough to make a man forget the restless and romantic longing for the lady in the distance, who can never be completely possessed.

Indeed, many of his descriptions of famous personalities remind  us of his heroines
-of  Peggy Sanderson,  for example, or Anna Prychoda.  In idealizing his women, Callaghan stereotypes them, and the list of their qualities tends to sound like a catalogue of virtues, the virtues of Womankind  in general:
in Bergman one gradually becomes aware of an extraordinary  availability which was exciting; it was not merely good humour and  sympathetic interest, but  the responses to life, the warmth, the laughter, the eagerness, the sadness, the joy were there within your reach and made available.

A final group of essays requires comment here. Pieces devoted to prognostications about  the post-war  world point to the importance of the 1g2o's in the formation of Callaghan's consciousness and  the origins of the  "debunking" impulse  in  his work.  They  also  help  explain   (indeed,  define)   the  "new   romanticism" of  his thought.
An article entitled  "Are we on the eve of a new era? Look what happened  after the end of the  first world  war"  (May  1947), for example,  is a lament  for  the
1920's; they are characterized as "the age of the debunkers":

CALLAGHAN

Just  about  everything interesting in  modern American literature, folk  music  and theatre was being  born  in the  twenties,  and  whatever is still  hanging around  now and  registering with  any  impressiveness  seems  to stem  from  those  times....  Most writers,  painters and  musicians,  having  seen  the  world  blow  up  in the  First  Great War,  had  a frantic desire  to  make  something new  which  could  have  no  relation­ ship  with  the old war slogans but  which  would  be clean,  hard, concrete and  tough. They seemed  to  want  to rub  their  eyes and  look at  the  world  freshly.

Again, in a piece entitled "Postwar  May Usher in Debunkers Again"  (May  I945), Callaghan  predicts "another expression of disillusionment  after  this war"  on the grounds  of the  "spiritual  breakdown"  that  followed  the  first and  points to "the birth  of a  new romanticism"  as a  probable  corollary.  This  last,  he argues,  will probably entail not only the "casting  aside [of] slogans" and  "mass nobility" but also the search for "experiences that  tend to enlarge  [men]  as individuals."
And  finally,  in  a  piece entitled  "Young  Suffer  War's   Aftermath"   (August
I 945), Callaghan  defines the nature  of the revolution.  In  essence the cautionary tale of a professor's daughter  who has been carefully brought  up on the doctrines of social service, and who renounces all in the name of a passionate personal love, the article extols "the  fantastic  adventure  there is in the spontaneous  play of one personality upon another," and promises that  "all else is possible" if only she suc­ ceeds in making  "a  good intimate  world with  just one  man." No political  con­ sciousness this, but  one fashioned  in opposition  to ideology. Callaghan  grasps at personal straws and the sources of his insights are literary.




Wu.AT, THEN,   SHOULD ONE  MAKE of their  literary  signifi­ cance? Although few of Callaghan's pieces are written directly on a literary theme, comments about literature  and  writers are sprinkled  throughout his columns, par­ ticularly in the pieces devoted to speculations about  the future. More importantly, perhaps,  the  columns have biographical  significance. They  illuminate,  as much by what they don't say as by their revelations, the nature  of  his personal difficulties during the war and the origins of his "personalist" stance. They also point to future  directions.  Apart  from  being a useful compendium  of  the author's opinions,  the columns  underscore,  both  in their outspokenness and  their  oral  qualities,  the in­ creasing tendency towards explicitness and clarity in his later  work.
They  also signal a change of character  and setting.  Pieces such as "A Sporting
Gentleman" (May  I943)  and "Montreal cafe team have a secret for their success
... they make a habit  of being themselves"  (March I 947), for example,  reflect the author's growing familiarity  with Montreal, the site-to-be of both The  Loved and the  Lost  (I95I) and  The  Many  Colored  Coat  (I96o), while his constant preoccupation  with "progressive-progressives" looks forward  to the more mature, articulate  heroes of his later novels.

I6

CALLAGHAN


Several  columns connect directly  with  his novels. An  early  piece entitled  "The Game  That Makes  a  Nation" (February I943)  represents  the  first working  out of the  significance of  hockey  as a  national sport  (the  game  surfaces  again  as a symbol in The Loved  and the Lost  [I9SI] ). In another article,  "Justice for all ... charity for  none" (November I945), Callaghan speculates  about the  meaning of justice and  defends  charity as an alternative ideal. In this case the column  probably represents an  advance in  the  author's thinking  from  his earlier   handling of the theme  in They Shall  Inherit the  Earth  ( I 935). Already  "justice" is compared to a "bomb," an  analogy  which  looks forward with startling similarity to the  "two­ edged sword" of TheM any Colored Coat  (I 960). And an article  entitled "Maybe we're  all  making too  much  of  a fuss these  days  about  our  teen-agers  and  their problems?" (July   I947)  looks forward to Luke  Baldwin's Vow  ( I948).
Still  other  columns have  a general  significance. Reflections in  his pieces about
education, for example, as well as all his speculations about  the  Canadian  char­ acter, come to fruition in The Varsity Story  ( I 948).  A fictionalized  description of the  University of Toronto, this  novel  represents  the  author's return  to  creativity, although it clearly  bears  the  marks  of his journalism.  Articles,  on  the other  hand, such  as "The Censors  Are Smiling  At  Last"  (AprilI 946)   look  forward to That Summer in  Paris  (I 963). Indeed, the  tendency   toward  autobiographical remi­ niscence alternates with  the fictional impulse  throughout Callaghan's columns  and is one which  results in some of his finest writing.

NOTES

1 Enjoying a press run in its heyday of 17o,ooo copies World  News Illustrated  (I940-
48)  began a bilingual  edition  in January I944 and  advertised  itself as "Canada's
National  Picture  Magazine,  Published Monthly in English and French." Owned  by
E. P. Taylor  and  published  in Toronto  by Anglo-Canadian  Publishers,  the  maga­
zine  rapidly  lost  popularity   after  the  war  and  was absorbed  by National  Horne
Monthly in  I948.
2   "What  makes us afraid of New Year's eve?" New World, 8, No. I I (January I948),
28-9;  "Which   comes  first:   love or  money?"  New  World, 9,  No.  I   (February/
March   I948), 23-5, 32. For  a complete  list of Callaghan's  articles,  see Appendix attached.
3 Robert  Weaver,  "A Talk  with  Morley  Callaghan,"  Tamarack   Review, 7  (Spring
I958)' 20.
4   "Editorial," New World, 3, No. I  (March  I 942),  5·
5 Letter  to the author, I7 November  I976.
6  Compare,  for example,  the  magazine's  advocacy of community  centres  in an  edi­ torial  entitled  "We  Will  Remember  Them" (November  I945)   with  Callaghan's articles,  "Even  Idleness  is Now Regimented" (March   I946)   and  "Young  Suffer War's Aftermath" (August  I945).
7  Brandon  Conron,  "Chronology," Morley  Callaghan  (New  York:   Twayne  Pub­
lishers,I g66),  p.I 5·
8 One should not confuse the title of the article with the radio program,  "Of  Things

CALLAGHAN

to Come." Although the column  was the occasion  for some advertising-a photo­ graph of  Callaghan, as  chairman of  the  new  program, and   his  fellow  panelists accompanied it-the piece itself was devoted  to speculations about Canada's eco­ nomic  future. The program was, in  fact,  incorrectly referred  to  in  the  article as "Things to Come." According  to CBC  archives,  its actual title  was "Of  Things to Come."
9  George  Woodcock, "Lost  Eurydice: The  Novels  of Morley  Callaghan," Canadian
Literature, No. 2 I  (Summer I964),  34·
:1co   Conran, p. 8.
11 New World, 5, No. IO (December 1944), I4-15.

APPENDIX

The following  is a complete  list of Callaghan's articles for  New  World. The last page of his October I 942 piece is unfortunately missing; he wrote  no article  for August I943; and  the last issue, February /March I948, is a combined one, numbered g, No. I. I am  indebted to the  staffs of the  University of Manitoba Library and  the  Manitoba Legislative Library for their assistance in locating the articles.

A. Sport
r.   "Guerilla Warfare in Hockey," NW, I, No.  I  (March I94o), 48, 51.
2.   "The Admirable Apps," NW, I, No.2 (April   I940), I3-I5.
3·   "Watching the  Workouts," NW, I, No.3 (May   I940), 8-I r.
4·   "Stable Stuff," NW, I, No.4 (June I940), I2-I5·
5·   "Fast and  Loose,"  NW, I, No.5 (July  I940), I2-I5.
6.   "Advice to Fathers," NW, I, No.6 (August I940), 38-9.
1·   "Out in the Open," NW,  I, No.7 (September I940), 4I-3.
8.   "Yes, It's  Cricket," NW, I, No.8 (October I940), 40-r.
g.   "From a Seat  in the Sun," NW, I' No. 9 (November I940)' 58-6o.
ro.   "The Cream of the Jest,"  NW, I, No.  IO (December I94o), 40-I, 52.
I I.   "Stanowski-the Totem Pole,"  NW, I, No. I I  (January I 94 I), 46-77. I2.   "That Man's Here Again," NW, I, No. I2  (February I94I),  26-7.
I3.   "Even If You Can't Ski," NW, 2, No.  I  (March I94I)' 46-7, 56.
14·  "In These Times," NW,  2, No.2 (April  I94I), 52-3,56.
I5.   "The Man  From Montreal," NW, 2, No. 3  (May   I94I), 46-7, 55· I6.   "The Man  Who Loved Horses," NW, 2, No.4 (June I94I), 59-60. IJ.   "The Brooklyn  Rhapsody," NW, 2, No. 5 (July  I94I)' 24·5, 56.
I8.   "The Collapsible Amateurs," NW, 2, No.6 (August I94I), 52-4.
I g.   "Picture-Book Pitcher," NW, 2, No. 7 (September I94I), 54-5·
20.   "Great Expectations," NW, 2, No.8 (October I94I), 68-g, 72.
2 r.   "Hockey at the Whipping Post,"  NW, 2, No. g (November I94I), 52-3.
22.   "Alert and Smartly Tailored," NW, 2, No. 10 (December I94I),  66-8.
23.   "Happy Day is Here  Again," NW, 2, No.  I I  (January I942), 52-3, 6o.
24.   "Women and  Wrestlers," NW, 2, No. I2  (February I942), 44-5,48.
25.   "The  Cauliflower Dignitary," NW, 3, No.  I  (March  I942), 46-7.
26.   "From the Goal  Out," NW, 3, No.2 (April  I942), 48-9.
27.   "Everybody's Alley," NW, 3, No.3 (May  I942), 48-g.

18

CALLAGHAN


28.   "Colour  Blind," NW, 3, No.4 (June  I942),  40.
29.   "In  the Years of the Locusts," NW, 3, No.5  (July I942), 47·
30.   "Sport on the Waterfront," NW, 3, No.6 (August I942), 42-4.
31.   "At Night in the Field,"  NW, 3, No.7 (September  I942), 38-40.
32.  "A Sporting  Establishment," NW, 3, No.8 (October  I942), 54-6.
33·  "Man  Versus Machine," NW,  3, No. g (November  I942), 54-7·
34·  "The Hurricanes are their Targets,"  NW, 3, No. 10 (December  I942), 54-5·
35·  "What is Sport?" NW, 3, No. I r  (January  I943),  52-3, 57·
36.   "The  Game That Makes a Nation," NW, 3, No. I 2 (February I943), 35·
37·  "Pros & Cons," NW, 4, No. I (March  I943),  54-5·
38.   "Corrida de Toros," NW, 4, No.2  (April  I943),  32-3, 58.
39·  "A Sporting  Gentleman," NW,  4, No.3 (May  I943), 56.
40.   "It's Always the Team!" NW, 4, No.4 (June  I943), 54·

B. General Commentary
41.   "Things  to Come,"  NW, 4, No. 5 (July  I943),  40.
42.   "Our Puritan  Cities," NW, 4, No.7 (September  I943), 28-g.
43·  "Friends of Quebec," NW, 4, No.8 (October  I943), 22-3.
44·   "The  Brains' Club:  Men Who Mould Public Opinion  in Canada," NW,  4, No.9 (November  1943),  45·
45·   "Are We Undisciplined?" NW, 4, No. 10 (December  1943), 44-5·
46.   "In  His Image," NW, 4, No. I I (January I944), 57·
47.   "Those  Men in the Black Hombourgs," NW, 4, No. I 2 (February  I 944), 36-7.
48.   "Those  Men of Action,"  NW, 5, No. I  (March  I944), 37·
49·   "A Woman  Waits For Me," NW, 5, No. 2 (April  I944), 44-5·
50.   "My War Against Women,"  NW, 5, No.3 (May I944), 36-7.
51.   "The Democratic Voice," NW, 5, No.4 (June  1944), 44-5·
52.   "The Corpse in the Parlour," NW, 5, No.5 (July  I944), 48.
53·  "Who  hit us on the head?" NW, 5, No. 6 (August  I 944),  48-g.
54·  "The  Politician  as a Hero,"  NW, 5, No. 7 (September  I 944),  36-7.
55·  "Love in Canada," NW, 5, No. 8 (October  I944),  52-3.
56.   "How old is a woman?" NW, 5, No. g (November  I944), 52, 55·
57·  "The Secret of Christmas," NW, 5, No. IO (December  I944L  I6-q. s8.   "A Certain  Kind of Woman," NW, s. No. I I  (January I945)' 44-5·
59·  "How  to Become a Great  Man  in Canada," NW,  5, No. I2  (February   I945),
36-7.
6o.   "A New Kind of Democracy," NW, 6, No. I (March  I945), 27-8.
61.   "They're Swell Gals But Shy on Mystery," NW, 6, No. 2 (April  I945), 36-7.
62.   "Postwar  May Usher  in Debunkers Again," NW, 6, No. 3 (May  I945),  50-I.
63.   "Why don't  Canadians laugh?"  NW,  6, No.4 (June  I945), 37-8.
64.   "What Men  Hope  They  Are Shows Up  in Their  Moustaches," NW, 6, No. 5 (July  I945), 36-7.
65.   "Young Suffer War's Aftermath," NW, 6, No.6 (August 1945),  29-30.
66.   "The  Case of the Tall  and Determined  Girl," NW, 6, No. 7 (September  I945),
23-4·

19

CALLAGHAN

67.   "What makes  a shirt  stuffed?" NW, 6, No. 8  (October Ig45), 35, 37·
68.   "Justice for all ... charity  for none," NW, 6, No. g (November Ig45), 3g, 4I.
6g.   "Christmas is Full of Golden  Corn," NW, 6, No.  IO (December Ig45), 34·5·
70.   "Boom,  Violence, Mark  Post-War Manhattan," NW,  6, No.  I I  (January Ig46), I4·I5·
71.   "Canada Puzzles  the Stranger," NW, 6, No.  I2  (February  Ig46), 2g-3o.
72.   "Even  Idleness  is Now Regimented," NW,  7, No.  I   (March Ig46), 22, 24·5·
73·   "The Censors  Are Smiling  At Last," NW,  7, No.2 (April  Ig46), 3I,  33·
74·  "A Dilemma for the Dissenters," NW, 7, No.3 (May  Ig46), 45·7·
75·   "Too Much Tolerance Dangerous Thing," NW,  7, No. 4  (June Ig46)   35, 3g.
76.   "Our Heroes  Are Being Neglected," NW,  7, No. 5  (July   Ig46), 35-6.
77·  "True Love  Blooms in Hollywood?" NW,  7, No.6 (August Ig46), 27, 31.
78.   "Canada:  Land of Lonely  People," NW, 7, No.7  (September Ig46), 28, 31.
7g.   "Our popular songs  have  a  philosophy  behind   the  words  and  music  that   may amaze  some people," NW, 7, No.8 (October Ig46), 4g-5r.
8o.   "What's left  for  men  of goodwill  who  learn   that  a  political   band  wagon  is no dreamboat?" NW, 7, No. g (November Ig46), 45-6, 4g.
8r.  "The case of the man  who had  his own  pet  formula for  'how  a family  should  be brought up'," NW,  7, No.  ro  (December Ig46), 38, 41.
82.   "What about our  reputation as cold and  distant in  the  light  of the  new  fashion in national manner?" NW, 7, No. I I  (January Ig47), 26-7.
83.   "The man  who  solved the  riddle  why anyone who  doesn't have  to continues to live in Toronto," NW, 7, No. I 2 (February Ig47), 28-g.
84.   "Montreal cafe team have a secret for their  success ... they make  a habit  of being themselves," NW, 8, No. I  (March Ig47), 30-I, 33·
85.   "What's behind  this strange frenzy that  seizes our solid citizens  at Junior Hockey play-off  time?" NW, 8, No.2 (April  Ig47), 44-6.
86.   "Are  we in the eve of a new era?  Look what  happened after  the end  of the  First
World  War," NW, 8, No.3 (May  Ig47), 34, 36, 38.
87.   "Does  the true  Canadian lead  a respectable, colorless  life, clinging  to a dream he can't express?" NW, 8, No.4 (June Ig47), 43, 45·
88.   "Maybe we're  all making  too much  of a fuss these days about our  teen-agers and their  problems?" NW, 8, No.5 (July  Ig47), 36-7.
8g.   "Do  the new hemlines  herald  a major  depression as they did in the late twenties?"
NW, 8, No.6 (August  Ig47), 32-3.
go.   "The person  with real talent  needs to have  a better break  these days in this broad land of ours," NW, 8, No.7 (September Ig47), 30, 33-4·
gr.    "The Woman Behind  Lucille  Ball," NW, 8, No.8 (October Ig47), 32-4, 37·
g2.   "Skirt lengths  or  philosophies-a fickle  fashion   dictates the  style  changes   for them  both," NW, 8, No. g (November Ig47), 32, 34, 36.
g3.   "This man  couldn't find a fresh angle  on  Xmas, but  he did  find  peace  and  good will," NW, 8, No. IO (December Ig47), 26-8, 31.
g4.   "What makes us afraid  of New Year's eve?" NW, 8, No. I I  (January Ig48), 28-g. g5.   "Which comes  first:  love or  money?" NW,  g,  No.  I    (February/March Ig48),
23·5, 32.




20


A. M. KLEIN AS JOURNALIST





M. W. Steinberg








ALTHOUGH A. M. KLEIN's  FAME as  a write<  rests very largely on his poetry, his prose writings, which extend over a period of more than a quarter  of a century,  also represent  no mean  achievement.  For  the  most part, these writings are in the form of editorials, articles and  book reviews prompted  by contemporary events during  the time that  Klein served as editor of The   judaean, The  Canadian  Zionist and The  Canadian  jewish Chronicle. Even though  during most of this period  he was a  practising lawyer and  held various other  positions, such as consultant for Seagram's  Ltd. and lecturer in English at McGill University, he took his responsibilities as  journalist  very seriously. During  his editorship  of The  Canadian  jewish Chronicle, for example, he contributed  weekly a page or two of editorials and a section of commentary on current events, often very incisive and witty; he frequently added articles on such subjects as humour, folklore, poetry, the Bible; and  in addition  he wrote long book reviews and  contributed poems, occa­ sional short stories, and  translations  from  Hebrew and  Yiddish literature.  Many of his editorials  were written  in  response to passing local events, often  out  of a sense of duty to the community  and its agencies, and at times written  in  haste to meet printers' deadlines, but they seldom descended to the level of mere hack work. These prose pieces, written  regularly week by week, constitute,  in effect, an intel­ lectual and  to some extent  literary autobiography  of A. M. Klein.
The  influences that  directed  Klein  to  journalism and  defined  its purpose  can
be clearly discerned  in his early background.  Born of immigrant  parents,  he was brought  up in Montreal, and  except for a brief sojourn in Rouyn,  Quebec,  lived his life there. His formative years were spent in the tightly-knit community ghetto­ ized in the area surrounding St. Lawrence Street. Even the Protestant  high school that  he attended, Baron Byng, had an enrolment  that was preponderantly Jewish. The  pattern  of life that  he experienced, with its religious festivals and observances, its institutions which sustained  a high degree of social and cultural  self-sufficiency, its mode of conducting business-on the street, in the small shops, in the needle­ trade  factories-and even its radicalism,  was uniquely Jewish. The  links of this


21

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

society were for the most part not with non-Jewish segments of the population  in Montreal, let alone Quebec or the rest of Canada, but with the Jewish communities mainly in central and eastern Europe or with communities  like itself in other cities in Canada and the U.S.A. News from these European sources was awaited eagerly and  received fearfully.  No child  in  this setting  failed  to  hear  from  family  and friends first-hand accounts of pogroms, imposed penury, abuse of every description suffered in the Old  World from which they had fled. Klein's imagination  and  his responses were shaped by this pattern  of life and  these accounts,  by the fears and the hopes for redemption  which such experience fostered. They  were shaped  also by his home and his learning. From what information we have, Klein's home was rich only in domestic virtues. The father, a mild man, a presser in a clothing fac­ tory, provided only a scant livelihood, but both parents earned  their son's reverent love. It was a religious home, and though  Abe Klein was later in life to question some aspects of orthodoxy and depart from some of its practices, he was never able or willing to break the strong ties that  bound  him to the Judaism  of  his parents. This  religious bond  was reinforced by his studies. On  completing  his elementary education  at the Talmud  Torah, he studied with private tutors for many years and was fortunate in his teachers, whom he mentions  affectionately  in  several poems and  stories. As an adolescent, he was committed  so strongly to  Judaism  that  he considered going to a Yeshiva for rabbinic  training. Instead,  he embarked  upon a secular career. After graduating  from Baron Byng, a silver medallist, he went to McGill  University for a B.A. degree ( I930)  and then to the University of Mont­ real for his degree in law ( I933).
Klein's career as a writer began early. While still in high school, encouraged  by
one of his teachers,  he wrote much  poetry, revealing  a concern  for form  and  a sensitivity to language  that  promised well for  his future  as a  writer. His literary interests  developed  much  more fully, however,  at  University,  where  he became active in the Debating  Union  and contributed articles to The  McGill  Daily and founded  a  University  literary  magazine,  The   McGilliad. During  his  university years his circle of friends and his range of interests widened and embraced  persons and causes not Jewish. But the main thrust of his life, determined  by his beginnings and  by the  pressure of the social environment  which  tended  to confine Jews  to Jewish  associations, was towards  Jewish  causes and  needs. While  at  McGill  he became treasurer  of the Maccabean  Circle, and a leading figure in Young Judaea, the Zionist youth movement. In  I929, at the age of twenty, he became editor of its national  periodical, The  ]udaean, and  the following year was appointed  Educa­ tional  Director  of Young Judaea of Canada. As  the  Zionist  movement  gained momentum  in the  I 93o's and as the spread  of fascism and  anti-semitism  became an  ever more threatening  menace,  his involvement  in  matters  Jewish  deepened. He served for a short while as Associate Director  of  the Zionist Organization of Canada in I936 and as editor of The Canadian Zionist from I936 to I937· During

22

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

these years and  after, he often toured towns in Ontario and Quebec  and on occa­ sion visited other  parts of Canada lecturing and organizing on behalf of  Zionism. This early concern  with Jewish affairs found expression also in articles which he published in The Canadian  Jewish Chronicle in the early 193o's. In  I938 he be­ came the editor of this Anglo-Jewish weekly, a post that  he held until  I955·
In  an editorial  reviewing  the achievement  of The  Canadian  Jewish Chronicle
Klein singled out two functions of such a press as deserving special mention. "The first was the fact that  it served, and serves, as a means of bringing to our English­ speaking population  a knowledge of the traditions of the past and an awareness of Jewish problems in the present. The second was as a means of communicating with our non-Jewish fellow citizens who first learned of the reaction of our community to current  events only from its columns."1  In  this statement  Klein  indicated  two of the central  responsibilities he had accepted on assuming the role of editor. He saw hiinself as an educator  whose task it was to teach  his own people, especially the young North  American-born segment, about  their  rich cultural  past and  to heighten their consciousness as Jews and their pride in their Jewishness, and at the same time to make them more aware of their current  dangers and  responsibilities. He wrote many  articles and  editorials on great  contemporary  Jewish  writers and statesmen such as Herzl, Achad  Ha'am, Tchernichovsky, and  he drew constantly on his knowledge of the Bible, the Talmud  and  the works of rabbinic  sages and Jewish philosophers and  poets of  the past. Jewish holidays, as they occurred in the cycle of the year, were carefully  noted and commented  upon. Whether  Purim  or Passover, Yom Kippur  or  Chanukah, the meaning of each was developed, given its full historic significance and  contemporary  relevance. The  annual  public cam­ paigns  for  Zionist  causes,  for  welfare  and  other  philanthropic institutions,  for Hebrew  schools, Jewish  libraries  and  Rabbinic  Colleges, were supported  vigor­ ously, the editor  prompted   by his own commitments  and  sense of duty. Klein's editorials on  these subjects  often read like sermons, exhortatory  and  admonitory,  at times fervent, at times witty, nearly always learned.




kE CAUSE TO  WHICH he devoted himself as a journalist most constantly and energetically was Zionism. He believed that at a time when Judaism was becoming increasingly pluralistic, cultural Zionism would provide "a new principle  of coalition,"  a  more  effective means  of preserving  Jewish  unity.  He shared  Achad  Ha'am's dream  of Zion as a renewed cultural  and  religious centre from which the Jewish contribution to civilization would be made in more specifi­ cally Jewish tenns, reflecting what he believed to be the characteristic, individual  genius of the people. In one of his earliest articles, written  at the age of  nineteen, Klein stated,  "It is to arouse  the  just recognition of the Jew  to his own abilities,

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

and to prompt  him to use it for the creation of his own culture,  that  this Zionism exerts all its efforts. A culture not of one language  (for in the Diaspora  that  is an impossibility),  but of one thought, a literature  not of one style, but of one spirit, a product singularly Jewish and yet remarkably cosmopolitan -that was the dream of Achad  Ha'am, that  is the goal of cultural  Zionism."2   This  culture  had  to be rooted in the soil, in a Jewish Homeland,  but it had to be more than  a product  or an expression of an agricultural  undertaking, or of a political-economic  arrange­ ment;  it had  to be concerned with "the  redemption  of a spirit."  This ideal,  this vision of an  Israel  restored to its Homeland, as a spiritual  centre,  persisted even though  the  rising menace of Nazism and  the  threat  of physical  annihilation of European  Jewry  made him emphasize the need for a Jewish state more urgently in terms of rescue and freedom from persecution. Throughout the late I 93o's and
1940's, Klein, though an admirer in most respects of the British people, its institu­ tions and its spirit, criticized the British government  for its vacillating policies and its tactics in the Middle East and for its failure to implement  the Balfour Declara­ tion. In the force of his denunciations,  as in the unqualified  rejection  of the Peel Commission  plan  in  1937 to partition  Palestine,  Klein  went  beyond  the  public utterances of most Jewish communal leaders, and displayed the integrity and bold­ ness of a crusading  journalist. The fulfilment of the Zionist dream, the achievement of Jewish statehood in 1948, was the happy culmination  for Klein of years of dedi­ cated  labour  on its behalf, an event  made all the more solemn and  exhilarating, momentous,  almost Messianic in  meaning, by the Holocaust  in Europe  that  pre­ ceded it. Klein's response to that event found lyric expression in his "Notebook  of a Journey," a diary-like account  of his journey in 1949  to the new state  and  to some of the older communities in Europe and  in North  Africa from which immi­ grants  flocked, an account that formed the  basis of his novel, The  Second  Scroll
( 195 I). Klein's  support  of the new state  continued  undiminished  to the end  of
his career as a journalist.
At the same time, however, that  Klein praised every achievement  of the fledg­ ling state  and  urged other nations and  Diaspora  Jewry  to aid it, he was  not un­ critical  of a small  chauvinistic  element  in  it  that  tended  to  disparage  the  non­ Israeli Jew and  the culture of Diaspora  Jewry,  contemporary and  historical.  He felt the need to re-affirm the positive values of Judaism  developed  during  twenty centuries of exile. His own learning provided him with such an appreciative  aware­ ness of the  Jewish  heritage  and  its contributions to  religious and  philosophical thought,  to science and the arts, that  he dismissed the superficial negation  of the Diaspora experience  as unrealistic and unjust.  In  an  article called "The Dangers of Success" he angrily attacked this negation as divisive, calling it wicked and per­ nicious, because it undermined  the Jewish  unity that  he hoped  the attainment of Zion, a spiritual,  cultural centre, would reinforce. It set up an "aristocracy  of resi­ dence" and an "abominable class distinction"  between Jews who returned  to the

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

Homeland   and  those  who  remained  in  the  countries  where  they  lived.  "The primum  mobile,"  Klein insisted, "is neither land  nor language; it is people. It  is the folk-and  all of it everywhere -which  is of the essence. Domicile, status, speech, etc., these are but adjectival;  the substance is Amcho-thy  people." 3
Klein's  criticism is sound  and in the  prevailing circumstances,  timely, but  the force of the attack  against a relatively insignificant group  in this article and  in a subsequent  one only two months later, "Of  Jewish Culture,"4  might suggest that it was in part also an attempted subconscious justification for his own unwillingness or unreadiness to live in Israel. The whole bent of his life, the essence of it as ex­ pressed in his writings, indicated  that he should, but timidity and a deep affection for Canada  weighed against such a step. In a later essay, "In  Praise of  the Dias­ pora,"5 he again movingly recounted the manifold achievements of Diaspora Jewry, the creation of a culture and a spirit that would live on through  a renascent Jewry, but the central  theme of his earlier essays on this subject-the expectation  of a fruitful interplay  of Israeli culture and Jewish Diaspora culture-is missing. The  tone of this essay, one of Klein's finest pieces of prose, is  nostalgic;  the  praise, a graveside eulogy. The  Diaspora,  he asserts, the  conditions  that  prompted  great Jewish creativity  in scattered  lands, is dead. Clearly there  was a serious ambiva­  lence in his feelings about  his own position, and  perhaps  a sad foreshadowing  of his own not too distant  withdrawal  from life.
Almost as significant to Klein the journalist as his espousal of the Zionist cause, was the task of alerting  his people to the gathering  dark  forces from  within  the local scene and from abroad  that threatened  their security and even their existence. This constant concern was addressed not only to his Jewish readers, but to the non­ Jewish public as well. He felt it incumbent  on himself as journalist to take up the challenge thrilled  vituperatively  by anti-semites from public  platforms  and  in the press. Passionately and  logically he made  the case for his people to those  whom reason and sincere feeling could reach, countering  the lies and innuendoes of the anti-semites, and  condemning  anti-semitic action, whether  vandal  acts by  a  mis­ guided mob or the calculated  policy of civic politicians. He denounced  restrictive covenants  and  other  discriminatory  practices in Canada, and  he  replied  to  the slanderous  attacks  by the  Coughlinites  and  the American  Firsters in  the  United  States. His dislike for Soviet Russia on ideological and  humanistic grounds,  deep­ ened by his resentment  at its anti-Zionist stance, was related to what he recognized as its deeply-ingrained   anti-Jewish  bias,  which  existed  despite  the  state's  lofty proclamation  to the contrary.  Jewish cultural  genocide was no more  palatable  to Klein than physical oppression, and he foresaw and warned  against the connection between the two. His greatest concern, however, was over the increasing manifes­ tation of anti-semitism, discriminatory and violent, in eastern and central  Europe, by the governments  and  people of Poland, Rumania  and  Hungary,  and above all of Nazi Germany.  In his journalism, as in  his poetry, he reviled the cruel policies

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

and barbarous  acts. He appealed  to the moral conscience of western nations and was deeply outraged at the relative indifference shown by the so-called liberal democratic  nations of the western world to the plight of the victims in Europe and the refugees drifting on land and sea. The moral apathy  of the world at large dis­ tressed him and may well have contributed  to the deep depression from which he subsequently suffered.
The moral concern so clearly evidenced in Klein's articles and editorials on anti­ semitism and  the refugee problem, was not limited  to matters  Jewish. Scattered throughout his journalism are vigorous condemnations of harsh and arbitrary treat­  ment of other minority groups. He denounced, for example, the policy of apartheid in South Africa, the unjust policies of the Canadian  government  towards its Jap­  anese  citizens on  the  West Coast,  and  of the  Quebec  government   towards  the Jehovah's Witnesses sect. Klein was equally ready to criticize his fellow-Jews when their  actions in his view deserved censure. Thus,  though  he shared  the  ultimate objectives of the lrgun  and the Stemists in the Yishuv-an independent Jewish state-he unequivocally condemned their acts of terror as conscienceless betrayals of morality. This concern over political and social abuses, voiced frequently  in his prose, found parallel expression, stated or implied, in poems published in the 193o's such as "The Soirte
or "Barricade Smith," and again in several poems from the forties. It underlay his political stance, that  of a liberal socialist. Though  for most of his life he was not active in political parties or political processes, he did let his name go forward  as the C.C.F.  candidate for Montreal  Cartier  in 1944, a riding with a heavy Jewish vote, but  he subsequently  withdrew  it. In  1949  he was again  prevailed  upon  to stand for the C.C.F. in the federal election and this time he fought an unsuccessful campaign. Although  his defeat was not unexpected,  the task of electing a C.C.F. candidate in Quebec  at that  time being virtually impossible, he had  reason to be deeply disappointed  in view of his record of service to the community.
Klein's journalism largely reflects his views on public affairs and his involvement in them,  particularly  in matters  pertaining  to Jews, but it manifests also another important aspect:  his interest in literature.  Although  the  journals that  he edited and to which he contributed  most of his prose non-fictional writings were directed chiefly to a Jewish  public and  perforce dealt  with  topics that  interested  them  as Jews, Klein used the oportunity  afforded  him as editor  to publish  many  reviews and  articles on literary  topics. Frequently  these writings,  too, dealt  with  Jewish themes, such as the Bible as literature, or Jewish folklore, or with books by or about Jews, but Klein wrote also about literature  in general. His journalism reflects specifically his interest in the Canadian literary scene. Paralleling  his increased involvement  in the  193o's in Jewish affairs was his valued  association  with  Leo
Kennedy,  A. J. M. Smith,  and  Frank  Scott,  the group  known  as the  Montreal
Poets, whose achievement, according to Klein, marked the emergence of a modem,

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

sophisticated  literary  culture  in  Canada.  In  the  r 94o's  Klein's  association with P. K. Page, with Irving Layton, John Sutherland, Louis Dudek, the Preview group and  the  First Statement group,  attested  to his continuing  close connection  with literary  circles in  Montreal. The  strong  moral  sense revealed  in  his response to public affairs is evidenced  also in his judgment of writers  and  writing. Thus  he condemns Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, and Robinson Jeffers as poets on moral grounds, even though he finds much that is praiseworthy in the art of the last two. Similarly, his admiration for certain  qualities of Karl Shapiro's  poetry is over-shadowed  by his angry  criticism  of what  he considered to be Shapiro's  negative,  even hostile attitude towards the Jewish tradition.  On the other hand,  his high praise for poets
such as E. J. Pratt  and  Chaim  Nachman  Bialik was earned  not merely by their
technical  craftsmanship, their  artistic skill, but  also by the  fact  that  they wrote within  a national  tradition and  expressed clear and  unequivocally  strong  moral values.




LE TASK  OF   THE  JOURNALIST, according  to Klein, was to be not merely the  eyes and  ears of the world, reporting  its activities,  but  also a sensitive conscience, for  which  beliefs and  values provided  necessary standards. And, furthermore, the journalist had to be prepared to commit himself to act with the power at his command  on behalf of those causes to which his conscience com­ pelled him. In a review of Pierre van Paassen's The Forgotten Ally Klein scornfully provided  a simple diagnosis of what  he termed  the classic ailment  of  reportage: "a  pseudo-impartiality, a  cynical  hard-boiledness,  a  spectatorial   and  olympian aloofness from the realities which are presumably the  journalists' metier. At such a one you can level no greater insult than to say that 'he takes sides.' It is his proud and pathological  boast that  he never takes sides, that he can describe the workings of iniquity with the same dispassionate unconcern with which he retails the philan­ thropies  of virtue,  and  that  he is, essentially and  by  definition,  au  dessus de la bataille.'' 6   Klein was well aware that  the journalist, in taking sides or espousing a cause, might  become a propagandist, or seem to become one, but  this possibility the journalist had to risk. Facts for him were merely indicia;  he had to search for conclusions and in his search he had to be guided by conscience and personal judg­ ment. Klein sums up his views on the responsibility of the  journalist  by referring to van  Paassen's  quotation from  a letter of Alfred Loisy to Pope  Benedict:  "No  one has a right to be neutral in moral questions. Whoever pretends to be indifferent is in reality siding with him who is wrong."
Much  of  Klein's  journalism  is, as might  be expected,  ephemeral  in  nature, though  many  articles  transcend  the occasion that  prompted  them.  All, however, are part  of the history of the times, recording and commenting  on the grim and

27

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

exhilarating  decades that saw economic depression and  growing international ten­ sion; the cancerous growth of Nazism with its accompanying horrors-the plight of the unfortunate refugees, uprooted and drifting,  and  the monstrous fate of the still less fortunate, the millions who perished in the Holocaust; the events of  World War  II and  their  happy  termination; and  the struggle  for a  Jewish  Homeland  which saw the emergence of the Jewish state.  Whatever new events  and  public figures the passing years brought  to the fore, most of these subjects constantly  re­ curred, and the point of view -the events seen largely in terms of  their impact  on the Jewish condition -remained more or less the same through the decades.
Stylistically, Klein's editorials, articles and reviews differ markedly, but together they reveal the qualities that  characterize  Klein's  writing,  many  of which are  to be found in his poetry as well. He loved words, the sound  and  the sense of them, mouth-filling,  polysyllabic words, teasing  words  that   playfully  become  puns  or homonyms, words that create pictures and extend the imagination. His notebooks reveal that  his search for novel, strange diction, technical  or obsolete or rare, was constant, and his essays and articles show the results of this search. He seasoned his writing  with  foreign  words, Latin  and  French,  Hebrew  and  Yiddish,  and  with historical allusions, often quite esoteric and remote, with the result that  his writing is frequently  over-spiced. His play with language  is one form of his pervasive wit. His satire is another  form, usually sharp, a quick plunging flash, but at times heavy and obvious, a verbal mallet. His tone and mood were varied. He could build up a case logically, writing in a cool, dispassionate manner, but much  more often he indulged  in rhetoric,  the mannered,  argumentative stance  of the  debater,  a  pose that he loved, or the swelling, denunciatory  tones of the angry attacker  or desperate defender, the spokesman committed to a cause dearer  than life itself. In his strident passages Klein's comment on the Soviet journalist llya  Ehrenburg applies to him­ self, for he, too, "is the Jew who writes with passion, with the memory of  atrocity perpetrated against  his kith and kin, with invective and  malediction  last heard  of only in the tochacho pages of Deuteronomy."7
Klein's prose is frequently flawed structurally  and grammatically, a consequence undoubtedly  of the haste in which he wrote many of the pieces. Klein's sons relate that frequently he was composing at the very last moment, even as he was hurrying to the typesetter. Often  he would dictate to his wife, seated at her typewriter,  an entire editorial  or article, with virtually  no pause in the diction  and  no time for revision. One  stylistic consequence of composing in this way is that  such writing bears the impress of the spoken word. In  these works Klein's  prose rhythms  are speech rhythms and  the language is simpler, more colloquial than  that  of his more polished or more carefully wrought essays.
Klein's  journalism suffers somewhat  more serious flaws than  those of careless grammar. He is at times too self-consciously "clever," and  rhetorical  to the  point of artificiality. His unusual diction and abundant learned  allusions, which clearly

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST


reflect his mastery of language  and his knowledge of Jewish  and  non-Jewish cul­ ture, also suggest at times an  unawareness of the limitations  of his readers, or of the fact that  they might  be distracted  or bored by his frequent  use of  foreign ex­ pressions, or English words that are archaic or pedantically  rare. Perhaps  it would be more correct to speak of his unconcern-for he must have  been aware-an unconcern  that  reflects a degree of indifference to the level of  his readership  and an occasional readiness to subordinate his journalistic responsibility to his literary impulses. While on the one hand it is to his credit that he never wrote down to his public and that  he tried to be himself in his writing, saying what he had to say in the manner  that  best suited  and  pleased himself, these characteristics  of his style suggest a  measure  of intellectual  ostentation,  and  his indifference,  insofar  as it existed, perhaps  indicates an aspect of cultural snobbishness, or at least conscious distancing,  that  seems to have been an element in Klein's  complex make-up.  His sense of verbal play and his obvious delight in the exercise of an agile, sophisticated mind, qualities  which endear  him and his writing to us, could at times become a compulsion to be witty at all costs, so that his humour strikes one at such times as forced or misplaced. But such lapses, seen in perspective, are really minor matters and do not significantly detract  from the over-all achievement  of Klein the  jour­ nalist.
In an editorial celebrating the centenary of the London  jewish Chronicle 8  Klein mentioned two other purposes of an ethnic press, not unrelated  to the purposes dis­ cussed earlier.  The  pages of such  a  journal,  by chronicling  the  daily  or  weekly events of a community,  serve as an authentic  history of the community,  but  the journalist,  he adds significantly, must not  only record this history but  also, in a sense, make  it.  Klein's  writings  constitute  a  truthful   though  not  dispassionate account of the times. They did more. His journalism, which for him  was not sep­ arable  from his participation in the work of the Zionist  Organization of Canada  and of the Canadian Jewish Congress, or from his literary  activities, undoubtedly  helped to make the history of his community. It is difficult to assess the impact  of a writer on his generation,  but we can safely affirm that  Klein's influence was per­ vasive and  widespread.  As editor of the leading Anglo-Jewish  journal  in Canada for  many  years, at  what  was  probably  the  most  critical  period  in  post-Biblical Jewish history and indeed in world history, he reached a large reading-public  and on the whole successfully gave expression to their feelings and helped to shape their responses. His  wide  reading,  sensitivity,  and intelligence  made  him  a  perceptive observer and an able analyst of current political developments, while his command  of effective language,  his passion, rhetoric and wit, made  him an eloquent spokes­ man,  on most occasions, for  his  people. These qualities  put  to the service of his people, particularly  in their struggle against anti-semitism and on behalf of Zion­ ism, enabled  Klein in his journalism to carry out admirably  the responsibilities, as he saw them, of chronicler and champion.

29

KLEIN AS  JOURNALIST

Klein's  journalism,  apart  from  its value  as a  chronicle  and  commentary  on events of world-wide import, has particular  significance for the student  of  litera­ ture. It is a body of prose writing of genuine literary  merit in itself, and insofar as it relates frequently  in substance and in language  to his poems and fiction, it pro­ vides a very useful background, a context, for the study of his creative writing. In a more general sense, by revealing aspects of Klein's personality, ideas, values and commitments,  these non-fictional prose writings contribute  to our  understanding and appreciation  of A. M. Klein the poet-journalist.


NOTES

1 The  Canadian  Jewish Chronicle, May  12, 1944·
2  "Notes on Cultural Zionism," The  Judaean, November I928.
9   C.J.C., March 18, 1949.
4   C.].C., May  13, 1949.
C.].C., January 9- February 27, 1953·
6  C.J.C., January 28, 1944.
7   C.].C., September 22, 1944.
8  C.].C., March 21, 1941.





POEM FOR VL]IDIMIR
 


G. Ripley


time  bagged  you at  last,
pushed  through your abdomen that  pin
which  holds you tight  inside a cabinet of earth.
death classified you thus:
genius, aesthete, athlete,
a  type both  rare  and  known, here  local to the steppe.
when  numbers moved  and  flexed against  your sleep,
you mimicked  life, made  hours  stop
with  words,  made  worlds,
holding the  dream at  bay and  spreading wings above  the plane  and  linden  trees. perhaps you felt
the  night  explode  again  and  multiply, when  time  said  you were  dead.



OUR WESTERN TOUR



Lady  bartender at home  with  a souvenir  dog, New  Orleans, 1964
Albino  sword  swallower  at a carnival,
Maryland, 1970
Masked woman in a wheelchair,
Pennsylvania, 1970
 


]. D. Carpenter


-Diane Arbus

1

Morning ablutions
-Bow River  near  Lake  Louise

Young  bear  in garbage
-below Mount Stewart

Rock  face
-Sunwapta  Pass

Whistling marmot accepting oatmeal
-Maligne Lake

Doe  on road
-Tete Jaune  Cache

Rapids on  North Thompson River
-at Blue  River

Horse  in field
-McLure

Sagebrush
-Heffiey  Creek

Loons,  goldeyes
-Paul Lake

Hay  loaves
-Semlin  Ranch

31

POEM

Eatery
-Cache Creek

The Thompson meets  the  Fraser, grey  meets  green
-Lytton

Blind man  visiting Hell's  Gate
-Fraser Canyon

Camper pulling  trailer  carrying camper carrying canoe,  bicycles, lawnchairs
-Boston  Bar

Couple  in matching tops, floral  pattern
-Jackass  Mountain

Girl  in ankle  socks and  cat  head,  dancing
-Sardis

Indians offering  wine to cyclists
-Chilliwack River  Road

Prawns,  white  wine
-English  Bay

Man  in sauna
-West Vancouver

Baltic II, Ripple  Point, Squamish  Chief, Westminster  Scout, Arctic Fox II,
The  Polish Girl, Rose Beauty, Snow  Bay
-Powell River

Clouds  in kaleidoscope
-from Sechelt Queen  in Georgia Strait

Coastal  range,  black grey, dove
-Grief  Point

Car  hauling  stockcar  about  to kill
American tourist
-near Comox

Cornucopia,  Kittiwake  V, Sequel, Lament,  Now Then, Nereus, Serene, Silver Harvest
-Victoria Harbour

32

POEM

2

Ship  in sunfog
-Coho in Juan de Fuca  Strait

Beer drinkers and  majah
-Port Townsend

Lighthouse in silhouette
-from Rhododendron, Admiralty Inlet

Park  ranger with  cigarette
-Deception  Pass

Rapids
-Skagit River  near  Newhalem

Muledeer grazing
-Loup  Loup  Creek

Sagebrush
-Mazama

Gunfighters, tourists
-Winthrop

Morning ablutions
-Sherman  Creek

Flagman
-Columbia River  at  Evans

Short order  cook and  mirror
-Northport


3

Deserted street,  early morning
-Nelson

Freeform dancers
-Vallican  Whole

Europeans in mineral pool
-Ainsworth Hot  Springs

33

POEM

Fawn  at  roadside
-Fry Creek

Swimmer in curlers
-Slocan  Lake

Boy with  fishbowl, ling cod
-New Denver

Scenic  view, litter,  three  ravens
-Hills

Ruined arena
-Nakusp

Loggers  bound  for Parson
-aboard Galena, Shelter  Bay

Moon  Cafe
-Golden

Fawn  killed by car
-Bragg Creek

Mad  woman,  union  man,  albino  man, men  with  whippets,
guitarist, flautist,  tourist, shoplifter
-8th Avenue  Mall

Wolf  Child,  Crowchild, Many  Horses, Laughing After,  Went  After  Water, Killed  Close  to the Water, Killed  First, Dog,  Dog  Eater, Eats  Anything, Scraper, Sleigh,  Died  After,
Dick  Night, Dick Starlight,
Peter  Manywounds, Well  Slaughtered
-Sarcee  and  Blackfoot  Indians, Glenbow Museum

Morning ablutions
-Round Up  Motel,  Motel  Village,  Crowchild Trail

Rabbits on  the runway
-Calgary  Airport

34


ORDEAL  BY FIRE
The Genesis of MacLennan's The Precipice



Elspeth  Cameron





IN <946, ON A  TRD' with  his wife, Dowthy Duncan, to New York, Hugh MacLennan saw the American Ballet Theatre's new production, Pillar of  Fire. The  occasion  was to focus the  themes he was considering  for his third novel, The Precipice ( 1948). This ballet, in its first performance on April8, 1942, had  marked  the  emergence  of an  erotic  and  modern  mode  of  ballet.  Anthony Tudor,  choreographer and male lead, and Nora Kaye, the prima  ballerina, soared into popularity  to an ovation  of twenty-six curtain  calls. Enthusiasm  for Pillar of Fire, especially for  Nora  Kaye  in her  role as Hagar,  continued  well beyond the year during  which MacLennan saw it.
Before seeing the ballet, MacLennan had been considering two general notions for his next novel,l On  the suggestion of his friend, Blair  Fraser,  he had decided to set the novel in "darkest  Ontario"-not Toronto, but those small towns which still embodied  the Canadian puritan  heritage. This puritan  heritage  had already gone sour in the United  States and promised to do the same in Canada-a socio­ logical situation  which, Fraser surmised, might prove an  interesting subject. This third  novel, then,  would  provide a literary map of yet another  Canadian region. Receptive to Fraser's suggestions, MacLennan had spent  a week or so in the On­  tario  lakeshore  towns of Coburg,  Belleville and  Port  Hope,  chatting  with local people, and getting a feel for the countryside. At Port Hope  he saw the huge sani­ tary company there and  discovered that it had recently been sold to an American company,  with  the  result  that  mass-produced  facilities of  inferior  quality  were being made. The second idea MacLennan was working on was that  of having his central  character a  woman.  This  he  considered  a  challenge-how to  present convincingly the female point of view.
Seeing Pillar of Fire in  r 946  produced  in MacLennan "an  immediate,  strong
creative feeling."  Here,  suddenly  and  by accident,  was the  "form" which could integrate the general themes uppermost in his mind. As Dorothy Duncan  remarked after  the ballet, "You  have the plot for your novel right  there."  MacLennan  re­ turned  to see this "remarkable ballet" a second time; his first impression was con­ firmed.


35

MACLENNAN

Pillar  of Fire  was inspired primarily  by Arnold  Schonberg's  V erkliirte  N acht (Transfigured Night), but also by the sequence of poems, W eib und Welt (Woman and  the  World), which  gave rise to this  music.2     These  poems by  the  German romantic,  Richard  Dehmel, describe a situation  between  two lovers in which the woman confesses that she has conceived a child by a casual relationship.  This ex­ perience has, she claims, taught her that she loves him rather  than the sensual man she has encountered. As they walk through  the moonlit  woods, the  man  forgives her, accepts  her and  maintains  that  their love is so great  that  it will  transfigure this situation,  just as the moon transfigures the night.
Anthony  Tudor  in Pillar of Fire, as George Balanchine  describes it in his New Complete Stories of the Great Ballets, "takes this story and presents it dramatically, introducing  additional  characters, giving us a picture of the community  in which such an event can take place, motivating the characters  as completely as possible."3
In keeping with the Biblical title4    (suggestive of a night transformed, not by moon­ light and love, but by divine revelation), Tudor  names his heroine "Hagar." This name  recalls the  Egyptian  bondswoman  of Abraham who is  sent  by Sarah,  his wife, to conceive a child by Abraham; having done so, she is outcast,  wandering  in the desert until God gives her direction. The  name Hagar suggested to Tudor  the original "lost woman."s
Hagar  in Pillar of Fire has two sisters -the "Eldest  Sister" and  the "Youngest Sister."  The  "Eldest  Sister" is a rigid church-going spinster  who dominates  the household;  the  "Youngest  Sister"  is a  pretty,  insubstantial flirt.  The  two  men who correspond  to the true lover and the sensual lover in Weib und  Welt appear in the ballet as the "Friend" and the "Young  Man  From The  House Opposite."6
The community  in which Tudor  sets these characters  is Victorian,  in keeping with the date  of Verkliirte Nacht   ( r8gg)  and  puritanical, in order  to set up a moral framework  in which Dehmel's tale might most fully express dramatic conflict.
In Tudor's adaptation of the story, the plainly dressed Hagar,  fearing  that  it is her fate to become a spinster like the "Eldest Sister," hopes for the attention  of the visiting "Friend." He, instead, is attracted  to the pretty,  blond "Youngest  Sister" with whom he dances offstage. In a desperate  attempt  to resist her apparent fate, Hagar  responds to the bold "Young  Man  From  The  House Opposite," dances a wild pas de deux  with him and enters with him the house opposite where she has seen couples meeting and  embracing.  She  emerges from  the  house into  a  world where her act will inevitably be seen as sin. The "Eldest  Sister," in a violent scene, reprimands her, filling her with guilt. The  whole community  shuns her, even the "Young  Man  From  The  House Opposite."  The  "Friend" returns,  disappointed in the superficiality of the "Youngest Sister," and  offers Hagar  his enduring  love. The  ballet closes with the two lovers walking into  the dark  moonlit  forest where, presumably, the confession and forgiveness of Dehmel's story will occur.

g6

MACLENNAN


IN THE PRECIPICE, MacLennan bases his main character, Lucy Cameron, on Hagar  in Pillar of  Fire. Like Hagar,  she has an  elder sister, Jane, who is an inflexible spinster, and a younger sister, Nina, who is a superficial flirt. Jane, aged thirty-seven, takes after her calvinist father, John  Knox Cameron:

Her  nose and  chin  were somewhat pointed, her mouth small and  straight. Her features were sharp enough to give her an air of decision, though they were not gaunt.  Her dark hair, severely drawn back, formed a widow's peak at the top of her forehead. It  was a heart-shaped face, and  a vain woman would have made much of it. But nothing about Jane invited admiration; everything about her demanded respect.1

Her father's Scottish harshness has turned sour whatever joy in life may have been latent in her, feelings that are revealed only when she plays the Appassionata on the piano;  "a  deep indignant  passion of which Jane  herself was obviously unaware." Jane is a music teacher, not because she finds music beautiful but because it is "use­ ful." This puritan  notion of usefulness also informs her gardening.  No flowers for her, only vegetables. Typically  divorced from  nature,  Jane  stays indoors  reading books as dry and  lifeless as possible; for her, "sex was ... near  to the root of all evil." Like her father,  she can  "create  at  will an atmosphere  in  which everyone around  her felt guilty." Sternly running the household as her father did before her, Jane,  Lucy thinks to herself, "was like their collective conscience. She was the only one of them who followed in thought  and in life, all the principles of the religion and morality which the entire Protestant  part of the country professed to honour." Nineteen-year-old  Nina, like the "Youngest Sister" in the ballet, marks a con­
trast to Jane:

She was a girl with blue eyes, golden curls, snub nose, a wide, laughing mouth, plump bare arms coloured like honey in the sun, and a short neat body that  was never still.

In keeping with his placing of the novel between the years Igg8-1945,  MacLennan indicated  that  Nina has learned  her craft from Hollywood actresses. Knowing her­ self to be "the  prettiest girl in town,"  Nina indulges herself in clothes and  parties as much as she can in the prudent  Cameron  household. If Jane  is their "collective conscience," fun-loving  Nina is their collective "id." 8
Between these two extremes, Lucy is as uncomfortable as Hagar  in Pillar  of Fire.
At twenty-seven spinsterhood  closes in; Nina bluntly says to Jane, "Nobody  would ever want to marry  Lucy." Or as Bruce Fraser, her friend next door, puts it, "any pleasures Lucy Cameron  would ever have would be shy ones." Even Lucy antici­ pates with  pain  "facing  a blank  wall for the rest of  [her]  life with  a  quiet  and decent  dignity." But  the  process which  has almost  completely  repressed  Jane's  emotions has not been quite so effective with Lucy. Jane  has an "iron  will" and

37

MACLENNAN

flawless self-control; for Lucy there is still a lapse between  response  and  repression. When  Bruce  Fraser  calls across  the  hedge  to  her,  for  example, "quick  pleasure flashed  into  her  face  as she saw  him  and  then  was  immediately checked." Like Hagar with  her  clenched  fists and  palpable tension   (and directly  recalling Nora Kaye's  performance),
Lucy moved with the quiet grace of a shy animal,  yet in all her movements  there was an  air  of conscious control,  as  though  she  hoped  whatever  she  did  would escape notice. This same characteristic  was even more marked  in her face. It was an intelligent  face ... essentially a proud face. Her chin and the upper  part of her head  could  have  modelled  a  cameo,  clear-cut  and  distant.   But  in  the  eyes and mouth  unknown  qualities brooded. Her large eyes were brown and  widely spaced, with  curving  brows. Her  lips were soft and  warm  and  sensuous. These  features together with her air of dignified solitude, combined  to give her the prevailing expression  of a  woman  who  has  never  been  recognized  by others  for  what  she knows herself to be.

Thinking herself  plain,  Lucy  disregards her  appearance, pulling back  her  abun­
dant  dark  hair into a severe style.
Three things in Lucy, however,  help to militate against a future like Jane's: her intelligence, her  love of beauty  and  her identification with  nature. Lucy's intelli­ gence is instrumental in freeing  her from  the past. In  his treatment of the Cameron family,  MacLennan works with the well-known  Biblical  theme  that  the sins of the fathers are visited on succeeding generations. Just  as John Knox Cameron has been formed by  "the merciless  religion  which  her  Father's aunts  had  inflicted   upon them," so in tum, Jane and  Lucy carry  the burden of  puritanism handed down  by their father. "My father," Lucy realizes, "was queer, but it was such a Scotch  kind of queerness we never noticed  it till after  he was dead. Jane doesn't realize it even now."  Lucy  does realize it-thanks to her intelligence and  a three-year illness in her  mid-teens which  afforded her time  to  contemplate. Ultimately, Lucy  can  see what  Jane cannot:

The  images of her father's  aunts  returned,  and  with  them,  a rush  of indignation and  a  rise of self-assertive confidence.  It  was absurd  that  .these two  women  she had  never  seen, so ignorant  they believed  even  the  misprints  in  the  Bible were sacred,  should  bind their  power into  the third  generation. Knowledge  had  power too. She knew what they had done to her father  and  what  her father  had done to her. Knowledge  was the only power in the world which  could  undo  the chain  of evil men left behind  them.

"Yes," she asserts, "there was knowledge.  It exorcised  the  past  from  the  present. Now  this whole thing  was throbbing with  present  life;  the  only thing  of meaning and  merit." Lucy can free herself from the past through intelligent perception.
Jane is immune to beauty. Not so Lucy  who appreciates with  a reverence. Re­ calling some romantic lines of poetry from  William  Strode's "In Praise  of  Music," Lucy  responds  deeply:

MACLENNAN

One thing had stood by her, and she had learned how to foster it. She had learned how to discover beauty  when no one else was near.... It was the kind of beauty
... which exists almost without  knowledge of good and evil, probably the only kind
possible in a puritan town.

Particularly from  her garden and  the beauty of flowers does she derive  pure  joy.
Moreover, Lucy  feels herself  a  part  of nature; from  this  identification she  de­ rives strength. Just  as Jane is seen typically in the house,  as is the  "Eldest Sister"  in Pillar of Fire, Lucy  most often  appears outdoors,  especially  in her garden. This  garden, with  all its  Biblical  and  secular  associations,  recalls  man's  religious  and natural roots.  Certainly  Dehmel had  made   much  of  this  theme  in  W eib  und Welt, where  the  lover  takes  most  of his arguments from  nature.  Similarly, Pillar of Fire vindicates a natural world  which  is at  odds  with  the civilized  community which  rejects "natural" behaviour. To reinforce  this theme, MacLennan sets Lucy in the  natural world,  describing her as a "shy  animal" and  making her  rejection  of the town's values in favour of the natural world:

Lucy went alone into the garden  to inspect her flowers before it got too dark to see them. In  full sunshine  the garden  was unchangingly  brilliant,  but in the morning and  evening  the flowers were like an assembly of living things, resting in the eve­ ning, in the  morning  like children  eager  to shout  how fresh  they  were  after  the night and  how much  they had  grown. Now the hyperion  lilies had  almost closed, but  in the  gathering darkness  the  nicotianas  had opened  and  were  filling the air with  fragrance.  A sickle moon was in the sky, half hidden  by the  upper  branches of a maple tree. One  pale star was visible beside it.

In  a conversation with  Stephen, Lucy  confesses,

"well, to me just being-just existing-would be a full life, if-"
"If what?"
"If I felt  I were making  the most of all that  lay around  me. If I felt free to be myself-as natural as one of those flowers."

MacLennan thus  prepares the way for Lucy's sexual awakening through her identification with  "nature"; in doing  so, she harks back  to both  Dehmel's W eib und Welt  and  Pillar of Fire.
The transformation of Hagar in  Pillar of Fire is transposed directly  into  The Precipice. Lucy's  transformation from  probable spinster  to full-awakened  woman­ hood  is essentially  the same  as Hagar's. Flanked  on the one  hand  by  the  "Eldest Sister" who  represents the  rejection of physical  love, and  on  the  other  hand   by the "Youngest Sister" who represents the superficiality  of sensual love, both  Hagar and  Lucy  discover through painful experience the fullness of a love that  embraces both  physical  passion  and  tenderness. For  each  there  is a  rite  of  passage  from innocence, through experience, to fulfillment. MacLennan  relates  this transfigura­ tion in Lucy directly to the laws of nature. In  her garden, early in the  novel, Lucy speculates:


39

MACLENNAN

Now all the thoughtless world was busy fulfilling innumerable life cycles, most of them  with such savage cruelty  that  Jane  would have  been appalled  if she  under­ stood what they meant. Lucy watched the lilies eager toward  the sun, the nicotianas sturdy  in  the  heat  like white-faced  women  with  closed eyes, the  phlox  crowding each  other  in their struggle to live. It was odd  that  gardening was supposed  to be the gentle occupation. Any garden  was an arena  of frantic  strife.

The  view of life here  is distinctly  Darwinian; Lucy  plunges  into  life, bidding for survival  itself, compelled  by natural urges more  powerful  than  any  individual.
As she herself concludes  later,

there  is nothing  unique in the fact that  the least probable  men and  women attach themselves to one another  and that  time and  place are more selective than we our­ selves know how to be. People can  join as much  by random  chance  as the  grains of pollen which meet in the air.

And  her  actual sexual  awakening connects  her  with  a  prehistoric past: "Out  of the  ecstasy  grew  and  became  visible, a  jet of  unbelievable flame  flaring  out  of primeval darkness." A revelation,  a pillar of fire. 9 Lucy,  like the  plants  she adores, never ceases to grow. Despite suffering, "she had refused  nothing. She had lived ... Now at least she was a whole woman."
Instrumental in Lucy's transformation are the two men in her life:  Bruce  Fraser and  Stephen Lassiter.  In  both  W eib und Welt  and  Pillar of  Fire there  are  two men.  In  the former, there is the sensual  lover by whom  the  woman  has conceived a child,  and  the  true  lover who accepts  her,  despite  her  condition; in  the  latter, there  is the sensual  lover, the "Young Man From  The House  Opposite," and  the true  lover, the  "Friend." In  both  works, the woman, desperate for the  love of the true  lover,  turns  to a sensual  lover,  then  is outcast, to  be accepted finally  by the true  lover.  In  The  Precipice, however,  the  "Friend," Bruce  Fraser, is  also  the "Young Man  From  The  House  Opposite." The sensual  lover is Stephen Lassiter, the American efficiency expert  who has been  deserted  by his wife.
The roles played  by these two men  are,  consequently, somewhat different from those of the  two  men  in Pillar  of Fire. Like the  "Friend" in  the  ballet,  Bruce,  at first, cannot see Lucy as she is :

Bruce  was too young, he  was too engrossed  in  his own  problems -in  trying  to understand the surfaces of so many different  things-to  be able  to feel what  lay within  her, or even to know it was there.  Like most of the men she had  met, he looked for nothing  in a woman's  mind  but some reflection  of his own.

But there  is no evidence  in The Precipice that  Lucy  loves him  as Hagar loves the "Friend" in  Pillar of Fire. She  is attracted instead   to Stephen, the  sensual  man, who recognizes  and  answers her physical needs. MacLennan  emphasizes Stephen's physicality   by  making  him  a  young,  athletic man;  Lucy  first  sees  him  playing tennis:

MACLENNAN


Lassiter was well over six feet in height, but his chest and shoulders were so power­ ful he seemed large rather  than tall. In spite of his muscular development he was not still; he moved on the court with the feline precision of a natural tennis player.

This "animal vitality" links Stephen  with the natural  world of which Lucy is so much  a part.  He  and  Lucy  are  initially attracted  to each  other  and  ultimately "bonded" by natural instinct: "He had invaded her solitude and taught  her finally that  she was passionate, probably  more passionate than  the average woman." In marked contrast to Stephen,  the more intellectual Bruce links Lucy's garden  "with a political and philosophical idea."
Although  Lucy does not consummate  her relationship  with Stephen,  as Hagar does with the "Young  Man  From The House Opposite,"  she undergoes the same brutal  criticism from  society in  general,  and  her elder  sister in  particular, that Hagar  does in the ballet. In a scene taken directly from Pillar of Fire, Jane  berates Lucy:  "if they [the people of Grenville] said you'd been committing  adultery  with this sordid American-and you may be sure that's  exactly what  they would  say
if the  talk  started  ... do  you think  you'd  be able  to  tell  me  then  you  weren't ashamed?"
Outcast  like the  woman  in W eib  und  Welt, like Hagar in  Pillar  of Fire  and like the Biblical Hagar  before her, Lucy elopes with Stephen  to New York. Only after she is married  does Bruce perceive her beauty:

he had been a fool not to have seen Lucy with different eyes all the years she had lived in Grenville. It was almost shameful to have come to New York and  here see her with her husband and child before discovering that  she was a beautiful woman.

This  irony  does not  resolve into  a  happy  ending  for  Bruce,  as it  does for  the "Friend" in Pillar  of Fire. Even  when Lucy's marriage  to Stephen  disintegrates under the pressure of his "unnatural" work patterns and Lucy returns to Grenville with her children,  she does not give herself to Bruce. Ironically  she comes to see that  she and  Bruce have  needed exactly the same thing,  someone to see beneath the surface  and  recognize the  true self:  "She  knew tonight,  clearly for  the  first time, in what she had failed him. She had not sufficiently understood the tensions, she  had  given  him  no  adequate releases for  them."  Her  decision  to  return   to Stephen  leaves Bruce feeling as if he is on the edge of a precipice. Thus,  although MacLennan altered  in several significant ways the plot of Pillar of Fire, and  the roles of the  two men  who  act  as catalysts in Lucy's transformation, his novel is clearly drawn  in large part from the ballet.
Some settings in The Precipice  can also be traced to Pillar of Fire. The  set for the ballet in theI 946 production  showed two houses facing each other  across the stage;  one belonging to the three sisters, the other belonging  to the "Young  Man From The  House Opposite." Behind these is a moonlit forest as backdrop.10

MACLENNAN

In The Precipice, the houses are next door, affording Bruce  a view of the Cam­ eron  garden. The   "high, narrow  house ... embellished with  Victorian  scrolls"11 from  the  ballet  is transposed  into  a house  in  Grenville that  MacLennan  uses to foreshadow Lucy's  rebellion  against  her  Calvinist past;  having "stripped off  the imposed  ugliness" of the harsh  brown  paint  her father had used, Lucy has painted it white  with  a turquoise door  and  surrounded it  with  flower  beds.12 Though he based Grenville on three Ontario towns, MacLennan draws  in more specific detail  "the picture of a community in which such an event  can  take  place"13 from  Pillar of Fire. Like the  community there, Grenville  has  a small-town outlook,  the  result of puritan conditioning:

Here  was lodged  the hard  core of Canadian matter-of-factness on which  men  of imagination  had  been breaking  themselves for  years. Grenville  was sound,  it  was dull, it was loyal, it was competent-and oh, God, it was so Canadian! ... Until the Grenvilles of Canada  were debunked from top  to bottom,  Bruce decided, there would be no fun and  no future  for anyone in the  country.

The town  is "prematurely old,"  largely  composed of  women  and  children  pre­ occupied with  respectability. Even  the  fields around it,  Stephen  observes,  "look respectable." It is, Lucy  sums  up,  "a  town  where  people  never  divorced,  where  passion was either  orderly  and  blessed by clergy, or else concealed and crushed  out of existence." The town,  in other  words, is diametrically opposed  to  nature, im­ posing  an  overlay  of  respectability which  hides  the  great   passions  and  stultifies  imagination. Lucy describes the force of this community as "closing in around her, freezing  her into  the mold of perpetual childhood."
Finally, vestiges of the ballet surface from time  to time  in MacLennan's descrip­ tions  of the  gestures  of the  three  sisters. Jane is always  "erect" or  "brisk"; Nina  "gambols" and  is "never still." Lucy's  movements develop, like those of Hagar in the  ballet,  from  tense constraint, through "quiet grace" to "suppleness." On  one occasion,  her inward response to Stephen's caresses could stand  as a description of part  of Pillar of Fire against  the moonlit  backdrop:

She turned  from him and  moved inland.  In  this haunted, luminous mist the trees were strange.  They were cool and ghostly like fungoid  outgrowths  of the darkness itself, like the  colourless, scentless, noiseless landscape of  a  dark  dream  through which  once she had  wandered  lost and  alien,  and  then  had  awakened.

Indeed, the  turning point  in  Lucy's  transformation occurs  at  a  dance to  which Stephen takes  her,  after  which  she  "never felt  herself  a  spectator again." This scene is strongly  reminiscent of that  section of Pillar of Fire in which  Hagar dances with  the  "Young Man  From  The  House  Opposite" before  they  enter  the  house and  her sexual initiation takes place. During this part  of Pillar of Fire, the "Young Sister" has  danced off-stage  with  the  "Friend," a situation roughly  paralleled in The  Precipice, where  Nina's partner at the dance is Bruce.

42

MACLENNAN

BUT  WHILE  MACLENNAN uses directly several aspects of Pillar of Fire, he changes others significantly in his novel. The  basic framework  of the "Cinderella" theme14 forms the backbone of the novel. Lucy's transformation from
repressed girl to fulfilled woman is in essence and detail like that  of Hagar.  Her rite of passage is unchanged in its context of the three sisters. Any reader  of the novel will recognize at once, however, that MacLennan does not let this framework stand  on its own.  He  fleshes it out  with themes, characters  and  concerns which overwhelm Lucy's story. Indeed, the novel's title The  Precipice  testifies to the cen­ trality of the theme suggested by the Port Hope Sanitary  Company-that of the puritanical   drive  for  material  success which  motivates  the  American,  Stephen Lassiter. Heavy  with  moral,  philosophical and  social comment,  they swamp  the more   delicate  theme  of Lucy's  rebirth  which  constituted  the  whole  concern  of Pillar of Fire.
MacLennan also accounts in great detail for the personalities, actions and  mo­ tives of his characters. The  burden  of puritanism  and  its effects are  traced  back two generations,  both for  Lucy and  her sisters and  for Stephen  Lassiter.  Nina's flirtation  is attributed to her interest in films; Stephen's  attraction to Lucy is ex­ plained  by noting  her  resemblance  to his mother;  even Grenville's  attitudes  are traced  back  to early  Loyalist times. The  novel is, consequently, firmly placed  in small-town  Ontario during  the Second World War. This more factual  representa­  tion of the story detracts  from the mystery of Pillar of Fire, a mystery even more evident  in W eib  und  Welt where the  characters  are  unnamed and  the  timeless omnipresent  natural world  broods over  them.  On  the  other  hand,  this specific setting  affords  MacLennan the opportunity  to  speculate  on  such  topics  as  the advertising  world,  Canadian  nationalism,  and  puritanism  in  Canada and   the United States-topics which may interest the more historically-minded  reader.
While some of the settings in The  Precipice  are taken  directly from  the ballet, many are added by MacLennan. The set for Pillar of Fire, with its Victorian houses, must have suggested small-town Ontario to MacLennan, just as the Victorian morality  of the  community  suggested Canadian puritanism.  These settings, and those scenes in the woods, fields and  beach near Grenville are strongly reminiscent of the ballet. MacLennan adds  to these the scenes in  New York and  Princeton, taken  from  his direct  personal experience. That these scenes seem of a  jarringly different  order  than  the  earlier  Grenville scenes is, consequently,  not surprising. Lucy in New York is not only transformed  from her earlier self, she also inhabits a different level of reality.
The  theme  of opposition  between  nature  and  society is essentially unchanged from Weib und  Welt through  Pillar of Fire to The  Precipice.  In all three, natural law  romantically  triumphs over civil law,  and  beauty  is vindicated.  Here,  too, MacLennan renders  the theme more specific. His view of nature  has Darwinian

43

MACLENNAN

overtones, relating Lucy's struggle both to survival against odds  (many  men from Grenville being away at war), and to natural  selection  (in her urge to have chil­ dren by the strongest male). Civil law is specifically defined as the moral codes of Scotch puritanism.  In the debate between natural and civil law, MacLennan intro­ duces as his spokesman a defrocked priest named Matt McCunn, who lives by anti­ puritan  values, symbolically outside the town.
The most pronounced  difference between Pillar of Fire and The Precipice is the difference in the roles played by the two men. MacLennan portrays Lucy as faith­ ful to one man.  It  is the sensual lover, not the friend,  who commands  her love throughout.  Furthermore,  unlike  both  Hagar   and   the  woman   in   W eib   und Welt, Lucy does not conceive a child out of wedlock. She discovers her full sexual nature  gradually  through  marriage  with Stephen,  and  MacLennan  terms  her  a "whole woman" only after she has had children. This is significantly different from the  more sensational  sequence  of events in  Pillar  of Fire  and  W eib  und   Welt where the woman, having conceived a child by a lover, returns  to the deeper  re­ lationship with a friend.1    This change alters the plot. Gone is much of the tension between  Lucy and  Nina, although  Nina seems to be  drawing Bruce away from Lucy, not  only in  the early  part  of the  novel, but  also later  when  Lucy  leaves Stephen  to return to Grenville. Instead, MacLennan has Nina compete briefly for Stephen's  attention; though, again, it is never a serious competition. Nina, in fact, in one scene supports  Lucy's bid to find love against  Jane's  criticism, a scene for which there is no precedent in the ballet. This dilution  of the competitiveness be­ tween Lucy and  Nina dulls the keen edge of the story and  is inconsistent with the Darwinian  view of nature propounded  in the novel. By having  Lucy remain loyal to Stephen,  MacLennan  seems to put forward  a view that  sexual intimacy  and children  bond a couple "naturally," a view consistent with  his treatment  of mar­ riage in other novels.
Finally, the depiction of Bruce Fraser lends a completely new dimension to the original story. In  Pillar of Fire, both men succeed:  the "Young Man  From  The House Opposite" enjoys Hagar  when he desires her;  the "Friend" returns to have her permanently. A fine ironic balance is achieved in the ballet when the "Youngest Sister"  wanders  off with  the  "Young  Man  From  The  House  Opposite"  at  the ballet's close. Bruce, in contrast  to this, fails. He never cares for Nina and, falling in love with Lucy only after her marriage,  he waits hopelessly in the wings. Even when it appears he may yet have her once she has left her husband,  she decides to return  to Stephen. Bruce's story runs parallel to Lucy's. Her true self is sought out and  nurtured by Stephen;  Bruce is not lucky enough  to meet  anyone  to do the same for him. MacLennan seems to have identified with the role of Hagar  in Pillar of Fire, as well as observing it as a feminine phenomenon. Indeed,  Bruce's role - that  of an "unreleased  Hagar"-resembles that  of Nick Carraway in The Great Gatsby. Like Nick, Bruce is the observer who merely looks on and records the lines

44

MACLENNAN

of those more passionate than  himself. MacLennan  was later  to define the quality
Bruce never develops as "spirit."
Somehow the story of The Precipice, though ostensibly Lucy's  (and  Stephen's) is really Bruce Fraser's. Had  MacLennan allowed Bruce to narrate the tale, as Nick Carraway  did  in The Great  Gatsby and  George Stewart  was later  to do in The Watch That Ends  The Night, the novel would have been a stronger  and  more ironic one. Bruce is, then,  a prototype for George Stewart.  In  The Watch That Ends  The  Night, MacLennan's interest was to focus more clearly on the "Every­ man" theme, which first appears  with Bruce in The  Precipice.16  It must have been Hagar's anguished  isolation at the beginning of Pillar of Fire which  most struck MacLennan as emblematic  of the human  condition. Through  Pillar  of Fire and the raw working out of its themes in The  Precipice, MacLennan  was to strike the motherlode  which  was not  to be fully mined  until The Watch  That  Ends  The Night.

NOTES

1 Interviews with  Hugh MacLennan, January 6, I976 and  September 29, I976.
2  MacLennan had  studied at Oxford some poems from Weib  und Welt  in the Oxford
Book of German  Verse.
3 George  Balanchine, New Complete  Stories of the Great Ballets, ed. Frances Mason
(New  York: Doubleday, I968), p. 307.
4  God  is said  to appear "by  day in a pillar  of cloud  to lead  them  (the  Israelites) the way; and  by night  in a pillar  of fire, to give them  light" (Exodus: I 3,XXi).
5  Interview with  Anthony Tudor, September 6,  I 976.
6  MacLennan saw the following cast in these roles:  Hagar-Nora Kaye; The  Friend
-Anthony  Tudor; Eldest  Sister-Lucie Chase;  Youngest Sister-Janet Reed;
Young  Man  From  The House  Opposite-Hugh  Laing.
7   This  description of Jane is reminiscent of Lucia  Chase  in her  role of "Eldest Sister" in  Pillar of Fire. Anthony Tudor described  Miss Chase  as "pure granite"  (Inter­ view, September 6, 1976).
8  MacLennan seems  deliberately to suggest  this  Freudian interpretation  by calling Nina's dog "Pan." Just  as Jane represents the "super-ego" Nina  represents the "id," or hedonistic nature.
9  Anthony Tudor was well aware of the phallic  implications of this title,  an implica­
tion hinted at here  by MacLennan.
10 The  costumes  and  set of  Pillar of  Fire remain the same  from  performance to  per­ formance. Always Victorian in period  because Schonberg's music  was composed  in I900,  only  the  slightest  variations in set  (silver  birches  in  the  forest  for  the  Nor­  wegian  performance, for  example)  have  given  local  colour   to  different perform­ ances.  (In  interview with  Anthony Tudor, September 6,  I 976.)
11 Balanchine, p. 307.
12  Something Hagar would  never  have  been  allowed  to  do  by  her  "Eldest Sister." (Interview with  Anthony Tudor, September 6, I976.)
13  Balanchine, p. 307.
14  The term  "Cinderella theme" is used here, as it is by MacLennan in his description

45

MACLENNAN

of the novel, in the general sense of the ancient "three sisters" story. Anthony Tudor disclaims  any  connection between  the  Cinderella story  and  Pillar  of Fire  and  has taken  great  pains in his directing of the ballet  to prevent any hint  of Cinderella from appearing in  the  interpretation of Hagar. (Interview with  Anthony Tudor,  Sep­ tember 6, 1976.)
1 Anthony Tudor intended his Hagar to have conceived a child  in her brief encounter with   the  "Young Man   From   The House   Opposite."   (Interview,  September  6,
1976.)
16 At the  beginning of Section  5 of The  Precipice, MacLennan  speculates: "We  reach a point  where  we can physically go no farther, but  our  thoughts leap and  then  for a few moments we are on our  way to becoming Everyman."










DRE)IM FOR )IN )ISTHM)ITIC LOVER

Susan Leslie

Lying in the moonlight
Lost 	lost
You fall
Through sheets and  fingers
Down flooded halls
Past  vacant  beach
to the smooth  enveloping sea

Water, you said
I dream of water
Nightly  I drown
I am  nightly  devolving
This  unseen  fall
Is easier
Than the daily struggle for breath
I slip with  the  tide Pulling  back  to the  time When  I began
When  I  was simple
An  urgent arrangement of flesh
This  body 	swimming 	surviving
Before  words 	before  breath

POEM

Lying  in the  moonlight
You are  breathing
The air  comes  through the  open  window
And  you  breathe as if Equipped for  this medium For  this cool, solitary  air

But  you walk
In  the darkness and  the slow slow time
Of  the  bottom of the sea
While  I watch
You drift  on  the verge
Of  continents
You  shift  in your sleep And  long banners of weed Conceal your  passage

You stay  unmoving in the sand
Ignored by other  things
No gasp  betrays  your  presence
You  have  forgotten land  and  air
On  the hills of the bottom of the sea
You  lie

Lost in the  moonlight
Drowning in your sleep
Miles  below  the  surface  I float  on and  touch-








CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741


47


SUNFLOWER  SEEDS

Klein's Hero and Demagogue



,(ailig Pollock




IN "por.rncAL MEETING" A. M. Klein d"'crib" an  O'>tor addressing  an  anti-conscription  rally in Quebec.  The  Orator, we are  told, is "a country  uncle with sunflower seeds in his pockets." The  description  of the  sun­
flower seeds in the Orator's  pockets is the most vivid physical detail  in the poem. But  it is more  than  just that.  For  anyone  who  knows "Political   Meeting," the image  of the sunflower seeds has the power to call up the complex  mood of the poem, and, in particular,  its ambivalent  attitude  to the Orator. Significantly, the image occurs exactly midway through the poem (in the twentieth  of its thirty-nine lines),  for in retrospect  it seems to be a kind of centre  out  of which  the  whole poem emanates.
What,  precisely, is the attitude  to the Orator  in the poem? The  poem is subtitled "For  Camillien  Houde,"  but even without  this subtitle it would be easy to recog­ nize the Orator  as a portrait  of Houde,  the popular  mayor of Montreal  who not only had the same appearance and manner as the Orator, but also, like him, spoke out strongly against conscription. Klein, as a Jew, had  little sympathy  with those who interfered with the war against Hitler, and when Houde was interned  without trial  by the  Mackenzie King government,  Klein  certainly  did  not object.  At the time, Klein was editor of the Canadian  jewish Chronicle, and he gleefully, almost gloatingly, reprinted  an editorial from the Montreal  Gazette  condemning  Houde as a traitor.1 But "Political  Meeting" was first published six years later, and though Klein still clearly disapproves of Houde's position as represented  by the Orator, his attitude seems less simple than  before, perhaps  because  he is no longer  writing under  the immediate  pressure of war. He is not satisfied simply to condemn  the Orator as an evil man;  he is interested in exploring the strength  of his appeal, and, through  exploring it, he discovers that  he himself is not immune  to it, whatever he may  think  of the Orator's  ultimate  aims. The  subtitle  of the  poem  is, perhaps, revealing in this regard:  though Klein is against  the Orator, he is, in a sense, for him as well, "for  Camillien Houde." This is what makes the Orator so dangerous, that  there  is something  genuine  and  valuable  in  him  and  in  his relation  to  his followers.

SUNFLOWER SEEDS


Klein's ambivalent  attitude to the Orator,  deep distrust mixed with fascination, even with a kind of admiration, comes through  especially in the detail of the sun­ flower seeds. What  are these sunflower seeds? Are they a cynical ploy on the  part of the  Orator to manipulate his audience's  sympathies  by parading  his  humble "country" background? Clearly they are that. But they are also a sign that, what­ ever his ultimate  intentions,  he really is rooted in the same world as the people he is addressing and that  he is genuinely moved by the same concerns as they are.
This  interpretation of the role of the sunflower seeds in "Political  Meeting"  is supported  by a passage in The  Second Scroll. The narrator of the novel tells how, when he was a child in Montreal,  refugees arrived from his parents'  village in the old country  and  described  a pogrom which had  wiped out  many  of his parents' friends, neighbours,  and  relatives. The  narrator  says of the visitors:  "Their  faces were lined and  always held serious expressions except when they patted  my head and  I discovered that  they had sunflower seeds in their  pockets. They spoke with a great and bitter intensity."  In a footnote, the narrator  says "Somehow  my entire childhood  is evoked  through  this incident."  I  think  it is legitimate  to see Klein himself speaking  here, especially since the note goes on to refer us to another ver­ sion of the incident  in a poem entitled "Autobiographical" which Klein had writ­ ten several years before The  Second Scroll. In describing the Orator, then, Klein has used a detail, "sunflower seeds in his pockets," which evokes for him the world of his childhood  with its intense sense of community, of "home  and the familiar" as he says in "Autobiographical." That  is, he is associating the Orator  with what is most valuable to him in his own life. He rejects the Orator's  politics; he rejects the dark passions he arouses in the crowd; but he feels a deep sympathy for a man who, after all, is trying to defend his community with the same "great  and  bitter intensity" of the refugees from the pogrom.2
Klein's choice of the image of sunflower seeds, then, can be seen in two different contexts. We can see Klein as cleverly choosing a telling detail, in the fashion of a novelist of manners,  which  throws light on a particular social situation,  or we can see him as making  use of an intense personal association which is more signifi­ cant to him than  to his readers, most of whom have no way of knowing about  it. Whichever  context  we choose, we seem to arrive at  the same sense, a disturbing  sense of ambivalence  towards  the Orator  and what he represents.
There  is a third  approach to the sunflower seeds which also supports  this sense, but which, in the end, tells us much more than the other  two. This approach con­ centrates  neither on the external  world with which Klein's  art  deals-the  world of Klein's society-nor on the internal world from which his art ultimately springs
-the world of Klein's  psyche;  instead  it concentrates  on  the  art  itself. Klein's lifework is a single complex whole unified by a central  concern,  and when we are able to see the image  of the sunflower seeds as part  of this whole, it takes on  a resonance that  could otherwise hardly be guessed at. Though it may be useful to


49

SUNFLOWER SEEDS

know about  Klein's society and his spiritual  biography, what  we must really know about is his art and the vision it embodies.
A. M.  Klein's  work as a whole can  be seen as one extended  exploration  of a central  vision, a vision of the One in the many.3  That is, although  the nature  of things is infinitely varied, this variety is the expression of an underlying  unity. The underlying  unity does not have an independent existence of its own;  it is not, in some sense, "out  there." It exists only in the variety through  which it is expressed: the One exists in the many, not apart from it.
Throughout his career as an artist, Klein is concerned  with recreating  this vision of the One in the many in the very forms of his poems. Perhaps  the most obvious way in which he creates formal equivalents of the One in the many is by grouping poems together  under single titles. Nearly half the  poetry in the Collected  Poems consists of such groups. In  this way we are  presented  with an experience  of the many which points to an underlying unity. The  most important of these more than twenty collections, and  the one in which form  most obviously mirrors  content,  is "Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens," which is a celebration  of Spinoza, the greatest philosopher of the One in the many. The  Second  Scroll can also be seen as a kind of collection demonstrating  in its form the One in the many.4   It consists of five chapters  linked by their titles to the five books of the Pentateuch, the first scroll. Each  book has a separate  appendix,  or gloss, and  the last gloss is, in itself, a collection of poems.




WEN WE   TURN TO  INDIVIDUAL  poems, we continue  to see the principle of the One in the many at work. In  "Portrait of the Poet as Land­ scape," Klein speaks of the Poet naming the universe "item by exciting item.>' This is an excellent description of Klein's method in many of his finest poems, as well as in The  Second  Scroll, especially the  "Catalogue of  Incognitos." That is, Klein often  makes use of the oldest poetic form  of all,  the  catalogue  or  list of items. Though  this technique may appear  primitive, Klein's use of it is invariably sophis­ ticated: listing the many is always some way of commenting on the One. A striking example of this technique  is the opening of  "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape," describing the indifference of the world to the apparent death  of the Poet:

Not an editorial-writer, bereaved with bartlett, mourns him, the shelved Lycidas.
No actress squeezes a glycerine tear for him. The radio broadcast lets his passing pass. And with the police, no record.

This apparently random,  unconnected  list of different  ways of ignoring  the Poet

SUNFLOWER SEEDS

in itself demonstrates the  fragmentation of a  world  which  rejects  the  unifying power of poetry.
Another  aspect of Klein's  art  which is even more striking evidence of his con­
cern with the One in the many is his use of metaphor.  Klein's use of metaphor  is at its highest, most developed form in the poems of The  Rocking Chair. Again and again he begins with one particular thing-a rocking chair, a refrigerator, a grain elevator-and spins  out  of  it  a  seemingly endless string  of  metaphors  which appear  to lead off in totally different directions but which all take us back to the actual  thing  itself, whose  essential nature  provides  them  with  their  underlying unity. One example is "Lone  Bather,"  which begins

Upon the ecstatic diving board the diver, poised for parabolas, lets go
lets go his manshape to become a bird.
Is bird, and  topsy-turvy
the pool floats overhead, and the white tiles snow
their crazy hexagons. Is dolphin. Then
is plant with lilies bursting from his heels.

But of all the aspects of Klein's art which point to his central concern, perhaps the most interesting,  the one which seems to work on the deepest level, is his imagery. There  are certain  images which recur again  and again in Klein's  work and  take on a greater  intensity as his art  matures. These images tend  to cluster together  in the works which are his major  achievements and his major statements  on the pur­ pose of his art, works such as "Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens," "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape," and The  Second Scroll. Two of the most important of these images are dismemberment and flowers.
Klein often uses imagery of dismemberment  to represent the world of the many in which the unifying vision of the One has been lost sight of. The  most powerful dismemberment passage in Klein's work occurs in Melech's description of the Sis­ tine Chapel in "Gloss Gimel," the third gloss of The  Second Scroll. Michelangelo's  portrayal  of the divinity of the whole human form reminds Melech of

another scattering of limbs, other conglomerations of bodies the disjected members of which I had  but recently beheld. . . I saw again the relictae of the camps ... the human form divine ... reduced and broken down to its named bones, femur and tibia and clavicle and ulna and thorax and pelvis and cranium....

In  "Meditations Upon  Survival,"  Klein  describes his dismembered  people  as "longing  / for its members'  re-membering!" The  pun on remembering  is  impor­ tant,  for Klein  often presents the process of unification, of  "re-membering," as a kind of "remembering," of locating oneself in a tradition  which has been tempo­ rarily disrupted.  When  Spinoza  "remember[s] the thought  of the Adored,"  and when Klein's  poet  "remember[s] his travels over  [the]   body" of language,  they are  both  re-membering something  which  their  misguided  contemporaries  have

SI

SUNFLOWER SEEDS

dismembered. Klein's   most  moving   description  of  the   process  of  remembering occurs in The  Second Scroll, when the  narrator witnesses the  coming  to life of the ancient Hebrew language in the  new land  of Israel,  and  sees it as the  restoring  of a oneness  which  the  Jewish  people  had  yearned  for over  the  centuries.
It  was as if I was spectator  to the healing  of torn  flesh, or  heard  a  broken  bone come together, set, and grow again.
Wonderful is the engrafting  of skin, but more wonderful  the million busy hushed
cells, in secret  planning,  stitching,  stretching,  until-the  wound  is vanished,  the blood courses normal,  the cicatrice  falls off.

If imagery  of dismemberment suggests a world  of the  many  where  the  One  has been lost sight of, imagery  of flowers, especially in bunches, occurs  whenever Klein perceives the vision of the One  in the many  with  the greatest intensity. At the end of "Out of the Pulver  and  the Polished  Lens," we are told to
Think  of Spinoza ... plucking tulips Within  the garden of Mynheer, forgetting  Dutchmen  and  Rabbins, and consumptive  fretting,  Plucking his tulips in the Holland  sun, Remembering  the thought of the Adored,
Spinoza, gathering  flowers for the One, The  ever-unwedded  lover of the Lord.

Spinoza's vision of the One  in the many  is symbolized  by his picking  tulips  in the sun,  which  is their  ultimate source,  and  gathering them  up  as a gift for the  One.6 "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape" ends with  a similar  vision of the  poet alone  in the  garden of the  One -the Garden of Eden -planting seeds.  In  "Grain  Ele­ vator," Klein  transforms the  huge  cement  box of the  grain  elevator  into  a  flower box symbolizing  the unity of mankind:
always this great  box flowers over us
with all the coloured faces of mankind....

In The  Second Scroll, the  narrator is sent to Israel  to compile  an  "anthology" of Hebrew poetry  which  will give evidence  of  the  oneness  which   Israel  embodies. Klein,  who describes  the anthology as "flower-picking," is clearly  aware that "anthology" is derived  from  a Greek  word meaning "flower gathering" (compare Spinoza  "gathering flowers for  the  One"). The most  exciting poetry  which  the narrator discovers is the  poetry  of everyday  speech,  the  poetry  of a language and a nation  reborn. We have already  seen how he describes  this discovery  in terms of a dismembered body re-membering itself. He also describes  it, in the same  passage, in terms  of flowers:
Nameless authorship  flourished  in the streets.  It was growth,  its very principle, shown in prolific action! Twigs and branches that  had  been dry and sapless for generations,  for millennia,  now budded,  blossomed-and with  new flowers!
I had at last discovered it, the great efflorescent impersonality.

52

SUNFLOWER SEEDS


IT SHOULD BE   CLEAR  BY   NOW that  Klein is deeply concerned with, even obsessed by, his vision of the One in the many.  What  may not yet be clear is why. My discussion so far may have suggested that  Klein's concern is pri­ marily philosophical or aesthetic. This, I believe, is not true. For Klein, the deepest significance of the vision of the One  in the many is that  it allows him  to  define
the most important moral question of his age, and perhaps of any age, the relation of the individual  to the community  of which he is a part. To Klein, whose period of artistic maturity coincided with the age of the dictators and its immediate after­ math,  this question presents itself in one form in particular.  What  is the difference between a hero and a demagogue?
Spinoza,  who is the  greatest  spokesman for the philosophy of the  One  in the many, is also one of Klein's ideal heroes, for, as "Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens" argues, the two go hand in hand. Spinoza's philosophy involves the rejection of the dogma  of a transcendent God in favour  of a vision of God as immanent. That  is, the rabbinical  elite of Judaism,  as well as the priestly elite of Christianity, argue that  God exists apart  from His creation, which He controls but with which He has nothing in common. The rabbis and priests locate God "within  his vacuum of heaven"  where "suspended  in mid-air"  He "play[s]   his game of celestial soli­ taire," the solitary One "exiled" from the many. 7 Instead of this transcendent God, Spinoza  postulates an  immanent  God whose only existence is in the world  of the many. Klein has Spinoza say to his God "thou  art the world," recalling the actual claim of the historical Spinoza  that  nature,  the world of the many, is simply the form in which we perceive the One which is God.
The  reason why rabbis and  priests present God as transcendent is obvious:  by claiming  that  they are  the chosen servants of a God who is beyond the world of everyday experience,  they can  acquire  power as members of a  ruling elite. In  a typical Kleinian  pun, the rabbis are said to have made God into a "factotum." A factotum, of course, is a menial servant,  but  the literal  meaning  of the  word is someone who does everything; by claiming that the omnipotent God, the God who does everything, is transcendent, they have turned  him into a servant  whom they use for their own ends. The  ultimate  product  of the transcendent religion of the rabbis is the demagogue Shabbathai Zvi who is described in the last section of the poem. Shabbathai Zvi was a contemporary  of Spinoza's  who claimed  to be the Messiah and was accepted  as such by most of the Jewish world. He eventually betrayed  his followers, causing them  immense suffering. As Klein  describes him, Shabbathai Zvi perverts a holy ritual  whose purpose is to bind  men together,  by using it to set himself apart  from his fellow men. Specifically, he asserts his claim to be the Messiah by performing  a public marriage ceremony with the Torah, the scroll containing  God's word.
Spinoza, with his philosophy of an immanent  One in the many, rather  than  a


53

SUNFLOWER SEEDS

transcendent One apart from the many, is the precise opposite of Shabbathai Zvi: a true  hero rather  than a false demagogue.  In  direct analogy  with his immanent God, Spinoza  refuses to set himself up to be worshipped.  In  the end, through  his teachings, he exerts a unifying influence on his community  which Shabbathai Zvi can only parody. But he exerts this influence unobtrusively from within the garden where he "gather[s] flowers for the One,"  heroically embodying, in his life as well as in his philosophy, the true vision of the One in the many.
For Klein, the demagogue is always a Shabbathai Zvi, a kind of transcendent
God thrown  up by a frightened multitude  which needs to be reassured by hearing its many voices echoed back from a figure who can arouse a sense of worship. The demagogue  is essentially passive and  uncreative,  a hollow personality constructed out of cliches, who, in the absence of the true hero, simply magnifies all that is most superficial, least vital in the people he claims to lead. In The  Hitleriad, Klein says of Hitler, the most evil of demagogues:

through him, magnified Smallness comes to our ken - The  total bigness of
All little men.

The hero, like the immanent God, the One in the many, never sets himself above his people to be worshipped.  Unlike the demagogue  he is not a public figure:  he is hidden,  private. As far as his people are consciously aware, he might as well not exist. Uncle  Melech speaks of the version of creation  in the Cabbala, the Jewish mystical tradition: "there  [was]  fashioned Aught from Naught," something from nothing. The  Cabbala  speaks of the Creator  as "Naught," as nothing,  because he cannot  be perceived apart  from his creation; if we try to look for the One  apart from the many what we see is precisely nothing.8 The same is true of the hero who works  in  hidden,  unobtrusive  ways creatively  unifying  the  society  whose  pro­ foundest  ideas he embodies. In the most real sense of the word the hero does not exist apart  from  his society since his identity  as a particular individual is what  is least important about  him. His real existence, all that  really matters about  him, is the  unifying influence  he exerts on his society. Because he works  through  his society's deepest, most unconscious levels, the  hero is likely to be  misunderstood and  perceived as a threat  rather  than  as a saviour.  But, though  rejected,  it is he and he alone who can give continuing life to the community  of  which he is a part. As Klein says of Joseph:  "Rooted  in the common  soil, he  turns  his eyes to new directions."
Klein gives other examples of the true hero, besides Spinoza. The  Poet in "Por­ trait of the Poet as Landscape" leaves fame to demagogic "impostors," and accepts his anonymity  as a condition for his true heroic task of creation; he "makes of his status as zero a rich garland,/ a halo of his anonymity."

54

SUNFLOWER SEEDS

Uncle  Melech is similarly anonymous. In his death,  as in his life, he brings his people together,  but we never see him apart  from them: the only photograph  of him is a multiple exposure. Like all true heroes, Uncle Melech is a "great efflores­ cent impersonality," a flowering out into the many, uniting  his whole society, but doing so impersonally, without  the personal fame and worship which is the motive of the demagogue.
The  great  danger  of the  demagogue  is that,  although  he  is a  self-interested
manipulator, the impulse he appeals to is, at bottom, a genuine one:  the desire of a fragmented  people for unity. Klein's portrayal  of the demagogue  is at its most powerful  when  he can  make  us feel this appeal,  which  he  himself feels at  the deepest level of his being, and, at the same time, can alert us to its dangers. Klein's attack  on Hitler in The  Hitleriad is such a dismal failure  because he is so repelled by Hitler  that  he presents him as simply a disgusting buffoon who could not pos­ sibly appeal  to any feelings that  a decent person might share.  A demagogue who is merely a buffoon is of no interest;  one who, like the Orator in "Political  Meet­ ing," taps the same depths of feeling as the true hero is much more dangerous.9




IN  "POLITICAL MEETING," a community is united in a "ritual," a quasi-religious ceremony  complete with cross ("the  agonized  Y"), "surplices," and  "gargoyles."  It is a kind of communion,  and  the  moment  when  the Orator arises recalls the  elevation  of the  Host -"The  Orator   has  risen!"  But there  is something wrong with this ritual; it is directed towards a false god, an "idol" who is using a solemn ritual  of unification for the purpose of being "worshipped," just as Shabbathai Zvi does in "Out of the Pulver and the Polished Lens."
The  disturbing  quality  of this ritual  is suggested by Klein's  description  of the
crowd singing the traditional song of "the  ritual bird":
suddenly some one lets loose upon the air
the ritual bird which the crowd in snares of singing

catches and plucks, throat, wings, and little limbs. Fall the feathers of sound, like alouette's.

In summarizing  "Alouette," which describes the  plucking of a bird, he makes it seem sinister. He describes it as a kind of dismemberment,  suggesting, through  an image  we have come to recognize, that  the ritual  which  we are observing is one of destruction and not of creation. The sense of the sinister increases in the descrip­ tion of the crowd waiting outside to hear the words of the Orator:
(Outside, in the dark, the street is body-tall, flowered with faces intent on the scarecrow thing that shouts to thousands the echoing
of their own wishes.) ...

55

SUNFLOWER  SEEDS

The  street  outside  has  become  a single  body;  the  community has  been  re-mem­ bered.  The  sense of oneness is further emphasized by the  flower  image, "flowered with faces."  But  again  we feel there  is something wrong. The  crowd  is  not  being creatively  transformed into  a true  unity;  it is merely  listening  to its  wishes being passively echoed  back  to it. It is an  "idol" the  people  want, something they  have made  for themselves  out of their own sense of frustration.
All this prepares for the  Orator and  for the  image  of the  sunflower  seeds with which he is immediately linked. By now, some of the resonance of this image should be clear. Continuing the image of the flowered  faces in the  previous stanza, it calls up the numerous associations of flowers with the One  in the many  through Klein's work.  In  particular, it recalls Spinoza  "in  the  Holland sun  ... gathering  flowers for the One." The  image of the sunflower  occurs  again  in Klein's only other  poem which  refers  to  Camillien   Houde, and  it  does  so  to  the  exact  same  effect.  In "Parade of St. Jean  Baptiste," "the rotund  mayor"10 is presiding  over  the  annual celebration in which  the Quebecois  assert their  sense of oneness. In a phrase recall­ ing "flowered with faces," the crowd is described  as having "flowering faces,"  and  the  parade as a whole  is a huge  bouquet of flowers.  There are  "gay  attitudes of
flowers,"   "wards and   counties   burgeoning  hero I ribbons   and   countenances,"
"badinage of petals." Most  important, though, is the  phrase  "this  rich  spectacle turned heliotropic." "Heliotrope" is, of course,  another name  for sunflower.
The  image  of the sunflower  seeds, then,  suggests that, although the  Orator is a demagogue, a Shabbathai Zvi, he has some of the appeal of a true  hero, a Spinoza. On  the one hand  he consciously manipulates the  crowd  for his own  purposes; but on  the  other  he has  genuine  links with  his people.  He  really  does feel himself  at one with them,  and  they feel the same. "He has them, kith  and  kin,"  the  poet says, and  we can read  this two ways: he has them  in his power  now, or they are his own kinspeople.
The  climax  of the  Orator's speech  is an  attack on  conscription and  on  "the clever English" whose policy it is. Although the  Orator is attacking a policy which Klein  wholeheartedly supported, he is doing so by appealing to some of the things
which  Klein  holds most dear: "the virtue  of being  Canadien I of being  at  peace,
of faith,  of family." Klein sympathizes  with  the  fears the  Orator is exploiting:  his description of the cross as "an  agonized  Y" suggests, through a pun,  that  he under­ stands  how  conscription must  seem  to the  Quebecois who  are  losing  their  loved ones in a war  which  means nothing  to them.  But it is precisely the genuineness of the Orator's appeal which makes it most dangerous, for it allows him  to draw  his people together in a way which  perverts  their  potential for good  into one for evil:

The whole street wears one face, shadowed and grim; and in the darkness rises the body-odour of race.

SUNFLOWER SEEDS


The disgusting smell  of the  tightly packed crowd, of its one  re-membered "body," becomes, as "the body-odour of race," a vivid  image of  the  evil  which arises  from the  false  unity  which a  demagogue can   impose on  his  followers by  eloquently echoing their fears and  prejudices.11 The Orator has brought his followers together, but  only  to divide them more  completely against others of their fellow  men. This is a grotesque and evil  parody of the  true  unity  which  the  hero  creates by drawing on  the  most  valuable impulses of  his  people, impulses which perhaps only  he  is consciously aware of. The Orator, like all demagogues, has  perverted what should have been  a  ritual of  re-membering into  one  of  dismembering. In the  words of Uncle Melech, the  Orator and  the  rest of his kind  "would be like  gods; but  since the  godlike touch of  creation was  not  theirs,  like  gods  would they  be  in  destruc­ tions." Behind the  figure who  presents himself  as an  Uncle Melech or  a  Spinoza we  see  a Shabbathai Zvi;   the  true nature of  the  "country  uncle with  sunflower seeds in his pockets" is clear.


NOTES

1 "Commentary," Canadian Jewish Chronicle, August  I6,  I940,  p. 4·
2  Milton  Wilson  notes  the  parallel  and  comments, "for  one  awful  moment [we]  see the  shadow   of  Uncle Melech   rising  up  behind   the  Camillien Houde  who  is his parody." "Klein's Drowned Poet:   Canadian Variations on an  Old  Theme," Cana­ dian  Literature, no. 6; rpt.  in A.M. Klein, ed. Tom  Marshall (Toronto: Ryerson,
I 970), p. 94·
3 See Marshall's Introduction, p. x; John  Matthews, "A.  M. Klein  and  the  Problem of Synthesis" in Marshall, p.  I44;  and  G. K. Fischer,  In  Search  of Jerusalem: Reli­ gion  and  Ethics  in  the  Writings of A. M. Klein   (Montreal:  McGill-Queens  Uni­ versity  Press,  I 975), p. 76.
4   "The method [of The Second  Scroll]  is ... of a piece with  the patterning of diverse and   seemingly   discontinuous  facts   of  experience characteristic  of   Klein's  best poetry." :rvt:alcolm Ross, "Review," in Marshall, p. 89.
5  For  other  examples, see "Elegy," "Address to the Choirboys," "Diary of Abraham Segal,  Poet," and  "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape." Dismemberment imagery  in "Portrait of the  Poet  as Landscape" is particularly interesting. In  sections ii and  vi, the  poet's  vision  of  the  true  nature of language is presented in  terms  of a  whole body. The poet's  society  has  tried  to replace  the poet's  whole  language with  "bart­ lett,"  a collection of dismembered fragments: Milton  Wilson  speaks of "an Orpheus dismembered into  Bartlett's Quotations" ("Klein's Drowned Poet," p. 94).
6   The  image  of flowers in a garden  reaching towards  the  sun  is an  ancient symbol of the  relationship between   the  Creator and  the  created. See  Stanley   Stewart, The Enclosed  Garden: The Tradition and  the  Image  in  Seventeenth  Century Poetry (Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin  Press, I966).
7  For  Klein's rejection of the  concept of a transcendent God,  see "Browning's  Blas­ phemy," Canadian Jewish  Chronicle, June  I I,  I948, p. g. Browning's blasphemy is that  he claims  "God's in his heaven," that,  as Klein  indignantly puts it, "He con­  fines himself  to heaven! ... He  does not intrude upon  earth!"
8 For  a discussion  of the  Cabbalistic doctrine of "Aught from  Naught," see Fischer, pp. 96-98.

57

SUNFLOWER  SEEDS

9  In his Introduction, Tom  Marshall argues that  Klein's "vision  of unity" would  have been "more profound" if he had  had  "a  greater awareness" that "man's wish to be the One  generates both what  he calls good and  what  he calls evil"  (p. xiv). I argue that Klein  was fully aware  of this, and  it is precisely  this awareness which  gives his vision of unity  its profundity.
10 If this  were  not  enough   to  identify   Houde, the  mayor's reference to  himself  as "Cyrano" would  be. Houde had  a  notoriously  large  nose and  as a  young  man  he "tried to  hide  his chagrin  by playing  a  magnificent Cyrano de  Bergerac in  small theatrical companies." Eva-Lis  Wuorio,  "The One  and  Only  Houde," Maclean's, December 15, 1947, p. 7·
11 For  other examples of Klein's use of odour  to suggest  evil,  see "Not All the  Per­
fumes  of Arabia," Version  I and  II, and The  Second Scroll, pp. 64-65.





WHERE '14M I GOING
 


Tom Wayman


I remember walking  on a dirt  road  through the woods one autumn afternoon as a child,
not  far from  a lake, with  adults, the  sumach  beside  us
already crimson  in  the  sunlight
and  a small,  chill  wind -I  am  wearing a coat­
blowing  down  red and  yellow leaves where  birds call,  as we pass.

And  the years afterwards
I belonged  to the organizations that  went camping,
or my enjoyment now
of a breeze billowing  the canvas  of my tent, are  as though I could  someday
be on a trail  descending a ridge, worrying  as always
about the hour,  or the weather, or about animals, and  at  the  bottom  enter  a wood
in October, and  come  upon  an  old  road
and  follow it, until  ahead  of me
I am  aware  of figures
-a man,  a woman,  and  a child - and  find myself once more
walking securely in the turning seasons, safe,  in another time.

ss


CLAIRE MARTIN

Une Interview





Franfoise Iqbal & Gilles Dorion





Q:   Que represente pour vous l'ecriture?

R:  Si l'on ecrit, c'est parce que le "moi"  peut s'exprimer  par l'ecriture. 11 est bien entendu  que si l'on  travaille  dans le domaine  des arts, que ce soit la musique, la peinture,  l'ecriture, c'est pour exprimer  quelque chose qui ne peut pas s'exprimer dans le courant  de la vie par un autre travail. Cela ne veut pas dire qu'on  ne peut pas vivre sans s'exprimer  de  cette  fa on.
d'ecrire  tout a coup. Je fais encore un peu de traduction  de temps en temps, mais
cela, c'est la chose tout en ne l'etant  pas. C'est l'acte exrerieur d'ecrire  sans l'acte interieur,  c'est !'imitation d'ecrire, si l'on peut dire.

Q:   Pour vous, ecrire incarne  t il

R:  Je pense que c'est le travail de !'exegete d'analyser ce genre de chose. Je ne crois pas que l'ecrivain  soit pousse a analyser aussi finement. Je ne peux pas vous dire si vous avez raison. Ou se situe l"'anima", ou se situe l"'animus", je ne peux vraiment pas vous le dire. Les Morts, par exemple, c'est vraiment le dialogue entre les deux, c'est toujours  la meme  personne qui  parle, c'est a dire
je me reponds.

Un ecrivain comme Gide, qui s'analysait  enormement,  qui reftechissait beaucoup sur lui meme,
plupart  des ecrivains sont des etres plus spontanes.

Q:  Jusqu'a quel  point ecrire  un roman  est il deploiement  de virtuosire?
R:  De virtuosite? Je  ne crois pas. J'ai toujours eu le desir simplement. J'entends bien que la simplicire de l'un  n'est pas celle de l'autre.  Pour  moi, ce doit etre  un exercice de style, avec  autre  chose en  plus. L'histoire  que  j'ecris doit  etre  assez soignee pour  que ce soit aussi un exercice de style. Cela fait  partie  du  plaisir. Si j'ecris n'importe comment,  sans la moindre recherche, sans jamais chercher  autre


59

CLAIRE MARTIN

chose que  le mot qui  me viendrait  d'abord   a l'esprit,  sans  jamais  chercher  de musique,  d'assonance,  de dissonance, dans  le son que  cela  donne   a l'oreille  in­ terieure  comme a l'ext,erieure d'ailleurs, il me semble que <;a  ne vaut  pas la peine
d'ecrire  une histoire. Ce n'est pas que cela ecrire un livre.

Q:  Ecrire, c'est le plaisir de l'ecrivain.  Est-ce que vous recherchez  aussi le plaisir du lecteur?

R:  Cela doit venir par surcroit, si c'est reussi. Ce n'est que le lecteur  qui  pourra dire si c'est reussi. Je fais toujours tout ce que  je peux. Je laisse aller un manuscrit quand  j'en ai fait ce que je peux faire de mieux. C'est le lecteur qui  peut ensuite
dire s'il en retire du plaisir. Mon plaisir a moi est tout a fait different. 11 faudrait
etre bien complaisant  envers soi-meme pour retirer d'un  livre qu'on  ecrit le meme
plaisir qu'en  retirera  le lecteur satisfait.
Q:   Que pensez-vous de la situation transactionnelle que l'on retrouve a l'interieur du nouveau  roman, situation qui fait que l'auteur interpelle  le lecteur ou encore le dirige au moyen d'indices semes dans le texte?
R:  J'ai  beaucoup  pratique le "nouveau  roman"  a ses debuts et, par la suite, je l'ai abandonne radicalement.  Je n'en lis plus, j'evite cela comme la peste. J'ai  pris cela en haine et je ne peux pas vous en parler. Je ne connais pas ces ecrivains qui font des trues transactionnels,  comme vous dites, je n'en  sais rien et  je n'en  veux rien connaitre.

Q:  Butor est un des auteurs qui  pratiquent  beaucoup  ce genre et n'est-il pas vrai que vous aimez Butor?
R:  11 fut un temps ou j'aimais beaucoup  Butor, dans le temps de la Modification, par exemple. Puis, comme pour les autres,  je l'ai completement abandonne. L'on change de gout, l'on change d'idee. Les derniers livres que  j'ai lus de Butor etaient tellement  enfonces dans ces nouvelles fa<;ons de s'exprimer, qu'on  ne sait  meme pas de quoi il est question. 11 semble qu'on  n'ait  qu'une idee, c'est d'ennuyer.  Je
refuse de m'ennuyer  en lisant. J'ai  appris cela il y a une quinzaine d'annees  a peu
pres. Si la premiere page d'un  livre me deplait,  je commence  a me mefier serieuse­
ment. Car  je pretends qu'il faut  plaire des la premiere  page, ou bien cela ne vaut
pas la peine de mettre un livre entre les mains du lecteur.  C'est  presque l'insulter que dele forcer a continuer sans savoir s'il va l'aimer.

Q:  Vous avez done la hantise de la premiere page?

R:  Oui,  cela fait partie du respect qu'on  doit au lecture. Cela fait partie aussi du respect que l'on se doit comme ecrivain. Si on commence  de travers, <;a ne vaut pas la peine d'ecrire. C'est important, un debut de livre. S'il est rate,  je pense qu'il ne se retablira  jamais. Autrefois, un livre reussi, ce n'etait  pas la meme chose que maintenant. Des tas de romans du siecle dernier  commencent  par une tres longue

6o

CLAIRE MARTIN


introduction, une tres longue  presentation  des faits, des lieux, des caracteres, des families. La plupart  des romans de Balzac commencent par une assez longue expo­ sition mais, enfin, c'est Balzac:  on sait qu'on  ne s'ennuiera  pas. Je  prefere finale­ ment les ecrivains du XIXe siecle a ceux demon siecle. lls ne m'ennuient pas du tout.

Q:   D'ou vous vient votre amour  de la langue, de sa justesse, de son raffinement?

R:  J'ai  eu une grand-mere maternelle qui etait  une deesse, qui parlait  Un franc;ais admirable,  qui ecrivait d'ailleurs  un franc;ais tout aussi admirable,  qui etait grande liseuse, qui avait toujours  Chateaubriand sur sa table de chevet, qui me faisait des reproches  chaque  fois que  je parlais  mal, que  j'employais  un  terme  fautif.  Ma mere, sa fille, etait  pareille.  Mais rna mere, toujours  malade,  etait  moins severe. Grand-maman m'a  toujours  longuement  explique qu'il  fallait  apprendre a bien parler, a bien ecrire, quand  on etait  petit.

Ensuite,  je suis allee chez les Ursulines. On a eu souvent !'impression  que  j'avais bien mal parle des Ursulines, dans Un  Cant  de  fer. Je crois que  j'en ai tres bien parle  par  moments.  Les reproches  que  j'ai faits ne concernaient   pas les etudes. Ordinairement, les cours 'etaient  excellents et, surtout,  les cours de franc;ais qui etaient donnes par des specialistes.

A sept ans, toute  petite, on ne faisait plus de fautes d'orthographe, ce n'etait  pas admis. Maintenant je r ois,
une faute par ligne. Ca n'est plus important, dit-on. Je veux  bien, mais on change la langue, on pratique  la mediocrite.

Q:  Vous avez ecrit dans  Avec ou sans amour:  "Les defauts ont des sexes," l'ecri­
ture en a-t-elle un aussi?

R:  Presque  tout  ce que  j'ai ecrit  dans  Avec ou sans amour,  je le rejette  plus ou moins. J'etais  encore  jeune et Iegere quand  j'ai ecrit cela. Tres souvent, il y a des choses qui ne sont la que pour l'ironie du texte, qui ne me semblent  pas plus vraies que leur contraire.  Je pourrais dire aussi: "Les defauts n'ont  pas de sexe," cela me semblerait  aussi vrai. Cela dit, il y a des dHauts  qui ont des sexes. Ce sont de tres graves  defauts.  Par  exemple,  la  criminalite  est masculine,  c'est  une  chose bien connue. Puis, l'esprit de guerre, de revolte, de revolution, de violence et de je-vous­ tue-dans-la-rue, <_;a, c'est masculin.

Q:   Ma vraie question etait: Est-ce que l'ecriture  a un sexe?

a: Je pense qu'elle en avait  un bien gros autrefois, si j'ose m'exprimer ainsi. C'est une chose qui a un peu disparu,  je pense. Peut...etre que dans mes livres, si on cher­ chait  dans  ce sens-la, on  trouverait  beaucoup  moins de diflerenciation  feminine dans les derniers que dans les premiers.

61

CLAIRE MARTIN

Q:   Y a-t-il un imaginaire feminin qui se differencie essentiellement de l'imaginaire masculin? Helene Comus dit, elle, que les femmes "ecrivent  ala place des hommes, dans une masculinite et sans jamais avoir cherche  a capter  autre  chose, a inscrire quelque  chose qui serait de l'ordre de la  eminite."

R:  Cela tend a disparaitre, probablement  a cause de la vie que les femmes menent maintenant. Si nous faisons la meme vie, si nous vivons de la  meme fa<;on, nos
11eactions en face des chases tendent a s'uniformiser.  D'ailleurs, le monde entier est
en train  de s'uniformiser.  Je ne suis pas du tout d'accord avec ce qu'a  dit Helene
Cixous a ce su jet.

Ecoutez, Colette, c'est la parfaite feminite dans ce qu'elle peut avoir de perfection. Son style, en perfection, est comparable  a celui de n'importe quel ecrivain  honune.

Je  pense que  tout  est vrai et que tout  est faux.  11 arrivera  a un  moment  donne quelque  f,eministe qui dira:  "Cette  femme, je la rejette,  parce qu'elle a ecrit  p. 56 telle chose." Et George Sand, alors!

Q:  Les feministes font une grande distinction entre George Sand  et Colette!

R:  Oui,  mais on  parle au  point de vue  eministe.
feministe. Je viens de terminer le onzieme volume de sa correspondence  et je vous la recommande, c'est une merveille!

Q:  Y a-t-il, integre a votre matiere romanesque, une pr·eoccupation consciente de
!'affirmation  de la femme?

R:  Oui, cela me semble 'evident. La femme dont la destinee s'exerce en derivation de celle d'un  homme, qui n'est que la femme de celui-ci, la fille de celui-la, ou la mere d'un  autre, <;a me semble la fin de la desolation. C'est un des grands change­ ments que notre siecle aura apportes et e'en est un merveilleux. Evidemment il y a encore bien des bavures, bien des difficuhes. Une femme se demande  s'il vaut  la peine de travailler quand on lui dit:  "Mais  vous etes bien payee, pour une femme, vous avez un tres bon salaire pour une femme!" Mais c'est le propre  de tout etre humain  de vouloir r·egir sa propre destinee. Ecrire  des histoires de gens qui  ne le font pas, cela m'aurait sembloe fort ennuyeux!

Q:   Et, pour vous, le dominant,  c'est la femme, le domine, c'est l'homme?

R:  J'ai  toujours  cru  que  les femmes etaient  tres  superieures  aux  honunes.  Les femmes sont capables de faire tout ce que font les hommes comme travail,  en plus de faire des milliers de chases qu'un  homme ne peut faire.

lls sont rares les hommes qui peuvent apprendre a se debrouiller  dans !'existence. lls ont toujours  besoin d'une  femme, pour que  tout marche.  Je me demande  si ce n'est pas pour cette raison qu'ils se marient ...

CLAIRE MARTIN


Au  point de  vue intellectuel,  je pense qu'il  y a  une assez grande  difference.  La femme  n'est  pas aussi "exbibitionniste," aussi vaniteuse,  ce qui  fait  qu'elle  fera beaucoup  mains de chases stupefiantes.

On nous dit souvent:  "Ou  est votre Michel-Ange, vous autres, les femmes, ou est votre VanDyck, ouest votre Shakespeare?"  Est-ce que les hommes sont vraiment superieurs  pour cela? Bien souvent, cela signifie que les femmes sont mieux equi­
librees, mains portees a faire des chases retentissantes. La vie quotidienne,  pourvu
qu'elle  soit belle et enrichissante,  leur suffit. Evidemment,  ce serait  malheureux
qu'il n'y ait pas eu de Michel-Ange, de Shakespeare. Mais est-ce que <;a veut dire que l'homme est superieur?

La  plupart   des femmes  n'ont   jamais ete  en  situation  d'accomplir  de  grandes oeuvres d'eclat.  Je pense qu'il faut longtemps pour entrer  dans cet esprit. La  plu­
part des femmes ne voient pas !'interet  de sacrifier toute une vie a faire des chases
extraordinaires.

Peut-Ctre que les hommes ant plus de genie que les femmes. Maison a toujours dit que le genie etait  pres de Ia folie ...

Q:  Dans vas romans, les hommes sont votre cible favorite ...

R:  Non! les femmes aussi, parfois! Dans Avec ou sans amour, on peut dire "moitie­ moitie." Dans Doux-Amer, man editeur n'est pas antipathique, il n'est pas si faible que <;a, il est amoureux!

Q:   C'est une faiblesse?

R:  Ah! non, c'est une force d'aimer! II se trouve qu'il aime d'une  fa<;on qui n'est pas admise par les gens. La plupart  croit que I'amour,  pour un homme, doit passer apres  le travail  alors que !'amour, pour les femmes, doit  passer avant  le travail. Pourquoi  doit-il en etre ainsi dans taus les cas?
Q:   On  a dit,  a propos  de Colette,  que  l'homme  etait  un  objet  pour  elle, qu'il n'etait,  dans son oeuvre,  qu'un  accident  de parcours.  Pourrait-on dire  Ia meme
chose a propos de votre oeuvre?

R:  Dans les livres de Colette,  les hommes sont encore  plus objets que dans  mes livres. L'homme, c'est vraiment  un beau jouet, dans les livres de Colette. Je pense
a Cheri, mains, ala  Naissance du  jour, qui est son roman le plus merveilleux.

II y a des quantites de femmes pour qui un homme est un beau  jouet. Ce n'est pas extraordinaire, cela!  Les hommes croient  qu'ils sont tau jours assez bien, n'est-ce pas? Pourquoi le contraire  ne serait-il pas vrai aussi? Pourquoi  faut-il toujours que ce soit Ia femme qui soit le bel objet? II doit y avoir de nombreuses femmes qui ant envie d'un  bel objet aussi!

6g

CLAIRE MARTIN

Q:   Dans  Quand j'aurai paye ton visage, Robert est un bel objet?

R:  Oui,  quoique Robert soit  un  homme  doue  d'une grande sensibilit·e et  d'une grande moralite aussi. 11 fait  une  vie qui,  d'apres les normes  bourgeoises,  est  im­ morale,  mais c'est  un  homme  tres moral.  Ce n'est  pas si frequent la moralite chez les hommes!

Q:   Dans  les Morts, la disposition  de  l'appartement reproduit une  scene  presque classique. 11 y a une serie de partes qui ouvrent sur  une antichambre et done,  c'est comme  la scene theatrale d'autrefois?

R:  Oui,  bien sur,  a
du theatre, c'est qu'on a voulu  en faire  une  piece.  Mais  je me demande si ce n'est pas une solution  de facilite.  On s'est dit:  "Voila, c'est  dialogue, a

Q:  Votre  oeuvre  m'apparait comme  une  elaboration de  la  serenite   par  l'inter­ mediaire d'un  regard reflexif.  Cette  serenite  est-elle  un  masque  conquis  sur  des vertiges refuses, c'est-a-dire une sorte de triomphe de l'esprit?

R:  La ser·enhe est toujours une sorte de triomphe, a mains  qu'on ait  beaucoup de propension au sommeil.  La serenite,  <;a se gagne  comme  n'importe quai.  11 s'agit de faire  face d'abord et de gagner  ce qu'on veut  avoir,  ensuite, de faire  confiance a  la  vie et  a soi-meme  et  d'etre entoure de  gens  en  qui  on  a  confiance. Savoir s'entourer, c'est deja  la moitie  de la vie qui  est gagnee. Je  n'avais rien  de ce qu'il fallait  pour etre  une femme sereine a l'origine. On  parle  toujours des traumatismes de l'enfance; j'en ai eu rna bonne  part! Cependant, j'ai  refuse de me laisser trau­ matiser  pour  toujours par  l'enfance que  j'ai  eue.  Quand on  commence a  refuser ces choses-la,  on  refuse  tout  ce qui  est contraire a  la  serenite  ... si l'on  veut  la serenite. Ce n'est  pas tout  le monde  qui  la veut. 11 y a des gens qui  ont  besoin de leurs  angoisses,  <_;a   leur  est  necessaire.  11 y a ·enormement d'ecrivains  qui  suent  l'angoisse; je pense que, si on la leur enlevait, leur  carriere serait  terminee.

Q:   Croyez-vous qu'il  y ait  un lien entre  le fait  que  vous ayez atteint la serenite  et le fait  que  vous n'ecriviez  plus?

R:  Ah! non, c'est toutle contraire. Je me suis mise a ecrire  parce  que  j'avais atteint la serenite. J'ai  commence a ecrire alors que  j'avais 45 ans. Des l'age  de 30 ans, a peu  pres,  j'avais  atteint la serenit·e. Sinon,  je n'aurais jamais  pu ·ecrire Dans  un gant  de  fer. Les faits  que  j'ai  decrits  ne peuvent ·etre vus que  d'un oeil serein  et ironique.

Q:   Quand on considere  Avec ou sans amour  jusqu'aux Morts, avez-vous !'impres­
sion qu'il  y a une ·evolution du  paraitre vers l'etre?

R:  Oui,  surement. Dans  mon  premier  livre, il n'y  a  pas  beaucoup de  reflexions. C'est  un livre leger;  alors que les Morts, c'est un livre grave.

CLAIRE MARTIN


Q:  Est-ce que le lecteur est justifie de penser que les Marts, laissant Ia narratrice avec elle-meme, Ia libcrent?
R:  En  tout  cas, ils Ia laissent seule face a son travail.  Peut-on  appeler  cela  une liberation?  La fin est quand  meme assez melancolique. Je ne sais pas si c'est une liberation, mais elle est libre de ne faire que son travail. Elle part. Qu'est-ce qu'elle va faire? Je ne m'interroge jamais sur ce que vont faire mes personnages quand  le livre sera termine.

Q:   Comment  vous vient l'idee d'un  livre? Est-ce quelque chose que vous mijotez?

R:  Que  j'ai mijote, oui.  je  ne crois pas beaucoup  a !'inspiration. Qu'on  s'assoie sous le coup de !'inspiration et qu'on se mette a ecrire, je ne crois pas a cela. Ordi­
nairement,  il y a un certain  nombre de chases que j'ai envie de dire. Autour  de ce que je veux dire se construit une histoire pour me permettre d'illustrer  man propos. Ainsi, pour Doux-Amer: c'est Ia femme qui travaille et qui, peu a peu, emerge de Ia mediocrite quotidienne par une vie de travail. J'ai  construit mon histoire autour
de cette idee.
Q:   Ecrivez-vous un roman  a partir d'un  plan precis et trcs detaille?
R:  Un  plan precis? Oui.  Tres detaille? Non. Je ne fais pas de plan  chapitre  par chapitre. Sauf dans Quand j'aurai paye ton  visage. Habituellement, je sais exacte­
ment ou je vais, ce qui va se passer, les evenements principaux  et je m'en  tiens a
<_;a. Je n'aime  pas commencer un roman en me laissant mener par mes personnages. Cela ne m'inspire  pas. II y a peut-Ctre Doux-Amer ou, tout  a coup,  j'ai change le debut, en relisant mon manuscrit.

Dans les Marts, ce n'est pas pareil, ce n'est pas veritablement  un roman, c'est plutot un roman-essai. II se passe peu de chases. Les faits ne sont qu'evoques.  Je n'ai  pas fait de plan. J'ai seulement ecrit les propos que je voulais tenir, une sorte de nomen­ clature des sujets que je voulais traiter.  J'ai suivi mon inspiration  comme dans une
sorte de conversation.  J'ai ·ecrit a peu pres six fois plus de pages que Ia publication
elle-meme. Apres,  j'ai effectue un tri.

Q:   Quel est, parmi votre production, votre livre prefere?
R:  Je  crois c'est les Morts. Mais  je mets a part  Dans  un  gant  de  fer. Un  livre autobiographique ne peut pas etre compare  a un livre qui ne l'est pas. Je ne veux pas dire qu'il est meilleur, qu'il est mains beau, que je l'aime mieux, que  je l'aime
mains,  je ne peux pas le comparer.  C'est un secteur a part dans ce que  j'ai fait.

Q:  Les Morts, c'est aussi un espace autobiographique des lacs interieurs,  beaucoup plus que dans les memoires?

R:  Dans tous mes livres, sauf Dans  un  gant  de  fer, ce qu'il  peut  y avoir d'auto-

CLAIRE MARTIN

biographique  ne peut etre qu'interieur. Je ne raconte  pas des histoires qui me sont arrivees. Parce que Gabrielle est un ecrivain, les gens simples s'imaginent que  j'ai deja ere amoureuse  d'un  de mes editeurs. Ca n'a  rien a voir. Ce n'est  pas comme a

Q:  Pourquoi  avez-vous cesse d'ecrire?

R:  I1 y a plusieurs raisons. La plus ordinaire,  c'est que man mari a pris sa retraite et que nous sommes alles vivre en France. Je me vois mal passant toutes mes jour­ nees a travailler  avec un homme qui, lui, a cesse de travailler.  Cela ne serait  pas juste pour lui. Il serait isole dans la vie, il serait  tout seul. Surtout  quand  on vit dans un autre pays, on a besoin d'etre tres ensemble et de s'appuyer l'un sur I'autre.

Il y a aussi que tout ce qui s'est passe dans le Quebec  au point de vue de la langue m'a completement  degouree. Je n'ai plus eu envie d'ecrire.  Ca m'a fait rager cette histoire de "joual," a
comme  une espece de rancune  qui  fait  que  je ne me  reconcilierai  jamais  avec l'idee d'ecrire.

Q:   Ca  veut  dire  que  quand  vous ecrivez  vous  vous adressez  plutot  au  lecteur quebecois qu'au  lecteur fran ais?

R:   Surement! Je ne me suis jamais adressee au lecteur fran  ais. Martin ecrit pour les Fran ais,"
rna langue, et je suis Quebecoise. Si la langue a pris cette tournure, je n'y suis pour rien. Je  me suis assez battue  contre  cela!  Il  me semble  que  j'ai  prouve  que  le fran  ais
tional,"  je trouve a
tout.

Q:  Il y a de nos bans ecrivains quebecois, comme Aquin,  Bessette, Carrier, God­ bout  qui  eux ne recourent  pas au  joual mais ant  neanmoins  vecu cette  periode "joual." Ne peut-on pas considerer le joual comme un mal necessaire?

R:  Je ne crois pas au mal necessaire, en rien. Par exemple, on dit que la violence est un mal necessaire. Je ne peux pas accepter  cela. D'autres ant  accepte de con­ tinuer  a ecrire  dans ce climat. Parmi  ceux que  vous avez nommes, i1 y en  a qui ant refuse de vivre. Le joual y a-t-il ere pour quelque  chose? Je n'en sais rien.

Cependant, je vais vous raconter  une  petite  anecdote  a  ce sujet.  Un  jour,  j'ai participe  a  une  table  ronde,  dans  un  paste  de  radio  anglais,  avec Jean  Ethier­ Blais, Hubert  Aquin  et d'autres.  Aquin  a dit "A  partir  de ce soir,  je ne  parlerai qu'anglais,  parce  que  je refuse ce qui se passe dans  le Quebec,  a  propos de la langue." Il s'est ecroule sur la table et il s'est mis a pleurer.  Je  ne crois pas qu'il etait  homme a pouvoir vivre facilement avec cela. Je ne vous dis pas qu'il  n'avait

66

CLAIRE MARTIN

pas d'autres raisons. Mais  je vous dis que cette question le traumatisait enorme­ ment. On ne se met pas a pleurer devant tout le monde, surtout  devant des Anglais, pour rien!

Q:   Croyez-vous que le Quebec  soit en train  de se sortir  de cette  phase  "jouali­
sante"?

R:  Je n'en sais rien.

Q:  Que  pensez-vous des ecrivains quebecois de votre generation?

R:  Bessette a ecrit du joual, enfin du langage populaire. Aquin,  lui, n'en a jamais fait. Aquin  etait  un excellent ecrivain, il ecrivait merveilleusement.  J'ai  aime les premiers livres de Godbout,  mais apres, je n'y comprenais plus rien. C'est toujours Ia meme chose. J'ai  participe  a je ne sais combien de jurys. Je vais vous expliquer comment  je procedais pour illustrer ce que je pense du  joual et l'efiet que cela me fait.

Je r ois
et, si c'est ecrit en joual, je le ferme, je le mets de rote.

J'ecris  sur  rna feuille:  non. Je  n'en  lis pas plus long, man  jugement  est fait,  je refuse dele lire. Je dis au  jury:  "Je  ne l'ai pas lu, parce que c'est ecrit en joual." Si on me dit:  "Ce  n'est pas juste." Je reponds:  "Oui,  c'est juste," parce que c'est une raison suffisante pour moi dele refuser.

Cela vous montre  a quel  point  je refuse le "joual." Meme  si on me dit:  "Mais c'est excellent,"  je ne crois pas que <;a  puisse etre excellent. D'ailleurs,  quand  on travaille avec ce genre d'outil, finalement, il ne se passe rien. II n'y a pas d'anec­ dote, les personnages sont inexistants. II n'y a qu'un  personnage, c'est le langage.

Q:    Pour  plusieurs de ces romanciers, cette lange qui manque de forme represente
!'alienation des Quebecois.

R:  Surement  que cela represente I'alienation des Quebecois!  Mais  je ne vois pas pourquoi  on essaierait de propager  cette forme d'alienation. Que  ce soit le reflet ou Ia chose, a toute fin pratique, <;a donne un livre. Ce livre se repand, les gens le lisent. Si vous avez une dizaine de nouvelles expressions Ia-dedans,  tout  de suite, on les adopte et <;a se repand. Finalement, on ne comprend  plus ce qu'on  nous dit. Combien  d'expressions  a Ia mode a-t-on entendues qui etaient  sombrement  ridi­ cules? II faut  dire que la-dessus Ia television est bien coupable.

Q:   La critique  vous reproche  beaucoup  ainsi que Ia jeune generation  d'ecrivains votre evasion  hors de Ia "quebecite." Quelles sont  vas reactions  en  face  de ces reproches?

R:  Je n'ai  pas de reaction.  Car  je ne les connais pas, ces reproches.  Je  ne r ois

CLAIRE MARTIN

jamais  rien, personne  n'est charge  de me faire suivre  les commentaires  dans  les journeaux,  dans les revues.

Je ne vois pas pourquoi  je serais restee ici si je n'en avais pas eu envie. Je ne suis pas la seule. C'est assez curieux que les romancieres  quebecoises finissent toujours par s'en aller. Nous sommes nombreuses a etre parties. C'est un phenomene  assez etrange ...

11 y a plusieurs reponses a cette question, autant que  pour le fait que  j'aie arrete d'ecrire.

D'abord, le climat  du Quebec  ne me convenait  pas, les hivers sont trop  durs, les etes sont trop chauds. Physiquement, je n'etais jamais a mon aise. Le medecin nous recommandait de changer  de climat.  C'est  deja  une  raison suffisante pour  aller vivre ailleurs. Mon mari avait tres envie d'aller finir sa vie sur la cote d'Azur,  dans l'arriere-pays, plutot. Puis, il n'y avait  plus rien qui  pouvait  me retenir  au  point de vue "climat  litteraire."  Je ne voulais plus les voir et eux non plus ne voulaient plus me voir. Quand je suis partie,  un de nos ecrivains  a ecrit  "Bon  debarras." C'etait  reciproque.

Q:  Est-ce qu'il y a dans votre deracinement  une rupture qui est delivrance,  ou un refus de soi sterilise?
R:  11 n'y a pas de refus de moi. 11 y a un ref us, oui, mais du climat litteraire  dans lequel je vivais.

Q:  Avez-vous senti cette rupture  comme une delivrance?

R:  Oui,  je crois.

Q:  Alors vous etes heureuse?

R:  Bien  silr,  que  je suis  heureuse!  Remarquez  que   j'etais  heureuse  aussi  au Canada. Je suis par  nature  une femme  heureuse.  11 y avait  des choses qui  me deplaisaient. J'ai  pense que je serais plus heureuse ailleurs:  j'ai eu raison.

Q:   Quels sont vos auteurs preferes?

R:  Plus  je vieillis, plus mes auteurs  vieillissent aussi. Nous vieillissons ensemble.
11 y a tres peu d'ecrivains actuels qui me plaisent vraiment. Je me suis mise a lire les auteurs  de  rna  jeunesse. Je  les trouve  merveilleux.  Je  relis toujours  Balzac, Stendhal. Je me suis mise a lire toute la correspondance de George Sand; de ce fait,  j'ai commenoe a lire ses livres, que  je n'avais  pas Ius, pour la plupart, parce qu'on  m'avait  dit que c'etait d'un  ennui puissant, ce qui n'est pas vrai.

Je lis Gide,  je lis beaucoup  de memoires, parmi  les actuels. Tout  le monde  ecrit ses memoires  maintenant. Souvent,  ce sont des comediens  que  j'ai vus  jouer ou que j'ai vut au cinema quand  j'etais jeune. 11 y a toujours  une espece de nostalgie.

68

CLAIRE MARTIN

On  lit cela un peu par  curiosit:e, mais j'ai toujours beaucoup  aime le monde des comediens et le monde du cinema, pas pour y avoir v,ecu, simplement  pour les avoir vus jouer. Ces gens-la ant  toujours  des vies extraordinaires, un  peu folies. Leurs memoires sont tres divertissants. J'en lis cinq ou six par annee.

Q:   Les auteurs  franc;ais qui vous avaient influencee restent tau jours vas livres de chevet?

R:  J'ai  tout  Colette  dans  une tres jolie edition. C'est deja  un plaisir de tenir ces livres dans ses mains. ]'en lis toutle temps. Taus les mois, j'en lis un. Butor, non, je n'ai meme pas apporte  avec moi La Modification. Diderot,  je le lis encore. Mais pour repondre  a une question comme Ia votre, il faudrait  se faire une petite Iiste. Quant a Hemingway, c'est fini. II y a dans ses livres une espece de violence, fausse­ ment virile, on dirait  le rattrapage d'un  castre.

Q:   Lisez-vous des romans quebecois?

R:  On m'en envoie. J'enlis parfois. Je lis les livres de Louise Maheux-Forcier, par exemple. J'ai  lu les romans d'Anne  Hebert.

Q:   Est-ce qu'il y en a que vous aimez particulierement?

R:  Specialement  Louise Maheux-Forcier. C'est un ecrivain  qui dit des chases tres belles, mais qui se laisse parfois emporter par Ia beaute de Ia chose. Son vocabulaire est tres fleuri. II y a plethore d'adjectifs,  une sorte de lyrisme. Elle a un amour  de l'enfance que, moi, je ne comprends pas du tout. Je n'ai  pas garde un bon souvenir de Ia mienne. Je n'aime  pas les enfants. Je comprends mal qu'on  soit si imbu des merveilles de l'enfance. Mais,  je l'admets.  Je  vois bien  que,  pour  elle, c'est une chose extd!mement  importante. Ce n'est pas un reproche que  je lui adresse, c'est simplement !'accusation d'une  difference que je constate. Mais, on ne lit pas simp­ lement les livres des gens qui  nous ressemblent. Sinon, on serait  toujours  devant le miroir, ce qui ne serait  pas sain non plus.

Q:    Le principal  theme de vas romans c'est l'amour.  Est-ce que Ia beaute est syno­
nyme de !'amour ou une condition de !'amour?

R:  Non, c'est une circonstance.  C'est quelque chose en plus. Dans certains cas, ce peut etre une condition. En tout cas, il y a certainement  un rejet de Ia laideur. Mais qu'il  y ait  une  necessite de  beaute,  peut-etre  pas. Le  personnage  masculin  dans Doux-Amer, je ne sais pas s'il est beau. Je ne me suis jamais pose Ia question. Pour­ tant, il a ete passionnement  aime. Je pense que, sans avoir de laideur, il devait etre un peu comme toutle monde,  un peu ordinaire. Le fait  d'etre  beau  change telle­ ment  de chases dans  Ia vie ... Je  ne suis pas sure que  ce soit un  bonheur  d'etre  tres beau. Je ne suis pas sure que ce soit quelque chose de tres bon pour Ie bonheur.

6g

CLAIRE MARTIN

Vous me disiez: "Le theme principal de vos romans, c'est l'amour," c'est le theme principal de Ia vie aussi. 11 n'y a rien de plus important que l'amour, je crois.

Q:   Dans Doux-Amer, peut-on parler de soumission amoureuse  du narrateur?

R:  Oui,  je crois. Je pense qu'il  considerait  Gabrielle  comme  une femme  qui  lui etait superieure. A ce moment-la, il peut y avoir soumission.

Q:  Lui etait-elle  aussi superieure  au point de vue travail?  Parce  que c'est quand meme lui, editeur,  qui l'avait  lancee, avait  corrige son manuscrit.  11 s'etait  pour ainsi dire substitue a elle. Parce qu'elle dit:  "Le deuxieme livre, il sera de moi."

R:  Je ne me suis jamais pose Ia question pour  voir s'il l'avait  vraiment  refait, ce livre, s'il avait fait du "rewriting," comme on lit, ou s'il avait simplement  corri les fautes  d'orthographe, s'il y en avait.  Mais,  j'ai !'impression  que  Gabrielle  ne devait pas faire de fautes d'orthographe. Ou s'il avait corrige quelques gaucheries, quelques  betises. Mais, vous savez, je pense qu'un editeur  demande  toujours  de faire quelques corrections. Pierre Tisseyre m'a toujours demande  de faire de petites corrections ici et Ia. Je les ai toujours faites parce que  j'ai confiance en lui et que je l'aime.  Je sais que s'il me demande  de corriger  quelque  chose, c'est pour mon bien. Mais, Gabrielle est une femme beaucoup  plus vaniteuse que je peux l'etre.

Q:  Sur quoi  est fonde le principe de domination dans l'amour chez vos  person­
nages? Fondez-vous cela sur Ia superiorite de !'intelligence?

R:  Pour  moi ce qu'il  y a de plus important  chez les etres humains,  c'est !'intelli­ gence.  Meme  si, chez mes personnages, Ia  beaure  compte,  !'intelligence  est  de beaucoup superieure. S'il y a tant de beaure chez mes personnages, c'est parce que c'est une chose qui change la vie. Cela devient  un element  eminemment roman­  esque. On  n'a  pas Ia meme vie si on est beau  et si on ne l'est  pas. Ca,  j'en suis persuadee. 11 vous arrive des chases, si vous etes beau, qui ne vous arriveraient pas autrement. Pas toujours des chases agreables, cependant. Une  comedienne  extre­ mement  belle ne fera pas Ia meme carriere  qu'une autre  qui  n'a  que du  talent. Est-ce un bien? Probablement  pas.

Q:  Dans Doux-Amer, votre editeur ne se complait-il  pas dans les "souffrances" de l'amour?

R:  Oui,  bien sur. Mais les "souffrances de }'amour," c'est encore  de l'amour. 11 dit quelque  part: "Puisque  c'est tout ce qui me reste d'elle." J'ai !'impression  que c;a doit etre vrai pour bien des gens. Bien souvent, les souffrances de l'amour  sont aussi importantes que les plaisirs de l'amour, parce  que c'est ce qui  vous prouve que vous aimez, ce qui vous fait toucher  du  doigt que cet amour  existe, qu'il  est important. Plus vous souffrez, plus il vous semble qu'il  existe et qu'il  est vrai. Ce n'est pas une raison suffisante pour chercher  a souffrir. Si un amour  est heureux,

CLAIRE MARTIN

on le prend comme il est. Je vois une exception:  la jalousie. La jalousie peut faire d'un  amour  heureux  un amour  malheureux,  parce que c'est une nevrose. C'est un vice qui ne m'a  jamais beaucoup  inspire. 11 y a un passage dans Doux-Amer ou il parle de sa jalousie, mais c'est bref. Je ne pense pas que c'etait  la le caractere  de l'editeur.  Ce sont simplement  les circonstances qui font  que, lorsque'on  aime  et qu'on  est trompe,  on ne peut  pas faire autrement  que de souffrir de jalousie.

Q:  Dans les Morts, vous dites que I'amour c'est de l'obstination?

R:  Si on ne s'obstine pas apres un amour, i1 n'existe plus, finalement, au bout d'un certain  temps. L'amour, ce n'est pas une chose qui reste la comme un objet qu'on met sur une table. Un  amour, il faut s'obstiner  ale garder,  a le faire fructifier, a l'embellir. C'est un soin de taus les instants.

Q:   Dans les Morts, la narratrice trouve l'amour  apres la mort de ses amants. Est-ce une preuve que l'ecriture est une entreprise de sublimation?

R:  Elle doit etre  frappee  par le fait que taus ces gens soient morts. Elle ne peut faire autrement que se poser des questions: "Comment se fait-il que je sois entouree d'amours mortes?" Il peut y avoir ace moment-la une sorte de sublimation, juste­ ment par obstination.

Q:   Dans Doux-Amer, tout se passe dans le registre du souvenir. Le narrateur revit ses sentiments, ses peines d'amour et se complait dans ses souffrances amoureuses. N'est-ce pas du masochisme?

R:  Je  ne cherche  pas a faire  des livres OU  les gens n'aient  pas de defauts,  OU  les gens n'aient  pas de nevrose, des personnages qui seraient  pleins de qualites.

Q:   On a deja dit de vous: "Claire  Martin,  c'est une intellectuelle, plutot un intel­
lectualiste, elle n'a  pas de sentiment."

R:   Pour etre note comme etant  quelqu'un de sensible, il faut  pleurnicher.  Je n'ai jamais pleumiche dans la vie, je ne vois pas pourquoi  je le ferais dans mes livres.
Q:    Peut-on dire que le perfectionnisme des femmes dans votre oeuvre romanesque, camouflant  en quelque  sorte leur orgueil, leur amour-propre et une certaine com­ plaisance, se rattache a l'art  de la tromperie?

R:  Oh! mais c'est tres vilain ce que vous dites la. Le desir de mieux faire serait en somme un mensonge?

Q:  On dit que c'est souvent de l'orgueil, le perfectionnisme.

R:  Le  perfectionnisme,  cela me semble une immense qualite.  Voila  encore  une autre  chose qu'on  met sur le meme  pied que  l'intellectualisme.  Si taus les etres humains etaient  des perfectionnistes, a
le monde. Ce serait l'euphorie. A partir de celui qui ne jetterait  pas un papier dans

CLAIRE MARTIN

larue a aller jusqu'aux oeuvres les plus extraordinaires, aux traveaux les plus trans­ cendants. Que lcs femmes soient plus perfectionnistes,  je crois que cela arrive sou­ vent. Je  pense que c'est une sorte d'entrainement. On  attend  toujours  plus de la petite fille dans le domaine  du  perfectionnement  quotidien  et  domestique.  Cette attitude  finit par se repandre sur toute une vie.

Q:   Dans vos deux livres de memoires, les evenements  sont  racon{;es d'une  fa on objective, mais, dans vos romans, il y a beaucoup  de sensibilite?

R:  Je le crois. Je n'ai rien contre la sensibilite, au contraire. Un etre qui n'est pas sensible est un pauvre etre. Je me sens assez bien pourvue  pour vivre confortable­ ment une vie heureuse.

Q:   On  vous reproche  vos mots d'auteurs, vos maximes, vos sentences. Vous etes moralisatrice?

R:  Oui,  j'ai meme  pense en faire  un petit livre. Je  me dis que a drole parce qu'il doit y avoir la-dedans taus les contraires  possibles.

Q:   Est-ce que ces I'eflexions ajoutent  de la densite a vos personnages?

R:  Ca doit faire partie de ce que pensent mes personnages. Je n'aime  pas que mes personnages  exprimcnt  de grandes  idees. On  fait  un  personnage,  on  en fait  un grand  philosophe et, quand  on ouvre les guillements,  on lui fait  dire  des betises insondables. Mes personnages pensent un peu et, la plupart  du temps, ils pensent comme moi. Ou bien, s'ils sont contraires a moi, ils pensent exactement  le contraire de moi, bien sur! De temps en temps, ils emettent des propos et ces propos viennent souvent sous forme de maximes.

Q:   Dans Quand   j' aurai paye ton visage, qu'est-ce qui comptait  le plus pour vous:
l'histoire d'amour ou la critique sociale?

R:  Ah!  la critique  sociale! C'est  un  milieu que  j'avais  assez bien connu  quand j'etais a la radio, les petits bourgeois riches, etroits d'esprit.

Q:   Dans ce livre, vous parlez du visage. C'est apparu a certains critiques comme un peu superficiel en tant  que manifestation  de l'amour, en meme temps, cepen­ dant,  un peu sensuel, mais a fleur de peau. C'etait  un amour  masque?

R:  L'amour, c'est d'abord  un visage. La seule chose qu'un etre a a vous offrir, en premier  lieu, c'est son visage. Meme s'il avait les qualites  les plus profondes et les plus surprenantes, c'est une chose qu'on  apprend  plus tard. On dit toujours que le visage, c'est le miroir de l'fune, je pense que c'est vrai dans un certain sens. On  ne peut pas aimer quelqu'un dont le visage deplait,  a
toujours une certain  beaute, ne serait-ce que dans le regard  qui fait que vous etes
attire  par cette personne  tout  d'abord. Ce n'est que  plus tard  que l'attachement

72

CLAIRE MARTIN


peut decouler de qualites  plus importantes.  Ce n'est que par le visage qu'on  peut exprimer l'interieur de soi-meme.

Q:  Est-ce que  pour vous le visage representerait  toutle corps?

R:   Jusqu'a uncertain point. Quelle que soit Ia fascination que le corps peut exer­ cer sur !'autre, quel que soit le desir que peut inspirer un beau corps, il doit tou­ jours etre surmonte d'un visage qui vous dit quelque chose. C'est du visage que sort Ia parole.

Q:   La solitude semble tres penible a vos personnages particulierement dans Doux­ Amer  et dans  Quand   j'aurai  paye ton  visage. A part  les maladies  de  !'amour,  croyez-vous que Ia solitude  soit le sentiment  le plus dangereux  pour  le  bonheur?
R:  La solitude est quelque  chose d'assez nHaste pour Ia personnalite et qui est supportee  plus ou moins bien selon les individus. II y a peu de gens qui supportent bien Ia solitude et qui s'en tirent indemnes. La plupart  des gens qui souffrent vrai­ ment de solitude finissent par developper des fa<;ons d'etre assez effroyables. Si mes personnages supportent mal  Ia solitude, cela doit deprendre d'une  certaine idee que je me fais des malheurs  de !'amour parce que moi je ne souffre pas facilement de Ia solitude. Je  ne me sens pas tres menacee de ce cote-la. ]'endure assez bien d'etre  seule, assez longuement.  Je ne m'ennuie  jamais seule. Ce que  je suis et ce que sont mes personnages, <;a n'a souvent rien a voir. Mes personnages ne sont pas une image de moi.

Q:   Dans les Morts, on a dit que vous avez joue avec les sentiments  et avec Ia rai­
son. Les Morts ont semble a plusieurs une sorte de "jeu  intellectuel."

R:  Je pense qu'un  ecrivain est habituellement  un intellectuel.  Je  pense aussi que le mot intellectuel n'est pas une injure, au contraire. Je trouve risibles les gens qui vous traitent  d'intellectuel en pensant  vous insulter. Moi, <;a  ne m'injurie pas du tout.  Came fait plaisir. Les A1orts, c'est un jeu intellectuel.

Q:   Je crois que ceux qui parlent  de cette fat;:on trouvent que les Morts est un livre difficile d'acces.
R:   Quand on ne raconte pas une histoire de A a z, bien sur que c'est moins simple. Mais  je serais bien incapable d'ecrire  des choses difficiles a comprendre. Ce n'est
pas du  tout  dans  rna nature.  J'emploie  toujours  des mots a Ia portee  de tout le monde  et  les idees  que  je developpe  dans  mes livres sont  toujours   ordinaires. Qu'est-ce  qu'il  y a dans ce livre? Des choses contre Ia violence, contre  Ia guerre. C'est ordinaire.

Q:   Pourquoi  votre narratice des Morts s'attache-t-elle aux nomades, aux amoureux nomades?

R:   L'amour est toujours une sorte de nomadisme. C'est le sentiment lui-meme qui


73

CLAIRE MARTIN

est nomade.  Si, en plus, un etre humain  a une certaine  crainte  d'etre  envahi  par l'amour  ... Presque  taus les etres humains ont un peu peur de l'amour. L'amour est dangereux  en soi: il peut changer votre vie, vous forcer a faire des choses que vous ne voulez pas faire ou que vous estimez ne pas vous convenir. 11 peut  vous forcer a accepter la vie avec quelqu'un qui voudra  vous changer.  De sorte que si
]'amour  existe avec un etre plus ou moins nomade, il se termine par lui-meme. Un
jour, l'amour s'en va, on ferme laporte, le danger  de voir sa vie bouleversee s'en va en meme temps.

Or,  pour  l'etre  qui  travaille  et qui  accorde  une  grande  importance au  travail,
]'amour  peut etre  preferable quand  il est un souvenir au lieu d'une  l'ealite qui est la et qui vous envahit. Je crois que c'est, en gros, le sentiment  de la narratrice des Morts.

Q:   Est-ce que c'est parce que vous craignez que vos personnages deviennent  rou­
tiniers, ou qu'ils  prennent !'habitude de l'amour comme dans  Doux-Amer?

R:  Quand  vous 'ecrivez des livres, il ya un certain  nombre d'intrigues qui vous sont possibles. On ne peut pas toujours refaire les memes. Mois, I'amour-habitude, c'est un des themes que je cheris, mais je ne peux pas toujours recommencer.  Je ne suis pas Fran ois

Q:   Mais VOUS  trois livres ne sont-ils pas en somme le meme livre ecrit  de fa on differente,  avec des structures  differentes, des constructions  differentes?

R:  J'ai !'impression que non. Mais, comme celui qui est de I'autre cote du livre se rend bien mieux compte de cela que celui qui l'a ecrit, c'est possible.
On  m'a  deja  dit  aussi que  c'etait  la  continuation, la  meme  livre  en  plusieurs tomes, la continuation  d'une  meme histoire ...

Q:  On  pourrait  meme pretendre que c'est Gabrielle qui s'interroge  dans les Morts
et qui pense aux anciens amants  qu'elle a eus?
R:  Oui,  pourquoi  pas? Et que dans Quand  j'aurai paye ton visage, c'est Gabrielle jeune ...

Q:   L'ensemble de votre oeuvre est-il une remise en question de la condition femi­
nine?

R:   Assurement! C'est dans rna nature  profonde  de remettre  en question la condi­
tion feminine,  a
vive, je ne crois pas que la condition feminine s'ameliore  profondement.

Q:  Dans VOS livres, on releve beaucoup de premonitions. Est-ce propre a l'ecrivain
OU  a VOS  personnages?

R:  C'est  propre .a moi. J'ai  beaucoup  de premonitions  et de pressentiments. Non

74

CLAIRE MARTIN

pas que  je sois prophete,  mais un romancier,  surtout,  peut  ressentir ce genre  de chose.

Q:  Pourquoi  faites-vous de la traduction?

R:   Je fais de la traduction parce que de temps en temps  j'ai envie de travailler. Tout  a coup, meme si j'ai de multiples occupations,  je sens un certain  besoin de me mettre  devant  rna machine  a ecrire et de faire quelque  chose. Comme  je ne veux plus ecrire  de livres signes par  moi, la meilleure chose que  je puisse faire, c'est de la traduction. Ca  me parait securisant, en un sens:  vous savez que vous allez terminer  le livre. Ce livre, i1 est la. On ne risque pas de se decourager. L'in­ trigue est Ia, vous savez ou vous allez.

Q:   Quand  vous ecriviez, vous avez la hantise de ne pas terminer  vos romans?

R:  Pas souvent.  Ca  m'est  arrive dans le cas des Morts.  Quand je me suis vue a la tete d'un  nombre  incalculable  de feuilles, obligee de choisir pour ne retenir que ce qui me plaisait,  j'ai trouve cela decourageant.

Q:  Vous avez eu de la difficulte a ecrire les Morts ou vous etiez desarc;onnee par l'abondance de la matiere?
R:  Desarc;onnee par l'abondance de la matiere. Je voulais faire un livre bref. Un livre semblable, s'il est long, devient d'un  ennui mortel. Il ne faut  pas que ce soit plus long qu'une longue conversation. Je ne voulais conserver que ce qu'il y avait de plus important. J'etais en butte a de nombreux problemes. En supprimant de passages qui  me semblaient  de  moindre  valeur,  j'avais  toutes  les difficultes du monde parfois a raccrocher  les autres passages ensemble. Ca m'a  pris du temps a ecrire ce tout  petit livre. Quatre ans, je pense.

Q:   Quand  Yvette Brind'Amour vous a demande  d'en  faire une piece de theatre, quelle a ete votre reaction?

R:   D'abord, j'ai dit  non. Apres, on m'a  tellement suppliee.  Les gens du  Rideau Vert  ont  pris le livre, l'ont  completement  demoli en  petits  morceaux,  puis l'ont recolle pour qu'il  soit plus scenique. Moi, c;a ne me plaisait  pas toujours. Je con­ siderais le tout avec tellement d'indifference. On pouvait en faire ce qu'on voulait a la condition  que  je ne  vecrive pas le texte.  Mais quand   des raccords  ont  ete necessaires, c'est moi qui les ai faits.

Q:  Est-ce que les representations de la piece vous ont plu?

R:  Cane m'a  pas deplu.

Q:  Pourquoi  avoir modifie le titre?

R:  Parce qu'on  me l'a demande. Il parait que les Morts, cela aurait  fait peur aux gens.

75

CLAIRE MARTIN

Q:  Est-ce que le titre de Ia piece, Moi,  je  n'etais  qu'espoir,  ne donne  pas,  juste­ ment, Ia signification du livre qui se termine sur une note d'espoir  pour Ia  narra­ trice?

R:  Une note d'espoir? Pas tellement.

Q:    L'utilisation  de l'humour  et de l'ironie dans  votre oeuvre, c'est constant?

R:  C'est rna tournure d'esprit.  Je suis tou jours tres sensible a I'humour. Un livre humoristique,  tout en ayant quelque  chose a dire, est extremement efficace. Cela frappe  beaucoup  plus que si c'est dit sur le mode solennel.

Q:   Justement,  je m'ctonne que vous sembliez renier Avec ou sans amour que vous appelez  un  livre de  neophyte. Alors qu'il  est tres  brillant.  L'esprit  y est un  peu caustique,  un peu mordant.  D'ailleurs, Ia reussite de Ia formule de Ia nouvelle est incomparable.

R:  Je vous remercie de tous ces compliments. Mais,  je ne sais pas pourquoi,  je le sens un peu loin de moi ... Je disais tout a l'heure  que  je le trouvais Ieger. Pour­ tant, quand  il a ctc public, je l'aimais bien, j'en etais assez satisfaite.

II m'est  arrive  quelque  chose d'assez  traumatisant. Quand  on  l'a  public  dans "le livre de poche,"  on m'a  envoye les placards  a corriger  et  j'ai trouve <_;a  d'un ennui mortel. Je ne sais pas si c'est parce que  je connaissais toutes les ficelles de ce livre, cvidemment, sont inconnues  du lecteur.  J'ai  fait  une  chose que  je n'avais jamais faite. Je  n'ai  pas termine  les corrections:   j'ai  mis le manuscrit  dans  une enveloppe et je l'ai  retoume  comme s'il avait ete corrige.

Q:  Je  trouve  pourtant  que c'est un livre tres abordable, peut-etre  a cause de Ia formule de Ia nouvelle?

R:  II y a peut-etre aussi le fait qu'il y a dans ce recueil des choses que  je ne pense plus. On  change  avec l'age, notre vue des choses change.  Les ev·enements autour de nous font que les circonstances sont autres.  Toutes  sortes de faits nouveaux  se produisent  a l'interieur  de nous.

Q:   Reecririez-vous vos memoires?
R:  Ah ! non ! Parce que c'etait le moment pour moi de les ecrire. J'etais mure pour les ecrire. Cela faisait des annces que je les prcparais. D'ailleurs,  je ne voulais pas les ecrire avant  de me sentir prete a les publier et avant  que  je sente les gens prets ales accepter.  Or,  si je les avais publics en 1959-6o,  c'aurait ete un  peu tot. lis auraient  tellement  deplu qu'ils seraient tombes a plat. Si je les avais publics plus tard, c'eut cte trop tard. II ne faut pas arriver en dernier  avec un livre de ce genre. II faut etre un peu en tete de file, sinon on a l'impression  de faire comme tout  le monde.

CLAIRE  MARTIN

Q:   Quelle  definition  donneriez-vous du Quebecois d'aujourd'hui?

R:  Le Quebecois  a enormement  change en bien et en mal. Je crois que beaucoup de Qm!becois ant  cesse de rever a un certain  perfectionnement. Je  ne parle  pas seulement  de la langue,  je parle de tout.  C'est  d'ailleurs  universe!. La  notion de perfectionnement est devenue  quelque  chose de risible pour la  plupart  des gens, dans  taus les domaines.  C'est  une chose que  je trouve  absolument  indispensable chez l'etre  humain  et qui peut lui servir de religion.

L'homme   quebecois  est  devenu  un  homme  tres  different  de  ce  qu'il  etait.  Il m'apparait tres libere compare  a ce qu'il etait  autrefois. Il a surement  change ses vues sur I'amour,  le mariage,  les femmes, les hommes, ce qui est absolument bene­ fique dans la plupart  des cas.

Q: En quai l'etre  quebecois vous a-t-il dei_tu?

R:  Je trouve que les chases ant mal toume  au Quebec. Je ne parle pas politique­ ment. Je trouve  que les gens ont perdu le respect d'eux-memes  dans la vie quoti­ dienne.

Q:   La petite fi1le lit, qui est votre dernier livre, je  'ai
voir exploite ala fal_;on de Proust, que vous citez en epigraphe.  C'est  tres interes­ sant, mais on reste sur sa faim.  Il m'apparait, tel quel, comme un  petit  exercice litthaire.

R:  C'est  c;a, c'est  un  exercice  littera.ire. J'ai   ete ecrivain  invite  a  l'Universite d'Ottawa et, lorsque l'on accepte !'invitation, on accepte en meme temps de laisser un petit texte en partant. Je n'ai  jamais pu ecrire sur commande, cela me desseche. Alors, j'ai fait  ces vingt pages. En somme, c'est un article.

Q:  Vous etes optimiste,  mais vous etes capable  d'observer  avec un certain  pessi­
misme les vealit,es de la vie. Vous etes severe aussi?

R:  Je suis severe et je ne suis plus tellement optimiste non plus. J'ai  perdu  toute confiance dans les humains.  Je sais qu'ils sont capables de taus les crimes. Je suis intimement  persuadee  que tout cela finira dans des catastrophes  effroyables.

Q:   Vous ne croyez pas que les hommes peuvent se racheter  et produire  quelque chose de mieux?

R:  Je sais qu'ils sont capables dele faire, mais je sais qu'ils sont presque incapables dele vouloir. Je vois tout ce qui se passe dans les pays d'Europe. Les gens veulent
courir a leur perte, ils ant un desir presque incoercible de courir a leur perte. C'est
ainsi dans beaucoup  de pays. On ne veut pas que c;a aille bien, on veut que a
mal et pouvoir crier. Le desir de la catastrophe,  c'est humain  aussi.




77


WILDLIFE



Building dams
of clay in wet May ditches watched by the yellow eyes
lynx springing out

Prowling the dump for parts to cars
I don't own
 










of sight
 


Lorne Daniel

rattle and tumble
bear 	all around Trudging through  boot-top snow frozen
with a start: deer flight across my eyes
Bent over cracking husks flushing a squeek of grey
whump: thrashing wings lift it away
Walking through woods whispers behind
brushing through bush
scratching    stinging puffing through  winter
cold breath around my ears
stepping softly through memory:


life
 wild-
 

in the back of my mind




review articles



SHORT FICTION'S FABULOUS REALITIES


W.H.New


E. T. SETON, Selected  Stories  of Ernest Thompson Seton, ed. Patricia Morley.  Univ. of Ottawa Press, $6.oo.

DAVE   GODFREY, Dark Must  Yield. Press Porcepic, $12.oo; paper  $6.gs. DAVID   ADAMS RICHARDS,  Dancers at Night. Oberon,  $1s.oo; paper  $6.gs. DAPHNE  MARLATT, The Story, She  Said.  BC Monthly, vol. III, $3.00.
MATT COHEN,  Night  Flights:  Stories New and Selected. Doubleday, $7-95·


THESE  FIVE    BOOKS  make  an odd combination: Seton's nineteenth-cen­ tury   Darwinian  animal   tales,  Richards' coarse  slices of  smalltown  Maritime life, Godfrey's    1970's   nationalism,   Cohen's dreams,  Marlatt's perception of words as designs.  But  through all  runs  a  preoccu­ pation  with   the   twin   impact  of  things linguistic    and    things    physical    on   the mind. And  in  all  cases,  the  writers  have contrived  varieties  of  fable   in  order   to render  this   impact.  In   an   evasion   of realism  lies their  route  to reality-which in  turn  shifts  uneasily  from  inside  a  per­ ceiver  to outside and  back  again,  less at will than  by the  tricks of the mind's asso­ ciations.
Seton  asks  us, of  course -this  collec­ tion  reprints some  eight  of his  tales -to accept that  animals talk  like  human be­ ings as they  fight  and  adapt and  connive  their   way  to  survival.  We  accept  that  they   communicate. The  fabular  reality  results  because  Seton  equates communi­ cating with  talking  (not  in the  substance
 
of  the  tales, which  mentions tailslapping and  such  phenomena,  but   in  their method). And  because  of  the  method it is impossible  to maintain that   the  narra­ tives are solely animal, that  they have  no connection  with   human   society.   What readers  receive  from  Seton  is a  message about    their   own   animal  nature,  their participation in the physical  world. Some­  what paradoxically, they  receive  the  mes­ sage  because  of  the  way  they  respond to language:  not  automatically, as  a  reac­ tion  to one  woof or  two,  but  association­ ally,  inferring  meaning  and   connection where  none  is  necessarily  implied.
Richards' world,  of  the  other four created here,  is closest  to  Seton's. His  is a  human society,  exerting its animal  na­ ture  frequently enough, violent as  often as it is protective towards its own kind: a world  in which -as  in  the  title story  of Dancers  at  Night-sputtering  obsceni­  ties  constitute  an   automatic   code   that  communicates  well  enough,   but   substi­ tutes for talk. It is a world where  violence

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   protectiveness are  inextricably  con­ nected, where  sneers  and  insults  and old jealousies  have  more  of a  power  to  hurt  than do  sticks  and   stones,  yet  a  world where  the  people  who are  so  profoundly motivated by words are reduced  (perhaps raised?)  to silence  in  those moments   (of fire  and   death,  for  example)   when   the physical  world actually intrudes into their lives.  When  the  silence  breaks,  they  fall back  on  custom, on  ritual.   When   inex­ perience  and  inexcusable  pride  lead  to a man's   death  in   "Ramsey  Taylor,"  the man's  son  is offered  a  warming, dulling draught of  rum,  but  he  demurs: " 'I'm not  allowed  to  drink  yet,'  the  boy said." As though  in sympathy with  that  refusal to  mask   the  pain,   Richards' stories  re­ peatedly insist  on  their  own  kind  of  con­ frontative ritual: the voices in his stories always  seem suspended,  disembodied, yet their  verbal  dances  are dances of night­ repeated (and  a little repetitive) manoeu­ vres  that  finally  turn  puritanically in  on the  weaknesses, strengths, and  horrors of the  bodies  those  voices inhabit.
Matt Cohen's world of Night Flights is not  unrelated, but  the writer  he most ap­ proximates is not  Seton  but  Morley  Cal­  laghan. The stories  contrive  two levels of talking: a  laconic  surface  narrative that  relates    bizarre    and   interrupted  events, and  a  deep  flow  of  passionate  will  that  strives   but  often  fails  to  find  a  way  to express  itself  openly.  The  actuality of the passion  and  the debility  that  hides it con­ stitute Cohen's recurring subject.   (There are  many  bursts  of anger  and  angry  love, but  these,  rather than  being  "open," are part of the failure of the will to sustain  its effectiveness.) This  central  subject, more­ over,   subsists  in  Cohen's   technical  me­ thod.  There is a  repeating moral  code  to these  fables-"God's love"  is  the  only thing    "constant"  in   the    world,    says Columbus  to  the  fat  lady  in  a  marvel­ lously  funny   and  serious  story  reprinted from an earlier volume  (these early fables

8o
 remain  Cohen's  best  so  far). But   the overt  topics  (rural encounters, sideshow vagaries,  urban vagrancies) are less the substance than  the  medium by which  we understand the dimensions of stasis in people's   lives.  The   passion  flows,  but  to what   purpose? Who   (or  what)  has  the power  to move,  to grow,  to alter?
For   Marlatt  and   Godfrey  the  imme­ diate  answers  to  these  question  are  often sardonic   (influence  grows,  corporations move, politics stays the same) ; like Cohen  they    rely    on    their    fabular    technical method to present  this state  of affairs,  but in their  case the method, too, is an answer of sorts,  and  an  emblem. The  Story, She Said is a story-in-progress, the  result  of a communal  game   (involving Marlatt, Bowering,   Kiyooka, and   several   others) of  writing a  story  on  a   journey,   which Marlatt then   brooded   on  and   recreated alone.  The  prefatory "warning" is worth quoting:  "constancy is not  of  this world. Characters change from  story to story, depending on  what  was said  between  the writing, the  lines  of relation continue to move...." And  indeed  they do. As the characters ("names given  to gestures") travel   along   the  Pacific  Rim/Rime  ( cf. grim/grime),  they   turn   into   the  story. The story  (an   echo   of  Lowryesquerie) tells  them, moves   them   from   place   to place,   moves  the   places   through  space, time,  and  attitude: the  "real" town  of Spence's   Bridge,  for   example,  is   trans­ formed   into   Suspension   Bridge,  S' pen­ sion, Spencer,  and   Suspense. Landscape becomes    language,   becomes    technical method,  reinvented  by  every  gathering mind.   (In Cohen's  "Heyfitz,"  one  con­ versation reads  like  this:  " 'Do  I pass the test?'   asked    the   doctor.   'Of    course,' Franz  said. 'If you  weren't going  to pass, I  wouldn't have  invented  you.' ")  The  artifice  of such  enterprise is obvious,  per­  haps  for some readers intrusive. Certainly it  doesn't  tell  conventional narrative or tell   narrative    conventionally.  But    the

REVIEW ARTICLES



point   of  it  all  exists  in  its  will  to  resist rigidity-a rigidity  which  can  appear in language  most   readily   of  all,  in  a  sus­ ceptibility to code-words and  definitions, and  a resistance  which  fabular  narrative, relying  on  correspondences with  what  we think   rather  than    with   what    we   see, allows  a  reader   to  experience in  literary  form  as well as to appreciate in life.
It  is Godfrey's world  that, of the  ones created by  these  works,  I  find  most  in­ volving.  Not  all  the  stories  are successful
-"A New   Year's  Morning  on   Bloor
Street" doesn't work-nor  are  they  all new.   "The  Hard-Headed  Collector" is here  again,  along  with  several  other  fa­ miliar   pieces.  But   the   point,   as   before when   Godfrey   has   reprinted   fragments from   his  ongoing   Book  of   Changes,  is that   the  context  is  different.  If Cohen and  Richards find  themselves repeatedly dancing  and   flying   through  the   night, Marlatt's "train moves on, into  the night" only  to  allow  the  characters to  discover
 night's  morning. For  Godfrey,  too, "dark must yield." This is not a blithely naive utopian  illusion;  much   of  the   book­ particularly the  last  "fables  and inputs"
-is spent,  in fact,  as a kind  of multiple commentary on the observation made in "The Chrysler /The Bridge":
Man    [has]  three  fantasies:  sex,  slaughter and   utopia. And   I like  to  think   they  come to  his life in  that order, at  least  in  terms  of arriving with sufficient force to  function as determiners of  action.

It is part  of an  enactment, rather, of the observation made  in the central, pivotal essay-story  "East and/or  West";  reflect­ ing on his past,  the  narrator observes:

And  all this  past,  these  movements, searches, learnings, flights, live  in  me.  So  when   you say  place,  I say  movement. Can   they  really die,  these  breathings; what is  the   physical place  more   than locus  of  events?  Elements lose meaning.

It is worth  reflecting on  the  relation  be­
tween  this observation and  Seton's inter-




Ph.D. in Canadian Literature

Bibliography and  Textual Criticism

Advanced Studies in  Canadian Poetry  and  Prose

History  of Canadian  Literary Criticism

Comparative Studies in  French/English, Canadian jAmerican, Canadian/ Commonwealth Literatures

Contextual Studies in Canadian Cultural and  Literary  History

Further  Information:
Supervisor of Graduate  Studies Department of English CARLETON UNIVERSITY Ottawa, Canada KlS 5B6
(613)  231-3849



81

REVIEW ARTICLES



pretation  of  Molly   Cottontail  and   her rabbit-son Rag:

She  fought a good  fight  in  the  battle of life. She   was  good   stuff;  the   stuff   that  never dies.  For  flesh  of  her  flesh and  brain of  her brain was Rag. She  lives in him  and  through him  transmits a finer fibre  to  her  race.

Seton  saw the world  as a set of biological determinations, and   by means  of a  con­ ventional Imperial language  managed to incorporate with   these  ideas  an  at  least latent political  and  racial message. Gene­  tic  science   lies  close  to   the  surface   of Godfrey's world,  too-I look forward to someone  explaining to  me  the  computer metaphor of  Dark  Must  Yield, and  the implications,  technical and  otherwise,  of the  binary  dysfunctions it  probes-but it seems less  to determine character than  to  account  for  the  multiplicity of  possi­ bilities   in   the   world,   the   constancy   of change, and  (hence)  the shifting  context  which  the variety  of prose forms  mirrors, derives from,  and  further  serves.
The book divides  into three sections, separately titled  "Tales," "Realities," and "Fables and  Inputs." There is more straight story to the tales, more open autobiography, essay,  and   political  rhe­ toric  to  the  realities, more  literary  self­ consciousness   to  the  fables.  No  group  is better  than  any  other; the  three  together constitute   simply    different   voices,   all working  in their own way-tale and fable as counterpoint to reality-toward poli­ tical  reform.  Sovereignty over  the  locus of place was  the  chief  issue of Godfrey's
I Ching  Kanada. The same issue surfaces here  as well in the allusions, observations, and  realizations by which  the speakers  of each  section  apprehend meaning. There are  violent   cinematic visions  of  the  fu­
ture:

The  producer  knows   better. . . .  The   pro­ ducer knows  there is no connection  between  the  two  facts. The producer is the  only  one
 with  enough sense  to go out  and  retrieve the raft, haul it ashore, send  down divers  for  the gun and  lay  it in  the  sun  to  dry.  Better even than the  pilots, or  the  ferryman, or  the biologists, he  knows  our  needs.  Knows that the  gun, before too  long  will  come  in  handy once  again. It is  never  rewritten. Its  plot  is in  the  quicksilver of genebirths.

There is a recurrent creative chorus  that tries  to make  sense of visions like this:

I get  but  slowly  to  my story,  for  I have  had it  doubted before this,  and  I too  admire the details of  truth.
There are  other names  for  enclosures. There are  other names for  reserves.  Those who  do not  possess place in some  equality  possess nothing. Are  gifted  with   the  skill  of  false­ naming. And  fear of the  truth.
And  ... perhaps we had  no need  to ask him questions, perhaps we  were  part already of
... the  tales....
She  . .  looks  him   up  to  talk   to  him  about the  dream, the  first  dream, the  dream about which she  has  made such  accurate  notes.
My only accomplishment is to have gained enough power  over  magic  to control some  of the   transformations, to  learn   something of the  pigments of  time.

These  are    various    voices -dour   and ironic  and  ruminative and bold-all speaking  here   out   of  context. But   to­ gether  they constitute a kind  of subtext in the  book  as  a  whole,  confirming for  the author the aspiration of a character in an early  story: "In  the  morning he  would become   again   his   image   of  himself,   a spark   of  chaos  in  the  traditional  world.
... " For  Godfrey it is a political  as well as a  literary aspiration, glimpsed  here  in fragments of a larger vision of cultural heritage and  social  possibility.  There are fabulous  realities  to  be  won   from   the world,   say  Godfrey's  fables  and   others. The disorder we  suffer  to find  them  de­ rives both  from  our  fear of the future and  from   our   debilitating  satisfaction   with some of the more constraining possibilities of  the  past.





 6  ks 	


NO FUTILITY

WYNDHAM  LEWis, Mrs. Dukes' Million. Coach
House, $7.50.

IN 1973, SECKER  AND WARBURG published The   Roaring  Queen, a  1936  Wyndham Lewis novel that  typically  never saw print because  of libel  threats. Also in  that  year came  Unlucky  for Pringle, Vision  Press' collection   of  Lewis   short   stories,   some previously  unpublished. Four  years  later, Coach  House  Press in Toronto published what  must  be one of the most attractively printed books  of  recent   years  as  well  as one   of   the   more    delightful  of   Lewis "finds."   Mrs.    Dukes' 	Million,  editor Frank Davey  informs us in his brief note, was  likely   written  in   1909  or   1910- about  the   time,   that   is,  of  Lewis'  first published   fiction  in  the  English  Review. The   typescript,  discovered  by   Charles Handley-Read in a London junkshop over twenty  years ago, has resided  in the Lewis Collection of  Cornell University Library
-a   rather  ironic   place   of   rest,  given
Lewis' early successful resistance to his father's desire  to  send  him  to  that  insti­ tution. It is, of course,  ironic  as well that  a Toronto press should  publish this work, since  Lewis'  novel,  Self-Condemned, be­ trayed  quite frankly his feelings about  his wartime  exile in  that  city.
Mrs.   Dukes'   Million,  however,   pre­ dates  the defiant Enemy  persona of  Lewis and   adds   yet  another  dimension  to  his
work.  To  our  awareness of  Lewis'  range
-from the  tragic  self-destruction of the
Canadian novel  to the vituperative satires on falsity  of The  Apes of God and  other novels -we must  now  add  what  Davey calls  a  "mystery  novel,  an  art   novel,  a comic  novel."  Although to call  it an  "art novel"  seems  rather forced,  clearly  it  is
 in  the  Sherlock   Holmes-in-disguise  mys­ tery   novel  tradition,  complete  with  an exotic Eastern  ambassador as mastermind of a clever and  theatrical  plot to defraud an  old Cockney  woman  of  her  newly  in­ herited  million  pounds. The tale revolves around  the  kidnapping  and   subsequent successful   impersonation   of   this   Mrs. Dukes.  But  there   are   twists  that   range  from  a  cliched  rival  American gang  that kidnaps Evan  Royal  (the  ingenious actor disguised  as  Mrs.   Dukes)    to  the   more novel   and   amusing  substitution  of   his stand-in, Hercules Fane.  There are  tradi­ tional  scenes of suspense  amid secret  pas­ sages in a Liverpool house, but  there  are also such deliberate exotica as a new type of terrifying strangler-a  beringed idol­ like Mesopotamian giantess.
From    Lewis'    letters    to   his   literary
agent,   we  know   that   even   the  titles  of the chapters of this "miserable pot-boiler," as  he  called  it,  were  chosen  to  be  "vul­ garly  effective." That  Lewis  had  an  eye out  for  possible serialization  seems  clear.  Chapter 43  ends:  "At   the  silence   that followed  these  words  of  the  doctor's, we will leave this group  as it is for a moment, and go back to Evan  Royal dreaming des­ perately of  escape   in   the  house   of  the three    tall    Americans."    This    self-con­  sciously   manipulative  narrator  intrudes frequently in his tale, often  seemingly  for the  sheer  delight of irritating his reader, or  perhaps  showing   off  his   newly   dis­ covered  narrative tricks:

The   young   men   wandered off  again -but let   me  hasten  to  explain that  we  are   not following  these   young   men   round  because they   interest  us  in   the   least. On   the  con­ trary,  they    are   very   tiresome-although charming-young    men.    We    are    merely using   them   as  a  convenience. As  we  have not  been  i vited
and   there   IS   no  one  that   we  know,  except the   host,   we   are   using   the   eyes   of   these young  gentlemen-and even  we  have  con­ descended  to  make  use  of  their  voices -in the   imparting  of  a  little  information.  For
this   reception  is  of   great  interest  and    of

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



importance  in   the   progress    of   our   story. This is merely  said  in  case the  reader should imagine he  was  expected to  pay  any  atten­ tion    to   them  -glance    at    them,   give   a smile.   No,  he   can   be  as  rude  as  ever   he pleases   with   them. They   are  people  of  no interest   or    consideration.   Mere    conveni­ ences.
This    narrating  voice   presents    certain problems, however,  for the  novel's coher­ ence,  for  there   are  shifts  in  tone, from the  bantering, admiring raconteur to  the solemn,  condemning moralist  (shifts  that  Lewis'  later   taste  for  satire  would  inte­  grate   more   successfully) .  The   original  Mrs.  Dukes, for instance, is kept  prisoner in  a  fake   hospital   room   "where  many before  her  had  lain,  and  who,  once  they had  entered  in,  never  went  out  again  to the   life   they   had    left,   but   went   out changed  people,   transformed  by   some sinister  magic.... " Yet  the  very  moral ending of the novel, in which Mrs. Dukes is restored-in fact,  to a better  life than before   - undercuts   this    and    similar moralizing.
Lewis  claimed, in  Blasting and  Bom­
bardiering, that  he had  "never done any­ thing  considerable in  the  art  of  writing" before  Tarr.  While  Mrs.  Dukes'  Million is  not  likely  to  prove  him  wrong,  it  re­
mains  an  interesting comic  novel.  T. S.
Eliot felt Lewis' humour was "near to Dickens" and  yet  "not   too  remote  from Ben Jonson." And indeed,  from  the open­ ing  paragraph  the  spirit   of   these  great comic  writers  is present:

Mrs.  Dukes   was  about sixty-five   years  old, her  hair quite white, with  rifts  of red  where it   grew   scarce,  and    although  not   exactly fat,  she was  lumpy in an  expressionless, puzzling  way.   It  was   as   though  the   fat within  her   case  of  clothes  were   loose  and adrift, and   like  the  contents of  an  ill-made bolster,   would    sometimes  collect   in   one place, sometimes in  another.
Lewis, the original  "portmanteau-man" in  his  own  estimation, brought  even  to this early  fiction  his multiplicity of  inter­ ests  and   talents.   Although  in   I g 10  this
 book  might   not   have   seemed   "market­ able" to  his  agent, Lewis  was  wrong  in feeling  that  it  was a "lesson showing  the futility   of   pot-boiling"  for   him.   What Mrs.  Dukes'  Million   offers,  beyond   the pleasure  of  a  good   mystery  engagingly recounted,   is   another   document   with which  to combat the reductive danger of seeing  Lewis'  work  only  in  the  light  of its least  attractive  element-its  authori­ tarian  politics.   His   range   was   wide - from  satirical  fiction  to speculative liter­  ary and  art criticism, from autobiographi­ cal  memoirs  to  social  polemics.  To  this we  must   now  add   a  recognition  of  his ability    as   a   writer  of   primarily  non­ satirical comedy.  The characters of Mrs. Dukes' Million  are, in a sense, types with­ in the mystery genre,  yet at the same time they escape  such  classification because  of what    even    one   of   Lewis'    "enemies," Lytton Strachey, had  to call  his "fiendish observation,  and    very   original    ideas." Perhaps the  source  of the  comedy  of this early   novel  is  best  explained  in  Lewis' own   terms   from   "The  Meaning of  the Wild  Body" :  "The root  of the  Comic  is to  be  sought   in  the  sensations   resulting from  the  observations of  a  thing  behav­ ing  like a person.  But  from  that  point  of view  all  men  are   necessarily  comic: for they   are   all  things,  or  physical   bodies, behaving as  persons." Young  actors  dis­ guised  and  successfully  masquerading as an   old   Soho   bric-a-brac  shop   lady   is probably as close as men can  get to being "things ... behaving as persons,"  and  the result   is  surprisingly  deft   and   engaging comedy.
LINDA HUTCHEON

MOSTLY MIDDLE
GEORGE BOWERING,  A  Short  Sad  Book. Talon- books.

VONNEGUT, BARTH, FOWLES LOOK OUT: Here comes  Bowering.  The parody of realistic  fiction  or  anti-novel  (to  use the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



familiar semi-literate label)   is itself  paro­ died in A Short Sad Book. George Bower­ ing has descended from  the Black  Moun­ tain  to cock  a  snook  at  post-modem fic­ tion,   to  have   some  fun  with   Canadian nationalism, Canadian history,  Canadian literary  personalities,  and   to  raise  some heavy  philosophical issues, as  in  the  fol­ lowing:

I saw  a  line  of  trees  at  Naramata  British Columbia & then when  I moved  I saw a diagonal line  of  trees.  From  the  air  it  was  a rug  of  trees.
But  I had  to  get  up  there by machine, so much for the  subjective Scenery has no beginning or  ending but  you  have  &  I have
&  my  dog  has  &  even  airplanes  have.

A Short Sad Book does have  a beginning and  an  ending, but  like scenery  and Can­ adian  history,  it is mostly  middle, and­ to  put   the  cart   before   the  horse  in  this review-a  delightful  middle.
It is, of course,  essential  to identify  the specific  genre  of a  work  if one  is to give it due consideration-particularly in the context of Canadian literary criticism. Accordingly, it should be noted  that Bowering   has  given   us  an  anatomy,  of which  an  eminent Canadian literary critic might  have  written that  he was impressed by

first,  the  clarity with   which   the  sights   and sounds and   smells  of  Canada come   to  life, the  rotundity of  the  character-drawing, and the  naturalness of  the  dialogue. Second, the elaborate way  that the  story  and  characters are   parodied  by   being   set   against   arche­ typal   heroic patterns, notably the  one  pro­  vided   by    Canadian   history.    Third,  the  revelation of  character and incident through the  searching use  of  the  stream-of-composi­ tion   technique. Fourth,  the    constant  ten­ dency   to  be  encyclopaedic and  exhaustive both   in   technique  and   in   subject  matter, and   to  see   both  in   highly  intellectualized terms.

The sights,  sounds,  and  tastes  of Canada are  caught early  in  the  words  of its  nar­ rator, George Bowering  as an  eight-year­ old:
 It is  true,  we  have  to find  out   what  we  are not  first.  We  are  not  first.
In  Mexico we  were  not  even  second.
Cuba was  second.
I found   out   I was  not  American first.
Long  before that I knew  I was  not  Brit- ish  &  I thought I must  be  American.
I listened   to King &  lickt  the  backside of
George  the  sixth.

The  plot of the  anatomy is structured by the manipulation of a continuous parallel with   the   pattern  of   Canadian   history whose loci are: the  Conquest, the expul­ sion of the  Acadians, the  two Riel  upris­ ings, the war  of  I 81 2, the building of the Railroad, the  two  World  Wars,  and  the Stanley  Cup.  All of this is brilliantly em­ bodied   in  a   tragic   romantic  encounter between   Sir   John   A.   MacDonald  and Evangeline   on   a   mountain   overlooking Burrard inlet :

In  the  mountains with   the  Acadian girl, John A. MacDonald felt all at once very romantic.  He   pickt   some   alpine flowers   & offered  them   to  her  in  his  trembling  fist.
The  flowers   are   nice,   she   said.   But   I
would   rather have   the  earth they  grew   in.
But   this   land  is  promist  to   Macmillan­ Bloedel,   he  said.  Everything   over   a   thou­ sand   feet   to  Macmillan-Bloedel, everything under a  thousand feet   to  the   CPR.
Who  is Bloedel, she  enquired.
I wish  you  hadnt askt  me  that, he  said. I dont know,  but   I can  assure   you  that  he is a  part  of  the  national  policy.
It sounds to  me  like  a  classic  rip-off,  was
her  reply.
I'm  afraid you will eventually end  up in Louisiana, my  dear. Come, let  us  go  down now.  I just  have  time  to  catch my  train.
You  couldnt catch a cold, she  thought to herself.  Theirs was  a  love-hate relationship.

Third, the revelation of character and incident through the  searching use of stream-of-composition  technique:

Sparrow said  we got  to  stop  them  Ameri­ cans   from   getting the   beautiful  Okanagan Valley  but  he  wrote it  the  way  the  Ameri­ cans   do   in   Washington.   Okanogan,  with an  0.
It was  a   dead  give   away. He   went   to college  in  the  U.S.  That's where  he  was  re-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cruited by  the  CIA. He  was also  approacht by the  NKVD. He  copied  the  spelling of the OK   Valley   from   their   instructions I  mean the  CIA. That was  AOK   with   them.  Back in  B.C.  we  are  careful about our  letters.
There's  a  lot   of  Canadian literature at
the  bottom of  Lake   Okanagan.

Bowering  goes on from  this to the arche­ typal  Canadian incident of the drowning of Tom Thompson [sic], illustrating both the  encyclopaedic  tendency   of  A  Short Sad  Book and  the ironic  potentialities of the  spelling  of  motif.
The  encyclopaedism, however,   is  not restricted  to  Canadian history-as  has been noted  by Marshall Delaney  in a pseudonymous  review,   "Bowering,  me, and   the  Robertian Conspiracy"  (Satur­ day Night,  April  I978)  over the name  of Robert  Fulford. A  list  of   references   to contemporary Canadian  literary person­ alities  will  suffice  to  illustrate my  point  since  A Short  Sad  Book is provided  with an  index.  These,  then  are  some of  those personalities: AI, Bob, Carol, Stan, Lionel, Vic,   Frank,  and   Brian.   There  are,   of course,  many  more  familiar names  in the book,  some  with   both  first  and   second names.
In  short,  there  is something for every­ one  in  this  book. The professor of  litera­ ture   will  find  his  undergraduate lecture  notes   comically  echoed;  the  student  of Canadian  literature and  history  will find his cliches  trotted out  and  thumped; the trendy  follower   of  contemporary  fiction (amongst  whom    the   present    reviewer must  meekly  number himself)  will find himself    cleverly   out-trendied;  the   ob­ server  of Canadian literary  and academic politics  will  recognize  a  variety  of send­  ups;   and,  finally   those  worrying   about Canadian identity might be able  to laugh at  the  comical  echoes  of their  worries.
A Short  Sad Book is a  truly  delightful piece  of  comic  writing,  and  one  that   I
have  not  begun  to  exhaust  in  two  read­
ings.
LEON SURETTE

86
 MYSTERY & MANNER

JOAN    HARCOURT   and    JOHN    METCALF,   eds.,
77:   Best  Canadian  Stories.  Oberon,  cloth
$15; paper $5-95·
DAVID    CARPENTER,  ed.,   Stories   from  Alberta,
Oberon, cloth $15; paper $5-95·
MICHAEL   ONDAATJE,   ed.,    Personal   Fictions.
Oxford University Press,  $4.50.

THE  TITLES OF   THESE  THREE  BOOKS of short  stories  are  good  clues  to  their  edi­ tors'  intentions. Oberon's annual  collec­ tion,  between  1972 and   I976 called  New Canadian   Stories,   has   reasserted,   and with   greater  right,    the  I 97 I volume's  claim   to   being   Best   Canadian   Stories. The  similarity in   title  and   function  to Martha Foley's The Best American Stories is deliberate. The editors  feel, as they said in  last  year's  foreword, that  it is time  we honour our  own  writers.  The  change in title  corresponds to  a  change in  the  edi­ tors'  policy  of  selection.  Until   last  year the  Oberon anthology accepted only  un­ published stories.  This  year  Judith  Pen­ ner's   "Cuixmala" is  the  only  previously unpublished  piece.   To   find   the   other  seven  stories,  the  editors   read  their  way through  twenty-three   Canadian   maga­  zines and  the  CBC  Anthology series.  To judge  from  the  foreword, the  experience left   them   exhausted  and   shaken:  "To read   nearly   all   the   literary  magazines published in  Canada during one  year  is to  realize   how  ephemeral  much   of  the work  is and   how  precarious the  lives of the  magazines themselves." Surely,  how­ ever,   they  are   overly   despondent  when they  claim   that   their  anthology  "directs the  attention of  readers  to  writers who otherwise might   have  been  consigned   to the  vaults  of  microfilm."  In  fact  six  of the  eight  authors in  this  anthology have had   books  published-W. P.  Kinsella, W.  D.  Valgardson, and  Beth  Harvor by Oberon itself, which  publisher admittedly has  done  more   than   its  share   to  foster Canadian short  stories.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Kent  Thompson's "Perhaps the Church Building Itself" about the  break-down of an  elderly  narrator and   Judith  Penner's "Cuixmala" (the  title  means  graveyard) are  exceptions to the generalization I am about to make.  Which is that  the  stories in  this  volume  celebrate endurance often with  humour and  sometimes even   (is  it possible?)   with  joy. In W.  P.  Kinsella's "lllianna Comes  Home," the  Indian nar­ rator  Silas Ermineskin tells the funny-sad  story  of his sister's  return with  her  white husband  to   the    reserve.    In   Elizabeth Spencer's "Prelude to a  Parking Lot,"  an essentially shrewd narrator with a flair for irony  and  parody  recreates the  cluttered lives   of   Mother,   Brother,  Uncle    Jess, Janey, and  herself  in a crowded house in Nashville. Beth Harvor's "Travelling On" is about  a  woman  who discovers  she can cope-cope with  the memory of her im­ posing  and  self-dramatizing mother, with the  break-up of her marriage and  the end of  an  affair   with   a  younger   man,   and above  all with  discovering who she is.
However, it is Jack  Hodgin's allegorical story,  "More Than  Conquerors," that dominates the  collection  with   its  length
-sixty-six pages-and  its  vibrant  char­ acters.  The lives  of  inhabitants  on  three  levels of an  A-frame house  on Vancouver Island  grotesquely intersect as each strives to conquer death :  the aging artist  on the top  floor  through art;  the  middle-class family   in   between    through   a   physical resurrection of their  dead  daughter; and in  the  basement the  working class family Carl   and   Gladdie  Roote   by  their   lusty love  of  life  itself.  The  Rootes   are   the "more  than   conquerors"  in   the   story, which  ends  with  this  affirmation:

"Hell Gladdy." ... He  ran   [his]   hand  up her leg. "Any  bugger  who's saddled  with an old rip like you for a wife's got no business looking   for   signs.   It's   them   other   people that  have  to make  them  up. The  ones  that don't  trust  something."

Spirits  are  less buoyant in  David  Car-
 penter's Stories  from  Alberta  and  despite the  strength  of  many   of  the  individual stories,  the  collection  as  a  whole  is  less satisfying.  In  his lengthy  introduction on "Alberta's  regional  psychology," Carpen­ ter  is far  more  impressed   than  I am  by the  metaphoric  possibilities  of   Alberta's provincial flower:  Alberta,   "the  virgin land   of   wild   roses,   a   new   version   of mother earth";  "a  romantic  vision  seen
. . . through  wild-rose-coloured  glasses"; "turning the rose-strewn wilderness  into a prosperous    Promised    Land";  "an   un­ molested,  natural Eden   blossoming  with roses and  forests  and  oil  derricks";  "Al­  berta's  provincial  emblem   may   be   the wild-rose  but  its  flagpole  is  the  oil  der­  rick."   Perhaps fortunately,  very  few  of these  prelapsarian wild  roses  are  in  evi­ dence   in  the   stories   themselves   which,  taken  together, show  Alberta's transition from  Indian possession to pioneer  farm  to industrialized  city.
Rudy  Wiebe's  opening story "Along  the Red  Deer  and  the  South Saskatchewan" begins,  "This is long  ago.  Before  whites dared    to  come   into   our   country.... " This  Indian culture has  been  eroded   in Georges Bugnet's "Mahigan's  Atone­ ment." Mahigan's attempted  slaying  of his brother  occurs  within  the  frame  of a larger   contest   between    the   Evil   Spirit  Mati-Manito and  the  Great Spirit  Kitse­ Manito, but  this traditional  mythic struc­ ture  is being  undermined  in  the story  it­ self,  as  Bugnet   perhaps   unintentionally shows, by the  white  missionary.
The majority of the middle  stories represent, in one  way or another, the loss of  innocence or  the  failure of  romance. In  McCourt's "White  Mustang," a  boy looking for  a legendary white  horse  finds instead  a defunct grey nag sunk in quick­ sand.  Helen  Rosta's "The  Magpie," like some of Alice  Munro's stories, shows  the schoolyard   as  a  treacherous and  violent place  where  teachers have  no  more  real authority   than  do   guards  in   prisons.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Kroetsch's "The Harvester" is a nostalgic view of the displacement of the legendary thresher and  the  old farm  kitchen  by the combine and  the  short-order take-out. In the  last  two stories  by Bowering  and  At­ wood,  the  transition to the  urban  setting  is complete, and  the city itself  turns back again  into a wilderness. Atwood's  "Polari­ ties"  uses  the   Edmonton  setting   to  ex­ plore  the contrasting images of open  and enclosed space. By the end,  the protagon­ ist recognizes  his own failures  of love and commitment and  the  utter  inadequacy of his own  attempts to define  and  defend  a structured human space:

the  land  opened before  him.  It swept  away to  the   north and   he  thought  he  could   see the mountains, white-covered, their  crests glittering  in   the    falling  sun,   then    forest upon   forest, after  that   the   barren tundra and   the   blank   solid   rivers,  and   beyond,   so far  that the  endless night  had  already descended, the  frozen sea.

Had  Carpenter included the usual bio­ graphical  and   bibliographical   notes  on the  contributors,  it  would  have  helped the  reader see the  book as an "expression of   Alberta's  regional   psychology"   and directed  his   attention   to   less  familiar writ  rs
and  Betty  Wilson.  It does make  a  differ­ ence to one's  reading of the story to know that  Georges  Bugnet's "Mahigan's Atone­ ment" was  first  published   in  French   in
1924 and  republished in 1929 in the Con­ stance    Woodrow   translation    reprinted here.
Michael Ondaatje  undertakes his  edi­ torial  task  with  more  flair  and  imagina­ tion.  The   title   Personal  Fictions  comes from  a  quotation  by  Clark  Blaise  which is provided in an appendix, "The Authors  on  Their  Writing":

I  think the   real   reason   I'm   fond   of   "per­ sonal'' fiction is that two  things  move  me in fiction-texture    and  voice.    Texture   is detail arranged and  selected  and  enhanced.
... By  voice  I am  referring to  the  control, what    is   commonly  referred  to  when    we

88
 mean  the  "world" of  a  certain author.... what we  sense  of  his  final  concern and baffiements.

This   book   allows   exploration  in   some depth  of  the  fictional   worlds,  concerns, and  baffiements  of four  writers.
Ondaatje solves  the  problem of range by  a  judicious selection   of  his  authors: Alice 	Munro,   Rudy     Wiebe,    Audrey Thomas, and   Clark   Blaise.  He  gives  us two  women   and   two  men;  two  native Canadians who  recreate their  childhood environment,  and   two   new   Canadians who   range   more   broadly   for   their  set­ tings;  two writers  who have  found  a con­ sistent  narrative voice and  point  of  view that  are  carried over  from  story  to story, and    two   who   dramatize  the   different voices  and   ways  of  seeing   of   a   wider  range   of  character  types.  Some  of  the stories,  like  Munro's  splendid  "Peace of Utrecht" are  well known; others, like the selections   from   Audrey   Thomas,  have  been published just recently. Munro care­  fully recreates the texture of life in small­  town  Southern  Ontario and  Vancouver. Wiebe  gives fictional  shape  to the histori­ cal experience of Indians and Mennonites in  the Canadian West. Thomas uses Brit­ ish  Columbia and  Mexico  as  settings   to explore, as she  puts  it,  "the   terrible gap between  men  and   women." And   Blaise depicts the  "North American education" of a  wary  outsider at  home  in  neither of his  two  settings-the American South and  Montreal.
I found  Personal Fictions  the most con· sistently  satisfying  of the  three  collections of  short   stories.   The  overall   quality  is higher because  Ondaatje is not  con· strained  within   the  strict,  though  legiti· mate, limits  that  govern  the  selections  of the  other editors. Ondaatje's inclusion  of writer's comments, taken  from  published interviews and   essays,  focusses  attention on the kinds of worlds created in these personal fictions.  More  than  that, the comments suggest some of the preoccupa-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions common to writers m all three volumes.  Some  examples:

I'm   very   excited  by  what   you   might  call the  surface of  life....  It seems  to  me  very important  to   be  able   to   get   at  the   exact tone or texture of how things are.    (Munro)

What I suppose I'm doing, really, is trying to   unbury  the    story    that  I see  is   there. (Wiebe)

Ilike  to set  things in  alien  cultures because they're that  much starker.    (Thomas)

These [Montreal  and   the  Deep South] are places  where setting is not  merely an excuse, but  where setting is in  fact  the  mystery  and the  manner.     (Blaise)

CATHERINE ROSS



STRATEGIES

DAPHNE  MARLATT, Z6calo. Coach House, $4.50.
MONICA  HOLDEN-LAWRENCE,   Mad   About   the
Crazy  Lady.  Air  Press,  cloth $10.95; paper
$5-95·
JOHN    RIDDELL,   Criss-Cross.   Coach   House,
$4-50.
THE   SENSITIVITY    AND   PRECISION    that have  distinguished Daphne Marlatt as a poet  serve  again  in  Z6calo, her  first  sus­ tained    work    of   prose    fiction.   Z6calo (which  means  "square," or "piazza") re­ counts   several   days   and   nights   in   the journey   of  a  Canadian  couple   through the Yucatan in Mexico. With  its alertness  to detail  and  personal  response,  the  book combines   the   best  features of  both   the travelogue and   the  diary,  and   the  mere fact  that  a reader should  make  this com­ parison  says a  lot  about Marlatt's ability to conjure the heady experience of travel­  ling, when  the mind  and  body  teem with new impressions  and  the associations  they invoke.
But  the  author is attempting far  more than   the  evocation  of  a   journey.  Ulti­ mately,   through  her   unnamed  narrator
-the  female   member of  this  travelling
 couple -Marlatt   seeks  to   express   one woman's consciousness  as  a  simultaneity of  perceptions, thoughts, and   memories, irradiated by sensations  and  feelings. One is reminded of Virginia  Woolf's  "lumin­ ous envelope" and  the connection is justi­ fied.  There  is,   however,   an   instructive difference between  the types of sensibility articulated  in  Woolf  and  Marlatt. Woolf uses a ubiquitous and anonymous narrator  who is not so much  a person  as a medium through which  an  ambience or  envelope of  experience, enclosing  several  separate characters,  gains   expression. Marlatt's narrator, in  contrast, is a  definite  char­ acter  examining her  own  experience, but without employing the  first  person  pro­  noun.  Instead, the  narrator refers  to her­  self throughout  as "she," and  the objecti­ fication  provides  an  effective  solution  to the  problem Marlatt poses. Her  aim  is to express a sensibility  so reflective  that  it is continually  turning  experience  into   an object of thought. The narrator cannot let




Out-of-Print

CANADIANA   BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS





HURONIA-CANADIANA
BOOKS

BOX   685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



go even  for a moment and  lose herself in some  activity, as her  companion, Yoshio, is  able   to  do  through  photography. At times, the  pull  of self-preoccupation is so strong   that   she  is  tempted  to  abandon the  external world  and  wander through her  private universe  forever.
Thus, Z6calo  is far  more than  a travel­ ogue  or  diary.  It  becomes  a  struggle  for contact, for  what  Marlatt  calls "the  mu­ tual  day,"  and   this  gives  an  urgency  to the     descriptive    passages,    since    only through responding to the outside can the struggle be won. There is no final victory; the  two  poles  of participation and  with­  drawal   (Marlatt  calls  them   "presence" and    "absence")    are    never    resolved. Through their tension the book achieves considerable power.
Mad  About  the  Crazy  Lady  is Monica Holden-Lawrence's first full  length  work of  prose  fiction.   It is  an   extraordinary text that augurs well for the career of its author. The  book  is experimental in  en­ larging  the   novel   form   to  express   not merely  the  discovery  of the  author's own creative centre  (after  A  Portrait  of  the Artist  as a Young Man such an enterprise would   not  be  new)   but  also  to  voice  a debt  of  gratitude to  the  reader for  con­ summating her  identity  as  a  writer   and as  a  person.   This  warm  address   trans­  forms  the  experience of  reading, not  by making  us  feel  responsible  for  breathing life  into  the characters as  Sartre urges, but  by  involving us in  the  very  impulse  that  led  to their  creation. To  convey  the vitality    and    excitement   of   this   com­ munion, first within  the author  and  then between    author   and    reader,   Holden­ Lawrence  uses  sexual  metaphors  of  all types:    narcissistic,   homosexual,  hetero­ sexual,  and  hermaphroditic.
The strategy is fascinating and  depends upon    the   venerable  device   of   a   story within  a story. Here, the story of reaching her  own  centre  is  contained in  a  later story  which   tells  about   reading the  first

go
 story  to a high  school  audience. It works like this. In  the earlier story about  reach­ ing  her  own  centre, the  author  divides  into   three   aspects   of  herself:   "Mon  as Mon.   Mon   as  Zoa.   Man   as  the  Crazy  Lady." Freudians  especially  will  have  a field  day  deciding exactly  what   parts  of the  psyche  these  fragments  represent. At any   rate,   Man's mission  is  to  find   the Crazy  Lady.  To  do this, she must  write  a story  about the  search, and  hence  we get yet  another story  within a  story.  By the end,  neither the  Crazy  Lady,  who  is still at   large,   nor   Zoa,   who   helped   in   the search  for her, is needed  any longer; Mon has  finally  found  her  own   true   centre. The   discovery,   however,   is  incomplete, for  to find  oneself  is to  find  nothing, to have nothing external  by  which   to  tell who one  is:  "It's just me and  the  black." Yet,   as  this   story   is  contained  by  the larger one about reading to a high  school audience,  there   is  a  solution.  Man   has found  her  creative centre, but  she  is not alone   with   it; there   is  the  audience  to share    it   with    and,  by   extension,  the reader.   Holden-Lawrence,  then,    gives new form  to an old  insight: only through being  read  does an  author's true  identity emerge.
John  Riddell,  the   author  of    Criss­ Cross,  is  not  so  concerned with  writing fiction  as with  writing about  and illustrat­ ing   a   particular  theory   of   fiction.   He experiments  with   what   Richard  Koste­  lanetz    calls   "visual   fiction" -the   co­ ordination of various compositional tech­  niques,  such  as concrete poetry,  cartoons, and  collage,   to  enhance the  reading ex­ perience.    Criss-Cross,    consequently,   is not    a   novel,    but    a   collection -one might  say  a  handbook-of  possible  ap­ proaches to visual  writing. At  their  best, the  results  are  interesting. Just  as Cubism presents a  large  number of simultaneous points   of  view  on   the   same   object,   so Riddell  exploits  several   aspects   of   the reading  experience.  For   example,  in  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



parody  of phenomenological analysis, he portrays visually an experience all too common to readers of this kind  of prose: the    sudden   encounter   with    obscurity when the text simply stops making sense. Riddell represents this phenomenon typo­ graphically, first turning the words them­ selves  into   gibberish, then   merging  the lines  until  by the  bottom of  the  page  all we see is black  ink.  Elsewhere, however,  Criss-Cross   seems   too   derivative  for   a book  trumpeting  stylistic  innovation.

ERIC P. LEVY


WEST COAST  SEEN

JIM   BROWN,  Northern Light. Blue   Mountain
Books,  $4-95·
MARILYN  BOWERING,   One  Who   Became  Lost.
Fiddlehead  Poetry Books.

MARILYN BOWERING,  The   Killing  Room.  Sono
Nis  Press.

PENNY  KEMP,  ed.  West   Coast  Works.  Apple­
garth Follies,  $3.50.
AUGUST KLEINZAHLER,  The  Sausage  Master  of
Minsk. Villeneuve, $4.00.

you  dont get  any  where if  you  dont take  some chances

THESE  LINES OF JIM BROWN's ought  to apply   to   poets   anywhere, anytime. In the  last ten  years or so, however, it seems that  most of the chance-taking poets have lived, written and  published in B.C. With the   notable   exception  of  bp  Nichol   in Toronto,  the    most   interesting   experi­ menters-Bill  Bissett,  Daphne  Marlatt, Gerry   Gilbert-have been  West  Coast  natives.   Jim   Brown,   as  one-time  editor  of  Very  Stone House  Press  and  Talon­ books,   has   been   a   part    of   the   post­ modernist scene  in  B.C.  for  some  time now.  Northern Light  is his ninth  book of poetry   and   contains  poems   written  be­ tween   I970  and  I976.
 Brown's   poetry   concentrates  on   per­ ception; his "I" is the visionary  self:  "eye see  you  through /  these   storms."  The  phenomenological world  is  important to him  in  its  revelation of  the  eternal, and  as a poet, his role is to reveal  the presence  of eternity  in the immediate world.  Noth­ ing unconventional here. Brown's  voice is similar  to Bissett's, vatic  and  incantatory:

the  beat  is in  the  music the  magic  is in  the  eye

it  all  flows out   of  the  moon and  it  all  flows  into the  sun

On   the  whole,   Bissett  does  this  sort  of thing  better,  and  Leonard Cohen, in  the "God  is alive.  Magic  is afoot" section  of Beautiful   Losers,  does  it  best.
In his introduction, Edwin  Varney suggests that  the movement from  the per­ sonal  to the  universal in  Brown's  poetry  pivots on a specific line or phrase. I found  this   to  be  true   of  some   of  his  earlier  poems,  such   as  "Late  february"  in   If There Are  Any  Noahs   ( I967),  but  dis­ appointingly inapplicable  to  the  present  collection.   In  moving   towards  a   freer  mode   of  composition,   he   is  sacrificing  verbal  dexterity:

eye  dont  build poems  like  eye used  to....
these  words  are more  related to  the  flight  of  random
birds
in  a  swarm  or  like  bees

do  they find   their way  to the  petals  of  your  heart?

The answer is no.  Joe Rosenblatt's bumblebees  might have served  as a model of energy in a poem. There's no sign of it here.
Marilyn  Bowering's two  books reveal  a close relationship to the  land, specifically the  West Coast. Her  images  are of death, blood, bone and  corpses, and  many of her
phrases  are curiously  reminiscent of A. J.
M.  Smith's early   poetry:  "white  jagged

gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ribs of the land" and  "the  visionary lust / dissolves   flesh"   are   metaphysical, and, insofar  as they  resemble  the poetry  of the
192o's,  dated. Bowering's  voice  is  truest and    most   original  in   the   poems   that appear  to   reflect   her   interest   in   West Coast    Indian  mythology   and   the   ele­ mental unity  of  man  and  landscape. In One  Who Became  Lost, these poems  are the core of the book. "Sea-Woman Curse" is a fine example :

Woman, curse  the  sky's male-brazen light
and  clot  the  flood  black sea with  hungry  blood.

Her   poems   are   "peopled"  with   eagle, bear, salmon, cormorant and  clam. She writes  in  short  lines,  piling  up  opposing pairs  of nouns  modified  by simple  adjec­ tives:    "leaden  beach,"   "scarring   bed,"  "tonguing sea,"  "steepest  sky,"  "wrink­ ling skin,"  and "silver  brink" are all from a  single  poem.  This method   works  well in   exemplifying   the   eternal   balance  of natural forces. Human relationships, however, are  often  depicted as vicious, unconsummated, wounding: "I pushed  a stick   through  his  eye."  The   Atwood   of Power  Politics is a debilitating influence here,  but  in The Killing  Room, Bowering moves  towards a more  personal  poetic statement:

He  cannot  die who makes  things as he  wants  them.

Neither Brown  nor  Marilyn  Bowering is  included  in   West   Coast  Works, but many  big names  are  represented: Daphne Marlatt, Robin   Blaser,  Susan  Musgrave, George Bowering, Judy Copithorne, Gerry Gilbert. Unfortunately, only a few of the poets   have   been   allotted   more   than   a couple  of pages each. Generally, more poems by fewer writers make for better anthologies, unless  the  book  is designed to   show   many   variations  on   a   single theme     (Love   Where  the   Nights    Are

92
 Long)  or  a  specific  form   (The  Cosmic Chef).  Margaret Atwood   has  said  that "anthologies are  mirages  created, finally, by their  editors." If so, then  editor  Penny Kemp's contribution might  hold  the  key to   her   editorial  procedure.  Sadly,   her work  is a pale imitation of Daphne  Mar­ latt,   and   that   ought  to  say  something about the  rest of the  book as well. By far the   best   piece   in   it   is   Marlatt's  own "Pluto  Seen   From   Earth:   A   March Journal   for   South   Vietnam,  3-5/75·" This is  a  brilliant  fusion  of  reality   and  myth,  blending the attributes of Pluto­ death,  darkness   and   burial-with   the slaughter  in   Vietnam,  and   contrasting that with  the  poet's own situation, plant­ ing  seeds  on  a Sunday afternoon in  B.C. The  planting  is a  ritual   gesture  directed against death  but  also  involving burial, and  other similar   paradoxes are  irresist­ ibly drawn out in a dialectic of  death  and  rebirth. Playing on  the  meanings of  the different names  given  to  the  god  of  the underworld   (wealthy,   unseen,   mouth), Marlatt makes   the  words  of  the  poem, like  the  seeds  she  plants,   ritualized, re­ demptive, and finally  transforming. As AI Purdy  would  say,  this  poem  will  freeze you  right  inside  your  clothes.
That's something that  can't be said  for August  Kleinzahler's The Sausage Master of  A1insk,   though  it's   a   pleasant  little book. There are a number of awkward phrases in it that suggest a young poet in search  of a voice. No one ought to be scrupulously pleased  with lines like these from  the  title  poem:

the  eldest  son, no boon,
even  with  the  shop's  renown,  was
I to my parents.

The staccato phrasing of  these  poems reflects  an  urban consciousness  almost totally  absent from  the poetry  of the West Coast,   and    I  suspect   that    Kleinzahler has  lived   long   enough  in   Montreal   to absorb  some  of  the  energy  of  the  poetry

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



scene   there.   He   offers  a  mixed   bag  of settings: West Coast  mountains, alpine lakes,  European  beaches, Minsk  and Mount Royal,  but  his vignettes of urban life  are  his  best  poems.  "A  BL&T  with Old  Ed  Hopper in  Gimbel's  Luncheon­ ette" is pure  Souster. And  the poem on a snowy   Montreal  winter   ends   with   this fine image:

Cats threw cats off
each  shed's sweetest angle.

If only for those lines, Kleinzahler should be  in   the   recent   Montreal  Poetry  an­ thology,  if  he  is indeed  a Montreal  resi­ dent   now.  Vancouver  publishers,  indeed publishers everywhere, are  put  to  shame by Fred   Louder's handsome  printing of the  book  for  Villeneuve  Publications.

MICHAEL DARLING



CEREMONIAL HOUSES

GEORGE    WOODCOCK,     Peoples of    the    Coast.
Hurtig, $17·95·

JOHN  VEILLETTE and   GARY WHITE,  Early  In­ dian   Village  Churches. UBC   Press,  $2g.oo cloth; $15.00 paper.

GEORGE  WOODCOCK SAYS THAT the art  of the Coast  Indians, immediately appealing though it  is,  can   be  understood  only  if we understand the  society  that  produced it.  His  book  Peoples  of the  Coast  makes it clear  why this is so and  goes a long way towards providing that  understanding. It has  made   me  tum, again   and   again,   to Northwest Coast  Indian Art  and  the con­ versation  between    Bill   Holm   and   Bill Reid,    to   Wilson   Duff's   Images   Stone  B.C., hearing more,  seeing  better.
Woodcock's book  is  not  simply  about
the  art  of  these  peoples,  though it  is, he says, "among that  art's products that  we
 find ourselves most closely in contact with their  intellectual and  spiritual life." His intent  is to portray, in all  its aspects  and at  its height,  the culture of the Coast  In­ dians,   "homogeneous in  spirit   yet  mar­ vellously varied  in  its detailed  manifesta­ tions."
It was  a  culture that   had   developed very  slowly. Evidence from  archaeologi­ cal discoveries,  as well as from  studies  of languages   and   myths,  suggests  that   be­ tween  ten and  twelve thousand years ago, people   came   down   through  the  Fraser  canyon   towards   the  sea.  As  they  settled  along   the  coast  or  on  the  near  islands, the mountains behind them  and  the deep fjords  of  the  coastline northwards  gave them  a measure of geographical isolation. Food  was  abundant. They   had  no  need
-as  agrarian  communities do-to  dig
and  delve.  The earth   gave  "without the need  to disturb it"; and  the sea provided so richly through seasonal  runs  of salmon that  the peoples of the coast could  devote the  winter   months to  the  art  and  ritual which  manifested their  sense of the close­ ness  between   the   daily   world   and  the world of spirits.  For  them,  all things  were imbued  with  spirit,  not  only  the  all-pro­ viding  salmon   with  whom  thy  felt  pro­  foundly  connected,  by  whom  they felt  so gifted,   but  the  great  cedar  and   indeed  every creature, object, or event  significant in  their  lives.
The  winter  ceremonies were  the  spirit dances  and  the potlach. All the Coast cul­ tures   used  both   ceremonies  to  validate possessions   of   such   tangible   goods   as canoes, blankets,  engraved coppers,  or in­  tangible  possessions like  one's  own  dance  and  song,  the  clan  or  lineage   rights   to fishing   waters   or   hunting  grounds,  to names  and  crests. Though they  respected material wealth, the Coast  Indians valued  intangible  property more,  since it was on its manifestation that  a man's  standing in society  depended, "or  rather, his seating, since it was where  he sat at  a potlatch or


93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



during a winter  ceremonial and  the order in  which   he   received   gifts   that   deter­ mined  his  rank  and  thus  deeply  affected his honor." Possessions of any  kind  were pointless   unless   they   were   "validated," which   entailed  not   only  a   public   per­ formance  or   claiming  before   witnesses, but  the  presentation of  gifts to those wit­ nesses. "A  chief  of the Kwakiutl or more northerly  peoples  could  only  dance   the dances  that supernatural beings had given to his ancestors, or  assume his hereditary title,  or give  his  son  a  prestigious  name, or celebrate the  puberty of his daughter, or  raise a totem  pole  to record  his great­ ness and  his family's  legends  ... after  he had   validated his  pretensions by a  pot­ latch  feast."
To describe  the different social and ceremonial patterns developed   by cliff er­ ent  people,  Woodcock devotes  a  chapter each  to the  Nootka, the Coast Salish,  the northern   peoples,    and    the    Kwakiutl. Among    the    northern    peoples  - the Haida, the Tlingit, and  the Tsimshian­ competition  between   clans   for   prestige stimulated  magnificent  carving,  of poles, of  crests,  of  head-dresses, masks,  rattles,  and  other ceremonial objects.  Differences between their ceremonies and  those of the central  Coast  peoples  are  evident   in  the fact  that, for  instance, the  Haida carvers seem concerned to hold to the existing natural form of pole or feast dish. The Kwakiutl, "grandiose and  expansive" in their  winter  ceremonials, were  more  in­ clined  to give the  form  to be represented a  kind  of  sculptural  freedom.
The Coast  Salish  were  the only people who did not develop an art within the symbolic-figurative tradition.  Their  gen­ ius  lay  rather in  mystical  introspection. They    were    intensely   involved    in   the guardian spirit  quest,  the  attempt to en­ counter  a  spirit  that  might   inspire   one man   to  be  a  shaman, another  to  be  a canoe-maker  or a  fisherman.   It  was  the guardian  spirit which  gave  one  dancing

94
 power,  and  one's  own  dance  bore  witness to  the  encounter. For   the  Coast   Salish, the individual experience was of primary importance, whereas  for the northern peoples,  to  whom  clan  and  lineage  were what  mattered, ceremonial patterns were more highly organized; potlatches were more  formal; individual spiritual  experi­ ence  was  transformed into  a  socially  ap­ proved  collective  experience.
The groups described in  these chapters were   not   political  entities.    They    were language groups  within  any one of which many  dialects were  spoken.  People  lived in  independent  villages,   many   of  them isolated. Even  within the village,  rivalries between kinship  groups  for  prestige  pre­ cluded an  organization of a  political sort. What   brought   them   together - work rhythms, rites,  and ceremonies-kept all the  coastal people  in touch.  They traded with   each   other;   they  exchanged  tech­  niques  and  ideas;  there  were  all  manner of cultural  borrowings. Their way of liv­ ing,  evolved   over   so  long   a   period   of time, very  little  changed for  several  hun­ dred  years  before  the  arrival of  the  first European  explorers and  traders, was maintained  for   another   hundred  years after   that   time.  But  finally  the  invaders, for  their  various reasons,  began  to  inter­ fere.  The success  of  that  interference is startling enough  to  require  explanation. In   his   penultimate   chapter,  Woodcock refers  to the  myth  of  the Transformer, a myth  deeply  rooted in the consciousness of the  Coast   Indian.  For   him,   the  Trans­ former-Trickster  was  Raven; for   the peoples  of the interior it was Coyote.  Just as  Simon   Fraser  was  taken   for   one  of Coyote's companions, the first white-sailed ships were thought by Coast  Indians to be Raven returning. "And  in their  own ways the newcomers did fulfil the mythical roles attributed to  Raven and  Coyote." Their gifts were  double-edged, at  first stimulat­ ing,  finally  deadly.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It's  a familiar but  still a  terrible  story. Woodcock    does   not   sentimentalize it. "The  aboriginal culture," he  says, "was no more  ideal  than  any  other" and  even without such open  attacks as the law ban­ ning   potlatch,  the   winter   social   cere­ monials,  the  spirit dances,  it would  prob­ ably have  declined for other  reasons. The  economic basis of  Indian  society shifted; their  land  was  pre-empted; their  fishing grounds   trespassed   upon.   There  was  a shift  away  from  communal houses,  com­ munal property. The leisure  of  the  long winter, the social  motivations for art,  the basis   for   the   potlatch   and    the   spirit dances   were  all  gone.  The   animist   view of  the  universe  is no  longer  pervasive  in Indian societies. There is, Woodcock  says, no  possible  return to  the  life  they  lived before  the white  invasion. But the terrible breakdown  of  morale  seems  over.  The pride  and  the  artistic accomplishment of the  native  people  are  alive  and  growing. George   Woodcock's  book,  like  his  final chapter,  is  a  witnessing-full,  factual, fair-minded as  is his  way.
Early   Indian    Village   Churches,   by John Veillette and  Gary  White,  is one of a number of  books in  Indian studies  and B.C. history  being  published by the  Uni­
versity   of   British   Columbia  Press.   It's
hard  on  this  volume   to  tum to  it  from Peoples  of the  Coast.  Its   pictures have been  collected  with  real  concern and affection, and  the several  commentaries thoughtfully prepared. But  the  churches we are  shown  were,  as the  foreword says, "the  structures ... of  the   newly  arrived whites. An imposed culture was conveyed by an  imposed  architectural form." It is an  extraordinary experience to turn  from the  pictures and  descriptions of the Coast Indian house  to the  pictures of these churches, the  carvings in  their   interiors.
Many   of  them  are,   of  course,   gone, burnt down or simply  deserted, neglected. Wooden   structures don't  last  forever   in the  rain   forest,   and   the   native   peoples
 were  never  much   concerned  to  preserve their  artifacts anyhow.  The authors, who have  helped  to restore  two  churches, clearly  hope  others  will be preserved. But Harold Kalman and   Robin   Fisher  both show how many  questions arise about  the value  of restoring or  preserving churches that  seem redundant.
HELEN SONTHOFF


THE MIXTURE AS BEFORE
C.  H.   GERVAIS and   JAMES   REANEY,  Baldoon.
The Porcupine's Quill.

FoLLOWING THE TEXT of Baldoon, James Reaney and  Marty Gervais  have thought­ fully caused  to be printed an  "Appendix Incorporating  Scholarly   Apparatus   for the  use of  EDUCATORS." And  of RE­ VIEWERS, one  might   add. One   hopes that  audiences are  provided with  similar assistance,  and   time  to  absorb   it  before the  performance begins.  Both  audiences and   readers   need  all  the  help   they  can get to digest  the rich  mixture of Baldoon. The   basic  ingredient,  as  in  Reaney's trilogy  about   the  Donnellys, is local  his­ tory. In  Baldoon,  near  Wallaceburg, On­ tario,   a  nineteenth-century farm  family  suffered  a long series of  supernatural visi­ tations,  ranging from the usual  poltergeist tricks  to fires and  visions. Various efforts  at  exorcism  failed.  Finally,  driven  nearly  to  despair,  the  farmer obtained the  ser­ vices of a doctor and  his psychic daughter from  Long Point  on  Lake  Erie  and, fol­ lowing  instructions, shot  the  wing  of  the stray  goose in  his flock with  a silver  bul­ let,  thus  causing   the  witch  who  was  the source  of  the  trouble   to  break  her  arm  and   be   both    identified and   rendered powerless.  It's  a good  yam,  and  Reaney, a  vigorous  opponent of soulless  modern­ ity, likes to believe it is true. The printed text   of  the   play  is  occasionally embel-


95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lished with Victorian typography which helps establish the feeling of the dusty archives  and  Goodwill  Shops  Reaney ex­ plored  to find  his story. His commitment to  local  history   as  the  raw  material of drama is now firmly  established.
Part  of the mixture, as always, is meta­ phor.  Metaphor  dominates the  language of the  play, both  the  prose and  the verse, and   is  complicated  by   a   dense   Scots brogue   for  McTavish, the  haunted  far­  mer,   and   a  Pennsylvania  Dutch  patois for   the   Doctor.  Metaphor   merges   into  symbol  and   symbol   manifests  itself  not only verbally  but also in concrete forms:  puppets shaped  like  birds  represent  the souls  of  the   three  principal  characters, marionettes   represent   mechanically­ minded  people,  and   hand   puppets asso­ ciated  with  some of the witches represent elements in the  other  characters' warped psyches.  (Not   all  of  these  meanings are readily  apparent from  the text, even with its chatty stage directions,  but the Appen­ dix  helps.)
Some  other elements   in  the  brew  are
songs, magician's tricks, a chorus, doubl­ ing of roles and  of locations,  an "illusion box" and  a model of a church, a plethora of   stage   business   including   children's games,    mime,    flashbacks,    a   novelistic narrated  conclusion, and  assorted Brech­ tian effects. Out of all this, and out of the legends    and    the   Calvinism,   arises  - somehow -a  sense  of  Reaney   trying  to exorcise  his own  puritan past,  to identify  and  break  the mind-forged manacles and liberate   the   guilty   soul  by  confronting and  confessing   the  guilt,  and   by  rejoic­ ing  in  the  fullness  of life,  very  much  as Hagar Shipley  learned to do in Margaret Laurence's  The   Stone   Angel.   Hagar's message   comes   through  directly   as  she narrates her own insights. Reaney's, how­ ever,  is  so  nearly   swamped   by  his  own bag of theatrical tricks that  the good Doc­ tor  is occasionally  given  the  task of stat-

g6
 ing   it,   metaphorically  but   nevertheless baldly:

Yes,  God   does   hold   you  over   a   pit -a valley, an abyss of happiness filled with frankincense and  citrons  and  dancing and music   and   love -he hangs   you   by   the slenderest chust thinnest filmiest flimsiest cobweb   thread   ever  seen  yet  and -you spiders-you  won't   let  go,  you  won't   let go.

Add  to  all  this -and  stir  well -the NDWT  Theatre  Company, the   actors and  director who brought life to the Don­ nellys   and    again  to   Baldoon.   Reaney  writes  for  and  works  with  his own gang,  not  to the  point  where  he produces "col­ lective  creations" (the  voice  of  the  play is always  his)  but  to the point  where  text and   production   interact  so  completely that  a  perceptive  Alberta reviewer  won­ dered  in  print if  anyone  else could  per­ form   Reaney's   plays  satifsactorily. This  puts  the  reader  of  the  play  at  an  even more  serious  disadvantage than  usual,  as he wades through improbable stage direc­ tions while wrestling  with the other multi­ tudinous elements of  the  text.  To   have seen a production of a Reaney  play-any Reaney   play-is  almost   a  prerequisite for  reading one.
Other   dramatists  have    done    these
things-written for  a specific  company, exhumed  the  chorus, dipped   into   local history,  devised  methods to put  narrative into   drama,  broken  through  theatrical conventions  in  various   ways.  Brecht   in particular  comes   to  mind,   an  influence that  Reaney acknowledges. But, as far  as I know, no other dramatist plays so many theatrical games  simultaneously  as  Rea­ ney  does.  Reading or  seeing  a  Reaney  play,  especially   the   Donnelly  trilogy   or Baldoon, is like attending a  workshop  in dramatic technique. Reaney and  his gang  are  devoted   to  workshops,  both  for  chil­  dren  and  adults. On  tour with  the trilogy, they  conducted   workshops from   British Columbia to  the  Maritimes, demonstrat-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ing their  cats' cradles  and  urging  children to  revolve   like  the   Husky   Tower. The stage directions in Baldoon dictate similar activities  or   make    various   suggestions that  would  leave  the actors  free  to follow their   impulses   of  the   moment,  though within   the   constraints  of  meaning  im­ posed by the Appendix. The line between workshop and  finished  play  is  not clearly drawn. But  in  the finished  play, the  feel­ ing  generated is not  so much  that  of the spontaneity and individual creativity sup­ posedly fostered  by a workshop as that  of frenetic   activity    and   a   compulsion to demonstrate  the  full  range   of  exercises which  the  company has  practiced. What Reaney has  to  say, interesting and  valu­ able   though  it  is,  is  almost   lost  in  the melee.  The  mixture is rather too  rich.

ANN P. MESSENGER



SURVIVORS
OF THE MARGINS

NICHOLAS CATANOY, Modern Romanian Poetry.
Mosaic Press/Valley Editions.

LYUBOMIR   LEVCHEV,    The  Left-Handed One.
Hounslow Press,  $4.95.

GILES  EDWARD GOBETZ and  ADELE DONCHENKO, Anthology  of  Slovenian  American   Litera­ ture. Slovenian Research Center of  America,
$7.00.

LINO  LEITAO,  Goan   Tales. Vesta   Publications,
$4·50.
REFLECTING THE PLURALITY of Canada's cultural heritage, these four  collections of ethnic poetry,   fiction,  and   art  are  strik­ ingly  different from  one  another  in sub­ ject,  form,  style,  and   artistic  merit.   Yet together  they   raise  central  problems  of second-language literature  and  literature in  translation-essentially,  how  to com­ municate  the   experiences  of  one   place and   culture through a  language having
 none  of  the  original  associations-and they  also share  common themes,  includ­ ing   uprootedness,  fascination   with   the past,  and  marginality.
One    highly    successful    experimental
solution  to the translation dilemma is pre­ sented  by Modern Romanian  Poetry,  an anthology  of ninety-eight  poems  by fifty­ three  twentieth-century  Romanian  poets
-some   having   lived   abroad  (such   as editor  Nicholas  Catanoy who  is based  in Fredericton)  but   most   living   at   home, and  all  using  their  native  language. The poems  were  first  translated into  English by Catanoy and  others; then  these  trans­ lations  were  recreated as  poetry  by lead­ ing   English   Canadian   poets,   including Atwood,  Bowering,   Lee,  MacEwen, and  Marshall.
The   most   distinctive  poems-trans­ formed  by some of our  most densely sym­ bolic   contemporary Canadian   poets­ depict  eerie, apocalyptic mindscapes, twi­ light  zones of loss, solitude, paralysis,  and  breakdown.  Psychological   exiles  under   a political   regime   from   which   they   feel estranged,   these   poets   wander  in   laby­ rinths  of fantasy, nightmare, or  nostalgic  reverie.  Even  in  the  most  overtly  engage poems,  gathered  together  in  one  section entitled  "The   Alibi,"   their    protest    is vented  through  strategies  of  silence,  and  their  imagery-intensely compelling­ ranges   from   the   grotesque,  to  the  sur­ realistic,  to the gossamer.

Take this  bony  body
Gone   thin, almost   transparent, And  that  dying  dog  of a  rag;
From   these,  stitch me  a  garment of  light.

"The Coat":  Eugen Jebeleanu/ D.  Dutescu/ J. Michael  Yates.

An informative Afterword gives a brief survey   of   the   evolution  of    twentieth­ century in Romania. Two  names  which stand  out  are  Tristan  Tzara, founder of dadaism, and absurdist playwright Eugene  Ionesco; their   influences  are   felt   in  a

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



veiled   way   throughout  this   collection, which  seems  written, for  the  most  part, just  one  shock  short  of  total  disintegra­ tion.  Bearing little  family resemblance to the   most   celebrated   Canadian  poet   of Romanian birth   (who  contributes some poetic   resuscitations  and   a  brief   Fore­  word)  -namely,  Irving  Layton -these poets  fall  flat  on  cliches  when  they  at­ tempt   direct    lyric   expression    ("Your
ankles  were dearer to me I Than heaven
or  earth")  but  rise  to  eloquence within
the luminous confines of the subconscious, leaving   us  "richer  for   the   marvels   we
have  lost I On  opening our  eyes again."
The  Left-Handed One presents a selec­
tion   of   poems   by  Bulgarian  poet   and Minister of Culture, Lyubomir  Levchev, whose    writing   is   translated   by   John Robert Colombo and  Nikola  Roussanoff, a  Canadian  writer   of  Bulgarian   back­ ground. The title  is a literal  translation of the poet's  surname, suggesting  the con­ fessional    nature   of    Levchev's    poems, even   when   they   promote  the   cause  of communist revolution. The  personal  nar­  rative   threaded   through  the   collection  takes  us  from   Levchev's ancestral  past
("Hey, you,  grandfather, I great   far-off
grandfather, I your   blood  is  flowing  in
my veins"), through "A Song about Me"
and   "Self-Portrait," to  the  point   where the   poet's   son  asks  him,  "Father   ... I don't you think it's necessary for me, too, I
to become  a  revolutionary ... ?"
Totally unlike  the Romanian poems, Levchev's demonstrate little  skill with imagery and  even  less with  rhythm and the sounds of words. Despite his alleged reputation as the most contemporary of Bulgaria's  poets,   Levchev's   poems-at least  as  they  have  been  transmitted here
-do not manage to achieve even a one­ light-read Waymanish individuality. The­ matically they  fail  to  penetrate beneath the superficial, while stylistically they fail to  rise  above   the   mediocre. The   com­ munist  ideology  which  informs  the  poet's

g8
 vision  brings  Western readers  an  unusual source  of poetic  inspiration, for  there  are poems   prompted  by  Levchev's  admira­ tion  for  Neruda, Lorca,  and  Engels.  But the  text  suffers  from  sloppy  editing, and generally  even   Levchev's   revolutionary dedication  amounts to  little more   than  adolescent verbal  fisticuffs:
I don't  want  them  to find my skull
without a hole from  a bullet or a k.nive [sic] !
Anthology  of Slovenian American Literature, a  collection of  writings   and art work by immigrants to North America from  Slovenia  (the  northernmost  repub­ lic of  Yugoslavia)  would  be  easy  to  dis­ miss  by  certain   conventional   norms   as non-art. The  literature consists  of  auto­ biographical   narratives  and   thinly   fic­ tionalized  accounts of the  immigrant ex­ perience   and   working-class  life   largely confined  to  the  Cleveland area  in  terms of  setting,  but   with  some  vignettes   por­ traying crises  of adjustment in  Southern Ontario as well. Though deeply  felt  and at  times  painfully affecting, these  stories are  not  written in a style that  commends itself   on   grounds  other  than   its   utter honesty,  so that  the  collection's main  in­ terest   and   value   are   not   aesthetic  but sociological.
One   of  the  most  moving   personal   re­
flections  on  dislocation  and   otherness   is Rose  Mary  Prosen's  "Looking Back."  In a  disjointed and  child-like way, she  des­ cribes  the  gradual  process  of  the  wean­  ing from  a Slovenian family heritage and her  difficult  search for  selfhood   and  an integrated identity as  she  grows  up  in  a U.S.    where    fathers   raise   rabbits    and  chickens in  city  garages,  mothers take  in boarders in  every room  of  the  house  in­ cluding  the  kitchen, and  girls  commonly go  to  work   in  factories  by  the   age  of fifteen. Prosen  closely observes  this com­ munity   of  economically-pinched,   hard­ working immigrants-out   of	necessity

BOOKS IN REVIEW



frequently doing  double shifts in mines, steel  mills,  or  bakeries -and  she  com­ ments  on  how  some  of  the  older  people "felt displaced their  whole life long, never learning English,  never leaving the neigh­ borhood, hugging  their  own  blood,  their own plot of land, living still as workers on the  landlord's  great  estate." Predictably, their  old world values and  rituals  are per­  ceived  as  a  source   not   of  strength and  reassurance but  of embarrassment by the younger  generation whose  schooling pre­  sents  them  with  the startlingly dissimilar, sanitized,  orderly  world   of  Dick,   Jane, and  Run! Spot! Run!
From   these  rough hewn  stories,  filled with   personal  sacrifice,   financial   hard­ ship,    accident,  death,   and   also   cere­ mony,  emerge  examples of  quiet  heroism amongst  marginal   people -those   sus­ pended between   two  worlds -which  is a human condition  probed no more  can­  didly,  but  clearly  more  searchingly and  memorably,  by  leading writers in  many newer  Commonwealth  nations, too.
Goan Tales  presents more  stories writ­ ten   in  English   by  an   immigrant,  Lino Leitao, who was born  in Goa  (the former  Portuguese colony  which  is now  part  of India), was later  expelled from  Uganda in  Amin's  purge   of  1972,  and  who  now resides  in  Montreal.  His  unornamented accounts of peasant life in Goa  and satiri­  cal exposures  of the European community and   its  Asian  "assimilados" in  colonial India or Africa are  narrated in a straight­ forward and  at times  even  fairytale-like style. But  the simplicity of  the  surface  is supported  on  a  foundation  of  political  comment, and  the  naivety  conceals  pro­ fessional  cunning.
For    example,   in   "Armando   Rodri­ gues,"   an   Emperor's  New   Clothes   tale given  specific  political focus and  culmin­ ating  with  scatalogical  intensity, Leitao  exposes the hypocrisy  of  the "assimilados" and   their   misguided   adulation  of   the colonial  masters by  depicting the  Goans'
 shocked  reaction at  the discovery  that  an important  European  government   mini­ ster,  "a   real   Portuguese," can   be   bent double   with  diarrhea on  a  public  plat­  form beneath the broiling Asian sun. This  event   marks   the  political  awakening of the youth, Armando Rodrigues, who con­ cludes  that  "all  men  are  equal. ... They  all shit."
Those  stories  which  take as their  osten­
sible subjects  unhappy marriages are  less successful, for  Leitao's women  are  either saints (who go mad) or whores, and his depictions of  betrayal  and   adultery are melodramatic   and    unconvincing.   Still, even  these  stories   address   salient   social and   racial   issues,   though  less  directly, since   themes   of   misunderstanding and miscommunication   between    people   re­ main  more  than peripheral.

WENDY ROBBINS KElTNER


DUSTED INSIDE

JOE   ROSENBLATT,  Top   Soil.   Press   Porcepic,
$7·95·
HARRY HOWITH,   Multiple Choices:   New  and
Selected   Poems,   1961-1976.   Mosaic  Press,
$3-gs.
DAVID      Me FADDEN,    The    Saladmaker.  Cross
Country Press.

MosT   OF THESE POEMS are   rather  se­ lected  than  new,  but  all  of  them  belong to well established figures -steps  in our recent  literary history. Since Rosenblatt's first seven  books  are  out  of  print  we un­  derstand the  important service  that  Press Poroepic   is  providing  for   poetry   lovers with the publication of Top  Soil. The col­ lection  is divided into four parts. The  first three  sections  retain  their  original  titles:  The  Bumblebee  Dithyramb   ( 1972), The  Blind  Photographer   ( 1973)   and   Dream Craters  ( 1974). The fourth section,  en­ titled   "More  of   the   Insane,"   includes  poems  from   Rosenblatt's  early  books  as


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



well  as  recent   unpublished  material.  So with  the  exception of Virgins  and  Vam­ pires ( 1975), we have  with  Top Soil  the complete Rosenblatt reader.
The sound-poetry presentation like "Moth Sonata," the  intricate songs  that the  poet  weaves  with  the  thread   of  sub­ human worlds,  a rich imagination pushed to  the  limits  of  originality and  a  comic perception  of   the   universe   that   often takes  the  dimensions of a full  rhetoric of irony  make  of Joe  Rosenblatt a  frivolous Kafka, an  amusing Poe,  a  smiling  Lau­ treamont; in short: a man  Andr·e Breton would   have   welcomed   in  his  anthology of  black  humour.  Because  he  is all  this, the  author of  Top  Soil  should   be  con­ sidered  as the  most  talented poet  writing  in  English   Canada   today,  even  if  (not  like  many  others)   he  doesn't take  him­ self seriously.
As for  the  other two poets,  I recognize their good quality, I am aware  of their importance but  I am  afraid  they are  too pale,   too  heavy-footed  in   their   realism and   too  domestic   in  their  confession  to inspire  real enthusiasm. McFadden's ma­ jor collections are Letters From the Earth to   the    Earth     ( 1969),   Poems    Worth Knowing ( 197 I ) , Intense  Pleasure ( 1972) and   A  Knight  in  Dried  Plums   ( 1975). The  titrology  is not misleading; the poet's  egotism  is no secret  for  his  readers.  The  twenty-three  poems   of The  Saladmaker originally appeared  as the  ninth  issue of George  Bowering's Imago. This  time  the author has  provided an  introduction for his  pamphlet  and   it  is   worth   noticing  that  he dated it  "Halloween, I976."  It is perhaps  better  to  let  the  reader   decide about  the  taste  of McFadden salad:

These are  mediocre moments in  a  mediocre life
as  I bathe daily  in  diabolic acid. And  I hope  I have  not  bored  you with  details of a life  you'll  never  live being sick enough with  your  own.

Harry Howith is the man  Louis Dudek


100
 called  "The best  poet  writing in Canada today."  About   Multiple  Choice   this   is what   Howith  tells  us:   "This book  con­ tains   poems   which   I wish  to  preserve.  Most   were  first  published in  other   vol­ umes,  but  have  since  been  revised; thir­  teen    are    recent    and   hitherto   unpub­ lished."  Less  original   than    Rosenblatt, Howith   retains-far	more    than    Mc­  Fadden does-a  sure  elegance, a  sense for   solid   meditation   and    a   classicism through his  modernity.  Poems  like  "Au­ tumn   I959" illustrate  Howith's firmness as a  poet:
Autumn
in  this  country of  cold  Pepsi-Cola and hot  politicians
is  the  time  to  take  the  first  drags
on  the  nicotine of  need,


This is surely the  season
for  the  politics of  need  and  desire,
and   I do  not  wonder
that so  many revolutions happen between September and  the  snow.

We  will perhaps see longer  studies  about poets like these. One could begin with a rhetoric  of  attitudes.  For   instance,   we could  ask:  "Why are  these  poets  writing today?" Each   one  of  them   gives  us  an answer   that   is  somehow   a   key  to   the reading of  their   works.  Rosenblatt  tells us:
In the  genes  of  my  poems
in  the  body  of  the  beast,  the  spirit
moves  on  fours, thumps its  barrelled chest, devours the  black  mud, snarls, growls.

For  him  this  happens when  "The  Muse in Mid-Winter" hibernates. So even when inspiration is at  its  lowest  tide  the  poet writes  by instinct, acting in a way similar to the  bumblebee, an  insect  he celebrates in  many  of  his  poems.
McFadden  doesn't  write   by  instinct and   must   therefore furnish an  explana­
tion  for  his  poetic  activity:

into my  notebook because  someday it  will  all  be dead, dead, dead

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and I'll  curse myself  for  not  having recorded its  images

Does this kind  of poet  keep his notebooks next to the family album? Whatever the intention is, vanity  doesn't seem to be excluded   from   the  indirect motivations:

for  I am  Adam and  my screams drown out  all  others, the  song
of the  language of my pointed moments protecting me  from  putrefaction

As for  Howith, he  tells  us  that  his  pub­ lisher  thinks  that his poems  are  a contri­ bution to society,  while his friend  believes that  writing  is good  therapy.
Instinct, desire  of  immortality and  so­
cial  considerations are  the  motives  here. But  if  poetry   must   remain the  explora­ tion  of a  new  language I  will  stop  with Joe   Rosenblatt  at   the   threshold  of  in­ stinct.  I salute him  as  a  sign  of hope,  as a man  who only needs three  lines to make you  dream:

The capsule is lost  in each  fire: a  sun  with  a  bishop's  mitre­ the  tulip is dusted  inside.

ALEXANDRE AMPRIMOZ



GERMAN TRANSLATIONS

WALTER   RIEDEL,   ed.,  Moderne  Erziih[er   der Welt- Kanada. Tiibingen &  Basel:   Horst Erdmann Verlg.

As   GENERAL   TRANSLATOR   AND   EDITOR, Walter Riedel outlines in  his  Introduc­ tion  that  this collection of  short stories is an  attempt to bring closer to the German speaking reader the richness  of Canadian short  prose.  Since  this  volume  is largely intended  for   the  European  market  the editor  begins,  quite  justifiably,   with  an excursus  on  the  concept "Canadian" in its   geographical   and    historical    sense, underlining  thereby  the   human  experi-
 ence of a vast and  often  empty  country of fiendish  snowfields,  desolate  tundras, and endless  prairies that  colour  many  a Can­ adian story.  Not  only  a  hostile  nature, however,   but   also  aboriginal   people­ now   themselves   threatened-and   the economically  dominant neighbour to  the south  are  felt  here  as a  potent threat to man's  existence.  Often, therefore, as  an important aspect  of  this  specific  "Cana­ dian   experience"  the  central   motif   be­ comes  that  of physical  and  cultural "sur­ vival."
It is this  very  aspect  of  the  Canadian experience in the prose coupled with its literary  quality,  Riedel   asserts   further, that  guided  him  in  his "subjective  selec­ tion"  of the stories in this anthology. The traditional  chronological  division  of  the material is fortunately  abandoned in  fa­ vour  of an ethnic one with  four  sections: I.  Eskimo  and  Indian  prose,  II. Franco­ canadian   prose,     III.     Anglocanadian prose,   and   IV.   Germancanadian  prose (one  sample) . The distribution is consis­ tent  with  the general literary representa­ tion  in  Canada in  that   more  than   two­ thirds of the  material make  up  the  third  group,  whereas   unfortunately  only   two aboriginal voices, those of Markoosie and George  Clutesi,   are  heard, both  writing with an intriguingly mythical touch  about their  native  land.
Although most  of the  remaining prose is very readable indeed, it varies widely in literary quality, Canadian  content, and emotional and  intellectual impact. Pieces such  as "The Painted Door" by Sinclair Ross  and   "Water" by  Frederick  Grove are of good rhythmic style and  proper proportion, concise and  freshly  realistic, psychologically  motivated but without overintellectualisation of the problems involved.   Moreover,  the  Canadian  per­ spective  is intensely  captured in  the  first instance in  the  inescapable  impact of  a relentless   snowstorm  in   the   vast,  silent


IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



pra1ne   on  a  young   farmer's  wife,  and secondly  in the  longing  of a shrewdly de­ ceived   farmer  for   his   lost   Northland fields. Contrary to  the  gripping  intensity  of  some  of  these  texts  there   are  others  which   portray  only  rather  thin   insights into  life with  little Canadian flavour  like Mordecai Richler's "Bambinger" or Don Bailey's  "A  Bauble  for  Bernice." Adher­ ing to his own criteria for this prose selec­ tion Riedel could  well have chosen differ­  ent  samples  by  Richler,  Bailey  or  say Hugh Garner:  compared to for example "The  Yellow   Sweater,"  although  well known  as  the  title  story  of Garner's  first collection  of stories,  "The Conversion of Willie  Heaps," the  highlight  of this book and  winner  of the Northern Review  Prize in  I 95I,   lacks   the   stereotyped   cliched plot  of the  former text  and  is, in  fact,  a much   more  original  and  skilfully  ambi­ tious   piece   of   writing.    Even   Garner's "One-two-three   little    Indians"    might have  been  a  preferable choice,  providing a gruesome insight  into the often  degrad­ ing  and  hopeless  living conditions of the poverty stricken Indians on this continent. Although  for   instance  Margaret  At­ wood,  Pierre  Berton,  Marie-Claire Blais, Leonard Cohen or Robertson Davies who are  all  well  known  to  have  greatly  con­ tributed  to  the  literary establishment of a Canadian identity could  not  have  been included  in   this   anthology,  since   it   is strictly    limited    to   short    stories   only, Riedel's  book    can    be   readily   recom­ mended  to  the  German-speaking  reader  seeking  a  quick  overall  orientation. Fur­ thermore, the editor has provided a help­ ful  biographical index  of the  authors, al­ though  its   usefulness   is  somewhat   im­ paired   by  certain omissions  in  both  the publication dates  of the texts chosen  and the  birthdates. All  in  all,  Walter Riedel  has presented us with  an interesting, well translated  and   very   readable  anthology that   vividly   captures  for   the   German-

102
 speaking public  the social, cultural, politi­ cal  and  climatic spirit   of  the  Canadian literary scene.
UTA  WILLIAMS


DISCONNECTING

MICHEL   FOUCAULT,   Language,   Counter-Me­ mory,  Practice:  Selected  Essays  and  Inter­ views,    ed.    Donald  F.    Bouchard,   trans. Donald  F.   Bouchard   and   Sherry  Simon. Cornell University  Press,  $I2.50.

ROBERT   MELANCON,   ed.,  Le   Lieu    Commun
(litudes  franfaises,   13,  1-2,  April   I977),
$6.oo.

JEAN-PIERRE  ROY, Bachelard, ou  le concept contre  !'image.  Les  Presses  de  L'Universite de  Montreal, $14.00.

JEAN  FISETTE, Le Texte Automatiste: Essai de theoriel pratique    de   semiotique    textuelle. Les  Presses  de  L'Universite du  Quebec.

DARKO    suviN,   Pour    une    Poetique    de    la Science-Fiction. Les  Presses  de  L'Universite du  Quebec.

INTELLECTUAL LIFE IN  THE ENGLISH speaking world  has  been  less dominated by universalizing, totalizing thought than the  French or German. For Anglophones, Forster's "only   connect" seems  a  some­ what  plaintive exhortation, almost a pre­  dictive   reproach  for   not   having   made enough   connections   between    different ideas.  Hence  the  force  of  Michel   Fou­  cault's project of  breaking links,  scatter­ ing   clustered   associations  of  ideas   and  creating gaps  instead  of  filling  them,   is likely   to   be   felt   less  strongly   than    in milieux    where    totalizing   systems    of thought like Marxism are  part of the  air intellectuals breathe. Just   as  one   must know  the  great   line  of  German  philoso­ phers  from   Kant  to  Schopenhauer and Marx to fully  savour  Nietzsche's radical­ ism, one must  have felt the  power  of dia­  lectics  in  order to  relish  Foucault.
Even   so,  we  should   welcome   Donald
Bouchard's translation into  English  of  a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



collection of Foucault's essays. It deserves the  widest  possible  readership, especially among literary people,  for  literature is its principal focus.  The most  striking essay is  "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History."  Im­ plicit  in  this  notion of  genealogy  is  the idea  of  history  without  sources,  without explanation by origins. The past is recon­  stituted as a space  in which  the genuinely  new  is possible,  and  hence  the  genuinely  old,  rather than the  merely  pre-modern. The  search   for   pre-existent  causes,   the reduction  of   the   new   to   the   already there,  neglects  the  vicissitudes of history, "its   jolts,  its  surprises, its  unsteady vic­ tories   and   unpalatable  defeats" - pre­  cisely those radical, inexplicable coupures or   fault   lines   which   stratify  Foucault's own   archeology.   Nietzsche's   idea    of genealogy  as "wirkliche Historie" is  con­ trasted to traditional history,  which "aims  at  dissolving  the  singular event  into  an ideal  continuity-as a teleological move­  ment  or a natural  process.  'Effective'  his-
 tory, however,  deals  with  events  in terms of their  most unique characteristics, their most  acute  manifestations." The  smooth and  fluent  medium of  conventional  his­ torical   time  is  replaced  with  a  view  of dramatic  highlights, sudden   breaks  and  unexpected  intensities. The  Nietzschean genealogist  is also strong, sufficiently  con­ fident  of the  rightness of  his own  present  standpoint  to  recognize   and   relish   the alienness of past  events, in their  intercon­ nection    of   sheer   chance.   Historicism, which  might   at  first  seem   to  present   a courageous   imaginative  sympathy  with cultures other than  its own,  then  timidly effaces  that  difference with  the  comfort­ ing  blur  of  an  evolution leading inexor­ ably into  the  present. Genealogy's tracing of  a   line   of   descent   maintains  events in their singularity, their  dispersion, their unnecessity. The tenuousness of their con­ nection  forms  a kind  of  counter-memory, severing  the  lines with  his own  past  man  has imagined for  self-reverence or  meta-



AUR -)R
NEW CANADIAN WRITING1979

edited by Morris Wolfe


Here  is the  second   edition of  an annual  collection of  previously unpublished work  by  Canadian writers, showcasing some  of the  newest  and  best  Canadian writing  of  the  past  year.  Included are fiction, non-fiction, poetry and  works  by Aretha  Van Herk  (winner of the  prestigious Seal  First  Novel Award)  as well as George Woodcock, Susan Musgrave and Marie-Claire Blais.
$7.95  paperback.


el DOUBLEDAY Canada Limited

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



physical 	reassurance.   Counter-memory discomforts us, defamiliarizes the past we thought we  could   remember.
The  tribute this essay pays to Nietzsche immensely  clarifies   one's   sense   of   the temper of  Foucault's philosophic  endea­ vour-its stony  calm,  its  steadfast  nega­ tivity, its disruption of  usual groupings, its breaking of  established  connections. The mountainous  terrain its  metaphors  con­ tinually seek  is a landscape of  "fissures, abrupt descents and  broken  contours," a landscape full  of  barriers  beyond  which nothing can  be known  or foreseen -one can  only  leap.  Foucault replaces  dialectic with  limit  and  transgression in a recipro­ cally conditioning relation: a limit is only realized   as  such  by a transgression,  and vice  versa.  The  "beyond" is defined   by the threshold which  forbids it. Transgres­ sion  is not  to  be equated  with  negation, however,  even  though  negation  plays the same definitive, identifying role in dialec­  tical  thought. "Transgression opens  onto a   scintillating   and   constantly  affirmed world,   a  world   without shadow   of   twi­ light,   without  that   serpentine 'no'  that  bites  into  fruits  and  lodges  their  contra­ dictions  at  their  core." In  this  redeemed  world,  dark  is not  needed  to define  light,  nor good  to define  evil. The positive,  the affirmative, is independent  of  the  nega­ tive.  Foucault proposes  a "thought with­  out    contradiction,    without     dialectics,  without negation;  thought  that   accepts divergence;   affirmative  thought  whose instrument  is  disjunction." The   infinite  connexity created by dialectics is replaced by a  space of disconnection, of genuine difference, where   the  unexpected, the radically new,  exists  beyond  the  limit  of each  entity  or subject of thought. It  is reached not  by contradiction or  contrast or continuity, but  by a leap, a break,  a transgression.
Limit and  transgression: this  model  is at   work  in  all   Foucault's  characteristic areas  of concern. Imprisonment and  free-
 dom, sexual repression and libertinage, rationality and  madness, the inescapable limitation of  a historical   era's   epistemic grid  and  the  sudden "break" that  makes way for  the  new:  all are  variations of the same  pattern. Yet  ultimately, God  is the definer  of  limits  and   transgressions. The event of  his  departure  or  death  denies us  "the limit  of  the  Limitless," and   the texts of Sade  and  Flaubert, Holderlin and Nietzsche, Bataille and  Borges,  all  bear witness  to this modern predicament.
Holderlin's work emerges from "a strug­ gle  at the  limits  of  language."  Foucault images  this limit  as a mountain  ridge,  an "escarpment  of   mythical   lyricism"    on which  we are  free  to graze. "He made  it possible  for  us, positivist  quadrupeds, to climb  the slopes of the inaccessible summit  which  he had  reached and  which  marked  the  limit,  and   in  doing so,  to  ruminate upon  the psychopathology of poets." This  limit  divides  reason  and  madness; it also marks  "a division  that   is responsible for every  work  in our  culture, a division  that links it to its own absence." If Holderlin's language is perpetually in danger of being silenced    by   madness,  Sade's,  his   con­ temporary, displays  the  opposite  propen­ sity of never  being  able  to attain  silence. Profanation must  be infinite, since it can­ not  finally  locate  the sacred. Hence the exhaustive, exhausting, unreadable char­ acter of  his work: "to  a world  of captive readers, Sade,  the captive, denies  the pos­ sibility  of  reading." The  infinite repeti­ tion  of  sexual  transgression can  only  be recorded  at infinite   length: to  this  cor­ responds  the   reflexivity   by  which   lan­ guage  can  create an  infinite  depth  within  itself.  "Headed  toward death,  language turns    back    upon    itself;    it   encounters something like a mirror; and  to stop  this death which   would   stop   it,  it  possesses but  a  single  power: that  of  giving  birth  to its own image  in a play of  mirrors that  has  no  limits." This folding  of  language over  on  itself  forms  a  world;  thus  mark-





Annie Howells and Achille
Frechette 	James  Doyle

Post-Confederation Ottawa sets the scene for this biography of Annie Howells (1844-1938), sis­ ter of the American novelist William Dean How­  ells, and her husband Achille Frechette
(1847-1927), brother of the French-Canadian
poet  Louis Frechette. Both Annie  and Achille were authors themselves, and their  lives and careers offer a fascinating glimpse into Ottawa's literary, political, and religious life. $10.00


The Rock Observed
Studies in the Literature of Newfoundland
Patrick O'Fiaherty

A Newfoundlander looks at the conflicting im­ pressions of his island left by writers over the centuries. An integrated survey  of Newfoundland literature, culture, and history, The Rock Ob­ served offers a sympathetic but  unsentimental portrait of the island and its people. $15.00
 


New titles
in Canadian literature





Contemporary Quebec
Criticism
Translated and edited by Larry
Shouldice

This is the first  collection translated into  English of what critics are saying in French about  Quebec writing. The ten articles are all general in scope; rather than focusing on the work  of particular writers, they present a broad view of Quebec literature and culture, and give a representative sampling of the concerns and ap­ proaches of Quebec critics over the past twenty years. No study  of
French-Canadian literature in transla­ tion can be complete without refer­ ence to this unique introduction to the rich and diverse body of criticism that has developed along with it.
$20.00 cloth, $7.95 paper










University of
Toronto Press

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing  the  birth  of literature in  the  modem sense. Here  the  Book  takes on  the ambi­ tion   to  rival   and   abolish   the  World   it should  represent. The authority of God's  book  was scattered among  all  books and is now  to be recollected first of  all into  a Library and  then into  "a book which  tells of all the  others." This  is the limit  ambi­ tion   of   the   modem  novel   from   Don Quixote    to   Ulysses  and   the   dreamed Book  of  Mallarme;  but  Foucault  takes Flaubert's Tentation de Saint  Antoine as his  exemplar.  Repeatedly rewritten, this text  is  repressed beneath  all  his  others; "the entire work  of Flaubert is dedicated to  the  conflagration of  this  primary  dis­ course: its  precious ashes,  its  black,  un­ malleable   coal."    Foucault   reads    the Temptation  as  a  "Fantasia  of  the   Li­ brary":  its  allusive   erudition   "recovers other  books;  it  hides  and  displays  them and,  in  a  single  movement  causes  them to  glitter   and  disappear." As a  book  of books,  it   becomes   self-sufficient,   purely literature,  a world  in  itself,  with  infinite  recession into its depths through the series of visions within  visions Foucault follows. The death of God, "the limit of the Limit­ less," has condemned us to a literature of infinite  length  and  infinite  depth, corres­ ponding to language's alienation from  the world,  which  in God's  day was known  as the  Book of Nature:  Language,  by fold­ ing  over  onto  itself,  becomes Literature: a world  of its own,  a world  without end.
Though they  rarely  attempt Foucault's more  visionary  fl.ights, the  four  other books  under  review   amply   demonstrate the  vigorous  presence in  Canada of  the "new  French criticism." The special issue of  the  Universite  de  Montreal's  Etudes Fran aises
mun" posits a rupture of recognizably Foucaultian character between  the  Clas­ sical-Medieval  use  of   commonplaces  as necessary  and  productive instruments of thought, and  their  modern degeneration into cliche, stereotype, and stock response.

106
 Jean-Pierre Roy's  Bachelard offers us a "non-Bachelardian"  reading of  his  sub­ ject aimed  at  deconstructing the  dualism  between  his epistemology of the scientific concept  and   his  poetics   of   the  literary image. Roy sees this disjunction as symp­ tomatic of much  modern thinking about literature, and  as  an  obstacle  to  the  de­ velopment  of   criticism  into   a   science. What that  development  might   produce in  practice  could  be something like Jean Fisette's   Le   T exte   Automatiste, which elaborates a theory  of semiotic  text analy­ sis and   applies it  to  works  by  Borduas,  Giguere,  and   Lapointe.  Scientific  criti­  cism  might  seem  especially   appropriate for   science   fiction,   but   Darko  Suvin's  Pour une  Poetique  de la Science-Fiction,  despite  its use of diagrams and  numbered propositions, falls to a great  extent within the more  traditional field of genre  theory. As such, it is greatly needed, and  the theoretical section  leads well into separate studies  of Wells, Verne,  Capek, and  Rus­ sian   science   fiction.   In   addition   to his knowledge of Slavic  sources, Suvin shows a fine synthesis of both French and Anglo­  Saxon   literary methods and   ideas.   For Canadian  criticism this  is a  consumma­ tion,   or   rather  connection,  devoutly  to be   wished!  And   appropriately  enough, Yale  University  Press  has  now  published an   English   version:   Metamorphoses of Science   Fiction:   On   the   Poetics   and History  of  a Literary  Genre.

GRAHAM  GOOD


ISLAND ROMANCE

TREVOR FERGUSON,  High  Water  Chants. Mac-
millian,  $g.gs.

THOUGH   ONE OF   THE   PRIMARY AIMS  of the  novel  is to create and  sustain  an ima­ ginary world,  some novels pretend to give us an  immediate vision of the  real world,  while  others do  not.  This  distinction  is

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



what  leads us to differentiate between  the novel  proper and  the  romance. Trevor Ferguson's first novel. High Water Chants, is most  assuredly a romance,  though its author does  not  seem  to  have  been  fully cognizant of the fact. From  his occasional confusion  of genres  derives  a number of significant    flaws;    despite    them,    High Water  Chants  is in  parts  quite  good  and as a whole  of some  value.
Ferguson sets  his  romance on  an  ima­ ginary   island    off   the   coast   of   British Columbia. His  plot  is archetypal  both  in form   and   in  content:  the  major  char­ acters  are  severally  compelled to  journey to  the  island's  interior, where  they  make certain  discoveries; then   they   return  to civilization and   follow  the  consequences of  their  discoveries  through to  the  end.
The  story  revolves  around the heart  of darkness in  what appears to  be a family with  a  curse.   A  sole  girl-child, Gail,  is born  into  the  vast,  brawling Duff  family. Her  birth  reforms her  father, who  there­ after   treats   Gail   as  the  incarnation  of good,   her   unregenerate  brothers  as  the incarnation of evil.  One  of her  brothers, Morgan, eventually rapes her and sets her adrift at sea. The book opens  when  Mor­  gan  returns to  the  island,  years  later,  to commit  a  miner's  rape   upon   its  virgin wilderness.   A  second   brother,  Thomas, has  become  the  hermit guardian of  that  wilderness  as  well as  the  keeper  of Mor­  gan's   secret.    Four    more    brothers,   all speechless  "idiots" who seek reunion with Thomas in  order to  redeem   their  collec­ tive  sin, perceive that  Morgan  must  des­ troy  the  hermit or  have  his  crime  come to light. Mysteriously, they compel  Fergu­ son's   four   heroes -Henry,   Doc,   Evlin and   an  Indian  named  Billy -to  go  to the  hermit's  aid.
This   array  of  characters is  not  sche­ matic,   I  think, but  mythopoeic.  It  is a composition of symmetries in which every archetypal figure  is balanced  by its oppo-
 site:  the martyred saint,  by the devil; the fool  who  guards the  secret,   by  the  his­ torian   (Henry)   who   seeks   knowledge; the  four  wise men  (the idiots)  who  can­ not act, by the four heroes  who know  not why they act; and so on. The trend  is per­  haps overdone when Evlin  turns  out  to be Gail's  double  and  serves  momentarily as her   ghost.   But   this   mandala-like  con­ struction is integral to Ferguson's holistic  world  and  message. Evil only arises, he is saying, when we exacerbate the tension be­ tween antinomies. Redemption is achieved through wholeness,  and  the  route  to wholeness is through knowledge.
The  antinomic tension  between   doing and    knowing    provides    Ferguson  with many  of his best passages. By shifting the point  of view, but only among his four heroes-those who  do but  do  not  know
-he permits  the  reader  both  to observe
and  to share  their  confrontation of  mys­ tery.   The    four   all-knowing   idiots   are  never  more  than  a  shadowy  presence  of undefined  power,  kept  just at the edge of the reader's vision. Ferguson's handling of point  of  view  suggests  that  he possesses the   instincts   of  a  fine   writer,  but   not enough  of the training. Of  his four heroes, only  Henry  is  sufficiently  well developed as a character  to permit  us to see vividly through his  eyes. Henry at least  is, how­  ever,  an  effective   and   original  creation whose persona  contributes much  towards making the fiction  convincing.
Mastery  of genre  is perhaps less impor­
tant than mastery of point of view, but authorial confusion can  be equally devas­ tating in both  areas. On  two crucial  occa­  sions  Ferguson   fails  to  capitalize on  his genre's   characteristic  potential for   high drama; on other occasions  he corrupts his romance with elements  of realism.  At the beginning  of  the  last  third of  the  book, Morgan is left wounded but  still danger­ ous  in the  island's   interior. There he  is confronted by a  mysterious woman  on  a


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



horse,  whom  he  takes  at  first  for  Gail's ghost-but  who  turns  out  to be  merely Evlin,  her  look-alike. Evlin's  appearance here,  apart from  the  implausibility of  a number of  details,  is anticlimactic. The more  apt   invention, and  a  brilliant  ro­ mantic device,  would  have  been  for  the rider  to be Gail  herself, or  (since her rape and    disappearance   occurred   seventeen  years earlier) Gail's  daughter. The latter  choice  would  have  expanded the symbol­ ism while  preserving the  symmetry.  Fer­  guson's   second   failure  of   nerve   comes when  Morgan is at  last  delivered   up  to his four  idiot  brothers. The book's  entire  structure demands an apocalyptic climax  here,   but   the  episode  is  trivialized   and foreshortened. Only later are we informed
- rather  offhandedly - that    Morgan
has been sawn into pieces at the local mill.
One   of  the  special  characters of  the realistic  novel is its pretence of transpar­ ency. By transparency I mean  the quality possessed by referential language, in which words  are  transparencies through which we  see  actual things.  Romance, by  con­ trast,  revels in opacity  almost  as much  as does  poetry.  That is, instead  of pretend­ ing  to  watch  the  real  world  through the page-as-window  (or   as  mirror) ,  in   ro­ mance we focus  on  the  page's  own  ima­  ginary  world,  and  on  the texture of  sym­ bolic meanings woven  therein. Corners of transparency - of   novelistic   realism  - then   have  a  disruptive  effect,  much   as would  a hole or  a window in  the  middle  of a movie screen. Ferguson's worst  rever­ sions to realism are the passages on reform  in   the   island's   white   settlements - a prime  concern  of  Doc  and  Evlin-and on  the  self-reform of  the  Indians under  Billy's    leadership.   Both 	subjects    are treated sketchily,  and  both  have  the  air of tangential intrusions from  what  ought to be separate works  of fiction.

ROD  WILLMOT

108
 MOTLEY
MAGIC CARPET

MARTIN    MYERS,    Izzy    Manheim's    Reunion.
General, $10.00.

MARTIN  MYERS' TWO PREVIOUS NOVELS have  elicited  comparisons with  Joyce, Vonnegut, and  Groucho Marx. With  his latest,  Izzy  Manheim's Reunion, one might  add  Pynchon and  Barthelme, Tol­ kien   and   Atwood,  Tom  Robbins,   Mel Brooks, John Fowles, and Agatha Christie. But  amazingly, he  has  woven  out  of  this motley  a magic  carpet of a book. It soars and  swoops, performs dizzying arabesques, and  every  time  it  threatens to careen  out of control Myers brings  it safely down  to earth, only to send it off again  next crazy sentence. This  is a  novel  that  lives  dan­ gerously and, just  because  it does,  makes exhilarating reading.
It does not begin auspiciously. Thenar­
rator of the first few chapters seems to be an   obsessive,   third-rate   standup   comic who  insists on  at  least  one excruciatingly bad  joke per paragraph. Is a bad  joke any less bad  for being self-consciously  so? The information that  Izzy Manheim has made his  fortune in  glue  gives  to  a  string   of groaners  involving  words   like  "sticky," "tacky," and  "grab." The unlikely parent­ age of both  Izzy  (son of "a lapsed Jewish  ritual   slaughterer and   Polish   Canadian former rodeo  queen")   and  his wife  Els­ peth  ("born in Singapore of a Norwegian operatic  soprano's  illicit   liaison   with   a Kurd  rebel  chieftain")  is just  too forced  to be funny. But once  Myers sets to work he  becomes   genuinely  funny -and   the story  he  tells  is exciting and  compelling. Thirty years  after leaving  Toronto for Africa,   where   he  has   become   the   glue magnate and  one  of  the  world's  richest men,   lzzy   Manheim  decides   to   return home  and  organize a  reunion of his  col­ lege graduating class. Unaware of his own

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



real  motives  and  ignoring his  wife's  pro­ testations that   you  can't go  home  again,  he buys the biggest, gauchest house in the city and  proceeds  to contact all his former  classmates.  They  are  a somewhat  bizarre  lot, particularly the twelve who have gone off  to  live  monastically  in  a  computer centre   in  the  Arizona   desert,  dressed  in fluorescent  blue   jumpsuits,    bound    to­ gether  by a gold chain, and committed to a  vow  of  silence  until  rg84.  Even  more curious  is that  while lzzy remembers each of  his  fifty  schoolfellows  in  intimate de­ tail, none of them  seems to remember him at   all.  The   unravelling  of  this  mystery comprises  one  of  the  two  major strands of the  novel.
The  other  consists  of a  series  of  flash­ backs   involving   lzzy's    early   years   in Africa as an anthropologist and climaxing in his discovery  of "the  power," which  is also the  secret  of  making  the  glue  which makes  him  rich.  This narrative, too,  has a  silly  beginning;  but  as it  develops  and weaves itself in and  out  of the  present,  it thickens with suspense.  These  chapters contain some wondrous writing as well as the  novel's  most  extraordinary character, Kakapupu. He  is a man  of many  talents
-African witchdoctor, Detroit disc  joc­
key, Harvard Business School  graduate, Mephistopheles to lzzy's  Faust, Daedalus to his Icarus, and  master-of-ceremonies at the novel's  brilliant finale.  lzzy's relation­ ship  with  Kakapupu, as  with  his  fellow graduates, is a  complex  mixture of  love and  hate,  guilt  and shame, all the permu­ tations  of   which   are   explored  at   the reunion.
One  of the  chief  marvels  of this  novel is the  way  it successfully  modulates  back and forth  from zany cartoon comedy to science   fiction   fantasy  to  domestic and psychological realism.  Almost  as if testing the  limits  of  his  own  fiction,   Myers  at once  demands that we accept the  outra­ geous  proportions of  his  story  and   still care  about his  characters. And  somehow
 we  do.  Interpolated  memories of  lzzy's childhood  and   quiet,   intense  confronta­ tions  between  him  and   his  wife  at  first seem  jarring  in  the  midst  of  computers that hum "Get Up  and Boogie" and char­ acters  like Pop  Gi::iesthe, who  remembers things before they happen. What unfolds, however,  is in fact  a serious  novel. "Any­  thing  was  possible,"  Izzy  realizes  at  one point.  And  it  is just  such  a  world  of in­  finite possibility, transcending the narrow consistencies   of   genre    and    tone,   that Myers renders  so imaginatively.
Myers'   Toronto  is  the   familiar   con­ temporary landscape of big-city alienation and  absurdity. Subway   riders  who  avoid eye  contact,  old  ladies  forced   to  carry  guns,   neighbours  who   never   see  each other,    black   towers   and   impenetrable bureacracies are symptoms of life's reduc­ tion. As lzzy's  former philosophy profes­ sor succinctly puts it, "Everything is shit."  On   his   return  Izzy  himself   feels   "the sameness,"   the   sadness,   "the  irretrieva­ bility of the past."  But he has also experi­  enced the magic of Africa, where  the most radical  transformations  have  proven  pos­ sible. The  "reunion" of  the  title  is more than   just  a  gathering  of  alumni. In  an Italianate  castle  built  by  a  Japanese in the  middle  of  a Canadian city,  African mystery  and   American technology  com­ bine  to  liberate suppressed  energies  and  re-unite the  fantastic with  the  mundane. Appropriately, Kakapupu  concludes   the proceedings  with a tour de force that  joins music  hall  and   magic  show,  encounter session and detective story,  just as he him­  self  embodies   a  union   of  disparate cul­ tures. The  novel ends -almost-with a group-sing, a  most  traditional comic  re­ conciliation    of    individuals   and    com­ munity.
Comedy, someone once said, is a funny  thing.  It can  be  used  as  either   a delicate instrument or  a  sledge-hammer, and  Myers is often  better  at  the first than at the second. He  can  even  be elegant, as

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in this passage where Izzy considers the mysteries  of  the  plot  in  which  he  seems to be caught up:
If anything  was  going  to  happen, it  was going  to happen  when  it  was ready  to hap­ pen   and   not   before.  That   seemed   clear. Besides, when  one doesn't  know what  to ex­ pect,  how  does  one  go about  expecting  it?  The   adage   that   watched  kettles  don't   boil may  have some application  out  there,  but it doesn't  in here. For one thing, if there  is an analogue to  the  kettle,  what  is it?  Without knowing  that, what  does one  watch?  Until  one knows  what to watch, one cannot  know what  it is capable  of doing, unwatched, that  is  analogous  to boiling.  And finally, to con­ clude  this circumlocutory piece of reasoning, even if one knew what  the kettle and  boiling analogues  were, but,  being human,  watched nonetheless,  then  if the  adage  holds  water, the  watched  kettle  analogue  would  not  boil analogue. In  short,  nothing  would  happen.

In contrast is Myers'  frequent inability  to resist pure  schtick, corny one-liners, and gratuitously ridiculous proper  names. One doesn't mind  so much  that  a minor char­ acter  is named, for  no particular  reason, Lou  Shmendrick. But  the  name  "Kaka­ pupu" is not only irrelevant but inappro­ priate, and  even in some curious way em­ barrassing.   Similarly,   the   ex-gangster's gangsterese,  the   East   Asian   detective's speeches   peppered  with  "by  golly"  and "oh  my goodness," and  Kakapupu's ghet­ to patter are generally  uninspired  (though in  the  last  case,  often  very funny) . Per­ haps  lzzy  Manheim's Reunion  provides its own  explanation for such  lapses when Elspeth, herself  a  novelist,  tells Izzy that  when  she  is having  trouble  with  a  novel she writes  jokes:  "I resort  to humour, the writer's last resort." But in Myers'  case apologies  are    unnecessary.   These    are minor  flaws in  a fine  writer  who  has  the feel of a major novelist. Besides, who can complain for long about  a novel that con­ cludes  with  a  list of  its own  Loose  Ends and   Red   Herrings,  sung   by  the   entire  cast of characters to the tune  of  "Putting on Your  Top Hat"?
JERRY WASSERMAN


I IO
 ART IN QUEST OF CRAFT?

CAM     HUBERT,   "Rites of  Passage,"   Room   of
One's  Own,  Vol.  III, No.  11    (1977)   $11.00.
HERSCHEL  HARDIN, The  Great Waue  of  Civili­
zation.  Talonbooks, $4·95·
KEN  MITCHELL  and  HUMPHREY  It THE  DUMP­ TRUCKS,  Cruel  Tears. Talonbooks, $4·95·
JULIUS   HAY, Haue,  trans.  Peter  Hay.  Talon- books, $4·95·
A DECADE  OR  MORE AGO Canadian writers, prompted by an orgy of theatre-building, discovered  the  stage  as  a  medium; and audiences responded with delight to the novelty of home-grown scripts  interpreted by  our   own  performers. That  the  play­ wright,  more   often   than   not,  possessed little  qualification  beyond ownership of a typewriter was not held against him. Now that  a stage  existed,  we  thought, drama­ tists would  acquire the craft  necessary  to exploit it.  Meanwhile,  patience and  en­ couragement were  the  watchwords.
For    some   fifteen   years   I  have    sat
through Canadian dramas by the score, resolutely turning  a  blind   eye  to  intel­ lectual  poverty,    naive   characterization, hackneyed language,  and stylistic  inepti­ tude. To  date  I have witnessed  perhaps a dozen   plays  worthy   of  the   name   when appraised  by  the  most  generous of inter­ national standards. Lately  I find my toler­  ance  waning. When, I  ask  myself,  will Canadian dramatists begin  to  take  their art  form  seriously?
My   impatience  with   Canadian   plays has been  often  tempered, it must  be said, by  unqualified admiration  for  the  craft and  ingenuity of actors  and  directors who lavish  upon  these  apprentice pieces more art  than they deserve.  I cannot but won­ der,   however,  in  my  more  cynical  mo­ ments,  how  many  would  willingly  do  so were it not for Canada Council insistence  on  native  content as a virtual pre-condi­ tion  for  regional  theatre subsidies.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



New  plays  by  Cam   Hubert and  Her­ schel Hardin do nothing to allay my nag­  ging skepticism.
"There  are   times   in   women's  lives," Ms.  Hubert tells  us  in  her  Prologue   to Rites  of Passage, "when we  pass, almost predictably, through  an  empty   land  de­ void  of guidelines or  signposts.  We  have to  learn  to  venture out  of  the  nest,  then to build  our  own,  and  finally  to live in a nest  once  crowded, now  private....  We have  to learn  to live alone,  learn  to have the  courage  to  fail.  Hardest of   all,  we have   to  learn   who  we  are." She  might  well   have   stopped there.  Her   play,  a veritable rag-bag of  cliches  drawn from  Women's Lib  rhetoric, is merely  a tedious  demonstration of this  truism.
Bess Sutherland, the  wife  of an  immi­ grant Vancouver Island miner, spent  her life  hurtling  between   stove  and   scrub­  board  without time  to  question the  pur­  pose  of  it  all.  Now  a  grandmother, and  with  her  husband  dying  of  pit-lung, she pauses  to ask what her  existence  amounts to. Her  daughter, Beth  MacDonald, vic­ tim  of  a  shotgun  marriage  to  a  young miner, is shattered by her husband's deser­ tion after  more  than  a decade of marital misery.  Confronted  by  the   choices   her new-found freedom allows, her will is im­ mobilized.  Thirteen-year-old  Maggy, off­ spring   of   Beth's    youthful   indiscretion, knows only that  she wants a life different from  her mother's; and  between  snatches of "Oh, dear, what  can  the  matter be?" she canvasses  her seniors  for  wisdom  and support.
Ms.  Hubert  opts   for   realism   as  her stylistic  vehicle,   but   is  betrayed  by  her want  of craft. Action,  whether physical or psychological, is  realism's  life-blood;  yet we are  fobbed  off with  static  debate. Op­ portunities  for   direct   character-conflict are  sacrificed  wholesale in favour of nar­ rative  recollection.
The protagonists might evoke  some sympathy for  their   plight   were  all  three
 more  sensitive  and   less sententious; but the  playwright seems  oblivious  to  every­ thing   but   their   didactic   function.  Ms. Hubert has a neat  way with dialogue and  a good  ear  for  dialect;  but  they  are  not enough  to  make a play  of what  is essen­ tially  a pamphlet.
The  Great Wave  of Civilization  has an equally  well-worn  axe to grind. Although
Hardin's  theme  is  the   exploitation  of
Blackfoot  Confederacy Indians  by  nine­
teenth-century fur  traders, contemporary capitalists are  not meant to mistake its relevance to  their  concerns.
Little Dog, of the Northern Blackfoot tribe,   exasperated  by  the   white   man's greed and the passivity of his people's response,  attempts to convince  the  tribal elders  to adopt a more  aggressive  stance. When   rhetoric fails,  he  constitutes  him­ self a one-man guerilla  force,  and wreaks sporadic vengeance  on  the  enemy  until  he  is cut  down   in  a  shoot-out with  the free traders.
Hardin, like  Hubert, has  little  new  to say; and  his choice  of the  Brechtian epic style only underlines The  Great Wave's intellectual  feebleness   and   political   na­ Ivete.  Most  of  Brecht's faults  flourish in abundance -preachiness,  bias,  and   pa­  tronization of the audience, to name  only a  few-but  Brecht's vigour,  brutal wit, and  keen eye for moral  contradiction are lamentably  absent.
Slide captions appear and  fade; moral lessons are administered by tribal chiefs; Indian argues  alternately with  Indian, trader, and   clergy;   and   spirits   of  sky, water,    and    the    animal   kingdom    are evoked ad nauseam. Apart from  a telling scene  or  two,  the  action   moves  us about as much  as  a CBC  documentary for schools.
It  is  perhaps Hardin's  abuse  of   lan­ guage  which  disappoints one most. At his best  he  is  an   impressive   word-wielder. The  austere  phrasing and flat cadence of the  Eskimos  in  Esker  Mike a  few  years


I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



back still haunt my ear. But his Indians espouse no such  restraint. Their verbal pretentiousness and  rolling  periods  smack more  of  the  pulpit  than   the  pow-wow; while the white man's utterances, if some­ what  more  direct, would  hardly do credit  to a  third-rate  western.
The  tedious  propaganda of Hubert and Hardin tempt  one to overvalue Ken  Mit­ chell's  Cruel  Tears, a  forthright  tale  of jealousy  and  violence,  crafted  with  style and    theatrical   flair.    Nevertheless    his achievement is considerable.
Indebted for  its  theme   and  handker­ chief  device   to  Othello, a  loan   frankly  acknowledged, the  play  takes  as its hero Johnny  Roychuk, a  Saskatchewan  truck driver, who  marries  his  boss's  daughter and seems destined for an idyllic marriage and   a   gilt-edged   future.  Jack   Deal,   a fellow   trucker,    unhappily  mated    and  jealous  of  Johnny's success, manipulates chance  events  to  exacerbate  the  latter's insecurities. The  bloodbath which  ensues costs Johnny his felicity and  Jack  his life.
Described as a "country opera," Cruel Tears  is a  minor   stylistic  tour  de  force. Shaped by the  aesthetics of Country and Western  music, an all-pervasive if not uniquely   Canadian art  form,  script  and songs complement each other  with rare aptness.  The simple  melodic  line,  strong beat, crude emotions, and  romantic ideal­ ism  of  the  Country and  Western  ballad find   their   counterpart  in   the   drama's crude    plot,    over-simplified   psychology, and    sentimental  tone.   The   music   by Humphrey and  the  Dumptrucks is tune­  ful,   and   the   lyrics   as   good   or   better  than   the  average Country and   Western  product.
All  three  dramatists could  profit  from a  close  study   of  Hungarian  playwright Julius  Hay's  Have, now available in a new and   stageworthy  translation  by   Talon­ books  editor, Peter   Hay.  Written  partly  in  a  Viennese   prison  in I 934  and  com­ pleted  in Moscow after his release inI 935,


II2
 Have   explores   the  social  and   economic lot  of  women   in  an  early-twentieth-cen­ tury   Hungarian   village.   Victimized  by government   bureaucracy,  industry,  the church,  and   male   avarice,  the   village wives turn to their  midwife  for relief. Her  assessment of  their  plight  is blunt,  and  its implications  horrific. "The master  of the yours-and-mine is master  of  the  world," she  tells  them.  "Is  the  world  the  village? Yes. The world  is the  village.  Out  there is the Count, out  there  is the Sugar Com­ pany.  Where they  begin,  there  the  world ends.  It's   not  mine,   it's   not   yours.  Be­ tween   them,   here,   this  is  the  world.   It might be  mine,  it  might  be  yours."
Concluding that  property means  power, the  women   form  an  unholy  compact to poison  their  husbands in order  to inherit the  few  acres  of  land  they  leave  behind. And  once  dedicated to materialism, they prove  even  more  ruthless than the  men. The slaughter of  village  males  ends  only when  Mari, a local girl, weds rich  farmer David   to  buy  the  prosperity necessary  to unite   her   with   her   lover  Dani, an  im­ poverished policeman. Romantic idealism  leads  her  to  refuse  her  husband  his con­ jugal  rights  on  their  wedding  night; and  want   of   caution proper  to   capitalistic enterprise incites  her  to  poison  him  the morning after.  Her  arrest  is  inevitable; and   exposure  of   the   entire  conspiracy follows.
Although Hay's  analysis  of social  con­ ditions   betrays    Marxist   sympathies,  he eschews   doctrinaire  solutions.   He   issues only a warning, as grim  as it is profound: the society which subordinates human ful­ fillment to  material gains  runs  terrifying risks.
Have's dramatic thrust owes  much   to its folk-play inspiration. The village venue yields a wealth of colourful and represen­ tative   characters. The earthly  simplicity  of the peasant psychology, and the rigidly­ defined  social system within which it oper­ ates,  allow  Hay  to  make  his  point   with

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



parable-like economy. The  precision of his observation and  the logic of his argumen­ tation are  almost   scientific;  yet  the  hu­  mane   sensibility   which  animates his  in­ quiry  is  never   in  doubt. The  language, superficially  realistic  but  artfully stylized, is evocative, vivid,  and  poetic.
Less  familiar  in   the   West   than   The
Horse    ( 1g64),  Have   merits   closer   ac­ quaintance.  Eisenstein spent   a  year  ex­ ploring it  with  his  students.  Will  Cana­ dian  directors prove equally susceptible to its charms?
JOHN RIPLEY



STRIKING IMAGERY

susAN  MUSGRAVE,   Becky   Swan's   Book.   The
Porcupine's Quill, $4·95·
CATHERINE  FIRESTONE,   Daydream   Daughter.
McClelland & Stewart, $4,95·
FRAN SPAFFORD,  Snowmelt. Pieran  Press.

I  READ    RECENTLY   IN     Vancouver that Susan   Musgrave  considers some  of  her own  poetry  obscure  now  even  to herself. The  interviewer went on to comment con­ fidently: "In her later  poems, Susan Mus­ grave  treats  her  subjects  with  clarity  and  wry  intelligence  that   is   lacking   in   the earlier ones."  With  this reassurance, I was prompted to look  again at Becky  Swan's Book.
I am impressed by the handsomeness of the   publication.  With   its  Cloister   Old Style type and  its Kelmscott stock, it emu­ lates  early   book   printing   practice.  The  cover  illustration and   the  densely  decor­  ated  inside  covers are intriguing, mysteri­ ous.  Part  of  the  visual  trick,  along  with the  type,  is  the  distracting device,  used throughout, of  placing at  the  bottom   of each  poem,  the first line of the  poem  that  follows on  the  next  page.  But  the  prom­  ised   "clarity   and    intelligence"  of   the poetry  I  cannot find.
The  book  is  obviously   about  people,
 since sixteen  different ones, most of them women,   are   mentioned   in   the   eleven short  poems.  Nowhere is there  any  men­ tion  of  Becky Swan,  or  of  any  Becky  at all.  Obviously,   too,  the  book  has  to  do with  bizarre,  remote  situations  and  hap­ penings. Nearly every poem contains some startling lines :

Mary Matlin
why  do you  poison  her?

Lucy  Littlecote
wearing 18th century boots
was  found bricked up  in  the rectory only  yesterday

I confessed   to  uttering spells

I go into  witch country with  a dowry  of wild  cattle
... he  beheaded me  for  adultery

But what  do the mentions (that's all they are)   of  witchcraft, poisoning, adultery, murder, etc. really add  up to?  I just can't say.  When  I try  to  grasp,  rationally, the culminated "meaning" either of any  one poem  or  of  the  total  eleven,   I  find  the book merely pretentious, a work relying completely  on  slick, visual  effects.
Certainly I'm   left  with  a   feeling  that I've   somehow   been   contacted  by  some long ago spirit  who has a compulsion to communicate a  state   all  too  familiar to her. Although the constrained, understated symbols hint  at some inner, ancient world of torment, I cannot help but feel that  the communication is  effected   more   by  the total   format  than   by  the   poems   them­ selves.
Susan  Musgrave may later  find the poetry  of this book obscure  as she has her earlier  works. But, at  the  time  of writing, I think  she knew  Becky Swan.  With  help from  outside  the  poetry,  I think  I know her  too.
While  I  found   more   than   I  had  ex­ pected  in  the  Musgrave  book,   that  the reverse  was true  of Catherine  Firestone's Daydream Daughter can  perhaps be  at­ tributed to my  expectations set  up  when

II3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I learned that  this poet composes in both French and  English.  I immediately (and excitedly) assumed  that she uses both languages in one book, even in one poem. Bilingual  poetry.  What  a step toward solving one of our  national problems.  But no,  the  French and   English  are  in  sep­ arate books.
Overall, Firestone's poems  are  not pleasing. Too  much  consciously  used rhyme   and   alliteration, too  many  over­ used  connections, and  persistently  mixed metaphors mar  her  artistry.  Examples of all  these  deficiencies  emerge  at  the  very outset, by the fifth  poem, in fact. "Out of
her   haze I  and   craze   and   daze,"   "un­
timed,  mimed   mood,"  are   two   unfor­
tunate rhymings,  both  in  the  title  poem, the first in the book. The  third  and  fourth poems  give us "the  whelp  of whalebone" and "croaked crones." "Graves are rocked cradles," in  the  fourth poem,  introduces the  tendency to  trite  connections,  while the  jarring movement from  organ  soloist to solitaire   player  to  "birdwide toucher" to "pudding of pig" to "hollowed-tree remnant" to "the churlish   blind"  of  the fifth  poem  warns  us of the mixed  images in store  throughout the book.
However, there  are exceptions. Five poems   in   particular,  appearing  in   se­ quence in the last quarter of the book, are gratifyingly   different.   "Kelday's    Last Night" is a  powerful poem  about  a  girl who  died  at  fourteen. The power  derives from  the  prose-like  form  with  which  the poet  seems  more  comfortable.  The  lines,
"She  even filled the  bodice of a peasant  I
blouse  and  at  that   was an  early  woman
neatly   tucked   together" offer  a  striking example of  what  Firestone  can  do  when she  frees  herself  of  the  flaws  mentioned earlier. "The  Round Game" successfully communicates its rather unusual theme  (a woman's need to pretend she is pregnant), even  in its title  and  in the opening lines:
"You  hold  the  bundle of laundry I like a
bundle of baby."


114
 "Our Sib's Ribs" is a strong  social com­ ment   with   its   juxtaposition  of   starving children  ("their  bellies  reach  their  hag­
like I knees, their  legs are thin as pencils  I
so that  small  garters would  drop  I easily
down")  with  the  well-fed  "us"  who "de­
cide  how  much  candied peel  to add  I to
the   mincemeat  steaming hot."  Another
poignant juxtaposition, this time  between child   and   adult, is  central  to  "Child  I Kneel  to be Your Size" with paradoxical, unembellished lines  such  as "I will grow up  to  be a  child,  as  you."
"In the  Housemaid's Pantry," a  com­
ment  on   mother I smother  love    (my
rhyme), I would  judge  the  most success­
ful poem in the book. Every line evinces amazing control of image so that  the total effect is one of that  powerful kind of com­ pactness  one  finds  in so much  of  Seamus Heaney's poetry.  The  undeniable control of the  mother is firmly established  in  the first  stanza:

she  taught him  to tie a shoe lace as if it were a closely
fitting  corset,  to gobble  the goodnight
kiss as if it were a rush on gold;

while  the  effect  on  the  son  is aptly  con­
veyed in  the  concluding lines:

He  had  become  her; wads of coil wade through
the vortex of the  heart  to the roof of mouths and  nothing can  tear  them  out.

Firestone's range of subject matter is vari­ able,    and    though,    unfortunately,   her poetic competence is also, the good poems are  very  good.  I  still  hope  that  she may, some day, combine this potential with her linguistic  ability   and   give  Canada some much  needed, excellent, bilingual poetry.
Fran Spafford's Snowmelt, while  a much    humbler   publication   than     the other  two,   has   a  unity   of  theme   and imagery that, I feel,  makes  it superior to both. There is no pretentiousness whatso­ ever,  either in  the  "chapbook" format or in  the  form  and  diction of the  poetry.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The promised  winter theme of the title is   evident  in   nearly    all    twenty-seven poems, sometimes obviously, sometimes obliquely. The  imagery   that   carries   the theme  is always strong, sure. Snow spiders
are  "tentacled oracles   1 Spreading little
winters," whose webs are  hurled to earth
"In  tiny,   mad    blizzards";  hawks    are
"Thermal cowboys I riding autumn out  I
and  rounding up  winter"; a  cloud  is "a torn   tattered cloud   mother  I her  white belly swollen  I with  tiny  snow  children."
And  the  imagery  of winter expands to
give a sense of the land:

the countryside lying
like some great  wintering animal
beside  the  highway in  the  sun

and  the  people,  both  general :

the  world  is full of winter  people hibernating in winter  caves feelings  slowed  to a  minimum
for survival
in a world of below-zero  humanity

and  individual:

you  began  a personal  migration as full  of purpose 	and  intent
as geese 	salt  and  peppering the sky
in  southbound arrows.

There is also  a  delicate fibre  of  "story" that   touches  on   the   Indian  condition. "For   Keith-Who     Will    Not    Trust Again" introduces a runaway boy of ten, "full  of brown  pride," who

arrived in a series of rusty  half-
tons;  riding  in the  back with  matted
dogs and  old  lumber

and  "Helen" tells of a girl  "reeking with vanilla, and  too  many  lovers"  whom  the poet  addresses thus:

You are fourteen, Helen Even now the old squaw looks out from your eyes, and  holds your  hand
to shuffle down
to the  beer  parlour on  Main  Street.
 The   whole  book  speaks   of  the  emo­ tional  climate  of  the  prairie.  While   the cold and  the hardship predominate, there is a strong  underlying hope  of alleviation, although the  limit  of  its  extent   is  fully realized:

Winter  people­ Praying  for  a chinook,
Never daring  to hope for a heat  wave.

If there  is any  agent of "snowmelt," it is, for Spafford, the warmth of personal love:

Let  winter  melt  through your  pores
To  puddle  at  your  feet
and evaporate in  the heat  of two.

PEGEEN BRENNAN



THREE FACES OF FRENCH CANADA

JACQUES  FERRON,  Quince  Jam.  Trans. by Ray
Ellenwood. Coach  House, $6.so.

GABRIELLE ROY, Garden  in the Wind. Trans. by
Alan Brown. McClelland & Stewart, $1 o.oo.

BEN-ZION SHEK,  Social  Realism  in the  French- Canadian  Novel.  Harvest House.

THESE  THREE BOOKS -one  a  work  of criticism,   the   other  two   collections  of short    fiction-illustrate 	an    extensive range   in   critical  thought  and    literary practice in current French-Canadian writ­ ing.  The  most  interesting  result  of  con­  sidering  them  in  juxtaposition is  that the major  thesis  of   the   criticism   does   not account for the effectiveness of the fiction.
In   his  study   of  social  realism   in  the modem  French-Canadian   novel,   Ben­ Zion Shek sets a curious problem for him­ self. Beginning  with  the  obvious fact  that  Gabrielle Roy  and   Roger  Lemelin  were two of Canada's  best  novelists  writing in French just after  the Second  World  War,  Shek  argues  that they established a tradi­ tion of social realism  which  can  be traced in  the  work  of  their  contemporaries and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



successors. He commences with the masterpieces, exhaustively analyzing Bon­ heur   d'Occasion,  Alexandre   Chenevert and   Lemelin's  Quebec  City   trilogy   as urban  novels which  arise out of  and  com­ ment  upon  specific socio-economic  condi­  tions. He  then calls attention to secondary  novels of the post-war decades  which  also deal  with  poverty,  class struggle,  labour disputes  and  similar matters of  modern  working life. Yet as Shek himself acknowl­  edges, most  of these secondary  works are  items  of  modest  literary  value  which  do not  belong  to  the  mainstream of  recent Quebec fiction.  Rather than  declare  that the tradition he seeks is hardly  a tradition at all, but a phase  which bloomed quickly and  then  modulated into another kind of writing  (exemplified by Roy's  own  move from  slice-of-life  realism  to  more  philo­ sophical, metaporical fiction) , he shifts his definition of realism.
Shek coins the term "neo-realism" to describe the often politically motivated aesthetic experiments conducted by the generation which  exploded  upon  the Quebec literary scene in the  196o's. This critical leap  could  work  if his argument gave  equal   weight   to  realism  and   neo­ realism,  showing in detail  how the former  grew into  the latter. As it stands, however,  the  book's  title  is misleading; it  is essen­ tially  a  study  of  two  novels by  Roy  and three  by Lemelin, brought up to date  with two   appended  chapters   dealing  rather hastily  with  the  work of  recent  writers.  A simple   page   count  indicates   the  imbal­ ance: Shek devotes forty-six pages to Bon­ heur  d'Occasion  and  thirty  to Alexandre Chenevert;  then  he  disposes  of  Hubert Aquin  in four, Marie-Claire Blais in three,  Roch  Carrier  in  one,  and  all  but  ignores Anne  Hebert.
Despite this difficulty, Shek's  judgments are  generally insightful, illuminated by a comprehensive  knowledge   of  Quebec daily  life  and   social  history.  Their  pre­ sentation, however,  does not do them jus-

116
 tice. Basically a warmed-over dissertation, Shek's book suffers many of the common faults  of thesis-writing: undigested lumps of plot summary, a compulsion to mention the  opinion of  every  single  critic  in  the field, and  a pendantically objective tone whose impersonality dulls the impact of cogent   critical perceptions. In  addition, conventional  footnotes  are   replaced   by a frustrating system of documentation which  sends the reader  scurrying to an in­ convenient   bibliography   at    the    back. Thoroughly re-written, Shek's  book could satisfy  the current need for a comprehen­ sive English-language study  of  the  social ramifications of modern French-Canadian fiction.
Social  realism,   "neo" or  otherwise,  is not   the  motivating factor  in  the  other two  books under  consideration, Gabrielle Roy's  Garden in  the  Wind   and  Jacques
Ferron's  Quince  jam.  Neither  book  lo­
cates  its primary sense of reality  in the external   world    determined   by    socio­ economic circumstance. Instead they both begin from  the inside, concentrating upon the  subjective nature  of  perception. Roy establishes this  inner  focus  in  her  choice of content, Ferron in his manipulation of narrative form.
Ferron's witty  tales are  controlled  fan­ tasies  in  which  the  fragmentation  of  the self and  of reality  is reflected  in  the frac­  turing  of  conventional   narrative  struc­  tures.  Events  and characters overleap the boundaries of  the  stories  themselves,  dis­ appearing  unresolved in one  tale  only  to reappear   unexpectedly  in   the   next,   as usual    causal    sequences    collapse    into dream-like surrealism. Verbal  fluidity  and patterns of recurrence replace the usual logic  of  cause   and   effect,   yet   Ferron's stylistic fluency creates an overall  sense of continuity.
This  is not  to say that  Ferron avoids all social  commentary. In "Papa Boss,"  his sardonic version  of  a  modern  annuncia­ tion  and  immaculate  conception, Ferron

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



applies  his irreverent sense  of  illogicality to the  materialism of the  automobile age and  the  failure of organized religion.  He plays with  ironic  double images: the  vir­ gin  is replaced by  a  fallen   nun  and  the annunciatory angel  is her landlord, a sui­ cidal   character  named   Gerald  Pelletier  whom,  significantly,  everyone  keeps  call­ ing  Gerard.  Drifting into   the  hallucina­ tory  core  narrative are  pieces  of literary  parody and odd encounters with distorted images  derived   from   Quebec's  folkloric and religious inheritance.
Woven    into    the    other    three   inter­ related  stories  is a series of doubles whose implications  are   simultaneously   literary  and  political. Ferron poses the problem  of the  relation  between   the  author and  his characters when  he eventually announces that  he personally stands behind  Fran<sois M·enard, the introspective narrator of the nightmarish  "Quince Jam," and  declares autobiographical  the  charming  glimpses into   small-town  Quebec  life.   Menard's mission   is  to   poison   Frank   Archibald Campbell,  a   "Montreal  Rhodesian"  to whose grandfather  Ferron attributes verses   by   Bliss   Carman  and    Duncan Campbell Scott. Ferron  avows  his  hos­ tility  to  the  liberal   Anglo-Saxon  culture Frank  represents  (espoused   most  perni­  ciously by Hugh MacLennan, he claims), yet he gives Franc;ois and  Frank  more  in common than their  first  names. Both  are born in Maskinonge county, Ferron's own native  ground. Franc;ois recognizes  Frank  as   the   cop   who   had   beaten    him   up twenty  years earlier  during a radical stu­ dent  demonstration  and   calls  him  "the skillful engineer and  malicious witness of my sellout," but  he  also concedes  the  at­ tractiveness of  the  image  of  the  English gentleman. Upon seeing  the  (poisoned) quince  jam Franc;ois has  brought to their weird   midnight  encounter,  Frank is  re­ minded   of  his  own  Quebec City  child­  hood  spent  in  an  enclosed  garden, yearn­  ing  for  the  liberty   and   humanity of  the
 forbidden French world outside. Ferron appears to imply a sense of reciprocity between  the  two cultures: if not  friends, they relate  as adversaries, defining  their separate identities against  each  other.
More conventional and accessible is Gabrielle Roy's Garden in the Wind. Like Ferron, Roy  is a  master   stylist;  in  these four superbly  crafted stories her controlled use of understatement heightens the lone­ liness and  displacement of her characters. I  am   puzzled   as  to  why   Alan   Brown, Roy's  translator, changed  the  title  from Un   Jardin  au  bout  du  monde; the  four stories  share  an  end-of-the-world quality, the   characters'   physical   distance    from  their  native  lands  corresponding to  their social and  psychological  alienation. Each  tale  concerns   individual isolation   in  the immense  Canadian West, and  the need to root identity in a particular place.  In  the first, an engaging con-artist exploits  the feeling of homelessness shared by the Quebecois who emigrated to Manitoba. Pretending to come  from  the  old villages left so many years ago, he moves from household  to household, earning his keep by fabricating stories about  the emigrants' long-lost  relatives.   His  victims  half-con­ sciously  comply   with   the  deception  be­ cause  they yearn  for  the sense of identity he provides, yet feel deeply betrayed when the  imposter is  eventually unmasked.
These   stories   arise   out   of  Gabrielle Roy's  personal past,  covering territory familiar to readers  of her  western  fiction. In   her   introduction  she   explains    that three  of the four  pieces are  reworkings of older  material; it almost  appears that  she returned to her own literary roots in order to describe  individuals seeking compensa­ tion  for their  uprootedness.
A mood of poignant reflection  pervades all  four  stories.  Sam   Lee   Wong   leaves China  for   a  Saskatchewan  village,   at­ tracted  to  a  string   of  little  hills  on  the horizon  which  strike  a  subliminal  chord  in his imagination. Due  to a series of mis-

I I 7

BOOKS IN REVIEW



understandings, his hard-won acceptance climaxes ironically when the community forces him  to leave  by giving  him  a fare­ well party.  He moves to another town, on the other  side of the hills. But the rounded  hills  themselves,  the  emblem  of  his striv­ ing, he will reach  only in death. In "Hoo­ doo  Valley" a group of  Doukhobour set­ tlers,  misled  by the  illusive  light  of sun­ set, selects a wasteland because it momen­ tarily  reminds  them  of home.  And  in the title story an old Ukrainian woman  dying on  a  remote   homestead in  northern  Al­ berta  compensates for  the  failure  of  hu­ man   love  by  pouring her  final  energies into her brilliant flower garden.
Despite   these   themes   of  mirage,  dis­ placement and  isolation,  Roy's  writing  is remarkably affirmative. She dwells less on defeat   than   on  the  will  to  persist,  cele­ brating both  idiosyncracies and  universals of  human  behaviour   with   a  masterful touch  of restraint and  affection.

CAROLE GERSON


FERRON & FICTION

JACQUES   FERRON,  Escarmouches.   2  vols.,  Le­
meac.

JACQUES   FERRON,  Wild   Roses. Translated  by
Betty   Bednarski.    McClelland   &   Stewart,
$6.gs.

WHEN A NATION  IS STRMNG to assume its identity, the  avant-garde plays  a  signifi­ cant  role in giving voice to the aspirations of the masses. This phenomenon has been particularly apparent in Quebec, where it has   often   produced   partisan   criticism which  obscures   the   distinction  between good  writing   and   effective  propaganda. Jacques Ferron, the  doctor-artist,  speaks in a unique voice in which a distinction between    craft    and   content  cannot  be made.
Discussing  his role as an artist  Dr. Fer­
ron  has said :

II8
 J'ecris avec  des  mots  qui  ne  me  sont  pas personnels  mais avec des mots qui appartien­
nent  a tout  le monde.  Le mot  est  un  outil.
C'est  ainsi  et  je  n'accepte pas  du  tout  que
l'ecrivain soit  considere   comme  un  homme
de metier. Ecrire,  c'est aujourd'hui un droit une  liberte  semblable  a Ia liberte  de  parole:

Nowhere is this philosophy more clearly illustrated than  in  Escarmouches, a  two­ volume  collection of  Ferron's  occasional  writings  from  I948 to  I974- Defined  liter­ ally  as  unimportant  combat  between   a few members of two opposing  armies, "es­ carmouches" also  has  a  figurative  sense
-"disputer Iegerment." A  subtitle, "la longue   passe,"  extends this  connotation. That the  thrust is of a pen  rather than  a sword  takes  nothing from  the  sharpness of the attack. Escarmouches has three sec­ tions:  "politiques," "medicales," and "lit­ teraires." Ferron's literary criticism is sen­ sitive;  his  social  satire  of  hypocrisy  and behavioural  absurdity  is  both  acute and funny; but  his political satire  is mordant, its  force  doubly  apparent after   the  elec­ tion  of the  Parti  Quebecois.
The tone  is not  consistently light.  In­ dignation and  outrage surface  in an early article  on  the  I 959  strike  at  Radio-Can­ ada,  the event  that  started Rene  Levesque on  a  new  political path. Jacques Ferron, too, spoke out: "La  seule fac;on de sauver  nos minorites: nous sauver nous memes." The  English  workers  at  CBC,  he  termed "des hypocrites et des Taitufe; des racistes dans toute  la force du mot." In I96o, Fer­  ron   resigned  from   the   P.S.D.,   Quebec wing of the  C.C.F., after  the Convention passed  a  resolution supporting  self-deter­ mination  for   Algeria,   but   defeated  the doctor's  parallel  motion  demanding the same   rights   for   French   Canadians.  In "Adieu au  P.S.D.," he  begins  in  typical Ferronian style:  "La C.C.F. est un parti­ ouesterne. II est ne de l'accouplement de monsieur  Woodsworth et  d'un bison,  ac­ couplement bizarre:  le  bison  en  est mort...."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Frank Scott  is a favourite target  of Ferron, for whom  he epitomizes the Eng­ lishman who  has preserved archaic tradi­ tions,   a  colonizer despite   himself   who would  leave  the  French in  peace  as long as  they  do  not  interfere  with   him;   but who  cannot understand  why  they should  be  at  odds  with   one  another politically  when  they  are  so  similar  racially.  When asked  about  his  reaction to  the  possible francization  of   McGill,  Scott   flaps   his arms "comme un epouvantail derange par un moineau."
Ferron uses parable, mock fable, and Biblical  imagery  to  effect.  Much   of  his satire  could  be  classified  as  modern  bes­ tiary   with   politicians  cast   as  wolves  in sheep's   clothing. For  Trudeau,  Pelletier  and  company, he  has  antipathy. He  has Pelletier  say, "Notre avenir? Moi,  je n'en
sais   rien.   Je  suis   comme    le   prophete
Jonas  dans  la baleine. 11 reste a savoir  ou
la  baleine  le vomira." He  considers  Tru­
deau  a greater threat to  French Canada than  "le  plus  arriere des  Blue  Nose."  In several  sketches,  he calls Trudeau "le Prince," a  Machiavellian power  monger, not  to  mention a common name   for  a horse.
It is impossible  to convey  the  full  fla­ vour  of Escarmouches, which  ranges over a vast  area  of history,  politics, literature, art   and   medicine with  probing  intellect and   ironic  humour.  Reading them,  one moves   into   the   intellectual  climate   of Quebec today and senses that  Ferron will be   hailed   as   having  been   a   prophetic voice of what  is now coming to pass.
Wild   Roses   takes    the    reader    into
Jacques Ferron's fiction  universe  where he
reorders a "wasteful" reality   into  com­ plex,  compact  artifacts.  Winner  of   the I972  Prix  France-Quebec, this  novel is a deceptively simple  tale  of a selfish young executive  whose   wife   commits  suicide, leaving    him   with   an   infant  daughter whom  he boards  with an Acadian family in  Moncton  until  she  reaches   majority
 and  flees her  father's encroaching  mad­ ness. Symbolic  and   historic  perspectives extend  the meaning of the story.
Wild  roses twine  through the  narrative carrying a  fairy-tale curse   with   their scent. Soon after  his marriage, Baron  and his wife transplant wild flowers near  their bungalow.  The roses immediately

perked  up when transplanted, and  they pro­ ceeded  to do so well that  by the second  year they almost covered  the windows of the bed­ room which remained  dark from  the  time of their  flowering  in  the  third  week  of  June  until  the  coming  of  the  snow,  and  became darker still  as  the  roses  grew  thicker   with the years.

The   roses' curse  of  darkness contributes to  the  wife's  madness,  but  they  are  also related to a curse  that  Baron  carries with­ in  himself.  The first  description  of   him notes that  "he  took all the light and never spoke   of  the   dark." The   roses  extend Baron's  function. Their  thickening mark  his   wife's   progressive   withdrawal   into  total  isolation.  She dies  when  they  are  in full  bloom  and  Baron  absorbs  her  guilt.  The scent  of the  roses becomes  unwhole­ some,  following   him  even   to  Moncton, haunting him  until his own  death.
The  historical perspective becomes  ap­ parent when  Baron  arrives in  Moncton, during a conference on  Mental  Retarda­ tion,  with a charming young English  wo­ man  from  Newfoundland  whom   he  has met on the  plane.  They  tour the city and  he gives a capsule history of the Acadians, for whom  Ferron has infinite compassion. The  author himself attended that  confer­ ence,  sending  back  two  articles   on  "Les Chiacs" to  Magazine McLean. Much of this material appears unchanged in Wild Roses.

Quoi,  Monsieur! Vous  les  instruisez   done, vos  Acadiens   . . . Y  avez-vous   pense?   ... Instruire les Acadiens, et en franc;ais, non,  je n'en  reviens pas! Voulez-vous  apprendre une nouvelle,  Monsieur- ?  Eh  bien  vous  allez avoir  tant6t  un hard  time.

II9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Ferron comments on the tragic  destiny of this  people,  less vocal  and  militant than their  Quebec compatriots: the Acadians who received  no rights after  the Conquest and  were tracked  down like wild beasts to the edge of the forest. Baron repeats their story  to  Anne  Higgit, although  there  is some   incongruity  in   his  political   pro­ nouncements since he "was not interested in politics and  attached no importance to all  these  conflicts,  remnants  of a  past  he was  unable  to  comprehend." But  it  may be   that   Ferron   attributes  Baron's   own tragic destiny  to this attempt at sloughing off a past which is part of him whether he acknowledges it  or  not.
Wild Roses has been well translated by Betty Bednarski  who also translated the earlier Tales  From an Uncertain Country. But  despite  its  ingenuity,   it  left  me  less moved  than  the spleen  and  wit of  Escar­ mouches.
LINDA SHOHET



A TASTE OF EARTH

ALBERT  LABERGE,  Bitter  Bread.  Translated   by
Conrad  Dion. Harvest House,  $9.95; paper
$3·95·
JACQUES  BENOIT,  The   Princes. Translated   by
David Lobdell. Oberon, $9.95; paper $4-95·

THERE ARE THREE  GENERATIONS separat­ ing  Albert   Laberge   and  Jacques Benoit, and   the  gulf  between  their  worlds  is as deep  as  that  separating  the  Quebec of a hundred  years  ago  from  the  Quebec of today.
Albert    Laberge   ( I 871-1g6o)    studied for the priesthood but lost his faith  and became  a  journalist instead,  working  as a sports  writer  and  art  critic  for  La  Presse and  then  retiring while still a young  man to  write  short  stories  and  works  of  criti­ cism  in  his house  in Chateauguay. Bitter Bread   is  Conrad  Dian's   translation  of Laberge's only novel,  La Scouine, which,


120
 condemned as pornographic by the church, was  published privately  in  Igi8. What  Mgr.   Bruchesi   considered   porno­ graphic won't  even  raise  an  eyebrow  to­ day, but  the oblivion  to which  this extra­ ordinary novel  was  consigned   from   the outset   has  strangely  persisted,   and   it  is only recently  that  it has begun  to acquire the reputation it deserves as a masterpiece of French  Canadian  naturalism.
"La  Scouine" is Marie Rose  Paulima, born   in   I853   the   daughter  of   farmer Urgele  Deschamps. She  quickly  emerges as a character who must  take her place alongside Hagar  and   Isabelle-Marie  as one  of  the  memorable women  in  Cana­ dian  fiction.  Laberge's  novel  follows  her escapades in  thirty-four chapters, each  of which   focuses  briefly  and   devastatingly on  one  episode   in  the  life  of  the  rural  community around   Beauharnois,  where  Laberge himself  grew  up.
As a child  she wets her  bed every night and  her  school companions nickname her "la  Scouine" because  of her  smell.  (The term   has   no   particular  meaning, and Dion has wisely refrained from  trying to translate  it.)    Forcing  a   popular   new teacher to leave the school, telling tales on her  friends, and  lording it over  the  other children, she is a little  horror, exactly  the kind of child one would  not want  to have, and she grows worse as she grows older, drowning a  dog  in  a  well  and  giving  a lead  quarter to a hungry beggar  before sending  him back out  into a bitter Christ­ mas  night.
What is surprising is that  a  book  cen­ tring  on  the  exploits  of  such  a  very  un­  pleasant  woman   can   exude   a   warmth rarely  equalled in  any  fiction.  How  La­  berge  succeeds  in  this can clearly  be seen in  the  episode  concerning  itself  with  the death of la Scouine's twin sister.
La  Scouine takes  charge   of  the  house for  a  week,  and   since  the  children are crying she leads them  into the room where their  mother is lying.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"If ya're bad, your  ma'll come  and   pull your  toes  at night," she  told  them.
Terrified  by  this   threat,  the   motherless
children quieted down. They cried  in silence,
afraid that  the   one   who   had   loved   them would come  to  hurt them. Fear had  entered their  minds, the   way  an   intruder enters a house; it wandered inside of them eerily  and rent these  young, defenseless beings, harass­ ing  them  by day  and  keeping them awake at night....  Their bare feet  touched  the  floor nervously; and  when they  curled  up in  their  bed,  they  bunched up  one  against  the  other in     anguished     expectation.     They   could scarcely close  their eyes  for  fear  and  would suddenly  break  out  in  tears.

The  short  chapter concludes with  an excited  la Scouine smugly  describing the funeral to an acquaintance ("she  stressed every detail,  sputtering, her  big, thick lips shot  little  humid beads  in  the  old  lady's face") and  boasting: "Father Dubuc said he'd never seen such a nice coffin in his church, never  seen such  a nice coffin."
The life of the people  populating  Bitter
Bread is the relentless  life of working a merciless   land,   a  life  sustained  by  the
round loaves of a bread  that  is "heavy  as sand, sour and bitter to the taste." The frequent references to  this  "bitter  bread, marked  with  a cross" leave  no doubt  that his novel  is no  simple  celebration of  the rural  life Laberge saw disappearing, and his bleak view is further darkened by powerful images of disease and death startlingly linked   with   religious   images: "the land  seemed eaten  by cancer, leprosy or  some  disgraceful,  malignant  disease. The  fences   had   been   burnt   in  certain places,  and   the   burnt  stakes   cast   their black shadow on the plain,  like a long procession  of monks."
But above all the hardships and  sorrow there  emerges  a compassionate picture of humanity, however   warped, and  we  are left with a taste of the earth that  is sourer, more  bitter  than  the  bread  itself, but that is the  staff  of life for  all  that.
The translation is stark,  evocative and
poetic,  like  Laberge's French,  but  Dion
 does tend  to use redundant phrases  ("she boasted   proudly")   and   occasional   gal­ licisms  ("little  humid  beads"),  and  his attempt to  render the  dialect   in  English (always a difficult  job)  is eyecatching and irritating.
Jacques   Benoit   (born   1941)   won  the Prix  de  la  Province  de  Quebec for  his first novel, Jos Carbone.The Princes (Les Princes, 1973, admirably translated by David  Lobdell) is his fourth and, in its disconcerting combination of fantasy  and realism,  it  is typical  not  only  of his own best work but also of much of the fiction being produced by the talented younger writers  in Quebec today.
An   elaborately   described  imaginary city in The  Princes is populated  by more­ or-less human beings,  monsters and dogs.
The   starving  people   break   a  centuries' old  taboo  and  start  killing  dogs for food, and  the highly organized society of dogs retaliates  first of all by making  themselves poisonous and  then by killing and eating people. The militia steps in, the dogs are hideously mutilated and  massacred, and commander Kroknell  goes  home  to  an­ other  section of the city, happily calculat­ ing  that  he  personally  is  responsible  for the  death  of 91 dogs. His pet  dog, Nina,  slinks away from  him  on  his arrival, and it is only later  that  he wakens  to find her at  his feet  with  a  large  black  mastiff  be­ side her. Just  as he is vaguely  thinking  of reaching for  his cutlass,  the  mastiff  hurls himself    forward,   his   jaws   closing   on Kroknell's throat.

Avoiding the  spreading pool  of  blood, Nina leapt on  to  the  commander's chest,  pressed her   muzzle   to   his   face,    and    plucked the man's  eyeballs from   their sockets.   Raising her  head  in  the  air,  she  gulped them  down.

The    characteristics  that    they   share show  up  most  clearly   the  contrasts  be­ tween  Laberge  and  Benoit.  Both  have  a remarkable eye for the striking detail,  and both record  their  observations crisply, but where   Laberge   is  compassionate  in  his


121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



chronicles of cruelty and  ugliness, Benoit is dispassionate, and  the world  of The Princes is as cold and  inhuman as that  of Bitter Bread is redolent  of sweet stinking humanity.
Some  of  the  best  fiction  ever  written
centres on people  we aren't meant  to care very  much  about. I'm  thinking not  only of extreme cases such as Beckett's derelicts but   also  of  the   characters  in  a  whole range    of   more   accessible   novels   from Crime   and   Punishment    to   Death   in Venice  to 1984. But  even if Raskolnikov, or   Aschenbach,  or   Winston   Smith   are poor  enough specimens  of humanity, the power    of    these    novels   lies   in    their authors' ability  to make us care  about  the predicament the  characters are  in, if not about themselves  as individuals.
At the end of Bitter Bread a now aging la Scouine, her mother and  her brother Charlot have  moved  off the land and into
the  village.  La  Scouine   is  not  unhappy
with   the  change  because   now  she  can pester  the parish  priest and his assistant as often  as she likes; the mother  is dying and spends  her  days  looking  out  the  window at  the  cemetery; but  Charlot is suffering abominably:
This  is what  it will be like forever and  ever. He  had  abandoned  the  land  to  be  able  to rest, to lead an easy life, but  he has only discovered  boredom, a killing and consuming ennui.   He  is  not  living,  he  is  waiting  for death.

The land   was  not  kind,  but   its  loss  is more  awful   than   the  cruelest  of  winters The  prospect Laberge saw for the  people he  wrote  about was  not  a cheering one, and  it is a tribute to a great  writer  to say that  he  makes  us feel  their  predicament. The  machinations of  dogs  and   men  in The  Princes, however, lack  importance: there  is nothing in  this novel  to make  us care  about what  happens to anyone.  In this The  Princes is fortunately not at all typical  of recent  Quebec fiction.

LINDA LEITH


122
 PLAYGOER

WAYNE E.  EDMONSTON&, Nathan   Cohen:  The
Making   of   a   Critic.  Lester   and   Orpen,
$12.95•
IN 1948, WRITING FOR  THE Canadian Jewish   Weekly, Nathan   Cohen  stated that   the  primary duty  of a  drama critic was  "not  to  lay  down   rigid   rules  and thereby  arrive at  decisions,  but  to serve playgoers  as a guide  and  to assist drama­ tists  and   performers and   producers,  by constructive suggestions,   in  raising   their standards of achievement." He adhered to this principle, though  with increasing im­ patience at  the  too  gradual replacement of  amateurism  by  professionalism in  na­  tional  theatre in  Canada, throughout his career as a drama critic. That career ger­ minated  in I 940  when  Cohen joined  the Mount  Allison  Argosy Weekly  as  a  staff writer. By the  time  he  left  the  paper as managing editor in  1942, it  had  become more of a newspaper than simply a typical university student production, mainly be­ cause  Cohen had  shifted  its  emphasis to features, sports, and  editorials rather than  literary contributions and  had infused  the former  with   lively   social   and   political  comment.  In   the  same  fashion, by  the time  of his death at  forty-seven  inI 971, Cohen had reshaped the role and  perspec­ tive of drama criticism  in Canada through his   work   as   newspaper  journalist  and radio broadcaster by emphasizing theatre as an  art  rather than  idle  entertainment and insisting  on  higher  standards of con­ tent and  production.
Nathan Cohen: The  Making  of a Critic
is a eulogistic  account of Cohen's  evolu­ tion as "national" critic, or as Wayne  Ed­ monstone grandly declares,  "one   of  the architects of our  cultural  consciousness." That's a  formidable  claim  to  fame,  and justification  of  it  will  probably have   to come from  a book whose author identifies  less closely with his subject  than  does Ed­  monstone. A  former colleague of  Cohen

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



at  the  Toronto Star, and  now  visual arts critic   for   the   Vancouver  Sun,  Edmon­ stone lacks sufficient   distance  from Cohen's role as mentor in  his own career  to  avoid  over-identification with  Cohen.  Some  identification, of  course,  is  neces­ sary  for   a   biographer  on   any   level  to understand his subject's background and state of mind, and  the way in which he expresses himself. But if the  biographer is unreserved in his identification, he risks writing as  much   about himself  as  about his subject.
Edmonstone makes  no claim  to have written a scholarly biography and  hasn't exactly  written a dull  one.  His  approach is "documentary" or "narrative." "I have let Mr. Cohen do the  talking, to make his own  case. I  hold  the  view  that  a writer's ideas  are  best served  by the  clear  presen­ tation of what  he has written, rather than  someone  else's interpretation of that  writ­ ing." What results from such an approach is an  undiluted and  undigested account from which  the reader is expected to draw  his own  conclusions.
I have  two  main  criticisms of  the  ap­ proach. I now  feel  as  if  I  have  indeed read Nathan Cohen, but I also feel I have read   a  biography in  the   making  rather than   a  completed  one.  There is  some­ thing   raw,   for   example, about  coming upon  ten  straight pages  of  direct  quota­ tion  from   the  September  1950  issue  of The  Critic, a  small  magazine  of  theatri­ cal   reviews   and   arts  commentary  that  Cohen founded that  year.  This   particu­ lar  quotation  is Cohen's side  of a debate  with   Mavor   Moore  on   the   subject   of Canadian theatre. It is typical  of Cohen's generally  lively,  incisive,  and   uncompro­ mising  prose:  "until a few years ago, the only thing  that characterized our arts was a   hollow adequacy, taxidermal compe­ tence, and  nothing more. There was noth­ ing  in  the arts  for  the  public  to come  to grips  with; our  artists were  either dilet­  tantes,  who plied a precious ignorance dis-
 guised as intellectual mystery, or else flyweight  hacks." As Edmonstone points out,  the whole exchange quoted, in which Cohen    was   defending  his   claim   to   a widely growing  theatrical awareness  in Canada against Moore's contention that Cohen  overestimated this awareness, still occurs. But do we need  ten pages of  quo­ tation  to make  this point?  Over  and over, we   are   given    these    long   "narrative" chunks  of quotation.
My second  criticism  is that  in adopting this approach to  biography, Edmonstone also  adopts  a  folksy  and  anecdotal  tone that   cloys. For  example, describing  Co­ hen's   voice  as  one   "caught  somewhere between    a  Papal   pronouncement   and  terminal  sinusitis,"   Canadian  artists   as "drooling and   whimpering  about   their  lack of  recognition in their  own country," and  a  broadcast  by  Cohen about   Celia  Franca as being  "delivered in the  tone of a disappointed lover, who sees his goddess in danger  of becoming a slattern -if  not a prostitute-before his eyes" is cute and colourful  but   self-indulgent.  The  occa­ sional  reference   to  "Mr." Cohen  sounds rather  obsequious. And   the   occasional  pompous   remark such   as  the  following  assumes a lack  of interest and  awareness among his  readers that   is  simply  offen­  sive:  "In fact,  for those of  us who are old enough  to remember, the world was to be reconstituted 'on  the same old  post-1918  basis... .' " (This is  in  reference   to  an editorial for  the  Argosy Weekly  written by  Cohen   in  1941.)   I rnay  not  be  old enough to remember, but  I can read  and  I don't like being  patronized.
Despite  its  tone  and  subjectivity,  Na­ than Cohen: The  Making  of a Critic is a worthwhile contribution  to the history  of drama criticism  in Canada if it does noth­ ing else than  remind us of  Nathan Cohen
and of what he said. Obviously, being out­ spoken as he was and, towards the end of his  life,  increasingly acerbic  about  the state  of Canadian culture  and  of  Cana-


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dian  drama in particular, Cohen  was not universally   admired  and   respected.  Ed­ monstone throughout  his book  works to­ wards   achieving  a   balance   in   Cohen's favour.  He   contends  that   a   distorted  image  of him has been promulgated since his death, one in which Cohen  appears as a  prejudiced, provincial, insignificant in­ fluence.  This  image  is surely  inaccurate, though   depicting  Cohen   as  the   white knight  of   Canadian  drama   criticism   in the  twentieth century may  be going  too far  the  other  way.
Whatever the bias towards him, Nathan Cohen himself  was  clear  about   his  role and  what   he  liked  and  didn't like,  and that  is refreshing. He  loved  the  theatre: "I believe  it's  the  most  humanistic of all forms  of art,  and  the  most stimulating­ emotionally  and    mentally."  What   he looked  for  in  a  play  was  "what it  said, what   its  underlying  purpose   was,"  and then  he tried  to explain  and  interpret the play  "at  least  as well  as  the  person  who wrote it." He does occupy a unique  place in Canadian drama criticism,  and  though this biography is disappointing and some­ what  irritating, it  is a  just  acknowledge­ ment  of Cohen's role in  the development of that  criticism.
JEAN WILSON



IN PERFORMANCE

HARRY ADASKIN, A Fiddler's  World. November
House, $14·95·
"Goo HAS  A  FEW OF   US   whom  he  whis­ pers in  the ear; the  rest may  reason and welcome; 'tis  we  musicians  who  know,"  said  Browning's Abt  Vogler:  A Fiddler's World  is one  musician's characteristically idiosyncratic and  candid  attempt to  ex­ plain  something  of  what  it  is that  musi­ cians  "know," of  what  it  means  to  have to be a musician and, consequently, what the life of a professional musician  entails.


I24
 The Friends of Chamber Music  see only the violinist and  pianist,  the quartet, or whatever, formally attired  on  the  plat­ form  giving a performance; some of  them may,  afterwards, meet  the  musicians  at that  equally   formal  occasion, "the small party   to  meet   the  musicians."  Adaskin  describes   the   long   preparation  for   the concert-hall   performance.  He   takes   us further than  back-stage-back into  his own youth,  his discovery of the violin and music,  his  need  to  become  a  fiddler.  To  discover  what  one  wants  to do and  to be able  to do  it  is a  fine  thing.  But  a  good fiddler  is  not   made   by  practising  until one  becomes  better   and  better and, one day,  becomes  a  founder member   of  the first   (and   what   many   reckon   still   the best)   Canadian string  quartet. Quartets play   harmoniously  in  public   and   their members may  well  be as  harmonious in their  private lives. Adaskin,  while  recog­ nizing this, talks uncompromisingly of the stresses  such  an  artistic   "marriage" pro­ duce  over the years. The  rewards of music and  of being a musician  are  often  expen­ sively earned.
There are  times  when  the  satisfaction of  the  artistic drive  demands hard  deci­ sions:   Adaskin   never   lacked   the   nerve to   make    these -from   changing   early teachers when   they  had   taught  him  all they  could,   to  resigning   from  the  Hart House  Quartet when  his career seemed at its peak.  To  have  the  nerve  is one  thing,  to realize the cost and  accept  it is another. Adaskin  freely  tells what  he did and  what  it cost him. There is nothing of the apolo­ gia  about this:  he  does not  offer  himself as   the   "artist"   whom   others    did   not "understand." The  candour reveals  per­  haps  more  than  the writer  is aware, but his truth is told. The feel of what  it is like to play  the  violin  for  a living,  literally  to thrive  upon  music,  is finely  caught. One  has  to practise, of course,  and  others'  in­ ability to understand this is amusingly illustrated by the story of the summer  cot-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tage  residents who  assumed  the  Adaskins were there to  play  sweetly  of an  evening for  them   as  background  to  social  talk; they  had   to  be  put   to  flight   by  steady Bach  (poor  Bach!  but far  poorer  the resi­ dents). The summer in  France  (the  best and  most moving part  of the book)  shows another  aspect   of  the   artists'  life:    the chance to  meet  Ravel  and  introduce his string  quartet to  North  America yet an­  other.
Such  experiences helped   to  create   "a
fiddler's world," the  creation of which demanded sure sense of purpose. The  new world   took  Adaskin   into  a  different  so­ ciety  from  that in  which  he  had  grown up  without making him  ashamed  of  his background. It  asked   a   willingness   to learn   (a  learning that  is  not  always  car­  ried lightly) . It is also a world  full of love and  affection.
Chronology, happily, gives  way  to  di­ gression    and    reminiscence.   This   is   a spoken   book  and   it  speaks  the  man:  it reminds us why his classes are still remem­  bered  at  the  university  where  he  taught for  so many  years.
R. W. INGRAM



COMIC VARIATIONS

MORLEY   TORGOV,   The  Abramsky    Variations.
Toronto: Lester  and  Orpen, $8.95·

DENNIS  T.  PATRICK  SEARS,  Aunty   High  Over the  Barley Mow. Toronto:  McClelland   & Stewart, $12.50.

SHANE  DENNISON,  Sidehill   Gouger  or What's So   Deadly   About    Caterpillars. Toronto: Doubleday, $8.95.

ToRGov's The  Abramsky Variations is more   ambitious  in  scope   than   his  first novel.  In  three  sections,  Torgov explores how  three  generations of Abramskies   (or Brahms)  variously   express   their   will  to live through fantasy rather than to accept reality,  and   how  they  attempt to  recon-
 cile   essentially   Gentile    ambitions  with their  Jewish  tradition and  identity. Part I, set in Toronto, traces  the  rise of Louis Brahms   (Leibel  Abramsky)  from  his  ar­ rival  as a  new  immigrant to  Toronto in
1927 through his marriage to Goldie Glicksman and  prosperity as owner  of a chain of delicatessens. Part  II, also set in Toronto, examines the mid-life  crisis of Hershel  Brahms in  the  summer of  1960. Part   III, set  in  France near  Nice,  treats the   coming-of-age  of   Bart   Brahms    in
1976. Each generation identifies with a Gentile  hero: Louis  and  Goldie  with  the aviator Charles Lindbergh who achieved a  victory  over  nature and  space,  Hershy with   the  scientist-explorer  Thor  Heyer­ dahl   who  vanquished  time   by  sailing   a papyrus boat  over  the  route  of  the  early Egyptians   to  India, and   Bart  with   the Beatles who  translated their  age into  art.  All  three  seek  adventure and  a  sense  of significance  missing  in  their  own  lives.
Torgov   clearly  identifies  with  Hershy, the middle  generation. Yet the most vivid and  compelling section  is Part I  with  its depiction of ethnic streets  and  markets in Toronto in the  192o's and  go's and  its portrayal of the exuberant Louis.  Part II is monotonous and   cliched ; the  malaise of   affluent   lawyers,   employed    by   rich clients  to handle income  tax evasions  and seeking   release   from   the   ennui   of  life with  their  $ro,ooo Mercedes, expensive stereos  and  barbecues at  the  lake,  is  ex­ tremely dull.  Part  III is little  more stimu­ lating  in its depiction of the world-weari­ ness of  nineteen-year-old  cynics,  already bored  with  life  beyond  their  motor-bikes and  their  current  love affairs.
A rna jor weakness lies in the parallelism. It is Goldie  rather than  Louis  who fanta­ sizes  that   he  is  Lindbergh,  yet  Louis  is clearly  the  protagonist and  the  represen­ tative  of the  first  generation  immigrant, and   the  book  ends  abruptly  and  crypti­ cally  with   his  checking  into   the   Hotel  Lindbergh in  Paris.  The  novel  has  pos-

125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sibilities and  it suggests a deeper  problem, the  search  of the  modem Canadian Jew for  cultural roots and  heroes.  But it does not  really  fulfill its predecessor's promise.
Sears'   Aunty   High  Over   the  Barley Mow  is also somewhat disappointing. The novel, like The  Lark in the Clear Air and Sears'   autobiographical  sketches  Fair Days  Along  the  Talbert, is  set  in   the sparse  farming country of the Laurentian shield  near  Lindsay  and  depicts the  life of  the  shanty Irish   of  the  district. The story is told in retrospect by fifty-year-old Padraic Fallon  and concerns  the initiation into  adulthood  of  Padraic (Patch)  and
his  sister  Brigid,  significantly   nicknamed
Bride. The Fallon  men grow  up in a  tra­ dition of fighting, drinking and wenching,  and  many  problems  are solved by the fists or   the   bottle.   The  Fallon   women   die young,  and  indeed  the  book  is dedicated to  Sears'   three  aunts  who  died  in  their twenty-second year. Eight italicized  inter­ ludes  spaced  irregularly  through the  text provide  the chief  points of reference: the early   idyllic  relationship  between   Patch  and  his sister,  the  marked  change  in  this relationship  when   Patch   takes   out   his first date, the final  parting as he leaves at seventeen for  the  war, and  his mourning of  her  and  the  lost  ghosts  of  his  past.
There is  much   humour in  the  treat­ ment  of local  characters and  the  style is at  times  richly  lyrical  and  at others pithy or colloquial. But  the  realism and  tough­ ness  of  the  individual episodes  is coun­  tered   by  the over-all   tone  of  sentiment and  nostalgia.
Dennison's  first   novel   is  more   truly comic  in  overall   tone.  In the  title  itself and  the  chapter headings, which  form  a complete sentence, Dennison is playing games   with   conventional  techniques  of the  novel  and  the  effect is entertaining if sometimes   distracting or  unclear. The novel  is set in Chance, B.C., a little  town remote  from  any  city, with  a  population of 67. The most successful characters are
 the  eccentric  townspeople. However the focus shifts  disconcertingly between  these colourful but  one-dimensional characters and  the  adventures of Stumpy Ross Lor­ ringer, a sixteen-year-old student, and  the married  teacher  Laura  Wilson   Bloddy. The book  examines the  conflict  of  Ross and    Laura  with    the   conventions  and  power structure of family, community and  educational  authorities. Dennison clearly  identifies with  Ross, treated by his family  and  teachers as  a "re-tard," and   sensi­ tively  develops   the  relationship  between an imaginative but misunderstood boy and a perceptive teacher, a relationship which deepens into love. Ross   is  identified with the side-hill  gouger of the title, the mythical mountain creature with  one  leg wom   short   to  adapt  to  its  hillside  en­ vironment. It can  be defeated only out  of its own  area  but  Ross  insists, "I'm  going to fight it out  right  here in the hills."
Many early   scenes  are   highly   comic. With  more  experience Dennison may sharpen  his  focus,   choose   between    the novel of action, the novel of psychological development, and  the  collection of  char­ acter  sketches,   and    control  his   comic techniques  in  the   service  of  an  overall  unity.  For  Dennison's novel  is  the  most original of  these   three,   and  promises   a rich  vein  of  humour to  be  developed in future.
CATHERINE  MCLAY



ON MERTON

GEORGE    WOODCOCK.   Thomas  Merton:  Monk and   Poet.   Douglas   &   Mcintyre,  $12.95; paper  $5·95·

GEORGE WOODCOCK AND THOMAS MERTON would appear to have little in common: Merton, a Trappist monk  who  spent  his life amidst the  austere and  authoritarian surroundings of a rural Kentucky monas­ tery,    and    Woodcock,   a   well-travelled

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



author and  genteel anarchist who  admits to not being particularly religious. It turns out  that   they  have  a  lot  in  common­ their  maturation in England in the 193o's, their   distrust   of   political   power,   their  pacifism,    their    attraction    to    Eastern spirituality, and   the  fact   that   they  are both  poets.  Moreover,  Woodcock recalls that  Merton once said  that  if he had  not believed  in God, "conscience would  have made him  an  anarchist."
In  addition, both  Merton and  Wood­ cock  have  been  highly-productive, wide­ ranging  authors,  and  it  is in  the  area  of Merton's  prolific  publishing, a  puzzle  to many observers,  that  Woodcock lends an especially  sensitive  ear,  noting in connec­ tion  with  Merton's apparently conflicting careers   that     the    contradictions   were "more apparent  than  real." Focusing on Merton's paradoxical identity as the talk­ ing  monk  whose  life  was  formally dedi­ cated  to silence,  Woodcock argues  lucidly that  the  "creative persona is not  the  self as commonly understood; he is a different being  from  the  man  with  the same  name whom  the  world  encounters in  the street or  at  the  bank." The trinity  of identities within  Thomas Merton, Woodcock writes, essentially encompassed the  creative writer, the  Trappist priest,  and  the  her­ mit who eventually moved  away from  the communal  buildings into  a  cinder-block cabin  on the  monastery lands. Working it all  out,  Merton kept  "one   name  for  the monastery and   another  for   the   public.  Father Louis never  published a line under  his   monastic    name;   Thomas   Merton never performed a  sacerdotal act."
Inevitably  for   many   readers, Merton the  man  is as interesting a  phenomenon
as  the  writings.  Thus, Woodcock devotes a  lot  of  space   to  Merton's  life  and   to recent  developments in  the  Catholic Church in order  to bring  out  the  outline of  the   man   in   a  loosely  chronological
 study  of Merton's career, sampling the writings  with  care  as  he  works  through the life. The  book is a general rather than a literary study,  although it contains some useful   distinctions  about   the   kind    of poetry   which   Merton  wrote    (e.g.,   the poetry of the choir and the poetry of the desert). It is a  lucid,  engagingly candid, and  generous  appraisal, probably the best of  the  general   studies  of  Merton  which have  appeared in such  number in  recent years. Woodcock  is most  acute in dealing with  Merton's contemplative poetry,  his attitudes towards the  politics  of  the  6o's and  his ill-fated  but spiritually fertile  trip to  Asia  in  1968,  areas  in  which  Wood­ cock and  Merton might  be said to under­ stand  each  other. Where  Merton writes as the  orthodox man,  Woodcock politely turns away from  the writings, which  have obviously become opaque for  him  at  that  point.
Although   Woodcock's  is  an   accom­
plished  book, general studies  of this  sort have  their  limits.  In  summarizing  Mer­ ton's    career,    for   example,   Woodcock  writes that  the "role  of the monk  and  the role of the  poet  had  come  together, each serving  the other and  both, in  his belief, serving   God."  While  attractive, such   a view overlooks the detailed evidence from Merton's essays on poetry  and  contempla­ tion  where  it  is  made  clear  that   Merton saw  his  commitment to  poetry  as abbre­ viating   the   life   of   contemplation.  He decided  to  give  himself   to  both   poetry and  contemplation with  the consciousness that, in terms of his own ideas  of spiritual perfection at  least,  he  was trying,  finally, to be only second  best. This gives a  sub­ tlety   and   poignancy  to   Merton's  inner reconciliation   of   his   various   identities which    George    Woodcock's    and   other  general  studies of Merton have  tended  to miss.
ROSS  LABRIE




127






THERIAULT'S Agoak

LE   DERNIER    ROMAN    d'Yves   Theriault forme   le  troisieme  volume  de  Ia trilogie Agaguk -T ayaout -Agoak  et  referme le cercle  d'evolution cyclique des  person­ nages. A Ia fin d'Agaguk,  le heros atteint un  sommet: I'Agaguk  primitif  est, grace a  Iriook  sa femme, devenu  plus  humain, plus    sensible    aux   valeurs    de   vie   et d'amour, libre  dans  un  royaume  ou  il  a prouv·e sa  vraie  mesure.  Le  couple  Aga­ guk-Iriook  est  arriv·e a  un  stade  d'unite, de  communion,  de  respect  mutuel  peu commun. Le  premier volume  se termine par   Ia  victoire   eclatante  de  !'amour  et de !'enfant, par  Ia vie jaillissante  apres  Ia fille, acceptee enfin  par  Agaguk,  nait  un fils perpetuateur de race. Couple comble done,  ou  homme  et femme  se retrouvent en  tant   qu'egaux, entoures de  leur  pro­ geniture, integres a  une  nature  libre  et grandiose. T ayaout  nous montre  Ia lente decheance  d'Agaguk,  l'heroique   peleri­ nage  du  fils Tayaout.  Comme  son  pere jadis,  Tayaout s'en   va  loin  de  Ia  tribu pour   devenir   un  homme  veritable. Soli­ taire    dans   son   itineraire   existentiel,  il decouvre  Ia steatite, Ia pierre  magique. A Tayaout   incombe  Ia  mission  sacree   de redonner   a   son   peuple    Ia   pierre    des Esprits.  Les Inuits, menaces  de  materia­ lisme  et   de  corruption  par   !'entourage pervertissant des  Blancs,  se  remettent a delivrer !'arne  de chaque  pierre,  refaisant ainsi  des  gestes  millenaires,   concretisant leurs  reves, leurs angoisses, devoilant dans leurs   sculptures  le  message   mysterieux des   dieux.    Malheureusement,   Agaguk trahit son  peuple   en  vendant ses  sculp­ tures  au  Blanc  et  en  reniant de  ce  fait son  arne  meme.  Tayaout se fait  le  justi-
 cier  du  pere,  il  le  tue  impitoyablement. Mais  Tayaout  lui-meme n'est  pas  pur,  il a doute  des dieux  et est puni: !'ours  blanc l'ecrase en une masse meconnaissable. Tayaout et  Agaguk  se rejoignent dans  Ia mort,   tas  de  chairs   dechirees,  dechique­ tees,  abimees, sanguinolentes,  morts  sans visage.   Ce   qui   s'annon($ait   comme   un renouveau  humain,  comme   une   renais­  sance   de  dignite, de  spiritualite echoue  en  un  reniement des  dieux  et  des valeurs  ancestrales.  L'ebauche de  l'homme puri­  fie  s'efface; !'evolution vers  un  etre  civi­ lise, spiritualise est avertee. L'homme  re­ tourne  a   Ia   terre,    poussiere   sanglante avalee   dans   Ia  nuit   des   temps,  graine  anonyme qui  ne  germera  peut-etre plus dans  l'aridite d'un  monde sclerose  par  le manque de foi et  Ia  cupidite de !'argent.
Agoak,  petit-fils  d'Agaguk (Agaguk a eu  deux  fils, Tayaout et  Agaguk),  con­ tinue  Ia lignee  de ses ancetres. A !'inverse du   heros  qui   dans   Agaguk   evoluait  de l'homme primitif  a l'homme  plus civilise, Agoak  retrace le chemin  inverse,  regres­ sant  de  l'Inuk  eduque,  raffine,  integre  a Ia  civilisation blanche,  a  l'esquimau pri­ mitif,   brutal, dont  Ia  seule  obsession  est celle de Ia survie  dans un milieu  dur,  hos­
tile,  violent.
Alors   que    dans   Agaguk,   Ia   femme Iriook  est Ia campagne benie de l'homme, celle   qui    l'initie   au    vrai    partage,  a
!'amour genereux, Judith, Ia femme d'Agoak, est source  de  desaccord, de desunion, de  regression,  de  perte.  Agoak seul  parmi  les  Blancs,  se  sent   parfaite­ ment    integre   a   Ia   societe   capitaliste nord-americaine;  il  s'est  hausse  intellec­  tuellement au  niveau  des Blancs,  il s'est adapte a  leurs  manieres, il a  acquis  leur confiance;   comme   Nochasak    son   ami, Agoak  vient  de  loin.  A Frobisher Bay, il vita !'occidentale, porte des habits comme  ceux des Blancs;  il a des gestes tendres  et raffines  dans  ses ebats  amoureux avec  sa femme.  C'est   Judith  qui   ne   reconnalt plus  en  Agoak  l'Inuk qu'elle a  connu   a

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Pov:    "On  dirait  que   tu   es  un   autre homme."
Elle    lui    reproche   de    "devenir  un Blanc,"   de  renier   les  valeurs   primitives, de  se concentrer sur  l'achevement d'une
evolution a laquelle elle  reste  totalement
etrangere et  pour   laquelle  elle  n'a   que
mepris: "Pour toi,  vivre  signifie  etre  un
Blanc.   Pour   eux,   cela   signifie   etre   un
Inuk."   Agoak    ne    comprend   pas    sa femme: "Etre Blanc,  etre  Inuk  n'impor­ tait  pas  tant. Etre  et  bien  servir les des­ seins lui  paraissaient suffisants."
La  tendresse  erotique, l'acharnement a
jouir  du  jeune  couple ne  parvient pas  a
les sauver. Le  physique  devient cause  de perdition, a !'inverse des  autres  romans
therialesques. Pour remplir les  jours creux,   Judith  sur   !'instigation  de   son mari,   travaille  dans   un   restaurant.  Sa beaute primitive et  simple   attire les  re­ gards   de  deux   jeunes  Americains  riches
-image  un  peu  stereotypee du  monde
capitaliste, vandale et exploiteur-qui la suivent  jusque chez elle et l'y violent brutalement. Agoak  revient du  bureau  et apercevant les assaillants immondes, il les
tue,  les  depece   sauvagement en  proie  a
une furie  dechainee. Dans  sa rage,  Agoak a les gestes de l'homme non civilise, les instincts de ses ancetres. L'heritage d'Aga­ guk,  son  grand-pere, est  bien  ancre  dans Agoak,  fardeau impossible  de  nier,  resur­ gissant spontanement contre toute logique calme  et ordonnee. C'est cette  sauvagerie inexplicable,  sadique,  inhumaine que  le Blanc  ne  peut  comprendre et  qui  separe
Agoak des societes civilisees. L'occident pardonnerait a Agoak son homicide justi­
fiable; il ne lui pardonnera jamais son primitivisme inne  qu'aucune  education, si poussee soit-elle,  ne peut  extirper.
Le couple  Agoak-Judith s'en  retourne dans  les grands espaces  blancs.  Leur  de­
part   est  loin  d'etre la  deliverance  a la­
quelle  Agaguk  et  Iriook  aspiraient. Cette fuite  sinistre  n'est  point  retour a une  vie
libre,  epanouissante; elle est au  contraire
 une  course desesperee avec comme unique but la survie physique. Le combat d'Agoak   contre l'ours   blanc   n'est   point une initiation aux  valeurs  d'adulte, il est un retour  aux  forces animales pures  et simples, une confrontation de deux masses physiques, le plus fort eliminant le plus faible.
Nous assistons ici au scenario renverse d'Agaguk. Au  lieu  de  soigner  son  mari, Judith tente  de s'en  debarrasser, de s'en­ fuir; au  lieu  d'un duo  amoureux,  nous
assistons  a un  duel  presque   sans  paroles
ou  Agoak,   le  plus   ruse,  le  plus   brutal
finira  par  vaincre Judith, la peureuse. La maison,  l'igloo  symbole  de  chaleur,  uni
a la  feminite   redemptrice dans  Agaguk,
devient   ici  la  prison   etouffante, lieu  de
sombres complots. Agaguk  avait  tue le trafiquant  Brown,   malhonnete  et   mau­
vais, mais Iriook  parvient a lui faire com­
prendre l'horreur  de  son  acte,   meme  si
celui-ci etait  justifie. Agaguk finit par se repentir et  promettre de  ne plus  tuer,  de respecter   la  vie.  Agoak,  apres   avoir   tue les  deux   violeurs,   rejette  completement tout  le code  civilise et laisse dans  son  sil­ lage un veritable carnage, tuant la famille  d'Esquimaux  amis   qu'il   recontre  et  les deux  policiers Inuit, massacrant done  non seulement   des  Blancs  mais  des  gens  de
sa propre  race.  En  plus, Agoak a !'inverse
d'Agaguk ecrase  la  fille  nouveau-nee de
Judith, creusant par  ce refus  au  droit  de vie, l'abime   le  separant de  sa  femme  et de son passe. Si Agoak  ne tue  pas Judith,
c'est uniquement parce  qu'elle lui est necessaire  a sa survie.
Nous trouvons Agoak totalement trans­ forme   en  sauvage   cruel   et  sanguinaire, ravale   au   niveau   de   la   bete  humaine. Judith devient  une bete de somme, docile,  matee,  presente   pour  satisfaire le  besoin sexuel  du  male,  besoin  denue de  toute  tendresse.  Judith   qui   n'avait  point   ap­ precie  les conforts de la vie moderne, qui avait   meprise   les  allures   effeminees   et tendres de son mari,  se rend  compte  sou-


I29

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



dain  de !'aberration meme  de  ses reves: la   vie  primitive  ne   peut   etre   elevante pour  l'homme, vu qu'elle  est uniquement centree sur sa survie  individuelle. Elle en arrive a regretter le sain raisonnement d'Agoak, la  deference attentive qu'il  lui temoignait;  elle  aspire   au   retour a  ce passe si proche, celui  ou son mari  et elle vivaient dans une securite bienfaisante, rassurante. Meme  la prison lui para.lt etre un  paradis compare a l'igloo froid,  glace, isole. Sa derniere tentative de dialoguer avec Agoak  ne mene  a rien.
"J'essaie de te faire  penser," dit Judith ( alors  qu'avant  Agoak  avait   vainement essaye  de  faire   penser  Judith ... )  "Je veux  que  ce  soit  comme  avant ... Nous vivons  comme  nos ancetres ont  du  vivre, a  peine  mieux   que  des  betes.... "  Dia­ logue  inutile, le  couple   ne  se  rejoindra jamais  plus:  Agoak  est redevenu un veri­ table  animal hante  par sa  survie.  De  la bete, Agoak a acquis la brutalite gratuite. Alors  que   dans   tous  les  autres   romans  de   Theriault   c'est  la   bete   qui   mutile  l'homme,  eprouvant  ainsi   la  valeur   de l'etre, ici c'est Agoak qui mutile, se degra­  dant  done  au  niveau  da  la  bete.  Le mot "instinct" revient  de nombreuses  fois dans ce roman. Agoak, mu  par un subconscient demesure, ne garde  plus rien de son education raffinee. "C'est une chose qui n'existe    pas   un    homme    civilise,"    dit Agoak. Affirmation troublante, cynique d'Yves  Theriault lui-meme.
Agoak est peut-etre le livre le plus vio­ lent,  le plus erotique,1 le plus pessimiste de Theriault.  Avec   Agoak,  il  semble   bien que  le  heros  therialesque  ne  puisse  plus sortir   de  son   cul-de-sac   comme   Victor  Debreux; il  s'enfonce  dans   la  bestialite  morbide d'un  Bruno  Juchereau.2   Est-ce la  l'optique  negativiste  d'un auteur qui voit  dans  la  societe  moderne aussi  bien que  dans   la  vie  primitive une  impasse: l'impossibilite   pour   l'etre   de  s'epanouir totalement,  librement,  joyeusement? Ce roman   serait   alors   une  condamnation:
 l'homme voue a la decheance se retrouve tot  ou  tard  dans  le cercle  infernal d'une existence  absurde, vouee  d'une part a  un materialisme aneantisseur, d'autre  part  a ses  instincts  sauvages, destructeurs,  nar­ cissiques  orientes vers la simple conserva­ tion  physique. Quelle sera  l'issue?  Peut­ etre  un prochain roman d'Yves  Theriault nous la montrera.

NOTES

1 Avec  Les  Temps  du  Carcajou. N'oublions pas Oeuvres  de Chair, centes erotiques paru en  1976, ouvrage  Ieger, fort  bien ecrit.
2   Victor   Debreux,  le  heros  de   Cul-de-Sac; Bruno  Juchereau, le heros des Temps du Carcajou.
LOUISE VANHEE NELSON


BLESSED ARE THE GUILTY

Dark  of Caves  ( I977)  is described by its author, Abraham Ram, as "part two of a novel  of  its  time." In   the  first  volume, The  Noise of Singing  (I955), Ram intro­ duced  us to Moe  Tabb (he  who pays the tab?), a middle-aged, balding  teacher of English   in  a  Montreal  Jewish  parochial school,  graduate student at  MacMillan University, aspiring playwright, divorced, and   now  permanent  resident in  his  par­ ents'  home.   Moe  is  a  "shmo," a  "little man,"   a   "loser" -a   familiar  enough figure  in Canadian literature in both lan­ guages.  But  Moe  is also  burdened  by  a sense  of  guilt.  In  the  course  of  the  first volume  he  undergoes a series of  personal reverses   and   seems  doomed   to  lose  his job  in  the  parochial school.  In  the  last scene,   in   a  desperate attempt   to  keep order in the classroom, l\1oe threatens his pupils  with  "a  judgment" at  the  end  of their   school   year.   But   immediately  he feels  "a  curious sense  of   anomaly.  He was  now  a  judge.  And  who  would  judge him?"

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



These  final  lines of Part  I lead  directly into  the much  superior Dark  of Caves, in which Moe's obsessive guilt becomes the principal theme  of  the  novel.  From  first to  last,   Dark   of  Caves   is  pervaded  by Moe's awareness of the approaching Jew­ ish High  Holydays. Moe  does not observe them  in any  formal  way,  but  they  none­ theless dominate his waking and  sleeping  life. As Yom  Kippur, the  Jewish  Day  of Atonement approaches,  Moe  dreams   he has  been  brought to  court  on  Judgment Day  confronted  by a  faceless  prosecutor and  a  witness  box  full  of  those  he  fears he   has   neglected,   exploited,  estranged and   betrayed. He  succumbs  to  his  feel­ ings:  "The  prisoner beats  his  breast  and cries:   'Al   chait!   I have   sinned!'" Yet Moe  is a  good  man -humble, thought­ ful,  kind,  generous, sensitive  and   essen­ tially  honourable in  his dealings.  He  has no  real  reason   to  feel  guilt,  but  he  has only  to  meet   one  of  his  former  pupils, now Dr. Arye Cohen, to feel uneasy:  "All much  further along  in life than  he."
Moral    breast   beating  belongs   to   an earlier  and  different stream in  Canadian literature. We  find  it  in  Niels  Lindstedt and  in  other characters in  the  novels of Frederick Philip Grove,  in the fiction of Hugh   MacLennan, in  Sinclair Ross'  As For Me  and  My  House, in  the  first  two volumes  of Roch  Carrier's trilogy, in Margaret Laurence's Stone   Angel.  Some critics have observed that the guilt which afflicts  characters in  Canadian novels  is the by-product of the  Puritanism that  has suffused  both  English  and  French-Cana­ dian  literature.
If, as most  critics  have assumed, Cana­
dian   literature,  no  matter  what   its   re­ gional  or  ethnic origin,  reveals  a  certain  unity,  we should   not  be surprised  to dis­ cover   that   Canadian-Jewish  writers   are also   preoccupied  with   guilt.   Yet   how could   this  be  the  result  of  Puritanism? Judaism  does  not  contain  anything like the  Calvinism or  Jansenism that  had  so
 marked an effect on the conscience of Canadian Protestants and  Catholics. The Jewish  tradition does, of course,  contain the notion of sin and the need for divine forgiveness. Hence  the significance  of the Day  of Atonement which  most  Jews, in­ cluding  the irreligious, are  aware  of, and can't   help   feeling   guilty   about -even when  they are most determined to ignore  it. But Judaism regards  all  human beings as  sinners  and   does  not  reject   an  indi­  vidual   simply   because   he   or   she   has sinned.  Nor  does  Judaism  make  its  ad­  herents  feel  anxious  or  guilty  because  of their  sins, sexual  or otherwise. It tends  to emphasize  the  here  and  now  rather than  salvation  or  damnation  in   a  world   to come.   Hence   the   stress   on   life   which characterizes Jewish  culture and  much  of its  literature.  By  and   large   Canadian­ Jewish   writing   does  not,  as  English   or French-Canadian writing often does,  ex­ press  guilt  for  sexual  urges  or  even  for sexual    misbehaviour.    Nonetheless,   the guilt  motif  is obvious  enough   in  Cana­ dian-Jewish  Literature. It is to be fonnd  in  the  characters in  Wiseman's The Sac­ rifice,  in  Kreisel's   The  Rich   Man  and The  Betrayal,  in  much   of  Richler's fic­ tion,  in  the  short  stories  of  C.  J.  New­ man,  and  in some  of the  narrator figures in Norman  Levine's stories.
The   guilt  motif   usually   takes  one  of three forms. In the works of the older generation  of   Canadian-Jewish   writers the  characters  or  narrator figure  some­ times  express  guilt  for   having  survived  the  Holocaust  of  World   War  II, while millions   of   their   fellow-Jews   perished. Thus    in   "Meditation  Upon   Survival" ( 1947), A. M. Klein  writes:

At  times,  sensing   that the  golgotha'd dead run   plasma through  my  veins,   and   that   I
must  live
their  unexpired six million circuits, giving
to  each  of  their nightmares my  body  for  a bed-
inspirited, dispirited-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



those  times  that I feel  their death-wish bubbling the
channels of my blood -
I grow  bitter at my  false  felicity-
the  spared one -and would  almost add  my
wish
for  the  centigrade furnace and   the  cyanide flood.

Similar feelings can be found  in Henry Kreisel's   two  novels,  which  deal  directly with   the   holocaust  experience,  and   in Jake   Hersh,   the  hero  of  Richler's St. Urbain's  Horseman.  The   post-war  Jew­ ish-Canadian writers  are conscious of the Holocaust, but  are  not  affected  as  their elders  were.  Survival-guilt is, of  course, distinctive to Jewish  writers, though it is possible  to  detect   in  other  novelists  the sense  that  Canadians enjoy  a  life  that  is sheltered,   protected   and    comfortable while  other  less fortunate peoples  do not. In   Peace  Shall  Destroy  Many, for  ex­ ample, Rudy  Wiebe raises the moral  issue of   Mennonite   non-involvement  in   the Second   World  War.  Annamarie accuses her   own   people   of  profiting   from   the pain  and sacrifice  of others :

The  whole   world   is  now   in   it.   We   can't avoid    it.  Father  raises   pigs   because  the price  is high: some men charged up the Normandy  beaches  last   Tuesday  with   our bacon in  their stomachs. Pete  Block can  stay home  because Mr. Block's farm  is big enough to   be   called  an    essential  industry.   Sam works  in  one  now  too. He wrote  last week he was  being   shifted  to  Ontario to  work  in  a boot  factory. Alternative service  is necessary to  winning the  War. Wars  can  only  be  won with  some  fighting, so we  divide the  job:   I supply you  with   bacon   to  eat  and   boots  to wear  and  you go kill  the  Germans -for the good  of  both  of  us."
Thorn  shuddered.  After   a  moment,  she went   on.  "Only, we  have   the   better part. We  don't take  any  risks-and grow  rich besides."

It is  not  surpnsmg that   some  Cana­ dian-Jewish  fiction   expresses  discomfort or guilt  for  having relinquished Judaism. In  Norman  Levine's "Why  Do  You Live So Far  Away?"  the  Jewish  narrator who
 has settled  down  in  England with  a  non­ Jewish   wife   IS    one   day   visited   by   his sister  Mona:

My  sister   looked   at the   Christmas  tree, the  decorations, the  cards.
"Do they   know   about Chanukah?"
The kids  were  silent.
"Your Daddy will  tell  you." Then  back
to  me  in  the  same   low  disapproving  voice. "You celebrate Christmas?"
"We sort  of  have  a tree-and  I give  out the  presents on  Christmas Day."
"I  always say,  how  you  want to  live  your life,  that is your  business.'' Mona said.

The Jewish  protagonists of Charlotte Fielden's Crying  As She  Ran  and  Rich­ ler's  Son  of a Smaller  Hero and  St. Ur­ bain's  Horseman  are  engaged  in  similar  struggles  of conscience.
A third  kind  of guilt  is caused  by the desire  to achieve. This is in  large  part  a North American phenomenon, stimulated originally   by   the    so-called    Protestant work-ethic, and  the  American dream, but it  took  root  among  American Jews  who believed.   more   perhaps  than   any  other immigrant community, that  the  way out of  poverty   and   the  ghetto was  through business  achievement or  through  educa­ tion  and   the   professions.  Jewish  immi­  grant  parents  who   did   not   themselves  climb  the  economic  ladder often  led  vi­ carious  lives of  success through their  edu­  cated  children,  and  so  parental pressure  was applied to encourage children to be­ come   doctors,  lawyers   and    academics rather  than   poets   and   writers.  At   the same  time,  and   this  is true  of other  im­ migrant groups,  they  tried  to  hold  their children  in   ethnic  traditions  that   the Canadian-born  no   longer    believed   in. The   confrontation  scene   between   old Melech    and   young   Noah   in   Richler's Son  of a  Smaller   Hero  brings  both   of these motifs  together:

"Other  boys   go   to  college. They  make something from  themselves."
"I can't make   something of  myself  that
way,  Zeyda. I'm sorry.  I think it's  freedom

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



that I want. I -I  no longer have  any  rules to refer  to  the  way you  had. I ... "
"Listen how   he  talks.   You   should study
Talmud."

Noah   hesitated. He  felt   guilty, tempted. He   had   never  heard  Melech  ask  for  any­ thing before. "I'm  sorry,   Zeyda. I  can't. I can't go  back."

"I  wanted you  to  be  a  somebody. Some­ thing. Something not  like  them. All  there is for  them is money."

Melech was  old,  but   he  was  full  of  justice and  not  to  be pitied. Yet I  had  nothing but apologies to  offer  him. Noah did  not  feel triumphant.  He   felt   small.  He   started  up the  car  and drove off into the  night.

Moe   Tabb, the   protagonist  of   Abra­ ham  Ram's "novel  of its  time," does  not express  survival-guilt, but  he is  most  cer­ tainly    conscious    of   being    an    under­ achiever:

He'd betrayed his  own  bright hopes.  The bright day  is done, and  we  are  for  the  dark.

Here he  was-hiding, hiding. He  must exorcise that load  of guilt, free  himself  from it.  But-the  bowl  of  sky  atilt  overhead­ how   to  harness  the   wheeling  periphery of events, the  mesh  of  everyday  trivia, the  in­  evitable pattern ... This,  this  he  had  failed  to  do,  latter day   Ancient  Mariner Ishmael that he  was.  I, Moe  Ishmael. Ishmoe ...

As  the   allusions   to  Ishmael  and   "The Rime  of  the  Ancient Mariner" indicate, Moe is a symbolic figure as well as an individual. He  is a  wanderer, a  quester, torturing himself  for having failed  to achieve   the  status   and   the  success  that North   American  life  makes   people  feel they  have  to attain.
The recurring motif  of  guilt  in  Cana­
dian  literature has  been  attributed to the influence  of Calvinism or Jansenism. The sense of guilt  in Canadian-Jewish writing
appears, however, to be different in kind and origin. Are the forces operating in Canadian literature so very  different? Or is it that  Puritanism is inadequate as an explanation of  the  guilt  theme in  Cana-
 dian  literature? Perhaps a more profound force, which  is bound  up with  the nature of  this  country, its  origins,  and  its  rela­ tions  with   the   outside   world,  underlies  the  guilt  theme   in  our  literature, some­ thing  connected  perhaps to  our  colonial mentality, to our  tutelage to systems and forms  of  government  not  indigenous  to this soil.  Puritanism may  be one  expres­  sion of  this,  but  the  real  thematic prob­  lem  underlying Canadian  literature may be  a  fear  of  life  itself,  the  symptoms  of which  are  frustration, defeat and  guilt.
In  his struggle to  find  salvation   in  his own way Moe must resist family and community pressure  to conform. In  Dark of Caves Moe  appears to make some headway  against this, but  he pays a heavy price    in   guilt.    Probably   in   the   next volume  Moe will reveal  more  of the attri­ butes of his namesake Moses, leader  and law-giver,  but  if Ram  does choose  to de­  velop  the  analogy further  we should  not be  surprised    if  Moe   never  reaches   his promised  land.  At  any  rate,  if Ram  can maintain  his  present quality  of  writing,  the third volume  will be well worth  wait­  ing  for.

MICHAEL  BENAZON



QUEBEC'S REVOLUTIONARY NOVELS

FoR ANY ENTHUSIAST  in Canadian litera­ ture  who  had   become  familiar  with  the recent  quebecois   novel,  the  "new   page"  in Quebec  history  opened by the  Novem­ ber   1976  election    could   scarcely   have come as a shock. The direct expression  of political  partisanship  in  certain pages  of L'Hiver de  force  {I972), a work  written by so prestigious an author as Rejean Du­  charme, is a case in point.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Historically speaking, a literary expres­ sion of aspirations towards independence is a constant quebecois phenomenon, for it  appears that  a  revolutionary spirit  has always  existed  in  Quebec; it grew  in  the aftermath of the  Conquest.1 Any revolu­  tionary  mythology, however,  needs  some form   of   palpable  support  in   order   to grow.   A   truly    revolutionary  literature burst  forth only  in  I837· Little  did  the dozen or so patriots who died  on  the end of  an  English   rope  at  that   time  realize that their cause would survive and express itself  with  shouts  and  tears  of  joy over  a century later  one  November  night  in  the wake of a bizarre  election.
It is certainly not my purpose to retrace the whole  of this ideological  current here. Nonetheless, it is interesting to  note  that Jules-Paul Tardivel's novel Pour la patrie, written in .the post-Confederation era, ex­ presses a virtually paranoiac fear that the English   (under the  sway of the  masons) were    plotting   the    destruction   of   the Catholic French nation  in  North  Ameri­  ca.2 Equally pertinent in this work  is the fact  that  it is the wealthy  and treacherous Montarval,  attempting  to   sell  out   his blood-brothers,   and    not    the    English,  whom  Tardive! sees as  the  chief  villain.
Perhaps the  work  of  prose  fiction  ex­ pressing  most  perfectly  the French Cana­ dian   mystique,  the   fundamental   "com­  plexe  d'alienation"3   and  spirit  of  revolt evident in  so much   of  their  literature is Mgr. Felix-Antoine Savard's epic Menaud maitre draveur (I 932) : old Menaud, who has long struggled against those who have  threatened his  land,  his  culture and   his identity,  wanders  alone  in  a  despairing delirium. It  is  significant  here  also  that  animosity is  not  mainly  directed   against  foreign  incursions, but  rather against  Le Delie, the sly coward who, for wealth  and power,  betrays  his own race.
The demise of  colonialist powers through the  events  of the  Second  World War  gave  Quebec's nationalist and  revo-


134
 lutionary spmt a  new  impetus. Signs  of mounting tensions  are  apparent, for  ex­ ample, in  a  work  which   has  become  a virtual  classic,  Gabrielle  Roy's  Bonheur d'occasion  (1947). With sombre  indigna­ tion,  the  author  portrays her  people: the French Canadian migrants from  the  land turn in  the  hellish  circle  of the St.  Henri slums, while the English  bourgeoisie occu­ pies   mansions  on   the   slopes   of   West­ mount.
Eventually, with  the  6o's  and  the  "re­
volution tranquille," Quebec began  mov­
ing more  forcibly  out  of its torpor. It was during these years that  two principal ten­ dencies  of  thought became   more  clearly discernible  in   its   literature:    the   first, liberal, in  the  broadest sense,  verging  on the  universal and  aiming  chiefly  at  pure authenticity and  literary  goals.  Here   we would    place    such    authors   as   Andre Langevin, Gerard  Bessette,  Roger Leme­  lin  and  Anne  Hebert. The other  current, thoroughly nationalistic and  treating liter­  ature  often as a vehicle  of social  change, has  become  ultimately entrenched in  the independence movement. Among  its chief representatives may  be found Hubert Aquin, Jacques Ferron, and Jacques God­ bout. The two currents are, of  course,  not mutually  exclusive.   Indeed,   we   cannot ignore  the  fact  that  all  Quebec literature is  fundamentally  inspired   by  a  sense  of cultural   uniqueness.  Both   Lemelin  and Bessette  may   be  seen  as  compassionate advocates of social reform  and  certainly Godbout's great  knowledge and  scope  go well    beyond    his    quebecitude.    Marie­ Claire Blais would  seem  to be  firmly  at­  tached  to  the  first  tendency,  while   her creation of adolescent monster-figures em­ broiled   in  negative  and   powerless  revolt has  doubtless a distinct bearing upon  the second.
It is this second  tendency, particularly in  its  more  recent   manifestations, which is my    principal  subject  here.   A   brief glance   at  fiction   written in  the  militant

OPINIONS AND NOTES



vein  just  prior  to  the  197o's  shows  that, despite  a pressing  desire  for initiative and a strong  potential for  violence,  it  was es­ sentially  a time  of hesitation. Whether in reference to  Godbout,  Aquin,  or  Claude Jasmin, it  is  striking  that   these  writers  inter   alia,  although  adept at  describing the  quebecois  predicament in  the  midst of North American civilization, are  none­  theless perplexed when  it comes to formu­ lating   justifiable   paths   of  action  or   to determining precisely  who  is  to  blame.4
Despite  these  instances of  indecision,  al­
ready  in 1965 the  Dean  of French  Cana­ dian   theatre, Gratien Gelinas,  created a prophetic drama, Hier  les  enfants dans­ aient, which,  through the presentation of a young  revolutionary  figure  thoroughly equipped with a   resolute  and  well­ rounded separatist   ideology,   underlined the  growing menace.
The October crisis  in I 970  marked a turning-point: in Quebec FLQ terrorism
may  have  been  defeated; however,  an in­
tensification  of  hostilities  on   the  social level  was  reflected on  the  literary   plane by  the   upsurge  of  a  more   radical   na­ tionalist    current.  For    example,   Andre  Langevin, who  had   gained   fame  in  his earlier novels  for  his  predominantly  psy­ chological and  existential analyses  of hu­  man interrelationships, adopted in l'Elan d'Amerique    (I 972)     a   new    approach clearly  symbolic  of  the  Quebecois'  prin­ cipal  causes  for  rancour:   linguistic  and ethnic  discrimination,   exploitation,  dis­ possession in their  own  homeland.
In  addition, while  socio-economic  fac­ tors  might   explain in  part   a  new  mode that   was  developing  in  Quebec  letters, other elements were  also involved. There was, for  example, the  growing  ability  of television   to  exploit  material   that   was formerly   the  domain  of   literature. The novel  itself was in  question, and  this ini­ tiated  a more acute search  for  new forms of expression. The best  works  of  the  ris­ ing generation of the  70's are  permeated,
 moreover,  with  an  intense  effort  at exor­ cising   a   religious   and    humanist   ethic  largely  held  responsible  for  the  past  par­  alysis of the  quebecois  sensibility.5 Thus, the  treatment given human sexuality  and  all   physical   existence:   texts   are   inter­ woven,   often   gratuitously,  with   scenes which   are   either  distastefully crude  or brutally lascivious  and  obscene.
Among  the  authors of  this  generation who are of "revolutionary" bent, probably the  most talented of those  to emerge  has been Gilbert  La Rocque. In his first novel, Le nombril, La Rocque portrays  qualities of  the  quebecois  personality pushed  to a pathological extreme; the severe tenets of a  jansenist  catholicism inculcated in  his formative years have condemned the hero to  a  horror of  all  flesh,  culminating in obsessive fantasies of death  and  putrefac­ tion.    We,   the    readers,    sense   age-old  themes,  and  indeed, many of the author's topics  are  well  worn,  but  it  is  the  dy­ namics  of  his  style,  the  sheer  ferocity  of his expression,  that  constitutes his value.  The horribly anguished Jerome, protag­ onist  of  Le  nombril, continually thrown back upon his own inner  prison, examines within  his  conscious  experience the  vari­  ous  forces  that   together provoke  failure and sterility.6  Inhuman years of schooling, his  father's passing,  the  labours  of a mo­ ther devoured by disease and  resultant en­ slavement   to  routine drudgery in  a  mer­ cantile  system largely  controlled by  "out­ siders,"  these are  among the elements  fo­ menting trauma in a sensitive  morbid  na­  ture.  Strong  hints of  xenophobia  (one  of
the most unseemly aspects of nationalism)
underlie his  dreams of  revolution.  Sym­ bolic  revolt   comes   when   he  strikes   his always   proper  Jewish   employer, Jacob Drachs, and   is fired.  He  wanders, near  despair  and madness, through the ugliness of  Montreal-North.  Possible  escape  and  salvation arrive,  however,  in  the  form  of Nathalie   who,    herself     long-suffering, offers  him  love. Rather than  grasping  at


135

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



this chance to project beyond himself, the weight  of his "nombrilisme" proves too much: at  first,  the  girl  provides   release for  his  suppressed   sensuality,   but   then, faced  with love's demands, Jerome proves himself as impotent as in everything else. In  the end,  only through his own gratui­ tous choice  between  living and dying  can he find a source of identification and free­ dom.
Here  we have an intensified,  even exag­ gerated rendition of  the  Quebecois' hu­  man   condition.  As  utterly   cruel   as  this novel appears, its conclusion, as well as its touches  of  tenderness, preclude the  "mi­ serabilisme" of some of La Rocque's con­ temporaries. In  his  second  work,  Corri­ dors  (I 97 I ) , which  is also  his  best,  this search   for   positive   values  is  more   pro­ nounced. Its  plot  less encumbered, more rapid-moving than   those   of   his   other creations,  Corridors  has,  moreover,  the great    virtue    of    examining   effectively several cogent human problems: violence, revolution   and   self-discovery.   At   mo­ ments,  in  keeping  with  the  author's pen­ chant  for  savage   imagery,   his  desire  to stress  man's   fundamental  bestiality,   we feel,   with   Clement,  that   we  are   in   a maniacal  presence   similar   to  Jerome's.7
However, though Clement may be touched with  the same  basic complexes  as his pre­ decessor, he is the most appealing of  que­  becois  revolutionary heroes.  There  is his delicacy  towards his family, his protective affection  for his retarded brother, Rosaire,  and above  all the girl of  his heart,  Cetine.  Indeed, it  is  a  remarkable  balance   be­ tween  opposites-the two  familiar  as­ pects  of life -the  cruel  and  the  beauti­ ful,  that   produces a  striking  realism.
In  the opening pages, Ciement has dis­ covered  his love for Celine  and  they have a child.  However, sensing his own lack of personal   evolution,  he  flees  this   bond.  Fearing aimlessness,  he  joins the Quebec revolutionary movement.  Within  a  sub­ group  of the  FLQ, theory soon turns  into
 action as he finds himself punishing a cer­ tain  Van  Den,  a rogue  who has informed on a captive cell. True to the pattern, we have here  once again the central image  of a lowly traitor (though with such a name  there  is an  unmistakably xenophobic nu­ ance). It  is  then   that   Clement  realizes that  he is not a terrorist. Seeing  Van  Den tormented  and  beaten by his long-haired assailants, he reacts  much  as he had  done years before  when  his brother, Rosaire, suffered  humiliation. As if by a purely vis­ ceral  impulse, Clement  helps  the  traitor escape.  Recaptured, it is with  greater re­ solve that  he saves the  villain  turned vic­ tim   and,   as  a   consequence,   is  gravely wounded.
Through this bloody experience, having returned to his working class home, the convalescent matures rapidly. He realizes, through an  innate integrity, that  only  by liberating himself from his family and accepting his own  individual  responsibili­ ties can  he  fulfill  his true  role. This  role he had  falsified  as a member  of a band  of pseudo-revolutionaries who, dope-ridden and    vicious,    planned   strategy  in   the smoke-filled   Pan   Club   surrounded  with dark  "filles de  joie." Neither the stagnant "11evolution tranquille" nor  the  petty  ter­ rorism   of  men   like  Jean-Louis  and  the sadistic  Morneau could  ever help to bring  about the authentic emancipation of Que­ bec's  people.  For  Clement, there must  be no flight  from  reality  nor abdication from this  ideal.   Certainly,  violence   would   be necessary   if  the  "federastes" refused   to release  their  grip,  but  it  would  be a vio­ lence expressed  not  as a vengeful  egocen­  tric gesture, but  clearly  in the name  of an entire people.  This   is already   prefigured in  the  novel  with  Clement's original  re­ marks  on violence:
frappant  plus  fort   et   plus   juste   jusqu'au moment  oil le peuple  dirait  QUI, adMrerait en masse au  principe de Ia vraie  revolution, c'est-3.-dire le progres social, !'unification sociale, sans prostituer le sens du mot revolu­ tion,  sans  ravaler   Ia  revolution   au  seul  ni-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



veau   des   r glements  de   comptes   et   des boucheries,   mais  en  se  proclamant  uni  et
libre,   en   s'arrachant  lucidement des  ma­
choires  &eniles de  Ia Confederation, en  ad­
mettant enfin qu'il  faut  vivre debout.

In  contrast with  this idealism,  the  por­ trayal  of jean-clad quebecois youths, with their   beer,   hashish,   electric   music,  and dark  sanctuary, is a  biting  indictment  of a prevalent mania. The  negresses  in  the Pan   Club   bar   provide   the  author  free reign  for  his scatological  fantasies. Their licentious  postures   stir   Clement's  virile impulses; however, when  it  comes  to ex­ changing cash  for  sexual   favours,   he  is filled  with  nausea:  that  it  is all  just  an­  other empty adventure. Thus, this young man  has  crossed  through a  further "cor­  ridor" of  consciousness  in a quest  for self­ affirmation. In  the end,  in full  control  of his own destiny, he can allow himself the commitments of love  with  Celine.
A less moderate view of French  Cana­ da's   revolutionary  struggle   appears  in Pierre  Gravel's A perte de  temps  ( 197 r), which  suggests  that   only  explosions   will stir  the   people   from  traditional  inertia. As regards  Alice  Parizeau's Les militants ( 1974), the  plot  is shrouded in  a  fairly commonplace apology  for  political  sover­ eignty. However, the same  year  there  ap­
peared   Yves  Beauchemin's more  impos­ ing novel, L'enfirouape, which  is an ebul­  lient, grotesque and often shocking parody  of the  October crisis.
The ingredients with  which  Beauche­ min concocts  his story are those of a poor detective novel set in relief by a good deal of ribald  wit and  immature buffoonery. In a series of fantastic scenarios,  we first dis­ cover   the  intrepid  young   Maurice  Fer­  land,  who comes  to Montreal to seek his future.  Here  he  meets   his  girl   friend's uncle, the wealthy Jerry  Turcotte, who inveigles  him  into  removing a desk  and its contents from  a private residence. Maurice soon  finds  himself  on  trial  for theft    and   assault,  for   Turcotte  is,  in
 reality, what the English close homonym suggests, the archetype of the quebecois "turncoat."  A   widower   and   owner   of large  firms, he is a deputy in  the govern­ ment  as well as a sot and  a  lecher.  As it turns out, Maurice actually pilfered  docu­  ments  that  could  have  helped  their  parti quebecois  owner    to   contest    Turcotte's election.  Betrayal, again, is at the core of this  novel,  for   the   young   scapegoat  is packed   off  to   jail  where   he  broods   in hatred for some time.
Once free, he forms a gang of social victims who set about kidnapping the despicable Jerry. Demanding a heavy ran­ som,  they  hole  up  in  an  apartment  sur­ rounded with  guns  and  bombs. The War Measures  Act is declared, whereupon the populace is stricken  with  fear. The police finally close in  and  the  drama mounts  in a  crescendo  of  blood  and   violence.  The frantic  Jerry  tries  to  escape  by throwing himself  through a window  pane.8
The  survivors  of  the  siege  are  offered free passage to Cuba  in exchange for their hostage. However, in a weird  twist, Mau­ rice crashes  the  plane  at  the airport in a vain  effort  at  destroying the  "Prince" of the powers that  be. This mysterious  poten­  tate,  after  escaping  the  resultant explo­  sion, turns  to his surreptitious manoeuvres at  keeping  the  populace in  tow. Though not explicit, the political ramifications of the  novel  are  in  keeping  with  the  mood of the times. With  his tongue-in-cheek ap­ proach, Yves Beauchemin manifests com­ plicity  with  the  view  that   the  FLQ had often  justice  on  its  side;  in  this,  we  can scarcely feel he was alone.
As a final  example, we may  now  con­ sider  the  most  ambitious work  of  fiction yet undertaken in  this  revolutionary cur­  rent, Paul Villeneuve's Johnny Bungalow. It is the sheer  immensity of this  author's project that  is in part  responsible  for  this novel  being  an  artistic failure. Irregular in  structure, redundant and  laborious in style, it suffers from  the principal fault of

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



these young  writers  of the 70's:  verbosity. Despite  these  drawbacks, Villeneuve's obvious  sincerity,  the  dynamic  quality  of his  work,  as  well  as  its  rich  symbolism, render his product quite fascinating.
In  1963,  charged with  terrorist  activi­ ties   relating  to   the   Quebec   liberation movement,  Jean    Martin,   alias   Johnny Bungalow, a  26-year-old  from  the  work­ ing  class,  decides  to  reply  to  his  judges and  to denounce social injustice in all its forms.  In  his  efforts  at  self-justification, Johnny   feels   that    he,   another  young "nombriliste" born  to poverty and  misery, must    tell   all   "jusqu'a  la   moelle    des choses."   In   a   similar   way,   Villeneuve shows  in  the  course  of  his work  a  total  adhesion  as a novelist  to the deprived of this earth, and  not to any intellectual elite. As witness to the  lives of two generations of  his  fellows,  Johnny  intends, further­ more,  to  revive  all  their  dreams,  suffer­ ings  and  misfortunes as  well as  his own and, at long last, restore meaning to these dreams. With   Villeneuve, as  is  the  pat­ tern  in Quebec literature, dream  fantasy  is a  predominant facet  of his  writing.
In  1937,  towards the  end  of the  great depression, Johnny's father,  Aime,  tired of the unlivable city, leaves with his wife, Marguerite, and  others,  to build  a colony in  the  Abitibi  region  of central Quebec. This "gout de  la  grande   route" is later seen by Marguerite's brother as having portended evil. There is an incredible struggle   to  build  a  homestead, clear  the land.  One  day, in the midst of his labours, momentarily blinded  by the sun, Aime accidentally slips and  is dragged to death by  his  horse.  Marguerite is consequently left  destitute with  three  small  sons.
In  the  first  instance, settlement of this remote region  by these  Quebecois colon­ ists can  be  seen  as  an  effort  to  found   a "Terre  promise" far  from  the  industrial centre  which,   with   its  inhuman  distor­  tions,  could   no  longer  conform  to  their dreams. This  migration  expresses,  more-
 over,  on  the  level  of creative fiction,  dis­ illusionment with  the  real  world  and  an attempt to formulate an  imaginary geog­ raphy, or,  in other  words,  to build  out  of language a  new  land.9   As far  as  Aime's  fatal  accident is concerned, there  are some remarkable  parallels with   the  deaths of several outstanding characters of the Que­ bec  novel,  all symbolic  of the  fundamen­ tal sentiments of victimization, impotence and  defeat.10  A  number of  events-the founding of a home,  man's closeness with the  earth, the  cycle of seasons,  the  cure's power-all  recall  quite  closely Ringuet's classic "roman de la terre" Trente arpents ( 1938).  The  second   section   of   Ville­ neuve's  chronicle, entitled  "Montreal 1," with  its  descriptions of  slums,  alleyways
and  gang  fights,  clearly  evokes  the  great social  novels of Roger  Lemelin and Gab­ rielle  Roy.  In the  same  way,  the  latter part of Johnny Bungalow, with  its young males,   alcohol   and   violence,   brings   us closer to the present. What I am saying is that,  besides   elucidating   many   historic  details  which  parallel  his  narrative, Vil­ leneuve  attempts to  summarize within  it the principal phases in the Quebec novel's evolution. This  might   perhaps be  better  defined  as an endeavour to reformulate a nation's mythology, to synthesize  a spirit­ ual geography which,  dark  and  defeatist, seeks some  form  of  rebirth. Described as a chronicle, Johnny Bungalow greatly sur­ passes, in actuality, the conventional real­ ism of its style.H But once again, to under­ stand   this,  we  must   return to  the  story itself.
After    Aime's    death,  a  heartbroken
Marguerite is forced  to  return to  Mont­ real  with  her  children and,  with  unem­ ployment rampant, scrape  together a liv­ ing  as a waitress.  Young,  pretty and  de­ fenseless,  she  is  noticed  by  a scoundrel, Bernard;  finally,   in   her   loneliness   and  desperate need  of love, she gives in to his advances. Her  sentimental nature allows her  to embrace new dreams, but  they  are

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



short-lived. A job and  material comfort involve  her also in complying with  the desires  of  other men;  should   she  refuse, her children are threatened. Marguerite, like a hunted animal, is thus  won over  to a life of prostitution. Escape  comes when she  is hired  as housekeeper and  stays on as  mistress  in  the   Westmount home   of Perry,  a  wealthy   Irish   Canadian  whose wife is an invalid. It is here  that  her Jean becomes Johnny, "the  little genius" of this new father figure, and  Marguerite finds some   respite   in   her   tragic  life.   Here, though it is expressed  in English,  there  is happiness and   love.  The  children  grow in this  home  and  think  it  theirs,  but mis­ fortune is their  natural state;  Perry,  un­ stable  and  haughty, evicts them  on a sud­ den  impulse. This  means  a return to  the tenaments of the lower town  and  a life of prostitution.
Only  in the latter sections  of the narra­ tive  does  Johnny play  a  paramount role. Buffeted  from  job to  job in  labour gangs throughout the North, his only lessons are gained  from   a  life   without  security   or hope   of  any  headway. Society,   to  him, resembles    an    immense   concentration camp; his people  are  enclosed  in concerns  which  are  mean,  material and  mediocre.
In  reality,  it  is the  author's concept of
man's   predominant animality which  ex­ plains, at times not   too  convincingly, much  of the  fabric of this work.  Love  is seen  principally  as  erotic   passion: thus Marguerite, the  once   pure  girl,  then   a deeply  enamoured wife,  is  finally  trans­  formed  into  a woman  of  easy virtue.  The  sex act, a virtual obsession, is treated with coarse effrontery; sordid  details  receive ir­ relevant attention; self-pitying characters drown themselves  in drink. Despite  the writer's political  intent, there  is a basic pessimism in all this, for, outside  of Aime, none  of  these  "damnes de  la  terre" por­ trayed  in Johnny Bungalow has any moral  fibre.  Johnny's companions, an  obdurate
 lot,  find  their  only  purpose  in  beer,  sex, and  automobiles.
It is Johnny's brother, And:re, an intel­ ligent  dreamer, broken   by life,  who  de­ fines the situation with  the words:  "II  y a deux  societes  icite  et  c'est  c;a qu'il   faut  casser."   In   hopes   for   regeneration,  a family house is eventually built. However, the   memories   of   sumptuous  meals   at Perry's  table, doubled by other  images  of filth and greyness, frequently stir the rest­ less  Johnny. The first  FLQ bombs  have begun  and  it  is time  for  action.
The symbolism of the terrorist episode towards  the  narrative's end deserves close attention. In this melodramatic scene, Johnny  bursts   in  on  his  former   patron and  holds him  at  gunpoint. He  burns  old photos, the only traces of his and  Perry's companionship: "c'est  fini cette  comedie de l'amour et des grandes amities  entre  le p'tit gar«<on canadien-franc;ais et son papa anglais."
All  Johnny's  blame   is  heaped  upon Perry's  head: for  having tried  to assimi­ late him into  the English  world, for offer­ ing him,  in  good  faith, wealth  and  a fu­ ture.  The  family  sword, symbol of British power   and   prestige,   was   also   to  have passed  to  the  boy  when he  had  come  of age. This old saber had fascinated Johnny, but was never  to be his. Since  a true  mar­  riage  wtih  Marguerite would  only  have brought shame, so the  Canadian had  be­ trayed  his Quebecois sons  and  flung  out their mother when  he had  done  with  her. Quebec's history  is clearly  represented
in these symbolic events.  The image of an orphan is indeed   not  new  to  this  litera­ ture.   Johnny  had   twice  lost  a  paternal figure:   the  first,  his  real  French  father, fallen  in  his  prime,   the second,  an  Eng­ lish father who destroys this bond through treason.   In   Johnny   Bungalow,  English Canada, then,  is held directly responsible for the betrayal  of  Confederation and  for the ills of its French speaking compatriots. Even   though   Villeneuve's  frenzied   ter-


139

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



rorist is incapable of murder, his enemy is unequivocally  identified,  and   we  learn
that  "a l'avenir, y aura aucun  coup de feu
inutile."
Johnny's resentment appears to stem principally from   the  fact  that   he  could never truly aspire to the family sword of honour. If a marriage had  taken  place in this  Westmount home,  are  we to  under­ stand  then  that  for Johnny (and  for Vil­ leneuve)  all would  have been well? Could the  Quebecois's  historic  resentment  not also be attributed, at least in part,  to their own age-old "nombrilisme"? These  ques­ tions  and  others   assail  the  reader. It is strange,  for  instance,  that   Perry   is  the only "traitor" chosen  for vengeance, while we   should   remember  that   it   was   the schemer, Bernard, a Quebecois, who was first guilty  of betraying Marguerite's true sentiments, thus  provoking the whole sub­ sequent  disaster  in their lives. In any case, isn't  Bernard meant  as a further  product of the "English" mercenary system? There is  also  a  hint   that   this  man   may  have been  of  Italian origin.
Perry's  discomposure before his aggres­ sor reminds  us immediately of  Jerry  Tur­ cotte's sufferings in  L'enfirouape.  While we are  supposed   to  find  the  young  gun­  man  heroic,  Johnny might  just  as easily be seen as a  ridiculous tough.
These  outstanding examples  of French Canadian revolutionary literature present thematic strains quite  removed  from everyday   reality.  The holy  cause  of  na­ tionalism  has  long  been an  obsession  dis­ torting  quebecois prose  with   themes  of powerlessness,   defeat   and   death.12    For Villeneuve, as  for  the  others,   normality  can,  of  course,  only  come  through inde­ pendence.    Notwithstanding   this,    signs portend that, whether the nationalists win their dream or not, given the "new  page" recently  turned in its history, Quebec will henceforth reflect  a happier, more serene image  in its letters.
 NOTES

1 Joseph  Costisella, L'Esprit   Tlivolutionnaire dans la litterature canadienne franfaise (Montreal:  Beauchemin, 1968).
2   Jules-Paul Tardive!, For My  Country 'Pour la  Patrie', Intro.  by  A. I. Silver, trans!. by Sheila Fischman (Toronto & Buffalo: Univ. of  Toronto  Press,    1975). Originally   pub­ lished  in   1895   by  Cadieux  &  Derome  of Montreal.
3  Yvon  Daigneault, "Menaud maitre  draveur devant Ia  critique  1937-1967," Livres  et auteurs  quebecois  1969  (Montreal: Editions Jumonville, 1969), pp.  248-62. Daigneault states that Menaud  is one of the  great  myths of  the  human soul,  and  mentions that Gilles Marcotte considered it  "L'illustration du complexe d'alienation  des  Canadiens  fran­ c;ais"  (p. 257).
4 I am  thinking, in  particular, of Jacques Godbout's Le  couteau  sur la  table  ( 1965), Hubert  Aquin's  Prochain   episode   ( 1965) and  Claude  Jasmin's Ethel   et  le  terroriste ( 1964).  Godbout's narrator  cannot decide whether to  kill  or   not   to  kill  his  English­ speaking  mistress, Patricia;  Aquin's  revolu­ tionary  vacillates  between  admiration  and  hatred for  the  multi-faceted  de  Heutz, and  Jasmin's   terrorist  is  fraught  with    the   di­ lemma of  his  love for  the  Jewish girl,  Ethel. At  the  same  time,  betrayal recurs as  an  im­ portant theme in each  of these  works; in an­ other  instance, in   Godbout's  Salut   Galar­ neau   ( 1967), a  violation of  sexual  loyalty  involving two  brothers is central to the  plot.
5  Victor-Levy Beaulieu, "Etre  ecrivain  que­ becois," Le Devoir, samedi 21 octobre, 1972,  p.  18.  In  this   article, while   marking   the emergence on  the  literary  scene of  Jacques Renault,  Rejean   Ducharme,  and  himself, Beaulieu announces with  the  arrival of these  young  "Turks" a  new  phase  in  the  Quebec novel.   He    defends,  moreover,  the    abject image  of  man   and   the  obscenity evident  in their  writings as  producing a  more  authen­ tic  reflection of  reality than  the   bourgeois formulae of  the  past.
6   Gilbert La  Rocque, Le nombril  (Montreal: Les  editions du  jour,  1970), p. 9· The title means "navel." In so far   as  xenophobia  is concerned, Mlle. Squash, Drach's stoutish secretary, is the  most  grotesque portrayal of an  Anglo-Saxon yet  made in  French  Cana­ dian   literature.
7   Gilbert La   Rocque, Corridors   (Montreal: Les  editions du   jour,   1971). In a  certain

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



passage, Clement refers  to  a  man  who,  be­ cause he was too prolific, carved  out his own testicles  with  bloody  precision.
8  Yves  Beauchemin, L'enfirouape (Ottawa: Les Editions  La  Presse, 1974), p. 233· (The novel's title is a slang  term  for "the  dupe.")
9   In  the  "Annexe" to  his  novel,  Paul  Ville­ neuve  considers a  return to  the  earth   and the  colonization  of  the  Quebec  hinterland as   a   necessary   national   enterprise.  This search for a new land  is even more apparent in  the  author's  first  novel,  ]'ai  mon  voyage ( 1969), where  he  takes  us on  an  extensive ramble   through   his   inner   as  well  as  his
exterior  world. A flight from an unbearable reality is likewise one of Rejean Ducharme's main  themes.
1o  I am thinking of the fate of Franc;ois Paradis in Maria  Chapdelaine and of Menaud's son, Joson,  in Menaud maitre  draveur.
11 Since  one  of  his  chief  objectives   is  social reform,  Villeneuve conforms  to the precepts of  zolaesque   naturalism.  Nor   would  Zola have  taken  exception to this  novel's  mytho­ logical  essence.
12 Victor-Levy  Beaulieu,  "Une question  de ni­
veaux,"  Le   Devoir,   samedi    1 1  decembre,
1976.  "Des  generations d'hommes, et  non parmi  les  moindres, ont  ete  conscrites  par
!'ideal   politique,  au   point   de   s'y  castrer
veritablement," p. 17-

LEONARD W. SUGDEN


GROVE'S
liTHE CANYON"

IN 1926, SHORTLY AFTER the  publication of Settlers  of the  Marsh, Lorne Pierce  of Ryerson  Press turned down a novel by Frederick Philip  Grove  entitled "The Canyon." The  novel describes  the ill-fated marriage of a  young  Canadian poet  and a  beautiful heiress.  The story  ends  with the woman's suicide, undertaken in the belief that  her death is necessary for her husband's art. Readers of "The Canyon" who  do   not   understand  Grove's   philo­ sophical   assumptions  have   deemed   the novel  prolix,  turgid   and  bizarre.  Arthur Phelps summed up the reaction of Grove's
 friends  when  he  reported  to  Grove:  "I am prone to say it's too analytical, lacking in  action  and   human variety  to  make  a
'seller'." Margaret Stobie, quoting Phelps, further describes  "The Canyon" as "nar­ row,  tight-lipped, forced," held  together by an "attenuated nervous logic."1
The novel depicts  a young couple's dis­ covery   that   their   marriage  is   doomed  according to Plato's laws of  metaphysics. "The  Canyon" can  be fully  appreciated only in the perspective of  Plato's  thought. It  is  a  measure   of  Grove's highminded innocence that  he submitted such a novel for mass publication without giving a hint  of   its   philosophical   basis.   Rather,  he seems  to  have   misled  his  readers   unin­ tentionally. In  an Author's Note, he says: "In the matter of thought content of this book my indebtedness is, of course,  to all who have gone before; specifically to acknowledge  all   claims   would   be   im­ possible.  But,  when  this  work  was  being sketched  in its first form,  a friend sent me James  Branch  Cabell's 'Beyond Life'; and  in it I found  some of my own conclusions so  perfectly   expressed   that  I  could   not resist  the  temptation  to  borrow   two  or three   phrases  literally. I  herewith make my bow to Mr. Cabell." 2
Popular in the 1920's, James  Branch Cabell  was an American writer  of  roman­ tic  novels. Margaret Stobie  cites  Grove's words  to support her  view  that  he "bor­ rowed a good deal more than two or three  phrases" and   "The  Canyon"  is  "an   at­  tempt  in James Branch Cabell's manner," an "experiment" intended to gain Cabell's success.3 In fact, Grove's novel resembles Cabell's work  only  in  choice  of  subject. Both novelists are concerned with the tendency of some young men  to confuse  a woman   with  a  spiritual ideal.  Each  one treats  the subject in a different way. "The Canyon" is a dogmatic philosophical tragedy,  while  Cabell's works,  usually  set in  a  mythical   part   of  medieval Europe, are   playful   ironic   romances.  As  Grove

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



suggests in the Author's Note, the thought expressed  in  "The Canyon" stands  in  a long tradition of work involving  an ideal­ ization  of female  form. Grove's ideas gain definition from  Plato.  "The Canyon" des­ cribes,  in Grove's  most explicit  terms,  the tragic   interpretation   of   Plato's  dualism  which  informs  most  of  Grove's work.  In particular,  "The   Canyon"   illuminates Grove's two  other  "Platonic"  tragedies, Settlers  of the  Marsh  (1925)    and   The  Yoke  of Life  (I 930). Rather than  being an   aberration,  as  Stobie   suggests,  The  Canyon provides a key to a clearer  under­ standing of the mainstream of Grove's thought.
Philip  Grove  studied Plato  as a student of  Classical   Philology   at  Friedrich-Wil­ helms  University in  Bonn  between   r8g8 and   1goo.  In  letters  and   poems,  Grove reveals  that  he has a broad  knowledge of Plato's work  and regards  the  philosopher as  the  world's  most   profound  thinker.4
There are  three  volumes  of Plato  in Grove's library in  Simcoe,  Ontario. The most important-Five Dialogues of Plato Bearing on Poetic Inspiration-contains marginalia in Grove's hand  and  is under­ scored.5   Briefly,  Plato   teaches  that   the material  world   in  which   we  live  is  an ephemeral and  flawed expression  of true reality   which   is  spiritual  in  character. In   reality,   truth,  beauty,   goodness   and  man's other  spiritual ideals  (or  "Ideas") actually  exist  fully  realized  and  eternal. The  desire   to  achieve  union   with   the realm   of   Idea    is  the   divine   principle which   underlies all  of  man's   higher  en­ deavours. The task is attempted  by trans­  cending  the   physical   world,  and/or  by recreating the ideal  vision on the material plane. While  Plato suggests  that   a  large measure   of   transcendence   is   possible, Grove   does  not  pursue   a  life  of  divine  contemplation. Instead  he  concentrates on man's endeavours to recreate the ideal in the material world. As an artist  he sees his  work  as  an  attempt to  recreate an
 ideal  conception of beauty or truth. His tragic  vision  is  based   on  the   fact   that while  the  human spirit  craves  perfection, the  ideal  never  can  be  fully  realized, as Plato explains, matter  is  ultimately  in­ tractable. To   the  dualism of  spirit  and matter Grove  attributes human suffering, ignorance and  of course mortality. Never­  theless  he believes life gains  meaning and  dignity   ( "true    tragic    greatness")    by dauntless  striving   for   perfection  which despite   inevitable  failure  manifests  the divine spirit  in man.6
According to  Plato,  love is another ex­ pression  of  the  spirit's longing  for  union  with   the  immortal  realm   of   Idea.  The things  people  ordinarily  love  are  but  re­ minders and   reflections of  their  real  de­ sire.  The desire  for  eternal perfection is expressed   by  creative  acts.  Most   people  achieve a  kind  of immortality by having children,  but  gifted   spirits  identify   with the  ideal  through noble  deeds  and  great  works  of  art. In comparison, sex for  its own  sake is regarded as wasteful  and  de­ ceptive. It focuses attention on the  ephe­ meral reminder and  obscures  the  Idea of beauty  which   is the  true  object  of  love. By its  alternation of  desire  and  satisfac­ tion, sex identifies  the lover with  the tran­ sitory   natural  world   and   the   cycle   of growth and  decay.  In  contrast, the  Pla­ tonic   lover's   desire   for   the   immutable Ideal  never   wanes   because   necessarily, and  in Grove's view  tragically, the  desire is never  fulfilled.  The lover  of  the  Idea  thus   identifies  himself   with   the  eternal spiritual  realm  and   achieves   a  kind   of immortality  in  his  work.
The  teleological character of  Grove's tragic  vision is well illustrated by "The Canyon" which  depicts the  unpleasant consequences were man  able to attain per­ fection. Intoxicated  by  sexual  desire,   a poet  convinces himself  that  his wife is the perfect incarnation of the  Idea of beauty  rather than a flawed  reflection.  He  soon finds  he can  no  longer  create  because  he

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



has lost his vision of perfection. His wife, too, is dissatisfied  with  a purely  mundane love and  commits suicide  in  order  to re­ store  the  original vision.  She  becomes a symbol   of   perfection  in   her   husband's mind   which   once  again  inspires him  to create immortal works. Thus Grove asserts that  an  ideal  reached is an  ideal  lost, and man's  "tragic" condition is part of a feli­ citous ultimate design.
Harold Tracy, the  protagonist of "The
Canyon," seeks  immortality by  pursuing in  poetry  a "dream" of  perfection (the Idea). He  falls in love with  Frances Montcrieff, an attractive young heiress whom   he  mistakes   for  a  "fulfillment of his dream in the flesh."7 Frances is "his poem   become   flesh   and   blood;  she  is beauty  incarnate." "Is  beauty  so much?" Frances asks  Harold. The  poet  replies: "God  is beauty; and  truth is beauty.  The highest,  the  finest  there  is in  the  highest and  the finest mind  or soul is but a reflec­ tion of an immortal thought; and that  im­ mortal thought took form  in you."
Frances  protests   that   she  is  not   the Idea  incarnate but  only a reflection of it, and  that  his vision of her  (and  hence  the Idea) will remain intact only if they part. Love  will  "forever  illumine our  earthly days  unless we allow  it  to  be drowned  in the  intimacy  of  the  dust."  Harold  also knows   that   "the  finest   and   highest   in them  could  indeed  come  into  play only if they  parted; and   not   to  see  it  in  play seemed already tragedy. Frances had  been right; from a love like theirs nothing could come  but  disaster  unless  it  remained  un­ fulfilled; fulfillment meant degeneration." Despite  their  spiritual  need  for  an  un­ attainable ideal, both Frances and  Harold are  also  aware of  a  purely  human need for  carnal  fulfillment.  We  are  told  that
Harold

longed  to  touch  the  lovely  cheek,  the  lips, the  hair  of this  woman; and  it  seemed as if the  mere  touch  would  carry  its own reward of peace  and  happiness  that  would  pay for
 the  loss of the soul even  though  it  might  be eternal.
His suffering  sprang  from  this dualism  of
flesh  and  soul.  In   his  heart   of  hearts   he knew he was on the  point  of sacrificing  this
woman,  and   with  her  his  own  finest  con­ ception that  called  it into  being-he would sacrifice  her  on  the   altar   of  what  is  not eternal  but fleeting.

Harold  marries  Frances because  as the narrator says, "nature is cunning and  will have  its way,  so  that   the  ecstasy  of  the lovers  may  be  bodied  forth  again  in  the wail  of  an   infant...."8    Almost   imme­ diately, however,  Harold and Frances are unable  to reconcile  their  action with  the demands of  the  spirit.  Harold longs  for immortality through his poetry  but  while his vision of the  Idea  is  obscured   by the physical  presence  of  Frances, he  cannot write  a single word. He  is "no  longer  the free man he had been." Frances also longs for immortality  through Harold's poetry. "She  didn't  care  if his vision  of her  was a true image; something of her  was in it, that  something she  wanted  to  see  per­ fected into a form which would stand forever."
In  time  Frances learns   to  regret   that they married. She rues  the fact  that

what   had   thwarted  their   insight   was  sex, not only in the sense of the  body but  in the higher sense of the need  of the soul for com­ pletion,  of the  mind  for  confirmation  of its own  secret  tenets.  She  saw  now  that,  even in   their   first   ecstatic   raptures at   having found  each  other,  sex  had  played  its  part: sex   in   that    highest,    alluring,   iridescent  transfiguration  and   disguise,   in   which   it could   deceive   the   most   finely   organized natures  into  a  union  of  the  flesh. It was a cunning   trick   of  nature  to  sublimate  the vulgar   passions  into   that   ethereal  ecstasy where   not    the   remotest    reflection    of   a thought   was  on  the  body-where  at  the most the  body  was a  symbol of  the soul ...

Once  they had  taken  the great step "from the plane  of the  spirit  to the  plane  of the flesh,  the   rest   must   follow.   The   rest? What  was  it?  She  looked  into  an  abyss. Desire    and    satisfaction   in   everlasting


143

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



alternation: a  succession  of  contrary errors between which their victims must oscillate    till    satiety    came;  and    with satiety   must  come  estrangement, at  the best,   mutual  toleration:  that   peaceful goal  at  which  most  marriages  end."
Harold and  Frances attempt to resolve their dilemma by agreeing that  Harold should  separate her from his dream  by ignoring her.  "The man  must  die  if  the poet  may  live,"  he  tells her,  "and in  his death,  the   woman   in  you  must   share; then  perhaps the  goddess will arise from the ashes"; and  he goes on to declare: "I shall  be  submerged. For  only  by  killing my personal life can  I give life eternal to my dream." Although Frances counts her­ self  "blessed   above  all  earthly  women," the  "earthly" part of her becomes jealous of the attention Harold pays to his dream. When  he notices  her suffering,  he decides to  forego  his  poetry  and  devote  himself totally  to Frances. "Never now would  he find   that  solitude   in   which   alone   the dream could  rule  him  to the exclusion  of a reality  which  did  not measure  up to it. Never now would it become so strong and compelling  within him  that  he  must  put it out of  himself, into a form which would endure forever."
Despite  Harold's   decision,   however, they remain mindful of their  dilemma. While walking  in the park, Harold notices some swans  in a pond  and  asks:

"Why   is  that   reflection  of  the  birds  less real  than  the  birds  themselves?  Is it as  per­ fect?"
"Because," Frances  said and  stopped; again  she was poignantly  aware  of the sym­ bolism of  what  she  was going  to say.  Then  she  said  it  in  spite  of  that.  "The  slightest breath  of wind  breaks and  destroys it."
"But  it is the  bird  I love, not its image." She  smiled.  "You  do not and  cannot  see
the  bird  itself;  you can only see the cage in which  it is caught."

Gently,  Frances is reminding her husband that  the spiritual world  is invisible and eternal while the material world, of which

144
 they are a part, is ephemeral and destruc­ tible.  In  devoting himself  to  her,  he  has not  chosen   the  eternal Idea,  but  rather the flawed  material reflection.
Yet  Harold and  Frances cannot recon­ cile  themselves  to living  only in  the  tem­  poral  sphere. Though they decide  to part, "only  in  the  moment of  their  first  meet­  ing  was  parting  possible."  This   decision they  are   unable  to  carry   out   becoming aware once  again  that  ''they had  fallen." Frances  reflects  on   the   future:  "What was  to  be  the  future? If they  lived,  she would   never   have   the  strength  to  stay away  from  him.  She  might  go, yes! But she would return. And  then? The vicious circle!    Abnegation,   desire,    surrender, satiety ... Anything rather than  that!"
Suicide,  Frances  decides,   is  the   only
solution. The couple  go camping at Banff, the  locale  of  the  first  avowals   of  love. Frances steals away and  reaches  the ledge of  a waterfall. From   the  edge  she  tells Harold that  she does not reproach him. Natural  imperatives had  subverted their spiritual desires. "We  had  surrendered to life  and  life  played  with  us  as  it  always does  to  obtain  its  ends.  Between   spirit and  flesh there  is war  everlasting. And  so is there  between  man  and  woman, male and  female." Harold's initial vision of her should  have  been  a reminder of the  Idea, she declares, not  a substitute.

"No   poet   has  ever   created  out   of  the void;   for  you  our   meeting  had   been   the great  fertilization of your soul. But  no great poet  ever  married the  woman  he loved  and did  not  rue it. For  human  reality  is not per­ fection.  I had  been  a fleeting  vision  to your imagination on fire. And  there  I was in  the flesh,   contradicting  the   vision,  interfering with  it,  slowly  destroying  it.  That vision  I had  to rebuild. That is why  I  asked  you to go back  with  me  to the  mountains."

In order to  create, Frances says  Harold would    have    to   exclude    her   from   his dream. As a woman, she would  be jealous and  would  do everything in her  power  to destroy  his dream. Rather than  that, she

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



prefers suicide.  "Those who  have  the in­ sight  and  live  with  their  soul,"  she  says, must  live  in  the  future rather  than  the present. "All  this you and  I foresaw  from the  beginning. The peculiar  thing  is that  our  frail  humanity forced  even  us to test its truth by the  test of  reality.  But  we see clearly  now  not  to ...  bid  the  sun  stand still. ... " Harold   begs  her   to  wait   but Frances prepares  to  leap.  "I shall  always be with you, dear, in  the spirit," she says. "In the flesh we shall  never  meet  again." She  throws herself  into  the  canyon, sym­ bolic   of   the  abyss   between    spirit   and matter.
After  Frances' death, Harold conforms to  the  Platonic requisite that  he  love the Idea  and  not its material reflection.  He marries a "commonplace" woman  and remains childless. Before  his death, he publishes  two world-famous volumes of poetry.   Harold's  poetry,  tragically, can never  duplicate the  Idea of beauty,  but it is  immortal testament  to  the  hunger of the   human  spirit   for   perfection  and   a higher state of being.  "The Canyon" demonstrates that  while  man  is tragically doomed  to  fail,  the  endless  struggle   for the ideal  is the design  of life. Harold can­ not  create as  long  as  he  thinks  he  has achieved  his  goal.   Only   when   Frances  commits suicide  is he  capable of  striving  once  more.
As Grove suggests himself,  there  are parallels between  some of these ideas and those  expressed  by James Branch Cabell in Beyond  Life. In  an  essay entitled "The Witch-Woman," Cabell explains a  con­ cept  of love which  has  Platonic overtones  called   "woman worship" or   "domnei." The  essence   of  "domnei"  is  "that  the woman  one  loves is  providentially set be­ tween  her  lover's apprehension and  God, as  the  mobile  and  vital  image   and  cor­ poreal  reminder of  Heaven, as  a  quick symbol  of  beauty  and  holiness,  or  purity  and  perfection. In   her   the  lover  views all  qualities of  God  which   can  be  com-
 prehended by merely  human faculties  ... And  instances  are  not  lacking  in  the ser­ vice of domnei where  worship  of the sym­ bol developed  into  a  religion  sufficing  in itself,  and  became  competitor  with  wor­  ship  of what  the  symbol  primarily repre­ sented...."9
In  Cabell's view, many  young men  are in love with such a vision of perfection, which  he calls  the "witch-woman." They are, he writes,  invariably disappointed when,  after   the  initial   rapture of  love, their   wives  fall   far   short   of  the   ideal vision. While  these  men  are  reconciled to their   predicament,  they  do  not  forsake the witch-woman; they are the "witch finders" and   express   their   faith   in   the vision  of ideal  beauty  by creating  works of art.  "For  here  and  there  art's  master­ works  become   precursors  of   the  witch­  woman's advent, and whisper of a loveli­ ness, as yet  withheld, which  'never  waxes old,'  of a loveliness  which stays as yet the nebulous goal  of art's surmise...."
Cabell  deals  with  the  theme  of  "dom­ nei" in two novels published  before "The Canyon" was completed in  1925. In  con­ trast  to  "The Canyon,''  these  novels  are primarily concerned with the protagonist's quest  for  the  witch-woman rather  than  with  the consequences of finally marrying her.  At  the  conclusion, the  heroes  finally attain  their  object, but  the  result  is quite different from Grove's novel. Cabell's pro­ tagonists  are  disappointed that  the incar­ nation  fails to match the ideal, but, unlike Harold  Tracy  and   Frances  Montcrieff, they  become  reconciled to  this  fact.   In The Cream  of the   fest   (1917),  Cabell's persona, Felix  Kennaston, discovers  that  the  witch-woman whom  he  has  pursued in  his dreams is really  the  image  he  had  of  his wife during the initial euphoria of love.  Referring to  the  lover's  dsappoint­ ment  when passion dissipates, he remarks: "to  marry  for  love  is to  invite inevitable tragedy." He   concedes,  however,   "who are   we  to  mate   with   goddesses?"   and


145

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



affirms  the  virtues   of  domesticity: "the ties of our  ordinary life here  in  the  flesh have  their  own  mystic  strength and sanctity."
In  Domnei  (I 920),  Cabell  depicts  the
heroic   efforts   of   the   Frankish  brigand Perion   to   rescue   his  beloved   Melicent from the harem of a Moorish warlord, De­
metrios.   When,  after  many   years,   the quest  is rewarded, Perion  "knows  disap­ pointment for  the  first  time."  Melicent, an  ageing  yet  still  compelling  woman,  is not  the girl for  whom  he fought; nor, he realizes, was he  the  same man  whom  the girl had  chosen.  "Then  Perion  perceived  that  love may  be a power so august  as to bedwarf   consideration of  the  man   and woman  whom  it sways."  Renouncing his expectation that  Melicent should  be  for­ ever   youthful,  he  becomes   aware   of  a "new  and  finer  love."
In a short  story entitled "The Wedding Jest"  (I 9I 9) , Cabell depicts  Melicent  and Perion   many   years  later.   Melicent  says that   the  love  that   bound   her  to  Perion while  she  was  in  Demetrios'  thrall   has been  replaced, in  marriage to her  cham­ pion,  by domestic  bickering.  There is no rancour, however: "So Perion and  I grew old  together, friendly  enough; and   our senses and  desires began to serve us more drowsily, so that we did  not greatly  mind the falling  away of youth ... and we were content enough. But  of the  high  passion that  wedded us  there  was  no  trace,  and of little  senseless  human bickerings  there
were a great  many."1° Cabell slowly moves
towards Grove's conclusions  with  regard
to   the   consequences  of   marrying  the "ideal woman." In  a 30-page  prose poem entitled  The   Music   From  Behind   the Moon   ( I926),  a   poet   finally   beds  his muse  and  finds  that he no longer  has inspiration for  poetry.  Only  after  she dies a natural death does  he once  again  hear the "music from  behind  the moon."
While  Grove  and  Cabell  deal  with  the same general  subject, the view that  Grove
 is merely  imitating his American contem­ porary is unwarranted. The  treatment of the   topic    by   the   two   authors  differs radically. In  "The  Canyon," Grove   ad­  heres  dogmatically  to Platonic tenets.  He stresses, more  than Cabell, the  duality of spirit  and  matter, of  Idea  and  reflection.  Unlike Gabel,  he portrays sex as a primi­ tive  expression  of   love,  and   he  empha­ sizes the constant conflict  between  carnal and  spiritual desire.  More   than  Cabell, Grove makes  clear  that  creative work modelled on  eternal ideals  best expresses man's love for perfection and immortality. In contrast to Cabell's ironic  acceptance of mundane existence, Grove's  protagon­ ists assume  a  "tragic" grandeur by sacri­  ficing everything to  their  spiritual aspira­ tions.   Apart  from   philosophy,  the   two authors differ  markedly in aim  and  style. Grove,   always   the   didact,  presents    a mirthless exercise in metaphysics; while Cabell, more  interested in fantasy  than reality,  is happier to entertain than  to instruct.
Finally,  we  must   recognize   that   the theme  of tragic  dualism is not  limited  to "The Canyon" but  is  present in  almost all   of   Grove's  work.   The  conflict    of spiritual and  carnal desire is at the centre of Grove's metaphysical vision. "The Can­ yon" expresses  this vision in Grove's most explicit   terms   and  therefore  illuminates more subtle  and skilful novels like Settlers of the  Marsh  and The  Yoke  of Life.  In the  former  work,  Niels Lindstedt's spirit­ ual aspirations are  undermined by carnal desire   which   finds   its  object   in   Clara Vogel. By murdering Clara, Niels liberates himself  to  pursue the  Idea of  perfection symbolized   by  Ellen  Amundsen. In  The Yoke   of  Life,  Len   Sterner  and   Lydia Hausman  commit  suicide   because,   like Harold Tracy, Len  cannot reconcile  lust for Lydia  with  his need  for  her as a sym­ bol  of  the  ideal.  He  seeks  in  death  the higher state  of being  which  his spirit  can­  not  attain while  housed  in  the  flesh.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Both  these  novels  are  elucidated by a study   of  "The  Canyon," where   Grove depicts most clearly  man's tragic  paradox. Harold and  Frances consist  of both  mat­ ter  and  spirit; they  are  both  human  and  divine.  As  human  beings,  they  need  the fulfillment   that    this   world    offers;    as spiritual  beings,   they  crave   eternal  life through the pursuit of unattainable ideals. As poet  and  goddess they  cannot live to­ gether, but  as man and  woman  they can­  not  live apart. Frances Montcrieff sacri­ fices carnal existence in favour of spiritual aspirations.  Through  her   action,   Grove asserts  that  man's primary motivation is a desire for perfection. As Harold's poetic rebirth   indicates,  Grove   believes  man's tragic  fate  is to struggle everlastingly for the ideal.

NOTES

1 Frederick Philip Grove (New  York: Twayne,
1973), p. 96.
2   F.  P.  Grove, "The  Canyon,"  Unpublished
 Typescript,   Grove   Collection,   Elizabeth
Dafoe Library, University of  Manitoba.
3  Stobie, p. 95·
4  See Desmond Pacey,  ed.  The  Letters  of Frederick  Philip  Grove  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto Press,  1976), pp.  57,  308; and an unpublished poem,   "Questions Reasked" (Grove Collection), which  begins:
What are  we?  Whence? and  whither are we  bound?
0 questions answerless which  still we pose
As  Plato  posed   them    who   could    more
deeply  sound
Such  problems than whoever went  or goes.
5   Plato, Five Dialogues  Bearing  on Poetic  In­ spiration    (Ion,   Symposium, The    Meno, Phaedo,  Phaedrus)   ( 1910; rpt.   London: J. M.  Dent &  Sons   Ltd.  "Everyman's  Li­
brary," 1924). I wish  to  acknowledge the
kind  co-operation of  Mr. A.  L.  Grove who
allowed   me  to  inspect  his  father's  library.
6   F.  P. Grove, It  Needs to be Said  (Toronto: Macmillan,  1929),  pp.   150-53. Cf.   F. P. Grove, In  Search  of Myself  (1946; rpt. To­ ronto, NCL, 1974), pp.  230-31.
7  When Grove submitted "The Canyon" to Ryerson Press  in  1926, his  suggested  alter­ native  titles    were    "Frances   Montcrieff,"





Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current  list)

NOVENA TO  ST. JUDE THADDEUS, by M. Lakshmi Gill, $5.00
MOVING INLAND, by Diana Hayes,  $4.00
A SPLIT IN  THE WATER, by Candice  James,  $5.00
ON  THE BROKEN MOUNTAIN, by Norman Newton, $3.00
SYNTAX OF  FERMENT, by Liliane  Welch,  $4.50
COUNTRYSIDE CANADA, by James  Wreford,  $5.00

Order   from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English  Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3

(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED  ON  REQUEST)



I47

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



"The Unending Quest," and   "The Poet's Dream,"  (Grove to  Pierce, April  8,  1926). Grove's use of the  word  "dream" in  the suggested   title    is   ironic.  In   the    novel, "dream" refers   to  the  Idea of  beauty after which   Harold strives in  poetry. In the  sug­ gested  title, Grove  also  uses the  word  in  its strict Platonic sense.  In  the  Republic, Plato says:   "Consider: is  not  to  dream  just  this,  whether a  man   be  asleep  or  awake, to  Inis­ take  the  image   for  the  reality?" In  mistak­ ing  Frances (the image  of  beauty)  for  the reality  (the  Idea of  Beauty),  Harold  was dreaming.
8  This is  one  of  the  phrases that  Grove  bor­ rowed. Cabell writes  that  humanity is  hood­ winked  by  the   dynainic  illusion  known   as love,  "in order that humanity  may  endure, and  the  groans of a lover  be  perpetuated in the   wails  of  an   infant...."  James  Branch Cabell,  Beyond   Life   (New   York:  R.   M.  McBride, 1920), p.  76.
9  Ibid., p.  77.
 politici ns,
eyes  and ears  of  those  around  them, and   it  is significant that  Stursberg's earlier garlands of tape   recordings  about  Diefenbaker  were   also more   interesting  than  what  Diefenbaker had to  say  about  himself.

**  LEOPOLD INFELD.  Why I  Left Canada, translated by Helen lnfeld. MeGill-Queen's University  Press,  $16.95. Leopold  Infeld  was a  Polish  physicist who  left  his country between the   World  Wars, collaborated  with   Einstein at Princeton and in  1938   joined  the  Univer­ sity  of  Toronto. At  the   war's   end  lnfeld wel­  comed  the   establishment  of   socialism  in   his country   (though  he   was   far   from    being    a Stalinist Communist), and  in  1950  went  there for   a  summer of  teaching,  to  be  deprived  of his  Canadian  passport.  lnfeld never   returned. Much of  Why I  Left  Canada  is  a  description of  the  incidents that  led  to  his  exclusion. The rest   of   the   book,  translated  from   the   Polish  original,  consists  of   reminiscent  essays   about

1o  Edward  J.  O'Brien,  ed.,
Stories  of 1919   (Boston:
1920), p.  120.
 The   Best  Short
Small, Maynard,

HENRY  MAKOW
 people -Einstein and  Niels  Bohr,  Max  Planck and     (this   piece     written   with     unexpected venom) Oppenheimer. Infeld lived through interesting times,  knew   interesting  people, yet he   communicates little  of   the   excitement  of such   experiences, and  one  suspects that  his evident  self-absorption  made  it   difficult  for

ON THE VERGE

***   PETER   STURSBERG.  Lester  Pearson  and the    Dream    of    Unity.  Doubleday,   $17.95· Lester  Pearson  and  the  Dream  of Unity is  a rather superior example of  what   not  long  ago we called  a "non-book." Peter Stursberg has followed the  method Barry  Broadfoot gave its Canadian celebrity by consulting a  great  com­ pany   of  witnesses  to  the   past,   and   trimming and  sewing  their statements into  a  book.  This, he  tells   us,  is  the   first   part   of  a  two-volume work;  the  second   volume  will  deal  with   Pear­ son   in    terms    of   his   relationship    with    the United   States  and   the   United  Nations.  In other  words, a  somewhat artificial  division   is made between  the   Canadian  Pearson  (whose internal policies  are  still  haunting us with  their ineptitude)     and    the    international   Pearson whom   on  the  whole   we  regret  because of  the parochialism of  his  successors. What, I  think, makes  for  the  appearance of vigour in  Lester Pearson and the  Dream  of Unity  is the  broken and  varied and   often   rough   texture produced by   the    technique   of   tape-recorder   mosaic, which  is  particularly  stimulating to  a  reader who has been subjected to the characterless blandness  of   Pearson's  own   memoirs.  Most

q8
 him  to  tap  the  real  essence of other men's  per­ sonalities. Why I  left  Canada  is  mainly  inter­ esting  for   its   documentation  of   a   piece    of witch hunting that shows  clearly the  influence of  McCarthyism on  Canadian  policies.

"'*  JOHN   A.    B.  Me LEIS H.  A   Canadian    for All   Seasons:    The    John   E.   Robbins    Story. Lester &  Orpen,  $14.95· The  title   is  not   the only   uninspired  aspect  of   this   biography  of John E.  Robbins, a  notable figure  in  the  great transformation of the  Canadian cultural and educational  world. But   there is  more   to  biog­ raphy than facts. There is the establishment of a  man's  personality, and  personalities are   de­  fined   by  shadows as   much   as  by  highlights. There  is  no   doubt   that, as  McLeish  so  en­  thusiastically   demonstrates,  Robbins  was  one  of  Canada's  eagerest  beavers. But   was   he  so entirely flawless? Did  he always  do the  RIGHT THING? Was  everything he  did  equally  inter­ esting, equally  estimable? Did   he  walk   with­ out   a  shadow?  McLeish evidently  believes   all of  this,  but  his  readers will  not.  Robbins had  his  defects and   it  is  no  service  to  his  reputa­ tion  to pass  them  blandly over. Nor  is it  honest biography.
o.w.
