$7so per copy


CANADIAN
liTERATURE N°·94
Autumn, 1982

STORIES, TJILES, & SKETCHES FROM LIFE
Articles
BY  JOHN .F. TI NKLER, DARLENE KELLY, LA C REL  BOONE, ANTHONY JOli N HARDING, A I.LAN PRITCHARD
Drawings
RY ISAAC BICKERSTAFF
Poems
BY  J t 'DITH  HAR\VAY, LF.N  GASPARINI, BP  NICHOL, :\tiLTON ACORN,
:\fARY RAZZELL, :\llCHAEL ::\!!ROLLA, G\\'LADYS DOWNES
Reviews
BY  :\-IICHAEL DARLING, JOHN F.  HCLCOOP, PETER MITCHAM, NEIL BESNF.R,
:\IICHF.LLF. GAOPAlLLE, JA::\IES DOYLE, R. II. R A:\[SAY , HRY AN  N. S. GOOCH, RICH ARD C. DAVIS, CAROLF. GERSON, ANDREW BROOKS, BRCCE PIRIE, ROBERT LECKF.R, ESTELLE DAN SER F.Al.." , HANS R . Rl'NTE,  K. P. STICH, DAVID O'ROl'RKE, LORRAINE MC  Mt;LLEN , CARL  BERGER,  PEGGY NIGHTI NGALE, LISE ROCHETTE, LINDA SROHET, DAVID \•VATMOUGH, GEORGE WOODCOCK, LINDA ROGERS
Opinions and Notes
BY :F. H . WHITMAN, EVA-MARIE  KROLLF.R, D . \\·. Rl 'SSF.LL, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, K EITH HARRISON
A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW


e it11rial 	




TELLING TALES






I  HAVE  BEEN   MEANING   FOR    SOME  TIME   to  say  something about  the short story, and to draw attention  to the useful series of reprints  which for several years now the Books for Libraries  Press has been publishing  in  Free­ port, New York. There are at least fifteen Canadian short story texts in the series. Though   reading  through   them  by  themselves  charts  only  a  selective  map  of Canadian short story history, it nonetheless proves instructive.  For there emerges a glimpse of an unofficial canon of writers, a canon  that  needs questioning  if we are adequately  to reread and re-evaluate works from the past.
There  are  two anthologies  among  the  fifteen  reprints,  which serve as a  con­ venient  guide to what  I mean  by "canon." Raymond Knister's  Canadian  Short Stories (I 928)  -gathering Denison, Duncan, Parker,  Pickthall, Thomson, Rob­ erts, de la Roche,  Scott, and  (more  surprisingly)   Leslie McFarlane,  who  went on  to  become  more  famous  as the  Ghost  of the  Hardy  Boys-celebrates the "realistic" as it  was "emerging  from  the  imitative  stage," a  view of the  times which  has  nudged  its  way  into  critical  dogma.  The   other,   May  Lamberton Becker's Golden  Tales  of  Canada  ( 1938), more  openly  reveals its  bias, which makes it easier to  put  down : "The charm  of  Canadian literature," the  editor writes, "... is largely  due  to its romantic  reassurance  that  in  an  over-crowded world,  wide and  wonderful  spaces  yet  remain." Moreover,  the  "stories  in  this collection, like those in the five original anthologies  that  have  preceded  it, bring back an America  that  has ceased to be." In  an age wanting  realism, cosmopoli­ tanism, and  national  character, neither the attributes of "charm" and  "romantic reassurance"  nor  the  backswing  compliment   of  being  a  "region" of  America were likely to take critical root. Yet clearly the interpretation involves a question of perspective, for the list of contributors to Becker's anthology  is familiar: Deni­ son, Duncan, Parker, Pickthall,  Thomson,  Grey  Owl,  Connor,  and  others. The "others"  (Leacock,  Haliburton, Hernon,  Richardson,  McClung, Beames,  and Sime)  scarcely alter the flavour-a flavour which Becker characterizes  as Tory, Scottish, and influenced by "the  manse." Jessie Sime, fascinated  by Irish Catholic

2

EDITORIAL


Montreal, is a writer worth investigating a little, but the "story" from Richardson is merely a chunk  from Wacousta, and  the "story"  by John  Beames a bit from his novel Army without Banners, a tonally uneven tribute  to the  English contri­ bution  to Saskatchewan  settlement.  For editor Becker a "Golden Tale" seems to have  meant  an  excerptable anecdote.  But  "anecdote,"  "sketch,"  "tale," and "short  story" do not all mean  the same thing, and a careful  reading of the short fiction of the  tum  of  the  century  shows that  writers  were  experimenting  with form as much  as with romantic  charm  or national  persuasion.
It  is this continuum between  form  and  political  impulse  that  the  Books for Libraries  reprints  (of volumes by Thomson, Scott, Parker,  Barr,  Allen, Roberts, Grenfell, Hickman, and de Ia Roche)  reveal. E. W. Thomson's Old Man Savarin Stories, in  its  I9I7 form  (that  is, with  the addition  of some late  stories to  the
I 895 edition), is the  most anecdotal,  full of artificial dialect  and  high  political principle.  '"Dey's fight  like dat  for  more  as four  hours,"' says one  character. "'God be praised, I die in British waters!'" breathes another. A third,  reminding us of the reality  we are expected  to find in an internal  tale,  declares, "I myself had  shuddered   and  grown  cold, so strongly  had  my  imagination  realized  the awful experience  that  Petherick  described. At length  he resumed  his story...." Today  we might  balk  at  both  the elevated  tone  and  the sense of exaggeration that  derives from  the inverted  syntax,  but  the "value" of these stories lies else­ where than  in technique. They  are works which assert the validity of  neighbour­ liness, the  capacity  to overcome  temptation, and  the existence of  justice. Irony for  the early  Thomson  did  not declare  a cynicism about  life;  it  reinforced  the values of a time. But it could  do little in practice  about  public  behaviour,  and the later  stories-"Boss of the World"  and  "Miss  Minnely's  Management"­ alter in tone, observe satirically such matters as urban  political  manoeuvres  and business ethics, and  perhaps  therefore appeal  more to the modem  reader, who is more  likely to  find  them  "shrewd" and  the  early  sketches  "sentimental." For Thomson,  one suspects, it wasn't  shrewdness at all, but disappointment.
Thomson's set of beliefs has its parallel in works by C. G. D. Roberts,  Gilbert
Parker,  and  Wilfred Thomason Grenfell;  his disappointment, a parallel in D. C. Scott's  The  Witching  of  Elspie (I 923), which remains  one of the finest  collec­ tions of early Canadian prose. Gathering  together loup-garou tales and  trading­  post narratives of psychological warfare, Scott's book carefully balances its respect for the idea of independence with its observation of the reality of  human pettiness and  tyranny.  Scott,  moreover,  manages  to convey  the  cadences of  vernacular  speech without  the  artificiality  of Thomsonian  dialect.  But for  Parker,  Roberts, and  Grenfell,  something  other  than  "tyranny" or  political  tension  is true  and real:  an  amalgam  of duty,  love of Woman,  death,  justice, and  faith-mostly faith,  which  in  their  writings  tends  to  override  both  human   discomfort  and literary  form.  With  Grenfell  it takes its most  obvious and  least  effective shape.

3

EDITORIAL

Yet such  a code appealed  in its day, and  will still appeal  to those for  whom  it reinforces  a  particular moral  set. Henry  Van  Dyke,  who  introduces  Grenfell's
0If the Rocks  (I 906), avers:  "you who feel that  religion is just as real as Nature,
just as real as humanity,  and that  brave adventures may be achieved in the name of Christ,-this book is for you. This is the real thing." But as with the tales of Down  North  on the  Labrador  ( 19I I) and  Labrador  Days:  Tales  of the  Sea Toilers  (I 919) , there is such elevation of suffering in the life-stories Grenfell tells that  the effect is grotesque  rather  than  truthfully eloquent.  The  tales may  well be stories drawn  from life, as Grenfell declares-and the photographs of his own Labrador  travels, which he includes in his books, reiterate  Grenfell's veracity­ but  their  cumulative effect does not  heighten  a  reader's  awareness of  human  misfortune;  instead, it emphasizes Grenfell's  presence at the disasters he describes. The  narrator intrudes  into the tale  just as much  as he does in Thomson's anec­ dotes, in other  words, but  with a twist : for it is less the  declared  selflessness of the narrator than  his undeclared  ego that  commands  a  contemporary reader's  attention.  The  difference  between  intention  and  effect  only stresses further   the flaws in  Grenfell's  artistry,  and  by  contrast  stresses again  the  achievement   of Scott, who as much  as Grenfell  accepted  moral  standards but  made  his readers come to  understand  them  through  art-using  his art  to  reveal life's values in the context of its daily uncertainties.
Sir Charles  G. D.  Roberts  was, of course, as aware  of life's ambivalences  as
Scott  was;  his  preface  to  Earth's  Enigmas   (I895), in  which  one  finds  such familiar  sketches as "Do  Seek Their  Meat  from  God,"  stresses just such  a  per­ ception. "Most  of the stories in this collection," he writes, "attempt to present one or another  of those problems of life or nature  to which, as it appears  to many of us,  there  is  no  adequate   solution  within  sight.  Others are  the  almost  literal transcript  of dreams.... The  rest are scenes from  that  simple life of tide-country with which my earlier years made me familiar." Combined  in theory,  therefore, are  his notions  about  real life, the life of the  imagination, and  the  appropriate means for  representing  such life in literature. Hence  Roberts'  failure  to  match Scott  derives not  from  his initial  perception  of life  but  from  his lesser skill in manipulating words;  whereas Scott pared his language  back and  revealed reality from inside his limiting  forms, Roberts  (like Parker  in this respect)  laid  reality on his characters and scenes externally, by adjectival statement. One  of Roberts' stories opens:  "He was a mean-looking  specimen,  this Simon  Gillsay, and  the Garnish  Camp  was not proud of him." One  of Parker's, from  An  Adventurer of the North  (I 896), begins in comparable  fashion, though  its crisp brevity gives it a certain  cachet: "He  was seven feet and  fat." Far  worse than  either  of these sentences are  those  which by intention  use their  adjectives  to elevate  the  effect or the moral tone of a passage but in fact  prove reductive  because the diction  is hackneyed or the comparisons forced. Hence Roberts :

4

EDITORIAL


Her hair, in color not far from that of the red ox, was rich and  abundant,  and lay in a coil so gracious that not even the tawdry millinery of her cheap "store" hat could make her head look  quite commonplace.

And Parker,  in excerpts from Pierre and His People ( I894)  : He was busy with the grim ledger of his life;
and  A Romany of the Snows  (I 896) :

"For heaven or hell, my girl," he cried, and they drove their horses on-on. Far behind upon a divide the flying hunters ... saw with hushed wonder and  awe a man and woman, dark and weird against the red light, ride madly into the flicking surf of fire.

The  point  is that  despite  these sentimentalizing  techniques,  both  Roberts and Parker  were aware  of the moral distinctions that  bedevil human  experience,  that mark it off from the kind of life governed by what Roberts calls "Natural Law"; and  implicitly  these  distinctions  call  human   judgments  into  question  as  well. Parker  goes so far  as to question  even human  institutions,  having  his  trickster character  Pretty  Pierre  champion  Conscience over Law.  But neither  Pierre  nor Roberts'  characters can escape the language  in which their authors  have trapped them.  In  order  to demonstrate their human  nobility, Roberts'  characters repeat­ edly  have  to discover  their  "slumbering  manhood" (adjective, noun).  Pierre's  frontier compatriots have to express their "keen discernment." And Pierre himself, the outsider  and  the centre of Parker's interconnected  "histories," is presumed  to appear  French  because he punctuates  his speech with "Enfin" and "Alors." The  adjectives  are  too much.  Alors is not  enough.  And  the  balance  between  heroic romance  and  real life falls apart.
Why,  then,   should   Parker,   Roberts,   and   Thomson   have  emerged   as  the "classic"  Canadian story-writers  of their  day?  The  answer  has,  I expect,  more to do  with  fashion  than  with  taste.  Commentators located  natural morality in Canadian Nature  and  found it good:  elevating their approval  of a stance  and  a place into an assertion of reality  (as Knister did)  or locating charm  and  reassur­ ance in it (as did May Becker).  Writers like Mazo de la Roche, in the truly awful stories of The  Sacred Bullock ( 1939), attempted to continue  the Parker tradition, and it is perhaps  not too far off the mark to find it continuing still, in an inverted  form,  in  Joyce  Carol  Oates'  world-weary  fascination  with  naivete  in  A  Senti­ mental  Education (Dutton, I 980). But  it  is worth  reminding   ourselves  that  fashion  has  to  do  with  time,  and  that  if in  the  present  we  might  be  seeking alternatives  to Parker  and  Roberts,  then  Parker  and  Roberts  wrote  as they  did in part because they in their day were seeking to be different from other traditions, too.
In this context it is worth  going back to Knister,  to ponder  his assertion  that
Pickthall  and  Leacock  show  in  their  work  that  they  were  born  in  England,


5

EDITORIAL

whereas Albert Hickman  is "Canadian through  and through." So completely has literary  history  buried  Hickman  that  one might  be forgiven  for  asking "Albert Who?"  Even Knister, after singling him out, does not include  him in his anthol­ ogy, and  it  is therefore  bracing  to  find  Hickman's volume  Canadian  Nights
( 1914), along with Robert  Barr's In a Steamer Chair  ( 1892)  and  Grant  Allen's An African  Millionaire  ( 1897), among the Books for Libraries  reprints. Reading Hickman, I am not clear what  Knister  meant  by his distinction.  Reading Hick­ man  beside Allen, Barr, and  Parker  & Co.,  however, offers glimpses of a  world of fashion  that  Parker  and  Roberts  rejected  as shallow,  a  world  given  to  wit rather  than  to  sentiment,  to  Style  rather   than   Pathos,  to  society  rather  than nature.  By opting  for nature,  the Parkers  of Canadian literature  felt  they were opting  for  reality. From  our  vantage  point  in the  198o's,  we can  see that  they simply opted for another  form of artifice. While they offered a way of legitimizing Canadian nature  in literature-and of developing  a literary  vernacular-they also established  a rural  illusion of Canada which  it has taken  many  decades  to shed. In  their  way, that  is, Knister  and  Becker were both  right.  By the time  of Knister  and  Callaghan, in fact, writers were trying  to pare sentiment  out of the laconic dialogues they found  characteristic  of Canadian speech;  the little-known Thomas  Murtha, whose 193o's  Short  Stories  have  recently  been  collected  and published  by the University of Ottawa Press, was one of these, though  he more often told experience  ("Irene was very happy")  than  realized  it. But the literary games of the 197o's, which were part  of the dismantling of the sentimental  tra­ dition  and  which have required  us to view artifice anew,  also allow us to return to Hickman  and Allen with a different eye and to find in them  not  ( dismissively, or "merely")  practitioners  of a "dated" international mode,  but  artificers  (ad­  mittedly flawed ones) of ironic and urbane  literary forms.
Barr is the least successful of the three,  but  even he could  pen  Wildean  con­ ceits. "'I am  glad to find that  I am  in the  majority,"' says one  character, dis­ cussing Howells, James,  and  Chutney,  "'even in the matter  of  ignorance."' But Barr's solemn comedies-romances between the naive and the articulate, games­ manship  among  the  low and  the  highborn -scarcely  reach  beyond  anecdote and  do not survive their time. Characters  called  Plodkins  and  Cupples  are  pre­ Leacockian  stereotypes, of the sort  that  Leacock  himself satirized.  And  a story like "The Man  Who Was Not on the Passenger List" -about  a man  killed on shipboard  and buried at sea, whose ghost keeps returning and requiring  reburying because he paid  the fare for a  WHOLE transatlantic trip -begins in suspense and  ends in banality.  Allen  and Hickman  could  both  manage  better  the  artful craft of literary silliness.
Hickman, for  example -and  perhaps  this  was the  quality  that  Knister  ac­ knowledged  in  him: a sensitivity to social  attitude that  could  express  itself in literary  nuance-wrote a story about  an architect  from  Ontario who on  a visit

6

EDITORIAL

to a Quebec  bar is disrespectful to Montreal,  and is promptly taken up to Mount Royal and made to apologize to all the institutions separately. In another story he drily observes that

In  North America there is a small hut delicately perfumed army of young ladies who have made it their business to start an aristocracy. For certain obscure reasons, including the lack of aristocrats to fill it with, they have failed; but, instead, they have what is called a plutocracy, which is the same thing from the inside, though from the outside it is quite different.

Still  other  stories,  certainly,  show  that   Hickman   was  capable   of  overwriting adventure, but  he was also magnificently  adept  at  indirect  satire;  one forgives a lot for a polished sentence like this one:

Miss McNab ... braced both feet against the sloping footboard and labored with her expression.

Hickman's stories are,  in other  words, about  politics and  manners  rather  than about  combat  in  nature, and  are  no less real for  that.  And  they  are  no  less unaffected   by  fashion -as  Hickman   himself  was  aware.  He  opens  his  story "Oriented," for example, this way:

This  is a  poor story, for it has no plot, and  all stories written  in  America are supposed to have a plot. Nothing else matters. This story has a girl and a man and a chief event.

The  language  of the  time tells us about  the social relations of the  time;  it also helps  to  distinguish  between  the  plotted  American  tale  and  the  fragmentary Canadian sketch  form,  which  Hickman  (like Scott,  and  like Leacock and  Cal­ laghan  and Hugh  Hood much later)  was making his own.
By contrast, Grant  Allen in An  African  Millionaire  was more attracted to the
tale and  was using it to reach a more international readership.  His book (which is also full of pungent  asides: a definition of "bigamy" as "occasional  marriage," or an observation  that  "two  things go to produce success -the  first is chance; the  second  is cheating")  is subtitled  "Episodes  in  the  Life  of  the  Illustrious Colonel  Clay."  It tells of the  escapades  and  final capture  of a  Robin  Hoodish character  with  an  India-rubber face, an elusive name  and  nationality, the  pro­ fession of  wax-figure  maker,  and  the  skills of a  con-man-whom the  crowd loves and   the  narrator  deplores.  Over   the  series of  linked  adventures,  what emerges  is a  revelation  of the  "honest" narrator's shady  morality,  which  it  is tempting  to  read  as parable; using the  familiar  convention  of the  honest  con­ man,  Allen  reports  on  the  connection  between  South  Mrican  economics  and European  politics,  and   more  particularly   on  the  inability   (or  the  failure)   of ordinary  public power to contend  with multi-national enterprises. Allen writes to entertain  rather than  to preach,  but  he pens a clear message anyway, a message of some literary  facility  and  some  political sophistication.  If  he is not  a  great

7

EDITORIAL

writer,  he is at least as good as many  who are  now  known  better. But  he was an expatriate, and   his  mannered  message  was  one  which   post-Victorian Canada would  either  dismiss as formal  contrivance, or find irrelevant to the  new  century and  the  growing  nation, or ignore.
It seems one  cannot overestimate the  impact of the  new  nationalism and  the
First World  War  upon  the direction Canadian literature took in the early  decades of this  century. As Elizabeth Spencer  observes  about two  of  her  characters, in one of the rare  Montreal stories in The  Stories of Elizabeth  Spencer  (Doubleday, a collection  of works written  betweenI 944  andI 977)  : "The man  and  his wife
... seemed,  above  everything else,  concerned  with  their  own   relevance  to  the
world  they  lived  in."  Enquiring into  the  relevance of  the  world  to  them  seems beyond  their  capacity to imagine, and  it is just such  a closure of mind  that  literary and   political   isolationism   begets.  Perhaps it  is  the  fate  of  every  generation to presume that  cultural sophistication is the  achievement of its own  day.  Glimpses of  the  international  connections that  stimulated (and  perhaps also  threatened) Canadian life at the turn  of the century  suggest, however, how  much  was cut off by  the  exigencies  of  the  war  in  I914  and  by  the  subsequent determination  to forget  what  led  to war,  and  therefore how  much  in  the  way  of political, social, and  cultural connection with  the  rest of the  world  had  to  be started anew  after
I 945· A true  cosmopolitanism is not  something Canada  has  yet  acquired. And a  lot  of  the  old  connections, with  their  attendant biases,  have   persisted  in  the society,  unrestrained. To  look  back  carefully   at  the   writings  and   the  urbane culture of tum-of-the-century Canada, however,  is to see how  lively the  culture actually was, to reassess the literary judgments that have shaped our  picture of it, and  to  appreciate once  again   how  important the  satiric   voice  is in  shaping a
politically  astute  and  culturally informed society.
W.H.N.




B:21TS



At night the orchard  shook with bats in flight, tight-ropes of sound strung tree to tree. Between the leaves
their whine evaporated  to gnat hwn
and  toad antiphony.  On  the way home, crushing apples underfoot, you'd pause and listen for the gypsy moths,
for fish teeth clicking, ants among  the roots. We heard, we did not hear.
 

Judith Harway


8

POEM

One  night  a dark  wing grazed  your cheek, aware of your shape,  where  you stood.
I would  transcribe that  sonar,
sing  your  face,  or  trace  the  route  we followed home  those  nights.  Instead I write
an  alphabet of wings-the first word,
Dusk, spelled  out  by flights of geese-to say
I think  of you when  tense wires coil in silence, when the  bats  hang  sated,  upside down,  and  sleep.








ON DOSTOEVSKY'S  "NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND"

Len Gasparini

Sometimes I too feel like a character
in a nineteenth-century Russian  novel-

one of those  morose, solitary  characters given  to boredom and  low debauchery,

for  whom  life is as meaningless  and  grim as this planet that  moves in its doom-

starred course  like a  bomb  through  space. Then I consider the  unreal  but  egotistic

roles we play  to survive  among  our  kind, and  in  the  consciousness  of my despair

know  that  twice  two will always equal  four, because  everything is a necessary lie.








9

CANADIAN  CULTURAL NORMS
& AUSTRALIAN  SOCIAL RULES

Susanna Moodie's ((Roughing it in the Bush" and Marcus Clarke's "His Natural Life"



John F. Tinkler




ROUGHING rr IN THE BUSH and  Hi< Natuml  Life are  di,_ similar in a number of immediately striking ways. The first is the autobiographical account  of a British gentlewoman's  attempt   to come  to terms  with  a  "rough" farming  life in the Upper  Canadian bush;  the second is a fictional record  of the convict system in Eastern  Australia, in which  the innocent  protagonist,  Richard Devine,  is arrested  in  Britain  and  transported  under  the  name  Rufus  Dawes, finally escapes imprisonment  to  re-emerge  as  a  storekeeper   (now  named  Tom Crosbie)  in the gold rushes, and returns at the end of the novel to England  and his rightful  inheritance.1  Yet both  works first  appeared within  twenty  years of each  other  in  the  middle  of the  nineteenth   century,   both  concern  themselves largely  with  theI 83o's  in  each  country,  both  deal  with  the  phenomenon   of British colonial settlement, and  both have proved successful and  enduring  works in their  respective  cultures. These similarities  between  the  cultural   positions  of the two books make the differences between them significant.
This  paper  will attempt  to  understand  some  dissimilarities  between  the  two
books by showing how they display different  patterns  of cultural  sensibility in nineteenth-century Canada and Australia.  In  particular, I will argue  that Cana­ dian literature of the  period displays a commitment to the notion of  cultivation, and  to  the  implementation of cultural  norms  as a  way  of  achieving  progress, whereas  Australian   literature   demonstrates   a  national  tendency   to  rationalise activity  by creating  social rules and  institutions.  To  avoid  drawing   too  much significance from the merely personal eccentricities  of  each  writer,  I also consult other  works from  each  culture -most  notably  Alexander  Harris'  Settlers  and Convicts (for Australia), William Dunlop's Statistical Sketches of Upper Canada, and  Catharine Parr  Traill's  The  Backwoods  of Canada, all works which  have stood the test of time, if only in a minor  way, and  which  were either  published in theI 83o's or deal with that period.2

IO

MOODIE & CLARKE

The  obvious  place  to begin a comparison  of Moodie's  and  Clarke's  books is their  titles. The  title  of  Moodie's  book does not  contain  an  irony so much  as express an  underlying  faith: "roughing  it"  is a  polite  vulgarism,  an  expression specifically derived  from  the vocabulary  and  values of the "smooth" life which it implies as the norm.  To "rough  it" is to take a  pastoral  break, like the Duke and  his entourage in the  Forest of Arden,  without  losing one's sense of the  dis­ tinctions  between  "rough" and  "smooth," without  relinquishing  the  verbal  dis­ criminations  and  mental  structure  of one's smoother origins.3  Mrs. Moodie is not quite  in a class with Shakespeare's  Duke, but so firm is her commitment  to the distinctions of her inherited  culture that her initial responses to Canada are naive and far too schematic. She glows at the Canadian landscape  with a sense of the Edenic  potential  of  pastoral :  "Cradled in  the  arms  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and basking  in  the  bright  rays of the  morning  sun,  the  island  and  its sister group looked like a second  Eden  just emerged from the waters of  chaos";  and  glowers at fallen  man  with  a dear-sighted sense of his corruption:  "here,  as elsewhere, man  has marred  the  magnificent  creation  of his Maker." As a  woman  enlight­ ened by Christianity's saving faith in the virtues of order, her endeavour  becomes, rather  like that  of the  Duke's  entourage,  to carry  purified  courtly  manners,  or their  nineteenth-century genteel equivalent,  into  the wilderness.
From  a  philosophic  point  of view, the  most interesting  aspect  of  her  initial
attitude  to the new colony lies in her imported  conviction of man's  natural evil: "You  would  think  they were incarnate  devils, singing, drinking,  dancing, shout­ ing, and  cutting  capers  that  would surprise the leader  of a circus. They  have no shame -are  under  no  restraint -nobody  knows  them  here,  and  they  think they can speak  and  act  as they please." Natural  man,  with  "no shame,"  is not for  Mrs. Moodie,  and  her  book becomes a monument  to the  power of culture. On  all levels, culture,  the  taming  of the wilderness, provides  the  premise  upon which  her  view of the  world is built. On  the subject  of the  equality  of classes, she is firm to Mrs. D-- about the importance  of cultivation through education : "There is no difference  in the flesh and blood;  but education makes a difference in the mind and  manners,  and till these can assimilate, it is better to keep apart." Mr. Malcolm strains her faith in cultivation, but she remains firm in her commit­ ment to the values of gentlemanly education: "A dirtier or more slovenly creature  never before was dignified by the title of a gentleman.  He was, however, a man of good education, of excellent  abilities...."  This  faith  in  the  need  for  social culture  in man  is repeated  in  the broader  context of the Moodies' relations  with the natural environment. The structural skeleton of the book is her record of the family's  attempt to  restrain,  put  in order,  cultivate  the  bush, and  it is for  this purpose of agricultural cultivation  that they have come to Canada. Culture,  both of the  physical  environment and  of the social man,  is a  dominant   theme  and faith of  Moodie's narrative.


I I

MOODIE & CLARKE

The obvious contrast  evoked by Moodie's and  Clarke's  titles is that  between  a civilized woman  "roughing it" in the bush, and  a writer  who  plunges into  "na­ tural life" unequivocally. But, interestingly, Clarke's view of "natural life" appears  initially as pessimistic as Moodie's:  "We  must treat  brutes like brutes," remarks Maurice  Frere of his fellow men  (m, v).  Clarke's  natural men are animals,  and even, in the  case of the convict Gabbett, cannibalistic. What  is different  about Clarke's attitude  is that  he dwells on and pessimistically exaggerates the condition of brutishness, while Moodie avoids it or attempts to civilize it.
But Clarke's title is ironically misleading, and the fact of this irony provides an important contrast with Moodie's title. Moodie's title belongs to the vocabulary of a  particular  class and  mental  outlook, and  indicates  a  refusal  to relinquish  the distinctions  between  "rough" and  smooth"  even  while  living  in  the  rough.  As Carl  F. Klinck  comments of Moodie and  Traill,  "a defence  could  be set up  by use of  stock  words  with  inflexible  interpretations, or  surrender  could  be  an­ nounced  by a change  of idiom  with  the  risk of unpredictable responses,"4   and Moodie, with no intention  of surrendering,  tends to want  her vocabulary  unam­  biguous. Her response to the custom of "borrowing" is so violent, and so lengthy, partly because her neighbours  use the word in a way that  confuses its meaning: "As you never  repay  us for  what  you pretend  to  borrow,  I  look  upon  it  as a system of robbery.... If you would come honestly to me and  say, 'I want  these things, I am too poor to buy them myself, and  would  be obliged  to you to give them to me,' I should  then acknowledge you as a common  beggar, and  treat  you accordingly."  Her sensitivity to language  is acute: she abominates swearing,  she reproduces dialect  with an extraordinarily  keen ear, she is enormously  conscious of  the  titles  people  use in  addressing  each  other-and  this  sensitivity  to  the diversity of linguistic  phenomena  indicates a strong sense of the inherited  norms of language.
Moodie's  desire to  maintain  an  unambiguous language  for social intercourse places her in direct contrast  with Clarke, whose title derives its impact  from  the complex set of ironies that  it initiates-ironies that  deprive  the  title  of stable meaning. The  most immediate  irony is the one literalized  by the longer title given to the  novel after  its author's death:  For the  Term of his Natural  Life.  The "natural life" of the title really refers to the most complete and intrusive of social controls:  penal  servitude  for  life. Rufus  Dawes,  as a  convict,  is made  into  an epitome of the unaccommodated nature of poor, bare, forked animals, and is maintained in that state by an unremitting  institutional surveillance.  His brutish­ ness is in  fact  unnatural and  socially enforced,  the  result  of  the  guards'  para­  doxical conviction that  men taken in charge by society's law are animals.  Dawes the animal  plunges to the depths of misanthropy, as Gabbett  resorts to cannibal­  ism, but this is not the nature  of man so much as the nature of social man caught  up in the  paradox  of penality that  Clarke  evokes:  at  the heart  of social control

12

MOODIE & CLARKE


and surveillance is enshrined  a simultaneously unnatural and anti-social ostracism and  isolation.  "Rufus Dawes  came  back  to  his prison  with  the  hatred  of  his kind,"  Clarke  tells us, "that his prison  had  bred  in  him"  ( rv, xii).  Marooned with a small group  of people at  Hell's Gates, Dawes is placed  in a true state of nature  rather  than  a state  of institutionally  controlled  brutishness,  and  he there displays a  positive social altruism.  It  is one of Clarke's  piquant   ironies that  in this  "semi-savage  state," Dawes shakes off  his enforced  Hobbesian  brutishness and  regains the specifically social title of '"Mr' Dawes"  ( m, xiii).
Clarke  points to a morally  positive natural  man, especially in the portraits  of "good  Mr. Dawes"  ( m, xvii)  and  the young Dora, but  Dawes is stripped  again of his title and Dora is fatally caught  up in the trammels of Frere's  machinations. Where Moodie believes in culture, Clarke's novel concentrates on the paradoxical symbiosis of brutish "nature" and excessive social control-with the determinant position  occupied  by social control.  The  positive conception  of natural man,  a man  unfettered  by social control, is consistently frustrated  by Clarke's  Australia: Dawes  has to  return  to  England  to  have  his natural  innocence  vindicated.  In the minds of Clarke's  government  officials, there  are only two alternatives: law in all its rigour, or else lawlessness; convicts restrained  in prison, or convicts rampaging  at large. Where  Moodie's attempt  is to cultivate  the wilderness of the backwoods, the issue for Clarke's Australian  officials is so much one of  institution­ ally  regulated   order  opposed  to  mere  chaos  that  they  formulate  a  theory  of
·Australia as a divinely appointed prison, a "Natural Penitentiary" (IV, xx), which
sets the  convicts and  their  environment in  a state of irreducibly  hostile contra­
diction and estrangement.

kE TRANSFERENCE   OF  VALUES  that  allows  the  Australian officials to see the natural environment  as a function  of man's  institutional arrangements, a conspirator  in  his social conflict, reveals a scale of values with
social order  placed well above nature  and  the soil. Later  Australian  writers  who have emphasized  the facts of the natural landscape  as primary  characteristics  of "Australianness" run  quite  contrary  to  the  Australian  cultural  tradition as  in­ herited  from  writers like Clarke.5   For Clarke, the landscape  is of relatively little interest beside the facts of the Australian  social condition. Clarke's Australia is a social rather  than  a natural entity, to such an extent that social distinctions come to appear, in  the  minds  of characters  like Frere,  as self-evident  as the  natural distinctions between animals and  human  beings. The social environment assumes the role and  importance that  might otherwise have been assumed  by the natural  environment.
InI 86g,  Patrick  Maloney  claimed  that  "In  Canada they  have a nation,  but no national  feeling. In  Australia  we have national  feeling in abundance, but  no

MOODIE & CLARKE

nation."6  In some ways, it appears  a true statement (and  very Australian), but we must  qualify  what  is meant  by "national feeling."  Although   Moodie  con­ cludes her book with a damning  warning  to prospective immigrants, she is more lyrical  about  Canada than  either  Clarke  or  Harris  about   Australia:   "British mothers of Canadian sons!" she exclaims, "teach  them to love Canada-to look upon her as the first, the happiest,  the most independent  country  in the world." Moodie never quite  relinquishes the idea of Canada as a  potential  second Eden, while Clarke  instinctively uses a range of infernal  images, including  the striking spectre of the  prison at "Hell's  Gates."
If there  is something  hollow in Moodie's  rhetorical  flights of national  fervour which would  justify Maloney's claim, it is their  abstraction, their  idealization  of a socio-political idea of which she understands  little. While  Moodie,  who "knew nothing,  heard  nothing of the political state of the country," is giving a rousing "Huzza for England! -May she claim  j Our  fond devotion ever" for the Cana­ dian  war  effort,  Clarke  is involved in examining  the  conflicts  and  tension  be­ tween predominantly unlovely government  officials and  the  rest of  the  predomi­ nantly  unlovely  population  that  the officials will not,  or  cannot,  leave  without supervision.  Clarke's  "national feeling"  is not  expressed  in  rhetorical  flights of nationalistic  fervour  and  optimism,  but  in  the  complexity  and  subtlety  with which  he is drawn  to examine  the  country's  internal  social  oppositions  and  di­ lemmas. The Australian flavour of Harris'  and Clarke's books is not their national optimism,  but  the  passion with  which  their  authors  find  themselves  forced  to examine  and  respond  to the  political  and  social  anomalies  of Australian  social life.
Moodie escapes from corrupt  customs officials at  Quebec  into  the  backwoods
to  cultivate   her  farm,  but  Clarke  insists that  the  regulatory   machine   of  the Australian  national  institution is inescapable, and  Harris  devotes a whole chapter to the "extensive  and  galling inconvenience  to which  the labouring class is sub­ ject''  because  of  the  Bushranging  Act,  whose  provisions  are  so extensive  that civilian settlers "have  commenced building  private lock-ups on their own farms."  The  distinction  that  our writers indicate  between  a pervasive Canadian  faith  in culture,  and a pervasive Australian  sense of social intrusion,  has implications  for the  way  they  present  the  social or  cultural   coherence  that  binds  each  nation together.
The  Canadian writers have a close involvement  with  nature  and  the soil that the Australians lack. Moodie lives in the bush and responds to nature  with lyrical fervour;  Catharine Traill  experiments  with  dyes from  native  plants,  names  the flowers and tries to save groves of the native trees; Dunlop  opens up new regions of the country  for cultivation,  and advises the new immigrant to "lose not a day in setting  to  work upon  your farm." But in  Australia,  Rufus  Dawes is kept  in prisons absurdly  imposed on the landscape; Harris  lops down  trees, not  for the

MOODIE & CLARKE

sake of clearing  the land  for cultivation,  but  merely in order  to remove timber from the surface of the land  and sell it for what he can get;  and  Harris' timber­ cutting  adventures find a striking  later  equivalent  in  Clarke's  diggers  who pick out  of the soil what  gold  they can get, transforming  pasture  land  into  "lines of white  tents ... surrounded on all sides by red  heaps, like molehills" where "ten thousand  cradles -sometimes six abreast -whirred,  hummed,  and  sung"  (VI, v).  The suggestion of a factory in Clarke's description of "ten  thousand cradles" is revealing. Where  the  Canadians think  in the terms of  cultivation  and  adap­  tation  natural to an  agricultural society, the  Australians'  dissociation  from  the soil has  all  the  marks  of an  advanced  industrial  society without  the  advanced industry.  In the extensive proliferation of Australia's  techniques  of social organi­ zation,  it  is typical  that  money,  the  archetypal  symbol  of socialization,  should assume enormous  importance.  Not  only is it assiduously dug  out  of the ground as gold, but Harris  ritually  adds up his financial profits with  evident satisfaction after  each  venture; Dawes  (now  Tom  Crosbie)  displays considerable  business acumen  in maximizing  his profits by establishing a store rather  than mining; and, throughout His Natural  Life, the thread  of the Devine  wealth  runs as the only sure line to salvation.  The Australian  alienation  from  the soil appears  to be not just a  negative function  of  the  peculiar  landscape,  whose flora  and  fauna  were destined to alienate a European mind, but also a positive result of the institutional  nature  of the country's settlement,  governed ultimately by the socially constituted imperatives of  money and  power.
The  reason for the difference between the two countries appears  too obvious in
our  writers:  Australia  transported a social institution,  while Canada imported  a set of cultural  values. The institution  was intensified in its new Australian  context, and  this produced  a distortion  of cultural  values. Meanwhile  the cultural  values imported  into Canada were retained,  though  the conditions  of Upper  Canadian life loosened  and  even  democratized  the  English social structure that  had  con­ tained  them,  producing  a kind of "universal  gentry."
One of Clarke's  more astute  perceptions is that  the prison officials he describes are  not  merely  gothic  monsters.  They  are  distinct  English  types  transported, intensified, and  distorted.  Mr.  Meekin is a clerical dandy  who would be innocu­ ous enough in a suitable English parish, but he is a positive evil when transplanted to Australia.  Of  the  Bible that  Meekin lends Dawes in  prison,  Clarke  remarks that  "All the material  horrors of Meekin's faith-stripped, by force of dissocia­ tion from  the context,  of all poetic feeling and  local colouring -were launched  at  the suffering  sinner  by Meekin's  ignorant  hand.  The  miserable  man,  seeking for consolation and peace, turned  over the leaves of the Bible only to find himself threatened  with  the  'pains  of Hell,'  'the  never-dying  worm,'  'the  unquenchable fire,' the bubbling  of brimstone, the 'bottomless pit,' ... (IV, xix). The  fact  that Dawes, the "suffering  sinner" in question, has already passed through  the  prison

MOODIE & CLARKE

at  "Hell's  Gates,"  transforms  Meekin's  clerical  inadequacy into  sanctimonious malice. The  delineation  of Frere  is masterful,  for  Clarke  establishes him  in  the first book not as a pathological sadist, but as a type of the "Old  English Gentle­ man"  who has always had  the potential  to be intensified  from  Fielding's  brutal  country squires into Clarke's sadistic tyrant.
Clarke's Australian  intensification of an English social model produces a strati­
fication of human  beings into two distinct  groups  separated by something  more than  English  class,  more  even  than   race -they  are  separated   by  zoological species. Frere's dictum  that "We must treat brutes like brutes" is a startling  index of the Australian  ruling-class mentality  which contrasts sharply  with the tolerant gentility that  pervades the Canadian writers. But the two Australian  species hold their  positions  because  of  each  other.  Michael   Wilding   has  commented   that "without  a  Dawes to persecute,  Frere  would  be lost ... and,  in  a terrible  way, the prisoners are  dependent  on him and  admire  the  authority he wields.m The relation between guards and convicts has something  of the dialectically symbiotic nature  that  Hegel  ascribed  to masters  and  slaves. This  mutual  dependence   of opposites is distinctive. John  Matthews  has shrewdly remarked  of Australian egalitarianism   that  it  "is  felt  to  be  necessary only  because  the  economic  con­ ditions  for  its attainment have  not  been  realised."8    The  ideology  of   equality springs dialectically  from  the  oppressive existence  of inequality.  To  the  extent that  Harris  espouses egalitarianism,  he does so not  as a  positive  creed,  but  in reaction  against  the inequality  of ruling-class institutions  and  power: "I always found  my betters so readily breaking  the laws of the land  when  they  imagined them to run counter to their own 'law of honour,'  that  I never found the slightest difficulty in my own particular  case about  making  the same exception  in favour of the law of nature." If Clarke's and  Harris' "national feeling"  is measured  by the extent of their response to social anomalies, in a country where social arrange­ ments and  institutions  take the  place of the  natural environment as a focus of concern, so it is the very fact of social opposition that gives Australia its coherence. Harris'  title is typical. He sees the country not in terms of a life-style Roughing  it in the Bush, or in The  Backwoods of Canada, but  in terms of a social polarity: Settlers and Convicts.
On  either  side of this social opposition,  desperate  attempts are  made  to stan­ dardize  behaviour: the settlers and guards  impose overwhelmingly  harsh  regula­ tions of control  as a way of establishing order  (and  protecting  their  positions) , while the convicts and  workers develop codes of mateship  and  egalitarianism  in their  own  defence. The  irony  of Australian  culture,  as its  writers  present  it,  is that  the  rage  for order  and  uniformity  produces  disorder  and  opposition.  The  unity that  develops is a unified field of oppositions and contradictions. This  habit of forming  conflicting interests between groups, each of which  develops its own regulations  and  language,  is typical of  predominantly  social man.  Michel  Fou-

MOODIE & CLARKE


cault  has remarked that, among the human sciences, "sociology  is fundamentally a study  of man  in terms  of rules and  conflicts :"

On  the projected  surface  of economics, man appears  as having  needs and  desires, as seeking to satisfy them, and  therefore as having interests, desiring profits, enter­ ing into opposition  with other men; in short, he appears  in an irreducible situation of conflict; he evades these conflicts, he escapes from them or succeeds in dominat­  ing them, in finding a solution that  will-on one level at least, and for a time - appease  their  contradictions; he establishes a  body of rules.9

As Harris points  out,  the  various  rules  in  Australia-laws "of  the  land," "of honour," and  "of  nature"-are subsumed  in the facts  of conflict.
In  Moodie's book,  Canada's relationship to Britain  is marked  by neither  such a slavish transportation of social systems as Clarke's Australia, nor  by such violent reactions against them. Cultivation is the keynote, and  it implies a specific attitude toward both  the  new  colony  and  its British  origins : cultural values are  imported by  Moodie and   adapted as tools  for  cultivating the  new  land.   Anna  Brownell Jameson commented of Toronto in  1837  that  "it  is a  young  place;  and  in  spite of this affectation of looking  back, instead  of looking  up, it must  advance,mo and Catharine Traill exclaimed that  "Canada is the  land  of  hope; here  everything is new;  everything going  forward; it is scarcely  possible for arts, sciences, agricul­ ture,  manufactures, to retrograde; they must keep advancing." Here  is not only a faith  in the  Canadian cultural soil, but  a sense of Canada advancing as a nation  by  developing  the   "arts,  sciences,  agriculture, manufactures"  inherited  from Britain. Canada  appears at  once  different from,   yet  compatible  with  Britain, diverging into  independence by developing in a  necessarily  different way from  a common basis. The country's parallel  yet  different  development gives it  a  claim to equality with  Britain: "But  oh !" declares  Moodie, "beware of drawing dis­ paraging contrasts between the colony and  its illustrious  parent."
The  second, and  related, keynote  of  the  Canadian writers  is independence: Moodie  praises  the  "happy independence enjoyed  in  this  highly-favoured land," while Traill talks  of the  "country where  independence is inseparable from indus­ try." The  independence of individuals is analogous to  the  independence  of  the country as  a  whole,  and   is  constituted by  a  sense  of  common  interest  that   is strong  enough to allow smaller  differences to be countenanced. Traill, Moodie, and Dunlop share a common faith  in cultivation, in a  broad  standard  of  gentility  or decency,  in  political stability allied  to Britain, though their  individual attitudes to smaller  matters may  be quite  different. When  Moodie  describes,  through Mr.  Malcolm, the  absurdities of a botanist, she is in part  poking  fun  at  her  botanist sister, Mrs. Traill. But these differences are  personal and, as Dunlop comments of religious  sects,  do  not,  or should  not,  intrude as conflicts  into  common  interest. "This blasphemous mixture of  political  and  religious  dogmas, however  it  may add  to the  numerical strength of any  sect, must  be  pernicious in the  extreme to

17

MOODIE & CLARKE

the true interests of Christianity," remarks Dunlop  with a typical dislike of divisive "sect" and a sure sense of "true  interests" that  would  not be possible in Clarke's divided and morally ambiguous world. Whereas the Australians become unified around  a common  field of conflicts, the Canadians have a sense of unified sensi­ bility sustained at the core of divergent personal interests. Thus,  when we talk of Australian  egalitarianism  and Canadian cultural  diversity, it may be necessary to qualify our terms; for at the core of Moodie's  Upper  Canadian diversity lies the need for a substantial  body of agreement, while Clarke's Australian  egalitarianism  functions  within  a field of oppositions and  inequalities. To  reverse the  received definitions of each country,  it is the inequality  and  conflict of Australian  society that  gives rise to the  philosophy of egalitarianism  in  Clarke's  novel;  while it is the  sense of a  basic  homogeneity  of Canadian  ideals  that   permits  Moodie  to tolerate the cultural  diversity engendered  by personal independence.




OvERALL, THE APPROPRIATE   MODEL  for  these  Canadian writers is not the social one of conflict and  rule, but  what  Foucault  defines as the biological model of function and norm, in which the physical facts of the environ­ ment  (soil, nature) play a central role in man's  adaptation to, and cultivation  of them:

It is upon the projected surface of biology that man appears as a being possessing functions-receiving  stimuli, ... reacting  to  them,  adapting   himself, evolving, submitting to the demands of an environment, corning to terms with the  modifi­ cations it imposes, seeking to erase imbalances, acting in accordance with regulari­ ties, having, in short, conditions of existence and the possibility of  finding average norms  of adjustment which permit him to perform his functions.11

This  model helps us to illustrate  how the Canadian writers,  in their  concern  to adapt  to and cultivate  the natural  environment, developed  a strictness of  norma­ tive values to accompany  their social flexibility. Moodie  sees herself in  terms of the gentry, and struggles to maintain  the values of gentility.  Her initial  response to Canada involves a shock at the loss of class distinctions,  and  she  never quite relinquishes  her sense of having  fallen in  Canada from  her  genteel  origins.  In her closing pages she remarks with some bitterness of Canada that  "to the poor, industrious  working  man  it  presents many  advantages; to the  poor  gentleman,  none!"  Her reluctance  to work on the farm  appears  to spring from a reluctance  to descend below the level of the gentry defined as a class whose members do not work with their hands. But, with the aid of some religious reflections, she survives the ordeal  of manual  labour  with her sense of values intact.  She begins to learn that her values of gentility can be adapted  and generalized  without  the attendant social relativity and  wealth of the gentry. There is a revealing  irony to the term

x8

MOODIE & CLARKE

"inferiors," and  a revealing emphasis on proper conduct  rather  than  on class in her remark  that  "The conduct  of many of the settlers, who considered  themselves gentlemen ... was often more reprehensible than that of the poor Irish emigrants.
. . . The  behaviour   of  these  young  men  drew  upon  them  the  severe  but   just censure of the poorer  class, whom they regarded in every way as their inferiors." Moodie begins to accommodate herself to a kind of universal  cultural  gentry on a reduced  social scale, as Dunlop  had  already  advised : "A  man  of fortune,  in my opinion,  ought  not  to come to Canada. It  is emphatically  'the  poor  man's country' ... though  the  necessaries and  most of the  luxuries of life are  cheaply and  easily procured."
Like Moodie, Dunlop  is aware that  Canada is not the country for the English gentry,  but  it is a country  where the  "poor  man"  can  acquire  the  "necessaries and most of the luxuries" of a kind of reduced or democratized  genteel indepen­ dence. Drawing  a contrast  between England  and  Canada in the way employers treat their servants, Moodie remarks that "In  Britain, for instance, they [servants] are too often dependent upon  the caprice of their employers for bread.... They are brought  up in the most servile fear of the higher classes," whereas "the  happy independence enjoyed in this highly-favoured land [Canada] is nowhere better illustrated  than  in the fact  that  no domestic can be treated  with cruelty  or inso­ lence by an  unbenevolent  or arrogant  master."  The  contrast  with  Clarke's  and Harris'  Australia  is striking: the  convicts who act  as servants  are  reduced  to a completeness  of literal  servility that  Moodie  does not  dream  of.  What  Moodie describes as "that common vice of English mistresses, to scold them for any slight omission," is transformed  in Australia into an imperiousness which inflicts physi­ cal  tortures   of  sometimes  gothic  dimensions,  leading  in  the  case  of  Clarke's unfortunate  Kirkland,  who  cannot   bear  to  hear  his  master  swear,  to  being whipped  to death.
If Clarke's  Australia  imported  and  intensified English social institutions  with a corresponding  intensification of class conflict, Moodie's tendency  was to import the values of a class and  then  to begin emptying  them  of their  class specificity. The distinctive demographic spread of Canada, with each settler on his own farm, implies an  extended  landed  gentry  which  contrasts sharply  with  the  Australian habit  of huddling  together  in the social monoliths of large  cities. This  extended gentry  (or gentility)  is socially paradoxical: its values are those of a distinct  and definite class, while their  universal applicability appears  to empty them  of the pejorative   and   divisive  implications   of  conflicting  class  interests.  The   values which,  in  Australia,  would  characterize  a  particular  class in  a state  of conflict become  in  Canada  universal  norms.  For  an  Australian,   this  phenomenon  is sinister and obscures real conflicts of interest, while for the Canadian writers it is an assurance of harmony  and  progress.

rg

MOODIE & CLARKE

The  comparison between  Moodie  and  Clarke reveals  differences between  the aspects  of  British  culture and  society  that   were  of  most  significance in  the  two colonies-a social  institution  in  Australia  versus  cultural  values   in  Canada. Clarke  sees Australia as developing from  an  imported social  institution of which stratification and  conflict  are the  key features. As his book progresses,  the  convict system  becomes   the  pattern for  later   historical   development. Thus,  when   the action  is brought forward in Book VI  to the  gold  rushes  of the  I85o's, patterns of social tension  are seen to be reproduced from  the convict  beginnings, even  though many  of  the  actors  of the  new  drama of the  gold  fields  are  recent  immigrants unacquainted with  the  convict  prisons.  The  diggers  of Book  VI,   "yellow  figures, bare-armed and  bearded" (VI, v), are yellow from  the soil, but  their  appearance immediately recalls  the  yellow uniforms of the  convicts,  and  the  opposition that develops  between  the diggers and  the  police, culminating in the  Eureka Stockade, is intended to be seen as repeating the  pattern of opposition between  the  convicts and  their  guards which  had  culminated in the  prisoners' riot  of July  I, I 846,  in Book v  (v, iv).
The  extent  to which  Clarke  intended to say that  the  convict  system established a national pattern is suggested  by the  way he revised  the  book.  When  he excised the  whole of Book VI,   he also withdrew the  earlier riot  chapter (the  only  chapter dealing  largely  with  convict  life withdrawn from  the  original Book v). The  only plausible  reason  for the  withdrawal of this chapter is that  Clarke had  set himself to explain in Book VI  a landmark of Australian history,  the  Eureka Stockade, by pointing to its reproduction of an  already  established pattern of opposition and unsuccessful  revolt.  When   he  removed   the  famous diggers'   rebellion,  he  also withdrew the  convict  riot on which  it was  patterned, thus  leaving  in  his revised version,  which is almost exclusively a record  of the convict  system, a starker model of oppression and social opposition.
Moodie, on the  other  hand, sees a social development that  is the  exact  reverse
of Australia's. In  the  revised introduction that she  wrote  for  Canadian reprints of her  book   in  I 87 I, she remarks that  her  compatriots "can lead  a  more  inde­ pendent social life than  in the  mother country."12  This  is not  to say that  there  is no method of social control  involved  in Moodie's vision.  Comparing the Canada of  I 87 I  with  the  country she  had  known  forty  years  before,  she  comments that  "its  aspect  is wholly  changed." What is not  changed are  her  values,  her  sense of cultural norms-and these norms  are  triumphant. The bond  that  she sees hold­  ing together the independent individuals of her world  is a commitment to cultural standards imported from  Britain, represented especially  by an  ideal  of education. "A  young  Canadian gentleman is as well educated as any  of his compeers across the  big water," she reports  proudly. She  witnesses the ideals  of the  British  gentry  taking   hold,  and  is able  to  record  with  satisfaction  that "the  farmer gradually became a wealthy  and  intelligent landowner ... and  was able  to send  his sons to

20

MOODIE & CLARKE


college  and  his daughters to  boarding school."  The  educational norm  is British genteel  culture, and  when she remarks, with an odd  phrase, that  "our print  shops are full of the  well-educated designs of native  artists," she  clearly  means  that  the native  artists  are  conforming to the  cultural standards of Europe. In  sum,  then, she  can  point  in I 87 I to the  social fulfilment  of an  inherited cultural ideal  that binds  together the socially  diverse and  independent individuals of her  world.
Normative values  usually  have a regulatory function. In  I 87 I, Moodie calls on her  compatriots to "unite in  carrying out  measures  proposed  by the  government for  the  good  of  the  country, irrespective of  self-interest   and   party   prejudice." Laying  aside  the  possibility  that  there  is any such  thing as an  abstract and  uni­ versal "good," a widespread cultural agreement about  normative standards of the "good" will produce the  relative  stability  that  was in fact  to  characterize  Cana­ dian  federal politics. Robert L. McDougall argues, especially on political grounds, that  "Mrs. Moodie's way,  was to become  the  Canadian way." The  power  of a common cultural ideal  to produce political  unity  is one aspect  of this "way." Of Moodie's later  Canadian book,  McDougall remarks that  "it  is no wild  fancy  to see in  Life  in  the  Clearings a  kind  of  prophecy."13  This  is no  blind,  Sybilline prophecy, but  a self-fulfilling one. The  regulatory function of  Moodie's cultural norms  is their  "prophetic" capacity, through widespread  assent, to realize  them­ selves  in  social  reality.  If Moodie's title  implies  a  mental  commitment to  the vocabulary of a "smooth" norm,  she sees her world in I 87 Igradually conforming to her norm : "The country is the same only in name.... The  rough  has become smooth, the  crooked  has been  made  straight, the forests have  been  converted into fruitful fields."  The institution that   Clarke  portrays   is  a  concrete  structure of social  reality  in  which  individuals are  enmeshed, willingly  or  not.  The   norms that   Moodie inherits  and   employs  to  cultivate  her  world   constitute a  mental structure to which  social  reality  is gradually brought to conform. Moodie's norms  are less concrete than the institutional regulations that  characterize Clarke's Aus­ tralia, but  they  are  no less definite  in origins and  outline. Significantly, the  regu­  lations  of Clarke's officials produce opposition  and  rebellion, whereas  the  genteel  norms  to which  Moodie gives expression invite  assent in conformity.

NOTES

1 Susanna  Moodie,  Roughing  it  in  the  Bush, ed.  Carl  F.  Klinck   (Toronto:   Mc­ Clelland & Stewart,  1962); Marcus Clarke, His Natural  Life, ed. Stephen  Murray­  Smith  (Harmondsworth: Penguin,  1970). There  are  two versions of  His  Natural Life,  the  original  version  which  was published  serially  between  1870  and  1872, and  a shorter  version,  revised by Clarke  for publication  as a  book in  1874.  The Penguin  edition  used  here  follows the  original  serial  version,  and  to  avoid  con­ fusions  book and  chapter   numbers  are  cited  with  all  references.  The  history  of Roughing  it's publication  is more confused. Early  versions of some of the sketches first appeared serially  in  1847,  while  the  complete  book  was first  published  in London  in 1852. Moodie made some further revisions for a later  Canadian edition

2I

MOODIE & CLARKE

of  I871.  Although the  McClelland & Stewart  edition is an  abridgement of  the edition  of  I852,  it is used here  because  of its general availability.
2   Alexander Harris, Settlers  and  Convicts, ed.  C.  M.  H.  Clark, 2nd  ed.   (London: Cambridge Univ. Press, I954); William  Dunlop, Statistical Sketches of Upper Canada, in  Tiger   Dunlop's Upper Canada, ed.  Carl   F.  Klinck   (Toronto:   Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, I967), pp. 63-I37; Catharine Parr  Traill, The  Backwoods of Canada, ed. Clara Thomas (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart,  I966). The  original dates  of publication of these works are,  respectively, I847,  r832, and  1836.
3  Washington's use of the expression  ( 1796)  cited  in OED bears  out  its connotations of a departure from  normal  experience: "Never having been  accustomed to shift or  rough  it"  (s.v.  "rough").
4   "Literary Activity  in  the  Canadas I8r2-I84I," in  Literary History  of Canada, ed. Carl  F. Klinck  et al., 2nd ed.  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I976), I,  I 57·
5 The social issues that concern  Clarke  are  quite  different from  the  journey  into  the interior landscape that   Patrick   White  places  at  the  centre of  his  modern  inter­ pretation of early  Australia in Voss  (I 957).
6  Quoted from  Australian Union, 2 ( r869)  by John Pengwerne Matthews, Tradition in Exile  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I962), pp.  4-5.  I  wish to  thank   Prof. Matthews for  his helpful  advice  during the  preparation of this  paper.
1 "Marcus Clarke: His  Natural Life,"  in  The  Australian Experience, ed.  W.  S. Ransom (Canberra:  Australian National University, 1974), p. 34·
8  Matthews, p. 23.
11   The Order  of Things, trans. Alan Sheridan-Smith (Random House, 1970), chapter ro, sections  III, V,  and  VI; rpt.  "The Human Sciences," in  The  Structuralists from Marx to Levi-Strauss, ed. Richard and  Fernande deGeorge  (New  York: Doubleday, r 972), pp. 259, 258.
10  Winter Studies and  Summer  Rambles in  Canada, ed.  Clara Thomas (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1965), p. 52.
11  Foucault, p. 258.
12  The introductory chapter of  r87r  is reprinted in  W. C. Bell's edition of  Roughing it in the  Bush  (Toronto: Bell and  Cockburn, 1913), pp. 3-15.
13  "Editor's Introduction," in  Life  in  the  Clearings, by Susanna Moodie, ed.  Robert
L. McDougall (Toronto:  Macmillan, I959), p. xx.





HOUR 17
5:35  to 6:35  p.m.

from «A  Book of Hours"



two freighters gliding  in the distance as if they would  finally meet & touch somewhere south  of here
in the grey blue haze of lake erie
 





bpNichol


22

POEM

the different planes & surfaces  become  unclear collision  course

feet in the crashing waves at  pelee's  tip sun in a haze above  me
hugeness  of the sky surrounds this i
the mind  beats against  the skin contains this brain
& only that  thin  shell of flesh & bone remains maintains this sundering

empty  it out empty  it out
only the wind  moving  in the tear  ducts
blowing  into  my open  mouth
my throat carries  this  noise & force  within it is consumed
blood  thrives  on  it all  thot  this animal  flesh contains thrives  on  it

gulls in clouds  above  & around
pelee island's  outline  over  the waves
so little  to say when  the birds scream  & the wind the world  is in voice around me


all  of  this
the  personal references
 


the  names

nothing more  than  shrill chatter
 
noise

reaching some day a final destination unintelligible vocabulary
history

earlier today
ellie & i at  southwold earthworks pacing the  perimeter
(Arthur's Table? Mayborough?)
no trace  of a maker  remains
these  monuments we raise, books we write, wind  up  in a lost tongue
finally  all  reference  vanishes

tho reason  points  out  the folly a voice is born  again

POEM

tho  the different purposes  & meanings remain unclear this voice is born  again

empty  it out empty  it out
i have  this dumb  shout  within  me a lifetime  cannot approximate
i have  this wish to write  the world  i can  never  realize stand  here 	mouth open


blown  away
 air  fills me

in the day  to day hugeness  of this hazy being

i can  never  take it all in

i have  this sentence i must finish i have  this poem  i must  write
the boats  steam  away
west towards  lake huron east  to lake  ontario
the planes & surfaces  foreshorten & change
bird  song &  wave  noise wind  & whistling  air





a presence  or a silence
 
in  the  midst  of there  is something

an absence  or the pressure  of



(leaving  southwold drove  west
paused  near  morpeth where  Lampman's buried
read  his lines inscribed  in the graveyard:

"Yet, patience-there shall  come
Many great  voices from  life's outer sea,
Hours of strange triumph, and  when  few men  heed, Murmurs & glimpses of eternity.")


THERE


THOMAS HALIBURTON & TRAVEL BOOKS ABOUT AMERICA


Darlene Kelly





LMAS HALIBURTON's OBSERVATIONs on   Brillih  tmvel commentaries  about  America  reward  examination  on several counts.  First, they are  valuable  historically,  recreating  for  the  modern  reader  a  phase  of  Anglo­ American  relations  when  these analyses of America  renewed  hostilities  between two  nations  recently  at  war.  Also, they  point  up  Haliburton's  interest  in  the format  of travel  writing itself and  his adaptation of it in books as diverse as the Account  of Nova Scotia, the Clockmaker  and Attache series, and other humorous works like The  Letter-Bag  of the Great Western, The  Old  judgeand  The  Season Ticket. They reveal as well two general features of  Haliburton's satire:  the objec­ tive appraisal  of all sides of a situation,  and  the didactic  personal  voice.
Studies  of America  written  by travelling  Britons never fail  to excite the  con­
tempt  of Haliburton's famous  character, Sam Slick. In  the first volume of The Clockmaker  (I 8g6), he bluntly states that the writers of these travelogues are no doubt   "ensigns  and  leftenants ... from  the  British  marchin   regiments  in  the Colonies, that  run over five thousand  miles of country  in five weeks, on leave of absence, and then return,  lookin as wise as the monkey that  had seen the world."1
In other  words they are superficial tourists who too quickly see little and  under­
stand less:

When   they  get  back  they  are  so chock  full  of knowledge of  the  Yankees,  that  it runs  over  of  itself,  like  a  hogshead of molasses rolled  about in  hot  weather-a white  froth and  scum  bubbles  out  of the  bung;  wishy washy  trash  they  call  tours, sketches,  travels,  letters,  and  what  not;  vapid  stuff,  jist sweet  enough  to catch  flies, cockroaches, and  half  fledged  galls. 2

In the second volume of The  Clockmaker  ( 1839), Sam  tells his Nova Scotian Boswell, "'I've read all the travels in America, and there ain't  one that's  worth a cent !"3  Derogatory  references  to  this travel  literature   are  scattered  throughout both  the  Clockmaker series  (1836-1840)   and  its sequel,  The   Attache   (1843-
1846). A key passage occurs at the end  of the third  Clockmaker   when Sam  is
given  his first assignment  as American  attache  to  the  Court  of St.  James.  An

HALIBURTON

official from  the  Secretary of State's office informs him  that the  British  govern­ ment  has  been  commissioning the unflattering portraits of America and  instructs him  to make  the  Queen  aware  of America's displeasure:

It would  be advisable, if a favorable  opportunity offers, to draw  the attention of the Queen  to the subject of her authors  and  travellers, -carelessly like, as if it weren't  done a purpose, for it don't  comport  with dignity  to appear  too sensitive, but  jist merely  to regret  the  prac-tice  of hirein'  authors  to abuse  us in  order  to damp  the admiration of our glorious institutions.
We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  Captain  Hall  received  five  thousand pounds for this purpose, and Mrs. Trollope  the same sum;  that  Miss Martineau is promised  a  royal  garter,   (it's  a  pity  she  wam't hanged  with  it,)   and  Captain Marryatt to be made  a Knight  of the  Royal  Baths. This  conduct  is onworthy  a great people like the English, and unjust and insultin'  to us; and you might suggest to her  Royal  Highness  that  this mean, low-lived, dirty  conduct  will defeat  itself, and  that  nothin'  short of kickin' out  her ministry  will be accepted  as an  apology by the American  people.4

Sam's expose of the deceptions  practised  on the reading public  by British  travel writers  echoed  actual defences  voiced  everywhere in  America. In  America  and her Commentators, a study  of the  offensive  commentaries published just  before the  end  of the  Civil  War,  H.  R.  Tuckerman writes  that  many  English  publica­ tions  critical   of  America  were  believed  to  be  anti-emigration   propaganda for which  the  authors were  remunerated in  secret   by  their  government.5    In   The  American  in  England,  a  more  recent  analysis  of  this  crisis in  Anglo-American relations,  Robert Spiller  supports Tuckerman's  argument, citing  the  rise of  the United States as a  world  power  as a reason  for  these  measures.'6  The  American official tells Sam  to convey outrage and  to feign indifference at  the same  time­ "it  don't comport with  dignity  to  appear too  sensitive" -when  he  brings  this problem  to the attention of the British Crown. But  the  ultimatum he is to deliver shows that, whether it comported with  dignity  or  not,  Americans were  sensitive to British censure.  Tuckerman notes regretfully, "The importance attached to the swarm  of English  Travels abusive  of America, upon  calm  reflection, appears like a monomania; and  equally  preposterous was  the  sensitiveness of  our  people  to foreign  criticism."7  Americans were, in fact,  so nettled  by this criticism  that  they began  to publish  their  own travel  books about America, ostensibly  by a foreigner greatly  impressed  with  the country. Charles Jared Ingersoll wrote  lnchiquin, the
f esuit's Letters  ( 181o), a mock-collection of praiseworthy epistles on America by
a visiting Jesuit. In  Notions of the Americans Picked Up  by a Travelling  Bachelor
( 1828),  James Fenimore Cooper  used a similar technique for  bolstering up  his country in  the  eyes of the world.  James Kirke  Paulding preferred to make stan­ dard   British  comments on  America  look  ridiculous, as  he  did  in   fohn  Bull  in America;  or the  New  Munchausen  (1825),  by  having  a  British  narrator  inflate them  to absurd proportions. And in A Sketch  of Old England, by a New England

HALIBURTON


Man  ( 1822), he  reversed  the  tactic  of the  British  commentaries by putting the
Old  World  under scrutiny.
One  reason  then  that  British  travel  books and  the  American response  to them figure  prominently in  Haliburton's writings   was  their   topicality. Haliburton's interest  in them  may also have owed something to his own attempt to write  a commentary about America, or  at  least  that  corner  of it  that   he  knew  well.  A decade earlier than The  Clockmaker, he was at  work  on  a  project  which  even­ tually  came  to  be  called  An  Historical and Statistical  Account  of Nova  Scotia. Mter seven  years of painstaking research, it appeared in 182g. Given  the success of the  English  commentaries, Haliburton expected  an  enthusiastic  reception for his Account  on both  sides of the ocean,  but  especially in England. On  January 7,
1824, he wrote  excitedly  to his friend  and  advisor,  Judge Peleg  Wiswall: "Every
thing  ... which  has  America for  its Subject (how  dull  or  absurd soever  it  may be)  is read  in  England with  avidity,  and  I am  not  altogether without hopes  of being  able  to dispose  of my labours in some  way  or  other...."8   Moreover, the Account  provided a corrective to misconceptions Englishmen had  been  given  of Nova  Scotia. Years  later  at  a banquet given  in his honour the  celebrated author of  The  Clockmaker recalled   the  misrepresentations of  Nova  Scotia  that  were current in  England during his youth :

You  have  been  so good,  Sir, as to refer  in  terms  of  approbation to  an  humble effort  of mine-the  History of Nova Scotia. On  that  subject  permit  me  to say, that  in early life I  twice visited Great  Britain,  and  was strongly, and  I  may  say painfully,  impressed  with  a  conviction  that  has  forced  itself  upon  the  mind  of every man who has gone to Europe from this country-namely, that  this valuable and important Colony was not merely wholly unknown, but misunderstood  and misrepresented.  Every  book of Geography,  every Gazetteer  and  elementary  work that  mentioned  it, spoke of it in terms of contempt  or condemnation. It  was said to possess good harbours,  if you could see them for the fog, and fisheries that would be valuable, if you had  only sun enough  to cure the fish, -while the interior  was described as a land of rock and barren, and doomed to unrelenting  sterility. Where facts were wanting,  recourse was had  to imagination....9

Sam  attributes errors such  as these  to the  breakneck speed  with  which  British commentators travelled through the  country, perceiving  accidental rather than essential  features. He  insists to the squire  that  only the  native  writer -a title  for which  Haliburton's Account  of Nova  Scotia,  not  to  mention  his  chronicles of both  Yankee and  colonist,  would  have  qualified  him-can  provide  an  accurate picture of the  New  World:

if you want  to understand  us, you must live among us, too; your Halls, Hamiltons, and DeRouses,  and such critters,  what  can they know of us? Can  a chap  catch  a likeness flying along  a rail road?  Can  he even see the  featurs? ... if you want  to know the inns and  the outs of the Yankees-I've wintered  them and  summered them;  I know all their  points, shape, make and  breed;  I've  tried 'em  alongside of

HALIBURTON

other folks, and  I know where they fall short, where they mate  'em, and  where they have the advantage, about as well as some who think they know a plagy sight more. It  tante  them that  stare the most, that  see the best always, I  guess. Our folks have their faults, and I know them, (I warnt born blind, I reckon,)  but ... the tour writers, are a little grain too hard on us.10




HALIBURTON's Account of Nova Scotia won him plaudits at home  and  in the  United  States, including  an  honorific  membership  in  the  dis­ tinguished Massachusetts Historical Society, but in England  it did not sell as well as either  the  author  or the  publisher  had  hoped.  Joseph  Howe,  who  had  con­ fidently printed  3,ooo copies of the work, took the brunt  of the financial loss. He noted in his business memoranda, "None  sold abroad.... I was left  with  about
1,ooo copies, scattered  about,  unsaleable  on  my  hands.  As late  as 1837,  these
I,ooo  copies of the history remained  unsold, though  offered  at  half  price." 11
The  Account  of Nova Scotia failed to spark  the interest  of English  readers in
182g, but a few years later  the author's sketches of Sam  Slick, designed initially for the readers of Joseph Howe's Novascotian,  were pirated  by British publisher Richard  Bentley and  became, to the author's  astonishment, immediately success­ ful. His visit to England  shortly after  the  first volume  of The  Clockmaker  had appeared   there  generated  great  excitement  in  literary  circles.  We  read  in  the
1838 journal of Charles R. Fairbanks,  Haliburton's fellow traveller  at the time: "Haliburton [is] now  the  greatest  Lion  in  London.   Mrs.  Trollope  and  Thea. Hook desire to be acquainted with him.m2  The  name  of Sam  Slick fast became ubiquitous.  Justin  McCarthy  commented  in his Portrait of the  Sixties that  for a time Sam  Slick rivalled Sam  Weller of Dickens' Pickwick  Papers in popularity, "his sayings and  doings ... the subject  of frequent allusions  and  quotations in English books and newspapers, and in the conversation  of all who had a genuine relish for fiction of the comic order."18 Allusions to Haliburton's famous Yankee even appeared in such famous commentaries about the New World as Captain Marryatt's Diary in America14 and the revised 5th edition  of Mrs. Trollope's Domestic Manners  of the  Americans. 15  A reviewer writing  in Blackwood's  Edin­ burgh  Magazine  urged  the author  of the first Clockmaker   to turn  his  attention  to the  Mother  Country  in subsequent  works:  "Let  him  leave  Nova  Scotia  and come to  England. Caricature of  the  most  cauterizing   kind  never  had  ampler opportunities."16
Haliburton did  not hesitate to make capital  of his popularity  in England.  As the writer  in Blackwood's  Edinburgh  Magazine  suggested,  he directed  much  of the subject matter of the second Clockmaker  to the English reading public. In discussing this book with a former colleague living in New Brunswick, he wrote : "I have another  volume ready for the  press, which  is not so local as the other,

HALIBURTON

and  I think  better  suited  for  English  readers."17  In  the second  Clockmaker  as in the first, Sam  Slick continues to attack British books about America. In  this same book  he also  makes  his readers aware of Haliburton's Account  of  Nova  Scotia. Some  references are oblique, as when Sam  enthusiastically recommends a histori­ cal study  written by his brother Josiah  Slick, like Haliburton both  a lawyer  and a writer:

he is a considerable  of a  literary  character. He's  well known  in  the  great  world as the author  of the Historical,  Statistical,  and  Topographical Account  of  Cutty­ hunck, in five volumes; a work that  has raised the reputation of  American genius among  foreign  nations  amazin',  I can assure you. He's  quite  a  self-taught  author  too.18

The "Historical, Statistical, and  Topographical Account of Cuttyhunck" is very close to  the  title  which  Haliburton had  once  projected for  his own  book  at  an early  stage  of its redaction: An  Historical, Geographical and Statistical  Account of  Nova Scotia. 19  The bid  to  associate  his own  commentary with  that  of Josiah Slick is made  explicit  when  the  narrator jocularly  declares  that, next  to  Josiah Slick's  History   of  Cuttyhunck, "Haliburton's History  of  Nova  Scotia ... is the most important account of unimportant things  I have  ever seen."20
As  this  coy  reference to  himself  would  suggest,  Haliburton  had   taken   the measure  of  publicity achieved   by The  Clockmaker  and  resolved  to  exploit  it.:n Evidently he still considered his history of Nova Scotia marketable. His jest at this study  as an "important account of unimportant things" combined self-promotion with  humour, demonstrating a  shrewd   understanding on  Haliburton's part  of how to make  a product appealing to a consumer. In a letter  written on December I g,  I 839,  shortly  after  the  second  Clockmaker  was  issued,  Haliburton tried  to persuade his  publisher Richard  Bentley  to  republish   the  work  if  only  for  the colonial  sales :

I believe you are  aware  that  ten years ago I published  a history of Nova Scotia in 2  vols. Somebody, I don't  know who, has reprinted  it in London,  which I am sorry for as it is now an old work. I am loudly called upon here for a new Edition that  shall bring the Statistics  down to the present day, and  I should like to do it, if it would cover expenses. If you can find it worth while to give 250 pounds for this service, the book itself I will say nothing  about,  as my object  is utility to the country,  and  not money. Let  me know immediately  and  I will go to work at  it. It is said to be the best Colonial  History, by every review of it, that  has appeared, and  was as perfect  at  the  time as I could make it, but  our  civil divisions are  all altered  since, and so have our statistics materially changed.  It cannot  have a great circulation  in England  nor would it be worth your while to pay for the work, but if revised in the way I have spoken of might suit your views and mine. All I require is the expense of revision and correction.22

Another letter  to  Bentley  written on  September 1,  I84o, reveals,  however,  that the  publisher declined the  offer:

29

HALIBURTON

I find that  there was no English Edition of the history of Nova Scotia published, that it was a trick of a bookseller here to dispose of the remaining copies by giving them a new title page. I am sorry you declined it, because I do not wish to publish with Colburn, but as the work must either be republished or superseded by some­ one else I shall have to do it.23

Determined  not  to  have  to call his first literary  attempt   a  failure,  Haliburton continued  to submit it to publishers. Finally, sometime after  I 844, another  edition wasi ued.                                                      ·
The  idea  of  vicarious  travel  continued  to  dominate many  works that  Hali­ burton  wrote  after  his Account  of Nova  Scotia.  The   Letter-Bag  of the  Great Western; or, Life in a Steamer  (I 840)  consists of letters  written  by  Haliburton on the steamship  voyage from  Bristol to  New  York,  ostensibly by  various  pas­ sengers on board. One of these is entitled "Letter from a Traveller Before He Had Travelled," an  ironic  portrait  of a  British  commentator who  is  going  to  tour America  in eight  weeks in order  that  he might  interlard his  already  completed book on  America-e entially
commentators24  -with  colourful  tid-bits.  Travel   books are  in  the  main  badly done, Haliburton insists here as elsewhere, but he nonetheless adopts their succe ­ ful format.  The   journey is the  main  organizational principle  of almost  all  his fictional  works, a thread  upon  which is hung  a miscellany of facts, impressions, sketches, and  anecdotes.  The  "sayings and  doings"  of Sam  Slick  in  both  The  Clockmaker  and  The  Attache  are occasioned  by sights seen and  people  met  by the famous Yankee, his friend Squire Poker, and  other characters in their  travels throughout Nova Scotia, the United States, and England. The  Old  judge  ( I849)  is narrated by a British traveller who begins his American  tour  by a stay in the colonies where he is introduced  to the  people and  their  traditions  by his lawyer host and  the  wise, experienced  "old  judge"  of the  title.  In  The  Season Ticket
( I86o)   Squire  Shegog  and  his fellow-p engers
express discupeople they have  met  while travelling  through  life. In  this, the last of Haliburton's works, the speaker asks, "Who shall write a book of travels now?"25  The  subject  of world touring  has been exhausted  in literature, he states. "We  must, at last, tum," he argues, "to  what  we ought  to have studied  first­ ourselves. 'The  proper study of mankind  is man.' " 211



EoM   THE FIRST  Clockmaker  on,  Haliburton  had  demon­ strated a lively interest in the study of mankind.  As one might expect in a satirist, he paid  special attention  to human  foibles and  shortcomings.  The  British  com­ mentators  were censured  by him  chiefly for  publishing  impre ions
that  were gro  ly,
was not  one-sided,  however, but  often  balanced  by telling  thrusts  at  the  unde-

HALIBURTON


sirable  traits of persons from  other  countries as well, as in the following  exchange between  Sam  and  the squire. When  his Nova  Scotian  friend  tries to declare him­ self free of prejudice, Sam  mockingly  compares him  to travel  writer  Basil  Hall:

Captain Aul,  (Hall,)   as he called  himself, for  I never  seed  an  Englishman  yet that spoke good English, said he hadn't  one mite or morsel of prejudice,  and yet in all his three  volumes  of travels through  the  U-nited  States,  (the  greatest  nation it's ginerally allowed atween  the Poles,) only found  two things to praise, the kind­ ness of our folks to him, and  the state prisons. None are so blind, I guess, as them that  won't  see; but  you folks can't  bear it, that's  a fact.  Bear what?  said  I. The  superiority of Americans, he replied....27

First,  Sam  ridicules the squire's contention that, as a North  American colonist, he is somehow free  of  bias.  Secondly  he  makes  the  point  that   British  commen­ taries  like  Captain Hall's are  niggardly  in  their  praise.  And  thirdly  he  indicts  himself  as  an  uncultured and  boorish  American in  a  speech  replete  with   bad grammar and  vulgar  boasting. Robert L. McDougall describes  this type of triple­  edged  satire as "controlled orientation," an  aspect  of technique which  he defines as a "process by means  of which  Haliburton gains  the  detachment  necessary  to move freely and  in the  best sense critically  between  the  three  points of the  North Atlantic triangle.ms This  technique also  reflects a strategy  of  adjustment to  the American and   the  British  spheres  of  influence   and   justifies  McDougall's claim that, in  this  area  of his achievement at  least,  Haliburton  is solidly  in  the  Cana­ dian  stream of  writing, "ours  or  nobody's, part   of  our  living  tradition or  no living  tradition."29
But at  times  Haliburton seems too overcome  by intense  political  convictions to remain  detached in his analysis  of the  British  travel  writers.  This  is suggested  by certain  puzzling shifts of attitude on the  part  of his main  character. For example, when  Sam  discusses  controversial features of  the  United States  outlined in  the commentaries -such as republicanism and  the absence  of an established religion
-his views strangely become  more Tory  and  Anglican than  American. In  short,
for  brief  stretches of The  Clockmaker  and  The  Attache, he  becomes  a  fictional incarnation of  his creator. Nowhere is this  clearer  than  in  Sam's attacks on  the political  economist and  reformer Harriet  Martineau whose liberal  theories  were anathema to Haliburton. The  correspondences which  exist  between  her  writings and  Haliburton's parody of them in the second Clockmaker  are especially enlight­ ening in this connection.
Of  all the  British  commentators mentioned by Haliburton, Harriet Martineau is the  only  one  who  is attacked at  length. No  study  of  Haliburton's work  has undertaken  to  explain  why  he  singles  her  out  in  this  way.  Brief  unflattering references  are  made to her  in several  of the  Sam  Slick  books,  but  in  the  second Clockmaker   the  offensive  is an  extended one.  Here  a  number of  conversations take  place  between a famous author and  Sam  Slick,  whom  Haliburton uses  to

gr

HALIBURTON

lampoon her  in  what  at  least  one  contemporary thought  a  tasteless  way.80   Al­ though he  does  not  name  Harriet Martineau directly   in  these  episodes,  Sam's allusions  to  her  French ancestry  and  to  her  celebrated  Illustrations  of  Political Economy  (I 834)   would  have  made  her identity immediately obvious:

Year afore last, I met an English gall atravellin'  in a steamboat; she had a French name  that  I can't  recollect, tho'  I got it on  the  tip  o' my tongue  too;  you know who  I  mean-she  wrote  books on enonomy, -not domestic  economy,  as galls ought,  but  on  political  economy, as galls oughtn't, for  they  don't  know  nothin' about  it.31

But it is the arguments in Harriet Martineau's more  recently  published  Society in  America   (I 837), and   not  those  in  her  Illustrations  of Political  Economy, which  Sam  ridicules.  No direct  reference  is made to the  title  Society in America, but  thinly   disguised   excerpts  from   this  book  of  travels   appear in  the  second Clockmaker, establishing that   Haliburton knew  it  well.  To  begin,  Sam  tries  to discredit  the  book  by drawing the  reader's attention to  the  author's deafness:

She had a trumpet  in her hand,-thinks I, who on airth  is she again'  to hail, or is she again'  to try echoes on the river? I watched  her for some time, and  I found it was an ear-trumpet.
Well, well, says I, that's onlike most English travellers  any way, for in a gineral way they wear magnifyin' glasses, and do enlarge  things so, a body don't  know 'em ag'in  when he sees 'em. Now, this gall won't  hear  one-half  that's  said, and  will
get that  half wrong, and so it turned  out.82

Harriet Martineau herself had  called  attention to her  impaired hearing in  the preface  to Society in  America,  advising  the  reader to  consider it  a  handicap if he saw  fit,  but  pointing out  as  well  that  this  disadvantage proved   an  asset  in drawing confidences  out of otherwise  reticent  people. Sam  attributes the distortion in  her  views  to  her  failure  to  hear  perfectly,  aligning it  with  the  exaggeration found  in  British  commentaries generally.  He  then  examines several  observations made in Society in America, striving  to make  each  look as ridiculous as possible.
Given  Sam's patriotism, his attempts to dismiss Harriet  Martineau's criticisms of the  United States  are,  if  at  times  discomfiting, at  least  understandable. Her condemnation of  the  disparity between  egalitarian  principles and  slavery  is  a case in point.  It was incredible to her, she wrote  in Society in America, that  even religious  slaveholders could  be blind  to "the fact  that  the  negro  is a man  and  a brother."83 The  English  "gall" with  the French name speaks  along  the same  lines in The  Clockmaker  when  she asks Sam,  "... do you  not  think  these unfortunate fellow-critters, our  sable  brothers, if emancipated, educated, and   civilised,  are capable of as much  refinement and  as high  a degree  of  polish  as the  whites?"34
Sam  responds by way of anecdote. His  brother Josiah  Slick,  he  says, once  bet  a man  a thousand dollars  that  he could  find ten  black  men  who  would  prove  more polished  than   the  same  number of  whites.  He  then  proceeded to  polish  up  ten

HALIBURTON


blacks  with  Day  and  Martin's blacking  until  they shone  so brightly   in  the  sun that   they  blinded   the  judges  assembled  to  decide  the  bet.35    Sam's handling of Harriet Martineau's objections to slavery  is deliberately  flippant, an  attempt  by him  to  impugn observations on  slavery  made  by those  who  had   no  first-hand knowledge of  it.  He  says  elsewhere  in  this  connection, "... nothin' raises  my dander more,  than  to hear  English  folks and  our  Eastern citizens  atalkin' about this  subject that   they  don't  onderstand, and  have  nothin' to  do  with." 36    And he returns to the  problem  in the second  volume of The  Attache, where  he scorns "the absurd  accounts that  travellers  give of the  United  States  in general, and  the gross exaggerations they  publish  of the state  of slavery in  particular."37

ToFEND  OFF  ATTACKS on  American institutions by Harriet
Martineau and  other   commentators is for  Sam  a  patriotic activity  that  is  con­
sonant with  his belief in "the superiority of Americans." He  repeatedly boasts to acquaintances from  England and  the  British  North  American colonies that  "the U-nited States  [is] the  greatest nation  it's ginerally  allowed  atween  the  Poles."38
Thus for  Sam  to  attack   those  parts  of Society in America which  praise  aspects
of the country he considers superior to all others is out of character. His occasional concession  that  America is not  faultless  never  quite  rings  true  because  it departs too radically from  the boasting for which we know him best. For instance, Harriet Martineau's  accolades for  the  voluntary system of  religion  in  the  United  States and  the accompanying attack on the evils of the Established Church of England displease  Sam,  causing  him  to remark  uncharacteristically to the squire:

I don't  like to hear  English people come out here and  abuse their church; they've got a church,  and  throve  under  it, and  a national  character under  it, for honour and  upright  dealin',  such as no other  people in Europe  have:  indeed,  I could  tell you of some folks who have to call their goods English, to get them off in a foreign land  at all. The name  sells '.em. You may boast of this tree or that  tree, and  call
'em  this dictionary  name  and  that  new-fangled  name,  but  give  me  the  tree  that
bears the  best  fruit, I say.39

Sam's contention that   England is the  tree  that  bears  the  best  fruit  is at  odds with  his belief  that  the  United States  is the  greatest  nation   "atween the  Poles." Also perplexing is his complaint that  no one church  or form  of worship  is estab­ lished in the  United States  over any other:

... we don't  prefer one and  establish it, and  don't  render  its support  compulsory. Better, perhaps,  if we did, for it burns pretty  near out sometimes here, and  has to be brought  to  by revivals  and  camp-meetin's,  and  all  sorts  of excitements;  and when it does come to, it don't  give a steady clear light for some time, but spits and sputters  and  cracks like a candle  that's  got a drop o' water  on the wick. It  don't seem  kinder  rational,   neither,   that  screamin'  and  screetchin',   and  hoopin'  and


33

HALIBURTON

hollerin',  like possest, and  tumblin' into  faintin's,  and  fits, and  swoons, and  what
not: o

In  his partiality for the  English  Church and  his view  that  certain democratic manifestations are  suspect,  Sam  Slick  is close  in  spirit   to  Thomas Haliburton himself.  Notice  the double  thrust  of his attack on Harriet Martineau's analysis  of what  she  called  the  "spirit  of religion" in  America. In  the  chapter of  her  book bearing  this title,  Martineau commended those  congregations "where the  people of colour  are  welcome  to worship  with  the  whites, -actually  intermingled with them,  instead   of  being  set  apart in  a  gallery   appropriated  to  them."41    These situations, she  argued, illustrated perfectly   the  ideal   of  Christian  brotherhood summed  up in the quotation from  Navalis  used as the  chapter's epigraph: "The Christian Religion  is the root of all democracy : the  highest  fact  in the  Rights of Man."42   Sam's mockery of this view, which  he is able  to render almost  verbatim, demonstrates that  Haliburton had  read  this section  of Society in America closely:

If you was to revarse that  maxim o' yourn, said I, and say democracy  is too often found at  the  root of religion, you'd be nearer  the  mark,  I  reckon. I  knew a case once exactly  in  point.  Do  tell it  to me, said  she;  it  will illustrate  "the  spirit  of religion." Yes, said I, and illustrate your book too, if you are awritin'  one, as most English travellers do. Our congregation, said I, to Slickville, contained  most of the wealthy and  respectable folk there, and  a most powerful  and  united  body it was. Well, there came a split once on the election of an Elder, and a body of the upper­ crust  folks separated  and  went  off  in  a  huff.  Like  most  folks that  separate   in temper,  they laid it all to conscience; found  out  all at  once they had  been adrift afore all their  lives, and  joined another  church  as different  from ourn  as chalk is from cheese;  and  to shew their  humility,  hooked  on  to the  poorest  congregation in the  place.  Well, the minister  was quite  lifted  up  in  the stirrups  when  he saw these folks jine him; and  to shew his zeal for them  the next Sunday, he looked up at  the gallery to the niggers, and, said he, my brether'n, said he, I  beg you won't spit down any more on the aisle seats, for there  be gentlemen  there  now. Jist  turn your heads, my sable friends, and let go over your shoulders. Manners, my brothers, manners before backey. Well, the niggers seceded;  they said it was an infringement  on  their  rights,  on  their  privilege of spittin',  as freemen,  where  they  liked,  how they liked, and  when they liked, and  they quit  in a body. "Democracy," said they, "is the root of religion."43

One  suspects  that  Harriet Martineau's reputation as a radical reformer helped to draw  her  the  lion's  share  of abuse  heaped   upon  the  British  commentators  by Sam  Slick.  The   low  opinion  of  the  extension   of  democratic rights  reflected   in Sam's  story  calls  to  mind  Haliburton's own  political   views.  In  Nova  Scotia   he fought  vigorously  against  responsible  government, seeing  in  it a creeping  repub­ licanism.  Not surprisingly he was also opposed  to the  additional voting privileges granted by the  Reform Bill of 1832.  Thomas Poker,  the  Nova  Scotian  narrator who  more  often   than   any  other  character  in  the  Sam   Slick  books  articulates Haliburton's own  opinions,  comments sorrowfully upon arriving in England that

34

HALIBURTON


the once  sterling  conduct of the  English  has  been  despoiled  by "dissent, reform, and  agitation."44    Martineau's affiliations  with  the  reformer, Francis  Place,  and the  main  author of  the  1832  Reform  Bill, Lord  Durham, would  in  themselves have  discredited her  in  Haliburton's eyes.45
Haliburton's intense  antagonism to  Lord  Durham became  public   just  before
Durham, after  a  brief  period  of office as Canada's Governor-General, published his famous Report on the  Affairs  of British  North  America on January 31, 1839· In  a  work  entitled Bubbles  of Canada  which  Tories  attempting to  forestall  the Report  had  commissioned him to do, Haliburton denounced Durham as "a radi­ cal  dictator and   a  democratic  despot."J!6  The   Report   itself  when   it  appeared alienated Haliburton further. To support his contention that  Nova Scotians were not  fully  developing  the   resources  of  their   province,   Durham  made   a  veiled reference   to  the  first  series  of  The   Clockmaker, "a  highly  popular  work,"   he wrote,  "which is known  to be from  the  pen of one of Your  Majesty's chief func­ tionaries [an   allusion   to  Haliburton's  appointment  to  the   judiciary]  in  Nova Scotia."47  Haliburton immediately dispatched an angry series of letters in rebuttal to the  London Times which  was later  reprinted as A  Reply  to the  Report  of the Earl  of Durham. Durham's biographer, Chester  New,  remarks that  Haliburton expended bitter  sarcasm on portions of the Report  that  he had,  either  deliberately or otherwise, misunderstood.48  And  Haliburton's own  biographer, V. L. 0. Chit­ tick,  dismisses  the  letters  as ineffective  "products of  ill-temper."49   Exactly  when in the  turbulent 183o's Haliburton's  passionate  dislike of Durham began  and  to what  extent  it influenced his caricature of Harriet Martineau and  her views it is difficult  to  say.  Certainly  his  rude  treatment of both   Durham and   Martineau reveals  an  intense  dislike  for  what  he saw  as  perniciously  liberal  tendencies on both  sides of the  Atlantic. Why  he attributed his own  anti-republican sentiments to Sam  Slick is another  vexed question. It is possible that  he hoped  to weight  his argument more  heavily  by enlisting  the support of an otherwise  patriotic Yankee  in  pointing out  the  weak  spots  in  the  American system;  or  perhaps, all  uncon­ sciously,  he  mistrusted the  indirection of art  in  his eagerness  to  make  these  de­ ficiencies perfectly  clear.
Thomas  Haliburton's  recreation of  the  battle  of  New  World   commentaries
waged  by citizens  from  all  points  of the  North  Atlantic triangle is nourishing to the  historical imagination. It is also relevant, for although the  books  themselves are no longer  controversial, Canada's relation  to Britain and  to the  United  States is. To  see where  we as a nation  have  been  is the  first step  to seeing  both  where we are  and  where  we are  likely to go. This  is not to suggest  that  Haliburton  was writing   for  posterity.   On   the  contrary, his  repeated  allusions   to  British  travel books indicate a concern that  was immediate and,  in places, highly  personal.  Not surprisingly we find  him  using  this popular genre  himself.  Elastic  in form,  it was able  to accommodate the  pronouncements on every imaginable subject  that  con-

35

HALIBURTON

stitute his  best-known  works.   His   remarks on   the   British  authors  themselves, moreover, demonstrate two features of his general satiric approach:  the  revolving, dispassionate criticism that   Robert L. McDougall calls  "controlled orientation," and  the  biased comment. Finally, the  passages on  the  travel books,  barring a few intemperate lapses,  have  genuine literary merit. As  Northrop Frye  has  observed, invective is more  readable than panegyric.50 And  the  invective in  this  case  is distinguished  by  the   wit,  sharp caricatures, and  vivid   tropes that  mark   Hali­ burton's better writing.

NOTES

1 The  Clockmaker; or  the  Sayings   and  Doings   of  Samuel  Slick, of  Slickville,  I
(Halifax: Joseph  Howe,  I836), p. 58.
2  Clockmaker, I, p. s8.
3  The  Clockmaker; or  the  Sayings  and  Doings  of Samuel Slick, of Slickville, n,
4th  ed.  (London:  Richard Bentley,  I839), p.  3I9.
4   The   Clockmaker; or  the  Sayings  and  Doings  of Samuel Slick, of Slickville,  III
(London: Richard Bentley,  I 840), pp.  299-300.
5   America and  her  Commentators with  a Critical   Sketch of Travel in  the  United
States  (New  York: Charles  Scribner, I864), p. 252.
6  The  American in  England  During  the  First Half  Century of Independence  (New
York: Henry  Holt  and  Company, I926), pp.  300-01.
1 America  and  her Commentators, p. 256.
8  As quoted   by V. L. 0. Chittick, Thomas Chandler Haliburton ('Sam Slick"): A Study in  Provincial  Toryism (I924; rpt.  New York: AMS  Press,  I966), p. 200.
9 As quoted  by Chittick, p. 123.
1° Clockmaker, I, pp.  60-61.
11 As quoted  by Chittick, p.  I44.
12 As quoted   by Chittick, p. 222.
13  (London: T. Fisher  Unwin, I903), p. qo.
14 Frederick,  Marryatt, A Diary in  America  with  Remarks on  Its  Institutions ( I839), ed. Sydney Jackman (New  York:  Alfred  A. Knopf, I962), pp.  30I,  306.
1
1(New York: Random House,  I949), p. 209.
16  "The World   We  Live  In,"  Blackwood's Edinburgh  Magazine,  xu   (November
I837), 677.
17   As quoted  by Chittick, pp.  202-03.
18  Clockmaker, n, p. 87.
19 As cited  in a letter  from  Haliburton to Judge Peleg  Wiswall.  See Chittick, p.  I30.
2 ° Clockmaker, n, p. I 16.
21  On  more  than  one  occasion  in  his fiction,  Haliburton appealed to  highly  placed readers  for  preferment. At  the  end  of  the  second  Clockmaker, for  example, Sam recommends that  the  Nova  Scotian  squire  request  of  the  Minister of the  Colonies substantial rewards for his literary  efforts  in such  words  as  these:

HALIBURTON


if you want  to make  an  impartial deal,  to tie the Nova  Scotians to you for ever, you'll  jist sarve  him   [the   creator of Sam  Slick]  as  you  sarved   Earl  Mulgrave (though his writin's ain't to be compared to the Clockmaker, no more  than  chalk is to  cheese)  ;  you  gave  him  the  governorship  of  Jamaica, and   arterwards of Ireland. John  Russell's  writin's  got  him  the  berth  of the  leader  in  the  House  of Commons.  Well,  Francis  Head,   for  his  writin's   you  made   him  Governor  of Canada, and  Walter Scott  you made  a baronet  of, and  Bulwer  you did  for  too, and  a great  many  others  you have got the other  side of the  water  you sarved  the same  way.  Now,  minister, fair  play is a  jewel, says you;  if you can  reward  your writers  to home  with  governorships and  baronetcies, and  all sorts o' snug  things, let's  have  a  taste  o'  the  good  things  this  side o'  the  water   too.... The  Yankee made  Washington Irvin' a  minister   plenipo', to  honour him;   and  Blackwood, last  November, in  his  magazine, says  that   are  Yankee's  books  ain't   fit  to  be named  in  the  same  day  with  the  Clockmaker-that  they're nothin' but  Jere­ miads  (3I9-20).
Another instance of self-promotion can  be found  in  the  "Dedication to  the  Right Hon.  Lord  John Russell" which  prefaces  The  Letter-Bag of the  Great  Western; or Life  in a Steamer ( I84o; rpt.  Toronto: University  of Toronto Press,  I973). "Like a good shepherd, my Lord, open  the gates,"  Haliburton pleads,  "and let down  the bars, and  permit us to crop  some of our own  pastures,  that  good  food may  thicken our fleeces, and  cover our  ribs." He points out further that,  although it is not fitting to say what  he expects  for  himself,  "... if the office of distributor of honours  and promotions among colonists  is vacant,  as there  are  no duties  to  perform, and  the place  is a sinecure, it would  suit  [him]  uncommonly well, and  afford  [him]  leisure to cultivate talents  that  are  extremely  rare  among  the  race  of officials"  (xiii). The main   thrust   of  this  remark is, of course,  satiric  in  its  criticism of  governmental neglect  of deserving colonists,  but  Haliburton's willingness  to  be  officially  recog­ nized  and  rewarded is also  underlined.

22   "The Correspondence of Thomas Chandler Haliburton and  Richard Bentley,"  ed. W. H. Bond,  in The Canadian Collection at Harvard  University, ed.  W. I. Morse, Bulletin  IV  (Cambridge: Harvard Univ.  Printing  Office,  I947), pp. 61-62.
23   Canadian Collection at  Harvard, p. 63.
24   The  Letter-Bag, p.  I30.
25    The Season-Ticket ( I86o; rpt.  Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I973), p. 1.
26   The Season-Ticket, p. 3·
27  Clockmaker, II,  p. 58.
28   "Thomas Chandler Haliburton," in Our  Living  Tradition, Second  Series, ed. Rob­
ert  L. McDougall (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I959), p.  29.
29   Our  Living  Tradition, p. 29.
30   Lt.-Col. C. R.  Fox,  an  officer  of His Majesty's  forces stationed at  Halifax in  I836 to whom  Haliburton dedicated the second  series of The Clockmaker sight  unseen, is said  to  have  deplored its allusions  to  Harriet Martineau. This  is mentioned by Chittick, p. 232.
31  Clockmaker, II,  p. 58.
32   Clockmaker, II,  pp. 58-59·
33 Society in  America ( I837; rpt.  New York:  AMS  Press, Inc.,   I966), I, x.
H Clockmaker, n, p. 86.

37

HALIBURTON

35   Clockmaker, II,  pp.  88-89.
36 Clockmaker, II,  p. 89.
37   The   Attache; or, Sam  Slick  in  England, II,  2nd  ed.   (London:  Richard  Bentley, I843)' p. 67.
38   Clockmaker, II,  p. 3·
39   Clockmaker, II,  pp. 6I-62.
4 ° Clockmaker, II,  pp. 63-64.
41 Society  in  America, m, p. 258.
42 Society  in  America, III,  p. 258.
43   Clockmaker, II,  pp. 65-66.
44  The Attache; or, Sam  Slick  in  England, I, 2nd  ed.   (London:  Richard  Bentley, I843), p.  I 17·
45  In  I834  Harriet Martineau collaborated with  Lord  Durham in  the  composition of a tract  on  the improvement of labour  relations. As her  posthumous Autobiography ( I877)   reveals,   she  held  him  in  high   esteem,   an   opinion  she  may   well  have expressed  publicly  during the period  of their  association.
46  As quoted by Chittick, p. 238.
47  Lord  Durham's Report   on  the  Affairs  of  British   North  America, ed.  Sir  C.  P. Lucas  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, I 9 I 2) , II, p. 2 I 4·
48   Lord   Durham:  A  Biography   of  John  George   Lambton  First  Earl  of  Durham
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, I 929), p. 5 I 7.
49   Chittick, p. 263.
50  Anatomy of Criticism  (Princeton: Princeton Univ.  Press,  I957), p. 224.











CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available  at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741




A	LITERARY GARLAND



24 Caricature Drawings

of Nineteenth-Century Canadian Writers




by


ISAAC  BICKERSTAFF












ED.  NOTE:   Canadian  Literature  wishes  to  express  gratitude to  the  Canada Council for  a  grant to  facilitate the  printing of  this  set  of  drawings. The originals are  now  held  by the  University  of Calgary Library.





TI-/OMAS   M ccw...LOCH-




CATHA NE.  PA!:.R.  TRAIL..L





JoHN RlcHARPSoN





















































SusANNA  MOO'PIE'-

43






OcrAV£ C EMAZIE-

44





O ;vtR 	6o1..PSM ITH

45







WILLIAM 	KIR$i

47




M. A otNE- GERIN- LAjoiE.






LAU:et.  CoNAN


49






50





JAME.S  DE. MILLE..





IHoMAS	CHANPLEHALIBUR-ToN





















































ISA'Sf.LLA	LANCY

53



..
·,;,.•
 .... ,·  :.:
	.	...
...-·-.--.-


. -
.·.
 


•	--!
'  -         :-:...;....-
 

- ..· ..


··'     ".
 _.·_.-_.....,
 ,!'.	.,
	..	·.



<·.
 '	-·,-.·

.,:·
....
. · ,
 
,.,·



...
. ..
 



_.··"·:+
 
.....
 
-·:·


r._	: - ..

'•', --....
;·, ..
 ·....· •'	·..··.·.



'..,··



-.·
 
.·. -

·r'     '•  ·':  .. , 	.. '
...

'\..·.




··...
-· ..
. .









AOSANNA 	LE.P!i!of/ ON

54







CJ.IA LES  MAIR.

55




I
·;../	-;;:.:-:h.:
..,












...;:::;-·--

































EMILE. NELLIG-AN






57









sB





















































6L.ISS  CA AN

59





"P()/1/CAN  CAMP5tLL  SCOTT

6o









A CHigALD	LAMPMAN

61







SA	J ANN TTE DUNCAN






AL.P/-1

POEM
 

THE GR;21CKLE



A grackle squats  up on my roof and  squacks
Until I want  to target  him for  rocks.
He  soon will drive  the  tuneful  robins  off. Bad music is all they're  afraid  of.

It's  illegal  to kill a robin
Or  a man in some few circumstances
Or  a human  foetus  on Prince  Edward Island. This  is a  neighborhood of miracle
Working  mechanics, too  honest  for  garages
Who'd certainly be failed  by I.Q.  tests Being  not very strong  upon  language. They're stubborn about  their  folksongs; Singularly  uncolorful curses;
Old time fiddlers  whom  their  hearts  engage: Not  very modern about  rock music.

They  do not  heed  the voice of the grackle. The  lawns are converted to dinosaur pastures Onto which  are  towed  ancient vehicles
Which  by and  by drive  off, momentarily fixed. Three young ravens  patrol  up and  down­ Visited  and  counseled  by elders -
This  street,  playing  crow, a favorite raven  game; Observing the  manners of these  strange  beasts.

One  said "kaw" to me. I answered "growk"
With  an inside-of-a-bottle intonation
I consider  pretty  genuine.
I  think she was actually  startled
As if a grackle'd made  a proposition
For  sex, to become  a handsome prince.

Then she re-enacted a scene from  a dream I'd  had some months  ago about a hawk Contrary to Professor  Asimov
To  whom all things are  as they all seem
Or  don't,  by this watch  and  estimation.
 




Milton Acorn

POEM


THE  CONCEIT  OF ]( R](VEN



Down  over  the  lip of the  verandah
Into my sight  swept  the  raven.  Whup!
His shadow fell from  the roof to the lawn; So quiet the  spell  I heard  that  patch  flop.

Oh  sure  it  was some other  phenomenon Like  breaking the  ripple-barrier of wind That flicked  like flame about  the eaves:
Or  his shadow made  more  noise than  he  did.

It's  a universal  rule of miracles; There must  be a natural explanation. The catcher must  not leave home  plate  Nor  the  eye fool about  in dimensions.

I maintain it's likely, to repeat,
For  the  very  green  grass to feel a twinge If suddenly brushed  by dark  and  such Conceit as is dealt  by ravens,  and  flinch.

That raven  wore a tight  toque  on his head Quite black  of course,  plus a  body-stocking Blithe  russet  brown,  for  those  raven-pelfs Have various  tinges  of unblack  shadings-

Which  ravens  and  raven  types can descry­ Besides  that  obvious  fust  for  deceit ...
Since  shadows  are not  black  but  colored.
I saw  him  as oneself. Jesus  that  bird!









It is absolutely true  that  ravens
Roost  in cemeteries. We are  between Three of those  big ominous  bird  havens In our  village  where  no spirits are seen
 


Milton Acorn










































Milton Acorn

POEM

Perhaps for lack of eyes to look at  them Unpreoccupied. This  is a bedroom Community for leftover  spasms
Of  rest that  seems to be part  of our  doom.

Sometimes a solemn  dark-plumed  procession In  numbers amounting to  the  hundreds Without creaks, caws or  croaks  of discussion Pondering the possibilities of thunder
Will give an  unaccustomed colorful
Dimension to the air  above  Parkdale.










HOMETOWN



Oh  it was a  joy to be alive and  back in my hometown after  so many  years abroad!
The train  rumbled  into  the station on  time. The  midwinter sun
came  out  to greet  me.
I wanted  to shake  hands  with  the  world. Never  had  I felt so alone.
I took a taxi  to the  nearest  tavern, and  everything was copasetic,
(as we used to say in the Sixties) . I drank  three  screwdrivers,
tipped the waitress a ten-dollar bill, and  swaggered  to the men's  room. Scratched on the wall
above  a smelly urinal choked with  cigarette butts was  the latest  graffiti:

If you only  have  a year to live, spend  it in Windsor,
and  it'll  seem like  twenty.
 


Len Gasparini


66


WILFRED  CAMPBELL RECONSIDERED



Laurel Boone




TEART OF   WILUAM  WILFRED  CAMPBELL cannot be "'P" arated  from  his life.1  Campbell  believed that  only social thought  was worthwhile and  that  intellectual  and  artistic  activity could  properly  take  place  only within
society. Therefore  most of his poetry is social or public. His poems about  nature often  depend  on  nature's value  to  man  in society;  his dramatic poems  tell of heroes and  heroines who live and die by the highest social ideals;  and,  after  the success of "The Dead  Leader" in r 8g I, he came to see himself as the laureate  of Canada, duty-bound to commemorate  persons and events and to rouse the nation to achieve its best nature  and  highest dreams. His poetry would teach  what  that nature   and  those  dreams  should  be.  Unlike  the  work  of  more  individualistic artists, Campbell's poetry must be seen in the context of the man's intellectual  and spiritual  nature  and his intellectual,  political and social milieu.
In  the  Literary  History  of Canada,  Carl  Klinck  recognizes Daniel  Wilson's Caliban:  The  Missing  Link  as a source of Campbell's  "experiments in imagery of primitive  nature  and  primitive  religion."2   Wilson influenced  Campbell  even more  profoundly  than  that.  He  had  been  a  professor of  history  at  University College, University of Toronto, since I843, and when Campbell  began his studies there in I 88I, Wilson was the new president of the College. Campbell  probably heard  him  lecture,  and  he  had  the  opportunity   to  know  the  man  himself,  a singular  blend of poet and scientist. Wilson credited Shakespeare  with discerning the proper  application of the theory of evolution to man  because in Caliban  he had  shown  how  high  man's  animal  nature,   uninformed  by  the  divine,  could evolve. Shakespeare's unique  poetic intuition  enabled  him to know and  describe what  nineteenth-century scientists had  just begun  to  discover.  Other   thinkers, such as George Paxton  Young, professor of ethics and  metaphysics at  University College, and  William  Dawson  LeSueur,  an  acquaintance of Campbell's middle age, rejected  with Wilson the positivist idea that  all knowledge must  be derived from sensory perceptions. Young finally became an idealist, and LeSueur regarded knowledge derived from intuition  or relevation to be factual  along with scientific

CAMPBELL

knowledge.3   Wilson's idea about  Caliban  seized Campbell's imagination, but  it was the holistic view of knowledge he and  his fellows shared  that  gave Campbell the impetus  and  courage to regard  all knowledge  as within  his province  and  to pursue science through spiritual  or poetic intuition  for the rest of his life.
Campbell  left the University of Toronto  in 1883  to study  at  Episcopal Theo­ logical School in Cambridge,  Mass., where the intellectual  ferment  marked  him as permanently  as did the exposure to American  transcendentalism.  The  School had  been founded  just sixteen years before Campbell  began  his studies there.  It was independent of Harvard, but its nearness to the university  and  the freedom of students to take courses at either institution  meant  that  the Theological  School had  to meet  Harvard's high  intellectual  standards. In  Faith  and  Freedom,4   a history of the School, the Rev. George Blackman says that faculty  members were required  to teach  "'theological science"'  and  had  to display "'a scientific mind and  culture, ... some acquaintance with the later  results of scholarly research in other departments ... [and]  acute knowledge of  the relations of modern  Science to Revealed  Truth."' The  social sciences and  psychology were  welcomed,  and higher criticism of the Bible was both practised and  taught. Faculty  and students were on  intimate  terms, studying,  living  and  worshipping   together.  Blackman describes some of the men who were  Campbell's teachers:  Peter  Henry  Steen­ stra,  his professor of Old Testament,  was a  man  of "monolithic honesty"  who was "almost  frighteningly  frank." Because of his continuous  inquiry,  his "schol­ arly opinions changed  throughout his life." Alexander  Viets Griswold Allen, who taught  church  history, was "absorbed  by the  history of ideas embodied  in insti­ tutions"; "the  large  and  cloudy canvas  on  the grand  scale"  was his "favoured  medium." A student  said  of  New Testament   Professor  Henry  Sylvester  Nash, "'His was  no  Sunday-school  course,  shielding  our  faith.   We  were  given  the supreme  documents  of Christianity  and  we were set to find  their  meaning  and their truth.  If they were filled with hard questions which might later  unsettle our faith,  we were forced  to face  the  issue at  once."'  Campbell's spirit  of  restless inquiry into any subject and his sense of the unity of knowledge, set in motion at University  College,  received direction  and  encouragement  at  Episcopal  Theo­ logical School.
By contrast,  his life as a rural  priest must  have  been extremely frustrating. A man  with such an appetite for speculation  and  (as Klinck suggests in his biogra­ phy)  such  a relish for lively conversation  would  chafe  under  parish  duties  per­ formed  in  isolation  from  suitable  friends.  Campbell   also became  disenchanted  with  the  church  as a  model of society. The  hypocrisy  of  churchmen and  the pettiness of parish  politics disgusted  him so much  that  while  he was writing  a sermon  with one hand  he was composing invective against  churchmen with  the other.5  He left the  priesthood in 1891. The  poetry  he wrote  near  the end of his ministry shows that  he felt the despair induced  by a vision of a godless universe.

68

CAMPBELL

Nevertheless, all his life he remained  at least a spasmodic churchgoer. His specu­ lations on man and  nature  carried him away from trinitarian, sacramental ortho­ doxy, but if he no longer defined his faith according  to the Thirty-nine  Articles, he did not deny them  either. His view seems to have been, not that  the faith  of the church  was wrong,  but  that  it was insufficient. In  verse and  prose he flayed both  Protestantism and  Catholicism,  but  he praised  Christianity  itself as one of the main  unifying forces in society, a part of the common  heritage of the British race. Campbell's faith  was tried  severely during  his six years in  the  priesthood, but  he neither  lost it nor ceased to value the institution  which embodied  it. The harmonizing of religion, science, and social theory which preoccupied  his middle age began in these years.
Campbell  spent  twenty-six  years as a civil servant  in  Ottawa without  rising
above the rank of clerk. His I g I o diary6  is filled with complaints: when he is late he must sign a  book;  his office is too small and  uncomfortable; he is not  paid enough. But not one of these complaints concerns the work itself. In  Igo8 he had been promoted  to Archives because of the fine historical work he had done while working in Privy Council  ( I897-Igo8) /and his projects continued  to be histori­ cal. Far from creating  intellectual  or artistic tension in his life, his work coincided with his interests.  He seems to have worked alone much  of the time too, so that when  he  took  advantage of  the  policy which  permitted   civil  servants  to  take unpaid  leave when they wished, he was not constrained  to hurry  back. In  I 8g7, I go I, I go6 and  I g II, he made extended  visits to Britain; letters to Mrs. Camp­  bell during  the  I go6 visit express his intention  to write to various people to fore­ stall criticism of his four-month absence. These letters admit,  too, that one of the purposes of the trip,  as well as the means of financing it, was to sell some poems and  Ian  of the  Orcades.8  He succeeded in these endeavours,  but not in his search for  a  position  in  which  he  could  contribute  more  directly  to  the  Empire.  His yearning  for  work  that  would  serve not  only  his interests  but  also his highest ideals, first expressed when he became a priest, persisted until the end of his life. When his age and  health  prevented  his becoming a soldier in the Great  War,  he threw  himself into  the  war  effort in  Ottawa, recruiting,  drilling  Home  Guards  Corps, lecturing, farming, and writing poems, songs and articles. Finally, Archives loaned  him to the Imperial  Munitions Board as historiographer.9  At the time of his death,  he was writing an  account  of Canada's munitions  industry,  his daily labour  at last the outlet for his spiritual  as well as his intellectual  energy.




MucH HAS  BEEN  MADE   oF Campbell's quarrels  and  his contentious  nature, but it is worth  noting  that  the complainers  have been other writers.  Professional  jealousy sharpened  Campbell's pen,  and  it  also amplified

6g

CAMPBELL

the responses to its jabs. Campbell  may have parodied  Lampman's poetry in "At the Mermaid  Inn,'no  and  irritated  his fellow travellers  to  the  I897  meeting  of the Royal Society by declaiming blood-curdling  passages from  his tragedies;11  he may  have been  too  eager  to defend  his literary  territory  by  ravaging  someone else's; but  among  philosophers and  historians, and  among  politicians  and  other men of the  world,  he was more  at  ease. On  May  23,  I8g4,  he  was elected  a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, and from  I903  until  I9I I he was secretary of Section rr, the section for English humanities.  His correspondence shows how zestfully he performed  his duties and documents the warm relationships he formed with the most interesting  men in Canadian letters.  In  Ottawa, Campbell  made lasting friendships with William Lyon MacKenzie  King, who was his frequent companion  from  I go 1  until  his death;   Thomas  Gibson,  his  physician  and  an amateur  pianist  of local fame;  the  Rev. D.  W. R.  Herridge, Ottawa's  leading
Presbyterian  minister;  and  W. J. Sykes, an anthologist  and  the librarian of the
Ottawa   Public  Library.  He  became  close friends  with  his  clan  chieftain,  the ninth  Duke  of Argyll, and  with  Earl  Grey  when  he  was Governor  General  of Canada. He also visited Nicholas Flood Davin,  A. R. Dickey, John  Peter  Feath­ erston, and  other  politicians who could enjoy a heated  discussion with  him. He conducted  a long  and  animated  correspondence  with  R.  Tait  McKenzie  about art  in general  and  their own art  in particular, and  he and  Charles  Harriss,  the composer, enjoyed a fruitful and pleasant collaboration.
Unlike the writers who criticized him, Campbell  was a showman.  He filled his life with music. His mother, a musician, owned  the only piano in Wiarton, 12  and doubtless taught  young Will to play. His daughters played, composed, and sang, and  he may have  done  the same. The  Lome  Pierce  Collection  contains  manu­ scripts of musical settings for poems, one by his daughter Faith  and  at  least one that may be in his own hand, although  whether  he copied it or actually composed it cannot  be known. He and  Amy Troubridge, who adapted  "England" and set it to music,  planned  to earn  a good deal  of money  by  collaborating on songs, and he and  Charles  Harriss enjoyed several notable successes. Campbell's  poetry has been called  unmusical,  but  many  poems  that  appear   to  be repetitious  and harsh, such as "Chant Cordiale"  and  "The Sea  Queen," could easily be made into rousing songs, and  perhaps this was the fate Campbell intended  for them.
Whether  Campbell himself played or sang for others  is not  known,  although
as a priest he could hardly  have avoided it. But he did  recite. On  February   I7, I8g6, at the Historical  Ball given by the Governor  General  and  the Countess of Aberdeen,  "Mr. Hayter  Reed  as Donnacona made  a speech  in the  Indian  lan­ guage  to Their  Excellencies. Mr.  Wilfred  Campbell  as Tessonot  interpreted.ma  Campbell's  photographs  show  what  an  elaborate  event  this  was,  and  how  in­ tensely he played his part. A year later, on March  2, I8g7, he performed  in "An Intellectual  Treat," in which  Dr.  Thomas  Gibson  and  others  played  the  piano

70

CAMPBELL


and Campbell  and Miss M. F. Kenny, an actress, recited Campbell's poetry. Miss Kenny's  offerings included  "The Vengeance  of Saki,"  "written for  her  by the author." Her  rendering  of "Harvest Slumber  Song" was accompanied by music she had composed. Either she or Campbell  recited "Pan the Fallen,"  and Camp­ bell's recitation  of an  excerpt  from "Daulac" was "quite  the intellectual feature of the evening.m4  There  was some enthusiasm, at least in Ottawa, for Campbell's  closet drama. Four  of his "poetical  tragedies"  were  published  in book form  and a fifth appeared  in a magazine. One  typescript play  remains in a full script with well-thumbed  individual  parts  and another  is in six copies; both  were rehearsed, if not  pedormed.u In  his lectures on life, literature, and  the  Empire,  which he began  to give in  the  early  years of the  new century,  Campbell   combined  this passion for drama  and  performing  with his sense of mission as a teacher.




CAMPBELL TRIED CONTINUOUSLY to discover the nature  of man, his place in the physical and social universe, and  his relationship  with God. From  his earliest exposure to the idea of evolution at University  College, he was obsessed by the puzzle of man's  origin. From about  I 902  until  at least  I 9 I o, he worked on a treatise called "The Tragedy  of Man,m 6  which begins with an idea akin to Daniel Wilson's:  man's animal nature evolved according to the pattern suggested  by  Darwin,   but  his spiritual  nature  came  more  directly  from  God. Campbell  then postulates a superior race, one not evolved from the rest of  physi­ cal nature,  which mated  with the evolved race to produce  human  nature  as we know it; this mating,  he says, was the Fall. On  this scheme  depend  twenty-two chapters  of speculation  about  mythology, ethnology, the Bible, literature and art, religion, ancient  and  modem  history, monarchy  and  man's  social relations,  and man and the universe. Campbell  builds the entire corpus of his religious, literary, and  political  thought  upon  his theory of man's origin.
Campbell  does not subscribe  to the dualism inherent  in  Wilson's  suggestion:
man  for Campbell  has one nature,  not two, although  his nature  was formed  by two influences. Man's spirit, he believes, is dominant,  infusing and  controlling his whole being. Klinck says that Campbell's  thought is "Emersonian idealism return­ ing  through  reliance  upon  spirit,  if not through  spiritual  self-reliance,  to some­ thing very near orthodoxy." He adds, "The  only -ism in [Campbell's]  approved list was idealism."  Actually  Campbell's  idealism is not Emersonian. It is related only collaterally  to that  New England  school of thought.
Klinck's statement contains the key to the difference. Emersonian  idealism is individualistic; "reliance upon  spirit"  is very different  from  "spiritual  self-reli­ ance."  A. B. McKillop,  in  A  Disciplined  lntelligence/ 1 outlines  the  idealistic philosophy of John  Watson  and George Paxton  Young in terms that  come very

7I

CAMPBELL

close to describing Campbell's.  Watson, a Scot from  Glasgow University,  taught logic, metaphysics and ethics at Queen's  University from 1872 until 1924. He published  frequently  in magazines  as accessible as The  Canadian  Monthly and Queen's  Quarterly  as well as in scholarly  journals.  A  charter   member  of  the Royal Society, he was in Section 11 when Campbell  was secretary. George Paxton Young was older than  Watson,  but  he became  an  idealist late enough  in life to be considered  Watson's follower. He taught  ethics and  metaphysics  at University College when Campbell was there. These men were disciples, not of the American school, but  of Kant  and Hegel by way of Edward  Caird,  Watson's  professor of moral  philosophy  at  Glasgow. For  them,  "the  universe  [is] an  organic  whole," and  the  single  principle  behind  history  is  a  spiritual   one.  Physical  nature   is "'transmuted by the  action  of thought  into  exemplifications  of necessary laws, and  thus  half-subjective  generalizations  are  raised  to objective  truths.'" Man  is literally made in God's image, because reason "'connects him with the Divine'"; Nature  is "'the visible garment  of God'"; and  Duty is "'the voice of God speak­ ing in the innermost  depths of our  moral  nature."' This  appeared  to  Watson  to be "'the essential  principle  of Christianity,  the  union  or identity  of  the  human  and  divine.'" Christianity,  not the personal expression of private  religious senti­ ments,  followed  from  the  idealism  propounded by  Caird  and  interpreted  and taught  by his followers in Canada. Watson  reconciled  the contradiction between the need for freedom  and the belief in necessity by calling  a free act  one which "'is regulated  by the  highest laws of our  nature,'" that  is, by the internal  sense of duty which comes from God. One  who acts freely in this way "'is not subject to any  external  necessity, but  only to the inner  necessity of  his own  nature,  in obeying which he strengthens his will."'  By "'working out one's freedom  through  seeming necessity,' one  [is] brought  to a  universal  point  of view."  "Watson ... taught  that  the  Christian  message was best understood  and  acted  upon,  not  by depending  on traditional  creeds or doctrines ... but by the application of idealist social thought  to life in the secular world. In so doing, the secular  world would be spiritualized  and the Kingdom of Heaven  would  arrive."
The  Canadian idealists extended  to society their  notion  of duty  as freedom. Their  view, like Hegel's and Caird's, was that  because society is an organic  whole, social freedom is found in subordinating personal to social good. This means that personal life ought  to be assessed from a social perspective, and  that  it will have meaning only insofar as it contributes  to the common  good. Watson says that  the man  who  has  freed  himself from  "'undue  accentuation of  his own  individual desires'"  moves from  being merely a citizen of his family  and  then  of his own country  to being a citizen of the whole community  of man.  His duty  is to serve larger and  larger social organizations: the family, the church,  the state,  and  the whole race of man.

72

CAMPBELL


'"[E]ach individual  must  conceive of himself as a member  in a social organ­ ism,'" Watson said. Because the parts of an organism are bound  to their various orders of duties, an organic  view of society encourages monarchism  and Toryism. And if the organic  metaphor be extended  over time, society is seen as evolving, just like other organisms. Nat ural selection suggests that if one organism flourishes more  vigorously  than   others,  it has  a  natural  superiority;  when  evolutionary theory is reconciled  with  Protestant  Christianity,  that  organism's superiority  be­ comes an  expression  of  God's  purpose.  For  idealistic  imperialists  like  George Parkin,  George Grant, and  Wilfred Campbell, the supremacy  of the British race was clearly a sign of its superiority,  and  the expansion  of the  Empire  was '"as natural and  organic  as the force which compels the bursting  of a bud."''l8   They translated  Watson's  ideas on personal duty to the human  race into an imperative  to serve the British race and  his idea of the world into their  vision of the British Empire.  Campbell  thought  that  the higher, godlike portion of his nature  inspired in  him  a  sense of brotherhood,  not  with  all  people,  but  with  those  who,  like himself, had evolved into the supreme race on earth. Serving this race was Camp­  bell's mission in life. As a  poet, he sang impassioned songs to inspire  his feelings in  others,  for  his  imperialism  expressed not simply  his political  stance  but  his deepest spiritual beliefs.
Campbell's passion for history springs from these same sources. If present soci­ ety is an organism, and if it has evolved like an organism, then a man  who aspires to guide it into  a nobler  future  must know its history. With  his fellow  idealists, Campbell  believed that  the direction in which the race would evolve was neither predetermined nor decided  by such externals as geography  or the encroachment  of other cultures. In his "Life  and Letters" essays,l:9   Campbell insisted that  analy­ sis of the  race's  history  disclosed the special strengths  of  the  national  character  and therefore  that  it could enable statesmen to pursue strenuously  and effectively the highest national  goals. Widespread  study of  history, he said,  would rekindle in all members of the social organism the racial pride that  would make each one a devoted  contributor to the  progress and  welfare of all.


WTSON IDEALISTICALLY  VIEWED  Nature   as  '"the visible garment  of God.'" Because of Campbell's  intimacy  with  nature,  his philosophy became  more  complex  than  Watson's.  Campbell  found  the  natural world, like
the social world, to be informed  by spirit, and  nature's  physical beauties commu­ nicated  this spirit to him. Poems such as "The  Mystery"  ( CP   I 04, PW   I 87)  and "The  Earth  Spirit" ( CP   I42, PW I02)  articulate  this attitude fully  and  beauti­ fully. In "Nature the Benign"  ( CP  274, PW 233),  Campbell  says that  the reality is not the  randomness  and  violence seen by the materialistic  observer;  instead,


73

CAMPBELL

"She  is a spirit,  and  her  joy is life." His poems involving gods, goddesses, nymphs, satyrs,  or dryads express  his sense of that  continuous, timeless  spirit  which  gives value to nature's physical reality.  In  "An  August Reverie," he confesses that

I may not know each plant as some men know them, As children gather  beasts and  birds to tame;
But I went 'mid them as the winds that  blow them,
From childhood's  hour, and  loved without  a name.
(cP I 17, PW 61; ll. 43-46)

He  concentrates emotionally on that  spirit  in  nature which  informs her  physical manifestations. In  his earliest  poems, the  haunting of woods,  lakes  and  rivers  by the  souls  of  ancient Indians marks  the  beginning of  this  concentration. In  his mature work,  exhausted  man,  attracted  by  the   beauties of  nature,  draws  his only solace  from  nature's spirit.
Campbell's feeling  of oneness with  nature, expressed  in  "An  August  Reverie" and  also in  "March  Morning in  Canada" ( PW 325), comes  from  two  sources. First,  as a physical  being,  man  is a creature of earth, and  is kin to other  earthly creatures. But  he  is  not  to  be  identified   with   them. Man   is  not  part   of  the economy  of nature because  his spiritual component separates him  from  the  na­ tural  world.  Yet  the spirit  of man  can  find its counterpart in the spirit  of  nature, and  so on  the spiritual plane,  as well as on  the  physical  one,  man  is united  with nature.
This sense of spiritual unity  and  continuity means  that  the effects of nature can be felt  even  when  the  physical  reality  is absent, and  for  Campbell,  recollection is as important as experience. Not only is he able  to recreate at  will the  pleasures of nature as he writes about  them,  but  he is also able  to draw  from  his spiritual communion with  nature the strength that  enables  him to maintain his equilibrium in his daily life. Nature alone is rarely the subject of his poems about nature. Man is almost  always  present  to be acted  upon  by  nature or  to reflect  on  her  lessons. In  the  later  poems,  the  persona  finds a refuge  in  nature from  the  stresses of life. He  turns  away  from  other  men  to  refresh  his spirit  in  the  spirit  of  nature, and then   he  is  able  to  continue his  worldly  life.  Although Campbell conceivei'i of society  as  an  organism in  which  each  member ought   to  find  his own  good  in seeking the good of the whole, men succumb often  enough to their  individualistic animal natures to make  actual  life intensely  materialistic, even  for an  idealist  like himself. Communion with  the spirit  of nature mitigates the  damage inflicted  by other  men.
One  of Campbell's favourite words is "dream," and  he  uses it to describe  the state  in  which   his  spirit  is united   with  nature's. In  this  state,   he  receives  the messages  of  nature, spiritual   truths   apprehended  by  his  spirit.   He  knows  the source of these truths, too:  God.  Visible nature may  be the  garment of God, but

74

CAMPBELL


the  spirit  of  nature, which  alone  has  power  and  value  for  him,  is the  voice  of God.  This  distinction between  the  voice of God  and  God  Himself, and  between the spirit  of nature and  physical  nature itself eliminates the  need for Terry  Wha­ len's  division  of  Campbell's poetry  into  "romantic" and  "transcendental"  cate­  gories.20 For  Campbell, nature is neither the  stepping-stone to  a  transcendental God  nor  the  physical  manifestation of God. The  "face behind  earth's face" and  the "mystic word  our  wisdom  fails to spell" is the spirit  of nature through which man's spirit  is in  speechless  communion  with  God   ("Nature's Truth," CP   277, PW  235). In  "The  Mystery," Campbell articulates this  relationship clearly.  The  mysterious "glory" or  "greatness" which  "nature makes  us feel"  guides  men  to
God; the "glory" is not God  Himself,  nor does nature's physical  reality  alone  lead

1.
 "Stella Flammarum" ( PW  285)  gives concrete expression  to

the  idea  that  God  communicates through the  spirit  of nature with  the  spirit  of man.  Although man  cannot understand the  actual errand of Halley's comet,  his certainty that  it has a duty  imposed  by God  is in itself an  important message.  In his diary  entry for  April  I3,  I910, Campbell says, "I believe  that  the  comet  has its  appointed place  and   task  in  the  universe.... No  one  can  fathom the  vast unplumbed depths of the mystery of the vast universe. Our  mind  is finite;  but  the soul  is wider  in  its dim  consciousness  of  things  outside  of its  whole  comprehen­ sion." Man's nature is in  part  godlike;   his spirit,  which   has  come  from   God,  responds  to  the  spiritual quality in  nature and  is thus  united  with  God.  From  this  union  Campbell derives  the  energy  to  try  to  practise  idealism  in  the  world and  his comfort when  his efforts seem futile.
Sometimes Campbell  is unable   to  achieve  this  "dream" state; nature seems
utterly  dead  and  symbolic  of human death. Then, in  "The Winter Lakes" ( CP
346)  and  "Into My  Heart the  Wind  Moans" ( PW  333), his images  are  all  of winter.  Even  in "September in the  Laurentian Hills"  ( CP I 5I,  PW 95)  and  "An October Evening"  ( CP  I 46,  PW   69), autumn signifies  only  the  approach  of death-dealing cold.  Yet  in  some  of his most  frigid  poems,  such  as "To the  Ot­ tawa" ( CP I 20, PW I I 9)  and  "Cape Eternity" ( CP I 03), he is awed  by sublimity rather than numbed by emptiness and  fear.  In  many  poems,  too, death is seen as the  final  mystery,  an  awesome  passage  to some  unknown state  of being.  It is only  in  poems  combining winter  imagery  with  ideas  of  death  that the  spirit  is absent.  Campbell experiences his version  of  religious  despair  when  the  spirit  of nature holds  no communion with his own, for he is separated from  God.
Actually, for  Campbell, winter  is usually  a time  of peaceful  sleep  and  hidden growth; nature rests in  preparation for spring,  and  the  snow  is gentle  and  kind. Even  a storm  can  be exhilarating when  nature's spirit  is present, in  the  poet  as well as in the  woods  and  streams.  John  Ower  is surely  mistaken in his suggestion that  "How One Winter Came  in the  Lake  Region" ( CP 344, PW 74)  ends  with the  "equation of spiritual inspiration with  annihilation" and  the  "celebration of

75

CAMPBELL

an apocalypse of obliteration."z2  Lines I-20 indeed  show nature  devoid of spirit, and, by extension, they also describe the poet's desiccation. However, the redden­ ing of the  sky and  the  landscape  in  lines  2 I-25 communicates not  "incipient horror"  but the mystery of some burgeoning life force. The  tone of  the stanza  is positive: red is usually a colour of life for Campbell,  and all of the content  words in line 22,   "Flooding the  heavens in  a  ruddy  hue,"  have  positive  connotations throughout his poetry.  When  the sun in line 2 I   sets "like  blood,"  it does so in favourable  contrast  to its "blear" and  "aghast" appearance  in  lines 6 and I 8. The lake in lines g and I o is deadly still, and in lines 3 and  4 the fields are dead, but in line 23 the red light begins to revive them. The  marshes and creeks become red, too,  and  no longer  seem "shrunk  and  dry."  Life  has  not  yet  returned­ "never  a wind-breath blew" -but  the landscape,  the  poet  and  the  reader  are poised on the  brink  of true apocalypse.  In  the last stanza,  new life arrives  vio­ lently. The  "north's wild  vibrant  strains"  finally bury  the deadness of the world in snow so that nature can begin her yearly movement  toward  rebirth. The winter in the poet's veins and the "joyous tremor of the icy glow" signify nature's spirit rushing into the poet, awakening  his creativity,  just as the snow comes to prepare  the earth  for its new life. When the spirit of nature  is absent,  poet and landscape  are dead,  but  however violently that  spirit returns,  it brings  back  the essence of life. The  last  stanza  of "How  One  Winter  Came  in  the  Lake  Region"  com­ municates the  joy and peace of this return. "Thunderstorm at Night"  (Pw  323), on the other  hand,  ends with terror. The  spirit of nature  is absent  and  "ancient Dread"  overwhelms  those primitive  men  whose  "modem cults"  give  them  no security against nature's  outward  rage. The sonnet "Nature the Benign" ( CP  274, PW 233)  sums up Campbell's  solution of the  problem: when  the spirit of man is at one with nature's spirit, even her violence is life-giving.2·s
Poetry  was  Campbell's   vocation,  and  in  "The Night  Watcher" he  tells of receiving his calling.24  The speaker, on a hilltop in the stillness of a winter  night, refers to his shadow,  the evidence of his material  self, as "doggedly" following him, a  "grotesque  giant  on  the snow."  The  "I" experiencing   the  event  is his spiritual self. The great intelligences of the past come to him through  nature  and enrapture him so that  for a while he knows immortality and  the infinite directly. As he returns  to the  material  world, each  intelligence  kisses him,  baptizes  him into their fellowship, and bestows on him the fiery gift of tongues. Receiving the holy spirit of poetry, he hears the music of the spheres and is set apart  from other men. Campbell  sent "The Night  Watcher'' to the  Atlantic  Monthly on January
2 3, I 8g I, but it was not published there or anywhere  else until Sykes included  it
in the Posthumous  section of his Poetical Works.
The reason for this may be that  the poem speaks of a private,  personal inspira­ tion that  Campbell  soon came to regard  as only a part  of his calling.  His elegies on the deaths  of poets show the  beginnings of this change.  "To  Mighty  Death

CAMPBELL

Concerning  Robert  Browning," probably  written shortly  after  Browning's death in  December  I88g,  is a  meditation  on  death  and  poetry,  whereas  "The  Dead Poet,"  composed in August  I8gi, and  "Tennyson," published  in October  I8g2, reflect on  the services Lowell  and  Tennyson  gave to  humanity and  the  public grief upon their  deaths.25   In  mid- I 8g I, Campbell  distributed   his first occasional poem, "The Dead  Leader" (cP I83, PW 77),  written on the day of Sir John  A. Macdonald's funeral.  The  I 8g2  notebook contains  several  poems  prompted  by social rather  than  personal  feeling;  by the fall of  I 894  Campbell  had  written "The Lazarus of Empire," and in I 8g6 he published "Ode to Canada." By I goo, he  could  write  "[Canadians in  this  great  Canadian Land],"  his statement  of intention   to direct  all  of  his poetry  to  the  public  good.26   Social  thoughts  and current  events inspired  about  half of his poetry in the decade following the Boer War,  and  during  his last  years the  horror  of the Great  War  compelled  him to write public poetry almost exclusively.


His "LIFE AND  LETTERS" ESSAYS OF    I903-05  spell out his convictions about  the poet's mission. He has not given up his sense of the poet as seer:  "the  poet, who interprets [natureJ, is also a prophet  of God ... listening to
the  oracle  and  uttering  it  in  tongues of fire, on  human  pages.... [T]he  truest prophet,  the truest  revealer  of Deity, is he who has the largest  nature,  who can find Deity not only in the Bible and the church, but also in history, life, genius and nature" (December  26,  I903). Poets must continue  to sing, whatever  obstacles be placed in their way (March 26, I904); they will remember  "the  sacred office to which they were hom,  and  its relationship  to mankind" (January 30, I904). The  measure of a poet's work is the benefit the world derives from it  (September I 2, I 903). Indeed, "the  religion or philosophy of any writer greater or less should be that of the whole community  in which he lives.... No true genius is eccentric.
He cannot stand  alone.... [H]e  represents [the people's] ideals"  (September  I7, I 904). Poems about society need not be directly nationalistic : "A nation's greatest poets are not always those who have written its most striking  patriotic  verses, yet the body of their  work is generally imbued  with many  sentiments  of a patriotic nature." "The poems of a true  poet crystalize from the finest emotions and ideals of his life," which  necessarily include his patriotic  feelings, and  a great  national poem "must represent the highest crystalization of a truly national sentiment" (November  I4,  I 903). "Literature is the voice of a people's ideals"  (January 23,
I 904), and the poet is the conduit of this voice. Campbell's persona, therefore, is usually the  Poet Laureate, the anointed  one. He does not  hesitate  to be openly didactic,  for  that   is  how  he  must  perform  his duty  to  God  and  his  people. Philosophy, politics and  religion are suitable subjects as well as themes for poetry

77

CAMPBELL

because  the  public  poet,  in  "crystalizing" the  highest  ideals  of  his  audience, inspires them to nobler lives.
The  poet should  remain  committed  to art  as well as to society, but  humanity
must be at the core of artistic expression. The "truest  realism" is unrelated  to the accumulation of facts about daily life on the material  plane, but instead it "is the creation  of a mind  great  enough  to see human  life as it is in all ages-which can grasp  universality"  (February  27,  Igo4). "Art  for art's  sake" is worthless, and so is art for nature's  sake. Scorning merely descriptive  poetry, he says, "Hu­ manity  is everything,  because it  is soul;  and  nature  is only its  environment or mirror. ... Nature  on  the large scale, in  its various  moods ... has a  wonderful effect on our humanity; but we must have the humanity first on which the nature  can act"  (September g, I go4).  The  peculiar  quality  which  makes the  works of the greatest  artists immortal  is "a  wonderful  touch  of the  purely  natural" taken from "the  book of nature  and of life"  (May  2 I,  I go4) . "[T] here will ever be a wide  gulf ... between  art  and  nature....  To  discern  this  is  needed  a  divine instinct of the truly natural." The  artist  must go "to  life  and  nature  first and  to letters afterwards" (September  I 2, I gog).
Naturalness  forbids "fine writing" and artificial style, first because of the purity and  beauty  of the  thought  behind  the  poem,  and  then  because  the  truly  great artist  will write  only in his own  unique  way. "That which  is simplest  because most human  and  natural  ... is the great  literature....  [T]he  words  themselves are lost, like elements in the limpid water ... in the greatness and  beauty  of the thought  which they help to clothe"  (September 26, I gog). "I would lay it down as an axiom that in literature  and art the style ... if it is natural, is but a product of the message.... [W]hat  is language save the magic expression of thought  and ideal."  This magic expression should be unpedantic, free of "artificial  conceits," and  universally   comprehensible.  "What  the  great   mass  of  sincere  men  and women  can  understand and  appreciate ... is  without   doubt   the  best  and  the nearest  to  nature.  The  universal  judgement  is after  all  the  final  one."  To  be simple and  understandable, literature  must  not  "strain   to  a  pretence  of, or  an arrogation   of intellectual  meanings  and  spiritual   insight  which  cannot   be  ex­ pressed in  ordinary  language ... so as to  be  intelligible  to  the  average  sincere mind."  Great  literature  cannot  come from  the  "cult  in  which  small  cliques  of men  and  women  claimed to see and  feel beauty  and  idea  in  language  and  art, for the most part  unmeaning  to the rest of the world"  and  therefore  "divorce[d]
... from humanity" (July g, Igo4). Truth to nature  demands  simplicity of style, and  the  touchstone  of simplicity  is the  accessibility  of the  ideas  to  the  sincere reader.
Campbell's poetry  shows that  he did  not  push  this ideal  of naturalness  and simplicity to the logical conclusion of refusing to revise lest he strain  after  "fine writing"  or "artificial  conceits." On the few occasions when  he changed  a poem

CAMPBELL


after he had decided on its final form, his alterations coincide with his ideal of simplicity, consisting  mainly  of cutting  out  repetitious  material  and  substituting specific terms for general ones. The drafts show how he wrestled with his material to find the forms,  words and  expressions he wanted,  and  his letters  record  that he invited criticism and willingly made changes his friends suggested. He also accepted  editorial   criticism.  Instead  of  holding  his  original  expression  sacred because it was "natural," he attempted  an artistic rendering  of the natural. As he developed  his theory of simplicity, his use of grammatical  inversion declined. His continuous  use of archaic  verb forms is not natural, in the sense that it does not imitate speech, but it seemed to Campbell  to be the natural language for a poetry which he intended  to be universal, linking his audience  with their poetic heritage as well as with one another  in the present. Believing that  contrast  is as necessary in natural poetry as it is in nature  itself, he praised the unevenness of finish such contrast requires and did not take pains to distill his thoughts or express them economically. He believed that true simplicity and directness demand  not mere compression, but greatness of thought  expressed according  to the writer's  natural genius. The  greatest  poets, he said, have always "been  considered  uneven in the character  of their  work," and "the  uneven poem may be as necessary to the line or stanza  of beauty  therein  as the wood or heaven to the flower or star."27
Naturalness and  simplicity  led  Campbell  to  use  conventional  stanza  forms. Seeing himself as a member  of the timeless community  of poets, too, he felt that innovation  would  be a rejection  of his calling. In  his earliest  Indian  poetry,  he plainly  imitated   Longfellow,  although   he  soon  outgrew   this  attachment.  His enthusiasm  for Poe helped  him to shape his melodramatic impulses into  market­ able verse in  theI 8go's.  Of  the English Romantics,  he loved  Coleridge,  Byron, and Shelley, but he found  Wordsworth  too far removed from humanity and Keats too deliberately  artistic.  Campbell's  poetry was obviously  influenced  in a lasting way by Tennyson's,  although  his critical appraisal  of  Tennyson  was ambivalent. As an artist,  he said, Tennyson  was a "writer  of  polished verses," a "mere  maker of  rhymes  and   phrases."  Poems  such  as  "The  Lotos  Eaters,"  "Ulysses,"  and "Enone" exemplified  his "drivel  about  mated  vowels." But "he  was not the most finished artist  when  he produced  his best and  most characteristic  verse" such  as "Locksley Hall,"  "The Charge  of the Light Brigade,"  and  "The Death  of Wel­ lington."  These  represent  "genuine  bursts of  inspiration," written  in "his  truest and least self-conscious moods." He credited Tennyson with "a strong individual­ ity ... which chafed ... against that very smugness and artificial conventionalism,  of which Tennyson  the artist  afterwards  became the  chief and  leading  apostle"  (May  7,I 904). The  key to Campbell's  mistrust of Tennyson  the artist lies in his term  "self-conscious": the  true  artist  is conscious of his mission, not of himself. Consequently,   he  writes  narratives  or  meditations  with  clear  messages for  his audience,  not  self-indulgent  tone  poems. Campbell  did  not  like Kipling  either,


79

CAMPBELL

and  for  the  same  reason:  his work  was self-indulgently  boisterous  and  vulgar, and  his narratives  contained  little to mirror  and  encourage  the  highest ideals of the race (October I 7, I 903). Campbell  admired  Lowell without  reserve, praising "the  noble  spirit  of  his verse which  voiced  a  high  ideal  of  human  effort  and ultimate  destiny."  Lowell  "felt  and  put  into  his  song  the  responsibility  of  the national  life and  saw the ill resultant  from  the  failure  of  the  people to  realize that  only  unselfish citizenship and  the  putting  into  practice  of the  golden  rule could  ultimately  save the  Republic," a lesson Campbell  found  appropriate  for Canadians, too. He especially loved Lowell's  patriotic  "Conunemoration Ode," on which he modelled his own (June  IB, I904). Campbell  regarded  Shakespeare with awe as both a dramatist  and a poet. That the British race had produced Shakespeare  was one of its highest achievements.  Campbell worshipped  him;  he did not criticize him. Among his contemporaries,  his friend William Henry Drum­ mond was his favourite. But Campbell  loved Burns above all other  poets. When­  ever he wrote about  others, Burns was his touchstone.  Burns wrote naturally; he "went  to life and  nature  first";  he recognized  and  was  inspired  by "Nature in the abstract,  the great  purifying,  elevating,  consoling  influence" (September 3, I904); and he was the quintessential  poet of  humanity. None of the poets Camp­ bell admired  was an experimenter  with form. All were conservative,  making  the poetic conventions  new by their  special  use of them  rather  than  leading  other poets into new ways. As a poet of  humanity  writing for "the  great mass of sincere men and  women,"  Campbell  found  his only suitable  vehicle  to  be the familiar verse forms.
Although  Campbell  did not invent new forms, he was not enslaved by the old ones. In  "Sebastian Cabot"   (cP  I72,  PW  107)   and  "The Tragedy   of  Man" ( PW  280), for instance,  Campbell  shaped  the feelings he wanted  to evoke with varied  line  lengths  and  irregularities  of metre.  These  irregularities suggest  the organic  nature  of the emotion as it arises little by little from  the thought,  as well as conveying  the emotion  itself. With  his use of the  six-beat  line in such  early poems as "The   Winter  Lakes"   (cP 346)  and  "To the  Ottawa" (cP  I20,  PW
I I 9), he augments  his descriptive and evocative powers with a subtle yet intense onomatopoeic  rhythm.  Such  manipulation of form  cannot  be  considered  inno­ vative, but it shows more sensitivity than  Campbell  is often  credited  with having. In general,  his meditative  poetry is less regular  than  his narratives, exhortations, or songs, and the poetry from the middle of his career, from the I89o's until about I 9 I o, is a little more adventurous  in rhythm  and  less regular  in rhyme than  his
earlier, more imitative  work or his later, more didactic  work. Campbell  wrote to
draw a certain response from a certain audience,  not to express his private feelings or to create detached  works of art. His poetry is "self-expression" only in the sense that  he  expressed  feelings and  ideas  that  he  believed  to  be  worthy  of  public attention  and  general  application.   His  attitude toward   the  formal  qualities  of

Bo

CAMPBELL


poetry,  like his attitude toward its subject  and  the emotions it should  convey, was governed   by  his vision  of  the  use of  poetry  in  the  world  and  his mission  as  a poet.
In  the fragment "[Canadians in this great  Canadian Land]," Campbell artic­
ulates  the  unity  of  his  poetic  impulses : the  aim  of  his  poetry  is to improve   all Canadians by showing them  the  essence of  their  land   and  their  own  collective nature. He  asks for  the  poet's  crown  because,  knowing these  essential  truths, he can  communicate them   at  the  one  appropriate level,  the  poetic.  He  would  be the laureate who  would  teach  his countrymen to nurture their  own  best selves so that   they  could  contribute whatever was good  in  themselves to  the  nation  and the race. Most of his poems about man and  nature  and  all his poems about events have  this  pragmatic aim,  and  this  is the  context  in  which  we  must  read  them. Then we  can  see  how  interesting his  poetry  is, and   how  valuable it  is in  our literary history.


NOTES

1 For  a  biography of  Wilfred Campbell, see Carl  F.  Klinck, Wilfred  Campbell:  A Study  in  Late  Provincial  Victorianism (Toronto:   Ryerson,  I 942;   rpt.  Ottawa: Tecumseh, I977). References will be to  the  reprint; the  title  will  be abbreviated
we.
Page  references will be made in parentheses in the  text  to the  two collections  of
Campbell's poetry  most  likely  to  be found  in  libraries: The  Collected  Poems  of
Wilfred  Campbell  (Toronto: Briggs; Toronto: Ryerson; New  York  and  London: Revell,  1905)    (cP); and   The   Poetical Works  of Wilfred   Campbell,  ed.  W.   J.
Sykes  (London: Hodder and  Stoughton, I923)   (Pw).  For  poems  found  in neither of  these  books,  I  will refer  to  Laurel Boone,  "The Collected Poems  of  William Wilfred  Campbell" (Ph.D. thesis,  Univ.  of New  Brunswick,  I 98 I)    (B) . See  also Carl   F.  Klinck, intro., Wilfred  Campbell:  Selected  Poems  (Ottawa:  Tecumseh,
I 976), and  Raymond Souster, ed.,  Vapour  and  Blue:  S ouster  Selects  Campbell
(Sutton West: Paget,  1978).
The Lome Pierce  Collection at Douglas  Library, Queen's University, holds most
of Campbell's papers. The initials  LP   and  the letters,  numerals and  titles following
will indicate material in  the  Lome Pierce  Collection.
z Carl  F. Klinck, Literary  History of Canada, 2nd ed.  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I976), Vol.  I, p.  I75· Daniel Wilson, Caliban: The  Missing Link  (London: Macmillan, I 873) .
3  A.  B.  McKillop,  A   Disciplined   Intelligence:   Critical   Inquiry   and  Canadian Thought in  the  Victorian Era  (Montreal:  MeGill-Queen's Univ. Press,  1979), p.  I68.
4  George  L. Blackman, Faith  and Freedom: A Study  of Theological  Education  and
The  Episcopal Theological  School  (New  York: Seabury, I967).
5 Ms.  notebook   LP    I3/V Poems.  Collected  (5)    (ca.  I885-I887). See  also  At  the Mermaid  Inn, ed. Barrie  Davies  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I979), Decem­ ber  24, I892,  p.  2I6.  This essay is anonymous but Campbell is certainly its author.
6  LP   II/III Diary.  I910-I9I6.

8r

CAMPBELL

7  Klinck,  WC, p. I2.
8  LP gfll Letters. Draft letters  to Mrs. Campbell, not  bound.
9 Klinck,  WC, pp. 23g, 24I-42.
10 Davies, viii; July  I,  I8g3, p. 341.
11 ArthurS. Bourinot, ed., Archibald  Lampman's Letters  to  Edward  William Thom- son (r89o-r898) (Ottawa: privately  printed, Ig56), gg.
12 Klinck,  WC, p. 2g.
13  The Lounger (July  Ig86), p. I6.
14  Clipping in LP I g /V Poems. Collected  ( I )  [I 8g5-18g7]. See also Montreal Gazette
(March Ig,  I8g7).
15  Mordred and  Hildebrand (Ottawa: Durie, 18g5); Poetical  Tragedies (Toronto: Briggs,  1go8);  "The  Brockenfiend," The  Lounger  (December  I8g6),  p.  285;   LP I 2 /IV Drama 8. "The Fatal  Throw"; LP  I 2 /IV Drama 4· "The Heir  of Linne."
16 LP 2ojVI Prose  76. "The Tragedy of Man."
17 See note g.
18 Carl  Berger, The Sense of Power  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  Ig7o), p. 226.
19 "Life and   Letters" appeared weekly  in  the   Ottawa  Evening  Journal   between
<August 2g,  Igo3,  and  June 24, Igo5.  Barrie  Davies  is preparing an  edition of  the series and  has kindly  permitted me to use his typescripts.
20  Terry Whalen, "Wilfred Campbell: The  Poetry of  Celebration and   Harmony,"
Journal  of Canadian Poetry  (Autumn Ig78), 27.
21  ( CP  104, PW 2gg) . Klinck  found  what  he believes  to be an  authoritative correction in one of the copies  of CP which  came  to the  National Library from  William  Lyon MacKenzie King's collection.  On   this  basis,  Klinck   emends the  last  line  of  the poem  to read  "Linking life to God"  ( W C, pp. 2 1g, 2 78) . This emendation does not alter  the  point  made here.
22   John Ower, "Portraits of  the  Landscape as  Poet," Journal  of Canadian Studies
(February 1g7I),  27.
23 For  another criticism  of Ower's analysis, see Whalen, pp. gg-g5.
24    (Pw  316). "The Night  Watcher" is Campbell's ms.  title  for  the  complete poem. Sykes'  title  for  his slightly abbreviated and  changed version  is "The Sky Watcher" (B 466).
25   "To Mighty Death Concerning Robert Browning," The  Dread  Voyage (Toronto: Briggs, I8gg), p. I8I; B 50g. "The Dead  Poet" (cP  162,  PW 210). "Tennyson," The Week  (October 28, 18g2), p. 758; B 537·
26  "The Lazarus of Empire" ( CP gog, PW  11g). "Ode to Canada," Massey's  Magazine (July  I8g6), p. 55;  B 67g. "[Canadians in  this  great  Canadian Land]," LP  Ig/V Poems  Collected ( 10)  [I goo] ; B gig.
27   Davies,  November I2,  I8g2,  p. 18g; "Life and  Letters" (January 28,  Igo5).







LEJIVJNG HOME



Small  house  on a sad street, the  North Hill of Calgary. Purple crocuses  in  Mid-March
matching mauve  bruises on my mother's arms, from  him or self-induced,
sum  of a  Depression.

Thin string  line of diapers between  water  heater
and  drainboard in  the  kitchen, Tied  to the  lean  wail
from  the front  bedroom of yet another baby:

Result of a hurried assault  in the grey light of a January dawn, when,
back  from  Edmonton, and  holding
two white  jack rabbits  by frozen hind  legs, hit  by his Ford
on  snow-drifting highway,  he came home  from  a selling  trip.

A sometimes salesman: cars, waterless  cookware, shrubs of  marvelous blossom, cookies  with  confection centre
lying  like melted  pink  bathsoap in  stomach's dish,
tractors for  Massey-Harris. (Later Massey  Fergus.)   Betraying heritage of worn  linoleum,
long ribbed  stockings, and  goose-grease.

Makeshift picket  fence missing  laths,  half-painted.
Warped front  door,  letting in the storms
but  lock-jammed in  summer. Inside,  welter  of worry  lines:
One  pound  of baloney  (ten  cents)
on  white  chipped enamel  table set  for  seven.
 POEM




Mary Razzell

POEM

Lean  view from  cramped house, through prairies reached unbroken
to mountains rimming west with  blue. Shut  door. Hate seeping  under  the crack to lie hidden  in dust  balls
under  all the  beds in all the rooms holding  the many  children
that  were my father's nonchalance and  my mother's religion.

Lift  the shell of then.  Hear shock waves of anger
go round  and  round, bounce
from  aging bathroom, cracked  tub  and slanting floor, to where
sleeping  on a couch  not  yet paid  for
I recorded all.

Let  me quit  that  house,
Join   jubilanting meadow-larks celebrate spring  waters
and  violets rising from  old snows.







I'M IN NO W").Y
 


Michael Mirolla


I'm  in no way afraid of my worst  enemy's knife,  gun  or  words. They are no more  powerful  than  those  I possess. I'm in no way worried   that  he  might   jump  me  from   behind   or  attack me  while I sleep. I have  a bodyguard trained to do  nothing but  walk  back­ wards-and I do not  sleep, having cultivated insomnia through long and  arduous practice. Nor  is there  any  possibility  whatsoever
of his catching me unawares, perhaps drunk and  debauched, spilling myself copiously  into one of his beautiful spies. I drink  and  make love moderately, with  always a watchful part  of myself in reserve. No, I fear  absolutely  none  of  those  things.  What frightens and disturbs  me, what  sends unearthly shivers  down  my back  and  causes me  to pace  nervously  is the diabolic talent  my enemy  has of for­ getting.

FIELD OF VISION

Hugh Hood and the Tradition  of Wordsworth



Anthony John Harding






ROMANTICISM, ITS CRITICS have suggested, was locked in a futile struggle  against  time. The  elusive beauty  which  was sought  by a  Words­ worth or a Keats mocked the steady running of the hour,  and  could be described only as it disappeared from  view, as we can  perceive a subatomic  particle  only by the track  it leaves on  the screen of an electroscope. The  realistic novelist­ so the argument often  ran-could  not stay for such  phantoms  of sublimity, but must  make  time  the  very  essence of  his or  her  work,  paying  no  attention   to Romantic notions  of the  eternal  moment,  the  moment  out  of  time.  Romantic poets, it  was argued,  wrote  about  the  evanescent,  the  unrealizable; the novelist wrote about  life as it is lived.
Fortunately for Canadian writing, Hugh  Hood  in The  New  Age has rejected this  dichotomy  between  "dreamy" Romanticism  and  "down-to-earth"  realism. By making  his narrator a self-confessed Wordsworthian, and  a  reader  of  Cole­ ridge and  Blake, Hood  has claimed for himself and  his readers  the  tradition  of the  central  English  Romantic poets,  and  embarked   upon  a  major  revisionary reading of Romanticism. The  aim of this essay is to determine  how far the three parts  of The   New  Age  so far  published  (The Swing   in  the  Garden,  A  New Athens,  and  Reservoir  Ravine) 1 have enlarged  our  understanding of Romanti­ cism, and established a place for it in Canadian cultural life.
Most modem  critics of Romanticism  agree that  the Romantic feeling towards time is not  altogether  one of outright  fear or distrust,  but  rather  the sense that time is the  matrix,  the essentially creative and  beneficent  medium  in which our perceptions  are  formed.2   In  terms  of Christian  mythology,  it  is the  rapture  of Adam  and  Eve at learning  that  God will bring final good even out of so poten­ tially  tragic  an  event  as  the  Fall  and  the  loss of  Eden,  contrasted  with  their earlier despair  at that  loss :

0 goodness infinite, goodness immense! That all this good of evil shall produce, And evil tum  to good....3

HOOD

Instead  of Eden  and  the Shechinah, we have  human   history  and  the  light  of common  day-and  the substitution  is not  altogether   something  to  grieve  at. Time, seen in  this manner,  permits  humanity  to  participate in  the  redemptive process foreseen  by the  archangel  Michael -particularly  through   the  creative powers of the artist, the poet, the historian.
In  an interview  with Robert  Fulford  broadcast  in 1974,  Hood  suggested that the moral universe of Canadians  is essentially postlapsarian, as that  of Americans is Edenic:

I  think  there is Canadianness, and  I  really do  think  there  is a Canadian  style. I think sometimes it's a more blameworthy, a more After-the-Fall moral style. The Americans are all questing after Eden, and I think every American would like to be in Eden....  we're so conscious of the  Fall  in  Canada.  We always seem to accept the limit in the possible because we know we're in a fallen state. That's  the kind of thing I'm interested in.4

For just this reason Matthew  Goderich, Hood's chief narrator, is at pains to stress the  humanness  of  what  he is doing,  its time-  and  history-conditioned quality. Works of art, in the words of Matthew's  father,  are "an  extension of our agency" (Swing, p. 119), they will have the marks of the  workshop  on them,  the grainy vitality  of  a  Cezanne,  as their  claim  to  authenticity, their  signature:  artificer humanus fecit. Goderich's  career as an art  historian  begins in his study of stone houses in Ontario's Loyalist County, rather  than  in the university lectures on the (for  him)  remote  Watteau  and  Rubens,  accessible only in  photographic  repro­ ductions.  News of the  discovery of the  cave  paintings  at  Lascaux  almost stuns him with  the  revelation  that  art  is more than  thirty  thousand  years old,  coeval with humanity itself. The  brilliant  Maura  Boston, Matthew's friend  at Victoria College, deeply versed in Fearful Symmetry, sees all art as revelation, all literature as theology-but Matt's  comment  on  Maura's vision  is  "there's an  essential piece of the structure missing" (Athens, p. 36). We are  surely invited  to guess that  what  is missing from this complete, unified  vision is our  own  postlapsarian  incompleteness.
Goderich's Romanticism, then, is not of the apocalyptic kind, the Romanticism
that T. E. Hulme  unjustly called "spilt religion," but the Romanticism that  looks before and  after,  that  is as entranced  by the  processes of  becoming  as by the mysteries of being. This Romanticism  is not impatient for sudden  revelations of absolute  truth  and  beauty, but uncovers its values progressively, through  patient study of time and its structures.  Memory is essential to it, but not the unselective, purely linear  memory  of the  chronicler: it  is not  the  sequence  of  events  that matters  to it, but  the  correspondences, connections  and  transformations lurking
within the events, history's cunning corridors. Wordsworth's "The days gone by I
Return  upon  me almost from the dawn  I Of life"can in this sense be applied to all  human   history,  as well as to  the story  of  one  life, for  to  the  Romantic

86

HOOD


memory  is not  a mere  chronicler  of sense-impressions but  a  power  that  contin­ ually supplies and shapes the materials of our individual  and  national conscious­ ness. Without   the  knowledge  that  this shaping  memory  can  give  we are  lost, literally  un-conscious.  What   Roger  Shattuck   remarks  of   Wordsworth-"To notice  was for  him  an  act  of  imagination:  forming  an  image  so  strong  and integral  it  transformed   the  world" -is,  at  key points in  the  narrative, true  of Matthew  Goderich. Yet The  New  Age is not a portrait  of  a man  born out of his time and  place, nostalgically yearning for Grasmere and the lost Wordsworthian wholeness. Hood's  point  is precisely that  Canadians,  like other  moderns,  have inherited  the Romantic-Wordsworthian task of  reunifying a dislocated world. To borrow Shattuck's terms once more, The  New Age is "the  portrait  of a conscious­ ness resolved to assimilate its surroundings as a fully conscious expression of the universe, as the locus of a whole life" (Shattuck's version of Wordsworth's achieve­ ment in The  Prelude) .'6   Canadian dislocation and anomie constitute  a particular, perhaps exemplary  case of the post-Enlightenment dilemma.7




QHAPS NO  OTHER new-created  country  is so much  a  prod­ uct  of  history's  quirks  and  U-turns as  Canada,   which  is  why  Hood's  novel sequence  can  claim  to  be  about  Canada in  a fuller  sense than  most  previous Canadian works. Decisions taken elsewhere -in  Paris,  London, Washington - have had so significant an impact  on Canada's development that some have been tempted   to  dismiss  all  talk  of  Canadian  nationhood   as  empty   rhetoric.  The  truest  Canadian style, it  would  then  follow, would  be  some form  of Dadaism,  Hans  Arp's  response to the fate  of his native  Alsace,  which  was claimed  alter­ nately  by France  and  by Germany  as the chances of  war  pushed  it  first in one direction,  then  in  the  other.  Hood  takes  the  different  route  of  acknowledging  the exterior  determinants on Canada's development,  while arguing  that  they still do not altogether  invalidate the sense of possibilities, of alternative futures,  that has characterized the Canadian  psyche in some of its manifestations.
He achieves this by revitalizing  the favourite  Romantic analogy  between  the
personal  development  of  the  individual  and  the  historical  development   of the state.8   While  giving full play to his narrator's sense of his own inner  life, Hood shows at  the same time  Goderich's  acute  awareness of the  determinants  placed upon  him  by his political  and  economic  environment-by  Toronto, by  North Rosedale, the CPR,  Canadian Catholicism.  Goderich  is no mere cipher  in some sociological blue book, however:  the point is that  he can see, he can  know.

We  want to  tell what we  have  seen,  and  more  than  that  we  assign  values in  the course  of our  narrative. Being is Being Born, moving  through the seed to the  womb to the  go-cart to the coffin, always human, always free  though always  constrained,

HOOD

always entering into new knowledge, retelling it, testifying to its truth, guaranteeing it. (Ravine, p. 203)

Wordsworth's "something  evermore about  to be" seems present  to the narrator's mind  here, and  so too does something  like Heidegger's  concept  of "the  human existent,"  Dasein, of which John  Macquarrie remarks "Dasein is never complete in its being. To  exist is always to be on  the  way ... constituted  by possibilities rather  than  properties."9
If one image conveys this Romantic  understanding of being-in-time  more than any other it is that of the path, track or  (sometimes)  labyrinth; in particular, the strange  trick that  paths have of returning  us to the place we started  from. As individuals,  we like to think we travel in straight  lines:  history tells us we travel in circles, or in spirals. When James Joyce left Dublin  in 1902 he was travelling towards  Ireland, not  away from  it. The  white  arms  of roads  leading  Stephen Dedalus towards Europe are the white arms of Eileen in the first chapter of the Portrait. Like  Wordsworth  at  Tintern, we are  perpetually   recrossing  our  own paths, and all we see is deja vu.
There   is nothing  intrinsically  reassuring  about   this : the  experience  can  be restorative,  as at  Tintem, or  oppressive, involving  more  "sad  perplexity"  than "cheerful   faith." Its  value  depends  upon  the  imaginative intelligence  that  is brought  to  it-without  that,  it  is no  more  illuminating than   Alice's  baffling inability  to find a path away from the house that  doesn't  immediately  return  her to  the  house again.  "We  assign values in  the  course  of  our  narrative." Matt Goderich  sometimes  benefits from  the  telescoping  of  time,  as  when  he  stands before the Master of Alkmaar's seven panels in the Rijksmuseum  and discovers knowledge he didn't  know he had,  knowledge that  had  been lying in  wait until this moment of its fulfilment. And sometimes the experience is mystifying and troubling,  as when he glimpses his schoolroom of forty years ago on a late after­ noon  walk,  and  his importunate demand  for  reassurance  and  Wordsworthian restoration  is met only by a sense of "perpetual loss, paralysis of  will"  (Ravine, P· 219).
After  banishment   from  Eden,  however,  the  Wordsworthian  knows  that  the
only sane course is to accept the substitution  of earth  itself for the lost paradise, or still more radically, to make earth  itself one's  Eden:

whither shall I turn,
By road or pathway, or through trackless field, Up hill or down, or shall some floating thing
Upon the river point me out my course?
1(Prelude 1,  II. 27-30)

Imagination  brings  together  the  crossings of  the  paths  where  meaning  waits, aligns  the  corridors  of history so that  meaning  comes  down  to  us, sometimes

88

HOOD


bewilderingly, sometimes with  the  force  of illumination. There is no  choice  but to do it this  way : there  are  no more  Mount Sinais  to climb.
Matt's infant dreams are  blended, not  with  the  voice  of  Derwent, but  with
the  traffic  of  the  CPR line  that  borders  his parents' back  yard.  Where  another writer   would   see  opportunities for  parody, Hood   keeps  our  attention  on  the object  as it  really  is. The CPR line  running through North Rosedale  is first  of all  an  irreducible fact,  neither holy  nor  unholy  but  one  that  is woven  into  the texture of many  thousands of lives, as indeed  was -and is -the River Derwent.
Later, Matt visits Tintem and  finds  that  many  more  paths  meet  there  now than  even  Wordsworth could  have  envisaged.  The  episode  beautifully illustrates Hood's understanding of  the  spiral  or  cyclical  nature of  Wordsworthian time. Matt Goderich, drawn by Wordsworth's account of what  happened to him  as he recrossed  his own  path near  Tintem, visits the  spot -like many  others  before him  and  since -and  tries  to  retrace  the  very footsteps  of  Wordsworth and  his sister.

We decided  that  the  earlier  travellers  had  ascended  the  hillside southeast  of the abbey  buildings,  so we looked around  and  sighted  the  elegant  small bridge  that crosses the  river  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  north  of  the  abbey. We  wandered across the bridge, admiring  the serene flow of the river as we stood above it looking down from  the bridge. Then  we followed a track along  the east bank, climbing at quite  a steep  angle into  woods. In  a few minutes we'd  gotten  into  thick greenery and  were on  high  ground,  on a hillside which  rises maybe  700 feet.  Most of the way we were in cover, on a straight, evenly graded walkway.
In  ten  minutes  we stopped,  turned  and  looked down  upon  the  ruined  abbey,
supposing  we had  found  our  way to the exact  prospect  that  the  poet had  gazed down upon  just as he began  to conceive his poem,  160 years before. We could see sportive hedgerows. After taking in the beauty of the prospect we began to wonder about  the walkway  which  had  led us up here, a path  of some sort, mighty wide, man-made perhaps.
The  damn  thing  was an  abandoned  rail-line.  (Athens, p. 49)

Then in an  even  more  time-warping moment, Matt and  Edie,  in  the sepulchral emptiness of an  unused railway  tunnel, feel the  same   frisson as Wordsworth felt as he descended into  the  grave-like dungeon at  Cockermouth Castle.  (A  further richness  of  meaning is added by the  fact  that  it was  at  Goodrich Castle,  a few miles north of Tintern, that Wordsworth spoke to the  little  girl described  in "We Are  Seven." There is, it  seems,  a Goderich-Goodrich connection, in  which   the main  link is the notion  of the continuity of the human enterprise, the indivisibility of living and  dead.) When railways  were new, Wordsworth loathed them,  but  to those who  come  after  him  an  unused  railway  is already an  antiquity, part  of the landscape, more  truly  an  antiquity, in a sense, than  Tintem Abbey  itself,  which is constantly renewed by Wordsworth's poem.  The  abandoned railway  line,  with its  empty, sepulchral  tunnel,  becomes   Hood's image   of  existence-in-time-past

8g

HOOD

(not, he is at pains to emphasize, of non-existence), uncreated, virtually, because now untravelled,  but  still continuous  with  Matt's present  path.  What  has once existed cannot  cease to exist:  "History  traces the footpaths of the Divine Being" (Athens, p. I I). Hood rejects in this image the dark  belief visited upon  Forster's Mrs. Moore, in the  Marabar Caves:  "Everything exists, nothing  has value."  In the continual  refashioning  of our  world by the  paths  we take,  we bestow  value, and the artist more than anyone has the power of doing this.
So Wordsworth, again, roaming the hills in "the  blessed hours / Of early love," and  coming  upon  the spot  where once a murderer had  hung  in  chains  on  the gibbet-the  spot from  which  Wordsworth  himself  as a  boy, conscious of this horrible association, had fled in terror -now finds even this dark  remembrance of fear and panic enhances the "radiance" of the place for him, because that fear, and  the subsequent  visionary sight on the  bleak  moorland, is part  of him : his memory and imagination  have fed upon the experience, uncovered its particular meaning. The  power  which shaped  Wordsworth  the  man  has brought  good out of what had once been evil (Prelude xu, 11. 225-27 I).




WRITERS ON   THE  PICTURESQUE, such  as William  Gilpin, would often  rank  beauty  spots in order  of aesthetic  value,  much  as the  Guide Michelin ranks restaurants: this view is nearly perfect, that  is imperfect  but worthwhile,  a third  is quite  uninteresting.  Wordsworth, scorning  this cultivation of the eye at the expense of other human  faculties, democratized geography.  Not the "objective  beauty" of the spot, but its interweaving with a human  life, is the source of its value, its visionary meaning.
There  is no trickery in this, no literary  hocus-pocus.  Some  readers  of  Words­ worth have felt that,  if anything,  he explains too much,  is over-particular. Keats, in his jibe about  Wordsworth's  "Matthew, with a bough of  wilding in his hand," means to suggest that  Wordsworth  deliberately  chooses images that  are  prosaic, devoid of literary  association, images that  resonate  only  within  a  particular ex­ periental context.  For Wordsworth,  it is not "fields of Arcady," or even "fields," but:  "A  single Field  which I have looked upon." Particularity, the opposite  of Johnson's  "just  representations  of general  nature," is the  very fabric  of Words­ worthian  Romanticism; without  it  you cannot  "see  into  the  life of  things,"  a notion  which  in  Hood's  view is closely related  to  the  Thomistic,  and  Joycean,  understanding of the quidditas or "whatness" of  a thing.

I have ... written some stories about  a kind of experience close to that  of the artist: metaphysical thought. ... It is the  seeing-into-things, the  capacity for  meditative abstraction, that  interests  me about  philosophy, the  arts  and   religious  practice. I love  most  in  painting an  art  which  exhibits  the  transcendental  element dwelling

go

HOOD


in living things. I think of this as true  super-realism. And I think of Vermeer,  or among  American  artists  of Edward  Hopper,  whose paintings  of ordinary  places, seaside cottages, a roadside snack bar and gasoline station, have touched some level of my own imagination  which  I can only express in fictional images.... The  kind of knowing which Wordsworth  caLled "reason in its most exalted mood" and  which Coleridge  exalted  as  creative  artistic  imagination,  does  the  same  thing  as  that power which Saint  Thomas Aquinas thought  of as the active intellect.1 '0

The  pivotal instance of vision, seeing-into-things, in The  New  Age as we now have it is probably the moment at the opening of A New  Athens when  Goderich, walking  along  Highway 29 north  of "Stoverville," crosses a strange embankment, a pair  of close parallel paths  leading  off into  the far  distance spatially, but  tem­ porally  leading Matt right  back  into  his own  past.  "This place  intersected  with that  time....  I knew  where  I'd  been,  where  I was  now,  what  funeral ground I'd  impinged upon" (Athens, p. 18). But this moment of vision is not  an  incom­  municable, evanescent, purely  private experience. The  meeting  of  road  and  of those parallel tracks  is for Goderich the opening of a tunnel in time, "that strange junction where  an  object   turns  into  a  subject, where  classification and  science leave  off and  imagination and  history  begin"  (Athens, p. 18). Imagination and history; because  Wordsworthian imagination, if "egotistical," is not  solipsistic, it does  not  behave as  though  its  awareness of   the  present   moment  carne  from  nowhere and  led nowhere. What does it mean  to say that  something "belongs to history"? The  railroad that  intersected  with  Highway 49, and  whose  "funeral" Matt Goderich now  recalls,  is of  far  more  than   merely  incidental interest, the insignificant fact  that  accidentally triggers  a  nostalgic  association. Like  Tintern Abbey itself, it was the expression of the aspirations of a community, their political  and  economic structure and  resources,  and  even  in  its demise,  in  1952,  it  con­ tinued  to  affect  human lives by the  traces  it left,  both  literal and  figurative. In "noticing" the  railroad, as  Wordsworth "noticed" his  field,  Goderich both  un­ covers and  bestows  its significant form.
Wordsworth and   Coleridge never  made   the  error  of  rejecting the  historical reality  of a  thing  in favour of its idealized  form.  Coleridge, according to one  of his more  insightful nineteenth-century critics, "denounced as equally  heretical the attempts to exclude either  the  'ideal' or the  historical  element of Christianity."11
Christianity's progressive  development of spiritual significance out  of historical actuality, one  might   add, was  the  Romantics' model  for  the  understanding of human history  at all its levels. Wordsworth's rejection  of Cambridge, and  his admiration for  the  democratic beliefs  of  the  French   republicans, resulted -as he  well knew -from  his love for  the  egalitarian community he  had  known  in­ timately during his boyhood  in Hawkshead. Hood  is at  his most  Wordsworthian when   using  one  of  Matt's  apparently  commonplace boyhood   recollections  to reconstruct an  entire  town  or segment  of Ontario society, complete with  its class

91

HOOD

snobbery, its preferred ways of trading, investing, building,  all the underpinnings of what a sociologist would call its "value-system." But where the sociologist eliminates the personal in order to draw general conclusions about socioeconomic conditions, the novelist reunites personal and  imaginative life with  political life. Hood's  dominant motif of the road, railroad,  and  navigable  river enables him to traverse  this  false  boundary  with  ease.  Nothing  is more  clearly  a  product   of economic forces than  a railroad  or highway;  and  nothing  is more immediately  a part  of everyday  life. (The  St. Lawrence  Seaway  and  the  CPR  are  admittedly frequent  motifs in Canadian writing, but that  is only to say that  they are ripe for demythologizing.)   The  manifold  causes that  bring  Matt  and  Edie  together  in I952  at the last run  of the Stoverville, Westport  and  Lake  Superior  Rail  Road are traced  out by Matt in A New Athens not from egotism, but from his entirely credible desire to comprehend  the cultural  and  political  powers that  have shaped his life. Yet Hood  avoids historical  determinism,  knowing  that  history and  the historical imagination create the concepts by which they illuminate, they do not disinter them from the granitic mausoleum of some historical datum : "we assign values in the course of our narrative."
In the third  novel of the sequence, we learn  that  a similar  preoccupation with value as conditioned  by time had gripped  Andrew  Goderich,  Matt's father,  even on his wedding  day in  I 925,  as he replayed in his mind  a conversation  with  his German  colleague Aaronsohn: "Valuation seemed to imply the necessity of  con­ cepts.... To  be valuable  will be to exist as issuing in concept; to  evaluate will be  to  form  concepts"   (Ravine,   p.  136).  Through  Aaronsohn  and   Andrew Goderich,  then,  what  was in  I925  "advanced"  European thought  filters down to  the  young  Matt,   but  more  as a  series of  questions  than  a  set  of  answers. Although  Andrew  Goderich later  describes himself as an  axiologist, he leaves it to  his son  to  make  his own  discoveries about  value,  usually  a   posteriori,  and sometimes,  he  admits,  embarrassingly  late  in  the  day.  If  Goderich   pere  is a Coleridge  or  an  Emerson,  asking  all  the  right  questions,  Goderich   fils is the Wordsworth  or Thoreau  who lives and  experiences some of  the right answers.




l:E TRADITION OF   WORDSWORTH is, then,  one of the deter­ minants  of The  New  Age; but  criticism of  the  kind  I have  attempted  has  to beware of mistaking the process for the product.  To  be preoccupied  with becom­ ing at the expense of being, with history and process at the expense of imagination  and  quidditas, can  be fearfully  destructive,  as Hood  knows. An  early  story  of Hood's,  written,  I think, to exorcise this past-obsessed, regressive tendency  in his Romanticism, centres  on  Arthur   Merlin,  a  Prufrock-like,  past-obsessed,  ghost­ ridden  man,  his name  evidently  ironic  since  he is short  on  both  courage  and

92

HOOD

wisdom.  At  the story's  climax,  Merlin  addresses  the  woman he loves in what  for him are words of sincere  praise : "everything that  you do is fixed by the tradition, and  that's what  makes  you a beauty.  Your  inheritance."12  She is understandably repelled  by this morbid inability to see her as existing  in time  present, a desirable, sexually  alive woman. The danger in doing  what  I have  tried  to do in this paper
-relate  Hood's work  to the  Romantic tradition which  it  draws upon -is the danger Arthur Merlin falls prey to, that  of confounding the  product in the  pro­ cess, the  perception of the  thing-as-it-is in  the  perception of the  thing-as-it-has­ come-into-being. Any  criticism  that  addresses  itself to  the exploration of a "tra­ dition," must beware of saying to any writer "everything that  you do is fixed by the tradition," a  self-evident absurdity. Our   sense  of  the  Wordsworth tradition  is considerably widened by The  New  Age, but  in reading it what  we experience is a  refreshing return  to  the  living  source,  not  a  minimal  endgame largely   pre­  determined by some  other players'  initial  moves. Hood's  Romantic inheritance cannot help  but  enrich  his work, especially for any  reader who  accepts  his belief that  we are still in  the  middle  of the Romantic movement, but  the  thing-as-it-is, the  three  parts  of The  New  Age as they  now stand, is no late-blossoming flower on  a transplanted tree.  It displaces Grasmere and  Derwent, as Wordsworth dis­ placed  Elysium  and  the  pit of  Erebus; in localizing  and  particularizing Canadian understanding in  Canadian  geography and  Canadian  experience, it  simultane­ ously  reveals  the  locality, the humanity, and  the  contemporary relevance of  the Romantic enterprise itself.

NOTES

1 Published  in  Toronto by Oberon  Press in  1975, 1977, and  1979  respectively.  I should like to thank Dr. Susan Beckmann, of the Department of English, University of Saskatchewan, and  Dr. Vincent Sherry, of Villanova College, Pennsylvania, for their comments  on a draft  of this paper.
2 The most vigorous opponent  of this orthodox or "canonical" way of reading Wordsworth  is Harold  Bloom:  see his remarks on the  "Intimations" Ode  in The Anxiety of Influence  (London: Oxford  Univ. Press, 1973),  pp. 9-10.
3 John  Milton,  Poetical  Works, ed. Douglas  Bush  (London: Oxford  Univ.  Press,
1966, rpt. 1970),  p. 455; Paradise Lost, Book xn, 11.  469-71.
4  Robert  Fulford,  "An  Interview  with Hugh  Hood," Tamarack Review, 66  (1975),
66-67.
5  William  Wordsworth, The  Prelude  or  Growth of a  Poet's  Mind, ed.  Ernest  de
Selincourt,  second edition,  rev. Helen Darbishire  (Oxford: The  Clarendon   Press,
1  1959),  1850  text,  Book  xn,  ll.  277-79. All  further   references  to  The   Prelude,
1850 text, are given in text by book and line number.
6  Roger  Shattuck, "This  Must  Be  the  Place:   From  Wordsworth   to  Proust,"  in David  Thorburn and  Geoffrey Hartman, eds., Romanticism: Vistas, Instances, Continuities (Ithaca and London: Cornell Univ. Press, 1973),  pp. 185, 196.
1 Hood has argued  that  Canadians have yet to resolve for themselves "the  doctrinal and  philosophical  battles  of the  Enlightenment": see his essay "Moral  Imagina-

93

HOOD

tion: Canadian Thing," in William  Kilbourn, ed.,  Canada:  A Guide  to the  Peace­
able Kingdom   (Toronto: Macmillan, I970), p. 33·
8 Thomas Arnold, for example, in his essay "On the Social  Progress of States," speaks of "a natural period  in history, marking the  transition of every  country from  what
I may call a state  of childhood to manhood" (The Miscellaneous Works  (London: B. Fellowes,  I845), p. 8I). The  related   notion  of  the  childhood and  maturity of the  human  race became  almost  a commonplace of criticism after  J. G. von  Herder expounded it in V om Geist der Ebriiischen Poesie: "Es  ist Hingst  bemerkt, dass das
menschliche Geschlecht in seinen Zeitaltern und  Revolutionen den  Abwechslungen
unsres Menschenlebens nachzugehen scheint; (wenigstens dichtet sichs der  Mensch also)  und  wie die Empfindungs- Sprach- und  Sehart eines Kindes nicht  die Art des
'erwachsnen Mannes ist;  wer wollte  von  Nationen im Kindheitszustande der  Welt
unsre  erfahrne GeHiufigkeit  und  Fli.ichtigkeit  in  Bildern, den  Eckel  und  die  Fein­ heit  unsres abgebrauchten Herzens  fodern?" (Siimmtliche Werke, 33 vols.  (Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, I877-I9I3), XII (I88o), 8-g).
9 John Macquarrie, Martin  Heidegger  (Richmond, Va.: John Knox   Press,  I968), pp.  I2-I3.
10  Hugh  Hood, "Sober Colouring:  The  Ontology of  Super-Realism,"  Canadian
Literature,  49  ( Swnmer I 97 I ) , pp. 30-3 I.
11 F. J. A. Hort, "Coleridge," in W. G. Clark,  ed., Cambridge  Essays (London:  J. W.
Parker and  Son,  I 856) , p. 328.
12  "Failings from  us, Vanishings," in  Flying a Red  Kite  (Toronto:  Ryerson, 1962),
p. I6.




CHIJIROSCURO
 


Judith Harway


As sun slips lower, I can  see
the  road-gate and  the  purple hills across the county  line. But not our pastures,
not  the River  Dearing: all  the  mossy
bottomland gives in  to darkness first.

Shifting lines of light  and  shadow dust
the  plain  with  possibility. I work  the  pump,
I stare  into  the dusk,  imagining
broad fields of corn  and  sugar  beet. The cows jostle and  drain the  half-filled  trough.

With  this handle, I plait  ropes of water binding them  to me. I've always understood that  cows see auras,  nameless colours, blurry
borders for the world. I want  to bend  and  drink
dark water  with  them,  feel my muzzle  steam,

94

POEM

and  chew  each  moment twice. But I labour here,  I bend  and  rise, and  night
is flooding in across the fields.
There is no colour  left. I slap  the cows' rumps  hard and  shout  them  back into  the  bam.









THE FOOL IN WINTER
 


Gwladys Downes


jealous  of air,  feathering silky swirls on  your window
brittle  with  frost

jealous  of the  wheel  you finger and  the  stylus
that  cuts  your  hieroglyphs

jealous  of the  tulip  tree's  shadow guarding the  courtyard
of your  graves

jealous  of a woman  you loved and  a man  who loved  you above  all  jealous

of the masked  black dancer circling, sashaying by, who hung  your only heart from  her  wrist with diamonds

in  this  theatre of the  absurd, remember:
faced  with  your face, ancestral,
one player  cried a name  and  cursed his bones.








95

WEST OF THE GREAT DIVIDE

A View of the Literature of British Columbia




Allan Pritchard





EmoNs IN   UTERARY CRITICISM change <apidly. The  "sur·
vival" thesis that  has dominated  the thematic  criticism of Canadian literature  in
recent  years may  be  about  due  to fall  from  favour.  Yet  it has  proved  highly stimulating,   and  its  usefulness has  still  not  been  totally  exhausted.   Before  it recedes from  its present  prominence  at least one further   value  can  be extracted from it, although of a paradoxical kind. It serves admirably  as a means of defining the regional characteristics  of the literature  of British Columbia-if  one merely reverses its central  propositions.
The survival thesis is now so familiar  that litde reminder  is needed of its salient points. Like much of the best in our criticism, the view that  conflict between man and  nature  is central  in Canadian literature  seems to have developed from some brief but  perceptive  remarks of Northrop  Frye. It has been elaborated  by many critics and given its fullest and most influential formulation by Margaret Atwood. According  to Atwood, the essential literary  symbol for Canada is survival in the face of hostile nature. In our literature, she suggests, man is seen predominandy as a victim and nature  as a monster. The land is alien. Of the seasons only winter is real. The characteristic experience of the immigrant and setder is exile and defeat. Canadian books are populated by life-denying women and trapped, defeated characters.  The  central  experience  represented   is  death,   and   as  a  whole  the literature is "undeniably sombre  and  negative.m
If one turns  from  these propositions  about  the  nature  of Canadian literature and  looks at  the work of such  notable  writers of British  Columbia  as Roderick Haig-Brown,  Malcolm  Lowry,  Ethel  Wilson,  and  Jack  Hodgins,  the  sense of contrast  is so strong as to suggest the scene in October  Ferry to Gabriola where Lowry describes the  journey of his central  characters, the  Llewelyns, westward from Ontario. At the Great  Divide they had  their  first view of "the  wild beauty of lakes and  ravines  and  pastures  of  British  Columbia" like  "two  children  of Israel shading  their eyes before a vision of the Promised  Land."2:

g6

BRITISH COLUMBIA

This contrast  brings into sharp  relief the common qualities  that  the writers of British Columbia  have  tended  to share  in  their  response  to the  land,  notwith­ standing  their  admirable individuality  and diversity. This is not a case where the Atwood  thesis  can  be  applied  with  minor  modifications  to  take  into  account variations  from  the  norm  caused by local factors of geography, climate and  his­ tory. Rather, the  dominant characteristics  of the literature of  British Columbia appear  to be diametrically opposed to those Atwood  postulates for the literature  of Canada as a whole. Here the writers have more often shown relations between man and  nature  as harmonious than  as hostile. The experience of the immigrant  has more often been represented  as fulfilment and growth  than as imprisonment or  defeat.  Writers  have  more  often  developed  themes  of   integration   than  of alienation.   Celebration of  the  splendour  and  generosity  of  the  land  has  been central in the literature. If a single symbol or myth can be found for the literature  of British Columbia  it is certainly nothing so negative as survival, but so far from this that a strong case can be made for the legend of  Eden or the earthly paradise, which is developed  in  a great  variety  of versions  ranging  from  the  romantic  to the ironic yet always with  a sense of its special relevance for the experience and literature  of this region. Appearing  in local literature  as early as the I 84o's, it is grandly  elaborated  a century  later  by  Malcolm  Lowry, and  is prominent  in the work of many other  writers,  both rna jor and minor. The  most remarkable  writer to  emerge  recently  in  the  region,  Jack  Hodgins,  recognizes  its  centrality   by making  an  examination of  the  quest  for  Eden  the  subject  of  his  novel, The  Invention of  the  World.




AMONG THE USEFUL LESSONS Margaret Atwood has helped impress upon  us is the importance in studying  themes of this kind of giving due attention to documentary accounts, such as the writings  of Susanna  Moodie,  as well as to fiction and  poetry. The  literature  of British Columbia  is exceptionally rich in autobiographical narratives  and  these provide  the  best starting  point  for an  exploration  of the  response of the  writers to the  land.  This  approach  has  a special value for it reveals that  to a surprising extent  even such an exotic figure as Malcolm Lowry fits into well-established local patterns  of response. In the documentary narratives the  basic pattern  is established  very early. The  promi­ nence of Edenic  language  and  imagery  in  descriptions  of British  Columbia  by early European settlers is striking. The  mountainous  coastline had  impressed the navigators of the late eighteenth century sometimes as sublime but often as sombre and  desolate.  From  the  mid-nineteenth century,  however, explorers and  settlers seem to have been confident  that in this wilderness were to  be found  places that might fittingly be compared  to the earthly paradise.  In  1843 James  Douglas saw

97

BRITISH COLUMBIA

the rugged northwest coast as a "dreary  wilderness" in contrast  to the rich Oregon territory  about  to be lost to British possession, but  he reported  he had  found  a site for the  Hudson's  Bay Company's  new headquarters on  the southern  tip  of Vancouver   Island   that   appeared   "a   perfect   'Eden."' In   March   I85o  John Helmcken,  the  young doctor  who  was to  become  Douglas'  son-in-law,  arrived at the newly established Fort Victoria, where as he later  recalled, in his first view of the park-like landscape in the bloom of spring,  against  the  background  of sea and mountains, "everything  looked paradisiacal." He  responded  with similar enthusiasm  to the rougher and more heavily timbered  coastline he observed on a voyage in  May I 850  to the north  end of the  Island,  even though  his scientific training  had made  him aware of the struggle for survival that  rages in  the world of nature: "Wild  and  savage,  yet wonderfully  lovely ... apparently  happiness, peace, contentment reigned."3
Gilbert  Sproat,  who  arrived  from  England   in I 86o,  not  only  reported  that Victoria  had  probably  the  best climate  in the  world  but  described  on the  west coast of the  Island,  where he founded  a settlement  at  Alberni,  scenes  "like  the creations in a happy  dream." In  this period  there  appear  many  similar  celebra­ tions of the  visual splendour  and  the  richness and  abundance  of nature  in  the coastal area.  Before long we find that  even the  remote  and  misty Queen  Char­  lotte Islands are being described as if they were some Hesperides.  In  a narrative of his visit in I 863 an English engineer, Francis Poole, calls the Queen  Charlottes  "a land of enchantment," "the  Eden of the North  Pacific,"  and  comments:  "As far as the eye can reach either way the land  was a  picture of loveliness. The  very atmosphere  seems laden with the perfume of its vegetation."•
Such enthusiastic early descriptions may not be in themselves necessarily a contradiction of  the  survival  thesis, for  Atwood  suggests  that   a  characteristic pattern of Canadian experience has been a favourable first impression of the land followed by disillusionment  upon  closer acquaintance. Thus  she states that  Sus­ anna  Moodie's first impression of the scenic grandeur of Canada was replaced  by a  sense of  the  wilderness  as  prison,  and  that   the  life  of  the  immigrant  then became  an  exile from  the  loved  home  country.  However,  this  disillusionment seems far from characteristic  of the narratives  of pioneer life in British Columbia.  Perhaps the closest Western equivalent to Mrs. Moodie's Roughing  It in the Bush is Susan  Allison's Recollections. Mrs. Allison was an  English  gentlewoman  who lived and brought  up her many children during  the  I 86o's and I 87o's in parts of the  Similkameen  and  Okanagan areas  so  remote  that  years  sometimes  passed without contact  with other European  settlers; yet she writes in her reminiscences: "I led  a  perfectly  ideal  life at  this  time."  Among  some  specially  advantaged settlers of  a  particularly  idyllic area,  the  Gulf  Islands,  we even  encounter the complaint  that  life was too good, so easy  and  pleasant  as to be damaging to the characters  of boys growing up there.5

g8

BRITISH COLUMBIA

In more typical narratives  we have descriptions of the arduous  labour of  clear­ ing homesteads of the great trees of the coastal forest and other pioneer hardships, but almost always with the reflection that  the immigrant  has come to a land that offers him far more  than  the one he left. Eric Duncan,  pioneer settler  and  poet of the Comox Valley, comments that  if a band of  crofter-fishermen  of his native Shetland   Islands  had  suddenly  been set down  with  their  boats  on  the  coast of Vancouver  Island  "they  would  have thought  themselves in  Paradise," such  was the  richness  of  both  land  and  sea.  In  one  of  his  poems,  "Unreasonable," he expresses homesickness for the Shetlands  but he turns this into a reflection on the illogical  nature  of  nostalgia  in  "A  land  of  rural  bliss, to  poverty  unknown."6
Rather  than suggesting imprisonment  the narratives of pioneer life often lay great
emphasis on freedom  found  in the new land, including  liberation  from  the rigid class structures of older societies. The young Englishman  Martin  Allerdale Grain­ ger in perhaps  the first notable  novel to be set in British Columbia,  the strongly documentary Woodsmen  of the West  (I goB), writes much  of isolation and other hardships of life in a logging camp on a sombre inlet but he comments enthusias­ tically on  the sense of freedom  he feels to be characteristic  of the  country.  Fre­ quently  this freedom  is associated with human  growth. Eric Collier, who arrived in the Cariboo  from  Northamptonshire at the age of  nineteen,  writes, "I took to the sparsely settled  outlands of interior  British  Columbia  as the sunflower  takes to  the  sun.m  Here  the survival  thesis of  Margaret   Atwood  seems to  have  less relevance than  the frontier  thesis of  Frederick Jackson Turner.
Such accounts  cannot  be dismissed simply as belonging  to an  early  period  of uncritical  optimism  about  the new land, for narratives  of personal discovery and experience  that  locate the great  good place in British Columbia  have continued to be numerous  in the middle  and  later  twentieth  century.  Nor  have they  been confined to the mild climate  of the coastal area;  in recent  years they have often been set in the more remote parts of the interior, as is the case with Eric Collier's book. Theodora Stanwell-Fletcher's Driftwood Valley (I 946)  is a classic account by an  expert  naturalist   and  gifted  writer,  a  native  of  Pennsylvania  who  spent some three  years in  a very isolated area  of the interior,  where she encountered winter  temperatures cold  enough  to freeze horses. Yet  she  found  the  land  far lovelier than such tropical  areas as Fiji and Java, where she had previously lived. She  comments  that   here  nature  is much  harder  and  more  terrible  than  that known  to  Wordsworth  and  the  English  Romantic   poets,  and   needs  someone stronger and  more elemental,  but that  it has all the greater  wonder  and  beauty. Despite dangers  and  hardships,  the  cold of winter  and  the flies of summer,  her confidence in the wilderness steadily grew, and she gained an ever increasing contentment. She  writes in her diary: "This  must be what  is meant  by perfect happiness."  Even the accounts of hardships often rise beyond survival into some­ thing  approaching epic,  as  when  she  reports  that  farewells  with  a  family  of


99

BRITISH COLUMBIA

Indians  with whom she had had many disputes were affectionate : "for  we have seen and done great  things together."8 Although  Driftwood  Valley  is superior  to the average in its literary qualities, the experiences it records have close parallels in many other  narratives.  For example, T. A. Walker's  recent  account  of life in the remote Cassiar mountains, Spatsizi  ( 1976), is much  more a story of growing harmony  than of antagonism  with the environment. The  author  writes:  "The wilderness never failed us, and  the first years in Spatsizi  were our  paradise."9
In  these narratives  the attitude  toward  the  native  Indians  conforms  no more closely to the Atwood thesis than  the attitude toward  nature.  While Atwood  has emphasized  that  in Canadian literature  the  Indian  is frequently  seen as a  men­ acing figure, associated with an alien world of nature,  in British Columbia writing the  hostile  Indian   is relatively  rare.  Helmcken  discovered  in   1850   that even among the war-like Indians of northern  Vancouver  Island  he could  roam freely, and stated  he certainly "felt less fear of molestation than  I had often experienced when traversing  the slums of London."Lo Such  narratives  as Susan Allison's have much  of kindness and friendship  received from  Indians. Rather  than  appearing as threatening, the Indians  and  their traditional cultures  provide in the writings of Stanwell-Fletcher, Emily Carr,  Earle  Birney, and  many  others models of the ideally harmonious relation  between  man  and  nature.  In  the  literature of this region the menacing  figures are much  more often land surveyors and  real estate developers than  Indians.
Many  of the autobiographical narratives  are built around  dominant themes of
the kind Atwood  identifies and  discusses, but  these are  rarely  developed  in ways so "sombre  and  negative"  as the survival  thesis would  lead  one  to expect.  For example,  there  is the  theme  of exploration,  which  is nowhere  more  prominent than in this region. The earliest literature of British Columbia  in the European languages is literature of exploration; and the exploits of the early explorers have been  made   the  subject  of  books  by  writers  as  diverse  as  Haig-Brown,   Roy Daniells, and  George Bowering. It seeiiiS in  keeping  with  the spirit  of the  place that  the daughter  of a pioneer of the Gulf Islands should remember  in later years that  what she had learned from her father  was above all a love of exploration,11 and that  one of Ethel Wilson's characters,  Aunt  Maury  in Love and Salt Water, although  a  native  of Nova Scotia, should  frequently  occupy  her  time  in  those same islands by reading  the journals of Captain Vancouver. How  far this oldest of themes is from being exhausted  is indicated  by the fact  that  in The  Invention of the World  Hodgins gives the ferryman  who conducts  us to Vancouver Island, Strabo  Becker, the name of a great classical geographer.
As a fine and original example of the many modem  narratives  of personal exploration  we may  take M.  Wylie Blanchet's  The   Curve  of Time   (1961), a story of voyages made  in  a small  boat  by the  author   and  her  children  during several summers  in the Gulf of Georgia  and  the coastal straits  and  inlets, some-

100

BRITISH COLUMBIA

times following the routes of Vancouver  and other early navigators. The  book is not  without  sombre  aspects, for it is haunted  by the awareness of mortality  and a sense of the ruins of time represented  by the relics of a vanished  Indian  culture, in a way that  brings into  question  Earle  Birney's well-known  dictum  of a land without  ghosts,  but  it  is none  the  less a  joyful celebration  of  the  beauty  and variety of the coastal landscape  and  life and  of the  possibilities of adventure.  It provides a total contradiction of Atwood's suggestion that  in Canadian literature exploration  is typically represented  as leading only to disappointment or death.
By a natural process the narratives of exploration  frequently  lead into a second major  theme: the making of a home. A good example of a book that  has making the  home  as its primary  subject  is Eric  Collier's Three  Against  the  Wilderness ( I 959). The  author   settles  with  his  wife  and  child  in  the  remote  Meldrum Creek  area  of the  Cariboo,  builds a  house, clears a garden,  and  learns  how to make a living from  the land,  experiences that  bring none of the frustration  pos­ tulated  by the Atwood thesis but fulfilment and growth. The  title seems to suggest an antagonistic relation  between  man  and  nature  but  the narrative has  more of heroic  adventure than  mere  survival,  and  its ultimate  theme  is  harmony  with nature.  The  author   works not  only to build  a home  for  his  family  but  also to create a habitat  for wild life, to restore streams and bring back the beaver. Here the theme of making the home leads into another  theme that,  as will be seen, has special prominence  in the literature of British Columbia: conservation.u
The  theme of making  the home is closely related to another  very large theme, which may be termed  possession. It attempts  to answer the question of how those who have newly arrived  in a land can gain any close and enduring hold upon it, and  often recognizes that  no real possession is to be bought  with  money or  con­ ferred  by legal ownership.  One  of the most moving manifestations of this theme occurs at the end of Cliff Kopas'  Packhorses to the Pacific  (I 976). The author  and  his wife rode  by  horseback  in  the I 930's  from  Alberta,  then  blighted  by depression and  drought, through  the mountains  to the Bella Coola valley on the coast. His response to the lush valley, with its rich soil, great  trees, and salmon­ filled streams,  was to kiss the earth  and then  kiss his wife with  the earth  still on his face, and  to take the resolve that  there they would remain. Kopas takes pride in the fact that  his identification  with the place was later strengthened as a result of medical  blood  transfusion : he has in  his veins the  blood  of the  Bella Coola tribe, as well as of the  Norwegian  and Scottish pioneers of the area?3  This desire to establish some special  tie with the  native  Indians  is a form  frequently  taken by the possession theme: if the Indians  cannot  be claimed  as ancestors by ties of blood, then there will be at least an attempt  to establish by adoption  ties of culture and art. Other  striking manifestations of the theme include  the wish in those who have come from other  places that  they had been born in the new land, a feeling sometimes  detectable  in  Haig-Brown's  fictional accounts  of boyhood  in  British


IOI

BRITISH COLUMBIA

Columbia   (despite  his happy  memories of his own  childhood  in  England)  and expressed also by characters  in  Ethel  Wilson's  The   Innocent  Traveller. In  the context  of  this  local  fascination  with  possession it  is entirely  appropriate that Joseph Bourne's splendidly ambiguous book of poems in Hodgins' The  Resurrec­ tion of joseph  Bourne should be titled "Possessing Me."  For the writers of this region the theme of possession clearly has special importance, and they have made it, whether implicitly or explicitly, very nearly the major  theme of  the literature of British Columbia  for  the  past one  hundred  years, the  grand  theme  into  which all other  themes  dissolve. It is the  antithesis  of the  exile  theme  of the  survival thesis.



SusPICION MAY OF couRsE  ARISE that  the strongly  favour­ able  view of the  land  that  dominates  such  minor  and  documentary  writers  as have been considered  thus far is superficial, and it may be expected  that  we will encounter  a view that  is much  darker  as well as much  more complex  when  we turn  to  the  major  writers of the  region. In  fact,  when  we  make  this move  we find much less contradiction  than  continuity.  The  transition to the rna jar writers is most easily made by way of Roderick Haig-Brown, who has good claims to be regarded  as the  first to sustain  a long  and  distinguished  career  as  a  writer  in British Columbia. Like Lowry  he is an  exceptional  figure  who  arrived  on  the scene rather  deceptively in the guise of a familiar, easily recognizable local  type of English migrant: while Lowry might be seen as the last of the remittance  men, Haig-Brown  was initially attracted  to British Columbia, like many another  young Englishman, by the  possibilities of sport  and  adventure in  a frontier  area,  but instead of contenting  himself with a conventional  book on British Columbia  as a sportsman's  Eden he proved to be a talented  and dedicated  writer with the fullest possible commitment to the new land.  His first book with  a local setting,  Pool and Rapid, published in  I932, was followed by more than  twenty others during  the next forty years. Although he wrote some fiction, he was primarily a naturalist  and  essayist: this is a region  that  has tended  to produce  and  attract  naturalists  before novelists, and painters before poets.
Haig-Brown's special subject  was angling,  but  his writings  range  far  beyond
this, to describe  the splendour  and  variety of the coastal landscape,  the richness and  abundance of the vegetation and  wildlife, the  distinctive  ways of life of the loggers, fishermen,  and  farmers.  Taken  together  his books  probably  provide  a more  comprehensive   picture  of  the  landscape   and  life  of  the  coastal  area - outside the cities, at least-than is to be found  in any other  writer.  His work is
a  prolonged  celebration  of the  land.  He  constantly  writes  of it  not  only  with scientific precision  but also with wonder  and  with  an overwhelming  sense of its generosity. A typical comment is the one he makes on a fixed fishing line stretch-

I02

BRITISH  COLUMBIA


ing into a channel  of the sea at Stuart  Island: "I can never pass this contraption without feeling that  I live in a country  whose generosity is in a class with that  of the better South  Sea Islands."14
In  Haig-Brown's writing  the  themes  already  identified  as  characteristic  of much  of the  literature of British Columbia  are fused inextricably  together:  ex­ ploration,  making  a home, possession, and conservation. He insists that possession can come only from  knowledge, from no other form  of ownership, and  he seeks this  knowledge  both  through  the  scientific skills of  the  naturalist  and  through  years of close observation  and  varied experience of the land.  For  him life was a continual  process of exploration,  and  though  he travelled  widely  throughout the world he valued specially the detailed  knowledge of the single locality where he made  his  home  at  Campbell   River.  In  striking  contradiction  of  the  Atwood theory of a land  that  disappoints on close inspection, he held that  a lifetime was not long enough  to exhaust  the fascination even of a single stretch  of his home nver.
In his writings about  nature  scientific language moves easily into the language of love, and  a favourite  word for the knowledge he seeks is intimacy.  This  inti­ macy is revealed  especially in relation  to the seasons, for he believes, as  perhaps  countrymen  always have,  that  the true  test of knowledge is the  ability  built  up through  observation  of a place over many  years to mark  what  is  specially early or  late,  usual  or  unusual.  Hence  his  two  finest collections  of   personal  essays, A River Never Sleeps ( 1946)  and  Measure  of the Year ( 1950), have the struc­ ture of a monthly  calendar  of the year. In  a key passage of the latter  he writes that  to watch  the signs of the seasons is "a  rite among  men." These signs have passed  "through wonder  into  superstition  and  religion,  and  are  now  become wonder again  and living pleasure." They are a pleasure not for themselves alone but they bring  also "the  sense of participation in the  world's real life, of steadily increasing intimacy, of possession that grows gradually stronger over the years."15
As this statement suggests, Haig-Brown's  celebration  of the land  is of a much profounder  kind  than  is characteristic  of the  numerous  books written  to  praise British Columbia as the "sportsman's Eden."  He writes as a naturalist  but  even more as a  humanist. His  ultimate  theme  is the quest  for  the  full,  harmonious, and integrated life, and he celebrates the land because it provides opportunity for complete human  growth  and balanced  development. He is, he declares, although a professional writer, "the  professional amateur" in all other  things, holding that in an  age of specialization  "amateurism is the world's lost youth  and  hope  and delight."16  He  writes not only as the fisherman, scientist,  and  artist,  but  also as the farmer and gardener, the axeman, book collector, magistrate and conservation­ ist, not least as husband  and father,  and as one who combines many other  roles; and  he rejoices in a land  generous enough  to allow fulfilment  and  growth in  all these diverse roles.

BRITISH COLUMBIA



HAIG-BROWN's PRIZING of his amateur status, his refusal of the status of the specialist, and his desire to express in his writings all the aspects of a very full and rounded life no doubt make the essay the right form for him, for in these things  his position is much  like that  of Montaigne, from  whom  the  great tradition  of the personal essay springs. Unexpectedly, however, it is not the finely balanced  Haig-Brown  but  the  tormented   Malcolm  Lowry  who  applies  to  his writings of British Columbia  the  motive he believes existed  for  Montaigne, the belief "that the experience of one happy man  might  be usefu1."17  In the new environment  Lowry  temporarily  achieved  a  balance  and  happiness  he had  not known before, and  integration  became the theme of the best of his writings with West Coast settings as much as of Haig-Brown's.  In a letter in  I95I he described "The Forest Path  to the Spring" as the only short  novel he knows of its type that brings the kind of majesty usually reserved for tragedy  "to  bear on human  inte­ gration  and all that  kind of thing.ms
In the regional context Lowry has a special claim to interest  as the writer who has made  the  most serious, sustained  and  successful  application of Edenic  im­ agery to the British Columbia  setting. His modes of celebration  of the  land  are of course completely different  from  Haig-Brown's.  He  writes  not  so  much  as a naturalist   (although he took a great  interest in studying  the flora  and fauna  of the  area)   as a  poet  and  symbolist,  much  less literal  and  more  "literary" and allusive than  Haig-Brown,  more intense and  lyrical,  reaching  closer to mystical levels, although  with  less power to sustain or achieve  permanence in  the  vision. As has often been pointed out, "The Forest Path  to  the Spring" was conceived by Lowry as the  Paradisio to the  Inferno  of Under  the Volcano. The  image  of British Columbia  as the earthly paradise is established  near the end of Under  the Volcano  when the consul Geoffrey Firmin  meditates  in the heat of Mexico that the place may be "an  undiscovered, perhaps undiscoverable paradise."19   Lowry's description  of life in  British  Columbia  in "The Forest  Path" is "h<tlf real,  half fable,"  filled with paradisiacal imagery from Genesis and  Revelation,  from  Bun­ yan's  journey  to  the  Celestial City  in  The  Pilgrim's  Progress and  many  other sources. His home on the north shore of Burrard  Inlet is given the name Eridanus  from  the  river  that  in Virgil's  Aeneid  waters  the  Elysian  Fields of the  Earthly  Paradise. His narrator meditates: "there  was everywhere  an intimation  of Para­  dise."2'0
In  "The Forest Path" the splendour  of natural setting,  its beauty  and  peace, lead to inward  purification and ecstasy, and the realistic details of the description of  place  become  the  symbols of  divine  perfection.   In  this  benign  setting  the cougar is not harmful, the mountains are not threatening but guardians; the clear waters  of sea and  spring,  the  greenness of  the  forest  are  emblems  of  life and

BRITISH COLUMBIA

growth.  Even  the seagulls are  "dovelike"  and  have "angelick  wings." Here  the narrator finds both freedom  and  tranquility; he learns  the  nature  of reality and love. He achieves a true  harmony  with the world of nature,  with the woman  he loves, with humanity as represented  by neighbours, who appropriately are fisher­ men;  and  he gains  an  almost  mystical sense of unity  with  the  whole  creation. He reflects:  "Ah,  what  a life of happiness had now opened  before us!" "Was  it possible to be so happy?" "We  were still on earth,  still in the same place, but if someone had  charged  us with  the notion that  we had  gone to  heaven  and  that this was the after life we would not have said him nay for long."21
A writer  could  scarcely  go further  than  Lowry does here  in  celebrating  the
earthly  paradise,  but his vision is expanded  in October Ferry  to Gabriola, which is filled with memories of the perfection of life in Eridanus, from which the nar­ rator  feels threatened with  eviction. It  provides another  demonstration  that  in British Columbia  Lowry had  found  a natural  setting so magnificent  and  benign as to liberate him for a time from the prison of egotism, the self-absorption of the writer  and  alcoholic,  and  from  the  obsession with  words  and  symbols  to  the exclusion of other  realities. Here the wanderer  found a home, and the archetypal  theme  so prominent in  much  of the literature  of  British  Columbia,  making  or finding  the home, is developed  with peculiar  intensity. The  narrator in October Ferry  is the  eternal  wanderer, sometimes linked with  the  Wandering Jew,  who has lost through  a succession of  catastrophes  every home he ever inhabited, until he finds the  perfect  home  unexpectedly  in  a little wooden  shack  built  on  piles over the water  in  Eridanus,  and  then  he fears nothing  so much  as losing it. He meditates that  it is so precious to him and his wife he would lay down his life for it: "But  what  was it that  gave them  this life so free  and  dear,  that  gave them so much more than  peace, what was it that made it more than  an ark of timber? Ah, it  was  their  tree,  door,  nest, dew, snow, wind  and  thunder, fire and  day. Their  starry  night  and  sea wind. Their  love."22
A stronger confutation could hardly be found of the Atwood thesis that  the characteristic experience  of the  immigrant   has been  disillusion  and  defeat,  the sense that  the  good  place is not  here but  elsewhere, the feeling of exile. Lowry and  Haig-Brown  both  declare  their  preference for the new land  above the most idyllic settings of the old. Haig-Brown  had spent much of his childhood beside the Frome,  in  the  place  that  stood for  Thomas  Hardy  as the  earthly  paradise,  the Valley of the Great  Dairies in Tess  of the  D'U rbervilles;  yet though  he was well aware of the advantages of the Dorset setting for the novelist he came to prefer the  Campbell  River  to  his native  Frome.23   Lowry  not  only  contrasts  Burrard Inlet  with  his native  area,  "the  terrible  city"  of  Liverpool,  which  becomes a symbol of deprivation and  alienation  from nature,  but  he prefers it even to the most sacred place of Romantic nature  poetry. After the return  to England  at the end of his life he visited Grasmere,  as he states in a letter, "not  because it reminds


105

BRITISH COLUMBIA

one of Wordsworth  so much but because if we half shut our eyes we may be able to imagine  we're  back on Burrard  lnlet."24   For  him  the  flow of nostalgia  was totally reversed.
A VERY    SIMILAR  VIEWPOINT   PREVAILS  in  the  fiction  of Ethel  Wilson, even though  in many other  respects she is as different  from  both Lowry and  Haig-Brown  as those two writers are from each other. If her charac­
ters experience  any sense of exile it comes not from life in British Columbia  but from  absence  from  that  place.  In  Hetty  Dorval  the  narrator Frankie  Burnaby spends a happy  childhood  on a ranch  near  Lytton,  which  provides a total  con­ trast  with  Atwood's   picture  of  the  typical  childhood   of  Canadian  fiction  as crippling or restricting. Hers was so filled with love of her parents and love of the land that she writes: "Life, for me, could not have been bettered." When Frankie is later  taken  to  live for  a  time  in  England, even  though  she  appreciates  the beauties of Cornwall  she knows that she must return  to her  native  place, and  in London  she  yearns  for  the  sage  brush  country  of  her  early  years  when  some reminder  calls up "a  disturbing  magic," "the  genius of  my horne." 25
Ethel  Wilson,  who was born  in South  Africa  but  lived  in  Vancouver   from
childhood,   provides  her  fullest  account  of  the  immigrant  experience   in  The Innocent  Traveller, which is based on the life of an older member  of her family. Aunt  Topaz, although  migrating  in middle  age from  a very comfortable  life in England  to the raw new town of Vancouver  in the 188o's,  responds to the land with the greatest enthusiasm, rejoicing in its beauty  and  openness, and  when she returns for a visit to England she becomes a fierce defender of the "colonials." Although she has the limitations of a person who lives on the surface of life, she is shown to possess good judgment, and her enthusiasm  for the new land is shared by the other characters of the novel. On arrival  from England  Aunt  Rachel  feels immediately  that  she has come to her own  kind  of country,  although  no words could express her all pervading  release of spirit.  She  wishes she had  come there two generations  ago. She writes to a cousin: "It is so lovely, Eliza, that  I feel I've wasted my life in not living here before," while the grandmother writes to a son in England  that  although they miss the family and old horne "this  place is beauti­ ful  beyond  description." Nor  is there  any  disillusionment  after  this  initial  en­ thusiasm.  Before long  the  contours  of the  mountains have  become  part  of the lives of the  characters, and  they are  happily  tied in  numerous  ways  to the  new land.26
Ethel Wilson has just as powerful a sense both of place and  of the goodness of the land as we find in Haig-Brown and Lowry. In Swamp Angel Mrs. Severance comments: "Everything of any importance happens  indoors,"  but the central character  Maggie Lloyd immediately  replies, "Oh, it does not," and  here we feel

106

BRITISH  COLUMBIA

that  Maggie  speaks  for  the  author.27   As a  psychological  novelist  and  moralist Ethel Wilson is primarily  concerned  with the inner landscape,  with the develop­ ment  of the  heart,  and  with  relations between  people, but  the outer  landscape  and local imagery are of great importance to her also. Indeed  they are so promi­ nent in bfr
provide loving descriptions of so many areas as to constitute  a literary exploration
of the province: the mountains, harbour  and  townscape of Vancouver,  past and present, in all seasons and all weather, the Fraser Valley in a golden autumn  and a severe winter,  the sage brush  country  at  Lytton  in  the  drought   and  heat  of summer,  a peach  orchard  in  the bloom of spring  beside the lake at  Naramata, lakes in the Cariboo,  numerous  rivers and streams, Comox with its bay and  spit, the  west  coast  of  Vancouver   Island,  the  Gulf  Islands.  These  landscapes   are developed  not in vague general terms but with precisely observed details of  vege­ tation and  wild life, whether  the arbutus,  juniper, and  cedar of the Gulf  Islands, the aspen around  a lake of the interior,  the seabirds of Vancouver  harbour, the flight of wild geese, or the ways of trout. These things are not superficial touches of "local colour" but part of the substance and texture of her novels and stories.
Ethel  Wilson's  view of the  relation  between  man  and  nature,  inner  life and outer  landscape,  is far  from  simple. She develops images of Darwinian   cruelty as well as of Wordsworthian beauty,  joy, and  healing  power in  nature.  In  her fiction sometimes  a character's move to an  idyllic rural  setting  may  represent  a flight  from  responsibility  or  a  retreat  into  life-denying  isolation,  as  with  Ellen Cuppy's  flight to the Gulf Islands in Love and Salt Water. More often, however, the  country  is a  setting  for  renewal,  integration,   and  growth -providing  the character   makes  the  right  moral  choices, as is the  case with  Maggie  Lloyd  in Swamp  Angel. Maggie follows the river from the city to its source in a pure lake, and there, while working to help others, she is able to recover and grow, to make a  new  and  better  life. Themes  of growth  and  integration predominate in  her fiction  (published  mainly in the lateI 94o's andI 95o's)   to a degree  that  seems to run counter  to the literary fashions of the mid-twentieth  century. She has, like Haig-Brown,  a distrust  of extremes, including  perhaps such high flights as  Low­ ry's, but  a  belief in  the  possibility of a "happy chequered  life,"  which  is  Ellen Cuppy's  fate at the end of Love and Salt W ater.'28   There  is surely a close relation between  the  two features  of her novels that  have most puzzled critics :  her  pre­ dominantly optimistic view, despite her strong awareness of the fragility of human  life and  happiness,  and  the prominence  of landscape  and  nature.  The optimism seems so inexplicable  to one critic that  he has referred  to it as "whimsy,"29   but it springs  partly  from  the sense that  once one  has learned  to  accept  inevitable limitations  the  created  world  becomes a source of great  and  enduring   joy.
Ethel  Wilson's  descriptions  of  place  and  time  provide  the  strongest  possible
contradiction of  Margaret Atwood's  claim  that  Canadian fiction  has only  one


I07

BRITISH COLUMBIA

season:  winter. Wilson, Haig-Brown,  and Lowry all share the view that  a special glory of the land they describe is the variety of the seasons, the endlessly repeated cycles of gradual  change: Haig-Brown is as much the essayist of the gently chang­ ing Vancouver  Island  seasons as James Thomson  is the  poet of the  English sea­ sons. If there  is a single season that  dominates  the others,  for the  writers of the mild coastal area  it  is not  winter  but  spring.  This  is of  course  a  clear  case of geographical  determinism.  The  spectacular  nature  of the  coastal  spring  imme­ diately impressed the early settlers. Eric Duncan  recollected fifty-seven years later the indelible  impression he received upon  his arrival  at  Comox  in  June I 877: "everything  was a tangle of green. I had  never seen  such growth  before, and  I shall  never forget  my first sight of it-I  can  shut  my eyes and  see it now." 30
The  challenge  for the coastal  writers has been to evoke this extraordinary  phe­
nomenon  of greenness and growth, to render it as vividly as Emily Carr  in paint­ ings. The  most successful, in addition  to Emily Carr  herself in her  journals, have been  Haig-Brown,  Lowry,  and  more  recently  Hodgins.  Haig-Brown   made  his first attempt  to describe the  coastal spring  in  Pool and  Rapid  and  returned  to the  subject  again  and  again,  achieving  his finest  handling in  A  River  Never
Sleeps and  Measure  of  the Year.  In  keeping with  the  paradise  theme,  spring  is
the  dominant season in "The Forest Path  to the  Spring," although  Lowry  de­ scribes all the other  seasons as well. Comparison  between  his and  Haig-Brown's descriptions,  for  example,  of the  varied  shades  of green  in  early  spring  would make an interesting exercise in criticism. It need hardly be added that  just as the imagery  of winter  is associated with negative  views of life in the survival  thesis, in  the  literature   of this region  imagery  of spring  is commonly  associated  with themes  of  growth  and  fulfilment.  The  fiction  of  Hodgins,  where  the  idea  of "second growth" has special prominence,  provides notable examples.




bE WRITERS  OF   BRITISH  COLUMBIA have  been much  more inclined  to praise  than  to curse the  creation,  and  there  has  been more  of  cele­ bration  than  of survival in the literature.  This  tendency  has been carried so far, indeed, that  concern is sometimes expressed by Hodgins and others that the poets and novelists of the region face special dangers in being seduced  away from other subjects and  themes by the very splendour  of nature  and  landscape. Even where the writing expresses anguish of mind and spirit,  the land  is more often seen as a mitigation  than  a cause, as the poetry of Susan  Musgrave illustrates.  Frequently  the writers seem inspired by the spirit of the Psalmist  ( Ps.I 6 :6) : "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage." It is impossible to escape the conclusion that  the survival thesis does a great  injustice  both to the land and  to those who have written of the land.

I08

BRITISH COLUMBIA

There  are of course darker  and  more negative aspects of the literature of the region  than  the  picture  given thus  far  suggests. Many  of these are  inherent  in the theme  of the earthly  paradise  itself, for  no writer  of any sophistication  can write of paradise  without  also writing of paradise lost. Even  in his most exalted celebration  of Eden  in "The Forest Path  to the Spring"  Lowry is well aware of the dangers of immaturity and delusion in the idea of the earthly  paradise : death camas is among the flowers that grow in Eridanus. In his later  writings and those of others the special strength  of the theme of possession is matched  by an equally intense  fear of dispossession; there is growing protest against  the spoiling of the land, and strong contrasts are developed between the magnificence of the natural setting and  the imperfection  of the social order.
If we carry  our  examination   of  the  Eden  theme  into  the  later  part  of  the twentieth  century we will find that its tragic and ironic dimensions become increasingly  prominent, as if serious treatment were taken as far as it could be in Lowry's "Forest  Path" and  after  that  only ironic versions were possible, perhaps even  for  Lowry  himself  in  later  writings.  Here  one  might  well echo  Milton's words as he approaches the Fall in Paradise Lost (rx, 5-6): "I now must change
/ Those  Notes to Tragic." The  "perfect  'Eden"' of James  Douglas  and  the "paradisiacal" place of John  Helmcken  are  replaced  by such  ironic  versions as the "Garden of Eden"  in a real estate advertisement  (Lowry)  and the "Paradise Beer Parlour" (Hodgins) .31  In Birney's The  Damnation of Vancouver the picture is of a spoiled place that  is described as "this  Eden"  only by Legion, an absurd booster and blind believer in material  progress.32  Hodgins makes the central myth of The  Invention of the World  not Eden but the "Eden  Swindle."  Such a devel­ opment  apears  inevitable,  particularly  if one recollects that  during  the very year when  Douglas  described  the  site  of  Victoria  as  an  "Eden"  Charles  Dickens published Martin Chuzzlewit with its satire on the ironic gap between the promise and  the reality of the western American  paradise, as represented  by the activities of "The Eden  Land  Corporation."33
Yet there is much in Hodgins'  The  Invention of the World  to suggest that  the "Eden Swindle"  was not a swindle after  all, or at least that  the goodness of the land  and  the strength  of the  human  spirit  were great  enough  to convert  tragic into comic irony. The  Irish  peasants who followed Donal  Keneally to Vancouver Island  were deceived  by the  messianic pretensions  of  their  leader  and  harshly exploited  by him  but  they  were not disappointed  in  the  place  to  which  he led them,  where  the  forests had  "a  higher,  sweeter smell even  than  the  furze"  of Ireland.84  Space  does not allow any detailed  examination  of Hodgins  here,  but there  is in  fact  a  high  degree  of continuity  between  the  responses to the  land exhibited  in  this novel and  those expressed by Haig-Brown,  Ethel  Wilson,  and even by Lowry in the "Forest  Path." It is not to question  Hodgins'  very striking

109

BRITISH COLUMBIA

originality  to suggest that  their  central  theme  of  integration and  growth  in  a generous land  is ultimately also his central  theme.
The Invention of the  World   is a  novel that  might  almost  have  been  written to refute the survival thesis, and  this is equally  true  of the more recent The Resurrection of joseph  Bourne, even though  it carries further  Hodgins'  satire on the  western  Eden  and  his criticism of all  materialistic  conceptions  of  paradise and possession. While Atwood comments on the lack of heroes in Canadian litera­ ture, Hodgins' fiction is as full of exemplars of true and false heroism as the work of Spenser and  Milton  (although his characters  may hide their  heroism  beneath unpromising  exteriors), and her criticism that  vital life-giving women like Molly Bloom do  not  appear  in Canadian fiction35    is contradicted  by  such  prominent  characters  as Maggie  Kyle in The Invention of the  World  and Jenny  Chambers  in  joseph  Bourne. While Atwood suggests "surely  the  central  Canadian experi­ ence is death" and  holds that  funerals  have  a  special  prominence  in  Canadian literature,S6    The  Invention of the  World  concludes  with  an  exuberantly   joyful wedding.  joseph  Bourne  does indeed  include  a funeral  but  it is comically  ren­ dered,  and  the  central  subject  is not  death  but  resurrection.  At  the  conclusion of this novel the words are carefully chosen in the comment  on the life-affirming dance  with  which  Jenny  Chambers  responds  to  disaster: she  and   the  other characters  are "much more  than  simply survivors."37
The  existence of these strong and  pervasive contradictions between  the litera­ ture  of British  Columbia  and  the  survival  thesis obviously  raises the  question whether  a thesis that  fails to pass such a regional  test can  be valid as a  national  theory of literature. The  contradictions  have their own value, however, in defin­ ing  many  of the special characteristics  of British  Columbia  writing.  They  may help  us understand the meaning  of Ethel  Wilson's words:  "my  locale in  a sus­ tained  piece of writing  (that  is, in  a book)  has to be British  Columbia.  There  are other  places in the world that  I know and  love, but  none that  I know, and feel,  and  love in  the same  way. But  I  did  not  choose it.  It  chose. It is very strong."88

NOTES

1 Survival:   A Thematic Guide  to  Canadian  Literature   (Toronto: Anansi,  I972), p. 245· Such a summary inevitably makes Atwood's formulations appear  cruder than they really are, but they were clearly intended to be provocative. If they have hardened into an orthodoxy, that is probably the fault of others.
2  Ed. Margerie Lowry (New York and Cleveland:  World Publishing, 1970),  p. 151.
3 See Douglas to James Hargrave, February 5, I843, The  Hargrave Correspondence, quoted  by Maria  Tippett  and  Douglas Cole in  From  Desolation  to  Splendour: Changing  Perceptions of the  British Columbia  Landscape  (Toronto  and  Vancou­ ver: Clarke, Irwin, 1977), p. 29; and The  Reminiscences  of Doctor John Sebastian Helmcken, ed.  Dorothy Blakey Smith  (Vancouver:   Univ. of  British  Columbia Press, I975), Appendix u, pp. 282, 298; cf. pp. I03-05. Tippett  and Cole's study of

I IO

BRITISH COLUMBIA


regional traditions in  painting provides  many  interesting points  of comparison for the  literary treatment of the  landscape.
4   Sproat, Scenes  and  Studies of Savage  Life  (London: Smith, Elder,  1868), pp.  12,
18.  Poole,  The  Queen Charlotte Islands   (London,  1872),  quoted  by  Sam  L.
Simpson, "Two Voyages  by Sea-1863 and  1971," The Charlottes: A Journal  of the  Queen Charlotte Islands   (Queen Charlotte Islands Museum Society), no.  1
(I 97 I ) , 35,  38.
5 Survival, pp. 50-5 I. Mrs.  Allison's  comment is specifically  on life in  the Okanagan in  the  187o's: A  Pioneer  Gentlewoman in  British Columbia: The  Recollections of Susan   Allison, ed.  Margaret  Ormsby    (Vancouver:  Univ.   of  British   Columbia Press, 1976), p. 47· The last comment is Beatrice  Freeman's, in The Gulf Islanders, Sound   Heritage, vol. 5, no. 4  (Victoria:  Provincial Archives  of British  Columbia,
1976), 15.
6  See  Duncan's From  Shetland  to  Vancouver  Island, Recollections of Seventy-five Years   (Edinburgh:  Oliver and  Boyd, 1937), p. So, and  his The Rich  Fisherman and  Other Sketches (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1932),  pp.  104-05.
7  Three Against  the  Wilderness (1959;  Toronto: Clarke,  Irwin, 1965), p. 10.
8  Driftwood Valley ( 1946;  New York:  Ballantyne, 197 1), pp.  q8, 1o1, 75, 342.
9   (Surrey, B.C.:   Antonson, 1976), p. 260.
10 Survival, pp.  91-95,  and   Helmcken,  Reminiscences, p.  326.  Cf.  Helmcken, pp.
143, 284, 292, and  Allison,  Recollections, pp.  33-39.
11  Dorothy Richardson, in The Gulf Islanders, Sound  Heritage, 5, no. 4  ( 1976), 23. For  Atwood  on  exploration see Survival, p.  115.
12 I hope  to deal  with  themes  of spoiling  the land  and  conservation in a sequel  to the present  article. Here of course  the  Atwood  thesis becomes  relevant but  only  in  its reversed  form: nature as  victim  of  man.
13 Packhorses  to  the  Pacific  (Sidney,  B.C.:  Gray's,  1976), p. 125, and  Kopas,  Bella Coola  (Vancouver:  Mitchell, 1970), p. viii. Atwood  has  an  interesting  discussion of attempts by Canadian writers  to adopt Indians as ancestors, although this phenomenon is not  easy  to reconcile  with  her  main  thesis  (Survival, pp.  103-05).
14 A River  Never  Sleeps  (Toronto: Collins,  1974), p. 236.
15 Measure  of the  Year   (Toronto: Collins,  1950), pp. 3-4.
16  Measure of the  Year, pp.  246-48.
17 "The Forest   Path to  the  Spring," Hear  us  0 Lord   from  Heaven  thy  Dwelling Place  (Philadelphia and   New  York:   Lippincott, 1961), p.  281.  Lowry  gives  his source  for  this idea  simply  as what  "someone said, speaking about  Montaigne"; "someone" is probably Virginia Woolf in her essay, "Montaigne," in The Common Reader.
18 Selected   Letters, ed.  Harvey Breit  and   Margerie Lowry   (Philadelphia and   New
York:   Lippincott, 1965), p.  266.
19  ( Harmondsworth, England: Penguin  Books,  I 977) , p. 354·
20   "Forest Path," pp.  255,  261. Like  many  of Lowry's  allusions, "Eridanus" is com­
plex and  ambiguous, but  this  is the explanation given  in October Ferry, p.  164.
21  "Forest Path," pp.  232,  242,  281.
22   October Ferry, p. 67. Cf. Douglas Day, Malcolm Lowry, A Biography   (New  York: Dell,  1975), pp. 406,415-18.

I I I

BRITISH COLUMBIA

23   See  for  example  A  River  Never  Sleeps,  pp.  83-84  (where the  context is  trout fishing).
24   "Forest Path," pp.  225, 240. Letter to Ralph Gustafson, April  29, I957, Selected
Letters, p. 4I o.
( I947; Toronto:  Macmillan, I973),  pp. 8, 56, 87.
25

26   (Toronto:  Macmillan, I949),  pp.  I I3, I21, I22.
( I954; Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I962), p.  I49·
27

28    (Toronto:  Macmillan, I956),  p. 203.
29   Frank Birbalsingh, "Ethel Wilson,  Innocent Traveller," Canadian  Literature, 49
'(Summer I 97 I), pp.  35-46.
3° From Shetland  to Vancouver  Island, p. I 28; cf. Duncan's Fifty-seven  Years in the
Comox  Valley  (Courtenay, B.C.:  Comox  Argus  Publishing, I934), p. 21.
31 See October Ferry, p. 244, and  The  Invention of the World  (Toronto: Macmillan,
I977)' p. 95·
32    (I957; Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I977), p. 49·
33  However, even  Dickens  in  his role  as editor helped   disseminate the  Edenic  view of  British  Columbia. When  he  published a report in  the  journal he  edited, the region  was  described as  a  "garden of  the  Hesperides," with   rich  resources   and ideal  climate, from   which   the  world  had   long   been   jealously  excluded  by  the Hudson's Bay Company; and  Bishop  Hills'  opinion was  quoted that  Victoria was "the most  lovely and  beautifully situated place  in  the  world": "Episcopacy in  the Rough," All  the  Year  Round, 4  (February 23,  I86I), 470-74.   (Dickens was  a close  friend   of  Hills'  patroness, Angela  Burdett  Coutts.)   Nevertheless, the  com­ plaint that   British  Columbia has  been  falsely  represented as  an  "Eden"  by  land  speculators appears in R. Byron  Johnson's Very  Far West  Indeed, A  Few  Rough Experiences  of the  North-West   Pacific Coast,  third edition   (London:   Sampson, Low, Marston, Low  and Searle,  I872),  pp. 44, 278; and  no doubt earlier examples could  be  found.
34  This is the  comment of one of Hodgins' characters, Seamus O'Mahony, p.  I I6.
35  Survival,  p. I99· In  regional  terms it is interesting that  Atwood  notes  Ethel  Wilson as in some  respects  an  exception.
36  Survival,  p. 222. In  keeping with  this view, Atwood  emphasizes the  prominence of death by drowning in Canadian literature (p.  55), but  Hodgins in  joseph Bourne (like  Ethel Wilson  in some  of  her  work)   develops symbolism  of  swimming in  a much  more  positive  way, to represent  mastery  over  fear.
37   (Toronto: Macmillan, I979),  p. 269.
38   "The Bridge  or  the  Stokehold? Views of the  Novelist's Art," Canadian  Literature,
5  (Summer I 960),  p. 44·






Il2

FLOTS)IM  JIT ROSE POINT

Gwladys Downes

A brave boy beareth the  flukes away­
after  three  days
no blood  is criminal in these Islands

where  we offer our  faces
to the glittering spite of the midday  sea our  vulnerable  eyes

but  do not  admit a distant destruction moon  arcs  of madness
gashing of green  boughs

admitting it we should  be wholly lost
in quicksands waiting  by the river's  mouth unstable dunes

no perfect shells lie angled  in these stones but  we are  permitted to gather agates
of a certain luminosity

our  real care, searching heads down over dry salt is to avoid  the  haunted  eyes
beyond  the  sun

"We  have  survived"-your voice against the  wind as though the  end  were
breath only, bitter  air

binding us to knives and  whale  and  running boy and  brilliant fingers torn  apart by light,
the strange rebirth of suns.













113




REDEEMING REALITY

LOUIS DUDEK,  Continuation  1. Vehicule  Press,
$4-95·
LOUIS DUDEK,  Texts  and  Essays. Open  Letter, Fourth Series,  Nos. 8-9  (Spring   and  Sum­ mer  I981), $7.00.
LOUIS   DUDEK   and  the  Vehicule  Poets,  A Real
Good Goosin': Talking  Poetics. Maker  Press,
$2.00,

Of   all  sad  fates   the   avant-garde's  the worst-
They  were  going  nowhere,  and  they  got
there first.
You  can  go  through a  red  light  but  you can't go through a red truck. -Louis Dudek

THAT THE TRUE GOAL  of  modernism is silence  or  nothingness, as some  contem­ porary  critics  might  argue,  is not an  idea that  would appeal to Louis Dudek,  though  neither would  it surprise him.  No-one  in Canada has  understood   better   than   he that  the liberating impulse of the modern­ ist  movement  may  embody  its own  self­ destruction. Yet in the path of the current flight  from  meaning and  referentiality in literature  lies a  formidable red  truck  of poetry  and  criticism  that  is the  legacy of Louis Dudek.
So many  paradoxes surround this man.
For  thirty  years, he  has  been  a  professor of English literature at McGill University, and  yet he is relentlessly anti-academic in his approach to  the  writing  and  study  of poetry.  Who  else but  Dudek  would  have had  the  temerity  at  a symposium  on  Isa­ bella Valancy Crawford to denounce her poetry  as "hollow convention," "counter­ feit,"  and   "fake  idealism"? Though  he has done  as much as anyone  to encourage young Canadian poets, especially in Mon­ treal,  he  has  also  trounced  the  younger poets  for  the  slovenliness  and  self-indul-


114
 
gence  of  their   wntmg. His  own  poetry has progressed from finely-crafted lyrics through long philosophical meditations to what  an  uncharitable critic might charac­ terize    as   shapeless    and    self-indulgent rambling, a stream of  consciousness  quite  unexpected from  a man  who clings  tena­  ciously  to  the  New Critical ideal  of  the poem  as an autonomous work of art.
But  perhaps the  biggest  paradox of all is that  Dudek  the outspoken opponent of Black Mountain poetics finds himself cele­ brated in a special  double  issue of  Open Letter,  edited   by Frank Davey,  the fore­ most Canadian exponent of Black Moun­ tain,    whose   postmodernist   bias   would seem to preclude any sort of  appreciation of  the  modernist aesthetic  espoused   by Dudek. In  fact,  Davey  has  considerable praise  for  Dudek as  the  first  Canadian man  of  letters-poet,  editor, publisher, anthologist, critic,  and  cultural commen­ tator.  Perhaps  the  apparent  contradic­ tions  I've outlined  are  no  more  than  an indication of  the  wide  range  of  Dudek's interests, for  if  these  three  recent   works tell  us anything about the  man  it is that  both   his  poetry  and   his  criticism   stem from  a  deeply-felt  and  intellectually co­ herent view of life and  art,  a view that  is neither avant-garde nor outdated. But be­ fore turning to an explication of this view, let  me  just  briefly  describe  the  nature of the texts  under review.
A   Real  Good   Goosin'   is  a  23-page
pamphlet in which  Louis  Dudek  and  the Vehicule poets  exchange ideas about  po­ etry.  Rather loosely  edited   and  printed, the  book  says  more  about   the  Vehicule poets   (Ken   Norris,   Stephen   Morrissey,  Endre Farkas, Tom Konyves, Artie Gold,  John  McAuley, Claudia  Lapp)  than   it does about Dudek. For an elaboration of the  poetics  sketched  out  in  4 or  5  pages here, it's necessary to turn  to the 320-page  special issue of Open Letter. It contains a long interview with Dudek  (conducted by George   Bowering,   Frank  Davey,   Steve

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



McCaffery, and   bp  Nichol),  reproduc­ tions   of   manuscript  drafts   of   Europe, Atlantis, Continuation 1, and  "Silence," two letters from  Dudek's poetry  mailbag,
2 I  essays, and an autobiographical sketch, plus  numerous snapshots of  Dudek  from
1940 to the present. In  this collection may be  seen,  in  Frank Davey's words,   "the whole  Dudek, not  only  critic,  commen­ tator, and  lyricist,  but  modernist theore­ tician,  author of four  extraordinary long poems,  editor and  energizer of a  decade  of Canadian writing." More  than  this, the collection,   taken   together  with   Davey's recent  book  on  Dudek   and  Souster, is a tribute from  the present generation to the preceding one, an  acknowledgement of influence  without anxiety, that  should  go far towards a revaluation of Dudek's posi­ tion  in Canadian literary history.
What are  the  proposals so clearly dem­ onstrated in  these  texts  and  essays?  Of the   relationship  between   literature  and  reality,  Dudek   writes,  "for  me  literature has  no other  reference, no other  ground, as its starting point  and  its ultimate point of return, than  this reality as we know it."  This statement holds  true  from  the  ear­  liest lyrics in  East  of the  City  to the long poem  just published, Continuation 1, and  from  the essays in First Statement through to  the  interview  in  Open Letter. Reality  as we know  it is the  basis of literature, a view which explains Dudek's well-known  attacks on Northrop Frye and  mythopoeic criticism. But  for  Dudek  there  is another potential reality,  unseen  but always within  the  realm  of  possibility,  the  Atlantis, the nine-tenths of  an  iceberg  below  the sur­ face,  an  as  yet  unrealized  potential  to­ wards  which   we  struggle  up  out  of  the muck   of  the   mundane  reality   that   our senses  perceive.   In  Dudek's words,  "be­  hind  this reality, the human sense image, we assume  there must  be another, its sub­ stratum, which  we do  not  know,  so that  the  reality  which we  know  is authentic and   true  only  because   it  has  a  certain
 correspondence with  the  one  we  believe exists  beyond  it,  as  the  unknown   real." The  greatest  power  of a  poem  thus  "de­ rives from  the  faint hint  or suggestion  it gives  of  that   other,  unknown world   of being."  Surprisingly,  perhaps,  Dudek   is able  to apply  this quasi-Romantic idea  to modernism, arguing that  "modernism de­ scends to the destructive element  of  real­ ity, and  it tries to raise  that  reality, by an act of criticism,  or by ecstasy, to the height  of vision."  Here it's  important to  under­ stand,   however,   that  the   real   is   never actually    abandoned  or   transcended - rather, the real  is the very basis for what­ ever  vision may occur.  Thus, for Dudek, the true modernists are Joyce and  Proust,  Pound and  Williains, but  not T. S. Eliot,  because  Eliot   does  not   "force   the  real world to yield its treasures of infinite  joy."
By the  same  reasoning, A.  J. M.  Smith,
the  "Aesthetic Master  of  Canadian   Po­
etry," may be better known  for his poetry of  "extreme  austerity"  which   turns   its back on reality, but  it is his "contradictory reaching toward  life"  that   Dudek   finds most attractive.
As a postmodernist, Dudek  is "celebra­
tory" in the same way that Ken Norris describes  the  Vehicule poets -"we cele­ brate   what   it  is about life  that  we  can find  to  celebrate." But  as  a  modernist, Dudek  chooses to celebrate not chaos, not meaninglessness,   not  the  nostalgie  de  la boue,  but  order, beauty,  and  above  all, art.  For him,  the imagination, the "power which is behind the word-assembler of the poet,"  seeks  "possible   webs  of  unity,   to organize  the chaos  of impressions,  to cre­ ate  an  order." So  that   whereas   he  can tell the Vehicule poets  that  he likes their spontaneity,  their   experimental  vigour, the  way they  "descend into  the  chaos  of the actual," and  he can  assure  bp Nichol and  Steve McCaffery that  he is for "total liberation and  total  renovation" and sup­ ports their efforts  in that  direction, he still affirms,  "I want   a  poem  to  result." It's


115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not  at all  surprising to find  Dudek  prais­ ing  the   conservative  position of   Gerald Graff   articulated  in   Literature   Against Itself. Liberation is fine  as long  as it does  not  become an  end  in  itself,  as long  as it does  not  undermine the possibility of cre­  ating a  culture  antithetical to  the   bour­ geois  philistinism it  opposes. "I  want," says Dudek, in what I take  to be a perfect description of  the   man himself, "Henry Miller and  Matthew  Arnold rolled   into one."
What sort  of a poem would  be written by Henry Miller and Matthew Arnold rolled   into one? A  poem   that is  at   the same   time ironic and  sincere, rhetorical and   reflective, lyrical and  epigrammatic, serious   and  banal, a  poem  of  quotation and   self-parody, always striving "to  find that meaning which eludes us."  Contin­ uation   1  has   five   sections,   the   first   of which  was   previously   published  in   the  Collected  Poetry  ( 197 I),  and the  second in Tamarack Review in 1976. Dudek calls it "an experiment in poetic  process" with­ out   a  specified   conclusion  or   endpoint, eschewing a consciously-imposed order to find  "an  order in  the  nature of the  mind itself,  or of  the  world we live in."
"So   let's   continue" it  begins,  and the sense  of  continuity is in  the  voice,  in  the alternating  patterns  of  short  and    long lines structured in verse paragraphs whose spatial arrangement on the  page  seems natural, not  artificial.
Beyond a few sentences,  in our lives, there
is nothing

But what  did  you expect-
the  poem  to write  itself?
or  to start  a hurricane?

Not  really, only  a language
to contain the  essentials  that  matter, in all
the flux
of illusion

Pebbles, that  shine through  the cobbled grey that  emerge,  in time's
liquid flow
as diaphanous heaven

116
 And  the  viscosity of things
How  it  all  hangs  together
hiding  whatever  it is it hides.

The  content of  the   poem  is  Dudek's own   experience, and  his  thoughts about that experience-politicians and  the stu­ dents of Poland, Bartok and Irving Berlin, dandelions and  telegrams, God  and  the  gravy train, many fragments and compet­ ing   ideologies.  But    from  this   heap  of broken images Dudek, the  bricoleur   par excellence, forges a unified  vision  of  real­ ity  and its  shadowy  counterpart, the  re­  ality behind or  beyond sense  perception.
"Let the  words lead us  wherever they go"-one could describe Dudek's poetic as   phenomenological  or   proprioceptive but  there would have to be a qualifier­ the  words, however they  come, wherever they  lead, are  still  subject to a final  shap­ ing  or  revising, for  poetry is  made, not  emitted. Dudek  argues that any  revision that  "violates  the  text   as  it  came ... is fake,"  but   at   the   same   time   maintains that "What is required to turn your  talent into that  real  poetry you  are   interested in  is  the  critical sense,  discrimination, a grasp of  'principles' which will  make your  revision masterful." A contradiction? No, because what Dudek is saying here is that revision is necessary but  that it should not  be  false  to  the  initial impulse, it  should not betray the spirit of the original words. The   revision that  involves cancellation and substitution is evidently all  right in Dudek's view  as  the  selected pages from the  early drafts of  Continuation 1  repro­ duced in  Open Letter   testify   to  such   a revising process, though  we  cannot  say whether  that  revision was  more  or  less instantaneous or  was  effected some  time  after   composition   began.  Though   the  open-ended  poem is coterminous with the  life  of  the   poet, it  is  subject along  the  way  to growth and change.
And  the  poem is never finished
Death puts  on the  finishing  touches

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



However much   they  may  or  may  not agree with  the view of life put forward in Continuation  1,  readers  will,   I   think, come  away  from  this  poem  with  an  un­ derstanding and  appreciation of the integ­ rity of both  its form  and  the vision of its author.  Dudek's  attempt   to   "get   the moment  down   on   paper"   is  absolutely  faithful to  the  theory  that  stands  behind  it, and  resolutely uncompromising. As one m n's
evitably  a fragment, a search  without end, but  in  that   sense  is true  to its  time  and
place.
 
A.M.KLEIN Beyond Sambation
Selected Essays
and Editorials
1928-1955

MICHAEL DARLING


THE WILL TO BE
TIMOTHY FINDLEY, Famous Last Words. Clarke, Irwin,  $17·95·

"END FACT. TRY  FICTlON." This  quotation from   Pound's  poem,   "Near  Perigord," serves  as  epigraph  to  Chapter  Five  of Findley's new novel, Famous  Last Words. The  relationship  between  history    (the aBegedly  factual  account  of  what   La­ rousse describes as "la  vie de l'humanite") and  fiction   (the  stories  we  invent  about  people  "qui  n'existent que   par  conven­  tion") is difficult  to pin  down  partly  be­ cause  the  word  "history" combines   two meanings: a   record   of  events   and   the events  themselves.   In   the  sixth  century  B.C.,  the  Greek  word  historia  meant  the search for knowledge in  the  widest sense. It meant inquiry, investigation, not  nar­ rative.  But,  since  Aristotle's time,  history (a  recital  of  the  details  of  accumulated knowledge) has  been  regarded as a form of literature, and  the word  has been  used (in French as in English) to mean  a nar­  rative  of  actions or  events,  real  or imag­  ined,   a  story,   une   histoire.  That Wells could write  An  Outline of History  within  ten  years  of  writing The  History  of Mr Polly  makes  the  point   and   the  problem clear.
 EDITED  BY
M W STEINBERG AND USHER CAPLAN









The broad range of A.M. Klein's interests,  ideas, and activities are reflected in this selection of articles, editorials,  and reviews
- a selection which also reveals those qualities that distinguish­ ed all his creative writing and the highly idiosyncratic aspects of his stye. Though Klein's major concern was with the Canadian Jewish scene, his in­ terests were part of the mosaic of Canadian history and his work forms a chronicle and a commentary on events of
world-wide  significance. $29.95

University of Toronto
Press

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



'Yet no one who has read Defoe's Jour­ nal of the  Plague Year,  Fielding's  ]ona­ than Wild, any of Scott's  Waverley novels, Dickens'  Barnaby Rudge,  or  Thackeray's History of Henry  Esmond  can  have  felt uneasy  about  the  mixture  of  historical  facts  and  fiction  in  more  recent   novels like  Wilder's  Ides  of  March  and   Doc­ torow's  Ragtime, or  been  puzzled  by the subtitle  of Capote's In Cold Blood-"A Non-fiction  Novel." Then why is Famous Last  Words  so  unsettling?  After   all,  it announces   itself   unambiguously  as   "a  novel"  on  the  title-page. And  certainly our  disquiet  cannot derive  from  the  fact that  one of  the two protagonists is Wallis Warfield Simpson,  the  Duchess  of Wind­  sor,  still  alive   though  comatose   in  her horne outside  Paris; we have  become ac­ customed  to encountering the famous and still-living  in  journalistic fictions  by Ker­ ouac,  Mailer, Wolfe,  and  others.
Much more  than   Findley's  daring  re­ suscitation of the  driven  duchess who, in her demonic but  frustrated  ambition and her compulsively couturiered desperation, seems distantly related to the less loveable members  of  the  family  surrounding an­  other duchess -entitled Arnalfi  (and  the whiteness of the Official Party at the incendiary Spitfire  Bazaar  is wonderfully Websterean) -much more   disturbing than  Wallis  is her  literary non-lover,  the narrator of Findley's novel  who  is, para doxically, a fictional  fact. Debate win doubtless flourish   at  a  later   date   as  to whether Findley's Mauberley, hunted  and haunted inscriber of  "the ultimate  graf­ fiti"  (which explicitly  parallels  the  judg­ ment  scrawled  by God's hand  on the wall of  Belshazzar's   palace and  boldly  inter­ preted  by the  prophet  Daniel:)  bears  any resemblance to  the  fastidious fragments of  Pound's  imagination  immortalized in the poem-persona with  the  unforgettable name  of "Hugh Selwyn Mauberley." Mauberley is the discomposing element in Famous  Last  Words.  In  his  devastating

118
 deconstruction of his private and  public history  or  age-the  "accelerated  grim­ ace"  of which  he  is himself  an  image­ Mauberley makes the reader shudder with revulsion  and  shiver  with contempt; and  yet, at the  same  time,  he forces  from  the reader   gasps  of  amazement at  his auda­ ciously stylish and  witty  wall-inscriptions. He  also makes  us weep  at  what  Wilfred Owen called "the pity of war": the poetry  of  Findley's book  is  undoubtedly in  the pity.
That  Findley chose  Mauberley as  his narrator is a stroke  of genius.  Inspired  by a sensitive  reading of Pound's poem,  but mainly  a man of his own invention, Find­ ley's  Mauberley, "a compulsive  witness" whose   "notebooks  were   feared   like   a
morgue where  the dead  are kept on ice - with   all  their   incriminating  wounds  in­ tact," compels  admiration because  he  is so  horribly  honest;  and   he  commands sympathy because  he is so anxious to say everything, to tell the whole truth, to sal­ vage  what he  can  "of  words   and   hold them  up against the sword." Like Isabella  Loverso   (another  in  Findley's gallery  of great   female  portraits),  Mauberley puts his faith in  "the currency of  the  human mind,   the  written word"; and   like  Isa­  bella's  husband, Mauberley is murdered by  fascist  thugs  fearful of  what   he  ha& written. This is why Famous Last Words is itself the answer  to the impossible ques­ tion Captain Freyberg puts  to his literate lieutenant, Quinn. Gesturing at the walls on which  Mauberley has recorded his last will and  testament to the world,  Freyberg, in a fury  of outraged indignation and  in­ comprehension, asks,  "'Can you  tell! me why  it is your  heart  goes out  to all  these people  here?'" -meaning all  the  people  Mauberley has  written  about,  including himself:   fascist   sympathizers,  many   of them,  plotting to outwit Allied  and  Axis forces  in  order  to set  up  their  own  elitist government  with the  Duke  and  Duchess  as  their  puppet king  and  queen. Quinn

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cannot and  is not  allowed  to answer. Be­ cause  Freyberg wants  facts. Like Dickens' Gradgrind,  Freyberg collects  facts.  He  is putting together an  historical account of all   the   atrocities  committed   by  fascists against  innocent  victims.  Freyberg does not care about fictions, or about interpre­ tations. On  the  contrary, he  hates  them; to  him  they  are  lies  obscuring the  truth, the facts. He has no love of words, either.  Almost   the  last  thing we're   told  about  him  is that he  "appeared not  to  hear  a word  that  was said to him." For Freyberg, actions speak  louder than  words.  And  to prove  it, he  punches Quinn in  the  stom­ ach   when  frustration  refuses  verbal   ex­ pression.
But it is to Mauberley, incarnate in his own  words,  that  Quinn's heart goes out, just as it is to Findley's words  (famous already but  not, we hope, his last), and  to the fictions he forges with them, that the reader's heart goes out.  Thus the reader's response  repeats Quinn's which  repeats Findley's, since it was to Pound's words (amongst  other  things)    that    Findley's heart  went  out in  the first place, enabling him  to find  exactly  the  right  voice  with which   to  tell  this  ingenious story,  or  to retell  this  curious and  complicated  piece of history.
Amongst  the  "other things" that  seem to have  commanded Findley's creative attention in  Famous  Last  Words   (as  in The   Butterfly  Plague)  are   "fascist  aes­ thetics" -briefly  formulated   by   Susan Sontag in a  1975  review  of Leni  Riefen­ stahl's photography (Findley's interest  in and   use  of  photography   has   been   dis­ cussed by a number of critics, most nota­  bly Eva-Marie Kroller in the Fall-Winter
 

"A Better Way  to Buy Books"

The  Academic Book Club has ex­ panded   the  idea  of  a  traditional book club  into  a  completely new and  unique concept.
Save 20-40%  on any  book in  print! Save up to 80%  on selected titles.
NO  GIMMICKS
NO  HIDDEN CHARGES AND  NO  HARD SELL
Just  low,  low  prices  every  day  of  the year;  unlimited  choice  of  books;  and fast, efficient, personal  service on every order.
ACADEMIC BOOK CLUB
Canada: 105 Wellington  St., Kingston,  Ont.  K7L 5C7
U.S.A.:  Cape  Vincent, New York,
13618-0399
Europe: Postbus 1891, 1005 AP Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands







PRICE INCREJISE

Effective  January 1983, annual subscription rates to Canadian Literature  will  be  as  follows:

Individuals 	$20.00

1981  issue  of  the   Journal  of Canadian
Studies).  Fascist   aesthetics  "flow   from
 Institutions
 $25.00

(and  justify)  a preoccupation with situa­ tions   of   control,   submissive   behaviour, and   extravagant  effort"-all  of  which can  be demonstrated  by  turning to Find­  ley's latest  fiction,  in  particular to  Mau-
 Plus  postage   of  $5.00   outside
Canada.





119

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



berley   (given   to  submissive  behaviour) and  the  Duchess   (full  of extravagant  ef­ fort), and  to the fight for control between Von Ribbentrop, Bedaux, Reinhardt, and the  cabal  that  goes under the code  name  of   "Penelope"   (Flaubert,   rather  than  Wallis   Windsor,  should   have  been  and  perhaps   is,   finally,    Mauberley's "true Penelope"); and  to  the  rival  fascist  fac­ tion  centred  in  Schellenberg-Schaemmel and the  Nazi Central Security.  Egomania and  servitude are  ostensibly  opposite  but in   reality   complementary  states   which Sontag sees as crucial to fascist aesthetics; and  the "relations of domination and en­ slavement take  the form  of  characteristic pageantry." Mauberley sees a number of handsome  young  Blackshirts  making   "a great   show  of   their   presence"   in  a  res­ taurant. They exude  "an  aura  of mascu­  linity," and   when   one,  "wearing  boots and  a  wide  belt,"  passes his table,  Mau­ berley  wants "desperately to follow  him.
... And  I went  away  with  him-in  my mind.  And  knelt  before his strength. And his victory." Later, he  is drawn  to Rein­ hardt,  Mauberley's eventual   murderer: "desire ... rose  against  my  will  when   I saw Harry Reinhardt's inhuman eyes. In­ human and,  therefore, without  the  im­ pediment  of   moral   choice.   There  was nothing -nothing one could not imagine  him  doing."
Ruth  Damorosch, in  The Butterfly Plague  (which is the  novel  Famous  Last Words resembles,  rather than  The Wars or The Last of the Crazy People;  though, like  The  Wars, Findley's latest  fiction  is another  "Fire  Chronicle") ,  experiences the same desire  as Mauberley when she encounters the  blond  "Superman," "the Messenger  of  Race" and  of  Death who comes "all the way from the pages of Nietzsche" to deliver  his message  to her. And  in  her  "War Sermon," in Can  You See   Me    Yet?,  Cassandra Wakelin   ac­ knowledges    in   herself    those    impulses which   generate  fascist  art    (it  "glorifies

120
 surrender ... exalts  mindlessness ... glam­ orizes death") and  become  the principles of the fascist aesthetic. Hearing voices on the  radio   (Hitler,  Mussolini,  Roosevelt,  Ma  Perkins,  and  Aimee Semple  McPher­ son), Cassandra asks, "Why  do we listen?  Why  do  we  pay  attention? Why  do  we obey?" Because "there's something eager and   malignant  in  us  all  that   yearns   to cringe, wants to be obedient. That is the secret  of  their  power.  Our willing  weak­  ness.  We  are  the  horses  that   they  ride, the  beasts  they  hunt, the  cattle in  their  abbatoirs.  We  are  their  victims-every­ one -because  we  are  afraid  to  be  our­ selves." Commenting on Can You SeeM e Yet? in  a 1981  CBC  interview, Findley said  that   "Everyone is so  afraid  of  life itself that  they  would  prefer  to be locked up in an insane asylum." All his works, he said,   are   concerned  with   the   different facets   of  what, at  some  level  or  other, "allows  fascism  to  be" : a  "what"  going beyond   politics,   a  spiritual  sickness  the symptoms of  which   are   fear,   hatred, a lack of love which  makes  cruelty  possible, and   a  failure of  imagination which  be­ trays  us into  confusing the truly beautiful with    the   allure  of   the   high   and   the mighty, with  the  glitter and  glamour of "the  surface people." We  are  seduced, Findley  asserts,  by "the  attractiveness of the elite. We acquiesce."
"Ezra will  be  condemned," says  Mau­ berley  in  Famous   Last  Words;  but  only "because the  world  cannot  acknowledge that   the  mad  have  visions  of  the  truth." No one  "wants to be seen  by a  madman
-lest the  madman call  him  'brother.'" And  so  Pound   will  be  pulled   down   by those  who  want  to  dispose  of "the  mad­ ness in themselves ... by blaming it all on him." But   those  who   say  "'We  should  never  have  done  these  things ... were  it not  that   men  like  Pound   and  Mussolini
... drove  us to  them'" miss "the fact en­ tirely  that  what  they  were  responding to were  the whispers  of chaos, fire and  anger

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in  themselves." This is precisely  the  fact that  fact-hungry Freyberg misses. He dis­ misses the words  that  whisper  chaos, fire, and  anger  in himself. Thus, by refusing to acknowledge his own  guilt  and  responsi­ bility,  by  trying   to  blame  "others" for "everything,"   Freyberg  inaugurates  yet again  the  tragedy that  Quinn recognizes and   can  acknowledge his  part   in-the historical tragedy recreated by Mauberley in  his  own private Passion:   a  passion  to tell  the  Truth that   attaches him  to  the facts (two pieces of wood)  with forever questionable fictions  (maybe  nails, maybe ropes) . All of which  may  help  to explain why  Findley  calls  Famous  Last  Words a
 novel, but why he also allows his fabulous tale-teller to assert  that  "All! have  writ­ ten  here ... is true; except  the lies."
This   is  a  brave   and   beautiful book:
brave  because  Mauberley tries  to tell  the truth  about  himself -"Including  the mistakes he made"; beautiful because "Mauberley's whole  and  only ambition  is to describe the  beautiful." Findley's "greatest gift," like Mauberley's, is "an emphatic belief  in the  value  of  imagina­ tion."  Findley's mount, as we  know from  The Wars, is Pegasus,  and  he  rightly  be­ longs in  that  famous  company identified by another  high-stepping stylist, Wallace Stevens:   the   company  of  noble   riders



IDENTIFICATIONS:
Ethnicity and the Writer in Canada

Edited by Jars Balan

Examines the  relationship between ethnicity and  the literature of selected writers in Canada. The contributors are  D. Arnason, J. Balan,
G. Bisztray,  M. Campbell, P.G. di Cicco,  M. Haas,
M. Kostash, H. Kreisel, S. Levitan,  G. Ryga,
Y. Slavutych, D. Struk,
A. Suknaski, R. Wiebe  and
J. Young. The  volume is a pioneer study of Canadian ethnic literature: "What  we
learn  may  not only change our  understanding of Canadian literature, but may also  change fundamentally how  we see  ourselves."




158 pages, $7.95 paper

Published by the Canadian
Institute of Ukrainian Studies
 Order from:
University of Toronto Press
5201 Dufferin Street
Downsview, Ontario
Canada M3H 5T8


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW


moved  by  and   moving  to  the  sound  of words.  His  subject-matter is often  grave, and  could  not  be  of  greater concern   to readers  than  now when  the  world  is marching deliberately  to  the  right,   and right  into  formations hideously  familiar to those who remember the last "outbreak of hostilities." And yet his manner is often humorous and  occasionally  hilarious (on board  the  Excalibur, for example, and  at the Spitfire  Bazaar).
In  the  "creative vision,"  as Roger  Fry
noted  in  I9I9, "a  man's  head  is no more or less important than  a pumpkin." And, in  the  final   analysis,   Findley's  subject­ matter is only as important or as moving as  the  articulating power  of  the  novel's form  allows  it  to  be.  In  eight  chapters, subdivided into forty-three episodes  cov­ ering thirty-five years, Findley fashions a marvellously complex  "prose  kinema," its choreography alternating  between   what Sontag (in her essay on fascist aesthetics) calls "ceaseless  motion  and congealed, static,  'virile'  posing." Findley's  narrative facility  is a  marvel   to  behold  and  to  be held  by. It entices,  teases, compels,  even bullies,  but  it  never  leaves  the  reader  to drift  aimlessly. If, as Todorov asserts, the end of narrative is death, then  the end of Famous   Last  Words, when  Quinn  pre­ pares to "walk  down  from the mountain," having  had  his vision and  played  Daniel, is a triumphant transcending of the inex­ orable   nature   of   narrative  boundaries, and   therefore  of  mortality. Since  Mau­ berley  identifies  himself  with  the  shadow lying dormant on the other  side of reason and  whispering "I  am  here,· I  wait,"  he locates himself "at  the heart  of the human race-which is its will  to say I am."  In doing  so, he aligns  himself  with  all of us, in  and  out  of fiction,  who  are  still  alive and  waiting for the end.

JOHN F. HULCOOP




I22
 


NUTGALLS &
SUNBURSTS

IRVING LAYTON,  Europe  and  Other  Bad  News.
McClelland & Stewart, $8.gs.
AL     PURDY,   The   Stone   Bird.   McClelland  &
Stewart, $8.gs.
THERE IS SOMETHING   ABSURD and  fabu­ lous   about  the   Layton  legend.  Like   a character from  a Bellow novel he charges  through  the   mind    astride    a   blaze   of words,  hefty  and  febrile, with  a fecundity probably unmatched  in  poetry  since  the early Victorians. Symphonies of verbal  in­ flation  attend him  across  the  land: bard of the  brutal, bestial  and  beautiful, out­  rageous,  superb, proclaim the  blurbs.  We need   him,   swoons   the  Victoria Times, as  though  somehow,  had  he  not  existed, he  would   have   to  have   been  invented. There is something fabulous and  familiar also   about   his   place   of  residence,   the Niagara Peninsula, our great, golden  horn of  plenty, at  the  lower  and  of which  one pictures Mr. Layton, always about  to pour forth  something for  his  public  seated  at the  other end,  ears  up,  for  all  the  world like  the  dog  on  the  R.C.A. Victor decal. Still,  what  this dog  is actually doing,  the critics  don't rightly   know.  Some  reckon he  is wagging  his  tail,  others  that   he  is merely astonished. Many insist he is about to foam  at  the  mouth. Anyway-cheer, marvel,  shudder,  or   foam   as  you  will, Irving Layton's Europe   and  Other   Bad News   has   something  to   support   every viewpoint,  beginning  with   a   foreword that  is not  so much  a  foreword  as it is a peremptory fanfare, grim, sometimes comic  and  simultaneously a quite  expert piece  of  verbal   demolition. Amid  alter­ nating blasts of rhodomontade and  right­  eous wrath, walls are shaken-those be­ tween  east  and  west, those of the  middle class,  of  the  religious  establishments, of academe, the pedants routed, disarmed or buried  in  the  rubble. What follows  next

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



is  a  series  of  eighty   pieces  which,   in  a review  this short,  can  be gathered loosely under three  headings: the  joyless, the joy­ ful,  and   those  in  which   the  two  moods sometimes   meet.  A  prose  postscript-a strangely comic  reprise  in  which  immor­ tality  is bestowed  on, among other things, the Canada Council and  the  New Bruns­ wick potato-of  course  does not count.
The joyless are  the most numerous and among the most vivid of the pieces. Their range  is a wide sweep  of inhumanity, in­ justice, stupidity, and  betrayal from bibli­ cal days up  through World  War  II to the present. "Michel," "Flora," and  "Good­ bye  to all  That" might  be  mentioned in this  context, each  in  its  own  way sharp and  convincing yet -curiously-fading from   the  mind   as  one   turns   the  page. Tone and  stance  have  much   to  do  with this:   little   tonal  modulation from  piece to  piece  and,  in  some,  too  much  sooth­  sayer  as  well,  Whitmanish, but  a  Whit­ man   gagging  on   nutgalls,  his  auguries
 ("Anarch," "Malachi," "Reingemacht," "Eternal Recurrence," for instance)  run­ ning  together, lost in  a flow of  hectoring and  vitriol.
Then there   are  the   joyful  pieces,  too
few of these alas  ("The Consummation," "The Annunciation," "Early Morning Sounds") -shot through with sunbursts, bright  feathers, and garden sounds, but in no  sense  a  Wordsworthian  communion with  nature. This  is strictly  a  Robinson Jeffers  sort  of  affair, no  mysticism,  the peace   and   joy   described,  moments  to breathe in  really,  attainable close to  the natural world  because  nature's pain  and violence,  in contrast with  man's, is  inno­ cent.
Pieces under the third  heading are  not
abundant  either, maybe   because  as  one title explains,  there  is "No Absolute  Joy." However  there  are moments of buoyant illumination ("Other Beginnings  and Starts," "A  Psalm  in  Niagara")  and  of a kind of mellow  grace  achieved in sweet






Hugh  MacLennan 1982



Proceedings of  the  Hugh   MacLennan  Conference at   the  University of  Toronto last  February. Edited   by  Elspeth   Cameron. Papers and commentaries by  Stanley   Ryerson  and  Brian  McKillop, Jacques  Bra­ zeau  and   David   Dooley,   William   Keith and   David   Staines,  Robin  Mathews and  Patricia Morley,  Eli Mandel and  Barrie  Davies, Antoine Sirois  and  Ben-Zion  Shek; personal  reminiscences  by Robert Kroetsch, Solange  Chaput-Rolland,  Marian  Engel   and   Constance  Beresford­ Howe.  Copies  available at $10  (plus 75¢ postage and handling) from:
CANADIAN STUDIES  PROGRAMME Room  A102,  University  College University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario M5S lAl




I23

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thoughts of woman's love, sexuality,  and goodness ( "Astoreth," "Deliverance," "The Queen of Hearts"). Unfortunately, there  are  moments of vaudeville, too,  in which  two inelegant aspects of human behaviour are  put  on stage: the gross and the  ludicrous. From  "The Itch," for  ex­ ample, some  readers might  be stunned to learn  that  sexuality can, on occasions,  be a   leering,   cumbersome,   thick-fingered business, or from  "The Glimpse" that  too much  sun and  a glimpse of a lady's draw­ ers may activate a bout  of satyriasis, Ho­  meric  and   loony.  Such  pieces  surely  are misplaced and  get a person a bad name.
Still,  only  the  most  captious   of critics
would deny Mr. Layton as an entertainer. His work read  aloud, especially by him, sounds  right.  People  flock to hear  him, or they used  to. They don't to AI Purdy, al­ though   he's   also  a  bit  of  a  showman. Maybe   that's because   his  pose  is  more mannered, low-keyed, nonchalant. Either  way, if Layton's  poetry is sometimes  less than   it  sounds,  Purdy's is perhaps a  bit more, although The  Stone Bird, like Lay­ ton's  Europe and Other Bad News, is not
-on the whole-what solid reputations are  built  on.
The  Stone  Bird is principally an  over­ view  of  the  Americas, past  and  present, with  a side glimpse  or two of  Europe. In this  way  it  is a  rather  comfortable and  painless  account, first  class, as  from  an automobile,  train,  and  airplane-your genial  guide  usually,  as it  were,  purring over  the  seatback, a  can  of cold  beer  in
his hand, or a peg of good bourbon  in the offing  ("South of Durango," "Journey of the  Sea,"  "Hail Mary  in Dawson  City"). His eye is acute: here  are the shimmering hunks   and    colours   of  lost  worlds   and ancient  civilizations-Mexico,    Yukon, Galapagos, Samarkand-teeming plant and  animal life, living and  dead,  reptiles, porcupines, burros, mammoth wolves, tor­ toises, and  blue-footed boobies. Here, too, sound,  sense,  and   motion  merge  neatly,

124
 as  in  "Bestiary" and   more  especially   in "Red Fox on Highway soo," a succession of  poems  edging over  the   threshold  of some  vast  conception, each  one  a  minor­ keyed breakthrough in some post-Darwin­ ian  rediscovery. Now  your  guide  has  be­ come  the  diagnostician, ear down  to  the circulatory surges and borborygmic churn­ ings  of  Old  Mother  Earth ("The Stone  Bird") . Case  histories are  consulted, illu­  sions  peeled  back   ("Near  Tofino, Van­ couver  Island," "Moses   at  Darwin Sta­ tion," "Across  the  Mary  River," "Nurse­ log").  We  are   tuned  into   the   core   of reality,  the  natural  processes,  the  prog­ nosis:  earth's the  right  place for love, na­ ture's song  in  the  seasons,  in  her  evolu­ tionary motions  will  provide   the  missing connection,  the   key  so  sadly   lost   these days  amid   the  concrete and  plastic  dis­ tractions of the shopping mall. Poems like "Mantis" and "The Darkness" strike some of  these   notes  well,  but   in  others   real feeling   is  sometimes dissipated  in  trivial puns  and cuteness ("Birdwatching at  the Equator," "Found Among  the  Effects"). And   then   there    are   those   lamentable lapses   in   voice,   an   adolescent  squawk, slangy  and  nasal,  reminiscent of  Holden Caulfield, cropping up  for  no discernible reason  in pieces as diverse as "D. H. Law­  rence   at   Lake   Chapala,"  "No   Second  Spring," and  "Writer in  Rez."  Even  the titlepiece,  "The Stone   Bird," suffers  in this regard-the wrong  note-an evan­ gelical   persistence,  the   whine   and   the hankering aspect  of a  recent  convert  de­ termined to press  the  Watchtower  on  an indifferent  passerby.  In  the  best  poems, though, deep  affection and  feeling show. Here Purdy is an  expert  practitioner, as in  the  good-humoured  "For  Bumper," a piece  about old age, and in "On the Bel­ las Express," where  a  haunting image  of tired faces before a scene of injustice, self­ ishness,  and  pampered privilege  becomes a  telling  comment on  our  identity.
PETER MITCHAM

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ACROSS BROKEN GLOBES

HENRY   KREISEL,    The   Almost    Meeting    and
Other  Stories.  NeWest Press,  $12.95·

HENRY   KREISEL  OPENS  his  well-known essay  "The  Prairie: A  State of  Mind" with his memory of a letter  in an Edmon­ ton newspaper, from  a man  Kreisel  imag­ ined as "a giant, a tord of the land  [who] asserted  what  his eyes saw, what  his heart felt,   and   what   his  mind   perceived" - that  the earth was flat. Kreisel  eventually transformed that  giant's unshakeable faith in his flat  prairie world  into  the figure  at the centre of his finest story, "The Broken Globe." All of Kreisel's stories  document the  breakup of  worlds  and   worldviews; as a Jew fleeing Austria in the late 193o's, Kreisel  lived  his  own  way  through  one. His  forced  passage  to  the  new  world  fis­ sured  his ties with  the  past,  and,  inevita­ bly, with  his first language-any writer's first  home.  Deciding to  write  in  English, Kreisel   adopted  Conrad  as  a   "patron saint"; deciding to make a life in Canada, Kreisel    looked   to   A.   M.   Klein,   who showed   him  that   he  could   lay  claim  to both   halves   of   the   immigrant's   world without sacrificing either.
In the  title  story,  appearing here  for the first time, Kreisel pays Klein a warm tribute. "The Almost  Meeting" recreates Klein's personality, transforms lines of his poetry,  and  evokes  the  enigmas of his re­ clusion  in  the  figure  of David  Lasker, "a great  poet as well as a great  novelist, who had  created an  astonishing body of work, but  had  then  suddenly fallen silent." Las­ ker  writes   narrator  Alexander Budak  a congratulatory note on  his first novel, an autobiographical story of old  world feuds splitting up  a  new  world  marriage. The
son,Budak, searches all over Nor.th Amer- ica  for  his father, but  never  qmte  meets
him. Budak's eagerly  anticipated meetings
 with  Lasker  never  materialize either, but Lasker's closing note explains that even almost  meetings are  "something":

It was impossible for  me to see you.... You wanted to ask me  things. I have  no  answers. But  you are  in  my heart. Let  me be  in   our heart  also.   We   had    an    almost    meetmg. Perhaps that is not  much. And  yet it  is something. Remember me.

Kreisel   has:    his  heartfelt  evocation  of
Klein,   like  Livesay's   "For Ae
Poet,"  is imaginative literary  history, pn­
vate and  public.
"The  Homecoming," revised and
greatly  expanded in  this version,  is Krei­ sel's  bleakest  evocation of  the  European postwar   wasteland.  Mordecai  Drim er feels compelled  to return to what remams of his home  town  in  Poland; he is Krei­ sel's  most  tormented  figure,  haunted by demons  real   and   imagined,  Jew-hating peasants   and  leering gargoyles that threaten him from church spires. Kreisel's vision of the post-holocaust landscape is surreal,  vaporous with  desolation; Drim­ mer's  agonized  descent  into  the past  is so powerfully   iinagined, the  devastation  so utter   that  in contrast his final  rebirth of hope' seems a fragile  scene, more  wished
for, more  strained after   than  fully  real-
ized.
The remaining six stories are  reprinted without change. "The Travelling Nude" is  a  comical,   tongue-in-cheek sendup of an art  instructor who loses his job  teach­ ing  extension   courses  in  outlying  prairie communities  because   he   insists   that    a travelling nude  would  be  just  the  ticket for   his   students.  Mahler,   the   artist/ teacher, opens  his story with a portrait of his  travelling nude,  travelling  nude-to pose  for  aspiring  artists   in  Great  Fish Lake,  Three  Bears  Hills,  Pollux,  Castor.
... Kreisel  gives Mahler's tantalizing ob­
session whimsical, lighthearted treatment. "Annerl" and  "An  Anonymous Letter" show Kreisel's sensitivity  to children's rites of passage  into  adolescence. Annerl  is an


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



irreverent old  peasant woman   who  sells roasted   chestnuts on  a  Viennese  street­ corner.  Two  schoolboys  make  her  post a regular   stop; she  disappears for  a  few days and  then  returns, her  drunken  hus­ band  dead  and  buried. She continues to rail at him as she had when he was alive, but   fondly   remembers   that   he   was  a "right  good  'un" in  bed  when  he  wasn't  too drunk. Intrigued, the boys ask her  to explain  how  men  make  love, but  Annerl sends  them   off  with  free  chestnuts  and orders  to pray  for  her  Joseph's  soul, and  they waLk off towards several initiations at once. "An  Anonymous Letter" follows a boy's  investigation  into  his  father's  infi­ delity. David  tracks  his father  to  his ren­ dezvous  with  his  mistress  and  then  con­ fronts them in a restaurant. His innocence  gives way to ambiguity in  the space  of a sentence:  wondering  if   he  is  guilty   of spying,  and  whether  he  should  now  tell his  mother, he  realizes  that   "everything was  too  tangled   up  and  nothing could ever be simple and straightforward again." In  "Two  Sisters  in  Geneva," Warren  Douglas,   a  young  Canadian  student of history  at  Oxford, is  privy  to  two sisters' monologues  in a Geneva train  station; his occupation makes him  an apt  auditor for a debate between  old and  new world sen­ sibilities.  Mrs.  Miller  emigrated with  her husband from  England to Canada; after his  death, she  moves  from   their   Peace River  homestead to Edmonton. Now she's come to Europe, bent on dragging her sis­ ter  away  from  her  home  in  Florence  to the  alleged  comforts of  the  new  world. Mrs. Miller  is intolerant, bigoted, a blithe materialist. She  can't  pronounce her  sis­ ter's   name;   she's   shocked   that    Emily would "up  and marry an Eyetalian," and she's scandalized at statues of nude figures in  Florence. Emily  Buonarroti, also wid­ owed,  tells Douglas a  very different  his­ tory:  her  husband was a teacher of  Ren­  aissance  art,  and  "when you  live  in  Fi­ renze -in  Florence -you  have to learn
 something.  Art,   religion,   history -it  is all  preserved around you."  Nowhere is Kreisel's perception of the deep  divisions between   worldviews more  artfully  imag­ ined.   The  story   closes  with   the   three  boarding their  train  -Emilia longing  for Florence, Mrs.  Miller  eager  to  show  her the "wide-open prairie ... and  the Rocky Mountains," and   the  student of  history silent; the  sisters'  monologues  have  told separate stories  all too well.
I've   saved   for   last  the   two  stories  I
admire most. "Chassidic Song"  sings first with  the voice of a Chassid,  another of Kreisel's giant, faithful figures. During a plane ride  from  Montreal to  New  York, the Chassid  questions Arnotd  Weiss (a modern  Jew,  a  Joyce  scholar   who  has just presented a paper on Leopold Bloom) on  the  nature of  his faith.  Rhythmically reasoning,  the   Chassid   answers   himself with  more  questions, in dialectical  coup­ lets:   in  the  mind's eye,  he  sways  back, forth, nodding, sighing, incantatory:

What  do   you   mean-I? ... Did    I  start this? What did   I start? Did   I talk   to  you first  or  did  you  talk  to  me  first? Did  I tell you where I was  going? Or  did  you  ask me? Who mentioned the   Farbrengen? Did   I or did  you?.... But  even  did  you?  Or  perhaps it   was   Moses   Drimmer  speaking  through you.  Not   the  father. The grandfather.

The  Chassid   communicates  a   grandfa­ ther's faith   to  his  grandson, a  song  sub­ merged  for a generation. He leaves Weiss with   an   invocation:   "Remember  your grandfather. He  knew  that  the  tongue  is the  pen  of  the  heart,  but  melody  is the pen of the soul. ... He sang. Your  grand­ father. Oh, yes. He sang,  too."
"The Broken  Globe" is simply a classic. Nick  Solchuk, a young  geophysicist  in London, is  making a  name   for  himself with  his  work  on  the  earth's curvature. He  is estranged from  his father: the  two had quarrelled years ago when  Nick came home  with  a  toy globe  to show  him  that the  earth moved,  that  it was  round. The

BOOKS IN REVIEW



father had  smashed   the  globe  and   beat Nick.  As  in  other   Kreisel   stories,  there is an  intermediary in  this  one,  a  figure poised between two worlds, looking both ways;  here,  the  narrator accepts  a  teach­ ing post at  the University of  Alberta and  promises  Nick  that  he'll  drive out  to  his father's farm  to bring him  greetings.  The  broken  globe  still  sits  in  the  old  house;  when  he  sees the  narrator  examining it, the  father  tells  him  the  story  behind   it. Like   Kreisel,  the narrator  is  fascinated with  the  farmer's brooding, massive  fig­ ure;   the  closing   image   evokes   his  un­ broken  faith  in all its stillness, size, and shadow:

I looked   back   at   the   house,  and   saw  him still  standing there, still  looking at  his  be­ loved  land, a lonely, towering figure  framed against the  darkening  evening sky.

In  postwar Europe, on  the  prairie, in the  family,  at  the  writer's desk, Kreisel's immigrants inherit and  inhabit a  broken globe, living the doubLe experience that Kreisel  knows so intimately. By presenting all of his stories to us in one place, The Almost Meeting makes one of the richest aspects  of Kreisel's varied contribution to Canadian literature that  much  more  co­ herent.
NEIL BESNER


A PERFECT FIVE
MARIAN ENGEL,   Lunatic Villas. McClelland &
Stewart, $14.95·
ANYONE  WHO GREW  UP receiving  Little Women, The   Five  Little   Peppers,  and What  KatyDid for Christmas and  birth­ day  presents will  recognize in  the  Ross­ Littlemores  of  Marian   Engel's  Lunatic Villas distant relations of all the poor-but­ virtuous families of this sentimental moral fiction,  so beloved  of  gift-giving aunts.
Engel's  heroine, Harriet Ross, has, through adventures both  amorous and litigious,  acquired six children, and  tern-
 porarily  taken  in  an  unruly  seventh.  To their  overflowing  Toronto home  comes a little  old English  lady,  Mrs.  Saxe, with  a "face  like  a  boil,"  and   "an   eye  like  an old poached egg," who pulls up uninvited on her ancient bicycle and  settles in. The coming  of Mrs. Saxe  to Rathbone Place, though  portentous, like  that  of the stork, or  the wolif to the door,  is not  the begin­ ning  of  the  story;  for  Engel  furnishes  a prologue-a profane Genesis, to account for  the creation of the small piece of real estate  that  will  be  the  world  of  Lunatic Villas.  Like   all  good   geneses,  this  one stresses original cause, is casual about  sub­ sequent  event,  and  revels  in  reeling  off names:

Which is how  Harriet Ross, and  Sim, Mela­ nie, Ainslie  and  Tom's Mick  came  to christen [it]  Ratsbane Place. It  didn't  come  to be Lunatic Villas, however, until  it  had   met Vinnie and   Winnie and  Sylvia  and   Roger, Michael Littlemore  and   the  twins,   Madge and  Adge,  Elaine and  Pen, and Marshallene, Bob   the   Painter  and   his  friend  Fred, the people  from  Saskatchewan  and  oh ...all  the  others.

It is partly  this sheer  multiplicity of  char­ acters, especially  in Harriet's family,  that  allies them  to the  Marches and  the  Pep­ pers, the Eight Cousins, and  all the other  fecund   families   of  yesterday's children's fiction.  But  Harriet's brood   has  a  more than numerical resemblance to these ear­  lier families,  which  were  often  fatherless, usually poor, and  fiercely loyal to a "Ma" who was a good, strong woman, daily rubbing in  the  lesson  that   they  possessed in  their   happy   home  a  wealth   that   no riches could purchase. To point  the moral even more  surely, these  books usually boasted a rich family, who tended  to have solitary, unhappy children who strayed inevitably  into  the  homes  of  their  poor­ but-happy relatives  or  neighbours.
Now Engel's  Ross-Littlemores are in many ways far removed  from the Marches and  the Peppers. Billed on  the paperback as today's  "typical extended family," they


127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



exhibit  marked contemporary  character­ istics-they swear, play hooky, make out,  smoke  pot,  steal  records  from  the  A&A, and  are suspected  of wearing  safety  pins in their  earlobes.   And   Harriet,  though essentially  the  good,  strong  Ma,  is a  di­ voroee, an  adultress, and  a  harbourer  of uncharitable  thoughts.  Given,   however,  the  contemporary  setting, the  failings  of the   Ross-Littlemores  aren't   any   more seriously  deviant  than   the  March  girls' pranks,  and  their  virtues  are almost iden­ tical.   Mrs.   Saxe   may   snap,   "Modern youth,"  at   the   revelation  of   Sidonia's misconduct,  but   as  Harriet   points   out, "I keep  meeting girls like  that in Victor­ ian  novels."
We've  met  Sim  before,  too-the gen­ tle older  brother, good with  the kids and  relied  upon  by Ma.  Sidonia  is the spoiled rich kid seeking  to be healed in the poor­
but-happy household. There are  the irre­
pressible twins, Patsy and Peter, the rich relatives,   Madge and   Babs,  the  legacy, and  even  the  struggle to  keep  the  poor family together, here against  the triple adversaries of money, respectability, and leather shoes.
What, above  all,  Lunatic  Villas shares
with  this early  children's fiction is its con­ cern  with  the  depiction of  love,  specifi­ cally  that   seven-eighths  of  love  that   is loyalty,  commitment, and  responsibility,  that  brings  its rewards slowly, and  is not in the least romantic or sentimental. Har­ riet, the "competent" one, epitomizes  this kind  of love;  her  neighbour, Roger,  dis­ oovers  it  in  his  role  as  single  father  to Winnie, and  the solitary Marshallene pays tribute  to   it   as   she   laments  her   own inability to meet its demands:

Oh  Mrs. Saxe, what  do you do with  this big white  moon-sized loneliness inside you? ... Marriage? Don't make me laugh, it's unjust; don't make  me  cry,  it  isn't  fair.  I want  to love.  I want   to  cry,  I want  to  eat.  But  I don't want  to  vacuum   or  cook. And  those who  want  everything  both  ways  get  it  no way.
 There's nothing particularly original about the overflowing, harum-scarum lov­ able  family; even  their  rebellions are part  of  the  canon.  What  originality  there   is in Lunatic Villas comes not from its more sensational flauntings of the canon-the children's dining-table initiation into  the politics   of   adultery-but from   its  un­ spectacular rejection of idealized  pictures of parenthood and  childhood. In  Lunatic Villas children are  presented as children: they  may  be strong, but  they  cannot  re­ place   fathers;  sweet,   but   they   can   be seduced by  money;   vulnerable, but  they can  survive  away  from  home. Moreover, the abundance and attractiveness of Har­ riet's  brood  should  not  obscure   the  fact that   the  real  story  is  that   of  the  older generation -Madge, Babs, Harriet, their father, and  the sad  "failure of love"  that destroyed their  family.
In  a  final  violation of  the  canon,  Lu­ natic Villas  eschews  morals-the  didac­ tic is, of course,  "out" in  modern  fiction
-but here even generalization is avoided. Like  the  coming   of  Mrs.  Saxe,  Lunatic Villas  itself "refuses  abstraction," despite a  perfectly worked-out ending, in  which all loose ends are accounted for. "Making fictions," Engel  has  said  in  an  interview with  Graeme Gibson,  "is  an  opportunity to add  two and  two and  make five. If you are  too careful, if you work  it all out  too neatly,  you'll  only get  four."

MICHELLE  GADPAILLE


SHOCK: RECOGNITION

DAVID   ADAMS RICHARDs,   Lives  of Short  Dura­
tion.  Oberon, $8.gs.

"You CAN'T  UNDERSTAND IT," says Quen­ tin   Compson  of   his   native   American South  in   William Faulkner's   Absalom, Absalom!;  "you  would  have  to  be  born there." The same  sense  of  exotic  exclu­  siveness   emanates  from   David    Adams

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Richards' fictional   images  of  the  Mira­ michi region of Northern New Brunswick. In  his  third   novel,  Richards  has  turned away from  the  economically  and  psycho­ logically  disoriented  working-class youths and  their  families who  were  the focus of The   Coming  of	Winter  ( 1974)    and Blood   Ties  ( 1976),  to   encompass  the bourgeoisie, the entrepreneurs and would­  be  social  leaders of  his  backwoods   and small  town  society. He  also  continues his explorations, begun  in some  of  his short stories   collected  in   Dancers    at   Night
( 1978), of the historical and geographical associations  of  the  Miramichi, including the  relationships between  whites  and  na­ tive Indians, and  the  century and  a  half transition from  pioneering society to dec­ adent North American cultural  and  eco­ nomic  backwater. The result  is a novel of Faulknerian proportions and  intensity,  a novewhich is  bound   to  provoke  initial  incomprehension and  revulsion  from  the reader  secure   in  his  urban  garrison   of Vancouver  or  Toronto  who   knows  the Maritimes  only  from  the  songs of  Anne Murray or  an  auto trip  along  the Cabot  Trail.
Essentially, the novel is the story of the Terri family,  told  in  four  sections  in  the voice of an omniscent narrator, with each section emphasizing the point  of view and experience of one  member of the  family. The action  moves backward and  forward over   a   period    of  almost   one   hundred years, and  occasionally beyond  the mem­ ories of the living characters into regional tradition and  folklore.  Personal and  com­ munal  reminiscences are interwoven with the  present-time action,  often  in  abrupt and   seemingly   arbitrary  succession;   cli­ mactic  actions, speeches, and  episodes are repeated, from  varying  perspectives and in shifting contexts. In structure and  nar­  rative  technique the  work  is not  particu­ Jarly  experimental   by   198o's  standards, but  Richards  handles the  established  de­ vices of discontinuous narrative and motif
 repetition with   the  assurance of  an  ex­ perienced  artist.  The  fragmentary  mode  of plot development, furthermore, is well suited  to the almost  unbearably grotesque and   repulsive   fictional   world   which   he reveals.
The novel   opens   powerfully,  with   a
drunken  barbecue  party   seen  from   the bleary  perspective of George  Terri, mid­ dle-aged  failure and  alcoholic,  whose in­  coherent actions and egotistical fragments of memory  are comparable to the percep­ tual  mosaic  of  the  idiot  Benjy  Compson in  Faulkner's  The Sound   and  the  Fury. The twisted chronicle of family and com­ munity   fortunes  becomes  clearer-and more  morally   complex -in  the  section dominated  by  old   Simon   Terri,  ailing  patriarch of the family,  and  in the subse­ quent sections  featuring Lester  Murphy, old  Simon's  half-brother, and   "Packet" Terri,  old  Simon's  intelligent  but   surly and  self-destructive grandson. As he  has demonstrated in  his earlier  works,  Rich­ ards is most convincing when dealing with  the   perspectives   of  old  age  and   young adulthood; but all four  parts of the novel are  accomplished with psychological  per­ ceptiveness  and narrative skill.
In his earlier novels, Richards managed to  elicit  a  good  deal   of  tolerance and sympathy  for his alcoholics  and violence­ prone   derelicts,   by  allowing  occasional  glimpses  into   the  pathetic  solitude   and barrenness of their  secret selves. In  Lives  of Short  Duration, he concentrates more relentlessly on the cruelty, selfishness, and stupidity of  his  characters. His  women,  unlike some of  the rather idealized  female  characters in  Blood  Ties, seem  especially crude:  George  Terri's ex-wife  Elizabeth is a  self-centred, destructive bitch; their daughter Lois  is  a  foul-mouthed,  over­ sexed slattern. Among  the more numerous male  members  of the  family, Old  Simon  is  an  ineffectual and  uncomprehending relic of the  past; the lives of his grandsons Packet and  Simon are dominated by alco-

129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



hoi,  dmgs,   and   the  suicidal   pursuit  of excitement.
Other middle-dass members  of the  lo
cal community are  presented through the resentful eyes of the less successful Terris, but  they all seem  to be locked  into  their self-absorbed obsessions with money and status.  Indeed, self-centred and  defensive isolation   seems  to  be  the  characteristic stance  of  all  these  people: family  ties, a sense of community, any kind of  recogni­ tion  of  the  common bonds  of  humanity emerge  only  in  half-suppressed  and   ill­ comprehended glimpses.
Richards' Miramichi, on  first  encoun­ ter, seems  unique  in  the pervasiveness  of human degradation; but the drunkenness, the violence,  the  marital and  family con­ flict gradually emerge  as concentrated re­ flections of modern North  American soci­ ety.   This   society   destroys   nature  and  aboriginal peoples, ruthlessly sets individ­ uals  against  each  other  in  economic,  so­ cial,  and  sexual  competition, then  salves its  conscience  with  meaningless   gestures of institutionalized benevolence. Richards' novel is a strong,  and  at  times  bitter  in­ dictment, unrelieved by irony or by prom­ inent suggestions of counteracting positive values. Lives of Short Duration is a bleak vision  to  which   many   re;:, ders  will  not want  to consent; but  it is a  vision  which fascinates even  as it appals. What is par­  ticularly   unsettling is the  possibility  that  this vision is closer to the Canadian reality than   either   the  traditional True  North  self-glorification  or  the  more  recent  self­ pitying  Victim/Survival syndrome which have  so far  dominated English-Canadian fiction.  In  the  mood  of  self-pity,  Cana­ dians  are  fond  of complaining that  their country,  and   the  world   as  a  whole,  is being   Americanized;  Richards  suggests, on  the  contrary, that   the world  is being Canadianized, a process which, even more than  Americanization, is terrifyingly redo­ lent of universal  decay and death.
JAMES  DOYLE

130
 UNRECONCILED OPPOSITES
KEITH   MAILLARD, The  Knife   in  My   Hands.
General Publishing, $I5·95·
NOVELS OF  GROWTH   and   development usually   trace   a  familiar pattern of  the process  of  individuation. Often, such works indulge a nostalgic  vein, depending largely  for  their  appeal on  the recreation in the  reader's mind  of a particular time, place, and  collective sensibility. Keith Maillard's third  novel, The  Knife  in My Hands,  attempts more.  Though  it  cap­ tures  the  special  flavour  of  the  years be­ tween  I 958 and   I 963,  charting  the  tran­ sition   in  generational   touchstones  from the  sullen  insouciance of  James Dean  to the  rasping protests  of   Bob  Dylan   and from   the  beatnik  wanderers inspired   by Kerouac  to   the   revolutionary  activists  simmering restively before  the full boil of Vietnam,  the   novel  suggests   that   these years  of   searching and   challenging  are  haunted by a fundamental concern not so much  with  personality or  society as with reality  itself,  a  conviction,  as  Maillard states  in  the  last  paragraph of the  book, that  life  is  significant, that   evil  is  real, that  something greater than   "a  series  of small,  decent, liberal   corrections" could be fought for, won or lost.
Set  in West Virginia, The  Knife  in My Hands takes the form of an autobiograph­ ical  reminiscence by  John  Dupre of  his life   between    the   ages   of   sixteen   and twenty-three. It  is  clear   from   the  start
that  Dupre does  not  fit  any  of  the  con­ ventional roles offered  him,  but  his  non­  conformity  is  both   unusual   and   unfo­ cused. Two tendencies, sexual and  meta­ physical,   provide an   unsettling  polarity for  his life. From  an  early  age, Dupre is confused about  his  sexual  identity. As a child  he dressed  himself  as a girl, and  as a  teen-ager and   young   adult,  notwith­ standing the  military academy to  which

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



he is sent  to reinforce his masculinity, he suffers  from  a  confessed   Lolita-complex
-an attraction to young  girls, pre-teen,
slender, boy-like. Throughout the novel, however,  the issue is never  clarified:  Du­ pre comes no closer to revealing or under­ standing  his  true   nature than  does  the reader. His  other  peculiar  characteristic is a fascination, developed during his uni­ versity years, with  the Cabala and,  like a miniature Lowry,  he spends  much  of his time   wandering   drunkenly  through  its labyrinthine mysteries.
Surrounding the  main  character are  a
handful of other eccentrics: Lyle Ledzin­ ski, a high school friend  and long-distance runner  with  a  highly  personal brand   of Catholicism, who  jogs  his way  to  insight and   disappears early  in  the  novel;  Wil­ liam  Revington,  rich,  bright, who  drops out   of   university   to   be   on   the   road; Carol   Rabinovitz, beautiful, intelligent, independent, who  tries  to  reconcile   her gifts with  her  Jewish  role models; Marge Levine,  social  activist, committed  social­ ist; and  Bill Cohen, who somehow, one is meant to  believe,  through  self-discipline and  a  kind  of  rugged   passivity,  achieves sainthood. In  one  important scene, each character  in   turn   is  challenged  by  the others   to  state his  or  her   credo.   Carol  defends  the  beauty   and   value   of  litera­ ture;  Marge, the  dignity and  wisdom  of the  working  class; Cohen, the universal significance of each  being  and  each  mo­ ment;  Revington, the   futility   of   every­ thing.   Against   these,   Dupre   constantly measures   himself.  For   him,  the  Cabala furnishes "an  accurate map of  the  things that  are ordinarily hidden to us. I want  to know those things."
Indeed, Dupre is obsessed with  the Shekinah, the  abiding presence of  God, the source  and  centre of glory, and  is frequently visited by strange voices and visions.  Though Maillard gives  such scenes thematic prominence, they seldom sustain   the   weight   they   are   meant  to
 carry.  Of  course,  Maillard is aware,  per­ haps  through that  other  drunken  mystic, of  the  connection  between  alcohol  and the occult and  may even be using alcohol  in  its  symbolic  role  as  a  conjunction of opposites,  fire  and   water,  male  and   fe­ male. In addition, Dupre's sexuality  itself becomes  a  metaphor, not  only  of a con­ fused  society,  but  more  importantly of a possible creative resource of mythical di­ mensions.   But   Dupre  himself   goes   no further than  to become  a voracious reader  of rabbinical esoteria and  women's fash­ ion magazines, lusting eventually after  the open,  waiting, womanly Carol,  but  with­  drawing instead  into  self-centred sex and escapist drinking, while  his philosophical speculations diminish into  sublimation, fantasy,  and  frustration.
Near  the  end  of  the  novel, Dupre, de­ ciding  he  is unfit  for  anything  else,  toys with the idea of becoming a writer  (some­ what    dubious  credentials,   one   would think). Whether he pursues this goal may appear in  the  sequel  in  which  Maillard intends   to  follow   Dupre  from  I g63  to
1970.  As  it  stands,  The   Knife   in  My Hands,  though  it   aspires   to  something other  than   the  conventional  Bildungsro­
man, and  though it contains some power­ ful  and  evocative  scenes,  remains loose, episodic,  incomplete, not  taking  full  ad­  vantage  of its potential. In fairness,  Mail­  lard   sees  the   novel   as   one   half   of  a whole, and one must wait  to see if the rest fills  out  developments  underway but  so
far  unresolved.
R. H. RAMSEY


SOUND & VOICE

w.  J. KEITH, Epic  Fiction:  The   Art  of Rudy
Wiebe. Univ.  of Alberta  Press, n.p.
As w. J. KEITH REMARKS in his Epic Fiction: The  Art  of Rudy  Wiebe, any assessment of the work of a writer  "in mid­ career  ... must ... be  tentative."  Indeed,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   such   an   evaluation  is  necessarily made without the benefit of hindsight  and historical  perspective  is one  of  the  po­ tential    perils   scholars   understand   well enough; however,   it  also  offers  its  own special  kind  of challenge. Speculation as to  what  future  years  might  bring  is in­ triguing  too,  but   it  is  valuable only  as speculation;  posterity  will  judge  its  ac­ curacy,  just as posterity will also make its own   assessments   and   comment   on   the rightness  of mid-term criticism on the subject  writer's canon  as a whole. And clearly,   time   will  also  offer,  directly   if there  is sufficient  interest,  or indirectly  by virtue  of comments on  the  primary  ma­ terial, its comments on the criticism of the criticism.  Thus the  reviewer  of a  critical  work  on  a  contemporary writer  and  the author of  that  work  essentially  walk  the same  path  or,  if  they  feel  nervous  about  their  task,  the  same  high  wire.
r:f'here is, however, no evident nervous­ ness in Keith's study  of Wiebe's prose fic­ tion. The book  moves from  a short  Pref­ ace  and   brief  list  of   Abbreviations  and References to a useful introductory chap­ ter and  then  to considerations, in individ­  ual  chapters,  of  Wiebe's   novels  as  they appeared-Peace Shall Destroy Many (1964), First  and  Vital Candle   (1966), The Blue  Mountains  of China   ( 1970), The  Temptations of  Big  Bear   (I 973), and  The Scorched-Wood People  ( 1977). The novella,  The Mad  Trapper (1g8o), the play, Far As the  Eye Can See  ( 1977), and the short stories receive principal attention in  a final  chapter. Notes,  care­ fully  prepared  and   often  offering  addi­ tional    insights,    information,   and   sign­ posts, a useful  Bibliography  (divided  into  sections  listing  books,  books  edited,  arti­ cles  and   reviews   by   Wiebe,  and   criti­  cism) ,  and   an  Index  conclude   the  vol­ ume.
Given  the structure of Keith's book one might  assume  that  its central  chapters on the five novels  break  down into five inde-
 pendent essays; indeed,  these chapters can be read  as separate critical studies,  but  in fact  to do so is to risk losing the thread of Keith's argument that  Wiebe  appears, as one examines his prose fiction, to be mov­ ing  in  his  later   writing to  "features ... that  belong  to epic  more than  to the con­ ventional novel." Beyond this, a  reading of only one or two of these sections would also  miss  another  point:  this  book  is  a thoughtful and  careful study  of  the  de­ velopment of Wiebe's  prose, and  the value of  Keith's  work  lies in  great  part  in  the notion   of   cumulative  comment,  in   the deliberate  way  in  which  he  moves  along  his  critical  trail.  Links  between   Wiebe's works  are  explored-Keith looks  both forward and  backward in time as he pro­ ceeds;  the  result  is a well controlled and integrated  treatment of  Wiebe's   themes and   techniques.  He   provides,   then,   an exploration of  what  Wiebe  has  to  offer, the way in which  he presents  his concerns, and  the  importance and  success  of  both content, structure, and  style.  Just   as  he comments  that   "continuities are  so  im­ portant a feature of  Wiebe's  work," so one  might  fairly  observe  that continuities are an essential  element of  Keith's critical approach. r:f'here are  no loose ends.
It is clear  that  Keith admires his  sub­ ject's   writing;  the   approach  he   takes, while  not  without criticism,   is  apprecia­ tive,  fair-minded, and  encouraging. For example, he  comments  that   in  First  and Vital Candle one will "find  the clumsiness  as well as the excitement of  the growing powers  that may be considered character­ istic  of  a   transitional  work.  Here,    the conspicuous structuring of the  climax seems in conflict  with  the modernist sense of   tentative   development  that    distin­ guishes  Abe  Ross'  story.  Elsewhere,  the didactic  sections   of   the   novel   become oppressive; while  they  can  be  defended intellectually,   they    remain     vulnerable artistically." In his  view,  Wiebe  in  First and  Vital Candle  "has  not  yet succeeded

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in fusing  meaning and  action; he only achieves this in the novels from The Blue Mountains of China onwards." These  are not   in   any   way   words   of   unqualified praise, but the sense of realistic, overall evaluation is there.  With  The Blue Moun­ tains  of China, Keith asserts, "Wiebe be­ comes    a   major   novelist.    Exceptional promise   has   evolved    into   indisputable achievement.... The sensitive reader  will recognize,  within  the texture of the writ­  ing,  what  I  can  only  describe as  the  ex­ hilaration of  accomplishment."
It should   not   be  assumed,  however, that   in  his  comments about  The  Blue Mountains  and   the   later   novels  Keith offers   his   reader  only   unreserved   ap­ proval. His  assessment of The  Scorched­ Wood  People, for example, moves from  a careful  look  at   the  background  to  this piece   of  historical   fiction -at   Wiebe's care   in  his  treatment of  Riel-to  the structure of  the  novel  and, in  particular, the  employment of Pierre Falcon  as nar­ rator. He  addresses  with   understanding issues  which    might    well   disturb  some readers. For  Keith, "Riel and  Wiebe and, to a lesser extent, Falcon, are  linked  by a preoccupation  with   the   visionary.  'Vis­ ion,'  indeed, is a major element  not only in   the   subject-matter  but   even   in   the structure  of   the   book";   "when   Falcon  speaks   'from   beyond   the   grave'  as  an authoritative,   omniscient    narrator,   he has  taken  over  the  function  of the novel­ ist;  author and   narrator  can   no  longer be easily separated." There is a "richness" in  this novel,  though it is "a richness sel­ dom   accompanied   by  formal   elegance; there   is a  roughness  and   jaggedness ... that   can  offend  devotees of  artistic   de­ corum." Here is a book which,  in Keith's opinion, "lacks  the  gradual development to  which  we  are  accustomed in  a  tradi­ tional  novel; indeed, each  section  relates to  the  next   not   by  any  necessary   plot­ connection  but   because   it  adds   yet  an­ other  facet  to our  ultimate understanding
 of  Riel."  Thus, Keith not  only  suggests that  a "reader may  well find  himself  be­ wildered,  overwhelmed by an  embarrass­ ment   of  riches," and   bothered  by  the structure, but  he also moves on to suggest an  approach to  the  novel  which  allows a potential source  of  difficulty  to become a very real  basis for coming  to grips  with it. He remarks that his own "first reading broke   down   in   puzzlement  as ... [he] tried  to account for apparently capricious shiftings   of    the   spectral  narrator";   a further  reading suggested  that  the  novel be  seen  as  "a  series  of  imaginative tab­  leaux ... ; in  this respect  it  proceeds  like The  Blue  Mountains of China, through the  cumulative effect  of significant  spots of   time."  One   is, Keith asserts,  "in   the presence of an unquestionably major nov­ elist."
Keith  is   a   sensitive   critic;  he   has learned    "to   listen    to   Wiebe's   novels; sound  and  'voice'  determine meaning ... Wiebe demands sympathetic perseverance on the part  of his readers; ultimately, however,   his  prose  yields  up  its  secrets and,  to adopt one of his own phrases,  he can  make  the  past  sing in  our  ears  with sweet songs."
Epic  Fiction: The Art  of Rudy Wiebe is,  then,   a  clearly   worked,   considerate, and  useful study. It is not long-the text (without Notes,  etc.)   runs  to  some   128 pages-but in  the  best  sense  it  is long enough,  given  what  it sets out  to do. His book is worth  reading-for its clarity  of structure and  statement, for  what  it says about  Wiebe's  art,  and  for  its spirit  and sensitivity  which  have  their  proper result in  that  they  impel  one  to  return to  the works of Wiebe  himself  with  heightened understanding and  enthusiasm.

BRYAN N. S. GOOCH






133

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LOOKING NORTH

THOMAS YORK,  Trapper. Doubleday Canada,
$I9-95·
DAVID WILLIAMS, The  River Horsemen. Anansi,
$9·95·
JIM TALLOSI, The  Trapper and the  Fur-Faced
Spirits. Queenston House, $12.95; pa. $6.so.

THE CANADIAN NORTH is the strongest common bond  linking these three  books. Yet "north" should  be thought of as a direction only, and  not as any definable geographic locale, for these three  volumes share  little   more  than   settings   that   are "north" of Toronto. Trapper  is set along the Peel and  Porcupine watersheds of the Yukon   Territory, The   River  Horsemen tells of a short  journey  up the South Sas­ katchewan River,  and  the  poems in The  Trapper  and the  Fur-Faced  Spirits were inspired    by   the   wilderness   regions   of Manitoba.
Of  the  three  authors, only York  draws
on an arctic setting.  In  the Author's Note he claims  that  "the land  itself is the  pri­ mary source,"  thereby  explicitly directing attention to his setting as something par­  ticularly important to him, and not simply a  necessary  component of  the  narrative process.  York's   other  books -We,  the Wilderness,  The   Musk  Ox  Passion, and Snowman -suggest that  such a setting  is essential to what  the author wishes to say, yet  unlike   the   prairie  novels  of  Grove, Laurence,  and   Ross,  York's   books  are based  on visits to the  north, not on long­ term  residences.  In Trapper, he  takes  up the  Albert  Johnson/Mad  Trapper figure in  an  effort  to "come to  terms  with  the Arctic," an   attempt   he  had   previously made    through  the   character  of   John  Hornby in  Snowman.  As  he  did  there,  York asserts  the  authenticity of his land­ scape by pointing to his personal  confron­ tation with  the geography he evokes, and welcome as such  first-hand knowledge  of the land  would  be in  northern fiction,  it

134
 is difficult   to  see what York  has  "come to terms with" in this novel. Certainly his efforts  leave  my own  appreciation and understanding of the  Arctic  unchanged. Possibly this failure arises because  even though  the   author  has   journeyed  over some of the  routes  travelled by his char­ acters'  prototypes, York  sets  the  climax  of his stories  in  mid-winter, although his own  knowledge of the land has been gar­ nered  in the summer season. Significantly, those   two   northern   figures   who   would  allow   York   to  come   to  grips   with   the Arctic  died miserable deaths after  lengthy  periods  of  starvation and  exposure to the elements,  circumstances bearing nothing in common with  York's well-outfitted and seasonal  excursions. The point  is not  that York   must   starve   before   he  can   write about  starvation,  but    that    his   stories smack  of contrivance because  he does not write  from  his own  experience.
In   spite   of  these   problems  with  set­ ting, Trapper is not  at  all a conventional romantic adventure  set  in  the  wastes  of the  uninhabitable north. York's  prose, in fact,  is anything but  predictable, and  his story is hardly a one-dimensional thriller. Using  language  that  at  times is intensely  lyrical, York shifts  between  narrative and dramatic modes. He consciously varies his prose from that  of a ponderously scientific treatise   on   the    nature  of   matter   to straight-forward narrative development of event.  Few  of these shifts,  however,  have solid  aesthetic  validity;  they  betray  in­ stead  an  undisciplined story-teller  whose enthusiasm for  his subject  is greater than his self-control. For  example, when  John­ son's doom  draws  inevitably nearer in the final   chapters,  Trapper  spins   off  in  a kaleidoscope of voices and points  of view. But York's  efforts  at  poetic intensity here undermine the  vigorous  narrative devel­ oped  in  the  earlier pages.  After  building  on  the  innate narrative potential of  this legend, York  loses track  of everything in a blaze of unrestrained ejaculations.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ffhis  lack  of  discipline is equally  clear in other narrative elements. The first two­ thirds  of  the  book  centres on  R.C.M.P. Inspector Eames  and   his  domestic afflic­ tions-an unfaithful wife, an unconvinc­ ing sexuality, and  an  uninteresting plan­  tars  wart.  Johnson remains in  the  back­ ground,  an  almost   petty  aggravation  to Eames'  more   visible   initations.  In   the final   third,  however,    Johnson  himself moves  to  centre stage  and   becomes  the principal actor, and  Eames  is all but for­ gotten.
The control missing  in  Trapper is working  overtime in Williams' The River Horsemen. The setting  here  is Saskatche­ wan   south   of   the   Laurentian  Shield; "rural" evokes the geography better  than does    "wilderness."   Like    Trapper   the events  take  place  during the  Great De­ pression. A sequence of short interior monologues reveals  the story of two Indi­ ans,  a  Ukrainian boy, and  a  fallen-away revivalist   preacher  who   canoe   up   the South  Saskatchewan to Saskatoon, where each  seeks to satisfy his own  personal  ob­ session.  This   motley  collection   is  comi­ cally,  irreverently,  yet  tellingly   reminis­ cent  of earlier  travellers who  plied  these same  waters,  perhaps ultimately for  the same  reasons. Hilarious, pathetic, outra­ geous,  tragic -the  full  gamut of  emo­ tions is finely executed by Williams.
The book has one weakness -As I Lay Dying.  Williams is too much  under  the influence  of Faulkner's tour  de  force. The narrative technique-a series of  I -4 page interior monologues related by and in  the idiom    of   the    various    characters -is clearly   derivative.  Of   course,   Faulkner himself  could  hardly  be  said  to have  in­ vented the  stream  of  consciousness   tech­  nique  that  underlies this  narrative mode. But   the  similarities  between  As  I   Lay Dying  and The River   Horsemen do  not end  here.  Instead of the  Bundren  family hauling Addie's corpse  through the  piney woods  to Jefferson, this  new  incarnation
 depicts  the  four  misfits  paddling upriver after  their  "borrowed" tractor breaks down.  No one drills  any  holes in Addie's face here, but  the scalping of Many-birds by a  jealous  and   enraged "bohunk  bar­ ber'' adds  the same  touch  as does Varda­ man's  auger.  And  as the enticements lur­  ing  the  members of  the  Bundren family to Jefferson  are  quite  various,  so each  of these more northerly pilgrims  has his own personal mission. The boy goes to inform  his  lunatic mother of his  father's death; Many-birds seeks further libidinal  pleas­ ures   with   his   scalper's  wife,   who   has turned him  out; Fine-day, the  aged  In­  dian  who  cannot forget  the death of his son  twenty  years  ago,  finds  a  surrogate son in  the  boy;  and  Jack  Cann, the  re­ vivalist   preacher and   guardian  of   the boy, ultimately walks  off to be sacrificed in  the  place  of the  unregenerate miscre­ ant,  Many-birds.
The conscious  parallels with  As I  Lay Dying create a problem  in evaluating The River   Horsemen,  because   they  are   not used  for  parody   or  burlesque, but  seem only  to be imitative. The   problem  is the more  serious  because  The River  Horse­ men  is  otherwise an  accomplished  and insightful  piece of  prose-its characteri­ zation  is brilliant,  its  language rhythmic and   in  tune   with   the   vernacular. The voyageurs,  both  Indian and   white,   ring true,  and  in  spite of  (or  because  of)  the outrageous events  that  befall  this unlikely foursome,  the  characters remain   as  pat­  ently  human as do  Faulkner's Yoknapa­ tawpha originals.  The River  Horsemen creates  an  enduring and  substantial  im­ age, both  of these  pilgrims  from Depres­ sion-ridden  Saskatchewan  and   of   the larger    human   spiritual   condition.   In short,  the  entire   created  world   of  Wil­ liams' novel is solid. The River  Horsemen might  best be seen as an  ingenious  meta­ morphosis  of As I  Lay Dying, transform­ ing the sultry  Mississippi  milieu  into  one of  unmistakably Canadian  origins.

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The  granite-ribbed Shield  country of Manitoba's wilderness  areas  provides  the physical   background   for   many   of   the poems  in  Tallosi's The  Trapper  and the Fur-Faced Spirits, but occasional verses sweep as far  north  as the District  of  Kee­ watin.   A  clean   and   elegant   simplicity characterizes Tallosi's style, bringing care­  ful observation of the land  together  with a poetic  insight  that infuses an elemental significance into what he observes. A har­  monic  chord  runs  through his images  of the  natural  universe   and  its  people,  an organic  unity  common  in  pastoral  and romantic poetry, but such an integrated vision  of  man   and   the  unsettled   land­ scape  is not  often  encountered in  Cana­ dian  writing about the  northern  wilder­  ness,  where   one  more   often  finds  man struggling against a  hostile  environment. Tallosi's focus, however, falls on the beau­ tiful  and   mysterious  integration  of  this world,   not   on   its   harshness.   In   "The
North," for example, "the  people  I speak
I a language I made of rivers, smoke and trees   I fires,  flesh  and   feathers   I their breaths I are  little  I winds."  In  "A Song
for the Northern Lights" the aurora is not the  ominous symbol  of impending doom that  frequently appears in fiction,  but be­ comes  an  image  of  creation   and  birth:
"A son of sky, I am  a Magyar- I Born
of my mother, a woman,  I and  the Bird­ Lover.... From  her  womb  is born I the
green  and  dancing light."
Elsewhere the northern lights create an illusion,  causing a  trout  to  jump  "thru a
green   reflection   I mistaking stars   I for
fireflies   upon    the    surface."  Like    the
Trickster figures  Nanabozho and  Wisak­ edjak   of  Indian mythology,   the  natural universe  is simultaneously benefactor and deceiver, not  only  to  man, but  to all  the creatures who are a part  of it. In another poem,  the  lore  and  cunning of the  trap­ per's  occupation  elevates  him  to  a  sim­ ilar   ambivalent   stature:  he   becomes  a
"trickster I making scents of entrails and
 essences."  Tallosi  observes  and  interprets the events  of the land. There is, in fact, a strong  bond between  the dissembling trap­ per figure and  the poet, who is himself an illusionist. In  "The  Sandhill  Stag" stars are  transmuted into flying sand, the stag's  antlers into   "leafless  scrub  oaks."   Else­ where,  the poet describes  eskers that  "lay
I like  I mountainous  I sand   snakes   I
stretching I into  the  tundra." Acting  in
the  role  of  shaman, the  poet  transforms
what   he  sees, deceiving his  readers and thereby  showing them  what  they had  not been able  to see.
ri'hroughout the volume  Tallosi  returns
to an  image  of  "dancing" objects-the sun,   the   northern  lights,   the   hills,  the mice.  This  rhythmic motion  extends not only to the objects themselves, but to the choreography of the shaman as he chants and  conjures, and  to the poet's  own dance as  well.  In  "Totem" Tallosi  writes  that
"My   flight  is  a  dance  I and   my  voice travels  I as my flight," effecting  this com­
plete synthesis between  poet, shaman, and
the  natural universe.  This  is Tallosi's first book of verse; it surely will not be his last.

RICHARD C. DAVIS


ORIGINAL ANCESTORS

LESLIE  MONKMAN, A Native  Heritage: Images of  the  Indian   in  English-Canadian  Litera­ ture.  Univ.  of Toronto  Press,  $25.00.

WE  ALL  KNOW THAT INDIANS  have  fig­ ured  in English-Canadian literature from its earliest  days;  what  is surprising is that  until  now no one has compiled a detailed and  comprehensive survey  of the various  roles and  stereotypes that  have been thrust  upon  these literary Indians. Leslie Monk­ man's  new   book   covers   an   impressive  range  of  material,  drawing  on  minor  as well as major  works from  the  nineteenth and  twentieth  centuries. Although many of  his  observations  will  hardly   astound

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



teachers and  students  already interested in  the  subject, it  is  both  refreshing and useful  to have  so much  information or so important  a  topic   cogently   summarized and  systematically organized.
'From  Monkman's study  emerges  the irony  that  at  many  moments in the nine­ teenth  and   twentieth  centuries   writers have  presented simultaneously conflicting  stereotypes of Canada's native peoples. At the  same  time  as  the  Indian  was vilified as  a  brutal savage,   he  was  praised  as  a noble  child  of nature; he was seen as an unregenerate  heathen   (fit  only  for  con­ version)    and   also  as  a   practitioner  of natural religion  superior to corrupt Chris­  tianity.  Indians have been viewed as both a nation  doomed by  the  natural progress of civilization and  a people  whose demise testifies  to  the  white  man's   guilt;  they have  been  portrayed as a group  without a history, and  have  also supplied identity­ hungry white  writers with  indigenous his­ torical heroes.
Works and  literary figures  discussed in some  detail   include W acousta, Beautiful Losers, The Double   Hook, The Wabeno Feast,   The  Vanishing Point,   Riverrun, Tay    John,  Surfacing,  The   Studhorse Man, Gone  Indian, the  Manawaka nov­ els, poems  by  John Newlove,  Al  Purdy, and  Don Gu tteridge, the historical fiction of   Rudy    Wiebe,   the   Indian  plays   of George  Ryga,  the Indian poetry  of Craw­ ford  and  D.  C. Scott,  and  Pauline  John­ son and  Grey  Owl.  Especially  interesting are Monkman's ventures into some of the narrower byways  of our  cultural  history. He indicates that  the depiction of Indians was shaped by social  and  political  events in  the  writer's world   when   he  discusses the appeal of Tecumseh to anti-American nineteenth-century authors and  of Louis Riel  to  modern  writers. His  observation that  in  1939,  1940,  and   I94I, Governor General's awards went  to works venerat­ ing the Jesuits draws  a suggestive parallel  between  support for  seventeenth-century
 warriors  against "savagery" and  the  con­ temporary  struggle   against  Nazism.  He demonstrates that  the modern appropria­ tion  of the  Beothuks  as an  image  of  the fragility  of our  own  civilization  was pre­ ceded   by  earlier  literary   interest   in  the extinct Newfoundland tribe, and  that  the figure  of  the  dying  Indian child  is a  re­ current motif  in recent  English-Canadian fiction   and   poetry.   I   also  enjoyed   the several pages devoted to the response of nineteenth-century writers to Indian place names and  to the season known  as Indian summer.
One of the major problems confronting
the author of a study spanning more than two  centuries and  referring to  scores  of literary  works  is organization. Should   he proceed   chronologically,  often   creating rather artificial   time  periods  and  risking needless  repetition of  recurring  themes; or should he proceed  thematically, tracing the  development  of  separate  ideas  and attitudes, but  then  missing the chance to analyze  in  depth eras  which  are particu­ larly  distinctive? Monkman  has  chosen the  latter,  presenting  his  themes  as  they appear historically, but  within  each  sec­ tion  jumping over decades  and sometimes  centuries. It is  indeed   interesting  to  see how  certain  themes   like  "Death of  the Indian" or  "Indian  Heroes" have  modi­  fied  over   the   years,  yet  one   misses  an inclusive  discussion  of,  for  example, the differences between   early  twentieth-cen­ tury  and  post- I 960  views.  The  structure of the  book is admirably suited  to Monk­ man's emphasis  on the continuity between  past  and  present, a  basic  premise  under­ lying his thesis  that   "white writers  have repeatedly found  in  the  confrontation of native  and  non-native heritages a unique focus  for  the   exploration  of  their   own concerns  and  culture." However, it  also allows  him  to  leap  back  and  forth  from the  interest in  the  Indians expressed  by nineteenth-century writers  to that  of writ­ ers of the  I 96o's and  I 970's, without hav-

137

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ing to account for the  relative  absence  of native   peoples  from   the  mainstream of English-Canadian literature from  World War   I  to  the  decade of  the  Canadian centennial.  Monkman  covers   this   gap with  Klein,  Pratt, and  O'Hagan, as well as many  fairly  obscure  writers  and  works (e.g., a serialized  novel  by W. 0. Mitch­ ell from  the mid-fifties), so that the reader  hardly  notices the scarcity of  references to most of the central writers of the  period.
Some aspects  of this study  suggest  that
Monkman may have  been working  under rigid constraints imposed  by his publisher. With  only  165 pages  of text,  the  book is very short,  considering the  magnitude of its  subject, and   sometimes   terse  to  the point  of awkwardness, as if graceful tran­ sitions  and  leisurely  reflections had  been sacrificed  in  favour  of solid  information. Description prevails  over  analysis,  telling us who wrote  what  when, but  risking  few conjectures as  to  why.  A  piece  of sound preliminary research, A  Native   Heritage should  prove  to be a  valuable basic  text which   lays  the  groundwork  for  further investigation  and  signals  new  directions for imaginative critical inquiry.

CAROLE GERSON


IN DRAFT

DENNIS  COOLEY, ed., Draft:  An Anthology  of Prairie Poetry. Turnstone Press and ECW Press, $g.oo.

To  REVIEW A  BOOK OF POEMS by a single author is one  thing; to tackle  an  anthol­ ogy of work by a large  number of  poets is another. The  single   author   is   putting poems together to form  a statement which is  informed  by  his  instincts   and   con­ science, a statement  inseparable from  the poetry  itself.  An  anthology, though, can be assembled according to any number of designs.  Draft, edited   by Dennis  Cooley and   produced  co-operatively  by  Turn-
 stone  Press in  Winnipeg and  ECW  Press in Downsview, is a collection of poetry  by prairie writers and  quite  simply aims  to represent  the  best  work  in  a  variety   of forms  by a group of poets who share  a strongly-felt, distinctive geography. The book is fascinating, challenging, and  suc­ cessful.
Cooley  is acutely aware of  the  special
problems of  the  anthology. For  instance, although he  has  included his own  work, he has done  so in a unique and  imagina­ tive  way.  His   poem    "Draft,"  a   poetic  examination of  the  word,  appears as  an epigraph  to  the  collection.  This neatly overcomes the  complications courted  by an  editor  who enjambs the  roles  of poet and   editor by  posing  as  an  "objective" judge  of the  work  of others while  imply­ ing  similar  qualifications in  selecting his own  poetry.  Cooley's   uniquely  personal statement also undercuts-with winning humility-the notion   of  editorial "om­ niscience"   (which  can   creep   into   the strangest places)   by making his  function as editor a  personal one.  He  avoids  both extremes-he is neither a demigod  choos­ ing the  poetic  elect  nor an  editor  abusing his privilege. Instead, the entire  anthology is openly  acknowledged as a personal vis­ ion, or "anthology not as canon" as Turn­ stone's  brochure puts  it. This  is Cooley's  selection  and  he's  not  afraid   to admit it. As "Draft" points  out,  drafting itself is a process  of  change,  new  poets  following  old, old poets who

snuck  onto  the  raft when  I wasn't  looking
with  new  stuff  in  their  pockets

and  no two anthologies are ever the same.
Cooley has ensured that the material included in  Draft  spans  a wide  range  in theme  and  genre.  Many of the names will be familiar to those who've watched with interest the  coming-of-age of  prairie  po­ etry   and   the   growing  respect   which  is accorded to  it.  The anthology  is full  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  powerful influence  of  a  bizarre,  sur­ real   human  landscape. Kristjana  Gun­  nars  describes  the  transformation  of hu­  man   will   into   something  like   "Fate"; through a  process  of  quiet   but  graphi­ cally-represented violence, human agency transforms itself into  a  type of the  death to   which   it   must   itself   succumb,  and which  relentlessly  haunts it  at  every  mo­ ment.   This,   too,  is  part   of  a  landscape which    contacts   its   inhabitants  at   all points, on its own unforgiving terms. Peter Huse,  whose material left  me largely  un­ moved, is nonetheless master of a striking, idiosyncratic power with great  potential. Brenda Riches'  work  has  a stunning  vis­ ual quality; somewhere there  must  be an artist  who could  put her  poetry on canvas. Australian-born Craig   Powell,  who  out­  shines  almost  everybody  else  in Draft­ in  a  delicate, understated  way-creates a  human  landscape  through  a  form  of direct  image-making which transcends the normal limitations of  context and  attains total  contact with  the  emotions:

I want to see  your
body shake with  light 	on your  fingers as they
move  apart 	snow

fall  like  sailors
off  the  edge  of the  world
I need  to  hear
your  body  in  its  sleep

in  its cold  drifts

Helen   Hawley   and   S.  Padmanab  both show  an  appreciation of  the  musical  po­ tential  of  words.   Hawley   in   particular writes   searching  lines   full   of   personal mythology  expanded through language to majestic proportions.  Padmanab is sensi­ tive to the appearance of words and  lines on  the  page  and   the  hypnotic  rhythms become a rhetorical device, aiming at our understanding.  Jon    Whyte's    "Pitch 'n' Toady" is a  long,  whimsical monologue whose strength lies in its euphonic  read­ ability:
 Listenname, listenname wudja believe
I wouldn't believe
you've  gotta believe
it's  all the  same  believer's game
now for the first time high  time  prime time lady,  if you  don't buy
won't  try  can't try  bug  off
I haven't got  time  to  waste  on  thrillseekers
billseekers, chillseekers, daredevils or fair devils
OK.

(All right,  I confess;  a lot of "Pitch 'n' Toady"  bewildered  me.)    Strongly   felt also are Myron  Turner's elegance  and Douglas  Barbour's subtle  but  rigorous in­ telligence.
Draft is an excellent anthology. Its suc­
cess stems not so much  from  the fact  that it attains  its own  unique aims as from  the general  success sought  by any  anthology. The mark  of distinctive landscape is  cer­ tainly  there,   but   then   again,   an  honest and  intelligent sensibility  can  refine pure poetry from any set of circumstances. Suf­ fice it to say that  it is difficult  to assemble any  volume  whose  real  success lies in  an intelligently-managed diversity.  Maybe successes like  Draft  are  few  because  edi­ tors like Cooley are so rare; I don't know. I like to think  there  are  more  like Cooley out  there,  waiting  to  make  their  state­ ments.  We  need  them.  Meanwhile, I'm  having  Draft.
ANDREW BROOKS


BETWEEN CULTURES

BYRNA  BARCLAY,  Summer of the  Hungry  Pup.
NeWest   Press,  $14.95; pa.  $7-95·
MARK  MEALING,  Coyote's  Running Here.  Pulp
Press, $4-95·

THE ATTRACTION OF  Byrna Barclay's first novel,  Summer of the  Hungry Pup,  lies in   the  author's attempt  to  structure a multi-faceted presentation of her  theme. On   several   complementary  levels,   the

139

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



novel deals  with  both  the frustration and the  fertility that  come  from  the  meeting of two cultures. Annika,  a young white Canadian woman, nurses a dying Cree while  the  "Old Woman" recounts  her memories  of  the  late   18oo's,  when   the Crees  who  participated in the Riel rebel­ lion  fled  to  the  United States.  On  one level,  the  action  of the  novel is Annika's effort  to  absorb Cree  wisdom  and  use it for  revitalizing her  own life. On  another level,  the  challenge is  for  the  Crees  to find "a  new  way  to live" as the  terms  of existence  increasingly become dictated by the  whites,   the   two  races  finding   each other  equally contemptible and  inscruta­ ble.
Misunderstanding between  the  races is mirrored by the constant problem  of translation between  the two languages. A
treacherous translator  who  exploits   the
language barrier receives almost  as much contempt as a pimp  who delivers Indian girls to  white  soldiers.
·Both physical and verbal intercourse finally  transcend the  barriers.  Old  Wom­ an's  memories climax  in  an  understand­ ing  sexual  relationship with  a  white  sol­ dier,  just  as  the  narrative in the  present  climaxes  with  Old Woman's story fertiliz­ ing the life and soul of Annika.  The Cree wisdom  at  the  core  of  this  novel is that misunderstanding debilitates as surely  as slow  starvation  ("summer's hungry pup"). In  truth, everything is "apart but also a part" of everything else. The  same medicines cure  us all:  Old  Woman  may prefer  foxglove  tea  to  the  doctor's  pills, but  both  remedies  contain digitalis.
Barclay's theme  lends a special urgency to her  effort  to  bring  to  the  attention of mainstream Canadian readers  the history and culture of a people who have too long been  "apart" more  than   "a  part." The novel's weaknesses, however, erode the impact of this vision.
Annika's growth is thematically crucial, but she fails to become  a living character
 in   our   eyes.  She   repeatedly  announces that  hearing Old  Woman's story is an important  learning  experience for   her; she  has  to  tell  us,  for  we  would   never guess otherwise. We know  too little  of her needs  and  feel nothing of her  reality. Summer of the  Hungry Pup  closes with an  embarrassingly unconvincing  descrip­ tion    of   Annika  dancing   through   the woods in ecstasy, while we uncomfortably reflect  that  she  has  never  been  anything but  a creaky  literary  device.
A further problem is the linguistic bar­
rier  that   the  author throws  up  between the reader and  Old  Woman's story. Barc­ lay,  a  student of the  Cree  language, de­ cides  to  deliver  Old  Woman's memories  in an  English imitation of Cree,  the main  feature of  which  is  the  omission  of  the definite  article  ("first   light  of  new  day is  grey  and   air  is  cool") .  At  first,  this decision   annoys   the   reader    as   an   af­ fected   "me-Tarzan-you-Jane"   primitiv­ ism. Three hundred pages  later,  the  style is merely  tiresome.  Trudging through the prose   of  Old   Woman's  memories   is  a leaden experience. Whatever may  be the status  of  the  definite article  in  Cree,  the English ear accepts  its systematic omission only  in  poetry,  not  in prose.  In  her  final death vision,  Old  Woman soars  into  po­ etry  and, for  the first  time,  the truncated style seems appropriate.
The British Columbia poet Mark Meal­
ing  succeeds  in  avoiding the  very  pitfall that  traps  Byrna  Barclay.  A third  of  the poems  in  Coyote's Running Here  are re­ workings  of  Indian texts  on  the  Coyote­  Trickster  theme.   In  a  preface,  Mealing declares that  he  aims  "to  present stories in  largely   inaccessible   native   languages and  in aesthetically awkward translations in such  a way  that  they  do  not  jar  upon the hearer/reader." These recreations are only   the   first   step   in   assimilating  the Trickster   legends   to   mainstream  con­ sciousness.  A  second  group  of  poems  are his own  creations in imitation of the  au-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



thentic legends,  or,  as  he  coyly describes them,  "stories 'not  yet'  traditional." The remaining works  in  the  "suite" are "per­ sonal   poems-the    writer's   immediate confrontation with  Coyote."
This three-way approach -recreation, imitation, and  personal assimilation-is both  a thoughtful and  a  useful  approach to native  legends.  It is thoughtful because it may well reflect the steps necessary for mainstream culture to come to terms with native   cultures. It  is  useful   because   it allows the poet flexibility and variety that make   the  reading of  Coyote's Running Here  an  exuberant experience.
A  key  aspect   of  the  Trickster in  his various  incarnations around the world - Reynard the  Fox  and   Br'er   Rabbit are perhaps more  familiar examples-is  his elusiveness:    "lotsa    tracks    /  no   HIM though." At  heart, this  is a  moral  slip­ periness:
Coyote does  all those  bad  things
all  those  good  things too good  & bad  together
he  REALLY isn't straight

Coyote  is a  Creator -he  creates every­ thing  from  menstruation to  mortality - but  he  is a  Creator  without the  ethical  burden of  the  Old  Testament God.  He is a Creator who sticks  his tongue  out  at the  universe,  reveling  in  the  bravado of phallic boasting. He is a Creator, in short, more  human than   divine.  He  has  all  of humanity's moral   ambiguity, and  Meal­ ing plays this potential for all it is worth. The  book   swings   from   two-and-a-half pages  of  scatalogical  insults  (an  instant classic in the  curse genre) , to a stunning Indian parable of a man  who  turns  him­ self  into   a  monster   by  eating  his  own flesh,  to  Mealing's  resonant  "personal" readings  of   the   Trickster  figure   as  an existential  hero  come  to  tell  us  that  our own  home  is  the  centre of  the  universe and  the stars spin around us.
Above  all,  Coyote  is  a  talker   and   a singer.  He  creates by naming-a quint-
 essentially   human activity-and   when we  take  up  the  wooden  mask  of Coyote, we too become makers  of our own world.

Remembering IS  Making Singing IS  Remaking Telling IS  Finding

Mealing  finds, remakes,  and  makes a vis­ ion of the world  through the Indian mask of  Coyote.  He  remembers and  tells  and  above all, he sings:  the rhythms of Meal­ ing's  poetry  are  as sure-footed  as Coyote  on a good day. Coyote's  Running Here  is boisterous,  ribald,  witty,  always  surpris­ ing,   and   often   profound. It  makes   a major  contribution to  the  enrichment of Canada's culture through the recovery  of native  culture.
BRUCE PIRIE


MOTHERS & OTHERS

AUDREY THOMAs,   Real  Mothers. Talonbooks,
$7-95·
STANLEY K. FREIBERG, Nightmare  Tales. Bore­
alis  Press, $16.95; pa.  $10.95·
CHARLES G.  D.  ROBERTS,  The  Lure of the Wild, ed.   John  Coldwell  Adams.  Borealis   Press, n.p.

As THEIR TITLES SUGGEST, these are three very  different  books:   Audrey   Thomas' Real  Mothers includes   ten  highly  read­ able  stories  written in  a  predominantly realistic  mode; Stanley  Freiberg's Night­ mare Tales  also contains short fiction, but in  this  case  we  find  a  forced  and   ulti­  mately   unsuccessful   blend   of   strained lyricism, gothic  cliche, and  naturalistic heavyhandedness; The  Lure  of the  Wild comprises  the  three  "final" animal stories that  Charles G.  D.  Roberts wrote  forty­ three  years  after  he  published  "Do Seek Their Meat  from  God" in  1892.
Audrey  Thomas is often  described   as
an experimental writer  who employs Post­ Modern techniques in an  attempt to ren­  der female consciousness  and convey fern-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



mist views. Such  a description might be applied  to her novels, but it does little to convey  the  refreshing conventionality of her  short  stories.  In  Real  Mothers, as in Ten Green  Bottles   and   Ladies  and   Es­ corts,  most  of  the  fictions  develop  in  a fairly    straightforward,   linear    manner. The narrative viewpoint in Real  Mothers  seems intentionally detached:  Thomas is in  her   characters'  worlds,  but  she  has chosen  to remain outside  their  conscious­ ness, so that  we are  provided  with  a po­ tent  blend  of  authorial involvement and withdrawal  that  makes  the stories  rich in implication, subtle  in design.
The   book's  title  is  ironic.  The  "mom and  apple pie"  woman   pictured on  the cover   (she   sports   an   apron   imprinted with  red hearts) does not exist;  the mom and  apple pie daughter we see (a minia­
ture  of  her  mother)  is  not  "real." But
Thomas' stories are  concerned with  more than    a   failed   mother-and-child ideal: they  explore   the  relations -social,  sex­ ual,  or  intellectual-that  debase  tradi­ tional  values  and   make  it  hard   to  find anything "real."
The title story  frames  the collection  in terms   of  the   irony   I have   mentioned. Here  the mother, whose marriage has recently  collapsed, abandons every  sense of responsibility  conferred by her so-called role. A curious metamorphosis takes place as her  children begin  to take  care  of one another while  "Mommy" and   her  new­ found   lover  barricade  themselves  in  the bedroom to "Make love, do dirty things." "Out  in  the   Midday Sun"  exposes  the selfish  expectations  of  a   professor  bent upon  seducing the women in his class. In "Ted's Wife,"  middle-aged  Phyllis Keep­ ing  is shattered  to  learn  that   the  recent  widower   she  wants   to  romantically  be­ friend   is  passionately   involved   with   a much  younger  woman  whom  he eventu­ ally marries.  "Harry and  Violet" suggests the  conflicts  between  a child's  frustrated desire for attention and  an adult couple's
 frustrated attention to their  desires. Here, as in  "Galatea" and  "Timbuktu,"  the broken   dreams are   recognizable enough to  be  called   mundane. But  for  Thomas the mundane is special  because it remains so  unknown. Though  the  stories  are  set in such  diverse  places  as Africa,  France, and  Canada, their  purpose  is consistent: to  dwell   upon   the  ordinary; to  explore the  nuances  of self doubt; to show  com­ pellingly   how   "real  people"   live,  love, misunderstand each  other.
In Real  Mothers the  nightmares seem authentic. This  cannot be said  of  Night­ mare  Tales. Freiberg seems unable  to de­  cide  on  a form appropriate to his vision. This  is because  his vision  is so confused. Freiberg wants to be a gothic  writer  evok­
ing houses of "cavernous dimness" amidst
"the  threatening, oppressive   dark."  He wants   to  tell  us  that   people   are  "com­ pletely at the mercy of the elemental pow­ ers of ice and  darkness." He  wants  us to think   of  rural  buildings   as  "scars   and  tumors of decay among the leafless, scare­ crow  trees."  On  the other  hand, when  he wants  us to believe that  people and nature are  inherently  magical and  good,  he  re­ sorts  to crude  romantic diction and  alli­ terative  overkill: "Arbutus, ivy, and  tall ferns  cover  cool forest  floors where  small birds, swift and  colored,  sing from  bough to bough." This  kind  of language is hard to  justify  in  a  book  replete with  malig­ nant  dreains, folkloric  devils, and  bizarre deaths. Those who  want  to experience a "horrific world  of  the  imagination" (the book   jacket   quotes John   Moss)   should look elsewhere, for they will not find a genuinely nightmarish "world of inner darkness" in  the  "prosaic plants" and "jungle of debris" cluttering Freiberg's landscapes.
It's  a long way from  Thomas and Freiberg to Charles G. D. Roberts' animal kingdom. As John  Coldwell  Adams  points out  in  his intelligent introduction to The Lure of the Wild, Roberts lived  for poetry

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  by prose.  His  fiction  had  to address the    demands   of   a   popular   audience caught between  Darwin and  Decadence. Even  in I 935,  when  he  completed these three  stories,  Roberts remained  preoccu­ pied  with  the  notion  of  natural  selection and   was  still  relying  on   the   anthropo­ morphism spurned by many  modern crit­  ics. I've  always found  this criticism  hard  to explain. In  these stories, as in his early ones,   Roberts   persistently  suggests   that  animals and   people   are   alike.  Roberts' realistic  impulses lead  us to  resist calling  his stories fables. But his strength in prose lies precisely in his ability  to create  stories that animate the  concerns of his age. Al­ though  the  subject matter  of  the  early and  late  stories  remains much  the  same, one  does  note  a  shift  in  this  collection  towards  more  anxiety-ridden  imagery,  as when  Roberts tells  us of an  owl capable of  "searching  the  spectrally  lighted   ex­ panses of the  waste." Yet faced  with  this waste,  Roberts' animals  are  still  capable of  "falling in  love";  they still  want   "to  melt  the  fair  one's  heart." Such  contra­ dictions -and  there   are  many  of  them in both form and content-provide Rob­  erts' prose with some curious  tensions that  remain to be explored.

ROBERT LECKER



DE LA PERSECUTION

ROCH  CARRIER,  Les  Fleurs  vivent-elles  ailleurs que  sur  la terre? Stanke,  $6.50.
RocH  CARRIER,  La   CJleste  Bicyclette.  Stanke.

"REVER c'EST ECOUTER l'enfance attardee dans  l'homme." Deja  dans  son  charmant conte  "Le  Jour ou  je devins  un  apostat," Roch   Carrier,  romancier et   homme   de theatre estime  au  Quebec comme  a  l'ex­ terieur, nous  avait  fait  ressentir  les  mer­  veilles   de   }'imagination   enfantine.   Ce meme  theme domine  dans  les deux  oeu-
 vres en question. Selon le reve, si l'homme se laissait  emporter vers  la  fantaisie comme  l'enfant, sans  aucune contrainte, "toutes  les  magies   deviendraient   possi­ bles."  La   triste  verite,  cependant,  s'an­ nonce autrement. La societe ne permettra
jamais   a l'homme  de   s'affranchir;   ce
qu'elle   accorde a l'enfant  devient  chez
l'adulte une deviance. Il risque, en s'expri­
mant, de  perdre sa  liberte meme.  Mais
pourquoi l'homme prendrait-il un  tel risque?  "Ecouter le ciel," vaguer  vers l'in­ connu  lui permettent de rejeter les bornes du  veel, de se trouver soi-meme  et d'aller ala rencontre de la vealite. Pour certains,
c'est !'invitation a la  prise  de conscience.
Comme nous  le suggere  son som, Pru­
dent B. (Boniface) Pepin, le personnage principal du   roman,  Les  Fleurs   vivent­ elles ailleurs que  sur la terre?,  a  toujours vecu  modestement, meme  timidement, se laissant  guider par  "les lois de  la  proba­
bilite."  Cet  homme,   a qui  rien  n'arrive,
qui  prefere  !'effacement a  la  renommee,
subit,  un  soir,  un  tatouage  transsideral. C'est  ainsi  que  le mutisme et  la  securite (important pour  un agent  d'assurance) feront  place  au  cri  et  au  risque  dans  sa vie.  Des  la  premiere  phrase   du   roman
( "Rien de  cela  n'aurait dO.  lui  arriver") le lecteur  se rend  compte que  les evene-· ments  qui  s'ensuivront n'apporteront  ni
bonheur, ni  vraie  renommee a Prudent.
Dans   ce  propos   metaphysique,  Carner
demontre que  le monde   civilise  n'est  ni
pret,  ni capable d'accepter l'illogique: "Quand  arrive a un  homme   un  evene­
ment   que  la  societe   ne  peut   expliquer, elle   envoie   l'homme  a   l'hopital,  a   la prison  ou a l'echafaud."
Le  drame se  joue  sur  deux  plans:  les evenements qui  menent P. B. Pepin   a se
devoiler,  meme  s'humilier publiquement; et  les questions  universelles  (en  italique) qui se posent sur la vie en societe. Ces dernieres, si verites  elles  sont,  expriment
des  banalites  typiques   d'un  etre   a  son
premier reveil:  "Des  choses  et  des  gens

143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



nous paraissent inutiles  dans  la  vie;  c'est que  nous sommes  trop  ignorants pour  en soup'<onner  l'utilite." Petit  a petit  Pru­ dent  trouve  le courage de vivre avec  au­  dace,  mais,  en  regagnant ce  merveilleux talent  qui  permet de  voyager  au-dela de lui-meme et  de  son  milieu,  il perd  sa vie d'homme et sa credibilite; toute  redemp­ tion  devient  impossible.
Ce que Carrier avait  si bien reussi dans Les Enfants du  bonhomme dans la lune, un monde  de l'enfance anime  par l'emer­ veillement  et  !'imagination au  fond   du coeur  de  chacun, ne reste ici  que  propos mal integres  a un personnage peu interes­ sant,  meme,  il faut le dire,  ennuyeux.
Le rapport entre  personnage et lecteur/
auditeur,  que   Carrier  ne  reussit  pas  a
etablir dans son roman, est une des gran­ des reussites de la piece,  La Celeste  Bicy­ clette.  Je  me  sens  toujours  emue,  meme un  an  apres,  par  la  representation d'Al­  bert   Millaire  dans   le  monologue  d'un  acteur enferme dans  un  hopital psychia­ trique. Le spectateur est invite  a un  pro­ ces prive ou  toute  la vie du malade glisse a ses oreilles  par  une sorte de monologue interieur. Combien de fois l'acteur dit-il: "Je  suis content de  vous  voir"! Le  plai­ doyer  du  seul  temoin,  qui  est  aussi  !'ac­ cuse,  oblige  le spectateur a  se  poser  des questions  serieuses sur  la realite  et la fic­ tion. Bien qu'il  declare:  "Je  n'oserais  pas me  mentir," l'acteur  invente-t-il une  vie fictive  et  une  experience illusoire?  Cher­ che-t-il  a reveiller la sympathie ou simple­ ment  l'oreille  de son  auditoire? L'acteur joue-t-il   le  role  d'un  acteur   jouant   un role ou d'un malade vraiment angoisse? Ces  ambiguites irresolues  engagent  l'au­ diteur au drame du personnage.
Comme Prudent  B. Pepin,   l'acteur a subi une experience celeste-en rentrant a  bicyclette   apres   une  representation,  il
s'est  senti  transporte vers les etoiles:  "Je montais,  je  montais. Je  n'etais plus  fait d'os  et  de  chair, mais   j'avais  ete  trans­ forme   pour   me  mieux   melanger  a  l'es-
 pace." Comme il ne doute jamais  d'avoir vecu   cette   attirance vers  l'inconnu,  ses amis,  ses collegues et  sa  femme  l'aban­ donnent aux  psychiatres qui  veulent  etu­  dier son obsession. L'absence de certitude devant cette  folie/innocence (apres tout,  "la   folie  et   la   raison   se  ressemblent") ajoute ala richesse de ce personnage qui, tout  en  reconnaissant les limites  de !'ima­ gination, accepte que  "ce qui  apparah extraordinaire ne  l'est  peut-etre qu'a cause de notre  ignorance."
tMeme  si Prudent reussit  a  s'echapper de l'hopital, sa mission  de revelation, d'evangelisation aboutira a l'echec.  Par contre, bien  qu'il  soit emprisonne, en  py­ jama,  et  qu'il  ait  une  jambe  dans  le  pla­ tre,  l'acteur peut   tenter son  auditeur en lui off rant  la delivrance spirituelle: "Ac­  cepterez-vous  de  venir  avec  moi?   Nous monterons tres haut, mais n'ayez pas peur.  Si vous venez,  vous allez  enfin  naitre."

ESTELLE DANSEREAU


DEATHTRAP

DORIC  GERMAIN,   La   Vengeance  de  l'orignal.
Prise de Parole, $7.75.
HUGUETTE LE  BLANC, Bernadette  Dupuis  ou La
Mort  apprivoisie. Le  Biocreux, $g.oo.
CLAUDE  BOISVERT,  Tranches de neant.  Le  Bio- creux,  $g.oo.

DOES  DEATH START STALKING US as we approach our  fortieth birthday? Born  in
1946, 1943 and  1945 respectively, these authors certainly seem  to  be  much  pre­ occupied   by murderous Mother  Nature, by dreadful bodily  decay,  and  by  the  in­ scrutable unhinging of  the  mind.
In  Doric   Germain's "The  Vengeance of the Moose," the Great Ontarian North swallows  up  two unscrupulous, vainglori­ ous, and  greedy  American game  and  gold hunters and  their Francophone helicopter pilot.   Huguette   Le   Blanc,   in   "Tamed Death," dissects the last winter in the lives

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of Bernadette and  her  quadraplegic  hus­ band  Edmond and  performs a  haunting autopsy  on  the  ruins  of  their  old  age, of their   expropriated  house,   of   Edmond's rat-eaten corpse and  of  Bernadette's body as  it  wilts  quickly  in  an  old  folks  home. Death lurks  finally  in  the  recesses of  the mind   and   reduces  Being  into  "Slices  of Nothingness" in  Claude Boisvert's  work. An    astonishing   non-survival   trilogy which  proceeds from the archetypal "men  for  moose" revenge  motif  to an  interior­ ized,  visceral  revolt  against a  society  of land registries and  surveyors,  to a cerebral danse   macabre   full   of  mental  legerde­ mains!   Of   the   three   texts,  Doric   Ger­  main's fable  is doubtless  the  simplest,  as black-and-white in its moral  as the snows of Mammamattawa and  the flies of Lake Pitukupi. He  who  defies  not  only  article  I7, paragraph 3I  of  the hunting and  fish­ ing  code  forbidding shooting game  from the  air,  but  also  the  moral intent of  a
$s,ooo fine  in  order   to  continue  raping the wilderness  of its treasures, will vanish and  die  unlamented in  the  limitless  do­ main  of the  moose.  With  its trappings of an adventure and  gold rush story, this fa­ ble makes  nevertheless for  pleasant read­  ing. Its real significance, however,  may lie elsewhere.  It is one of  roughly  two dozen literary works  published since  I974  by a Sudbury publishing house  whose  name  is also  a  programme:  Speaking  Up.   Not much has so far  been heard  from  French­ Canadian authors outside Quebec (Doric Germain has  received  a  mention in  Let­ tres  Quebecoises, volume   22),  with, of course,   the   notable and   overshadowing exception of  Acadia's  Antonine  Maillet. Yet  there  are  many  mutually beneficial experiences to be shared through creative  interchange and  critical  experiences be­ tween    Franco-Ontarians,   Acadians, Franco-Manitobans, etc. Doric  Germain's is an  ingenuous kind  of  writing, pure  as the  waters  of  the  Kenogami River  and free of the complexes  which  often  plague
 Acadian   literature. It is  not  without its own problems,  however. Because of the gentle  ecological-moral  and  professorio­ didactic warp of his approach (he teaches French in  Hearst) , Doric  Germain traps himself   in   sermonizing   (with   footnote  glosses) and in a curiously  disharmonious use of  French: Philip  Dagget  from  De­ troit
n'avait  vraiment  pas    eu   de   chance.  La joumee meme de  son  depart, Lavoie venait de   trouver  Ia   premiere  pepite   [d'or]... . Alerre,   Collins  [from  Boston]  accourut .. . [il] oscillait entre Ia joie ... et le decourage­
ment.  . . . II  fit  part   de  ses  reflexions   a son
associe ...

whom  such   urbane  proceedings around the  planning dish  do  not  disturb at  all. In  this stiffness Doric  Germain  resembles his  protagonists after   their  first  full  day of canoeing; in  future works  his literary strokes  will  no  doubt be smoother.
It is sheer  poetic  power  which  prevents Huguette Le  Blanc's   apocalyptic  death­ rite from sliding  into  the sunset sentimen­ tality   of   a  Golden,  albeit   irreparably polluted, Pond, or into subcultural rumi­  nations about Far-Eastern philosophies  of cosmic  rebirth.  From   the  tender   to  the brutal, from  the sublime  to the abject,  she chooses with sensitivity and honesty the colours and  tones  of her  verbal  palette  to describe  the love, revolt,  hope, hallucina­ tions,  defeats,  and  victories  of  her  hero­  me:

Leurs   etreintes  avaient  depasse le  geste   et le mouvement, elles etaient dans  Ia connais­ sance,  dans Ia lecture de leurs corps, dans  Ia calligraphie de  leurs fletrissures....  [Berna­ dette]  s'ecoulait.... Le  milrissement de  son corps laissait eclater et jaillir un  tel depouil­ lement  qu'elle voyait  poindre une eclatante liberte de  reprise de  soi.  C'etait !'emergence de  Ia liberte.

Not A Sleep  Full of Dreams but a wake devoid of tears,  this book does not seem to have  received  the  attention it  deserves.
Tranches de neant  is Claude Boisvert's
second  collection of "nouvelles" (Paren-

145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



doxe, Hull: Asticou, I 978).  It is a clever book of fourteen mental and verbal magic acts.  Appropriately, it  begins in  a  circus ( "Londres, comme  si vous y  etiez")  and
ends  on  a  stage   ("Tranche de  neant") . Under the  tent,  the  spectator finds  him­ self in the  heart  of London, but the  next morning both the city and the circus have disappeared. In  the  theatre, a Dr. Flamel conjures up  a  black  column  of nothing­ ness into  which  vanish forever a gawker's  hat  and  then  the magician  himself.
Some of the  contents of this frame  are slightly  more  disquieting. In  "Diable!" a latter-day Faust sells his hide for sex, money, and  power and is promptly  and literally skinned. And "Vis done, esclave!" is an  amateur  philosopher's sarcastic command to humankind whose members
can  only  exist  as long  as they  think  one
another:

tu  n'es   vivant que   parce que   je ... te  ma­ terialise a chaque instant ou je  te  parle   ou je te  pense, ou tu  me  paries.                     '
Claude Boisvert  (see Quebec Franfais,
4I,  pp. 14-16)  dedicates his book "a l'hu­
maniue,  dont je suis, helas!"  Such  a  dis­
position  leads  potentially serious  thinking ("L'Escalier")  into  cynicism,  and  more light-hearted musing  into  flippancy.  The "croissez  et  multipliez-vous"  ("be  fruit­ ful  and   multiply")  of  Genesis  becomes "croassez ..." ("croak ...") in the mouth  of Christ   whose  followers  take  faithfully to  the  air  and  abandon the  rebel  to  the crowd-control brigades ("Le Prophete"). In   "Tel  est  pris  qui   croyait   prendre," God   creates   Woman   and   then   cannot help  making Himself  Man.
There  is  much   stylistic   virtuosity   in
Claude Boisvert's  collection,  from the nominal  staccato of "Londres" to the ex­ pansive   theorizing  in   "Esclave" to  the singing rhythms of "La Ballade des assas- sm. s."However, when the game ends and the last  magician has  exited, the waiting  for a glow of human sympathy continues.
HANS R. RUNTE

146
 GREAT PLAINNESS OF SPEECH

w.  J.  KEITH, ed.,  A  Voice  in  the  Land.  Ne-
West, $16.g5; pa. $8.gs.

SERIOUS   READERS CAN  NO LONGER afford not  to listen  to Rudy  Wiebe's voice. That is the  message  of this collection of essays by and  about him. For  too long, responses to  his  fiction   have,  it  appears,  suffered from  negative attitudes toward so-called religious novels and  toward the fictional representation of minority groups such as the  Mennonites, the Metis,  and  the  Indi­ ans Wiebe  has written about. Yet to con­ sider  him  narrowly as a crusader for peo­ ple's rights and Christian values is morally  and  aesthetically wrong-headed. Wiebe  is no literary evangelist, no Ralph Connor; he   is  an   accomplished language-  and myth-maker. It is of course  natural that transferences and  analogies between nov­ elist and  dedicated Christian, between  art  and   religion,  should  constitute a  central issue in this collection-as its manipula­ tive title already suggests:  "a voice in the land."
With  few  exceptions, the  twenty-three contributions to this volume  deal  with  the phenomenon of authorial voice  and  with directly  related   terms   or  concepts  such as  language,  myth,   typology,   prophecy, translation, translatio, or  metaphor; and they  do  so from  various  angles  of  inter­ pretation. The  contributions   consist   of eleven   essays  by  Wiebe,  five  interviews with  him  (all  mercifully free of  the  con­ versational  fill  so  characteristic  of  that  popular  form   of   criticism)   and   seven critical  pieces,  two  of  which-Magda­ lene Falk Redekop's "Translated into  the Past:  Language in  The  Blue Mountains  of  China,"   published  here   for   the  first time,  and  David   L. Jeffrey's "A  Search for  Peace: Prophecy and   Parable in  the Fiction  of  Rudy   Wiebe,"  an  expanded

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



version  of  an  earlier study  on  Wiebe­
are substantial articles.
W.  J. Keith has  effectively  organized
the  contributions, whose  publication  his­
tory  ranges  from   rg64  to  rg8o,  in  order to document Wiebe's growth as a novelist. Autobiographical essays on Wiebe's Men­ nonite background are  followed  by items focusing  on  Peace Shall  Destroy  Many,  The   Temptations of Big  Bear  and  The Scorched-Wood    People   and   by  a  final chapter on  "Wiebe and  the  Art  of  Fic­ tion." This arrangement and Keith's help­ ful introduction to each contribution give the  book  a  welcome sense  of  continuity and  unity rather than,  as is often  the case with  similar  editions, the  arbitrary form of a bunch of essays. The arrangement is flexible enough, though, to encourage the reader   to   make    his   own   connections among the interrelated biographical, his­ torical,  and  critical pieces.  The  resulting  sense of involvement between  editor  and  reader, between  Wiebe  and  his critics,  as well  as between  contributors  and  reader  makes  this edition a  stimulating and  in­ formative one.
!Wiebe's own essays together with  the interviews are  indispensable  here.   With the  exception of Shirley  Neuman's  "Un­ earthing Language:  An  Interview  with Rudy  Wiebe  and  Robert  Kroetsch," they have all appeared in print before, yet only few  of  them   in  well-known  periodicals. They   provide   essential   information  on Wiebe's Mennonite background, his home region of  the  prairies, his admiration for Faulkner, Grove and  other writers,  his reservations about the  cocksure variety  of bestsellers,   his  concern  with   languages, and  his sense of calling as a novelist  who believes   that   "all   great  art   has  a   pro­ foundly  moral  purpose if in no other sense than   that   it   purges  us  from   pettiness,  from   smallness   of  mind   and   outlook." While accepting such  indirect didacticism in  fiction,  Wiebe  firmly  rejects  novels  as a  means  to  preach any  kind  of prefabri-
 cated  doctrine. One is reminded here  of other  Christian novelists in  North Amer­ ica such as Flannery O'Connor, who once said  that  a  Catholic  novelist  may  be  a Catholic but has to be an artist, and  Mary  Gordon, who  made the  same  point  in  a recent  interview in  Notre  Dame  Maga­ zme.
A first-rate example in  this  collection of the contentiousness of what  constitutes a  good  religious   novel  is  Herbert  Gies­ brecht's learned yet  dogmatically  Chris­ tian  review of Peace Shall Destroy Many  and   Wiebe's  reply,  "An  Author Speaks About  his  Novel," in  which  he  defends  the  book  on  aesthetic  as  well  as  moral  grounds.
In  a  wider   North  American context, the  relation  between   Wiebe  as  a  Men­ nonite  and   as  an  artist   parallels  the  re­ lation   between   the  puritanical  tradition and   the  artistic achievement  of,  for  in­ stance,  Hawthorne and  Emerson. To   a large  degree,  these  relations result  from conflicts   between    Puritans  and    Men­ nonites  as  covenanters and   their  artists  as  inevitable individualists, strengthened rather than inhibited by their  religious traditions. This is why, in their own minds as  in   the  minds   of  their   readers,   such writers may assume  the functions of seers, makers,   tellers,  and   prophets  who  con­ tribute to the rise or fall of their societies. With   specific  reference  to  the  state   of contemporary Canada,  Wiebe  thus  won­ ders, "Where, Lord, were our fictions  in­ adequate to sustain  us?"
Wiebe's  role as prophet, in  the  biblical
tradition of  the  term,  is argued  impres­ sively in Jeffrey's essay, whereas Ina  Fer­  ris stresses that  "despite the depth of  his own  religious  convictions,  Wiebe's  imag­ ination is essentially  secular  and  novelis­ tic."  Such  disagreement is  constructive, since it reflects  the complexity of Wiebe's achievement, his  multi-levelled meaning and   technique. In  fact,  Wiebe  disagrees with   himself   on   a   related   matter,  the

147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



always   equivocal  question    of   autobio­ graphical content  in  novels-facts, fic­ tionalized   facts,  fiction:  "To   write   the kind  of stuff  that  I do you have  to write out  of  yourself,  genuinely" (I973); "Up to now  I haven't been  that  interested in writing out  of my own"  (I 977).
The  concept of translatio  in all  its lit­ eral  and  figurative  meanings makes  one see such  differences as complementations rather than  misrepresentations. The  sig­ nificance  of  this concept in Wiebe studies becomes   quite  evident    when   Redekop transliterates the German iibersetzen  (to translate)  as to  overset,  a simple  but  in­ genious  step   allowing her  to  illuminate Wiebe's  use of  Low  German,  High  Ger­  man  and   English   as  metaphors and   his juxtaposing of  times,  places,  voices  and  actions.  Through  oversetting, word  and deed in his fiction form analogies.  Aware­  ness  of   translatio   also  underlies   Ferris'  mainly  structuralist  study  of  The  Blue Mountains of China, and  it  is construc­ tive in Jeffrey's examination of the same novel  as  well  as  of  The Temptations of Big  Bear  and  The Scorched-Wood  Peo­ ple. His  hermeneutical approach  encom­  passes formalist, Jungian, and  above  all, biblical  methods to reveal  the richness of Wiebe's art.  The advantages of  translatio to give  meaning to  the  nature,  the  con­ tinuity,   the   variations,  the   techniques, and  the speaker's voice in  Wiebe's  novels are convincing in this collection. The dis­ advantages  of  such   a  classic  rhetorical concept -especially  the  encouragement of  academic   heaviness  and   quasi-auto­ matic  respectability through biblical  and classical association-remain negligible, partly   because   of  the  critical   astuteness of the  major contributors and  partly  be­ cause of the full measure of Wiebe's work. It seems inevitable, though, that academic criticism  is occasionally  accompanied  by burdens  of  diction, if  not  of  interpreta­ tion,  that   should  bother   tutored or  un­ tutored readers  alike.  A good example is
 Jeffrey's point   that   in  The Blue  Moun­ tains  of China "the dialogic  technique is the   rhetorical  methodology   of  Isaiah." Such  matters aside, the contributors' com­ plementary assessments of Wiebe's  fiction impel   the   reader    towards   his  own   ap­ praisal  of  that  fiction  as major literature.
Thus a reader may be tempted to waive his duty  to scrutinize the considerable linguistic, biographical, and  historical  re­ alities   that   characterize  Wiebe's  writing of fictional lives like the Reimers' and  the Friesens', and   fictionalized  lives  like  Big Bear's and  Riel's. He may perhaps be wise not   to  distinguish   between  Wiebe's   fic­ tions  and  researched facts,  but  to  leave such distinctions to the author. However, I hope  he will retain enough self-reliance and  skepticism to hear  Wiebe  as only one of many  voices in  the land.
!The  land  bears  the  detailed solidity  of the Great Plains,  but it is really anywhere humans dwell. So nationalist minds should not pause  unduly  over Wiebe's Canadian­ ness  or   over   the   prefatory  note   to  the collection, "Manufactured   in   Western  Canada."   Should  one   pause   over   the cover  that  shows  Wiebe with  beard, sun­ glasses,  modified   Stetson,  and   with   an ambiguous  expression   of either anger  or laughter?  Perhaps. The picture becomes a kind  of  Whitmanesque metaphor when linked with Eli Mandel's final  remarks in his interview with  Wiebe: "I suppose  it's too much  to claim,  but  as  writers  I sup­ pose  finally   we'd   like  to  be  known   as Almighty  Voice.  Almighty  Voice   Rudy Wiebe.  How  about   that?" Wiebe's  reply begins,  "No. No. No one  should  ever  at­
tach  that  to himself ... but, you know...." All in all, the collection is indeed  what
its  editor wants it  to  be, "a  prerequisite
for an intelligent appreciation" of Wiebe's fiction.  The book's  critical  value,  how­ ever,  goes  further than  that; it  is an  ex­ cellent   volume for  anyone  interested  in the  oversetting of history  into life and  of life into  art.                                 K. P. STICH

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SINCERE, ALIVE

FILIPPO   SALVATORE, Suns  of Darkness.  Guer­
nica Editions, $5.00.
MARIANNE    MICROS,    Upstairs    Over   the   Ice
Cream.  Ergo,  $4.95.
JAROSLAV  HAVELKA,  Reflections and  Preoccu­
pations. Ergo,  $7-95·
LUCIEN FRANCOEUR, Neons In the Night. Trans.
Susanne   de  Lotbiniere-Harwood.  Vehicule
Press, $4.00.

IT  WOULD   BE  TEMPTING to   approach these  works  as  further evidence of  Can­ ada's rich  and  energetic cultural  mosaic. This  sort  of thing usually  goes  over  very well, despite its  unfairness to  the  writer, and  allows the  reviewer  the luxury  of not hurting anyone's feelings. A more produc­ tive approach is to simply  evaluate them in  terms of their  success or  failure  as art.  In  this  regard, I recall  a  definition once dropped by Canadian artist,  Ron  Bloore:  art  is anything  you  can get  away  with.  I always liked  that. Applied  here, one book makes  it and  three don't.
Filippo  Salvatore's Suns  of Darkness  is sincere  writing from  a  man  with  a  true feeling for the peasant. He details  an Ital­ ian  immigrant's passage  to  and  arrival/ survival  in the  new world  and,  in Ulysses fashion,  the  present   is seen  to  pale  next to a heroic  past. Much of the rhetoric can be excused  here,  as the  book  attempts to be epic  in scope: the  tragic  history  of an exile. The problem is it's not  poetry-at least Salvatore's own  English  translations aren't-it's  prose   broken   up  into   me­ chanical lines  ("you   who  long  to  kiss  / and  grasp  another young  body on Satur­ day  / nights  and   are  content by easy  / pleasures   and   volatile  emotions." There is no  music,  the  images  are  boring,  and  the insights  are cliched. The Italian orig­ inals which appear on each  opposite  page might    be   more    impressive    as   they're  marked with complex rhymes, but I don't see   how   the   content  can   significantly
 change.   Salvatore comes  close  to  some­ thing  beautiful on one occasion, however; "Nous Les  Rapailles," to Gaston Miron, is a  perceptive and  moving  portrait for four  stanzas  before  Salvatore again   gets carried  away  with  being  epically  oratori­ cal.
Marianne  Micros' Upstairs   Over   the Ice Cream comes highly touted  by John Newlove on the back jacket ("A rare and sensitive  exploration delving  into  the po­ et's  past  and  illuminating her  present. It sets  the  everyday  world  of  a small  town against  old world  images of  haunting and  mythic  beauty")  and  by  Hugh Hood  in the   publisher's blurb   ("The work   is  a remarkable effort   in  collage,   where   all the  details,  and  particularly the  striking period photographs, work to reinforce the final effect, which  is as if one were eating  a  very rich  slice of apple pie  cut  whole, in  one moist  chunk  out  of the  multiform life of a quarter-century"). It's  certainly in  the  Alice  Munro tradition of a young girl growing up with a very personalized sense  of  history,  and   the  Greek  grand­ mother's scrapbook   (a  4-page  collage  of items)  is effective,  but  this book  is more autobiography than  art.  Most  of the  po­ ems could  just as well  have  been  written as paragraphs with only a few exceptions. Micros   has  a   nice  ear   for   the   spoken language, though, apparent in comments by  the  Chinaman and   Uncle Don,   and has good  success with  humour when  she allows  it  in.  This is  the   poet's  grand­ mother:

When asked if she could read and write in English, she answered,  "What do you mean? I can't  even  read  write  Greek!" She signed her  X  boldly.

The book's  closing  poem,  in  which   the return to  Greece  is finally  made,   is also very  effective.   There  is  genuine  talent here,  but  it  is only  occasionally evident and   Micros  should   have  been   made to sweat considerably more over this volume

149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



before letting it out. A more demanding editor  and  a little  less praise would  be appropriate.
'.Jaroslav Havelka's  Reflections and  Pre­
occupations, as  a  collection   of   medita­
tions, aphorisms, and  insights  into  life, is in  a  category  of its own  which  does  not try  to  be art.  The introduction by John Orange  suggests   we  "Find   a   pleasant, quiet  spot,  open  to any  page and  ponder an   entry   for  a  few  minutes." Havelka must have cringed when he read that; unfortunately, it's  appropriate. I  found
I 7 of the  236 entries  (arranged in  7 sec­ tions)  worthwhile; this might  serve as an example:
It is  dark   outside. I want   to  look  through the  window into  the  darkness of  night. In­ stead, I see my  reflected image  on  the glass. Again  my ego  interferes.
Most  of  these  entries,   however,  are  not the  products of wisdom-a number are not  even   informative  ("Even  the  mos­ quito,   like  us,  never  knows  whether his buzzing  is more  true  in  the  daylight   or during  the   night") -and  only  a  very few are  so hauntingly  well-phrased as to be aphoristic. The sentences  are  all lean, but there  are too many of them assembled to say very  hackneyed  things:   we let our egos get  in  the  way of our  really  savour­  ing life; we should  all aspire  to be at one with  nature and  the  rhythms  of the  uni­ verse; after  death, we return  to where  we came  from  or,  failing  that,  we get  a  re­ birth.  I don't mean  to be too cynical, but anyone  who knows Havelka's The Nature of   the   Creative  Process  in   Art    (The Hague, 1968)  would have expected more.  As it  is, we have  before  us a number of nicely-worded, but usually cliched,  obser­ vations   illustrated   by   Romantic  meta­  phors   (sparrows,  trees,  roses)   that   any street kid would call bourgeois. The  situa­  tion  is  not  improved  by Havelka's easy acceptance of  the   Creator myth   which repeatedly  becomes   the  foundation  for the happy thoughts in the book's last sec-
 tion,  "Death as  Beginning." I  keep  pic­ turing a wreck  on  the  freeway, blood  on the pavement.
In   many   respects,   Lucien   Francoeur and  Jaroslav Havelka are  opposites.  For one  thing,  Francoeur's work  is usually without intellectual content. For another, it's  not  unusual  for  Francoeur, a  Que­ becois  rock  and  roll  singer,  to  include a frontal nude  picture of himself  in a book. Neons  In  the  Night   is  a  selection   from six  previous  collections   of   Francoeur's "poetry," and  it is superbly translated by Susanne de  Lotbiniere-Harwood.
I hesitate to  say  it,  but  some  of  this
writing  is really good: alive, usually play­
fully alive, almost  always  sexual:

you vicksvaporub yourself  so mentholly mint to  my  hysteriform nostrils
that I somersault cock-eyed
up  against the  walls  of your  lozenge

Francoeur  celebrates  life   like   a   street Walt   Whitman;  there's  juice   in   these lines.  The  poet's   "lush   green   girl"  be­ comes  a  "redhead in  rouge  boots,"  "an  ingenue in  neon" ("Softspoken"),  while
in heaven  "while God shaves I and  drinks
his cologne  I sonny smiles at flesh"  ("TV
Flesh") . Everywhere, "the  beat  goes on"
("Via Dolorosa"), and  Francoeur is after it.  In   her   introduction,  de   Lotbiniere­ Harwood  describes   this  as  "the  pursuit of  intoxication," and   I   think   she's  got something. The pace  of  the  book itself is fast,   though  it   is  sometimes   not   clear whether Francoeur  is in  quest  or  simply being  driven. What  is  clear  is  that   the man's a  poet,  though  by the  last section,  Les N eons Las (I 978), he begins to finally settle  down  making an  earlier   poem  at last appropriate :

as  nymphs fade away
a  naked  alley-rimbaud  wearies
a living-room verlaine gives  him  shelter
("A Smog  Rush").

Happily for Francoeur, his translator is often   able   to  improve on  the  original:

BOOKS IN REVIEW



particularly difficult,  because  so much  of this work is imagistically and inspiration­ ally  right  out  of  rock  and  roll.

DAVID O'ROURKE


WRITERS & CRITICS

DAVID  HELWIG, ed.,  The Human Elements. Sec­
ond  Series. Oberon, $15.95; pa. $7-95·
JON  PEARCE, Twelve Voices. Borealis, $21.95.

WHAT A DELIGHT   TO READ an  entire  col­ lection   of  critical  essays  free  of   jargon, pretension, or  pomposity, and  what   an achievement for  editor David  Helwig  to have  collected  them.  As Helwig suggests, other  elements may  link  these  essays, but what  first  struck  me  about   The  Human Elements was   the   consistent  clarity   of style. One  sets aside this volume  with  the sensation    of   having   read    for   pleasure  rather than  for  knowledge,  insights,   or challenging ideas, although, in fact,  these, too, are attained.
A further attractive aspect  of this col­ lection  is the  diversity  of  topic  and  per­  spective,  cutting across  disciplines  to  in­ clude  not   only   the   expected   essays  of literary criticism  but also essays on painter Jack   Chambers, film  maker  Pierre   Per­ rault, and   theatre director  George   Lus­ combe; concert  pianist William Aide uses musical   analogies to  write   of  Margaret Avison's  poetry; Peter Harcourt refers  to
historian J. M. S. Careless as he traces  the
course  of Edmonton's Citadel Theatre.
George  Woodcock sets a high  level for the   volume   in  the  first  essay,  "Casting Down  Their Golden Crowns: The Novels of Marian Engel," the first in-depth study of this important contemporary novelist. Terming  Engel's  novels   "small    books, as unupholstered as Shaker furniture," Woodcock illuminates Engel's  works with references  to   writers    from   Defoe   and Aphra Behn   to  Gide   and   Camus. This
 essay is a delight to read,  both  for its perceptive comments on an  unjustly neg­ lected  writer  and  for  its felicitous style.
Each  essay has  its  own  distinctive at­
traction. Barry  Lord's detailed  apprecia­ tion,  "Jack  Chambers:  Five  Late  Draw­ ings," carefully  outlines the way in which Chambers in  his  last  illness  infused  the light  and  life which  characterize his best work into subject matter found  on a sick­ room   table.   In   Peter   Harcourt's study, "Pierre Perrault  and  Le  Cinema Vet;u,"  I was  struck   by  parallels with  English­  Canadian   literary   concerns.  Harcourt's  reference   to  Quebec film  makers,   song writers, and poets transforming their land into  a landscape of the  mind  recalls Sin­ clair Ross's use of landscape which Laurie Ricou explores in Vertical Man/Horizon­ tal World. And  Perrault's  demonstration in the second film of his Ile  aux  Coudres trilogy  of  a  family  returning to  France, the land  of  their  ancestors, only  to realize that  their roots are no longer  there, echoes a  recurring  English-Canadian  motif,  of which  Margaret Laurence's Morag in her journey  to  Scotland is  possibly  the  best known   exampie.  Much  like  Harcourt's careful explication of  Perrault's art, George Vogt's essay, "The Politics of  En­ tertainment: George  Luscombe  and  the TWP," demonstrates Luscombe's brilliant production techniques. Luscombe reminds me of Joan  Littlewood, so I was  not sur­  prised  to learn   that  he  worked  for  three  years  with  Littlewood's  company.  Vogt outlines  a  number of   instances  of  Lus­  combe's  fresh  and  unconventional use of the  artificiality of  the  stage  to  achieve  a sense of reality. Brian  Arnott's less happy  account of  theatre, "Memories or Monu­ ments: The Citadel as a  Popular Thea­ tre,"  traces  the  ups  and   downs  of  The Citadel via its artistic directors, from  the high  hopes  with   which   it  began   to  its attempts to cope  with  the  economic diffi­
culties of the 197o's.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Two  of the  essays deal with  poetry. George  Bowering's "Metaphysic in Time: The Poetry  of Lionel  Kearns" explores theme and  language in Kearns' poetry  in what  seems to me the first serious attempt to come  to grips  with Kearns' art-an elusive  art,  as  Bowering  points  out. "Kearns' sense of form cannot  entail com­ pletion,"  Bowering   tells  us,  as  he  links Kearns' attitude to poetry  and  his "Heg­ elian  sense of form" with  his career  as a teacher of linguistics. The second essay on poetry,  William Aide's  on  Margaret Avi­ son,  strikes  me  as  highly  impressionistic. Aide,   who   says   that   a  strictly   literary  criticism   is  inadequate for  dealing   with Avison's strongly  religious subject  matter, is  more  satisfactory in  his  dealing   with her  two  later  less complex  volumes  than  with  her first.
In the final essay of this collection, "Bushed in the Sacred  Wood," John  Moss
testifies  to  his  defection   from   thematic
criticism   as  he  calls  for  an  urbane and cosmopolitan approach to Canadian liter­ ature. Moss skirts  the soapbox  as he seeks to explain the reasons  for the genesis and  popular acceptance of  thematic criticism,  and  is as critical of  those who somewhat pompously  and  righteously   complain  of thematic  criticism  while offering  little  in the  way of alternative. When  Moss asks, "What  chance  has   anyone   else  but   to be  considered below Wordsworth on a Wordsworthian scale;  what  chance a Ca­ nadian  in  comparison  with   those  from whose achievement the scale is made?" he calls  to  mind   an   objection   of   feminist  critics: women  writers  are judged  by cri­ teria  set by men  and  based on writings  by men.  Moss  advocates  replacing the  the­ matic  approach with  an  explicative and evaluative criticism   which  seeks  to  ap­ preciate art  as art,  an  approach  which  I endorse but  to which  many  might object  as a return to the  New Criticism.
Not  only Moss' essay but  the collection as  a  whole   questions  the  adequacy  of
 present Canadian literary criticism.  Hel­ wig points out  in his introduction that  the artists  dealt  with,  except  for Jack  Cham­ bers, are "not usually considered central." This volume indicates, as Helwig hints  it might, the  narrowness of  a  tradition that  does  not  have  room  for  a  Marian Engel or a Margaret  Avison. These essays draw attention to  artists  usually  ignored, little  understood, or spoken of dismissively. The Human Elements, Second Series points  to the need for a third  series to treat more of our  serious  artists  in  depth, in  the  same jargon-free   and    unpretentious   way­ writers such  as Jane Rule,  Matt  Cohen, Hugh  Hood,   Miriam  Waddington, and Audrey  Thomas, to name  a few.
On  the  other side of  the  coin,  Twelve
Voices  allows  writers to speak  for  them­ selves.  Jon   Pearce  interviews   Elizabeth Brewster,  David   Helwig,   Dennis  Lee, Gwendolyn  MacEwen,   Tom  Marshall, Susan  Musgrave, John  Newlove, Michael Ondaatje, P. K.  Page, Raymond Souster, Miriam Waddington, and  Tom  Wayman. Some  time  ago George  Woodcock noted that   many  poets  also  write   criticism   of fiction,  and  I find  it interesting that  most of these poets have  written fiction as well.
The questions put  to  the  twelve  poets are  the expected ones:  influences, writing habits, the  genesis  of  a  poem,  intended
audience. Answers  are  at   times  surpris­
ingly similar, at  times  just as surprisingly contrary. One  comes away  from  this text with  the conviction that  Canadian poetry has  come  of  age.  Most   of  the  younger poets speak  of the  influence  of other Ca­ nadian poets rather than  foreign poets. AI Purdy  and  Irving Layton are most  often mentioned, although P. K.  Page,  Patrick
Lane, A. J. M. Smith, and  James  Reaney
also receive  credit. Most  also refer  to  the
encouragement and  helpfulness of fellow poets,  and  display  a much  keener aware­ ness of the interest in poetry being written in  Canada than  in  that  emanating from the   United  States   or  Great Britain. To

BOOKS IN REVIEW



some extent  Wayman is an exception. Having spent  some  years in California, Wayman learned from  American as well as Canadian poets  and, while  most of his fellows believe  that  better poetry  is being written in Canada than   elsewhere,  Way­ man  believes that  American poetry is bet­ ter crafted, although it has a correspond­ ing lack of content.
The  interviews convey  the  impression that   the  poets  gave  careful  thought to their  replies. Jung and  Freud come in for some   serious   discussion.    Conversations concerning the genesis of a poem  reveal a dichotomy between   those  like  Musgrave, Page,  and   MacEwen  who  say  that   the poem,  or  part  of it,  presents  itself  to  the poet-the  poet  is by some  likened  to  a medium-and those  like  Wayman who consider  that  only rarely  is a poem  given, that  writing is a  job;  one  sits at  the desk each  day  to write.
Most  interesting is Dennis Lee's  inter­ view   which    Pearce   acknowledges   Lee himself   rewrote. Lee  explains  what   he tries  to do  with  poetry  by examining his poem   "The  Death  of   Harold  Ladoo," which   he   terms    "a   meditative  quest." Lee's  essay is titled  "Enacting a Medita­ tion"  and,  as he explains, the  poem "em­ bodies  a  particular  stance or  condition, by  speaking a  particular voice.  It enacts a   trajectory  of   meditation,  by  moving from  one  voice  to  the  next,  and  then  to the  next, and  the  next." In  his search  for a flexible medium, Lee seeks a voice "that can   metamorphose  endlessly   from   mo­ ment  to moment-to slangy  humour, to lyrical  delicacy,   to  direct  personal state­  ment,  to rich  churning  philosophical ex­ ploration, and   so  on."  Lee's   essay  pro­  vides  an  interesting  parallel  with   Bow­ ering's essay  on  Lionel   Kearns in  The  Human Elements, Second  Series.
This  text  is well  written and  the  poets often  provide thought-provoking  answers to   Pearce's appropriate  questions.   Por­ traits,   photocopies  of   manuscripts,   and
 brief outlines  of the life and  works of each poet  are  included. The  book is clearly  a student text,  appropriate for  the level  to which  the  OISE tapes  of  poets  reading their  works are directed. Pearce  mentions in his introduction having  talked  to "forty or so" poets, most of whom  were enthusi­ astic  about   his  project. His  reasons  for choosing  the  particular  twelve  are  some­ what  vague:  geographical location,  sub­ ject matter, and  "other such  matters." If geographical  location is a  factor, where are  the  Maritimers? My  only  complaint is that  many  of  the  poets  included here have  discussed  their  poetry  elsewhere. There are  others   I would   like  to  hear from,  and  as  with  the  critical essays I'll name a few-Andrew Suknaski, Joy Ko­ gawa,  Stephen Scobie,  Seymour  Mayne, and  Gary Geddes.
LORRAINE MCMULLEN



LOCAL HISTORIES

SHIRLEY  E.  WOODS,  Ottawa: The  Capital of
Canada. Doubleday Canada, $19.95·
GOTTLIEB LEIBBRANDT, Little  Paradise. The Saga  of the  German Canadians of Waterloo County, Ontario, rBoo-1975·  Allprint   Co., Kitchener, n.p.
PATRICIA E.   ROY,   Vancouver. An   Illustrated
History. James  Lorimer,  n.p.
GEORGE WOODCOCK,  A  Picture History of  Brit­
ish  Columbia. Hurtig, $18.95·
JOHN  THEBERGE, ed.,  Kluane. Pinnacle of the
Yukon.  Doubleday Canada, $ss.oo.

THESE  FIVE    "LOCAL HISTORIES" have been  selected   according  to  criteria that only  book review  editors  understand and they  confirm   that   it  is  now  almost  im­ possible to write  a history  of Canada that  is coherent  and   adequately  reflects  the diversity  of local  experience.
Judging by some of the lines quoted  by Shirley  Woods  the  capital   runs  Toronto a very close second as the object of critical

I 53

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



comment. Lord  Dufferin called  it "a wil­ derness  of  shanties  spread   along  either  side of long,  broad  strips  of mud"; Lau­ rier, who grew  to like the place, said  that  "Ottawa is not a handsome city and  does not    appear   destined    to   become    one either." Setting out  to  challenge the  im­ pression that  Ottawa is a dull civil service town,  Woods  highlights the more colour­  ful and exciting  elements of its past-the canal  builders,  timbermen, and  the  con­ flicts  of  French and   Irish -and  he  has produced  a  curious   hybrid,  a  cross   be­ tween  the  travel  guide  and  the historical  column  of the local  press written to show that  a  lot of interesting  history  has hap­ pened  here.  He  is an  insider,  a  splendid  raconteur who  takes  nothing  for  granted and  cannot resist  a  digression.  Buildings, monuments, even empty  lots and  the wa­ ter  works  system  become  alive  with  his­ torical  associations.  He   seems  to  know everything-the   occupants of   the   old Roxborough  apartment   building  right down   to  the  ill-tempered parrot  in  the bar; that  the first telephone hook-up con­ nected  Alexander Mackenzie's office with Rideau Hall  and,  despite  the Prime  Min­  ister's objections, was maintained because Lady  Dufferin enjoyed having  an official sing to her  guests  over  the  line;  that  the first book published in Ottawa denounced the  spiritual dangers of democracy, that in  the  twenties  one  of  the  city's  growth industries was the  production of business forms. Accounts of the design of the par­ liament  buildings,  the   protocol   of   the Rideau Club,  or  the  pleasures  of  a  visit to  the   Central  Experimental  Farm  are equally  rich  in  anecdote. All  this  has  its charms no doubt, but episodes and  anec­  dotes do not add  up to a coherent picture of the development of a city;  nor do they convey  an adequate sense of  the  distinc­  tive atmosphere of the  place. This  short­ coming  is partly due  to the method; it is also   a   consequence   of   the   deliberate downplaying of what  to an outsider seems

154
 rather important-Ottawa  as  political capital and  civil service  centre.
Gottlieb Leibbrandt's  compendium of information on the German-Canadians of the  Waterloo area  is the kind  of local  his­ tory that  has given  the whole genre  a bad name.   Focussing   on  the  people  of  Ger­ man  origin  rather than   the  Mennonites, he  parades the  personal histories  of  the successful  (names italicized) as models of "hard   work  and  thrift"; chronicles  dis­ putes   about  teaching the   German   lan­  guage   in  the  schools ;  and  describes  the history  of the ethnic press, churches, sing­ ing societies, concluding with  the  inevita­ ble  catalogue of   contemporary cultural organizations.  Though pride in  the  real achievements   of   this   small   community and  the  accomplishments of outstanding individuals-Adam Beck,  the  advocate for  Ontario Hydro or  Augustus Stephen Vogt,   the  founder  of  the  Mendelssohn Choir  -is understandable, the  format is all  too  predictable. The result  is a  store­ house  of detail, the  raw  material  for  his­ tory. Yet  this clumsy  chronicle takes on a certain eloquence for it conveys a sense of the  past  from   within   the  perspective of the people  whose history it celebrates. For Leibbrandt  the  golden  age  of  German­ Canadian  culture was  the  late  Victorian age  when   it  was  possible  to  reconcile  a sentimental  attachment to  the  new  Ger­  many   with  a  loyalty   to  Canada, whose queen  had   married  a   German  prince.  This  divided  loyalty   was  symbolized   by the monument erected in I 897 to Kaiser Wilhelm I in  Victoria Park,  Berlin,  and the addition of one  to Queen Victoria in I9IO.  This   balance of  attachments  was destroyed in  I9I4-I9I8 and  these  "dark times"  become  in  Leibbrandt's narrative the  central, tragic  event  in the  history  of this  community.
Patricia Roy's profusely illustrated study of  Vancouver is  a  volume   in  The  His­ tory of Canadian Cities Series which aims to relate  the  inner histories of  individual

BOOKS IN REVIEW



communities to the more  general  patterns of   urbanism. Where  Woods   and   Leib­ brandt seek  to communicate a feeling  of place  through anecdote, her analysis cen­ tres  on  economic growth,  civic  politics, population  and   ethnic  relations, indus­  trial-labour  relations,   the   urban    land­  scape,    and     social    and    cultural   life. Though compressed  and  somewhat sche­ matic  in  organization  this  fine  study   is especially  effective  in  accounting for  the emergence and  consolidation of distinct class and  ethnic districts, and  in  tracing Vancouver's  evolving metropolitan  rela­ tions to the B.C. interior and  the prairies.  As one  would  expect   from  her  previous work,  she  writes   with   authority  on  the development of urban transportation and race conflict; she qualifies  the general  im­ pression of the port  as a hot-bed of labour  radicalism, even in 1919; and  she gives a most informative account of civic finance  and   taxation  that    makes   sense   of   the single  tax  experiment and  takes  into ac­ count   the  special   problems   arising  from Vancouver's role  as  a refuge  of  migrant, unemployed labour.
As  for   the   distinctive  personality  of
Vancouver, Roy's  is a picture of contrasts
-cosmopolitan, with a tradition of racial exclusiveness; a  post-industrial centre  set amid  great  natural beauty, yet dependent upon  resource development. These  im­ pressions are  amplified by George Wood­ cock  who,  in  summing  up  his  pictorial  history  of the  province, comments that  it remains  "a region  where  space  and  mo­ bility  are  important," where   people  are still  bound   to  the  "primal  realities" of land and  sea. "The  wilderness," he adds, "... is still a reality  in our  lives:  ... to go north is still a way to prove  oneself."
That may   be  so,  but   to  go  north­ imaginatively-to the  St.  Elias  Moun­ tains   and   the   foothills   of   the   Kluane Ranges   in   the   southwestern  Yukon   is more  an experience in humility. The six­ teen  scientist-writers  who  have  contrib-
 uted  to this  stunning volume  on  Kluane describe its geological  history and glaciers, its  living   things-plants, animals, and fish-and  the  few  men  who  touched it and  left behind  only rotting log cabins.  It seems at  first a place  which  has  no past; but its history is longer  and  more compli­ cated   than  that   of  any  human  commu­ nity. John  Theberge has  been  faithful to the  spirit  of all  these  essays  when  he  re­ minds  us  that   Kluane  is  itself  a  living thing  of immense complexity-and  fra­ gility.  Why  is it  that   the  most  beautiful and  moving  of  these "local  histories" is a book   that   makes   human  history   seem trivial?
CARL BERGER


FIVE POETS

KATE BITNEY, While You  Were  Out. Turnstone
Press, $6.g5.
SHERRY DEMING, Not  Tonight. Box  302, Erin. DOROTHY FARMILOE, Words   For My  Weeping
Daughter.  Penumbra, $5-95·
BRENDA  RICHES,  Dry  Media. Turnstone  Press,
$6.oo.
BARBARA SAPERGIA,  Dirt  Hills Mirage.  Thistle- down, $I4.oo;  pa. $6.g5.

WORDS FOR MY WEEPING DAUGHTER by Dorothy   Fanniloe is a  small  volume   in which the poems are addressed to the speaker's daughter  who   has   been   wid­ owed  soon after  her  marriage. The  book is divided  into  two  sections.  In  the  first the  poems are  concerned with  the imme­  diate  shock,  the  funeral,  and  the  anger  that  follows.  Mother  searches  for  words of comfort  and  finds she has little  to offer
"when it's  I his  arm   you  want   around
you  I not  metaphors." However, in  the
second  section,  "letters" to  the  daughter
(who   has  moved   to  a  new  city  apart­ ment) offer  the  timeless  comfort  of con­ tinuity  in  nature and   in  human  experi­ ence. Dorothy Farmiloe writes in straight-

155

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



forward direct   statements with  a  clear­ sighted  use of everyday occurrences as the source of her metaphors. In  reviewing  the tragedy,   she  finds  one  image  that  over­ shadows  all  others:

what i see are  potatoes
the  potatoes you  peeled  and left sitting in  water waiting his
hi  what's   for supper.

As she begins to look forward, a metaphor emerges   from   work   in  her  garden -a wall she plans to construct of rocks blasted from  the  path  of a  new  road,  a  wall  on which  she  hopes  her  daughter will work with  her. The rocks are the "bones  of this land" which  strengthen her;  in a cairn  or wall  they support one  another as mother and  daughter do;   building   the  wall  to­ gether  will impart greater meaning to the construction. Despite  one reference to the violent  grief of a young  neighbour at  the death of his wife,  these poems  are about the conununity of women.
community begins  with  two the  old  myth-makers
knew  what they  were  doing  when they  entrusted continuity
to  a  mother and   her  daughter

questions like
who  was  Persephone's father
didn't enter into  it.

There are  no  new  insights  into  grief  or how to deal  with it in  these poems;  there is, rather, a mature and  assured  voice reiterating with  admirable simplicity  and convincing sincerity  the universal  comfort of love and  the passing of time. Drawings by  Peter   Schwarz  add   to  the   pleasure given  by this book.

Not  Tonight   by  Sherry  Deming is  al­ most the complete antithesis of Words  for My  Weeping  Daughter. While  Farmiloe writes  of a  specific event  and  builds  her imagery  on very tangible detail,  Deming's poems  are  crowded with  abstractions. In a description, "StavrosiSpr IBo," a phrase
 such   as  "the best  of  such   an   intricate being"  and  words  such  as  "charm," "pride," and  "mystery" do not  bring  that individual to life. The reader is told Stav­ ros  is  "a  strange person" and  that the speaker feels "strongly" for him, but  that  is all. And  that  is the  failing  of  many  of these  poems:  too often   Deming says she is bored,  anxious, angry,  lonely, in or out of love, but  the  poems  fail  to capture the sensation in  an  image  or  in  sounds  and  movement of language which might  make the  reader a  participant in  the  emotion.
Too rare  is a  simile  such  as  "Silence.  I
like a round room  I with no echos  [sic]  I
listening to itself," and  even this is under­
mined  by the next  line, "in  the essence of calm." Some  poems  end  with  lines  that should  have  been  omitted: "something I
can  love. I My pillow." turns a fair  poem
into  one  that  sounds  more  like  the  work
of a young adolescent; similarly,  "such  an unpleasant I sound  I your footsteps" adds
nothing to  the  twelve  line  description of "the sloppy  slide  I of  the  flat  I of your shoes   I  with   your   crooked   heels...."
Taken as a whole  Not Tonight  is not impressive,   but   Deming  has   insight­
"Don't cry  from  your  heart  I if  the sor­
row  I is in your  mind"-and with  more
mature  judgment  and   editorial  advice,
perhaps her  second  book will avoid  some of  the  pitfalls in  which  the  first  traps it­ self.

In capturing the  people  and  events  of her secure  and  happy  childhood, Barbara Sapergia avoids  those traps in her first published book  of  poems.  Dirt  Hills  Mi­ rage  is  a  coherent work   in  which   the narrative perspective shifts over  the  four sections  from  that of a child, who  tries to fry  eggs  on  the  metal  of  a  playground slide and  who understands only intuitively adult  tensions  and  sorrows,  to  that  of  a young woman, who  is aware  of the  land  and  its past and  who has been touched  by death.  Each   of  these  poems  links  event

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and   mood   and   conveys   them   with  au­ thority.  Events of  childhood-arguments with other children, her brother's reaction to inspecting the  site of a  plane  crash,  a series  of  accidents -are  placed   in  con­ text  so  that  as  one  closes  the  book,  one feels as familiar with  Moose Jaw's Robin Hood  Mills,  the slaughter  house, and  the grandfather's  ranch   as  one  is  with   the family  itself.  It  is  difficult   to  single  out particular  poems  for  praise  as  most  are highly   successful,   but   "Arranged  Mar­ riage" captures  the  family's Old   World background, its adaptation to New World custom,  the girl's developing sense of her­  self as a woman-soon-to-be, and  the gen­ tle  humour with  which  the  author views her own  past. Almost  twelve, she meets a Romanian  boy  at   the   roundup  at   her grandparents' ranch. He  writes to her "to say, he guessed  we'd  be  / married soon" and  sends her  a hankie:

i could   just  hear  my mother saying:
you  must   have  done  something to encourage him.

The  episode  seems to pass unnoticed, the letter is burned and  the hankie hidden  "so well/  i still haven't found it,"  but one day "grandpa came  to town  / & spilled  the beans."  The boy's father has  tried  to  ar­ range  a  marriage and  has  talked  of  how many  cows  and  sheep  she  is worth  and  her  dowry:

my  mother gave  firm  instructions i was  not  for  sale
grandpa looked  a little sad­
it had  sounded like  a good  deal
& he didn't like to offend old  friends

there were  no more letters
no  hankies, no  rings, no  offers i  was  not  blamed
i was only  a little girl, after all
 presented  book. Dirt Hills Mirage is to be recommended.

Kate  Bitney's  world  is a very different one  from  Sapergia's. It is  inhabited  by black leather clad lesbians, mad women, promiscuous young  women  surviving on mean  men's  favours; the  imagery  is  fre­ quently   drawn  from   nightmare  visions. The  volume's first poem is "'The Anger of Ghosts"  in  which  the  former  inhabitants of a deserted  TB ward  who were tortured by their  beautiful surroundings return to haunt the  writer  who  chose  the spot  for its peace.  The  poem  gives its title  to the first section  of  the  book and  it establishes the mood for the following poems of age, death  and  disillusionment. In  the  book's second    section,  "Perhaps   We    Are Wounded," a number of love poems share the  tone of  "Mistrust The First  Amour" in which  the  poet  advises:

Drink the  blood  out retract your  teeth leave  the  corpse retreat

When you  have  this  fever you must  let  it do  its  work It will cleanse
or  kill  you.

In  "Snow" as in other poems,  yielding  to love  is not  achieved without  tension:
But  love tortures my hands
begs me  to come
down  from   this  crystal

But when love and desire are admitted, images of fire and  glitter convey sensuous JOy:

my body showers to earth


soon  i  couldn't  remember
the  letter or  the  words on  the  hankie
only  the  weight of his  brown arms
& hot  dry  dust  on  his skin.

Barbara Sapergia's eye for detail  similarly enriches all the  poems of this attractively
 glitters in  your  hair
melts  softly
on  your  speaking lips     your  hands are  full
of me     mutating.

Bitney's  perspective is urban even  when a  poem is about  the  land. "I Am Shown

157

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  Land" records  a  vision in  which  the tension and  power  of nature are conveyed in words such as "rakes," "devours," "flailing," and  "twisted"; the  poem  ends with   the  injunction, "Stop   motor   bikes,
cars  I erase oil I I put  all the gravel  back
I to where  it was.  I I Return electric  I to
the exciting air." While  You Were Out is
a tough-minded and  wide-ranging collec­ tion of poems distinguished by its original  and often  disturbing imagery.

In  Dry Media  Brenda  Riches  also em­ ploys   disturbing,  even   chilling   images, but   this  collection  of  poetry  and   brief prose  pieces  reveals  a  greater  range   of styles  than   any  of  the  other  four  books here  reviewed. "Demeter's  Daughter" is a  cruel   vignette  in  which   third   person narrative description of a mother's abhor­ rence  of her  daughter alternates with  the daughter's  stream  of   consciousness.   In three  and  a  half  pages Riches  conveys a very  ugly  rivalry   in   which   the  already  alcoholic   mother has  no  chance of  sur­ vival. "Persimmon" shows a different side of  Riches'  talent-the  ability  to turn  a love of words and  word play into hilarious  satire.  A  photographer named   Ambrose tries to seduce  Virginia: "Come  with me, my  little tangerine,  and  see what  devel­ ops. No kidding. His opening  words  to her...."  Three pages  of  puns  and  Am­ brose  trying   to  get  Virginia to  pose  for ludicrous  "arty"   photographs   leave   a reader  giggling  quite  helplessly  as do  the two "Amanda Pieces"  in which  proverbs  and  cliches  are  twisted  into brief  tales of Amanda and   her  Grannie.  In   the  first Amanda learns why one is warned  against  trying   to   teach   Grannie   to  suck   eggs. These  pieces, a rather chilling  brief prose piece, another  disturbing story of violent imagination,  and  a quite  beautiful prose poem describing changing light in a room make up less than half  the book. The  rest continues  in   similar    dazzling   diversity
 with  the addition of a few highly polished poems. A definition of shadow ends:

I lie    your shadow under  you moving
you move me to become
the  darkness  your  body makes
Dry  Media   is  the   most   original   of  all these  books,  frightening, funny  and  fas­ cinating, and  too varied  to appreciate in one  reading.
PEGGY NIGHTINGALE


CHOJX
DE METAPHORES

MICHEL  BELIL,  Greenwich. Lemeac,  $12.95. NORMAND  ROUSSEAU,   Le   Deluge    Blanc.  Le­
meac,  $12.95·

DEUX   JEUNES   ROMANCIERS QUEBECOIS; deux  personnages aux  destins  problema­ tiques.  Greenwich  de  Michel  Belil et  Le Deluge Blanc de Normand Rousseau, tous deux  publies  chez  Lemeac, decrivent, de maniere omnisciente, la survie  difficile de deux heros  tourmentes.
Greenwich, titre  d'apres le prenom de son personnage central, est marque par  le poids  intransigeant du  temps.  II  gravite
constamment de  la  realite  a un  univers
de souvenirs accablants. Quelques evene­
ments   a la   portee   retentissante   provo­
quent chez  lui  une  culpabilite profonde
qui l'atteint meme  physiquement par  une maladie etrange  qui  le  fait   vieillir  pre­ maturement.
Le   recit   est  construit  par   une   alter­ nance de deux  temps: le present, qui  est une  fuite vers  l'exil  et  l'oubli  et le passe, malgre tout  omnipresent. En effet, fuyant vers  d'autres lieux,  Boston,  Drumont en l'occurence, Greenwich ne sera  pas gueri
du  mal  qui  l'habite puisque  le quotidien est pretexte a des associations  d'idees qui
le relancent dans  le monde  des souvenirs de  ceux   qu'il   nomme   ses  "quatre  fan-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tomes."  "Blottis  quelque part, ses quatre fantomes se tiennent cois." Il est obsede a la  fois par  des  reminiscences vives de sa vie avec  son  fd:re  Goliatte, mort  prema­ turement,  du   suicide   de  deux  amis  de jeunesse:  Renard et  Cha.teau  Brillant et finalement par la fin brutale de sa relation  avec  Calypse. La  culpabilite  provoquee par  ces  evenements aura  des  retentisse­  ments  lors de son exil.a Boston lorsqu'elle  sera concretisee par  une veritable descente aux  enfers,  manifestee  par  une  invasion de sauterelles qui immobilisent la ville.
La  narration, bouleversee  chronologi­ quement par  le recours  constant au  pro­ cede  des  annalepses,  souleve  parfois  des problemes de comprehension a la maniere de Evade  de la Nuit  de Andre  Langevin. En  effet,  les  bonds  constants de  reel  au monde   des   souvenirs  qui   brouillent  la trame  du  recit,  pourraient rendre  neces­ saire  une  relecture. Le  n!cit  est constam­ ment  narre au  present, rendant par  con­ sequent  difficile  la  distanciation  des temps,  le  reel  etant obsedant parce  que parseme  de  signes  qui  le catapultent  ra­ pidement au  coeur  du  souvenir.
Greenwich, atteint par  cette  "maladie du  temps," porte  le  nom   du  meridien, reference horaire internationale. Son pere est  horloger, il  porte deux   montres.   De plus, hors ces details  exterieurs et le desor­ dre chronologique de la narration, le recit lui-meme bat   le  pouls  du  temps  par   le recours frequent de l'auteur a des  phrases courtes,  hachurees, elliptiques. "Les draps.
Les oreillers. La  nuit."

"L'Ennerni c'est   le  temps. II  hante toute ce qu'il touche. II  encercle l'homme."

En  n!alite,  tout   s'est  arrete puis  enche­ vetre   au  moment de  la  paternite  inter­ rompue. A !'instant ou le premier mot du roman est  pose,  tout  est deja  consomme,  une  conscience  se faisant jour  et revelant  l'aspect  douloureux du  passe  et  en  par­  ticulier de l'avortement fatal  de  Calypse. Greenwich n'aura pas pu  sauver  a temps
 son "heritier" et en gardera une profonde culpabilite  justifiee   par    l'accueil  tiede qu'il  lui  reservait et  par  "les  quatre  mi­ crobes qui  gangrenaient sa vie." Sa  rela­  tion  avec   Calypse   est  amplifiee  par   le verre deformant du souvenir  et de la cul­ pabilite. En effet, cette relation routiniere, parsemee  de conftits, est devenue  doulou­ reuse au  moment ou  Calypse  annonce sa grossesse amon;ee. L'incomprehension de Greenwich  entraine  l'avortement puis  la mort  inutile  de  celle-ci.
D'autres morts pesent bien  lourd, Greenwich  subissant   egalement  la   pre­ sence obsedante de ses autres "fantomes."
Son frere  Goliatte, a qui  il avait  accorde
la  presence  illusoire  d'une paternite,  in­
hibee par une mort precoce, indice d'une impuissance a realiser  dans  1' epanouisse­
ment  la  paternite et  les suicides  de  deux amis, une fils brime et un poete incompris, maudit par  la societe, Renard et Chateau Brillant.
A la toute  fin, il se laissera  vaincre par l'illusoire,  mettant tous ses espoirs en  son fils, ressuscite en son esprit.
Un  culpabilite se  fait  egalement  jour dans   le  roman  de   Normand  Rousseau mais cette  fois sous la forme  d'un rat  qui "hante" la demeure du personnage princi­ pal, Orval. Celui-ci  est seul dans  sa mai­  son  depuis  peu,  sa  femme  venant de  le
quitter. Une   tempete fait   rage  a l'exte­
rieur,  au  coeur  du  printemps,  interrom­
pant    les   cours   de   paleontologie qu'il donne a l'Universite. La tempete annihile
peu  a peu  le  monde  exterieur, le  recou­
vrant  de   blanc,    per«;u   dans    l'oeuvre
comme  signe  de  mort.  Un  rat  manifeste sa  presence   par   des  bruits   de  grignote­ ment  graduellement obsedants. A mesure  que   s'intensifie   la   presence   de   ce   rat,  l'isolement de Orval devient un  veritable gouffre; il devient le "Noe  de  la  fin  du monde."
Au  creux   de  la  conscience  de  Orval sont  tapies  des  revelations qui  tardent a
se  faire   et   qui   sont   camouflees   par   le

159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



leurre   qu'il   maintient  presque   tout   au long du recit. Une fuite  frequente hors du reel  accablant s'opere tout  comme  dans
!'oeuvre  de  Michel   Belil.  Une   fuite   en arriere est  executee sous  forme  d'anna­ lepses  mais  uniquement pour  se  tourner vers les souvenirs  les plus tolerables.
Le debut  s'amorce dans le cadre securi­ sant   d'une  petite  maison   de   banlieue.  L'augmentation de la vivacite de la tern­ pete  et  des grignotements du  rat  i; tensi­ fient   l'acuite  dramatique  du   recit   tout comme   dans   une   nouvelle.  D'ailleurs, l'appelation de  roman est  probablement un  peu  faussee,  cette   oeuvre   possedant  beaucoup des caracteristiques d'une nou­  velle. En  effet,  tous  ces elements  tendent vers  le  denouement,  le  recit  etant  par­  seme de signes annonciateurs de celui-ci; tout est centve sur  un effet a produire. La presence   quasi-invisible du  rat  ne  trou­ vera son retentissement concret qu'a la fin de !'oeuvre. Le recit est d'ailleurs maitrise  efficacement en  fonction  de  son  aboutis­  sement   bien  que  de  nombreux passages repetitifs  gagneraient  a  etre   retranches. En  effet,  un  recit  plus  court  aurait  cer­ tainement  produit  un  effet   dramatique plus soutenu.
Le   tempete  exterieure  qui   "rongeait peu a peu  ce qui  n'etait pas blanc" est presente  a l'interieur de la maison sous la forme de ce rat "invisible." Celui-ci  ronge comme  un remords tout ce qui entoure Orval. Ces  acces  de  remords, on  le  re­ marquera, sont  provoques par  des evene­ ments   exterieurs  qui   lui   remettent  en memoire ce  qu'il   aimerait  tant   oublier.  En effet,  la presence  du rat coincide  sou­ vent   avec  des  souvenirs  qui   tentent de se faire  jour a la surface de la conscience; le  bruit  interrompt  les  pensees  et  oblige les souvenirs douloureux a replonger aux trefonds  de l'etre, la ou ils ne peuvent etre  conn us.
Cette presence   du   rat  comme   un  re­ mords  s'exprime egalement par  la culpa­ bilite  qui  le cerne  d'un halo  de  mystere.

160
 Une   vmsme   de  Orval, le  sachant  seul, vient lui offrir son aide. Celui-ci, dans un acces  de  pudeur ou  de  culpabilite tente de la chasser  ayant une peur immense  que la presence  du  rat  ne lui soit revelee. L'u­ nivers   de   Orval  est   contamine   par   le malefice   de   la   presence   du   rat  et   par l'horreur surnaturelle qu'il  provoque.
A  la  toute   fin,  un  indice   majeur  est foumi pour  la lecture de !'oeuvre: "le rat
n'existait peut-etre que  dans  sa tete  mais il en mourait." Les inhibitions provoquees par  des  evenements anterieurs a  la  nar­ ration  semblent vouloir  cesser de se dero­  ber  a la  conscience.
Le  refoulement du  reel  accablant  est done  un processus  dynamique, Orval em­ pechant les evenements insupportables de la rupture avec sa femme et de la relation illusoire   qu'ils  ont   vecu,  de  parvcnir  a cette conscience au  moyen  de la presence  du rat. Ce processus entraine une depense d'energie extraordinaire qui  l'entrainera meme  dans  la mort.
Le  rat  sera  present au  sein d'un delire chronique, d'une  frenesie.   La  conserva­ tion  de  la  clarte et  de  l'ordre  dans   la pensee  contribue a  rendre  vraisemblable la presence  du  rat.
!Il est  a  noter  qu'il  existe  une  curieuse correspondance entre les themes  du delire et de ceux  de la litterature fantastique.
Malheureusement,   malgve   l'efficacite
du  recit,  un  point  reste  faible: l'ecriture. La recherche des mots frise souvent la naivete; les  fteurs   de   rhetorique  abon­ dent.  Greenwich  dec;oit egalement  par  la surabondance des  metaphores  faciles  qui surnagent dans  le recit.

"En  cette  fin  d'automne, les feuilles  mortes roulaient,  seches,   tordues,   bossues  comme celui  de  Notre-Dame...."

Les  noms  des  personnages (Boucane,  Li­ quide ...)  egalement empreints de facilite  sont farfelus et uniquement descriptifs. Ils ne possedent  pas  la qualite denominative de ceux  des personnages de Ducharme.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Chez Belil, l'ecriture de contes pour enfants laisse  une  trace  constante quant aux   choix   des  metaphores fleuries.   Un recit  plus  bref  pour  Rousseau aurait  per­ mis un  choix  de  qualificatifs plus  sobres, la  r·epetition  des descriptions  etant  dimi­ nuee.
£n  definitive, il  s'agit   de  ce  type  de romans ou, fermant les yeux sur les details qui agacent parfois, le lecteur  peut arriver
a se divertir....
LISE ROCHETTE



ON DISPOSSESSION

The Spice  Box, An  Anthology of Jewish CanlV­ dian  Writing, selected by  Gerri  Sinclair & Morris   Wolfe.  Lester   &   Orpen   Dennys,
$16.95.
"WHEN THE SUN SETS on Saturday night (ending the  Sabbath), devout  Jews  con­ sole and  fortify  themselves  by inhaling the fragrance  of   the   family   spicebox."  So Gerri  Sinclair and  Morris  Wolfe  explain  the  choice   of  title   for  an  anthology  of Jewish   Canadian   Writing.   Wishing   to avoid   a  false  stereotype of  the  Jew,  as their  original  title,  Rags,  Bones, Bottles seemed to evoke, they accepted their pub­  lisher's suggestion  of The  Spice  Box, be­ cause

the  spice  box  is a  longstanding reminder of the   bittersweetness  of  Jewish  life,  for   not only   is  it   an   object  of  ritual  art    (and  a collector's item)  but   it  plays   an  important part   during   "havdalah,"   the    ceremony which   concludes  the   Sabbath.

There is  unacknowledged  irony   in  this title  for,  as Sinclair and  Wolfe  state,  the anthology  is  arranged  to  reflect  an  in­ creasing  sense of dispossession  and uncer­  tainty  in the Jewish  voices of this country. For  these  modern Jews,  the  spice box  is certainly no  longer  a  source  of  consola­  tion or fortitude, but a relic, a collector's item only. The final selection  in the book,
 Avrum  Malus' poem,  "I am  a  Modern
Jew"  says it sadly and  clearly:

I do not  put  on  'tefilin'
Irun each  day

around and  around the  track I go a modern Jew
on  running shoes
limping and  flying

The selections range over the Canadian Jewish experience regionally  and ideologi­ cally. We begin  in a  Polish shtetl  of long ago,  with a  tale  by  Solomon  Ary written  in  Yiddish,  in  a  style  and   tone  far   re­ moved  from  the modern, and  translated. "The Pact" is a  bitter  tale  of the  down­  fall   of  a   beautiful  young   Jewess   who transgressed the  strict  moral  code  of  the time.  The  editors  seem  to  feel  that   the three  Yiddish  writers,   Ary,  Roehl   Korn
and J. I. Segal, with  whom  they open  the
volume,  establish   the  tone  and  sense  of
place from which English-speaking Cana­ dian  Jewish  writers  take  their  departure. Korn's  evocative soul   searching  poetry  has  long  been  recognized in the  Yiddish speaking  world and  deserves  a wider  au­  dience.
In  the remaining short  stories, excerpts from novels, essays, and  poems set in Can­ ada,  we share  the  immigrant experience, urban  and  rural,  familiar scenes in Mon­ treal  and  Winnipeg, lesser known  ones in the  prairie  flats.  Eli  Mandel  commemo­ rates   the  Jewish   cemetery  in  the   farm  community of  Hirsch:

ann  is taking pictures again while I stand in  the  uncut grass counting the  graves: there are  forty I think
(Near Hirsch a  Jewish Cemetery)

Robert Currie responds   to  Mandel with an  elegy on  "Diaspora Lipton, Sask."

The Jewish farmers wandered here  from
Russia
rode  like dust  upon the  wind they came  for  land  and  freedom came  to stay  awhile

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Sammy  Bateman son of Mark us
broke  the  land  and   worked  the  fields Israel Cohen Louis  Reich

Two generations later,  the Hebrew on the epitaphs puzzles and  mystifies these  pio­ neers'  descendants.
A  sense  of  loss  reverberates through The  Spice  Box. A few  lone  voices, such as A.M. Klein,  bespeak a depth of Jewish knowledge and  commitment (though the editors could have chosen Klein poems shadowed by doubt). The holocaust haunts survivors  whether they were  there or not. Abraham Boyarsky in "The Birth­ day Party" recounts a sixth birthday party  for   the  one  remaining  son  of  two  sur­ vivors in a D.P.  Camp in the early  fifties while  awaiting  immigration  to  Canada. Amid  the festivities, friends weep for their  own lost children, and  the father ends the day exacting a promise  from  the child  to avenge  the dead  when  he grows up. How remote from  the childhood of Erna  Paris, a "Canadian Jewish  Princess from  Forest Hill" who grew up insulated from  the outside world and made her "first real connection" with  "the collective  past  of every Jew" in a tour  of the concentration camps  at age twenty-two.
,Irving Layton pays tribute  to the neces­
sary   self-reliance  of   "Israelis" -"It   is themselves   they  trust   and  no  one  else." Others ponder the meaning of Jewishness in Canada or  the  meaning of the  Jew  in the modern world.  Richer's seminal  story of  Mortimer Griffin  reduces  the  Jew  to "an   idea." The  Jew   becomes  less   par­ ticular, more  symbolic, an  Everyman. To  Mark   Sarner  the  promise  of  his  youth "seemed  to be that we would grow up and  in the  process would  be relieved  of what  was inconvenient and  burdensome about being Jewish." Like Malus'  persona, limp­ ing and flying in his running shoes, Sarner speaks for a large segment of the post-war  generation:
 There is  ambivalence and   there is  frustra­ tion,   and a  sense  of  atrophy that  is  inter­ nalized and   inarticulate.  And   there  is  the habit of survival that keeps  the ideal and  the possibility of  a  resolution  alive  like  a  dim,  flickering light.

The   Spice  Box  is a  timely  collection. Now in one  volume.  a reader  can  sample the richness and  diversity of the Canadian Jewish experience presented by Klein, Richler, Cohen, Wiseman, Mandel, and many  more  known  and  hitherto little known  writers.  Like  most  anthologies of its  type,  it  cannot offer  depth in  one  or two selections  per author. There are a few weeds,    such    as   William     Weintraub's "Sport in  the  Old   Testament," a  weak imitation of Richler satire,  and  there  are the inevitable omissions, such as David Solway's  poetry.
ffhe editors  attribute the tone of recent
writing to  the  effects  of declining  preju­ dice  and  growing  assimilation.  Yet  even in  recent  months, there  has  been an  up­ surge  of anti-semitism in  North America  and   increasing  world   abandonment  of Israel.   Canada  has  never  had   as  many Jewish  children receiving parochial school education. We  will have  more  indication of the Canadian  Jewish  future when  this newest generation finds  its voice.

LINDA SHOHET


CANDID ACCOUNT

MARY     MEIGS,   Lily   Briscoe:   A   Self  Portrait.
Talonbooks, $8.gs.
IT IS RELATIVELY RARE that  books by non­ Canadians get washed  up on our quixotic shores  for  their   publishing  baptism. We may  occasionally get  a  simultaneous ap­  pearance with  a  volume  seeing  the  light of  day   in  Britain   or   the  U.S.,   but   we usually  play second  fiddle  to both  super­ power  publishing places.  In  the  case  of Lily Briscoe, an autobiography by the cur-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



rently Quebec-based painter, Mary  Meigs, we  can  consider ourselves  fortunate  for an  unusual chain   of circumstances  lead­ ing  from  love  and  lesbianism   to  a  Van­ couver  publishing house.
The  late   Edmund  Wilson,   arguably the  most  distinguished American literary critic  so far  this  century, had  broadcast the  genius  of a  young  Quebecoise  novel­ ist,  Marie-Claire  Blais,  in  his  book,  0
Canada, and  the  young  woman  duly turned up in Wellfleet,  Mass., where the venerable man  of letters lived.  Now it so happened  that   Wilson   was  a  friend   of Mary   Meigs   who  was  then   living  with another woman, a political activist  and feminist  named  Barbara Deming.
rEventually our  author split up with Deming, and   after   a  stormy   time   with Marie-Claire Blais and  some  intermittent collusion   with   another   woman,  moved with  Marie-Claire to Quebec where  they both,  apparently, still share  a home.
Now  lest  my  concertina'd  account of
co-habitation give the  impression of  pro­ miscuous   farce,   I should add  forthwith that  Lily Briscoe is one  of the most mor­ ally saturated accounts of life I have  read for  a  long  period   and  as  such  is both  a refreshment and  a challenge.
As  the  author makes  clear-perhaps too  clear,   to  the  point   of  onerous  self­ consciousness -she is a  product of  east­ ern U.S. gentility  where  penury was never a personal problem. However, the absence
of  poverty   provides a  plethora of  prob­
lems of quite  a  different kind: from  the impact  of  loveless  Presbyterianism and the  deification of duty,  to an  abhorrence of sexual  heterodoxy and  all  those  chal­ lenges  to homosexual liaison  which  arise from  the  lack  of any  external  cement   to relationship. Outside, that is, the will and determination of  the  two  participants to make  a success of  their psychological and romantic coupling.
And  it is, indeed, in  these  areas  which in  their  ultimate application are  human
 rather than  exclusively  sapphic concerns, that Mary Meigs' autobiography offers extraordinary riches. That her insights on moral   issues,  courage  in  self -searching, and  hard-won wisdom  in some peculiarly opaque   quarters of  life,  are  couched   in an  elegant  prose,  is a  bonus  that  at  first sight  may  appear supererogatory.
I do not  think  it is. I believe there  is a
struggle  for  spiritual  discipline   revealed in  this autobiographical account, an  ele­ gance   sought   from   the   egotistical,   an­  archic  mess which  all self-centred  people know, which  quite  naturally  reveals itself in an ordered and  fortuitous language.
It is a  particular boon  of  this  book­ which  reads  almost  as  a  novel  in  its in­ sistence on a moral  evaluation of acts and in  descriptions of  character  and  charac­ ters-that we are free of  the cloying self­ pity which  disfigures  so much  of the sub­ jective romanticism  which  passes for  hu­  man   communication  in   our   time   and  place.
For  this  reason  alone  I would  suggest that   Lily Briscoe  be compulsory reading
in every Creative Writing Department across the country, and  contend that  there are  really  few  Canadian  practitioners of either   poetry   or  fiction   who  would   not stand  to benefit  from  an  absorption of its
260 pages.
Indubitably there  are  weaknesses, even passages  that   are  boring   and   risible  (as when  Ms. Meigs reduces  Christianity into something so Americanly upper-crust and Vassarly as "proper behaviour"). And the self-conscious   peering   into   the  murk   of her  own  creativity sometimes  surfaces  as a  whine  and  sometimes, for  the  reader, as an  embarrassment.
But with all that said, the reservations stated, there  is a moral  vigour  to this can­ did  personal account of a  well-born  Les­ bian  and   her  friends of  all  sexual  com­ plexions,  which   only  demonstrates  how enervated and  vacuous  so  much   of  our contemporary literature is-and  by that

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I mean not only personal writing but that which  is both  creative and  Canadian.

DAVID  WATMOUGH


PHILOSOPHERS, NOT KINGS

LESLIE   ARMOUR  and   ELIZABETH   TROTT,   The Faces  of Reason:   An  Essay  on  Philosophy and Culture in  English  Canada,  rBso-1950. Wilfrid  Laurier Univ.  Press, $17.00.

Bv  NOW  THE   IDEA OF  THE  Philosopher King  is as much  discredited by history as Shelley's vision of poets as the unacknowl­ edged  legislators  of the world. It is recog­ nized  that   both   philosophers and   poets work  through  ways  other   than   those  of political  power. Yet  the  presence  of phi­ losophers  is certainly one  of  the  criteria by which we tend  to assess the importance and  the vitality  of a national  culture. England (and  Scotland, too, in its own rights of Hume and  others), France, Ger­ many,  Italy,  Russia,  China, India:  all of them  have  been  the  homes  of great  phi­ losophers  and   of  philosophies that  have been much  more than  merely speculative: that   in  important ways  have  influenced  the patterns of human  behaviour.
But  there  seems  a limit  to  the  permu­ tations   of  thought that  increasingly   in­ hibits   the   production   of   great   original  philosophic systems. I  have always found  an  analogy  in  music,  where  the  number of composers  at  the same time innovative and   ultimately  satisfying   has  decreased  over  the  generations since  the  death   of Haydn,  until  we  have  reached   the  stage where few composers  have both  the origi­ nality and  the substance -the sheer stay­ ing power -to seem likely candidates in a musical  equivalent of  Stendhal's lottery
-to be  heard  (rather than  read)   in  a hundred years. Yet even  where  music  no longer  plays  a  dominant and  originative role, as it  did  in  eighteenth-century  Aus-
 tria-Hungary, or philosophy as it did in sixth-century  BC   Ionia    or   nineteenth­ century  AD   Germany,  no   culture  can really  be thought of as complete that  has no expression  in  music  and  no extension into  philosophy.
But if there  are no great  originative philosophers at  work,  if no  new  seminal systems   of   thought  are   introduced­ what,  one may well ask, is the function of such  philosophers  as  appear? Because  it gives some sound answers  to this question, The  Faces  of  Reason, by Leslie  Armour and  Elizabeth  Trott, seems  to me one  of the most interesting and  important Cana­ dian  books  that  has  yet appeared in  the history  of ideas.
It  is  essentially   cultural  rather  than philosophical  history   that   The Faces  of Reason  offers,  and   in  such  a  context, I suggest,  Armour and  Trott are  correct in placing the little-known figures who  have served  Canada as its philosophers. Up  to now  their   works  have-with  a  few  ec­ centric exceptions like Richard Bucke, the disciple   of  Whitman -been   little   read outside university philosophy  depart­ ments.   They  figure   in  the  chapters  on "Philosophical Literature" in the Literary History   of Canada, which  most  readers  skip, and  one can  reasonably assume  that  few even  among  Canadian  writers know much   about  James  Beaven   or  William  Lyall   or   George  Paxton  Young.    The thinkers in  this  book  who  are  reasonably well known outside  the world  of academic philosophy  are  either the  brilliant  birds of  passage  who  had  already made   their  names  elsewhere,   like  the  great   French teachers  Jacques  Maritain  and   Etienne Gilson  who  taught briefly at  the  Univer­ sity of Toronto, or men who entered phi­  losophy  from  some  unaccustomed direc­ tion,  like Harold  Innis.  Indeed, so far  as contemporary Canadian philosophic atti­ tudes  are  concerned, one  can  safely  say that   they  owe  more   to  economists  like Innis,   or   historians  like   Creighton,  or

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cntlcs like Frye, or even novelists like MacLennan, than  they  do  to the  profes­ sional  philosophers.
Yet the philosophers, and  the academic
activities   over  which   they  presided,  had an  important role  in  shaping the  domi­ nant  culture of English-speaking Canada. They  represent in  an  almost  extreme in­ tellectual form   the  influence  of  Scottish and  Loyalist  traditions on  our  schools of theology   and   philosophy  and,   through them,  on  our  whole  academic tradition. Such  influences  are  permeative, and  it is not an exaggeration to say that  a knowl­ edge  of  how  John  Paxton Young's  phi­ losophy  was influenced by the  theological  conflicts within Canadian Presbyterianism helps  one  understand the  states  of mind Hugh  MacLennan explores in novels like Each  Man's Son.
The Faces of Reason  is a large  (more than   500 pages)   and   thorough book.  It deals  in some detail with  eighteen  Cana­ dian   philosophers  (almost  all  of   whom came  originally from   Scotland  or  Eng­ land) and  with  the  two great French ex­ patriates. But   just  as  important  as  the discussion  of what each  philosopher said (and  often  they had a fresh way of stating  truths that   were  not  especially  original) is the sense of an  intellectual continuum emerging in  which  the  philosophers play their  parts,  either in  naturalizing exotic trends  of  thoughts to a Canadian environ­ ment  or  in giving  a rational shape  to na­ tive drifts of opinion that  would otherwise  lack shape  and  direction.
I doubt if many  readers will go  back, after   reading The  Faces  of  Reason,   to study-say-James  Beaven's   Elements of Natural Theology or John Clark Mur­ ray's  Hand book  of Christian  Ethics. But it is still helpful in seeking  to understand how  Canadian culture has  developed   if we know  how  important  the  subjects  of such  books  were  in  the  emergent phases in  what  we  now  see  as  the  growth  of a Canadian  consciousness.  And   the  great
 merit  of Faces of Reason  is that  it always sees philosophy, and  the  teaching of  phi­ losophy,  within  the  wider  context  of  the general  culture, so that  one  is constantly finding    cross-references that    are    im­ mensely helpful not only in understanding the philosophic concepts that  found  their way into Canadian novels and poems, but also  in  determining  the  principles  that, however  falteringly, have  shaped  Cana­ dian  scholarship and,  ultimately, the  Ca­  nadian way of life.
Faces of Reason  is made  accessible  to
readers   outside   the  area   of  philosophic study  by the lucidity  and  liveliness of the writing.  The subject may  not  be  intrin­ sically  engaging, but  the  fluency  of  this unusually   felicitous   team   of   writers   en­ ables them  to guide  one skilfully and  even wittily through a forest of potential bore­  dom.  They  summarize  effectively,  para­ phrase clearly,  and  all the time relate  ap­ positely to the historical  and  cultural con­ text.  I do  not  think  I have  encountered, since Bertrand  Russell's  History  of West­ ern  Philosophy, a  book  in  this  field  so open  to the layman interested in the links
-within the  general   cultural ambiance
-between  philosophy and  letters.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


SCARED?

JOHN   ROBERT  COLOMBO and   MICHAEL   RICH­ ARDSON,  eds.,  Not   To Be  Taken  At   Night, thirteen classic   Canadian  tales   of   mystery and  the  supernatural. Lester &  Orpen Den­ nys, $16.g5.

ANYONE WHO WATCHES the universe un­ fold   with   Knowlton  Nash   at   10   p.m. weekdays or reads a newspaper is likely to have  a  fairly  high  tolerance for  the  bi­ zarre   and   bloody.  Perhaps  that  is  why this  collection of  thirteen  little  tales  se­ lected  by Canada's  renaissance antholo­ gist and  an  English expatriate friend  falls flat. Not To Be Taken At Night  is a curi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ous book which tells us more about  the polyglot  state  of  our  life  and   literature than  it  does about  the  paranormal.
One   of   the   most   interesting   things about  the book is the writers  who are left out.  Why are  P. K. Page  and  Ethel  Wil­ son, who are not represented by  their best work,  the  only  women  here?  Where  are Audrey Thomas and  Alice Munro, whose adventures  with    African    gynecologists and  rural  ants are  just as spine-tingling as any  adventure  in   this  book?   Where   is Sinclair  Ross? Granted, you can't include  everyone,  but Not To Be Taken  At Night runs  to  onlyI 84  pages,  slim even  by to­ day's  standards,  and   hardly   enough   for more  than  one  or  two  moonlight dips.
What these stories  tell me is that  there are few classic Canadian tales of mystery and   the  supernatural, probably   because we haven't yet evolved a folklore and possibly never will, because it takes a homogeneous  mythic   experience  to  de­ velop  the archetypes for  this literary  and social  genre.  This  is not  true,  of  course, of  our   native   people,   who  have  passed down  by word of mouth wonderfully well constructed  stories   of   the  supernatural, which  became  flesh  and endured because the  people  who  made  them  had  a  com­ mon  social  and  spiritual  life  with   their audience.
There are  two main  problems  which weaken  short  stories. One  is lack of struc­ ture   which   leaves  the  story  amorphous and meaningless, and  the other is obvious­ ness of craft,  where structure and  coinci­ dence  are pushed too hard  and  credibility  is lost.  Both  sins  are  manifested  in  the weaker  stories  of   Not  Te  Be Taken   At Night.
An  example  of  the   former   is  "The Lice" by Wilfred Watson,  the story of a miracle  in a Catholic church in  Edmon­ ton.  This  story  is developed  horizontally in nine  short  chapters as the  bishop  asks for a sign of  the  failure of  his  congrega­ tion  to  submit   to  the  will  of God.  First

166
 the  crucifix   and   then   the  priest  are  in­ fested  with  lice  as  Watson explores  cor­ ruption within   and   without  the  church. Unfortunately, the power of this symbol is lost in  what  I would  have  to call  a  per­ version  of  the  short  story  form.  Though I must admit I had  second thoughts when I saw two flies cavorting on the cross over the altar in my own church this morning, as I  kneeled  smug and  full  of Christmas pud  at the communion rail.
A story  that  pushes  the parameters of belief  is  Al  Purdy's "The  Undertaker." This   tale  has  possibilities  but  comes  off the wall when  Purdy  has his undertaker consummate an  innocent high school  ro­ mance in  necrophilia at  the,  pardon  me, climax  of  the  story.
Robertson  Davies'  "The   Cat    That
Went  to Trinity" also groans  with  struc­ tural and  coincidental  obviousness.  This  gothic  tale  is an  adequate bedtime treat  for  the  fellows  at  Massey,  I  assume,  but hardly  a "classic."
Some  of the  stories  don't  go anywhere at all, not  even  to Trinity, and  they exist in the fog that  passes for mystery. Among these  are  "The Village  Theatre"  by Graham Petrie  (a pale shadow of Thomas Mann, who also used the theatre as meta­ phor for life in short  stories) , "The Death of Arthur Rimbaud" by Lawrence Math­ ews, and  P. K. Page's "The Woman."
I'm not  going  to say anything about Michel  Tremblay's "The Thirteenth Wife of Baron  Klugg." Perhaps it suffers in translation.
Take heart, there  are a few classics, although one  of the  best  is "The Sight," written by an Irishman about a New Yorker.  Brian  Moore's story is a sensitive description of a lonely  man  facing  cancer and  the  premonitions of his  Irish  house­ keeper,  who  comes  from  a  culture with the  right   blend  of  religion  and  supersti­ tion  for  good  storytelling.
"The Barren  Field" by Yves Theriault is the  story  of a modern-day Demeter of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the Canadian prairie who must sacrifice a man  to grow wheat  in a barren field. This tale simply  and  beautifully illustrates the hunger of the  soul  which  nurtures super­ stition. It takes  blood  to make lilies grow in  the  field.  Western culture  is  based  on that  premise.
•This   story,  Moore's,  and  Andreas
Schroeder's "The Late   Man" make  this volume   worthwhile. "The  Late   Man," set on  the  coast  where  "fishing  boats  lay strewn  about the beach like broken teeth," draws   the  line  between   man   and   God, what  is known  and what  is merely guessed at,  right  at  the  edge  of  the  sea.  It  is a
story that  transcends reality  and national­
 dian  historian, and  exasperated the  less  think­ ing  Canadian  nationalists by  convincingly ar­  guing    that    the   conquest  of   Canada  by   the British  in  1760  had  no important  influence on the  social, economic, or  institutional structures of  Quebec, and   that it  was  later generations, moved   by  political   developments into  a  de­  fensive   position,  who   created  the  idea   of  the "trauma" of   conquest. It  is,  whether or   not one   agrees   with    its   ultimate   conclusions,  a superb piece  of reasoning from  a  massive  base of factual  evidence. But  who  is  the  translator? One  suspects, since   he   wrote    the   Postscript, that   it  is   Allan   Greer,  but    neither  he   nor anyone else  says  so,  which   is  unfortunate, for the  Englishing of  Ouellet's book  is  a  massive and   finely   accomplished  task   that    deserved much  more ample acknowledgment than  this printing accords it.

ity  and  speaks  to  the  soul.  Surely  there are  more  like this around.

LINDA ROGERS


***  DONALD A. SMITH, Long Lance: The  True Story    of   an   Impostor. Macmillan,  $r6.95. Doubtless as  many people as were  taken in  by the  books  of  "Grey Owl" were  convinced  by that   vividly   written narrative of  a  prairie  In­ dian life,  Long  Lance.  Perhaps some  of   them  hesitated over  the  tales  of buffalo hunts  as  late  as  1890,   but   probably  most  of  them  decided that   the  sense  of  time   of  an   Indian   born   in the  wilds  would  not  be so accurate  as  that  of a clock-dominated paleface. Now,  in a well-docu­ mented  biography by  Donald  Smith, we  learn  that  the   real    "Long   Lance"   was   a   North Carolinan  of   indeterminate  Indian   ancestry, Sylvester   Long.   Even    before    his   death  by apparent suicide in  1932,  there were  those  who suspected  that "Long Lance" was  the  guise  of an  impostor, but  it  was  never  publicly proved. Here, for  the  first  time,  all  of  Long's  cumula­ tive   deceptions  are   recorded,  and   a   strange tale   they   make, almost as  strange  as  the  fic­ tional    narrative  we   now   understand  "Long Lance" to  have been.
 G.W.

***  JOHN   BUCHAN,  Sick   Heart   River,  re­ printed with  an  introduction by Trevor  Royle. Oxford, $12.95.   In  his   brief    five   years   in office,  John  Buchan  was   the   first   Governor General to  tour  the  far  North, and  out  of that expedition in  1937  he  gathered the impressions that  led to his only  Canadian novel, Sick Heart River, now  reissued   with   a  rather  fulsome in­  troduction by Trevor Royle.  Sick  Heart  River was  written  at  the  end   of   Buchan's life   and  published posthumously in  1941; one  h;s the feeling that   the  novelist's own  premonitions of death played   their part in  this  strange story  of an  English lawyer  who, after receiving a death sentence from  his  doctors, goes  into the  North to  find  a  vanished  businessman  and   ends   his life  ministering  to  a  band of  Indians threat­ ened  by famine and  accidie. It is a novel  worth rereading; the  passages  of action are excellently done   and   the   look  and   feel  of  the   mountain country of the  Yukon-British Columbia  border­ lands    are   well    evoked,   though    the    hero's thoughts and  motivations are  presented with  a rather Edwardian  ponderousness.
o.w.

G.W.

****   FERNAND OUELLET,  Economic  and  So­ cial  History  of Quebec, I760-I85o.     Carleton Library No. 120; Oxford, $12.95·     This is the first   translation  of   Ouellet's   Histoire   Econo­ mique    et   Sociale    du    Quebec,   I76o-185o: Structures et  Conjunctures, which  appeared  in
1966.  It established Ouellet as  a  major Cana-





THE CASE OF ROSS'S MYSTERIOUS BARN

WHEN DISCUSSING SINCLAIR ROSS' "One's a Heifer," most  readers  seem  drawn   to essentially  two  considerations: why  Vic­ kers would  not allow  the boy to look into the stall and  what  he kept there. Over  the years  one    popular   explanation  has emerged  to   the   exclusion   of  others - namely,  the  boy was denied  access to the stall  because  Vickers  kept  there  the  girl who  used  to  visit  him,  and  that  she was possibly  dead,   but   more  probably  con­ fined  as  a  prisoner. In  my  opinion  this explanation is  totally   unsatisfactory, for the very good reason  that  the whole story of the  girl is nothing more  than  a fiction in  Vickers'   mind.   I  see  no  grounds for believing  that  the  stall  contains  anything or for rejecting Vickers'  own explanation of  his  conduct:  "There's a  hole  in  the floor-that's why I kept the door closed. If you didn't know,  you might  step  into it -twist your  foot."
The clues  that   Vickers'  girl  is  purely imaginary may  be  found   in  both   what Vickers   tells  us  about the  girl  and   his behaviour  in  the  light   of  what   he  has said.  Our  suspicions  ought  to be aroused by the very first mention of the girl ("Last summer I  had  a  girl  cooking  for  a  few weeks, but  it didn't last.  Just  a  cow she was-just  a big  stupid   cow"), and,   if not,  then  certainly by the account of her performances at   the  checkerboard :   her inability  to make  decisions  ("I  had  to tell her  every  move  to make") , or  remember ("she'd forget  whether she was  black  or red") ,   or   even   speak    ("This  one ... couldn't even   talk   like  anybody   else"). What puts  the  issue beyond  doubt  is the

I68
 description  of  Vickers   playing   checkers with  himself:

Most   of  the   time   he  played  checkers with himself, moving his  lips,  muttering words  I couldn't hear, but  once   I woke  to  find  him staring fixedly  across   the  table as if he  had a  partner sitting there. His  hands were clenched in  front of  him,  there was a  sharp, metallic glitter in  his  eyes.  I lay  transfixed, unbreathing. His  eyes  as  I watched seemed to   dilate,  to   brighten,  to   harden  like   a bird's. For  a  long  time  he  sat  contracted, motionless, as if  gathering himself   to  strike, then furtively he  slid  his  hand an  inch   or two  along   the  table towards some  checkers that were  piled  beside   the  board. It was  as if  he  were   reaching for  a  weapon, as  if  his invisible partner were  an enemy. He clutched the  checkers, slipped  slowly  from   his  chair and straightened....
It  was    a   long    time ... then    suddenly wrenching  himself   to action he  hurled the checkers with   such   vicious   fury   that  they struck  the   wall   and   clattered  back   across the  room.

The change that  Vickers  undergoes, the impression he creates of playing  with  "an invisible   partner," someone   he  is  angry with,   the  final  description of  the  game, the consequent release  of tension-all of these  things  call  to  mind   what   Vickers has  previously  told  the  boy of his games with  the  girl,  in  particular that   "If she didn't win  she'd  upset  the  board  and  go off and  sulk." Significantly Vickers  would always sit rigidly before  the checkerboard, staring fixedly before  him, his eyes not on the door  but  the  window.  The reason  for this  is obvious: his  "visitor" never  came through the door  but  always "appeared" in the window,  and  when  she "appeared" was  unmoving: "night after   night  she'd be  sitting  there   where   you  are-right there  where  you  are,  looking  at  me,  not even trying  to play." Such odd behaviour, it is worth   pointing out,  does  not  escape the  boy.  After   the  game   has  been  dis­ rupted and  Vickers  has calmed down, the boy sums  up  the  episode  with  the  obser­ vation, "I relaxed  gradually,  telling  my­ self that  he'd  just been seeing things."

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Clearly   the   most  important cause  of these  "appearances" is the  extreme  lone­ liness of Vickers'  life. As Vickers  himself explains   in  one  revealing  passage,  "You don't  know   how   bad   it   is  sometimes. Weeks  on  end   and   no  one   to  talk  to. You're  not   yourself-you're 	not   sure what  you're  going to say or do."  Worst of all is apparently the summer ("it's worse even than  this in the summer. No time for meals -and  the  heat   and   flies") .  Evi­ dently  this is when  Vickers  feels loneliness the most;  by no coincidence, it is also the time  the  girl   has  "stayed"  the  longest. Significantly,  the   girl   disappears  when Vickers  goes to town  and has  social con­ tact: "I went  to  town  for  a  few days - and  when   I  came   back  she  was  gone."  Solitude, then, is a primary factor in Vic­ kers' condition; but  it is not the only one. Another would  seem to be Vickers'  belief in  the  need  for  a  feminine  presence  to handle the   domestic   work.   As  he  says, "You  get  careless   living  alone   like  this. It takes a woman." So strong  is this sense that  in the absence  of a woman he himself takes  on  a  feminine   role.  This  tendency comes  out   in  a  number  of  small  ways, most  notably  perhaps in  the  scene  where Vickers  is  helping  the   boy  dress   ("He [Vickers] held  my sheepskin for me while
I put  it on, and  tied  the  scarf  around the collar  with a solicitude and  determination equal  to  Aunt  Ellen's") ; its culmination of  course  is  the  girl's  "appearance"  for given  periods  of  time.  So  it  is, I  think, that  in  Vickers   we  may   find   a  rather sharp  portrait of a schizoid  personality, whose  duality is expressed  in  the  title  of the story  ("One's a Heifer") , which  itself is excerpted from  the  boy's description of the  calves  ("Yearlings ... red  with  white spots  and   faces.  The same   except   that one's a heifer and the other isn't"-my italics). There is a nice  symmetry to this
-this equation between  the calves and Vickers:  the  boy  does  not  find  the  two almost  identical calves  that  he is looking
 for, but in Vickers,  particularly when the "big stupid cow" of a girl appears, he happens  upon  a striking human parallel; and  in both  matters, identification of the calves and  analysis of Vickers'  behaviour, the  boy misinterprets what  he  sees by a wide margin.
!As I see  it,  the  business  of  the  barn, what  might  or  might  not  be there,  is not
only  unimportant but  is even an impedi­ ment   to  any   appreciation  of   what   the story-a study of illusion-is about.  In­ terest  in this  matter only arises when  the reader  is seduced   into  an  unwitting ac­ ceptance of the  values  and  opinions  of a narrator who believes in Vickers' guilt but whose  judgments  throughout are  unfor­  tunately  unreliable. For  such an  elemen­  tary critical  error  there  can  be no excuse. We are told  explicitly  that  the boy is only thirteen; we know  that  he  has  not  been away   from   home   all   night   before  and never visited these parts; we can see from his reactions  on the way to Vickers' place, as  his disappointment at  not  finding  the calves mounts and  his sense of alienation increases,   that   he  is  highly  impression­ able; and   what   is  more  important,  we cannot  escape  the  fact  that in  charging Vickers  with   theft   of   the   calves  he  is simply  wrong.  Given  this,  I  find  it  sur­ prising  that   any  reader would  entertain the  boy's suspicions  seriously.  Aunt  Ellen obviously knows better.

F. H. WHITMAN


JACOBITES IN CANADIAN LITERATURE

IN  HIS ARTICLE  "Angles   on  Saxons:  A Study of the Anglo-Saxon in Quebec Fic­ tion"  (journal of Canadian  Fiction, 25/
26),  Roman Hathorn counts  the charac­
ter  of Archibald de  Locheill  among   the

169

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Britishers  who,  in  numerous novels  pub­ lished since L'Influence d'un livre ( 1837), have become stock  types in French-Cana­ dian  novels. Although  Hathorn mentions  that   Arche   is  "a  chivalrous  and   duty­  bound  Scot," and  not  an Englishman, he does  not  sufficiently   underline  the  fact that de Locheill's very special background as a Jacobite provides him with  the  pre­ requisite  for  his acceptance in  the d'Ha­ berville  family.  Thus, Hathorn  confirms the  simplistic   notion   of  the   "two   soli­ tudes."  This  concept  has  contributed to overlooking significant  ethnic,   religious, and  linguistic   nuances  in  the  Canadian mosaic,   nuances  which  are   rarely   self­ explanatory in  isolation  and  can  appear in  numerous  combinations  with   others. One   such   characteristic,  e.g.,   religion, may  completely change the  chemistry  of a  given  group  of people  in  their  interac­ tion  with  another. As a result,  the  Glen­ garry  community in  Connor's  novel  ob­ jects  to  Yankee   Jim   less  because  he  is American than   because  he  is Methodist, and   Quebec  families  were  often   more willing  to let  their daughters marry  Irish officers  because  they,  too,  were  Roman Catholics.
Jacobites assumed   a  particularly  priv­ ileged  role  among the  groups  whose  be­ liefs  and  ethnic background  made  them akin  to  both  the  British  and  the  French. At  Culloden  in   1745,  the  followers   of Prince   Charles  Edward  had  suffered   a defeat  similar  to that  of the Quebecois on the  Plains  of Abraham, a parallel under­ lined  by the  fact  that  Murray  and  Wolfe were present at  both battles.  The Stuarts were  Roman  Catholics and,  having  been educated in France, spoke French, besides their  native  Gaelic.  Their linguistic  ver­ satility led to confusing encounters during the   Battle   on   the   Plains   of  Abraham where a group of Highlanders, taken  pris­ oner,  is reported to have  been frightened by  a  "gigantic French officer"  who  ad­ dressed  them  in Gaelic; "they  concluded

170
 that   his  Satanic  Majesty in  person   was before    them"   (John   Murray  Gibbon, Scots   in   Canada    [Toronto:    Musson,
19II], p.  78). Arche's status   in  Aubert de  Gaspe's  novel  is further  enhanced  by the  fact  that  he is the  descendant of one of "Bonnie Prince  Charlie's" most loyal followers,  namely Donald Cameron, the "gentle Lochiel" of Jacobite lore,  and  of Dr.  Archibald Cameron who  is the  sub­ ject   of  an   affecting  episode   in   which,  shortly  before  his execution, he  writes  a letter  to  his son advising him  "to service God,   honour King  James,  abstain  from late  and  heavy  suppers, and avoid  drink­ ing  and   whoring"  (John   Prebble,   Cul­ loden    [London:    Seeker   &    Warburg,
1 961 ] ) . The letter   remained  unfinished because   the  pencil   broke  and   there   was no knife  in Cameron's cell  to sharpen it. Thus, Aubert de Gaspe  has made consid­ erable efforts  to choose an "Anglo-Saxon" for   his  novel   who   is  acceptable  to  his French-Canadian hosts on many accounts, not  the  least  being  the  affectionate hu­  manness surrounding his family.
Arche  is the literary prototype of a Jacobite character who appears in a num­ ber of nineteenth-century and  early twen­  tieth-century historical novels in Canada. This  type is not only significant in helping us  to  correct the  theory  of  the  two  soli­ tudes,  but  also in  contributing to formu­ late a distinctive Canadian voice. A num­ ber of the novels to be considered in  this context   experiment  with   point-of-view techniques aimed   at  doing  justice  to  the multiple  loyalties   of  the   characters  in­ volved.  In  her  books The  Curious Career of Roderick  Campbell  ( 1901)  and  A Di­ ana of Quebec  (1912), Jean  Mcllwraith uses  the   perspectives  of  a  gruff  Scotch  soldier   and   of  a  worldly-wise  Scotsman respectively   to   relate    her    story.    Her  choices   allow   her   to   resensitize   issues which   had  already   become  set  descrip­ tions  and  attitudes in  the  historical  ro­ mance.  Captain  Mathews, for  instance,

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



can  be allowed to make  surprisingly criti­ cal remarks on the state  of the conquered city  of  Quebec, because  his  background allows  him  to  say,  "I  have  no  personal  feeling against the French whatsoever.... They  were  the  ancient  allies  of my fore­ bears,  and  stood  by us  in  our  wars  with England" (Diana, p. g). In  other  histori­  cal  romances of the  time,  Quebec City is romanticized and  frequently seen from  a glorifying  distance  (see Andre Duval,  Le Quebec  romantique   [Montreal:   Boreal,
I 978] ) , a  stereotype  contrasting sharply
-and   revealingly -with    the   disdain
generally  expressed  for  the French-Cana­ dians  living  in  it  (see,  for  example, The Man  from  Glengarry).  Descriptions  of Quebec  like  the  following  by  Mathews  were  generally  considered anathema  be­ cause their  realism  might  have confronted the  English  reader with  the  physical  and psychological   consequences  of  the  con­ quest  even  in  the  escapist   world  of  the romance: "We  ... were  making our  way up  Mountain Hill,  avoiding, as  far  as it might  be,  the  pitfalls of  ash  heaps,  soot, and  filth  of every  kind  which  the citizens had  deposited without their dwellings  de­ spite the most stringent orders  to the con­ trary.  Refuse  from  the Lower  Town  was to  be  placed    on   the   beach   in  certain  places  at  low  tide;  that  from  the  upper  Town   was  to  be  taken   through  Palace Gate  and deposited on  the shore  near  the Intendant's Palace" (Diana, pp.  7-8). Despite  Mathews' candidness, it would be exaggerated to call Mcllwraith a realist writer; later   on  in  the   novel,  after   the Captain has fallen  in love, his descriptions of   Quebec -and   other   scenery -be­ come  as  idealized   and   distantly  hazy  as those in contemporary  romances, so that  his  earlier  frankness  makes  more  of  a comment on  his own gloominess  than  on the  social  reality  of  Quebec.
Whereas Mathews' versatility is  delib­ erately  limited to a general sympathy with Quebecois, Mcllwraith   has   created  in
 Roderick   Campbell and   Hugh   Maxwell of Kirkconnel characters who exploit, to the  full,  the  adaptability of the Jacobite. Roderick, an  amiable turn-coat who  en­ ters symbioses with  every  imaginable fac­ tion  in the  Old   World  and  the  New  (in The Curious  Career  of  Roderick  Camp­ bell), for   the   love  of   life  and   of   his nephew  Gilbert, is a  wanderer by neces­ sity  as  well  as  by  choice: a  true   picaro. Kirkconnel in The Span  o'Life, however,  is  a  professional  soldier   who  suppresses personal  emotions for the sake of politics. Mcllwraith co--authored  The Spano' Life with  William  McLennan  who,  one  may assume, wrote  the first part, "Maxwell's Story," while  Mcllwraith contributed "Margaret's Story." The  dryness of  Max­ well's  narrative  is  offset  by  "feminine" emphasis  on  descriptive  detail  and   con­ ventional   responses  to natural scenery  in the   second   part.   The   bridge   between  Maxwell's  and  Margaret's perspectives is provided   by  the  presence   of  M.  de  Sa­  rennes,  whom   both   characters   initially despise  as  a  "well-bred Canadian."  Sa­  rennes  takes  revenge  by  ridiculing their ignorance of  the  Canadian  landscape.
Kirkconnel is modelled  on  the  histori­ cal Chevalier de Johnstone whose fiction­ alization   in   Mcllwraith's   and   McLen­ nan's  novel  may  be  regarded as  the  cli­ max  of Canadian  literary and  historical interest   in  him.  The   vicissitudes  of  the Canadian   research  conducted   on   him during the  nineteenth century and  early twentieth   century  again   illustrates  the  fact   that   the   Jacobites  belong   to   the worlds   of    both    the   English    and    the French. In  Johnstone's first  appearance in Canadian literature that  two-facedness is  translated into metaphorical terms. In Richardson's W acousta,  Leslie  is  teased by his fellow soldiers  because  his ancestor was a  "traitor to  England." As a  conse­ quence,   Leslie   distinguishes  himself   re­ peatedly   through  outstanding valour, in an attempt to compensate for Johnstone's


171

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



and,  within  the  framework of  the  novel, for Wacousta's unethical behaviour. Wa­ cousta's  life story  is modelled  on  that  of the Chevalier de Johnstone who took part  in the  '45, fled to France, and  joined  the French on  the  Plains  of  Abraham. Wa­ cousta's  motivation is blind  revenge,  Les­ lie's the  pursuit of  his family's  rehabilita­ tion  in the esteem of the English.  Among  the  many  problems attending  the  New Canadian Library edition  of W acousta is the  fact  that   this  carefully  planned bal­ ance  between  revenge  and  rehabilitation has  been destroyed through eliminating episodes concerning Leslie Johnstone. Richardson must  have  been familiar with one of the first English editions of the Chevalier's Memoirs  of the  Rebellion  in
1745 and 1746 which were published  in London in 1821 and  1822; the Historical and  Literary Society  of Quebec only printed excerpts in  1866 and  1887. For
years,  Johnstone, in  a typically  Jacobite fashion   as  we  have   seen,  confused   his­ torians  with  respect  to his mother-tongue. James LeMoine, who wrote the introduc­ tory  notes   to  both   the  1866  and   1887 editions,  commented on Johnstone's Eng­ lish as  "not  remarkable for  orthography or purity  of diction; either  Johnstone had forgotten or had  never  thoroughly known the  language"  (Literary  and   Historical Society    of   Quebec,   "A   Dialogue   in Hades: A Parallel of Military  Errors, of which   the   French  and   English   Armies were guilty during the Campaign of 1759, in Canada," in: Manuscripts  Relating to the  Early  History  of Canada  [Quebec:
1868]). Only   in  1915  did   the  Society publish  the  Memoires  de M. le Chev.  de Johnstone  in  the  original   French, after P. B. Casgrain, one  of  the  ex-Presidents of  the  Society,  had   located   the  Journal in  the  original. The confusion  over,  and the continued interest  in, Johnstone's life (see the  Dictionary  of Canadian  Biogra­ phy, vol. 4,  [Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press, 1979])   as well as Johnstone's own
 analysis of the campaigns at Culloden and the Plains of Abraham, made  him a valu­ able  historical source  for both  the French and  the  English,  and  a  medium  for  non­  chauvinist historical fiction  trying  to for­  mulate the  multiple  human  perspectives necessary  in  approximating the  historical truth.1

NOTE

1 Although there  appears  to  be  no  novel   of the   quality of  Mcllwraith's  describing the fate of  the  Jacobites who  became United Empire  Loyalists,  a   similar  case   can    be made  for   them.   Whereas  the    arrival  of Prince Charlie in Nova  Scotia is only  wistful legend (narrated  in  Percy   E.  Hart,  Jason­ Nova  Scotia:   Founded  upon   a   Romantic Legend of My  Native Land  [N.Y.:  Bibelot,
1903]),  Flora MacDonald did  emigrate to
North Carolina where she and her  family became strongly involved in  the  struggle of the  Loyalists; on  her  return to Scotland, she briefly  stayed in  Halifax. The loyalty of  the Jacobites to a monarchy responsible for  their expulsion from Scotland puzzled  their Amer­ ican compatriates; yet, as Morven in Robert Sellar's novel  Morven  ( 1 91 1 )   explains, re­ venge  on  the  French who  had  deserted the Scots   in  their hour of  need  was sweet, be­ sides  the  fact   that any  monarchy appeared more  legal   than the  democracy the  revolu­ tionaries proposed  to establish in  America. Again,  the   actions   of   the   Jacobites  defy facile  explanations.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER


QUATRE VERSIONS D'UNE LEGENDE CANADIENNE

LE 16 AVRIL  1542, Jean Laroque de  Ro­ berval  quitte le  port  de  La  Rochelle en France en route pour  le Canada avec trois navires  et  Ia commission du  roi Franc;ois
I de fonder une  colonie  franc;aise dans le Nouveau  l\1onde.   Pour   des   raisons  de politique europeenne Ia colonie sera "tres  catholique" et  aura le  but  ostensible de

OPINIONS AND NOTES



porter Ia foi chretienne aux sauvages. Jacques Cartier, qui  avait  deja  fait  deux voyages au Canada, participe a cette mis­ sion a titre  de navigateur.1
A cause des delais dans  les preparations de   Roberval,  Cartier   avait    quitte   Ia France avec  cinq  navires  un  an  plus  tot que  Roberval, le chef officiel de !'expedi­ tion. Quand Roberval arrive a saint-Jean, Terre-Neuve, au  mois  de  juin  I542  il y rencontre Cartier  par  hasard. En  depit  des ordres  directs de Roberval de retour­ ner avec lui au pays d'Hochelaga, Cartier, qui   avait   deja  decide   d'abandonner  Ia tentative de  coloniser   le  nouveau   pays, quitte  Saint-Jean  a  couvert  de  Ia  nuit  pour   rentrer  en   France  avec   ce   qu'il croyait etre  de  l'or  et des diamants du Nouveau Monde. Roberval continue son voyage  par  le detroit de Belle  Isle, et ar­
rive   a Charlesbourg-Royal, maintenant
Cap  Rouge, ou Cartier avait  passe l'hiver
de   I54I-42· A  son  tour   Roberval  aussi passe  un  hiver  miserable et  l'ete  suivant il abandonne sa mission de fonder  une colonie  fran<;aise. Toute Ia colonie  rentre en  France en  I543  avec  les navires  ravi­ tailleurs. C'est-a-dire, toute  Ia colonie  est rentree, a  !'exception  bien  entendu  des gens  morts   au  cours  de  l'aventure et  a
!'exception d'une dame  exilee sur  une ile
deserte  par  Roberval.
Le  recit  de  cet  exil  a  vite  suscite  de
!'interet en France ou Ia premiere version
publiee  etait  celle  de  Marguerite de  Na­ varre,    dans   l'Heptameron   imprime   en I558, quinze  ans seulement apres le retour de  Roberval.2 La composition de  Ia nou­  velle soixante-sept de l'Heptameron a dil suivre de  pres  le retour de  Roberval, en I543· Marguerite de  Navarre avait  com­ mence  Ia redaction des nouvelles  pour son Heptameron vers  I540 et  n'avait pas ter­ mine  Ia composition de  ce que  l'on  sup­ pose  aurait ete  un  recueil  de  cent  nou­ velles  avant sa  mort   en  decembre  I549· D'autres versions  de  Ia  legende  de  Ia dame exilee par Roberval ont  tres vite ete
 cl'eees, et  chaque siecle  depuis  !'incident nous a foumi plusieurs  nouvelles creations litteraires basees sur  Ia legende.3   Les  his­ toriens aussi font  souvent allusion  a l'exil de  Marguerite de  Roberval, tout  en  sig­ nalant Ia qualite legendaire du  recit.4
Quels   sont   les  elements  de   base  du recit, consacres par Ia legende? Selon Ia tradition, parmi les colons de Roberval se trouvait une jeune dame, Marguerite de Roberval   ou  de   Nontron,  qui   etait   sa soeur  ou  sa  niece.  Quand Roberval  de­ couvre  Marguerite en flagrant delit  avec un  jeune  artisan pendant  le  voyage  au Canada, il decide  d'exiler  Ia  jeune  dame  et son ancienne nourrice sur l'ile  des De­ mons. L'action de Roberval serait inspiree  a  Ia fois par  sa  jalousie  et  par  son  desir de prendre possession lui-meme des terri­  toires  considerables  de  Marguerite. L'a­ mant  de Marguerite se sauve  du navire  a Ia  demiere minute et  rejoint Marguerite et sa nourrice sur l'ile.
Les exiles s'adaptent tant  bien que  mal a  leur   nouvelle   vie,  mais   ils  sont   mal prepares  pour  l'hiver. En efiet,  le mari  et
!'enfant que  Marguerite a mis au  monde trouvent   Ia mort  pendant le premier  hi­ ver;  le mari  dans  un  accident de  chasse,
!'enfant apres   seulement  quelques   jours de  vie. La  servante meurt aussi au  com­ mencement du  deuxieme hiver  de  l'exil, mais  Marguerite  continue  a  vivre  seule sur l'ile  jusqu'a ce qu'elle soit sauvee  par des   pecheurs  bretons,   vingt-neuf    mois apres  le commencement  de  son exil.  Les pecheurs  bretons  ont  eu de  Ia difficule  reconnaitre Ia  forme  humaine dans  cet etre  sauvage   qui  les  interpellait de  l'ile des  Demons.  Marguerite quitte l'ile  un peu ,a regret, car  elle y a enterre tant  de ses proches.
Le  developpement  de   Ia  legende   est trop  complique pour  examiner en  detail ici;  il suffira  de  remarquer que  les  pre­
miers  a raconter !'incident ont  dit  avoir
connu  Roberval et  Marguerite.5  Ce con­
tact   personnel   entre   les  ecrivains   et  les

173

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



principaux du   recit   etait   bien  possible, meme  probable, et cela suggere l'authen­ ticite  de  l'incident, malgre quelques  con­ tradictions dans  les  details  trouvees  dans les  premieres  versions.  Mais  la  question  complexe de la part  exacte  de  verite  his­
torique  est  secondaire, finalement,  a  la
consideration  de  l'attrait  persistant que
cette  legende  a exerce  sur les ecrivains  et les historiens. A cette  fin nous  proposons ici une  comparaison de trois versions ca­ nadiennes contemporaines et  de  la  pre­ miere   version   publiee   pour   demontrer quelques aspects  de  cet  attrait, et  pour signaler   des  contrastes  frappants visibles dans  les versions  comparees.
L'emission televisee  en decembre I 979 de "Marooned in the Land  God  Gave  to
Cain" au reseau anglais de Radio-Canada nous a donne  la version  la  plus  recente.6
Le film, tourne par Barry Pearson et Peter Rowe  en  1979, exploite  assez bien  les  as­ pects  les  plus  evidents   de  cette  legende,  car  le  recit  incorpore  admirablement le theme  de la  confrontation avec l'inconnu dans le Nouveau Monde. L'accent est mis sur Marguerite, qui dans cette version, est accompagnee seulement par  son  amant. Le  contraste  est  developpe  entre   Mar­
guerite  qui  s'adapte  physiquement a la
terre  et  Franc;ois  qui  passe son  temps  a
compter les jours et  a guetter  le bord  de
la  mer  pour  un  vaisseau  qui  les sauvera.
Pendant que  Marguerite herborise   pour des plantes comestibles,  fait  de la chasse, construit la  cabane, et  se fait  des  vete­ ments avec des peaux d'animaux, Franc;ois construit  une   croix   et   une   tour  pour mieux signaler les navires, et se scandalise  du comportement sauvage  de Marguerite. Presque   inevitablement  Franc;ois est  tue
par  accident dans  le piege  a ours,  car  il
est reste  prisonnier de sa mentalite  euro­
peenne.
L'echec final de Franc;ois est predit par l'echec de  sa  premiere tentative de  con­ tacter   des   pecheurs.  Quand  il   voit  les pecheurs, Franc;ois insiste que Marguerite

174
 s'habille correctement dans  sa robe avant d'aborder le bateau, et  dans  leur  hate  et leur  maladresse d'habiller Marguerite sur la plage  ils font  peur  aux  pecheurs qui les croient  des   demons.   S'ils   avaient  ete moins  soucieux   de  respecter les  conven­ tions   sociales,   ils  auraient  attrape  sans doute le  bateau. Ce  n'est  que  deux  ans plus  tard   que   Marguerite  verra   encore  un  bateau. Cette fois l'action est l'oppose  de  la  premiere  rencontre:  Marguerite a nie son identite europeenne et se promene deguisee  en  animal. Quand les pecheurs se sauvent  de  ce demon, Marguerite  re­
vient   a elle  et  commence a  prier   et  a
pleurer.  Les   hommes  reconnaissent  les
mots de la priere  et voient finalement la femme  et  non  pas le demon.
"Marooned in  the  Land  God  Gave  to Cain," cree  pour   le  grand   public,  con­ tinue,  done,  la  tradition litteraire  popu­  laire  commencee par  Franc;ois  de  Belle­ forest et Andre  Thevet au seizieme siecle.7
Le  contexte historique sert  de  cadre   au developpement d'un  drame  de  la  con­ frontation de  l'inconnu,  un  drame  d'a­ ventures physiques  et  psychologiques.
Tout  autre  est   le   soixante-septieme conte  de l'Heptameron ou !'accent est mis sur la foi chretienne de la femme. Quand son mari  est condamne de trahison par  le capitaine, la  femme   propose  que  Rober­
val  les exile au  lieu  de donner la  mort  a
son mari.  Dans  leur  exil la femme  lit  in­
cessamment le Nouveau Testament, tout en  aidant son  mari  a construire un  logis et a les defendre des betes sauvages.  Elle sert  de  medecin et  de  confesseur a son rnari  qui  meurt a cause  des "eaues qu'ilz
buvoient."8 Apres la mort  de son mari elle continue sa  vie  "bestiale" de  corps  mais "angelique"  d'esprit,  et   elle   passe  son temps  "en  lectures, contemplations,  prie­ res et  oraisons." Pour recompenser  la foi et  la  vertu  de  cette  dame, Dieu  fait  que les navires de Roberval repassent par cette ile   pendant  leur   voyage   de   retour  en France.

OPINIONS AND NOTES



La   cntlque  a   gem!ralement  accepte cette nouvelle comme  un eloge sans ironic de la vertu  feminine et de la puissance  de Dieu. Dans la discussion du recit par les conteurs  de   l'Heptameron,  Simontault, un  personnage militaire et  misogyne  qui a offert  cette  nouvelle  comme preuve  de sa bonne  foi envers  la femme, insiste que l'incident est  un  exemple frappant de  la vertu  de la femme.  Longarine renforce  la louange de l'amour de la femme pour son
mari  et de sa foi en Dieu.  Mais  a un autre
niveau,   Marguerite de  Navarre critique
obliquement le comportement de  Rober­ val   dans    l'incident,  car   elle   rend    la femme    exilee   complt  tement   innocente d'un   amour  coupable  et   la   dote   d'un  amour noble et chretien. Dans le contexte plus  grand   des  autres  nouvelles,  Simon­  tault  se montre un homme qui approuve­ rait   vite  les  actions de  Roberval  envers
une  femme   infidele   a  son  maitre,  mais
ironiquement  dans   cette   nouvelle   c'est
Simontault qui  loue les vertus et la foi de l'exilee.  Par  cette   technique  Marguerite de Navarre a renverse,  pour  ainsi dire,  le contenu anecdotique de l'incident que Roberval lui-meme lui  a  sans  doute  ra­ conte.9 La ou Roberval a vu une trahison personnelle par  une femme entetee, Mar­  guerite    de   Navarre    nous   donne    une louange de vertu  et les signes irrefutables de la  benediction  divine de cette  femme.
L'accent inattendu sur  la  religion  que l'on  trouve  dans  la version  de Marguerite de   Navarre  se  retrouve  aussi   dans   la version  contemporaine de George  Wood­ cock,  ou  la  religion  est  peut-etre  encore moins  attendue. The  Island   of Demons,  une  piece  de  theatre  en  vers  libres,  pu­ bliee en  1977, presente le drame dans  un cadre  retrospectif car  l'action commence avec  le  voyage  de  retour en  1545.10  Le dramaturge  developpe  brievement  }'in­ trigue amoureuse et les raisons  pour l'exil, en  se  servant  d'elements   traditionnels: l'intrigue   amoureuse  du   jeune    couple  precede le voyage,  et la colere  de Rober-
 val  est inspiree   par  la  pauvrete du  pre­ tendant ainsi  que  par  le projet secret des amants.  Mais  l'exil propose  par Roberval  devient  ici  une  punition  poetique de  la revolte des  jeunes  gens:  "You  and  your
lover  planned  to  run   away   I Into  the green shades of the wilderness.  I There is
your  wilderness-that demon's island." Robervalleur promet tout  ce dont  ils au­ ront   besoin  physiquement,  mais  il  leur rappelle  l'absence de  civilisation:  "Food
of  the flesh you  shall  not  want  I But  in
the spirit  you may  starve." Avant  tout  il
evoque l'absence de l'Eglise dans leur paradis   pour  confirmer leur  mariage, la naissance   de  leur   enfant, et  leur   mort
eventuelle. Et  finalement a leur  idee  de
paradis,  il oppose  l'idee  de  regret: "And if  no  visible  demons rend  your  peace   I
Do not forget  the demon  named  Regret." Les demons  du  titre  de  la piece seront done  des forces interieures qui demontre­ ront  la folie de cette  tentative de trouver  le  paradis  dans  le  Nouveau Monde. Les pulsions interieures a l'homme, le Doute, le Desaccord, et le Regret, sont presentees  comme  des  personnages allegoriques qui vont  presider  au  deroulement de l'action
et  a la  destruction du  reve  de  paradis:
"Doubt, Discord, Regret-thought,  ac­
tion, consequence! I We always  work  to­
gether,   a  trinity   of  negation." Le  recit
sert, dans cette  perspective, d'allegorie de la  condition humaine:  "Any  island  I Is an  Island  of Demons, and  any  mind,  for
that  matter. I We are  not  always  active. Long we lie latent; I A moment's impulse
calls  us back  to life."
Ce sont le Desaccord et le Doute qui commentent  la  mort   de  Michel,   et  de l'enfant premature. Leur  presence  ala fin de cette scene souligne  leur presence  aussi dans  l'action de  Ia  piece,  ou  Marguerite et Michel  se sont  querelles au  sujet  de la chasse et de leur  exil volontaire.
Le Regret  est plus important, bien sur, apres la mort du mari et de l'enfant. Marguerite avoue  amerement: "Better a

175

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



lifetime   as  my  uncle's prisoner   I Than the grim  joys that  liberty has brought!" Marguerite accepte la  perspective   chn ­ tienne   de  Marie et  de  Roberval  sur  le monde   physique: "We   thought the  wil­
derness  would  be  an  Eden.   I If it's  an
Eden,   then   the  Fall  came  first.  I Lend
me your  cross,  Marie."
Le  vrai  debat est  entame avec  les  de­ mons apres  la mort  de Marie. Marguerite confronte ouvertement le doute qu'elle  ne sera   jamais    sauvee,   ses   sentiments  de haine  envers  Marie,  Michel,  et  Roberval causes  par  des  desaccords passes, et  elle
s'adresse  a ses regrets  de ne  plus  voir  le
pays de son enfance. Ces trois demons  de
Doute,  Desaccord et  Regret  la supplient de maudire Dieu,  mais Marguerite est sauvee    par    !'apparition  divine    de   la Vierge  Marie: "I am  Marie,  but another
Marie also. I I rise from within  you. Your
own  cries called  me forth,  I And  in  that instant  when   you  denied   denial   I You
forged  your  freedom. Demons  and  pro­ tectors  I Alike are  bred within  the human hearts, I And  man  in his own  will makes under  Heaven I His  free way  to destruc­ tion  or  to glory.  I Look  to  the sea. Mar­
guerite:   The ship  sails  in  from  the  east like  a  great   white   bird   I And   all  the
voices of the  island  are  silent."
A l'encontre du  film "Marooned in the
Land God  Gave  to Cain," The   Island  of Demons   s'oriente vers !'abstraction d'un debat  intellectuel. Le  refuge   de  la  foi chretienne est  oppose  au  chaos  des  rela­ tions humaines: libere  des entraves de  la civilisation l'homme se trouve menace par des  forces  interieures qui  risquent   de  le detruire. La  quete d'un  paradis terrestre  que   l'on   voit  dans  la  legende  de  Mar­ guerite de  Roberval  sert,  dans  cette  re­
creation  par  George   Woodcock,  a nous
rappeler que  la  nature  humaine rendra
toujours ce  paradis terrestre   difficile,  si non impossible.
Par  une coincidence interessante, Anne
Hebert ecrit   une  deuxieme version  dra-
 matique  de  la  legende   en   I977-I978.11
Tout comme  le titre  de la piece de George
Woodcock indique bien sa preoccupation avec   les  demons,  le  titre   de   la   piece d'Anne Hebert nous revele son noyau central: L'ile  de la demoiselle  se concen­ tre sur  une  etude de la femme.
L'action  de  la   piece  se  divise  'egale­ ment  entre le voyage  et l'exil. Pendant le voyage  !'auteur nous  presente  des  exem­  ples du  comportement  feminin  tradition­ nel  dans   un   monde  ou  l'homme, dans la  personne du  capitaine  Roberval, est "maitre  apres  Dieu." La  femme   seduc­  trice se presente dans  la dame  de qualite: cette  femme  bigame  fuit  la  France pour eviter   la   situation  facheuse    creee   par l'existance de ses trois maris  bien vivants. Mais   des  le  commencement  du  voyage elle  essaie  de  seduire Roberval pour  s'e­
tablir   au   Canada. Tout  en  signalant  a
Marguerite que  Roberval est sa chasse gardee a elle,  la  dame de  qualite  rend
Marguerite sensible aussi aux  pouvoirs  de
!'attraction sexuelle  que  la  jeune  femme exerce  inconsciemment  sur   tous    les
hommes a bord  le navire. Tout est permis
en  amour, et  pour   se  debarasser  de  sa
jeune  rivale  pour  les attentions de Rober­ val, la dame  de qualite accuse Marguerite de sorcellerie. Bien pratiquee dans  les arts feminins, la dame  de qualite sait bien que
!'accusation  de   sorcellerie    est   un   des
moyens les plus efficaces de se servir  de la beaute d'une rivale  pour  la  detruire.
Le   piege   de  la   dame   de   qualite  ne reussit  pas, cependant, car  la servante de Marguerite est  aussi  pratiquee dans   les arts  feminins et elle a su exploiter I'amour ressenti par Roberval pour sa niece afin d'obtenir des faveurs du  capitaine. C'est son  amour pour   Marguerite qui  pousse
Roberval a ne  pas  croire  !'accusation de
sorcellerie, et a pardonner a sa  niece  son amour pour  Nicolas  si elle  vient  mourir
avec  lui  dans  le naufrage qui  les menace.
Au  milieu   de  tous  ces  courants  senti­
mentaux, la  jeune  Marguerite reste  eton-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



namment naive et innocente. Elle croit toujours au  but  ostensible  du  voyage  de fonder la colonie  tres catholique. Elle re­ pond  franchement aux  avances physiques du   jeune    homme   sympathique   qu'elle
rencontre ,a bord  le  navire, et  lui  donne
son  coeur   sans   arriere  pensee.   Et   elle avoue  cet amour a son oncle  sans se ren­
dre  compte des consequences de cette insulte  a son  rang  et  a son  amour pour
elle.
Mais  avant tout   Marguerite est  rem­
plie d'un  desir de vivre. Face  a !'invitation
de  mourir de  son  oncle,  elle  dit  simple­
ment   qu'elle  doit   vivre:  "Helas,  M.  le
Commandant, j'ai grande pitie de vous, mais  je ne suis  pas  libre  de  mourir  avec vous.  II  faut   que   je vive  avec  Nicolas." Des  trois  exiles,  il  y  a  seulement   Mar­ guerite  qui   refuse   d'accepter   la   mort malgre la  difficulte  de  sa vie. Elle se re­
volte  a la suggestion  de  Charlotte que  la
mort  de son enfant est la volonte  de Dieu,
car  elle  ne  veut  pas  que  son  fils soit  un ange  au  paradis, elle veut  qu'il  vive avec elle  sur   terre.   Elle   demande  justice  et reparation et   jure  de  vaincre  le  grand oiseau  noir  de  la  mort.   Pendant  son  hi­ bernation solitaire dans  la grotte  elle lutte pour    vivre    en   confrontant,   dans   des songes, toute sa formation europeenne de jeune  fille  bien   eduquee.  En   depit   des principes  de   gentillesse   et   de   passivite feminines,  enonces  par  la  voix  d'une  re­
ligieuse,   Marguerite  passe  a !'action et
enduit son  corps  de  graisse  pour  se  pro­
teger  du  froid,  et  songe  a tuer  Roberval
pendant  qu'elle  dessine  !'image   de  son
oncle meurtri sur le mur  de la grotte.  Elle accepte  de devenir quelque chose de  pri­ mitif  afin  de  vivre: "Je  ne suis  plus  une femme,  ni rien  de convenable. Ce que  je suis devenue   n'a  pas  de  nom  en  aucune langue  connue."
Cet  etre  primitif  effraie  les pecheurs  au premier contact, mais  les Bretons reussis­
sent  a reconnaltre une  femme dans  cette
apparition sur  la  plage.  En  l'honneur de
 cette  femme  qui a gagne  une  victoire  sur le monde  inhabitable de l'ile des Demons, ils  renomment l'endroit  "l'ile   de  la  De­ moiselle." Un  dernier signe de sa victoire  se trouve  dans  la  nouvelle  de  l'assassinat de   Roberval   que   Marguerite   accepte comme  un  signe  que la  justice  qu'elle   a tant voulue lui a ete accordee mysterieuse­ ment.
Les trois versions  canadiennes contem­
poraines de la legende  sont une preuve  de
!'interet toujours vif inspire  par !'incident obscur du seizieme siecle. Mais au lieu de developper le drame de !'intrigue  amou­ reuse et familiale, ces recreations moder­ nes se concentrent sur d'autres aspects  du recit.  Le  film  de  Barry  Pearson  exploite,
a un  niveau   populaire,  le  theme   de  la
confrontation du  pays et  de !'adaptation
par  la  femme seulement, pour  suggerer un  certain feminisme   dans  son  interpre­ tation.   Nous  avons  vu  des  elements   de feminisme   aussi  dans !'interpretation re­ ligieuse de  Marguerite de  Navarre, mais c'est  Anne  Hebert qui  exploite  d'une fa­ (_;On plus detaillee ce theme  de feminisme. Cela  se  voit  dans  la  division  de  la  piece entre  une  description des comportements traditionnels de la femme  dans  la societe europeenne, et la creation d'une nouvelle maniere  d'etre femme  dans  la  deuxieme partie   de  la   piece.  Cette   image   de   la femme  victorieuse fait  partie   integrante de !'oeuvre d'Anne Hebert, car Marguer­ ite  fait  echo  lointain aux  T ombeaux des Rois.  Mais   bien  que   les  interpretations d'Anne Hebert  et  de  Barry  Pearson   se
placent tout  a fait  dans  les courants con­
temporains  de   feminisme,  le   conserva­
tisme de !'interpretation de George Wood­
cock,  ou  !'accent est  sur  un  debat  phi­ losophique,  me  semble,   par  contre,   un phenomene plus inattendu.

NOTES

Une   version   plus   courte  de   cet   article etait presentee le  24 mai  1981 aux  11eunions de l'Association   des   Litreratures canadiennes et

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



quebecoise  pendant   le   congres  des   Socieres savantes a Dalhousie  University.
1 Voir   Marcel Trudel,  Histoire  de  la  Nou­
velle-France I. Les Vaines  Tentatives. 1524-
1603   (Montreal: Fides,  1963), pp.  124-75 pour de  plus  amples details.
2   Cf.  Marguerite de  Navarre,  L'Heptameron,
ed.  Michel Fran ois
pp.   392-95.  Les   premieres editions datent de  1558  et  1559·  La  version  de  Marguerite de  Navarre est  restee dans  l'oubli jusqu'a la mention   par    l'historien   canadien   Henry
Harrisse, dans  Notes  pour servir a l'histoire,
a la bibliographie  et a la cartographic  de la
Nouvelle-France   (Paris:  Tros,  1872), pp.
278-79. Cf.  Stabler, p. 5·
s Voir  Arthur P.  Stabler, The  Legend  of Marguerite de Roberval  ([Pullman]: Wash­ ington State  Univ.,  1972). Stabler  etudie
le developpement de cette legende a travers
les siecles.  La  premiere version canadienne,
selon  Stabler, est  celle  de George Martin, le poeme  Marguerite or the Isle of Demons (Montreal: n.p.,  1887), suivie  de  pres  par la  piece  de  John Hunter-Duvar, De  Rober­
val,  a  Drama   (Saint John:  J. &  A.  Mc­
Millan,  1888),  et   le  roman historique de
Thomas G.  Marquis, Marguerite  de  Rober­
val  (Toronto and   London: T. F.  Unwin,
1899).  Robert  LaRoque  de   Roquebrune s'est   interesse aussi  a l'histoire, et  a  publie
des  articles dans  le  Dictionnaire  de  Biogra­ phie  canadienne   I  Dictionary  of  Canadian  Biography; voir  sous  "Marguerite de Rober­ val" et  "Jean LaRoque de Roberval."

4   Voir  Stabler, pp.  64-78; Trudel, p. 155;  et Robert Lacour-Gayet, Histoire  du Canada (Paris: Fayard, 1966), p. 48.  Les  historiens modernes preferent tantot celle  de Thevet.
5   Marguerite de   Navarre  connaissait  Rober­
val   a la  cour de  son  frere. Andre Thevet
pretendait avoir   visite  Marguerite de  Non­
tron apres !'incident, et  se disait un  intime de  Roberval. (Voir Stabler, pp.  12, 38.)
6   Barry  Pearson, "Marooned in the Land God Gave    to   Cain,"  30",  couleur;  directeur: Peter Rowe, Rosebud Films,  Toronto, 1979· Emission, CBC-TV,  le  28  decembre  1979, dans la serie  "The Spirit of Adventure." Je remercie Barry  Pearson et  Peter Rowe  de  la copie du  scenario qu'ils m'ont empruntee.
1   V:oir  Fran ois
glques, 5  (Paris: Hulpeau, 1570,  2• edition
1572),  et  Andre  Thevet,  Cosmographic
Universelle   (Paris:  P.  l'Huillier, et  Paris:

q8
 G. Chaudiere, 1575), et !a  discussion de ces auteurs dans Stabler.
s  Tales  from the  Heptameron, ed.  H.  P. Clive
(London:  Univ. of London, Athlone Press,
1970), p.  156.   Toutes  les  citations  seront de  cette edition.
9  Nicole   Cazauran remarque sur  le  contraste entre la  version de  Marguerite et  celles  de ses contemporains: "A  comparer ce conte devot, si austere de  style  comme de  schema, aux  autres versions du  XVIe siikle on  peut voir  combien Marguerite de  Navarre s'est detournee du   romanesque qui  s'offrait, qui s'imposait presque, pour une  telle  aventure." L'Heptamhon de Marguerite de Navarre (Paris:  Societe d'edition d'enseignement superieur, 1976), p. 189.
1o   George Woodcock, Two Plays: The   Island of Demons;  Six  Dry  Cakes  for the  Hunted (Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1977), pp.  9-55.
11  "L'ile de    !a  demoiselle"  ( texte    original
1977-1978), Les Ecrits  du Canada  fran,ais,
42  (1979), 9-92-
D.  W. RUSSELL


liLA DAME" DE ROCH  CARRIER

LA  DAME QUI  AVAIT DES  CHAINES  AUX CHEVILLES est le huitieme roman de Roch Carrier.1 Il est alors  naturel d'y retrouver des  themes   que   l'auteur  a  deja   traites dans   ses  oeuvres   anterieures.  On   n'est ainsi  pas  surpris de  voir  les militaires et les religieux ridiculises comme  dans  La Guerre,  Yes  Sir!2     On   est  encore   moins surpris  de  retrouver la veine  sumaturelle
-pour ne   pas   dire   fantastique-qui avait  deja  ete  amplement exploitee dans Les Fleurs vivent-elles  ailleurs que sur la terre3   et  dans  Jolis deuils!  Violence  ex­ treme,  amour bestial,  religion impitoyable et  croyances  ridicules:  les  elements  du drame Carrierien sont  bien  reunis  ici en
une synthese  a la fois moins rabelaisienne
que  Le Guerre, Yes Sir! et moins delicate
que  La Celeste Bicyclette.5
Mais au fond  ce qui distingue ce roman
des  oeuvres  anterieures c'est  sa forme  et

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



j'entends par  la simplement le style et la structure narrative.
tAu niveau   stylistique  le  lecteur   peut etre facilement decourage par !'accumula­ tion des lieux  communs et des repetitions, meme  si les  uns  et  les  autres doivent  re­ presenter les tatonnements de personnages  plutot  simples d'esprit. U n  exemple  suf­ fira  a  illustrer ce  point:  "Virginie tu  es triste  comme   si  c'etait  l'automne, mais c'est   betot   le  printemps." Cette   phrase revient trop souvent et le seul effet qu'elle puisse  produire sur  le lecteur c'est la  las­ situde.  II me semble  que !'iteration  stylis­ tique   n'avait ete  avant La  Dame  qu'un peche  veniel  chez  Roch  Carrier.
La  structure narrative ne suit pas l'or­
dre   chronologique des  evenements  evo­ ques  et  permet au  lecteur de  s'accrocher au   recit.   Tenant  a  la  fois  du  discours mythique, de  l'occulte, de  l'enigme poli­ ciere   et   du   nouveau-roman,  La   Dame constitue un effort  plus que  louable  en ce qui   concerne   la   grammaire  narrative. Ainsi les cent  premieres pages contiennent de  nombreuses allusions  au  "grand  mal­ heur" mais  la  nature de ce  dernier  n'est que progressivement revelee  pour etre en­ fin completement devoilee  a la page  108: "Cet  horrnne, dit-elle,   a  tue  mon  en­ fant."
Cependant  la  structure  narrative  de La  Dame   merite une  attention  particu­ liere car  elle est constituee de deux  recits et  des  nombreuses relations  que  !'auteur etablit entre ces derniers.
II y a tout  d'abord le recit de La Dame. II s'agit d'une legende  que I'on raconte  au Pays de Quebec. Dans  le Vieux  Pays une Dame tue  son  mari  pour  se venger  de la mort   de  son  enfant  dont   elle  rend   cet homme responsable. Apres  un  long  em­ prisonnement  La  Dame  saisit  !'occasion de recommencer sa vie. Elle monte  sur un voilier  qui  la  conduira au  Pays  de  Que­ bec.
til  y  a   ensuite  le  recit   de   Virginie:
l'heureuse epouse de Victor, jusqu'au jour
 du  "grand  malheur."  Par   une   nuit   de tempete Victor perd le hebe dans la neige. A partir de  ce  moment-Ia Virginie  s'en­ ferme   dans   un   douloureaux   silence   et medite  sa  vengeance. Un  beau  jour  elle finit par empoisonner Victor pour  ensuite  confesser son crime  a  un  moine.  Virginie sera  jugee  au  Tribunal de  Quebec. Re­ bondissement inattendu: Victor  n'est  pas mort  apres  avoir   bu  le  cafe  de  chicoree empoisonne  que   lui  avait   prepare  Vir­  ginie.  La  liberation du  couple   s'accom­ pagne de la naissance  d'un nouvel enfant. Comment peut-on expliquer cette  insolite affaire?  Bien que !'auteur laisse planer  un certain   doute  il  ne  s'agirait  ni  plus  ni mains que d'un cas de possession :

Mais  cet  homme dans la  tempete n'etait pas Victor, et  cette femme dans la  forit n'etait pas  Virginie. Dans la  foret errent des  ames condamnees.  Elles  cherchent des  corps comme   des   betes   affamees. Ces   ames   ont envahi leurs corps. Elle  n'etait plus  Virginie.
11 n'etait plus  Victor. Cet  homme qui  n'etait plus  Victor a  tue  un  enfant. Elle  qui  n'etait
plus  Virginie  a  empoisonne l'homme qui n'etait plus   Victor. C'est  a cause   du   vent
dans  les arbres que  tout  est  arrive.

Tout cela  pourrait sembler  plutot sim­ pliste si au  niveau  symbolique ne  se  des­ sinait  pas  une  certaine  metaphysique de
!a narration. Ainsi !a legende  de La Dame est une sorte  de matrice, de formule gen­ erale.  Ceux  qui  prendront  connaissance de cette  trame narrative seront  peut-etre tentes  de  l'appliquer a  leur  propre   vie. Le  pouvoir  de  suggestion  semble  ici  tres fort et !'on pourrait affirmer  que !'on n'est en  presence  ni de  la mimesis  ni de !a  se­ miosis. En effet,  ce n'est  pas !a litterature qui imite la vie et c'est encore  mains !'art qui  est independant de !a realite. Ce  que Roch  Carrier suggere  serait  plutot que la vie imite la litterature:

Virginie n'a plus de  regret, elle n'a  pas peur, et  elle  sait   des  choses   qu'il  £aut  des  cen­ taines d'annees  pour apprendre.  Elle  vivra  dans   un   cachot  et   ses  chaines   traineront longtemps derriere elle.  Un  jour, elle  errera,

OPINIONS AND NOTES



elle  aussi,  dans  les  histoires du  temps passe que  !'on  racontera de  generation en  genera­ tion   et  que   les  enfants  ecouteront,  hypno­ tises.   Une   nuit, l'une  de  ces  enfants  con­  naitra  un   grand   malheur.  Alors,   dans   le vent, elle  se  souviendra de  l'histoire d'une Dame....

La  fin  du  roman  peut  sembler  opti­ miste,  mais  une  phrase  du  narrateur in­ diquerait  plutot  que   la  possession  peut etre  intermittente. En  effet,  Victor, qui semble  avoir  retrouve  son arne, se met  a rire  et  l'auteur  precise  "La   mechancete qui marquait son  visage est revenue  dans son  rire." De  tels  details  semblent sug­ gerer  qu'a  tout moment les ames  legen­ daires  peuvent s'emparer des  corps  pre­ sents  pour  revivre  leurs  haines.
La   Dame   qui  avait   des  chaines   aux
chevilles  est  done  une  nouvelle  explora­ tion  des  liens  mysterieux  que  Roch  Car­ rier  ne  cesse  de  voir  entre  la  vie  et  la mort.  Ce  qui  semble  interesser   l'auteur c'est  en  quelque sorte  le rite  de  passage, les ceremonies que  son  imagination en­ gendre.  Elles ne sont  pas inutiles  car  elles constituent ce  qu'il  y a d'essentiellement humain  et  attachant  chez  un  etre   qui
refuse de ne pas croire  a la vie-celle du moment, comme  celle de l'eternite.
Dans  ce cadre  l'on  peut affirmer  que sa piece Le Cirque  Noir6  prolonge !'explora­ tion entreprise avec La Dame et que cette exploration ouvre  au  mains  la  porte  sur un espoir,  aussi ambigu soit-il. Ainsi l'au­ dela  de  Roch  Carrier  a  le merite  de  ne pas etre  etouffant, comme celui que Jean­ Paul  Sartre  presente  dans  Huis  Clos, par exemple. La mort  pourrait apres tout  etre bonne.   Comme Montaigne, comme  ses personnages, Roch  Carrier sait "marcher avec cette  idee comme  si elle etait  une musique."

NOTES

1 Roch  Carrier,   La   Dame   qui   avait   des chaines   aux   chevilles   ( Mont11eal:   Stanke, IgB I).

r8o
 2   Roch Carrier,  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!   (Mon­
treal: Editions du  Jour, I g68) .
a   Roch Carrier, Les Fleurs vivent-elles  ailleurs que  sur la terre  (Montreal: Stanke, I g8o).
4   Roch Carrier, ]olis Deuils  (Montreal: Edi­
tions  du  Jour, 1g64) .
5   Roch Carrier, La  Celeste  Bicyclette   (Mon­
treal: Stanke,I g8o).
a   Roch Carrier, Le  Cirque   Noir  (Montreal: Stanke,I gB2).

ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ


LOWRY'S ALLUSIONS TO MELVILLE IN "LUNAR CAUSTIC"

LOWRY   DESCRIBES  AN     EARLY   DRAFT   of Lunar   Caustic   as  being   "among  other things,  about a  man's hysterical  identifi­ cation  with   Melville."1   The setting   for this  novella  is a  mental hospital and,  as L. E. R. Casari points out  in  "Malcolm Lowry's Drunken Divine  Comedy," "the insane    asylum   is  theoretically  a   place where  a diseased  man  could  be purged of his  lunacy."2    However,  the   therapeutic promise  remains unfulfilled. Despite Low­ ry's Dantean plan  to write  "a trilogy  en­ titled  The Voyage That  Never  Ends ... with   the   Volcano  as  the  first,  infernal part, and  a much  amplified  Lunar  Caus­ tic as the  second, purgatorical part  ... ,"3 he  equivocates in  the  use of  the  clinical  metaphor in  the  novella. Repeated allu­  sions   to   Melville's   "Billy   Budd"  and  M oby-Dick,  in  effect,   suggest   that   the very  clinical  framework from  which  any putative cure might emerge  is inadequate, fraudulent, and  perhaps even destructive.
By naming the  psychiatrist in Lunar Caustic Dr.  Claggart, Lowry   makes  an overt  allusion   to  "Billy  Budd." The   boy Garry correlates with  Melville's  hero, "Billy Budd."4  Like  Billy Budd  ("so pop­ ular   with   the  men"5 ), Garry   is  widely

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



liked   ("everyone's fond  of  him"6 ). In  a symmetrical reversal  of Billy's speech impediment, Garry is voluble.  The  most significant parallel between  the  two char­ acters  is a  quality of  murderous  purity.  David  Benham argues  in his essay "Low­ ry's  Purgatory," that   "in   each  case  the innocent and  honest  ... is accused  by du­  plicity  (the  two Claggarts) ; the  innocent is left  literally  or figuratively speechless, and   can   only   express   himself   in   vio­ lence."7  Billy  Budd  kills Claggart with  a blow   to  the  forehead  in  response   to  a charge of mutiny; analogously, Garry cuts a  child's  throat with  a  broken  bottle  be­ cause "'she chalked on the pavement that  I and  my  mother and   father were  bad people  who  should   be  in  helL'" By de­ liberately echoing  Melville,   Lowry  does not  merely  explicate Garry's presence  in the insane  asylum: like Billy Budd,  Garry in his brief instant of rage  protests  against a corrupt social  order  that  victimizes in­ nocence.
Lowry's Dr.  Claggart lacks  the  innate evil of his namesake; nevertheless, strong parallels exist between  the doctor  and Melville's master-at-arms. In "Billy Budd" Claggart is one  whose  moral  per­ version is not sensual  in nature but "dom­ inated by intellectuality."8   This  form  of evil,  which  "folds itself  in  the  mantle  of respectability," is something  that "civili­ zation  ... is auspicious to,"9   according to Melville.  In  Lunar  Caustic Dr.  Claggart, with his intellectual cast of mind and with the authority conferred by his official po­ sition,  acts  like  the  master-at-arms. De­ spite  the  psychiatrist's benign  intentions, he  corresponds to Melville's Claggart in slandering the innocent: Dr. Claggart un­ wittingly  collaborates with  (and  corrobo­ rates)  the child's  view that Garry "should  be  in  hell" by  his  professional insistence that  Garry remain in the hospital, that  is, in hell, a "doleful" place  that  is "the  foul core" of the  world.
Lowry  uses the  allusions  to  Melville  to
 question -even to  deny-the  asylum's therapeutic function. Dr.  Claggart, in seeking to make  Garry accept  social  real­ ity, negates  his interior world  of  infantile fables,  destroys  his  Adamic  innocence.10
Within  these  stories  of Garry there  is, in the mind  of the  narrator (William  Plan­ tagenet,   an   English   jazz   musician), an impulse affirming life:  "I don't know, it's funny how people  want to create,  and  do, in spite  of  everything-order and  chaos both." Plantagenet sees the  fables  of the boy as akin  to the creativity of Rimbaud, the  aesthetic  vision   disclosed   by  mad­ ness.11 Lowry's  narrator anticipates R. D. Laing's  perspective  that   "Madness  need not  be all  breakdown. It may  be  break­ through. It is  potentially  liberation and renewal. ..."12  Plantagenet confronts Dr. Claggart  with  the  question, "Don't  you see buried  in all that  wreckage his craving for  freedom?"  The psychological   claims for Garry's liberation are  rejected by the psychiatrist  (as a projection of Plantage­ net's  own  neurotic concerns), just as the political  claims  implicit in  "Billy  Budd" (the ship named after  Tom Paine's Rights  of  Man)    are   rejected.  Like   Melville's  petty officer, Dr.  Claggart appears hostile to individual freedom in his "duty of pre­ serving order.m3
Such   an    order,  both    Melville    and Lowry imply, is doubly  false, an epistemo­ logical  as  well   as  a  moral  fraud.  The  setting  of  Lunar   Caustic, an  insane  asy­ lum,  exposes  the  human  inadequacy of rational  categories,   particularly  as   the boundaries  separating  the  sane  from  the crazy shift and  blur in the manner articu­ lated  by Melville  in "Billy Budd":

Who   in   the   rainbow  can  draw  the   line where   the   violet  tint   ends   and   the   orange tint  begins? Distinctly we see  the  difference of  the   colors,  but   where  exactly  does   the one  first   blendingly enter  into  the   other? So with  sanity and  insanity. In  pronounced cases  there is  no  question about them. But in some supposed cases,  in various degrees supposedly  less   pronounced,  to   draw  the

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



exact   line   of  demarkation few  will  under­ take    though  for   a   fee   some   professional experts will.14

Dr.  Claggart, for  example,  does  not  see any ambiguities whereas Garry  does  not see any categories at all in a radical  vision of "disaster encompassing not  only  him­ self but  the  hospital, this land,  the whole world."  Plantagenet, who voluntarily en­ tered  the  hospital  because of his alcohol­  ism,  represents  an  intermediate position, a blending of  sanity  and  irrationality, but he sides with  Garry in collapsing  the  ra­  tional distinction between  the insane  asy­ lum  and  the  external world.  Thus, Plan­ tagenet    wonders   "if   the   doctor    ever asked  himself   what   point   there   was  in adjusting poor  lunatics to a  mischievous world  over  which  merely  more subtle lu­ natics exerted  almost  supreme hegemony,  where  neurotic  behaviour  was  the  rule."  Even  though Dr.  Claggart comments  de­ risively,  "'The  "so-called" sane  world,  I suppose   you   think?'" -thereby   recog­ nizing  Plantagenet's criticism-the psy­ chiatrist  fails   to  dismiss  effectively   the conftation  of madness  with normality. As a  result,  the  purgatorial impetus  behind the  clinical   metaphor  falters.  The  hos­ pital,  instead, becomes  a symbolic micro­  cosm  of  the   external   social  order   that  should  seek  renewal. It is  precisely  this theme  that  is central to "Billy Budd" and Lunar   Caustic, along  with  Dostoevsky's The Idiot. All three works illustrate how social  order  excludes  naive  goodness;  by showing   how   such   innocent  figures  as Gary,  Billy  Budd,   and   Prince   Myshkin are social misfits, the  writers  reveal  para­ doxically  society's  need  for  regeneration. Allusions drawn from  another work  by Melville,  M oby-Dick, equal   those  taken from  "Billy  Budd" in  their  shaping  im­ portance for  the meaning of Lunar Caus­ tic, and  touch  the  consciousness of  Low­ ry's  hero  Plantagenet more  directly.  Be­ fore   entering  the   hospital   he  identifies himself  with  "Ahab stumbling from  side
 to  side  on  the  careening bridge,  'feeling tl1at he  encompassed in  his stare  oceans from  which  might  be revealed  that phan­ tom  destroyer of himself.''' The novella's preoccupation  with   vision,  suggested   by the  title,'5  centres  on  Plantagenet "look­ ing  for his sight":  he is an Ahab  without the lucidity of monomania. But like Ahab,  he  risks self-annihilation in  his quest.
Plantagenet's initiation into  the  realm of madness  is a symbolic  rejection of  logi­ cal    restraints,   and    is   consistent   with Ahab's claim   that   "Truth  has  no  con­ fines."16  In  this   context  Garry   merges with  Pip  who was "carried down alive  to wondrous depths, where strange shapes of the  unwarped primal world glided  to and fro before  his passive eyes.''17 By choosing  to  enter   the  insane  asylum,  Plantagenet undergoes a similar disordering of experi­ ence,  glimpses  like  Rimbaud's voyant   a chaotic world  beyond  rational categories, and   relates  his  confused   vision  to  Mel­ ville's   ambiguous  image   of   the   white
whale.18
Lowry   uses  the   malevolent   connota­ tions  of  whiteness  set  out  in  Moby-Dick to  create an   epiphanic  moment  in  the psychiatrist's office,  one  in  which   Plan­ tagenet experiences bafflement  instead of illumination. Prior  to this  interview epi­ sode,  references  to  the  Pequod 19  and  to Moby-Dick  have  given  the  word  "white­ ness" an allusive  function in Lunar  Caus­ tic,  evoking   Melville's  discussion   in  his chapter, "The  Whiteness of the  Whale":

Is  it  that by  its   indefiniteness  it  shadows forth the  heartless voids  and  immensities of the  universe, and  thus  stabs  us from behind with   the  thought of  annihilation,  when  be­ holding the  white depths of the milky way?20

This   meditation  on   the   "colorless,  all­ color" nature  of  whiteness   partly  expli­ cates   the  following passage  from  Lunar  Caustic:

"I-what," said Plantagenet, looking around  him,   bewildered. He   couldn't  find the   doctor  among  the   phantoms, for   the

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



curtains, blowing in  at that moment, made one  whiteness with  his  robe.
Plantagenet's baffled  condition,  disorien­ tation  and  anxiety  in  the  midst of phan­ tom  whiteness,  echoes  Melville; rational order,  personified by the psychiatrist, van­ ishes. When  Dr. Claggart, a few moments  later,  tacitly  defends society's  values  and order,  Plantagenet's sense  of  dislocation becomes dizziness, in a way that  is analo­ gous to Pip's  "ringed horizon"21   as "The Castaway":
the   room,   the   whiteness, spun around  him with   a jagged   dazzle; he  closed   his  eyes  a second: where was  he?
Lowry,  by alluding to  Melville's   treatise on "whiteness," not  only conveys an  am­ bivalent  attitude towards the white-robed doctor and  the  therapy he  represents  but also communicates, through Plantagenet's physical  response  to  vertigo,  the  baffiing ambiguities  of   life   that   lie  outside   any narrow, clinical perspective.
Near the end of Lunar Caustic all the scattered and elliptical references  to the white whale coalesce in the appearance of
"'that   phantom destroyer of   himself'"
that  Plantagenet-Ahab had  long dreaded and  searched for:
A  seaplane  was   gliding  whitely  past,   and now  it  was  turning, to  Plantagenet suddenly it had  the fins and  flukes  and blunt luminous head   of  a  whale; now  it  roared straight at the  window, straight at  him.
The  foreshadowed catastrophe occurs not in  the  form   of  physical   death  but  as  a kind  of psychological disintegration:
There was  a furious crash of  thunder and simultaneously Plantagenet  felt   the  impact of   the   plane,  the   whale,  upon   his   mind. While metamorphosis nudged  metamorpho­ sis,  a  kind   of  order,  still   preserved within his  consciousness, and  enclosing  this  catas­ trophe, exploded  itself  into the  age  of  Ka­ lowsky  again,  and into the  youth  of  Garry, who  both  now  seemed to be spiralling away  from   him  until  they   were   lost,  just  as  the seaplane  was  actually tilting away,  swaying  up  to  the  smashed sky. But  while  that   part of  him  only  a moment before in  possession
 of  the   whole,    the   ship,   was   turning  over with  the  disunion of hull  and  masts  uprooted falling   across   her  decks,  another faction of his  soul,  relative to  the  ship   but   aware of these  fantasies and  simultaneities as  it  were from   above,  knew    him    to   be   screaming against the  renewed thunder and  saw  the attendants closing   in  on  him,  yet  saw  him too,  as  the  plane seethed away   northwards like  the  disembodied shape of  the  very  act of darkness itself,  passing  beyond  the  asylum walls  melting like  wax,  and  following in  its wake    sailing on  beyond  the   cold   coast   of the  houses  and  the  factory chimneys waving farewell -farewell -
Plantagenet's consciousness  re-enacts the destruction of the  Pequod. The imagery of  a  ship   "with   disunion   of  hull   and masts  uprooted"  pictorializes the  narra­ tor's  mental  wreckage. His experience of madness  contains the  ambiguities which Melville  discloses in his novel, and  which R. D. Laing would  later  articulate theo­  retically:   counterbalancing the  sense  of helplessness  (unable to  resist  external force,  "the attendants") is the  explosion of temporal and spatial  boundaries (Plan­ tagenet's metamorphoses into  his  fellow patients, Garry  and  Kalowsky)  in an  in­ stant  of cosmic  perception.
In the context of the M oby-Dick  paral­ lelism, the long passage  just quoted shifts dramatically Plantagenet's  identification from  Ahab  to  Ishmael.  Lowry  ironically structures  Plantagenet's   farewell   to  the hospital   within  this  experience of  mad­  ness   and   connects  this  moment  of  re­ leas,
Ishmael's moment of salvage. Standing outside  the  insane  asylum,  Lowry's  pro­ tagonist feels no Dantean joy of  salvation, "only  inquietude." In   his  confused   sur­ vival  Plantagenet,  like  Ishmael,  merely acts  as the  single  available consciousness from  which  can flow the  narrative of de­ struction.

NOTES
1 Selected    Letters,  eds.   Harvey  Breit    and Margerie B. Lowry  (Philadelphia:  Lippin­ cott, rg6r), pp.  24-25.

183

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



2    (Ph.D.Diss., UniversityofNebraska, 1967), p. 282.
s  Selected  Letters, p. 63.
4   Herman   Melville,  "Billy    Budd,   Foretop­ man,"  in    Selected    Writings  of    Herman Melville     (New   York:   Modern    Library,
1952)' p. 837·
s  "Billy  Budd," p. 862.
6   Lunar  Caustic,  eds.  Earle  Birney  and  Mar­
gerie    Lowry     (London:   Jonathan   Cape,
1968),  p.    56.     (Reprinted   in    Malcolm Lowry:   Psalms   and   Songs,   ed.   Margerie Lowry  [New York: New  American Library,
1975], pp.  259-306.)
7   Canadian  Literature, no. 44  (Spring 1970), p.  37n.
8    "Billy  Budd," p. 842.
9   "Billy  Budd," p. 842.
10  The  psychiatrist, by  placing  the   need   for social  order before the  importance of an individual, parallels Captain Vere  in  "Billy Budd"; however, Dr. Claggart, unlike Cap­ tain   Vere,  shows   no   tragic   awareness  of these  antithetical  demands.
11 "Le   poete   se  fait   voyant  par   un  long,  im­ mense   et   raisonne  derelement  de   tous  les sens."  Arthur    Rimbaud  by   Enid   Starkie (New  York: New Directions, 1961 ), p. 123.
12 R.   D.   Laing,  The   Politics  of  Experience
(Harmondsworth:  Penguin, 1967), p. 110.
1a   "Billy  Budd," p. 83o.
14  "Billy  Budd," p. 87.
15  "Lunar caustic" is a  painful medicine once used  by doctors to clear an  infant's sight.
16  Herman Melville, M oby-Dick,  ed.  Charles
Feidelson, Jr.   (New   York:  Bobbs-Merrill,
1964), p. 221.
17   Moby-Dick, p.  530.   In Lunar  Caustic  Pip also  has   affinities  to  the  inmate Battle, a figure  that Beverly  Rasporich argues is like "the stereotyped black   minstrel  of  the American theatre."  "The Right Side  of Despair:  Lowry's Comic Spirit in  Lunar Caustic  and   Dark  As  The   Grave  Wherein My   Friend   Is   Laid,"   Mosaic,   10,  no.   4 (1977), p. 56.
18   It should be noted  that the  phantasmagorias created by Plantagenet's alcoholism prepare for  this  visionary experience.
19  The  patients can   see   through  the   barred window a  derelict coal   barge   that  mirrors
 their   situation  and   evokes    the    doomed
Pequod;

between the  two  wharves and  fast  against the  poverty grass  before the  hospital lay the  coal  barge, sunken, abandoned, open, hull cracked, bollards adrift, tiller smashed. . . . ( p.  12)

20   Moby-Dick, p. 263.
21  Moby-Dick, p. 530.

KEITH  HARRISON


ON THE VERGE

****   PATRICK   A.    DUANE,   Gentlemen   Emi­ grants:  From  the  British  Public  Schools to the Canadian    Frontier. Douglas  &    Mcintyre,
$16.95.   Canada is a country of minorities, for if one  divides people of British origin into their various national groups, none  has ever  reached the  so  percent mark. Nevertheless, because of historic links,  the  English have  existed in  pop­ ular  myth  as  the  dominant and  most  powerful group. And   this  makes  it  all  the  more  curious that  the   English should  be  the  Canadian mi­ nority that has  attracted  least  attention among scholars and writers. Studies of  the  Quebecois, the  Acadians, and   even   the  M'etis  abound; so do  books  on  the  Scots  and  the  Irish and  even  on   relatively  small  minorities  like   the   Douk­ hobors.  But   books  on   the   English,  and    par­ ticularly general  studies of  the   English as  an  element in  the  growth of  a  Canadian  society, have   been  surprisingly few.  This is  why  Pro­  fessor  Duane's Gentlemen Emigrants  is so par­ ticularly welcome. It  is frankly class-bound in its interests, dealing with  the  sons-and  much less often the daughters-of  the  English gentry who  played   such  an  important and often such an  eccentric part in  the   settlement  of   rural Canada from  the  Eastern Townships westward to  British   Columbia.  These  were   the   people who  were   perhaps more   responsible than  any other  group  except  the   Quebecois for   giving Canada  a   political  and  social   and    cultural image so different from  that of the  great  neigh­ bour  to the  south, and they  deserve a  celebra­ tion.  Indeed, there is  obviously so  much more  to be said  about them that several of  Professor Duane's   chapters,   and    notably   that  on   the Remittance Men  (much neglected  as a subject by social  historians), contain the  germs  out  of which  whole   books   might  in   the   future  be written.
G.W.

ON  THE VERGE



****   JARS   BALAN,  ed.,   Identifications:  Eth­ nicity  and  The   Writer in  Canada. Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, Univ. of Alberta ( distrib.  Univ.  Toronto  Press),   n.p.     This book  collects  the  papers and  provides a  tran­
script of  the  panel discussions that  took  place at  a  conference on  "ethnic" Canadian  litera­ ture, but  what emerges is a  tremendous  battle over  the  term  "ethnic." The  papers themselves are  personal (Henry Kreisel on  the  inunigrant's experience),   scholarly    (David   Arnason  on Stephan   Stephansson    and     other   Icelandic writers),  and   generally   sedate.  But   a   great brouhaha  breaks out  among the  lively  panelists
-Rudy  Wiebe, George  Ryga,  Maria  Camp­
bell,  Myrna Kostash, Maara Haas, Andrew Suknaski,  and   several  others -praising   par­ ticularity, denouncing "hyphenation,"  praising self-possession, denouncing   balkanization  and  political hegemonies. What  is  important about the  book  is  that it  provides  a  chance to  listen in  on  these  debates, and  therefore on  ways  in which  language is changing. These changes are  happening  because  there  are   writers  in  "un­ official"  languages warranting  close  apprecia­ tion,  and because there are writers using  Eng­ lish  and  French who  are  implicitly challenging their  static form  and  their often ill-understood political biases.
W.N.

****   GEORGE   WOODCOCK,   Ivan   Eyre.   Fitz­ henry & Whiteside, $4o.oo.    Woodcock  begins this  splendid appreciation of  the  painter  Ivan Eyre   by  remarking on   his  own   belief   in   the correspondances   between  the   visual   and   the verbal,  and    proceeds   by   trying  to  find   the words  to  express   the  moral  understanding, the conceptual   perspective,    which     lies    behind Eyre's   fine-line  acrylic    landscapes,   his    ab­  stracted and   symbolic  angular  delineations of men   and   human  structures, and   his  repeated designs of a  severed head  or  a suspended body against a  vivid  screen of  vegetation. By  turns biographical  and    critical,  Woodcock  records various  details  of   Eyre's  family  history   and artistic growth  (appendices of  exhibitions are attached)  and   comments  on   the   apparently paradoxical explorations of  intense colour and equally  intense  absences of  colour:  of  green and   winter, of  the   radiant  and   the   sinister. Always,   in   clear  prose,   he  seeks   the   "philo­ sophic" dimensions of  Eyre's  work-an inter­ action between Platonic  forms and   a  personal sense   of   tradition  and   change, a  connection between an  almost  mediaeval  vision   of  myth  and  a Borgesian  ability to externalize by intro­ spection. But  the  eye  wanders away  from   the
 words   into    the    many    magnificent  paintings here  reproduced, and  the  mind   realizes  slowly the  implications of  the  low  aerial perspective: the  viewer  is  suspended, away  from   the  earth and   apart from   the   rest  of  mankind, godlike, but is able -perhaps even  begged -to make connection with  the  dreams and  nightmares he watches through the  window of  his own imagination.
w.N.

****   JOHN  ROBERT COLOMBO, ed.,  Poems of the  Inuit. Oberon, $23.95;  pa.  $11.95·   The indefatigable Colombo, with  the  able  assistance of   several   librarians,  has   assembled  here    a moving collection of poems  and  a substantial testament  to  the  creative  power   of  the   word ("The poet,  as  a  shaman, is  a  spirit-maker"; the singer,  the  drawer of breath believes  in "the power  of words  to transform attitudes, if not realities")  among  the   peoples  of  the   Arctic. There are  incantations, poems  about the  hunt, life  and  death, and   daily   life-together  with notes  and  a bibliography. No poem  is more evocative of  the  power  and  plight that a poem can  convey   than Umahaq's song: "I  was  idle I When the  season   turned  again to  spring. I My  fishhook,   since   it  pulled  up  nothing, I I was  idle   II I was   idle   I When  the   season turned  turned  again  to  summer. I My  hus­ band, since  he caught no caribou, I I was idle."

W.N.

***   LIZ   &  JACK BRYAN, Backroads  of British Columbia. Sunflower Books,  n.p.    All  across Canada, there are  small  presses  producing valuable and   useful  books  on  local   travel and local  culture. This is one  of  them, in  a  revised edition, handsomely illustrated and  clearly worded. It is a guidebook to 25 "backroads"­ those  gravel routes   that can  take  an adventur­ ous   driver  off   the   speedway  into   wilderness and  history.
W.N.

**  BO   CURTIS   and   J. A.    KRAULIS,   Canada from the Air. Hurtig, $29.50.    Kraulis's aerial photographs are  at  their most  ordinary  when they   attempt  to   portray  places   and   at  their finest   when   they   delight  in  sheer visual  pat­ tern:  the   roofs  of  Datsuns,  the   whorls   of   a harvester's trail, the  ripples and   ragged  edges  of  water and   ice.  The text  provides a  service­ able  accompaniment. This is  a splendidly con­  ceived   book,  but  it  wanted  one  more editorial eye  to shape it  into  a  splendidly executed one.

W.N.

NOTES



AMONG RECENT  REPRINTS   are  several   of  some interest, including  Jay   Macpherson's brilliant Poems  Twice Told  (Oxford, $6.95), a  gather­ ing  together of  The  Boatman and  the  unduly ignored  poems  of  Welcoming  Disaster; James H.  Gray's The  Roar  of  the  Twenties  (Paper­ Jacks, $7·95), a cultural  history  of the  prairies; Mavis   Gallant's The  Pegnitz  ]unction  (Mac­ millan, $7·95) ; Gilles  Archambault's Le  V oya­ geur  distrait   (Stanke, $8.95), which   won  the Ig8I    Prix  David; and   three   various  titles   in Fides'  "Bibliotheque quebecoise," with  critical comments  and   bibliographies appended:   Pa­ trice   Lacombe's  La  Terre  pat emelle  ( 1846), Eugene Cloutier's  Les   I nutiles    ( 195 7), and  Louis   Frechette's  collection of   sketches  and  tales,    La    Noel    au   Canada   ( I goo).  Alfred  Bailey's  Collected Poems,  under  the  title  Mira­ michi Lightning (Fiddlehead,  n.p.), brings  to­ gether  a  substantial  number   of   poems   pub­  lished   (many in  journals  only)   between 1932 and   rg8I; these  are  poems  which   reveal   Bai­ ley's  wit,  his  reflective intellect, and  his  bright skill  with  words  and   rhyme. Bailey  has  never  fit   within   any    of   the    standard   groups  of twentieth-century Canadian poets; nor does the personal vision  he  plainly records  draw undue attention  to  itself.   But   in  the   collection one discovers a public record of a private mind  and a  quality  of   accomplishment  warranting   a closer   look.  George  Bowering's West   Window (General, $9.95)  is a  selection of  the  author's poetry, a  useful   reminder of  his  wit  and   his skill  with  public and  runic language; as Sheila Watson points out  in  her  preface,  Bowering  is "his  own   man  ...,  attentive ... to   language which  is waiting to speak...." His  "essentially political   poems ... describe  nothing,  explain nothing; they   present  and   evoke." And    they focus  back  intently on  his own  contemporaries. Margaret   Doerksen's  jazzy,   a   Peace    River romp, is  available from   PaperJacks ($2.95). And   three major novels  are   now  available in translations: Au  Service du  Seigneur? (Fides, n.p.)  takes  Sinclair Ross's  As For Me  and  My House into  French,  in   Louis-Bertrand   Ray­ mond's translation; Antonine Maillet's Pelagie, translated  by  Philip Stratford, brings  the  au­  thor's Prix  Goncourt-winning novel, about her  Acadian   legacy,  into    an   abundant   English (Doubleday,  $I7.95); and  in  a  new,  though still-flawed  translation    (this    one    by    Alan  Brown),  Gabrielle  Roy's  Bonheur d'Occasion returns as  The  Tin  Flute  once  more   (McClel­ land &  Stewart, boxed  set,  $35.00). As John O'Connor has   pointed   out   elsewhere,  Brown  corrects the  most  extreme of  the  errors in  the Josephson   translation   (where  the   word    for "blizzard"   in  Chapter  12  is  translated  as   a

186
 murut10ns  factory explosion) but occasionally omits whole   phrases and sentences.
Among standard  reference works,  Contem­ porary  Authors, 103    (Gale,  $68.oo),  features AI Purdy interviewing  Milton  Acorn; Contem­ porary    Authors,   new   revision   series   vol.   5 (Gale, $68.oo),  contains  biocritical  notes   on Earle Birney  and   Robert Sward; and   Twen­ tieth-Century  Literary Criticism, vol.  6  (Gale,
$68.oo), includes critical excerpts on  Malcolm
Lowry   ( 22 pages) and D.  C. Scott (I 8 pages). Canadiana, the  National Library of  Canada's authoritative list  of each  year's  publications, is now  available for  rg8r; each  year  it undergoes improvements (this year  it lists foreign publica­ tions  of  Canadian interest, and   its  index is  a kind   of  librarian's  bibliographical  guide)  but each  year  I am  frustrated by its  organization: it  desperately  needs   a  detailed   table   of  con­  tents, for  without one,  the  various alphabetical sequences, which   the  computer  may   be  able to   tell   apart,   blend    into  each    other  in   a bewildering fashion.   Maria  Calderisi's  Music Publishing in  the  Canadas, I8oo-I867  (in  two languages; National Library, n.p.), by contrast, is  splendidly clear. Both  historical and   biblio­ graphical in  nature, the  book is a welcome contribution to  the  history of  Canadian  taste, and  adds  to  the  detail of  information in  Kall­ mann's Encyclopedia. Data  on  publishing fig­ ures   like  Octave Cremazie  and   John  Lovell, periodical and sheet  music distribution, and  on mission  society activities  punctuate the  story  of fashion, enterprise, and   the   growth  of  copy­  right conventions. But  one  of the  chief  delights is the  reproduction of  many title  pages: includ­ ing  "The Merry  Bells  of  England," "Le  Depit Amoureux," "Beautiful Venice, a  Popular Bal­ lad   sung  with  much  Applause by  Mr.   Hum­ phreys,"   "Polka  Mazurka  des   Etudiants  en Medecine," and   "Canadian Band   March  in­ troducing the  Popular Air  Old   Piney  Woods, by Woodlawn."
Reference works  from Quebec include many of  interest. Jean Carriere's  Atlas Monde  Can­ ada   Quebec  (Centre  Educatif  et   Culture!, n.p.)  is a secondary school  atlas,  focussing on Quebec  resources, land   use,  and  "regions ad­  ministrative&  et   traditionelles."   Three  books from   the   Editeur  officiel   du  Quebec  provide more    detailed  historical  and   cultural  data: Yolande Lavoie's  L'Emigration  des  Quebecois
aux  Etats-unis de  I840  a I930  is an  illustrated
statistical  and    historical  account  of   shifting
life styles  and  patterns of emigration; Rene Bouchard and  others have compiled a fascinat­ ing  guide to  the  sources of  the  nomenclature of  towns  and rivers  between Quebec and  Mon­ treal, in  Itiniraire  toponymique du  Chemin du

NOTES



Roy; and  in  Jean-Yves Dugas's  Repertoire  de gentiles  du  Quebec, we  can   find   the  Official Adjectival  Terms  to   describe  the   people   of particular  Quebec towns   (in   Wesunount  live les Westmountais, in  Thetford Mines les  Thet­ fordois). Renee  Legris's  Dictionnaire  des  au­ teurs   du  radio-feuilleton  quebecois   (Fides)  is a valuable guide to writers and  broadcasts, with  helpful commentary. And  Le  Metier d'ecrivain (Livre d'ici/Boreal  Express)  provides practical advice for  those  who  want  to write  profession­ ally  in  Quebec.
Less  standard  guides include the  Softwords Complete  Guide  to   Punctuation    (Porcepic, n.p.);  The Telidon Book, ed.  David  Godfrey and  Ernest Chang ( Porcepic, n.p.), an  analysis of the  system  and  a clear guide to the  processes at  work  and  the  availability of the  machinery; and  George Woodcock's Taking  It  to  the  Let­ ter   (Quadrant, $7.95), which   is  a  series   of letters  Woodcock wrote   while  editor  of  Cana­ dian   Literature and   hence  constitutes a  guide  both   to  his  own   travels  and  to  the  unfolding directions  of  the   first   eighteen  years   of  this journal.
Another  substantial  group  of   works   from
Quebec  is  aimed  at   children.  Included  are works   of  several  kinds -textbooks,  picture books,  game books,  myths. All  the  illustrations are  first  class, and  often  in  full  colour; I would single  out  for  particular praise the  drawings of Daniel  Sylvestre for   Bertrand Gauthier's Un
]our   d'ete  a  Fleurdepeau  and  Marie-Louise
Gay   for   De  Zero  a Minuit). But   sometimes
the   pictures  dominate,  as   in   Le   Hibou  qui
avait  avale  la  lune   by  Bernard Clave! (Fides)
or  Les  Saisons (Les  'editions Ia courte echelle) by  Raoul Duguay, and   appear  designed more for  the  adult eye  than for  the  child's  imagina­ tion.  The drawings of  Sylvestre and  Gay  both appear  in   delightful  works   published   by  Les Editions La  courte echelle.  Un   Jour  . .. is full of  lively,  detailed,  entertaining, active  illustra­ tions -of  crowds and  banquets and  events,  all recorded in  a  lively text  as  well,  a  text  about the   summer  day   of  a  town   with   a  mairesse named  (marvellously!)  Lili  Coprere. De  Zero
a Minuit is  a  simple counting  book.  Another
in  the  Court echelle series,  Crapauds et  autres
animaux,  is  a   series   of   animal  poems   with much more  static accompanying designs.  Pun­ ning,   both   visual   and   verbal, is  a  feature of three  other  books,    Nelcya's   Nogaud   ou   le
dragon    qui   voulait  apprendre  a  vivre    (Les
Editions Ia  courte echelle),  Darcia  Labrosse's
Ou  est le chat? (Pierre Tisseyre), David Lord Porter's Histoire de l'o  (Hurtubise HMH). Porter's book, designed around line drawings of an   "0," tells   of  the   simple adventures  of  a
 hippopotamus and  a  seagull;  Labrosse's hides cats  in  a series  of  playful drawings, while  the text  tells of a chapiteau, a chameau, a chapeau, a  chateau, and   Chagall and   teases  the   reader with    sounds;  Nelcya's  is   a   delightful  (and satiric)  story   of  a   gentle  dragon  who   seeks friends and   a  place to  live.   (An  Oz-like  Pro­ fessor  at  one  point thunders:  "L'Univers-Cite,
«'avait  ete   un   beau   reve,   rien   de   plus.   Un dragon qui  veut  apprendre a vivre  n'a   rien  a
faire   la.")  Three  books  from  Ovale  Editions retell  classic Quebec tales-Johanne Bussieres' Les  Feux  Follets, Robert Piette's La  Sirene de Perce,  and   Suzanne Piette's Le  Chien d'or.  I liked  the  last  of  these  best,  both  for  the  adven­ ture   of  the  story   and   the  boldness of   France Lebon's illustrations. Several other  books,  all from   Centre  Educatif  et  Culture!,  are   delib­ erately  designed  for   classroom   use.  Twenty small  pamphlet-books in  the "Collection Solei!"  series,  with  simple  sentences  by Jean-Yves Du­ four,  and  simple  drawings by Louise  Blanchard and   Robert Bigras,  are  of  Golden Books qual­ ity,  more  colourful in  concept than in  execu­ tion,  more  functional  than memorable. Several workbooks    by   Jean-Luc  Picard,  by   contrast (Autour  de   moi, En   passant   par  chez   nous,  and   Moi   et   les  miens, each   with   a  separate teacher's  guide), are  splendidly clear  and  col­ ourful    (and   imaginative)   introductions  to French  vocabulary and   language usage.   Here function  is  recognized  as  invention as  well  as exercise.
Other recent publications include three that will  be  of  interest for  students of  Indian  cul­ ture. One   journal, Tawow  (now  entering  vol.
8), is devoted  to  the  subject, and  is  available from   the   Ministry  of   Indian  and    Northern Affairs   (Ottawa)  at  $1.50 an   issue;   vol.   8, no.   1  is  devoted  to  the   prison experience of native people, exploring various topics -from the   System   to   the   history  of   confrontation (including  references  to  Almighty  Voice).  A prison   diary,    poems,   and    drawings  are   also included. The  Malahat Review, no.  6o,  is  de­ voted   to  the   West   Coast Indian  renaissance, and   integrates  new   works   with  old   myths­ with    the   verbal  icons   on   myth    by   Michel Butor. Carriers  of the  Dream Wheel, ed. Duane Niatum  (Harper  &   Row,   n.p.), is  a   hand­ somely  illustrated  anthology  of  contemporary, "Native  American" poetry-which  closes  at the   border   and    reveals  its   Americanness  as much  as  its   Indianness, perhaps  unintention­ ally.
W.N.

NOTES



L21ST  P:21GE

WITH THIS  ISSUE, we start what  we  hope  will be  a  regular new  feature of  Canadian  Litera­ ture:   selective  surveys  of   significant   recent developments in  writing outside  Canada which  bears   some   relation  to   Canadian writing. I stress  the  word  "selective"; we will try  to  note  new  publications in  various   fields,  as  circum­ stances permit, but  cannot predict what  direc­ tions  the  coverage will  take.
A number of recent books  to  come  this  way all  draw attention to  traditions in  the   short
story  and   to  recent breaks from  national  con­ vention.  New   Zealand's  writing offers  an  ex­ ample. The  two  stars   of  the  tradition  are   of course   Katherine   Mansfield   and   Frank  Sar­ geson.   Penguin's recent The  Stories   of  Frank Sargeson provides an  updated  introduction to the  latter author,  who  died  earlier this  year.  After   Mansfield's   accounts  of  the   undercur­ rents  of female life,  Sargeson turned New  Zea­  land  writing along  a different course -sketch­ ing  a  world  of  maleness that   came   to  be  ac­ cepted  both    as   reality  and   as   the   national identity. A recent anthology-All the  Danger­ ous  Animals  Are  in  Zoos   (Longman) -goes a long  way  to  disputing this illusion. Often the writers  collected  in   it   are   so   concerned to attack the  national myths  of safety  and  egali­ tarianism  (probing  images   of   violence,  wars between   the    sexes,   childhood    cruelty,  and  dreams of  evil)   that they  sacrifice  art for  mes­ sage.  (Peter Hooper's  The Goat  Paddock and Other Stories, from John Mcindoe, does much  the  same   thing.)   But in  the  best  of  the   new writers in  the anthology-Russell Haley   (who has   another   excellent  story,   "Fog,"  in   New  Directions 44), Ian Wedde, and  Patricia Grace
-there is a  lively  experimentation with  anti­
realistic form; by their new  methodology, these
writers evoke   the  changing values  of  the  cul­ ture  they  represent: the  idealistic values  which  they  perceive as  almost lost,  and   at  the  same  time,   the   surrealistic  values   which   they   see creeping in  to  take  their place.
If there is a surrealistic morality in  the  work of the man  who may be New Zealand's finest contemporary man of  letters, Vincent  O'Sul­ livan,  it  is usually lodged outside the  country, in  the  America (the New  York  in  particular) of,   for   example,  Dandy   Edison   for   Lunch (John Mcindoe). But  here  these are the  weak­  est stories, struggling for  a  voice  and  a  vocab­ ulary   not   quite  heard   aright. In stories   like "The Witness Man" or  "Some   Who  Came to the  Wedding" or   the  title   story,   by  contrast, all  is authentic:  subtle  shifts  in  point of  view

188
 give   an   edge   to   the    apparent  realism, and while   the   author  revels   in   a  quietly  caustic irony, he  also   reveals  a  gentle-hearted  clear­ sightedness about the  contradictory motivations that  patch  together  modern life.  "For that is what we  are," one  character  muses,  watching someone die;  "we   are  machines for  pain, for these   last   days   of   dissolution  and   denial, as though  the   sun   had   never   shone  on   us,   as though  everything  we ever  took  from  family  or God  whatever it might be,  must   now  be  paid  for  with  words  like  that, the  indignity of deny­ ing  what we always  loved." Admirers of  Mavis Gallant will find  much to  admire here  as  well.

W.N.
