per copy $z.oo




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·2




Autumn, 1959

ETHEL WILSON
A Cat  Among  the  Falcons

GILLES MARCOTTE
·     Une  Poesie d'Exil

DESMOND PACEY on
·Major John Richardson

ROBERT WEAVER on
Morley Callaghan

MILTON WILSON  on
Margaret Avison

GEORGE  ROBERTSON
Drama  on  the  Air

M. W. STEINBERG on
A.M. Klein

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










AREOPAGITICA RE-WRITTEN


We  should  be wary  therefore what  persecution we  raise  against the  living  labours of public  men,  how  we spill  that  seasoned  life of  man   preserved and  stored   up  in  books;  since  we  see a  kind of  homicide may  thus  be  committed, sometimes   a  martyrdom, and   if  it  extend to  the  whole  impression, a  kind  of  massacre, whereof   the  execution ends  not  in  the  slaying  of an  elemental life,  but  strikes  at  that  ethereal and  fifth  essence,  the  breath of reason  itself,  slays an  immortality rather than  a life  .  . .

Banish   all  objects   of  lust,  shut   up  all  youth   into   the  severest discipline that  can  be exercised  in any  heritage, ye cannot make them  chaste   that  came  not  thither so: such  great  care  and  wis­ dom  is  required  to  the  right   managing of  this  point.  Suppose we could  expel  sin by this  means; look how  much  we  thus  expel of sin,  so much  we expel  of virtue: for  the  matter of  them  both is the  same;  remove  that, and  ye remove  them  both  alike.
JOHN   MILTON, Areopagitica.


THE  DEBATE on the censorship  of literature is a peren­ nial one, and  each  generation and  each country  must, it seems, produce  its own good or bad re-writing of Areopagitica. This year in both Canada and  England the  legislators  have  been at  work changing the laws  that  govern   the  banning of  books. Parliament in  England has  passed  the Obscene  Publications  Act,  1959, which  marks  a  clear  advance in  the safeguarding of literature and  the  defining of  obscenity, and  on which, as  the  Times   Literary  Supplement   remarked  recently,  "authors, pub­  lishers, and  those interested in serious literature may congratulate them-

3

EDITORIAL



selves".  Parliament in Canada has passed Bill C.58,  amending the pro­ visions of the Criminal Code in regard  to obscene publications; this legis­ lation  marks  no advance  at all in the safeguarding of literature and,  in fact,  introduces new perils and  uncertainties into the  process of  publica­ tion.  It  has been  received  with  almost  universal  concern  by  publishers,  book-sellers, librarians and  writers, a concern  well expressed in the book trade  journal,  Quill & Quire, which remarks  in a recent editorial headed  "A Thoroughly Dangerous Law" that  the amendments "threaten to limit the  freedom  to read and  the freedom  of expression very considerably in Canada".
It is this writer's  personal opinion that censorship of any kind is morally unjustified   and  practically self-defeating. It  places  a  premium on  ob­ scurantism and  intolerance, it lowers  the  climate of social  relations by encouraging the sneak and the informer,  and it places works of literature at  the  mercy  of  policemen,  Customs  officers,  magistrates  and   judges whose training does not often include the inculcation of artistic  discrimi­  nation.  Let  us remember-even discounting such  extreme cases as the celebrated Irish  list of banned  books-how  many  works now acknow­  ledged  to be of high  literary  standing have from  time  to time  been at­  tacked  in  the  courts  or  confiscated by the  Customs  of even  the  most democratic countries; they include  Madame  Bovary, Les Fleurs du Mal, La  Terre, An  American Tragedy, Salome, Ulysses,  Lady  Chatterley's Lover, The Rainbow, The  Naked  and the Dead, The_Woman of Rome, and The Psychology of Sex. Finally, there is no evidence  to suggest that  a country  which  imposes a  rigorous and  unimaginative censorship  in fact maintains a high  degree of  conventional sexual  morality; Les Fleurs du Mal, for example,  was prosecuted  in that  France of the Second  Empire when the great courtesans  of Paris prospered with impunity and  wielded enormous social power.
However,  given  a situation  in which  large  groups  of the  population
insist on the  continuation of censorship  and  the  majority of the  people tacitly  agree,  it is clear  that  we have  to  reckon with some  degree of governmental interference in the freedom  of publication. And  if we ac­ cept  this interference even temporarily and  reluctantly, as for practical purposes  we must,  the question  becomes how  best to frame laws which, while  satisfying  the  demand to "protect the young",  will also safeguard works  of  literary, artistic   and  scientific  merit   from  persecution. It  is

4

EDITORIAL



doubtful if  these  two  requirements can  ever  be completely  reconciled, but at  least  a search  should  be made  for the best compromise. It would seem, from  a comparison of the laws they have produced  this year, that Parliament in England has sought  carefully  for a good solution and  has come  very  near  to attaining the  best, while  Parliament in Canada has done  neither.
Let  us take  the English  law first, and  note its improvements. First,  it
re-defines obscenity  by liberalising  the old definition  put  forward in the Hicklin   case  of  1868,  which  for  the  past  ninety  years  has  been  the standard test in  both  English  and  Canadian courts. The  Hicklin defini­ tion  reads  as follows:  "I think  the  test of obscenity  is this, whether the tendency  of the  matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and  corrupt those whose minds  are  open  to such immoral  influences and into  whose hands  a  publication of  this  sort  may  fall."  The  definition  in  the  new Obscene  Publications  Act, 1959, states  that  "for the purposes of this Act an article  shall  be deemed  to be obscene if its effect or (where  the article  comprises  two or  more  distinct  items)  the effect of any one of its items is, if taken  as a whole, such as tend  to deprave  and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the  matter   contained  or embodied  in it."  I have  italicised  the  passages which seem clear  improvements on  the Hicklin  definition; an item must be corrupting or depraving as a whole, and not merely show a tendency, while  there  must  be a fair  likelihood  of corruptible persons reading it; this should  effectively  thwart any hypothetical arguments about  isolated passages of works like Ulysses or The  Psychology of Sex depraving child­ ren  who  may  happen  to chance  upon  them.
The  second  very important provision of the English Act  (which  inci­
dentally  is described  as "An Act to amend  the law relating to the publi­
cation  of obscene matter; to provide  for the  protection  of literature; and to strengthen the law concerning pornography")  is that  which  relates  to works of literary, scholarly or artistic  merit. This falls into two parts. The first states specifically that  neither  a conviction nor an order for forfeiture shall be made "if it is proved that  publication of the article  in question  is justified  as being for  the  public  good on the ground  that  it is in the in­ terests of science, literature, art or learning, or of other objects of general  concern". The  second provides-and this also is a major  victory for the cause of intellectual and  artistic freedom-that "the opinion  of experts

5

EDITORIAL



as to the  literary, artistic,  scientific or other  merits  of an article  may  be admitted in  any  proceedings  under  this  Act".   No  longer  need  we see what   happened on  several  scandalous  occasions  in  the  past-English court  rooms  filled with  distinguished  critics  who  had  come  to give evi­ dence on behalf of a work of literature and were not even allowed to take the witness stand.
In  addition to  these  major  advances  in  the  English  legislation,  it  is worth  noting  three  important minor  provisions.  Bona  fide ignorance of the  contents  of a prosecuted work is to be accepted as a defence. Pub­ lishers and  authors are  allowed  to appear in court  to defend  a  work in the  event  of  the  prosecution  of a  bookseller  for  selling  it.  Finally,  the eagerness  of informers should  be somewhat  blunted  by a  provision  that  "if as respects any articles brought  before it the court  does not order for­  feiture, the court  may if it thinks fit order  the  person on whose informa­ tion  the  warrant for  the  seizure  of  the  articles  was issued  to  pay such costs  as  the  court  thinks  reasonable   to  any  person  who  has  appeared before the court to show cause why those articles should not be forfeited." One hopes that  English magistrates will apply this clause with the fullest ngour.
Now  let  us turn  to the  changes  in the  Canadian law.  These  also in­ clude  a new definition,  but they do not include  anything resembling the safeguards for serious literature which make  the  English Act so notable. "For  the purposes  of this Act,"  reads the new Canadian definition,  "any  publication a dominant characteristic of which is the undue  exploitation of sex, or of sex and  any  one of the  following  subjects,  namely  crime, horror, cruelty  and  violence, shall  be deemed  to  be obscene." Here,  in­ deed,  is a radical  departure from the Hicklin definition, since the nature of the work -and not its possible effect -is made the criterion by which it shall  be judged  obscene. At first sight  this might  seem an advantage, since at  least  theoretically it takes the argument out of the hands  of the sentimental defenders  of youthful  innocence  hypothetically threatened. However, an examination of the clause soon reveals a dangerous vague­  ness in  the  choice  of words which  seems to place  the  prosecuted work virtually at the mercy of the judge's opinions. How are  we to identify  the dominant  characteristic of any work? How are  we to decide  whether sex is unduly exploited?  Such questions test the ingenuity even of professional  critics. They  can only be answered  subjectively.

6

EDITORIAL



Furthermore, compared with  the  new  English  definition,  ours is  un­ satisfactory since it contemplates the condemnation of a work not because as a whole it is likely to deprave  or corrupt, but merely because a single dominant characteristic may  be objectionable; the  significant  rejection  by the Minister of an opposition  amendment that  this be changed to "the  dominant characteristic" leaves it open to prosecutors or magistrates to argue   that  a  work  may  have  several  equally  dominant characteristics and  that  if an emphasis  on sex is merely one of  them then the work must be condemned. Certainly, as it stands this definition is unclear  enough to allow many works now sold freely in Canada to be condemned by prudish judges.
It is true  that  the Minister has said that  the new definition  is intended
to apply to "a certain type of objectionable material that  now appears on the news-stands  of Canada and  is being sold to the young people of our country  with  impunity", and  that  works which have serious literary pre­ tensions will continue to be dealt  with  under  the Hicklin  definition  (the  original  definition  and  not the advantageously amended one in the Eng­ lish  Act). But  no provision  is made  in the legislation  for  such separate treatment, and  therefore we have  no guarantee that  the new  definition will not  be used indiscriminately in dealing with  books of any kind. Mr. Fulton  may speak in good faith; he cannot speak for the good faith of his successors or even for  that  of the police authorities who will presumably  bring prosecutions under  the Act.
Again,  the Minister has made a great deal of the fact  that  provision is
now  being  made  under  the  new law for a publication to be prosecuted quite  apart from  its vendor,  so that  a forfeiture may be ordered without the  conviction   of  any  person.  However,  the  law  does  not  specifically guarantee that  the vendor  shall  not  be prosecuted,  and  here  the matter is left to the discretion  of provincial  attorney  generals, so that  the danger of a bookseller  incurring a heavy fine or imprisonment may be lessened, but it is certainly not removed.
As to  provisions  for  the  defence  of literature such  as distinguish  the
English Act, it is in these that  the Canadian legislation is totally deficient. A small group  of opposition  members  supported an amendment provid­ ing for  the  new definition  to be applied only to a publication "which  is without   literary or  scientific  merit". The  amendment  was  rejected  by the  Minister and  his reason  for doing so, as expressed during the discus-

7

EDITORIAL



sion  in  committee, must  strike  anyone  who  takes seriously  the  issue of artistic freedom  as both frivolous and obstructionist. "It seems to me," he remarked, "that the  insertion  of those particular words  ('and which  is without literary  or scientific merit') would impose definitely on a person who intended to publish  an obscene book the  necessity merely  to put  in one chapter, or indeed  one paragraph, with  literary or scientific merit, and  then  he  would  argue  that  his book  did  contain some  passages  of literary or scientific merit.  Therefore, he would say, this book should not be found  to be obscene." It would not, one imagines,  have been difficult for a government genuinely concerned  for the  public  good in matters of literature and art  to have formulated a clause that  would have protected bona  fide examples  of serious writing  while excepting those curious pro­ ducts  of ministerial fantasy,  books which  perform the extraordinary feat of being bad throughout except for the single good paragraph that  shines out like a diamond in the mire.
As for expert  evidence, that  got very short shrift  from  Mr. Fulton. "It
is my view,"  he said, "that this type of definition  does not lend  itself to the  giving  of opinion  evidence  by experts." And  Mr.  Fulton's view  un­ fortunately prevailed.
The  lack  of space  prevents  me from  dealing  with  the  clauses  in  the Canadian act  which  provide  for  enforcement; I  have  concentrated on the  issues which  most  immediately concern  authors. And  these  aspects alone  reveal  that  our legislators  have imposed  on us an  equivocal,  hasty and  dangerous law  which  can  only  bring  a  new  element  of insecurity into literary life.
But  before  leaving  the subject  one cannot avoid  recording one's im­ pression  of the  difference  of atmosphere surrounding the  passing of  the two  Acts.  Once  they  had  taken  the  plunge, the  English  Members of Parliament seem to have been inspired  by the sense that they were carry­ ing out  an  historic  reform, and  the speech  with  which  the noted  British jurist, Lord  Birkett, introduced the Act into the House of Lords had what  the  Times Literary  Supplement called  "a  Miltonic ring" as he spoke of the  freedom  of writing  in clear  tones which  make one  return with  em­ barrassment to the  timidity  or-worse-the indifference that  prevented all but four of our Members  of Parliament from voting for the protection of literature.
The  English  have  re-written Areopagitica for  their  own  generation,

8

EDITORIAL



and  re-written it well. We have allowed our legislators to re-write  it very badly,  and  it becomes our  duty, as men and women interested in serious literature, to remind  them  unequivocally  that  Milton  belongs to our tra­ dition  as well, and  to make  sure  that  all  the victories  do not go  to the pressure  groups  which  would like to undermine the freedoms  of  expres­ sion he so convincingly  defended.













THE NEXT ISSUE of Canadian Literature will be devoted largely  to current Canadian books. It  will include  the annual Bibliography of books and  literary articles in English  and  French, and  also an extensive review  section  with  articles by, among  others,  Herbert Read, Peter Quen­ nell,  Margaret  Ormsby, Jean-Guy Pilon  and  R.  E.  Watters. The  longer  features of  the  issue  will  include   The Story  of a Novel   by  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan and  a study of the  literature of the Klondike Gold  Rush by Pierre Berton, a  long  satirical poem  on  literary trends  by Wilfred  Watson and articles by  Hugo McPherson on  the  novels of Robertson  Davies  and  by James Reaney on  the  work  of Jay  Macpherson and  other  younger poets.
Other articles  to appear in Nos. 3 and  4 will include studies of Canadian anthologies by Robert Weaver, of the immigrant in Canadian literature by  Ruth  McKenzie, and  of  the  CBC  Critically Speaking  pro­ gramme by Tony Emery, some reflections  on the  role of the dramatist by Lister Sinclair, and  essays  on  Anne  Hebert's poems  by  Jeanne Lapointe and  on the  plays  of Gratien Gelinas  by Marguerite Primeau, together with a feature on Eskimo poetry by Edmund Carpenter, including translations of  poems  and  Eskimo drawings. Early  issues will  also  contain previously unpublished drawings by B. C. Binning, Jack  Shadbolt, Molly  Bobak  and Gordon Smith.





9



A CAT AMONG
THE	FALCONS


Ethel Wilson

REFLECTIONS ON THE WRITER'S CRAFT





Let FAME,that all hunt  after in their lives, Live registred upon our brazen Tombes,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death: when spight of cormorant  devouring  Time, Th'  endevour of this present breath  may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythes keen edge, And make us heyres of all eternitie.



So WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,  the worthy  Friend and Fel­ low of his chroniclers Henry Condell and John  Heminge-worthy Friends  and  Fellows too-takes up his pen and  tears into yet another play, and in the rush of the very first words of the play we hear all the winds of heaven blowing through. No one taught  him how to do this. There was no need, for he knew. This was one of God's spies, who wrote of the ungentlemanly goings-on of the dog Crab,  thrusting "himselfe into the company  of three  or foure  gentleman-like dogges under  the  Dukes table", yet this was the man  who set  down  the five terrible  words, "never, never,  never,  never, never".  His own mark is upon the words he wrote,  and  the endeavour of his present  breath did buy that  honour which made  him heir of all etern­ ity. This,  I think,  translated into ordinary talk about  writing  in our coun­ try and about  its future,  is my theme.
It  is about  fourteen  years since I first put 5o,ooo  or so words down on paper  and began, later,  to think about  the inner workings of a person who

IO

A CAT  AMONG THE  FALCONS



wntes  even an ephemeral book. The writing part  was not done in secrecy but in privacy  and, as far as I am concerned, conditions of privacy are the only conditions  under  which writing can be done. I am sure that  the busi­ ness of writing is one of the four or five most private things in the world, excluding  the planning of international treaties or crime.
The   under-educated person,  appearing in  a  learned   journal,  has  a
slight attack of the shivers and is at a disadvantage in educated company, but one soon resumes the pleasures of ordinary conversation. Of conversa­ tion, that  practical man  Henry  Fielding said that  one of the natural and essential  parts  of a  novelist's  equipment  is conversation-talking in the daytime, talking  far into the night, and with all kinds of people. Conversa­ tion is a book of knowledge  concerning people. It can be electrically  sur­ prising-or not; and there are moments when it is one of the most charm­ ing and  rewarding of human  joys. So is silence.
I  will  tell you why I  have placed  at  the beginning  of this article  the noble words  with  which  Shakespeare opens one of his comedies.
To begin with,  the words are written  by the hand  of glory, and  that  is enough.  Further, they  were written  for a generation of men who loved glory and fame,  not coefficients of expansion or statistics. Further, I think of Shakespeare himself  and of the great  endeavour of his present  breath that made him heir of all eternity, and of lesser men than he, whose poetry and  prose have made  them at least heirs of time. And then I think of our own future, here, in which we seem to take a hand.
When  much  time  has  been spent in summoning  and  examining invis­ ible images, in excitement, progress, recoil, and probable destruction, and at last a point  is reached at which  the inner note of  completion is struck and  the  manuscript is reluctantly or  eagerly  passed  into  the  publishing  hand-a writer  of novels, great or small, has been through  a curious priv­ ate experience. The  emotions  and thoughts among which he has lived (it may be for months  or for years, depending on his own character, powers, and  object) have  provided  a second life which  is apart from  the life he leads with people, sorrow, amusement, love, breakfast, death, motor cars, illness, satiety  and  change, and  yet it  pervades  them  all. I cannot  think that  at  any point  during this immersion  in work  the majority of writers seriously contemplate the idea of Fame or, as we say, fame. Perhaps these generations are  less ardent. Keats,  with  his tragic  fore-knowledge upon him, was a great  and touching  exception.

II

A  CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



But if the writer  has some merit,  much  merit,  or astounding merit  in which  a rich and  powerful quality  is manifest,  if indeed  he has the Gift, then,  like a  thunderclap or like the strong  slow movement of waters  or glaciers, comes fame. He may by that time be dead. The  thunderclap may be a misfortune, its effects transitory,  and  its sound  superseded by other sounds, soon forgotten. Young Colin Wilson received such a thunderclap and  his fame  was perhaps his misfortune  but he still has time, an active acquisitive  mind, and possibly little  judgment.



MY HOPE is that  with the help of initially sound and natural individual processes we may in Canadian letters  attain that hon­ our which shall make us at least heirs of time.
I say "initially sound"  because  the  chances  of our  literary fame  are joined delicately  and strongly to the conditions  and  progress of our early education at  the  present  time  and  place.  These  conditions  are  so  self­ evident  that  we  tend  not  to see them.  Before  the  young student  leaves school, he should  be early familiar  with the function  and construction of a sentence  (the  sentence is a bridge,  or it rests), and  the paragraph. He should be familiar in a simple way with precis work, which trains thought and  manipulation of language.  He  should  begin  to recognize  that  the sentence  is something in itself which can be expanded and sometimes  re­ duced  in a variety  of ways. His spoken  and written language should  be flexible and  fairly  easy through  the medium  of conversation, answers  to questions  ("True or False"  will not help), and  through frequent simple well-corrected exercises in  the  form  of tales  or essays. Then he can say what  he has to say in the way he wants to say it. This  is a great  deal  but not  too much,  and  it can  be assimilated, and  should  be and often  is not, before a student  leaves school, whether or no he proposes to enter a uni­ versity. If the student proposes to enter a university  he then finds the ord­ inary use of written language no barrier, but an approach. And if he is the story-teller, here are his tools to his hand.
Early  education in  the  arts  of reading  and  writing, and  now a later habit of wide and very varied reading  (wide and varied enough  to enlarge the faculties  and prevent  derivative writing)  sharpen the self-criticism  of

12

A CAT  AMONG THE  FALCONS



the  person  I  am  considering-the potential  writer.  But  the  Gift  is the crown,  and  the lack of the Gift is the lack of a crown.
Assuming that  a potential writer of fiction has also the power of observ­
ation,  that  he has something that  needs to be said or told, and  a sort of osmosis, writing  is an art  very much to be learned  by doing. Not even the judicious  commentaries of E. M. Forster  (Aspects of the  Novel), Percy Lubbock   (The Craft of Fiction), Elizabeth  Bowen  (Notes on Writing  a Novel), the  contributions to  discussion in Writers at  Work  (Malcolm Cowley), or  the  studies  of Lionel  Trilling can  teach  a  potential writer how   to  write,   whatever provocative  pleasures  such  books may  give  to either  a potential or a practising writer. As Lubbock  says, "It is pedantry to force rules upon a novel. We know of novels which  everybody  admits to be badly constructed, but which are so full of life that  it does not ap­ pear  to rna tter."
And  so, the  course  known  as "Creative Writing" renders  me  uneasy and year by year I am apprehensive lest the results in our country  may be marked by a current mode or--contrariwise-a straining after  difference, and  lest our  writing  may  become derivative  and  undistinguished. These courses can  stimulate and  give pleasure,  and  that  is great  gain;  but  the odds are  there.  It is a branch  of study not indigenous here,  I believe, but it is sporadic on this continent  and  will increase,  whether I like it or not. I first recognized,  unforgettably and  years ago, the  echoes of a Thomas Wolfe  manque in  productions from  our  neighbour's house,  and  I  have since heard other  echoing sounds.
Of twelve Canadian novelists whom I have in mind, I will mention  four
dissimilar  names-Gabrielle Roy, Morley  Callaghan, Robertson Davies, Colin  McDougall. I do not know the writing  processes, early or later,  of any of my twelve writers  but I am impelled  to think  that  most of  them­ equipped with their natural and varied gifts and their early acquired pro­ cesses of  language-travelled their  own legendary  way.  I  cannot  avoid the conviction  that  a writer  who can already  handle  his tools and  write,  is thereafter self-taught by writing  (how the view opens out), and  thus a literature is made.  I am  well aware  of being what  E. M. Forster  calls a pseudo-scholar, and  I have scholarly friends who disagree with me on this whole subject. It is possible that  a preference for early and  thorough fa­ miliarity with  language, for privacy of intention, and  the individual road in the matter of "creative writing" (I borrow the term, it is not mine), is

13

A CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



a personal idiosyncrasy only; but as I look over the wide reaches of writing and at the highly personal art and act of writing, I don't think so.
Something puzzles me -what  is the  boundary between  creation and
non-creation? One man writes about  Peru and  Peruvians; he writes what is undistinguished and true. The  Editor  of this Review  writes about  Peru and  its people  and  there  is manifest  truth, and  creation from  manifest truth, the outward eye and the inward  eye. One man writes about  a river, but Roderick  Haig-Brown writes about  a river that  never sleeps; there is truth and  there  is creation, the outward eye and  the inward eye. Here  is one of the mysteries that  make literature.
With  no thought of becoming a writer, I left school  to enter  life as I
found it to be, which included  earning  a living. Following  a hard-working and  happy  schooling in a spartan boarding school my education became unorthodox, eclectic,  spotty,  and  ceaselessly  interesting. The   joys of a little  learning are  very great.  My own discovery  of John  Donne  almost before  he  had  again  entered  the  recognized  Re-Establishment, dazzled me. My roaming  discovery of the First Folio was as intoxicating to me as to the first readers  of it  (Shakespeare should  be read in Folio). The great blank  spaces in my map are too great  and  I may be trapped there,  but I cannot  grieve  very much.  These  discoveries of one's own are strong  and sweet  and  lively. A university  education is uniquely  valuable and  to be desired,  different  in kind from these vagrant discoveries smelling of sage­ brush.  The  record  in the  U.B.C. Alumni  Chronicle, alone, indicates the impressive contribution that graduate students make to our world, nation­ ally and  internationally. But here, I think,  we are conversing  about  writ­  ers and  how they come about  and  where  they go. The  absence of an en­ riching  university  education does not  prevent  the  practice of the art  of writing. A shoddy early education may prevent  it and probably will unless one is a natural, like Samuel Hearne.
If we  examine  a great  novel which  attains and  keeps  a  measure  of fame, we are aware of the flavour of the writer's personality in that work, as a peach  tastes like a peach, caviare  like caviare, an onion like an onion. Although we rarely find in great  works an over-awareness of the writer's self,  narcissism,  a  deliberate self-consciouness,  the  mark  of  personality endures. If Henry James had been advised and convinced  that The Wings of a Dove is "oh so beautifully" and nigglingly constructed and that con­ versations  beat about  the bush (which may or may not be true), he might

A CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



have faltered in his intricate mode of writing and the pervading contmu­ ing essence of Henry  James  would have departed. If Henry Fielding  with his knowledge  of life's  dark  places and  his shrewd  unpretentious gaiety had  been advised  that  it is against  the rules to stop by the roadside  and laugh  at  the  customers,  he would have smiled  his long-nosed  smile and continued to make  his pertinent and impertinent observations, for that  is Henry  Fielding. The  individuality of a great original  writer, set into ac­ tion  by who knows what  deep springs and events, produces  James  Joyce who produces Ulysses which William Faulkner  does not produce, because he is William  Faulkner. The  strange man  Marcel  Proust-not  Balzac, whose voice is different-writes A la  Recherche  du Temps Perdu.  The  unique  and inspired  idiocy  ( oh frabjus day)  of Lewis Carroll, and no one else,  gave  us  the  "Anglo-Saxon  attitude", without   method   but  with meaning. I do not enjoy Sir Herbert Read's novel The  Green Child; but does that  really  matter?  The artist's  personal  vision and  expression  are there  in his strange story. The  unknowable  Ivy Compton-Burnett, not the wise and  knowable  E.  M. Forster,  exposes A  Father  and  His Fate. All these  people  are  different,   immensely  expert,  original,   unteachable. I think  that  is literature. I have shot my arrows very high at  these names, because  we are thinking  of fame, and of some of the constituents of liter­ ary  fame.
Some  of  the  people  that  I've  been  talking  about  sit  upon  Olympus. Somerset  Maugham does not pretend  to sit upon Olympus,  but I wonder if there is any novelist anywhere in the English-speaking world today who can write a straightforward story like Cakes and Ale, full of humanity and dexterous exposure.  He is a master  of the involuntary revelations of con­ versation. Henry  Fielding would approve.
I wish to talk  about  Ivy Compton-Burnett because  she is an  extreme example of the  explosion  of personality  in truly  original  writing.  Some people lay her books down. I read her with almost painful pleasure and incredulous admiration. One  had  better  not read  two of her  novels in a row, that  is too many; a few pages, read with cold chills, will suffice, and then  some  more.  Metaphysical, metaphorical, and  real  doors open  and shut.  She  plays tricks with  time and  place. There are  sinister reverbera­ tions of thought in a closed room. Not a sentence  may  be missed, for it hooks into a sentence  past or to come or it strays into the universal air and the meaning hangs  there.  There is no landscape.  The currents of a mind

IS

A CAT  AMONG THE  FALCONS



rise for one moment  to the visible surface,  taking  their  place in the story as violently as a railway disaster, scattering the injured. The  demons are phoniness and domestic cruelty. Threads of moral  beauty  appear, vanish, re-appear in the sombre fabric of the tale from time to time, establishing (but  elusively)  the ultimate  facts of good and  evil. All this is done with ease,  certainty, and  a  sardonic  wit.  Who  could  have  taught her  these curious  powers?  No one. No one knew all this before, although the words lay here and  there  for anyone to use. Let  us not have another Ivy Comp­ ton-Burnett. One  is enough. If this accomplished writer  of  fiction,  who knows so much  more  than  we do, should  offer  to instruct  us  (but  she would  not), should  we accept?  No, she is too much  herself, and  rightly.
There is a moment,  I think,  within a novelist of any originality, what­ ever his country  or his scope, when some sort of synthesis takes place over which  he has only partial control. There is an incandescence, and from it meaning emerges, words appear, they take shape  in their order,  a fusion occurs.  A  minor  writer,  whose gift  is small  and  canvas  limited,  stands away at last if he can and regards  what  he has done, without indulgence. This  is a counsel of perfection  which  I myself am  not able  to take  with skill, but  I must try to take it. I am sure that  the very best writing in our country will result from such an incandescence which takes place in a pre­ pared  mind  where  forces meet.  (A  writer's  mind  seems  to  be situated partly  in the solar plexus and  partly  in the head.)   We do not look to an earnest  mediocrity amongst  us but  to this  personal  incandescence in a lighted  mind  in whatever  manner  it  shows itself.  I  think  it  was shown here, lately,  by Sheila Watson in the small book The  Double Hook. Such work as that  is individual, an emergence from  within,  not to be copied.  We can  recognize  this phenomonon, great  or in miniature, wherever  we see it.




DuRING THE YEARS before the war,  1937-38,  I began to write.  I did not contemplate a future in this occupation-life as it was seemed already full-yet now, for the first time, I found  it imperative to write.  In  my childhood  we had stood, in Vancouver, on a sort of subsoil of a culture which, as the forests came down, had  been vaguely prepared by our forebears in the haste of building  and  earning. They  had  arrived

16

A CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



at  the water's edge  with  their  violins and pianos, some books, some pic­ tures, ideas, undoubted aspirations, opinions-or nothing whatever. Many had  memories,  no money and  a dubious future.  Suddenly a small public library  was housed. Here  was this subsoil of theirs and this was where we stood when I was a child.
When,  all these  years  later,  it seemed imperative to me that  I should
write,  I knew of no outlet  for "my kind of thing"  nor for an individual in Vancouver who was so looney as to think  of writing,  then.  I sent some pieces to the  New Statesman  in London  and they were published. Then the war  closed down on us all. The  distinguished,  sarcastic, and  admired Head  of the Department of English at the University of British Columbia said  to  me  during the  war,  "You  are  a  damfool  not  to  write". I  was pleased  by the  compliment but  disregarded  the  advice  as I  had  other things to do, and one must go one's own way. Life took another direction.
After  the war I immediately wrote an innocent novella which was pub­ lished  in Canada and  in England  and  I then  became  aware  of  literary  criticism  in our country. I had long been addicted to the reading of liter­  ary criticism  with great  respect and liking.
When  my husband and I were married in I 92 I, an impecunious cousin
sent us the most valuable present of our lives. It cost him ten shillings, sale price-or  was it five? This  was a six months'  subscription to the New Statesman  with which were later incorporated the Nation and the Week­ end Review. This weekly publication was execrated in all its works by the Right,  venerated by the  Left,  and  early banned  by Hitler. That was my first introduction to literary and  artistic  criticism  and  political  polemics. I soon read in all directions, regardless of politics and schools. What  would have  happened in  my own  mental  life in a geographical area  that  was then still a periphery, not a centre, if this very fortuitous influence had not arrived  and at that  time, I don't quite know. Something else, more or less, because  of a child's  rigorous  education and curiosity,  for  I had  become one of Condell  and  Heminge's "Great Variety  of Readers".
Hard  years came  when  literary  magazines  died-Middleton Murry's Adelphi,  Cyril Connolly's  Horizon, Orion in London. Here  I wish to pay affectionate and  admiring tribute  to my friend  Alan  Crawley  and Con­ temporary Verse, to brave John Sutherland and Northern Review, and to Here and Now whose life was too short; these have taken their permanent place in the record of Canadian letters.

I7

A  CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



In  those years immediately following the war, most  (but  not all)  liter­ ary  criticism  in our  country  was insipid  and  uninformed.  Now, in  that  scene, there  is divination  in Canada. The  falcons  cruise high above and search  the literary plain where the game becomes more plentiful. Looking  about  us, we see and  hear  in many  places and ways that  the art  of criti­  cism is in a healthy state. Without  that,  those of us who attempt to write  would  be poorer.  But with the increasing  popularity of this art,  there  is also a fringe  of prentice  comment  which  goes by the name  of criticism.  It is one  of  my  favourite  indoor  games-this game  of opinion-but I know that  it does not qualify as the art of criticism.
Critics  of novels, some unkind  people  say, are  disappointed  novelists.
That is not true. The critic has probably no desire to write a novel, though some have done so, failed, taken the bitter  medicine, and they then know more  about  the  peculiar  difficulties and  vagaries  of the task the novelist sets himself. The  finely acid or wise or  benevolent and  instructed pen of a superlatively good critic  is the  pen of a writer. Whether that  critic  is writing  about  a recent  novel, a history of Crete, or a reprint of the life of the ant, he has a quality  that  makes him a tingling  pleasure  to the reader who  may  not  even  care  about  ants.  The  written and  the  deliberately spoken  reviews of V. S. Pritchett stay in the memory.
A wry reflection  that  decades of reading  expert  criticism  cannot make a writer  out of a knowledgeable reader,  does not detract from  the value of good criticism.  Neither  does it damn  the reader. The  reader  reads for stimulation, pleasure,  and  even  for  information, and  by  that  form  of osmosis which  true  readers  share  with  writers,  he acquires  perhaps dis­ crimination, perhaps a catholic  and  adventurous taste,  and  the gates of perception are  held open to him. But however  much  those years of read­  ing  and  criticism  may enrich  his life, they  will not of  themselves  teach  him to be a writer  any more than  years of  knowledgeably watching first class tennis will teach him to be a tennis champion. The  Gift is imponder­ able and  unpredictable, and there is no satisfactory substitute.
If eminent  critics  disagree,  that  makes  expert  criticism  peculiarly in­ teresting and  sometimes amusing. Opposite opinions of the unusual Aus­ tralian novel Voss by Patrick  White  and of James  Gould Cozzen's wordy novel By Love  Possessed point to human fallibility  on the part  of  people who are  supposed  to know everything. That is reassuring  for those of us who  indulge  in non-conformity of opinion  or who are  early inclined  to-

18

A CAT AMONG THE  FALCONS



wards scepticism.  Wit can be a delight in a serious critic, but not solemn­ ity,  the  voice  of  the  prophet or  the  Great  Panjandrum.  Dullness  is a misdemeanour.
I find that  in talking  about  novelists, their lasting or passing fame, and
their  critics  (who  are  an  undetermined factor  in fame) , I am  thinking first and  always as one of "the  Great  Variety of Readers"; in a small but definite  degree  as a writer; but not at all as a qualified  critic.  I am not a cat among  the pigeons.  I am a country cat among  my friends  the falcons who are handsome, formidable and trained  birds, equipped to detect and pounce  upon  error. It  will be better,  now, to take my convictions  safely indoors  and  sit looking out of the window at what  I can see, and  at  the sky which is so beautiful.



WOOD  ENGRAVING BY  BRUNO  BOBAK

19



A COLONIAL
ROMANTIC

MAJOR JOHN RICHARDSON, SOLDIER AND NOVELIST


Desmond   Pacey

PART I: THE  EARLY YEARS




MAJOR JOHN  RICHARDSON was the first Canadian novelist to achieve  an international reputation; his best novel, W acousta, has appeared in some twelve editions and was in print  for over a century; he was the first Upper  Canadian poet to have a volume of verse published in Great  Britain; as a soldier he distinguished himself for gallantry before he was seventeen  years old;  as a journalist  he played a significant  role in the 183 7 Rebellions. He was undoubtedly the most colourful  figure in our colonial literature, and as certainly  the most obnoxious.  Excitable, bellig­ erent, haughty, and quick to take offence, his life was a succession of quar­ rels, controversies,  and duels. Yet no full-length biography of this colonial romantic has ever been written, I and the facts of his birth, marriage, liter­  ary and  military  career,  and death  are still in doubt. The purpose  of this article  is to shed some new light on these obscure facts.
Various  dates  have  been suggested  for  Richardson's birth,  but  there seems to be no doubt  that  the correct  date  is October 4,   796. His birth­ place  was the  village of Queenston, near  Niagara Falls. His father, Dr. Robert  Richardson, was a Scottish surgeon  attached to Simcoe's Queen's Rangers, and  the scion of a Jacobite  family.  His mother was Madelaine Askin, second daughter of the prominent Detroit merchant, Colonel John

I The nearest   approaches to  a  full  biography of  Richardson are  to  be found in A. C.  Casselman's introduction  to his edition of The  War  of 1812  (Toronto, 1902) and  W. R. Riddell's John Richardson  (Toronto, 1923).

20

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Askin. The  biographies of Richardson all state  that  his maternal grand­ mother, the first wife of John  Askin, was a French  lady. The  john Askin Papers," however,  which  fully document  that  merchant's career,  make it clear  that   the  novelist's  grandmother was an  Indian:  "Askin  was  the father of a numerous family of children. The  three elder children, John  Jr.,  Catherine, and  Madelaine, were  by an  Indian  mother, concerning whom  we have  no certain knowledge." This  Indian blood in Richardson helps to explain  the great  interest in and admiration for the Indian which is revealed in all his work:  his long narrative poem, Tecumseh, is a tribute  to  the  bravery  of  that  famous  Indian Warrior;  Wacousta is a  tale  of Indian warfare; and   Indian  characters appear,  usually  in  a  very  fa­ vourable  light, in almost all his novels.
The  john  Askin Papers shed other new light on the parentage and early
life of John  Richardson. There are a number of letters from Richardson's mother  to his grandfather both before and after her marriage to Dr. Richardson, and  there  are also letters from Richardson's father. Some of these letters  include  direct  references to the future  novelist. For example, on February 18, 1798, Madelaine wrote in part as follows: "The children are well. John  walks everywhere  and is as fat as ever. He is very fond of sleigh riding  for he loves a horse." Already,  before he was two years old, Richardson was revealing  the love of fast horses that  was to be one of the constant  passions of his life! On August 6, 1801 Dr. Richardson wrote to Colonel Askin from St. Joseph's  as follows:

I hope  John  is a good  boy and  attentive to his Grandpapa. Madelaine frets  a little sometimes  about him,  but  I am  perfectly  easy myself as I am  certain he is with his best friends, next  to ourselves.

This  letter  reflects the fact that,  since Dr. Richardson's duties compelled him to move about  a good deal from station  to station,  John spent a large part  of  his boyhood  with  his grandparents in Detroit. His  grandfather filled  the  boy's mind  with  stories of colonial warfare and  of trading ex­ peditions  into  the  wilderness,  and  his grandmother told him of her own experiences during the siege of Detroit  in Pontiac's Rebellion. Many  of these reminiscences he was later to incorporate into his novels.

•  The John  Askin  Papers, Vol. r: 1747-1795, edited  by Milo M. Quaife, Secretary­ Editor, The Burton Historical Collection. Published  by the  Detroit  Library Commis­  sion,  rg28.

21



A COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Thus  fired with  dreams  of heroic combat,  young John  Richardson did not  hesitate  when  the  United  States  declared  war  on  Great   Britain  in June,  I 8I 2. Although he was only fifteen, he immediately enlisted  as a gentleman volunteer and  during  the next sixteen months  fought  in every engagement in which  his regiment-the 41st-was involved. On August
3, 1813, Richardson was commissioned as an ensign, and it is interesting
to note that  in his Eight Years in Canada Richardson declares  that it was his friend Sir Isaac Brock who secured his commission for him: thus early was  born  another of Richardson's life-long habits,  that  of relying  upon personal  influence  for advancement. However,  Richardson was taken prisoner in October of I8I3 at the disastrous battle of Moraviantown, and spent the following year as a prisoner-of-war in Kentucky. His harrowing experiences as a prisoner  are vividly described in his first novel, Ecarte.
His sufferings in captivity in no wise cooled Richardson's martial ard­
our. Once  released  on exchange, he  joined the  2nd Battalion of the 8th King's  Regiment as a lieutenant, and sailed for Europe  in June,  I815 to take  part  in the  war  against  Napoleon.  He reached  Europe to find that the  Battle  of  Waterloo had  been fought  during  his ocean  passage  and, along  with many  other  junior officers, was almost immediately placed on half-pay. By pulling  strings,  he managed to win a return to active status on May  25, 1816, and sailed with his regiment for the West Indies. Dur­ ing this voyage, made  in November,  1816, Richardson's haughty temper  had  an  opportunity to  display  itself;  he  was disgusted   by  the  pranks played  when  the ship crossed the Equator, and refused to submit himself to shaving  and  other  indignities.3  His spirits were,  however,  restored  by his  first  glimpse  of  the  beauty  of  Barbados-his  description  of which provides a sample of his romantic enthusiasm:

Nothing could  exceed  the  beauty  of this island which, as we approached  sufficiently near   to  distinguish trees  and  plantations, appeared to  rise like  a bed  of emerald from  the  deep  bosom of the  waters.  Much  of that  beauty moreover arose  from  the association of idea,  for  having  left  England at a moment when  the  bleak  winds of autumn had   robbed   the  fields  of their  green  and  the  trees  of  their  foliage,  to  be thus,  as it  were,  transported suddenly into  a new  and  luxurious season,  excited  a sentiment of delight....  Alas! how  few reflected  that  in  that  island  so fair  to the


3  For  this  and  other information relating to Richardson's experiences in  the West
Indies, see his  Recollections of the West  Indies, New  Era, March 2, 1842 et seq.

23

A  COLONIAL  ROMANTIC



eye, lurked the seeds of death, and  that  in the light  atmosphere which  crowned its ever-green summits played  those exhalations which  are fraught with subtlest  poison to the health of the European.

Richardson is referring in that  last sentence, of course, to the yellow fever which  at  this  period  of history  made  the  West  Indies  a graveyard for British  soldiers.  Within  ten days of his arrival, Richardson himself  fell victim  to the disease, and although he temporarily recovered  sufficiently to undertake military  duties,  he was eventually invalided home.  He  re­ mained   long  enough  in  Barbados,  however,  to form  strong  feelings  of disgust  for  the moral  laxity, the caste-snobbery, and  the slave-system of the island.  Richardson's impassioned  but well-reasoned attack on slavery, in his Recollections of the West  Indies, is one of his most attractive pas­ sages.
By October I 8 I 8, Richardson was again  back in England, and  on the half-pay list. Almost nothing is known of his activities during  the next ten or  twelve  years. It is assumed,  largely from  the internal evidence  of his first novel, Ecarte, that he alternated between  London  and Paris, leading the life of a young man-about-town and of a minor  journalist. He is sup­ posed to have contributed articles  to English  newspapers and magazines  describing life in Canada and the West Indies, but no one has ever docu­ mented  this statement, and I have been unable to trace any of his periodi­ cal  writings.  We do know that  in  I828 he published his narrative poem Tecumseh, in  I82g  his  novel  Ecarte, and  in  I832  Wacousta.  Another certain glimpse  of Richardson during  this period  is  provided  by a War Office  Return of Services for  I828.4 Under the  heading "The officer is here  required to state,  whether he is desirous of service".  Richardson has written in his flowing, impatient script: "Desirous,  and anxious for Serv­ ice-Repeated applications having been made  and  replied  to on the sub­ ject by his late  Royal Highness the Duke  of York." It is a characteristic glimpse: Richardson eager and impatient, and furiously pulling strings.
But the chief significance of this Return of Services is that  it allows us to clear up, at least to some degree, the mystery of Richardson's marriage. Previous  biographers have  agreed  that  "about I83o",  Richardson mar­ ried "an  Essex lady", whose first names are always given as Maria Carol-


4   Public  Record Office.  War  Office  Return of Services  etc.   (wo   25), Vol.  772,
p.  130.

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



inc  and  her  last  name  either  not  at  all or as Wrayson.  The  Return of Service,  however,  gives the date  of his marriage as August  g, 1825, and the  place  the  British  Embassy  in Paris.  This  lead  made  it  possible to trace  Richardson's marriage certificate  among the Miscellaneous Foreign Records  in the  General Register  Office, Somerset  House,  London.5  The certificate reads as follows:

Marriages  solemnized in  the  House  of H. B. M.'s  Ambassador in Paris in  the Year

1825
John  Richardson, of the Parish of St. George in the County of Middlesex, Bachelor, and  Jane Marsh of Leamington in the County of Warwick, Spinster, were married in this House  this Twelfth Day of August  in the Year One  Thousand eight  hundred and  Twenty five by me George  Lefevre   for Ed. Forster, Chaplain.
This  marriage  was solemnized between  us John Richardson

Jane  Marsh
In the  presence of E. Bloque
]. F. Lemaire


Thus is established beyond all doubt the date of Richardson's marriage and the name  of his bride. But, as so often happens, to solve one problem is only to create others.  Previous biographers have felt confident in giving Maria Caroline as the first names of Richardson's wife because there is a tombstone  in the Butler  Burial Ground  at Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, reading  as follows:

Here reposes Maria  Caroline, the generous-hearted, high-souled, talented  and  deep­ ly  lamented  wife  of M ajar  Richardson, to  the  everlasting grief of her  faithfully  attached   husband.  After   a  few  days'  illness  at  St. Catharine's on  the  16th  of August, 1845.

One   must  assume,   therefore, that   Maria  Caroline was  Richardson's second  wife,  that  Jane Marsh  died  between  1825  and  1837,  and  that

s  Since I have  not been  to the United Kingdom since this research was instituted, I am  indebted to  various  of  my  students and  friends  for  locating these  documents. I express  my gratitude here  to Messrs. Hugh Peacock,  Allan  Donaldson, F. Algar,  Dr. W. K. Lamb, Col. C. P. Stacey,  and Major Bateman.

A  COLONIAL  ROMANTIC



Richardson's second marriage occurred  during this same  period.  I base the  assumption about  the dates  on the  facts  that  Richardson brought  a wife with  him to Canada early in 1838, and that  we have such a full knowledge  of his life in Canada after 1838 that  we should be sure to know about  the death  of Jane and the re-marriage to Maria Caroline had these events occurred  in Canada. Diligent  search  on the  part  on many  people has, however,  failed  to unearth any record  of either  the death  of Jane or the  marriage to  Maria   Caroline.  The  only  missing  part  of  the  jigsaw puzzle that  has come to light is the identity of Maria Caroline. Her obit­ uary in the Gentleman's Magazine  reads as follows:
On  August   I6,  at  the  residence  of the  Rev.  Mr.  McDonough at  St.  Catherine's, Maria Caroline, wife of Major Richardson, Superintendent of Police  on the Wei­ land   Canal, the  second  daughter of  William   Drayson, Esq.,  of  Brompton,  near  Chatham, Kent.6
We know, then,  that  Richardson was twice married, in August of 1825 to Jane  Marsh  of Leamington, Warwickshire, and  later  to Maria Caroline Drayson  of Brompton, Kent,  and that  his second wife died at St. Cather­ ine's on August  16, 1845; but we do not know when his first wife died, or when he married for the second time.
Apart  from  his marriage to Jane  Marsh, the only exact  knowledge  we have  of Richardson between  1818 and  1835 is that  he published  three books and one pamphlet. The first book, Tecumseh, is a verse narrative of Indian warfare in the manner  of Byron's Childe  Harold. If he had hoped to emulate Byron in waking up to find himself famous, he must have been gravely  disappointed. The  only review of Tecumseh which  I have suc­ ceeded  in tracing states curtly: "We  can only say that  the feeling which prompted it is better  than the execution. The  notes are exceedingly inter­ esting."7  Whether the author of this  brief  review  was being serious  or sarcastic,  the fact is that  the notes to Tecumseh are more interesting than  the poem itself. Some of them give us glimpses of  Richardson's boyhood, and one of them is an early example of his penchant for the sensational:

To  the  propensity of this  tribe  for  human food  the  Author can  personally attest. Strolling through the Indian encampment an  evening or two after  the action of the Miami on  the  5th  of May,  I8I3, he, in  company with  another officer, suddenly

6  Op.  cit., New Series, XXIV: 665  (July-December,I845).
7   Literary Gazette, No. 604, p. 519  (August  I6,  I828).

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



found  himself  among  a party  of Minouminies who were seated  round a large  fire above  which  was suspended their  untempting meal.  At  the  surface  of the  boiling water  appeared an offensive scum, and each  warrior  had  his own particular portion attached  to  a  small  string, one  end  of  which  hung  over  the  edge  of  the  vessel immediately opposite. They stated  with  evident  satisfaction, that  it was an Ameri­ can,  and  extended their  invitation to the  Author and  his companion, who to con­ ceal  their  loathing, while  declining the honour, were prudent enough to dress their  countenances  in  a  forced   smile,  which   but  ill-accorded  with  the  state   of  their  feelings.  It would  have  been  unwise to have  manifested disgust.
That the Indians may have been joking seems never to have occurred  to Richardson: he was never distinguished  by his sense of humour. And the subject  of cannibalism had  a peculiar  fascination for  him;  he often al­ luded  to it, most nauseatingly in The  Monk Knight of Saint  john.
Richardson's literary ambitions  were not easily daunted. If he could not succeed in verse, he would try prose; if British readers were not inter­ ested in tales of Indian bravery,  they might  be intrigued by revelations  of French  vice. Accordingly, he set to work on a novel of fashionable dissipa­ tion in the French capital-Ecarte, or the Salons of Paris. This  book cer­  tainly brought him notoriety, if not fame. Its anticipated revelations were heralded before  publication in The  Athenaeum  of February 25, 182g; it was praised  by some reviewers as an instrument of virtue, and damned by others as an instrument of vice; it served as the text for a long and earnest  sermon in the. Westminster Review on the evils of gambling. The  Literary Gazette,  which  had  so curtly  dismissed Tecumseh, could  damn but not dismiss the book; in typical self-righteous  style, it fulminated :

This  is  another of  those  detestable publications whose  only  tendency can  be  to deprave the  mind  of  even  the  most  superficial  and  thoughtless readers. It is not easy  for  us  to  describe  it,  certainly not  to expose  it,  without polluting our  pages with  obscene  extracts....  Unfit  to be seen beyond  the  precincts of the  stews, the profligate manners of which  it describes,  Ecarte is merely  less pernicious in conse­ quence of the contemptible talent  of its would-be  libertine and  licentious author...8

This  hostile  review,  which  Richardson explains  as the consequence of a threat by  William  Jerdan, publisher  of the  Gazette, to damn the  next book published by Henry  Colburn, served Richardson as the occasion for one of his many quarrels. Here is his own version of the affair, as given in a footnote  to Eight Years in Canada:


8   Op. cit., March 28, 1829, p. 208.

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



On  the very next  day after  the ill-natured and  threatened critique had  gone forth to the  public,  there  was an  evening  reunion of literary people  at  Mr. Redding's­ the  author of  the  'Beckford   Papers' etc-at which  were  present  Harrison Ains­ worth, Thomas  Campbell, Silk  Buckingham  the  author of   'Tremaine',  Charles Oilier, and  a  number of other  distinguished writers  of  the  day....  Late in  the evening.... Jerdan made  his appearance.... After  conversing a short  time  with those  who  were  most intimate with  him,  he came  up  to  me,  a personal stranger, and  said  "he  should  be very happy  to have  the  pleasure of taking  wine  with  me."
... I rose from  a tabouret on which  I had  been sitting  near  the feet of the mistress of  the  house,  and  exchanging a  significant   glance   with  her,  observed   that   Mr. Jerdan did  the  author of Ecarte  too much  honour in  inviting him  to drink  wine with   him,  but  that  nevertheless   I  should  be  most  happy to  accept   his  proposal. Jerdan stared, drew  up  his eyebrows, seemed  for  the  first  time  conscious  of a mal entendu, bowed  stiffly, sipped  his wine, and   then  turned to converse  with  some­ body  else.
Such personal  feuds were the stuff of life to Richardson; from this time forward there  was scarcely a moment  when he was not involved in a con­ troversy  with somebody. Some of his enemies  he attempted to wound  in his next  publication, published  like Ecarte  anonymously-Kensington Gardens in 1830, Canto  I of a projected satirical narrative poem  mod­ elled on Byron's Don juan and brought out as a pamphlet by Marsh  and Miller  in 1830.
A measure  of fame, as distinct  from  notoriety, came  to Richardson in
1832  with  the  publication of his most  ambitious novel, Wacousta. Re­ viewers on both sides of the Atlantic were almost  uniformly favourable to the  book. The  London  Satirist stated,  "The perusal  of this novel has af­ forded  us more  satisfaction than  anything of the  kind  which  has fallen within  the range of our reading in many a long day",9  and the Athenaeum concluded a three and a half column review with this measured judgment:
The merits  of this novel consist in the spirit  of its historical pictures, which  possess, at  least, the consistency  of truth. The  writer  displays  no ordinary share  of graphic power,  and  has  the  rare  talent  of 'rendering a fearful battle in music'.  His descrip­ tions  of scenery  are  well executed, but  unfortunately they  are  rare.  The story  itself is not  very consistent or  very probable, but  it maintains its interest to the end.' 0
American reviewers,  while  criticizing  some  improbabilities in  the  plot, also wrote at length  of Richardson's gift for vigorous narration, powerful
9   This  review  is quoted in  H.  J. Morgan's Bibliotheca C anadiensis; I  have  been unable to trace  the magazine itself.
10  Op. cit., Dec. 29, 1832.

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



scenes, and  vivid descriptions. And the novel was apparently popular with the  general  public,  for six editions  were published  within  the first eight years, and  subsequent editions in 1851, 1868, 1888, 1906 and 1923.
After  such  a success, Richardson might  have  been expected  to settle
down to the life of a popular novelist. But his restless temperament could not long remain content  with any one kind of life. Literary fame was not enough; he still yearned  for martial glory. For sixteen years he had been vainly  longing  for  active  service;  inI 834 an opportunity offered and he seized it eagerly.
Civil war  broke out in Spain  between  the legitimate monarch, Queen
Isabella, and  the  pretender to the throne,  Don Carlos. The  British Gov­ ernment, while  remaining officially neutral, sanctioned the  recruitment of a British  Auxiliary  Legion.  Richardson enlisted,  was  promoted to a captaincy, and  later  to a majority at the storming  of San Sebastian, and  created a Knight of Saint  Ferdinand by the Queen of Spain. Since he also wrote no less than four books about  the campaign, it would appear at first glance that  Richardson had finally found a full measure of satisfaction for his soaring  ambition. Unfortunately his own  haughtiness and  pugnacity again  betrayed him. While convalescing  in London from his wound, and shortly  after  issuing his  journal  of the Movements of the  British  Legion
( 1836)  in which he defended the Legion and its commander, General Sir De Lacy Evans, against  the hostile criticism of the Tories in the House of Commons, Richardson heard  that  he had  been  passed over by General Evans in a list of promotions and  decorations.  He promptly added a sec­ tion to the  book bitterly  attacking Evans as a cowardly  and incompetent commander, and  reissued it in 1837 as Movements of the British  Legion with  Strictures on the Course of Conduct Pursued by Lieutenant-General Evans.  Never one to drop  a quarrel lightly, Richardson followed  this up with  a  second  attack, The  Personal  Memoirs   of Major  Richardson as connected  with  the  singular  oppression of that  officer while in Spain  by Lieutenant-General Sir  De  Lacy  Evans,  published  in Montreal in 1838 after  Richardson had returned to Canada. The final assault was made in a satirical novel in which  Evans is the thinly-disguised  villian-Jack Brag in Spain, never published in book form but published  serially in the early eighteen-forties in Richardson's Brockville newspaper, The  New  Era.
The  ramifications of this quarrel and its aftermath are too complex  to detail  here.  In  retrospect, the whole affair  has a comic opera  air. When

29

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Richardson returned to Spain  in  I837 a  military  Court  of Inquiry was held to "investigate and report  upon the conduct  of Captain Richardson,
6th  Regt.,  for having  while in England  thrown  out imputations in print, and in letters  addressed  to the Military Secretary, calculated to cast dis­ credit  on the conduct  of the  Legion  in the  glorious  action  of the 5th  of May". Richardson managed  to shift  the subject  of the inquiry from  the nature of his remarks  to the nature of his conduct  in battle, and as there never  was any  doubt  about  his personal  bravery  he  managed to win  a favourable verdict-but at the cost of whatever vestiges of popularity he retained with his fellow officers. Back in London, the affair  was brought  up several  times in debates in the House of Commons,  where  the govern­ ment's Spanish  policy was a subject  of  intense  controversy.  Some  mem­ bers favoured direct  participation on  the  side of the  legitimate Queen; others  felt  that  even to allow  the volunteer Legion  to participate was a dangerous precedent. Since the first edition of Richardson's journal of the campaign defended  the Legion, and the second edition  tended to discredit  it, he found  himself quoted  by both sides, and  there  was much  confusion as to which  book was being quoted.  In  the  debate  of April I 7,I 837, for example, we find Mr. O'Connell trying to clarify the issue as follows:
The  gallant officer opposite,  in  the  course  of his speech,  had  talked  disparagingly of the 10th Regiment, upon  the authority of one Richardson, whose book was really two  books;  the one  written  when he was in favour with General Evans,  and  there­ fore  all in his praise, the other  written after  he had  been dismissed  the service, and,  of course, all against  him.I  I

When  the "gallant officer" referred  to, Sir  Henry  Hardinge, interjected that  Richardson had nothing  but praise for Colonel O'Connell, the latter said  "he  should  be sorry  to  receive  praise  from  such  a quarter as Mr. Richardson. If he was not mistaken,  all the officers of his regiment refused to speak  to him." The  debate  dragged  on intermittently for months,  and as late  as  March I3,  I838, after  Richardson had  left  for  Canada, Sir Henry  Hardinge was still trying to make clear which  edition  of Richard­ son's chronicle  he was quoting.I
Embroiled in such fruitless controversies,  Richardson must  have wel­
comed  the news of the I837 Rebellions in Upper and Lower Canada. His

" Parliamentary  Debates, 3rd series, Vol. XXXVII, p. I385.

·Ibid, Vol.    XLI, p. 847.

A  COLONIAL  ROMANTIC



resoluLion to return to his native land is expressed with Miltonic gravity: "Canada being the land of my birth which, while a mere youth, I had left with  my regiment  in I8I5,  I naturally felt some solicitude  for its welfare, and as the news which reached England  by every packet  was of a nature to induce  the belief that  my services might  be available in her defence, I resolved  to embark  forthwith."' 3 He  embarked  at  the London  Docks on February I8, I8g8.

'3 Eight  Years in Canada (Montreal1848)  p. 6.


A  SECOND ARTICLE BY  DESMOND PACEY CONCERNING  THE LATER LIFE OF   MAJOR  RICHARDSON  WILL   APPEAR  IN  OUR  NEXT  ISSUE.





LINO-CUT  BY   BEN  LIM

31



UNE 	POESIE
D'EXIL





Gilles Marcotte



LE LECTEUR FRANCAIS n'Cprouvera  gen&alement, de­ vant  la poesie canadienne-franc;aise d'aujourd'hui, aucune impression  de depaysement. Il  peut  lire  un  recueil  d'Anne Hebert, par  example, ou
d'Alain Grandbois, sans meme soupc;onner qu'il  a paru  outre-Atlantique, c'est-a-dire dans  un  climat  physique  et  spirituel  fort  different du  sien. Entre  la poesie qui s'ecrit a Paris et celle qui s'ecrit  a Montreal, il n'existe assurement pas  de cloison etanche. Les memes  influences  litteraires s'y retrouvent, et si l'on peut  definir, quant a la France, une aventure poet­ ique  commune, cette  aventure est  partagee par  les poetes  du  Canada franc;ais.
On  peut  done se demander s'il est permis-et si oui, dans quel sens­
de parler d'une  poesie canadienne-franc;aise. Au debut  du siecle, encore, plusieurs  de nos poetes se distinguaient aisement: par  un  bric-a-brac de themes  patriotiques et regionalistes,  inseres avec  plus ou  moins de  bon­ heur  dans  des formes  passe-partout. Ces signes tout  exterieurs sont au­  jourd'hui revoques,  et  l'on  convient   qu'avec  Saint-Denys  Garneau la poesie canadienne-franc;aise s'est resolument tournee  vers l'homme, vers l'universel. De Ia a dire qu'elle  n'a  plus rien de canadien, il n'y a qu'un pas. Mais, pour le faire, il faudrait ignorer  les liens tres etroits que gardent entre  elles les oeuvres les plus significatives d'aujourd'hui; entre  elles, et avec  ce qu'avait donne  de  plus vrai  la  poesie  canadienne-franc;aise du siecle  precedent. Notre  poesie  n'est  plus  enfermee   dans  ses frontieres; mais cette  liberte  meme qu'elle  a  conquise  l'a  conduite a explorer  avec plus de conscience  et de rigueur un paysage spirituel qui lui appartient en

32

UNE  POESIE D'EXIL



propre. En ce sens, elle revele, au-dela des differences de formes et de filiations litteraires, une tres profonde  unite. Dans la mesure meme ou elle echappe aux facilites  du pittoresque local, la poesie canadienne-fran<;aise rejoint  une interrogation fondamentale, qui est celle de son enracinement, de sa reussite humaine dans un lieu donne.




(ETTE INTERROGATION, on l'entend deja chez l'ancetre Cremazie, qui  ecrivait, aux  environs  de  I8so,  des  poemes  effroyable­ ment lourds, enchifrenes, soumis a des influences etouffantes. Mais les vers de sa Promenade de trois morts, si maladroits soient-ils, disent  avec sin­ cerite  une difficulte de vivre, qu'on aurait trop vite expliquee par le temp­  erament personnel et quelques  circonstances  penibles.  La  premiere voix poetique qui  s'eleve  au  Canada parle  de la  mort; de la mort,  non pas comme  un repos, une paix,  un au-dela,  mais de celle qui pourrit de l'in­  terieur   tout  espoir  d'enracinement.  Une  interdiction de  vivre  ice.  Le temoignage de Cremazie, d'ailleurs,  sera bientot  corrobore. Son contem­  porain  Alfred  Garneau avoue la meme  hantise  des cimetieres,  la meme desaffection  a  l'egard de !'existence. Quelques annees  plus tard,  Albert Lozeau:
]e sens en moi grandir une ame d'etranger.

Quand la poesie de cette  epoque  renonce a ses alibis patriotiques, senti­ mentaux ou religieux,  c'est  cela qui reste:  un sentiment d'etrangete a la vie, d'exil radical. Ses paroles les plus justes sont paroles d'effroi, de regret,  de desespoir, et elle s'abandonne, sous divers pretextes de fiction litteraire, a d'etranges maledictions.
On  peut  s'en  etonner; voire, s'en scandaliser.  11 ne semble pas normal
que  les premiers chants d'un  peuple  jeune, repute jovial et sain, engage dans  une  rude  aventure de survivance,  soeint autres qu'heroiques. Mais c'est lase faire  une idee un peu simple de la realite  canadienne-fran<;aise. Nos premiers poetes  n'avaient rien de primitifs; c'etaient des Europeens deracines. Par  toute  leur  culture,  par  les fibres essentielles de leur  etre moral,  ils continuaient d'appartenir ala  France. Ils n'etaient plus totale­ ment fran<;ais, pourtant. Un autre style de vie, d'autres appartenances, un autre solles  requeraient. Un autre  "paysage", qu'ils n'avaient pas encore

33

UNE POESIE o'EXIL



reconnu,  et dans  lequel  ils ne s'etaient pas encore  reconnus.  Le Canada ne pouvait  etre,  pour ces poetes, un lieu humain parfaitement suffisant. Faire  un pays, ce n'est pas seulement defricher, batir  des villes, edicter  des lois, c'est  aussi-et surtout-reinventer  l'homme, dans  un reseau  de co­ ordonnees  nouvelles. L'Americain n'y est pas encore arrive: Alfred Kazin a  pu parler  dans  son recent  essai sur les lettres  americaines, d'une "im­ pression de  depaysement ressentie sur  notre  propre sol". Si  l'Americain souffre,  aujourd'hui, d'un  tel depaysement, qu'en  sera-t-il  du Canadien
fran<;ais, affronte a la meme  tache  d'humanisation, mais  replie  sur  lui­
meme, isole en Amerique par sa langue meme, prive des secours qu'offrent
le nombre  et la richesse a ses voisins du sud?
Et comment, des lors, s'etonner  que notre  poesie s'interroge, avec une constance  et une angoisse toutes particulieres, sur sa condition d'exil?




NoN PAS qu'elle en evoque frequemment la figure ex­ terieure,  qu'elle se retourne  avec nostalgie vers ce qu'hier encore on appe­ lait,  au  Canada fran<;ais, la "mere-patrie". Elle ne peut  recevoir son hu­ manite d'ailleurs-et  la France,  dans  uncertain sens, lui est un ailleurs.  L'exil que subit la poesie canadienne-fran<;aise est celui, sans forme ni vis­ age, qui se loge au coeur, et nourrit  la tentation de !'absence. Absence ala realite  exterieure, a  la  realite  sociale:   a  mesure  qu'elle se degage  des cliches  patriotiques et  regionalistes,  cette  poesie  se decouvre  sans  voix devant   les hommes,  devant  les paysages  qui  devraient etre  siens. Tres  rares,  parmi nos  poetes, sont  ceux  qui  ont  affronte les grands  espaces americains; et ils n'en ont tire qu'un avec de neant, ce "silence des neiges aux  epousailles  seches de vide", qu'evoque la poesie d'Yves Prefontaine. Mais le plus souvent, les paysages, les chases, sont a peine evoques. On se tient  a l'ecart, dans  une intimite douloureuse, ou l'exterieur n'est admis  qu'apres avoir  perdu  sa qualite  d'autre. Ce qu'on a coutume d'appeler le reel devient  ici un jeu d'images  pures, sans autre appui, sans autre titre a I'existence, que leur resonance interieure. A I'extreme, voyez Le Tombeau des rois, d'Anne Hebert: on y parle  de fontaines, d'oiseaux,  d'arbres, de maisons, de villes, mais les images evoquees par  ces mots sont privees de coloration individuelle. Le particulier n'existe  pas pour  cette  poesie. Elle ne  nomme, elle  ne  possede que  le plus  general, ce qui  commence tout

34

UNE  POESIE D'EXIL



juste  d'cxistcr. Elle  nait  en  meme  temps  qu'un  monde; ou plutot,  elle renait, dans  le sentiment que tout  lui a ete enleve, interdit, et qu'il  faut
tout reapprendre a partir des elements.
Tout  reapprendre, et soi-meme d'abord. Car si la possession des choses parait  menacee, le poete  n'eprouve  pas moins de difficulte  a se posseder lui-meme, a realiser sa propre  unite. La figure definitive de !'absence, nous
Ia  trouverons  ici:   dans  une  alienation interieure, dont  la  poesie  cana­ dienne  fran _;aise n'a  jamais cesse de porter  le temoignage. On  pense au vers de Saint-Denys-Garneau:

]e marche  a cote d'une  joie
D'une  joie qui n'est pas a moi ...

C'est pour avoir fait eclater en pleine lumiere, pour avoir vecu et exprime, avec une sincerite bouleversante, cette alienation, que Saint-Denys-Garn­ eau  a exerce  une influence  decisive sur la recente evolution  de la poesie canadienne-fran _;aise.  Avant  lui,  beaucoup  de  choses avaient ete  dites, mais  par  echappees seulement, avec  des  reticences,  des hesitations; et
aussi, il faut  l'avouer, dans des formes poetiques surannees,  peu propres  a
liberer !'expression. Chez Saint-Denys-Garneau, liberation de la forme et liberation de la  parole  vont  de pair.  Desormais,  il sera  de  plus en plus difficile d'eviter quelque dur  affrontement. La  poesie  canadienne-fran­
,;aise a trouve  son centre: avant  toutes choses, elle confesse une division interieure, un  profond  malaise  a vivre. D'Anne Hebert a Alain  Grand­
bois, de Jean-Guy Pilon  a Roland  Giguere,  il n'est  pas aujourd'hui, au Canada fran _;ais, de poesie digne de mention,  qui  ne se mesure  d'abord au peril de !'absence. C'est dans ce combat  qu'elle affirme, de plus en plus largement, son humanite, et qu'elle  rejoint  les poesies contemporaines les
plus significatives.




ON NE   MANQUERA  PAS,   en effet, de  remarquer que plusieurs  des caracteres attribues a la poesie canadienne-fran _;aise pour­ raient, tout  aussi bien, s'appliquer a plusieurs poetes fran _;ais de l'apres­
guerre.  Une  difference  subsiste, cependant, qui fait  que les memes  mots, en  France et au  Canada, ont  memes  sens ... et ne l'ont  pas. Le poete

35

UNE POESIE o'EXIL



franc;ais est arme comme le canadien ne l'est pas. II possede un langage­ quelque difficuhe qu'il eprouve a le recreer; une culture--quelques dures secousses qu'elle  ait subies. II habite une maison, meme menacee de ruine, ou il se reconnait  aussitot,  ou les moindres objets  lui offrent  un sens im­ mediatement recevable.  Le poete canadien-franc;ais commence plus bas, dans  une  pauvrete plus nue. Ses pessimismes--ou ce qu'on  designe sou­ vent de ce nom-ne sont pas les pessimismes europeens. II en est encore a reconnaitre sa demeure,  a conquerir  son droit  ala vie, ses libertes  avec lui-meme et avec les choses. La poesie canadienne-franc;aise est une poesie des premieres demarches.





LINo-CUT  BY  KEITH  BRANSCOMBE



A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH

A.  M.  KLEIN's  The  Second Scrall



M.  W.  Steinberg







SINCE ITS PUBLICATION in 1951, A. M. Klein's The Second  Scroll  has been recognised  by discerning  critics as an outstanding novel and  yet-surprisingly in view of the author's considerable  reputa­ tion  as a  poet-it has received  scant  attention. It is, indeed,  a  story of complicated form,  in  which,  on  the  simple  framework of a  nephew's
search  for a long-lost uncle, Klein weaves a moving pattern of contempor­ ary Jewish  history seen as the fulfilment  of age-old religious and  national aspirations. The  return of the Jewish  people to the Holy Land,  regarded as a miracle  manifested by God, establishes in part  the religious theme of the  novel.  Concurrent with  the  development of this theme  and  bearing  on it is the question  of faith  in God and the acceptance of His ways.
The  historical context  in which  the story takes place  is the period  be­
tween  1917,  when  pogroms  in Russia  terrorized  the Jewish  population, and  1949, a year following the establishment of the state in Israel.  It con­ tains, therefore, an account of the sufferings of the Jews in exile, the exod­ us from  Europe, the  land  of their  enslavement, and  the  return  to the Promised  Land. It  parallels in this respect  the  first scroll, the Old Testa­ ment, as the history of the Jewish people. The parallel, which is obviously indicated by the  title of the  book and  by the chapter headings, Genesis, Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numbers, Deuteronomy, is  carried  further as Klein sees in contemporary events,  in the achievements of the Jewish  people, the working out of their destiny-a working out that  is for him explicable  only  in  religious  terms.  And  further, just as  the  Torah comprises  not

37

A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH



merely  the Bible, but also the commentaries on it-the Talmud, for ex­ ample-which expand  upon  the  events  in  the  Five  Books and  explain  them,  completing the message, so too in Klein's The  Second Scroll there  are  five glosses which  elaborate upon  or  which  help  us interpret events in the story. The  parallel  so obviously indicated in the structure suggests more  than  actually  obtains  in  the  material.  There is  little  or no direct  connection, for instance,  between  the Book of  Leviticus and  the chapter Leviticus in the novel, or between the rabbinical discussions in the Talmud and  Klein's  glosses. The  pentateuchal form  of The  Second Scroll with the  Biblical  labels,  may  be  justified,  however,   by  the  major   thematic parallels of the two scrolls.
The  central theme  of the  story  is established at  the  outset.  Melech
Davidson,  a pious scholar, appalled by the atrocities which he witnessed in  Russia  in I 9I 7, renounced  his faith  and  sundered himself  from  his people  because he could not reconcile his belief in a loving and  just God with  the unspeakable depravities which  He permitted. No longer able to depend  on God for  justice, he joined the Communist Party  to help bring it  about,  and  he  devoted  his zeal and  dialectical skill,  acquired in  the study of the Talmud, to the service of his new master. The German-Soviet pact  of  1939,  which  resulted  in  the  handing over  of  three  and  a  half million  Jews  in eastern  Europe  to the  Nazis, made  him  believe that  his Marxist ideology  had  been  "a  saying  of  grace  before  poison"  and  he abandoned this faith too.
Thus  spiritually isolated  and  bewildered he existed  until  rounded  up with  the  rest of the Jews of Kamenets for extermination. Finding him­ self, by accident or miracle, the sole survivor of the massacre at Kamenets, he felt  the  need  to identify  himself completely with  the martyred Jews and  to express their  lives through his own.  In a letter  which his nephew  received  just  before  his departure for  Israel,  Uncle  Melech  wrote,  "At times I feel-so bewildered and burdened is my gratitude-that the num­  bered  dead  run through  my veins their plasma, that  I must live their un­ expired  six million circuits, and  that my body must be the bed of each of their  nightmares".
His  re-affiliation with  the  Jewish  people  was advanced by his  intel­ lectual  and  spiritual experience on  viewing  the  magnificent  figures  by Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel. He was directed to the art treasures  by Monsignor Piersanti, a subtle fisher for souls in troubled waters  ( typi-

A TWENTIETH CENTURY PENTATEUCH



cal  of  those  who  hovered  in and  around  Displaced  Persons'  Camps  in Europe  shortly  after   the  war)   who  hoped  to win  a Jewish  convert  to Roman  Catholicism by  impressing   the  sensitive  faith-seeker  with  the glories  of Christian art.  But  Uncle  Melech's  interpretation of  Michel­ angelo's  pictorial sermon  had  an opposite effect. The  panels exalting  the human form,  glorifying   the  flesh,  reminded   him  of  the  wracked  and wrecked bodies in the Nazi slaughter-camps; the panels depicting Biblical scenes  establishing the  kinship  of God  and  man  made  him  aware  that  human  slaughter is also deicide.  The interpretation of Christian art  by Christian history  for  Uncle  Melech led  not only to a rejection of Chris­  tianity   but  to  its  indictment.  Some  of  the  frescoes,  particularly "The Separation of  Light  from  Darkness", were  positive  in  their  assertions prophesying for him  life,  not destruction. In a long circular sentence  in which,  says  the  narrator,  he  distinguished  between  commas,  in paren­ theses,  all  the  thirteen  credos  of Maimonides, Uncle  Melech  climaxed  and completed this spiritual experience.  Thus the paintings of the Sistine Chapel led the uncle to a re-affirmation of Judaism.
Through incident  and symbol, Klein goes on to suggest that  more than
an individual re-affirmation is involved. Uncle Melech,  we learn, delayed his departure for Israel.  Like his Biblical forebears  who, according to the commentaries, had  to wander  for forty years in the desert  to be cleansed of their  slave mentality, to be welded into one and  to be purified  before ascending  into  the  Promised Land,  he,  too, who  had  "not  yet got  the
'galuth' [exile] out  of his system",  had  to purge  himself  of his ambiv­
alent  attitude towards his former  life, his loving and hating it at the same time.  For  this  he had  to experience  the suffering of the "galuth" to the full, "to  feel in his own person",  as his friend  Krongold said, "and upon his own neck the full weight of the yoke of exile", and in so doing achieve a sense of oneness  with  all,  even the most wretched. With  this in mind Uncle  Melech, the   European Jew,  went  off  to  Casablanca  where  he mingled and  merged  with the humblest of all Jews, the inhabitants of the mellah. There, though  he soon made himself  persona non grata with the authorities, he persisted  in denouncing violently the filth, the humiliation and  submissiveness  characteristic of life in  the  mellah.  In  a  symbolic gesture  that   proved  he  was not  an  "outsider" philanthropically aiding rather remote  alien  fellow-religionists, but rather was one with  "his Se­ phardic brothers", he led a procession of lame and  blind  beggars  to free

39

A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH



their  imprisoned fellows. At this point  Klein  indicates the changing role of Uncle Melech  through the symbol of a photograph. When the nephew, who has  not  yet seen the face of his uncle or its photographic image,  is shown  Uncle  Melech's  picture  in  Casablanca, he  discovers  it  to be "a double, a multiple exposure". He describes his flight over the Mediterran­ ean  to Israel  as "an  ascension, a going forward in which  I was drawn  on and  on  by  the  multiple-imaged appearing and  disappearing figure  of Uncle Melech". Then  in Israel, where  the nephew traces  Uncle Melech,  the  identification of the  Uncle with all Jewry  is complete, for wherever  the  nephew  looks, the stances,  the faces,  even  the  names  of people,  all evoke in him  possibilities of his  Uncle.  When  the  process of the  Uncle's  merging  into  the people of  Israel is complete, the  individual disappears from  the  scene,  murdered  by Arab  marauders. It is clear  that   Uncle Melech  is to be taken as the Jew in exile, and his experiences,  his divaga­ tions from  the faith-his enticement to other  ways and  beliefs-are those of his people,  as are  his sufferings, the  burden of the "galuth", and  his eternal quest  for  truth  and  justice, and  his final ascendance to the Pro­ mised Land.




As THE  ROLE of  the  Uncle  undergoes  change, the meaning of the nephew's search, its purpose,  becomes clearer. The  thread of narrative is the  journey  of a Jewish-Canadian  journalist to the  new
state  of  Israel  to  discover  for  his publishers the  poetry  of  the  re-born people.  A second  and  more  important strand of narrative grows out  of this as the  nephew determines to track  down his uncle while in Europe, a  search   that  takes  him  to three  continents. The  subtly  suggested  shift from  the  literal to  the  symbolic  in  the  presentation of  Uncle  Melech shapes and  gives new levels of meaning to the external framework. The young Canadian Jew,  it is suggested, separated from  his European rela­ tions, is not  sufficiently involved  in their  fate.  Though his concern with their  tragedy and  their  future  in Israel  is real,  one feels that  it  is also somewhat remote, belonging  to the  realm  of dreams,  of  abstract fancy­  ings. His  life, he said, "was, and  is bound  to the country of my father's choice,  to Canada". Uncle  Melech  reminds  him in the letter  that,  "we

A TWENTIETH CENTURY PENTATEUCH



were all in that  burning world, even you who were separated from it by the Atlantic-that futile  bucket". His experiences  in America,  however, differed so greatly from those of his Uncle in Europe that  communication between  them  ceased.  Not having seen even a photograph of his Uncle, as we are  told at the  beginning of the story, he had no steady conception of  the  reality,  and  he  comments, "as  the  years  went  by and  I  myself changed from  year  to year, the image of Uncle Melech  ... also suffered its transformations". His  decision to visit his Uncle,  described  as "a  de­ flecting  compulsion", stemmed  from  his sense of family  obligation, and it is his feeling of family pride that  determined his continuing the search when he learned  of his Uncle's possible conversion to Roman Catholicism. Following  his Uncle's  trail  through Europe,  North  Africa and  Israel,  led him,  however,  to an  understanding of his Uncle's  life, past,  present  and future; for  the  Uncle,  during  the course of the search, had  become  the symbol  of  the  Jewish  people.  With  this understanding came  a sense of belonging, of kinship  with all Jews. His journey and search for the Uncle became  a search  for identification. Now that  he was in rapport with the spirit  of his people  he was able to fulfil his original  mission, which was to find and  evaluate the  poetry of the re-born people. He discovered it not so much  in the  formal  writings  of  the  poets, in the sentimental pastoral  lyrics of  the  kibbutz-dwellers, the stirring  songs of the  nationalists, the nostalgic, plaintive hymns of the religious, or the cryptic utterances of the mystics,  but  rather in  the  poetic imagination of the  people  as a whole, which was most clearly revealed for him in their actions and in the process of vocabulary-building necessary for the resurrection of the Hebrew lang­ uage as a medium of  daily intercourse.
Klein  develops  his theme  further, still in accord  with Jewish  tradi­
tion. In the restrained speeches at the funeral of Uncle Melech,  the Israeli mention  not only "how  he had  become a kind of mirror, an aspaklaria, of the events of our  time", but also "how  he had  through the sheer force of his existence  again  in our life naturalized the miracle". At the same time  that  Uncle  Melech   was  becoming  increasingly  the  symbol of the Jewish  people  he symbolized the Messiah concept.  He literally  rose from the dead in the mass grave at Kamenets, and taking on himself the burden of his people,  he figuratively  brought  the  dead  to life through his own life, actions  traditionally ascribed  to the  Messiah  who is to come.  The symbolic gesture at Casablanca, where Uncle Melech  joined the lame and

A  TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH



blind  beggars  may  well have  been suggested  by a story in  the  Talmud concerning the  Messiah.  Rabbi  Joshua   ben  Levi  in  his search  for  the Messiah was directed  by Elijah  the Prophet to the market-place in Rome, where the Messiah would be sitting among  the blind beggars and cripple3, attending to their  wounds.  Furthermore, Uncle  Melech's name  clearly establishes  his Messianic  role:  Melech  (King)  Davidson (David's son) is none other  than  Messiah, who is commonly  referred to as Messiah  ben David  (David's son)  or simply as "Son of David". There is no contradic­ tion or  confusion  in the  fact  that  Uncle  Melech  seems to act  in a dual  symbolic capacity suggesting to the reader  both the Jewish people and the Messiah.  A  traditional Jewish  view, set forth  by  Maimonides, tends  to identify  Messiah  with  the  people  in a  purified  state,  in what  might  be termed  a Messianic  condition.  The  people contain within  themselves  the Messiah  idea.  To  this extent  and  in this way is the miracle  naturalized.
Though the  naturalizing of the  miracle  through Uncle  Melech  is a
sound  literary  device and  a not  unsound  Judaic doctrine, the author  is not content  with  a simply secular  explanation of the miracle; rather, he makes explicit the intervention of the divine. Not only does Uncle Melech say, "I bless the  Heavenly  One  for my rescue,"  but  the  nephew  too, in seeking an explanation of the historical events, the exodus and the return, rejects  the theories  of a companion on the flight  to Tel-Aviv,  though in­ trigued  intellectually by them.  At  the  end  of  their  discussion  he  asks, "And  what  rOle does Providence  play in your scheme?  You have forgot­  ten, in your thesis, to place God."' And  later  in his sojoumings in Israel  the nephew  becomes fully convinced  of God's  part  in the redemption of the Jewish  people.  "And  now in Israel," he  remarks, "the phenomenon was being made everywhere explicit. The fixed epithet wherewith I might  designate Israel's poetry,  the poetry of the recaptured time, was now evi­ dent. The  password was heard everywhere-the miracle! I had found the key image."


' The companion, an  American journalist, is described as a member of an assimil­ ated  Jewish  family.  Though he is  now  a  Zionist, his  background has  provided him with  a very  scant  knowledge of Judaism, and  his  theories are  presented  in obviously unJudaic  terms.   The  nephew's   rejection   of  these  theories  is  perhaps intended  to suggest  his  rejection of  the  assimilationist's explanation  of  Jewish  history.  If this  is so,  then   the  Canadian Jew's   rejection of  the  assimilationist  position   parallels and  completes the  European Jew's  rejection of  Communism and  Christianity in his search  that  leads  him  back to his own faith.

42

A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH


hns RELIGIOUS  interpretation of events raises a more profound religious question, one that runs through the entire novel and constitutes its central and  most moving motif:  the question  of good and
evil, a  question  which  involves the nature of the  relation  between  God and  man.
At  the  beginning  of  the  story,  Uncle  Melech,  the  devout  Talmudic scholar,   appalled by  the  inexplicable evil acts  perpetrated during   the Russian  pogroms,  raised  the outcry not infrequently heard  in the course of a long history of persecution: "Wherefore doth  the way of the wicked prosper?" But in the past such questioning was less of a challenge to God's authority than  an  agonized  plea for  understanding. Uncle  Melech, the modern  Jew, finding no answer, unable  to reconcile the prevalence of evil with  belief in an all-loving and omnipotent God, forsook his religion. The act  of evil, regarded as an isolated event, was not understood and could not  be  justified; only if one can  see the  whole, Klein  suggests, can  one judge the part. But this full vision, this God's-eye view, is not vouchsafed to man, who nonetheless feels compelled to judge, and in judging, too frequently errs. Because his view is limited or because he is overwhelmed by the immediate tragedy, he fails to see that out of evil can come good, out of death, life. For such an awareness,  faith  in the rightness  of God's acts is essential.  The  centrality of this theme in the novel is indicated by an  extract from  John  Milton's Areopagitica  which  Klein  inserted  in the title page of The Second Scroll:

And  ask  a Talmudist what  ails the  modesty  of his marginal Keri  that  Moses  and all  the  prophets cannot persuade him  to pronounce the  textual Chetiv.

Milton,  in the  passage  from  which  this extract  is taken,  criticizes  those who would change words in the oral reading of the Torah in accordance with  the Talmudic precept "that all words which in the law are  written obscenely,  must  be changed to more  civil words".  This  injunction,  in­ voked for  modesty's  sake, angered  Milton,  as he remarked, "fools, who would  teach  men  to read  more  decently  than  God thought fit to write". Klein  finds this remark a fitting prelude  to his story, saying in effect that  those who presume  to judge the rightness of God's acts are guilty of folly. He  reinforces  this theme,  the need for accepting God's will, by adding a second  prefatory comment in the  form  of an  extract  from  Rabbi Levi

43

A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH



Yitschak's song in praise of God's all-encompassing love."
Through meaningful Biblical allusions and  symbols in the text  of the novel, Klein suggests the reconciliation of good and evil, necessary for the acceptance of God. At the end of chapter Genesis in The  Second Scroll Klein  writes that  the great  smoke that  billowed over the Jews of Europe for the six years following Hitler's invasion of Poland, the smoke of war and from the gas chambers and funeral  pyres, became  their cloud by day, their  pillar of fire by night. This allusion to the instruments by which God guided  and  protected the Jews while in the desert  following  the exodus from  Egypt,  suggests symbolically,  in Klein's  seemingly  ironic  use of it, the theme of good out of evil. Again, at the end of Exodus in The  Second Scroll, immediately after  the  horrifying  description of  the  massacre  at Kamenets, comes the lyric outburst  of the note of hope, symbolised by the Israeli  ships come to collect the remnant for a new life. The startling juxtaposition of the events and  their  moods clearly suggests a close rela­ tionship,  a kinship  of good and  evil. Uncle  Melech  at this moment pon­ ders  the miracle  of redemption, the messianic  nature of  the events. And he concludes:

When   the  years  were  ripened, and  the  years  fulfilled,   then   was  there  fashioned Aught  from  Naught. Out   of the  furnace there  issued  smoke,  out  of  the  smoke  a people  descended. The  desert  swirled,  the  capitals hissed:   Sambation raged,  but Sambation was crossed.3

Later in Israel  the nephew finds the answer  to the question  that  he put to his companion on the airplane, "And  what  role does Providence play in your scheme?  You have forgotten, in your thesis, to place  God." The ob­ sessive  theme  of  the  discovered  poetry  is the  miraculous, and  the  key image  necessary to explain  the remarkable vitality,  the rebirth evidenced  in every aspect  of life, is the miracle.  With  this increasing awareness, the nephew  realized  suddenly  the significance of his own experience earlier

"  Rabbi Levi  Yitschak,  the  Berditchiver Rabbi, one of the most  noted  of the post­ Biblical  Rabbis, is famous  for  his having  summoned God  to judgment to account for the  evil  He  can   prevent   but  does  not.  Klein's poem  on  this  subject,  "Rabbi Levi Yitschak   Talks  To  God"   (in  Hath  Not  a Jew), parallels The  Second  Scroll in  that  in  both  a religious  man  challenges  the  justice  of God's  acts  only  to accept ultimately on faith  His will.

3 The Sambation is a legendary  river  beyond  which  the  lost tribes  of Israel  are  to be found.

44

A  TWENTIETH CENTURY PENTATEUCH



at the Arch of Titus  in Rome.4  His sense of humiliation was transformed to triumph and  the stone of the Arch disappeared at the moment  he re­ called  his Uncle's  words, which  express the essence of faith:  "When the years  were  ripened, and   the  years  fulfilled,  then  was  there  fashioned Aught  from Naught." And the fifth gloss, the final statement in the entire book, restates  in exalted  tones this theme.
This  awareness  of the element  of the miraculous,  of the manifestation
of God's will, led the nephew  immediately after to an act of piety which, he said, "spoke  well for me before the Rebono She! Olam  (Master of the Universe)." He went  in memory  of his mother  to Rachel's Tomb  to say Kaddish, the  mourner's prayer,  and  there  at  the  nearby  synagogue  of Rabbi Yitchok  Luria, the sixteenth century Jewish mystic, he saw, he tells us, a symbol,  an  old man,  bearded  like antiquity, teaching a young boy the Talmud, "forever unaging  in the study of Torah, which is Life". The scene and  the discussion with the old sage strengthen the nephew's grow­ ing conviction  of the  miraculous nature  of the  historical  events. "They affirmed  it for  me,"  he comments,  "the  young boy prodigy  and  the old man  who  looked  like  Elijah: Israel  had  not  only  returned  back  into Time; it still belonged  to eternity."5  Here at last he learns  of  his Uncle's abode,  but  he fails to see him,  since Uncle Melech  was  just murdered. But with  the  new conception of evil and death,  which  is rooted  deep in the Jewish  religion, he is not overwhelmed by a sense of tragedy. Evil and death are not things in themselves;  they have their place in God's scheme and  therefore are  not  to be vilified or unduly lamented. The novel ends with  the  recital  by the  nephew  of the  Kaddish, the  mourner's prayer,  which,  significantly  enough,  does not even mention  death  once. It is not a lament, but,  on the contrary, a Magnificat, an exalting of God and an acceptance of His ways.
It is not my intention here to get involved in this ancient and continuing
question,  the dilemma confronting all who seek meaning and  purpose in life.  Klein's   answer  in  The  Second Scroll to the  question  of evil adds nothing new. The  objections to his answer, which are also long-standing,

4   The Arch  of Titus was built  in commemorate the victory  over the Jews in 70 A.D.
by Titus, the destroyer of Jerusalem and  the Holy Temple.

5 It might be pointed out  that  according to traditional belief the second  coming  of Elijah the  Prophet will  immediately anticipate and  accompany the  coming   of  the Messiah.

45

A TWENTIETH  CENTURY PENTATEUCH



are not invalidated, but neither do they offer the final word. The problem remains  unresolved, for it is essentially unresolvable. One takes up a posi­ tion,  knowing  its  vulnerability, and  orders  one's  life  accordingly.  And Klein,  in this novel, accepts  the traditional Jewish position, an optimistic view which does not regard  reason or will as fixed and final, but as a dyn­ amic  force  capable of expansion  to the  point where  man,  by his efforts, aided  by Divine  Law  and  the  occasional  intervention of a loving  God, approaches a Messianic condition. Klein's novel is based on this assump­  tion, and so despite  the cataloguing of horrors, it ends on an exultant note.
The  Second Scroll is then  not simply,  as some critics  suggest,  a nee­
Zionist novel. Even if one were to regard  Zionism as an expression of  reli­ gious faith and yearning and not merely as an expression of nationalism­ for Zionism,  historically,  was conceived  and  maintained in a category of holiness-such a view of Klein's  intent  is too narrow. The  novel is con­ cerned  fundamentally with religious themes, in that contemporary Jewish history is interpreted in terms of religion  as the coming  together again  of God,  the Jewish  people and  the Holy Land. The events, seen as miracu­ lous, reveal the involvement of God's will. The  Second Scroll, however, is a religious novel in an even more fundamental and  universal  sense. The  universality  of Klein's  religious theme  is made  evident  by his indicating the essential oneness of the three major  western  religions, Judaism, Chris­  tianity  and Mohammedanism. In the third parable of Gloss David,  he in­ sists that  it is immaterial  whether  the  agent  of the  lamp  manufacturer (the  light  creator) is  Mahmad or Ibn  Amram (Moses)   or  Ibn  Yousuf (Jesus); what  matters  is the  quality  of the  light  itself. And  just as the Bible tells not only the history of the Jews, but, more important, recounts  the unfolding of man's awareness of God largely through God's revelation  of Himself  through deeds, so too A.M. Klein  here develops as his central theme  the drama of man losing and finding  God. This  religious theme  is, of course, in this story inseparable from the national theme, for the mirac­ ulous return to Israel is seen as part of God's plan, and is the happy fulfil­ ment  that  furnishes  the  optimism  basic  to a  renewed  faith  that  alone enables  him  to resolve the old dilemma faced  by religious  thinkers,  the problem of evil and its bearing on God's  relation to man.





THE	POETRY	OF
MARGARET AVISON


Milton Wilson








ER MOST READERS of Canadian  poetry, Margaret Avi­ son seems to be less a poet than a kind of negative  legend. One of the first critics to mention  her in print simply regretted  her absence from an anth­ ology; one of the last wondered ironically if she had  ever published  any­ thing  but  "The  Butterfly". This  negative  emphasis can  be misleading. Miss Avison has published about forty-five poems in the last twenty years, and over half of them  have been in Canadian publications. Her  total out­ put may be scattered, but it is sizable enough, and certainly substantial.'
We hear  her called  a very intellectual poet, but she begins  (and  often ends)  with  the perceiving eye. That eye seems to have been educated on the  prairies,  even when  it looks at  the city or the  East.  Where  so much space flows between  object  and object or between  foreground and back­ ground, the nature of the  picture  depends  on the focus  (long-sighted or short-sighted). The  eye may even refuse to separate near  from  far,  and either  flatten  the  grain-elevator against  the sky or  pull the horizon  with all  its infinity  to the  front  of the stage.  Miss Avison likes to stretch and  contract and  revise our vision, as we watch "the  hill and the hoof-pocked dark  between I evening star and mushroom". We are whirled  into space, struck  by  distant boulders,  cut  by sharp  buildings,  and  crushed   under  "leafless  tons of sky". In  "Perspective" she contrasts the  idea  of infinity as  the  point  at  the  end  of a diminishing  vista  with  infinity  as "sturdy everlasting foregrounds". Perhaps the first stanza  of "Rigor Viris"  gives

47

THE POETRY OF MARGARET AVISON



one  the sense of  Miss Avison's outdoor  eye in operation as well as any other  brief quotation:

One  bland  elipse in cornflower  blue Fans out  beyond  the gunneysack. The profiles of Egyptian smiles
Confuse the clues these chimneystacks
Suggest  of smoking miles,
Wed sun to smoke instead, And  blazon that  parade
Of all intolerables in flowing frieze
Against  a pink brick wall in a dun  autumn.

These  problems  of focus or perspective  are  at  their  crudest  in the  early poems. In "I Saw One  Walking" the speaker  loses the proportion of the near  by watching a  man  "as  he made  his way I Up  the  slow slope  of evening". She  returns  to the safety of a closer dark,  but the return is in­ complete, "Tum  where  I may in dread  of the wide  air".  No doubt  the problem  concerns  more  than  the  eye. But  for  the  moment  it  is  enough to notice in Miss Avison's poetry an interplay of fuzz and focus, of windy space  and  solid  structure, of "startled design" against  "the  larger  iri­ descence of unstrung dark".
In front  of the foreground of Miss Avison's landscapes, on this side of the windowframe (so to speak) , are her interiors: offices, warehouses, fur­ nished  rooms. The  structure informing  space  becomes the room squared out of space. In "New  Year's  Poem" the centre  of gravity  is the repeated "windowledge", but the poem ends:

Gentle  and  just pleasure
It is, being human, to have won from  space
This chill  habitable interior.

She likes to dwell on the shape and furniture of rooms, their  inner  order or disorder, their  outside pressed on glass. "Hiatus" is about  the gap be­ tween room-no-longer-inhabited and room-not-yet-inhabitable: in short,  about  moving, or, better  still, about  the suspense of a "mover unmoved". But  the  interior may be oppressive  and  seemingly  windowless. The  eye may become  trapped in its own foreground, as in the last stanza of "The Party":

THE  POETRY OF   MARGARET AVISON



Uo-watt stars in crystal  cups
Keep  all perspectives squat  and square. No alien  unthought breath corrupts This decorous!y  airless air.


Pure  foreground vision is a dead interior; the passive eye must break free and redesign in space. "The optic heart  must venture: a jail-break  I And re-creation." The  square  must seek the circle. And even the circle must spring  free.
If the  front  of the  foreground stifles us, the  back  of the  background leaves  us gasping.  Just  beyond  Miss Avison's immediate horizon  is the total  perspective of the  earth  itself.  In  "The Agnes Cleves Papers" she keeps stretching space and time out to unimagined corners and then snap­ ping them back to the West. The poem ends at nearly full stretch with the speaker  equidistant from  Moscow on one side and  Lima  on the other.  In the  last  lines of "Rich Boy's Birthday  Through a Window" the  horizon suddenly  loops (as on a high-frequency wave)  from a tourist resort where "the peaks  saw-tooth the  Alberta  noon"  to the  "Ionic  shore,  at  Mara­ thon". But Miss Avison's "optic  heart" can be more venturesome and less earthbound than  this. ·Whereas in "New  Year's Poem" we follow


.  .  . the  long loop of winter wind Smoothing its arc from  dark  Arcturus down To the  bricked  corner of the drifted  courtyard, And  the still windowledge,


in many poems we find ourselves moving the other way, "swept I In some siderial  curve", or  plumbing "The skies and  skies and  skies beyond,  the terrible I Layers  of magnitude". The  foreground is a kind of Pandora's box; when we open it out, we unsquare  the circle or unfocus its contours. At the end  of "Rigor Viris"  Miss Avison tries to have the  box somehow open and shut at the same time:


Now, Child  Pandora, lift the lid again
And  let the clamoring mysteries be dumb. In this clear  twilight  contour must contain Its source, and  distances with contours come
Opening peacock  vistas that  can no man entomb.

49

THE  POETRY OF  MARGARET AVISON



A good many of her poems (however  different  in other  respects)  leave us at  the  end  trying  to grasp  a visual structure of this geometric and  par­ adoxical  kind,  like the "liquid Euclids in foolscaps of air" in the last line of "Tennis". This  is obviously true  of the  desperate attempt to stab  an angle  into  a curve  which  concludes  "The Butterfly", but  even  a quite  objective  and  undiscursive  piece like "Stray Dog  Near  Ecully" exists in terms  of similar  patterns. Here  a "dog  called  Sesame"  escapes  from  a Roman  amphitheatre when the gate is opened  to let a bicycle in; he gazes beyond the "Rouault hoop" of the landscape, and, as they search for him in the courtyard, the poem dies away to the echo of his name. "The Agnes Cleves Papers" ends, not merely between  Moscow and Lima, but also be­ tween  the  images  of children playing  hop-scotch and  a  ship sailing  out beyond the gap. The far-off event towards which all this seems to be mov­ ing,  Miss Avison's optical  millennium  of reconciled  curves  and  straight lines, is "Meeting Together of Poles and Latitudes:  in Prospect".






So FAR I have been anxious  to keep prospects literally prospects. The idea of Miss Avison as a "metaphysical" poet, passionately concerned with contemporary science and  theology  and  assimilating dif­ ficult chunks of them in her poems, has only a little  to be said for it. She is sensitive to what is in the air and no doubt  reads widely, but, compared to a Donne or even a Tennyson,  she needs very few footnotes. One might call  her  a  kind  of Northern Wallace  Stevens,  but  a less conceptualized kind. Yet the poems published  from 1943 to 1947 do show some eagerness to move from  perception to conception; and, if ever Miss Avison's specu­ tions  turn  theoretical, it is here.  "Perspective" is a  success, perhaps be­ cause  the  theory  builds directly  on the eye, but "Geometaphysics" must have  sounded  like ancient  science-fiction  even in that  pre-Sputnik time. A more  interesting failure  is "Neverness, or The One  Ship  Beached  on One  Far  Distant  Shore",  where  the  equation of space  and  time  begins with  the  heavy-handed title  itself.  The  argument of the  poem  sees the historical  process from Alpha  to Omega  as the endless surface of a sphere.  What holds together  this future-past is the pivot Adam, or the primordial cell, or the nascent thought, or the single outline,  or whatever you want to

THE  POETRY OF  MARGARET AVISON



call the non-historical thing which the whole cycle spreads from and turns on. But Adam,  being non-historical, is more than the pivot Adam, clasped by the  serpent  circumference; he is the core of the  dream  "that  history is done".


Then must  the pivot  Adam  be denied
And the whole cycle ravelled  and flung loose. Is this the Epoch when  the age-old Serpent Must  writhe and  loosen, slacking out
To  a new pool of Time's eternal sun?
0 Adam, will your single outline blur At this long last when slow mist wells Fuming from  all the valleys of the earth? Or will our unfixed  vision rather blind Through agony  to the last gelid stare
And none  be left to witness the blank  mist?


The  passage is weakly phrased, but Miss Avison's dream is worth sharing. To begin with, now that  the cycle has been flung loose, we can see beyond it to a multiple universe in which the odd apocalyptic explosion here and there  seems just a matter of course. And, although one of the serpents  of Time  has been scotched,  he'll close again elsewhere under  "Time's eternal sun".  As for our denied and released Adam, his outline  blurs and the con­ tours of the hill on which he stands  dissolve in mist. Or,  to put it another way, the  dreamer's eyes unfix and  turn  to ice. At the end of the poem, a blank eye faces a blank image.
What Miss Avison does with sight  (and  to some extent  with sound, as
in the supersonic conclusion of "The Valiant Vacationist"), we hardly ex­ pect her to do with taste and smell, which seem less capable of projection. But, although the eye dominates her poems, it does not exclude the more intimate senses. Even in "Neverness", infinity is smelled as well as seen. And,  as we return from  "outer utter  darkness" back  to "the palaces  of sense",  we  find  a  good  many  scents  and  flavours  lingering   about   the porches and  gardens and courtyards, intensifying in the dark.  Old houses are  the  structures of decaying  sense, "patchy after  years of hopeless up­ keep",  and  Miss Avison likes to explore  these thresholds of memory  and history.  Indeed, her later  poetry is much  less concerned with  tracing an orbit  than  with  "the Sticks-&-Stones,  this City".  A lot of space and  time

THE POETRY OF MARGARET AVISON



may be just around the paradoxical corner,  but, for all that,  no Canadian poet  is better  able to depict  the clutter and  savour  of the urban  or semi­ urban here and  now, as in poems like "Factoring" or "All Fools' Eve".
Her  most  memorable houses are  labyrinthine and  in need  of repair, ripe  for inner  dialogues between  Youth  and  Age, South  and  North. No­ body  who  has  read  "The Agnes  Cleves  Papers" is likely to  forget  the "circular apartment" with  "too  many  doors",  or even  the  pale  mother yearning for

A rocking-chair and  her childhood by the stove
The day the postman failed  to come
And chickens froze on the roosts.

In "Excerpt from Work in Progress ..." a young girl remembers her dead grandmother's house and  contrasts  the out-of-door "spherical" world of her childhood with the glassed porch  (like an anteroom to the palace  of the dead  owner), where Auntie Jean  sat out the  March afternoons

On  the tom  cotton  swing
Its rusty coils faintly complaining... , Folded in her thin coat,
Mute behind  her mourning glasses,
Deaf  to the icewater  day's mowing  and  mumming
Beyond the paint-flaked window-frames....

In  Miss  Avison's  poetry  you can't  seem  to escape  those  windowframes and  windowledges, where  "all  but  the  lovers'  ghostly  windows  close". Even  her  "valiant vacationist", climbing  an  endless spiral  of steps and sending  back fainter  and fainter  waves of communication, finds "a  dirty windowpane" as well as an uncompanionable fly on "a half-way landing". The  "Excerpt" itself ends:  "Strangers moved into grandmother's house I And kept  a stepladder in the porch. It broke one pane."




Miss AVISON's  literary sources   (like  her  personal ones)  are  usually either  concealed  and  transformed or  (when  obvious) insignificant. I leave it to others to speculate on such things as the doubt­ ful  relation of the last section of "Neverness" to "Sunday  Morning", or "The  Butterfly" to Emily  Dickinson,  or  "The Agnes  Cleves  Papers" to

THE  POETRY OF MARGARET AVISON



assorted  Russians. She may never have cast her eye into Blake's Milton or traced   the  ragged  margins   of  Marianne Moore.  Miss  Avison's  poems originate in  one  another more  clearly  than  in their  predecessors.  Some remarks  on  her  internal stylistic  development are  at  least  possible,  al­ though  we can never  be sure if the order of publication comes very close to the order of composition.
Among  the early  poems, a fairly distinctive group  is formed  by the six
in rhymed  quatrains, which  consist of "Gatineau", "Optional", "Maria Minor", "Old Adam", "Song  But Oblique  to '47"  and  "The Party", all published  between  1939 and  1947. Miss Avison normally has little pa­ tience  with  rigid,  recurrent stanza  forms and  her  use of rhyme  is spotty and  eccentric. The  fact  that  the  only end-rhyme of "The  Butterfly"  is between  "Eternity" and  "Galilee" may be significant,  but, if so, the tech­ nique  is certainly not characteristic, as you can discover  by trying  to fix the  scattered rhymes  of  "Perspective". Nor  is there  usually  any  neat arrangement about  the sectional divisions of her poems. Their apparently designed,  stanzaic  shape  on the page is often in striking contrast to their fluctuating movement in  time. At first glance some of them  manage to look like Herbert or Vaughan, but they act more like Cummings or M'il­ liams. The  quatrain poems are exceptional and  (outside  of the remotely analogous  "Stray Dog") 1947 sees the last of them.
Most of these six poems are ingrown; they end shut,  rather than open;
and  in this lies the appropriateness of their form. "The Party" is a boxed interior; "Old Adam" leaves us with "the  heart  imprisoned in a circum­ ference", like the more oblique "Song". "Maria Minor" is about the pre­ Adamic Lilith  giving  birth  to Adamic  form.  Her occupation gone, she recedes West to the flux and  the forest.

The East is far and  weary. The thrush's young  are fed.
I go down  among the leaf mold
To  mash  my head.

This  may  be the  rigor  mortis  of the shadow,  not of the  shape,  but  the stanza  gives it a similar  finality, like the suicidal end of "Gatineau". That Miss Avison associates rhyme with reduced  dimensions is clear in her only intricately rhymed  piece,  "Rigor  Viris",  and  the  off-rhyme  with  which the poem ends has just the balance  that  the argument requires. But even

53

THE  POETRY OF  MARGARET AVISON



in  "Rigor Viris"  the interweaving of rhymes  is resolutely  arbitrary and asymmetrical, and  the stanzas pretend  to no more than  a kind of sketchy regularity, a tentative rigidity of form: "... distances  with contours come I Opening peacock vistas that can no man entomb". Miss Avison's poems are likely to zig-zag pretty freely at the margins, as though  the typewriter had  a mind  of its own, and her most characteristic endings  are not shut, but  open,  or at  least ajar: "It broke one pane," or "Past beaky statue­ shadows...."
If the later  poems seem, on the whole, more  tentative and  fluctuating,
it  is partly because  they  are  richer  and  more  enterprising. Indeed, the period since I956 is already the most brilliant and productive of her whole career. Some  excellent  poems may have  appeared in the  forties  ("The Butterfly", "Perspective", The Iconoclasts", perhaps "Maria  Minor" and
-to my taste at least-"The Valiant Vacationist"), but the decade ended with  inferior  contributions to Contemporary  Verse  and  Here and Now. The  period  from  I949 to  I956  (the  year  in  which  Miss Avison was a­ warded  a  Guggenheim fellowship)   was a  kind  of hiatus,  with  just  one published poem,  even if a good one. To many  observers  of the time, the early fifties seemed  like rather grim days for Canadian poetry  in general, with the decline of Northern Review only the most obvious symbol of the whole process. Miss Avison never contributed to John Sutherland's maga­ zine, and  the appearance of general  decline  turned out to be  (in part  at least)  an illusion, but in I955 it might  have been tempting to see her as a remarkable talent  which had  petered  out, another of Canada's prodigies  without  staying  power. The  temptation has by now ceased to exist.
One obvious virtue of the late poems is the increased variety  and fresh­ ness of the stuff they are  made  on. In  the lesser work of the first decade, one  soon  gets  weary  of  the  "far-borne aching   echoes"  or  "this  crude  angle I Splayed  through  the dreamer's prairie":  those predictable mo­ ments  when  Miss Avison yet again  plumbs  the infinite  spaces  with  her esprit de geometrie. By the end of her  twenties the vision has worn  thin and its substance needs renewal. In a stanza of "Geometaphysics" (I 947) , space  is pushed  until  it  rolls over;  up  and  down,  water  and  air  inter­ change; space  explorers become deepsea divers. In "Civility a Bogey", or "Two Centuries of Canadian Cities"  (I 959),  the  same  image  is much more successfully developed in terms of  the aquarium-like boardroom at the top of a skyscraper  (presumably the Imperial Oil Building in Toron-

54

THE  POETRY OF  MARGARET AVISON



to) . And here  the image  is only part  of a subtle and  detailed  comedy  of Canadian Space  and Time,  Superstition and Civilization. In "Factoring" (also  1959)   the  "Vision  on the  iris" is Sunday  by a bakery. The  poem ends with evening and  the metaphorical rise of a new week:


And the bath of light goes tepid, the delicate  froth of light scums down. An iron-hoofed evangelist howls two  blocks south
to idling  drifters....
The  slow-working yeast of weariness has  belched
its gases in the social dough. The  clock sparks  ovens for the clank
of a new week.


The  prairie eye has come to terms not merely with the metropolitan sky­
line  (that is an old story), but with the city's material refuse and  richness as well. A. J. M. Smith  speaks of Miss Avison's attempt "to interpret, as
in  'Neverness', the  mutations of time  in terms  of something significant in  the  lives of the  human beings who throng  Yonge Street  at  the  noon rush  hour". But  in  "Neverness" ( 1943)  the  apocalyptic world  and  the stenographic world  just  touch  and  no more.  In  a  late  poem  like "Our Working  Day  May  Be Menaced", the fantasy  and  the  factory  are  one. This  tropical factory  is a futuristic "orange-pippery" where  oranges are forced  to disgorge their  seed without  losing their  juice. The  technique by which  they are  sterilized  but not turned  inside out  "is of course secret". The  management provides a perfect setting for the process, with walls of wattle  and  "parakeets on the p. a. system". The  incident  around which the  poem  revolves  concerns  Madeleine, a  rather flighty  worker  on  the assembly line, who decides to leave at the end of the day not by the usual elevator  cage  but  along  "the  extension  bridge  (windy  at  sunset) ". The speaker  who observes and  records the incident  is a kind of reluctant apoc­ alyptic  voice, bearing  uneasy witness to the first sign that  their factory  or universe has become obsolete.





55

THE  POETRY OF MARGARET AVISON



A person  has a nature.
I note  hers only that  I may bear witness. Her  silhouette high on the span
Focused  us then, for the quick­ Occurrence? A hard  designation. It was As if a spoke of the final sky
Snagged  her  suddenly.
For  what  seemed only one Queer moment, she was swept In some siderial  swerve,
Blotted  sheer out of time;  then spurned
Back to the pebbles of the path (After  the footbridge) , where Heartstain of sun
Still  blurred the airfloor dark.

An evening  delegation called; concluded
She is not schooled  to cope....
Some of us, privately  piqued, privately  speculate.

. . . A calling  from our calling?
In  the ceconomy of the clairvoyant, Or some high  pillared  parliament
We gave election, in an elated  moment
Too  rare  for conscious purpose, Can it have come to light that
The  thirst  for  perfect fruit  abroad
Has  now been superseded, or subsumed Under a new, more radical, craving? Can  they have  appointed
A locus elsewhere  for us?
Our  mocha  faces are too bland for trouble.
Yet may we, when  the morning steam-cocks open
For  our new day aloft
Find  there  is come about  a universal
Swallowing-up
(proceedings against  Madeleine alone clearly  being  absurd)
with  only the racks and  vats,
the lifts and  cages left, uncrated and forgotten, and  the pipes steaming thinly
under a fading crescent?


s6

THE POETRY OF MARGARET AVISON



Although such a poem is unmistakably by the author of "The Butterfly" or "Another Christmas", its implications (social, economic, political, reli­ gious)  range  farther afield. To become progressively less austere  is some­ thing of an anomaly for a Canadian poet of Miss Avison's generation. She began to publish her poems during the war. On the pages of the Canadian Forum they appear side by side with those of P. K. Page, James  Wreford and Patrick Anderson. If her poems had any social implications, they cer­ tainly  remained unnoticed in that  company.  By  now she seems to have passed her contemporaries going the other  way.
But I do not wish to attribute to Miss Avison's poems any belated con­ temporaneity,  which  would  be  a  dubious  virtue  at  best.  In  any  case, "Gatineau", which announces the beginning of her poetic career,  is really no less a "sign" of the times than  "Our Working Day May Be Menaced" or the  recent  "Voluptuaries and  Others", one of the  most  brilliant  and ironic of her  prophecies. "Signs are taken for wonders," mutters the aged Gerontion, who ought  to be one of Miss Avison's heroes. But her ultimate future  never  looks much  like "fractured atoms". The awful  truth is not the give and  take of chaos, but total comprehension:

... the  other kind  of lighting-up
That shows  the  terrain comprehended, as also its containing space, And  wipes  out  adjectives, and all shadows
(or  perhaps, all but  shadows).









1  The following is  a  list  of  the  poems I have seen: GATINEAU, Canadian  Poetry Magazine (December, I939);  BREAK  OF DAY, I SAW ONE WALKING, Canadian  Forum  (November, I942);  OPTIONAL,  Canadian Forum    (January, I943);  NEVERNESS,  OR THE ONE SHIP  BEACHED ON ONE FAR DISTANT SHORE,  MARIA MINOR, OLD ADAM  (later retitled THE SIMPLE HORIZONTAL), THE BUTTERFLY,  The  Book  of  Canadian  Poetry,  edited by  A.  J. M. Smith ( I943); THE PAST AND  THE BREAK,  THIS  IS THE SEASON, Manitoba Arts  Review (Fall, I943); MUTABLE  HEARTS, Canadian Forum   (October, I943); THE  VALIANT  VACATIONIST,  Canadian Forum   (December, I944);  GEOMETA­ PHYSICS, THE ICONOCLASTS, PERSPECTIVE,  SONG BUT  OBLIQUE   TO  '47,   THE  PARTY, Poetry   (September, I947); CHRISTMAS, THE ROAD, ANOTHER CHRISTMAS,  Contemp­ orary  Verse   (Fall, I948); OMEN, THE coWARD,  Here   and   Now    (January, I949);

57

THE POETRY OF  MARGARET AVISON



HIATUS,  Poetry  (April, 1952); FROM  A  PROVINCIAL, THE  APEX ANIMAL, NEW  YEAR'S POEM,   KNOWLEDGE   OF  AGE,  Kenyon Review    (Spring, 1956); THE   AGNES  CLEVES PAPERS, Origin   (Winter, 1957); RIGOR VIRIS, VOLUPTUARIES AND OTHERS,   The Book
of Canadian Poetry,  edited  by A.  J. M. Smith   (1957); ALL  FOOLS'  EVE, STRAY DOG,
NEAR ECULLY, RICH  BOY'S  BIRTHDAY THROUGH  A  WINDOW, Poetry  (December, 1957);
EXCERPT FROM WORK  IN PROGRESS ... , OUR WORKING DAY   MAY BE   MENACED, TENNIS, NOT  THE   SWEET  CICELY OF  GERARDES HERBALL, Folkways  Records, Album  FL 9806 ( 1958); ODE  TO  BARTOK   (from  the  Hungarian of Gyula  Illyes)   The New  Reasoner (Summer, 1958); SNOW, MEETING TOGETHER OF POLES AND LATITUDES: IN  PROSPECT, The Penguin Book  of Canadian Verse, edited  by Ralph Gustafson ( 1958); JUNE  AS CHRISTMAS, Combustion (November, 1958); PRELUDE, Poetry (March, 1959); CIVILITY A BOGEY OR  TWO CENTURIES  OF CANADIAN CITIES,  Queen's Quarterly (Summer, 1959); FACTORING,   Canadian Forum   (August, 1959). The  list  includes only  the  first  place of  publication.






LINO-CUT  BY    DEN  LIM


ss



DRAMA
ON THE	AIR




George Robertson







R     I saw a script for a radio play, it seemed like a wonderful, special language, as unique as a poem, more direct, more immediate than  a story. I suppose I was at university then. A year or two later,  in a  class of "creative writing", we listened  to the  news that  the CBC would  pay $75 for  a half-hour  radio  play. Here  was the  ideal: to be able  to say what  you wanted, create  characters you believed  in, and to get paid for it. Assured  that  the technicalities of the medium were not really  formidable, we listened  at  home  on Sunday  nights,  and  wrote.  I adapted a  story  by  Elizabeth Bowen  which  was  turned down,  kindly, because  it was not  really  the kind of story that  made  "good  radio", and later  I wrote a play of my own which was "better radio" but not, I think, much  better, and  got  paid  for  it.  I  think  I have  never  viewed  writing with  such  innocence,  joy, and  desire  as  then.  My  mind  teemed  with characters (many of them my friends slightly disguised)  and situations (invented)  and  I  took  pleasure  in seeing the  words  they spoke to each other  separated,  double-space, on the page, like some  relentless mathe­ matical equation, fascinatingly alive, that  was summing up the meaning and mystery of the world.  Radio, it seemed, was the way, my way, of im­ posing  my imagination upon  the startling world  around  me.
Since then,  radio itself has got in the way. A novel, a story, even a play
for the stage,  can  be bent  and  twisted and shaped  according to the pas­
sion of the artist and to the need of the subject. I think a developing writer
-and a good writer  is always developing-has to feel the tension and conflict of himself against  the medium. With  radio,  and  even more with

59

DRAMA ON THE  AIR



TV,  it is always  the medium  that  wins any such battle.  Eventually I  re­ tired  in confusion  from the lists, and became  instead  a producer of  radio plays. Now  I believed in the radio play as an article  of faith: it must be possible to write good plays, unique plays, for radio,  otherwise I couldn't believe  in my  job. But  I  recognized  that  most  writers,  like  myself,  felt defeated and  frustrated by the medium; regarding it quizzically,  as one would  an  unexpected cat  that  bites when  you stroke it: until  television came  along,  causing  writers  to transfer their  fascination and  horror  to that  still more  exacting  (and  financially rewarding)  medium.
What  has gone wrong? In  theory, radio  and television ought  to be en­ gaging  the  most  experimental minds of our  time.  Could  they have pre­ dicted   the  rise,  thirty  years  ago,  of  two  forms  of  communication  that  were also (let us be charitable)  art-forms, vehicles for dramatic thought that  would  speak  with  the language  of the  time and  address  themselves to millions  of listeners  and  watchers, would  not  the  writers  of that  day have hailed  the future  as a kind of author's Utopia?
One  does, in fact,  still hear  professions of this faith. It need  not take the  form  of enthusiasm for  reaching a  large  audience; it is sometimes couched  in the form of a recognition  of the artist's need to engage what­ ever materials come to hand, in short, of keeping  up with the times. Thus,  Henry  Green  in the Paris Review wonders  now whether novels will con­ tinue  to be written at all;  and  he shows no alarm at the prospect  of their demise,  for,  as he says, we must  all be on the lookout  for new forms  of communication. We have  also heard  people,  usually  producers of radio  or television  programmes, speak of the  exciting challenge of the  limita­ tions of their  medium.  Both "exciting" and  "challenge" are  good CBC words, and  they probably  have their counterparts in New York and  Lon­ don as well.
Now it is all very well for the producer to talk of the limitations of the medium: but  it  is rather  useless to ask  writers  to  be "excited" by the formal and  technical demands of radio and television. To recognize them, yes, but  not  to revere them; one should encourage the writer,  if possible, to destroy  them.  The  best radio  is always on the  borderline of not being "good  radio". But  there  is a sort of morality espoused  by producers and executives  in the broadcasting arts, a belief that  writers  have for too long been slopping  around in the loose and  permissive  garments of the novel, the short  story, the play, or verse; that  they are  being somehow  reaction-

6o

DRAMA ON  THE AIR



ary  in  nul eugaging   themselves  with  the  new media.  In  fact it is radio and  television that  are,  by their nature, reactionary. Nothing  wrong with that: they fill a need,  and  that  is to emit signals night  after  night  to fill the  darkness   with  comfort, forgetfulness,  reiteration of  the  accepted mores of the  Establishment, and-lest it seem as if I were condemning them absolutely and out of hand-to entertain, and at times ( unpredict­ able)   to stimulate. Perhaps the  void they fill was not there  before  they came:  but  that  is another and  far  graver  subject.  The  fact  is, they are with  us, and  it is better  to have good radio than  bad radio. So producers, as I did,  will continue to propagandize for their  art,  and continue to at­ tempt  to seduce  writers from  more  conventional pursuits.  Writers have never been more  in demand, more respectable,  better  rewarded. Why is it then that  among  the most successful of those who have elected to write for radio  and  television,  the feeling persists that  they are not really writ­ ing at all?
An  immediate answer  is that  neither  radio  nor  television  give to the
writer  that  feeling,  so necessary and  terrible  to his ego, that  he is wrestl­ ing alone  with  his subject; that  if the  victory  is his, it is his alone.  For some writers,  I think  this is the highest "excitement". Whereas the radio  or  television  writer, however  lonely he may be at the moment  of pitting  himself against  the  blank  paper  at  the beginning  of a script,  knows that  in time  the  battlefield will soon swarm  with  friends; all of them  tilting,  it will seem, in different directions.  When  his work is done, he can really only wait or watch  fearfully while the important  people  (it must seem at this  stage), the  director, the  actors,  the  technicians, transform his cold pages  into  a  living entity  spewed  out into the  general  air.
The  broadcasting arts,  like the  cinema,  are  not  really  writer's media at  all.  The  work  of shaping and  refining, in which  lies so much  of the pleasure  and  creative satisfaction, falls finally  to  the  director. It is he who must  have almost  a plastic apprehension of his craft,  without  which any  good  script  or acting  performance can  be made  ludicrous.  Writers who  have  had  experience of radio  and  television instinctively  recognize this:  they either  treat their  writing  as the result of a good day's work  (if it sells)  and  are  only interested in the result insofar  as it reflects on their prestige,  and  their  ability  to sell the next script -or else, in the case of a few enlightened people who have not yet lost interest  in writing as a universal  pursuit, and  are  therefore still engaged  with  novels or verse or

61

DRAMA ON  THE  AIR



whatever, they  treat  broadcasting as an occasional  occupation: they are the knowledgeable amateurs. I assume a measure of skill in either  case. But  I would  rather have  radio  plays by this sort of "amateur" than  the other  sort of "professional", and  would rather be that  sort of writer my­ self.
But I believe that only a very cunning  person can be that sort of writer,
for  radio  and  television have  produced   their  own  mystique,  and  exact, as  well as a knowledge  of the  techniques  involved,  a sympathy for  the few kinds of dramatic statement that  can  be made.  It is the understand­ ing  of this small  but fertile  landscape,  seen  through the  jnngle  of elec­ tronics,  and  not the  tidy do's and  don'ts  of the writers' handbooks, that  will continue to keep drama  on the air alive. It is ironic that so few of the people  producing both  radio  and  television  appear  to  understand the difference.  For instance,  much is made of radio's ability to be everywhere and  anywhere, to  vault  oceans  in a second,  and  to supply  the  perfect, because  imaginary, backdrop  for every  setting.  Granted that  this free­ dom from  the visible and  tangible  has its certain uses; but it is so often either  too much  used, or not at all. The flexibility  of radio  must  not be used as an excuse for failing  to write scenes that  are  really relatedthat follow inevitably and yet (for such is the paradox of good dramatic writ­  ing)  unpredictably. Too often  the transparency of radio  is made  simply to cover  a failure of the writer's  imagination. How do I get out of here? I  know,  FADE OUT.  FADE  IN, ONE DAY  LATER.  Or  else this transparency, which in the degree of extravagance with time and space which it permits has positively poetic qualities, is hardly  used at all. One scene follows an­  other,  inevitably perhaps, but all too predictably, and one feels that  radio  somehow  might have been used to juxtapose and  create  tension between  situations that are instead  left hanging  side by side, like beads on a string.
But among  the  writers  who place  too great  a strain  on the  flexibility
of radio  there  are  those  who  feel  it  should be  used  in  the  service  of "action", constant movement  and event, interspersed with necessary plot­ ting dialogue; and  they ignore what is really  to me radio's  chief asset, its ability  to convey  and  conduct  a  line  of  argument.  Words  speak  to us directly,  free of distractions; the stronger  if they clothe  an idea,  embody a humour. Yet  how often  words are  made  to act  like lumbering trucks, dumping a thought now and  then at our feet,  a  thought which could  be seen coming  minutes  away.  How seldom  are  words  alive of themselves;

DRAMA ON  THE  AIR



how scluom  do  they  have fire and substance; and  how, when  we rarely hear  them,  do they carry  us on, exultant, in a new wonder  at  the power of radio.  But  this requires  of a writer,  intelligence; or better  a power of
thought married to style.- We have to adapt Shakespeare, the Jacobeans,
and a few others,  to hear that.
Similarly  in television,  the first lesson we are  taught is the need to "be visual". Yet a conversation of moment  between  two people on television is often far  more  visually interesting  than  many purely visual actions, in­ cluding,  perhaps, a fistfight.  I admit  this is an extreme  opinion,  and ob­ viously not always  true.  But it is necessary to statit because for a  long time anything as static as a conversation had to be decked out with move­ ment: if not the foreground, then the background was busy. In this case, producers were  asking  the eye to rob the mind, not to serve it. In  truth, the "visual" quality of television is hardly  more important than another which  television  shares  with  radio: its intensity,  the degree  to which  it forces itself, in conditions more or less private,  on our attention, and  the degree  to which  it can then select detail, however minute, for our inspec­ tion.  Television  is, or ought  to be, superb  at  conveying  certain kinds of intellectual and  emotional stress:  again,  it  is  the  substance  of what  is happening between   people  at  their  most  intimate and  revealing   level which  is of  paramount  importance, and  it is this  that  television,  well­ used, can so triumphantly achieve. Argument (and  by argument I mean  the  movement of ideas  and  feelings,  not  just of words)  is both  limited  and  heightened by  being seen. It  is limited  by being  restricted to cor­ poreal  and   reasonably  real  beings, and  thus  some forms  of drama are better  served  on  radio. Socrates  could  well enough  be photographed in his cell, but  I would prefer  not to see him fleshed except  in my imagina­ tion;  there  are  certain identities  that  we degrade by making  corporeal, and  radio  offers  a  nice  compromise:  the  voice but  not  the  body. The  production  of Oedipus Rex  by the Stratford Players,  both on stage and  on  television, in masks, was an attempt to solve the problem,  and  in this respect  at  least,  I think  successful. A mask, like the voice alone, imposes a stylization  on  the  personality behind  it, one which  we recognize to be valid  if  the  intellectual content  of  the  drama   is sufficiently  pure  and intense.
But argument is also heightened in television, in a way which no other medium  can  command except  the film  (with  its intensity  and  selective-

DRAMA ON  THE  AIR



ness)  and  then  in a more calculated way, and  comes from  the infinitely varied   possibilities  of  the  human   face  and  body,  creatively used.  The best of scripts can go so far, and then must stop at the wild and uncertain territory of the  actor's  and  director's interpretation. If they are  in sym­ pathy  with  the play  (assuming  it is a good play)  they can only add to it. The  actor  makes  the  word  more-than-alive. This  is television's famous  sense of immediacy, and not to be scorned.
Does  this  emphasis  on  the  primacy  of the  word  seem  to be a  radio producer's view of television?  Perhaps. But surely  both  radio  and  tele­ vision plays are,  must  be, before everything else, drama. And  drama is impossible   without   both  communication  and   tension  between  human beings,  or  between  human   beings and  ideas.  And  does  not  one  person abstract ideas from another: ideas to hate,  admire, love, or envy? A fight between  cowboys-even cowboys-is always  more than  an instinctive  aversion  to each  other's  person:  each  has abstracted from  the other  an idea,  or group  of ideas, to hate, or fear; and  these ideas, whether spoken or not,  are  given  words. A play, however  visually  evocative  and  reveal­ ing, cannot  be built without this foundation of meaning.
What has happened is that  many writers are content to make the same tired  patterns in the sand;  radio and television drama has become an imi­ tation  of an  imitation of an  imitation of life-you  can  take  it  to  any power you like. And we are back to one of the functions of the broadcast arts, to lull us to sleep with the old nursery rhymes. If drama is to be more than  this, it will come not from  writers  who are  more  and more  skilled in the intricacies of production methods  (which can only teach the writer to fear  real  experiment, not  to attempt it)   but  from  writers  who have an original  view of the world and  pursue  the consequences of that  view to  the  top and  bottom  of the souls of their characters. With  this clearly seen, there  is argument enough for any play, of any kind. Of skill, it takes only an  intuitive understanding of the self-evident features of the media themselves: for  radio,  its  transparency, its ability  to superimpose word and  music and sound, its freedom  from space and  time, and its directness  of  utterance;  for  television,  its  lack  of magnitude but  its  intensity,  its selectivity  of  detail, its power  to render  nuance, to juxtapose; and first of all,  to show  in large  completeness  the  human face.  If this much  is per­ ceived, most of the  rest follows. There remains  the dramatic instinct,  the ability  to  quicken   the  experience  of life  into  form  and  shape,  without

DRAMA ON  THE  AIR



which even an interest  in radio  and  television drama is a waste of time. This is all.
And  yet the  monumental appetites of the broadcast arts  can  be sated
only by a steady  diet of the mediocre; the mediocre  served up with great professional  skill. Small wonder  that  writers are inhibited from venturing into art-forms so conscious of their own complexity.  More  than  cunning, a sort of insane  disregard for logic will keep a few people still trying  to write  well for radio  and  television. We can only hope that  such Quixotry will some day bear fruit.













CANADIAN LITERATURE
graces either  the mind or the coffee table;
let your friends  decide.
Send a subscription  for Christmas.





Naturally., we will notif y your friends of  your gif t.








66



review articles



STORIES
BY CALLAGHAN

Robert Weaver



MORLEY CALLAGHAN.  Morley Callaghan's Stories. Macmillan. $4.95.


MORLEY CALLAGHAN   is  the most  important novelist  and   short  story writer  in  English  Canada, and  he is the only  prose  writer  of  an  older  generation who  might   have  much  influence on  the young writers  of today.  Yet his reputation in  his  own  country has  been  a  curiously fugitive  one,   and   although  his  stories have  been  published in all sorts of  antho­ logies  and  most  of the  influential  maga­  zines of our  time,  the  bulk  of them  seem now  to be surprisingly  little  known.  Two  early  collections of  the  stories,  A  Native  Argosy and  Now That April's  Here, have been  out   of   print  for  many   years,  and recent  essays  about  Callaghan's work  by Canadian  critics-Malcolm Ross,  Hugo McPherson-have dealt  with  the  novels, which  lend  themselves  more  readily  than the  stories  to  an  intellectual  framework.
Callaghan's  stories   are  hard to  write
about:  their   odd,   wistful,   lyric  quality keeps   escaping  definition;  they   require from  the  reader a  kind  of  quiet,  unhur­ ried   sympathy  that   most  of  us  are  too impatient to  give.   And  I  want  to write  an appreciation of them-a difficult  thing  for  any critic  to do.  But  the occasion  for
 some   kind   of  appreciation  is  certainly here  in  this  new  collection, Morley  Cal­ laghan's   Stories.   It's   a  fine,  impressive book,  and   its   publisher  ought   to  share some of the credit for being willing to risk a big and nearly comprehensive collection  when  volumes  of  short  stories  are  notori­ ously difficult  to sell in hard covers.
One  test of a writer  is whether he  has the  ability  to  create a  complete fictional world,  and  in  the  fifty-odd  stories  in  this book Morley Callaghan shows us a whole world. It isn't  a wide, wide world. It's  the narrow,  stifling   world   of   a  few   small towns  in  Southern Ontario and  one sec­ tion of Toronto--the old, downtown area of  the  city  spreading a  couple   of  miles east and west of Yonge  Street and ending  a  few  blocks south of  St.  Clair  Avenue.  One  of the  incidental virtues  of  Morley Callaghan's  Stories is that  it captures for­ ever  the  spirit   of  much  of  this  crowded and   lonely  heart  of  the  city  before  the wreckers  moved  in.
The   people   who   live  in   Callaghan's
part  of the city inhabit some shadowy boundary line between social classes:  they are  not  solidly  middle class  but  they  do

REVIEW  ARTICLES



not   consciously   belong   to  the   working class.  I  suppose  that   a  sociologist  might define  them pretty clearly, but I once described them  as marginal people,  and  I still can't discover  a better  way of  identi­ fying   them.   They   are  the  students,  the landladies, the waitresses, the young clerks and   their   wives,  the  slightly  failed  and  faded older  couples,  who  belong  to  the rooming houses and furnished flats of the aging  residential streets  downtown. (The people    in   the   stories   about   the   small towns  aren't much  different  in status  and expectations.)  In  many  of the  stories  we meet  the  old,  tired  priests and  the  eager, young  priests  of  the  city parishes.  There are  no really wealthy  people in this world, and  Callaghan has a wry comment  about that  in a brief introductory note he has written for  the  book.  On  summer  nights Callaghan's people are likely to be out wandering  through  the  streets,   and   in the  cold  weather they  hurry  to  the  res­ taurants and  bars and  other  amusements of a city  that  has always. had its own, very strong  texture but  (until lately)  no sharp and   decisive   character.    They   are   city people,   yet  they   are  uneasy,  alien,   not really settled  in to the city; you sense that  the   city   frightens   them,   that   they   feel vulnerable -and   they   are   indeed   vul­ nerable.
For   one  characteristic of  Callaghan's
world  is that  it  stifles or wears  away  the people   who  inhabit it.  The   atmosphere of  his  stories   often   reminds   me  of  the atmosphere  of   the   Italian   nco-realistic movies   (especially De  Sica) ; it  isn't  sur­ prising  that  many  of the stories have been translated  and   published  in  Italy  since the  war.  Most  of Callaghan's  people are caught, sooner  or  later,  in  one of  those small  tragedies that  are so appalling sim­ ply because they are never over.  Or  they

68
 attempt  a  tiny  rebellion against   the  re­ strictions of  life.  But  even  the  rebellions are  subdued  and   fumbled a  little  from  the  beginning. Yet  I  don't  want   to give the  impression that   there  is  nothing but tragedy  and   sorrow   in   this  world,   and  Callaghan  does   not  subscribe to  that  Catholic  heresy   that  gives  the   work  of Mauriac and  Graham  Greene its  joyless and   obsessive  quality. There  is  a  great  deal  of sweetness  and  innocence and  love, an   eager,   yearning, uncertain  reaching out  for  life,  in  all  these  stories.  Again  I am  reminded of De  Sica.
The first story in the  book is called  "All the  Years of Her  Life". It has  been given the  place  of honour, and  it establishes  at once one of Callaghan's favourite themes. A boy, Alfred  Higgins, has  been  working in  a  drugstore, and  one  night  the  owner stops  him with  the evidence  on his person of the  petty  thievery  that  has  been going on ever since he began  to work there.  The owner  calls  the  boy's  mother, and  when she  arrives   at   the   store,   Mrs.   Higgins, with  her quiet  pleading and  painful com­ posure,   persuades  the  owner   not  to  call the  police. Alfred  is fired, and  the mother and  son go home  together. Alfred  swears that  it will never  happen again, but it has happened many  times  before, and  it  will happen  so  many    times   in   the   future. There is nothing for  Mrs. Higgins to do when   they   arrive  home  but  to  drink   a cup  of hot  tea and  try to compose  herself to face  all the  years of  her  life.
In the story called "A Wedding-Dress" there  is  rebellion: a  tiny,  only  half-con­ scious  rebellion  of the spirit against drab­ ness and  restriction.  Miss  Lena  Schwartz lives  in  a  boarding  house  on  Wellesley Street in  Toronto  (almost  the  exact  cen­  tre  of  the  area  of   the  city  I  described earlier  as  Callaghan's special   preserve).

REVIEW  ARTICLES



She  has  been  waiting for  fifteen  years to marry   San1  TTi!Lon;  now she  was  "thirty­ two, her hair  was straight, her nose turned up  a little  and  she  was thin". But at  last she is going  to  be married, and  she quits her  job to spend  the  day shopping before going  to  Windsor for  the  wedding. Her  spirit,  so meek  and  drab, has  come  alive on  this  day,  but  she  hasn't much  money,  and   the   dresses  she  can   afford   to  buy dampen  her   fine   feeling.   She   looks  at some  French  dresses;  they  are  beautiful and   far   too   expensive,  and   she   has   a dream  of men  watching her  on the street as she walks with Sam in one of these fine dresses.  And  in  her   dream, almost   un­  aware, she  slips  a dress  from  its  hanger  and  into  the  wide sleeve of her  coat.
The next  morning Lena  Schwartz is in court, in  the  dress  which  does not fit her thin figure, charged with shoplifting. Sam
 has  come  from   Windsor, and   there  are the lawyers  and  the  magistrate, who find Miss  Schwartz pitiful  and  a  little  amus­ ing. Sam  agrees  to pay for  the dress, and  she  is  released   to  leave  the  city  and  be married. And  where  is the  dream of the sly glances  of men  as she goes walking  in her  fine, French  dress?
There are  more  dramatic stories  such
as  the   well-known  "Two  Fishermen" about  the hangman come to do his job in a  small  Ontario town.  But  most  of  the fifty  stories  in  this  book  quietiexplore some  common happening  in  the  life  of the  city  or  one  of  the  Ontario towns.  A young  priest  tries  unsuccessfully  to bring solace  to an  unhappy,,  hysterical and  im­ portant  woman   member  of   the   parish  ("The Young  Priest"). A father and  son discover  themselves through a  lost  base­ ball cap  ("A  Cap  for Steve"). Two  Eng-



RODERICK HAIG-BROWN MARJORIE WILKINS   CAMPBELL GREGORY CLARK
GERARD FILION



THE
 
C. L. BENNET

32  pages  of half-tone illustrations

$4-95

FACIE	OF 	CANADA

We  gave  each  of  these  brilliant  writers and   outstanding  Cana­ dians a  chance to  tell  you  about the  part of  Canada  they  know and   love   best.   The  result is  the   most   perceptive,  beautifully written  appreciation  of  our   country  and   her  people. This  is no  shallow patriotism of  maple leaves   and  Mountie snapshots, but   impressions which  are   sometimes   wry,  often  candid,  but  always affectionate.
CLARKE  IRWIN

6g

REVIEW  ARTICLES



lish  boys trace  out  their  little  tragedy  as misfits  on  a  Toronto newspaper ("Last Spring  They  Came Over"). A whole way of life in an Ontario town comes painfully alive  in  "Ancient Lineage". The Depres­ sion  wears  away  at  young  couples  with too  little  money  and  older  men  insecure  in  their   jobs. Young  people  make  a  try at  love, and  there  are other  small  rebel­ lions like that  of  Miss Lena Schwartz that  somehow just flicker  out.
These  stories  are  North American, but they don't connect Callaghan with Ernest Hemingway as many  people would like to do.  They  are  quieter, more  human, and less  optimistic  than   most  American  fic­ tion. If Callaghan's stories are good evid-



LAZY NOVELS
 ence  (and  I  think  they  are), we  Canad­ ians  are  far  less hopeful than  Americans about  altering circumstances.  There is a sweetness  and  an  eagerness  for  life  (and  a failure to make connection) in much  of Callaghan's work that  has  a good  deal  in common  with   the  stories   of  Sherwood Anderson. But  there  is an  acceptance of life that  seems more European than  North American, and  that  may; help  to account for  the  interest in  Europe in  Callaghan's work  in  recent   years.  This   book  has  an odd  and  appealing quality of seeming  at once  to  come  from  another time  and  to be  perfectly contemporary. It is the  best we  have  in  the  tough genre  of  the  short story,  and  it is very good  indeed.






Margaret Stobie


NAN SHIPLEY.  The Scarlet Lily. Ryerson. $4.50. JEANN  BEATTIE. Behold  the  Hour. Ryerson.  $4.50. JOHN CORNISH. Olga. Macmillan. $3.50.


Goon  THINGS are  stirring for Canadian writers   these  days,  what   with four   new   literary  journals   under   way, two  in  British   Columbia, one  in  Mani­ toba,  one  in Quebec; the Canada Coun­ cil  giving  awards to  novelists  and  poets for    work  in   progress;  a   Canadian Book Club starting in Toronto; two new programs  of   short   stories  on  CBC;  pub­  lishers'  prizes,  magazine prizes  - even a  sorority's  prize - for   novels;  local and  provincial competitions for shorter works; and publishing possibilities in various reviews  and  quarterlies or  even, more  modestly, in  newspapers and  trade journals.
 I have   always   felt  that   we  could  not expect a flowering of Canadian writing until   we   had   an   atmosphere  that   en­ couraged  it.   The   atmosphere  seems   to be  developing. And  not  only  the atmos­ phere.  Over  the  past   year,  we  had,  not   just   a   single   commendable  work,  but   several  good   novels - by  Colin McDougall, Hugh   MacLellan,  Ronald Hambleton,  Sheila   Watson -novels of great   diversity, it is  true, but  all of them  showing creative  vitality. Even   the  less ambitious  books  by Ralph Allen  and   by C.  T.  Ritchie  had engaging qualities of simplicity or clarity or  liveliness  or  good story-telling.  There  was,  of  course,   the

REVIEW  ARTICLES



usual   number  of  other  novels  that   had none   of  these   qualities,  but   still,  while it  was not  a flowering, perhaps, the  year did  seem  to show  the  swelling  of a bud.
With  such  excitement and  anticipation in  the  air,  I looked  forward to  the  par­ cel   of   books   for   review.   It   contained three  pieces  of  Canadian  fiction   which had  all been  published. One of them  had won  a  prize.  Those  two  facts  say  much  for   the  zeal  of   Canadian  publishers in presenting work  written in  this  country, and  suggest   that  there   are  more  money awards  available   than    there    are   good writers.
There is another side to this, of course. Books  like these  three pay  a  penalty for being  Canadian. By  that  I  mean   that, while  we  pick  only  the  best  of the  writ­ ing  of other countries for  serious  atten­ tion,  we  are   desperately earnest  in  our  care   to  examine everything that  comes out   of  Canadian  publishing  houses.  In that   sense,  we  are   unfair to  the  third­ rate,   which   exists  anywhere,  but  which normally  would   be  greeted   by  a  brief notice  in  the   daily  papers  and then  al­ lowed   to  disappear  quietly.
But  in  addition to our  usual  conscien­ tiousness,   there  is  the   problem  of  the editors  of   the   increasing  number of journals and  reviews.  If an  editor wants  to  run   a   fiction   review   in   each   issue, what  is he  to  do?   Even   the  good  work of  the  past   year   would   not   be  enough  to  fill  a  regular  column. The  result   is that    we   turn  a   critical   spotlight  on writers  who   probably  do   not   want   it, and   who  certainly do  not  deserve  it.


BuT  Now, what  are the books? One  is a harmless piece  of  historical fic­ tion   which   ranges   from   the  foothills to
 Ottawa, touches  on  the  Indian Treaties, the Riel Rebellion, the founding of the Mounties, Sir  John   A.  Macdonald, and the   Canadian  Pacific   scandal,  and   by means  of a  highly  improbable love story stitches  together bits of research  about Indian customs and fashionable ladies' attire.
The  quality of the  writing can  be seen in  the opening paragraph:

As   Ellen  scraped  the   mud    from    her silver-buckled  shoes   she  overheard  a  male voice   inquire  curiously of  another   passen­ ger,   "Who  is  that girl  in   the  green cloak  with   hair  like  fire  spilling out  of  her   bon­  net?"

Here   is  lesson  one  in  Writing Popular Fiction: catch  the  reader's attention  by colour  (silver, green,  red) ; establish time (buckled   shoes,   cloak,  bonnet-time past) ; and  create a  bit  of mystery (who is   she?   where    are   they?  why   is  she there?).  Unfortunately, the  one  line  of dialogue  shows   that  the   writer didn't get  as  far  as  lesson  two.
The  others are  better than that, and
they  have  the  merit   of  at  least  starting with  an  idea.  One   of  them   started out to   be   an  expose   of  the   Canadian   TV­ advertising  world-a fruitful   field  for an  expose -and  the  opening pages  are promising. But  Love  enters  in  no time at all, and  from  then  on  everything goes to pieces.  There  is  a  crazy  mixed-up  boy who  is talent and  a  crazy  mixed-up girl who is advertising. But  that isn't  all. The man  is an alcoholic. By this time  we have  a   concoction  of   What   Makes  Sammy Run?  and  The  Lost  Week-End. But  that  isn't  all. The girl  has a career, and  so of course  outside she's  cold,  but  inside  she's shy  and   lonely.   (She   belongs   with   the poor   rich   man   and   the   prostitute  with the   heart  of  gold.)    Anyway,   what   this

71

REVIEW  ARTICLES


girl  really wants  is someone  strong, some­ one  to  protect her,  someone  to  cling  to, and   finally   (the   alcoholic  having   com­ mitted  suicide)    she   finds   HIM-guess where?  In  a   CBC   producer  she   had  thought  she   hated,   but   of  course   that  deep  down  feeling she had  about  him  all along   was  really   love,  only   she   didn't know  it.  The  book  is as  trite  as  that­ or  at  least  the  main  character  is.
In    spite   of   this   nonsense,   however, every  once  in  a while  there  is a glimmer of  something better. There  is  one  out­ standing scene in the TV studio before  the first  show,  which  catches   the  confusion,  the  excitement, and  the tension superbly.  The other   glimpses  are  mainly  of  what  the  book might  have  been. It might  have been  a competent  study  of the TV  adver­  tising   world.   It  might   have   been,  if  it hadn't been cluttered up, a study in artis­ tic   frustration.  It might   have   been   a novel  of strange ironies, for  though several  characters profess ideals of various kinds,  when   the  show-down comes  it  is only  the  sceptic,   who  never  believed  in any   of  it,   who   acts   by  the   principles which   the  others   profess  and  walks  out. The book  might  have  been  any  number of interesting things.  What  it is, is hash served  with corn syrup.




THE  THIRD  BOOK   is  possibly the  best  of  the  three.  At any  rate,  it  de­ pends  less on  cliches.  This  time,  the  girl pursues    the   boy  with   infinite  patience and  gets him.  But  while  that  is  the main action  of   the   book,   the   main   idea   is something else.
It is a lively new  perspective on the riotous  mixture of peoples in this country
-m  this  case,  in  the  interior of British

72
 Columbia. The nature of the  perspective is  suggested   through  references to  Trol­ lope's   Barchester  Towers   and  Dostoiev­ ski's  The   Idiot.  It  is  exemplified   in  the ludicrous  conjunction   of  seedy   English  gentility and  brooding Russian  peasantry set down  together in a lush orchard valley with  the  background  lit up by occasional explosions  and   fires  contributed  by  the Sons  of  Freedom.  The  absurd melange, and   the   prospect  of  the  boy   (English) and   the   girl    (Russian)  studying  each other  with  some  apprehension over   the pages   of   Dostoievski  and   Trollope  re­ spectively, have   wonderfully funny  pos­ sibilities.   The  approach  certainly   is  a great relief  from  our  usual  solemn  treat­ ment   of  racial   backgrounds.
With  such  an  excellent idea  contained
in it, the  book  as it stands is the  more disappointing. The manuscript should have  been turned back to the author with stern  instructions to write  the novel  that is  here.
The very  elementary nature of  what is  wrong  with   the  writing can   be  seen in this  description of the girl and  her grandmother getting into  a car  (the italics   are  mine) :

Olga pushed her  grandmother ahead, scur­ ried  in  herself  and slammed the  door. Then she   wriggled  adroitly  across   to   the   front seat  beside  Madge.

What sort  of car  is this?  The same com­ plete    lack   of   visual   imagination   is  in comments about the  town.  At  one point  it seems to be the usual  one-street village,  but   a  few  pages  later it  seems  to be  a considerable centre where  shoppers take time   "to   look  at  hats  at  the  modiste's". A  book  of  this  sort  needs  sharp clarity, but   here   the  reader   gets  only   blurred confusion. The same  thing  is true  of  the characters.  For   instance, the  first   thing

REVIEW  ARTICLES



that  we  learn  about  the   sister   of  the English  boy  is that  she  has  gone  to Gir­ ton.   But  it  soon  turns  out   that  this  is not  the famous English  college, but some sort   of   girls'   school.   She   talks   like   a thirteen-year-old, but  presently we learn  that  she  is the  same  age  as  the  heroine. Her   school-girl  prattle does  not  suggest Lesbianism, but  that is what the  author
 1s   trying   to   convey.   In   short,  what   is wrong  with  this  book  is sheer  laziness.
That  perhaps is  the  one  quality that all  of  these   books  have   in  common­ laziness;  laziness  of  thinking, laziness  of imagination,   laziness   of   craftsmanship. No  development in  Canadian writing  or any  other  kind  of  writing will come  out of  that.






A LINGUISTIC THEORY OF CRITICISM
 





R.  ]. Baker


1 .-P.  VINAY and   J.  DARBELNET,  Stylistique comparee du   franr;ais  et  de  l'anglais,
Paris, Didier, (Montreal, Beauchemin), 1958.


As   CANADIAN   literary   criti­ cism   develops,  we  hope   to   see   more comparative  study  of  our  two  mam  literatures. A book  which  systematically compares  the   stylistics   of   French  and  English  should  obviously be noted  in this journal,  even   though   detailed  rev1ews belong  elsewhere.
Style-of   an   author, genre,   dialect,
language -is that   which   is  character­ istic,  that   which  differentiates the  work under   consideration  from   other  works. Whereas linguistics deals with  what  is twical, sty,listics  deals   with   what   is  in­
 In  Stylistique comparee du  franfais  et de  l'anglais,  the  first  volume  of  La  bib­
liotheque   de   stylistique   comparee, J.-P.
Vinay  and  J. Darbelnet give  us  a  book
of far more interest than  their  sub-title, Methode  de  traduction, indicates. They begin   with   a   brief   description  of   the main  features of Ferdinand de Saussure's theory  of  language. They accept his  di­ chotomies  of langue  and   parole,'  signifie and   signifiant, signification  and   valeur, and   they  develop   suitable and   parallel dichotomies for  the  study  of  translation. Of servitude  and  option, they say:

dividual.  But  the  two  studies  are  closely	 	

related.  The  individual  can   be   recog­ nized  only  if the  typical is known. Styli­  stic description, in other  words,  must  be­ gin  where  linguistic  description ends.  It must  be built  on a foundation of linguis­  tic   description.   A  theory  of  stylistics  necessarily implies a  theory of language.
 1  In spite  of the  attempts of such  writers as Sir  Alan  Gardiner to  establish standard  trans­ lations of these  technical terms, I think  that it is   premature  to   assume    that   language   and  speech,  for   example,  will   be   understood  in their  Saussurian  senses.  Consequently I have  left   the   key  terms  untranslated. An  unhappy procedure,   perhaps,   when   dealing  with   such  an  excellent  account of  translation, but  a  safe one.


73

REVIEW  ARTICLES



Dans  Ia   mesure  oil   Ia   langue  nous   est donnee, elle est un  ensemble de  servitudes auxquelles nous sommes contraints de nous soumettre. Par  example, le  genre des  mots, Ia conjugaison des verbes, !'accord des  mots entre  eux.   Dans   ces  limites   il  est   possible de   choisir    entre  les   ressources   existantes, et  c'est   cette  liberte  qui   cree   Ia   parole. C',est  un  fait   de  langue que  !'existence de l'imparfait du subjonctif. Ce n'est  plus aujourd'hui une  servitude et son emploi, devenu facultatif,  represente  done   une option. (p.  31).

Building  on   de  Saussure's  linguistics and  Bally  and  Malblanc's stylistics,  they explore categories of  comparative stylis­ tics  based  on  procedures of  translation.
 It is  by  looking  from   the  outside, as  it were,  from  the  point  of view of the translator, that one  discovers particular features of one's  own  language. The im­ plication  is  that    translation  can   be  a form of literary criticism, or  at  least  the basis  of  a  kind  of  criticism.
With  a wealth of  examples,  they systematize the  differences between  Eng­ lish and  French vocabulary (le  lexique), order (l'agencement) and  what  they  call le message, "!'ensemble des  significations de  l'enonce, reposant  essentiellement sur une   realite   extra-linguistique,  la   situa­
		 	• 	

examples, given opposite, is the barest skeleton of  the  system  is apparent from the    fact    that    they    spend    over    two hundred pages  putting flesh  on  it.  And,




NEW   BOOKS BY  AND   FOR  CANADIANS
AT  YOUR BOOKSELLERS'

From Our  Town
BY    JACK scoTT.   From the   first   day   at  the   summer cottage  to  the hazards of  watching the  Late Show, here  are  experiences common  to Canadians  across   the   country  related with   rueful  humour,  nostalgia and  a  keen  sense  of  the  ridiculous.                                                  $3.00

Atlantic Anthology
WILL.  R.   BIRD,  Editor-in-chief. A  panorama of  the  Atlantic  Provinces and   their   people   as  seen  by  over   6o   distinguished  writers  past  and present. A lasting record of a proud heritage.                              $6.oo

Canada and the Atomic Revolution
BY  D.   M.   LEBOURDAIS.  The timely and  exciting story  of Canada's  role in  the  atomic age,  its  beginnings, present activity and  potential for  the future. Illustrated.                                                                             $7.50

Just Add  Water and  Stir
BY  PIERRE  BERTON. The weird and   wonderful phenomena of our  time from  the  "clean" bomb  to  Dick-and-Jane readers and  Christmas  com­ mercials seen  by  the  popular TV personality and author of  Klondike. Cartoons by  the  author.                                                                              $4.50


McClelland & Stewart Limited

74

Tableau  General des Procedes de Traduction


LEXIQUE 	AGENCEMENT 	MESSAGE



I Empru.nt
 F.   Bulldozer 	F.   Science-fiction	F.   Five o'Clock  Tea
A.   Fuselage 	A.   (Pie)  a Ia mode 	A.   Bon voyage



F.   Economiquement	F.   Lutetia Palace 	F.   Compliments de Ia Saison
a
A.   Normal  School 	A.   Governor General 	A.   Take  it or leave it


(1)
 3   Traduction	{ F.   ink 	{
 
F.   L'encre est sur Ia table
 { F.   QueUe heure  est-il?

t:::l	litterale	A.   encre 	A.   The  ink is on the table 	A.   What  time is it?
:.:.:.t:.

......
 { F.   Expediteur	{ F.   Depuis  Ia revalorisation du  bois	{ F.   Defense de fumer

(1),	A.   From: 	A.   As timber  becomes more valuable 	A.   No smoking
("')
		{	{	{

c..,

......
(1)
'
 
5   Modulation



6  Equivalence
 F.   Peu  profond 	F.   Donnez  un peu de votre sang 	F.   Complet

A.   Shallow 	A.   Give a pint of your  blood 	A.   No  Vacancies


{ F.   (Milit.) La  soupe   { F.   Comme  un chien dans  un jeu de quilles    { F.   Chateau de Cartes
 


<
(;:;

A.   Br. (Milit.) Tea 	A.   Like a bull in a china shop 	A.   Hollow Triumph	....
0
......r	t"'

(JI
 
7  Adaptation	{ A.   Br. cricket 	{
 l:'l
en
{

F.   Tour  de France

U.S.  baseball
 F.   En  un din d'oeil
 F.   Bon appetit!

A. 	A.   Before you could say Jack  Robinson 	A.   U.S. Hi!

REVIEW  ARTICLES



if I dare  continue the  metaphor, there  is no  fat.
Since   the  book  is  primarily intended
for   students  of   language,   translators, and  linguists, of what use is it to literary critics, as  critics? I suggest  two  things, at  least,  one  particular and  one  general. If the  authors are   right   (and   they  cite numerous examples to  prove  their  case) that   English   is  inherently better   at  de­ picting  the  concrete and  the  particular whereas French is better  at depicting the abstract  and   the   general,  the  critic   of English  literature has  a  linguistic   justifi­ cation  for   certain   romantic theories   of poetic   diction  as  against  those,  say,  of the  English  neo-classicists.
Secondly, many   critics  may  find  that the   dualistic, somewhat metaphysical linguistic system  of  the  Saussurian school   will  provide  them   with   a   con­ genial  general theory of language. When the   study  of   literature  meant   the   de­ tailed    study    of   at    least   one   foreign  literature,  criticism and  linguistics   went hand   in   hand.  Since   English   criticism  has  become  more  and  more  monolingual and  self-contained, it  has too often  been divorced from  linguistic study.  Some  of the  meetings of  the Association  of Cana-
 dian  University Teachers of English  in Saskatoon  this   year   showed   that  some of   the   younger  critics   lack   any   know­ ledge   of  either  contemporary  or  tradi­ tional  1 anguage   studies.   Sounds  and  spellings, speech  and  writing, langue  and  parole  are  persistently  confused, and   as Northrop  Frye   has   pointed  out,   many  critics  persist  in  an  impossibly  atomistic treatment of  meaning, word   by  word.
Linguists  in   North  America, on   the
other  hand,  have   too   often   pursued a rigidly   behavioristic  study  of  language that is as repugnant to critics  as it is successful  in constructing scripts and grammars.  Unless   we  want   to  see  the study  of   literature  permanently   sepa­ rated from   the  study  of  language,  with critics   in   departments   of   English    and  linguists in  departments  of  anthropolo­ gy,  we  must  work   towards some  com­  mon   theory  of   language   that   both studies can   use.  It is  easy  to  overwork the  view  that  Canada is the  natural mediator  between the  U.S.A. and Europe, but   it  is  nevertheless true   that we  are  fortunate to  have  in  Quebec the only   substantial  group  of   linguists  on this   continent  who   are   working within the  Saussurian tradition.














TWO ANCIENTS AMONG
THE MODERNS

GEORGE WALTON.   The Wayward  Queen. Con­
tact  Press,   28   Mayfield Avenue, Toronto.
$r.so.
FRED COGSWELL.  Descent From  Eden. Ryerson
Press.  $2.50.

THE  CATEGORY  "minor poet" should  not really  exist  in  criticism, though perhaps that  would  make  it  more  difficult  to evaluate poets like Fred  Cogswell and George  Walton. Light  verse exists, and versifiers  function as entertainers -ad­ vertisers, joke artists on  TV, and writers of  Song  Hit   "lyrics" - but  these  have very  little   to  do  with  literature. Austin  Dobson  is a limited  poet,  i.e. a bad  poet, not  a  special  category of  poet  who  ex­ cels  in  his  own   right.  In   other  words, there   are   the   critical  criteria,  and   no writer   can  get   under  the   ropes  by  by­ passing  the  usual  tests.  No  man  - cer­ tainly  no  poet  - has  a  right   to  refrain  from  being  fully  human.
George   Walton's The Wayward Queen contains much  of  that kind  of  versified wit  that  saves one  from  betraying either emotion    or   suffering,  and   acts   as  an armour of  irrununity for  the  adult  intel­ ligence.  Perhaps poetry demands  a  cer­ tain    callowness  and   innocence   to   the end  - vide  Yeats  in  old  age,  a  foolish man   - or   perhaps  we  have   not   yet learned in  civilized  life  how  to  be fully
 adult   yet  passionate, serious,  vulnerable, aggressive,  and  capable of love.
Well, obviously  Dr.  Walton is not  one of our  adolescent poets,  and  he  is some­ what   stiff  in   the   joints;  but  he  retains a  freedom   of  mind   and   an   unconven­ tionality that   make   him  the  poet  he  is. Some   of  the   poems  go  back  to  earlier times,  as  far   back  as I 926.  The   test  at any  rate  is  how  far  this  release  reaches  into  experience on  the  occasion when  it does  become  poetry.
The   piece   beginning "Maidens are timorous, I shy of experiment, I but  with experience I appetent, ardent ..." pro­ ceeds  with  a  deftness  that  begs  foT the
title   "good   minor   poetry";  but   I   am willing  to  praise  it  as  just  good  poetry, for  its  happy craftsmanship-the  rhyth­ mic shift  to  marked trochees in  the final verse  - and   also  for  the  way  it makes  the  angels  of sexual insight, interest, re­ finement, wisdom,  all  dance  together on the  point  of  a  needle.
There  are several poems here of equal merit.  And   there  is  the   much-quoted detail   etched  in  acid,  of  the   war  hero who  came  back  "to  walk  a  dog  a  dirty
night  I and   guard  it   from   the   muddy
ditch  I and  lead  it  home  again  and  see I
it  cuddled   by  a  scolding   bitch." Many of the  others are  expendable, occasional poems,  notes  to old friends, echo  rhymes in   an   outworn  fashion.  We  might  ex­ empt  the  poems  of recollection and  nos­ talgia- e.g. "Varley's  Fairley"-which have   a  universal  appeal  as  variants of an   ancient   theme   ("Ubi sunt", "Ou sont    les   neiges",  etc.).   Dr.    Walton's book,  like  L.  A.  Mackay's  some  years back,  is a  garnering of  poetry and  verse from   three   decades,  a   brief   review  of an  entire   period, and  a  bid  in  the  light of   prolific  poetry publishing in  Canada

77

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW

,------------------------------------1
I	I
I	I
1	New  Canadiana 	I
I
The Capture	!
of Quebec

Christopher  Lloyd

The  battle  which changed the   al­ legiance  of   Canada  from   France   to England  was  one   of  the  most  signifi­  cant of  modern times.

An  authority on  naval history, Christopher  Lloyd provides a  close-up view  of  the  battle and the  participants through a vivid use of eye-witness accounts and  plentiful contemporary illustrations.                                 $s.oo


Colourful Canada with  text
by Kenneth McNeill  Wells, author  of THE  OWL PEN

A pictorial tour  of Canada from Newfoundland to the  Northwest Terri­ tories   in   go   full-colour   illustrations with    brilliant  original   accompanying text   by   Kenneth   Wells.               $4.50


I
I
I	BRITISH   BOOK SERVICE
I
I	(Canada)   LIMITED
I
I	1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE
I
	I	I
L------------------------------------!
 


since  I 940   to   refurbish  and   renew   the claim   of  some  written before  and  after this  date   by  older hands. The voice  of seasoned   experience,  especially when   it is so boyish  in  its  charm, is always  wel­ come  at  the  banquet table  of  the  poets.
Fred  Cogswell's book  is at  once  more ambitious  and   less  natural.  His   rather embarrassing statement  printed  on   the jacket  makes this  clear: "My experience with  reviewers in  the  past  has convinced me  that   none   of  them has   caught  the full  implications contained in  the  poems of  mine   they   have    reviewed." Hardly the  way  to  file  such   a  complaint!  Also, Mr.  Cogswell  should  know,  as  an  editor of Fiddlehead, that  reviewers  are  a fairly conscientious  lot.  There's  no  point   for them  in  distorting or  depreciating-it's hard enough to tell  the  truth as one sees it:   a   good   book   will   always   find   its champions. However, he  asks  for  closer scrutiny, and   he  should   get  it.
The "full   implications" of  his  poems have   to  do  with   the   romantic and  re­ ligious  ideas  implicit in  them: the fall  of man  from  primal  innocence, his  present immersion  in  evil,  the  conflict  between innocent  ideals   and   shocking  facts,   the occasional vision  of  lost  purity, the  re­  surrection  or   travail   through  suffering and  Christian faith. I  would  not  dismiss any  of  this  as  insignificant or  trivial; it is the  grand old familiar story, but  there is  little  in   Mr.   Cogswell's  method  to make   it   new.

Strange-scented  birds    and    song   flowers grow
In  the  garden  where I cannot go  . .  .

was   echoed    at    least   more    crisply   by
A. J. M. Smith  in his

... wild  and innocent  wildwood
Of   our   lost   innocence, our   ghostly child­
hood.

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



The title   poem   "Descent  From   Eden", equating  innocence  with   the   ape-stage
 Cross:
 
What will it matter

of  man's   history and   his  fallen  state  of cruelty and  blood-lust with  reversion  to "cold,   ancestral  seas",   restates   a  theme that    Pratt  has   already  flattened  to   a fine plate on his terrific anvil.  Even in Canada we  have   heard all  this  before!
Other poems  are  even  older  and  more obvious  echoes  in  form  and  matter: bal­ lad   poems   of  the   nineties   period,  such as  Duncan  Campbell Scott   might  have written; character poems  in a prosy, bit­  ter,  disillusioned-romantic  manner, such as  E.  A.  Robinson did  write; lyrics  in the  soporific  quatrain form,  where  every nuance  of   rhythm   and   rhyme   is  "fa­ miliar   as  an  old  mistake, and  futile as regret".  Only   in   Fredericton  perhaps, lovingly   attached   to   Carman,  Roberts and   Sherman,  could   such   poetry  have been   written.   Mr.    Cogswell   obviously believes  that  no  poetic  manner or  tech­  nique  ever  goes  out  of  date; the  tragic result    of    this    conviction   appears   on every   page  of  his  book.
The  difference between Cogswell  and
Walton in  this  respect  is that the  latter quite  naturally  writes   out   of  an   older way   of   feeling    in   poetry,  a   tradition to   which   he   belongs,   and   has  enough humour to  drive   his old  Ford car  with flair  on  the  new  modern highway; Cogs­ well, however, pretends to  be  racing  the latest    8-cylinder  fins   with   puritanical faith   in  the  superiority of  old  models.
To  be fair   to  him,  the  last  section  of the  book,  titled "Lyrics",  contains some poems  in  a  different vein,  free  of  rock­ ing   chair    rhythms  and   also   of   sober­  faced  romantic irony. The idea inherent in  "The  Top of  Keirstead   Mountain" stands   obviously   in  contradiction to  the business   of   Faith,   the   Fall,    and    the
 Days  when   the  brooding sun  clutches here­
after
Others under  the  shell  of  an  eyeless  sky?

This  is clearly  a  later and  more  austere way   of  thinking;  the   poetry  somehow gains  in  force  and  vitality. In  the  same vein,   the   best   poem   in   the   book   is  a very short one, "Snake Shadow", eleven lines that condense momentary tension, vision  and  desire,  in  a  single  "instant of time" - a  true   imagist   success.  Pound was   right: "It  is  better  to   write   one Image in a lifetime  than to produce voluminous works."
LOUIS DUDEK



NOVEL AS
MYTH

CHARLES   BRUCE.   The  Township of Time,  A Chronicle.  Macmillan. $3.75.

The  Township of Time is a  tantalizing book.  Perhaps because  the  overall inten­ tion   of   its   author,  Charles   Bruce,    is working  at  cross  purposes  with  his skills as a creative artist, the reader repeatedly finds   that    a   promised   feast   has   been snatched   away   before   it   can   be  more  than  tasted.
This  book  is not  a novel,  though it  is
more,  and  less, than a collection of short stories.  The  author terms  it  a  chronicle, but   its  tone   and   emphasis are  those  of fiction   rather  than   history. It  is,  per­ haps,  a  mythology, an  imaginative  ren­  dering of  the   half-remembered  legends of  a  particular tribe inhabiting  a  par­ ticular  region.
The region  is the  "Channel Shore" of
Nova  Scotia,  the  tribe   the   descendents

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of the  first  three  settlers,  John  Cameron, Richard  McKee,  and   Colin   Forrester. Their  marriages and   home-makings  in­ troduce  a   casually  chronological  series of  tales  extending in  time  from  1786  to
1950.   In   each,   a   member   of   one   or another of the three families passes through a  moment of  insight   or  of  de­ cision.  But  Mr.  Bruce  is not  concerned solely  with   the  individual  and  regional  implications of his  material.  His  "town­ ship" is  a   microcosm.  His   plots  focus upon  crises  which  are  significant for  in­  dividuals   but   are   mere   eddies   in   the eternal  flux  of  time.  His  characters re­ veal   themselves almost  exclusively  in terms of their  attitudes to time-to what is  past,  or  passing,  or  to come.
This  might   have  been  a  more  satisfy­
ing  book  had  its characters been  less  in­ sistently  presented as  a  succession  of ships  passing  downstream  in  the  tide  of Heraclitus'  ever-changing   river.  Where nothing  is  fixed  there  can  be  no  com­ pleteness, and,  for  the  reader, no  point  of  rest  or  satisfactory  resolution. He  re­ sponds   to  the  author's skillful   creation of setting,  his  subtle  evocation of mood, his   effective   simplicity  of   style.   He  identifies   readily   with    his   characters, numerous  and   varied   though  they  are.  But   at   the  close  of  each  episode   he  is left   hanging  over  the   cliff's  edge   with no  hope  of  rescue.  Was  there  a  scandal because  Naomi  Neill  was snowbound at the  schoolhouse with   Mr.  Harvey? Did Mel  Sommers succeed  in  dragging Cam Sinclair  across   the   ice  to  safety?  And why  did  Saul  go  off  in  that   mysterious way,  never   to  return? If he  wants  any more   he  must   sing  it  himself.   That  is the  way of myths.  They  are  ".  .  .  some­ where  in   memory, forgotten   or   only casually brushed in  thought for  seventy

8o
 years",  like   the   tale   referred  to,   but never   told,   by  Young Richard  McKee. But  as fiction  none  of the  stories  is fully realized.
The dialectic of time  shapes  the struc­ ture  of  the  book  also,  giving  it  a  dying  fall.   The  pioneers are  absorbed  in   the present, in  the  daily  struggle to  ensure that  there shall   be  a  future. The  next  two  generations  look   forward  into   the promise  of an  expanding community, of a   province  growing  steadily  in   wealth and   culture,   of   a   world   dedicated to "progress". But  after   1870 a  twilight   of the  gods  sets  in  on  the   channel shore. Its children move out into  the greener pastures of  New   England or  the  West, from   which   only   the  old  and   defeated return.  For   the  others,   the  township   is the  sea-mark  to  which   they  look  back with  a nostalgic longing.
It  is  a   pity   that   the   merits   of  The
Township of Time should  be negated by its failure to  reconcile  conflicting though praiseworthy ambitions. Canadian  liter­ ature needs  a  mythology. It  needs  writ­ ing   which   deals   with   universal  themes  while  remaining  distinctively Canadian. But   this  book  tries   too  hard   to  do  too much   with  too  many   stories,   with   the  result   that  God's  plenty is  transmuted into   the  Devil's own  frustration.
MARION  B. SMITH

BOOKS  IN REVIEW


NEW STORIES

Klanak  Islands:  a  collection of  short   stories.
Klanak Press.  $2.50.

KLANAK  ISLANDS is the  second  publica­ tion  of the  Klanak Press,  a  new  venture promoted  by  Vancouver  lawyer,  Wil­ liam  McConnell, and  specialising in  fine typography. The  technical production­ design,  type and  original illustrations by local   artists-is    excellent;  the   stories, achieving near-professional competence in technique, fail in intellectual and emotional impact.
A certain freshness of approach, a meaningful distortion manifested in the oblique   theme   or   the   quickened  word, might be expected from  such  an  experi­ mental offering. The  symbolism  em­ ployed,  the characters displayed, and  the themes  chosen  are, however, the  already accepted  ones,  recognisable and   readily  classified.  Here  is  the  jazz  musician en­ dowed    with   the   improbable,  magical  qualities of the piper of mediaeval Hame­ lin  town;  the  modem "wandering Jew", past    persecution  and    past    hope;    the adolescents with   their   self-conscious  re­ volt  and  retreat into  a world  more  fear­ ful,  more  ritualistic and  formalistic  than  the  adult one  they  flee;  and   the  preco­  cious  children - observers, philosophers and  moralists - acceptable as  children only   by   a   convention  of   fiction.   The  themes  are  the familiar problems of per­ sonal   relationships complicated by the discordance of modem life, and  both themes   and  characters are  expressed in the  current idiom.
This  is not  to suggest  that  these stories are  entirely trite.  They are  not,  but  they are confined  within  narrow limits of execution. The  experimental is  lacking
 and,  consequently, the  invigorating and enlivening. When  the  unexpected is  at­ tempted  as   in   the   sudden,  murderous denouement  in  The   Sound  of  a Horn, it   appears  more   melodrama   than   the natural  outcome   and   resolution  of  the situation.
But   despite   its   questionable  ending, this  story   by  Robert  Harlow is  one  of the  most  successful   of  the  collection   in its creation of the  twilight state of the prostitute and  sexual  deviate, the jazz player  and  the  beatnik. The other  story that  achieves  the  same impact of  atmos­ phere  but  with  greater economy of inci­ dent  and  a  resultant tightening  of emo­ tion   is  Henry  Kreisel's   Homecoming. The   dispossessed Jew   returns  to  the parallel  destruction of  physical home and spiritual   hope.  Among  the  ruins  of  one lies sorrow,  in  the  ruins  of the  other  lies tragedy.   It  is  part of  Kreisel's   compet­ ence  that  he  brings  this  inescapable dis­ tinction   to  a  subtle  conclusion.
JOAN  SELBY


A HOUSE FOR CRITICISM

INGLIS  F. BELL  and DONALD BAIRD. The English Novel, 1578-Ig56. A Checklist of Twentieth Century Criticisms. Alan   Swallow. $3.00.

THE  ACCELERATION  of critical interest  in fiction  during the  last  ten  years is  recog­ nized in  this checklist  of criticism  on  the English  novel,  edited   by two  Canadians, published   in   the   United  States.   In   the face of such  an international venture, the question  naturally arises  who is supposed to  buy  such   a  book.  Scholars, to  begin with   the   most   likely  group, should   be warned   that   they   will  not   find  here   a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



substitute for the various  yearly periodical bibliographies or  for  the  thorough  bibli­ ographies  in   book  form   which  already  exist for many  important novelists. In  I4I pages, with an  average of eleven citations to   the   page,   the   book  has  fewer   than  I,700 entries.
The  publisher seems  to  think   it  will
attract  today's   common reader. On   the contrary, it seems  to me, it will appeal to today's  uncommon reader, the  university student  taking   English   courses.  And   it will also prove  useful  to that  instigator of uncommon  reading,  the   young  English instructor, who  is usually happy  to find a quick  and  easy guide  to the chief  articles and   books  on  the  novel  he  has  to  teach next   week.  Such   is  The   English  Novel, I578-I956,  and  as such it  does  not  quite fulfill the publisher's claim  to give us "the first  important guide  to the critical writ­ ing  of our  time" on  the  novel.  Nor  does the  book aid  "the effort  to codify critical methods", as  the  last  paragraph of  Mr.  Bell's  otherwise  commendable introduc­ tion  would  lead  us to expect.  For it does not give a full indication of the variety; of approaches  to   the   novel   which   makes modern  criticism  valuable. Granted  that  the  checklist   could   not  be  complete, its compilers should  have  been more definite about   what   it  included and  what  it  ex­ cluded. On  p.  ix, for  instance, Mr.  Bell tries  to limit  the new critical approach to a  concentration  on  technique.  He  omits mention of  the fruitful influence  of such non-literary  approaches as  anthropology and  psychology  (though they are  repres­ ented in  the checklist). Nor does he give credit to the  applications of such import­ ant  traditional approaches as comparative studies,  source  hunting, and the history of ideas.  The  latter are  among  the  unmen­ tioned  omissions and  are more  important

82
 than   the  announced exclusions,   the  ob­ vious  "expositions of plot  and  eulogizing  commentaries" denounced in the preface.
In  fact  failure to  tell  the  reader what he  is and  is not  getting constitutes the greatest fault of  the  book.  He  is not  told that  introductions to novels are  excluded unless  they  have  been  printed  elsewhere. He is not  told why, Henry  James does not appear, though Mr.  Bell makes  James  the keystone   of  his  introduction,  where   he refers to him as an "English critic and novelist". Finally  the  reader is  not  told the  terminal date  for  including criticism. One  book published in  I958 appears,  yet the  book  coverage  for  I957 and  the peri­ odical  coverage for  I 956 are  both  some­ what   spotty.
But  to make  these  qualifications about
The  English  Novel,  I578-I956  is not  to deny its importance as a convenient bibli­ ography  or   its  timeliness   in   appearing when  there  is so much  critical interest in fiction.
ELLIOTT  GOSE



SCHOLASTIC PERSONS

JOHN   MANNING. Dickens  on  Education. Uni­
versity  of Toronto. $5.50.

IN  THE   PREFACE to  his  study,   Dickens on Education, Professor  Manning quotes the   opinion  of  G.   R.   Gissing   that   "a review   of  all   the   scholastic  persons   in Dickens'  novels  would   be  very,  interest­ ing  and  of definite historical value". This  speculation-for when  Gissing  advanced it,  in   I925,  it   was  nothing  more   - is one  of  the  plausible  kind  that   so  many investigators   find   attractive.  One   need

BOOKS IN  REVlliW



only  light   upon   a  minor  theme   in  the works  of sumc  uuvclisl uJorc or less  well­ known,  and  the  thing  is done.  The minor  theme   is  supposed  to  borrow  a  kind  of weight   or  substance  from   the  author's general  reputation   and   gain   a   signifi­ cance   in  itself.
One  might  safely; guess  that  the Dick­
ensian   gallery   of  "scholastic  persons" could   scarcely   fail   of  being   wholly  in­ teresting. Professor  Manning   has   en­ riched  it by the  addition of Fagin, whom he   includes   in   Appendix  A   under   the heading A  Reference List  of  Schoolmas­ ters,   Schoolmistresses,   Ushers,  Tutors, and  Governesses  found  in  the  Works of Dickens. At  first,  this  suggests   a  rather broad-minded  view   of    pedagogy,  but one   need  not  quarrel  with  it.  Professor Manning makes  his  point  elsewhere.  At
 Page  204,  he  tells  us that, excepting the lessons  taught  by  five  persons,   one  of whom  is  Fagin, Dickens   never  supplied his   reader    with   a  "demonstration  of sound  teaching   method  in    a   good school".  In  a  strictly  professional sense, Fagin's might   indeed   be  called   a  good school; but  in the  same  breath, Professor Manning  tempers  his  praise,   and   con­ demns   all   the  excepted  lessons  as  "in­ adequate". He   does  not   enlarge-but as   far    as   Fagin's   instruction  is   con­ cerned, one  remembers  that   the  Artful Dodger   was  caught out   in  the  end.
Professor    Manning  is   quite    clearly aware  of the  capital difficulty  in making any  attempt to  turn fiction  upside  down and   sift  out   its   content  of  fact   - to weigh  its  "definite historical value". At Page   r8o,  he  says  "There is  alway11 the





'A miraculous little children's book.'

ROBERT FULFORD,
in  the
Toronto Daily  Star






The  Sunken City

AND OTHER TALES FROM  ROUND THE  WORLD

Oxford

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



possibility  that  the views expressed  in a writer's  fiction   may   not   be  those   that the writer himself holds." Against the possibility of being thus misled, he has supplied us  with  a  chapter setting  forth Dickens' private views on education as expressed in  his  letters. This  is a  neces­ sary  safeguard,   especially   with    an author  so  highly   coloured   as  Dickens.  "As   the   mediaeval  sculptors   skilfully fashioned   fantastic   gargoyles   for   the cathedrals",  says   Professor   Manning while  remarking that  one  does  not  find a  "really  satisfying"  schoolmaster  any­  where   in   the   novels,   "in   like  manner Dickens  fashioned  many   of  his  school­ masters as fantastic and grotesque devils."  The question is, and  always will remain,  what    definite  historical  value may  the  reader   find  in  Dickens'  inven­ tion,  the  repulsive  Squeers?  There is no good  in  saying   that   Squeers  is founded on  fact   and   therefore  must  have  some such   value.   The  question  is  not   to  be evaded - how  far  in  his  delineation of Squeers did  Dickens  depart from   fact? So  it  is  with  Dickens'  actual  views  on education-when the  statement of them is  made  to   serve   the   ends   of  fiction, what  weight are we to allow them in themselves?
It seems    unprofitable  to    consult
Dickens   on  so specialized   and  demand­ ing  a topic  as education. Professor  Man­ ning   points  out  that  he  has  found "no  closely  reasoned  presentation  of  educa­ tional   philosophy" and   says  that   "per­ haps   one    could    hardly  expect    it   in Dickens". That is surely  the  nub  of  the matter.   Without   Professor    Manning's industrious investigation, which  is  laud­ ably   restrained  in  its  statement  of  dis­ covery,    and    despite   Gissing's   hopeful  suggestion, one   could  hardly  expect
 much   from   Dickens   on  this   topic.   His interest and  his intentions, his whole constitution,  were   against  the   kind   of cool and  systematic treatment that  the subject  demands.
He    was    merely    the   leader  of   the school   of  "sensation" novelists,   writing to a formula, feeding, as Professor  Man­ ning   reminds us,  the  heart   rather  than  the  head. He  gave  a brother  novelist  his whole   recipe  and   told  him  how  to  deal with   readers. "Make  'em   laugh," he said,  "make 'em  cry-make  'em  wait." His  ideal   story  was,  in  his  own  words, "wild,  yet   domestic".  As  the   Fat   Boy intimated,   the   idea   was  to  make   your flesh   creep.   Thus  when  educational theory  or  the  ideal  of  the  schoolmaster got  in amongst the  Quilps and  the Cheerybles and  the fantastic half-world where  all of Dickens' characters live, strange  things   were   likely   to  overtake both.
Professor Manning  comes  to  the  con­ clusion,  which  can  hardly  be questioned, that    Dickens'  principal   value   was   in­  direct.  His   "preposterous  teachers,  his caricatures   of   men    like   Squeers  and Creakle,  depicted with  such  realistic de­ tail,  first  magnetized the  English  public,  then   rocked   it   with   hilarious laughter
.  .  . and   because   the  line  between   joy

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



and   sorrow   is  so  thin,   the   public   was often   llloveu  to  tears   as  well  - moved to  the  point  where  it  was  ready  to sup­ port  far-reaching educational reforms." Certainly, that is as  much  credit  as can be allowed   to  Dickens in  this  matter - and  it  is  not  a  little.
 character for  himself,  a mask  or  persona which   will  reveal   only  so  much   of  his true   self  as  he  is  willing  to  show.  Wil­ liam Stevenson's book  about  Red China, more   tract  than   travel,  suffers  because  the   character  in   which   he   chooses   to appear is  that   of  a  know-it-all Cassan-








TRAYELLERS' MASKS
 E. MORRISON	dra.    He   is   forever  arguing  with    his
Chinese  subjects, and  even  when  he lets them  have  the  last  word  he  manages to make it appear that  he has  won the argument. His  newspaper articles for  the Toronto Star  and  his  broadcasts for  the CBC     have   alway$  been   striking   and   in­ formative. But  when  they're worked into  a   book   like  this   their   effect   is  weari­ some.  After  a  chapter or  two  the Cold War  polemic  gets on our  nerves.

GEORGE   WOODCOCK.    Jncas    and    other    Men.
British  Book  Centre. $5.75.
WILLIAM STEVENSON.  The Yellow Wind. Brit­
ish  Book  Centre.  $7.00

CANADIANs  nowadays  travel   abroad  al­ most   as  much   as   Americans but   they are  no  great   readers of  travel  books. It was only to  be expected then  that  native  writers  should  have   neglected   this branch of  literature. It  remains for  an immigrant  man   of   letters  like   George  Woodcock, or   a   foreign  correspondent like  William  Stevenson,  to  cultivate it. They  are   able   to   do  so  only   because there   is  an   audience  for  their   work  in the British  Isles, where  there are  enough  people  with  enough curiosity about ex­ otic  places  to  support them.
I  wonder how  long  the  present  obses­
sion of Canadian readers with  echt- Canuck topics  will last? Sooner  or  later we're  sure  to get  bored  with contemplat­ ing  our   own   navels   and  start  contem­ plating someone else's.
Travel-writing  is  like   autobiography in  that it  forces   the  writer to  invent   a
 Mr.   Stevenson  sets  out   to  make   our flesh   creep   by  comparing  Mao's   tech­ niques   of   persuasion  with   the  famous experiments on  Pavlov's dog.  The hor­  ror  we supposedly feel  at  vivisection  - especially   Russian   vivisection-is  by, a blatant trick  of  debate transposed to  the process of  communist indoctrination.  We know  what  to  think   of  people   who  are nasty  to dogs.  Very  well  then,  we  know what to think  of the Chinese communists.
The  most  honest  thing  about  The Y el­ low Wind  is its illustrations-15 pages of human faces, competently  photographed.
The  figure  Mr.   Woodcock   cuts  in  his
book  on  Peru   is  very, different.  Gently curious,  he  is always  a fair-minded  trav­ eller, not looking  for anything in particu­ lar-except   perhaps art    objects-but open   to  impressions   of  people,  of  land­ scape  or  of   architecture.  Anything that  might  engage  the  notice  of  a  cultivated and  sympathetic mind  he  records,  along  with  the more  humdrum detail  of travel, so  that  we seem  to  travel  with  him  and share   not   only   his  expert  appreciation

Bs

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



but  his daily  routine as well.
He  takes  the  liberty  that  travel  books afford   (and  fiction,  perhaps, no longer affords)  to get  off some fine set-pieces  of description, archaeological   discursions, character studies; and  he is good at mak­ ing  the   sort  of  non-odious  comparisons and  cross-references that illuminate both the  culture he  describes  and  our  own  as well.  The  image,  however, which   his book   leaves  in  the  mind   is  of  a  harsh country inhabited  by an ignorant peasan­ try,, doped  with  coca  and  drink,  and  kept down   by  a  corrupt  alien   oligarchy. In spite  of Mr. Woodcock's tact  and  under­ standing  he  makes   us  feel  that   Peru  is one   of   those  countries  like   Australia which   we  could   cheerfully   die  without seemg.
This  may   be  partly  because   George
and   Inge  Woodcock  spent  so much  time on the road,  travelling in rather primitive conditions. Dilapidated buses, crowded trains,  non-pressurized aircraft-they are bound   to  be  depressing. But  there  is  an­ other reason  why  the  name  of Peru  now takes  on  a  faintly  sad  aura.
The  thoroughly admirable person  Mr. Woodcock chooses to be sees persons  and places  without the sharp  glance  of  preju­ dice  or  the  spleen  of  a good  hater, but also  without the  intensity  and  passion  of a lover. His picture is therefore somewhat level in  tone:  like a photograph  taken  on a  day  when  the  sky  is overcast  it  makes  no  striking  overall   effect,  its  excellences









86
 are all in detail. But-as the Swahili proverb has it-"a  little  and  a little  fills the  measure"; the  detail  is rich  and  re­ warding, and   the  mind   that   brings  it to life  distinguished.
KILDARE  DOBBS



NATIONAL PERIPATETIC

VINCENT   MASSEY.  Speaking of Canada.  Mac­
millan.  $s.oo.

FRESH from  his brilliant success as chair­ man  of the Royal  Commission on Nation­ al  Development in  the  Arts,  Letters and Sciences,  the  Right  Honourable Vincent Massey  became  the Governor-General of Canada in  I952. During the  seven  years that  he  held  this  high  office he  travelled with  quiet  constancy from  coast  to coast and  into  the far  northern regions  beyond the  Arctic  Circle.   He  was  always  on  the move,  always observing, and,  through his speeches  and  personal  contacts, always encouraging his fellow-Canadians to achieve  high standards in their  daily thinking and  doing.  Speaking of Canada is  a  selection   of  the  speeches   he  made to various clubs, societies and academic gatherings during this period.
Mr.   Massey  was  well  qualified   to  as­ sume  the  role  of  a  national  peripatetic. He was already widely known throughout Canada, and  for  long  had shown  a glow­ ing  faith  in  Canada as a  nation. He  was a  fine  writer   and   an  excellent   speaker, who  could  move  with skill and grace  into  the  language of  French-Canada when the occasion   was   appropriate. He   was  at home  in the classics of Greece  and  Rome,  could  draw  with  quiet assurance on  the

BOOKS  IN   REVIEW



Bible  for  ideas,  illustrations and  inspira­ tion,   awl   II<td    rang(•d   with   admiration through the  wide  fields of  English  litera­ ture.  He  had  pondered  deeply  on  many of  our   national  problems and   he  could draw   on  his  rich  background of  experi­  ence  to offer solutions and  indicate paths  to be  followed  if we were  to attain those higher reaches of living he so thoroughly believed  in.
It should  not  be surprising, then,  that this volume  makes  good  reading. Each speech shows the marks  of long and care­ ful   preparation; each   gives  evidence   of an  eager  desire  to  be fresh,  entertaining and  provocative. In  talking  to  university  groups   Mr.  Massey  shows  a  wide  know­ ledge   of  educational   institutions  and   a genuine  interest  in   students.  When   he addresses   the   Royal  Society   of  Canada he is steeped  in the history  of the original
 Royal  Society,   chartered  by  that   witty and   foolish  monarch, Charles II.  At  a Press Club  dinner in Ottawa he surprises his  sophisticated  and   tough-fibred  audi­ ence  by  delivering his  whole  address  in rather neatly  turned couplets,  somewhat  reminiscent of Butler's  Hudibras.
His  provocative remarks (and of these there   are  many)  are  rooted   in  his  own beliefs. He  is best described, I think,  as a Christian  humanist,  with   an   abundant faith   in  the  Christian  tradition and   an unflagging interest  and   belief  in  human nature. While   recognising  the   values  of the  sciences, he  boldly  affirms  the  deeper values  to  be  found  in  the  classics.  For him  universities  should  exist "... to pre­ serve  and  promote all truly  useful  know­ ledge  ... " and   "...  the  most  useful knowledge  which  any  of  us can  acquire, or  try  to  acquire, is a  knowledge  of  the




NOW   AVAILABLE
dnze  c/eu cy
ncan ;,n/"/e//
ct
.sff	cu{/ nz/n-tan
and"CJdeu

SELECTED  AND   EDITED   BY
 h
[A:J.(ADIAN LITE'l\..ATURE Fiction -  Poetry -  Essays
Canadian  Art
New  and   out-of-print
I800-I959
j
S nglish- French
I
supply wanted  titles.

ARTHUR S.  BOURINOT (Editor, The  Lampman Letters,
The  Thomson Letters,
At  the  Mermaid Inn, Etc.)

VERY LIMITED  EDITION -PRICE $3.50
not   many copies   left

Order   from
ARTHUR   S.  BOURINOT
I 58 Carleton Road, Rockcliffe, Ottawa
 I
7JAVIES	I
'BOO!( COMPANY
LIMITED
h	3468 MELROSE  AVENUE
b	MONTREAL,  QUEBEC HUNTER  6-2494
h
h	We  are   always interested  in   pur- chasing collections of  Canadian
books  and scientific libraries.

BOOKS  IN REVIEW


nature and  meaning of life." How  is this knowledge acquired?  The  mind  that  has examined  the  great   writings  of  Greece and  Rome  "...  with  attention and  un­ derstanding is a mind  disciplined, experi­  enced   and   mature. It is a  mind  stored with  truly  useful  knowledge  and  under­ standing;  knowledge and  understanding of  human nature and  of  human destiny in  the  light  of  human  experience."
On  language, too,  he  lays great  stress
- on   our   own,   everyday   language - for  "...  the  pursuit of  pure  knowledge is  only  made   possible  by  a  careful   and reverent  use   of  one   of  the   most   pre­ cious  parts   of  our  civilised  heritage   - language." He  would  also have all Cana­ dians,    from    childhood  up,   read   good books:    "Children  who  have   been   able to  see  what   is  good   will  know  what   is cheap and   inferior." And  he  asks  adult Canadians  ".   . .  to   support  journals which   devote   themselves  to  serious  and informed  discussion    on  matters  which should   be  of  general interest." But  how many  are  prepared to support  such  jour­ nals?   His  answer   is  timely.  "Ask  those unhappy  souls  who  try  to  launch   them and   keep  them  afloat."
I conclude with  one  suggestion: go  to the  book  and  read  it.  It  is a  rich  gift  to the  nation  from  one  who was a  remark­ able   Governor-General  and   IS     a   very great   Canadian.
S. E.  READ







88
 


A FIGHTING GOVERNOR


FRED   SWAYZE.   Frontenac and   the   Iroquois.
Macmillan. $2.00.

FRONTENAC  AND THE IROQUOIS is the nineteenth in the  Macmillan historical series for children, the Great Stories of Canada. The series  in  general is  excel­ lent,   particularly; The  Map-Maker, The Great   Chief,  Raiders   of   the   Mohawk, The  Golden Trail  and  The  Man    from St.   Malo.
Governor Frontenac, unfortunately, did   not   provide  a  writer  of  biography for children with  clearly  heroic subject matter. He   was   jealous,   vain,   irritable and   autocratic, and   continuously  quar­ relling, throughout  his  two  administra­ tions,   with   the  Jesuits,   the   Bishop,   the Governor  of   Montreal,   the   Intendant and  the Sovereign Council. (Mr. Swayze in   his   subtitle   calls   him   the   fighting  governor  of   New  France and   this  will not   be  disputed.) The  extent  to  which he  was  unheroic is documented in  detail
in   W.  J. Eccles'   new   biography   Fron­
tenac:   The   Courtier  Governor.  Eccles
portrays him  as  not  only insatiably quarrelsome  and   vain,   but   as  a   pro­ crastinating  military leader  only  finally forced into  a full-scale assault  upon  the Iroquois by  the  defection of  his Indian allies,  pressures exerted by  his subordin­ ates   and  specific  orders  from   France.
Mr.  Swayze  presents a  quite  different picture  based on   the-until   now­ generally  accepted,   over-sympathetic, Parkman  estimate.   For   the   reader  in­  terested in  historical  accuracy the  flaws in Frontenac's character are  glossed over too  lightly,  and   ideas,  ideals  and   objec-

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



tives   are   attributed  to   him   which   he
clear!y   Bever   haJ.
The story  makes  good  reading  never­ theless  for   those  willing   to  regard it  as fictional  biography. Mr. Swayze  selected his  material  well  and  gave   it  humour, action  and   excitement.  For   the   young reader   interested  in   adventure  and   a well  told story  this is enough. The  dis­ criminating  parent  can   purchase,  and keep  for   the   future, a copy   of  Eccles' The Courtier Governor.
INGLIS  BELL



FACE
OF A RIVER

WILLIAM   TOYE.    The  St.  Lawrence.   Oxford.
$4-50.

MR. TOYE, we are  told  by. his publishers, set out  to write  a history  of the St.  Law­ rence   designed   for  young   people  whose normal  text   books  he  felt   did  not  pay enough attention to certain social aspects of  the  Canadian past.  But  in  the  process of  gathering his  material,  he  apparently found  the  nature of  his  book  changing and  its appeal broadening.
The  result   is  an   unusually  congenial piece  of  history  writing. It will  probably appeal to  a  few  intelligent children; it will certainly appeal to adults who like a fresh  taste  in the  mind after  reading history.
Mr.  Toye,  skipping rather  perfunctor­
ily over the  geological and  archaeological past,  takes the history  of the St. Lawrence in  hand   with  the  arrival of Cartier, and guides   us  down   to  the   present   day.  He is  clearly   very  much   more   interested in social than  in political history, in the lives
 of common and  nameless  people  than  in those  of generals and  governors. And  so he  tends  to  reproduce somewhat too un­ critically;  the  accepted views  about  men like Frontenac and  Carleton and  then  to shuffle them  out  of the  way  as quickly  as possible. His  real  heroes are the habitants and  the voyageurs, the emigrants and  the lumberjacks,  and   on   their   lives  he  be­ comes  expansive,  drawing on  unfamiliar materials  and  using  them   in  ways  that  present  quite new  insights  into  aspects of Canadian social history one had  imagined drained  of  all  possible freshness.
Like the river of which he writes, Mr. Toye's   narrative becomes  stronger   as  it flows on.  In  the  earlier  chapters on  Car­ tier and Champlain he is doing little more  than   competently  re-stating  what   every student knows.  Even  his  chapter on  the social  life  of  the  riverside  in  the  mid­ eighteenth century is frankly  a paraphrase of the fairly well-known account of Peter  Kalm.  But   in   dealing   with   the   period  after  the  British  conquest  he  opens  un­ exploited   sources   of  information,  and



handles  the  faits divers  of early  and mid­ nineteenth century Quebec and Montreal with  an  ably  selective  hand. His descrip­  tion  of  the  voyages  of  the  timber   rafts,  his  account  of  the  practices  of  crimpers on  the  Quebec  waterfront, and  his brief story of the more curious aspects  of early Canadian railways,  are all good examples of  that  power   of  condensation which  is the  most  necessary  gift  of any  social  his­ torian  dealing with the age of the daily newspaper.

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Apart   from   its  merits   as  a  well  con­ structed and  clearly  written piece of social history,  The St.  Lawrence is one  of  the most  attractively produced books  I  have seen  for  a  long  time   from  a  Canadian publishing house,  and  for  this  also  Mr. Toye,  who is a book designer as well as a writer, must  get  the  credit.  Finally,  the spirit  of the  narrative is well  rendered in the  drawings by  Leo  Rampen, of  which one  was  reproduced  in  the  first  issue of Canadian Literature.
GEORGE WOODCOCK



CANADIANS AND SLAVS

o.s.N. LUCKYJ,  (Ed.), Canadian Slavonic  Pa­ pers,  vol.   m.   Published  for   the   Canadian Association of  Slavists by  the  University of Toronto Press  in  co-operation  with  the  Uni­ versity  of British Columbia. $3.00.

THIS VOLUME OF Canadian Slavonic Papers  follows  the  same   pattern as  the two  previous   ones.  The contributors are mostly  New  Canadians engaged   in  uni­ versity   teaching. The  ten  contributions range   from   phonology to  international relations, though literary themes  predom­ inate.
The essay,s on the Russian  novelists Tol­
stoy and  Merezhkovsky, the  Polish  journ­ alist   Wyslouchowa,  and   the   Ukrainian poet  Sosyura  illustrate the tribulations of writers  in  the  Slav  world, as well as their attempts  to  influence   their colleagues  and   the   population at   large.   Professor Novak   publishes   a   manuscript  entitled "Leo Tolstoy: His Art; His  Personality"; this was written  by  the well-known  revol­ utionary Peter  Kropotkin, who  was  also an authority   on  Russian  literature.

go
 Though several   of  Kropotkin's  interpre­ tations are   bound   to  evoke  controversy, they  are,  as  Professor  Novak  points  out,  "of  special  interest  as  a study  of one  fa­  mous Russian  by another". Professor  Bed­ ford's well-documented account of "Dmi­ try  Merezhkovsky, the  Intelligentsia, and  the Revolution of rgo5" deals with a once fashionable novelist  who  was  disappoint­ ed  by the  course  of events in  Russia  and  the  failure of his own  brand of Messian­ ism  to gain  ground in intellectual circles. The article on  Maria  Wyslouchowa  de­ scribes   her  efforts   to  "raise   the  cultural levels of the  peasant masses" in what  was known   as  Austrian  Galicia, Professor Luckyj's study  of  Sosyura  and   Professor  Bromke's "Background of the  Polish  Oc­  tober  Revolution" deal,  in  passing,  with the problem of those intellectuals who for a  variety of reasons  were prepared to ac­ cept  at one stage  a compromise between Communism and  nationalism in the Ukraine and  Poland.
The specialized nature of most contri­ butions  to   this   volume   will   confine   its appeal  to  a  fairly   limited  audience.  In spite   of  this  Canadian  Slavonic  Papers serves  as  a  useful  reminder of  the  rapid and    valuable   progress   made  in   Slavic studies, which  has  been  greatly   encour­ aged   by  the  creation of Departments of Slavic  Studies,  with   their   emphasis on language and   literature, at  a  number of Canadian  universities.
IVAN  AVAKUMOVIC







UNE NOUVELLE  REVUE:

Liberte  59



Kurt  Weinberg



Liberti  59   parait  depuis   le mois  de  janvier aux  Editions   de  l'Hexa­ gone   (Montreal).  Independante aux points de vue politique, social et religieux,  cette   revue  bimestrielle de  langue fran­
<;aise se  presente comme   l'organe d'une equipe de  jeunes  ecrivains-pour la  plu­ part  frisant la  trentaine-qui se groupent autour   du   poete    Jean-Guy   Pilon.    Le comite   de   redaction  compte   parmi  ses membres  Andre Belleau,  Jean  Filiatraut, Jacques  Godbout,  Fernand   Ouellette, Andre  Guerin et Claude Asselin; tous des auteurs dont   au   moins  un  recueil   ( sauf erreur)  est  destine  a  loger,  ou  loge deja a  l'enseigne de  la  maison  editrice.
Sans etre  bilingue, cette  revue veut s'assurer, dans  un  but  de  rapprochement culture!, "la collaboration des intellectuels canadiens, qu'ils soient  de  Montreal, de Winnipeg ou de Vancouver". Tiche am­ bitieuse   autant que  louable dont  on  ne peut  que  souhaiter la  reussite.  Pour !'in­ stant, cependant, le nombre des collabora­
teurs  de  langue  anglaise Iaisse encore   a
desirer.  Ce  n'est, en efiet, qu'au  troisieme numero de  Liberti 59  qu'on decouvre le premier  ( et,  pour  le  moment, !'unique)
 morceau traduit de I'anglais; encore s'agit­ illa d'une nouvelle de H. W. R. Morrison dont  la version  originale avait deja  paru  auparavant dans  Queens  Quarterly. On  peut  esperer  qu'a l'avenir, une  collabora­ tion   plus  active   des  auteurs  de  langue anglaise  contribuera  a  ce  climat de  dia­  logue   que   favorisent  les  redacteurs  du periodique.
Liberte  59 se propose  de servir  la  nou­
velle litterature, de discuter sans ambages les  problemes  culturels du  Canada et  de suivre   au  jour  le  jour  !'evolution  de  la pensee  contemporaine. Par  la  variete meme de ce programme, Liberti 59 ecarte done  le danger que  constitue la  cultiva­ tion exclusive  d'une  seule categorie litter­ aire   (poesie,  critique,  sociologie,  etc.)­ une sorte de specialisation qui caracterise bien  des  revues  au  titre  millesime,  telles qu'elles  fleurissent   un  peu  dans   tous  les pays  civilises  depuis   la  guerre. Cepend­
ant, a beaucoup d'egards, Liberte 59 reste
dans  le sillon  de ce  genre  de  periodique.
C'est  ainsi,  par  exemple, que  predomine ici cet esprit  d'engagement qui  est Ie pro­ pre de toute  revue  d'equipe. Aussi trouve­
t-on  dans  ces  pages  des  articles  de  fond

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



lucides  et souvent  intransigeants, exprim­ ant   avec  fraicheur  des  opinions  parfois impopulaires. Mentionnons surtout, a cet egard, l'excellente etude si courageuse ou
!'eminent sociologue  Jean-C.  Falardeau examine de  pres  les  difficultes  qui  con­ frontent,  tout   particulierement   dans   la Province de Quebec, le professeur de car­  riere   et   tout  l'enseignement superieur ("Les Chaines de Promethee", No. 2, pp.
69-78). II nous manque l'espace  pour dis­ cuter  dans le detail,  ce qui ne se revele au fond  que comme  un aspect secondaire de cette revue. Car,  comme  de  juste,  la poesie, la  critique,  le conte-en  somme, les  belles-lettres-occupent dans  Liberte
59 ce  premier plan  que  ne sauraient  ob­ scurcir   les questions auxquelles  la  redac­  tion  consacre, a !'occasion, des  numeros  speciaux ( telle cahier 3, de mai-juin, qui pose  plutot   qu'il   ne  resout  le  probleme epineux d'une  "Synthese des  arts") .
C'est  dans leur poesie et leur critique litteraire que  nos confreres  de  Liberte 59 atteignent  quelquefois a une  sorte  d'uni­ versalite qui  transcende le cadre de la vie au Canada Franc;ais. Le poete qui, parfois avec   une  maladresse  emouvante,  trans­  pose sur un plan universe!ses  angoisses de Canadien   Franc;ais;   le  critique  dont   la formule,   souvent    gauche   mais   sincere, cherche  a  transformer des  idees  venues d'outremer-voila les ecrivains  qui depas­ sent  un regionalisme etroit  dont les effets, si  souvent  salutaires au  roman  canadien franc;ais,   menacent  pourtant   d'etouffer dans  la petitesse  provinciale toute  aspira­ tion  litteraire un peu  plus vaste.
En poesie, d'ailleurs, comme en critique, Liberte 59-a  l'exemple d'autres  revues au titre millesime--fait profession de non­ conformite sans,  pour  cela, s'enroler dans  l'avant-garde.  Nous  voulons dire   par  la que  le depaysement  qu'affectionnent  ces

92
 poemes  nous  conduit  presque  invariable­ ment  vers un paysage,  une ambiance deja connus; que ce soit  (costumes ala canad­ ienne)  la  luxuriance verbale   d'un Walt  Whitman ou d'un Pierre  Emmanuel ( dont pourraient  se  reclamer  Paul-Marie   La­ pointe et, a  un  moindre degre, Franc;oise Bujold), ou  la  "nuit" d'un  Cocteau que "creuse" Michel  Garneau, une  poesie d'amour  qui   rappelle  Eluard   ("Nava­ celles" de Jean-Guy Pilon), ou encore  ces tours  de force  dont nous  amuse  le spirit­ uel  Jacques Godbout et  qui  evoquent en meme  temps  Prevert, Queneau et  les ex­ ercices  a la  "grands rhetoriqueurs" ou  se plaisait, vers  1940,  Aragon. C'est  a  des­ sein  que  nous  insistons  sur  cette  double  tradition  americaine et   franc;aise  qu'on retrouve partout chez les jeunes poetes du Quebec,  et   qui   fournit  si  souvent    une forme  a  cette  sensibilite  toute  nue  et  vi­ brante  qui   chante   dans  la   poesie   du Canada Franc;ais.  II n'y a dans cette  con­  statation rien  de  depreciateur. Car  s'il  y a  ici  influence,  elle  ne  se  manifeste  pas par  des emprunts mais par ce principe de
!'imitation des  meilleurs auteurs qui, de­
puis   l'antiquite  romaine, fait   partie  de toute  tradition classique, permettant au poete  de  chercher ses maitres ou  bon  lui semble.
Quant a  la  critique, il  serait   injuste d'oublier ce  que  doit  a Apollinaire,  Bre­ ton,  Paulhan, Sartre et  Blanchot  un  cri­ tique  comme Michel van Schendel. De sa prose,   qui   ne  resiste  pas  toujours  a  la tentation  du   jargon  philosophique, il  se degage, face  a l'absurdite existentielle, un esprit  fraterneJ qu'on dirait catholique s'il ne   frappait  d'anathemes  l'adversaire­ que  ce  soit  l'infortunee Fernande Saint­ Martin, heretique "bretonisante", ou Guy Sylvestre, accuse  d'avoir par  dedain  ex­ clus  de  son  anthologie les poetes  Claude

OPINIONS AND   NOTES



Fournier,  Claude Gauvreau,  Yves   Pre­
fontaine et Paul-Marie Lapointe.
Pour  ce  qui  est de  la  prose !'imagina­ tion,   la  ou  elle   touche   a  la   perfection ( comme  dans  le conte  de  Claire Martin, "Toute  la  Vie",  No.  r,  pp.  31-32),  elle reste  plus  pres  du  petit  poeme  en  prose (genre  Le  Spleen   de   Paris)  qu'elle   ne
se rapproche, par  exemple, du roman d'avant-garde (Sarraute, Robbe-Grillet, Butor). Pour   tout  dire,  et  ceci  n'est  pas un   reproche,  cette   prose   remarquable­ ment  economique, rapide, a la fois tendre et violente ne se debarrasse jamais  tout  a fait  de  cette  "marquise" qui  "sortait a 5 heures", et  qui  empechait Valery  de lire des  romans.
Contes, poemes, critique, chroniques, articles   de  fond: en  somme,  tout  ce que nous  avons  pu  lire  dans  Liberti 59 porte Ia marque de la sincerite, d'une honnetete





Christmas in
Canada Edited by  Flora McPherson and   M.  J.  Barber.
Designed  by  Leslie
Smart as a Christmas Gift   Anthology. Illustrated by  Frank  Davies.
 incorruptible, du talent et d'urie  fraicheur qui augurent bien pour  l'avenir des belles­ lettres au Canada Franc;ais. Penetres d'un  sens de  responsabilite  sociale,  ces  jeunes auteurs s'efforcent tres serieusement, dans le domaine du  style, d'acquerir cette  dif­
ficulte qui  (pour parler avec Joubert), s'ajoutant  a  une  facilite   innee   d'ecrire,
fait  Ia condition meme  du metier  d'ecriv­ ain. Tant de qualites n'existent cependant pas sans imperfections. Certaines reserves, en effet, s'imposent. Le temps  est venu ou l'on  peut  souhaiter  que  les  jeunes  poetes depassent   !'esprit  franc;ais  d'entre-les­ deux-guerres et  des annees  40. De meme,  ayant  appris  les  lec;ons de  Mauriac, Ber­ nanos,  l'existentialisme, et   de  !'heritage
surrealiste, Ia critique devrait se mettre a
la  recherche de  son  propre visage,  a  Ia
decouverte d'une  identite authentique telle  qu'elle   ne  pourra surgir  que  de  la





Anerca
Eskimo  poetry, illustrated with  original  Eskimo drawings, collected and
edited  by  Edmund Carpenter,
PH.D., University of Toronto.

PRICES:
Paperback edition, $2.00
Library edition, $2.75






J.  M.  DENT &  SONS (Canada)  LIMITED
TORONTO & VANCOUVER



93

OPINIONS  AND NOTES


realite  de  !'esprit canadien fran<;ais.  Ex­ cellentes   que  soient,  dans  cette  nouvelle  revue,  prose et  poesie, il leur manque un peu de ce grand souffie epique qui  habite
les paysages  a peine  explores du  Canada.
Peut-etre aussi faut-il, pour que  se mani­ feste  dans  la  litterature ce grand  souffie, que   les  jeunes  ecrivains  en  quete  d'une ecriture plus  personnelle approfondissent et  murissent  dans   leur  for  interieur  les mythes  et  les  arche-types  d'une arne  na­ tionale   encore   par   trop   timide.   En  at­ tendant, nous  saluons  en  Liberte  59 une revue pleine de promesse et d'integrite, affranchie d'academisme et de  toute  tut­ elle.


LET'S
START A MAGAZINE

PRISM, Vol.   1, no.  1. $1.oo.

IT IS DIFFICULT  not  to pre-judge a  pub­ lication from  its  prospectus,  which, like a  letter  from   a   stranger,  seems  under scrutiny to  reveal  something of the  per­  sonality   that   launched  it.  Prism's  little  letter  of   introduction,  resembling as  it did  the  literature wrapped round  a new pharmaceutical  product, augured ill for the  appearances of the  new magazine.
Then  there   was  the  name,   which   in my   mind   evokes  Canon Chasuble and the  colours of the  rainbow-and  prunes. Perhaps it was a fear of being thought Victorian that  prompted the editorial promise  that  Prism "would  make  no con­ cessions  to  Mrs.  Grundy''.  Immediately one   recalled  the   words   of   e.  e.  cum­  mings:

let's start a magazine to  hell  with  literature

94
 we want something redblooded
lousy  with pure reeking with  stark
and  fearlessly obscene

In  fact, the  magazine on  arrival  proved to  be  less  strenuously Lawrencian than its   harbinger  had   suggested. The  con­ tents   were   unexceptionable-  if   unex­  citing. The  design,  alas,  was   every bit  as  disastrous as  the  prospectus  had  threatened.
At  first  sight  Prism  resembles  nothing
so  much   as   the   Optometrists' Journal. It is unfortunate for  Mr.  Norman  Pear­ son,  who  is accused   on  the  title  page  of being  responsible, that  the  last  three  or four  years  in  B.C.  have  seen  the  emerg­ ence  of  a  belated  interest  in  book  pro­  duction and   magazine  design.  His  mix­  ture  of  parish-magazine layout  jazzed  up with    a   few   raccoon-coat-and-hip-flask effects,  such  as  a  different type-face for every  title,  and   cute   lower-case  initials  for  the  contributors' names,  would  have passed  unnoticed a  couple  of  years  ago, but   now  Reid   and   Tanabe have   set  a standard  that  must   not   be  allowed   to sag.
The  typographical enormities are  too
numerous  to  catalogue: there is  hardly a page that does not pour vitriol on the sensitive   eyeball.  Who can  gaze   un­ moved    on   pages   forty-two  and   forty­ three, to give one  searing instance? This  sort   of   thing   is  unfair   to   writer  and reader  alike.
Of   the   stories,   Mr.   Henry  Kreisel's
unfolds with  a humorous Middle Europ­ ean   irony    reminiscent  of   Svevo;   Mrs.  Laurence's subject-matter  and   style  in­ vite   a   comparison   with   Joyce  Cary which  she is not  yet  ready  to withstand. Mr.  Hall's sample chapter persuades one that his  book  will  be  no  less  worthy of

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



publication than  the  fifty  almost  identi­ cal  novels   with   which   it  will  be  easily confused; and  Miss  Luckhurst's  offering  is  surely   the   "something  authentic and delirious" foretold in  cummings' poem. The poetry is  pretty  much   what   one would  have  expected: competence from the   professionals,  mountainous travail and   ridiculous  mice from   the  beginners.  Mr.   Birney's  gay  and   rhythmic holiday  piece,   "Bangkok  Boy",   with   its   bright  surface  pattern and   new,  exotic   words like  Wat  and  klong  and  impet, shows a sure  touch; Mr.   Wilfred Watson offers some   amusingly  satirical  lines, but arouses  the   suspicion  that   Layton  and Dudek are  targets for  the  rapier rather than the  blunt  instrument that  has  been laboriously fashioned here.  Miss Livesay, after  an   uncertain  start  which   might have   been   better  omitted,  produces in
 her second stanza the best thing in the magazine,   and   some  of  the  best  poetry I  have  seen  recently, before  tailing   off into  a  rather obvious  conclusion.
Mr.   Richard  Watson, in  naming  his
verses  "Five   Songs   of  a   Fool",   is  too hard   on  himself:   he  is  no  fool,  but   I doubt  if he  is a  poet  either. Mr.  Souster is flippantly amusing in  an  undergradu­ ate  way;   Mr.  Sowton is probably a born prose-writer, and   Mr.  Bluestone   is  ob­ viously   an   academic.  Mr.   Susac   can't make   up   his   mind   which   he  admires most,   Empson  or   Spender; but    Mr.  Nowlan, especially  in  the  poem  "Begin­  ning",    gives   promise  of   writing  good poetry  sometime,  and  is clearly  a  name  to   watch. Joseph  Capozio's pen   and wash  drawing is one  of the  most satisfy­ ing  things  in  the  issue.
The total  impression left  by  this  first










THIS  magnificent  volume  contains  g6 of   Karsh's  most    memorable   photo­ graphic  portraits.   EACH    PICTURE is approximately  97'2  x  12  inches, flaw­ lessly  reproduced by sheet-fed gravure. They   have     the    quality   of   original prints fresh   from  Karsh's studio. You have    never    seen   anything  to   equal them in  a  book  before: QUEEN ELIZA­ BETH  11,  Pope   Pius   XII  and  Pope  John  XXIII,   Churchill,   Eisenhower, Nehru,   Massey,  Pearson,   Einstein, Schweitzer, Best,  Hemingway, Picasso, Casals, and  many more   of  equal fame are    recorded   in   these    pages.    EACH PORTRAIT  is   accompanied  by   bio-
 YOUSUF KARSH

(/1cwtr lts <>f


fjre t.-.ess


graphical  details  and  a   scintillating text  by Karsh describing conversations and   incidents of  each   sitting and  re­ vealing  delightfully  the   personalities of  the   subjects.  A  WONDERFUL  GIFT, and   a   treasure   to   own.   208   pages,
97'2   x   12   inches, handsomely bound
and   jacketed. $I 7.so.


U,tve,.stt/ c-f  C[.,.,..,.,t.,. (!l,.ess
TORONTO  5,  ONTARIO

95

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



issue  can   perhaps  best   be  summed   up in  the  words   of  Johnson: "This was  a good  dinner  enough, to  be  sure;   but  it was  not  a dinner to ask  a man  to."  Four years   ago,  speakers  at   a  writers'  con­ ference  held  on  the  U.B.C. campus were deploring  the   dearth of   "outlets"  (I think   that   was  the  Kinseyan  term  em­ ployed)   for  the  beginning writer. Look-











































g6
 ing  at  the  current crop  of literary maga­ zines  one  wonders whether  perhaps we have   not   too  many outlets  chasing  too few   writers;   reading   some  of  the  verse that   finds  its  way  into  print, one  has  to stifle  the  ignoble  question: Is  it  possible to  write verse  so  bad  that   it  could   not find   an   editor,  somewhere  in   Canada, willing   to  print  it? 	TONY  EMERY
