lr.25 per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·33




PUBLISHING IN  C]IN]ID]I


Articles

BY GEORGE  WOODCOCK, NAIM  KATTAN, JOHN  MORGAN  GRAY, W.  J. DUTHIE, JOHN ROBERT  COLOMBO, WYNNE FRANCIS

Answers to a Questionnaire

BY EARLE  BIRNEY, KILDARE DOBBS,  ARNOLD  EDINBOROUGH, ROBERT  FULFORD, RODERICK  HAIG-BROWN, CARL  F. KLINCK, HUGH MACLENNAN, ROBERT  WEAVER

Reviews

BY A. W.  PURDY, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, GEORGE  BOWERING, W. H. NEW, DAVID WATMOUGH, E. B. GOSE, SANDRA DJWA, DAVID MACAREE, RONALD  SUTHERLAND, ROBIN  SKELTON, ALAN  R. SHUCARD,
FRED  COGSWELL, J• A. LAVIN, MARY  JANE EDWARDS, H. B. TIMOTHY, S. E. READ



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW


PUBLISHING IN CANADA


Preface to a Symposium



George Woodcock









A SYMPosmM on  Cmmdian  publishing,  which  mo't  of
this issue of Canadian Literature  is, needs little in preface.  Most of the main arti­
cles are by writers  connected  in some way, as publishers, booksellers or commenta­ tors, with  the  book  trade  in  this country.  It  was to supplement  these essays by a body of opinion  from people outside the trade  but vitally interested in it, that I also resorted  to  the  old  device  of the  questionnaire -"Opinions  on  Canadian Pub­  lishing"-- which  has allowed  the condensed expression of views on many  aspects of the subject.  The  contributors were chosen to represent  various  literary  interests
-and interests   are   by  definition   vested.  Three are   writers primarily-the novelists Hugh  MacLennan and  Roderick  Haig-Brown, and the poet Earle Birney; Robert  Fulford  of the Toronto Star  is the  most knowledgeable literary  journalist in  the  Canadian newspaper   world;   Arnold   Edinborough is editor  of  Saturday Night  and  a critic;  Robert  Weaver  is editor ofT amarack Review  and originator of many  important CBC  literary  programmes; Carl  F.  Klinck  is General  Editor  of The  Literary  History  of Canada  and  a leading  academic critic;  Kildare Dobbs is many-faceted-writer, former  publisher's editor  and  now  magazine editor.
Deliberately,  I  asked  plain  questions.  One  contributor lamented their general­ ized  tone,  but,   as  all  experienced   interviewers   know,  the  precise  and  detailed question  can  often  box  in  the  field of  possible answers  much  too  closely.  I was concerned  to  provoke  as many  and  as free  opinions  on  Canadian  publishing  as possible. In  my  view, a good  deal  of detailed  and  useful  comment  has emerged

3

PUBLISHING IN  CANADA



from   this  approach. Two   questions   raised  generally   unilluminating  responses, and  for  the  sake  of space  I  have  omitted  them  and  their  answers.  Also, where answers  were "Yes"  or "No" or so brief as to allow summarization, I have  done this in the  prefatory  notes to the questions.  Where  the answer,  even though  brief, was  illuminating or  individual enough   to stand  on  its own.  I  have  presented  it in complete  form.
One  point insufficiently  noted in the answers to the questionnaire is the astonish­ ing expansion  of the role of the  private  presses in the publication of  verse. This  is largely  covered  by  Wynne  Francis  in  her  article  on  the  Little  Presses, but  it  is worth  adding-to give some idea  of the rapidity  and  importance of this change
-that in 1959  (the first year for which Canadian Literature  published  an annual bibliography), 24  books  of  verse  were  published  in  Canada, of  which  8  were from   private   presses,  while  only  seven  years  later,  in  1966,  67  volumes  were published -almost  three  times as many -and 52 of them  came from  the small presses. Even  then  it is doubtful if all the mimeographed pamphlets published  in various corners of the country  were included.
A  final  general  comment, on  a subject  also barely  covered  by the  answers  to the  questionnaire, is perhaps  to  the  point.  Many  books  by  Canadians are  pub­ lished  abroad, in  London, New  York  or  Paris,  and  only  become  available  here when  they  are  distributed   by Canadian publishers  or  jobbers on  an  agency  basis. This  is mainly  because  there  is still an  insufficiently  large  public in  Canada for books  which  do  not  have  a  strong   Canadian interest.  I,  for  example,   lived  in Canada for seventeen  years, and  during that  time published eight books in Britain  (some  of  them  in  the  United  States  as well as in  French,  Italian, Swedish  and Japanese translations) before my first Canadian-published  book appeared. Natur­ ally,  every  writer  is pleased  to  gain  a  wide  international  sale for  his books, but for one  very good  reason it is unfortunate, for readers  as well as for writers,  that in such  cases there is not also separate Canadian publication. Books by Canadian writers  who  publish  abroad  come back  to  their  native  land  with  a heavy mark-up because  of  agency  sales, so that  British  and  American readers  buy  them  much  less expensively  than  Canadian  readers.  The  next  necessary  revolution  in  Cana­ dian  publishing  is surely the production of separate Canadian editions of all books by writers  working  in this country,  no matter what  their subjects.  When  a Cana­ dian  publisher  finds it  commercially feasible  to  underwrite a separate edition  of a book  by a Canadian  on Ancient  Egypt  or the  Merovingian kings, one will feel that  Canadian  publishing   and  the  Canadian reading   public  have  at  last  come of age.

4


CANADIAN PUBLISHING



Answers  to a Q,uestionnaire





by Earle Birney, Kildare Dobbs, Arnold Edinborough, Robert Fulford, Roderick Haig-Brown, Carl F. Klinck, Hugh MacLennan, Robert Weaver










1.  What is worst in Canadian publishing?

Editorial standards. Editorial initiative. Dim-witted old ladies in backrooms  instead of bright  young  talent.                                                                                 KILDARE DOBBS

Editorial  weakness.  I  hear  complaints constantly from  writers  about   the  passive and   often   indifferent  editorial   attitudes of  the  Toronto  publishing houses,  and those  writers  who  have  dealings  with  publishers  in  New  York  say that   they  are treated   quite  differently  there.  Possibly the  economics  of  publishing  in  a country with  a  small  population  has  something to  do  with  the  editorial situation. Still, it's  noticeable  that  the Toronto publishers  don't  employ  editors  who are personally influential in  the  literary  affairs  of the  country; the  last  book editor  I  can  recall with  this  kind  of influence  was Kildare Dobbs  when  he  worked  for  Macmillan a few  years  ago.  The  editorial   policies  of  the  two  most  important Canadian  pub­ lishers,  McClelland &  Stewart and  Macmillan, are  dominated by their  managers, Jack  McClelland and  John  Gray,  and  I think  that  by now it would  be  very diffi­ cult  for  a  strong  and  independent writer  to find  a  place  in  either  firm. For  that  matter, the  editorial   policies  of  the  other   houses  seem  to  be  dominated by their managers.                                                                                                     ROBERT  WEAVER

Half-hearted  promotion and  marketing of  books.                              CARL F. KLINCK

5

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



The  desire  on  the  part  of some  publishers  to  have  a list at  all costs. This  means the  inclusion  of shoddy  works  which  should  never  see the  light  of day.
ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

Lack  of enterprise and  imagination, though  this  is not  universal  with  all of them. Generally   it  stems  from  the  fact  that   nearly  all  Canadian publishers  are  branch plants  of English  firms, and  in  the  past  the  home  offices regarded them  largely  as outlets  for  their  overseas  trade. It  was  the  policy  of  at  least  one  to  down-grade Canadian work.                                                                                    HUGH MACLENNAN

The   fact   that   it  must  operate for  a  limited  market   and  a  largely  unconcerned public,  both  of  which  are  still  further reduced   by the  existence  of two  language groups  with,  seemingly,  little  intercommunication.         RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

From  the  author's view, I think  it is the  near-certainty that  whatever  is published will  not  circulate outside   Canada. In  other words, that  less  than   3%  of  the world's  English-speaking public  will  ever  be reached.                   EARLE BIRNEY

What   is  worst  in  English-speaking Canadian  publishing is  a  lack  of  audacity. Example:  the  most  important  (in  terms  of  influence)   thinking   to  emerge  from Canada in  recent  years  is that  of Marshall McLuhan; yet commercial Canadian publishers  have  had  nothing to do with  McLuhan. One  of his books was published by the  University  of Toronto Press, the other  by McGraw-Hill, a subsidiary  of the American  firm.  This  was  a  difficult  area  for  a  commercial publisher  a few  years ago, and  none cared  to enter  it. It is only now that  McLuhan is famous  that Cana­ dian  publishers  are  taking  an  interest  in his work.  Example: in  England  and  the United   States,   books  on  current affairs  are  now  common; in  Canada  they  are still rare.  They  demand  speed, imagination and  audacity, qualities Canadian com­ mercial  publishers  rarely exhibit.
After  the  lack of audacity, perhaps the  worst  aspect  of most Canadian publishers is their  inability  to sell (as opposed  to merely issuing)  books.        ROBERT FULFORD

2. What  is best in Canadian publishing?

What  is best about  the  best of the English-language publishers  is a certain  residual idealism.   They   are  businessmen,  but  they  realize  that   they  have  a  duty  to  the community as a whole, and  they  take pride  in doing  that  duty,  whatever  the costs. This  is old-fashioned in  the  best sense, and  is too seldom  recognized  as the  virtue that  it  is.                                                                                                    ROBERT FULFORD

The  fact  that  it exists at  all.                                                       RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

Again  from  the  author's point  of view, the feeling  that  if one's  book is any good, it  is likely  to find  some  publisher, even  though  not  necessarily  an  established  one.
EARLE BIRNEY

Sales  effort.                                                                                                    KILDARE DOBBS

6

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



A  few  publishers-Longman's,  Oxford, General   Publishing, for  example-are looking  more  actively  for  Canadian books, and  hopefully,  they  will help  to make the  publishing scene  a  more  lively  and  varied  one. 	ROBERT WEAVER

Recently, the  production of  volumes  on  academic subjects  and  various  arts.
CARL F. KLINCK

The  determined efforts  by Macmillan, University  of Toronto Press, Clarke  Irwin and  one  or  two  others  to  restrict  their  list  and  publish  only  what  they  consider a good  book.                                                                                     ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

A new willingness on the part  of a few to take chances  with  new Canadian writers.
HUGH  MACLENNAN


3 (a) .  During  the  past  decade,  have  Canadian publishers  become more adventurous in their choice of books?

The general  view  was  that  ·they  had  become more  adventurous, but  the  ayes" of  those contributors  who replied   briefly   was  qualified   by  terms  like  ((within limits" and  ((apparently''. Those whose   views  were  emphatically affirmative  en­ larged  upon  them.

Undoubtedly, and  in  this  respect  McClelland &  Stewart  (a  native  house)   leads the  way, most  notably  with  its Canadian Library  paperbacks. But  these should  be available   everywhere   that   paperbacks are  sold,  and   not  merely  in  bookstores.  I understand the  bookstores  enforced  this  sales practice,  but  I  may  be wrong.
HUGH  MACLENNAN

In  the  last decade  our  publishers  have  become more  adventurous in both  the form and   the  content   of  their   books.  Form:   They   now  produce far  more  ambitious books  than   in  the  past-No Mean City   (University of  Toronto), Birds  of the Northern  Forest    (McClelland  &   Stewart),  French-Canadian  Furniture    (Mac­ millan)   are examples  of books which  are physically ambitious. This  change reflects both the influence  of the Canada Council   (which subsidizes some expensive books) and  the  growing  affiuence  of  book-buyers.  Content:  At  the  same  time,  the  pub­  lishers have  taken  advantage of weaker  censorship  laws to publish  books which  in the  I 95o's  would  have  seemed  impossibly  daring-Layton's  poems,  Love  Where the   Nights  are  Long, Beautiful Losers,   perhaps   Place  d' Armes. In  this  case  the change  appears mainly  in  the  work  of one  publisher,  McClelland &  Stewart. At the  same  time,  it should  be pointed  out  that  Canadian  publishers  have  played  no significant   part   in  the  fight  against   censorship.   The  one  important case   (Lady Chatterley's Lover)  was carried  to the Supreme Court of Canada by New Ameri­ can  Library.  (In   fairness,  incidentally, I  have  to  add  that  Canadian publishers, through  their  association,  offered  to assist financially in this fight.)  ROBERT FULFORD

7

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



No, why should  they? Adventurous probably  means  unsaleable.          KILDARE DOBBS

Somewhat.  Mostly   because   McClelland  &  Stewart  has  been  forcing   the  pace.
ROBERT WEAVER

Yes, though it  has  taken  them  a  long  time.  The  leader  in  this  regard  has  been Jack  McClelland, though  the creation of a Canadian list by people like Doubleday and  Longmans has  also burst  certain   barriers.  Ten  years ago it would  have  been quite  impossible for Cohen's  book Beautiful  Losers to have  been published.
ARNOLD EDINBORO UGH


3 (b). Have  they  become more  sophisticated in the  design and  produc­
tion of books?

Here  the  view  was more  positively  affirmative  than  on 3(a). The   five  contri­ butors  who  answered  briefly  were  agreed  that  on the  whole  there  had  been  real improvement in this direction.

Yes, particularly the  University  of Toronto Press, though Oxford and  Macmillan deserve   favourable  mention   here.  Clarke,   Irwin   have  always  produced   elegant books and  they  continue  to do so.                                              ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

Yes, and  a  good  number  of  Canadian books are  now  good-looking  books.  From time  to  time  some of the  book designers  go too far,  and  like a movie or television director, use the  writer  as a  tool.  But  generally  I'm  very much  in favour  of what is  happening in  the  design  and   production of  Canadian books, and  people  like Frank  Newfeld,  William  Toye,  Allan  Fleming,  and  others  deserve the credit  for it.
ROBERT WEAVER

Certainly Canadian publishers  are more sophisticated in the design of their  books, but  there  are still far  too many  weak spots-the Ryerson  books are mostly deplor­ able, Macmillan's are seldom impressive, and the McClelland & Stewart paperbacks continue to  be  mediocre   or  worse.  Compared  to  1957,  however,  our  books  are much  closer to a good  international standard. A novel, for instance,  is likely to be better   treated   visually  in  Canada than   in  Britain.   Macmillan's books  are  often better   looking   than   Doubleday's,  though  not  as  good   looking   as  Atheneum's, Knopf's or  Little  Brown's  and  not  as consistent  as Random House's.  Our  picture books  are  vastly  improved and   now  can  be shown  at  an  international book  fair without  shame. 	ROBERT FULFORD

3 (c). Have  they  become more enterprising in their  public relations?

Here  the  name  of one  publisher  came  up with  astonishing  frequency.  In addi­
tion  to  the  answers  we  reproduce, ,three contributors   remarked  on  the  achieve-

8

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



ments  of McClelland  &  Stewart  in  developing   public  relations. The only  other publisher  commended  specifically  (once)  was  the  University of Toronto  Press.

Not  really, so far  as I can see. But  except  for a book so obviously a best-seller even before  its  publication that  it  can  underwrite radio  and  television  or bus and  sub­ way  advertising,  the   publishers'   promotion  departments  seem  to  be  limited   in what   they  can  actually   accomplish.                                                      ROBERT WEAVER

Not  really. They  still rely too much  on launchings and  getting  their  authors on to local  TV   and   radio  interview   shows.  Again,  Jack   McClelland understands this area  much   better  than  anybody  else, the  classic example  being  The Comfortable Pew.                                                                                                         ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

In  public  relations  only one firm  has  shown  any  significant  change  for  the  better in  recent   years-McClelland & Stewart, which  sells its  books  with  vigour  and imagination and  whose  President is his  own  best  public  relations  man.  In other cases,  public  relations   is still  mainly  a  routine   activity,  carried   on  at  the  lower levels of each  company; mostly  the  publishers  depend  for  publicity  on the luck of the  draw,  which  means  that   they  generally  lose out  to  more  energetic  areas  of activity. 	ROBERT FULFORD


3 (d).   Have they become less inclined to publish bad books because they are Canadian?

Here  there  was less agreement  than  on the  previous questions. Carl  F. Klinck and  Kildare   Dobbs  thought   there  had  been  no improvement, the  latter  adding that  "some  bad  books  are  saleable if they  have  local  relevance."   Earle  Birney saw   an   improvement  among   "the  leading   publishers",   Arnold   Edinborough thought   there  was  perhaps  less inclination to  bring  out  bad  books "but  some clangers  still  get   published",  and   Roderick   H aig-Brown   remarked   that  "un­ doubtedly some  very  bad  books  are s·till published  solely because  they  are  Cana­  dian in content".

This  is a tricky  question.  Twenty years ago it was my impression  that  it was policy with  some  firms  to  publish  really  bad  books. Their purpose  was to indicate that the  parent houses were trying  their  best with  no material. The  real aim, of course, was  an  excuse  to  mark  up  U.S.  imports.   But  this  situation has  improved if  not disappeared.                                                                            HUGH  MAC LEN NAN

I don't think  Canadian publishers,  generally,  are  any  less inclined  to publish  bad books than  they  were  a decade  ago.  Certainly there  are  far  too many  bad  Cana­ dian  books.  But  is it  fair  to  say these  are  published   because  they  are  Canadian? New  York  publishers,  who  presumably have  no  parallel  nationalistic  motives,  also

9

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



publish  many  books for  which  it  is hard   to imagine  any excuse, literary  or  com­ mercial.  Rather, I think  publishers  in all countries  tend  to set up publishing "pro­ grammes" and  little  office bureaucracies, and  that   these  require,  in  effect,  a  set number of books per  year.  The  books are  then  found, whether they have  value  or not.  The   unfortunate  aspect   is  that   good  books  are  crowded   out-they  don't  receive  proper  bookstore space,  or  they may  be insufficiently  promoted.
ROBERT FULFORD

InI g67, probably  not:   this year is a cross that  we all must  bear.  But  the question is at  least  partly   irrelevant. Canadian  publishers  ought   to  publish  a  wide  range of Canadian books, and  some  of  them  are  bound  to  be inferior.  But  how else do you  serve  readers  whose  tastes  in  books  are  at  least  as impure as my  own  tastes are?  How  else do  you  bring  on  a  writer  except,  often,  by publishing  him  before he is fully  at  ease in his craft; or support an  established  writer  except,  sometimes, by publishing him in periods  when  he isn't  at his best? In  this respect I don't  think that   Canadian  publishers   are  really  so  different   from   publishers   in  London  or New York.                                                                                                    ROBERT WEAVER

4.  Have  the possibilities of paperback publishing  been properly exploited in Canada?

Among the  shorter  answers there  was a general consensus that  the  possibilities in  this  direction  had  not  been  properly exploited. Roderick  Haig-Brown  felt that there  was  uan  immense   potential"   which  had  not  yet  been  even  «properly  ex­ amined, much   less exploited", but  Carl  F.  Klinck   pointed  out  that  there  had been uconsiderable  improvement of range, nevertheless."

Perhaps  not.  But  the  sale  of  really  cheap   paperbacks depends   everywhere   upon the  existence  of a mass market  that  this country  doesn't  really possess. Some  years ago  Collins  and  Harlequin tried  to service  a mass market  in  Canada, and  failed. Their books  looked  drab  and  their  editorial policies  were,  to be polite,  erratic; I think  that  the same  criticisms  can  be made  of McClelland & Stewart's new Cana­ dian  Best-Seller  Library.  But  I'm  still  not  convinced  that  there's  much  chance  of succeeding   with   Canadian  reprints  in  this  market.  I'm   sorry,  however,   that   a more  selective  reprint   series like  McClelland &  Stewart's  New  Canadian Library had  to  be left  to  the  initiative of one  firm;  I think  it  would  have  been  a  better  idea  to form  a subsidiary  with  access to the  back  lists of all  Canadian publishers.
ROBERT WEAVER

I don't   think  so,  but  then  I don't   know  what  the  possibilities  are.  McClelland, University  of Toronto and  Ryerson  are  moving  in the  right  direction (a direction set by McClelland in the New Canadian Library  and  the Carleton Library), which is towards  university and high school auxiliary  reading.  The trade  possibilities of paperbacks in  Canada must  be very limited.                            ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH


IO

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



The   possibilities  of  paperbacks have  not  been  properly  exploited   yet. In  this  we have   greatly   improved   during  the  last  few  years-the University   of  Toronto, Oxford   and   Clarke,   Irwin   are  all  publishing handsome quality   paperbacks,  and there  are  the  shabby  but  useful  books of  McClelland &  Stewart's New Canadian Library   and  Carleton Library.   But  there  has  been  hardly  any  serious  attempt to penetrate the  cheap   (under one  dollar)   news-stand  market. This,  it seems to me, is more  likely due  to lethargy  than   (as the  publishers  sometimes  say)  to problems of  marketing. The   popular Canadian books-including  the  very  popular  ones, like  Anne  of Green  Gables-should be available  cheap,  as similar  American  and English  books are. 	ROBERT FULFORD

Probably   not,  but  already   too  much  so  far  as  authors' royalties  are  concerned. When  Turvey went  into  pocketbook,  sales doubled, but  royalties  dropped to  one­ tenth  per  book.                                                                                              EARLE BIRNEY

5.  Are Canadian publishers too much restricted  by their role of distribu­
tors for British and American houses?

There may  be restriction in this,  but  if so it is a matter of inclination and  laziness rather   than   compulsion.   I am  aware  that   inclination towards  growth  and  inde­ pendence of Canadian branches  has  been restricted  at  times, but  it would  be hard  to show  that  the  restriction  has  not  been  economically  sound.
RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

Yes,  most  Canadian Houses   (but   not  all,  now)   are  playing  it  safe,  as glorified agents  for  foreign  books, and  taking  no risks. But  the  leading  Canadian firms  are learning how  to make  money,  or  not  lose it any  way, from  Canadian authors.
EARLE BIRNEY

Most  of them  are  nothing  but  distributors.                                        KILDARE DOBBS

The   word  isn't  "restricted"; it's  something   like "paranoid". Those  firms  that  do nothing but  distribute  books  in  Canada  imported from  England or  the  United States   have  a  minimal   stake  in  the  publishing   community here.  Subsidiaries of foreign  publishers  sometimes  make  the  gesture  of publishing  some books by  Cana­ dian   writers   (Doubleday, for  example)  ;  others   don't   even  bother   to  make  the gesture   (Random House,  for  example; Bennet  Cerf  should  come  up  to  Toronto to  investigate) . Most  Canadian  houses  are  burdened  by  too  many  books  from English  and  American  firms  which  they  must  attempt to service.  Canadian pub­  lishing  has  been  gelded  by the  agency  system-and the  best firms  wouldn't have existed  without the  support of the  agency  system.                             ROBERT WEAVER

It is possible that  profits  derived  by Canadian publishers  in  their  role as  distribu­ tors of British and  United States  books are too high and  too tempting for gambling on  books of Canadian origin.  Perhaps  Canadian publishers  could  not exist without


II

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



performing this  role  as  distributors; yet  there  are  now  foreign  publishers  setting up  Canadian  establishments to  skim  off  the  distributing profits.  The  role  of  the Canadian publisher  may  be changing; McClelland & Stewart appears  to be a suc­ cessful  Canadian firm  engaged  largely  in  the  trade  of  books of Canadian  origin.
CARL F. KLINCK

The  restrictions are  less now than  they  used to  be, and  most  of the  major  houses use  their  connections   to  promote   Canadian authors, which  is a  liberation rather than  a  restriction. Many  of the  larger  houses abroad  are  now handled entirely  by firms which  are more  jobbers than  publishers  anyway.            ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

There was a time  when  Canadian publishers,  because  they  made  so much  money out of distributing British and  American  books, took a rather cool view of their responsibility  to sell their  Canadian books. Perhaps  this  accounts  for  their  rather over-gentlemanly approach  to  promotion. I  like to think  that  dependence on distribution of  British  and  American books is gradually  diminishing.
ROBERT FULFORD


6.  Has publishing in Canada a future,  and, if so, what?

It has a future so long as Canada has, and  exactly as much.  So long as this country remains  a  small  political  satellite  of the  United States,  involved  in  the  American economy  of  waste  and  war,  our  cultural future will  be  negligible.  "Publishing" needs  defining.  The  future is with  the  disc, tape,  film,  even  more  than  with  the printed   book.  The   publisher   who  understands  this  will  alone  survive  into   the next  century.                                                                                                    EARLE BIRNEY

Yes.  It will  grow  rapidly   with  the  educated  population, if it  learns  to  diversify its  books  and  appeal   to  more  special  groups.                                       KILDARE DOBBS

Of  course.  It will  probably  remain  as  chaotic  and  illogical  as it  now is, improve its economic  situation, and  put  more  emphasis  on Canadian books. Most  Toronto publishers  are  probably  not important enough  to tempt  the  English  and  American publishing cartels.                                                                                       ROBERT WEAVER

Canadian publishers  have  a  future here  and  abroad, provided  that  they  exercise the  ingenuity   of,  say,  the  Australian publishers  who  do  very  well in  selling  Aus­ tralian books in  the  United   Kingdom and  elsewhere.                        CARL F.  KLINCK

Reading has a future, and  the  book has a great  future. I can't  think  that  Canada doesn't   share  in  this.  How,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say,  because  it's  a  matter of economics.   In  the  magazine field  I  would  know  what   the  future is  (within   the limitations  of  my  crystal  ball), but  in  book  publishing   the  situation  is entirely different.                                                                                ARNOLD EDINBORO UGH

I2

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



Definitely  a large  future owing  to the  rapid  increase  in  population and  a  remark­ ably  growing   interest   in  Canadian  books  as  their  merit   becomes  truly  interna­ tional.  Also the  Canadian market  is a good  one,  as I know  from  experience.  My novel,  The   Watch that  Ends  the  Night   (1959), was  12 weeks on  the  New  York  Times best-seller  list  (from  place  12  to 8)   and  sold  26,ooo in  the  States.  It sold the  same  number here.                                                                        HUGH  MAC LEN NAN

Of  course.  Gradual growth  in  all  lines of  publication, tied  to  population growth and  improved education.                                                    RODERICK HAlO-BROWN

I  believe  there  is  a  future   for  Canadian  publishers   as  publishers   to  the  world, printing  books  in  Toronto  or  Montreal  for  distribution  in  the  United  States, Britain  and  elsewhere.  The  advantage would  be that  the  Canadian writers  could be  represented internationally by publishers  genuinely  and  permanently interested in  them-in  this  way,  for  instance, Callaghan  would  be  permanently in  print in  the  United States  and  Britain,  as I  think  he should  be. At  the  same  time  this greater  business activity  would  eventually  raise the level of editing  in Toronto and Montreal and  have  a  generally  favourable effect  on  the  Canadian  literary  com­ munity.  But  this  growth  will be slow and  will depend  on  the international  popu­  larity  of  certain   Canadian writers.  It has  already  started   with  a  non-commercial house,  the  University  of Toronto Press. 	ROBERT FULFORD

7. Any other comments?

Only  that  publishers  should have greater  confidence  and understand that an international  literature, based  on  Canada, already  exists.          HUGH MACLENNAN

In  general,  the  change  for  the  better  which  has  come  over  Canadian  publishing in  the  twenty  years  that  I have  been  in  Canada is remarkable. When  I think  of the  inexpressibly  ugly  books  that  Ryerson  used  to  put  out,  when  I  think  of  the junk  that  used  to  be published,  I am  astonished  at  the  elegance  and  the  richness of  Canadian  publishing   now.  On  public  affairs  I think  we  do  remarkably  well, both  for  readers  and  writers;  in  poetry  we surely  are  a model  for  the  rest of the world.  Fiction  alone  lags behind.  The  reason  for this latter  is, of course, economic risks for  the  writer,  who would  prefer  to get  published  abroad   where  the  market is bigger.                                                                                            ARNOLD EDINBOROUGH

There is in  my opinion  no comparison between  the  state  of Canadian  publishing
35  years  ago,  when  I began  publishing   books,  and  today.  At  that  time  one  was not  aware  of any such  thing  as Canadian publishing  in  the  real sense. To  publish, one  turned   to London or  New York  or both.  This  remained pretty  much  the case until   after   World   War   II, and   there   has  been  steady  improvement ever  since. Though I  am  not  thoroughly informed  on the  point  I suspect  that  U.S.  copyright law  works against  Canadian publishing  more  than  any  other  single factor,  though

I3

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



I understand there  have  been  some  recent  improvements. Canadians, French  or English, are in an advantageous position in that they have alternatives to native publication. At  the same  time  I believe all publishing is declining  in the following respects:

(I)  Interest in and  concern  for the individual writer.

( 2)  Quality of content, partly  due  to (I).

(3)   Concern for  keeping  good  books in  print.  This  is most  marked  and  reflects, as does  ( 2),  a sort of mass-market obsession with  turnover, perhaps economic­ ally inevitable.

I seriously  doubt   that   Canadian  publishers   had  too  much   choice  in  the  whole matter. They   are  limited   by  economics,  competition  and   their  own  capabilities (aren't we  all?). Textbooks   or  something of  the  sort  are  the  backbone  of  most firms  and   literary   publishing,  here  or  elsewhere,  takes  its  chances  among   these larger  issues.                                                                                   RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

(I) The   gravy  is in  school  and  college  textbooks.  Since  they're  "recommended" (or  not)   there's  danger   of  corruption. Whether there  is in  fact  corruption I don't know.

( 2)  Canadian publishers,  as  mercantilist branches  of foreign  houses, have  made no  effort  to seek markets  in  Africa,  South  America  or  other  emerging  coun- tries. 	KILDARE DOBBS

Despite  everything I may have  written  above, the Toronto puhlishing scene would be bleak  indeed  without  Jack  McClelland and  his firm.  I suppose  it's  a comment of sorts on this symposium  that  it's common  knowledge  that  McClelland & Stewart is  not  one  of  the  fat  cats  on  the  Toronto publishing scene.  I suppose  it's  also  a comment on this symposium  that  the  two firms about  which  I hear  the most  criti­ cism  from  writers  are  McClelland &  Stewart and  Macmillan, the  houses  which have  done  the  most  in  recent  years for  Canadian publishing and  have  still  failed to create  the editorial climate  so necessary to the  book business in Canada.
ROBERT WEAVER

It seems  to  me  that  the  growth  of  the  University  of  Toronto Press, from  a  tiny house  publishing a dozen or less books per  year, to a major  university  publisher, is one  of  the  two  major   events  of  Canadian publishing   in  this  period.  The  other major  event  is the  change  in  McClelland & Stewart from  a fairly  modest  and  not very  distinguished  house  to  an  aggressive  and  expanding corporation.
ROBERT FULFORD

Canadians, I think,  profit  greatly  by being  exposed  to books from  abroad  as well as to  those  produced at  home.  I  believe that  this  condition should  be encouraged

CANADIAN PUBLISHING



and  even  consolidated if  (i)   the  Canadian mark-up on  foreign  books were  sub­ stantially   lowered   (inviting  an  increase  in  number   of  books  sold), and  if   (ii) Canadian books of quality  could  be guaranteed publication and  extensive sale. In the  fluctuations of the  market  in  Canada, Canadian books lead  a  precarious exis­ tence;  they should  be the staple  items come what  may.                       CARL F. KLINCK
















CANADIAN LITERATURE PUBLICATIONS


A  CHOICE  OF CRITICS
Selections  from  Canadian Literature, edited  with  a criti­ cal  introduction  by  George   Woodcock.   Essays  on   the Canadian literary   landscape and  on  individual  writers, including Margaret  Avison,  Earle  Birney,  Morley  Cal­ laghan,   Robertson  Davies,   A.   M.   Klein,  Hugh   Mac­  Lennan, Jay  Macpherson,  E.  J.   Pratt,  Gabrielle  Roy,
A.   J. M.  Smith,   Raymond  Souster,   Anne   Wilkinson.
Published   by  Oxford   University   Press  in  co-operation
with  Canadian Literature. Cloth  $5.00, paper  $2.50.


CANADIAN LITERATURE I LITTERATURE CANADIENNE Edited  by Inglis F. Bell and Susan W. Port. A listing of Canadian creative and  critical   writings  in  English  and
French   for  the   period   I959-I963.  Cloth   $5.50,  paper
$2.50.

Obtainable   from
PUBLICATIONS CENTRE,  UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, BRITISH  COLUMBIA




IS


L'EDITION
AU CANADA FRANCAIS



NaimKattan










LES DIFFICULTJ\s  qu'Cprouvent aujomd'hui le< Cditeun; du
Quebec ne sont  pas  nouvelles. Leurs  racines  plangent dans  l'histoire  de !'edition
au  Canada, voire  dans  l'histoire   tout  court.  On   n'imprimait pas  de  livres  au Canada sous !'ancien regime,  et  apres  la  Conquete il fut  interdit d'importer des livres de France. Ce n'est qu'enI 830 que cette interdiction fut levee. Les premiers imprimeurs de  Montreal et  de  Quebec offraient  leurs  services  aux  anglophones et  aux  francophones en  meme  temps.  Le Gouvernement, l'Eglise  et les journaux etaient  leurs premiers  clients. Longtemps, ils furent  leurs seuls clients. Les libraires, qui  cumulaient les fonctions  d'editeurs preferaient importer des livres plutot  que d'assumer  le  risque   d'en   publier   eux-memes.   Certes,  les  produits   des  auteurs canadiens  figuraient   sur  les  rayons  des  libraires-editeurs.  Ils  constituaient,  on
!'imagine, une infime minorite.
Un evenement a modifie radicalement le visage de 1'edition au Canada fran<;ais: la  deuxieme   guerre   mondiale.   L'occupation de  la  France coupa  subitement les libraires  canadiens fran<;ais de  leur  source  d'approvisionnement. Les besoins du public  ne  diminuerent  pas  pour  autant. II  fallait  trouver   d'autres sources.  Du jour  au  lendemain, Montreal  devint   un  grand   centre   d'edition. Des  ecrivains fran<;ais  illustres,   refugies  en  Amerique,  faisaient   paraitre  leurs  ouvrages   au Canada  et  les  ,editeurs  canadiens  fran<;ais reeditaient  les  chefs  d'ceuvre  de  la litterature  fran<;aise.  Montee   fulgurante  qui  ne  fut  que  de  courte   duree.   Ces maisons  d'edition  n'ont   pas  survecu. La  guerre  finie,  elles disparurent les unes apres  les autres.  Au  cours des dix annees  qui suivirent  la liberation de la France,

r6

L'EDITION AU  CANADA  FRANCAIS



!'edition au Canada fran  ais
Elle ne s'en  est relevee qu'avec !'entree en scene, dans  le monde  de !'edition, du Conseil  des Arts  du  Canada et du  Ministere  des Affaires  culturelles  du  Quebec. II  ne serait  pas  exagere  de  dire  que,  sans !'intervention des instances  gouverne­ mentales, !'edition au  Canada fran  ais
Ou en est ['edition aujourd'hui?
Voici quelques  chiffres fournis  par  le Service des Lettres  et du  Livre du  Minis­
tere des Affaires culturelles du Quebec:


Annee:
1963
1964
1965
1.
Nombre d'auteurs  qui ont pubhe
276
226
248
2.
Nombre  d'ouvrages  publies
360
325
304
3.
Nombre  de maisons d'edition
47
39
35
4.
Total  des volumes imprimes
1,422,998
1,328,222
1,190,696
5.
Tirage  moyen
3>744
3,906
3,9!7
6.
Valeur au prix de detail




des ouvrages imprimes
2,366,473
2,464,1 !8
2,386,598
7.
Prix moyen d'un  ouvrage
I.66
!.85
2.02
Le  livre scolaire  represente  plus  de  la  moitie  de !'edition en  langue  fran  aise
au  Canada. II  compte,  d'apres le rapport Bouchard (page  148)   pour  la moitie de toutes  les ventes  des libraires  de la Province. Les problemes  qui se posent  aux
editeurs  de manuels  scolaires  different  de ceux  auxquels  les autres  editeurs  ont  a
faire  face.  Du  reste, chacun  des deux  groupes  d'editeurs dispose d'une association distincte:  L'Association des Editeurs  Canadiens et Ia Societe  des Editeurs  Cana­ diens  de  Manuels  Scolaires.  II  existe,  par   ailleurs,  une  Societe  des  Libraires  Canadiens et  une  Societe  des  Libraires  Grossistes Canadiens.  Les  quatre organ­  ismes se sont groupes  en  une federation: Le Conseil Superieur du  Livre. Ce Con­  seil publie  une  revue:  Vient de  paraltre  (qui  est un  bulletin  du  livre au Canada fran  ais)
principale activite  du  Conseil est d'organiser chaque  annee  Le Salon  du  Livre de Montreal auquel   prennent part  non  seulement  les editeurs  canadiens mais  ceux de  tous  les pays francophones et  notamment ceux  de  la  France, de  la  Belgique et de la Suisse.
Pour  comprendre le fonctionnement et  la geographie de }',edition au  Canada fran  ais,
romancier, il a le choix  entre  plusieurs  editeurs.  II peut  presenter  son  roman  au
Cercle du Livre de France. II sait que cet editeur  donne  un prix annuel  de $I,OOO et  qu'il   publie  non  seulement  le  roman  du  laureat mais  ceux  de  la  plupart  des finalistes.  II sait  aussi que  les descriptions  les plus  audacieuses  et les opinions  les

I7

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



plus provoquantes ne rebuteront pas cet editeur  qui, quantitativement, est le plus important editeur  de romans  au Canada fran<;ais.
L'auteur du manuscrit pourra se presenter  aussi chez HMH (Hatier, Marne, Hurtubise) . Cette  maison  publie depuis  plusieurs annees  des ouvrages  de qualite: essais,  romans,   nouvelles.  Elle  groupe   les succursales   de  deux  grands   editeurs fran<;ais: Hatier, qui se specialise dans I'edition scolaire et universitaire, et Marne dont   la  specialite   est  le  livre de  caractere  religieux.  Le  directeur et  l'associe canadien de la maison  est Claude Hurtubise. Cette  maison  est l'une  des rares qui s'interesse  a la traduction des livres canadiens anglais. Elle a offert au public francophone des ouvrages  d'auteurs aussi differents que Hugh  MacLennan, Walter Gordon et Thomas Sloane.  Elle vient meme de marquer un point sur le plan international:  elle  a  obtenu   les  droits  pour  l'edition fran<;aise des ouvrages  de Marshall McLuhan. La traduction en sera faite au Canada et l'edition  parisienne suivra  celle de Montreal et c'est Marne, l'un  des proprietaires de la maison HMH, qui en assumera  la responsabilite.
D'autres editeurs  publient  egalement  des romans: Beauchemin, qui se specialise cependant dans la publication et la diffusion des livres scolaires. L'auteur sera egalement bien  accueilli  par  Jacques Hebert, proprietaire et fondateur des  Edi­ tions du Jour. Ce n'est pas la premiere  maison d'edition que fonde Jacques Hebert. Journaliste de  combat,   grand  voyageur, M.  Hebert crea,  il  y a  une  dizaine  d'annees, une  maison  d'edition  d'un   genre  tout  a  fait  nouveau   et  inusite:   Les Editions   de  l'Homme. Il  faisait   paraitre, a  des  prix  populaires,  des  ouvrages d'une   grande   actualite. Un   jour,  il eut  l'idee  de  reunir  des lettres  adressees  au Devoir  par  un  instituteur anonyme du  Lac Saint-Jean.  Publiees sous le titre  Les Insolences du Frere Untel, ces lettres obtinrent le plus grand succes dans l'histoire  de l'edition fran<;aise au Canada. En quelques  mois, il s'en est vendu  plus de cent mille   exemplaires.  Quelques  annees   plus  tard,   Jacques   Hebert   quittait  cette maison  en raison  de certaines  divergences  avec son associe et fondait  Les Editions  du  Jour   dont  il demeure aujourd'hui  le seul  proprietaire.  Cette  maison  connut  des fortunes  diverses mais  semble  surmonter  les difficultes qu'elle  a eprouvees  au cours de ces dernieres  annees.  Jacques Hebert a diversifie ses editions.  Il continue a publier  des ouvrages  d'actualite mais fait  paraitre aussi des romans,  des recueils de  poesie, des  essais. Il  vient  d'obtenir  un  grand  succes international. En  effet, c'est lui qui a public Une Saison dans la Vie d'Emmanuel, de Marie-Claire Blais. On  sait  que  ce roman  obtint  le Prix  Medicis,  a Paris,  et qu'il  a deja  une grande carriere  aux  Etats-Unis, en France  et  bientot  dans  d'autres pays. C'est  la maison d'edition canadienne qui  possede les  droits  internationaux.

18

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



Jacques Hebert adopte,   pour  lancer  ses livres,  une  technique qui  bouleverse toutes les habitudes de l'edition. Chaque titre est une surprise.  Le nom de l'auteur et le theme  de l'ouvrage ne sont reveles que la semaine de sa mise en vente. Autre­ ment  dit, cet ancien  journaliste cree autour de chacun de ses livres un "evenement".
Les Editions  de l'Homme poursuivent la  publication de livres d'actualite mais se specialisent   de  plus  en  plus  dans  la  reedition  des  romans   ( notamment  ceux d'Yves Theriault) et dans les ouvrages  qui s'adressent a des publics des plus divers ( astrologie,  gymnastique, education, sexuel,  controle  des naissances,  etc.).
Si l'auteur du  manuscrit est un  poete, il peut s'adresser  a plusieurs  maisons qui
se specialisent   dans  cette  activite   peu  rentable. La  maison  la  plus  prestigieuse dans  ce domaine c'est l'Hexagone. Fondee  par  un groupe  de  jeunes  poetes dont plusieurs,  par  ailleurs, sont  membres  du  comite  de redaction de la revue  Liberte, cette  maison  est tres exigeante.  Elle accorde  autant d'importance a la qualite  du texte  qu'a  sa  presentation. Son  animateur, Gaston  Miron,  est d'ailleurs l'un  des poetes  les  plus  remarquables du  Canada franc;ais.  Est-il  besoin  de  dire  que  les Editions  de l'Hexagone n'ont  aucune  assise financiere  et qu'elles  survivent  depuis
des annees  grace  a 1'acharnement  et a Ia volonte  de ses animateurs dont:  Jean­
Guy  Pilon,  Paul-Marie Lapointe, Gilles Henault et Michel  van Schendel?
Mentionnons  parmi   les  autres   editeurs   de  poesie  les  Editions   Esterel  et  les Editions   Deom  qui,  par  ailleurs,  publient   aussi  des  romans   et  des  essais, ainsi que la Librairie Garneau de Quebec.
Si !'auteur du  manuscrit est un  universitaire, il peut  s'adresser  aux  editions  de
son  universite.  Depuis  quelques  annees,  les Presses de  l'Universite de  Montreal, les Presses de  l'Universite Laval  et les Presses de l'Universite d'Ottawa ont  con­ siderablement  augmente  le  nombre  des  ouvrages   qu'elles   publient. On  trouve  dans  leurs  catalogues  des titres  de livres tres specialises mais on  y  decouvre  aussi des ouvrages  de  critique  litteraire susceptibles  d'interesser le  grand  public.
Si !'auteur a  des  preoccupations religieuses, il peut  proposer  son  manuscrit a
plusieurs   maisons   dont   la  principale  est  Fides.  Celle-ci  est  l'une   des  maisons d'edition les plus importantes du Canada franc;ais puisqu'elle publie, depuis de nombreuses   annees,  des  livres  de  caractere general,   bien  que  les ouvrages  qui portent  son nom  presentent  un certain  aspect chretien.
Les  Peres  Jesuites  disposent  de  leur  propre  maison:  les  Editions   Bellarmin. L'auteur peut  egalement  £rapper  a la porte  d'autres maisons religieuses:  Les Edi­ tions  Pelican  et  les Editions  Levrier.  L'auteur  d'avant-garde, surtout s'il  est de
tendance  separatiste,  peut  diriger  ses  pas  vers  une  nouvelle maison qui,  ces dernicres  annees,  a  publie,  en  plus d'une revue,  des ouvrages  d'un  grand  interet litteraire: les Editions  Parti  Pris.
19

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS


L'aide  a l'edition
En  rgs8,  L'Association des Editeurs  Canadiens s'adressait au Conseil des Arts pour  obtenir une  aide  a !'edition. II est devenu  evident  que !'edition des ceuvres litteraires n'est  pas rentable  au  Canada franc;ais. Piusieurs  facteurs  rendent  Ia vie de  l'editeur  canadien  franc;ais  extremement precaire.  D'abord,  le  marche   est restreint.  II se limite  a six millions  de  personnes.  Mais  Ia n'est  pas le plus grave probleme.   Certes,  le  Canadien franc;ais est  un  bon  client  de  librairie  mais  c'est un  client  choye.  Rares  sont  les  pays  ou !'edition subit  Ia concurrence des  plus grandes  maisons de !'Occident. Ainsi, le lecteur  canadien franc;ais trouve sur Ia devanture  de  sa  librairie   toutes  les  nouveautes parisiennes. On   achete   pour pres  de  $ r o,ooo,ooo  de  Iivres  franc;ais  par  an  au  Canada. De  plus,  le  public lecteur  se  recrute   au  Canada franc;ais  dans  les classes cultivees,  autrement dit,
parmi  des personnes qui  peuvent  lire non seulement le franc;ais mais aussi I'anglais. Rarement ce lecteur  attend-ilia traduction franc;aise d'un grand  succes americain. II  l'achete des sa  parution dans  sa  langue  originelle,  parfois  en  livre  de  poche. A Ia concurrence americaine s'ajoute  celles du  Canada anglais  et de Ia Grande Bretagne. Par  consequent, Ia marge  est mince  qui  est laissee a l'editeur canadien franc;ais.
Le  Directeur du  Cercle  du  Livre  de  France, M.  Pierre  Tisseyre,  a  repondu, dans  un  article  publie  dans  Ia  revue  "Vient de  paraitre" a Ia question: Ou  va
!'argent du  lecteur  au Canada franc;ais? Voici le tableau  qu'il  dresse:


Auteur Libraire Distributeur Imprimeur
 
IO   p.c.
40  p.c.
15  p.c.
30  p.c.




Editeur
 95  p.c.
5  p.c.

Pour  qu'un livre puisse se vendre a un prix abordable au grand  public, il est absolument necessaire de repartir les frais de composition, de mise en page, de correction   d',epreuves,  etc.,  sur  trois  mille  exemplaires. Cette  loi  de  I'edition s'impose  aux  editeurs  de  New  York,  de  Paris  et  de  Londres.  Leur  marche  leur permet  d'y  faire  face.  Pour  l'editeur canadien franc;ais, dont  le marche  est vingt a  cinquante fois  plus  petit  que  celui  de  New  York  ou  de  Paris, Ia  meme  loi s'impose.  II est evident  que  sans l'aide  du  Gouvemement, il ne parviendra pas a s'en  sortir.  Le Conseil des Arts du  Canada et le Ministere  des Affaires culturelles du  Quebec sont  au  fait  des exigences  de Ia realite  canadienne. La  culture  cana­ dienne  ne pourrait survivre  si les editeurs  canadiens ne pouvaient mener normale-

20

L'EDITION AU CANADA  FRANCAIS



ment  leur travail.  Or,  il ne le peuvent  pas sans aide et sous subventions. Le Conseil des Arts  donne   une  aide  directe  a  l'editeur. En  Ig6s-66, les editeurs  canadiens fran<;ais ont  re<;U  de  ce fonds  le  montant de  $1g,ooo   (compare a  $14,000   au Canada anglais) . Les subventions sont  donnees  sur  presentation d'un manuscrit. Un  jury du  Conseil  des Arts decide  si le manuscrit merite  d'etre  publie.  Dans  ce cas-la, le Conseil  des Arts accorde  une subvention qui couvre  en gros les frais d'imprimerie.
Les  editeurs   canadiens  fran<;ais, dans  un   memoire que  leur  Association   a presente  au  Conseil  des  Arts,  trouvent paradoxa! que  le  jury  qui  se  preoccupe de la valeur  du livre examine  recommande plus facilement un ouvrage  de grande qualite  a  peu  pres rentable plutot  qu'un ouvrage  de qualite  moindre  mais  d'une rentabilite douteuse.  Ils  demandent de  plus que  le montant des subventions soit augmente afin que  le livre puisse etre vendu  a un prix abordable.
Il est tres difficile de  juger de la justesse du  point de vue des editeurs. Sur quoi le Conseil  des  Arts  devrait-il  se baser  pour  octroyer  une  subvention a l'editeur? Sur  la  rentabilite de l'ouvrage ou sur sa valeur  litteraire?  Il semble  que  la valeur litteraire soit une valeur  plus sure et, qu'a la longue, plus  apte a favoristr le developpement culturel  au  Canada. La  prime  donnee  a la qualite  aboutira sure­ ment  a assainir  le marche de l'edition. Sans  doute  la rentabilite peut-elle etrr  un facteur  qui  determinerait le montant de la subvention mais non  point  la subven­  tion elle-meme.
Le  Ministere   des  Affaires  culturelles  du  Quebec,  cree  en  I g6 I' poursuit  une politique   d'aide soutenue   au  livre,  de  sa  creation   a  sa  diffusion.  Les  ecrivains re<;oivent des subventions dont  le montant, en  Ig6s-66, etait  $87,500.  De  plus, le Ministere  aide  les auteurs  par  des achats  directs de leurs ouvrages. Une somme de  $3s,ooo etait  reservee  a  cette  fin en  Ig6s-66. Le  Ministere  donne  aussi une subvention speciale  aux  editeurs,  connue   comme !'assurance-edition. Cette  sub­ vention se traduit par l'achat d'un  certain  nombre d'exemplaires des livres publi,es. Les editeurs  voudraient que  le  Ministere  des  Affaires  culturelles  donne  ses sub­ ventions  aux  editeurs  sur  la presentation  d'un  manuscrit plutot  que  de leur offrir une assurance-edition une fois le manuscrit publie. Si l'editeur sait que ses risques sont amoindris, il peut  plus facilement faire  paraitre un nombre plus considerable d'ceuvres litteraires.

Editeurs fran(,;ais et editeurs canadiens

Etre  publie  en  France   est  pour  l'auteur  canadien une  sorte  de  consecration. C'est   aussi  une  ouverture sur  le  marche  mondial. Nombre  de  romanciers, de

21

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



poetes  et  d'essayistes  canadiens ont   vu  leurs ceuvres  paraitre en  France. Par consequent, ce  phenomene n'est  pas  nouveau. La  question  se  pose aujourd'hui avec  plus  d'acuite. Depuis  quelques   annees,  les editeurs  fran<;ais ont  essaye de lancer  qui  un romancier qui  un  poete canadiens. Les Editions  Robert  Laffont  ont meme  cree  une  collection  d'auteurs canadiens. Ces tentatives  n'ont  pas donne  le resultat   voulu  et  les  jeunes  romanciers et  poetes  furent engloutis  dans  la  masse des auteurs lances sur le marche chaque annee.  Dans  cette  perspective, l'automne de  1g66 fut  en  tout  point  exceptionnel pour  la litterature  canadienne. Plusieurs grandes   maisons   fran<;aises:   Gallimard,  Grasset,   Laffont   avaient   un   poulain canadien. On  a parle de Rejean Ducharme pour le Prix Goncourt et Marie-Claire Blais obtint  le Prix Medicis.
L'interet des editeurs et des lecteurs  fran<;ais pour  la litterature canadienne est reel. On  n'y  decele  plus le paternalisme complaisant d'antan.  Les auteurs  cana­ diens  ne  sont  plus  aux  yeux  des  Fran ais
anachroniques, perdus  dans  leurs  steppes  glaoees. On  les retrouve  sous le visage
de jeunes gens en colere qui vont jusqu'a lancer des bombes pour affirmer leur attachement a la culture  fran<;aise. Ce sont surtout des ecrivains  qui ont une voix, un  ton  peu familiers  aux  oreilles fran<;aises. Il est trop  tot pour dire si cet engoue­ ment  est passager et n'aura point de lendemain. Son implication sur I'edition n'en est pas moins  reelle. Si l'auteur canadien prenait  !'habitude de s'adresser  directe­ ment  aux  editeurs  fran<;ais, le role de l'editeur canadien serait  considerablement amoindri.  Il  y eut  certaines  tentatives de  co-edition,  mais  on  ne  peut  pas  dire qu'elles  aient  abouti  a des resultats  tangibles.  Sur ce plan,  il est loin d'etre evident  que les interets  de l'editeur et de l'auteur coincident.
Pour   un  jeune  romancier canadien fran<;ais, l'edition   en  France   peut  mener a  une  audience internationale, a des traductions en diverses langues.  Par  contre, l'auteur  perdrait la  possibilite de  gagner  les divers  prix  litteraires  canadiens que les Gouvernements federal,  provincial   et  municipal offrent  chaque  annee.  Sans doute,  l'editeur canadien pourra, dans  les annees  qui  viennent,  assurer  pour  ces auteurs  les traductions et !'audience mondiale. D'ailleurs, la participation, chaque annee  plus importante, des editeurs  canadiens a la  Foire  du  Livre  de Francfort, atteste  de leur  volonte  d'entrer de  plain  pied sur  le marche mondial  de !'edition. Il y a cependant des habitudes et une experience qui ne peuvent s'acquerir qu'avec le temps et l'auteur canadien peut manifester  une preference  pour les maisons fran<;aises qui   possedent   une  grande  tradition.  Celles-ci  acceptent  parfois  que l'auteur soit publie d'abord au Canada. Paradoxalement, plus un auteur  canadien a de chance  de reussir sur le plan mondial  et moins les editeurs fran<;ais voudraient

22

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



ceder  les premiers  droits  a des editeurs  canadiens car,  comme  on le sait, l'editeur obtient  ses plus grands  revenus  des droits  de  traduction et d'adaptation.
C'est  dans  le domaine des manuels  scolaires que  les rapports entre  les editeurs canadiens  et  les  editeurs   etrangers   posent,  a  l'heure actuelle,  les  plus  graves problemes.   Dans   le  cadre   de  !'entente  France-Quebec, conclu   recemment,  le Ministere  des Affaires  culturelles  est intervenu d'une fac;on determinante dans  un arrangement qui favorise !'utilisation de manuels franc;ais dans l'enseignement superieur  au  Quebec. Cet  accord  prevoit  une subvention de trente  pour-cent aux etudiants  sur   des  ouvrages   scientifiques   et  techniques   edites   par   des  maisons franc;aises. Or,  ces maisons, notamment les membres du groupe Sodexport, produisent  beaucoup de traductions d'ouvrages americains. Dans  un memoire presente  le I 6 decembre I g66, au  Ministere de I'Education, la Societe des Editeurs Canadiens de  Manuels scolaires exprime  ses craintes  que  cet accord  n'aboutisse a defavoriser   les  editeurs   canadiens.  Elle  demande que  l'accord   France-Quebec concernant l'aide  aux  manuels  scientifiques  et  techniques  soit  denoncee.  D'autre part,  les editeurs  canadiens redoutent encore  davantage !'implantation au Quebec de  grands   editeurs   americains  de   manuels  scolaires.  Pour   plusieurs  maisons d'edition  c'est  deja   fait.   La  Maison   Holt,  Rinehart &  Winston   a  maintenant pignon  sur  rue  a  Montreal. Son  programme  d'edition  debute   par  des  reuvres litteraires   d'avant-garde:  une  revue  "Theatre  vivant", des  recueils  de  poemes, un  roman  ... Les  milieux  d'edition  de  Montreal redoutent ce  qu'ils  appellent  une  invasion.   Pour  eux,  la  publication d'reuvres  litteraires n'est  qu'une fac;ade. Le  but  ultime  et  veritable  de cette  maison  c'est  de vendre  les manuels  scolaires qu'elle   publie  en  anglais  et  dont  elle  pourrait offrir  des  traductions franc;aises. Deja  cette maison s'est engagee dans  une polemique avec les defenseurs de I'edition quebecoise.
II serait  trop  facile  d'imputer le malaise  dans  !'edition des manuels  scolaires  a
!'invasion   de  l',etranger.   Les  difficultes  auxquelles les  editeurs   canadiens   des manuels   scolaires  font  face   tient  surtout  a  la  profonde   modification  dans  les structures et dans l'esprite  de l'enseignement. Le Ministere  de !'Education doit approuver les manuels  scolaires  utilises dans  les ecoles de la  Province.   II est en train  d'examiner tous les manuels  qui  furent  approuves  avant  le Ier juillet,  rg62. Pour  les editeurs,  la modification  profonde de !'esprit et de la politique  de l'enseignement  se  traduit  par   une  obligation   de  modifier  leurs  manuels.   Dans leur  memoire,   ils  se  declarent   conscients  des  deficiences  de  certaines  de  leurs editions et ils sont prets a moderniser le contenu  pedagogiques des ouvrages.  Mais ils souhaitent que  les approbations soient  faites  rapidement et que  les normes  en

L'EDITION AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



soient pvecises. On  peut dire que meme !'edition des manuels scolaires ne garantit plus aux editeurs des revenus importants.  Et le malaise qui sevit dans !'edition scolaire ne manquera  pas d'avoir  des repercussions sur !'edition  en general.
L'edition  au Canada  franc,;ais traverse une periode de transition. Si les editeurs resistent  aux  difficultes auxquelles  ils font  face,  ils  pourront   affirmer leur  au­ tonomic.  Autrement,  ils seront  absorbes  par  !',edition etrangere  et  ne  joueront dans  la  promotion  de  la  litterature   canadienne  qu'un   role  secondaire,  et  ceci nonobstant  l'aide  du  Conseil des Arts et du  Ministere des Affaires culturelles du Quebec.









































24


CANADIAN BOOKS

A Publisher's View




John Morgan Gray












TE PROBLEMS  THAT  WRITERS  and   pubfuhen;  talk  about together   have  usually  to  do  with  money  and  the  publishing   situation. Writers are  always searching for  the  means  to make  a living from  writing,  or to find an occupation that  will leave them  time  and  energy  to write. This  is as true in  Eng­ land   and   the  United   States  as  in  Canada, but  the  smaller   Canadian  market  sharpens all aspects of the problem.  This  is not a return  to the charge  that Cana­ dians  do  not  buy  books;  Canadian books, at  least, they  support quite  well. But the Canadian market  for books in either  English  or French is not a large market  and  will not be so for many  years. In  our circumstances, the emergence  of a cadre of  professional  writers,  and  of  a  publishing   trade  equipped  to serve  them,  was bound  to be slow. There are some who  believe that it hasn't  happened yet.
Of  professional  writers  who  live chiefly by the  writing  of books there  are  cer­ tainly few in Canada, and  few enough  anywhere  else. In  older and  more sophisti­ cated  societies  there  were  always  some  writers  who  lived  on  private  means,  but the  majority in  all societies  have  had  to struggle  and  contrive  in  order  to live while  practising their  chosen  art.  So generally  was this the  case of  the more  im­ portant writers  that  it  is not  difficult  to  believe  the  struggle  has  been  itself an essential element  in the writer's  experience.
To  talk  of "professionals" is not simply  to define  a means  of earning  a liveli­ hood;  by that  definition  the writers  of radio  scripts  and  of jingles for  advertising commercials  are alike entitled  to call themselves professional writers. "Professional"

25

CANADIAN BOOKS



implies  qualifications, a  finished  skill in  a trade  or  craft  or  art  that  exists apart from  its  earning   power.  In  that  sense  we  have  scores  of  writers  in  English  in Canada who,  if not in all respects  professional,  are also neither  hacks nor merely gifted amateurs.
Teaching and   the  communication media  have  always  provided  a  base  from
which  would-be   writers  have  sought  to  move  toward   the  work  of their  choice. University   teaching or  other  campus-based occupations  now  serve  this  purpose for  some  of  our   most  important  writers,  among   whom  obvious  examples  are Hugh  MacLennan, Earle  Birney, Robertson Davies, James  Reaney,  Frank  Scott, George  Woodcock,  and  Irving  Layton,  though  there  are many  others. Journalism and  writing  for broadcasting or films are major  occupations for a large  and  vital group   that   includes  Bruce  Hutchison, Pierre  Berton,  Joseph   Schull,   Mordecai Richler,  W. 0. Mitchell,  and  Charles  Israel.
A number of important writers  who have  little enough  in common  fall outside these  two  obvious  groupings.  They  appear to  have  fewer  external  supports for their  book  writing,  or  at  least  no other  major  commitment. Chief  of these must be  Morley  Callaghan, a  great  influence,  and  almost  a  legend  in  Canada from his youth  onward. Various  in  their  writing  directions,  but  sharing  what  must  at times  be  a  perilous  singleness  of  devotion  to  the  writing of  books  are  Farley Mowat, Thomas Raddall, and  Margaret Laurence.
Unsatisfactory as the listing of names must  be, there still remain  two important groups  to  recognize.  There are  first those who  as yet defy classification  but  who have  done  at  least  one  book  of great  promise  and  might  at  any  time  do  more: Adele  Wiseman,   Sinclair   Ross,  Colin  MacDougall, Phyllis  Grosskurth, Kildare Dobbs,  and  possibly Leonard   Cohen.  A very important group  is that  of the aca­ demic  writers  in Canadian history  who have  chosen to stay within  their field, but in  terms  of  a  national literature are  making  a  major  contribution  which  could come  from  nowhere  else. And  finally  there  are  a few  highly  gifted  writers  who fall  into  no  clearly defined  group,   among   them   Ethel   Wilson  and   Roderick  Haig-Brown.
Whatever is to come,  a great  deal  has  happened to  Canadian writing  during the  past  fifteen years. It  has been stimulated by our  post-war  nationalism and  by our  growing  prosperity.  It must  seem  that  better  publishing  is also a product of these factors,  and  in  part  it  unquestionably is. Yet it is at least  proper  to record that  the houses that  have led the way in the movement  -McClelland & Stewart, Macmillan of Canada, the University  of Toronto Press, the Ryerson Press, and Longmans-were trying,  less successfully  but  no  less hard, in  the  192o's,  and

CANADIAN BOOKS



through the  frustrating years of the  depression,  to further Canadian writing; this at  a time  when  it had  no possible economic  justification.
Even now the  publishing  trade  suffers from  the same  basic disability that ham­ pers most writers in Canada. A brilliantly  successful book, within  our borders, will not set a writer  free from  financial  pressure for long;  nor will it offset many of the promising  but  unsuccessful  books in a publisher's  list. Ten  years ago at a Writers' Conference in  Kingston, I said  publicly  that  the  relationship of  author  and  pub­  lisher in Canada lacked  a rational economic  basis; that  the Canadian author who depended on his books for money  did  not make it from sales in Canada; that  the Canadian publisher  made  none  of the  net  profit  of his business from  the overall result of his Canadian general  publishing.
I  revert  to this now, because  the statement has been  rather  widely quoted  and discussed. Ten  years  ago  I  found  only  one  Canadian publisher  to challenge  the opinion,  and  he was better  known  for  his generous  intentions than  for  his  arith­ metic.  It  was  properly  recognized  that  even if publishers  issued  Canadian  books as loss-leaders,  as props to their  egos or from  better  motives, they could hardly  be counted   on  for  major   and  sustained   adventures. They   could  not,  for  instance,  continue for  long  to subsidize  a young  writer  who showed  no  measurable sign of arriving,  of achieving  major  critical  acclaim,  if not financial independence. Even the  Canada Council,  far  above  the  market  place,  is not  prepared to do that.
Though the  situation in  Canada has  not  changed   beyond  recognition  in  ten years,  I  would   not  now  make  the  same  statement  without  qualification. The publisher's  "no  net  profit"  has at least  become  "a  possible profit".  And if  Cana­ dian  authors  still do  not look to Canada for  any important part  of their income, a  successful  book  may  now  make  them  a  surprisingly   good   return  from this market-though it  will  still  be  far   below  what   a  comparable  success  in  the American market  would yield an American author.
The  economic  problems  of the established  writer  have  lessened substantially in ten  years,  though  not  chiefly from  the  sales of books. The  increase  in  academic salaries,  and  in  the  returns  from  free-lance writing,  have  left  him  free  to write only  the  books  of his own  choice.  Such  changes  help  the  writer's  situation, but they  do  not  much  simplify  the  publisher's task.  Increased sales  in  Canada,  as elsewhere,  have  almost  all gone  to  non-fiction: biography, popular history,  and current events.  Fiction,  which  was  in  trouble  ten  years  ago,  is in  worse trouble now,  and  the  publication of poetry  has become  almost  an empty  act of defiance. Too  many  novelists and  poets seem to  be lookouts  who  have  little of general  in­ terest to report. There are notable  exceptions,  but  notably  few.

27

CANADIAN BOOKS



PuBLISHERS  MAY   FEEL  they  have  contributed  something to the  improved climate  for some  Canadian writing,  but  it is not  easy to see what they  can  do  for  the  areas  that  have  worsened.  Publishing can  support a genera­ tion's  vision or view of the  world  it lives in, but it cannot  provide  a  new insight.  There are some who  consider  that  support in the form  of much  more publishing of poetry  and  fiction  at  the  apprentice stage  would  help;  the  assumption  is that  this would  help  writers  to learn  their  craft  and  presumably to sharpen and  clear their  vision.  Both  parts  of  this  proposition  may  be  true,  but  the second  at  least is in doubt. Against such doubt  the publishers  must set the cost of well-intentioned proposals  of  this  kind.  This  is first of  all  a  cost in  dollars,  and  secondly  in  the health  of  the  book  industry. In  the  second,  at  least,  all  writers  of books are  in­ volved.  Merely  to  issue more  volumes  of  poetry  and  more  first  novels  through  commercial  publishers  to  booksellers  would  probably  incur  losses at  the  rate  of something like $500  per  volume  of poetry,  and  $I ,500 or more  per  unsuccessful novel.  An  industry  which   is  still  gathering  strength   cannot   contemplate such losses on any large scale for long. Just  as much of an obstacle is that  no publisher  wishes to win  a reputation for  publishing  unsaleable  books. If the  public  doesn't  want  his books and  the bookseller can't  sell them,  such  a publisher  can look for a diminishing  welcome.  Such   a  programme, if  prolonged,  would   actually   work against   publisher,  bookseller-and   author. That it  stimulates   and   teaches   to see one's  work in  print  there is no doubt, but  normal  commercial publication and distribution by commercial houses is not the way to increase  greatly  what  is being done.  Other ways-such as a Poetry  Book Club -are being thought about,  but it  is  questionable how  far  over-taxed publishers  can,  or  should  be  expected  to involve themselves in such concerns.
If it is reasonable  to wonder  whether  Canadian publishers  should  be expected
to  act  beyond   their  commercial interests,  it  is realistic  to  ask how  far  they  are likely  to  do  so.  At  present  there  are  about  forty  genuine   publishing   houses  in English  Canada, of which  ten appear to be Canadian-owned. Together, the forty sell  and  stock  the  books of  almost  eight  hundred British  and  American  houses. Apart   from   the  Canadian-owned  houses,  perhaps ten  of  those  owned   abroad have long  had  some record  of support for Canadian writing.  Though it is part  of world  publishing   tradition  that   the  industry has  always  published  many  books at an anticipated loss, that  tradition is everywhere  being put to the test in a world of  mounting costs, and  to specially  severe  tests in  Canada. Publishing  has  to be recognized  as a business accountable to shareholders. Formerly, the shareholders were owner-managers, but  increasingly,  as houses "go  public", management must

CANADIAN BOOKS



face shareholders more interested  in money  than  in books. This  trend  is not likely to be reversed in Canada, where foreign ownership  of public  companies  is so widespread. Though our  publishing  resources have greatly  increased  theoretically in  recent  years, they may  not in  practice  have  done  more for Canadian  purposes than  keep  pace  with  the  growing  number of manuscripts.
Within   the  next  five  years  there  will  be  about  twenty  publishers  in  Canada equipped to  publish  Canadian books  in  English;   that  is, to  take  a  manuscript, arrange for  and   finance  its  printing  and   binding   in  appropriate form,  publi­ cize it  and  offer  it  for  sale.  Though that  may  seem  (and  in  many  ways  is)  a simple series of steps, each  calls for immense  care, skill, and  experience. Of those twenty   publishers,   about   half  will  be  chiefly  interested   in  publishing   "general books";  that  is the  trade  term  for books that  reach  the public through bookstores and libraries.  Since textbook writing  is chiefly the work of teachers, it will be to the publishers of general  books that  Canadian writers will tend to look for publication.
There is, of  course,  nothing  to prevent  an  author  who  writes in  English  from sending  his book  to a publisher  in London or  New York;  but  for the majority of books  written  in  Canada, the  logical  publishing  centre  is Toronto. Toronto did not  become   the  centre   of  English   language  publishing   in  this  country   as  the result of any discernible  plan,  and  it is pointless to regret  or resent it. At the time British publishers  began  to set up branch offices in Canada, in the late nineteenth and  early  twentieth century,  Toronto was the  capital  of the  most densely  popu­ lated  English-speaking area in Canada, seat of an already  distinguished  university and  of  the  largest  provincial  school  system.  Canadian school  book  houses  were already  in  being  there,  the  Methodist Book and  Publishing  House,  Copp-Clark,
Morang, and  W. J. Gage,  and  it was logical for Thomas Nelson, Macmillan, the
Oxford  Press, and  Dent  to settle near  them.  In  the  next few years several  young
Canadians who  had  learned   their  trade  under  William  Briggs of the  Methodist Book Room  started  businesses of their  own,  among  them  J. G.  McClelland, Fred Goodchild, Thomas Allen,  George  McLeod, and  S.  B. Gundy. The  cluster  was
formed   and  by  I gI 4  Toronto was  unalterably the  English-language  publishing centre for Canada.
These  rather primitive  publishing  organisms  did  not  at once  develop  maturity of editorial   judgment or much  interest  in the  craft  of bookmaking. They  existed chiefly to sell imported books and  were chronically  short of skilled manpower and of  capital,   but  they  did  from  the  first  publish  their  more  important books  in Canada. The  first war  checked  this promising  development and  the industry  had no time  to regain  momentum before  the depression,  followed  by the second  great
war, froze the situation for another twenty-five years.
29

CANADIAN BOOKS



Toward the  end  of that  time  there  were  indications of a new  vitality  in  both writing  and  publishing. It was little enough,  perhaps, but  books like Hugh  Mac­ Lennan's Barometer   Rising   (I 94 I ) , Sinclair  Ross's  As  for Me  and  My  House ( I94I), Earle  Birney's David  ( I942), and  Bruce Hutchison's Unknown Country
( I 942), carried  more concentrated excitement and  promise for Canadian readers
than  they  had  ever experienced  or had  seen any reason  to expect.  They  were the more ready  to welcome a group  of books that spoke to them  urgently  and directly as the  war  ended: Gwethalyn Graham's Earth  and  High  Heaven   ( I944), Hugh MacLennan's Two Solitudes  ( I944), Ross Munro's Gauntlet to Overlord  ( I945), Edward  Meade's Remember Me   ( I946), Gabrielle   Roy's  The Tin Flute,  and, first of a long list of fine books in Canadian history, Donald  Creighton's Dominion of the  North   (I944) and  A. R.  M.  Lower's  From  Colony  to Nation   (I946). It appeared  that   a  new  day  had   been  announced; on  these  early  showings,  the critics could  not  be certain  of the  probabilities, but  to the Canadian reader,  who had  waited  too long, it shone  brightly  and  seemed infinitely  promising.  For about three  years, Canada bought  Canadian books as it had  never  done-and  wasn't to do again for a dozen years.
Canadian publishers  shared   in  the  excitement and  basked  in  the  bright  day though  their  role had  been  a modest  one.  Much  of the initiative  that  had  found and launched these books had come from American publishers. In the main, the Canadian houses  performed   their  historic  role  of  selling  the  books.  It  was  not that  Canadian publishers  would  have  been  incapable of  recognizing  talent,  but they  had  limited  resources  and  experience  for  its exploitation. More  serious,  the writers  lacked  confidence  in them  and  tended  to look first for American  publica­ tion.  But  when  the  flurry  of excitement died  down  it had  done  its work:  it had awakened   an  appetite for  Canadian books;  it had  given  authors  confidence  and made  them  aware  of their  problems; it had  given  the  publishers some increased
confidence  in the market,  and  a new notion  of what  they might  become.






IT IS  AN    INDICATION   of  the
 
comparative  sophistication  of

several  "Canadian" houses  (i.e.  companies  that  had  been functioning in Canada for  many  years,  whatever  their  origins)   that  the  next  step  in  their  development could  be taken  in so short  a time. The  recognition  of what  was called for and  the
knowledge  of  how  to  set  about   finding  the  right  people,  could  not  have  been

30

CANADIAN BOOKS



done quickly or well by those interested  only or chiefly in the selling of other pub­ lishers'  books. The  personality  and  the  ethos  of a publishing  house  are  complex as a result  of the  trade's  mixed,  and  sometimes  muddled purposes.  Many houses swing  unevenly  between  the clear-cut  demands of business and  the temptation to behave   like  a  prestigious   literary   foundation.  A  Canadian   publishing   house's personality  is at once  the cause and  the effect of its publishing  policy  (or  perhaps  that  of a parent  house in London  or  New York); changed  by the inter-action of its  own  traditions and  the  attitudes of  the  senior  executives  and  of  the  people they have gathered around them.
A house's  character appears  in its dealings  with authors, its promotional policy, its  relationship with  its  customers,  and  in  many  lesser ways;  but  it will be best known  for its editorial  policy in  the  publishing  of general  books. In  Canada this has  meant  above  all whether  it looks for  and  publishes  Canadian books. Again, no  one  person  shapes  editorial   policy,  except  in  broad  terms.  The  chief  editor may  come  to do so after  many  years, if he has won some special standing (as in the  case of  the  late  Dr.  Lorne  Pierce  of the  Ryerson  Press),  but  usually  editors work  within  a  policy,  which  in  any  case is always  subject  to  financial  circum­ stances.  This  has  been  the  more  true  in Canada until  very recent  years,  because publishing  houses were weak  financially  and  had  very limited  funds to devote  to highly speculative ventures.
The  reaching  out  for  experience  and  qualifications was the  publishing  trade's response  to  the  literary  explosion  of the  late  1940's.  The  sound  of the  explosion did  not  reach  far  beyond  our  borders,  but  some  publishers  and  agents  in  New Yark  were  mildly  aware  of it,  and  interested, and  a few of our  books achieved the  big prizes in the  United  States:   book club selections, movie sales, and  paper­ back  editions.  Canadian publishers'  awareness  of their  own  deficiencies  were  re­ inforced  by  their  dealings  with  authors   who  had  been  published  elsewhere. The  resulting  growth   in  editorial   range  and  of  interest  in  more  sophisticated book­ making  was probably  greater  between  1945  and  1g6o  than  in  the  previous  fifty years. If this is to  the  credit  of  today's  publishers,  it is to  be shared  with  those who  had  gone  before,  who  understood the  task  but  were  continually frustrated by small  markets  and  a quality  of writing  that  waited  on  some stimulating and liberating impulse.
It  was not  to be expected  that  the  new energy  and  excitement would  at once produce   a  literary   outpouring of  consistently  high  quality,   nor  has  it  done  so. But there  had  been  a substantial increase  of both  quantity and  quality,  and from the  publishing   side  a  strengthening of  editorial   resources  to  make  the  most  of

CANADIAN BOOKS



whatever  is offered.  The  number of book  manuscripts offered  to Canadian  pub­ lishers has  doubled  in  the  past  twenty  years, but  the  number of published  books has  almost  quadrupled. Of  the  published  books,  a large  number fall  within  the general  term  "commissioned", that  is books that  have  been  planned  in  advance with  the  publisher. The  balance,  books that  have  been  accepted  after  unsolicited submission  is, always  and  everywhere,  very small.  Ten  years ago  Philip  Unwin,
writing  for the  National Book League  in England, put  the figure at less than  1%
for  his own  house  and  implied  a similar  figure for  the  publishing  industry  there. The same figure would certainly  be valid in Canada.
The   unsolicited   manuscript may  be  defined  as  a  manuscript sent  in  by  an
author for  whom  a firm  has  not  previously  published,  and  with  whom  the  book has not  been  discussed. It will always be the view of the  unsuccessful  writer  that publishers   don't really  welcome  manuscripts, that   "they" have  had  their  taste blunted  by sex or best sellers, and  can't appreciate his work.  A like conviction  is the  certainty  that  a meeting  with  a publisher  or an  editor  is the  necessary key to success.  The   poor  showing  of  unsolicited   manuscripts from   unknown   authors tends  to give substance to this view, and  always has done so. But the arrival  of a good manuscript from  an  unknown author is eagerly looked for and  greeted  with great  satisfaction in  any  publishing  office. Even  if a talk with  a wise and  experi­ enced  editor  can sometimes  point  an author towards  a better  use of his gifts, such talk  can  best follow  the  submission  and  consideration of a  manuscript;  this will tell an editor  much  more about  an author's potential  than can the author himself.




l:E GREAT  BULK of all publishers'  lists is made  up of books that have  been  previously  discussed  with  authors. An  important section  is of  books from  authors whom  the house  has formerly  published,  and  with whom  it is more or less constantly  in touch.  Another section  is composed  of books that  have  been discussed  and  the  writing  of which  has  been  commissioned. Commissioning may grow  from  an  idea  for  a  book suggested  by either  author or  publisher,  and  the publisher's support may  range  all the  way  from  a mere  expression  of interest  in the  project  to the  provision  of a sum  of money,  as a grant,  or more often  an ad­ vance against  royalty earnings.
A commission  may  result  from  a talk with  the author of an  unsolicited  manu­ script,  if his manuscript has shown  talent  and  perhaps  knowledge  of a  particular field. The  book he has submitted may  be unpublishable but  his next submission,

32

CANADIAN BOOKS



under   these  conditions,  will  not  be  unsolicited.  It must  still  make  its  way,  but he has earned  the  right  to such  guidance as the  publisher  can give, and  he is re­ inforced  by the  knowledge  that  he is writing  a specific book for  which  the  pub­  lisher has been looking.
This  makes  both  the  writing  and  the  commissioning  of  books sound  simple, which  they  are  not.  Every  publisher  and  editor  has ideas for scores of books for which  he  may  never  find  the  right  author. This  is both  because  commissioned books  are  frequently  by  their   nature  more  useful  than   exciting,   and   because writers  can  seldom   respond   to  ideas  that   are  not  their  own.  Moreover,  com­ missioned  books  will frequently require  research  as well as writing  time,  and  in the  still small  Canadian market  the  book  may  be  a long  time  returning  to  the author  his investment of hours  and  energy. If he has another means  of  livelihood the  project  will interest  him only if the  topic  does, or if the book offers  prestige; if he lives by his income  from  writing,  the  majority  of proposals  of the  kind  will not  be  sufficiently  attractive. There  are  times  when  an  industry  with  enough money  to spend  can  bribe  an  author to write for them,  but  the ordinary book for general  sale  cannot  provide  this kind  of bait.
There will  always  be  many  would-be  writers  whose  longing  to  be  published outruns  all other  needs;  they are most often the very young or the writer  manque, the  writer  who  lacks some  essential  ingredient. It  is an  editor's  responsibility­ and  a grave  one -to decide who is worth  helping  and, sadly enough,  who is not. Authors  often  complain  that  in rejecting  their  book an editor  has not given them a  detailed   comment. This  usually  happens when  the  required  revision  seems to be  beyond  the  author's powers.  Traditionally in  Britain,  editorial   direction   (or interference)  is much  less than  is assumed  to be  needed  in  North  America.  The  British start  from  the assumption that  authors worthy  of publication don't  need a lot  of "messing  about" with  their  manuscripts.  The  American attitude seems to have  grown  from  the  early  realization  in  a vigorous  and  developing society that many  people  with  important  stories  to tell have  never  learned  to write,  and  can only manage with  substantial help. The  editor  thus  becomes  the successor to the ghost writer  of an  earlier  day. Canadian publishers,  in recent  years, have  moved much  nearer  the American position;  they are now much  better  equipped  to work with writers, or at least with writers of non-fiction.
We shall  leave  to others  the  debate  on whether non-fiction  writing  is creative writing.  It is at  least the  area  in which  editors  may most properly  and  most  use­ fully  offer  suggestions.  And  many  of  the  non-fiction  works  written   in  Canada will find  publication here  or  not  at  all.  This  will hold  for  most  of  the  work  in

33

CANADIAN BOOKS



Canadian history,  politics, and  regional  studies;  of immeasurable value to us and an essential  part  of the bed-rock  of a national literature, but frequently of limited interest  outside  our  borders.  It could  be  argued  that  the  publishing  trade's first responsibility  is to  this  material, and  that  the  first priority  for  limited  resources should  be to help  the doing of those things that  no one else will do for us. It is not a business argument, but  then  publishing  has never looked  to business arguments alone for its justification.
In  the  non-fiction  field the  writer  is applying  a technique, or  at  most  a craft,
to an  ascertained body of reasonably  established  fact.  What  he is trying  to do is usually  clear  enough  and  the editor's  task is simply  to comment  on the degree of his success in the form: "Can you clarify?",  "In this you assume more knowledge than  is to  be  looked  for  in  your  reader", "here  the  emphasis  or  the  proportion seems to be wrong". The  author's purpose  is declared  and  the editor  merely con­ tributes  his experience  of writing,  his knowledge  of the audience, and above all a fresh reading,  to the result. If his comments  are offered  tactfully  they  are  usually welcomed  and  often  acted  upon.  In  cases where  a writer  is working  to an editor's  blueprint for  a  commissioned  book,  the  editor,  theoretically   at  least,  has  a sort of right  to suggest revision and  reworking  of the material that is normally exercised only by magazine editors.
Though the margin  between  fiction and  non-fiction  has narrowed and  become less clear,  there  is at  least  a  body  of writing  that  is in  its essence creative.  This will  be  better  handled   for  a  knowledge  of  the  writer's   craft,  but  it will  not  be accomplished   by  craft   alone.   It  is  altogether  more  subtle  of  purpose,   and  its source  is mysterious.  This  is true  of "serious"  fiction,  of  poetry,  and  of what  is vaguely  called  belles-lettres.  Ideally  it is also true  of biography. In  this area  the editor's  task  is far  less clear  and  his responsibility  correspondingly great.  This  is accentuated  as  fiction  tends  increasingly   to  follow  poetry  in  the  casting  off  of familiar   forms.  The   more  inward  and  deeply  personal  the  author's vision,  the more difficult will it be for an editor  to be helpful.
The   best  editors   (in  Canada or  anywhere   else)  are  not  by  temperament  or training chiefly interested  in  the  higher  criticism;  nor  are  they merely  frustrated writers,  as some  authors  contend. To  be either  would  create  a too great  tempta­ tion to impose ideas or technique or form on the author. It might lead to attempts to change  a writer's  view of the  book  he intended. Granted some or all of these things may sometimes be needed,  it should  not be a conclusion  the editor comes to lightly.  These  are  desperate  remedies  and  may  more  often  kill than  cure.  In  the creative   area,  above  all,  the  editor's  first  job is that  of  a  midwife,  helping  the

34

CANADIAN BOOKS



author to set free his book, as it has been conceived -to realize his full potential. To  do  this,  he  must  try  to  understand  completely  the  author's purpose.  And much  of the  time  he will be only a sympathetic bystander; available, but  not too ready to offer his help.
If an editor  is not an  advanced critic,  he is at least a man  of letters.  He should have  a  broad   background  of  reading   and  an  intense  interest  in  books  and  in current  trends in writing.  This should  extend  to as many  fields as possible, though it will not be equally  valuable  in all. He inay be asked for an opinion  on any type of  book,  but  his response  will  be  conditioned by  the  policy of  his house  and  a knowledge of the market.
Just   as there  are  certain  types of  book  that  should  look  to  Canadian  houses for  publication, others  are  better  launched elsewhere.  With  this kind  of decision Canadian publishers  are  familiar   and  can  be helpful.  Generally  speaking,  books with  a  pronounced Canadian  content   will find  their  major  market  in  Canada; some  of  them  will find  no  market  outside   (though they  may  be first-rate). For those that  can  have  a modest sale in other  countries,  the Canadian publisher  will normally  be  able  to  make  appropriate export  arrangements which  may  not  pro­ duce  much  sale or royalty  but  will, at least, help to get the author known. In  the case  of  books  that   have  larger  sales  potential outside  Canada than  in,  he  will either  send  the  manuscript to  a  publisher  in  the  States  or  Britain, or  may  send the  book  to  a  literary   agent  who  will act  for  the  author. This  kind  of  helpful activity  has  often  been  misunderstood. It is frequently interpreted  as  meaning that  the  Canadian publisher  "won't take  a chance" unless  somebody  makes  up his  mind  for  him;   but  with  many  books it is the  way  he  can  serve  the  author best.  Light  fiction,  for  instance   (detective, spy, or  what  used  to  be  called  "ro­ mance"), unless it  is outstanding, will usually  sell 250  to  500 copies in Canada in  cloth  or  hardcover, and  not  enough  in  paper  to  justify its publication in that  form  here.  If it is good  of its kind,  even  though  not  outstanding, certain  British or  American houses will take it for its larger  sale in their  market  in cloth, for the possibility of a paperback sale, and  in the  hope of  other  and  better  books by the same author.
In  the field of children's books, especially those heavily illustrated  in full colour, the  Canadian publisher  can  also  be helpful  but  he  can  seldom  offer  to publish. Again,  if the  content  is wholly  Canadian, he will try. If not,  it is best published in  the  United  States;  even  the  British  market  supports comparatively few of the expensive  read-aloud  type  of  picture   book.  The  reason  is simply  a  question  of economics.  Books of  this  kind,  if  they  are  to  be  reasonably   priced,  have  to  be

35

CANADIAN BOOKS



printed   in  an  edition  of  15,000 copies  or  more  at an  investment of  perhaps
$2o,ooo.  Even  if successful  such  a  book  will  usually  not  sell  15,000 copies  in Canada in several years;  and  it may not be successful, no matter how enthusiastic the  author and  the  publisher. And  if such  a sum  is put  into  a book of this kind (which   if  good  enough   will  be  published   anywhere else)  it  is probable in  an allocation  of limited  resources  that  some other  books must  go unpublished. The same factors  apply to heavily illustrated books for adults, unless their content is peculiarly Canadian. It is a mistake  to interpret this  as deplorable caution; it is the  kind  of decision  people of limited  means  must  make  continually in  deciding what  is important to them.
Authors  in  Canada who  are  just beginning  to write,  and  to be published,  take the  publishing  trade  as it exists for granted; they like it or they don't, but  except for  differences  in size they find  it much  the same  as publishing  elsewhere. Those who began  to write fifteen or twenty  years ago know how much  has been changed and  is changing. They  can  look  more  confidently  for  experienced   comment on their  manuscript, for  good  design  of their  pages, for  careful  editing  and  reading of proofs  and,  at  the  end,  for  a well-made  book. If it doesn't  always happen in just that  way, it does so increasingly.
Most  important of  all  is  the  knowledge  that   within   Canadian houses  there exists a group  that  is growing  in  numbers and  experience, of people who  under­ stand  what  the  author is trying  to do.  This  does not  refer  to editors  who  suffer from  the  Max  Perkins syndrome-a compulsive  need to discover and inspire and remake   authors-but  rather to  editors  willing  to  do  what   the  late  Maxwell Perkins  of Scribner's did,  as opposed  to what  legend  says he did. At  their  best, they  are  more  ready  with  encouragement than  advice,  for  they  know  they  are among  the privileged  few to whom  an author can talk about  his lonely work. And like  their  authors,  if not  in  all  respects  professional,  they  are  a  great  deal  more than  gifted amateurs.


THE OTHER SIDE OF THE CASH REGISTER


A Bookseller's View



W. ]. Duthie









QLISHERS AND  BOOKSELLERS   have   nov" been  nally friendly,  although they  have  many  common  interests.  One  reason  is that  book­ sellers always  owe  publishers  money.  But  apart  from  that,  publishers  lament­ usually  publicly-that  with   a  few  exceptions   booksellers  in  Canada  are  not doing  their  job properly.  And  booksellers complain   just as publicly  that  the  pub­  lishers  have  only  themselves  to  blame,  or  thank, for  this situation. Over  the decades  the  publishers  in Canada have  taken  away from  the booksellers many  of their  traditional markets:  the  textbook  business;  the library   and  school  library business;  to a large  extent  the  technical  book  business; certainly  the medical  and legal  book  business.  Not  satisfied  with  that  gentle  attrition, they  have  recently launched into  the  book  club  and  direct  mail  bookselling  business;  this  without  mentioning  the  wooing  of  the  academic  customer   through  discounts   and  free reading   copies.  In  Great   Britain,  Europe,  and   the  Far   East,   unlike  in  North  America,  it  is  the  volume  of  this  institutional business,  plus  the  university  text business, that  allows booksellers in  those countries  to carry  large stocks of current and  standard books, and  to operate as showrooms  for the latest  publications from the publishers.
In  spite of this unfavourable situation, perhaps  in defiance  of it, there  are now in Canada more  and  better  bookstores  than  there  have  ever been  before, though not every city in  the country  is as well served  as, ideally, it should  be. The  reason for  this is that  the  educated public  is increasing  in numbers,  and,  perhaps  more

37

THE OTHER SIDE OF  THE CASH REGISTER



important, the  public  that  is in  the  process of  being  educated, or  wants  to  be educated, is growing   proportionately at  a  startling rate!   Hence  the  market  for books  on  an  almost  limitless  range  of subjects  has  grown  remarkably, with  the result  that   booksellers,  while  operating in  sometimes   savage  competition  with their  own  suppliers,  are  doing  a  better  job than  would  have  seemed  probable a decade  or so ago.
Among  various  reasons for this improvement has been  the increase  in demand
by the  Canadian public,  as well as the institutional buyers, for Canadian  books. It is  likely  that   by  now  the  selling  of  Canadian books  provides  at  least  thirty per cent  of a bookseller's  volume,  and  perhaps  more.  Fifteen  years ago the figure was closer to ten per cent.
Reliable  statistics  on  the  Canadian book  trade  are,  however,  hard   to isolate.
Some  time  in  the  fall of I g67  there  will appear  for  the  first time  a catalogue of Canadian  books  in  print,   i.e.  available   from  the  bookstores.  The   preliminary work  on  this catalogue has shown  that  there  are over I o,ooo  Canadian books in print,  over  6,ooo  of these in English  and  4,500 in French   (there is some duplica­ tion  here  of  course) .  This  quantity has  startled   most  of  those  involved  in  our business-publishers,  booksellers  and   librarians-and  makes  it  obvious   that  such  a catalogue is long overdue. It should  be mentioned also  that this catalogue does not include  publications of the federal  and  provincial  Queen's Printers, who publish  more  titles than  all the other  publishers  combined. It should  also be noted that  many  of the  titles included are texts for elementary and secondary  schools.
What   this  catalogue proves  is that  there  is an  appreciable body  of available Canadian literature, more  than  was suspected,  which  is the  result  of decades  of work  by  authors,  of course,  and  by Canadian publishers  who  have  worked  dili­ gently  to  present  native  writing  to  an  often  ungrateful public.  The  cumulative effect  of all  this  writing  and  publishing  is that  more  Canadian  books  are  being published  and sold and  read  than  ever before. The  rate of  increase of this activity is impressive.  Twenty years  ago  a  Canadian  publisher  who  put  out  more  than  ten  trade   (fiction,  non-fiction  or  juvenile)   books  a  year  was  outstanding. This year  one  Canadian  publisher   (McClelland  &  Stewart)  will  publish  about   one hundred  trade   titles,  another   (the  University  of  Toronto Press,  which  occupies a special  and  somewhat privileged  position)  will probably  bring  out  even  more, and   half-a-dozen Canadian  firms  will  publish  from  25 to  50  new  trade   titles, while  several  others  will issue a  dozen  or so books  each,  and  smaller  publishers  all over  the  country  will produce  a  remarkable number of regional  books, which are  important to booksellers of their  particular localities, if not nationally. There

THE OTHER SIDE OF  THE CASH REGISTER



may  well be, too, I oo new books or pamphlets of poetry  published  this year. Not every title is profitable,  naturally, but  all this activity  does mean  that  bilingually some  1,500 to  2,ooo  new  Canadian books  are  being  published   this year  (com­ pared  to some  2s,ooo  in  England)  and  are  being  absorbed  into  bookstores  and schools and  libraries  across the country.
It  is not  my purpose  to give a history  of publishing  in  Canada. It  is sufficient to say that  it started  with religion, and  was enlarged  by the requirements of  popu­ lar  education. At  the  beginning  of  the  century  some  famous  British  publishers opened  branch offices in Canada, and in the ensuing years these-where operated efficiently-have become  independent in  everything  but  name.  Some  of  them are  essentially  Canadian as  (or  even  more  Canadian  than)  the  Canadian pub­ lishing  firms  that  originated   at  the  same  time.  After  World  War  II,  American publishers   (obviously   recognizing   a  good  thing),  started   opening   branches   in Canada, and  some of these branches too have  achieved  a considerable degree of independence. All  these  firms  try  to  show  their  Canadianization by  publishing  more  and  more  Canadian trade  and  textbooks,  which  is good  for  us  (the  Cana­ dian  reading  public)   and,  if  profitable,  good  for  them.  Every  branch   firm,  and almost  every indigenous  Canadian publisher  earns  a considerable part  of his in­ come from  importing  and  selling United  Kingdom and  United  States  books  (the so-called  "agency" system). The  volume  of business  that  this provides  subsidizes to some  extent   the  Canadian publishing  programme. The  printing of a book  is a technical  skill, but  the  choosing and  editing  of manuscripts, the  promotion  and selling  and  distribution of finished  books in  the Canadian market, are  both  diffi­ cult  and  expensive,  and,  without   the  volume  of  business  provided  by imported
books, would  be economically  difficult, if not impossible.







themselves.
 P.HAPS IT  IS  TIME to move on from  generalities  to the books

The   publishing   of  original   fiction  in  Canada is  a  risky  business,  and  made more  risky here  because  the subsidiary  profits -film  and  TV  rights,  paperback rights, book club  revenues-which figure prominently in the publishing  of fiction in the  United   Kingdom and  United  States, seldom  make  any contribution to the Canadian publisher's   profits. This  is perhaps  a  reason  why  only  four  Canadian publishers,   McClelland  & Stewart,  Macmillan, Ryerson   and   Doubleday,  seem willing  to take  these  risks, and  all four  will probably  admit  that  they  take a loss

39

THE OTHER SIDE OF  THE CASH REGISTER



on twice as many  novels as those on which they show a profit and  that  quite  a few others may  not lose money for them, but do not make any either. It is our good fortune  that  these publishers are trying to publish for us the work of  Cana­ dian  novelists. It  is their problem  to make it profitable, and  they have a  variety of ways of doing it. All of them  will try to arrange  for the publication of these books in the other  English-speaking markets, thus hoping to attract international publicity  for  the  books and  their  authors  and  by means  of  a  joint  publishing programme  to supply the number  of copies of a book which they  can reasonably hope to sell. If this is not possible, they will grit their teeth  and  print the 3,500 or 4,ooo  copies that  the economics of publishing dictate, and  hope like hell that they  will sell all or most of these, while admitting  to  themselves that  they will be lucky to sell I ,500  copies though  there is always  at  least the  possibility that they will sell 10,ooo.
An  interesting,  daring,  and  unassessable experiment  in  fiction  publishing  is being tried  by McClelland  & Stewart.  In  the two most recent seasons they have issued about  fifteen new  novels, in simultaneous  paperback  and  hardcover  edi­ tions, hoping  thereby to widen the public for their authors, and sell more  copies of their books. In this experiment  they appear  not to have differentiated between established novelists -Gabrielle Roy and Margaret  Laurence for example -and the many young and experimental  novelists they are introducing. In order to keep their printing  costs within reason they have used paper  that  is not the best, and adopted  a stereotyped format,  thus forcing a uniformity  of  appearance  on some individual  and  widely varying novels. By using this very formula  they have pub­ lished several books this year that otherwise would  never have appeared  in print, and some, but not all, of these first novels deserved  to be published.
One  recent  development,  which  makes  prospects look a little  more  cheerful for  publishers of Canadian  novels, is that  the universities  (even Toronto)   have started  offering  courses in  Canadian  literature.  Students  are  now  directed  to read The Master  of the Mill  as well as Middlemarch. In response to this demand W acousta  has  just reappeared  as a  paperback.  As an example of what  this  de­ velopment  can  mean  to publishers, W. 0. Mitchell's Who Has  Seen  the  Wind soldI o,ooo copies slowly betweenI 947 andI 960; since then it has been reprinted three times as a $1.95 paperback.
The   publishing  of  poetry  is  probably  no  more  difficult in  Canada   than  in
other  countries,  except  perhaps  Russia.  More of the large  Canadian  publishers issue books of poetry than issue novels. And the number of small publishers whose whole output  is poetry shows that  the market  must  be improving  a great  deal.

THE OTHER SIDE  OF  THE CASH REGISTER



Here   again   McClelland  &  Stewart, while  having   nothing like  a  monopoly   on the good  poetry  being published  in Canada, have  been very successful at  promot­ ing  the  poets  they  do  publish,  using  the  same  hardcover-paperback  formula as with  their  fiction,  and  selling their  poetry in  quantities that  a  few  years  ago would have been considered fantastic.
Every  Canadian publisher  is willing  to  publish  humorous books, though  they seem  to  rely almost  completely  on  authors  whose reputations have  already  been made  in  newspapers   or  on  radio  or  TV.   This  may  well  be  good  commercial publishing,  since most of these authors  have  continuing exposure  in  these media, and  they  can  help  to  promote  their  own  books.  It  is unfair  to  complain  about this, since  British  and  American publishers  have  the  same  habits,  and  all pub­ lishers, regardless  of race,  creed or colour,  know that  a good funny  book will out­  sell a good serious one, certainly in the short haul.
The   publishing  of  Canadian history  is the  most important single function   of our  publishers.   The   amount of  historical   material  produced, and   bought   and read,  has  done  as much  towards  establishing  our sense of national identity,  such as it is, as anything achieved  by the C.B.C.,  and  certainly  a great  deal more than anything attempted  by our  newspapers  and  magazines.  Perhaps  it is because,  as A. R.  M.  Lower  wrote  recently,  "History in  Canada is a  profession  in  a sense that,   with  one  or  two  exceptions,  other  disciplines  have  not  yet  attained. The Canadian historian  is a  member   of  a  distinctive  school  with  its  own  standards and  traditions, developed  and  tested over many  years in a large  body of writing." It  is  probably   fair  to  say  that  Canadian historical  writing  came  to  maturity with  the  publication of  Donald   Creighton's biography   of  John A.  MacDonald and  of Lower's  Colony  to Nation. Since then  there  have been hundreds of books, some popular and  some academic, on early exploration, on political  development, on  personalities,  on  the  debates  during the  various  periods  of our  history,  and many  of these have been very successful. There are multi-volume series now being published,  as well as very useful paperbacks making  available  historical  material that  has  been  out  of print  for  decades.  The  situation with  such  books is similar to  that  with  Canadian fiction;  there  are  so  many  courses in  Canadian history and  Canadian politics being offered, that  the sales of some of these books are often
much  better  now than  at the time of their original  publication.
As befits a country  with  so much  space,  and  so much  wild land,  books of  ad­ venture  and  books about  our  animal  and  plant  life have often  been  very success­ ful in Canada. Most of the first material published  about  Canada was contained in  the  journals  of  the  early  explorers  and  the  reports  of fur  traders.  The  wolf

THE OTHER SIDE OF  THE CASH REGISTER



and  the grizzly and  the caribou  are  prime subjects  now as then,  as is the struggle for survival  against  the  elements.  Many  of the  regional  books published  fall into this  category-those stories  of  nursing  in  the  far  north,   trekking  through the arctic  wastes,  surviving  in  the  rugged  mountains or  on  the  equally  rugged  sea coasts. Such  books are widely read  by Canadian city dwellers who have bookstores and libraries handy.
To  turn  aside  briefly from  the  output of the  major  Toronto publishers  and  to
the  books  issued  by smaller  regional  publishers,  it  is safe  to say  that  there  are many  more  of  these  than  most  people  imagine.  A few  years  ago it  was easy to recognize  them  for  their  bad  design,  typography and  printing, but  all these  are gradually improving, and  some  of the  regional  publications are  now  very  hand­ some,  probably  because  more  and  more  of the  art  schools across the country  are teaching typography, and  teaching it to good effect. In  Saskatoon  there is a local publisher   who  issues important books,  all in  colour,  on  the  wild  flowers of  the Rockies and  of the  Pacific Coast.  In  British Columbia there are several publishers  who  specialize  in  regional  material and  seem  to  do  so  successfully. And  every­ where  in  Canada there  are  publishers  of poetry  and  of  literary  magazines. Some of the  best printing in Canada is done  by these small concerns.  And  some of the sales figures they achieve are extraordinary. A locally published  book about  British Columbia, which  appeared in late  rg66,  has already sold well over 6o,ooo  copies. This   type  of  publishing,   while  not  nationally  important, is  very  important  to booksellers in the regions concerned. The  sale of  the books it produces  contributes substantially to the  thirty  per  cent of a  bookseller's  volume  that  now comes from Canadian books.
The  paperback revolution  had  little immediate impact on Canadian publishers,
although its effect on  the  bookstores  here  was quick  and  considerable. However, after  a  slow start  our  publishers  have  now  provided  a respectable list of  paper­ backs,  some from  their  backlists, some original  publications. Here  again  McClel­ land   &  Stewart, with  their  New  Canadian Library   (which   now  offers  among  other  titles  almost  the  complete  works of Stephen Leacock), and  their  Carleton Library   (which   concentrates  on   books  for  history  students),  have   published  most titles, but  other  publishers  like Oxford, University  of  Toronto, Clarke  Irwin  and  Macmillan have  helped  to ensure  that  booksellers have to provide  a respect­ able shelf space for Canadian paperbacks.
In   conclusion,   Canadian  publishers   are  now  beginning  to  benefit  from  the missionary  work they did for so many  years on behalf of Canadian writers. So, obviously,  are  the  booksellers. There is a growing  element  of professionalism  in

42

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE CASH  REGISTER



the industry  which  is long overdue  and for which  the public  as well as booksellers ought  to be sincerely grateful. The  publishers  are becoming  more sophisticated in their  choice of manuscripts; their  editors  seem, sometimes,  to  be more  effective; their  designers  have  shown   remarkable improvement. Perhaps  the  writers  are better.  Certainly the prices are higher.




















CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE
BACK ISSUES

Special issues of Canadian Literature still available include the  following:

No.   15.    Salute  to A.  J. M. Smith. Articles on  A. J. M. Smith by Earle   Birney,  Roy  Fuller   and  Milton  Wilson, together with  original  poems   and a  Self-Review  by   A.  J.  M. Smith.
No.   19.    Special   E.  J.  Pratt Number.  Articles  on  E.  J.  Pratt by Paul   West,   Fred  Cogswell  and  Vincent Sharman,  to­ gether   with Ethel  Wilson's memoir on  Alan  Crawley.
No.  25.    A Symposium  on  A.  M. Klein. Articles on  A.  M. Klein and   his  various  aspects   by   M.  W.  Steinberg, Miriam Waddington, Dorothy Livesay, T. A. Marshall.

$1.25  each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS   CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH  COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.



43


INSIDE THE TRADE

An Editor's Notes





John Robert Colombo











EM MY EARLIEST  YEARS  I w=ted to  be an  e<Etor. If an anxious  aunt  had  asked me, "What are you going to be when  you grow up?"  the last  thing  in  the  world  I would  have  answered  was, "An  editor." At  the  time  I didn't know  what  the  eclitorial function  was, or even that  there  was a profession called  editing.  But what  I did  know  was that  I loved books;  I was curious  about their  format, smell, heft,  manufacture, appearance; I liked collecting  them,  even if I never  actually  got around  to reading  the books I had  bought.
W"hen I was eight  years old,  I remember cutting  out  two or three  dozen  car­ toons that  had  made  me laugh  from  the pages of Esquire  (it was not the sophisti­ cated  publication in  those  days  that  it  is now). I prepared a  dummy  booklet, stapled  the  pages  together,  and  I even  recall  the  words  I  pencilled  on  the  cover and   title  page:   "Favourite  Cartoons by  John  Colombo."  My  mother   took  an interest  in  my  first  collection,  and  I can  hear  her  today  as she said,  "But  you didn't draw  them.  How  can  you say  the  cartoons  are  'by'  you?"  I was puzzled by this for some time,  but  I was unshakeable in my belief that  the  collection  was mine in some curious way, and  that  only the labelling  of my selection was at fault.
That  was  my  first  introduction  to  the  editorial   function.  My  second  came through a  part-time  job,  not  through running high  school  yearbooks,  editing  a college  newspaper, setting  type  and  running a  handpress in  my  spare  time,  or even  being  invited  on  to  the  editorial   board  of a Toronto literary  magazine­ that  is another story  entirely.  More  through a fluke than  anything else, I found

44

INSIDE THE TRADE



work  on  the  campus  of the  University  of Toronto while an  undergraduate. The University's  publishing   company   had   just  moved  into  spanking  new  editorial offices just a few yards  west of University  College,  where  I  was enrolled,  and  a few  steps  south  of  Sir  Daniel   Wilson  Residence,  where  I  was  living.  Nothing could  have  been  more  convenient, or  awe-inspiring.






l:EN AS   NOW,  the  University   of  Toronto Press  was  a  tight ship.  My summer job was with  the  Editorial Reading Department which  I soon learned   was  euphemistic for  the  Proof-Reading Department. It turned out  that the  books  and   academic  quarterlies  published   by  the  Press  were  typeset  and proof-read  in the unionized  printing department which  was located  a block south of  the  editorial   offices. But  the  books  and  academic  publications of  the  Press were so incredibly complicated  and  specialized  that in many  cases at least two sets of  proof-readers were  required   to  oversee  them.  Two  sets of  unionized   readers would  be  too  expensive,  so the  second  stage  of reading  was  performed by  non­ union  help, some permanent and some, like myself, part-time.
I  was more  delighted  than  dismayed  when  I learned  this because, in  the back of my Inind,  I  had  always  wondered about  the secret language educated editors used  when  they  wanted   to communicate with  seemingly  illiterate  printers.  Clues were given  in  the introductory pages  to mammoth dictionaries which  sometimes featured   a  page  of  proof-reading marks,  but  that  was  "pure" information and what  I  needed  was  "applied" instruction. So for  two summers  and  a few hours each  week  running through  two  academic years, I learned  the  business of  read­ ing proof and  production procedure. We read in tandem, the copy-holder reading  to  the  copy-marker, and  then  back  again.  We  learnt  to watch  out  for  errors  of fact,  which  we  automatically question-marked, but  more  to the  point  we learnt  to  mark  those  errors  which  were  not  really  errors  at  all because  they  were only divergences  from  the copy which  occasionally  looked incorrect. Through long hot summer  months,  back  and  forth,  we croaked  our  verbal  equivalents of four-line  mathematical equations, and  with bleary eyes we confused all manner of algebraic  unknowns, superscripts, subscripts,  German and  Greek  letters  when  the  English upper  and  lower  case alphabets had  been  exhausted. I  was gradually learning  a science,  and  today  the  most  complicated of  mathematical or statistical tables  do not faze me in the least.

45

INSIDE THE TRADE



The   University   of  Toronto  Press  was  being   transformed  from   "practically nothing  to one  of the  major  university  presses on this continent." These  are only roughly   the  words   Northrop  Frye  used  to  describe  what   its  Director,   Marsh Jeanneret, was doing.  I wish I could  boast  I had  a hand  in  this transformation, but in fact  I only glimpsed  Mr.  Jeanneret striding  through the halls with  (to me) famous  people  like Jack  Pickersgill  and  Mason  Wade  and  Robert  Finch  in  tow. I was on  the outer  fringes  of the  publishing  world,  but  at least I had  one foot in an editorial  office!
While  at  the  Press,  I  was  never  given  a  title,  but  in  retrospect  I  would  call myself an  editorial   assistant.  I  quickly  introduced myself to the  half-dozen  full­ time editors who were lucky enough  to actually  correspond with the authors  whose work I was proof-reading. The  editors  were able to mark  up their copy with pen­ cilled  characters and  meet  their  authors  when  they  came  to town.  Peeking  into their  offices, I en joyed watching them  at work. They  were a delight  to behold - all  girl  graduates,  young,  attractive,  nubile   (only  later  would  the  Press  begin hiring  male  graduates as editors). They  checked spellings in their Concise Oxfords and  resorted  to chapter and  verse of that  publisher's  Bible, The Chicago  Manual of Style.  I wondered  how  these young  lady  editors  were  able  to keep everything consistent  and  correct  until  one  day  I  asked one  of the  prettiest  ones her  secret. As it  turned   out,  while she  laboured through a  three-hundred page  manuscript on ophthalmology, she jotted  down  all the variables  on a piece of foolscap  which she kept  beside her. This  sheet of paper  was ruled into  twenty-four sections, each for  a  letter  of  the  alphabet, and  in  this  way  she  could  remember whether  she had   earlier   spelt  "judgment" with   an  extra   "e," and   whether "regime" had appeared a hundred pages ago with an acute  accent  or not. Purely  typographical variables,  like the use of the hyphen,  the "en" dash, or the "em" dash, were noted there too. This simplified things immensely.
Although I didn't realize its importance at the  time,  today  I like to boast  that I was one of the first to work on the Dictionary  of Canadian Biography, a monu­ mental   series  and  the  greatest  single  publishing   venture   to  date  in  Canada. I asked myself where  Professor George  Brown would  even begin his task of compil­  ing  a  multi-volumed encyclopaedia of great  Canadians. I learned  soon  enough  the  nature of the first step: Buy two sets of all previous encyclopaedias published in this country-even if they are collectors' items -and  have editorial  assistants like myself clip  the  entries  and  paste  them  on  to  large  filing cards.  Then  divide the  cards  into  specific  periods  and  shuffle them  into  alphabetical order-that's as good a beginning  as any.

INSIDE THE TRADE



I can't  imagine  a better introduction to the intricacies  of the mechanical aspects of publishing   than  the  one  I had  at  the  University  of Toronto Press. Over  the two-year  period,  I had  absolutely  nothing to do  with  its publication policy, but I automatically began  to identify  with  the books the Press had  elected  to publish. Gossip reached  my ears on the use of readers'  reports, editorial  conferences, index­ ing  procedures, the  importance of scheduling, and  even  the  odd  bit of  informa­ tion  on  contractual stipulations. I had  not  the  luck  to share  in  expense account  lunches,  nor  was  I privy  to important discussions on movie  rights.  I met  no im­ portant authors  or  publishers,  although I did  manage to shake  hands  once with Yusuf  Karsh   at  the  launching of  his  Portraits  of  Greatness  in  the  Press'  new bookstore  immediately below the editorial  offices.
At  the  same  time,  I had  learned  something about  myself too.  I realized  that I didn't want  a career  of editing  such books as Late  Archaic  Chinese, which  was one  of the  most  important books published  by the  Press during my  period  with the  house.  I understand it supplanted all previous  Sinological  grammars, but  the system  the  proof-readers devised  of voicing  all kinds of diacritical marks  simply broke  down  when  faced  with  the  Chinese  characters that   Professor  W.  A.  C. Dobson  was introducing into  the  manuscript at  the  rate  of half  a dozen  a page. Academic publishing  was not for me. Every year the Press published  a few books of general  rather than  specialist  appeal, but  the  house  existed  to  take  on  books no  trade   publisher  could  hope  to  produce   at  a  profit.  To  my  mind,  academic publishing  was a specialized  branch  of educational publishing-producing text­ books  for  scholars  rather   than  for  students. What  I  wanted   was  a  job in  trade publishing,  producing books for the  "lay" reader.


As IT    HAPPENED,  the  Dean   of  Canadian  Editors-the
Alfred  A.  Knopf  of  Canada who  had  spent  more  than  thirty  years behind  the
editorial  desk at  The  Ryerson  Press-had  just retired  and  left a vacuum in his wake. Dr.  Lome Pierce's  successor was not  a publisher  at all, not even an editor, but   an   author  and-in  his  own  right-a  man-of-the-letters.  John   Webster Grant was  an  ordained minister  who  had  resigned  his teaching position  at  the University  of British  Columbia to help  the Ryerson  people  along.  Dr.  Grant  saw his move,  curiously  enough,  as shifting  from  one sector of the  United  Church to another, since The  Ryerson  Press was really one of a number of operations under the banner  of the United  Church  Publishing House of Canada.

47

INSIDE THE TRADE



A few  years after  hiring  me,  Dr.  Grant moved  out  of publishing  entirely  and took  to  the  Chair  of Church History  at  Emmanuel College in the  University  of Toronto. But  while  he  held  the  editorship, the  house  thrived. He  had  the  im­ possible task of tackling  the hydra-headed problems  that  Dr.  Pierce had  managed to stave  off with  his own  combination of seniority,  authority, and  outright bluff. In  retrospect,  I cannot  but  admire Dr.  Grant's level-headedness. Working  under  him  each  day  was an  eight-hour lesson in tact  and  diplomacy  as much  as it was an introduction to publishing  procedure itself.
At  Ryerson,  I was  known  as Assistant  Editor  of Trade Publications. This in­ volved  being  responsible  for   (but   not  actually  reading, if  I could  help  it)   the approximately thirty-five  unsolicited   manuscripts that  arrived  on  my  desk  each week. I checked  through  the dog-eared  MSS, wrote  brief reports on them for our weekly conferences, and  then  filed them  away.  (Only  the  exceptional  books  get published; to my knowledge,  no one has ever done a study  of unpublished  book­ length  manuscripts. Such  a study-by  an  anthropologist rather  than  a  literary  critic-would  lay  bare  much   about   Canadian  educational and  mental-health standards) . More  important to me was  the  task of pioneering  new  publications. This  involved  watching the  newspapers  and  reading  the popular  and  little  maga­  zines for  new  names  and  new  book  ideas.  But  by far  the  greatest  part  of each day  was  spent   (in  Dr.  Pierce's  inimitable phrase)   "lining   up  the  copy for  the machines." By  this  he  meant   checking   the  author's  copy  for  consistency  and correctness,  seeing  the  proofs  through  production, putting the  book  to  bed.  In between,  there  were discussions about rights, contracts, design, illustration, proper  jacket  copy,  promotion, and  all  this  merged  one  long  meeting  into  another. As well, I talked  with salesmen,  had  conferences  with authors  if they lived in Toronto or were passing through, and  got involved in endless correspondence with authors  who resided elsewhere.
Scouring   the  country   for  manuscripts  by  mail,  with   the  occasional   trip   to Montreal or  Ottawa, was  exciting  but  generally  unproductive. About  this  time Marsh  Jeanneret was quoted  by The  Globe  and Mail  as saying, in effect, "'There are no good manuscripts going unpublished in Canadian attics." I began to realize that  he was  right,  but  that  what  Jeanneret had  not  said  was equally  important. There were  no  completed   manuscripts  begging  for  publishers,  but  there  were plenty  of good  ideas  that  would  never  be turned  into  good  books because,  first, the  publishers  were working  to capacity  already  and, second,  the market  was too small  to warrant too much  enthusiasm over  projects  that  might  take  a  consider­
able  period  of time  or  money  to get off the ground.

INSIDE THE TRADE



This was all happening while the Quebec separatists  were blowing up buildings. French  Canada was slowly coming into focus, and it occurred  to me that French­ Canadian literature offered  a ready-made source  of already  written  books which Ryerson   could  publish  with  great   benefit  all  around.  Mostly  because  Toronto publishers   are   monolingual,  excellent   books  published   in   Paris  and   Montreal go  untranslated  and  even  unnoted   in  English  Canada. I  am  not  talking  now about  limited-appeal books,  but  popular novels  and  popular studies.  Potboilers  like  Yves  Theriault's  Agaguk   were   unjustly   neglected,   and   topical   titles  like Marcel  Chaput's Pourquois   je suis  separatiste, it  seemed  to  me,  should  imme­  diately  be  made  available  in  English.  Both  of these  appeared on  Ryerson's  list. As often  as not  the  Canada  Council  came  up  with  the  necessary subsidy  to pay the translator and  even aid the publisher  to budget  the book.
One  day,  to satisfy my own  curiosity  about  Quebec writing,  I tried  to buy an English-language introduction to French-Canadian literature, the equivalent of Desmond   Pacey's  Creative  Writing in  Canada, an  unjustly  criticized  volume.  I was  astonished  to find  that  there  was  not  then  and  had  never  been  a survey of French-Canadian literature either  written  in  English  or  translated into  English! Gerard   Tougas' excellent  Histoire  de  la  Litterature Canadienne-Fran(aise  pre­ sented  itself  and  was  duly  subsidized,  translated, and  published. Another  major  book, but with less appeal,  was Jean  LeMoyne's collection of essays Convergences. A  conservative   thinker   not  unlike  George  Grant, Le  Moyne's  ideas  deserved  a wider audience; he too was translated and published.
All editorial  decisions are group  decisions;  this is a particularly useful formula when  the decision is a negative  one. I take pride in the fact  that,  during  the three years I spent  at Ryerson,  the organization again  began  to publish  books that  were judged  worthy  of Governor-General's Awards.  There were three  of these, in fact, for books by James  Reaney,  Hugh  Garner, and  Raymond Souster.
About  nine  o'clock  one  morning (I was  an  early  riser when  I was salaried), the secretary  of the  editorial  department said  there  was someone  on  the line for me.  I  knew  it  was  too  early  for  any  of my  friends  or  writers  to  be calling,  but it  turned  out  that  the  call wasn't  really for  me but  was being  directed  to me. It was  Ryerson  policy-and probably  still is-to  direct  all  those who  telephone in  blind  to the  newest  member  of the  editorial  department. I lifted  the  receiver and said, "May I help you?"
"Yes,"  a woman   replied,  obviously  elderly.  "I would  like to  know  something about  the book business."
"What specifically would you like to know?"


49

INSIDE THE TRADE



"Well,   I  have  a  book  I  want   published,  and  I want  to  know  how  one  goes about  it."
This  was a usual  request  so I made  the  usual  reply. "Why don't you send  the manuscript to  us for  a  starter. We  will read  it,  and  if  we like it  we will make you an offer to publish."
"You  will 'make  me an offer'?  What  does that  mean?"
"What I mean  is, we would  manufacture and  sell the  book for  you and  pay you royalties on the sale of your book."
"Royalties?" She sounded  suspicious.  "How  much  would  they amount to?"
"Most contracts begin  at  ten  per  cent of the list price of the  book."
"You  mean  I would  get  ten  per  cent of what  the  book sells for at  the store?" "That's right.  There is a sliding scale, so that  if the book sells more than  a few
thousand copies you automatically receive an even higher  royalty."
"Only ten per cent!" She was getting  cranky. "Why do I get only ten per cent? Who gets the other  ninety per cent?"


IDECIDED TO  leave The  Ryerson  Press about  the time the next publisher  in my life entered  the office. He  was a fiery Hungarian named  Stephen
Vizinczey,  and  his one-man publishing  house  corresponded in  an  uncanny  way to my  own  one-man editorial  service.  Stephen came  into  my office with  a bulky manuscript under  his arm.  "Would you look this over, John," he asked, "not  as an  editor  here  but  as a friend?" I agreed  and  was delighted  with  what  I read.  I mentally  decided  that  I would like to edit for the company that  would be pioneer­ ing  enough  to  publish  a book like this. As it  turned  out,  no company  published Vizinczey's  book, but  In  Praise  of Older Women became  a bestseller  nonetheless.
So  I struck  out  as a freelance  editor.  Actually  I dislike the  word  "freelance" because  it invariably means  "between positions."  I was not  between  positions be­ cause  I had  turned   down  two  full-time  appointments in  order  to  try  my  hand  at  being  self-employed.  After  three  years of being in  an  office, I wanted  to sleep in  the  mornings,   work   hard  when the  mood   hit  me,  and   avoid  as  much   as possible  inter-office  friction.   I've   been  successful  in  this  ever  since.  I  accepted  manuscripts to read  from  any number of publishers, did substantial editorial  work for three of them, lectured, conducted writing  courses, wrote reviews, articles, and scripts for  newspapers,  magazines, and  radio,  and  on the side even wrote a shady market  letter  for  a stock promoter (a story in itself). I  was delighted  to discover

INSIDE THE TRADE



that  there  are  no limits  to your earnings if you are self-employed,  fairly versatile, and  willing  to work  a twelve-hour  day  and  enjoy it. It is an  exhilarating experi­ ence,  after  being  office- and  salary-pent, because  you  never  know  on  Monday  what   Tuesday  will  bring.  It turns  one  from   a  civil servant   into  a  small-time  capitalist, but  the  main  difficulty is that  you spend  the latter  part  of  the morning and  the earlier  part  of the  afternoon rounding up work and  the evening  actually  doing it. It was Jock  Carroll, the Toronto journalist  for Weekend .Magazine, who said,  "The trouble  with  freelancing is that  if you  take  an  extra  half-hour over lunch, you think  you are starving  to death."
In   between   assignments,   I  edited   Stephen  Vizinczey's   manuscripts  through three  drafts  and  into  production. I felt  as if all along  I  was working  strictly  for Vizinczey  because  he was always on the  phone  or at  the door  (he  never resorted to  the  mails)   with  revisions,  proofs, suggestions,  questions,  jacket  copy, illustra­ tions, or  what-have-you. After  the  manuscript was whipped  into  shape, he pub­  lished it  himself  with  his own  capitalization under  the imprint of  Contemporary Canada  Press. In  Canada alone,  the  hardbound edition  sold  approximately ten thousand copies, and  it is currently  doing excellent  business as a Ballantine paper­ back.  At  last  count,  Vizinczey  made  $6s,ooo  out  of the  venture  and  is now  in London  dickering  over translation rights.


MY NEXT   VENTURE   in   publishing   corresponded  to  the phenomenal success of The   Comfortable Pew,  which  was, surprisingly, the  first
book  I  edited  for  McClelland & Stewart. It was  a  small  editorial   task,  and  it consisted  of  checking   the  punctuation,  the  quotes,   and  seeing  through   speed publication "a  manuscript about   the  church." After  three  years  at  the  United Church Publishing   House,  I  was  becoming   a  religious editor! When  I  learned that  the  manuscript was  by  Pierre  Berton,  and  after  I  had  read  it,  I  knew  in­ stinctively  (perhaps even more  than  the  publisher-certainly not  more  than  the author) that  this was a big-time operation. It went on to become  the outstanding trade  bestseller in Canadian history.
The  trouble  with  money,  John   Kenneth Galbraith once  said,  is that  it exerts "pre-emptive tendencies." The  same  thing  could  be said about  good  books which are  destined  to  become  big  books. The  publisher  of big  books in  Canada  today is obviously  Jack   McClelland. This  has  only  been  so since  1959,  the  year  the firm he directs,  McClelland & Stewart, published  paperback and  hardbound edi-

INSIDE THE TRADE



tions of Sheila  Watson's  The  Double  Hook  and  Irving  Layton's A Red  Carpet  for the  Sun. Since  then  his truly  contemporary list has grown  impressively, and  part and  parcel  of  his  concept  of  publishing  is the  need  for  promotion and  striking packaging. Jack  McClelland is the Barney  Rosset or John  Calder  of Canadian publishing.  Forty   years  ago  he  would  have  been  the  Alfred  A. Knopf  or  Sir Stanley  Unwin  of the business. How times change....
It is a  pleasure  to work  with  McClelland & Stewart, first as an  outside  editor or  stringer  and  then,  comparatively recently,  as an  editorial  consultant. It is an astonishing   experience   to  handle   a  book  like This Game   of Politics, rework  it against   an  impossible  deadline,  and  see  it  through  publication, all  the  while reading  about  its author, Pierre  Sevigny, in the newspapers and seeing him inter­ viewed  on  television  telling  everyone  that  he  is going  to  "tell  all"  about  John  Diefenbaker and  his Cabinet days.  It makes  an  editor  feel that  he is in  his own small   and   anonymous  way  helping   to  make  history.  A  delusion  perhaps, but Samuel  Goldwin  used to call the sweet sensation  "being  immortal for a day."
I could  continue and  discuss other  books, like George  Grant's Lament  for a Nation  and  Walter  L. Gordon's A Choice  for Canada, and  dozens which  no one expected  would  make the headlines  and  which didn't, but  this phase of my opera­ tions is not  by any  means  over.  In  fact,  I hope it will never  be over, because  the supply  of  excellent  books seems  never-ending and  appears   to  increase  from  list to  list.  Working   half  inside  a  house  and  half  outside  has  turned   out  to  be  my ideal  way  of both  writing  and  editing.  It  takes a fair  amount of organization, a lot  of  nervous  energy,  some  moving  about,  and  vast  quantities of midnight oil. But I always did like sleeping in in the mornings.





RATHER THAN  STOP  in  medias  res, let  me  round  out  this personal  account  of the publishers  in my life with  a few observations based solely on my own experience.  I am numbering my points, not because it is fashionable to
do so today  a  la Susan  Sontag, but  because  the  points  are  really  unrelated   and
taken at random.
1. Raymond Mortimer once said  that  publishing  was "at  once an  art,  a craft, and  a business." In  Canada it is only becoming  all three. The  Yellow Pages of the Toronto Telephone Directory  lists 19 :12  column  inches  under  the heading "Pub­
lishers -Book,"  but  only  by  the  wildest  stretch  of  the  imagination could  more

52

INSIDE THE TRADE



than  half a dozen be said to be serious publishers. The  rest are dabblers  or strictly distributors of  foreign  titles  (one  bookseller  in  Toronto refers  to  them  as  "job­ bers"). Only  a few  Toronto companies  give one  the  impression  that  they  could exploit  the  possibilities of a  Gone With  the Wind. The  best of the  worst  would probably  turn  the  literary  property over  to their  U.S.  or  U.K.  principals  and  be content  to handle  the  title on  an  agency  basis in the  country of  its origin.
2.  Sir  Stanley   Unwin   made  elementary distinction   between  an  editor  and  a publisher.  "An  editor," he said,  "selects manuscripts; a publisher  selects editors." In  my  experience,  very few  editors  in  Canada ever select  manuscripts; they  are too  busy second-guessing  the  publisher. No one  really knows  what  will sell. The odds  are  against  anything selling, but  when  you are a gambler  by profession it is foolish not  to go for  broke  now  and  then.  The  editor  has to be a perpetual opti­ mist;  the  publisher  a grim  (and  game)   realist.
3· The   continued  existence  of  Canadian  publishing  often  seems  to  me  very much  an  open  question.  It is possible  publishing  in  Toronto will simply  vanish like a  mirage  one  day-with  the  Americanization of  the  country,  the  gradual easing  out  of  British  books,  and  the  "free-flow" copyright  and  tariff  acts which seem to be looming  on the American horizon.  The  classic debate  is between  Marsh Jeanneret and  Jack  McClelland. The  Director  of the University  of Toronto Press feels that  "Canadians should  be  publishers  to  the  world," and  the  President  of McClelland  &  Stewart   feels  that   Canadian books  should   not  be  exported   but should  be  republished in  foreign  countries   by  resident  companies. But  between the  two  positions-between books like Late Archaic Chinese and  The  Comfort­ able Pew- there  are  perhaps  a hundred books published  each  year in  Canada that  could  automatically be exported. Obviously  the  most  commercial titles will be  contracted for  by foreign  publishers  before  publication, but  what  about  the remainder which  have  a limited  but  legitimate  market  outside  Canada which  no company  except  the  University  of Toronto Press is attempting to service?  What is needed  is a decision  by the Book Publishers' Association of Canada to invet
a  joint  outlet   for  Canadian titles  in  New  York  and   London.  Doubleday-style bookstores  should   be  merchandising  points  for  English-language  books  manu­ factured in Canada when  the American or British rights have not been previously placed.  One  book I worked  on comes to mind.  It was a prairie pioneer's reminis­ cences,  one  of  the  first Canadian titles of its kind.  I suspect  similar  books have appeared in  the  United  States,  but  still there  are  midwestern  areas  south  of the border  where  possibly two or  three  hundred copies of the  Canadian book could be absorbed  at only a nominal  cost to the  publisher.

53

INSIDE THE TRADE



4· If you  are  an  unpublished author, permit  me  a word  of advice  when sub­ mitting  to a Canadian publisher.  Establish  conditions  with  your submission. Too many  houses are still in the horse-and-buggy days of office organization and  think nothing   of  keeping  an  author waiting   nine   months to  a  year  for  a  yes or  no answer.  One  United  States  company, Simon  & Schuster, boasts that  it will report  back  to the  author within  two weeks of submission,  and  I am  certain  this policy, which is not an unreasonable one, nets them  the first look  at a number of promis­  ing  manuscripts. So when  submitting, I recommend  imposing  a polite time limit in the covering  letter.  "If I don't hear from  you within  two months,  aside from  a routine   acknowledgment of  receipt  of the  manuscript, I will assume  the  manu­ script  has  been  rejected  by  your  company, and  I will submit  my  carbon  else­ where." That should  get action. To  be politic, a letter  two weeks before  the im­ pending   deadline, drawing  attention to  the  condition  of submission,  is a gentle reminder to the publisher how long you have been waiting.  The  truth  of the mat­  ter is publishers and editors feel as guilty about  their bad organization and lethargy  as authors  feel irritated.
5·  Let  me  conclude  with  some  advice  to the  young  graduate wary  of an  aca­ demic  career,  bookish,  and  curious  about  publishing. I meet  half  a dozen  such young  people  a year. I find myself lending  them  a pamphlet called So You Want  to Get into Book Publishing by Daniel  Melcher,  published  by Publishds Weekly,
62  West  45th  St.,  New  York  26.  It discusses opportunities, salaries,  ways  and means  of  breaking   in.  Besides Sir  Stanley   Unwin's classic introduction  to  the field, The  Truth   About  Publishing,  two  paperback collections  of essays are  ex­ cellent.  These  are  edited  by Gerald  Gross and  are  called  Editors on Editing  and Publishers on  Publishing.  Unfortunately,  opportunities are  limited  in  Canada, especially  in  trade  editorial  work,  and  advancement as often  as not  comes from leaving  one firm and  joining another. There is no problem  here except  that  there just aren't that  many  firms to go around. And  the main  barrier  remains  getting  started, since  there   are  no  training  programmes. The  great   myths  about   the business also stand  in the way. One  of these is that  every editor  "needs experience on  the  road." Any  normal  person  can  pick  up  all  he  has  to  know  listening  to bookstore  managers at  their  annual meetings  and  talking to travellers  after  they return  from  their trips. My advice to publishers is leave the editors to their editing  and  the travellers  to their selling. Once  you are working  as a junior or senior  edi­ tor, meeting  book-buyers  is an  exciting experience,  but  the actual  selling  ( euphe­ mistically  called  "representing") is  best left to the  experts.  If I had  had  to start  out  as a salesman,  I don't think  I  would  have  lasted  long enough  to become  an

54

IN SIDE THE TRADE



editor.  Another   of  the  great  myths  is that  trade  editors  are -well-parasites and   that   educational  editors  are   the  Real   McCoy.  Fundamentally the   only difference  between  educational editing  and  trade  editing  is that  educational edit­ ing  is easier.  Textbooks  are  obviously  more  profitable  than  trade  books,  but  the latter  are often  profitable  too, and  even if they aren't they are an  attractive "loss leader" to an educational department. There are more openings on the educational side, but  the  worst  thing  that  can  happen is for a young  editor,  who has his eye focussed on trade  work, to be categorized  as an educational man. If you are good at  it, you will be doing  it for  the  rest of your  life. But if you  are  a trade  editor,  doing  the  odd  educational title on  the  side  can  be a  refreshing  change.  There's nothing  to it!






































55


THE	LITTLE 	PRESSES



T1J'nne Francis






TEACTIVITY  of the little  pcess ;, an ;ndex to the v;tality of the
literary  underground.   Most  typically the  instrument  of the  little magazine,  the
little press takes many forms. It may be distinguished, however, from the average private  press by its  preoccupation  with  new  and  experimental  writing,  by its idealism and  amateurism  and by its ephemeral and capricious nature. The weak­ ness of the  typical little  press is its compulsion to publish whatever  is  new and different, regardless of merit;  its virtue, on the other hand, is to act as a sensitive seismograph  recording subtle  changes in literary sensibility. Little press  publica­ tions, for reasons both <esthetic and financial, are not aimed at the general public. Most  of  them  serve,  more  or  less intentionally,  to  strengthen  that  mysterious international network of readers and  writers which comprises the little magazine world.
In  Canada   the first significant little press was established in Montreal  in the early Forties by John  Sutherland  and his associates. As editors of First Statement magazine  these young writers managed  to purchase a second-hand  press, taught themselves to set type and  laboriously but lovingly performed  all the other  tasks connected with the printing and publishing of a magazine. The importance, for modern   literature   in  Canada,   of  First  Statement  magazine  and  its  successor Northern  Review   is well-known. But John  Sutherland  made further  significant use of First Statement  Press. At a time when commercial  houses were decidedly reluctant   to  publish  young  Canadian  poets,  Sutherland   established  the  First Statement  New Writers Series. Irving  Layton's first book Here and  Now  ( 1945) was No.  1 of  the series; succeeding  titles included  work  by Patrick  Anderson, Miriam  Waddington,   and  Anne  Wilkinson. Designed  and  illustrated  by artist Betty Sutherland,  First Statement  books were more attractive  than the occasional

THE LITTLE PRESSES



chapbooks  put out by commercial publishers  and  more professional in appearance than  the  publications of many  more  recent  little  presses.
One  other  important  publication by  First  Statement Press was  the  anthology
0ther  Canadians  (I 947). With  its challenging introduction  by Sutherland and its generous  representation of  Preview  and  First Statement poets,  Other  Cana­ dians  serves  historically  as  a  salutary corrective  to  the  impression  made  by  the first edition  of A. J. M. Smith's  prestigious The  Book of Canadian Poetry.
As the  power  of First  Statement Press declined  its role was taken  over in  the early fifties by Contact Press. Louis Dudek,  who had  learned  much  from  Suther­ land  and  more  later  from  his  New  York  sojourn  and  his  correspondence with Ezra  Pound, provided  the  initiative  and  zeal for  the founding of the  new  press. Established   as  a  poets'  co-operative, Contact  was  more  prolific  and  more  am­  bitious than  First  Statement. This  time  the poets did  not set their own  type;  they sent  their  manuscripts to  a  job-printer. There  remained, however,  all  the  other important chores  of publishing,  from  the selection  and  editing  of manuscripts to the  designing  and  distribution of the  books.  Contact Press began  by publishing  Cerberus  (I 952)   which  comprised  poems and  prefaces  by the  three  poet-editors  (Dudek, Layton  and  Souster)   and  continued throughout the fifties and sixties to publish   the  work  of  deserving  and  neglected   Canadian  poets  of  their  choice. Contact Press  kept  in  close  touch with  the  literary  underground through   Little Magazines such   as  Contact,  Civjn and   Delta  with  which   the  poet-publishers were variously connected. But as the years wore on, the Press displayed  less urgent  commitment  to  new  and  experimental writers.  By the  late  fifties Contact Press had  become  a  prestige symbol;  it  could  afford  to wait  until  a writer  had  proved himself  elsewhere  before  offering  him  the  advantages of the  Contact imprint. In this  sense,  Contact has  lost some  of  the  character of the  little  press although  it has  given  recent  evidence  of  a continuing interest  in  experimental writing.  The publication of  New  Wave Canada  has  redeemed  the  Press somewhat in the eyes of new  young  writers,  though  this anthology  may  reflect simply  the  predilections of  editor  Raymond Souster.  In  general  Contact seems  content  to function as a private  press serving  the liberal  fringe  of the general  poetry  reading  public  rather than  as an intimate gauge  and  instrument of the avant-garde.
This  latter  function has  been in some small  measure  served  by two other  pub­ lishing ventures  in which  Dudek  is engaged. The  McGill  Poetry  Series  (which  in fairness should  be named  the Dudek  Poetry  Series)  has been  devoted  to talented  students  whose  work  came  to the  attention of  Professor  Dudek. Beginning  with Leonard   Cohen's Let  Us  Compare   Mythologies  ( I956)  the series has included

57

THE LITTLE PRESSES



such  titles as Daryl  Hine's  The Carnal  and  the Crane, D. G. Jones'  Frost on the Sun  and  Pierre  Coupey's  Bring Forth the Cowards. Recently  Dudek  has launched Delta  Canada which  so far  has four  titles to its credit, including R. G. Everson's Wrestle  With an  Angel  and  Michael  Gnarowski's Postscript  for St.  ]ames Street. Delta's  most recent  publication is Picture  on the Skin, an exceptionally  attractive volume  of  poems  by Eldon  Grier  with  full-colour  reproductions of paintings  by Sylvia Tait.
Other little  presses  active  in  the  fifties  proved  of  varying  duration and  im­ portance. Some were short-lived  but  made valuable contributions, such as Emblem Books, an  imprint under  which  Jay  Macpherson published  her  own  early  work and  that  of Daryl  Hine,  Alfred  Purdy  and  others.  The  Fiddlehead  Press under  the  editorship of Fred  Cogswell  is still extant. It has served  the  Maritime poets well and includes  titles by Alfred Purdy  and Alden  Nowlan,  as well as the regional anthology   Five  New   Brunswick   Poets.  Alphabet  Press  is  used  mainly  to  print Alphabet   magazine but  James  Reaney  has  plans  to make  of  it a "regional pub­  lishing  centre" for  writers  in  Western  Ontario.  Reaney  does  his own  printing. Some insight  into  the motivation of the little presses as well as a sense of Reaney's fascination with  the  visual form  of letters  can  be gained  from  his remarks  about  his press:  "I learnt  typesetting,  acquired  type and  got  a press because it was the only way  to get out  a little mag  that  looked right and  didn't cost the moon.  Paul Arthur's Here  and  Now  is the  force  behind  the  idea  of it  looking  right.  John Sutherland gave  me  the  notion   that   you  could  do  it  this  way ... All  sorts  of [experiments] are  possible because  you have this trusty giant  with the old squeeze power ... you  can  initiate things  that   no  commercial publisher   would  dare   to think  of ... There is something  utterly glamorous  about  type and  a press ... I've  learnt  the feel of books since I started  doing  all this. Actually  it all goes back to a rubber  printing set I was given  (or  earned  at  5¢  a week)  as a kid in return  for watching our  flock of geese-that it didn't get into  the wheat. By that  print  set
I was  hooked!" Reaney's publishing  ventures,  apart from  Alphabet, include  his own  Dance  of Death  and  Colleen  Thibideau's Lozenges  (Poems  in the shape  of things). Among  other little presses in the early sixties John Robert  Colombo's Hawkshead  was  particularly active,  publishing   a  half-dozen   titles  by  Colombo himself  as  well  as  the  work  of  Jay   Macpherson, Mike  Strong,   Milton   Acorn Phyllis Gotlieb and others.
In  the  mid-sixties several  new little  presses have  been  established.  Nelson Ball, who  edits  the  magazine Weed,  also  supervises  the  Weed/Flower  Press  which publishes  both American and  Canadian poets. The  Quarry Press, which  publishes

THE LITTLE PRESSES



Quarry  Magazine, has  also issued The Beast with  Three Backs  (poems  by Tom Eadie,  Tom   Marshall and  Colin  Norman). Prism/international has  announced plans  to publish  a series of foreign-language  poets.
The  role of the strictly  avant-garde press, however,  has clearly been taken  over by  three  new  little  presses. In  Vancouver The  Very  Stone  House  Press, run  by Seymour  Mayne and  Patrick  Lane,  has recently  published  a book by that  wizard of typography and  graphics,  Bill Bissett. Fires in the Temple displays not only the wildest  distribution of type  on  paper  but  also an  astonishing  array  of montages, foldouts  and  pop-art  gimmickry  among  its pages.  Bissett, as editor  of the maga­ zine  Blew  Ointment, is already   noted  for  his neo-Dadaist shenanigans.  Fires in the Temple is less of a book than  a happening.
Ganglia  Press in Toronto is another source of audacious experiment. Currently
it is offering  the Singing  Hand Series which  includes  a pamphlet called  Asps and Other  Wourneys by David  Aylward.  It has  also published  The Universal  Pome (described  as a small  poem-sculpture in cellophane and  cardboard) by bp nichol and is planning "a  postcard  series of concrete  poems." Recently  Ganglia  published a selection of Bissett's work called We  Sleep  Inside  Each  Other  All. Appended to this is a helpful  note on "The typography of Bill Bissett" by bp  nichol.
The  most ambitious of the new avant-garde presses is run  by Victor  Coleman. In  addition   to  the  magazines  Island  and  Is  (pronounced "Eyes"), Island  Press has  published   books  by  Fred  Wah,  Stephen Rodefer   and  Coleman   himself.  Its most  recent  title  is an  experimental work  by  Gerry  Gilbert called  Phone  Book. Coleman  has  also undertaken to reproduce, in their  original  mimeography form, the important defunct  little  magazines  Combustion, Contact and  Measure.
Island   Press  has  recently   joined  forces  with  Stan   Bevington's Coach   House Press. Bevington  has  his printing shop  literally  in  an  old  coach  house  on  Bath­ hurst  Street   in  Toronto. He  has  previously  published,   among   other  titles,  the LSD   Leacock  by  Joe  Rosenblatt and  New  Wings   for Icarus  by  Henry Beissel. All Coach  House  books so far  have  been  marked  by  their  colourful  design  and attractive typography. Coach  House  is now  printing  Is  magazine in  a much  im­ proved format.
Coach  House  plans to publish this fall a "book" by bp nichol called  ]ourneying
and  Returns. The   advance  notice  calls it  "more than  a book ... this  three  part package  dissolves arbitrary boundaries between  mediums   to  present  the  totality of one man's  existence. The  first part  ... is a forty-eight  page long poem sequence
... the second  part  is a recording  of two long sound  poems ... the third  part  is a
selection of 15 visual concrete  poems and  objects ..."


59

THE LITTLE PRESSES



Obviously  the  work  of new  avant-garde little  presses is only  partially  literary. With  them  we enter  a McLuhanish universe  which  exploits several  media simul­ taneously  and  engages the audience in a kinetic communion. One  does not "read" artists  like  Bissett and  Nichol-one "connects" in  an  audio-visual-tactile  mode of  response.  Traditional literary   criteria   are  no  longer  adequate  to  describe  or measure  this new form  of multi-dimensional communication.
Readers   for  whom  modern   poetry  is still  primarily   a  literary  experience  are well-served by several private  presses notable for the artistic excellence of their publications. Private   presses often  exhibit  qualities  conspicuously  lacking  in  the average  little  press. They   are  marked   by  a  concern  for  the  book  as a  physical object  of artistic  potentialities, by their  professional  competence in design, typog­ raphy  and  printing, and  by their  relative stability  and  business sense. When  these qualities  are combined  with an interest  in good modern writing,  the result is likely to be a fine book whose appearance and  contents  form  an  artistic whole. Such  a press is Klanak of Vancouver. Klanak  is a Salish Indian work meaning "a gather­ ing  of  the  tribes  for  serious  discussion".  It  suggests  the  way publisher   William McConnell thinks  about  books. He  brings  together  the  talents  of writers  and  the professional  craft  of  designers  and  printers  to  produce  such  attractive volumes as Marya  Fiamengo's The  Quality  of Halves, F. R. Scott's  Signature, Ralph  Gus­ tafson's   Rocky   Mountain  Poems,  and   Klanak   Islands,   an  anthology   of  short stories.  Klanak books  are  so successful  artistically  that  they  have  won  prizes  at book fairs  and  typography shows here and  abroad.
The  concern  for  the  physical  appearance of a book also distinguishes  the  pro­ ductions   of  Periwinkle   Press,  another Vancouver  venture.  Publisher  Takao Tanabe, primarily   a  painter, does  his own  printing, illustration and  design.  He publishes  only  the  poetry  that  interests  him  and  only when  he can  take  time off from  his painting. Titles  bearing  the Periwinkle  imprint are Roy Kiyooka's Kyoto  Airs, Gerry  Gilbert's  White Lunch, Phyllis Webb's  Naked  Poems and  John  New:  love's Elephants Mothers
Another  more  ambitious  private  press which  combines  the  talents  of artists  is the  Heinrich Heine  in  Toronto which  last  year  advertised  an  unusual portfolio called  Miraculous Montages featuring the poems of John  Robert  Colombo, draw­ ings  by Don  Jean-louis and  typographic design  by Peter  Dorni,  "each  page  will be  printed  by hand," runs  the  advertisement-"the numerous  drawings will be reproduced in  a  unique  way-by  blind  embossing ... The  entire  portfolio  will be housed  in an  unusual  case."  Publisher  Peter  Darn  has already  won awards  for his editions  of the Selected  Poems of Heinrich  Heine  and of Voyage  of the Mood

6o

THE LITTLE PRESSES



by  Joseph   Rosenblatt.  Still  another  press  founded   by  a  designer-typographer (William  Reuter) specializes in the artistic union of text and format; Reuter's Aliquondo  Press has published  four  titles, the latest being  Barry  McKinnon's The Golden Daybreak Hair.
At  the  other  end  of  the scale  from  such  elaborate production is the  work  of Upbank  Press  in  Morin  Heights,   P.Q.   Upbank is not  primarily   literary  but  it deserves to be known for its unique  devotion  to humour. Cartoonist Peter Whalley has for several years issued a series called Hyperbole under  the imprint of Upbank. In various formats,  the numbers  of Hyperbole have graphically satirized  Canadian public  figures  and  institutions.   Notable   are  the  "Diefenbaker Record   Album," "Some  New  Canadian Stamps"  (gummed and  perforated), "A  Dominion  Day Salute" with  its  startling   fold-in   (like  Mad   magazine)  version  of  the  famous Fathers  of Confederation portrait, and  a riotous satire of the craze for Eskimo Art. Of more literary  interest  is the hilarious  parody of Layton  and Town's Love Where the  Nights are  Long. Hyperbole's version  is "Lust  Where  the  Summer's Short" by  "Ivy   Persis  Peyton" and  "Henrietta  Nowt." It deserves  to  be  much  better known than  it is.
As active  as little  presses and  private  presses are in Canada, however,  they still do  not  account   for  all  the  interesting   work  published   by  experimental modern writers.   Frequently modern  Canadians  are  published   by  little  presses in  other countries.  Creeley's  Divers  Press and  Jonathan Williams'  Jargon Press have  both published   Irving   Layton.   George   Bowering's   The  Man in   Yellow  Boots   was brought  out  by El Como  Emplumado, Mexico.  Ron  Everson's  Incident on  Cote Des  N eiges  bears  the  imprint of the  Green  Knight  Press, Amherst,  Mass.
Furthermore, a  poet  often  brings  out  his early  books  by  the  simple  device  of hiring  a  job-printer and  taking  care,  himself, of the  remaining chores of  publish­ ing,  in  which  case  he  sometimes  invents  a  "press"  for  the  occasion.  Thus  Two Longer Poems  by Howith  and  Hawkins was published  by "Patrician  Press" and an  early  book  of Layton's by  "Laokoon Press."  Scores  of poetry  titles  in  recent years  have   appeared  under   similar "ghost" imprints.  Many  of   these  are  so ephemeral and  so poorly produced  that  they serve little  purpose beyond  announc­ ing  a poet's  presence  and  gaining  (hopefully) the attention of  a reviewer. Others prove  of lasting  interest  because  of their  design  as well as their  poetic content,  as in  the  case  of  John Newlove's  Grave   Sirs  produced   by  "The Private   Press  of Robert   Reid  and  Takao Tanabe." Such  titles  are  soon  out  of print  and  extant  copies eventually  become  the  pride  of jealous collectors.
Most  of  the  books privately  printed or  published  by the  little  or  private  press

6r

THE LITTLE PRESSES



are not reviewed in newspapers  and magazines. This is due partly to failures in distribution and  partly  to the indifference of book page editors who have in mind, naturally, the  general  reading  public.  Frequently, too, the  writers  themselves  are content  with  a small  group  of readers  with  avant-garde  tastes.
For  the general  reader  who may be interested  in the activities of the little press, one way to gain  information is to subscribe  to one or more little magazines.  Even the  most  ephemeral Canadian  little  mag  is likely to contain   advertisements and notices, and  sometimes  reviews, of recently  published  experimental work. A more systematic  approach may  be made  through Trace, a quarterly which specializes in "an  evolving  directory" of  little  magazines; or The  Small  Press Review,  a  new quarterly by Dust  Books (California) which  also promises international coverage.
The  reader  who follows such  clues will find that  he has embarked on a stimu­ lating  adventure: he will be threading his way through  the mysterious and fascin­ ating  labyrinths of the literary  underground.



review articles




LANDFALL IN VINLAND
 


A. W. Purdy



FARLEY  MOWAT,  Westviking. McClelland & Stewart. $10.00. HELGE  INGSTAD, Land  Under  the  Pole Star.  Macmillan. $10.go.


IN GREY EARLY MORNING,  with fog hanging over  the sea, a broad-beamed high-bowed  ship some 7o-8o feet long dropped   anchor   in  a  small   bay  whose shores  humped  above  the  mist  to  form a  vague   country  of   green   spruce   and marshy   bog  land.  Cattle   bawled  on  the ship,   hungry   for   fresh   forage   not   far away.  Armed   men   peered   through  the mist, wondering if the forest concealed savage human or super-human enemies. Women crouched behind the men-also wondering. And then the Settlers splashed ashore   with   weapons   ready,   and   stood for  the  first  time  on  the  outside  rim  of the  New Country.
The   time  of  all  this  was  a  few  years less than  a thousand years ago. The  place was  Epaves  Bay  (L'Anse  au  Meadows), at  the  tip  of the  Great  Northern  Penin­ sula  of  Newfoundland-Canada.  Com­  bined   archaeological,  cartographic  and written  evidence  has confirmed  this Vik­ ing  landing   to  the  point  where   no  un­ prejudiced person would now doubt its validity-confirmed  it  to the  absurd modern  culmination of Italo-American supporters of  C.  Columbus parading public  loyalty  to  the  "firstness"  of  their own  undoubted  hero.
In  Farley   Mowat's  book   the   whole
 business has been reduced  to a further absurdity-Did Leif  Eriksson  turn   left or  right  at  the  first  stop  sign?-while the Vikings cogitate over wind and ocean currents like a  bunch  of company  direc­ tors deciding  on a corporate merger.
Probably   I'm   being  unfair   to  Mowat.
That  the   Vikings   discovered   America first seems indisputable. What their  men­ tal  processes were  while  doing  so  is thus bound  to   be   important,  though  not  necessarily interesting  (depending on  the writer), and  certainly  speculative at  this late  date.   But  Mowat's  "author-hubris" in  this  book   (a  disease  some  of  us  are familiar  with   in   poets)   interferes   with and  spoils  the  story  for  me,  at  least  to some extent.
The  stated  object  of W estviking  is  to resolve  "the   degree  of  Celtic  participa­ tion   in   the   westward   thrust;   the   real scope  of  Erik  the  Red's  explorations ... the identities  of the several native  peoples encountered; the detailed  tracks followed by all the  voyagers; the identity  and loca­ tion  of   the landfalls,   havens  and  settle­ ments; the major  factors which prompted, shaped, and sometimes doomed  the efforts of westward  venturers; and  many lesser matters."
For   its   factual  structure  and    basis

REVIEW ARTICLES



West viking   draws   on  three   sagas:   Erik the  Red's   Saga,  the  Karlsefni   Saga  and the  Short  Saga, these being  Icelandic literary   sources   written   in   the   twelfth and  thirteenth  centuries. The   book  also draws   on   several   historical    (as   apart from  "literary") sources, such  as the "Is­ lendingabok" by  Ari  the  Learned,  writ­  ten in Iceland during the twelfth century; and   only   mentions   Adam   of   Bremen's writings  which  date  less than  a  century after  the  actual  westward voyages of Lei£ Eriksson  and  Karlsefni.
Mowat  excerpts  and  arranges his quot­ ations   from   both   sagas   and   historical  sources,  jerking  many  quotes out  of their original   context   in  order   to  compile   a single   coherent   story   which,    naturally enough,    agrees   with   and   supports  his own  conclusions.  After  quoting his com­ posite  story,  Mowat  goes ahead   to  elab­ orate  and  explain how, why, and  in what  way  things  actually happened.  Thus   we have   the   sagas   plus   quotes   from   Ice­ landic  histories  mixed  together, followed by   modern  commentary.  This   for   goo pages.  At  the  end  of the  book there  is a series of long appendices, on everything from  Norse sailing  vessels (they  were ex­ ceptionally seaworthy)  to  the  recent  ex­ cavations by Helge  Ingstad  at  L'Anse  au Meadows    (Mowat  thinks   the   Ingstad site was a Basque  whale  fishery, then  re­ verses  himself  to  declare  it  a  Norse  site
-in all probability) .
In  a  long  introduction  to  their  Pen­ guin   translation  of  the  Vinland   Sagas, Magnus Magnussen and  Herman Palsson comment on  the free  and  easy  treatment other  writers  besides  Mowat  have  given the  sagas:   "Too   often   they   have   been served  up  to  the  public  in  filleted  ver­ sions, with  their  texts  emended  or cut  or adapted or  even  conflated   into  a  single
 uneasy  narrative in  an  attempt to  gloss over   their inconsistencies. The sagas themselves  have  become  obscured  rather than   illuminated  by  editors   who   arbi­ trarily   selected   textual   variants   to  suit their   own   theories."  I'd   go  along  with Magnussen   and   Palsson  in   this,  for   it scares  me  to  think   what  Mowat   might  do  to  Elder   Edda, not  to  mention   the Dead  Sea Scrolls.
But there  are several good things about W estviking. In  the  first place  it's  a  com­ mendable  thing   that   a   popular   writer  like  Mowat   should   examine   the   sagas (however   wildly), and   thus  draw  them to  the  attention  of  the  general   public. For  there  is a whole  fascinating  range  of Icelandic literature, quite  apart from  the Vinland    sagas   themselves.   The   Floa­ manna Saga, for  instance, was quite  new to me. It tells of Thorgisl  Orrabeinfostri, a friend  of Erik  the Red, whose ship  was wrecked  on the way to Greenland to join his  friend.   Thorgisl  had  just  been  con­ verted   to   Christianity,  and   his  dreams  were troubled  by visits from a red-headed pagan god called Thor. Indeed, when one considers the factual Skraelings  (Dorset Eskimos)   and   human giants  like  Thor­ gisl  Orrabeinfostri,  one   need   only   jog over a slight  mental  bump,  and  there  we are   back  at   the   Elder   Edda   with   the Fenris  Wolf and  Midgard Serpent.
One  passage  in  the  sagas  makes  long­ dead  Erik  the  Red  similar  to  a  modern hen-pecked  husband    and   very   human. When  his wife, Thorhild,  was  converted to Christianity, she  refused  to sleep  with Erik  because  he was still a heathen. That was  certainly   one  reason  why  Erik   de­ cided  to go along  with his son on another voyage  to  Vinland. He  fell  off his horse on  the  way  to  the  ship.  Erik  went  any way, aching shoulder and  all, but  stormy

REVIEW ARTICLES



weather   drove   him  back  to  Greenland. He  died   a  year  later,   still  unrepentent and  presumably unconverted.
But  docs Mowat  accomplish  his stated
goals  in  writing   this  book?  Re  the  de­ gree of Celtic  participation in the Viking westward   thrust    (he   believes   the  Celts were  in  Greenland  before   the  Norse) : the  only possible evidence  for  this is that Norse   house   foundations  in   Greenland were  underlaid by ruins  of a slightly  dif­ ferent  nature. Of  course  it  is  pretty  well established   now   that   Celtic   anchorites were in  Iceland  before  the  Norse,  which is  not   very  good   ground  for   assuming they were  also in  Greenland.
Re  the  identities  of  native  peoples  en­ countered  in  the  area,   there   were  only Beothuck   Indians  and   Dorset   Eskimos. Mowat  mentions  no others.  And  the pos­ sibility  that  Thule Eskimos  (the  Dorsets'
 successors) ,  who  moved   eastward   from Alaska  around goo A.D.,  might  have arrived  on  the  eastern  Atlantic seaboard a  hundred  years  later   is  somewhat   re­ mote.  In  Newfoundland itself  only  Dor­  set   and   Beothuck    remains    have   been found.
Mowat   also  identifies,   at  least  to  his own satisfaction, " -the detailed  tracks, identity  and   location   of  landfalls   etc." The   general   area   of  Norse  exploration (the  east coast of Canada and  the United States, including Newfoundland) can be taken  for granted, since it is documented and  fairly  well substantiated. That Cape Porcupine on the Labrador coast is the Norse "Marvel-Strands" and L'Anse  au Meadows   (Epaves   Bay)   an  early  settle­ ment  seems  to  me  beyond  question.  But that  Vinland is Tickle  Cove on  Trinity Bay,  Nfld.  (as  Mowat  maintains)  is de-




from Jackdaws to poetry
CLARKE IRWIN  is involved
in Canada's past, present and future

Here's  what  we are  doing  about  it:

Publishing    books   of   award-winning  merit    (George   Woodcock's The   Crystal   Spirit), distinctive   biographies    (Emily   Carr,  A.  Y. Jackson), humour and  fiction  (watch  for I Heard  the Owl  Call My Name   by  Margaret Craven, set  in  an  Indian village  on  the  B.C. coast), poetry  by  Alden  Nowlan   and  George  Woodcock,   plays  by Gratien  Gelinas,   the   English  translations  of   eminent   French­ Canadian historian Gustave  Lanctot  (a  new  one:  Canada  and  the American Revolution, 1774-1783), the  World  War  I  reminiscences of  Leslie Frost  (Fighting Men),  and,  of course,  the important new series  of "instant history"  in  Canadian  Jackdaws.

CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO   VANCOUVER

REVIEW ARTICLES



cidedly   unproven.  However, it's   an  in­
teresting  speculation.
No  doubt   Mowat   does  possess  more types of specialized knowledge, such as navigation  and familiarity with  ocean currents, etc.,  than  any  ordinary  person. I respect this knowledge, but doubt  if it enables   its   possessor  to  do   more   than probe and  prod  this  I ,ooo-year-old  detec­ tive  story,   raise   the   puzzling   questions themselves.   And   this   is   much.   Mowat  may certainly have stumbled  on  to some of  the  correct  answers,  but  how  are  we to  know  this?  His  case  is decidedly   un­ proven.
In   his  Epaves   Bay  appendix  Mowat
discusses Helge  Ingstad's discovery  of an early Norse settlement at L'Anse  au Meadows  (which I visited this summer). Ingstad    has   unearthed  the   remains   of several   buildings,   a  smithy   where   bog iron  had  been  smelted,  a  spindle   whorl of early  Norse design. Carbon-I4 tests on charcoal found  at  the site established  the dates  of 86o A.D.  plus or minus  go years to   I6oo   A.D.   plus  or  minus   70  years. These dates are to be found  in Ingstad's National    Geographic    article    for   Nov. I964;   the   dates   in   Mowat's  appendix run   from   68o  A.D.   to   1060  A.D.   (It would seem that  Mowat's first date  is a mistake,  and  that  he  simply  turned  Ing­ stad's  figure  backwards.)  All of  this adds up  to fairly  satisfactory  proof  of  a Norse settlement at  the   time  in   question. Mowat   admits   this   reluctantly.  Despite the   scarcity   of   artifacts  (only   a  Norse spindle   whorl),  the  authenticity  of  the site  seems  beyond   doubt. But  is  it  also the  original   Vinland  of  Leif   Eriksson? That's something else altogether.
For    some   unknown    reason    Mowat seems  to  have  formed   a  dislike  for  Ing­ stad,  and  suggests  the  Norse  writer  and

66
 his archaelogist-wife found  the site under false pretenses.  Mowat  says that  George Decker,    on   whose   farm   the   site   was located, thought Ingstad  an associate of Danish   archaeologist Jorgen   Meldgaard, and guided him to the spot under that impression. In his National Geographic article  Ingstad says a fisherman  told  him there were ruins on Decker's farm. There seems no reason  to doubt  Ingstad's word in this matter. And Decker, a friend  of Ingstad,  is  now   dead.   As  a   mere   re­ viewer  here  I  would  venture the opinion  that   Mowat   is  less  than  generous  to  a man   who  has  made   an  important  dis­ covery:   the  only  early  Norse  settlement in   North    America.   The   discovery   has been  authenticated  by  Canadian, Ameri­  can and British archaeologists who helped unearth the  site,  which  is  now  a  New­ foundland  museum.
To put forward all the questions  Mowat has  raised  in  West viking   is  a  fine  and wonderful accomplishment. That  he  has not answered the questions satisfactorily detracts little  from  the  book.  (Only  Ing­ stad  has made  a single step towards  their solution.)   The  Floamanna  Saga  alone  is sufficient   reason   for   reading  the   whole book. And  the  Viking  ships coming  into Epaves  Bay   I,ooo   years  ago,  on  a  grey morning with  cattle  bawling  and  women crouching  behind   armed   men -all  this now seems a little more  real to me. Those early Norse discoverers were fascinating literary    characters:   I'm    pleased    they were  also  real,   though   they   lived   and died  I ,ooo  years ago.

Land  Under the  Pole Star, Ingstad's own book,   deals   with   the   Norse  in   Green­ land-the   jumping-off    point   for  Leif the  Lucky  and  Thorfinn  Karlsefni to the New   World.    It  does   little   more   than

REVIEW ARTICLES



mention the discoveries at L'Anse au Meadows, which are reserved for another book.  But  this  one  amounts  to  a  com­ panion  volume  for  W estviking, in  that  it deals intensively  with  Greenland  circum­ stances,  with  exploration, settlement, and the  sao-year-old  question:   why  did  the Norse  in  Greenland  disappear  so  com­ pletely,  with  only  ruins  and   graves  left behind? Ingstad  presents  his own answer, as well  as portraying a people  somewhat different from the conventional view of hard-drinking,   quarrelsome  Norse   sea­ raiders  who were  the world's  scourge for a period  of more  than  200  years.
But again  the claims made  on the dust
jacket for the book seem a little excessive, though   not   as  exuberant  as  those   for W estviking. Many  sagas are quoted,  most of  them   unknown   to  me,  that   of  the "Foster-Brothers"  being  especially  inter­ esting.  It  is a guided  tour  of the  ancient  Eastern  and   Western  Settlements  of Greenland,   and    occasionally    becomes much   too  discursive.   Detail   is  piled  on
 detail,  as if Ingstad   had  bodily  removed all  the   intervening  years,  one   by  one, from   Viking   graves  in  the   permafrost. Even some of their clothing has been preserved  by cold.  And  magical  runes  of the  period,  carved   on  wood  and  stone, persist  into  the  twentieth century.
As for  Vinland, I would  like  to  think Ingstad's site at  Epaves  Bay near  the vil­ lage  of  L'Anse   au   Meadows   in   New­ foundland  was  the  land   of   grapes  and wheat.  But I doubt  if any modern  achae­ ologist  can   establish   that.  The   ancient  Norse  language  is  relatively  as remote  as Greek   Linear   B,   and   subject   to  many interpretations.  The Atlantic  coastal  area where   the  Vikings   ranged   is  vast,  and while  there  are   Norse  church   ruins  in Greenland, none  have  been found  in  the New   World.   And   it   is  interesting to speculate  that  Vinland was discovered  by pagans,  and  that  the  last  leap  across the sea from Greenland was too much for a Christian god to accomplish  before the square-pooped sailing ships of Columbus.






CENTENNIAL TIDE
 


George Woodcock and

W.H.New




As CENTENNIAL YEAR gathers momentum, the  output of historical Canadiana, both original  publications and reprints,   grows  into  a  flood  rather than a flow. To  review everything that  arrives these  days  is  impossible;   to  miss   notic­ ing  all  the  new  and  reprinted  books  an exceptional  year    is   making   available  would  mean  withholding  attention  from
 many useful and some distinguished volumes. As a special expedient, not often to  be  repeated, we  can  only  resort  to  a brief   summarizing  of   those   that   have come  to  our  attention.
Among  the original  volumes one of the most   ambitiously    compendious  is  The
Canadians, IB67-1967, edited  by J. M. S.
Careless   and   R.   Craig   Brown    (Mac-

REVIEW ARTICLES



millan,  $9.95) . In  more than  8oo pages, eleven   historians   begin   by  providing a co-operative history of Canada's first century,    and,   in   a   second   half   which shifts  our  viewpoint to the  present,  nine­ teen  other   experts   study  aspects  of  our social,  political   and   cultural   life,  from religion  to foreign  affairs,  from  sports  to painting. A good  centennial bargain.
Another  compendium, more  ambitious
in its production-it contains  some first­ rate  Swiss colour  printing-is  a volume of   the   same   type,   Canada,  edited   by Earle  Toppings (Ryerson  Press, $Ig.g5). The   photographs,  by  many   hands,   are well-chosen  to give a sense of the  variety of  modern    Canadian  life;   Canada,  in fact,  concentrates on  the  country  today, and   its  seventeen   essays,  including  one by the  editor  of Canadian Literature, embrace  not  merely  studies  of  the  land in  general,   its  people  and  its  plant   and animal   life,  but  also  specific  surveys  of the  provinces  and  regions.
The Prime  Ministers  of  Canada  1867-
1967 (Canyon Press) consists of brief biographies of  each  of  the  fourteen national    leaders   since Confederation, by Christopher Ondaatje and  Robert Catherwood.  The   book  is  an  introduc­ tory   one,  quite   readable  to  those  with little  familiarity  with   the  country's  his­ tory.  Though  constrained  by space,  it  is most   illuminating  on   the   least   known men -Abbott,   Thompson,  Bowell  and Tupper-but  its  oversimplifications be­ come  obvious  when  it  contends  with  the complexities of  Laurier and  John  Diefen­  baker.
Quebec, the  Revolutionary Age,  IJ6o-
9I   by  Hilda  Neatby    (McClelland & Stewart, $8.50), describes the  troubled Canadian  years   after   the   British   con­ quest.   It is  Volume   6  of  the  excellent

68
 Canadian Centenary History  of Canada, and  well  up  to  the  general  standard of the  series.
The   Old  Stones  of  Kingston: Its Buildings     before    1867,   by    Margaret Angus  (University of Toronto, $7.50) consists  mainly  of  pleasant   photographs with  brief introduction and  terse  explan­ atory  notes;  architectural  historians   will probably  form  its most  appreciative pub­  lic, and  there  are  few  of them.
A Mountain and a City by Marjorie Freeman  Campbell  (McClelland  &  Ste­ wart,  $8.50)   is a  history  of  Hamilton, a dense   chronicle    so  packed   with   detail and  so  devoid  of   perspective  that   deep local   loyalties   are   probably   needed    to read  it  with  comfort.
Patterns of Canada,edited by William   J.
Megill   (Ryerson   Press)  anthologizes the best   articles   from   the   Canadian   Geo­ graphical  Journal  over  the  past  35  years, and  brings  to light  a wealth  of  forgotten and  interesting material; the  bias,  curi­  ously,  is  historical   rather   than   geogra­  phical.
In   La   Salle    (Longmans Canada,
$g.5o),  E.  B.  Osler   tells  us  all  that   is known,   and   most   that   is  likely  to   be known  of  that   arrogant, mercenary and yet strangely  visionary  man,  Rene-Robert Cavelier,   who   called   himself   La   Salle and  who  first explored  the  Mississippi  to the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  It is an  admirable piece of biographical reconstruction, greatly superior to Osler's excessively popularized  biography  of  Louis  Riel.
The   good   background  guide   to  any
part   of  Canada  is  hard   to  find;   there are  lists  of  hotels  and  motels,  but  there is little  that  prepares one  for  the  feel  of a place.  In  brief form  this is what  Derek Patmore  and   Marjorie  Whitelaw   pro­ vide   in   Canada    (General   Publishing,

REVIEW ARTICLES



$r.95),  a   brightly    written    paperback which   deliberately    avoids   giving   mere facts   available    elsewhere   and   concen­ trates  on  providing enough  basic history for  each   province   to  give  the  visitor  a sufficient   perspective   to   realize   that   in
I 967  he  is  arriving  in  a  land   that  has long  ceased  to  be either  new or  raw.
Most   welcome   of  the   many   reprints
'Shieh   the   year   brings   is  F.  H.  Arm­ strong's    abridgement  of   Henry    Scad­  ding's  Toronto of Old (Oxford University Press,  $7.50),  the  highly  anecdotal  his­ tory   of   Toronto,   published    in    I873, which  Scadding  wrote  in  the  form  of  a series  of  walks  along   the  streets  of  the city  and  along  its  lake  and  river  banks. It is a fine source  book, deeply mined  by later   historians,    and   also   a   charming narrative projecting a personality  which Professor  Armstrong justly compares with that   of  Gilbert   White.
Macdonald to Pearson: The Prime Ministers  of Canada  by Bruce  Hutchison (Longmans, $6.so), might  be taken  for  a new book; in fact it is a condensed  reprint of his Mr.  Prime  Minister, tailored  to fit into  Longman's Canadian Pageant  Series. The  criticisms  made  of Mr.  Prime Minis­ ter in  this  journal  on  its first  appearance apply  equally  to the  new  version.
 Donald  Creighton's inimitable John  A. Macdonald  is  now  available,  both  vol­ umes, in paperback at  $2.95 each  (Mac­ millan) . Other recent  paperback  reprints  of  valuable   books  in  the  field  of   Cana­ dian   history   include    W.   L.   Morton's The  Progressive  Party  in  Canada   (Uni­ versity  of  Toronto,  $2.95),  Peter  Frue­  chen's  Book  of  the  Eskimos,  the  best  of all  accounts   of   actual   long-term   living among    the    Canadian   and    Greenland Eskimo   (Fawcett,  95¢),  Donald    Mac­  Kay's   history  of   the    Hudson's   Bay Company-The  Honourable Company (McClelland  &  Stewart,  95¢),  Eileen Jenness's  The  Indian Tribes   of  Canada (mainly   a   condensation  of   Diamond Jenness's  The  Indians  of	Canada) (Ryerson,    $r.95),  Helen  Creighton's pioneering    volume,   Songs   and   Ballads of  Nova  Scotia  (General Publishing Com­ pany,  $2.95), and  Bern  Anderson's The Life   and   Voyages  of    Captain    George Vancouver   (University   of   Toronto,
$2.95), told with expert  knowledge  by an
American   naval  hydrographer. McClelland   &   Stewart's   paperback
New  Canadian  Library  has  also  added four titles in celebration: Gabrielle Roy's minor    but    welcome   Street    of   Riches ( $ r .50),   appreciatively   introduced   by






n1chanb aset &  company, 1nc.


Scholarly  Books  in the Arts  and  Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS   ANGELES,  DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



Brandon Conran; Stephen  Leacock's Short   Circuits   ($1.65)    (for  reading   on transcontinental  railways) ;  and   two  af­ firmations  of all  the  glory  and  grandeur that  was the  War of I 8 I 2 : John Richard­ son's   Wacousta   ($2.50)    and    William Dunlop's Tiger  Dunlop's  Upper  Canada ($1.75),  both   edited   by   Carl   Klinck.  The  Leacock  volume  is  one  of the  more interesting of  his  minor  works -tonally quite   different  from   Literary   Lapses,  a
fact  which  D.  J. Dooley  sympathetically
examines in his introduction. Professor Klinck   is  another  sympathetic  critic­ whose enthusiasm is so infectious  that  we almost   overlook   what   he   himself   calls "the   emotional  ordeal   of   Charles   De Haldimar  and   of  the  fainting  heroines whom    he   resembles."    Most   twentieth century  readers  must   still   approach W acousta  with  tongue  lodged  in  cheek, however,  so that Richardson will seem to have  used  his  cliches  more  cleverly  than he  probably  intended.
McClelland &  Stewart's other   quality
paperback  series,  the  Carleton  Library, seems  to  be veering  away  from  reprints. Of  the  six titles with  which  it celebrated centennial  mid-year, only  one  is  a  pre­ viously  published   book,  Fred   Landon's Western   Ontario    and	the    American Frontier  ( $3·95) . Two are original works, W.  H.  Kesterton's  timely  and  extremely  useful  History  of  Journalism  in  Canada ($3.65),   and   John   Porter's   Canadian Social   Structure,  a  Statistical    Outline ($2.95),  strictly  a  non-book,  but  full  of essential   data   for   those  who  intend   to study  the  basic  framework  of  Canadian society.  Finally,  there  are  three  compila­ tions  of  documents and  essays,  collected
 with  an  obvious  eye to  the  trapped  aca­ demic    public,    Church    and    State    in Canada,  I627-1867, edited   by  John   S. Moir   ($2.95), Approaches   to  Canadian Economic    History,    edited    by    W.   T. Easterbrook and  M. H. Watkins  ($2.95), and   Historical   Essays   on   the   Atlantic Provinces,    edited    by    G.    A.   Rawlyk
($3·55)·
More   ambitious  than   the  paperbacks
are  the handsome facsimile volumes pub­ lished  by  the  Johnson   Reprint  Corpora­ tion   in   their   series,   Canadiana  Before I867,  planned  in  co-operation  with  the Toronto  Public  Library.   Some  of  these volumes  have  already   been  reviewed  at length   in   our   columns.   Others  which have since come to hand  are John  West's The   Substance   of  a  Journal   during   a Residence  at  the  Red  River  Colony ($9.00), a  clergyman's account of  Hud­ son's   Bay  Company  life   between   I82o and   I823,   and   A   Concise   Account   of North   America     ($9.00)     by   Robert Rogers,  one  of the  rare  books to give an on-the-spot   account   of   both   European and  Indian life in British  North  America  during  the interregnum between  the con­ quest  of  Canada and  the  rebellion  of the older  colonies.
Among   the   less  classifiable   but   still highly   readable  reprints  of  Canadiana are  Mary  Hiemstra's Gully  Farm   (Mc­ Clelland   &  Stewart,  95¢),  a  vivid  and sometimes   moving    account   of    British tenderfeet  pioneering on  the  Saskatche­ wan  prairies   in  I903,  and  Emily  Carr's last  book,  Growing   Pains,  in  which  she tells  of  her   development  and   her  final acceptance as  a  painter   (Clarke,   Irwin,
$I.90).

INSIDE LEONARD COHEN


George Bowering


LEONARD  COHEN,  Parasites of  Heaven.  McClelland &  Stewart. Cloth    $4.50, paper
$2.50.


NoBODY  WHO  IS  INTERESTED in  Canadian  books  can   be  unaware  of the Leonard Cohen  boom.  McClelland &
Stewart has  printed   or  reprinted five of
his  six  books  in  the  last  year,  and   now a more or less matched set of his poetry books sits in  book  stores,  Leonard's face seen in different moods on their covers. Obviously   the  Canadian  Publishers   be­ lieve two things:  Cohen  has something to say;  Cohen   will  sell.  Apparently Cohen has  both  things  in  mind  too, and  people arc worried  that the selling might  intrude upon   the  saying.  Leonard  Cohen   could be::-ome the  Jewish  Kahlil  Gibran. That's the   danger   when   a  poet   has  as  much myth  hung   on  himself  as  in  his  poetry.
Cohen  is  good   enough  and   smart
enough   to   proceed   despite   the   photo­ graphs  and  magazine  articles.  He is, after all  (or  before  all), a  serious  writer  with a vision of himself  that  is  more  enduring than  kodak.  His  work  as  a  whole  shows that.    The  newest   book,   Parasites   of Heaven, is his  least  important, but  in  it one  may   find   his  greatest   strengths   as surely   as  his   most   obvious   tricks   and shortcuts.
I  think   that   the  reason  for  any  con­
fusion  and   blurring  lies  in  the  kind   of thing  Cohen   is trying  to  do.  He  is  ulti­ mate   lyric   man.   That  means   that   he shows any  range  of his  discoveries, mun­  dane  to metaphysical, always through his consciousness   of   singular   self.  In   that
 way he is the epitome  of Western  man, formed  by post-Hellenic European modes of perception and  thinking. The  difficulty comes in confusing  the discovery through self  with   the   apprehension  of  identity, that   awful   put-on.   Cohen   is  aware   of that  lure:
Leonard hasn't been  the  same since  he wandered from  his name
Some  people  don't  realize  the  problem the  poet  has  here,  or  how  he  is facing it. (Hence TV journalists, Beryl Fox and Pierre Berton, are utterly nonplussed by Cohen's  words in interviews.)   A reviewer in Toronto complained that  the first  per­ son singular  appears too often  in Cohen's book.  But  that   is  not  a  valid  objection  concerning lyric  poetry,  whether  Shake­ speare's   sonnets   or   Cohen's   songs.  One  might   as  well   object   that   there   is  too much   of  the  past  in  an  epic.  The   first person is singular -each is -and  hence worth   singing   of.   The    2yd  Psalm   is written  that  way,  but  it  is surely  as uni­ versal  as any  poem  may  be.
In  fact  it  is when  Cohen  is too  much
aware  of the  gallery  outside  the  self that the   poetry   goes  sour.   The   poetry   goes sour  often  enough   in  this  book  to  give the impression  that  we hold here a gather­ ing  of  loose  ends  and   leftovers  to  pad out  the core of really good  poetry  written  since  Flowers  for  Hitler.  Cohen  leftovers, especially   for   fans,  are  of  course  more palatable than  some  large  meals  served

REVIEW ARTICLES



up  by other  Canadian poets.  I  list some of the faults  I see/hear:
Terrible   adolescent   effects    and/or
cliches.  "True, the  mind   bleeds  a  little, but if you don't part your hair too deep nobody  will  mention   it."   (p.  I 2)
Dependence   on   similes   for   making
startling images.  The  simile is the  easiest way to write,  being a reason-oriented and self-indulgent  practice   more   than   a  re­ sponsive  one.  This  trick  is probably  one reason  why  kids  of  all  ages  pick  up  on Cohen's  poetry  so easily.
Letting the will spin off surreal  images,
rather than  finding  surreal  images  by putting the  will to sleep.  (p. I 3)
Cutting  prose   lines   into   sandwiches with recurrent sentences to make the semblance  of lyric order.  (p.  I4)
Mock-profundity.  (p.  24)
Using  the  tricks of rhetoric (politician's repeated  syntax,   e.g.)   rather  than   the magic  of  the  cantor.
BUT.  There are some poems here that will  always  be among  Cohen's best,  and thus  will be around  for a long  time.  One of these is "Two  went  to sleep."  (p.  35) It is  composed   beautifully  (by)   for  the voice  of  incantation -literal sense  ends and   the  spirits  of  the  age  are  liberated by its images,  till
 One  carried matches one  climbed a beehive one  sold  an  earphone one shot  a German
and  one better  hears  the whole poem and its resonances.  Not  to see whether  Cohen has his facts  straight-that is irrelevant, finally-but  to   know   whether   he   has been   at   all   transported  where   words, properly  served,  may  go. James  Reid,  in The  Open   Letter  5,  has  the  feeling,  and says of poetry-making words:   "They are approximations of  a  true  state  of affairs in some hidden  place  of the imagination, and  do not represent  at all that  involving world  of  blunt  and  irreducible fact  that we in the  past  have  aimed  at  revealing." So  Cohen   is  usually  at  his  best  when
he plays with the main old magic-calling form,  the  ballad.  In the  ballad  he is  im­ pelled  by  his  self's  dance  to  a  measure,  not  his intellect's groping  with  the  looser forms  where  the  content, i.e.  the  whole verbal  experience, has  not  proven  to  be that  interesting to the second  person,  i.e. the   reader.  This   is   also  why   Cohen's guitar  songs are good-they  accept  help from  authentic muses, and  don't  give his intellect  time   to   show   off   its   own  creations.
Keep    looking    at   that    belly-button, Leonard Cohen.   It  got  angel  dust  in  it.




QUITE  A GIRL
 


David Watmough



EMILY  CARR,  Hundreds and  Thousands. The  journal of Emily  Carr.  Clarke, Irwin.
$ro.oo.


As A  PAINTER Emily Carr  can be  neatly  niched:  lyric  representational­ Ism  touched   to  surrealism   under   the  in-

72
 fluence  of  Lawren   Harris.   Sturdy   work, one  might   say,  with  a  persistent   vision of  local  landscape  and   regional   matter

REVIEW ARTICLES



such  as Indian totem  poles and  the  per­ vasive  presence  of  the  coniferous  forest. Above   all,   there   is  consistency.   Rarely  do  the   paintings  and   drawings   tail  off into   mediocrity,  rarely   do   they   break through a final  restriction  of  imaginative limitation  to speak  cosmically  or  beyond the  touchstones   of   a  familiar   local  con­ text.
But her writing?  It is a long time since I  have  experienced   such  a  rushing, breathless  exploration of the entire  gamut of prose-from a tough and wiry quality that    neatly    nails   reality,    to   a   gushy naivete   that   recalls  the  very  worst  kind of  amateur  lady  writer  who  is all  itchy ardour    to   evoke  the   grand   solemnities of life.
Yet  when  all  is said  and  done,  when the  last  protest  against  the  arch  phrase, coy stance  and  self-conscious  attitudiniz­ ing in anthropomorphic  terms before  the beauties   of  nature  has  been  duly  regis­ tered,  there  remains  a down-to-earthness, a  so-eminent  humanity  and  an  intimate tearing   away   of  the   veils  that   conceal any   artist's   true   anguish,   that   there   is finally  only  room  for  admiration.
In    several    respects    Hundreds     and
Thousands recalls for  me the  journals  of Denton    Welch    that    appeared   shortly after  the Second  World  War.  To  be sure the  custodian of  a  white  rat,  a  monkey and   a  batch   of  little  Griffon  Bruxellois terriers  does  not  for one  moment  display the   rounded    perfection    of   the   wholly natural writer   that  Denton   Welch  does. Yet  given  the  restrictions   of  this  nature
-the   blatant  anthropomorphisms, the
inability or refusal to probe the depth of introspection-Hundreds  and    Thou­ sands  yet  manages   to  yield  a  great  deal that  is fascinating and  pleasurable while largely  irrelevant  to  the  fact  its  author
 was  also  a  painter. Denton  Welch,  too, of  course,  was  a  painter.  But  whereas, for    the    young    and    crippled    Anglo­ American,  writing  was  the  primary acti­ vity,   with    this   Canadian    Spinster,   a diarist  here  in  her  riper  years, the  word­  business  took  very  much  second  place  to her  pursuit  of  a  visual  aesthetic.
What   emerges,  however,  is  that   both of them unconsciously offer the reader a marvellous  sense of  period.   With  Welch it  was  wartime  Britain,   blackout,  gaso­ line   rationing  and   the   problems   of   a sweet-tooth    confronting   an   econom1c austerity.
For   Victoria's  Emily,   the   world   of
1927-1941 was largely an absentee affair. Maybe  there  are more references  to inter­ national  sheenanigans than  Jane  Austen ever  permitted to  cast  shadows  over  her ceuvre.  But  all  the  same  the  provincial capital   that   lurches  in  and  out  of  focus through   the  pages  of  this  diary  is cosy, smug, familiar, and  altogether reassuring.
So for  that  matter are  the  contours  of
the  author's life  as  she  sets  them  down
-whether in breathless hyperbole, bitchi­ ness  or,   just  occasionally,    in   that   real strength   of  language that   certainly   be­ trays  an exceptional imagination if not  a skilled literary  practitioner.
I have  the  impression   that   Hundreds and Thousands might  well find greater favour in the United  Kingdom than  in Canada. For  amateurism is still  a  frag­ rance    in    Britain    whereas    in    North  America  it is observed  as merely a stench.  Too,   Emily   Carr's  thoughts   and   argu­  ments,    whether    religious,    a:sthetic    or purely social, are  essentially  Anglo-Saxon in   their   matter.  This  means  something parochial   rather than  racial,  but  it  does necessitate,  I think,  a  basic  empathy for her   between-wars   kind   of  environment

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  a  tucked   away  corner   of  the  British Empire to feel the nuances of her anguish and  to appreciate the fierce flame of determination to sustain  a  high  doctrine of artistic  pursuit  in a mundane world  of non-comprehension  and  basic  uninterest in  the  affairs  of the  imagination.
Hundreds and  Thousands is not  a notebook  of Emily  Carr: artist.  And  be­ cause it is arbitrary in the selection  of its entries,  devoid  of an  index  and  bereft  of any kind of accompanying essay "setting" her  in  her  proper   context,  it  will  be  of no avail  to the  grimmer  kind  of  scholar­  ship  that   demands such  a   priori factors  in  order  that  the  machinery  of criticism might  run  smoothly.
I do not mean  to be unnecessarily  per­ verse,  however,  when  I suggest  that  be­ cause  it  patently  cannot  serve  the  Emily Carr  Industry, it has a more honest  posi­ tion  as  a  piece  of  literary  creation. For
 better  or for  worse it  has to stand  on  its own  two  feet  as an  evocation  of  person, place  and   period -for  those  of  us  for whom  the  ancillary   data  is lacking.
As  it  is,  I think   these   journals,  lop­ sided  in style, lopsided  in focus, and  lop­ sided  in   chronological   presentation though   they  may   be,  do  in  fact   stand  up   as   a   fascinating   literary   chronicle. The   woman   who  emerges  through  this literary  portrait is nonetheless  remarkable even  though   her  feet  were  of  clay,  her surroundings   mundane,  and   her   vision sometimes commonplace.
Indeed, because of these things, her sui generis features stand  out yet more  badly. There is something to chuckle  over  legi­ timately   in  her  snippety  comments  fol­ lowed    so   swiftly   by    her   mea    culpa guilt-offerings. There  is   pathos,   too,  in her  struggle   to  grasp  the  inner   core  of reality,  after  flirting with  theosophy  and




FOOLS OF TIME

Studies in Shakespearean Tragedy

NORTHROP FRYE

With   his  view   of   three   types   of  tragedy, the   tragedy  of  order,  the   tragedy  of   pas­ sion,   and    the    tragedy   of   isolation,   Dr. Frye    offers   a   distinguished  and   incisive analysis    of   Shakespearean   tragedy.   Fools of Time  will  be  welcomed  by all  who  are familiar  with   Dr.   Frye's  keen   critical  in­ sight   and   who  value   his  work  as  a  means toward  a  deeper  understanding of  English literature.    $4.95

University  of Toronto Press




74

REVIEW ARTICLES



dallying  with  what  seems  a  pretty  tepid and  Erastian-tinged  Anglicanism.
Emily Carr, this record reveals, knew herself  better  than  most  of us know  our­ selves,  and   torn   between   affront  at  her period  for  its   (relative)   modernity  and an  equal   determination  to  paint   herself free  of straightjackets  wrought  from  de­ moded  idioms,  she  experienced   a  loneli­ ness that  can  surely  find  current echo.
The  ingredients are a frustrated female,
 surrounded  by  her   pets,  living  out   the artist's   life  in  a  stuffy  provincial capital between  the  wars.  The  finished  article  is a   compelling    journal   that   manages   to push   sophistication  to   the   wings   and wrings   genuine   if  containable  emotions in   steady   succession   from   the   reader. Emily  was  all  kinds  of  painter,  but  as rough   and   ready   diarist   her  vivid   por­ trait   declares  she  was  also  quite  a  girl.




POLITICS AND BEDFELLOWS

W.H.New


MICHAEL SHELDON,  The  Personnel Man.  McClelland & Stewart. $4.95.
PETER    TAYLOR,   Watcha Gonna   Do  Boy ... Watcha  Gonna   Be?  McClelland  &
Stewart. $2.50.
DAVID  LEWIS STEIN, Scratch  One  Dreamer. McClelland & Stewart. $2.50. PHILIP  DEANE, A Time   for Treason.  Longmans.


PoLITICS EXISTS at  different levels in society-from government affairs  to  private  ones-and  several  re­ cent  Canadian novels  have  a  "political" entanglement as their  focus.  The  respec­ tive   treatments,  as  one   would   expect,  vary  widely.  Philip  Deane's A  Time  for Treason, for  example,  is a cross between Ian   Fleming   and   Father  Knows   Best, with  neither  strain  benefitting noticeably  from   the   match.  The   story   is  set   in Washington,  D.C.,   at   a   time   when   a peace mission from  Red China  is visiting; a murder occurs;  a Cuban  subplot  is  re­ vealed;    rightwing  tempers   flare.   Then Mayne,  the hero, goes visiting; sex occurs; the    hero's    innocent   daughter   is   kid­ napped; and  divine  justice,  with  the  as­ sistance  of  the  C.I.A.,  closes  the   book. The  trouble  is that,  in spite  of some nice
 touches  of irony in both  the dialogue  and the   plot,  we  are   never  involved   in  the characters  or  particularly  caught   up  in the  situation. Another book  which  deals with  kidnappings   and    communism, Charles   Israel's  The   Hostages,  is  with all its weaknesses of characterization  still much   more  arresting than  this  one-it captures the  mind   by  its  chilling  credi­ bility.  On  the  other  hand,  an  Ian  Flem­ ing  book has  the  power  to suspend  one's disbelief   by  its  very   incredibility-the imaginative  extravagance that   it  reveals is enough  to  take  a reader  willingly on a vicarious  iconoclastic  adventure. A Time for  Treason, unfortunately, does  neither, but  it  will  fill  a  couple   of  hours   with easy  reading.
Rather  more  dependant on  irony  for
its  effect  is  Michael   Sheldon's The   Per-

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



sonnel   Man,  which   has   as  its  central figure  AI Strutt, the  personnel  man  of a ubiquitous Quebec communications com­ pany.   When   Earle   Blackwood,  an  em­ ployee,  dies  under   sordid  circumstances, Strutt  is  sent  out  as  widow-visitor   with official  company  condolences.  The   chief worry,  however,  is  not  the  widow's  feel­ ings but the company's reputation. When  Audrey    Blackwood     ("Earle   said   you were a phoney") turns out to be conscious of this and  somewhat  of a tartar to boot, the   character  study   deepens   and   what there  is of a  plot  thickens  almost  imper­ ceptibly.   Strutt  takes  the   rebuff   as  the threat  of   a   personal/personnel   defeat,  and  his subsequent sexual conquest of the woman  is part  of his attempt to refurbish  himself  as an  executive  and  as a  private  individual.  He is married, of course,  and there  is  also  a  rival  for  the  attentions of the  tart  Audrey.  But  conquest   and   ego turn   into  love,  and  the  conflict  between Reputation and  Individuality is on.
The   possibilities  for  irony   here  seem
endless,  and   Sheldon,   as  he  does  in  his earlier  works  The   Gilded  Rule  and  The U nmelting  Pot- perhaps   he  could  call his next  book The  Unwavering  Title?­ capitalizes   on  many   of   them.  His  lan­ guage  is  deliberately  controlled, so  that  the  overall   tenor  of   the  book  is  one  of understatement. AI Strutt always tries "to  sound   casual"   even   in   situations  that  jeopardize  his  company  image.  When  he at   one   point   discovers   Audrey   taking  part  in  a  placard-carrying demonstration in  front  of  an  anonymous consulate, for example,  one  part   of  him  is  horrified; the  other  simply  responds  "Good   even­ ing,  Audrey." This  contrast  between  per­ sonal  and  personnel,  or  between  internal response   and   external    reaction,   is  the central  reason,  apparently, for  the  book's
 existence.  At its best, certainly,  the  work has  the  power  to  delight  its  readers; it should  also have  the power to move them, but  unfortunately the  characters  remain on  the  page,  unvivified  and  artificial.
It is difficult to say why the book seems
ultimately so unsuccessful. Part  of the reason is possibly in the wit itself. The dialogue   seems  not   stilted   so  much   as staged -as  though  the   whole   thing would   make   a  nice  scenario,   in  which the verbal interchanges would entertain while the  audience visually perceived  the background. Sheldon   tries  to  make  it  a novel,  however,  by adding an  expose  of Big Business and  the French-English con­ flict  in  Quebec. In  theory  these  are  re­ lated  to the  whole  question  of  being  true  to one's  identity  and  not  worrying  about  a  thing  like  reputation,  and  as  a  theory  this  may  be  sound.  But  the  background is either  too full  to let  us  concentrate on Strutt alone  or  not  full  enough  to let  us see  him  mirrored  by  his  society  and   to see them  both  as  politically  related  units. In  a sense Sheldon should  have  rewritten Middlemarch or condensed  it for  MGM, but  he has done  neither, and  we have, instead,  yet another slim volume.
The   two   paperback  books   by   Peter
Taylor   and  David   Lewis  Stein  are  also published    by   McClelland   &    Stewart, those  whimsical   Canadian  publishers   of the   very   good   and   the   extraordinarily bad, who seem to rely on  word-of-mouth for  the  distribution of  their   wares.  The first  thing  to  be  noticed  is that  the  pub­ lishers   have   at   last   designed   the   book covers  in  a  lively,  attractive  (and  sale­ able)   way, for  which  they are  to be con­ gratulated.  Unfortunately  they   have upped   the   price   of   the   volumes   to   a ridiculous    $2.50   which   will   surely   do nothing  but  limit  their  sales again.  What

REVIEW ARTICLES



they  need  to do is publish  works that  are of a  little  more  consistent  quality,  spend a little  more  on  advertising to let  people know regularly what they're bringing out (what   blindness   has  directed   that   they refuse to send such information to Cana­ dian  university   teachers,  for  example?), and  arrange for  their  works  to be distri­  buted    regularly    in   England   and    the United   States.  Sales  and  quality  should go   up,   and   prices   should   soon   come down.   They   used  to  be  The  Canadian publisher,  but  they're rapidly being super­  seded  by  both   Oxford   and   Macmillan. From  the  outside at  least,  that  competi­ tion  seems  a  welcome  thing.   But  where did  all  the  dynamism   go?
The  title  of  Peter  Taylor's book, then,
W atcha  Canna   Do Boy . .. W atcha Can­ na Be?, can be an ironically reflexive ques­ tion  asked  of  the  publishers   themselves, but   it   is  also,   in   the   book,   implicitly asked of everyone. In particular it's asked of  the  seventeen-year-old narrator,  who leaves  his  home   after   high  school  and, uncertain of  committing himself  to  uni­ versity  (or  whatever)  and  filled  with his grandfather's stories of  railroading, heads off  to  work  on  a  railroad gang  in  New Brunswick.  What he finds out is that  he's
 naive,  but  he  acquires  V.D.,  friends, ex­ perience,  and  knowledge,  and  learns  that  "That railroad sure  ain't  what  it  used to be."  Nor,  of  course,  is he.  The  novel  is a   Bildungsroman,  written   almost   as  a diary,   detailing  moments  in  the  life  of the  young  Peter  William-not so much
a  retelling  of  events  as  it  is an  attempt
to  make  concrete   the  stages  in  the  boy­ man's  growth.  What  we see is a series of responses,  some  of  them  funny,  others  a little   pathetic,  and   we  come  to  under­ stand  something   of  the  conflict  between  his inclination to  rebel  and  his brooding  conscience.   Pervading   all  is  a  distinct  liveliness   of   style   that   is  welcome   in Canadian  fiction,  but  somehow  vaguely incongruous in  a book  this slight.
It does  not  even  come  close,  that   is,
to   the   quality   of  David   Lewis   Stein's Scratch  One  Dreamer, which  is  unques­ tionably   the  finest  novel  published   here so  far   this  year.  This   is  a  story  about  conflict,  conscience,  rebellion,   and   poli­ tics  which   actually   recreates   and   con­ tends  with  the  contemporary scene.  The characters are alive,  the  prose is handled well,  the  ideas  develop   rapidly   but   are probed  in some  depth, and  the  narrative conflict   is   wholly   absorbing.   The   story





Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



77

REVIEW ARTICLES



concerns Joe Fried, middle-class Jewish liberal  individualist, whose family and friends  are committed to political  activity
-in  the form  of unionism  in one gener­
ation  and  peace  marches  in the  next.  Joe wants   simply   to   be  free   of  his  ties  to them,  but  he soon discovers that  freedom means  something other   than   the  avoid­ ance   of  commitment.  He  has  been  an­  tagonistic   to  his  uncle,  the  union   hero, and  impatient  too  with  his  cousin,  who is  leading    a   peace   march   against    an Ontario missile base. In  thinking  that  he
1s  faithful to  himself,  he says:

the   code   of   a   private  individual ... Psl the   exact    opposite  of   the   kind    of   thing that   Leo's   always  stood  for.  Leo's   a  public man  and  everything's on  the  surface, every­ thing's  for   show.    What  matters   most   is what   people   think   and   how  much  you  can  influence  them.    What  you   do   in   private, whether or  not  you  keep  your  word, doesn't really   matter  as  long   as  you  look   good   to the  people   out  front. Inside the  party, Leo was  a  hatchet man,  did  you  know  that? ... I'm   saying   it  doesn't  matter  what   happens out   front,  as  long   as   I  hold   true    to  my own   personal  code.

Boag,  his  mistress,  promptly  gives him  a C- and   orders   more   booze.  And  Stein manages    to   maintain  this   balance   be­ tween   the   sentimental  and   the   comic, with  the  result  that  he has written a fine novel.
Only  the  immediate conflict,  however,
is  tentatively resolved.  Joe  finds  that  he is  influenced    both   by  his  environment
 and   his  personal   responses  to  it,  which leads  him  in  turn   to  commit  himself  to a political  action  that,  done, seems  point­ less, but, not done,  would rack his private  conscience   and   deny   him   the   kind   of maturity  he  thinks   he's  already  found.  It's   a  much   more  credible  investigation of a  political  event  than  Deane's  book, a much   more   sensitive   study   of   growth  and    even   more   warmly  human   than  Watcha  Canna  Do   (though the  central  question  is the same  one) , and  as a pre­  sentation  of   a   moment   of  crisis  in  the life  of  an   individual,  it  is  much   more tense and  alive than  The  Personnel Man. Stein's  book, too, has a level beyond  that  of   the   individual  characters,  but   here the  conflict  is  not  resolved,  it  is simply presented. What   happens if  you  scratch a  dreamer?  Do   you  find  an   ability   to
act ... or  words ... or  vision ... or  noth­ ing?  And  who  is  the  dreamer  anyway?  Is  it  the  individualist who  thinks  he can exist  apart  from   others -or  the  group  leader   who   equally   erroneously   thinks that  his group  is  acting  as a single  unit?  David   Lewis  Stein   has  created   a  book that  explores  these  ideas  and  that  speaks directly   to   his  generation; what   makes it doubly good is that  it also speaks about his  generation and,  in  a sympathetic, in­ volving,  and   concrete  way,  about   some of  the  problems   that   any  person   today will meet  if he is -in  the  broadest  sense
-politically  alive.




UNIVERSE
BEFORE CREATION

DIANE  GIGUERE,  Whirlpool. Trans. by  Charles
Fullman. McClelland &  Stewart. $2.50.

THIS  IMPRESSIVE   NOVELLA  is  not  really about  a young woman  who has an idyllic affair  with  a married man  while on  holi­ day  in  the  Caribbean,  an  affair  which goes  dead   when   they  attempt  to  trans­  plant   it  to  their   native  Montreal.  The  book is not  about  that outline  of its plot, nor  even  about  the  guilt  which  helps  to ruin  the year's  prolongation of the  affair. Miss  Giguere  writes  with   authentic in­ sight  about  the  psychology  of  adultery, but  not even that  is her true subject.  The  man,  for  instance,  is hardly  a  felt  pres­ ence  in  the  book.  Rather it  is about  the psychic  situation of  Nathalie, the  young woman  of the  triangle,  the  self-absorbed narrator of her  desperate situation.
In  other  words,  this  book is subjective or visionary fiction, as evidenced  by terms such as dream, fairy tale, enchantment, transformation, occult,  and  magic  sprin­ kled  throughout. Whirlpool is,  then,  an embodiment of archetypal  experience, of possession  by  and  conflict  with  the  un­ conscious  and  suprahuman forces within.  But,  through  liberal   use  of   natural im­ agery,  the  author is able  to  render  both the  physical  and  the spiritual sides of her heroine's   struggle.  On the  island  of  St. Croix,   for   instance,   Nathalie   becomes sensual  under  the  sun,  but  moves  in  a different   direction    under   the   moon   at night.
 Bats ... tiny   magicians,  sowing   disorder  in my  soul,  driving my  imagination to  distrac­ tion,  and   turning my  eyes  towards  the  sea, a  sea   which,  stripped  of  its   daytime  eu­  phoria, now  seemed  aloof  and  mysterious. I had  a  strange premonition  that  it  enclosed  a  vast   realm   peopled   by   statues  and   the figure-heads of  ships; that  somewhere back of  those   waters   lay   the   other  side   of  the world; and   that   in  their  dark   depths, in­  habited  by   formless,   whale-like  mammals, there  reigned the  great  hush  of the  universe before  creation.
The threat and attraction of this world become  acute  when  she returns  to  Mon­ treal  to  find  herself  almost  out  of  touch with  reality.  "In my dreams,  I  visualized ancient   cities  on  the  banks  of   the  Nile, and   I  followed   the   river   until   I  came upon tall pyramids. I questioned sphinxes. They  informed me  that   I  was of Sume­ rian    origin    and   a   spinner    by   trade. Others, again,  told  me  I was the  daugh­ ter  of  a  galley  slave."  The   crux  of  the tale   is   Nathalie's  inability   to   find   an identity.
On   one  level  the  fault   lies  with   her
mother, who had  encouraged her when young  to  write  fairy  tales.  The  heroines of these tales became  the strongest  source of identity  for a daughter whose mother lacked   contact  with   reality   and   after­ wards went  temporarily mad. So Nathalie grows  up  able  to  imagine  herself  as Ra­  punzel,  waiting  to  be  rescued,  or  as sev­ eral  other  enchanted  heroines  of western culture. Finally  she  realizes,  "Any  char­  acter   was  free   to  find  a  home  in  me, since I  had  no  identity  of my own."
Her  lover, Yves, for instance,  holds his
wife  up  as  virginal   and  feels  driven   to insist  that   Nathalie is  promiscuous.   She takes on this identity  too, but only as a pretense until one day, suddenly freed of inertia,  she  runs   to  a  park   where   she accepts  the  advances  of a stranger. Their love-making  over,  he  offers  her  money

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



which she does not refuse, realizing the impossibility of appearing to him in any other role. But this accepted  mis-identity paradoxically frees her;  she is able  to tell her  lover  of  the  episode.  As "proof" of her  depraved nature, the  incident causes a  break   with   Yves,  further freeing   her from  a deadening enchantment.
Although this  break  is hopeful,  Nath­ alie still  has  not  solved  her  deeper  prob­  lem of identity. She  remains caught in a disorienting   polarization  similar   to   the one  Yves  forced  on  her.  We  have  seen one  pole  in  the  mother's seductively  ir­ rational   dreaminess.  The   other   pole  is less  discussed  but  perhaps equally  strong, the  father's  reductively analytic   realism. The mother divorces  the father after  her bout  of insanity; an aging  mistress finally moves out  when  the father starts  leaving her  alone  with  Nathalie. By the end,  the reader   has  begun  to  suspect  that  Nath­ alie's  only  chance  for  rebirth  will  be  to move  out   like  the  others.   In  any  case, Miss Giguere has rendered in  rich images and  scenes an  important  crisis  in  the  life of the  psyche.                               E.  B.  GOSE



CANADIAN COD

JOHN  PETER, Take  HiJJnds  at Winter. Double- day.  $5-95·
Take   Hands  at  Winter, like  Mr.  Peter's first   novel   (Along   That  Coast,   I964), presents  two  very sharply  defined  groups of  characters set  within  the  structure of an  emerging nationalism and  against  the background of a larger  humanism. In  his first  book,  this  division  of character into the  whites  and  blacks  (with  the  further sub-division  of  white  into  humanist and exploiter)  together  with  the fatalistic de-

8o
 velopment  which  complements the failure of  the  larger   humanism  is effective  be­ cause   the   terms   of  reference   of   Along That  Coast   are   those  of  the   primitive
VlSIOn:
Right down   that coast,  from   the  Tugela to  Algoa   Bay  and   beyond,  the   rhythm  of human  awareness adapts  itself  to  the   thud and   thunder  and   hissing   of  the   surf,   the lift    and    flash   of   the    breakers,   the    raw smell  of the  sea.
But   this   second   novel  is  a  different kettle  of fish entirely,  and  Canadian  cod at  that.   In  brief,  it  is  the  account   of  a young  British  immigrant, David   Gilpin, his relationship with another immigrant, Andrew Dacre, and the growing strain between the two accentuated by Gilpin's affection  for Dacre's neglected  wife Mar­ garet   and   child   Jenny,   further  compli­  cated  by  the  allures  of  Dacre's  mistress, a  leggy  blonde  co-ed,  Kirsten  Thorgeir­ son. Should  this be considered inadequate complication  for   a   new   immigrant  on his first year in Canada,  the  jacket  blurb adds  that   this  account  of  Gilpin's   entry into   adult    life   parallels   "the   growing  pains  of   Canada,  a  young  and  vigorous nation   just  now  entering  upon   its  cen­ tennial  year."
Reading through this novel, the general
impression   is  that    of   a   rousing   good story  complete  with   sex  scene,  pathetic death,  some   straightforward  structural symbolism  and  the  unexpected bonus  of a   rather  tender    love   story,   reassuring enough   for  even  the  coldest  of  winters. But  I  don't   think  that  this  book  will  be read  primarily  for its decription of  Cana­ dian  issues or for its thoughtful  presenta­ tion  of  character. The  major  characters of Take  Hands  at Winter can  be divided right  down  the middle  into the good guys and   the   bad  ones;  only  the  terms   that  Mr.  Peter  prefers  are  those  of  the  givers

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and the takers.  Gilpin  tells us that  he and
?vfargaret are "givers"  who can only hope for  "happiness". Dacre,  in  opposition, is a  "taker" who  "gets  his enjoyment from taking".  Using   this   schemata,  we   can see that  the industrialist Courtland is also a taker  and that  Kirsten  Thorgeirson and Tom    Lavern     (an   ex-TV    personality) haYe definite  functions within  the  novel to  elaborate the  nature of  what  it  is  to take  and  to  be taken.
This   schematic  division  of  character,
effecti,·e  within   the   primitive   vision  of Along  That Coast,  is not  nearly  so  con­ vincing  for  the  more  variegated  world  of community in-fighting  in prairie Canada. The  objection  is not so much  that people
:of  this  general  type  don't  exist,  but  that Peter's   whites    are   too   white   and   his blacks  too black.  Margaret's major  sin is that    she   doesn't    clean   up   the   second bathroom,   and   Gilpin's   that    he   can't hold his liquor.  Dacre,  on the other  hand, is  an   unqualified  monster;  even   cosily abed  with  his  mistress  he  is not  allowed to  be  anvthing but  nasty.  There are  all sorts of thematic and  psychological  justi­ fications  that   might   be  put  forward  for this  last  scene,  but  such  objections  don't  alter   the  general   case  that   unmitigated character consistency  is  as  unconvincing as it  is unnatural. At  best,  this  is a sim­ plistic  stmctnre.   At  worst,  some  of  the novel's  action   and   dialogue   seem  to  be contri,-ccl to fit; even the  status  of immi­  grants  in  Canada is  brought   into   play. The  se,-eral  clashes  between  immigrants Gilpin  and   Dacre   point   out   rather  too clearly  the  difTerence  between   the  fine, upstanding  Gilpin   and   the  selfish,  ego­ centric   Dacre.   The   inevitable  bridge   to Canadiana  is  provided   by   Jeff   Loder,  Gilpin's   friend   from  Alberta:   "Andrew isn't   only  Andrev\'.   He's   every  English-
 man  who  ever  put  a Canadian back  up. This  overbearing stuff.  Insentience".
This  last word  is also a reminder that Peter's   descriptions   of   Canadian  issues don't   always  ring  true  in  the  sense that those of MacLennan do. It's sometimes as simple  a  matter  as  syntax  and   diction; "insentience", for  example,  is an  English word   that    hasn't    been   naturalized  in Canada. As such, it's not the sort of word that   an   Albertan  would   use  for  coffee talk  before  a  hockey  game-even  sup­ posing  he had  once  taught at  university. Something  very  similar   occurs   later   in this  same   chapter  when   Gilpin   sees  at the   game   "a   clock   assuring   him   that PLAYER'S PLEASE". But  this  isn't,  of course,   the   plain   statement  that   immi­ grant  Gilpin  assumes, but also an implicit  request  for  a pack  of cigarettes as  would be   recognized   by   any   advertising-con­ scious North  American. It may be unfair  to  assign  the  perceptions  of  a  character to  those  of   his  creator, but  this  passage catches  the eye as a clear example  of that  slight   angling-off   in   perspective   which undercuts   a   full   acceptance  of   Take Hands at Winter's discussion of Canadian problems.
Then  too,   Mr.   Peter   is  running  up
against   the   fact   that   ever   since   Mac­ Lennan's Two Solitudes  it may no longer be  possible  simply  to  insert  passages  of talk  about   Canadian issues  into  a  novel and  expect  for  them   to  be  accepted.   If such  material doesn't  grow  naturally out of  character  and   action   or   isn't   given imaginative  treatment   as   is,   say,   the Montreal of  Brian  Moore's  Ginger  Cof­  fey, the  undigested  Canadiana sticks out suspiciously like a  Centennial concession. Even  if we could  accept  this  material at face value,  there is  still the further prob­  lem that  a serious discussion of Canadian

8r

BOOKS IN REVIEW



problems   is incongruous when  it  is  pre­ sented   together   with  events  that  topple over into  melodrama. Many  of the chap­  ters  in   this   book,  like   soap-opera,  end with  a resounding climax. To  take  a few examples   at   random, chapter  five  ends in  a  car  smash,  chapter six  in  a  family quarrel  and  chapter seven in a sex scene. At the conclusion  of chapter eight, Gilpin (in  Dacre's   absence)   has  brought   Mar­ garet  to  the  hospital  for  the  birth  of her second  child.  After  a long,  apprehensive wait,  Gilpin  is approached by her doctor: "There's something we  have  to  talk about".
It  is at  this  point  that  we might  logic­ ally  expect  a  fade-in   of  the  theme  song and   a  request   to  tune  in  tomorrow for the  next  instalment of this thrilling story. Not   that    there's   anything   wrong   with this  approach if  both  reader  and  writer agree  that   the  end  of  the  book  is enter­  tainment,  pure  and  simple,  but  such  an approach  is disconcerting in a novel  that  suggests   a   more   pretentious  aim.   Like
11r.   Peter's   first  novel,  Take   Hands   At
Winter  seems  to  suggest   that   the   only hope  of  genuine   happiness in  a  wintry world  crowded   with  people  who  exploit each  other  is that  larger  love which  gives of self. The  metaphor is that  of the spontaneous giving and  taking  of hands. Within    this   larger   humanist  structure, the sexuality of Kirsten  and Dacre is introduced only to be rejected  ("Not that fair  field ...")  and  the  ego-centric  con­ cern  with  self  which  characterizes  both Dacre   and   Courtland  is  left  behind  in the   discovery   of   Tom   Lavern.   In   his extremity,  like  Lear's   "poor   Tom",  he affirms  the  bond  of  common  humanity: "humanity   was   waiting,   stretching  out its  hand  to him,  waiting  for  him  to  take it."  But  again,  just  as the  novel seems to
 be commg through there  is a last-ditch attempt  at  life,  closed  melodramatically by a slamming door,  and  we are  back  to the  thriller  again.
More   than   anything else,  to  me  this
novel seems  to lack  that  sense of human complexity  and  indirection which  Forster and  Lawrence present  so  well:   fatalism may   be   appropriate  for   the   primitive vision, coincidence the  mainstay  of  soap­ opera,  but  a  series  of climaxes  catapult­ ing   towards    a   neatly   modified   happy  ending   is  an   inadequate   vehicle   for   a novel that  attempts a serious  representa­ tion  of  life. 	SANDRA DJWA



CHILCOTIN TALE

PAUL   ST.   PIERRE,   Breaking  Smith's  Quarter
Horse. Ryerson. $3-95·
FoR  THE SECOND TIME Paul  St.  Pierre has turned one of the popular half-time programmes of his I965 Cariboo  Country television  series into  what  must  be called a short novel for want of an alternative classification -even  in  face  of  the  au­ thor's  comment in  a  prefatory note  that  it should  be considered  as "just  one more story  out   of  Chilcotin,  where  so  many have  been told  beside the fires of so many camps."   The   difficulty   in   the   way  of judging  Breaking  Smith's  Quarter  Horse as merely  a yarn  to pass  the  time  is that  it  has  the  conflict,  plot,  and  fully  devel­ oped  characters to  meet  some of the  de­ mands   of  the   more   sophisticated  form even  if,  so  considered, its  apparent art­ lessness   exposes  a  few  narrative  short­ comings.
As a tale of St. Pierre's  mythic  Namko
Country,  that   land   west  of  the  Fraser and  separated  by it  from  the  section  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the Cariboo  whose chief town is Williams Lake,   Breaking   Smith's  Quarter   Horse possesses the  integrity   and  the  haunting strangeness   of  its  surroundings.  In   that setting  we can  accept  the  man  who "was known  as Smith," a man  whose aloofness forbids   the   greater   intimacy   of  a  first name  even  in  the  mouth   of  Norah,  his wife. We  can  accept,  too, the  struggle  of the pair  to make  a living on a poor ranch with  many  horses  but  with  only 78 head of breeding  cows at a time when  the cold economic  laws of the  world  outside indi­ cate  that  at  least I oo  cattle  are  needed for survival.  We can  accept,  likewise, the Indians of  the  region  who  drift  in  and out  of  the  story  as casually  as they  drift  in  and   out   of  the  lives  of   settlers   like Smith,    contributing   their   own   set   of values  that   conflict  disconcertingly  with those  of  the   white   man:  01  Antoine,  whose memory embraces  the final surren­ der  of  his  people  and  for  whom  present  and   past  merge,  especially  when  Smith  reminds  him  of his contract to  break,  in Indian   fashion,   a  quarter  horse  which seems to  have  possibilities;  Gabriel  Jim­  myboy,   himself   a  victim   of  the   white man's  greed  but  guilty,  none  the  less, of killing a neighbour  in a senseless drunken rage;  and  Walter  Charlie  who  has come to  terms  with  white  society and  is inter­ ested  solely  in  his  own  welfare   to  the extent   that   he  draws   from   Smith   the rebuke,  "Who is  going  to  help  Indians in  this  world  if  Indians don't   help  one another?"
All this is well so long as the action unfolds  in  and  around   Smith's   ranch  in one  or  other   of  the  two  seasons  of  the Namko   year:   Winter   and   August.  The tale  falls  off  into  slapstick,  however,  as St.   Pierre's   touch   seems  to  desert   him with  the  transfer  of its locale  to the  out-
 side world represented by Williams Lake with its symbols of social authority: bank, Government  Agency, courthouse,  and police  station.  In  failing  thus,  St.  Pierre is  not  alone.  Following   Ralph  Connor, other  Canadian writers  have created self­ contained communities only to have them  broken    into    by   pressure    from    "The Front," to  use the  Glengarry  man's  own term   for  the   outside.   It  is   noteworthy that  St.  Pierre  avoided  this  pitfall  in  his first adaptation, Boss of the Namko Drive, for   here   the   tale   ends  with   the   cattle  crossing the Fraser  and entering the hold­  ing grounds  so that  the  external  world  is barely felt except  in  the  presence  of that  minor  figure,  the  cattle  buyer.
Smith's   contacts   with  everyday  life in
Williams   Lake,   then,   are   presented   in terms  of farce  and,  as a result,  the  repre­ sentatives   of  society  are  reduced  almost to the  level of buffoons.  This  is  the  most serious  weakness  in  St.  Pierre's  work  but a lesser failing  falls to be noted  likewise: the  amount  of  authorial  comment  that  breaks  into   the  narrative  from   time  to time,  perhaps for  the  purpose  of stretch­ ing it to novel length. If this is the reason, it is a pity for it  weakens  the  flow of the tale, as for  instance  when  the  description of 01  Antoine  is held  up  for  two  pages by a kind of text-book  disquisition  on the native peoples  of  the  Chilcotin. Perhaps the  answer   might   be  to  put   two  such tales together  if the exigencies of  publish­ ing  demand   a  volume  of  certain length so  that   the  constituent  items  would   be novelle, similar  to Hemingway's The  Old Man  and  the  Sea.
One final word. The adverse criticism mentioned  here is not to be taken  as con­ demnation.   Readers  will   surely   enjoy Breaking   Smith's  Quarter   Horse,  for  it has the power  to engage  the feelings and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to move them; the weaknesses mentioned, however,  prevent  a good work from  being a great  one.                         DAVID  MACAREE



BRANDY AND SELF-ABASEMENT


sCOTT   SYMONs,   Place   d'Armes.  McClelland
& Stewart.  $2.50.

AMONG THE ITEMS which  the protagonist of Place d'Armes cannot  suffer  are Mon­ treal  Westmount types, Toronto Rosedale  types,  college  fraternity  types,  La  Place des  Arts,  the  Rapido,  professors  of Eng­  lish Literature, middle-class  French Can­  adians,   lower-class    French    Canadians, banks,   Ph.D.'s,  career   women,   Musak, Methodists,   Presbyterians,  girls,   Angli­ cans,    businessmen,    politicians,    patates  frites,  Americans,  the new Canadian flag, and   himself.  On   the  positive  side  there is Marc  de  Bourgogne  brandy,  which  he adores,  and  three  French-Canadian male prostitutes,  who  are  necessary  props  for the   ritual   of   self-abasement  which    is theme  and substance  of the novel.
Concerning a man  from  Toronto who
wanders around Montreal's  Place d'Armes for twenty-one days, visiting restaurants, shops and  the Notre  Dame Church and  dining  with various acquain­ tances,  the  story  is told  by  interspersing three  methods: a  third-person narrative, the  protagonist's  notes for  a novel, and  a first-person  narrative from  the  protagon­ ist's  point  of view.  Whatever might  have been  the  author's purpose  in  using  these three   methods,   certainly   the   technique does   not   provide   stylistic   or   thematic variety,  except  for  the  different  kinds  of
 printer's  type.  The   book  is  in  fact  dis­ tinguished by four  different  kinds of  type, as  well  as  by photographs, maps,  repro­ ductions of  handwritten  comments  and a number  of other  devices.
Description  of  the  area   of  Montreal
around  Place   d'Armes   occupies  a  good deal  of  the  author's attention. Like  most English-Canadian  novelists who  have dealt    with    French    Canada,   however, Symons  fails  to  capture  an  atmosphere and  provides  no  more  than  a superficial glimpse at a small segment of the French­ Canadian people.  But  then  his main  pur­  pose, apparently, is to provide an analysis of the partial, complete and imminent cas­ tration of various segments of the English­  speaking  Canadian  population. Promoted by   traditions,  the    Establishment   and English-Canadian   Cubes   (4D,   or   is  it
3D?)   in  general,  castration is the  novel's basic thematic idea,  the  most  fascinating aspect  of  which  is a  hint  on  the  part  of the   hero   that   the   affliction  may  some­ times  be  cured,  or  at  least  alleviated.
The  book contains  stated  or thinly dis­
guised  references   to  a  number  of  Cana­ dian  figures,  including Douglas  Le  Pan, Hubert Aquin,  Jean  Drapeau  and  Pierre Berton.   The   author   develops   his   own system of measuring such figures in terms of  quantity of   testicle-"Hees has  one, Roblin    IY4,   Robarts  IY2-but    never uses them."
Stylistically   Place  d' Armes   is   experi­
mental.    The    author   appears  to   have sought   the  kind  of  freshness  and  frank­ ness  of   expression   which   characterizes Leonard  Cohen's  excellent  novel  Beauti­  ful   Losers.   But   while   Cohen's  book dazzles  and  hypnotizes  the  reader,  rising often  to   Faulknerian   heights,  Place  d' Armes  jars and  bores. Coinages  such  as "fteshment,    cripplement,    thunderment,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fundament,  gigglement,   buttockry,   hot­ doggeral,   homosexation" appear  to  sub­ tract  rather than  add to linguistic vitality. By  far   the  most  effective  passages  in Symons'  novel  are  the  satirical   descrip­  tions  of  English  Canadians in  operation
-the law  student  on  the  Rapido, the
fraternity buck  (blondbeeste)  in  the  res­ taurant, the  two  well-heeled  couples in a French-Canadian   antique   shop.   These are   the   people   with   whom   the   author seems most at home, and  yet he obviously gets  a  kick  out   of  detesting   them.   In effect,  the  impression  one  gets  from  this novel  is  that   the   narrator  is  patterned after  the  sick  white  liberal  described   by James   Baldwin   and   others -a   person whose   exaggerated  guilt   complex   and sense of the  sins of his  fathers  hopelessly distorts  his vision  and  translates into  the psychological   need   to   see  himself   de­ graded.
One   wishes   that    Scott   Symons   had given  more  space  to  his  Marc  de  Bour­ gogne,   which    IS      indeed    an   excellent brandy.                      RONALD  SUTHERLAND




POSSESSED BY DEATH


RALPH    GUSTAFSON,    Sift    in    an   Hourglass.
McClelland  &  Stewart. Cloth   $4-50,  paper
$2-50.

RALPH GusTAFSON is,  like  Webster, "much  possessed  by  death", and   when he sees the "skull beneath the skin" he expresses  the  vision  with  Jacobean  den­ sity  and  Browningesque  gusto.  Thus his work  has,  from  time  to  time,  a  deliber­  ately  idiosyncratic  anti-modernity.
 Stand
Among  deathbeds as though among  heroes, Pausing in winter along  windy  corridors
With   the   knowledge ahead  of  us,  to  wrap our  throats.

It  is not only  the  odd  diction,  the  inclu­ sion   of   such   obsolete   or   near-obsolete words as "pelf", "fesses" "Bubs"  "clomb" and   such  contractions  as  "I'the coffin" but    also   the   combination  of   staccato  effects   and   rhetorical  questions   which give  the  verse  its  character. In  a  poem of  farewell to Ned  Pratt we get

Dashedly caught
Up  with  you, have  they,  Ned,  that tide, Those  monuments of ocean? complied, Have you?  Gone,  eh?  By God....

In  Dirge  for a Penny  Whistle we have:

Edith, and  he of the  clerical cut, Stiff,  laid  out,  are  they,
Dead,
In  a box?
0 monstrous monstrous! Frost  and  e.e.?
They  too, they  too?
Laid  in a row, Corruption!
Dost  'ou  smell  it? Fug.
Stuff  nostrils. Usury.   Usury.
Only  Pound to go?

Here   the  quotations and   near  quota­ tions  turn  the  poem  at  times  almost  into collage.  In  other   places,  too,  Gustafson  employs  pastiche,   puns,  parody,   with   a dexterity   that  is often  breathtaking.
This   does  sometimes   result   in  works which amount to literary  games, but the games  Gustafson   plays  have  the  urgency and   point  of  ritual,   and  enable  him,  in a voice magnified  by the masks he wears, to express certainties and  paradoxes which   overarch  the   centuries.   Thus   in THE EXHORT AT!ON he,  recognizing his own  adopted disguise, cries

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Oh  I would  be less hortative As my critics ask, but  less The man....

The  poem  ends  by suggesting  that  pres­ sure  of  awareness  of  mortality  results  in JOy.

By grief  I mean  joy.    I talk To  you flippantly in  paradox. Understanding is lack  of death.

The  understanding of mortality, of grief, is joy in  the  way  that  Yeats's  makers  m Lapis   Lazuli   were   gay.   This   gaiety   IS forced  upon  us by that

long  wait  for  the
trump with  nothing else to do but  rot.  The best nilly must  put  a false
face  on  the  matter, think of heaven....

The   joy here  expressed  is exuberant and at  times  grotesque.   The   judgement  day is comical

Poked  from  their  coffins, Risen  at  the  trump
Of  the  topmost angels  blue-faced
Goggle-eyed blowing  their  bum-splitting brass,
The coughed-up dead,
Stitchless, poor  danglers, driven, Huddle their  tiers  of doom.

The  criticism  was made  of  Milton,  as it could  also  have  been  made  of Browning and  Dylan  Thomas, that  he "writ  no language", and  Gustafson  could  be  simi­ larly  accused.   Frequently one  feels  as if the  whole  grotesque,  exuberant, drama­ tic, vivid, cluttered, poetic  world  belongs to some  nowhere  land.  Nevertheless,  this news  from  nowhere  is always  entertain­ ing  and  sometimes  disturbingly relevant. We  have  few whole-hogging rhetoricians these   days,   and,   of   recent   years,   only Djuna Barnes  in  her  somewhat   tiresome The  Antiphon has  attempted  the  Jaco­ bean  mode.  Sift  in an Hourglass  is  better

86
 than  The  Antiphon,  though  just   as tricksy. It does, in its outlook, share some of  the  bizarre  and  vigorous  quality  of  a number    of   younger   British   poets,   and reminds   me,  in  its  wit  and   texture, of early   Lowell   and   Berryman.    However one  tries  to  place  it,  however,  it  refuses to be killed  by qualification. Exuberance, vigour,   passion   remain.  This   could   be, in    its   violent    opposition     to    current fashion,  an  influential and  valuable  col­ lection. 	ROBIN SKELTON




RIGHT WORDS
IN THE VACUUM


RAYMOND  FRASER,   Poems   for  the  Mirimichi.
Poverty Press.  Unpriced.
JOHN   GRUBE, Sunday   Afternoon   at  the   To­
ronto  Art  Gallery. Fiddlehead. so cents.
CYRIL  MCCOLGAN,  A  Spoonful   of Ashes.  Pan­
dora's Box,  Victoria. $r.so.
RENALD sHOOFLER,  Small  Change.  Delta.
$r.so.
WHEN oNE READS  in  Raymond Fraser's
"The Birds"

It must  be  nice  to  be a  bird
From  some of their  speech  that I have  heard

one wishes that Fraser had listened more closely  to   the   "musical  words"   of  the birds, so that  he might  have informed  his work more frequently with the musicality of  poetry.  Of  course,  there  is a  place  at which the line between poetry and prose becomes  indistinct in  the  area  of  poetic prose and  free verse, but even taking  this into account it would  be difficult sensibly to defend  the  prosy and  prosaic  pieces in this collection,  like "Baptism", as poetry. And  Poems  for the  Mirimichi suffers not only from  this  technical   defect,  but  also

THE  OXFORD COMPANION TO  CANADIAN  HISTORY AND  LITERATURE
by Norah  Story

MODERN CANADIAN   VERSE
edited  by A. ]. M. Smith

THE  MODERN CENTURY
by Northrop Frye

POEMS:  NEW  AND  COLLECTED
by  A.  ]. M. Smith

PHRASES FROM ORPHEUS
by D. G.  Jones

AS  IS
by Raymond  Souster

WORD  FROM NEW  FRANCE
The Selected  Letters of Marie  de !'Incarnation, Translated and edited  by Joyce Marshall

THE WAY  IN  AND  OUT Science and Religion  Reconciled, by F. W. Waters

SALVATION! 0 THE  JOYFUL SOUND The Selected  Writings of John Carroll,  edited  by John  Webster  Grant

THE  REPUBLIC OF  CHILDHOOD
A Critical Guide to Canadian Children's Literature  in English, by Sheila  Egoff




Oxford  University  Press

BOOKS IN REVIEW



from   the   apparent  failure   to  come   to terms with a basic tenet of poetry:  a poet must  search  for  himself  in a  public  way, as Whitman does, or his work becomes tedious, embarrassing. In "Baptism"; "On My Balcony  at Belleisle";  "June I3"; "Montreal Morning"; and  "An  Army  of One", in which  the  brave speaker  carries the    standard   of   himself    against    the
"numerous I and   fierce"   enemy   (which
turns  out  to be "the  devouring stomach  I of  social  amorphosity"), Fraser  searches for  himself in such  a personal,  immature
way  that   one  hesitates  to  share  the  ex­ perience  with  him.  He so far  shows little of  the  genius  he  has  seen  "humbled  by half-wits" in  "Poem  at  Twenty-one", al­ though  occasionally,  as  in  "Withdrawal" and   "Dialogue",  he   finds   the   imagery with  which   to  reach  the  reader. At  his best he  does  not  speak  through the  grill of  the  confessional,  and   makes  a  poem sufficiently  good  to  cause  the  reader   to wish the  rest were  better.
John Grube fares notably better in his Sunday  Afternoon  at  the   Art   Gallery. There is dross  in  the  volume,  as  in  the second stanza  of the two-stanza  "Purged" and  the  final  "Haiku," which  in  its  en­ tirety  falls flat:   "The Emperor of  Japan writes  poetry  for  his own  pleasure." But there  are  little  gems, as  well, such  as "A French  Canadian  Girl"  and   "Assimila­  tion"; Grube  is notably  good  in  the  pas­ sages of  understated  deadliness,  as in  "A Portrait" and  the first stanza of "Purged", which  later  loses its way:
A portly gentleman in  gold-rimmed spectacles,
trickling blood,
stooping with  difficulty  to  pick  up  his morning paper
and  tucking his  napkin in  at  the  neck gently  bashes  in  the  skull  of his egg
and  contemplates the  buttered toast  like a  baby.

88
 More  gems, please, Mr.  Grube.
The   difficulty  with  Cyril  McColgan's A  Spoonful  of Ashes,  promising  as  it  is (how  any  poet  must  despise  having  his work called "promising"), is that  it seems disappointingly derivative; one  feels  one must  wait impatiently for the  poet  to de­ velop more of his own idiom. Present are ee cummings's  lower-case "i" and  the  un­ mistakable  voice  of  Dylan   Thomas  in such lines as:

my  hairy   adam-sin unshorn
was  scraped by  baptismal blades from  my  soul; with  wild  tirades
the  bishop  of birth shook me from  the womb and  wiped  me  clean  to  hear  the  book
of  doom.

McColgan speaks of:

The bones  caught in  the  clock cross at  the  end  of  the  final  hour: nothing escapes  the  symbol.
the  crack  in  the  skull
issues slender lengths of light sounding fathoms deep....

"Burning the  roses in  the  field ... " and
"Intangible  moodiness   after   the   storm
..."  reflect   the   strong   Imagistic  influ­ ence  upon   the  work,  an  influence  gen­ erally  so  well  treated  that  it  becomes  a strength of  the  volume. If McColgan is Imagistic, so  be  it,  but  one  wants  more McColgan  and  fewer  echoes of others  in the  poems.
Renald   Shoofler's   Small   Change   is  a
collection of poems over which the poet retains  excellent  control  of whatever  im­ agery  is appropriate to the  subjects  with which  he deals,  from  the  well-structured "Torpedo"  poem,  which  achieves  a  de­ liberate  insensitivity  ("0,  I am  not  Pru­  frock, ... I have  wheels!"), to  the  deli­ cate  "Anonymous Legacy"  piece,  which touches  the  sense  of  tradition.  There  is little that  needs to be said about  Small Change   because  it  speaks  so  eloquently

BOOKS IN REVIEW



for itself; it ought to be widely read, and Messrs. Fraser,  Grube, and  McColgan might  take seriously Shoofl.er's "Nature Abhors a Vacuum":

You  have  a  thought
And  you're struck dumb;
put  words  into   that and  it's  a  poem.

The  thing  is, of course,  to  put  the  right
words into  that  vacuum.
ALAN  R.   SHUCARD



A HEAVEN OF CONTROVERSY

DONALD STEPHENs,   Bliss  Carman.   Burns    &
MacEachern.  $4.75.

DoNALD STEPHENs'   monograph  pro­ pounds   the  following   thesis  to  account for  the  nature of Bliss Carman's  poetry: (I)  because  of  his  loyalist  heritage   and New    Brunswick    background,  Carman was  a  conservative  in  outlook,   a  tradi­ tionalist  whose essential techniques, ideas, and  attitudes never changed  after  the publication  of  Low  Tide   on  Grand   Pre in  I 893;  ( 2)  because of Carman's almost pathological dependence on other  people, he borrowed  his habits  and  his ideas from those   around  him   wherever   he   might happen to  be;  ( 3)  Carman had  no  true self  with   which   to  confront  the  world, either   as  man  or  writer; he  had  rather a series of sometimes  contradictory masks which  he  had  fortuitously assumed  as  a result   of  his  background,  reading,   and the  events  of  his life.
Such  a  thesis,  if  lucidly  set  forth   and
applied  rigorously, might  do much  to explain  the apparent inconsistencies  in thought and  mood  and  the  unevennesses
 in  style  that   occur   in  Carman's  work. Donald   Stephens   is  to  be  congratulated for having thought of it and for having investigated its possibilities. The  result  of his  investigation, however,  as  it  appears in  Bliss Carman, appears to  me  to  be at times  contradictory  and   confusing.   The work abounds  in statements on various aspects of Carman's personality  and  work that  are  difficult  to  reconcile.
For example,  Stephens writes of Car- man's  personality  as follows:
The  myth    and    the   mask   have   to   stand strong  and   alone   because  there   is  no  man behind  them.    (p.   37)
Behind   them    all    [the  marks]  is  a   man
who  is  part   and   parcel of  them.   (p.  39)
When   Stephens turns   to  a  considera- tion  of Carman's craftsmanship, he  is equally  contradictory:

Unfortunately  his   [Morris']  main   fault  is too  much   fluency   and   the   intensity  of  his poetry     is   watered   down    with    excessive words.   Much  can   be   said   about  Carman in  the  same  way.   (p.   I I9)
From   Christina  Rossetti Carman  borrowed the   careful  workmanship  and   exquisite melody    so   evident  in   some   of   his   short
lyrics;  he learned from her the rule of compression.  (p.   I I8)

When  Stephens deals with the question of  Carman's  borrowing from  others  and with   that   of  artistic   integrity,   the  same kind  of inconsistency  occurs.  The contra­ dictions,    however,    become    most    pro­ nounced   in  Chapter III,  where  Donald  Stephens'  honest,   and   often   acute,   ex­ amination  of   the   development  and  characteristics   of    each   of    Carman's volumes   brings  him   into  direct   conflict with  one  of  the  cardinal assumptions  of his  hypothesis,  namely,  that  there  should be  no growth  or  development after  Low Tide   on  Grand  Pre. Grudgingly, he  ad­ mits  change   and  development  and  then in  a  subsequent   statement  denies  them.

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



For example,  he is forced to admit  that Carman's contributions to  the  V agabon­ dia  volumes  "tend   to  be  tinged  with  his deeper  philosophy  and  melancholy", but on   the   very   next   page   he   contradicts this statement, "His poetry  becomes more a  picture of  the  landscape than  a  state­  ment   of   philosophy."  He   finds   an   at­  tempt,  only   partially   successful,  in   the five-volume   series  of  The Pipes  of  Pan to  integrate  various   aspects  of  modern life into  a mythopoeic structure-some­ thing  certainly   that  had  not  occurred in the earlier Grand Pre volume. At the conclusion  of his account of the second volume  of this series, The  Green  Book  of the  Bards,  Donald   Stephens writes:

Any  chances  of  breaking  out  of  the  mold were   now   gone.   He   could   now  only   re­ iterate   the  concepts   that   he  had   received in the past.  (p. 67)

He  then  immediately turns  to a new  de­ velopment in  Carman's work,  his  treat­ ment  of   love   in   Songs  of    the   Sea Children, which  shows "an  individuality that   is  refreshing ... a   maturity ... a keener  vision."
Following    a   cursory    description   of Songs  from a Northern Garden, Stephens remarks,  "But  it is with  this volume  that familiarity sets in with  the  reader  of Carman. From   now  on  there  would  al­ ways  be  echoes  of  an   earlier   Carman; with  Songs  of the  Sea  Children  the  bolt had  been  shot."
Three  pages  later,   Stephens  is  faith­ fully   grappling  with   the   originality  of Carman's treatment of the  Sappho frag­  ments.
From  the  above,  it  becomes  apparent that   Stephens'  main   general   hypotheses with   respect   to  Carman  are   not  estab­ lished  in  this  book.  On  one  point  alone is Stephens consistent  and  firm, and  that

go
 is  that   Carman  never  changed   because he was a traditionalist and from Frederic­ ton.  He  seems  completely  unaware that  this  hypothesis  is in  direct  contradiction to his third  hypothesis,  that of Carman's being necessarily affected by his surround­ ings and  his friends. Through the greater  part  of his poetic  life, these surroundings and  friends  were  not  of Fredericton, but of  places   quite   unlike-Boston,  Phila­ delphia, and  New  York.
Had    Stephens  applied    the   logic   of
"Occam's  razor"   to  his  thesis  and   dis­ carded  it  after  investigation, had  he con­ tented  himself  with  a descriptive analysis of the  publications of Carman and a sum­ mary  of  his  life-both  areas  in  which his insights  are  often  sharp  and  valuable
-he would  have  produced  a more  con­
vincing   and   consistent   book.  He  would not, however,  have  produced  so stimulat­ ing  a  one   to  read,  or  to  write.  In   the words of Browning's "Andrea del Sarto", "A man's  reach should  exceed his grasp,/ Or  what's a  heaven  for?"  I predict   for Bliss  Carman  a  heaven   of  controversy.
FRED  COGSWELL



ORWELL'S WORLD

GEORGE   WOODCOCK,     The    Crystal   Spirit:  a study    of    George    Orwell.  Clarke,    Irwin.
$10.00.

MR.  WooncocK   met   Orwell   in   1942, after  a heated  debate  which  they carried on   in   the   Partisan   Review   concerning the English pacifists. They became and remained  friends   during  the  last  seven years of Orwell's life, a period  which provides   the   material  for   Part   One   of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



this  book,  which   the   Preface   warns   us is not a biography, but a "critical study". Selected   passages  from   Orwell's  letters to Woodcock, and reminiscences of their conversations are  used to outline  Orwell's political  attitudes, which  were  often  ap­ parently   contradictory. In the second and longest section of the  book these attitudes are  traced  through the  novels, which  are shown  to  share  a  single  major  theme­ the  evils  of  a  class-divided   society.
What  Woodcock  means  by warning  us
that   his  book  may  be  called  a  "critical study"  only  "if  one  interprets that  term in   the   free   way  Orwell   himself  would have  sanctioned"  gradually  become  ap­ parent.  The   approach  to  the   novels  is essentially   thematic,  with   an   emphasis  on  the  political  beliefs which  the themes demonstrate.  The   alienated   hero   (who reappears in  various   forms)   attempting to escape  from  the  class to  which  he be­ longs  and   always  failing,  and   recurrent motifs  such  as  the  boot  in  the  face,  are shown   to  be  central   to  Orwell's  world view. There are some sensitive comments  on  particular scenes,  and  positive  judge­ ments   about   the   relative   merits   of  the novels,  all  of   which,   including  Animal  Farm and  Nineteen Eighty-Four, are seen as  demonstrations of  the  self-destructive nature  of   caste   systems.  Woodcock   is particularly  good   on   Animal    Farm,   a notoriously   difficult   work   about   which to say anything sensible, and  he is surely right   in   disagreeing   with   those   critics who see Nineteen Eighty-Four as "a state­ ment  of pessimism carried  to  perversity". He  argues   that   the  novel  is  a  warning rather   than   a  prophecy,   and   that   even though   Orwell's techniques   at  times  ap­ pear  realistic,  the  verisimilitude  of detail  and   the  tone  of   the  writing  should   not mislead   the  reader, since  Orwell   was  a
 writer  within  the  moralist  tradition, and like  all  moralists   tended   to  write  fables and parables  rather than  novels. But Woodcock   says  little  about   structure  or style,  and   "contemporary critical  warn­ ings  against  the  personal  heresy  and  the intentional   fallacy"     are    dismissed    as irrelevant.
The last two sections of this study are mainly    concerned    with    Orwell's   non­ fiction,  but  continue the  discussion  of his ambivalent attitudes  towards   such  mat­  ters  as  progress   (he   was   basically  con­ servative) ;   nationalism    (he    was    a patriot) ;   population   (he   was   strongly anti-birth-control) ; imperialism (the Empire produced  some benefits and he admired  Kipling) ;   education  and   the intellectuals. Woodcock  defines Orwell finally  as  a  moralist   rather   than  a  poli­ tician,   as  an   unorthodox   socialist   who saw the  nineteenth century  as the golden age,  as a  revolutionary who  was  really  a middle-class  liberal.
The   short   fourth   section   does  make
some comments  on Orwell's style and structure, points  to his failings  in  charac­ terization,  and   remarks   on  the  lucidity  of  his  prose  (Woodcock's own  is  a  wel­ come  relief  from   the  turgidity  of  much academic writing),  but  the  volume  as  a whole  focusses  on  ideas  rather  than   on literary   techniques, an   emphasis   which will  please  some  and  no  doubt  infuriate others.
J. A. LAVIN











91

BOOKS IN REVIEW



0 GOD!
0 MONTREAL!


KATHLEEN JENKINS,  Montreal  Island   City  of the  St. Lawrence. Doubleday. $6. 75·

KATHLEEN  JENKINS, born  in  Montreal and  educated  at  McGill,  is a  former  li­ brarian at the Westmount Public Library.  Her   book,  Montreal   Island  City  of the St. Lawrence, the  second  in  Doubleday's "The Romance of Canadian City Series", chronicles   the  history  of   Montreal  from
1535 to  1965 with  scrupulous detail  and an  unfailing respect  for facts.  Unfortun­ ately though, despite  the care with  which the  subject   is treated, and  despite  some interesting  passages, Montreal Island City of  the  St.  Lawrence  is  dull,  trite,   and pedantic.
There are  several  reasons why the his­
tory fails. One of these is the style. A discussion of the progress of education in Montreal between  182 1  and  183 1  opens :
This same  decade witnessed  some  modest progress  in  education.  Ever   since  I 760,  it had   been  a  thorny subject, as  between the French Roman Catholics and  the English Protestants,  and   a   settlement  pleasing  to both,   was  not   easy  to  come   by.  Much  of the   friction  stemmed from   the   official  de­ sire  to  anglicize  the   province, which  how­ e;ver  unsuccessful  in   fact,   stirred   up   bad feelings  on  both  sides.
Trite diction,  illogical  punctuation,  mis­ placed   modifiers,   ambiguous   references,  and   awkward    sentence   structures:  all create  difficulties  both  of  reading  and  of comprehension.
Not   only   do   individual  paragraphs
jump   jerkily  along,  but  the  whole  book suffers  from   St.  Vitus'   Dance.   This   is partly due to the history's chronological organization. Chapter  g, for  example,  is titled   "168g-1 6g8"  and   covers  such  di-
 verse events as the reappointment of Frontenac as  Governor of  New  France, the  succession  of  William  and   Mary   to the  English  throne, the  war  between France  and  England in Europe,  the  Iro­ quois  hostilities   in  North   America,  the welcome  of  Frontenac to  Montreal, the French   attack   on  Schenectady,  the  de­ fense of Vercheres by Madeleine, and  the prie-dieu affair  in  Montreal.
Such  sudden   switches  of  theme  indi­ cate  another weakness in Montreal Island City  of the  St. Lawrence; this is the con­ cept of history  which  allows the historian  to chronicle  events  without interpretation and   without  regard   for   their   thematic significance.  The  material  points  clearly to an interpretation of Montreal's history as  the  centre  of,  and  symbol  for,  Cana­ dian  life from  1535  to  I965.  The  mate­ rial  also suggests a thematic organization around such  concerns  as  politics,  educa­ tion, economics,  religion, and  society.
A  thematic  organization  might   have
allowed Miss Jenkins  to map out more satisfactorily   the    development   of   the body, mind,  and soul of the "Royal Mountain".   Certainly,  it   should   have made  her  take  more  note  of some facets of  Montreal  life  which   she  almost   ig­ nores.  The   cultural  life  of   Montreal  is chiefly relegated  to a brief  section  in  the last chapter. The non-French, non-Anglo­ Saxon  Montrealers are  similarly  treated in a brief section in the last chapter. And even  though   French-speaking  Montreal­ ers  appear  throughout  the   history,   the general  impression  given by Montreal Island City  of the St.  Lawrence  is that Montreal  is   basically   an   Anglo-Saxon city after  all.
Finally,  one  finishes  Montreal   Island
City  of the  St. Lawrence   with  chagrin. Miss Jenkins'  failure  to climb  the  moun-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tain,  to  look  at  the  island,  to  watch   the St.  Lawrence,  and   to  imaginatively  re­ create  the  history  of  Montreal is  annoy­  ing,  especially  when  the  book is  part  of Doubleday's "The Romance of  Canadian Cities Series".  The  failure  is  also sad, for Montreal's story is a  romance, one of the most    challenging    and    significant    ro­ mances  in  Canadian  history.
MARY JANE  EDWARDS



GALT RECONSIDERED

w.  M.  PARKER,  Susan   Ferrier  and  John   Galt.
Longmans, Green. 2/6.

MR.  PARKER's refreshing   reappraisal  of John   Galt   (who   alone  among   the  two satirists  he  discusses,  concerns   us  here), is written with incisiveness, in a clear, comprehensive  style,  and   focuses  atten­ tion   on   Galt's   best  works,   clear   proof that   he  cannot   be  relegated   to  second class. There are  concise summaries, judi­ ciously   selected   passages   and   a   useful bibliography.
"It  was", we read, "in  Canada ... that
he  (Galt)  expended most energy in  prac­ tical affairs,  but to little purpose  as trans­  pired."  Correspondence with  the  author has   confirmed   that   "to   little   purpose" should  be understood  as  meaning "so far as  Galt's   personal   advantage  was  con­ cerned."
Again:   "He   began  by  writing  worth­ less poetry  and   plays  that  have  gone  to deserved  oblivion."   Few  would  disagree  so far  as  Galt's   plays  are  concerned. As regards   his   poetry,   the   bulk   of  which remains   unpublished, it   does   not,   ad­  mittedly,  rank   high  as  belles-lettres,  yet,
 as  a  self-analysis,  its  worth  is not  incon­
siderable.
A last point arises out of the author's viewpoint,  derived  from  Sir Walter  Scott, that  Galt  indulged   in  "a  too free  use of the  Scottish   dialect." Against   this  must be set the weighty, contrary opinions of David   Macbeth  Moir,   Galt's   first  biog­ rapher, and  S. R.  Crockett  (Introduction to the  Annals  of  the  Parish, published  by John   Grant,  Edinburgh, I936).
An otherwise  masterly  treatment of the
subject    is   concluded    with    a   warning against   the   possible  error   of  regarding Galt  as a spent  force  in literature.
H. B. TIMOTHY



NOTE FOR BIBLIOPHILES

James Douglas in California: r84r. Ed. Dorothy Blakey  Smith. Vancouver Public Library. Hard cover  $15.oo, leather $2o.oo.

ON  THE 3RD  OF December, I84o,  James Douglas left Fort  Vancouver on the Columbia with  orders  from  his superior, Dr.  John  McLoughlin, to  "proceed   with an adventure of goods to California, with the  view  jointly  of  purchasing the  pro­ duce  of  that   country   and  forwarding  a large  herd   of  livestock  by  the  overland  route   to   the   Columbia."   He   also  had "other  objects   of  a   political   nature  in view."
On  the  23rd  of  January, 184I,  he  re­ cords  laconically: "Passed  the  Puebla  de Santa Clara  in  the evening; This  though  the  largest   village   in   Calefornia."  The rest   of   his   journal,   which   must   have recorded   his  slow   return  to  Fort   Van­ couver,  has disappeared, perhaps for ever.

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The  existence  of  the  journal  has  long been known.  H.  H.  Bancroft  made refer­ ence  to  it  in  his  History   of   California
( I 886) , and  the  Bancroft  Library  trans­
cript  of it was published  in the California Historical    Society    Quarterly  for   June I 929. This  new edition,  however,  is from the   original   journal    in   the   Provincial Archives  of British  Columbia. The  intro­ duction   and  notes  have  been  beautifully handled    by   Dorothy    Blakey   Smith,   a fine scholar  and  bibliographer, who hopes that  the  general  reader  will  "find  much to   interest    and   amuse   him   in   James  Douglas's  frank  and  lively  comments  on the  men   and   manners  in  California  m
I 841."
Actually,   the   primary   importance  of the  work  is historical,  but  Douglas,  who had  a  keenly  observant   eye,  an  obvious and  a deep  appreciation of nature, and  a sense of  humour, does  make  entries  that will  please  anyone  interested in  the literature of  travel.
Finally,   any  bibliophile   will  find   this book  attractive. It was composed  in  the types of Frederick W. Goudy and the composition    was  begun   on   the   8th   of March, I965,  the  hundredth anniversary of Goudy's birth. The design, the hand setting,   and   the   printing  was  done   by Wil  Hudson, for  the  press  of  the  Van­ couver   Public   Library.   The   edition   is limited   to  500  copies  and  each  copy  is numbered. The  work  is  already  a  much desired  collector's  item.
S. E.  R.










94
 PRO CHAIN EPISODE


HuBERT AQUIN's  novel,  Prochain   Epi­ sode,  has   just  appeared  in  an   English translation by Penny  Williams,  published by  McClelland &  Stewart   ($5.00). Our  readers   are   referred   to   the   exhaustive review  of  the  original  French  version  of the   novel  by  C.  H.  Moore   which   was published   in  Canadian Literature  No. 29.





NEW WAVE:
A CORRECTION


WE APOLOGIZE  for  a  typographical error which at one point seriously changed  the sense of Ralph  Gustafson's article, "New Wave in Canadian Poetry",  Canadian Literature No. 32. In the third paragraph on page  I o, the 7th sentence  reads:  "The new formalities have as their  correct objective  the achievement of greater interference  with   the   instant   of   cogni­ tion."  The sentence   should   read:   "The new formalities have  as  their  correct  ob­ jective  the  achievement  of  greater   and swifter  immediacy   in  presenting experi­  ence;  of  minimal   interference  with   the instant  of cognition."
