$2 .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·63
Winter,1975


WILDERNESS fiND UTOPifl


Articles
BY  NORMAN NEWTON, ALLISON MITCHAM, R. D. MACDONALD, DENNIS  DUFFY, LEONARD W. SUGDEN, CAROLE GERSON
Interview
ALDEN NOWLAN BY  JOHN  METCALF

Poems
BY P. K. PAGE  AND  AL PURDY

Review Articles and  Reviews
BY TOM   MARSHALL, GEORGE WOODCOCK, FRANCES FRAZER, LEN GASPARINI, H. J. ROSENGARTEN, ANTHONY APPENZELL, DONALD STEPHENS, LINDA ROGERS, S. E. READ, LLOYD ABBEY, JACK WARWICK, ERIC  THOMPSON,  MARY JANE EDWARDS, ALEX MCKINNON, RUI AFONSO, FRASER SUTHERLAND,
JOHN R.  SORFLEET, JUDY KEELER, ROSEMARY SULLIVAN

Opinions
BY BERNARD WEBBER AND T. E. TAU SKY


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









CHANGING PATRONS






ALREADY  DEEPLY  ENGAGED in the massive task of the Dictionary of Canadian  Biography, the  University  of Toronto   Press has  now  commenced another  scheme equally vast, and in this case of international rather  than  national relevance. It is the  great  complete  English translation  of the works of Erasmus, the first of its kind, expected  to fill between forty and  forty-five volumes, and  to be published -the Press announces -at  approximately  two volumes  per  year until  the  edition  is complete  in  about  twenty  years' time. Already,  in  Saturday Night, Robert  Fulford  has made  the appropriate comments, after  surveying the magnitude  of the project, with its thirty-three  contributing scholars, located in universities the world over.

What seems  to  me  admirable-perhaps I  mean  enviable-about this  project is its assumptions. The editors  and  publishers  not only believe that  there  is a serious need  for  Erasmus in  English  right  now;  they  believe  that  there  will be a need  for a great  deal  of Erasmus in English  over  the next  three  or four  decades. More  than that,  they  believe  there  will be  a next  two decades,  and  that  there  will continue to be scholars,  universities and  libraries.

Perhaps  the one melancholy fact about the project-and Fulford  talks of this too -is that  it  constitutes  a  kind  of viaticum  on  Latin  scholarship,  which,  if not dead, is in perilous condition. Again to quote Fulford:

The   project is, of course,  uniquely  a  product of our  own  times-a  few  decades ago  it  wouldn't have  been  necessary;  scholars  would  have  assumed   that  anyone who cared  to read  Erasmus  would read him in Latin.

The first volume of the Collected  Works is entitled Correspondence of Erasmus, Letters  1 to 141; it consists of the letters written between I 484 and I soo, together

3

EDITORIAL



with  a few  replies Erasmus  received from  fellow scholars. It  is an  index  of the energy of this remarkable  man  that  his correspondence  alone will take up about twenty volumes-or half the Collected Works.
Though   time  and  fashion  have  made  the  literary  language   Erasmus  used
archaic in a world that sorely needs a similar neutral and eloquent means of communication, what  he has to say is often timeless in its implications. True,  like other  writers,  Erasmus  sometimes framed  his letters not only for the  eye of his contemporaries but  also for  that  of posterity;  he was not  above gathering  them into collections to meet the greed of the early Gutenberg  age for new publishable material.  But  modern  authors  who hoard  their correspondence  with a view to a library  sale, and  who are  not  above shaping  their  letters with a regard  for how they  will eventually  look in  print,  can  hardly  dismiss such  a  practice  as totally archaic.  And  in his less self-conscious moods, especially in the later letters in this volume, there  are  times when  Erasmus  (whom  we have too often been inclined to regard  as a titan  of pure scholarship), emerges as the prototype of the profes­ sional  writer,  the  post-mediaeval  intellectual  who  parlays  freedom  of  thought against precariousness of existence. Consider the following:

So  I entreat and   implore you,  dear  Batt,  if  you  have  a  single  spark  of  your former   affection  for  me,  to  give  your  most  earnest   consideration  to  saving  me. With   your  agreeable, easy-going  disposition,   you  possibly  believe  that   you  have left  me  well off;  however,  I  seem  to be in a worse state  of ruin  than  ever  before, since  X  offers  no  bounty, my lady  merely  extends  promises  from  day  to day,  and the  bishop  goes so far  as to turn  his back upon  me, while the abbot  bids me be of good  hope.  In  the meantime, not  a soul comes forward to give, save only X, whom I have  already squeezed  so dry,  poor  fellow,  that  he  has  not  a penny  more  to give me ... At  the  same  time,  I have  many  thoughts to  ponder; Where  shall  I  flee, without a  rag  to  my  back?  What if I fall  ill?  Granted that   nothing of  this  kind happens,  what   will  I  be  able   to  achieve  in  the  literary   field  without access  to books?  What  can  I  hope  to do  if I leave  Paris?  And  finally, what  will be  the  use of  literary  productions  if  I have   no  recognized   position   to  back   them?  Will monsters   like  the  person   I encountered at  Saint-Omer  be  able  to  laugh   at  me, calling  me a prater?

The  age of private  patronage  has gone, and  its passing has removed some of the acuter  humiliations  from the writer's life. Still, money remains a great subject in  writers'  letters,  as  in  their  conversations,  and  one could  imagine  a  modern letter very much  like that  of Erasmus with persons being replaced by institutions, with  an  impoverished   independent  publishing  house  taking  the  place  of  the squeezed-dry X, and  the CBC, the Canada  Council, and one or other provincial

4

EDITORIAL



arts council taking on the roles of "my lady", the bishop and the abbot. The  very freedom that  writers desire creates its everlasting precariousness, and  until writers accept  to be civil servants,  which one hopes they never will, they will always be asking for bread -and snapping  like Erasmus at the hand that feeds.

THE UNDUE DWELLING on violence in literature, like the undue dwelling on sex, may  appear  to  the sophisticated  a self-defeating  process, since for  them  as  readers  its  more  or  less rapid  effect is a  state  of either  ennui  or ridicule.  Sade  shocks and  then  amuses and  then  bores;  no sane  reader  can  get through  two of his books in close succession without vast skippings. But boredom and  laughter -let  us  admit-are  self-defensive reactions,  and  the  fact  that brutality  and  porn or near-porn  may seem ludicrous to those who find a sense of balance essential in art  and  life does not mean that they are any less attractive  to others,  or  any  less significant  as signs of the  times. Nor  are  the  problems sur­ rounding  such  phenomena  made  any less complex by the fact  that  one finds, in censorship of any kind,  a solution  neither acceptable nor likely to succeed.
Indeed,   the  question  of  whether  brutality  or  an  exaggerated   preoccupation with sexuality should  be encouraged  or discouraged or forbidden  is not the real point. Both exist, and  there is a kind of symbiotic sub-culture  which unites those who  produce  extreme  works in both  directions and  those who read  or see them on  the  screen. To  a  great  extent  the  relationship  is a  passive one;  few of the people who  watc.h violent  films go out  to imitate  the  brutalities  they  have wit­ nessed. The  real  question  we have to face is why in  a society that  has  become theoretically more  permissive there should be an upsurge of the kind of  fantasies
-in literature,  in  film and  to a less extent  in the other  arts-which  one  had hitherto  regarded  as typical  products of repression and  of the fantasies of  libera­ tion  it  produces. The  answer  obviously is that  if we have  to take such  extreme advantage  of  our  freedom,  then  we are  not  yet free. This,  of course,  is what many contemporary  radical  intellectuals say when they argue  that violence in the arts  is a form  of extreme  protest  against the decaying society in  which  we live, and  which  we must  destroy  before a non-violent world and  its appropriate arts can come into being. The  essential flaw of such an argument seems to lie in the fact  that  historic  precedents,  at  least from the triumph  of  Lenin  in I g I 7, have demonstrated  that violence used to destroy the old order has an obstinate tendency to  perpetuate  itself in  defence  of the new order,  so  that  the  non-violent  world and the new art it would allow to flower are indefinitely postponed.
Nevertheless, I  could  see little  realism in the arguments  of those writers who


5

EDITORIAL



during   the  195os  took  a  quasi-pacifist  standpoint   and  condemned   violent  art somewhat  fatalistically  as a sign of social decadence,  rather  than  attempting to understand  either its works or its motivations. The  last decade  has demonstrated that-whether  just  or  not-their  condemnations  have  had  little  effect.  It  is therefore  rather  surprising  that  we should have had to wait until 1974 for a book that -even  in  a  rudimentary way-attempts a sensible analysis of the causes of violence in literature  and  the other  arts and -without either  applauding the phenomenon  or condemning  it outright-tries to present a sound  response.
The  book is Violence  in the  Arts  (Macmillan,  $7.50), by John  Fraser, a critic of English origin  who now teaches at Dalhousie. It is a brief book-162  pages plus notes -and  it  can  be regarded  as no more than  a  reconnaissance  for the exhaustive  survey  of  the  phenomenon   that  one  day  needs  to  be  written.  But, such as it is, the  book is timely and  useful. Basic to Fraser's historical analysis - and  to his whole argument -is the contention that there is an essential difference between violence in the literature  of earlier ages, and violence in literature, film, etc. after  the rise of Nazism. Violence in the classic works from  antiquity down to  the  nineteenth   century   was  qualified  by  concepts  of  justice  and   nobility. Unmitigated violence tended  to be isolated in highly formalized works like those of Sade  and  Octave  Mirbeau,  which had obviously no connection  with  real life. (Fraser  ignores the  hints of an emerging  preoccupation  with gratuitous violence in  the  works of pre-World  War  II writers like Gide and  the early Sartre.)  But by making it a political necessity, the Nazis first made violence part  of the "very fabric  of society".  (Again,  not  enough  attention  is paid to the extent  the  Nazis built on Stalin's  transformation of Chekist violence into a  political way of life.) To  begin, the  rest of the  world  was revolted by the Nazi excesses, but, as often happens  in such cases, revulsion was transformed into fascination,  and  more and more often we have been imitating the Nazis in recent years, either directly-as in Algeria or Vietnam -or  vicariously in our arts. Because the Americans  lack
a tradition  of self-criticism, their  country  has become-as it were-the eye of
the  hurricane; there  is a  curious  touch  of loyalty to the  homeland  in  Fraser's rather  gauche  argument that  the  English are saved from American  extremities of  violence  by having  the  right  combination  of anarchic  instincts  and  conven­ tional  behaviour  patterns   (though   perhaps  the murder  statistics,  which  he does not quote, give support to his point).
As I  have suggested,  there  are  many  weaknesses in Violence  in the  Arts, but
these  must  be  balanced   against  a  resolute  effort  to  come  to  terms  with  the phenomenon,  made  in a clear  prose that  reflects both its writer's  sanity  and  his

6

EDITORIAL



admitted   debt  to  Orwell.  "When   the  only options  [he  argues]   are  pure  non­ violence  or  undiluted  violence, it  becomes harder  for the  kinds of  intermediate relationship   to  be  worked  out  that  may  in  fact  render  violence  unnecessary."  Violence  in  action  as well as in  the  arts  is what  he obviously  means,  and  he suggests that  we can grapple  with the problem, as earlier ages did, by recognizing that  there  are different kinds of violence, with different moral aspects. "One still has to decide, sooner rather  than  later  [he  goes on]  which  party  one backs and agree  that  if violence is essential for its survival it must  use  violence. In  other words, one  has to come to  judgment.  And in general, violence or the  possibility of  violence  is a  great  sharpener  of  judgment."  The  flaw  in  that  argument, of course,  lies in  the  fact  that  the  calm  self-defences of  some  of  the  worst  Nazi criminals suggest that  they too had come to judgment, but without  a sharpening of the kind Fraser might wish. And wrong judgment -which is always a human  possibility-is less irredeemable  when it is  unaccompanied by violence. For all that,  Violence  in the Arts is an honest and welcome attempt  to face with candour a problem -or  perhaps  rather  a cluster of  problems, social as well as artistic - which  so far  have  been  largely  avoided,  either  from  prejudice  or,  worse, from embarrassment.

GEORGE WOODCOCK












CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS /228-4741


7


ALDEN NOWLAN




Interviewed by
John Metcalf




METCALF:  What  are  your  working  methods?  How  much  rewriting  do you do?

NOWLAN:  Well, almost everything  that  I write goes through  two phases. Usually I  do the  first version of a  poem almost as an exercise in free association except that  it's  tethered  to the  point  that  brought  it into  being. Sometimes  I  think  of these first versions as first drafts  and sometimes I think of them as notes toward a poem. Some of them  never go beyond this phase. The rest I throw into a drawer and  periodically  I dig through  a bunch  of them and  pick out those that  appeal to  me  at  the  moment  and  then  I  work  at  them  as objectively  and  coldly as possible, almost as if they were somebody else's work. Then  when I'm  preparing the manuscript  for a collection of poems I make further  changes in almost every poem  that  goes into  the  book,  not  to  make  them  conform  to  any  theoretical principles  but  according  to Robert  Graves' dictum  that  a  poet ought  to handle his lines and  images  and  words  like a  housewife separating  the good  tomatoes from those that are under-ripe or spoiled.

METCALF:  What  have  been the main  poetic influences in your career? To what tradition  do you feel you belong-the British or the American?

NOWLAN:  I  think  perhaps  I  belong to the first generation  of Canadian poets to be influenced  most by other  Canadian poets or maybe I should have said:  to be influenced  most  directly  by other  Canadian   poets. I believe Margaret  Atwood says that  her most important influences were Canadian. None of the older Cana­ dian  poets could have said that.  Every previous generation  turned  to England  or the  United  States  for  models. And  as for the  younger Canadian  poets I doubt if many  of them  could  name  even one of their  English or American  contempo­ raries. The  more  I think  about  it, John,  the more I feel  that  this question is ten years out of date.

8

ALDEN NOWLAN



METCALF:  Have  there  been any  particular  poets who have influenced  you?

NOWLAN:  Oh,  there  have been dozens and  dozens of poets that  have influenced me either a little or a great deal at various periods. I've been writing poems and stories ever since I was eleven years old. It  would be easy for me to declare that I  didn't  begin to write seriously until I was twenty-five and  then  mention  some of  the  poets  I  happened   to  be  reading  when  I  was that  age  as  being  major influences-but that  would be essentially false. One of the important  influences on me when  I got to be reasonably mature,  say seventeen or eighteen  years old, was D. H.  Lawrence.  And it's curious. I think someone reading  my work would be very unlikely to find echoes of Lawrence but  only recently I was intrigued  to discover  that   Lawrence   also  had  a  great  influence  on  Orwell.  And  reading Orwell  you wouldn't  guess that  Lawrence  had  had  any influence on him at all. Lawrence  was much  more of a romantic  than  Orwell was or than  I am, and so if all three of us were using the same instrument  we'd none of us be playing the same  tune.  Quite  often  people look at  a  writer  and  glibly reel off a list of the people that  he resembles who lived prior to his time and  say that  they were his influences.  I've  had  reviewers say that  of course I  was influenced  by so and  so
-and it  was somebody  I'd  never  read  beyond  a few things  in  an  anthology,
perhaps.

METCALF :  I  remember   your  saying  to  me  once  that   Robinson   was  a  great influence.

NOWLAN:  Yes, Robinson  was a big influence on me when  I was about  twenty­ five-but  I'd  come to him  through  Fred  Cogswell, you see, just as I  came  to the Black Mountain people through Layton and Souster.

METCALF:  From your early books to your latest there's been a progressive loosen­
ing of form -an abandoning of metre and rhyme.

NOWLAN:   That's come  about   through  an  almost  purely  intuitive   process. At intervals  over the years I've  looked back over my work of, say, the  previous six months   and   I've   suddenly   realized  that   I've   been  writing   differently.   The important thing  to keep in mind  about  the process of development  as it applies to me is that  my whole intellectual  life, the  whole growth  of my mind,  for the first twenty-five years of my life took place in a solitude that  couldn't  have been greater  if I  had been living alone on an island. That's so odd that  people find it impossible to understand-they think they understand,  but  they don't.  Because

9

ALDEN NOWLAN



it wasn't  necessary for me to verbalize any of the reactions that  I was having or to justify any direction  that  I was taking-because there was absolutely nobody, nobody  at  all  for  me  to  talk  with  about  such  things,  many  of these  processes remained  on the non-verbal  level that  we call intuition.  I think that's  what intui­ tion is: non-verbal  thought.

METCALF:  What's been the  influence  of Olson and  Creeley and  Duncan?  Had they anything to do with your formal development?

NOWLAN:  Oh,  yes, very much so. You see that  just as I went from Cogswell who had  influenced  me  directly  to  Robinson  who had  influenced  him directly, so I went  from  Layton   and  Souster  and  Dudek  to  their  direct  influences,  which included  either  Creeley, Olson or Duncan  or the  people, such as Williams, who had  influenced  Creeley,  Olson  and  Duncan.  There  was Kenneth   Fearing,  for instance,  who  must  have  had  an  enormous  influence  on  Souster.  And  I  like Kenneth  Patchen -but I  could  never write like that.  I  think it's important to find  the  right  influences,  the  influences  that   are  sufficiently congenial  to  be useful.  There   was  a  time  when  like everybody  else in  those  days  I  read  and re-read  Dylan  Thomas,  but  it would  have been fatal  for me to have developed a  Dylan  Thomas   kind  of  style-simply  because  we're  such  different  people. You  have to begin  with your basic nature.  There  are certain  facets to my mind and  my manner  of expressing myself that  are as inescapable as the fact that  I'm six feet  three  inches  tall  and  have  blue-gray  eyes. And  that's  true  of everyone. I've  also been influenced  by the  Irishman  Patrick  Kavanaugh. But none of this conflicts with my earlier statement  that my most direct influences were Canadian. I came to English and American poetry later.

METCALF:  You  have  written  a  poem on the  death  of William  Carlos  Williams and  I  wondered  if  you'd  studied  any  of his or  Olson's  theoretical  writings on poetry.

NOWLAN:   Yes, I've  read  Olson's  projective verse essay that  old  Williams liked so well that  he included  it in his autobiography, and  I've read a lot of Williams' critical  pieces. But  I've  always had  the suspicion that  with  Williams at least the criticism  was only  a  kind  of  unwilling  justification  for the  work, that  he only bothered  putting  that  kind  of thing  down on paper  because he felt that  he had to do it in  order  to obtain  critical  respectability for his work and  work like it. Bertrand  Russell said that  every philosopher ought to first publish a book written


10

ALDEN  NOWLAN



in   jargon  that   no  layman   could  understand,   and  once  having  done  that   he wouldn't  have to bother  with such  jargon any more. And  perhaps  a poet ought to begin by publishing a book of criticism with all sorts of high-sounding  phrases
-adumbrate  is a  very  big  word  with  the  critics -and  then  he  wouldn't  be
expected  to waste any  more time  with that  sort of thing,  he could simply write poems,  which  is what  a  poet  ought  to  be doing.  But  I  think  Pound's  critical writings  are  valuable -I  keep recommending  them  to students.  I wrote  to old Pound  when  he was in St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital  and  he sent  me a  note saying, "I tray-sure yer replies," whatever that meant.
On  this  continent  and  in  our  lifetime it  seems that  to  justify yourself  as a writer  you must first proclaim  a critical theory and then  proceed to demonstrate it. If Shakespeare  had  been required  to do that  he'd have spent  his whole life in some obscure place writing  a critique on literature  that  nobody would remember and he'd never have found the time to write any of his plays. But, of course, Shakespeare, as they liked to point out in the I 8th century, wasn't  an intellectual. He  broke all the rules. He's  been stuffed and  mounted  for so long that  we tend to forget that.  One  thing  that  I've  come to feel more and  more strongly is that because  so  many  North   American   poets  are  professors there's  come  to  be  a confusion  of roles. Take  the  questions after  a  poetry reading -I  find  that  go per cent of those questions are questions you'd ask a professor, not questions that you'd ask a poet. Now, if it happened  that  I was a professor as well as a poet I'd slip  automatically  out  of my  poet's  laurel  wreath  and  into  my academic  gown and  answer  as a  professor without  even being conscious of changing  from  one role to another.  If most of the  poets were motor  mechanics  there  would  be the same confusion of roles, I suppose, and during  the question  period  after  a  read­ ing  people  would  say,  "Mr. Layton,  I'm   having  transmission  trouble.  What should  I  do about  it?"  Acorn,  Purdy,  myself, and  Newlove, are  about  the  only Canadian poets of my generation that aren't also professors.

METCALF:   I'd  like  to  ask  you  another  question  about  form-about the  line divisions in your work. Are they sense units, breath units or purely typographical?

NOWLAN:  They're  many  different  things but above all they're  attempts to find a typographical  substitute for the purely visual and oral things that play such an important part in a conversation-facial expressions, gestures of the hands, intonations  of the  voice. I  might  end a line in a certain  way in an  attempt  to create  the typographical  equivalent  of a shrug, for instance.  Then,  too, some of the divisions are intended  to make the reader slow down -to read certain  words


I I

ALDEN NOWLAN



m  units  of five instead  of  units  of ten, for instance.  And  sometimes  the  break adds  an additional  level of meaning  in that  the reader is led to believe that  I'm saying  one  thing  and  then  an  instant  later  he finds that  I'm  saying something else which  doesn't  supersede  the first thing,  but amplifies it, or  modifies it. The thing  that  he thought  I was going to say and  the thing that  I did say are  both there,  one strengthening and  supporting  the  other. There's  a  deliberate  instant of ambiguity, you see, which reflects the ambiguity of life.
Now,  I  have  no intention  of giving you specific examples-of  pointing  out how that  works or is intended  to work in individual  poems. That  would be like a pitcher  walking in before the pitch to tell the batter what kind of a ball he was going to throw  him. Somewhere  years ago, I forget where,  I read  the objective of  the  poet, like the  objective  of the  pitcher  in  baseball, is to make the  batter understand -too late. I was immediately struck by the truth  of that.

METCALF:  When  you give public readings, the enjambment  often doesn't follow the printed text of the poem.

NOWLAN:  Right. The  dominant tradition  in poetry written in English has always been  that  poetry  is heightened  conversation,  an  oral  art.  But  the  people  who carry  the  Black  Mountain  theories  to  their  ultimate  extreme -and  anything becomes absurd  when  it's  carried  to its ultimate  extreme-they seem to forget that  fully  literate  people  don't  move  their  lips when they  read.  And  they also forget that  the eye takes in as many as, oh, say, twenty-five words at a glance­ whereas  when  you're  listening  to somebody reading  aloud  you hear  the  words, one  by one,  in  succession. The  line  divisions on  the  printed  page  are  for  the reader -but  if I'm  there in the flesh and come to a point on the printed  page I used  certain   line  divisions  to  indicate  a  shrug-well,  I  simply  shrug.  Mark Twain   when  he  was  reading  his stories in  public  didn't   read  them  at  all, he simply  told  the same  story. Then  there's  also the fact  that  I'm  not  an  actor.  I don't  have the dramatic ability to indicate verbally the equivalent of, say, a semi­ colon, and so possibly I insert another  word-an extra word that  a professional actor  might  not need  to use. Some of my poems now have one printed  and one spoken version. Sometimes I change entire lines in them when I read them before an  audience.  At  first  I  worried  about  that  and  I  used to feel that  I ought  to make the printed  poem conform  to the spoken poem, the poem as spoken by me, and  I'd  rewrite  them-but  I found  it  weakened them  on the  page. Now you take someone like Allen  Ginsberg  who is  constantly reading  to large audiences. Now when he writes a poem he knows that he's going to read it in an auditorium


12

ALDEN  NOWLAN



and  there  are  going to be an  enormous  number  of distractions  there -such  as lightbulbs  breaking  and  doors slamming,  people coughing, and  of course people will be thinking  about  other things, wondering if their wives are being unfaithful, if they can  pay the rent, worrying about  the pimple on their earlobe. Now if you were  reading  the  book you could close it and  go back to it later.  You can't  do that  at a reading  and so to express something you need only hint at on the page you may have to repeat the same word or line several times.

METCALF:   So, if the  poet  writes  with  a  live audience  in  mind  he  writes  less purely than he would were he writing for the eye of the reader.

NOWLAN:  Oh,  yes. You see I don't  write poems for an audience. An audience  is a crowd. I write poems for one person at a time. I distrust the kind of thing that can be shouted  to a crowd. At the end of that  road I see the spellbinding  orator. I'd  rather  talk with one person than speechify to a thousand.

METCALF:  Your  poems seem to split into two major  divisions-poems that  are descriptions or lyric (and some of the descriptive poems become poems of total metaphor) and  then  there are discursive or philosophical poems. There's a third, smaller  group  of satiric  poems. The  descriptive and  lyric poems seem to belong to the earlier  books in general. And the discursive, philosophic and satiric  poems to be increasing in your later books.

NOWLAN:  Well, I suppose  I'm  what  Neruda  would call an  impure  poet, in  the sense that  I feel that  almost anything  that can be experienced can be turned  into poetry-and I suppose  that  most of us tend  to become more  philosophical,  if that's  the  right  word,  as we get older.  Possibly one reason  why I  now  publish more  poems of ideas is that  earlier on I didn't  have sufficient experience  and  it didn't   come  off, I  mean  that  the  poems of that  kind  that  I  attempted didn't come off. As for the satires, well, Bernard Shaw said that  if you told  people the truth  you'd  be well advised to make them laugh,  because then they'd  be less apt to kill you. But mostly I think of the satires as a type of light verse.

METCALF: You say you didn't  have enough experience earlier to write more philosophic  poems yet some of the  descriptive  poems, and  certainly  those  that become total metaphor,  are just as sophisticated and possibly even more profound.

NOWLAN:  Yes. Yes, I  think  I  may  have  phrased  that  very badly.  Some of the earlier  poems which were articulating  ideas were doing so at  a non-verbal  level

13

ALDEN  NOWLAN



-no,  what  I  mean  is, a non-abstract  level -because that's  how my mind  was working. It goes back to what  I said about  working out my ideas in isolation. In those days I thought in total  metaphor  to a greater extent than  I do now and so inevitably  I  wrote  in  the  way  I  thought.  The  ideas were expressing themselves not only on the  page  but in my mind almost wholly through  things. You know, William  Carlos  Williams  said,  "No  ideas  but  in  things."  You  must  remember that  I was born and  grew up in a very primitive society. I suppose in some senses I'm  like one of those 18th  century  Tahitians  that  were brought  to England  and thrown  in among  the  London  literary men. Even when they learned  Greek and Latin they couldn't  change what they'd been, don't you see?

METCALF:  In seemingly simple poems like "Hens" and "Palomino Stallion"  they work  simultaneously  as  pure  description  and  pure  metaphor. There  is a  total fusion.  Did  you see these  poems from  the start  as metaphor  or did  the fusion come as you were working from the thing seen?

NOWLAN : Well, the thought  came from the thing seen and the poem came from the  thought  that  had  been  provoked  by the  thing  seen -and  in  another  and maybe truer sense it all happened  at once. [Pause]  There  was a time a few years ago when I had  this worry, and  it was a very real worry at the time, that  I had no inventiveness. Not no imagination, but no inventiveness. In other words some people  can  sit  down  and  invent  an  incident  to illustrate  an  idea,  but  I find it almost literally impossible to do that.  I'm  a born liar, but that's  different.  Born liars  don't  invent  things,  they  simply can't  bear  the  unvarnished   truth-or  I ought  to say  the  naked  fact,  because there's  a great  difference  between  a fact and  a  truth.   I'm  sorry  to  be  blathering  around  so much  but  I have  to  keep hesitating  to  think-which  is what  prevented  Stanfield  from  winning  the last election. The  poor bastard  stops to think when he's asked a question and then he looks like an idiot because nobody does that any more.

METCALF:  In some of your later work as the forms have moved further  from the traditional, it seems sometimes that the colloquial -that speaking voice you were talking about earlier -falls into the prosaic.

NOWLAN:  It's  one of the risks you have to take. To  be a writer you have to run the risk of making  a fool of yourself. When  I run the risk of sounding  prosaic I run the risk deliberately -just as I sometimes deliberately run the risk of sound­ ing sentimental.  I  think  you have  to risk sentimentality  if you're going  to write

ALDEN  NOWLAN



anything  that  matters  because  after  all sentimentality  is very close to the  things that  genuinely move people -it's not a falsity but simply an exaggeration.

METCALF:   "Ypres  1915",   which  you've  said  is one  of your  favourites  among your work, is a poem that  plays on the edge of sentimentality  the whole time.

NOWLAN:  Sure.  That poem is essentially a dialogue  between  the  brain  and  the guts, the  cerebral  and  the  visceral. The  tension between  the sentimental  or the near-sentimental   and  the  cynical  or  near-cynical  is deliberate.  Which  reminds me that I wrote a poem called "He Raids the Refrigerator  and Reflects Upon Parenthood," and  because the emotion that evoked the poem was a maudlin  one (for we all of us do feel maudlin  at one time or another,  provided  we're human, and  to be a  poet is to express what  humans  feel) -I  actually  began  the  poem with  the  words,  "Nowlan, you maudlin  boob."  I  feel now  that  I  should  have entitled it "A Maudlin Poem",  because there was one reviewer who said, "Unfortunately, Mr.  Nowlan has one maudlin  poem in his book called 'He Raids the Refrigerator'." And so this particular  reviewer didn't  know enough  to know that  the  poem was supposed to be maudlin even though  I'd  said so in the poem. But then  I don't  suppose he'd  read  the poem. Many  reviewers don't.
Any poet who deals with the emotions that  move some people to tears is going to be accused by some people of being sentimental because sentimentality is by definition  an  excessive emotion  and  what  to one  person may seem excessive to another  may seem perfectly normal. Thomas Hardy was also accused of being sentimental.  I  happen  to be a very passionate person who is very readily moved to both tears and laughter  and if I denied this I would be false to myself. Now I assume that T. S. Eliot was a very cold person, but he was also a very great  poet. That  coldness was natural to him, presumably.
But by God! I'd  rather  have spent an evening with Charles Dickens or Thomas
Hardy than with T. S. Eliot.

METCALF:  Your  poetry  is far  more visual than  oral.  Is the  musical element  in poetry unimportant to you?

NOWLAN: If you mean  by "musical  element"  what  I think you mean -the  use of pleasant  sounds  merely for the  sake of using pleasant  sounds-I try  not  to put anything  into my poems that  isn't functional. And, then, too, it's not entirely a  matter  of choice. I suppose  the  music that  I  respond to is very simple,  unso­ phisticated  music-the visual  equivalent  would  be  Norman   Rockwell.  In  so

ALDEN NOWLAN



much  criticism and  in so much  of the  pretentious  bosh uttered  by writers when they're  discussing  their  craft  there's  the  unspoken  assumption  that  everything you do as a writer  is the  result of choice or in accord with some critical  theory. In  reality,  of course,  a  poet  born  tone-deaf  is going to  be an  entirely  different poet from  a  poet  born  with  perfect  pitch. You have to work within  the limita­ tions of what  God  made  you. A moose might  prefer to be a butterfly  but  he'd be a damned  foolish moose if he wasted any time feeling sorry for himself  because he wasn't one.

METCALF:  Things, their  physical appearance and texture, dominate  a lot of your poetry. Is this a religious position? Do you believe in immanence?

NOWLAN:  I have a very strong, almost primitive, sense of the sacredness of objects and  things.  Animals.  Someone  once  pointed  out  to me  that  in  all  my  poems there  wasn't  a single animal  called  'it' -they  were always 'he'  or  'she'.  In  my poetry I try to tell the truth.  It's  a losing battle because there are so many truths you can't  really tell but  I try to show the thing as it is. That's the reason why I named  one of my early books The  Things  Which  Are after St. John  the Divine being told  by the angel to write  'the  things which thou hast seen and  the things which are'.  (I think  now  it was a rather  bombastic title -but at  the same time it was trying  to express this devotion  to the truth  of things.)  There  is a kind of truth  in a beer can,  you know. If you say, "There's a beer-can"  that's  something everyone can establish. They can go and see if it's there. But if you say "The ineluctible  Providence  is shining  down  upon  you," you don't  know whether  it is or not. Yes, I believe in immanence very strongly.

METCALF:  Yours is a sophisticated  and  "high" art,  yet I've  heard  you quoted  as saying  that   you  write  for  truck  drivers.  Were  you drinking  that  day  or  just annoyed by someone?

NOWLAN:  As I remember,  about  that  truck  driver  business, I said  to someone who later  wrote  a newspaper  thing  that  if there comes a time that  truck  drivers read  poetry, mine will be the  poetry they'll read, and I think that's  quite  true. I
hope that  you're right when you call my poetry "sophisticated". I like to think it's elegant. But it seems to me that  the very greatest literature  has all sorts of levels. Huckleberry  Finn, you know. The  biggest risk a person runs who tries to write as I do is the casual, superficial glance. "Oh, that's all there is to it",  you know. I'm always quoting  Mailer  who quoted  Gide, who probably quoted somebody else-

x6

ALDEN NOWLAN



"Please  do not understand  me too quickly". That's one of the things  I've  always been frustrated  by, so much so that sometimes I've been tempted  to introduce deliberate  obscurity-and that  seems the one valid argument  for self-conscious obscurity-to make the reader read it more carefully.

METCALF:  How would you justify yourself, then, for practising what  is essentially an elitist art?

NOWLAN:   I  don't  feel obliged  to  justify myself. If I were called  into  court  like that  poet  in  Russia  and  charged  with  wasting my time  I'd  probably  come  up with some arguments  in my own defence-but otherwise why should  I bother? I don't  think of myself as an elitist, but even if I did, and even if what  I'm  doing
is  absolutely  useless -like Oscar   Wilde  saying,  "all  art  is  utterly  useless" - even if that  were so, I don't  see where my elitism and  uselessness would  matter to anyone else. I have a friend  who is a painter,  Tom  Forrestall,  and  one day I asked him what  he'd  been doing  that  afternoon,  and  he said, "looking  at  wind­ falls." He'd  spent the whole afternoon  simply sitting and  watching  the changing pattern  of sunlight  on  apples.  Now the  president of the Canadian  Chamber  of Commerce  would  probably  consider that  a  useless act. But who  knows? Maybe there  is a  God like the  god  described in  the Old  Testament  and  he saw Tom Forrestall  looking at  the windfalls  that  day and  decided  that  on second thought he wouldn't  destroy the world. Maybe the whole show will fall apart  if there ever comes a time when there's nobody left to look at the windfalls.






















17


WILDERNESS
NO WILDERNESS


Norman Newton



We   have  had  to  wait  until  the  middle   of this  century   for the crossing of long separated  paths: that  which arrives at the  physical world   by  the  detour   of communication, and  that   which, as we have  recently  come  to  know, arrives at the  world  of  communica­ tion  by  the  detour  of the  physical. The   entire  process of human knowledge thus  assumes the  character  of a  closed  system. And  we therefore  remain   faithful  to  the  inspiration  of the  savage  mind when   we  recognise  that, by  an  encounter  it  alone  could  have foreseen,  the  scientific  spirit  in  its  most  modern  form  will  have contributed to  legitimise  the  principles  of savage  thought and  to re-establish  it in its rightful  place.

The Savage Mind, Claude Levi-Strauss


IN ms Mythologiqu", Claude  Levi-Strauss  p=ents a revo­
lutionary  but  deeply  satisfying  analysis of the formal  principles of that  class of
Amerindian  myth  which depends  on the symmetrical balancing  and  transforma­ tion of fictive events. Meanwhile,  Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend, in  their  Hamlet's Mill, show  the  origin of a great  many  mythological  motives, including  some very important Amerindian  ones, in an early but systematic form of astronomy. The  result is an earthquake. A tremendous corpus of theory about myth  disappears  from  intellectual  view:  Frazer, Jung  and  Freud  (though  Levi­ Strauss  reaches out a hand,  Freud  misses it)  go clattering  into the abyss. Robert Graves manages to grab  the branch of an oracular  tree on the way down, but his Muse, pierced by a sharp twig of the same tree, deflates with a hissing sound and rockets erratically  away. Several  lesser poets and  literary critics disappear,  never to be heard of again.
Simultaneously  a revolution  is taking place in literary criticism which is bound
in time to affect poetic practice. Structuralist  critics, fascinated  by interlocked symmetries, are  putting  forward  a view of poetry which is likely to pull it out of

r8

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



the  post-Symbolist  phase  in  which,  with  decreasing  profit and  despite  countless minor excursions, it has remained for several decades. The result is a sort of geometrodynamics  of the imagination,  which derives thought  from mathematical operations  implicit  in  the  structure  of the  mind.  If the  making  of  poetry  is to remain  an  intellectually  respectable  activity, it will probably  move into  an  area of  close calculation   of  a  mathematical or  pseudo-mathematical kind:   we can expect  the  poetic equivalent  of the serial revolution  which  SchOnberg initiated in  music so long  ago. If the semiologists have  their  way the image,  up  to now recalcitrant  to absolute intellectual control, may well become a completely manipulable   construct,  like the  tone-row  in  music.  We  may  expect  something like  that  combination   of  emotional  brutality  or  vacuity  and  sensuous  ugliness with  intense,  and  in  its way very rewarding,  intellectual  excitement  which  dis­ tinguished  the  music of a few years ago. Certainly  the  present state  of  English poetry,  in  which  an  art  once  as  formally  complex  and  learned  as  traditional music  lies  crushed  and  smothered  under  the  spreading  buttocks  of   half-dead amateurs  and  "professors of Creative  Writing"  who would be hard  put to it to scan  a  line  of  verse correctly,  seems to  point  to  the  advent  of   new  forms  of technical  rigour.  A vacillation  between chaos and  formalism,  between  ignorant  violence and  frigid intellection  seems typical of the art  of this century.  I  would suggest that  contemporary  poetry can only escape this horrible seesawing between rotten  flesh and  dead  bones by seeking intellectual  excitement in imitation  of the patterns  found  in  nature.  The  immediate  alternative  is a  secular  scholasticism more deadening  than  any  found  in the medieval  period,  with  no prospect  of a Renaissance  at  its end:   Levi-Strauss's  "closed  system".  Indeed,  the  discoveries of Levi-Strauss are of great  importance: taken in one way, they spell out  death to the imagination, taken in another, they signify its release.
Certainly   the  implications   of  such  discoveries, which  seem  to  remove  the "mystery"  from myth, appear  at first to be disastrous, so far as the poetic imagi­ nation  is concerned.  But only dilettantes  and  charlatans  will inevitably suffer;  I mean  those  who  have  for  years uttered  such vaguely sonorous  phrases  as "the  myth-making   imagination",  "primitive  spontaneity" and  "archetypal images", without  ever bothering  to tell us what  they meant. It is not likely that  any real poet will reject insights which make it possible to unite the  poetic and  scientific imaginations  in  a  manner  which  has been almost  impossible since  the  days of Milton. Structuralism  itself may be profoundly anti-poetic, but one is not obliged to accept  Levi-Strauss's total  theory of man, which is full of inconsistencies, as is the whole structuralist  position.

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



To  Canadian writers,  such  discoveries are of special importance.  Up  to now we have  never  really come to terms with the intellectual  history of our country, which is preponderantly the intellectual  history of the Indians.  Instead,  we have invented  the  idea  of  "wilderness",  simply to avoid facing  it. The  "wilderness" never existed.
At last we may enter  into the mythical  past of the continent; indeed,  we can­ not  avoid  doing  so. It is  now  clear  to  any  rational  person  that  Amerindian  thought  was, on  its  highest  level, fully comparable  to  that  of the  pre-Socratic Greeks. Thus  it forces itself into our  tradition,  not only because it is  part of the history of the country  we or our ancestors chose to settle in, but by sheer authority.  Not to know it, that is, is to be ignorant.
One  must  first,  however,  know  how  to  read  Amerindian  myth.  In  order  to derive an  resthetic from  mythical  tales we must first determine  their  non-literary uses. Otherwise  we are  likely to consider a form of esoteric "tech  talk",  to use a phrase  of de Santillana's and  von Dechend's,  as resulting from  the free play of the  imagination.  Northwest   Coast  myths-our  present  concern -look very strange  when  they  are  regarded  as works of the purely literary imagination  and there  is a  temptation  to  believe that  we are  dealing  with  mental  processes of impenetrable obscurity.
One  does not  have  to be professionally skilled in mathematics or the physical
sciences  to   understand  the   cosmological  aspects  of  Northwest   Coast   myth. Amerindian   cosmological  thought   might  legitimately  be said  to  organize  the directly  observable  phenomena  of nature  into  vast coherent  structures  compar­ able to those of music, an analogy found,  by the way, both in de Santillana  and von  Dechend  and  in  Levi-Strauss.  For  that  matter,  the  German  musicologist, Marius   Schneider,   has  shown   in  his  remarkable   El   Origen  Musical   de  los Animoles  Simbolos  en la Mitologia  y la Escultura  Antiguas  (Barcelona,  I946)  that   the  musical  analogy   was  completely  and  consciously applied   in  several cultures  around  the world.  Certainly  the process was analogous  to mathematics,  even  higher  mathematics,  but  if  we  were  to  express this  aspect  of  mythical thought  in  a form  of notation  we would  have  to  use quasi-musical  not  mathe­ matical  symbols, the  clusters of myth-concepts  dissolving into  each other  in  the manner  of clusters of notes rather  than  mathematical functions. The  reason for this is that  mythical language is built up from an accepted set of cultural symbols, just as musical scales themselves and  indeed  all systems of musical construction including   the  most  recent  are;  it  is  not  built  up  from  "pure"  mathematical relations.  Nevertheless,  some  idea  of   mathematical  relations  helps  to  sharpen


20

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



one's  sense of  the  intellectual  subtleties in  myth-patterns,  just  as it  can  in  the analysis of works of art: think  of the interest of Greek  and  Renaissance  artists in geometry, of composers of all ages in acoustic theory and its mathematical implications,  and  of poets in  the  art  of time measurement  and  the geometry  of
symbolic worlds.

0BVIOUSLY  this article can  neither  be exhaustive  nor  pro­
found.  The  intellectual   world  of  the  coast  Indians   was  a  very  complex  and
reasoned one  (the  incoherence  of its reflection in most anthropological literature is hardly  the  fault  of the  Indians) and  it would  take  several  books to lay out even its main outlines.
We  will take  the  briefest  of  looks at  three  stories  recounted  to  the  anthro­ pologist John  R. Swanton   (one of the most responsible of the researchers in this area)   by  the  Haida,   Walter   McGregor,  in  rgoo-01.  McGregor,   I  have  been informed  by Mr.  Solomon  Wilson of Skidegate, was very knowledgeable  in  the Haida   calendrical  tradition, a  fact  which  is also  clear  from  the  stories them­ selves. They  are  to  be found  in  Swanton's  Haida  Texts and  Myths:  Skidegate Dialect.
The first of these is the story of Shining Heavens.
Shining  Heavens,  who  begins life as a tiny creature  found  by a princess in a clam-shell,  shoots  certain   birds  and  learns  to  fly  in  their  skins.  In  time  he becomes a sky-god.
First he catches two varieties of sea-bird, a cormorant  and a goose. His mother, Fine  Feather  Woman,  who  is presumably  a sea-goddess in  one  of her  aspects, eats them. He then shoots and dries the skins of a wren, a doubtful  bird which is perhaps the red-winged blackbird, a bluejay and a woodpecker.
In  the wren skin "he  sat  as broad,  high cumulus  clouds over the ocean."  In the  bluejay skin he sat "blue,  broad and  high over the sea."  In  the woodpecker skin "he sat over the sea, the upper  part of him being red".  For some reason he does not fly upward  in the skin of the (presumed)  red-winged  blackbird.
The  symbolism of the  birds in this story is part  of a network  of bird-imagery which extends over most of the northern hemisphere. The naturalist  Edward A. Armstrong  has examined  these linked metaphors  in  his The Folklore  of Birds. Such   resemblances  are   satisfactorily  explained   by  a   theory   of  Levi-Strauss (referred  to in his Tristes  Tropiques), which would have Scandinavian, Celtic,

21

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



aboriginal  Siberian,  Eskimo and  Canadian Indian  cultures  linked  in  a cultural continuum  extending around  the Arctic Circle.
Armstrong  suggests a relationship  between the wren and  the thunderbird, the latter  being related, in his argument, to Zu, the stormbird  of Sumeria.  This gives us a clue as to why  the wren  is identified  with clouds. In  this case, because of the  benign  nature  of Shining  Heavens,  it is not stated  whether  the  clouds are fair-weather or storm clouds:  "cumulus" is suitably ambiguous.
The   bluejay   (actually   it  is Steller's  jay)  is a  fairly  obvious  image  of  blue skies.  But  the   jay  is  a  member   of  the  crow  family  and   indeed   appears  in Chinookan  myth  as the Transformer, performing  the same function  that  Raven performs among  the Tsimshian,  Tlinglit  and Haida.  As the bird of the clear sky, it  reminds  us of the  tremendous  authority  attached  to the figure of Raven  who has, as Armstrong  points out, solar connotations  in China,  Japan and  Northeast Asia as well as in Northwest America.
In  the Old  World  the woodpecker is usually thought of as a harbinger  of rain, thunder   and  lightning.  Here  Shining  Heavens  in  his woodpecker-skin  robe is associated with clouds but  not rain  ("red  sky at night, sailor's delight"), a choice of the "positive"  aspect of the function  over the "negative"  one. This is also true of him in his wren-aspect and his blue jay-aspect.
Thus  the  birds in whose skins Shining  Heavens appears  represent  three stages of the day.
The  wren is the morning.  More specifically, perhaps, he is associated with the clouds  of  early  morning,  when  the  sea  is still warmer  than  the  land.  He  also represents  the sun's  position near  the horizon:  the wren, of course, is a ground­ dwelling  bird,  living in  brush-piles  and  among  tangled  roots;  it is  rather  like a mouse in its habit  of disappearing down one hole and suddenly appearing from another.   By  extrapolation  of  the  kind  common  in   pre-literate   astronomical systems, the wren also stands  for the dawn of the year, which may be thought  of as  beginning  just after  the  winter  solstice. In  this sense, the  wren is the sun as troglodyte, emerging from the ground to climb into the heavens.
The  bluejay (Steller's  jay)  represents the sun at noon position, also the cloudless sky of an  idealised  noon. By extrapolation, the bluejay also represents  the noon of the  year,  the  summer; bluejays  are  most easily seen in  British  Columbia  in June  and  July  when  family  groups  forage along the edge of the woods. As the noon the bluejay would also represent the sun at the zenith.
The  woodpecker,  with its bright  red head markings, its body black or spotted black and  white,  would  represent  the western sky at sunset, with  its bright  red

22

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



clouds  (the  head)  and  the darkness creeping  up from beneath  the horizon  (the body). By extrapolation, it  would  represent  the autumn  or  winter.  The  wood­ pecker  is a  rain  and  thunder   bird  in both  the Old  World  and  "on  Vancouver Island", as Armstrong  points out.  Autumn  and  winter, in the  mild  wet climate of the coast, are the "rainy season".
At first sight these interpretations may seem somewhat fanciful,  but "Sin", the Haida word  Swanton  translates  as "Shining  Heavens",  is the ordinary word for day  as  distinguished  from  night  and  also for  an  entire  period  of  twenty-four hours. It  applies as well to the sky vault when it is illuminated  by sunshine. Thus "Shining  Heavens"  is  not  strictly  a  sun-god,  but  stands  for  a  more  abstract concept: he represents the day in its three stages, in which the sun only serves as a  marker.  The  story of Shining  Heavens  is a kind of imaginary  clock in which the  qualities  of the  year  and  day  are combined.  It  might  be thought  of as an analogue  of  the  simple  but  ingenious  and  effective mechanical  devices which were part  of the stagecraft  of the coastal theatrical  tradition: the coastal peoples were fascinated by moving models and the technology of illusion.
The  calendar  was regulated  by close observation  both  of celestial bodies and of  seasonal  phenomena.  Observations  of seasonal  phenomena-the behaviour of  birds,  fish and  animals  and  the growth  cycles of plants -are  recognized  as having   been  detailed  and  accurate.  Anthropologists,  unfortunately, have  con­ sistently underplayed  the practical  astronomical knowledge of the coastal peoples. Yet  much  of  the  material  they  have  themselves collected  proves them  wrong. For  example,  the  Bella Coola  "model"  of the  physical heavens, as  described  in both  Boas' and  Mcllwraith's books on this people, could only have arisen out of a  fairly  elaborate  and  systematic  astronomy,  based  on  naked-eye  observations and  on "common-sense"  deductions as to the relative distances of celestial bodies. A similar  model is implicit in most coastal cosmologies. It  is true, however, that by  the  time  most  anthropologists  began  to  collect such  material,  Indians   had become completely dependent  on the European  calendar and compass, and  most star  names  had  been  forgotten.  Indians  have  told  me  that  their  ancestors  did have  specialists in astronomy  and  the calendar  but  that  their  knowledge is now lost. Only  a few star  names survive and  it takes the  utmost  patience  and  much trial-and-error to  work from  these to a broader  understanding of the system. It seems  that   this  knowledge  was  a  secret,  the  possession of  certain   guilds  or initiation-groups. According  to the Haisla  Gordon  Robinson,  who has published a small  book on the folklore of the Kitimat region, it extended  to the ability  to

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



foretell eclipses.   Unfortunately, our   knowledge of  observational methods, while it  indicates a high  level  of  competence, is incomplete in  several vital  areas.

Ew STORIES  are  so  enigmatic as  Canoe  People Who  Wear
Headdresses. I quote it  verbatim, as told  by Walter McGregor to  J. R. Swanton.
I hope   the   reader will  bear with   this  apparently  boring and   incomprehensible tale: it will repay his attention.

There were  ten  of  them,  and  they went  to hunt  with  dogs. After  they  had  gone along  for  some  time  it  became  misty about  them  and  they  came  to a steep moun­ tain  and  sat  there.  Their dogs  walked  about  on  the  ground below. They  yelped up  at  them.
Then they started a fire on  top of the mountain, and  one  among them  who was full  of mischief  put  his bow into  the fire. But, when  it was consumed, it lay on the level  ground below.  Then he also  put  himself  in. After  he had  burned for a while and  was consumed, lo, he stood  on  the level ground below. Then he told  his elder brothers to  do  the  same  thing.  "Come, do  the  same  thing.  I did  not  feel  it."  So they  threw  themselves  into  the fire. They  were consumed  and  stood  at once on the level ground.
And  when  they put  the next  to the eldest in, his skin drew  together  as he burned. His eyes were also swollen  by the fire. That happened to him because  he was afraid to  be  put  in.  When   he  was  consumed   he  also stood  below. The  same  thing  hap­ pened  to the eldest. This  mountain was called "Slender-rock."
Then they  left  it.  After   they  had  travelled  about   for  a  while  a  wren  made  a noise  near  them.  They saw a  blue  hole in  the heart  of the  one  who was travelling nearest   to it.  And  after   they  had  gone  on  a while  longer  they  came  to  the  inner end  of Masset  inlet.  When  they  had  travelled  on still farther (they  found) a hawk feather floated  ashore. This  they  tied  in  the hair  of the  youngest.  He  put  feathers from  the  neck of a mallard around the lower part  of it. It was pretty.
Now  they  came  to a  temporary village. They  camped  in a house  in  the  middle
which  had  a  roof.  They began  eating mussels which  were  to be found  at one  end of  the  town.  He  who  was  mischievous  made  fun  of the  mussels. He  kept  spitting them  out  upward. By and   by  they  set  out  to  see  who  could  blow  them  highest (through the smoke  hole). One  went  up on the  top of the  house  and  held  out  his blanket, which  was  over  his shoulder. By and  by he looked  at  it. His  blanket  was covered   with  feathers. They   did  not  know  that  this  was caused   by their  having broken  their  fast.
And  after   they  had   walked  about   for  a  while  in  the  town  they  found   an  old
canoe.  Moss grew  on  it. Nettles  were also on it. They  pulled  these off, threw  them away,  and  repaired it.  Then the  mischievous  one  made  a  bark  bailer  for  it.  On the  handle he  carved  a figure  like a  bird.  He  carved  it in  a sitting  posture. They

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



tied a bunch  of feathers in  the hair  of one of their  number, and  he got in forward with  a  pole.  Another went  in and  lay on  his back  in  the  stern.  They  poled  along.
After  they had  gone  along  for a while they came  to a village where  a drum was sounding. A shaman was performing there.  The  glow  (of the fire)  shone  out  as far as  the  beach.  Then they  landed in front  of the  place,  bow first, and  the  bow man got  off  to  look.  When   he  got  near   (the  shaman said):  "Now, the  chief  Super­ natural  Being   Who   Keeps   the   Bow  Off   is  going   to  get   off."  He  was  made  ashamed and went  directly  back.
And  the  next  one  got off to look. When  he got near  (the  shaman said)  : "Chief Hawk-hole is going  to get  off."  And  he looked  at  himself.  There was a blue  hole in him. He became  ashamed and  went back.
The  next  one  also  got  off  to look. When  he got  near  he  heard the  shaman  say again: "Now  the  chief  Supernatural Being on  Whom  the  Daylight Rests is going to get off." And he went back.
The  next  one  got  off. He  (the  shaman) said,  as before: "Now the  chief  Super­
natural Being on the Water on Whom is Sunshine is going to get off."
And  another got  off  to  look.  When  he  got  near   (he  said)  :   "Now the  chief Supernatural Puffin  on  the  Water is going  to get  off."  He  was also ashamed and went  back.
And  another got off. He  (the  shaman) said  to him:  "Now the  chief Hawk  with
One   Feather Sticking out  of  the  Water   is  going  to  get  off."  He  looked  at  the shaman from  near.  He  had  a costume  like his own. Then he also went  back.
Still  another got  off.  When   he,  too,  got  near   (the  shaman said):  "Now the chief  Wearing Clouds around His  Neck is going  to get off."  He  remembered that he had  been thus.
And  yet another got off. When  he, too, came  near  the door  (the  shaman said)  :
"Now   the  chief  Supernatural Being  Lying  on  His  Back  in  the  Canoe is going  to get off."
Then he got  on  again, and  the  oldest got off to look. When  he came  near   (the
shaman said):  "Now the  chief  who  owns the  canoe,  Supernatural Being  Half  of
Whose Words are Raven, is going to get off."
Then  the  eldest   brother said:  "Truly, we  have  become  supernatural   beings. Now,  brothers, arrange yourselves  in  the  canoe." Then they  took  on  board  some boys who  were  playing  about  the  town.  They  put  them  in  a crack  in the  bottom of the  canoe.  And  they  pulled  up  grass growing  at  one  end  of the  town  for  nests. They  arranged it around themselves where they sat.
Then they started around the west coast. When  the one  who  had  a pole slipped his hands  along  it, its surface  became  red. He  alone  pushed  the  canoe  along  with his staff.
As  they  floated   along,  when  they  found  any  feathers floating about, they  put them   into  a  small  box.  If they  found  flicker  feathers   floating   about, they  were particularly pleased  and  kept  them.
Then they  came  to a town.  A woman  went  about  crying  near  it. They  took her

25

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



in  with   them.   When   this  woman's  husband  came  from  fishing  with  a  net   (he thought) some  man  had  his arms  around his wife. Then he put  burning coals on the  arms  about   her.  But  it  was  his  wife who  got  up  crying.  It was  she  who  was going about  crying, whom  they took in.
[It  should  be  noted,  parenthetically, that  the husband  mistook  his wife's  hands,
which she held clasped  about  herself, for those of some man.]
Then they  made a  crack  in  the  bottom  of the  canoe  for  her  and  put  her  hand into  it,  whereupon it  ceased  paining her.  They  made  her  their  sister. They  placed her above  the bailing  hole.
Then  they  came  in front   of  Kaisun. And  the  woman  at  the  head  of  Dju   (a stream  near  Kaisun), Fine  Weather Woman, came  to them.  (She  said): "Come near,  my  brothers, while  I give  you directions. The  eldest  brother in  the  middle will own  the  canoe.  His  name  shall  be Supernatural Being Half  of Whose  Words are  Raven. Part of the  canoe  shall  be Eagle,  part  of it shall  be Raven. Part of the dancing hats  shall  be  black; part   of  them  shall  be  white.  The   next  one's  name shall  be Supernatural Being with  the  Big Eyes. The  one next  to him  will be called Hawk-hole. The  next  one  will  be called  Supernatural Being  on  Whom  the  Day­ light   Rests.  The  next  one  will  be  called  Supernatural Being  on  the  Water   on Whom  is Sunshine. The   next  one  will  be called  Puffin  Putting His  Head out  of the  Water. The next  will  be  called  Wearing Clouds  Around  his  Neck.  The  next will  be called  Supernatural Being  Lying  on  his Back in  the Canoe. The next  will be  called   Supernatural  Being  Who   Keeps   the  Bow  Off.  He  will  give  orders.  Wherever you  give  people  supernatural power  he  will  push  the  canoe.  And  the next  younger  brother will  be  called  Hawk  with  One  Feather Sticking Out  of the Water. And  the sister sitting  in the stern  will be called Supernatural Woman Who Does  the  Bailing.  Now,  brothers, set  yourselves in  the canoe.  Paddle to Stangwai. It  is  he  who  paints   up  those  who  are  going  to  be supernatural beings.  He  will paint   you up.  Dance four  short  nights  in  your  canoe. Then you will be finished." That was how she spoke of four  years.
Immediately, he   (Stangwai, the  spirit  of an  island  a  short  distance   south  of Kaisun) dressed  them  up.  He  dressed  them  up  with  dancing hats,  dancing skirts, and   puffins'-beak  rattles.   He   pulled   a  skin  of  cloud  around  the  outside   of  the canoe.  He  arranged them  inside  of it.  Where  they sat he arranged their  nests. All was finished.
This  is the end.

Certain  motives in   this   story   occur  again  and   again  m  a  group of  Haida myths which, it seems  to  me,  are  clearly  related to  astronomy, the  calendar, and the  supernatural celestial   beings   presiding over  certain forms of shamanism and magic. They are  the  stories of  Sacred One  Standing  and Moving, Supernatural Being  Who    Went   Naked,   He  Who   Had   Panther  Woman  for  His  Mother, Laguadjina, The   Story   About   Him   Who   Destroyed  His  Nine  Nephews,  He

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



Who Was   Abandoned by  His  Nine  Uncles  and  How  a Red  Feather  Pulled  Up Some   People  in  the  Town of Gunwa, all of which may be found  in Swanton's Haida  Texts and  Myths, Skidegate Dialect.  These stories usually concern  them­ selves with eight or nine brothers  and  a varying number  of female relatives.
There  are ten brothers in Canoe  People Who Wear  Headdresses:
I.  Chief Supernatural Being Who Keeps the Bow Off
2.   Chief Hawk-hole
3·  Chief Supernatural Being On Whom the Daylight Rests
4.  Chief Supernatural Being On the Water On Whom Is Sunshine
5·  Chief Supernatural Puffin On the Water
6.  Chief Hawk With One Feather Sticking Out Of The Water
7·  Chief Wearing Clouds Around His Neck
8.  Chief Supernatural Being With The Big Eyes
g.  Chief Supernatural Being Lying on His Back in the Canoe
IO. Chief Supernatural Being Half of Whose  Words are Raven.
The  woman in the set, and  the eleventh person, is Supernatural Woman  Who
Does the Bailing.
It is clear from the story that  much importance  is placed on the order in which they  sit in  their  canoe.  There   are  two seating  arrangements. The  first  is that shown in their order of disembarkation  at the village in which the shaman is performing: this is the order  indicated  above. The second is the order  they take on  the  instructions  of  Fine  Weather  Woman.  Admittedly  her  use of the  word "next" may be interpreted in more than  one way, but since she begins with  the man  who is to sit in the middle, Chief Supernatural Being Half of Whose Words are  Raven  (Number   IO),  the  most obvious interpretation of her instructions  is that  she is counting  off from  the middle. Thus  Supernatural Being with the Big Eyes (Number  8)  is next to the middle man on one side, Hawk-hole  (Number
2 )   is next  to him on  the other  side and  so on respectively to the  bow and  the
stern. Fine Weather Woman's seating arrangement  would thus be-
I 	7	4 	2 	I o 	8 	3 	5 	9 	6 	( I I  sits in the stem) Let  us assume the  ten  brothers  represent ten thirty-six day  months  of a year. This  is not entirely arbitrary. In  one Tsimshian story (Sun and  Moon in Boas's Tsimshian Myths, pp.  I I3-I  I6)   an artificial year of forty-day months is referred to;  the  ancient  Mediterranean system of decans divided  the  year into  thirty-six ten-day  periods;  the Aztec year  was divided into eighteen solar  months. Super­ natural   Woman  Who  Does  the  Bailing may  be  the  five  intercalary   days,  but since we do not know  where they came in this form of  the  year we must leave her out  for the moment.  But  we do know that  among  the  Haida  the  year was

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



thought  of as beginning  in  March  or April, so the spring  equinox,  March  2 rst, may be taken as the beginning of our hypothetical year, as follows-

1.  March 21st
2.  April 26th
3·  June rst
4·  July 6th
5·  August 1rth
6.  September 16th
7·  October r6th
8.  November 28th
g.  January 3rd
10. February 8th

This  would correspond  to the order of the supernatural beings as seen by the village shaman.  Of course these dates are arbitrary,  in the sense that  they are not based on astronomical  observations, or on any specific information  from a native source,  but  on  successive  counts  of  thirty-six  days  from  the  spring  equinox. However,  I do believe that at one time there did exist an "astronomer's calendar" divided  into intervals  roughly  similar to the above. It  must  have been based on the dawn  rising, or evening setting, of prominent  ecliptic or near-ecliptic stars or constellations at intervals of thirty-six days.
The former existence of an "astronomer's calendar",  which was used to correct the  rough  popular  calendar   based  on  lunations,  is the  best way  of accounting for the extraordinary confusion as to month-names found in the anthropological records.  Lists differed  and  still differ from informant  to informant, even in the same  village,  and  there  was  much  confusion  as  to  the  times  when  the  great festivals were supposed  to begin  and  end. Several informants  expressed sadness over the dying-out  of calendrical  experts and  the resultant  loss of knowledge. It is clear that  only a complex calendar,  based on stellar observation, could fall into such  disarray.  A  calendar  in  which  the months simply ran  from  new moon to new  moon,  and   which  was  corrected  by  observing  the  point  of  the  horizon where  the  sun  rose at  the  solstices, would  have  remained  more  or  less intact during  a  period  of  cultural   breakdown.  Many  family  heads  would  have  been able  to keep track  of it  themselves. Some such elementary  calendar  did in fact survive, as we know from  the anthropologists.  The  fact that  these simple obser­ vations did not suffice to keep the total calendrical system in order indicates that it must have been based on more complicated principles of observation,  probably both stellar and lunar.

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



We  revert  to  Fine  Weather   Woman's  arrangement. This  time,  though,  we connect  the  figures which  would  be in opposition  if we were to  place  them  at
equal distances around  the rim of a circle


I I
I	7	4
 
I
I
2 	10
 
I
8 	3 	5 	9 	6

I	I 	I
I 	

Months  3  (June   1st to July  5th)   and  8  (November  28th  to January  2nd) are  closest together  in  this scheme. These  are the months  in which  the summer and  winter  solstices occur.  Months  1  (March   21st to April  25th)   and  6  (Sep­ tember  16th  to  October   22nd)   are  farthest  apart.  These  are  the  months  in which  the spring  and  fall equinoxes occur. Months  2 and  7 are,  after  the  pair
8-3, the next closest together: these precede or "announce" the solstitial months. Then  follow 5  and  1o, which  precede or "announce" the  equinoctial   months. Finally we have 9 and  4, which precede 5 and  10. Since we do not know which is bow and which is stern in Fine Weather  Woman's  arrangement (either  1 or 6 could  be  at  the  bow:   spirits  sometimes  act  "in  reverse.")   we  do  not  know whether   to  place  Supernatural  Woman  Who  Does  The   Bailing  next  to  the spring or the fall equinox, but we know she must be one of the two. Thus  there is a clear indication  that  the intercalary  days are associated with  the equinoxes. This  is also indicated  in the month-names  of a calendar  which is known to have been in use at Masset. March  in the Masset series is referred to as "russet-backed thrush"  month,  and  the great Haida  goddess, Dzilaqons, is involved in a scandal with  Swimming   Russet-backed   Thrush   m  the  related  story  of  Sacred  One Standing and Moving.
There   is  another   significant  element  in  the  story  which  tells  us  that   the
arrangement in the canoe as seen by the village shaman  is meant  to be carefully distinguished  from  the  arrangement set  out  by  Fine  Weather   Woman. When the brothers  leave the village in which the shaman  is dancing  they take some of the  village  boys on  board  and  pull  up  grass  from  the  village  for  "nests"   (as celestial bodies, they  have  the  characteristics  of birds) . They  are  thus  placing themselves in  the  lower regions of the air,  those closest to the earth.  But when they have been allocated their  places by Fine Weather  Woman -a very exalted goddess, the mother  of Shining  Heavens -they are given a skin of cloud, which the island-god Stangwai  pulls "round  the outside of the canoe".  They  are  then placing  themselves in  the  higher  regions of the sky, thus  closer to  the  timeless realm of the gods and overseeing spirits, and the realm of secret knowledge.

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



The   bark  bailer  carved  by  "the  mischievous one"  must  be  a  constellation, since one  of the  very few constellation-names  we have from  the  Haida  is that which  refers  to  the  Pleiades  as  a  "canoe   bailer".  "The mischievous  one"  is identified  by Swanton   as "Chief  Supernatural Puffin on  the  Water", whom  I have tentatively  and  approximately  identified with the month  from August 16th to  September    18th.   It   is  therefore  of  some  interest  that   the  inhabitants  of Kodiak  Island  name  the  month  of August as "the  Pleiades begin to rise", even though  this constellation  is only prominent  after  midnight in this month.
Nobody could  pretend  that  the mathematical operations involved in this story
are  very complicated. It is something  like a  "farmer's  almanac" and  embodies the  kind  of calendrical  and  meteorological  knowledge one would expect  to find in  an  illiterate   village  society.  What   is  fascinating,  "elegant" indeed,  is  the manner  in which it finds verbal  counterparts  of ideas which we can only express in  diagrams.  Poets  were at  one  time masters of the calendar,  as Robert  Graves points out  in his highly valuable if extravagant  studies of myth;  they have been trying to reclaim it ever since. But only stories such as those of Walter  McGregor can  take  us back  to the time when  poetry and science were one and  the  poetic fiction was not a mere commentary  on the scientific "fact", the possession of the professional astronomer,  but a verbal model of it.
It  can  be seen  that  this story is only a little more complicated  than  the story of  Shining  Heavens.  Walter  McGregor  no  doubt  thought  of it  as elementary stuff. For this remarkable  man also told Swanton one of the most intricately constructed stories I have ever come across.


IN THIS  STORY, which  is called Laguadjina  in  the Swanton collection,  many  of  the  images  from  the  Canoe  Beings and  Shining  Heavens stories reoccur,  but  in  a totally  new context and subject  to an entirely different
set of transformations. It is as if one had  passed from arithmetic  to calculus, or, to use a perhaps more valid image, from elementary harmony to advanced counterpoint.
Obviously  I  cannot  analyse it  here:  properly  to spell out  the implications  of this story, with its dizzyingly rapid succession of "shorthand" images, would  (and this is not  hyperbole)   require  a small book. In  it, nine brothers  and  their sister, creatures half-dog and half-human, travel through a number of very strange adventures  in  a  totally  improbable  landscape.  It  seems clear  from  the  context

30

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



that   the  children,  seemingly  children  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  are  abstract entities of calendrical-astronomical significance.
The  behaviour  of  these  beings  is utterly  incomprehensible  in  human   tenns. They  offer  their  sister as bait  to catch  a supernatural sea  monster;  their  sister commits incest with one of the brothers  (the trickster Pitch,  who seems to repre­ sent  the  fall equinox)   and  is later  caught  lying with  "North", a sort  of Cold Giant  associated here with  the winter solstice. Certain  passages occur  which are obviously intended  to be taken "in  reverse":  Heron, who talks entirely in contra­  dictory and nonsensical terms, offers them three canoes, those of a bird, a rainbow trout  and  a  jellyfish:  they  choose Jellyfish's canoe  as the  fastest. There  is an utterly obscure and  puzzling  (puzzling  even on second or  third  reading)   adven­ ture  in  which  one of the  brothers,  hunting  groundhogs,  becomes a  groundhog  himself and  is caught  in  a  deadfall  by the others. Yet,  by means  of a  breath­  takingly ingenious  use of doubledged  and  ambiguous imagery,  it turns  out  that he has at the same time  ("thinking himself to be a human", so to speak)  caught his  brothers,  who  have  themselves  been  turned  into  groundhogs,   in  his  own deadfall.
The  use of "reverse  language" seems to arise out of the  necessity to consider
two sides of the year-circle  at  once, to establish, for example,  that  the sun is in constellation A when the full moon appears in constellation  B, which is opposite to A on the year-circle. The  necessity of keeping the movements  of the sun and moon  in  the  mind  at  the  same  time, which we would treat  as a  mathematical problem, is handled  here  by inventing  two contradictory  actions  which are  pre­ sented  as a  sort of  paradoxical  single action.  I  know of no  precise  analogy  in
literature,  outside  of  MallarmC's  Un  Coup  de Des, which  Octavia  Paz  has, in
his Claude  Levi-Strauss,  an Introduction, compared  to Levi-Strauss's  Le Cru et le Cuit;  the nearest analogy is in music, in that  form of counterpoint in which a cantus firmus and its mirror  image are played at the same time. But here it is an episode in a very complicated  fugue.
The  story is a sort  of verbal  planetarium  whose chief purpose  seems to have
been  the  regulation  of  the  calendar.  It also identifies  constellations  presiding over intermediate  periods of the solar year. It seems to concern itself with  recon­ ciling  an  "astronomer's  year",  based  on  the  rising of  the  sun  in  certain  key constellations, with the  "popular" lunar  year, based on the  phases of  the moon. In  its  simultaneous  concern  with  "opposite  points"  of the  year-circle  and  the relative  positions of  the  sun  and  full moon  it  would  indeed seem  to  make  it possible for the adept  to predict  at least some eclipses, something  which, accord-

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



ing  to  tradition,   native  astronomers  could  do. Such  a  statement   could  not  be proved,  however, until sites known  to be used for celestial observation  had  been surveyed  according  to  methods  similar  to that  established  by A. Thorn  for the study of British megalithic observatories.
One  such site  was the  hill named  Andimaul,  near  Kitsegeucla.  In  his book, From Potlatch  to Pulpit,  the Tsimshian  clergyman, W. H. Pierce, described how native  astronomers  belonging to different tribes would gather  on this hill, whose name  means "Seat  of Astronomers",  to observe the setting of the sun, the spring and  the  fall being  particularly  significant times. They  had  done  this so long, he said, that  certain  observation  points, used as seats, were worn away from constant use. After  consulting  among  themselves, they would send  out  messengers to the different   tribes  with   their   predictions   of  events  for  the  following  season - weather,  the size of the salmon  run or the berry harvest, and  possible epidemics. Astrology of this kind,  pseudoscience though  it was, must  have  depended  upon an elaborate form of astronomical symbolism.



b.E READER may have been asking himself what relationship such  matters,  interesting  enough  in  themselves, bear  to  literature. The  answer must  be that  the  imitation  of the  abstract  rhythms of  nature,  temporal  or  geo­ metrical,  has in most ages been considered as much the work of the artist as the imitation  of the  patterns  of human  life or the depiction  of plants  and  animals. Ovid's  Fasti and  its congeners in classical and Asian cultures are more than mere aids to scientific memory;  they are  true  poems, and  if  we cannot enjoy them as such,  it is our  loss. Yet  these are  already  far removed from  the  tradition: they are  discursive poems about  astronomy  and  the calendar. In  Laguadjina  we have a much  older form, a story which is, so to speak, a set of  astronomical  formulas, in which the movements of the heavenly bodies dealt with are imitated  as literally as possible, in the form of a fictional adventure. The result, even when the story is only partially  understood  (and  we cannot  hope to interpret  it in full),  affords keen resthetic satisfaction.
The  interesting  thing  is that  a good deal of the high verbal  art  of the great
period of European literature did much the same thing, though  in the context of pure   art.   Recent   investigations  into  the  use  of  numerical  symbolism  in  the English poetic tradition have  uncovered  the frequent use, as formal skeletons, of astronomical-calendrical cycles and sequences of significant numbers. Alastair Fowler and  A. Kent  Hieatt  have examined Spenser in this light with astonishing

WILDERNESS NO  WILDERNESS



results:  the  works of  Chapman, Milton  and  others  have  also been  examined, though  in  less detail.  The  existence of Chaucer's  work on  the  astrolabe  would make one suspect similar  patterns  in his work. This great tradition seems to have died out, at least among the poets during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries,  though  Tennyson,  a  more  intellectual  poet  than  is usually  realized, returned  to it to some extent  in  his now stupidly  underrated  Idylls  of the  King. Lowry rediscovered it in  part  in Under the  Volcano by an  agonizing  process of trial and  error,  but  he had composed a great work of counterpoint "by  ear"  and the  effort  so exhausted  him  that  he could  never  repeat  it.  Its  death   must  be related  to  the  disappearance  of the  ability  to  write effective and  shapely  long poems and  verse plays:  it was no longer understood that  the very skeleton of the work  must  be  a  kind  of abstract  image, and  would-be epic  poets merely  con­ structed  a  plot and  draped  imagery  over it. Only in music was the  great  work still possible:  elaborate  forms such as the fugue and  the sonata  arose out  of  the decay of major  poetic form and  took over many of its devices. The  final collapse of  traditional  harmony  and  counterpoint   (with  their  double  roots  in  ancient acoustical  symbolism and  post-Renaissance  acoustical science)  has now  brought the age of the musical masterwork to an end as well.
In  our  day,  however, the literary  stream  seems to be seeking its old  channel,
assisted by strange  and  perhaps  unknowing  engineers. Structuralist critics such as Roland  Barthes, searching  for a model which will best represent  the  manner in  which  artistic  form  may  govern  the  use of  words,  have  found  themselves using  an  image  of a  vertical  systematic axis crossing a  horizontal  syntagmatic one,  which  is very similar  to the  basic Amerindian  "model"  of the structure of the universe. The  most interesting  current  researches into  poetic form,  therefore, are   discovering  structures   similar  to  those  which  Levi-Strauss  has  found  in Amerindian  myth.
One  can  even say, staggering  though  the claim may seem, that  close study of
the  native  tradition   makes  it  possible to  reconcile  international culture   at  its most abstract  and  "universalist" with local culture  at its most concrete,  to find, so to speak,  that  Parnassus  where local wild-flowers grow and  on  whose slopes one  may  find  such  homely  Canadian animals  as  beaver,  porcupine  and  black bear.  One  may find, for example, links between such an apparently  wild British Columbian  tale as Laguadjina, Ovid's  Fasti and The Faery Queen, a link which is not  arbitrary,  but  is based on the survival of a very ancient  calendrical  tradi­ tion  in  all  three  works.  In  such  intellectual  adventures   we  may  follow  the Romans  who, in a spirit of syncretism, discovered the faces of their own gods in


33

WILDERNESS NO WILDERNESS



the  gods  of  the  European  tribes  they  conquered-a  process which  at  first intuitively  impresses  one  as  right,  which  further  study  seems  to  condemn   as naive, superficial and  unworthy  of a modem  mind,  and which yet further  study restores to its first  position,  though  vastly enriched.  The  process appears  as the humanisation  of the  wilderness, though  this too would  be a superficial  descrip­ tion, since it is really the  discovery of the humanity  of what  was not  wilderness at all.
Could  not  one  of  the  missions of  Canadian   literature  in  both  English  and
French-if  the two may be allowed a common mission-be that  of showing a certain  absurdity  in the split which one finds in both United  States and Spanish­ American  literatures,  and  which is caused by conflict between a European  tradi­  tion  and  a native  one? To  show that  the conflict is not inevitable,  though,  one must  dig  deep  enough  to  find  the  common  root.  The  point  of con junction,  I would  suggest, is to be found  in  the most local  tradition  of all -Indian  myth­ ology-and in  that   mythology  at  its  apparently   most strange  and  alien,  the
cosmological myths.




FINCHES FEEDING
 

P. K. Page


They fall like feathered cones from the tree above
sumi the painted grass where the birdseed is skirl like a boiling pot
or a shallow within a river -
a bar of gravel breaking the water up.

Having said that, what have I said? Not much.
Neither my delight nor the length of my watching is conveyed
and nothing profound recorded, yet these birds as I observe them
stir such feelings up -
such yearnings for weightlessness, for hollow bones, rapider  heartbeat, eastjwest eyes
and such wonder-seemingly half-remembered -as they rise
spontaneously into air, like feathered cones.


34


NORTHERN UTOPIA



Allison Mitcham



A VERY  GREAT NUMBER  of  contempom<y Canad;an novelists, both  French  and  English,  have focused on the  northern  wilderness in
the  belief that  it  is what  makes  Canada  distinctive  and  original.  For  novelists with  styles and  attitudes  as diverse as Gabrielle  Roy's and  Margaret  Atwood's, Yves Theriault's and  Henry  Kreisel's, Claude  Jasmin's  and  Harold  Horwood's' (and  the list could go on  and  on ... )   the  northern  wilderness has become the dominant  Canadian myth.
For all these novelists the northern wilderness is a place where men and women in flight from what  they feel are  the decadent  and  sterile values of the "South" may  seek a  heightened  self-awareness-perhaps even  perceptions  so  transcen­ dental as to be termed "salvation". In their terms the "South" frequently becomes not only the towns, cities and outposts of civilization in Southern  Canada  or even the  United  States,  but  by implication  all Western  civilization.  The  North  thus represents a vast and  pure, though  at the same time a terrible and cold, reservoir of enchantment, where the disenchanted  individual can hope to escape from the false utopia in which  he feels trapped.  His choice, if  he remains  in the "South" appears  to be between a mechanistic, communal and soft "brave  new world" and a  mechanistic,  communal  but  humiliatingly  brutal  and  ugly world  approaching that  of  Orwell's  Nineteen  Eighty-Four.  The  North-a  new  utopia,  as many seem  to  see  it-stands  out  frequently  in  contemporary   Canadian  novels  as perhaps  the  only  place  left, not  only in  Canada  but in all  the  Western  world, where  man   can  yet  pursue  a  personal  dream-where  he  can  hope  to  be individual.
The  farther  north  they  go, our  novelists feel, the  more  likelihood there  is of
their protagonists fulfilling their dreams. Thus Paul, the terrorist-protagonist of Jasmin's  Ethel  et le terroriste,  who is an expatriate  to the United  States after  his act of terrorism in Montreal,  engages in a mental flight to the North  Pole. If he could only get there,  he feels, he would be able to purify and  renew himself:

35

NORTHERN  UTOPIA



Nous roulerons vers le nord et nous depasserons Ie pays. Nous irons jusqu'au  pole, chez  Ies Esquimaux.  Et  Ia, on  se deguisera  avec de  Ia !outre,  de  Ia martre,  du phoque.  Nous  nous construirons  un  joli peti  iglou. Nous serons bien, au  propre, au frais, au blanc. Le pole sera notre retraite,  notre ultime voyage de noces. Et Ia, on se Iaissera geler. Mais bien geler pour un temps infini. Nous hibernerons, Ethel. Jusqu'a ce  que  cette  crise  passe. Quand   nous  nous  reveillerons  de  notre  long sommeil, il se sera passe peut-etre  tout un siecle et nous serons demeures  jeunes et frais,  dispos,  prets  a  rouler  de  nouveau,  a  fuir  autre  chose. Et  quand  on  sera fatigue  de  nouveau,  eh  bien,  on  reviendra,  on  remontera  encore  une  fois tout Ia-haut, au pole et de nouveau ce sera un long sommeil congele.

It  is  also  to  the  far   north, the   Ungava Bay  area-and  once  again   Eskimo country-that Pierre,  Gabrielle Roy's  artist-hero in  La  montagne  secrete, goes in  pursuit  of artistic  truth; and  it is there  that  he finds his inspiration, his magic mountain. Pierre's  love of the  North  produces  a magic  glow in his work. Conse­ quently, the  expansive and  genuine feelings  behind  his northern  drawings stand  out  in contrast to the cramped and  bleak feelings which seep from drawings such as  those  produced by Sinclair Ross's  artist-minister Philip  Bentley  in  As  for me and  my  House. Philip,  in  contrast to Pierre,  has lost the  capacity to dream, the imaginative quality so necessary  to the  artist,  by being confined  within  the false­ fronted limits of a series of Southern Canadian small towns such  as Horizon.



ARTISTIC IMAGINATION and fulfilment  are again  linked  with the  North   as  inspiration in  Yves  Theriault's Tayaout, fils  d'Agaguk. Tayaout, an  Eskimo  boy inspired  by visions of past  Eskimo traditions, dreams of travelling alone  northward, far  beyond  the  present  habitations of  man -and  of  finding there   the  mystical   lost  stone  of  his  people.  When   he  does  make  the  perilous northern  journey  and  does  find  the  stone,  he  dreams  of  forms  which  he  must extract from  this  special  stone.  In  turn  he tells other  members of the  tribe  that they must  consult  their  own dreams so as to perceive and  bring  out the individual soul  dormant within   each  stone.  Art  thus  becomes  the  province of  every  indi­ vidual  able  to  heighten his perceptions through meditation and  exclusion  of the materialistic  values   which   rule   the   "South". All  goes  well  until   the  tribe   is lured  into  selling  sculptures to  a  "Southern" trader and  consequently  betraying their dreams  and  their traditions.
Yves Theriault and  Harold Horwood are  the two contemporary Canadian novelists  who  are  perhaps most  convinced  of the ideal  or  utopian aspects  of the North. Both  subscribe to  the  notion  that  the  Northland is, as  Horwood put  it,

NORTHERN  UTOPIA



"such  a splendid  land -... splendid  like a country  in a vision",2   and  that  the Eskimos are,  potentially at least "a nation of visionaries".3  Heroic  characters are the result of the authors'  subscribing to this thesis. Tayaout,  Agaguk, and  Gilling­ ham  are  epic heroes-legendary figures who stand  out in stark  contrast  to the usual non-heroes of contemporary  Western fiction. All three work toward achiev­ ing  an  ideal  which  is at  once  physical and  spiritual.  Physically, they  are  all of exceptional  strength,  with  an  ability  to survive in  the  world's  harshest  climate. Spiritually,  they are committed  to an ideal:  Tayaout  and Gillingham  to restoring to  the  Eskimo the  past  traditions  which the  white  man,  whether  missionary or trader,   has  in   his  meddling   intrusions  into   the  Arctic   almost  succeeded  in destroying;  and  Agaguk  (and  his family)  to living  a solitary Thoreauvian type of existence in  a  Walden  wilder  than  anything  Thoreau  imagined  even in  the wilderness  of  the  Maine  woods. The  magical  aura  which  has surrounded the lives of  Gillingham  and  Tayaout  persists  during  their  final  disappearance and presumed  death,  and  we are led to believe that, in much the same way as Saint­ Exupery's   "petit   prince",   they  are  endowed  with  immortality   for  those  who sympathize with them.
The  Eskimos alone among the peoples of the Western world have at their best, Theriault and  Horwood maintain, an ideal of excellence divorced from material­ ism. Thus  if an  ideal society is to exist anywhere, they see the far  North-the North  well beyond  the greedy  reaches and  the endurance  of the  men  from  the South -as  the  land  where  dreams  can  be  pursued  and  sometimes  fulfilled, provided  that  the  individual   has  extraordinary  strength  of  body  and  of spirit. The  land  itself, the Arctic,  moreover demands  the  preservation  of such qualities as generosity, trust and  loyalty as the price of  survival:  "If you live in the Arctic your life automatically  is in your brother's keeping."4  Affection and  loyalty then are  shown  to  be, ironically,  much  more  in  evidence in  the  Arctic  than  in  any "Christian" country  paying  lip  service  to  such  ideals  because  of  the  Eskimos' natural   personal warmth  and  the  fact  that  "the  people they love are  left free."5
Another Canadian novelist who is also aware of the dream of a northern utopia
is Henry  Kreisel. Kreisel's immigrant, Theodore  Stappler  in The  Betrayal, in his flight from the remembered  horrors of Nazi Germany  finds Canada generally an "innocent country"  because  it  has been spared  the  mass betrayals  and  the  gas ovens. However, it is only when  he goes to the Arctic as a doctor  that  he finds peace  and  fulfilment:  " ... he found  there, in  the Arctic  wilderness, a kind  of peace, and  a sense of unity with elemental forces." For Stappler,  as for Dosteov­ sky's  Raskolnikov,  the  northern   experience  is  a  healing  one-an  experience

37

NORTHERN  UTOPIA



which  dissipates  his  intellectual   arrogance  and  endows  him  with  the  faith  to commit  himself to life. Like Gillingham  and Tayaout,  Stappler  is at last mysteri­ ously swallowed up by the strong and violent forces of the North.
Margaret   Atwood  in  Surfacing and  Gabrielle  Roy in  La  Riviere   sans repos, like  Henry  Kreisel,  give  only  fleeting  glimpses of  the  ideal  possibilities of  the North.6   The  ideal  is quickly  obscured,  they show, by Southern  and  particularly by "American" invasions which  result in the destruction  of the natural environ­ ment  and  the disruption  of established patterns  of life. The  heron  killed only to satisfy a crude  blood lust and  left hanging  putridly from the tree on the portage represents  for  Atwood  the  destruction  of Northern  purity  and  innocence  sacri­ ficed to Southern  lust and  insensitivity. Roy's novel begins with  the rape of Elsa, a gentle Eskimo girl, by an American  G.l. during his brief stay at the Fort Chima base.  The   rape  seems  for  Roy  symbolic  of  a  more  general  American   (and Southern  Canadian) rape of the North. Such a rape results in the birth of a new sort  of individual  who  really  belongs nowhere -a  being out  of tune  with  the traditional rhythms  of  the  North.  Despite  the  wilderness flights of  the  central characters  in  both  Atwood's  and  Roy's  novels,  they remain  unhappy  and  dis­ satisfied because they are  too firmly caught  in  the nets of civilization  to be able to  escape   permanently -to   fulfil  themselves  in  the  wilderness  as  Tayaout,  Gillingham and Stappler  do.
Nevertheless the  pattern  of northward  flight in pursuit  of a utopian  dream  is
clearly a dominant  pattern  in contemporary  Canadian  fiction.7    The  farther  into the  northern  wilderness  the  characters  go the  more hope  there  seems to  be of their  dreams  being fulfilled. Indeed  all the novelists looked at in this essay seem to  agree  that  "This land  gets  better  as you go north.... Cleaner."8  They  also seem to subscribe to the Thoreauvian pronouncement  that: "In  civilization, as in a  southern  latitude,   man  degenerates  at  length,  and  yields to the  incursion  of more northern  tribes."9  Obviously  then, according to our  novelists, we would do well to learn  from  the  North  and  from the  Eskimo-and to learn  our  lessons well -before we destroy him and  his environment,  and thus perhaps our dreams of a northern utopia.


NOTES

1 Gabrielle  Roy  (particularly  La  Montagne   secrete- I968  and  La  Riviere  sans repos- I970), Margaret  Atwood (Surfacing- I972), Yves Theriault  (particu­ larly Agaguk- 1961, Tayaout, fils d' Agaguk-1970, Ashini-1963, Le ru d'Ikoue
- I963),  Henry  Kreisel  (The    Betrayal- I964), Claude  Jasmin   (Ethel   et  le
terroriste -1 964) , Harold Horwood (White  Eskimo -I 972) .

NORTHERN  UTOPIA



2   Harold Horwood, White  Eskimo, p. 59·
s Ibid., p. 67.
4   Ibid.,  p. 174.
5   Ibid., p. 72.
6   Roy's idyllic episode  is longer  and  more  memorable: her  depiction  of the  happy and productive  life which Elsa, Jimmy and L'Oncle  Ian  live at the old Fort-Chimo before  Roch  Beaulieu,  the  policeman,  is sent across the  river  to bring  them  back to civilization so that Jimmy can attend school.
7   Some other  novels dealing with this theme are:  Andre Langevin's  Evade de la nuit (1951)  and  Le temps  des hommes  (1956),  Bertrand  Vac's  Louise Genest  (1957), Ethel Wilson's Swamp  Angel ( 1954), Roger Lemelin's Pierre le Magnifique  ( 1952), Robert  Harlow's Scann  (1972),  Harry Bernard's  Les  jours sont longs (1951).
8 Harold Horwood, White  Eskimo, p. 130.
9   Henry  David  Thoreau, A  Week  on  the  Concord  and  Merrimack   Rivers,  Signet
Classics, p. 57·








POEM

P. K. Page


Prince, to whom three ladders  lead, dreams and  dreaming are my lot. Waken me and  help me up
rung  by glittering rung until fetters fall from me and free those I fetter,  those I love
locked in my entwined embrace like an endless knot.
Let us move as air in air skywards up the Cosmic Tree
and  where its blueness fades to white
and  the Tree  begins to shine, let us through its silver leaves glimpse its golden fruit.

39


SERIOUS WHIMSY



R. D. MacDonald




IN THE  MIDST of World  War  II, George  Orwell wrote: And  this  period  of  [the  last]  ten  years or so in which  literature was mixed  up with pamphleteering, did  a great  service to literary criticism, because it destroyed the  illusion  of  pure  aestheticism.  It  reminded  us that  propaganda in some form or the other  lurks in every book, that  every work of art has a meaning  or purpose
-a political,  social  and  religious  purpose-and that  our  aesthetic  judgements
are always coloured  by our prejudices  and  beliefs. It debunked  art  for art's  sake.1

Orwell's statement is useful  to the  reader  who  believes that  Ethel  Wilson's Hetty Dorval  was  written for  more  than  the  sake  of art,  escape  or  pleasure  and  who suspects  at  the same  time  that  her  novel is far  more  than  a simple  moral  sermon. Orwell  forces  me  to ask in  what  respect  Ethel  Wilson is a serious  novelist, espe­ cially when  her tale seems to cater  uncritically to the escapist fantasies of a female  readership.
The  answer  lies in  a whimsy  which  permits  Wilson  to render, as the  playfully serious  Emily  Dickinson   does,  the  sudden, often  confused  and  always  innocent shifts of the inner-!or the raw self. The  whimsy exhibited  in the quotation below is  both  amusing and  disturbing as  the  narrator, Frankie, betrays  the  incredible impropriety of  the  childish   mind: this  mind  lies at  the  base  of  Wilson's  own whimsy  and  so often  becomes  the  "subject matter" of Wilson's  fiction.

I felt sorrier  for Ernestine  than  for myself because no one likes to be snubbed. And she loved dogs so dearly  that  when she was fifteen she waded into the Fraser River  just below the  Bridge, and swam out a few strokes to save a little  dog, and was carried  away  by the  current  and  was drowned.  It  was terrible.]   [The  little dog was drowned too. [italics and brackets, mine]

This  is  not  simply   the  child-like   and  innocent whimsy  of  a  Huckleberry Finn employed  to expose  the  pompous deceits  of the adult  world.  Nor is it simply  the scatter-brained  and   inverted  whimsy   of  a   Leacock   displaying ironically the inevitable  absurdities  of  the  human  condition, though   both   kinds  of  whimsy,

SERIOUS WHIMSY



particularly   Leacock's,  are  often  apparent together  in  Hetty  Dorval, especially in the digressions/progressions of Frankie's mind and words.
Throughout Hetty Dorval  whimsy is also apparent in a larger sense as Wilson's
(not   Frankie's)    whimsy  continually   holds  up  possible opposites  of  meaning against  the simple drift of Frankie's  tale. Wilson's whimsical attitude generates a richly  complex  dialectic  which  moves outward  exploring  and  questioning  the bases of our  human  solidarity  ("No man an island"), and  yet at  the same time through  Hetty  and  through  Frankie  herself exploring and  questioning  the bases of our human separation  or insularity.
Though  the tale often seems a simple, extended  parable,  it is really a starting
point,  an image or shape  in the mind, like the Eskimo carver's  bear tooth,  to be fondled,  turned  this way and  that,  reshaped  until its inherent  reality  is released to  both  artist  and  spectator.  Seeing Hetty  Dorval  as a serious work of  explora­ tion, I must fully agree with Desmond Pacey's statement:

It  would be almost possible to treat the novel as an allegory, in which  Inno­ cence meets Evil in the disguise of Beauty, is temporarily enchanted  thereby, is made  wise by Parental  Wisdom, and  succeeds finally in  cheating  Evil out  of another  victim. But although  there is just enough of this element in  the novel to make such a summary  possible, and  to set up  interest-analogies  with Spenser's Faerie Queen and Bunyan's Pilgrim's  Progress, the summary grossly over-simplifies the moral and psychological subtlety of the book.2

I  only  wish  that  Pacey  and  Orwell  had  gone further  in  emphasizing  that  an allegorical  work can  be more  than  didactic  or partisan  and  in recognizing  that novels like Crane's  The Red  Badge  of Courage,  James's The Turn of the  Screw and  Wilson's  Hetty   Dorval  become  beautiful  and  serious works of art  as each explores and  questions the very premises upon which each allegory or tale seems to be built.
What  I  have written  does not go far in resolving the conflicting  claims of art and  morality,  beauty  and  duty.  But  it should  help  to  draw  attention  to  the central  dilemma  presented  in  Hetty   Dorval:   which  way is Frankie  to incline? Toward   the  languid,  self-indulgent  narcissism of Hetty?  And  similarly  towards the  composed, self-contained  and  reflected beauty  of Sleeping  Beauty,  i.e., the framed  and  mirrored  reflection  of a  British Columbian  coastal  mountain?3   As Pacey indicates, the other  alternative  is that of "parental wisdom",  which seems occasionally no more than  the constrained  and conventional  response of a garri­ son mentality, but which is referred emphatically again and again to the humanist tradition  as expressed by Donne's  "No  man is an  lland,  intire  of it  selfe" and

SERIOUS WHIMSY



to the  moral  realization embodied in the close, loving union  of Frankie's parents. How  opposite   are  the  conflicting claims  of art  and  morality, beauty   and  duty, the  private and  the  public,  is made  clear: Frankie soon  learns  after  her  secret visits  to  Hetty   that  such   private actions  belong  to  the  public  domain, that  she "lived  in a glass goldfish  bowl  where  the  behaviour of each  fish was visible to all other  fishes, and  also  to grown-up people outside  and  in the  vicinity  of the glass bowl."  And  she  learns  that  the  hostile silence of her  parents has  been  caused  by her  own  artifice,  her  cunning silence, which  has established  empty  links between her parents and  herself.
Which  way  then  is Frankie to incline?  The  epigraph, her  own  moral  impera­ tives, and  the  description of the  pain  caused  by false consciousness assert unequi­ vocally  that  duty  precedes  beauty. And  yet Frankie's language  again  and  again  betrays  a  falsely  precocious realization of all this, a "wisdom" which  is not  won or  not  genuine even  as she speaks  retrospectively. Moreover as with  the death  of her  friend   Ernestine, Frankie speaks  too  easily,  too  glibly  about matters which should  be alluded to only  indirectly or in a hushed  tone. The bright  impropriety of  her  voice  suggests  occasionally a  creature who  is as  illegitimate, as  natural, and   thereby   as  removed   from  "human" feeling  and  propriety as  Hetty Dorval  herself.  My  response  to  Frankie's voice is anticipated  by Frankie's own  confused  response  to  Hetty's bright  glibness  as Hetty  speaks  ecstatically  about the  thrust­ ing, integral and  natural flight of the Inigrating geese:
"Can  we often see that?" [Hetty] asked. "Will it ever come again? Oh Frankie, when we stood there and  the geese went over, we didn't seem to be in our bodies at all, did  we? And  I  seemed  to be up  with them where  I'd  really love to be. Did you feel like that?"
That   was  so  exactly  how  the  wild  geese always made  me  feel,  that  I  was amazed.  Perhaps  Mother  and  Father  felt like that  because they, too, dearly loved watching  the  geese passing  overhead,  but  somehow we would  never  never  have said that  to each  other-it  would have made us all feel uncomfortable. But Mrs. Dorval said it naturally, and  was not at all uncomfortable,  and it gave me a great deal of pleasure to agree with her without confusion and apology.
Is  Hetty's kind   of  speech   "natural" or  "unnatural"?  Certainly throughout much   of  Hetty   Dorval,  both   the  "natural" and   "artificial" are  construed as "unnatural" -somehow   "dishonest".  And   certainly   there   is  a   false  ring   to Frankie's meditation upon  her  departed friend  Ernestine. And  are  we to take the rather abstract meditation below  as if it  were  spoken  in  retrospect by  an  older and  wiser  Frankie? Or  are  we  to see the  abstract language as a  hint  of a  pre­ mature and  rather empty  speculation?

42

SERIOUS WHIMSY



When  we are  young we have,  by nature,  no concern  with  permanent change or  with  death.  Life  is  forever.  Then  suddenly  comes  the  moment  when  death makes  the  entrance  into  experience,  very  simply,  inexorably;  our  awareness  is enlarged and we move forward with dismay into the common lot, and the bright innocent  sureness of permanency  has left us. There  had never been a time when I could  not  remember  my  almost  daily  companion   Ernestine; she  was  my  very particular friend  and  I was hers, and  nearly all our fun  (and  that  was nearly all our life) had been together.

The   tinsel  quality of  this  is betrayed   surely  by  the  exaggerated  schoolgirlish insistence   upon   an   uninterrupted  constant   friendship:  how  could  it  really  be such  when   Frankie has  described   the  remoteness  of  her  ranch-home from  the town,  school  and  boarding home  of Lytton?  And  if "our" collective  awareness is so "inexorably" enlarged, how  is it that  Frankie so easily reverts  to the  arrogant "closed  corporation" of youth  when  she  and  her  mother  are  aboard ship?  And how  is it  that  after  the  death of  her  father and  her  sudden   quickened  concern for  Rick,  she  forgets  for  ten  days  in Paris  her  duty  to  protect  Rick  and   Molly from  the charms of Hetty  Dorval?
I  acknowledge the  inappropriateness of  my  above  priggish  quizzing  because it is obvious  that   Ethel  Wilson  is no Puritan satirically  belittling Frankie as she sets her  against  a  high  and  supposedly  achievable ideal: instead  Wilson  renders the  inevitable and  thereby,  paradoxically, the  natural and  innocent movements of  the   amoral  mind.   That Wilson  is  lightly  indulgent I infer  from   her  play­ fully  coy  presentation  of  her   coy  narrator-this  Frankie  who  must   be  like Wilson  herself,  far  from  frank. As an example, note, as Frankie is professing  her tremendous love for  Molly,  Richard and  Uncle  David,  that  she has immediately before  this  been  checked  by her  mother  for  her  youthful  arrogance and  unkind­ ness,  upon  which   Frankie attempts, in schoolgirlish  style,  to  cover  up  in  a  way that   should   make   the  reader   wonder   about   the  authenticity of  her  tone  and observe Wilson's  own ironic play over her fictional narrator's voice:

I  should  like to describe  Molly and  Richard  and  their  guardian, 'our'  Uncle David  Trethewey,  because they are very important to me and  have meant  a great deal in my life and  now  [now? what does this mean, that she succeeded in marry­ ing  Richard?]  they always  will. But this is not a story of me, nor of  them,  in a way, but of the places and ways known to me in which Hetty Dorval has appeared. It is not even Hetty Dorval's whole story because to this day I do not know Hetty's whole story and she does not tell. I only know the story of Hetty by inference  and by strange  chance.
(italics  and bracketed  words, mine)

43

SERIOUS WHIMSY



The  narrative technique   here  is like that  of  Ford  Madox  Ford  in  A  Good Soldier where the unreliable  narrator, Dowell, insists that  he cannot  get his story going  properly  and   each  time  he  is obviously  on  the  verge  of self-discovery insists that  he does "not  know".  The  emphatic  adjectives and  adverbs  crowded into  one  sentence  surely  suggest  a  questionable  emotion.  And  surely,  despite Frankie's  protestations,  this is the story of our less than candid  or less than  aware Frankie,   especially  as  it  is  Hetty's   effect  upon  Frankie  which  is  continually relayed to the reader-Hetty as one of the affecting "places" or "ways" drawing forth  Frankie.  And  surely it is the  reader  also who can know only by inference what  Frankie  is  because  even  Frankie  as a  fictional  presentation  is not  to  be known  "directly". In  this passage then  I see Wilson warning  us of how little we know  of  ourselves, our  friends,  our  acquaintances in  fiction,  and  our  novelist herself who is at all times betraying  and yet cloaking her self in her fiction.

Is THIS AN   EXCESSIVE  ELABORATION from such a short  pas­
sage?  Perhaps.  But  in  the same  paragraph Frankie  and  her coy shadow,  Ethel
Wilson, continue  to insist upon  the impossibility of having a direct knowledge of Hetty.  This  insistence  reflects back all too appropriately to the narrator herself. Because even she cannot  know fully what  she herself is, she too is relayed to us in a rather removed, indirect and fragmentary fashion:
But one cannot  invade and  discover the closed or hidden  places of a person like Hetty Dorval with whom one's associations, though significant, are fragmen­ tary, and for the added reason that Hetty does not speak-of  herself. And there­ fore her  gently impervious and  deliberately concealing exterior  does  not permit her to be known. One guesses only from what one discerns.

This,  I  contend,  is true  on  the  literal  level of Hetty,  but  also true  of our  less­ than-candid narrator who insists "but  this is not a story of me", and by extension true of the novelist herself smiling behind the mask of her narrator.
Occasionally  in  Hetty  Dorval, it would seem that  Wilson is being more than
playfully indulgent  with  her  narrator and  the languid  Hetty,  that  she approves as Nietzsche might  of the  unknowing  and  natural forces welling within,  behind and  below the thresholds  of the controlled and  civilized mind. Something  of this is suggested  in  Hetty's  and  Frankie's  ectstatic  absorption  in  the  powerful  and free flight of the migrating geese.
A  similar  kind  of  natural force,  undivided  and  exhilarating,  is experienced
by  Maggie  Vardoe  in  Wilson's  The   Swamp   Angel. After  Maggie  chooses to


44

SERIOUS WHIMSY



leave  her  narrow prison  of marriage for a fuller  life, she soon  finds that  her  new relationships bring  the  constraints of new  obligations,  and  she  is tempted  once again  to leave, this  time  in impatience with  her employer's foolishly  jealous  wife. She  stays,  but  the  magnitude of  her  decision  to stay  is emphasized by her  con­ trary   temptation  to   unchecked  freedom.   This   urge   is  caught  in   an   almost  Freudian metaphor of swimming. In  the  passage  below,  one  can  see  Maggie's realization of that  raw,  unimpeded surge  of power  which  the swimmer  feels:

There  was this extra  feeling about  the swim:  Maggie's life had so long seemed stagnant  that-now  that  she had moved forward  and found  her place with other people  again,  serving  other   people  again,  humouring   other   people,  doing  this herself, alone, as a swimmer  swims, this way or that,  self-directed  or directed  by circumstance-Maggie sometimes  thought   It's  like swimming;  it  is very  good, it's  nice, she thought,  this new life, serving other  people as I did  years ago with Father; but now I am alone and,  like a swimmer I have to make my own way on my own power. Swimming is like living, it is done alone.

Another consciousness,  however,  overlooks Maggie's swim  and  her  temptation to a primitive insularity:

Her  avatar  tells her that  she is one with her brothers  the seal and  the porpoise who tumble and  tumble in the salt waves; and as she splashes and cleaves through the fresh water she is one with them. But her avatar  had better  warn her that she is not  really seal  or  porpoise -that  is just a  sortie into  the  past,  made  by the miracle  of water-and  in  a  few minutes she will be brought  to earth,  brought again  to walk the  earth  where she lives and  must stay. Who  would  not be a seal or  porpoise? They  have a nice life, lived in the cool water  with  fun and  passion, without human relations, Courtesy Week, or a flame thrower.

Here  more,  than  in  Hetty Dorval, Ethel  Wilson recognizes  the attraction and  yet the impossibility  of a life lived for its own sake, just as she implies  more indirectly the attraction yet impossibility of art for art's sake.
Occasionally,  similar   representations  of  raw   force   are   suggested   in   Hetty
Dorval;   one  minor  instance is when  Frankie, like a cat,  senses  that  if she  will, she  can,  through gossip lightly  dropped, destroy  Hetty's chance to gain  a refuge or  security  in  marriage to  General Connot. Another instance  (one  which  Des­ mond  Pacey  misrepresents as sentimental) is to be seen as Hetty, who  has found  temporary refuge  in  Frankie's bed, is observed  by the  precocious, catlike, musing  child.  I think  the scene is one calculated to raise chills, because  as the "Evil" one lies helpless asleep in  the  "Innocent's" bed,  the  "Innocent" muses in a language which  appears  to  be  the  embodiment of charity,  while  in  fact  the  drift  of  her

45

SERIOUS WHIMSY



thought  begins  to  take   on  the  shape   of  an  angry,  crouching cat.  The  scene possesses  the   dream-like  qualities  of  a  fairy-tale.  Hetty   has   just  conjured in memory   and   word   the   unrestrained  flight  of  the  geese,  and   the  queer   night yelling  of the  coyotes  and  then  their  even  more  queer  silences.  Hypnotically this shared   memory,  for  the  moment, takes  on  a greater reality  to  the  two  women than   the  fact  of  Frankie's drab flat  in  London. Then  as the  older  and  "lined" Hetty falls asleep  grumbling for  the  moment  about  "people", those  who  prevent her  from  being  a  free  spirit,  she  instantly reverts  in sleep  to  that  sweet  beauty and  innocence of appearance which  one  might  expect  of  a  child.  Frankie now appears to muse  charitably over  the sleeping  body of her helpless opponent, only to  betray  the same  brutality of selfish will which  she despises in Hetty:

There  is that  in sleep which reduces us all to one common denominator of helplessness and  vulnerable   humanity.  The  soft rise and  fall  of  the  unconscious sleeper's  breast is a miracle.  It  is a binding symbol of our humanity. The  child in the lost attitude of sleep is all children, everywhere, in all time. A sleeping human being  is all  people,  sleeping,  everywhere  since time  began.  There  is that  in  the sleeper that arrests one, pitying, and that makes us all the same.

For  the  moment Frankie's language and  scope  suggest  an  onrush   of  magnani­ mous  understanding. But  in  the  next sentence,  the "fancy  language" and  "senti­ mental" tone  are  brought up  short  and  made  questionable by  the  shrillness  of Frankie's  perception of  human  helplessness  as  it  is enclosed  in  the  grotesque Donne-like image   ("the frail  envelope  of skin")  and  yet  more  bluntly   by  the violently  plain word  "prodded":

The  rise and  fall of the  frail  envelope of skin that  contains  the  microcosm of wonder  is the  touching  sign. If one  had  an  enemy, and  if one saw  that  enemy sleeping one might  be generously moved in pity of spirit by what lies there, unconscious.  I  looked  at  Hetty  and  could  almost  forgive  her  because  she  was Hetty, sleeping; but that  did not prevent me from prodding her and saying "Hetty, move over. I've got to sleep!"

Frankie's understandable rancour is seen more emphatically:

I lay there  trying to be as comfortable  as I could in one third  of my own single bed, and  trying to go to sleep. Little by little Hetty relaxed into a spacious S again. I got out of bed, furious, turned  back the bedclothes, woke her and said,  "HETTY, MOVE   OVER" and  gave her an  almighty smack on her round  silken bottom.

The  capitalized and  alliterated S's,  the  obviously  unwanted touch, and  through­
out  the  book  the  lurid  suggestions   of  Hetty   as  the  Scarlet   Woman-all  this

SERIOUS WHIMSY



suggests  that   the  contact   here  is sexual  and  is to  be  violently  resisted.  And  yet even   here,   Wilson's   playfully   deliberate  language,  especially   her   alliteration, suggests a droll  undercutting of this kind  of serious moral  or sexual  allegory.



EvEN GREATER  COMPLEXITY  is to be found  in the  climax  of Hetty   Dorval.  Comic   counterpoint,  melodrama  and   ominous  overtone  are arranged  in   strange    combination.  Before   the   scene   of   confrontation  where
Frankie challenges  Hetty   (like  the  governess in the  Turn of the  Screw  confront­
ing  her  evil apparitions), Hetty  is presented  as an ominous  force  in opposition to any  natural (in  this  context,  "humane")  harmony. This  presentation is achieved in  part   by  a  simple   juxtaposition  implying   conflicting opposites.   Speaking of Cliff House,  Frankie says:

It  was all natural  and  completely  young and  happy.  Nothing  spoiled  the  har­ mony and  confidence of our lives together, whether we were all together, whether we  were  apart,  or  whether  in  Cliff  House  by the sea.]   [I  had  not  thought   of Hetty Dorval for a long time.]
(italics and brackets, mine)

In the  next  chapter and  next sentence,  Frankie abruptly reports the  death of her father. I am  not arguing that  Hetty is presented  as the cause  of this death, but  I am arguing that  Hetty and  destruction are continually associated  together. Again, as Frankie has returned to London and  is musing  upon  Hetty, she explicitly  links destruction and  Hetty: "And  I was sure that  if Hetty in an idle or lonely moment entered   the  integrity of Cliff  House,  she would  later  as idly  depart and  leave  a wreckage  behind." Then   as she  describes  the  London  night  "growl[ing]  gently about   [her]  for  miles",  she  moves  abruptly and,   apparently, digressively  to  a "prevision of  craters,   rubble   and   death". The   passage  relates  obviously   to  the motif  of our  fragile  mortality, a recurring echo of Donne,  and  is more  obviously a  prevision  of the air  raids  of the  World  War  II. Here  then  large  demonic forces and Hetty Dorval are closely associated :

For what  you are destined,  you arrogant man,  walking  unhurriedly  along St. James's  Street?  And   you,  you  rolling  bus  with  your  load?  And   you, hurrying waiter? What  awaits us all? But  as I  walked  through  the  rain  in  Hyde  Park  to take  my bus  to Hetty's,  the skies above London  were still empty.  Paula's  father was a  journalist,  whose territory  was Middle  Europe, and  from  him  Paula  and  I had  caught  the feeling  of pre-vision  with  the oncoming  months,  but  more  than anywhere  in London, which  speaks through  air and stone, wall and  pavement.

47

SERIOUS WHIMSY



This  forbidding  vision of general  disaster encloses and  magnified  the smaller drama  of  Hetty  and  Frankie,  and  anticipates  the  close of the  book. There,  in two sentences, the  reader  discovers that  Hetty  has found  no pleasant  refuge in Vienna: instead she exists at  the centre of the imminent  war which is about  to unleash  its destructive  forces upon  the whole world. There  is more  here surely than  the ironic  justice of an imprisoned  Hetty  receiving her due, for throughout the  whole  novel  Hetty  herself  has  been  represented  as  the  embodiment  of  an attractive  yet destructive force of nature. The last passage:

Six weeks later  the  German  Army occupied Vienna.  There  arose a  wall of silence around the city, through which only faint confused sounds were sometimes heard.

As always Hetty  has apparently desired to be left alone in peace but  has become instead the source of chaos for others.
It would be wrong then  to emphasize too much the harmlessness and insignifi­
cance  of Ethel  Wilson's  droll  and  often indulgent  whimsy:  Hetty  too obviously stands  as a warning  against  self-indulgence. And yet even here Wilson's whimsy and  her heavy artificiality  serve to undercut  and  to bring into question Frankie's high sense of mission as she sets out to check the self-indulgent  and  destructive Hetty.
The  climax  then  is strangely  mixed.  A serious confrontation   and  revelation
are being worked out, and  yet the verisimilitude of character, action and thought is being  undercut  by a  whimsically and  yet deliberately inappropriate  language. Immediately  before the confrontation, Frankie's  purposes are made questionable by her high, almost euphoric  sense of mission. Already I have alluded to Frankie's disposition  to  abstract   or  allegorize  her  conflict  with  Hetty  into  a  crusade  of manichaean  proportions,  especially as she speaks of herself and  Hetty in terms of "forces".  Unlike  Henry  James's  governess, however, she is presented  as having sufficient self-awareness  to  be  "wary  enough  to suspect  the  queer  exhilaration that   [she]  felt".  As Frankie  approaches  Hetty's  lair, Mrs.  Broom is mistakenly reduced  to the simplistic image of the woman who does "nothing but close doors all  her life".  And  yet this false reduction  of Mrs. Broom and  the misplacing of Mrs. Broom outside the focus of light in which the two antagonists are to meet is beautifully  and  dramatically appropriate because the light, like the small drama, and  like the  polarization   of simple  opposites, is false. The  scene then,  at  this point,  instead  of becoming  tragic,  becomes comically inverted.  Though  it would be appropriate for  Hetty  in any  event to reduce  her opponent  in her easy and

SERIOUS WHIMSY



feline  way,  she  does it so aptly  that  the  reader  must  question  the  mainspring of
Frankie's actions  and  smile at  the  right  thing  done  for the  wrong  reason.

"What is it, Frankie?" she asked beguilingly, "you  funny child. You  appear­ I  remember  before -with the  air  of one making  portentous  announcements. Is it your  role? You  have become too serious, Frankie.  Wasn't  Paris gay enough?  I like your hair. It looks nice. Very smart. Pull up that fat little chair."

Not  only  does  Hetty  point  to  Frankie's false, histrionic  gestures; she construes
Frankie's desire to protect  as really the desire to possess: " ... my dear  little  prig.
. . . you're  in love with Richard yourself and you're very jealous".
If then  the  over-simplified opposites  of the  confrontation have  been  presented as  false,  one  might  expect  a  straight and   more  genuine statement in  Wilson's naturalistic  rendering  of  Mrs.  Broom's  declaration  that   she  is  Hetty  Dorval's mother. But  even  here,  there  is a  strange  combination of  the  artificial and  the real.  Such  an  unexpected revelation, one  might  argue,  belongs  only as an  accep­ table  convention in a melodrama or romance. And  yet, Wilson  is surely creating an  artificiality which  draws  attention to itself. Note  in the  quotation  below,  how much   the  language suggests  the  self-conscious,  analytic and  geometric concep­ tions of the cubist  painter:

Hetty  and  I  stared  at  this controlled  woman  who stood shaking  by the  table, steadying  herself with  her strong  hands  fiat on the  table  within  the  circle  of the lamplight. I stood up straight  and saw her hands square and  rough and the fingers short  and  square-tipped  pressed down hard  on the  table to prevent  their shaking as Mrs. Broom was shaking. The  lower part  of Mrs. Broom's face was in shadow but  on her forehead  I saw the veins stand out on the temples and  then I saw that the whole face was distorted. I cannot tell you how horrible this was and how frightening,  to see this woman of wood and of closed doors opened violently from within  with  great  suddenness  and  without  reason.  Hetty  put  her  hands  on  the couch  each  side  of  her  and  leaned  backwards  as  though  to  spring  away.  She looked in  horror  at  Mrs. Broom who, still leaning  toward  the  table, struggled  to compose  herself.

Out  of  the  elegant  lines, then,  of a drawing room  comedy  breaks  forth  the  un­ expected  and  violent  announcement of Hetty  Dorval's parentage, and  the heroic yet  ugly strength of  Mrs.  Broom.  The  ugliness of this strong  woman  is  empha­ sized  by  her  lamplit hands,  "red  ... swollen  and  congested", and  by  her  coarse language which  breaks  out  like a curse against  the  measured, elevated  and  false language of the heretofore drawing room comedy:

49

SERIOUS WHIMSY



She flashed round at me. "A lot you know, you comfortable safe ones. Wait till you've had your baby in secret, my fine girl, in a dirty foreign place, and found a way to keep her sweet and clean and a lady like her father's people was, before you talk so loud. Shut your mouth!"

I am not attempting to suggest that Wilson so modulates the tones of her novel that   she  achieves  here  a  sudden   and   powerful  and  naked  statement   which transcends  the  rather   ironic  whimsy  that  has  characterized  so much  of  Hetty Dorval. Certainly  an  unexpected  door is opened  by Mrs. Broom's words and  a level  of  meaning   much   larger  than  the  false  confrontation   of  opposites:   the roughness and  ugliness of this loving woman is very far removed from the defini­ tions  of  love  to  be  found  in  traditional   humanism  and  in  the  elegance  and detachment of Donne's Meditation ( xvi).
Mrs. Broom, a discordant  note of naturalism  breaking out of the ritualized confrontation,  indicates  once  more  the  richness  of  Ethel  Wilson's  vision,  her ironic and serious awareness that  this powerful, even heroic, love of Mrs. Broom's is founded  upon a force as natural, violent and irrational  as the blindly possessive instinct of a female cat or dog for its own offspring, a force not unrelated  to the raw impulses of both  Hetty  and  Frankie. Though  nowhere else in Hetty  Dorval is there such plain speaking as one finds in Mrs. Broom, even here Wilson renders her  character   in  such  a  way  that  she  is more  than  an  allegorical  type,  more than  a simple  vehicle expressing  the novelist's message. For  Mrs. Broom is not the  naked  embodiment   of  an  idea:  she has  too  contrivedly  been  dramatically presented in her naturalism  as a counterpoint  to the melodrama  of the simplistic confrontation of opposites. The  nakedness of her  plain speaking  opens  up  new vistas of ironic meaning  as Ethel  Wilson uncovers once more the unexpected  or overlooked  foundations,   both  beautiful  and  ugly, of human  impulse,  especially the "human" impulse of love.
I end this essay abruptly  because the book ends abruptly  and  undramatically. We do not know what  becomes of Mrs. Broom. We do not find out whether  the
.    fruit  of Frankie's  battle  is marriage  to Richard. And we do not  know whether the  "confused  sounds"  sometimes heard  from Vienna are  the trapped  sounds of a  Hetty  Dorval  wanting  to get  out,  or  whether  they are simply the  discord of war,  or  the  cries  of  an  inevitably  distressed  human  condition.  Like  Wilson's whimsical  voice,  this  ending  provokes  the  reader  to  question  and  to  explore "obvious"   realities  like  "love"   and   "responsibility"  without   expecting  simple answers. In this sense, Hetty  Dorval is a serious or genuine work of art.

50

SERIOUS WHIMSY



NOTES

1 George   Orwell, "The  Frontiers of Art  and  Propaganda", The  Collected  Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, Vol. II, (London, I968).
2    Desmond Pacey,  "The Innocent Eye:  The  Art  of Ethel  Wilson", Queen's Quar­ terly,  No.  6I   (Spring I954), 48-49.  And  see  Pacey's  Ethel  Wilson  (New  York, I 967) , especially  chapter 2,  "Hetty Dorval" and  the  concluding chapter. I  think Pacey  makes  Wilson  sound  far  too  tame,  too  harmlessly  optimistic, especially  in his  consideration of  Frankie's "innocence" and  her  later  "responsibility". Pacey's
statement  below  can  only  lead   to  unfortunate  simplification if  it  be  applied  to Hetty   Dorval:   "The  Development is  almost  always in  the  direction of  greater wisdom,  tolerance and  understanding: life, for  Mrs.  Wilson  as for  E. M.  Forster, is largely  a  matter of  development of  the  undeveloped heart.  In  almost  all her novels, her  chief  protagonists confront a crisis or series of crises which  shock  them out  of complacent egoism  into  some kind  of self-surrender or self-transcendence." My  italics  point  to Pacey's  own  awareness  of the limitations of his generalization, but  I  still insist  that  generally he makes  Wilson  and  particularly he makes  Hetty Dorval far  too tame.
3  This  artificial beauty,  an  analogue of Hetty  Dorval, Frankie finds far  more  pleas­ ing  and  memorable than   the  "real" mountains or  "real" people -"more lasting  even  than   the  cheerful reality  of old  Mrs.  Richards beaming anxiously  behind  a large  brown  teapot.... "
4    In  the  terms  of  this  book,  can  such  a closed or  insular  harmony and  pleasure be genuine? Similarly, can  the insular closeness of Frankie's parents be genuine? See the  innocent but  still mushy  account in Sister  Marie-Cecile's letter, p. 61. Wilson at  least  does  manage to  achieve  some credible  distance from  this  embarrassment by speaking through the nun.





KER)IMEIKOS CEMETERY
 


AI Purdy


So old that only  traces of death remain
for death is broken with the broken stones as if convivial party-goers came
and talked so long  to friends they stayed
to hear the  night birds call their  children home

All over  Athens rooster  voices wake the  past  converses with itself and  time is like a plow  that turns up yesterday
I move  and all around - : the marketplace
where something tugs my sleeves as I go by


GEORGE ELLIOTT

The Kissing Man




Denis Duffy






Certainly  the  world is immeasurably  beautiful, but it is quite  horrible. In a small  village in  the  country, where there  are  few  people and  nothing much   happens,  "old   age,  disease, and   death"   are  experienced   more intensely, in greater detail, and more nakedly than elsewhere.

Karl  Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, trans. Aniela Jaffe.


r.  AN "uNDERGROUND  CLASSic"? Perish  forbid,  but  I read  the  book at  Clara Thomas' insistence,  in  the  same  way  friends  had  pressured  me  into  reading A  Clockwork Orange and  Dune   before they had  caught  on. Once  I had  read Elliott's  book  (he  published  it  in I g62  and  hasn't  had  a  thing  out  since),  I began  passing it on,  to  the  extent  of  reading  it aloud  to  (willingly)   captive guests. It's catching.

2.   CAGEY  in  public  converse   ("A  very  tough  cookie,"  muttered   one  of  my students  after  a  class Elliott  attended), the author  has let the  following drop: a)   "nostalgia" means going home, but with  pain;
b)   it is a feeling we seek refuge in because the pain nostalgia brings is preferable to the anguish of the present;
c)  if  themes  and   passions  in  various  of  the  stories  in  the  collection  remain unresolved, it is because nothing in life is ever resolved.

3·  RITUAL as resolution:  rituals attempt  to congeal life's fluidities. The  wedding feast  states  that   a  relationship   both  social  and  sexual  has  or  ought  to  have reached  a solidity sufficient for proclaiming it to all the world;  the funeral  party that  a person's existence has now been "framed" and that  the world can analyse and  reminisce over that  existence as if it were now an objet  d'art. Undertakers,

GEORGE ELLIOTT



with   their   rage   for   the-person-as-artifact,  are   the  last  dandies. In   a  secular, provincial society,  lonely  people  come  up  with  their  own  rituals: Honey Salkald ("An Act  of  Piety")  turns  upside-down a  set  of empty  milk  cans  as a  way  of marking  off  a   time   of  life,  Young   Audie   Seaton's  nameless   mother ("The Listeners"), blows out  the insides of eggs and  places them  on a shelf after  passing on  to  one  of  her  sons  an  account of  her  lifelong  frustrations. The  Tsars had Karl Faberge to do  this for  them; Southwestern Ontario farmers must  make  do with  whatever's around.
The  actions   are   double-edged.  From   one  viewpoint,  they  are   the   pathetic gestures  of  the  socially  atomized, feeble  attempts to  graft   a  meaning onto  life through  the   equivalent  of   macrame  or   kinky   sex.  The   gestures   are   puny, eccentric  microcosms   of  those  larger   pomps  and  ceremonies and   thus  tend   to undercut all that  is grand in social  existence. Seen in another fashion, they assert man's need for ritual, his tireless effort to fashion  a dwelling-place amid  the chaos of  existence.   Like  symphony orchestras in  the  death  camps  or  birthday  parties for  leukemic   children,  they  seek  not  to  hide  cruel  realities,  but  to  proclaim a vision  of an  existence  bigger  than  those tortures. Honour to the strivers,  honour to us fools!

4·   OuR  LITERATURE  has  conditioned  us  to  look  on  small  towns  as  hotbeds of obsessive, private re-enactment of essentially magical  gestures,  ways of social intercourse seeking  to create  changelessness.  A shrewd  portrayer of that life gives us that  sense of a film loop  perpetually running in the  following  ritualised  cross­
talk:

And a little further down they passed the Shingle Beach, and Dr. Gallagher, who knew  Canadian  history,  said  to  Dean  Drone  that  it  was strange  to  think  that Champlain had  landed  there  with his French  explorers three  hundred  years ago; and  Dean  Drone,  who didn't  know Canadian history, said it was stranger  still to think  that  the hand  of the Almighty had  piled up the hills and  rocks long before that; and  Dr.  Gallagher  said it was wonderful  how the  French  had  found  their way  through  such  a  pathless  wilderness; and  Dean  Drone  said  that  it was  won­ derful  also to think  that  the  Almighty had  placed even the smallest shrub  in its appointed   place. Dr.  Gallagher  said  it  filled him  with  admiration. Dean  Drone said it filled him with awe. Dr. Gallagher  said he'd been full of it since he was a boy and Dean Drone said so had he.

Stephen Leacock, Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town.

Twenty-nine years  later,   the  rituals  remain, but  only  to  chafe  the  sensitive/
neurotic soul enmeshed  within  them:


53

GEORGE ELLIOTT



Mrs. Finley, for instance: she must have spent hours preparing for us, cleaning her house, polishing her cut glass and silver-and if I know anything at all about Main  Street  economics she'll spend as many more hours polishing her wits for ways and  means to make ends meet till next allowance day. Yet as President of the Ladies Aid, and first lady of the congregation, she had to do the right thing by us-that  was Propriety;  and as Main Street hostess she had to do it so well that no other hostess might ever invite us to her home and do it better-that was Parity.

Sinclair Ross, As for Me and My House.

As a  background  to these rituals  pounded  into  daily life, the small town  life­ cycle possesses its greater  shows, Leacock's Marine  Excursions of the Knights  of Pythias, the  prayer-meetings  for rain in Ross's Partridge  Hill, the L.O.L.  convo­ cations bedevilling  Doc Fletcher  in Elliott's "You'll  Get the Rest of Him Soon".  Elliott's small town  fulfils the reader's  expectations. Without  ever finding out the name of the place  (the  author  grew up in Strathroy,  Ont.), the reader learns of the  location  of  Weaver's   Barber  Shop,  the  Queen's  Hotel,  the  Fair  Grounds (with  the W.I. lemonade  booth), the base-line road along the eighth concession, and  Geddes'  dry-goods  emporium.  Not  that  this  wealth  of  precious knowledge pours over the reader  at once. Rather,  it all happens in passing, since the gossipy speech of the faceless narrator ("Aunt Cress said the store was something like the street dance  the  Lodge  puts on every fall. ... ")  burbles on as if the reader were naturally   au  courant   with  the  movements  of   this  all-inclusive,  self-confident society.  It  is  the  authentic  tone  of successful  provincial  literature, whether  it come from  Hugh  Hood  or Sherwood  Anderson,  whether  it relates of life in the Russian town ofF-·---------- or in Cranford.  It is the voice of the wise or wise-assed insider,  the fellow whom  everything  placed, with a story to relate whose dimen­ sions he doesn't  quite grasp  but  whose effects upon his society he realises acutely.
Southwestern  Ontario has produced some fair literature  of this sort  (as well as
Galbraith's delightful  memoir, The Scotch) : James  Reaney's Stratford  (Colours in  the  Dark), Alice Munro's  Wingham  (Dance of the  Happy Shades, Lives  of Girls and  Women), Robertson  Davies' Thamesville  (Fifth Business), towns seen with  a  sturdy  sense  of  place  and  positioning.1   Let  Western  Ontarians  ascribe this to the breezes from  Lakes Huron  and Ontario; I only note the regional fact. George  Elliott  has  speculated   in  conversation  that   perhaps   because  Western Ontario "peaked" in  the gos and  has gone nowhere since  ("One by one they'll all clear out/Thinking to better  themselves, no doubt/Never caring how far they gojFrom the  poor little  girls of Ontario"), its liveliest spirits migrating  West or

54

GEORGE ELLIOTT



to  the  cities,  the  place  provides  that  sense of a golden  age  gone  bust,  that  old­ bitch-gone-in-the-teeth,  botched-civilization sensibility  that   good  writing  thrives  on.   Certainly  the   region   has   produced   considerable writing about  childhood pain  and  humiliation.

5· The  Kissing Man  differs from the   works I've  mentioned in  that  the realistic  aspect  of the  collection  is balanced  by its sense of another dimension of existence.  In  practise,  this  means  that  detail  is thinner than  in  the  works  above. Between  those  town  landmarks listed  in  the  preceding note  lie vast  stretches of the  diffuse,  the  opaque, the   reality  that   cannot   always  be  conveyed   through concrete detail.  Let two passages illustrate this:

The  years went by. Doctor  Fletcher  kept on delivering babies. The  secretary  of the Aid got old. Jacob  and  Esau, for they were boys as the doctor  had  promised, grew up in the orphanage in the city.
Esau developed  a nervous affliction in the orphanage  as he came on  to adoles­
cence. Jacob  was shy and  didn't  talk or play much with anybody but Esau.
Shy  Jacob  and  nervous  Esau  came  back  to the  town  where  they  were  born. They  had  to,  because  there  came  the  day  of  their  sixteenth  birthday   and  the people at  the  orphanage in  the  city and  the  people at  the  Aid in  town  had  no alternative.  And  there  was a  wedding  going on in  the  Anglican  church  the day the twins, Jacob and  Esau, came back to the town where they were born.
George Elliott, "When Jacob Fletcher Was a Boy", The  Kissing Man.

Contrast the  first  two  paragraphs of  this  passage  with   the  final  paragraph. They  have  about  them  an  air  of the  parabolic and  timeless that  is not  a product alone  of  their  subjects' Biblical  names.  The  three  short,  simple  sentences in  the first and  the  repetitions of the  names  in each  of the  brief  paragraphs, the  prosaic yet genteel  tone  ("a nervous  affiiction"), convince  us that  the  story  is told  in  a manner seeming  to deny  any  individuality to the  twins. The prose crawls  along, never  bothering to  accumulate detail.  We  are  not  told  how  the  boys look,  and can  only infer  what  extent  of woe and/or madness  lies behind  the  euphemisms, "nervous  affiiction"   and   "shy".2     "Went  by,"  "kept   on," "got   old"-we  are watching events from a very great distance indeed.
In  the  third  paragraph, we  re-enter  the  "real" world.  Now  the  twins  are  re­ located  in  time  (but  with  those  very heavy adjectives looped  about their  necks) , and   within   a  social   context    (those   stymied   bureaucratic  Siamese  twins,   the orphanage in the  city and  the  Aid in town) , and  finally  at  a  particular moment within  a  social  framework  (a  wedding-day). The  final  clause  brings  the  wheel full  circle -the boys  have  been  away  from  that  world  of  tick-tock   time  into


55

GEORGE ELLIOTT



which  they  were  born,  but  now  they  are  back,  and  that  moment too  has  been firmly re-located in time.
A   passage   from   another  tale   in   this   collection   of  inter-connected  stories3
presents a differing aspect of the book's strange realism:

There  was a  way down  the  high  bank  to  the  flat lands  below, to  where  the cedar  clumps  were. It  was along  the top of the bank for a way, to the rail fence where  there was a crude  stile. Here  there  was a grassy lane cut out of the side of the  bank in a gentle slope for maybe forty rods. At the bottom,  little tracks were worn  in  the  clay by the  farm  animals  on their  way to the river. At that  time of year it was easy to step across stones in the river and get to the other side.
Bertram   stood  up,  then,  with  Froody  in  his  arms.  Honey's  first  feeling  was
weakness because he knew how strong Bertram was. He had seen the yellow callus pads  and  the dusty  hair  on his wrists. When Bertram started  walking away from the  blanket  where  the food  was spread  and  where Honey and  Lillian  sat, Honey was filled with  horror  because  he was now so small and  the sky seemed far off. There  was nothing  to hold  to. Lillian  was there,  not looking, only staring  down the clay bank.  ("The Commonplace")

The   first  paragraph  presents   a  pastoral   landscape,  a  section   of  humanized natural space.   The   rail  fence  with  its  stile  and   the  tracks  made   by  the  farm animals confirm  that   the  spot  has  known  the  hand  of man.  The  landscape has been  moralised   into  a  pattern of  accessibility.  A  mountain/valley  duality exists in  the  setting   (banks vs. flat  lands)   but  "there was a  way." That way  isn't  so much  described  in itself as shown  in its relationship to the land   ("cut out  of the side  of  the  bank"). It  is a  way-not  the  cut-out road  of  the  engineer-and thus  not  subject   wholly  to  human control.  "At  that  time  of year"  it is open  to the   other   side  of  the   river-a  traditional mark   of  accessibility,  especially  in hymnbooks-but obviously  not at other  times. No less than  a freeway  cloverleaf, the scene observed  has "limited access" posted over it.
Just   how  limited   is  that   access  comes  across  in  the  next  paragraph,  where Honey   watches another  fellow  literally   carry   off  his  girl   (new   life  in  a  pop cliche). The  view, once  displaying a way to and  through, turns  into  empty  space ("he was now so small  and  the  sky seemed so far  off") , that  empty  space  that  is so persistent  a feature of the  Canadian literary  landscape. Bertram carries  Froody away  from  the  communal meal  into  a realm  that  Honey  can  see only as the void ("nothing to hold  to"). As we shall see later,  the  movement  is from  a humdrum polite  ritual  to a movement, a dance,  of far greater moment  than  a picnic  usually offers.  We  know  already that  there  is no  void, or  rather  that  it is inside  Honey, in  his feelings  of impotence. The  accessible, friendly  countryside exists alongside

GEORGE ELLIOTT



this momentarily  crazed vision of it. There  has been no preparation for this shift from  pasture  to void, communal  to individual,  outer  to inner;  it  has happened instantly  as  Honey  senses the  assured  masculinity  of his  rival.  This  is realism, but  of a complex sort. It is an  effort to convey to the reader  the fullness of the world we inhabit,  and  it therefore  has to include a view of our  primitive as well as our  socialized selves, our  unconscious as well as our conscious. Another  way of expressing this dualism that  is our reality is to realize that  the former self is far less timebound  than  the  latter.  The  second passage complements  the first one I treated,  which is a less psychologically-oriented expression of this complex nature of  reality.  The  first  passage  presents  this duality  through   traditional narrative strategies -the twins  move  into  the  story  from  outside,  accumulating   more concrete  detail about  them  as the narrative  proceeds -while  the second  moves from  the  detailed  and  controlled  to something  greater  and  terrifying.  But  the movement  is  within  a  single  consciousness. The  "Commonplace" passage,  we can  say,  ultimately  employs  psychology as  a  figurative  language   for  a  reality lying outside the individual  psyche, a reality we contact fitfully and  dangerously.

6.   GILBERT  RYLE has pointed out that  just because there are more things in this world  than  are  dreamt   of  in  your  philosophy doesn't  allow  you  to  put  more things in your philosophy than  are in this world. When this sort of thing happens in  literature,  we speak of a  failure  in  tone. For example,  the  devices and  con­ ventions of fantasy  may  be used to smooth the narrative  or moral  progress of a work  chiefly realistic in  dialogue  and  setting.  When  this  happens  in  Victorian novels we accuse them  of being evasive, melodramatic  or cheating, but  what we are  expressing is an  aversion  against  any  attempt  to express one  of those dual aspects  of  reality  in  terms  of  another.  The  Kingdom  of  Wish  has  to  be  kept distinct  from  that  of  Must.  When  this is carried  out  by  persons in  a  socially approved fashion, it is known as sanity.
Literature,  like the other  arts, revels in blurring the boundaries; it is filled with talking  animals,  living  urns  and  blushing angels. Such  naughtiness  is excusable because it is the  result of conscious choice; everybody knows it is make-believe. Some  make-believes, even in  fiction assumed  to be realistic,  are  more  fantastic than  others, and  unrealities  in  the telling are more acceptable  than  the same in what  is told. We all assume that  The  Stone  Angel  is a more realistic novel than Fifth   Business;  is the  latter's  magic  any  more fantastic  than  the  former's  con­ trolled inner monologue? We demand  a consistency in the amount  of  credulity a writer  tries to squeeze out  of a reader. A suspension of disbelief  remains  willing

57

GEORGE  ELLIOTT



only so long as the reader  suspends a steady one ton per hour. If he has to shift back and forth  between one cwt. and two tons within a thirty-minute period, his muscles will strain.  After  all, when Judy  Garland  laments that  birds fly over the rainbow,  why then oh why can't  she, only a fool would deliver an explanation  of gravity in reply.

7.  ELLIOTT's  PROSE STYLE is laconic, elliptical even. As the passages cited demonstrate,  the  reader  is left  to fill in the blank spaces with feeling, a  charac­ teristic demand  of the  modem  writer.4   This demand  on the  reader  is a founda­  tion  of the  narrative structure,  in that  facts are  presented about  characters  and their  setting  in  no particular order,  only as they arise in various contexts. Thus Froody, the principal  character of "The  Kissing Man",  is also the girl taken from Honey  Salkald  in  "The  Commonplace", while another  glimpse  of her and  her husband,  late in  their life together,  is given in another  story, "A Room, a Light for Love." Not all the blanks can be filled in; for example, we know that  Froody dates  Dougie Framingham for a long time and eventually  marries him. Does her relationship  with  Honey in "The  Commonplace" precede or occur in the middle of  the  lengthy  courtship?  Probably  it  happens  before,  because  we are  told  the characters  are  still in  high school,  but we cannot  be  certain.  Elliott  is skilled in the  placing  of detail,  forcing  the  reader  to review  each story in the light of the entire  collection in the same way a reader learns to pause at a passage like: "He  had a real name all right. John  something. It's sure to be on the desk pad at the Queen's.   Nobody  used  it"   ("The Man  Who  Lived  Out   Loud"). The  gross defects  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  collections of  small-town  contes,  Winesburg, Ohio, are for me summed up in the following:
Before such women as Louise can  be understood and  their lives made livable, much will have to be done. Thoughtful books will have to be written and thought­ ful lives lived by people about  them. (Sherwood Anderson,  "Surrender",  Wines­ burg, Ohio)

It is so trudgingly earnest, so padded-bra uplifting! Elliott avoids this browbeating of the reader, yet tries to give him a world in which feeling still exists.

8.   "I never said that  people were terrorized  but that they were terrorists. I said that  a lot  of people were satisfied and  that  a terrible unease  prevails none the less." Henri Lefebvre, Everyday Life in theM odern World.
The  first things we find out about  Froody in the title story are visual:  "A real
Gibson girl Froody was.... " Strong  black lines against a white page outline the willowy beauties  of  Charles  Dana  Gibson,  and  the  narrator next  mentions  the

GEORGE ELLIOTT



way  the  July  sun  drained  the  colour  from  the  town's  main  street.  Garbed  in white  blouse and  dark  skirt, cool-looking in the sun  (Gibson's  girls always have a  pout  upon  their  lucious  lips),  Froody  is cooler still in  the  shade  of Geddes' dry-goods store  where  she works. One  way of summing  up  the story is to state that  an  initial  blackjwhite version of reality  (reality is here,  fantasy over there) melts like a Dali watch  in the face of an awareness of the raw emotions govern­ ing  our  lives. Briefly, Froody sees a mysterious stranger  arise out  of  nowhere  to kiss three  of  her  store  customers  and  evaporate.  Related  baldly,  it  seems  the soppiest  of sentimentalities,  a  quite  illicit intrusion  of the  Land  of  Oz  into  the Upper  Canadian store of Jethro Geddes one Thursday  in July. But  the story is about   the  onset  of  maturity   in  Froody;  the  appearance of   the  Kissing  Man (sounds  like an  Errol  Flynn-romantic bandit  movie)  is  incidental  to this, how­ ever large  it may loom in the actual  reading experience. "Froody  was a dreamy girl,"  we are  told,  "Sometimes  it was a  bother  to her to keep her mind  on the work."  Dreamy  girls of a strong  sexuality  ( "Froody,  in a get-up  like that,  was just what  it took on a hot day to  put gumption  in a fellow")  are forever having things happen  to them in literature,  from Pamela to the brilliant  Gothic imagin­ ings of Joyce  Carol  Oates. But the scene is rural  Ontario,  a little while after  the Great  War,  so that  the Kissing Man  will not be a dark rapist-deliverer.  Instead,  what  could  have  been a romantic  archetype  becomes a fantasy  of another  sort. The dreamy Froody watches him kiss the three women (one on Thursday, another on Saturday,  the last on Monday; after all, the business is closed on Sunday  and it  wouldn't  do  to  have anything  unreal in the story),  and  finally questions  him after  his last foray. The  kisses are not gestures of comfort, as the term is generally used, but  rather  marks of a new awareness on the part of the recipients. Each of them,  after  the  experience,  sees some cruel  fact  of  life in  sharper   relief,  and responds either  with  "It's not fair at all" or by weeping. The  comfort  extended is the harsh one of knowing where they stand.  In a sense, it has been a conscious­ ness-raising5 rather  than  a healing that  Froody has witnessed. When  the Kissing Man  assures Froody that she has been one of the lucky ones, not needing him yet (emphasis  mine),  she is branded   by maturity,  seared  by the  knowledge  that  it must  all  come  to this:  knowing  what  it is that  makes one  hurt  so badly. "She knew more than she wanted to know, ever."
But  how seriously can  we be expected  to take  this sci-fi device of a  Kissing
Man  for  Froody's  lapsing from  Innocence  into Experience?  Of course, a young girl's fantasies could indeed take the form of a Kissing Man,  as is apparent from my  noting  of his resemblance  to the sort of dashing  figure who sweeps in  and

59

GEORGE ELLIOTT



out of women's fictional lives. But if he is merely a dream,  an hallucination, why does he so kick against  the  wishes of the dreamer?  He doesn't  offer the stuff of adolescent  fantasy,  but  the  urgent  insight  of  a  mature  dream.  Two  italicized reflections by the  Kissing Man  on the pain the Women suffer follow his encoun­ ters;  they  give him  a  flesh solider  than  a  ghost's.  What  the  story  is  saying,  I think, is the truth  that  there is more to dream  than  cookie-castle wish-fulfillment. The  man  represents  Froody's struggle to attain  maturity,  no matter  how steep a price  it  may  exact  in  unhappiness.  She  has  watched  the  facades  of  placidity crumble  away from  the three  women, and  we know she pays for her moment  of insight  by  what   will  probably   be  a  hum-drum  married  existence  (the  story alludes  to  the  routine  nature  of  Dougie  Framingham's courtship,  and  we are told that  "she finally married  him.")  Well, an eagle is not fine a thing as a truth,  and  all the truth  in  the  world  cannot  give it literary value if it is clumsily put. The   Kissing  Man   as  a  device  intrudes  upon  the  action  of  the  story,  putting forward  too glib an evocation of  the more charged state of existence surrounding our everyday one.

g.   IN  EXAMINING   the   work  of  an   admired   author,   we  discuss  "Patterns", "Rythms", "Recurrences"; anyone less esteemed is talked of in terms of  "Formu­ lae",  "Repetitions", "Limitations". The  basic pattern  of the  stories  in  Elliott's collection  is that   of  the  small-town  organism  reacting  to  stimuli  it  eventually numbs itself to. Some of these disturbing tremors come from within. The insiders either  die off or  go  mad-Alison  Kennedy  in  "A  Room,  a  Light  for  Love", Doc  Fletcher  in  "You'll  Get  the  Rest of Him  Soon", Young  Audie's  mother  in "The Listeners" -or  else, in  the case of a young boy, hop it  out of town  ("A  Leaf  for  Everything  Good" ) . In  other  stories, the  disturbers  hail from  outside and  either  die in  frustration   ("The Man  Who Lived Out  Loud") or pass back to  where  they  came  from  ("The Kissing Man", "The  Commonplace"). It  is typical  of  the  author's entire  approach   that,  while the  last  stories  concern  a spiritual  or metaphysical  distance  between townees and  outsiders, the collection's opener,  "An  Act  of Piety",  treats  in  passing the  commonplace  social ostracism visited  upon  a  goitre-ridden Irish  family seeking  to settle in  the  town.  Since  I admire  the  work,  "The  Commonplace" doesn't  strike me as a  repetitive  piece, but  a  successful handling  of  this  pattern  of  entry  and  withdrawal. As well, it develops successfully the  opposition  between  the  two  aspects  of  reality  that  is treated with less skill in "The Kissing Man."
The  idea  of  a  small  community  shaken  by the  entry  of a  dynamic  stranger


6o

GEORGE ELLIOTT



occurs  especially  often  in the  literature of fantasy,  though it is one  of the  themes of  Middlemarch, The   Pied  Piper, The  Mysterious  Stranger,  Westerns: they  all deal   with   upsets  among  the   good  burghers,   whether  the  strangers arrive   on horseback   or   (a  trendy  development)  motorcycles.  Perhaps the  story  of  Jesus, especially   as  diagrammed  in  the   opening   chapter of  ]ohn,  offers  the  central Christian  source  of  this  narrative type.  In  "The  Commonplace", the  town  is invaded by a clan  of strangers. The  Sunbirds, who  remind  us a little  of the  role played  by the  Bens in  Who  Has Seen the Wind  (1947), proceed  to  raise chicks in  an  abandoned hotel  they  occupy.  Of  course,  in  the  last  line  of the  story  the Sunbirds move on at  winter's onset  (if a writer  is to be that  heavy-handed in his naming, he might  as well go all the  way). The  tale is saved  from  being  an  easy put-down of  provincial narrowness by its focus upon  the  effects  of the  Sunbirds on   Honey   Salkald,  the   principal  character of  the  collection. This   prevents it from  becoming another raggle-taggle-Gypsies-oh romance.
The  story  climaxes  during a  private  ritual-dance in  which  Bertram Sunbird, having  whisked  Froody   away  from  Honey,  puts  before  his rival  a  pattern of a life too rich  in its style and  satisfaction for  him ever to reach.  What in a townee would  be the stripping of a girl  before feeling  her  up  becomes  with  Bertram the prelude  to a deeper act:
He  took the  two ribbons  from  her hair  and  hung  them  up  in the  branches  of a bush. Then  he took her  hat  and  placed it on another  branch.  He took off his tie and  hat  and  put  them  on branches. He took out his handkerchief  and  hung it up. The  little  bits of cloth  fluttered  in a breeze that  Honey couldn't  feel on the river bank, and the horror of it hurt his stomach.
Honey's  pain  and  confusion even before  this act  of stripping away  of all that is fluttery  and  likely to  blow  away  has been  examined in  Note  5· His  turmoil is not  the  product of sexual   jealousy  alone.  It is also  the  feeling-most  notably expressed  in  English  Literature in  Hyperion-of  pain  that  comes  from  a lesser being's  understanding that, however  devastating its upshot  may  be for  him,  the work of a rival compels admiration and is beautiful in itself.
Bertram  stood before  Froody  in the little clear area.  He  took her hands  in his and  they walked sideways around  the cleared  area.  Then  he walked sideways in the other direction, still holding hands.
Gradually   the  pace  of  their  sedate step was quickened  and  Honey  realized  it was a  kind  of dance.  He  couldn't  hear  from  that  distance,  but  he  thought  he heard, now and then, Bertram's voice singing.
They  were skipping  lightly round  in a circle by now, and  Froody's  dress flared out. There seemed to be no weight to her at all.

61

GEORGE ELLIOTT



He  is  watching   a  ritual   whose  music  he  barely  hears,  as  if  Bertram   were Dionysius and  he, Mark  Anthony. The  patterned  movement seems to have more to it than  the eccentric, lonely steps taken earlier in the book (see Note 3). I am reminded  of Atwood's  "The Animals in That Country",  where the stylization of killing  gives a  drama   and  urgency  to  the  slaughter  of  animal  life that  is not attainable in the secular,  rationalist  society we know, with its routine  zapping  of raccoons along the highway.

Thus there  are  other things  besides capital that  are  subject  to accumulation: for instance  knowledge, techniques  and  even ... populations.... But  everyday  life  is not   cumulative.... Emotions  and   feelings  change   but   they  are   not   stored   up; neither  are  aspirations.... Physical   performances, erotic  achievements,  the  time required for  growing   up  or  growing  old  and  natural fertility oscillate  on  a  rela­ tively  limited   scale.... In  short   the  effects  of accumulation on  everyday  life are superficial though  they  cannot be  completely eliminated.  Everyday life,  when  it changes, evolves  according to  a  rhythm that  does  not  coincide with  the  time  of accumulation and  in  a  space   that   cannot be  identified   with  that   of  cumulative processes. (Henri Lefebvre, op. cit.)

Honey  weeps because everyday life is not cumulative and it is not a matter  of him saving  up  his pennies or  his energies until he can acquire  Bertram's  mana. In the unsuccessful "What Do the Children Mean"  Elliott explores the difficulties of inventing  an emotional  calculus, and Honey is here shown sunk in the knowl­ edge  that  it  never  can  be. There  is that  in  life which can  redeem  it from  the banal;  behaviour  informed  by the sense of things that gives a glimpse of greater dimensions to existence. Not everyone is born into a society that  can  teach such behaviour.  The  townees,  with  their  tea-table  mumbo-jumbo, cannot  grasp  that it is stronger  medicine  they require. The  more they immerse themselves in codes of manners, the further  they get from what ritual is really about.
The  story twice emphasizes  Bertram's  strength,  in its description  of him as a harvest  hand,   and  in  the  ease  with  which  it  shows him  lifting  Froody.  The strength  is not the mindless compulsion of Big Audie Seaton  ("The Listeners"), it is instead  the flow of energy a man can put himself in touch  with, if he only lives deeply enough.  (And  if-ascetic  moral here -he is willing to forego the conventional  delights of stability. Bertram  does not, after all, have Froody. That will be  left  to  her  townee  lover,  Dougie.)   I think  this is what  Sheila  Watson conveys  about   Kip,  that   very  ambiguous  character  in  The  Double  Hook. A prying fool, blinded,  he is also a more serene figure even than  Felix in his accep­ tance of the pattern  of things and  his place -for weal or woe -within it.

GEORGE ELLIOTT



Bertram's dance is a liturgy in  a society  that knows  only  theatre. Modems can be   patronizing about  those   philosopher-killing Athenians  who   also   reacted  so violently to  Euripides, our  brother. Shallow folk,  not  to see  the  devastation that matchless  playwright  represented.  From   ritual to  stagecraft, moral  intelligence to intellect, Pericles to Alcibiades. Who but  the  leanest technocrat  would willingly let go so rich  a portion of reality?

"All  he did  was sing and  dance with  me a little,  Honey.  Bertram, he's  very  much older  than  you and  me. Very much  older."

Such a  statement needn't be  literally true to  be truthful. A  family of  nomads who  stick  to  the  older ways  of doing things would  easily freak the  good  townsfolk upon whose   territory they  light. The effect  of  even  the  most  offhand courtship ritual on  a  shy,  insecure boy  grown up  in  a  flat  and   petty  place  makes Honey's trauma over  Bertram's far from casual gesture credible.

10.   I HAVE a deep liking  for  these  stories,  even  when  they  do  not  work. When they   do,  they   become themselves metaphors  for  grace, for  man's refusal to  slog along in   an   impoverished  existence, whatever  pain   it  may   cause  him   to  take larger views  and  gaze  upon   a world that may  not  even  have  room  for  him.



NOTES

1 Compare Davies'  Deptford with  his Salterton: the  latter is Provincial Society,  the former a sharply  felt place in time.
2   One  recalls  the  private code of Victoria R.I. and  John  Brown  when  she was scurri­ lously  known  as  "the Empress  Brown."  "Shy" meant   passed-out   drunk,  enabling Her   Majesty to  explain   her  servant's absence  from  a function in  an  unembarras­ sing manner.
3 A  popular  enough  form   in  our   literature; see  Sunshine  Sketches,  Around   the
Mountain, A Bird in the House, Lives of Girls and Women.
4  In a  time  of  films  like  A  Clockwork  Orange  and  Straw  Dogs,  when   behavioural scientists   bemoan   "the loss of  affectivity" in  language that  adds  to  it,  students of literature can  no longer  assume  that  the general  reader  is putting back  into  a scene the  moral  elements  a hard-boiled prose style excludes.  I suspect,  for  example, that Men  Without  Women is  a  very  tricky  work  to  teach  because  it  is  unthinkingly equated with  such  brutal crime   novels  as  (say)   Richard Stark's  "Parker"  series. The  process  by which,  in  our  collective  sensibility,  Nick Adams  became the Conti­ nental Op  offers a paradigm of a brutalisation in public  taste  and  feeling.
5   I  thank Miss  Heather-Jane  Sanguins for  pointing this-as  well  as  many  other things  about  the story-out to me.


THE UNENDING CYCLE

Leonard W. Sugden
LHIS   CRITICAL ESSAY on  the  poet1y  of  Emile  Nelligan included  in  Une  litterature  en ebullition,  Gerard  Bessette has  pointed  out  that,
besides being able  to appreciate each  poem for its intrinsic  value, one may also study  the  poems together  as a single integrated  story. They  constitute  the drama of the  poet's  own  life and  tragic  breakdown,  and  contain,  for  Bessette, all  the essential elements of a French Canadian myth.1
The  meaning  of le Cycle,  Bessette's most recent  novel, is greatly  clarified by his comments on Nelligan:  the title not only represents the mutations  in Quebec life from generation  to generation,  it suggests at the same time that  this novel is identifiable  with the Quebec  myth, it is a symbolic recreation, a remodelling and commentary  on  this myth,  and,  what  is even more interesting,  it is an ominous prophecy of things to come.
That the  author   had  intended  to  project  into  le Cycle  the  main  facets of a
mythology  is clear  from  its very structure.  Since it is written  in  the  form of a number  of  interior   monologues  presented  in  a  virtually  insignificant  sequence, each  monologue  appearing to illustrate  a different set of values and  attitudes  of mind, it is difficult to locate this novel at any one stage in the evolution of French Canadian  prose.  When  we  read  the  first chapter,   which  is comprised  of  the infantile  ramblings  in  the  mind  of tiny Jacot,  we feel we are in the  presence of one  of  those  perverse  children   found  in  the  pages  of  Marie-Claire  Blais or Rejean  Ducharme. At  the  same  time,  when  we come to the  third  monologue, which contains the tormented  reflections of the mother, Vitaline, with her intense religiosity, combined  with  a  fierce desire  to  maintain   her  children  within  the traditional  flock, we have  the impression that  we are not far removed from the turn  of the century  world of Laura  Conan or Louis Hernon. It is true, of course, that   many  French   Canadian  works of fiction  present  the  everpresent  conflict between younger and older generations, but few succeed, as does le Cycle, in sustaining  so well the  basic tensions between them.  Le Cycle appears  thereby  to incorporate  within   its  structure  a   number   of  phases  in   Quebec's   spiritual evolution.
If Bessette's  preceding   novel,  !'Incubation, is  a  deep,  powerful  and  highly

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



imaginative  commentary  on the  modern  world, le Cycle is an even more  ambi­ tious  analysis  which  is limited  in  its interest  to  French  Canadian  society.  In l'lncubation, for  the  first  time,  the  author  had  incorporated into  his  work  the methods  of the  French  New Novel and shown the strong influence of the "con­  scious stream" method  pioneered  by James  Joyce  and  Virginia  Wool£.2 In  his latest  work he continues  the same  trend,  though  now, rather  than portraying  a single subjectivity, he endeavours  to present the thought processes of seven differ­ ent  individuals,  all  members  of the same family. The  relative  truth  that  we, as human  beings, can  know  about  any one of these  personalities is revealed  to us through  the reflections of each of the six other  participants.  If we add  to this the fact  that,  by employing  this structure,  Bessette  proposes to encompass some four generations  of  family  relationships,  if,  moreover,  one  considers  the  numerous relatives, friends  and  associates who  are  also brought  into  focus in  these seven monologues,  we  have  an  idea  of   the  breadth   of  perspective  that   the  author  attempts to capture  in his novel.
In  le Cycle, Bessette demonstrates  once again  his interest  in probing  the most
intimate   thoughts   hidden   in  the  obscure  recesses of  consciousness. His  very original  undertaking has been to fix in a vivid, abstract  and  highly stylized form the spontaneous  movements  of the human  psyche. To  this end,  he has made  a certain  number  of modifications  to the already quite effective techniques  used in l'lncubation.  After   the   early  novels,  la  Barre  ( I958)    and   les  Pedagogues (I g6 I), which  had  been  written  in accordance  with  the  conventional  percepts of Flaubertian realism, Bessette had  moved in evolutionary  sequence  to the first person narrative  in le Librarie  (I g6o)  and  from thence to the more completely subjective style of l'lncubation. In le Cycle, as the title suggests, the course of his work  comes full  way  around. This  last  novel is an  original  effort  to  integrate within its structure  the different  qualities of his previous fiction and  to establish thereby a superior form of realism.
Le  Cycle  contains  the  usual  Bessettian themes:  a  pervading  pessimism, irre­ mediable  situations,   human   ineptitude   and   defeat,  the  preponderant  human motives of lust and  money, the grossness of sexuality and  man's  physical repul­ siveness, oedipal  relationships and  the sublimatory  origin of ideological drives - and,  last but  not least, the monotonous and  useless tasks imposed on many  by a mechanistic society. The  rapprochement  between literary invention  and scientific theory so apparent in French  prose in the latter  half of the  I gth Century  is here vigorously introduced  into  French  Canadian  letters. Freudian  concepts strongly enhanced   by  the   principles  of  environmental   and   physiological  determinism

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



form  a  systematic  framework  on  which  the  narrative  is built.  There  is also a greater  effort on the author's part  to reproduce  the subtleties, chaotic movements and utter crudity of notions welling up from the subconscious.


WILE IN rIncubation,  Bessette had  advanced   his  own personal rendition  of the  perennial  theme of love, in le Cycle  he turns to explore a  subject  which  is equally  universal  to  human  experience:   the  significance  of death.  The  focal  point  of the  entire  story may  be traced  to the  passing of the
father  of the family in question,  Norbert  Onesime BarnS. The  central  scene is a funeral  parlour.  It  is at the moment  when the mother and  children  are gathered around  his coffin to pay their  last respects that  the author  lets us enter the inner domain of each, and we learn what meaning this death has had for them all individually.
We learn  that  when  Norbert  Barre met Vitaline  Francoeur  some thirty-seven years  before,  he  had  been  an  enthusiastic  suitor  as well as an  impeccable  and very mature  citizen already  established in insurance. It is for this reason that  the girl's  family  pushed  the  match  and  Vitaline  refused another  young  beau  who stirred  her  heart,  but  who  was not  as "solid"  as Norbert,  twenty-five years her senior.  It  was from  this loveless marriage  that  the Barre family came into  being and  from it stemmed  all the unhappiness  that  these pages retrace. The  unbridled Sophie,  mistress of the  Barre's  rebellious son, Julien,  is rather  justified then in claiming that, "la famille il n'y a rien de plus dangereux."3
Steadily  worn  by  his  routine  debates  with  clients and  by quarrels  at  home,
reduced  to silence by years of nagging, exacerbated  by rancour  after his estrange­ ment  from  his wife's bed, Norbert  Barre, insurance  agent, had slowly  weakened and  finally, morally and  physically broken, had succumbed to his fate at seventy­ three  years of  age:  death  from  arterio-sclerosis. Partly  due  to the  fact  that  he was of gentle  character and  never  manifested  any  qualities of  leadership  or of parental  authority,   his first son, Roch,  had  been a failure in  most respects and his other son, Julien,  had  become a beatnik and a revolutionary. It is the intelli­ gent  Roch  who observes that  "Dans  n'importe quel couple ... il y a toujours  un des deux  partenaires qui  domine."  Between  Vitaline  and  Norbert,  it  had  been the husband who proved to be the weaker.
But Norbert  Barre had  been truly loved:  his children all mourn  him sincerely and  his wife, Vitaline,  recognizing that  the years had built a certain  affection, is tormented   with  grief,  remorse  and   repentance   at  his  passing.  After  all,  the

66

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



defeats he had  known were largely beyond his control and  we must look further to  uncover  their  source.  The  complexes and  personality  attributes  (or  impedi­ ments)  of each of these individuals  must here be ascribed to Freud's well conse­ crated  formula:   the  behaviour  of the  adult  is directly  related  to  the  events of early childhood,  for there is a mysterious life going on beneath  conscious experi­ ence-a  secret  life  which,  moreover,  determines  consciousness itself. For  this reason,  we must examine  the  question of another  death  hovering over the story, a death  even more pertinent  in its effects on the lives of all these persons.
Vitaline  had  known  all  her  life an intense love, or, might  one say better,  an oepidal  bond,  with  her  father,  a  strong  and  domineering  figure.  At  the  same time,  when  only  very  young,  she  had  experienced  the  wrathful  violence  of a fiercely devout and  puritanical  mother who had one day caught  her exploring anatomical   differences  with  her  tiny  brother,  Joachim.  And  so  we  find  years later a mature Vitaline, as pious as her mother, but deeply neurotic and with a subconscious  fear  of  the  flesh.  In  her  marriage,   her  intimate   relations  with Norbert  were considered  as "mes  devoirs d'epouse"; her  husband's early  ascen­ dancy  over  her  soon  fading,  the  enormous  father  image  began  to find  a  poor reflection in her daily partner. Three  children came:  Anita, a happy first arrival, Roch,  stubborn  with  his mother  and  more attached  to  his father,  and  Berthe, who, as a further  burden,  was relatively undesired. Then,  the  cataclysmic  event occurred:  the  maternal   grandfather  became  partially   paralysed  and  Vitaline Barre, shocked and  crushed,  fell into a torpor  of grief  which was only intensified by his death.  The  stout  and  passive Anita  was now  beyond the emotional  needs of  early  childhood,   but   Roch  and  Berthe,  pale  and  emaciated,  who  arrived during  this painful  period, experienced deeply the  bane  of the  unwanted.
Norbert's  meeting  with  Vitaline  had  been a fatal  accident,  his relations  with
her  being, from  the start,  more  or less determined  by events out  of her  past of which  he was completely  unaware.  As is subtly shown  in  the  novel, Vitaline's unconscious  quest  after  her  father's  demise was that  into  her  life there  should enter once again, "dans  l'outre-tombe une immense et fantomatique figure". The atmosphere  in the home  became  unbreathable.  Vitaline,  for her  part,  was like a pale  and  lonely  phantom   harassed  by  the  incessant  presence  of  an  attentive husband  and  three  children.  In  the interim,  however, the  messiah came,  but in the  form  of another  son, Julien.  It  was this boy, always fondled  and  admired, who  became  the  model,  the  chosen one  for  his mother's  devouring  ambitions. But  Julien,  resentful of an  aging  father  who was of little guidance,  could only find a solution to this suffocating mother love in revolt and escape.

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



The  eldest  daughter's life appears  to  have been subconsciously patterned  on rivalry  and  emulation  of the  maternal  image. Anita,  too, marries  at  eighteen  a man  much  older  than  herself, Charles  Bachand,  whom she easily dominates and scarcely loves. Thoroughly sated  with affection during  her infancy, she knows no great  emotional  disquiet  later.  Seven  years after  their  union,  Charles  dies in sexual  congress  (trying  to give the  mother  hen  a larger  brood)   and  she is left with  two offspring  plus independant means. Thenceforth,  the only visitor to her home  is  the  vicar  Aurelien   Latour.   Her  affective  needs  are  now  sufficiently sublimated   by  religious  fervour   and   her  admiration   for  this  attentive   priest. Bessette hereupon  satirizes mercilessly the Quebec clergy and  religion as a whole (much   as  he  had   done  in  treating   mother  Vitaline's   piety  and   hypocrisy). Neither  Anita  nor Aurelien seem to understand  the real motives for his frequent
visits:   "Cesse  de  revasser  Anita   vaniteuse  mets  fin a ces folies  d'adolescente
jamais  ton  nom   (pardonnez-moi  mon  Dieu)   jamais  n'apparaitra  en  grosses lettres sur la couverture  d'un  livre content-toi de faire ton devoir d'aider humble­
ment  l'abbe   Latour   a faire  son  devoir."  The   passage where  Anita  awaits  in
horror  the departure of the dawdling  abbe while her adolescent daughter uncon­
sciously discloses some of her fleshly charms is one of the funniest  in the book.
Roch  Barre  resembles in  certain  regards  Bessette's apathetic anti-hero  in  the
1g6o  novel,  le  Libraire,  but  with  Anita's  brother  there  is no  question  of  an assumed detachment; his defeat  in life is total and irreversible.4   Roch lives in an attic  hovel where  he spends  his time  drinking  bourbon  to calm  his nerves and poring  over  blueprints  for  the  profit  of  the  British American   Company.   His natural  talents  are  undermined   by  his  past.  Roch  is the  first  to  hurry  to  his father's  deathbed; his affection  for this man has been his most lasting bond.
Berthe  has  been  the  least  loved  of  all  the  Barre  children,   which  doubtless drives her to become the sexual slave of the bestial Roberto. Berthe had criticized her  husband,  Albert  Laverdure,  and  treated  him  contemptuously,  for  the  ex­ athlete  had failed to satisfy her craving for affection. Even at school, as a miser­ able, lonely, neurotic  adolescent,  Berthe had succumbed, in search of  relief from her  frustration, to a  lesbian  affair.  Now, since Albert  has fled, her  attention  is almost completely absorbed  by the uncouth  and hawklike Italian. It is Roch who understands  the real reason: "Illa tient par la peau".
But  the  death  of  Vitaline's  father  not  only  blighted  the  lives of Roch  and Berthe,   and   confirmed   Norbert   Barre's  moral  destruction;   it  also  visited  its curse  upon  the following generation  in the person of the infant,  Jacot.  Between the strain  of her  job in an office, under  the tyranny of a vicious female accoun-

68

THE  UNENDING  CYCLE



tant,  and  her own emotional  problems, Berthe had little time for her son. Jacot's hatred  of his father's  replacement  and  his own distress are expressed in obsessive activity  of his excretory system;  his refusal of self-control is the one way he has of punishing his elders and getting attention.
The  various inter-relationships  between these brothers and  sisters are  carefully delineated  in respective monologues. The  most striking device the author  utilizes in order  to illustrate  these complex  psychological reactions is also one  he shares with  Henri   de  Montherlant. By  the  use of  "altemance", the  French   author presented  that  fundamental duality  whereby any thought entering into conscious­ ness simultaneously  suggests its converse. In  other  words, it is not at  all illogical that  Gaetane  should  sneer one moment  at  Berthe's shameless  conduct  and  then suddenly  declare:   "Pauvre  Berthe  la  proteger  lui  donner  de  bons  conseils la delivrer de ce corsaire." Roch sardonically  refers to Julien's mediocre intelligence and   his  socio-political  beatnik   behaviour  stirred  by  his  unseemly  girl  friend, Sophie,  then  proffers instantaneously: "il a  peut-etre raison il est peut-etre  plus libre que toi Roch Barre dessinateur squelettique." For Bessette, as for the heroes of Montherlant, man's  interior  drama  springs from this basic ambiguity; it is the keyboard of fatality.
Julien  is held  by the  Flemish Sophie Teunebroker  in much  the same  way as Berthe  by her  Roberto.  To  begin, Julien  was a refined young man,  adulated at home and  gaining  top marks at school, but then he began to frequent  a slovenly crowd  of drifters  and  dope-takers.  There  he met Sophie, an  unkempt  European leftist, with  her expressionless face, her dirt  and  her limitless sensuality. In  their abject  apartment, she and Julien  lie on their grubby mattress, making fierce love and discussing how they plan to revolutionize society, destroy bourgeois capitalism, overthrow a claustrophobic system which breeds hate and misunderstanding. In complete  incomprehension,  Vitaline  prays, "qu'il  oublie  pour  une  fois la  con­ testation   la  revolution  les  assemblees socialistes fascistes  maoistes  separatistes qu'est-ce ($a veut dire toute cette salade."
In  a  portrayal  which  recalls  Huxley's  Brave  New  World  or  Orwell's   1984,
Bessette pushes to an  extreme  what  could possibly be the traits  of a new order. His  early  solidarity  with  resurgent  Quebecois  unionism  is now  tempered   with much  irony  and  scepticism.  Julien  and  Sophie  in their  revolt  aim  to  thwart  a system which  has bred  such  irretrievable  creatures  as Anita,  Roch  and  Berthe. Julien's  soul  cries out  for  vengeance  against  a  society which  has  made  of  his father's  life a living hell. In his eyes his brother  Roch's work as draftsman for the Anglos symbolizes his people's  plight after  a hundred  years of in justice. Yet the

6g

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



suggestions  of  a  new  fascism  are  evident  in  his  attitude,   for  he  accepts  an unswerving self-discipline in the name of the cause. The  leader, Stanislas, stands on  the  podium  beneath  the  fteur-de-lys flag with  his enormously  muscular  legs spread so as to form an indestructible  X. Dressed in shining black nylon and high leather  boots, he roars  his message through  loudspeakers to an infatuated crowd propelled towards the mystique of a new Calvary.
The  most appealing figure in  the  novel is Gaetane.  Delicate  and  intelligent, this  teenager  has  been  deeply affected  by the  death  of her  father,  but  it is her older  brother,  Julien,  in  whom  she finds an  enthralling  masculine  image. The love of these two borders on incest, but Gaetane  is really an innocent  girl passing through  a crucial  moment  in her life. She is in the process of questioning her environment,  forming  her opinions. Her inner  debate is perhaps  the heart  of the novel, for  the  side  she  and  those of her  generation  fall  on  wiii determine  the future  direction  of  her  homeland.  She,  for  example,  is going  through  a  very serious religious crisis:  "Dieu  existe il est la-haut  quelque  part  (non il n'est nulle part il n'existe pas il se fiche de nous) ." The other characters, except for Gaetane and  Julien,  may be seen as lost souls sold to the system of money and conformity to  bourgeois  rules. The  young  girl  has the intelligence  to question  such values. She is drawn  to her  brother,  Julien,  but as yet she does not yield to the tempta­ tion  of complete  intellectual  revolt. For what  do people like Julien  and  Sophie, the  rebels of the  younger  generation,  have to offer in  place of  what  has been? Bessette's satire  makes  it quite  clear in the  naming  of the  great  leader  towards whom  the  new  youth  aspires,  Stanislas  Auguste  Casavant-or as it may  be deciphered: Stanislas Box-of-wind.



Tu:E MYTHICAL QUALITIES of le Cycle are unmistakable. Once again,  as in many  a  French  Canadian work, we have the story of a family and its symbolic struggle  to survive against forces lying within as well as outside itself; we observe, moreover, among  the members of this family a characteristic "com­ plexe d'alienation"/ or  deep-seated  fear  of estrangement,  whether  on  the indi­ vidual,  social, cultural,  or  political  plane. In  all of Bessette's novels,  as in much recent  Quebecois  fiction,  the  characters  live in  the  closed milieu  of  a  modem city away from  nature's balm:  in other  words, they are threatened  as  well with alienation from their natural heritage.
At  the  moment  of  Norbert  Barres death,  the family's disintegration  is immi­
nent.  The  established  order  is definitely breaking  up. Yet the thwarted  Vitaline

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



and  her children  still express  inwardly a nostalgia  for reconciliation and  reunion. Roch  says of  his sister  Berthe: "pourquoi ne  pas  tenter  avec  elle un  rapproche­ ment  pourquoi ne  pas  l'appeler ou  meme  aller  chez  elle."  Julien  overtly  refuses his family  and  all  it  stands  for;  he is the  only  one  not  to  come  to  the  funeral. However, we  discover  that   he  has  in  fact  prowled  around the  Funeral Home, only  to  flee at  the  last  instant from  his father's corpse,  the  religious  observances and  the  presence  of  the  others.  A  moment  of  penetrating  insight  reveals  to  the young  rebel  exactly  what  he has  been  doing  subconsciously  through his political initiatives: "est-il  possible  qu'un  antique implacable  Oedipe  anteconscienciel ait meme   alors   au   fond   de   moi  erie  reclame   exige  vengeance)  la  revolution  le socialisme  la revance proletarienne damnes  de la  terre  unissez-vous  qu'eussent-ils perdu   et  Stanislas-Auguste Casavant  Carlos  Ramirez Sophie Teunebroker  de
quai   les  aurais-je  prives  en  quoi   les aurais-je  trahis  si  je  m'etais alors   jete  a
genoux  ou simplement approche de ce lit."
In  le Cycle, Bessette  delivers  his prophetic vision. French Canada's survival  is strongly  threatened. (That  Gaetane's daily  routine at  school  should  involve  the English  tongue  is another symptom of this.)   But  fanatical leadership will go to all  ends  to  see that   the  threat does  not  materialize. The   present   may  be  filled with  disorder  and  one  may  wonder  what  form the  new order  will take.  The  signs portend that  the  future will not  be "august". The  "Casavants" are  at work  and, for the sake of a race  and  a language, the  pattern of a rich and  beautiful cultural heritage   may   be  extinguished.  In   any  case,  it is  vigorously   implied   that   the tragedy  of the  lives of such  people  as the  Barres  cannot  alone  be ascribed  to the evils of a system and  an  establishment. Catastrophe is, after  all,  often  the neces­ sary  consequence of  human relations,  the  tragic  fates  of  men  being  frequently irremediable. The   design  of  the  Quebec   myth,  of  which  le  Cycle  is  a  further representation, is  itself  founded  upon   the   primordial  instincts   of   the   human psyche, impulses  that  may  be traced  back  through all the  great legends  of man's past.   Human  nature  cannot  be  fundamentally  altered.   Although  ideological  fervour  may interrupt its course for a time, the cycle will go on.

NOTES

1 Bessette, Une  litterature  en ebullition  (Montreal: Editions du  jour,  rg68).
2  Glen Shortliffe, Gerard  Bessette l' homme et l' ecrivain, "Conferences  J.A. de Seve," Universite de Montreal  (Montreal: Therien Freres, rg6o), p. r6.
3 Bessette, le Cycle  (Montreal: Editions du  jour, 1971),  p. gr.  Henceforth references to this work will be designated  by the first letter of the title.
4   Shortliffe, op. cit., p.  r8. In  his conference on Bessette, Glenn Shortliffe  points out

THE  UNENDING CYCLE



how  Herve Jodoin,  protagonist of  le  Libraire,  embodies  a  modern  phenomenon which   he  calls  "schizoidism." Finding  the  various  demands which   contemporary society  thrusts  upon  the individual difficult  to bear, the "schizoid" learns  to develop a  psychological distance,  a  sort  of  built-in   non-reaction, towards  all  persons  and objects   making  up   exterior  reality.   Jodoin's  bizarre   indifference  recalls   Camus' famous  hero, Meursault, in the novel, l'Etranger.
5   Yvon  Daigneault, "Menaud maitre-draveur  devant la critique  1937-1967," Livres et auteurs quebecois 1969 (Montreal:  Editions Jumonville, 1969), pp.  248-262. In his article on  Felix-Antoine Savard's novel,  Yvon Daigneault states  as his principal thesis  that   "Menaud serait  !'expression pour   nous  des grands mythes  fondamen­ taux  de  !'arne   humaine." Daigneault further mentions  how  Gilles  Marcotte con­ sidered   Menaud   as  being  essentially   "!'illustration du  complexe  d'alienation des Canadiens franc;ais"   (p.  25 7). While   M enaud  maitre-draveur  and   le  Cycle  are exemplary, all  Quebecois fiction  may  be said,  in general,  to follow  this  pattern.




THE DEJID CHILD


I dreamed  the child was dead and folded in a box
like stockings or a dress

I dreamed its toys and games its brightly coloured clothes were lying in the grass

and I was left behind adult  and  dutiful
with ink instead of blood.

I could not bear the grief
accommodate  the loss.
It was my heart that died.

But wakening I saw
the child beside my bed
'Not dead, not dead!' I cried

and startled  by my voice and fearful of my glance the child ran off and hid.

(Poems  from Melanie's Nite-book.)
 

P. K. Page


DUNCAN'S  WEB



Carole Gerson




W,LE THE  OVERT subject  of The Imp.,;a[;,, ffl  indeed imperialism,  the novel's deeper structural  unity derives from its focus on idealism
and  its  internal   patterning of  perceptions  and  points of  view. Sara  Jeannette Duncan  uses Canada  not only to provide the history of the imperialist  movement, but also to supply a foil for the old world, so that in the interaction  between old world  and  new world  experiences and  personalities she can scrutinize  subtleties of idealism  and  levels of vision. Hence  her concern is not narrative for the sake of narrative  but the effect of event on the formation  of vision; as she herself says of Lome  Murchison's  trip  to England,  "what  he absorbed  and  took  back  with him is, after  all, what  we have to do with;  his actual  adventures  are of no great importance." In  the context  of tum-of-the-century Canadian fiction, marked  as it  was by a  strong  emphasis  on  "actual adventures",   Duncan's  ability  to work into the fabric of her narrative  the abstract  problem of the levels, limitations  and horizons of vision distinguishes The  Imperialist from the story-telling of Gilbert Parker,  Norman  Duncan  and  Ralph  Connor.  Much  of her  distinction  may  be due  to  her  long absence  from  Canada,  which  may have  helped  to expand  her artistic  vision and  give her  greater  detachment  and  a more  universal  frame  of reference  than  her  Canadian contemporaries.  This  detached   perspective,  com­ bined  with  her  personal knowledge of Canada  and  her dexterous  manipulation of characters  and  ideas, renders The  Imperialist one of the most  carefully struc­ tured and unduly neglected Canadian novels.
The  skill of Duncan's  structural technique  lies in her meticulous interweaving
of narrative  threads  so that  all events and  characters  implicitly  comment  upon one another,  and  through  the various attitudes  manifested by various  characters the "figure in the carpet" slowly and surely emerges. Within this scheme of levels of  vision  the  highest  focal  point-the  horizon-is  idealism,  political  in  the case of Lome  Murchison,  moral in the case of Hugh  Finlay. Just  outside central focus  sit  the  two  characters  who  function  on  the  lesser plane  of self-interest,

73

DUNCAN'S WEB



Alfred Hesketh and  Dora  Milburn. And the substantial  background  to the whole is provided by Elgin, Ontario, recognized by John Murchison to be "a fair sample of our  rising manufacturing towns," and  by his son Lome  to be a microcosm of eastern  Canadian society:   "Elgin  market  square ... was the  biography  of Fox County, and, in little, the history of the whole province."
Elgin's vision focuses on  "the  immediate,  the vital, the municipal." Anchored
in  common-sense  pragmatism,   the  town  distrusts  imaginative   eccentricity.  In Elgin  religious fervour  "was  not  beautiful,  or  dramatic,  or  self-immolating;  it was reasonable;" and  young  daydreaming  Advena  Murchison  learns  that  "No one  could  dream  with  impunity  in  Elgin, except  in  bed."  As the  microcosmic example  of the  level-headed,  business-minded Canadian community,  Elgin  sup­ plies the formal  testing-ground  for Lome's  idealism and  judges less by  principle than  by  economic  practicability. When  Lome  accepts  the  Liberal  nomination in  a federal  by-election  and  makes imperialism the keynote of his  platform,  the whole country  looks to  Elgin  to indicate  the national  reaction  to  the  Idea  and sees in Elgin a mirror of itself.
The  town's solid, practical  personality manifests itself in Mrs. Murchison and, on  a  more  sophisticated  level, in  Dr.  Drummond.  "The  central  figure ... with her family  radiating  from  her,"  Mrs.  Murchison  contains  the stability of  every­ day reality:  she knows that  the crises of ordinary living are whether Abby's baby has the whooping cough and  what to serve the minister for tea. On her own level of apprehension  she sees through  the ideal of England  when  Lome returns with his clothes  "ingrained  with  London  smut,"  and  she  implicitly  understands  the emotional  realities that  Advena  and  Finlay try so hard to idealize away because, in her common-sense world,  no young man and  young woman  can see so much of one another  without  falling in love. Dr. Drummond,  the Scottish Presbyterian minister,  exemplifies a similar  intuitive  grasp of ordinary  life. While his limita­ tions are those of any man  who moves "with  precision along formal and implicit lines"  and  whose study  is lined  "with  standard   religious philosophy, standard poets,  standard  fiction,  all  that   was  standard   and  nothing  that  was not,"  his fundamental knowledge  of  human  behaviour  enables  him  to confront  Finlay's misguided idealism  and  to inform  him that  he and  Advena are "a  pair of born lunatics" for their determination to sacrifice love to principle.
While Elgin, Mrs. Murchison  and  Dr. Drummond  represent the primary level of vision -namely  common  sense and  practical  conduct -there  runs in them a deep vein of old loyalties and  half-hidden  emotional  ties waiting  to be tapped by Lome's  more  penetrating imagination. For  all its spirit  of North  American

74

DUNCAN's WEB



enterprise,  Elgin,  "this  little  outpost  of Empire," maintains  its umbilical  ties in its  annual   lively celebration  of  the  Queen's  Birthday;   the  importance of  this event to the Murchison  children  fills Duncan's  opening chapter. Dr. Drummond and  John   Murchison   emigrated   from  Scotland  together  and  transferred   their concerns entirely  to  the  new  world,  yet "obscure  in  the  heart  of each  of them ran  the  undercurrent  of  the  old  allegiance."  Allegiance  to  tradition   inspired Mrs. Murchison  to name her first two daughters  after their grandmothers, Lome after  the  Marquis  de Lome  (Governor-general  of Canada  from  1878  to  r883) whose mother-in-law  was Queen  Victoria,  and  two sons after  Canadian Liberal party leaders. In addition,  Lome  Murchison grows up in the old Plummer  place, a home distinguished  by the "attractiveness  of the large ideas upon which it had been built and designed." This atmosphere of "large ideas," Elgin's lingering "sentiment  of affection  for the reigning  house," and  Lome's  early manifestation of "that  active sympathy  with the disabilities of his fellow-beings which stamped him later  so intelligent  a meliorist" are  all absorbed  into  his earnest  personality and  into  the  making  of  his  idealistic  imperialism.  In  her  careful  plotting  of Lome's   background   Duncan   weaves an  intricate   fabric  of  colonial  affections which requires only Lome's  personality to tailor it into the imperialist  banner.



BuT EVEN  MORE  IMPORTANT than  the content  of Lome's idealism is his idealism  itself, as The  Imperialist  focuses squarely  upon  the  per­ sonality  of  the  idealist.  For  Duncan,  idealism  results  more  from  temperament than  from  philosophy. Hence  her  two principal  idealists, Lome  Murchison  and Hugh  Finlay, are described in remarkably similar terms although the actual  forms of their idealism differ greatly.
Hugh  Finlay, the young Presbyterian  minister from Dumfriesshire,  and  Lome
Murchison,  the young Canadian lawyer, are  two examples of the same "type": sincere,  open,  at  times  almost  simple,  and  noticeably  different  from  everyone else  in  intensity  and   visionary  focus.  Both  inhabit   a  dimension  beyond  the ordinary,   both  appeal  to  others  by their  strength  of  personality,  and  Duncan describes both in terms of expanded  horizons. Lome's face is "lighted  by a certain simplicity of soul that  pleased even when  it was not  understood;" he is "frank and  open,  with  horizons and  intentions;  you could see them  in  his face."  Simi­ larly  Finlay  is "a  passionate  romantic ... with  a shock of black  hair  and  deep dreams  in  his eyes ... a  type ... of the simple motive  and  the  noble intention, the  detached   point  of view  and  the somewhat  indifferent  attitude   to  material

75

DUNCAN'S WEB



things."  Like  Lome,  he  has  "horizons,  lifted  lines beyond the  common  vision, and  an  eye rapt  and  a heart  intrepid." Circumstance  and  place of birth  rather than temperament direct Lome's idealism towards political theory, and Finlay's towards  personal sacrifice and  the upholding  of old moral allegiances. While the story  of  Lome's   political  career  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  story  of  Finlay's romantic  involvements,  the  parallel  plots complement  one  another  as the  new world  idealist  finds  his  moral  inspiration  in  the  old  world,  and  the  old  world idealist  looks to  the  new  world  for  "elbow-room"  yet cannot  shake  off his old world ties.
Lome's  incipient  idealism finds its focus when he is invited to be secretary to a deputation   from  the  United  Chambers  of Commerce of Canada shortly to wait upon the British government  "to  press for the encouragement  of improved communications  within the Empire." For Lome the Empire immediately becomes "the   whole  case;"   Canada  has  stuck  with  and  must  continue   to  stick  with England   for  "the   moral  advantage."  Once  in  England,   Lome   alone  is  not disillusioned  by  "the   unready  conception  of  things,  the  political  concentration on  parish  affairs,  the  cumbrom,  social machinery . . . the  problems of sluggish overpopulation" which  depress the other  members  of his delegation.  Instead  he colours all with his idealism, and sees "England down the future the heart of the Empire,  the  conscience  of  the  world,  and  the  Mecca  of the  race"  if only the colonies wiii come to her economic aid.
Once  Lome's  idealistic temperament attaches  itself to imperialism, enthusiasm
rather  than  reason determines  the course of his career. On  his return  to Canada his gift for transmitting his earnestness becomes the source of his political attractiveness: "at  the  late  fall fairs and  in  the lonely country  schoolhouses his talk  had  been  so  trenchant, so  vivid and  pictorial,  that  the  gathered  farmers listened with open  mouths, like children,  pathetically used with life, to a "grown­ up  fairy  tale."  That imperialism  is little  more than  a "grown-up  fairy  tale"  is implied  by  the  outcome  of  Lome's  career.  His  growing  feeling  that  he  rides "upon   the  crest  of  a  wave  of  history,"  and  that  he is the  instrument   of "an  intention,  a great  purpose  in the endless construction  and  re-construction  of the world"  severs him  from  the  pragmatic   reality  of  Elgin.  Once  the  Idea  takes possession of him  he proves incapable  of following the advice of the Liberals to subdue  his imperialism  which  is becoming  increasingly  suspect  in  the  business community.  As a  result  he barely wins the  election, and  when irregularities  are charged  by both  sides and  the seat is to be re-contested, the Liberals ask him to withdraw.  Lome's  idealistic  vision-his  overly expanded  horizons which cause

DUNCAN'S WEB



him  to lose touch  with  the  primary,  common-sense vision of his  community­ makes him a unique  figure in the canon of Canadian  hero-victims:  he wins the election, but he loses the seat.
Into  her pattern  of levels of vision Duncan  works an Elgin-level idealist who, by  juxtaposition,  accentuates   Lome's   loftier  idealism.  Elmore   Crow,  Lome's former  schoolmate,  goes out  west only to  discover that  from  a  common-sense point of view normality is best:  "you've got to get up just as early in the mornings out there as y'do anywhere,  far's  I've noticed. An' it's a lonesome life. Now I am back, I don't  know but  little old Ontario's  good enough for me." Having  "wore out  his Winnipeg  clothes  and  his big ideas,"  Crow  returns  to the  family  farm and makes himself useful.
But like Lome,  Finlay  and  Advena live far above the  plane of useful reality. The  lovers are saved from the adverse consequences of their idealism only by the deus  ex  machina   intervention  of Dr.  Drummond.  The  two  meet  after  Advena has already  loved Finlay  from  afar,  and  much  of Finlay's  bungling  stems from his inexperience  with  women  and  his inability  to  perceive Advena's  love until things   have  already   progressed  to  a  point  of  deep  emotional   commitment. Artistically, perhaps  the  finest passage of the book is the scene of their  first real encounter which sets the subsequent direction of their relationship.
Late  on  an  April  afternoon -the  time of year is the  transition  into  spring,
and  the  time  of day  the  transition  into evening-Finlay overtakes  Advena  on his way home. They  walk in silence together, and  Advena  feels that  the event is "pregnant, auspicious" -like the time of day and  the time of year, the brink of something.  When  they tum  a comer  and  the sunset suddenly  bursts upon  them, Finlay,  the  recent emigrant  from  the old world, marvels that  "it's  something  to be in a country where the sun still goes down with a thought  of the primaeval." Advena, born and  raised in Canada,  prefers "the sophistication  of chimney-pots" and  longs "to  see a sunset in London,  with the fog breaking  over Westminster." After some witty exchange  they go their separate  ways. Finlay's  road lies "to  the north,  which was still snowbound," while Advena's is into the "yellow west, with the odd sweet illusion that a summer day was dawning."
In  the  paradoxes  worked into  this scene Duncan  maps the lovers' course. For all his admiration  of the  "primaeval," Finlay remains morally  and  intellectually "snowbound" by  convention.  By birth  a  northern  man   (from  Dumfriesshire), his northern   route  to  his  home  in  the  new  world  concretely  expresses his old world  vision, which  is embodied  in his intractible  resolve to honour  an  engage­ ment  of convenience  to a distant  cousin made before his departure for  Canada.

77

DUNCAN's WEB



In  contrast,  Advena's  new world vision and  western direction signify her greater consciousness of  passion  and  emotional  freedom,  and  her  capacity  to see that Finlay's "dim  perception  of his own case was grotesque." While she glances intellectually  towards  chimney-pots  and  Westminster,  and  does  try  to  support Finlay's  conventionalism  and  his marriage  to Christie Cameron, it is her passion that  finally shatters  their  idealistic  self-renunciation.  So  long  as  they  maintain their idealism -their intellectual  refinement which allows them  the illusion that theirs is a "friendship of spirit" -the course of their relationship  runs northerly, towards   frozen  passion  and   ice-bound   convention.  But  when  Advena   meets Finlay  in  a thunderstorm and  passionately declares "We  aren't  to bear  it",  and Dr. Drummond conveniently decides to marry Christie himself, the lovers turn abruptly  towards  the yellow west and  the frontier of emotional  freedom.
In Duncan's pattern  of levels of vision Lome and Finlay are two versions of the
same thing:  two sides of the woven carpet, to return to Henry James's  metaphor. While  Lome's  idealism is directed  outward,  towards an impossible "union  of the Anglo-Saxon  nations  of  the  world,"  Finlay's  is entirely  personal,  designed  to avoid  "the  sacrifice of all  that  I hold  most valuable  in  myself." Just  as Lome expatiates   on  the  moral  advantages   of  imperialism  without   working  out  the concrete  economic details, so Finlay expatiates on the freedom  of the new world without   perceiving  his imprisonment   by the  conventions  of  the  old  world.  As idealists, they are  removed  from  the primary, common-sense vision of Elgin;  but because  they are  idealists, their  motivation  is well-intentioned:   Lome  wishes to save the Empire, Finlay to save his principles.



DUNCAN  ADDS another  dimension to her pattern  of levels of vision with  the  self-centredness  of Alfred  Hesketh  and  Dora  Milburn. As with everything else, Lome's  apprehension  of Hesketh, an independently wealthy, apparently benevolent  young Englishman  whom he meets in London,  is coloured by his idealism:  "Hesketh  stood,  to him, a product of that  best which he was so occupied   in  admiring   and   pursuing.... There  is no  doubt  that   his  manners were good, and  his ideas unimpeachable in the letter; the young Canadian read the rest into  him and  loved him for what  he might have been." Hesketh is suffi­ ciently  inspired  by  Lome's  infectious  idealism  to  come  to  Elgin,  but  once  he arrives Lome  realizes that  Hesketh is a useless twit. "I certainly  liked him better, over there,"  he confesses to Advena,  "but  then he was a part  of it.... Over here you seem to see round  him somehow."  Lome's  doubts about  Hesketh's  place in

DUNCAN'S WEB



Canada  are borne out when Hesketh, campaigning  for Lome, succeeds only in alienating  his audience  by his condescension and snobbery. Like Finlay, Hesketh carries all his old world attitudes  to the new world;  he fails even to perceive the gap  between his class-conscious Englishness and  middle-class Elgin's egalitarian­ ism and  pragmatism.  Hence  he admires the affectedly English  Milburns  as "the most  typically  Canadian  family"  for  "Miss  Milburn   will  compare   with  any English  girl."  But  unlike  Finlay,  Hesketh  lacks principles.  While  his ostensible purpose  in  coming  to  Elgin  is to  help  Lome  spread  the  gospel of imperialism under  the  aegis of the  Liberal  party,  he finds it easily  convenient  to swing  his allegiance   to  the  Conservatives-- Mr.   Milburn's   party-when   he  becomes involved  with  Dora,  and  to develop  a consuming  interest  in  Milburn's traction engines. Hesketh completes his betrayal of Lome when he announces  his engage­ ment  to Dora, to whom Lome  had already given a ring. But in Duncan's scheme Dora  and  Hesketh  belong together,  for by  their self-importance  they hold them­ selves aloof from  Elgin society, and  by  their  lack of principle  and  their  selfish motivation   they  operate   on  a  level  far   beneath   the  high-mindedness   of  the idealists.
Lome's  romanticized  vision of Dora  prevents him from perceiving  the selfish­
ness underlying her coyness and  her continual  evasion of a definite promise. Not at  all  the  goddess of  Lome's  conception,  Dora  presents "a  dull  surface  to the more delicate vibration  of things," and to her one of the most significant  ramifi­ cations of Lome's  trip  to England  is that  she will lose her escort to the  regatta.  She cannot  stand  to see propriety disturbed -"When she was five years old and her kitten  broke its leg, she had  given it to a servant  to drown" -and  Lome's  enthusiasm  disturbs propriety. She also cannot stand  to be ignored, and when she feels at  times  that   "Between   politics and  boilers ... the  world  held  a  second place  for  her,"  she  graciously  accepts  the  attentions  of Alfred  Hesketh.  While Elgin views the world from the level of common sense, and  Lome and  Finlay see things  through  their  exalted  idealism,  Hesketh's  and  Dora's  level of  vision  is limited to self-interest.
Even  after  her  pattern  became  clear, Duncan's  personal attitude toward  her
characters   remains  strangely   vague.  The   first-person  voice  which   frequently enters the narrative  is probably Duncan  herself, but even this voice remains so detached   that   apart   from  overt  disapproval  of  the  self-centred  characters   it refuses to commit  itself to  more  than  a  distant,  ironic sense of sympathy  with both the common-sense community  and  the idealists. If there is a character  who represents the author's  point of view it would have to be Advena,  who straddles

79

DUNCAN'S WEB



the common-sense and  the idealistic worlds, and who views Elgin and her brother with  detached  sympathy.  Advena  appears  to  abandon   the  solid  reality  of  her parents'  world when she supports  Finlay's marriage  to Christie, but her common­ sense  roots finally  assert  themselves. When  she  passionately  declares  to  Finlay that  she can  no longer  maintain  their ideal she feels that  all is lost:  "Before she had  preferred  an  ideal  to  the  desire of  her  heart;   now it  lay  about  her;  her strenuous  heart  had  pulled it  down  to foolish ruin."  But the ruin of the ideal is "foolish"  to Advena  only initially;  Duncan  makes it clear that it is the ideal itself that   is  foolish -the  fabrication  of  two  people  "too  much  encumbered   with ideas  to  move simply,  quickly  on  the  impulse  of  passion."  Lome  destroys his political career  because his idealism is too passionate; Finlay and Advena nearly ruin  their lives because their  idealism is too intellectual. If Duncan  intended  any message beyond her exploration  of the different levels of  vision at which different people operate,  it  could  be the  Renaissance ideal  of  temperance-the balance of passion and  reason which  produces concrete human  achievement.
The  Imperialist has unfortunately suffered the neglect accorded to much litera­ ture based on a topical  political situation. What  in 1904 the Canadian Magazine found  "opportune" the modem  reader now finds obscure, since Duncan assumes her  readers'  familiarity  with  the  imperialist  movement.  Like  Marvell's  Painter satires,  The   Imperialist   requires  some  annotation   and  explanation. But  once made  accessible, the  book  reveals itself to be one of the  most sophisticated  and penetrating  Canadian  novels  written   before  World   War   I. Sara   Jeannette  Duncan's  scheme  of levels of vision, her ability to  work  ideas into the structure  of  her  narrative,   and   her  detached  sympathy  for  both  her  idealists  and  her common-sense characters  raise The  Imperialist  above the local and  the historical into the universal concerns of literature.

















8o


review articles



KLEIN'S POET SURFACING


Tom Marshall



The  Collected  Poems of A. M.  Klein, compiled  and  with an introduction by Miriam
Waddington. McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $14.95 cloth, $6.95 paper.


THis IS an  important  publi­ cation.  It makes  available to the  general  reader  for  the  first  time  in  many  years a large  body  of  work  by  one  of  our most important poets. Except  for The  Rocking  Chair   and   The  Second   Scroll,   all   of A.  M.  Klein's   books   have  been  out  of print  since at  least  the  I 95o's. Moreover, there   are   enough   poems   never   before collected  to fill a number of slim volumes. All serious students and  interested readers  of  Canadian  poetry  owe  a debt  of grati­ tude to Miriam Waddington and  to the Klein  family  for  making this work  avail­ able. In  its richness  and  variety, its virtu­  osity and  range,  in  its failures  as well as its  successes,  this  book   provides  one  of the  most ambitious and  fascinating testi­ monies  of  creative  achievement  that  we have had.
That said,  let me  register  two quibbles
before  attempting some  sort  of comment about  Klein's  work  as a whole.  Firstly,  I regret  that  for  whatever reason  a  splen­ did  opportunity was  missed;  Ms.  Wad­ dington and  her publishers have  included  only  those  poems  that  were  published  in
 
magazines   and   books,  and   have  not  in­ cluded    those   unpublished   poems   from Klein's   own   notebooks   and   the   private manuscripts  he  made   for   relatives  and  friends  in  the  Iggo's  when  book  publica­ tion   was   impossible.   To   include  these would  have  occasioned  textual problems  (as  they   would   any  serious   attempt  to deal  with  Klein's very extensive  revisions, many   of  them   made  after   poems   were published), but  we would  then  have  had a  "Complete"   Poems.  As  it  is,  we  are unlikely  (for  commercial reasons)   to see such  an  animal for some  time.
My  other   quibble   is  less serious,   and has  to  do  with   the  order   in  which   the poems are  printed here. Klein's first volume,  Hath   Not  A  Jew ... , was  pub­ lished  in   I940,  but   most  of  the  poems were  written in  the  late  Ig2o's and  early Iggo's.    Nevertheless,    Ms.   Waddington places  these after  the  "radical poems" of the middle  and  late  I ggo's. This  can  give a   misleading   impression  of   the   poet's  development.   Still,   Ms.   Waddington  is correct, I   think,   in   making  a   distinct group  of  the radical poems,  which  might

REVIEW ARTICLES



well have  made   (in  their  time)   a  timely book.
In  fact,  a  reading of  the  many  poems never   before    published   in   book   form shows  how  much   of  Klein's better  work had  been  lost  to  the  general   public.  He was  a  prolific   poet,   for  better  and   for worse, producing a large  body of verse between   1927  or  so  and   the  195o's.  To know   him  only  as  the  man   who  wrote The   Rocking   Chair   and   The   Second Scroll,  and   then   fell  silent   for   twenty years, is to know  him  at  his best, but  not in all his variety.
Linguistic playfulness  and  an addiction to   rhyme    characterize   Klein's   earliest work.  A fondness  for  light  verse-some of  it   quite   juvenile,    some   of   it   quite delightful-·is   the   counterpoint  to   his more  sombre  accounts of Jewish  suffering throughout the  centuries. There are  also sonnets   of  biblical   subjects,   love  poems and  poems of the ghetto. As one  who has written about   Klein's work  before,  I am grateful to  Miriam  Waddington for  the discovery   of  a  number  of  witty   poems that  I had  never  read  or else had  forgot­ ten.  One   such  is  "Dialogue",  in  which two   Jewish  wives    pine  for   the   old country:

The two shawl-covered grannies, buying fish, Discuss  the spices  of the Sabbath dish.

They laud  old-country dainties; each  one bans
The heathen foods  the  moderns eat  from
cans.

They get  to talking of the golden  land, Each phrase of theirs couches a reprimand.

Says one: I hate these  lofty  buildings, I Long  for a piece  of unencircled  sky.

I do not  know  the  tramway system, so
I walk and  curse  the  traffic  as I go.

I chaffer English, and  I nearly choke,
0 for  the  talk  of simple Russian folk!
 The other says:  A lonesomeness impels
Me  hence; I miss the gossip  at  the  wells.

I yearn  for even  Ratno's muds; I long
For  the delightfully heartrending  song

Of Reb  Yecheskel  Chazan, song  that tore
The heart so clear  it did  not  ask for more.

They  sigh; they  shake  their  heads; they  both conspire
To  doom  Columbus to eternal fire.

Here  an experience common to many Canadians -and  not,  of course,  only  to Jews-is memorably and wittily set down. Another early poem that greatly appeals  to me is the sonnet "My  Literati Friends  in Restaurants", in which  the polyglot poet scribbles the last line of the Divine  Comedy  on  a  menu  and  dreams of his love while his intellectual friends bicker  and  shout  their  abstract love  for the working classes.
But  much  of  the  early  work  seems  to me   clumsy  and   fustian,   sometimes   be­ cause  of  the  dubious   tactic  of  a  deliber­  ately   archaic   diction   and   syntax   as   a means of rendering the medieval  or earlier  Jewish world,  sometimes because  the  rhymes  are  not  subtle  enough   to  lift  the satires   out   of   the   realm   of   burlesque.  This  is a  fault  one  finds  in  much  of  the "radical" poetry, and  at  its worst  in The  Hitleriad   of  1944.   It  was  Whitman, I think,  who  said  of  Poe  that   he  carried  the  rhyming  art  to  excess,  and  it  might  be   added    of  Klein   that    his   technical strengths often become weaknesses through excess. One  takes  the  bad  with the   good  when   a  poet  1s   as  vital   and exuberant as this.
When  Klein's   devices  work,  however, the  result  is a  poetry  of great  originality. In  Hath  Nat  A  Jew ... , where  the  best of  the  early  work  is collected,  Klein  ex­ plores  the situation of the  Jews  through­ out  history  in  a  language  adapted  from

REVIEW ARTICLES



that   of  Spenser,  Shakespeare  and  Mar­ lowe. Much of this hybrid  verse-which unites  the  great   but  disparate  traditions of English  literature  and  Hebrew lore­ is surprisingly fresh, colourful and  scintil­ lating,  especially  in  poems  for  children, based   on  Jewish  folklore   and   Chassidic tales  from   Poland,   the   land   of  Klein's immediate  ancestors.   There  is,  in   this book, almost  no reference  to Canada or identifiable mention  of Montreal. But one of  the  most  impressive   poems,  "Out of the  Pulver   and   the  Polished   Lens",  de­ velops a universal  statement of the search for  "identity" in  terms  of  Baruch  Spin­ oza's   liberation  from   ghetto   and   syna­ gogue  into  a  wider  world  full  of  God's presence.   The   search   for  "God" is,  the poet  suggests,  the  search  for one's  fullest and   not   one's   narrowest   self   (one   can think  of  this  in  terms  of  Jung's descrip­ tion of the individuation process) . Such a concern   transcends  cultural barriers, and foreshadows  Klein's  later   expressions  of sympathy for  French Canada.
In   the  radical   poems,  too,  Klein  ex­ tends  his sympathy  to all who suffer from economic  injustice.  I have always felt that these  poems were somewhat hit and  miss, but  certainly  there  are  among  them,  as Klein's Elizabethan colleagues  might  say, "palpable  hits"   such   as  this   complaint against  the  bourgeois  philistines:

Milady Schwartz, ( oh,  no, she is no snob) Speaks to the staff: The season  is belated. Her husband works too hard. You'd never
think
So fine a soul would  take  to cloaks  and  suits, Competing with  such  thieves as Levy,  Inc.
But  she does  not complain. We  all  must suffer
For  those  the  higher things life  has to offer.
Does  Mr.  Abram Segal  still write verses? It must  be wonderful. She  envies  him.
She  wishes  she could  make  up  rhymes. She nurses
 Feelings  unuttered, smitten by lockjaw.
(Moi, j'ai Apollon sur les bouts  de  mes dix  doigts  ... )
Of course  she loves art. She  goes  to lectures. But yesterday she heard a recitation
About  the  patter of a babe's pink  toes.
He should  have  heard it, should the  poet,
Abe.
Also, she is a member of a club
Occasionally addressed by local  bards. (A teaspoonful of art, before and  after
cards.)

Klein's  poems of social  protest  prepare the  way  for  his  fusion  of  private  vision and public observation in The Rocking Chair  (1948). Meanwhile Poems  (1944) continues his articulation of specifically Jewish themes. In the poems immediately preceding The  Rocking Chair   (some  of them   later   employed   as  glosses  in  The Second  Scroll)   there  is a  new  assurance and   poise,  a  gradual  movement  toward a   more    consistently    "modern"   idiom. What   his  most   severe   critics   have   re­ garded   as  a  facility   for  empty  rhetoric Klein  turns,  as  I  shall  attempt  to show, to appropriate purposes.
The   Rocking  Chair  is, I  think,  a land­ mark  in  the  history  of  Canadian  poetry. Stylistically,   Klein   has   benefitted   from association  with  other  Montreal poets  of the  forties   (P.  K.  Page,  Patrick   Ander­ son,  possibly even  the  early   Irving Lay­ ton)    and   from   acquaintance  with   the work   of   Yeats,   Hopkins,  Auden    and Thomas, but   he  remains  very  definitely himself,  probably  because  his mastery  of various  languages  brings  an  individuality (if not an oddity)  to his manner of nego­ tiating   English.   In  a   richly   inventive, sometimes  even  ornate  language he  ap­ plies his very considerable insight  into  the nature of  minority  groups  to the situation and  character of the French Canadians, Canadians in general, Canadian Indians, and  even  the scattered tribe  of Canadian

REVIEW ARTICLES



poets.  In  this he expresses  what  must become the collective Canadian conscious­ ness, a  tapestry  of minority  groups,  each in  its  own  cultural  garrison   (or  ghetto) and  surrounded by a vast and  forbidding landscape. "Portrait of  the Poet  as Land­ scape"  is, in  fact,  the  key poem,  for  in it the  poet's  function is  seen  as  the  articu­ lation  of man's  place in the social, natural and   cosmic  landscape, and  of  its  life  in him.   Unfortunately,  as   the   poem   also indicates, hardly  anyone  was likely to be listening   in   1 948,  and   Klein   was  never able  to enjoy  an  audience like that  of the
196o's   and   7o's,  which   has  lionized   his
successors   (Layton,  Purdy,  Cohen,   At­ wood  etc.)    for   their   enlargement  upon these basic themes.
Klein's work   reflects the   Canadian
multiculturalism; even  the  zionism  of many  poems and  of The Second  Scroll is, by analogy   (and   because  the  Old  Testa­ ment  is part  of the  mythic  baggage  of us WASPS   too),  relevant to  the  Canadian attempt to achieve  community. In  "The Provinces" Klein writes:

... the  heart seeks  one,  the  heart, and  also the  mind   seeks  single   the  thing that  makes them  one,  if one.

And  in  "Grain  Elevator" all  his  worlds are  yoked together in a cinematic flow of images  that  flash  by at  almost  hallucina­ tory  speed,  a  "montage/of  inconsequent time  and  uncontiguous space" that  binds a  Montreal  grain   elevator  to  Babylon, Leviathan,  the  ark,  Joseph's  dreams  in Egypt,   Saskatchewan,  the   liberation  of the   Bastille,   Araby,   Mongolians  in  the steerage  of a ship, and  a number of other things -in  fact  to  all  times,  places  and peoples  that  have been sustained by bread. Recurrent  images   of   prison,    ship   and river  give way to the  eventual  flower-box
 (and flour-box) from which (and through which)   "all   the  coloured faces  of  man­ kind" are  raised. Canada contains, in the microcosm  of  the  grain   elevator,  a  uni­ verse of  need  and  its  possible  fulfilment. Material and imaginative liberation occur together   in  this  Utopian  vision ; it  offers what   Margaret  Avison  calls  "jailbreak/ and   re-creation".   Exuberant   metaphor articulates a  basic  human  (and  in  other  poems  an  extra-human)  unity  in  diver­  sity.
Here   and   in  "Lone  Bather" identity
with  the world is achieved through meta­ morphosis.  Language is made  an  instru­ ment   of  magic,   a   flexible,   esemplastic substance.  As  the  bather  becomes  bird, dolphin,  plant    and   merman   in   turn,  Klein's  customary  dislocation of conven­  tional   syntax   functions  as   part   of  the process by  which  one's  "normal" percep­ tion of  reality  is broken  down  in order  to reveal  man's  kinship   (and, as he returns to  his  evolutionary  origin,   his  ultimate identity)  with  all living  things:

Upon the  ecstatic diving board  the diver, poised  for parabolas, lets go
lets go his manshape to become a bird. Is bird,  and  topsy-turvy
the  pool floats overhead, and  the  white  tiles snow
their  crazy  hexagons. Is dolphin. Then
is plant  with  lilies bursting from  his heels ...

The   world  is  rearranged  and   reconsti­ tuted  for  us;  we are  even  allowed,  by a sudden  shift of perspective, a momentary look through the diver's eyes.
Klein's  magic  is "Canadian" insofar  as it  proposes  an   ultimate  unity   while  re­ taining   respect  for   the  individual  cate­  gories, cultures,  boundaries and  creatures that  make  up  the  whole.  His  was essen­ tially  a religious  sensibility, and  his great  theme  is the transcendence of evil through imaginative sympathy. To be a Canadian,

REVIEW ARTICLES



he  suggests,   is  to  experience  alienation and   exile,   to  know   cultural  conflict   as well as cultural diversity.  All Canadians, in this view, are like wandering Jews in a vast   and   mysterious  land   of  exile.   (By I974,  I  think,  many  have  begun   to  feel at   home,   but   this  happy   process  is  far from   complete.)  It   seems  advisable, in this situation, that  the several Canadian garrisons  attempt to communicate their hopes and anxieties to one another, and communicate also the attempts of each cultural or regional  community to achieve some  feeling  of  harmony with  the  land and,   perhaps  through  the  land,   with  a larger   order   of  things   in  the   universe. Thus art,   thus  the  poet  who  takes  into himself  the landscape.
It  was, then,  potentially tragic  that,  at least at  times, Klein  should  have seen the poet,  once  the  acknowledged spokesman for  his culture, as an  invisible  man  hope­ lessly unable to communicate  his essential vision  to  a  society  entangled  in  technol­  ogy and  drugged with  its attendant pop­ culture. The poet  of  "Portrait" holds  his v1s1on as  a  "secret",  harbouring  in  his situation of  neglect  feelings  of  profound
 ambivalence  about   his  own  worth,  and even inclined  to doubt  his own existence. Some   poets,   Klein   writes   in   a  passage both  amusing  and  sinister,  "go  mystical, and  some go mad." The  experience of divinity  that  expresses itself in artistic creation may,  after  all,  he  seems  to  sug­ gest,   be   just  a   form   of  madness.   The  serious  artist  may  well  be  dismissed  as a madman  by  a  society  that   has  forsaken  any  experience of  transcendence.
But  the  poet  is the  man  whose  nature will  not  allow  him  to  forego  the  experi­ ence  of divinity,  even  if his  social ego be submerged  and   lost  in   the   attempt  to communicate his  vision.  If he  comes  to feel that  it cannot  be communicated, then he  is  totally  isolated,  ghettoized indeed. But  if he  touches  the  imagination of his people,   he   surfaces    triumphantly.  His (and  our)   sense  of  balance and   whole­ ness may  be restored  by the  ability  of the human imagination to move  to the  tran­ scendent  perspective of "another planet". Insofar   as  the   reader  of  the   Collected  Poems  (now  and  in future)   may  experi­  ence this, he will have  (in himself)   resur·­ rected  Klein's  drowned poet.





POET AND POETASTER
 


George Woodcock


The Poems  of Archibald Lampman. University of Toronto Press. $6.so
CHARLES   MAIR,  Dreamland  and  Other Poems.  Tecumseh: A  Drama. University of
Toronto Press. $4.50.


IT IS WHEN reprints once again  make  poets of the  past freely avail­ able  to us -instead  of their  works being trapped in  libraries  from  which  we may chance  to  liberate  them   (unless  we  are specialists)    once  or   twice  in  a  reading
 
lifetime -that we can keep their  works beside us in a way which  not  only allows us  to  appreciate  the  general  totality of their   achievement,  but   also  to  establish a more  personal  relationship by recogniz­ ing  special   qualities  in  their   work  that

REVIEW ARTICLES



strike  an  intimate response  in our  minds. This  kind  of  liberation  of  our  classic Canadian  poets  to  what   one  hopes  will be   a  wider  readership  has   been   the achievement of the University of Toronto Press's  Literature in  Canada series;  one can  in  general   find  only  praise  for  the felicity   of  the   choice   of  titles  and   the appropriateness of  the  choice  of  editors that   have   been   shown   by  the  General Editor of  the  series,  Douglas   Lochhead. Having brought back  to us the  poems  of Charles G.  D.  Roberts, Isabella  Valancy Crawford and Charles Sangster, Dr. Lochhead now offers The Poems of Arch­ ibald   Lampman,  and   Dreamland    and Other Poems- together with Tecumseh:
A Drama -by Charles Mair.
This   has -I  confess -been  the  first time  I  have  read  Charles Mair   in  toto; it may  well be  the  last.  I had  in  the  past been  content  with   the  fragments of  his verse  which   I  read   in  anthologies,  plus the   lively  picture  of   the   man   and   his times-and 	the   further   fragments  of verse-provided  by  Norman  Shrive   in his  Charles   Mair:  Literary   Nationalist. Shrive-who  has  written the  introduc­ tion to  the  present  volume-clearly rec­ ogmzes  that  this is a case where  the man is much   more  interesting than   his  writ­  ings,  and  when  we  read   the  derivative fustian  of  Dreamland and  Other Poems, and   plod  through  the  ponderous imita­  tion  of  English  eighteenth century heroic tragedy   in   which    Mair   embedded  the moving  and   genuinely  heroic   stories  of Tecumseh  and  Brock,  we   can    only wonder  what  happened  to   the   man who  actually played  a  somewhat  fantas­ tic part  in the  Red  River  Rising and  who knew   the   reality   of  the  old  west  from experience.  The   links  between   the   two Mairs   seem  to  exist  only  in  a  very  few

86
 passages of his verse, such as those in Tecumseh where the woodenly  romantic lover  Lefroy  describes   his  journeys  into the  prairies,  and   the  occasional  hanker­ ings in the shorter  poems after some kind of earthly paradise, and  odd  hinting pas­ sages  in  such  peculiar  lyrics  as  "To my Photograph" in which Mair  rather mawk­  ishly asks his sepia image  to

... tell my love how you and  I
Have seen strange suns on dream-lakes glow.

Mair  did  have  the  kind  of feeling  for animals  and  trees  and  wild  plants  which the  best of the early  prairie travel  chron­ iclers showed,  and  the  finest  stretches of verse  he  wrote  were  those  in  which   he worked   such  observations  of   the  Cana­ dian  landscape into  evocations  of  a  real environment, its  look  and  mood.  There was  at  times  in  him-as  in  the  almost contemporary  wandering English  painter of  the  prairies,  William  Hind-a  genu­ inely  pre-Raphaelite power  to  make  the setting glow  by  means  of  such  a  "vivid picture of the flora and  fauna", as Shrive put it.
In  picking  the  three  best of such  pas­
sages  for  his  Book  of Canadian  Poetry, there   is  no  doubt   that   A.  J. M.  Smith showed   Mair   in   an   unrepresentatively
favourable light.  And  even  on  the  basis of selected  fragments it is doubtful if one can  claim  that-as  Smith   actually  sug­ gests-Mair attained "a  more  universal  and   truly   classical   way   of   looking   at things  than  is exhibited  by any Canadian poet    except   Archibald    Lampman."  I could   pick  a  greater  selection  of  "truly classical" passages even from Roberts, and certainly a  much  greater selection   from Smith   himself,   than   Mair   could   offer. Thus, on  the  grounds of a few eminently collectible   passages    (like   his   Keatsian

REVIEW ARTICLES


"August" and  the travel  descriptions in Tecumseh) Mair  has been  well served by his anthologists, and  he has  been  equally well served-both in an excellent  biog­ raphy    and   in   the   introduction  to   the present    selection-by   Norman   Shrive. Yet it is still Mair's life that  holds our interest, and  the  amazing fact,  as Shrive indicates, is that  so little  of that  life found its way into his mainly  derivative, shallow and  artificial verse.
The kind  of  comparison  with  Lamp­ man   which  Smith   made  can  only  be  to the  disadvantage of  a  writer  like  Mair,  since  Lampman, for  all  the  comparative shortness  of  his career, is so  much  more varied   and   versatile,   so  much  more  ac­ complished in his craft, so much  truer  in his  voice.  Lampman   even   at   his  worst seems  to  speak  as  a  genuine poet,  while Mair   even  at   his   best  strikes  one  as  a poetaster  who  has  surpassed   himself.  If one counts  Duncan Campbell Scott-by virtue  of his mature  work-as a  twenti­ eth   century   poet,  then   Lampman  must certainly be  regarded as the  finest  Cana­ dian   poet  of  the  Victorian  era.  And  if that   in   itself  is  not   enough,  there   are probably   a  couple   of  dozen   poems   by Lampman    which    compare   well   with poetry  being written anywhere during the r88o's   and   the   r8go's   in   the   English language.
Since the Literature of Canada series deals   in  reprints,  this  is  not   the  long­ needed   complete   Lampman,  embracing all the unpublished and uncollected mate­  rial. It is a composite volume  which  might be  described  as the  Scott  Canon; it con­ sists of  The  Poems  of Archibald  Lamp­ man,   as   assembled   by   Scott   after   the poet's  death and  published in  Igoo,  and the  later   selection  of  previously   unpub­ lished  material  which   Scott   and   E.  K.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Brown  put  together more  than  forty  years afterwards and  published in  1943  under the title of At the Long Sault and Other Poems.
The introduction has  been  written by
Margaret Coulby  Whitridge, who shows herself a critic  of considerable though hitherto  untested    quality.  She   leads   us away  from  the  virtues  of Lampman as a nature poet, which  are undoubted but familiar,  towards   his  interest  as  one  of our  first  poets  aware of urban alienation (a  consciousness   evident  in  many   more poems  than  his justly famous  "City  of the End  of Things"), towards  the importance of fear as an element in his later  poems linking him with Canadian poets of the present  century, and  towards  the strength and sincerity of his socialist convictions, which    have    been    under-estimated   by earlier critics.
In  comparison with  his friend  and con­
temporary Roberts, one of the striking aspects  of Lampman is his  unwillingness to give expression  in verse to the sense of Canadian nationality he revealed  in other media,  and  in  comparison with  both Roberts and Scott, an equally striking characteristic of  his  work  is  his  disincli­ nation  to  name   settings   for   his   poems. Even   when   one   recognizes   the   regions and  sometimes  the close localities of which he  is writing, he  does  not  often  mention actual places,  and  "At  the Long  Sault" is his   only   poem   that   actually  evokes   a Canadian historical incident in its proper setting    (though   the   incident  described does have a verse devoted  to it in a poem, strongly  pacifist   in   flavour, entitled "War'').
Such   a  scarcity   of  specific   localisms
supports Smith's idea of Lampman's hav­ ing   a   "universal ... way   of   looking   at things". His  politics  went  beyond  nation-

88
 ality  to view poverty  and  war  and  greed as  worldwide   problems,   and   the  liberta­ rian  socialist Utopia that  is the subject  of the  dream   he  narrates in  "The  Land  of Pallas"  is timeless and placeless in earthly  terms,  but  in  terms  of   the  mind  closely related    to   the   visions   of  Godwin    and William   Morris;  indeed, despite   Lamp­ man's   nominal   Fabian  affiliations,   it  is Morris's socialism  that  is most  nearly  re­ flected   in   his   politically-or    perhaps rather morally -radical  poems.
In  the  same way as Lampman saw his socialism  within  a universal setting,  so he tended   to  see  himself   as  a  poet   within the  total  English-speaking tradition,  try­ ing  in  his geographical remoteness  to do the same kind of thing  as his English and American  contemporaries.   His   moving elegiac sonnet, "The Death of Tennyson", showed  his  affiliations  accurately. When he  filled  his books  with  narrative poems about    mediaeval   figures   in   European cities, when  he wrote  ballads  in the man­  ner of Poe, when he echoed  James  Thom­ son's  The   City   of  Dreadful  Night   and wrote 	a    long	Wordsworthian 	poem ("Story of  an  Affinity")   in  a  Canadian setting,   he   was   not   imitating   foreign models  in  a mood  of slavish  colonialism; he  was  being  a  Canadian poet  in  what seemed to him the best way-the way of staking  his claim  to equal  standing in the English  tradition by doing  as well as they what  the metropolitan poets did. This was the literary equivalent of certain forms of nineteenth   century    nationalism   which combined  an intense  local loyalty with an equally    intense    imperial   devotion;   in Mair's case  the  political  side of such  im­ perial  thinking  was dominant, while with Lampman it was otherwise.
The  result  could  have  been  disastrous
if Lampman had  not in fact  been the fine

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   perceptive nature poet  he  was.  His romantic  verse  tales  of  lands   he  never saw  and   times  he  never  lived  in  are  un­ convincing because  unfelt  with  any inten­ sity,  and   it  is  in  the  sonnets  and  short lyrics  where   he  talks  of   what   is  close, the landscapes he loves, the emotions that wrack  him,  that   he is  always  best.  Then  also  he  is  nearest   to  being  a  Canadian
 Keats,   not  in  an  imitative or  derivative way   (though  the  derivations  are  some­ times  there), but  in  the  sense  of  a  poet fulfilling  in a way appropriate to  his own time  and  place  the  role  Keats  played  in the  England   of the  Romantics,  and  that  was indeed  a role which  implied  Smith's  "universal and  truly classical  way of look­ ing at things."





SCARCELY AN END
 


F. M. Frazer


L.  M.  MONTGOMERY, The Road  to Yesterday. McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  $7·95·


PARTISAN Prince Edward Islanders, whose "How do you like our beautiful island?" is as automatic as other people's   "How do  you  do",   are  under­ standably fond of all L. M. Montgomery's works and  fanatical about  Anne  of Green Gables. Montgomery's  picture of  the  island  as a semi-magical,  sea-girt  garden  is naturally appealing to  patriots.
But they are far from alone in their enthusiasm. The most  gifted English major graduating from  the  University of P.E.I. in  1973, a young  woman  now working   toward   a  Ph.D.  at  the  Univer­ sity of  London, came  to  the  Island   uni­ versity   from   Virginia  because   of  Anne.  And   hers  is  only  one  testimony   among  thousands, though  a  particularly striking  one,   to   the   far-reaching  and   enduring power  of  Montgomery's first  novel.  The musical  version  by  Donald   Harron and Norman    Campbell  continues  to   draw overflowing  audiences to  every  perform­ ance at  the   Charlottetown   Summer Festival,  where  it has  played  for  ten con­ secutive  seasons. It was similarly  success­ ful at  Expo  70 in Japan, and  in England,
 
where it won the London critics'  award as the best musical of the  1g68-6g crop. Admittedly, the stage show is now well launched  as  an  independent entity,   but fairly clearly the novel is the seminal  draw.
Faced  with  such  widespread and  last­
ing love for one of her  novels, one  might expect  a new book by Montgomery to be hailed   as  a   literary   event,   the   sort   of thunderbolt, albeit  of much  smaller  volt­ age,   that    we   would    recognize   in   the discovery  of  the  concluding  numbers of Edwin   Drood.  But  The  Road  to  Yester­ day,  a  collection  of  fourteen  stories  un­ earthed  by  her  son  and   now  published for   the  first  time,   is   unlikely   to   make much   public  impact.  In other words,  it is a consistent  sequel  to the  other twenty books she wrote  after  Anne, and  readers  may  well feel  that  she  should   have  paid more   attention  to   her   Captain  Jim   of Anne's   House  of   Dreams    (1gr8)  when he said,  "A  writing woman   never  knows when to stop; that's the trouble. The  p'int  of good writing  is to know when  to stop." Austere  readers,  that  is. For  the  rest of
us,  from  the   soft-hearted  and  sweet-

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



toothed  to the downright soppy,  the book undoubtedly has touches  of the old magic that  flashed  most  frequently in  Anne  but also flickered intermittently in most of Montgomery's subsequent  works.  It is a magic  composed  of some  honourable and some   ignoble   appeals.  On   the   positive side  are  a  few  deft   characterizations of lively,  likeable  characters  like  the  early Anne of the "brisk mental processes", gorgeous  imaginings, and  penchant for "lifelong sorrows"; and  some  powerfully irritating portrayals of such  unlovables as Anne's   early   antagonist,  the   appalling Josie Pye.
None of the protagonists in the current
book  rivals  young  Anne  in  either  attrac­ tiveness  or  credibility, but  there  are  sev­ eral   winning   people,   and   the  gallery  of the nonheroic is not unimpressive.Perhaps the  most  memorable  of  the  nonheroines is Myrtle Shelley,  the grim  old spinster  of the  story  "The Reconciliation". Decades  ago,  Miss  Shelley  lost  her  only  beau,  a glib,  shallow   fellow,  to  her   best  friend,  the  equally shallow but goodnatured Lisle. The  jilting was abrupt and  definite, and  Miss Shelley's  reaction was similarly emphatic: she slapped her  rival's  smiling face.  Now,  inspired   by  a  revered  minis­ ter's  sermon  on  forgiveness,  she  sets  out to make  a great  gesture of  magnanimity. But   charming,   lightheaded   Lisle,   still charming in  late  middle age,  long  since married  and   widowed   by  someone   else entirely, has quite  forgotten the  incident, and  is  merrily forgiving when  reminded.
To  be forgiven when  you  came  to forgive! Myrtle  Shelley   stood   up.   Her  face   had turned a  dull  crimson. Her faded blue  eyes flashed   fire.  Deliberately she  slapped  Lisle Rogers  across   her   smiling  face -a   hard,
no-nonsense-about-it, tingling slap.
"You  didn't  remember that  first   slap," she  said.   "Perhaps you  will  remember  this
one."

go
 In  fact,  for  all  her  saccharine  maun­ derings    about    enchanted   blue   castles, white  ways of delight, and  latterday dry­  ads  by P.E.I.  ponds,  there  is a  streak  of tough,  humorous realism  in L. M. Mont­ gomery,  and  a  broader conception of the capabilities   and   proclivities  of   human minds   and  spirits   than   she  is  normally  given  credit  for.  Early  in  Anne  of Green Gables,  Anne  is  compelled   to  apologize to Mrs. Lynde  for repaying heedless adult  cruelty with outraged reproach and rude­ ness.   At   first   merely    forced   and   per­ suaded, she soon warms to her task and indulges   in  such   an  orgy  of   self-abase­ ment  that  even  commonsensical Marilla is  uneasy,  though  Anne   herself  is quite  content. Occasionally Montgomery illuminates  the  uncomforting truth that it is possible to smile and smile and be a villain -or a fool, or something else not quite  admirable-without ever  realizing it oneself. So, in The Road  to Yesterday, predatory  relatives   woo  the  eight-year­ old   heir   to  a   fortune   ("The  Cheated Child") with scarcely a glimmer of recog­ nition   that   they   don't   really   like  him. And  the  ostensibly  mourning relatives  of "A  Commonplace Woman", putting in a long  vigil  as their  Aunt  Ursula dies, are comfortably conscious  of  their   rectitude even as they fume  with  impatience.
Again on the positive side, Montgomery had  a gift, though  she sometimes betrayed it, for terse, telling phrases and effectively specific, tart dialogue. The  cheated child's governess  has  a  voice  "as  cold  as  rain". The  raddled madwoman of "A Dream Come  True" glares  at  her  erstwhile  ad­ mirer    "in   a   way   that    made   his   skin crinkle". In  "A  Commonplace  Woman" the   heroine's   perfunctory   mourners  try for appropriate sentiments:

REVIEW ARTICLES



"Aunt  Ursula  was   the   best   hand  at   a sponge  cake  I ever  knew," said  Uncle  Alec.
"What an  epitaph!" said  Emmy.

Then there  are  the  less legitimate  ap­ peals,  like  the  constant  wish-fulfilments. If justice  is not  absolute in L. M.  Mont­ gomery's  fiction,  it  comes incredibly close to  that   ideal   state.  Virtuous characters and   sympathetic  readers  must   suffer   a little in the interest  of plot-and so that  the   splendid  compensations  with   com­ pound  interest  will be particularly satisfy­ ing. But like the lady who simply couldn't manage  to   work   in   her   doctor's  diet allowances   between   her   regular  meals, Montgomery is  considerably more  inter­  ested in  feasting than  in fasting.  And like enormous  chocolate  creams,   her   happy endings   are   individually  delightful  but cumulatively rather sickening.
On  the  face  of it,  a  succession  of  just and beautiful endings should be hard  to sustain,  and  as I've  said,  Montgomery is in many  ways a realist.  Sometimes in this book  she   simply   shifts   key  into   quasi­ fantasy   or   coyly  invokes   Divine   Provi­ dence.    Misty    little   Esme   of    "Fancy's Fool",  a most insipid  heroine, throws over a wealthy  worldling and  is rewarded with the  reincarnation  of  a  ghostly  lover  she once  "met"  in  childhood  when  she  ac­ companied   her   crazed    (or   enchanted) aunt    into   a   haunted  garden.  Lincoln  Burns,  the  amiable, hag-ridden bachelor  of "A Fool's Errand", succumbs  obliquely to  his  sister's  nagging insistence  that   he take  a  wife.  He  makes  a  pilgrimage to the  distant  beach   where  once  long  ago he  proposed   to  a  friendly   little  girl  and bade her  wait for him.  She did  wait. "He was  not  surprised   to see a woman  stand­ ing at  the end  of the  sandy  road, looking out over the sea. Somehow,  it all fitted in, as if it  had  been  planned ages ago."
 Most  often  Montgomery pays her  dues to credibility by sketching in the  long sentences of sorrow or deprivation her protagonists  have   already  served   when she takes up their stories. Her philosophy seems  to  be  that   into  every  life  a  little sunshine  must fall-only she chooses to bestow veritable sunbursts of blessings, monetary as well as spiritual.
Perhaps this need to mix realism  with sugared  romanticism, as much  as her pre­ occupation  with   the   past,  accounts  for the  large  number of late  lovers'  reunions in Montgomery's fiction. Half  this collec­ tion  of stories  deals  with present resolu­ tions   of  old   love   affairs,   one-sided  or mutual.
Another kind  of questionable nostalgia invests  all fourteen stories,  a kind  identi­ fied by Montgomery's manuscript title for the   book:    "The  Blythes   are   Quoted". The  Blythes-Anne,  Gilbert, their  chil­ dren,  and  their  factotum Susan  Baker - make  fleeting  appearances in  the  stories, or   are   at   least   quoted  or   considered. Presumably Montgomery hoped  to invoke the old allure effortlessly exerted  by young Anne  but  rarely  approached by the  sub­ dued,   gracious,   queenly,   birch-tree-kiss­ ing,  conventionally romantic heroine she supposedly   became.  If so,  the  hope  was worse   than    vain.    For    all   the    good­ humoured  tolerance  of   her   infrequent remarks,   Mrs.  Blythe  comes  across  as  a painfully  perfect  goody-good. The  moral conditions of characters are  immediately signalled   by  their   reactions  to  her.  Ad­ mirers  are    obviously  fine   folk,  and doubters are  in  spiritual  peril.  Decriers, envious  and  semi-respectful though  they tend   to  be,  are  plainly   mad   or  bad.   A kind  of goddess, with  Susan  Baker  as her priestess,   Anne   dwells   apart,   discussed but   seldom  seen  by  mere   mortals. The

gr

REVIEW ARTICLES



effect  is  sadly  stilted. Like   Mazo   de  Ia Roche   in  the  later   Jalna  books,  Mont­ gomery   seems   afraid  to   move   a  very popular character lest she jar the public's  enchantment.
All in  all,  The Road  to  Yesterday has
its  charms,  some   dated  and   some   not, some  specious  and   some  valid.  But  it  is unlikely   to  appeal  to  a  wide  audience. The  stories are not aimed  at children, and are  unlikely  to attract  teen-aged readers, now accustomed to rougher realism. They are    certainly   too    novelettish   to   suit
 modern adult  tastes. The chorus of the Harron-Campbell musical will probably carol  "Anne of  Green  Gables,  never change"  to  appreciative  ears   for   years to come, while Montgomery's later  books, including this posthumous one, leave scarcely  an  echo.  For  all  Montgomery's real  story-telling powers,  the song under­ lines  what   seems  to  me  a  valid  literary judgment.   It    ends,    "Anne  of    Green Gables,   in   our   hearts  you  are   forever  young."





ONE PLUS THREE
 

Len Gasparini



PATRICK LANE, Beware  the  Months of Fire. Anansi Press,   1 oo pp. $3.25.
ANDREW SUKNASKI,  Leaving. Repository Press, 78 pp. $2.25.
GARY GEDDEs,  Snakeroot. Talonbooks.
BRENDA FLEET,  Sullen Earth. Fiddlehead Books, 32 pp.


PATRICK  LANE forewarns the unwary  reader  with  an epigraph from Celine's Journey  To  The End  Of  Night. The epigraph is a  solemn  reminder, and Lane's  poems   tell   us  about    things   we would like to forget. They are the acerbic documents of an  imagination turned  in­ side out.  Lane  records  his  impressions of reality  with guts. There is no jive circum­ locution    in   his   style-an    unschooled, street-cool  one  that  serves  the  purpose  of his perception. Neither does he run  at the mouth  for  the sake  of vocabulary: "You learn   when   you   wake   up/not  to  open your  mouth  for  fearjof what  you  might fill it with."
Beware  the  Months of  Fire  is  Lane's
ninth  collection, and  it contains many poems from  earlier, now out-of-print edi­ tions.  The   new  poems  complement  the
 
range   of  Lane's   voice.  They   also  touch upon    familiar    and   poignant  subjects: from    the   almost   scatological  view   of "What Does Not Change" to the brutality of   "Gerald";  from   big   city   streets   to country jails  to the  haunting isolation  of the  B.C.  interior, and   from  the  malaise called South America to Canada's own spectral Indian Reservations. Lane  has covered  them  all.  His  poems  are  mirrors with  the  spidery  cracks  of truth in  them. He  doesn't   flinch  from  the  ugliness  and cruelty of life, but observes it with ironic compassion. Like  Layton and  Jeffers,  he knows the grimace  behind  the grin.

It isn't  dying  so much  as it is
falling into the  ground pushing up at you
*  *  *

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  me sitting
on the edge  of the  hill
back  to the  river feeling  the  ground pushing up at me

There are  so many  heavy  poems  worth quoting in their entirety that  I feel some­ what    constrained   in   being   unable  to comment on all of them. However, a few in   particular  should   suffice.   One   that stands  out  starkly  in  its pathos and  tor­ mented   analysis  of  a  marital break-up is "The  Absinthe  Drinker". The   opening  stanza  numbed me.

For  years  I tried  to leave  them, leave  them  all.
Now  they've left  me.
Three childish smiles  are  scars inside  my  mind.
She  took  all three.

In another poem, "Because I  Never Learned",  the  last   two  lines  fuse  irony and  image into an ontological experience. And  this is what  a good poem should  do: involve our feelings via image -not idea.
Lane's  vision  encompasses  the  surfeit of experience pushed  to its extremity. Whether he writes about wild dogs or lovemaking, "Toronto  the  Ugly"  or  the "shredded" walls in a tenement house, he is right   there,  gripping the  essential,  in­ ducing  us to look. He feeds us raw chunks of life.
Because  of  his seeming  obsession  with
the seamier  aspects  of life, the lyrical and reflective   moments   in  his  poetry    (And they  do  happen!)  hit   us  unexpectedly. "The Bird",  "Saskatchewan", "October'', "Cariboo  Winter",   and    "Similkameen Deer" are   evocative   of  nature and   the tender  ceremonies  of love. In  these  pieces Lane  transforms   the  "I" and  gives  it an objective   dignity.   Metaphor and   mean­ ing  create  a  kind  of magnetic  field,  and the  poet places the "I" within  that  space.
 That Lane's dedication to his craft  is no desultory  matter -let  the reader beware as he listens  to a final  poem  addressed to him:

know
the  poet  is made of paper
can  you hear  him  inside your  eye
the  scream of the  tree as you  read  him

*  *  *
now
can  you feel  the  dead  tree as you turn his pages  away

Anansi  Press  should   be  lauded   for  pub­ lishing  such  a vital  collection. It is easily the  best  book  of  poems  to  come  out  of Canada this year.
Andrew   Suknaski's Leaving reads  like a  travelogue in  verse.  His  volume  is divided  into  three  parts  with  poems rang­ ing  from  prairie impressions and  home­  spun  episodes  to  lyrical  globe-trotting.
Unlike   Patrick  Lane's,  the   poetry   of
Suknaski  does  not  deal  in  raw  sensation and  lacerated  nerves.  The  consciousness of the predator is undefined. Instead we move  into  a realm  of mountain climbing and  pastoral visions. The  poems  are,  for the  most  part,  quite   prosy.  I don't mean to imply  that  they  are  dull,  but  the  form they emerge  from  consists of clipped  lines and  awkward  stanza  patterns. Since Suk­ naski  has  experimented extensively  with the  concrete  type  of  poetry,   you  would think  that  his eye for arrangement  would be  more  fastidious. But  then,  form  isn't everything-and   as   Creeley   said,   it's  only  a  vehicle  for  the  content.  And  this brings us closer to what Suknaski's poems are all about.
"Dea thlocks" presents an   effective analogy  between  rutting elk and  two farmers fighting  over a girl. "Xmas in California" and  "Motorcycle Gang" are

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



both  sordidly  realistic.   In  the  first  poem we  see  an  alcoholic Santa  Claus   "lying face   down   near    a   chimney  -".   This tragic  image  is intensified  by a little sym­ bolic allusion: "his  reindeer waited  forty days/before  the    people   grew    kind enough/to cradle   him  away."  The  other  poem  combines  religious  symbolism  with synecdoche to connote the noble savagery  of Hell's  Angels type motorcyclists "mov­ ing   across   vast   freeways/of  california/ dicing   her  neon  oases  in  the  sun." The  poem ends with a victim.

they  found their  mary  magdalene in a city's  concrete garden

& because she flunked
her  prostitution  assignment
they  pinned her  with  three  spikes to an  oak
like a single  crimson rose

In   "Hitch  Hiking",  Susnaski's true poetic   diction    is  apparent.  The   words flow imagistically within  the limits of conventional stanzaic  disciplines. The poet  is standing on  the  highway  thumb­ ing  a  ride.  He  is not  having  much  suc­ cess:   "each  hour   added/ another  spoon of  hate/to  my  marrow-". His  frustra­ tion  becomes a  violent  entity  in itself:

i know
that  if the  world
had  been  a single  brick
about that  time one karate blow propelled  by the  helium of my hate
would  have  cracked it
in half

A truck  finally stops  to save  the  world, and  the poet rhapsodizes: "i could have curled   the  dust/on the  man's boots/into a nightingale-".
The poems  in  the  book's  last  section
recount the  journeys  that  Suknaski  made abroad in I 97 I. They  cover  most  of  the

94
 seven  continents, and   each   poem  is  ap­ pended  with  the  name  of the  city  it  was written  in.   The   poems   are   careless   in construction, and  they  contain  too much metaphysical  digression.
Leaving  is interspersed with  some fine sepia  photographs of  abandoned   houses and  windswept   plains,  but  the  total  im­ pact  of Suknaski's  collection  doesn't quite  measure   up  to  his  canon   of   craftsman­ ship.  His  poems  need  a bit  of  revising.
Snakeroot, the   title   of  Gary   Geddes'
third   book  of  poems,   is  a  plant   whose roots have  been regarded as a remedy  for snakebites.  One  is immediately struck  by the attractive design of this volume; how­ ever,   the   poems   seem   too  short   to  be printed on such wide  white  pages.
Geddes  is a late  entry  into  the game of poesy-writing.  Most  of us remember him for  2oth   Century  Poetry  & Poetics,  an excellent    book   that    he   edited    several years  ago.  I  think   that   Geddes   is more gifted  in scholarly  research, and  because his  lucubration in  that   area  seems  com­ patible  with  his logician's  sensibility,  the poems in Snakeroot  suffer from  a curious  inconsistency.  The   poem,  "The  Addict", exemplifies   the   disparity   in   autumnal imagery   and  the  most  sentimental  kind of introspection-in  this case, the  mem­ ory  of  lost  youth.  The theme  is  Words­  worthian,  but  the  dynamism  needed   to carry  it  through is  sporadic and  insuffi­ cient.   The    mood   just   isn't   there.    In "Where Both  Rails  Meet", Geddes  shifts his focus  and  a  balanced perspective  re­ sults. We see a prairie railway "cutting a relentless  swath/through   history,   a  suc­ cession/of  small  towns  in  its wake."  The  concluding  stanza   is  a   poetic   trick   of association; the  mood  lingers  this  time.

Rolled  sections  of snow  fence are stacked  at regular intervals,

REVIEW ARTICLES



wait  the  sure  coup  of winter. The land  parades, makes
its  naked protest.
The only  weakness  is the  phrase  "sure coup." I winced at that  one. It skirts dangerously close to pathetic fallacy.
"Blood  and  Feathers" is another  poem that  works  quite  well in  the  evocation of a   single,   dominant  mood   through  the use   of   a  sensation-creating  trope.   The poet  "refuse (s)  to be seasonal,  stirred/ to frenzy  by a  planet's turning." He  would rather "Let  dead  rocks and dying grasses/ speak   for  themselves,   or  be  dumb." In the  natural order  of things  the poet ques­ tions   his   own   role.   The   premise   is  a purely  academic one,  and  Geddes  leaves it at that.
The  title   poem   and   "Goshawk" are
both   impressionistic  in   technique,   and this  impressionism   reveals  itself  through a blending of vivid imagery.
Snakeroot, even  with  its  chiaroscuro­ etched photographs, fails as a supposedly unifying  collection.  If Geddes can subdue  his subjectivistic approach to a poem, I'm  sure   his  follow-through  would   be  a  lot stronger.  He  has  the  verbs;  all  he  needs is a pronoun.

Between my fingers,  spaces;
a wheel  of broken  spokes,
a broken wheel.     The house gapes.    Grandmother, lost
to me, you singer of sullen  earth.
These   lines  set  the  mood  for  Brenda Fleet's  Sullen  Earth-a pamphlet-length poem that derives its basic force from a combination of symbolic contrast and regret.   The   landscape  of  this   poem   is bleak,  almost   Depression-like  in  its  im­ agery:  "You   ask  me  to  feel  at  home,/ here   where   there   is  no   homefand  no man's  stake  is  driven/firmly into  receiv­ ing earth."
 I think  that  Fleet  has succeeded in relating the bitterness and  fatalism of a woman who feels victimized by her mate's spurious   promises  of  security. The  irony is understated throughout the  poem,  and Fleet's   purpose    in   playing  down    this device is significantly  dramatic. The terra firma  is contrasted with  unrequited  love and  the rigours  of   a mean  existence:
I do not  redeem  the  soil. I sell my birthright.

The women  slowly die, and so the  soil
We laugh, we show  our  breasts
We die in parked cars.

Sullen   Earth   is  a  monologue of   low­ keyed anger  and  despair. It has  its  mon­  otonous  moments, but  Brenda Fleet's  vis­ ion is a unique  one. She  has traversed the contours   of  "a   small   lifetime ... letting loose all manner of  nightmare" like "an­ other   Pandora  seeking  rebirth"  through love, in an environment of love.


ESSAYS
ON
CANADIAN WRITING

The first  issue  of Essays  on  Canadian Writing is  now  available. Included are:  a  long  inter­ view   with   Eli   Mandel,  a   bpNichol   checklist "The  Survival Shoot-Out", and   many  other provocative articles and   reviews. If  your  book­ store  doesn't have  a copy,  send  $r.5o (or  $4.50  for 3 issues)  to:
Essays on Canadian Writing
S765  Ross Building
York  University
Downsview, Ontario   M3J 1P3

Unsolicited manuscripts are  welcome when  ac­ companied  by  a  self-addressed stamped  enve­ lope.   Essays,   bibliographies,   interviews,   and  reviews  on  any  genre  or  period  of  Canadian writing will be promptly considered.


95

THE WALKING GHOSTS OF EMPIRE
 




H. ]. Rosengarten


ROCH   CARRIER,  they   won't   demolish  me!  Translated  by Sheila  Fischman.  Anansi.
$3.25·
HAROLD SONNY  LADOO,  Yesterdays. Anansi. $3.25.


THOUGH THE SUN has set on the British Empire, WASPish imperialism is alive  and  well and  living  almost every­ where.  As always it seems benevolent and well-intentioned, while subtly  and  secretly it corrupts or destroys. Its appeal is strong
-who  can  resist  its  technological  bene­
fits, its affluence  and  comforts? -so that any   attempt  to  oppose   it  is  ultimately vain  and  futile.  Yet  our  consciousness  of that  futility  only  increases  our  sympathy for  the  resistance  of  a  man  like  Dorval, whose  battle  with  city  hall  in  they  won't demolish   me!  takes  on  epic  proportions. Roch  Carrier's hero  sets  himself  against progress,   in  an   episodic   and   sometimes allegorical  tale  about   the  demolition  of his   rooming  house   near    Montreal,   to make   way  for  high-rise   office  buildings. The    theme   is  only   too   familiar:   the destruction of a community with  human values    and    traditions,  by   big-business interests. The  evil forces  are  clearly iden­ tified  and  embodied in  the machines, the cranes  and  bulldozers destroying people's lives for the sake of  the faceless capitalists lurking in  the  city;  and   the  city  itself  is seen  as  a   threatening  monster  creeping  up on the innocent. Inspired by memories  of   the   wartime  French  resistance  with which  he  had  fought, Dorval sets up  his own   resistance    with    the    help    of   his boarders,  and   even   takes   the  attack  to the enemy  in a glorious  nocturnal expedi­ tion  to secure  the ears of passing Anglais.

g6
 
Yet the attempt to revive his past, to halt the    inroads    of   time    and    change,   is doomed   to  failure. The   sources  of  that failure   lie  in   the   imperfections  of  our moral  as  well as our  physical  nature. In an  understandable relaxation of principle, Dorval  turns his house into a brothel for striking construction workers, and so becomes identified with the capitalist exploiters  he has defied  for so long.
they  won't   demolish me!  moves  easily from  farce  to  satire   to  near-tragedy; its pace  never  slackens,  for  Carrier  prunes his  narrative of  unnecessary  elaborations of  character or  setting.  The   tone  is  pri­ marily   comic,   but   the   novel's   political implications are  not: Carrier's targets  are the   Anglais   of   North   America,  whose financial   power  is  undermining and  de­ stroying  French  Canada. Even  Dorval  is sucked  in  by  the  prospect  of  making  an easy  dollar  out  of  the  workers.  Yet  by giving  his  hero  weaknesses  and  inconsis­ tencies,  Carrier makes  him  all  the  more sympathetic and   believable,   and   avoids the oversimplifications that might  have arisen by making Dorval some kind of martyred saint. Despite  his vigour and energy  and  seemingly  inexhaustible  pas­ sion for love, Dorval is only human  after  all,  ageing,  tiring; and  his failure,  given tragic  expression   through the  suicide  of another character at  the  end,  is  a defeat  for the human spirit everywhere.
Business, the law, and  even the church,

REVIEW ARTICLES



are  allied  in the  name  of progress  against Dorval's  assertion   of  individual  values; and  in  his  second  novel,  Yesterdays, the late   Harold  Sonny   Ladoo  perceives   a similar  pattern emerging in the life of the West   Indies.  His   hero   Choonilal  is  a simple, hard-working, middle-aged native of Carib Island, an  Indian who is in awe of the  white  world,  while  holding fast  to his  ancient  faith   and   his  Hindu   priest. His  son  Poonwa,   however,   has  had   the benefit of a Christian education; a Cana­ dian   woman   missionary   beat  the  pagan out  of him  as  a child,  and  now  Poonwa  wants  to return the favour. His plan  is to go to Canada and convert the Christians:
I  am   going   to  make   them   feel   that  their culture is  inferior; that  the  colour of  their skin   can    justify   their  servitude. Within a few   decades I  will   teach  them    to   mimic Indian  ways.   Then  I  will   let   them   go  to exist    without  history.  I  will   make    East Indians buy  up  all  their lands  and  claim  all their  beaches. Then  I  will  drain  all   their national wealth and  bring it  to Tala. In  this way   I  can   make   East   Indians  a  superior people.
Poonwa  has learned   the lesson of  colo­ nial  history  well;  and  though the  author keeps a distance between  himself  and  his character, who  is a  selfish  and  heartless son, Poonwa's bitterness is very  evidently  shared  by  his   creator.   Yesterdays is about    the   destruction  of   a  culture  by white   imperialism; and  for  once  Cana­ dians  are  seen  as  oppressors,  not  victims. The  sadism, bigotry and  exploitation with which  we  like  to  charge   others  are  here laid at our door, for in this novel Canada is   representative  of   the   white    Anglo­ Saxon  world  as a whole, whose language, laws and  religion have swamped a less materialistic and  less aggressive culture. Poonwa's consciousness  of  white  oppres­ sion  does  not  lessen  his  desire  to  share some   of  its   fruits;  he   wants   to   enjoy
 Canadian  affluence,   even   if  his   father must  mortgage house  and   land   to  send him  to Canada. Choonilal however clings to the old ways, even  to the  lengths of rejecting modern toilets as being offensive to the Aryan gods. Much of the book's comedy  derives  from  the  importance  at­ tached  to defecation, and Choonilal's con­ stant  concern  with  the state  of his bowels. This  might  in  part   be  intended  to  flout convention,  to  mock   the  more  sophisti­ cated    Westernized    portrayals   of   West Indian life by such writers  as Naipaul. At the  same  time,  the  emphasis  on  sex  and defecation is a  reminder  of  the  common  humanity which  links all  men,  but  which white   society   tries   to  deny.   Even   here, Ladoo   suggests,  white   Christianity  has been   a   disruptive   influence;   Poonwa's experience  at   the   Mission    school   has taught him to despise his background and to enjoy  the superior comfort of an indoor  toilet free of smells and  flies.
Father and  son  are  further separated by   the   most   potent  form   of   imperial power-language. Poonwa speaks  Eng­ lish  with   an  Oxford accent;  and   along with  the  language, he adopts its  implicit attitudes of superiority to native  colonials. Choonilal himself speaks in  the crude but vivid  patois  of the Caribbean, a mangled form   of   English   which    makes    up   in vigour  what  it  lacks  in  correctness, as m this retort  to his son's rudeness:

Wen   you   de   small   you   used    to   call   me "fadder," now  you  does  call  me  "father." It look  like  English  flow  from  you  ass.  But  all de  book  you  read  Poonwa, and  all  dat  edu­ cation you  have  in  you  ass  is  notten.  In dis same  island   man   wid  education have  to  eat dey   shit!  You   is   one   man    who   have  to catch you ass in dis world  ...

Choonilal's attempt to resist  Poonwa's scheme finally fails;  he is defeated by a combination of external pressure  and  the

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



workings  of  his  own  faith. The   corrupt Hindu priest  who  persuades Choonilal  to mortgage his property embodies the worst consequences of  Western   colonialism, its spiritual  impoverishment,  its   decadent and   empty   materialism.  Like   Carrier's hero  Dorval, Choonilal cannot carry  on the  battle alone; the  old  must  be  sacri­ ficed  for  the  new,  and   progress,  in  the shape   of  automobiles,   iced   drinks   and cameras,  must  be  served.   In  both   these
 novels,  comic  plot  and   characterization serve  larger  and   more  serious  purposes; both  Carrier and  Ladoo  want  to point  to the  moral   decline   of  societies  ruled   by Western   capitalism.  In   they   won't   de­ molish   me!   this   comes   through  as   an almost  resigned  awareness   of  the  inevit­ able;  but  beneath  the  comic  surface   of Yesterdays the  reader   may  sense  a  deep  and  unappeasable anger.




THE VOGUE
OF THE BIG BOOK
 




Anthony Appenzell


ANTHONY   ADAMSON  and   JOHN   WILLARD, The   Gaiety   of  Gables,  McClelland &
Stewart. $I7·95·
MORLEY  CALLAGHAN  and  JOHN  DE  VISSER,  Winter. McClelland & Stewart. $I8.g5.
J. RUSSELL HARPER, A People's Art. University of Toronto Press. $22.50.
LORNE  E.   RENDER,  The   Mountains  and  the  Sky.  Glenbow-Alberta Institute  and
McClelland &  Stewart. $27.50.


DESPITE THE talk of financial cnsrs  m  the  book  trade, of  shortages in paper,  the  vogue  of the  Big Book, which is rarely  the great  book, goes on with only seasonal  variation; the  Christmas season continues  to  carry,   in  literal  terms,  the heaviest  weight  of  each  publishing year. The  four  books  I am  reviewing -when I  came   to   test   them   on   my   scales­ weighed   in  all  some   13  pounds. Their total    length -pictures   and    letterpress together   and   taking  into   account  that  two   were   inexplicably   unpaginated­ came  to  about   700  pages,  the  equivalent of two average novels. Their cost to any­ one who may be inclined to buy the batch  in  a  bookshop  is $86.go  for  the  four,  or an  average   of  $21.72  per  volume.  Even taking  account of  inflation, that  is more than  most  people  who  take  their  reading

g8
 
seriously  enough  to buy  many  books can afford  to pay for a single title.
I  am  far  from  advocating stinting  in book  design.  I en joy a  book  that   looks and   feels  good,  with  elegant   type  faces and  jet black ink on well-textured paper; that  is well bound  and  well-proportioned, with  colour  plates vivid enough  and  large enough   to  do  justice  to  their  subjects.  I am  willing  to urge  readers  to pay  within reason  for  excellence  in  production, and where  in  past  years a  big and  heavy  and expensive  book  has  shown  a  superb  bal­ ance  of space  and  content  (as in  Arthur and   Witney's    The  Barn   and   Michael Bell's  Painters  in  a  New  Land), I have not  hesitated  to  recommend it  regardless  of price. But that superb  balance is neces­ sary,  and  my  feeling  for  the  dwindling forest  as  well  as  my  dislike  of  uselessly

REVIEW ARTICLES



conspicuous spending make  me pause be­ fore   the  massive  offerings   which   I   am now reviewing.
Of  course,   all  the  books  whose  titles
appear at  the  head  of this  review can­ in  one  sense  or  another -be  classed  as "art  books",  and   in  this  genre  there   is something  of  a  tradition   of  lavishness, bound   up  with  a  questionable  assump­  tion,  to  which  I  shall  return, that   such books  are   bought  only  by  libraries  and connoisseurs and  need   not  therefore be inexpensive. But the vogue of the big and over-lavish  book  has  spread   into  regions of   publication   where   it   seems  entirely  inappropriate. An example I encountered recently   is  a   book  called   Mind  in   the Waters  (McClelland & Stewart), a  kind of  symposium  or concert  of  writings  and pictures  edited   by  Joan    Mcintyre  "to Celebrate  the  Consciousness   of  Whales and  Dolphins". If the  book  were  only  a celebration, a threnody on a doomed  race of  beings-then  there   might   be  some justification  for   the  fact   that   this   is  a heavy,  coffee-table-sized  book  that   costs
$r4.95· But it is far  more  than  a celebra­ tion;  it is also a p!ea-with  whose aims I  am  entirely  in  agreement -for  action
to  save  these  fascinating peoples  of  the ocean   before  man,   their   moral   inferior, destroys  them.  The  material of Mind in the  Waters could  have  been  put   into  a paperback original  and -given  the  cur­ rent   interest   in  the  subject-it   would have   sold   widely   and   far   beyond   the bookstores  at  somewhere  around  $2·95; in its present  form  it will sell slightly  and slowly, and so the purpose of its compilers
-to save the whales and  the dolphins­
will be little furthered.
Admittedly, the same kind of tactical consideration  does   not   arise   with    the books  on  my  list.  None  of  them-not
 even   Morley   Callaghan  (superbly  illus­ trated    by   John    Visser)    on   Winter­ seems  likely  in  any   form   to   be  a  best seller.  Even   so,  their   sales   might   have been  increased if  their  weight  had  been reduced  by a  third,  and  this  would  have been  possible-with  benefit   to  our  for­ ests   and    to   readers'   buying    power - through   a  more  critical approach to  the handling of  space. By now we have surely recovered from  the delight at great  white areas   of   paper    which    we   experienced when   the   wartime  austerities  that   lin­ gered  into  the  Fifties  finally  disappeared and   Canadian   publishers  developed  a taste for the large and  the daring. A page, we have re-leamt, is meant for print, and
a  book  can  be  too  thinly   populated  as well as  too crowded. Just  as type  that  is too large  can  attenuate its message, so an excess of  margins   and   half-empty  pages can  diminish   the  interest of  what  is  dis­ played   (as  museum   directors are  begin­ ning  to  realize  now  that   they  are  revert­ ing  from  selective   to  exhaustive  display techniques) .
The  Gaiety of Gables, by Adamson and Willard, is a good example of the unjusti­ fiably  big  book.  The  whole  concept is a fragile  one,  to be handled  modestly.  The  hand-wrought   bargeboards   of   Ontario houses-the gay gables of the title-are charming  indeed, but  charm is the  limit  of their  appeal. Thus Anthony Adamson can write only a slight  introductory  essay, because   there   is  nothing  to   support a more   pretentious  presentation,  and   the illustrations, which  move  within  a some­ what   restricted  range    of   patterns,  are diminished rather than  enhanced by be­ ing  isolated   within  large   white   margins that  tend  to leach out what  tonal  contrast survives   the   printing  process   in   black­  and-white  illustrations,  which   form   the

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



greater part  of The  Gaiety of Gables. To devote  a large format to a book dedicated to  this  minor  facet  of Canadian popular art,  and  to charge  $I7·95  for  it, is  exces­ sive.  A  smaller   book  at   half   the  price would   have   been   in   proportion  to  the subject  and  would have sold more  widely.
A  rather different doubt   attends one's approach to  Winter, which  is really  two parallel things: an album  of photographs taken   by  John   de  Visser  up  and   down Canada during the  seasons  of  snow  and ice, and  a long essay by Morley  Callaghan describing the Canadian winter as he has experienced  it.  Here   again   the  illustra­ tions    have    been    unimaginatively   ar­  ranged, one  to a page,  with  in every case a central  presentation, which  in the  hori­ zontally-oriented  prints   has   meant  vast and  deadening upper  and  lower  margins. Yet   more   important  in   Winter   is  the failure of  the  two  parts   of  the  book  to merge, and  this is because  the participants each  insist  on  being  the  complete artist. Callaghan, as  a  good  essayist,  writes  out of   his  own   memories   and   impressions, ignoring  the   photographs that  are   to accompany his prose, and  as his memories are extraordinarily visual they create their own  image  in  the  mind's eye and  do not require physical  illustration. On  the other hand, de Visser is a visual artist  of poetic cast,  whose  photographs are  heavy  with suggestion,  loaded  enough  with  messages and  meanings for  them  to  appear as an album  in  their   own  right, while  Calla­ ghan's  essay  might    have   found   a   far better place as-say-one of a group  of prose   equivalents  of  The  Seasons.  One  has  the  feeling  that  this  is  a  made book, thought up  in  a  publishing office, rather than   a  book  whose  two  parts   came   to­ gether  out   of  a  symbiotic empathy  be­ tween  writer  and  photographer.

IOO
 The   remammg two  books  on  my  list show a better  marriage of form  with con­ tent,   and   also  a  greater   consistency   in content. They  both serve useful functions, though     their    functionalism   is   rather pedestrian  and   their    design   lacks   the inspiration that  marked   both  The   Barn and  Painters in  a  New  Land,  with  their visually  and   verbally   felicitous   balances of illustration  and  commentary.
In   A  People's Art,  J. Russell  Harper
complements his classic  Painting in Can­
ada with  a  survey  of "Primitive, Naive, Provincial and Folk Painting in Canada". There is  a  somewhat  messianic  tone  to his  approach, for  he  sees  a  quasi-moral quality  in these various  forms  of popular art,   looking  back   as  they  do  to  a  time when  art  mirrored an  organic  social  col­ lectivity,  and  forward  to  the  day  when all men  will have  the  power  to be artists. It is a vision that  has long haunted  those who  move  of the  periphery  of the  world of  artistic  creation.  The great   arts-and­ crafts    prophets,   William  Morris    and Walter   Crane,  had   it; so  did   Herbert Read,  a failed  painter who became  an art critic, and  Tolstoy,  at  the cost of denying  the  high  art  of  his  own  greatest novels, and even Trotsky,  in his own special way.
But  it  is a vision  that  founders  always on  the   reefs  of  evidence. For  while  in tribal  societies,  and  in  strongly  knit  col­ lectivities  like most  mediaeval  societies, a single artistic  tradition might carry all the spiritual   impulses  of  the  community, in post-Renaissance societies the division has always  been  deep  between  the  living  in­ tentionality of  high  art  and  the conserva­  tive acceptance of popular art.  Occasion­ ally   an   individual  bridges   the  gap,   as Henri    Rousseau    le   Douanier  did,   or Scottie   Wilson,   whose   presence   among Mr.  Harper's exhibits  reminds  us that  his

REVIEW ARTICLES



eccentric talents were  first  recognized on Yonge  Street, Toronto. But  most  really popular art   since  about  16oo  has   been static  in  its  world  view,  eccentric rather than    innovative  in   its   methods,   and limited   in  its  range  of  perceptions; it  is significant that   the  best of  the  paintings Mr.  Harper reproduces-the  landscapes of  Thomas Davies   and   Pierre   Le  Ber's splendid  death  portrait  of   Marguerite Bourgeoys -had   appeared  among  the examples of  high  art  in  his  Painting   in Canada, and  were done  by educated men who  had  at least some  training in  the art they practiced. A People's  Art is useful as a  record  of some of our  untrained  paint­ ers,  but  it  would  have  gained  greatly  if Mr.  Harper had  extended his province to include sculpture, for carving has been at least   as   interesting a   manifestation  as painting of  the  Canadian popular sensi­ bility.
A People's  Art is as poorly  presented as the  other books  I have  discussed -and is even  more  wastefully  big. Chunks of exposition    are   followed   by  a   series  of pages arranged as in an album, with paintings shown  centrally, each  above  its appropriate legend.  The  Mountains and the  Sky  at  least  departs from  this  mono­ tonous  patterning; it  mingles  illustration with   text,  varies   the  size of  prints,   and plays quite  effectively  with  the  juxtaposi­ tion  of  prints  and  white spaces.  Written and  arranged by Lorne  E.  Render, The  Mountains and  the  Sky  is really  a  kind of  catalogue  raisonne of  the  best  works in the collections  of the Glenbow-Alberta
 Institute of Calgary, one  of whose  many functions has been the assembling of a representative collection of  paintings  re­ lating  to   Western    Canada,   from   the prairies   through  the   mountains  to   the Pacific Coast.
The Mountains and the Sky  is not pre­
sented   as  a  comprehensive  overview   of western   landscape  art.   Indeed,   anyone knowledgeable about  the region's painters will  quickly  detect   the  major  omissions; there  are  none  of  the  western   paintings of,  for  example, A. J. Jackson or  Loren Harris; there  is nothing by Jack  Shadbolt or Alistair  Bell, by Edward J. Hughes or Tony  Onley, or by Bruno  or Molly Bobak in  their  western   period; nothing, to  dip farther into  the  past,  by  William   Hind. But in one way the volume's frank limita­ tion  constitutes also its main virtue, since the Glenbow  Institute has been  assiduous  in   collecting   landscape   painters  whose achievements were  neglected  as  artistic  fashions  veered  in  recent  decades, and  a number of  these  are lavishly  represented in  The  Mountains and   the   Sky. Those  who still regard  one of the  roles of paint­ ing  as  the  retention  of  the  moment of inspired   visual   apprehension  will   wel­ come  an introduction-or a reintroduc­ tion-to  the  scope and  intensity of such uncelebrated but excellent  landscapists as
Walter J. Phillips,  W. L. Stevenson, Carl
Rungius, A. C. Leighton and  the early Maxwell  Bates. The critical and  historical commentary linking   the  prints is  sound and  sufficient.










101





A WORLD SEQUESTERED

RUDY   WIEBE,    Where  Is  The  Voice   Coming
From?  McClelland & Stewart Ltd.,  $4·95·

UNTIL  I  read  The  Temptations of  Big Bear, I always looked  forward to reading the  work  of  Rudy Wiebe; not  only  did Peace Shall  Destroy  Many and  his stories appeal to  me,  but  also  I  liked  his  value judgments as reflected  in his anthology of short  stories  from   Western Canada.  But Big  Bear  was  not  to  my  mind  a  success, so  that   when  I  came   to  Where  Is  The Voice  Coming From?  I  did  so with  mis­ givings.  My  fears  were  groundless.  This  collection  impressed  me with  the balance  Wiebe  shows as a  writer  of short  fiction and  his ease  in  maintaining a  consisten tone   that    neither  frays   nor   bores   the reader; its  stories  proved   to  me what   I have   always   felt:    that   Wiebe   is  much better   with   the  short  story,  as  a  form, than  he is with the novel.
The stories  which   concern  themselves
with  the  Indians or  the  Eskimos  create  a sense of achieved  intimacy with  that  part of Canada and  its people  that  is alien  to most Canadians.

When  the  blue  shadow  that  precedes  dawn co es
trail  for  the  dogs  Is no  easier  for  the  wind
rises inevitably,  nagging  loose snow, and  the bank   of   cloud   more   clearly   rolls   higher
behind  me.
This   is  a   world   sequestered  from   our world; a history  remote from  our  history. Yet,  Wiebe  has gone  into  this  microcosm of human experience and  made it live by


102
 
giving  to  the  experiences he  talks  about the  vividness  of  something  half-seen. It is an isolation within  isolation  that  he creates. Finely tuned to the sound of language, Wiebe participates with his cre­ ations   as  they  attempt  to  outlive   their existence.  The  mind  of  the  reader  meets no  resistance  in  the  texture of  these  tales even   though   it  is  an   alien  world.   The habits  of  telling  a  tale  are  no  different even though  the milieu  is different. There is no transparency here, and  at  the same time   no  attempt  to  cloud   the   reader's vision;   instead,   the  language  grips   the reader, forcing  him  to  assimilate the  ex­ perience   into  his  own,  and   in  so  doing  remove  the  false  preconceptions that  we so often  have about life among our native  people.
Most   stories   written  today,   however
good  they  may  be,  attempt to  show  us some vision of our own reality. Though Wiebe concentrates on the universal humanity  of   the   people    he   sees,   the Indian and  Eskimo  tales  in  this  volume seem closer  to the  flow of dreams, where nothing  is  questioned  or  ever  shall   be. The  authority of the  narrator is  justifica­ tion  enough   for  any  turn   of   event,  for anything that  happens. His own decisive­ ness is echoed  in  the  decisiveness  of  his characters : a  character  decides   to  give himself   up   to  the  authorities or  to  his enemy; and,  in  one  of  the   stories   the narrator  simply  tells  us how  he  will sur­  viVe:
She  lays  the  naked  boy  in  the  robe,  then pulls  off her  own  worn,  frost-hardened clothes,  spreads  them  out  on  the  floor  and gets into  the robe.  I  blow out  the stove and in  the  darkness   I  quickly  undress  and  lay out  my clothes  to freeze.  Then  I crawl  into the robe  also. It  is just large  enough.  I can fel
mme  but  I know that  together  we will soon
be  warm,   and   as  she  hunches   closer   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



wind's whine  over  the  house  is already dying in my ear.

Plots in this collection of short stories never  seem contrived; though   the  stories appear  that   they  could  only  happen  to the people involved and in a particular setting,  they ring true.  There is, of course, a sense  of  cultural interplay, but  this  is softened  by the priorities the various nar­ rators   put   on   themselves:   how   does  a child  meet  death   for  the  first  time?  how does a man  cope with  a war  between  his own  people  and  those  of the  same  race? how  far  does  a  man   take  the  responsi­ bility  that   he  is  "his  brother's keeper"? The  conflicts are universal, as they always must  be  in  order  to  be  understood, but they  are  shaded   by  a  voice  that   makes them   elemental  rather  than   normal   or average.
Wiebe  tells his stories  in  various  ways, and he plays, in a subtle way, with the language. Sometimes,  as narrator, he is external and  the distance he creates  from what  is going on merely  brings  the reader closer  to  the  action,   as  in  "Scrapbook", when  a boy suddenly  realizes,  by looking at   his   "Healthy  Foods   Scrapbook" at school   that   the   sister   wfio  helped   him make the cover has died :

He  said,  almost  aloud, "She's dead," and  he knew    that    'dead'  was   like   the   sticks   of rabbits he found  in  his snares.
And  suddenly he  began to  cry.  Everyone stared, but  he could  not  stop.

At other  times, Wiebe  creates  a  narrator who  immediately brings  the  reader right in   on   the   action;  no   external   process takes   place   as  the   reader  immediately begins to participate with what  is happen­ ing, as in the first lines of  "Along the Red Deer  and  the South Saskatchewan":

This   is  long   ago.   Before   whites  dared  to come  into  our  country, when  they  built  the
 Big   House  they   call   Edmonton  now   and then   Little  Big  House at  the   edge   of  our country and   barred the  doors and   put  can­ nons   on   the   corners  and    let   our   people through one  small  door  one  at a  time  when  we came  to trade.

The  reader is no longer  "white", but instead  is part  of the action  of the  people of  "our   country", of  people   who  speak easily, in long sentences,  whose grasp of composition  is  rudimentary, who  speak, in a way, in another language, but  are as easily understood.
Where Is The Voice  Coming From?  at first  appears to  be  a  classic  example of what   Margaret  Atwood   calls  the  "sur­ vival"  theme   in  Canadian literature. It speaks  of  the   harshness   of  winter,  the violence of the North, the hardship of life on the prairies.  But underneath that  gloss is the  greater will  that  makes  this  book: the will to grow, to discover,  and  to build that  really  is the  essence of survival. The intensely  simple  stories  where  the  fulness of  life  is  realized   through  awareness of nature, of responses to the sad,  joyful and the  ironic   that   makes   man   recover   his sense of self through those tiny, but mean­ ingful  distractions. The  writing is active, alive, unassuming, and  infinitely  touched with  a  growing   and  well-grounded  lyri­ cism. I look forward to more  stories from Rudy   Wiebe.   He   has   the   capacity  to handle   the  short   story  with   vigour   and taste,  with   discretion  and   grace.   I  feel that  the form  is best for  him, and  that  he
should  strive  to  give  us more  stories  like those in this volume, rather than  longer fiction like his last novel.

DONALD STEPHENS



I03

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SAURIAN SAGA
ON BLOOR STREET

DENNIS LEE, Alligator Pie and  Nicholas Knock.
Macmillan, $5.95 each.

WITH   THE   PUBLICATION of  two   books, Alligator Pie, nursery  rhymes,  and Nicho­ las  Knock,  poems   for   older   children, Macmillan  and   Dennis   Lee  promise   to fill that  dead  air  space  "Great  Canadian Children's Classic"  with poems. This  kind of grandiloquent assertion, usually  the in­ evitable  nerve  grinding corollary to  con­ versations about  the next Canadian novel, is  guaranteed  to  elicit  a  whimper. Lee's poems, however, explode in giggles and bangs.  Anyone   who  sets  out   to  write  a classic  is crazy,  but  luckily,  this  verse  is free of the  pomposity  of invention.
In his "Hockey-Sticks and  High-Rise" postlude  to  Alligator  Pie, Lee  describes his frustration with the foreignness  of European  nursery literature.  Mother Goose   had   somehow   failed   to   make   a stop  on  Bloor  Street. Out   of  the  urban environment of  Toronto and  his  experi­ ences with  his own  children, he  has writ­  ten  a  modern   verse  romance,  an  odyssey which  moves  from  zoo to  laundromat to day-care centre.
Previous  generations of Canadian read­ ers  have   somehow   made   the   transition from   Robert  Louis   Stevenson,   Mother Goose and  A. A. Milne  to an  astonishing per   capita  consumption  of  "grown-up" Canadian  verse. But  the  rate  of attrition, which   is   probably  equally   astonishing, may  be  due   to  the  dearth  of  a  native literature, particularly poetry, for childen.
Superficially, this  concern may  appear to be  much  ado  about nothing, but  chil­ dren   learn   by  looking   in   mirrors   and hearing the  sounds  and  rhythms of their
 own world in words. It is not nationalism, but  a desire  for  self-knowledge that  cre­ ates  the  need  for  good  Canadian  books for children.
Fortunately, the picture appears to be changing. Lee's books join a small but growing  body of Canadian books we can place  on  the  nursery  shelf  beside  Grimm and   Carroll and   Milne. Gordon  Light­ foot's   The   Pony  Man   is  one   and   the beautifully  illustrated   books  by  Ann  Blades  and   William  Kurelek  are  others.
In  the proper  tradition of the balladeer, Dennis   Lee  allows  his  poems  to  change and  grow  in  the  telling.  In  his  postlude, he encourages the parent to let the young listener  exercise  his  prerogative to  revise the  living  poems, which  are  meant to  be read,  shouted,  acted.  The poems  are  full of good  old  anglo-saxon rhyme  and  alli­ teration, the rhythm and  bump  of  sounds which are a child's first toys.

My little sister's  sitter
Got  a cutter from  the  baker,
And she baked  a little fritter
From  a pat  of bitter butter.

Much   of  Lee's  Learish   humour  relies on the  bizarre  juxtaposition of words,  the explosion  of syllables  into  nonsense.  An­ other  source  of  comedy  is the  grotesque childhood  world  of  fantasy  and  cruelty.  One  poem, "In Kamloops", has the story­ teller  eating  a veritable butcher's counter of  human snacks;  fingers,  toes  and  ears;

And I'll eat your nose And  I'll  eat  your  toes In Medicine Hat and
Moose  Jaw.

This  is all in the  time-honoured tradition of the Brothers Grimm and Mother Goose who  had  little  children ringing   round   a rosy, dropping off  from  the  plague,  and that    unfortunate   mediaeval  politician,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Humpty  Dumpty, falling   and   cracking his skull.
Lee's  fairytale world  of  monsters   and
jokes and  children   tricking their  parents by  running away  works  because  it  is all told   from   the  real  comfort  of  a  warm parental lap. Even in this reassurance, though, he  cannot  resist  a good  political joke for adult readers:

William Lyon  McKenzie King
Sat  in the  middle and  played  with  string
And  he loved  his mother like anything - William Lyon  McKenzie King.

Did  he ever.
Unfortunately, the drawings of Frank Newfeld   for  Alligator   Pie  and   Nicholas Knock are  banal  caricatures of the school of Seuss. Lee's  poems deserve illustrations of the calibre  of those created by Etienne Delessert  for  Lightfoot's The  Pony  Man and   the  Ionesco   stories  for  children, or those of Arthur Rackham, Maurice Sendak  and  Beatrix Potter, or E. H. Shep­ herd's wonderful drawings for  the  Milne  Books and  The Wind in  the  Willows.
In  spite  of  the  accompaniment of  not so perfect  drawings  and  the irritating ubiquitous presence of a rather "Disney" dancing Ookpik,  Lee has fulfilled  his own expectations in  the  two  books.  Alligator Pie and  Nicholas  Knock  manage to sing consistently off-key, without sugar  and "pious versicle",  to the delight  of children and  the  jaded  poetaster.

LINDA ROGERS


GREY DAYS
BARRY BROADFOOT,  Ten Lost  Years 1929-1939.
Memories of Canadians Who  Survived The
Depression.  Toronto,   Doubleday  Canada
Ltd., 1 973· $g.gs.
BARRY BROADFOOT  is a  journalist, not  an historian, and   Ten Lost  Years   is  not  a
 history.   Rather  it   is   an   anthology  of reminiscences    taken    from   hundreds  of interviews   with  survivors   of  the  depres­ sion years-people that   he  met,  usually informally and   casually,   as  he  travelled across Canada for a total  of  some r s,ooo  miles,  well-armed  with   a   tape   recorder and   an   abundance  of   note   paper   and  pencils.  In  the  "Preface" to  his  formid­ able   volume    ( 390   pages  in   all)  he describes   himself    as   "a  child    of   the Depression,  born  in  Winnipeg in   rg26" but  "by  the  time  the  rg7o's  rolled  along I  realized  that  probably seventy-five  per­ cent   of  Canada's   2o,ooo,ooo-plus   knew nothing, or  very  little,  about  those  years
- rg29-39."  Why?  Because:

For   some   reason    a   conspiracy  of   silence seems  to  have  tried   to  hide   the  Depression from   Canadians too  young to  remember it, to  sweep  under the  rug   those  ten  lost  years that  were  the  most  traumatic in our  nation's history, the  most  debilitating, the  most  dev­ astating, the most  horrendous ... Text  books used   in   Canadian  schools   tend    to   dismiss those  ten  years  with  half  a page,  three  para­ graphs, even  one  sentence. And  if a student is  interested  enough  to  seek   further  infor­ mation, there   is  precious  little to  be  found in the  library system.

So  off  he  went,  this  man  with  a  mis­ sion,  to talk  with  survivors  -in  "homes, in offices, in stores, in bars,  in  cafes.... I even  met  people  on  hot-line  shows."  But he  did   not  talk   with   "the  movers   and shakers,  the  men  who  shaped  events  in those dreadful days," nor did  he seek out the  academics-economists,  political scientists,  historians.  For   this  is  a  book about  ordinary people-"the soldiers, so to speak, not the Generals."
In  the end  he had  a chaotic mass of material, and  this he has carefully edited. The  people  he interviewed are  unnamed, the  places  of  interview unstated. In  all, he includes  material from  some 360 inter-


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



views,  some  of  which   are  mere  snippets of conversation-a paragraph or  two in length; many  of which  take  up  a page  or slightly more; and  relatively few of length and  full-bodied content. And  all were finally arranged, somewhat loosely, under thirty-five chapter  headings, each  chap­ ter   being   preceded  by  short   Broadfoot comments. Some  of  the  titles  are  reveal­ ing-others not: "On Relief", "Employ­ ers Could  Pick and  Choose", "You  Go a Little Crazy",  "Kids", "Hoboes-Com­ ing   from   Nowhere,   Going    Nowhere", "Government Relief Camps-They Treated Us  Like Dirt",  "Law and Order". His own somewhat complacent farewell  to his text  is significant: "I hope you will take  this whole  book as the com­ plete  statement of those years, those years that  we hope  will  never  come  again."
But  shall   we,  or  should   we?   Beyond
question the  work  is a valiant  attempt  to recapture  the  mood   and   atmosphere of the  "Dirty Thirties", and  in  many  ways it   succeeds.   Here   are   witnesses   to   the gloom,  the despair, the  bitterness of those long dark  days -and  to the courage, the fortitude,  and   the  hope   and   even  good humour  with   which    the   more   valiant faced   apparently  insurmountable  obsta­ cles. Certainly no  other   volume  is  avail­  able with  this mass of first-hand evidence  on  how  the  great   hordes   of   the  unem­ ployed   and   the   poor   managed  to  exist from  day  to day,  on  the long  bread-lines and   the  hunger  marches, on  the  hobo­ jungles  and   the  relief  camps, on  riding  the rods and escaping the vigilance of the "bulls".  Some  of  the   accounts are   told with  a dramatic intensity  that  is gripping, but  much   of  the  work   is  repetitious  in tone-flat	and    grey-perhaps    inevi­ tably   so  because   of  the  greyness  of  the decade. Moreover, the  lack  of  any  iden-

I06
 tification  can  at  times  be annoying. Who are  these  nameless   witnesses?  How  reli­ able  are  they?  On   the  whole,  I  assume, they   are   good   and   honest   people,   but amongst   them  are  the  questionable ones
-stumble-bums, alcoholics, thieves, boot­ leggers, and  chronic malcontents-often ignorant, illiterate,   and   sadly   warped. From  them,  at  any  time,  would  come  a biased and  distorted view of society.
A flaw, too, is the fact  that  the Depres­ sion  is never  placed   in  a  clearly  defined historical  perspective. A  youngish  reader  may   well  get  the  impression  that   long working  hours,  low  wages,  and  primitive living  conditions  on  farms   and   frontier homesteads  were   the   immediate  results of  the  Depression  itself.  But  in I 929  we were still living in a laissez-faire economy and   the   concepts   of   the   welfare   state  were  yet  to  be  given   wide   and   serious consideration.  Our  society  was  delicately  balanced  and   ill controlled,  and   when the  Depression  struck   the  world  our  al­ ready  existing  evils  and   inequities were dramatically heightened to tragic  propor­ tions. Many an oldster-myself  included
-can remember the sixty hour working week at fifteen or twenty cents an hour; intolerable conditions in the mines; sweat shops;  teachers and  parsons  labouring for a few hundred dollars a year; and the marginal conditions of those  who  braved frontier  life -all   in  the  early   years  of this century. The  society of pre-depression years was not today's affluent society. Life was simple,  costs were  low,  and  we  sur­ vived. So by some of the sad tales included in  this  book  as depression  tales  I  am  not deeply moved.
Finally,   Mr.   Broadfoot's  belief  in  "a
conspiracy of silence ... to  hide  the  De­ pression   from   Canadians  too  young  to remember  it"   is  erroneous   and  naive.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Witness,   to   name   but   two,   A.  R.   M. Lower  who  devotes  28 pages of his Colony to  Nation ( 1946)  and  Margaret Ormsby who  devotes  37  pages  of her  British Co­ lumbia: A  History   ( 1958)   to  the  events of the  time  and  their  background in day­ to-day   living.  It is  true,  of  course,   that younger  Canadians  know  little  about  the Depression, but  Canadians of all ages do not  usually  have a keen  awareness  of the past   from   which   they   come.   For   most under fifty  or  sixty  the  First  World  War is as remote as the wars  of Alexander the Great; and  for the slightly younger  the Second  Great War  is as vague  as Caesar's wars   against  the  Gauls.   Armistice   Day passes as a holiday, but few of the young attend services;  and  the  anniversaries of the  attack on Pearl  Harbour or the land­ ings  on  "D  Day"  pass  by  forgotten and unnoted. It is not  a  conspiracy that  has swept  the depression years under  the rug;  it  is simply  old  Time  who  has  been  the villain  and  the  destroyer. And -sadly  I say  it-I  doubt  if  Ten Lost  Years  will bring   success   to   the   author's  mission. Some  of  the  young  may  read  it,  but  not many will reread  it; some may be moved by  certain of the  tragic  utterances found  in its pages, but  none  will find it a "com­ plete  statement" of  the  grey  years  of  a sad  decade.
S.E.READ


ANTI-EPIC
AND NOSTALGIA

FRANK DAVEY, The  Clallam. Talonbooks.
STEPHEN scoBIE,  The  Birken  Tree. Tree Frog
Press.

ON  JANUARY 8, 1904, the Canadian  pas­ sengers   of   the   American  ship   Clallam  drowned  two   miles  out   from   Victoria,
 victims  of the  criminal negligence of the ship's captain and  part-owner, George Roberts.  Roberts  managed  to  keep   the ship afloat until it was towed over the international boundary, thus evading prosecution by Canadian courts.
This  is hardly  the  stuff  of which  epics
are made,  as Frank Davey's  allusion  to "goddamn  Ned  Pratt" reminds us. Still, Mr.  Davey's   account of  these  events  in his  book-length poem,  The Clallam, de­ rives  ironic   force  from   the  background presence   of  Pratt's Titanic.  Mr.   Davey telescopes  his choppy  irregular lines  and sparse  paragraphs into a narrative whose compactness  seems   almost   to  repudiate Pratt's standard metre  and  expansive de­ velopment of  situation. Not  that   he  has the  scope of Pratt. The  poem  is done  on a  small  scale,  and   he  surely  could  have pushed  his laconic  style  to  a more  effec­ tive length.
But  it  has  impact, and  he  defends  his own reticence, with some intentionally grotesque internal rhyme:

This  is not a documentary of the  Clallam's
sinking.   There are  documents
but  no objective witnesses
of the  Clallam's sinking.   The survivors were  not  objective.  I
am  not  objective.   Only the objects we survive in.
All the stinking white corpses.

On the surface this seems merely an affirmation of engagement, but  it  is also a  scepticism,   an   emphatic  rejection  of epic  assurance as false  and  inappropriate not   only   to   the   narrative's   depressing details   and   the   view  of  the   U.S.   they imply,  but  also  to  its  view  of  suffering. There are  no courage or self-sacrifice; no bardic heroics here.
No, but  rage  breaks  through the  jour­ nalistic    paragraphs   centred   on    large blank   pages    (newspaper photo  on   the

107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cover). Mr.  Davey's  emotional punches flash  out  in  skilful  and  ambiguous turns of phrase.  The  startling repetition and transformation  of  the  word   "objective" in  the  passage  quoted is perhaps the  best example of this.
Equally  admirable  are   the   "double­
take"  syntax  and  line-breaks. We survive only  in  what  we  leave  behind. What do we leave  behind? Stinking white  corpses. An  inadequate paraphrase, but  the poem's  verbal  repetitions deserve empha­ sis.  They   consistently  surpass   the   mere cleverness   that   often   characterizes  this kind  of "pared down" minimal assertion. You  can  usually  see  what's going  on,  as well:

You  can
almost see where the  ship  is not  going into  the  dark  purple of the  snow beyond  the  flagstaff.    The snowflakes
know  where they  are  going.   The women gather at  the  lifeboats knowing.
In  all  this darkness the  waves
shine, pour  over  the  deck. The  deck  too is shining.

Here  again  rhyme  parodies symmetry, order.  Menacing nature, a  Canadian cliche,  is  strong   and   fresh  in  such  pas­ sages. The second  sentence strikes a long­ familiar chord   with  alarming  resonance. However, the  poem  is  sketchy;  the  Clal­ lam's  world  should  have  been  more  sub­ stantially  fleshed   out.   Exactly   how  this could  have  been done  it's  not my business to  say;   but   I   would   just  like  to  have heard  more  about   the  storm,  the  passen­ gers-what    they   said,   looked   like.   It would  have  strengthened the  blow.
In  an   earlier  disaster poem, The Scarred   Hull, Mr.   Davey   kept   flashing back    and    forth    between    storms    and wrecks  and  the  psychic  wreckage of  chil­ dren.  Something similar  could  have been effective  here,  where   the  only  character

ro8
 we  really   see  is  the  incredible Captain Roberts,  who  during the  course   of  the poem  seems to become  a symbol  for American "manifest  destiny" and  capi­ talist  greed.  Not  that   the  poem  is  melo­ dramatic or naive;  it evokes genuine out­ rage.  What  it  shares   with  The Scarred Hull  is commendably vivid  imagery, and it  has,  in  addition, subtle  and  intelligent word-play  which   surpasses   that   of  the earlier   poem.  But  it  doesn't   go  on  long enough  to make a really lasting  effect.  Its single focus on the one disaster  should  be more  successful  than   the   jumping from incident to  incident that  occurs  in  Hull, but   it   doesn't   seem   to  me   to  be  fully realized.
I   also  get  a  little   uneasy   when   Mr. Davey reminds  us that  all the Clallam's survivors   were  American.  I'm   certainly not pro-American, but the narrative lacks the   power   to   justify  moralizing  of  any kind.  Anyway,  its  concise  clarity   speaks well for Mr.  Davey's  versatility,  especially when  one  recalls  the  expansive  medita­ tion of Weeds and  the inventive mytholo­ gizing of many  of the lyrics. This  is obvi­ ously a multi-faceted talent.
Stephen  Scobie  locates   his  nostalgias,
with   modesty  and   intelligence, in  Scot­ land   and   in  various   parts   of   Canada. After  reading his epigraph from Gertrude Stein,  on  the  search  for  roots,  and   then tracing his  own  homequest,  through re­ flections   on   his  friends,   to   his  father's death,  to   a  vision   of  his   ancestors,  I couldn't  help   recalling   Souster's  com­ ment   that   "if  all  of  us  who  need  roots/  start   digging   at   the  same   time"  there  won't  be enough shovels.
Usually  Scobie  lacks  the  particularity
to even break the ground :

Some  people  I'm scared  to be friends with, most  of them  men.     They  are  too

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vulnerable, easily  broken; but  still
have  dangerous weapons for wounding
me.     It is hard  for  men
to be friends with  each  other:
nothing prepares us for such  honesty.
This  seems to me to be true,  but  it lacks the  particularity of  poetry.  When   Pope, in  his Essay On  Man, talks  about his clockmaker God,  I suspect  he  is all  wet, but   I believe  he  means   it,  because   his vision of cogs in the grand  machine is sufficiently   vivid  to  be  convincing. Mr. Scobie's  images  are  seldom  recognizably his  own  and   usually,  as  above,   he  does not  illustrate his statements with  any account of his experience. Neither vivid imagery  nor  accounts of personal  experi­ ence  are  essential,  but   there  is,  as  well, nothing  to   distinguish  his  language, rhythm and  metre  from  that  which  any intelligent  man   would   use  in  versifying his  opinions.   Or  maybe   there  is. In  the quoted  passage, the  "me"-"honesty" rhyme  is unfortunate and  the  concluding pentameter  line  betrays  the  rest  of  it  as standard metre badly written and fashion­ ably  disguised.
When  he does particularize, his details are  often   weak,  and   his  metaphors are too  often  cliches:   the  map  of  the  body, the  shroud  of  the  snow.  One  could  con­ tend,  correctly,  that  novel  metaphors are unnecessary, but   something  has   to  be novel,  even  if  only  the  directness of the language, and  Mr. Scobie's  flat assertions are  not  of the  odi et amo  variety.
Occasionally, though, there  is an arrest­ ing  conceit  and  once,  at  least,  the  plain speech   derives   poignancy  from  its  con­ text:
On  the back  seat of the car beside  my brother
is the small  oak casket of ashes.
Oh  father,
I never  thought to drive you  horne like  this.
 This   demands  respect,   as  does  the  seri­ ousness of intent which  informs  the  book as a  whole.  Perhaps the  experience  is as yet too immediate to be  transmuted  into art.
LLOYD ABBEY


ROUGH AND  READY

S.  ROBINSON and   D.  SMITH,  Practical Hand- book  of Canadian  French. Macmillan,  $10.

RoBINSON and  Smith are  to be congratu­ lated  on  having  addressed  themselves  to the  filling  of  a   badly   felt  gap.   In   the present  state   of  research  on  the  French language  in  Canada,  we  simply  cannot be kept  waiting for  an  erudite synthesis:  we need a little handbook to tell us what  usages  are  generally   regarded  as  Cana­ dian,  and  how  they  compare with  main­ land   French. The  visitor   to   Montreal, etc.  will  find  it  helpful   to  know  in  ad­ vance   what   words   he  should   expect   to hear,    and    which    ones   might    not   be readily   understood.  After   that,  he  can find  out  for  himself  what  usage  prevails in a specific milieu.  Robinson and  Smith have  very aptly  called  their  work  a Prac­ tical  Handbook, to  indicate that  this  is its scope, and  that   it should  not  be  used as  a  socio-linguistic  analysis   by   region, class and soon.
However, in  the  absence   of  any  very useful  work  on  those  lines,  the  Practical Hand book  will  also  be  used  by students of  literature. Existing   works  in  the  field have  their  various  shortcomings. The pioneer    Glossaire   du   parler    canadien­ franyais   ( 1930)   has  a  rural  bias  which excludes  most  of  our  present  concerns; Belisle (I 957)  makes  a serious  attempt to mark   off   Canadianisms  with   the  scope of a general  dictionary; Turenne (I 962)

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   Dulong  ( r g68)   are  concerned  with the  joual problem  as a whole, rather than a simple lexicography. Le Dictionnaire canadien/Canadian   Dictionary  remains our  only general  bilingual dictionary and is a conservative register  of correct usage for  the  two  languages in  Canada. There are  others,  with  similar  strictures.
The  special  feature of the  present  work is that  it groups word lists under such headings as Work,  Weather, School,  etc., and   there   lists  them   in   three   columns headed    Canada,  France  and    [blank]. The   unheaded column   gives  equivalents in English.  Some  three  pages of  introduc­ tion  explain the  linguistic assumptions of the  authors. These  are,  briefly, that  there is a  recognized   North  American English (but   no  mention  of   any   characteristic Canadian  usage  here),  that   words  used in  France are  "more literary or  less col­ ourful  than  the  Quebec words" and  that  French  teaching in  English  Canada usu­ ally  aims at  the colourless  variety.
One  may  suspect  the  authors of  some­
times  making   selections   to  uphold  these views. Opposite the  Canadian  guidoune, for  instance,  they  list  none  of  the   racy terms   known   to   most   second-year   stu­ dents.    These,    however,    are    fortunate enough to  know  the  slang  dictionary of Etienne and  Simone   Deak,  and   there  is no  reason  why  it  should   be  reproduced here    (it   might   have   been   mentioned). This  is not  a comparative study,  and  not even   a   two-way   practical   guide.   The  "Canada" column  comes  first  and   there  is  no  way  of   proceeding  from   a  word known  in  France to  any  Canadian equi­  valent. If the authors are  right  in suppos­  ing  that  is the  way most  of their  possible readers  need  to  go,  it  is a  pity.  But  for readers   of   French-Canadian   literature (who  are  probably  more  numerous than


110
 Robinson    and   Smith  admit),  it  is  no obstacle.
The  first  entry  shows  the  word  under the  France column  incorrectly spelt. This is all the more disconcerting, as the spell­ ing  employed   reflects  a  common  Cana­ dian  pronunciation of a word  which  our  authors would  have  us believe is not used in Canada. They  have warned us that  "in  many  cases, the  French words or  expres­  sions are  also used  in  Quebec," but  pro­ ceeded    to    make    definite   attributions which   frequently,  as  in  this  case,  seem arbitrary.  What   will   Marc  Dore   think  when  he  finds  that the  title  of  his novel Le  Raton-laveur is not Canadian, or Yves Theriault  when   he  finds  his  characters ought  to say "bartender" instead of  "bar­ man"? What kind  of  surprise  will  there  be among  French restaurateurs  who find that  they  have  all  their  lives  been  using the   Canadianism   "casse-croute",  where they  should   have  been   writing "snack" on  their   window?  How  was  La  Grande  V adrouille  such a popular film in a coun­
try  where   only  a  balai   a  franges  or  a
ballayeuse are known?
Another  kind  of  problem, less serious no  doubt, is that   of  incomplete groups. Having  learned  that  le corps de  pompiers is  called   la  brigade   du   feu,  we  might wonder   what   Canadians  call   the  indi­ vidual    pompier.   Having   launched   into the  complex  stove j oven/ cuisiniere /four  j fourneau,  we might  want to get the whole group  straight, once and for all, and know which  word  means  what,  where.  In such cases  this  handbook   will  be  found   less than practical.
It would  of course  be sheer folly to ask a work like this to be exhaustive, or even to  give  any  general  rules  about   variants with  systematic  correspondence  between the  two  bodies  of  usage.  Even  so,  I  am

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



disappointed to find no entries for the important Canadian series  like  niaiseux. A brief explanation about  -eux and  -ique terminations would  go a long  way.
The  common  denominator of all  these
problems   is  that   Robinson   and   Sinclair are  regarding words  as permanent  instal­ lations,   rather  than   movable  feasts.  To  some  extent   this  is to  be  explained, and therefore excused,  by  the  handy   format they   have   chosen.   In   that   case  all  we have  to say is that  the scholarly  user will get  what  quick  help  he  wants  from  this book,  but  remain  aware of its  necessary limitations. On  the  other  hand, the  use­ fulness of the book is seriously limited  by the  authors'  abdication  of  all  responsi­ bility  to give  the customary classifications fam.,  colt.,  argot,  etc.,  or  to  devise  new classifications  more  suited   to  the  Cana­ dian   scene,  or   to  give  any  idea  which words    have    long   been    accepted    and which    are    regarded    by   most   French  Canadians as  young  upstarts destined  to disappear.
Despite  these  limitations, the  Practical
Handbook of Canadian French lives up to its  title  as  a  rough  and   ready  guide.  It will  be  more  useful  to  readers  of  Cana­ dian  literature than  many  of  their  meta­  literary quarrels about   the  special  place of  French-Canadian/Quebec culture.

JACK WARWICK


BETWEEN
TWO WORLDS
GEORGE  BOWERING,   In  the  Flesh. McClelland
&  Stewart, $2.95.
JOY   KOGAWA,  A  Choice  of  Dreams.  McClel­
land & Stewart, $2.95.
Between  Two Worlds seems an appropri­
ate  phrase  to describe  the  effect  of these
 two  books  of  verse.  On   the  one   hand, there  is the  work  of an  established poet, George   Bowering,   seemingly   doing   the same as he has done in the past-writing projectivist  lyrics-with   more   or   less skill,  but,  in  fact,   I believe,  caught  be­ tween  styles and  unable, satisfactorily, to resolve  some  fundamentally  opposed artistic   problems.   On   the   other    hand,  there   is   the  work   of  a  new   poet,   Joy Kagawa,  making   her  first  collected  ap­ pearance in book form; the nature of  her ancestry-second-generation   Canadian of Japanese descent-and of  her  artistic vision,  largely   determine   the   "between two worlds" impact of her poetry.
Bowering's  book, it should  be said  (ac­ cording to  his  prefatory note),  is  made  up   of   "period"  pieces,   done   "after I turned  thirty." His attitude to  the poems here,  then,  is that  they come from  a time when   he   has  left   behind   another  and fading  world  of experience.  Yet,  the  sig­ nificance  of that  age  milestone is impor­ tant  to him:  in his thirties, he says, he has become  more  passionate about   life  than  he ever was before. Certainly, the Bower­ ing of In the Flesh is not the Bowering  of many poems in those slim earlier volumes which were little  more  than  jejune  imita­ tions  of Black  Mountain poetry.  For  one thing,  he  has  more  to  say  now.  But  the trouble  is that  he  is  not  saying  what   he has  to say well. The  reason,  I suspect,  is that  his use of the old techniques simply snarls his vision into hopeless syntactical knots. The Bowering whom we know and respect-especially in such a fine, earlier poem like "Grandfather" -is the Bower­ ing  who  gives  full,  oracular  vent  to  his voice.
Too   often,  the  Bowering   we  have  in
this  volume   is  a  labouring technician;
the   verse  does  not   sing.   Many   of  the


I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



poems   at   the   beginning  are   flawed   by earnest   striving-after-effect, and   the  ex­ cessive  hammering on  the  face  of  being trapped in  his  "brain" world  ultimately becomes   tedious.   There  are  exceptions. "When I", an elaborately disciplined dis­ play   of  words,   is   inspired    by  Milton's great   sonnet   on   his   blindness;  without cavilling    about   the   superiority  of   the original, Bowering's handling of Milton's theme  (and  words)   is richly  perceptive. The  major   poem,  "Stab", however,  is a disappointment;  there  are flashes of Bowering's real  voice,  but  as  a  whole  it falls  flat,  for,  unlike  Whitman in  "Song of Myself"  and  Acorn  in "I Shout Love"
-longer poems   it   closely   resembles­ Bowering  is unable to  sustain  his  imagi­ native  energy throughout.
In   some  respects   Kogawa's  poetry   is more   attractive  than   Bowering's-cer­ tainly    less  irritating  stylistically.    Plain statement  (rather  than   verbal   trickery) is her  forte,  but  this,  of course,  does  not mean   that   her   work   lacks  colour.   Her control of  tone,  and   the  strongly  visual quality of her imagery, are not only func­ tional  but  cast  subtle  shades  of  irony and sardonic humour over  her subject  matter.
A  Choice  of Dreams  is in  three  parts: there    are   poems   about  Japan,   poems about   childhood  and   youth,   and   poems about   life  in  a  doomed   world.   Kogawa has  constructed  her  book  well,  for  both scenes and  rhythms shift  easily to and fro in  time  as  the  poet  surveys  her  personal and   its  social   setting.  We  sense  she  is engaged    in   a   quest   for   certainty,  but everywhere she  sees  conflict   and  uncer­ tainty.   In   her  "Japanese"  poems,  espe­ cially,  she  reveals  a  sharp  eye for  incon­ grmtles:   always   the   slightly   detached observer,   she  is  yet  amused    (and   terri­ fied)  by the collision of old and  new cui-

II2
 tures -as,  for  example, by  the  rough "choreography" of the  pushing crowds in smog-ridden Tokyo,  side-by-side  with  the delicate politesse of the tea ceremony. Indeed, ceremony   intrigues her,  and,  in her "Canadian" poems, she recalls, edgily, the  ceremonies  of innocent children in a world   of  internment  camps,   war,   and race  hatred.
It  is in  the  last  part  of her  book,  par­ ticularly   in  the  long  monologue,  "Dear Euclid", that   Kagawa's  vision  of  man's  fallen  world  reaches  its peak  of  intensity  as  she  abandons her  detached  stance - but   not  her  icy,  controlled   tone-and attacks the  stupidity of a  world  bent  on self-destruction. Neither   in  East  or  West does  man   know  how,  or  dare,   to  save himself  from   the  dark  dream of  death. Still,

There are  patterns more  hidden than our patterning
Deaths more lasting that  our  murdering
There are  celebrations still  in the  surety of death
And  more  resurrections than I have  known

and   in  that  hope,  or  choice  of  dreams, may  yet  lie  man's   salvation-between two  worlds.
ERIC THOMPSON


"THIS MAD, WICKED FOLLY"
MAXINE NUNES  AND   DEANNA WHITE,  The Lace
Ghetto. new  press,  $7-95·
THE  LACE GHETTO  is the third  in a "New Woman" series of books  under   the  Gen­ eral Editorship of Adrienne Clarkson  that  are   being   published    by   new   press.   In chapters on  such  subjects  as  men's  view of   women,   the   suffragette   movement, sexuality, marriage, and  motherhood, the authors,   Maxine   Nunes    and    Deanna

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



White, present images of women as they appear and  have  appeared in  advertise­ ments,    books,   cartoons,    comic    strips, newspaper  and   periodical   articles,   and photographs. In  their  own  text, which  in­ cludes   interviews    and    selections   from taped     discussions    with    contemporary Canadian men  and  women,  they  analyse the   differences   between   the   images   of woman   and   her  reality.  Their  point   is that  woman,  in  accepting the  "myths of
'femininity' " imposed  on  her  from  out­ side,  has for  the  most  part  failed  to  find her  inner   self  and   therefore  to  achieve her full potential as person. Their hope  is that   The    Lace   Ghetto  will   have   "the  effect  of  a  low-key  consciousness-raising meeting" and  convince   woman   that   the achievement   of   friends   and   the   search for  self-discovery  are  not  "mad,  wicked follies" but sane, healthy  activities  for finding  her  essence.
No  one  book,  of  course,   is  going   to spring  a woman  suddenly  or  easily from what  the  authors call  her  "lace  gretto". But this publication should  help. By being "low-key", the authors have avoided  the strident  tones sometimes struck  by other "women's libbers".  By using  visual  aids, they  have  increased   the  effectiveness  of their  written  text  and  created a series of witty,  often  humorous, comparisons and contrasts. By reproducing items from contemporary  North   American   publica­ tions and  by quoting contemporary Cana­ dian  men  and  women,   they  have  made their   points  with  immediacy  and   relev­ ance. Queen  Victoria's letter  about  "this  mad,  wicked  folly  of  Women's  Rights, with  all  its  attendant  horrors" and   her most   dowager-looking  photograph   will cause laughter, for example. Anne  Land­ ers'  column  on  "Ten secrets  of  a  happy marriage" printed  between  two stories of
 unhappy marriage, each   told  by  a  con­ temporary Canadian  woman,  should create,  if not  a  "flash  of  recognition" as the  authors  hope,   at   least   a  pause   for thought in  each  reader.
The   Lace  Ghetto, then,  is a successful book. It ought  not  to replace  a work like Simone  de  Beauvoir's The  Second   Sex, from  which  the  authors often  quote  and which  is still  the  book  on  women.  It will not  itself give  a  woman  freedom or  pro­ vide  her  with  self-discovery.  But  it  may, and   indeed   should,   delight   its   readers,  teach  both  men  and  women  about  them­ selves  and   their   society,  and  help  some women-and  perhaps  even  a  few  men
-to find  the  courage to  be.

MARY   JANE  EDWARDS



BACK
IN ANGUISH

EARL     BIRNEY,   The    Cow   Jumped    Over   the Moon:  The  Writing and  Reading  of Poetry. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

IN THIS  BOOK the  poet  Birney has turned critic, or at least has abandoned the poet's usual  Delphic remoteness enough  to ack­ nowledge    the   existence    of   those   who presume  to come  between   the  poem  and the  reader,  to  criticize   the  critics.  The  Cow   Jumped  Over   the   Moon  varies  in tone   from   gentle   self-mockery   to   the avuncular voice of  an old  tribesman who would  like to tell  the  younger  generation how things are done, without letting them know  he  is  doing  it.  Under the  guise  of telling   how   he   wrote   his   own   poetry,  especially  "David", and   of  how  he  be­ lieves   poetry    should    be   taught,   Mr.  Birney fires intently at such often  battered targets   as  teachers  and   professors   who

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



insist  on  one  interpretation  of  a  poem, who  make   the  analysis   more   important than   the  poem,  or  who  use  any  of  the standard   teaching  deviations  developed in classrooms.
But  let  us  begin,  as  they  say,  at  the
beginning. Birney  bluntly  states  his inten­
tions in  the opening paragraphs:

This book is mostly  about a poem  I wrote called  "David."  I  begin    by   recalling  the making of it: the  happenings, thoughts, motives, influences  that   led  me  first  to  the idea   and   then   to  the  shaping of  it.  Then I talk   about  the  difficulties I  had   in  finding readers and  listeners.... the  problems others have   had   in   reading  the   poem,   especially those   caught  in   the   process    of   having it taught to them.
The wistful   purpose of  this  book  then   is to  persuade anyone literate  in   the   English
language who  thinks  he does  not  like  poetry that he  is  missing   a  unique  pleasure  easily within   his   reach-or    anyone  who    likes poetry a little, or  only  some  kinds  of poems, that  he  may  extend his range and  pleasures.

With  such  explicit  guidance a reader mostly   knows   what    to   expect    in   this book,  but  the  next  pronouncement,  typi­ cal  of  the  work,  may  find  some  readers unprepared; it forcefully  posits a  Birney­ esque  premise  to what  follows:

... students are  warned (Kaff! kaff!) that I consider the  "teaching" of  poetry a  per­ version   of   the   intentions  of   poets ;   that   I denounce (harumph!) any  teachers  or pro­  fessors  who  make  this  book  the  sole  text  for any   course  or  who   set  examinations  on  it requiring a  "right" answer. Persons employ­ ing  this  text  for  authoritarian  purposes are  the  enemies of  all  genuine students.

Birney  also announces that  the  book is based on "nine personal  and  probably unsound premises about  the  nature of poetry," then   deftly  undercuts them: "Further warning: the  above  statements are   all  partly   false."  At  this  point   one begins   to   tire   of  the   self-mockery and suspects  that  the  author's second  premise

I 14
 about   poetry   applies   also   to   the   book itself:  "It is unreliable as a source of information about its  subject or its author, on any rational level."
As with  poetry  itself,  however,  so with
Birney's book: one should  not insist on a coldly   logical   approach  to  either. The merely "rational level" precludes the con­ comitant emotional response  that  is  part  of everyone's  experiencing of  poetry,  and that  has to be one's  reaction  to the semi­ facetious   statements  Birney   delights   in. He asks us to suspend  our rationality and normal  expectations, to go along  with  his tone  of  sly innocence.  We  get  the  mes­ sage:   he  is deadly  serious  but  does  not want  to sound  like  it.  For  once  a  cover blurb  is accurate: " ... an  unusual blend of  poetic  theory  and  autobiography, for all  those who  enjoy  poetry  but  especially for  those who  have  learned  not  to."
A  priori it  may  not  be  assumed   with
confidence   that   one  can  inculcate  prin­ ciples of poetry appreciation by the expli­ cation  of  one  poem.  The  basic  question  here  then  concerns   the  degree  to  which this   book   successfully   accomplishes  its author's purposes.  Birney  tells us that  of the three hundred-odd poems he has pub­ lished,  he chose  "David" because  it  has been "the  most widely read,  critically  dis­ cussed, anthologized and  'taught'." It  has been required  reading at high school or university  level in  every  Canadian  prov­ ince. He  kept  a record  of the many diffi­ culties he had in getting it  published, and assures   us,  "I  happen   to   remember  a great  deal  about  the way the  poem began in my head."
In  talking  about   writing  "David" and about  poetic  composition  in  general, though  always interesting and  instructive, Birney  can  be  as  prosaic  as  anyone  else, but often  he approaches a quality of lyri-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cism -the  prose of a poet, perhaps. Such passages are one reason why The Cow Jumped Over  the  Moon is successful: it is a delight  to read.  It would  be a disser­ vice  to  Birney  and   his  readers  to  resort here  to partial quotation, but those inter­ ested  readers  may  note,  for  example, the barely subdued excitement with  which  he sets down  seven "special techniques to be expected in most poetry."
In Birney's account of the long, slow process  that   produced "David",  the  in­ evitable  nostalgia  is kept  in control by the poet's   defensive   sparring  with   his   less sensible   critics,   and   the   resulting   com­ ments    provide   terse    clarifications   for those  who  want  this guidance.
Twelve   others   of  Birney's   poems  are treated  in   much    the   same   way   as  is "David", but  more  briefly. These  include "Vancouver Lights" ("a descriptive poem,  in  a  mood  of  simple  delight   and awe  in  the  beauty  of things"),  "Mappe­ mounde"  ("the  sort   of   thing  that   can trigger    complaints    about    obscurity"), "From  the   Hazel   Bough"    (one   of  the poet's   own   favourites),  and   inevitably,  "Canada:   Case   History"  ("I've  never thought of  this as a poem.  It's  a piece of satire  in  verse.... ") ; a fourth version of this  poem, a satire  on the original, is here published  for the first time.
One   senses  Birney's   abiding  love  of poetry  as  he  voices his  misgivings  about what  has been done with  it in the schools. He is speaking out of decades  of personal experience,  looking   back   in  anguish   at what  has been  done  to his own  poetry  as well as to poetry in general.
Several   appendices close off  the  book with  a flourish.  The  titles of the first two need  no comment: "Extracts from Letters about  'David' " and  "Notes on  Notes  on
'David'." Having enjoyed  these,  a reader
 may speculate whether the  third, "Biblio­ graphical   Information,"   lists   only   the critics  of  whom   Birney  approves. Judg­ ing by this book one  can  almost,  but  not certainly, count on that.

ALEX MAC KINNON


LA NUIT QUEBECOISE

VICTOR-LEVY BEAULIEU,   En  attendant Trudot.
L'Aurore,  $2.50.

VICTOR-LEVY BEAULIEU is one of Quebec's most  exciting   (as  well  as  most  prolific) young  writers.   En   attendant  Trudot  is the  second  of  his plays  to  be staged  and the first to be published.
Beaulieu  has  built  his  reputation on  a series  of   interconnected  novels   out   of which  a "Beauchemin Saga" is gradually emerging (to  date,  Race  de Monde!, La nuitte  de Malcomm Hudd, Jos  Connais­ sant,   Les   Grands-Peres,  Un  reve   que­ becois,  and   Oh   Miami,  Miami, Miami have  appeared;  several  other novels  are in  preparation) .  The  picture of  human existence-more specifically,  of French­ Canadian  existence-painted  by  Beau­ lieu, the novelist, is not a very comforting one:   the  natural state   of  almost   all  of Beaulieu's    characters  seems   to   be   "la noirceur", a  state of  dereliction and despair.   As Jean-Claude  Germain,  who directed  and  produced En attendant Tru­ dot, writes, in his preface to the play:

Victor-Levy Beaulieu,  tout  comme le  doc­ teur  Miron  et le docteur Ferron et beaucoup d'autres, fait  partie de  l'epaisseur de  Ia nuit  quebecoise et  toute son  oeuvre  en  porte les signes....

The  "plot" of  En  attendant Trudot is simple  to the  point  of being  almost  non-

I 15

BOOKS IN REVIEW



existent:  Ti-Be's   wife,  Genie, has  died; Ti-Be  tries  to escapejcope with  the real­ ity of that  death. There are-nominally
-three characters in  the   play:  Ti-Be,
his Memory, and  his wife, Genie. As the play progresses, however,  the audience comes to realize  that  Genie  is not  Ti-Be's wife but a character who has no existence (and  perhaps never  had)  outside  of  Ti­ Be's psyche.
The  original draft of the  play was, according to Martial Dassylva,  writing in La   Presse,   completed  some   two   years before   the   play   itself   was   finally   pro­ duced; the draft was considerably revised under the expert guidance of Jean-Claude Germain. The  result is astonishingly good theatre: crisp  dialogue,  clear  but  subtle character delineation, effective  black  and Rabelaisian humour, ingenious use of pantomime and  song, unobtrusive symbo­ lism.   The    fact   that   everything   which happens on  stage  is  actually going  on in Ti-Be's  mind  gives  En  attendant Trudot an overpowering unity; the fact  that  what  is going  on in  Ti-Be's  mind  is happening on many subconscious and  conscious levels at  once,  allows  Beaulieu   to  handle con­ cepts such  as time  and  reality  in a man­  ner reminiscent of the  French Surrealists, Theatre of  the  Absurd   playwrights such as Beckett  and  Genet, and  Panic  Theatre playwrights such as Arrabal.
The  most striking feature of En  atten­ dant  Trudot is that, except  for  a  few of the  stage  directions, it  is written  entirely  in  joual  (even  Beaulieu's  introduction to the   play   is  in   joual).  Like   Joyce   and Genet,  two  writers  who  have   obviously had   a  great   deal   of   importance  upon language, he has said:

Pour   moi,  le  joual, <;a  veut   dire d'une  cer­ taine maniere "anarchie",  pis  sa  veut  dire  "r volution".

116
 le   system  ... c'est   de   parler  en   joual ... Quand  tu  paries   et  que   t' cris
peuvent  pas  du   tout   t'encadrer, y  peuvent pu du  tout  t'encarter t'es completement de contre.

Le  joual is the symbol,  par excellence, of the   people   of  Quebec; a  revolutionary French-Canadian author such  as  Beau­ lieu has  no choice  but  to write  in  it. But le  joual is not only the  language of  Que­ bec; it is also Quebecois for le cheval and le  cheval    (joual)  is  one   of   the   most important   recurring   symbols   in   Beau­ lieu's   work-the symbol  of   a   French­ Canadian   idealism    and   hope.   Ti-Be's  "joual", Nellie,  is dead  even  before  the play begins. The  message of En attendant Trudot  merits  being  heard, not  only  by French-Canadians,  but  by  all  of  us  in Canada.
RUIAFONSO


THE NELLIE

RAY   SMITH, Lord  Nelson  Tavern. McClelland
&  Stewart, $6.gs.

THE LORD NELSON  TAVERN, better  known to habitues as "The Nellie", is one of Hali­ fax's   more   prominent  pubs.   For   Ray Smith,  a  former  Haligonian, it  is only  a departure point  for a set of  grotesque but credible   characters  in   a   book   that   his publisher   obstinately calls  "a  novel"  but is actually a story-sequence.
The  sequence begins with  "Two Loves". A group  of college students drink beer  and  debate the  aesthetic merits  of the   lovely   Francesca  who -with   the dashing yachtsman Dimitri-becomes the cynosure  of all eyes; she and  he are "per­ fect   lovers"   that    "lemonade   summer." Among  the  imbibers  are  Grilse, who gets assassinated   twice  in  the  course  of  the book;  Naseby,  famous   for  his  repulsive-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ness, who in "Walk", the last story, is the head   of  the  sexploitation film  company FBN  (a small  anagrammatic joke here); Paleologue, who  in  "Sarah's Summer Holidays" sexually  initiates a  I3-year-old whose  I.Q.  is  "I63 on  the  Kinns-Noble scale"  which   "runs to  I 8o  hypothetical top". Sarah is nominally the  daughter of Gould,  another  Lord   Nelson   customer who  marries  the  large-bosomed Rachel who, while  having  her  portrait done,  has the  affair  with  the  painter Ti-Paulo that produces Sarah who  absent-mindedly breaks Naseby's spine with a judo hold....
One gets the idea. Lord Nelson Tavern resembles   nothing  so  much   as  a   zany gossip  column   whose  economy  of  narra­ tive  is matched with  a  sometimes  unfor­  tunate tendency of  characters to go into long   monologues   that,  while   funny   at first, tend  to be tiresome  after  a while.
Yet  there  is a good deal  of art  in these seven  pseudo-realistic stories  and  Smith has a strong  purchase on the characterist ambiance -one cannot  say  motivation
-of  their  protagonists. The  poet  Paleo­ logue   is  absurd,  but   he  has   a   certain  Humbert  Humbert  pathos   about   him;  Ti-Paulo's Pygmalion inclinations are en­ dearing. And  the precocious Sarah's jour­ nal   jottings   are  so  delightful  that   the actual  seduction  of  Paleologue  is,  well, anti-climactic.
Here   she  is  on  her  own  physical  de­
velopment:

I have  recently  become  more  aware  of my body   in   that   I   began   to  menstruate  six months  ag.
the  other  s1gns of  puberty  are  there  and  at
Christmas   I allowed  Rachel   to  force  upon me four  bras. She has been  trying  to get me
into   them   since   I  was  nine,   but   I  have refused, I think  wisely. Other  girls at school have   been    wearing    "training  bras"    for several   years   and   there   is  nothing   more disgusting  than  their  constant  nattering and
 squeezing  and  poking.  If I  sound  somewhat proud   of  myself,  I  admit    I  am.   I  have achieved  puberty  earlier   than  all  but  three of  my  classmates   (cows  all)   and   so  have gained  respect. This  makes  life much  easier in certain  ways. I hate  to think  of the  teas­ ing  I would  have  to  put  up  with  if I  were among  the last. Finally,  of course  I am  glad it  has  begun. It is somewhat  uncomfortable and,  I  gather  from  the  books, will continue so for  a  year  or  two.  But  the  discomfort  is not great  and  I can safely conclude that  the major   part   of  it  is  over.   So  far   as  such development goes, I have only  two things  to cope  with  in  the  future: sexual  intercourse and  menopause.  I  assume  neither is immi­ nent.

Some other reviewers have come down rather  hard   on  "Two  Loves", the  first story  in  the  book,  but  Ifind  it  in  some ways the  most satisfying  of all. One  love, that   of  the  rich  and   elegant  Francesca for  the  elegant and rich Dimitri, is founded on narcissism; the  other, that  of the intellectual Paleologue for the typist Lucy  who  comes  from  a small  town  and is obsessed by the country-and-western ballad  "Stand by Your  Man", is the  at­ traction of opposites.  Francesca and  Di­  mitri  sail, or fly away into  the sunset, but Paleologue must  resign  himself  to  losing Lucy   of  the  callow  mind   and   ethereal body. He says:

I will not  perform  for them  any longer.
I want  only to sleep. I am  so tired.  I will
sleep  in  the  harbour. The   ocean  is  too  far away. I will sleep in the  harbour. I will not
perform for them any longer. Not for them.
Not for you.

Lord  Nelson  Tavern would  have  been a more  than  intermittently entertaining collection   if  the  wit  and   sharp satirical sense of the other  stories had  been accom­ panied  by "Two Loves" strength of sym­ metry,  its shaped  compassion.

FRASER SUTHERLAND


117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



THE DICKENS LODE
JOSEPH      GOLD,	Charles    Dickens:     Radical
Moralist.  Copp  Clark,  $g.so.
MICHAEL  GOLDBERG, Carlyle  and  Dickens.  Uni-
versity   of  Georgia Press,  $10.00.
JosEPH GOLD's  Charles  Dickens: Radical Moralist--chronologically   examining  in individual   chapters   the    fifteen    novels from   Pickwick    Papers   to   Our   Mutual Friend-has  at  first  glance   the  appear­ ance  of an  undergraduate-oriented read­  er's   guide   to  the   Dickens   canon.  It   is that,  and  more. He  has a  thesis, of inter­ est to  both  specialist  and  general   reader, which  provides  a  unifying framework for his  discussion  of  the  novels.
Agreeing  with  other   critics  that  Dick­ ens  is both  reformer and  moralist,  Gold sets  himself  apart  by  trying   to  discover precisely   what    kind    of    reformer   and moralist  he is. Examining the  works indi­  vidually,   he  finds   the   clue   in  Dickens'  developing   understanding   of   the   psy­ chology  of  behaviour. He  contends that  "while  Dickens   saw   perfectly   from   the start  what  good  and  evil  looked  like,  in all  their guises, he did not explore their underlying psychology  until  much  later". Accordingly, Gold  groups  the Dickens canon  under   two  thematic headings, the Anatomy   of  Society  and   the  Autonomy of Self.  The  first  group   includes   mainly the earlier novels stressing radical social reforms   in  order   to  eliminate  suffering and injustice and  thus create  harmony between  the individual and society. The second  group  includes   those  later   novels that   emphasize  not  social  solutions   but a   search   for   answers   within    the   indi­ vidual,  moral   rather than   social  reform.  In  this  regard, it  is with  the  first-person  psychotherapy   of   the   autobiographical David  Copperfield  (184g-so), Gold  says, that "Dickens' growing  awareness that  the

l I 8
 nature of society depends on the moral quality  of individuals comes to its first full development." Thereafter,  though the novelist  occasionally   may  examine  speci­ fic social in justices as in Bleak  House  and  Hard  Times, his principal  preoccupation is   development   of   the   self   into    "an  autonomous  and   fully   realized   whole". This   is  achieved   through  psychological  analysis   of  the   self,  whereby   the   indi­ vidual   may  come   to  self-knowledge,  be morally   regenerated,  and   in   turn    for­  ward   the  regeneration of  society.  Thus the   moralist   and   reforming  aspects   of Dickens  and  his  work,  Gold  shows,  find their  meaning and  unity  in  his  explora­ tion  of  psychology,  and  function in  the novels  to  portray   a   coherent  vision   of better   people   per  se   making  better   the world.
Though Gold's  thesis may interest  both specialist   and   general    reader,  his   pri­ mary  target  seems  to  be  the  high  school and  undergraduate market, sorely in need of such  a survey.  One  clue  to  this inten­ tion   is  the   book's   organization:  many chapters contain  considerable analysis  of matters  not  strictly  necessary  for  Gold's  thesis but  of  undeniable value  to the stu­  dent  searching for  a  good  overview  of  a specific work. In  this regard, each chapter can  stand  alone  as a commentary on  an individual  novel;   each   also   provides   a fair  number of "takeoff" points  for class­ room   discussion   or   a   student's   further investigation. The   two  or   three  quota­ tions  prefacing  each  chapter   (the most frequently-chosen are  from  Blake  and  R. D.  Laing; Carlyle  is  unmentioned)  may function as  additional  foci for  discussion. Orientation  towards   the  student  market is also  suggested  by the  book's  surprising lack of  an  index.  A more  minor  criticism  Is     the     occasionally      disproportionate

BOOKS IN REVIEW



amount  of   space   devoted    to   different works: A Christmas Carol, David  Copper­ field and  Bleak  House  get  8,  I o and   I I pages   respectively,   while   Oliver   Twist, Nicholas   Nickleby and   The  Old   Curi­ osity Shop  get  4I,  27  and  23. The  space for Oliver  is justified; it is often  on school and   university  courses-as  are  the  first three  works.  But  the  last  two  are  not.
Where    Gold's    book   is   aimed    at   a
readership embracing both student and scholar,   Goldberg's  is  not.   His   Carlyle and  Dickens  is mainly  for  the  specialist. He   takes   up   the   critical  commonplace that  Carlyle  influenced  Dickens  and  sub­ jects  it  to  close  scrutiny,  examining  at length   the  relationship  between   the  two Victorians  from   their   first   meeting  in March,   I84o   until   Dickens'  death  in June,  I87o.
Goldberg sees  Carlyle's influence   first
appearing in  the  economic  concerns   of A    Christmas   Carol    ( I843)    and    The Chimes      (I 844),   written   soon    after Dickens'  disillusioned   return from  a visit to the  U.S. Goldberg then  skips ahead  to Dombey   and  Son    ( I848),  calling   it  a "Carlylean parable" on Mammonism and elaborating on  the debt  to Carlyle:
The social  vision  of  the   novels  from  Dom­ bey  onward, with   their sense  not  merely  of faulty   institutions  but    of   a    sick    society inhabited  by  tyrants,  who   are   at  least   in part  the   victims   of  the   forces   they   repre­ sent,   owes   more    to   Carlyle   than  to   any other man.

Thereafter,   though   he    discusses   only Bleak    House 	  (I852-3),  Hard 	Times (I854) and  A Tale  of Two Cities  (I85g) at   length,   Goldberg  indicates  Carlyle's continuing influence  on  the  other   novels by  occasional   examples  discussed   under the 	chapter 	headings	of	"Politics", "Style" and  "The Grotesque".
JOHN R. SORFLEET
 ISLAND ANTHOLOGY

Vancouver  Island    Poems,  edited  by   Robert
Sward. Soft  Press,  $3.50.
IN A  BOOK  of  poems  one  creates  an  im­ pression through establishing a motif with rhythm, a kind of unity  of style and form which  creates  meaning by allusion. There must  be a sense of continuity, but  a small book  cannot attempt  many   things.  The  motif  of Vancouver Island  Poems  is "an  anthology of contemporary poetry",  (but  not  merely  poems  from   or  about  Van­ couver   Island) .  Its   strength -and   its weakness-derive   alike   from   the   fact that  it is an anthology and it is short.  The book is a sampler, and  because  of that  it offers fresh and  new  tastes; it fails where it gives only a taste and  leaves  the  senses blurred.
The  aim  of  a  collection is always  the same,   the  movement  towards  the  clear way of creating, recreating, of heightened experience. Each   poem  is self-contained, but  each  must  be  part   of  the  whole.  If the  presentation of  Vancouver Island Poems had  been  less traditional, if it had been  a more  careful exercise  in  the  mix­ ing  of media,  its  unevenness might  have been  carried  off  with   zest.  But  though visual  images  are   used,  one  senses  they are  token  images: a  picture  of  a solitary  seagull, a  closeup   of   barnacles, Salt Spring  Island  rocks;  the pictures are nice, but that  is all.
The  worst of the contributions to Van­
couver   Island   Poems  are   the  dull   pain poems,  the  cliched   poems  of  the  usual. For  example:
Touch only  my heart tonight
Listen  my little one
Love  me a thousand years  right now
Tomorrow I may  be gone.

Compare that  with  the shining  quality of

II9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Dorothy Livesay's  "One-Way  Conversa­
tion":

0 do not be distressed that  you cannot 	create the great  illusion; thundering gods
at the womb's intrusion
You have a role valid as sunshine
of speech as equal of man in parallel pain 	joy partner to woman:
you have a role human  to human

Vancouver Island  Poems, which  is pub­ lished  by  the  new  west  coast  publishing house,  Soft  Press,  merits  attention when you  find  that   special  individual  way  of seeing. It does not  pretend to be a defini­  tive  collection,  but  it  does  include many  fine  poems,  some  by  new  authors. Espe­ cially  notable  are  "Going to the  Station"  by   Jeremy  Boultbee,    the   collection  of poems  by Marilyn Bowering,  Anne Burn­ ham's "There is a  Need  in  Me",  "Sum­ mer   Is"   by  G.   V.  Downes,   and  Ken Cather's "Ladysmith", which  is  a  poem in motion, a poem  which  travels through the Island  town of its title.

JUDY KEELER


WORLD
OF TWO FACES

MARIE-CLAIRE BLAis,   The  Wolf, translated by
Sheila   Fischman.    McClelland   &   Stewart.
$6.gs.

THE MAIN CHARACTERS of the novels of Marie-Claire Blais are always adolescents. It tells  us  much   about  her   vision  that they  are  inevitably maimed or  destroyed by the  process  of  maturation -they  die of disease  or  are "crucified on  the cupid­ ity" of an  adult world  where  the familiar


120
 constants are frustration, suicide,  and omnipresent death.  Blais's  fictive  world has two faces:  the tragic  and  comic alter­ ego of the  Greek  mask.  Her gothic world of  rural   Quebec  (how  obsessively it  is a waste  world  of snow!)  can  be delineated with   a   bawdy,   if   morbid  humour,  the humour of Jean-Le  Maigre in  A  Season in  the   Life   of   Emmanuel   ( I966). Yet more  familiar is  the  hermetic universe  of her  first  novel  Mad-Shadows, published  inI 959, where  all  the  action takes  place against  an  apocalyptic atmosphere of un­ relieved  doom.  The Wolf, first  published  in French in 1972, and  recently  translated by  Sheila  Fischman, is a  product of this latter vision.  Blais  has  experimented  be­ fore  with   the   nocturnal   underworld  of pederasty,  prostitution,   and  vice.  Here  she   returns  to   a   familiar  figure,   the Rimbaud-archetype,  child-vagabond, de­ voted  to  a  chivalry  of  evil:  "They take all the vices floating  in the air and  absorb  them."
The   novel  is an  impressionistic  mono­ logue  delivered   by a  youth  called  Sebas­ tien, a young pianist, in which he recounts his homosexual  liaisons  with  four  succes­ sive men.  It begins:  "I  want  to  tell  you about   the  love  of   boys for  men  and  of men  for  boys-or,  quite   simply,  about
'love  for  my fellow  creature'." Sebastien
thinks  of  himself  with  apostolic   fervour as belonging  to an involuntary race of  re­ deemers,  drawn  by the  secret suffering in others  which  he seeks to  expiate through a pity that  can only be sensually expressed since  charity  is  a   gift   of  the   body,  a pagan  gift. He is a kind  of perverse child­  Christ  living  in  an  excremental position where  "all   the  humiliation of  the  world seemed  to  be  relieving  itself."  There are two   poles   of    characterization   in   the novel:   lambs  and   wolves -often  a  dis-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



guise for the "weakness  of the slaughtered lamb". One  of Blais's  themes  is that  any relationship (and  homosexuality is a kind of  stark   metaphor  for  all  sexual   coup­ lings)   involves  parasitism,  spiritual can­  nibalism: "Love perpetuates crimes ... ", is  barbaric,  destructive. Sebastien's four lovers  are all  aspects  of this wolf culture. They  are   the   outlaws,  outsiders;  they constitute  everything that  society  has  re­ jected.  How   well  Blais's  novels  fit  into the  predominant  archetypes of  modern French literature; one  thinks  of  Genet: the  fascination with  secret  anguish,  per­ version; the  victim-slave as  holy  experi­  ence.
Each   of  the  four  lovers  represents an
alternative  response   to  the  pressures   of an   outlawed  vice.  Bernard  is  a  school companion  (the   perverse  claustrophobic world    of   the    monastery   or   Catholic boarding-school  recurs   in   almost   every Blais  novel)    who  initiates  Sebastien  to pederasty. Dionysian  in his natural appet­ ites,  he  is  twisted   and   maimed   into   a violent   animal by  his  sexual  alienation, movingly  portrayed in  his  brutal rape  of Sebastien. He  is  a  voracious   mouth ab­ sorbing  the  world's  poisons, "a  strangler, disemboweling,  searching  in   cemeteries for  the  roots  of  life."  Lucien   is  a  fifty­ year  old   neurotic, a  teacher of   musical counterpoint. For  Sebastien he is  a  sym­ bol of repression.  "I saw in him an image of  Hell: an  atrophied heart, a  soul  en­ slaved  by moral  rules that etiolated him."  A  bizarre   and   haunting  image  exempli­ fies  his   self-denial.    In   a  sexual   scene which  ends  in  frustration, he is described  as "cautiously replacing my forbidden sex against   my  thigh ... as  though  he  were replacing a  crystal  object  in  a cupboard, afraid  of   breaking it."  The   third   lover, George, is  a  business  man  who  acts  as a
 benefactor   to   young   musicians.  He   is dying and turns to the sixteen-year-old Sebastien  for  the  sensual  gratification he has always denied  himself.  Yet he is a hypocrite, fearful  of exposure, repugnant is  his  "usury   of  the  beautiful  things  in life,  the  usury  of feelings,  of  the  gifts  of mind  and  body that  were  everywhere wasted  so scandalously." Finally  there  is Eric, a musician  and Sebastien's present lover.  When  Sebastien initiates a menage
a trois with  a former lover,  Eric  becomes
hysterical  and  possessive, teaching Sebas­ tien  the final  truth about  love.  Love  that  is too generous  only  awakens  the  instinct  of the wolf. Love  with  too great  freedom should   belong   to  angels;   in  humans  it awakens  inexplicable savagery.
One finds oneself compelled to ask what is  Blais's  purpose   in   this   extraordinary and  sustained   exploration of   homosexu­ ality.  It  seems an  odd,  vicarious subject, vaguely  sensual  but  never  directly erotic.  What  seems to fascinate her  is the  theme  of the couple, and  the  human parasitism of sexual  desire,  as  though all  couplings involved   a   mutually  destructive  union between  prolific and  devourer. A subsidi­ ary  theme is the way the mind  cankers spontaneous sensual feeling through shame,  fear,  or  jealousy.  Sin  is not  men­ tioned  in  the  novel  but  there  is  an  ever­ present  perversity   that  leads  to  the  con­ tinual    exploitation  and    spoilation   of human  dignity.   The  book   is  obviously intended as a moral  examination of love. Its  conclusion?  Love fails.  It is a dream; "we're wrong  to  expect   any  consolation from   the   other."   We   are   autonomous beings,  alone  until  death. The most  we can  ask is for  a  witness  to  penetrate the glacial  solitude  by passionate and  vicari­ ous  suffering  with  us. A  nostalgic image haunts the book-the lost house of child-


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



hood  but  with  its divine  welcoming doors closed.
The novel closes on an extraordinary symbol:  a small wooden  figure of the crucifixion carved   by  a  peasant sculptor
-Christ  as redeemer: "He suffers,  he is
offended, but  you  can  feel  that   he  only asks to bend over  you in a moment of surprising accessibility." We discover  that this morose and  compelling tale of  homo­ sexual   love  is  finally   religious  in  inten­ tion: "What then,  is redemption?" Sebas­ tien sees himself as a reverse  image  of the lamb  of God, through his self-immolation seeking  the moral  remission  of others.  His awkward  compassion fails.  He  discovers that  his peculiar  monastic love only raises tormented appetites without being able to assuage them: to give "oneself  completely to  another,  becoming his  food,  does  not calm   one's   hunger  but   provokes   it  and tempts it  to  the   point   of  dizziness."  At the  end  of  the  novel  Sebastien is alone. The reader  is left  with  what  one  feels is a wistful  consolation: one  drop  of blood, of compassion  and  love, given  freely, un­ stintingly, even if given  badly, is not com­ pletely  lost. "I would  like to dedicate my life to  that  once  again." But even  such  a minimal expectation is unfounded in this bleak  exploration  of  human  passion.
The novel  is  metaphysical  in  style  as
well as content. It is an  extended  mono­ logue  with  all action  abstract and disem­ bodied.  It is as though the real world  has been   totally   interiorized,  except   for  the occasional  anchor  in  certain stark  physi­ cal  images,  all  the  more  effective  as they emerge  with hallucinatory vividness from cerebral  meditation-a swimming pool, a  winter  landscape, a  mansion in  fall,  a primitive  sculpture. The structure is en­ tirely  fluid;   there   is no  action, simply  a repetitive stream   of  lyrical  images.  This

122
 can   make   for  difficult   reading. Such   a book works better  in French than  in Eng­ lish  which   makes   more   pragmatic   de­ mands  on  structure and  language. What can  be a fine almost  crepuscular style in French can  seem  introverted  in  English
-the spider  weaving   from  its  own  en­ trails. The translation by Sheila Fischman is very fine indeed,  capturing Blais's exotic vocabulary with   a  sophisticated  control  of  nuance.  Fischman is one  of  the  foun­  ders   of   Ellipse,   known   for   her   bawdy translations  of  Roch   Carrier.  Here   she shows herself equally  adaptable to the metaphysical macabre of Blais's world.

ROSEMARY SULLIVAN



POETS AND CRITICS

ONE OF THE KEY TASKS of an  editor­ and  often  it is the  most difficult  one-is to seek the critic  most likely to be in tune with  a  particular  author or  a  particular book,   and   therefore  most   likely  to   be sensitive  to  the  virtues  of  the  work  and also  to  the  ways  in  which  it  has  failed, given  the  creator's intentions, to become what  it  might  have  been. The best criti­  cism  arises  from  a  happy   fulfilment  of this   task,  from   the  conjunction  of  the right  critic  with  the  right  book,  and  in Poets and Critics  (Oxford, $4.25), George Woodcock   has  selected  a  series  of  occa­ sions of this kind  from  the  past  issues of Canadian Literature; the anthology forms a  pendant to the  earlier Oxford selection of writings  from  the  journal,  A Choice  of Critics.
Fifteen  critics  (including Frank  Davey, A. J. M. Smith, Mike  Doyle, Margaret Atwood,   Stephen  Scobie   and   Douglas
Barbour, as  well  as  Woodcock   himself)

BOOKS IN REVIEW



write on eighteen contemporary poets, ranging chronologically from  E.  J. Pratt to   bp   Nichol.   While   not   claiming  to present a complete coverage  of all the significant  poets of our  time and  country,
Poets  and  Critics   does  reveal   the  main trends  in  Canadian criticism  and  poetry during recent  decades,  and  it shows  how closely linked  are  these  two genres,  since, as  Woodcock   points  out,  ten  out  of  the seventeen    essays  are   by   poets   writing about   other   poets.  A  similar   proportion would  not  be  found   in  an  anthology of essays on fiction,  for  modern novelists - Woodcock  observes-rarely take  to criti­ cism as easily as modern poets.
Woodcock  suggests  that   "the   link  be­ tween  poetry  and  criticism  sprang mainly from  a  tendency  among poets  in  periods of  great   creativity-whether for  them­ selves or in the general  world  of poetry - to work intensely  on both  the intellectual and  the  intuitive levels. Poetry  is a craft which demands more  intense  and  meticu­ lous  intellectual  disciplines  than   fiction, and  it does so by very  reason  of the irra­ tionality  of its sources."
L.T.C.


ON THE VERGE
*****  PETER c. NEWMAN, Home Country. McClelland &  Stewart. $7-95·  Home Country is  journalism at  its   best.   Peter  Newman has long  been  recognized  as  an  acute  observer of the  Canadian  political scene   with   the   ability to express  his  insights in sharp  revealing ways, and  many  of the  short  pieces  in  Horne  Country
-which is a collection of  his  periodical  essays and  notes-do  just  this. What raises  the  book to a level much  higher than that of the average journalist's gathering is the  series  of long  essays called  "Places" which  forms  Part  I of the  book. With  an  extraordinary  impressionist vividness, Newman  evokes  in  these   pieces   the   spirit of modern  Prague and   of  Israel, of  melancholy Sweden    and   lost   Laos   and    even   more   lost Nixon-era Washington. The sadness-and the
 splendour-of   our   time   have   rarely  been  so well  evoked  in so  brief  a  space. Reading  New­ man   writing  on   Prague,  any   essayist   should feel  a  twinge  of professional envy,  as  I  did.
*****   BERYL  ROWLAND,   Animals with Human Faces:  A Guide to  Animal Symbolism. University of Tennessee Press. $r0.75. Beryl Rowland, one  of  Canada's leading  Chauceri­ ans,  has created out  of her  studies  of  mediaeval art and  literature an  excellent guide  to animal symbolism-mainly    in   the   European  tradi­ tion.  She  proceeds  alphabetically, mingling the mythical  with   the  real,   all   the  way  from   the Amphisbaena and  the   Ant  to  the  Weasel   and  the   Wolf,   and   presents  with   a  seemly   wit  a wealth of  information of  the  kind  most  writers find  curious and   suggestive. She  arranges her book  without daunting pedantry, but  provides suitable references after each  entry and  an excellent general  bibliography at  the   end   of the  volume. Animals  with   Human Faces  is  a book for every  poet's shelf.

*****   ARTHUR S.  MORTON, A  History of the Canadian  West   to   I870-71.  Second  Edition, edited  by   Lewis   G.   Thomas.   University  of Toronto   Press,    $25.00.  Professor  Morton's History  of  the   Canadian West  was  first   pub­ lished   in  1939,  and   it  has  not   been  reprinted since.  In   part this  was  due   to  its  dimensions, for  the  book  was  as  monumental in  size  as in scope,   running  to   almost  a   thousand  pages. But  some  of  the  blame for  its  neglect must   be laid   to  the   jealousy   of  fellow   academic   his­ torians,  who   condemned  the   book   on   such frivolous grounds as  Morton's  disinclination to burden it  with   an  excess  of  scholarly appara­ tus, or, more  weightily, his generally favourable treatment   of   the    Hudson's   Bay    Company, which    was   repugnant  to   the   kind    of   senti­ mental   nationalism  that  found  superiority in the    fur   traders  operating  out   of   Montreal. Time  always   neutralizes  superficial objections of  this  kind,  and, having made The  Canadian West  in  its first  edition an  extremely rare book, now   reveals   it-republished   and   with   a  list of   sources   assembled  from   Morton's  notes   to satisfy  the  pedants -as a work  of such  quality and   content  that   its  long   unavailability  must appear  as  unfortunate as  its   present  issue   is welcome.
****   FARLEY   MOWAT,   Tundra. McClelland
& Stewart, $r2.50. One anticipates that Farley
Mowat will  be  remembered longer in  connec­ tion  with  other men's works  than with his own.  His  more  personal books,  with  their often  mis­ firing   passion, their   opinionatedness  in-and-


I23

BOOKS IN REVIEW



out-of-season, their  frequent inaccuracy, their grinding    self-righteousness,  and     their    self­ advertising bravado, do  not  wear well.  Amus­  ing   for   a   single   reading,  sometimes   initially heart-rending,   they    pall    even    at  a    second glance.  On    the    other  hand,  Mr.    Mowat's anthologies of  writing on  the  north  which he so  demonstratively loves  are   useful  and   inter­ esting documents, for   he   has  an  eye  for   the vivid,  and  while  I have  allowed  his  own  books to  be borrowed from  my shelves  without insist­  ing  on  their return, I have  clung quite obsti­  nately to  his  Ordeal by  Ice  and   Polar  Passion for  their assembly   of  the  essential writings on the    Arctic   regions.   Tundra   completes that cycle   with   an  admirable  selection of  writings of   the   early   travellers  and    explorers  of   the Barrens.  There  are  times  when the  quintessen­ tial   Mr.   Mowat  emerges  to   make  slighting remarks about travellers whose  endurance and achievement one  had  thought at least  equal to his  own   (Franklin, for  example), but  one  has learnt  to   let   such   lapses   pass   and   to  accept with    gratitude  the   garlands  of   other  men's Arctic gatherings which he  presents. I am  also grateful that   Tundra has  been  published in manageable form; too much attention was  paid to display in  Ordeal by  Ice  and  Polar  Passion, which were  large and  expensive books, difficult to shelve.
*****   Robert  Craig  Brown    and   Ramsay Cook.  Canada  1896-1921:  A   Nation   Trans­ formed. McClelland  &  Stewart,  $12.50. This volume  is  a   somewhat  belated   item    in   the monumental  Centenary  series,  the   18-volume history of  Canada which   began  publication in
1967   under the  editorship of  Donald  Creigh­ ton  and   W.  L.  Morton; it  has  turned  out   to be  one   of  the   best   of  these  excellent  books. Brown   and   Cook   deal   with  an era   in  Cana­ dian life  whose   dramatic  importance has  not up  to  now  been  fully  recognized -the  era  in which, slowly   and   hardly  perceptibly  to   the people of  the  times,  Canada  changed from   a rural into   an  urban land. It is  the  era   whose early    years   were   dominated  by   Sir   Wilfrid Laurier and  to  an  extent  reflected his  facilely  optimistic  idealism; its  last   decade  embraced the  First  World War, the  times  of  radical dis­ content  that  followed it,  and   the   progressive dissolution of  the  Victorian attitude  that   had dominated Confederation  Canada.  To   weave all  the  conflicting strains of this  time  of change into   a  cohesive narrative  was   no  mean  task, but   Cook   and   Brown   have   done it  well,  and Canada  1896-1921  will   remain  for   long   the best   work   on   the   generation  in   which    the shape of  modern Canada  became visible.


124
 ****   The  Letters of  Thomas  Hood, edited by  Peter   F.   Morgan,  University  of   Toronto Press,   $I 5.oo.  Once  a  year   or  so,  a  volume appears in  a little  known series,  the  University of   Toronto  Department   of   English  Studies and  Texts. They  are  sponsored by  the  Depart­ ment    named,  but    are    not   restricted   to   its members. They   include  original works  of  crit­ icism,    like    William    Robbins'   The   Ethical Idealism of  Matthew   Arnold   and   Hugo  Mc­  Pherson's   Hawthorne    as   Myth-Maker,   but  they  also  include  scholarly editions  of  literary classics,  some  of  which, like  F.E.L.  Priestley's splendidly  introduced version   of  Godwin's Po­ litical    justice, have    also   become  classics   of editorship.  Peter   F.  Morgan's edition of  The Letters of Thomas Hood   is  the   latest  volume in  the  series.  It is a  more  modest   achievement than  Priestley's, but   then,  Hood was  a  more modest   figure  than Godwin, with   none  of  the great anarchist's haunting capacity for  revival. He  was  a good  man  of  letters, concerned with the   professional  problems   of   writers  in   his time,  but   belonging, despite  his  much anthol­ ogized   jeux  d'esprit, inalienably to  the  second rank. His  letters   reflect   his  position; they  are almost   entirely  to   lesser  writers  like   himself. Occasionally   he   addresses   a   Dickens   or    a Thackeray,  but   the   leading  men   of  his  time are   more   often    mentioned  than  written   to. Yet  his  correspondence gives  a  vivid  sense  of what  the   life  of  a  sound   professional writer must   have   been   in   the   years   between  IBIS, when    the   first   of   these   letters  was   written, and   the  day  in   I 845  when, his  career ended, Hood   wrote   his  gallant  last   letter  to  David Macbeth  Moir:   "God  bless   you   and   yours, and   good-by! I drop  these   few  lines,  as  in  a bottle from   a  ship   water-logged, and   on   the brink   of foundering, being  in  the  last  stage  of dropsical  debility;   but    though   suffering  in body,  serene  in mind. So, without  reversing my union-jack, I await   my  last  lurch ..."

*****   J.  L.  WISENTHAL,   The  Marriage of Contraries. Harvard  University  Press.  One   of the  puzzling  things  about Bernard Shaw  is that he  was  a didactic writer and  yet  because  of­ rather  than  in  spite   of-this  fact  his  plays have  worn  amazingly well  in  comparison with  those   of  his  contemporaries -even of  Oscar Wilde, whom  now  we  really  remember mainly for  The  Importance. The  secret, which  should  perhaps have  been  obvious, but  which no critic before  Mr.  Wisenthal has fully  developed, is to be  found  in  the  fact   that   for  all  their  didacti­ cism,  no   really   didactic  person-at least   in the   sense  of  a  person   with   decided  views  on political    and    social    matters-ever     whole-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



heartedly  accepted Shaw's plays.  Such   people always   felt   let   down   because  the   conclusion that  seemed    obvious   to   them    was   somehow sidestepped. In  other  words, Shaw  -rather like   Proudhon -carried   on   a   kind   of   two­ termed dialectic. His  plays  contained the  thesis and   the  antithesis, but   the  grand  synthesis of the   revolution   achieved  was   never   reached because for  the  continuation of  life  the   inde: pendent survival-even  in  marriage-of  the contraries  was  essential.  It  is,  as  Mr.   Wisen­  thal  suggests, a   Blakeian   rather  than  a Marxian   dialectic,   and    he    approaches  the plays  from  Man  and  Superman down   to  Back to   Methusaleh   in   accordance  with    Bernard Shaw's contention that his characters are  "right from  their several  points of  view". It is a  use­ ful  approach, going  far  to  explain the  peculiar tensions that keep  Shaw's plays  alive  for  read­ ers   and    theatre-goers  sixty   to   seventy   years afterwards. This  is one  of  the  few  good  recent books on Shaw.
****   Mind    on   the   Waters,  assembled   by Joan Mcintyre. McClelland & Stewart, $14.95. Mind  on the  Waters  is an  important and  fasci­ nating book,  both  in  itself  and   for  its  ulterior aims.   It is  a  fine  anthology  of  facts,  experi­ ences,   arguments, poems,   pictures,  relating to the  Cetaceans, that great natural  family of the whales   and   the   dolphins  whose  members ap­  pear  to  rival   man   in  the  complexity of  their  minds  and   the  scope  of  their consciousness. It is  impossible  to  read   the  items   assembled  by Joan  Mcintyre,   founder  of   Project   Joshua, without being  intrigued and  moved. But,  apart from   giving   pleasure  and   information,  Mind on  the   Waters  is  intended  to   arouse  public  support  for  the  campaigns Project Joshua and its  allies  have   under way  to  end   the   hunting of   whales,   and    even   its   royalties  are   being ploughed  back    into    the   project.  Given    the atrocities we  perform in  the  dubious name  of science   on  our   closer   relatives, the   apes   and monkeys,  it  will  obviously  be  a  hard  task   to persuade men  that more  might be gained from communicating with  the  great denizens of  the ocean than from  exterminating them, and  that is  why   one   hopes   that  this   large   and  rather expensive  volume   will  soon  be  reprinted in  a smaller  paperback  that  can   be  sold   cheaply
 and   widely   enough  to   have    some   effect   on general opinion.
****   HEATHER   ROBERTSON,   Salt    of  the Earth. James Lorimer. $17.50. Heather Robert­ son's Grass Roots was a classic  piece of prairie reportage, a  moving record of  the  old  age  and impending death of  the  Canadian prairie  cul­ ture.  Researching  for   that  book,    she   came  across   many   documents relating  to  the  youth of   prairie  society,    the    age   of   the   pioneers between  188o   and   1914, and  in  Salt   of the Earth  she   has   allowed  those   pioneers  to  tell their   story   by  means  of  a  mosaic of  contem­ orary
lmked  together by the  most  modest of editorial bridges.  Salt  of the  Earth  has  an  advantage in authenticity  over   certain  recent  books   that were  compiled from  recollections tape-recorded long  after the  event; its  voices  tell  of the  trials and   joys  of  pioneer  life  when  they  were   still
new in  the  memory, and  this  gives  the  book  an altogether fresher feeling than one  experiences from   reading  of   pasts   re-arranged  in   half   a century of changing memory. This is the  world of  Grove   and   Stead, and  also   of  Nellie  Mc­ Clung; students of such  Canadian  writers  will find  it  immensely useful  in  fixing  the  relation­ ship  between factual and  fictional representa­ tions of the same  world.
***  GERMAIN LEFEBVRE,  Pellan. $18.g5. One of  the  best  of  Canadian  painters, and   one  of the   most   potently  seminal  influences  on   the past  generation of artists in our  country, Alfred Pell3;n  deserves    to   be   celebrated   splendidly, and  m the  present volume there is no fault one can  find  with  the  choice of illustrations or  with the   quality  of   the   reproductions.  There  are about 130  plates,   and   they   serve  as  an  excel­ lent,  well-chosen visual  introduction to Pellan's work.  Pellan, indeed, would be  a  superb book if  the  written side  of  it were  only  as  good  as the  visual.  But  Germain Lefebvre has  provided a  shallow  and  gushing  account of  Pellan's life and  a quite inadequate critique of his work.  It would   have  been  better  to  have   presented the reproductions as  an  album  with  a  very   brief biographical  introduction, rather than to  spoil their   effect   by  subjecting  the   reader  to  an
account  which   does   little  more  than   sensa­
tionalize Pellan's career.








125







GROVE
IN POLITICS

FREDERICK  PHILIP  GROVE was in his early seventies  when   I met   him.  He  lived  at Simcoe,  Ontario, and   was  running as  a CCF candidate in  the  rural riding of the same name  in the  Ontario provincial election  of I 943·
He  was  a  tall  man,  grey-haired, with
such a commanding presence that  he seemed  larger  than  life-size on  the  politi­ cal platform or in any group of  which  he was a  member. He  was erect  in  bearing, unnaturally so because  of an  injury that  prevented  his   bending  his  back  very  much.  He  thrived  on  adulation, nor  was he  starved   for  it  in  his  own  home.  His wife  and  a  woman  visitor  nourished his ego constantly.
His manner of speaking, too, drew attention. He was a rhetorician of the old school, grandiloquent in speech, using exaggerated  gestures,   which,   if  he  had been a lesser man,  or if they had  not been all  of a  piece  with  the  man,  would  have been comic. His accent  was extraordinary but   consistent   with   the   image   he  pro­ jected.   If you  can   imagine an   Oxford accent   grafted  upon   the   remains   of  a Swedish   accent,  that   was   the   voice  of Frederick Philip  Grove.
As  he  told  it,  his  story  was  this.  His father  had   been   a  Swedish   millionaire who had  sent him  to Oxford. During holidays,  he sailed  the  Mediterranean  in his  father's yacht.  He  lived  the  life of a
 
sybarite.   When   his  father  died,   it  was found  that  he had  squandered the family fortune. Frederick Philip  Grove emigrated to North America  and hoboed  around it before  settling  down  as a teacher  in Manitoba.
Frederick  Philip   Grove,   never  a  rich man,  lived in genteel  poverty  in his home at  Simcoe.  His  home  was  in  contrast  to his  flamboyance  as  a  man.   The   rooms were generously  proportioned, and,  as I remember,  painted  a  soft   cream,  with white  trim  on the woodwork. There were few pictures  on the  walls, but  what  there were, were of high  quality. The  furniture was sparse,  austere, but  elegant. His library,  well furnished with  books, was a holy of holies which  few  were  invited  to enter.  I  felt  that  I  had  arrived when  he took me there  for a chat. It was his boast that  he never went  to sleep at night with­ out  reading some  pages  from  one  of the authors of ancient Greece  in the original.
When   he  took  my  wife  and   me  into our  bedroom,   he  waved  majestically  to­ wards   about   fifteen   books  held   upright between  bookends  on  the  dresser. "Have you  read  any  of  my  books?"  he  said.  I would   have   been   embarrassed   to   have told him  the truth that  I hadn't heard  of him until  I had  been  sent  down  to speak for  him,  and  mumbled  something about  not  having   had   that  pleasure. Whereat he  autographed and  gave  me  a  copy  of A Search  for America.
The  fact is that  Frederick Philip  Grove was  not  very  well  known   at   the  time. Later, he  came  into  considerable vogue. Now,  he  is  somewhat  in  eclipse  again, except   as  a  representative  figure   of  a certain  stage in  the development of  Can­ adian   literature.  Even   his  story  of  his early background is in dispute. It doesn't much  matter if he  fabricated all  or  part

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



of  his  identity. He  came   to  live  it  as  a fact.
I  have   mentioned  that   he  was  never
rich. That is an under-statement. He  told this story  about  himself.  Not  long  before I met  him,  when  he was at  an  age when most men retire, he had worked in a pea factory   in  rural   Ontario,  dumping  peas into  a  hopper for  ten  cents  an  hour­ that's right,  ten  cents  an  hour! Another Oxford graduate  was  working  near  him at  the same  wages. He said  to the other: "What  brought you  to  this  condition?" The   other   replied,  "Drink." The other  then  asked  Frederick  Philip  Grove  what brought  him  to  this  pass. Grove  replied, "Literature."
As a  candidate in  the  provincial  elec­ tion, Grove  had  no political  organization so  far  as  I  could   see.  There were  few CCFers in  rural  Ontario  in  the  summer  of 1943· My wife and  I and  the others  in the   household   including  Grove   himself folded   and  mailed   his  campaign  litera­ ture   from   the   little   building  in  which Mrs. Grove  taught school  to about  seven pupils.
I   spoke   at   a   political  meeting  with
Frederick  Philip   Grove.   I   still  have   a copy   of   the   notice   of   meeting  which Grove   inserted   in   the  local   paper.  His name  was  in  letters   about half  an  inch high; mine,  in  letters  about  an  eighth  of an  inch  high,  although I was the  visiting speaker  and  an  M.L.A. sent  from  British Columbia to speak  for him and  others.
The  meeting  was well attended. I think most of the folk came out of curiosity. Frederick Philip Grove spoke first. I was fascinated by the measured flow of his language. Remember, he was in his seven­ ties, but  he spoke  vigorously,  coherently, figuratively,  and  effectively.  It was a very good speech  indeed. I followed after,  and
 thought  that   I  had   not  done   badly  be­ cause  I  had  afterwards that  warm  inner glow  by which  a speaker  knows  when  he has come close to the mark.  We returned to  Frederick  Philip   Grove's  home   after  the  meeting-his  wife,  my  wife,  their guest,   me,  and,   of  course,   the   author. Everyone  was loud in praise of his speech.  He  stood  in  the  centre of  the  floor  bask­ ing in the homage  of the rest of us sitting  around  on   chairs.   At   this   point,    Mrs. Grove  remembered that I too had  spoken at the meeting.  She said graciously, "And  Mr.  Webber,  I  thought  you made  a fine speech,  too."  "Yes,"  said  Mr.  Grove,  "It was  just  what   was  needed   to  complete mine."
Such egocentricity takes one's  breath away. But that  quality in Frederick Philip Grove   was  no  mean, puerile thing. In him,  it  was raised  to a fine art  so that  it seemed to enhance the man.
The  next  morning, my wife  and  I  left
for  campaign  meetings in  other   ridings, but   no  other   candidate made   anything like  the  impression   on  us, immediate or lasting,  as did  Frederick Philip  Grove.

BERNARD WEBBER




THE CITIZENSHIP
OF ELFRIDA  BELL

IN THE WINTER, 1974 issue of Canadian Literature, Pierre  Cloutier's article, "The First  Exile,"  is based  on  the  premise  that Elfrida  Bell,  the  heroine  of  Sara  Jean­ nette  Duncan's novel,  A Daughter of To­ day,  is a  Canadian expatriate.  He  refers directly  to  "Sparta, her  small,  drab On­ tario  hometown."


127

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



The Toronto News Company I894 edi­ tion of the novel states,  on p. 2 and many times  thereafter, that  Elfrida Bell is from Sparta, Illinois.  The copyright page indi­  cates  that   this  edition is  merely  an off­ shoot  of  the  American D. Appleton and Company  edition.  Both   American  and English  reviews  (in  The  Critic, The  Na­ tion,  The   London   Bookman   and   The  Athenaeum)    confirm    this   account  of Elfrida's origins.
It is true  enough that  Elfrida's nation­
ality  is less important in  the  novel  than either her bohemian style of life or her artistic   ambitions.  It  is  clear,  neverthe­ less,  that   she  is  distinctively  American, and  that  her  type  of  American  character is  consistent with  Sara   Jeannette  Dun­ can's   treatment   of   national  differences throughout her fiction.
Women, especially,  are  defined  in Miss Duncan's novels  to a considerable degree by  their  nationality.  The  American type and  the British type are usually contrasted with   each   other.   The   American   type (here  Miss Duncan follows  Howells  and James)  is  outspoken,  relatively  free  of parental ties or  inhibitions, and  eager  to acquire culture. The  English   type -at least  in  the  I8go's  novels, before  the suf­ fragette movement caused  Miss  Duncan
 to  modify  her  ideas-is  shy,  under parental  control   and   intellectually   pas­ sive. Canadian women,  in the  two  novels in  which   they  are   prominent,  are  pre­  sented    as   a   third   alternative:    North American in  their  willingness  to  explore  new  ideas   and   emotions,  but   more   re­ served and introspective than  The Ameri­  can Girl.
Elfrida Bell is the  most  radical version in Sara  Jeannette Duncan's fiction  of the American type. She advocates free love, even  if she  does  not  practice it,  and  re­ nounces  her  homeland. She  is contrasted throughout the  book  with Janet Cardiff, an   English   girl  who  is  somewhat  more adventurous than  her compatriots in Sara  Jeannette Duncan's fiction, but  compared to Elfrida is cautious and  bourgeois.
Elfrida's character is too complex  to be summarized briefly. In one perspective, however,  her suicide  represents the tragic consequence of a peculiarly American sin
-lack of   restraint.  When    a   parallel
character  in  Cousin  Cinderella  is  criti­ cized for being "very  American," a genu­ ine   Canadian  replies:   "Americans  like being  very. I don't  believe  they  can  help it."

T. E. TAUSKY
