$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·57





PUBLISH CJINJIDIJIN



Articles

BY  WYNNE FRANCIS, IAN   MONTAGNES, ANNE WOODSWORTH, MAX  DORSINVILLE, DAVE  GODFREY, ROY  MACSKIMMING,
SARAH MCCUTCHEON,  GEORGE WOODCOCK



Answers on Publishing

BY  SHIRLEY JACKSON, MICHAEL MACKLEM, DENNIS LEE,
DAVID ROBINSON, JAMES  LORIMER, VICTOR  COLEMAN, MEL HURTIG



Review Articles

BY  MORRIS WOLFE,  MARGARET ATWOOD, DOUG  FETHERLING, JAMES POLK




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









PUBLISHING PRESENT






Srx YEARS ago (No. 33, Summer,  1967)  we devoted the pages of Canadian  Literature  to a survey of publishing in Canada. There  was not then much  to choose from.  Quebec  publishing being considered apart  in an article  by Nairn Kattan, there was in English Canada  a landscape of big commercial presses and  non-commercial   little  presses, and  it  was on  this  basis that  the  issue was arranged. Wynne  Francis  (who  appears  again in this symposium)  wrote on the little  presses. Presenting  various  views on the  established  houses, John   Morgan Gray of Macmillan  wrote as publisher, John  Robert  Colombo-with experience at the University of Toronto  Press and McClelland  & Stewart-wrote as editor, Bill Duthie-with experience as sales representative of two leading publishers­ wrote  as bookseller. Finally,  a  panel of writers, magazine  editors  and  reviewers expressed their views on the current state of publishing;  it was mainly a dim view, with most of its scanty light focussed on McClelland  & Stewart, who then seemed to offer all that  was hopeful in Canadian  publishing.
The present collection differs from the past in more respects than it resembles it, and  thus reflects the  changes  that  have taken  place over such  a brief  period  in the Canadian publishing situation. The little presses are there again, joined in sep­ arate  articles by the  little  magazines and  the  underground or  alternative  press, so that  three  times  as much  space  is devoted  to  counter-cultural  publication,  which  I think  faithfully  reflects the momentum  of  a  change  I  already  sensed when,  in my editorial  in I 967,  I pointed  out  a sixfold increase  in  the  produc­ tion of poetry by little presses between 1959 and  1966. The little  press, the little magazine  and  the  alternative   press have  ceased  to  be  a  delicately  ephemeral  fringe  of publishing  in general;  indeed,  not only have  such  ventures  vastly in-

3

EDITORIAL



creased in numbers,  activity  and  audacity,  but they have also grown  in  durabil­ ity, and  several of the  presses which  Wynne Francis  mentioned  in  1967-not­ ably  Coach  House,  Weed/Flower,  Quarry   and   Fiddlehead-are  even  more active today  than  they were then.
In  addition,  however, there  has appeared  a new category of small and  on the whole intensely Canadianist publishers who have shifted the whole balance of publication  in  this  country.  Their  emergence  has  largely  counterbalanced  one other  crucial  development   during   the  past  six  years-the  conversion  of   im­ portant   native  Canadian  houses  (Ryerson  and  Gage)   into  branch   plants  of American  publishing  corporations -and  it  has  run  parallel  with  an  unprece­ dented  governmental   interest  in  publishing,  exemplified  by the  Ontario Royal Commission on Book Publishing  and  by the activities of the federal  government  in subsidizing Canadian publishers through  the Canada Council and the Depart­  ment of State.
In  the  present survey,  devoted  to  publishing in  1973, it  was obviously these radical changes that  needed most attention,  and this will explain what some read­ ers may first regard  as a certain  imbalance  in the contents. Once  again,  publish­ ing  in  Quebec  is discussed, this  time  by Max  Dorsinville, but  in  a  piece  com­ menting  mainly  on  the changes  there in recent  years that  have  paralleled  those in  anglophone  Canada. University  press publication,  whose  contribution to the number  of Canadian books in print  has rarely been fully  acknowledged,  is dealt with in a special article by Ian  Montagnes. There  is the group  of three essays on counter-cultural publishing. There  is also a group  of  items dealing with  the new small  presses which  attempt  to  combine  the  commercial  and  the  experimental; they include essays by two leading participants in this movement, while the ques­ tionnaire-unlike that  in  CL  33 -is based not  on the  views of critical  out­ siders, but  on  the  motivations  of committed  participants  in  the  current  expan­ sion of publishing.  Finally,  there  is a critique  by the  journalist  Morris  Wolfe, a regular  contributor to  Saturday  Night,  of the  Ontario  Royal  Commission's  re­ port  on publishing.
This  has left the established larger  publishers virtually unexamined,  except  for my own essay on the reprint  phenomenon,  which necessarily stresses their  contri­ bution  to this further  phase in  the  recent expansion  of Canadian  publishing­ in my view one of its most important phases. This  is not from  any intent  to be­ little their  contribution in  recent  years. Quite  apart  from the  university  presses, McClelland  & Stewart  and  Clarke  Irwin  among  Canadian  publishers,  and  the two leading subsidiaries of British firms (Macmillan  over most of this period and

4

EDITORIAL



Oxford  still),   have  published  during  these  years  many  important  volumes  of Canadian poetry  and  fiction,  history and  biography,  though  it  must  be added that  they have neglected Canadian drama  and  left the field open  for the timely endeavours  of New Press and Talonbooks among the small publishers and the University  of Toronto  Press among the academic  houses.
Nevertheless, in  planning  this survey and  referring  back  to  its predecessor in
1967, I cannot  help reflecting on the change in the comparative  standing  of  Mc­ Clelland  & Stewart  then  and  in  1973. In  1967  McClelland  & Stewart  concen­ trated  the hopes of most people who were concerned for the future  of  writing in Canada; they were more enterprizing  than  other  large  publishers,  more  willing to take a gamble, more perceptive -through their editors-of  emergent  talent, and  one appreciated  the  immense effect Jack  McClelland's  energy  had  at  that time  in  opening  the  horizons  of  Canadian  publishing.  Evidently,  however,  he did  not open them far enough, for it was very shortly after  the summer  of 1967 that  the existing little presses, who catered frankly to small minorities,  were sup­ plemented  by the  whole  new  galaxy of small  presses which  revealed  not  only authors  and subjects with which the existing presses-even McClelland  & Stew­ art -could  not cope adequately,  but also substantial  readerships  who seemed  to have  been waiting  in  unconscious  eagerness for  the  books that  New  Press and Anansi and Jim Lorimer and  Mel Hurtig and Talonbooks had to offer them. Ob­ viously Canadian  publishing needed an expansion outside either  the existing big
presses or the existing little presses.
G.W.





















5

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM

Literary Magazines




H-J'nne Francis





A FEW YEARS AGO it was 'till p=ible to group Canada'' literary magazines into loose categories labelled university quarterlies,  small inde­
pendent  reviews and  little magazines. Since 1967 an explosion of publishing  ac­ tivity has blasted  the categories.  So many  and so various are  the literary  maga­ zines in Canada today  that  it is easier now to speak of an expanding spectrum the  bands  of which  blend  into  each  other  like the  colours of  a  rainbow.
At the extremes of the spectrum  are the academic  journals  and  the  alternate
press  periodicals.  In   between  range  many  kinds  of  university-based   journals, numerous  independents large  and  small and  a great  variety of little magazines. Each  band  of the spectrum  has expanded  year by year and  though  many of the magazines  are  short-lived,  new  ones  appear   at  an  astonishing  rate.  An  exact count at any one time is impossible; but it is safe to say that  close to one hundred literary  magazines  are  currently  being published in Canada.
For perspective  it is worth  remembering  that  in the early Sixties, when  liter­
ary outlets in Canada  numbered  under twenty, the founding  of a new magazine was regarded  as a great risk. Doomsters were quick to say that  the reading  public was not  large  enough,  not  enough  talent  existed, standards   would  surely  fall. During  the  mid-Sixties it seemed  that  the  nay-sayers were right.  It  was a drab period  and  few magazines survived it. Since 1966, however, the number  of new and successful magazine  ventures has confounded all the prophets. Before survey­ ing  these development,  a  word  about  the  fortunes  of those  magazines  founded prior  to  the  mid-Sixties.
Notable  among  the  magazines  which  flourished  and  died  in  the  Sixties are
Yes   (1956-70), Delta  (1957-66),  Alphabet   (1960-71),  Evidence   (1960-67),

6

THE  EXPANDING SPECTRUM



Edge  ( I 963-69). The short unhappy  life of Parallel ( I 966-67)  should  be noted; a successor to Exchange   ( I96I-62), it  represented  the second failure  by  Mon­ trealers within a decade to establish a national  "quality" magazine. The long life of Culture-founded in  I93I  and  for  many  years the  only bilingual  scholarly review in Canada-came to an end in I97L  Some magazines died because their work was done;  others failed in the competition for grants. A few enjoy a ghostly or  phoenix  existence:  Tish,  for  example,  which  thrived  in  the  early  Sixties, is being reprinted  in toto by Talon  Books; Island  ( I965-68)   gave way to Is which has been transformed  from a tiny magazine devoted to the "occasional" poem into a handsome serial anthology of new poets. Open  Letter  ( I965-)  is in its third  of a series of incarnations. Begun as an in-group  poetry  newsletter,  it now appears as a sober  triquarterly review dedicated  to  changing  the  course of criticism  in Canada.
Of those magazines which survived the Sixties, the established university quart­ erlies are the most stable. The  University of Toronto  Quarterly  retains its position as the  most scholarly  and  continues  to offer its valuable  annual  review  supple­ ment  "Letters  in  Canada". Queen's  Quarterly  and  Dalhousie  Review   (which celebrated  its fiftieth year in  I970)  still keep many  pages open to  creative work and  reviews of Canadian authors.  Canadian  Literature,  ten  years  old  in  I969, maintains  its exclusive devotion to criticism and  review of  Canadian  letters;  but though  it has doubled  in size during  the  Sixties it  has,  regrettably,  dropped  its annual  bibliographical checklist. Among the independents, The  Canadian  Forum,  fifty years old in  I97o,  has adopted  glossy covers, a thematic  scheme and  a more relaxed  attitude   towards  poetry  selection  and  book-reviewing.  Saturday  Night,  after  many  vicissitudes, appears  to  have  achieved  a  new  stability.  Celebrating  its eighty-fifth  year  in  1972,  Saturday  Night  has recently  increased  its literary content  considerably  in both  quality  and quantity.  The  Tamarack   Review, ten years old  in  1966  and  staple  fare for  readers  throughout the  Sixties, began  to waver in its quarterly  schedule in  I970 and has since temporarily  suspended  pub­ lication.  The   Fiddlehead  had  its  twenty-fifth  birthday  in  I970.  Flirting  for  a time with a monthly schedule and critical commentary,  it has now settled  back, though  much  enlarged,  to its  original quarterly  status  and  its emphasis  on  new poetry  and  fiction.  Quarry,  an  independent   quarterly  since   I965,  pursues  its electric policy, but has recently announced  a triquarterly schedule. Prism interna­ tional,  too, now  appears  three  instead of four  times a  year.
Among  the  little  magazines,  Blew Ointment  ( I 963-)   persists in  its  prolific,
erratic  displays of  neo-dadaist  pyrotechnics.  Imago   (   944-) ,  dedicated   to  the


7

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



long or serial  poem,  feels that  its work is done.  Now in its nineteenth  number, it  will fold shortly  or  be  absorbed  by I ron  ( I g66-).  Intercourse  ( I g66-),  the only little mag that  ever laughed  at itself and its readers, has recently been trans­ formed into a Buddhist-oriented  magazine which will absorb  another short-lived Buddhist  poetry  magazine,  Sunyata  ( Ig66).




E       of little magazines in the Fifties was due in part  to what  has been called the mimeograph  revolution -a  cheap  and  easy method  of production which  encouraged  numerous  scruffy, emphemeral   mags. The introduction of photo off-set printing in the Sixties has had much wider significance. For example,  the physical appearance of magazines in every band of the spectrum  has improved.  Even a small amount  of capital and  reasonable care with the original script can now ensure a legible, attractive  magazine.  Photo off­ set allows for much greater  freedom,  too, in shape and size, typography, graphics and  illustrations.  Colour,  also,  though  more  expensive, has  been  employed  by many  journals  in  recent  years. Even  many  little  magazines sport  vari-coloured pages and  bright  covers  (Black   Fish,  for example)   and  many  indulge,  as does Is, in lavish photography and  psychedelic effects. The  improved  appearance of magazines generally has led to more of them being placed, and found, on library shelves and  in  bookstores where  they attract  a  considerable  number  of  readers who would otherwise never see them.  (This doesn't apply to The   Ant's  Forefoot, an  elaborate  production which is a foot  too long to fit any  bookshelf. But such exposure  is not  as important to  the  little  as it is to the small magazines  which depend  on sales and  subscriptions  to supplement  their grants.)   Needless to say, an attractive  appearance is no guarantee of quality or stability and  many editors, enamoured  of the possibilities, rush into publication  only to find that  they cannot sustain the effort beyond a  few  issues. Photo off-set is only relatively less expen­ sive than  previous methods.  Production  costs continue  to rise and so do those of mailing  and  distribution  which  are  particularly  expensive in  Canada.
Apart from university-subsidized or consumer-based magazines, therefore, those
with small  presses to back them  up  have the  best chance of surviving. It  is not surprising that along with increased numbers of new magazines there has been in recent years a proliferation  of small press books. Many of these, due again  to the advantages   of  photo  off-set  printing,  are  handsomely  designed.  They  have  a greater  possibility of reaching  reviewers' desks than  do the magazines themselves.

8

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



Furthermore, contributors  to the magazines are often attracted by the  possibility of having a book produced  and  will frequently  contribute  financially  to a small press for that  purpose. The  proceeds from small runs of a successful book can  be ploughed  back into the production  of the magazine. Thus,  especially among  the independents,  the  development  of the small  press is linked  with  that  of  maga­ zines.1
In the practical  realm, then,  facility of new means of production  has been  re­ sponsible not only for  the improved  appearance  of established  and  new  maga­ zines but also for the launching  of related literary enterprises. Other  less tangible factors  have  contributed   to  the  nature  and  expansion  of  magazine  activity  in recent  years. Most obvious is the new nationalism;  and  though  this  topic  has a snowballing  tendency  to pick up everything in its path,  it does  prove  useful in explaining  the origins, nature  and fortunes of many magazines.
Especially in Centennial  Year, and since, governments  at all levels in Canada have encouraged  cultural  development  by providing financial  aid in the form of grants,  subsidies, cash  awards  and  prizes to  a  degree  unheard   of  in  the  past. Such support of talent and entreprise has enabled many magazines to survive otherwise fatal financial crises and has slowed down the process of attrition which free competition  normally  ensures. Also, the general  reading  public,  in  a  wave of intensified  national  feeling,  has  become curious  about  its literary   past  and interested in its present  writers. One magazine in particular  is central  to this de­ velopment.  Canadian  Literature   (viewed  at  its inception  in  1959  with  wide­ spread  scepticism)  has served throughout  the Sixties to reflect and  to stimulate the growth of a national  literary  consciousness without ever  capitulating to mere chauvinism.
Other  magazines have responded to nationalism in various ways. A few are avowedly anti-American, not  only excluding American  contributors but  also at­ tacking any evidence of American  influence in Canadian cultural  affairs.  Every wave of Canadian nationalism  has had an anti-American  component; the latest expression of this feeling has been exacerbated  by the presence of large numbers of disenchanted  emigres from  the  United  States. Since these  recent  immigrants tend  to  be young,  often  talented  and  enterprising,  they  frequently  impinge  on magazine activity in  Canada. A count of contributors  to several  magazines  will yield a surprising  percentage  of writing  by Americans  now  living  in  Canada. Furthermore, several successful magazines have been launched  by Americans, not­ ably in Ontario  and  British Columbia.  Canadian editors  who suspect Americans of being carriers, however unwittingly, of a dread, infectious cultural  disease, are

9

THE  EXPANDING SPECTRUM



resentful  of their  presence,  especially if, as is often  the case, the  immigrant  re­ gards Canadian literature  as a regional expression of North  Americanism. When it comes to the competition  for Canadian grants  and awards, such  concerns can become  bitterly  acute.
Some  magazines  are  aggressively pro-Canadian. Subtitles  such  as  "A  maga­
zine  for  independent   Canadian  Literature" are  common.  Editors  often  flatly state pro-Canadian policies. Some, like Northern  journey, indulge in lengthy polemics, signed  with  maple  leaves, on the  need  to preserve  Canadian  culture. Others,  less blatant,  nevertheless focus on some aspect of Canadian  experience. Copperfield, for  example,  "an  independent   Canadian  literary  magazine  of the land  and  the  north" firmly  believes that  "the  Canadian mythos  is solidly  en­ trenched  in the heart  of the land  itself" and that  the only way to be aware of it is "to  live it, to attune  oneself to the landscape."  Copperfield,  which  derived  its name  from  the  rich  fields of copper  ore in  the  region of  Temagami,  feels the more  justified in  its nationalistic  policy whenever  Canadian  readers  assume, as they often  do, that  the title "must  have something  to do with  Dickens".  White  Pelican  is another  magazine  which  emphasizes  Canadian culture  and  recently devoted one whole issue to Canada's North. Porcepic's first issue contained  a long essay on  the  Canadian  wilderness  and  the  proper  response of  writers  to  "the monster".
Still others are devoted  to the bicultural  aspect of the new nationalism.  Many
established magazines  have opened  their pages in recent years to writers in both French  and English. One quarterly, Ellipse, was founded specifically to bridge the gap  between  cultures.  It  offers interlingual  translations  of French  and  English poets along  with  parallel  translations  of critical commentary.  (Occasionally  the poets chosen, French  or English, are from outside of Canada). A new bilingual review, Le Chien d'OrjThe Golden Dog, also hopes to span the two founding cultures, focussing more closely on Quebec  and Eastern  Canada.
A few  magazines  have  emerged  in  direct  response to  the  growing  need  for certain  kinds of outlets for  Canadian authors. The  Canadian  Fiction  Magazine prints  the  work  of  "writers   residing  in  Canada   andjor  Canadians writing  in other  countries".  The  journal  of Canadian  Fiction was founded  on the  premise that  there is a Canadian imagination: "We  accept its viability and  have chosen to limit our scope to its expression in  (prose)  fiction". Quite  a different  need is met  by  jewish  Dialog. This  magazine  "was  started  in  the  belief that  Canada needed   a  high  quality   magazine   devoted  to  contemporary   Jewish   arts  and letters...."


10

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



A totally different reaction is displayed by another  group of magazines. Claim­ ing  that  international exposure  is a  mark  of sophistication  and  maturity, The  Malahat   Review  was founded  in  1967  to  celebrate  Canada's  coming  of  age. Easily the  most elegant  magazine  in Canada   today,  The  Malahat   publishes  a large  number  of eminent  authors  from  other  countries  along  with  some  estab­ lished Canadians. With  varying emphases, several other  magazines  share  similar views-notably Prism international,  Contemporary  Literature  in  Translation, West  Coast  Review  and,  most  recently  Exile.




ANOTHER FACTOR  contributing  to the increase in magazine act1v1ty may be traced  to the universities. During  the Sixties these institutions multiplied  rapidly and spawned  numerous colleges from coast to coast. They en­ joyed several  years of affluence due  to  swollen enrolments  and  lavish  govern­ mental  support.  The  additional  staff required  to cope with  expansion  was  per­ force recruited  largely from  the ranks of youthful scholars eager  to  publish  and young enough  to share  many  of their students'  enthusiasms.  Significant  changes in curricula  also ensued, which shifted  the emphasis from  the traditionally  aca­ demic  pole towards  the creative -witness the  number  of  drama, fine arts  and creative  writing  programs  that   have  been  introduced  to  campuses  across  the country  in the past few years. During  these years also  most universities acquired a  Writer-in-Residence  whose  presence  tended  to  generate   publishing   activity. Furthermore, especially the new universities and colleges were eager to lend  their support  and  often their  names to hopefully  prestigious magazines  of one kind or another.  The  result of these factors in  varying combinations  is that  the  univer­ sities in Canada became the patrons of  numerous literary magazines ranging from lavish student  publications through  a variety of periodicals generated  by English or Creative  Writing  departments  to  a  few more or less impressive scholarly  re­ views. As examples of the latter  two categories the following have appeared since I965:   The   University  of  Windsor  Review   (I965); The   West   Coast  Review (Simon Fraser,  I966); Wascana Review  (Saskatchewan,  I966); The   journal of Canadian   Studies   (Trent,   I966);  The   Malahat   Review   (Victoria,    I967); Mosaic  (Manitoba,  I967);  Catalyst  (Toronto, I967); The  Far  Point  (Mani­ toba,  I968); Pacific  Nation  (Simon  Fraser,  I969); Tuatara   (Victoria, I969); Ellipse (Sherbrooke,  I969); The  Antigonish Review  (St. Francis Xavier,  I97o); Ariel   (Calgary,   I97o);  Event   (Douglas  College,  I97I); Impulse    (Erindale


I I

THE  EXPANDING SPECTRUM



College,  1971);  White Pelican  (Edmonton, 1971);  Karaki  (Victoria,   1971); The   Capitano  Review   ( Capilano   College,  1972); The   journal  of Canadian Fiction  (New  Brunswick,  1972); Exile  (Atkinson College, 1972); Aspen Grove (Brandon,  1972). Of these, only Mosaic and  The   journal of Canadian  Studies are wholly scholarly in orientation  and  do not include creative work.
Of the remainder  a few, notably  those generated  by university staff members as individuals,  have  subsequently  attained   independent  status  with  the  aid  of various granting  agencies. On  the other  hand,  some earlier ones, Prism  interna­ tional as an example,  began  as independents  and  later sought and  won  the sup­ port  of a  university.  As for  university student  publications,  the  turnover  is too rapid  to list titles, but  at  any given time more than  a score of  them  are extant. Some live beyond  the student  days of their  editors to play a  significant  role, as did Tish and Quarry,  in the development of literary history. Two new ones, each with nation-wide  aspirations,  have  just come into existence.  One,  Bruises (John  Abbott  College, Montreal), is "open  to all Canadian  undergraduates". Another is Scratch  (Victoria): An Anthology of Canadian  Student  Poetry.
When we add  the university magazines founded  prior to 1965 the list becomes
formidable.  Whatever  the degree of dependence, the fact is plain that almost half of the magazines extant  in Canada today either originated  in or have strong  as­ sociations with universities. Ten years ago this might have implied a heavy leaning towards the academic and scholarly. In fact, very few of these magazines fit either description.  Most of them  enjoy considerable freedom in their policies and  many are  devoted exclusively to creative  work. It  has been argued,  however, that  the mere  proximity  of the  university exerts a conservative  pressure, a subtle  censor­ ship  in favour  of the  established  and  the  traditional.  While  this  may  be quite proper to academic  and scholarly magazines, it is not as healthy a sign in creative ones. These tend as a rule to be eclectic with  ill-defined policies. And  while they serve as extra  outlets  for  established  writers  and  show-cases for students'  work, they most often lack a sense of unity, commitment  or direction. The  proof is that many  of them  could  trade  their  list  of contributors  without  the average  reader noticing much of a change.  It is this which marks them off from the little maga­ zines in  particular. The  small  independent  magazines see them  rather  as rivals with  whom they must  compete for subscribers and,  increasingly, for grants.  For the time has come  when  the universities have begun to withdraw  their  support. Many  a magazine harbouring in a university has protested that  it is really inde­ pendent  because the institution  does not supply it with money. However, as hid­ den  subsidies  such  as  phone  and  mail services, office supplies, secretarial  help,

12

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



and  time  to  devote  to  the  magazine  are  gradually  withdrawn   such  magazines must  turn  increasingly  to  outside  agencies for  support.  The   universities  have entered a period of retrenchment and financial stringency;  the next few years will tell how drastically  this will affect the magazines now enjoying  their  patronage.
A third  factor,  accounting mainly for the  proliferation  of little  magazines,  is the extension of the  network  known as the literary  underground. This  network is elitist in the sense that  it attracts  not the many  but  the  few;  it is intimate  in its mode of operation: subscription  lists grow by word of mouth,  personal letters, small advertisements  in  fellow little magazines, listings in small  directories;  and it is international in scope, being linked with similar networks all over the world. Little magazines are not usually found on library shelves or in bookstores. For one thing,  they are by nature  ephemeral;  for another  they do not  feel bound  to  ap­ pear on a regular schedule,  or to maintain  the same format  from  issue to  issue. None of them expects to make money; many of them are given away free; most of them  are  run  on a shoestring, out  of love, if not sheer altruism.  Given  such characteristics,  the wonder  is that  little mags exist at  all. In  fact,  they  abound.  That  their survival is of the species rather  than  of the individual  magazines  is a sign of their significance. Little magazines are a true  index  of  the  vitality of lit­ erary  culture  today.  While  each  is unique  and  few would  care  to trade  lists of contributors,  all little mags worthy of the name share certain  attitudes.  They  are antipathetic to the literary  establishment;  they resist  the  pressures of commercial publishing;  they are committed  to new writing, partial to young writers and open to experiment  in form and freedom of subject matter.  The  approval  of the acad­ emy, financial  success and  popularity  are  not among  their  aims.  Though   it  is true  that  many  established  writers  began  their  careers  among  them,  the  little magazines do not function  primarily as launching  pads. Their  function  is that  of the avantgarde, challenging tradition and convention, promoting new or neglected aesthetics, exploring  new modes and genres; testing the potentialities  and  limita­ tions of language  itself. They  are thus the source of new blood, the oxygenizing agents without  which the literary system would die of hardening of the arteries. It is gratifying,  therefore,  to note  that  the increase in  establishment  journals  in Canada   has  been  paralleled  by  the  extension of  the  underground  network  of little magazines across the country.
The  highest concentration   of little magazines is in Toronto and  Vancouver,
where  the  variety  and   rapidity  of  turnover  defy  description.  The  search  for catchy  names is getting  harder  all the time. One  of Toronto's most  recent  has settled for another poetry magazine, a title which carries some sense of exhaustion.

THE  EXPANDING SPECTRUM



But almost every region in Canada now boasts at least one little mag. To  name a few-Nanaimo, B.C., has just spawned  Island;  Victoria has Tuatara;  Burnaby, Black  Fish;  Prince  George,  54  Forty;   Ganges,  Earthwords;  Repository  comes from  Seven  Persons,  Alberta;  Vigilante  from  Calgary;   Salt  from   Moosejaw; Mainline and  Black  Moss  from  Windsor;  Wagtail from  Sarnia; Other  Voices and The Stuffed Crocodile  from  London; The  Oyster in the  Ooze  from Ottawa; Flooboards  from  St. John; Urchin from  Fredericton.  Upon  examination, many of these prove to be edited  by students  and/or professors. Their  distinction from the usual university magazines stems from their partisan alignments. A full list, including  a score each  from  Toronto  and  Vancouver  would  run  close to sixty titles all of which  existed some  time  during  the  past five years and  about  half of which are extant.
Montreal,  a centre of little magazine activities for several decades, is currently
rather  barren. Since Yes  and  Delta died, no magazine of comparable  stability has appeared. Of those most clearly committed  to underground  activity  I ngluvin ap­ pears  irregularly;  jawbreaker lasted  for only three issues; Intercourse is  under­ going transformation; Tide is sporadic.  Each of these had  some unity  and  sense of  direction,  however-qualities which  are  sadly  lacking  in  a  recent  venture called Booster and  Blaster. This magazine is an attempt  to foster a poet's cooper­ ative whereby anyone  who wishes may submit  copy plus the  money required  to reproduce  the  pages  involved.  The  copy is then  circulated  to  all  contributing  members  any  of whom  may then  send in critical  "boosts"  or  "blasts"  plus the cost of the pages involved. Someone then volunteers or is elected to put the pack­ age together. The pages are reproduced,  as received, by photo off-set, and stapled together  with a cardboard cover and sold, if at all, for fifty cents. As an exercise in  democracy  the  first  issue was  a  thorough  debacle.  The  poets  pulled  them­ selves together  long enough  to  put  out  a  slightly  improved  second  issue and  a third  is envisioned sometime this year. Only poets resident in  Montreal  may par­ ticipate. A brave effort to revive the poetry scene in Montreal  but a sorry lesson in  how not to start  a little  magazine.  Most  recent examples of little  mags from Montreal  are  Anthol, Moongoose and  Bruises, all originated  by students.



AT THE   RADICAL FRINGE of the little  mags  is a  group  of publications  which are  best viewed as products  of the counter-culture. Here  we find the  most extreme  experimentalism,  represented  in  magazines  like Ganglia, Cronk, Blew  Ointment and  Elfin  Plot. A more recent example  is a phenomenon

14

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



called  "Intermedia" in  Vancouver  which  since  1968  has  been  responsible  for several short-lived magazines and  an ongoing circus of mixed-media  happenings. These  involve  tapes,  discs, films, comic strips,  postcards,  exhibitions,  festivals, poetry readings and theatre, and involve artists from many different  media.  Many such experiments  (and  they are  not limited  to Vancouver)   are  designed  to free the creative  imagination  from  traditional  modes of expression and  from  the lim­ itations  of one medium.
The  literary  implications  are  significant.  Visual, concrete  and  sound  poems, for example, are attempts  to liberate poetry from the tyranny of the printed  page. These  artists  reject  the  concept  of literature  as something  in  a  book -in  fact they specialize in  non-books. They  attack  language  itself, wrenching  its syntax apart,  releasing the magic  of its separate  words, their sight,  sound  and  texture, making their component  letters dance, and forcing them into imaginatively fruit­ ful alliances with various other  arts. While much of the fractured syntax,  phony spelling and  typewriting antics is exasperatingly juvenile, the full effect of  serious experiments along these lines is profoundly subversive. Language,  as it has existed for  centuries,  has been  the  prime  vehicle of culture. Traditional  values  are  en­ shrined  in  its conventional  grammar, syntax,  idioms. To  tamper   with  these, to unhinge  and  disarticulate  language,  therefore,  is to commit  an act  more  radical than  most political revolutionaries  dream  of.
Thus  while some of these activities are spurious and  may be regarded  as non­ sense games which the young play to bug their elders, it would  be folly  to dis­ miss the phenomenon  totally. Much of it reveals on the one hand  a dadaist  judg­ ment on existing values and on the other a serious attempt  to find  new, redemp­ tive modes of seeing, doing and knowing. Many of these artists are fully conscious that  they are engaged in what they call "the  language revolution"  and  they have been at it for some time. Some measure of their success may be noted in the fact that  concrete poetry, once considered a freakish aberration  confined to little mag­ azines, is currently found on the pages of many "establishment" magazines. Possi­ bilities for the future  are indeed  bewildering.  But insofar as these radical  experi­ ments  may be called literary  it is clear even  now that  traditional categories and standards are not applicable  or relevant. We shall have to learn  new measures of judgment  if we must cope with  this  phenomenon.  In  the meantime  the  curious may  write to Mr.  Poem of the  Poem  Company  in Vancouver  for  copies of the tiniest poetry magazine  in the country.  It  is issued once a week. Or  to the Elfin Plot whose elves use many kinds of magic in their plot to lift the  poem from  the page.

IS

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



It should  be noted  that  the counter-culture  is responsible for quite  a different kind of magazine  activity.  What  used to be called  (in the Sixties in the  United States)  the "underground" press has surfaced and is now better described as "alternate". (As such it is dealt  with elsewhere in this collection).2   For our  pur­ poses here, however, it should  be noted that  while most alternate  periodicals are social or political in emphasis and  aim to change their  readers' thinking  patterns about  community affairs, ecology, sexual mores, ethnic problems and so on, many of them do include a literary dimension. This being so, they often serve as regional outlets for local talent; and sometimes, as in the case of The Georgia Straight and The  Mysterious  East, they sponsor important  "new  writing" series and  book re­ view supplements.   Others,   like  Square  Deal in  Charlottetown,  have  spawned small presses devoted  to literary  expressions of  regional experience.  Many  Mon­ treal poets, for want of other outlets, are appearing  in Logos. There  are also num­ erous  hybrids  among  the  magazines.  Alive,  for  example,  is deeply  concerned about  "an  independent  Canadian  literature". The  British Columbia  Monthly  is a weird and saucy mixture  of  social criticism and  West Coast literary  narcissism. In other words the alternate  press overlaps, to a degree, the  band  of little maga­ zines at one extreme  of the literary spectrum.
The  counter-culture is also, at least in part,  responsible for the new humanism which characterizes  many  of today's  magazines. This  accounts  on the one hand for a general  loosening of categories, a broader  range  of interests, a  relaxing  of taboos, an openness to fresh ideas. On the other hand, combined with the new nationalism,  the counter-culture has encouraged  both  regionalism  and  personal­ ism. Many  magazines, once afraid  of being thought  parochial,  now  flaunt  their regional concerns. Photographs of old buildings, landmarks,  scenery, sketches of local  "characters", poems, stories  and  articles about  the  region  or  community are  often featured.  This  can  be folksy or campish;  but  more  often  it  adds  the warmth  and  depth  of  the  ordinarily  human  to  a  literary  enterprise  too  long marked  by dry imperialism  and cosmopolitan anonymity. It is not surprising that fiction is being given more  attention  recently. More  than  lyric poetry,  which  is subjective  and  individualistic,  fiction  explores  inter-personal  relationships.  And lastly, almost  all of the  new  magazines,  short  of the  purely  academic  journals, have evinced an  increasing  curiosity about  the lives of their  authors.  Minimally this may mean only an extension  of the  biographical  data  entered  in "Notes  on Contributors". More characteristically, however, the new magazines devote pages to informal  interviews, vignettes of  their authors,  personal histories and  reminis­ cences, intimate  correspondence, and photographs  both candid  and casual. These

r6

THE EXPANDING SPECTRUM



practices, along with the increasing tendency of writers to allude, in their  poems and stories, both to things Canadian and  to the work of fellow-Canadians, serve to develop a strong sense of literary community  heretofore  unknown  in  Canada. Tempting as the prospects are, one wonders at the delightful  audacity  of  North­ ern  journey  which  includes  two  pages  of  perforated  detachable  stamps   with photographs  of contributors  on one side and  brief biographies on  the other.  Are we to envision a time  when  high school students  will trade  Canadian Authors Cards instead of those of Hockey Players? If that  time ever comes, we shall have to insist that  the chewing gum, too, be "Made in  Canada".


NOTES

1 This  relationship is closely discussed by Sarah  McCutcheon in "Little  Presses of
Canada",  pp. 88-97.
2    See "Underground  or Alternative" by Anne Woodward, pp. 29-34.

THE UNIVERSITY  PRESSES



Ian Montagnes




IN THE MIDST of the crises and  p=ions that  have character­ ized so much  of Canadian book publishing  in  recent  years -the  branch-plant infestation,  the foreign  takeovers,  the threatened  bankruptcies,  the  jingoism, the
innuendoes  of muscle and  "families"  in mass-market  paperback  distribution - the country's  university  presses have proceeded  quietly with  their  work.  Almost stodgily, it might  seem. There  is little to excite the  general  imagination  in  the appearance (or, for that  matter,  the non-appearance) of a plan  for a dictionary of Old  English  or  a  detailed  microphotographic study  of the  organogenesis  of flowers. University  publishers do little to change this image:  books such as these, despite providing  the  butt  for  occasional humour,  are their  stock in  trade  and raison d'etre.  Indeed,  in their low profile and measured persistence, the university presses smack of an  earlier grey Canadianism  of the pre-Trudeau era.  Yet they are not without  a ferment of their own, and strains of their own;  and  in a period of general industrial  malaise they are having a continuing,  if not indeed a grow­ ing,  impact  on  Canada's literary  and  national  development  that  is belied  by their small voice and  scale of operation  (for most are staffed  by only a  handful of people, and some only by professors and  administrators  who must fit publish­ ing into  an  already  crowded  timetable). Although  their share  of dollar  sales is not large, for most of their  books are intended  for severely limited  markets,  the eleven members  of the  Association of Canadian University  Presses show  up  re­ markably  well in  a  more  significant  index-the  relative number  of titles that get published.  Out  of every nine  Canadian books currently  in  print,  in  French or English, one bears the imprint  of a university press. Moreover,  this proportion has  been  growing.  Among  francophone   publishers,  the  university  presses have since I970  accounted  for about  nine per cent of new books published each year; but  in  English-language   publishing  the  university-press share  has climbed  since
I 97 o from eight  per cent  of the total  of books in print  to ten  per cent  in  I 97 1
and  to twelve last  year.

18

THE UNIVERSITY PRESSES



The  subject  matter  of a  publisher's  output  is also important. In  addition  to the staple  esoteric academic  topics, the university presses now  are  publishing  a remarkable  number  of  books that  probe  directly  into  the  Canadian  make-up. In  its current  seasonal catalogue  the  University of Toronto   Press, for  example, lists new books on the  psychology of charisma,  the impact  of freer  trade  on the Canadian economy, the  rural  Ontario  scene as depicted  by Thoreau  MacDon­ ald, the development  of Canadian science policy, the influence of the late Doug­ las Duncan  on Canadian art  and  artists, the growth of Social Credit  in Quebec, plus a translation  of Femand Dumant's  La  Vigile   du  Quebec and  several  new books in three important series of reprints which are making  newly available  key works in the study of Canadian literature  and social history. This same press has published,  over the  years, such  works as Harold  Innis's  Fur  Trade and  Bias of Communication, Marshall  McLuhan's Gutenberg Galaxy, John  Porter's  Vertical Mosaic,  Russell Harper's Painting   in  Canada,  Reginald  Watters'   checklists of Canadian literature,  the  Literary  History  of Canada  edited  by Carl  F.  Klinck, Douglas Jones' Butterfly on Rock, and Jack  Warwick's  Long   journey, as well as the monumental  Dictionary  of Canadian  Biography.
Toronto's  publishing  list has certain  advantages  as an  example.  For  most of this century Toronto  (founded  in I go I)  was the only English-language  university press in Canada   (Les Editions de l'Universite  d'Ottawa were founded  in  Igg6, Les  Presses de  l'universite   Laval  in  Igso,   McGill-now   MeGill-Queen's­ University Press in  Ig6o). Toronto's backlist furthermore comprises about  three­ quarters  of the English-language  university press titles in  print,  and  a little over half the total  in both  languages.  (To  put Toronto  in  a  national  context,  it an­ nually  publishes more  new  titles than  any  other  house  in  the  country,  and  its backlist is slightly  larger  than  those of  McClelland  and  Stewart   and  Clarke, Irwin  combined.)  But what  is true of Toronto  holds for its brethren,  whether  it is MeGill-Queen's series on environmental  pollution, or the well-illustrated  works on  Borduas  and  de  Tonnancour  published  by  Les  Presses de  l'Universite   du Quebec,  or the massive study  of Canadian  administrative  law  now in  prepara­ tion at  Laval.
This  activity  is critical.  It  is not  unique  of  course  to  the  university  press:
scholarship also benefits when Donald Creighton is published by Macmillan  or Margaret  Atwood by the House of Anansi. But commercial  houses, which  must return  their  shareholders  an  eventual  profit, are  far  more  likely to  make  only forays into Canadiana, carrying off the cream for a coffee table book or a library series or a college text. None of them can afford to support-often  at consider-

THE  UNIVERSITY PRESSES



able  financial  loss -the  sustained  publication  of in-depth  academic  investiga­ tions of Canada's literary  heritage,  history, economics, labour  relations,  political science, law, or other  fields. That  is the university press's  function.  "In  the end most scholarly publishing  cannot  be profitable, or at least it must be selected and edited and  produced  with the  purpose of maximizing its academic  service rather than  its profitability."  (Report of the  Royal Commission  on Book Publishing in Ontario,  p. 229: the Commissioners might  have added  that  such a  programme normally  requires substantial  subsidization,  direct  and/or  indirect,  from the par­ ent  university,  as  well as  benefiting  from  the  watchful  eye of  a  university-ap­ pointed  editorial  committee  of  scholars.)   Commercial  publishers  do,  however (and  this is probably a proper division of  labour and of spoils), ensure that  much of what  is published  by a  university  press reaches a  broader  market  in  revised form, either as more popular  nonfiction or in a high-school or elementary-grade  textbook. Toronto's  backlist  illustrates  this further  point-that the influence of
a  university  press book may  extend  well beyond its covers and  the  campus.  It
may directly affect political or economic policy; it may provide the raw material for a paperback  best-seller; it may add  expressions to the language; it may alter the teaching of Canadian cultural  and economic history. It is this seminal and pervasive influence  that  makes a strong university publishing community  an  im­ portant  national  resource.
The  extensive publication  of Canadian material  by scholarly publishers results
in part  from  deliberate  editorial  policy and  manuscript  procurement, but  it has been possible only because of, and  ultimately it reflects, the upsurge in Canadian studies among the teaching staffs of our universities. In this respect the university presses have not, and  will not, change. Their  principal aim is to extend  the  pro­ fessional study  and  the  lecture  room,  to  disseminate the  fruits  of  scholarly  re­ search  so that  others  may  build  thereon.  The  advance  of  knowledge  depends upon  this  role. Research  unpublished  is stillborn,  but  every  scholarly  book has the potential of stimulating  further  work in its field. Beyond this, as A.S.P. Wood­ house once wrote, "without the hope of publication, scholarship languishes";  on the  other  hand,  the  existence of a lively university  press may stimulate  authors who would  not otherwise write.
The  scholarship  which  is the  lifeblood of a  university press may  be national
or even regional in some of its emphasis, yet in its approaches,  its standards, and in  large  measure  its  subject  matter   and  intended  audience,  it  recognizes  no boundaries.  Perhaps  that  is why  Canadian scholarly publishers  have  been  less vocal than  some of their trade  and  educational  colleagues in demanding nation-

20

THE UNIVERSITY PRESSES



alistic protection. A substantial  proportion  (over fifty per cent)  of a Canadian university press's sales may be outside the country,  and  the  books thus sold may deal with Czech literature,  medieval European  fiscal policy, higher  mathematics, or the microorganisms  that  infest food. Indeed,  for a Canadian scholar  working in  a non-Canadian field, the  university  press may offer the  only  route  to  pub­ lication  within  his own country.  Commercial  presses are  more  dependent  upon the  domestic  market  and  what  it will buy,  but  for  the scholarly  publisher  it is often only the existence of a foreign market that makes publication of a book eco­ nomically possible. (It  is a rueful  joke at Toronto  that  when the first volumes of its Collected   Works of  fohn  Stuart   Mill  were  published  in   I965,  considerably fewer copies were sold in Canada  than  in Japan.) It  also seems to be true  that Canadian scholars are less prone today to treat  publication  in their  own country as second-best only after rejection  by Oxford or Cambridge or Harvard or Yale, and  that  more and  more British and  American scholars are submitting first-rate manuscripts  to Canadian houses that  have shown strength  in their areas of study. This  is probably  an  indication  of  the  growing  maturity  of  Canadian scholarly publishing;   but  at  the  same  time  one  must  recognize that   the  same  pressures which  shall  be discussed later  are  affecting  university  presses everywhere,  and scholars are having to look further  afield these days to get published  at all.
Scholarly manuscripts  cross borders and  oceans every day in search  of a  pub­ lisher or in the process of appraisal; the books that  result may be sold in  literally any country  and  may  be translated  into  half a dozen different  languages.  It  is no wonder  that  the  university  presses, to  an  extent  unique  in  Canada, have  a sense of belonging  to  an  international publishing  community.  There  is a  long tradition  of co-operation  with colleagues south  of the  border  within  the  Associ­ ation  of American  University  Presses. The  Canadian houses  are  quick  to recog­ nize that  they have learned  much through  this relation, but  they have also (most notably  Marsh Jeanneret, Toronto's director, who was AAUP  president  in  I970-
7 I)  contributed to it. It  was a Canadian press, Toronto,  that  founded  the first
quarterly  journal for authors and  publishers devoted to this field, Scholarly  Pub­ lishing,   which  has  quickly  reached  a  worldwide  readership   and  attracted  an equally polynational list of contributors.  And it was no coincidence that  Canada  was host (with the support  of both Ottawa  and Unesco)  to a meeting in Toronto  last October  which led to the formation  of an International Association of Schol­ arly Publishers, with its secretariat  in Toronto.  Nor is it surprising  that  when the Association  Internationale des  Presses d'Universites  de  Langue   Fran aise

2I

THE  UNIVERSITY PRESSES



formed this spring  at Grenoble,  another  Canadian,  Danielle Ros, director  of Les
Presses de l'Universite  de  Montreal,  was elected its first president.
The  emphasis  on scholarship  and  common  problems  has encouraged  similar co-operation  across language  lines within Canada.  Toronto  and  Laval  have, for example, co-published many works, most notably the Dictionary of Canadian Biography/ Dictionnaire biographique du  Canada   which  must be the  most  con­ crete  example  of true  bilingualism  outside  government:  articles  for  it  may  be written  in either  French  or English, are  then  translated,  are edited  in  both lan­ guages,  checked  again  at  both  centres,  and  published  simultaneously  in  both languages in companion  volumes at the same price. Last  October  was formed the first  bilingual  publishing  association  in  Canada,   the  Association  of  Canadian University  Presses/ Association  des  Presses  Universitaires  Canadiennes.   (Other  publishers are divided among  the Conseil Superieur  du Livre and, on the English language,  the competing  Canadian Book  Publishers' Council and  the Independ­ ent  Publishers' Association.)  The  members of the new body range  in size from the University of Toronto Press, which includes in its publishing operation seven­ teen  journals and  also runs  a  specialized printing  plant  and  four  bookstores, to the  University  of  Windsor  Press  which  has  two  books in  print,  supports  two journals,  and  plans expansion on the basis of a financially successful co-publica­ tion with  McGraw-Hill of Marshall  McLuhan's Interior  Landscape.
The  largest of the francophone members is Laval, with 337 books in print last year,  a  number  exceeded  within  Quebec  only by Fides and  Editions  du  Jour. One of the members functions  bilingually:  Les Editions de l'Universite  d'Ottawa publishes in either  French  or  English  (mostly the  former), or  both,  depending on author  and subject. Five of the members besides Windsor  have been founded since the expansion of higher education  began in earnest in the late  I 950s:  Me­ Gill-Queen's  ( Ig6o), Montreal  ( Ig62), Manitoba  ( I967), Quebec  ( Ig6g), and British Columbia  ( I97 I). Two  are sponsored by specialized  institutions that  are not  universities, the  Pontificial  Institute  of  Medieval  Studies and  the  Ontario Institute  for  Studies  in  Education, both  in Toronto.  In  addition,  several other universities  and  university  departments   have  small  publishing  programmes  of their own.



Y.T ALL   IS NOT  WELL in the ivy-covered publishing  houses. Strains  and  cracks are  appearing, not from foreign competition  but  notably  be­ cause of government  policies-a legacy of past expansion  and  current  austerity.


22

THE UNIVERSITY PRESSES



Parts  of the  story  are  well known,  although  their  impact  on  university  presses may still not  be fully  recognized. The  sixties were a  heady  decade  in  all  uni­ versity endeavours: money  was available,  staffs were  growing,  buildings-in­ deed  whole  campuses-were mushrooming  to  meet  the  high  school  students clamouring   for  admissions;  libraries  enjoyed  budgets  such  that  a  large  com­ mercial reprint  publisher could boast, "I can sell any book I offer," and  mean it; university press sales and establishments swelled as part of  the tide, and for many a university without  its own imprint  a press promised  prestige and  a channel  for its faculty's  publications.  That   was the  picture  across  North  America,  on  both sides of the border. Then  a general disenchantment  set in. Public funds were cut. Library  budgets  in both  the  United  States  and  Canada were slashed.  Research libraries  are  the  bread-and-butter  accounts  of   university  press sales, and  their declining power to purchase affected not only  new books (titles were not bought, or were bought  singly instead  of in multiple  copies as before)  but  also backlist sales and  journal subscriptions  (the latter already hard  hit by institutional  photo­ copying). Sales volume dropped  and  inventory mounted  as stocks of old titles re­ mained  relatively static.  The  parent  universities, fighting  across-the-board   bud­ get pressures, were unable to increase subsidies to the presses to make up for de­ clining sales revenue, and  at  the same time the costs of publishing-of  salaries, of typesetting, paper, printing, and binding, of promotion  (particularly by mail), and  of order  fulfilment-rose sharply.
Non-economic  pressures grew as well. With  the output  of a growing  profess­ oriate and  the needs of expanding  disciplines such as environmental science and Canadian studies, the number  of manuscripts submitted  to  university  presses in­ creased sharply.  Not all received or deserved serious consideration,  but the num­ ber of those that  did  at Toronto  roughly trebled  in  a little over a decade.  This is a  rate  that  paralleled  remarkably  the  growth  of teaching  staff  in  Canadian universities over the same period. There is no reason to believe that  the quest for publication  will decline in the near future.  It  may be anticipated rather  that  it will continue  to  rise as manuscripts  now  in  preparation reach  fruition,  for  to­ day's scholars seem to be more productive than  in the  past, possibly because the prospects of publication  had until recently been improving so greatly. One  might also anticipate  that,  as academic  jobs grow scarce, publish-or-perish  will become more intense and  would-be  authors accordingly more aggressive. The  university press is caught  between two opposing forces -a growing demand  for more pub­ lication,  and  declining  ability  to carry on subsidized  programs  even  at  existing

THE  UNIVERSITY PRESSES



levels. A year ago  university  publishers were talking about  the  "crisis"  in  their profession. Today  they are beginning to talk about  a long-term crunch.
How  can  this  gloomy  picture  be related  to the  rosy statistics of a  few pages back?  Part  of the  answer  is, of course, that  publishing commitments   (and  par­ ticularly  scholarly  publishing  commitments)   are  not  made  and  met  within  a single year;  many  of  the  titles  brought  out  in  I972  were  promised,  if   not  in actual  production,  before  the  financial  picture  darkened.  Also, the  increasing proportion   of  university-press  titles in  English-language  publishing  comes  in  a context  of cutbacks  by  publishers  in  the  trade  and  educational  areas.  But  the most important reason why university presses have so far successfully weathered the  storm  has  been  the  prompt  and  generous  reassurance they  have  received from their  principal  non-university  patrons. When the problem was set out at an unprecedented   meeting  in January 1972  between  the country's  university  pub­ lishers and  the  Joint  Committee  on  Publication  of the  Humanities   and  Social Science  Research   Councils  of   Canada,   both  councils  agreed  to  increase  sub­ stantially  their  support  for  book publication,  to make the terms of that  support more  flexible, and  to  channel  it  whenever  possible to  Canadian houses  rather than  abroad.  Their  parent  body, the  Canada  Council, at  about  the  same  time substantially  increased  its support   to  learned  journals.  University  presses have also been  strengthened by other  government  support  to the  book publishing  in­ dustry:  they share  in  block grants  under  a  program  instituted  by the  Canada  Council;  those in Quebec  receive provincial  grants  for books; those in  Ontario may be expected  to be eligible for such assistance as may be provided  as a result of that  province's  recent  Royal  Commission report.  Both Toronto  and  MeGill­ Queen's also received  last  year  unexpected  large  grants  from  the  Andrew  W. Mellon Foundation, intended  primarily to support  publication of works in the humanities  by younger scholars.
With  such  patronage, the  convulsions that  have  racked  presses south  of the border have not yet been evident here. In the United States two university presses have been closed down, and  a third avoided extinction only after vigorous lobby­ ing by the teaching  staff of its university  (two of the most vociferous  petitioners being professors whose manuscripts  it had  rejected!)  ; the director  of  one of the most prestigious of all American  university presses has been fired, in  part  for a superfluity  of red ink;  and,  overall, staffs have  been cut, fewer books  published, and  belts tightened.  No  presses have been closed in  Canada,   but  budgets  have been pared  and  personnel  reduced.  There  is less talk on two or  three  Canadian

THE UNIVERSITY PRESSES



campuses of starting  new presses, and at least one of the smaller  existing presses seems to have deferred  plans  to appoint  a full-time director.
There  has never  been  much  fat  in university publishing,  even  at  the  best of times, and government  support  cannot be expected to grow indefinitely. The con­ flicting  pressures that   began  with  the  seventies may  be  expected   to  continue through  the decade.  What  then  will this mean  for authors  and  readers  of uni­ versity press books?
The scholarly author  who offers a fresh, original approach  to a significant sub­ ject should  never  have  great  difficulty in  reaching  print.  In  general,  however, we might expect that  it will become more difficult to be published. The costs of appraising  a manuscript  are sizable-not only in the time and salaries of editors, but  equally  in  the  hours  and  energy  required  of outside  scholarly  readers  who must  divert  efforts from  their  own writing  and  research  to  advise  on  the  pub­ lishability  of others'.  More  and  more  manuscripts  of  apparently marginal  im­ portance  thus  may  have  to  be summarily  dismissed.  The  doctoral  thesis, with few exceptions, will more frequently  be rejected  without  detailed  reading,  for so few theses are  truly  books, and  the work  required  to  revise most  of them  into books is so great,  that  publishers can little afford these days to scour the doctoral desert for seeds and  nurture the  few  they  encounter  that   hold  the  promise  of germination.  More  and  more,  also, it  may  be expected  that  manuscripts  from outside Canada  will be given a low  priority unless they fit precisely into a press's area  of publishing  concentration -for example, into  an  established series. This is a development  which gives no  cause for satisfaction,  but  only embarrassment, in view of the liberal support Canadian  scholarship has received in the past from U.S.  foundations,  the  importance of  the  U.S.  market  for  Canadian scholarly books, and  the  desirability  of international recognition  for  Canadian imprints. But  the  first  priority  must  be  to  Canadian   scholars. As  well,  we  may  expect presses to concentrate  their efforts in areas of demonstrated  strength  where  they already  have reputations and  substantial  backlists, and  to  be more  reluctant  to publish in fields new to them,  no matter  how deserving.
As subsidizing funds grow relatively more scarce, standards of acceptance  may
reluctantly  have to be adapted. When subsidization is unavailable,  the book that is published may not necessarily be the most significant but the one most likely to find a market to cover costs of publication. University presses will also find it in­ creasingly tempting, if not essential, to publish some books that  do more than re­ cover their  own  costs-that may,  in  fact,  make  a  substantial  contribution   to overhead  and  even  generate  net  revenue  that  can  be  turned  into  subsidizing

THE  UNIVERSITY PRESSES



funds  for  other  works. A  certain  number  of university press titles  have  always reached  the general  bookstore. Such books are for the most part  edited  and  pro­ duced  to  the  same  standards that  govern  all  university  publishing,  but  to  the extent  that  a  press  must  concentrate its  efforts  on  their  development  it  may vitiate  its principal  efforts.  (This  is not  to gainsay the fact  that  a  work  of im­ peccably serious research, such  as The  Vertical  Mosaic, may start  life  as  a sub­ sidized short-run  title and  end  up selling 72,000 copies.)
We may also anticipate that  those scholarly books which do receive serious consideration,  and  which eventually are  judged suitable for publication,  will find their  passage further  slowed by economics. They will have to take their  place in line,  not  only until  the funds  that  may  be necessary to subsidize  them  can  be found,  but  also until  the  editors,  whose numbers  are likewise restricted  by lack of money, can  handle  them  through  copy-editing and  proof.
University  presses are  introducing new techniques into their  book production to  help  reduce  some costs. Some  are  using computer  typesetting  where  applic­ able,  most  usefully to  date  in  the  publication  of complex  bibliographies. Some are  using  computer-assisted   phototypesetters,  and  other  forms  of  "cold  type" where  possible, instead  of the  traditional but more  expensive hot-metal  setting. They  are  moving  away  from  the  codex,  into  microfilm  publication   and  occa­ sional excursions into multimedia. Along with such innovation,  they are  provid­ ing  a  continuing   example  of  typographic  excellence, as  they  have  for  years through  the work of Robert  Reid at McGill and more recently of Allan  Fleming at Toronto. (The  only Canadian book ever  to win a gold medal  at  the famous Leipzig competition  for the year's "most  beautiful  book in the world"  was pub­ lished by a university press in  1g6g.)
In  spite of these efforts,  books which meet high standards  of production  will
cost considerably  more  in  the  future,  although  comparison  of their  prices with those of a  bottle  of good Scotch  or  burgundy  suggests that  the  book-buyer  has little  to complain  of. In  the  production  of other  books, the  upward  price spiral will be moderated  by compromise.  More economical paper  and  binding  will be used. Designs will be standardized. More books will be produced  by "strike-on"
-a euphemism   which  means  typewritten,   whether  by  a  sophisticated   tape­
driven machine  whose product  cannot  be easily distinguished from hot-metal typesetting,  or by standard office machines operated  by the  author  or  his  secre­ tary  to  the  publisher's  specifications.  More  often,  tabular   material,  computer printouts,  or appendices  may be published in future on microfiches tucked into a package at  the  back of the  book to complement  the  printed  text;  there  will be

THE UNIVERSITY PRESSES



initial inconvenience, but the economics of micropublication  will enable authors to present documentation to an extent never before practicable.
The  kind of creative compromise that  may become more common  is exempli­ fied by  a  process developed  in  the  Printing   Department  of  the  University  of Toronto   Press. With  a relatively simple adaptation of present  equipment, it  is possible to produce reprints of books in quantities of as few as fifty copies, and to sell them  at  prices acceptable  to libraries  (six to seven cents  a  page)  if not  par­ ticularly  to  individuals.  This  process has  been  applied  to  a  number  of out-of­ print  Toronto  titles and  to selected works of  nineteenth-century Canadian  liter­ ature,  none of which could support  a normal reprinting.  The  volumes that  result from this development  are somewhat less than pleasing aesthetically, but they are fully readable;  and  with them the term "ojp"  may in time be erased from  pub­ lishing and  a corpus  of otherwise  unavailable  early  Canadian literature   be de­ posited in university and  other  reference libraries.
There  has been no suggestion that  editorial  standards  should  be permitted  to suffer a parallel  compromise. A scholarly publisher stands or falls on the quality of his editorial  judgment  and  performance.  Yet pressures may be expected  to be reflected here as well, despite the best intentions, for no increase in staff has been possible that  is comparable  to the growth in demands  upon the presses. Less time may be available  to help authors  to develop their manuscripts,  and  in other  ways editors may in future  appear  less accommodating.  Presses are less able  today  to absorb the cost of an author  who cannot make up his mind,  who depends  unduly on the editor  to catch errors in spelling or citation,  who debates  overlong  about the use of illustration,  who holds up proofs or asks unreasonable  changes in them. Increasing  sophistication  of printing  technology is coupled  with  increasing  cost of delay and  alteration.
There  is a small paradox  here, however, for as long as neither author  nor  pub­ lisher wants  any  revision -in  fact  no editing-new  technology  does  make  it possible to disseminate material  that could not support  a traditional style of pub­ lication.  The  old  joke about  a  journal  of  unpublished  manuscripts  is  coming true: at least one firm in the United States is prepared  to publish works in micro­ form, by photographing typescript provided directly by the author  and selling the result  to scholars and  libraries.  There  is a  parallel  industry  devoted  to  issuing documents  and  out-of-print  works in  microform  in  near-epidemic  proportions.  University presses will have to be wary of entering uncritical  parapublishing.
One  further  development  may  be expected,  although  it  may  be approached with  some reluctance.  This  is greater  co-operation  between  presses on  a  more

THE  UNIVERSITY PRESSES



formal  and  intimate   level than  in  the  past.  A  trend  is evident  in  the  United States toward  consolidation  and  the creation of regional presses, such as the Uni­ versity Press of Kentucky  which serves nine campuses in its state.  In  1g6g  Mc­ Gill  and  Queen's   Universities  crossed provincial  boundaries  to  pool  their  re­ sources on a parity  basis in a single university press with  administrative  offices in Montreal  and editorial  offices on both campuses. (This experiment  was described in detail  by the director  of that  press, Robin  H. Strachan,  in Scholarly  Publish­  ing, January 1971.)  There  has been some talk  of a  press to serve a number  of universities in the Atlantic  provinces, and  it  does  not seem unreasonable  (to  an easterner  at any rate)   that  some of the existing Western presses and  publication centres might yet join forces in some manner. The fonn  of co-operation  can vary considerably, and  can  ensure that  individual  universities retain  autonomy  in the one and  only critical  area,  the  decision to publish. This  is the  nature  of a pro­ posal for  a  new  Universities  of  Ontario   Press, which  would  provide  a  central shared  facility for  warehousing,  order  fulfilment, and  (if desired)  editorial  and production  services  for  presses that  are  now in  operation  or  may  be started  at any  or  all  of  the  fourteen   Ontario  universities,  while  leaving  the  individual  presses to  decide which  books they will sponsor, all of which  will bear  the indi­ vidual  press's own imprint.  There  are powerful reasons for such a move. Econ­ omies  of scale operate  in  scholarly  publishing  as in  any  other  business. It  has been suggested that  maximum  efficiency is reached at net billed sales of just over a  million dollars, which is not a realistic goal for most Canadian presses.
Some years ago  the  director  of  Harvard   University  Press gave  a  classic  de­ scription  of the aim  of the scholarly  publisher and  the constraints  within  which he must  operate: "A  university  press exists to  publish  as many  good  scholarly books as possible short  of bankruptcy." The  edge of financial  bankruptcy  seems closer today than  it has sometimes in the past, but  it can  be  controlled  by tight accounting,  conservative decisions, and  cutbacks as necessary in publication  pro­ grams. There  is an  intellectual  insolvency, however, that  will grow if such  fin­ ancial  measures should  create  a serious gap  between  what  the  university presses should  be publishing  to meet the needs of their  community,  and  what  it is pos­ sible for them  to publish.  Canadian scholarly  publishers, with support  from  uni­ versities  and  government,  are  endeavouring  to  ensure  that   every  worthwhile manuscript  they receive does  become a book. Their  continuing  success is a goal to which the country's scholars and  academic  administrators,  as well as its uni­ versity publishers, must address themselves.

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



Anne Woodsworth







OSE "hippie  <ags", known  commonly  "-' undcrgmund papers, were never very far under  Canadian  ground. To  earn  the name  "under­ ground", papers should  be published out of suitcases and  dank  basements. They must be secretive as well as in opposition. Perhaps it is because  these conditions did  not apply that  the  papers,  shortly after  they were  established,  began  to call themselves opposition/alternative papers or papers of  the  counter-culture rather than  underground  papers.
Although  they live short turbulent  lives, alternative  papers  do provide  readers with their addresses or box numbers, encouraging  feedback,  donations  and  sub­ scriptions.  They  face  libel  suits,  convictions  for  pornography  and  are  closely watched,  yet officially ignored,  by the establishment.  Still the  papers survive­ kept alive by subscriptions from libraries -biting  the hand  that feeds them.
The  papers are most often  managed  communally. The  runs  are small,  norm­ ally four  to five thousand.  A circulation  of  Io,ooo  in Canada bespeaks  a well­ established alternative  paper.  In its prime the Georgia Straight  managed  to reach that  figure. The  Other  Woman, a relatively new women's  liberation  paper,  sells perhaps  one third  of its issues to cover printing  costs and  uses the  rest for  pro­ motion.
Many alternative  papers live to publish only a few issues. Some disappear  al­
together  after  a short  time;  some  merge with  one  or  two  others,  while  others after a year or so will split and become two papers. Often,  one or two individuals will start several papers in quick succession. All favour change  to varying degrees and  by various  means;  all  oppose the  political  and  social  status  quo,  and  all question solidly entrenched  people, ideas and institutions. For example, Toronto's Satyrday  called  itself  "a  forum  for  hip  people ... with  one  commitment. To

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



truth." (August,  1968). Vancouver's Partisan stated that it "is dedicated  to pub­ lishing  the  truth   about   what  is  happening   in  our  communities."   Being  more activist and  radical,  the latter  added  "The  Partisan  Party  is dedicated  to doing something  about  it."  (June 22,  1971).




IT IS EASIER to state  what alternative  papers are not, than  it is to  define what  they  are.  They  did  not  grow out  of  the  socialist  papers  that flourished at the beginning of the century. Nor are they sprouts of the beat poetry
and  little magazines of the fifties. The  movement from which  they grew spread from  California  and   New  York  in  1964.  Underground  papers,  as  they  were called,  began  to  appear   in  most  major  U.S.  and  Canadian  cities  until  now papers  of  the  counter-culture are  firmly  entrenched  in  most  countries  of  the western  world.
By 1966,  Canada had its first underground newspaper, Satyrday, produced  in and  for  the  Yorkville  district  of  Toronto.   Other   cities quickly  followed  with flower children,  and  appropriate districts and  newspapers. The  papers  reflected the psychedelic frenzy of the time, with splashing colours, Alice B. Toklas  recipes and  price and  quality reports on street drugs. By 1972 the papers reached  a fluid and  fairly stable  number  of  two  hundred  that  were alive  and  publishing.*  It seems impossible to arrive at an accurate  figure since some publish only one issue and then die; others, through  amitosis, will become two (viz.-Georgia Straight and Grape) and several will merge to become one-such as Bellyful, Velvet Fist and The  Other  Woman joining forces and publishing now as The  Other  Woman.
Over  the past six years, Canada's alternative  papers, their  messages and  their
audiences  have changed  a great  deal.  Love-ins changed  to sit-ins. The  counter­ culture  learned  the  power  of  controlled  violence and  forcible  demonstrations.  During  that  period the newspapers were catalysts for social change,  a part of the change  and  a  rippled  mirror  reflecting  the  changes that  took  place. They  also became a unique source of information  about  events -future,  present and  past. Today,  they are not only the sole recorders of the underground-alternative­ counter-culture movement,  but  also the  harbingers of it.

*For the only listing of Canadian  papers attempted to date see The  Alternative  Press in  Canada;  a  checklist.  (University of Toronto  Press, 1972. 74  p.)  compiled by A. Woodsworth. Ed.

go

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



ALTHOUGH a few papers in the U.S.A.  have been become financially  lucrative  ventures,  profit-making  is never  the  aim  of an  alternative newspaper.  They  are  characterized  instead  by wanting  to  change  the  environ­ ment-social, political, physical, etc. Usually they assume a watchdog stance over issues involving deprived segments of their communities. A sampling of headlines will show where they aim their scatterguns:
"Big business -the real criminal"
"Compost  power"
"Developers  and  the Canadian State"
"Don't get trapped  ... boycott Kraft  products" "How  to grow psylocybin"
"Interviews with speed users"
"Kraft slices Canadians" "Organic gardening  special" "Prison: a  mirror  of sexist society" "Rotten bus service"
"Sexism in children's  books"
"Strike  busting at Brantford"
In  content,  alternative  newspapers  resemble their  hated  oppositiOn, carrying hard  news, editorials,  book, music, film and  theatre  reviews and  recipes. Lack of sports  and  financial  sections  is compensated  for  by extensive  sections  on  free things,  events-notices and  reports  on  drugs  on  the  market.  Decent  layout  is rare;  photographs,  comics and other illustrations are largely amateurish, perhaps even  deliberately  so.  Most  are  produced  by cheap  offset  with  the  newspaper staff sharing  the writing,  typing and  pasting-up  of camera-ready  copy. Inclusion of many  photos and  colour printing  bespeaks an established  paper  with  regular advertisers, subscribers or else outside financial  backing.
A bare  bones 24-page  issue with  no photographs  can  be produced  at  a  cost of $250  for  4,ooo  issues. It  is therefore  easy for  every mini-movement,  co-op house or messiah  with  a  message to spread  their  alternative  messages through the world.  With  the proliferation  of OFY  and  LIP  grants  the  task of gathering cash for the printer  has become still easier.




ALTHOUGH not as bland  as the  yellow press, alternatives conform  with one another  by having their own biases and  jargon-filled  rhetoric.

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



As  George  Woodcock so  aptly   put  it  in  writing  for  Dreadnaught, "An  under­ ground paper  which,  like The Mysterious East, avoids counter-establishment con­ formity  is rare  indeed  and  to be treasured as evidence that  there  are  people  who stand  outside  the  two  orthodoxies of our  time." (October 1970,  p. 5)
Perhaps the  adjectives used  by  the  establishment to  describe  the  papers   best indicate the  variety   of  their  free-wheeling prose.  Alternative papers   have  been labelled  amateurish, audacious, blasphemous, boring,  colourful, devoid  of humor, exciting,  humourous, informative, irreverant, libellous, lively, mean-minded, mes­ sianic,   obscene,   psychedelic,    refreshing,  revolutionary,   scatological,   satirical, smutty, undisciplined and  vindictive. Style within  one paper  can  vary enough  to cover all those adjectives and  can  range  from  excellent  prose and  poetry  to non­  sensical  strings   of  four-letter  invectives.  Few  papers  distinguish  themselves   by been  consistently  literate.
The   rhetoric  is usually  consistent  with  the  message  imparted:

An important thing  that  brothers and sister who dig Red Morning  can be doing is helping us get our  paper  out. For our people to really serve the people we need to know more about  people's struggles around  the city. That  means rapping  with us and writing about  what's  coming down in your community ... And it means turn­ ing on more people to the  revolution  by making sure our  paper  gets out  to  more brothers  and  sister. The  pigs don't  want  to see that  happen ... They  don't  want people  picking  up  on  revolutionary   ideas  because  they  lead  to   revolutionary actions.  (Red  Morning, Summer  1971,  p. 8)

With  slang-ridden,  free-wheeling writing   they  attack  -like Guerrilla,  com­
menting on the  demise  of Toronto's Telegram and  emergence of the  Sun:

And so the game has been played out, the Telegram  is kaput  with its subscription list going to the Star,  for TEN  MILLION? and  out of the  dust  and  subterfuge, the dawning  of an archaic  new day, the right wing rays of a devious SUN.  (Nov.
10, 1971,  p. 8)

And  get  attacked:

Guerrila  and  the  Georgia  Straight  have  come under  attack.  A  man  in  a  small Ontario town was arrested  for obscenity after  displaying  a comic from  Guerrilla. Two  Toronto   lawyers  went  down  and  the  judge,  apparently   afraid  of  another Skopes Monkey Trial,  dismissed the case on a preliminary  motion.
Meanwhile  in  Moosomin  Saskatchewan  a  teacher  was fired  for  displaying  a
Georgia  Straight to her students ... (November  10, 1971, p. 14) Sometimes the  satire  is excellent  and  devastating:

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



At my school we even grade  people on how they read  poetry. That's like grading people on how they make love. But we do it. In  fact,  God  help  me, I do it. I'm the Adolph  Eichman  of English 323. Simon Legree of the poetry plantation. Tote that  i-amb! Lift that  spondee!
(Excerpt  from "The  Student  as a Nigger", originally published  in  the  L.A.  Free Press, reprinted  in  many  Canadian papers  and  the  cause of censorship  in  many schools, colleges and  universities across the country.)




l:E EFFECT of the  alternative press on  Canadian society  is difficult to measure  for it is, at once, the recorder  and  the catalyst  of events.
The   world,  including Canada,  has  changed   much  since  underground  news­ papers  first  appeared and  the  papers  themselves  are  part  of  that  change.  They  pounce  on  the  causes  and  perpetrators of social  ills. The  members  of the  small, vocal  and  often  militant groups  that   the  papers   represent,  practise  what   they preach. They  eat  the  organic foods  they  teach  people  to  grow,  take  the  drugs they  write  about  and  arrange demonstrations in support of  the  unemployed, the exiled  and   the  unliberated. Being  gadflies,  goading  naturally  everything  that  moves  conservatively and  slowly,  they  elicit  strong  reactions  from  the  establish­  ment.
Two  weeks after  Abbie Hoffman's  Steal This  Book was banned  by Canada  Cus­ toms, Toronto  mayor  William  Dennison attacked  the  free bi-weekly paper  Anti­ mony for  printing  excerpts from  the volume's guide  to shoplifting.
The Toronto  Star of August 6 quoted Dennison as saying Antimony was either a maoist or  communist  sheet advising  young  people on  techniques  to  destroy  our whole economic  system and  step  back into  a collective  jungle. They  are  funded by the federal government  and  the silent majority  just sits back and  does nothing to stop it.  (Tabloid, August  1971, p. 10)

Whom   do  the  papers   reach   with  their   messages?  Certainly  the   converted; probably  those  they  attack; and  infrequently those  for  whom  they  fight-wel­ fare  recipients,  lower  working  classes, strikers,  Indians, and  repressed  women.
In  short  they  provide  a small  segment  of our  population with  a cheap means of expression  and  communication, albeit  often  tediously  repetitive. It  is the  per­ sonalities   of  its  staff   that   shape   the   content,  strength  and   impact  of   any given  paper. The   waves  made   by  the  papers   are  sometimes   big -sometimes small.  If an  alternative idea   reaches  the  mass  media   and   the  mainstream of society's conscience,  then  the  papers  usually drop  the  issue.

33

UNDERGROUND OR ALTERNATIVE



Are the alternative  papers really harbingers,  running  before the major  cultural movements? Do they for a brief time present alternatives  to the status  quo  and then, when society absorbs or is changed  by the alternatives, seek new directions? Even  that  varies. Some papers  die once their spewings have  been swept  up  by society. Other  papers  and  editors seek new issues and  new frontiers  on which to fight.
And what of the future?  What direction will the alternative press and the move-
ment  take? Perhaps some of the current  headlines herald it: "Beyond free schools to critical schools"
"If the structure  doesn't fit we must change it" "Politics  is a no no"
"Towards an authentic  Canadian left"
But perhaps  these are not the new directions. Anyone can guess and  anyone can be right. The strong  pro-drug  and  anti-war  messages are now gone, having  been replaced  by comments  on communities, ecology, and labour  problems.  Whether these issues represent  a future  direction or a transition  period can be determined only retrospectively and  in two or three years.
Although  the crystal ball is hazy, one thing is certain-in  whatever  direction
the  papers  choose to  move, it  will be contrary  to, divergent  and  distinct  from that  which is and  has been. That is because a thing, to be alternative, must  by definition  be different.
























34

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU LIVRE QUEBECOIS



Max Dorsinville



D.s LITTERAIRES  jetant  leur  devolu  sur  le Quebec  con­
temporain  ant  voulu  reconnaitre  par  le biais du  livre !'expression  de la culture
d'un   petit  peuple  devenu  agissant  dans  !'articulation  de  sa  quete   d'identite. L'equation art  et societe servit d'axiome.  L'ecrivain,  jusqu'alors sujet  a des trau­ matismes et a des crises d'atermoiements dus a !'indifference  du milieu natal pour
la vie des lettres, derechef devenait  temoin de son temps et porte-parole  des siens. L'art  reflete dans le miroir de l'acte d'ecriture  et son produit,  le livre, recuperait les tenants  et  les aboutissants  d'une  societe en  pleine  revolution,  dut-elle  n'etre que "tranquille".
Avait-on  raison d'accorder une telle importance  au  role du livre et a celui de
l'ecrivain eu egard  aux realites socio-economiques, etonnamment peu connues, auxquelles est soumis le livre quebecois? Une  analyse reposant  sur  un  historique des centres de production et de diffusion et sur la fortune  du livre en tant que pro­
duit economique  nous permettrait d'apporter des elements de reponse a une telle
question et d'esquisser la congruence de l'ecriture dans l'esthetique  contemporaine quebecoise.
L'histoire du livre, comme celle de nombreuses autres  activites dans  la societe
quebecoise, ne commence  pas avec les annees 6o, et encore  mains  avec  l'eclate­ ment  des premieres bombes du F.L.Q.  Elle s'inscrit, par contre,  dans !'inevitable grand  dessein clerical dont  l'histoire  des idees et des institutions  au  Quebec  n'a pas fini de rendre compte  tout  en l'assumant.  C'est  un  lieu  commun  d'affirmer que  parmi  les multiples  consequences  de  la  Conquete  le  temps  d'arret impose pendant  un siecle a la vie intellectuelle par la cessation d'echanges  culturels entre le Quebec  et la  France  s'averera  l'une  des plus  facheuses.  La  nourriture  intel­
lectuelle  vehiculee  par  le  livre  ne  parvenait  pas de  la  France.   Ainsi  un  petit

35

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS



peuple,  conquis selon d'aucuns et abandonne  selon d'autres,  oblige de se replier sur lui-meme,  delaisse les villes pour  les campagnes,  et, fidele aux  prescriptions des seuls dirigeants  qui lui restent,  abandonne  la pensee pour  la foi et se donne
entierement   avec  une  exaltation   toute  mystique-n'arrivant  pourtant   pas   a
masquer  les tourments  de  la  depossession-aux  humbles  travaux   de  la  terre, ample sein devant  proteger les siens et assurer la survivance. Du moins telle veut la mythologie qui  resume  pour  certains  l'histoire  du  Quebec  d'avant les annees
6o. Qu'en  est-il dans les faits?
S'il est vrai d'une  part  que faute  de renseignements precis sur les mouvements d'opinion  des masses populaires  de l'epoque  il est difficile pour  le chercheur  de demontrer  la faussete d'une  telle representation,  il n'en  demeure  pas moins que les recherches de  Claude  Galarneau sur les relations franco-quebecoises  durant
la  periode  q6o-I 8 I 5  permettent d'affirmer  que, suite a la  Conquete,  les elites
quebecoises ne ressentirent  jamais un traumatisme  tel qu'elles  abdiquerent toute vie intellectuelle, tout  contact  avec la France, et chercherent  refuge dans le buco­ lisme. Le Seminaire  de Quebec  ( 1765)  et le College de Montreal   ( 1767), aux­ quels s'ajouteront les Colleges de Nicolet (I8o3) et de Saint-Hyacinthe (I809), assurent l'enseignement  au niveau secondaire dans un milieu qui en 1789 compte qo,ooo ames. La bibliotheque  du Seminaire de  Quebec  posscde 5,ooo volumes en  q82, dont  I,ooo  relevent des belles-lettres et de l'histoire et ont pour auteurs les Voltaire,  Diderot,  Rousseau,  Montesquieu  et  autres grands  esprits du  "siecle des lumieres".  La Bibliotheque  Publique  de Quebec  ( I 779)  a  I ,8 I 5 volumes sur ses  rayons  en   I 785  regroupant   l'eventail  des  grands   courants   de  pensee  de
l'epoque.  L'introduction de l'imprimerie  a Quebec  en  I764  par  William  Brown
( un  Americain!)  et  a  Montreal   en  I 776  par  Fleury  Mesplet   ( un  Fran  ais!)
donne  naissance  a la  presse periodique:  Brown fonde  en  I 764  La  Gazette  de
Quebec,  hebdomadaire bilingue,  tandis  que  Mesplet lance  dans  le meme genre en  I 778  La  Gazette  du  Commerce   et  Litteraire  qui,  devant  fermer  ses portes apres un an, reparaitra en  I 785 sous un nouveau  titre, La Gazette  de Montreal. Cette  presse periodique,  autant par le choix des nouvelles et des chroniques  que par ses editoriaux  et sa correspondance,  temoigne d'un  echange  continu  d'idees entre  la France  et son ancienne  colonie. En plus des resources des bibliotheques et du  lien maintenu  par  les imprimes,  Galarneau  souligne l'apport des voyages frequents  entre  I 760 et  I 793 des Canadiens  en France, la correspondance entre­ tenue  entre  les membres  de families rapatries  en France  et la  parente  restee au Canada, celle entre  les communautes religieuses des deux  cotes de  l'ocean,  et, finalement,  l'arrivee  entre  I793  et  I8o2  de  I5o  pretres emigres  fuyant  le Direc-

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS


toire dans les milieux de !'instruction  scolaire qu'ils rehausseront  a plus d'un  titre. Ces manifestations  de vigueur  intellectuelle resserrent les liens culturels  entre  les deux pays, et font mentir  le mythe de l'isolement du Quebec  dont  l'appetit  pour
la  vie de !'intellect  ne  commencerait  a etre  satisfait  qu'en   I 860  lorsque  parait
La Capricieuse, transportant le premier chargement  de livres fran<;ais a atteindre
le Quebec  depuis  I 7 6o.
Entre  I8oi  et  I8IO sept imprimeurs  publient  262 ouvrages. Les recherches  de Galarneau   dans  le commerce  du  livre sont  approfondies  par  Jean-Louis  Roy, lequel demontre  la continuite  historique  de l'industrie  naissante  tant  au  niveau de !'edition  que de la distribution  dans une etude  consacree  a la maison  Fabre.
Trente-sept   librairies  florissent  a  travers  la  province  entre   I 82 3  et   I 854;   la maison Fabre,  fondee  en  I 8 I 6 a Montreal  avec succursales dans  les principales
villes du Quebec, en est la plus importante.  Travaillant a l'interieur de la formule consacree a l'epoque,  Fabre  se lance dans !'edition  finance  par  le procede  de la souscription.  Cautionne   contre  toute  catastrophe   par  le  controle  absolu  de  la diffusion  de ses ouvrages  et  par  la  collaboration  etroite  maintenue   avec  l'im­ primeur  Perreault,   Fabre  publie  49 ouvrages  de  I827  a  I854·  Entre   I828  et
I 835 cinq titres paraissent annuellement.  La nature  de ces publications  reflete la
clientele  scolaire  a  laquelle  elles sont  destinees:   ouvrages  religieux  ou   peda­ gogiques rediges par les clercs par ailleurs pedagogues. En plus du  commerce  du livre, la  maison  Fabre  s'occupe  de la  vente  de  marchandises  diverses.  Mais  le marche  religieux semble privilegie puisqu'en  I 83o les articles  du culte  comptent pour  23.9 pour cent  de la vente annuelle,  alors qu'en   I 854  ce pourcentage  est plus que double et passe a 53·2 pour cent.
L'agencement de l'edition au commerce de librairie sous un meme toit structure
dans sa forme classique, sinon inaugure  par  Fabre,  donne les bases a l'industrie autochtone   qui  ne  se  renouvellent  qu'avec   la  deuxieme  moitie  du  vingtieme
siecle. Le  procede  est repris par  les librairies  Beauchemin  ( I 842)   a Montreal,
Garneau   (I 844)   a  Quebec   ( cette  derniere  ayant  sa  place  dans  l'histoire  lit­ teraire puisqu'elle  tient lieu de salon pour les Cremazie, Casgrain et Garneau qui forment  la  premiere  ecole litteraire  au  pays).  A  ces librairies  entre  des  mains laiques s'ajoutent celles des communautes  religieuses. En  s'accroissant,  ces  der­ nieres controlent  les secteurs des  de !'impression,  la diffusion et la  creation  dans un marche  essentiellement scolaire dont elles ont le monopole  jusqu'a  la creation du  Ministere  de !'Education en  I964.  (Nous  verrons plus loin  que le cas Fides, maison fondee en  I937, n'est pas le fruit du hasard.)  Vers la fin du dix-neuvieme siecle naissent les librairies  Granger  ( I 885)   et Deom  ( I 896).

37

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS




APRES LA    PREMIERE   GUERRE  mondiale  il se  produit  des changements provoques par !'evolution scientifiquc exigeant des publications specialisees, !'influence  de 1'Alliance Franc;aise, et  par  la  resurgence  du  monar­ chisme prone dans les ecrits de Maurice Barres, Charles Maurras  et autres diffuses par  1' Action  Franc;aise  dont   le  pendant   quebecois  est  1'Action   Canadienne­ Fran<_;aise animee  entre  autres  par  le Chanoine  Lionel Groulx. Ce  dernier  parti­  cipe d'un  autre  phenomene: les voyages d'etudes  de plus en  plus frequents  de Quebecois en France  qui ramenent  avec eux des influences se manifestant  comme facteurs de changement agissant sur le commerce du livre. Entre les deux guerres, la librairie  Pony ouvre ses partes avec l'exclusivite des livres Hachette; Wilson et Lafleur se specialise dans le commerce des livres  juridiques et medicaux;  1'Action Canadienne-Franc;aise,  rampant avec  la  tradition, fait  uniquement   de !'edition et, lorsqu'elle ferme ses partes ala suite d'une  faillite en 1937, son innovation  est poursuivie par  Valiquette.
Mais c'est  pendant la  periode  I939-I945, et  grace a  un  concours  de  circon­ stances, qu'il se fait  un deblocage et que le labeur  d'un  Albert Levesque et d'un  Bernard  Valiquette  visant !'implantation de maisons d'edition  franchement lai­ ques porte fruit.  La chute  de la France  obligeant  les maisons fran<_;aises  d'inter­ rompre  leurs activites,  les libraires  et editeurs  canadiens-franc;ais obtiennent   en I94I   du  gouvernement   fran<_;ais  les  droits  d'edition   et  de  re-impression  des oeuvres de Giraudoux, Claudel,  Mauriac, Gide, Martin  du Gard,  Proust, Valery et autres.  Les plus grands  noms de la litterature fran<;aise moderne sont par  con­ sequent  publics au  Quebec.  Une  pleiade de maisons sont fondees pour  repondre a la  demande -les Editions  de  l'Arbre,  Varietes,  Parizeau,  du  Uvrier, Vali­ quette-tandis que  les maisons  etablies-Beauchemin, Fides-prennent  un essor considerable. Cette periode marque les annees de gloire de !'edition  au pays. De I9I  a I945, pas mains de 22 editeurs produisent  I,725 titres. En  I943,  Pierre Tisseyre et ses collegues  fondent  la  "Societe  des  Editeurs  Canadiens   du  Livre Franc;ais".  Cependant  des  difficultes qui  vont  en  grossissant commencent  deja a poindre  en pleine  euphorie: problemes d'approvisionnement en  papier,  encre et autres  matieres premieres  dus au controle strict des prix et des denrees exerce par le gouvernment; problemes d'exportation vers le marche francophone  d'outre­ mer.  En   I 944,  le  gouvernement   gaulliste  en  exil  entreprend   des  pourparlers visant  le rapatriement des droits  cedes. A la liberation,  les editeurs  franc;ais sa­ bordent  la concurrence  quebecoise en reprenant  leur marche  qui lui est de  plus coupe par  des mesures protectionnistes.  L'une  apres l'autre,  en  I946 et  I947, les

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE QUEBECOIS



Editions de l'Arbre,  Valiquette, Parizeau, Varietes ferment  boutique.  Seuls Fides, Beauchemin,   Granger   et  autres   ayant  toujours   public  pour   la  chasse-gardee scolaire et  religieuse et, surtout,  pouvant  s'appuyer  sur  les revenus surs de  leur commerce de librairie echappent a la debacle. Sur 22 maisons d'edition  existant en  1945· 14 appartiennent a des communautes  religieuses.
La situation  de !'edition  et du  commerce de librairie  dans  les annees  d'apres­
guerre  jusqu'a  la  fin des annees  50 est homogene et  fixe:  les maisons  mariant ces deux activites conservent  leurs droits acquis dans le marche  traditionnel. La publication  accrue  de  romanciers  et  de  poetes tels que  Gabrielle  Roy,  Roger Lemelin, Anne Hebert  ne s'inscrit pas dans ce cercle ferme. Mais aussi bien avant
1960 qu'apres,  aucun editeur  quebecois n'a pu survivre dans le metier en publiant principalement  des oeuvres litteraires: la literature  etant  le secteur le mains ren­ table de l'industrie.1 En revanche, une maison comme Fides doit sa prosperite aux faits suivants qui resument  tres bien le profil du  marche  de l'epoque: elle est li­ braire  et editrice;  propriete  de la Communaute des Peres  de Sainte-Croix; pro­ duit  surtout  des manuels  scolaires  et  religieux  qu'elle  ecoule  dans  un  systeme scolaire dont  une partie  de la clientele lui est garantie  puisque  la  Communaute est proprietaire  d'institutions telles que  les Colleges  Sainte-Croix, Notre-Dame,  Saint-Laurent, le  Couvent  Basile-Moreau,  l'Oratoire  Saint-Joseph; ses auteurs  sont pour la plupart  des pedagogues de la Communaute qui  pour l'hagiographie destinee a l'Oratoire Saint-Joseph s'inspirent du thaumaturge de la Communaute, le Frere Andre;  finalement, etant propriete religieuse, elle ne paie pas de taxe.
Une rupture  du monopole  clerical et une diversification dans la production  et
dans  la vente du livre  permettront a l'industrie  quebecoise de sortir  de l'omiere dans  laquelle,  meme  apres  un  siecle d'intervalle,  les maisons  Fabre  et  Fides se retrouvaient. Lorsque l'on sait que cette diversification coincidera  avec l'eclosion d'une  litterature nationale  quebecoise, pour  ce faire il ne fallait  rien  de  mains qu'une   revolution  culturelle  reposant  sur  une  redistribution   des  rapports   entre l'Eglise et l'Etat, l'Eglise et !'Education, et l'Eglise et le Commerce.  Cette  revo­ lution,  "tranquille" au  depart,  debute en 1960 avec l'avenement au  pouvoir  du gouvemement  Lesage.  ( Soulignons toutefois que  meme s'il  est  certain que  cer­ taines mesures adoptees  par ce gouvemement  se reveleront indispensables pour la naissance d'une  franche  industrie  du  livre,  il n'en  demeure  pas  mains  que  la fondation  des Editions Hexagone  (1953), Lemeac  (1957), de l'Homme (1957)  est un signe de changements  qui se produisaient deja sous 1' "Ancien  Regime".)
Quels sont les facteurs  directs de changement  provoques par  le gouvemement
Liberal?  Premierement,  !'election  elle-meme du  gouvemement  Lesage dans  un


39

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS



contexte  politico-religieux  ou  feu  le  fondateur   et  chef  de  l'Union   Nationale, Maurice  Duplessis, put  se vanter  un  jour de "faire  manger  les eveques dans ses
mains"'  et  a I'issue  d'une  campagne electorale  ou  des cures  n'avaient cesse de
repeter  a leurs  ouailles que  l'enfer  etait  rouge  ( couleur  traditionnelle du  parti
Liberal)  et le ciel bleu  ( couleur de l'Union  Nationale)  signale au depart  la sepa­ ration  des pouvoirs de l'Etat et de l'Eglise qui par la suite ne pouvait  que suivre l'ordre logique d'une  telle premisse. Deuxicmement, le Bill 6o codifiant les recom­ mandations de  la  Commission  Parent  et creant  le Ministere  de  !'Education en I964  devait par  la refonte en profondeur  du systeme scolaire degager  celui-ci de la  tutelle  religieuse, le  moderniser  sinon  l'ameliorer  et,  tout  en  elargissant  les cadres  de  l'enseignement  superieur,  y permettre  une  accessibilite  plus  generale. Troisiemement, suite au rapport  de la Commission Bouchard sur le commerce du livre, en  I963,  le gouvernement  emet les  ordonnances  suivantes:   (I) les ecoles, colleges, bibliotheques  et autres  institutions  subventionnees  par  l'Etat  s'approvi­  sionneront  dorenavant aupres de librairies accreditees par  le gouvernement; ( 2) le gouvernement  exercera  un  pouvoir de regularisation sur la vente du  livre par
!'accreditation  des  librairies;   ( 3)   le  gouvemement   creera  une  Regie  du  livre du  Quebec  pour  veiller  a !'application de  ces reglements.  (Une   autre  recom­
mendation   principale  de  la  Commission,  soit  la  creation  d'une   societe  de  la
Couronne  devant  s'appeler  "Maison  du livre" et ayant  pour fonction  d'approvi­ sionner  en  exclusivite a titre  de  grossiste les librairies  accreditees  restera  lettre morte  face  a  I'opposition  des  libraires.)   Quatricmement,  la   Commission  re­
affirmera  de plus l'esprit et la lettre  du Bill 29 adopte en avril  I962  visant l'aide
a 1'edition dispensee par le Ministere des Affaires Culturelles, fonde en  I 96 I' qui
poursuivait   ainsi  !'initiative   du  Conseil  des  Arts  du  Canada  lancee  quelques annees auparavant. Finalement, le gouvemement  revoque, en  I965,  le privilege d'exemption fiscale des librairies et des maisons d'edition  religieuses.
C'est  ainsi que des I965,  sur  un total  de 38 maisons d'edition,  on  ne compte plus que  I 3 qui  soient  aux  mains  des religieux, soit 34.2  pour  cent  (en  I 945, le pourcentage  etait  de  63.6) . Six ans plus tard,  en  I 97 I' il ne reste  plus que
8 maisons d'appartenance religieuse sur un total de 42  ( soit  I 9 pour  cent). Il y
a done  lieu de croire que  de  I945  a I97I  il y eut  non seulement  croissance de
I 00  pour  cent  dans  le nombre  d'editeurs,  mais egalement  decroissance  de  plus de 300 pour  cent  dans  la  presence des clercs dans l'industrie  du  livre.  Pendant ce quart  de siecle, on observe parallelement  une nette diminution  dans la formu­ le traditionnelle libraire-Cditeur.  En  I 945,  86.4  pour  cent  des  editeurs  etaient egalement libraires  (I 9 maisons sur 22) ; en  I97 I, seulement  26.2  pour  cent  (II

LA PROBLEMATIQUE  DU LIVRE QUEBECOIS



maisons  sur 42)  adherent au  modele.  Un  fait troublant qui  n'existait pas en  I 945 et en  1965  est par  ailleurs  mis a  jour en  I97 I  :I 2 pour  cent  des maisons  d'edi­ tion  appartiennent a des interets  etrangers. Nous  y reviendrons.


Nous  POUVONS  done  constater   de  nets  changements dans le panorama de I'edition et de la vente du livre depuis  I 76o  jusqu'a 1960. Il con­
viendrait maintenant de cerner  schematiquement la carte  de !'edition, d'abord en faisant  un releve des maisons d'edition fondees avant  I96o  et encore  actives  (Tab­ leau  I)  pour  mieux  faire  ressortir  le contraste avec  celles fondees  depuis  I 960 (Tableau II). Ces tableaux reposent  sur  des donnees  officielles  recueillies  aupres du  Conseil  Superieur du  Livre  (qui  remonte a 196 I)  et  reftetent  les composantes de  cette  federation  d'organismes professionnels  du  livre  groupant  entre   autres
1'Association  des  Editeurs   Canadiens et 1'Association  des  Libraires du  Quebec.
(Quelques maisons  non-affiliees au  C.S.L.  sont absentes  des tableaux.)


TABLEAU

Maison  d'Edition        Date  de  Fondation      Lieu                      Propriete             Autres  Activites

Action Nationale
Beauchemin

I933
I842
Montreal
Montreal
Laique
Laique


Librairie
Bellarmin
I920
Montreal
Religieuse
Librairie
Cercle du Livre
I946
Montreal
Laique

de France




Deom
I896
Montreal
Laique
Librairie
Ecrits du
I95o
Montreal
Laique

Canada franc;ais




Edit. Officiel du Que.
I867
Quebec
Laique


Fides
Hexagone
I937
I953
Montreal
Montreal
Religieuse
Laique
Librairies
(8)
Edit. de !'Homme
I957
Montreal
Laique
Librairies
(2)
Inst.  de Rech.  Psycho.
I958
Montreal
Laique


Lemeac
Palm
I957
I948
Montreal
Montreal
Laique
Laique
Libraries
Librairie
(3)
Paulines
Pelican
I947
I956
Sherbrooke
Quebec
Relig.
Laique
Librairie

Presses H.E.C.
I957
Montreal
Laique


P.U.L.
I95o
Quebec
Laique
Librairie

Richelieu
I940
St-Jean
Relig.
Librairie


41

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU LIVRE QUEBECOIS



Sur  un  total  de  dix-huit maisons,  douze  sont  situees  a Montreal  ( 66.7  pour cent)  ; quatre appartiennent a des ordres  religieux  ( 2 2.2 pour  cent)  ; dix  posse-
dent   des  librairies  ( 55·5  pour   cent).  Comparons maintenant avec  le  tableau suivant.

TABLEAU  II

Maison  d'Edition
Actuelle
Date  de  Fondation

1970
Lieu
Montreal
Propriete
Laique
Autres  Activites
Aquila
1970
Montreal
Laique

Boreal
1968
Montreal
Laique

Cosmos
1969
Sherbrooke
Laique

Ecole Active
1968
Montreal
Relig.
Librairie
Education  Nouvelle
1964
Montreal
Laique
Edit. du Renouveau
1965
Montreal
Laique

Pedagogique





Etincelle
1972
Montreal
Laique


Ferron
1961
Montreal
Laique


F.I.C.
1964
Laprairie
Relig.


FM
1969
Laval
Laique


Format
1972
Montreal
Laq!ue


Fregate
1967
Montreal
Laique


Guerin
1967
Montreal
Laq!ue
Librairie

Harvest
1960
Montreal
Laique


Heritage
1968
St-Lambert
Laique


Hurtubise/HMH
1960
Montreal
Laique


Jeunesse
1962
Montreal
Laique


Edit. du Jour
1961
Montreal
Laique


Julienne
rg6s
Longueuil
Laique


Edit. La  Presse
1971
Montreal
Laique


Lidec
1965
Montreal
Laique
Libraries
(3)
Noroit
1971
St-Lambert
Laique


Parti  Pris
1963
Montreal
Laique


Phare
1966
Desbiens
Relig.


P.U.M.
1962
Montreal
Laique


P.U.Q.
1969
Montreal
Laique


Re-Edition  Quebec
1968
Montreal
Laique


Sablier
1968
Boucherville
Laique


Songe
1969
Ste-Adele
Laique


Sur  un  total  de  trente maisons,  vingt-et-une sont  situees  a Montreal ( 70  pour cent)  ; trois appartiennent a des ordres  religieux  ( 10 pour  cent)  ; trois  possedent
des librairies ( 10 pour  cent).

LA PR.OBLEMATIQUE DU LIVRE QUEBECOIS



Le decalage  entre  les periodes pre- et  post-soixante nous permet  de constater qu'il y a: (I) baisse accrue de la propriete religieuse (22.2  pour cent vs. IO pour cent) ; ( 2)  nette diminution dans le nombre des libraires..editeurs ( 55·5 pour cent vs.  I o  pour  cent) ;   ( 3)  Iegere augmentation   dans  la  localisation  montrealaise ( 66.7 pour cent vs. 70 pour cent). Mais une globalisation de la carte  de !'edition par  la  con jonction  des deux  tableaux  demontre  un  rythme  de  croissance  tres marque  depuis  Ig6o,  alors que  presque deux fois plus de  maisons sont  fondees par comparaison  avec la periode anterieure.  Cette quantification dans les raisons sociales peut s'averer  trompeuse neanmoins si l'on s'imagine qu'elle correspond necessairement au  rythme  de la production.  Nul doute  qu'a  !'exception  des  Edi­ tions du Jour,  Hurtubise et La Presse, les grands producteurs  se retrouvent parmi les maisons  fondees  avant   xg6o  (Lemeac,  Cercle  du  Livre  de  France,  Fides, Beauchemin, les Editions  de I'Homme). Les Editions de !'Homme, pierre  angu­ laire  du  groups  SOGIDES  (Societe Generale  d'Impression, de  Distribution  et d'Editions), arrivent  bans  premiers avec une  production  annuelle  de  I oo  nou­ veaux titres et un tirage global de 2  million de volumes. Ajoutons  que leur cata­ logue enumere  400 titres de plus de 250 auteurs.
Sur  un  total  de  quarante-huit  maisons existant  a  l'heure   actuelle   ( I973), treize ant des librairies  ( 2 7· 1 pour cent) ; sept appartiennent a des religieux ( 14.6 pour cent) ; trente-trois  sont situees a Montreal  ( 68.8 pour  cent) ; et trente exis­ tent depuis Ig6o  ( 62.5 pour cent).



  LUMIERE  de  la  croissance quantitative des  maisons d'edition  retracee  plus haut,  le livre quebecois, surtout  depuis  xg6o, semblerait temoigner effectivement  du  dynamisme de la societe dont  elle refteterait  la vita­ lite culturelle. Poursuivons la reftexion en s'interrogeant sur !'adequation de cette croissance et de certaines realites economiques controlant  la production  et la vente du livre au Quebec.
Nul autre  que  Pierre Tisseyre, un pilier de !'edition  au  Quebec  aussi bien par son role au sein de 1'Association des Editeurs  Canadiens  qu'en  tant  que president du Cercle du  Livre de France,  nous rappelle la conclusion de Robert  Escarpit  a la fin d'une  enquete  menee pour le compte de !'UNESCO: un marche  du livre viable  doit  reposer  sur  un  public  de  cinq  millions de  lecteurs.  Or  le  Quebec serait loin d'atteindre ce chiffre. Mais si les tentatives d'elargissement  du  marche de SOGIDES, des Editions du Jour et de La Presse (qui  viennent  de signer des

43

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE QUEBECOIS



accords  de co-diffusion et  de  co-edition  avec des maisons europeennes)   reussis­ sent,  il y a lieu de  croire  que  le tirage  moyen  d'une  oeuvre  litteraire   (jusqu'a present de 2,ooo a 3,ooo exemplaires)  se declupera  en fonction  du  marche  fran­  cophone international. Du meme coup, il serait possible pour l'edition  quebecoise de s'affranchir de la  tutelle  gouvernementale  de l'aide  a  l'edition  qui,  tout  en etant   necessaire  et  d'un   apport   certain   pour  l'essor de  l'industrie   durant  les annees  6o,  ne  constitue  pas  moins  une  forme  de  dependance   paralysante,  em­ pechant  les initiatives  qui  fondent  le progres et  la  croissance economiques  dans le monde  de la libre entreprise.
Bien que l'avenir  de l'industrie  depende  d'une  ouverture  sur  le marche  inter­
national,  et de !'acceptation de composer avec les lois du marche,  on voit mal a l'heure  actuelle comment  cet avenir echappe  a une problematique  fondamentale. Selon des chiffres fournis  par  le C.S.L.,  le marche  du livre quebecois  rapportait en  I97 I  des revenus s'elevant  a  40 millions de dollars. Au secteur  de  I'edition des manuels scolaires on attribue I 5 millions, a celui de la litterature generale,  2 millions 6oo,ooo;  tandis  que  la  vente  de  volumes etrangers  atteint   22  millions
40o,ooo  dollars. Les grossistes, par  ailleurs, se partagent  9 millions  I 35,000  dol­ lars.  Dans  les trois  domaines  principaux   de  l'industrie,  la  propriete  etrangere  s'etablit  a 40 pour cent dans l'edition  des manuels scolaires, 65 pour cent dans la distribution  et le commerce  de librairie  en gros, et  I5  pour  cent  dans  Ia vente au  detail  de librairie.  Cette  presence etrangere  se resume en  definitive  a  Ia pre­ ponderance  de Ia maison Hachette de France,  la plus grande entreprise  du livre au  monde   ( 6oo  millions  de  dollars  de  revenus  en   I970  vs. 300  millions  chez McGraw-Hill at  357  millions chez  Macmillan,  ses  deux  plus  proches  rivaux) .2
Depuis  I968,  et surtout  depuis !'acquisition  des librairies C.E.C.   (en  I970)   et
Garneau  (I 97 I), qui  lui est perrnise grace  a  un arrete  ministeriel  d'avril   I 97 I
fixant a so  pour cent le maximum  de capital-actions  pouvant etre detenu  par des
interets etrangers  dans  une entreprise  du livre au Quebec  beneficiant  de !'accre­ ditation  et de l'aide  a l'edition,  Hachette,  selon certains, viserait  a  monopoliser le marche.  Toujours  d'apres  les chiffres du C.S.L.,  Hachette  aurait,  en  I97I,  le controle effectif de 20 pour cent de l'edition scolaire (par  l'entremise du  C.E.C., le plus important editeur  de manuel  scolaire dans Ia province),  de  20  pour  cent egalement  de  Ia  distribution   en  gros  (par  ses Messageries  Internationales  du Livre),  de  I 5 pour cent du commerce de librairie, et de 2 2  pour cent de la vente des volumes franc;ais vendus au  Quebec.
L'opinion  publique  fut  alertee en  I972  par des libraires et des editeurs  diriges par  Jacques  Hebert,   president  des  Editions  du  Jour,  lequel  relanc;ant le debat

44

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE QUEBECOIS



qui en  Ig62  incita le gouvernement a creer la Commission Bouchard  reclama  la mise  en  application   d'un   arrete   ministeriel  fixant  les  limites  de  la  propriete etrangere  dans le commerce  du  livre a 20 pour cent du  capital-actions, tout  en faisant  planer  la menace  certaine  d'etouffement  du  livre quebecois  en  tant  que bien culturel  une fois que celui-ci serait soumis au monopole  d'Hachette dans la distribution  en  gros aussi bien  que  dans  le commerce  de  librairie.  On  affirma que  la  maison  Hachette n'etant  preoccupee  que  par  les  gros  sous  preferait mousser la  vente  de  ses propres  produits.  En  achetant  le  C.E.C.,  elle  demon­ trait  du  reste que seule la production  scolaire, financierement  rentable, l'interes­ sait;  tandis  qu'elle  manifestait   une  indifference  totale  a  l'egard   de  la  produc­ tion litteraire,  l'enfant  pauvre  de l'industrie.
Peu  importe  d'entrer dans  les details de  toute  cette  affaire.  L'histoire  d'Ha­
chette, un cas d'espece, n'est pas differente de celle de McGraw-Hill en Ontario, et elle ira en se repetant  selon la logique de la concurrence  economique. Tandis qu'au  Quebec  comme en Ontario les professionnels du livre agitent  le spectre du patrimoine-culturel-menace, de l'existence-d'un-peuple-mise-en-peril, afin de sen­ sibiliser I'opinion publique ala question, les hommes d'affaires  que sont apres tout les editeurs  et les libraires  negligent  de s'appesantir  sur  les reels  fondements  de leur  ressentiment:   la  concurrence   des  grandes  maisons  internationales  contre laquelle  celles du Quebec semblent  difficilement pouvoir  tenir le coup.  Que  cette situation  ne soit pas negligeable  justifie les demandes  d'assistance  logees aupres du  gouvernement  aussi bien en Ontario  qu'au  Quebec,  mais non  pas le recours a un genre d'arguments qui demontrent  une foi  plutot faible  dans la libre entre­ prise souvent accompagnee,  par  un retour  ironique  des chases, par la  preconisa­ tion d'une  forme de socialisme invitant  le  gouvernement  a  placer  le marche  du livre national  en regime autarcique relevant  non pas des lois du  commerce  mais de l'integrite  culturelle  nationale.  Mais l'on  voit mal ce qui  empecherait  le gou­ vernement franc;ais, ou n'importe quel autre gouvernement,  d'arguer d'une  meme ligne  de  pensee et  d'interdire  par  consequent  une  penetration  plus  que  sym­ bolique  du  livre quebecois  dans  son marche.  Meme  si des mesures  protection­ nistes etaient  adoptees au  Quebec  ( comme elles l'ont ete en Ontario, jusqu'a  un certain   point), le  dilemme  principal  decoulant  du  desequilibre  entre  la  crois­ sance  necessaire de l'industrie et l'etroitesse du marche  demeure  entier.
A la  rigueur,  on  peut  retorquer  que les rapports  de forces n'etant pas egaux
-en I g62, le Quebec  publiait  g,6oo titres, alors que la  France  lanc;ait I 3,282 titres sur le marche-i1 y a lieu de soutenir  le bien-fonde  d'un  certain  protec­ tionnisme  pour  l'industrie  quebecoise  qui  ne se  justifierait  pas  pour  sa  contre-

45

LA PROBLEMATlQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS



partie franc;aise.3   II est meme  juste de dire qu'il  y a vice de procedure  lorsque le consortium  Hachette,  dont  les influences  s'exercent,  parait-il,   jusque  dans  les cabinets  ministeriels  aussi  bien  en  France  qu'au   Quebec,  est  finance  pour  ses operations au Quebec sur le meme pied que les petites entreprises  locales, par des subventions  gouvemementales.
L'on  se met a sanger,  cependant, qu'a  l'interieur  des lois du  marche  du  livre international telles qu'existantes le livre quebecois a peut-etre deja atteint  le degre de croissance zero4   et confronte !'alternative suivante:  ou bien s'etendre  en allant au-dela de ses frontieres naturelles quitte a tomber sous la coupe de la fusion selon le principe des corporations  multinationales,  ou bien se resigner a la stagnation  a l'interieur  d'un  systeme autarcique. Les accords de co-diffusion et de co-Cdition recemment  signes entre  SOGIDES, les Editions La  Presse et  Hachette, et ceux signes entre les Editions du Jour  et Robert  Laffont laissent croire qu'il  y a eu op­ tion  a  long  terme  pour  le  premier  des  deux  choix.  Le  livre  quebecois  en se decouvrant  une  vocation  internationale a choisi de composer avec les lois  de la concurrence  economique  telles que  revues et  corrigees par  John  Kenneth  Gal­ braith,  qui  delimitent  le patrimoine culture!  de l'homme  d'affaires  a  l'interieur  non  pas de l'Etat-Nation mais de l'Etat-Industriel.
Quel  role attribuer a l'ecriture litteraire  dans l'esthetique  nouvelle qui se fait
depuis 1g6o, dans  un contexte  aussi problematique  que celui retrace  plus haut? Nous savons  par  Lucien  Goldmann, Ian  Watt  et  Georg  Lukacs,  entre  autres, que l'ecrivain europeen  du dix-huitieme siecle, participant  a l'avenement  de l'economie  de marche,  delaisse les traditions  litteraires  issues d'une  economic  a base domestique  ou feodale et cree le genre romanesque, bourgeois et realiste axe sur les problemes du citadin  vivant  dans une societe soumise aux fluctuations  du capital.  L'ecrivain  quebecois reflete une semblable demarche  en etant situe et par son oeuvre et par sa fonction  d'ecrivain  dans une  problematique  ressortissant du nouvel  ordre  socio-economique   de  sa  societe  dont  il  ne  saurait   se  distancer comme  temoin,  et  encore  mains  comme  porte-parole,  puisque  son  oeuvre  est mains un reflet des apparences de sa societe qu'un  signe renvoyant  au signifiant et signifie socio-Cconomique.
Cet ecrivain  ayant  ses racines dans le milieu natal  dont  il tire son inspiration
et temoigne tant  par les themes que par les images dans son oeuvre nait effective­ ment  en I 944-45-Roger Lemelin,  Gabrielle  Roy-a  une  epoque  ou  l'eco­ nomie rurale,  domestique,  cede devant  l'economie demarche. Le roman  de fac­ ture  realiste avec pour cadre  la ville, et theme la situation  de l'homme  d'ici  aux prises avec le quotidien  prosaique  regi par les lois du marche  contre lesquelles il

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS



se trouve  sans  defense, fait son  appantJon. Cet ecrivain  part1c1pe d'un  courant historique au sein duquel l'eclosion d'une  litterature modelee par le pays, done nationale,  sera  parallelement  accompagnee  par  l'avenement   d'une  industrie  du livre autochtone. Ce qui suggere !'hypothese  que  creature  et  progeniteur   de  la fortune  du  livre, l'ecrivain  doit etre envisage dans  le miroir  direct  de ce qui  le signifie en  tant  qu'ecrivain, c'est-a-dire  son  produit,  le livre.  L'ecrivain  semble etre des lors un type "en situation" vis-a-vis son oeuvre voulue essentielle ( reftet de l'ame  prof onde, etc.)' mais su jette a reification, a n'etre  entrevue  qu'en  tant qu'objet  a valeur  d'echange  minimale dans  la societe de consommation. Tel  est par consequent  le malaise fondamental  de tout ecrivain,  de dire Goldmann, mais un malaise qui  en se precisant  autour  de quelques  points des  devrait  nous  ren­ seigner sur le caractere  specifique de l'homme  de lettres d'ici.
L'etroitesse du marche, la faiblesse quantitative du public lecteur, l'impossibilite de vivre de sa plume et l'absence  de droit  de cite a la profession cement  en  ge­ neralle malaise.  Mais l'histoire  du  role de l'ecrivain,  qui  traditionnellement  ap­ partient  soit aux  professions liberales et aux "grandes  familles",  soit aux  ordres, precise une ambiguite  qui en s'accentuant autour  des pales elite-peuple situe l'ir­  reconciliabilite de l'ecrivain  et de la societe. De Cremazie a Nelligan, de St-Denys Garneau  a Fran(_;ois Hertel,  le culte de l'isolement dans les manoirs seigneuriaux  ne cede que devant  des desirs d'evasion exacerbes par l'onirisme ou  par des pere­ grinations sans fin n'arrivant pas a faire taire le mal metaphysique. 11 est de bon ton  d'affirmer  que  depuis  les Automatistes  et  leurs  fils spirituels  (Hexagonistes  et Partipristes), la  vie en serre-chaude  a ete  detruite pour  faire  place  au  pays. Mais le constat  d'echec  dans  la thematique  et  la symbolique  d'auteurs tels que Godbout,  Aquin,  Miron  et autres -ne  serait-ce que  pour  mieux  affirmer  l'ur­  gence de choisir-ne demeure pas mains eloquent. L'exil qui ne cesse d'etre  pre­ fere au pays natal  (Blais, Hebert), le silence des afficheurs, la mise au rancart de l'exigence  du  pays ces  dernieres  annees,  temoignent  d'un   malaise  qui  dure  et qui ne releve en  derniere analyse que de l'essentielle problematique de l'ecriture  au pays de Quebec.
L'ecrivain   lu  dans  les Cegeps  est dephase  dans  une  contre-culture  qui  ca­
racterise son art comme elitiste, sinon defaitiste  ("Trap nair;  nous autres  on veut vivre,  on  veut  pas  etre  pogne") ,  mais  privilegie les arts  de  nature   populiste. L'eclosion du livre quebecois dans  une decennie marquee  par la ftoraison corres­ pondante  de l'audio-visuel  en  Occident,  et  au  Quebec  en  particulier,  dans  les institutions d'enseignement jusqu'alors modelees par la rhetorique ancienne  n'ex­ plique  pas que  depuis  I g68 le genre  litteraire  a  la  fine  pointe  de  la  nouvelle

47

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE  QUEBECOIS



esthetique ne soit ni le roman et ni la poesie, mais le theatre,  la forme orale, visu­ elle et collective correspondant aux  gouts de !'audience  nouvelle.  Une  audience qui souhaitait  que sa langue  quotidienne  filt valorisee par ses createurs. Bien que les ecrivains de Parti Pris eussent theorise in-extenso sur les vertus du  joual dans
des essais dont  Boileau n'aurait pas rougi, il appartiendra a des spectacles  popu­
laires maniant  la  parole  et I'image ( plutot  que la langue et 1'ecriture) -l'Oss­ tidcho  de Deschamps  et de  Charlebois;  le cinema  de  Perrault,  Jutra  et  Carle;  la chanson -de creer une esthetique  nouvelle fondee simplement dans la recon­ naissance de la voix et de l'image  du pays tel que vecu.
C'est  a se demander si le plus engage des ecrivains  quebecois  ne se voit  pas
force de constater  son insignifiance  (dans  son sens litteral:  l'acte  de  ne pas  sig­ nifier, absence  de  correspondance entre  1' "emetteur"  [l'ecrivain] et  le  "recep­  teur"  [le public  recherche], dichotomie  et rupture  au niveau  de la  communica­ tion)  dans  un contexte  culturel  ou le role que lui a attribue  une certaine  tradi­  tion  litteraire   du  siecle  demier,   meme  re-definie  dans  un  contexte  existentiel precis (artiste  revolutionnaire ou maudit)  n'est qu'illusion quichottiste.  L'heritage  de Rimbaud, Baudelaire,  Verlaine,  Hugo, Huysmans, Lautreamont et autres que l'on retrouve sans effort chez les ecrivains d'ici les plus farouchement nationalistes ne semble  pas faire  le  poids dans  une  jeune  culture  ou  la  vision s'obtient  de­ mocratiquement  pour  le prix  d'un  "joint", et pour  qui  l'artiste  visionnaire  ( et revolutionnaire)  est celui qui  manie  les sons, les  couleurs et les parfums  par  la chanson, le cinema, le theatre  ou qui s'incame dans le delire d'un  Luoar  Yaugud, d'un  Pierrot-le-Fou,  des Infoniaques  et autres insolites du  Quebec  Underground.
Dans  un  pays ou la problematique de la relation  entre  l'ecrivain  et le milieu natal  a de tous temps ete doublee  par le traumatisme  de !'alienation linguistique primant  la langue  plutot  que  la  parole,  certains  auteurs  qui  ont  tou jours  che­ vauche les arts de communications et de l'ecriture,  tels que Godbout, Languirand, Perrault,   Carle,  ont  opte  pour  1' "oralite", selon  !'expression  de  Languirand. D'Amour, P.Q.,  par  exemple,  le demier  roman  de  Godbout,  se  termine  par  la destruction  de l'ecriture  et l'eloge du langage quebecois dans  un  discours radio­ phonique  se voulant  symbolique  de  la  fin  du  discours  romanesque  sans  cesse courtcircuite   dans   la  structure  de  l'oeuvre  elle-meme   par   le  dialogue   entre Thomas  d'Amour   ( calembour  sur Thomas  d'Aquin,  "docteur  angelique"  de  la pensee philosophique  officielle enseignee dans les colleges classiques), l'ecrivain,  et ses amanuenses de l'Universite  de Montreal.  Languirand  s'en tient  aux ondes de Radio-Canada, quand  i1 ne  publie  pas ses  demieres  decouvertes sur 1' "oralite"
de McLuhan  a Pythagore.  Roch Carrier  travaille des textes pour le theatre  et le

LA PROBLEMATIQUE DU  LIVRE QUEBECOIS



cinema. Pierre   Maheu,  ex-grand essayiste de  Parti Pris, fait   du  cinema. Paul Chamberland  rejoint   la  demarche  d'un   Jean   Basile  dans  !'articulation  de  la contre-culture degagee  de  toute  mainmise.  Tous,  des "drop-outs" de  l'ecriture.
Victor-Levy  Beaulieu,  nouveau preux  du  joual  litteraire, et  recuperant la  plus belle  tradition des  prefets  de  discipline  d'antan, tombe  a bras  raccourcis sur  les
infideles,  fUt-ce un  Andre Langevin. Mais  le probU:me est mal  pose:  il ne s'agit pas d'ecriture joual et non-joual, mais bien de savoir si l'ecriture litteraire en tant que  systeme codifie de signes verbaux saurait  etre  consideree  comme  vehicule  de culture signifiant  le Quebec qui  se fait,  puisque  l'ecrivain n'est  pas  au  diapason d'une esthetique ou  priment le collectif,  la  parole,  l'audio-visuel, et  le  rejet  de
tout  systeme  quel  qu'il  soit?  L'ecrivan quebecois  sait  neanmoins qu'il   est  a la
remorque d'une longue  tradition d'art mimetique lui renvoyant sans  cesse l'image de  son  ambiguite extreme dans  un  marche  ou  sa  valeur  d'echange s'avere tres mm1me.


NOTES

1 Rappelons  qu'en  I966 le pourcentage  de livres consacres ala litterature s'elevait  a
23.2 pour cent dans la production  rnondiale du livre  (Robert  Escarpit,  Le  Litter­
aire et le Social, p. 25I). En  I962, le pourcentage  pour  le meme  secteur  dans  la
production  du livre canadien  se chiffre a I8 pour cent  (Robert  Escarpit, The  Book
Revolution, p. 7 I).
2    Pourtant la production  en  langue  fran aise
cent de la production  mondiale  du livre, alors que les productions  en langues  an­
glaise et allemande se situent  respectivernent a  I 5·7 pour cent et  I o pour cent  ( Es­
carpit,  The  Book Revolution, p. 6I).
3  En  I967, la production  canadienne (dans  les deux langues)   n'atteint pas  I   pour cent de la production  mondiale  ( elle est de 0.79 pour cent). Quant ala production quebecoise, elle represente  3·34 pour cent de la production   (mondiale)  en langue fran aise
effectifs  mondiaux   (Jean-Claude  Beau,  "La   Production   du  Livre  Canadien  de
I952 a  I970",  Melanges,  pp.  2I8-2I9)·
4    Les chiffres sont assez eloquents. En  I 966, il se public 3820 titres,  un  volume  ine­ gale depuis, puisque la production  en I 967 est de 3782; en  I 968 elle baisse a 3527; en  I969  elle augmente  legerement   par  comparaison  avec  l'annee  precedente  et
s'eleve  a  3659;  pour  degringoler  a nouveau,  en  I97o,  a  3457   (Statistiques   de
l'UNESCO citees par Jean-Claude Beau, Ibid.,  p. 2I6).









49

NEW	WAVE
IN 	PUBLISHING









ORIGINS

What do  you consider  the  principal  reason (or  reasons)   for the  rise of so many  new  publishing  houses in Canada  during  the  past  five years?


WRITERS  couldn't get  published. Houses like  Anansi   have  filled  a  need,   first  by proving   that   there  are  Canadian  writers (by  putting their  books  into  print);  this was  newsworthy  enough   that   a  market for  them  began  to develop; the  emphasis on  the  Canadian  Identity  bolstered   the public's  awareness    (to   say   nothing  of Royal   Commission, attention  from   the Federal Gov.  etc.)   It's  been  a  snowball­ ing  effect-but I think  the  idea  behind  most  new  houses  was  simply  to  fill  the need   for   publishing   houses   who   would publish   new  Canadian writers. I  think  they   all   assumed   there   was   a   reader­ ship  out  there.
SHIRLEY   GIBSON
 talented younger  writers  who  had  either been  turned  down  at  the  established houses, or felt totally  alienated from  their apparent  aims  and   sensibility,   or  both. So they started  new ones. It was their impatience, energy and naivete that brought  all  but   a  handful  of  the  new houses  into  existence.
Because  most of  those  writer /founders were literary  types, their  houses publish   a far  higher   proportion of  literature than do the  mainline  houses.
Another  note    in   literary    sociology: older  conventions of publishing your own work  with  another  press  have   gone  by the boards. Instead, the little-magazine groundrules apply.


A NEW SENSE of the differences involved in  being  Canadian. The  centennial was the  occasion.
MICHAEL  MACKLEM

REGIONALISM,  nationalism, cheaper  zaz­ zier  printing methods ... but  perhaps the most  consistent  element was one  or  more
 DENNIS   LEE

THE  DISCOVERY,  among  ourselves,   that we have the writers-poets, playwrights, novelists, short  story  writers,  even  artists and   film   makers,   and   that    they   need books-as  a service  to  their  community and  to  the  community at  large.
DAVID ROBINSON


Qyestions by GEORGE WOODCOCK Answers by
SHIRLEY  GIBSON  (Anansi)
MICHAEL MACKLEM (Oberon) DENNIS LEE (formerly Anansi) DAVID ROBINSON    (Talonbooks)
JAMES LORIMER  (James, Lewis  & Samuel) VICTOR coLEMAN (Coach House) MEL HURTIG  (M. G. Hurtig)




THOUGH I AM   SURE  people  close to  pub­ lishing  will think  it a bit  silly to say  so, I think   that    the   first   point   to   be   made  about   why  publishing  houses  have  been established in  the  last  few years  is that  it has  not  been  done  as  a  way  of  making  money.  I  am  constantly  amazed   by  the assumption  which  is  common,   among   a few  writers, many  academics, and   most of the cultural  policy-makers in the coun­  try,  that  book  publishing is  really  pizza manufacturing or  oil  refining  in  disguise
-somebody's bright  idea about  how they can   make   a  lot  of  money  and   build   a colonial   empire. Perhaps this  is  yet  an­ other   expression   of  cultural  colonialism,  an   automatic  refusal    to   give   cultural value and  importance to an activity  when it  happens in  Canada,  even  though it  is taken  for  granted  when  it  happens else­ where. How  often is Allen Lane  described by his many Canadian admirers as some­ body  who  wanted to  get  rich  quick  and did  it in  book  publishing?
My impression is that  the  main  reason why  people  have  turned to starting  pub­ lishing  operations  recently   has  been  an awareness, implicit if  not  explicit,  of the
 way  that   the  medium of  publishing has been    impoverished,  warped,   and    re­ stricted   to  make  it  a  very  serious  bottle­ neck  between   writers   and   readers.  Not only  was  the   total   number   of  original books  by  Canadian   writers   being   pub­  lished very small, but the  kinds of readers  being  catered   to  was also very  restricted. That of course  is still  true,  except  in  the restricted   areas   which   the   new   houses have  added.  People  interested in  Liberal and  Tory  political   history,  for  instance, were  well  served  by the  established  pub­  lishers; but it is only since the  new houses got going that  there  has been much  avail­ able from  Canadian publishers  for  people interested  in  history  seen  from   a  more radical  viewpoint.
I  think   that   all  the  media,   both   the cultural media and  the mass media, are impoverished  and   restricted  in  the  way that   publishing   was  and   mostly  still  is. The   main   reason   why  something   hap­ pened  in  publishing before,  say, anything of  note  happened in  the  mass  magazine or pop music recording is that  publishing is an easier medium  than  most for  people to get  into.  It  takes  relatively  little  spec-

51

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




ialized knowledge and  relatively little capital, at  least  for  a  small  operation. If it took, say, $soo,ooo to start  a book  pub­ lishing  operation  as  it  would   to  start   a decent   mass  magazine  or   to   finance   a modest  feature film,  there  would   be  no new  book  publishers.
JAMES  LORIMER

THE REASONS for the rise are still pretty vague; I mean,  it wasn't  WWII, so we're not actually examining them  that  rigidly; I see them as being mainly  economic. Inflation came  to us as a kind  of rakeoff from a Boom; and the Government Arts Agencies   were   responsive    and   sympa­ thetic.    The    five   year   marker   suggests you're  using  the  Anansi  calendar. Coach  House   started  in   Ig6s,   Contact  Press published  its last  book  (much to the cha­  grin  of  two-thirds of its editorial board)  in    I g66.   The  book   was   New    Wave Canada.
VICTOR COLEMAN
 CANADA  is maturing as a nation, and  the evolution  of  the   new  publishing  houses was only inevitable. Too  many Canadians keep thinking  of us as a country of ten million   people  or  fifteen  million,  but  of course  we're  going  on  twenty-three  mil­ lion  and  we're  developing better  writers and   better   readers   and   a   public  much  more interested in their  own country than  they  used  to  be.  The   day  is  long   past when  most  Canadians  would  look  across the  ocean  or  across  the  border  for  what  was necessarily best or necessarily  right  in the   world.   More   and   more   Canadians are  recognizing  how  lucky  we have  been to live in a country that  is still very much  in the process of just becoming,  and  so all of   this  is  chicken-and-egg  and   all  of  it made   the  new  publishing houses  inevit­ able.  Some  of  the  older  Canadian firms were  very,  very  conservative and  far  too many  good  books and  good  writers  were going  unpublished.
MEL HURTIG





CONSTITUENCY

How   far  have   writers  in   fact  been  responsible   for  creating   these  new presses? What support  have they  since given  them?


THERE's no question that  they founded a number  of  them-Godfrey,  Lee,  Lor­ imer,   Coleman,  Bacque,   MacSkimming
-others are currently involved  (Atwood, Graeme Gibson,  Newlove, Helwig,  Matt Cohen, etc-mostly  in  editorial  capac­ ities,  but  also  in  management) .  I think too   that   the   new   presses  have   created  some  writers  from  within;  my  first  book of poetry  has  just  been  released.
SHIRLEY  GIBSON

52
 IN MANY CASES they have been directly involved  and  even  where  they  have  not they  have  given  decisive  support. This  is where   the   situation  in   Canada   differs from   that   in  the  States.  Here   the  new houses are at the centre of the  movement, not  on  the fringe.
MICHAEL MACKLEM

MosT   of  the  new  houses  I know  were started  by  a  writer   or   writers.   Hurtig

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




wasn't, nor Peter  Martin Associates, nor Oberon (though Michael Macklem has written and   translated) ; otherwise, they were.
In   my  experience,  writers   supported
Anansi  very honourably: they  pressed for things  that   mattered to  them,  and  were almost   always  able  to  see  the  decisions that  affected  their  book in  the  context  of the whole  press. When  they  were  well re­ viewed,  many  were  wooed  by  the  estab­ lished  houses  that   had  originally  turned  them   down.   By  far   the   most   common  thing  was for  them  to stay  with  a  house that  had  first shown  confidence  in  them.
DENNIS   LEE

·wRITERS, I think, have been completely responsible for the creation of the new presses, but  their  rise does  not  rest  with them   alone.  Writers   could   just  as  soon sink  any  one  of  the  new  presses  as  aid them.  Solidarity, dedication, and  careful management have,  I  think,  built  the  new presses.   As   for   writer-contributor /sub­ scribers,   there   seem   to   be   a   hardcore number of writers  who are supporting the movement as  it  is  afoot,  aligning them­ selves by working  for  or  with  the  various presses, but  there  are  those  too  who  play publishers  off against  one another, estab­ lishing  literary  and  other   more  commer­ cial   reputations;   then   again,  there   are those  who  sadly  enough   have  previously aligned  themselves,  before  the  rush,  and

VIABILITY
 who are a bit lost, still somehow colonial­ ly  tied;  or,  too,  there  are  those  who  are only  out  for  their   own  aggrandizement and   would  use  any  publisher  to  gain   a reputation.
DAVID ROBINSON

CERTAINLY writers  have  been  involved  in a lot of the  new  houses,  though it  is  im­ portant to  remember the  exceptions  like Hurtig   and    Peter    Martin    Associates. Where    they   have   been   involved,  like Dennis   Lee  and   now  Margaret Atwood in Anansi or the  three original New Press partners,  they   have   stayed   at   least   for some time while things got going, or went so badly  wrong  that  they  felt  it was time to  get  out.
JAMES  LORIMER

WHAT the  editors   at   Contact   believed was that  only  the  writers  read  the  books. I argued  many  times long  and  hard  with Ray  Souster  about their  silly limited  edi­ tion  policy  and  general   lack  of   purpose  as  soon  as  the  precious  object-book  ap­ peared.   They   seldom  followed   through. But  they  were   writers.   I   think   all   the writers  who  were  hassled  about publica­ tion  were  screaming,  and   their   screams were   heard;  but   so  far   only   partially answered  or satisfied.
The  writers  support us  by  writing  for something other  than  profit  and  promises.

VICTOR COLEMAN

Have  the  new  publishing  houses established  themselves (a)  in  terms of  financial viability  and  (b) in  terms  of literary  viability?


SoME HAVE ... some haven't, and  I think we'll  see, within  the  next couple  of years, a consolidation of some  houses, a falling
 by  the  wayside  for  others,   as  part   of  a natural  process.   Financial  viability   de­ pends  on  many   things    (including  help

53

NEW WAVE IN  PUBLISHING




from  governments at  the  moment) but  it also  relates   heavily   to   your   publishing policy.  If it's  relevant, and   fills  a  n':ed (and   thank   God   these  needs  are  ?emg acknowledged in  Canada, finally)  fman­ cial  viability  is possible-not  easy, until we get some control over  our  distri_bu i n problems,  but  possible.  Literary v1ab hty
-or editorial   viability-is,     I    thmk,
much  the  same.  If you can  carve  out  an editorial space for yourself  (or usurp somebody  else's by doing  it  better?)  then the  chances  are  fairly  good-e.g. James Lewis   &   Samuel   with   their   books   di­ rected  to  the  post-secondary school  mar­  ket.   Anansi   seems   to  have   done   it   by means    of   a   relentless    (but   hopefully somewhat  imaginative)   editorial   policy, with  emphasis   on  certain  kinds  of  books which  we  do  best.  Often we're  tempted to  slop  (and  that's a  good  word  for  it) over   into   areas   which   we   know   little about.  Fortunately a  kind   of  ingrained sloth and  intuition usually  brings  us back into   line-while   permitting  us   to   di­ versify  and  expand our  boundaries little by little.
I  think   the  houses  least  likely  to  suc­ ceed  are  those  which   go  publishing  off in  all  directions-that  destroy  their  lit­ erary  viability  which  of  course  means  the end  of financial viability  too.
Must   qualify   this;   it  refers  of  course only   to  smaller   houses.   Big  ones   have enough   time,  money,  staff,  etc.  to  pro­ duce  the  kind  of  promotion that  sells al­ most   any   kind   of  book ... no  editorial viability  = financial viability. But Canada doesn't  own  too many  of them.

SHIRLEY  GIBSON


(a)  No-most of the new houses are concerned   centrally   with    books    that


54
 aren't commercially viable  without public subsidy.
(b)   Certainly -these  houses  are  where the action  is.
MICHAEL  MACKLEM


I  DON'T  KNOW  the  answer  to  this  ques­
tion.
I'm   not  up  to  date   with  most  of  the new    houses,    since    I    left    Anansi.    I wouldn't be surprised  to see a number of the  new  houses  either   close  down  or  go much   more  commercial,  over   the   next five  years.  Part   of  the  pressure   towards that   is  money   (and   there   has   been  so much  ink  about  that  that  I  won't  add  to it). Part   of  it  is  what   seems   to  be  a natural life cycle in new enterprises  (pub­ lishing  or  other)  : you  seem  able  to  do things   in   the   first   3-5   years,   on   the strength  of energy, ignorance and imagin­ ation,   that  you  have  trouble  doing  l ter even    with    far    more    dollars    ftowmg through  the  office.  And  a  third   reason would be the tendency of  writer /founders to withdraw to their  own work.  (To some extent   I'm  a case in  point.)
Th: literary    question    is   interesting.
Quantitatively, there  is more literary mediocrity   published    in   Canada   now than   before   (say)   1967.  That's  because there is more literature being published. Proportionately, my impression  is that things  are  about  the  same.                     .
By  comparison  with   other   coun.tnes,
you know, there  is far  less crap  published in Canada than  in most other  western nations.   In   both   relative   and   absolute terms. The main  reason  is that  we don't have  access  to our  own  paperback  racks (or  didn't; a few  changes   have  begun) , so  hack   writers   have   very   little   outlet here. We probably  have  a higher  propor-

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




tion  of  arty,   pretentious crap   than  else­ where  (there is almost  no such thing as a Canadian "popular novelist") ;  certainly  we have  a far  lower  proportion of purely cynical  crap. Needless  to say, it's  a func­  tion  of  economic control, not  virtue.
A  lot  of  people  who  felt  comfortable with  the  scale  of Canadian  writing/pub­ lishing  over  the last  decades-in which, for example, it was  possible to read  every new  poetry   book  or  chapbook  that   ap­  peared,  as  a  leisure-time  pursuit-feel jostled, even angered by the proliferation. I  can't  get  very  excited   about   it  either  way,  myself.  Good   work  is  good  work, bad    work    isn't,    and    quality    doesn't change that. I do hope,  as a reader, that the  convention of  doing   new-writer  an­ thologies  will  continue;  otherwise  inter­  esting  younger  writers  will  certainly take longer  to surface.
Incidentally, the  new  houses are  vastly more   open   to   non-commercial andfor freaky kinds of writing than  most of the established  ones  have   been.  Which   is a good   thing.   But  once   that   is  acknowl­ edged,  I  can't see that   the  average level of  editorial  judgment and   skill  in  the new  houses,  with  their  particular tastes, is notably  higher  than  at the  old  houses, with  theirs;  i.e., no  hell.
DENNIS  LEE

I  DON'T THINK any  Canadian press as it now  stands  can  claim  financial  viability. At  this  point,  given  the  concerns,  I  just don't  think  it's possible. Literary viability, however,   is  a  different  story  and   most new  Canadian presses  can  claim  this  in some  form  or  another simply  because  of the  authors they  represent. I  don't think until   Canadian   publishers are   able   to move into  educational publishing instead of  its  being  ripped-off   by  the  American
 branch plants   will  they  stand   a  chance of becoming  financially viable.  For  now, most  Canadian  publishers are   too  busy building  basic  lists  to  be  exploring  the educational  market.  Perhaps  too,   some will    never  feed    this    market. That wouldn't  be  so  bad  either. I  think   the big  rush  to be educated is perhaps over. I,  for one, sometimes  wish I  had  learned more   of  a   trade,  but   only   if   it   were taught with some imagination. Publishers, if  they're   deprived  of  educational  mar­ kets, will have to re-examine what they're  publishing, perhaps publish  the  tarot  and the  zodiac-what the  masses  are  inter­ ested   in-or    back    to   nature,  whole earth, rather than   what  the  system  has been   feeding   them.    It   should    be   in­ teresting.
DAVID  ROBINSON

FINANCIALLY, only the most commercial houses are  in anything close to reasonable shape.  The   fact   that   most  of  the   new houses are still around, and  many  are ex­ panding their  activities quite  rapidly, is solely a  result  of  recent  governmental fi­ nancial  assistance measures,  including the prospect   (if  not  the  receipt)  of  working  capital   loans  from   the  Ontario  govern­ ment  for  Ontario houses and  the  various  federal  programmes  financed  (but   mis­ erably)   by  the  Secretary  of  State. But with  the demand for Canadian books in­ creasing,   and   with   many   of  us  looking very  carefully   and   closely  at   the   com­ mercial   ends  of  our  operation  in  order  to improve  our  financial state,  I  think  it is  possible  that  some  of  the  new  houses will prove  financially  viable.
In terms  of  literary viability, I  think there  is no question. I also think  it is very interesting that  there  are  some  people  in the  book world who are  complaining that

55

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




"too  many" Canadian  books  are   being published   these  days,  so many  I suspect that   the   bookstores   are   having  trouble finding   room  for  all  the  American and British   books  they   have   stocked   for  so long,   and   the   reviewers   are   finding   to their  dismay  that   they  have  to spend  so much   time  reading the  Canadian  books that    come   out    that    they   don't   have enough  time for  the  books they  think  are really  worth   reading.  Anywhere   else  in the   non-colonized  world,   people   would boast    if   the    number  of   books   being written  and   published  were   increasing, particularly  people   in   the   book   trade. One  of the  complainers is, of course,  the man   whose  bookstore   has  the  best  gen­ eral   stock  of  Canadian  books  in   Van- couver. 	JAMES LORIMER

(a)  THE ones who have gone astray of original ideals;
(b)  The  ones who've stuck  to  their  orig­ inal  ideals  are  bound   to have  continuous trouble  economically  because  their  prod-


NATIONALISM
 uct  doesn't   make  a  'profit'  in  terms  of ready  cash.
As far  as literary  viability  goes, a book like  Survival   makes   the  literature  stop. I think  I'm  more  interested in  letting  it continue, even if it doesn't get recognized by the  media  as a  revolutionary exercise.
VICTOR COLEMAN

THE answer is (a)  to a degree and  (b) emphatically. Most  of the  new publishing houses,  to  my  knowledge,   are   having   a tough   time  financially. Working capital is  their   rna jor  problem.  In   some  cases the  administrative or  financial  manage­ ment   is  weak.   But   in   terms   of   their  product ... the  books  that   they   publish
... I  think  the  new  houses  have  made   a very substantial contribution from  almost every conceivable  point  of view  and  cer­ tainly   including  "literary  viability".  Al­ most without exception, the foremost  new houses  have  done  some  very  imaginative publishing and  some very successful  pub­  lishing  in terms of  sales.        MEL HURTIG


Some  of the  new  presses have taken  on a distinctively "Canadian" tone. How  far did  nationalist  motives  lead to their  creation?


IF  YOU  FORM  a  company or  work  with a company which  was founded  primarily to  get  Canadian writers   into   the  hands of Canadian readers, I guess  that  makes you  at  least   nationalistic. Once   into   it, the  feeling  tends  to  grow.  I  have  on  the wall  in front  of me  a quote  by the  presi­ dent    of   McGraw   Hill    International; "The  prime  objective of  a  foreign   sub­ sidiary  is not  its  own  publishing but  the sale  of the  U.S. product." The  president
 of  another  branch-plant told  me  to  my face  that  Canada could  never  have  a  lit­ erature of its own-yes,  other  countries (any   other   countries)   could,   but   not Canada.  I   know   innumerable   writers  whose  books were  turned   down  by sub­ sidiaries   because  "our funds  for  experi­  mental writers  must  be used  on  the writ­  ers in our own country." If you get much  of  that,   and   you  do,  there's  not  much  alternative.                         SHIRLEY  GIBSON

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




NATIONALIST motives were of cardinal importance from  the  start  in  most  cases. This   has  latterly   become  important also at Oberon. This  is partly  a matter of marketability,  partly    a   matter  of   con­ viction.
MICHAEL  MACKLEM

DAVE  GODFREY  and   I  started  Anansi  in I g67, and  I think  these  things  were more sharply   defined   for   Dave   at   that   time than  for  me.
At  the  beginning,  my  publishing  na­ tionalism  was  largely  a  positive  thing: I wanted  to read  more  good stuff  by people rooted  where  I  was. As time  went  on, it started   to  include   a  lot  more  negative things  to  boot.  I  began  to  see  just  how badly  Canadian  writers  and   readers  are fucked   by  most  publishers  who  operate  in  the  country,  and   the  notion   that  ap­  peals  to  their  ideals  would  change any­ thing  came  to  seem  pretty  laughable.
I  had  known   nothing about  the  pol­ icies of book clubs;  nor  about  paperback distribution; nor  about the  kind of books educational houses  are  selling  to schools. I  shared   the  impression  that   the  visible bad-guys -the   Longmans   or   Double­  days,  which  only  did  a small  handful of Canadian trade  books a year-were the villains  of  the   piece.   It only   gradually dawned on  me  that   there   are  scores  of corporations flogging books in the country
-some Canadian-owned,  though  more
foreign-owned-that  don't even  bother to  maintain  editorial  offices  here;  that treat   us  unequivocally  as   a   marketing colony. I began to hear  the rumours about paperback   distributors   and    organized crime.  And after  awhile  the  polite  token­ ist publishers, while  they  didn't  look any less shabby  than  before,  were  clearly  not the  worst  offenders  by  any  means.  That
 made  my nationalism a  lot  more  aggres­
srve.
DENNIS  LEE

TALONBOOKs'  impetus to  begin  publish­ ing  was local,  which  is where  I  think  it should  be. Canada is such a fucking huge country,  you  can't   possibly  really  know who's  writing  in  the Maritimes or, if they speak   the  same  language, if  they   have made  it  into  the  2oth  century, yet  there are  certain  figures, certain  writers,   who stand   above  others   and   that's,  I  guess, where  the nationalism comes in. Too,  the whole   nationalist   issue   confounds  me. Some   of   our   more   ardent   nationalists (Dave  Godfrey,   for   example)  will  buy over-runs of  sheets  from  American  pub­ lishers,  thus  feeding   the  American  corp­  orations, President  Nixon's  friends,  who own  all but  three  of the  New York  pub­  lishers;  and   there   are  others   who  have reputable  firms   (Clarke  Irwin,  General Publishing) , and  who  make  a large  por­ tion  of  their  money   on  importing lines and  who only publish  Canadian books on the side, for prestige  ( ?)  and  to lay claim to  the   word   "nationalist". To   me,  it's simple.  You   print  Canadian  books   by Canadian  authors  on   Canadian  paper (if that's the  paper you want  to use),   in Canada, and  you  put  a  beaver  or  some symbol  like  Coach  House   does  on   the book to prove it. Of  course,  you can  pub­ lish  American  or  British   authors  if   you like -if   they're  good   and   you  get  the chance, but  you  publish   them  here,  give them  a home. Repatriate what's been lost and   add   to   what   you've   already  got. Don't fall victim  in any  way.
DAVID  ROBINSON

IT SEEMS To me that  the book publishing medium is  organized  so  that   publishing

57

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




is  either   a  local  or  a  national  activity. There  are   no   real   international   pub­ lishers,   who   regularly  publish   and   dis­ tribute books for  international  audiences. Even    the   U.S.   multi-nationals,  before they  can  regularly  do  international trade publishing, are going  to have  to do much more  to  create   an  international  market. Now,   markets   and   readers   and   writers (with  a few notable  exceptions)  seem  to me   to  work  on  a  national  basis.  So  I think  anyone  getting involved  in  publish­ ing  automatically directs  his  attention to the local or  the national  market  in which he  is  operating, and  gears  his  activities  primarily to  that.
But  if you were  to look at  the  publish­ ing  programmes of  large  firms  in  coun­  tries  like  Britain   and   France,   certainly you would  see many books which could  be expected to be of interest  only  to British or French readers, and many others  which would  be of  interest  primarily to  British or  French  readers,  but  also  to  others   if they  were  published  in  other   countries. Operating  in   a   branch-plant  economy,  with   tremendous   penetration  from   the U.S.  and   to  a  lesser  extent   Britain, it  is hardly  surprising that  Canadian publish­  ers find  themselves  concentrating on  pro­ ducing the  kind  of  books  that   U.S.  and U.K.	publishers 	are    not 	publishing, which  is to say  books  only  of interest  to Canadian  readers   because   of  the  char­ acter   of  their   subject-matter.   The   few established  firms   for   which   this   is  not completely the  case,  it  seems  to  me,  are locked  into  a  peculiar  continentalist ap­  proach which  doesn't really work  because they  are  so far  out  on  the  fringes  of  the
 number of the others  involved  in  the new houses,  that   part   of  the  reason   for  be­ coming  involved  in  this  activity  was  an explicit  concern  with  freeing up  and  ex­ panding one  of  the  media  essential   for an  independent Canadian  cultural  and intellectual  life.
JAMES LORIMER

0NE OF   OUR BIGGEST sellers this year will be  Allen   Ginsberg's   Iron   Horse.  Gins­ berg  was here, stopped for  a  while, gave us  the  ms., and  we  produced  what  sym­ pathetic folk are calling  a beautiful book.
National Culture is as important as its content   wants   to  be.  More  self-promo­ tion  otherwise.
The  difficulty of the "regional" ethic  is
more  to  the  point  I  think.
Most of my influence  came  from  south of  the  border  or  from  the  region  I  grew up in. It was men and  women,  not books. I   never   asked   anybody   his   Nationality and  don't  intend  to start.
VICTOR COLEMAN

HERE  IS ONE of the most important ques­ tions and  one of the  most difficult for me to  answer.   In   our   case,   our   evolution from  booksellers to publishers occurred at the  same  time  as our  increasing concern  for  the  survival  of  our  country. But  I'm  certain   that  there  weren't "motives" in­ volved,  but  rather  that  it  "happened" at the same  time. I would  hardly think  that  it  was  an  accident   that   our  first  major  success was The  New Romans. But some­ how  it  seems to  me  that   the  word  "na­ tionalist" has  a  slightly  negative  conno­ tation   in  your  questionnaire.  I   may  be

empire. 	wrong.
But of course  it is true,  of me and  of a 	MEL  HURTIG

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING



WHEN  A MAN  IS TIRED OF TORONTO ...

Why do  you think  there  has been so little  effective  decentralization in  this new  wave  of publishing?  Why  is most  publishing  still done  in  Ontario?


THERE IS  NO GETTING  around  the  geo­ graphical fact  that  the  centre  of  English language publishing is in  Ontario. Many  of   us  would   like   to   move   out   to  the mountains and  the  sea  but  here  we are. Unquestionably   this   gives   us   a   basic strength, but  we  also  work  our  asses off
-allowing that  it's  easier  to  do  that  in Ontario than  in  the  Maritimes. But  you have  to begin  somewhere.
For  instance, we've  been  very  success­ ful  in  the  past  couple  of  years  with  the Ontario Council of the Arts. They  started  out  by giving  us charitable  little  grants,  and  we've  poked  and  prodded them  into what  is really quite decent  action.  A Van­  couver    writer /publisher,  who   shall   re­ main  nameless,  talked  to  me in  my office and  wanted to know  if I  would  get  him money  from  the  Ontario  government­ if  not,   why   not-he  was  prepared  to take  up  temporary  residence  here  to get it.  I  suggested  that,  inasmuch as  B.C. is not  exactly  starving,  he  might   go  back horne, form  a  tough  lobbying  group  with the   west  coast   publishers,  and   put   the screws on  the  B.C. government. To  date,  I  have  not  heard  a  progress  report.
Of  course  we have  advantages here  in Ontario, but  many of them we've created, or at least  helped  to create,  ourselves. I'm not so insensitive  that  I can't imagine the bile   that   rises  in   many   throats-both East  and  West -when  they  think  of us, but  certainly the  IPA,  in spite  of  accusa­ tions   to   the   contrary,  is   making  great
 efforts   to  help   the   regional  publishers. But  the  initiative has  to  come  from  the people primarily concerned. Another publisher   (East)   asked  me  how  I  could find  time  for  all  the  meetings, trips,  let­ ters,  phone-calls   which   lobbying  entails.  A  good  question.   Nobody  can  afford  it, so you spread  it  around-allowing that  there   will  always   be  workers   and   non­ workers in any group.
SHIRLEY  GIBSON

VANCOUVER is well represented. The new houses tend  to develop  where  the  writers are. Oberon is an exception. How  many good writers do you think there are in Saskatoon?
MICHAEL  MACKLEM

THE   GEOGRAPHICAL   distribution  of  the new  presses is much  more  proportionate to   the   distribution   of   people    in   the country than  the old presses. Aren't the established  houses  purely  Toronto?
Toronto presses are bound  to reflect Toronto and  all  it  implies,  even  if  they try  not  to  be callowly  or  shallowly  Tor­ onto.   But   I   can't  get   too   worked  up about   that. I  was  extended  to the  limit for  six years,  helping make  a  press  hap­  pen in Toronto. We did  a lot of southern Ontario writers,  a fair  number of others.  If I'd   been  working  at  a  new  house  in Vancouver or Charlottetown, I can't im­ agine  that  it  could  have  been  any  more draining; and  the  relative proportions of

59

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




where   our   authors  came   from   would have  been  reversed.  Isn't that  normal?
God    knows,    most    of    the    Toronto people  knew  bugger-all about publishing before  they  got  into  it. They  were  work­ ing  on   the   assumption that   publishing
was important, and  if nobody  else would do certain things,  then  they  would  them­ selves.  People   who  have   put  their  own asses on  the  line  in  other  places  under· stand   what's going  on  in  the  process,  I think,   and   know  that  you  work  within the  limitations  of  who  you  are.   Which includes  where  you are.  Anybody  in  Flin Flon  who doesn't  like a  whole  lot of new publishers  in Toronto should  start  a new house  in  Flin  Flon.
DENNIS   LEE

Goon  QUESTION. It's  because  63%  of the money  the  federal  government is putting into  publishing in  English  Canada is go­ ing  to  Ontario  and   56.5%  is  going  to Toronto. It's   the  old  Eastern  Axis  syn­ drome,  where  the  budgets  and  the  deci­ sion-making power  is kept  in  the  East.  It works  that   way  for  the  CBC,  for  NFB, and  now  too, for  publishing. Power  cen­ tralizes,   Godfrey   tells  me,   and   it  stag­ nates.  I don't know how  to change  it, ex­ cept  to offer  to  do  things  over  and  over again, to bring new  blood  in,  but  also, to move  things  out.  I try,  in  letters  I don't  think  anybody  reads  or  cares  about, and I go  back,  if even  to confront them  with my  presence,  as often  as I can.  It's  diffi­ cult,  and  they never  come  to you. People are   afraid;  paranoid,  suspicious.   More trust  is what's needed; more  working  to­ gether  rather than  in isolated  pockets.
DAVID ROBIN SON




6o
 AT THE LEVEL of the small poetry  presses, there  is of  course  tremendous  decentral­ ization  in what  has been happening, with new  presses  starting up  right  across  the country.  One   of   the   difficulties   about  their  situation is, of  course,  that   in  the absence  of  supporting  media   which  are  intensive enough  to provide  detailed cov­ erage of  what  the small  houses are  doing, they  are  not  widely  known  outside  their localities,  and  they  do  not  have  a  distri­ bution  network  which  operates effectively across the country.
At  the  level of  the  larger  new  houses, the  new  presses are  about  as  centralized as  the  established   Canadian  publishers. This  must  be partly because,  though  it  is extremely  difficult  to  establish  a  success­ ful  new  firm  anywhere in  Canada, it  is likely  to  be easier  in  Toronto than  else­ where,  because  the  local  market is larger  than  anywhere  else except  for the Quebec publishers  in Montreal.
JAMES  LORIMER

I THINK the  reasons  here  rest  largely  on technology; since  most  publishing  tech­ nology  is located   here  the  natural  place for  the  publishing to  happen is  here;  by the  same  token  it's  always  best  to  have all  the  garbage  in   the  dump   and   not spread  out  through the neighbourhood.
VICTOR COLEMAN

I'M   NOT CERTAIN   I  agree.   Sure,   most publishing   is still  done   in  Ontario, but the  trend   had  been  a  good  one  in  the sense  that  many  of  the  new  houses  that have   become   active   over   recent   years have  not  been located  in Toronto.
MEL  HURTIG

NEW  WAVE IN PUBLISHING



SUCCESS OR SURVIVAL?

Have  the  new  presses been a success as you  define  success? How  have they  helped  writers ... and  readers?


SoME  HAVE   been   more   successful   than others  certainly, but  we  have  created an awareness   of  Canadian  literature  (both past  and   present) ;  we  have   brought a lot of Canadian writers  to a lot of  Cana­ dian   readers; and,   as  a  spin-off,  we've gotten   many   of   the   branch-plants  off their   tails   and   into   the  publication of Canadian writers.   I  don't question   their motivation-they're    doing    it.   There's lots  more  room  for  lots  more  success­ but  to date  I  think  the  new  presses have done   a  better    job   than   most   of  them would  ever  have  thought possible  a  few years ago.
Many writers would never have been published  without the  new  houses. They are  finally  beginning to  acquire an  iden­ tity  and  a  role  within  their  own  country
-no  longer   any   need   to  go  pounding
off  to  Europe  or  Mexico.   Funding  ag­ encies are  recognizing them  and  increas­  ing grants.  Course  adoptions are bringing  their  work  to young  readers. And, in line with  the  Great Canadian  Irony,  foreign houses are  now wooing them.  I think  the new   presses  and   the   Canadian  writers are   defining    the   Canadian  identity­ whatever it  is.  And  readers   are  learning  that  they jwe  have  one-just  like every­ body else.
SHIRLEY  GIBSON

THEY HAVE CREATED possibilities nobody dreamed  of  seven   or   eight   years   ago. They  have  added completely new dimen­ sions   to   the   Canadian   literary   scene. Many  of  the  writers  would never  other­  wise have  been  heard of.  As for  helping
 readers,   if  you  think   reading Canadian books is good  for  you,  then  yes.
MICHAEL  MACKLEM

ANANSI's aim  was  to  publish  good  writ­
ers.  I  think  we succeeded.
DENNIS  LEE

As I THINK I've  tried  to explain, the  new presses  are  a  mixed  lot.  Success  in  this day   and   age   is  very   suspect   and,  of course, hard  to come  by. That the presses exist  is  a  feat   in  itself;   that   they  have grown, is still more of a feat.  I think everybody  is struggling to give them  a recognizable  name  and   an  imprint.  Be­ yond  that,  when  you get  into  motive and structure,  I  don't  know.   It's   still  early. Things as yet,  I  don't think,  have  sorted themselves  out.  For  me,  however,  Coach House  is the  model.
The  small  houses  have  most  definitely helped  writers.  Think of  all  the  reputa­ tions   that   have   been   established.  And think   of  the   books  themselves.   Canada produces  mighty attractive-looking books, you  know.  What  the   new  presses  have given  readers  is a  new  pride  and  a  new consciousness.  George   Ryga   talks  about  waiting  for  the first Canadian and  Pierre  Vallieres   writes  that   "relations  between  men  must   be  radically transformed  and imperialism    definitely    overthrown...." Too,  Vallieres says, "We  must  wrest  the vast resources  and  gigantic possibilities  of this  century from  the  grasp  of  business­ men."  God,  I  know  it  seems  small,  but
I  believe  both  these  men  and   I  think  it just  might   happen  here,   soon.  I  know

6t

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING



?f no other  country that  is so close;  feel
1t so. Too,  I am  working  for it, every day.
My  life  on  the  line.
DAVID ROBINSON

HERE IS WHAT I  think  they  have  done: They  have  increased the  space  available for  writers  in  Canada, both  in  kinds  of writing where  there  was already some publishing going  on  and  in  areas  where there   was  virtually  no  publishing  going on  before  they  got  going.  This  is to  the benefit  of writers  and  readers  both.  They are  one  more  example of how  it is  possi­ ble to start  independent Canadian  media in  some  fields,  free  both  of  foreign  links and   of  control  by  Canadian  corporate business.  They   have  made   the  issue  of book  publishing a  political   issue,  by  be­ coming  involved  in  the  fight  over  Ryer­ son and  using  that  as a means  of organ­ izing the Canadian-owned publishers into  a  political pressure  group which  remains concerned with  publishing. So they help encourage people  in other  fields to do the same  thing,  to raise cultural issues to the level of  political   discussion.
But  I  also  think   that   what   they  have done  is  pathetically little  in  comparison to  how  much   there   is  to  do,  if  writing and  publishing in Canada are  to achieve the  level  necessary  for  independent  cul­ tural   life.  And   book   publishing  is  only one  of  many   cultural  and   mass  media  where  similar  enormous effort  will  be re­ quired  if  we are  going  to  work  our  way out  of our  current branch plant status.
JAMES  LORIMER

TREMENDOUSLY SUCCESSFUL, with  all its appurtenant  broken   lives.  The  relative
 cultural  ebb  in  Canada  is  over   and   a little  of what  gets published is even  being read seriously. It's a whole new ballgame, culturally,  and   I  for  one  think   it's  too soon to define it. Quantity-wise we're  on the  way  to  bigger  pools  of  information
almost  none  of it,  happily, on  the  mass-'
cult  level -yet.
The  more  presses with  responsible  ed­ itors,   the   happier  the   writers;   though writers  who have  no sense at  all of what
?ublishing  entails   are  still  hurt   by  the
1dea of such a small audience and  no ossi_ble
hcatwn  1s   great   and   the   writer   has   a
chance  therein  to trim  his vision  or let it grow  wild;   he  can   see,  or  sense,  a  re­ sponse and  go on.
As for  the  reader, in  many  cases  no. I  think  all  the  promotional activity   that some  of  the  presses  concerned have created has fogged up the glass through which  most  readers  find  themselves  dis­ covering   their  own  culture.
At   Coach   House   we're   helping    the reader  by giving  him  an  object  contain­ ing writing  which  reflects the writing and  is  therefore  worthy   of   respect  on   both these  levels.
VICTOR COLEMAN

OH,  SURE,  they  have   been  a  success.  I think   they   have   been   a   great   success. And  I  think  they've  helped   all  kinds  of writers   and  if  the  number of  copies  of all of the  books sold is your  criterion for "have  they   helped   readers?"  then   ob­ viously there's no doubt  about  the answer.
MEL HURTIG

NEW WAVE  IN  PUBLISHING



AFTERTHOUGHTS

I  prelude this last section  with  a statement rather  than  a question, since I feel some  explanation of the  way this collection  of opinions was gathered and  finally selected  is necessary. Whenever even  an informed outsider  (as a professional writer  obviously  is in relation  to  publishing)  puts  questions about  a  field in  which  he is not  directly  involved, some  of his  questions will inevitably seem  to the  answerers  less relevant  to  their  problems  than others,  or,  to  say  the  least,  will  prove  unproductive. I  originally   asked thirteen questions; it  was obvious  from the  answers  that  three  proved  too insubstantial  or  too  tangential. In  dealing  with  them I  decided   that   it would  be most  fair to the  answerers, and in  the  end  most  enlightening to the  reader  to leave -in  the  case of material  I  did  use -all  the  answers to any  question. This  meant  that  when  a question  seemed  to  have  failed, I  dropped   it  with   all  its  answers. Thus three  groups   were  immediately jettisoned.  Since  most  answerers expressed their  views  at length, space be­ came  another   problem; two  more  questions  with  all  their  answers  were dropped   mainly   for this  reason, though   they  were  also  the  weakest  sur­ vivors. The last three  of the  remaining  eight  were  then  condensed  into  a single question, since they  were closely related,  and  this left  the  six  groups of opinions  on  what  seem to me  the important  facets of the  new  publish­ ing  that  reached  the   printing  post, and  now  appear.  I  also  invited   par­ ticipants to  express  any  further  views they  had,  and  of the   few  opinions  submitted I  have  chosen  the  following by James  Lorimer  and  Mel  Hurtig  because I think  each  adds notably  to our understanding of  what  has been going  on in  publishing  during  the  past  few years.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


IT USED to be possible for creative people in Canada to get away from  the fact  that they  were  Canadians, to  avoid   the  fact or  to  extinguish  it  by  becoming  British or  American. There are  many  people around who  have  succeeded  at  one  time or  another in doing  this,  and  their  ranks have    recently    been   reinforced   by   the arrival in  the  country of  many  who  are not  in  fact  Canadians and  who  have  no intention of becoming  so. But  my impres­ sion  is  that   it  is  now  difficult  for  most people   involved   in  artistic and  intellec­  tual   work  to  avoid   their  Canadianness, and  that   their  consciousness  of  that  fact
 leads  to the  difficult  question of what  to do  about  it.
Artists  and   intellectuals  in  a  country
like  this  one  where   many  of  the  serious media  of communication and  most of the mass media are dominated by material originating from  abroad or  imitating foreign   material  have   to  act  differently from   similar   people   in  other   situations where  the  media  already exist.  An  essen­ tial  part  of  being  a  Canadian  artist,   at the  present  moment, is working to create  the  media  by  which   the  work  of  Cana­ dian  artists  can  reach  a  Canadian audi­ ence,  and  can  be  publicly  discussed  and

NEW WAVE IN PUBLISHING




evaluated. Of course some of these  media do already exist, but  they  are  so thin  and weak  that  they make  possible only  a very thin  and  weak  cultural life.
For  writers,  that  means  concern about
publishing. It also  means  concern about periodicals,  since  periodicals  are  so  im­ portant for  the discussion  and  evaluation of  writers'   work.  For  painters,  it  means  concern  about  the  private and  public  art  galleries,   art  magazines   and   so  on.  For film-makers, it  means  concern   about  dis­ tribution  companies, ownership and  con­ trol   of   movie   theatres,  and   the   media both   popular  and   serious   as  sources  of movie criticism.
Of  course  all of  us have  a stake  in the
existence  of all  kinds  of cultural and  in­ tellectual  activity    in   Canada,  and   we should  all  be concerned about  these  mat­  ters  and   work  at   changing  the  present situation.  But   artists    and   intellectuals have   the   biggest,   most   immediate  and direct  stake.  They  must  have  these  media  if  they  are  going  to  be  able  to  practise  their  art.  When  these media  do  not exist, they  are  permanently  crippled. We  can't  afford   to  wait,  as  writers,  for  publishers  to  come  along  and  do  something about  publishing.  This  is  especially   true   when most  publishers   have  abdicated  most  or all   of   their   cultural  responsibility and function in  Canada in  favour of making easy  money  as  junior  "agency" partners of  foreign   publishers. That  is why  jour­ nalists  can't wait  for  magazine  publishers to  start   new  Canadian  magazines; they must   start   their   own,  create  their   own medium. Artists  can't  wait  for  public  art gallery   trustees   to  improve  the  state   of the  art  galleries;  they  have  to  get  them­ selves  organized   and   try   to   take   over
 those  art  galleries,  or  at  least  get  them­ selves  into   a  position   of  being  a  force which  has to be reckoned  with.
It is in  the  light  of  these  facts  about our  situation,  and   of  the  need  for  this kind  of  strategy   from   Canadian  artists and   intellectuals,  that    what    has   hap­ pened  in Canadian publishing in  the last few years has to be evaluated.
JAMES   LORIMER

THE MOST INTERESTING  thing about  book publishing  and  the "intellectual commun­ ity"  that   I've  come  across  is  the  failure  of  most  academics  and   book   reviewers and  book columnists  and editorial writers to  understand  the  role  of  the  publisher.  Particularly what   I'm  thinking about   is the  way  in  which  a  good  publisher   with a  good  editorial  staff   helps  the  author. And  further  Ifind   the   lack  of  under­ standing about  how  the  publisher  origin­ ates  books  (marries an  idea  to a writer) is quite  astonishing. The really good  pub­ lisher who is doing  a proper job is always looking  for  the  right   person   to  do  the kind of book the  publisher wants  to  pub­ lish.  The   image  of  the  publisher  sitting back and  waiting  for manuscripts to cross his desk is prevalent and  grossly distorted in  most  cases.  Much of  the  problem   in Canadian  publishing lies  in  inability   to have   proper   access   to   working   capital. The  federal  and  provincial governments could  play  an  effective   role  in  assisting the  Canadian  book   publishing  industry  best of all  not  through grants and  loans and  giveaways or handouts but  simply by providing  guarantees for  some  moderate chartered  bank  capital. This  would  cost the  governments very,  very  little.
MEL  HURTIG

THE CANADIAN PUBLISHERS

All217 of them



Dave  Godfrey







IN THE sPruNG when I W"-' 'eading some of my 'ecent fictioo to  a  Conference at  the  University   of Calgary, I met  a  student, Sonja, born  in Alberta, who  was  finishing  an  M.A.  in  philosophy  and  yet  had  not  only  never
studied any  Quebec philosophers, or any  work  of George  Grant, she  had  indeed never  heard of George  Grant; and  this lack did  not  upset  her.  Nor  did  she know anything about recent  French  philosophy.  What  she knew  was Chomsky  and  his disciples.  What she believed,  and  felt the  rest of the  world  did  too,  was  that  the Americans were  better  philosophers than  anyone  else-they  alone  were  discus­ sing  what   was  important. "Better" was  her  key  word.  She  would   not  accept  my  peace-offering that   the  space  between  American  philosophers and  our  own was  better  termed a  difference   than   made  part  of  a  competitive  hierarchy.
When   I first  presented some  of  the  material which   follows,  to  a  group of Canadian Studies  students at  Victoria  College,  the  first question  which  followed was this:  "Why don't you writers  and  artists  and  everybody  who  can't get  your stuff  sold  just  hire  a  manager to  do  it for  you?"  Presumably Sam  Slick's  great grandson, with  an  M.B.A.  from  Harvard, would  settle  it all in  a few  whirlwind weeks.
Atypical you might  say, and  far  from  the  world  of publishing. But  then  in the opening lecture  of the series in which  this paper  was formalized, at the  prestigious Royal   Ontario  Museum, a  member   of  the   Ontario  Cabinet,  Robert  Welch, charged specifically  with  overseeing  the  Ministry  of  Social  Development  Policy Field,  spoke for almost  an  hour  about  the  relationships between  Government and Culture, and  not  once  did  he mention  a single Canadian thinker, a single  Cana­ dian  writer,  a  single  specific  Canadian situation, or  a  single  Canadian  book.

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



We  are  still  far  too  far  away  from  possessing our  own  world,  from  inhabit­ ing  a space  at  least  part  of whose  complexities  are  made  up  of  our  own  tradi­ tions,  our  own  conflicts,  our  own  perceptions, our  own  definitions  and  redefini­  tions,  and  our  own  attempts at  struggling with  these  realities.  Hiring American managers, or  American-trained systems analysts  or  system-conceivers, is the  last thing  we ought  to  be considering. Only  within  the  crucible  of our  own  problems  can  we hope  to move  closer to our  natural sense of  being  and  learn  to look out­  ward  with  some  confidence and   dignity.
Now I have  never  pretended that  a progressive, indigenous publishing industry is going  to turn  the  heads  of our  Sonjas  and  Robert Welchs  around overnight. But  having  put  the  best part  of the last five or six years into  an  attempt to make philosophy  work,  to  be  creatively nationalistic, to  be innovative within   a  tradi­ tional  framework, and  having  seen some successful  results  along  with  many  set­ backs, it's  perhaps a good  time  for  me to look at  the  situation, in  the early  sum­  mer  of 1973,  and  estimate how far  we've  come-remembering  that  the  Royal Commission, after  a good  deal  of expensive,  high-quality  research,  recently  con­ cluded:
It should be clear  by now that  all the evidence which we have examined  leads, directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Canadian  book  publishing  in­ dustry  is facing  almost  insuperable  economic  pressures. They  threaten  either  to force it under,  or so to attenuate it that  it could only survive as an  enfeebled  re­ gional cultural  activity.  (Canadian Publishers  and  Canadian  Publishing, p. 25 I.)

It  is not  wolf,  wolf,  that  we have  been  crying.  Our  mistake,  if any,  has  been to attempt to keep  the  revolt  civilized,  to work  within  groundrules  established by groups  who look forward with  pleasure  to the inevitable results of those economic pressures.
But  what  is  publishing that  it should  loom  so large  in  the  minds  of  certain
intellectuals and  activists?  In  an  ideal  world,  it is nothing more  than  a  mechan­ ism, one mechanism among many  for ensuring  that  the best, the  most  interesti g and   the  most  popular of  the  ideas,  fantasies,  facts  and   hypotheses  of  a  com­ munity's  intellectuals  and   poets,  its  innovators  and   teachers,  its  story-makers and  its holymen,  are  distributed freely and  cheaply  to the  other members of that  community. A simple  mechanism acting  within  a complex  cultural environment which  hopefully  ensures  that  the  individual outsider  is not  discriminated against, nor  any  group   of  outsiders allowed  to  destroy  the  actuality or  the  potential of the  community's culture.
What is culture? To  me  it  is no  more  than   the  sum  of  the  activities  of  the

66

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



given community,  not  limited  to  the  theories of the  intellectual,  or  the  crafts­ manship  of the worker,  or the laws of the  possessors. And  one of the  main  rea­ sons why publishing  in Canada  is in such a diseased state  is that  we suffer  here from  two  very  false  definitions  of culture,  definitions  which  many  publishers themselves not only help propagate  but live out their lives within.
The  first, which  is essentially European,  implies always that  culture  is  some­ thing to be added  to a community  from above, as a lord might  add  fine wine to a  peasant's  meal. To  me, once you are a member  of a community,  you  enjoy, and are enlarged by, and  limited  by, its culture. You can en joy individual  exotic artifacts, but you cannot  add culture to yourself alone, you cannot rise above your birthright  culture  without  raising it up  with  you or  participating in  its enrich­ ment,  you  cannot   borrow  improvements  from  outside  unless  your  own  com­ munity is willing to make that  borrowing with you or you can so persuade  them.
A  great  deal  of  the  sterility  and  mis-direction  of  our  culture  and  criticism stems from that  "fine-wine"  false definition, as well as many  of the  oddities  of our  "high-culture" elitists,  but  it  is  not  basically  dangerous.   Even  when  the Southams  and  Dwyers let one  more  Factory  Lab  Theatre die so we can  have, for example, more ballet in Ottawa, they are still more irritating than  dangerous.
It is the definition, or anti-definition,  of culture, which I denote as Ben  Frank­ linism,  which  is the  overwhelming  threat.  This  definition  sees  function,   mere materialistic  functioning,  the single-minded  performance  of  wealth  and  power­ garnering  activities  by the  individual  and  essentially on  his  sole behalf,  as  the guiding  principle  of behaviour.
Ben Franklinism  thus denies so many areas of complexity to culture,  that,  al­ though  as a set of ideas it cannot  totally destroy any group's  culture  so  long  as the members remain  as participants despite these harsh limitations,  it can so root out and cauterize the elements of the culture as to leave the group's potential  for successful evolution almost minimal. And America, of course, is the home of Ben Franklinism: our good neighbour  to the south, the United  States, united  in their search for military  power  and  consumptive consumption  and  efficient wasteful­ ness and self-destruction.
I see that  Ben Franklin  anti-culture  as one of those dark void stars which some say lie at the heart  of the  Milky Way, so concentrated  in density that  even light is bent as it enters the  gravitational field. If you live near  such  a star,  you  ob­ viously spend  a good deal  of time  trying to discover what  it is up  to;  you  ob­ viously fear  its emissaries and  servants-especially those  who  speak  in  Texan drawls  of the  "dangers" of  nationalism;  and  battle-words  obviously  enter  the

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



vocabulary of  your  own  culture, no  matter what  its inner  propensities, as  they entered the  vocabulary of  Mexico  when  faced  with  the  joys of  Texan  "inter­ nationalism" in  the  previous   century.
And  I aver  that  the  forces set loose by a Ben Franklin cauterization of culture have  a triple  potential for  disruption in neighbouring cultures  such  as our  own: a)   in imposing  upon  us the  same  strictly  materialistic standards  of America, b) in enticing  us towards a General Motorsji.B.M.jMaclean-Hunter  culture, a new form  of feudalism based  on vast  accumulations of power  within  fewer  and  fewer hands but  sanctified  in  the   dogma   of  individualism  and   efficiency  and   free­ markets, c)  in enforcing an  internal split  between  what  Scott  Symons  has  called the  Roundheads and  the  Cavaliers, between  those who  now  control  the  produc­ tion  aspects  of our  culture and  wish to see it further Ben Franklinized  and  those who  seek reform  and  innovation within  tradition.
It is  possible,  I believe,  to  define  much   of  what  our  culture is,  to  describe precisely  what  is being  lost within  the  dark  star's  field of force,  but  let  us rather examine these  cultural  propensities within  one  component of  the  culture,  book publishing, an  important  component not  only  because  so  much   of  its  vitality comes  from  its  adherence to  the  best  of  these  propensities   but  also  because  it constantly demands, by its very  nature, connections  between  those  aspects  of our life which  some  would  keep separate, between  art  and  politics,  between  manage­ ment  and  radicalism, between  selling and  teaching, between  accounting  and  art­ istry,  between  production and  personality.


BOOKS, our  books  and  their  books,  have  an  especially  im­
portant role in any culture which  is besieged by a stronger  yet inferior  culture. Practically  as  well  as  symbolically.  In   an  age  of  increasing   centralization  of power,  when  even a bankrupt city newspaper is worth  $12,ooo,ooo, and  a single television  show  can  cost  its  corporate sponsors  a  million  dollars,  a  small  book, such   as  Grant's  Technology  and   Empire,  or   Bergeron's   Petite   Manuel,  or Drache's Close  the  Forty-Ninth Parallel,  or  Ryga's  Ecstacy  of Rita   joe,  or  At­ wood's  Survival, can  be produced for less than  a year's salary  of an  assistant  pro­ fessor. The  book  remains  then  an  outlet  of freedom  for  the  disaffected  and  the disenfranchised, and  if spoken  truly  and  if in  touch  with  the  true  propensities  and  beliefs of the  culture, can  have  a  far  wider  and  more  deep-reaching effect than  any  Kraft TV spectacular or  ad  campaign in  Chatelaine.
That such  books are  produced under  conditions  of great  difficulty  and  are  al-

68

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



ways likely  to simply  disappear from  our  cultural life,  however,  even  the  Royal Commission with  all its blinkers  is willing to admit. The prime  spur  to Canadian publishing in recent  years has been the vast number of circulating manuscripts of high  quality with  an  angry  creator, not  too  far  back,  somewhere behind   them. Although the  "internationalists" claim  always  that  the  opposite is true,  the  real stumbling block  has  been  foreign   control  of  distribution  and   the  imposing   of foreign  standards of  quality   and  relevance   (and   of  course,  although  never  de­ fended, profitability). Thus, the  many  Canadian author /publishers of  the  past decade.
Now  that  my  own  infatuation with  publishing is almost  over,  I  can  see that it  went  through seven  stages  and  while  not  normative, is to  some  degree  rep­ resentative. It is first  of  all,  difficult  for  me  to  believe  that   any  of  us  became  publishers in full rationality. If we had  known  the  problems,  all the problems, we might  well  never  have  started. It  grew  out  of a  gut  reaction, a  kind  of  buried anger  in the mid-sixties  at the constant humiliation, the sense of  foreignness  when you entered a bookstore  or read  a review,  while, at the same time-to some  de­ gree -you believed  the  anger  was  justified  given  your own inadequacies as well as  your  country's. One  thing   I  had  learned, from  Africa,  was  to  distrust   that  sense  of inadequacy, to  look  back  to  the  remnants of one's  own  culture for  in­ spiration, to  the  needs  of the  people  about  you for  purpose,  and  within  yourself and  your  friends  and  family  for the  necessary imagination and  will to create  new structures and  new modes of action.
Given  that  knowledge,  there  are  seven steps to the  process  as I see it.
The  Egg Stage: where  you finally ignore  the existing structures and  institutions and  their  frustrations to communicate your  own  undistorted thoughts directly  to a few listener-readers, no more  than  can  hear  the sound  of your  voice in a room or  read  your  manuscript.
The  Ego  Stage: where  you look  at  the  end-result  of the  publishing structure,
books  on  a store  shelf,  and  say,  quietly,  I can  do  that. And  do  it.  Even  though that  first book on the shelf cost you $3.00  to produce and  it's selling  off the shelf at  $2.50,  and  it's only on ten shelves in the  whole country.
The  Joy  and  Happiness Stage: when  you find out  about  Stan  Bevington   and
the  other  people  who've  been  doing  it for some time  without dying  of smallpox; when  the  Canada Council  finds  out  about   you  and  gets  you  some  encourage­ ment,   however   minor;  when   your   breakthrough  seems  somewhat   miraculous and  therefore repeatable and  you take on other  authors besides yourself  and  your good  friends.

6g

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



The fourth stage I call, Mammon  Enters:  Now the handouts  and loans, which appeared  munificent  at  first, are  suddenly seen to be a little smaller  than  your needs. You enter,  very confused and  reluctantly, the world of regular  bookstores and  national  distribution. You find out there are fewer than  six hundred  book­ stores in the country  that  can even attempt  to justify the name, while their associ­ ation,  the  C.B.A.,  has only a few more  than  two  hundred  members.  And  you learn  about  invoicing,  and  discounts,  and  accounts  receivable,  and  aged  trial balances  and  credit  lines and  straight  line depreciation.  And  bang,  you're  into Department X.
For into the inevitable chaos that  has been building about  you comes the voice of the  Government, stating  officially, YOU  ARE  A BUSINESS, YOU  MUST OBEY RULES. They  kick you out of your basement, because it's part  of a  resi­ dence;  they question  your tax-records  and suggest strongly you hire an  account­  ant  whose salary  would  only  take  120% of your  annual  gross, and  insist you start  using a  six-part  invoice  form,  filed by number  and  customer.  And  what they don't  demand,  the  banks do. Because by now you can't  pay for  everything just  by  giving  up  beer  and  movies and  new  clothes. Your  friendly  bank  has agreed  you're commercial  and  they'll be glad to loan you three thousand  dollars
-if  you don't  have a Government  of Canada  Bond they'll gladly take a second
or third  mortgage  on your house -after  all, what  is their  purpose  if not to aid struggling  young capitalists?
You swallow, sign,  and  enter  Stage  Six:  Fledging  Entrepeneur:  by now  a structure  has grown  up between author  and  reader that  is really quite immense;
you look something  like this


Canada Council
 Bank
Governments 	Critics


AUTHORS-You-Production-book-keeper-shipper-bookstores-READERS Author 	Manager	invoicer 	libraries
Teacher
Editor
Manager	Printers

But  you don't   really  have  time  to  look at  yourself;  you're  too  involved  in creating  and  juggling the structure  to even read a book about  business, because of course you're  not  really in business, you're  just trying to do what  you set out to do -get  yourself and  Dennis  Lee and  Margaret  Atwood some of the readers you deserve. And pressure from the establishment institutions  which keep you on the run is matched  by pressures from authors;  everybody, at that  stage, seems to have a friend  who has a great  idea:  about  reforming the universities, or helping

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



new draft-dodgers,  or reforming City Hall, or stopping  the Spadina  Expressway, or revealing the energy sell-out. And many of them  are very good ideas.
OK.  So  why weren't   we all successful? Stage  Seven  ought  to  have  been  a Mercedes  and  retirement  to  the  Bahamas. All we had  to  do  was  stop  fooling around  and  take  a  course in  Accounting  for  Managers  at  the  Park  Plaza.  All across the country from  the mid-sixties on, similar structures  were evolving at  a rapid  rate  to bridge  the gaps between Canadian authors  and  readers  that  have been imposed by economic colonialism. Why were they not fully successful;  why is aid and support  still required?
A  mature  culture  requires  constant  examination   and  redefinition  and  elab­ oration, in minor as well as major areas. The  mass-media is hopelessly inadequate for  this purpose;  it cannot  present  detail and  it cannot  sustain  an  examination  for much longer than  two or three months.
What  would an  American  manager  do? Suppose he came from  an  American house  with  a  lingering  conscience,  one  which  had  not  sold  out  to  Litton  or Xerox. His average  print  run might have been as low as 8,ooo copies. He would
have been used to a budget in the following range for a 200 page book.

Retail  price
Sales
$7.00
8,ooo copies
Unit  cost
Design


$  400.00
Retail income
$s6,ooo.oo
Typeset
2,000.00
Minus royalties
s,6oo.oo
Platesjpaper

Minus bookstore

print@ ·35
2,8oo.oo
discount @ 40o/o
22,400.00
Bind@ .40
3,200.00
Gross income
28,ooo.oo
Total
8,400.00
Cost of sales
8,400.00
Unit cost $r.os


Out  of the $28,ooo  gross approximately   r8o/o goes for selling and  fulfilment costs, leaving almost $1s,ooo.oo per title for other costs such as editorial, promo­ tion, space, salaries, interest, etc.
The  first thing  such  a  manager  would obviously do  is to  look  at  a  average budget  for  a  similar  type  book  in  Canada.   Because of  market   pressure  from America, he could not sell the book at a higher retail price. But his sales expecta­
tion would be optimistic at 2,ooo copies. So the budget would look like this.


Retail  price
Sales
Retail income
Minus royalties
 $7.00
2,ooo copies
$r4,ooo.oo
1,400.00
 Unit cost  professional  presses
Design	$  400.00
Typeset
@ $ro.oo per page	$2,ooo.oo

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



Minus  bookstore	plate/paper /print
discount  @
40o/o
s,6oo.oo
@ 8o¢
$I,6oo.oo
Gross income

$  7,000.00
Bind@ 8o¢
$I,6oo.oo
Cost of sales
Net  revenue

s,6oo.oo
$  I,400.00
Total  cost of sales
Unit  cost-$2.80
s,6oo.oo

Out  of which  the same  I 8%  of gross income,  or $I ,26o.oo,  must  be allocated as a  firm  expense  for  selling  and  fulfilment, leaving  $ I4o.oo   to  pay  for  editorial, salaries,  promotion, space,  interest, etc.
What can  he  do? There might  be an  attempt to lower  the  unit  cost,  by using I.B.M. typesetting, back-street printers, one  colour  jackets, etc.,  but  very  quickly one of two decisions would  be made: a)  Do only those kinds of books which  have a  possibility  of getting back  up  to the  U.S.  minimum press run  of 8,ooo  copies: i.e. some  kinds of textbooks,  the  odd  popular novel,  books about  politics,  hockey and  Indians: b)  Push sales of imported books, which  can  be brought in at  a  rea­ sonable  unit  cost,  and   out  of  the  "profits" from  such  sales  publish   the  occa­ sional  important  cultural book.  That is,  the  Doubleday  versus  the  Oxford  al­ ternative.
Between  the  implications of  this  economic  contrast   however,   and   the  philo­ sophic  environment  I  described   earlier,   you  have  a  specific  social  situation, a poverty  cycle, which  is influenced both  economically  and  philosophically.
If publishing can  be seen as symbolic  in its recent  innovative breakthroughs, it is also more clearly symbolic  in its state  of disease during  the  Ig6o's.  Some  would term  it  only  disrepair, but  it  is difficult  to  prove  that  the  patient was  not  very, very close to terminal.
In  general, the  industry simply  reflected,  and  still reflects  in  economic terms, the  Canadian industrial pattern:  branch-plant replications  based  on  the  current mode  of struggle  for market-control in the  U.S.A.:  operating philosophies based far  more  on  Sam  Slick  and  Kraft Incorporated than  on  George  Grant and  Sir Adam   Beck;  expectations, in  terms  of salaries,  prices,  content  and   packaging, based  on American practices  rather than  on our  own realities,  utilization of  con­ sumer-media overspill  to ensure  market-control for foreigners; philosophic attacks
-backed by cash  donations to  political  parties-upon nationalism and  social­ ism;  a closing of export  markets  by head  office directives  or  planning  strategies; fragmentation and  the  encouragement of  destructive forms  of  competition with the  native-owned industry;  imposition of American law  extra-territorially; a  net non-importation of capital as the  foreign-controlled  segment  of the  industry in­ creases,  through the  use of  retained earnings,  artificial,  tax-encouraged  depreci-

THE CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



ation,  and  the  willingness  of Canadian banks  to encourage monopoly control by directing their  lending  policies to favour  already  large  accumulations of capital; and  a  redesigning  of  distribution methods-both  through mass  market  outlets and  via  the  idea  of chain-stores -in a  manner which  reflects  American habits and  pressures  far  more  than  Canadian traditions or  needs.




AGAINST  THESE   PRESSURES,   Canadian   publishing  has fared  little better  than  our drug,  oil, auto  or chemical  industries. It does have  one advantage the  others  lack  in  that  each  product is distinctive. A  refrigerator is a refrigerator, but  no  matter how  Philip  Roth  is packaged and  merchandised,  he still  cannot have  as  much   to  say  to  Newfoundlanders  as  Harold  Horwood or David  French. The  greater the  remaining cultural integrity  of the  hinterland, the easier  for  its  writers  to  be  distinctive and  to  find  an  audience. But,  as  Robert Welch  and  Sonja  indicate, in  Calgary  and  Toronto we do  not  have  all  the  ad­ vantages of Newfoundland. In  terms  of an  urban, complex  society,  one  attempt­ ing to come to terms  in its own  way with  technology,  rapid  change  and  multiple moralities, we  are  in  a  very  sorry  state.  There  is  a  real  danger  of  allowing  America's experiments and  postulated solutions  to swamp  our  own.
Speaking statistically,   by  1970  all  publishers  made  a  contribution of  o.o67o
to  the  Canadian G.N.P., significantly   lower  than   the  U.S.A. where   the  value added  by  publishing accounted  for  o.z6%  of  the  G.N.P.  We  shaft   ourselves doubly,  by depriving ourselves  of  the  contents  of our  own  books  and  by giving up  the  chance   to  make  almost   four  times  as  many   jobs  available for  editors, printers, authors, salesmen,  designers,  etc.  as are  now  available.
And   those  figures  are  from   the  1970  Ernst  and   Ernst   report, the  first  and only  Federal study  of  publishing as an  industry. The  sale  of  Gage  and  Ryerson cut  the sale of Canadian author books by Canadian owned  firms down  to a mere
2.5 percent  of the  total  dollar  market. It's  as though  we were  in  a race  with  the
oil industry for the  most  shameful showing.
But  all the  problems  are  not  external. It  was our  churches and  our  old  fam­ ilies who made  these two symbolic  sales. The  branch-plants benefit, although this is changing quite  rapidly, from  three  other  factors  which  should  not  be  under  their  control. They  benefit  from  a sleeping  citizenry,  a  populace  which  is only slowly  beginning to see connections between  business and  culture,  which  is only slowly  beginning to  realize  that   allowing  McGraw-Hill to  buy  Ryerson   means

73

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



fewer  jobs for  Canadians, unless they,  the  people, insist on  certain  safeguards, such as exist in the Ontario educational system's insistence on Canadian-authored textbooks.
The  branch  plants  also  benefit from  the  colonial  mentality  of many  of our critics. A Kildare  Dobbs  represents  the "fine-wine"  variety. An  occasional  book might match  his made-in-UK standards,  but  he is not interested  in, nor capable of, the effort required  to see Canadian culture  as a complex  entity  and  to view specific books at  least  partially  within  their  own framework,  as  do  the  newer, younger,  better  critics such  as Reg  Vickers, Bill New, Eldon  Gamet,  Margaret Atwood and  Sandra  Djwa.
The  "branch-plant" or  Ben  Franklin  variety  of critic  is best  represented  by William  French,  who constantly  worries himself sick-one imagines  him biting his nails to the quick with worry-about the potential dangers of government interference if all these socialistic fiddlers are allowed to disrupt  the beautiful free play of market  forces, yet who sat,  as the senior literary  critic  of Toronto,  for years and  years while the  Mafia  extended  its control  of paperback  distribution from Toronto  to cover most of Ontario,  and  yet never let out a single peep, was indeed  blissfully ignorant  of the entire situation,  until long after  the Royal Com­ mission, in  true  R.C.M.P. fashion,  had  laid  down  the  law  to  those  St.  Louis whiskey-runners  who  were  working  outside  the established  modes  of  exploiting the  natives. Only  now,  in  1973,  is he deigning, on  C.B.C.  money,  to  examine the publishing situation; yet when  he started  out on his tour  he was  unaware  of even the names of many important new houses, let alone their  members or mode of operation.
But more important, as an aid in the withering of indigenous  publishing,  was, and  is, the "good servant" variety  of colonial mentality.  And  this, in a sense, is the most difficult to attack.  Because we do dislike rebelliousness and  excess, that is one of the givens of our culture. The War Measures Act would never have been accepted in America or France  or Britain or Nigeria exactly as it was in Canada. Nor  forgotten  so  quickly.  We  long  for  order  and  safety, so  that  our  children might grow up in peace and  joy, and we fear the crunch, we fear even discussion of the  crunch.  We  are  primarily  the  offspring of servant  classes, landless  Nor­ mans,  younger  son  Englishmen,   crofter  Scots, dispossessed Hungarians,  draft­  dodging Americans,  West Indians  exploited first by slavery or indentury and then by neo-colonialism. We specialize in insurance not inventions. It is not very diffi­ cult for the Americans to find good servants among  us-Wally  Mathesons  and Paul  Irwins and  Bill Frenches:  to sell their books, to buy their  books, to defend

74

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



their rights to control  the market-for  that  is "natural" according  to our  phil­
osophy, our borrowed  philosophy-and to manage  these branch-plants.
They  are good people, these Paul Boltons and  Ivan  Owens, many of them  the nicest people in publishing,  people whom you would be glad  to have live down the street from you, without  an evil stick in their  bodies, and  impossible to hate, and  yet, and  yet, and  yet, we must rage against them for they do have a failing in  that  they  cannot,  or  will not,  because of  deep-rooted  fear,  see where  their actions  lead.  Good  servants  can  perpetuate   a  pleasant  society  as  long  as  they have  an  absentee  or  benevolent  landlord,  but  they  cannot  create  a  self-reliant and independent culture,  because their very role as servant denies that  possibility. And when the landlord  turns nasty the impossibility of their  role will become ap­ parent  even to them.  Or  when their fellow tenants suddenly  awake  to the  possi­ bilities of a fuller life. Now, when Paul Bolton quits managing  a  branch-plant to start  his own  company,  he first looks for an import  line of  books as a "base  of operations." When  Ivan  Owen  and  Oxford  part  company,  it's  unlikely  he will tear down  the wall Tamarack  has erected between art  and society.
The  writers should  be more  aware  of economic  realities, but  there  are  num­ erous branch-planters and  good servants there  too, sweet Mary  Jane  Edwardses and  hard-pressed  John  Metcalfes.  People who  would  love to sell  "their" book to an American  book-club for example. Yet those same book clubs must  be seen as an  omen  of  the  disastrous  future  if  we do  not  take  strong  action.  Of  the
$225,ooo,ooo   worth  of  books  purchased   by  Canadians   in  I970,   more  than
$5o,ooo,ooo  worth are purchased  directly from America through  book clubs. We don't  even obtain  the  dribble  benefits of an  agency system in  this instance.  No wonder  we rage.
The  seventh stage then,  in most instances, was not marked  by "mature  entre­ preneurship". Most of us remained  fledglings to some degree.  Rather,  through the  problematic  evolution  of the  Independent Association,  we sought  solutions to the  problems  which  were larger  than  any  given firm. Again,  since  we were seeking solutions  rather  than  imitating  foreign models, the  process is still some­ what  hazy and  open  to various interpretations. And,  since the  membership  in­ cludes older  houses as well as new houses, community  presses  and  commercial firms, Marxists, anarchists, capitalists and the inevitable neurotics of any remnant  industry,  everything  I  am  about  to say will offend at  least one member.
Canadian social philosophy is still basically inarticulate.  When  Abe  Rotstein
and  Robert  Fulford  and  I  were  editing  Read  Canadian  we  wanted   to  do  a chapter  on Canadian social philosophy, for we all felt that it would be possible to

75

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



know  whether a certain way  of acting  or  organizing, especially  as  a group,  was basically   within   or   without  an   acknowledged Canadian  framework,  but   we couldn't find  enough   books  to  make  a  chapter. Still,  Toronto is  not  Chicago, C.U.S.O. is  not  the  Peace  Corps,   C.B.C.  is  not  C.B.S.,  Ontario Hydro is  not I.T.T.,  Calgary is not  quite  Houston, R.M.C. is not  West  Point,  the  C.L.C. is not  a  mirror image  of  the  A.F.L.C.I.O. There is,  I  believe,  a  similarity to  the way in which  such  Canadian  organizations differ  from  their  American  counter­ part. Suffice it to say at  this point  that  they are characterized more  by order  than  by  competition,  more   by  a  habit   of  bumbling  humanity  than   by  a   required necessity of greatness, more  by a sense of purpose  than  by an  adherence to ma­  terialistic  practicality. I  think  that  neither  Haliburton nor  the  Blackfoot  Indians, two of my touchstones for  a sense of our  traditions, would  be  too  unhappy with the  I.P.A. Nor  would  Sir  Adam   Beck,  nor  our  farming  ancestors  gathered  to­ gether  for  communal barn-raisings, or stump-pullings, or  church-buildings.
The  official  organization for  Canadian book  publishers  was something called
the  Canadian Book Publishers Council,  ridden  with  Ben Franklinism. In  typical fashion  within  Canada's weird  industrial structures, more  than  two-thirds of the members  of this  national trade  association  were  branch-plants. They  would  not, could  not,  and  did  not agree  with  the basic premises of our struggle.  They  offered us, if we  joined,  a special  new  committee to deal  with,  yes, Canadian  books.
If the  I.P.A. can  be seen  as the  seventh  stage  of an  individual's  involvement
in the  art/industry of publishing, then,  it is worth  examining briefly, for it  repre­ sents  in  many  ways  something more  fruitful in  kind  than  any  of the  individual publishing houses which  have sprung up in the last few years. If it  works, and  no one can guarantee that  it will even survive,  its example  would  be  useful for other  industrial components of our  culture.
Like  all trade organizations, we spend  a good  deal  of time  lobbying  the  gov­ ernment and  other  segments  of the industry. But membership is limited  to Cana­ dian-owned firms,  which  is not  typical.  Annual fees are  only seventy-five  dollars  and  associate  membership is available  for firms who  don't  yet have  the  requisite  ten  books in print  yet. Within the  I.P.A., the individual publisher  is  able  to face some of the larger problems  that  he was barely  even aware  of while locked  in the chaos  of the  fledgling  entrepreneur, problems  which  in many  cases  are  as much cultural  as  industrial.  For  our  environment  is  not   American,  of   course,   and neither should  be our  solutions  or  goals.
The  I.P.A., to some  extent, is worker  democracy at  the  ownership level. The
membership outlines  major areas  of concern  and  sets general  policy. Then indi-

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



vidual  publishers  head  committees to deal  with  specific  problems and  are  given relative  autonomy to solve detailed problems  as they see fit, with  the  proviso  that any  member  is free  to sit on  any  committee  if he so desires,  and  the  practicality that  in general  people  work on  committees  in which  they  have some  self-interest. The  executive committee comprises  all such chair  persons plus officers elected so as to represent  the  various  regions  of the  country  and  the  different interest  groups within  the  I.P.A.  It contains then,  since it is essentially co-operative, the  seeds of being  something  more   than   the  average   trade   association,   something  creative and  yet within  our  traditions.
I have described to some extent  the negative aspects of being "good  servants", including the  inability   to  respond   to  the  new  shapes  of  accumulated power,  to IBMism,   that  is to  the  social  structures resulting   from   that   desire  to  become a New World  King  or Duke  or  Lord which  is a major  factor in Ben Franklinism.
One  way which  our  current form  of corporate, hierarchial industrial structure perpetuates itself, despite  its essential  wastefulness  and  unhappiness, is by  prob­ lem-solving  on a corporately individual basis, so that,  as each  problem  is solved, whether in the technical, management financing,  marketing or interaction spheres, that  solution  remains  a  secret  of  the  individual corporation,  part   of  its  growth  and  strength.  We  are  so  conditioned to  this  that   we  look  upon   it  as  natural. But,  especially for people  in the  condition  of Canadians, is it  necessarily  the  best answer?
To  some  extent  the  problems   which  large  corporations have  solved  are  real
problems,   especially  in  a  country  with  the  ethnic   and   geographic diversity   of Canada. We know  that  the  small  firm, although perhaps in a  psychological  and philosophic  way representing the  ideal size for a unit  of production cannot   hope to act  satisfactorialy if it acts  always  on its own.  w·e have  constantly before  us, among  many  examples,  the  death of most  of Ontario's small  dairies  and  cheese­ makers,  whether   co-operative or  capitalistic,   when  Kraft  really  turned  on  the muscle  it  had  developed  in  the  competition-rewarding environment  of  America.
The  question  is how  to  remain a  good  servant, which   is part   of  our  ethos, without becoming  a  good  servant of a destructive master.   One   theoretical  way out  is worker  control,  but  most  of Canada's workers  are  excellent  servants; the awakening of national consciousness which must foreshadow innovation is only beginning  there.  The   battle   for  full  worker   participation  is  one   which   must eventually   be  fought   and   won,   but  at  least  in  English-speaking  Canada   few workers  are in the forefront of the  current  struggle.
The   possibility  remains of  using  the  I.P.A., as  a  forum, if  not  as  the  total


77

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



framework, for  a  new  process,  one  whereby  the  owner-publisher  would  retain control over  her  basic  production unit,  finding  manuscripts, making editorial  de­ cisions, convincing reviewers  to review and  buyers to buy, and,  above  all, working  with  her chosen  authors, while vesting  in a larger  co-operative body those aspects of  industrial  operation  which   demand  magnitude  of  scale  and   the   resultant dangers  of wasteful  competition and  accumulation of power.
You  do  not,  of  course,  break  a  poverty  cycle  merely  with  theory.  The  indi­ vidual  publisher  breaks  it with  books which  do sell more than  the  average, books like Anansi's Survival and  James, Lewis & Samuel's Corporate Welfare Bums and New  Press's  Shrug   which  sell from  twenty  to  fifty  thousand  copies.  Such  best­ sellers further increase  our  consciousness  of ourselves,  provide  a  decent  return  to author, and,  simply  by being  successes, revitalize  the  climate  for  other  Canadian books.
Group pressure  on  governments for  a  wider  and  fairer  distribution of funds has  helped  make  available important  books which  don't  fit  this  best-seller  cate­ gory and  yet which,  once  published, help in similar  ways to revitalize  the climate.  Librarians suddenly realize,  often  on  demands from  their  customers,  that  Cana­ dian   books  are  playing   a  more  important  role  in  their  borrowings. Even  the branch-plants, faced  with  this changing climate,  are forced  to increase  their  token Canadian  publishing, at  least  for  the  moment.
In  terms  of a broader view of what  we have  been  up to it is possible to say we have  basically  been  engaged in  a  survival  battle  for  the  Canadian off-shoot  of Anglo-Saxonism. But  we have  found very compatible allies in  the  French-Cana­ dian  publishers, who  are  organized very similarly,  but  started  much  easier;  they loaned  us much  of our  constitution, many  of our  principles,  and  a  great  deal  of
our  inspiration.


0N  THE  OTHER HAND, there  are  many  problems  we have not  yet even  begun  to face.
It is supposedly a  national goal  to  create  a  mosaic  culture within   Canada, but  then  where  are  the  books in  our  unofficial languages? What is to  be the  re­ lationship of  the   German-Canadian  book  to  the  Anglo-Canadian   book?  The  recent  Ontario Royal  Commission, in  its  admittedly minimal  budget, set  aside
$25,ooo.oo  for   books   about  native   peoples,   which   wouldn't  be   enough   to establish  even one good  Indian or  Eskimo-controlled house;  it set aside  no funds

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



whatsoever for  books  not  published in  English.  We  have  never  seriously  ques­ tioned  the  premises  of our  "national mosaic"  myth,  and  this  is not  the  time  to do  so,  but  isn't  one  of  the  reasons  for  such  a  myth  the  fact  that   we  don't see our  own  culture  as  viable?  The   centralist, liberal,   mercantilist,  "non-culture" represented by a  Lester  Pearson  or  Bud  Drury,  views culture as  somehow con­ cerned   with   Italian opera   and   Ukrainian  Easter   eggs  and   Nova   Scotian folk songs and  can  therefore perpetuate a myth  of many  cultures  knowing that  none of  these  "cultures"  (except   for  the  problem   children   such   as  Hutterites and  Doukhobors)  posed  a threat  to  Canada's C. D. Howe  and  Donald MacDonald version  of  Ben  Franklinism. Once   our  own  culture  breaks  free  of  Ben  Frank­ linism  however,   the  problems   of  real  sub-cultures and  unmelted  cultures  will become  clarified.  In  the  next  decade  this is one  of the  major difficulties  we  will face.
The  geographic diversity  of Canada is a  condition we are  more  used  to  con­
fronting. Here  is an  area  where  the  I.P.A. has  waited  almost  too  long  to  press for  a  formal,  socially-supported, east-west  axis  to  countervail  the   north-south one  imposed   by American economic forces.  Upper Canada is closed  off  almost totally  to  books from  the  coasts.  Quebec is, in  many  ways,  another  country. A proposal we  have  submitted to  the  Secretary of State  would  enable   us, after  a detailed preliminary study,  to set up a co-operatively owned  national distributor, which  would  act  as a  middleman with  the  wholesalers  who  control distribution in  the  various   cities  and   regions  and  also  professionalize   the  attempts  of  the publishers to  enter  the  mass  market.
The   average bookseller  too  is in  many   ways  a  victim  of  the  poverty   cycle, happy  selling  foreign  books for so long that  now  he is unprepared for  the  surge of  competition  from   American-style  chains,   from   the   book-clubs,   and   from direct  mail  selling.  Hopefully ways can  be  found  to  increase  the  self-sufficiency of the  independent Canadian bookseller,  but  a  necessary  first step  for  many  of them  will have  to  be a realization  of their  common  plight  and  of their  potential for  common  action.   If,  for  example,  they  exerted   common   leverage  against publishers   who  sold  directly  to  libraries  and  library   jobbers,  or  if  they  formed their  own  book  club  and  mailed   promotional material to  their  own  customers and  potential  customers, or  if  they  formed   a  co-operative to  do  joint-purchas­ ing  of major titles,  they  could  gain  some  of the  advantages of  the chains   with­  out   sacrificing   individuality  and   independence. Together   with   the   new   co­ operative national  distributor  and   the  I.P.A.,  they  could  set  up  a  system  to greatly  simplify  the  distribution chain,  including,  for  example, single  payment

79

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



of  invoices,   common  order   forms,   on-line   processing   of  order,   and   regional warehousing.
Another important  area   of  policy  rethinking must  concern   education. Here we have  a terrifying example of Canadian non-co-operation. Until  the  provinces can  learn   to  develop   learning materials   jointly,  we  are  wide-open   victims  for overspill  from   large   runs  of  American  textbooks;  we  will  be  inevitably   pro­ vided   with  freedom   of   (American)   choice.
One  of the  tied-in  problems here,  of course,  is the  unfortunate centralization of  book  publishing in  Toronto and   Montreal. The   other   provinces   use  rather simplistic,  almost   primitive methods of  retaliation; each  province,   as  with   re­ sources,  opens  itself  up  to the  quickest  and  least  productive raping, in order  not to  lose out  to  a  sister  province.   By co-operation, each  province   could  long  ago have  established  at least  one  indigenous publishing firm  with  sales over  a  million dollars,  instead  of accepting the  crazy situation now  where  twenty  branch-plants have  a salesman   in  each  of the  ten  provinces,  providing an  absolutely  minimal amount of employment for  authors, printers  and  management.
This   distortion  caused   by  educational  authorities  fosters  another  distortion, where  U.S.  and  U.K. companies, with  their  vaster  sales forces  and  sales income, act  as parasites  on  the  more  gentlemanly small  publishers.  A Coach  House  takes many   chances   on  young   poets  and   fiction  writers,   and   then,   when   the  good has been sifted from  the  bad,  the  branch-plants hire a Canadian editor  like Mary Jane Edwards and  slap  together an  anthology  for sale to the  educational market. The  small  publisher is too  exhausted by  his losses on  original   publishing to  be able  to afford  the  large  capital investment required for such  an  anthology.
Here  the  failure is partly  ours,  for  we should  long  ago  have  organized  boy­ cotts  of such  firms,  refusing   jointly  to sell them  rights  and  seeking  author  sup­  port  to  establish   the   boycott   and   to  broaden  it  out  from   an  obvious  base  in Canadian literature and   political  writing.
Another of our  failures  has  been  to  accept  the  subsidiaries'   pattern of  ignor­ ing export  markets. It  is true  that  our  first responsibility  is to distribute  our  own authors to  our  own  people,   and  we  should   not  rush  into  exporting  solely  for the  sake  of exporting as the  Liberals  would  have  us do.  But,  in  my  more  confi­ dent  moods,  I  see  some  value  for  the  rest  of  the  colonized   world  in  what   we are struggling to achieve  in Canada. In  many  cases, of course,  we  have  to learn  from  them.  East  Africa   has  a  publishing  company sponsored   by  three   govern­  ments   and   India  was  far   ahead   of  us  in  insisting   on  the  nationalization  of foreign  firms.

8o

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



We have  been  relatively successful in unrusting  the governmental pump,  but neither the Pelletier policy nor the Report of the Royal Commissioners presents anything  more  than  crisis support.  Both  present  a  case for  "immaculate  con­ sumption"; that  is, they  are  unwilling  to  attack  openly  the  facts  of  American domination  of this segment  of our life and  they give in to nationalistic demands only to the extent  of agreeing  with  the obvious, that  there  must  be an  opening up  of channels  for  Canadian writers. They  would  like, somehow,  to  see more Canadian  books consumed,   but  not  at  the  expense  of   McGraw-Hill's  multi­ million  dollar  sales. They  present  no  policies aimed  at  the  necessary withering away  of the  branch  plants.  The  Royal  Commission is  more  learned  in  its ap­ proach,  more  innovative  in  seeking crafty  ameliorations  without  attacking   the distortions,  but  except  for  the  field of  guaranteed loans,  the  Federal  Govern­ ment  has  been far  more  advanced  in  its practices.
The  philosophy  I  have  outlined  as a  counter-response  to  the  problem  is by no means adhered  to by all Canadian publishers, although  it is in many  ways a product  of compromise.  A  few  rampantly  mercantilistic  individualists  such  as Jack  McClelland  and  the  various  Maclean-Hunter dukedoms  refuse  to  accept its premises, although  so far  none  of  them  have  turned  down  any  of the  cash benefits of government  support.  Even  for  the  established  firms,  life  is such  a constant struggle that  there is a great tendency to ignore new solutions and refinements.
I  have  mentioned  the  vacuum  in "multi-cultural" publishing,  but  there  has
been  a  similar  inattention  to  the  problems  of  regional  publishing  which  will require even higher levels of social support if it is to be viable, and  about  which the society will also have  to make  value  judgements  as to  the  necessity of, and nature  of, its  being.  We  are  also far  from  devising  a  "freedom   for  servants" strategy,  which  would  assist those  Canadians  who  are  too  fixed in  their  ways to  break  free  from  their  branch-plants without  encouragement. The   resale  of Gage  back  to  its employees and  private  investors offers an  important  opening for radical  and  innovative  action.  Special attention  should  be paid  to the  possi­ bility of instant  assistance for  experienced  bands  of ex-branch-plant  employees who wish to start  their  own firms.
On the other hand there are encouraging signs that the remnant  Canadian magazines,  who stand   roughly  where  we did  five years ago  in  terms  of  com­ munal  action,  are  beginning  to band  together  and  look for  their  own  solutions.
And  finally,  we  must  be  on  guard  against  a  substitution   of  Canadian  for
American  monopoly.  If power  and  wealth  are  to  be distributed  equitably  and

81

THE  CANADIAN PUBLISHERS



equally,   government policies  must  be set  and  funds  distributed in  consultation with  the  various  segments  of the  industry, real  consultation. Limits  must  be set on  the  size or  the  extent   of  any  individual or  corporation's control   within   the industry. Coles,  Maclean-Hunter, Classics and  the  concept  of a  publishing czar represent   as  much   of  a  potential threat  to  our  culture as  McGraw-Hill. One interesting  precedent,  set   by  the   Royal   Commission,   would   limit   any   given wholesaler  of books to a market of  1·4 million  people.  The  Ontario government approved this, as a  barrier to the  expansion plans of the  Mafia, but  then  quietly reneged  on  it  when  Maclean-Hunter became  the  controlling partner  in  Metro News.  But  we  are  not  fighting   the  battle  for  Canadian  independence in  order to  see  the  old  American  replaced  by  a  new  Canadian  version.  Other  similar precedents must  be firmly  established and  adhered to.
Nonetheless,  with  all  these  sins of omission  and  commission  and   potentiality,
few  could  deny  that  the  situation has improved in the  past  five years.  The  sur­ vival  raft  is still  a  raft,  but  there's a little  more  fresh  water  per  day,  and  more and  more  friends  floating  around on similar  rafts.  Perhaps some  day  soon  we'll begin  to hook  up  even  more  and  start  heading towards  land.  Perhaps we'll  even reinvent the  paddle.

QUESTIONS OF CASH



Roy MacSkimming



T"' IsN'T a  single  one  of  the  more   pmductive  new houses  which  hasn't   published  some  very  good  books  in  the  past  few  years,
whether  poetry, drama,  fiction or non-fiction. The  poems of Coleman,  Lee,  On­ daatje,  Nichol, Beissel, Jonas;  the  plays of Ryga,  French,  Reaney,  Davies;  the novels of Carrier,  Gibson, Helwig, Engel, Godfrey, Kroetsch;  and  important po­ litical,  social or  philosophical  books like Technology   and  Empire, Shrug:  Tru­ deau in  Power, Working  People, The  Unjust  Society, The  Only  Good  Indian, Greenpeace  and  her  Enemies,  Bleeding  Hearts,  Bleeding  Country, The   Real Poverty Report,  The  Death of  Hockey,  and  The  Real World  of City  Politics­ among  numerous  others-have  issued  variously  from  seven  houses established since centennial  year (Anansi, Coach House, Hurtig,  New Press, Oberon,  Talon­  books, James  Lewis & Samuel).
It's  a safe bet that  many of these titles wouldn't  have  been touched -or,  in
some cases, created  through  solicitation-by  the long-established  firms, least of all the  branch  plants, who would  have mistrusted their  political or literary  rad­ icalness, or their apparent  lack of commercial potential. The  new houses haven't  restricted  themselves to publishing  along strictly ideological or literary  lines, but have seen the satisfaction  (not  just monetary either)  in producing books that  are simply  useful, even fun-LawLawLaw  and  V.D. ( Anansi),  Where  to  Eat  in Canada   (Oberon),  A  Natural  History  of  Alberta    (Hurtig),  The   Gourmet's  Canada,  Champagne   Is  for Breakfast,  The   Parent  as  Teacher, The   Guide  to Family  Law  (New  Press).  I  understand  that  even  the  radical's  radical,  James Lorimer,  has quietly put out a book on the art of  preserving flowers, presumably Canadian flowers (James,  Lewis & Samuel).
At the same time, I've  no doubt  that  all of these houses, like publishers  any­
where,  have  reason to regret some of the  books they've  published.  I'm  equally sure  that  they'd  stand  by their  decision to  publish  many  books that  have  lost money, on the  grounds  that  those books deserved to  be published-they  were

QUESTIONS OF  CASH



the kinds of books the  publishers  had  gone into  business to produce  in the first place.
Which leads us to the more painful question of financial viability or, in other words, survival.
Because the new houses have made a strong contribution  to the literature  and self-knowledge of Canadian, it's important  that  they survive. Not that  Canadian publishing  would disappear  if the new houses disappeared; there  would still be McClelland  &  Stewart,   Macmillan,  University of Toronto  Press, General  Pub­ lishing and  Clarke,  Irwin; the  odd  branch  plant,  notably  Oxford  and  Double­ day, manages a few honest Canadian titles a year. But nearly a half of  the  best Canadian trade  (i.e. non-textbook)   publishing would go if the new  houses went, and  it's a  plain  fact  that  financial  problems constantly  bedevil the  life of these houses. Why? Are they  just mismanaged  by the writers and  intellectuals who, in most  cases, have  founded   them?
Possibly, to a degree,  although  it's  been an  extraordinary, almost  unholy ex­
perience  to see such  men  and  women  come to  grips  with  the  occult  mysteries of capitalization,  cashflow, payables and receivables, unit-costing and inventory control. And still publish good poetry!
The  heart of the problem is more immediately found in numbers:  the country has a mere I 6 million  English-speaking  people, but  it's 4,ooo  miles wide.  Con­ trast  that  with  a country  of comparable  size publishing  in  the same  language, the U.S.,  with about  220 million people, or the U.K.,  a much  smaller  country, with about  6o million people. Our  market for books, therefore, is tiny, while the difficulty and  expense  of distributing  and  promoting  to  that  market  are  huge, especially when the  competition  from American  and  British  books is considered. (Imagine, from  the  publisher's  miserably self-interested  point of view, if there were only such a language  as "Canadian", and  the world's  great  literature  had to be translated  into it and  published right here!)  These mundane  facts are com­ monplace  to anyone involved in Canadian book  publishing,  but they are never­ theless a frequent  cause for despair-how can  you fight limits like that,  except by imposing a  ban  on  birth  control?
Some publishers have responded  by confining their  publishing to a strict  min­ ority or regional base, and  if  they stay small enough  they can make it.  But that doesn't  answer  the need for nationally  based houses helping to build a  national culture,  without  which  most Canadians  will be reading only books  published in New  York or  London.
Who's trying to build such a culture? In  part, and  perhaps regrettably, writers

QUESTIONS OF  CASH



who've  had  to  become  publishers. "Regrettably", because  you  can't   count  on writers-the trouble  with  them is that  their  job is to write,  and  if they're  any good they'll eventually  go off and  do that,  instead  of trying  to be editors,  entre­ preneurs, cultural  middlemen.  Most of these writer-publishers  have by  now gone through  the  initial  stage  of  joyfully ignorant  enthusiasm,  when  they  coined  an imprint,  published  a  dozen  or  twenty  books, and  discovered  that  they  hadn't gone bankrupt after  all-there  really were readers  out  there  who  cared.  Then the  problems  began.  There's   nothing  more  troublesome  than  success. With  a growing inventory,  a growing bank line of credit, a growing indebtedness  to all­ too indulgent  printers,  the  writer-publisher  realized  he was  in  a  death-struggle,  not only against  the imported  book and  the vagaries of  public  taste,  but  against the sour realities of economics in a capitalist society.


W ARE  NOT  of course so devoted to free enterprise  in this country that  we tell publishers  (or writers)  to sink or swim. There's  the Canada
Council;  there are various types of provincial-government  aid, notably in Ontario and  Quebec.  But  these aid  programmes,  popularly  called  "handouts" and  pre­ sumed to make the recipients fat and contented,  are in fact  inadequate to cover the shortfall  between  revenues  and  expenses for  most  publishers.  The  Canada Council's  heralded  operating  grants, though  welcome, cover on the average  only ten per cent of the publisher's overheads, quite apart  from his investment  in book production.  The  Ontario government's  system of bank  guarantees,  based on the value  of inventories  and  receivables, is more  realistic;  but  it's  still too  early  to tell if this programme   will guarantee  the survival  of  any of the  Ontario-based houses, since it  may  become  available  only to  those  that  meet  an  as-yet  unde­ fined standard of financial  performance.  And  in  any  case it is not  available  to publishers in other  provinces.
Government  cultural  bodies are  going to have to accept  the  fact  that  Cana­
dian trade  publishing is not a business like the others, but essentially a non-profit activity comparable  to theatre,  opera or dance. If they want to ensure stability in our industry, if we as a society want to, then  the federal and  provincial  "hand­ outs"  will have  to  be much  bigger-comparable, say,  to  the  heavy  subsidies that  ensure the continuation of the Stratford  Festival, the Canadian Opera  Com­ pany,  or  the  National   Ballet,  none  of  which  displays the  works  of  Canadian artists nearly as much  as the  publishers do.

QUESTIONS OF  CASH



There  are  other  measures  that  publishers  themselves can  and  must  take  to ensure financial  viability. Needless to say, they must constantly  reassess their  op­ erations  in order  to tailor  expenses to revenues, to make the best possible  use of their limited capital; this is an obvious consideration for any business, but worth pointing out to literary  people who expect publishers to do wonders, since it  may involve  cutting  back  on  the  number  of titles  published,  cutting   back  on  staff (who  are  chronically  overworked,  underpaid   and  nevertheless  devoted),  or  re­ allocating  funds from  title output  to sales and  promotion.  Some new  publishers have designed their  operations  and  controlled  their growth  shrewdly;  those who haven't  soon learn  to operate  within  the narrow  limits of  their  environment, or else face bankruptcy.
Another  measure  is to  pay  more attention  to the educational  market  which, given  the  right  products,  can  provide  a  bigger  return  than  the  trade  market, although  educational publishing  also requires  much  more capital  and  expertise than  most of the new publishers possess. The field is dominated  by the American­ based giants, but there are opportunities  in the growing area of  Canadian studies which  the  new publishers  are  in  a  unique  position to grasp.  This  would  be an especially appropriate use to which  to put  increased  government  grants,  if they were forthcoming.
A third  measure is to act as agent for a profitable British or American  line of books, an idea that  is reviled by some publishers who refuse to facilitate  the entry of non-Canadian books. First,  this attitude  is xenophobic,  and  second,  if those books are going to be sold here any way, why shouldn't  they provide a profit base for  the  Canadian-owned house? This  is a  ripe area  for government  legislation, which  could require,  as the  Quebec  government  has, that  publicly financed  in­ stitutions like schools and  libraries  buy their books from Canadian sources.
Finally, Canadian publishing  activities need to be rationalized.  Such  rational­ ization  need  not  take  the  form  of corporate  mergers;  better  that  it  shouldn't, because  editorial  diversity  is an  outstanding   feature  of  the  current  publishing scene. But almost every publishing function  except editorial decision-making  can be accomplished   (at  least  theoretically)   on  a  co-operative  basis. Sharing  with other  publishers  the  costs of office space,  warehousing,  shipping,  invoicing,  ac­ counting  and  sales, even typing  and  typesetting,  would  go a  long way  towards rationalizing  the  marginal  Canadian industry  by  cutting  publishers'  overheads. Production  and  promotion  might  be trickier services to share, since they are  so intimately  tied  to editorial  planning; most  publishers may  have  to  continue  to afford  their  own  personnel  in  these  jobs, if  they are  to  retain  sufficient control

86

QUESTIONS OF  CASH



over  their  own  programmes.   But  the  other  business functions   are  much   less sensitive, and  there  are  precedents  for  this type  of cost-sharing,  in  the  Belford Book Company  (named  after  a nineteenth-century  Canadian  entrepreneur who pirated   U.S.  editions),  which  provides  customer  servicing  for  Anansi,  James Lewis & Samuel, and  Peter  Martin  Associates, and in the  presence of several  re­ gional sales representatives who act  jointly on behalf of many  houses.
These  measures are,  I  admit,  not  very startling  or  glamorous,  but  they  con­
stitute  the  kind  of canny,  practical  decision that  Canadian publishers,  new  or old,  will probably  have  to  take  if we are  to continue  to  have  Canadian  pub­ lishers, and  therefore  the  dissemination  of Canadian  writing.
If financial  viability can  be attained  through  these or other  means,  we  may
yet witness the happy  state  where  writer-publishers  can  give their  best energies back to writing, and  where a new breed of editor-publisher  arises, possessing both literary and entrepreneurial imagination,  even moving from house to secure house during  hisjher  career.  But  don't  count  on it. The  current  struggle-phase  could easily end in two or three years with fewer Canadian houses than  when it began. At that  point it may  become  necessary for even more  writers,  especially fiction writers whose books are more costly to produce than  poets', to found  publishing co-operatives  that  are  avowedly  non-profit,  for  the  sake  of  getting   published at  all.

LITTLE  PRESSES
IN CANADA



Sarah McCutcheon



Ll'ITLE  PRESSES in Canada are "Pidly expanding and be­
coming  noticeably  more  productive.  As underground   alternatives  to  the  larger
publishing  houses, they represent  a retreat into a more intimate  circle of  produc­ tion.  They  are  characterized  by their  co-operative  nature  and  their  dedication both  to the literature  itself and  to the forms in which it is published. The  work of the little press -publishing,  editing  and  often designing, printing  and  bind­ ing  books-is  done  in  close working  relationships. The  people  involved  range from  academics  to writers,  artists  and  radicals. However,  most  little  presses are predominantly the  creations  of poets. The  reasons for forming  a  press and  the processes of development  are  as varied as the  presses are  numerous.  What  does seem to distinguish  the little  press in general  is a concern  for a literature  which is ignored or subverted  by the existing publishing situation  (in  many  cases a re­ flection of the dominant culture.)
Little  presses in the  past  were  usually part-time  endeavours,  but  now federal and  provincial  government  aid  (Local  Initiative  Projects and  Opportunities  for Youth  as well as federal  block publishing grants)   have allowed  many  presses to develop as full-time ventures. But even these presses operate mainly on shoestring budgets with little financial  security.
The  impact  of the little  presses, both  on literary  activity  and  on  the  reading public, has escalated over the past six years and during  the past three has-like publishing  in  general-developed in  a  rapid  crescendo.  The  little  presses of Canada  can no longer be counted  on one hand,  nor are  they all to be found in Montreal  or Ontario. Moreover,  while little presses in the past tended  to remain in literary  reclusion, nowadays, since the changes in publishing patterns  signalled by the  formation  of the  Independent Publishers' Association, they  are  entering into  the  politics of publication.  For example, David  Robinson,  editor  of Talon-

88

LITTLE PRESSES



books in  Vancouver,  is an  active member  of I.P.A.'s  executive,  while  his press, together  with  other  little  presses such as Delta  Canada,   Fiddlehead   Books,  In­ gluvin  Publications,  Ladysmith  Press and  Weed/Flower, are  chartered  members of IPA  on the same basis as more commercially oriented  Canadian-owned pub­ lishers. Other  newly formed  presses, such as Tree  Frog in  Edmonton, have  been admitted   to  affiliated  membership  until  they  have  published  enough   titles  to qualify for full membership.
Another  politicizing  aspect  of  the  present  situation  of  the  new  presses is of
course the fact that  nine of them,  including  Fiddlehead  Books which for the first time in its long history  has accepted  government  aid,  received  block publishing grants  ranging  from  $1,500  to  $6,ooo.  (The  others  assisted were  Alive,  Inter­ media,  Coach   House,  Vancouver   Community   Press  [now  New  Star  Books], Delta  Canada, Ingluvin,  Talonbooks  and  Weed/Flower.)  The  infusion  of fed­ eral money  has, indeed,  recognized the  national  importance  of the  little  presses and  has had  the  practical  effect of keeping  the  collector  temporarily from  the door. But the benefits of this new aid, together with that  provided  by the Canada Council,  LIP  and  OFY,  can be overestimated, while questions arise, on the gov­ ernmental  side of avoiding  paternalistic  attitudes  and  on  the side of the  presses of maintaining independence of editorial  control.




'l:E PROFUSION of new presses and  the size of their  opera­ tions is in marked  contrast  to such celebrated  but largely isolated  predecessors as First Statement  in 1945, and  the  presses of the seventies are even  different  from those of  the  sixties;  they  have  more  stability,  a  wider  readership,  and  receive more publicity.
Of the little presses that did flourish in the sixties, some of the more notable are
still in existence : the three new presses into which Delta  Canada has now split, Sono  Nis, Coach  House,  Weed/Flower and  Quarry   Press. These  presses have retained   much   the  same  policies over  the  years,  and   their  editors   have  not changed,  but even they, in their established patterns,  have expanded  and  grown, and  there  is good reason to believe that  they will continue  to flourish well into the seventies. They  have  been  joined by many  newer  little  presses-of  whom some of the most interesting  will find mention  later in this article;  it is hard  yet to  judge  whether  individually  these will be ephemeral  endeavours  or  will  per­ severe. But it seems clear that  as a phenomenon  the little  press is established.

8g

LITTLE PRESSES



Little presses can now be found  widely scattered over Canada. The  highest concentration  is on the \Vest Coast, mainly in Vancouver,  where the roots of the tradition  go back to the 1g6os, the growth of the presses being closely linked with the literary  underground which first found its voice in a succession of little  mag­ azines, several of which  developed  into presses; Talon,  for example,  was started in 1963 and in 1967 grew into Talonbooks, while bill bissett's Up the Tube event­ ually developed  into  Blew Ointment Press. Other  active  West  Coast  presses in­ clude Blackfish, Pulp  Press, Sono  Nis, Intermedia, B.C.  Monthly  and  New Star Books (formerly  the  Vancouver   Community   Press  affiliated  with  the  Georgia Straight). Both Blackfish and  Pulp  Press have  produced  magazines  and  poetry broadsheets as well as books.
There  are few little  presses, moving eastward  geographically,  between  British Columbia  and  Ontario, though  an  interesting  example  is Tree  Frog  which  re­ cently began in Edmonton, where a great deal of the more ambitious  publishing has been undertaken by M. G. Hurtig,  a small rather  than  a little  press.
Ontario-and especially Toronto-has  become an even more active centre of book production  over the past six years than in the past. Apart  from the small presses like  Anansi  and   new  press,  both  of  which  arose  largely  through   the initiative  of Dave  Godfrey,  a  more traditionally  little press-press  porcepic­ was started  last  year  by Godfrey  and  a  number  of associates as  an  outlet  for young and experimental writers. It now operates out of an old farmhouse  in Erin, Ontario. Some of the little presses which began in Toronto during  the sixties, not­ ably Coach  House and  Weed/Flower, continue  in strengthened  form. After four years, Alive Press is still publishing  actively out of  Guelph, and  Quarry  continues operations in Kingston  under the poet and critic Tom  Marshall and a community of rotating  editors.
Montreal,  which  has  always  been  a  strong  centre  of  small-scale  publishing
activity, has emerged in recent years with several important new little presses. Ingluvin  Publications  is edited by K. V. Hertz  and Seymour Mayne, while Delta Canada  has recently split, with its three editors-Louis  Dudek,  Michael  Gnar­ owski and  Glen Siebrasse --parting ways to continue  their  publishing  activities independently.  Their   new  presses are,  respectively, D.C.,  Le  Chien  d'Or jThe  Golden  Dog and  Delta  Books.
In the Maritimes several new presses have recently appeared,  while Fiddlehead
Books, edited  by  Fred  Cogswell,  is continuing  with  renewed  strength.  At  the Purple  Wednesday  Society,  also  in  New  Brunswick,  William  Prouty  has  pro­ duced  several  books of poetry.  Sand  Patterns  Press and  the  Square  Deal  have

go

LITTLE PRESSES



both started  recently in Charlottetown, Prince Edward  Island.  In  Halifax,  Rick Rofihe  has produced  some highly imaginative  books of writing  by children  and for children.
In  eastern Canada, as on the  \Vest Coast, many  little  presses either  grew out of small reviews or have since published their own magazines  along with  books, poetry  broadsheets  and  folios. The  histories of  Delta  Canada and  Fiddlehead Books are  instructively  variant  in  this respect.
Louis Dudek edited  his journal,  Delta, from  I957  to  I966. In  1967  he  joined Michael  Gnarowski  and  Glen  Siebrasse to  publish  books under  the  imprint  of Delta  Canada. The  joint editorship  continued  for five years and  resulted  in the publication  of more  than  thirty  books, mainly of verse. The  decision  to  divide activities was mutually  agreed in I 97 I because, as Dudek  explained,  "It is  diffi­ cult  to  have  a  clear  editorial  policy when  three  points  of  view  are  involved." Gnarowski  now  publishes a  little  magazine  which  bears  the  same  name  as his press-Le Chien d'Or /The Golden Dog-but neither Dudek nor Siebrasse has returned  to magazine  publishing.
The  first book which  Dudek  published  under  the  imprint  of  his  new  press, D.C., in  I972  was Avi Boxer's book of verse, No  Address. As well as many books of poetry, Dudek is also planning  to publish more conventionally scholarly books, including  an  edition  of the  letters  of Ezra  Pound  and  a  book  on  painting  by Henry  Miller. Gnarowski  has been led by his historical interests into  publishing at  his  Golden  Dog  Press such  literature  from  Canada's  past  as  Heavysege's
]ezebel  and  Lampman's original  text of The  City  of  the  End  of  Things, as well
as  the  first cumulative   index  of  Canadian  Literature, and  small  introductory volumes  by the  Montreal   poets  Peter  Lord  and  Nancy  Stegmayer.  The  third former  editor of Delta  Canada, Glen Siebrasse, has continued  to publish  young poets and  is at present compiling  an anthology-the first to come out of Mon­ treal in many  years-of   2 5 to 30 contemporary  Canadian  poets.
The  origins of Fiddlehead  Books were linked only indirectly  with a little mag­
azine.  While  Fred  Cogswell  was  editor  of The   Fiddlehead   he  published  four poetry  pamphlets,  and  out  of this venture developed  Fiddlehead   Books, a  pub­ lishing enterprise quite separate  from the magazine, and  more prolific in  its  pro­ duction  of small  books of poetry than  any other  Canadian press, little  or  large.
Several other  presses-Alive, Quarry,  Square  Deal  and   (as  we  have  seen) Talonbooks  grew  out  of  magazines  bearing  the  same  name.   New  Star  books grew out  of Georgia  Straight, an  underground  newspaper.  Other   little  presses began with books and soon after produced magazines. On the West Coast Black-

LITTLE PRESSES



fish is published  by Blackfish Press and 3¢  Pulp,  a funky bimonthly,  comes from Pulp  Press. Sand  Patterns  Press in Charlottetown  produces Sand   Patterns  mag­ azine. Between  rg66  and  1967  Weed/Flower in Toronto  produced  Weed, while Coach  House  Press, founded   jointly  by  Victor  Coleman  and  Stan  Bevington, published  Island   until   rg68,   has  published  The   Ant's  Forefoot   (which  comes to  an  end  this  summer  with  No.  10), and  currently  publishes  IS   and  Open
Letter.


As WELL AS   editing and  publishing, the operations  of the little  press often include  printing  and  book design. For simplicity, financial  rea­
sons or lack of interest  in printing,  some presses farm out  their  books to jobbers. Others  print  them cheaply and  inartistically by offset or mimeography.  However, there  are  many  who painstakingly  do their  own printing.  They  possess or have access to equipment  for quality  reproduction,  and  often work with artists. There is an  increasing  return  to the  once apparently  dying art  of book-making,  and  a strong new emphasis on the visual and aesthetic aspects of publishing. In this field the work of Stan  Bevington at Coach  House Press has given other  houses an ex­ cellent example  in design and  creative  printing set.
While  many  books have  been  produced  with  hand-set  print  and   a  careful choice  of  papers,  bindings  and  illustrations,  in  the  tradition  of  artistic  small presses, Coach  House  has  paid  particular  attention  to  photo-offset  lithography and  appropriate book  design.  This  summer   ( 1973)   its  founders  plan  a  two­ week workshop for other small presses, dealing with photography,  colour, graphic techniques,  book design, distribution  and  pricing;  this is being  organized  in  re­ sponse to  the  fact  that  many  small  publishers  have  approached  Coach  House for  information  about  its mode  of operation.
Coach  House is still operated  after seven years by Victor  Coleman  and  Stan Bevington,  working  with  a  loose association of poets in  their  coach  house  just behind Rochdale College. They have expanded and diversified considerably. Originally  they published  mainly  poetry, but recently they have  been producing prose and engaging in printing  with a more directly visual appeal.  Last year they published a catalogue  for the Image  Bank exhibition of old postcards, sponsored by the  National  Gallery,  and  M. Vaughn-James' The   Projector;   more  recently they have brought  out  A  History  of the  Toronto Islands. At the same time, they have  continued  to publish  poetry,  both  Canadian and  American.  Coach  House

LITTLE PRESSES



is aiming towards a "post-literate" society with books that tend more and  more to be as visual as they  are  verbal.  Frank  Davey's  Arcana- a tarot  book  of lyric document-is printed  on pages under-printed with pale green symbols from  the occult. The trains printed  on the pages of Ginsberg's Iron  House  create a moving train  effect when  the  book is leafed  through  quickly. Coach  House  books have appeared  in all shapes  and  sizes, including  one shaped  like a  baseball  pennant. The  images are taken from graphics,  wallpapers,  colour-screen photographs and photo-stills, etc.
Among  other  presses producing   books of  experimental   design,  Talonbooks, Tree  Frog,  Pulp  Press, an-der-bo  and  especially press procepic  have some inter­ esting work.
Press porcepic started  in 1972  with a small magazine-also entitled  porcepic, which  was exceptional  in  both  format  and  content.  Printed   with  the  help  of Coach  House  Press, it  included  an  essay by  Eldon  Garnet,   a  short  story  by Gilles  Vigneault,   and  poems  by  known  poets  (Birney,  Gustafson,   Colombo), younger  experimentalists   (Joe  Rosenblatt  and  bill bissett)  and  by  total  news­ comers, including  Tim  Inkster.  This  "magazine  of writing"  marked  the  emerg­ ence of what  may well be one of the most exciting and  important  little  presses in  recent  years. Porcepic  has gone on to produce  a series of books  which  have maintained a remarkable standard of aesthetic and -in most cases -of  literary excellence. All the  production  goes on at  the  Erin  farm,  where  the  design  and making  of books -presided  over  by Tim  Inkster -is  treated  as  if it  were  as much a creative act as the writing of them. The  papers, bindings and visual logos are  chosen meticulously to harmonize  with  hand-set  print  in  unusual  typefaces. In  1972  porcepic published four  hardcover  books, and  more recently it has pro­ duced  Joe  Rosenblatt's  The   Blind  Photographer, a book to  delight  bibliophiles, containing  poems and  drawing  by the poet relating  to the  organic  underworld.
Another  small press run by a typographer  was Bob Burdett's  Roundstone Press
in Toronto, which  published  an  unusual  book of poems and  graphics  by Vera Frenkel,  entitled  Image   Spaces. The  type was set entirely  by hand  and  printed by artist  Bob Marsh;  many of Vera  Frenkel's graphics, executed in subtle shades of grey, were printed  directly from  her  plates on to the  page,  so that  the  book actually  contained  original  prints.  Image  Spaces,  printed  in a limited  edition  of
1,ooo,  was Roundstone  Press's sole venture  as a little press; it has since been  in­ corporated  as a non-profit  council for the arts,  under  Bob Burdett,  which  is at present  compiling  a catalogue  of the works of Canadian artists  on  exhibition.



93

LITTLE PRESSES


0UTSIDE  ONTARIO  many little presses act  as regional  pub­
lishers  producing  the  works  of  local  writers  and  serving  a  geographically  im­
mediate  reading audience.  Tree  Frog, in Edmonton,  which has a full-time print­
shop,  is a good  example  of development  on  these lines. Its  origins  go  back  to I 968 when its editor  Allan Shute  began to print  his own poetry and  that  of his friends and  to circulate  it privately. As printing  equipment  was acquired,  volun­ teer  labour  became  available,  and  manuscripts  were submitted,  Tree  Frog  de­ veloped until finally in  I972 it  became a full-fledged little press. It has published books by such local poets as Stephen  Scobie (The Birken  Tree) and  Jan  Lander (Space Baby), and  an anthology of Edmonton  poetry, 39  Below, including  work by Douglas Barbour,  Dorothy  Livesay, Elizabeth Brewster, Richard  Homsey and many  others. Tree  Frog  does not  plan  to  restrict  itself to  local  writers  only;  it plans to produce  One  Quart   of Canadian Poetry,  "an  anthology  of new Cana­ dian  writing  packaged  in  a sealed  quart  container." Other  little  presses in  Ed­ monton  are The  White Pelican  and The  Merry  Devil  of Edmonton, which pub­ lishes poetry broadsheets.
On  the West Coast the little presses are predominantly  regional in orientation,
publishing  local  writers  mainly  for  local consumption,  through  enterprises  that are largely co-operative  in  organization  and  that  concentrate  mainly  on  poetry. A  few  presses, however,  like Talonbooks  and  Sono  Nis, do  publish  books  by writers working outside  British Columbia.
From  modest  and  experimental beginnings in I 967, Talonbooks  has become
a dominant force in British Columbian  publishing. It  produces  a wide range  of books, from  poetry and  a series of plays to art  and  film. It  is one of the  presses that  describe themselves as co-operative societies. Talonbooks  does its own  print­ ing,  and  its  books are  designed  carefully  in  collaboration   with  their  authors. Though   often  original,  the  resulting  format  does  at  times  have  overtones  of Coach  House style.
The series of Talonbook plays, which began in  I96g, includes works by James
Reaney and George Ryga as well as by younger playwrights like Jackie Crossland (Rinse Cycle)  and  Beverley Simons  (Crabdance). The  press's poetry  publish­ ing  programme  has cut  across the whole spectrum  of British  Columbian  poets, both  well and  little  known, including  poets who were  prominent  in  the  experi­ mental writing movement of the West Coast during the Sixties, such as bill bissett, Frank  Davey and  Jim  Brown,  but also established  poets like Phyllis Webb,  who is represented by a definitive Selected  Poems. Poets from outside the region are also


94

LITTLE PRESSES



represented on  Talon books'  lists;  they  include  Victor   Coleman  and   bp  nichol.
Pulp  Press and  New  Star  Books, both of which  have emerged recently  in  Van­ couver,  can  be classed  as alternate presses. New  Star  has  affiliations  with  earlier  underground publications, for  its origins  can  be found  in  a  tabloid  writing sup­  plement  to the  Georgia  Straight  which  developed  into  the  Georgia Straight  W.S. Series. This  series published works  by well and  little  known  West  Coast  writers,  including George  Bowering,  Daphne Marlatt, Fred  Wah,  Judith  Copithorne and Chuck  Carlson. In  1972  a group  broke  away  to form  themselves into  the  Grape Collection, to establish  New  Star  Books, and  to publish  their  own  newspaper­ "a  political  analysis  of society."  From  this  point  they  began  to  turn  away  from the  kind  of  literary   works  they  had  published   before,  such  as  George   Bower­ ing's  Autobiology, and  now  they  are  producing such  books  as  labour organizer Jack  Scott's  Class Struggles  in Canada.
Pulp  Press  began  in  1972  with  a group  of eight  members  "mainly interested in publishing"; it has already published  six books and  its little  magazine, 3¢ Pulp, which  is worth  at  least  the  price  of its title  for  its interesting rambles  and  trou­ vailles. Pulp  Press, whose attitude of creative  anarchism is expressed  in its slogan "Independence without gov't", publishes  poetry  and  "conversational"  novels  by young  writers  who  are  not  well-known.
Blackfish, another recent  and  lively Vancouver press, was started by two  poets (Brian  Brett  and  Allan  Safarik)  to provide  an  alternate to  the  existing  publish­ ing facilities  on the  West  Coast.  They  seem to have  attracted the  best  of  current local  poetry,  which  they  publish  in  a  little  magazine  (Black fish)   and  in  small edition  books, folios and  broadsides.  The  writers  they  have  so far  published in­ clude   Earle   Birney,  Seymour   Mayne,   Milton   Acorn,   Pat   Lowther,  Pat   Lane  and  Dorothy Livesay,  and  they  plan  shortly  to  produce a  thirty-page illustrated poem  by Al Purdy, The  Bear Paw  Sea.
Very  Stone  House  began  in Vancouver in  1966,  with  Seymour   Mayne as one of its four  poet-editors. Since  the  demise of VSH,  Mayne-with K. V. Hertz­ is publishing again  in  Montreal. Hertz  and  Mayne  had  worked  together in  the past  to  produce  the   militantly  experimental  magazine  Cataract   in   Montreal, which  in  the  sixties  was  a  close rival  to Tish  in  Vancouver. They  founded In­  gluvin  in 1970 as a "magazine of Canadian writing". Out  of it emerged Ingluvin Press, whose books were  printed by Hertz and  for the first year  edited  by Mayne  from  Vancouver. The   early  volumes  were  all  of  poetry,  including 40  Women Poets, edited  by Dorothy Livesay. This year  ( 1973)   Ingluvin has veered  towards

95

LI'ITLE PRESSES



prose, publishing  Raymond  Fraser's short stories, The  Black  Horse  Tavern, and
K. V. Hertz's  imaginary  and  satirical  world history, Eurethrea.
Although   most  of  the  little  presses in  the  Maritimes  are  strongly  regional, Fiddlehead   Books stands  out  with  its  concern  for  poetry  across  the  country. Recently  Fred  Cogswell,  who  for  many  years  edited  and  printed   Fiddlehead Books and gave a hundred  or so poets a first chance to expose their  works to the public eye, announced that  he had decided to suspend the press, owing to finan­ cial and  personal  pressures. If this  happens,  Canada  will lose a  press  that  has served poets well, in accordance  with the eclectic editorial policy Cogswell estab­ lished when he began publishing  ten years ago and  determined:  "insofar  as time and effort permitted  not only to publish as many poets as I could, but to publish poets of all  kinds -whoever  showed  a  particular   kind  of  promise  or  finished achievement." In  Fredericton,   as well as Fiddlehead  Books,  a  more  regionally oriented  series, New  Brunswick  Chapbooks,  is  published  and  edited  by  Nancy Bauer. Up  to now it has published some fifteen  brochures  by local poets.
Of  the remaining  little  presses in the  Maritimes, Square  Deal  Publications  in
Charlottetown is regional in the best sense of the word. It began in 1972  by  pub­ lishing The  Square  Deal, a little magazine revolving around  editor  Reshard  Goal and  a group  of local  poets. Square   Deal  has  received assistance  from  the  Uni­ versity of Prince  Edward  Island,  where Goal teaches, and  from  an  OFY  grant; it is not a university publication.  Goal, a much-travelled  political scientist, is also a  notable  poet.  He  has  published  six handsome  volumes,  including  verse  (In  Medusa's Eye  by Reshard  Goal,  Winter in  Paradise  by  John  Smith,  Pomes  de Terre  by Jim  Hornby), a play (Amadee Doucette & Son  by Tom  Gallant) and Portraits  & Gastroscopes, a book on island  people by  Goal  and  Frank  Ledwell. Sand  Patterns  Press in Charlottetown also publishes, apart  from its little  maga­ zine, small books of poetry.
Generally  speaking  little  press publication  is in  a  healthier  condition  than  it has  ever  enjoyed  in  the  past.  Though   many  of  the  books published  by these presses do not find their way into bookstores, particularly  outside their own area, there  is a growing  market  for  them.  Distribution  is the  problem,  and  many  of the little publishers are concerned  over the difficulty of making their  books avail­ able to a geographically  wider  public. Some of the  presses, and  especially  those who are  members  of IPA,  have  considered  pooling booklists,  since many  book­ stores do  not  like to order  small  quantities.  This  proposal  was discussed at  the February  1973 IPA  Conference  on Book Publishing in Toronto, where the idea of a small press readers' club was also suggested. Some arrangement of this kind

g6

LITTLE PRESSES



is needed  to bring  together the  large  group  of little  presses -on  the  one  hand  - which  are  publishing so many  excellent  books of poetry,  short  stories  and  plays, and -on the  other  hand  -the growing  number of students and  others  who  are interested in the developing literature of our  country. At present  it needs  an  alert eye to know  what  is going  on among the little  presses, though useful leads  can  be found  in such  booktrade publications as Quill & Quire and  Books in Canada, in the  book pages of local newspapers, and  of course in the wide selection  of literary journals  now  published  in  Canada.

Editor's  Note. Sarah  McCutcheon has perceptively noted  the characteristics and  the dominant  trends of little  publishing  in Canada; she has also mentioned  most of the active  presses. But, as we become aware from  the  books that  reach  us, it is hard  to keep up with the numbers of such  presses and  harder  still to discuss them  all in one article. However, for the help of our readers, we would record the names of a number of other  active  presses: Concorde  Press (Windsor) , November  House  (Vancouver) , Aliquando  Press (Toronto), Anak  Press (Wood  Mountain,  Saskatchewan), Borealis Press  (Ottawa), Manna   Publishing   (Toronto), Disposable  Paper  Press  (Ville  La Salle, Quebec); Klanak  Press of Vancouver, a pioneer in the Sixties, has reactivated itself with a finely printed  volume  (When  We  Lie Together  by G. V. Downes), and Ladysmith  Press of Ladysmith,  Quebec,  continues  to publish regularly.




























97

REPRINTS AND
THE READING PUBLIC



George Woodcock




IDON'T THmK Jack McClelland  has ever  quite  fo<given me
for a review I wrote and  published in Canadian Literature thirteen  years ago, in
the summer  issue of  1g6o. I  was discussing the third  batch  of four  titles in the New Canadian Library.  (The   Library  and  Canadian  Literature are  close  con­ temporaries,  as students  of  our  cultural  history might  profitably  note).  I  had been greatly encouraged  by the series as an idea, and on the whole with  the first eight selections which  Malcolm  Ross, the  General  Editor,  had  made.  They  in­ cluded-the record  by now has become literary  history -such basic  Canadian books as As  for Me  and  My   House,  Over  Prairie Trails, Barometer  Rising  and The Tin  Flute;  my own assessment of the eight was six bullseyes and two misses, and since I revised my view of Such  is my  Beloved  shortly afterwards, my score­ board  for those first eight  titles would now be seven  palpable  hits, though  I still confess to  being  quite  unable  to  appreciate  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts'  The   Last Barrier,  perhaps  because it was imposed on  me with excessive enthusiasm  at  the age of ten  by a  Canadophil father  in  England.
Given such a fine beginning,  the third  quartet  of the New Canadian Library was no less than terrifyingly bathetic. A second Leacock (in the first twelve titles) , dull  volumes  by  Raddall and  Drummond,   and  a  collection  of  Confederation poets with too much  Carman and  too little Scott! The  real disappointment was that  there  was nothing  here  to  represent  the  vital  trends  in  Canadian  writing that  had  been  emerging  since the  later  thirties;  one feared-at  least  I  did­ that  the series might  be taking  a downturn  into  conventionality,  that  it would end up with Service and  Grey Owl, and in my review, perhaps  provocatively en­ titled "Venture on the Verge",  I expressed my apprehensions that the fate of such a laudable  venture  as the  New Canadian Library  might  be-if  care  were not

g8

REPRINTS



taken -to  "perpetuate in  the  minds  of  ourselves and  others  the  feeling  that writing  in Canada is a pretty dull  business after  all."  I ended,  more  pompously than  I would today:

I  wish  the  New  Canadian Library  well,  since  I  realize  what   it  might   be,  but unless something more  daring appears under  its covers than  the four  volumes  now presented, I fear  my wishes will not  be of much  avail.

Looking  back over those years, I cannot  be surprised  that  at a  party  in  Van­ couver  shortly  afterwards   (the  first and  one  of  the  few  times  we  have  met) Jack  McClelland  should  have  complained  with  considerable  vehemence.  I  still believe that  what  I said had  at that  particular  time in our  literary  history to be said -though  perhaps  not  quite  as I  had  phrased  it-but  I  can  understand the  exasperation  of  a  publisher  who  has sunk  money  and  confidence  into  the task of giving his country  back its literature and  then  is sharply  criticized  by an editor who in some ways should be his  natural  ally.
That  is a long time ago and in the interval since I 960 there have been gestures of mutual  confidence.  I submitted  a book of my critical essays-Odysseus  Ever Returning-to the New Canadian Library;  Malcolm Ross accepted  it and  Jack McClelland  published it. But the implied is never quite  the same as the explicit, and  this occasion, when  I discuss one of the most interesting  phenomena  in  re­ cent Canadian publishing, the proliferation of reprints, is perhaps the appropriate time to say one or two things directly. I  am  happy  to have learnt  that  my ap­ prehensions  of I 960  were not  justified, and  to  underline  this  remark  with  the further  observation   that,   when  one  talks  in  I973   of   Canadian  reprints,  it  is automatically of the  New Canadian Library  that  one  first thinks. The  achieve­ ment  has been notable; more than  that, invaluable.
In  the  history of the  New  Canadian Library  one sees much  of our  cultural pilgrimage over the  past decade  and a half recapitulated. Sales in the late  fifties and  the early sixties were not spectacular,  and  it needed  more than  a modicum of confidence for the  publisher and the editor to continue. Their  subsequent suc­ cess has been partly due to changes in the academic ambience.  Courses in  Cana­  dian Literature have proliferated  to an extent unexpected in I 960, and it is likely that  a fair  proportion  of the hundreds of thousands of copies of these books now sold every year will never be opened again by their owners once their courses are ended.  That  is the  fate  of all college texts, but  in  the  meantime  the  academic demand  has  kept  titles in print  and  brought  others  to the  press  that  otherwise would  not  have  been  available  to  the  public  outside  the  universities  and  the

99

REPRINTS



schools, and  this voluntary  public-the most important  public -for  Canadian books has clearly  been increasing  steadily over precisely the same  period  as the New Canadian Library  has been in existence.
I propose to dabble  in no occult questions of cause and effect; the fact is that
the emergence of the right reprint  series coincided with the movement  of interest that  made it a success, and if that  makes Jack  McClelland  a perceptive  publisher
-as for my money it does -he must be given the credit. I am not saying that every title  included  in  the  93  reprinted  volumes and  the  8 special  anthologies which to date  form the series has excited me. In  the pile of recent titles that  lie on my desk I find a familiar  unevenness of quality. Three-The Edible Woman, The  Fire-Dwellers and  D. C. Scott's collection of stories, In the Village  of Viger
-are  so obviously excellent  by any  critical  standards  that  their  inclusion  was almost  mandatory. Historical  reasons  justified the  inclusion of Rosanna  Lepra­ han's  early  Victorian   Antoinette   de Mirecourt,  though  it is hard  and  at times absurd  reading. But no amount  of delight in Douglas Le Pan's  poetry can for me be metamorphosed into pleasure in his novel, The  Deserter, and  I  found  Hubert  Evans' Mist  on the  River  not  quite  worthy of the fine  background  introduction with which my friend  and  colleague W. H. New has  provided  it. But the  point by this stage is not  that  the  New Canadian Library sometimes brings out  books not to the taste of all readers;  it is rather  that  it has always kept enough  superb titles moving through  its list to allow us a rambling  personal choice among  the other  more  marginal  books -those  products  of  talent  never  taking  the  plunge into genius -which form so large a proportion  of  our literature  and which make it seem at  times so tense a gamble.
An interesting  chapter  in any book on literature  and the reading  public might be written  on  the  role  of  reprint  libraries  in  explosions of  literary  awareness. There  is no doubt  that  the Everyman  Library, bringing out its hundreds  of  class­ ics and  of nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  century  masterpieces at  a  shilling­ and then two shillings -apiece, was one of the key influences in the great spread of literary  interest  that  came  in  Britain  after  the  universalization  of  education during  the late Victorian  era.  Penguins, dramatically  ending  a  publishing  dead­  lock during  the depression of the 1930s with  their sixpenny  paperbacks,  accom­ panied  and  partly  caused  a  similar  breakthrough -at  a  time  when  economic factors were changing social values-into a wider popular consciousness of mod­ em  literature,  its aims and  methods, as well as of many aspects of contemporary scholarship that  hitherto  had achieved little currency.
Both  the  Everymans  and  the  Penguins,  even  if they  were  pioneers,  quickly

100

REPRINTS



became merely the leaders in larger movements, as reprint  ventures  proliferated, and  similarly,  though  the  New  Canadian Library  has in  our  country  been  the most dramatic success in terms of sales and  popular  acceptance,  it is only part of a very widespread  development  in contemporary  Canadian  publishing.

TIE REASONS for the great  upsurge  of reprinting  are fairly obvious. The  public for books of all kinds -to the discomfiture of the sometime
prophet  Marshall  McLuhan -has  increased immensely;  the libraries  have  also become so numerous  that  an expensive hardcover edition is sure of selling its two or three thousand,  and  then  the book, if it has any kind of popular  appeal,  can go  into  a  paperback   edition.  Though   there  are  exceptions-New  Press  and M. G. Hurtig  come immediately  to mind-the great  mass of Canadian reprint editions  (both  soft and  hard  covered)  have been undertaken by the large estab­ lished  publishing  firms, who  have  both  capital  and  backlists of  contracts; this alone must modify any assumption  that recent changes in the aspect of Canadian publishing  are  entirely or in every respect the result of an  invasion of new per­ sonalities and  new  philosophies  of  book production  and  distribution. The  new publishing  houses that  have appeared  during  the past  decade  have widened  the field of publication  in  the sense of giving greater scope  for  the  experimental  in prose and  verse, yet -even  though  some of the  smaller  presses have  managed extraordinary press runs for  books that standard  publishers  would  have  consid­ ered unsaleable -the largest share of the increased market  has gone to the older publishers -and  particularly   the  largest  share  of  the  reprint   market.   In  this development,  of course, new printing  processes have  played  their  part.
The  reprints, of which many scores now appear  in Canada each  year, can  be
divided  into  two categories,  which  rather  arbitrarily  I  term   fortuitous and  sys­ tematic. By fortuitous, I mean  the reprint  that  does not fit the  pattern  of a  par­ ticular series; by systematic I mean one that is part of a series and  in many cases is there because of a special aim or philosophy behind the series. Most  publishers are inclined nowadays, when a hardcover  book sells out quickly, to follow with a paperback   edition   rather   than   going  through   the  succession  of   progressively cheaper  hardcover  reprints that  was customary in the past until, after some years or even decades, the books would reach some widely popular level like Everyman or Penguin.  Thus  McClelland  & Stewart,  Macmillan  and  Oxford  reprint  many books outside the  regular  series they may maintain.  Good  recent  examples  are Oxford's   paperback   reprint  of  John  Glassco's Memoirs  of  Montparnasse and

IOI

REPRINTS



McGraw   Hill-Ryerson's   reprints  of  Klein's  The   Rocking  Chair  and  of  Alice Munro's  Dance of the  Happy  Shades. I  was interested  to  observe, in  a  recent McClelland  & Stewart  blurb for their paperback  reprints, that  I5 were individual titles of this kind,  as against  I 6 which  were appearing  in  their  various  reprint series.
One  aspect  of this individual reprint  phenomenon  is the  extraordinary  tele­ scoping that  has taken place in terms of time. Now a paperback  edition of a book will often appear  in the next season to the original book; in fact, some publishers
-McClelland & Stewart,  Oxford,  Anansi-have found it advantageous, especi­ ally with poetry, to eliminate the intermediate  stage, and to publish the paperback edition  (which  would  normally  have  been the  reprint)  simultaneously  with  the hardcover  edition, a procedure  which has obvious benefits in view of the fact that most poetry-buyers today  are  likely to be young  people unable  to afford  normal hardcover  prices.
The  reprint  series themselves vary a great deal in character  and  intent.  Some, like Macmillan's  Laurentian Library  (which  has recently been bringing  out  the less familiar  early  novels of  Morley  Callaghan)  and  Clarke  Irwin's  Canadian Paperbacks   (notable  for  their  reprints  of Emily  Carr  and  Robertson   Davies), while  they  are  both  oriented  towards  Canadian writing,  seem still  mainly  in­ tended  to keep in print  the more interesting writers these houses have  published over  the  years. The  same  is true  of Toronto's   excellent  Canadian  University Paperback  series, which  has  now  passed its I 3oth  title. Though   the  Canadian University  Paperbacks  are  concerned  mainly with Canadian  themes and  publish mostly the  works of Canadian authors,  in  neither  case are  they  exclusive;  the list in  fact  presents  a  fine,  broad  selection from  the  past  publishing  record  of one  of  the  continent's   best  academic   printing  houses.  From   its  earlier  titles, which included  key works as varied  as McLuhan's The  Gutenberg  Galaxy  and McNaught's A Prophet in  Politics, down to such recent  titles as Jones'  Butterfly on Rock, it maintains an extraordinary list of books that  are  basic to the under­ standing of Canadian society and  Canadian  culture.
The   New  Canadian Library  is perhaps-to  date-the  most  important of the schematic  series. Looking  back over the long list of titles, one  realizes how carefully Malcolm Ross has arranged  his choices in such a way that  an interest in contemporary Canadian  books would lead  to an  interest in  the  more  neglected classics of our  literature, and  vice versa. Of  course, the series would  not  have been so successful as it actually  is if it were not for the nationalistic  trends  that have created  a deeper interest in Canadiana of every kind and  have encouraged


102

REPRINTS



the  phenomenal   proliferation  of studies of  Canadian books in  universities  and schools. Still, a touch  of special insight was needed to anticipate a development of this kind; indeed, there is no doubt at all that the New Canadian Library contributed a great  deal towards the very situation  from which it has benefitted.
Other  reprint  libraries  were encouraged  by a  related  phenomenon  -the  in­ terest in the Canadian past that  came into being through  a whole series of  cen­ tennial  celebrations  beginning  with  the  B.C. festival of  1958  and  carrying on through  the  196os. M. G. Hurtig,  in Edmonton,  apart  from  the  interesting  re­ gional  Albertan  titles  which  he has produced  as  part  of his  regular  publishing programme,  has also experimented  in the  reprint  of  Canadian literary  classics; he has brought  out new hardcover  editions of  Callaghan's  early Strange  Fugitive and  of Hugh  MacLennan's volume  of  essays,  Cross Country, the  latter  with  a curious new preface  by the author.  But  the most important  of Hurtig's ventures to date  is undoubtedly  the Canadiana  Reprint  Series, a handsomely  bound  line of facsimile reproductions  which concentrates  mainly on travel literature, includ­ ing Butler's The  Great  Lone  Land,  Franklin's  two narratives,  Hearne's  journey to the Northern  Ocean, Ballantyne's Hudson's  Bay and the accounts  which Alex­ ander   Mackenzie,  Paul  Kane  and  Alexander  Henry  left  of  their   journeys;  it varies in price from  John  Palliser's Solitary Rambles at $5.95 to George Heriot's  Travels  through  the  Canadas  at  $23.00  and  Henry  Youle Hind's  Narrative  of the Canadian  Red  River  Exploring  Expedition  at  $25.00.
Coles Canadiana Collections -of  which 47 titles appeared  in the most recent
list with apparently  a dozen more to come shortly-tends to overlap  the  Cana­ diana  Reprints.  There  is even one work in common-George  Heriot's  Travels through  the  Canadas,  and  in  the  Coles Collection  it costs only $7.95,  but  it is paperbound, and it lacks the background  introduction  which is a feature of each Hurtig  reprint.  (I  gather  that  in this respect the Coles policy may shortly  change and  introductions may be commissioned.)  Coles Canadiana tends to be less con­ cerned with the explorers than  with the pioneers, and it includes a variety of for­ gotten  titles that  are  intriguing  documents  of social history  (such  as The  Cana­ dian Handbook  and Tourist's  Guide,  1867, Canadian  Folk-life  and  Folk-lore by William  Parker  Greenough,  1897, and  The  Canadian  Home  Cookbook, 1877), together  with  nineteenth  century  travel  narratives,  mainly  of  the  prairies  (e.g. My  Canadian   journal  by  the  Marchioness  of  Dufferin,  Ocean  to  Ocean   by George  M. Grant,  and  Milton & Cheadle's  The  North-west  Passage by  Land) and,   finally,  a  small  group   of  Canadian   literary classics-Anna   Jameson's  Winter   Studies  and  Summer   Rambles  and  Catharine   Parr  Traill's   The   Back-

103

REPRINTS



woods of Canada  and  Canadian  Wild  Flowers. As will be evident,  the stylistic level of the series is uneven;  the  documentary level is uniformly  high,  and  all one misses is the kind of scholarly notation  that sets the work in its context.
One is aware  of the same  deficiency in the new Ryerson Archive  series, and there  it is even less justifiable, since the reprints  are expensive at  $12.50: three times as dear  as many  of the Coles reprints and almost twice as dear as many of the Hurtig  reprints,  which also are bound and  which do have introductions.  One finds it hard  to determine  what  public outside libraries is envisaged for the Ryer­ son Archive  reprints.


AN ESPECIALLY GOOD  SERIES is the oddly titled Social His­
tory  of Canada, published  by the  University  of Toronto   Press under  Michael
Bliss's editorship,  and  consisting  of a  variety  of books-published  mainly  be­ tween 186o and  1930-that recall the social debates and struggles of our form­ ative era. Goldwin  Smith's  Canada  and the Canadian  Question  is  there; so are
J. S. Woodsworth's  My  Neighbour, Nellie McClung's  In  Times  like These  and
Alan  Sullivan's  strange  social  novel, The   Rapids,  while  Ralph   Connor's  The Foreigner and  Stephen  Leacock's The  Unsolved  Riddle  of Social  justice are announced. Each  of  these  volumes  has  its  own  special  documentary   interest, but the most striking  feature  of the series is the high quality of the introductions. Carl  Berger's opening  essay to Canada  and the Canadian  Question  is in its own rights a classic study  of Smith  and  his significance for his times, while Richard Allen's introduction to Salem Bland's The  New Christianity, the most recently published  title,  is not  only better  written  than  the  book it  prefaces,  but  also a much more lucid -because more concise -exposition of the Social Gospel than Allen's own book, The  Social Passion. This is a series to be watched with special interest.
Another  reprint  series -on  the indeterminate verges of history and  sociology
-which has turned  out to contain  a great deal of material  peripherally interest­ ing both to the  historian  and  to the literary  critic, is the Carleton  Library,  pub­ lished  by McClelland  & Stewart  but  originated  as a project  of  the  Institute  of Canadian Studies  at  Carleton  University. Under  the general  editorship  of Mic­ hael Gnarowski, the series now includes 70 tides. Some are special complications of  essays previously  printed   in  periodicals -like Bruce  Cox's  recent  Cultural Ecology-which  under  its laconic  and  unpromising  title  conceals a  group  of

REPRINTS



very  useful studies  of  Canadian Indian  life and  its  basis in  the  environment. Others,  like the first volume,  Lord  Durham's Report, are crucial  Canadian con­ stitutional  documents,  and  yet others, like Peter  Newman's  Renegade in  Power among  the  recent  reprints,  are  classic examples of good  Canadian  journalism. George Grant's  Lament  for a  Nation, Andre  Siegfried's  The   Race  Question in Canada, 0. D. Skelton's  Life  and  Letters  of Sir Wilfrid   Laurier,  Mason  Wade's
The  French  Canadian Outlook and J. B. Brebner's  North   Atlantic Triangle are
among the notable works that  up to now have appeared  in the Carleton  Library. One  pleasing aspect of the series is that the editors have not confined their choice of reprints  to  books originally  available  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  pub­ lishing and  book distribution.  Of the latest batch  of titles one -Ronald  Livers­ edge's Recollections of the  On  to Ottawa Trek-is the reporting  of a  narrative  originally  made  available  more  than  a  decade  ago  in  a  mimeographed   form, while a second, H.  Blair  Neatby's  Laurier  and  a  Liberal  Quebec, is an  edited version of the thesis Neatby  submitted  for  his doctorate  in  1956;  both  are  ex­ cellent finds. Finally, among  reprints in the field of  history, McClelland  & Stew­ art  have  begun  to  reissue in  paperback  form  the  early  titles  of  the  Canadian Centenary  Series, beginning  with  McNutt's  The  Atlantic  Provinces, Careless's The   Union of the  Canadas and  Craig's Upper  Canada.




FrNALLY, some very useful reprinting  is being done in a field which I suppose one can best describe as literary antiquarianism-the repub­ lication  of those writers  who  have long been names in  the literary  histories but for many years have been readily available only in anthologized  fragments.  The New Canadian Library,  of course, has done its bit for this cause, but  mainly in the field of prose (such  novels as The   History  of Emily  Montague, The  Golden Dog  and   W acousta),  though   David  Sinclair's   Nineteenth-Century  Narrative Poems is an  example  in  the field of verse. However,  the  major  contribution in this field is being  planned  by the  University  of Toronto   Press, which  has  two series in hand -Literature of Canada,  published  in both  paper  and  cloth,  and a more expensive series of cloth-bound  books, entitled  the Toronto  Reprint  Lib­ rary of Canadian Prose and  Poetry and designed mainly for "public  circulation". Both series are edited  by Douglas Lochhead, and the 38 titles already  announced for them promise a valuable  extension in our stock of available  Canadiana.
The  first four  volumes of Literature  in  Canada   are  now  off the  press -fat


105

REPRINTS



books, well printed,  with scholarly introductions  and, considering their bulk, rea­ sonably  priced in  paperback   between  $3.95  and  $4.50.  One  tends  to  approach  them  on divided  paths:   the literary  antiquary  delighted,  the literary  critic  cau­ tious and somewhat apprehensive-a tone by no means absent from some of the introductions.
There  is of course  no  doubting   the  quality  of  Isabella  Valancy  Crawford's Collected   Poems,  though  one  wishes James  Reaney's  introduction had  been  a little less playfully oblique in its approach  and  had tackled frontally  the question of Garvin's  manipulative editing  of  the  original,  which  is here  reproduced  in facsimile as printed,  with no attempt  to show, by annotation, the evident diverg­ ences between Crawford's intent  and  what  after  her death  appeared  in  print.
To the other volumes one's reactions are mixed in a rather  different  way. It is not the scholarly apparatus that  leaves the literary antiquary  unsatisfied so much as the  basic material  which  leaves the  critic  in  doubt.  It  is doubtless  "a  good thing"  to have Charles  Sangster  available  in extenso-both The   St.  Lawrence and  the  Saguenay and  Hesperus   in  one  volume-but one  soon  realizes why Gordon  Johnston  is so defensive  in  his introduction. "So  the  best advice  ( un­ fortunately  vague)  is that  we not expect too much of him, and  at the same time we not  under-estimate  him. We should  be ready to be delighted." Indeed, there are moments of delight, harmonious  passages, occasional lambent  images, but the journey one takes to earn  these rewards  leads one through  vast sloughs  of  bore­
dom, through  echoing defiles of empty eloquence. A. J. M. Smith with great dis­
crimination   picked for  his Book  of Canadian Poetry  most of the  passages from Sangster  the general  reader  is likely to need. But for the  literary  historian  such a reprint  as the  present is still invaluable.
There   is an  even  deeper  sinking  of  the  critical  heart  as  one  wades  one's grumbling  way through  the Victorian  ineptitudes that fill most pages of Edward Hartley  Dewart's  Selections   from Canadian Poets, originally published  in  r864; except for a few pieces -and  here Charles Heavysege impresses with  a kind of preposterous  power-the  actual  contents of the anthology  have far  less interest than  Dewart's  introduction, which  is well argued  and  well written,  quite  apart from  its special  interest  as one of the  earliest  manifestoes of  Canadian  literary nationalism, one of the first essays to suggest that there might  be a local source of inspiration,  different  from  European sources in its essential character.
I have remarked  elsewhere that  Canadians  developed a power of functionally
eloquent  exposition  while  they  were still  unsure of the  imaginative  forms  that would  be appropriate to  their  experience,  and  this observation,  I  feel, is sup-


106

REPRINTS



ported  not  only by Dewart's  Introductory Essay on  Canadian Poetry,  but  also by the three early critical works that  Clara  Thomas  collects and introduces  in the last of the first four titles in Literature  of Canada.  These are John  George  Bour­ inot's Our Intellectual  Strength  and Weakness, Thomas  Guthrie Marquis's "Eng­ lish-Canadian Literature" and  Camille Roy's "French-Canadian Literature", all of them  pioneer critical documents  which helped to shape our cultural conscious­ ness during  the years that  followed their  publication.  To  have these works avail­ able, with  Dr. Thomas's  excellent  historical introduction, will be most  useful to the reader  who seeks to trace  the  development  of a Canadian critical  tradition. By the time  Marquis  and  Roy wrote in 1913, there was already  a body of liter­ ature  that -whatever its  unashamed   derivations -could  be  accepted   as  dis­ tinctively Canadian  besides containing  some works good by any standards in the English-writing world. This,  of course, makes all the more surprising  the accur­ acy of  prophetic insight with which, having such dubious material  from which to judge  in  1864,  Dewart  so clearly envisaged the future  of our  literary  develop­ ment, short on history and drawing  its strength  from an immediate  apprehension  of  "external  Nature" and a deep questioning immersion in "human nature".
In  reviving  the  pre-modem   literature   of  Canada,   at  least  one  of  the  little presses is playing  an interesting  role. The  Golden  Dog in  Ottawa has begun  to issue a series of finely printed  pamphlet-sized  reprints  of single works that  have acquired  a classic standing  in Canadian literary esteem. The  first three  titles are Charles  Heavysege's impressive little  narrative  poem,  ]ezebel,  his  Dark  Hunts­ man,  in  two variant  versions, and  Archibald  Lampman's The  City  of  the  End of Things, published as Lampman evidently intended  it and  not  as D. C. Scott thought  proper  to rearrange  it for inclusion in the posthumously  published  Col­ lected Poems.
One  might  argue  that  the current  upsurge of reprinting  in Canada is merely
part   of  the  general   paperback   revolution,  which  has  kept  in  circulation   or brought  back to the bookshops an amazing variety of titles from  the world's lit­ eratures.  Yet I think  there  is a specially intentional  character  in what  has  been done  here which is quite  distinctive. The  reprinting  of saleable  books  merely to keep them  in  print  has been less important  in Canada   during  the  past  decade and  a half than  the deliberate  reassembling of the materials  for a  cultural  tradi­  tion. Our  reprint  publishers and editors are not only giving us back our  past but also sustaining  the vitality of our contemporary  movement  by  keeping  its works in productive  circulation.



107

review articles





THE ROYAL COMMISSION

Morris Wolfe



Royal  Commission on  Book  Publishing:   Background   Papers. Queen's Printer and
Publisher, Province of  Ontario, 1972.  $3.75·
Royal   Commission on  Book  Publishing, Canadian  Publishers  & Canadian  Publish­
ing.  The Queen's Printer for  Ontario, 1973.  $3·75·


THosE   WHO  followed   On­ tario's   Royal  Commission on  Book  Pub­  lishing   from   its  inception  in   December
1970  to  its  conclusion  in   February  of
I 973  probably  found   its  final   report­ Canadian  Publishers   &  Canadian  Pub­ lishing-anticlimactic.   The   moderately nationalist tone  of  that  report  and  many of its specific  recommendations had  been anticipated; the Commission's interim re­ ports  and  effective   public   relations had seen  to  that.
The announcement by Ontario's then Premier Robarts of a  Royal  Commission came  on  the  eve  of  the  sale  of  Ryerson Press   to   the   U.S.-owned  McGraw-Hill Co. of Canada. Ryerson  had  been  the second   major  textbook   publisher  (Gage was the other)  to come  under the control of  U.S.  interests   in  1970.  The  members of   the   Commission   were    lawyer    and writer  Robert   Rohmer; former president of  the  national Conservative Party,  Dal­ ton  Camp; and  Marsh Jeanneret  of  the U.  of T. Press.  Their terms  of  reference  were broad:

108
 to  conduct  an   examination  of  and   report upon:
(a)  the  publishing industry in  Ontario and
throughout Canada with  respect to its position within  the   business  commun­
ity;
(b)   the   functions of  the   publishing indus­
try in terms of its contribution to the cultural   life    and    education   of    the people  of the  Province of Ontario and Canada;
(c)   the  economic, cultural,  social   or  other consequences for  the  people  of Ontario
and  of Canada of  the  substantial  own­ ership or control of publishing firms  by foreign  or   foreign-owned or   foreign­ controlled   corporations   or    by    non­ Canadians.

It became   clear   quite   early   that   this was  going   to  be  a   Royal   Commission with  a  difference. Even  before  its  hear­ ings  began,   Jack   McClelland   had   an­  nounced   that   McClelland   and   Stewart was facing  bankruptcy and might  have  to sell  to  U.S.  interests.   Within  days   the Commission  issued a special  Interim Re­  port   recommending  a  government  loan to  the   publishing   house   of   just   under
$r,ooo,ooo. "McClelland  and   Stewart," said  the  Report,

REVIEW ARTICLES



represents an  accumulated creative  momen­ tum  in  original Canadian  publishing which  could    not    quickly   be   replaced   by   other Canadian  publishing  enterprises.... [It is] a   national  asset   worthy  of  all   reasonable public encouragement and  support.

The  Government agreed   to  the  loan  al­ most  immediately. (Following the  crea­ tion  of  the  Commission, William  Davis had  replaced  John  Robarts as Premier of Ontario, and  he  was  now  eager  to dem­ onstrate his  nationalism.)
Three months  later, in  June rg7r,  the
Commission issued its Second Interim Report, charging that   a concerted  effort was under  way

on the  part of one or more  non-Canadian individuals, or  corporations, engaged in  the wholesaling  and   distribution  of  periodicals and  mass-market paperback books  to gain control of the  principal distributors, or wholesalers, of  similar  merchandise  in  On­ tario  and  possibly  elsewhere in  Canada.

Eight   days   later,   the   Ontario   Govern­ ment   had   brought  in   legislation  which would  require  paperback  and   magazine  distributors to   be   licensed   and   which would  withhold  licenses  from  new  com­ panies that weren't 7 5 per cent  Canadian owned.
In  August   rg7r  a  Third Interim  Re­
port  appeared, recommending that finan­ cial  aid  be given  to  Ontario's  book  pub­ lishing  industry through  a  government­ supervised   board.   The   Report  restated the fundamental lesson of  Canadian pub­ lishing economics  it  had  learned only  too well  in  its  early  hearings: because  book publishing is a  capital-intensive industry, Canadian  publishing companies are  at  a double  disadvantage.

Not   only   do   they   quickly reach  the   point where   their total capital  is  tied   up  in  in­ ventories,  often   with  relatively  slow   tum­ over   prospects,  but   as  a  consequence  new Canadian  publishing  opportunities  are   lost
 ... to   the    Canadian   branches  of   foreign publishing firms....

Under   the    Commission's    recommend­
ation,  the Ontario Government would guarantee  loans  and   pay  so% of  their interest  upon  approval of an  application
by the  book publishing board. The  Com­ mission  also  recommended  that  it  be  a matter of government  policy

that  any   further  sales   of  Canadian-owned book   publishers   to   non-residents  be   con­ sidered contrary to  the  public interest.

Again  the Ontario Government acted quickly.   Premier  Davis   announced   ac­ ceptance of  the  Report's  proposals,  and asked  the  Commission  itself  to  evaluate and  approve applications for  capital as­ sistance.   (The  Commission  subsequently received   a   number  of   applications  for loans,  and   approved  five.  But  the  loans weren't  announced   by   the  Government until  April  1972,  and  the  five didn't get their  money  until  almost  the  end  of  the year. It seemed  as if there  was  no longer  any  great  urgency  for  the  now  re-elected  Davis government.)
The   Fourth  (and   final)   Interim  Re­
port  of the  Royal  Commission in  March
1972  dealt   primarily  with   a   potential monopoly  in southern Ontario by Metro Toronto News-an 	American-owned distributing company;  the  Report's  rec­ ommendations would  have  forced  Metro News to reduce  its operation substantially. Ironically, American  anti-trust action  against   the  owners   of   Metro  News,  as much   as  threatened  action   by  the  On­ tario Government, ultimately forced  them to sell their  Canadian operation to  Mae­ lean-Hunter. As a result, Maclean-Hunter has  become   the  only   Canadian  among thirteen national distributors. The Fourth Interim  Report   also  recommended that

109

REVIEW ARTICLES



distributors be  required to  carry  a  "rea­ sonable" number of  Canadian-edited and published books and  magazines -clearly a  step,  an  important and  necessary  step, towards  the  kind  of  quotas   the  CRTC has  established for  radio  and  television.
The   flurry   of  Commission  and   Gov­ ernment activity,  particularly prior  to the October 1971  election, generated  a  great  deal    of    excitement-excitement    rein­ forced  by  news  of  the  stringent  regula­ tions  the  Quebec government was  plan­  ning   to   introduce  to   combat   foreign control of French-language publishing. Dennis  Lee perpetuated the myth  that  it's the  fault  of Americans that  much  of our publishing industry has fallen  into  their hands.  He   attacked  branch-plant   pub­ lishers in  Canada for  their

abysmal   failure ... to    accept   their     [my italics]  responsibilities ... to risk, on  talented Canadian  writers, a  few  of  the   millions of dollars they  have  grossed  teaching Canadian school-children  to   venerate  Abraham   Lin­ coln.

James  Lorimer suggested  that  only Cana­ dians   be   allowed    to   publish   books   in Canada.  Twenty  Canadian-owned  pub­  lishing   houses -McClelland   and   Stew­ art   the   only   important exception­ formed  the  Independent  Publishers' As­ sociation. Their moderately nationalist constitution declared that  "books  of  our own   are   essential    to   the   educational, social  and  economic life of an  independ­ ent  Canada" and   that  "vigorous Cana­ dian-owned and  controlled book publish­  ers  are  essential  to  the  accomplishment of  this  goal" -a view  later   subscribed  to  by  the Commission itself  in  its  final report.
In April 1972 the Royal Commission published Background Papers, a specially prepared collection  of nineteen essays on

110
 aspects  of  Canadian  publishing ranging in subject from history to distribution to copyright.  This   generally   excellent  vol­ ume  is the  most  comprehensive  study  of publishing  ever   undertaken  in   Canada, and  in  itself  provides  sufficient  justifica­  tion  for  the existence  of the  Royal  Com­  missiOn.
There's  a   fine  essay  by  H.   Pearson Gundy,   "The Development of  Trade Book Publishing  in Canada," with its gloomy  reminder that   the  literary  boom of the  twenties  was followed  by a  period when  the  best books-C. B. Sisson's  bi­ ography of Egerton  Ryerson,  for example
-had to  wait   years   to   be   published. There's George Woodcock's perceptive essay, "On  the Resources  of Canadian Writing."  In   it  he  suggests   that,  as  a kind   of  over-reaction  to   past   conserv­ atism,  current Canadian  publishing tends

among writers, towards an  experimental foolhardiness that  often   outruns talent; among editors towards a permissiveness that fails  to  provoke  a  writer into  his  best  form; and  among  publishers towards a thirst for novelty,    a   restless   neophilia,  that  can   be just   as  detrimental ... [as   the   desire   for] safety  and  respectability....

One  is inclined,  however,  to quarrel with Woodcock's  rather sanguine view  that  if one is patient  a good book will eventually get  published  in  this  country. University presses-the U.  of  T. Press  is  a  prime example-are 	finding    it    increasingly difficult  to subsidize books that  can't rea­ sonably  be expected  to recover  their  own costs.  The   trouble   is  that  some  of  the best  scholarly   books,   particularly  those unsupported  by  grant   money,   fall   into this  category.   (Surely  it's  no  longer   any more   reasonable   to   expect   a   scholarly  book  to cover  its  own  costs  than  it  is to expect  a  scholarly  institution to  do  so.)
There's a disturbing piece, "Public and

REVIEW ARTICLES



School  Libraries," by Sonja  Sinclair;  she points  out  that  as recently  as I 96o, "sixty­ four  per  cent  of  [Ontario's]  municipal­ ities and  thirty  per  cent  of  its  population were  still  without  any  library   service  of any   description"-or,  one   might   add,  and  here  the  percentage  of  the  popula­ tion    is    even    greater,   any    bookstores worthy  of   the  name.   And  anyone   who believes  that   the  recent   wave  of  literary nationalism has  had  a  substantial  effect on our  elementary and  secondary  schools is in for a surprise.  Ms. Sinclair reports:

There appears to be a remarkable lack of concern  among  the    educational   establish­ ment for  the  survival of an  indigenous pub­  lishing  industry  or   the   propagation  of   a point  of  view ... unadulterated  by  the   na­  tionalism  of   others.  One   secondary  school  principal     admitted ... that,   out     of    one thousand   books  recently  purchased  from   a wholesaler for the school's new library not a single  one  was  Canadian.

(This  confirms  my experience in Guelph, Ontario,  where    my   three    children­ grades   6,   5   and   3 -have   almost   no Canadian content   in  the  classroom,  and the only Canadian authors in their  school library   are   Farley   Mowat  and    L.   M. Montgomery.)
The  best   essay   in   the   collection  is
Sheila   Egoff's   "The  Writing and   Pub­ lishing  of  Canadian Children's  Books in English." According to  Ms.  Egoff,  there are   no   full-time  writers   or   editors   of children's books in Canada; the market is too  small  to  support   them.  Understand­ ably,  she  says, some  Canadian children's writers-Christie Harris, for example­ prefer   to  be  published  in  the   U.S.   (If nothing else,  there's  the  chance of  better  sales. According to Ernst  and  Ernst, chil­ dren's  books  in  Canada, including  im­ ports,   account  for   only  6   per   cent  of sales; in the U.S. they account for  22%.)
 Meanwhile,  many   aspects   of  Canadian life  have  never,  or  rarely,   been  written about   for   children-the   arts,   for   in­ stance.   When   it   comes   to  fiction,   Ms. Egoff  claims,  writers   of  Canadian  chil­ dren's  books are in a class by themselves:

While other English speaking children, as seen  through their books,  are  coping with ineffectual parents,  no  parents, one  parent, being  unhappy, tuning in,  dropping out, brushing up against drugs, alcoholism, homosexuality and  racism -Canadian  chil­ dren   are  still  visiting a  lighthouse,  crossing the   barrens, discovering a  cache of   Indian relics,  escaping a  murderer, catching  a bank robber, or  getting a  pony  for  Christmas.

Apart  from Christie Harris and  Farley Mowat, she says, the  writers  of Canadian children's books  choose  to  avoid  contro­ versial  subjects.
In   February  I 973,   ten   months   after the  publication of its Background  Papers and,  significantly,  on  the  same  day  that  the Secretary of State  announced  federal government   assistance  to   publishers  through its   book   purchase  programme, the  Royal  Commission's final  report ap­  peared. Canadian Publishers  & Canadian Publishing  contained few surprises. None­ theless, it  did  a  remarkable job of  draw­ ing  on  the  I 9  background   papers,  I 85 briefs, and  other  pieces of  information at its  disposal   to  put   together  a  coherent and  far-ranging  picture of the  difficulties faced  by the Canadian book industry.
The  Report  concerns itself mainly  with the  need  to create  a climate in which  an indigenous Canadian  publishing industry can compete on an equal  footing with foreign   subsidiaries.    What  that   comes down   to  is  money.   The  Commissioners put  the problem  this way:

Because  of the  difference in  size of potential markets, the  unit cost  of  a  book  originated in this country tends to be high, while  the traditional price   levels  are  set  by  imported


III

REVIEW ARTICLES



books,   chiefly   by   those    from    the   United States. Thus  the   same   percentage  of   pub­ lishing misjudgments is more  costly  in  Can­ ada   and   the  same   percentage of   publishing successes  provides less income  with  which to underwrite the  mistakes.

Another major area  of discussion is educational publishing-still    the   most lucrative part  of the publishing industry (so%)  although changing patterns of education, including a move away from prescribed  texts, are making this an in­ creasingly  less secure  branch of  publish­ ing. The  Commission strongly  commends the Ontario Department of Education's Circular  I4,  which  lists  acceptable  texts and  clearly states  that  "preference should be  given  to  books  by  Canadian  authors or editors, printed and bound  in Canada [sic]."  Without  this   preference   policy, the  report  declares,  there  would  be many fewer   Canadian  books   in   the   schools. (But  even  with  the  preference policy,  as the Toronto Graphic Arts  Labour Coun­ cil  complained  in  its   brief,   more   than so%  of  Ontario's  textbooks in   I g6g -
$2g,ooo,ooo  worth-were    imported,
mostly  from  the  U.S.)
The   Commission  recommends  the  es­ tablishment of an  Ontario  Book  Publish­ ing  Board  to administer a  programme of title grants and  the establishment by that  Board   of  a  programme of  Ontario Lit­  erary  Awards,  especially  in  areas  such  as children's books  where   there   are  almost no existing  awards. (The  Governor-Gen­ eral's  Award  for  best  children's book was discontinued in   Ig6o.)   It   recommends that   all  books  awarded  title   grants "be manufactured  wholly  in  Canada." (This  seems unwise, since  there  are  cases where a  publisher  would  be  further ahead de­ clining   a   grant  and   manufacturing  a particularly  expensive   book  abroad.) It recommends  that   the   Board   encourage


112
 the  development of post-secondary courses  in  all  phases  of  book  production and   marketing.  (The  Report  comments on the general scarcity of good creative editors,  and  the  particular need  for them in   a  country   such   as  Canada  without "the  inspiration of a national literature developed  over the centuries.") It recom­ mends  that  the  Board  give  assistance  to one  or   more   Ontario-based   periodicals devoted   primarily   to   book    reviewing.  (The  fact  is  that   we  in  Ontario  don't have  such  a  periodical worthy  of public support. We'll have  to create  one first.)
In  the  area  of educational  publishing, the  Commission   recommends partial  de­ frayal  of research  and  development  costs for   selected   textbooks,   and   encourages schools   at   all   levels   to   find   ways  for "Canadian authors,  artists,  book  design­ ers,   and   other   creative  people   closely connected with book publishing" to come into  contact  with  students. Significantly, it  also  recommends a programme of title grants for books about  andjor by Indians and    Eskimos.    The   cultural   genocide we've  committed  on  our  native   peoples through our  texts,  the  Commission seems to say, parallels  what American texts are doing  to us.
According   to   the    Commission, the
minimum annual cost of funding the On­ tario  Book Publishing Board  and  its vari­  ous   programmes  would   be   $I,ooo,ooo. But   the   Commission   expresses   concern  about  adding to an already  overburdened provincial 	budget,	and 	recommends, therefore, that  this  sum  be  raised  by re­ moving  from  magazines their  exemption from  the  provincial sales tax  (now  7%). The  sum  of $I,ooo,ooo and  the  sales tax as a  means of raising  it  reminded me  of Peter   Martin's  appearance  before   the Commission  shortly  after  the loan  to Me-

REVIEW ARTICLES



Clelland   and    Stewart   had    been    an­ nounced. Martin  told  the  commissioners that   he   thought  it   would   take   maybe
$Io,ooo,ooo  in  low-cost   federal and/or provincial loans to save the Canadian publishing industry. "As  it  happens," he said, "this  is about  the  price  that  the De­ partment of  National Defence  is  paying for   its  fifth   Boeing   707;   one   wonders
 which investment contributes more  to na­
tional   survival." Idon't   know   whether
$I o,ooo,ooo  is the  right  figure  (I  suspect it may be)  but Ilike Martin's point. If there's  no stinting when it comes to the Department of  National  Defence's kind of national survival, then  surely  the same standards should  be applied  to an equally important kind  of  national survival.



REANEY COLLECTED
 

Margaret Atwood


JAMES REANEY, Poems. Edited  by Germaine  Warkentin, New Press  $12.95


WATCHING POETS' CRITICAL reputations  is  a   lot   like   watching  the stock  market. Some  poets  make  slow but steady  gains  and   end   up  safe  but  dull, like  Blue   Chips.   Others  are   more   like shady  gold  mines:   they're  overvalued  in­ itially,   then   plunge    to   oblivion.   More
often  it's  a combination of the  two, with each  high period  being followed  by a low of sneers and  dismissals and an ultimate recovery  engineered  by  a  later  squad  of critics  who  rescue  the  poet's  reputation, from  a safe distance.
This  is especially  likely to be true  of  a poet who, like James Reaney, has been associated  with  a  trend, group  or  move­ ment  which  has either angered  people or gone   out   of   fashion.   Judging   from   a sampling   of  recent  critical   commentary on  his collected  Poems,  Reaney's reputa­ tion  is  in  its  slump   phase; which   is  a shame.  Any  poet  who  has created an  or­ iginal   body   of  work,   especially   one  of such  uniqueness, power,  peculiarity and, sometimes, unprecedented weirdness as Reaney's  deserves   better    treatment.   A critic  might  begin  by attempting to actu­ ally read the  poems,  as opposed  to  read­  ing into them  various philosophies and lit-
 
erary  theories  which  the  poet  is assumed to  have.  If you  start   this  way,  with  the actual   poems,  one  of  your  first  reactions will   almost   certainly  be   that    there   is nothing else like  them.
I'd  never  before  read  most  of  the  un­ collected   single  poems -my  reading of Reaney   had   been   limited   to  The  Red Heart, A Suit  of Nettles, Twelve Letters  To a  Small   Town, and  The  Dance   of Death  in London, Ontario  (as well as the plays  and   the  short   story  "The Bully")  so  I  was  most  intrigued   by  sections   I, III and  V  of this  volume.  I was  especi­ ally  struck  by the  early  appearance of a number of Reaney images  which  crop  up again   and  again,  variously   disguised,  in his later  work. The fascination with  maps  and  diagrams   ("Maps", I945), the  col­ lections   of   objects    ("The  Antiquary",
1946), the sinister  females,  both mechan­ ical   ("Night Train",  I 946)   and biolog­ ical  ("Madame Moth",  I 947) , and  that  nightmare, the  Orphanage, already pres­ ent  in  "Playbox", I945-all  foreshadow later   and   more   fully   realized    appear­ ances.
But  what  became   clear   to  me  during a  chronological reading  of  this  book  Is

I 13

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  most   commentators-including
Reaney  himself, and  his editor and  critics
-are somewhat off-target  about   the much-discussed influence  of Frye on his work.  I  have  long  entertained a  private vision  of  Frye   reading  through  Reaney while muttering "What have  I wrought?" or  "This is  not  what   I  meant, at  all," and  this  collection  confirms  it. Reaney  is to  Frye  as  a  Salem,   Mass. I 7th  century tombstone is to an  Italian Renaissance angel:  Reaney   and   the  tombstone  may have  been  "influenced", but  they  are primitives  (though  later  in   time)    and their  models  are  sophisticates. The  influ­ ence  of  Frye,  however,   was  probably   a catalyst  for Reaney  rather than a new in­ gredient;  let   me   do   a   little   deductive speculation.
The world presented to us in the early poems,   up   to  and   including  The   Red Heart   (I 949), does  not  "work" for  the poet  on  any  level.  The   people  in  them are  bored   and   trivial, like  "Mrs.  Went­ worth", or  they  are  actual  or  potential orphans, loveless, lost or disinherited, like the  speaker  in  "Playbox" or  the  one  in "Whither do  you  wander?":
 touching and wistful children; they are repulsive,  "With plain  white/And  cretin­ ous  faces",  or  filled  with  elemental  de­  structiveness. Within a  larger social  con­  text,  the speakers  are stifled  by their  soci­ ety, like  the speaker  in  "The Canadian", who   longs   to   escape  from    a   parlour haunted by his  "grim  Grandfather" and  the   Fathers  of   Confederation  to   "hot lands"  and   "heathen  folks"    (a   theme  treated   more   succinctly   later    in   "The Upper   Canadian").  In    these   "social" poems,   Reaney    does   not    analyze,    he dramatizes; and,  like a dramatist, he counterpoints. Thus to  the  smothered longing  of  the  provincial in  the  "Cana­ dian" poems he opposes the sneering of a cosmopolite  who has escaped  the  Fathers of   Confederation,   is   reading  Tristram Shandy  and  Anais  Nin,  and  who  says to the  "proletariat":

Your  pinched white and  gray  faces
Peer  in
Like  small  white   tracts held  off  at a
distance.
Well ... is it  not  all  very  beautiful?
As you  stand  hungry in  the  rain
Just  look  to what  heights you  too  may
attain.


... I never  find
What I should like  to  find;
For  instance, a father and  mother
Who  loved  me  dearly ...
Instead I must  forever run Down  lanes  of  leafless  trees Beneath a  Chinese-faced sun; Must   forsaken and  forlorn go
Unwanted and  stepmotherishly haunted
Beneath the  moon  as white as snow.

The  reverse  side  of  the  melancholy state of  being  an  orphan -hate  for  and  dis­ gust  at  the  rest of the  world  and  the  de­ sire   for   revenge-is    explored   in   two other   orphan  poems,  "The  English   Or­ phan's Monologue" and  "The  Orphan­ age",   but  in  these  the  orphans are   not

I 14
 ("The Ivory   Steeple")

If this poem  had  been  written by anyone else  but   Reaney,   everyone   would   have called   it  savage  socialist  satire; in  fact it's  a good deal  more  savage  and  socialist than  much  that  passes by that  name.
In  these early poems the objects-and the   poems   bulge   with   objects-create the  effect   of  a  kind   of  rummage  sale, partly  because  the  objects  are  lacking  in all  but  personal  significance:

... my  spotted ring
And  the  wool  blanket hemmed in  red ... Also the  corduroy suit
And  the  scarf  with  the  purple bars ..•
("Play-box")

REVIEW ARTICLES



The Cup   had  the  outlines of a cup
In  a lantern-slide
And  it  was  filled  with  Congou tea
What did  it  mean  this  cup  of  tea?
("Faces and  the  Drama in  a Cup of Tea")

The  speaker  can  rarely  make  "sense" of them  by  relating them  to  anything else; all  he  can   do  is  record   them,   and   the effect  is  a  still-life,  captured  and   rend­ ered   immobile,  like   the   pictures   Miss ffrench takes  in  "Kodak":

They have  their camera.
No  one  sits in  its gloomy  parlour
Of  pleated  walls.
No  wind  stirs  or  ghost stalks  ... And  all  my  garden stands suddenly
imprisoned
Within her  pleated den.

In   the  early   poems  on  "love" -and there  are  quite  a few of them-the love is either  unconsummated, as in "Platonic Love",  or it turns  into sex, which  is as inextricably linked  with  death as it  is in the  poetry  of  AI Purdy.  This  is  sex  ob­ served  through a child's  eyes, foreign  and monstrous. At  times  Reaney  manages a kind   of  queasy   humour,  as  in  "Grand Bend", which  begins:

It is the  rutting season
At  Grand  Bend
And  the  young  men  and  the  women
Explode in each  others' arms
While no  chaperones attend.

More   often   it  is  simple   horror,  mixed with  revulsion,  as in "The Orphanage":

They that lie  pasted   together
In  ditches by  the  railroad tracks And  seethe in  round-shouldered cars  With  the  lusty  belches  of a Canadian
spring.
Young men  with  permanent  waves
Crawl over  ghastly women
Whose cheeks  are  fat  as buttocks ...

"So  love  does  often  lead  a  filthy  way  to death" one  poem ends,  and  another con­ cludes,   "It has  always   been   that   lust/  Has  always  rhymed  with  dust."
 Reaney's early  world,  then,  is an  unre­ deemed  one, populated with orphans and  spiritual exiles, littered  with  couples  en­ gaged  in   joyless,  revolting  and   danger­ ous  copulation, and  crammed  with   ob­ jects  devoid  of  significance. In  it,  babies are   doomed   as   soon   as  conceived   (as in  "Dark  Lagoon"), the  "real world" is the  one  described   at  the   end   of  "The School  Globe",   filled  with   "blood,  pus, horror,  stepmothers  and   lies",   and   the only escape is the  temporary and  unsatis­ factory  one  of  nostalgic  daydreaming. If you  believed  you  lived  in  such  a  world, you'd surely find the negative overwhelm­ ing.  Anyone  familiar with  the  techniques of brainwashing knows  that  all  you have to do to convert  almost  anyone  to almost anything is subject  him  to a nearly  intol­  erable  pressure, then offer him  a way out.  The   intolerable  pressures   rendered  with such  verbal  richness  in  the  earlier  poems are  those of  the  traditional Christian ver­ sion  of  this  earth, but  with  Christ   (and  escape  to Heaven)  removed; sin with  no possibility  of  redemption, a  fallen  world with  no  divine  counterpart.
Frye's literary  theories-this is a guess
-would surely  have  offered  Reaney   his discredited childhood religion  in a  differ­ ent, more sophisticated, acceptable form: the  Bible might  not  be  literally  true,  but under  the  aegis of  Frye  it  could  be seen as metaphorically, psychically  true.  Frye's  "influence", then,  is not  a  matter of  the critic's   hardedged  mind   cutting out   the poet's  soul  in its  own  shapes,  like cookie dough:   "influence",  for   good   poets,   is surely  in  any  case  just  a  matter of  tak­ ing  what  you  need  or,  in  reality,   what  you  already  have.
Frye made a difference (and again  I'm guessing)  not so much  to Reaney's choice of  materials,  or   even   to   his  choice   of

I 15

REVIEW ARTICLES



forms,   but   to   the   kinds   of   resolutions made   available  to  him.  Horror  remains and  evil is still a presence,  but  a way past the world, the flesh and  the devil is now possible. The  redemptive agents  are all invisible,  internal: they  are  the  imagin­ ation,  the memory,  verbal  magic  (Reaney  has  several   poems   about   language, and many   references   to  the   magic   tongue)  and -I'm   thinking   here   of   the   short story  "The  Bully" -dream. These   ele­ ments  are so important in  Reaney's work because  the  hideousness  of  existence  can be redeemed  by them  alone:  it is the in­  dividual's  inner   vision,  not  the  external social  order,   that   must   change  if  any­ thing  is to be salvaged.
It is this arrangement of priorities that
surely   accounts  not   only   for   some   of Reaney's  themes,   but   also  for  some  of his characteristic structures, in  the  plays as well as the  poems.  The pattern I'm thinking of is that  of  the  sudden  conver­ sion-a  Protestant rather than a  Catho­ lic  pattern. If you  think   of   the  Divine Comedy  with   the   Purgatorio   left   out you'll  see what  I  mean: we get  the  hell­ ishness of the "earthly" situation and  the quick  turnabout followed  by  a  transcen­ dent  vision,  but  we  are  never  told  how you  get  to the vision -what process you undergo,  what   brings   it  about.  No  in­ dulgences  sold here; it's Faith, not Works and   you   just   somehow   have   to   "see".  There  are   several   Reaney    plays    (The  Sun   and   the   Moon,   The   Kildeer)   in which   the  evil  witch   figure  is  defeated simply  by being perceived  as a fraud; but in the lyric poetry,  this structure can  best be  illustrated  by  that   unsettling  poem, "The Sparrow". It's  a poem about grubby lechery   in  the  most  unappealing   places
-underpass,  the    episcopal   church-

116
 symbolized   by  obscene   chalk   drawings, and  the fourth   verse starts  like  this:

Dirty, diseased, impish, unsettling, rapist Illegitimate, urban, southless, itching, Satyromaniac, of  butcher string the  harpist, The sparrows and  their  gods  are  everything.

Then comes the  tum:

I  like  to  hear  their lack  of  tune
On  a very  cold  winter snowy  afternoon. They  must  be listened to  and  worshipped
each-
The shocking   deities: ding dung is sacred
So  is filthiness, obscenity ...

And the last stanza makes the point: everything,  not  just  beauty,  is in  the  eye of  the  beholder:

Christ and  Gautama and  Emily  Bronte were
Born  in  the  midst  of angelic whir
In  a dripping concrete den  under, Under the  alimentary trains: it is we Who  see the  angels  as  brown  lechery
And  the  sacred  pair-Venus  and  Adonis
As  automatons coupled as  a  train is.
And  so step  down  my  chalky   reader, Why  keep  our  festival here
In  this  crotch?
Ding  dung  chirp  chirp:
A  sparrow  sings if you  but  have  an  ear.

In  Reaney's  work,  the  Songs  of  Inno­ cence  come  after  the  Songs  of   Experi­ ence;  in fact,  you  can  take  a  number of figures or images  from  the  earlier poems and   follow   them    through   the   corpus, watching how  the  Lost  Child  gets found  (most  notably  in  Night-Blooming   Cere­ us) ,   how    the    s1mster    Orphan   gets changed    into   the   harmless   comic-strip Little    Orphan   Annie,    how   the   baby doomed   from   before   birth    is   allowed more   latitude   (though  he   can   be  the Christ   Child   as   parody   dwarf,  he  can also  be  the  real  Christ   Child   or  magic baby;  see  "A  Sequence in  Four  Keys"), and   how  the  collection   of  random  ob­ jects is permitted (or  perhaps forced)    to have  universal  significance    (see,  for  in-

REVmW  ARTICLES



stance,  the pebble,  the dewdrop, the  piece of  string  and   the  straw,  in  "Gifts").
The   problems   I   have   with   Reaney's work  are   both   theoretical (I  can't  see certain   pieces of evil,  for  instance   Hitler and  the  Vietnam War,  as angelic  visita­ tions or even  unreal, no matter how hard I  try;  and  I  don't   think  that's  a flaw  in my vision)   and  practical -that  is, some of the  poems work  admirably for  me and others   don't   get  off   the  ground   at  all. Reaney's  best  poems  come  from  a fusion of   "personal"   and    "mythic"  or   "uni­ versal";  when  they  lean  too  far  towards either  side,  you  get  obscurity  or  straight nostalgia  at  one  end  or  bloodless  abstra­ tion  at  the  other. And  at  times,  reading  his work,  I  feel  the  stirrings  of  that  old Romantic distinction between  the  Fancy and  the  Imagination, though  I  try  hard to suppress  it; I  even  hear  a  voice  mur­ muring "Whimsy'', and  it murmurs loud­ est when  I come  across  a  concrete image linked  arbitrarily and  with  violence  to  a "universal"  meaning.  If you  can   see  a world  in a grain  of  sand,  well, good;  but you  shouldn't  stick  one  on  just  because you think  it  ought  to  be there.
But this is a Collected rather than  a Selected; it isn't  supposed  to be Reaney's best  poems,  it's  all  of  his  poems,  and  I can't think of any poet who produces uniformly splendid  work. It's by his best, however,  that  a writer  should  ultimately be judged;  and  Reaney's best has  an  un­ mistakable quality,  both stylistic  and  thematic, and  a  strength that   is  present only  when  a  poet  is  touching  on  some­ thing  fundamental. Certain  of   Reaney's  poems  do  admirably what  a  number of his others  attempt less  successfully:   they articulate the  primitive  forms  of  the  hu­ man  imagination, they flesh out  the  soul,
 they   dramatize -like Blake's   "Mental Traveller" -the stances  of the self in re­ lation  to the  universe.  That sounds fairly heavy;  what  I  mean  is that  Reaney  gets down  to  the  basics-love,  hate,   terror, joy-and gives them  a shape that  evokes them  for the  reader. This is conjuring, it's magic  and  spells rather  than meditation, description	or    ruminating;    Coleridge rather	than	Wordsworth,	MacEwen rather  than   Souster.   The  trouble with being a magic poet  is that  when  you fail, you fail  more  obviously  than  the  medita­ tive or descriptive poet: the rabbit simply refuses  to emerge  from  the  hat.  But  you take greater risks, and  Reaney  takes every risk  in  the  bag,  including a  number of technical ones that  few others  would  even consider  attempting.
The  physical appearance and  presenta­ tion  of a  book  such  as  this  is  really  the least  important  part   of  it,  but  it  never hurts  a book  to look good. Typeface and design-spare  and   antique,   but   some­ how   lush   and   eccentric-are   in   har­  mony  with   Reaney's world.   The  Intro­ duction  by Germaine Warkentin, inform­ ative  about  both  poet  and  poems,  repre­ sents  only  a  small  part   of  her  editorial task;  the  major piece of work  must  have been  the  sifting,   comparison and  selec­ tion of the  poems, some of which exist  in a  dismayingly   large   number of  versions. The  most  unattractive thing about  this collection   is its  price.  The  ways of  pub­  lishers   are   unfathomable,   but    I   hope someone can convince  New Press to bring  Reaney's  poems  out  in  paperback  soon so that  more  than  a few  people  will have the chance  to read  what  Reaney  actually wrote  rather than   what   he  is  popularly supposed  to have  written. The  difference,
it  seems  to  me,  is considerable.



117

RICHLER'S JOURNALISM
 



Doug Fetherling




MORDECAI RICHLER,   Shovelling   Trouble. McClelland   & Stewart,  $6.gs.


THE  REASONED  CONCLUSION must  be  that   Mordecai Richler is  some­ times-not  usually  or  often,   but  some­ times-a  far,  far  better  journalist  than  he  is given  credit   for  being.  Among  his contemporaries in  Canada  (not   among  his peers, who are  understandably silent) he is known  for  having churned out,  es­ pecially  during Centennial year,  all those articles  about  what   was going  on  in  the country  from   which   he   had   exiled   a decade or  so.  The   reaction, one  feels, is against not only his brashness  but  against  the  fact  those  pieces-the one  for  New Statesman, the  one   for   Look, the  ones for   a  lot   of  what   lay  between-were essentially  the  same  article, restyled  a bit for  each  appearance.
But   there   remains  also  the  fact   that
when  he  is good,  Richler is  quite   good indeed. And  when  he  is good,  it  can  be seen from  this new collection of pieces Shovelling Trouble, is when   he  is more essayist than  reviewer,  when  he is writing from some need deeper than a magazine cheque,  about   a  subject  he  has  to  im­ merse  himself  in  and  has  to  think  about  for  a  longer   time   than   it  takes  him  to physically   write   the  copy.  In  the  sense, then,   that   he  writes   better  information when   not   under  pressure   of   deadline, Richler is not  the  professional journalist, or at least  not  the stuff of the  journalist's image.
There is another sense,  too,  in  which he  is  not   really   a  serious   independent

II8
 journalist, and   this  also  has  to  do  with the occasions  on which  he writes. A  nov­ elist    first,    last    and    temperamentally, Richler does  not  feel  the need  to give  a running  chronicle   of   his   time,   or   any small  part  of it,  in  anything but  his fie  tion.  So  that   while   the   middle   of  this volume  is comprised  of  reviews  of  books by such  persons  as  Roth, Fiedler, Kazin  and   Podhoretz,   there  is  no  implication that  the  reviews are  part  of an  even sub  conscious  discussion  of  Jewish  American writing  or any  phase  of it. They  are  just statements  (and  generally   pretty fatuous ones)   on  objects  in  hand, of  no  higher quality  than  your  average  newspaper re view,  except  a  little  longer  perhaps and  smart alecky         a   way   few   newspaper deskmen  would  allow.
To  aspire  to stuff of newspaper quality, to allow  age  and  not  ideas  to  make  the copy  interesting, is to be no great  hell  as a  journalist. And  this  is what  Richler  is doing  a good  percentage of the  time.  His piece   "Answering  the   Ads,"    reprinted here  from  a  rg64  Maclean's, is another example. It is a cheap run down
of those gag-writers who  advertise in  the backs  of  pulp   magazines. It  is  what   a magazine editor  would  call a laundry list, and  it  is hard   to  imagine it  having   ap peared   so  recently   in  a  now  pretty   re sponsible 	middle-class 	magazine 	like Maclean's.  Like   several    other  of   his pieces,  however,   it  is  revealing  for  the light   it   throws   on   Richler's  fiction,   in

REVIEW ARTICLES



this  case  the  concern   with  pop  tnvia  so apparent in  St. Urbain's  Horseman.
Trivia, together  with other forms of nostalgia, is another of the keys since Richler, so much  the  autobiographical writer, is concerned with  the  past  only insofar  as it is his past  and  with  the pres­ ent  only  to  the  extent  that  it  is  personal  nostalgia   in  the  making. It  is  not   sur­ prising  then  that  most  of his  better  non­ fiction   is,  like   his   fiction,   first   person idealizing of  times  gone  by.  Two   pieces in Shovelling Trouble-"A Sense  of the Ridiculous",  a  memoir   of   Paris   in  the early  Fifties,  and  "Etes-vous  canadien?", an  account of his receiving  the Governor­ General's   Award   the    first   time -are good  because  he  was  able  to  employ  in them  the  fiction  technique he  has  been perfecting  for   years.   The    Paris   piece, which  is the  better  of  the  two  and  is in fact   a  first-rate  job,  is  also  confessional in the same way his "Why I Write" is confessional: because  he  is dealing  crit­ ically  and  nostalgically with,  in  the  one, a  persona  he  has  now  outgrown  and, in the  other,   with  a  kind  of  writer   (if  we are  to believe  him)   he  is  currently  ceas­ ing  to be.
Yet  journalistically Richler is the same writer he always has been. His previous assemblage, Hunting Tigers Under Glass, published  in I g68,  was  much   like  this one. It had  the same simple allegorical humour and  the same indulgent though funny reminiscences.  It had  the  same commentary of Jewish  folksiness and  the same  put-downs of  the  other  commenta­ tors. And  Shovelling Trouble not only has repetition, but   the  same  repetition. But whereas    Hunting   Tigers   included  one long  piece  of  excellent  reportage, "This Year  in  Jerusalem",  that  rose  above  all the   cleverness   and   the   tinny   style,  so
 Shovelling  Trouble  contains a long, seri­ ous   piece   also   good   enough to   stand  apart. This  is "Bond", a  solid  chunk of literary  detective   work  in  which  Richler digs out  and  examines the  tendencies - some subtle, some blatant-toward anti­ Semitism   in   Ian   Fleming's  spy   novels. On  this  he  has  done  a  skilful  and   con­ vincing   job,    and   one   wishes   that    he would  save  up  these  periodic flashes  for
a  true  book of essays instead of throwing
them  away  in  grab-bag volumes  to  keep his name on bookseller's shelves between novels.
The  current vogue  of  novelists  cover­ ing  major   news events  has  a  longer  his­ tory  than   such  novelists  would   have   us believe. Witness the  journalism of Dreiser  or  Anderson or,  only a  decade ago,  the coverage   of   the    first   Patterson-Liston fight  by  Schulberg,  Mailer, Baldwin  and  Hecht.   Richler,   suited   to   this   kind   of journalism   by virtue  of  his  basic  report­ orial   ability   and   his  often   loud,   loose style,  has   not   undertaken   such   assign­ ments.  This  is a  pity,  for  he  also  has  an approach to  journalism  unusual  (or  un­  professional)   enough   to   break   through the  cliches fast  closing  in  on  this  type  of reporting and  to give  new insights.
But  then  he is basically  an  iconoclastic writer,  even  when  autobiographical, and such  writers  have  an  historical tendency to   reach   a   certain  plateau  and   camp there  for  the  duration  of  their   careers. The  very fact  that  Richler, the iconoclas­ tic  nostalgist,   could   have  written "Why I  Write" is a  strong  indication that   his fiction  is changing or  will  be  changing. But  what  about  his  journalism? Does  he really  want   to  be  as  skilled  a  journalist as  he  is a  fiction  writer?  He  could   be, but,  alas,  he  has  only  the  one  art; and  with  that  goes the  curious  detachment of

119

REVIEW ARTICLES



art  from   the  workaday self  from   which it  is  distilled   or  wrung-a  detachment the  journalism possibly  would   usurp.
At one  point  in  "Why I  Write," Mor­ decai   Richler   tells  us:   "When   I'm not writing,  I'm   a   husband and   father  of five.  Worried   about pollution.  The   pop­  ulation explosion.  My sons' report cards." This   is  a  state   of  mind  one   would  ex­ pect  from  a  popular  comic  novelist,  but
 one  does  not expect  to  find  it  so frankly articulated.  A  novelist   such   as  Richler can  bypass in his true  work these, to him, very  real  daily  worries.  The   journalistic writer Richler could be would  (with the hopeful   exception   of  the   report   cards) have  used  them   rather than   mentioned them.  Iconoclasm  must  go  forward  too, even  if it hurts.



MOWAT'S LEVIATHAN
 


James Polk


FARLEY MOWAT,  A Whale  for the  Killing.  McClelland  & Stewart, $6.gs.


FARLEY MOWAT's  whale  book is set in a Newfoundland fishing village, down   at   the   heels   but   culturally   self­ sufficient,   a  tribal   society  doomed   by  a new  fish-packing plant  and   Joey  Small­ wood's  centralization policies. A pregnant whale  gets  trapped in  a  nearby  cove,  to be savaged  by louts  with  rifles and speed­ boats.   The   narrator  tries   to   save   her bullet-riddled  body,   but   his  efforts   are thwarted by greed, ignorance and  oppor­ tunism.  At length, the animal dies a slow, hideous death, mourned by its mate  who swims  near  the  impassable channel ;  her fate  is a symbol  for  the  extinction of the great   whales   everywhere.  Mowat  finds himself  persona  non  grata in  the  village and  must  leave, doubting his own  motives and  brooding over  the innate destructive­ ness of man.
This   is  a  bald   summary of  A  Whale
for the  Killing,  but  it  may  suggest  what the   frivolous,   sensation-mad Canadian public is buying, since it is, like most of Mowat's  books,   a   best-seller.    Granted that  the  mood  is more  overtly  pessimistic than   is  usual  for  Mowat, A  Whale   for


l O
 
the Killing presents in dark relief themes which  are  constant throughout his work: the disintegration of a small social unit, modern  man's   alienation  from   Nature, the imminent death of the  planet,  the helplessness of the individual in a bureau­ crat's  world, and  the essential isolation  of the  self. It would  not  seem  to  be bread­ and-circuses material  ready-made for  the masses, but  critics  seldom  emphasize  the "dark" Farley  Mowat. In  fact,  reviewers and  interviewers  seem   united   in  giving him  an  amused  brush-off, as if handling a  crackpot uncle  who  is funny and  good at heart,  but who  really doesn't belong in the front  parlor.
Of   course,   Mowat's  books   vary   in
quality  and   in  any  one  of  them  senti­ mentality and   horseplay  can   run  cheek by  jowl  with  a  probing  examination of man's   relationship  with   the   Canadian environment. There  is  not  much   horse­ play in  the  newest  one; indeed, the  book is  excruciatingly  painful  to  read   if  you identify,   as  you  must,   with   the  animal  victim  and  are  disturbed, as what  think­  ing  person  isn't,  over   the  plight   of  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



whales. Mowat makes his point  that  the maltreated  whale  is  a  "measure of   hu­ manity's unquenchable ignorance of  life", and  that   the  gap  between  man  and  Na­ ture   grows  apace.   But   the   reader   who accepts    this    may    have    trouble   with Mowat's  insistence   that   he   can   bridge that  gap  himself. As he tells it, the  whale in  her  agony  speaks  to  him,  deliberately trying  "to   span  the  chasm   between   our species.... She  failed, yet  it  was  not  a total  failure."
I  believe  it;  thousands wouldn't, and certainly  this  kind  of  personal   commu­ nion  with  animals is a rare  thing outside  the    children's  library.  It   is   especially strange  to  find  it  in  Canadian  writing,  where   Nature  tends   to   be   indifferent, harsh,  sphinxlike. Mowat  can  write  about  the  unknowable mysteries  of Nature, and yet   he   seems   to   have   made    unusual  breakthroughs.  The  wolf  in  the  snow  is revealed  playing  tag  in  Never  Cry  Wolf, a   book   which   shows   the   much-feared terror  of   the   north   as  a  decent   fellow with  a  respectable family  life. Wolves are given   names   (George,   Angeline,   Uncle Albert), whales  communicate, and  even the  family  mutt  is a Dog  Who  Wouldn't Be,  all  but   human.  Mowat's exuberant love  of  the  natural world  demands, and gets, return in kind.
He tackles the true Canadian leviathan, the  land  itself, and  insists that  the  empty unknown spaces  are  alive  and  a  part  of us. Landscapes become  human:  Canada North opens  with  the  Arctic   as  a  giant man   with  "a   thin  skin  of  tundra"  and spring  comes  in  People  of the  Deer  with its "breath ... that  of a strong  woman  in the  grip  of  passion."  The   blank  barrens are  really  teeming  with  "life  in  ten  thou­ sand   forms"   (The   Desperate   People) which   Mowat  vividly   details;   then   he
 shows  us  long-ago   caribou "waiting  for the day when man would come bringing sentience   into  a  new  world." The  high Arctic  is  not  a  white   void,  but  a  place with   a  human  history   and   meaningful charts (Ordeal  by Ice). The leviathan is accessible.
Thus he  can  allay  our  nagging  suspi­ cion  that  the  natural  world  doesn't give a damn  after  all, and  we  read  the  books enjoying   the  idea  of  a  wilderness   made  agreeable, amusing and  well-intentioned. Sometimes   Mowat's  approach  packs  all the  punch   of  a  Walt  Disney  featurette, but   usually   a   darker  vision   is  nearby,  checking   the   pull   toward  pathetic  fal­ lacy,  offering  a  tension   and   a  dialectic. Communion  with  Nature, first  of  all,  is not  possible without a lot  of heavy  booz­ ing,   physical  discomforts  and   bickering with   hard-headed Ottawa  or   the   local rednecks. More  disturbingly, Mowat must always  leave  the  amiable beasts  and  un­ polluted  landscapes to  their  doom. He  is a Romantic ironist,  who  loves, but knows all along  that  love is not  enough.
Doom  comes to nature in  the  shape  of man,    and    Mowat   cannot   escape    his genus.  After  nightmarish  efforts   to  free the  whale,  a perceptive codger  tells him: "The way  I  sees it  you  done  that   whale no good. You done  Burgeo  no good.  And
I  don't say  as  you  done   yourself   much good."  At  the  end  of  Never   Cry  Wolf, Mowat  hears  George  howling and  is  re­ minded  of "a  world which  I had glimpsed  and   almost   entered ... only   to   be   ex­ cluded,  at the end,  by my own self." Like Walt   Whitman,  Mowat  is  big,  he  con­ tains   contraries:  the   man   who   under­ stands  the animals is denied  Nature after  all.  It is  the  usual  Canadian view  gone awry-Nature   is   not   indifferent,  but man  is unworthy:  we are  more  destruc-


121

REVIEW ARTICLES



tive,   in   the   long   run,    than    anything natural.
That too is a Romantic position,  and much    of   Mowat's  work   gains   interest from   the  conflict  of  Romanticisms  rub­ bing  against  one   another. If  the   New­ foundland  village   is   Eden,    the   New­ foundland village  is  also  fallen.  Burgeo, in  A  Whale  for  the   Killing,  is  said   to contain  folk  who  "continued  to  live  in their  own  time  and  their  own  way;  and their  rhythm was  the  rhythm of  the  nat­  ural  world." Well,  maybe,  but  the cliches date   back   to   those   eighteenth-century tracts  on Natural  Man, pieties still opera­ tive  in  pseudo-folk   songs  and  other   cul­ tural  artefacts for  the  middle-class teen­ ager,   but   much    too   easy   for   literate people.  However, even  as  Mowat  ideal­ izes,  he  shows  us  Newfoundland  at  the moment of deterioration; the simple  folk get  confused   and   hostile;   we  can   have our  pastoral  myth  and  lose it at  the same time.
Mowat's very Canadian interest in  the small   group-threatened  garrison   cul­ tures  all-has ranged  from  military bat­  talions   (The  Regiment) to  early  Norse settlements (West viking) to men  banded  together  on   the   sea   (The   Grey   Seas Under). It is central  to  his  saga  of  an Eskimo  tribe, People of the Deer and  The Desperate  People,  two  books  which  con­ stitute a  long  elegy  on  the  death of  the Ihalmiuts, with  Mowat in  his  best  form as tale-spinner, scientist,  wit,  idealist  and despairing  witness.  Questions  about   the factual  accuracy of these  books seem  be­ side   the   point;  they   form   a  discursive epic of Canada north, in which  the  tribe functions  as   a   communal  hero,   going from gaiety and innocence to dissolution, worked  upon  by fate,  tragic  inner  flaws,

122
 disease,  nature, and  especially  the  white man  and  his government.
In writing about  tribal  societies, Mowat is once  again  the outsider: he cannot  be­ come  one  with   the   Eskimos  and   New­ foundlanders, just  as  it  is  impossible  for him  to grow  fur  and  run  with  the  pack. His   stance   is   that    of    Byron's   Childe  Harold, the  uneasy  pilgrim who observes and   warns   and   bitches   and   laments­ and  then  exiles  himself  to another place, having    none   of   his   own.   "With  him  alone  may  the  rest  pain," Byron  writes;  " ... with   you  the  moral  of  the  strain." If Mowat  cannot   have  or  save  his  pas­ toral  worlds  he  can  report  on  the  pain; we  are  left  to write  our  M.P.'s or  join  a conservation group.
As  with  most  Byronic  types,  the  nar­ rator's despair  and  irony  sooner  or  later  turn   in  upon   himself.   In   A  Whale   for the  Killing, Mowat  begins  to  dream   of his  charge   as  a   pursuing   monster;  he realizes  that  all mankind is  trapped with the  whale  in an  apparently  pre-ordained cosmic   disruption  of   life.   Mowat    sees himself  trapped along  with  the  rest, and  even  his  need  to  be  a  guardian of  the natural world  becomes  suspect: "Had I come  to  rely on  her  presence  in  order  to maintain  my  role?"  he  asks,  consumed  with   self-doubt.   We   are   sinners   in   a fallen  world,  a  moral  any synod  of Scots Presbyterians  would  recognize  with  grim approval. No wonder  the whale  book has done  so well  in Ontario.
Mowat's pessimism has deepened over the    years.    In    The  Desperate    People ( r 959), the government bungles,  sending rancid  supplies  to  starving Eskimos  and axes for  a  treeless land,  but  at  least  it  is trying and  there is hope  at the end, in the establishment  of  a  rehabilitation  centre

REVIEW ARTICLES



near  Rankin Inlet. Also, throughout the Eskimo  books, we meet  ordinary  men­ airline pilots, scientists, even business offi­ cials-who  are  looking  for  ways  to im­ prove  the  lot  of  the  native  peoples.  In Never  Cry Wolf  (  1963) , the government is  thoroughly  roasted   over   the  coals  of the  author's  contempt and   we  fade  out with   the   Wildlife    Service   dispatching wolf   poison.  Here   the  common  man   is found  to be  falsifying  his  reports,  blam­ ing  wolves for  the  caribou  his  own  rifle has  wiped  out.  A  Whale  for  the  Killing presents government as a tawdry charade; it  is  the  common   man,   newly  affluent, who sprays  the  helpless  animal with  bul­ lets.   Innocent   fisherfolk    demand  cash money  for  their  services,  and  little  chil­ dren   chant  in   the   streets   that    Farley Mowat    had   better    get   out   of   town. Mowat's  faith   in   human  kind   can   be traced  as a  plummeting curve  which  has all but  hit  rock  bottom by now.
However, he can  make  his desperation funny  most  of  the  time,   just  as  another best-selling Calvinist, Mark Twain, found the  knack  of  making   bitter   insights  into the    human    condition   come    out    like cracker-barrel wit. Mowat's intense isola­ tion  is  often   worked   for  laughs,  as  we find  him  stranded and   barely  coping  in some   god-forsaken  tavern,    leaky   tub, Dantesque Ottawa agency  or  windswept tundra. Like  Twain, he  makes  his  jokes about   cowardice  and  terror,   the  low es­ tate  of  civilization,  and   Everyman's in­ satiable   thirst  for  alcohol. Yet  even  his most  lightweight  works  are  shadowed by melancholia.  Read, for   example, the  opening  pages of the laugh  hit, The Boat Who  Wouldn't  Float,  in  which   waiting  for  Jack  McClelland begins  to seem like waiting  for  Godot.  Or  there  is The   Dog Who Wouldn't Be, advertised as  "really
 'doggone' funny", which  turns  out  to  be about  a curiously  isolated  family wander­ ing from  small  town  to small town  in the hopeless   barrens  of  the   Depression.  At the end,  the  dog  gets run over.
But  then,  much  of  the  comedy  is  im­ plied  by  the   mere   presence   of   "Farley Mowat" in  the  story.  Like  Twain  again, and   Byron   too,   Mowat   has   created  a public    persona   which   works   indepen­ dently  of the  writing, aided  by the media  and  McClelland & Stewart (and, it some­ times  seems,  Barnum  &  Bailey) . He   is one of the few  Canadian writers  to have such  an  image; even  the  New  Canadian Library has stopped  putting authors' faces on  its  covers,   possibly  because   they  all look   so   much   like  everybody   else.  But Mowat is unforgettable: the bearded, crotchety, kilted  Scot,  loyal  to  the  bottle and outrageously frank  at Establishment parties.  Everybody knows  Farley  Mowat.
This  mask,  if it  is one,  is a  legitimate part of Mowat's creative production, as much   as  the   Mowat  I   have   described bearing  the  pageant of his bleeding  heart with  haughty scorn  across  the  Northwest Territories. There is room  for variety  and contradiction  in  Mowat's manufactures, the  number and  range  of which  is  noth­ ing short  of a miracle in  the  land  of the one-book  author. A Whale  for the Killing is  possibly  not   the  best  introduction  to Mowat:  like   the   later   work   of   Mark  Twain, it seems too dark  and  narrow for its  own  good;   the  subject  allows  no  ca­ tharsis,  no  room  to move;   to  read   it  is almost  a  masochistic act.  I  know  it  hap­ pened   this   way;   anything  which   helps whales,  I  am  for.  But.  There is  a  Na­  tional   Film   Board   short   in   which   we watch a  trout  dying  of suffocation on the screen; it shows  that  the  pollution of our water   must   cease -a   worthy   message,


123

REVIEW ARTICLES



but  there  is a  point  at  which  assisting  at the  death of an  animal becomes  an  exer­ cise in  bathos  or  worse,  no  matter  what  the  ecological  cause.
Nonetheless,  A Whale   for the  Killing
works; the  writing  is effective and  Mowat is by now a master  of the form  he has invented: a Scotch broth  of spiritual autobiography, folk legend,  documentary, satire,  burlesque, romance, popular  biol­ ogy, sermon,  social analysis, narrative, di­ gressions,  and  reformist  tract. His  genre, which  Dell  on  one  paperback cover  tries to sum  up as "Humor/ Nature," is really "Canadian  Mosaic", in  which  form  fol­ lows content.
Although the  treatment of regional groups  and  unspoiled  landscapes is tra· ditional  in   Canadian  bestsellers-con-
































124
 sider  Anne of Green Gables, Jalna, the works  of  Haliburton,  Connor,  Mitchell, and   Raddall - Mowat's  persistent   re­ frain  that  Progress is destroying both sug­ gests   a   hard-headedness  unusual   in   a popular author  and   his  reading  public. Perhaps it is sociologically  revealing that  one of Canada's most  widely  read  writers should  be a Romantic Calvinist specializ­ ing  in  non-fiction  about  ecology  and  so­ cial loss. This fact  may  identify who and  where  most of  us are  at  the  moment, as well   as   suggesting   a   way   of   gauging Mowat's particular importance. "Oh well, Farley  Mowat," as  someone  said  to  me the  other  day. "He's a Canadian Institu­ tion."
Exactly.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ON THE VERGE


*****  ,BELEN   J.  DOW.   The    Art    of   Alex Colville. McGraw-Hill-Ryerson.$25.00. Against the   disintegrative   trends    that    have   broken apart the  tradition of  Modern  Art  during the past   two  decades,   Alex  Colville   has  always stood  out  as  a  major  exception,  and   perhaps most  of all  because  he  has  never  seen  himself as  part   of  that   Movement.   Though  he  has accepted    and   used   the   new   techniques    of painting, he has bent them  to an art  as ordered and  as transcendentally realist  as that  of Piero della  Francesca,  to  whom  one  naturally  com­ pares   him.   His  illuminist   realism,  in   which space  is used to signify infinities  beyond  physi­ cal   perception,  and   in   which   human   and animal   figures  enact   the  laws  of   their   being, is an  extraordinarily deliberate  and  intellectu­ ally  motivated  kind  of art,  yet  it  is combined with   a  formal   instinct   and   a  visionary   per­ ception  that  make  his  works,  not  surrealist  in the   historical   sense,   but   superrealist  in   the sense  that,  as  Robert  Melville  remarked, they show  us  reality  "through an  unflawed  mirror which  presents  an  image  sharper   and  clearer than   reality   itself."   Undoubtedly  Colville   is
one  of  Canada's finest  painters,  and  Helen  J.
Dow's  book is an  excellent  presentation of his
work,  well-illustrated,  informative    about   the
intellectual structure  that  supports  his  artistic
practice,   and   judiciously  analytical in  discus­
sing  his  paintings, whose  deliberate structure
makes  this  kind  of  treatment  especially  rele­
vant.

*****  Harold  B. Burnham  and  Dorothy  K. Burnham. "Keep  me  warm  one  night":  Early Handweaving  in  Eastern  Canada.  University of Toronto Press,  $27.50.  This  is  much  more than  a  charming picture   book -though  it  is that   to  begin  with.   It is  also  a  fine   intro­ duction  to the great  collection  of  handweaving and   of  weaving   tools  and  equipment  in  the Royal  Ontario  Museum.  But,  most  important, it  is a  fascinating and  well-illustrated  history of  the  craft   as  practiced  by  the  pioneers  in Ontario, Quebec  and  the  Maritime   provinces;  it   provides    not   merely   a   most   exhaustive record   of   processes,   but   also,   because   the weaver   was  so  important  a  member   of  the early  Canadian  community   and   his  products entered in so many ways into  the lives of the settlers,  it  opens  curtains  on  a  whole  vista  of pioneer   social  history. "Keep  me  warm   one night"   is  likely  to  became  a  basic  book  for
 handweavers,   but  nobody  interested in  Cana­
dian  history should  neglect  it.

*****  DONALD CREIGHTON.  Towards the  Dis­ covery  of  Canada.  Macmillan.   Paper   $6.95, cloth  $I 1.95.  We  are  accustomed to  think  of Donald   Creighton  as  the  author of   some  of the  most  challenging books  on  Canadian his­ tory,  and  in  recent   years  we  have  seen  him taking  arms  in  popular  periodicals on  behalf of   Canadian    nationalism.    Over    the    years Creighton  has  in  fact   written  a   number   of significant  essays,  both  on  the  art   of  history and  on  Canadian historical  problems,  particu­ larly   in   their    relationship   to   the    present. Towards   the  Discovery   of  Canada   is  a  col­ lection  of  them,  and  an  extraordinarily inter­ esting   volume;   it   begins   with   a   section   on "The Craft   of  History"  in  which   Creighton puts   an   excellent   case -supported   by   the high  writing  of his own  books-for  regarding history  as  a  branch   of  literature  rather   than as a social science, and  goes on through further sections  considering   Canada's  relation  to  the Empire,  and  various  aspects  of that  Creighton­ made   hero,   Sir   John   A.   Macdonald,  to   a group  of  provocative   essays on  Canada's  role in  the  modern  world.  Very  interesting it  is to see Creighton's transformation, without chang­ ing   his   essential   doctrines,   from   an   anti­ nationalist   imperialist   into  a  nationalist anti­ imperialist.   He   opposed   the   nationalism  of Mackenzie   King,    which    sought    to   detach  Canada  from  the  Empire  and  submerge  it  in a continental pattern, but  now he supports the new   nationalism    of    those    who,   when    the Empire   is  dead,   seek   to  assert   the   separate  identity  of Canada  in  opposition  to the United  States.  Yet  his basic  beliefs  remain  the  same:  that  the  Fathers  of  Confederation intended a strong  central  government and  that  there  was never  any  contract at  Confederation between two   nations,   the   English    and    the   French. Hence  he  opposes  the  recent   growth   of  pro­ vincial  power and  also the  idea  of any kind of special  status  for  Quebec.   One   may  disagree with  him  emphatically on  both  points,  as  this reviewer  does,  but  still  admire  his  command of  Canadian  history,  delight  in  his  resonant prose, and  welcome him  as an  ally in the  fight for  independence.

*****  William  Godwin.  De  la  Justice  Poli­ tique.  Traduction imSdite par  Benjamin  Con­ stant,   editee   par   Burton    R.   Pollin.   Laval.
$12.00.  Canada   has  become  something   of  a centre  of Godwinian   scholarship and  publish­ ing.  Some  years ago  Toronto  published   F. E.


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



L. Priestley's definitive edition of  Political  Jus­ tice,  with  its  monumental  scholarly  apparatus, a   work   for   which   all   students  of   libertarian doctrines  must   be   thankful.   Now   Laval  has published   for   the    first    time    the    legendary translation   of   Political    justice   by   Benjamin Constant  of  which  all   Godwin  scholars  have  heard,  but   which    few   have   seen,   since   the only   copy   has   been   preserved   in   the   Biblio­ theque  Nationale  in   Paris.  Burton  R.   Pollin,  the   most   assiduous  of    Godwin  editors  and  bibliographers, obtained  permission-no mean  feat   as  anyone familiar  with   the   Bibliotheque Nationale  will  know -to  publish the  transla­ tion,  and   it  is the  whole  of  Constant's  incom­ plete  rendering of  Godwin that Laval now  re­ produces,  with   a   copious  and    extremely  in­  formative  introduction  to   the   background  of the    work   and    the    translation  by   Professor  Pollin.  One  curious fact  will  strike the  reader. On   the  dust  cover  flap   the   work  is  described as "De  Ia Justice politique par  Benjamin Con­ stant",  and   on  the  spine of  the   book  as  well as of the  dust  cover, it  is Constant's name, not Godwin's, that  appears. Doubtless, in  a  franca­ phone readership, Constant  is  likely  to  arouse more   interest  than  Godwin.  Still,   there  are limits   to   the   propriety  of   appearing   to  give credit where it  is not  due.

****   Donald S. Hair. Browning's Experiments with    Genre.   University   of    Toronto    Press.
$1 o.oo.  In  some  ways  Browning was  the  origi­ nal  pioneer of  mixed-media through  his  assid­ uous   attempts,  by  grafting  on   to   his   poetry  elements from  other literary genres, to  achieve the  kind  of  vehicle   that   most  nearly  fitted   his aim,   which  was   the   exploration  of   the   com­ plexity   of  human motives and  anxieties. It is strange  that   no-one -before   Professor Hair
-has thoroughly studied  this   vital   aspect of
Browning's achievement. His  book, which  care­ fully   examines  all   of   Browning's   important works  and  analyses the  effect  on  them of  their  literary  associations is  therefore  an   extremely valuable addition  to  the   already  considerable volume  of  recent studies.

****   James  Gray.  ] ohnson's  Sermons:   A Study. Oxford  University  Press.  $I5.50. That Samuel Johnson should have tried his  hand at the  writing of  sermons, which  he  regarded  as "a considerable branch of  English literature", or   that  clergymen at   a   loss   for   inspiration should   have  welcomed him  as  a somewhat sub­ stantial  ghost-writer, is  not   surprising.   More  surprising is  the  fact   that  this   branch  of   his work, which illuminates an  important  aspect  of
 his  character-his   consistent  piety-should have    received    so   little  attention   from    the critics;  the   fact   that    his   sermons  have   not been   freely   republished   and    that  there    has been  controversy  over  the  exact   degree of  his authorship, is hardly sufficient excuse,  and  the explanation  for   the   development  must   surely lie  in  a  radical shift   of  point of  view  among intellectuals, not  towards religion as  such,  but towards  its  institutional expression. It  is  for this  reason   that   James Gray's book,   johnson's Sermons,  is a  timely  and   original contribution to  the   study   of  that   extraordinary  man   who combined  so  memorably,  like   the   Church  of England to  which   he  so  loyally  adhered, both grandiosity and  true greatness.

****  w.  J.  ECCLES.  France  in  America. Fitzhenry & Whiteside. $10.30. France in America appears under unfortunate auspices, which  are  likely  to  prejudice Canadian  nation­ alists  against  it.   It is  published  as  a  volume  in  the  New  American  Nation  series,  which   is described   as    a    "comprehensive    survey    of United  States  history   since   the   days  of  dis­ covery ... "  This certainly  suggests   academic annexation,  since   only   a   comparatively  few pages   of   France in   America  are   concerned with    territories-mainly   in    the    Mississipi Valley-that   have    ever    been    part  of   the United States. By  far   the  greater part   of  the book   relates  to   what  later  became Canada, and  the  rest  to islands in  the  West  Indies that have  never  recognized the  rule  of any  imperial land   but   France. It  is  unfortunate that  Pro­ fessor  Eccles  should have  co-operated in  such  an  imperialist failure  of  tact   and   fact  on  the part   of  the   American publishers and   editors of  the   series.   Still,   it would   be   just   as  un­  fortunate if  Canadian  readers were  to  neglect France in  America  for  that  reason,  since  it  is one  of  the  rare   books  that   relate  early  Cana­ dian   history   clearly   to  other  French  imperial ventures,  and    it makes    a   good    condensed history  of  the  efforts  of the  Bourbon monarchy to  establish  a   viable   colonial  system   in   the  Americas.

****   The   Canadian   Oxford   Desk  Atlas  of the   World. Oxford    University  Press. $7.95. The  surface of  a   sphere  is  infinitely   multi­ centric, and  for  this  reason alone  it is  possible for  any  country, in  an   access  of   nationalism, to  regard itself  as  the  centre of  the world.  In more  modest   terms,  it  is  logical  for  a  country to  have   an   atlas   which   begins  with   its  own geography  and   spreads   outward,  and   this   is precisely    what    the    Canadian    Oxford   Desk

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Atlas,  in  its  third  edition, does.  A  quarter of the    maps    and    more    than   a   third   of   the gazeteer are   devoted  to  Canada; in  addition, an introductory section  of 20 pages  presents essential Canadian  statistics. The  Atlas   thus provides an  excellent introduction  to  the  geog­ raphy of  Canada, and  at the  same  time  gives Canadians a  good  introductory  background to the  geography of  the  world   as  a  whole.

****   PETER C. DOBELL.  Canada's  Search  for New  Roles.  $2.95·  BRUCE THORDARSON.   Trud­ eau and Foreign Policy. $2.95. Oxford  Univer­ sity  Press.  We  have  passed   beyond  the period  of careless  rapture in  Canadian  foreign affairs.  Foreign affairs under Trudeau  have  necessarily
-as a   result   of   the   world   situation  rather than of  the   prime minister's style-been  less
productive of  gratifying roles  for  Canada. In another way  than  Mackenzie King's, Canada has  again been  turning in on  its own  problems, and   seeing   its   foreign  policy   in   relation  to these    problems-the     largest of    them,   of course,  itself   the   product  of   a   foreign   con­ nection, with   the  United  States. In  these  two books  the  reader will  find  an  excellent balance of   views   on   the    Trudeau    era    in   external relations. Peter Dobell tends  to  represent the official   attitude,  and    to   outline  without  cri­ ticism   what   the  government  has   been   setting out   to  achieve  in   the   past   four   years.   Bruce Thordarson,  while  not  a  critic of  the  Trudeau regime   in   the  manner  of  Walter  Stewart or Peter   Newman, presents Trudeau's   acts   and policies  within  the   necessary context  of   poli­ tical,  academic and   popular reaction, and  as a slice of contemporary history, balancing all  the factors  and    reaching   highly   judicious   con­ clusions,  his  Trudeau  and   Foreign  Policy  is quite a virtuoso performance. Certainly anyone  who   reads   Thordarson's   and   Dobell's  books attentively can  feel  himself  well  briefed on  an aspect   of  Canadian   policy   that  has   changed radically  since  Trudeau  the   pragmatist  took over   the  leadership  of  the   government  from Pearson  the  romantic.

***  LESTER B. PEARSON. Mike.  University of Toronto Press, $12.50. ARNOLD HEENEY.  Things that  are Caesar's. University of Toronto  Press,
$12.50. Lester B.  Pearson and   Arnold Heeney are   names   that   have   become  firmly   attached to  the   period   when   Canadian   foreign  policy
first   attained   self-consciousness, and   their volumes  of   memoirs  may    have    a   historical value  that   transcends their interest as personal documents. That  of  course   is  for  historians to say;  my own  impression is that both  men  were
 so conditioned by diplomatic activity that even now   they   let   escape  very   little  that  gives   a startling  revelation of  Canada's role  as  a  kind of  floating middle power. But  inevitably there is  the   interest  of  considering politicians and public  servants as  men  and  Ininds, and  here  it is  Heeney  who   presents  the   more  intriguing self-portrait, partly  of  course   because  he  was a  figure   less  in  the   public  eye  and   therefore less   known    than   Pearson,  but    partly   just because   he  is  a  better  memoirist. It is  hard to  believe  that Pearson was  really  a  dead-level Mr.   Average Canadian,  but   that is  the   kind of  person   he  makes   himself   appear, and   far too   much  of   his   book,   where   it   does   not concern  the   details  of  foreign  service   work, consists of cosy trivia told in resonant cliches. Arnold    Heeney,  on   the   other  hand,  deploys a  surprisingly philosophic  mind  and   a   quite urbane style  over  his  recollections. The  result is that   he often illuminates his  time  and   place, and  the  ironically perceived "great" who  move through  them,  in   a   memorable  and   original way, and  one  continues to  read  his  book  in  the always   satisfied   expectation  of   vivid   and   re­ vealing personal insights. The  Things that  are Caesar's  is  for  its  own   sake  one   of  the  most interesting books  ever  written  by  a  Canadian public  servant;  Mike   is   interesting   for   the history  that rubbed off on its writer.

**  Peter  Such.  Soundprints:  Contemporary Composers.  Clarke Irwin.  $3.50.  Peter  Such, an  interesting experimental  novelist, has  writ­ ten  a  useful-if   gossipy -guide  to  some  of our  contemporary and  more experimental com­  posers   of  music.   The  choice  of  composers - Weinzweig, Somers,  Beckwith, Beecroft,  Buc­  zynski,  Shafer -is  a  confessedly personal one,  though  it  has  the  virtue  of  presenting a  fair  variety of  musical  perspectives. Still, many   in­  teresting  composers  are  absent, and it is curi­ ous  to find  none  of  the  francophone musicians. Soundprints  gives   a   peephole  look   into    the world  of Canadian music; for  a  good  compre­ hensive  book  for  laymen we are  still  waiting.


TALK AND CREATION

A Checklist  of Canadian  Literature and  Back­ ground  Materials,  by  R.  E.  Watters   (Univer­ sity  of  Toronto Press), is  the  revised  version  of  what-since  its  first   appearance  in    1959
-has   become   the   standard  bibliography  of
Canadian letters. The first  edition covered the
period  from   1628-1950; the   1972 edition  ex-

127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tends  the  coverage ten  years  to  I g6o.  This  ex­ tension   in  time  is accompanied by a  growth in volume from   72 I pages  of  actual  bibliography (i.e.   not   counting  index  or   introduction)   to
I ,oo I pages.  A minor part of  this  increase  has
been   due,   I  suspect, to  a  more   sophisticated typographical  layout,  but   the   greater  part  is undoubtedly  a   matter  of   increased content, and   since   this   means  an   expansion  of  more than a  third in  size,  it  is  evident that it  can­ not   be   caused    by   the   extension  of   a   mere decade in  the   time   covered. Canadian  litera­ ture   has   proliferated  indeed  in   recent   years, but  not  to  that   extent. In  other  words-and this   one   finds   by  spot-checking   through  the pages-a    fair    number  of    omissions    in   the earlier  edition  have   been   corrected,  in   addi­ tion  to  the  inclusion of  later titles.  The Check­ list is  not  only  larger,  but  also  more  complete than it  was  before.
It is divided into two  parts, the  first  dealing with  poetry, fiction  and  drama, and  the  second
-the  so-called "Background Materials" -in­
cluding such  fields as biography, essays, local history,  religion  and    morality,  travel  and    a strange grab-all category called  "scholarship", which  seems   to   overlap  into   both   biography and  essays. The arrangement means that an author's works  are   shown   together only  if  he has  written  in  a  single   genre;  otherwise they are   divided  among  the   various sections, and this  many   readers may  find  an  inconvenience, but  there are  arguments to  be  made for  both kinds  of arrangement.
Part I  claims   to  be  complete,  and   indeed appears to  be  virtually comprehensive. Part  II, we  are  warned, is no  more   than selective, and this   is  certainly  the   case,   for   I  have   found titles   missing   that,  perhaps  having  different criteria  from   Dr. Watters, I  would   certainly have  included. Nevertheless, the  page  ratio be­ tween   the  two  sections tells  us  something  very interesting about the  Canadian  literary genius. In   the   original edition Part  I  contained 32 I pages,  and   Part   II 400  pages. In   the  present edition Part I contains 452  pages  and   Part   II
549  pages,  and  is confessedly incomplete. Thus in  each  case  the  selected  background materials exceed  considerably in  length the  whole  of the so-called   "creative" works.  Canadians, it  is evident, have   been   and   remain in  their  writ­ ing   a   people  more   inclined  to   the   didactic than  to   the   imaginative.  I  suspect   that  the vastly  increased publication  of  poetry  and   the modestly increased  publication  of   drama and
fiction   since   I g6o   may   begin   to  equalize  the
 balance. But  the  chilling evidence of  the  Wat­ ters  checklist seems  to  be  that   up  to  now  we have  been  far  more  likely  to  talk  than  to  cul­  tivate our   imaginations.
In    physical    terms -layout,   binding  and dust  cover-the  new  Checklist is a  great  im­ provement on  the  first.
G.W.


BACKGROUNDS

IN   VIEW   of   the   upsurge  of  both   interest in Canadian  dramatic writing and   creativity in that  field,   we  welcome    as  one   of   the   most useful   of  recent   checklists The  Brock  Bibliog­ raphy  of  Published  Canadian   Stage  Plays  in English   1900-I97:i1. It is  prepared  by  a  Dra­ matic Media Class  at Brock  and  sponsored by the University's Department of  Drama. (Copies are   available  from    the   Playwright's  Co-op,
344  Dupont Street, Toronto, $1.50.)
The Bibliography contains almost goo  titles,
yet,  as  the  compilers admit  with   an  astonish­ ment   which   others   will  share,  even  this  is  an  incomplete  list   (though  certainly   the   fullest  yet available), and  supplements are apparently contemplated.
As  the   compilers also  point out,   the  Bibli­ ography,  lengthy as  it  is,  does  not  contain by any   means  the   whole    of    Canadian  drama. Radio and   television   plays,  even  if  published, are   not   included;  several  hundred such   plays have   achieved print  in  one form   or  another, and   there  are  thousands  more   in   the  C.B.C. archives   which,   as  we  have   often   remarked, comprise    the    largest   pool    of    unpublished
literature in  Canada. It  is  to  be  hoped that some  equally enterprising group will  make  the appropriate  checklist of  non-stage drama in Canada-for decades its most prolific  and  at certain periods its most  interesting form-to complement this  excellent Brock   bibliography of stage  work.
English-Canadian   Literature:  A  Student Guide  and  Annotated   Bibliography, by  R.  G. Moyles  and  Catherine Siemens (Athabascan Publishing Company, Edmonton, n.p.), is a useful  search tool,  listing historical and  bibli­ ographical  material on   the   subject  and  indi­ cating sources  of primary material  available to
the  student-e.g.  anthologies, reviews,  paper­ back   editions,  and   the   research   resources  of libraries in Canada and  abroad.
L.T.C.
