· $1.25  per copy


CANADliAN
liTERATURE
.	N°·20







THE 	CRITIC'S TJISK



&tides
BY A.  J. M.  SMITH,  NORMAN SHRIVE, 'li'HElLMA  MCCORMACK, MARGARET  K. Z][EMAN, GEORGE  l30WERING




BY S. E. READ, R. JE. WATTERS, WAlL'fER D. YOUNG,
GILLES ARCHAMBAULT, ROBERT  CRAIG BROWN AND OTHERS


Opinions

BY EARLE  BIRNEY AND  ROBERT MCDOUGALL





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










PROBLEMS

OF EQUILIBRIUM





FoR  THE THIRD   YEAR,  Canadian  Literature   announces   the award  of  the  University  of  British Columbia's  Medal  for  Popular  Biography. Fewer  good  biographies  were  published  in  1963 than  in  1962, but  there  were still several  very  competent   books in  the  field;  after  lengthy  consideration  the panel of  judges, consisting of S. E. Read,  Donald  Stephens  and  George  Wood­ cock, decided to award  the Medal to Lord Selkirk  of Red  River  by John Morgan  Gray. A review of this book by one of the judges appears  in this issue of Cana­ dian  Literature;  here  it  is enough  to say that,  besides being  based  on  copious research,  Lord   Selkirk  of  Red   River is a finely written  book  which  presents vividly the  complex  historical  background  to Selkirk's life  without  diminishing our interest  in the personality  of its hero. In  doing this Mr. Gray has solved the vital  problem  of equilibrium   between man  and  environment which  faces every historical biographer  and defeats so many.

* 	* 	*
IN  SPITE OF    THE VIKINGS   and   Cartier,   the   discovery  of Canada   by  American   magazine  editors  is an  almost  annually  recurrent  event. Trapped  in  their  myths  of  the  Last  Frontier,  these  hearty  pioneers usually regard  the  country  to  their  north  as a  kind  of misty  hinterland   to  their  own shining  world, where the ghost of Manifest  Destiny can walk again  in the shape of  the  American  investor  or  the  American  big-game  hunter.  A  recent  special issue of Holiday has somewhat changed the customary perspective; instead of Americans  talking  about  Canada, the  task of  presenting  the  country  has been

3

PROBLEMS OF  EQUILIBRIUM



given to a visiting English writer, V. S. Pritchett,  and a team of eight Canadians, including  a quartet of novelists- Hugh MacLennan, Robertson  Davies, Morde­ cai Richler and Jack  Ludwig.
The  result is not  the glowing symposium one might  have expected from such
a group  of writers. But what one does read in this issue of Holiday  at least em­ phasizes some  interesting  facts  about  the  relationship   which  exists in  Canada  between  journalism  and  the  art  of writing.  For  it  is V. S.  Pritchett's  leading article,  Across the  Vast  Land, that  dominates  the magazine  in quality  as well as in  length.  It  is urbane  and  perceptive,  full of those quick  and  penetrating in­ sights by which a practiced  traveller can often  reveal the truths about  us which are  too  near  for  our  own  ready  perception.  It  presents  sensibly and  accurately the characteristics  that  make Canada  a country  different  from others and  Cana­  dians  a people elusively distinct. It is, above all,  admirably  written,  as clear and controlled  as  its  author's   short  stories  or  his  excellent  critical  explorations  in the  New  Statesman. Here is a writer who maintains at its best the tradition  and the  pride  of  the European  man  of letters,  to write at  the  height  of his powers no matter  what the occasion.
In  comparison,  the Canadian contributors  either  plod  with elephantine slow­ ness or  strike feebly provocative attitudes;  the  one  thing  they have in  common is that  none of them is doing his best. And here, I suggest, they are victims of a pernicious  attitude   bred  of  the snobberies of  North  American  litterateurs   and encouraged   by  the  deliberate  Philistinism  of  Canadian  magazine  editors.  The notion  that  there  is a  hierarchy  of writing,  with  poetry,  drama  and  fiction­ united  in  current   cant  under  "creative  writing" -floating somewhere  in  the empyrean,  and  other  genres wallowing  in  the  depths  below, is neither  old nor universal. But it is persistent and powerful in Canada today, and it causes writers who  practice  in  both  fields-as  necessity often  forces  them  to  do -to  make a half-conscious distinction  between the poems or novels which must be as good as they  can  make  them,  and  the magazine  articles which  need merely be good enough  to pass. Without  exception, the editors of popular  magazines in Canada
-begin  the  roll  with  Weekend  and  end  it  with  Maclean's -encourage  this attitude by demanding articles that  are cocky, superficial  and  shoddily written, and  by deliberately discouraging anything  that in terms of style or thought  might demand  a mental  effort on the part  of their  readers.
These  two influences  have  helped  to  create  a  double  standard in  Canadian writing. Not only is it demanded  by editors-and presumably by well-conditioned readers-that articles published in large-circulation  periodicals should  be more


4

PROBLEMS OF  EQUILIBRIUM



shallow  and   vulgar   than   anything one  would  expect  to  find  between   the  hard covers of a "serious" book;  writers  themselves, led away  by the notion  that  some genres  are  lower  than   others,  produce  two  different  levels of writing and  seem unaware of what  men  like Gide  knew all their  writing  lives-that a good  article needs as careful shaping as a good story or a good play. And so, among the eight contributions by Canadian writers  to the special issue of Holiday, we find nothing that  is first-rate, even  as  journalism, and  some  remarkably bad  writing. Robert­ son Davies,  discussing  The  Northern Muse, at least produces a workmanlike and  sometimes  sparkling note  on  the  main  trends  and  names  in  Canadian  writing, and  Hugh  MacLennan records  some  pleasant, ambling  reminiscences of  Cape  Breton.  These  are  the  high  points. Jack  Ludwig leads what begins as a promising descriptive  piece  on  Winnipeg into  the  bathos  of   column   chatter:  "There, in an  office featuring autographed pictures  of  Elizabeth  II and  her  Prince, I found Stephen Juba, the  Mayor"; "I spent  time with  Manitoba's Premier Duff Roblin, an  intense   man   in  his  forties,  and with  Dick   Bonnycastle, the  chairman of Metro." And  Mordecai Richler writes a  piece on Canadiana, in which  he builds up  some  grotesque  Aunt   Sallies  out  of   accumulated  mis-statements and   pro­  ceeds  to  knock   them   down   with  great  gusto  and  self-satisfaction. He  accuses Canadian   Literature,  for  instance,  of  publishing   "straight-faced critical   reports  of thrillers  and  cookbooks";  instead,  we have  published, in  his better  moments, Mr.  Richler.  Nevertheless,  Richler's attack  on  excessive preoccupation with  the Canadian identity might  have  been salutary if he had  not dissipated  his energies  in  a back-slapping interlude on Toronto literary  personalities and  ended  with  an antique plea for annexation. "All we have to do is to acknowledge what's obvious to  any  foreigner.  We're Americans."
To  one  foreigner at  least,  and  a  well-travelled one,  our  Americanness is not obvious.  Noting what  distinguishes Canadians' attitudes towards themselves  and the  world,  V.  S.  Pritchett has  no  doubt  that   they give  Canadian life  a special flavour; he does  not  see us as American except  in the  wider,  geographical sense.
The  professional Canadian, let  us agree,  is absurd; so is the  professional  non­ Canadian. History  and  politics, the  English presence and  the existence of  Quebec, our sense of the great  empty  North  and our  paradoxical consciousness of  being­ in all but  acres-a small  nation  on which  the shadows  of the Powers bear  down, all  help  to  mould   our  lives  and   hence our   writings  into  something different from  the  lives and  writings  of people  elsewhere. The fact  is there; Mr.  Richler's vehemence is one of its manifestations.



5


THE CRITIC'S TASK

Frye's Latest Work






A.]. M. Smith





  was ori- ginally  delivered  as a series of lectures at  the  University  of Virginia  in  March
I g6 I. In  its present  form it consists of three  chapters  entitled  respectively "The Moral  of Manner," "Manual of Style," and  "All Ye Know  on Earth". The  first deals with education  in language and  rhetoric as it affects contemporary  society; the second  is an  analysis and  classification of rhythms,  a practical  handbook  of rhetoric  arranged  with scholastic meticulousness; and the third  develops a theory of value  based on the recognition of criticism as the key to the apprehension  of literature  as imagination,  belief, and culture. Although  the book in its framework is expository, the  prose moves from the purely syntactical  and  rational,  through oratory  and  rhetoric  to the occasionally discontinuous  and  associative rhythms of wit and  paradox.  Indeed,  in its phrasal and  verbal detail,  as well as in its struc­ tural validity, The  Well-Tempered Critic may be considered a philosophical poem. Its  affinity is with  Pope's  Essay on Criticism  or Boileau's VArt poetique  rather than  with Shelley's Defence  of Poetry or Matthew  Arnold's Culture and Anarchy. Its stylistic virtuosity-its occasional dips, usually in the form  of parody, into a low demotic  style and occasional ascensions in moments of climactic intensity to the high hieratic-and its rhythmical variety, which includes the point and sting of aphoristic  sentences as well as the  build-up  of  neatly  developed  paragraphs, both suggest the snake-like speed and accuracy of  the kind of verse (Pope's)   that is nearest to good prose.
It is the completeness and  the assuredness with which the whole field of com­
munication  and expression as prose, verse, or speech is here organized and "dealt

6

THE CRITIC'S TASK



with" that  make  this essay a unified work of art.  Frye has seen the  critic's task as one  of analysis  and  synthesis,  an  immense  intellectual effort  that  must  neverthe­ less be informed by love and  illuminated by imagination. Satire,  a sense of social responsibility, and  a sort of controlled  indignation set the tone of  the first chapter; the second  is largely  intellectual, with here and  there a metaphorical or aphoristic tour  de  force; and   the  third, as  tightly  organized   as  either  of  its  predecessors, moves  to  a climax  that  is metaphysical if not  mystical. The  closing  pages  of the book  are  intensified   by  the  organizational  intellectual control,  and   this  comes about because  the substance, the ideas themselves, are so rich and  so passionately, though  unostentatiously, held.





IN THE   FIRST  ESSAY,  seeking  a  co-ordinating  principle  to unite  scholarship (the  product of university  training) with criticism  (largely per­
force  at  present  self-acquired)  Frye examines  the confusion  that  results from  our failure   to  distinguish  between   three  primary   rhythms,   the  rhythms of  verse,  of prose, and  of "ordinary speech". The  last is commonly  called  prose, but  here it is sharply   distinguished. "Actual  prose  is  the  expression  or  imitation  of  directed thinking or controlled description in words, and its unit is the sentence.... [Prose] imitates, in  its  rhythm and  structure, the  verbal  expression  of  a  conscious  and rational mind."  (p.  18). On   the  other   hand,   "Ordinary speech  is  concerned mainly  with  putting into  words  what  is loosely called the stream  of consciousness: the  daydreaming,  remembering,  worrying,   associating,   brooding and   mooning that  continually flows  through the  mind.... Thus  ordinary speech  is concerned mainly   with  self-expression."  (p.   20). It  is clear  that   Professor  Frye  takes  his stand   with   thought  and   communication  (prose)    rather  than   with   "ordinary speech" or self-expression. The  latter  he calls "the  associative squirrel-chatter that one  hears  on  the streets,  and  even in college halls, jerking  along  apologetically or defiantly  in a series of unshaped phrases,  using slang or vogue words  for emphasis and  punctuation." ( p.  36).  Examples of this  associative  bastard style  are  cited from  literature in  the  monologues of Mr.  Jingle  and  the  reveries  of  Mr.  Bloom and  from  life in the speech  of a failing student and  the  jargon  of educational administrators-"Jobwise are  we structured for this activation?"
Frye takes a classical and  responsible  attitude to this linguistic  confusion and  its social  consequences, and  he  goes to one  of the  clearest  minds  of the  eighteenth

7

THE CRITIC's TASK



century for  a phrasing of his point  of view. But it is his point  of view, and  it has an  urgent immediate relevance -a  relevance so pressing  that  it  will be well to quote  Frye's  statement at some length:

Genuine  speech  is the expression of a genuine  personality.  Because it takes pains to make itself intelligible, it assumes that  the hearer is a genuine  personality too­ in other  words, wherever it is spoken it creates a community. Bastard speech is not the voice of the genuine self: it is more typically the voice of what I shall here call the  ego.  The  ego has no interest  in  communication, but  only in  expression....
If we ask what is the natural  way to talk, the answer is that it depends on which nature  is  being appealed  to. Edmund  Burke  remarked  that  art  is man's  nature, that  it is natural  to man to be in a state of cultivation, and the remark  has behind it  the  authority  of our whole cultural  and  religious tradition.   (pp.  41-42)

We are now, as Frye notes, in the realm of moral  distinctions, a realm from  which education cannot withdraw, and  presently  the  discussion  of speech  and  thought leads  inevitably to a discussion of freedom  of speech  and  freedom of thought. To continue the passage being quoted:

What  is true  of  nature  is also true  of freedom.  The  half-baked  Rousseauism  in which  most of us have been brought  up  has given us a subconscious notion  that the  free  act  is the  untrained  act.  But of course freedom  has nothing  to do with lack  of  training.  We are  not  free  to  move  until  we  have  learned to walk. ... Similarly, free speech cannot  have anything to do with the mumbling and grousing of the  ego. Free  speech is cultivated  and  precise speech, which  means that  there are far  too many people who are neither capable  of it nor would know if they lost it.  (pp. 42-43)

It is the  task  of linguistic  and  literary  education, of course,  to make  free speech possible. Among  the enemies of this freedom, forces of anti-education, are advertis­ ing  and   propaganda. The  first  in  a  free  society  is a  kind  of ironic  game,  "the verbal  art  of penetrating the  mind  by prodding the  reflexes of the ego"  ( p. 46), and  may  be largely  harmless,  but  in a society  that  has lost its freedom, the ironic game  turns  serious  and  advertising becomes  propaganda. Both,  however,  "repre­ sent  the  conscious  or  unconscious  pressure  on  a genuine society  to force  it into  a mass society." This  can only be done, Professor  Frye believes, by debasing  the arts.
This  leads  to one of the key ideas in the book and  makes a point  that  has been made   by  critics  as diverse  (and some  of them  in  many  ways  very  diverse  from Professor  Frye)   as F. R. Leavis, Eric Bentley,  F. W. Bateson,  and  R.  G. Colling­ wood.  It is that  to create  and  preserve a genuinely free and  individual society, our

8

THE  CRITIC'S TASK



apprehension and  comprehension of the  arts  must  be purified  and  strengthened. Here  lies the  vital  importance of "the  critic as a teacher of language" and litera­ ture.  What he teaches  is "not an  elegant  accomplishment, but  the  means of con­ scious life."  (p. 47).
The essay concludes with  a fine flourish of pianistic  virtuosity, a demonstration
in action  of how the  critic  as teacher  can make use of literature to appeal beyond and  above  the speculative reason  and  the practical reason  to vision and imagina­ tion.  Frye  takes  the  kind  of knowledge imparted to Adam and  the kind  withheld  from  him  by Raphael, "this  affable  and  evasive angelic doctor," as an illustration of the kind  of knowledge useful to man  faced  with  the choices that are  before  us today. That knowledge must come to us in the form of parable, myth,  and symbol.
The  Manual of Style, which  forms the middle  and  longest section  of the book, is  the  most  analytical and   the  most  technical. Three  primary  rhythms, prose, verse,  and   the  associative  speech  rhythm, are  examined in  all  their  varieties  as each  is influenced by  the  others  or  moves in  the  direction of one  of the  others. Thus prose as it moves from  the continuous syntactical and  logical  rhythm of exposition  in the direction of verse passes through  the secondary rhythm of oratory and   the  tertiary  rhythm  of  Euphuism, the  conscious  "ornamenting of  a  prose rhythm with  as  many   of  the  features of verse  as  possible."   ( p.  65). One  step further  leads  to  "the unconscious   wit  of  malapropism" and   finally  to  the  un­ conscious  free  association of  words  by sound,  which  brings  us into  the  realm  of poetry.
When  verse rhythm is similarly  analysed  as it moves in  the  direction of prose,
we go from  the  heroic  couplet, through blank  verse to the  secondary rhythm  of the  conversational style and  on  to the  tertiary  rhythm  of intentional doggerel,  as found  in  such  low satire  as  Hudibras, which  is discontinuous and  associative  in comparison with  the  rational progression  of the didactic poem  in heroic  couplets.
The  third  and  last  part  of the  Manual of Style deals with  the role of language, including poetic  diction, in  literature. Three main  literary styles-low,  middle, and   high-which  were  defined   in  Chapter I are   here   discussed  more  fully. Each  exists in  two  forms,  demotic  and  hieratic,  so  that  there  are  altogether  six classes to  be  considered. There is space  here  to indicate what  they  are  only  by naming some examples.
Low  demotic is the  literary  use of familiar  speech.  Coleridge's modification of
Wordsworth's Preface is mentioned with  approval: ordinary speech  is one  thing and  the  literary use of it  another. A very sophisticated form  of the  low demotic is the  attempt to reproduce in  fiction  "the  steady  stream of querulous, neurotic,

9

THE CRITIC'S TASK



compulsive babble"  of the imprisoned ego, as in Dostoievsky's Notes  from Under­
ground.
With  low hieratic  we are in the realm of creative  association, "the  babble  of associative sounds  out of which poetry eventually  comes."  (pp.  97-98). Smart's
]ubilato  Agno  and  Joyce's Finnegan's Wake  are in this style.
Middle  demotic  is the style of expository prose and  of narrative  and  didactic verse; it is the style of the greater  part  of The  Prelude.  Middle  hieratic  is con­ sciously "poetic" or Parnassian language, the self-consciously literary language of Homer  or the eighteenth-century  Pindaric  odes, or of prose stylists such as Pater.
When  we come  to  high style, both  demotic  and  hieratic,  Frye seems to this reader  less certain  of  his fugal  pattern  and  more  dependent   on  his talent  for brilliant  improvisation.  In speaking of the high  demotic style he brings out into the  open  a  fact  which  while it  had  not  been  concealed  had  not  been stressed either,  namely  that  these classifications are  not  absolutes;  they  do  not  exist as things  in  themselves  but  depend  on  reader-recognition   and  social  acceptance. "As  we listen to demotic  language,  we are  constantly,  if unconsciously, making judgements  along a certain scale of impressions." Low demotic: this is common­ place. Middle demotic:  this logically follows. High  demotic:  "something  emerges that  seems to  have  a  magic circle drawn  around  it, expressing something  in us as well as in itself, which halts the progress of an argument and  demands medi­ tation."  (p. 101).
The  high demotic  style tends towards  the aphoristic  and  the sententious, and
at  its  best simplicity  is united  with  "the  sublime". High  style is discontinuous, except  in  sacred  writings where it  exists on  both  the  demotic  and  the  hieratic levels and  is, I suppose, what John  Donne  meant  when he spoke of "the  style of the Holy Ghost." The  high hieratic arises when the sententious  becomes wisdom, and  Frye  prefers  a  modern  word  like intensity  to  the  more  conventional  sub­ limity  to  describe  its quality.  Again  the  critic  is forced  to  isolate  this  style in subjective  and  impressionistic terms, but the exactitude  and  precision with which he does it  convinces us of the general  validity of the  judgement.  We have  the high hieratic style, he says, "when  we feel the sense of what Joyce calls epiphany in a secular and specifically literary context, a momentary coordination  of vision, a  passage which stands out  of its context demanding to be not merely read  but possessed." (pp.  103-104).
The  high  hieratic  style is essentially discontinuous.  We can easily see why this must  be so:  you cannot  live at  the  point  of ecstasy for  long. As Donne  might have  said,  No man  is a  Phoenix. Even  in  the  Christian  gospels, as Frye  points

10

THE  CRITIC's  TASK



out,  "where  a  divine  personality  is presented,  the only possible literary  form is a discontinuous series of epiphanies."  (p.  I03). And this is the form-Professor Frye  here  makes  one of his most pregnant  and  fruitful  improvisations,  an idea that throws a flood of light on one of the dark places of contemporary criticism­ this is the characteristic form of the great  poem in the twentieth century. "Eliot, Pound,  Valery,  Rilke  and  others write discontinuous poems in  which everything that  must  be said,  in  Valery's  phrase,  has been eliminated.  The  continuity,  in effect, has been handed  over to the reader. ..." ( p.I 04) .
It is not hard  to see that  the discussion can now go on to deal with Poe's theory
of the invalidity  of all but  short poems and  the related  question of the function of Matthew  Arnold's  "touchstones", in their context as well as in isolation. The chapter   ends  with  the  demonstration   that  the  high  demotic  style  tends  to  be concerned  with  truth  and  the high hieratic with beauty,  and  we are ready to go into the more philosophical  third  chapter,  "All Ye Know  on Earth".






HERE WE  TURN to  the  theory  of criticism  itself. The  be­ ginning  once again  reminds  me of An  Essay on Criticism.  Both Pope and  Frye are  concerned  with  the  problem:   What  is a critic?  What  is his use to society? How  should  he  be educated?  The  modern  author  like the earlier sees  the critic as  a  sympathetic  and  refined  person.  Nor  does  he  hesitate to speak  of taste. This  is to  be  acquired   through  practice,  skill, and  flexibility. Frye  admits  that Coleridge, one of the greatest of literary theorists, lacked Lamb's intuitive "ability to  respond  directly  to  poetry  without  being  confused  by  moral, religious, and political anxieties."  He  affirms, nevertheless, that theory, "even when the theorist has a shaky practical  foundation, is still essential ..."
Using what later will be seen to be a false, though a temporarily  useful, dichot­ omy,  that  of  truth   and   beauty,  Professor  Frye  records  two  commonly  distin­ guished aspects of literary  rhetoric:  oratory, or persuasion, and ornament, or the figuring of speech.  One  might  think that  the first of these  had  to do with  judg­ ment and  the second with fancy, that  the one concerned structure  and  the other decoration -that  we were bogged down, in other  words, in the old Hobbesian distinctions,  but  a  paragraph or two enlightens us.  I shall  try in  a sentence or two-a   diagram   would  be  easier-to  lay  before  you  the  schemata   that  is worked out and developed in the 45 pages of the chapter.


I I

THE CRITIC'S TASK



Oratory, or persuasion, is demotic; it is creative expression; it is psychological;
it involves participation; it is essentially romantic.
Ornament, or figuring of speech, is hieratic;  it is imitation; it is psychological;
it implies detachment; and it is classic.
Critics from  Ben Jonson  to Samuel Johnson  have defended  the classic mode;
critics like Coleridge  and Shelley the romantic.
One  feels, and  Professor Frye shares our feeling,  that  the crux of the distinc­ tion  lies in  the  concepts  of  Nature,  of imitation, and  of detachment.  For  the classic critic  the  poem  is apart  from  nature   and  imitates  it;  for  the  romantic  the  poem  is itself a  part  of nature.  The  mimetic  tradition  stresses the  product, the poem itself as finished product;  the creative stresses the process. The imagery also is conditioned  by the attitude  towards  nature-imitation  or  identification. The  classic poet  tends  to give us figures of sight  and  space,  and  to stress the affinity of poetry and  painting;  the romantic  makes more use of aural  and  tem­ poral  metaphors  and  the evocative effects of rhythm  and sound.  He seeks spells, obscurity,  and  magic.  The  classic, Frye suggests, is  seeing in  the light;  the  ro­ mantic  hearing  in  the dark.  One  is a follower,  I  note,  of Apollo;  the other  of Hecate.
But our critic is too wise to take sides. Our  best critical models, he knows, are eclectic. The  critic must come to terms with an odd mixture  of participation and detachment, which, whatever the difficulty, must be reconciled. And there are dichotomies  too  that   both  the  classic and  the  romantic   poet  find  themselves involved in. For  the  classic, the poem as imitation  splits nature  in two. For the romantic,   the  poem  as creation  splits the  poet  in  two.  From  these  assertions, Professor Frye moves around  through  a discussion that clarifies them and demon­ strates their consequential importance.
Why,  he asks, have critics in all ages "preferred simplicity to cleverness in a poet"?  The  principle  of simplicity demands  the subordination of the personality of the  artist to the work of art  and is in essence a classic principle. Yet not only Samuel  Johnson  but  also Longinus,  Wordsworth,  Coleridge,  and  Arnold  have all testified against  the irrelevant  personal intrusion.  "Showing  off" is fatal.
Distinctions  and  discriminations  have  to  be sharply  made  if the  words  used by critics are to have any meaning and any relevance. The classic word imitation becomes nonsense if the poem is confused with  nature; and  the  romantic  word creation  becomes nonsense if  the poet is confused with the ordinary  man in usual contexts-falling in  love, say,  or  reading  Spinoza,   hearing  the  noise of  the typewriter or smelling the cooking. The illustrations  are from  Mr. Eliot, not from

12

THE CRITIC'S TASK



Professor  Frye  or  myself.  But  Eliot  is speaking  of the  poet,  who  is not  divided; Frye  of  the  critic,  whose  task  requires  him  to  divide  the  poet  as creator of this particular poem  from  the  ordinary man.  Frye insists that  criticism  has value  only if it is clearly  distinguished from  what  is not  criticism-not criticism  that  is, I presume,  either  because  it is not literature at all or, though literature, not critical. The  critic must  also be divided  into the usual ordinary man  and  the extraordinary judging  man,  functioning in  his capacity  as critic.  His  response  to art  must  be a critical,  judicial  one,  not  a  real  or fully engaged  one.  Here  the  critic  is running counter  to the  sentimental and  romantic habits  of our  time,  and  is likely to run into  misunderstanding and  abuse.  The  point  he makes  here  I believe to be valu­ able  and  true,  one  of  the  most  original  things  in  the  book.  I  will give  it  in  his own words:

He [the critic]  is never persuaded out of his senses, like Don Quixote at the puppet show. Nor should he be:  a 'real' or fully engaged response to art does not heighten consciousness but  lowers and  debases it. Such responses are  appealed  to by what ought  to be absurd,  as in naive melodrama, or by the interested, as in propaganda, or  by the  pornographic, or  by the  vicious and  perverted,  as in  the  various  arts of rabble-rousing." (p.  I23).

This  affirms  the  folly of such  theories  of tests for  poetic  value  or genuineness as feeling the top of your head  coming off (Emily  Dickinson) or your beard  bristling (A. E. Housman).
Later   Professor  Frye  deals  with  the  part  played  by experience in  the  critic's equipment. He  realizes  that  experience is no trustworthy guide,  for an  immature judgment may  be  based  on  quite  as real  or  intense  an  experience as a  mature one. As if this  were  not  enough  to demolish  the fallacy  that  intensity  of response is  a  measure   of  artistic   greatness,   Frye  follows  it  with  the  argument that   the coincidence of  great  literature with  an  appropriate response  is quite  accidental. The  fact  that we are often  in no mood  or condition  to apprehend the  true great­ ness of Paradise  Lost or Lear  is nothing against  these masterpieces. What eventu­ ally guides  us is not  the  direct  experience  of a poem  but  "a  body  of  knowledge" based  on  a  long  series  of  many  and  various  experiences,  which  have  long  been reflected  on and  critically  examined.
This  sounds  a  little  like  the  neo-classic  idea  of tradition and  the  imitation of the  masters,   but   there   is  a  significant   difference. For   Pope  and   Addison the masters  were  there,  fixed  and  immutable, and  tradition was a solid  body  of  un­ changing values.  For  the  modern critic  this "body  of knowledge" has  been  self-

THE CRITIC'S TASK



discovered, organized,  evaluated,  and  mastered. It is the  prize of an education, which this book suggests should no longer be only a self-education.
The  chapter  is brought  to a close with  an  assertion  of criticism's right,  as a structure  of knowledge which denies that  appreciation  of literature  can  be sepa­ rated  from  understanding of it, to what  actually  is the salvation  of  society and culture.  Without  accepting its social responsibility criticism would wash its hands of  a  culture  "forever  condemned  to  a  morbid  antagonism  between  the super­ cilious refined and  the resentful unrefined."  (p. I 36).
This  theme  is not  quite  the  last. At  the  end,  the  author  comes back  to  the
question  of the  ultimate  function  and  privilege of the  individual.  Literature is viewed  in  neo-Kantian   terms  as  "a  total  imaginative  form,  which  is, in  that context,  bigger than  either  nature  or human  life, because it contains  them,  the actual  being only a part  of the  possible." (p. I 55). But the  individual  mind is the  seed-bed  in  which  all  conscious action  is born.  It is the  reaction  between the  microcosm of the single mind  and  the  macrocosm  of all literature  that  the critic must learn  to evaluate and  guide.
Canadian literature  has been enriched  by this work only insofar as American or  British or world  literature  has been enriched  by it.  We can  be grateful  that our  culture  and  our educational  system has produced  a man  of letters who can speak thus to the universal commonality of letters.












POETS  AND PATRIOTISM

Charles Mair and Tecumseh






Norman Shrive








QHAPS THE  MAIN REASON that  Charles  Mai' has been  re­ garded  separately as literary figure  on  the  one  hand  and  historical  figure  on  the other  is that  he  himself,  despite  his ardent literary  nationalism, never seemed  to envisage  the  two  roles acting together. Here  was a Canadian who  by  word  and action  fanned the  flame  of Riel's   186g uprising,  who  was a leading  participant in  the  event  itself, who  avoided  Thomas Scott's  fate  before  a  metis firing  squad  only  by  a  last-minute escape  leading   ultimately to  an  almost  unbelievable trek across  the  frozen  wastes  of North Dakota, who  continued for  many  years to live a life of tension  and  adventure-yet  who evidently  never  considered any of this experience as  the  subject-matter for  literature. The  only  direct  connection, for example, that   he  made   between   his  literary  endeavours  and  Riel  was  that  the rebel  leader  had  been  indirectly responsible  for the loss of  poetry  manuscripts on the  "Fountain of Bimini" and  on  "some  incidents  in  the early  life of Zoroaster"
-long  narrative pieces,  evidently   of  romantic and  pseudo-Oriental detail  that almost  certainly would  not  have  helped  Mair's reputation any way.
Not  that   a  writer   must  write  from  his  own  experience. But  it  seems  curious that  Mair, so avidly  dedicated to what  he believed to be the callings  of the poetic dramatist and  of the  nationalist, did  not  realize  that  he had  unparalleled oppor­ tunity  to reflect  both  at  once.  If he had  written such  a play,  of course, his arch­ enemy  Riel  would  have  appeared as villain,  and  John Schultz,  or  a  figure  that Mair   might   have  based  on  his own  conception of  himself,  as  hero.  Today the work  would  be  a  curio.  But  not  so much  so, perhaps, as the  drama  that  Mair  did  write.

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



In  the early eighteen-eighties, when Riel's return  from Montana presaged new trouble  in the  West, Mair  moved his family from  Prince  Albert  to the safety of Windsor, Ontario,  and there he wrote Tecumseh, the verse drama  that he hoped would confirm the promise noted by so many critics in Dreamland  almost fifteen years before and that was meant to settle conclusively the question of who was Canada's greatest  national  poet. For "I would  rather  be the author  of a really good  Canadian  poem,"  he  said,  "than  anything else under  the  cape  of our northern  skies."'
The  great  Shawnee  chief had  for  Mair,  therefore,  a special fascination.  Not
only had  he been an unusual  personality, a brilliant  leader of his people, but  he had  also played  a very significant role in  defending  Canada against  armed  in­ vasion and,  indeed,  in saving her from  annexation by the hated  Yankee. In  the story  of the  final  months of Tecumseh's  career  Mair  could  reflect some  of his own knowledge and  experience of the Indian  race;  but most important, he could urge by means of literature-that touchstone or gauge, he had once called it, of
a  nation's  desire for greatness-a recognition  of Canada's heroic  past  and  of
her  potentiality  for  a  magnificent  future.  The  depression  that  had  so quickly followed  Confederation   had  overpowered  the  efforts  of  patriots,  literary  and otherwise,  to make firm the bonds by which the far-spread  provinces had  agreed to join. But the National  Policy of I878 brought  a surge of prosperity, and once again  a number  of writers, particularly  Roberts  and Lampman, began to express themselves in  terms  of  a national  literature. As Malcolm  Ross has  noted,  "the air  is charged;" and  Mair,  by  I88o,  riding  the  crest of economic security  and social  respectability  as a  Prince  Albert  merchant   and  land  speculator,  was  en­ couraged  to attempt  a work frankly  and  characteristically  reflective of his own ardent  nationalism.
He  had  not composed a line of drama  before this time, and  either  because of this inexperience or because of his simply following the example of a host of nineteenth-century  writers  from  Shelley   to  Browning, he  decided  upon  the "literary" or "closet"  drama  to tell Tecumseh's  story. The  long narrative  poem, as written  by  Major  John  Richardson  on  the same  subject,  he dismissed, "for the  brief  and  noble career of Tecumseh  was essentially dramatic" (DP,  Jan.  6,
I 884). But his feelings of inadequacy  led him  to depend  considerably  upon the opinions  and  advice of others.  No sooner had  he finished a scene, or even less, than  he sent it to Principal  George Grant  of Queen's  or to his old Canada First associate,  George T. Denison, of Toronto, either  of whom  might  then  forward it  to  someone  else before it  was  returned to  Mair in  Windsor. By the  time

I6

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



Tecumseh  was  finished,   much   of  it  had  been  read  and   criticized   by  not  only Mair's close friends  but  also by Sir Daniel  Wilson, Goldwin Smith, Charles G. D. Roberts-even  by  Matthew  Arnold.
Denison   was  a  source  of  advice  and  inspiration  such  as  probably no  other Canadian poet  has  ever  had. The  first  act  he  described   as  "the finest  piece  of writing  ever  put  to paper in  Canada," and  a song by lena (an  Indian maiden) as "a  gem". It was invariably to Denison that  Mair  turned when in doubt. Where should  this song  be placed-in  the  third  act or the fifth?  Or  what  did  he think of  these  lines  on  a  bison  herd?   Or  of these  on  a meeting  of Brock  and  Lefroy (lena's lover)   by  moonlight?

BROCK	How still the night!
Here Peace has let her silvery tresses down, And falls asleep beside these lapping waves. The hour is late so let us to repose (our beds?) War rises early, and will up ere dawn
To fright  her with his drum. or
Tomorrow  War will wake her with his drum (?)

Is  "drum" the  right  word?  I have  an  idea  it should  be "bugle" (DP, Jan. I6,
I884).
The  first criticism  of  Principal Grant tended  to increase such  doubts concern­ ing  diction. "The  power   of  the  work,"  said  Grant, "would  sometimes   be  the better   for  being   restrained, ... such  expressions  as  'their  damned offal  cast  as messes  to our  hounds' exciting feelings only  of disgust."  lena's song  (Denison's "gem")  he disliked  for similar  reasons:  "I could  hardly forbear using my pencil as I read  slowly and  carefully the second  time." Such  offences  against good taste ("form", Grant called it)  must  be expunged if the work were to have real literary  merit   ( DP,  Jan. I 6,  I 884) . And  Mair  conceded that  there  was  justification  for the learned  Principal's opinion; his "semi-savage life and  experience in the North­ West"   had   probably  deprived  him  of  "form",  of  opportunity to  mingle  with "literary and   artistic   society".  Denison,  then  beginning his  long  career   on  the Toronto Bench,  was,  as  always,  characteristically direct  on  these  points; "Don't be afraid of Grant and  his 'form'," he advised. "It is hard  work pleasing preachers and  is hardly  worth  the trouble; as long as you keep in with the Police Magistrates it is all right"  ( MP,  Jan. 3 I,  I 884).
The   critical   approach of  Mair's old  friend  was  generally   what   it  had  been

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



when  Dreamland  was published. There was little  question about  Mair's abilities as a  poet-perhaps a slight  change  might  be made  here  and  there-but  what really  mattered was  the  national spirit  the  work  reflected,  the  patriotic fervour it avowed. "I expect  your poem to be the first great  Canadian poem  written by a Canadian and   depicting the  grandest period   of  our  national history," he  both encouraged  and   advised.  It was  Mair's duty   to  give  this  "Canadian  national tone"  to his drama; "as Shakespeare breathed forth  the national spirit  of England in Henry V ... let  you give voice to it for Canada" ( MP,  Jan. 3 I, I 884).
Even  his differences  of political  opinion  with  Goldwin Smith  did  not  prevent
Denison  from  coaxing  the  Oxford  expatriate and  advocate of continental union to  read   Mair's manuscript. Smith's comments other  than   that  "the Indian was a mere savage" (DP, Feb. 1, 1884)  are  not extant, but they were evidently complimentary enough  to stimulate  Mair  to pay  tribute to Smith  "in  spite  of his unbelief   in  our   national future"  (DP, Jan. 16,  1884). Roberts was  also  in Toronto at  the   time,  engaged   in  his  short-lived  editorship  of  Smith's literary periodical, the  Week, and  Denison,  who  had  manuscript in  his pocket  when  he met  Roberts,

showed  him  your  lines in confidence . . . and  he  was delighted  with  every line, continually  breaking out  in praise .... He  said he had  studied  your Dreamland and  Other Poems  very closely and rated them very highly. From the lines I showed him, he said you have improved and matured   (MP,  Feb.  I4, 1884).

But  the  most  remarkable stimulus  Denison  provided for  Mair  was the criticism of  parts  of  Tecumseh  that  he  virtually  extorted from  Matthew Arnold. Arnold was  visiting  Goldwin Smith  at  the Grange before  returning to England from  his lecture   tour  of  the  United  States,  and  met  Denison  there  one  evening  in  early February, 1884. The  Colonel  invited  the  Arnolds and  Smiths  to lunch  with  him at his Heydon Villa  the next day, and  although Arnold said "he  had  a rule of not reading poetry  in  manuscript, as he  would  be  so bothered with  it,"  he  did  not mind  "doing it for  a friend" like Denison;

So after  lunch  to-day, I brought  him quietly upstairs into my library and pulled out  of my pocket  a copy of the passage by lena  and  asked him to read it. I had had my clerk copy it out very clearly and neatly  (now remember  this is all between you and  me). He  read it very slowly and  critically  to himself and  when he had finished it he said, "Whoever  wrote that  can  write;  it is very good." I said, "You like it?"  "Yes,"  he said again, "Whoever  wrote  that  can  write poetry."  But, said he, "I only  judge  from  these few lines; I cannot  tell how  the rest may be. This may be a fine passage imbedded  in a mass of stuff. I could form no opinion  of a

18

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



drama  from a few lines. Now, if I want to criticize, my objection  to the passage is this. He  brings  in  a  passage which is mere ornamentation; the  reference  to the clouds  shearing  off  fleeces, etc., is a very pretty  idea  prettily  expressed but it is pure ornamentation; it does not add to the passage but weakens it, breaks in upon the flow of it. All the  rest is very fine, all matter  vigorously and forcibly put and very interesting.  Now look here-there are one, two, three, eight lines just thrown in for ornament-they do not add force to the passage."
"Well,"  said  I,  "would  you strike  those lines out?"  "I don't  see well how he
could,"  said  he;  "but   he might  condense the idea."

Denison  again  cautioned Mair  about  divulging this private critique, for Arnold "would not like any  opinion of his to be known  outside  when  he has only seen a scrap  of your  work." And  certainly, he added, the nose of "the apostle  of  Sweet­ ness and  Light  would  have  gone up in the air," if he "had stumbled  upon 'excre­  ment,  buttocks and  offal  mixed  up in messes for hounds.'" But Denison's "great object  in  having  this  talk  with  Arnold" was accomplished.  "When your  book is out," he told  Mair, "I can  send  him a copy, remind  him of  his having  read some of  it,  and  by  having  interested him  in  it,  secure  his  attention to  it."  And  this, Mair's irrespressible friend  was convinced, would  be  "of  great  service in London
-for I know if your  book is only seen it will force its way, but it is important to have  it  noticed" ( MP, Feb.  14,  1884). After  further consideration of Arnold's remarks,   Denison   was  equally   convinced   that   the  British  scholar   could  really find  nothing wrong  with  the  passage he had  read,  but  had  had  "to  show that  he could  make  some  criticism" and  the  "simile  about   the  clouds ... was  the  only one  he  could  make" (MP, Feb.  21,  1884). The  lines  remained,  therefore, just as  Mair   had  originally written  them,  and  it  is doubtful that  Arnold  ever  read them  again.  But the whole incident is illustrative of the energetic concern  Denison consistently  evinced for  Mair's work-and also, perhaps, of those qualities Goldwin   Smith   had  in  mind  when  he introduced Denison  to  Lord  Salisbury  as a man  "who  proposes  to settle  all political  problems  by a charge  of light  cavalry drawn   up  and  armed in some  improved fashion."





H       of Matthew Arnold  to stimu­  late him  spiritually and  the  active  collaboration of Denison  to aid him  materially as  well  as spiritually, Mair   pressed  on  with  his work  through the  summer   and fall  of 1884.  For  a  while  during the spring  he had  thought he might  publish  in

POETS AND  PATRIOTISM



July  or  August of that  year, but  he considered  himself "so severe" towards  his writing  that  most of it went into the wastepaper  basket. Also, as he progressed, he became  increasingly enamoured  with the character  of Brock. As much  as he revered Tecumseh,  he felt the British hero would  have offered more scope than the  Indian   chief;  the  available  records, too,  about  Brock were  more  plentiful. For  a time, therefore,  he pondered  whether  or  not  he should  include scenes on the  Niagara  frontier  and  the death  of Brock at  Queenston. That  he eventually decided  against  this  different  emphasis  was  due  almost  as  much  to  Denison's urging  him  to finish the drama  as to his own  realizing  "it  would break  up the unity  of incident  regards  Tecumseh,  who had  no  part  in  the operations  there" (DP, Feb.  I, I884). There  was, however, despite the early unsureness concerning dramatic  writing,  a growing conviction that  the work might  actually  be staged. His wife Eliza thought  so; Denison said it "would  bring down  the house"  (MP, Oct.  I 6, I 884) ; and before he was finished, Mair  himself conceded that it might be "a  good acting  play ... , for it is full of striking situations -I may live to see it on the boards in Toronto  yet"  (DP,  Mar.  2I,  I88s). As a result he returned to material  he had  thought  to be in final form,  adding,  deleting  and  generally revising, with at least a half-resolved intention  of making Tecumseh a vehicle for the live stage. To  such delay were added others of varying significance. Denison, for  example,  objected  to  Mair's  favourable  depiction  of the  American  General Harrison,  and  composition  halted  until  Mair  resolutely informed  his friend:   "I am sorry he was not a beast but I cannot  falsify history for the sake of dramatic effect ... He  was  an  upright  man  of kind  disposition  and  considerable  ability
... I am sorry for all this but it can't  be helped"  ( DP, Mar.  I, I 884) .
There  was  one  interruption, however,  that  neither  Mair  nor  Denison  could avoid-the  North-West   Rebellion.  When  news  reached   the  East  that   Riel's metis had  defeated  a force of N.W.M.P. and  Prince  Albert  volunteers  just south of the town, Tecumseh was forgotten. On  April  I,  I88s, Denison's militia  regi­ ment was ordered  to prepare for active service and on the same day Mair arrived from  Windsor, determined  to join his friend.  "It is my duty,"  he wrote his wife; "I should  never forgive myself if I failed in this trying  hour  for Canada" ( MP, Apr.  2, I88s). But the note of high drama  ends here-even when it takes into account  a  letter  written  by a  Windsor  citizen  and  warning  Riel that  "Mr. C. Mair ... left  this  morning ... with  the object  of seeing  you  and  shooting  you" (MP,  Apr.  I,  I88s). For  Mair  and  Denison  never got  closer  than  a base fifty miles from  the fighting, and  by the end of July  the two  comrades-in-arms  were back in Ontario, intent  on finishing Tecumseh by the  fall. Even then,  however,

20

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



Riel's  trial  and  the  subsequent  delay in  his execution  kept  Mair's  mind  from work. His own  interest in Riel was, of course, greater  than  that  of the ordinary Canadian who  had  not  experienced  imprisonment  and  even threat  of death  at the  hands  of the  notorious  rebel chief;  and  his correspondence  reveals a strain that  perhaps  only  an  execution  could  relieve. "The  opinion  of the  best people here is that  Riel should  be hanged,"  he wrote to Denison with a smugness that belied his real uncertainty; "nothing  but hanging will suit the right public mind of Ontario" (DP,  Aug.  10, 29, 1885). But Riel went to the gallows on November
16 and  Tecumseh reached  the press a month  later.
Mair's  almost complete subordination  of artistic principles to those of ardent nationalism   and   of  sentimental   melodrama   makes Tecumseh  a  curious  work. For  its five acts and  twenty-eight scenes, which, if  acted,  would  require  at least four hours of presentation, the "play" is a pageant of stylized and highly rhetorical history-although various  patriotic  groups  in  Ontario   and  British  Columbia were to bring at  least parts of it to the boards in later years. During  the depicted period, three heroes, Tecumseh,  Brock and young Lefroy, vie for supremacy  with not  only invading  Americans   (including  low Yankee  ruffians)  but  also traitors in  their  own  camps-Tecumseh's villainous brother  the  Prophet,  and  Brock's faint-hearted subordinate, Colonel  (later  General)   Procter.  And  since the  play is a tragedy, the final "curtain" falls on a scene of desolation:  Tecumseh  is dead, Procter  has  ignominiously retreated,  the  Americans  have  won  the  battle  of Moraviantown, and  lena  is carried  away  lifeless in  the  arms  of the  distraught Lefroy. Brock, however, has died gloriously in victory at Queenston  Heights, Tecumseh  has  achieved  immortality  even in  failure,  and  the  Canadian  reader is obviously expected  to  realize  that  the  ultimate  outcome  of the  war  was an American  defeat.
Tecumseh  himself is a superb, if wooden, figure, a romantic  noble savage who acts with consistent gallantry  and integrity. As a dramatic  creation  he is at times Shakespearean, at  others  Miltonic,  and  at  others  Restoration  Heroic,  but  cer­ tainly always lofty. Brock is the idealized British soldier. Bold, energetic, decisive, but sensitive to his great  responsibility, he is aware of the odds against him, as he occasionally reveals in Shakespearean  soliloquy:


Now might the head of gray Experience
Shake o'er the problems that surround us here; Could England stretch its full, assisting hand
21

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



Then  might I smile though velvet-footed time
Struck all his claws at once into our flesh.

But  the  most interesting character is Lefroy, "a  poet-artist, enamoured of Indian life,  and  in  love with  lena." For  this  young  English  expatriate who  wanders in and  out  of the  woods searching for  love and  serenity  has  a  psychological  com­ plexity  quite  lacking  in  his fellow  dramatis   personre. He  is a  Byronic figure,  the melancholy poet on a quest,  but  transplanted from  a corrupt Europe to an about­ to-be-corrupted Canadian  wilderness.  Like  Tecumseh, he  deplores  "the   sordid town  that  here  may  rise,"  yet sees no solution  in  clearly  defined  boundaries for different races.  And  Lefroy,  as critic  W.  D.  Le Sueur was  quick  to note,  is de­ picted  "with a dash  of socialism  of a very modern type,  not unlike that  of which Mr.   William   Morris   is  perhaps  the  most  interesting  contemporary  professor" (Toronto  Week,  Mar.  4,  1886). At  first  Mair  intended  "to  kill Lefroy" in  the fifth  act,  "to  get him out  of an  unhappy world" (DP, Feb.  1, 1884), but instead  he introduced an  even more  pathetic reversal.  When  Lefroy  goes forth  to battle,  lena dresses as an  Indian boy so that  she can follow him in disguise. At a critical  moment she springs  from  "behind a large sugar  maple", intercepts an American bullet  "and is shot  dead". So  Lefroy  is  left  as
but a shell, A husk, an empty case, or anythin,g That may be kicked around  the world.

Two  other  aspects of Tecumseh warrant brief attention. By both soliloquy  and long passages of descriptive  dialogue Mair  provides  the reader with a vivid picture of the  flora  and  fauna of not only the Upper Canada of Brock's  time but  of also the  still  undiscovered  West.  Usually  the  setting  is pastoral rather than  savage, closer  to  the  Forest  of  Arden   than   to  the  wilderness  of  the  contemporaneous Deerslayer. Lefroy's  speech in  "Another Part  of the  Forest" and  beginning "This region   is  as  lavish  of its  flowers/ As  Heaven of  its  primrose blooms  by  night" praises  the  bounty  of nature in  terms  reminiscent of Friar Laurence or Banquo. But  when  he describes  the  "unrivalled wastes"  visited  by Tecumseh and  himself in  order  to  enrol  the  western  tribes,  Lefroy  becomes  expansive in  his poetic de­ lineation of  "ocean's paraphrase",  where
Great prairies swept beyond our aching sight Into the measureless West; uncharted realms, Voiceless and calm, save when tempestuous wind Rolled the rank herbage into billows vast,
And rushing tides, which never found a shore.


22

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



It should  be  noted,  however,  that  in  some  of such  descriptive passages  Mair wrote  verse that  rises to the  level of commendable poetry,  as modem critics  who have  not  dismissed  Tecumseh unread can  affirm. A. J. M. Smith, for  example, has praised  Mair's "impressionistic picture  of the wilderness, vast and  unplumbed, teeming with  life,  but  empty  of  man", the  "intensity and  power" that  resulted when  his  "imagination caught fire"  and  that  "anticipates the  more  fervid  spirit of the  later  poets." 3  Unfortunately, these strengths  point  up  the inconsistency so characteristic of  Mair's verse,  the  lapses  in  taste  and  "form" that   ran  through Dreamland  in  I 868  and  that  Mair  was never able to overcome,  even to recognize more  than  superficially.
His  provision   of  comic  relief  in  Tecumseh  is an  additional example. Shake­ speare   had   his  Dogberry and   Verges,  Snug  and  Bottom,  Bardolph  and  Pistol. Mair  has  his Twang and  Slaugh, Gerkin  and  Bloat, low buffoons  in the shape  of "Yankee ruffians" who,  of course,  speak  in  prose:

Slaugh. ... Jest  wait  till the  live citizens o' these United  States  and  Territories gits a chance, end we'll show ... what a free people, wi' our institooshuns kin  do ... I'd  give them Kernel Crunch's  billet.
Gerkin. What  was thet, General?
Slaugh. Why,  they  say he  killed a  hull  family o'  redskins, and  stuck  'em  up  as scar'--crows  in  his wheat  fields. Gentlemen,  there's  nothin'  like original idees!

Such  an  interlude was incorporated, of course, for more  than  comic  effect.  Its players  are  not  just  white  boors,  they  are  American boors,  and  are  intended to express  character  contrast as  well  as dramatic contrast  to  the  citizens  of York:

Excitement  and leave-taking. The  volunteers break into column  and sing:
0 hark to the voice from the lips of the free!
0 hark to the cry from the lakes to the sea! Arm! arm! the invader is wasting our coasts, And tainting  the air of our land with his hosts.

And  to such  patriotic aspects  of his drama did  Mair  devote  his most  painstaking attention and  the  largest  share  of his creative  talents.


BuT THE  RECEPTION of  Tecumseh   in   I886   by  press  and public  alike,  far  more  enthusiastic than  even  that  accorded Dreamland  eighteen
years  before,  suggests  that   Mair  had  caught the  national pulse.  There were,  of

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



course,  particular   factors  that  attracted   notice.  The  growing  awareness  of the plight  of the Indian, the part  he had  played in the recent Rebellion, Mair's  own exciting involvement  with the notorious Riel in  186g and  his subsequent partici­ pation  in the  campaign  of 188s,  undoubtedly  evoked  a special  response. And there  was also the literary  periodical. Although  limited in  circulation  and strug­ gling against great odds, magazines and papers such as the Week  and the Varsity were competendy  edited and, within  their scope, influential  in forming  taste and opinion. Along with the daily newspapers, they acclaimed Tecumseh almost with­ out qualification.  Mercer Adam's commentary in the Varsity  was so long, indeed, as to require  two instalments, on February  27  and  March  5, in which the former editor of the Canadian  Monthly  stated that  Mr. Mair  had "achieved  a great and complete  success" and  that  "in  the  choice  and  handling  of a  great  Canadian theme"  he had  "amply  justified the poet's function  and  art."  Surely "the  beauty and  melody of some of the love songs," Adam  wrote, "are  hardly surpassed by the best of England's lyric poets," nor could there be any doubt that the drama  as a whole had  risen to its "true mission"-"to preserve the memory of an heroic period in the country's annals, and to stimulate national interest in the events and characters  of the  time."
The  daily  newspapers  echoed  the  patriotic  fervour  of the  periodicals. There were frequent  references  (complimentary to Mair)   to Henry  V  and  yet also to the  fact,  as the  Montreal  Gazette  of  March   2   noted,  that  the  author  had  not passed  "beyond   the  pale  of our  own  romantic  story"  in  selecting  his subject. George  Stewart,  Jr.,  emphasized in the Quebec  Morning  Chronicle  of February
27 that  Tecumseh in tone and spirit was purely Canadian ("not a classical allu­ sion appearing in the text")   and  the Kingston  British Whig  of March  27 that it had  a claim "for  all Canadian royalists-in fact, for all Canadians."
The  diction of Mair's  characters,  both high and  low, however, proved to be a contentious  point  even with  the  highly commendatory Canadian critics. W.  D. Le Sueur in the Week  of March  4 thought  "some  characters  ... might  perhaps have  been  spared;" Gerkin,  Slaugh  and  company  were  probably  represented correctly  enough,  but  "we cannot  help feeling as if there  were a trace  of U. E. Loyalist prejudice in this portraiture." Adam believed that "our  neighbours across the line won't  take kindly to the rather  slangy prose dialogues",  Stewart  felt the American  ruffians "cheapened  the work", and  an unidentified  critic of the April Canada  Educational Monthly  was convinced that  their "very names ... betrayed the  prejudiced  spirit in which the Yankee caricatures  were drawn."
From  Mair's  literary  contemporaries  came  praise  and  encouragement similar

POETS AND  PATRIOTISM



to that  voiced by the native  press. Charles Sangster, fading  physically and  men­ tally as a Civil Service clerk in Ottawa, promised that  as soon as his "brain  got clearer"  he would  "dive  into"  Tecumseh. "I had got as far as the fourth  Act," he  wrote,  "when  my  brain  gave  out,  and  my doctor  will not  let  me  read  just now, as I am  unfit for brain  work"  (MP,  Feb. 23, r886).  Particularly  pleasing to  William  Kirby  was  Mair's  obvious intention  "to  make  Canadians proud  of their  country  and  of the  great  men who have lived and  died among  us"  (MP,  Mar.  4, r886). Roberts admitted  to Mair that he had considered his own poetry "the  best yet done in Canada" but  that  Tecumseh  was quite  superior; "I shall certainly  spare  no effort to do something myself  that shall equal  it"  ( MP,  Mar.
r o, I 886) . And  Pauline  Johnson  was ecstatic in her  praise, particularly of  the
evidence of Mair's  "long  study and life with the people whom he has written of so carefully, so truthfully". Her  only regret was that his love story should end so tragically:
Oh! Lefroy, where is your fellowman in fiction? lena, where your prototype? Alas, for all the other pale-faced lovers, they are indifferent, almost brutal creations, and as for the redskin girls that love them, they are all fawn-eyed, unnatural,  maidenly idiots ... But  the inevitable doom of death  could not  be stayed even by Mair's sensitive Indian-loving pen  (Toronto World, Mar. 22,  I 8g2).

The  personage  perhaps  most important of all in the excitement  stimulated  by the  publication   of  Tecumseh  was  Denison.  He  had  helped  to  write  it;  now, almost  single-handedly,   he  sold  it.  Like  a  commander  holding  a  literary  Fort York that would raise its gate to friendly overtures but from which attacks and foraging missions could be effected, Denison issued communiques  to Mair record­ ing  what  was surely  the  most intensive selling campaign  in nineteenth-century Canadian letters. "Foster  and  I  went to see Dwight  yesterday,"  he wrote a few days after the work appeared, "and  asked him to send an associated press despatch by telegraph  all over Canada to let the public know  what  a sensation  Tecumseh has  created." Other   reports  followed  almost  daily.  "I made  three  people  buy copies at Hart's this morning;" "Bain is selling plenty now; I keep sending people to him;" "I am  after  Ross, the  Minister  of  Education,  to use Tecumseh in the schools;"  "Foster  and  I have been at work  to-day to have editorials  in the Tele­ gram  and  News  about  the  rapid  sale of  the  book, complimenting the Toronto  people on  their  taste."  Denison  might  well report  to the author,  therefore,  that the booksellers had told him that  "no Canadian book has sold across the counter like  this  has,"  that  it  "is  going  like  blazes" and  that  "this  edition  is a goner"  (MP,   Mar.  3,  4,  r886).

POETS AND PATRIOTISM



Mair  was elated. It was,  perhaps excepting that  time  of a hero's  return from Fort  Garry  in  1868,  his finest hour.  There was a  possibility  that  the  play would be  translated into  Ojibway-"certainly an  event  in  the  history  of the  drama!" (DP, Dec.  7,  1885); even  more  exciting  was  that  fifty copies  had  been  sent  to Chapman and  Hall  in  London   (the  book  bears  their  imprint as well as that  of Hunter and  Rose of Toronto), who were  to await  English  reviews before under­ taking  publication themselves.  Mair   had   purposely   included  copious  notes  on Indian lore and  Canadian history for the  benefit  of English  readers,  and through a Prince Albert  friend  who was the cousin of "one  Andrew  Lang", critiques were to  appear in  the  Saturday  Review   and  other   British  periodicals.  These   hopes failed  to  materialize, however,  for  there  was  neither  criticism  nor  publication in Britain. Mair  charged later  that  Chapman and  Hall  did  not  even bother  to dis­ tribute their  copies, or to return the  money  enclosed  for obtaining English  copy­ right.  His  Prince Albert  friend  became  "a lying scoundrel."
But  in  the  spring  of  1886  Tecumseh was  widely  acclaimed as  the  country's
outstanding literary   achievement and  Mair   as its  greatest   national poet.  When Hunter and  Rose  suggested  that  a second  printing be  run  off as quickly  as pos­ sible,  he declined  only when  told  there  was a possibility of financial loss; he esti­ mated  that  the  years of writing  had  cost him  ten  thousand dollars  and  his return  but  five  hundred-"so  I have  bled  for  my  country with  a  vengeance" (DP, Nov.  3,  18go). But such  thoughts were  probably farthest from his mind  on Vic­ toria   Day,  1886,  as  Mrs.  John   Beverley  Robinson, the  wife  of  the  Lieutenant­ Governor, pinned  on his Rebellion  Medal and  dubbed him  "our  warrior bard." To  Mair, at  forty-seven  and  with  almost  as many  years ahead of him,  the future seemed  redolent with  promise.
Even  as a poet he could not imagine  the reversals  of fortune ahead. For within
a decade Tecumseh was forgotten and  its author was pleading to the government, to  his  friends  and  relatives,  to  anyone  who  might  rescue  him  from  the  poverty and  oblivion  that  had  befallen  him.

' Public  Archives of Canada, Denison Papers, Mair  to G. T. Denison, November  23,
1883.  All subsequent  notes from  correspondence  are  given  parenthetically in  the
text and  refer either  to the Denison Papers  (DP), or to the Mair  Papers  (MP)  in the Queen's  University Library.
0   Arnold   Haultain, Goldwin  Smith's  Correspondence   (Toronto:  McClelland   and
Goodchild,  1913),  pp. 5-6.
s "Nationalism  and   Canadian   Poetry",   Northern   Review,   I  (December-January,
1945-46), 39-40.



WRITERS AND
THE MASS MEDIA






Thelma McCormack







T.PURPDSE  of this papc• ;. not  to discuss the  many  points at which the writer comes into contact with the mass media, but rather  to suggest
in what  direction  the structure  and function  of these relationships are changing. First, I want  to indicate  the position of the mass media in relation  to other insti­ tutions -the  university  and  the  social  movement -which  impinge  upon  the writer;  second,  to suggest  that  the  distinction  between  "highbrow"  and  "low­ brow" culture  has never been entirely applicable  to writing in Canada, while the distinction  customarily  found  in the sciences between pure and applied science is closer to the facts of the situation;  third,  to trace the effects on the writer as the mass media change,  with greater  emphasis on  "communication" than  on "adult  education" or  "entertainment".
It says a great  deal about  how far we have travelled since the 1920s to discuss the mass media in national  terms. For, if there was ever a grand  Utopian  promise which  mushroomed  over  the  new media of the twenties, radio  and  motion  pic­ tures, it  was that  the  boundaries  of class and  literacy, region  and  nation  could be broken down. Social and  economic, domestic and international, sectional and ethnic  misunderstandings could  be mediated  when  the  parties  held  a  common frame  of reference,  a standardized set of meanings.
Hardly  anyone follows this line nowadays. We are so in the grip of a renascent
nationalism,  so convinced  that  any  pluralism  is better  than  no  pluralism,  that when the mass media do achieve a lingua  franca they are accused of committing

WRITERS AND THE  MASS MEDIA



a  crime  against  culture,  of destroying the  vitality  of language,  regimenting  the artist;  above all, of denying citizens their inalienable  right  to a sense of national identity.
This  phenomenon  is not  peculiarly  Canadian. Similar  criticisms of  popular
culture  and  the mass media are heard  in  the United  States,  England,  and  else­ where.  They  are  part  of a new intellectual  idiom  which  cannot  come to  terms with the ambiguities of social structure and finds it easier to cast Madison Avenue in the role of the villain; an idiom which talks about  "roots" versus "alienation" and  would rather  have social ghettos on its conscience than  the suicides of mar­ ginal  men.  Nor  are  Canadians  alone in their  obsession with a  national  identity. National  identity is a chronic concern of the modern  world, among old countries as well as the new, where consensus is necessary, but difficult to achieve, politically dangerous  and  easily shattered.
In literature  the quest for a national  identity  has a long and honourable tradi­ tion.  The  pendulum which sent writers abroad  in  the 1920s swung back  in the next  decade,  when  it was a mark of esteem to stay at home and  discover  or re­ discover our  own  "grass  roots" culture.  American  writers  employed  on  W.P.A. projects saw themselves as the avant  garde,  marching  against  the  Establishment (Mandarin  culture)    and   the  Bourgeois  irresponsibility   (commercial   culture)  represented  by drawing-room  comedy. The  late  Clifford  Odets  was among  the writers  who emerged  during  this period to form  a new elite and who eventually went  to  the  mass media  via  Hollywood.  John  Grierson  and  Andrew  Allan  in­ spired  the same  "Honey,  stay in  your own  backyard" sentiment.  Although  the Depression  and  left  wing movements gave  this  crusade  a  new impetus,  it  was part of an older populist tradition  which has been a constant  in the North Ameri­ can  experience,  and  can  still be  found  supporting "regionalism" and  regional literature, however  contrived they may  be. So, add  to the long list of grievances about  the  mass media  that  they  centralize  cultural  activity  in Toronto or New York at the expense of local cultures, "the  prairies" or Canada.
Serious intellectuals  have never been entirely  comfortable  in this atmosphere. Many  of them  are  by temperament  and  education  too cosmopolitan  for its  re­ strictions.  Professionally, they are  committed  to disciplines which  have  no  pro­ vincial  basis and  do  not elicit local loyalties. In  science as well as in  art,  work is ultimately  judged  by insights and standards that  transcend  temporal, national or  political  interests.  Whatever  "made" Norman  Levine, it  was not  the  totality of Canada, but  only that  fraction  of Canadian experience  which  bound  him to a literary tradition  that was stateless.'

WRITERS AND THE  MASS MEDIA



Nevertheless, Canadian writers and  other  intellectuals  have been amongst  the most articulate  in  insisting that  national  institutions  be created  and  maintained at  public  expense  to  allow  Canadian writers  and  scientists to  undertake their work and  make  it available.  Indeed,  for people who champion  the "free  spirit" so loudly, writers can be as hard-boiled and opportunistic  where their own vested interests  are  concerned  as  the  Canadian   Association of  Manufacturers. Wisely or unwisely, Canadian intellectuals are peculiarly indifferent to the totalitarian models where subsidized science and subsidized art serve national goals. For cold shivers down  the  spine,  try  reading  the  Massey Report  through  the  eyes of an Arthur  Koestler.
If Canadian writers  are  aware  of the dangers, they have not said so. Instead they have adopted, in some version or other, a national  ideology aimed  at keep­ ing institutions like the Canada Council, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and  the  National  Film  Board  alive. Considering  how little writers  have  to gain from  the  C.B.C.  or  the  N.F.B.,  both  of which  use writers  but  are  not  writers' media, it would seem that their enthusiasm for these institutions rests on the recog­ nition that  they are important symbols, representing a legitimate claim on public moneys and  public  attention  for  cultural  activity.  The longer such  institutions survive,  the  stronger  the  sanction.  Hence  serious  writers,  many  of whom  have never made a nickel out of the C.B.C. or N.F.B., automatically  and  instinctively support  these and  similar  government  institutions.  No serious Canadian poet or novelist wants  to see them  abandoned. Least of all young writers.
Young writers in Canada are young people. They have an aptitude  for creative writing, the ambition  to make writing a lifelong vocation, and enough confidence in themselves to believe that  they can overcome the obstacles in their way. Unlike their  counterparts in painting  or music, they are expected  to develop their craft by themselves through  trial  and  error.  Except for the occasional college creative writing  course or summer  workshop, there is almost nothing  that  corresponds  to the training  which artists and  musicians get through art or music schools. Instead of going to London  to study with Eliot, as a young composer might go to Paris to study  with  Boulanger,  the  fledgling writer  is left on  his own, and  he is apt  to drift  towards  San  Francisco  or New York, wherever the avant-garde are  nesting at the moment.  What  he acquires is a self-image, a style of life, membership  in a sympathetic  in-group,  and  a sense of solidarity, all of which add  to his assurance but not necessarily to his skill as a writer. Indeed, if his defects as a writer happen to  be shared  by the  group,  they  may be reinforced  through  repetition  and  ap­ proval. At least, says Archibald  MacLeish, in a University with its library, there

29

WRITERS AND THE  MASS MEDIA



is a wider  range  of literary  models for the young  writer  to examine.2  Still the idea persists,  not  just in Canada, that  writers  are  born,  not  made. The  public  believes this Wunderkind myth,  writers  cherish  it, and  critics sustain  it.
As long  as  young  writers  find  themselves  in  what  amounts to an  institutional vacuum, as long  as they are  not,  like medical students, conscious  of becoming a part  of  a professional  group, as long  as there  is no systematic training that  goes with  a career  line, they are  drawn  in varying  degrees  toward institutions that  are related   but  not  identical with  their  interests.  Three, in  particular, impinge upon the  young  writer: the University, the social movement, and  the mass media.  One way  of  comparing the  position  of young  writers  in  different countries is to  ex­ amine  the  relative  strengths of these institutions and  the  different ways in  which they  compete for  the  writer.  The  social  movement, for  example, does  not  have the significance  it did  during the I 93os in Canada or elsewhere; as an alternative then  it is not  weighted  as strongly  as the other  two.  At the same  time in Canada where   universities,  generally,  and  graduate schools  in  particular, are  not  as ex­ tensive  as in  the  United States,  the  gravitational pull  of  the  university  may  be less than  that  of the mass media.  In any case, the university, the social movement, and  the  mass media  are three  patterns towards which  the young  writer  is drawn; each  has  its own  organization and  own system  of  notation.
As a consumer, he is familiar with  them  all. The choices  they  represent  may, by  the  time  he is an  adult, be so internalized as to  make  for  a genuine  psycho­ logical  conflict,  a  fact  which  only  complicates his  life  further. To  be  a  writer­ scholar,  like  Lionel   Trilling;  a  writer-essayist,   like  James  Baldwin;  a  writer­ reporter, like John Hersey-to  be these  and  at  the  same  time  a  writers'  writer  like Proust,  Pound or Joyce and,  closer to home,  Malcolm Lowry or Ethel  Wilson, is  a fantasy   that  would  paralyze  almost  anyone. Yet  it  is one  which  the  young writer  in  our  society  can  scarcely  avoid.
Apart from   the  psychological   pressures  which   these  non-literary  institutions present, they also present  different  modes of creative  expression. Each  has its own definition of  reality,  its own  manual of style, its own  linguistic  conventions, and its own  standards for measuring achievement. Although there  are  important functional differences among  them,  they  are  alike  in  the  sense  that  none  is  pri­ marily  an  art  form,  and  all are,  at some  point,  hostile  to art.  From  this point  of view,  Time  magazine and  Henry   Luce  are  no  different from  Harvard  and  the chairmen of  English  departments, or  the  N.A.A.C.P. and  Martin  Luther King,  the  difference being  only a matter of prestige  or moral  grandeur.
The mass  media,  then,  form  one  of several non-literary alternatives available

WRITERS AND  THE MASS MEDIA



to  the  writer  and  especially  attractive to young  writers  at  the  beginning of their careers.  Once  this point  is grasped, it becomes clear that  dichotomies between "highbrow" and  "lowbrow" culture or other  distinctions  of a similar  nature, distinctions which   implicitly   assume  that  the  major  choice  a writer   must  make is between  fidelity  to himself as a writer  and  "selling out" to the mass media, are both   misleading  and   mischievous.   Such   distinctions   obscure   the  fact   that   the writer   must  choose  among   many  reference  groups,  between  the  literary culture and  the cultures of scholarship, social action  and  journalism.
What are  these alternatives, and  how do they operate with  respect  to literature
and  the  writer?  Briefly, the  University  is the atmosphere conducive to specialized and  analytic treatment of subject  matter whether it is in the sciences or the human­ ities.  Its  language and  literature are  the  learned   article  in  the  learned  journal intended for  learned  audiences but  adapted sometimes  for  wider consumption, the  textbook,  and  still  wider,  the  scholarly  book on  the  open market, published by  a  university   or  a  commercial  press.  When  scholars  talk  about   editors   and  publishers, they  sound   just like poets,  and  the  young  poet  turned academic may find  his publication problems  just as acute  as they were before. American scholars  are  perhaps slightly  better  off in this respect  than Canadians3 but  not  necessarily better  off  than  American poets,4   and  their  cri de  coeur is the same.  Yet,  despite this situation, the  university  offers a steady income from  teaching, and  the  fasci­ nation  of research.
In  contrast with  the campus and  its analytic  didactic  bias, the social movement brings   the   young   writer   face-to-face  with   the  realities  of  social  injustice, the camaraderie of  political  actors,  and  the  engaged  excitement of social  action. If the specialization of scholarship offers young  people a sense of authority of which they  are  otherwise  deprived, the  ideology  and  ethos of the social movement offer them  a sense of purpose. There is even  a certain  celebrity  and  fame  attached to Aldermaston and   Washington marches.  And  it is not  necessary  for  a  writer   to belong  to a social  movement to identify  with  it.
Here,  too, there  is an  ancient and  well-regarded literary  form: the social essay with  its  analysis  and  criticism  of the  status quo which  may  extend  toward  aca­ demia  in the social analyses of literature. In  the heydeys of the thirties  and forties, its learned   journals  were  the  "little mags"  where  writers  were  not  so  much "dis­  covered" as  "enlisted", a  distinction   which  is apt  to  be  blurred  when  art  and  politics are  part  of the same  revolutionary force  (as they were in the thirties) but becomes   clearer   in  retrospect  and   is  especially  vivid  when  one  compares the

WRITERS AND THE  MASS MEDIA



current   crop  of  off-beat  "little  mags".  Dissent is not  interested  in  discovering writers;  Tamarack  Review is not interested in enlisting them.
The   third  orientation  is  journalism  represented   institutionally   by  the  mass media.  Journalism  is a term writers don't  like any more than  they like the terms "scholarship" and  "social tract". But it is a distinct type of literature  which em­ phasizes immediacy, information,  and  interpretation. It overlaps a literary tradi­  tion  of  naturalism,  but is as different  from  it  as Walter  Lippman  is  from  the professor of Modern  American History. Like any other  literary form,  journalism is a discipline; its trials are rarely compensated  for by the legendary salaries paid to Hollywood and TV  writers or the narcissistic thrill of a large audience.  When it is well done, it is its own reward.  A Pulitzer  Prize, a Nieman Fellowship have the  same  meaning  to a  journalist  as a  Governor-General's  Award  or  a  Nobel Prize do to a novelist or poet, scientist or historian.
Later  I want  to come back to the mass media  in Canada, but  here there are a  number  of points I want  to bring out. First, in the absence of any systematic training  for young writers and in the absence of any established or stable literary community,  there is almost no way for a young writer  to develop into a writers' writer.  The  mass media cannot  be blamed  for this situation  or for exploiting it. If the media are blamed, then the university or social movement is equally guilty.
Second,  the  major  impact  of  the  mass media  on  writers  is like that  of the University  and  the social movement, to draw  off from  the large pool of creative talent many who, for one reason or another might have or should have, turned elsewhere anyway. Writers refuse to believe this. Too often the picture they carry in  their  minds is the one  Norman  Levine draws  when,  more in sorrow than  in anger,  he tells of meeting up with an old friend  and  former  classmate. "He  had joined the C.B.C., had put on weight, married,  three children,  a small house in a suburb  ... I  asked him about  his poetry. He had  written  free-verse poems as an undergraduate  which  were  published  in  the  university's  literary  magazine.   'I don't  even read poetry today,' he said quietly." 5 The impression given is that  this was  (a)   an  involuntary  choice and  (b)   a loss to modern  poetry.  Yet it could equally  well have been a voluntary choice, having more to do with self-discovery than  with  mortgages, hunger,  and  dependents.  If so, he is not  the first nor will he be the last undergraduate writer of free verse who found the C.B.C. more com­ patible  with his talents than  the coast of Cornwall.
No screening  process is perfect. And some are more imperfect  than  others. Economic  stratification  operates  selectively in  a  way  that  never  has  and  never will  correspond  to  the  distribution  of  writing  talent  in  the  population   which,

WRITERS AND THE  MASS MEDIA



until  proved  otherwise,  we assume  to be random.  In  addition  to an  economic variable,  there is a motivational one that will always make for some discrepancy between  those who  could  be  writers and  those who become writers. Here,  too, the  mass media  may  pick up  some and  lose others;  that  is, people  who simply "like  (or  dislike)  the  life" in  the  mass media  more  than  life in  the  milieu of belles lettres. And  this process works in the same way for the other institutions.








IN  CONTRASTING  the  three
 orientations-- university,  social

movement, mass media -their particular  properties are revealed. More in theory than  reality, for in reality they overlap, changing in response to the larger environ­ ment  and  in  response to each  other.  Historically, however,  the  unification  was much  greater  in  the  nineteenth  century  than  it is today  where  the  three  have become more compartmentalized.
The  trend  toward  functional  specialization is not historically inevitable, nor is it necessarily "progress". It can be looked upon as a lateral development or a regressive one. But it is a change,  a shift that one sees throughout modern social structure.  In  Canada it  is not  advanced  as far  as in  the  United  States  and  it may  never go that  far.  Writers,  however, have been slow to recognize its impli­ cations for themselves.
Broadly speaking,  literature  has become a specialization;  the writer is relieved of  the  necessity of combining  literature  with something  else, and  he is further, enjoined  from  doing so. He  is freer than  ever before to experiment  with literary forms  without   being  made  to  feel  he  is  abusing  good  education,   intelligence, talent  and sensitivity for nothing  more significant than  playing with words. Thus the modern  writer  has a freedom.  It  may turn  out to be an empty one. In some ways the modern  writer  is like the modern  parent  who is told by school author­ ities, "Don't teach  your child to read;  that is our job for which we are profession­ ally trained.  Yours is to  provide  the  child with psychological  security."-as if psychological security was not inextricably bound up with the growth of such key skills as reading! And  the  writer,  like the  modern  parent,  may  feel that  he is being  pushed  out  to left field. Nevertheless, the writer  now  has the freedom  to be a  writers'  writer,  to do  what  he is uniquely qualified  to  do, to go wherever his sensibilities lead him. Conversely, he is required to define his role functionally.

33

WRITERS AND  THE  MASS MEDIA



As a start  we can look at the writer in occupational terms. What  does he tell the census enumerator?  Some writers do nothing  else but write. If writing is not the  main  source  of their  income, it is the  main  demand  on  their  time. At  the other  extreme  are  writers like Frank  Scott  in  this  country  or  the late  William Carlos  Williams  in  the  United  States,  who  combine  two  highly  exacting  pro­ fessions in a way that makes it impossible to differentiate  vocation from avocation. Many  writers  are  forced  by economic  necessity to  lead  a  double  life, but  few thrive  on it, and  there is a hard  core who argue  that  it is the lesser  of two evils to sell shoes for a living than  to write for the mass media.
All of these differences are interesting, but like the endless debates over whether
or not  a writer should marry,  they do not advance  the cause of theory. A more serious problem  is the tendency for writers  to gloss over their  occupational  dif­ ferences  under   the  term  "amateur". Whatever   meaning  the  term  "amateur" had  in  the  nineteenth  century,  it  has come  to  mean  in  the  twentieth  century something  close to a "dilettante" or a "quack", engaged either in innocent  dab­ bling or malpractice.  (Even among doctors and  lawyers it is customary to differ­ entiate  between  a  licensed professional who  engages  in  unethical  practices  and the  layman  who  practices  medicine  or  law  without  the  requisite  training  and
qualifying  examinations). It seems, therefore,  distressing to find A. J. M. Smith
at  the 1955 Writers'  Conference  at Queens  University  talking about  the poet as
"amateur".
Smith meant  no disrespect to his colleagues; no one knows better  than  he how hard  poets work and  how dedicated  they are to perfection.  But I suspect he was thinking  of the  poet as a counterforce  to the depersonalization  of specialization, much  as one thinks of the general practitioner  or family doctor as contrasted  with the impersonal  specialist. I think he had in mind,  also, the fact that it is in one's least self-conscious moments that the creative sparks catch. These are problems confronting   any  professional group,  but  they  are  not  resolved by avoiding  the term  professional.
Specialization  has another  meaning.  When  a complex  process is broken down into simple operations  and  a worker devotes his time to only one of these opera­ tions, as in assembly-line production,  he is acting  as a specialist. Whatever other skills he has  are  extraneous,  and  he has little  or no  responsibility.  He  does not initiate  anything,   plan  anything,  and  the  product  or  that  part  of it  which  he produces does not bear his personal imprint.  These are working conditions which nourish  a  deep  and  bitter  resentment,  not  to  mention  escapist  and  delinquent



34

WRITERS AND THE MASS  MEDIA



fantasies,  whether  it  is among  automobile  workers in Detroit  or among  writers in  Hollywood.
Canada is neither  Hollywood  nor Detroit.  For reasons which I shall indicate
later,  the mass media  here are not organized along the lines of mass production. Some  of  the  elements  of mass  production  are  present.  What,  then,  is the  dis­ tinction  between  the writers'  writer and  the media writer?
In  the sciences a  distinction  is made  between  the  pure  and  applied  scientist.
Crude,  unsatisfactory  and  sometimes misleading, it nevertheless provides a basis for  analyzing  writers  along  a  continuum   and  analyzing  literature  in  terms  of function.  A further  distinction  in the sciences is between the creative scientist­ pure or applied-and the technician  whose work is necessary but highly routin­ ized and  built around  "means" rather  than any active participation in or critical evaluation  of "ends". Using this model, the media writer can be compared  to the applied  scientist  working  close to  reality,  reconstructing  it imaginatively,  colla­ borating  with  other  scientists while at  the same time pricking the rigidities and abstractions  of the  pure  scientist.  Within  this framework,  he may be a  "hack" or he may achieve a creative distinction. But the literary process, like the scientific one,  requires  that  the  pure  and  applied scientist act  as each other's  conscience, both  of them  periodically  brought  to task by the clever technician  who, not in­ frequently,  rescues them  both  and  has the last laugh.




As WRITING BECOMES a professional specialization some of the  pressure to serve as an art form or a forum for the arts will be taken off the
mass media.  Everyone  agrees that  the media  have a  responsibility to literature; no  one  has  ever  defined  it  clearly.  What  policies the  media  have  are  erratic, arbitrary,  expedient,  ad hoc. One season there will be a big run on reviews and literary  criticism;   then  it  is gossip about  writers,  interviews  with  writers,  dis­ cussions of the writing  process; at still other times the emphasis is on the presen­ tation  of  works:   "original",  "controversial", "folk",  "classical",  anything  the editors  think  will "go".
Whatever  the  responsibility of the media  may be, it is no greater  to the arts than  to science, no greater  to science than  to social and  political analysis. In  the past these varied  demands  competed against each other  with the not too surpris­ ing  result that  harassed  executives seized on any device that  would give them a

35

WRITERS AND  THE MASS MEDIA



rational  basis for decision. Audience  research -Nielsen  ratings,  readership sur­ veys, polls or  other  measures of audience  response  and  interest -have  served this need. There  is scarcely any difference here between public and private owner­ ship or between the Canadian  media and the mass media in the United States. As in all modern  bureaucracies,  rationalized procedures for making decisions replace hunch,  prejudice,  and  intuition.  Until  it is recognized  that  the  function  of the media  is to provide  a coherent  integration  of the  insights  coming from  various specialized disciplines, this situation is not likely to alter.6
Who  owns and  controls  the  media  is not  entirely  irrelevant.  In  the  case of
public  ownership,  the  policy of the media with  respect to literature  has been to lean  toward  a concept  of "adult  education", using this term  broadly  to include both  formal  instruction  and  other  treatments  of literature  intended  to raise cul­ tural  levels, encourage  writers,  and  stimulate  critical  discussion. In  the  case of private  ownership  the  policy has  been  toward  "entertainment",  ranging  from the most trivial kind of escapism to highly sophisticated  drama, fiction, or poetry. Neither  education  nor  entertainment, however,  are  necessarily  communication. At  best, these terms  conceal  the lack  of sustained  rational  planning; at  worst, they  justify the  transfer  of control  to groups  outside  of the  media,  advertising agencies,  teachers'  organizations,  or  other  similar  lobbies. The  media  serve as brokers, technical  advisers, adapters,  with  everyone dissatisfied. Efforts by Mar­ shall McLuhan  and others to study the way in which the technology of the media structures  perception  put  the cart  before the horse, but  they reflect the growing awareness that  communication  is  a  different  process from  learning.  It is not the technology of the media that is so radical;  rather,  it is the transformation of our social structure  from  rural  to  urban,  sacred  to secular,  class to  mass, changes which  tend  to isolate the  individual  and  fragment  experience. These  and  other changes  have  created  a  need for communication, but  the  media  cannot  pursue this objective  if  they  are  continually  saddled  by criteria  appropriate to  art  or other symbolic systems.





ERM FOLLOWS FUNCTION, as they say in architecture.  Where the  media  are  geared  to "entertainment", providing  consumer  goods for a  con­
sumer society, the system of production  tends to be a form  of mass production,
as in most consumer goods industries. Where the media  are geared to adult  edu-

WRITERS AND THE  MASS  MEDIA



cation,  they  have,  like our schools, followed  the organizational patterns of a craft industry, resting  on  a  base  of semi-skilled  or skilled workers  most of whom  can, like the  custom  tailor,  perform many  functions. The  uniqueness of the  Canadian media  lies in  the  fact  that  their  volume  of output is low. Even  then  we have,  as the  O'Leary  report demonstrated, a  hard   time  making  it  pay.7 So,  despite  the fact  that   we  have  more  private   than   public  ownership in  the  media, the  ethos is that  of public  ownership, developed  most fully in the C.B.C.; the typical writer­ media  relationship is a craft  relationship.
More  specifically,  the free-lance  writer in Canada is neither a small businessman­
entrepreneur nor  a  sub-contractor in  a  large  mass  production operation. He  is not  a  writer-owner  nor  is  he  the  anonymous wage-earner  who  carries  on  the comic  strip   after   the  original writer   has  departed  or  the  film  script  after   the original  writer  has  been  fired.  There are some  Canadian media  writers  who are entrepreneurs or sub-contractors, and  like such  writers in the  United States  their contract  negotiations with   the  media   are  primarily   concerned  with  the  price, economic risk, profit  and  other  aspects of the economics of the relationship. Their autonomy as writers is not what  is at stake.
For  better  or for worse, for richer  or for poorer,  the Canadian free-lance writer
(or  the  staff  writer)  maintains an  autonomy and  is paid  for  a  service.  On  the one  hand, we  do  not  have  the  spectacle   of  distinguished writers writing  for "girlie"  magazines, and,   in  effect,  permitting their  names  and   personalities to be  used  by  these  marginal periodicals  to get  around postal  regulations. On  the other  hand, we  do  not  have  the  phenomenon of writers  whose  identity  merges with  that   of  the  medium -"the  New  Yorker  writer", "the New  York  Times book  reviewer". Readers may  prefer  the  indiscriminate combination of  pornog­ raphy  and  an article  by Mailer; they may prefer  to subscribe  to a paper or maga­ zine  where  there  is a familiar style that  is the same  throughout the  year.  Nor  is there  any  simple  or  direct   relationship between   the  quality  of the  product and the status  of the  writer. Not  all hand-made Swiss watches  run  well.
Looking   at  the  content of  the  media,  Canadian or  American, one  sees that only a small  part  of it is fiction. And  what  fiction does appear is of the mass pro­ duced   type.  Stories  and  plays  often  have  a  Canadian setting,  but  this  is simply different packaging of  a  standardized product. The  bulk  of  media  content is a fictionalized presentation of non-fiction material, ranging from  the  documentary or  feature  piece  to  the  news  sob  story  based  on  "real"  case  histories.  Fiction  writers  are  used  on  these  non-fiction assignments.
Two  recent  examples of media  writing  by creative  writers  come  to mind.  The


37

WRITERS AND  THE MASS MEDIA



first are  the articles Mordecai  Richler did for Maclean's  on Israel. Richler's  trip to Israel was, I assume, inspired by James Baldwin's tour of Africa. Both Baldwin and  Richler  are  fiction  writers;  both  are  members  of  minority  groups  with  a history of persecution and  discrimination; both were returning to a "homeland"; and  both were looking at new countries where their own ethnic group was at the centre  of power.  Baldwin  apparently  found  this experience  such a challenge  to his ambivalences  as an American  Negro that  he was not able to write anything. Richler  turned  out  another  chapter  in  The   Apprenticeship of  Duddy  Kravitz, an  entertaining tour  de  force, more  interesting  to  people  interested  in  Richler than  to people interested in Israel.
The  second example is Morley Callaghan's That  Summer  in Paris which was not written on assignment but which was serialized by Maclean's  and read on the C.B.C's  afternoon  show, "Trans-Canada Matinee". On  the surface, the book is part of a writer's autobiography, an important document to anyone connected with modern  literature.  But it was also a story of a Canadian who brought  to Europe those  qualities  of  innocence,  candour,  and  humility   (but   nobody's  fool)  that are  Canadian. Still more,  it  was the  archetypal  nightmare of all  young  men: to  wake up  and  find yourself in a land  of giants  and  forced  through  a terrible set of misunderstandings  to fight one of them.  Any one of these themes by itself would  have  been soap  opera.  In  combination,   however,  they gave  the story a richness and  truth  which any housewife who heard it broadcast,  any businessman who  read  it  in  his doctor's  office or  any intellectual  who  bought  the book  in­ stantly recognized.
Both examples  are media writing, though  one was assigned and  the other was undertaken independently.  Their  success owes as much  to a  tradition  of media writing  as it does to an older literary  tradition  of "naturalism"; it owes more to the tradition  of media writing, with all its abuses, than  it does to the newer liter­ ary traditions, such as the French anti-novel. And both suggest that the limitation of using creative  writers of the stature  of Richler  or  Callaghan  is  that  they in­ evitably turn  out something  highly personal.
Writers  like Richler  or  Callaghan  are  a  luxury  for  the  media.  They  do not write  often  enough,  they  are  unreliable  as far  as deadlines  are  concerned  and they are  expensive. Thus  the fictionalized  treatment of non-fictional  material  is largely  in  the  hands  of run-of-the  mill craftsmen.  The  weakness here is of  an­ other  sort.  They  cannot  meet either  a large  diffuse demand  or a small  prestige demand. With  regard  to  the  latter,  nothing  is more  irritating   than  the  writer (or  interviewer)   who does not know enough  about  the subject  to ask  pertinent

WRITERS AND  THE MASS  MEDIA



questions   or  to  summarize  the  material; nothing   more  infuriating than   when this writer  adds  insult  to injury  by offering his own opinion  or his own evaluation of  the  material. Despite  the  good  intentions of  the  writer,  what  emerges  is an earnest  but  naive  or facetious  undergraduate  essay.
In  short,  the  limitations of  the  craft  tradition are  produced by the  increasing subtlety  and  complexity of knowledge which  the craft  writer  who is not an expert cannot grasp,   and   the  exhaustion or  redundancy of  themes  which   the  craft writer  could  handle.
One  can  only  speculate on  the  future. Will  the  Canadian media  continue as a  system  of craft  production,  establishing craft  relations  with  writers  who  make themselves  available? Will  Canadian writers  continue a "naturalist" tradition of writing which  lends  itself to the  media?  Based on the analysis suggested  here, the answer   is  negative. Our  more  ambitious writers  will  be  exploring new  literary forms  which,   if  nothing else,  will  set  them  apart. They  may   call   themselves "amateurs", but  they  are  going  to  probe  the  atmosphere  just  as surely  as any scientist,  for  the  same   reasons,  and  with  as little  concern   as  any  scientist  over whether the  public   understands their   jargon.  They   may  discover  nothing  new about   human  experience that   they  could  not  have  found   in  the  more  conven­ tional  forms.  Eventually, they  may  return   to literature which  combines art  with knowledge, art  with  social  judgment, art  with  journalism. But  the  young  writers are  not  likely to  ignore  the  freedom available  to them  due  largely to the special­ ization  of other  disciplines.
As for  the  media,  they  are  beginning to re-evaluate their  function, whether it was  education or  entertainment. In  moving  toward  a  concept  of  "communica­ tion" they  will feel less and  less obligation to writers,  individually or as a group,  and  more  and  more  to literature. It will provide one source of  insight  to be placed beside  those  of other  intellectual disciplines.  This  approach  will call for  a much greater degree  of  depth,  knowledge, education and  sophistication than   editors have  needed   in  the  past.  Nothing less is required  than   the  ability  to grasp  the­ matic  uniformities and  differences among  the  various  specializations, the  ability to  see  these  in  a  still  larger   historical  perspective,  and  the  imaginative skill to transform the pattern into  units,  print  or audio-visual, that  are readily  understood. The   media   will  become   conceptually  oriented  rather than   person  or  event oriented as  journalism was in  the  past. To  the extent  that  themes  are  not  rooted in any  particular locale  or to the extent that  they are wider  than  any one nation, the  nationalism of the  media  will become subordinate. Writers  will still be needed by  the  media,  but  their  competence will be  not  in  their  craft  as  writers  but  in

39

WRITERS AND THE MASS MEDIA



their  intelligence, their  ability  to  programme the  computers and  read  the  dials, to  relate  local  experience  to  broader generalizations. Thus "reporting" becomes part  of a critical  as well as a more  broadly  creative experience.


•   Norman  Levine, Canada Made Me, London,  Putnam, 1958.
2    Archibald  MacLeish,  "On  the  Teaching  of  Writing,"  Writing  in  America,  John
Fischer and Robert B. Silvers, editors.
3  Bernard  Ostry, "Research  in the Humanities and in the Social Sciences in Canada," Ottawa, 1962.
4   Roger  W. Shugg,  "The  Professors and  their  Publishers,"  Daedalus, Winter  1963.
5   Levine, Op. Cit., pp. 34-35·
6  Thelma McCormack,  "Social Theory  and  the  Mass Media,"  Canadian  Journal of
Economics  and  Political Science, Vol. XXVII, No. 4, Nov. 1961, 479-489.
7   Report  of Royal Commission on Publications, Ottawa, 1961.












ORIGINS OF
MARIA CHAPDELAINE





Margaret K. ,Zieman







IN 1921, when Louis HCmon's pionw epic of the Lake St. John  country  first appeared in English, its heroine, Maria  Chapdelaine, stepped at  once  into  her  own  special  niche in  Canadian literature. Hernon's  book was
eventually  translated  intoI 3 different languages; its sales in English and  French totalled  well over  a  million  copies. And  Peribonka,  the  tiny  Lake St. John  vil­ lage-not  even a pinpoint  on a map  when the 32-year-old French  writer lived there  in I 9  2 -found  itself suddenly  spotlighted  as  the  setting  of  the  Chap­ delaine  story.  Magazine   and   news  correspondents  as  well  as  curious  visitors arrived  to plague  the  astonished  villagers with questions:
"Who  was the  original  for  Maria  Chapdelaine?  Had  Hernon  shown  interest
in any particular local girl? Was life in backwoods Quebec  really as Hernon had pictured   it-primitive,  crude,  wholly  without  creature   comforts  and   refine­ ments?"
This  was fame,  but  Peribonka  didn't   relish it.  In  fact  not  until  the  prying etrangers  arrived  did  Lake  St. John  folk realize that  a  book had  been  written about  them.  When  they  did  learn  about  it  they were  shocked  and  indignant. What  did  they care  for  literary  fame -for  having  their  lives and  their  village immortalized?  And definitely they had no wish to be indebted  to that "Fou  of Bedard's",  the engage, who  harnessed a horse the wrong  way round,  who could not cut a straight  shingle or drive a nail without crushing  his fingers. The  people around   Peribonka   remembered   Louis  Hernon  simply  as  the  worst  hired  man ever encountered  north  of Lake St. John; they still do so even today.
The  whole of Hernon's  life is shot through  with such ironic contradictions. He

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



was Breton-hom  and  Parisian by background and  education, yet his own countrymen  frequently  mistook him for an Englishman. His blue-grey eyes (there was an O'Kelly  among his ancestors),  his somewhat  long and  heavy face, clean­ shaven except for a small moustache, and his extreme reserve probably accounted  for  this confusion. He also spoke English like a native.
The  Irish strain may have accounted for the fact that Hernon was a born rebel. From  his early youth, he showed a devastating  disregard  for conventional  values and  consistently flouted  his middle-class family's  fetiches of worldly success and financial  security. A brilliant  but erratic  student,  he studied first for the law, but gave  that   up  because,  as he  expressed it-he  refused  to  be  poured  into  the "mass mould".  Later,  he trained for the French  Colonial Service and  was on the verge of receiving  a good appointment, only  to  throw  it all  up and  depart  for England,  where  he supported  himself in  London  by working  as a  minor  office clerk and  wrote in his spare time.
He cared  nothing for money or security, and  did not stay long at any one job, preferring  the  kind  of vagabond  life which  his family  deplored.  It was natural that  Hernon's  removal  to Canada  should  confirm  them  in  the  conviction  that their  son was a  drifter  and  a misfit. He  was 3 1-years-old, without  a profession. While his writings showed promise, most of the articles he had sold were on sport­ ing subjects.  He  had  published  one undistinguished  book -Lizzie  Blakeston, a novel of London  slum life. He had married  while in England,  but when his wife died shortly after  their child's birth, Hernon sent his small daughter home for his family to rear.
And  now  he  was setting  off into  a  completely  strange  world.  What  about money?  How  would  he live? He  did  not  need  much,  he told  them.  In  his last letter home Hernon wrote:

. . . Some things may make me appear unbalanced  ... Oh,  well, little mother, I'm going to tell you a secret. I am not unbalanced at all. I know what I'm doing. While I cannot give you all the details, I have not lost the essential purpose ... nor one whit of confidence. There will be good news for you one day or another. Not for a long time perhaps, but one day or another, some news will be pleasant. It will come in a series like the bad, but it is necessary to await it patiently, without ever giving up  hope. And if these do not come, it  will  be something to have awaited them with courage until the end. But they will come.


There  is a  tragic  irony  about  that  prophecy.  Success and  world-wide  fame, sufficient  to  satisfy  Hernon's  proud  family,  did  come  but  too late  for  Hernon

42

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



himself. For his novel, Maria  Chapdelaine, did not achieve either fame or finan­ cial success until  nearly  ten years after Hernon's death  at the age of 33· He was struck  by a  train  near  Chapleau, Ontario,  in  I9I3,  as he was making  his way west, with all his worldly possessions in a knapsack, en route to Fort William and the west.
The  first slight  edition  of Maria  Chapdelaine, some  2,ooo  copies printed  in
I 9 I 4 especially for  French  Canada, after  the story had  appeared  as a serial in Le  Temps of Paris,  was virtually  ignored,  though it  was the later  reprinting  in Paris,  in  I92I   as one  of the  famous  "Cahiers  Verts",  and  the  translation  into English the same year, that  brought  recognition to the novel, particularly  among English-speaking  Canadians. But in French  Canada, Hernon's  book, which one critic  had  described  as  "the most  perceptive interpretation  of  the  Soul  of Quebec",   aroused  much  controversy  and  even  outright   antagonism,  especially north  of Lake  St. John.
Yet no one can  seriously question the almost documentary fidelity of Hernon's
portrayal  of  the  courageous  defricheurs, who early  in  this century  literally  cut their  farms  from   then  unbroken  woodlands  of  northern   Quebec.  In  Maria's father,  Samuel  Chapdelaine, Hernon shows us the habitant's passion for the soil and  his joy in "making land," where there was only forest before. In  Maria  and her  mother,  Laura   Chapdelaine, the  author  epitomizes  the  patient  tenacity  of their  race,  based  on instinct,  duty,  tradition-and rooted  deeply in  religion.






IN  CREATING  CHARACTERS  so near  to  life, Hernon  had  un­ wittingly sowed the seeds for all the ironic happenings  which were to follow  his book's sudden  access to fame. Thousands of readers and even many sophisticated journalists  insisted  that   the  characters  must  be  photographic  likenesses drawn from  living  models.  Many  an  author  has  been  overshadowed  by  his fictional creations. Hernon,  modest and  retiring, would not have minded  that. In his case, however,  not  only  the  prestige  but  also the  personalities of his  chief characters  were  appropriated  by living  rivals. In  particular,  the  twenty-year-long  associa­ tion of Eva Bouchard,  a school teacher from Peribonka, with the fictional Maria,  represents one of the most interesting moments of literary  history.
In  I929  at Montreal and  later in Toronto  at the First Canadian Book Fair in
I94I, Eva Bouchard  was introduced  as the "original  Maria" of Hernon's  book.


43

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



She  autographed copies of the  book with  the signature,  "Maria  Chapdelaine". And  until  quite  recently,  the  original  Bedard   homestead,   near  Peribonka,  in which  Mlle.  Bouchard  set  up  what  she  called  the  "Louis  Hernon  Museum", actually  bore the sign:  "Foyer  de Maria  Chapdelaine". However,  the collection of exhibits, which visitors could see here for a small admission charge, consisted almost  solely of testimonials  and  tributes  to  Eva  Bouchard  in  her  20-year-long portrayal of Maria.
Probably  Mlle.  Bouchard's  chief disservice to Hernon's  memorable  story was that  her  commercial  activities focussed visitors'  attention   upon  this lower  part of the Peribonka,  close to Lake St. John,  whereas Hernon's  book locates the Chapdelaine homestead I 2 miles further  upriver,  beyond the village of Honfleur in the midst of almost wholly uncut forest, where the Peribonka  rushes deep and dark  between high rocky banks to drop "steeply to the rapid  water and the huge blocks of stone  above  the fall."  The  sound  of the  falls, one critic has said, is a sort of "intermittent bass" throughout  the story. The  Peribonka  becomes almost a personality in Maria Chapdelaine.
But  these more  subtle  and  poetic aspects of Hernon's  work were forgotten  in the  anxiety to identify  the book's characters  with living prototypes. The  attempt around   1922  of  journalists  and   curious visitors to  "pin   down"  the  originals aroused a wave of hostility among the people of Peribonka. They simply could not understand  the excited interest of these prying "foreigners" in the peculiar  hired man  who  had  lived  among  them  ten  years  before  for  barely  six months,  and then  departed,  leaving not a trace on their lives. Even  the Bedards, with whom Hernon  had  lived, were surprised  to discover that  they  had  been harbouring  a genius.  They  recalled  that  Hernon  was always scribbling  in  a small  notebook, but Samuel  Bedard  told inquiring  journalists:  "I never thought  he had so much popularity.  He  did  not look it."
However, after the  first  shock,  the  Lake  St.  John people  also  set  about matching  Hernon's  characters  with  their  neighbours.  They  knew his book only by  hearsay,  but  since  two of its chief characters  bore  the same first names  as Samuel  and  Laura   Bedard -they  immediately  assumed  that  these  two  must be the originals for Samuel  and  Laura  Chapdelaine.
These simply French-Canadian farmers had of course no conception of the selectivity of the creative artist and certainly  none of composite characterization. And  they  were  justified to the  extent  that  the  cheerful,  exuberant,  kindly  and talkative  Laura  Bedard obviously contributed  a great  deal to Hernon's character­ ization  of the cheerful  and  practical  Madame Chapdelaine. Her father,  Samuel

44

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



Bouchard,  had  the same almost compulsive passion for clearing wild land  as the fictional Samuel  Chapdelaine. His moves, first to St. Prime, then Mistassini, and finally to the even more primitive area  north  of the lake near  Peribonka,  almost exactly  parallel  the  moves of Maria  Chapdelaine's  restless father.  Hernon  made use of other  information obtained  from  Laura  Bedard.  Certainly  he heard  her tell and  retell  the story of her  mother's  fatal illness on a savage bush farm,  far removed  from  proper  medical  care  and  from  the essential rites of her  church. As he describes the similar  death  of Madame  Chapdelaine-the climax of his book-it has the ring of almost eye-witness veracity. It can only have come from his having  fully realized the depth  of this family's bereavement.
It was perhaps  similarities of this kind that induced the Lake St. John  people, who had  first identified  Madame  Chapdelaine  with Madame  Bedard,  to change their  minds  and   decide instead  that  Madame  Bedard  must  be  Maria.  They pointed  out that  Laura  Bedard, like Maria,  had taken over the responsibility for her  small  brothers  and  sisters after  her  mother's  untimely  death.  And  so they continued  to snatch  at such fragmented resemblances in their efforts to identify Hernon's  characters.
They did not have too much trouble with the book's minor characters, for many of these Hernon lifted whole from life. Tit'Sebe,  the bone-setter from St. Felicien, who admitted  he could not help Madame  Chapdelaine  in her fatal illness, was a well-known  character  around   the  lake.  Tit'Be   and  Da'Be,  the  nicknames  of Samuel Chapdelaine's two sons, were also the nicknames of Ernest  Murray's two boys, whose family farm ad joined the Bedard's. Edwige Legare, the Chapdelaine's hired  man,  was  immediately   recognized  as  the  Bouchard's  hired  man,  Joseph Mure,  whose  favorite  swear-word,  like  Legare's  was  "Blaspheme!" And  so it went, with everyone fascinated  by the book and  at the same time resenting it.
Samuel  Bedard,  once  a salesman and  something of a man  of the  world, was quick  to sense possible financial  advantage  in all this publicity. He immediately realized  that  the  book could  attract  attention  to the  Peribonka  area  and  boost business for  the  hotel  which  he had  taken  over in the village, having  given up farming  some  years  before.  At  once,  he  changed  his establishment's name  to "Hotel  Maria  Chapdelaine". In  this hotel, visitors naturally  enough,  sought  the original "Maria", and  Madame Bedard, simply by not denying it, was confirmed in this role. Actually,  Laura  Bedard, and  later on, her younger unmarried sister, Eva  Bouchard,   were  at  first  not  at  all  happy  to be identified  with  the  simple uneducated   farm  girl  Maria.  Both were all too conscious of their superior  con­ vent education.

45

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



When, in  I9 I8, a well-known Quebec  journalist suggested that  Eva Bouchard might  possibly have  served  as  Hernon's  model  for  Maria,   the  idea  met  with indignant   repudiation  from  Mlle. Bouchard.  She  refused  to attend  the  dedica­ tion of the monument  which was erected in  I9 I9 at Peribonka  by the Society of Arts and  Letters for the Province of Quebec.  Madame Bedard  on  that occasion told the guilty  journalist:  "You'd  better not fall into the hands of  my sister Eva. In saying she was Maria  Chapdelaine, you've made  her a figure of  ridicule. You may be sure she won't show up here!"  Yet less than  ten years later  ( I928) Eva Bouchard  (her  sister, Madame  Bedard having died in the  meantime), suddenly turned  face, and  deliberately sought the acclaim and financial  advantages  which she  realized  would  be hers by identifying  herself  with  the  heroine  of Hernon's book.  Certainly  the  role opened  up  new  vistas  for  Mlle.  Bouchard.  She  went abroad   and  visited  Hernon's  sister in  France;  she  attended   the  Coronation  of George  VI  in  1939.





ALL THIS   HAS  IRONICAL OVERTONES,  for  Eva  Bouchard was basking in the reflected glory of a young farmhand whom, we must believe, she considered  to be only a figure of ridicule. "What innocent   (half-wit)   have you hired now?" she is reported  to have asked her brother-in-law, when she saw Hernon  for  the  first time,  with  the ear-flaps  of his cap  dangling  over his eyes.
Admittedly,  this  opinion  of  Hernon  was  pretty  generally  held  by  Peribonka
people. And even today, his book is far from  popular  among  them. They  feel it presents a derogatory picture of their lives and they can remember  only Hernon's representation  of them as colons, a term of opprobrium in the area.
While the special sensitivity of the Canadien must be allowed for, the questions arise:  Was there  justifiable basis for their resentment?  Is Hernon's book a realistic picture  of life at  the turn  of the century in the Lake St. John  area?  How much of Maria  Chapdelaine  represents factual  reporting?
The  answers can  largely be found  in  the  Bedard's  account  of Hernon's six­ month  stay with them near  Peribonka. The  very naivete of the information they supplied  to inquiring  journalists is its pledge of its authenticity.
Today  in  this lower flat  part  of the  Peribonka  valley where  Hernon  lived in I 9 I 2  with the Bedards on a primitive bush farm,  broad  fields of lush green hay and  oats have replaced the rough bush which he depicted  in Maria Chapdelaine.

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



Yet scarcely twelve miles upriver, where Hernon set the fictional Chapdelaine homestead,  rocks and  muskeg still make farming  much  the same back-breaking task as Hernon  described  so vividly. And in this bleak upriver  area  still can  be seen  many  of the  same  kind  of primitive  unpainted  one-story cabins, with  tiny kitchen lean-tos, which Hernon encountered when he came to work for Samuel Bedard.  At  that  time,  Bedard  apologized for the primitive  accommodation, but the new engage said he had  not expected the comforts of a palace and that  these things  made  no  difference  to  him.
Hernon's  dislike of the  artificial, the false, the insecure drew him naturally  to simple folk, the  poor  and  humble.  It  also accounts for his distaste for city life, and  his eagerness to get out of Montreal,  where he had spent a few months, fol­ lowing his arrival  in Canada in February  I9I2.
Yet his first impressions of the Lake St. John country could scarcely have been cheering ones. Spring comes late in this area, and the prospect of grey sky, chilling wind and gaunt  grim bush, which met Hernon's eye as the small lake packet, "Le Petit  Nord",  pulled  out  from  Roberval  for  Peribonka,  25 miles across the lake, may well account  for his book's sombre picture of a bleak, inhospitable  land and austere  threatening forest.
Among  the  roughly-dressed  defricheurs  (farmer  settlers)  who  were returning home  with  farm  supplies  and  stock purchased  in Roberval   (then  and  now  the market  centre  for  most of this area), the slightly-built  Hernon  in  his straw  hat and  city clothes must  have  looked very much  out of place. It  was fortunate for Hernon  that   Samuel   Bedard   happened   to  be  aboard   for  compared   with  the other  colons, Bedard  was well above the average in education  and  background. In  his youth  he  had  hoped  to become a priest, like his brother,  whom  he had assisted in Labrador. Bedard  was about  30 years old when Hernon met him -a restless, nervous,  rather  impractical man  who had  tried  many  different  types of work -none very successfully. He had been a salesman in small Quebec  towns and  had  served as a guide  to fur buyers and government  survey parties north  of the  lake.  After  marrying   Laura  Bedard,  he settled  near  Peribonka  on  a  farm beside that  of his father-in-law, three  miles outside the village. Restless still, he was even then toying with the idea of selling his farm, for he did not like the rough heavy work on  this bush  homestead.  And for  this reason,  too, he usually hired farm  hands,  few of whom  stood the hard  life for very long.
Bedard  engaged  the  stranger  in  conversation,  perhaps  because  he scented  in Hernon  a possible buyer for his farm.  He was not surprised  at Hernon's  Parisian accent,  for  at  this time  the  Quebec  government  was encouraging  French  immi-

47

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



gration  to Canada. Already one French family, a father  and two sons, had settled near Honfteur; these are the French immigrants  whom Hernon put into his book to illustrate  how difficult and  almost hopeless it was for anyone but a Canadien habitant  to undertake  pioneer settlement in this rough  bush country.
After  a few comments to break the ice, Bedard  asked Hernon if he was plan- ning to remain  in Peribonka.
"Perhaps-I don't  know  yet."
"Probably you intend  to buy land of your own?"  Bedard  probed.
"I'm planning  simply to hire myself out as a farmhand," Hernon told him.
"Comme s'adonne!"   Bedard  still thought  Hernon  was a  possible buyer,  but figured  he was wisely trying to gain some experience  first.
So  he told  Hernon  that  he had  contracted  to work  with  a survey party  that summer,  and  that  he  would  need someone  to  leave  behind  to  help  Madame Bedard  with  the  heavy farm  work. How  would  Hernon  like to work for  him? "For   you  or  another," Hernon  said  bluntly,  "though  I  prefer  you, since  I
know  you."
"What about  wages?" was Bedard's  next question. "Can you pay  me $8.oo--"
"By  the  week -Oh  no ..."  Bedard  countered,   not  letting  Hernon  finish. Actually  the usual rate for farm  help was $25 to $30 monthly,  and  Bedard  was prepared  to bargain.
"By the month,  Monsieur Bedard ... by the month," was Hernon's  startling reply.
Bedard  was always eager to tell questioners that  Hernon set this low rate him­ self. However,  the  stranger  made  one  condition; each  Saturday  afternoon was to be solely his own.  Hernon  wanted  to write  and  undoubtedly  realized  that  in working  for and  living with the Bedards he would  harvest  a  wealth of intimate impressions of the land  and  its people.
So the bargain  was struck. Returning  home  with the new farm  hand,  Bedard boasted to his wife about  his smart  "deal", but  Laura  Bedard,  the practical  one of the  pair,  was dubious.
"For   $8.oo  a  month,  you've  probably  picked  up  just  a  tramp,  a  good-for­
nothing,  someone  we can't  even trust in the house!"
Hernon's  appearance reassured  her. This  slender  young man  with  his brown hair,  neatly  brushed  back from a  middle  parting,  his shy diffident manner,  his cultivated  accent-Madame Bedard was quick to realize that  he was no tramp,

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



despite  the  fact  that  his entire  worldly  possessions consisted of only  a  blanket
(Hernon's  steamer  rug), some  handkerchiefs  and  a  toothbrush.







RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE   BEDARDS and  their  new  hired man  were  necessarily close. The  main  part  of their  home  consisted of a single room, divided by a curtain  to provide sleeping quarters  for Samuel and  his wife. Their  two adopted  children,  Thomas  and Roland  Marcoux  (the Bedards had no family of their  own), slept like the Chapdelaine  boys in the loft, to which they had  access through  a trapdoor at the head of a set of rough stairs. The  layout of this cramped  one-storey farmhouse corresponds almost exactly with Hernon's description of the Chapdelaine home. In a kitchen lean-to, so small that  Madame Bedard  could  stretch  out  her  arms and  touch  all four  walls, Hernon  slept on a camp  cot in  a kind  of nook, with his steamer  rug for blanket.  The  great  three­ decked  stove,  as described  in  Maria  Chapdelaine, which supplied  heat  for  the entire  dwelling, is today  one authentic  exhibit in the "Hernon  Museum".
Privacy of course was nil. Hernon usually sat on the side of his bed to eat. And it was here, after  the evening chores were finished, and on Sundays after church, in  the  midst of the family  conversation, with the two small children  ( 8 and  3) playing  about,   that   Hernon  briefly  jotted  down  those  day-to-day  observations which  serve  to  give  almost  documentary  accuracy  to  his saga  of  pioneer  life.
The  new hired  man  set himself to the farm  chores with energy and  stubborn persistence, if also with  incredible awkwardness. Sometimes Laura  Bedard grumbled   about  this  inept  engage  of theirs. "But  we  just had  to  put  up  with him,"  she explained  naively  to interviewers  years later.  "Naturally we couldn't drive him because of the small wages he got."
Hernon's  first job the day  he arrived  was to roll some cut logs from  the bank into  the river.  Panting and  pulling, he was struggling  with them  unsuccessfully, when  Ernest  Mure,  the  Bouchard's  hired  man,  came  to  his assistance.  In  his book,  Hernon  was  to  depict  Mure  as Edwige  Legare,  the  Chapdelaine's hired man, whom   the  author  describes as  a  dull  brutish "Man with  the  Hoe" kind  of creature, "clad  in  shirt  and  trousers of brownish  homespun -wearing huge dusty boots, he was from head to heel of a piece with the soil ... Nor was there aught  in his face to redeem the impression of rustic uncouthness."  Perhaps

49

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



Hernon  was quietly  "paying back" for  the  way  Mure  on  that  first day  took pleasure  in letting  the rough  logs fall back on  those soft white  hands  of "Cure Hernon",  as he called  him.  Mure,  the  yokel, was admittedly  out  to  "show  up Ce Monsieur."
But Hernon stuck stubbornly  to the task, and  when  Bedard  drew attention  to his crushed  hands,  he replied  with characteristic  wry humor,  "The  job got into my bones."
There  can  be no question that  Hernon  in Maria  Chapdelaine  was describing from  actual  experience  the heavy tasks on such  primitive  bush homesteads. We know  from  Madame Bedard's  account  that  he took part,  however ineffectually, in the back-breaking work of "pulling stumps" on those roughly-cleared acres, "sweating fit to kill" as Laura  Bedard expresses it. He not only shared in clearing land,  but also in seeding the hay and grain, in haymaking  and harvest, in picking the  wild blue-berries,  which cover the burned  over lands  with a veritable  carpet of blue during  July. All these operations-a veritable saga of the countryman's year-he describes in Maria Chapdelaine.
"Il etait si endurant." "Il  etait si maladroit!" "Il etait  si silent." These  were the  three  comments  interviewers,  questioning  the  Bedards  about  Hernon's  stay with  them,  were to hear  again  and  again.
"He  was always  the calmest  thing,"  Madame Bedard  told curious reporters,
but at times this energetic, excitable woman found this peculiar hired man, whom nothing  appeared  to excite, somewhat  exasperating, although  in  retrospect,  she was inclined  to laugh.
The   crowning  example  of  Hernon's  irritating calm  occurred  on  one  of  his Saturday  afternoons,  when as usual he retired  to the bank of the Peribonka,  just a stone's  throw  from the house, with his tiny notebook. There  he sat writing, his bare  feet dangling  in the water, on his head a large red handkerchief  tied at the four  corners as  protection  from  the  blackflies, when  suddenly  Madame  Bedard called excitedly from the farmhouse door:  "Monsieur Hernon!  Monsieur Hernon! the  cows are getting  into the grain!"
Hernon  did  not  move, so Madame  Bedard,  thinking  he  was rather  hard  of hearing,  ran  toward  the river, calling ... "M. Hernon!  Quick!  The  cows are in the  grain!"
Still no sign from Hernon.
"But  the  cows are  eating  our  grain,  M.  Hernon." Laura  Bedard  wailed. "Oh, well, Madame,  what  they eat  this summer,  they  won't  be able  to eat
next  winter,"  Hernon  replied  and  went  on  writing.


50

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



Even reproof did not appear to affect Hernon's calm. Once when Bedard was milking the  cows, with  black flies driving  both man  and  beast nearly  insane, he lost his temper  when Hernon  was unable  to light a smudge.
"It's obvious you can't  even light a fire, M. Hernon," Bedard said crossly, and proceeded  to do  the  job himself.
"You  see, M.  Bedard,"  Hernon  explained  calmly. "I never had  any occasion in France  or in  England  to light a smudge."
But how well he managed  to describe it in Maria  Chapdelaine!
Hernon's  very ineptness at  these various tasks gave him a special appreciation of these northern   Canadiens' unique  qualities,  their  hardly  resourcefulness  and withal their cheerful good nature  in the face of hardship-characteristics  which make  this race  pre-eminent  as pioneers.
Everything  Hernon saw, experienced or heard became part of his book. On Sundays,  he attended  church  with Samuel  Bedard,  who sang in the  choir. And on the first Sunday  after  his arrival  in Peribonka,  he witnessed the gathering of farm  folk on the  church  step, heard  the announcement  of parish news, saw the small  runty  pig in  a sack put  up for sale.
"Now,  I  know  why  he  was always  the  last  to  go  in-and  the  first out," Bedard  remarked  later  to interviewers. "He  was spying on us."
Hernon  had  an  unequalled  opportunity  to gain insight into  the  warmth  and affection so characteristic of Canadien  family life through  his close contact  with the  Bedards  and  their  two adopted  children.  Bedard  was himself a great  story teller, and  in  the long  winter  evenings in  the Bedard  home, Hernon  must  have heard  many a tale of his employer's earlier life in Labrador, of his contacts  with Indians,  of his work as a guide for fur buyers. All this information  can  be recog­ nized in the  background  of Fran<;ois Paradis,  the guide whom Maria  loved. An oft-repeated   account  of an  experienced  but  somewhat  headstrong  local guide's disappearance in  the  pathless  winter  forests, probably  suggested  to  Hernon  not only Fran<;ois's reckless character, but also his similar tragic fate.
Hernon  and  the  Bedards'  two adopted  boys were on excellent terms. Roland, the  older  lad,  probably  inspired  the  mischievous Telesphore,   Maria's small brother, who was so adept at lighting smudges. Thomas  Louis, "Tit'homme",  was just three  years old and  like many small Canadien  boys still had  long curls and wore dresses like a little girl.  Hernon  teased Tit'homme about  his dresses. "See here, Tit'homme. You know very well you're  not a little girl." The  little fellow would  turn  red with embarrassment, but took it all in good part.  Each  Sunday, when Hernon returned  from church, Tit'homme was waiting to play "their game."

MARIA CHAPDELAINE



"Here, little one, would you like some sweets?" Hernon  would ask. "Bien sur."
Together  they would go to the trap-door  of the loft, from  which a long string
hung.  Hernon  would  always repeat  the  same  hocus-pocus. "Taquino, taquino, Le  Chocolat  sortira."
Tit'homme, intent  on pulling the cord, would fail to see the chocolate falling
from  Hernon's  sleeve, where  he had  concealed  it. But for  the  rest of the  week, Madame Bedard  recalled,  Tit'homme kept  pulling  at  the  trap-door  cord,  but no chocolate  came.
Living with  the  Bedards, Hernon  gained  insight into every facet of the  habi­ tants'  lives. At the neighbouring  veillees on Saturday  evenings, which were occa­ sions for spirited reminiscences and retelling of local stories, he undoubtedly heard tales of encounters  with wild animals, information  about  les sauvages,  as Cana­  diens call the  Montagnais  Indians  who still hunt  and  trap  in this area  north  of the  lake,  of  the  work in  the  "shanties"  and  the  log drives,  which  still  supply seasonal work and  ready cash to farmers around  Lake St. John.  At these veillees, one of which he described in Maria  Chapdelaine, he must have met many of the lesser characters  who people his book-old-timers like Nazaire  Larouche,  with his sly jokes, expatriate  Canadiens,  like Lorenzo Surprenant, Maria's  prosperous suitor-home  on  a visit from  the  States,  and  many  a dull  young farmer  like Eutrope  Gagnon,  whom  Maria  finally agreed  to marry.
Toward  the end of his stay in the Lake St. John country,  Hernon was to experi­ ence,  at  first hand,  life in  the  woods with  the survey  party,  which  Bedard  had originally contracted  to work for. He suggested that Hernon take his place instead, for  by  this time  Bedard  had  realized  he could  not  leave  his farm  to this inept hired  man-with  the heavy work of haying  now due.  When  Hernon  returned  the  end  of November,  he insisted on  handing  over  to  Bedard  the $70  he had earned.  "I am supposed to be working for you for $8.oo per month," he explained with a characteristic  disregard for money and  a quixotic honesty.
So Hernon  spent the last Christmas  of his life with the Bedards at  Peribonka. Some time toward  the end of December, Samuel Bedard  undertook  to drive him to the southern  side of the lake, to St. Gedeon. They  went by berlot, the low flat habitant sleigh, following the road east along the river, finally crossing the frozen Peribonka  just below the  Chutes  of Honfleur  ... the  trip  across the ice which Hernon describes in the first chapter of his book, when Charles Eugene, the Chapdelaine horse had  to make  the leap  through  soft ice in  order  to reach  the opposite  bank.

MARIA  CHAPDELAINE



Certainly,  almost  everything  Louis Hernon  saw, heard  or experienced  in his six months  stay north  of Lake St. John  is recorded in Maria  Chapdelaine. But, though  he saw the crudity of pioneer life in northern  Quebec around  the turn of the  century,  it  emerges in  Maria  Chapdelaine  suffused with spiritual  radiance and  significance.  It is  this  deeper  insight  which  establishes  Hernon's   creative genius, gives his characters  their heroic stature and his book its rank as a sensitive interpretation of a  unique  people.



























53



chranicle



POETS IN

THEIR TWENTIES



George Bowering





The following  is an impressionistic survey by a  fellow  poet, not a critical estimation of the  state  of Canadian  poetry.

IF A  READER wm  to believe the  magazine  edito;s,  paternal poets, press agents, and university teachers of this country,  he would assume that
the  poetry  scene  from  Fredericton  to  Vancouver   was  populated  by  a  race  of North  American  Rimbauds.  Such is not the case, nor is it likely to be. But it is still apparent that  there are a lot of young and  very young poets in the country, and  more important, the book publishers, magazines, and  radio stations are pay­ ing more and more attention to them.
Last summer  the national  network of the Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation aired   a  sixteen-week  series of  half-hour   programmes   called  "New   Canadian Writing", an  arena  for  poets  and  short  story  writers  under  the  age  of  thirty. The  work of over twenty poets was heard. Earlier in the year "C.B.C. Wednesday Night"   had  produced   programmes  from  Montreal, Toronto,  and  Vancouver, in  which  many  of the same  people read  their  own work. Local programmes  in those three cities have given over an increasing  proportion  of their scanty poetry time  to the younger poets during  the past two or three years.
The  Ryerson  Press, in its biennial  anthology,  this year called Poetry  64,  pre-


54

POETS IN THEIR TWENTIES



sented   ten  English-speaking  poets,  almost  all  of  them  under   the  age  of  thirty, some  closer  to  twenty.   Delta,  in  a  special  issue dedicated to  "New   Vancouver Poetry", presented no one  but  youngsters,  one of them  a teenager in high school. Finally,  almost  all  the  many   new  literary   journals  in  Canada are  either  edited by  poets in  their  twenties,  or  notably  receptive  to their  work.
A  few  years  ago  Montreal and  Toronto were  the  only  cities where  any sense
of group movement could  be felt. But now new groups  of writers  and  new maga­ zines  are  appearing in  cities  all  over  the  country.  Another growing  youth  phe­ nomenon, the  spread of the  dimlit  coffee house,  has been  linked  in  the  popular imagination with  the  rising  activity  in poetry.  For  a short  while in  Montreal, and on  occasion  at  Toronto's  Bohemian Embassy,  this  has  been  true,  but  in  most cases  poetry  has  been  completely independent of  entertainment places.  In  Van­ couver,  for  instance, verse  has  been  read  from  time  to time  in the  various  folk­ song clubs,  but  it has  been  more entertainment  than  poetry,  and  usually  read  by painters  and   musicians  whose  interests   in  poetry  have  been largely  fashion­  able ones.
Montreal has  long  been  the  main  centre  of  Canadian writing,  the  home  of many   poets,  and   the  locale  of a  remarkably large  number of successful  novels. In  it  there  now  live some  of the  best of the younger  poets.
K.  V.  Hertz, once  actually referred  to by Louis Dudek  as a young  Rimbaud, is an astoundingly prolific lyric poet. He is still only twenty  years old, and  attends McGill   University. Last  year,  one  of  the  new  magazines, Mountain, published forty-four  of his poems in its second issue. Reading Hertz, one gets the impression that  he wakes up in the morning and  begins recording his emotions  and  thoughts, keeps doing  this  all day,  resting  finally to cut  his long  roll of paper  into  six-inch segments,   and   send   the  two  hundred  pieces  in  all  directions from   the  comer mailbox.
Naturally, Hertz   writes  many  poems  that  would  be  best  filed  away  with  old
report   cards.  But  somewhere in  the  mass  of  paper   there  are  always  surprising numbers of keenly  sensitive  and  caring  poems. Hertz  is marked   primarily by his response  to  the  attitude of beauty  projected  in  the simple  and  unprotective ges­ tures of men and  women,  boys and girls:

I wish I had my eyes unsealed to see it.
The  tom-tobacco-feathered owl lowering a ragged eyelid,
sees it.


55

POETS IN THEIR TWENTIES



Before his shaking pahns lower upon her fingered face
she sees.
Mountain  2, August 1962

I don't think  anyone  will get  the  impression  from  Hertz's poems  that  he knows a  great   deal.  But  he  wants  to  know,  and   he  writes  with  a  great  curiosity  and energetic  sympathy while he learns.  The  signs are  that  he will do a massive life­ time  of work,  and  in his middle  age he may  very  possibly be regarded as one of this  country's most  important poets.  In  the  meantime, it  is rumoured  that  the Nil Press  (Ottawa) will publish  his first collection, The  Cracked  Cellar.
Seymour   Mayne is also a student at  McGill, and  recently  editor  of The Page, a sheet  of poetry  published  by the McGill  bookstore,  and  of Cataract, a sporadic mimeomag for  a  group   of  young  Montreal poets.  Mayne, unlike  the  younger Hertz, writes  not  so much  of other  people  as of the sensation  of experiencing his own mind.  Sometimes he ponders  the questions asked by Oriental poets and sages, a  popular pursuit among  McGill  poets, but  more  often,  at  least  in his published work,  he engages  in a form  of controlled  surrealism. Nature becomes a vast arena of personified  space  animals, or a place for  the  powerful ego to cavort:

I dived from the moon's left tip-
plunged into the sun!

She exploded
when I caught her in my arms.

Now our hearts
zoom through empty space.


You can see us at noon. You can feel us tapping on your shoulder
 



then.

Amethyst, Summer  1963

In  many  ways,  Mayne  is characteristic of the  Montreal poets of his age group. In  the  first  place,  he produces  a large  quantity of very short  poems.  The  spirit seems  to  be  that  of a  poet  going  through a sensitive  period   (and  no one  would deny  Mayne and  his associates  their  sensitivity)  when  he should  write  down  as

POETS IN  THEIR TWENTIES



much  as he  can.  As a  result  the  poems  produced owe  much  more  to the  image than  they  do  to rhythmical interest,  or to the  qualities  and  possibilities of sound in  speech.  The  declarative prose line is the  most common. Statement supersedes music,  and  the  poems,  if they  have impact, owe it to the  vividness of the  image.
McGill  has,  as they  say, produced an  uncommon number of poets in the  past
decade, due largely  to the activities  of Louis Dudek  on campus and  the influence of Irving Layton  pervading the  city of Montreal. Another of these  McGill  poets is  Michael   Malus,  student of  medicine; in  I963  the  McGill  Poetry  Series  pub­ lished his first book, Night is a Flaming City.
Compared with  Hertz and  Mayne,  Malus  is a rather heavy-handed poet.  He seems to underestimate the  evocative  power  of ordinary English  words  well com­ posed,  and  tries  to make  striking  similes do  the  job. The  results strike  the ear  as rather old-fashioned poetry,  the  sort  of thing  that  used  to be exciting  because  it was  such  a  tonic  after   the  moribund New  Criticism-cum-Poetry of  the  thirties  and  forties.  In  fact  Malus's first  book  of  I963  sounds  very  much  like  Layton's first  book  of  I945·  Layton   would  be  the  first  to  say  that  even  Montreal has  changed a good  deal  in the last eighteen  years. Even the naughty thoughts Malus  has about  passing  girls are  reflections of those earlier  Layton  (and Dudek) leches of the First Statement Press days:

Squeezed between two bibles with priests attached
like mumbling  reading stands
I attack  my pocket book with celibate dignity
and yea, Lord
though  I tried to read the Word  became Flesh
on those legs across the aisle crossed in aphrodisiac Splendour long and intimating  Bliss and Grace

the smug custodian
with the key to her chastity belt
in the lapel of his chesterfield coat sits and gloats
the fat bastard

Layton  and  Dudek   were,  for  one  thing,  saying  it freshly  in  this country, for  an­
other  thing,  they  did  not  have  to spend  so long on the  metaphor.


57

POETS IN  THEIR TWENTIES




ToRONTO  IS  THE CITY   of  Canadian publishers,  and  over  the years it also has been the home of many poets. Probably  the most promising poet in  Toronto   at  the  moment  is Gwendolyn  MacEwen, who  is still in  her  early twenties. In  Ig6I  she published  a thin volume called The  Drunken  Clock,  and in  I963 she had two books published, The  Rising Fire by Contact  Press, and her allegorical  novel, Julian the Magician  by Corinth  Books (New  York).
In  her first published  poems, Miss MacEwen  sounded  a passion for headlong cataracts  of vowels and  consonants,  never  hesitating  to channel  them  into  any more  negotiable  stream.  If it  seemed  fun  to  say  "All  the  fine young  horses/ crumble  when the clocks leap"-she would go ahead  and say just that,  perhaps fearing  that  if she  tampered  with  her  muse-fostered  talent  the lights would  go out.  In  other  words  she  was  compiling  what  has  been  called  undergraduate lady poetry.
But  two years ago, possibly influenced  by the  poetry of her  husband,  Milton
Acorn, she began to join her formidable talent with sounds to an unshrinking examination  of basic human  hurts, and emerged with a highly authoritative kind of lyric unmatched  by any young woman in the country.  Beginning with entirely unsqueamish  though feminine fantasies of her own birth:

umbilical I lumbered
trailing long seed, unwombed
to the giant vagina, unarmed, no sprung Athene
-cry, cry in the sudden salt
of the big room, world,
-I uncurled plastic limbs of senses, freed the crashing course of menses,
-hurled ....
Canadian Forum, November Ig62.

She  then  reared  herself with  a tremendous  and  beautiful  energy against  all the blood-begotten  cares of the  human  animal.  The  emotional  sincerity in her later poems more than  makes up for the obvious physical manoeuvres.  Few poets now writing  employ such rubber  mallet  rhymes and  hurdy-gurdy  rhythms, and  none I know of have Miss MacEwen's  nerve and ability to get away with them.
Two  other  Ontario  cities have recently shown signs of poetic ferment:  Hamil­ ton  and  Ottawa. The  most  interesting  young  poet  in  Hamilton is  David  Mc­ Fadden, editor  of the erstwhile little little magazine,  Mountain, and in Ottawa

POETS IN  THEIR TWENTIES



the  most  interesting young  poet  is Harry Howith, who  edits  a  magazine called North for the federal government, and  who has started  a new publishing venture, the offset Bytown  Books, the first of which is Howith's Burglar Tools.
McFadden is a complete and  unabashedly good-natured romantic. His subject is almost invariably himself, whether he is exulting  over his superhuman powers of vision,  or in  the  Chinese  fashion   jocularly  demeaning himself in  just as extrava­ gant  terms.  Evidence recently  published  a gathering of his poems  under  the title, "Poems for  the  First  of March," which  is probably  what  they were and  are:


In this reahn I find self part
of inter-galactic  pinpoints
of light in symphonic darkness,

I refuse to be unconscious
of my own perfection

I will assume great roles
to distribute my material  wealth

I will sate all thirst for truth
with a glance.... No one hears me
I have betrayed
my impotence

Ant, move over.

Seed of tree you're crushing me

The round circumference  of my mind
-container of universe

Evidence, Summer 1963


The   romantic's telling  blow:  the  reader   is  convinced   against his  will  that  the abject  triumphs.
Harry Howith writes  in  the  same  open-spaces  manner, but  his unique person


59

POETS IN  THEffi TWENTIES



does not come through  as McFadden's does. This  may be simply a result of the fact  that  Howith  imitates  other  poets  (especially  Lawrence  Ferlinghetti)   in his early work. But it may also be because Howith  often strives for effect rather  than the reproduction of his own mind  and voice:

: take warning:
1
the grotesque burglar
sweat nights
to pry open fireproof people to dynamite you all
(each verse a hissing fuse)
so i can loot
your timelocked hearts of all negotiable lies
and go
on a promissory
note of hope


Probably  the most notable phenomenon  in Canadian poetry recently has been the emergence of the West Coast. This is not to say that  the West Coast has been without   poets  until  now -the  activities  of  Earle   Birney,  Roy  Daniells,  and Phyllis  Webb,  all of whom  published  books in  the  last  year, immediately  belie such a suggestion. But it seems that the sixties have been the years in which poetry has  become  something  between  a  fad  and  a  religion  in  Vancouver.  Poetry 64 lists five B.C.  poets among  its ten  English-language  representatives.  Delta's first special issue was devoted to Vancouver  poetry. Evidence  pays strong attention  to writing from the West Coast. Two articles about the new Vancouver  poetry scene have  already  been written, one by Frank  Davey in  the aforementioned issue of Delta,  and  one  by John  Newlove in  Leisure,  the  arts  supplement  to the  Van­ couver Sun, July 26, 1963.
The  best young poet in Vancouver,  and  possibly the best in Canada, is Lionel
Keams, whose "Stacked  Verse",  an  experiment  in  written  notation  for  poetry, has  been  reprinted  in  magazines  in  Canada, the  United   States,  and  Mexico, including  the  Vancouver  issue of Delta.
Unlike  most of the young  poets, Keams  is a student  of poetry,  in  the sense that  the artist should be a student  of his art.  He examines  the possibilities of his media,  and  their  relation  with what  he wants  to say. He seldom leaves a poem

6o

POETS IN  THEIR TWENTIES



alone  after  it  has  been  written, even  after  it  has  been  published. Some  of  his poems  have  been  published a number of times, in different written forms,  as he tries to break  through the  barrier that  separates the printed page from  the poetry, which  he says in one  note  on  poetry  "is a vocal art."
Kearns' poetry,  even  on  the  page,  is noticeably  vocal.  There is no  uncommon inversion,   no  unspeakable poetic  diction,  none  of the  shadowy limping iambic that   follows  even  some  of  the  best  Canadian poets.  Rather there  is a  concern with  immediacy-family, work,  travel,  people  in the street-and  the  problem
of getting  it all down  on paper  -in his own voice:





My eyes
 VISION

going now. No doubt
about it.

Kids
on tricycles
are blobs of color;

The mountains
a blurred approximation on the horizon.
But remember

George Shearing... blind;
no other piano like it
at all. Remember

Blind guitarist
on roaring
second-class-Mexico-City-bus,

Braced, ragged,
his boy
collecting centavos ...

POETS IN THEIR TWENTIES



The blind old beggar
singing purest
Malagueiia
Songs of Circumstance, 1963

While  Kearns is its  most  knowledgeable and   most  talented practitioner, the vocal  tradition of the  West  Coast  is not  his domain alone.  It is, in fact,  the per­ vasive  method   of  the  Vancouver poets,  and  especially  of  the  poetry  newsletter, Tish,  which  first appeared as a monthly  publication in September  1961.
The  first managing editor  of Tish,  Frank Davey,  virtually grew as a poet  with
the  journal, and  typified  its commitment to  the  poetry  of the  individual  voice. Writing in  the  introduction  to  Davey's   first  book,  D-Day  and  After,  Warren Tallman says  of  these  poems:   "Ideally they  should   be  read  aloud  and  ideally the  reader's voicing  should  be  an  attempt to  re-enact the  poet's  voicing.  The fact  that   there  is no  agreed-upon notation for  such  poetry  leaves  the  reader   to go it by ear.  Surprisingly often,  this works."
Many   reviewers  and  critics  have  objected to  what  they  hear  as a lack  of  co­ hesion  in  Davey's   poems,  but  I think  that   those  who  refer  to  "the  journalism style  in  Canadian  poetry"  are  not  listening  well  at  all,  allowing  themselves  to become  confused  by the strange  shapes  a Davey  poem  can  take on  the  page.  For one  thing,  listening  to Davey  will reveal that  a strong  trochaic beat runs  through his  work,  a  sound, incidentally, that  is more  characteristic of  excited  Canadian speech  than   any  iambic.  For  another thing,  the  characteristic  Davey  expression is greatly  influenced by Donne,  especially  in the  love poems, where  the  tone  can range  between   lightly  sardonic and  wittily  curious:

This cold night
of the three day wind D*** sits across the room among the others
as I ask for support for the Bear


She is in

black
 
well-worn

pedal-pushers which I haven't seen before

POETS IN THEIR TWENTIES




I talk wisely about the inadvisibility
of censorship
and stare at those
 




pedal-pushers

trying to avoid thinking of them or meeting her
(perhaps  apprehensive)

gaze
 
D-Day  and  After, 1962


It seems  that   there  are  hundreds of poets  in  Vancouver, and  dozens  leaving town  or  just  arriving on  every  highway.  Much  of the  messianic  intolerance that characterized the  original Tish movement  has diminished, and  along  with  it, the cohesiveness  of  the  group that  circulated around the  newsletter. There has been something of  a  cultural  exchange with  other  circles  of  poetry  in  the  city,  and even  acceptance of goodwill  missions from  other  points  in  the  country. Most  of these  meetings   have   resulted   because  of  the  apartment  and   poetic  energy   of James Reid,  one  of the  original Tish editors,  a  poet  who  is fiercely independent of any  claims  on  his poetic  affiliations,  and  who  for that  fact,  is beginning to be published   in  eastern   Canada and  the  United   States.  Unlike  most  of  the  Van­ couver   poets,  he  is  open  to  symbolism  and  language taken  from  wider  ranges  than  the  immediate speech  of the  Pacific Northwest.

Each  day,
like a wound in the mist, the sun in the east,
rising ...
rebirth  of the fire in which we burn.

The  beaches flame with it,
the fire and  the beauty of the browning body.

Alive in the sun,
each flashing of the gull, whiteness of sail,
touch of brown hand to breast, is solace and a cause
for laughter.
Delta, October  1962

POETS IN  THEIR TWENTIES



Reid  is also unlike  the rna jority of the Vancouver poets in  that  he can  unembar­
rassedly  declare  his knowledge  of beauty.
These,  then,  are  the most likely of the  newest  batch  of poets on the  Canadian scene. It will be interesting to read  this selection  ten or twenty  years from  now - interesting, and  perhaps embarrassing. These  people  may in two years be eclipsed by an even  newer  wave of young poets, many  of whom  are already  making them­ selves known  in the little magazines.
One   thing   does  seem  certain,   however.  If the  publishers can  keep  up  with the  poets   (and some  of  them  are  becoming unusually receptive)  the  next  ten years  will be, in  terms  of sheer  quantity at  least,  the  most  fruitful in  the  history
of Canadian poetry.





I. 	BOOKS
 A CHECK-LIST TO THE  CANADIAN POETS  IN  THEIR TWENTIES

BOWERING, GEORGE. Points On The  Grid. Contact  Press, Toronto, I964.
-.Sticks & Stones. Printed by Tishbooks and given away, Vancouver,  I963.
DAVEY,  FRANK. D-Day  and  After. Tishbooks, Vancouver, I962.
HOWITH, HARRY. Burglar Tools.  Bytown Books, Ottawa, I963.
KEARNS, LIONEL.  Songs  of Circumstance. Printed  at  the Tish  Press and given away,
Vancouver,  I963.
MACEWEN, GWENDOLYN. The Drunken Clock. Aleph Press, Toronto,  I961.
-.The Rising  Fire. Contact Press, Toronto,  I963.
MALUS, MICHAEL. Night  is a Flaming  City. McGill Poetry Series, Montreal,  I963.
NEWLOVE, JOHN. Grave Sirs. Robert Reid, Vancouver, I962.
John  Robert Colombo (ed.). Poetry 64. Ryerson Press, Toronto, I963.
Irving Layton  (ed.). Poems  for 27¢. Montreal,  I961.

II. 	PERIODICALS EDITED BY YOUNG  POETS
Amethyst. Gregory Cook, ed., Wolfeville, N.S., Quarterly. Cataract. Seymour Mayne, ed., Montreal,  Occasional. Evidence. Alan Bevan, ed., Toronto,  Quarterly. Mountain. David McFadden, ed., Hamilton,  Occasional.
Something Else. William Hawkins, ed., Ottawa,  Occasional.
The  Bloody  Horse. David Rosenfield, ed., Montreal, Occasional.
The Page. Seymour Mayne, ed., Montreal, Occasional.
Tish. David Dawson, ed., Vancouver, Monthly.

III. 	PERIODICALS THAT PUBLISH  THE YOUNG POETS
Delta. Louis Dudek, ed., Montreal, Quarterly.
Poet.  (Poet, no. 5;  special Canadian  Issue, edited  by John  Robert  Colombo, Sept.
I96I), Madras,  India,  Quarterly.
Prism. Jan de Bruyn, ed., Vancouver, Quarterly.
Teangadoir. Padraig 0 Broin, ed., Toronto,  Occasional.
The Canadian Forum.  Milton Wilson, poetry ed., Toronto, Monthly.
The Fiddlehead. Fred Cogswell, poetry ed., Fredericton, Quarterly.



reviev 	




THE LORD OF RED RIVER

S. E. Read



JOHN MORGAN GRAY, Lord  Selkirk of Red  River. Macmillan. $6.50.


OF  THE   MANY EXPERIMENTS m colonization that  of the Red River Settlement  at   the  opening of  the  nine­ teenth century is  perhaps the  most  dar­ ing,  as  well  as  the   most  tragic, in  the annals  of   the   Canadian   West.   It  has been  lightly  touched upon  by  a  host  of historians, and  dealt  with  in  depth by a few  others   (notably  Chester Martin and
J. P.  Pritchett); but  the  man  in  whose
mind  the    bold   venture  was   born­ Thomas Douglas, the  Fifth  Earl   of Sel­ kirk-has  long  remained a  misty,  "baf­ fling  figure  about  whom  Canadians tend still   to   have   strong  opinions  and   little information." To  shed  light   on  Selkirk as  a  person   and   to  study   the  complex  workings   of   his   ever-active  and   fertile mind  has been John  Gray's  self-appointed task-a  task  that   demanded five  years of meticulous  research and  patient writ­ ing-but  a  task  that   has  borne  golden fruit.   Lord   Selkirk    of  Red   River   is  a brilliantly   conceived   and   skilfully   han­ dled   biography  that   bears   evidence  on almost  every   page   of   the   unrelenting energy   with   which   Mr.   Gray   attacked the   available  evidence-the  thousands of  pages  constituting the  Selkirk  Papers,
 masses of correspondence between  mem­ bers   of   the   Selkirk   family,   and   some mountains   of   documents   and   archive  materials  relating   to   the   North    West Company,  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company, the  courts   and   the  governments of  the period.
Born  in  I 7 7 I, the  last  of  seven  sons,
the  young  Thomas Douglas seemed  des­ tined  to play small  parts  in the drama of life.  By  I797, however,  his  brothers   had all  gone  to  their   graves,  and  two  years later,    at   the    age   of    twenty-eight,  he succeeded   his  father   as  the   Fifth   Earl  of  Selkirk.  But  he  already had  seen  the vision  that  was  to  dominate his  remain­ ing  years-the  dream   of a  better  world for  his  humbler  fellow-countrymen  who faced  nothing  but  poverty,  loss of lands, and  loss of  human dignity  in  the  declin­  ing  economy  of  Scotland.  For   him  the solution  to their  problems lay in carefully planned   emigration to the vast untouched areas  of the New  World  where  the possi­ bilities  of  independent  action   were  un­ limited,    and    where    success   could    be gained  by honest  and  courageous labour.  Now  with  great  wealth  at  his command, he started  to  turn dream into  reality.

REVIEW ARTICLES



With a sure feeling for the dramatic moment, Mr. Gray subtly shapes his biography around  Selkirk's  shifting  for­ tunes,  gradually preparing the reader for the   dark   closing   pages.   Selkirk-here at  least -wears the mantle of the classic hero.  He  is a noble  idealist,  a  builder  of great  schemes  and  quite  capable of dar­  ing  deeds   and   heroic  action;  but  he  is often    aloof,   at   times   given   to   faulty judgment, and  occasionally   unaware of the   realities   that   faced   him,  or  of  the evil  in  those  around  him.
His  first  venture in colonization, when
h€1    shepherded  his   emigrants  to   rich lands  on Prince  Edward Island,  met with success;  but  in  his  second  venture at Baldoon   in   Upper  Canada  he   tasted the   bitterness of  partial failure.   Yet  he was  undismayed  and  quickly  turned  to his most grandiose and  most fatal  scheme
-the opening of  Assiniboia  to  agricul­ tural   settlement.  Hitherto  this  area  had been   the   home   of  the  Indian  and   the trading  ground  of   the   trapper,  but  through  his  acquisition  of   stock  in  the Hudson's  Bay   Company   and   with   the aid   of  other   shareholders   (notably   his brother-in-law,  Andrew  Colvile),  Selkirk was granted title  to this vast dominion­ I I 6,ooo  square miles  in  all-stretching westward from  the  "shores of Lake Wini­  pie,  otherwise  Winnipeg", southward  to the   watershed,  and   including what   was to become  an historical  focal point-the junction of  the Red  River and the Assini­ boine.   It  was  to  this  point  that   Selkirk directed   his  first  little  courageous  band in   I 8I I ;  and   it   was  at   this   point,   in I8I2,   that   Miles   Macdonell,  the   first Governor of Assiniboia,  built Fort Doug­ las,  so  named   in  honour   of  his  patron. By   accident  or   by  plan,   the   Fort   lay directly  across   the   trade   route  of   the

66
 powerful North West Company. Its posi­ tioning   invited   disaster   for   the  colony, and  eventually spelt  tragedy  for the  Earl.
With    little   prelude  the   conflict   be­ tween  settlers  and  traders broke  into  the open   and   for   the   next   five  years   the bitter  struggle  was  carried on.  At  first  it took  the  shape   of  threats;  then  threats turned into  destructive raids  that  ruined young  crops,  killed  rare  cattle,  and des­ troyed  newly-built  cabins.   For    the  Nor'Westers  looked  on  agriculture as  a menace  to  their   own  wealth, and   were resolved  to  destroy  the  Selkirk  kingdom.  But   they   did   not   know  the   Earl.   By the  early  winter  of  I8IS-I6, he,  with  his lovely,  vivacious,  and  extraordinarily  courageous wife   Jean,  had   arrived    in Montreal, and  by  early  spring  he was on his  way  west,  at   the   head   of  his  own little   army,  quickly   recruited  from   dis­ charged veterans of the de Meuron Regi­ ment.  Sure   of  the   justice  of  his  cause, he  quickly seized Fort William, arrested McGillivray,  one   of   the   giants   of  the North West  Company, then dashed through the  bitterness of a prairie winter to retake  Fort  Douglas, lost to his settlers following   the   tragic   massacre   of  Seven Oaks.
Quickly    he   restored    the   settlement,
granted  lands   to  the  de  Meurons  who had   served   him   well,  planned  to  bring in missionaries -as well as fresh cattle; then,   pleased   with   his  great   adventure, turned back  east  to  his  own  defeat.   He had already laid numerous charges against  the men  of the North West Com­ pany,  and  he  himself  had   been  charged with   "various acts  of  injustice  and   op­ pression."  He   knew   that   the   litigation would  be long;  and  he felt, perhaps, that  his own  case  would  be  heard in a hostile court.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Eventually  he  was  tried   in  York  and on  some  charges   was  found  guilty  and fined,    but    by   the    time    the    verdicts reached  him   he  was  really  past  caring. For  on  his  return to  Montreal, after  an unbelievably arduous  journey   down   the Mississippi   and    across   the    States,   his health  had  suddenly   broken,  and  he had returned  to  Eng;land,  then   gone  to  Pau in   the   Pyrenees   quietly    to   watch   ap­ proaching death.  He   died   on   April   8,
1820,  still  firm  in  the  belief  that  "truth
and   justice  will  prevail at  last."
 And  perhaps this  belief  has  now  been fully  realized,   for   John  Gray's   portrait of Selkirk  is full  and  well rounded, and, though  written with  cool objectivity and scholarly   devotion  to  detail,   done   with deep sympathy and warm understanding. Without  question, it  will  long  stand   as a  monument to  this extraordinary dreamer and  man  of action  who went  to his grave  in  apparent defeat   but  who in reality  "had  founded a  city  and  staked out   a   province,   the   hinge    on   which Canada would  one  day  swing  open."





LEACOCK UNIMPROVED
 


R. E. Watters


Leacock's  Montreal, edited  by John  Culliton.  McClelland & Stewart. $6.50.


IN   1942  AN    AMERICAN    PUB­ LISHER   issued   Montreal:  Seaport   and City,  by Stephen Leacock. Six years later the    same  book    appeared   bearing   a Canadian  imprint. With  some deletions and   additions  by  John   Culliton  it  has now  been  republished  under  the  modi­  fied-and  essentially  misleading-title of Leacock's Montreal.
Professor  Culliton made  his changes  in order   to bring  the  factual content up  to the  1g6os.  For   his  edition,  the  original title  would  have   been  more   precise  be­ cause,  to give only one  obvious example, the    recently    constructed    Place    Ville­ Marie clearly  had  no place whatsoever in "Leacock's Montreal."
Apart   from  Professor  Culliton's  intro­ ductory  biographical sketch  of  Leacock, the  first  two-thirds of  the  book,  covering the  history  of  the  city  from  the  days  of Jacques Cartier to  the  beginning  of  the
 present   century, seem  to  have   been  re­ produced   exactly,    apparently  from   the same  type.  This  is authentic  Leacock­ the  lively personal style, the opinionated forthrightness, the  eye  for  the colourful and   telling   incident,  the   sceptical   em­ ployment  of  statistics.  The  final  third  of the   book   is  still   mostly   Leacock,    but some   sentences   and    paragraphs   have  been  dropped  in  order   to  accommodate the  new material. Although the  fact  of a deletion  is occasionally  not indicated, the additions  are   all  scrupulously identified by  the   use   of  a   symbol.   The   reasons underlying  the  deletions   are  not  always apparent:  for   instance,  it   would   have been  simple   to  bring   up   to  date   both of the  appendices in the  original  book - one  giving   the   changing  population  of Montreal during 300 years,  beginning in
1642  (the  same  amount of space  is used
to give McGill's registration statistics  for

REVIEW ARTICLES



I 963-64!), the  other providing  a capsule
"chronological history"  of the  city.
With   one   exception  the   illustrations are   the  same,   although  in  the  original book the illustrations were arranged to match  the appropriate part  of the text, whereas  they  are  now  bunched together in   the   middle  of   the   book.   (Economy has  defeated logc
is  the  substitution  of  an  aerial   view  of
Montreal   today     (showing    the    Place Ville-Marie)  for   the  "Montreal  today" of Leacock's city  twenty  years earlier.
The  Index poses  some  curious  ques­ tions.  Obviously  it  has  been  worked over to  suit   the   changes   in   page-numbering of  this  new  edition  and  to  delete  refer­ ences  to  material  dropped  by  Professor Culliton. But  the  Index  seems  to  ignore completely all   the  added  up-to-date material!  This   effectively   negates    the
 whole  purpose of  the  revision.  A  tourist shopper  searching  the   Index  for  infor­ mation  about  the   twentieth-century Ville-Marie will  find  only  references  to the seventeenth-century  mission. The  In­ dex also ignores  additions which  mention such  names  as Maurice Richard,  Newton Bosworth,    Pierre   Chauvreau,  President Eisenhower,  Prince  Philip,   and   Queen Elizabeth. The  only  Index  reference   to "Britannia  (vessel)" in  both  editions  is to its mention in  a list of ships  launched in  the  183os;  yet  Professor  Culliton has added  (pp.   264-5)   a  full  paragraph  on the  trip  made by the  Queen   and  Prince Philip   up   the  Seaway   in   1959  in  "the Royal  Yacht   Brittania"  [sic] during the historic   opening of  the  new  waterway.
Before  the  decision  was made  to revise so personal a book as Leacock's, some thought   should    have    been    given    to







IVIL

BY  DOUGLAS A.  SCHMEISER


This book   contains the  first  extensive  analysis of  basic   human rights in  Canada. Religious freedom, educational rights and   the freedom  of   communication  are   discussed from  historical and constitutional points of view,  with  special reference to specific problems;  Lord's  Day   legislation, separate  schools, racial   dis­ crimination,  obscenity, etc.




OXFORD




68

REVIEW ARTICLES



exactly what kind  of revlSlon  was most essential. The  original book,   despite all its  charm and  vigour, was  seriously deficient  in   at   least   two   ways:  it   pro­ vided   only  a  narrowly  English-Canadian view    of    the    modern,   predominantly French-speaking city,  and it provided a wholly  inadequate  description of  the general cultural and intellectual life of Montreal (apart from McGill). In this revision, not  only  was  nothing done to rectify either  of   these deficiencies, but, indeed, Leacock's faults have been compounded.
In both  editions each chapter is  intro­
duced  by  a descriptive list  of  the  major topics    discussed. The   list   for   Chapter XIV in  both  editions concludes with  the phrase "Music, Arts,  and  Letters on  [sic] Montreal." In  the   original edition  Lea­ cock  had  devoted something less than two perfunctory pages to the  subjects so heralded. Professor Culliton  has  retained the  phrase  but  has  quietly  scrapped all mention of   the  subjects.  Leacock had   asserted that   although  Montreal is "a 'bad' theater  town ... it  is ... a  'good' musical one";  that a  "certain  distinctive Canadian  art, a  Canadian, way  of  paint­ ing,"  did   exist;  but   that  "there is  no distinctive  Canadian literature" and   no "Montreal  school of  English literature". The only  men   of  letters Leacock names are    Sir   Andrew   Macphail   and    John McCrae,  the  onJy  painter  Maurice Cul­ len;   no    French-Canadian   names  are
 mentioned.
Whatever one  may  think of  Leacock's discussion  of   the   cultural  activities in his  Montreal, surely  there is no  excusing the   entire  deletion of   the   little  he  did say,  unless   the   space   saved   were to  be used  to rectify his slighting of the French­ Canadian  contribution or   to  sketch  the  new    developments  of   the   past    twenty years.   Professor Culliton  makes no  allu­ sion   to  the  effect   on  the  culture of  his Montreal of  what  Hugh MacLennan has  called the  "international  veneer" -the contribution   made  to    the    spirit  and amenities of  the  city  by  the  non-French and  non-British immigration of  the   war and   post-war  periods. Is  it  really more important to  bring up  to  date the  num ber  of  grain elevators on  the  waterfront, or  the   number of  new  buses  on   the  in­ creased mileage of   paved streets   (as Professor Culliton does)   than to  inform readers that  Montreal is  the  home of  a number  of   lively   poets,   novelists, play­ wrights,  and   actors-in   both   of   Can­ ada's   languages-and  of   musicians, painters, and  even  chefs   of  not   incon­ siderable distinction  (as   he  does  not) ? Do  visitors  or  residents  become fond   or proud of a city  because of  its commercial statistics or   because  of   its  cultural  way of  life?
If you  own   a  copy  of  Montreal: Sea­
port  and  City, hang on   to  it.  In a  few years  it  will  seem  far  less outdated than this  shinyI g63 model.











6g







THE ELECTIONS
GAME

PETER  C.   NEWMAN,   Renegade in  Power:   The
Diefenbaker  Years. McClelland   &  Stewart.

THERE IS NO  LITERARY TRADITION in Canadian  journalism. Apart from  what is written  in  the  newspapers, the  literary output  of  the   professional   journalist in this  country has  been  either  non-existent or  limited   to  reprints of  old  columns­ which  seldom  improve with  age  or hard  covers.   It is  true   that  there  have   been some  exceptions to  this  rule.  Bruce  Hut­ chison   is  one   such   who   has   made   it between   hard   covers  several   times,  but more  often  than  not  his original  creations have  served  only  to  explain   this  lack  of literary endeavour.
Peter   Newman  is  a  member  of  the
Ottawa press gallery and National Affairs editor    of  Maclean's   magazine, so  he qualifies  as  a  journalist, but  his  smooth presentation of  the  dying  months of the Diefenbaker  regime places him   well above   the   common  herd   that   fill  our press  and  periodicals with  the  trite  and the   banal.   Mr.   Newman    has   not   dis­ covered  anything new  or startling  about  John  Diefenbaker or   the   men   around him.  What he  has  done  is  put  together  all the available information -and some not  widely  available  before-about this remarkable  episode  in  our   political   his­ tory. As a result the rise, decline  and  fall
 of the  Diefenbaker image and the Diefen­ baker  government can  be seen  with  fas­ cinating clarity.
It would   be  easy  for  a  writer   to  be
vindictive  in  such   a  study; or  perhaps easier  for  him  to  crusade. Mr.  Newman does   neither;  he   is  fair   and   objective. Indeed  he   admits  to  having  been  one of  the  many   thousands who  were,  as  it now  turns   out,   seduced   by  the  Diefen­ baker  campaigns of  I957  and  I958.  And Mr.   Newman's  description   and   discus­ sion of the  two campaigns recreates those events   anew   and   serves  as  a  reminder of  how  many   were  swept  along   by  the Diefenbaker  charisma  and   why.  Subse­ quent   pages  serve equally well, de­ monstrating the  almost  criminal paucity of   leadership  which   the   Prime   Minis­ ter   demonstrated  once  he  achieved  the office  he  had   sought   with  such   single­ mindedness.
Few   politicians  have   been   accorded the   support  received    by  John   Diefen­ baker  in  the   I 958  election.   He  had  the  largest   parliamentary  majority  and   the largest  popular vote in Canadian history. Yet  as early  as 1960 it had  become clear that   he  had   been  oversold.  And  it  is to the   discredit  of   his   colleagues   in   the cabinet  and   the  House  of  Commons -

BOOKS IN REVIEW



many since flown to political fields and pastures new-that the obvious  inability of  their   leader   to  conduct  the   business of   government  was   overlooked  for   as long as it was felt that  his vote-getting capability  was  sufficient   to   keep   them in  office.  The   last  days  of  the  ministry are  carefully recounted  and   the  picture is  one  of  cowardice, ineptitude  and  ill­ concealed opportunism.
R. H. S. Crossman wrote  recently  that
studies  of this  kind  cannot be considered history   since   they   shape   and   influence events  as much  as they record  them. Renegade in Power presents an almost unanswerable case  for  changing the leadership   of   the   Conservative  party. John  Dienfenbaker's  administrative   ig­ norance, his incredible smallness  of  spirit which   makes  it  possible  for  him  to  dis-
 play   a  meanness   that   chills   the   bone, and,   what   is  most   damning of  all,  his total  disregard   for  the  truth which  en­ ables  him  to  twist  and  distort facts  and misquote  allies and colleagues, all demon­  strate his utter   inadequacy for  the  posi­ tion  he now holds  and  for that for which he  still, apparently, strives.
Peter   Newman  has  done   what   more
journalists  ought to  do  and  while  it  is a pity  that  Mr.  Diefenbaker emerges  as a man  who  has  played  the  elections  game for so long and  so assiduously  that  it is literally   the  only  game   he  knows,  it  is because  Mr.  Newman  presents   his facts and  analysis  clearly  and  dispassionately. This  book will stand  for  some  time  as a model  of  popular  political   biography.
WALTER D. YOUNG









Illustration  by  Peggy   Steele from   Nunny  Bag  2
 We invite Canadian Authors
to  submit  poems,   short   stories,  and    plays   for children,  to   appear  in   the   fourth  annual   an­ thologies   of  Nunny  Bag   (seven-  to   nine-year­ olds)    and    Rubaboo (ten-to   twelve-year-olds).
The work  of  forty-three Canadian  Authors  has been   accepted  for  two  anthologies  to   be   pub­ lished   in   June  1964.   Award  winners   will   be announced in  the  Spring.

Purchase price  for  press  $150.00
Award  of  merit $300.00

For  brochure write:
W.  J.  GAGE  LIMITED Writing For  Young  Canada
1500 BIRCHMOUNT ROAD SCARBOROUGH, ONTARIO

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE UNPOLITICAL
j
POLITICIAN

ROGER   GRAHAM,    Arthur    Meighen.  II.   And
Fortune  Fled.  Clark,  Irwin.  $8.oo.

ARTHUR MEIGHEN  was  the  most  skilful Parliamentarian ever to become Prime Minister of Canada. But he was also one of   the   least   skilful   politicians   ever   to lead  a Canadian Government or to com­ mand an  Opposition party.  And  therein  lies  the   tragedy   of  Meighen's   political  career. He  was  decidely  not  a   political animal: he was cold  and  reserved, Puri­  tanical  and   inflexible.   Commenting  on criticism   of  his  rigid  tariff  policy  in  the Canadian   West,   Meighen    wrote    that "another  stand  would  be  more   popular in   the   West   but   a  great   party   cannot shuffle and  a  leader  worthy  of the  name never   shuffles."   It may  have  been  well not   to  "shuffle"   in  the  House  of  Com­  mons during a Budget  debate, but  would it   really  have   been   "shuffling"   for   the leader  of  a  national party  to attempt to come  to  terms  with  the  demands of one of  the  most  important  and   largest  seg­ ments   of  the   Canadian  economy?  Did the  Conservative party  expect  its  leader  to  score  brilliant   debating points  in  the House    of   Commons  or   to   rebuild   its shattered   remnants  into   the    great national party   that   it  once   had   been? Meighen  understood the  House of Com­  mons;  he failed  to understand the  people who   elected   its   members.   As  Professor Graham  writes,  "There was an  order,  a rationality    about   the   business   of   the Commons   which   was  absent   from   the business   of   leading   a  national  political party."
As a member  of Borden's  Government,

72
 Meighen had been party  to much of the change  that   World   War   I  brought to Canada. Yet  when  it was over  he sought to  turn   back  the  clock  and  found  com­ fort   in  the  symbols  of  simplicity  of  an earlier age. "We  have  been  living for the last  six  years  in  a  highly  abnormal and artificial  age,"   he   told  an   audience  in Truro in  Igzo,  "and  the  sooner  we  get to normal conditions  the  better  it will be for  all  of  us."  However, Professor  Gra­  ham  points out  that  "there was a danger  in  equating,  or  seeming  to,  the  old  and familiar  with   the   'normal'  and   desir­ able." The use of Conservative campaign ideas   from   the   elections   of   I 89 I and  I 9 I I  in  the  elections  of  I 92 I  and   I 925 is  a  case  in  point.
Surely Meighen's most  perplexing problem   was  his  inability   to  pin  down his    ever-shuffling    arch    rival,    William Lyon  Mackenzie King.  He  found  King's preference for  "mistier issues", his "shapeless verbosity,  incessant  moralizing and    calculated   obscurities"   "an   out­ rageous   debasement of  politics."  He re­ garded  King -and   his   biographer  ob­ viously  agrees -as  "the  most  despicable  charlatan  ever  to  darken  the  annals   of Canadian  politics."  That what  Meighen regarded  as  King's  shuffling  could   also be  read  as  King's greater (if  indecisive) understanding of  the  problems of   post­ World    War   I  Canada never  seems  to have   occurred  to  Meighen.
This  is the second  of an expected three
volumes   by  Professor  Graham on  Meig­ hen.  It is  neither as  tightly  nor  as  well written as  the  first  volume  and  there  is disappointedly little  to be said in  defence  of :Meighen  in  the  "constitutional  crisis" that    has   not   been   said   before   by  Dr.  Forsey.  It  is,  nevertheless, a  good  book. The issues confronting Meighen  between

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I92 I   and   I927  were  extremely  complex and   complicated and   Professor  Graham has  handled them  with  the  skill befitting an  accomplished biographer.
ROBERT CRAIG BROWN

UN CONTEUR VIGOUREUX

ADRIEN  THERIO,    M es   Beaux  M eurtres.   Le
Cercle du  livre  de  France.

AnRIEN THERIO compte  parmi  Jes  ecri­ vains    les   plus   prolifiques du   Canada franc;ais.   II  a   publie   depuis   1960  cinq ouvrages: La Soif et le Mirage  (roman), Flamberge  au Vent (roman), Mes  Beaux Meurtres (nouvelles), une  version  revue et  corrigee   de   Les  Breves   Annees    (ro­  man)   ainsi   que    Ia    traduction   de   A Yankee  In    Canada   de   Henry    David Thoreau. Cette  activite  plutot febrile  ne l'a  pas  ernpeche  de  mettre sur  pied  une revue  annuelle qui s'est  donne pour  mis­ sion   d'analyser   et   d'inventorier  Ia  pro­ duction litteraire au  Canada d'expression franc;aise.
Des  livres  que   nous  avons  enumeres, Mes Beaux Meurtres est assurement le meilleur.  II  s'agit, comme   nous  l'avons ecrit  plus haut, d'un receuil  de nouvelles, de  cinq  intrigues distinctes, unies  cepen­ dant  par  le theme de  l'assassinat.
"Le   Chat  Sauvage" est  le  plus  long
recit  et  aussi  le mieux  reussi.  L'auteur y raconte Ia  tyrannie d'un  pere   brutal   et
Ia  vevolte  qui  peu  a peu  s'installe dans
le coeur  de son fils, adolescent. Le traite­
ment   de   ce  theme  est  vigoureux,  con­
vaincant. Redige  a  Ia   premiere   per­
sonne,  le recit  nous  parvient de  Ia plume
meme    du   fils.   Sous   cet   eclairage,   le drame s'oriente rapidement vers  ce  qui doit  etre  !'essence  du sujet,  l'antagonisme
 pere-fils. L'auteur ne sacrifie  jamais a l'accessoire:   rien   ne  vient   nous  divertir de Ia peinture de  cette haine qui aboutira
a un  meurtre.
"Carnet de  Prison" raconte l'aventure
saugrenue d'un  vieillard   que  !'exaspera­
tion pousse .a se debarrasser de sa femme. Le ton y est vif, pittoresque et Ia nouvelle
a  Ia  brievete   qu'il   faut. "Une  Porte  a
ouvrir" est bizarre,  un  peu  a Ia fac;on de
Ambrose  Bierce. Le personnage principal est  un  medecin  qui  confie  a un  ami  son desir  d'accomplir  un   crime   gratuit.  Le
soir  meme,  sa  femme   meurt   assassinee. Evidemment !'ami  le denonce. Le  mede­ cin  tente  de se disculper, mais  les  temoi­ gnages  sont trop accablants. II aba,ndonne la  partie.  Avee un  peu  plus de concision, cette  nouvelle  se  comparerait aux  meil­ Ieurs  histoires  du  genre.   "La Joie  dans
le  Bocal"  aurait  pu,   a  notre   avis,  etre
ecartee du recueil.  Quant au  "Professeur d'Allemand", on y trouve  quelques bons moments,   mais  !'ensemble manque de nettete, de  precision.
Ce  livre  nous   permet  de  mieux  con­
naitre   un  conteur vigoureux, imaginatif, plein  de  ressources.  A certains moments, on souhaiterait plus  de discipline,  de rigueur. Mais,  tout compte fait, ce receuil est excellent  et  rempli de  promesses.
GILLES ARCHAMBAULT

ACADEMIC DILEMMAS
EDWARD  MG  COURT,  Fasting   Friar.  McClelland and  Stewart. $4.50.

"TODAY THE ENGLISH   NOVEL is a  trivial thing."   In  accepting H.  G.  Wells'  dic­ tum,  that   the   novel   be  "the  parade of morals  and  the exchange of  manners, the factory  of customs,  the  criticism  of laws and   institutions  and   of   social   dogmas  and   ideas,"   the  novelist   has  denied   his

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW








Testament
of
My Chtldhood

ROBERT de  ROQUEBRUNE

Translated  from the  French  by
FELIX WALTER



A colourful description of life in a   Quebec  manor-house at   the turn  of the century,  with absorb­ ing  accounts of the early  history of  Canada  skilfully  woven  into the  texture of the author's remi­ niscences  about his own growing  up.   This   is   the  first  time   this classic   of   French  Canada  has been  translated  into English. Cloth $4.95, paper  $r ·95·



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS









74
 "first   business" -"the   imaginative   re­ creation of life". In concentrating on "the problems   of  life  rather than   life  itself",  the  contemporary novelist  fails  as  artist  because  he  is "primarily  concerned with the   illumination  of  the  social   problem  through carefully selected  types who may or may  oot  have  much  to do with  human beings".  If Professor  McCourt's opinions (expressed    in   The   Canadian   West   in Fiction,    and    questionable   on    several counts) are  accepted in  order  to  under­ stand   his  view  of  the  novelist's  art,  then his  new  novel,  Fasting Friar, stands  con­ demned   out   of   his  own   mouth  as  "a trivial  thing".
Fasting   Friar-or 	The  Academic's
Dilemma-is  concerned with  a "matter of  principle". The "problem" it  presents has obvious  social, political, moral  and religious  implications. Has  the Board  of Governors of  what   the  dust-jacket  calls "one   of   the   less  fashionable Canadian Universities" any  right to  dismiss a member of the English department for writing an obscene novel? Has the only "distinguished" scholar  in  the  University any  obligation (after teaching the  Areo­ pagitica for  twenty-five  years)   to  defend  his  colleague's  right   to  publish  such   a book,   even   though  he  knows   that   the book  is  badly  written,  publicity-seeking, and    its   author  of    doubtful   academic integrity? These issues are carefully com­  plicated. The  Chairman  of  the  Board,  whose   business   acumen  has   put    "the university on  its  feet", is a  big wheel  in the   life   of   local   finance,   politics   and church. The scholar  made,  he  confesses, for   "the  cloistered life"  is  a  frustrated friar   who  celebrates in  his  office  "sanc­ tuary" the  rituals  of research  and  period­ ical    exercises,    attends   learned    society meetings   as  "an   act   of   penance",  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



finds   his  "heart  in   hiding"  stirred   by the   wife  of  the   author  of  the  obscene book.
The novel's  action   is  conducted  by a
collection  of faculty cliches,  "carefully selected  types  who  may  or  may  not have to do with human beings": Dalrymple, History,  "always talks in quotations"; Maharg, Sociology, foreign,  rebellious, rumoured to  be  a  Communist; "old" Garroway, Classics,  faded   and   wizened, "a  twittering bore"; Garbutt, Phys. Ed., booming,  braying, sweating, "a  man  born to put  his hug,e feet into whatever he approached"; Ha,mpton, Extension, bi­ goted  and  "foursquare", giving  "inspira­ tional  talks", lecturing on his own "Pales­  tinian   Pilgrimage",  a   relation   ( natur­ ally)  of the  bogeyman, Hickman, Chair­ man  of  the  Board;  Hickman  (the  name is enough)  has  "a  workman's hands  ... he  had  come  up  the hard  way, from  the wrong  side of the tracks". Presented with satirical   intent,   such   caricatures  might  move   meaningfully,  free   from   the  exi­ gencies  of  realism  which  must  be met  in the  kind   of  novel   McCourt  clearly  in­ tends   to  write.   Fasting   Friar,  a  moral  exemplum, asks to be taken seriously and "straight"; but  we  cannot  do  either   be­ cause  we cannot take seriously  any of the over-simplified  characters who define  the issues. In  their  hands,   the  issues become so absurdly  over-simplified  that  they  are not  worth  bothering about.
McCourt's brand of realism, compara­
able  with   that   of  the  "well-made" and
"thesis"  plays   written  in   France  from
18so-8o, is suffocating in  its rigidity.  His style is functional; it serves to tell a story. The sentences,  like the characters, do not recommend   themselves    on    their    own merit    or   vitality;   they   are    merely   a means  to  the  end  in  view-the  resolu-
 tion  of  the  problem   which   the  novelist sets  up  and   supposedly   sets  out   to  ex­ plore.
JOHN F. HULCOOP


DEFINING
A PROBLEM

Dear Enemies, Gwethalyn Graham and Solange Chaput  Rolland. Macmillan. $ 1.75 paper, $4.00 cloth.

BY Now most  Canadians are  aware  that French-Canadian  discontent  with  Con­ federation  poses   a   genuine   threat   to Canada's survival.  But  the  precise causes of    this    discontent,  and    the    possible remedies,    have    been   less   clear.    Dear Enemies     (which    is   also   published   in French  by  Les  Editions  du  Jour, Mon­ treal)    attempts  to   define   these   issues, largely  as  they  bear  on  individuals, and to make some tentative suggestions  about  solutions.
In  form,  the  book  is simplicity  itself: an  exchange of  letters  between   two women,  both  journalists, who  are  deeply concerned   about    the    future  of   their nation.  The   letters   do  not  answer  each other; each  writer  raises  many  questions which  the other treats  slightly, if at all. Naturally,  Mme.   Rolland's  letters   tend to  be  aggressive,  discontented  and  rest­ less;  Miss  Graham  more  often  explains English-Canadian   views    and    assump­ tions,   points   out   inconsistencies   in   the French  positions,  or  indicates difficulties too   often   overlooked,  which    frustrate English-Canadian initiatives toward  a better   understanding of  French Canada. Even   in  translation, the  differences  be­ tween   the   two  authors'  languages   and temperaments  are   clear   and   engaging:

75

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



Miss   Graham  has   a   soberly   English­ Canadian  reasonableness,  and  Mme. Rolland an   exuberantly   Gallic   turn   of phrase.    ("Zut!"   she   explodes,   for   in­  stance.)
English  Canadians may find Dear Enemies particularly interesting as Gwethalyn Graham's first  book  in  nine­ teen   years.   Both   her   highly   successful novels,  Swiss  Sonata   ( 1938)   and  Earth  and  High  Heaven   ( 1944)  won Governor­ General's  Awards,   but   both   have   suf­ fered   for   the   same   reason   that    Dear Enemies will more  justifiably suffer; topi­ cality,    which    is   both    Miss   Graham's blessing and  her  curse. Her  unerring eye for  the  timely  conflict assures her  a wide audience and considerable immediate ac­ claim,   but  exacts   as  its  cost  the   union of  her  work  to  the  particular  situations from   which   the  work  arose.  Earth   and High Heaven, for example,  has been seen as  merely  a novel about  wartime anti­ Semitism;  and   though   it   was   a   best­ seller  in I 944, it  is little  read  today.
Dear  Enemies will be  more  justifiably
forgotten;  frankly   topical   and   journal­ istic,   it   has   no   pretensions   to   artistic  merit;  it   was  conceived   as   having   an immediate social  purpose  in dealing  with an  immediate  social  problem. The  prob­ lem,   and   the   book,  are   extremely   im­ portant  now,  but   they  will  be  of  only slight   interest  after   Canada has  moved beyond   the   current  French-English es­ trangement-as  both  authors hope  and believe  it  will.
Less can  be said  about  Mme.  Rolland than  about  Miss Graham. One  bit of Canadiana discussed  by Dear  Enemies  is each   ethnic  group's  ignorance  of   the other's cultural life. It is therefore both ironic  and  appropriate that  for  most readers    of   the   English   edition,  Mme.
 Rolland   will   be   a   new   acquaintance, though  she  has  had   a  successful  career in  Quebec as critic,  journalist and broadcaster.
The  authors' suggestions about new approaches to  a  solution  of  the  problem are   useful,  if  predictable:  more   money for translations, and  for the C.B.C.; a programme to  encourage French  Cana­ dians  to   teach  French  in   English­ Canadian schools;  more person-to-person contact  between  the  two groups; revision of Quebec's system of  education; divorce  reform  (an English-Canadian grievance) and  so  on.
Dear  Enemies  is,  in  short,  an  intelli­ gent  discussion  of a social, economic  and political   problem, and  it  should  help  its readers  to  clarify   the  current issues  for themselves.   The  book  makes  no  attempt to  be  comprehensive;  it  simply  records  the   views  of  two   writers   who  may   or may  not   be  representative. They   try  to be;  and  they are  provocative. For  a book of  this  kind,  that   is  success.
D. A. CAMERON







CLASS IN CANADIAN
LITERATURE

Dear   Editor,
Director  Professor Robert  L.  Mc­ Dougall has  been  handing out  large and  erroneous statements  about  my  life  and  writings in   last  Autumn's  Canadian Literature.  These   appear  in   an   article  of  his,  coyly  called  "The dodo  and   the cruising  auk",  advising   young  Canadian writers to stay away from  our  universities and   so  escape   the  contamination  of  us older  hacks.
We  are  a  bad  influence, it  seems.  We
all  have  some grisly  disease  whose symp­ toms  are  "an   abnormal  absence  of  feel­ ing for class"; we write "negative" litera­ ture; we live in "closed, circumspect and intellectually    sophisticated  ranks";   we don't    "debate   the    credentials  of   the social  plan" (there is a  plan?), we don't  create  any  "social  turbulence".
Why  are  we like  this?  Because  we are at  the  universities,  or have  been  to them. Most   of   us,   he   says,  have   spent   our "entire   lives ... in    academic   circles"; even   our   "environments  of  childhood" have   been   "genteel",  above   all,   "aca­ demic". Writers, it  seems, shouldn't ever start    to   school   but   adopt   Whitman's advice   and   "go  freely  with  uneducated men".  With some  other  essayist one  might  suspect humour, but  that  pompous  repetitive   super-academic  prose   is  au­  thentic;  it's  obviously Professor Me-
 
Dougall's natural  vehicle.  Professor  Mc­ Dougall,  B.A.   (University of  B.C.),  M.A. PH.D.    (Toronto), Professor   of   English and   Director   of  the  Institute of   Cana­ dian  Studies  at Carleton  University, doesn't   want  any  writers  around Carle­ ton.   One   might   almost   say  he  doesn't  want  writers.  Not  the kind  that  are  writ­ ing   now   in   Canada,   anyway.   For   we are   neither   "Brahmins"  nor   g,ood  red "prols.",  just   poopless  sheltered  school­ corrupted   petit-bourgeois. Well,  Morley Callaghan  and  the  others   can  take  care of  themselves, but  I want  to tell Professor McDougall  he   has   no   business   saying that  "Earl   [sic] Birney has been a scholar and   teacher   all  the  days  of  his  working life"  and  shares  "common denominators in   family   background  and   education" with  the genteel  middle class.
Here  are  the  facts.  They  are  not  rele­ vant   to  my  goodness   or   badness   as  a writer,   but  they  are  a  refutation  of  the Director Professor's  thesis  in  so  far  as it applies  to me:
My parents  were  largely  self-educated; my mother  came  from  generations of Shetland fisherfolk  and  crofters; an  im­ migrant   girl,    she   was   working   as   a waitress  in   a   miner's  hotel  in   the  Kootenays  when  she  married my  father, who was the son of a small-town  butcher. My  father   was  by  turns   a  cowpuncher, brakeman, prospector,  paperhanger, sol­ dier,  and   unsuccessful  bush-farmer. There was never a time  when  we weren't poor-but-all-too-honest "prols"  (to  use Professor Director McDougall's faded Huxleyan slang);  I  was   doing  heavy farm   work   with    horses   before    I  was twelve; at sixteen, axeman; seventeen, swinging picks and  sledgehammers on winter    relief;    eighteen,  oiling   swamps with  a  forty-pound barrel-pump  on  my

77

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



back.  Eventually I paid  my  college  fees from  such  work  and from earned scholar­ ships.   Even   after   I   joined   the  genteel  ranks  of the  B.A's  I still had  to spend  a summer  housepainting  with  my  father, to  get  the  fare  to  Toronto  to start   the M.A.  From  then  on  until  World  War  II
I confess I earned a lousy living as an academic, in  between  depression  layoffs. Then I spent  four  years in  ranks  which were neither closed nor circumspect and only  rarely  intellectually  sophisticated­ the   Canadian   Army's.
Director Professor McDougall's whole argument for describing  my poetry and fiction  as "academic" and  lacking  "a genuine feeling  for  class", rests on  deny­ ing   the   realities   of  my  life.   I   say  his whole  argument, for  at  no  place  in  his article  does   Director   Professor  Mc­ Dougall   refer   to  anything  I  have  ever written -not   even   to  my   two   novels (one  of  which  is  much  concerned with class  structure  in   the   Canadian  Army, and    the   other   focussed   on   "the   class struggle"  in   Canada  in   the   thirties) . The  only  exception, a  reference   to  my poetry,  is  another  piece  of  biographical fabrication: "It is true that  the thirties produced   a   spate   of   socially   directed poetry   in  this  country, and   I  have   no wish  to question the sincerity of the con­ victions  which  led  F. R. Scott  and  Earle  Birney   and   others   to  write  it.   [Such  a sentence, of course,  raises the  question.] But  the voice of these years is ambiguous, as a glance  at  the volume  New  Provinces (published in  1936)   will  show. . .  It is academic ..." etc. The trusting reader, if any  were still left  to Director  McDougall at   this   point   in   his  article,   may   have thought  from   the  above   that   I  contri­ buted  to  New  Provinces, and  that  I pub­  lished   "socially  directed   poetry" in  the
 thirties. Neither is true.  Apart  from  two early   "nature"  pieces,   I  published no poetry   at  all  until   the  forties,  and  very little  that   was  "socially  directed"  before
1945·
I should  have  thought that  a Director
of  Canadian Studies  at  a Canadian  uni­ versity,  however  much  he disliked the en­ vironment in  which  he  has  risen  to such eminence, would  have  absorbed  enough  academic methods, if not  ethics, to have  checked   elementary    biographical    and  bibliographical data  with  the  living  sub­ ject,   or   with   ordinary  reference   books, before  launching a  thesis  based  on  bio­ graphical  arguments. Better,   of  course, to  have  deduced the  content of my writ­ ings   from  my   writings-but  this  is  a method  which   Director   Professor   Mc­  Dougall  shows  himself,   in   every   para­ graph, incapable of  using.  Whatever the Director Professor's  own class origins and  early   environment,  they  plainly   did  not condition  him   to  the  actual  reading of literature, or  to  the  understanding of it.
EARLE BIRNEY,
University of British Columbia.



A REPLY

Dear   Sir:
It was kind  of you to send along  Earle Birney's   little   diatribe  against   me   and the    piece   which    I   called,    I   thought rather boldly, "Class  in Canadian Litera­ ture". You   must   have   known  how  de­ lighted I  would   be  to  see  a  large   fish take  the  lure  in  a swirl  of  brown  water.  Professor   Birney  is  angry;  apparently  I have  touched a  raw  nerve.  I  do  not  like to   make   people   angry,  and I  try   my best  to  avoid  doing  so  in  personal  rela-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



tions. But in the interests of a cause or a principle I am another man.  I am  there­ fore   pleased   to   note   his   tauntings,  his snide  allusions   to  the  office  I hold,  his contempt  for   my   prose  style,  his  gross abuse   of  my   abilities   as  a   student  of Canadian  literature, his testy concern for his   reputation  as   a   writer,  his   rabid literalism. These  are  the  marks  of a man who  is thinking for  the  moment with  his guts,   not   with   his  head.   The   blood  of those Shetland fisherfolk  and crofters is indeed  strong.  Its strength and  the source of   that    strength  are   acknowledged in more  than  one  way in  Professor  Birney's letter.  How  can  I be  anything but delighted?
I  am  a  little  surprised, I must  admit, but  no less delighted, to find  that  despite all  this  flailing  of  arms  and  gnashing of teeth   Professor   Birney   is  really   on  my
 side.  A  good   part   of  my  sin  seems  to have  been  that   I tossed  him  lightly  into the camp  of the "academics" by suppress­ ing   credentials   which,    properly    read, would  have  shown  that  Professor  Birney knew  as  well  as  any  man   you'd  like  to produce what   it  was  to  earn   his  living in  the  rough-and-tumble of  life,  and  by the sweat of his brow. So be it. I willingly confess  to  a  sin  of  omission   when   the gain  is  that   I bring  the  "old   hack"   (I hope  a  permissible  use of  Professor  Bir­ ney's   own   phrase)   out   of   his   burrow  fighting.   And   yet  the   strange  thing   is, and   I must  say  this,  that   I   have   read almost   everything  that  Professor   Birney has written,  with  care and,  as I  thought, sympathy.  I  have always  begun  this way, with  him  as  with  others.  And  I have  a terrible   feeling   that  if  I  were  to  begin again   this   way   I should   end   up   with







Livres  et Auteurs Canadiens I96J
 A panorama of the  literary production of the  year  in  French  Canada.
A  complete  bibliography of  the  publica­
tions  of  rg62.
Articles  of  general  interest.
Reviews of the most important books, in fiction,  poetry,  essays and   juvenile  litera­ ture.
The  literary  events of the  year.
List of the doctoral theses defended in the
Universities of French Canada in  rg63.
An illustrated magazine of a hundred and fifty pages. On  sale at $ r .50.

Adrien  Therio, directeur,
LIVRES ET  AUTEURS CANADIENS
R.M.C. Kingston, Ontario.

The   rg6r   and   rg62  rssues are  still  avail­
able  at  $ r .oo each.




79

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



much the same stance as the one I have already   taken.  I  quite   agree  with   Pro­ fessor  Birney   that   the  literature  should speak  for  itself.  It does. His  does.  Some people    cross   the   tracks   and   can't    go home    again.    There  is   no   conclusive reason  why  they should. They  just don't.
In the  article which  I  contributed  to
your   periodical  in   the  Fall  of   rg63,  I tried   to  say  something which  I  thought needed  to be said  about  Canadian litera­ ture.   The  argument was  as   true   as  I could   make   it  to  the  letter  and,   more important, to  the  spirit  of  a  very  wide body  of  evidence. It was  meant to  con­ stitute a  kind  of  metaphor about  Cana­ dian   literature,   and   I   had   thought  it might  be  read  in  that  light,  and  read  in that  light  especially  by people  like Earle  Birney,  who  is  certainly   well  trained   in the  handling of  metaphor. But  alas!  the literal  mind  is always with  us, and  some­ times  in  unexpected  places.  I  am  truly sorry  that   Professor  Birney  thinks  I got him  somehow  mixed  up  with  New  Prov­ inces and  that   I  seemed  to  have  him  in print   before  his  time.  I  really  do  know better,  as  well  I   might,   having   taught Canadian  literature at both  the graduate and   the  undergraduate level  for  fifteen years.  But  I  admit the  passage  in  ques­ tion   is   badly   written. That's  my  poor prose.  My background, you see, is deeply bourgeois   and   academic, and   I  have  a hard   time,  as  Professor  Birney  shrewdly notes, in throwing off the incubus enough to  write   as  clearly   and   as  simply  as  I should.   It is  on  the  other   hand   just  at this point  that  I get up off my knees and cast  my metaphor right  back in Professor Birney's   teeth.   It   is  a  good   metaphor, and  I  have  seen  no reason  yet to change its  drift.  It is true  in  the  way  that  some of  Professor   Birney's   better   poems   are

8o
 true. When we have  recognized  the force of  what   it  has  to  say  about an  essential lack   within   the   English-language  tradi­ tion    in    Canadian   literature,    a    new generation of  writers  may  be in  a  better  way  to  doing   something to  remedy   the situation. In  the  meantime I  suggest  that  Professor   Birney   keep  an   eye  on   those young   lads  out   on  the  west  coast   who contributed so largely  to Poetry 64;  some of  them  write  as if they  already had  the kiss of death upon  them.
ROBERT L. MCDOUGALL,  Director, The Institute of Canadian Studies.











CORRECTION

We  much   regret   that   through an  un­ fortunate  oversight the   name  of   the  author of  the  article on  Brian  Moore  in issue  No.  18 was given  as  Naim  Kattim. It   should    of   course   have   been   N aim Kattan, and   we  apologize  both   to  the author, and  to  our  readers,  whose  atten­ tion  we  draw  to  this  correction.
