$1.25  per copy ,


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·21






RECOLLECTIONS OF E. J.  PRJITT



Recollections

BY NORTHROP FRYE, ROY DANIELLS


Articles

BY GIOSE  RIMANELU, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, E. B. GOSE, NAIM  KATTAN


Reviews

BY B. RAJAN, HENRY KREISEL, ROBIN  SKELTON,
GEORGE  ROBERTSON, GEORGE  BOWERING, ALBERT TUCKER, DONALD  STEPHENS, MARION  B. SMITH, MARYA  FIAMENGO AND  OTHERS




A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










ON 	THE	DIVIDE






OuR   RECENT ISSUES have  reflected  an  anxiety  which   many people  concerned  with   writing   in  our  country are  feeling  today.  We  can  see now,  as Giose  Rimanelli points  out from  a fresh  viewpoint  in a later  page,  that  a Canadian literature exists.  But  we are  still disturbed at  the  conditions to  which the  writers  who  make  that  literature must  adapt. The  consciousness of this situa­ tion appears in article  after  article submitted to us, and  we have published several pieces of this kind  because  what  they have to say seems to us urgently important. Underlying all  these  discussions  is the  realization that  a literary  "world" of the classic  Paris  or  London kind,  where  writers  could  undergo their  apprenticeship among   other   writers  (with   a  full  apparatus of  publishing  houses and   literary  journals), is not  likely to come into  being in Canada for a long time  yet, if ever. Equally  present  is the  felated feeling  that,  though at  the  moment we are  faced with   an  unprecedented  crop   of  young writers  publishing  their  works  in  the mimeographed  journals that   rise  and  die  like  mayflies  in  almost  every  city  in the country, the  chance of even the most brilliant of these new writers  having  the kind  of  leisure  necessary   to  become  latter-day Tolstoys  or  Flauberts is remote.  The   mere  time  to  write  the  impressive  literary   masterpiece becomes  more  and  more  a  luxury   to  be  won  only  by  the  ruthless  organization of the  scanty  spare  hours that  can  be won from less congenial  occupations.
How,  in  fact,  is  the  writer  to  keep  going  so  that he  can   write even  minor
masterpieces?  In   our   last  issue  Thelma  McCormack discussed  in  some  depth the  possibility of a new  relationship between  the writer  and  the  mass media,  and in  a  letter  which   reached us  yesterday  Hugh   MacLennan  remarked that  in  his view  her  essay  "went to  the  heart  of the  modem writer's predicament, which  is

EDITORIAL



common   no  matter where  he lives," and  added this  most  pertinent comment of his own:

... I was struck by her nostalgic reference to Proust, Joyce and  Pound. There  can be no such writers  these days because the  cost of living is too high. Hemingway says that  in his time in Paris, when he knew Joyce and  Pound, a couple could live, and  travel,  on $5.00 a day. Now the cost of living in  France,  even in Grenoble, is about  20o/o higher  than  in  Manhattan. Robert  Goulet  went  to  Mallorca  and managed  for a while, and  then, in Hemingway's  phrase,  "the  rich came."  I spent a day in Palma last fall en route, and  the only restaurant where I could get lunch before the ship sailed was as expensive, and  almost as vulgar, as Longchamps.  In the  lovely mediaeval  square  of  the  city,  plastered   right  across one  of  the  most beautiful  facades, was a Coca Cola sign with dimensions  (according  to my recollec­ tion)  of about  a hundred  feet by thirty.
Is Marshall  McLuhan  right? Though  he uses a kind of mystical jargon that sets my teeth on edge, he well may be.

Those  of us who  knew it even in its last days certainly look back with nostalgia to  the  writer's  life of the  twenties  and  thirties,  when  a productive existence  on a shoestring in a Paris hotel, a London  attic or a Cornwall cottage was still possible. In  recent  years the  writer  of these lines has  travelled far,  through Europe, Asia, Latin   America, and  he  has  come  to  the  melancholy conclusion  that  the  places where  the  writer  who  can  bear  isolation  might  live and  work  on  a pittance are vanishing as  rapidly   as  the  big game  in  Africa. Portugal, some  of  the  remoter parts  of  Spain,   Mexico  and  Greece,  the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas (as  long  as one  keeps  out  of  the  English-style  hotels)   and   Australasia are  about   the  last possible  refuges.  And  for  how  long?
Accepting  that   few  good  writers  can  function at  rock-bottom as  ascetics  or paupers, one  has  to  assume  that  the  world-wide levelling-off  of prices  will soon mean   an  end   to  those  economical gathering-places  of  the  Happy Few  which those  of us who  are  now  middle-aged were  lucky  enough to know  in our  youth. The  writer  who  wants  to live in the congenial  physical  surroundings of whatever may be the literary  gathering places of the future will have  to do so on hard  cash earned at  home; in that  sense we shall  all be -if  not  Sunday writers -at least holiday  writers,  working  most of our  time for  the  leisure  in which  we shall  write what  lies nearest  our  hearts.
The  most favoured alternative to that  possible new  relationship with  the  mass media   which   Thelma  McCormack has  explored is  the  retreat  to  the  campus. In  one  of  our  recent  issues Robert   McDougall rather  pungently suggested  that

4

EDITORIAL



writers  would  do  well  to  avoid  the  deadly  shades  of  the  academic groves,  and Earle  Birney  has replied. Writers  who have become university  teachers-and particularly  writers   with   freelance   pasts-realize  that   there   is  something to both  sides of the  argument; academic activity  can  provide  financial security  and even  certain kinds  of  intellectual stimulation, but-as  most  universities are  at present   constituted-it makes  too  heavy  demands on  the  very  sort  of  energy which  the  writer  should   be conserving for his real  work.
If the  alternatives are  so puzzling  even  to the  writer  who  can  regard  himself as more  or  less established, how  much  more so are they  to  the  apprentice writer in  a  country like  Canada. The   mass  media  at  present  can  offer  him  merely  a selection  of various  forms  of cub  journalism; at  best he can  write  scripts  for the C.B.C. and  at  likely  worst  he  can  become  a reporter  in  an  execrable provincial newspaper.
Here   at  least  the  academics-or a  minority  of them -offer  an  alternative
in the  various  Creative Writing courses, programmes and  departments which  are appearing in  Canadian  universities.  This  is  a  phenomenon  which   can  neither be  dismissed   summarily  nor   accepted  lightly.  Homer, Shakespeare, Tolstoy, Stendhal, Cervantes:  who  were  their   Creative Writing  teachers? But  perhaps that  question is too obvious; it may  be argued, at least, that  times  have  changed. So  far  as  I know,  not  even  the  most  dedicated of Creative Writing instructors suggests  that he  can  make  a silk purse  out  of a literary  sow's  ear; most  of them are  reconciled   to  the  thought that   the  majority of  their  students will  be  dilet­ tantes  with  no  productive future and  that  some  at  least  of  them  will  merely  be trying  for  easy  academic credits.  But  they do  put  forward the argument that, in the  absence  of a literary   ambience of the  classic type, their  classes and  seminars may  provide   the  kind  of environment in  which  a young  writer of real  promise can  receive  encouragement, advice,  sympathy, and  perhaps decide  whether, so far  as he is concerned, the  writing  game  is worth  the candle. On  the other  hand, many   people-including a  fair   number  of   practicing writers-believe  that even  this  type  of  academic interference with  the  development of writers  will do  more  harm than  good.  Certainly the  case  for  Creative   Writing classes has  not been  proved, either  by argument or by experience; but  it remains open,  and  it is worth  discussing.







5














I. The Personal Legend


Northrop  Frye




NED PRATT ;, the only  figure in  Canadian lite•ature,  'o
far,  who  was great  enough  to establish  a personal legend. The legend  was simpler
than  the  man,  or,  more  accurately, it  was cruder, because  the  man  himself  had the  genuine simplicity  that  is so  rare  and  so  difficult.  Poets  and  professors  are supposed  to  be  absent-minded, and   people  delighted in  telling  stories  of  Ned's absent-mindedness. They  are  also supposed  to  be  unpractical, and  the  fact  that he  was  easily  baffled  by  mechanical  contrivances also  pleased  them.   But  Ned always   remembered  a  great   deal   more  than   he  forgot.   He   carried   for  many years  a teaching, speaking  and  social schedule  that  nobody  in  business or politics would   attempt without  a  secretary. I  remember many  graphic stories  he  could tell of how  his lecturing and  visiting arrangements got fouled  up, but  I remember too  that  it  was  generally  other  people's  dim-wittedness that  was responsible  and not his. When  I first began  to try to write myself, the only really sensible and well­ informed advice  about  publishers  and  contracts I got came  from  Ned. And while it  was  true  that  he  always  counted   the  left  turns  he had  to  make  before setting  out  anywhere with  a car,  I  know  of no  contemporary poet  who  has  used  tech­  nological  and  mechanical languages with such  easy assurance.
In  my  fourth year  as an  undergraduate I was editor  of the  college  magazine,
and  had  to administer a  prize  of ten  dollars  for  the  best  poem  contributed. The poems  came   in,  and   I took  them   to  Ned.  Ned  didn't  recommend an  award.

6



NED	PRATT

Two  Recollections


















What he  did  was  to  put  his finger  on  one  poem  and  say,  "Now this  one-it has  some  feeling,  some  sensitivity,  some  sense of structure. But-well,  damn it all,  it  isn't  worth   money."  I  have  never  had  a  profounder insight  into  literary values,  and  I was lucky  to have  it so early. As a graduate student I was his assis­ tant  when  he became  the first editor  of the Canadian Poetry Magazine. I am  not saying  that  what  was printed in those opening  issues was imperishable, but it was certainly  the  best of what  we got. What impressed  me was the  number of people  (it  was the  depression, and  the  magazine paid  a dollar  or two)   who tried  to get themselves  or  their  friends  in  by  assuming  that  Ned  was  a soft  touch.   In  some  ways  he  was,  but  he  was  not  compromising the  standards of  poetry  to  be  so:  poetry  was something he took  too seriously. And,  as I realized  more  clearly  later, friendship was  also something he took  too seriously  to  compromise. People  who  thought him  a  soft  touch  were  never  his friends.  He  could  be impulsively, even quixotically,  generous   to  bums   and   down-and-outs,  and   I  think   I  understand why.  His  good  will  was  not  benevolence, not  a  matter of being  a sixty-year-old smiling  public  man. It was  rather an  enthusiasm  that  one  was alive,  rooted  in  a sense of childlike  wonder  at  human existence  and  the variety  of personality. This feeling  was so genuine and  so deep in him that  I think  he felt rather guilty  when  approached by  someone  towards  whom  he  was actually  indifferent.
His hospitality and  his love of parties  was the central  part  of the  Pratt personal


7

NED PRATT



legend. The   chair   at  the  end  of  the  Senior   Common  Room   table  in  Victoria College  was  always  left  vacant   for  him,  for  Ned  Pratt could  not  sit  anywhere but  at  the  head  of the  table.  (It  remained vacant for several  months after  it was clear   that   he  would  never  return   to  that   table.)  Yet  those  who  attended  his parties realized  how  passionate  his concern  was for  the  genuine symposium, the exchange of  ideas.  He  wanted   good  stories  and  picturesque language, most  of which   he  contributed  himself.  Not  many   of  his  guests  are  apt  to  forget  such things   as  the   huge  salmon   hooked  by  the   Governor  of  Newfoundland,  who poured an  entire  bottle  of Newfoundland screech  down  its throat and  then  re­ leased  it, only  to have it circle the  boat  on its tail singing  Rule  Britannia. But he was  quickly  bored  if the  conversation ran  down  in gossip or trivialities. The  per­ sonnel  at his parties  naturally changed  over the course of years, but from Bertram Brooker  and  Wilson  Knight  in  the  thirties to  Marshall McLuhan  and  Douglas  Grant in  the  sixties,  he  never  wavered   in  his  affection   for  friends  who  could talk,  and  talk  with  spirit,  content, and  something to say.
His  entire  poetic  career  was spent  as a full-time member of the  teaching staff of  Victoria College.  He  never  made  a song  and  dance  about being  "creative," and  he  never  felt  the  need  of compensating for  the  way  he earned his living  by issuing  anti-academic pronouncements. The   College  took  unobstrusive measures to  make  it easier  for  him  to get  on with  his work,  but  it could  not  have  helped beyond  a certain point. His reputation as absent-minded and  as a complete duffer in  practical affairs  was carefully  staged  by  himself,  in  order  to stay  clear  of the enormous  complication of  committees  and   similar   substitutes for  thought  and action that  are  such  a  bane  of  university  life.  He  taught students, and  worked harder to get  to know  them  than  anyone  else on the staff.  (Even after  his retire­ ment  he  gave  luncheon   parties  for  the  students in  the  classes he  had  previously taught.)  He  worked  with  colleagues,  to such  effect  that  one  came  to  recognize a  special  kind  of affectionate smile  that  preceded any  reference  to  Ned. But  he stuck  to  the  essentials  of  university  work,  to  teaching and  his own  writing,  and as  a  result  it  was  hardly  noticed  that  he was  an  academic poet.
He  was  also a  Canadian writer,  without either  trying  to be one  or trying  not to  be  one.  Not  many  Canadian writers  would   really  be  content to  be  popular inside  the  country and  largely  unknown outside  it. I  am  not  saying  that  he was wholly  content with  this either-nor  am  I. But  he  did  realize  that  he was  ad­ dressing  a specific  community, and  he showed  extraordinary integrity in  addres­ sing   also  the  general   reader   in  that   community, instead   of  writing  for  other poets.  He  was never in fashion,  and  he never  tried  to be out  of fashion, and  as a

8

NED PRATT



result  he has introduced hundreds of Canadians to poetic  experience who would not  otherwise   have  got  it,  or  who  would  have  tried  to  get  it from  some  phony anti-intellectual doggerelist. There are  many  popular features in  his work,  some of  them   obvious,  such  as  the  preoccupation  with  physical  courage and   heroic action,  and  some of them  less obvious, such as the absence  of bad  language, even when  dealing  with  the  grousing of sailors in Behind the Log. Yet there  is a tough conceptual skeleton   behind   all  his  writing:  his  supposed   incompetence in  the two disciplines  he tried  before  he tried  English, theology and  psychology, was part of his own  campaign to  persuade others  that  he was too simple-minded to have his time wasted in their interests.
So  although he  was  never  anti-intellectual, and  never  undervalued or  depre­ cated  what  the  university  stood  for, he still avoided  the  pitfalls  that  beset intellec­  tuals  in modern society.  Of  these, one of the  most striking is the fascination with the  logical  extreme, as  opposed   to  the  illogical  golden  mean.  To  write  and   to teach  in Ned's  generation meant  defending the values of the imagination through a  depression  and  a  war,  and  this  took  courage  of a kind  that  he  not  only  cele­ brated   but,  very  unostentatiously, possessed. Some of us grew  up in that  genera­ tion  and  tried  to  hold  on  to  the  kind  of liberal  values  that  are  not  simply  the values  of the  left as against the  right,  but  are  the values of human dignity  as op­ posed  to stupidity and  hysteria. We  remember  many  lost leaders  in  that  period,  some  temporarily and  some  permanently lost, who deserted  wisdom for  paradox. The sense of outrage and  betrayal that  I felt  when  I first opened  After  Strange Gods is something I hope  never to feel again. But during the war, at an evening in Earle  Birney's  apartment in  Toronto, I  heard Ned  read  The  Truant, and  felt, not  simply  that   I  had  heard the  greatest  of  all  Canadian poems,  but  that  the voice  of humanity had  spoken  once more,  with  the  kind  of authority it reserves for  such  moments as the  bombing of London, when  the  powers  of darkness  test the soul and  find ,once  more  that  "The stuff is not amenable to fire".










9



2. The Special uality


Roy Daniells



L.EARE  a few poets in the Canadian tradition who will be
remembered for  what  they were in themselves,  almost  independently of what  they
wrote.  Lampman and  Isabella  Crawford are  among them.  Now  our  good  Ned Pratt has  joined this small company whose personal memory  we shall not willingly let  die.  Yet  the  personal  image  is no  more  simple  than   the  image  of  Pratt the poet  whose  complexity   has  been  the  theme   of  H.  W.  Wells,  John Sutherland and   Desmond  Pacey.  Ned's  hospitality   was  famous, his  bonhomie a  legend  in his  lifetime,  his  kindness  a  constant  factor  in  many  lives. Yet  other  good  hosts, other  occasions  filled  with  wit and  paternal benevolence, have  not  left  the same indelible  mark  on  the  mind.  What  was Ned's  special  and  unique quality?
Let  us go  back  to  I 9I 9,  the  year  that  Pelham Edgar rescued  Pratt from  the psychology  department on St. George Street  and  installed him in Victoria College as an  associate  professor  of English.  Ned's  descriptions of his ill luck as a demon­ strator-prisms  flying  from   the  turntable  to  shatter  against  the  wall-may have  obscured   the  full situation. So may  recollections of Edgar's  prescience  and his  tactful  kindness   to  new  members   of  staff   (which the  present  writer   must recall  with  gratitude) . The  fact  is that  Edgar gave  Pratt  all  that  anyone  could have  given  at  that  time-a  favourable stance  from  which  to survey  a situation most  unfavourable to poetry.  By  I9I9 little  remained of  the  post-Confederation impulse  which  has  produced  Roberts, Lampman,  Crawford, Carman and  D. C. Scott.   Scott  alone   was  both  alive  and  kicking,  yet  his  statement to  the  Royal  Society  in  I922,  "Revolt is essential  to  progress",  was not  matched by anything corresponding in  his own  work. "We require" he said,  "more rage  in our  poets"  but  nothing of the  kind  was forthcoming. It was not  until  I925  that  the McGill Fortnightly  Review  came into  being,  borne  on  the  same  tide  of post-war  change  that  had  brought in  the first number of the  Forum  in  October I920.  When  the Review  began   its  brief   career,  Arthur Smith, Frank  Scott,   Leo  Kennedy and Leon  Edel  were  all in  their  teens or  twenties.  Pratt was by this  time  in  his early forties  and  writing the kind of poetry  which  appeared in his 1926  volume  Titans

IO

NED PRATT



(comprising "The  Witches' Brew",   "The Cachalot" and  "The Great   Feud"). He  was committed by geography, by his non-urban tradition and  by the impetus of  his  career   to  something quite   unlike  the  social strategy and  poetic  tactics  of the  Montreal group.
In  1919  the  Canadian  landscape had  indeed  been  bleak  and  if  we  imagine
Pratt searching among the  abraded  Edwardians, the  English  war  poets,  or  the pages  of Eliot  just  reaching Canada, it is hard  to see what  stimulus to sensibility or  what  techniques he could  have  recovered  from  outside  to help  him  deal  with actualities in  the  local  landscape, literal  or  intellectual. He  was in  fact  thrown heavily  back  on  his own  resources  (whereas Lampman, in a previous  generation, had  with  all modesty  rightly  felt himself a kind  of reincarnation of Keats). That the  whole  web  of  Pratt's poetry  had  in the  best sense of the  word  a  pervasively homespun quality  is  attributable to  his having  had  always  to  work  alone.  The "plain heroic  magnitude of mind" with  which  he got down  to his task has never, I think,  been  sufficiently  recognized. We may  recall the  days when  he was strug­ gling  to  write  The  Titanic, when  he  would  expound his intention,  when  floor­ boards  became  deck-planks under  one's  feet as the  long  narrow  office shuddered under   the  impact of  ice  and  slowly sank,  leaving  one  struggling-with Ned's  problems,  his efforts  to shape  the  narrative, to find  diction, to achieve  catharsis. (I  doubt  if he  really  got  help  from  anyone.) This  magnitude, this ability  not  to be overcome, was,  I think,  his most  distinguishing  and  most  admirable quality. Certainly, if  any  newcomer  to  Elysian  fields  were  trying   to  identify   Canadian poets,  Ned  Pratt would  stand  out  in  a  simple  way,  as  larger than   all  the  rest.
This  largeness  of mind,  which  sometimes  led to an  indifference to what  others felt  were  immediate  burning  issues,  saved   Ned  Pratt  the  poet   and   Professor Pratt the  academic from   pride,  pedantry, paranoia, the  Messiah-complex, the thirst   for  recognition, the  affectation of  "grand old  man", one  upmanship of every  description and  all  the  other  customary side effects  of a talent  for  writing or occupational diseases of academic life. He was never more -and never less­ than  Ned  Pratt getting on  with  some  job to which  he  was  uniquely  fitted,  with all  his powers.
Beside his  psychic  dimension, he  possessed the  complementary virtue  of being
responsive  to  people,  of  being  intuitive,  spontaneous, uncalculating.  No  one  of his  innumerable  beneficiaries ever  felt  he  had  to do  something in  return. "Pro pelle  cutem" was  not  in  Ned's  vocabulary. Lack  of guile  and  even  of foresight had   its  comic   consequences. The   college  would   be  ransacked for  Ned's   little black  bag  containing important papers,  day  after  day  until  he reported opening


II

NED PRATT



a cupboard at  home  and  "there it was!"  But fundamentally his lack of  calcula­ tion  reminded one of stories in the Gospels or in the Acts:  great  ends are in view yet from  day to day whatever  happens will turn  out to be divinely directed. Life is too  important to  be organized. It follows that  to  meet  Ned  casually  was to feel him  give his whole  sympathy to one,  immediately. After  a  time  one  counted on this.  Acquaintances felt  they  were  his  friends.   His  friends  each  felt  sure  of  a special  place  in  Ned's  regard-and  rightly  so:  he  had  room  for  a  great  deal of special  concern for others.  He  relived  the  old  virtues  of the  Canadian literary  tradition,  Roberts' ability  to  become  exemplary  by  becoming through  unaided effort   a  man   of  letters,  Lampman's life  of  spontaneous feeling and   creative  "dream". This  wise passiveness, this ability to give his all where  intuition promp­ ted  and  never  by calculation kept  clear  and  bright  to the  end  a sensitivity  which set  him  apart from  others.
Whether  his  massive  simplicity  of  purpose   and   the  unforced  immediacy of
his daily  response  to life were  related  to the epic strain  in his poetry  and  the un­ classifiable moral  impulse  which so powerfully  animates it-an impulse no theory seems to exhaust-these  are  problems  for  the  literary  critic.  What  seems at  the moment  more  important is that  as many  as possible of those who knew and loved him  should  leave  some  record  of "the  emperor in  his  habit  as he lived", going beyond  anecdote and sentiment yet not forgetting the man  in pursuit of his work.
We  shall  not  look  upon  his like again.  The   Newfoundland  community, now
part  of Canada, cannot   hope  to retain  its old  Elizabethan quality. The  kind  of sensibility  that   contrives   to  live  in  a  city  without succumbing to  urbanization threatens to  become  rare  to extinction. Our  culture, saturated with  mass-media, will no  longer  provide  the  partial vacuum in  which  by breathing hard  a strong sensibility  may  contrive  to have  its being. It is unlikely  that  uncalculating  good­ ness of  heart   can  persist  into  a  world  of  computers. All  the  more  reason  why memory   should   keep  green   the  greatness   and   uncontriving  simplicity   of  this good man.













12



CANADIAN LITERATURE

An Italian View



Giose Rimanelli






Dr.   Rimanelli  is  a   distinguished  Italian novelist   and  critic   who   has  spent   much time  in  Canada   and  has  written a travel book  on the  country  (Biglietto  di Terza). Now, with  another  Italian  writer, Roberto Ruberto, he has  prepared  an anthology of Canadian short stories, entitled  Canadiana, which   will  shortly   be   published   in  both Italy  and the United States. In  this article Dr.  Rimanelli explains the  reasons  which led  him  to undertake the  task.




LITERATURE rs  NOT   A  MERE   WORD,  but  the  individual ex· pression  of man's spirit.  Consequently, to study  the literature of an epoch  means to  study  the  spirit  of the  man  of that  epoch.  Man  lives, thinks  and  acts  within society;  he  is  for or  against  society  because  it  is part  of his destiny  to  accept  or rebel,  and   yet,  in  a  group or  isolated,  he  himself  is society,  therefore  presence, therefore history  and  myth,  therefore dimension, breath, parable.
The  history  of  the  universe  is the  history  of man,  but  it  is through man  that we  tell  the  story  of  the  universe,  because  he  is the  only  one  who  can  discover it, give it meaning and  thence  sing of it. Under this aspect,  there  is not  a country in  the  world  that   does  not  have  its own  poetry,  its own  literature,  primitive or refined, serene or chaotic, vital or creative. And Canada is no exception to the rule.
The  task of the scholar  is to find out if, beyond  the social and  political  changes
which  form  and  reform  a country, there  are creative  forces which  endure, which have  their  own  reason  for  being,  whether they  are  a mere  reflex  of the  time  in

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



which  they  are  produced  or whether  they  go beyond  it, to impose  themselves  on new  generations. Art  is tradition, even  in its most experimental forms.
There is a view in both  American and  Europe that  denies  Canada its "own" literature. This  view is based  more  on  an  ignorance of the  political-economic - and   therefore cultural-history of  the  country, than   on  positive  critical  facts. It is  expected   that   one  speak  of  Canada in  terms  of  anthropology,  ethnology, mineralogy and  immigration rather than  of literature. To  the  European mind  in particular the  idea  of literature in  Canada is exhausted in a  nucleus  of Indian legends  and  folkloric songs, or in those peculiar works of foreign  writers  who lived for  some  time  in  Canada, such  as  Hernon's Maria   Chapdelaine or  Constantin Weyer's  Un  Homme se penche  sur son  passe.
Canada, for  the  European, is still  a  pioneer   land. Among the  Italians  this
conviction can  be  attributed to the  Italian  migratory flow  toward Canada and the  lack  of  effective  cultural relations  between   the  two  countries. But  this  does not  explain   how  the  idea  persists  also  in  France and   England,  countries with which  Canada has both language and  traditions in common.
Some  years  ago,  writing  from  London, Mordecai Richler lamented that  there the  idea   of  a  Canadian  literature seemed   something similar   to  the  idea  of  a literature among the  aborigenes  of Australia. A strange fact  this,  if we consider the  success  obtained in  England  by  purely   Canadian writers  such  as  Stephen Leacock,   Mazo   de  Ia Roche,   Ethel  Wilson  and  Richler   himself.  The  situation reaches  the  point  where  those Canadians who  in  one  way  or  another have suc­ ceeded  in  arousing the  attention of Europe, lose their  Canadian identity  in  the minds   of  their   readers  and   are  seen  as  products of  other countries,  France, America or  England. For  the  Europeans, Frances Loring   and  Florence  Wylie are  English,  Gabrielle  Roy is French, and  Morley  Callaghan is American.
This  state  of affairs  has helped  to form  in  Canadian public  opinion  and  even among certain   Canadian writers  an  unjustifiable inferiority complex  in  relation to  the  literature of other  countries,  with  two  consequent reactions:  a conviction that   nothing written  in  Canada is worth  reading on  the  one  hand, and  on  the other   a  nationalistic urge  to  praise  and  exalt  everything that  is Canadian.  Of the  two,  the  former  is the more  widespread attitude. The man  of middle  culture, the  clerk  or  professional  man,  does not  know  the  names  of more  than  three  or four  contemporary Canadian authors: Callaghan for  his participation in C.B.C. panels; Hugh MacLennan for  his contributions to Maclean's magazine; Stephen Leacock  for  his Sunshine  Sketches  of a Little  Town of which  passages  are  read in  school;   Mazo  de  Ia Roche,  whose  ]alna  novels  are  found  in inexpensive  edi-

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



tions in most drugstores. But a writer like Frederick  Philip  Grove,  whose work has not  appeared on  television  or  been  adapted for  the  cinema, is not  even  known by name  to such  people.
If you were  to ask this man  of middle  Canadian culture what  he thinks  of the
literature of  his  country, he  would  probably  answer,  in  a  modest  tone,  as if to justify himself,  "Agreed, we don't have  a real literature, but-excuse  me-we are  still  a  young  country, hardly   at  the  beginning,   and   with  time,  with  time, you'll  see ..." A  very  similar  reply  might  be expected  from  a  university  student who  would  be  capable of  writing  an  essay on  James  Joyce  and  reading Proust, Lorca  and  Rilke  in  their  original  languages.
Such  an  attitude, even  if understandable, is now  unjustifiable. It  might  have been valid in the last century  when, even if there were writers such  as Haliburton and  Susanna  Moodie, and  even  if it was proclaimed that "Canada is no longer a child,  sleeping  in the  arms  of Nature," there was in fact  no Canadian literature because  there  was  no  Canada; it  might  have  been  valid  even  twenty  years  ago when,   even  if  there   were  good  works,  there  were  no  systematic  studies  of  the Canadian literary panorama. Since  then,  Canadian literature has  been  liberated from  the  colonial  condition and  has  attained an  individuality and  a voice of its own.  To speak  of a Canadian literature means in fact to speak  of a contemporary literature.
As I pointed  out  at  the  beginning of this article,  it is the  task of the scholar  to find  out  if,  beyond   the  social  and  political  changes that   form  and   reform   a country, there  are  creative forces  which  endure, which  have  their  own  reasons for  existence.   The   task  of  the  anthology   of  Canadian  stories  which   Roberto Ruberto and   I  have   been   preparing, in  Italian for  the  Italian reader   and  in English  for the  United States  reader, is in fact  a recognition of a literature which stands  on  its own  and  which  has  the  right  to be known  and  recognized, abroad and  at home,  as autonomous. As we see it, this literature is adult; the literary masterpiece may  yet  wait  to  be  born,  but  this does  not  change the  fact  that  a substantial production  of  quality  exists.





EVERY  LITERATURE   has  its  mark   of  originality. And  since every  literature is in  a sense the  epitome  of the  country  and  civilization  in which it has  been  born  and  has  evolved,  it reflects the  developments, the  anxieties  and

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



the  changes,   both  social  and  intellectual of  that   country and  that   civilization. Italian  literature, for  instance,   tends   toward  realism but   considers   aesthetic forms  important; Spanish  literature is formal, German  philosophic, French  in­ sidiously  experimental; English  literature speaks  of  reality   through  symbolism.  Beyond  these  characteristic patterns, of form  and  content, style and  idea,  are  the secret  forces  of  a  work  of art.  Its  beauty,  its universality, do  not  rest  upon  pre­  established   formulae,  but   on   a  mysterious   transcendental   quality  which   can reach,  and  therefore move  and  exalt,  the  heart  and   mind  of  man. Every  valid literature is thus  based  on  reality,  either  lived  or imagined.  Myth  and  the  tradi­ tional  elements of folklore,  time  and  space,  dream and  sickness, the  impulses  of childhood and  the demands of society, are interwoven in a literary  work which­ to  explain   this  complex  reality-must make  use of  language. Language is the true  maturity of a  people  and  also the  obstacle  that  divides  them,  because  lan­  guage   is  idea.   When   Stephen  Spender  stated  some  years  ago  that   Canadian literature lacks originality, did  he perhaps intend to say that  it lacks characteristic elements  and  therefore  a humus and  a language of its own?
Yes:  for  lack  of originality, Spender  labelled  Canadian literature "derivative"
and  "provincial". A  judgment too  quick,  too  easy,  and  also  unjust. It reminds one  closely  of  the  sardonic  judgments  expressed   by  Alfred  de  Vigny  regarding the  French of  Quebec in  colonial  times.  But  if  Alfred  de  Vigny   judged  while being  outside   the  tragic  reality  of  Acadia at  that   time,  devastated  by  internal struggles,  religious  pressures and  a lack of cultural contact with  France, Stephen Spender, not  dissimilarly,   judges  on  the  occasional basis  of  certain  presupposi­ tions:   on  one  side  the  dependence of Canada on  the  United  Kingdom, on  the other  its belonging to a continent whose magna  pars is the  United States.
According to the  judgment of Spender, Canadian literature would  appear as a reflex  of one  or other  of the  above-mentioned countries, as one prefers,  rather as in  the  Platonic theory  with  its relationships between  the  world  of things  and  the world  of ideas.  In  the  first case, one  might  equate Canadian literature -under the   term   "colonial literature"-to the  literary endeavours of  Australia,  New Zealand   and   South   Africa; in  the  second  case  it  would   appear as  "provincial literature", as  if  Canada were  a  state,  like  California or  Michigan,  belonging to  the  United States.  In  either  case  one  would  deny  it  its own  light  and  indi­ viduality.
But  a study  that  is not  superficial  demonstrates that  neither  of these supposi­ tions  is completely correct.  Canada cannot be  associated   with  the  other  British dominions both  because  of the  lesser distance  that  separates it from  Europe and

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



because  of  its  nearness to  the  United   States.  In  literature the  British  influence was strong  during the  last century, but  today  it is reduced  to the key writers  who have  influenced  to  a  certain degree  the  literature of  all  countries, authors like Joyce,  Conrad, Dylan  Thomas, and  so on. If there  is a tradition by which  most Canadian  authors are  now  influenced, it  is  the  American, that   of  the  United States: Hawthorne, Melville,  Eliot, Ezra  Pound, Hemingway. Morley  Callaghan, for  example, was  very  close  to  Hemingway when  both   were  reporters for  the Toronto   Star  and, later, in  Paris; Raymond Knister   began   his  literary   career with  a  review  in  Iowa; writers like  W.  0. Mitchell   and  Sinclair   Ross  show clearly   the  influence  of  Sherwood Anderson   and  Faulkner. It is  easy  to  note American influences on  other  Canadian novelists and  poets,  as it is, after  all, to note  them  on certain Italian writers  of the forties  and  fifties and  even on writers as  purely  English  as  William  Golding.  This  does not  mean, however,  that  such Canadian writers  lack  originality and  can  be incorporated into  American  litera­ ture  with  the  same  facility  and  naturalness as  writers  from  San  Francisco and Chicago. Everyone of  us has  had  fathers,  professors, books,  which  have  spoken to our  souls, often  changing them  also, but  at  a certain  moment we have  learnt  to  walk  alone,  to stand  by ourselves,  to think  with our  own  brains,  and  to suffer with  our  own  flesh.
Canadian literature is a  North-American literature; but  it is Canadian to the extent   that  Canada is Canada and  not  a  part  of the  United States.



LET us  OPEN AN  ANTHOLOGY of Canadian poets. The  parable runs  from  deserts of snow to the narrow  life of urban  metropolises. We are imme­
diately  overcome  by a vast sense of solitude,  of space,  of expectancy. It is almost a  sense of alarm. Man   has  not  yet dominated nature   here,  but  for  this  he lives and  struggles,  for  this  he  suffers  and  loves and  gets  drunk. From  the  one  side an old Eskimo song says:

There  is fear in
Feeling the cold
Come to the great world
And seeing the moon
-Now new moon, now full moon­ Follow its old footprints
In the winter night.

17

AN  ITALIAN VIEW


From   the  other  side,  a song  of the  city,  by  the  young  John Newlove,  answers: As one beauty
cancels another,  remembrance
is a foolish act, a double-headed  snake striking in both directions, but I remember plains and mountains,  places
I come from, places I adhere and live in.

The  outer  landscape -the  ice of the  North, the  immense  lakes,  the  prairies, snow,   winter-is  the   plasma  of  the   inner  landscape. The   human  psyche here  explains itself in  jolts, in gestures,  through pauses; and  the  individual sensi­ bility,  rather than  being  refined, seems to be  hyper-acute from  the  long silences, the far-away rumblings, that  drama which  has no origin.  Life is a canal of rapid  effusions,  a struggle  in the sun. The  cycle of the seasons,  Vico's life-history,  seems to have  been  lived  for one  half;  decadence has not  yet peeped  through the  walls of  the  houses.  The seasons have  only  two  colours; green  and  white-summer­ winter,  a trajectory which in Canadian poetry,  now ironic  and  then  melancholic, assumes  the  quality of mythic  time. P. K. Page,  as in a dream, would  say:

In countries where the leaves are large as hands where flowers protrude  their fleshly chins
and call their colours
an imaginary snow storm sometimes falls among the lilies.

Stephen Leacock,  in his humoristic tone, tells in a story that  "the solitude  of the dark  winter   nights  was  that  of eternity." But  especially  in  Canadian prose,  the ever-present  element   of  the  man-nature  struggle comes  out  with  violence.  At times,  nature  dominates the  pages  of  the  writer   and  overcomes the  man  who traverses  and  labours  it. Man  faces it with  fury,  or bewilderment, or resignation: the  resignation before  fate  which  we find  in  Greek  tragedy. But  pessimism  is a poison  which  has  not  yet reached  him.  In  the  story  "Essence of Man" by Alan Sullivan  there  is man's  victory over the snow; in Frederick Philip  Grove's  "Snow" there  is  that of  the  snow  over  man.  In  Grove's remarkable book,  Over  Prairie Trails,  nature explains  itself to man  and  explains man; this man  is a god-made man,  patient, tenacious,  stoic, bombastic. Grove,  here,  is a pantheist. But in  Sin­ clair  Ross's  story,  "The Lamp  at  Noon", nature is only  the  furious  background of the drama of solitude,  of cold, of white nights, of blizzards, and of  the desperate and  stubborn life on the farms  of the  prairie. The characters of  Helen  and  Paul,

I8

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



with  all  their  weaknesses  and  their  stoicism,  their  faith  and  their  disbelief,  their need  of  love  and   of  death, acquire   almost  symbolic  value.  This  nature is not always  generous   with  man,   and  the  panic  feeling  of  death   which  often  grasps man  becomes,  in such  stories,  a sacred  element.  Such  writing  could  not  be done
except  in  Canada: a lonely  land,  according to A. J. M. Smith,  whose  beauty  is
of dissonance and
of strength
broken by strength and still strong.
The  flora  and  fauna play  another important part  in this literature. There are the  immense   forests  of  firs  in  Ontario and  the  isolated  bushes  of  the  prairies; there  are the wild animals-the bear of the North, the eagle of British Columbia, the  wild  duck  of Alberta, the  beaver  of the  lake  regions.  A series of stories  also exists  to  which,   as  a  typically   Canadian  creation, the  label  "animal story"  is seriously  or  ironically applied.  In  this  field  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts is a  master. Then there  are  the  Indians, now characters in stories and  now their  narrators.
Of  course,  at  the  very  beginnings of Canadian literature we find  the  Indians' own  stories,  legends  and   poems,  typical  of  which  are  the  songs  of  the  Haida, which  place  at  the  centre  of  creation the  sun,  the  crow  and  the  bear.  In  these stories,  which  are  to  Canadian literature what  the  Provencal writings  are  to the Romance languages, one can  recognize not only echoes of Christianity but also resemblances to the  characters and  myths  of Orpheus, Prometheus, Samson  and Hercules. The Indian myths  are anterior to the arrival  of the white  man,  and  the similarities they show  to Mediterranean myths make one pose the existence of a universal  human mythology  of Asian  origins,  or perhaps rather of a way  of  per­ sonifying  needs  common to  all  men  of all  races.
The  Indians appear-as  characters, comic or dramatic-in  the short  stories of  earlier   Canadian  writers   like  Gilbert   Parker, Duncan  Campbell Scott  and Alan  Sullivan, and  in  those  of such  contemporaries as  W.  0. Mitchell, Hugh Garner and  William  McConnell. Through such stories one can  almost  follow the decline  of  the  red  race  and  the  adaptation of its life to that  of the  white  man. In  the stories of today,  the  Indian appears usually in European dress, either  as a vagabond or  a worker  with  a regular   job;  his woman  is no longer  a squaw, but plucks  her  eyebrows,  uses lipstick  and  drinks  whisky. At times, as in McConnell's "Totem", a solitary  character tries  to remain  faithful to the  tradition of his an­ cestors  through struggle  against  white  civilization,  but  he is mocked  by his  own people.

AN  ITALIAN VIEW



In  Canadian  literature there  is also  a  cosmopolitan element, which  is to  be explained by the  fact  that  contemporary Canada is a mosaic  of nationalities. In this  sense,  one  can  say that  each  writer  has  immersed in  Canadian literature a sensibility  and  a particular style. Some,  born  in  Europe, arrived in Canada with a  literary   background already  adult. Others came  as children. Grove  arrived  in Canada towards his twentieth  year,  after  having  passed  through Paris,  where  he had  made  contact with  Mallarme, Verlaine, Jules  Renard and  Andre  Gide;  he was born in Switzerland and  had studied  archaeology in Paris,  Rome and Munich. Brian  Moore,  born  and  raised in Ireland, is a Canadian by acceptance. Malcolm Lowry,  an  Englishman, took  Canadian  citizenship, lived  in  Canada for  almost fifteen   years,  and   wrote  stories  inspired   by  his  Canadian  environment. From England came  also Leacock,  and  such  poets as Roy Daniells,  Ronald Hambleton and   Wilfred   Watson.   Henry   Kreisel  arrived   in  Canada less than   twenty  years old,  having  escaped  Nazi persecution in Vienna. Ethel  Wilson  was born  in South Africa,  and  Jane Rule,  author of a brilliant first novel, The Desert of the  Heart, in New Jersey.
A varied  and  rich, stimulating, active,  creative  literary world  emerges  from  all
this.  The Canadian note  in  it is very  difficult  to define.  It consists in  a mode  of living and  feeling in an atmosphere which is easier to intuit, to perceive, to assimi­ late,   than   to  explain.   In  this  way  Canadian literature speaks  for  itself. The characters of  Leacock's   Mariposa, for  example, are  not  those  of  Mark Twain's Mississippi;  the  Montreal which  Callaghan presents  in  The  Loved  and  the  Lost belongs  in  feeling  as well as geography to  another country  from  the  New  York that  Dos  Passos describes  in  Manhattan Transfer. We find  ourselves  before  two Americas, the  America  of the  United States  and  that  of  Canada. Practically two worlds:   so close, yet so different. Canadian  literature is  a  reality  and  no longer only  an  aspiration.






20



LOST  EURYDICE

The Novels of Callaghan




George Woodcock






MORLEY CALLAGHAN's  best  book  for  a  qu.rter of  a
century  is that  which  he  probably wrote  with  the least effort  and  the  least intent
of  producing a  masterpiece. It is not  one  of the  three  ambitious but  imperfect novels  he  has  published since  the  last  war; it  is the  volume  of  autobiography, That  Summer  in Paris.
That   Summer   in  Paris describes  the  months  in  1929, just  before  the  great
stock  market crash,  when   Montparnasse was  enjoying  its  last  fling  as an  inter­ national literary  centre  and  when  Morley Callaghan, a young  man  from Toronto, mingled   closely  with  several   of  the  great  figures  of  the  Lost  Generation. It is self-revealing to an  extraordinary degree,  honest  and,  despite some  curious  vani­  ties,  more   modest   than   a  first  reading  immediately  suggests,  for  it  is  a  naive wonder  that  really comes through when he tells how Sinclair Lewis said "Flaubert would  have  loved  your  work"  and  Hemingway  remarked that "Tolstoy couldn't have  done  my  'Wedding Dress'  story  better."  In  a rare  feat  of reminiscent con­ centration, Callaghan really  does bring  back  the spirit  of Paris  a generation ago and   he  offers  some  extraordinarily  interesting insights  into  the  personalities of Hemingway, Fitzgerald and  even  Joyce;  he also recreates  very  convincingly his own  personality of  those  far-off  days.  He  not  merely  recollects  his past  self;  he seems  to  rebecome it,  and  the  achievement affects even  his writing. The  tone  is that  of They  Shall Inherit  the  Earth rather  than  that  of A Passion in Rome. The  flabbiness  of prose  and  thought  that  have  characterized his most  recent  novels is absent; everything is  crisp,  clear,  unpretentious. Callaghan writes  with  the  air of
a  man  knowing the  limitations of his powers  and  then  using  them  to the full, as
he did  in the  three  novels  of his middle  period  which  are  still unexcelled  among


21

LOST EURYDICE



his longer  works  of fiction-Such is My  Beloved, They  Shall Inherit  the Earth
and  More  ]oy in Heaven.
That  Summer in Paris is more  than  a satisfying  book for the  reader  interested in literary  personages.  It is in its own way  a fascinating handbook to Callaghan's own  other  writing. For  example,  we come  across incidents and  characters which we recognize  from  his fiction, and so we begin to get some insight  into his methods of  building up  a  book.  Callaghan's realistic  theories-even if they  have  never really  dominated his essentially  moralistic  novels -have  justified  him  in  appro­ priating anything that  life happened to offer  which  was suitable to his purposes  of  the  moment. Like  many  better  novelists,  Callaghan is  less  inventive  than imaginative. He  is always ready  to use a good  character or a good situation time and  again   under various  guises, so that  the  priest  whom  he  portrays  in real  life in  That  Summer in  Paris (the  priest  who  loved  drink  too  well and  has  walked with sixteen  men  to the death  chamber)  appears, variously  transformed, in both his  early  novel,  It's  Never  Over,  and   his  middle-period  novel, More   joy in Heaven.
But  even   more   interesting   than   the  buds  of  character  and   situation  which Callaghan has  more  or less successfully transplanted into  his novels from  the life portrayed in  That   Summer  in Paris are  the  statements of his literary   principles which  are scattered through the  pages of his Paris  memoirs.  Like Samuel  Butler, George  Orwell and  Ernest  Hemingway, Callaghan came  in his own  way  (which he  does  not  very  clearly  reveal  to  us)   to  the  conclusion that-in  our  age  at least-writing must  be uncomplicated and  direct. It should  present  the object­ not  seek to  transform it into something it is not  or  use something else  to suggest or  describe  it.

I remember  deciding  that  the  root of the  trouble  with  writing  was that  poets and  storywriters  used language  to evade,  to  skip  away from  the  object,  because they could  never  bear to face the  thing  freshly and  see it freshly for what it  was in itself.

Hence metaphor must  be  avoided.  At  this  point  in  the  argument it  is ironical to find  Callaghan picking for  the special  target  of his attack  the  man  who wrote in  the  Preface to  Lyrical  Ballads  that  the  language of poetry  should  be "a selec­ tion  of  the  language really  spoken  by  men."

Those  lines, A  primrose  by the  river's  brim  a yellow  primrose  was to  him, and it  was  nothing  more,  often  troubled  me,  aroused  my  anger.  What  the  hell  else


22

LOST EURYDICE



did  Wordsworth  want  it  to  be? An orange?  A sunset?  I would ask myself, Why does one thing  have  to remind  you of something else?

It goes against  the  grain  to defend  Wordsworth at  his most inane, but  there  is a certain   obtuseness  about   Callaghan's argument which  suggests  that   he  did  not even  attempt to consider  the  uses of metaphor; at least,  however,  he makes quite clear  the  practice he intends to follow in his own work.
He  follows  this  first  statement with  hostile  references  to  "arty  writers" and uses "too  literary" as a  regular term  of condemnation. He  remarks that  "it  was part  of  my  writing creed  to  distrust  calculated charm  in  prose," and  he shows a  hostility  towards  critics  and  "writers about  writers" which -even  if his later actions  have  shown  it  to  be  rather suspect -can  be  interpreted as  part  of his general  reaction   against literary  self-consciousness. Elsewhere he  talks  of aiming at a writing  "as  transparent as glass", and in what is probably his most significant statement he tells us this:

But  I knew  what  I was seeking in  my Paris street  walks, and  in  the  typing hours-with Loretto  waiting  to retype a chapter.  It was this:  strip  the language, and  make  the style, the method,  all the psychological ramifications,  the ambience of  the  relationships,  all  the  one  thing,  so the  reader  couldn't   make  separations. Cezanne's  apples. The  appleness of apples. Yet just apples.
Wandering  around  Paris I would find myself thinking of the way Matisse looked
at  the world around  him and  find myself growing enchanted. A pumpkin, a fence, a girl, a pineapple  on a tablecloth-the thing seen freshly in a pattern  that  was a gay celebration  of  things  as they were. Why couldn't  all  people  have  the eyes and  the  heart  that  would  give them  this happy  acceptance  of reality?  The  word made  flesh. The  terrible  vanity  of  the  artist  who wanted  the  word  without  the flesh. I can see now that  I was busy rejecting even then that arrogance  of the spirit, that  fantasy  running  through  modern  letters and  thought  that  man  was alien in this universe. From  Pascal  to Henry  Miller they are the children  of St. Paul.

The   philosophy is clear  and,  as Callaghan expresses it,  consistent.  Writing is concerned with,  in  the  old  Godwinian phrase,  things  as they  are.  Its  purpose  is statement. It should   be  simple-so  "transparent" as  to  be  self-effacing. The style and  the  content should  become  one, indivisible.  Writing should  not  detach itself from  the visible world  which,  for Callaghan as for Gautier, exists. Callaghan shared  his attitude, as I have  remarked, with many writers  of his time; it was part of the great  reaction against the reign of Symbolism. At the same time, he did not reject  entirely  those  who  followed  other  directions.  We  find  him  admiring Joyce, that   most  deliberately "literary"  of  all  writers,  and  Fitzgerald, though he  also says of  him:

LOST  EURYDICE



And  what  could  be  left  for  Scott  when  the  glamorous  wandering  was over? When  'a  primrose  by a  river's  brim, a  yellow primrose  was to him,  and  it  was nothing  more.'  My old  theme.  Nothing  more;  the  wonder  of the  thing  in itself. Right for me. But not for Scott.




hE THEORY of writing  Callaghan puts  forward in That  Sum­ mer  zn Paris is  rational enough,  but  literature is not  produced by  logical  con­ sistency.  Carried to  extremes,  such  a  theory   would  result  in  a  total atrophy of feeling,  but  no  real  writer  works  by theory,  and  Callaghan  as  often  deserts  his ideal  of stark,  direct  statement as Zola does  his vaunted  scientific realism.  Every Callaghan novel deals with  man  as a moral  being,  and  hence  it is led into  realms where   the  statement cannot   be  direct; here,  even  when  metaphor is not  used obviously,  it enters  in the  larger  symbolic  sense. A  whole  essay could  be written on  the  significance  of  the  cathedrals which  appear at  crucial   points  in  every novel   that   Callaghan  wrote,  from   the  Canadian  cathedral in  his  first  novel, Strange  Fugitive, of which  he says, "You can't get  away  from  it. It's  right  in the centre   of  things",  to  the  universal  cathedral, St.  Peters,  in  Passion in  Rome, where  the  ceremonies connected  with  the  death of the  Pope  proclaim the endur­ ance  of universal  verities which  reflect  on  the  morally  tortured life of the  novel's characters.
Strange  Fugitive  is probably  nearer  than  any  other  Callaghan novel  to  being
a textbook  example of his writing  theory  carried into  practice. The  narrative style is simple  and  for  the  most  part  decorated only  by a frequent use of vernacular. At  times the  tone  is that  of a rather naive  person  laconically telling  a tale.

The  practice  was over, he  went  into  the  dressing-room  and  talked  with  some of the players. He  watched a fellow stretched  out on his belly getting a rub down. He smelled the liniment, and thought  maybe the fellow had a charlie horse. Most players  undressed  slowly, singing  and   telling stories.  They   talked  loudly  and happily.  Harry   picked  up  a fellow's ball-shoes  and  whacked  them  on  the  floor, knocking the mud out of the spikes.

There is no need  to seek far  among  the companions of Callaghan's youth  to find something very  similar.  In  the  passage  I have  quoted, Callaghan was speaking as author; here  Hemingway speaks  through the  mouth of one of his characters.

Walcott  had  been just hitting him for a long time. It  was like a baseball player pulls a  ball  and  takes some of the shock off. From  now on Walcott  commenced

LOST EURYDICE



to land solid. He certainly  was a socking-machine. Jack  was trying to block every­ thing  now. It didn't  show what  an awful  beating he was taking. In  between the rounds  I worked  on  his legs. The  muscles would flutter  under  my  hands  all the time I was working  them.  He  was as sick as hell.

Of  the  two  passages  Callaghan's is perhaps the  better,  but  the  similarity shows that,  in  their  duller  moments, both  Callaghan and  Hemingway slipped  into  an almost  anonymous period  style. Because it contains  so much  writing  of this kind, Strange  Fugitive  is the  most  dated  and  the  least individual of Callaghan's early works.
In  content, Strange Fugitive   is already   typical  Callaghan, a  novel  of  conse­
quences.  The very  first sentence strikes the  note.

Harry   Trotter, who  had  a  good  job as  foreman  m  Pape's  lumberyard,   was determined  everybody  should  understand  he loved his wife.

What follows  is  Harry's fall  from  this  respectable   niche  because  of  his failure to control  his passions.  His  predilection for violence loses him the good  job in the timber   yard.  The attractions of an  easy-going  divorcee  lead  him  away  from  his wife;  here,  incidentally, we find  a situation that  recurs  constantly in  Callaghan's work-the conflict  between  sacred  and  profane love, between  the slender, some­ what  frigid  wife  figure  and  the  abundantly fleshed  amoral mistress,  the  Jocasta figure  of  men  who,  like  Harry Trotter, loved  their  mothers too  well.  Infidelity and  careless  violence  lead  to lawlessness and  deliberate violence.  Harry becomes a  bootlegger, kills  the  boss  of  a  rival  gang,  and  dies  under   the  sawn-off  shot­ guns  of  his  enemies.  It is a  fate  that  rolls on  with  massive  inevitability,  like  a Buddhist   Karma; in  fact  the  very symbol  of Karma fills Harry's eyes as  he lies dying.  "He saw  the  wheels  of the  car  going  round  and  round, and  the  car  got bigger.  The wheels  went  round  slowly and  he was dead."
Strange   Fugitive   is a  Canadian Rake's  Progress.  At  first  sight  its  inexorable
and  highly  formalized pattern of retribution seems at  variance with  Callaghan's expressed  aim  of direct  and  natural writing. Is this really, one wonders, Cezanne's apples?   But  the   inconsistency  is  only  apparent. For  the  aim  of  stripping the language, of seeing  things  as they are and  using writing  to make statements about them  is as  much   a  moral   as an  aesthetic aim; it is part  of  the  puritanical or Jansenist revolt  against luxury  in  art  and  thought as  well as in  life. The great moralist  writers  have  always  sought  for  a  renewed  directness  of language, from Bunyan  and  Swift  to Orwell and  Gide.  But in none of them  is this simplification

LOST EURYDICE



of style an  expression  of fictional  realism;  in fact  it tends  to remove  such  writers from   the  true  business  of  the  realist  novel,  that   objective exploration  of  char­ acter   which,   as  Flaubert  and  Tolstoy   knew,   requires all  the  subtlety,  all  the mutability and  all  the  richness  of suggestion  of which  language is  capable. Pil­ grim's  Progress and  Gulliver's Travels  are  neither novels  nor  realistic,  and  even the  typical   works  of  the  later   moralists,  like  Strait  is the  Gate  and   1984,  de­ liberately abandon  plausibility  to achieve  the  highly formal and  artificial  pattern of  the  moral   parable. Callaghan belongs  in  this  company; his  view  of style  is essentially  moralistic,  and  every  one  of his works  fails  or  succeeds  according to the success with  which  he manipulates the element of parable within  it.
This  is the  underlying motivation of Callaghan's desire  to "strip down" which, as his art grows, he carries forward into such larger  elements as action  and charac­ ter.  It is the essence of the  parable-novel to keep attention focussed closely on the moral  question  which  the author is posing to the reader. Hence the multiplication of sub-plots  is to be avoided,  the leading  characters must  be few and well-defined, the  minor  characters must  be  used at  crucial  points  to  perform  actions  or make  statements that   help  to  illuminate  the  theme.   Gide  and   Camus found   in  the peculiarly French  recit the  ideal  form  and  volume  for  the  moral  parable, and Orwell's best  work  in  this  vein  was  his slightest  and  least  complicated, Animal Farm.
Similarly,  in  Callaghan, we see a  progression  in  his earlier  novels toward the simplification  of structure. At  the  same  time  there  is compensating enrichment of the  language which  reveals an inevitable relaxation of the rules Callaghan had set himself  as an  apprentice writer. It is true  that  his characters continue to speak in  that   peculiar  rough   patois  which  is his  personal version-a  kind  of  Basic Vernacular-of   the  impoverished language  of  contemporary North   American man; in  fact  the  dialogue  becomes  more  laconic  from  novel  to  novel,  but  when it  is  well  done  the  very  sparseness  provides  an  effective  contrast to  the  fuller narrative  style.
Callaghan, even  at  this  point,  rarely  resorts  to  obvious  metaphor. But  there are  ways  of  being  metaphorical without   seeming   so.  The  Imagists discovered one  of them,  for  the  objects  they  presented  with  such  clear  delineation were so evocative  as to acquire metaphorical status.  When  an orthodox Imagist like H. D. says:

In  my garden
even  the wind-flowers  lie flat broken  by the wind at last ...

LOST EURYDICE



those  wind-flowers are  a  great   deal  more  than   botanical specimens. The  very absence  of specific  links,  like those  which  are  made  in a simile,  make  images  of this kind  productive of a rich  overgrowth of association.  That objects  have  their own  ambiguity and  mean  more  in the  mind  than  facts  has been  well understood by  a  later  generation of writers,  like Robbe-Grillet and  Butor.
It is to this quasi-metaphorical use of imagery  that  Callaghan turns  abundantly in  his second  novel,  It's  Never  Over. This  is a novel of the  everlasting return; it begins and  ends  with  a street  car  journey;  it concerns  three  people  who  are close to a man  hanged for murder and  who find themselves drawn into  an inescapable circle  of  emotions which   arouse  unadmitted  hatreds and  loves and  which  lead the  hero -the  dead   man's friend -to  the  edge  of  a  second  murder. At  one point  the hero  and  the sister of the hanged  man sit on the back porch of the house where he had  lived.

"Practically all  the  flowers are  gone  now,"  Isabelle  said.
Stems of flowers were still standing  in the garden  earth; withered  flowers with broken  stems;  a  few  asters and  zinnias still in  bloom but  fading  in  the  daytime sun;  tall  stalks of flowers lying dry and  dead  against  the  fence. The  leaves were still thick on the grape-vine.
"I  hate  to see the last of them go," she said. "I  worked with them all summer." The  fading of the  flowers is clearly linked  with  Isabelle's  appearance on that  day.
Since she had  become so much  thinner  her nose now was almost too large for her
face, and  her forehead  and  chin were too prominent ... She had on a black crepe dress, a  collar  high  on  her  neck. The  dress was a little  too large,  there  was no movement  under  it, the cloth  folds were unnaturally  still.

Everything in  this  passage,  even if Callaghan does not  present  it as metaphor, in  fact  means  something more  than  itself. The  withering of the  flowers  suggests the  withering of Isabelle's hopes of life, the  ending  of summer is linked  with  the winter  of death that  hangs  over the minds of the characters throughout the novel, and   Isabelle's black  dress,  with  no  movement beneath  it  and  its  "unnaturally still"  cloth  folds,  brings  to  one's  mind  the  idea  of a  mort-cloth and  recalls  the funeral of the  hanged man  that  had  taken  place earlier  in the day. In  fact,  as we see,  Callaghan's primrose  is  no  longer  "nothing more". He  is using,  like other writers,  the traditional devices of literature.
This   becomes   increasingly  evident   in   his  third  novel, A  Broken   ]ourney, written at  the  beginning of  the  thirties.  This  is  a  very  undisciplined  novel,  in which  the characters are  far less clearly  realized  than  the central trio in It's  Never

LOST EURYDICE



Over.  It is also a  longer  book  than  either  of its predecessors, and  it anticipates such  later  long  novels  as The  Many  Colored Coat  and  Passion in  Rome  in its failure  to focus clearly on significant  action, in its limping pace and in the author's inability  to provide  a structure that  will discipline  the  volume  of material.
A Broken  journey deals with such  themes  as love and  infidelity,  the  aspects  of
innocence, and  the  contrast  between  the indifferent natural world  and  the ideals by  which   we  try  to  approach it.  In  their  own  ways,  all  the  characters  suffer tragedy  because  of the distortions  of love which  their  own  natures conspire  with external circumstances to  force  upon  them.  Peter  Gould, temporarily paralyzed after  being  pushed  downstairs by a rejected  mistress, and  thus  rendered incapable of becoming the  lover  of Marion Gibbons  on  the  trip  they  take  into  the  wilder­ ness, represents on a physical level the deprivation of the other  characters. Marion loses her  prized  virginity  to  the  boatman, Steve,  a  man  of  the  wilderness,  and feels only  disappointment and  "a  strange  impersonal  tenderness". She  departs, defeated, and  leaves  Peter  to  the  closeness of  his  clearly  symbolic  "small  white room". Indeed, A  Broken  journey  is packed  with  symbolic  objects-the roses that   stand   for   doomed   innocence,  the   threatening  waterweeds  that   clog  the river  in  the  wilderness,  the  white  unattainable mountain peak  "that looked  like an  immense,   crude   rugged  cathedral  of  rock ..."  Furthermore,  in  this  novel Callaghan  introduces  long  stretches  of landscape description which  is intended partly  to evoke  the impersonal power  of the  natural world  and  partly  to deepen  the shadows  of  mood in the depiction  of a series of doomed  relationships.





IN THE TWO YEARS- 1932 to 1934-that separate A Broken journey  from  Such  is  My  Beloved,  the   leap forward is  extraordinary.  A Broken  journey might  have  been  the  product of a young  promise  disintegrating;
Such  is My  Beloved is the  work  of a writer  who  has-at  least  for  a  period­ found   his  true  direction. Since  this  and  Callaghan's other  novels  of the  193o's form  a closely related  group  it  may  be  well to start  by indicating some of their common  characteristics. All of them  are  novels of their  time,  in which  the writer shows  a deep  consciousness  of existing  social  ills;  it is depression  conditions that originally  drive  Ronnie  to  prostitution in Such  is My  Beloved  and  scar  Michael Aikenhead's  young   manhood  with   unemployment  in  They   Shall  Inherit   the Earth.  At  the  same  time  there  is no  suggestion-at least  in  Callaghan's  own

LOST EURYDICE



attitude -of  the  political  messianism  that  spoilt  so many  novels  in  the  thirties; he is well enough aware  of the arguments of those who call themselves the socially conscious, as the  harangues of Bill Johnson show in They  Shall Inherit the Earth, but  he  passes no  Marxist judgment and  the effects of a depression  environment on his characters are  observed  objectively.  But, while at times  Callaghan appears to  present  a  realistic  picture of the  social  landscape of his decade, and  skilfully reinforces  the  illusion  by  an  effectively  controlled  description of the  physical set­ ting in which  his characters move, these are no more novels of social analysis than they  are  of  political  propaganda.
They  are essentially,  as their  biblical titles suggest, novels of moral  predicament.
Each  asks its  question. What are  the  bounds  of Christian love?  How  far  can  a man  be  free  when  all  his  acts  affect  the  lives of others?  Can  the  prodigal ever return   to  the  world  against   which  he has risen in rebellion? Can  the  individual assert   and   maintain  his  human  dignity  in  an  acquisitive   society?  Each   novel asks its questions; none  provides  the glib and  easy answer.
It  is these  moral  questions that  dominate and  shape  the  novels of Callaghan's middle  period  to the virtual exclusion  of other  considerations. While  the apparent plausibility  of  background and  of  minor  action  may  at  first  deceive  the  reader, neither the  characters nor  the structures of action  in these novels are in any sense realistic.  Considered as  probable human beings, Father Dowling and  Kip  Caley are  absurd; considered as the  God's  Fools of moral  allegory  they  at once  assume authenticity. Similarly   the  two  Aikenheads, Michael  and  his  father Andrew in They  Shall  Inherit  the  Earth,  are  radically  simplified  individuals who  live fully only in terms  of their  essential  moral  predicament; everything else about  them - their  relationships with  people  outside  the  circle  affected  by  the  death of Dave Choat, their  nai:ve loves and  ambitions-is roughly sketched. As in a picture by Tintoretto, the  almost  slurred vagueness  of detail  has  the  effect  of concentrating our  attention on  the  central pattern, the  moral  heart  of the  work.
The  patterns of action  are  equally  simplified,  and,  as in Callaghan's first novel and  in  all  the  novels of  the  classic moralist  tradition, the  chain  of consequences works  out  inexorably. Kip   is  not  allowed  to  become  merely  disillusioned with the  society  to  which  he  returns; he has  to  be  physically  as well as morally  des­ troyed.  Andrew Aikenhead is only  reprieved  after  he  has  endured all  the  bitter  stages  of  a  moral   crucifixion. The   actions  of  the  characters  themselves  are  as unrealistic  as  the   destinies   that   rule  them.   Father   Dowling's haunting  of  the prostitutes he decides  to befriend  is plausible  only as a  manifestation of  neurotic obsession;  but,  despite  the  priest's  eventual mental  breakdown -another  blow

LOST EURYDICE



of  relentless   fate -it  is  obvious  that   Callaghan is  not  wasting   his  time  on  a clinical  picture of mental  aberration. Father Dowling's actions,  like his character, assume  meaning-even  in  merely  asthetic   terms-only  if we  regard   them  as contributing to  the  symbolic  structure of  a  moral  statement. Kip  Caley's  gross naivete, his optimism, his extraordinary blindness  to the implications of anything outside  the  almost  messianic  mission  that  inspires  him-all  of these  character­ istics and  all of the  actions  that  stem from  them  would  seem improbably childish if we  did  not  apply  in  reading  More  joy in  Heaven similar  standards to those we  apply  in  reading Don Quixote.  Kip  Caley  is not  a  likely human being,  nor does he seem  intended to be one, in spite of the fact  that  the record  of a real-life criminal provided the hints on which  Callaghan worked  in writing the novel.
It is in fact  within  a clearly  established  moral  spectrum that  all the  characters and  their   actions  in  Callaghan's three  central novels  are  to  be  observed.  They range  from  the  innocent  full  circle  to  innocence's parody, the  amoral. The  in­ nocence  of Julie  in  More  joy in Heaven,  an  innocence which  experience cannot  soil, is doubled by the frightening cynicism  of the  fur-thief   Foley who leads  Kip to  his  doom.   In  They  Shall  Inherit  the  Earth  the  joyful  natural  innocence of Anna  saves  Michael morally  and  brings  him  to  the  final  reconciliation with  his father and  his own  conscience,  but  Anna  herself  is for  one perilous  evening  en­ dangered by  the  ophidian lust  of the  amoral Huck  Farr, every  man's comrade and  every  woman's enemy. The  amoral characters in  these novels always  appear as tempters; it is another  of them,  Lou,  who  holds the  prostitute Ronnie in Such is My  Beloved to  her  path  of degradation and  profits  by it.  Hence the  ultimates of the  spectrum must  be regarded as the  innocent and  the  diabolical, and  in the gulf  between  them  the  central  characters  wage  their  struggles  not  merely  within  their  own  hearts,  but  also externally,  with  the  great  amorphous being  of a con­ scienceless  society  represented  by the chorus  of minor  characters, the  indifferent, the  cowardly, the  proud  and  the  corrupt.
Callaghan's rebels, as he presents them,  are not anarchistic rebels;  it is essential to the  drama of Kip  Caley  that  he should  return to society  repenting just such  a rebellion. The  actual martyr   figures  in  all  three   novels  suffer  acutely   because normal society  misunderstands and   rejects   them.   It is the  knowledge that   his fellow  citizens  are  wrongly  accusing  him  of the  murder of his stepson  that  breaks Andrew Aikenhead's spirit;  Father Dowling's calvary  begins  when  he discovers that   a  devout   Catholic family,  famous  for  its  charitable works,  will  not  accept as  human  beings  the  prostitutes   he  befriends; Kip   Caley's   catastrophe  comes when   he  realizes  that  the  people  who  appeared full  of  enthusiastic admiration

go

LOST EURYDICE



for  his desire  to live by good  works have  been  merely enjoying the  thrill  of  asso­ ciating   with  a  notorious and  reformed   ex-criminal and  have  never  understood the  moral   urge  that   burnt within  him.  Not  merely  do  such  characters seek  re­ conciliation with  the  society  that  rejects  them; they  also  try  to  bring  about  the reconciliation of other  rejected   ones who  have  sought  refuge  in  the  sub-societies of prostitution and  crime.  The  sinister  unresponsiveness of society, and  the moral  insensitiveness  of its symbolic figures-judges, bishops, politicians-suggests that  Callaghan  is  posing   the  classic  opposition   between   moral   man   and   immoral society,  between   the  actions   urged   by  conscience  and   the  actions   dictated  by custom  and  institution. The  ambiguous symbolism  of the  Cathedral, particularly in  Such  is  My  Beloved,  extends  this  dichotomy into  the  world  of religion,  into the  difference between   acts  spurred by Christian compassion  and  acts  necessary for  the  institutional stability  of the  church on earth.
In  writing   these  novels  Callaghan used  effectively  the  limited   resources  of  a talent  which  his own  statements on  his early  aims in  writing  have  defined.  Like the  French writers  of the  recits, he chose a simple  moral  theme  and  gave it flesh and   substance  through  the  lives  of  his  characters.  Economy of  structure and action,  simplicity   of  language  and  imagery, a  bold  use of  a  few  key symbolic settings  in  each  novel, such  as the  hotel  room  in More  joy In  Heaven,  the  lake and  the  rooming house  in  They  Shall Inherit  the Earth;  these elements provide an  appropriate form  for  the  kind  of  parable Callaghan set  out  to  write  at  this period.  The novels  are  not  flawless.  At  times  the  feeling  softens  into  sentimen­ tality; at  times  the  clear  writing  muddies into  dullness;  at  times  the  characters are  not  plausible  even  within  their  own  allegorical  framework. But  as  a  group  these  three  novels,  all  published between  1934  and  1937,  represent  Callaghan's best  work  outside  some  of his short  stories,  and  one of the  real  achievements in Canadian  writing.





EURTEEN  YEARS passed  before  Callaghan's next  novel,  The Loved  and  The   Lost,  appeared  in  1951,  and   another  nine   years  before  The Many  Colored Coat was published  in 1g6o, to be followed  by A Passion in Rome in  1961.  I do  not  know  the  reason  for  the  long  interval between  the  novels of the   193o's   and   The   Loved  and  the  Lost  (with  its  curious   Fitzgeraldish title) in  the  195o's.  But  for  the  purposes  of this essay the biographical details  are  un-

LOST EURYDICE



important. What is important is that  since  the  last  war  Callaghan has been  try­ ing a somewhat different  kind of novel, which  has brought him on a long and not entirely  successful  journey  away  from  his early  aims in writing. Abandoning the recit-like  form   of  his  best  period,  he  has  sought   the  complexity of  the  classic realistic  novel.  A  Passion in  Rome  is described   twice  on  the  dust  jacket  as "A Major   Novel", and,  while  the  publisher   may  have  been  responsible  for  this  so patently inaccurate description, there  is no  doubt  that  ever  since  the  war  Cal­  laghan has been  seeking to produce a successful work  of greater dimensions than  anything  he  had   written   before.
Unfortunately  his  three  most  recent  novels  have  been  large  in  size  but  not in  texture. Even  the  monolithic grandeur  of  moral   tragedy   that  lingers  in  the mind  after  reading Such is My  Beloved or More  Joy in Heaven  is totally  absent from  one's  recollection  of The  Loved  and the  Lost or either  of its successors.
On  reading The  Loved and the Lost one  immediately perceives  an  absence  of
the  unity  of conception that  marked  its predecessors.  There is a moral  theme  of a  kind,  rather indistinctly  embodied in  former Professor  McAlpine's inner  con­ flict  over  his infatuation for  the  ambiguous Peggy  Sanderson and  his  neglect  of the  cold,  career-ensuring Junior  Leaguer, Catherine  Carver.  But  in  the  main Callaghan is seeking other  goals, and  The  Loved and the Lost becomes a curious  grafting together   of  the  social  novel  and   the  romance. The  overworld  of  the Carvers and  their  quasi-patrician "society" set is opposed  by  the  underworld of the   negro   cabarets where   Peggy  Sanderson,  even  if  she   rejects   conventional society,  vainly  seeks  acceptance by  its  unconventional  substitute. Peggy  herself becomes  in  Jim's sentimental vision  a  kind  of   princesse  lointaine,  accompanied by symbolical devices -the carved  leopard  and  the  church which  the  hero  can never  again   discover-that belong  in  the  tradition of  courtly   romance. Jim's desire  for  Peggy  never seems much  more  real than  its object,  and  their  relation­ ship  enters  a  further stage  of  romantic  mistiness  as the  novel  assumes  the  form of an  Orpheus myth,  with  Jim  going into  the  underworld to rescue  his Eurydice and  losing  her  to death  when  gaining her  seems most  assured.  The  world  of the Carvers is hardly   more  convincing or  consistent  than  that  of  Peggy  Sanderson; one  cannot take  seriously either  Catherine Carver's combination of gentility  and vulgarity or  McAlpine's odd  values  when  in  her  company, values  which  make  a scholar of  history  imagine  that   he  has  really  found   his vocation when  he is al­ lowed  to  become  a  columnist  for  the  Carver newspaper with  its dubious  aims.
In  some  respects  The   Many  Colored  Coat  is nearer the  earlier   novels.  The
moral   question   of  the  nature of  innocence is elaborately  posed.  A  respectable


32

LOST EURYDICE



bank  manager, Scotty  Bowman, is fascinated by  the  personality and  the  com­ pany  of a free-spending, good-natured publicity  man,  Harry Lane.  The glamour of  Harry's world  and  the  easy  charms of one  of the  tarts  who  move  within  it arouse  in Scotty  a longing  for the kind of extravagant living he has never allowed himself.  He  offers Harry a  bank  loan  to buy speculative stocks;  he makes  a false statement  to  his  head   office,  and   then  the  stocks  crash.  Scotty  is  arrested   for embezzlement, and  at  the  trial  Harry is shown  in a dubious  light  by a doggedly loyal but  rather thick-witted friend  of Scotty, the boxer turned tailor Mike Cohn.  Scotty  commits  suicide  in  prison.  The  hatred   between  Harry  and   Mike  grows, and  it excites  the  mocking  laughter of the  Montreal bar-flies  when  Harry starts  to  wear,  in  and  out  of season,  a shoddy  jacket  Mike  had  made  for  him.  In  the end,  provoked beyond  endurance by  Harry's clowning,  Mike  knocks  him  down a flight  of stairs,  and  Harry is paralyzed  temporarily  (an  echo  of Peter  Gould's misfortune in  A  Broken  journey). At  the  trial  which  follows,  Harry, who  has suddenly seen  the  relationship between  himself  and  Scotty  in another focus, does not  appear; Mike  seems  triumphant, only  to  abdicate at  that  moment the  right of  judgment he  has  previously  exercised.  The  moral  of  the  novel -and  there seems  no  description quite  so adequate  as  that  old-fashioned term-is summed  up  in  the  question Harry asks himself,  "if  innocence  is like  a  two-edged sword without a  handle, and  if you  gripped it  and  used it, it cut  you so painfully you had  to lash  out  blindly,  seeking vengeance on someone for the  bleeding."
This  is a  theme  of the  same  order  as those which  inspired Callaghan's  novels
of the thirties, but  it is not served  by the same simplicity  and  economy  of writing. Rather like  Hemingway in  The  Old  Man  and the Sea, Callaghan drags  out  to tedium  an  idea  that  could  have  been  admirably treated  in  half  the  318 pages to which  The  Many  Colored  Coat  actually  runs.  The  looseness of  construction is paralleled in the characterization, which  hovers uneasily between  the sharpness of caricature and  the  flabbiness  of sentimental pseudo-realism. The  women  charac­ ters  are  the  most  ill-drawn. Like  most  Canadian male  authors,  Callaghan has always  had   difficulty  in  portraying women  except  as  types-the  cold,  proud  pseudo-saint  and   the  easy-hearted, loose-legged  floozie;  the  leading women  in The  Many  Colored Coat  represent these types at  their  worst,  Mollie  an  insuffer­ able  prig  and  Annie  a kind  of soft-centred candy  doll.
A Passion in Rome  is Callaghan's most recent,  most ambitious and least success­
ful  novel.  Unlike   his earlier   novels,  in  all of which  the  characters were  seeking justification   and   acceptance in  their  own  worlds,  A  Passion in  Rome  concerns two  lonelinesses  meeting  in  an  alien  setting.  From  the  very  moment when  Sam


33

LOST EURYDICE



Raymond reaches  Rome,  feeling scared  and  alone,  the  emphasis  is on  the  need, not  to find  one's  world, so much  as to find  oneself.  Sam,  an  unsuccessful  painter turned news-photographer, is another latter-day Orpheus who  discovers  his  par­ ticular   Eurydice in  Anna,  a television  singer  ruined   by  drink. Each  of  the  two seeks  some  new  accepting world;  Sam  wonders "if  there  couldn't  still  be some one  place  in  the  world  where  a man's  life might  take  on  meaning," and Anna, with  Italian blood  in her  veins, lives in  a displaced American's fantasy  of being "a  Roman woman". Both  learn  that  one  cannot fly through  space  away  from oneself.  The   only  Rome  they  can  find  is  the  false  Rome  of  tourists,  pilgrims,  newsmen; the  real  Rome  of the  little dark  Romans is always closed and  hostile, and  they  are  forced  to face each  other  in the  closeness of a symbolic single  room, where  Sam  searches  into  the  darkness,  draws  Anna into  the light  and  then  loses this  Eurydice whom  he  is too  anxious  to  keep.  In  the  moment  of loss he finds himself,  and  so the  two part  heroically  to face  their individual futures; the  novel ends,  if not  happily,  at least triumphantly,  as  Callaghan tells us in an excruciat­ ing  last sentence. "He  felt all at once fiercely exultant."
A  Passion in  Rome  is clumsily  constructed and  so verbose  that  one  wonders
what  has happened to the old vows to achieve  a writing "as  transparent as glass". The  set  pieces  of the  Pope's  funeral and  the  election  of  his successor  project  a background of stuccoish  unreality  against  which  the human drama never emerges into authenticity. Sam is the kind of improbable romantic fool who in Callaghan's earlier phase  might  have  been  raised  to something approaching  allegorical  gran­ deur. But  A  Passion in  Rome  has  all  the  signs  of  being  intended as  a  realistic novel,  and  in  a  setting  described  with  such  crowded detail  a  hero  of  this  kind is out  of place.  Anna  comes into  the  novel  fighting, interesting in  her sulky  per­ versity,  and   one  expects  much  of  her;   but  Sam's  devotion irons  out her  indi­  viduality  to  a  self-abnegating silliness which   the  author himself  seems  to  have found  unendurable, since  at  this  point   he  quickly   draws the  novel  to  an  end.
As  characters Sam  and  Anna   are  too  mechanically exemplary to  have  any place  in  a  novel  in  the  realist  tradition, but  at  the  same  time  insufficiently  dis­ tilled  to form  the  core of an effective moral  parable. Ultimately the test of  charac­ ters  lies in what  they say and  how  they speak.  Callaghan's earlier  characters are often  laconic  in their  peculiar  Callaghanese way of speaking; but they are usually idiosyncratic enough   to  be  acceptable. The   language in  which  Sam  and  Anna  converse  is  undifferentiated substandard North  American. One  opens  the  book at  random and  is faced,  usually,  by something like this:



34

LOST EURYDICE



"Do you really have to go singing there, Carla?" he asked, surprised.
"He'll   pay  me,  Sam.  I'll  be  getting  some money.  Singing  and  getting  some money."
"You  just said he wouldn't  pay you much."
"Look, Sam. You're the boss. Don't  you want me to sing there?"
"I  don't  care,"  he  said,  laughing  awkwardly.  "I  mean  the  thing  was to have you see you could sing anywhere.  There's  nothing to stop you doing anything  you want. It's  settled  now, and  you're free in your mind about  it."
"It means  some money for  just being myself, Sam. It's  easy." "How much?"
"A  couple  of hours  a night.  See that  you get ten thousand  lire a night  out of him, Sam."
"About a hundred  a week, eh?"

Such   passages  proliferate, filling  up  pages  but  achieving very  little  else. Thus the  search  for  transparency in  writing  has  ended  in  a  kind  of  dialogue  so dull that  its effect  is one  of complete  opacity.
Has   another  Eurydice vanished   into   the   darkness?   Certainly  A  Passion in
Rome  demonstrates more  convincingly than  ever  that  Callaghan is never  likely to be a good  novelist  in  the  grand  manner; the  moralist  allegories  of the  thirties remain   his best  works  of longer  fiction.  Yet  perhaps it  is not  too  late  to expect a  turn   in  that   devious   path   which  Callaghan's inspiration has  followed.   The freshness  and   honesty   and   directness  of  That   Summer  in  Paris, springing up unexpectedly between  two such  laborious  works as The  Many  Colored Coat and A Passion in Rome, showed  that  Callaghan has not yet lost the qualities which­ however   he  may  have  recently  neglected  them-have  made   him  a  Canadian writer   who  cannot be  overlooked.







35



THEY  SHALL
HAVE ARCANA



E. B. Gose







sOMEWHERE ALONG THE LINE,  the medica] prof =ion  be­ came  more attached  to gold and  methodology  than  to the human  nature  of  the patient.  Chaucer   recorded  this  in  the  fourteenth   century,  as did  Paracelsus  in the sixteenth.  After sixty years of psychiatry, modem  readers  are  probably sym­ pathetic  with  Paracelsus'  concern  for the  patient's  emotions,  and  perhaps  even with his mystical evocation of alchemy. In  1529 he made an attack  on the estab­ lishment  of physicians, looking to the occult for future  progress.

Don't trust you Galen and Avicenna. The Stone will be crushed and the Heaven [i.e., alchemy and astronomy] will make new doctors who know the four elements, magic and  Cabbala. They will be adepts  and archei.  They will be chemists and possess the quintessence. They shall have arcana, the tinctures, and the mysteries.'

The  attempt  to tum  some such yearning for a spiritual  key to the secrets of life into active and  practical  help for man is made  by the hero of Gwendolyn  Mac­ Ewen's  novel,  julian the  Magician.2     Like  the  hero  of  Bergman's  movie, The Magician, he travels with a small troop in a wagon from town to town. He also meets  with  "the  town  elders"  and  is quizzed  by the  sceptical  town  physician whose wife feels an  affinity for the magician.  Like the other  again, Julian  both believes and  doubts  the  mysteries and  illusions he  is  involved  in. Actually  his relation  to them  is quite different,  but  before we  begin  to discover how, let me mention  some of the defects of Miss MacEwen's novel.
Bergman's  strong  point-his  mastery of the  mood  and  tone  which  force us to suspend  disbelief -is  unfortunately  her weak point. The  setting of the novel is vaguely post-Renaissance, but the language is poetic and ironic, slangy modem and  analytic.  The  ingredients  do  not  mix smoothly.  There   remains  the story:

THEY SHALL HAVE ARCANA



Julian is  imitating  Christ,   as  indicated  not  only  by  chapter titles  but  by  long italicized  passages  paraphrased from  appropriate sections of the  New Testament. Consequently,  the   reader  who   knows  what   happened  to  Christ   knows   what happens to Julian the Magician. If, therefore, this study, which  began  in alchemy, now  leaves  behind  any  attempt to deal  with  the story as such,  and  moves  on to more  alchemy,  a fairy  tale,  and  mystical  psychiatry,  my excuse is that  Miss  Mac­ Ewen  brings  it on  herself.
Like  this  study,  her  book  is self-conscious.  Especially  so is her  title  character. The  parallels with  the  life of Christ  are  there  mainly  because  Julian forces  them on  himself  and  others.  By the  time  we reach  the  end  of the  novel,  we are  even ready  to believe  that  they  are  the natural manifestation of an  archetypal pattern. I mention this possibility to indicate that  Miss MacEwen is also self-conscious. Undigested  references  to  little-read religious  figures  help  attest  to  this:   we  are given   quotations  from   Celsus,  in   his  anti-Christian  work;   Origen,  the   early church father who  answered him;  Boehme  and  Paracelsus; the  Zohar, the  Kab­ balah   and  the  Pistis  Sophia  ("a  Christian Gnostic  writing   with  roots  in  upper  Egypt" [p. 113]).
"Undigested," I  said,  as  references. But  suppose  we  take  seriously  the  world
this  opens  up  to Julian and  his author. Suppose  we look  at  the  details  and  pat­ terns of the  novel in the light of Julian's main difference  with  his teacher Kardin. Kardin is  a  magician  whose  real  interest  is in  alchemy,   that   is, in  the  real  if mysterious   changes   substances  can   undergo. Julian  is  a  magician  whose  real interest  is "human alchemy," that  is, the real if mysterious changes people  under­ go.  Holding  the  full  implications of  the  "human" part   until  later,   let's  begin with  the  alchemic part  of the  phrase.  Julian scorns the magician  who can see no farther than  trickery.  "Woe to a pig like Cagliostro who shoved  gold  into  a tube  during an  experiment where  he claimed  to  'transmute' metal!" (p.  1 12). This opinion  takes  on force  when  we remember Julian's comment on his mother from the  previous   page: "I  think   that   even  after  20 years  she  still  feels  that   gypsy shoving  me  into  her  womb." Add  to  the  verb  "shove" the  fact  that  Julian has his gypsy father's dark  skin  but  blond  "golden hair", and  we realize  an  intended parallel. Just  as Julian has  a  "dark" past  (illegitimacy)  but  can  have  a golden future, so  as  a  human  alchemist he  tries  to  create  gold  out  of  lead,  light  out of dark.
The  two  undoubted miracles  that  Julian performs  are first to give an idiot  the light  of  human intelligence and  second  to give a blind  man  the  light  of human vision.  Both  miracles  occur  in  the  same  place,  by the  river  in  the  dark, in  the

37

THEY  SHALL  HAVE ARCANA



mud  and  bullrushes. The  first man  appears to an  outside  observer  like "a  log,  a piece  of darkness" ( p. 3 I). The  second  one has  his eyes wiped  with  Julian's spit mixed  with  dirt; he is then  sent  to  the  river  whence  he  returns dripping with riverweed, his sight  restored.  The  crowd  hails  Julian as a man  of God,  a "divine black-christ" ( p. 56). Julian runs  away,  partly  because  he is dazed  and  humble, but  also partly  out  of self-irony.  When,  for instance, his disciple  Peter  asks of the first   miracle,   "what did   you  do  there?" Julian  answers,   "Spit  spittle! Made charms ... peed  in  the  bullrushes!" (p.  39  author's ellipses). He  also speaks  of "magic manure." Earlier,   while  still  an  apprentice magician, he  had  noted  in his diary,  "bullrushes, by the way-I noticed  this yesterday-are actually  bulls' feces"  ( p.  II 9). He is in other  words working  from  the dark  principle which the Gnostics,  the  alchemists  and  modern psychiatry have  all seen  as the  true source of  "high" aspiration.
An  alchemical  motto  was  "Our gold  is  not   vulgar  gold."  Although early practitioners,  as  well  as  late,   certainly   worked   with   physical   substances, the spiritual  theme   is  present  in  one  of  the  earliest   of  alchemical documents, the Emerald Tablet of Hermes  Trismegistus, a  brief,  general, and  typically  obscure series of statements. I quote  two:

What  is below, is like what is above, and what is above is like that which is below, for the  performing  of the marvels of the one thing.
It ascends from the earth into the heaven, and again descends into the earth  and receives the power of the superiors and inferiors.3

Similarly, Julian in his diary  writes,

The  wholes are  parts of a Whole and  the Whole has all parts  and  no parts. lAO lAO  lAO. Is  the  High Self going forth  in manifestation.  lAO is the disciplined lower mind.
lAO  is christ and I am iao.4

We  will  follow  this  central  identification or  transformation farther  presently. But  first  we  must  look at  the  passage  preceding the  foregoing in  Julian's diary. "Saturn devoured his children, says Boehme.  What is this? ... The  magician eats his parts.  We eat our parts to form  wholes"  ( p. I 24). Saturn was lead in alchemic symbolism.  He  was  also  the  devouring father  ( Cronos)  who  ate  the  younger gods,  one  of  whom  was  destined  to  overthrow him.  That one,  Jupiter  (Zeus), forced  him  to disgorge the glory he contained. We can see a basis, in other  words, for   the  alchemic symbolism.  But  the  same  situation  can  also  be  phrased   in  a

g8

THEY SHALL HAVE ARCANA



pattern with   religious  overtones:  the  dark  wild  man  both  contains and  is the forerunner of the  saviour  figure.
In  case this  way  of putting it doesn't  automatically turn  the  reader's mind  to
the  New Testament, let's look at  the first of Miss MacEwen's italic  passages,  her version  of John the  Baptist: "The wild  man,  standing knee-deep in  the  water, his coat of camel's hair  dripping and  absurd  ... acknowledged and  baptized him" ( p. I 4). "Him" is of  course  Christ,  or  in  the  novel  Julian.  Keeping in  mind Julian's golden  hair  "like  the  sun  rising"  (p.  42), and  not  forgetting Saturn as the  heavy  father, I would  like to  turn  aside from  the  novel  for  a  page  or  two, and   assert  that   Miss  MacEwen's  description of  John  the  Baptist  is strikingly similar  to the  description given in a German folk tale of its title character, "Iron Hans" (as collected  by the brothers  Grimm) . Because the tale itself is relevant­ like  alchemy  a  carryover from  the  dark  ages-I shall  simply  retell  it as briefly
as possible.



A MAN  HUNTING  GAME in  a forest  where  other  huntsmen had  disappeared saw a naked  arm  reach  out of a deep  pool and  draw  in his dog.
When  three  men  had  emptied the  pool with  pails, they discovered  at the  bottom a  wild  man   whose  hair  hung  down  over  his face  to  his  knees.  This  wild  man (Iron  Hans)  was  bound and  taken  to  the  castle  where  the  king  had  an  iron cage  made  for  him.  The  key to it was entrusted to the  queen. The  king's  young son,  playing  alone  in  the  courtyard one  day,  bounced his golden  ball  into  the cage  by  mistake.  Iron   Hans   refused  to give it  back  unless freed.  When  the  boy reluctantly agreed, the  wild  man  told  him  that  the  key lay  under   his mother's pillow.  The boy  got  it,  but  in  opening  the  cage  door  pinched his fingers.  The wild  man   came   out,  gave  him  the  golden  ball  and  started to  leave.  The   boy pleaded   with  him  not  to  go  or  he would  be beaten  for  freeing him.  Iron  Hans then  set  the  boy  on  his shoulder and  carried  him  into  the  depths  of the  forest.
There he  explained that   the  boy  must  stay  with  him,  but  that  he  would  be treated well if he  did  as he  was told.  "I have  treasure and  gold  enough  and  to spare,   more  than   anyone in  the  whole  world." The  boy's  task  was  to  guard   a golden  well to see that  nothing fell in and  contaminated it. As he sat by it, how­ ever,  the  boy's  finger  pained  him  so much  that  involuntarily he dipped  it  in the water.  It came  out  gilded  and  nothing  he could  do would  take off the gold. Iron  Hans   discovered  it,  but  let  him  off.  Next  a  hair  from  his  head  fell  in.  Again

39

THEY  SHALL HAVE ARCANA



he was let off. The  third time, as he was looking at himself in the water, his long hair  fell in, and  when he pulled it out, it was golden  and  glittered  like the sun. He tied his handkerchief  over it, but Iron  Hans exposed it and said that this time he must  banish  the  boy. Since he knew the  boy's heart  was not bad,  however, Iron  Hans  granted  him one thing. If he were ever in need,  he could come and call for Iron  Hans  at the edge of the forest.
Keeping  a cap over his gold hair, the youth became a cook's helper to a king. When  the king asked why he did not take off his cap in the royal presence, the youth  answered  that  he  had  a  bad  wound  on  his head.  He  then  became  the gardener's  boy. The  king's daughter,  attracted  by the reflection of his hair, asked him for some flowers. To  her surprise he brought  her wild ones; when he would not  take  off his cap,  she snatched  it off. Then  she gave  him  some gold coins. He gave them to the gardener's  children to play with. This sequence was repeated a second day. On  the third  day he foiled her efforts.
War  broke  out,  and  the  youth  was determined   to  help,  despite the  ridicule of the warriors. He rode a three-legged horse to the forest where he called "Iron Hans!" Thanks  to the wild man,  the youth was able to lead an iron troop on a fiery charger  and  win the day for the king. Afterwards,  hoping  to find out who his unknown  helper  was, the king gave a  three-day  feast. On  the first day, the princess threw  a  golden  apple  which  was caught  by the  youth,  who  had  been outfitted  again  by Iron  Hans.  The  second day  the  same  thing  happened.  The third  day,  the  youth,  dressed in  black  armor,  was  pursued.  He  escaped  after being wounded  in the leg, but  his helmet fell off, exposing his golden hair.
Next  day  the  princess asked about  the gardener's boy. The  gardener  said he was working in the garden and had given his children  three golden apples. Again the  princess removed his cap, and  charged  him with being the unknown  knight. He  admitted  it, and  being asked by the king to name  a reward  for his help, he chose  the  princess. During  the  wedding,  a  proud  king  burst  into  the  hall.  He identified  himself as Iron  Hans,  whose bewitchment  the  youth  had  broken. All his treasure  now belonged to the youth.
Despite my abbreviated  telling of it, I assume that  a sense of the impressiveness of this simple tale comes through. But what about  the novel we are ostensibly considering?  Comparing  the two, we might draw  the moral  that  Miss MacEwen needs a greater  mastery of the genre  to make  the  image  patterns  work for  her as naturally  as they do in the tale (where the impersonal  form of repeated  tellings is presumably  substituted  for  the  conscious form  that  a single individual  must give) . Yet,  as we have seen, a great  deal  of effective  patterning does exist in

THEY SHALL  HAVE ARCANA



julian  the  Magician,  and  we  can  find  more  now that  we have  the  other  to put beside  it.




1'BEGIN  WITH "Iron Hans", then,  I will pass by the Freudian sexual  overtones without denying  them.  Neither  will I try  at  this  point  to apply
Jung directly,  even  though he  deals  with  three-  and  four-legged horses  among more  interesting  things   in  his  essay  on  "The  Phenomenology of  the  Spirit  in Fairy  Tales". Working instead with  what  we have  been  dealing with,  we must note  the alchemic motif.  From  one point of view the youth is engaged in a process which  results  in  the  transformation of  base  metal  into  gold   (Iron Hans into  a king). The boy's  actual  father could  see no use for the  wild  man  but  to confine him  in  iron.  But  the  boy contributes his little  bit of gold  to liberate Iron  Hans, who  becomes  his  guardian father and  finally  gives him  a  treasure of gold.  We must  also  note  that   the  youth  consistently  gives away  his gold  and  never  asks for the  treasure. On  the  other  hand   ("our gold is not  vulgar  gold"), the  youth's unaided actions  do cause  his hair  to tum gold.
At  this  point,  however,  we  must  bring  in  a second  level, the  Christian motif, which  is also  working  in  the  tale.  Releasing  the  wild  man,  the  boy  pinches  his fingers,  one  of which  he  presumably then  puts  in the  well. His  head  bandaged, he  tells  the  king  he  has  a  wound  on  it.  Later,  dressed  in  black,  he is wounded just  before  his  gold  hair  is  revealed.   Not  only  is there  a  conjunction of  dark­ wound-gold, there  is  a  pattern of  the  saviour   (first  of  Iron   Hans, then  of  the father  of  the  princess), of  his  being  wounded  while  helping, of  his  somehow turning the  hurt   to  help,  as if  the  highest  good  of gold  or  sun  could  be inter­ changeable with  hurt  or sacrifice.  Although we are only  a step  from  the  Legend  of the  Grail,  I will forbear and  tum back  to Julian.
He  also has  brought light  out  of black,  using the water.  Instead of the golden
well he has  a river.  But Julian does not  have  what  Christ  and  the  youth  had,  an actual wild  man  to show  him  the  way. Although John the  Baptist  is evoked,  it is only as an  analogue. Julian must  baptize  himself. To  put  it another way, we can say that  he  invokes  what  the  wild  man  stands  for:  brute  nature, uncivilized  yet powerful, potentially divine. 5   We  have  already  seen Miss MacEwen's images  for it -darkness,  dirt,   excrement. In   addition, toward   the  end  of  the  novel,  she introduces through Julian's diary  an  "incident" that  contains a  wild  figure  and

THEY  SHALL  HAVE ARCANA



explains  the  "panic" that  gripped  the  crowd  after  Julian's performances. At the request  of his naive  disciple, Julian tells a myth  or parable.

The  boy's name was Ernest and he was. A sort of dandelion  optimism drove him to do it....
. . . He  began a relentless search for the great dead god Pan, fanning  out over the
whole  countryside.  He  had  two  assistants and  they  split  up  to form  a  shifting, searching triangle of which Ernest was the apex.  (p. 136)

The  triangle is searching for another figure  which  will make it a square, in Jung's terms  change the incomplete trinity  into  a quaternity, a stable  number and  rela­ tion,  if it  includes  one  opposite.  This  opposite   may  be  brought in  by  conjunc­ tion,  in which  case she is a woman  (as the  princess the youth  marries or Mary  in the  Catholic church), or by union,  in  which  case the  hero  must  give  himself  at some  point  to night,  to the shadow  or  dark  wild  man  (as  the  "Devil" or  Pan). But  the  two  assistants  fall  asleep  (under three  oaks), and  Ernest  confronts Pan by himself.  He  berates  Pan for being dead  and  leaves with Pan's apologies for not existing  ringing in  his ears.   (Julian says of  the  parable:   "Satire [can]  reflect [a]   tragic  situation.")
At  first  we  are  tempted   to  take  Julian as  Ernest, since  he  can  be  connected with  the gold-topped dandelion. On  the other  hand, Julian has two lower helpers, Johan and  Aubrey,  who adding Peter as Ernest, can be seen as the three searchers. The  irony  of Peter's  relation  to Julian is similar  to that  in the Ernest-Pan relation: He  wants  to help  Julian and  to be led, but  he cannot believe in Julian's divinity or  his  miracles.  Julian, as the  "black   Christ" whose  performances cause  panic, is a  plausible  Pan  figure.  Instead of an  enchanting reed  pipe,  he  has  bullrushes by the  river;  his first miracle  is called "the divine cure  by the  bullrushes" ( p. 45) .
True union   resolves  polarities,  and   we  have  seen  that   for  Julian the  whole process  must  be  internal; he cannot naively  look for  salvation from  a god  or  a process  outside  himself.  In  the  Saturn passage  he said,  "The  magician eats  his parts  ... to form  wholes." Clearly  he has taken  the Freudian concept  of the father as a castration threat  beyond  its biological  limitations. He  makes  a virtue  out  of castration or the  loss of sexual  fulfilment, as have  comparable figures  in history: Origen castrated himself the  better  to serve  God.  Paracelsus may  have  moved  as Julian did  beyond  Celsus  to an  acceptance of  Christ's role of magus,  a miracle worker  free  from  the  contamination of  women.
The   search   for  purity  and  the  protection from  contamination links  up  with the  golden  well which  Iron  Hans  sent the youth  to guard. If he had  been success-

42

THEY SHALL HAVE  ARCANA



ful  in  this  appointed  task,  we  can  speculate   that  the  youth   would   have  won through to  another kind  of  victory  than   that  which  he  achieves  in  the  outside world.  Instead of  the  hero's victory   (success  in  battle  followed  by  conjunction with  the  princess), he would  have  achieved  the triumph of the  patient guardian, the seer, the pure  Narcissus  (staring at his image in the water  without contaminat­ ing  it). As it  works  out,  the  youth  has to  purge  his impurity  (his long  hair) in action,  but  this should  not keep us from  realizing  that  it was theoretically possible for  him  to be a successful Narcissus.  Julian becomes one, becomes  "a  perfect  gold fish from  the water" (p. 8I). (The youth in "Iron Hans" saw gold fish swimming  in  the  well.)   And  Heletius in  The Golden  Calf quotes  an  adept in  "the philo­ sophical  mystery"  of alchemy: "Break  open  the glassy seal of Hermes, in which the  Sun  sends  forth   a great  splendor with  his  marvellous  colored  metallic  rays, and  in which  looking  glass the  eyes of  Narcissus behold  the  transmutable metals, for  out  of  those  ways  the  true  adept  philosophers  gather their  fire"   (Taylor, p.  I47)-
( Lest this talk of purity  confuse the reader  who still recalls the earlier  emphasis
on  darkness  and  dung, let  me  re-emphasize the  paradox on  which  alchemy  was based: it is out of the impurity of dark  matter that divine light  comes. Like Christ Julian dies  on  a  cross  and  is buried  in  darkness.  The  youth  is technically held captive   in  a  dark   forest  by  Iron   Hans   while  he  guards the  golden   well.  One phase  of the  alchemic process was frequently the heating  of a substance by plac­ ing its container in dung.  A later  alchemic  phase is conjunction. Not  to move on to it  could  be  termed, in  the  Freudian reduction, to  remain  in  the  anal  instead of  moving  out  to  the  sexual.  Like  other  reductionists who  are  out  to  break  the code,  Freud often  seems not  to get the  point  that  the high  is nonetheless high for being  rooted  in  the  low.)
To  continue our  examination of Julian as free from one kind  of contamination, we should  note that  Miss MacEwen goes out of her way to underline his separation from   womankind. His  refusal  of  sex  gives  him  a  kind  of  passive  power.  "My gender   is  no  matter-my  mind   is decidedly   bi-sexual;   this  I  can  navigate in both  female  and  male  territory as freely as grass, and  anticipate both  female  and male  qualities in  all  things"  ( p.   I 2 I ) •  This  condition  is a  possible stage  in the imitation of Christ,  yet according to Jung it is a step  beyond  Christian dualism. "The self  is  a  union   of  opposites   par   excellence, and   this  is where  it  differs essentially  from   the  Christian symbol.  The  androgyny of  Christ   is  the  utmost concession  the  Church has  made  to  the  problem  of opposites." 6
Early  in  the  book,  Julian told  his  disciples,  "Inside the  womb ... of the  art,


43

THEY  SHALL  HAVE ARCANA



my  dear   Peter  ... is a  foetus,  another art.  The   virgin   craft  ... expands,  feeds the  other ..."  (p.  29). The  art  of magic  contains within  it the seed of another. Julian had  to allow  a  passive feminine  process  to go on in him  for  that  other  to grow.   Later  he  quotes  Boehme:    "Let   the   artist   but  consider  ... how  he  may awaken  the  dead   and  disappeared life  which  ... lies  hidden and  captivated in the  curse." Then, "if  he does  but  bring  it  so far,  it  works  of itself ..."  (p.  35, author's ellipses  in  foregoing  quotations). This  process  goes  on  at  the  religious level  as well.

Man  is the  unconscious agent  of God's  creative  will. He  pushes genesis.... And I have become a conscious agent. Have dipped  into my own divinity and found it warm.  And thus  did I approach  the conscious state of deity within  myself, Julian the Magician.
I am therefore  conscious God ( p.I 50)

The   similarity of  this  conclusion   to  Jung's  unorthodox Christian view  is clear.
The   unavoidable internal contradictions in  the image  of the  Creator-God can be reconciled  in the unity and  wholeness of the self as the coniunctio oppositorum of the  alchemist or as a unio  mystica.  In  the  experience of the self it is no longer the  opposites  "God" and  "man" that  are  reconciled, as it was before,  but  rather the  opposites   within   the  God-image itself.  That is  the  meaning of  the  divine service,  of  the  service  which  man  can  render  to  God,  that   light  may  emerge from  the  darkness,  that  the  Creator may  become  conscious  of His creation, and man  conscious  of himself.7
If Julian's cry is less measured  and  more  triumphant than  Jung's, it is because he is about  to suffer  the fate  of the  Western  man  who becomes  God: he is about to  be  re-absorbed into  nature.
In  conclusion, I would  say  that  by  allowing  "the dead  and  disappeared life" to  awaken  in  Julian  and   through  him  in  other   characters in  the  novel,  Miss MacEwen  has  created   patterns which  may  awaken her  readers also.  The  only thing  she  lacks  is enough  control  of  the  novel  as  a  form,  and  by  the  time  she gets  into  the  diary,  she has  begun  to  develop  that  too.  For  the  reader  who  can suspend  his disbelief,  julian  the  Magician has a lot  to offer.


FOOTNOTES
1  Translation and  comment by Henry  M. Pachter  in Paracelsus: Magic into Science
(Collier paperback,  I g6 I), pp. I 53-54·
0   By Gwendolyn  MacEwen, Macmillan,  I963.

44

THEY SHALL HAVE ARCANA



3  F. Sherwood Taylor, The  Alchemists (Collier  paperback, 1962), p. 79·
4   P.  124;  an  interpretation of  the  letters  lAO  is given  in  the  Gnostic  epigraph to the novel.
s  These  qualities, and  more,  are  discussed  by Richard Bernheimer in  his interesting book,  Wild   Men in  the  Middle Ages  (Harvard, 1952). He  mentions Iron  Hans briefly.  He  also  mentions the  legend  of St.  John  Chrysostom  who  was  discovered in  the  forest  by a hunting party,  crawling on all fours, his body covered with  hair. He  does not  mention John the Baptist,  nor that  Chrysostom  means  "golden mouth." He  does,  however,  connect the  wild  man  with  the  problem  of  death and  the  re­ ligious  notion  of life out  of death. For  an  essay on St.  John Chrysostom that does emphasize the  connection of  light  and  dark,  see pp.  52-65  of  Heinrich  Zirruner's fascinating book,  The  King   and  the  Corpse   (Bollingen,   1948;  Meridian, 1960). Zimmer   handles fairy   tales  and   Arthurian  romance   in  the  Jungian  manner, as examples of the  psychic  search  for  integration.
6   "Introduction to  the  Religious and  Psychological  Problems  of Alchemy," included in The Basic Writings of C. G. Jung  (Modern Library,  1959), p. 450.
7   Memories, Dreams, Reflections (Pantheon, 1963), p. 338.












45



MORDECAI  RICHLER

Craftsman  or Artist




NaimKattan




IN  AN  ARTICLE  which  he wrote fo, the 'pedal numbcr  that
the  American  travel  magazine Holiday   recently   devoted   to  Canada,  Mordecai
Richler said :

Finally,  the  best influences in the  world reach  us from  New York. The  longest unmanned frontier  in the world is an artificial  one and  I look forward  to the day when it  will disappear  and  Canadians  will join fully in the  American  adventure. To  say this in Canada  is still to invite cat-calls and  rotten  eggs. We would lose our identity,   they  say, our  independence.  But  Texas  or  Maine  still  have  distinctive identities  and  we are even now economically dependent  on the United  States.

This  is the  logical conclusion  that  can  be glimpsed  behind  Mordecai Richler's whole   literary output  and   behind   the  intellectual  and   psychological   processes from  which  it springs.  Before accepting the  argument of the  cultural supremacy of  the  United States,  this  Canadian novelist  explored all  the  ways which  might have  led  him  to a vigorous affirmation of the  cultural autonomy of Canada.
The journey  of  Mordecai Richler in fac.t runs  along  two  parallel  lines which
are  actually projections of the  same  hunger and  the  same  will to succeed; he is an  adolescent doubling as the  child  of an  immigrant.
This  immigrant's son was  born  at  a time  when  a middle class was beginning to  take  shape  in  the  heart  of  the  Jewish   community. The child  who  first  saw the  light  in  the  old Jewish  quarter of Montreal shared  the  dreams and  hopes of a generation which  was born  in  Canada and  wished  to gather with  both  hands the  possibilities  of  that  American land.   For  that   purpose, it  was  necessary  for him  to  detach himself  from  his family,  from  his group, from  his quarter. How

MORDECAI RICHLER



could  this  be done  when  the  family  and  the  quarter, the  traditions of the  group and  the  customs  of the  household, were inextricably  mingled  together?
In  such  circumstances the  young  man  chose  to  reject  them  all  at  the  same
time.  He  had  neither the  determination nor  the intellectual power  to disentangle the  overt  and  the  hidden forces  which  formed  the  texture of the  collective  life in  which  he  had  been  forced  to participate. He  therefore chose, as his first step, escape.
His  hostility  to  Canadian  provincialism was accentuated by the  presence  of a provincialism which  seemed  to  him  even  narrower and  which  gripped   him  like an  iron  halter-that of  the  family.  To  affirm  himself,  he  must  prove  himself not  merely  as an  adult, but  also as a man  open  to all the  widest  horizons  of the universe.  He  therefore departed  from  Canada. The  ancestral land  was  neither his destination nor his first port  of call. Following the steps of the Lost Generation, this  young  pilgrim   wished  to  demonstrate that  the  world  in  all  its  breadth  be­ longed  to  him.  Breathing the  smoke-laden air  of the  bars  of France and  Spain,  he thought in this  way to pose his candidature for inclusion  in the great company of powerful  and  adventurous writers.  But in imagining that  he was following  in the  steps  of  Hemingway, Richler   deceived  himself,  for  he  was  merely  reviving once  again  and  in  a  more  complicated manner the  adventures of a past  decade  described  by Bud  Schulberg in What  makes Sammy  Run?





AT THE  AGE   OF   22,   Richler's first  novel,  The   Acrobats, brought to  light  one  of the  richest  promises  in the  young  tradition of Canadian literature. The  Acrobats  is in  itself a  mediocre  novel,  but,  though  it  has  all  the pretentiousness and  all the  imperfections of a beginner's work,  it reveals qualities which  could  equally  well be those of a clever craftsman or those of a true  writer.
Richler  uses every means  to avoid speaking  directly  of Canada and  particularly of Canadian Jews.  He  sets his stage  as far  as possible from  St.  Urbain Street - in Valence, in Spain. The  complex  intrigues,  fruits of a fevered  imagination, hide imperfectly the  real anxieties of the young novelist. Since timidity  and  bashfulness prevent  him  from  speaking in the first person,  Richler  disguises  his characters to the  best  of  his  ability,  clothing them  in  borrowed   garments which  barely  hide the conventional faces of the  wicked who succeed  and  the good  who are defeated.
His  Canadian  hero   is  not   Jewish.   He  is  an  English-speaking painter  who


47

MORDECAI RICHLER



wishes to mingle  with  Jews  but  merely succeeds  in  making pregnant a daughter of  Israel  who  dies  from  an  attempted abortion. The real  Jew  is a bar-keeper, a gentle   and   corrupted  American, generous   and   unscrupulous, who  has  lost  his bearings and,  despite  all Richler's efforts, does not emerge  as a cynic.
In  his second  novel, Son  of a Smaller  Hero, the  masks fall away.  Richler  does not  speak  in  the  first  person,  but  the  autobiographical tone  of the  book  is not entirely  deceptive. It is the world of his own  childhood that  he reveals in fictional form.  The   adolescent   hero  deprived  of  childhood takes  his  revenge.  He  sits in judgement on  a  family  which  has  cut  him  off  too  early  from  an  affection   he desperately demanded. Three generations face  each  other: the  adolescent  Noah, romantic, sentimental, ambitious; Wolf, the father, the false hero;  and  the grand­ father   Melech,   the  patriarch, the  guardian  of  the   treasure  handed  on  from generation to generation. The  symbolism of the  novel is too easily  unravelled not to make  mention of it. Wolf passes for a hero  because  he saves from the fire a box which  everyone  believes contains  the  rolls of the  Torah but  which,  in his mind,  only contains money.  Noah  is therefore  right  to rebel  against  parents who exploit authentic traditions merely  to distort  them,  to empty  them  of  content and  mean­ ing.  Fortunately the  grandfather is there  to  remind one  that  this religion  which his unscrupulous children  have debased  had  once, in an age now departed, a truth that  has since been  obscured  and  concealed.
The  adolescent cannot  cross the frontiers of the  ghetto without doing  violence
to  himself.  He  is too much  affected  by the  traditions which  nourished his  child­ hood  for him  to  be able to reject  them  except  by force.  It would  be treating this rage  of  youth   too  seriously  if  we  were  to  elevate   Richler into  the  censor  and  critic  of a whole  community.
It is to his family  that  the hero owes a grudge; it is his family  he accuses of not bearing  the same  love and  feeling  as he does toward a doctrine which  he would like to maintain in  its pristine  purity,  that  is to say, without modification by the demanding laws of existence.
This  is  clearly   the  mental   process  of  the  adolescent. And  this  is what  gives the novel movement, if not power. The  ambitious youth  who has made  his reckon­ ing  with  a narrow society is propelled  by an  irrepressible impulse. He  wishes to deal  as a man  with  adult  problems. After  all, has he not set himself  free? Has  he not  said  what  he  thinks  of those who  do  not  see beyond  the  wall of  the  ghetto?  Now  he must  face  them  with  the  proofs of his initiation into manhood.
In  A  Choice   of Enemies  the  ghetto,  instead  of vanishing, gains  ground. The young  Canadian leaves his country  in search  of horizons as wide as his ambitions.

MORDECAI RICHLER



He  is Canadian, and  it is as a Canadian that  he wishes to affirm  himself.  New York?  It is too  near,   and  too  much  like home;   he would  be  drowned there  in the  mass  of  thousands of  immigrants' sons who  hope  to  devour  ravenously  the fruits  promised   by  a  powerful  and  prosperous  America. In  London  this subject of the  Commonwealth feels that  he might  not  be lost as he would  be in a North America   that   refuses  to  take  his  Canadian  characteristics seriously.  But  in  the metropolis   of  the  mother country "the   aliens  knew  only  other  aliens."  All  the Canadian and  American intellectuals, those in  flight  from  McCarthy's America and  those  seeking  the  roots  of their  Canadian origin,  are  merely  tourists  when they  get  there.  "For even  those  who  had  lived  in  London for  years  only  knew the true  life of the  city as a rumour."
In  this  novel  Richler places  himself in the  centre  of great  world  problems. He brings  before  us  the  ex-Communist who  fled  from  East  Germany, the  ex-Nazi, and  a  whole  assortment of  North-American fugitives  who  keep  meeting  in  that vast  city  as if they  were  living  in a little village  where  everyone  knows  everyone else,  knows  his  petty  habits  and  his grand   manias.  It is a  novel  in  which  skill is more  in evidence than  true  passion.
In  The   Apprenticeship of  Duddy   Kravitz Richler   returns to  his  childhood.
He  has  not  yet said  all  there  is to be said.  To  the  bitterness,  the  surly  anger  of Son of a Smaller  Hero is added the dream  of a world in which  frankness, straight­ forwardness  and   love  reign  together. Great   is  the  disenchantment  of   the  un­  fortunate child  who  has  put  all  his  hopes  in  the  mystery  of  non-Jewish society and  has found there  the  same  recurring faults  as elsewhere.
Duddy   Kravitz and   his  brother are  both  ambitious; they  are  children who
have  emerged from  the  slum  and  long to fill their lungs  with  the  air of the great outdoors. One   of  them   wishes  to  become  a  possessor,  to  affirm  his  power  by material conquest. The other  thinks  to obtain  prestige  and  the  respect  of Society by  his studies  and   his  medical   profession.  It is a  young  French-Canadian  girl who-for   Duddy-symbolizes all  the  mysterious  beauties   and   inexhaustible enchantments of the  unknown world  which  lies beyond  the  ghetto. But  his  un­ healthy   ambition  drives   him  to  destroy  the  loyal  love  which  gratifies  him  yet which  he can  do  nothing but  annihilate.
His  brother gains  admittance to  a closed circle of Anglo-Saxon Christians. It is a  bitter  victory,  for  this  world  conceals  nothing but  moral  corruption and  dis­ integration. These  young  people  of good family  come together in order  to drink,  and  as a sign of friendship they ask of him a service which  shows how much they really  despise  him.  They   ask  him  to  use  his  medical  knowledge to  procure an

49

MORDECAI RICHLER



abortion. The   world  that   is to  be  encountered outside   the  walls  of  the  ghetto is hardly  a pleasant  one.
In  this  novel,  which  is without   doubt   its  author's most  accomplished work,
one can measure  his talent  against  his limitations. Stirred by a demanding passion, he is led  to destroy  his characters through caricature. Facing a society  which  he wishes to  conquer, he has no  time  to look at  it,  to  understand it,  to perceive  its complete  ambiguity.  His  characters  are  linear,  for  complexity  would   deprive them  of the  artificial  consistency  which  is fabricated by a novelist whose wish to do  battle  is stronger  than  his desire  to comprehend. This  world  without love or tenderness is at  once  sentimental and  false -false  because  sentimental.
Richler   manipulates situations and  characters to  fill a  void  which  no  degree of inventiveness can  conceal.  He  does not succeed  in breaking the  yoke in which his sensibility  imprisons  him,  for he takes no account of the sensibilities of others, and  especially  of  his characters. These  are  his banner-bearers, the  extensions  of his own  tastes  and  whims.
It is evident   that  Richler,  who  bums  with  the  desire  to  plunge  into  the  great ocean  which  he sees beyond  the  walls of the  ghetto, can  never  quit  St.  Urbain Street.   Whether he  walks  in  England, France or  Spain, he  carries  everywhere his  little  world,  his secret  fatherland, for  he  never  succeeds  in  completing and going  beyond   his  adolescence,  which  is its  product.
In  his last novel his choice is made.  He is the master  of artifice  and appearance,
and  he intends to demonstrate the  fact.  In  fabricating his caricatures he goes to the  limit  of  his  powers.  He  no  longer  pretends to  create living  personages or complex  situations.
The   Incomparable  Atuk   is a  great  piece  of  farce  in  which  the  child  of  the
ghetto, once  again  disguised  behind  the  mask  of a fake  Eskimo  poet,  makes  his conquest of  a  world  of  imposters  and  hollow  men.  Richler turns  his  vengeful anger  against  all those personalities of swollen  reputation and  unmerited celebrity who  people  the  intellectual world  of Toronto. All of them  are  provincials puffed up  with  their  false  importance, blinded  by  their  degree  of  influence,  corrupted by  the  ambient  complacency. The  adolescent   who  reproached his  parents and society  in general for  responding meagrely  to  his longing  for  purity,  now directs a  burst  of  mocking  laughter against  a  world  which  was  to  blame  for  the  muti­ lation  of his dreams.

MORDECAI RICHLER




bE GREAT DEFEAT and  the true failure  will be those of Richler himself  if  he  has  made his long  journey  merely  to resign  himself  in  the  end  to marching in step in the  ranks  of that  immense  army  of script-writers from  Holly­ wood  and  the  various  Madison Avenues  of the  world  who  fill the  pages of the popular magazines and   put  interminable dialogues  into  the  mouths  of the  pro­ tagonists  of the  soap  stories of television. Can  he overcome his sensitiveness?  Will he  be able  to outgrow his childhood? Richler,  who is still  young,  might  discover in time  that  the  kind  of success he obtains  will prove ephemeral if the craftsman in  him  kills the  artist.   Recognizing the  power  of  American culture is not  itself an  insurmountable deterrent. After  all, he can  tread  in  the  paths  of Bellow and Malamud instead  of those  of Jerome  Weidman  and  Herman  Wouk.









Important New Studies Available from the Publications Centre

UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH  COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER,CANADA


Politics and Parties in Postwar Okinawa
by Mikio Higa                                                                    paper,  $g.so; cloth, $4.50

Piracy  and  Politics in the  Malay  World:  A Study of British  Imperialism in 19th
Century Southeast Asia by Nicholas Tarling                                                     $6.50

Democracy in  Pakistan  by G. W. Choudhury                                                     $6.oo

Canadian Yearbook of International Law  ed. by C. B. Bourne                    $8.50

Promises  and  Performances in  Australian   Politics,  1928-1963. Revised Edition. By Russell H. Barrett 	paper, $2.75

Studies   in  the   Modernization  of  ]a pan.  Asian  Cultural Studies,  International
Christian  University                                                                                  paper, $g.oo

A History  of Public  Education in British Columbia
by Henry  Johnson                                                                                     Winter  1964

Pacific	Affairs
AN   INTERNATIONAL  REVIEW OF   ASIA  AND THE PACIFIC

A quarterly  journal covering the political, economic, social and diplomatic prob­ lems of eastern  and  southern  Asia, with  articles contributed by writers from  all over the world.  Each issue contains a book review section.

Articles published in recent issues include:

University Students and  Politics in  Burma  by Josef Silverstein and Julian  Wohl; Generals  and Politics in India  by Lloyd I. Rudolph  and Susanne Hoeber Rudolph; Pakistan's  Constitutional Autocracy by William A. Douglas; Sinhalese Nationalism and Social Conflict in Ceylon  by Robert N. Kearney; Australia  and the American Alliance  by Thomas  B. Millar.

Published  Quarterly-$5.00 a  year

UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH  COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, CANADA



reviev 	





AN ARTIST'S  PROGRESS
 


George Robertson



MARGARET LAURENCE,  The  Stone  Angel. McClelland & Stewart. $5-95·
MARGARET  LAURENCE,    The   Tomorrow-Tamer, and  Other   Stories.  McClelland &
Stewart. $4.50.


The  Stone Angel and   The Tomorrow-Tamer, a  novel  and  a  collec­ tion   of  stories   respectively,   have   come virtually  in  the  same  month  to  remind  us  of   the    development   of   Margaret Laurence as  an  artist.  The  stories,  writ­ ten  over  a  period   of  years,  have  all  but one been published before, in such places as Prism, Tamarack Review, and Queen's Quarterly, and   we   assume  they   are roughly  contemporaneous  with  her  first novel,  This Side   Jordan, which  was  set in   Africa   and   published  in   1g6o.  The new novel  may  well  have  had  its  incep­ tion  before  the  African stories -in some ways  it  seems  a  "first  novel"-but was presumably written  after Mrs. Laurence's return to  Canada.  Biographical specula­ tion   aside,   it   is   written  with   more   of what   I  can   only  call  professional   care, is technically more ambitious, and -un­ fortunately -is  less successful.
Its  narrator, Hagar Shipley,  is at  the
age  of  ninety  as  unpleasant a heroine  as one is likely to meet.  It is no part of the author's intention to  give  us a  sweet old lady  remembering the  past. She is proud, bitter,   and   vengeful;  bloated    and   dis­ tended   with   a  disease   she  is  dying  of,
 unable   to  control  her   bladder  at  night or her flatulence by day, confused by a failing   grasp   of  immediate  detail,   and utterly  without  charity, humour, or sym­ pathy.  A character without  virtues?  Her  on,e virtue  is  her  will  to  stay  alive,  her blind  and  selfish rage  against  death, and  it  is  in  the   flailing   thoughts of  Hagar Shipley,   "rampant   with   memory",  that  Margaret Laurence  has  formed   this  ex­ traordinary   portrait.
It is  a  deceptive  novel.   It begins  as
though it  were  to  be  a  familiar tribute to a  prairie  matriarch, a family  portrait through  the  eyes  of  a  surviving  grand­ mother, one  of  those  obeisances  to  the  pioneer   spirit   common   in   the   regional  literature of  North America. It is nothing of  the  kind.  It  is  a  story  of  a  woman  flawed  by her  pride  and  her  concern  for respectability,  and    the   story   draws   in upon its narrator until  we are seeing, through her  eyes, the  total  desolation  of human  relationships about  her.
Without  the  endurance and   the  rage
there   would   be  no  novel.  They   are  al­ most  not  enough. The  chilling  portrait which   emerges,  indirectly   (since  Hagar Shipley  does  not  waste  much   time  with

53

REVIEW ARTICLES



self-analysis)    has  an   uncanny   truthful­ ness  about   it,  but  it  is  the  energy  with which    she   resists   her   dependence  on others  that   is  the  connecting  tissue  of the  novel.  Between  the  present  and  the past  she slips  (though the flashback  tech­ nique   is  too  neat   and   predictable), re­ gretting the past and  cursing  the present.  The  writing   compels   belief:   if  anyone  wants  to  know  what  it is like to wait  for the  end  in  a  hospital  bed,  this  is it,  you say.  And   when  the  end  comes,  there  is no   escape   into   sentiment.  She   is  not spared   the  embarrassment of  her  grand­ son  standing at  the  foot  of her  bed, say­ ing.  "You're a  great  old  girl,  you  know that?" Even   those  who  can  squeeze  an ounce   of  affection   for  her  exact  a  hu­ miliating  price  for  it.
Why, for all its merits,  does The  Stone
Angel  seem  a  disappointment after  This Side   Jordan?   It is, for  one  thing,  more consciously  written:  one  is aware  of the stylist without being sufficiently  unaware of  the  style.  I have  said  the  flashbacks were   neat    and   predictable.  They   are very  much  what  one  might  find  as  illus­ trations in  a  book  on  the  mechanics of writing: "Being  alone  in a  strange  place, the  nurse's   unseeing  stare,  the  receding  heat  of  the  day-all  bring  to mind  the time   I  was   first   in   a   hospital,    when Marvin was born." "I've waited  like this, for  things  to  get  better  or  worse,  many and  many  a time.  I should  be used to it. So  many  years  I  waited  at  the  Shipley place-I've  almost  lost count  of them." "I weary  of  the  game.  I'm  like  the  chil­ dren,  playing house.  I've   nothing better  to  do.  And  now  I remember some other children, once,  playing  at  house,  but  in a   somewhat  different  manner."  To   be fair,   it   should   be   said   that   these   are extremes; there  are many instances  where

54
 the   slipping   back   and   forth   is  much more   deft.   But  my  point   is  really   that one  is  too  much   aware   of  them   when they  do  occur.   Certainiy they  are  justi­ fied by the  rambling thoughts of a ninety­  year old woman, and certainly old people, many  of them,  live more  in the past than  in  the  present. I  would  have  preferred nonetheless  to   have   the   jumps,    when they  came,   to  be  abrupt,  disconnected. After  reading a  novel  as well articulated as  this, one  almost  sees the  virtue  of the Frenchman  who  writes  a novel as a deck of  cards,  the  pages   to  be  read   in  any order.
The stories  in  The  Tomorrow-Tamer
are very fine. One  doesn't really want to quarrel with  the  blurb,  which  says, "One of the  best collections of stories to appear in many years." And where in This Side Jordan, Mrs. Laurence doesn't  always succeed in getting behind the type to the unique  individual, in her stories she triumphantly does  so. These  are  real people, both the Africans and the whites, caught in a cruelly  changing land.  There is a mixture of comedy  and  tragedy, and sometimes  both  together, in  the  severing of   two   cultures.  "The  Perfume  Sea", which  begins:
"No  question  of   it,"  Mr.    Archipelago said,  delicately snipping a  wisp  of  hair, "I am   flotsam."

goes on  a  few  lines  later  to describe  the little  town  in  the  late-morning sun:

Past   the  turquoise-and-red facade of Cow­ asjee's  Silk   Bazaar,  in    the   rancid    and shadowy room,    the   shrivelled   Parsee  sat,  only   half   awake, folding a   length  of  sari cloth   and  letting  the   silk  slip   through  his fingers as  he  dreamed of  a  town   in  India, no    less   ill-smelling  and    dirty  than   this African  one,   but   filled  with   the   faces   and  speech   of   home.... At   the   Africa  Star Chemists, a   young   shopgirl  dozed,    prop­ ping   her   brown   arms   against  a  carton  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Seven   Seas   codliver  oil.  Down    the   street, in   the   Paradise  Chop-Bar,  a   young   man recalled  those    arms    as   he   sloshed   a   rag over    the    tables    in    preparation   for    the customers  who   would   soon   be  lifting  the striped  bedspread  that   hung   across    the doorway and  shouting for  beer  and   kankey. In   the   Government  Agent's  office,  and   in the    offices   of   Bridgeford and  Knight, Exporters-Importers,  Englishmen  sighed and    wilted    and    saw   from    their  watches that  they   could   not   yet  legitimately leave for  lunch. Pariah dogs  on  the  road  snarled over   a  cat   corpse;  then,  panting,  tongues dribbling,  defeated  by   sun,   they   crawled back  to  a  shaded  corner, where their  scab­ rous   hides    were   fondled  by   an   old   man in   a   hashish   dream.... Babies   slung    on their mothers' backs  allowed their heads   to loll   forward  and   whimpered  at   the   sweat that  made  sticky   their  faces.... Laughter like   melted  honey   poured  slowly.... Only the   children,  the   fire   and   gleam   of  them greater  even   than  the   harsh  glint   of  sun, continued to  leap   and  shout as  before.
In   that   story,   an   ageing   hairdresser, himself  an  exile  from  Europe, fears  that
 the   passmg  of  the   white   establishment from  his  dusty  town  will  mean   the  end of his business and a new exile. In "The Drummer of All the  World", an  English boy,  raised  as  a  missionary's   son  in  an African  village,  comes back  after  his English  education to find that  the African patterns  he  would   like  to  embrace are changing,  that   the   affection  he   would give them  is scorned  as another example of   the   white   man   trying   to   keep   the African  in his place.  Everywhere in these marvellously  well-written stories  the  rep­ resentatives  of   the   old   world   and   the new   are   thrown  into   strange   and   un­ accustomed   relationship, and  Mrs.  Laur­ ence  has perceived  that  the most poignant are   those  who  have   tried  to  step  from one  world  into  the  other,  and  belong  to neither.





MILTON SEEN ANEW
 


B. Rajan


ROY DANIELLS,  Milton,Mannerism and  Baroque. University of Toronto Press.  $6.oo.


THE CONSIDERATION of one kind  of  artistic achievement in  terms  of the  vocabulary of another is a recognized fallacy,  though it  was Babbitt, not  Wim­ satt,  who  first  pointed   the  reproving fin­ ger  at  it.  Fortunately,  Professor  Daniells  is not  deterred by the labelling of certain  territories as perilous  and  his exploration is  of  course  conducted  with  a  scholar's  sense  of   caution:  "We   must   avoid   the supposition that  a fa<;ade can  be directly compared  to   a   plot   structure  or   that there  is some  direct, simple  analogue  in literature for,  say, the  use  made  of light
 in  a  Baroque chapel."  As might be  ex­ pected,   Professor   Daniell's  exploration brings  substantial  rewards.  The  Muses, he   reminds   us,   dance   together  to   the  same  melody  and  something is surely  to be  gained   by  isolating   that   melody,  be­ fore  studying  how  it  is  orchestrated  by the  distinctive  resources  of each  art  and, most  decisively,  by the  individual accent of  the  author's genius.
The   word    "Baroque"  is  now   flung
freely  across the seventeenth century and one  is  resigned   in  particular  to  having the   "Nativity Ode"  thus   labelled. Pro-

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



fessor   Daniells    does   not   consider    this poem,   but   he  does  suggest  that   Comus and  Lycidas  are  Mannerist rather than Baroque. Mannerism we are  told,  "can­ vasses the elements of a fixed, traditional pattern,  unexpectedly  combines  them  to achieve  effects  of  dissonance,  dislocation and  surprise,  and illuminates the reader's mind,    enabling   him   to  reconsider    the whole   traditional   pattern  of   their   re­ lationship." If the  description  suggests Lycidas, it also suggests The Waste  Land and   indeed    "Tradition  and   the   Indi­ vidual   Talent" might   well  bear  perusal as  the  modem mannerist's  manual.
One  of the important features of  Man­
nerist   style  is  the  presence   within   it  of unresolved elements  which  remain  essen­ tial  to  the  artistic effect.  Thus  Professor Daniells   concludes  that  "Comus is  a great,  a  memorable  and  a  much   loved work  not  because  it  has no discrepancies and  failures  of resolution,  and  not  (as is frequently  implied)  because  its   other merits   outweigh    these  deficiencies,   but because   the  lapses  and   dislocations   are such  as to evoke an  aesthetic  response  of a  new   and   intensely   gratifying  kind." Similarly   with   Lycidas,   the  "refusal  to propagate a resounding resolution" is not an  artistic flaw  "any  more  than  the  rest­ less, unstable figures  flanking  the  Medici  sarcophagi are  to be regarded as  Michel­  angelo's  mistakes."  This  is an  interesting deliverance  from    some   recent   critical impasses,  though one  is  provoked   to  in­ quire   how  the  lack  of   resolution   which is indicative of  high  Mannerist achieve­  ment   is  distinguished  from   the  lack  of resolution  which   is  indicative of  simple artistic   failure.  The  question needs   to be  asked  even  if  the  answer  is likely  to be  slightly  Mannerist. To  the  present  re­ viewer  it seems that  a more  conservative
 defence of Comus might  be organized round the  principle that  the  Lady's busi­ ness is not  to answer  Comus  but  to reject him  and  that   the  final  resolution  is  pro­  vided   by  the  Epilogue. In   Lycidas,   the violations of  decorum, the  repeated  in­ trusions  of the  "higher mood"   (to  which Milton    pointedly   draws   attention)   are part  of the poem's strategy  of attack. The  assault   upon   convention  is  the   stylistic correlative of  the deeper  assault of experi­  ence   upon  the  sense  of  order; and   the restoration   of  equilibrium  in   language corresponds   to   and  validates  a   more fundamental  rehabilitation of  reality.
If Mannerist style  is characterized  by
unresolved elements, Baroque is  charac­ terized  by unity  and  because  the Baroque achievement  seeks   inclusiveness,  that  unity    is  often    won   by   sheer   creative strength from  the  resistance  of its  mate­  rial.   Tension,   ambiguity  and   paradox (whether  structural or  verbal)   are  fea­ tures  of  the  baroque equilibrium in which otherwise  disintegrative  forces   are   held in  balance by  the  power  of  design.  The reader should  recognize  this as a good description of  Paradise  Lost  even  if it  is not  a good  enough description of  Shake­ speare's tragedies, Jeremy Taylor's prose, Jonson's plays  and  Dryden's drama and  poetry,  all of which at  various  times have received   the  baroque label.  Some  speci­ ficity in  the  use of this term  is demanded if it  is not  to submerge more  distinctions than  it makes.
Professor   Daniell's chapters on  Para­
dise  Lost  are  the  best  thin,g in  his  book and, particularly in his treatment of  Mil­ ton's  cosmography, the architectural ana­ logues  come  into  their  own  with  notable results.  If a  caveat is to be entered   (and  to  do  so is  partially to  remind   ourselves that   every  approach to  Paradise  Lost  is

REVIEW ARTICLES



less than   the  poem)   it  would  be against the   emphatic  primacy   that   is  assigned to "will" in the poem's universe. The investigation  on  pp.  67-78  is impressive but   an   equally   striking  case  could   be made   out  for  "reason" and   V  roo-ro2, VI  40-43,  VIII 635-37,  IX   II27-31 and XII 83-90  are  among   the  passages  that might   be  put  into  contention. The  con­ clusions   that   will  "holds   a  whip   hand  over reason  and  emotion" and  that "both Adam  and  Milton  admit [that]  the  jus­ tice  of  God's  will  springs  from  its  being the  will of  God" are  too  close  to volun­  tarism   to  fully  reflect  the  total  effect  of the  epic.   If Paradise   Lost   is  organized  as  Professor   Daniells   suggests,  round   a single   axis   driven   "through  received Christian doctrine",  that   axis  is  forged from  an  alloy  rather  than   from  a  single element and   if   the  "decisive   experience for  Baroque  is  that   of  man's  power  in the  face  of   the  world" one  should   add that  that  experience is qualified  in Para­ dise  Lost  by an  equally  decisive  sense of man's  limitations. In  any  case, organiza­ tion  round   a vertical  axis is not  the  only possible picture of Paradise  Lost  and  this reviewer   is  still  drawn  to  a  schematiza­ tion  in  which   good   and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  chaos  and creation (the  opposi­ tions  can   be  indefinitely extended)   are seen   massed   as  opposing  armies,   each with  its  own  Trinity and   with  man  be­ tween  them  as the  centre of conflict  and decision.  In  such  a  diagram, will  exists in   two   aspects-as   separatist,   disinte­  grative  and   fundamentally Satanic  and as  unitive,  grounded in reason and reality and  freely   proclaiming  the    order   to which  it contributes.
The  calm  (and  some would say frozen) finality  of  Christ's rejections in  Paradise Regained    continue  to  fascinate  and   to
 disconcert critics. Professor Daniells' comparisons in  particular to  the  Church of  Santa Maria della  Salute, illuminate the  poem's  perspectives and  dispositions but   do  not  necessarily   reconcile   one  to its  moral   severity.   Perhaps  this   recon­ ciliation   can  only  be  affected   if   at  all, through  the   recogl\ition  that  Christ though   perfect  man,  is more  than  men, that   he  is  essentially  uninvolved  in  the debate   with  evil,  that  while  man  in  his mixed   nature  must  feel  a  sense  of  loss in preferring Jerusalem to Athens,  Christ  in   his  pure   nature  can   dispassionately choose  or  await   the  greater  good.  The  still  centre  of self-col\trol   may  approach the  inhuman; but   that   it  should   do  so may  be part  of the  poem's  necessities.
Samson  Agonistes  is Baroque not  sim­ ply  because  it  achieves   a  new  effect  in an   old  form   (one   could   scarcely   be  a writer   without   sometimes  attempting  to do  this)  but  because  the  new  effect  pro­ claims  the  unity  of  God's   purposes   and  the  absoluteness   of   his  power.   It seems to this reviewer  that  the  recognition that  the  power,  providence and  glory  of God are  exemplified   in  his  ways  and   works is   too  universal   to  be  called   Baroque: and Samson  Agonistes  in any case evokes not  only  God's  power  but  also  "th'  un­ searchable dispose/Of  highest   wisdom", the   justice  that   is  inscrutable  until   it  is dazzlingly  revealed.   The  pervasive irony of  the   play   (Greek   both  in  its  origins and   tactics)   works  to  suggest  the  half­  knowledge  of  man  in  the  face  of  divine  omniscience.   Our  condition  is  typically that   of  darkness  at  noon; and  "calm of mind    all   passion   spent"  implies   not merely  catharsis but  understanding.
The  main  merits  of Professor  Daniell's
book  should   now  be  apparent. It  deals with  the  entire   body  of  Milton's major

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



poetry   and  sees  it  in  a  perspective   that is both  unified  and  unusual.  Without the microscopy that  is  the   hallmark  of
 modern criticism  it  sends  us back  to  the text  with  a  renewed recognition of what the  text  is doing.





HISTORIAN'S BIOGRAPHY
 


Albert Tucker



BLAIR  NEATBY,   William Lyon Mackenue King, 1924-1932,
University of Toronto  Press. $7·95·


WHAT  ARE   THE  TALENTS   re­ quired of  a  biographer?  Biography  is so flexible  a  form,   as  various  as  the  ways in   which   men   act   and   express   them­  selves,  that   the  answer  must  depend on the  purpose of  the  author  and  the  role of his subject. If the subject is a political  figure,   then    the   chances   are   that    his biographer will  be an  historian, perhaps a  political   scientist   writing   history.  His purpose  cannot  be  simply  described,  but central  to  it   must   be  the   insight   into important  public  or  political  events through the  eyes  of  his  subject.   Inevit­ ably,  certain  problems  arise.
What  events   are  to  be  selected,   how are  letters   and   diaries  to  be  used,  how much  of personal and  private affairs  are to be included, what  license will be given to  psychological examination, and  where does  the  biographer himself  strike  a  bal­ ance    between     sympathy,    detachment, and  reflection? If these  questions  are  re­ solved  successfully,  the  author will write as  more than  historian; he must be a care­  ful  editor and  psychologist  as well.  Pro­  fessor Neatby has had  to face up to all of these  requirements, with  results  that  are both   admirable  and   disappointing.
As historian, his  thoroughness and  his

ss
 care   have   been   remarkable.  By   1924, when  this  volume  opens,  King's  life was dedicated   to   politics,    to   leading    the Liberal party  and  being  Prime  Minister, and  Mr.  Neatby  relates  every issue which went  into  the  making of  stable  national government. His  decision  to do so was a wise  one.   Detailed  accounts  of  freight rates  and   tariffs,   the  Hudson Bay  Rail­ way  and   the  deficit   of  the  C.N.R., do not   provide  exciting   reading;  but   they were   the   stuff   of   Canadian  politics  in the   nineteen   twenties   and   a  successful political  leader  had   to  devote   consider­  able   time  to   handling  them.    In   this volume  such  issues,  together  with  immi­ gration  and   the   budget, are   described  at great  length  because  they bore directly  on  the  coherence of  a  national  govern­ ment    out   of   the   various   sections   and  regions,  with  their  different economic  in­  terests, of so large and  divided  a country.
His   insight   into   the   nature  of  these
divisions  and  into  the  need  for  unity  lay at the  heart  of King's hold on the leader­ ship   of   the   Liberal  party.   "The cause of   Liberalism,"   says   Professor   Neatby,  "was   above   all   the   cause   of   national unity,    and   it   could   be   achieved  only through   a   policy   of   moderation  and

REVIEW ARTICLES



compromise. This was-and  always  re­ mained-the dominant theme  of King's political   life."   The  Tories found   their strength in  the  manufacturing groups  of the  East,  particularly in  Ontario,  where they   stood   for   protective  tariffs.   The Progressives  were  based  on  the  agricul­ tural   Prairies where  the  protective tariff meant  higher   prices   for   the   manufac­ tured   implements  and  tools  which   they had   to   buy.   Between    these   two   King moved  circumspectly, but  always  with  a view  to absorbing the  Progressives.  From  I92I   to  I926  their  numbers in the House of  Commons dropped  from  64  to  I2,  a remarkable tribute  to  King's tactics.  He would   never   accept  coalition,  for   that would   have   given   identity  to  the   Pro­ gressives.   Canadian  politics   functioned for   King   within    a   two-party   conflict, with  the  Liberals  based  on  Quebec and the  West.  "If we  can  find,"  he  wrote  in
I 925,    "the    things    which    the   men   of French Canadian  descent   have  in  com­ mon  with  the  settlers  of  the  plains and  base our  policy  on  this  common ground, we need  have  no fear  as to what  the  re­ sult will be at  the extremities or  near  the heart, as  I   assume Ontario  would  like to  consider  itself."
Does  this mean  that  for King Canadian Liberalism   had    no   basic   ideas?    The charge would  be  unfair. His  whole  con­ ception  of the  social  and  economic order  stemmed   from   the   ideas   of  late   nine­ teenth-century  liberalism.  At  their  core was  the  integrity of  the  individual per­ sonality; government must  intervene only where   private  rights   infringed  on   the public  good.  The  point  of  demarcation, however,    could   not  be   easily   defined. During  most  of   the   twenties   King   was content  simply   to   balance  his  budgets,  to keep down  the expenditure of govern-
 ment  so that  the  tariff,  the  sales tax  and the income tax would not interfere with economic   growth.  For   the   rest,  g,roups and  individuals could  be left  to promote their   own   interests,  the   provinces   and the   municipalities  to   cover   their   own debts  or  obligations. Prosperity   and  sta­ bility  left  King   himself  free  to  exercise his gifts as conciliator and  administrator. Certainly his mind  was  not  prepared for the  social  crisis  which  came  after   I 930;  the   stock-market   crash   did   not   touch  him   personally,   and  he  did   not   grasp  the   means   by   which  unemployment could   be   mitigated.  Because   King   did not  focus  on  social  issues in  the  election of   1930  it   looked   as   though  he   had deliberately anticipated  defeat,   when  in fact  he had  only failed  to understand the magnitude of the  crisis. Conclusions like this  are  not  entirely   new,  but   they  are more  fully substantiated by Mr.  Neatby's volume  than  they  have  ever  been  before. Any  review  must  first  of  all  pay  tribute to   this  quality   of  substance  which   the book  possesses in  so large  a  measure.
The    tribute   should    nevertheless   be
qualified.   The  biographer of  a   public man  can  be expected to keep  the  private life  of   his  subject   in   the   background, but   he  is  striving   also  to  communicate the   vital   impression  of   a   man   whose private  life   may   often   be   the   source which   helps  to  explain   his  public   one. Mr.   Neatby   confines   his   discussion   of King  as a person  to a minimum, stressing only  his excessive privacy  and  his loneli­ ness, which  impelled him  to spiritual ex­ periments.  Since   these   experiences  had little  influence  on  his  public  decisions  or activities, they  are  judged  to  have  been incidental or   idiosyncratic, at   the  most reassuring  him  of  his  own  goodness  or confirming  his  judgments. But  surely  so

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



complex   a  man   as  Mackenzie   King   is entitled to more  reflection  than  this. One senses  that   Mr.   Neatby  was  repelled   by these  experiments as adolescent  and  em­ barrassing. He  never  really  confronts  the central  question:  why  did  King  so  de­ liberately   avoid   passion?  How  was  this repression   connected  with  the  repeated emphasis   in   his  diaries  on  the  idea   of service,  of  his  life   as  dedicated  to  the public   good?   "A   nation,"  he   said   in
1927,  "like  an  individual,  to  find  itself must  lose itself  in  the  service  of others." The   conviction   undoubtedly   stemmed from   his   Presbyterian  upbringing,  but that   in   turn   was  interwoven  with   the idealization  of  his  mother.   His  love  for her  was placed  on the highest  plane;  she seemed  to personify  and  guide  the  dedi­ cation  of his life. At the age of  54, when he   signed   the   Briand-Kellogg   Pact   in
1928,  he  noted   in   his  diary:  "... as  I came    to   'Mackenzie' -dear  Mother's spirit  seemed  to  come  between  me  and the   paper,   to  almost   illumine   it."  Her image  turned marriage into  carnal   love, unworthy of a  higher  moral  purpose.  As a result, he sublimated his ambition  and repressed   any  doubt   or  probing  knowl­ edge   of  self.   His   life  was  one   of  un­ remitting industry, but the reasons which drove  him  also  made  him  indiscriminate



6o
 in the piling up of details, restless in his constant revisions  of  speeches,  colourless and  unimaginative in political  appeal, sensitive  and  diffident  in  any  formal  en­ vironment, and  intent upon  the  exercise of  power  as  a  moral  responsibility.
By   filing  King's  private  life   into
separate and  minor  sections  Professor Neatby   has avoided   tenuous speculation, but  he  has  also  deprived  his  book  of  a vital  quality. There are  numerous  refer­ ences  to his previous study  of  economics,  none  at all to indicate that  he considered seriously  some  study  of   psychology.  Mr.  Neatby's  gifts   are   more   at   home   with issues   than   with    people.    There  is   a curiously   impersonal   quality  about   the book;   repeatedly  he   calls   his   subject, "Mackenzie King," so that  the  reader  is kept  at  a  distance rather than  drawn in and  involved. Of  the  men  around King there  are  few character sketches  that impress their diversity, and while three elections   are   covered   in   this   book,  we never see King as the hardy and efficient campaigner. Above  all,  what  is  missing is reflection, the lucid  summing  up of sections. Like the confined, chronological rails  along   which   the  story  moves,  the style is lean  and  straight, without the variety   of  clause   or  phrase   which   can give  to  writing a  sustained   existence  of its own. Mr.  Neatby  was not writing a journalese  or  impressionistic  biography, but  the   alternative  need   not   be  so  ob­ jective,   thorough,  and   impersonal   that  the  reader feels he is trudging with effort rather  than   walking   with  ease.  If  that  is  the  only  alternative then  many  Can­ adian  readers, historians  included,  may ask  that   we  be given  less  of writing  and more  of   King's   letters,   diaries  and speeches,  from  Mr.  Neatby's skilful  edi­ torial   hands.








UP THE FRONT STAIRS

VINCENT    MASSEY,    What's Past   is   Prologue.
Macmillan. $7.50.

THIS   AUTOBIOGRAPHY   by  one  of   Can­ ada's   Elder   Statesmen  is  one   of   those books which  are  treacherous for the mere browser  or  book-nibbler. It  begins,  as it ends,   with   a   flurry   of   name-dropping and   reads   in   such   sections   rather  like some elderly socialite's memoirs  of palmy days  in  the  past.  But  persistence  is  re­ warded   if   the   reader    ploughs   through such   remarks  as:    "Spenny  Compton's sister  Margaret, now  the  Dowager Lady Loch,   has   been   a  lifelong   friend."  Or the  equally   fatuous  and   thus  aggravat­ ing:   "Harold  Macmillan  reminded  me not  long  ago  that   we  had   been  friends for fifty years.  My  recollection of Harold as a fellow undergraduate is entirely consistent  with  his most  distinguished career."
There  is  a   plethora  of  this   kind   of
thing   in  Mr.   Massey's  narrative, and  it is  not   altogether  confined    to   the   be­ ginning and   the  end.  However,  there  is enough  fascinating material for  the  per­ severing  lector  to  learn  something about  human nature,  something about   history, and  something  rather special  about  Can­ ada   too.
It  is  perhaps in  the  nature of  a  feat,
but  in  a  personal account  extending to some five hundred and thirty  pages, this distinguished  public   servant   manages   to
 remain  as discreet  as  the  popular image of  a  private  one-say  a  butler. If Mr. Massey  were  indeed   as  colourless  as  his book  suggests,   then   it   would   give   the lie to the account of his experiences that he presents. Yet his accomplishments, as Canada's first Minister to Washington, as High  Commissioner in London, and  then as  Canada's  first  indigenous  Governor­ General are  palpably  convincing as pre­ sented    in   these   pages.    He    does   not emerge   as  an  opinionless   drudge in  his career  as  a   diplomat.  As  Governor­  General he   was  not   the   Crown's  pale ghost.   Unlike   a  substantial  number  of his    compatriots,   including   the    Prime Minister, Mackenzie King,  under   whom he  served  for  so  many   years,  he  seems to  have  no  ambivalence  in  his  concept of  what   makes  a  Canadian  a  creature apart from his fellow North  Americans. When he was Canada's Minister to Washington he  leaves  us in  no  doubt  as to his grasp  of the  situation; his concept of Canada is invariably clear  and  never vitiated   by  destructive  tuggings   of   em­ pathy   from  either   the  United  States or the   United    Kingdom. The   same   tem­  pered   possession  of  a  distinctive Cana­ dianism   informs   his   occupancy  of   the post  of  High  Commissioner in  London. To  be sure,  he  demonstrates a  patrician attitude  one  suspects   would   find   more sympathetic   response  in   an   English country  house than  on an  Alberta ranch. But  there  is never  a  trace  of either that obsequiousness   or   flagrant  rudeness   to­ wards  his hosts that  are demonstrated  by some  Commonwealth   individuals  when enjoying   the   hospitality   of  the   Mother Kingdom  of   the   Anglo-Saxons.  He   is, par  excellence,  the   balanced  man.   And perhaps (tell it not in Gath) a somewhat dull  man.

61

BOOKS IN REVIEW



His life and career, of course, closely parallels  the   coming-of-age  of  Canada as  a  national entity  and  it  is impossible to think  that  a serious student of this country's  affairs   could   afford   to  ignore this autobiography. Nor for that  matter, should anyone prone to reflect upon the viability   of  the  Commonwealth  connec­ tion  pass this book up. For  those tempted to  see Canada as a  victim  tom  between the    Scylla   of   Great    Britain   and    the Charybdis  of   the   United   States,   Mr.
 Massey  has  something refreshing and sane to say. His reflections drawn  from personal experience of high places, are likewise equally  pertinent for those who smugly  see  Canada,  alternatively, as  a blessed inheritor of those two influences, from  the  south  and  from  the  east, which have done so much  to shape, her present character.
The    Massey   memoirs    are   a   strange
brew of front-stairs gossip and arresting common-sense.  We   thus    have   a   pot-




CJINJIDIJIN	LITERJITURE
BACK ISSUES

Early  back  numbers   of Canadian Literature  are becoming scarce. Some are  out-of-print; only  limited   quantities  are  available   of the   following:

No. 	2.    Contents include A Cat Among  the Falcons by  Ethel Wilson, The Poetry of Margaret Avison by  Milton  Wilson  and  A. M. Klein's The Second Scroll by M. W. Steinberg.

No. 	3.    Contents include The Story of a Novel  by  Hugh  Maclennan, Manifesto  for Beast Poetry by Wilfred  Watson and  The Third Eye by James  Reaney.

No. 	5.    Contents include Why I Am an Expatriate  by  Norman   Levine, Wolf in the Snow by Warren Tallman and  articles on  Leacock by R. E. Watters and  F. W. Watt

No. 	8.    Special Malcolm Lowry Number. Original articles, letters  and poems   by  Malcolm   Lowry,  articles  by  Conrad  Aiken,   Earle Birney, Max-Pol  Fouchet,  etc.

No.  10.    Contents include The Novels of Hugh Maclennan by George Woodcock, A Reading of Anne Wilkinson  by A. J. M. Smith, and   Emile Nelligan   by  Paul  Wyczynski.

No.  12.    Contents include The Long-Enduring Spring by  Roy Daniells, An Evening with  Babble and  Doodle  by James Reaney  and The Two Traditions  by  Louis  Dudek.

$1.25  each

Order  your copies early  from The  Publications Centre. University of British Columbia, Vancouver 8, B.C.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pourri   of  everything from  news  of  nobs for    snobs   and    Canada's  role   in   the policies  that  shape  the strategies of World War  Two,  to  the  myopic  vision of  Mac­ kenzie  King   whom   Massey  patently de­ tested.  All the  more surprising then,  that the  personality  of   the author persists  in remaining  abstruse,  and  one  is galled  by a  sense  of   being  served   hors   d'oeuvres and  desserts, with  the  main  course  being put  away to await another generation's delectation.
DAVID WATMOUGH


A FIRM BEGINNING

JANE   RULE,   The Desert   of  the   Heart.  Mac­
millan.  $3.95.

THIS   NOVEL    PROVES    AGAIN   that    "you can't tell a book by its blurb", and  seems to  prove  also  that   the  person  who  wrote the   blurb   did   not   read   the   book:   the resume  of  the  plot  has  little  to  do  with the  novel;  the names  of the main charac­ ters   are   misspelled; the   mistaken   aura  of  a  Ma   Perkins'   reject   is  put   on  the conflict.
It is perhaps the  contrast between  the blurb  and  the  book that  makes  this novel such  a  pleasure   to  read.  Jane Rule  does not   fall   into   any   category   of   contem­ porary   novelists;   neither  is  she,  as  the blurb  suggests, dealing only  with  a prob­  lem  of  a  lesbian  relationship  (which  is, in fact,  a very minor  theme in the novel). She  does  not  try  to  register  her  time  on a   loud   and   epic   scale;   rather,  she  is measuring smaller  conflicts,  personal  con­ flicts  and   hesitations  in   the   people  she sees.   Though  she   deals   with   a  homo­ sexual  relationship between   two  women, she is not concerned with that form of innovation which  consists in beating  back
 the  censors. She  has  used  the  novel  as a fine  instrument  and   capably   records   a variety  of experience that  has rarely  been explored  before.
This   probing   into   human  experience
brings  about  the  only major  fault  of The Desert  of  the   Heart. Jane  Rule   probes the minds of her main  characters, Evelyn and  Ann,  to  a  depth at  which  they  be­ come  more  or  less  alike.  So  alike  they become,  in  fact,  that   by the  end  of   the novel  Jane  Rule  finds  it  almost  possible to  dispense  with  them  as  characters and leave  them   as  an   idea.  This   would   be all  right  if she were doing  it on  purpose.  But  the  ambiguity  at the  end-and  it may  be a deliberate one-as  to whether Ann  leaves  with  Evelyn  or  Evelyn  stays with  Ann,  destroys  much  of  the  impact  that   the  first  half  of  the  novel  suggests and   which  the   last  half   demands, and deserves. The minor  characters, however, have  little  depth and  do  not  seem  pos­ sible  at  all;   this  is  true   with  them  all except  for Silver,  who is one  of  the  most delightful minor  figures  in  recent fiction in  Canada. She  has  a  wonderful ironic view of life which  Miss Rule  captures in a firm  and  skilled  fashion.
The   portrayal  of  Silver   brings  about
one  of  the  strongest   marks  of  this  book, and  that  is its humour. This  humour  lies in situation  (the  wedding  near  the  end) , in  description  (of Silver's  home), and  in the  cartoons which  Ann  draws.  Oh,  for one   of  those  cartoons  in   place   of  the blurb  on  the  cover!  This  would,   I feel, capture  the  essence  of  the   novel.   It is hoped  that  Miss Rule goes on into more humour  in  her   next   novel,  for  it  is  a facet  of  her  writing   that   is  very  strong and   never  wavers.
She  does  waver,  however,  in  the  final sections  of  the  book.  The plot  becomes

BOOKS IN REVIEW



artificial  because  of the characters; Bill would  not  threaten to expose the girls­ he  does  not  have  the  strength,  or  if  he does,  we  never   have  seen  it.  And  there is a  moralizing at  the  end  of   the  novel which  does  not  fit  in  with  the  rest.  Not that  Iwould  suggest  that  if  a  girl  were a lesbian  she should  send  this book home to  "the  parents" so  they  would   under­ stand;   but    there    is   a    hat-and-gloves quality   to  the  attitudes  expressed  about  the  relationship  that  is  out  of  date.  We would   not   take  it  if   this  were  a  novel about  a heterosexual  relationship; we do not  have  to  take  it  because  it  is about  a homosexual  one.
All   this   steers   away   from   the  other
remarkable facets   of  the  book:   the  use of landscape to produce a unity rarely explored  successfully by contemporary novelists,   and    the   writing    itself.   Miss Rule   has  fused   landscape so  well  with her  characters that   at  first  one  is liable to  corrunent  only  on  the  outward  mani­ festation   of  its  importance:  the  sterile relationship  on   a  sterile  landscape,  the desert  of Reno  which becomes  the desert of   the   heart. The   descriptions  of  the gambling houses in  Reno,  the strong  pas­ sages  of   beauty   in   descriptions  of  the lake  beach,  the  use of detail  in  physical analysis-all  work   together   to  dissolve eventually   into   a   whole   impression   of the  world   as  Jane Rule   sees  it  in  this book.  Coupled with  the  setting  and  the characters are  the  images:   the  recurrent use of glass and mirrors, the almost over subtle dreams (which are in themselves carefully   done) ,  and   the   casual   refer­ ences,   so  meaningful,  to  the  poetry  of Yeats.
But  the  writing,  the  style,  makes  the book.    From    the    powerful    first   para­ graph-
 Conventions, like  cliches,  have  a way of surviving  their  own    usefulness. They  are then   excused  or  defended as  the  idioms   of living.  For    everyone,  foreign  by   birth  or by  nature, convention is  a  mark   of fluency. That  is  why,   for   any   woman,  marriage  is the   idiom  of  life.   And   she   does   not   give it  up  out   of  scorn   or  indifference but  only when   she   is  forced  to  admit  that  she  has never    been   able   to   pronounce  it   properly and  has committed continually its grossest grammatical  errors. For  such  a  woman marriage remains a foreign tongue, an  alien landscape, and, since  she  cannot become naturalized, she  finally  chooses  voluntary exile....

to  the  end,   the  wntmg never  falters.  It has  its  own   peculiar  quality  in  that   it appears at first to be in short, simple sentences.  But  it is the long sentence that Miss  Rule   uses  to  such  advantage;  here is a control of punctuation and  rhythm which  many  writers cannot  master.  There is  a  beauty   to  this  prose.  Yet  it  never becomes   forced    nor   do   sections   of   it ever   stand   out.   What   is  extraordinary about   this  first  novel  is its consistency  in style, the  author's strict  attention to the whole  world  on  the  Nevada   desert.  Ad­ mittedly   she  selects,  and  at  times  glosses over   people,   but   she   is  always   in   the same   place.   This   is  a  good  first   novel, with  few  of  the  markings of one.
DONALD STEPHENS


DREAMS
AND REALITY

JOHN    MARLYN,   Under  the   Ribs    of   Death.
McClelland  &   Stewart, (New Canadian
Library).  $1.50.

WHEN I FIRST  READ John  Marlyn's Under the   Ribs   of  Death   in   I957,  Iwas  im­ pressed   by   the   spare,   sure   way   of   its telling  and  moved  by the  central  experi-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ence  with  which  Marlyn deals.  The qualities which  impressed  me in 1957 are there   still,  and   it  is  therefore  good   to see the  book published in the  New Cana­ dian  Library series, a  series,  by  the  way, which   is  now   emerging  as  one  of  the really   major  ventures  ever   undertaken by a  Canadian  publisher.
Marlyn's  novel  is  a  typical  Bildungs­ roman, in  which   the   author   traces   the attempt of his main  character to discover himself   as   a   person   and   to   shape   his destiny.  In  such  a  novel  the  milieu  is of the  first  importance, and  Marlyn's Win­ nipeg  is in  its own  way  as memorable a creation,  as   say,   Farrell's   Chicago  in Studs  Lanigan. In  the  intensely   human jungle  of Henry  Street, Sandor Hunyadi fights  for  air  and  for  a  place  in  the  sun. Like  Pip in  Great  Expectations, he wants to   become   a   gentleman.  For   him   this means   that  he  must   become   as  like  an Anglo-Saxon  as  possible-Sandor  Hun­ yadi   must   become   Alex   Humphrey  or Hunter.  The  roots  of  the  past  must  be cut  and  burned.  But  they  are  stubborn roots.  They   won't   burn   and   they  go  on bleeding.  This  attempt on  the  part  of the young  boy  to  deny  his  self  is  the  most sustained   and  most  powerful part  of the book.  Nothing in  the  second  part  of  the book, when  Hunyadi has become Hunter, matches it.
Within  the   primary  pattern   of   the
novel   Marlyn  explores   the   relationship between  men's  dreams and  illusions  and the  reality   with   which   they  must  cope. The  central conflict  here  occurs  between Sandor,  who  believes  that   the  world  is a  jungle  in  which  every  man  must  fend for   himself,  even   if  it   means   the  total suppression of  pity  and  compassion, and his  father,  who  asserts,  against  the  evi­
 


ESSAYS IN ENGLISH LITERATURE FROM THE RENAISSANCE TO THE
VICTORIAN AGE

PRESENTED TO  A. S.P. WOODHOUSE

Edited by
Millar M aclure and F. W. Watt



These essays  by  Canadian,  Eng­ lish  and  American scholars repre­ sent  some  of  the  most  influential kinds of scholarship  and criticism in  contemporary  English studies, and  range over the interests which for forty  years have  been  the  wide  province   of   the  distinguished scholar they  honour.






13!1 UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  PRESS

dence  of  Henry  Street,  "that  the  war  of	 	

6s

BOOKS IN REVIEW



each  against  all  is not  a  law of nature." What  the   son   sees  is  that   the   father, "who    loved   all   men   and   whose   only thought was  to  help  others," is yelled at and  ordered around like a dog;  what  the son sees is that  the  dashing,  exotic Onkel Janos sells himself  to a rich, ugly woman who  in  the  end  destroys  him;  what  the son sees is that  ultimately all that  counts is  success  as  defined   by  a  commercial world.  But in order  to sustain his own illusions,  Sandor-Alex must   believe  that the   Anglo-Saxon  commercial  world   is solid and  ordered, and  that  it is managed by wise and  thoughtful men. When  that illusion  collapses  in  the  great  depression of   the   thirties,  it   crushes   Sandor-Alex and sends him back into the depths from which  he  thought he  had  forever  risen. But Marlyn leaves the central philosophi­ cal  conflict   between   father  and  son  un­ resolved,  since  he  doesn't  quite  find  the fictional   situation  in  which  to  bring   it to  a  head,  and  hence  the  novel  ends  on a curiously  tentative  and  muted  note.
In the  Canadian context,  as Eli  Man­
del comments in  the admirable introduc-





66
 tion   to  this  edition, Under  the   Ribs  of Death, when  it is seen  together with  a number of other recent  novels, represents the   voice   of  the   European  immigrants who  settled   in  our  cities  thirty  or  forty years ago,  and  whose children and grand­ children are  now  beginning to distil  that  experience and  to tell us how it  was with them.
HENRY KREISEL


WORDS WITHOUT MUSIC

MARIKA  ROBERT,  A  Stranger and   Afraid.  Mc­
Clelland  &  Stewart.  $5·95·

A VICTORIA PROFESSOR,  writing  in a Van­ couver   paper,  pointed   a  way  when,   in part,   he   reviewed   the  dust   jacket   of  a book of  poems.  His  bravery  exceeded  his good  sense  by an  armlength or  two,  but he   may    have    started,  albeit    unfairly, something that  could  be valuable to cri­ tics   in   a   country  like   Canada  where every  book published here has its moment at   centre  stage,   rather  like   the   third shepherd in the Christmas play who shyly indicates  the   star   of  Bethlehem  and   is praised   by  his  elders   the  next  morning at   breakfast  for  his  great   index   finger. This   democracy  of   paucity    that    has grown  up  around our  search  for  a  place in  the  artistic sun  makes  grieving  cynics of  critics   and   public  alike.  The urge  to review  dust  jackets -especially  the  ones that  come  from  McClelland & Stewart - waxes;  the  belief  that   we  will  be  enter­ tained    beyond    this   point   wanes.   Miss Robert  is  a   very   pretty   lady   and   her picture  on   the   back  of  the  book  made me  wish  to  lie.
Miss  Robert is a  Czech  by birth   who

BOOKS IN REVIEW



came,  probably as a teenager, to Canada in  rgs 1 ; perhaps, then,  English  is not  as much  the  second  language it  was, say, to Conrad. She  has  written   a good  deal  of material  for   various   family   magazines and   papers,   and   her   prose   betrays   the flabbiness   of   that   undemanding   litera­ ture.  Her  model  is probably Pierre Berton when   it   should    be,   to   say   the   least, someone  more  rigorously  inclined  toward  stringent  communication. Here   is   the narrator's  description of  herself   on  the second   page   of  Chapter One:   "I  was not   yet  eighteen,   hungry-looking,  long­ legged,    and    skinny.   My   unruly  hair,  cropped  by   a   refugee  barber-who might  have been  a bank  director at home
-was always a mess. Though several people had commented on my budding beauty    the   bud    was   still   very   much closed."
The story  concerns Kristina,  a  Hun­ garian refugee,  who  comes  to  Paris  and  meets  Andre, a high-class blackmarketeer, in  whose  sumptuous  apartment the  girl half-lives  while  running errands for  him. One   day  she  disobeys  him  and   delivers a  mink  coat  three   hours  late.  When  she comes  back  to  Andre   he  orders  her  into  the   bedroom,  and   he  takes  a  belt  and beats  her.  The thing   that   upsets  her  is that   although she  hates   him  for  it,  she rather likes it  and  wants  to go back, and eventually  she   does.  He   says  he  knew she  would.  For  the  next  hundred  pages he beats her a few times more  and  makes love  to  her  often.   I was  never   able  to get   the   exact   relationship  straight,  be­ cause  Miss  Robert has  a  habit  of  draw­ ing  the  curtain of  decency  or  charity or
 something   over  every  scene   just  at  the moment when  real  and  human interplay is about  to occur  between  her characters. Andre  is thrown from  a  horse  and  dies; Kristina comes to  Canada,  marries a young,  weak and  extremely  nice  and  un­ dominant male.  Their relationship is less than  satisfactory.  She discovers  a "Hush" type  tabloid  where  people  advertise dis­ creetly   their   abnormalities  and  their desire   to  meet   same.   Kristina  contacts Claude,  rich  but  a boor  (Andre was rich but   a   Parisienne   boor)    who   is  rough,  knows the "code" (whatever that  is)  and can  stave  off  a  climax  for  twenty-four­ and-a-half  minutes.  The   ice   melts   in Kristina's love-life, and  her guilt  tightens until   it  almost   strangles  her.  She  loves her   Canadian  undominant   male,    and eventually  goes to a psychiatrist who tells her   it   isn't   necessarily   bad   to   be   ab­ normal.    The    book    ends    happily:    "I decided   to   count   my   blessings  and   let fate  take care  of the  rest. To  be different wasn't  a crime,  it  was only  a  problem. I was still a stranger but  no longer  afraid." The   book  is  better    than   this -and worse.   Like   Mrs.   Twain's   attempt  at swearing,   Miss   Robert  has   the   words but   not  the   music.   Kristina  is  not  big enough  to encompass the double-soul re­ quired;  the    author's   insight    into   her theme  and  her  characters is only  slight. What   she   probably  can   do  is  be  light and  bright,  and  with  different material, she  could  be  entertaining. This,  at  least, would  be better  than  putting herself into  another situation where  fate  would  have,
again,  to  take  care  of  the  rest.
ROBERT HARLOW

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



MORE TO IT
THAN THAT


Poesie/Poetry 64. Edited by Jacques Godbout and  John Robert Colombo. Les  Editions du Jour &  Ryerson  Press.   Paper  $2.00.  Cloth
$4.00.

ANY ANTHOLOGY  which contains the work  of sixteen  poets  writing  in two languages  is  bound   to  seem  a  little  di­ vided  against  itself,  and,  in  fact,  Poesie/ Poetry  64  is two  books in  one.  The  first is  composed   of  work  by  Gerard  Godin, And:re  Brochu,  Andve  Major, Fran<;oise Bujold,  Paul  Chamberland, and  Michael  Garneau, and owes a good deal to current French   poetry.   This   is  not  only  under­ standable,  but   healthy;  though   some­ times   the   rhetorical  imistence  and   the melodramatic imagery  are  overdone, the poetry  fuses European and  North Ameri­  can  traditions. Thus we get in the French half  of this collection a  much  surer  sense of   diction    and    of    form  than    in   the English  half; we also get  a more  musical verse   handled  both   with   and   without irony.  Take  the  opening lines  of  Andre  Brochu's  "Romance", for  example.

Amour du  mois de  mai  amour
La  femme  pavoise  nos tours  Et le pays  a bout  d'ecorce Comme le bouleau de Ia cour  Se resseve  a meme  Ia force....

Rhythmically this  is well organized, and the   consonants  and   vowel   sounds   are used subtly. And:re Brochu is, in this, not untypical of his companions. He  is, how­ ever,  very unlike  the  poets in  the English section  of  the  book.
Here   there   seems  to  be  a  wilful   at­
tempt  to throw out  any dependence upon
 the  European past  of  poetry  in  English, and  the consequence is a flatness,  a shal­ lowness  of  language,  and   a   poverty   of music that  lead  to dullness.  On  the other  hand,  there  is a strong dependence upon the   imagistic,  anecdotal,  narcissistic school  of  poets  who  have  been  affected to  their   disadvantage  by   the   work   of William  Carlos   Williams,  and   some  of the   Black   Mountain  poets.   Too   many poems are constructed of asides and weariness;   too  many   poems  totter  upon the  edge  of  rhythmic  decisiveness,  then fail to take the plunge. Lionel Kearn's "stacked   verse"   is  no   solution   to   the problem  of rhythm, and  he handles  it clumsily.  Frank   Davey   has   a  novelist's eye  for  significant   detail,  but   no  sense of  cadence.   These   poems,  though  writ­ ten   in   an   aggressively   colloquial   man­  ner   have   no   real   speech   quality,   and break  up  their  musics  with  clumsy  visual devices.
This  criticism  is true  in  part  of all  the
poets here, but two or three of them rise triumphant above such defects. John Newlove  has  a  real  structural sense, and he displays it convincingly in poems of toughness  and  compassion. "For   Judith, now  about I o  Years  Old" looks, at  first sight, like yet another clipped anecdotal near-imagist    poem    whose    form    is   so organic   as  to  be  protoplasmic;  read   it aloud, however, and the rhythm emerges strongly,   the   alliterative  patterns  come into  focus, and  the short  jabbing  lines are found  to be at one with  the  poem's  whole character and  attitude.

Judith, niece,  red welted  scars  on your  not yet adolescent chest,

slits cut,  say, yearly,  so you

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



may  lift  your  arms, ...

The same   fusion  of  structure  and  atti­ tude    occurs    in   the   fascinating   "The Double-Headed Snake". Newlove,  more­ over,    is   exploring   for   new    subjects, developing   an    idiosyncratic    and   real vision.   His   diction   still  lets   him   down from   time   to  time,  but  he  is  clearly   a poet of considerable potentiality.
Myra   von  Riedemann,  Margaret  At­
 of  brief  past  flowers,  capturing the  moment of bloom
in  a cage  of my own  sunlight

Gwendolyn MacEwen's poems are filled with  the things she  wants.  And  the language  of   the   poems   is  a   language of  ambition, of  wanting.  It  stands  out­ side the  mainstream of current Canadian poetry,  which  seems  generally  to  belong to  the  post-Williams  age.  That  is,  Miss
MacEwen's  language is  opposite  to  the

wood'
 and   Gwen   MacEw.en   are   th.ree
 language of  (our   purest  example)  Ray­


dnvm
 . g  out  mto
 
mond  Souster.  One  is aware of something

new   territory.  Margaret  Atwood   has  a
savage   wit   and   a  capacity   for  shifti g swiftly   from   burlesque    to   metaphysiCS which   makes  her  work  most  enlivening. Myra   von  Riedemann, like Gwen  M_ac­ Ewen,   is  inclined   to  fall  for   the  wild­ eyed  archetype a  little  too often, but  she is,  at  least,  searching and  working,  an she  has  begun  to use interesting  syntacti­ cal  shapes.
Of  the   rest  of  the  poets  it  is enough
to say that  I hope they stop trying to be "poets", throw  away  their  copies of  Lay­ ton,   Souster,  and   Donald   Allen's   A ­ thology,   and   settle  down  to  work.  It IS not    enough    to   be   disillusioned,   self­ conscious,  tough-minded, and   under thirty.  There's more  to  it  than   that.
ROBIN SKELTON




A COMPLEX MUSIC

GWENDOLYN  MACEWEN,  The  Rising Fire. Con­
tact   Press.  $2 .oo.

!   I want the  flowers  beheaded, the  garden sink,
the   rain deny   its  claim  to  princedom there

and  stand in  a garden of void applauding, tracing the  biographies
 like poetic  diction, not the rhythmic arrangement of  a  prose  line.  In  a  poem like "All  The  Fine Young  Horses", for instance  her  "issues"  if  she  claims  any, are  notf
young,   feminine,  personal   imagination.
Anthology-makers  or   those   who   teach survey  courses might  call her a Roman:ic. This present  volume  is the  first  maJor collection  of   Miss   MacEwen's   poetry. According  to  the  dust   jacket  blurb,  she has  been   publishing  it  since  she  was  a teenager  (she  is now  in  her  early  twen­ ties), and  in  rg6r  she printed  two  book­ lets  of  her  younger  verse.  Much of  that  is  reprinted  here,   and  the  result   repre­  sents  a kind of growth. But the best poems are  the  later  ones,  and  the  book  would be   more   enjoyable   if  the   whole   thing  were  made   up  of   the later   poems,  like the  musical   "The  Catalogues  of  Mem­ ory".   The   poem  is  too  long  to  reprint here    and  as  always  the  reader   is urged
to by
self. Though it  retains  some of the  poet's characteristic  excess

lions ... the  lean  loins  of them,

it also finishes on one of her high points, where  the incantation is beautiful in its simplicity,  while   at   the   same   time   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fabric   of   a  complex  music -m   other words, art:
now it is winter; heed,  heed
I say, heed
the  speech  of your  hands. feet,  feet,  I say,
move  swiftly,
leave
no  track
I  repeat, the   reader   is  urged   to  buy this  book, and  to  read  it over  a leisurely period of time. Miss MacEwen's usual unwillingness to  be direct  sets a distance at  first.  She  is not  an  immediate poet  in this  time  of immediacy. One  may  be put off  by  certain  amateur  tricks,   such   as the   use  of   an   adverb   in   place   of  an adjective  ("like   darkly   trees")  ;  or  im­ patient with   her  effort   to  overcome  the inertia of  a  heavy  metaphor, as  in  the poem, "Eden, Eden". But in other  poems such as "The Absolute  Dance" and  "The Dimensions  of   a  Tiger",  the   voice  re­ sponds   as   well   as  expressing,   and   the work   becomes   true    (see  Webster:   ac­ curately formed)  as  well  as  lovely.
In   other   words,  this  is  an  important book.  It  contains within   it  the  evidence that   a  young  woman  with  a  marvellous talent is  beginning to  take  charge.
GEORGE BOWERING


PERENNIAL PURITANISM

GEORGE  BOWERING,   Points  on  the  Grid.  Con­
tact Press.  Paper  $2.00. Cloth $g.oo.

IT IS  REMARKABLE how  hard   Puritanism dies  in   Canadian  poetry.   Crushed  and bull-dozed  to death by the flamboyant contempt of  Irving Layton   it  neverthe­ less emerges  again  as inverse  prudery in the    work    of   some   of    Mr.    Layton's
 staunchest  admirers. George  Bowering's Points on the Grid is a case in point.  Mr. Bowering  writes  a  number of  poems  on the  experience  of  orgasm.   It is as  valid a subject for poetry  as any,  but the worth of  the  experience as  poetry   depends on what you do with it. Mr. Bowering does exactly  what  he objects  to in D. H. Lawrence, only  with  a different  premise. Both   turn   sex  into   a  metaphysics and both fall into the same fault, tedium. "Lawrence, you old  bore",  writes Bower­ ing   with   justice,   "you   die   young   and leave   immediacy."  So  in  a   sense  does Mr.   Bowering;   he  wants  to  present   the power  of sex, "the  might  of  it",  but  the poems  in which  he attempts  to do so are curiously  non-erotic, and  display  nervous intensity   rather  than   passion.  They   are neural   rather than  sensual,  avoiding the ecstatic   as  well  as  the  erotic,   and   thus turn    into   emotional   prudery.  We   are presented   with   the   mechanics  of   sex, with  some  of  its  obsessiveness  but  none of its  enigma.
Perhaps  this is what  Mr.  Bowering  in­
tends,  orgasm  as crucial  reality  expressed in  a  kind  of  uncompromising stark  ba­ nality.  "I don't want   it  I'm   sick  of  it/ poetry-PAR- I  want/my hands   full  of woman  flesh." Mr.  Bowering  gets exactly what   he  asks  for;   his  hands are  full  of all kinds of things  in  Points  on  the Grid, but  not  always  of  poetry.
One  does sympathize with  his sense of
alienation,  of  frequent  isolation,   which forces  him to focus on  the  sexual experi­ ence  as  a  crucial   and  meaningful point  of  contact;   unfortunately  his  language seldom   rises   to   his   need.    Intensity  is not  hysteria  and  in  Mr.  Bowering's verse there   is  a  limited   emotional  range.   He adopts   not  so much  a  number of  masks as a  number of poses. Like  Alfred  Purdy

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he  is going  to  give  it  to  us straight   and in    the    vernacular.   But   whereas    Mr. Purdy   compels  one's  respect  because  of his passionate projection into  experience, Mr.  Bowering  does  not.
Lines  in raised  black capitals  are not a
satisfactory equivalent for emotional pro­ jection,   nor  is  endless  repetition.  These  do  not  create emotional  intensity;  they are   mere   typographical   tricks.   "Winter coming    an   injection/   in   the   veins   of September"  is  more  effective   as  poetry than   INDIAN  SUMMER FOR  GOD'S SAKE!   because   the   former    uses   lan­ guage   as   metaphor  and   the  latter  the arbitrary emphasis  of typography.  How­ ever,   Mr.   Bowering   doesn't   believe   in language  as  metaphor. He   believes   in Charles Olson,  something  called  "locus"  and   a   general    attitude   that   might   be defined   as  "the  poet  as  a  semi-literate garage  mechanic".  Were  Mr.   Bowering a   semi-literate garage   mechanic,   this would  be fair  enough, but  he is not,  and he gives himself  away by writing  a num­  ber  of  lyrics  of  deceptive  simplicity  and  tender  directness.  "What  joy/   to  teach you  joy/  of love ..." These  are  the lines of  Sunday  Poem  "your/  noon  day  Sun day  eyes"  are  successful  in  a  way  "Wil­ liam   Faulkner  Dead   is  like  my  father/ with    his    balls   meat    grindered    in    a machine" can  never  be, because the latter  is not  powerful but  sensational,  the  way cheap  newspaper  headlines   are   sensa­ tional. Of  course,  the  image  is a  protest against the  brutal sterility  of  death, but its  very  shock  effect  lessens  the  impact of  the  remaining lines  and  the  meaning of  the  total  poem.
In  his  foreword  Mr.  Bowering  writes
"you   can't  take  an  orchestra   or  a  poet to every  farmhouse on the  Canadian Tundra." This   kind  of  patronizing  flip-
 pancy   makes   one   suspect   the  genuine­ ness   of   Bowering's   Angst.   Bowering's language  is  obsessively   repetitive;  the phrase  "margin of the  mind" occurs  five times   in   five   different   poems   at   least and  nowhere is the  phrase  unexpendable.
The   love  poems  as  opposed   to  those on   a   sexual   theme   have   a   distinctive quality. "I  try   to   be   tender/   moving away   the   long   grass/  and   pray   pagan and  greedy/ for human associated soft spearing sunlight." These  poems do not reflect    a    "stand-up   mesmerized    poet bound   in  a  tunnel of sound" but  rather a conscious  articulate poet in control and without  pose.   George   Bowering   should write  like  this  more  often.
MARYA FIAMENGO


DOOMED  FRAGRANCE

Peterley Harvest; The  Private   Diary  of David Peterley, edited by Richard Pennington. McClelland &  Stewart, $6.50.

Peterley seems  now  to be merely the  symbol of   an   England  that  is   lost   forever,  the entre-deux guerres  is  joining the  Edwardian age  and   the   nineteenth  century as  history. There  does   not   seem   to   be   any   present, apart  from   this   waiting  for   the   first  shots of  the  second war.  Time and  a  future may still   exist   abroad;  but   here   is  only   a  sus­ pension   of   time    and    movement, a   mere  waiting.

This entry   for  February 1939,  sums  up the  essence  of  Peterley  Harvest, a  book which   is  partly a  journal of  the  heart, partly   a  novel,   partly   a  social   history. Peterley,  the  ancestral home  from  which the  author repeatedly fled and  to which, for  the  thirteen years  between   1926  and
1939 he as repeatedly returned, which motivated so many of his actions and inactions, is indeed  a symbol, an imagina­ tive  reconstruction of a late seventeenth-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



century  country house  pulled  down  long ago  when   the  family   moved   elsewhere. Its  "harvest" -emotional,  cultural  and political-is  nostalgia  for  the  past, frus­ tration, ambivalence and  dilettantism in the  present.
Though  Peterley   Harvest   is  a  record of  personal   failures,   and   the  failures   of a  class  and   a  nation, to  come  to  terms with  reality  it  is  not  a  depressing   book. In  a very  different way from  the  speech of  Synge's  Irish  peasants,  it  is as full  of flavour  as a  nut  or  an  apple, even  if the nut  is  just  faintly   musty   and   the  apple gone  slightly  soft. The dust  on  this bowl of  withered roses gives  off  something of the   doomed   fragrance  of  the   morning rose,  nor  is  the  romantic  sentimentality such  a  comparison suggests  unmitigated by  the   thorns   of  satire.   David   Peterley sees his class as clinging  to the  traditions of  the  great   age  of  the  gentry,  and  the annual visitant   to  the  card-room at Peterley  is  not   the   only   eighteenth­ century ghost  who  haunts  his  pages.  His delightful and  wholly  apocryphal "char­ acter" of  James  Boswell  by Dr.  Johnson  has   as   companion-piece a thoroughly Chesterfieldian letter from the  elder Peterley  to  his son,  the  flavour  of which is illustrated by the  following  extract:

You   need   not  assume   that   a  physical  inti­ mancy necessarily entails marriage, and  it  is prudent  to  be  cautious of  any  woman who refuses   to  admit  the   separateness  of  these two   things,  unless   it   is   the    woman    you intend  to  marry.  Living  with   women   can­ not   usually   be  postponed  until   marriage is convenient, and  it  is advisable to  give  some thought  to  the  choice   of  a  mistress. I  am of   the   opinion   that  the   most   satisfactory way   is   to   select   from    the   wives   of   your older   acquaintances,  or   at  any   rate   from the  young   wives  of  older  husbands. These are  often   neglected by  busy  and   indifferent men   and    are   eager  for   a   companionship which  is as much intellectual as physical. ...
 


I  am  assuming you  would  no more dream of   having    recourse   to   whores   any   more than   you  would   hire   for  an  evening party a  dress   suit   that    has   covered  the   private parts  of any tradesman or  commercial traveller.

Faithfully  as the author attempts to follow   his  father's  advice   on   all   these points,  he is seemingly  doomed   to fail  in the first of them. His entirely suitable, mortgage-lifting,  hunt   and   garden-club wife  proves   unsatisfactory  in   other   re­ spects, and  when  divorce  leaves  him  free to  do  so he  fails  to  marry  (fearing  that  the   gardener  at   Peterley   will  find   her unacceptable)  the one  woman  he whole­ heartedly  loves who  refuses  to  have  him on  any  other   terms.  She  has  lived  with him   in   rewarding   companionship  and unrewarding  chastity  for  three   years,  is a  Cambridge   graduate  and   a   brilliant musician,  but  her  South  London origins disqualify  her  for  the  Peterley   establish­  ment.
David  Peterley's flair for  the vivid evo­
cation  of atmosphere and  personality  in­ vests with  a sense of immediacy a  yester­ day  that   seems  to  us  now  so  long  ago and  which,  to   him,  was   inextricably entangled with  a  past  far  more  distant.

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Was  there,   in  our  time,  an  England in which   young   gentlemen  amused   them­ selves  with   seventeenth-century   re­  searches  in   the  British  Museum,   flitted at  will  from  the  ancestral   acres  to  the flat   in   town,   to  the  Continent  and   to Australia and   back  again?  Or  arranged the  marriages of their  rustic  mistresses at their   "owne coste",   and  hired  beautiful pianists   to  give  a  series of  private-in­ deed  solitary-recitals when  music  was the   only   tangible  return    for   the   sub­ stantial  investment involved?   He  makes us  believe  so, and  in  his search  for and flight  from  commitment to the  "present" of  the   thirties  takes   us  with   him   into some   very   good   company.   We   attend with   him   Housman's  lecture  on   "The Name  and  Nature of  Poetry",  are  intro­ duced   to  a  number  of quite  fascinating women,   eavesdrop  at  literary   discussion with  Machen and  Squire  and  Connolly,  visit   Prague   during   the   Munich  crisis, and  ally  ourselves  with Steed  and  Seton­  Watson  in  a  campaign  to  save  Czecho­ Slovakia.   With   Peterley   we  are  always on the  fringe  of things, but an interesting and  sometimes   exciting  fringe  it  is. The reader    also  identifies   himself,   however, with   the   dissatisfactions  of  the   author with  the  record  of a life which  seems to lead  nowhere, this  journal  of loose ends:

There are   still   the   old  unsolved   problems. One does   not   escape   them   by  growing up. Time leaves  the  old  ones  behind  unresolved, and   brings different  ones  we  shall   not  any more  successfully solve.... One   should   ac­ cept   the   unknowable,  jump   into   the  dark, do   all   that  you   were   told   should   never  be  done.

Peterley's "jump  into   the  dark" is  his return  to   Australia  after   more   than   a decade  as   a   prisoner   of   time   in   the present-less    dream-world  of   his   home­ land.   "Only  the   knowledge  that   I  can

74
 never  go  back,"   the   journal   ends,  "will keep  me  there."
According to  the  editor,  David  Peter­
ley,  on  his  voyage  to  Australia,  selected from  his  journals  "those  passages dealing with  his  private life and  wrote  them  out again   so  as  to  produce  a  more  or  less continuous autobiographical narrative". He   insists   also   that  this "is   not   the factual  biographical  story   that    justifies the  printing of an  intimate  journal" but "the   revelation of  the  inner  life of  fugi­ tive images  in the mind  and  fitful images of  the   heart  ... which   it  is  the  aim   of the   official   biography  to   conceal." Yet one  wonders how  much  of  its consistency of   theme  and   the   impression   of   self­ conscious   artistry   it   conveys   is  due   to Mr.    Pennington's   careful    selection    of materials and  his  restraint in  matters of editorial   intrusion.   The   resulting   unity, it  must  be confessed,  is achieved   at  the cost  of   occasional   confusion.  Sometimes an  explanatory footnote would  help  the reader  to negotiate the  tantalizing elipses of this  journal, but  the wise editor  leaves him   desiring   more   rather  than   less  in­ formation, and   to  wise  editing  this  un­ usual,  frequently absorbing and  not  in­ frequently unsatisfying   journal  owes, one suspects,  a good  deal. 	MARION  B. SMITH


THE EARLIEST VOYAGES

TRYGGVI   J.  OLESON, Early   Voyages  and Northern  Approaches,  I000-1632.  Vol.    1, The  Canadian  Centenary  Series.   McClel­ land &  Stewart. $8.so.
GWYN JONEs,   The Norse   Atlantic Saga.  Ox­
ford   University Press.  $7.50.
John    Ledyard's   Journal   of   Captain   Cook's Last   Voyage. Edited by James Kenneth Munford.   Oregon  State  University  Press.
$6.oo.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



A  NORWEGIAN   AMATEUR   NAVIGATOR   re­ cently   announced  his  intention  of   sail­ ing  across  the  Atlantic in  the  replica  of a  Viking  ship,  to  prove  that  the  Norse­ men   really  could   have  travelled  to  the American  continent   before    Columbus. The   gesture   seemed   highly  superfluous,  since  it  was  made,  not  in  a  lost  cause, but   in   one   that,   among  historians   of northern  North   America  at   least,  must be  regarded as  won.  No  history  of Can­  ada   is  now  complete  without  its  pious bow  to  Leif  Eiriksson,  and   the  only im­ portant  questions still open to controversy  seem   to   be   just   where    the   Norsemen  went  in  North  America and   the  extent  of  their  penetration  into   the  continent. Columbus is left with  the  diminished honour of  being  merely  the  first  captain to reach  the Americas across the open Atlantic instead of island-hopping the ocean's  northern rim  in  the  manner that brought  the   Vikings,   by  relatively   safe stages,  to  Iceland, Greenland, Labrador, the  Canadian Arctic  and, finally,  to Yin­ land,   which   the   evidence  of  the  sagas suggests must  be located somewhere near Cape   Cod.
The first  two  of  the  books  under  re­
view   deal   variously    with    the   existing evidence   relating  to  the   Norse  explora­ tions.  Professor   Gwyn   Jones,  in  a  most readable  analysis   of   the   relevant  Ice­ landic   writings,   describes  the  settlement of  Iceland and  Greenland  and   the  voy­ ages down  the  eastern seaboard of North  America.    He    portrays    an  essentially European  culture which   leaves  no  last­ ing   impression   on   life  in  what   is  now the   Canadian  North,  and  which   in Greenland  dies  out   in   the   late   middle ages  as  soon  as  the   links  with   Europe decay;    he   suggests   that    the   returning Eskimos  exterminated the  vestigial  Norse
 settlements  whose   inhabitants  were   al­ ready  a  physically  degenerating  remnant of the  once  proud  and  vigourous  Viking explorers.  "On the whole,  the  old  theory  of  the   Greenland   colony   dying   out   in increasing   isolation  from   an  indifferent world  must  still  hold  the  field."  In  the view  defended   by   Professor   Jones,   the voyages to the  islands  and  the  mainland of  Canada  were  merely  a  series  of inci­ dents  with  little  bearing on  the  general  fate  of the  settlements in  Greenland.
In   Early  Voyages and   Northern  Ap­
proaches,  Tryggvi  Oleson,  one of the leading  authorities in Canada on early Arctic exploration, shifts the perspective both  geographically and  historically.  For him   the  great   exploratory  achievement of  the  Vikings  of  Greenland lies not  in their   probe  to  the  south,  ending  in  the quickly  abandoned bridgehead on elusive Vinland,  but    rather  in   their   long­ sustained  penetration into  the  Canadian North  which,  in  his view, has  an  endur­ ing  influence   on  life  in  the  Arctic  and sub-Arctic   regions.
Professor  Oleson   identifies   the  Norse­
men   with   the   Tunnits,  the   tall,   fair­ skinned   men   who   long  ago,   according to   Eskimo   tradition,   appeared   on   the shores of Hudson's  Bay. He  suggests that  the Tunnits  were in  fact  Icelanders who, as  hunters of   the  polar  bear,  the  white falcon  and other  prized  Arctic  game,  had graduaiiy  adapted their  life  until,  when the   settlements  in   Greenland   disinte­ grated  through  failing   communications with  Europe,  they  turned  native,  inter­ married  with    the   dwarfish   aborigenes (the   Skraelings   of  the  sagas)   and   pro­ duced   the   hybrid   race   which   we  now know  as  Eskimos.  Instead  of  being  des­ troyed  they were absorbed, losing religion and  language in  the  process, but  they did

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not   disappear  without    contributing   to the  life  of  the  North   not  only  a  blond strain that throws back among modern Eskimos, but also a group of techniques which  transformed the primitive Dorset culture of  the  Skraelings   into  the  rela­ tively  sophisticated Thule culture.
Professor   Oleson   is inclined   to  make much   of  minor   and   often   oblique  evi­ dence;  he   conjectures  excessively.   Yet his  main   thesis,  which   is  supported   by other  distinguished Arctic  scholars,  is by no   means   far-fetched;   there   is  sound archaeological  evidence  to  suggest  that  hunters from  Greenland  did  reach  Hud­ son's Bay, while many features of Eskimo life, e.g. the characteristic dress, are most easily  explicable if  one  regards   them  as derivations from mediaeval Europe. Though  Professor   Oleson   does  not   use the  argument  by  analogy,   it  might  co­ gently  be  brought forward  in  support of his   viewpoint;  the   white   hunter  who went   native    and   contributed  certain  European  techniques to  Indian life  was a  familiar  figure  in  the  woodlands and prairies   of   central  Canada  during  the early  nineteenth  century,   while  the  hy­ brid   metis   society   which   actually    ap­ peared in the prairies showed regressive tendencies  that   might   well  have  led  to its re-absorption into a modified Indian society  had  the  link  with  European civil­ ization  been  broken,  as it was in  the case of   Greenland  toward    the   end   of   the fifteenth century.
This   brilliant  reconstruction  of  what may   have   happened  in   the   Canadian North  when the Greenland settlement disintegrated is the core of Professor Oleson's   book;  his  final  chapters on  the early   explorers   of   the   modern  period, from  Cabot  onwards, are  interesting mainly   for   the  evidence   he  brings  for-
 ward   to  suggest  that   they  were  at  least partly inspired   by a surviving lore  of far Northern lands  which  echoed  out  of the epic  past  of the  Norse  voyagers  and hunters.
Western Canadian  exploration has  no such   formidable  and   misty  ancestry   as that  provided by the Vikings. The first voyager   to   land   on   our   Pacific   coasts was  Captain Cook,  and  his  explorations are documented not only in the official account  by Cook  and  King,  but  also  in the   unauthorized  narratives which   beat it  into   print. One   of  these,  the  Journal of Captain Cook's  Last Voyage  by the former  marine, John  Ledyard, has   just been  re-published  with  an  extensive  ap­ paratus  of   footnotes  and   data   on   the plants  and  animals which  Ledyard  men­  tions.   Ledyard  is  distinguished,   among  the   several   participants  in  Cook's  final voyage  who  found   their  way  into  print, by his florid  style and  his admiration for the   Noble   Savage.   When   he  writes   of the   Indians of   Nootka   Sound   on  Van­ couver  Island,  he combines  the  two with devastating   effect.   On   arriving,  he  re­ marks:  "... we  had  scarcely  entered the inlet  before  we  saw  that  hardy, that  in­ triped [sic], that  glorious creature man approaching  us  from   the   shore."   And of  the  celebrated  whale-fishing of  the Nootka   Indians he  tells us: "They have a harpoon made  from  a mushel  shell  only. and   yet  they   have   so  disposed   it  as  to subdue the  great   leviathan, and  tow  the unweildly  [sic]  monster  to their  shores." For all his heady worship of uncivilized humanity, Ledyard includes  enough solid and shrewdly observed (and sometimes borrowed) fact to make his journal well worth  the  reading for those who are interested in  Canada's links with  the Pacific  world.                GEORGE WOODCOCK

BOOKS IN REVffiW



A NEGLECTED EXPLORATION



IRENE  M.   SPRY,  The Palliser  Expedition. An Account  of  fohn  Palliser's  British  North American Exploring Expedition 1B57-IB6o. Macmillan. $7.50.


EXCEPT  TO PRAIRIE AGRONOMISTS,  for whom  Palliser's Triangle is a familiar concept, and  to citizens of Calgary, where the  Palliser  Hotel  is the  leading hostelry, the name  of Captain John Palliser is generally  unknown to most Canadians. School histories  either ignore  or refer casually to the expedition under  his leadership which  undertook the most thorough  exploration  of  the   Northwest prior  to its acquisition by Canada. One reason   for   this   unwarranted  neglect   is the scarcity of copies of the British Government publications containing the report    of   the    expedition.   Palliser   in­ tended    to   publish    a   popular   account, comparable to his earlier work describing  a  hunting  trip   to  the  American  plains region,   but   this   never   appeared.  Mrs. Irene Spry,  a  specialist  in  economic  his­ tory   who   resides   in   London,  England, has   now   provided   this   popular  work, handsomely printed  with  well  chosen  il­ lustrations and   based    mainly    on   the official reports, supplemented by material secured   by   assiduous  searches   in  many scattered  archival collections.
Palliser,   the   son   of  a   wealthy   Irish
landowner, shared  the  enthusiasm which impelled so many  young Britons in the Victorian era   to  exchange  the  comforts of their  island  homeland for exciting  and arduous expeditions to  the  far  places  of the  earth.   No  simple  sportsman,  Palliser
 developed  an intelligent interest in the economic   potential  of   western    British North  America.  The prospects for  settle­ ment   and   resource development  in  this region   were   unknown,  since   European activity   had   hitherto  been  mainly   con­ fined   to  the   fur   trade  in   the   forested  north. Working  through  the  Royal  Geo­ graphical  Society  Palliser secured   finan­  cial   support   from   the   British   Govern­ ment,   on   the   condition  that   qualified  scientists should  accompany him-James Hector, physician,  geologist  and  natural­ ist;  Eugene  Bourgeau, botanist; Thomas Blakiston, magnetical observer; and John   W.  Sullivan, surveyor.  The  scien­ tists  secured   a  great   quantity  of   speci­ mens  relating to flora, fauna and geology, and   prepared maps  and  lengthy  reports and    observations    relating    to   climate, topography,  soil   and   other   natural  re­ sources,   and   transportation  routes.    In addition,  Palliser   and   Hector  produced daily   journals   of  the  movements of  the party,  replete   with   all  the  incidents of travel  under   difficult  and  often  danger­ ous  conditions.
It is  these  incidents  of  travel   which
Mrs.   Spry   has  chosen   to  emphasize in her   account  of  the   Palliser   expedition, rather  than   its  scientific   achievements. This   emphasis   is  at   once   the   strength and   the  weakness  of  her  book.  There  is much   to  interest  the  general  reader   in the   details   of   buffalo    hunts,    the   en­ counters with  various   Indian  tribes,  the journey    across   unmapped   prairie,  the exciting  winter  sorties  by  dog  team,  and  the hazardous searches  for passes through the  eastern  part  of  the  mountain region. Perusing   this  material,  one  is  forcefully  reminded of the constant and  formidable threats  to   human  survival   in   much   of Western  Canada before  the  era  of  rail-

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



way development and  early maturing wheat.   But   the   author's  preoccupation with the travel  narrative has inevitably involved   much    paraphrasing  and   con­ densing  of the  fresh,  richly  detailed, and vivid  prose  of  Palliser  and  Hector, with the  consequence that   some  parts  of  the book  are  pedestrian and  tedious.
Palliser's  conclusions  (discredited with­ in  the  next  twenty  years)   that  much  of the  prairie portion  of  present-day Saskat­ chewan   and   Alberta  was  unfit  for  agri­ culture,  and   that   no  practicable  route for  a  transcontinental railway  existed  in the  mountain region,  are  the  best known aspects  of  the  expedition's reports.  Yet, it is obvious from an examination of the originals   that    an   immense   amount  of sound   geographical  knowledge   was  ac­ quired, and   it  is  unfortunate that  Mrs. Spry  has  not  devoted   more  attention to an   evaluation  of  this  material,  so  that the   substantial   achievements  of  Hector and  the other scientists in the party could be  more  widely  appreciated.
LEWIS H. THOMAS
 ROAD TO  SARATOGA

THOMAS  ANBUREY,  With Burgoyne  from  Que­
bec. Edited by Sydney Jackman. Macmillan.
$5-75·

THE  MAN  OF TRIVIAL MIND  who observes great   events  is always  a  somewhat  diffi­ cult  witness,  largely  because  he  does  not realize   the   telling   significance  of   minor  circumstances  seen   clearly   and   objec­  tively,  but  all  too  often  seeks  to  inflate  them    with    false    philosophy.    Thomas Anburey, whose  Travels through the  In­ terior  Parts  of  North America  is now  in part   reprinted   under   the  title  of  With Burgoyne  to  Quebec, is such  a man.  He cannot  describe   an  Indian village  with­  out  long,  trite  reflection,  in  the  manner of   his  age,   on   the   relative   merits   of civilized  and   savage  life:

How  mortifying must  this  parallel be to civilized  nations?   And    the   more    painful the   reflection,  as   it   awakens  the   feelings to  the   cause   of  their   sufferings;  no  doubt but   they   will   one   time   or   other  be   con­ vinced    from    whence  it   arises;   from   the  confusion  of   their  opinions,   from   the   de­ fects   of   their  political    constitutions,  and  from  the  capriciousness  of  their Jaws, which  ever  are  in  continual  opposition to  the  laws of  nature ...

Anburey, one observes sadly, was not without an  eye  to  the  vivid  detail.  Des­ cribing cod-fishing off  the  Grand  Banks, for  instance,  he  remarks   that  "as  soon as the fish comes in view, the water  mag­ nifies  it   to  such   a  size  that   it  appears almost   impossible   to  get   it  on   board." Such  are  the  observations which,  rightly presented,   make   the  good   travel   book, the  appealing  volume   of  memoirs.   An­ burey,    unfortunately,  can   rarely   leave them  unembellished; the moralizing tone tends   to   take   over,   particularly  in   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



early   passages  of  the   book,  when  he  is engaged in describing Quebec and its people.  The later  sections, dealing with Burgoyne's actual  expedition, are  less marred  in  this  way,  partly   because   the need   to  describe   fairly   complicated  ac­ tion  leaves scantier room  for  philosophiz­ ing,   and    partly   because-as    scholars have   pointed   out-he    filled   out   his "diary" of  the  Saratoga  campaign with borrowings  from  other   participants who had   already   written  on   the   events   in which  he  took  part.
Admittedly, there  are  enough original
observations  in   Anburey's  narrative   to make it useful and necessary for research scholars.   But   whether  a   republication was  needed   is  another question; With Burgoyne   to  Quebec is fustian literature and  historically of secondary importance. Its   inclusion    in   the   series   of   Pioneer Books,  which  in  the  past  has  published such works of first importance on early Canada as  The  Letters and  Journals  of Simon   Fraser, Samuel Hearne's  Journey to  the  Northern Ocean and  Daniel  Har­ mon's   Journal, suggests  that   the  editors  are  searching rather  hard  for  titles.
L. T. CORNELIUS



LOYALIST HOUSES

MARION MACRAE and ANTHONY   ADAMSON,  The Ancestral Roof; Domestic Architecture of Upper Canada. Clark, Irwin. $10.00.

IT IS HARD TO  BELIEVE that  The Ancestral Roof  is  the  first  book  to  appear on  the subject   of  the   houses  of  early   Ontario, since   the   authors  and   photographer  of this  one  have  so ably  revealed the  rich­ ness, variety,  uniqueness and  quantity of the   available   subject   matter.  And   they
 assure   us  that   they   have   by  no  means covered  the  entire field.  They  and  their publisher  have turned out a handsome, glossy-paged volume filled with good, straightforward non-arty photographs and  lively but  simple  and  clear  pen-and­ ink architectural sketches.  As Mr.  Adam­ son  proclaims   in  the  introduction:  "the  purpose  of this  book  is  to encourage our readers    to   see,    and    having    seen,   to understand".   However,  Miss   Macrae, who wrote  the major portion of the  text, evidently   places   less  confidence  in   the ability  of  the  reader  to learn  through his eye:  she believes in  bending his ear.  One  admires her ability  to go on and  on  with seemingly endless  concern about  mould­ ings   and    mouldings, and   mantelpiece after  mantelpiece, but  one  also  wonders  if  she   really   believes   that   anyone   else shares  her  enthusiasm.
The  political,   economic and social history which created the house-building ancestors is partially described  by Miss Macrae, and  this,  together with the back­ ground  of   architectural   history   which dominated  the   building  of  the   houses, makes   the   most   interesting   reading  in the   book.   Now   and    then   one   comes across  a  pretty   but   dubious  literary   or philosophical  embellishment,   such   as: "an  absolute  eye is as  rare  in  the  visual arts   as  is  absolute  pitch   in  music",   or "ltalianate  villas   graced    a   number  of cities  of  Ontario but   the  pruning hook of  time  has  cut   them  down." The   air becomes  redolent of  a  ladies'  club  on  a summer  afternoon.  And,  since  exact  ad­  dresses are  given  for  only  a  small  num­  ber  of  the  houses  mentioned, and  not  a single  map  is  provided, it  seems  that   if the  reader ever  intends to go out and  see for  himself  what   the  book  says is worth seeing,   he   may   indeed   have   to   join  a

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



guided    tour    sponsored    by   a   Toronto ladies'  club  some  nice, warm  day.
The  book ends  with a kind of epilogue written and  drawn by Mr.  Adamson  and printed on an appropriately virile grey paper. This  epilogue,  replete with equally virile   sketches   and   an   unadorned   text­ book-like   commentary,  sums  up  several very   interesting  generalities   about  the houses which  have  been described earlier,  and,    having    seen,   one   does   begin   to understand, and  to wish that  there  could have   been  more   of   this  visual  analysis, more   detailed   photographs  and   a  few maps, so that  this worthwhile book could have  been  even  more  worthwhile.
ABRAHAM ROGATNICK



RECOMMENDED REPRINTS

A   FURTHER    FOUR   VOLUMES   have   just appeared in  the  New  Canadian Library, bringing the  total  number  of titles to 42. The    new    additions  include    Gabrielle Roy's   mordant  study   of  the  little  man in   the   murderous  grip   of  metropolitan routine, The  Cashier, and  John  Marlyn's novel  of immigrant dilemma, Under  the Ribs   of  Death. Brian   Moore   is  repre­ sented   by  the   least   Canadian  but   still perhaps  the   best   of  his   books,  Judith Hearne, while  a  forgotten writer  and  a forgotten book  are  revived  in  M.  Allar­ dale    Grainger's  quasi-novel    of   British Columbian coast  life, Woodsmen  of the West.







8o
 TO THE EDITOR

SIR,
I  have   been   working   on  a  series  of Indexes to  major Canadian little  maga­ zines.   This   work   is  sponsored   by   the Atkinson   Charitable  Foundation  of  To­ ronto.  Beginning in  October of  this  year Indexes  will   be   appearing at   regular  intervals in  monograph  form.  The   first one  will  be  an   Index  to  the  first  four volumes  of  Dudek's  Delta, published by Delta,  then  an  Index to  Souster's  Direc­ tion  to  be published  both in Culture and  apart as  a  booklet.  Other  periodicals to be   indexed are   CIV /n,  Contemporary
Verse   Northern  Review,  Preview, First
Statem' ent,   Combustion,  Contact,  Mo-
ment, McGill Fortnightly Review.  Any­ one  having  copies  of any  of these  maga­ zines  and   willing   to  lend   them  or  sell them  should  drop  me a line.
MICHAEL GNAROWSKI, Department of English, Lakehead College,
Oliver  Road, Port Arthur, Ont.
