$5 .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·90


THE }IRT OF }IUTOBIOGR}IPHY

Articles

RY 1·..\RUHl RNEY, (;OJ RG.l:. \\'OODCOCK, ROY  DA='l'IELLS, P. K. PAGE, JOHN LACBJ::R, .PA'l  L IIJARTARSOK,  jA:c\ET GlLTkOW, K . .P. STICH

Poerris

BY IRVING LAYTON, ROBERT KROETSCil, E . \\'. BRE\\'STEH, AL  PL' RDY,
E. F. DYCK, KRISTJ ANA Gt:.' NNARS

Reviews


BY  T. D. :\[ACLC"LICII, ED:\ IT:.
 
N n i\[Ql<R lSON, :\fAl.'THCE LEBEL, KEITH

GAREBIAN, l\ I ARIAN FO\ \"T .F.R , l\ 1 UR IEL  WH ITAKER, ALEC LL'CAS, TEimY GOLDIE, PET U{ KLOVAN, \\'END \' K F.l TNE R , R I C HAR D G. H ODGSON, H E LEN HOY, LI N DA ROG ERS, E LiZABET H  POP HA:\1, GEORGE MCWliiRTE R,
ERlC TllO:\IPSON,  SI?.-IONE  K NU TSON, P. l\IERIVALE

Opinions and  Notes

BY  J O H N OW ER, DOROTHY l·'AR l\ llLOE, BER NARD   LANGDON -LE.r-.fl EUX, GE R A LD  NOONAN, \\'ALTER  PACHE

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







SAYS WHO?




J  CAN   LOGICALLY BEGIN  this  issue on  autobiography with  no other  pronoun. The  subject  imposes itself on  the  editor, and  if he stretches for a way  to  talk  about   it, so  be it.  Selfishness,  perhaps. They  say  that that  can  be dangerous, but  who knows for sure? Sometimes you have to face matters squarely. We all do. Sometimes one has to fight custom, at other  times to adopt it, to stand where  one is and say Aye. (My  word.)
Clearly  there  are degrees of objectivity in this business of self-revelation. There
is the  (personal, engaging, self-centred, egomaniacal)  I (pick  an  adjective); the (impersonal,  disengaging, lofty,  generalizing)   one;   the    (aloof,   disinterested, partial)  he;  the   (imperious, imperative)  you;  the   (communal)  we  (or  is this just  a  royal,  editorial convention?) . By  these  pronouns we  connect with  each other-apparently inexactly,   for   they  are  open   to   judgment.  How,   then   to respond? Such  pronouns are  the  stuff  of courtroom theatre and  sibling  rivalry:

You did it. I did not. You did so. Who says? I says.
Sez you.
I saw him, and he did it.

(Whom do we believe?)

Evidence is limited, partial, biased,  circumstantial, sometimes corroborative, sometimes merely  irrelevant. How  closely it comes  to truth depends as much  on a  judge-and-jury's skills of interpretation as on  the  "facts" being  unfolded. And autobiographies, filled  with  the  selective  games,  guises,  and   biases  of  a  (self­ defensive,  self-aware, self-revelatory)  largely  ordinary life,  require  readers  with just such highly tuned  interpretive skills.
Several   recent   publications call  attention  variously   to  the  problems of  bias.
Graham  Greene's Ways of Escape   (Lester & Orpen Dennys) is one,  the  title itself  suggesting   before  we even  begin  the  book  a novelistic stance  with  life;  it

2

EDITORIAL

renders  a  set  of  autobiographical  choices  metaphorically,  making  a  "flight" through  life, not a winged glide above the common world, but a series of evasive tactics  devised by the successive ages of the same man,  as he contrives to make himself anew. "It is a curious business," he writes, "to  read  an account  of one's own  past written  by-whom? Surely not by myself. The  self of forty years ago is not the self of today and  I read my own book, The  Lawless Roads, as a stran­ ger  would."  But  this convincing succession of premises hides a fiction. We may accept  that  his older  and  younger selves differ, but logic does not  compel us to accept that  the younger self will be as strange to the older "as a stranger" will be. Which  he knows himself. The stance is a deliberate fiction, to engage the reader in  a  companiable kind  of opening  mystery-for the  book is  above all else an entertainment, a set of essays on the successive events in Greene's life that led to Africa, Asia, America,  Intelligence, and  Public Fame. Each episode, as he writes it, shaped  the new persona of his next decade. Anecdotally he tells of the way that  most  of  his life's  experience,  too,  resulted  in  novel-writing,  an  activity  which creates another  problem  for him as in  retrospect  he tries to unfold the sequence of his identities.  As his novels become  public property,  they and  "their  author," which is at some remove from "him," invite public interpretation, identification.  Greene  is not  required  to accept  identification  with his characters  or  his inter­  preters'  definitions  of  himself, or  with those  (if  he is really famous)   who may choose to  pose as him  in  look-alike contests or  public  restaurants. But to what degree are they  (all of  them)  inevitably part of himself? "I found myself shaken
by a metaphysical  doubt," he writes as he brings this volume to a close. "Had I
been the imposter  all the  time? Was I  the Other?" One  might  ask how serious such questions are, but must notice at the same time the writer's skilful play with pronouns.  This  book has all along been a quest for some sort of discovery; if at the  end  an  imposter  "I" named  "Other" finds a shaken  (newly  fragmented?) "myself,"  what  are  we to  make  of it? An  epiphany?   (Hardly likely-it's  not spontaneous  enough  for  that.) A deliberate  confusion?  (But  to what  end?)   A joke?  (The  element  of  comedy  goes often  unappreciated by critics strong  for "truth.") At the very least the writer seems to be preserving his options, refusing the present as a definition of the future,  already laying claim to the next identity (magus,  perhaps) that it will be his to claim and inhabit.
Greene's  sentences also, however, warn  us to be wary of the autobiographical novel. The  "I" in an autobiography may be a fiction, but it is not identical  with a  "fictional  1." There  remains  a distinction  between  fictionality and  historicity, which  affects both  the  generic  shape  of the  work and  the  critical  response we bring to it. Audrey Thomas's fiction may be "autobiographical"; like all novelists she draws  upon  what  she sees and  knows and  remembers as well as upon  what she imagines-but that  does not make her novels autobiographies. It  does not make F. P. Grove's  A Search  for America an autobiography either, whatever the

3

EDITORIAL

author  claimed. As far as Canadian writing is concerned, we do not clarify often enough  the differences between the diary, the autobiography, and the first-person narrative  viewpoint,  nor  have we sufficiently examined  the  differences between historical and  literary  (auto)biographical writing.  In  Search  of Myself  is tissued with imagination where one expects in the name of truth  to find masks of reality; Malcolm  Lowry's Dark  As the Grave Wherein My Friend  Is Laid  is tissued with reality where one expects to find aesthetic distance and  metaphoric control.  Most diary-keepers   (the  explorers,  many  pioneers,  Monica  Storrs,  Elizabeth  Smith) have shaped  daily events into an historical record;  John  Glassco, in Memoirs of Montparnasse, and  Charles  Ritchie,  in  An   Appetite  for  Life, have  shaped  a journal  into a literary  event. But the resulting memoirs are  not more "truthful" in the one case than  in the other. Glassco-like Claire Martin, like Clark Blaise and  Bharati  Mukherjee  (in  their magnificent  Days  and  Nights in  Calcutta), or like  Lowry  and  Grove  for  that  matter-has  conveyed  a  stance,  a  version of experience, which may or may not adhere  to externally  verifiable  fact, but  may well, more effectively and  even more accurately  than  a verifiable litany, convey the attitudes  of a time, the priorities of a person, the biases of politics and  place.
As theorists  have  lately been at  pains to point  out,  autobiographies can  take
quite different stances. In The  Forms of Autobiography, for example, William C. Spengemann delineates three  categories:  the  self-explanation, which  uses  auto­ biography  (in  this cast The  Past)  as a means of justifying The  Present; the self­ portrait,  which  offers a kind of "philosophic" analysis of identity;  and  the  self­ enactment, which  performs a  personal  psychodrama for  the  reader  to  observe and,  perhaps, decode. And as forms vary, so do the motivations for WTiting. Some autobiographies are  written  because there  are  stories to tell; some  are  done  for fame  and  money;  and some are  penned by ghost writers,  which raises problems for critics, who must try to figure out not only who's being written about  but also who's being revealed by the voice in the writing. June Callwood's literary  hand,  I'm  given to believe, has appeared  in the "autobiographies" of Barbara  Walters and  Otto  Preminger; Ed Ogle's shaped Duncan Pryde's  Nunaga; John  Munro's  created  the literary  voice for  both  John  Diefenbaker's One  Canada and  Lester Pearson's  Mike:  one  might  well  ask where  one  identity  begins and  the  other ends.
Yet all can be fascinating. Writing recently in Queen's Quarterly about Cana­ dian   biography   (once  almost  entirely  the  prerogative   of  historians) ,  Donald Swainson itemizes some of the attractions  of biography  as a genre:  "A study of a life humanizes  the  past and  makes it immediate. A fascinating person  holds our attention  through  drama  and anecdote. While reading  biography  we absorb data  and  concepts about  society.... " Autobiographies, too, offer  glimpses of others. Eleanor Farjeon's  A Nursery in the Nineties (which  Oxford has recently reissued) recounts a splendid  moment  when her elated  writer-father was about  to give up


4

EDITORIAL


his  colonial  life  to  head   to  England to  become  famous-all  because  he  had dedicated a  book  to  Dickens  and  Dickens  had  responded   with  a letter.  In  cold ink  the  letter  had  moderately and  indirectly said  Thank   you, but if you submit material  to  my  magazine  it  will not  necessarily be accepted.  "Believe  me," he closed, "faithfully yours." But as with ghost-written books, one might  be tempted sometimes  to  trust  surfaces  too  readily,  to accept  an  autobiography's  judgments of others  simply  because  of the seeming  authority of the  personal  contact. A good reader  must  be alive  to the  fact  that-whether accurate, false, or  just acciden­ tally  misleading -the nature of the  judgment often reveals much  more than the surface  declares. Susanna Moodie's portrait of the little stumpy man, in Roughing It  in the  Bush, tells us as much of  her  own  naivete  as it does objectively about her  unwelcome visitor.  She  owns she  didn't like him-but  whether because  of some  intrinsic character trait  or  because  he  preferred others  to herself she  does not  absolutely make  clear.  And  of course  it is this tantalizing near-revelation of the  self which  gives any  good  autobiography its special  cachet.  People  read  such works  out  of interest and  curiosity,  in order  to catch  the  changing versions of a self;  they  do  so  also  for  the  enjoyment of  having  a  personal companion guide them  through moments of history,  and  for the chequered pleasures  there  are that
lie in the process of turning I to eye.
W.H.N.






SJIMJINTHJI CLJIRJI LJIYTON
 


Irving Layton


Into  the ordinary  day you came,
giving your small nose and chin to the air and blinded by the noise you could not see.
Your mother's smile was your benediction;
my wonderment  will accompany you
all your days. Dear little girl, what blessings shall I ask for you? Strong limbs, a mind firm that looking on this world without dismay turns furious lust into sweet romance?
These, my child, and more. Grace lreep you queenly and kind, a comfort to the ill and poor, your presence a bounty of joy to all
that have vision of you, as I have now
who hold your fingers in my trembling hand.

5

CHILD ADDICT IN ALBERTA



Earle Birney




BORN so  MANY CENTURIES  AGO   ( 1904 to be exact), I fell an  early  victim  to  the  reading  habit.  Until  I  was seven, an  only child  on  an isolated  bush-ranch  in the Albertan  foothills, I saw other  children  only on feast
days or at church  on the Sundays when the wagon-road  to the Morningside flag­ station  was  passable and  my  mother  added  me  to  the  half-dozen  kids  in  the Sunday  School she ran there.  In  the long winters  we two were alone for  many stretches  while  my father  was  hundreds  of  miles away  working  in  the  bigger towns at his trade -he was a painter and decorator -to get the cash constantly needed  to develop  our surrounding  woods and  swamps  into at least  a  marginal farm.  Until  he returned,  my mother  cared for the horses, cows, pigs, poultry and me. From  spring  to autumn  my parents  were busy through  the  daylight  hours with planting,  clearing, woodcutting,  cultivating,  harvesting, marketing.  With no TV  or radio  to turn  on,  no movie house to be dumped  in, no high-fi, no tele­ phone,  no sitters,  I slid early and  with  parental encouragement into self-enter­ tainment, learned  my letters from father's sign-painting celluloids, and my count­ ing from a card-deck.
Whenever  housebound  by snowdrifts and  arctic temperatures, or bedded  by a series of childhood  diseases from mumps to scarlet fever  (picked  up no doubt  at Sunday School)  I worked at learning to read, and to play solitaire. Soon I was skimming,  a mindless waterbug,  with  growing  speed  over great  surfaces of the Bible, and  Robbie Burns, and anything else in print  and  within reach. It seemed there  was a lot of country  beyond  Morningside  and  even Calgary -where  my father  sometimes went looking for work and  where he said I had been born -a world almost as splendid as Heaven on the Sunday School posters, and more reachable.  Vices can begin virtuously enough. Through trying not to be a bother, I  had  become  a  compulsive  reader  and  a  card-shark.   By May I gI  I, when  I turned  seven and my father sold the ranch and moved us temporarily  back to my birthplace,   I  had  developed  as well a greed  for travel,  to wander  and  wander until I'd seen everything I'd read or heard about.
It appeared, however, that  I would first have to attend  schools and  grow up.
In  Calgary  I  was deposited in a term-end  holding-unit, ordered  to sculpt  with plasticene,  and  frightened  out  of my bushed  wits at  recess by a schoolyard full

6

BIRNEY

of strange,  shrieking  and  evidently hostile kids. I escaped, in two weeks, by con­ tracting whooping  cough.  "Keep   him  in  the  fresh air  this summer," said  the doctor, so my father  bought  a tent and moved us to the banks of the Bow River in  Banff. The  prescription   was right  on.  I soon stopped  whooping,  learned  to handle  a fly-rod, gut  my own  trout, and scramble  up mountain slopes with my dad.
When  September  came we rented  a house in town and  I reported  to the one­ room Public School. This act was a cultural shock both to the girl-teacher and to me:  Grade  One  was plasticene again, though there were also crayons for colour­ books, and even a slate to start learning letters and later maybe sums. Fortunately  the  Albertan  schools had  not  yet been martialled  into  what  Sir  Edward  Beatty later  called "the  convoy system in education," all ships proceeding at the pace of the  slowest. When  it  was  discovered  I  could  understand maps,  was presently stumbling  through  my mother's  copy of The Heart of Midlothian, and could cal­ culate  sums with  the speed  of a hardened  cribbage  player,  I was kicked up to Grade Three.
There  I had  to be cured  of writing only with block letters, and disciplined to do  homework  in  the  School  Reader  before  being  allowed  to  borrow  another Everyman  from the school library. But I went on reading  anything  in sight until my eye-muscles at last rebelled, and  I was saddled with spectacles  (for life, as it turned  out). My spirits drooped; I was having enough trouble learning to make friends  with  Banff's  native  sons, who rightly considered  me a freak, a teacher's pet, and  a total loss for even the peewee hockey team, since I hadn't yet learned even to skate.  Moreover,  because I was redheaded  and  built like a lath, school­ ground  wits had  dubbed  me  Matchstick.  By Christmas  I escaped  into  measles and bed; but bed was misery too, for the doctor forbade reading.


IWAS  RESCUED FROM   GLOOM   by my father's announcement he could now fulfill a promise made to my mother when I was born, to send the two of us back to her birthplace in the Shetland  Islands, to visit my grandmother.
The  cash  from  selling  the  farm  was enough  both  for  the  passage  and  for  my father  to lease a lot in  Banff, and start  building  us a new home while we were away.  Moreover  he had  gained  my teacher's  consent to my leaving in January, so long as I was back in time for the May exams. (It would seem I was going to be passed anyway.)
It  was a memorable  trip  and for the first month or two just the thing to hatch
a bookworm into a boy. Six days in a train  to Montreal, across a Canada not in any of my books, and  nine  more on an ocean.  I proved  to have sea-legs, as be­ fitted  a  fisherman's  grandchild, and  by now a  literary  eye. In  Edinburgh  my

7

BIRNEY

mother,  lapsing  a little  more into  Scottish  each  day,  took me to  walk Princes, "the   werrold's  bonniest  street,"  and  gaze  up  at  a  tower  taller  than   any  I'd thought  possible. I thought  it fitting it was a monument to Sir Walter  Scott and that  we now  proceeded  to St. Giles to stand  on  the spot  where Jeannie  Deans crouched  and  hurled  her stool.  My mom  had  brought  me straight  into a  real Heart  of Midlothian, still beating. Even better,  next day, I climbed into a huge and  truly  ancient  castle where there  were suits of armour, great  stone  cannon­ balls, and  a  cemetery  for officers' dogs. I  was now swallowing gulps of history without optical damage.
Shetland,  of course, was something quite  different; it was dropping  back into history itself. We arrived in Lerwick, the port town  where my mother  had  been a serving-maid,  in time for Up-Helly-Aa,  the end of the old Viking Yule. From my  uncle's  stone  house one  night  my two schoolboy  cousins and  I  gazed  at  a dragon-headed Norse galley being towed down  their  street  in torchlight.  There were bearded  men in it with great axes and  horned  helmets. We rushed out and followed them  in a shouting  crowd to the  docks, where the Vikings leapt  from their  ship,  tossed their  torches into it and  launched  it to flame  to death  in the harbour. This  was the real thing, better even than  G. A. Henty.  Travelling  was even more fun than  reading. I resolved never to stop doing either.
Next  day  my aunt  drove  up in  a Shetland  pony  cart  to  my grandmother's. That  night another  boy-cousin and I climbed a ladder  by the kitchen fireplace to sleep in straw under  the thatch of an ancient  croft. There were days then of pony riding  and  exploring  traces of old stone-age  forts  in  the  windswept  heather.  I forgot all about  books till a wind straight  from the Arctic ice drenched  me. Soon I lay with double  pneumonia, fighting for air in grannie's own bed, with nothing to read  but  the Guid  Buik again.  In my grandma's croft that,  officially, was the only book. When she wasn't in view, however, cousin John  would slip to my bed with the Deil's Buik, a dog-eared deck of cards, to abet the second favourite  vice of my childhood.
Back in time to be passed into Grade  Four,  I revelled in a second summer  at Banff, now without  whooping cough, learning  to swim in the old Cave & Basin, selling subscriptions  to Canadian  Pictorial  (reading every  word  in  every issue first),  starting   piano  with  a  maiden  lady,  and  carpentry with  my dad.  When September  came, and school, I looked no doubt  the same dumb spectacled kid, a little  lankier.  But  inside  I  felt  vastly aged,  a  man  of  many  parts,  student   of history, traveller  between two continents, cardshark. I soon found, of course, that any betrayal  of these inner  personalities got  me less than  nowhere on the school ground.  There  I  was still a dub  at games, except  marbles,  I was Four  Eyes the swot back again,  the  Matchstick who couldn't  hang  on to a hockey stick -and now some sort of travel-snob as well.

8

BIRNEY

So I  came  down  with  chicken-pox,  and  followed that  with something  really exotic  the  doctors  called  "mountain fever,"  acquired  from  a  wood-tick.  I  was back on  a reading  binge again,  once the fever sank. Fred,  the neighbour's  boy, two years older, brought  me his Treasure Island, and more Waverley novels from the  school  library.  Back at  school I  found  Hereward  the Wake  and  The  Last Days of Pompeii,  and  Rider  Haggard's She and  R. M. Ballantyne's  The  Coral Sea and ... and.... Is there  ever a time of life when reading  is more exciting, more utterly  compulsive,  more trusting?  No one told me I was on a diet manu­ factured  by British imperialists. So long as they were stories, with  unmistakable heroes who could  do everything  I couldn't  yet, and  heroines, if  any, only there to be rescued,  I loved all books. Propaganda I never noticed,  unless it was the religious sort;  piety I was still stuffed with at Sunday School, and  raced past on other  occasions.  I  put  up  with  Ralph  Connor's  only  because  he  wrote  about country my dad had been a cowpuncher in.




E	and  almost  kicked the reading  habit.  Dad  took  me on  weekend  camping  trips  trolling  for lake trout, and  bought  me  a  No.  2   Box Brownie to take shots of the  wild Park  animals: bighorns, porcupines,  deer, marten,  and the like. But by now what I wanted most was a bike. I began to save for one by selling newspapers and  curios to tourists, and  sachet  powders to housewives after school hours when winter came. I was a little heftier  now, and  less of a:n oddball in the schoolyard, and  permitted  at last into the scrub  hockey games on the river rink. But I was still so lightweight  I'd go flying into  the boards  at every check, and survived only by learning  to move always faster than  the others. For this I was made Rover-it was the old seven­ man  hockey days -and  began  to get around  so nimbly I came to the notice of Lou  Crosby,  the  town's  speed  champ.  He  began  encouraging  me  to train  for speed-skating.
News of this quickly raised my ratings with schoolmates, and  I was invited on toboggan  runs  and  snowshoe tramps.  (Skiing  had  not yet arrived  in Banff.)  A happy  redneck,  I  was practising  "Speed" one night  at  the rink  when  the  tem­ perature   dropped  suddenly  from  a  mere  fifteen  below  F. to  minus  35· I  got another  chill, another  bout of pneumonia, and sank back into reading.
When  I  recovered,  later  that  winter,  Luxton's  Lux  Theatre began  showing
movies, and  opened  up a whole new story world for Banff kids. Two of the first films I ever saw were, as it  happened,  scripted from  French  novels, The  Count of Monte   Cristo  and  The  Toilers  of the  Sea, which I'd  not  even heard  about. Seeing the films sent me to their Everyman  translations.  There,  though suspense was gone, I found  still  more  excitement.  The  films had  clearly defined the dim

9

BIRNEY

bounds of Dumas'  prison, and the length of Hugo's cephalopod.  Reading, I could imagine  even gloomier fortresses and  far  more dreadful  sea-creatures.  A heroin junkie doesn't  easily switch to pot. I've  never really changed,  still tend  to avoid movies with plots from Great Books.
I  remember,  however,  that   I remained  willing  to  consider  somebody  else's
devilfish, and  later  that  winter  got out  a library  book titled  The  Octopus, by Frank Norris, only to bog down in what seemed to me an incomprehensible  affair about  railroads  and  capitalists  and  wheat  farmers,  all  happening on  dry land. I was really much dumber  than  most nine-year-olds. It was another  twenty years before proletarianism  drove me to try The  Octopus  again  and  learn there was a drowning  in it after  all-in  wheat.  Meantime  I returned  to the tried if  not so true adventures  of The  Boys' Own  Annual and Chums and Tom Brown's School Days. And  my father  put me on the track of the most exciting tale-tellers of my boyhood by giving me Kipling's  Kim for my birthday.  That led me to Stalky & Co. and  Soldiers Three.  The  public school imperialisms  I took for granted  now, but there  was some magic in Kipling's story-making  that  held and still can hold me.
Those  early silent movies in the  Lux  Theatre had  begun  to wake me to the separate   world  of  American  literature, about  which  I'd   been  taught   virtually nothing.  In all the grades from one to nine in that  Banff school I can remember being introduced  by a teacher  to only one American  novel, Tom Sawyer. It was Huckleberry  Finn we boys found for ourselves, and  Tarkington's Penrod  books, and  Peck's Bad Boy, privately owned and circulated  from boy to boy till they fell apart; they were read  and  avidly quoted  by kids who never read  anything  else they weren't  compelled to. Our  teachers surely read  them  too but they were not about  to feed our  appetite  for  practical  jokery by letting  them  into  the school library.  Horatio Alger, Jr.,  was not stocked either, or 0. Henry  or Jack London. Perhaps  that  was just for lack of money. We read them by the barter system after they'd  been  lifted  from  parental   libraries  or,  as  with  A  Slow  Train  through Arkansas and any of the mild girlie magazines before World  War  One,  by nickel rental  from  Bully Fulcher,  who had  an "allowance" big enough  to handle such underground distributions.
I remember  liking London  and  0. Henry  most of all these;  they were direcf and compact; they practised what I would later learn to call "the  art of the short story." Also they made me feel in contact  with the North American  world I lived in;  they  were  writers  still alive,  who  had  worked  on  San  Francisco  docks or among New York's "four million" or in the small towns of the U.S.
,The only other  American  author  I'd  begun to read, Cooper,  was long enough dead  to be allowed into our school library,  though  never  referred  to. For some North American  juveniles like me, living in a western frontier  village, his charac­ ters were still alive. Hawkeye  and  Nattie  Bumppo  were the self-made  and  for-

IO

BIRNEY

ever bachelor  heroes I hoped  to become, if I could find the pluck to match their luck. Cooper  was long-winded,  true, but Scott had already seasoned me to skip­ ping, leaping  over the rhetoric  and  the insipidities of heroines to concentrate  on the manly melodrama. My father had run away from home at sixteen and ridden across the prairies with other  bronco-busters, depending  on his trusty Winchester for  food,  and  arriving  in  Calgary  even before the  railroad. He still sometimes wore his old beaded  buckskin shirt and a stetson hat. I believed in my father and, for a while, in Cooper too.



LEN IT  WAS THAT SUMMER of 1914, when the world began to spin  a little faster.  I'd  been able  by the end of school to buy the longed-for bike, and  was  at  once  busy selling more and  more newspapers  when  I  wasn't guiding  tourists along trails to fishing holes or up mountains to viewpoints. I was reading  little  beyond  the  headlines in the papers I sold till the Calgary Herald, for the first time to my knowledge, ran a headline one morning in red. It was the fourth  of August  and  the  heading:   BRITAIN DECLARES WAR  ON  GER­ MANY.  I  began  to  grow  up  more quickly. When school resumed  I  joined the cadets and  discovered  I  was a good marksman  despite  my specs. By spring  my father  had enlisted with a Field Ambulance  unit, against  my mother's pleadings, and was in Calgary for training.
After  a while my mother  rented  the house and  lived with friends, and  I was
sent  to  her  childless sister,  Chrissie, on a farm  beyond  Three  Hills. I  was  just turned  twelve and still spindly;  my uncle, however, a tough Cape Bretoner, ruled I was big enough for man's  work. I was of course flattered,  and put my guts into the  haying,  learned  to  drive  a four-horse  sweep, operate  mowers, rakes and  a disc-harrow,  in between pitching  hay and cleaning stables. I was inclined to flake out, however, by mid-afternoon and since I was wanted for milking after supper, my aunt  decided  I  should  have  two hours after  lunch  to lie about  in  the tiny unused parlour.  Here  I found,  among the old seed catalogues and almanacs, two broken-covered   books  by  somebody  named  H.  G.  Wells, Tales  of Space  and Time  and  The  Country  of the Blind. They'd  been left behind,  my aunt said, by a  lazy Sassenach  farmhand my uncle had  fired. She  was going  to throw  them out,  so I  was welcome  to  them.  I read  those stories many  times in the  blissful rests between drudgeries  on that lonely farm. From then on till college days Wells was my favourite  science-fantasy  writer, a modern fusion of Verne and Poe.
The  winter  that  followed was a bleak one for my mother  and  me; my father
was a stretcher-bearer at Ypres and on the Somme. To supplement  the corporal's allowance from  my father's pay, we took in roomers, mother  did midwifery and I endured  through  a cold winter the five-dollar-a-month job of church  janitor, confirming my secret atheism.


I I

BIRNEY

,By summer my father was in an English military hospital, and I was a butcher's boy, delivering  meat  on my bicycle, learning  to cut  it, and  learning  too from  a set of photographs treasured  by Bert, the number  two butcher,  what fellatio and fucking-a-trois  looked  like. Perhaps  because  I was a virginal  thirteen  and  had never seen a naked female, Bert's pictures have remained  bell-clear in my memory to this day. No doubt  they were fortified by my own  rascality, for I persuaded Bert to lend  me one set of his  feelthies for a week, in  return  for my staying an extra  hour  a  day  doing  his clean-up  chores  while  he went  swimming.  I then charged  a  quarter for  a  five-minute  look at  my shockers,  choosing  customers from reliable school pals in town that summer.
Dad  returned  to us in the autumn  of '15 -none too soon, it would seem, for
providing  me  with  paternal  guidance.  He  was a sick man  now,  with  trembly hands and rheumatism,  though no less my adored  father.
In  September   I was one  of five who  made  it  into  Grade  Nine,  into  High
School. I now  studied  French,  taught  by a  man  who  avoided  pronouncing it; Algebra,  my  favourite; Ancient  History,  including   a  prose  translation   of  the Odyssey; and so on. The English "reader" offered nothing  later than  Tennyson's "Maud." All this that  teachers called Literature seemed never to be written  by men  alive, or  even  by dead  Canadians.  Nor  was it ever  as much  fun  as Puck magazine or The Boy's Own Annual.
I liked writing  essays, however, and  was getting  A's on them. This  approval, coupled  with  pressure  from  Joe  and  Wally,  two  schoolmates  who  had  been customers for Bert's porno-packet,  led to the three of us starting  an underground school  newspaper.  The  news for  the  first issue consisted solely of a somewhat vague  but  suggestive account  by  Joe,  who  had  successfully shadowed  an  un­ named  girl in our class and a bugler from the Internment Camp,  and witnessed a stand-up  fornication  against a riverbank  poplar.  Wally, the school artist, drew a  scribbler-size  actuality  of the scene for  our  cover.  My  job was  to look after circulation,  which  would consist entirely of one copy, rented  out. Unfortunately Wally, true  artist  that  he was, thought  of an  extra  visual touch, and  began  re­ working  the  cover  during  a  geometry  lesson. He  was nailed  by  the  Principal.  Our  first and  only issue disappeared  forever,  and  we three  became  perhaps  the last schoolkids in  Banff to encounter  the  cat-o..:nine-tails.  It  was a mere  ritual flick,  however,  and  our  parents  were  not  informed,  presumably   because  the honour  of the cover-girl, or rather  of that  of her socially important parents,  was best  preserved  by  general  silence. There  were  enough  underground reverbera­  tions, however, to shake down at last any  image of me as a teacher's  pet. I was elected president of our Boys' Club and sent, with Joe and Wally, to a provincial conference in Lethbridge  of delegates from the Christian-Boys-in-Training Clubs. On my return  I gave up writing and went back to the reading kick.



12


TO MfiKE fiN END
(For Malka Cohen  z8g7-198I)

Irving Layton

The last indignities are over:
the bar  between  convulsing jaws;
gaunt cheeks, death's familiar foxholes, and  breasts  that once gave suck,
now flat and  unresponsive as damp rags; her diminutive teats,  raw and  womout, mocking  our vaporous presence on earth with  the mordant emphasis of quotemarks.

If ten devils possessed me
I'd flaunt my scorn for this stale farce that  made Lear  and  Achilles weep
and  pluck  those shrivelled paps looking like forgotten berries on winter's snow; razor  the mortician's balls and  grow them like bleeding  rose bulbs in the urine bottle empty  and  open  to the nurse's hand.

Where's my kinswoman with her blue-black hair, strong  white  teeth,  peasant health,
her high  colour  and  highboned cheeks? Is this she, now so shrunk  and  quiet,
the cannula still in her vein
that  supplied her seven rebel parts till the common axeman
dismissed  them  all with one soundless blow?

Shall  I never  touch  her warm  hand  again? Never again look on her fluttering lids
or praise her rough  affection for child and  friend? The white  walls are mute. And no clever instrument waits outside in the blank corridors
to graph incoherency and  human rage or the hopeless, homeless love
of her  weeping  daughters.

Toronto
January 28, zg8z


THE DYNAMITE MAN: A CHAPTER IN AUTOBIOGRAPHY

T...




ARE  PEOPLE who do not necessarily dominate periods of our  lives, but  who signalize them, so that  when we look back to a particular time  and  pour  the  blood into the pit like Odysseus, one  person advances out of memory before the others to give the tone to that  past. In this way Anton Kohout signalized  the  period  when  Inge  and  I  returned   to  Canada from  a  year­ through  I95I  and  I952-spent in France and California.
Our  first two  years in  Canada had  been  spent  at  Sooke, then  a  small  and
remote fishing and  logging village on the southwestern  tip of Vancouver  Island; I have already  told of that  precarious time and of the way a Guggenheim fellow­ ship in I95I  gave us an unhoped release from a situation  of recurrent destitution.  In  I 952, at the end of the Franco-American interlude, we left the Russian River country  of northern  California,  where we had spent the mild winter in a cabin in the  redwood  forest and started  back to Sooke, to collect the  possessions we had stored  there  and  to  decide  how  we would  now  arrange  our  lives in Canada, where we had finally decided to remain. As in our first years there, fromI 949 to I95I, I had  no regular source of income;  no more than hopes. The  Guggenheim fellowship  had  allowed  me to  put  aside  the  small  royalties  from  my  book on Western  Canada, Ravens  and  Prophets, and  this  time  we had  no intention  of even trying to earn our keep by truck gardening, as we had done before. I wanted to finish the book on Proudhon  I had researched in France,  and then to establish enough  literary  connections  to live by freelance writing;  the  first was a possible ambition, but the second at that  time in Canada, as I soon discovered, was not.
.We  went  by  bus  from  San  Francisco  to  Vancouver, travelling  the  Oregon coast road in a clear, bright spring, and sailed on one of the elegant old Canadian Pacific ferry boats through  the Gulf Islands from Vancouver  to Victoria. It was a  slow four-hours' trip  in  those  days, on  an  uncrowded   boat  with  a  passable restaurant, in  which,  on  that  day  of our  return, the  first  people  we saw were Anton  Kohout  and  his American  wife Natalie.  We sat down  with them to clam chowder  and  halibut,  and  as the  hour  went  by, the  beginning  of our  second period in Canada was determined.
We had  already  known Anton  Kohout  for almost a year before we left Sooke

WOODCOCK

in 1951. Then  he was  a quick old man, more than  seventy, Czech by race and certainly  in appearance, with  high Slavic cheeks, a rippling  crest of white hair, a  grey Hohenzollem moustache.  His ice-grey eyes darted  constantly  and -like those of an  animal -resisted  one's attempts  to fix them.  People in Sooke con­ sidered him shifty, but I would rather  describe him as protean,  not to be trapped  unless he wished it. His body never seemed out of motion, as if life were a con­ stant  gesture, and  as if gesture could control the world;  I remember how, when his ageing car  would strain  at a hill, he would move his body gruntingly  back­ wards  and  forwards   at  the  wheel,  as if  his  action  could  magically  help  the machine.
Kohout  talked  rapidly  and  almost incessantly, and  his accent  was  Germanic rather  than  Slavic. This  gave a clue to his background,  for he had  been born in the  Austro-Hungarian Empire  and-Czech  though  he might  be in  name and looks-he  regarded   himself  always  as a  member  of  the  Hapsburg Empire's German-speaking elite. Vienna,  much more than Prague,  was his spiritual  home, and  he had  retained  a kind of facile Viennese wit, interspersing  his conversation with bright  aphorisms and  stale European  jokes at which he would always laugh before anyone else, in a high-pitched  mad cackle, rather  like a jungle cock.
.But  his attachment to  Franz  Joseph's  Empire  had  not  prevented  him from voting with  his feet, for he had  arrived in Canada  not long after the turn of the century,  and  though  he never admitted  it, I am sure he left Austria-Hungary to avoid  military  service.  After  a  period  in  Quebec  he  gravitated to  Vancouver Island,  and   there  I  suspect  he  was  involved  in  land  speculation,  for  he  was extremely  informative about   the  corruption  in  provincial  politics,  particularly among  the Liberals. Finally,  he bought  a piece of forest land  on the cliffs at the entrance  to Sooke Harbour, and  there he built a resort hotel, the Sooke Harbour House,  at  the  butt  of Whiffen  Spit,  the long shingle bar  that  almost closes off the  harbour. By the  time  we knew him  he had  sold it to a chef from  Quebec who cooked disappointingly orthodox Canadian meals, even though  his roast beef was succulent and his pies were crisp and crusty.
Very soon after  we first encountered  Kohout  in the Post Office, where every­ one  picked  up  mail  at  11 a.m. and  exchanged  greetings, we began  to go down to the old farmhouse  near  Whiffen Spit which he was now inhabiting. We could not  afford  a  car,  and  we had  to  walk nearly three  miles, much  of  it  along  a narrow  dirt  road  through  the  bush where in summer  we would be half-choked by dust  whenever  anyone  drove  past us. The  walks back  along  the  unlit  road after  dark  were sometimes  nervous, for cougar and  bear often  used this piece of land  as a thoroughfare, swimming  the narrow  entrance  to the  harbour  on their way from  the woods of Metchosin  and  East Sooke to the Sooke Hills. We never saw  a  bear  there,  but  more  than  once we were assailed  by a sense of presence and,  halting,  would  hear  a swish in the vegetation,  perhaps  a slight crack of a

WOODCOCK

twig, that  ended  immediately  after  we halted,  and  would  know that  a cougar, impelled  by feline  curiosity, was following us. And,  though  we knew that  only when  they  were sick and starving  did cougars  attack  human  beings, we would still hurry to reach the main road as soon as we could.
Kohout   had  strange  tales  to  relate,  with  a  slightly  contemptuous  Viennese
amusement,   about  the  displaced  English  aristocrats   and  remittance   men  who gave a pinchbecky glitter to genteel life in the region thirty or forty years before we arrived.  He  had  been there when the Prince  of Wales came on an imperial visit and  had  attended  the great  eccentric ball that  Lady  Emily Walker  ("that elderly cobweb"  as the Pragger Wagger had  privately  called her)  had thrown  in her  rustic  mansion  among  the horse meadows,  to the delight  of the mosquitoes who flocked through  the open French  windows and  the envious derision of the other would-be gentry.
But Kohout  had other varieties of Island oddity to relate, including  the strange history of the religious community known as the Star Brethren, some of whose decaying  buildings  the  bush  was slowly submerging  down  the  road  from  his house. Many  of the  members had  been farmers  from  Minnesota  and other mid­ western states who had sold their land and trekked in their old cars into Canada, and  then,  when one of the leaders absconded  with the funds, had been left land­  less and penniless and, perhaps even worse, faithless.
And  he  had  a  great  deal  of miscellaneous  Indian lore to go with  the stone hand-hammers and  arrowheads  and  the other  artifacts  that  stood on  his book­ shelves in arresting  contrast  to the collections of Goethe  and  Schiller and  Rilke and  Hoelderlin  in  their gold-lettered  bindings.  Kohout  had  been in Sooke long enough  to  know  an  Indian  woman  who  had  been  a  slave of the  Moachat at Friendly  Cove, taken  away as a child during  the raids in which the West Coast peoples almost  destroyed  the  once  numerous  Salish  people  of Sooke. The  cliff edges at  Whiffen Spit where he had built  his hotel must once have been the site of  a  great  deal  of  Indian  activity,  possibly even  of commerce,  for among  the shell banks  there  he had  found  the  artifacts -the  last of a large  collection - that  stood  in  his  house. Once,  when  he  felled  a  tree,  an  Indian skeleton  lay buried beneath  it and, with the ignorance of archaeological  methods at that time, he packed the bones into a box to take to the Provincial  Museum.  No archaeolo­ gists, but shocked at such disrespect for the dead  and  fearful  of an angry spirit, his Chinese labourers  at once deserted  him,  taking  their story back to Victoria's Chinatown, and  not  until it was known that  he had  actually  taken  the bones to the museum did he find any Chinese willing to work for him again.
I don't  think  Kohout  had  a historical  mind,  though  he did  have that  Euro­
pean way of valuing the past which distinguished  his view of life from the living­ for-the-day   attitude of  most  of  the  Islanders   we  then  encountered.  He  was essentially an anecdotalist,  with a mind full of restless memories, yet he helped to

16

WOODCOCK

populate  the  tangling   bush  around   us with  historic  content,  and  he  was  an amusing companion.
So, when  we  joined him and  Natalie  at lunch  on the ferry that  day in May rgs2, we were receptive  to his ideas and suggestions about  our future, particu­ larly  as we knew  that  in  a month  at  most we would  have  to move  out  of the cabin on the  beach  at Sooke Basin that  had  been lent to us. Why not remain  at Sooke, Kohout   suggested,  particularly  if  we were giving  up  our  Thoreauvian idea of living by truck gardening and subsistence cultivation?  I would then have time to write at leisure, without  the distractions of finding my feet in a city, and I could  build  up  my connections in England  and the United States to make up for the lack of outlets in Canada.
Half-convinced, we protested  that  we still had nowhere to live in Sooke after we left the cabin.  A louder  cackle than  most, and then  Kohout  declared  that  he had  the  perfect  solution.  He  had  allowed  the  loggers  to  take  out  the  largest timber on his clifftop land, and  now he was dividing it into strips, almost an acre each,  with  more  than  a hundred  feet of water  frontage.  The  price-it  seems incredible  today-was $gsa, and  we could pay it off at $so  a month  without interest.  Since  we  already  knew  how  to  build  a  house,  the  second  time  over would  take  less time,  and   there  were  ways  in  which  he  could  help  us.  For example,  there  was a cabin  on one of the lots, built by an old hermit  who had died a couple of years ago. Anton and Natalie, having left their farmhouse,  were camping  there at present, but we could occupy it for the time we needed to build our house.
Looking back, I can only paraphrase a famous saying and remark that  the sole
lesson of one's  past is that  one does not learn  from the  past. We had  already  in I 949 been taken  to a piece of land  at Sooke and had let our illusions about  the kind of life we might live there lead us into a morass of poverty and frustration from which the Guggenheim  Foundation had  providentially saved us. And now, in  rgs2,  we went  down  with  Kohout,  up the sawdust road  the loggers had left, and into the lot he suggested.
Small trees and  underbrush had been left as a protective band along the road­
side, dominated  by a single giant first-growth Douglas fir, about twelve feet in diameter.  The  rest of the  ground  was the bare forest floor, dotted  with stumps, but  down  the  cliffs the  trees still grew  high,  and  there  was a steep  path  to  a shingly beach  that  gave way to sand where the tide lapped  up. A bald eagle sat in one of the clifftop trees; delicately roseate lady's slipper orchids were blooming among  the roots of the fir trees. We stood there, breathing  the scent of the sun­ warmed  conifers, and  talked  about  the kind of house that  might stand  there. As all of us were devoted  to the Austrian  Alps, it was perhaps  natural that the idea of a kind of Tyrolean  chalet  under the great fir trees emerged. Inge sat down on a stump  and  sketched  it out on an envelope:  a single large room, el-shaped and

WOODCOCK

swinging round  to the kitchen alcove whose wood stove would keep us warm in winter,  a shower  and  toilet, windows on all sides to keep the room light in the shadow  of the trees, a front  verandah,  window  boxes and  painted  shutters,  and the walls covered in rough cedar to fit the woodland.  And this was the house we built.  For, needless to say, we had fallen in love with the land,  perhaps  not as it was with its stumps and slash, but as it might be when we had cleared it all and planted grass and fruit trees and built a proper way down the cliff.
We built the house in six weeks of hard  work, with handsaw  and  hammer.  A
friend  helped  me over a weekend with the  rafters,  and  one day our  aged local Ninety-Eighter, Dirty  Sam,  who  had  built  the  fireplace  for  our  first  house in Sooke, brought  his vast birdsnest of a beard  for a cursing  day of tall tales about the  Klondike  as he laid  the  bricks for our  chimney.  For  the  rest we did  every­ thing ourselves, down to the wiring and  the  plumbing.  They  were long summer days, from eight in the morning  until ten at night,  and  usually twelve hours out of the fourteen  would be spent in the house;  I was never so tired, or so slim, or so healthy, as at the end of those six weeks.



KOHOUT, WE  REALIZED from the beginning, was moved to a restless fascination  by what we were doing. He would appear  with a loping walk through  the trees, and stand  with his head a bit on one side and  his eyes darting foxily over the scene. "My,  you're doing well!" he would cackle, and  then begin to offer help in various ways.
His first passion, we discovered,  was a constructive  one, for laying  concrete. When  we poured  the foundation blocks for the  floor beams  to rest on, he was there  to help us hand-mix  with shovels, and  when  we poured  the concrete slab for the steps he again appeared. But very quickly we found that  Kohout's passion had a more lurid side. Indeed,  I have never met a man who more neatly exempli­ fied  such  classic  anarchist   maxims  as  Proudhon's destruam   et  aedificabo   (I destroy and  I build up)  and  Bakunin's "The passion to destroy is also a creative passion."  For  Kohout  was fascinated  by dynamite  and  fire, and  loved to find legitimate excuses for applying them.
I  had  not  thought  much  about  how we would  get  rid of the stumps  on the property.  I calculated  that  some might be grubbed  out  and  burnt,  and  that  the two or three large ones might somehow be disguised with shrubs and creepers. "Impossible!" declared Kohout.  "It will take you weeks to grub out the smallest. And  the large ones will be an eyesore for ever! You must dynamite  them!" His crest of hair seemed to rise up as he spat out the words, and  his cackle reached a peculiar tremolo of excitement. "I will show you! We will do it together!"
I was, indeed, somewhat amused at the thought  that,  having  read and written so much  about  the  famous  anarchist  dynamiteros, I  should  at  last find  myself

18

WOODCOCK

learning  how to use the legendary  stuff. So I agreed, since Kohout  promised to do the more delicate tasks of fitting the detonators and the fuse.
We began, even while I was still working on the house, with a couple of small
and  distant  stumps,  and  it was obvious that  Kohout  knew the art of dynamiting well, as he led  me through   the  processes of digging out  a suitable  recess, well down  between  the  roots of a  tree,  bundling  the five or six sticks of dynamite, attaching the  detonator and  fuse, then  burying  the charge  with good stiff mud and  tamping  earth  over it to make everything firm, before we finally lit the fuse and  headed for cover. There  was a curiously intense quality  to those moments of expectation  as one squatted  down behind another stump or a pile of brush, wait­ ing  until  there  was a  satisfying  crack  in  the  air,  a  thudding  vibration  in  the ground  beneath  one, a shower of earth  pattering  among the trees, and one stood up  to see smoke drifting  up  between the neatly lifted and  bisected  or  trisected stump.
The  biggest stump  of all was at least eight feet in diameter  where it had been
cut  six feet  from  the  ground; it was supported  by heavily  buttressing  roots. It stood perhaps  150 feet from the house, and we should really have blown it before I even began construction. We decided that certainly it would have to be sprung before the windows were put in, and Kohout calculated that if we laid the charge properly  we could  direct  the  blast so that  the house would  not  be harmed.  So we went ahead,  excavating a veritable sap under the centre of the stump.
Kohout   was in  a  state  of extreme  excitement  while  this  was going on,  and
when our  sap was ready  he huddled  into it with a great  bundle  of fifty sticks of dynamite.  He  emerged,  grinning  and  cackling. "That should  do it!  But, let me see!  I've  some old  dynamite  stored  away  that  is probably  not  much  good any longer. But it might  give a bit of an extra  boost!" So off he trotted  to the cellar underneath an  old  barn  on  his property  and  emerged  with another  twenty-five sticks wrapped  in an  ancient  newspaper.  These too we packed  around  the fifty, and  then  went  on  with  our  tasks of fixing detonator  and  fuse, packing the end of the  sap  with  mud,  and  then  shovelling in earth  and  vigorously tamping  it. "Whack it  hard!" shouted  Kohout,  and  whack  I did,  fearing  all the time that too hard a bang might somehow set off the detonator.
When  all this was done  Inge and  Natalie, who had  watched  the process with
a horrified  fascination, went off into  the deep woods with our  black cat Tim.  I ran out into the lane  to make sure no cars or people were around. And then we lit the fuse and  headed  into  the trees a hundred  yards away, where we squatted down in a ferny dell low enough  to save us from the blast. We thought  also that we were far  enough  away  to avoid  any falling  debris, but  when  the  mine did blow with a formidable earth-shaking roar  (Kohout's stale dynamite  turning  out as good  as the  new), we cowered  down in astonishment  as rocks and  hunks of wood went flying high in the air over our heads, missing us entirely and pepper-

19

WOODCOCK

ing the woods a hundred  yards beyond us, I rushed back immediately, scared for the house, but  Kohout's  calculations  had  been exact. We had  blown the stump apart  into four vast segments in a way that  did  not harm  the building.
Afterwards,  when the house was complete, we blew the remaining stumps very successfully, and  I became so infected  with  Kohout's enthusiasm  that  when  he sold the  next  lot  to a  Danish  logger and  offered  to blow his stumps,  I gladly agreed  to act  as assistant blaster without  pay. But it was on Erik's land that  the moment  of truth  arrived which ended my career as a dynamitero. We were deal­ with  a  moderate-sized  stump  that,  we decided,  needed  ten sticks of  dynamite.  We  went  through   all  the  processes, lit  the  fuse  and  retreated   for  cover.  We squatted  there  the  necessary time and  nothing  happened. A minute  passed and extended  into five minutes. Still nothing  happened, and  this time when I looked into  Kohout's eyes they no longer danced  away.  They  were fixed  and  anxious. He  could  not  explain  what  had  happened -perhaps  a  faulty  detonator or  a faulty fuse. But we could not leave the charge  there to be a standing  peril.
"What can  we do?" "Risk our lives," said Kohout, his cackle quavering.  "We
can  carefully  uncover  the  charge  and  disconnect  it.  That  is very risky. Or  we can dig beside it and  put in a smaller charge  which we hope will blow the first. That  is ten per cent less risky." "I'll settle for ten per cent."
So we got to work, digging carefully, in the end with trowels, beside the first charge,  put  in a couple more sticks, with detonator and  fuse which we checked particularly  carefully, hurriedly filled in over the second charge, lit the fuse, and ran. This  time the double charge blew in a fine fountain  of soil and stones, and we  embraced   each  other  and  danced  crazily  in  relief.  I  never  blew  another stump. Nor, so far as I know, did Kohout.




BuT THERE  WERE OTHER  WAYS of fulfilling the destructive urge.  Dynamite  merely split the stumps  and  lifted  the  fragments  up.  Fire  was still needed  to consume them,  and  we would drag  slash and  rubbish  out of the woods  during   the  day  and  pile  it  around   the  stumps  in  preparation for  the evening  change  of wind, when  the fires would  burn  with  passion and  clarity. I still  remember   vividly  those  exciting  nights  when  the  four  of  us,  Inge  and Natalie  and  Kohout  and  I,  would  feed the  marvellously  incandescent  cores of the stumps,  and  over the crackling of the flames we would  hear  the slap of the seals as they played below the cliff or the crashing splash of the killer whales proceeding towards the harbour.
But  Kohout  was as dangerous  a man  with  fire as he was with dynamite.  As I have said,  there  was a good stand  of surviving  trees growing  out  of the cliff below our  lot, somewhat  cluttered  with the debris of logging which we intended


20

WOODCOCK

some  later  year  to  clear  away.  But  one  day  at  the  top  of  the  cliff near  the hermit's  cabin  to  which  he  had  returned,   Kohout  put  a  match  to  a  pile  of brush. It was early September  now, and  the last three  weeks had  been rainless, so that  the  rubbish  among  the trees had dried out. And,  by a freak chance, the wind  changed  that  evening  from  the customary southwester  at that  time of the year  to  a  southeaster,  blowing right  along our  cliff, catching  the  piles of slash and  leaping  into  the trees. In  the twinkling of an eye, almost, we had our own forest fire, the sky blazing a hundred  yards away from our house.
Kohout  appeared, darting  along the  lee of the fire, frantic,  intoxicated  with
excitement,  and  in  his face  none of the still apprehension   I  had  seen the  day the  charge  did  not  blow. But in another  way he was scared again,  and  when  I suggested we get the Sooke fire engine he was so opposed that  I knew he feared prosecution  for  setting  a  fire in  a  dry season. "It   will burn  out!  It will bum out!" he  kept  on  saying.  It  had  only to  run  another  half-mile,  I  pointed  out, and  then it would start  to bum  into the thick woodland of the next big property along  the coast and  he would  have a major  crisis on  his hands.  He still refused to go.
We  had  installed  no  telephone,  and  we feared  too  much  for our  own house for either  of us to attempt the three-mile walk into the village or even the half­ mile walk to Sooke Harbour House, which did have a telephone. So we stayed, our  only  weapon  a  garden   hose which  we took turns  spraying  on  the  roof of our  house  to  put  out  the  sparks  that  blew  over  from  the  blaze.  There  was nothing  we  could  do  with  the  fire on  the  cliff except  to  wait  it  out,  and  we stayed  up  most of the  night  merely to protect  the house. Fortunately,  when the fire had  crept  to the  edge of the  next  property,  the  wind  did shift and  finally die down,  but  there  were still smouldering  pockets along the cliff that  all night kept exploding  into small fires. I went down next morning  to see our cliff black and  still smoking, the rubbish  burnt  away and  many of the smaller trees killed; fortunately  the  bigger ones had  not been  harmed,  except for a litde singeing of the  lower  branches; they  had  been  little  cluttered  with  flammable  debris  and had stood mostly to windward  of the blaze.
As winter came on, Kohout, who suffered from bronchial asthma, began to disappear  for  spells  to  avoid  the  intensely  humid  coastal  winter:   trips  to  the California  desert  ("For drying out,"  as he cackled),  to Corvallis where Natalie had  been  a  professor  ("For  edification") and  to Penticton   ("For elevation"). But every now  and  then  he would  appear  again, scuttling  through  the trees to look at  our  lot and  say "My,  you're  going well!"  and  sometimes taking  us on trips  in his car,  of which  I  remember  most clearly an expedition  to Victoria  in a  blizzard,  made  terrifying  by the fact  that  Kohout,  who learnt  to drive when there  was  virtually  no  traffic  on  the  Sooke  Road,  seemed  to  regard  it  as his privilege  to  proceed  in  the  middle  of the  highway  in  all weathers,  as he  had

21

WOODCOCK

always done, so that  on that  single brief journey  we escaped  at least three colli­
sions in the blinding snow by a few inches.
Our  house was now finished; with the experience of building  an earlier home, and  with  a  more  modest  plan,  we had  completed  a  comfortable  small cottage by late  autumn   and  had  ploughed  and  seeded  into  a  promising  meadow  the stretch of land  between the house and the cliff. So I settled down to a winter of writing.  Each  morning  I  would  work  with  saw,  axe  and  wedge  for  an  hour cutting  and  splitting  the  day's stove wood. Twice  a  week, when  we could  not scrounge  lifts, we would  walk into  the village with our  rucksacks to buy  provi­ sions and  collect mail. On  bright  clear days I might  put  in another  hour or so clearing  more  ground  for  future  flower and  vegetable  beds. But  there was still plenty of time  to write,  particularly  as outside  visitors had  ceased  to come and the  lonely season  had  begun.  I  worked  on  the  material  I  had  gathered   in France  and   the  United   States  for  my  biography   of  Proudhon, and  I  wrote critical  essays, and   historical  articles  largely  based  on  the  knowledge  I had gained  in  recent  years about  North  America  west of  the  Rockies. I established long-standing  connections  with  the Geographical  Magazine  and  History  Today  in  England,   with  the  Sewanee  Review,  the  New  Republic   and  the  Saturday  Review  of Literature  in the United  States;  in  Canada, then  so lacking in  jour­ nals of literature  and  affairs,  I  continued  to  give occasional  talks on  the CBC networks  and  even  sold a small series of  documentary programmes  on the his­ tory of utopian  writing.
But still I was far from making  the kind of living, through  these remote free­ lance connections,  that  would enable us to live even the simple kind of  existence we followed in Sooke, and  when  all the  bills for  our  house  had  been  paid  we found  ourselves again  in debt  and-as in our  first 1949-51  period at Sooke­ lacking  any  really  assured stream  of income.  As soon as the  weather broke in early spring,  I had  to take, as I had done in the earlier  period, to manual  work. I worked as a labourer  for a friend  who was building his house;  this ended in a scare almost as extreme as that of the unexploded dynamite  charge. I was work­ ing  a  small  electrically  operated  concrete  mixer,  and  suddenly,  as  I began  to swing the  handle  to fill the  barrow another  worker  pushed  forward,  I felt as if my  whole  body  had  been  struck  a  great  blow,  heard  a  strange  yelling  voice which  I later  realized  had  been my  own, and  came  to myself lying flat on my back;  someone  had  switched  off  the  power,  but  my  hand   was seared  with  a wide  burn  that  took a  couple of  weeks to cure.  I was puzzled  that  instead  of showing  sympathy  and  concern,  my friend  and  his  wife looked  at  me  with  a kind  of suspicion  that  verged on  hostility. Almost  immediately  I realized  that they  feared  I  might  try  to  get  compensation   from  them  for  my  burnt  hand, which would in fact  have been something very much  outside my view of friend­ ship. So I quietly left.


22

WOODCOCK

Then   Inge  and  I  persuaded  a  fisherman  who was building  a  house up  the road to let us dig out his basement.  For almost two weeks we laboured  with pick and  shovel  and   wheelbarrow,   from  morning  often  until  dusk.  We  were  paid partly  in cash and  partly  in kind,  and  received $120 and  as much  salmon and halibut  as we could  eat  for  the  next  two months;  we got very tired  of fish by the  time  the supply  came  to an end.  Finally, the last  phase of our  relationship with  Kohout  bega:n when  he decided  to enlarge the hermit's  cabin  and  put  in such  amenities  as a bathroom  and  a real chimney instead of the dangerous  old iron  stovepipe.  I  worked  for  him  digging ditches, taking  a  pride  in  the skill I had  learnt  years before working on the land  as a conscientious objector  in  Eng­ land.  I could  compete  with  anyone in digging a smoothly finished ditch  with a gentle  and  regular  fall, and  I was pleased when Dirty Sam,  with his memories of miners'  flumes and  waterways  on  the Klondike,  came  to build  the  chimney and  roared  through  the  tangle  of his beard:   "There's a  bloody  dandy  ditch!" I  worked  too  as Dirty  Sam's  assistant  and,  between curses,  increased  my store of tall  tales about  Diamond  Tooth  Gertie and  Bishop Bompas. But my employ­ ment  by Kohout  ended on a rather  sour note, since I pointed  out that  the going rate  for labouring  work was now $1.25 an  hour and  not $r.oo, as he proposed to  pay. Kohout   had  retained  a  goodly share  of the  European peasant's  tradi­ tional  parsimony,  and  though  he paid  me in full  before  he set off on another trip, this time to Europe,  he clearly resented doing so.
As it  turned  out,  I saw  him  only two or three  times again,  and  those were
fleeting contacts.  For  by the summer  of 1953 we had  decided  to leave. Though I was earning  more by writing than  when we last lived in Sooke, it was still not enough  to  keep us going.  And,  just as between 1949 and  1951  we learnt  that we were not  temperamentally fitted for a Thoreauvian mixture  of manual  and mental  work, so now we learnt  that  at  heart  we were really urban  people. We were lonely and  lost in so remote a countryside, despite the odd friends we had made  in  Sooke  and  the  few  people who in good weather  might  venture  there from  Victoria  or  Vancouver. During  the  late  spring,  when  we went  to  Van­ couver for me to record  CBC  talks, we began  to make tentative  plans to  move there.  At  least  I  would  be nearer  to possible sources of income, and  we  would be  back  in  a  city  again.  Then  we  put  our  cottage  up  for sale,  and  waited  a nervous  two months  until  we finally sold it to a couple of women  teachers  who were so taken  with the way Inge had arranged  it that they bought it with almost everything  it  contained, and  we set off with  no more  than  our  clothes, books and  manuscripts  and  our  cat Tim  to start  again in Vancouver, where Jack  and Doris Shadbolt  had  found  a cabin for us in a wood near their  house on Capital  Hill.
We  never  saw  Kohout   after  we left. But  not long  afterwards   we heard  he
had  died  rather  miserably  yet in  a  way that  seemed to fit the  more grotesque

23

WOODCOCK

side of his nature, for he was involved  in a freak  accident in a hotel lift in which his leg was somehow  trapped; it had  to be amputated, and  the shock killed him. I sadly  remembered how, like Bakunin, he  had  seen  the  poetry  of destruction; like a Zoroastrian, he had loved the leaping  of the fire.



DRIVING, JICCIDENTJIL, WEST

Robert Kroetsch

1

the shaped infinity to hanuner  home

help, and the wild geese heading south

and every way and which, confuse

the fall of light the fatal peen

how, and the commonest crow or sparrow

speak the pale
or sensing moon

2
accelerate, the swan sing, or eloquent as

antelope, the crisp rejoinder of the duck's

quack to the deer's leap, and, even then

even, a static dream twitter and acquit

the kill, wait, for and  the nasty snow

fall, fall and for tonight, only, dream



PLYMOUTH BROTHER
 


Roy Daniells


IwAs BORN IN A  SMALL semi-detached  brick howe in south
London,  on  the  borders  of  Kent.*  As I  came  into  the  world,  my father  and
grandfather were on  their  knees in  the  next room, praying  for me and  for my mother.  And  I  grew  up in  this house where prayers and  hymns were the wings that carried life forward  and upward.
"When  I shall wake in that  fair mom  of moms I After whose dawning  never
night  returns I And  in  whose glory day  eternal  bums  I I shall be satisfied, be satisfied." That is what  they sang of a Sunday  evening, after the gospel meeting,
friends  coming  in for coffee and  cakes, my mother  at the  piano. "When  I shall gaze  upon  the  face  of Him  I Who  died  for me with  eye no  longer  dim I And praise Him  in the everlasting  hymn I I shall be satisfied, be satisfied."
Then  I would  go to bed  upstairs, where my grandparents lived, look out the window  across the  London-Brighton railway line to the  Crystal  Palace to see if there  were any fireworks. "Now  I lay me down to sleep I pray the Lord my soul to keep. If I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.... "
My  grandfather  might  come  in  when  the  gas  was  turned   out  and  pop  a peppermint into my mouth.  One night, as the bag became empty, he said, "The last of the Mohicans." After that  I called peppermints  Monekies. I had a certain knack  of getting  things  wrong.  My attempt  at  reciting  the  23rd  Psalm began, "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want Him."
My parents  and  grandparents were Plymouth Brethren,  a group  that  actually originated  in Ireland  but had one of its earliest and largest English congregations in  Plymouth.  We called ourselves Christians  gathered  in the name of the Lord, avoiding  any  denominational  name;  we  spoke of  each  local  gathering   as an assembly. We  had  no head,  Christ  in heaven being the head  of the church;  we needed no priest, for were we not all made "kings and  priests unto God"  ( Reve­ lation  1:6) . (We  were the  descendants  of those middle-class Independents who were  so  useful  to  Cromwell  in  his cavalry  regiments  and  for  whose liberty  of worship  Cromwell   pleaded  so eloquently  to  a  Presbyterian-dominated  Parlia­  ment.)
We had  no confession, no prayer-book, no creed, no formal theology-noth­
ing  but  the  open  Bible, the  King  James  Version, the  word of God.  Each  of us

*This  essay was among  Roy Daniells' papers when he died in 1979. In  a slightly different form, it was broadcast in 1979 over CBC radio. ED.

25

DANIELLS

read it for himsell and hardly needed an interpreter, for the Holy Ghost, as Jesus had  promised, would lead us into all truth.  Brethren  literally wore out Bibles by daily reading.  There  were occasional odd stories about  Bibles. A soldier carrying one in his haversack  might be struck by a bullet which embedded  itself as far as a last unbroken  page where some portentous text was found: "He  shall give His angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways" -the 91st Psalm.
We read the Bible continuously, so as to remember  every word of it; we memo­
rized  whole  Psalms  and  whole  chapters  of  the  New  Testament. We  were not critical-who could  be of God's  Word?-and if we compared  one text  with another  it was never to see whether they agreed;  we found  prophecies in the Old Testament  that were fulfilled in the New Testament. "Out of Egypt have I called my son" in the Old  Testament  was a prophecy fulfilled when Joseph, Mary and the child Jesus took refuge from  Herod  in Egypt  and later  returned  home. The Bible was a seamless web;  there  were no loose ends or contradictions or state­ ments without a profound spiritual meaning.
Occasionally, as a child, I opened the Bible quite at random,  seeking enlighten­
ment.  (Sortes Virgilianae  the Classics people call this.)  I tried it once in bed and read "Thou shalt not get down from the bed whereon thou  art gone up but shalt surely die." I hopped  out instantly and hit the floor, before the words could take effect.
Accepting  the  Bible as the  word of God,  we really  had  no problems of any kind. We did  not worry about  the state of the world for we were merely passing through  it to a much  better and  eternal  world. The  Bible kept asserting its own authority  and  this we accepted  without  question.  Problems  of authentic texts, of contradictions,  of bloody massacres and murders in the Old Testament, or prophecies,  miracles  and  wonders:   well, no  question  arose.  We  knew  that  the whale swallowed Jonah  and  kept him in its belly for three  days, for was not this a type of the death  and resurrection of Christ?  We knew that  Noah had at least two of each  kind of creature  in the ark and  to question  the sanitary  conditions in the ark, after nearly a year, never even occurred  to us. When Christ said to his disciples, "I will make  you fishers of men!" this seemed  to us a very beautiful image;  that  fishermen kill all they catch -well,  again,  it never occurred  to us. Once  the Bible is felt to be the word of God, all questions  cease. Reason  retires behind  the  curtains; faith  takes the centre  of the stage.  Faith  does not  ask for evidence or scrutinize  testimony or sift out proofs. As Saint  Paul said:  "Faith is the  substance  of things  hoped  for,  the evidence  of things  not  seen"  (Hebrews
11 : 1 ) . Having  the English Bible, we needed no Latin,  Greek or Hebrew  but we
would have agreed with Tertullian, that early Father  of the Church, "Certum est quia impossibile est." If you have faith you believe the rationally  impossible.
The  English Bible ! Most of us had the firm impression that  God spoke English and  had said at the  beginning, "LET THERE BE LIGHT!"  He could not have said

DANIELLS


it in any other language.  The English were, in any case, God's chosen people and Christ  was very English:  "And  did those feet in ancient  time I Walk upon Eng­ land's  mountains  green I And was the holy Lamb of God I In England's pleasant
pastures seen!"  These lines of William Blake used to be sung at the great political gatherings  of the Labour  Party. The  English were chosen to spread  the gospel to all the  world;  the Brethren  were unstinting  in their support  of missionaries, and stories of Livingstone and  his like were on every child's bookshelf. "What though
the spicy breezes I Blow soft o'er  Ceylon's isle I Where  every prospect  pleases I
And  only man  is vile"  (we sang  this in Sunday School). "In vain with loving kindness I The  gifts of God  are  strawn; The  heathen  in  their  blindness I Bow down to wood and stone."  (So much for the inhabitants of Sri Lanka.)
Having  no creed,  no  priesthood,  no sacred edifices or  holy days, no Book of Common  Prayer  or  Order  of the  Mass, we were committed  to the Bible, those square  black letters  bitten  into  the  white page. We knew it  by heart;  from  be­ tween its lines we rose directly toward  heaven where Christ sat at the right hand of God,  our  Redeemer  and  Advocate,  our  Lord and  Saviour,  who would  soon come again;   the  words  were more firm and  immediate  in our  minds than  our own  names  and  addresses:  "For  the  Lord  Himself shall  descend  from  heaven with  a shout,  with  the voice of the archangel  and  with the trump of God:  and the  dead  in Christ shall rise first: Then  we which are alive and  remain shall be caught  up together  with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:  And so shall we ever be with the Lord" (I Thessalonians 1: I 6- I 7).




A	I   HAVE  BEEN  GIVING   YOU   is a  recollection  of my childhood in England. But now we came to Canada.
My father  was a carpenter, who had risen to become an independent builder, but Lloyd George brought  in a system of taxation that  made it increasingly hard to raise risk capital  and  my father  remembered  that as a very young man he had worked in Canada, in the mining  towns of British Columbia  and in Victoria. So to Victoria  we came and  joined the Plymouth  Brethren  there, in a hall on  Pan­ dora  Street, soon moving to Blanshard Street, to an old rickety wooden hall next to a nice brick synagogue.
I got a long letter from my grandfather in England,  in his careful bent script, wishing me well in Canada, telling me he would pray for me and hoping I would grow up to be a man  of God. But here in Canada  my life changed  drastically. At home things were the same;  the same kindness and love prevailed. At South Park School it was rather  uncomfortable; it was full of recent Scottish and  Irish emi­ grants  who did  not  much  esteem us softer English. And  in the assembly of the Brethren on Blanshard  Street the changes were terrifying.

27

DANIELLS

As I have said, the Brethren needed neither  priesthood  nor clergy. But we did have so-called "ministering  brethren" who moved from assembly to assembly for shorter  or longer series of meetings, particularly  gospel meetings and expositions of the scriptures.  Men with names like McGrath and  McClure,  who hailed from Scotland  or Ulster, in whose veins ran the blood of Covenanters, Recusants, Calvinists and  such, who in past centuries had  been persecuted and  had  in turn persecuted. "Will  you take the Test? If not, Make  ready, present, fire, and there lay  the  Recusant." They  were passionate  men, intent  on  preaching  Christ, de­ nouncing  the world and warning sinners. They  loved to dwell on the imminence of judgment  and the end of the world; they told us of the rich man and Lazarus.  "Except  ye repent,  ye shall all likewise perish"  (Luke 13: 3). We sat under them as they thundered from the platform, night after night.
I felt  myself now to be a sinner  who might  at  any  moment  be irremediably lost. Instant  and everlasting destruction hung over me like the sword of Damocles. Christ might  come at any instant and take the saved, leaving me for judgment. I knew the  very words that  Jesus said:  "Then shall two be in the field;  the one shall be taken  and  the other left. Two women shall be grinding  at the mill; the one shall  be taken  and  the other  left"  (Matthew 24:40). I  have  come  home from  school, opened  the  kitchen  door  and  found  no  one  in  the  house, called "Mother! Mother!" No answer. I would search  the house and  through  the gar­ den, full of fear.  Nobody there. Then  I've  reeled against  the doorpost  with the conviction,  Christ  has come;  they're  all gone;  I'm  left for  judgment. Later  my mother  would  come  back from  a visit to  a  neighbour  and  find  me  white  and trembling,  hardly  able to speak. This happened  many times, for the terror of the second coming was thrust into our vitals at every turn.  From this ultimate  terror, this fear  of eternal  fire and  torment,  one  never  recovers. It  is  the extreme  and final terror  to which the mind and  body, the heart  and soul, the whole crushed and dismembered  personality of a child can be subjected.
The  ministering  brethren,  leaning  over  the  lectern  that  held  their  outspread
Bible, would also threaten  us with the sin against the Holy Ghost. This was a mysterious and  terrible  possibility. By some act or other,  perhaps scarcely  volun­ tary,  we might  offend  the Holy Ghost  and  He  would  depart  from  us, never to return.  Or  we might allow some blasphemous  thought  to lodge for a moment  in our  minds,  which  would seal our fate  at  the  last  judgment.  The  terrible  texts poured,  many  of them  uttered  by Christ  himself. We were told, of  course, that none of these horrors need overwhelm us. We had only to repent and believe the gospel to be forever safe. To people like my father  this had been simple. He told me once  about  his own  conversion:  "When I saw  what  Christ  had  done  and suffered for me," he said, "I came to Him with all my heart."
I longed  to follow his example but  there was one enormous,  insuperable  diffi­
culty-the  nature  of belief.  We  knew  that  to  believe  the  facts  of the  gospel

DANIELLS

story was not enough : "The devils also believe and tremble"  (!ames 2 :I 9) . One had to believe in some special way; one must trust in Christ and believe that  His sacrifice had  taken  away  one's sins. Christ only received those who believe that He  received  them.  In  order  to  obtain  salvation,  one  had  to  believe one  had obtained  it.  "Faith is the substance  of things  hoped for, the evidence of things not  seen"  (Hebrews  I I: I). The  proof of your salvation  is the  belief that  you have it, apparently.
Here was for me the dilemma,  the catch-22, the revolving door that seemed to take  one  into  the  kingdom  but  always delivered one  back outside again.  Many times, over  decades  rather  than  years, I  came to Christ  and  committed  myself into His hands; always with the same result, a complete blank;  I never had any sense of His presence as my saviour. The  Holy Ghost, the scriptures said, would enter  my heart  and  fill me with comfort and  joy and  lead  me into all truth.  It didn't  happen.
"Come  unto  Me all  ye that  labour  and  are  heavy laden  and  I  will give you rest"  (Matt hew  I I:28) . Why did I fail - so utterly and repeatedly -to realize this promise?
You are a Catholic?  You will perhaps tell me that  I failed to advantage myself of the  powers given  by Christ  to Peter,  powers transmitted  by the laying on of hands  to the  priest of today -"I  will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom" (Matthew I6: Ig). You are  a High Anglican?  You will perhaps  say something similar, with a slight check at Henry VIII. Both of you will probably add  that  I failed to perceive in the bread and wine of the sacrament  the Real Presence of the body  and  blood  of  Christ.  "He  that  eateth  my flesh and  drinketh  my  blood, dwelleth in Me and  I in him"  (!ohn 6: 56). Or perhaps you are a Calvinist and will hazard  that  I  was not  one of the elect, was never  predestined  to salvation. "Whom   He  did  predestinate, them  He  also called:  and  whom  he called them He also justified" (Romans 8: 30).
You are  a  rationalist? And  will remind  me that  if we believe absurdities  we
shall  suffer  penalties.  You  are  a  psychologist? And  will recall that  pulsation  in either  cranial   hemisphere   may  give  a  sensation  of  extreme  fear,  of  ultimate terror?  You  are  a  medical  practitioner? You  may  remind  me  that  feelings of sinking into the abyss may come from simple aortic stenosis.
And the good lady distributing  gospel tracts outside Eaton's store on Granville
Street  had  her own answer. Christ, she told me, had cured  her of cancer;  as for me,  "You  did  not  go  all  the  way,"  she said,  "You  did  not  go  all  the  way." (Actually  I  had  always  believed that  the  Good Shepherd  went  all the  way to find the lost sheep and not vice versa.)
I  have good  friends  in the  United  Church  of Canada and  they will say vel') gently that  I should  have avoided introspection and tried to do some good, some­ thing  Christlike,  in the community.  My excuse is that,  if you find  yourself in a

29

DANIELLS

burning  building,  in suffocating smoke, with dynamite  in the attic, you have to get out  yourself and  breathe  some fresh air  before you can save anyone  else. I could never seem to get out.
When  I was about  fifteen, out of a kind of desperate  desire to get on the right
road, I made a profession of faith, was baptized  and was brought  into fellowship. Baptism  took place in  a  galvanized  iron  tank  under  the  platform  and  was by total  immersion.  One  carne  up  gasping out  of the  water  as the  assembly sang with fervor and conviction, "Up from the grave He arose, with a mighty triumph o'er  His foes." One  was experiencing  Christ's  triumph over death  but  unfortu­ nately I felt no sense of triumph; I simply felt wet. If you are a Baptist, you may tell me I totally failed to understand  the nature  of baptism.  As Peter says, "Bap­  tism doth also now save us ... by the resurrection of Jesus Christ" (I Peter 3:2 I).
I  sat  with  the  assembly, partook  of  the  elements  as they  were passed from hand  to hand,  even, on occasion, gave thanks  for the  bread  and  broke it, gave thanks for the wine and  poured it. I ascended  the  platform  with my father  and we preached "God  so loved the world that He gave His only begotten son" (!ohn
3:I 6). And  I  have stood at  the  comer  of Government and  Johnson  Streets in Victoria, where we formed a circle, sang hymns and heard one of our number cry out the word of the gospel to all who passed and to any drunks  who would lean against  the  brick wall and  seem to listen. Much  like the  Salvation  Army  in its palmy days.
You will say I  was a damned  hypocrite, lacking  in moral  decency and  intel­ lectual  honesty. Mea  culpa.  It is true:  I had neither  courage  nor independence; they had  been drained  out of me. And remember,  I was trapped in that  revolv­ ing  door,  between  a  willingness to  believe and  the  certainty  of  believing, that door that  never stopped  long enough to deliver me into the kingdom of God.
I shall never forget Victoria Hall, on Blanshard  Street. It was a big, old frame
building,  rotten  with  decay  and  due to fall. The  ceiling  was high  and  stained. There  was  neither  carpet,  nor  flowers, nor altar,  nor  pictures,  nor amenities  of any kind. Only  a platform  with a table and  its old green tablecloth  with droop­ ing fringes, a  woodbuming stove and,  I  may  add,  absolutely  deplorable wash­ room facilities. The  walls were hung  with blue texts on yellow paper,  printed  in Kilmarnock  and  framed  in picture  railing. There  were a great  many  chairs, all of them hard  on the spine. All this signalled that  the world was a very temporary  and passing affair and our minds ought to be elsewhere.
The  effect of all the Bible reading, the preaching  and the prayer meetings was
simple,  cumulative,  undeviating,  and  finally  overwhelming. It was a  polarity. Heaven  shone  above;  hell gaped  beneath.  Heaven  meant  the  presence of God, His holiness, wisdom, mercy and loving kindness, God the Father,  with Christ at His  right  hand  and  the  Holy  Ghost  one  with  them  both.  Hell  meant  eternal

DANIELLS

torment,  prepared  for the Devil and  his angels. Two thieves were crucified with
Christ;  one went up and the other down.
Now if you wind a wire round  a piece of soft iron and pass a powerful electric current  through  it,  you have  a magnet  that  points north  and  south.  The  same thing  happened to the  mind  of a young person wound  round  by the Brethren's doctrines  and  subjected  to the current  of their preaching.  Heaven  and  hell were the only realities and this world simply did not count as permanent.


ISHOULD, OF  COURSE, have walked out of Victoria  Hall and slammed  the  door  behind  me. But I couldn't  do it. It was many  years before I could  leave  the  Brethren  and  even  pull the  door  to  behind  me.  Even  then,  I
closed it slowly and  quietly  and  waited for the latch to click. I am not sure that it ever did quite click.
The  burden  of the  Brethren's doctrines finally became  too heavy to permit  a normal  way of life. I left school in the middle of my last term.  I worked in the Bank of Toronto as a  junior;  I worked on D'Arcy  Island,  the leper station, and carried  packets of meat  and  rice to the lepers every morning; I worked on dairy farms  in Duncan; I picked fruit  in the Okanagan  and  in Oregon; I harvested on the prairie.  During  all these years I kept up my connection  with the Brethren.
In  Duncan  we met in the  drawing  room of General  Rice, who had served in India  and  was so old  he remembered  the Indian  Mutiny.  After the breaking of bread  service, he would  burn  what  remained  in the fire;  he did so, he told me one Sunday,  because of what God commanded  in Leviticus concerning the offer­ ing  made  by  the  priests.  His  military  sons and  their  children  in  turn  were all handsome,  aristocratic  in  manner,  and  devoted  Christians,  as though  one  had crossed  officers out  of  Kipling   with  archangels.  One   never  knows  what  an assembly of the  Brethren  may  bring  forth. The  kingdom of heaven  is a strange place and full of surprises.
During  these years, I met  people for whom, though  their  doctrinal  beliefs did
little  for me,  I  felt  a  warm  affection  and  deep admiration. Their  paths inter­ twined  with  mine  rather  than  coinciding, yet I felt a sense of lasting fellowship with them. You might say that  all our faces were turned  toward  the light.
One  such was Claude  Butcher,  whom I worked beside in Duncan. He was a small  Englishman  who had  come to Canada and  for  whom  everything  seemed to go wrong. He worked unceasingly but in the depth of the mid-2o's  depression he  could  scarcely  keep  his  wife, her  old aunt  and  himself. He  started  a small grocery store in Duncan, which failed dismally. A child was born to the Butchers, so small and  weak that  its life expectancy proved very brief. One  would guess he would be in despair. But not so. His faith in God soared triumphant over all his

DANIELLS

troubles. He was always cheerful and  greatly esteemed. He would walk miles on a country  road  to take a message to someone that  might get the fellow a job. He has long gone to his reward.  But the image  of Claude  Butcher  is still with me; he was one whose faith burned in an unwavering  flame.
Then  there were Sidney Burdge and his wife. Farming  in Alberta and by some miracle retrieving  half a crop in a dry and  barren  land.  I helped him harvest it. He was no longer young and he was in pain most of the time. But you would not know it. His wife and  counterpart was  withered  like some brown  and  beautiful autumnal leaf,  after  forty years of prairie  hardship.  She can  never have known rest. My last encounter  with them was years later,  in Victoria.  With  the aid of a stick, he could make it up a flight of steps, one at a time. The  last thing  he said to me was, "He  still loves us."
I still meet such people. One is a man  who, after  years of disinterested labour as chairman of a  key committee  in my own  university, was relieved of his post as administrators changed. One would have supposed it a heavy blow, a sad frustration. Yet, over lunch, he was cheerful and equable  as ever. He said simply, "I took it to the Lord." He showed no trace of disappointment, only a willingness to serve wherever he was permitted.
One  of my memorable  encounters was very brief. Passing through  an airport,
I saw a man  in a clerical collar sitting on a suitcase. On impulse, I bent over and said, "Do  you believe all Christians will meet in heaven?"  He looked up with the countenance of one of Botticelli's angels and said, "I believe all people will meet in heaven." I went on and  boarded  my plane.  But I've  never forgotten  him.
As I slowly departed  from the Brethren,  my father  was hurt  by my defection, though  he never reproached  me or even showed his disappointment. But he was wholly  devoted  to  the image of Christ  the  Brethren  showed  him and  he could not imagine  any other way of life than  that of Bunyan's  Pilgrim. I have seen him put  a ten-dollar  bill into the collection bag, at a time when that  was a great sum for a working  man,  and  noticed that  the  purple  of the bill was the same colour as an  unhealed  saw cut on  his arm.  He  was  in a sense giving his blood  to the cause of Christ,  to missions, for example.  When  he was  very old he had  some fears about  his own salvation and  my mother  had  to comfort  and  reassure him. She did not, I am sure, regret my leaving the Brethren.  In fact, as time went on, she ceased to attend  meetings. She said they made  her nervous. Her  faith  was a matter  of reading  the Bible with  the memory of her father  and  of her younger brother  who  had  passed away  and  was  in  heaven-with these memories and thoughts  of England  always with her. She understood  better  than  my father  the complexities of faith  and  the inner life; she would not have subscribed  to Paul's brash  assertion  to  the  jailer at  Philippi,  "Thou shalt  be saved and  thy  house" (Acts I 6: 3 1 ) . She  knew that  each generation  must in some sense find its own way.

32

DANIELLS

As the years went by, the biological urge to survive, the social urge to function in the community,  the economic urge to earn more than $go a month and the intellectual  urge to do something  other than labouring  jobs -these led me to go back to my books at the age of twenty-three. I secured a very humble post, teach­ ing in  a small  private  school, and  by slow stages arrived  at  university  teaching, first in  Toronto, then  in  Winnipeg,  then  in  Vancouver.  And  now  I  began  to make many friends.
My  main  interest  was in  the  poetry of Milton.  I was lucky, for  here was a
bridge  between  the  Brethren's doctrines  and  the world of humane  studies. The familiar  beliefs were now clothed in poetry of surpassing eloquence and adorned with a rich border  of classical and  historical reference. I was now listening, not to the ministering  brethren  but to magnificent archangels, Raphael  and Michael, who expound everything to Adam and Eve.
One small ingredient  of Paradise Lost I particularly enjoyed was Milton's sense of  humour.  Humour, I  hope  you  will agree, is a great  lubricant  in systematic thinking; it  prevents  the  great  facts from grinding  too heavily on one another. Milton  offers very little  humour  but  the quality  is excellent. Raphael  the arch­ angel  is in  the  midst  of warning  Adam,  as yet unfallen,  against  being  too pas­ sionate  in his love for  his delightful  Eve, when Adam  suddenly  asks about  love in heaven:   is there  a sexual  relation  between angels? Raphael  answers with "a  smile that  glows Celestial rosy red"; in other words, he blushes. He makes Adam an extremely  hasty answer  to the effect that  they have every  joy in heaven that  Adam  and  Eve  have  on  earth; he looks at  the sinking sun  (with  the effect of looking at his digital wrist watch)  and says, in effect, It's getting late;  I must go.
My  intense  pleasure  over  this brief passage may seem rather  odd. But, after
twenty-odd  years of gospel preaching  and  prayer meetings,  not to mention Sun­ day school, years in which  no subject could be viewed except in black and white terms, either  as pointing  to the will of God or away from it -after two decades and  more  of  that  sort  of suppression  of one's sense of humour, Book  VIII of Paradise Lost came to me like a flower flung to me by angelic fingers.
Reading  and  attempting to lecture  upon  Milton,  I  could stay in the Biblical
framework  but find it transformed  into something of great beauty and harmony. I  felt  I  could  learn  from  Milton  as Adam  learned  from  the  archangel  and,  to some infinitesimal  degree, offer the same kind of liberation  to my own students. I might wear the chains of Milton's  doctrines but they were golden, not the iron ball-a:nd-chain with which the Brethren had tied me down.
As time  went on, keys with  which to open prison gates fell into  my lap from
unexpected  sources.  Furthermore, some of the  walls turned  out  to be only  ply­ wood painted  to look like blocks from the Rock of Ages. I was sorting books one day  and  accidentally   came  across that  Old  Testa:rnent passage  which  excludes from  the  congregation  of  Israel  any man  who-perhaps in  an  accident  or in

33

DANIELLS

battle-has lost what is politely called his virile member.  The  terrible  tribalism of Old  Testament writers became, as in a lightening  flash, completely apparent. I  threw  the  book on the  floor. Then  I began  to find in the  English  devotional writers their belief that  the  joy of the redeemed  in heaven  will be heightened  as they look over the battlements  and  view their  friends in hell. Could  I take these atrocious  people seriously? In Rome, I looked long and  hard  at  Michaelangelo's ceiling and  end wall of the Sistine Chapel  and  perceived that  he was in as much trouble  as  I  had  been. His God  the  Father  takes  his creative  hand  away from Adam,  the  innocent  first man,  palpably  indifferent, clearly  leaving  him  to  his fate and  knowing what it will be. Can I believe in such a God? On the end wall Christ  in  judgment  is separating  the  saved  from  the  lost,  and  such  horror  is depicted  on  the  faces of those condemned  that  the  whole  pictured  scene falls apart,  as a courtroom  might fall apart  if suddenly  the  judge put  thumb  screws on the prisoner a:nd broke his joints. Could I credit this Christ?
As the prison walls began, in this way, to crumble,  there  were also doors thatJ swung  open  into  direct  sunlight.  Certain  books were invaluable; so was direct contact  with the  natural  world about  me. People  were of very little direct  help, because  we  in  Canada do  not  like  to  talk  about   ultimate  issues or  "eternal things," as the Brethren would say.
Books:  I found  Emily Bronte immensely liberating. Among the luminaries  of the English literary  tradition  she appears like a flash of lightning.  In Wuthering Heights  she  accepts  wickedness, violence, and  suffering  as  part  of the  human scene  but  a  spirit  of abundant and  unquenchable life supervenes.  (Heathcliff and  Catherine, though they have both died, are seen on the road, walking closely together,  never to be parted. This is beyond reason but not beyond experience.) In one of her superb  poems, Emily Bronte begins "No  coward soul is mine" and goes on to affirm "Vain  are the thousand  creeds to waken doubt." Doubt  in her faith that life triumphs over death.
I found  the same thing in Dylan Thomas,  the Welsh poet. In his memorable
war  poem "A  Refusal  to Mourn  the  Death  by Fire  of a Child  in London" he sees the dead  child as clasped safely in the arms of her mother,  the immemorial earth,  while the ever-flowing stream of the Thames  triumphantly assures the continuity of life.
I felt the bonds of the Brethren loosen and fall away. There was an immediate life to be experienced, even though  I had no experience of the "new  birth." I no longer felt with the Brethren that "the  whole world lieth in wickedness" (1 fohn
5: 19).
Better even than  books were natural  things. Across the road from where I live is a magnificent  fir tree whose branches are never still, for we live close to the sea and  its varying  winds.  Do not  be offended  if I  confess that  this tree, which is older than  I am and  will outlive me, in its steady  growth,  endurance of all wea-

34

DANlliLLS

thers and  aspiration  toward  the light-this tree is more to me than  the tree of Calvary,  with  its message that  without  shedding  of blood there  is no remission of sin.
And do not, furthermore, be offended if I say that the pair of swallows, violet­
blue, who come and  build in the nest I put  up for them in April and feed their chirping  young ones, fly swiftly out for food and swerve on sunlit wings-if  I say that  these give me more comfort and  hope than  any Biblical story of angels descending on Jacob's ladder.



BuT IN CASE  vou  THINK  I stray  from  a subject,  the  Ply­ mouth Brethren,  let me admit  that  I have never completed my escape from them. They  say that,  in the old days, a released galley-slave could always in a seaport town be recognized because he walked with a straddle,  his legs skewed as though still in irons. It  is the same with me. As a lapsed Catholic still in the back of his mind  resents  the  abandonment of  the  Latin  Mass, excludes  women  from  his concept  of  priesthood,  keeps somewhere in his memory the image of a compas­ sionate Virgin  and  watches in imagination  for the column of smoke announcing a new Pope -in like manner  the Plymouth  Brother who is no longer in fellow­ ship is still haunted by thoughts  of the moral polarity of  the universe, the immi­ nence of final catastrophe, the scene of the Last Judgment. He still feels he may step  casually into  an  abyss, as one might make one casual step off the sidewalk in the path of a ten-ton truck.
If an old Plymouth  Brother  writes, he returns automatically to the Bible for a
subject. "Remember Lot's wife" says the Gospel of Saint Luke and he remembers her, that  extraordinary woman  with an alcoholic husband,  daughters  of peculiar sexual  habits,  and   neighbours   about  whose fate,  as she  left  Sodom,  she  was naturally  concerned.  She was turned  into a pillar of salt, you remember,  but -

Her life was not a field of clover
For he was often half-seas over
And what he'd do when in that state
I will not here elaborate.
A place in Holy Writ she's got
But who would envy her her LOT?
And, all considered, where's the fault
In her? She's surely worth her salt.
So rudely plucked from home and garden, Her backward look we well may pardon, As, starting up the rockiy way,
She thought of friends all young and GAY
And wondered if the falling fire
Were pyrotechnic or in ire.

35

DANIELLS

Ah, well she knew what lay ahead: Two girls contending for her bed.

With shining  eyes, like votive candles, The  beasts now lie and lick her sandals. Look on her, reverend sirs, with favour. Good  salt, she has not lost her savour.

Or,  as I think of persecutors, of Bruno they burned  in Rome,  in the Campo  dei Fiori, or Servetus,  burned  slowly with damp  wood, in  Geneva-as  I  think  of these, I think of Saul of Tarsus who became the Apostle Paul.

As Saul  the persecutor rode
Hot  in pursuit, the doubled  heat  Of  midday  on Damascus road  Flamed into fire round  reason's  seat.

He, bright-eyed, bald, black-bearded, fell
And heard  a voice from heaven  call (So all the scrolls and frescoes tell) "Why  do you persecute me, Saul?"

We know his subsequent career,
Can  reckon up its strange percentiles:
He preached the word  both far and  near, Was called  the apostle  to the Gentiles.

To  those believing Paul  announced
An ever present  great  salvation,
And  those who did not he denounced
To fiery hell and  deep damnation,

And down through .all the Middle Age Scribes turned to Paul  and  read  his verses, Unfurling scroll or lifting  page
To  find his wide embracing curses.

Oh,  was the  judge inclined  to grace? The  executioner's hand  unsteady?
Some scribe could always find the place; A text from  Paul  was always ready.

The moral: Do not fear at all
Goliath  huge or Samson  hairy,
But oh! look out for men like Paul, For  persecutors never  vary.

And  so one keeps cheerful, like Balaam's  ass, who felt much  better  when she had  had  a chance  to speak her mind and  tell how she saw what others couldn't see, the angel, with a drawn sword, ready to smite false prophets.

DANIELLS


When  I come  to die,  I shall  rely on "grace alone" -that grace  and compas­ sion in  the  cosmos that  I already receive from  my family  and  friends. At the last judgment, which  I now see takes  place  at each successive moment of  life, I shall fall into  the  hands of God,  whom  the Plymouth Brethren  could identify for them­ selves but  not  for  me.  God,  who  in  the  last  event,  identifies  Himself-or is it,
more likely, herself?





COOK'S GJIRDENS
 


E. W. Brewster


Last week in Melbourne I visited Cook's Cottage, its bricks brought  from Yorkshire
and carefully reassembled, surrounded by an  English eighteenth  century  garden of old-fashioned  roses, herbs, vegetables,
no tree that would not grow in England,
perhaps  not even an Australian  weed.

Now, crossing the Nullarbor Plains, I see Cook's name again
at a station stop:
a desert town
existing only for the sake of the railway.

We stroll on the station  platform, buy postcards, souvenirs.
There  is a hospital with six beds,
a primary school, a post office,
even a prison
where someone was locked up last year for disturbing  the peace.

Back on the train
in our air-conditioned space
we return  to our breakfast coffee, cards or crossword puzzles,
watch sliding past
Cook's other garden:

37

POEM

mile on mile of salt bush, blue bush, coarse wiry grass

no trees at all

no domestic animals, not even the few sheep we saw yesterday.

I think there is no life at all until  I see a sudden graceless jump  of-
a kangaroo?   wallaby? -
running from  us
and  a startled bird rising in  this emptiness
that  makes the prairies  seem populous

a moon landscape over which  tonight the full moon
which is neither English  nor  Australian
will arise








THE W"AY HOME



Last  week
I picnicked  in Western  Australia under  the eucalypt trees
in hot late autumn weather

having  driven  from  Perth  and  the Indian Ocean along  rivers with  English  names-
the Swan, the Avon- and  past small towns
(York,  Northam,Toodyay)
where  the old gaols
have become the town museums
 


E. W. Brewster

POEM

visited  a nineteenth century  fannhouse with  its sheltering oak
grown  from  an English acorn
carried five months in a ship from home

This week
after  crossing  all Australia
and  the long yawn of the Pacific and  half  Canada

I am set down dazed,  confused
on the other side of the world in the chill morning green
of Saskatchewan spring the new  leaves.

Chance, I think,  carried acorn man,  woman, or child
across one ocean  or another.
That Western Australian farmer who planted the old oak tree came  from  Lincolnshire
like my own father's kin

But  the oak  grows as well in new soil
as native eucalypt.
The blue pine outside  my window here in Saskatoon,
the weeping birch -
they  too are  migrants.

Men  flying in space shuttles between earth and  moon must see the world as all one fragile, luminous body

and  other worlds as possible
places  for growing  eucalypts, oakis, people

somewhere alien  that  could  become­
in how many  generations?- the  old  country
home

39

EXTRACTS FROM A BRAZILIAN JOURNAL


P.K.Page


February 1st, 1957
How could I have imagined so surrealist and seductive a world? One does not like  the  heat,  yet its constancy,  its all-surroundingness is as fascinating  as the smell of musk. Every  movement is slow as if under  warm  greenish  water.  The flavour  is beyond  my ability  to catch.  The  senses are  being sharpened  by that smell:  the  vegetable  pole-cat called  jack-fruit,  which,  when  fallen, looks in size and  contour  like a black  porcupine  and is picked,  when  ripe, from  the trees in our  jungle;  by these  sights:  Niemeyer's bridges, for instance,  built over the can­ yons  of  this  extraordinarily  mountained   city -long, sinuous,  low  bridges  on pylons, with  glimpses of the sea both above and  below;  recurring  couples-on the street everyone is paired, in love, embracing  or half-embracing whatever  the heat;  the recurring  solitary figure in the window,  most often female, quite classi­ cal, framed  by a  mat  of hot air,  and  gazing  off in  a kind  of languor,  as if all time were designed for this purpose.
It is hard  to get anything  done. It is hard  to focus. A thought  is barely born before it melts and  in its place so lovely a void, one could  hardly  have guessed emptiness  so attractive. We swim  now, in  the  great  hot  pool, not  cooling off, merely drowning  our  wetness in  a greater  wetness, while  next  door  the  Sisters sing their  Aves in the totally dark convent. The  other  night we heard  the giggles of a myriad of small girls, and leaning on the balustrade, in what must surely be the  classical Brazilian  pose, found -instead  of  a  children's party  as  we had thought-the Sisters themselves, those whom we have seen at dusk silently read­ ing their breviaries under the cassia trees, now swinging on the swings, dark robes flying. A wonderful  subject  for  Pegi Nichol  had  she been  alive to try the inky ranges of greens and  blues, and  momentarily  lay aside her bright  jujube colours. I think  of her now perhaps because our reception  rooms are like the shell-white rooms  where  mermaids  might  sober  up  after  a  drunken   night -and  a  large Nichol  of  girls gardening  and  bending  would  shed  a  warmer  light  in  all  this green and white. A Nichol and a Frieman and a great Bannard.
The  Goodrich  (Roberts)  that  we have -and  all my life I've  wanted  to live
with a Goodrich -is large and  dark  and  totally  without  movement. The  pines against  the sky are  characteristic  as a signature-but it might  be forged. Sky, trees,  water -his  best ingredients -lie  locked  on  the  canvas.  I think  of  his

P.K.PAGE

large still-life in the National  Gallery and remembering, would hang it so happily with those other  paintings.  The fruit, the botde, the plate -painted as if he had suddenly glimpsed a world in which all objects glow.
A. is spilled on his bed like warm  milk, and the frogs, tree toads, cicadas  and
whatever  else,  cut,  saw,  bang  and  hit  the  black  tropical   night.  Around   and around  the driveway the armed  guard  in his sand-coloured  uniform strolls like a succession of men. In  the darkness between the pools of light shed by the lamps, he is totally lost. The frogs sound like dogs, like hens, like drums, like strings, and when they stop,  which they do occasionally, as if they are obeying a conductor, one hears the other drums and the wierd singing from the  favela.
It is from the  favelas that  the sambas come, according to our host of the other
evening,  a small  Brazilian  of Italian  origin. He is, he claims, a true  Cariocan: loves the heat, the negroes and the samba, and he takes pride in being responsible for having  published  many of the best known sambas, found  by him when visit­ ing the hills.

February 6th
The  heat  is over for the moment. During the weekend the temperature soared above the century  and no breeze moved among the smallest leaves of the maiden­ hair.  But, dramatically, Sunday  night a storm blew up and  the house seemed to rise  like  a  flight  of  wooden  eagles,  wooden  wings  flapping,  as  every  shutter  banged  and  swung.  You  could almost see the cooler air as it streamed  through the  rooms  overturning  photographs, riftling papers -a  manic  housekeeper  on the loose.
Last  Sunday,   a day  as sunny  as looking through  a topaz,  we set off for  the
Corcovada. This  is one of the  highest of the  peaks surrounding Rio. On  its top an  immense stone  figure of Christ  the Redeemer.  Just  below the summit  kiosks selling postcards  and  dolls and  butterfly  wing pictures, and  small boys swinging smoking  braziers  and  carrying  cone-shaped  packets-some edible for sale, but what? Then  endless flights of steps and lovers loitering-black, brown, white - dressed in  their  Sunday  best. And  finally at the top,  the  Christ,  and  the  lovers being photographed at His feet by young men popping  under  black cloths. And below-all Rio, fabulous, extraordinary, with its bays and islands and mountain peaks and lagoons and skyscrapers.

February  13th
Notes on flora and fauna: in the garden a bird like a yellow-bellied flycatcher. Trying  to find it in the inadequate bird books we have acquired,  I discovered the fact  that  Brazil  has a marsupial  duck!  Why  baby doesn't  drown  while mother swims, I don't  understand.
Yesterday,   when   Maria,   the  Spanish   maid  of  all  work,  was  cleaning   the

P. K. PAGE

verandah, she found  a very blond frog asleep on the lintel above the door to the sala. Giving it a good peasant swipe with her broom-the kind she would give in  affection  to  her  husband -she  brought  it  to  the  marble  floor with such  a resounding smack I'd  have thought  it dead. Instead, it leapt through  the door to the  sitting  room  and  straight  onto  an  upholstered   French  chair  with  all  the authority  of the transformed  prince. Finally, finding Maria's persistence with the broom too much for it, it clung with both forearms  to a railing of the verandah and emitted a loud wail like a Siamese cat.
For  the  first  and  quite  unforgettable   time,  we  have  seen  a  Brazilian  blue butterfly-as large as a flying hand -the upper surfaces of its wings a fluores­ cent Mary-blue,  the underside soft as the colour of snuff.

February  18th
Today  I fired the laundress with elephantiasis.  Hated  doing it but she was not a  very  good  laundress  and  five kilos of  beef and  eighteen  sugar  bananas  un­ accountably disappeared  on Saturday. Unfairly,  perhaps, I suspect her. Yet I am sorry to see her go. It is unlikely I shall ever again employ a grotesque: elephanti­ asis of the legs and  breasts and  a strange  little beard  which hung straight  down under  her chin  and  curled only at  the end.  In  a book I  was  reading  the other day,  the  author  said  Baudelaire  was the  poet  of  the  Brazilian  jungle ... and certainly Lourdes, for that  is her name, is pure Baudelaire.  Ready for the clothes line, her great brown arms full of white sheets, rows of clothes pegs clipped to her dress like  rows of  nipples on  some  gargantuan sow, she  was a truly  awesome figure.
In the garden one tree has four great sprays of tree orchids growing from it - white  with  purple  centres.  Another,  a  yellow orchid  with  a  rust  centre;  still another,  an  indescribable  flower of bright  cerise with  cerulean  blue tips on  its large  heather-shaped flowers. I  wish I  knew how to describe  the  vegetation, or indeed,  how to paint  it. It  is so excessive. Every  tree puts forth  some flower in clumps  or sprays or showers of yellow, purple,  pink, white or red -and  almost every trunk  bears  orchids.  Nature  doesn't  seem to  know  how to control  itself! For instance -the other day a yellow-bellied fly catcher flew out of a cassia tree heavy with yellow blossom, the tree growing in a flower bed massed with yellow day lilies -and caught, if you please, an immense yellow butterfly.
In my bedroom at this moment there is a flying creature  about  two inches long
-a cricket? a locust?-black lace wings and a green brocade  head and a noise like a DC3  revving up. Just as the crisp air, the warbling  of the magpies and  the smells of gum smoke and  daphne  will forever  conjure  Australia  for me, so will immense wet heat and thousands of night creatures-bichos-with their noise­ makers, conjure  Brazil. And too, the tremendous  length  of white sand,  blinding white in the sun, the fa ades

42

P. K. PAGE

design, look somehow like the ruins in a John Piper painting; pedlars with eagle­ shaped  kites  under  a  coloured  balloon  barrage  on  the  boulevard   by  the  sea; tropical  children  in pony carts with coloured nurses in starched  white; the faded patchwork  of the houses in the  favelas; people balancing  parcels on their heads; crowds at  the  beaches  in  mid-day  heat,  minus sun-glasses, minus  hats, beating out samba  rhythms  on the blistering hot radiators of their cars. This is Barbados and Paris. But there is more and other as well.

February 23rd
It  is cool-seventy-five  degrees  with  humidity  a  hundred. The  air  coming through  the windows is like sheet rain. Everything is mildewing. We burn lights in our  clothes cupboards and  place bags of salt among our shoes but the mildew forms. I  have  just found,  stashed  away in the basement, some bottles of  Mildu­ Rid. Plan to plaster it over overything.

February 26th
Notes  on  fauna: yesterday,  flying over  the  lotus pool, dragonflies  of bright cerise with blue wings. Someone once said that cerise was hideous and not a true colour.  When  I  asked  what  they meant  by 'true,'  they said it  was a colour not found  in  nature.  They  had  certainly  not  observed nature  much  in  the  tropics where bougainvillea and dragonflies deck themselves in it.
Last  evening  a  bird  like  a  ballerina-tiny, black,  dressed  in  a  white  tutu, flew out  onto  mid-stage,  did  a fabulous  tour  en l' air and  disappeared  before I could further  observe it.

February 27th
Today   the  house  is full  of  plumbers  ( bombeiros  in  Portuguese,  which  also means firemen and spies!), painters, and electricians. This afternoon  I have been de-mildewing  books. Each  day it's dry enough outside, I remove the books with the longest beards and  put  them in the sun. Today,  however, I got caught  with my books down. In one minute  flat the sun had turned  to torrential  rain.
This  is a very public  house. In  part,  because we are over-run  with  workmen,
but  it is also something  to do with Brazilian life, I think.  I remember  an  Indian friend  in Ottawa complaining  how lonely she was in a Canadian house; in India she did nothing  alone, she was always accompanied  by others-in everything as far  as  I  could  make  out,  from  cooking to  making  love. The  bliss for me of a house where I see no one all day!
Curiously,  even  though   I  speak  of the  house as public,  at  the  same time,  I wonder  about  its "emptiness." For  it is empty,  psychologically. Built by de B., reported  to be a cousin of the King of Portugal, on a dramatic site overlooked by twin peaks, Os  Dais Irmaos, with imported  marble for the floors, imported  artists

43

P.K.PAGE

to paint  the  ceilings, it is architecturally  beautiful. A long three-storey  house of terra-cotta pink with white trim,  wrought  iron  railings, terraces,  verandahs and arches; double and triple French doors with shutters and charmingly designed transoms. Lighted,  at  night, it is like a birthday  cake, waiting  to be blown out; while doubled,  upside down in the swimming  pool, its pinkness melts and slides in the dark  water and the seven frosting-white  arches of the lower terrace  reflect in shimmering  U's.
To  lay out  his gardens,  de B. employed Burle Marx,  the  best landscape gar­ dener  (and  jeweller! ) in Brazil who used a stream  with a waterfall, a lotus pond, flagstones  and  three  different  coloured  grasses  planted  in  sweeping  curves,  to make an abstract  painting of the land.
Here  in  this  palacete  set in a  jewelled garden,  de B. lived with  his beautiful wife until  one  day  she was missing, then  found  dead.  Sometimes  Maria,  eyes large,  says, "The Senhora  walks tonight,  Madammy." And,  occasionally  when I've  been weakened  by the heat and  unable  to sleep again  because of the drums from the  favela or the frogs or the tree toads, I wonder if the Senhora  does walk. But  I have  never felt her presence. If anything  it is her absence that  I feel-a sense of her having walked out taking the essence of the house with her, and it is that emptiness that the walls guard, as if it were a trust.

March 6th
All of Rio is sleeping off the orgy of Carnaval. Nothing  now but  hangovers, fatigue and  hospitals and prisons bulging. For the rich there were a series of balls, all fancy  dress-a  ball a night,  we are  told. The  Municipal Ball had  a mere
7,400 attend ! Many  thousands of cruzeiros  are spent on costumes and the danc­ ing goes on all night.  For the  poor in the  favelas this is the event of  their year. Months  in advance  they join 'samba  schools' and  practise night after night. Just what  they practise  I  am not quite sure because their  'dances'  to the samba  beat are a kind of mass walk, arms in the air. Each school has its own group attire­ one group of about forty all in diapers and bonnets and sucking bottles.
Virtually  everyone dresses up. In  mid-afternoon we saw two adults, male and female, in  Grecian  costume in earnest  conversation  on a downtown  street.  And a man  mounted  on  a  papier  mache  horse in  the  manner  of an  ice comedian,
'riding'  it along a sidewalk all by himself and having considerable  difficulty keep­ ing  it  from  throwing  him.  Here  and  there  a  ghastly  looking  female  (male,  I suspect)   carrying  a  placard:   Miss  Portugal, 1957, which  bears  out  what  we have  already  been  told,  that  the  Portuguese  are  one  of the  favourite  butts  of Brazilian  humour. No baby so small it could not wear a paper hat, at least; and one, only a matter  of months, was in all that  heat, dressed as a white rabbit. Tiny tired  Spanish  noblemen  in  black  velvet were  lifted  to  rest  on  the  radiators  of cars. And everyone, large or small, carried  with  them  the golden spray bottle of

44

P.  K. PAGE

scented  'ether' which is said  to provide the energy to keep going. A very small boy sprayed A. on the legs so we came home smelling of carnival.
In  the evening on the invitation  of the Mayor, we went to the Teatro Muni­ cipal to watch  the parade  of floats sponsored by the Tourist  Department. To my surprise we were able to fight our way through  the crowd and up the wide stone steps through  the mass of people -flexible, good-natured, rubberized almost and so able to contract  and  expand  at will. The  Mayor, looking a little like a Brazil­ ian  clerk because of his double-breasted  white linen suit, greeted  us with cham­  pagne. Below, one of the most extraordinary sights I've  ever seen:  a wide river of people samba-ing  up and  down the  Avenida  Rio  Branca, thousands  of them moving in such a way that  if you half closed your eyes you lost entirely the sense of them  being  people at  all. A great illuminated  multi-coloured  pattern  pulsing to the beat of the samba.  As far as one could see, there was nothing  but  people; the  tropical  night  sitting  fat  and  black on herds of zebras, families of leopards, tiny  ballerinas  no  longer  on  their  points and  other  enthusiasts  who  had  done nothing  more  than  sprinkle  talcum  powder  on  their  heads.  One  indefatigable equilibrist  whom  we had  seen in  the  afternoon  standing  on  a  narrow,  sloping ledge and knitting  a red woolen garment  with frantic speed, was still there, hours later, knitting  with the same frenzy.
Nature  notes for the day:  after one of the worst days domestically I have ever been  through, I  went  out  to  get  flowers for  the  dinner  table  and  something moved in the high  branches  of one of the trees. I promised to forgive the whole day if it were a monkey. And it was! The  wretched little thing, however, swung away from  me into  the  jungle. It  was small, only slightly larger  than  a squirrel.
Trees:  in  the  garden  there  are  varieties of what  the  Australians  would  call
Rain Trees-with composite finely fretted leaves and clusters of flowers-pink, red, white or yellow. There  are numerous palms-one with a pointed blade-like leaf  and  a  massive  tower  of  white  blossoms; one  like  a feather  duster  which throws  its  old  leaves  down -feathers shed  from  a  giant  bird.  We  have  the elephant  ear  tree,  of which  no more need  be said, and  one that  grows smooth and straight  as a young telephone  pole, no branch  below twelve feet. Then  there is the dense and  darkly  massed foliage of the  jackfruit tree and a spreading  tree, with  large,  deeply  indented   leaves and  green  fruits  which  look like mangoes. Feathery  stands  of bamboo.  And  both  nearby  and,  as it were, echoing off into the  jungle clad  hills, the Quaresmas  (the  name means Lent which is when they flower)  blooming  now with vibrant  purple;  and beside them, trees of pure silver, broad-leafed, and others with small clustered flowers yellow as gorse.

March 12th
Last  night  dinner   with  the  D's.  A small  party:   the  Argentines,  two  Shell people, Ambassador  N.-President of the Museum of Modem  Art in Rio, and

P. K. PAGE

C. -newly appointed  ambassador  to London,  a Senator, owner  of a chain  of thirty  newspapers,  magazines, radio stations  as well as prime  mover in the Sao Paulo Museum of Art. The  women elegant in black; much  jewelled. Ambassador N. large,  warm,  expansive, sophisticated.  We  waited  interminably for  C.  who finally phoned to say he would be 'a litde late.'  N. loathed  C. a:nd made no bones about  it. Said  he would not have accepted  the invitation  had  he known C. was invited.  Interesting   to compare  the  two -both  Brazilians,  both  ambassadors, both  involved in  Museums of Modern  Art. There  the similarities end.  N. is an immense man, C. a Napoleon. C. spoke volubly in French  which N. claimed was ninety  percent error.  When, forced as he later  was, to speak English, he was just as voluble and the percentage of error just as high.
When  the  party  broke  up,  C. asked A. and  me if we would care  to see the Cruzeiro  Palace.  It  seemed obvious  that  we should  care  and  so we drove  off through  the rain  and darkness  (nights seem immensely dark  in Rio by virtue of a by-law forbidding  the use of headlights, only parking  lights permitted)  down into  the  old  part  of the  city where the streets  are  narrow, the  buildings  ware­ housey and  undistinguished,  to come at last to an immense  cube, light  as foam rubber and glowing as if phosphorescent. This was the Cruzeiro  Palace, the plant where the magazine  0 Cruzeiro is published. Although  in use, its presses rolling and  its night  shift  working, the  building  is not  yet finished.  Designed  by Nei­ meyer, it  is raised  on  pillars, the  walls of all floors above  the ground  floor are glass, covered entirely by a brise-soleil of punched  sheets, the punch  holes being two to three inches in diameter.  It is this that  gives the effect of such lightness; and  because  a  very  white  fluorescent  light  is diffused  through   the  holes, the phosphorescent  glow results. A mural  by Portinari is  underway  in the  entrance  hall and  upstairs a dozen of his paintings are  waiting to be hung. Strange  paint­  ings,  flat,  like  cartoons  for  his mural.  Groups  of   people,  wonderful  in  their design, disappointing only in their surfaces, looking  much  as prime coating  does on a wall.
Thinking  of the  three of us-C. small, stocky, ill-tailored,  talking  execrable English, yawning,  pulling us by the force of his will across the cobbled streets in the  black rain-the two men,  black and  white  in dinner  jackets, I in  a black a:nd white dress with ribbons-to the cool martini  of a building,  it seems more like a sequence from a black and  white movie than  an actual  experience. And C. talking on, yawning and talking through  his yawns, of his masters-Caesar and Nietzsche -of  the  ugliness of the world, of his great  marble  hall in Sao Paulo
'for  the  people.'  The  photo of him that  we had  seen in front  of the book about the Sao Paulo  Museum is a wonderfully good portrait-it is a snapshot only, of
a small, squat  man in a crumpled  suit, wearing on his head  a child's newspaper
hat.  The  accompanying  wooden sword is not there  because  he doesn't  use one. Of wood.

P.K.PAGE

Manuel,  our  gardener's assistant, has planted  a  new lawn  at  the side of the house. This is done  in the manner  of planting seedlings. A little hole is made in the earth  and a small root of grass popped in. The effect, at this stage, is that of a  candlestick  bedspread -brown  with  green  tufts. The  whole  as if measured and ruled.

March 30th
Went,  the other  afternoon, in intense heat to see the Museo  de Arte Moderna in  the  process of construction. It is being built by private subscription  and  cost­ ing  in  the  vicinity  of three  million  dollars. The  building  committee  consists of Sra  B.,  wife of  the  owner  of  one  of  the  largest  newspapers;  Ambassador  N. whom we met at dinner; the elegant young chief of the Department of Tourism;  and  Henrique Mindlin, architect  and editor of an interesting and  well-produced book about  modern  architecture in Brazil. We know his book and  I had noticed among  his acknowledgements the name of  Elizabeth  Bishop. When  I asked him if she is still in Brazil, he said, yes. The next thing is to meet her.
The  maquette of  the  Museum  is impressive, and  standing  in  the  dust  and brick of the actual  foundation, on land recently reclaimed from the harbour, one is aware of how immense the building will be and of how wonderful the site.

Aprillst
The  Portuguese  language  is fascinating.  In  a country  which,  to us, seems to place small value on life, there is a difference of only one letter between to live­ morrar,  and  to die- morrer. So far  I have been unable  to find any expression for  how   funny- perhaps   because  the  Brazilian  finds  everything  funny.  One learns muito  bom- very good, immediately.  It is used about  almost everything that is not muito bem- very well or muito mau- very bad. In fact, the ubiqui­ tous muito is said with such feeling that the most ordinary events become drama­ tic.  Life  itself becomes  dramatic. There  are  differences  between  the  language texts and  the  spoken  language: servants  are no longer  criados- a word origi­ nating  with slavery when  a small slave child would be brought  up in the house of  the  master,  in  effect,  created-but  empregados  meaning  employees,  used however,  with  voce, the intimate  second person, not  o  senhor or a senhora, the more formal third.
As to the small  value  placed  on life, one has only to read  the newspapers to
learn  of the number  of people who carry guns and  fire them. A member of the Chamber  of Deputies fatally shot a traffic policeman who had stopped him for speeding. This is but one of many such incidents reported in the press. If one can believe what  one is told,  the very law itself ignores the importance of life. In  a traffic accident,  responsibility for the injured lies with anyone who calls an ambu-

47

P. K.PAGE

lance or obtains  medical help, with the inevitable  result that  a victim can lie in the roadway for hours before anything is done.

April22nd
Our  car  has arrived.  A great  relief. I  can  now, if I wish, get away from  the house. I took off for Copacobana  this morning -my first shot at Brazilian traffic!
Such  a morning ... the sea beautiful  and  miles of beach.  I swear every child in Brazil has a kite and manages to get it air-borne  no matter  how tiny the piece of ground  on  which  he is standing.  The  sky jerks and  bobs with them.  One,  a candy-pink heart on a string, leapt and spurted  its joy.
I  walked  among  the shops, just looking. Prices high, even of fruits -custard
apples, kaki  and  mamao. In a workman's shelter on the side of the street a group of men was solemnly playing dominoes.

April 30th
To  produce  small  boys quicker  than  you can say 'kite,'  fly one. We went on Sunday  with our  papagaio to the beach at  Ipanema. A strong wind tossed it up and flung it down again, its right wing always leading. All the small boys on the beach  were  kite  doctors.  Each  took it  as his  right  to  tie  another   knot  in  the harness string  to 'restore' the balance. One  finally tore off its eat's cradle harness to make a new one. After each 'restoration' the kite descended,  right wing lead­ ing. The small boys made us offers for our poor kite. Many negotiations.
The  beach  was  beautiful-slightly hazy.  Black,  brown,  white  Brazilians  in
futebol sweaters, kicking the ball about in the thick, soft sand;  the curving fac;ade of  apartment  buildings-whites,  pinks,  blues;  the  odd-shaped  mountains­ how describe their shapes?-elongated cones? the top  joints of  thumbs?-mak­ ing the sea look like a surrealist painting; and the waves tumbling  in -riding in green  and  high,  their  plate  glass cracking  and  breaking  and  pulverizing  into crystals and white powder.
We drove back with our wounded bird to the young man who sold it to us and he undertook  to mend it. A long, thin, tight young man  with one leg swinging at an  unusual  angle and  a face like a  Modigliani.  He  ripped  the  existing harness from  our  kite  and,  from  a spool of string,  measured  exactly  from  wing-tip  to shoulder,  shoulder  to beak, wing-tip  to beak, knotting  as he went  and  hanging the strings around  his neck until he was ready; checking further  measurements  by the length  of his palm plus one, two, or three fingers-all his actions quick and pretty  with  certainty.  We squatted  with  him on the  boulevard  beneath  his row of coloured  balloons bobbing in the wind as the light failed suddenly  and street lamps came  on  and  traffic increased  and  the  balloons  bobbed  more wildly. His small  helper,  wearing  shorts and  the top  of an  old  bathing  suit  which came  to

P. K. PAGE

just below his nipples, ran  to his bidding as he shouted orders-the two of them serious and intent  beneath  the balloons.
By the  time  papagaio was completed,  the wind was too strong for kite flying
and  the  night  too near.  But  the young man gave him  a trial  flight, letting  him out over the traffic then losing him in a perilous drop over the telephone wires in a sudden  calm,  fighting  as if he had  a trout  on his line, using all his skill and cunning  to edge the bird into whatever wind he could find until, coaxing, beguil­ ing,  he finally eased  it  up  and  over the  wires and,  miraculously, safely  back. I thought  then, as all kite flyers must have thought,  that  this strange childish sport which holds so great a fascination, is really fishing in reverse.

May  1st
Drove into the depths  of the city yesterday alone for the first time. Took as my route  the whole length  of beach. Beautiful, beautiful.  I shall never get used to it.

May  12th
On  the first, we left for Sao  Paulo  by plane, returned  yesterday by car. One world  to  another.   One  planet  to another.  Between  the  two  cities a difference much greater than between Montreal and Toronto.
From  Rio's  downtown  airport  you can catch  a plane to Sao Paulo every half
hour, like a bus. The  buildings, designed by M. M. M. Roberto,  are not my cup of tea. Columns  too heavy and  a kind of de Chirico-like desolation about  them. We were given numbered  discs upon arrival and  boarded  the plane according  to number. Very orderly and neat. Cafe and biscoitos served on board.
Driving in from  the airport  Sao Paulo looked more like my idea of a Scandi­
navian   city  than   a  Brazilian  one.  The  houses on  the  outskirts,  mainly  two­ storeyed, white and austere. Our  hotel, The ]aragua, a mixture of North America a:nd Australia  in flavour. It is the upper  half of a skyscraper, the lower floors of which house the largest newspaper  in Sao Paulo. Much use is made of tile, inlaid in  floors and  walls and  forming  planters  filled with  tropical  plants.  From  our window  we  might   have  been  visiting  a  higgledy-piggledy  New  York-sky­ scrapers everywhere, as if without  plan. Our  room was full of those extraordinary baskets of flowers-cestas they are called, and I hate them. Each flower head is cut off and wired. Within  a day they are all dead.
Sunday  the best day of all. We visited an early nineteenth-century fazenda. A
colonial house-light pink with white pillars and lacey black grilles on the win­ dows. The  present  owners  have modernized the plumbing  but left everything as much  as possible in its original state. The downstairs hall with its honey-coloured stone floor and  rough-beamed ceiling was decorated  with three beautiful  cheru­ bim  and  four  flat  candelabra from  old churches,  wooden,  painted  cream  and gold. Off the hall, a room full of trophies and slave relics, and off that, the slaves'

49

P.K.PAGE

room.  I  asked Senhora  M. if it  was haunted  and  she replied  that  there  was a little old lady, very nice, full of good will. Upstairs  was a mixture of modern  and old, containing  beautiful  church  carvings, a Gobelin  tapestry  covering an entire wall and, oddly, a Vlamink. On  a deep verandah, dark  from creepers with pink bells, were birds in cages and a white tasselled bridal  hammock.  She said C. had given her an antique  white one and her Doberman puppies had eaten it!
Her  husband,  a rich industrialist  who is now a rich farmer  and  who gave up
riding  some years ago in favour  of a  jeep, still wears the shiny chestnut  boots, spotless white  breeches, white shirt  and  chestnut  tweed  jacket of an equestrian. He is blond,  bland,  blue-eyed. She dark,  with  long  thin  hands  and  immensely long scarlet nails, was wearing plaid slacks and a white twin-set.
We  drank  a  Brazilian  cocktail-made from   pinga,  a  sugar  cane  liquor­
which  tasted  very like a daiquiri.  Then  lunch.  On  the dining  room  table,  and running  its entire  length,  was a  narrow,  flat  dish  crammed  with every kind  of yellow, red  and  orange  flower the garden  produces-brilliant, no leaves, star­ tling.  The  meal  began  with  what  looked  like  a  bowl  of  potato  soup  with  a poached  egg staring  from  its centre like a  jaundiced  eye. This  was carra soup. Traditional Brazilian.  The  carra, I  would  guess, is a variety  of yam. This  was followed by roast  pork, black beans mashed and  made  into a roll and garnished with little sausages and sitting on a bed of what  looked like cooked grass which tasted  bitter  and  pleasant.  For salad, sliced cucumbers  and  cold sliced marrow. Dessert was candied  pumpkin  served with farm  cream  and  fried  bananas.  And coffee. Everything  a product  of the  fazenda. Everything  traditionally Brazilian. And very good indeed.
Mter  luncheon  we saw the coffee plantation. Brilliant green bushes with scarlet berries.  And  the  coffee 'courtyards' where  the  beans  were  placed  to  dry.  We visited the calves which sucked your fingers as if they were udders when you put out your hand  to stroke them and saw the elaborate forecasting  month by month of the number of calves to be born.  A Senhora looked after the coffee and  he the dairy. He preferred, he said, his cows to his textile workers!
One  day we visited the park that  was built  to celebrate  the fourth  centennial of the  foundation of Sao  Paulo-its  gardens  laid  out  by Burle  Marx  and  its buildings  designed  by Niemeyer. There  is a  desolation  about  this architecture. Every bit of it seemed wrong, which  just shows how illogical I am because there are times when I find it so wonderfully right!  Perhaps  it needs sun. The building which houses-but does not show, for I think it is rarely open-the aeronauti­ cal exhibition  and  the Santos Dumont  artifacts  (Dumont was a Brazilian whom the Brazilians claim was the first to fly-even before the Wright  Brothers)  -is a long, low two-storey structure  of glass and  pillars. Seen under  a grey sky, with the  nose and  hand  prints  of a  thousand  A.'s  attempting to  peer  in,  it looked simply shoddy. From our peering position it seemed unsuitable  for the display of

so

P. K. PAGE

aircraft, the ceiling being so low that the top of even a small plane all but touched it. The  Palace of Arts, built exactly-but exactly -like an igloo with the addi­ tion of a row of portholes around  its lower edge really depressed me. Why trans­ port a form dictated  by materials and  weather conditions of the arctic and put it down in Brazil -and  then  blow it up, give it a radius of two hundred  and fifty feet?
Disturbed  and  excited  by Brazil. Why? What  is it all about?  Does place alter person? It's like falling in love-with the country itself.
Am reading  Yeats's letters. He complains that George Eliot had morals but no
religion and  that  if she only had  had a bit more religion she would have had less morality.  He  writes too of his dislike of reasonable people whose brains suck all the blood from their  hearts. And how he disliked moralists with neither spirit nor imagination enough  for  a  good  lie. How  he would  have  loved Brazilians and how, indeed, do I!
Drove to Santos, the coffee port and took the ferry to Guaraja, an island sum­ mer resort. Going down the escarpment  from Sao Paulo the weather was clear so we could see the sinuous  double  road  with its tunnels, the  narrow  strip  of flat land  and  the sea. Very lovely. Arrived  finally at a totally  unspoiled  beach on a wild and  beautiful  coast and,  unfortunately, an all-too-Hawaiian-appearing res­ taurant. More  interesting  the absurd  trio of  small monkeys in a cage -the ones with  tufted  ears -whose tiny fingers, trying to remove my rings, felt moist and limp  as the  stems of violets. Four  araras-the large  macaws-wing feathers cut  to prevent  flight, sat  on  perches and  cracked sunflower  seeds. Their  extra­ ordinary  black, dry, ill-fitting tongues moving about in their mouths, looked as if they had each  bitten  off the little finger of a negro, which now they were trying unsuccessfully to spit  out.  Nearby,  two green  parrots,  chained  and  aggressively bad-tempered, screamed at each other and everyone else.
There  was a clean and  pretty aviary where I had a chance to identify some of
'our'  birds, for  their  keeper-a truly Conradish  man  with  a week's growth  of beard  and  a long, wistful face -was kind enough to understand my Portuguese and  let me understand his. As he stood in the cage peeling bananas and  fixing them  onto  the  bars,  cutting   oranges  in  half  and  impaling   them  on  pointed branches,  placing sunset coloured arcs of mamao on the ground,  he also told me the  names  of the  birds around  him. We saw 'our'  tanagers  in the cage and  the little  jumping birds with striped  heads were identified as tico-ticos. The  sabia was there  too -like the  North  American  robin, only larger -and  the  dove and  a dozen pairs of lovebirds all freezing and huddled together.
After a long wait, a fine lunch: fresh shrimps from the sea and good Brazilian
beer. Afterwards  I followed a row of bright pink shells along sand almost as hard as turf.  Returning, in the distance, beyond the curve of this lovely shore, appear­ ing like shafts  of distant  rain,  the skyscrapers again, surrealist  in such a setting.

P. K. PAGE

Their  vertical lines a reaction against the horizontal  lines of colonial architecture, perhaps.  Or,  more likely, A.'s theory,  that  Copacobana ha.o; become  the symbol of all things lovely and so is being duplicated  everywhere. In  Santos, this argu­ ment  is certainly  borne out. There,  like Copacobana's twin,  the curving Santos beach  is rimmed  with skyscrapers, its sidewalks patterned with black  and  white stones.
We drove to the port -the largest coffee port in the world -and  visited the aquarium  where  we saw  the  terrible  Amazonian carnivore -the fish which, within  seven minutes,  I think  the statistics  run,  can  reduce  a horse to a pile of bones. I had  imagined  something the size of a shark and  found,  to my a.o;tonish­ ment,  a little fish no more than  a foot long. This  remarkable creature can smell blood  a great  distance  off, and  will come in a fla.o;h  to attack anything already wounded.  Saw  too, the inevitable  sea horse  which  never  fails  to amuse  me­ why should it want  to stand upright like a man?-and those poor blind shrimps with their  wide-ranging  antennae, looking half like a caricature of a guardsman, half like a nervous pianist -their anxious white front legs like fingers nervously playing  the same music over and  over again.  At one tank of striped  yellow and black  fish, a.o;   bright  and  fla.o;hing  a.o;  anything  you could  wish, a  minute  child gazed  mutely until  an inch-long colourless guppy swam into sight, whereupon  it set up a great  howl of excitement:  Pequeninho, pequeninho!   (Baby, baby!).
The  Museu  de Arte, C.'s collection, even with  most of its best paintings cur­ rently on exhibition  in the States, wa.o; still enjoyable. There  is a whole roomful of Portinaris,  large strangely grey paintings full of pain; some Segalls and di Caval­ cantis  and  a fair  collection of da  Silva.o;. Also a lovely El Greco of  St. Francis, two  enchanting little Renoirs;  a  number  of early religious  paintings;  and  then, almost  alarmingly,  about  five hundred  small  Dega.o;  statues,  looking rather  like the black notes on the piano. The  much  larger  ballerina  in her real tutu  is there too, with  her  hair  tied back. But all the  little  ones lose any impact  they might have.  Quantity  definitely  diminishes  quality-the  eye  blurs.  The  figures  are reduced  to no more than  the stick-men  I drew on the upper  right corners of the pages of my school books to make a 'moving  picture'  when I riffied them quickly with my thumb.
Lunch  with  A. at a French  restaurant and  then to the  natural history museo with Senhora  L. to see the birds. We began by having coffee with the curator, a man  with  a face  just like a dog's. Most  extraordinary. As I looked at  his eyes they were dog's eyes-those pale eyes often  seen in curs-and  I would think,
'Nonsense, look at his nose,' and  his nose too, wa.o; a dog's. And so I switched to his teeth-pointed, white dog's teeth.  Uncanny. But such a polite dog. Would not cock his leg just anywhere.
I don't  really like stuffed birds, nevertheless I learned  a good deal. 'Our' lovely
little blue bird  with its black ma.o;k is the sai-azul (blue skirt). Upstairs -prefer-

P.K.PAGE

able  to those in the  cage below simulating  life-the recent  result of one man's field trip, twelve hundred birds lying on their backs, stuffed with dried grasses. So light!  And like a rainbow.  Drawers full of them. The  alma de gato-soul of a cat-is  a  variant   on  our  Mangrove   cuckoo  or  yellow-billed  or  black-billed. Rufus above, grey beneath.
I asked about  the  marsupial duck. It is true  enough. Brazil has a number  of
marsupials.  I said, "Australians think they're the only ones who have," and our guide  replied  morosely,  "It's not  the  business of  Australians   to  know  about Brazil. And  we will never  tell them  because all we think  about  is football."  He showed  us a  large  blond  marsupial  rat  with  four  babies in  her  pouch.  And  a skunk,  just like ours only brown instead of black. We saw a balleen in his bones, long-fingered at his sides.

"I cannot  tell who loves the Skeleton
Of a poor Marmoset, nought but boan, boan. Give me a nakedness with her cloaths on."

And  I had  a long, slow look at the sloths, with their loofah fur and their Henry
Moore faces.
The  drive  back from  Sao  Paulo  was beautiful-rolling country  culminating in mountains  as we approached Rio -a climb and  then  a tortuous  drop to sea






"OUR HOUSE"


53

P. K. l'A<.H;

level.  We  passed  coffee plantations, citrus  fruit  fanns, cattle.  Saw  oxen  hauling carts  and  burros with  wicker baskets and  negroes  in bright  colours ,and  flamboy­ antes in flaming flower.
We  passed  one little  town  built  on a knoll from  which  every  tree and  blade  of grass  had   been   meticulously   removed, the   whole   earth-coloured structure  of houses and  hill rising like an  Australian ant-hill, while  crowding at its perimeter, the  lush,  tropical growth of Brazil.  One  day  I hope  to  return and  go  into  the church, for it was here a miracle  occurred, so the guide  book says, but  my Portu­ guese is not quite  enough  to understand what  the  miracle was! 0 Glory be.

May 18th
Nature notes: I saw a spider  with  a golden  web.  (It sounds  like the start of a riddle  poem.) This  spider  has a torso about the size of the top  joint of my thumb and  of the same  general  shape.  In colour  it is dark  grey with  gold spots. The web matches the spots. I would  have thought it a trick  of light,  except  that no matter what  the light,  the gold was unchanging, and  on the spider's abdomen was a clot of golden  thread -like the  clot formed  by a sewing  machine on  the  under side of the stitching if the bobbin  has not been correctly adjusted.
Does it eat  only  those it can  lure  by beauty? I had  believed,  without knowing much  about spiders, that  they spin webs as invisible  as possible in order  to deceive insects  into  thinking they  are  flying through air.  If that  is so, then  what  is this spider  up  to?  And  still  what,  even  if it  isn't?   Do  flies have  an  aesthetic sense? Why do I imagine it is the  property only of 'manunkind'? Is stupidity justified by anything less than beauty's trap?

june 13th
I have  been  drawing with  a felt-nibbed pen  and  so much  enjoy  it. Trying to recreate  the   wonderful shapes  of  the  leaves  and   the  intricate  background of mosaic  tiles.  I think  I might  be able  to draw if only  I could ... what?  If only  I could.
There is a  phrase-amigo  de onca, meaning friend of the tiger, a term  used
to denote someone who is not your friend. Heard the origin  of it today.  One  man said  to another, "What would  you do if you were  chased  by a tiger?" "Why, I'd run,  of course." "And if the tiger was gaining on you?"  "Why, I'd climb  a tree." "And if the  tiger  climbed  the  tree after  you?"  "Look here,  are  you my friend  or the friend  of the tiger?"

june 17th
Our marble floors are like sliced brawn-or is it head-cheese? -lots of gela­
tine  and  veal  and  pork  with  occasional  bits of fat.  A cold-buffet chef's  dream.


54

P.K.PAGE

The  Royal  Palms are truly the elephants  among trees. Their  trunks are, to the trunks of other trees, as the elephant's leg is to all other legs.

july 5th
I  have  done  another  large  drawing  of a cesta. It  amazes  me how easily and quickly I draw-just start right in with my heavy black pen.

july 6th
Last night  dined  with Senhora  M., a famous Brazilian sculptress. The apart­ ment  is  wonderful -Renoirs  tucked  away  in  corners,  a  group   of  nudes  by Rouault, a Picasso and  a new acquisition  by that  Portuguese  woman, da Silva, entitled  The Circus. It was like an intricate  and  mysterious crossword  puzzle in more than  the usual number  of dimensions, mixed with the feeling of  circus tents and  the checked  clothing of Pierrot, the patches of Harlequin and  the corridors of dream.  With  my felt pen I could  have done such a thing ... I  cannot  blame the tools!

August 17th
How  do  I write  my love song? It is as if I were wired and someone  (Some­ one?)  had  their  finger on  the  buzzer all the time. A strange  feeling  that  makes me almost afraid.  Can one fall in love with a country?
Drove today  up over the hills and  through  the  favela which should  make any sensitive, decent  person devote their life to social reform, but  I'm  afraid  my ini­ tial reaction  was one of a fierce pleasure in its beauty. Turning a corner we saw a group of vividly dressed people standing  against a great fortress of square gaso­ line tins, painted  every conceivable colour. Water-of  course. And socially dis­ tressing, but  my eye operates  separately  from my heart  or head -or at least in advance of them -and I saw first the beauty.
Following the beach, the great roaring green waves rising and smashing, the roadside  edged  wth  a low-lying palm-like plant which is putting  forth small ears of golden corn, we came finally to Bandeirantes  beach where a high conical rock joins the sea to the sand and  a disreputable  looking inn is located. But I love the inn, straight  out of a rather  sordid short story, and its round  tower and  tile roof and  untidy  paling  fence  and  the  herds of munching  goats and  the sheep  that tried to eat our picnic basket. In front of the inn two men were involved in what appeared to be a minute survey. One, black, dressed in a spotless pith helmet and white  shirt,  carried  a knife with  a  blade  long enough  to disembowel  you. The other,   white,   pant   legs  tucked  into  ankle-high   boots,  made   his  calculations beneath  a violet  beach  umbrella.  Drugstore  cowboys riding delicate  little motor scooters, arrived  by the half dozen, wearing lilac and yellow shorts. And a dusky brasileira  in  a  linen  suit  of so bright  an  orange  that  it  almost  hurt  your  eyes,

55



p, IC  pAGE














































1\. CORNER OF :a.'S Gl\.RDEN

P.K.PAGE

walked along holding  the hand  of her sweetie whose pale green slacks made her the ripest orange on the tree.
Home  by the  beach  road  again -the  pounding  sea on one side, the lagoon
on the other  and  an evening  mist giving the impression that  spume illuminated the dark land.  Earlier  it had  been bathed in a smoky blue, translucent  and lumi­ nous, I grow to love it all more each day -even the wide flat corner with some rather  awful  houses and  no vegetation  but  grass cover. That to me, now, is so like a Portinari  painting  that  I greet it with a special kind of eye. In fact, I think much  of  my  pleasure  is a  literary  pleasure. Had  I  read  nothing  and  seen no pictures, what would I see?

August  18th
Luncheon  today with the N.'s. Their house, in the heart of Rio-a high heart, for it's  up a steep hill from  the centre of the city-is an old coffee fazenda.  It overlooks the bay and has a vast garden with pool and guest house.
N. has had  Portinari paint  his wife and children. He showed us with pride the
first Portinari they  commissioned-the Sacred  Heart,  which hangs in a golden frame.  In  their  dining  room  three enormous  murals of Brazilian fauna-mon­ keys, parrots, anteaters.
The  party was entirely family-dozens of young people -girls with immense eyes and  young men with brandy snifters. Highly baroque  mirrors with frames of gilt and  mirror  'tears'  let in, like eyelet embroidery. In  the library  their books all bound  in gorgeous leathers.  We ate Bahiana  food -ground  rice cooked to look like snow;  fish with shrimps  and a blistering hot sauce full of tiny peppers.
This morning  I drew the  jacko tree -attacked it like a crazy woman to get it onto paper  before we went out. It's not very good but I shall do it again.

August  19th
This  wild Rio  wind  is tearing  at the house. Last night  it blew and  blew and blew.  Blew  through   my  dreams.  Awakened  as if I had  been  tossed about  all night.
Reading  the letters of R.L.S.  What  a darling  he was. And how extraordinary of him to set off for the South  Seas with his wife and stepson and mother, when, at  any  moment   a  hemorrhage could  have  ended  his life. And  what  a life in Samoa.  It  would suit me fine. Every day a new vegetation  to fascinate my con­ stantly hungry eyes !

August 21st
Started out  this  morning  with  H. She  was full of confusion  and  concern - we must go to Saint  Antonio's to draw  because she owed him some money. She

57

P. K.PAGE

had lost her diamond  clip and  had  promised  him a lot of money if he found it. Later,  when she discovered the clip on a dress, a friend  had  told  her that  as it had not been lost, she no longer needed to give the money. But H. claimed that this was Saint  Antonio's way of showing her that  she hadn't been giving enough to the poor, so she must go today before she forgot. But first, could I drive her to her dentist, as she had broken a tooth.
It was terribly hot, even at nine. The air coming in through  open windows was
like a furnace,  but the sun was shining and the day beautiful. We parked the car outside the Teatro Municipal and, acting against all previous plans, went straight to Saint  Antonio's.  It's an exquisite church  with a simple putty-coloured  fac;ade, plain except for the lovely curlicues on the towers and  the stonework  around  the windows. Inside we stayed only long enough for H. to drop to her knees, scatter­ ing drawing  blocks, paints, a folding chair  in various  directions.  Saint  Antonio himself wore a halo of baguettes of mirror. Through a room like a formal draw­  ing  room  with  floorboards  a foot wide and  dark  with  years of  polishing,  jaca­ randa  doors and  a  white ceiling with simple  mouldings  of  burnished  gold leaf, we entered  the  chapel.  Pure  gold-every  inch-every  half  inch.  Dazzling. It reminded  me of the day when I was a child and  my father  stopped  the car and asked me to go and  get some information  from  a man  working in a field. When he opened  his mouth  to reply, it was as if he had the sun in his mouth-uppers and  lowers of gold.  His mouthful  of gold is the only thing  comparable  to the excess -but in this case the beautiful excess -of that  chapel.
Standing   on  the  black  and  white  marble  squares  outside  we overlooked  a clutter of roofs, all tile, moving in a dozen different  directions-high gables, low gables,  wide  gables,  narrow  gables, all  red  tile. Spent  two  hours  drawing  like someone demented.  H. draws with great sensitivity. She drew the fac;ade of Saint Antonio's  with  its curlicues delicately, elegantly-a very  beautiful  subject  but one that  I had no wish to do.
Then  through  the crowds to H.'s  dentist, sambas  blaring  and  the whole world light-hearted. One  particularly  light-hearted  fellow above  me dropped  a  paper cone full of coffee which landed  bang on my head,  point first, before spilling its contents over my dress. Ended  the morning  at  a shop that  sells paints. I bought some gouache.  On  reaching  home I  put some dirty  red  paint  on all those tiles and felt very content.
Bedtime.  My  first day of paint.  As well as the  dirty  red on the tiles, I  have added  putty  colour to the fac;ades and laid a thin  and  mimsy sky. There  is now a pale ochre  wash on the  jackfruit and  the house is pink. I like these gouaches. The  colours are  vivid, they mix easily and  are  what  you will-transparent  or opaque.  But  I  am overwhelmed. I hardly  have enough  time to draw.  How will I have time enough to paint?

P.K.PAGE

August 27th
The  other  night talking about  Saint Antonio's church  with a Brazilian, he told me that  Saint  Antonio  has the  rank  of colonel in the Brazilian  Army and  that one of the Brothers goes monthly to the paymaster to collect his pay. They made him a corporal  a long time ago in a moment of great military  need, and  he did so well that  he was promoted  to sergeant.  Since then  he has gradually  worked his way up. It is this kind of thing that makes me love Brazilians.

August 28th
Drawing   with  H.  in  her  dream  garden.  Words cannot  describe  it,  which  is perhaps  why  I  draw.  Anturias  of every size and  shade-white to deep  red; those great  red rockets bursting out of banana-like  leaves; an ipe in full flood of yellow -its flowers seen middle distance like yellow hydrangeas.  Against a blue sky it is unbelievable.
H.  says, among  other  things,  that  the  Brazilian  woman  lives always in  the shadow  of her husband.  And as lunch time drew near, she bore this out, becom­ ing anxious, eyeing her watch to make sure she would not be late. Her husband is a handsome  man,  a hunter, and  his cages are full of birds whose calls he can imitate exactly. "Good eating," he says.



JIDOBE


From the mud thick bubbles pop
up comes newt and salamander up comes man
the immortelle of humans mud nursery of humans mad nursery rhyme
mud bubbles pop pop pop

Mud bricks baked in fire
the sun's fire a bakery
for living men and living women people of the dust
not Aztec kings or Inca lords but people of the brown dust mud fireflies
flash brown instants
 

AlPurdy


59

POEM

mud  rose mud  rose flower firefly

Why  applaud stone?
-fire-formed in the planet bowels a spewed green vomit
banded schist and  granite glitter
humped black basalt in deserts of stillness
why applaud permanence
only dead  things are permanent moments are  life
quick instants
flutter  away under  your eyes you flutter  away as well being yourself
a ray of sunlight
or water  shadow

God mud
the pig stuff of life sucking guck in ,rain
memory of a memory  of a memory new happening birth
float little human child
on the surface  of transience in the wild moment
hinged  instant
mud  flower mud  rose die little  human child between  before and  after mud  rose



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5 /228-4741


6o


LIBERTY AND THE PURSUIT OF PLEASURE

John Glassco's  Q,uest


John Lauber

"MY  MOTTO HAS ALWAYS BEEN  'Liberty  and the pursuit of pleasure.'  m In  that  phrase  of Man  Ray, avant-garde photographer and  the character  "Narwhal" in John  Glassco's Memoirs of Montparnasse, one recognizes the unifying theme  of Glassco's book; it provides both pattern  and meaning  (the
terms are  ultimately  indistinguishable) and  makes the autobiography a work of literary  art  rather  than  a repository of facts. Liberty and  pleasure -each a good in  itself, and  each  a means  to a still more valuable  end. Liberty  is a necessary condition  for  the  pursuit  of pleasure, and  pleasure, at  its highest degree, trans­ forms itself into  the experience  of ecstasy. As Ford Madox  Ford says, or is made to say:  "Joy  is in  the  nature  of a fever, of hysteria ... a  drunkenness, an  un­ natural state."2    It  can  best  be attained, the  Memoirs  suggest, through  sensual pleasure,  and  such  pleasure  can be experienced  best  in  youth,  when the senses are  keenest and  worldly  commitments  are  fewest.  The Memoirs  culminate  in a series of ecstatic moments, resulting from supreme pleasure.
There  are  no Blakean  implications  here;  sensual pleasure  does not lead  to a cleansing  of the  doors of  perception  and  a  recognition  of the infinite  in  every­ thing.  In Glassco's cosmos, "all life and indeed the whole universe of  phenomena  existed only as ... an accident,  an interruption of nothingness"; therefore,  joy or ecstasy can  be felt only while one is able to ignore the basic truth  and its conse­ quence-the transience  of everything, particularly  of youth. Rather  than reveal­ ing ultimate  reality, sensual pleasure mercifully blinds us to it. Youth, after all, is defined as a drunkenness.
Such a world-view must lead to a reversal of values by which frivolity becomes
serious and  seriousness frivolity,  while "to  remain  on the surface  of life" is the only genuine  wisdom, and  the pursuit of pleasure the most rational  use of one's time. A moralist  might accuse the Memoirs of advocating an ethic of selfish irresponsibility, but they contain  their own defence on both the metaphysical and the practical  levels. Glassco's behaviour conforms to the nature of the universe as he sees it;  furthermore, in  an  accidental  and  therefore  absurd,  or  meaningless,

GLASSCO

universe, all  moral  codes must be purely arbitrary and  all action  absurd.  (But surely that  which  is most pleasureable  is least  absurd !) In  practical  terms,  the Memoirs  assert that  Buffy and Graeme's  way of life had  at any rate the negative virtue of not harming  anyone;3  they were guilty only of "greed,  sloth and sensu­ ality-the three  most amiable  vices in the calendar." But Glassco claims more, he argues in effect that  their  behaviour  satisfied Kant's categorical imperative: so live as if your every act were to become universal law. "Far from misusing our time,  we were  really  turning  it  to  the  best  account  ... half  of  man's  miseries result from an insufficiency of leisure, gormandise  and sexual gratification  during  the years from seventeen to twenty."  No starving  in a garret for the sake of Art!  When Kay Boyle writes, in her edition of McAlmon's Being Geniuses Together: "We  were thin  as rakes, white-skinned, hollow-eyes, as poets had always been,"4 that "we"  does not include Buffy and Graeme, who are no more ambitious to die as  romantic  bohemians  than  to live as prosperous  businessmen.  Buffy's nearly fatal illness results from devotion to pleasure, not poetry.)
Food  and  sex are  the  prime sources of pleasure  in  the  Memoirs, and  it's  in terms of food that  the contrast between Canada and  France  is most dramatically presented:  "Lobsters  broiled in butter, tender little octopuses in black sauce, how your  memory  haunts  me in  this  abode  of corned-beef  hash  and  Jell-0!" The "abode  of corned-beef  hash and  Jell-0" is the Royal Victoria  Hospital  of  Mon­ treal, in which Glassco completed the Memoirs  while awaiting  a dangerous oper­ ation. These foreshadowings occur throughout the book, intensifying the sense of present  pleasure.  But corned-beef  hash  and  jello have  more  than  literal  signifi­ cance;  they symbolize the omnipresent  blandness  of  North  American  existence, its willful denial of the senses, in contrast to the delicate  perversities hinted at by "tender  little octopuses in black sauce."
The  Memoirs  assume a necessary opposition between the hedonist and society;
the  unqualified  pursuit  of pleasure is socially subversive, setting  a bad  example and  rendering  ridiculous  all socially-approved  goals. Society deals with  the  de­ mands  of the senses by ignoring them,  by repressing  them,  or  (more subtly)  by selling an inferior substitute for pleasure, exemplified by a night-dub floor-show: "this ton of listless flesh, these fixed smiles, these snowy pink-tipped  contours ... the appetites  of desire, glamour  and  money were opposed  and  never met." This organized "pleasure," frustrating  rather  than  satisfying the senses, is to the reality as corned-beef hash is to octopuses in black sauce.
From  the  point  of view of the Memoirs, all social institutions   (including  the various professions)  impose constraints on the  pursuit  of pleasure. Hence Buffy's early attraction to the apparent anarchism  of the surrealists. But anarchism  with leaders and  manifestos is perhaps self-contradictory,  while on closer examination the  surrealist  techniques,  far  from  offering  imaginative freedom,  become  only another  set of rules-formulas for surprise. Better then simply to lead one's own

GLASSCO

free life in the cracks and crevices of organized society; that is the practical possi­ bility which  the  Memoirs  present.  Freedom  from external  pressure is gained  at the outset,  by the  escape to Paris. Freedom  is threatened  more seriously by the internal  danger  of commitment-specifically, to the  career  of  writing.  "I had no commitments except, in a vague way, to remain uncommitted ... vis-a-vis the deadly  earnestness  of Morley  Callaghan  ... I had once again  the salutary  sense of the abyss that  yawns for everyone who has embraced  the literary  profession ... literature ... was  just  another   trap." The  writers  who  figure  in  the  Memoirs appear  dehumanized in some sense by literary  ambition:  Hemingway  a calcu­ lating  opportunist (behind  a show of boozy good-fellowship),  Callaghan a my­ opic professional, Stein the tyrant of her salon.
The  conflict  between  father   and  son,  or  Montreal  and   Paris,  is external;
that  between the apparently incompatible  demands of life and art, or "enjoyment and  achievement," is between Buffy's own conflicting desires, and therefore more difficult to resolve. Throughout the Memoirs  he struggles to avoid  the  commit­ ment  to literature, which is demonstrated  by the existence of the book itself and foreshadowed   by  Graeme's   remark  in  the  first chapter: "I  just saw  you  in a dream -as an  old man  with  whiskers, writing.... " The  decision to write the Memoirs  was an attempted compromise by which life, experienced  to the fullest, might  be  translated   directly  into  art.  But  this apparently  undemanding form made  its demands, and  the  choice between life and  art  had  to  be repeated  in Luxembourg and  on the  Mediterranean. Even at 18, Buffy  (unlike  McAlmon)  knew that an autobiography is more than a receptacle for facts.
But however much Buffy might believe "that  if I could only get rid of my itch for writing,  I might  be quite  happy" to get rid of it was impossible. He lives his life in  literary  terms.  Arriving  in  Paris on  a disagreeable winter  night:  "I had only to think  I was now in the city of Baudelaire,  Utrillo  and  Apollinaire  to be swept  by a  joy so strong  it  verged on nausea." (Pleasure  and  pain,  at  such  a pitch, seem indistinguishable; perhaps the quest was ultimately not simply for pleasure,  but  for intensity of life.)  To  denounce  the soul-destroying  boredom of his Montreal  job, he borrows the rhetoric of D. H. Lawrence: "the  day was curl­ ing its edges around  the granite  walls of the Sun Life Assurance Company, while inside the men  and  women  were all busy denying their  dark  gods." The dream of Paris  itself seems to have originated  in a reading of George  Moore's Confes­ sions of a Young Man, and  Moore's  hospitality and gift of a pamphlet to Buffy and Graeme  constitute a secular benediction for their enterprise.
Repeatedly  life is shaped  or given significance by literary  recollection. When Buffy and  the  novelist  Diana  Tree,  about  to become lovers, share  a carriage: " 'Keep  on,  keep  on!'  she  cried, like Leon  Dupuis  in Madame Bovary."  Mrs. Quayle  misquotes  appropriately on reencountering  Buffy after  an  interval  of six months:   "0 what  can ail thee, man-at-arms/ Alone and  palely loitering?"  The

GLASSCO

quotation not  only describes  Buffy at  the  moment (pleasure has ended  for him) but  foreshadows the sexual slavery that she will impose  upon  him  and  his condi­ tion  when  he emerges  from  it.  When  Kirilenko the  photographer  gives the  now penniless  and  hungry Buffy chance of employment as a male  prostitute, the offer is seen as the  recurrence of an  archetypal situation: "the theme of  Mephisto and  Faust, of Vautrin and  Rubempre, here reduced  to its crassest terms ... Homeless,  cold, and  hungry, I made the classic response. 'You  might  as well.'"
Moments of  ecstasy in  the  Memoirs result  not  only from  sensual  enjoyment, but  from  a  total  experience of which  literary, artistic  and  historical associations form   an  essential   part.  These  alone  suffice  in  the  realization of  Paris  already quoted, which  owes  nothing to  outward circumstances. Even  an  ecstasy  which appears purely  physical,  the  consummation of liberated sexuality, owes much  to reminiscence and  association.  The  passage  must  now  be quoted in full:

'Keep  on!'  she cried,  like Leon  Dupis  in  Madame Bovary. 'Go  right  around the Arc de Triomphe and then come back.'
As we returned  down the avenue a parade  came out from the rue de Presbourg. About  a  hundred   students,  led by a  makeshift  band  of drums  and  tin  trumpets,
were pulling a float bearing a gigantic movable phallus;  worked by ropes, its head
was slowly rising and falling. The  crowd shrieked with  joy as it moved slowly into the  glare  and  crawled  down  the  avenue.  We  fell  in  behind  this symbol of  the Third   Republic.  Reaching  the Cafe Tortoni, our carriage  turned  off at  the Rue Galilee  outside  Mrs. Quayle's  apartment. We looked  into  each  other's  eyes with rapture; we had become lovers.

Pleasure is intensified   and  universalized by  placement in  a  wider  context. The occasion  is Bastille Day, a national holiday  celebrating the destruction of a prison, the  symbol  of  repressive  authority. The   phallic image  invokes  a  more  ancient past,   a   pagan  consecration of  sensuality, including  the   sexual   climax   being achieved  in the  carriage (with  the lovers triumphing at the  Arc  de Triomphe!), while  the  Cafe  Tortoni recalls  the  literary and  artistic life of nineteenth-century Paris.  The passage  ends, ironically, with  the  Christian implications of "turning off at  the  Rue  Galilee." (A double  irony, since  their  destination is the  apartment of Mrs.  Quayle, and  Buffy's later  involvement with  her nearly  destroys forever  his capacity for pleasure.)
The  third ecstasy  is the  vision of the  Mediterranean, and  as with  the  realiza- tion of Paris,  it comes primarily from  within:

my throat  was dry as ashes, I was coated  with a mixture  of soot and  sweat and aching  all  over;  but  the sight of that  tideless inland  ocean, mother  of gods and men,  nurse  of  poetry ... made  me dizzy with  joy. The  moment  was permanent, unforgettable, Keatsian ... The  first dip ... was like a baptism: all the grime and sweat and  alcohol seemed to wash away in the embrace  of the Mediterranean.

It  is a  pagan baptism, following  the  initial benediction by  George  Moore  and

GLASSCO

the  celebration  by Buffy and  Diana  Tree of what  has been presented  as a holy day  of sensuality.  Such  a  moment  transcends  simple  hedonism;  it  is available only to the mind  prepared  by experience and knowledge. Ecstasy is felt in those instants  when the  physical world is, in Wordsworthian  terms, half-perceived  and half-created. "The visionary gleam ... the glory and the dream" -the language of Buffy's favourite  poet seems appropriate, and for both writers these moments are a unique privilege of youth.


BuT ECSTASY  ALONE does  not  make   a  writer;  craft  is needed, and experience  of other  kinds. Buffy refuses to make the commitment to literature precisely because  he realizes its demands,  and  doubts  his own willing­
ness, and  ability, to meet them.  Not only was the labour  of composition incom­ patible  with the full-time  pursuit  of pleasure, but "I had never known despair or anguish ... hunger,  frustration, illness, or chastity.... How then  was I qualified to write?" The  list of deficiencies is formidable,  but all of these experiences were to  be supplied,  and  are  recorded  in  the  Memoirs.  Finally,  he  doubts  his own vocation:   "I told myself that  my desire to write had never been more than  a ... symptom  of  juvenile revolt. I came to believe that  I was lacking in any serious­ ness ... I had  really nothing  to say." The  bulk of the Memoirs  was in fact com­ posed, as Glassco informs  us in his Preface, "in  the  Royal  Victoria  Hospital  at Montreal   during  the  winter  of 1932-33,  when  I was  awaiting  a crucial  opera­ tion."  Dangerous   illness resolved  Buffy's  doubts,  providing  both  occasion  and motive for  writing.  While  writing  in  order  to relive past  happiness  and  to find meaning  in his brief existence, he would discover that  he indeed  had something to say.
Given these circumstances,  one is tempted  to say that  the Memoirs  move from
frivolity to seriousness. But this is too easy. If the pursuit  of pleasure constitutes the most rational  use of one's time, as the Memoirs claim, it cannot  be considered frivolous.  It  might  be  more  accurate  to say that  there  is a  progression from  a trivial seriousness (the solemn dullness of Buffy's Montreal) to a profound seriousness resulting  from  a comprehension,  under threat  of death,  of the value of life when it is fully experienced.
Seriousness is required  to provide both the content and  the shape of art. Mate­ rial  and  occasion  are  both  useless without  that  devotion  to the  craft  of  writing for  want  of  which  McAlmon's book  remained  only  "inchoate  maunderings." From  the  beginning,  Buffy  understood  that  recollection  was  not  enough.  The basic decision was made  deliberately  and early:  "I've already abandoned surre­ alism and  decided  to write my memoirs-not a journal  but a record of my life written  in  chapters,  like one  of George Moore's  books-to impose a narrative

GLASSCO

form  on  everything  that  has happened  since  we left  Montreal  last  February." From  the outset,  the author  had  provided  a model  for himself, and  a principle of selection and  emphasis:  "This  is to be the  book of my youth, of my golden age."  The  recording  of events without  form  (as in  a  journal)   is rejected,  and form is not  expected  to arise automatically  out  of recollection  (it  is to be  "im­ posed," and  requires a certain aesthetic distance from the raw happening). Buffy explains  one  of  his abandonments of the  Memoirs on  the  ground  that  "I  was feeling  handicapped by the  recentness of events.  I  could  not  see  Daphne and Angela  in  any  kind  of  perspective  and  was reduced  to stating  just  what  had happened." Three  months in hospital, two years and  more after  the experience, provided that perspective.




LACKING  THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT,  we cannot  study  the· process of composition  in  detail.  Something  can  be learned,  however,  by com­ parison of the first chapter of the Memoirs, as published in 1970, with the version that  appeared in  This  Quarter, under  the  title  "Extract From  an  Autobiog­ raphy," in 1929. Glassco's claim in his preface that  "The revision amounts  to the occasional  improvement  of  a  phrase  and,  in  the  case of the  first  chapter, the excision of some particularly fatuous paragraphs" clearly does not hold.
In fact,  a version of about  5300 words was reduced  to about  2300. A contin­ uous passage of 3 Y2  pages (out of 1 2 ) , describing  the last night in Montreal, was dropped;  gratuitous anti-semitic  remarks  were omitted;  diction  was sharpened
and  colloquialized;   telling details  were added.  "George   [the  "Graeme" of the final version]  and  I were striding along the station  platform  behind a porter, our arms full of overcoats, then  I relaxed" 5   became  "Only  when we were marching along  the  echoing  wooden station-platform, under  the  great  wooden  roof that covered  the  lines  of  tracks  and  with  the  engine  shooting  soot  and  steam  all around, did  I  relax."  In  his  prefatory  remarks  to  the  Memoirs,  Edel  praises Glassco's "fine  'visuality' "; the  praise is deserved, and  the effect was deliberate
-no accidental  result of total recall! If the language  contained  such a word as "audiality," we could say that  the  passage exemplifies that  as well. Something more  is accomplished;   the  recurring  adjective  "wooden," reinforced  by  "echo­ ing,"  not  only  characterizes  the station  but,  by  implication, the  society  which produced it.
In spite of its much greater  length,  the "Extract" gave no information  about Buffy's actual  work at Sun  Life, whereas  the  Memoirs inform  us that  "By ten o'clock  I  would  finish my  morning  work  of  posting  up  the  five and  ten-cent weekly premiums  for burial insurance  paid  by Chinese labourers  in Hong  Kong, and  then  go and  bed down in one of the toilets in the  basement,  where I made

66

GLASSCO

myself a little  nest in my ankle-length  raccoon coat." The  triviality and dullness of the  job combine  with the implied exploitation  of the poor to indict the world of business. Posting  premiums  for burial  insurance -what  an  incongruous  job for the 18-year-old  Buffy, concerned only with enjoying the  present at all costs! The  fact  that   even  bedding  down  in  the  toilet  seems  a  desirable  alternative emphasizes the monotony  of the work, while the raccoon coat offers a picturesque period  detail.  The  entire  passage functions  both  as texture  and  as an  essential part  of the total design;  it indicates  precisely what Buffy and Graeme are escap­ ing from.
Stylistic  revision eliminated  vagueness and  wordiness and  often substituted  a colloquial  for  an  inappropriately "literary" diction. Mter subletting  their  Mon­ treal  apartment, says the "Extract," "We ... were hardly  discommoded by hav­ ing to remain  away from our apartment on certain  nights of the week -less so than  we had  at  first thought  when it transpired  that one of the men  was never in  the  place,  undoubtedly  owing  to the fact  that  he would obtain  no  one who would  accompany   him  thither."6    "Discommoded," "transpired,"  "accompany him  thither"-the obsolete  vocabulary  of a  provincial  man-of-letters,  entirely inappropriate to  the  narrator of the  Memoirs.  In  revision:  "The extra  twenty dollars  was a  help,  and  it  was no hardship  keeping away  from  the  apartment until late on Wednesday  and  Saturday nights; moreover, it soon turned  out that  Petersham  was not  using the  place  (his night was Wednesday), though  he con­ tinued  to pay."
If the narrator could  not be allowed to seem a belated  Victorian  (as the dic­
tion  cited  above  might  suggest) , neither  could he express himself as a gushing adolescent. "But  George,  you know that  I cannot  go to Paris without  you. I can go nowhere  without  you. To  think  of you living alone  here, without  me whom you  love so  much ... do  you  think  I could  en joy myself in  Paris,  had  I ten women  in  my bed  every  night?"7   The  Buffy of the Memoirs, who "must  have imbibed  sophistication   with  his mother's  milk,"  would  have  seemed  incredible after such a passage; necessarily, it was dropped.
We may note in passing the increased dramatic effect achieved in revision. The
first sentence  of the  "Extract" reads:  "In  the winter  of 1928, George Graham and  I were living in an apartment on Metcalfe Street in Montreal." The opening sentence  (fragment, rather) of Memoirs is "Winter in Montreal in 1927." Season and  location,  the two essential facts, are given, the rest can follow. Furthermore, the  revised  version  parallels  "Paris! We  made  it  after  all,"  which  opens  the second half of chapter  1 in Memoirs.
Study  of Glassco's revisions demonstrates  that  the Memoirs  were the product
of conscious art,  not only in their  texture  but in their shape  and focus. The per­ suasion of George,  it seems likely, was cut  not only because of its embarrassing  sentimentality but  because  it  was inconsistent  with  the  sense of  destiny  being

GLASSCO

fulfilled  which  the  Memoirs create.  External   obstacles  are  emphasized,  while internal  doubts  cannot  be admitted: "It was on a dream  of Paris that  our ideas were vaguely but powerfully concentrated. This kept us going." In the "Extract," not only does "George" require persuasion, but the topic of Paris only arises after Buffy's father  has offered him an allowance of $roo a month.  "After  a great deal of hypocrisy on my part,"  says the "Extract," "and  of generosity on his, he con­ sented  to  give  me  a  hundred  dollars  a  month  for  seven  years. I was  greatly touched  by this.... "8 The  pattern  of the Memoirs requires that  the father  must not  be  given  credit,  even  ironically,  for generosity,  and  that  the  son  must  be uncompromising  in his hostility. He can acknowledge  neither  hypocrisy nor the weakness of  having  been  "greatly  touched." The   passage  was  completely  re­ written,  with  the  father  being motivated  solely by desire  to  avoid scandal: " 'I hear  you and  your friend  Taylor  are running  something close to a house of ill­ fame.... Colonel Birdlime, of McGill's Department of  Extramural Affairs, tells me  it's  common  knowledge.' ... [H]e offered  me  an  allowance  of  a  hundred  dollars a month  if I would live more discreetly.'' Father and  university,  related symbols of stupid  authority,  are  ridiculed  by  association  with  the farcical  name "Colonel  Birdlime"  (implying  a trap  for those who desire freedom), and  by the sense of petty espionage which the detail creates.
It's  no  use asking  what  the  historical  truth  might  have  been-that is  irre­ coverable.  Doubtless  the   r 930  version  represents  not  pure  invention  but  the elaboration  of a different  selection of facts, and  the effect created  certainly  was necessary to the M emairs as we have them.  To say this is not to  discredit their accuracy.  A life cannot  be recorded  in all its detail;  selection  must  take  place, and  inevitably  it  creates  a  pattern,  or  establishes  a  goal.  Experience  must  be reported  in  words,  and  language  is not  a  transparent  window;   the  autobiog­ rapher's  diction  and  syntax imply an attitude toward  the events being narrated.


"AUTOBIOGRAPHIES   ARE   ESSENTIALLY  works of fiction"- a fact  which  has been known for a long time, and  has become a commonplace of modern  criticism.9    But it must be added  that  a fiction is not necessarily ficti­ tious, that  is, it need not be a "lie," or invention.  To say that  an autobiography
is a work of fiction is to say that by selection, by emphasis,  by control of tone, the author  has revealed what appears  to be the meaning  of his existence. For him to be found  lying would discredit his work. We go to autobiography for truth  of a different kind than  the "truth" of fiction; we look for a revelation of meaning in actual,  historical existence.
What,  then, should one make of those aesthetic discussions and monologues by
Ford,  "Narwhal," and  others  which  are  recalled  in  such  convincing,  yet im-

68

GLASSCO

probable,  detail?  They  cannot  be accurate  reports  unless Glassco, like Boswell, immediately  entered  them  in his journal-but he kept no journal.  The  greater part  of those speeches must have been invented. Yet in the act of reading we do not take them  to be lies in a sense which would discredit the work. One assumes that  they  were  neither  entirely  invented  nor simply recalled;  rather,  that  they were  elaborated   from  remembered   fact.  In  addition,  they  are  saved  by  their transparent  artificiality.  One  is not  asked  to  accept  them  as literal  truth   (as Boswell claims for his recorded  conversations). The implicit claim is of a different sort-of  dramatic appropriateness to character, time and place.
Glassco himself has stated  this dual responsibility of the autobiographer:

Dear  Kay,  this loose and  lying chronicle You'll  understand and  all its young intention to dress the naked  facts and  brightly  tell
A young man's story.... 10

The  verse does not imply authorial irresponsibility. "Loose and  lying" is a state­ ment,  perhaps  exaggerated, of  the  autobiographer's freedom,  but  is  promptly qualified  by "to  dress the naked  facts." To  "lie" in this carefully  qualified sense
-not  to arbitrarily invent,  but  rather  "to  dress the  naked  facts,"  to select, to emphasize, to elaborate, to slant-there is the essence of the autobiographer's art.
The  Memoirs  are structured around  a set of basic polarities. On  one side the father,  the  university,  Montreal, business, age and  authority, and  denial  of the senses. On  the  other,  youth,  Paris,  rebellion, art,  liberty,  and  sensual  pleasure. Both literally  and  symbolically, winter is associated with Montreal  and its corre­ latives, while Paris is identified with spring and the Mediterranean with summer. The  narrative pattern  is equally  clear-a  rising and  falling  curve of  pleasure, commencing  with escape from Montreal  and the encounter  with Moore, reaching its long climax during  the summer  and early autumn  on the Riviera, and declin­ ing with the return  to Paris, poverty and a scramble to survive (and significantly the sale of  Moore's  gift), separation  of Buffy and  Graeme, obsessive love, and nearly fatal disease.
"'I don't  like an  unhappy  ending to a book,'" remarks Narwhal,  functioning as aesthetic spokesman. " 'I'm not saying I like a happy ending either. I'm  led to wonder if a book should  end at all ... there might be some merit in a book that was either left unfinished, or ended, say, by repeating the sense of its beginning.'" The  Memoirs  both satisfy and  exceed those requirements. The  ending is open­ Buffy is left  waiting  for  his operation; it  repeats  the  sense of its  beginning­ Montreal,  winter,   the  absence  of  pleasure-but at  a  higher  intensity,  both because the  danger  is greater  and  because the narrator  has experienced  life and pleasure and  learned  their  full value. The  form  is a spiral  rather  than  a circle; pattern  has been achieved  without the boring symmetry of exact repetition.

6g

GLASSCO

This  narrative pattern  derives from life, but there  is an important and  related structuring device  which is purely literary,  the  technique of foreshadowing  or more precisely of juxtaposing contrasting layers of time. In chapter  1, the chrono­ logical account  is interrupted by "Paris! We made it after all. This is where I'm  writing  now ... It's  spring night in the rue Broca, and  there's moonlight on the unfinished, abandoned statues in the yard outside the studio." Knowing  that  the dream  has been entirely fulfilled, we return  to the intensified  drabness  of Mon­ treal.  But  not  before  a  further,  more  complex  layering:   "As I  begin  writing again,  his [Graeme's]   voice startles me.... 'I just saw you  in a dream-as an old man with whiskers, writing.... ' " That  chilling suggestion of age and mortal­  ity not only emphasizes and adds  pathos to the transience  of youth, it ironically undermines  the efforts of Buffy to avoid the destiny, the commitment to writing, that John  Glassco would accept.
Beyond their  first three chapters,  the Memoirs were composed  under  the sha­
dow of death.  Chapter  3 ends triumphantly: "The streets were dipped  in warm sunshine now; it was the first day of spring."  Chapter 4 is headed:

DECEMBER   1932
ROYAL  VICTORIA HOSPITAL MONTREAL
That  heading,  with  the  following paragraph, accounts  for  the  existence of the Memoirs and  offers a  perspective from  which the  events to be narrated can  be understood  and evaluated.  These references to the hospital, set off in italics, recur throughout the  book.  (Could  Glassco have learned  the  technique  of signalling time shifts with  italics from  Faulkner's  The  Sound  and the Fury, published  in
1930?)  They  follow moments  of fulfillment  or of ecstasy:  spring  in Paris,  Mc­ Almon's  praise  for  the  first  chapter  of  the  Memoirs,  its  acceptance for  This Quarter, the  two  months'  idyll with Stanley  on  the  Riviera,  the  acceptance of Mrs. Quayle's  invitation,  the dream  of a  perfect  existence on the  lie  St. Louis. Pleasure  appears  more precious with our foreknowledge,  and suspense is created as well. Not as to whether Buffy will survive his operation-we know he will­ but as to what, facing death,  he will make of  his own experience. Can hedonism survive the threat  of death?  It does, nothing is recanted, and the work retains its integrity.  Pleasure  remains  a self-justifying  goal, the  narrator has  pursued  and attained   it,  he  has lived  his youth  to  the  limit,  and  his project  has  therefore succeeded.  There  is no  moral  to be  drawn;  physical  pain  can  teach  only "the  pointlessness of suffering," and  the only possible lesson is the need "to  be a little more  careful  in  exploiting  the  resources of  pleasure." The  conventional  moral pattern  of sin, punishment, repentance,  redemption is necessarily denied;  punish­ ment and  redemption  are impossible in an accidental universe, there is no repen­ tance, and the concept of sin becomes meaningless.

GLASSCO

The  significance  of order  depends  finally on  what  is being ordered,  and  the Memoirs  are  notable  for  their  richness of  texture,  or  content.   (Some  of  the methods  by which  this richness was achieved have been pointed  out in the  dis­ cussion of  Glassco's  revisions.)  Perhaps  the  most striking  single quality  of  the Memoirs, which  justifies their  title, is the author's skill at portraiture-of  Stein,  Hemingway,  Callaghan, McAlmon,  Moore, Frank Harris,  Lord Alfred Douglas, etc. That  of Stein may be taken as representative:

A  rhomboidal woman dressed in a floor-length gown apparently made of some kiind of  burlap,  she gave  the  impression of absolute irrefragibility;  her ankles, almost concealed  by  the  hieratic  folds of her  dress, were like the  pillars of a temple.... Her  fine  close-cropped head  was  in  the  style of  the  late  Roman Empire, but unfortunately it merged into broad peasant shoulders without the aesthetic assistance of a neck; her eyes were large and much too piercing.... She awakened in me a feeling of instinctive hostility coupled with a grudging venera­ tion, as if she were a pagan idol in whom I was unable to believe."

That  Stein did look like this can be proved by photographs; the portrait  is true. It  becomes  literature because  it  is imaginative  as  well. "Rhomboidal"  wittily suggests the  geometrical  blockishness of her  figure and  introduces  the  sense of rigidity which  pervades  the  passage. The  reference to late  Roman  sculpture  not only aids visualization  but implies the kind of authority  she possesses-an impli­ cation  reinforced  and  extended  by the associated simile of the pagan idol, which in turn  has been prepared  for by "hieratic" and by the comparison of  her ankles to "pillars  of a temple." A "floor-length  gown apparently made of some kind of burlap" -the  casualness  of  the  description  suggests her  total  indifference   to fashion  and  throws  emphasis  on  the  figure itself;  no  adornment  is present  or required.  "Irrefragibility" immediately  draws attention;  such learned  words  are rare in the Memoirs, and  it is an unusual adjective to apply to a person. Mean­ ing "undeniable" or "irrefutable," it seems more appropriate to an argument or a doctrine.  In  context,  it  indicates  that  Stein's  authority   (for  believers)  is  per­ sonal,  not  depending   on  her  work  or  her  theories. The  final  comparison  to  a pagan  idol sums up  not  only  the details composing the image of Stein, but  also the writer's own ambivalence-throughout, whatever is granted, or taken away, is instantly qualified.
"But  this is not  the  whole truth  about  Gertrude  Stein!" her  admirers  might
object. It is not;  only a novelist can know the "whole truth" about  his characters. In this portrait  Glassco offers not the truth  but a truth,  a testimony which reveals both  subject  and  author. The  total  "truth-about-Gertrude Stein,"  to the extent it goes beyond  primary  source materials, is after all made up entirely of such testimonies.
Glassco's Memoirs easily surpass their model, Moore's Confessions of a Young
Man. (Moore  really confesses nothing, he neither narrates nor portrays, he never

GLASSCO

allows the reader  to be aware of anything  but  his own ego.)  Glassco has written a memoir in the true sense; he presents the most vivid image we have of expatri­ ate  life  in  the  France  of  the  late  twenties.  Hemingway's A  Moveable  Feast, written  perhaps  thirty  years after  the  event,  lacks  the  immediacy  of Glassco's record,  while  not  more  than  a  quarter   of  Stein's  Autobiography of Alice  B. Toklas  deals with  the twenties. Memoirs  is less sentimental and  less pretentious  than  Malcolm  Cowley's Exile's Return;  Glassco did not consider himself an exile (Paris  was his true home, he was an exile in Montreal) and  he does not offer his experience as representative  of either his country  or his generation   (such abstrac­  tions did not concern him).
The  Memoirs  are  rooted in a  particular  context  of time  and  place, but  they possess a wider interest as well. They are representative in a more universal sense than  Cowley's. They ask fundamental questions. Liberty and pleasure-can one make them the exclusive goals of life, and what  are the consequences if one does? To do so is an experiment  that only a young man would attempt, and the narra­ tor embodies the youthful desire for pleasure, fullness of life, intensity of  experi­ ence. More truly than  Moore's Confessions, the Memoirs  constitute  "a statement of youth for all time, a youth in which we all partake somehow."


NOTES

1 From   an  interview prefaced   to  Man  Ray,  ed.  Jean Saucet and  Sarane  Alexan­
drian, trans. Eleanor Leviewx  (Chicago: J. Philip O'Hara, 1973).
2   John Glassco,  Memoirs  of Montparnasse  (Toronto:  Oxford Univ.  Press,  1970),
p. 37·
8  In  this essay the  author of the Memoirs  will  be referred to as "Glassco," the  pro­
tagonist as "Buffy."
4   In  Robert  McAlmon, Being Geniuses Together, revised  and  with  supplementary chapters by Kay  Boyle (New York: Doubleday, 1968),  p. 209.
3  John Glassco,  "Extract from  an  Autobiography," This  Quarter, No.  4  (Spring
1929),  p. 210.
6   "Extract," p. 199.
7   "Extract," p. 200.
8   "Extract," p. 200.
11    T.  H.  Huxley,  quoted  in John  Sturrock, "The New  Model Autobiographer," New
Literary History, 9 (Autumn 1977), 52.
1° From  an  unpublished poem  to Kay  Boyle, written on  the  half-title page of a copy of  Memoirs   of Montparnasse,  in  the  Canadiana  Collection of  the  North  York Public  Library, Willowdale, Ontario.


DESIGN AND TRUTH IN GROVE'S IIIN SEARCH
OF MYSELF"


Paul Hjartarson

ANIMPORTANT  souRCE for the study of a writer;.,  the body of his own statements  concerning  his life and works. This is as true for the
study of Frederick  Philip  Grove as for other  writers. In  In  Search  of Myself, in letters, in published  and  unpublished  lectures, and in notebooks Grove comments at length  upon  the genesis and  composition of his works, his relations with pub­ lishers, colleagues, and  friends, his views on the literary questions of the day, and his vision as  a  writer.  Until  recently,  the  most influential-and  certainly  the most frequently  quoted-source of such statements  was Grove's autobiography, In  Search   of Myself. That book was indeed  the cornerstone  of  critical  thought  concerning   the  writer:  from  it commentators   derived  their  conception  of  the novelist, their  understanding of the shape  of his career,  and  their  knowledge of the composition of his books. Following Desmond Pacey, whose pioneering study, Frederick  Philip  Grove, was based upon a reading of the then unpublished  auto­ biography, critics emphasized  the cosmopolitan nature of Grove's early life; noted the  importance to  the  future  novelist of the trips to  Siberia  and  Biskra, and  of the twenty  years spent  as an itinerant  farmhand in  the United  States and  Can­ ada;  and characterized Grove's life in this country as that "of a lonely immigrant, unknown  to fellow-writers  and  rebuffed  by  publishers, resolutely creating  litera­ ture in shacks and barns during the long northern  winters.m
The  publication of  Douglas  Spettigue's  two studies,  Frederick   Philip  Grove and FPC: The European Years, and of Margaret Stobie's Frederick  Philip Grove, has forced  critics to recognize that  the novelist's account  of his life in In Search of Myself  is often  inaccurate and  at  times without  any  basis in  historical  fact; and consequently,  that  the critical conception of Grove and the body of commen­ tary  on his writing  must be reassessed in light of the new biographical evidence. There  are  some signs that  such  a reassessment is underway.  The  commentaries  that  have  appeared to date  suggest, however, that  critics are  uncertain  how to evaluate  In  Search of Myself  in light  of the  biographical  discoveries, and  that some have  simply  dismissed Grove  as a  "congenital liar,"  none of whose state­  ments  can  be  trusted.2    Certainly  enough  of Grove's  autobiographical remarks

73

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

have been questioned  to make commentators  uneasy about  citing any of them in support  of a critical argument.  In lieu of more reliable information, and perhaps in the  belief that  the Canadian section of the autobiography is accurate  even if the European is not, some critics continue  to quote  Grove's statements  about  his career  as a writer in Canada,  but most simply avoid any reference to In Search of Myself at alP
If the image of Grove prior to the publication  of Spettigue's studies was that of a  poverty-stricken  but  indefatigable  author  "resolutely  creating  literature in shacks  and  barns  during  the  long  northern   winters,"  the  image  now  gaining currency  is the  one  that  emerges  from  Andre  Gide's  "Conversation avec  un Allemand  quelques  annees avant  la querre," an  image  far from  flattering.  In  a review of FPC:   The  European Years, Michael  Darling  questions  the  need for the final two chapters of that book-in which Spettigue  re-examines Grove's Canadian writing in light of the new biographical  evidence -and suggests that Spettigue  adds  those  chapters  because  he  is "more  sympathetic" than  to  con­ clude  his  study  with  the  Greve-Gide  interviews.  According  to  Darling,  those interviews  represent  the  "low  point"  in Greve's  European career.4   In  one sense Darling's  remark  is surprising  because  the  Greve  story  does  not  of  course  end with the second Gide interview in 1905, but with Greve's disappearance in 1909;  in another  sense the remark  is understandable  because reviewers generally have focused  upon  the  Gide interviews  as the  most  revealing  and  certainly  the  most interesting  evidence  Spettigue  uncovered  concerning  Felix  Paul  Greve.  Stanley McMullin, for example,  states:  "The  most intriguing  insights  into  the working of Grove's mind occur in the short-lived relationship  between  Greve and Gide."5
But what  does Gide's  record of those interviews reveal about  the elusive Greve? According  to Darling  the portrait  that  emerges is "of  a rather  pathetic  clown, a poor actor,  and a self-confessed liar"; and although  some critics might deny that Greve  was either  a  "pathetic clown" or  a  "poor  actor," few  would  object  to Darling's  description  of him as a "self-confessed liar."6  After  all, at one point in the first interview  Greve himself states:  "11 faut  que  je vous avertisse, Monsieur Gide, que  je mens constamment.m Indeed,  Spettigue  himself places considerable emphasis  on  the  portrait  of  Greve  that  emerges from  the   1904 interview  and returns  to Greve's confession of mendacity  late in FPC: The European Years  to explain the novelist's intention in In Search  of Myself.
There  can  be no doubt  that  Spettigue's  portrait  of Greve  as a congenital  liar has influenced  Grove criticism. In  a review of The Master   Mason's House  one critic, for example, writes:

Unkindly, one might suggest that [Grove] was a literary con man, or more kindly, that he derived much of his psychic energy and creative power from the life secret which he cherished, guarded, and never revealed to anyone. He must be having a good laugh right  now, whatever sphere he dwells in, as he looks down and sees

74

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

the work that  scholars must do to  untangle the threads he tangled  [,]  as they follow up the false clues he planted, and try  to find the buried paths he so success­ fully camouflaged.8
What  is striking  about  these  comments  is not only that  the  range  of possible responses -from  the "unkindly" to the "more  kindly" -is so limited, but that any distinction  between them  almost immediately disappears  when, after setting forth  the  possibilities, the  critic  pictures  Grove as in fact  a "literary  con man" intent  upon tangling threads and planting false clues.
In  1g6g Spettigue  pointed out that although Grove critics based their commen­
taries  upon  the  novelist's  autobiographical statements,  they  were  reluctant   to examine  the autobiography in any detail. The commentaries  that  have appeared since 1973,  the year in  which  both  Spettigue's  FPG:  The   European Years  and Stobie's Frederick  Philip  Grove  were published, suggests that critics are now will­ ing to dismiss In Search  of Myself, again without submitting it to much scrutiny. In  a review of Stobie's  book, Stanley  McMullin,  for example, describes Grove's autobiographical statements as a "romantic smokescreen" that scholars have pene­ trated  to reveal  "how  often  [the  novelist's]  actual  state  of  affairs  was different from  the picture  he wished to present."9  Alec Lucas's remark is even more strik­ ing.  In  a  review  of  Desmond  Pacey's The   Letters  of Frederick   Philip  Grove, Lucas  states  quite  bluntly:   "Scholars  have trained  their  guns on  the wondrous autobiography that  fascinated   Pacey  (and  Grove)   and,  owing  largely  to  the work of Douglas Spettigue,  they have reduced it almost to ruins.mo
Undoubtedly such  repudiations of In  Search  of Myself  are in part  a function of the  previous critical  reliance  upon  that  work:  having accepted  the autobiog­ raphy   as  factual,   critics  feel  betrayed.  (Spettigue's   revelations  prompted   one critic  to remark  concerning  Grove:  "He  was a stranger,  and  he  took us in.") 11
Although  in  the  short  run  critics may  choose simply  to  dismiss Grove's  auto­ biographical  statements,  and  thus the image he creates of himself in In Search  of Myself, in the long run Grove criticism must come to terms with that image and with  the questions implicit  in the discovery that the autobiography is historically inaccurate. We must come to terms with In Search  of Myself  because the image the  novelist creates in that  work permeates  all his writing,  and  is central  to our understanding of his fiction  and  of his place in Canadian  literature. We  must come to terms  with it, too, because literary  criticism is concerned  not only with historical facts-for example, when and in what order Grove wrote his novels - neither  of which  has yet been conclusively established -but  with, among  other things, the  novelist's vision  of  himself  as  a  writer and   his  conception of the art of fiction. In what follows I consider how Spettigue's biographical  revela­ tions  alter  our  understanding of  In  Search   of Myself, what  light  the  extant manuscripts   of  the  autobiography  shed  on  the  composition  of that  work,  and how Grove's account  of his life is shaped  by the stance he adopts in the Prologue.

75

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH



UNDERLYING  THE CRITICAL DISMISSAL  of  In  Search of Myself  as  "a pack  of  lies" 12  is the  assumption  that   autobiographies must  be historically  accurate, and  that  because  Grove's is not,  it is necessarily  a sham, a "mask" behind   which  the  novelist  conceals  his "true" self. That  assumption is questionable, and  given  its implications for  Grove  studies,  merits  more  scrutiny than  it  has yet received.  The  assumption is questionable for at least two reasons. First,  it  ignores  the  fact  that  autobiography differs  from  biography precisely  in that  whereas  a biographer endeavours to provide an historically accurate account of  his subject's life,  an  autobiographer attempts to  articulate his own  vision  of himself at  the  time  of writing,  of who he is and  of how the events of his life have shaped his development. What the  autobiography offers, consequently, is not the historical  facts,  but  the autobiographer's vision of himself.  Secondly, the  assump­ tion  that  autobiographies must be historically accurate involves a failure to recog­ nize  that   an  individual's life  is shaped less by  historical events  than by  one's reaction  to  a:nd  understanding of  those  events,  and  that  each  of  us constantly reinterprets his or  her  own  past.  In  Margaret Laurence's The  Diviners  Morag Gunn   observes:  "A  popular misconception is that  we can't change the  past - everyone  is constantly changing their  own  past,  recalling it,  revising  it.m3   We continually reshape our  past  in accordance with  our  changing understanding of ourselves.
Of  course,  not all autobiographies diverge  as markedly from  the verifiable facts as  Frederick Philip  Grove's.  In  a  recent  study  of  Andre Gide's autobiography, Si le grain ne meurt,  C. D. E. Talton observes that  "even  if a reader admires the style  or  enjoys  the  anecdotes [in  an  autobiography], he  must  still  respect  the truth of the  work for it to be successful as an autobiography." That observation leads  Talton to  ask:  "Just how  much  licence  with  the  truth can  the  autobiog­ rapher be allowed  and  still remain  worthy  of our  respect?" The answer  he gives with  regard to Si le grain ne meurt  is instructive. After  pointing out  the  many  historical   inaccuracies  in  Gide's   autobiography and   citing   Roger   Martin du Gard's comment that  "Gide's self-portrait was always slanted  with  the opinion of posterity  in mind," Talton states:

Gide traces not only the self that actually existed, but also aspects of himself which he  only  believed  to exist. Very  few  people  are  infallible  in  their  self-appraisal, and  even  fewer  could  be counted  on  for  as much  honesty as Gide  in  an  auto­ biography.  Gide's  factual  discrepancies, in  Martin du Gard's  eyes, would become only normal  human  failings, associated with  the  larger  question  of most  people's incapacity  for completely honest self-portrayal.  They  would have little bearing  on the  total  impression of the  autobiography. Gide  confessed  that  facts  external  to himself  could  indeed  become  twisted  in  his memory,  but  the  personal  emotion evoked  by  the  events  remains  constant.  His  nephew,  Dominique Drouin,  laugh­ ingly pointed  out  that  Gide's 1931 account  of a story which Drouin  had  told him

GROVE:  DESIGN  & TRUTH

at the end of the First World War so distorted the original version as to become pure  invention. In  consternation  Gide investigated what  might have happened, and, somewhat relieved, surmised that while he might have telescoped two differ­ ent stories, he had not, after all, invented a new one: "Car, en tout cas, ce que je n'avais pu inventer, c'etait mon emotion ... " We may and must believe that even where there are doubtful facts in Si le grain ne meurt, the emotions are honest. It would  seem that  this is all we can hope  for from any autobiography. This is espe­ cially true when the autobiographer is ... using his own life and a narrative form primarily in the interest of polemics. Provided that the emotional state he associ­ ates with each event is honestly depicted, Gide will have fulfilled his obligation to the autobiographical genre.14

According  to Talton, the autobiographer's primary obligation  is to be true to his own inner  life, his own  vision of himself. Readers of autobiographies, he asserts, "are   able,  indeed   almost  always  obliged,  to  excuse  inconsistencies  in  factual details ... [and] even conscious distortions of truth."
The relevance of Talton's statements to an understanding of Grove's In Search
of Myself  is to be found,  in part  at least, in Douglas Spettigue's comments con­ cerning  the  Prologue  to  that  autobiography. For although  in  his first book on Grove,  Spettigue   questioned   the  accuracy  of  the  Prologue-as of the  auto­ biography  as  a  whole-he  nevertheless affirmed that  "emotionally  the  whole Prologue  rings true," an  affirmation  he repeats in  FPC: The   European Years, adding  that  it is not  only emotionally  but to some extent  biographically  true as well.15   Indeed,  Spettigue  reports  his own surprise at discovering  just how much of  In  Search  of Myself  has its basis in  verifiable facts.  "What emerges from  a close comparison  of Grove's  account of his life with the facts," he remarks in the Introduction to the  NCL  edition of In  Search  of Myself, "is an astonished sense not only that  the life story is so fictionalized but also that so much of it is true.mo Critics  to date,  however,  have focused primarily on the more unsavoury aspects of Grove's  past  and  marvelled  at  the measures he took to ensure that  his early life remained  buried.
But if Spettigue's and  Stobie's studies reveal the points at which In Search  of Myself  diverges  from  the  verifiable facts,  they also demonstrate that  at  a very early stage in his life Grove  began to reshape his past and  thus slowly to evolve the image of himself he embodies in his autobiography. Although  details -like the precise date of his birth and the number of sisters -change, the image Grove creates  of  himself  in  the  autobiography develops with  remarkable consistency. The  process of evolution  is apparent in Felix Paul Greve's letters to his German publishers, Rudolf  von Poellnitz and Anton Kippenberg; in Andre Gide's record of his "Conversation avec un Allemand"  (I 904) ; in the biographical  notes Greve
sends Franz  Brummer  in  I907; in Fred Grove's letters to Isaac J. Warkentin; in
the  biographical  notes  the  novelist sends Ryerson Press inI 925, in articles like
Grove's "Apologia  pro  vita et opere suo"  ( I93 I) and  "The Plight of Canadian


77

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

Fiction: A Reply" ( 1938), and  in the novelist's letters to Arthur Leonard Phelps, Watson  Kirkconnell, Richard Crouch, Lome Pierce,  Desmond Pacey, and  others. As Douglas Spettigue himself notes,  "the core  of  [Grove's] account of his back­ ground in  the  autobiography is to be found  in  the  lies told  to  Gide  in  1904."11
Those  lies constitute Grove's  response  to and  attempt to cope  with  the  world  in
which  he found himself. It is important to note  that they  predate his immigration to Canada.
If, after  the  excitement of Spettigue's revelations concerning Frederick Philip Grove's   European past,  students of  Canadian literature have  found  Desmond Pacey's  edition of  the  novelist's  letters  unrevealing-and the  reviews  suggest they have -it is not  because Grove simply  buried his past, but  because he slowly reshaped it  in  terms  of  his  changing understanding  of  himself.  Thus the  man who  declared to  Franz  Brummer in 1907 that  he "was firmly  convinced that  in the future [he]  would somehow, somewhere in the  world,  be a centre," gradually came  to  feel  that   he  had  a  crucial  role to  play  as a spokesman for  Old  World values  in  the   New  World.   Although Alec  Lucas   asserts  in  his  review  of  The Letters   of  Frederick   Philip  Grove  that   "the 520  letters   of  Grove's Canadian period ... lift  Greve's mask  at  least  a little," he is almost  immediately forced  to acknowledge that "even in  the  intimacy of letters  to  his wife"  the  novelist  plays out  the role he created for himself.18 Grove did  not simply  play that  role:  he lived it.  And  in  his autobiography he sets his vision  of  himself  before  his readers. In Search  of Myself  will remain  a central document in the study  of Frederick Philip Grove  because  in it the novelist sets forth  the  vision that  shaped both  his life and his fiction.
In  FPC: The  European Years  Spettigue is clearly  uneasy  about the  liberties Grove  takes  with  the  historical  facts  and  about whether the  novelist's  reshaping of his past disqualifies In Search  of Myself as autobiography. In  the closing pages of his study  Spettigue raises the question  of whether Grove's autobiography really involves  a "search for  the self,"  as its title  suggests: "if  this  book  did  represent FPG's search  for the self within," he asks,
would  it  not have  dealt honestly with his peasant  antecedents,  the family's finan­ cial and  marital  problems, his relations with  his sister, his father,  his mother,  his friends?  With  the  shock  that  allegedly made  him  a  liar  on  his  mother's  death? With  the  trauma of university days, the  Wilde  imitations,  the  assumed elegance, the extravagance, the attempt  through  his youth  to be what he was not? With the dishonesty, with  the humiliation  of imprisonment? With  the strain  of poverty and overwork?  With  the flight to North  America?  He  had  nothing  to fear, surely; in the nineteen  forties few who had  known him were living, few at least who would be likely to notice or take an interest in his book. After  two World Wars his pub­ lishers were not going to pursue him. He could  not expect Elsa to be interested  in him now-she hadn't been much interested apparently in 1909. 19
Spettigue concludes that  because  Grove  was  "carefully concealing much  of  the

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

truth  about  himself" the autobiography is not in fact a search "by the author  for the  author." Although   he  stops short  of  disqualifying  In  Search of  Myself as autobiography because  it  does not  involve a sustained  search  for self, he does imply  that  such  a  search  characterizes  the  best autobiographies. In  Search of Myself, Spettigue  suggests, is simply a "conventional  autobiography" that "con­ form[s]  to a pattern  in Canadian confessional writing." Grove, he asserts, "hides"  his "real" identity  within  the autobiography: it is not the autobiographer but the reader who engages in the "search."
Spettigue's comments   raise  serious  questions  about  Grove's  intention  in  In
Search of  Myself. Certainly  Spettigue  is right  to question  the  use of the  word "search" in the title of the autobiography, for nothing in the Prologue or in the main  body of the  work suggests that  Grove intends to engage in such a "search for  self";  on  the  contrary,  the  novelist makes it clear  in  the  Prologue  that  he knows why he has failed  as a writer  and  that  he attributes  his failure  not to his own  inadequacies but  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was forced  to  write. Although  he  professes doubts  about  his ability  to explain  his failure,  he states that  he sees "the  reasons  clearly enough"  (ISM, r r ) . Grove's  intention  in the autobiography is actually  much  closer to that  of an  apologist than  to a  confes­ sional  writer:   he  does not  propose  to search  his past  in  order  to  discover  the essential truth  about  himself, but to explain  why his "struggle  [as a writer]  has been  such  as  to  make  defeat  a  foregone  conclusion"  (ISM   6),  and  thus  to defend  himself  against  his own  feeling of failure. Grove  uses his own life story and the genre of autobiography to demonstrate  that life in Canada is inimical to the arts, and  that  he did  not succeed as a writer in this country  because no one could possibly do so.


IN I 93 I  GROVE PUBLISHED  an article entitled  "Apologia  pro vita  et  opere  suo,"  and  like that  article  In  Search of  Myself appears  to  have developed  out  of the  novelist's growing sense in the  rg2o's  and  1930's  that  he
was writing  in  a cultural  wilderness. In  the I 93I article  Grove  defends  his life and  works with  considerable  confidence;  he had, after  all, published  five books in the preceding six years, and in three cross-Canada lecture tours had established a  reputation as a gifted speaker.  Although  the novelist speaks repeatedly  in the article of the  possibility of failure,  he looks to the future  with considerable confi­ dence. "I aim,"  he proclaims at the outset, "at  building the sort of work which, while like the  pyramids,  taking  time to build, will also stand  for some little time after  being  completed." Early  in  the  "Apologia" he shifts into  the first person plural, and in the final paragraph asserts:
what  we  are  trying  to do  cannot become  clear  till at  least  a  trace of the  walls of that   edifice  becomes  visible  which  we  are  trying  to  erect: so  far,  we  have  put

79

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

down  only a few of the foundation  stones. And  so we come  back to this:  either our  day  has been, or our day will come; we only know that,  in our  aim, we are not of this day of false fronts and shoddy. But we also know that, if our lives and works are  to be of any value whatever  (and  we sometimes doubt  it), they will be so precisely on that account.20

In  the  autobiography, begun  in  the  summer of I 938,  Grove  is much  less confi­ dent. Having published  only  one  book  in  eight  years,  and  reduced to soliciting  subscriptions for a private  printing of Two  Generations, he is forced  to acknowl­ edge  that  he has failed  to gain  an  audience for  his work. Although he still looks to  the  future for  his  jurisdiction and  although he  still  affirms  that  "the artist  should   always  build  his work  as if it  were  meant to last  through the  centuries" (ISM, 426-27), he is forced  to  acknowledge that  his achievements  have  fallen  far  short  of his own  minimum expectations. What is more,  Grove  is haunted in the  Prologue and  throughout the  autobiography by the  spectre of  old  age,  and  with  it the decline  of his mental powers. This is not the first time  he has despaired of gaining an audience, but  now  he feels that "[his] day  has been" and  that  old age is upon  him.
In   Experiment  in  Autobiography   H.  G.  Wells  states  that he  "began  [his] autobiography to  reassure  [him]self during a  phase  of  fatigue, restlessness  and vexation," and  notes at its conclusion  that  "it  has achieved its purpose  of  reassur­ ance."21 In Search of Myself appears to have  been  occasioned by a similar  need.  At  no time  was  Frederick  Philip  Grove's  career  at  a lower  ebb than just before  he  began   his  autobiography in  the  summer of  1gg8. In  a  journal entry  dated April  6,  1938,  the  novelist  asks himself  what  the  first  three  months of the  year have  brought him and  he replies:
They have been three months of the profoundest  economic depression through which I  have  lived;  and,  therefore,  of  the  most frantic  endeavours to break  it. Every­ thing seems to have gone wrong. There  is practically  no income:  $4-75 a week or within  a  few  pennies.  I  have  to have  many  trifles. But,  in order  to be  able  to spend  23¢ on a box of matches, I have to plan for weeks ahead  to gather the sum together  by pennies. The  strange  thing  is that,  within  this great,  relatively pros­ perous  country,  it would be entirely  within  the possibilities for a man  like myself who  refuses to apply for help,  to starve  to death  if he persists  in  doing  what  he was meant  to do, namely in standing face to face with things, instead of immersing himself  in  them.  Of  course, I am  too old  now in any  case. But,  had  I  foreseen what  has  happened-that, as a  writer,  I should  be  forgotten  in  my retreat­ would  it have  made  any difference in the past when  I was still young enough  to do other  things? As a matter  of fact, I am  just  obstinate  enough  not to mind for myself; I could live in a hovel and  go on, damning the world. But my wife? And my boy?22

It is in  this  despondent state  of mind-so effectively  evoked  in the  Prologue to
In  Search  of  Myself-that he  begins  to  write  the  story  of  [his]  struggles  as a writer."23

So

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

The  two extant  drafts of In  Search  of Myself confirm Grove's statements in his letters  that  he initially conceived  the autobiography  as a sequel to A Search  for America "dealing with the 26 years following the years treated in the older book" (Letters, 337;  cf. pp.  327, 330). In  the opening  pages of the earlier  of the two drafts,  the narrator, Phil Branden,  summarizes his first twenty years on the North American  continent  and  recounts the events that followed his decision to become a school teacher  in Canada. It is only in this early stage of composition, and then only  once,  in  a  letter  to  Lome   Pierce,  the  editor  of Ryerson  Press, that  the novelist gives the  tentative  title of the book as "In  Search  of Myself" (Letters,
337). He does so, I suspect, only to link it with A Search   for America, the most financially  successful of his earlier  works, and  thereby  with luck arouse Pierce's interest in publishing  it. The  title Grove almost always uses when referring to the autobiography in the years between its conception and subsequent  publication  is the "Life  of a Writer  in Canada," a title that  accurately  reflects both  his initial choice of subject  and  the focus of the published work. Interestingly,  the title that appears  on  the  last  manuscript draft,  which for the  most part  covers only the European years, that  is, from  the novelist's birth until  rgrg, is "My  Life[:] The Life of a Writer  in Canada.m4  At no point in the composition  of In  Search  of Myself  does Grove  waiver in  his desire to demonstrate  that  his "struggles  [as a writer]   had  been  such  as  to  make  defeat  a  foregone  conclusion"   (ISM, 6) . "Canada," he  contends  in  "The Plight  of  Canadian  Fiction:   A  Reply,"  an article   he  completed   shortly  before  writing  In  Search   of Myself, "is  a  non­ conductor  for any kind of intellectual current."25
If Grove's subject  in In  Search  of Myself is his career  as a writer in Canada, why in  the last  manuscript draft  and  in the published  work does he include an account   of his  European  past?  And  why in  giving  that  account   does he  not reveal  his former  identity  as Felix Paul Greve? It is impossible to answer either of these questions conclusively. Grove could conceivably have written an apologia for his life in Canada in which he either gave no account  of his years in Europe or completely revealed  his German  past. The  basis for the inclusion of the Euro­ pean section is, however, laid in the initial draft  of that  work, for in the opening pages of that  manuscript, as in the published book, it is clear that Grove's feeling of failure  is inextricably  bound  up in his belief that  he had  shown considerable promise  as a  young  man  in  Europe  and  that,  given  the  circumstances  of his birth, education,  and travel, he was ideally prepared  to be a "spokesman" for the "pioneers" he  encountered  on  the  North  American  prairie (ISM,  226). In recounting  his life in Canada Grove apparently  realized  that  he could not make his readers  understand the  enormity  of his failure  without  first leading  them  to realize the promise he had  shown as a  young man. So he includes in In  Search of Myself  the account  of his life in Europe  that  he had  shaped  over the preced-

81

GROVE:  DESIGN  & TRUTH

ing decades  to explain  to himself and  to others  why he had  become an  author and what qualified him to write about pioneer life in western Canada.
The  reason  why Frederick  Philip  Grove did  not  reveal his former  identity  as
Felix Paul Greve is perhaps implicit in what  I have stated thus far. Grove under­ took In  Search  of Myself  not  as a confession but  as an  apologia:   his intention  was not to seek the essential truth  about  himself, and  thus achieve a greater self­ knowledge, but to defend his career by demonstrating that  his failure was inevit­ ble. Grove's subject-and the focus of the published work-is thus his years as
a writer in Canada, that is, the years from  1912 to the time he began writing In Search   of Myself. He  added  the  European section  to  his "Life  of a  Writer  in Canada" in order  to set his failure in what  he regarded  as its proper perspective. The  vision he presents of Europe and of his early life there  is one seen from  this side  of  the  Atlantic  by a  man  who  feels  that  after  decades  of  "often  titanic endeavour" (ISM, 4)  he is a failure,  who feels finally that  he is "an  exile from [his]   youth  and  its  promise"  (ISM, 236). To  demand   that  Frederick  Philip Grove search his German  past is to demand  that he examine his life from another point of view and that he write a different book.


IN  "DESIGN AND  TRUTH IN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY" Roy Pascal  de­ fines autobiography as "the  reconstruction of the movement  of a life, or part of aJ life";  however, he hastens to add that it necessarily "imposes a pattern  on  [that] life, constructs out of it a coherent story."
Autobiography means ... discrimination and  selection  in  face  of the  endless com­ plexities  of  life,  selection  of facts,  distribution of  emphasis, choice  of  expression. Everything depends on the standpoint chosen....
Pascal  in  fact  argues  that  the  "interplay" -he  also  calls  it  a  "collusion" - between  past  and  present,  between  the  events  of one's  life and  the  particular standpoint from  which they are  reviewed and  interpreted, is "not  merely a con­ dition of all autobiography, [but]  its very essence." Moreover, he asserts that the "significance" of autobiography "is more the  revelation  of the  present situation  than the uncovering of the past."26
In  the Prologue  to In  Search  of Myself  Grove outlines the circumstances  that
impelled  him  to  write  his  autobiography and  establishes  the  standpoint from which he proposes to reconstruct his life in this country.  An accurate understand­ ing  of  the  standpoint he adopts  is essential  to a  recognition  of  the  pattern he imposes on  his experiences, and  of the image  he creates  of  himself as a writer. The mood is established in the opening lines:
It was  a dismal  November  day,  with  a raw  wind  blowing  from  the  north-west and  cold,  iron-grey  clouds  Hying low-one  of those  Ontario days  which,  on  the lake-shores or  in a country of rock and  swamp, seem  to bring  visions of an ageless

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

time after  the emergence  of the earth  from chaos, or a foreboding of the end of a world about  to die from entropy.
It was into such a country  of rock and swamp, a few miles north  of Lake Erie,
that  my business took  me that  day. I was driving  my old and  battered  car  and,
having  come a  not inconsiderable  distance, I felt chilled  and  cheerless. At last  I entered  upon a straight,  rutted  marl road which led for miles over a clay-coloured dam  thrown  through   a  morass dotted  here  and  there  with  the  dead  stumps  of huge  trees  of  a  departed  generation:  swamp-oak,  white  ash,  and   pine,  now blackened by carbonization. (ISM, I)

Into this dreary, life-forsaken landscape the novelist drives "to fetch  a girl for the Sisyphus   task  of  a  household drudge" (ISM,  1 ). The   further up  the  road  he proceeds,  the  more  deeply  rutted and  impassable it  becomes,  until  he finds  his way  blocked  by  a  washout. While  forlornly  considering what  action  to take,  he suddenly thinks  of the  events  of the  preceding evening  and  realizes that  his pres­ ent  despondency has  its source  in  those  earlier  events.  "My profound feeling  of misery  no  longer  seemed  to proceed  from  any  momentary quandary," he states,  "but from  something I had  lived  through the  preceding night"  (ISM, 2).  His immediate physical  predicament in effect becomes a figure for what  he regards  as the plight  of a writer  in this country.
The  novelist  relates  that   a  friend,  "the librarian of  a  great  city"  (ISM, 3),
who  periodically drives  to  the  Groves'  isolated,  ramshackle farmhouse to  keep the  writer  supplied with  "six or ten" of the best recently  published books, had  on the  preceding evening brought him  "the biography of a Frenchman still living" (ISM, 3)  whom  Grove  claims  was  once  a close personal  friend. In  their  youth, the novelist asserts, this critically acclaimed French writer had  frequently deferred to   his  slightly   younger   friend   and   "had  prophesied ... the   most  brilliant  of futures" (ISM, 6)   for  him.  Compared to  the  Frenchman-whom  Spettigue has  identified as Andre Gide-Grove  considers  himself  a failure, and  proposes to write  his autobiography to explain  why he has not fulfilled  the  promise  of his youth.  In  the  Prologue Grove  makes it immediately clear,  however,  that  the chief reason  for his failure is to be found  less in himself than  in the fact that  he "never had  an audience";
for no matter  what  one may say, he says it to somebody; and if there is nobody to hear, it remains as though  it had never been said; the tree falling in a forest where there  is none  to hear,  produces  no sound. A book arises as much in the mind  of the reader  as in that  of the writer;  and  the writer's art  consists above all in creat­ ing response;  the  effect of a book is the result of a collaboration  between  writer and audience. That collaboration I had failed to enforce.... (ISM, 6)

Although in  this  passage  Grove  places  the  onus for such  "collaboration" on  the writer,  the  Prologue as a whole suggests that  there  are  a number of factors  which in  this  instance absolve  him  of  responsibility.   On  the  one  hand, he  establishes early  in the  Prologue that  in  his youth  he was  recognized  as a man  of consider-

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

able talent  destined for a brilliant career; on the other,  he depicts this country as a  dreary  land  of  "rock  and  swamp,"  a  wilderness  inimical  to  the  arts.  Thus, whereas  "in  the  crowded  capitals of Europe" (ISM, 4)  the  French  author  has written  works that  fill "eighteen  pages" of bibliography, and  consequently  has earned   the  distinction  of  seeing  his  biography   published   within   his  lifetime (ISM, 4), "on  the lonely prairies of western Canada" the Canadian novelist has "in  spite  of  often  titanic  endeavour ... lived  and  worked  in  obscurity,  giving expression at the best, to a few, a very few mirrorings of life in the raw such as it has been [his]  lot to witness" (ISM, 4). Grove proposes to explain  why in spite of acknowledged  talent and in spite of prodigious effort his failure was inevitable; and thus he sets out to dramatize  the plight of a writer in Canada.
As Pascal's  comments  on autobiography suggest, the stance  Grove  adopts  at the outset of In  Search  of Myself shapes the account  he gives of his life. Grove's own  title for  the  autobiography, "Life  of a  Writer  in  Canada," is a more apt description  of the  work than  the title of the  published  book because all the ele­ ments of In  Search  of Myself, including  Grove's  account  of his European  past, are organized  as a revelation of his present situation. In  the Introduction  to the NCL  edition  of  In  Search   of Myself  Douglas  Spettigue  suggests that  Grove's book follows

a pattern  in Canadian  autobiographical writing whereby the ;mthor as an  immi­ grant  or of an immigrant family exalts his European  past into a sort of  Golden Age of culture and affluence. Mrs. Moodie's Roughing  It in the Bush is one clear example;  In  Search  of Myself is another.  According to  this pattern,  the artist comes to Canada  as to a land of promise, but the promise is not realized, or not in the way he had  expected. Instead he suffers isolation, humiliation,  poverty, and neglect until  he  emerges from  this ritual  descent  to a  sober  realization of the nature of Canadian life and his relation to it. (ISM, xi)

What  Spettigue's comments suggest is that  Grove  shapes  his European past in terms of his present  understanding of himself; indeed,  Spettigue  himself argues that  the "literary  intent" of the European  section of In  Search  of Myself and of "the  first section of Part III" is " ... to build up a sense of early promise to em­ phasize the fall."27  Certainly  Grove characterizes  his life in Europe as a period of great  wealth,  culture,  and  travel  to contrast  those  years with  the  time spent  in poverty  and  neglect "on  the lonely prairies of western  Canada"  (ISM, 4)  and on his small farm  outside Simcoe, just as in the Prologue  he recasts his relation­ ship  with  the  "young  Frenchman," exaggerating the  promise  of his youth,  to heighten  the  pathos of his own subsequent  failure. Similarly,  the novelist shapes the  account  of his life in Europe  and  of his years as an  itinerant  farm  labourer  to  demonstrate,  on  the  one  hand,  that  he  was  a  "cosmopolitan," and  on  the other,  that  he "had  fitted [him]self to be the spokesman  of a race"  (ISM, 2 2 6 ) , facts  that  serve  both  to  heighten  the  injustice  of  his failure  and  to  place  the

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH


responsibility for  it  on shoulders other  than  his own.  Concerning Grove's  back­
ground B. K. Sandwell wrote in I 945:
Of  the first forty years of his life, one half had been devoted to the acquisition of a very rich  and  wide-ranging  education  in various European universities, and  to extensive  travel  in many  parts  of the world;  the other  half had been lived in the closest contact   with  the  soil and  with  the  life of  the  great  generality  of  North American  people. There  could hardly have been a better  preparation for a literary career of the most important kind.28
Because  of his "unique" (ISM, 226)  background Grove  begins to feel at  a very early  stage  in  his Canadian career  that  it is his task  to  record  "the age-old  con­ flict  between   human desire  and  the stubborn resistance  of  nature," the  conflict that  underlies the  autobiography itself. "Perhaps, very likely even," he states,  "I was foredoomed to  failure in  my endeavour; in fact,  I seemed  to see even  then  that  I was bound to fail but the attempt had to be made" (ISM, 227).
To  recognize  that Grove  organizes In  Search  of  Myself  to explain  his failure
is to acknowledge the limitations of that  autobiography -and of autobiographies generally-as an   historically accurate  account  of  the   autobiographer's  life. "Every historian," Pascal  remarks, "knows how  critically  he must  use autobiog­ raphies, not only because  of conscious polemical intentions in the autobiographer, but  also  because  of  the  unconscious polemics  of memory."29   Certainly it  would be misleading to assume  that  while the  European section  of  the autobiography is largely  fictional, the  Canadian section  is for  the  most  part  historically  accurate. Although the   Canadian section   may  be,  relatively  speaking, more  historically accurate  than  the  European, the  novelist shapes  all the  events  recounted in the  autobiography to  justify his failure. And  just as he recreates his European past as a time  of great  wealth, culture, travel,  and  promise,  so he reconstructs his years in   Canada  to   emphasize  the   poverty,  isolation,   humiliation, and   neglect   he suffered.
In  Frederick   Philip  Grove  Spettigue notes  how Grove  organizes events  in  In Search  of Myself  to  indicate that  "a  malevolent destiny  or  touch-of-death [is] upon  everything associated   with  him." Concerning the  "Russian manor-house" in  which  he  was allegedly  born,  Grove states: "Incredibly, within  an  hour  or so of the  event,  the  hospitable house ... was struck  by lightning and  burned to the ground" (ISM, I 5). As Spettigue notes,  this is the  first of many  similar  events in the autobiography:
As a second example  of the malevolence of fate, he records that a French Catholic priest in North  Dakota  persuaded  him to go to Winnipeg  to take up teaching­ the  priest was subsequently  killed in a train accident  (ISM, 240). Similarly, when the Groves drove East in 1929 their car coasted into Port Hope and stopped there, out  of gas,  in  front  of a  branch  of  the  Royal  Bank.  Completely  without  funds, Grove  was granted  credit  by the  manager,  who had  heard  one of Grove's Cana­ dian  Club  speeches.  The  manager,  'suddenly'  died,  'two  days later'  from  'causes

ss

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

unknown'  (ISM, 404). As a matter of record, it was the previous manager who had died, of pneumonia, two weeks before Grove's visit, but Grove appropriated that death for his purpose.80

Did Grove consciously "appropriate that  death  for his purpose" or in the decade that  had  passed, had  he unwittingly  reshaped  that  event in his mind?  Whatever the answer, throughout  the Canadian section of the autobiography Grove can be seen similarly reshaping events.
1
InI 962 Mrs. Grove objected to the emphasis critics placed on the poverty she and  her  husband  endured,  and  observed that  it occupied  only a "short  period" in their  lives.32   But it is precisely the poverty and  neglect upon  which Frederick Philip  Grove himself dwells in In  Search  of Myself  and  out of which he creates the image of himself as a writer. It is the image of Grove  writing  A Search   for America "with  lined gloves on stiffening fingers"  (ISM,I 93), and  years later, when confronted  by the Saturday Evening  Post's request  for a typescript of that work, being forced  to  type each  word of his most recent  draft  over three  times because his typewriter  ribbon  had  worn thin  and  he could not  afford to buy a new one  (ISM, 360). In 1948 Northrop  Frye described Grove's life as "a  pitiful record of frustration and  heartbreak, combined  with a dogged insistence on writ­ ing as  he felt  without  compromise.  He  is apparently our  only example  of an artist's  fight for survival in an indifferent  society."33   Certainly  that  is the image the novelist creates in In  Search  of Myself. In reaction  to that  image critics have more recently asserted that  "in spite of his complaints  against lack of  recognition in Canada, [Frederick  Philip  Grove  was]  one of the most  honoured  Canadian novelists of his generation" (Letters, xvi).  In fairness to the novelist, however, it should  be noted  that  the Governor-General's Medal,  the honorary  degrees, and other  marks of recognition  usually cited in support  of  this statement were given

86

GROVE:  DESIGN  & TRUTH

to him in the years after  the autobiography  was completed.34  When  he wrote In Search   of Myself  Grove  was looking back over the decade  of the thirties, and particularly  over the years from  I933 to I939, during which despite all his efforts he was unable to secure the publication of a single book. What  he could no longer forget  was the  poverty  and  the neglect; what he could no longer evade was his own profound feeling of failure.


IN HIS  STUDY OF  AUTOBIOGRAPHY Roy Pascal points out that an  author's autobiography is "not  simply a statement  of what  a man  was and is";  it is also, he notes, "in  some sort a  polemical statement, another  contribu­ tion to his life's work, not a resume of it. It is an active contribution, not a closing
of  accounts."35    Spettigue's discovery  of  Grove's  German   past  necessitates  the recognition  that  In  Search   of Myself  is not  only the novelist's self-portrait,  but "in  some sort  a  polemical  argument," another  of Grove's  attempts  to win  an audience  for his work;  it is another  "Apologia  pro vita et opere suo," a defence of his literary  aspirations occasioned in this instance not by the attacks of critics, but  by  his own  profound  feeling  of failure.  In  the  PrologQe to  In  Search   of Myself  the novelist makes it clear that  his autobiographical impulse originates in and  is guided  by  an  overwhelming  need  to defend  his career  as a  writer,  to explain  that  his failure  was really a "foregone conclusion." He offers that expla­ nation  in the hope that  it "might  more than  compensate  for the failure to have made  [him]self  heard  so far" (ISM, I I). There  is no resignation,  no closing of accounts.
Throughout his life in this country Grove was haunted  by the spectre of failure and  of "a coming senescence" (ISM, 457).  When he arrived in Canada to begin life anew he was thirty.  By the time he returned  to writing and  published his first book in Canada he was forty-three.  He felt and claimed  to be much  older than he  was. He  believed  that  time  was running  out on  him,  and  was impatient  of success. Above  all  things  he  feared  failure  and  the  decline  of  his  mental  and emotional  faculties.  But if he feared these things he also found  his inspiration  in them.  He saw the spectre  of failure and  decay in the  boarded-up White Range Line  House, and  the experience  inspired  him to write Settlers  in  the  Marsh; he saw  that  spectre,  too, in  the  palatial  but  decayed  Rugby  farm,  and  fashioned Fruits  of the  Earth. Out  of his fascination  with  and  fear  of "a  coming  senes­ cence"  he created  characters like Whiskers in A Search   for America, Sigurdson in  Settlers   of the  Marsh, Percy  and  Ada  Weatherhead in  "The  Weatherhead Fortunes," Martha and  John  Elliott Senior in Our  Daily  Bread, Blaine in Fruits of the  Earth, Sam  Clark in The Master  of Mill, and of course, the senile old man in the Prologue to In Search  of Myself.
Grove's  portrayal  of the senile old man is particularly  striking. "There ye can

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

still see the  hole where they pulled him out,  with two towing  trucks," the old man remarks concerning the  "smart-aleck salesman  from  Tilsonberg" whose speeding car struck  the  washout  and  careened  off the  road.
'Him,  I say, but I mean his car.' And once more he focused his mind's eye in that absent  way of his; and  then he burst out laughing  in his sterile, cackling  hilarity.
'Do you know what  he did?' He took his elbow out of the window of the car and
raised  one  foot  to  the  running-board. Then,  as  if  to  smooth  out  a  kink in his spine, he  pressed his left hand  into  his side,  just below the ribs. And once more, under  that  dismal sky, he surrendered  himself body and  soul to the impulse of his overpowering  merriment,  slapping  his raised  knee  with  his right  hand  between guffaws. It  was an  incomprehensible,  obscene, drenching torrent  of mirth  before which  one  could  only stand  gasping.  'Yeah,'  he  ejaculated at  last  between  his bursts of gaiety,  'the  blasted fool broke ... broke his ... broke his neck!' And six, seven slaps of his open palm resounded  in succession on his knee while his head, swinging from side to side as if severed on its pedicel, hinted  at  the entire inade­ quacy  of mere  laughter  to express to the full  just how funny  this trifling mishap had  been.... (ISM, 10)

What Phil  Branden, the  narrator of  A  Search  for America, states  concerning Whiskers  is really  true  of all  these  characters: "He was  the  walking  Death-in­ Life;  he stood  for the end of all things mortal, for ambitions foiled or misguided; for that  disappointment which is the more  heart-breaking when it is unconscious. He  stood  for  Old  Age looking  back  on  Youth; for  failure incarnate, such  as in the  essentials  awaits us all, no matter what  our  apparent success may  be."36
The  spectre of failure  and  decay  haunts Grove's writing because  it haunted his
life, and  in his autobiography he wrestles with  it once  again. He  uses the form  of the  autobiography and  the  events of his own  life to demonstrate the  truth of the belief -widely  held  at  the  time -that a great  literature had  not  developed in Canada because, as  E. K.  Brown  was to argue in  1943,  economically the situa­ tion  of our  literature is, and  has been, "unsound"; politically  we exhibit  a "colo­ nial  spirit" and  show  little  interest  in  things  Canadian; and  culturally  we cling to frontier values,  admiring "the man  who can  run  a factory, or invent a gadget or save  a life  by surgical  genius," but  questioning the  value  of "the  aesthetic or contemplative life."37   Given  these  conditions, Grove  argues, his own  failure was inevitable. To   recognize   that   Grove  writes  In  Search of Myself  to  justify  his failure is to acknowledge its limitations as an  historically accurate account of the writer's  life, but  it is not to lessen the value of the  autobiography as the novelist's  vision of his years in the country.

NOTES

1 Desmond  Pacey, Frederick Philip Grove  (Toronto: Ryerson, 1945),  p. ro.
2   In  a  review of FPG: The  European  Years  entitled  "A  Mask for All Occasions: The  Identity  of FPG," ECW,  I (Winter  I974), 50-53, Michael  E. Darling speaks of the  "growing  portrait  of FPG  as a congenital  liar.''  In  FPG: The  European

88

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH


Years  (Ottawa:   Oberon, I 973)   Spettigue  himself  describes   Grove   as  a  "con­ genital" liar: "As  we have  seen from  the Gide-Grove interviews," Spettigue states,  "FPG is a self-confessed  liar. As we have also seen, the lying probably was at least as much  deliberate as congenital" (p. 214).
3   As  recently as  1979  Grove's autobiographical account of  the  origin  of  Fruits  of the  Earth  was  quoted in  an  explication of  that  novel.  See  D.  J. Dooley,  Moral
Vision in the Canadian  Novel  (Toronto: Clarke Irwin, 1979), p. 14. Dooley does not  acknowledge that  Grove  dates  the incident in I893,  when  Greve  was a school­
boy in Hamburg.
4   Darling, p. 53·
5   Review  of  FPC: The  European Years, Queen's  Quarterly,  81  (I974), 125.
6  Darling, p. 53·
7   "Conversation avec  un  Allemand quelques annees  avant la  guerre," N [ ouvelle] R[evue]   F[ranfaise], August   Igig; rpt.  in  a  revised  form  in  Incidences  (Paris: Librairie Gallimard, 1924), p.  I37·
8   Miriam Waddington, a review  of The  Master  Mason's  House, Humanities  Asso­
ciation Review, 28 ( I977), 297-98.
9  Review  of  Margaret Stobie's Frederick Philip Grove in Canadian  Literature,  No.
6o (Spring I974), p. I07.
10  "A Last Testament," Journal of Canadian Fiction, I7/I8 ( I976), 307.
11  Ronald Sutherland, "What was  Frederick Philip  Grove?" Inscap,e (Grove Sym- posium issue) , I I  (Spring I 974), 8.
12  Armin  Arnold, a review  of FPC: The  European Years, ESC  (I975), p. 244·
13  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, I974), p. 49·
14  Andre  Gide  and  the  Art  of Autobiography:   A  Study   ofi  Si  le  grain  ne  meurt
(Toronto: Macmillan, I975), pp. 59, 67, 68. The italics are mine.
15  Frederick  Philip  Grove  (Toronto: Copp Clark,   Ig6g), p.  23;  FPC: The  Euro- pean Years, p. 23.
16 In Search  of Myself  ( I946; rpt.  Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I974), p. ix.
17  FPC: The  European  Years, p. 2I4.
18  Lucas,  p. 307. The italics  are mine.
19  FPC: The  European  Years, pp. 214-I5.
20    The  Canadian  Forum,  II (I93I), 422.
21  Experiment   in  Autobiography: Discoveries and Conclusions  of a Very  Ordinary Brain (Since  1866)   (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1934), p. 705. Quoted by Roy  Pascal, Design  and  Truth in   Autobiography   (Cambridge,  Mass.:    Harvard  University Press, 1960) , p. I 93·
22   "Thoughts and   Reflections," pp.  5I-52.  The journal  is in  the  Grove  Collection, Department of Archives  and  Special  Collections, University of Manitoba Libraries, University of Manitoba, Box 22, folder  2.
23  The  Letters  of Frederick  Philip Grove, ed. Desmond Pacey  (Toronto:  University of Toronto Press, 1976), p. 333·
24    That manuscript is in  the  possession of the  novelist's son, A. L. Grove,  who kindly permitted me to examine it.
25   UTQ, 7 ( I938), 460.
2 6    Pascal,  pp.  IO, I I,  I2.
27   FPC: The  European  Years, p. 20.
28   "Frederick Philip Grove  and  the  Culture of  Canada," Saturday  Night,  6I   (No-

8g

GROVE: DESIGN & TRUTH

vember  24, I945), p. I8; rpt.  Frederick Philip Grove, ed. Desmond Pacey  (Toron­
to:  Ryerson,  I97o), p. 56.
29    Pascal,  p. I g.
3° Frederick Philip Grove, p. 7·
31 Frederick Philip Grove (New York: Twayne, I973), p. 46.
82    Transcript of  the  CBC  "Wednesday Night" radio   programme, "The Search for
Frederick Philip  Grove," Grove Collection, Box 23, folder  6, p. 2 I.
88    "Canadian Dreiser," The  Canadian  Forum, 28 (September I948), I2I-22.
34    Grove  completed the autobiography in  I940.  In  I94I   he was elected  a  Fellow  of the  Royal  Society  of Canada; in I946 he was awarded an  honorary D.Litt. by the University of Manitoba, and  an  honorary LL.D. by Mount Allison  University; in I947  he  received  the  Governor-General's Medal  (Non-Fiction)  for  In  Search of Myself.
35  Pascal,  p.  I g.
36   A Search  for America  ( I927;  rpt.  Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, I97I), p. 59·
37   On Canadian  Poetry (Toronto: Ryerson,  I943), pp. 6, I3,  Ig-20.




WE JIRE  Jl CONVERSJITION



I say whales and  they sound,  under the city. You say trees -ah, dear  binaries -
and  we argue time, its ecstasy, its arrow
rooted  in-no-its history, our  consequences. We trade in stories :
This is the lay of man, I sing
This is the song of branches,
and  you trace your verb to this phrase now by my side and  the night.

You  laugh  with me -my story is that  I bought a pregnant heifer and  having  never owned  a living
thing  I am excited -the end again eludes me, I grow desperate, push
it to calving, heifer  to milk cow- I sell the beast.

We remember a small boy, a bull calf quivering the red verb blade, its twitch  and  two testicles
in his palm,  nouns, and  the waiting dog; remember a little girl with her secret words father, brother, lover-all verbs
searching for nouns, flight and  bump.
 

E.F.Dyck


go

POEM

Now let us eschew phrases  (they sleep, they dream) and  follow the flying verb, the bumping noun punctuating this sentence  (for we are implicated) with  comma, with  dash-
We are a conversation
Encoded in an ancient  grammar
Let  us parse  this sentence  and speak.


DESCENT, :ziS USU)(L, INTO HELL
Robert Kroetsch

I've told her  now so long
so often  and  sojourn salut

diamond star  or

(ouest
or quest  or)

worry  bead relinquish

redolent as always as the heated rose

summer and a scent

(allot  illusion  as is necessary  to)

annealing praise reticulate as tongue

mighty  and  a mouse alike  a maze

can he her  up haul or over if and  may

asylum for her worship in  the night  announce

the  word  of way widen  the  weave

the was or is of story is a story of

GROVE IN SEARCH OF AN AUDIENCE

Janet Giltrow

AsA  FICTION WRITER,  Frederick  Philip  Grove =ms to have setded  into  his rightful place in Canadian literary  history-perhaps not so
eminent   a  place  as  he might  have  wished,  but  a  stable  position  nevertheless. Grove as a writer  of non-fiction is another  matter.  Because of their  literal refer­ ence, Grove's  non-fiction writings must go on facing their contradiction: specifi­ cally, Douglas Spettigue's  researches into Grove's  personal history.:. Over  Prairie Trails   (1922), The Turn of the  Year   (1923) and  In  Search  of Myself  (1946)  all declare  by their  formal characteristics  that  they proceed from a faithful  rela­ tion to fact. In Over  Prairie Trails  Grove honours that  relation, striving to secure an  exact  verbal  representation  of reality. Yet Spettigue  has shown  us that  we can't   always  count  on  Grove,  that  Grove  does  not  speak  truthfully when  he describes  his early  life and  travels in In  Search   of Myself. So we find  an  un­ setding  division in Grove's non-fiction:  on the one hand, the breathtaking lies of In  Search  of Myself  and, on the other,  the  meticulous veracity of Over  Prairie Trails. In  this essay, I  will try  to account  for  Grove's  duplicity  as well as his truthfulness  by focussing on his sense of audience:  Grove was obsessed with the problem  of audience,  and  with  his falsehoods he  tried  to short-circuit  ordinary  rhetorical  routes towards discovering, engaging and  convincing  his public.
A writer's genre determines his formal  relation  to his audience; his genre both
limits and  licenses what he will tell and atuhorizes  by convention  his claim to his audience's  attention. The  generic conventions  which govern  Grove's  non-fiction and  establish his relation to his audience are those of the travel book; Grove was a  journey-maker, and  the  central  event in  his life was his move from  the  Old World  to  the  New.  In  this  he  was something  of a  literary  late-comer,  for  he shares the perspectives of eighteenth-  and  nineteenth-century writers in the tradi­ tion  of  North  American  travel  narrative-St. Jean  de  Crevecoeur,  Moodie, Richardson, Thoreau, and others.
In  classic travel,  the writer-audience  relation is highly specified:  negatively, in that  the writer does not address the foreign society to which his travels lead him; and  positively, in that  he does speak to the society he left behind, at home, about what  has happened to him abroad.  Grove's separation from  his native  German culture,  his alienation  in a foreign community  which did not readily acknowledge

92

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

him,  and  his failure  to adapt  happily  to the new culture  turned  him  naturally towards  the  travel  genre. If he was to be unheeded  here, he would speak to an audience  far  away  which  would understand  him, and  he would tell about  what Mrs. Moodie called "painful experience in a distant land." But, having taken up a genre which demanded a literal account of reality, why did he lie?
Facing this question,  we must recognize the social aspects of travel writing, for
Grove's non-fiction  narratives  (both  true and  untrue)   were a literary response to a  social  predicament. Travel   writing,  like other  uses of language,  occurs  in  a social context, marked  by relations among those who speak, listen or overhear. Kenneth  Burke  has suggested  that  all literature should  be seen as "addressed," as being directed  towards  a postulated  reader, as going between individuals  and making  connections.2   This  connection-making is a social function  of texts, and genres establish their own forms of social relationship  between reader and writer. Sociolinguistic  theory  acknowledges  this characteristic of utterance  and  genre; by convention,  genres transmit  social information,  above the content level, as to the speaker's  status  and  identity  vis-a-vis his audience,  his community,  and  his subject.3  The  speaker in the travel genre obeys specific conventions:  his discourse about  foreign  places is informative,  conveying comprehensive  factual  data here­ tofore unknown  to his audience;4  he speaks as a member in good standing of the community  he addresses, expressing himself in ways valued by that  community rather  than  in  ways valued  by the foreign society he describes; clearly, in situa­ tions  of  language   difference,  he  will  use his  native  language  rather   than  the language  of the foreign  place. His discourse in itself signals his continuing  mem­ bership in his original  culture; it is an agent of  social coherence, and the writer's choice of genre indicates his idea of his place as a social being.
With  these  issues in  mind,  we find  Grove  in  a  peculiar  position. In  telling stories of travel,  the writer  presupposes a distant, attentive  audience  representing a community  of which  he is a member.  But the "addressed" quality of Grove's art  falters  on  two  counts.  First, the travel  genre was no longer  a stable literary form. After four  centuries of providing a direct literary avenue between the New World  and  the  Old,  travel  writing  had  lost  its currency; once  eager  for  the published  journals of travellers, European  readers were no longer paying close attention  to exotic news from America. Whereas Susanna  Moodie could appeal confidently  to a nineteenth-century European audience  which sympathized  with her  troubles  and  took an  interest  in her descriptions of Canadian life, Grove in the twentieth  century  enjoyed no such confidence. Travel  writing could no longer presume  a  recognized  relation  between  writer  and  reader  and,  therefore,  could not  perform  efficiently the social function  of reaffiliating the absent  writer  with the  addressed  community. Second,  Grove's membership  in the society he would address with  his travel art was dubious;  the educated  German  community  which

93

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

would have been his ideal audience  had, in effect, rejected  him, even set the law on him, as Spettigue discovered. I suggest that Grove's lies were an attempt  to reconstruct  the feeling of belonging, the clear sense of having  come from some­ where, which  would give his non-fiction writings generic  status, transmissibility, and  meaning.  Grove's  own  remarks  show  that  the  problem  of  transmissibility weighed  heavily  with  him.  Repeatedly,   he  complains   about   his  lack  of  an appropriate audience;  he confesses his "terrible  need  to  communicate" and  his need to "explain" what  has happened  to him;  he  describes numerous  instances of social isolation  where his voice is unheard  or  disregarded. In  all, he felt the awesome silence that  settles on the  alien in  a  foreign  place,  and  he wanted  to break  the silence by finding an interlocutor  who would  receive his communica­  tions from  this remote place. Like those who had gone before, he needed  to tell the story of his travels.
In   Search   of  Myself, Grove's  account   of  his  wanderings   in  Europe   and America,  is the  keystone of  his reconstruction  of  his origins.  Long  taken  as a reliable record of Grove's career, this book describes Grove's move from the Old World  to the  New, and  in it Grove managed  the informational conventions  of travel-based narrative,  including social commentary, in such a way as to convince his readers of the truth  of his account. In its expression of the writer's attitude of discovery  and  his feelings of social  disorientation,   this  book  shares  important features  with  classic North  American  travel  narratives.   Like  Mrs.  Moodie  in Roughing It  in the  Bush  ( 1852), Frances Trollope  in Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832),  and  John  Richardson  in  Eight   Years  in  Canada (1847), Grove  felt  demeaned  and  degraded  in  North  America,  unacknowledged   and even despised. Like thein, he resorted to long expositional  narrative  to recover his status. Unlike them, however, he knew no conclusive connection with a clearly identifiable  audience  sympathetic   to  his  argument. Grove's  ties  with  the  Old World were ambiguous, tortuous, and attenuated.




IN ORDER   TO   UNDERSTAND In  Search  of Myself, it is helpful to look at  its novelistic precursor,  A  Search   for America  ( 1927). The  shaping event of each  narrative  is identical:   the relocation  of the narrator from Europe to America. Obviously, this story was seminal to Grove's  Canadian years, claim­ ing his attention to the end. Not until the end, however, did he violate the boun­ dary  between fiction and  non-fiction, deliberately  miscueing  his readers as to the nature  of reference in In Search  of Myself. When  he did cross this boundary,  he took  A  Search   for America with  him  by suggesting  to  readers of In  Search  of Myself  that  his novel about  emigration  had been more fact than  fiction.

94

GROVE  & AUDIENCE


A  Search  for America  tells  of  a  young  man's  loss of  fortune in  Europe, his emigration to  Canada, and   his  travels  in  the  United States.  Having enjoyed  a youth  of cultural refinement and  careless self-indulgence, the  hero,  Phil Branden, learns  from  his father that the  money  which  supported his leisure  is gone. Shut out from  his accustomed life, Branden embarks for the New World.
His  situation  is  a familiar one.  Like  Mrs.  Moodie, rather  than   endure a declasse destiny  at  home,  Branden sets out  reluctantly to  repair  his fortunes. In her  introduction to  the  first  edition  of  Roughing  It  in the  Bush, Mrs.  Moodie writes  about the  social  circumstances connected with  this  kind  of  travel: "In most instances, emigration is a matter of necessity, not of choice; and  this is more especially  true  of the  emigration of persons of respectable connections, or of any station  or  position  in the  world.  Few educated persons, accustomed to the refine­ ments  and  luxuries of  European society,  ever  willingly  relinquish  those  advan­ tages,   and   place   themselves  beyond  the  protective   influence  of  the  wise  and  revered  institutions of their  native  land, without  pressure  of some urgent cause."5
Grove  represents Branden's "connections" as having  been  at  least  "respectable"
-indeed,  as nearly  illustrious-and his station  as eminent for so young  a man. His  educated mentality amounts to  genius,  and  his  habituation to  the  "refine­ ments  and  luxuries of  European society"  is profound. In  Mrs.  Moodie's terms, then,   Branden's emigration is  a  drastic  occurrence, and,  like  earlier   travellers from  Europe, he must  learn  to put  up  with  having  his social and  cultural assets and  his education called  into  question in  all his transactions in  North America. He enters into  an anomie phase of disorientation and isolation:

I had stepped from what I could not help regarding as a well-ordered, comfortable environment into what  had  upon me the effect of an utter chaos. For the moment all  human  contact  was  non-existent.  I felt  that  not  only had  I to learn  a great many  things, the social connections  of a world entirely different  from the world I knew, for instance;  but I also had laboriously to tear down or at least to submerge what  I had  built  up  before-my  tastes, inclinations, interests. My everyday con­ versation  had  so far  been  about  books, pictures, scientific  research.  Not  a  word had  I heard  or spoken about  these things since I had  set foot on the liner which took me across the Atlantic.t

Branden becomes  anonymous, for  his European identity :is  now  obsolete. More­ over,  he enters  into  a regime  of silence;  not a word is "heard or spoken" of what  had  been his accustomed intercourse with his fellow creatures.
In the third section  of the narrative, "The Depths," Branden becomes a tramp, passing into  a social  void.  He  sets off on foot, westward: "I have  left the society of man.  I am  an  outcast.... I am  alone; I stand  against the  world." Now com­ plete  quiet   descends   on  him  as  he  avoids  all  contact  with  other   men,  and  is "silent  for days  and  days  at  a stretch." In  this extreme isolation, silence becomes tolerable: "I  established a  mood  which  eliminated the  feeling  of  loneliness.  It

95

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

may  have  been  because I got used to being alone.  That  terrible  need for  com­ munication, for  imparting   to  others  what   I  garnered   in  impressions,  moods, thoughts  was on the wane."  ltinerancy  seems to rationalize  Branden's reticence; as  an  alien  traveller,  he  cannot  or  will  not  establish  the  social  relations  that generate  talk. He gets used to keeping quiet.
.But it is not strictly true that he was free of the "terrible need for communica­ tion."  In  In  Search of  Myself Grove describes the composition of  the Phil Bran­ den narrative: "in  x8g3, at the end of the year, I settled down to write the story of what  I had  lived through since August,  x8g2. The  result was a manuscript of, at a conservative  estimate, between five and  six hundred  thousand  words which I called A Search for America.m Grove's dating  is false, but his idea about  writ­ ing is heartfelt; what was not expressible in social intercourse  was imparted, in a flood of garrulousness, in a literary form. When the time came for speaking  out, Grove  compensated  a thousandfold  for the  verbal  restrictions of life in the New World.  And  he also redressed his  anonymity,  for,  with  his two long  narratives  about  his  travels,  Grove  would  make  up  for  his lack  of social  recognition  by publishing the details of his identity.
Here  we must face the problem  of Grove's  self-misrepresentation. Spettigue's
inspired  researches into Grove's European  past revealed an impoverished, irregu­ lar  background   which  was a far  cry from  the  opulent  origins  described  in  A Search   for America and In  Search  of Myself. Grove  came from agrarian stock, but before he was two years old his parents had left the land and settled in Ham­  burg, where his father found humble employment  with the civic transit authority. By becoming  a civil servant, Grove's father  gave his family some claim to lower middle-class status. As a schoolboy, Grove developed scholarly ambitions,  and in his later school years he consorted with children  of families of higher social class. Over  a period of two or three years during  his young manhood  he studied inter­  mittently  at German universities, but never acquired  a degree. He tried to ingra­ tiate himself with the literati, received some modest recognition for his poetry and translations,  but  finally failed to win the regard  of the intelligentsia.  Out  of this confusion of social influences and aspirations comes a sense of Grove's classlessness and  of his having  been socially  uprooted  by his ambition  long before he left for Canada. Of  one thing we can  be sure:  Grove-or Felix Paul Greve-was no affluent  gadabout but  a  rather  seedy translator, poet,  and  novelist, eventually imprisoned  for debt  and fraud. It was this sordid  indebtedness,  not the loss of a magnificent  fortune, which led  to his emigration. Spettigue  reckons that  Grove didn't  arrive  in America  untilI gog -fifteen  years later  than  he claimed.  Per­ haps  the  most  interesting  aspect  of  this  web  of subterfuge   is the  credulity  of Grove's   Canadian   audience;   by  exploiting   the  informational  conventions   of travel  narrative,  Grove was accepted  as the  man  he wanted  to be. He  created credentials for himself.

g6

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

In  his "Prologue" to In Search of Myself, Grove sketches the occasion of the book. His feelings of professional failure were crystallized, he says, when he saw a newly published  biography  of a "Frenchman, still living, who in my early days had  been one  of  my intimates." The  fame  of this former  cohort  (taken  to be Andre  Gide)   threw  into  relief Grove's  own  inability  to find an  audience.  He compares  his own obscurity  to the prominence  of the coterie of which he claims to have been a member: "of that  group  there was not one, except myself, who, that day, was not known beyond the confines of his country."
Grove implies that,  had  he not moved to the New World, he, too, would have found  recognition.  The  audience  unavailable  in Canada would have been his in Europe.  Yet  all is not  lost, for  he can still attack  the issue of his demoralizing anonymity.  He  can speak out, through  his art: "If I could explain, to someone, why I had failed, the explanation  might more than  compensate for the failure to have  made  myself heard  so far.  Could  I explain it?  I did  not know. I saw the reasons clearly enough.  I must try. And 'to someone'? To whom? To whom but my friend the young Frenchman who was now a man of seventy or more." Grove clearly identifies his audience  as European.  Now uttered  after years of obscurity and silence, this long talk-the "explanation" -will be directed to the sympa­ thetic  listener from  whom  his travels have separated  him. Bypassing the uncom­ prehending  Canadians who have so far paid no attention, the document becomes "addressed," and  transmissible. Furthermore, the explanation  "might  more than  compensate" for the years of being unheard.  Being unheard  and unacknowledged  is, it seems, an  inspiring  experience, and the lack of  encouraging social relations leads to literary  work. Much  later in In Search of Myself, when he fails to estab­ lish himself in the  regular  network of Canadian life, Grove feels again  the "ter­ rible need" to communicate; he wants to write:  "the less congenial my surround­ ings became,  the  more  insistently did  my old  aims and  aspirations  try  to raise their buried heads. . . . "
In trying to "explain" his feelings of failure and isolation, Grove constructs an elaborate  European background   to  his Canadian life, making  sure  his readers will  understand the  fitness of  his having selected the  famous  Frenchman as a receiver  of  his  communique. He  tells  us  that  his  magnificent   home,  "Castle Thurow," was a "world  in itself," sumptuous and secure. And even when young Grove  was away from  home, on his continental  travels, he was part  of a defin­ able  community,   attached as he was to  his admired  and  well-known  mother: "No   matter   where  my  mother   went,  she  dropped   automatically into  milieus where  it  established  a  higher  claim  to attention  and  even  distinction  to have written  a  notable  book, to have  painted  an enduring  picture,  to have  carved  a fascinating  statue  than  to have amassed wealth or even to have ruled  nations." When  he grew  up, Grove acquired  social credentials like his mother's:  "I had  a talent for forming  the centre of certain groups.... I don't  know what it was that

97

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

gave me this power of forming a nucleus of crystallization; I only knew I had it." Certainly,  these elements of the narrative-the "world  in itself" of the boyhood home, the "milieus" in every city, the "certain groups"  of which Grove was the "nucleus" -establish a sense of social coherence in Grove's early life.
In  the Canadian west there were no "milieus," and  standards for community membership  were opposite to those Grove attributes to the  European circles he knew:  here, wealth  and  political power carried  the day. And if Grove once had a talent  for  being a "nucleus," he lost it in the  New World,  where he seems to have  repelled  rather  than  attracted social  particles.  Even  when  he takes  up  a teaching  career, he remains socially isolated, and  resists assimilation. As principal of the Winkler school in Manitoba he finds that "any sort of social life simply did
not exist for me. Even as a farmhand I had ... had  more human  contacts.... " When  he marries,  he draws  his  wife into  the  void;  at  Gladstone,  "socially,  we lived, apart  from  the  Anglican  minister's family,  in as complete  isolation  as at Winkler."
Significantly, Grove describes his social predicament in a linguistic conceit. He writes:  "I felt an exile. I was an exile. I did  not live among  people of my own kind;  among  people who, metaphorically,  spoke my language.... " During  the Great  War,  the people of Gladstone  became suspicious of Grove's foreign origins and  he despaired  at  the  possibility of declaring  his special kind of allegiance  to Canada: "what  could the  people of Gladstone  know about  that?  Could  I even try  to explain  it  to  them?  I should  have  had  to speak  an  English  to them  as foreign  as, let me say Czech. I  had  not even  published  any  one of my books." Grove's concept  of "language" here shows how deeply he felt the restrictions on expression in his new life. He felt as alienated,  linguistically,  as the monolingual traveller among foreign speakers. And Grove's thoughts  on his "language" prob­ lems lead him directly to the idea of a specialized, literary  use of his alien tongue, as the final sentence in the last-quoted  passage shows. With  writing and publica­ tion  come feelings of belonging to some cultural  community-remote or near. If Grove could believe that  his language  and  "explanation" were intelligible and heeded in another  place, he could ignore the hostility of the communities  where he more  or less temporarily  resided. He could  rely, as Susanna  Moodie did, on the long-distance social connections brought about  by publication.
.But  unlike Susanna  Moodie,  Grove  had  recourse  to  no  reliable audience  or social group  abroad.  As Spettigue  has shown,  Grove even in Europe  existed on the dim  margins  of society. The  few social ties which  endured  during  the final period  of  his European life were  negative  ones,  which  he  cut  with  his flight. Grove had  no residual connections with his origins;  there  was no one in his life to receive letters-home, and no social group with which he could whole-heartedly identify  and  which  could figure as an  audience.  His relationship  to the distant

g8

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

audience  postulated  in the "Prologue" is a fantasy, but a functional  one rhetori­
cally for it yields the formal occasion of the narrative.
Through In  Search of Myself, Grove argues that his failure to discover a more immediate  audience  is a corollary of the immaturity  of Canadian culture.  Nearly a century  earlier,  John  Richardson, who desired a reverent  audience  almost as much  as Grove  did  and  who was also overtaken  by poverty and obscurity, pub­ lished  similar  grievances  about   Canada's disregard  of  its  artists.  Grove's  and Richardson's ideas on art and  culture spring  from similar social experiences. In Eight  Years  in  Canada Richardson  told about  his experiences here and  his dis­ appointed   attempts to  fit  into  Canadian society after  having  returned  for  the official purpose  of dispatching reports of the Canadian  political situation  to the London  Times. Settled  in  a  village in  Upper  Canada,  Richardson  felt that  he was being  buried  alive. Immobilized  by financial  attachments, Richardson  took a morbid  view of permanent residence;  his morose  depression was relieved only by his irritation at local manners  and  his yearning for a more hospitable milieu. Similarly, Grove at the end of his life settled at Simcoe, Ontario, and committed  himself through   mortgage  and  other  indebtedness  to permanent  residence. The situation aroused in him feelings like Richardson's: anxiety over powerlessness and demise, as well as expostulations against the indifference shown him by the Cana­ dian  community.   But  unlike  Richardson,   who  finally sold  up  and  moved  on, Grove  would  travel  no more. He lived his last years at Simcoe, and  died there, although  not without  first expressing his desire to be on his way again.  Remem­  bering  his earlier  wanderings,  he writes:   "If there  were  no  responsibilities in­ volved, I should gladly leave the place I live in and  join the army of those who are  on  the  road;  and  if, as it would be bound  to do, such a course, at my age, led to my  physical breakdown, I would still take a savage sort of satisfaction  out of the  fact  that  I should  'crack  up'  by the side of the  trail,  by way of protest against  what  we call civilization."  If he could keep moving, Grove's  feelings of alienation  would have meaning: his death  would be a "protest" and public state­ ment.  But as long as he stays put,  he faces all the social signs of his failure  and powerlessness;  his  worries  about  debt  suggest  a  recurrence  of  the  desperation which led to his flight from Germany.
In  Search  of  Myself   compensates  for  the  anonymity  Grove  experienced  in North  America  by creating  an  identity  for  him.  In  this  respect,  In  Search   of Myself  is a rhetorically  successful text, its success demonstrated by the numerous reiterations  of this fabricated biography  in commentary  on Grove's  work. Right into  the  197o's,  until  Spettigue's researches  received wide  attention, critics  re­ peated  the  story  of Grove's  eminent  beginnings in Europe,  finding  it,  perhaps,  especially appropriate to some current  ideas about  the  neglect of  Canadian art and  artists.8   Once  launched  in a referential  form, Grove's fictions about  himself made their way into the public domain as information.


99

GROVE  & AUDIENCE


IN SEARCH OF  MYSELF is a product  of inauspicious  residence, Over  Prairie Trails a product  of propitious itinerancy. Stationed permanently  at Simcoe, with no hope of escape through  renewed travel, Grove turned  to fantasy to explain  his alienation.  On  the  road,  however, in the earlier  period  described
in  Over  Prairie Trails, the actual  form of Grove's life accounted  for his aliena­ tion,  and  he needed no fictions to explain  his view of himself and  his environ­ ment.  In  In Search of  Myself,  he describes this interval  when domestic arrange­ ments  necessitated -or  invited -weekly travels,  as the  "happiest  year of our lives" and Over Prairie Trails as an "inspired  book."
Over  Prairie Trails  describes the  winter  of 1917-I8,  when  Grove  taught  in
Gladstone; his wife and  daughter lived in an  isolated  teacherage  at  Falmouth, thirty-five  miles away,  where  Mrs. Grove taught. Each  Friday,  Grove travelled by  horse  and  buggy or, later  in  the  winter,  by horse and  sleigh, to Falmouth. Each  Sunday  he  returned  to  Gladstone.  In  making  these  trips,  Grove showed that  his attachments were elsewhere than  in Gladstone,  where he worked. At the same time, by working and living five days a week in Gladstone, he made himself only a visitor at Falmouth.  In effect, he belonged nowhere -except on the road, as he travelled  the route that  became for this season the axis of his life.
As in  classic travel  narrative, the  journey is all in Over  Prairie Trails. Only
the most meagre details hint at the conditions of the traveller's life at each end of the axis. The self-aggrandizing "I" of In Search of Myself, extravagantly accum­ ulating  attributes,  looming ever larger, is not present in Over  Prairie Trails. Here Grove doesn't  have to tell about  his wonderful  beginnings, for the features of his discourse  will tell enough.  The  structure  of his text:  narrative  coextensive with itinerary; the logic of his text:  inference drawn  from first-hand observation;  the semantic  character  of his text:  literal  reference  secured  by  expert  diction -all these features  signify that  the  writer  is a man  of inquiring spirit,  educated  eye, and  authoritative voice. Here the travels can predominate over the traveller, who is only their  agent.  The  travels are a text in themselves, a "thing of beauty,"  a raison d'etre.  Grove  writes in  his preface:  "These  drives ... soon became what made my life worth living."9
Each  week's drive is an encounter  with exotic desolation. Although  his itiner­ ary  connects established communities  and  passes through  settled  areas, Grove is the only traveller  abroad  in the seven drives reported; he seldom sees the tracks of other travellers, and the few farms he passes show only negligible human  signs. Grove likes this emptiness. During  the drive described  in the chapter  "Fog," he experiences a benign isolation : " I was shut in, closed off from the world around.
. . . It  was like a very small room, this space of light-the buggy itself, in dark­
ness, forming an alcove to it, in which my hand  knew every well-appointed  detail.


100

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

Gradually,  while I was  wanning up, a sense of infinite comfort  came, and  with it the enjoyment  of the elvish aspect."  In the chapter  "Snow," the very absence of human  contact  seems to  reinforce  his pleasure in  his travels:  "None  of the farms  which I passed showed the slightest signs of life. I had wrapped  up again and sat in comparative comfort  and at ease, enjoying the clear sparkle and glitter of the snow." Out  here, on the road, the silence surrounding the solitary traveller makes a  psychological shelter.  Free of impinging  opinions, his mentality  ranges round  him as he scrutinizes natural phenomena. He is the sole human factor, positioned centrally, a "nucleus" again.
After  his description  of  the  "elvish"  comfort  discovered in  the  fog, Grove's observations begin to work outward  from this privacy to acquire  materials for his text:  "I began  to watch  the  fog. By bending  over towards  the  dashboard  and looking into the soon arrested  glare I could make out the component  parts of the fog."  His  analyses  of  fog, of  hoarfrost,  of snow and  drift,  are  like Thoreau's examinations of seaweed  in  Cape  Cod   ( 1865), or of phosphorescent  wood in The  Maine Woods ( 1864) . The  informational  status of these writings -first­ hand,  factual,  exhaustive-gives  Thoreau   and  Grove  the  right  to  speak, and claim  an   audience.   With   their   work  towards  discovering  the  natural  world through   expert  watchfulness  and  precise, often  scientific  language,  they  make places for themselves. Like Thoreau, who became a "large owner  in the Merri­ mack  intervals,"  Grove  appropriated parts  of the  terrain,  making  small  rooms and private places.
For each  writer, this literary  tenancy offset his economic exclusion from other forms  of ownership.  In  both  A  Search   for America   and  In  Search  of Myself, Grove  praises the easy terms on which Thoreau  engaged poverty. However, this aspect of Thoreau's life seems to have remained  an unattainable (and  probably undesired)   ideal  for  Grove,  and  the  disparities  between  Thoreau's career  and Grove's are conspicuous. Thoreau stayed put, productively;  Grove felt only bale­ ful despair  when domiciled permanently  at Simcoe. Thoreau's righteous pleasure in  the  decency  of  poverty  need  only  be  compared  with  Grove's  nearly  senile fantasies about  wealth in In Search  of Myself to reveal the distinctions separating  the social mentalities of the two writers.
But  when  Grove  speaks frankly  about  his travels, he can achieve  the kind of heightened  documentation  that  Thoreau   had  made  out  of  his voyage on  the Concord  and  Merrimack, his excursions to Cape Cod and  his expeditions to the forests of Maine.  In  Chapter 4, "Snow," Grove surmounts  a drift  as high as the adjacent treetops, and  reaches a moment  of nearly unnerving  perception:

What lay  to  the  right  or  left  seemed  not  to concern  me.  I  watched [the horses] work.  They  went  in  bounds, working  beautifully together.... It probably did  not take  more  than  five minutes, maybe  considerably less, before  we had  reached the

101

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

top, but  to me it seemed like hours of nearly fruitless endeavour. I did not realize at  first  that  we were high.  I shall  never  forget  the  weird  kind  of astonishment when  the  fact  came  home  to me  that  what  snapped  and  crackled  in  the  snow under  the  horses' hoofs, were the  tops of trees. Nor shall  the feeling of  estrange­ ment, as it were-as if I were not myself, but looking on from the outside at the adventure of somebody who yet was I -the  feeling of  other-worldliness,  if you will  pardon   the  word, ever  fade  from  my  memory-a  feeling  of having  been carried  beyond  my depth  where  I could  not swim-which came  over me when with  two  quick  glances to right  and  left  I  took  in  the  fact  that  there  were  no longer  any  trees  to either  side, that  I was  above  the  forest  world  which  had  so often engulfed  me.

In  this  instant of exultant travel,  Grove  has journeyed farther than  ever  before, into  an  "other-worldliness." Riding high,  Grove  and  his aerial  sleigh  are  more than  an  image  of transcendence: they are  an  actuality. No fictions are  necessary to redeem  Grove's sense of self. Neither argument nor  vehemence is required to "explail)."  the  author's claim  to  his audience's regard. He  enjoys  the  rhetorical privilege   of  the  travel   writer; having  gone  to  such  lengths, he  commands  his reader's attention with his far-fetched news.
Grove's dangerous travels  repudiate sedentary values  and,  on  the  whole,  the1 townspeople are  against  his drives:   they advise  against  his excursions; once  they literally  stand  in  his way, causing  a serious  delay.  "I disliked  the  town," Grove writes, "the town  disliked me." His successful travels  are in effect subversive; they show   his  independence of  the  community which   tries  to  absorb him  and   his contempt  for  the  civic  delegation  which   blocks  his  exit  from   the  school  one Friday afternoon. Grove's   dealings   with  the  communities in  which   he  taught seem  always  to  have  assumed  this  political   character and   perhaps only  in  this winter   of   1917-18 did  he  have  the  clear  opportunity to  resist  the  coercion of school boards.
Overcoming the  social obstacles  that  would  stop  him  in his tracks,  Grove  gets on  his way. But it is not  just his resolute  departure which  expresses his indepen­ dence.  His  investigations of nature-skies, mists,  temperatures-have  a result beyond  their  informativeness; they  also show  that  he does not  share  the  outlook  of the  townspeople he leaves behind  each  Friday. "I am  aware," he writes,  "that nobody-nobody whom  I know,  at  least-takes  the  slightest  interest  in  such things." This  way  of speaking, this exhaustive and  precise  report of natural sur­  roundings, is not  valued  by  the  community. Grove's narrative, then,   does  not  address  the  population of  Gladstone, for  it  is indifferent, but  some  other  group which  shares  his  refined  sensitivity  to nature. The more  involved  and  subtle  his discoveries  as a  naturalist, the further Grove  distinguishes himself from  the  com­ munity in which he lives.



102

GROVE & AUDIENCE



BEFORE  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY, the  naturalist's art  in America  had  traditional connections with a European  audience.  Jolm  and  Wil­ liam  Bartram,  the  Philadelphia  traveller-naturalists, and  John  Audubon, for instance,  looked  to  European sponsors for  their  public. So did  the  eighteenth­ century  French   traveller  St.  Jean  de  Crevecoeur  see the  proper  recipients  of observations  of America  as European. Crevecoeur settled down for ten years in pre-revolutionary America,  but  his Letters  from an  American  Farmer  ( 1782)  shows that  his  watchful,  inquiring  attitude   made  his  residence only  a  sojourn  in  a  foreign  place. When  the  fictional  narrator of  that book  begins his project  of sending  reports  on  the  American  scene-natural and  social -to  a European correspondent, his wife warns him that his work will alienate him from the local community,  set him  going hither  and  yon and  do him no good in the long  run.  He  proceeds  nonetheless -and  eventually  finds  himself  irreversibly estranged from American society, a persecuted victim of republican  hysteria. The  consequences of  Grove's  activities as an observer are  certainly  less catastrophic; he only makes his annual  transfer to another  school district. Further, he does not know Crevecoeur's certainty  that his informational  writings will find an interested public abroad.  But he does mark, with his excursions and  methodical  notations,  the same separation from  indigenous  culture  and economy which was the lot of Crevecoeur's  narrator.
The  comparison  between  Grove and Crevecoeur's farmer  also pertains to The Turn of the Year, for in parts of that  book Grove represents himself as a country­ dweller, ordinarily  involved in agrarian  life, just as the narrator of the Letters  is involved  in  farm  work  until  he begins his investigative excursions.  These  parts begin  and  end  Grove's  book. The  central  part  of his text  recounts  a series of bicycle  journeys  between  Falmouth   and  a  more  northerly  settlement,   Leifur.  There,  in the middle section, he is on the road  again, set  apart  as he is in Over Prairie Trails.
Three  of  the  first six chapters  of the  book describe the  seasons. (The other
three,  intermingled,  are  fragmentary  fictions.)   In  these  descriptive   chapters, Grove often uses "we"  to represent the observer, thereby suggesting a community of perception  of which  the narrator is part.  For example,  he becomes a spokes­ man for local experience when he writes:  "we follow the tracks of the rabbits  to where  they have gnawed  the  boles of the young aspens;  and  we read  the  inter­  lacing,   busy-looking  spoors  of  the  prairie-chickens.... '010    In  these  chapters, Grove  presents  cyclical time,  recurrences  rather  than  occurrences,  and  his per­ spective is fixed  and  local.  However,  in  the  long  Chapter   7,  "The Gloom  of Summer," which  comprises one-third  of the  text,  he  abandons the  pronominal plural  and  the  cyclical  chronology.  At  the  same  time  he  returns  to  a  linear

GROVE & AUDIENCE

chronology and  to the  journey form for narrative structure. Grove is on his own again.
As in  Over  Prairie Trails,  Grove  in  "The Gloom  of Summer" is separated
from  his family -Mrs.  Grove  and  their  child  remain   at  Falmouth while  he teaches a summer  term at Leifur-and  he makes weekly twenty-five mile  jour­ neys  to  pass  his  weekends with  them.  Once  more,  he  belongs  nowhere -at neither Leifur nor Falmouth -having given up the social membership  suggested in the earlier parts of the book.
Travelling   north  from  Falmouth  for  the  first time,  Grove  finds that  he has
come far.  He enters  a strange  region remote  from  the strawberry-covered fields around  the cottage at Falmouth:

Dark, unknown, and gloomy, the shade of night seemed to crouch in these woods, ready to leap out on the clearings and the road, as soon as the sun should sink, threatening with incomprehensible potentialities. Somehow these woods reminded me of Darwin's description of the forests of Tierra del Fuego.

Although  Grove is less than  twenty-five miles from  his point  of departure, he is on  an  exotic  adventure,   making  discoveries  as  marvellous  as  Darwin's.   Like Thoreau, who could discover unheard-of  wonders only a few miles out of  Con­ cord,  Grove  is alert  to every sign  of foreignness.  His  sojourn  at  Leifur  has  a macabre  aspect, and  the sullen northern  summer  has an estranging  effect on the visitor. The  woods, says Grove, are "gloomy, elemental,  terrible  in their gloom." Certainly,  there  is no question  of staying on in this murky  location, and Grove departs  promptly when the term ends.
To  other  parts  of the Manitoba landscape  Grove expresses fond  attachment. When he and his family first saw the isolated teacherage  at Falmouth, Grove felt he had finally come home:

The nearest farm was a mile away. The desolation of it all touched the innermost chords of my soul and made them vibrate.
It was nothing short of a revelation. I was at home here. (In Search  of Myself)

This was Grove's second homecoming. The  first occurred,  he says, during  an expedition  to  the  Arctic  in  his youth.  His  journey  across  the  Siberian  steppes touched  those "innermost  chords,"  too:  "the  steppe got under  my skin and into my blood.... only when I struck  my roots into the west of Canada did I feel at home again.... " Grove made no Arctic expedition; his experience of the steppes is a fantasy. And,  in a way, his homecoming  at  Falmouth is a fantasy,  too. He installed  his family in this vast and,  to him, endearing  desolation  but he himself stayed  at  Gladstone.  And  the  "roots"  he  struck  in  the  Canadian  west  were shallow and  portable. Except for the few early chapters  of The  Turn of the Year, Grove's  descriptions  of the Canadian landscape  are  those of an  alien wayfarer. His most perfect art-Over Prairie Trails and "The Gloom of Summer"-follows


104

GROVE & AUDIENCE

the formal values of the travel genre and Grove at his best as an artist was Grove telling the story of his travels.
Over  Prairie  Trails  seems not only "inspired" but also inevitable.  Yet so is In Search  of Myself  a necessary complement  to the earlier  document. Grove went out from  no clearly defined  point of departure; certainly he did not originate in Gladstone  and  his audience  was not to be found there. As he says over and over in In  Search  of Myself, he has no proper audience:  he speaks another  language, his voice is unheard, his manuscripts  are returned to him unread.  Up against this silent  void, Grove  constructs,  in In  Search  of Myself, a  meticulously imagined system of origins  and  a  vehement  sense of having  come  from somewhere.  He cannot  entertain any idea of going back there;  the return  trip  would be as fan­ tastical  as the Siberian  expedition,  the destination  as illusory as Castle Thurow.  But he can map  out the course of his art towards the culture  he left behind. He can  postulate  the  "Frenchman," the listener who shares  his values and outlook, and  thus make  his writings  transmissible. With  his fictions of his origins, Grove makes his own audience for the story of his travels.
We can compare  Grove to Susanna  Moodie in his feelings of social estrange­ ment and  his compensatory  literary activity. But he finally differs from her in his extraordinary loneliness. Grove  belonged  nowhere;  he  had  burned  his  bridges. Even  before  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  he  had  been  rejected  by  the  groups  to which  he  yearned  to  belong.  Felix Paul  Greve was dead  to  the  world  he left behind  him;  in extricating   himself from shady and  even criminal  involvements in Germany,  he feigned suicide.11  Crossing the Atlantic, he didn't even carry with him  his own  name.  The  "silence of the grave"  which  Mrs.  Moodie  felt closing over her as former  attachments shrivelled was something Grove brought on him­ self. When he broke the silence with his writing, he wrote in English, thereby only indirectly  addressing  the  literate  German  readers  to  whom  his values and  dis­ cursive arguments  speak. But Canadian readers intercepted  the message from the New World;  when Grove finally did discover his audience,  it was North Ameri­ can  and  not  European. The  "Frenchman" was surely not attending to Grove's "explanation," but Canadians were, at last.
A writer's  choice of genre  reflects the social context of his utterance-situa­
tion  determines  genre.  Certainly,  this  is true  of Grove's  travel  writings.  Alien, aloof, disregarded  in the community  where he lived, he adopted  rhetorical strate­ gies generically directed towards a distant audience. But the converse is also true:  Grove's  choice of  non-fiction  genre,  and  his manipulation of its  informational conventions,  created  a social context for him and his art. The response of Cana­  dian  readers to In Search  of Myself put him in the place he wanted  to be. Relish­ ing  Grove's  impeccable   pseudo-credentials,   glad  to  stand  in  for  the  famous "Frenchman," the  Canadian literati  perpetuated  Grove's  fantasies  of eminent


105

GROVE  & AUDIENCE

beginnings, publicized  his frustrations and  acclaimed his achievements. With  his story  of  his  travels,  Grove  stepped  out  of  his  voiceless, classless anonymity and situated himself.

NOTES

1 Pursuing  a train  of inconsistencies in Grove's  various accounts  of himself, Douglas Spettigue  published  Frederick Philip Grove  in  I969, "Frederick  Philip  Grove:  A Report   from  Europe"   (Queen's  Quarterly,   78)   in  I97I,  "The Grove  Enigma Resolved"   (Queen's   Quarterly,   79)  in  1972,  and   FPC:  The   European  Years (Ottawa: Oberon  Press)  in 1973. References  to Spettigue's  findings are  to those reported in this last publication.
2  See, especially, Burke's  A  Rhetoric  of Motives   ( I950;  Berkeley:  Univ.  of  Cali­ fornia  Press,  I969),  pp. 38-39. "Address"  is part  of  Burke's  overall  concept  of "identification" -the  process by which the use of language  reinforces, structures,  even  creates  social groupings and  "hierarchies" -which  is noticeably  applicable  to a case like Grove's, where social concerns are explicit.
3  Succinct   statements   of  sociolinguistic  principles   appear   in  John   J.  Gumperz's introduction  to  Directions  in  Sociolinguistics,  ed.  Gumperz   and  Hymes   (New York:  Holt,  Rinehart & Winston,  I972),  pp.  I-25, and  in Dell Hymes's "Models of the  Interaction of  Language  and Social Life," pp. 35-71, in that  collection. In Foundations   of  Sociolinguistics  ( I974;  rpt.  London: Tavistock,   I977),   Hymes surveys more extensively the possibilities for study of ways of speaking in relation to  notions  of speech  community,  speech  situation  and  speech  genre,  as  well as noting  the  convergence  of  interest  of  sociolinguistics  and  literary  theory.  See, especially, pp. 45-66.
4    Iuse  here James  L. Kinneavy's  definition of informative  discourse, as he presents it in  A Theory of Discourse ( I97o;  New York:  Norton,  I98o),  pp. 77-I93· Kin­ neavy  maintains that  the  three  essential  elements  of information are  factuality, comprehensiveness  and  "surprise  value."  All  three  elements  exist conventionally in  travel  narrative; the  travel  narrator speaks  exhaustively  about  what  he  has witnessed firsthand,  and  his subject  is by definition  foreign-new  and  "surpris­ ing" -to his stay-at-home audience.
5   Susanna   Moodie,  Roughing  It  in  the  Bush  (Toronto:  McClelland   &  Stewart,
1962),  p. xv.
6   Frederick  Philip  Grove, A Search  for America  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,
197I), p. 39·
7   Frederick  Philip  Grove,  In  Search  of Myself  (Toronto:  McClelland  & Stewart, I974), p. I8I.
8   See,  for  example,  even  Carleton   Stanley's  review  article  on  Desmond   Pacey's Frederick  Philip Grove, "Frederick  Philip Grove"  (Dalhousie  Review, 26 [I 946], pp.   434-4I),  which  retails  the  most  luminous   details  of  Grove's   inventions. Twenty-five   years  later  an  article  on  "Grove   and   Existentialism"  (Canadian Literature, 43  [I970], pp. 67-76)  by Frank  Birbalsingh  dutifully  opens with  the same old stuff. Grove's imposture, however, must have its greatest success in W. B. Holliday's   "Frederick   Philip  Grove:   An  Impression"  (Canadian   Literature, 3 [I 960],  pp.  I 7-22) . The  author,  who lived for a time with the Groves at Simcoe, presents  eye-witness corroboration  of Grove's  fantasies,  finding  him  "a  patrician by nature  as well as by birth,"  one who "as an affiuent youth ... had moved with ease in  the  great  cities of Europe,"  and  so  on.  In  FPC:  The  European  Years,

Io6

GROVE  & AUDIENCE


Spettigue makes  an  insightful observation on this whole  process of verification; he suggests  that  Pacey's  consultation of the  manuscript of  In  Search  of Myself  and his  publication of  pseudo-information from  it  in Frederick   Philip  Grove   ( 1945) added   to  the  documentary weight  of  In  Search  of Myself  when  it  appeared the following  year.
9   Frederick  Philip   Grove,   Over   Prairie  Trails   (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart,
1970),  p. xiii.
1° Frederick  Philip   Grove, The  Turn  of  the  Year   (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1929), p. 21.
11 See Spettigue, FPC:  The European Years, pp. 161-68.














from WH}ILE CONSTELL]ITIONS

Krist.Jana Gunnars


1

then  grandfather  rose at dawn with  the men. their  open  boat  rocked by the pier, their  hand
harpoons & arrows  pointed
at  night,  at familiar
whale.     :they circled,  aimed just degrees  away;
partly visible, they knew it was there.

now we face  north emptied of past years.
like two outer  stars we circle ursa major, a great  bear.
on a black & open  night
we walk  under seven stars


107

POEM

& i am unfamiliar
to myself.    only part  of me is easy to see.   new
days grow before  me
but i am not yet dependable, not whole

18

grandfather hunted blue whale  units
numbers based on oil
yield  (blue, fin, hump­ back, sperm -types compared  by size
of wound).
the  length,  the weight

of a year is the same : limited  in body serialized  in a mass.
we chase constellations of
bootes' dogs
& hunt small
years that  dip away.

there  was opposition
in grandfather's industry. scarcity  shifted & then­ abandonment.

we need that  caution
to match  our  decline, we need  to pursue
sharpness of whale  that  learns in time to avoid
dangerous water
as the dogs' eyes fade  in spring  mist

19

the antarctic stocks are
severely reduced.   grandfather's latest  catch  meant  little;
the  populations exploited,

108

POEM

explored.    now
factory ships cruise where grandfather whaled.     tankers fitted  with  factory
plants are  moored
in harbor in humpback fisheries. 	the small industry, regular, land-based, runs toward an end.

i begin at  the end,
shape  the line of descent, of third  & fourth generations.   i am the last star  denebola
in leo, i am  the first
in virgin's  head.     a tale of spica, i end
in the first magnitude
& rest.    my relative
unimportance alters over the years :

take  a place
among whale  species, take a line of measures among the first steps
to conserve stocks.    take licence
for catchers at work -
& this story of stars
is restricted
by silent  change silent  head

28, I

remember the whales stranded on the sand -
a school, maybe  thirty  or more still unrecorded
deformed with  healed
sk<eletal fractures?   that  way they lay on the beach
when  night  refused
to cover  the evidence
& the midnight sun shone
like rich stars in archer's bow.

109

POEM

grandfather told me of whales trapped in ice as the sea
froze, broken
in the lower  jaws,
a flipper  missing, flukes mutilated.   he suspected whale once was
highly  developed.  not scarce  but smart.   not dying out but modified in habit.     whale
avoids  dangerous ground
& becomes suspicious  of ships:

now he is dead.

28, II

when  the milky way is brightest i cannot remain
unrevealed.   no glass, no telescope is needed  to know the myth of sagittarius shooting scorpion  who bit orion  the hunter
to death.
when  the archer is in the sky, the hunter is dead.

our life too is hazard.
even in the brightest time a fractured face  reveals
a hurt intelligence; the habitual suffering of suspicion.

& when i strand
like this on your night, remember grandfather
& the accident of whales.







I I 0


GROVE'S NEW WORLD  BLUFF


K. P. Stich



EERICK PHIUP GROVE;. one of the  most intriguing auto­ biographical  novelists in twentieth-century literature. Unlike Joseph Conrad, who did not hide his Polish past, or D. H. Lawrence  (whom we can follow with rela­ tive biographical accuracy  in his autobiographical fiction from  The White Pea­
cock  to Kangaroo and  in his exile in Australia  and America, Grove disappeared from  Germany  and  systematically  cut  all  personal ties with  Europe  during  his still  mysterious  three-year  stay  in  the  United  States  before  finally  settling  in Manitoba in  I 9 I 2  as an  immigrant of fictitious Swedish  and  British  ancestry. During  his Canadian years he ingeniously misled literary critics and  biographers with his made-up  past which, on the surface, was brimful of lies and  distortions. In  retrospect,  however, thanks  to D. 0. Spettigue's detective work in FPG:  The European Years/  we  can  now learn  how Grove's  fiction  reveals  psychological truths  about  his self-exile without a home-coming, about  his attempts to re-create himself in  his writings,  and  about  the  art  of autobiography as practiced  by an impressive literary  liar.
While  still  in  Europe,   Grove  once  admitted   his  compulsive  lying to  Andre
Gide,2   but such a confession obviously became  unnecessary after  his emigration. He  could not, however, run  away from his memories of a life which, despite the apparent lack of archival  evidence,3  suggests remarkable similarities and parallels to  that  of  Thomas   Mann's infamous  confidence-man,  Felix  Krull.  Because of Grove's double identity  and autobiographical tendencies his books are deceptively accurate,   ironically  self-disparaging,  skillfully garbled/ and  artifully  patterned images of himself. Consequently  modem  readers have to disentangle  not only the documentary but also the psycho-biographical  truths of his self-proclaimed auto­ biographies,  A  Search   for  America  ( I927)  and  In  Search   of Myself  ( I946).  Reinterpretation, however, must not  be limited to such of his books which, even after   skeptical   scrutiny,   remain   autobiographical;   reinterpretation   needs  to include  his so-called prairie  novels such as Settlers  of theM arsh (I 925), because they are variants of the two Search  books.
Drawing  on Grove's  German  past, his exile and new identity  on the last fron­ tier of the  fabled  North  American  West, his inclination  towards  literary confes­ sion,  and  his  German  novel,  Fanny   Essler  (I 905) , I  will establish  patterns  of landscape  and  of character that  reveal the confessional nature  of  Settlers  of the


I II

GROVE'S BLUFF

Marsh.  My  approach, which focuses on linguistic  and  psychological  aspects of Grove's first Canadian novel, is of course partly reductive  because reductions are inevitable  in  the  study  of confessional works. This  is particularly so in Grove's case since he, I believe, is frequently  tempting  the reader to glimpse the haunting figure hiding  behind  the imposingly drawn  F. P. G. monogram on the covers of A Search  for America  (2nd ed., 1939)  and  In Search of Myself, behind the title of the  allegedly  burned  MS. of "Felix  Powell's  Career," 5   and  behind  sporadic ambiguous statements on his craft, such as,
I always dread the writing; not merely because it involves an enormous nervous strain and  drain on my vitality; it is much more important  that, by writing the story-necessary as that process may have become-I have to take leave of the figures involved in that story. They cease to be living beings to me; they lose their "freedom" as it were.6

Again  and  again  this fear  of writing surfaces  in Grove's  works. On  the  one hand,   this  fear  together  with  total  absorption   in  his character speaks  for  his seriousness as a creative writer;  but, on the other  hand,  it corroborates  his fasci­ nation  with re-creating the shadowy world of his past. His literary characters  lose their  freedom  as  they  turn  into  images  of self,  a  phenomenon  which  Grove appears  to have both loved and dreaded  and which partly explains the disappear­ ance of "Felix  Powell's Career,"  of course. With  Settlers of the  Marsh  as a case in point, one may want to question my interpretation of Grove's creative agonies. After  all,  that   novel  deals  with  prostitution,   abortion,  murder, and  madness, themes  which  generally  invite  "enormous  nervous  strain." Yet  in  response  to Lionel  Stevenson's  thematic   reservations  about  Settlers  of the  Marsh, Grove promises that  "there  will be more repellent themes. I just can't  help it. I can only write about  what  I have personally reacted to."7  The  platitude that  good writers write about  what they know best does not capture  the ambiguity of "what I have personally reacted  to." Grove is again guardedly  self-revealing in the knowledge of his European years of literary  pretensions,  professional failure,  and  financial and  social  irresponsibilities.  Indeed,  in  his  comments  to  Stevenson  the  act  of writing  itself becomes a  metaphor  for writing  about  the  past:  "for  the moment my  problem  is to  make  a living by hackwriting  ... , while incidentally  I  work over some of my oldest writings. I have no ambition  except to live one day, when
I am dead, through  my books"  (emphasis  mine). 8 What  seems to be a platitude about  posthumous literary fame really includes a teasing challenge to biographers as well as a fear of being found out while still alive. The fact that Grove, who had been married  in Germany,  had  a wife and  two children in Canada helps to sub­ stantiate his agony about  being unmasked. The  autobiographical allusions in his comments  to  Stevenson  inevitably  prepare   the  alerted  reader  to  question the meaning  of Grove's life-long opinion of that  novel:  "To this day I am not quite sure that  it conveys to others what it conveys to me."9  To show the confessional

112

GROVE's BLUFF

tensions  within  that  opinion  and  the  novel, I  begin  by examining  the  book's setting.


kE FRONTIER  SETTING  of the  Big  Marsh  in  the  novel is composed  of sloughs,  bluffs,  and  bush land.  Niels Lindstedt, a  recent Swedish immigrant   and  the  protagonist  of the  book, spends  his first winter  in  the  Big Marsh  district  "working  in the  bush and  driving, driving.... "10 On  one of his drives over the "bare Marsh,"

the snow was lashed into waves and crests like a boiling sea. There was no road left. He angled across the open land. It took two hours to make the mile to a huge poplar bluff which rose like an island or a promontory jutting out from the east into the waste of snow. He intended to unhitch and to feed in its shelter ... And before long it somehow was clear to him that this was his future home. (SM, 43)

The  following  year,  "he  filed on  the  northeast  quarter of section seven, in the edge of the Marsh, on the Range Line, which held the big bluff"  ( SM, 47).

The southern part of his claim was covered with comparatively small growth; for one of the marsh-fires that broke out every now and then had encroached upon it, some fifteen years ago, consuming everything that would bum.  For no apparent reason -perhaps in  consequence of a  change of  wind -the fire had  stopped short of that  tall, majestic bluff which now stood dominant,  lording it over this whole comer of the Marsh. (SM, 48)

While  these  descriptions  of  Niels's  new-found  home  appear   geographically accurate   and   in  keeping  with  the  tenets  of literary  realism -a  classification which  has, I feel, distorted  critics' readings of the novel -one should not over­ look the linguistic symbolic and psychological significance infused in the grandeur  of the setting  by means of topographical and climatic  extremes, particularly  the simple  yet  awesome  name  of the  "Big  Marsh," and  the  personification  of the "huge  poplar  bluff"  or "big  bluff" as "that tall, majestic bluff which now stood dominant, lording  it over this whole corner of the Marsh." The  key to the covert significance  of  "Marsh" and  "bluff" lies in  Grove's  German-English world  of words. To  him  the  "Big  Marsh" would  inevitably allude  both  to a vast marsh ("die  Marsch")  and  a long  march  ( "der  Marsch"), while the "big  bluff" is a splendid  play on the word "bluff" with its one English and only German sense of "lie"  or "false front"; its regional North  American meaning  of "clump  of trees" merely provides surface realism.
The  intense  description  of the bluff, its bilingual surprise,  and  its  personifica­ tion  thus  make  transparent Grove's  veiled comment  on  his own  exile, his tall stature,  his elitism, and  his confidence in a new career in the New World behind a  well guarded  fac;ade concealing  his past. In short,  Grove's fictional "majestic  bluff" in part  projects a self-confession as well as a vision of  the future. This does

GROVE'S BLUFF

not mean  that  the reader should categorically identify  Niels with Grove. In fact, it is not at all my intention  to dare  psychoanalyze Grove by simplistically equat­ ing  him  with  characters  or  aspects  of setting   in  the  novel;  however,  I  will, encouraged   by Grove's  "big  bluff,"  interpret   both  characters and  setting with psycho-biographical considerations in the light of his provocative autobiograph­ ical games with the reader. This approach  will yield numerous parallels and simi­ larities of varying  degrees between the author  and  his fictional characters.
The  linguistic  tensions of "Marsh" and  "bluff" lead me to their  psychological tensions which link landscape with characters  in  the novel, above all with Niels. Such landscape-mindscape relationships are,  of course, not  unusual  in fiction of the  North  American  frontier.  On  the  one  hand,   Niels carries  out  his pioneer tasks with  impeccable  planning  and  mechanical precision,  and  rises quickly  to prosperity;  on  the  other  he  unwittingly  neglects  his soul  because  of  his  over­ reliance  on  will. From  behind  the security  of  the  bluff  he  plods steadfastly  to fulfill his dream  of  an  idyllic life in the  new  country: a  farm,  a  family,  and material  comfort.  "It was merely a question  of persevering  and  hewing straight to the line. Life was simplified" (SM, 45), Niels concludes naively. Yet Marsh, bush and  bluff not  only frame  the stages of his struggle with  the land  but  also reflect stages of conflicts within  him and  with others  in  his quest for a new life and selfhood. The  landscape of the frontier  allows Grove to dramatize the layers of meaning  of the immigrant-hero's naturalization and, by analogy, of his own immigration.
In  this psychological context,  the Big Marsh  comes to represent  memory, the world of the  past and  of the unconscious; the  bush land,  which is easily cleared and  cultivated,  suggests a  world  of the  present  and  of  hope  for  the  future  so typical  of the  North  American  frontier;  while the  ambiguous  big bluff signifies, on  the one  hand,  a world of appearances  where  life, comparable to the  bluff's tall trees, seems straight,  rational,  and  secure,  and,  on the other  hand,  a world of the present threatened  by the past. The threat  of the past and the unconscious to the  world  of the  present  and  appearances is symbolically explicit in the  Big Marsh's  potential  for violent change.  The  paradoxical images  quoted  above of the  Marsh  as  a  "boiling  sea"  in winter  and  an  occasional  inferno  in summer represent  a chaotic,  primeval energy which the big bluff, in all its meanings,  has so far  been  able  to dominate  only by chance.  The  unexpectedly  cohesive and' strong  archetypal  topography  of the  Big Marsh  district  thus  counterpoints and questions Niels's conquest of the land, and, as I shall clarify along the way, both setting  and   Niels's  story  reveal  Grove's  fictionalization of  the  transition  from German  past to Canadian present, his own "big bluff."
Niels's lack of awareness of the forces of the  unconscious  and  his general  dis­
regard  of the past explain the paradox of both  his progressive homesteading  and growing  rootlessness. Almost from  the day of his arrival  his inner  chaos is fore-

I 14

GROVE's BLUFF


shadowed when  images  of  a woman  and  children  first  enter  the  landscape. In the  bush,

where  moonlight  filtered  down  through  the meshes of leafless boughs overhead, a vision took hold of Niels:  of himself and  a woman, sitting  of a mid-winter night by the light of a lamp and in front of a fire, with the pitter-patter of children's feet sounding  from  above:   the  eternal  vision that  has moved  the world and  that  was to direct  his fate.  He  tried  to see the face of the woman; but it entirely  evaded him. (SM, 36)

The vision  is  more   than  mechanically associated   with  the  unconscious in  the book,  for it alludes, through the  connotations of "eternal" and  facelessness,  to  a major archetypal figure  in  the  unconscious, namely,  the  Anima or  womanhood personified: "When  symbolized  in  dreams, the  Anima appears to a man  in  the figure  of a woman, generally either  a woman  with a blank  face or no face at all, or  a  woman  whom  the  man  may  not  recognize  in terms of his conscious experi­ ence."11



IL MY   JUNGIAN  PERSPECTIVE  might  seem  contrived, it  has  really  grown  out  of the  novel's  archetypal setting,  the  novel's  main  theme of quest  for  self and, particularly, Niels's archetypal domestic dream; a Jungian reading of  the  latter is hardly out  of place  in light  of the  close semantic  corres­ pondence between the  quotation on the  theory  of the  Anima and Grove's word­ ing  of  Niels's  vision.  Moreover it  should   not  be surprising to  see  the  author's process  of  psychological dramatization  of  Niels's life in  a  new  land  extended to his new acquaintances and  friendships, especially with women.
Ellen Amundsen, the first woman  to whom  Niels feels attracted, takes the  place of  the  blurred woman in  his dream. However, Niels's  first  casual  acquaintance with the virginal Ellen  already suggests his fateful obsession with sex, for "the trees stood  still, strangely still in the slanting afternoon sun  which  threw  a ruddy glow over  the   white   snow   in  sloughs   and  glades" (SM,  27). "Strangely" and the repetitive "still"  heightened by  the  new  sexual  shades  of  meaning of  the  now familiar  psychological tensions  among the  images  of  the  Marsh all  allude, in D. H. Lawrence fashion, to the turmoil  within  him.
The  turmoil grows   when   Niels  meets  a  second   woman, Clara  Vogel,   the district  whore, during a Sunday gathering at a neighbour's farm:

She  was dressed  in  a  remarkably  pretty  and  becoming way, with  ruffles around her  plump,  smooth-skinned   though  rather  pallid  face. In  spite of the season  she wore a light, washable  dress which fitted her slender and  yet plump  body without a fold. Her  waist showed a v-shaped opening  at the throat  which gave her -by contrast   to  the  other   women -something  peculiarly  feminine:   beside  her  the others looked neuter.  (SM, 29)

GROVE'S BLUFF

While  her  "pallid  face"  recalls Niels's faceless Anima figure above,  her  "black beady eyes" say otherwise. They would "glow with a strange  warmth  when they lighted on his own," which he finds "strangely disquieting" ( SM, 39-40). Always confident  behind  "the  protection  of her sex" ( SM, 30),  Clara  becomes for Niels an archetypal   femme  fatale,12   and the "strange" energy exchange  between  them prepares for his seduction. 13
The third  woman in Niels's new world is his dead mother, who appears to him after  the  wedding  party of his friend  Nelson. During  the  newlyweds' departure Niels "caught [the  bride's younger brother]  by the shoulder.  'I'm going, too,' he said to the boy. 'Tell  your mother  I'll be back in the morning  to finish the hay.'
'All  right,'  said  Bobby  and  squirmed  in  the  crush"   ( SM, 54).  The  "crush"
affirms  Niels's  covert  longing  for  comforting  male  friendship  after  the  loss of Nelson, with whom he used to work as a "steady  team" (SM, 22); it also points to  his child-like state  of confusion and  fear  because  of Clara's presence at  the party:

Without waiting for anybody Niels dodged ... into the thick bluff beyond.... The air  was strangely quiet for a swnmer day in the north.... He was a leaf borne along the wind, a  prey to things beyond his control, a fragment swept away by torrents. (SM, 55)

Yet  the  symbolic  false front  of  the  bluff  gives  him  little  protection  from  the "strangely  quiet"  undercurrent of his sexual  turmoil  which  reduces the strong­ willed, rational  Niels to "a leaf," a nobody, yearning  for mother: "He seemed to see her  before  him.... There  was pity in  the look of the  ancient  mother: pity with him who was going astray;  pity with him not because of what assailed him from  without;  but pity with what he was in his heart" (SM, 56). This desperate attempt  to return  to his mother,  who, as the word "ancient" implies, is of arche­  typal  significance,  fails.  His  symbolic  rebirth  on  the  primeval  frontier  cannot  begin as long as he  remains powerless over the forces of his unconscious which have manifested  themselves so strongly in his sexual awakening and  paradoxical fear of women.
Niels's instinctive  escapes into  hard  physical  work,  his hiring  of Bobby as a farm  help and companion,  his taking in an old neighbour, Sigurdsen, all fail him in his growing derangement; Sigurdsen even aggravates it:

The old man was getting to be stranger and stranger. Sometimes he would talk to himself for a long while, taking no notice of Niels's presence.... "Mind, George, that  girl in Copenhagen?" ... Niels would nod. He understood that the old man was talking to the phantoms of his youth. Strange,  disquieting  things he would sometimes say, trailing off into Icelandic which Niels understood only half: things that seemed to withdraw a veil from wild visions, incomprehensible in one so old.
. . . The  reappearance  of the animal in a man whom he loved, aroused in Niels
strange enthusiasms. (SM, 84; italics mine)

I 16

GROVE'S BLUFF

The  significance  of Niels's sexual "enthusiasms"  lies in  their  association with his struggle to overcome  his childlikeness and rootlessness, to build a future  on a present  without  a  past. All his successful pioneering cannot  give him  the emo­ tional self-reliance  he needs to cope with Ellen's refusal to offer him more than sisterly friendship.  He  rejects her offer because he senses her as a failed  Anima figure not only destroying his domestic dream  but also intuitively  reminding  him of  his  emotional   mess  by  her  own  emotional  insecurity  and  put-on  mannish behaviour.   Ellen  thus  becomes  the  unintentional catalyst  for  his seduction  by and  marriage  to Clara.  Although  Clara,  as a new Anima figure, can alleviate the sexual  manifestations of  Niels's anguish,  she makes a  mockery  of his quest  for selfhood  and  a family;  she soon intensifies his haunting fear of  being ironically uprooted  and  forsaken in his big house behind the "big  bluff." The  house, built on the Range  Line of his section of the Big Marsh, is called  White  Range  Line House,  as if  to  underline  the  paradox  of Niels's derangement despite  his pros­ perity and moral seriousness.
Clara's  role is complex. On  the one hand,  I see her as a personification of the) symbolic sloughs,  blizzards  and  fires of the  Big Marsh,  as a kind of archetypal Terrible   Mother   whose  realm  is in  the  wilderness  and   who,  in  appropriate Jungian terms,  is "the  mother  of innumerable  evils, not  the least  of which  are neurotic  disturbances  [which  rise]  from  the stagnant  pools of libido.m4   On  the other  hand,  she is a demonic  wife whose aggressive sexuality has turned  her into a Lilith-like figure in Niels's Adam-like rise and fall in the new land:

[According]  to  Jewish  tradition ... Adam, before he  knew Eve, had  a demon wife called Lilith, with whom he strove for supremacy. But Lilith rose up into the air through  the magic of God's name and hid herself in the sea. Adam forced her to come back  with  the  help of three  angels, whereupon  Lilith  changed into a nightmare or lamia who haunted pregnant women and kidnapped new-born children.15

Grove  appears   to  have  adapted   an  appropriate mythological  figure  to  deal with Niels's Anima. Ellen is the original Lilith whom Niels wants to own but who rejects  him.  A storm  and  metaphorical "breakers  in the surf"  and  "the  roar  of the sea"  (SM, g8)  accompany  her rejection. Clara now becomes Niels's vengeful Lilith,  his nightmare. Here,  too, it is hardly coincidence that  Clara's last name is German  for bird, a creature  which in mythology alludes to angels.16  Also similar to Adam's Lilith who stole semen from sleeping husbands with which to breed monsters,  Clara   plays her  role  as district  prostitute  with  nightmarish features always lurking  under  her make-up: "the  flesh was still smooth and firm; but her face was the face of decay"  (SM, Igg). Her decaying   face, which is reminiscent of Niels's earlier  vision of a faceless woman, emphasizes her failure as an Anima figure. Her whoring, in not only the house which is the symbol of Niels's new existence but  also the bluff that  is to protect it, parodies in grotesque fashion the

I I 7

GROVE'S  BLUFF

hollowness of Niels's quest for self, wife and  children,  a quest  for a New World future independent of his Old World past.
He senses this hollowness as he, psychologically speaking,  recognizes himself in Clara's shadow-like  personification of crude sexual obsession, an obsession which is at the centre of his emotional  upheaval.  The  recognition  comes when a neigh­ bour,  whose sexual  temptation  he  resists, taunts  him  about  his  marriage  to a whore, a fact of which he had not been fully conscious before:
For  a  moment  he  felt that  he  must pitch  forward  and  faint.  Instinctively his trembling  hand  reached for  [the  mower]  to steady  his swaying body.... The woman  saw it  and  stopped in  her  rush of  words. Her  eyes became wide. She realized what she had done:  she had swung an axe into a great, towering tree; and the tree had crashed down at a single blow. (SM, 178)

Mower  and  axe, the tools behind  the success of his homesteading  scheme, para­ doxically  signal  his  total  failure  to  take  roots. In  response  to the  neighbour's revelation,  Niels's vestiges of emotional  control  finally succumb  to  his passional chaos;  Niels shoots and kills Clara  in his White Range  Line House during one of her orgies.
Rarely  does Grove's authorial voice intrude  as bluntly as in these crucial scenes in which a quasi-Freudian chain of metaphors  of castration  or impotence drama­ tizes the end of Niels's quest for self. First we see him as "a  towering tree" felled by a woman's  "single blow." Then  we follow him through  trance-like wanderings through  his section of the Big Marsh  including  a poplar  bluff where "he felt his way from  tree to tree, supporting  himself by his hands, feeling up and down the ridged  trunks as if searching for something" ( SM, 183), the something  being his virtue  and  manliness.  The  loss of  both  is doubly  emphasized   with  grotesque Hemingway-like  clarity:  Neils's murder  weapon  is a  big-game  rifle with  which, after  Clara,   he  kills his favourite  horse,  a  gelding. Even  without  resorting  to further  simplistic  Freudian  reductions, something  so tempting  to do  because of the novel's laboured  focus on sexuality in conflict with search for self, one feels certain  that  Grove's evident fascination with the book's "repellent" theme, to use his word  to Stevenson, is somehow  linked  to a  blending  of autobiography and fiction. I  will try to explain  that  link  after  first rounding  out  the novel's arche­ typal pattern of landscape and characters.



QUITE IRONlCALLY NEILS'S QUEST for a new life continues in prison. The  prison itself, "a group of buildings of truly Titanic outline" (SM,
193), is the counterpart of the Big Marsh: it is a symbol of supreme law, order, tradition  and  social  consciousness, all  of  which  are  aspects  of  an  established society rather  than  a frontier district. There  Niels relives and orders his life with the  help  of the  "fearless"  ( SM, I 94)  warden  and  bookish  enlightenment. His

II8

GROVE'S BLUFF

spiritual  progression  manifests  itself in his early parole accompanied by sugges­ tive changes  in the frontier  landscape  (SM, 196): the Big Marsh  has drainage  ditches:  "the  old familiar  bluffs  [have]  been cleared away"; only the big bluff at  his farm  is still "dominating the landscape,"  as a stolid reminder  of  his past which restrains his renewed unrest when dreaming of Ellen:

Her  eyes light-blue,  her  features  round, her  complexion a  pure  Scandinavian white. Again it was her expression that held him.... No smile lighted her features.; her eyes were stern and condemnatory. (SM, 209)

Her  pure  white  face  appears to  cast  her  again  as Niels's  Anima. When  they actually  meet,  "her  eyes looked  searchingly,  questioningly,  expectantly.  There was nothing  in them  that  seemed to condemn.... They  were full of sympathy" ( SM, 21 1 ) • Like Adam in the Lilith myth, Niels has been given a second chance.
Without  the  German-English word-play  on  the  "big  bluff"  that  frames  the
book's  beginning  and  ending,  and  without  Grove's  life-long  bluffing about  his past,  Niels's  story  would  be  just  another   version  of  frontier  fiction  about  a North  American  Adam.  The  skillful manipulation of the surface  realism of the Big Marsh  frontier  with  its underlying  archetypal  dimensions,  and  the purpose­ ful integration of the  archetypal  characters  into the ambivalent setting serve to dramatize the  traditional New World  theme of man's  chance  at  a new life. Yet the  recurrence   of  the  bluff  motif  demands  further  psycho-biographical inter­ pretation   from  the  critical  reader  in  response  to  not  just  the  discovery of  a bilingual  pun  but  the  way  Grove  introduces  the  pun  at  the  precise  moment when  Niels chooses his section  of the Big Marsh where  "one  of the  marsh-fires that  broke  out  now  and  then  had  encroached  upon   [his  claim]  some fifteen years  ago,  consuming  everything  that  would  bum.  For  no apparent reason­ perhaps  in  consequence  of a  change  of  wind -the  fire  had  stopped  short  of that  tall,  majestic  bluff  which  now stood  dominant,  lording  it over this whole comer of the Marsh" (SM, 48).
Why  does the  omniscient  narrator choose the  exact  figure  of fifteen  years?
Why does he draw  attention, by means of "no  apparent  reason"  and "perhaps" as well as punctuation, to the "change  of wind," a plausible factual  explanation yet  also  a  figure  of speech  applicable  to  change  in  a  man's  life?  Within  the symbolic significance  of  this  passage which  I  introduced  earlier  on,  the fifteen years  have  unexpected   meaning  when  read  as the  fifteen  years between  1909, the  time  of Grove's  disappearance in  Germany,  and  1924,  the  year  he  com­ pleted Settlers  of the  Marsh.  This  reading, of course, also explains  the attention  given to the  "change of wind,"  and  reinforces the ambiguous personification of the  bluff itself. In  the  dramatic allusions to his fifteen  years of disguise rather than  in  the  book's  theme  of  quest  for self lies Grove's  initial  challenge  to the reader to be alert for oblique authorial self-revelations.

119

GROVE'S BLUFF

It would  be  too  simplistic  to  dwell  on  the   parallels  between   Niels's  and Grove's  life-histories. On  a symbolic level the  parallels  are  obvious, yet on  the factual level there are major discrepancies:  Niels's memories of Sweden are negligible, Grove's of Germany are not; Niels's imprisonment was for murder, Grove's   (in  Germany)  for  embezzlement;  Niels  was  a  labourer   and  farmer, Grove an  overly ambitious  novelist, essayist, and  translator. One  may, however, safely consider Niels as a surrogate of the new Grove who married a Canadian farmer's  daughter and school teacher  yet must  have been haunted  by his affairs with  older  women  in Europe  and  his marriage  to a German  divorcee.  Because detailed  evidence  is lacking,  it  would  be  irresponsible  to  equate  that  divorcee with  Clara  Vogel  in  Settlers   of the  Marsh. In  fact,  I  question  whether  that could have been Grove's intent,  because, in the  book, Clara  stands for a present with  a  past  but  no future.  Niels's murder   of  her  thus  corresponds  to  Grove's quasi-annihilation of his past self. This  makes  it  plausible to regard  Clara  as a surrogate  of  Grove's  former  self. While  his self-portrayal in  the  disguise of a female character  would give Grove additional security in North America from biographical   critics,  there  is also a  precedent  of  this  kind  of self-portrayal  in Fanny   Essler   (I go5),   his  first  novel.  Spettigue's  notion  that   the  model  for Fanny  Essler and  Clara  Vogel was Grove's  German   wife17  is only partly  plau­ sible, because in both autobiographical novels Grove appears  to reveal primarily himself through   his female  protagonists. Some  thematic  and  psychological evi­ dence from Fanny  Essler will help to substantiate my interpretation.



CoMPARABLE  TO   NIELS,  Fanny  suffers from  childlike nai­ vete, a mother  complex, voracious sexual desires and  frustrations,  all  indicative  of psychological instability and inability to cope with her life-energy. Among her lovers are  a  pretentious  baron,  a gentlemanly  sea captain, lesbian  theatre  col­ leagues, eccentric  artist  figures called Stein, Stumpf, and  Barrel,  and  an  upper­  class landowner  called Reelen. Stein, whose name  alludes to his heart of stone, is a  kind  of  demonic  lover;  the  noseless Stumpf,  though  impotent   as  his  name implies, can give her brotherly love and  security;  and  Barrel, her first husband,  finds in her inspiration  for his writing. Barrel kills himself after  Fanny's  engage­ ment  to  the  duty-conscious,  reserved Reelen,  who  offers her  a symbolic refuge after the decadent  world of artists.
In  each  affair   Fanny's  hot-bloodedness  inexorably   turns  into  frigidity  and sexual  torture; yet,  ironically,  she  regards  sex as  the  gateway  to  a  successful career.  Her  attempt to be an actress, as if to mask her inner life, fails miserably; and  just when her naive dream of the fairy prince promises fulfillment in Reelen, her Niels Lindstedt-like  derangement  reaches its nadir,  from  which his world of hollow gentility  can  no longer  rescue her. She  dies of malaria  in Portugal  only


120

GROVE'S BLUFF

days  before  her  marriage; and  in  her  final delirium  she longs to  be with  her mother.   Unlike  Niels, yet similar  to  Clara,  Fanny  is promiscuous,  dabbles  in literature  and  art, and likes nude paintings. She is, incidentally, also akin to Ellen in her puritanical upbringing and frequent signs of mannishness.
There  is another   crucial  connection  between  the  two books in  the fairy tale
Stein tells Fanny:

Once upon a time there was a little girl who dreamed of a prince far away in the great wide world. And she ran away from her father and mother to seek the prince. And before she found him, she had to cross a great marsh, and her clothes and body had become dirty. And he, who was glad to be finally recognized as a prince, did not notice it at first, and was full of joy, and kissed her because she had found him. But then he saw that on her long journey she had been unable to keep her­ self clean, while he was dying because of his passion for cleanliness.J.s

The  links to the Big Marsh  as well as Niels's passion for symbolic cleanliness are self-evident. The  "little  girl,"  however, deserves closer attention, since tradition­ ally the prince quests for the princess and not vice versa. This inversion of roles, in what is meant  as a lesson for Fanny, gives additional support to my interpreta­ tion of her as a version of Grove himself and, by analogy, to my reading of Clara  as a variation  of that  version. Even otherwise trivial coincidences become remark­  able in this analogy: Clara  and Grove dye their hair  with henna;].9  Fanny's  first creative  piece of work is a book design, and Grove designed the cover for Fanny
Essler;2 ° Fanny  and  Grove are heavy smokers; and  Fanny's  and Clara's  passions
and  mock-creative   pursuits  tend  to  parody  Grove's  passional and  artistic  diffi­ culties alluded  to  in  his In  Search  of Myself and  partly  documented  in  FPC:  The  European  Years.  I should  add  that  Grove's self-revelations in the  guise of female characters appear  also in his second German  novel, M aurermeister  I hies Haus  (I go6)  with its Fanny Essler-like protagonist, Suse Ihle.
In  the  absence  of thoroughly  detailed  biographical  evidence and  of syntheses of Grove's  habits  of writing,  my psychological reading  of Settlers of the Marsh, in response to both his implicit invitation  to do so and  his reputation as a confes­ sional writer,  relies on a synthesis of linguistic, thematic, and psychological pieces of  evidence.  While  the  ambiguity  of the  "big  bluff"  is the  cornerstone  of my interpretation, Clara's role as a surrogate  of Felix Paul  Greve,  the  old Grove, completes the evidence pattern  I have established. To Niels she is a failed Anima, to Grove a Shadow  figure in the Jungian sense of the term. In short, by creating  Niels, Clara   and  Ellen  as  archetypal  characters  in  an  archetypal   New World setting,  Grove   has  dramatized  versions  of  his  Persona   (Niels),  his  Shadow  (Clara) and  his Anima  (Ellen); or, in other  words, his present life (Niels), his memory  of  the  past  (Clara), and  his  future  (Ellen) . The  big  Marsh  setting appropriately triggers and frames his oblique self-revelations.2].

I2 I

GROVE'S BLUFF

There is further support for the  psycho-biographical significance of Settlers  of the  Marsh  in Grove's evidently  ambiguous revelations on his prairie books:

I  should  want  to  work all  my older  books over  again -to  refashion  them,  to bring them into accord with my widening outlook.22

For  the landscape  as it lives in this novel  [Settlers of the Marsh]  and  others, and its human  inhabitants as well, were mine, were the  products  of my mind; yet, to me, they had become more real than any actuality  could have been. For years, yes, decades, every figure in this novel, as in others,  had  from  day  to day, sucked my life blood  to keep  itself going, leaving me  limp  as a  rag,  making  me a  bore  to others and a burden to myself.23

[L] andscapes, characters,  destinies, they were all there, but stiii hidden  by the veil which could be lifted only by slow "creation."24

I believe I have hidden myself fairly well.25

These  statements round   out  my  prefatory comments on  Grove's literary  back­ ground, his fear  of writing, and  his high  regard for  Settlers  of the  Marsh. Par­ ticularly   the   playful   quotation  marks   around  the   word  creation  indicate  his haunting temptation to  both  unveil  and  veil his remarkable past  in the  form  of autobiographical fiction.
The  aim  of this  paper  has not  been  to reduce  Settlers  of the  Marsh either  to bits of sensational biographical gossip or to a convenient example of the  validity of psychological  theories.  The  aim has been  to  throw much  needed  light  on  the way  this  enigmatic literary confidence-man, Frederick Philip Grove  alias  Felix Paul  Greve,  manipulates the  genre  of autobiographical or,  more  appropriately, confessional  fiction  while provoking  the  reader's critical circumspection and attention to  those  unfashionable "hidden meanings" which  demand respect  for the symbiosis of fiction and  autobiography.


NOTES

1 FPC:  The  European  Years  (Ottawa: Oberon  Press, 1973).  Unless stated  other­ wise, biographical  information  about  Grove  in  this  paper  is drawn  from  Spetti­  gue's book.
2  Andre  Gide,  "Conversations  with  a  German  Several  Years  before  the  War," in Pretexts: Refiections on Literatur;e and Morality, trans. and ed. by Justin  O'Brien (New York:  Delta, 1964), p. 239·
3   See Hans Wysling, "Archivalisches Gewi.ihle," Thomas Mann  Gesellschaft, Zurich,
Blatter, No.5 (1965),  pp. 23-44.
4  See my note, "Settlers of the Marsh:  'A Garbled  Extract'?" Canadian  Not,es and
Queries, No. 21 (July 1978), pp. 8-9.
5  FPC: The  European Years, p. 197.
8   In Search of Myself (Toronto: Macmillan, 1946),  p. 386.

122

GROVE'S BLUFF


7   Letter  to Stevenson,  15 December  1926; quoted in C. M. Armitage,  "The  Lionel
Stevenson Canadiana at Duke University," American Review of Canadian Studies,
7, No.2  (Autumn  1977), p. 55·
a  Ibid., p. 56.
9  In Search of Myself, p. 379·
10  Settlers of the Marsh  (2nd  ed.; Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1966),  p. 42.
11 Ira  Progoff,  Junfts   Psychology  and  Its  Social  Meaning   (Garden City:  Anchor
Books, 1973),  p. 78.
12  L.  McMullen, "Women   in  Grove's  Novels," in The   Grove  Symposium, ed.  by
John  Nause (Ottawa: University of Ottawa  Press, 1975), p. 68.
13  For eyes as symbols of genitals, see C. G. Jung, Symbols of Transformation, trans. by R. C. F. Hull, Collected  Works, Vol. 5 (2nd ed.; Princeton: Princeton Univer­
sity Press, 1970), p. 268.
14  Ibid., pp. 174-75, 401.
15  Ibid.,  p. 248.
16  Ibid., p. 348.
17  FPG: The  European Years, pp. 137-38.
18  Fanny Essler (Stuttgart: Juncker, 1905), p. 372; translation  mine.
19  "Conversations with a German," p. 242.
2° Fanny Essler, title-page and  p. 407.
21  W.  J. Keith  considers  the  portrayal  of Clara  as Grove's  "attempting to explore realms  of  experience   to  which  he  is a  stranger,"  and  he  relates  it  to Grove's "decline  of artistic  control" and  "decline of basic seriousness" (Journal  of Cana­
dian Studies,  9  [1974],  30-31).  Grove's "decline of artistic  control"  is, of course, not the result of lacking experience;  the very opposite is closer to the truth.
Concerning   archetypal  landscape,  character   and   theme   in  autobiographical fiction, see also A. Fleishman,  "The  Fiction of Autobiographical Fiction," Genre,
9 (Spring  1976),  74·
22  In Search of Myself, p. 257·
23  Ibid.,  p. 373·
24   Ibid.,  p. 372.
25  Ibid., p. 383.



MALCOLM  LOWRY
A Reference Guide

Compiled by W. H. NEW
" ... an indispensable  bibliography" -Studies in the Novel
$18.00
Available from
G. K. HALL,  INC.,  70 Lincoln Street, Boston, Mass. 02111



123
































EVENING  DANCE OF THE  GREY FLIES P. K. Page


P. K. Page is a poet  of the rarest  sensibility, elegant  and sensuous, refined yet extravagant.  In her first  collection since 1974,
she offers  poems whose  rich imagery  and  technical assurance illuminate a fully  developed  visionary response to the world
as she mines  a prophetic vein that  is both disquieting and  unforgettable.
The  volume also includes  her much-admired short  story
'Unless the Eye Catch  Fire . ..',
a haunting tale about the  end  of time.

To be published  late October	Paperbound	$6.50

OXFORD




THE VISITANTS Miriam Waddington
The  many  admirers of Miriam Waddington's poetry will be glad to know  that  a new collection is forthcoming, her tenth.  In
The  Visitants she maintains the energy  and verbal  play one associates with  her later  poetry, while addressing herself  to such  serious  subjects as the  problems of women, the situation of immigrants, the  threat of the nuclear  world, and  most  of all
what  it means  to confront old age and  death.  Behind  the singing simplicity of her  poems  there  is a vision of life  that  is both austere and  passionate.  It is this tension  that  gives Miriam  Waddington's poetry its unique character, so that  lines and  images,  stanzas,
even  whole  poems  stay  in the  mind.

To be published late October	Paperbound   $5.95 	Oxford


r

POEMS TWICE TOLD
Containing The  Boatman and  Welcoming  Disaster

Jay  MacPherson

This volume  brings  together two collections - one  well known but  unavailable for some  time,  the other little known - by a distinguished Canadian poet.   The  Boatman, first  published in
19 57,  was one  of the outstanding poetry publications of the
1950s, a winner of a Governor General's Award.  It is an intri­ cate  sequence of short  epigrammatic poems  - in which  there  are echoes of ballads, carols,  nursery  rhymes, and  hymns - that  bear  a whole  cosmos  of the  poet's invention constructed from Biblical  and  classical allusions. Welcoming Disaster was privately published by the author in 1974 and will now reach the  wider  audience it deserves.


To be published late October	Paperbound	$6.95 	Oxford






RELUCTANT NATIONALIST

ELSPETH  CAMERON, Hugh MacLennan:  A Writer's Life. Univ. of  Toronto  Press,
$24·95·
ELSPETH  CAMERON's LIFE OF Hugh  Mac­ Lennan is  the  moot  thorough and  moot revealing   account  yet  published  of  the life  and  writings  of  a Canadian author. A large  claim,  and  perhaps a contentious one.  But  true.  Only  Douglas  Spettigue's account  of   Grove's  early   years   comes clooe  to  the  standard  Cameron  has  at­ tained.    Indeed,  for   sheer   brilliance   of scholarly   detective  work,  Spettigue  far outshines  Cameron -or any  other  Can­ adian  critic.  But FPG covers only a part  of its subject's life, and is more concerned with   establishing  Grove's   identity  than  with explaining how  that  identity shaped  Grove's  Canadian fiction.  On  the  other  hand,  Cameron's book  is a  comprehen­ sive biography, a sustained  and  satisfying encounter  between    a  perceptive  critic and  a major writer. Cameron's book, will surely   be  recognized   as  a  landmark  in the  development of  Canadian  criticism.
Cameron's  main   thesis  is  that   Mac­ Lennan's novels  "bear a  profound  rela­ tionship   to  the  course  of  his  life."  That
is, Cameron's study  confirms  what  many of  MacLennan's readers   have  long  sus­ pected,  that  his fiction  is often  a  kind  of displaced autobiography. Above all, Mac­ Lennan's  dictatorial,  often   puritanical male  characters owe  much  to his father, "Dr.  Sam"  MacLennan, a  demanding and   authoritarian  parent,   who   closely supervised  young  Hugh's career  until  his graduation  from  Princeton with  a  PhD


126
 at  the  age  of twenty-eight. Even  then, MacLennan  only  escaped   his  father  by the  skin  of  his  teeth, when  he  was  un­ expectedly offered  a  teaching  pooition at Lower  Canada College  in  Montreal.
In effect,   MacLennan  experienced a greatly   prolonged  adolescence  that   left him   in   emotional  turmoil.   Fundamen­ tally  he  respected  his  father's ideas  and  standards. He  could  never  simply  rebel against parental  authority and   be  done  with  it. Yet his father's expectations were a  heavy   burden. Young   Hugh  defined  success  in   much   the   same   way  as  his father  did-as  making   a  contribution to  "civilization." The  teaching of  Latin grammar  to  the  children  of  well-to-do Montrealers did  not  seem  a  vital  contri­ bution to  society's  health. And  teaching demanded time  that  MacLennan would have   preferred to  devote   to  writing fic­ tion,   his  own   chooen   route   to  success. Throughout   the  later   1930's,   when   his two  first  efforts  at  fiction  remained  un· published,  MacLennan felt  he  had   not fulfilled  his father's hopes-or  his own. In  short, he felt  himself  a failure.
When   Dr.   Sam   died   in   1939,  Mac­ Lennan faced  a  personal dilemma. Even if his future books succeeded, how  could he  show  his  father  that  he  had  made a success  of  his  life?  So  acutely  did  Mac­ Lennan feel  his father's absence  that  for several   months   he   continued  to   write  letters   to  the  dead man.  In  these  letters,  he   sought   to   rationalize  his   apparent failure and  transfer the  blame  to  exter­ nal  conditions. Therefore, I feel  Came­ ron  is  wrong   to  interpret  the  letters   as the  continuation of  an  apparent  recon­ ciliation  between   Dr.  Sam  and  his  son. Rather, MacLennan's subsequent  novels, with  their   recurrent  father-son conflicts, provide   evidence    that    he   retained   a deeply   ambivalent  attitude  towards his father.
I would   argue that   MacLennan  used
his novels to work out  a hootility he could

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



never   bring  himself   to  openly  acknowl­ edge.  In  his first four  novels the confron­ tation  with   the  father  becomes  increas­  ingly  explicit, until  in  Each  Man's  Son MacLennan  paints  a   severely   critical  portrait  of  Dr.  Ainslie,   who   is  closely modelled  on Dr. Sam. But  this novel also embodies MacLennan's atempt to under­ stand  his  father  from within.  By putting himself  in  Dr.  Sam's place,  MacLennan was able  to forgive  his father's harshness and  lack of overt  warmth. Indeed, if the conclusion  of  Each  Man's   Son  is  read from  Alan  MacNeil's viewpoint (that is, from   young    Hugh's   perspective),  the novel marks MacLennan's liberating recognition that, despite  a forbidding ex­ ternal manner, his  father did  want  and  love him.
'A good biography should  provide some surprises,  and  Cameron's book does  this. The  most unexpected revelation is the limited   extent  of  MacLennan's  knowl­ edge  about French Canada at  the  time he  wrote  Two  Solitudes.  He  derived  his picture of rural Quebec principally from Ringuet's Trente  Arpents.  Another sur­ prise is the strength of MacLennan's im­ pulse  to  leave  Canada. Cameron makes it clear  that  MacLennan was, for a long time,  a  reluctant nationalist. In his  two unpublished  novels  he  wrote  on  "inter­ national"   themes    of   universal   impor­ tance.   He   used   a  Canadian  setting   in Barometer  Rising  only  grudgingly, after  he had  reluctantly concluded that  a per­  verse   fate   had   doomed  him   to  be  a "Canadian"  writer. In  Two Solitudes he somewhat   opportunistically  mined    the vein of  Canadian approval he had  struck  with   his  first   novel.   For  many   readers  these   two   novels   filled   a   vacuum  in Canadian  letters;  they   were   welcomed for  their  themes  and  forgiven their artis­ tic  flaws.  Despite his enthusiastic  Cana­ dian  reception (which, however, brought more  applause than cash) ,  MacLennan tried  in  The   Precipice  to  break  through
 to  the  larger   American audience. He desperately wanted to write  a best-seller. Only   when   The   Precipice  met   a  luke­ warm   reception  did   MacLennan   fully resign  himself  to writing from  his  native  background. Reluctantly, then,  and de­ spite   a  very  un-Canadian   appetite  for applause and   fortune,  MacLennan pur­  sued  the  literary  career   that   has  made  him  a  Canadian  national institution.
ISince she began  work on her  project in
1974, Cameron has steeped  herself  in MacLennan's  writings,    both   published and  unpublished, and  has read  his exten­ sive correspondence. She  has studied   the reviews of his books, and  has interviewed not  only  MacLennan but  also  many  of his friends.  Her  efforts  have  produced a book that  is very detailed, a sort of fever chart of the fluctuations in  MacLennan's emotional and  intellectual life. But is this the   best   possible  biography  that   could have been  written using  these  materials? I  raise  this  question  because   it  is  clear that  Cameron is trying  to write  a Cana­ dian  literary  biography that  matches the standards  set   by  such   modern  biogra­ phers  as  Leon   Edel,  Richard  Ellmann, and  Edgar  Johnson. Judged at  this level, I think  Cameron's  book  has  weaknesses. For  example,   she  seems  overly  timid   in using  the  psychological   tools  Edel  advo­  cates and her own interpretation of Mac­ Lennan  seems   to   invite.  She   remarks that  the ending of Barometer  Rising  has a  deus ex machina quality about it. She fails   to  point    out   that    the   explosion, though superficially  an arbitrary denoue­ ment,   has  a  psychological  aptness. The explosion acts out  Neil Macrae's hostility  towards  Colonel   Wain   (and   MacLen­ nan's  hostility towards Dr. Sam)  ; the ex­ plosion   achieves   the   secret   wish   that MacLennan could  never  let Neil  (or himself)  consciously  admit.
Every modern biographer must  choose between  Boswellian  accumulation of  de­ tails and  Strachean selectivity. Cameron's

127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



book is emphatically in the Boswellian tradition. And like Boswell, Cameron has identified with  her  subject  and  prodded him   for  information; but  she  seems  to lack Boswell's eye for the entertaining incident, the  trivial   but  revealing  anec­ dote.  She  has  not  taken   to  heart  Mac­ Lennan's own  repeated  observation that  today  the  best authors of  non-fiction fre­ quently  use  the  techniques to  fiction  to enliven  their  narratives. Her  book is per­  haps  overly  earnest, too much  like Mac­ Lennan's  own  prose  at  its  most  ponder­ ous.  Cameron shows us MacLennan the introvert,  the  tortured  reasoner,   the  at times self-centred apologist  for his own work.  She  doesn't show  us  MacLennan the  raconteur, the  boon  companion, the lover of good liquor  and  genial conversa­ tion.  She doesn't do  justice to the side of MacLennan  that   produced  the  graceful  familiar  essays  collected   in   Thirty  and Three and  Scotchman's Return, and  that  created such amusingly grotesque charac­ ters  as  Aunt   Maria,  Captain  Yardley,  and  Matt McCunn.
My  strongest   reservation  about  Cam­ eron's  book  concerns its lack  of  straight­ forward critical analysis of  MacLennan's novels.   Cameron  explains   the   circum­ stances    under    which   each   novel   was written, and   she  patiently  outlines   the twisted  course  of  MacLennan's relations with   his   reviewers   and   his  publishers. (Indeed,   her   study   shows  conclusively  that  MacLennan's novels were  the  result of a virtual collaboration between  writer, publishers, and  readers.) However, Cam­ eron's closeness  to  her  subject  leads  her to accept MacLennan's statements of in­ tention  as  an  adequate  account  of  his final  achievement. She  often  blames  re­ viewers  for  misreading a novel  when  she might   better   analyze  why  the  novel  has failed  to produce the  desired  response.
Above   all,  Cameron  never   confronts the question a young Peter Gzowski asked in   a   review   of   Return  of  the   Sphinx
 brashly titled "Yes, But Can Our Major Authors Write?" How  good  a prose styl­ ist is MacLennan? How  believable  (and  how    interesting)   are    his    characters? How   well  can   he  arrange  the incidents of  his  stories   into   coherent   plots?   To  what  extent was Diana Trilling right  in suggesting   that  in  MacLennan's novels "seriousness and  decency  do a very good job as proxy  for  art"? Cameron's failure to   address    the   issue   of   MacLennan's artistic  success   or   failure  is  a   serious omission.   I  wonder,  for  instance, what non-Canadian readers or  even  Canadian readers who  are  not  specialists  in  Cana­ dian   literature will  make  of  the  biogra­  phy.  I doubt they  will  understand what  all  the  shouting  is  about. The book  as­ sumes,  rather than  argues,  MacLennan's importance and skill.
-But if Cameron does not analyze Mac­
Lennan's novels  in  detail,  she  does  pro­ vide  a revealing look  at  the  man  behind  the  novels.  The  reader need   not  agree  with  every  detail of Cameron's  interpre­ tation  in order  to find  the book! valuable. Her  abundant quotations provide a basis for   reaching   independent   conclusions. The  reader  can  sharply  question  (as  I do)   many  of  Cameron's judgments (for example,  her   assessment   of  the  preten­ tious  Voices in  Time as  "MacLennan's greatest novel")  yet still  understand  why MacLennan's total  accomplishment  gives him a permanent place in our cultural history. If some of MacLennan's writings fall  short  of greatness, this only serves  to remind   us that MacLennan is after  all a man,  not a personification of the national zeitgeist.
Cameron's research has been  thorough
and  accurate. I have  only a few quibbles with  her  handling of facts.  Why does she ignore   his   second   published  article,  a left-leaning summary of the  results of his doctoral research  [ "Oxyrhynchus,"  Dal­ housie Review,  I6, no. 3 (Autumn I936),
3I4-23]? Why  doesn't she  mention the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



novel  about  Montreal  [mentioned in "Cape Breton: The Legendary Isle," Saturday  Night    (3  July   1951),   12-13] on which  MacLennan says he spent  six months  before  discarding it  in  favour of the book that  became  Each Man's Son? Shouldn't there  be some mention of the doctor  MacLennan  insists   (in   a   1965 letter  to the Montreal Star)   is the model for Jerome Martell's healing touch, Dr. Reuben Rabinovitch of Montreal? Shouldn't Albert  Jay  Nock,  author of a book  that  MacLennan admired and cited for almost  forty  years, get at least a word in  passing?  These are  probably  niggling points.  But  details  as well as broad inter­ pretations matter in a biography.
As Cameron points  out  in her  preface, her   book  is  part   of  a  general  reaction against  the  purely  thematic criticism  that prevailed in  the  sixties.  Today many scholars  are  working to set Canadian criticism   on  a  sounder and   larger  foun­ dation of  basic  knowledge. One  impor­ tant   result  of  this  collective  activity  has been  a  growing  interest in  literary biog­ raphy.    Writers  will   be   treated  beside politicians and   businessmen  in   the  on­ going Dictionary of Canadian Biography; several  smaller   but  still  ambitious group projects are  currently producing a  large inventory of bio-critical studies  of our authors; an  entire conference has been devoted  to the  topic  of Canadian literary biography. There is surely  a  connection between  the  study  of individual identity and  the  study  of collective identity. The current boom  in  biographical studies seems to presage  a new stage  in our pur­ suit  of the  elusive  Canadian  identity. At the   outset   of   this   process,   Cameron's biography  sets   a   worthy   standard  by which   to  measure  all  subsequent  biog­ raphies of Canadian writers.

T. D. MACLULICH
 
Excellent
a model biography
... the details are as unexpected as they are illuminating.'·


Hugh MacLennan
A WRITER'S LIFE
Elspeth Cameron

MacLennan, one of Canada's major novelists, was the coun­ try's first  truly non-colonial writer. This impressive biog­ raphy centres on  the personal and creative struggles lying be­ hind the transformation of the  events of an artist's life into art.
'Admiring but  never sycophan­ tic, scholarly but accessible ... Cameron's account of the gene­ sis of each novel and the details of publication are perceptive and illuminating.' Ken Adachi,
Toronto Star*  $24.95

University of
Toronto Press



129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TO REMEMBER

EARLE  BIRNEY,  Spreading   Time: Remarks   on
Canadian    Writing  and   Writers. Book   I:
1904-1949. Vehicule  Press.

THE FIRST VOLUME OF Spreading Time (Earle  Birney's   "literary   memoirs")   is here  under its sub-title Remarks  on  Ca­ nadian  Writing   and  Writers-Book  1:
1904-1949,  and  a  very  rewarding  close­ packed   little  volume  it  is-stimulating, entertaining, and   instructive.  One   sees
the  graduate  students swarming and "lookiing for  indebtedness, Formal  Influ­ ences,  etc." in  rummage for  the author's precise  Literary Relationships, confident­ ly defining  his  place, tracing  his  literary  pedigree,   and   finally  assigning   him   to this  stall   or   that.   All   their   labour   will prove  vain.  Birney  has  walked  his  own way,  blazed  his  trail, and  paced  his path  alone.
"Like  most  infants," he  tells  us,  be­ ginningS pring Plowing 1904-26 (the first and   longest   and   most  attractive of   the autobiographical  sections under   the  running  head   of   As  I  remember)   "I absorbed 'poetry' before   I  could   read,  without knowing  what  it  was." Thus he remembers  his   mother's   lullabies   and liltings  and  hymns  and  other  "intercon­ tinental  chants   echoed   down    from   a Shetland croft ... " ('0 Caledonia! stern
and  wild I Meet   nurse for    a   poetic child !) .  Also, however   (and, in  view  of his future career, most  significantly), he
taught himself  to read and  before school had   acquired "a  permane'nt  love  affair'
with Words and their infinite shapes and sounds  and  meanings." These  words  are surely  among the most affecting in the whole  book.  Of  course,  he  had  his  par­ ents'   help,   principally  perhaps   his   fa­ ther's; for,  as  the  son  has  told  us   that
f ther.                                              1 &
h1s fmthful love-affair with  words."  It is
all   very   moving-the solitary  child
 ("Wordsworthian" is Birney's  word)  re­ mote   on   the   Albertan  farmstead    puz­ zling   out   his  language under N ture's ministry,  the "flowers  in the summer sun"  and     (severer   intervention)    "the  vast snows of  winter."
During boyhood  in Banff, he took his chances with  the  holdings, Canadian and ritish,
It seems  that  he  read,  with  a  boy's eager
appetite, whatever drifted within   reach. At  fourteen, in  high  school,  he  began  to compose  "bad verse"; and  in  Vernon at sixteen,  a homesick  junior  bank  teller,  he found relief  from  loneliness  in  the  com­ position   of  further verse  equally  "bad." There is nothing extraordinary in all this and   nothing might  have  ensued;  but  he yielded   to  urgings   (chiefly,  it  seems,  his mother's)  to  enroll   at  some  university. Accordingly,  he  entered   (September
1922)   the  University of  British  Colum­ bia.   There  he   shortly    made   his   first acquaintance  with    live   poets.   It was thoroughly disillusioning.
The first  poet   to  come   under  young
Birney's  eye was Sir  Henry  Newbolt, giv­ ing  a  set  imperialist speech  with  recita­ tions of his own  patriotic verse. When  he intoned Drake's Drum  (called  by Birney after    many   years   "a   particularly  silly jingle")    the    students   responded   with spontaneous booing. There was an  excit­  ing  aftermath, of   which  Birney  gives  a lively  account;  and   a  scathing  parody  called  Henry's Horn appeared in the stu­  dent  weekly. On  Birney,  it all had  a pro­  found   effect.  "I  began   to   realize   that  poetry ... had  powers  to  provoke  battles  over ideas,  rouse  basic emotions, stir  peo-­ ple  to  action. Out  of  Henry's  Horn  a flourish  had  been sounded I would  never forget,  an  assertion of cultural  indepen­ dence  ... , a piece of  Canadiana."
Subsequently  three    native   Canadian poets -Wilson   Macdonald,  Bliss   Car­ man,  and  Charles G. D. Roberts-were heard at  the  lectern and  all found  want-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing.  Birney   (who  had  begun   to  nourish private ambitions to become  a poet him­ self and  was, in  his  junior  year,  to write the  first draft of V ancouuer  Lights)  dis­ missed  them  all.  Two eloquent questions in  Spring  Plowing  may  best  express  his feelings  in   those  days  long  past.  "Who was  there   alive  and   young  and   coming  up  then?  Would  there  ever  be anyone  to write  the Canadian poetry  that  waited  in the air?"
Benign influences upon  him in his undergraduate years included the elfin Lionel  Haweis  with his "belief  in the pos­ sibility  of  a  significant Canadian  litera­  ture," who taught the young aspirant "the  pleasures   of creative  fellowship and  the importance of   trying." There  was  also the   curriculum   of   English  Honours which,   though it  failed   to  notice  Cana­ dian  literature, yet gave him  a sound  first view of the  whole  body of  English  litera-
 ture.  Far  and  away  the greatest and  best influence  was the legendary first Head  of the  Department,  Garnett  Sedgewick, then at the height of his powers. He introduced Birney  to  the  scholarly  study of  Chaucer and   furthermore, as  Birney here  says, "shocked parish-pumpery and intellectual  laziness  out   of  me,  and  re­ placed   it  with   Arnoldian  love  for   the
'best    that    has    been    thought   in    the
world.' " In    1926,  the   subject   for   the Honours Seminar  (that  year  conducted by Sedgewick)  was  Arnold's poetry  and criticism.  This acquaintance with Arnold was most important to Birney; and  hence his reference  to Sedgewick  as "my  men­ tor  and  culture-hero, my  own  Matthew Arnold.... "
!Upon  graduation, feeling  that  he had been "armed for a professional  life in the research  and  teaching of literature" he decided   to aim  at  that  goal  and  left  for




Letters of Bliss Carman
Edited by H. Pearson Gundy

A delightful and voluminous correspondent, Bliss Carman  virtually  writes his autobiography in these letters spanning the years 1874-1929. They begin with his student days in Fredericton,  NB and at Edinburgh and Harvard and proceed through his many years as editor and poet in the United States. Well-known there and in Great Britain, his work did not appear in a Canadian edition until1921, the year in which he was named Canada's 'Poet  Laureate.' This edition of his letters reveals him as an attractive, compassionate, and companionable man who, while taking a serious view of poetry, seldom took a similar view of himself.
$35.00

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



post-graduate study  at  Toronto  "prima­ rily  in   earlier   English   literature" -in short,  as  a  medievalist.  His  work  in lin­ guistics sharpened an ear naturally acute,  and   he  made   notes  upon   the   rhythms  and   intonations and  dialectal  forms  of living   speech.   Afterward,  during  two years   at   the   University  of  California, taking  the Ph.D.  program with  philologi­  cal  emphasis, his  work  in  linguistics  was very  wide-Gothic, Old  Norse,  Anglo­ Saxon,  Middle English,  Old French, each with  its associated   literature and,  to  top all, extensive  reading in the later  periods of  English   itself.   It was  a  remarkably rigorous   and   'scientific' training  in  lan­ guage,  and   he  thoroughly enjoyed  it.  A fellow-student  in   that   large  impersonal graduate  school  still  remembers  Birney in high  delight upon  reading  a couple  of lines in Robert Greene's Friar Bacon and Friar   Bun gay- 'Forty  kine.... With strouting   duggs  that  paggle  to   the  ground.'  He greeted   the  old  poet's  zest­ ful words with  a burst of happy  laughter.
Out of all  this comes Birney's  dazzling
play  with  words.  From  the  brilliant and early  Anglosaxon Street  to the  late traw­ na tuh  bellvul  by knayjin psifik  and from the  haunting David  to  CHAT  bilingual (for example, cucarachas  in  fiji)  or from Turvey to  Big Bird  in the  Bush  (to  turn to prose) , the language is heightened and extended  by  a   master,   qualified    after  years of arduous study. Granted, writing  has always been  a matter of words-but
'The lyf  so  short, the  craft   so  long  to Ierne.... ' And   'so  sharp   the  conquer­ ing.'  In all his wanderings over the earth, Birney   has   written  his  poetry  and   has heard  and  recorded the local accents  and idiom that  modify  standard   English speech.
After    1937   or   thereabout,  the   story continues in  sections  of  As  I  remember alternating  (according to  date  of  publi­ cation)  with   a  score  of   reviews,  edito rials, magazine articles,  and radio  broad-

132
 casts. The reader welcomes,  for example, Birney's   own  account of  his  pioneering work in establishing highly successful cre­ ative   writing courses   ("first   stone  in  a little    shelter  for   the   creative   student naked  in  Academia") at  Toronto and  at his  Alma  Mater, the  University of  Brit­ ish Columbia; but the minute account of his troubled editorship of Canadian Poet­ ry   Magazine  becomes   perhaps  a   little tedious   (As  the  Queen said,  'Something too  much   of  this') . On  the  other   hand, the  content of the  reviews, editorials, etc. is uniformly delightful.
These pieces,  twenty  or so, couched in
Birney's   excellent  prose-clear,  direct, and    plain,    and    therefore   powerful - range  from  general reflections  upon  Ca­ nadian poetry  and  its place  in Canadian life   to  particular  criticism   (beautifully expressed) of the  poems  of  Robert Finch  or  of  Paul   Hiebert's  humorous  master­ piece,  Sarah  Binks. The most valuable of these   'essays   in   criticism'  may   be   Has Poetry   a  Future  in   Canada?  and   Yes, Canadians Can  Read, but  Do They? But all   arouse   us  and   provoke   thought,  as does  everything  that   Birney  utters.  It is good  to see in  print, Why is Canada  still Banning   Joyce's 	Ulysses?   This   radio broadcast  of   1949  makes   us  ask  again how  any  reasonable man  faced  with  the question of  censorship can  come  to  any but  Milton's conclusion. Over  all of these pieces-Is    it   fanciful  to   think   it? - hovers    the    kindly    shade    of   Matthew Arnold.
Spreading Time:  Book  I  ends  with  a coda  which,  the  author explains, is drawn from   a  letter   he  wrote   on  New  Year's
Eve,  1949,  an  assessment  of  himself.  At the  milestones we all  pause  and  rest and are  weary,  even  discouraged-the  bur­ den   of  life,   many   doubts,  the   fleeting  years, the curtain hung  over our futurity, misgivings  a-plenty: these all combine to weaken our  resolve.  Such  sombre  reflec­ tions Birney  expresses  in  the Coda-- but

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he  rouses,  and  in  gen tie  irony  closes his book with Come  in, 1950!
Having  found Book  I  to be a source  of delight  and  instruction we may adopt  the form  of his welcome  to  the  year  and  say in  all  sincerity  Come  in,  Book  II!

EDMUND MORRISON



L'EPOCHE JANSENISTE

MARIE MORIN, Les Annales de l'Hotel-Dieu de Montreal  r6s9-r725: Histoire simple et veritable.  Edition  critique par  Ghislaine Legendre. Les  Presses  de  l'Universire de Montn  al.

MARIE  MORIN ( 1649-1730), que d'aucuns tiennent pour  le premier 'ecrivain  ou le premier historien canadien, aura   du  at­ tendre patiemment  environ deux  siecles
et  demi  avant de  voir  para.ltre  son  His­
toire simple  et veritable  de retablissement
des  religieuseJ  hospitalieres de  Saint  Jo·
seph  en risTe de Montreal diste a present
Ville-Marie, en Canada, de l'annee  1659.
. . . Tel  est le titre  complet du  manuscrit que  les  Presses  de  l'Universite de  Mon­ treal   viennent  de   publier  ( I979)   dans  son  texte  integral pour la  premiere fois. II  fait  desormais partie  de  la  collection  "Bibliotheques des  Lettres Quebecoises." Je  lis  par  bonheur  ce  qui  suit  sur  l'ele­ gante   jaquette  de  cet  ouvrage d'erudi­ tion:    Les   Annales   de   l'Hotel-Dieu  de Montreal   1659-1725  Histoire   simple   et veritable  k!arie  Morin  Edition critique par Ghislain  Legendre.
probablement  jamais   vu  le  jour  sans  le
concours du  Conseil   des  Arts  de  la  re­ gion  de  Montreal, du  ministere des  Af­ faires  culturelles du  Quebec et  du  Con­  seil  de  recherche en  sciences  humaines du  Canada; il fait honneur tout ensemble a son auteur, ala Collection eta la Mai­  son  d'edition,   car  il  est   presente  avec beaucoup de finesse et  de  gout,  de  preci-
 

Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues  free on  request








ETUDES SUR
LA LANGlJE
PARLEE
DE$ NFANTS QUEBECOIS :::
Gilles Gagne, Michel Page et al.
• La Performance  linguistique orale d'enfants quebecois  ages de 2
a 16 ans, objet d'un ensemble de
recherches.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sion et de savoir-faire. Marie  Morin elle­ meme   ne  pourrait en  croire  ses  yeux  si elle  pouvait  voir  aujourd'hui  son   texte aussi   copieusement  annote   et  superbe­ ment  edite.
Histoire simple et veritable comprend, outre   quatre hors-texte: Carte du  gou­ vernement   de    Montreal,  deux   pages
manuscrites empruntees  aux  Annates  et le  Plan   de  Montreal  ( I 675- I 687) ,  une
Introduction a Ia fois  detaillee, limpide
et   substantielle,   le   texte    complet  de
Marie    Morin,  des   notes  critiques,   des le-;ons non conservees, un index des noms, une  liste  des  noms  de  lieu  (Canada)  et un  glossaire.   Plus  qu'il   n'en   faut   pour faire les delices des exegetes de Ia petite histoire,  des  grammairiens et  des  lexico­ logues.  Les  notes  en   bas  de   page  sont aussi   instructives  et   precieuses  que   les
notes  critiques, rejetees  a Ia fin  de !'edi­
tion du manuscrit.
On  trouvera dans  !'Introduction   tous les renseignements indispensables a Ia lecture   et  a Ia  comprehension de  l'His­
toire  simple  et  veritable:  Ia  description
du   manuscrit  (3I7  pages,   3I,   5 x 20, scm:  32  lignes  par   page) ' le  plan  de­ taille,   chapitre  par   chapitre,  du   texte original de  Marie Morin, Ia  chronologie des  principaux  evenements,  une  biblio­ graphie choisie  ( ou I'auteur a sans doute  oublie  de mentionner  le Dictionnaire  des Oeuvres  litteraires  du  Quebec), et  des remarques sur  Ia  langue  et  le  style  du XVIIe siecle. Ce qui  y manque le moins, c'est  Ia  clarte   et  Ia  precision,  avec  une plethore  d'alineas,  de  titres   et  de  sous­ titres  en  caracteres gras,  de  dates  et  de parentheses; se qui  facilite  enormement, une   fois  qu'on  a  accompli   ce  steeple­ chase,   Ia  lecture    integrale   d'affilee   du manuscrit, dont  les pages  sont  si habile­  ment  numerotees et annotees.
Lecture faite,  je vois en  Marie  Morin un chroniqueur, un anecdotier-un eve­ nement en  appelle un  autre-un  sour­
cier,  un  memorialiste, un  annaliste a ses

I34
 heures  de sa communaute, de son milieu et  de  son  temps; elle  n'a   rien  de  l'his­ torien  de  metier, encore moins  de  l'ecri­ vain  authentique.  L'auteur,  doue  d'une heureuse memoire, a  entendu  beaucoup de   propos,   de   recits   et  d'histoires.  Ses sources sont  surtout orales. Impossible de
les  mettre  a  caution. 11  n'y  a  rien   de
neutre  ni  de   restrictif   dans   ce  qu'elle
ecrit.  Sans  doute  fait-elle un choix  parmi les evenements qu'elle rapporte. Et  c'est son  droit. Elle  a  beau  ecrire  "ce  qui  se passa  de  plus  remarquable dans  l'annee I 66 I" ou  I 670,  elle se garde  bien  plutot d'employer le mot  annales; en fait  je ne l'ai  pas releve sous sa plume.  Elle prefere les mots  suivants: histoire,  detail,  narre, petit   recueil,    ouvrage,  remarques,   dis­ cours, dans  l'acception latine du mot dis­ sertation, comme  l'emploie  Bossuet  dans
son  Discours  (dissertation)  sur l'histoire
universelle. Ce qui compte pour elle, c'est
Montreal,  c'est   une  communaute  civile
nouvelle,  c'est  une  communaute hospita­
liere   nouvelle.   Aussi  son   texte   est-il  le premier a avoir  jamais ete ecrit sur Mon­
treal,  sa fondation, son etablissement, son developpement; pas  un mot  de  I'exploit de  Dollard des  Ormeaux ( I66o), ni  du tremblement de  terre  ( I663)   ni du  mas­ sacre   de  Lachine  (I 66g) .  Environ   I 25
pages de son manuscrit sont  consacrees a
Montreal; autant le sont  a l'Hotel-Dieu
et  aux  premieres religieuses  fondatrices.
En  bref, son but  est de  justifier  Ia fonda­ cion  de   Montreal  et   celle   de   l'Hotel­ Dieu; ces deux creations sont etroitement unies,  l'une  n'existe   point  sans  !'autre. Fort  importants sont  Ies Appendices.
Dans  Ia Preface (I -23), il est  presque uniquement question de  Montreal et  des
religieuses   de  France.  D'ailleurs,  a  ces
dernieres, !'auteur  consacre des  portraits
tantot de  23 pages,  tantot de 38, et cela toujours suivant un  plan  uniforme  com­ pose  de  cinq  parties. Elle  ne  neglige  pas pour   autant les  jeunes  religieuses  cana­ diennes qu'elle  a  bien  connues.   Ce  qui

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



!'interesse au  plus  haut point,  ce sont  les acteurs  de   l'histoire;  elle  con  oit
toire  un peu  comme  une memoire collec­
tive. Elle  tient  les acteurs, c'est-a-dire les personnes   d'oeuvre, les fondateurs, pour des  modeles   a  proposer.  Aussi  son  but n'est-il  pas seulement de  recreer ses con­ soeurs  de  France, lesquelles  n'ont  jamais lu une ligne d'elle,  je presume, mais aussi de  justifier  les fondations. Cela est si vrai que  les deux  tiers  de  son  manuscrit sont des portraits de createurs, de fondateurs. Elle   consacre  peu   d'attention  au   recit proprement  dit;   les   rapports  entre   les faits,   !'etude   des   causes  et   des  conse­ quences ne semblent guere  Ia preoccuper. Esprit   vif  et  penetrant, femme  de coeur et  de  tete,  aussi  profondement croyante que  debordante d'activite, plusieurs  fois econome   et   superieure  de   sa   commu-
 naute,  c'est  dans  ses loisirs  qu'elle com­
mence  a 48  ans  a ecrire   cette   Histoire
simple et veritable. Elle sympathise beau­
coup   plus   avec    Maisonneuve  qu'avec Jeanne  Mance -son   silence   sur   cette derniere   est   pour   le  moins   curieux - avec   M.   de   La   Dauversiere-temoin l'emouvante lettre de !'abbe de Faucamp qu'elle   cite  au   complet sur   Ia  mort  du co-fondateur  de   Montreal-qu'avec Monseigneur de Laval.
Ghislaine  Legendre a  fait  une  oeuvre
utile  en editant de fru;on aussi  judicieuse cette  Histoire simple et  veritable, qui  est un   recit  d'epoque   janseniste, heroique, une  tranche d'epopee, haute en  couleur, ou  l'on  voit  a !'oeuvre des  fondateurs et des fondatrices, des personnages et des amazones,  des saints  et  des saintes.

MAURICE LEBEL





WLWE
World Literature Written in English

G. D. KILLAM,  EDITOR

WLWE is a  journal devoted   to criticism  and  discussion  of  Common­ wealth   literature, Third  World   writing   in  English   and  New  World literature in  English. Contributions of  a  scholarly  critical  nature are welcome  on  these  and  related  subjects; contributions are  also solicited specifically  for a special  issue on Canada in the Commonwealth. Other special  features in  future  issues will include  a section  on Doris  Lessing ( 1981)  and  one on  English writing  in Singapore and  Malaysia ( 1982).
SUBSCRIPTIONS    Institutions $12, individuals $10  per  year. Single copies  $5;  back  issues  $3.  Outside Canada please  add  50¢  per issue postage.
ADDRESS   G. D. Killam, Editor, World  Literature Written in  Eng­ lish,  Department of  English,  University  of  Guelph, Guelph,  Ontario, Canada N1G 2Wl.
postage.



135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LIES AND GRACE

AUSTIN   CLARKE,  Growing   Up  Stupid   Under
The  Union   Jack.  McClelland   &  Stewart,
$I3·95·
WILLIAM  KURELEK,  Someone   With  Me.   Mc- Clelland & Stewart, $14.95·

THE  MEMOIRS OF AUSTIN CLARKE, fiction­ writer,  and   William Kurelek,  artist, are quirky  relics. Clarke's first installment. of autobiography is a sly satire  on colomal­ ism  in  Barbados, in  which  the  target  is as  much   Clarke's  own  boyhood  naivete  as it is the overpowering shadow  of Eng­ land's imperial influences. Kurelek's post­ humous autobiography is a spiritual  ad­ venture  focussing  as it does on the artist's psychol gical
in his religious  conversion  to CathohCism
that  removed  the  shadows  of  depersona­
lization  and  chronic depression.
Clarke's  is  superior  in  style,  texture, and  incident, and  maintains a balance between   fleeting   notes  of  anger  or  con­ demnation  and   those  of  sturdy  endur­ ance  or  lyrical  celebration. Clarke was a schoolboy  in Barbados during the Seco?d  World  War  when  threats  of German m­ vasion  heightened the atmosphere of the­  atricality on  the  island.  Born  to be local "characters" -just as Trinidadians were in V. S. Naipaul's fiction and  non-fiction
-Barbadians  loved  to  dramatize  them­ selves.  They  sent   King   George   VI   a cable: "Go on,  England. Little  England is  behind you,"  failing  to  recognize  the colonial  irony.  While  the  Nazis inflamed  the  imaginations of  schoolboys  (a  local watchman became Hitler; a white  head­ master, Himmler  or  Goebbels),  Barba­ dians  scarcely  recognized   the  more  seri­ ous danger of  the  English.
The years 1944-I95o, spanning Clarke's admission to Combermere School  and, later,   his  entrance to  Harrison  College, were  an  "Union-Jacked  time"  when  he lived as if he were in an English country-
 side.   A   "dreaming  fool"   in  love   with English  literature, young  Clarke  adopted English   customs  and  attitudes quite  out of   sympathy   with   indigenous  ways of  his  native   village  of St.  Mathias. He was  split  down  the  middle by the  para­ dox of being  a "black Briton." At school, he   learned  to  be  white,   singing  "Rule Britannia"  and "White  Christmas,"  studying Virgil,    Milton,   and    pasto:al poetry,  thinking that  I o66 wase
ning  of  all  civilization, and  playmg cnc­
ket    the   gentleman's  game.   His   head­
m ter
a  tie  that   had   no  tropical colour  in  it, and when he spun a globe on its axis, he impressed  Clarke  and   classmates   with the  red  of the  British  Empire: "So  large an   empire,  to   which    the   headmaster told  us we as free  people  belonged! Our empire!"
This  Englishness   was  a  lie,  for   the Marine Hotel was carefully segregated, some of the whites  trained dogs to attack
blacks, and  visiting  English  sailors kicked boys in  their  shins and  called  them dark­ ies.  As  Churchill made his  war  appeals on  the   BBC,  military  cadets   at   school went   through  outmoded  drills  with  de­  funct Boer  War   rifles  whose  firing  pins had  been  ripped  out.  Despite choruses  of "God  Save   The  King,"   His   Majesty never  appeared at  any  island  ceremony.
At  home  in  his  village,  Clarke, the  il­
legitimate  son  of  the   hardworking  b t poor   Miss  Luke,   struggled  to  comb   his thick  "nappy" hair  with  fine-toothed tortoise-shell combs  imported from  Eng­ land,  and   learned  uplifting   Protestant hymns.  But  nothing taught  him  how  to cope   with   the   squalid   poverty  aroun? him,  the  centipedes and  cockroaches, vi­ cious dogs, women brawling in the st eets, religious  fanatics, and  sexually  promis?u­ ous   neighbours.  While   he  was   readmg about  Wordsworth's  leech-gatherer, vil­ lage  fools  and   old  women  were  picking welts and  "sea beefs" before being packed

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



off  to  a  mental hospital. The stigma  of his   illegitimacy  and   colonialism made him  identify with  the  Israelites and Shy­ lock,  yet  he  violated   himself  by  turning away   in  embarrassment  from   his  poor grandmother,  deformed  by  age  and  la­ bour,  who  visited  him  at school.
Perhaps this is precisely what Clarke means   by  his  title,  Growing  Up  Stupid Under The Union  jack. His "Cawmere" snobbery  did not win him approval in fashionable Belleville Avenue; and  his cringing  embarrassment left  a damning soul-taint. The next  autobiographical in­
stallment  will  probably  show   how   his colonial  stupidity began  to wear  off.
William  Kurelek's problems were those
of  a  crystal   soul  threatening to  shatter under   the  weight   of  a  prairie  boyhood ruled  by hard-driving Ukrainian parents. Born   in   1927  on  a  farm   in   Whitford, Alberta, Kurelek  was  a  dreamer, not  a practical farmhand.  He   struggled   with tractors   and    frozen    water-pipes,   was abused  and   beaten   by  his  father,  whose brutality gave  young  William a "concen­ tration  camp  mentality."   Kurelek's mother was hardly an  ally. She,  like the father,  was  hostile   to  the  English   that  William  and  his brothers and sisters were learning  at   school.  Both   parents  were against   "book  learning," and   were  baf­ fled  by  William's desire  to  be  an  artist.  Unable  to win his father's love or under­ standing-for which   he  competed  un­ successfully  against his  brother  John­ William   rebelled   at   nineteen.  But   this was a compromised rebellion. He refused to  go  with  his  family   to  a  New  Year's dance, had   to  give  in  angrily, and  was saved  only  by a sudden  snowstorm.
Depression, depersonalization, and  eye problems  arrived early.  He  began  to ex­ perience  powerful  persecution   fantasies  which  were expressed  through sacrificial, masochistic  images   in  his  art.  Inspired most by Brueghel  and Bosch, he indulged in   allegorical   "psychological  paintings"
 

TbeArtof
Margaret
AtnJoo{)

• E a	Jn CrJtJcJsm

Ei'litcil
ArnoCi'l E.Davii'lson &
CaUmN.Davii'lson


Thirteen essays  by critics in  Canada and   the United  States  explore  Margaret  Atwood's work, from  her  earliest poems to Life Before Man. Among the  contributors ...

• George Woodcock on  Atwood as a critic ...
• Sandra  Dj wa    on  Atwood  and  the
Canadian poetic tradition ...
• Clara Thomas on Lady  Oracle ...
• Annis Pratt on archetypal patterns in
Atwood's fiction ...
• Alan J. Home's annotated checklist of writings by  and about Atwood,  com­ plete through  1980 ...

As well as fine essays by Judith McCombs, Sherrill E. Grace, Lorraine Weir,  Linda  W. Wagner, Lorna  Irvine, Lee  Briscoe  Thomp­ son,   Catherine  McLay,  Robert  Lecker, and  editors Cathy N. and Arnold E.  Davidson.
"The editors  are to be commended lor bringing together such a variety of critical responses ... As a  result  of reading this  book, I personally will  turn  to Atwood's art  with  a renewed sense of its vitality and worth."
John Moss,  Qwll & Quire


$18.95                                                         AN ANSI
35 Britain Street, Toronto M5A  IR7

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that  were signals of his own psychic problems.  His  pictures on Doomsday themes  were  cries  for  help.  One  showed a  bird  flying  across  the  Atlantic with  a bag  around its  head.   It was captioned:
PLEASE HELP  ME PLEASE   HELP ME - PLEASE HELP.  His   despair   made   him identify   with   Van   Gogh.   He   also  felt allied   to  Joyce's   Stephen  Dedalus, al­ though his "essentially plodding farmer's intellect" created an  inferiority complex, especially   at   school   and,   later,   at   the Ontario College  of Art  where  he studied under  Shaeffer, Hagan, Parker, and  Frie­ field, and  worked  in the company of col­ leagues  such  as  Graham  Coughtry who seemed  much   more  gifted   than  he  was.
In  London, England, he  was  treated
at  the  Netherne  Psychiatric Hospital  in
1955, but found  scarcely any doctors  who were   able   or   willing   to  deal   with   his problems.  It was only when he discovered Roman   Catholicism that  he was  able  to solve  his  psychic  maladies. His  pictures changed. They became  realistic  and  pas­ toral,  and  expressed his   sanity   and "wholesomeness." The   "someone"  who was  with  Kurelek  was  God-the  ulti­ mate  father-substitute whom Kurelek had found  briefly  in  Father  Mateyko at  high school.
His  entire life  seemed  to  be  a  search
for   grace,   which   explains   in  part   the awkward,  stumbling  form  of  the  book. The  rural  scenes have  a horse and  buggy earnestness  as  they   record   the  familiar struggles   of   farm   life -a   grasshopper plague,   barn  burning, feuds  and   racial conflicts  at school,  and   family  life  that was as austere as it was insensitive  to his artistic  yearnings.  The  psychological sec­ tions   have   a   stiff,   clinical   dryness,   as Kurelek  speaks  of his quest for a kindred soul, his hallucinations, shock treatments, and   anxieties about   homosexuals  and  leftists.  He  tells  us  little of his  wife and  children, and  on the subject  of his art he is  only  slightly  more   revelatory,  telling

138
 us only that  he learned the Nicholaides method of drawing and  explaining some of the allegory in the disturbed "message paintings"  of   his   illness.   Abruptly  in Chapter 12,  he  tells  us  of  his  religious conversion, and although much  of his Christian  philosophy seems  naively  opti­ mistic,   his  passages  of  spiritual  medita­ tion  and   self-consolation are  moving   in their  awkward way.  He  subscribes  com­  pletely    to   what    he   calls   the    "divine economy" and  writes sanguinely that  "no  good  that is done  is ever  lost."  Believing with  Alfred   Noyes  that  "exquisite beau­ ty"  does   not   make  "mere  evolutionary sense,"  he  sees  life  and   art in  religious  terms, taking what  he calls "the compre­ hensive  Christian attitude to the  world," whereby  he  spurns tl1e bad,   enjoys   the good,  and  practises moderation. It is simple to mock his position  by withering irony, and  to pick holes in its specious metaphysic,  but   somehow,    I feel,   that such   an   assault   would   be  irrelevant  to one  who  made   a  leap  in  the  dark  and survived nightmarish rumination. Grace burned lie
and  this rescued  his story from tragedy, despite his  untimely death by cancer.

KEITH GAREBJAN


A SEA OF LIFE

VERONICA  STRONG-BOAG,  A  Woman with  a Purpose.   The  Diaries   of  Elizabeth   Smith IB72-1884.  Univ.of  Toronto Press,  $25.oo; paper  $10.00.

EVER SINCE THOSE Sense  and  Sensibility sisters, Catharine Parr  Traill and  Susan­ na   Moodie,  recorded  their  pioneer  ex­ periences in  journal form,  the  diary  has been   a  central  archetype   in   Canadian literature.  Elizabeth  Smith's  diary,   the  latest   volume  in   the  Social   History   of Canada series, is a delightful addition to the    genre.   Veronica  Strong-Boag has

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



edited   Elizabeth's  journal,  and   written an   introduction  which,   while   scholarly and    well-footnoted,   implies    that    the diary  is interesting primarily because of Elizabeth's "late Victorian feminist  con­ sciousness." This pigeonholes the diary as a  feminist  document, when,  in  fact,  like all  good   journals,  its  intrinsic  value   is literary, revealing as it does all  the com­ plexity  and   contradictions of  individual personality. A really good diary, as Marie Bashkirtsev  realized  in her  Journal  d'une  Jeune  Artiste, should be written "as if no one in the world were to read  it, yet with the   purpose  of   being   read."  Elizabeth Smith's embodies both  the necessary can­  dour,  and  the  necessary  sense of form.
1The  diary   begins   when   Elizabeth  is
thirteen, living  on the farm  near Winona, Ontario, which   would   later   launch   her brother  Earnest  into   the   E.   D.  Smith jams-and-jellies business. The  diary chronicles Elizabeth's school-days, includ­ ing her teacher-training in Hamilton and  Ottawa,  her   medical  training in  King­ ston,  and  her sporadic sessions of school­ teaching.  Elizabeth's spelling  and  punc­ tuation  are   erratic  (faithfully preserved  by    Strong-Boag)   and    her    metaphors often   hackneyed -she    is   particularly partial to sea imagery-but she can tum a  neat   epigram  and   has  a  remarkable ability  to  see  not  only  the  close  texture of  one-day-at-a-time, but  to  stand   back and  see the emerging figure  in the carpet of girl-becoming-woman.
One  diary  entry  for July  188o pictures
Elizabeth  leaning  on   the   railing   of  a
Lake  Ontario steamer, "looking at  the water  rather through the  water  into my­ self,"  but  it  is  her  diary,   not  Lake  On­ tario,  which  forms  the  clearest  reflecting  pool  for  the  self. She  perceives her  vola­ tile  temperament ("I think   I  am  about as full  of moods  as  Canadian winters"), her  teen-age narcissism  ("how egotistical  is  youth"), her  need  to  excel  in  every­ thing  she  does,  her   "eager  haste   to  set
 


The Young Vincent Massey




CLAUDE BISSELL


This complex and absorbing portrait is the  first  of two  vol­ umes about one of Canada's best known  and   least   undersmod figures- statesman, cultural ad­  vocate, patron, family man,  and  first    native governor-general. Beginning with  Massey's  pros­ perous Victorian childhood, car­ rying through his days as a stu­  dent   and  wartime officer,  and concluding as he sails to London to take his position  as this coun­ try's high commissioner in 1935, Bissell  writes   with  vigour   and elegance. Quoting   extensively from  private  records and  letters he  presents a  sympathetic but not   uncritical   portrait  of  The Young Vincent Massey. $22.50


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS




139

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  world  at  defiance to paddle my own canoe."  Gradually  she  shifts   her   level gaze  from  self  to others: "I have  found a clearer insight  to others by a previous study  of self." She has a een
ridiculous,  and   her   humour  is  dry   as
chokecherries.  Of  a  member   of   Parlia­ ment   who   pays  her   a  cousinly  call  in Ottawa, she  observes:   "I  think  he  had had  overmuch wine  for desert.  If he is a sample   of  the   energetic  ( ?)   politician pity the country-pity us all." She gives
a particularly caustic  account of the opening of Parliament where  members' wives, in full evening  dress, are "decided­ ly fleshy,"  and  all  "agreed  in  one  thing
&  that  was  to leave  their  dresses off the
upper  part  of the body & let two or three yds  come   creeping  after   them   on   the floor."
'At the  beginning of the diary, thirteen­ year-old  Elizabeth is already fired with  a Christian  zeal   to   do   good,   but   vague about   the  form  it  will  take:  "I want  to be  good.  I want   to  be  a  christian &  a noble   true-hearted   woman." She  casti­ gates  herself for "drifting idly on a sea of pleasure,"  but   there   is  no  doubt  that  pretty,   vivacious   Elizabeth  enjoys   her social   round  of   temperance  picnics, sleighing   parties,   dances  that   sometimes last  till dawn,  and  parlour socials  where Elizabeth  plays   and   sings  and   recites "Mary Queen of Scots" to wild applause. She  has  plenty  of  beaux  and   is  an  ac­ complished  flirt,  laughing  at   the  love­ sick antics  of  her  poor  suitors,  referring to them  as "that great  donkey" or "that great    cream    faced    loon."   When    the Principal of  the  Ottawa  Normal School forbids   the  men  students  to  talk  to  the women,  in  or  out  of  class,  Elizabeth re­ solves to "practise the language of smiles with    a   diligence."   "I  like   gentleman friends  and  they  like  me and  there's an end   'out,"  admits    Elizabeth  with   her usual  honesty.  "Well  & I like to get ahead  of  the  other  girls-thats a  confession."
 Elizabeth begins  her  first  teaching  job at  Speyside  "with all  the  energy  hope  & fear  that  a diver  tak!es in his first plunge" but  soon hits a rocky bottom of boredom and    disillusionment.   At    one    country school  she  has  forty  pupils  of all ages­ "oh  the worry and  bother and dirty  faces that    one   has   to   encounter" -and   is "tired of  battling with  overgrown boys," including one  lout  who is taller  than  she is, and  only  one  year  younger.  In April
I 88o,  Elizabeth  and   three   other  young women  launch  themselves into  the  trea­ cherous  seas of Queen's Medical  School, where,  until  their  arrival, only males had sported. "We are  adrift -on  the  sea  of study.   God   help   us   to  win   the   day,"  prays   Elizabeth. Her  amorphous  Chris­  tian  idealism  has now crystallized. Hence­ forth  she will "concentrate all my forces, mind  & body on my one aim, a successful career in my chosen  profession," and  will "throw off  all  trammels of shallow  fun" and  become "a woman with  a purpose." "When in my daily  tasks," she writes,  "I find  myself  displaying nervousness  &  the false timidity so inherent to girls of today I must   school   myself  to  do  away   with nerves   entirely."  Now   she   "must   only think   as   one   possessing   brains -must forget  that  I am  a woman." Her  first dissection  of a cadaver "would  have  been terrible ... had   I not  taught myself  will power," but  she doesn't faint  and, after­ wards,  even  tucks  away  a  hearty  dinner.
The seas grow  rougher in  r882,  when the men,  both  faculty and  students, wage a  cruel   war   aimed   at  forcing   the  four
women   to  leave.  Elizabeth is angry  and bitter, hating them   "individually &  col­ lectively   for   their   unkindness,  injustice, unmanliness, their  cruelty, their  jealousy, their  spite." The  winds are frightening in their   force,   but   Elizabeth  weathers  the storm,  scudding swiftly ahead from  idea­  list to  realist,  from youth  to maturity.
Towards  the  end  of  the  diary,  Eliza­
beth   meets   her   future  husband, Adam

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Shortt, who  was to  become  one  of  Can­ ada's   leading  political  economists.  The  journal ends  as Elizabeth  begins her final year   of   medical   training,  but   Strong­ Boag's introduction adds  a coda  of ironic  note :  Elizabeth graduated  in  I 884,  took up general practice in Hamilton, married in   I886,  and   thereafter   paddled  safely about in the shallows of wifehood  and motherhood, never  resuming her medical practice.
"I am  a  woman  now,  & so  changed
from  that  unsettled irregular immature young   person," writes   Elizabeth  at   the very end  of her diary.  She  is conscious  of how far she has come, just as Susanna Moodie was,  putting the  finishing touches   to  Roughing  It  in  the  Bush  in I852,  when  she  was  twenty  years down­ stream  from   the   immature  self   which had   begun   the  journal. For  both  Eliza­ beth  and  Susanna, the  choppy ambigui­ ties of personality are smoothed out  only in   the    slipstream   of    their    propelling irony,   their  detached  vision  of  the  self. Elizabeth   Smith's  diary    is   convincing testament  to the clarity of that  vision.

MARIAN FOWLER



LITERARY PEN-PALS

My   dear  Mr. M: Letters to  G. B. MacMillan from  L. M. Montgomery, author of  Anne of  Green Gables, ed.  Francis   W.  P. Bolger and   Elizabeth   R.   Epperly.  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  $14.95·
IN THE EARLY YEARS of this century a Philadelphian lady with  literary interests, Miriam Zieber,  conceived the idea  of initiating a  network  of pen-pals among writers  with  similar  interests. A young Canadian who had published some poems and  stories  in  American journals was in­ vited  to become  a member of what  Miss Zieber  called  "an  exclusive  circle of  writ­  ers"  and  her  name  was  passed  on  to an
 Alberta  homesteader and  a  journalist liv­ ing  in  the  Scottish   town,  Alloa.  In  this way  began   Lucy   Maud   Montgomery's lifelong   correspondences   with   Ephraim Weber   and   George   Boyd   MacMillan. Some  of  the  letters  to  Weber  were  sub­ sequently  published in  I 960 by his friend  Wilfred  Eggleston  as  The Gr,een Gables Letters    (From  L.  M.  Montgomery to Ephraim Weber,  1905-1909). Now   the letters  to MacMillan, discovered  by Mol­ lie Gillen in a trunk in Alloa and  used as a  basis  for  her   Montgomery  biography The Wheel   of Things ( I975), are  made available in  a  well-edited selection.  Be­ gun  in   I903  and   continuing until  four  months   before   her   death  in   I942,   the letters  span  Montgomery's adult life and  reach  back,  through  recollection, to  her own  childhood  and   the  history   of   her family.
These  are  not  the  self-consciously  wit­
ty  and   pontifical  letters   of  an   Evelyn






NOTICE

SSHRCC has awarded Carleton University  a Major  Editorial  Grant  to help fund  the prepa­ ration  of scholarly  editions  of major  works of English-Canadian  prose.  Works  now  being edited include  The History of Emily Montague, A  Strange Manuscript Found in  a Copper Cylinder, Stepsure Letters, Roughing  It  in the Bush, The  Canadian  Crusoes, and  Wacousta. The  editors  would  be  pleased  to  hear  of  rare editions, papers, manuscripts, and  memorabilia which might  be  relevant  to this project.  Please contact:
Mary Jane  Edwards,  Principal Investigator
Centre  for Editing  Early  Canadian Texts
Arts Tower,  Room  1901, Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6
Tel.:   (613)  231-5652  or  (613)  231-6758

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Waugh,   written   with    publication  in mind.  Rather they are  the kind of letters one  would  write  to and  hope  to receive from a friend  with  whom one shared common interests but  not a common  way of  life.  According to  Montgomery's son, Dr.  Stuart  Macdonald, her  rigidity  and sensitivity  prevented any easy camarade­ rie in  the  family.  Yet  the letters  reveal  a woman   who  is charming,  tolerant, curi­  ous,  humorous,  passionately   devoted   to friends,  cats, and  the  land  of Prince  Ed­  ward  Island,  and   not  unwilling   to  con­ fess   her    proneness  to   depression,    her questioning of  religious  orthodoxy, and her  awareness of  her  own shortcomings. It's   as  if  the  geographical  distance  be­ tween   the   correspondents,  the   lack   of physical   contact  (they   met   only   once, when  she  went  to Britain  in  I9I I on her honeymoon), make  it  possible for  her  to pour  out  her  heart. A  revelatory confes­ sion written on AprilI,I 907, tells of her love  for  a  young  Bedeque  farmer, Her­ man  Leard:

I loved  a man-let  us call  him A-once. It  was  emphatically  the  love  of  my  life. Yet  mark   this -I did  not  respect  him­ I did  not  admire  him  in  the  least. Before this experience I would have laughed  at the idea  that  one could  love a  man  they didn't respect.... I would  not  have  married  him for  anything. He  was  my  inferior  in  every respect.  This  is  not  vanity  on  my  part   at all.  He  simply  was.  He  had  no  brains,  no particular   good   looks,  in   short,   nothing that   I admire   in  a  man.  Yet  I loved  him as I never  can  love any other  man.

The difficulties of coping  with her grand­ mother who  cannot "see  anything from any  point  of view  but  her  own"  and  the later  disadvantages of  living  in  a  manse where  "one  never  has a sense of  perma­  nency"  are  confided, as well as her  atti­ tudes   to  a  large  circle  of  relatives  and  friends.   Where  her immediate family  is concerned she  is  more  reticent. We  hear  nothing of the long Tennysonian engage­ ment  to the  Reverend Ewen  Macdonald
 and  though the letters from Norval ( I926 to  I935)  darkly  hint at domestic troubles, it  is only  in  her  very  last  letter, written on  December 23, I94I,  that  she  admits,

This   past   year   has  been  one  of  constant blows  to  me.  My  oldest   son  has  made   a mess of  his  life,  and  his  wife  has  left  him. My  husband's nerves  are  worse  than   mine even.  I have  kept  the  nature of his attacks from  you  for  over  20 years  but  they  have broken  me at  last.

1In I922, Montgomery writes, "to me, letters   are  much   like  soup,  in  that   they always   seem   to  be  improved  in  flavor when  'warmed over.'" They  are also like soup  in their  variety  and comprehensive­ ness. This is a voluminous correspondence on  a scale  that has almost  become  obso­ lete. There is a good deal about her  books and  her  relationships to  her  publishers, including  her   long   drawn  out   lawsuit with  the  Page  Company. There are  the rhapsodic nature descriptions so familiar to  her   readers. There  are   many  refer­ ences  to   national  and   international events.  The two  World  Wars  greatly  op­ pressed   her.  She   was  horrified  that   "a man  would  throw away the crown  of the  greatest empire of  the  world  because  of his  infatuation for  a  middle-aged divor­  cee  with   two  living  husbands!" One  of the  most  powerful effects of the  letters  is their  ability  to convey  a sense of passing time.  An  early  letter  refers   to  bicycles. Daylight saving  time  is introduced. The Macdonalds acquire a car  and  a  movie camera. The  voice  of  King George V  is heard   on   the   radio and   in I 936  even television  is foreseen-"I never  cease  to marvel over  the  radio. It does seem  like witchcraft and  I suppose  the people  who
'hear'  will   also   'see'   in   twenty    more
years." In  I929 she  writes  "New  inven­ tions  crowd  on  each  others  heels -each one  more  amazing than the  last. But  the trouble is -no one  is happier  or  better because  of them."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The cnttc1sm suggests another aspect revealed  by the  letters-the fact  that technological progress was combined with the persistent influence of Victorian man­ ners, morals,  and  attitudes. Montgomery could  never escape  from  her Presbyterian upbringing, from  her  belief  in  duty  and usefulness,  or  from   her  conviction  that  talent   is  a  gift  of  God,  to  be used for moral    purposes. The   examination   of social,  philosophical,  and  religious  prob­  lems  is one  of  the  most  useful  functions the letters  serve.
The editors of My  dear Mr. M. are  to
be commended. Every  selection  is of  in­ terest.  Excisions  have  been  made  so skil­ fully  that  the  seams  do  not  show. Anno­  tation  and   editorial comment  is  rightly kept  to  a  minimum. What  we  have,  in effect,   is  autobiography, the   authentic voice  of  Lucy   Maud   Montgomery de-
 scribing  her  life  and   views  to  a  friend. The result is far  more  lively and  intimate than   that  achieved by  any  of  her  biog­ raphers.
MURIEL WHITAKER



A CHOICE OF GREATS

GEORGE   WOODCOCK,     100   Great   Canadians.
Hurtig,  $12.95·

GEORGE  WOODCOCK is nothing if not pro­ lific. In 1g8o alone  he published  a collec­ tion   of   essays,   A   Picture   History   of British Columbia,  and   100  Great Cana­ dians,  thus  consolidating  his  reputation as  man-of-letters  and   his   place   in  the coffee-table   school   of   historians,  which he had  joined only  two years before  with Faces from History. That book, however,





JUST RELEASED

The Duncan Campbell Scott Symposium
Edited  and  with an  Introduction by Klaus  Peter  Stich
Re-Appraisals: Canadian Writers   #6
The   proceedings  of  the  1978  D.  C. Scott  Symposium,  comprise  thirteen essays and  a selected  bibliography on one of Canada's outstanding writers.  The  essays cover  the  range  of Scott's  achievements  as a  poet,  a story  teller  and  a  novelist as  well  as  his friendships with  eminent  scholars  like Pelham  Edgar  and  E. K. Brown.  Among   the   contributors  are  John   P.  Matthews,   Fred   Cogswell,  and Robert  L. McDougall.
15.5 x 23.5 em    192 pages    Price:  $6.00

University of Ottawa  Press
65 Hastey  Avenue,  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5

Kindly  send  me .................... copies of the  Duncan  Campbell  Scott  Symposium. NAME ............................................................................................................................. ADDRESS ........................................................................................................................

Cheque or money order  included.
Kindly  make cheque  or money order  payable  to the
UNIVERSITY OF  OTTAWA PRESS


143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



had   reduced  Canadian  history   to  texts for  photographic portraits. In  100 Great Canadians, our  history  is again   limited, but  only  by  the  availability of  portraits of whatever sort  and  by the title itself.
The  "100" probably owes  something to tradition. As for "Great," Woodcock, granting that  he  can  name  no Canadian Mozart,  Tolstoy,  or   Michelangelo,  de­ fines the  word  somewhat condescending­ ly  in  a  cliche,  "the  right people  at  the right   place   in   the   right   time."   Wood­  cock's   "Canadian"  is  even   less  precise and  includes native-born-including Es­ kimo,   Indian,  and   Metis-and  immi­ grant-both European and American. Admittedly "Canadian"  is  hard   to  de­ fine. In  addition, the  DCB  (IX)  with an entry  for  Horace Greeley  may  also offer some excuse  for  the appearance of Colo­ nel  By, and  even  of  Jacques Cartier,  in
100  Great  Canadians. Yet,  in  a general
way, the  book reflects something of the attitude of  Woodcock's Canada  & the Canadians   ( 1970),  which    proclaimed that  Canada neither had  nor wanted heroes.
'Although   the  mantles of  greatness   in
100  Great   Canadians  bunches   a  bit  in
central Canada, Woodcock  does select from  the  country at  large  and  from  all periods   of  its  history.   Nine  profiles  are of  native peoples, fifteen of women, twenty-four of  French-Canadians, six of ecclesiastics, twenty of artists of various kinds,  and   twenty-four of  politicians   of many different views. The  rest of the collection   comprises athlete, educator, inventor, engineer, surveyor, mountain climber, soldier, business man, and even murderer. The  traditional favourite, the military  man, who figures so largely in Colonel  Stacey's list of (eleven)  great Canadians,  gets   short   shrift   in   Wood­ cock's  book!. No  Wolfe,  Montcalm, Cur­ rie,  Bishop  and   their  like  appear on  its honour roll. Besides, only four  all told­ Brant,  Brock, Tecumseh, and  McNaugh-

144
 ton-find    places   on   it.   The   business man,  who dominated Lonn's Canadian Profiles   ( 1965), fares   little   better   with only  five  representatives, Cunard,  Simp­ son, Fleming, Beaverbrook, and  McGilli­ vray.
By  its  very   nature  100  Great   Cana­ dians is open  to criticism  regarding those selected   and    those   omitted;  yet   those chosen  make  good  sense as nation build­ ers-Howe,  Macdonald, Laurier for  example -or   good   copy   as   legendary figures  as  Riel,  Mackenzie, Dunlop, Du­ mont,   Begbie,   and   Amor   De   Cosmos demonstrate. All  told  the  author tries  to strike  a  balance between   his  anarchistic sympathies and   the  view  that   history  is the shadow of officialdom.
Woodcock is strongest on  writers.  He
discusses   them   from   a  knowledge  that gives his sketches  authority. Despite  his several   books   about  Canada,  however, he  is a  chronicler, not  a  historian, and many  of his other sketches  are  of interest largely  in  revealing whom  he, as a noted litterateur, finds great. For  the most  part the  profiles  a:re popular history  centring on traditional public  images, and, as with Bell,  McGee, and  Ryerson, for  example, give  little  indication of  the  complexities of  interpretation their  lives involve.
As a  coffee-table book, 100 Great  Ca­
nadians    is  not   unduly   ostentatious or bulky.  Its  entry-titles are  catchy, but  not cute,  and  it avoids  large,  gaudy  pictures. Unfortunately, the  entry-titles carry  nei­ ther   names nor  dates,  and   some  of   the latter are  not  even  included in  the text. Some  "Greats," too, whom  Canada hon­  oured  as "Sirs," have ironically lost their titles  in  100  Great  Canadians. To  con­ tinue,  all portraits are  in black and  white  and   poorly   reproduced. The  book  has neither  index  nor  bibliography, and   the text  badly  needs  an editor's pencil.  Cath­ arine  (Traill)   turns   up   as  Catherine; Adventures With the Idle Rich, as Adven­ tures  of the  Idle  Rich; The Literary  Gar-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



land   and   British   North  American   Re­ view,    as   one   magazine;  and   Canada Cement, as Canadian Cement. The date  of  publication of  The   Descent  of  Man  and  of  Martha  Black's  birth  are  wrong, and   that   of   Macmillan's  death  appean; in   two   consecutive   sentences.  Pauline  Johnson  never  gets  credit for  Flint  and Feather.    "Insofar   as"    becomes    four words, and  "comprised of"  always  serves for  "composed of."  French spelling  gives much  trouble. "Maisonneuve" reads "Maissonneuve"; "Gonzalve," "Con­ salve,"    and     "Ramezay,"    "Ramezay." "Quebec"  is  always  carefully  accented; "Montl'eal," never.
Woodcock   came  to  this  work  through The  Canadians ( 1979)   and   drew  on  it and  Faces  from  History  for  much  mate­ rial.  If he  does  not  quite enjoy  the  de­ light  of   self-plagiarism,  he   at  least benefits  from   the   ease  of   recycling,  for twenty-eight  biographies   in   100  Great Canadians   had    already    appeared   in shorter ven;ions  in  The   Canadians  and forty-eight in scarcely  altered versions  in Faces   from  History.  For   any   one  who knows  Canadian  history,   but   especially for  any  one  who  knows  Woodcock, 100
Great  Canadians is  irritatingly deja  vu.

ALEC LUCAS


FOR SHEILA WATSON

DIANNE  BESSAI  and DAVID    JACKEL, Figures  in a  Ground: Canadian Essays  on Modern Literature Collected in Honor of Sheila Watson. Western Producer Prairie Books.

WILL IT ALWAYS BE TOO MUCH  to expect to  ask  for  honesty  in  festschrifts? What I would  like  to see  would  be something like  the  following:  "We  asked   various old  friends,  colleagues and  students of x to  contribute to  a volwne in  his/her honour. We rejected the ones which  were bad  and  were  left  with  this  bunch. We
 know  it  is a heterogeneous lot  but  that's the festschrift  business."
But  no.  The editors  must  continue to
provide   the  illusion  that   there   is  some­ thing   which   holds   the  whole  thing   to­ gether,  besides  the   occasion.  The  title  suggests  what  Bessai and  Jackel suppose  this  to  be. The essays  are  all  Canadian and   are   all   on   modern  literature.  At least  all  the  essayists are  associated  with Canadian  universities, except  for one.  As for  citizenship   I  have  no  idea.  But  they all   discuss  modern  literature,  although Robin  Mathews is concerned with  the nineteenth  century  and   treats   contem­ porary    material  only   in   passing.   And Rudy  Wiebe is dealing with legend,  often in decidedly  un-modern forms,  albeit  the seed  of  the  legend,   the  death of  Albert  Johnson, the  "mad  trapper," happened only fifty years ago.
Perhaps modern is meant only  to  de­ lineate  the twentieth century. And litera­ ture  is  to mean anything which  can  be read.  Even  then  one has  trouble with  the inclusion  of drawings  by  Norman Yates. In  the  preface,  Bessai  and  Jackel  state,

In   organizing the    collection  we   have been  guided, appropriately, by Sheila  Wat­ son's   own   belief   that  studies of   Canadian literature must  find  their proper and  unself­ conscious context in  a larger  concern-the study of  modern literature in  English. Too  much    recent    criticism in   Canada  has,   in our   view,   suffered from   the   facile   use  of
'modem'  and   'Canadian' as  distinguishing
terms,  as if  the  two  categories were  incom­
patible rather  than  mutually illuminating.

Yet   only  in  a  very  few  essays  is  there much  concern  for what  is modern or  for what  is Canadian. Those  essays which  do not  discuss Canadian subjects seem  typi­ cal  examples of  the  univen;al  academic. I  am   sure  some   ardent   patriots  could find  identifiable  maple-leaf   tinges  but  I would  be very  hard-pressed to  tell  whe­ ther  the  writer  of a  piece  on  Wyndham Lewis came  from  Canada, the  U.S., Bri-

145

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tain,   Nigeria   or   the   University  of  the
South Pacific.
But  there   is, in  a  strange way,  some­ thing which   brings  most  of  these  pieces together. In  the  preface,  Bessai and  Jac­ kel   state,    "This  present   collection    of essays is offered  by  us as  both  a  tribute to  Sheila  Watson  and  as  a  collaborative reflection  of the  wide  range  of her  criti­  cal,   scholarly   and   creative  interest    in modern letters." In  the  essays there  are quite  a  number of  references  to  Watson  herself,  as a  novelist and  as a critic.  This seems  less a  generous  obeisance than  an honest   reflection    of   the   way   she   has turned certain minds  around.
1This is quite  clear  in the essays on Wyndham Lewis. In many ways Lewis seems  a  rather arcane interest  today  but Watson  has kept him well alive for her students. One,  Paul  Tiessen,  does a very fine job of using Lewis to explore  the connections  between   modem  literature and   film.  None   of  his  comments  seem like  revelations  but   he  is  able  to  bring things   together  in  such  a  manner as  to bring great  clarity to an often  confusing subject.
Quite a different influence  is found  in the dialogue between  Diane  Bessai and Robert Kroetsch. The  title,  "Death is a Happy Ending: A Dialogue  in Thirteen Parts," might  suggest the all too apparent tendencies to  pretentiousness. Kroetsch's diffuse "post-modern" conversation needs a strong  weight  to hold  it down  but Bes­ sai  often  seems  ready  to  float  along,  al­ though  in   a   less   consciously   elliptical  fashion. Still,  the  piece  is highly  illumi­  nating  in   demonstrating  how   close  Kroetsch   is   to   Watson's The  Double Hook. His  comments should   provide  a profusion   of   hints   for   some   graduate thesis   on   sources   for   Kroetsch  or   on influences from  Watson.
Various other pieces  are  good  or  bad in their own ways. For me, Michael Ondaatje's   "Garcia  Marquez  and   the

q6
 Bus to Aracataca" simply  shows the  way that   the  influence of someone  like  Mar­ quez can  lead  even  an  excellent writer  to confusion.  F.   T.  Flahiff's  "The  Great Gatsby:  Scott    Fitzgerald's   Chaucerian Rag" seems  to  recall   the  common   ten­  dency   of   comparativists   to   generalize  about   connections.  Most   of   the   links which  Flahiff  finds  between  Gatsby  and  Troilus and  Criseyde could  also be found  in many  a dime-store romance. Pandarus was not the first pander, nor Nick Carra­ way the last.
In  a more  positive  vein,  Marshall  Mc­
luhan  provides a fascinating analysis of Eliot's  use of classical  rhetoric. The  rigid yet illuminating traditional approach shows a very different side from themes­ senger  of the  media.  Fred Cogswell shows his  broad   insights   in  a   brief  yet  wide­ ranging commentary  on  Canadian little  magazines. One  would  only  wish that  he had  dwelt  more  on  his own  personal ex­ perience.
Robin Mathews and   Eli  Mandel  give
fine  examples of  their  usual  critical  ten­ dencies,  Mathews stridently  political  and Mandel  tentatively  structural. Both  are well  worth   a  read,  although  Mathews's position   might   be  better  understood as presented   elsewhere,  in   his  own   Cana­ dian   Literature:  Surrender  or  Revolu­ tion.  A  third  work,   also   on  Canadian literature, vies in  my mind  with  those  by Tiessen   and   Mandel for  pride  of  place. This   is  Dick   Harrison's  "Cultural   In­ sanity  and  Prairie Fiction." Like Tiessen,  it  represents "what  oft  was  thought but n'er  so well expressed," in  a quite  defini­  tive  refutation of  the  role  of  the  Ameri­  can frontier thesis in Canadian literature.
A diffuse  lot, which  the editors' group­ ings of "Discoveries," "Exploration," and  "Identities" do   very  little   to  bring   to­ gether. For  most readers, the articles  will cover  too large an area  for  the  book as a whole  to  be  of  much   use.  But  for  those interested   in   the  ramifications  of   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



presence  of Sheila  Watson on  the  Cana­ dian  scene,  there  are  some  very  interest­ ing  things  here.  And  we  should  not  for­ get  that   the  justification  for  this,  as for any other festschrift, is simply  to honour. Sheila  Watson is a  seminal writer  and  a seminal person.  She  deserves  it.

TERRY GOLDIE


TIME'S MYSTERIES

PATRICIA  JOUDRY,  The  Selena   Tree.  McClel­
land  &  Stewart, $14.95·
VICTORIA  BRANDEN,  Mrs   fob.  Victor Gollancz, n.p.
JAMES  HOUSTON, Spirit  Wrestler. McClelland
&  Stewart, $14.95·

ALTHOUGH  THESE THREE NOVELS  differ considerably  in  content  and   technique, they are all concerned with the same perennial  theme -the  poignancy and mystery  of the  passing  of time.  The pres­ ent  is a  bewildering chaos,  the  future a fearful  unknown. Hopefully, we  turn   to the  past,  for  hints   of  who   we  are  and  who   we   may   become.    To   paraphrase T. S. Eliot,  we know  so much  more  than  our  ancestors: they  are  what  we know.
Patricia Joudry's The Selena  Tree  is a family  saga,  portraying four  generations in  the   Pollack   family   during  the   years I900-I956. The story  begins  with  Sophia da  Silva,  a  beautiful opera singer  who  is stranded in a  drab Alberta town.  She eventually  marries  Emery    Pollack,   the local  storekeeper, and  spends  the  rest  of her  unhappy life in a bitter struggle with her  husband and  his shrew  of a  mother. The novel  is  essentially   an   attempt   to reveal  the  effects  of  this  conflict  on  sub­ sequent generations. Joudry's  material is inherently melodramatic, but  then,  so is much   of  Faulkner's. What  Joudry lacks is Faulkner's skill  at  transforming melo­ drama into  art.  Her  people  are  flat  cari­  catures,  mere   vehicles   for   her   endless
 pronouncements on Fate,  and something called  "the   burning centre of  life."   (In her  I 977 autobiography, Spirit   River  to Angels' Roost, Joudry informs us that  she once saw herself  as  the spiritual bride  of George   Bernard  Shaw,   through  whom Shaw  dictated his posthumous plays. The Selena  Tree  is no  less pretentious.)  Jou­ dry's  rhetoric is always exaggerated, and often  extravagantly  silly,  particularly in her   sex  scenes.  Here,  for   example, are Sophia and Emery  "pleasuring" (Joudry's word)  each other:
:The great feast  before him, he feasted! Ambitious  and    deep-buried  desires   sprang to mind  one by one. Conspiratorially she assisted; she  led  him.  She  amazed! She amazed!  He   thought  once:  if  his  mother could see! ... and  laughed exuberantly into her  somewhere flesh.
0 unrestrained,   uncorseted  love!  Free­
dom  from  every   restriction! ...

Enough. The  Selena  Tree is a  chore  to read  and  a  relief  to finish.
Mrs   job,  by  Victoria  Branden,  is  a much  more successful  attempt to explore the  meaning of  time.  Branden  expresses her fascination with  the  past  through the memories   of  her   middle-aged narrator,
Meredith  Doyle I Poole I Harcourt I Ride­
out,   a   lady   with   many    identities and
many  troubles.  "Don't tell  me  that  God is  dead,"  she   exclaims,    "somebody up there  hates me."  As her waistline  expands and   her  options  diminish, Meredith  re­ calls her past  in a complex series of  flash­ backs, hoping  to find  the  precise moment when   her   life   began   to  sour.  Branden handles this  familiar, almost  trite  situa­  tion  brilliantly.
Her novel resembles a Restoration Comedy, with a large cast of not entirely likeable   characters  sent   racing   through their  paces at dizzying  speed.  No plot summary could do Mrs Job justice, but it seems that  Meredith's  problems began when  she fell  in  love  with  Nicholas,  the back  of  whose  neck  moved   her  deeply. Soon   pregnant,  but    unable    to   marry

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Nicholas  because   of   Bridgie,   his   mad Irish  wife, Meredith married Kenneth instead, in order  to appear "respectable." Her    marriage  with   Kenneth  was   not ideal.  "Kenneth would  have  been a won­ derful  husband," she reflects, "if only he'd  happened  to  be  heterosexual."  Now,  in the  present, Nicholas is dead  and  Mere­  dith  is alone.  Her  child, a lout of sixteen, has   run   off,   probably   to   join   Satan's Choice.    A   most    unliberated   woman,  Meredith longs for a man's  company, but meets  only  "oddballs and  neurotics and drunks and   clinging   vines,  lame   ducks and  fainting  robins." Here,  as in  a  Res­ toration  Comedy, beneath the  zany  sur­ face  we  sense  a  terrifying  emptiness,   in the  lonely  hearts of  characters unable  to give  or  receive  love.  But  Meredith does not despair. "Nothing is funnier than  un­ happiness,"   she   observes,   and    as   the novel ends,  she is looking forward to her next adventure. And  why not? "One day, as Virgil says, we will be glad to have remembered  even  this."
In    Spirit    Wrestler,   James    Houston travels   far   back   in   time,  to  when   the
Inuit-"the people" -still  roamed  free on  the  wild  earth of Canada's northern frontier. Indeed, in  Houston's work  the Canadian  north   is  not  a  frontier but  a living  force,  cold,  deadly,  implacable, yet almost  unbearably lovely. In  this  setting he  places  Shoona -a  shaman, who,  in his visions wrestles  with  demon  spirits  on behalf   of  his  people.  A shaman is "one who  turns   things   into  shadows." In  his ecstatic   trances he  leaves  the  mundane world   behind,  and   journeys  to  an   un­ known  country, where,  as  Margaret  At­ wood  writes  in  "Procedures For  Under­
ground," "you  learn   I wisdom  and  great power,   I if  you  can  descend  and  return
safely."  But  Houston's shaman pays a terrible price  for  his  visions. Feared  ra­ ther  than loved,  he  must  live alone  in  a most  lonely  land, without the comfort  of family  or  friends. Because  of   his  sacra-
 mental  belief  in  the  unity   of  all  living things,  he  is even  unable   to  kill  for  his food: "I knew  then  that   I would  never fire  a  killing  slug  of  lead  into   the  body of another animal. I feared  too much  the power  of their  wandering souls."
Houston takes great  risks in allowing Shoona to tell his story in his own  words, but the shaman's language is never  too stilted, and  never  deteriorates into  the pidgin   English  of Hollywood Indians. Thus, Shoona describes  the  approach of winter: "It  was  that   awesome   time   of year  when   the  moon   rises  like  a  wind­ burned face  and   sets  the  autumn  dark­ ness  all  aglow,  and   the  heather on  the tundra shimmers like  the  guard hairs  on a  wolf."  The  diction is  elevated slightly, to reflect  the speaker's dignity  and  power,  but  the  similes  are  firmly  rooted   in  the northern landscape. "Shimmers" is simply perfect.   When    winter   ends,    Shoona eagerly  awaits  the exuberance of spring: "After  the   long  winter  you  could   feel your  soul  singing  deep  inside  you."
Much of  Shoona's story  suggests  that he  may  be only  a  trickster,  preying   on the  gullibility of others.  Alternatively, he may  in  fact   be  a  shaman,  but   a   "de­ stroyer," rather  than   a  "healer" -one who  can   harm,  but   not  heal.  His  very name  means  "What-is-it?", and  Houston makes   no   final   judgments.   An   almost  hypnotic tension slowly builds, as Shoona's activities isolate  him irrevocably from  his people.   We  share  his  bewilderment and pain  as he becomes aware of his fate: his morality  reminds us  of  our  own.  "Man knows  his death is bound  to  come," one character tells him, "but we believe the animals are not  burdened with  such thoughts. That is their  good  fortune."
Whether Shoona is a  fraud or  a  pro phet,   one  thing   is  certain. The  culture and   the  world-view  he  represents have all  but  vanished, and  we are  the  poorer for  it. Houston has  devoted   much  of his life  to  exploring and   recreating the  lost

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



world  of the  Inuit. Now,  in Spirit  Wres­ tler, a  novel  rich  and  resonant  with  life, he  has given  us their  elegy.

PETER  KLOVAN


NOT GETTING  THERE

TOM  WAYMAN,  Living   on  the   Ground: Tom
Wayman Country. McClelland &  Stewart.

WAYMAN   QUOTING   KEATS? Holy   four­ letter   word!   But  it's  true; in  the  prose Afterword  to   A   Planet   Mostly   Sea (I979), and  more  recently  in the  prefa­  tory   poem   to   Living   on   the   Ground,  Canada's  fabled   beer-parlour  poet   be­ comes,  if  momentarily, a  fundamentalist aesthetician. In "What Good  Poems  Are
For," Wayman suggests that, "like plants  I
on  a sunlit  windowsill I of a  city  apart­
ment," poems  are  intended to  create  "a
brief moment of enjoyment." In the prose theorizing, Wayman differs with Keats  on the  notion  that  "Beauty is truth"; but  he endorses,  and  he  believes  his  writing ex­ emplifies,  the  second  half  of  the  English Romantic's syllogism,  that  truth is beauty
-"always."  Sketchy and   vulnerable  as this  claim  is, it  is a  least  consistent with Wayman's earlier  pronouncement that "If someone   can   talk,  they  can  write." Write   poetry?   Write   well?  Write   works of art  that  endure, that  go  beyond  mere momentary enjoyment to "put down roots in someone's mind," as Wayman  himself phrases   it  in   the   conclusion  of  "What Good  Poems Are For"? Wayman runs out of  the  stadium.
Self-confessed    reality    junkie   and   the heir apparent to AI Purdy and  Milton Acorn, Tom Wayman turns in a predict­ ably  smooth, readable, humane  perform­ ance   in   Living   on  the   Ground. Once  again the  writing is  unpretentious, collo­ quial, accessible.  In  this  new  collection  Wayman is noticeably less funny  and  less clearly committed to leftist  political  solu-
 tions -making    him    for    the    eighties something of a rebel without a cause;  but stylistically   his  work   remains   even.  To view it differently, Wayman has been accused   of  not   progressing   as  an  artist and,  with  few  exceptions, the  poems  in this sixth book do not shake for me the conviction   that   Wayman is essentially  a one-good-read poet.
The  book   begins   with   a   group  of poems  subtitled  "Homesteading,"  which
were written in the summer of I975 when Wayman and   his  friend   Garrison drove from   Vancouver  to   Fort    Collins,   the small town in rural  Colorado where Way­ man   had  taught for  a  year  in  the late  sixties after  finishing  his stint  at graduate school   in  southern  California.  Born   in
I 945   (so  now  turned  thirty),  Wayman reunites  with    other  friends  from    the heady  days  of  the  SDS,  student  radical­ ism, anti-war protest,  and  social ferment. "What sort  of  people  had  we  become  at this  distance  from   the   '6os?"   he  asks. Garrison,  Adamson,   Lechner,  Burnett, Davidson,  Duquet,  Smilie,  Thompson­ each man  casts his image  onto  a different poem,    but    none   comes    sharply    into  focus.   In   "Fort  High"  (which   begins, predictably, "I pull  the  tab  on another beer"), Wayman's record  is a blur: "the
people  in the  room  work as carpenters, I
journalists,  fence-builders, hustlers   I of a
dozen  jobs or  at  nothing." In  the  back­
ground  hover  scraps  of stories  about war atrocities witnessed,  election  races lost, divorce,  unemployment, loss of direction. There are no happy  pastoral hippies  and no Abby Hoffman-type converts to big business. Striking a note of sobriety  in the boozy fog surrounding them  all, Wayman remarks:
These  are  the people
I once believed  were going to change
America
according to the books we read,  the organizations
we lived in. Now it seems their  achievement is to be living  their  lives  just  like  anybody.

149

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



At  their  best,  these  poems  (such  as  the prize-winning "Garrison")   sing  in  cele­ bration of the  rare  individuals who man­  age  not  simply   to  conform and  buckle under   but  who,  defying   the  odds,  keep "running  towards  Jerusalem"  with   the hope  for social  amelioration still  burning inside.  But  often   the  lines  are   tedious, dull,  and  sprawling as  they  list  the  rou­  tine  facts  to  be  found   in  any  ordinary work   resume,   and   the  conclusions   fre­ quently   fizzle.
The   second    section,    "Looking   for Owls," gives a more  random sampling of "the  conditions and   quality   of   contem­ porary   life"  which   Wayman  has staked out  as  his  territory. Many  poems  centre  on  the  experience of  travelling the inter­ states  and  highways of the  western  U.S. or  Canadian  prairies.  These   new  works reinforce, but rarely  go beyond,  the early image  of  Wayman as "The Freeway  Im­ pressionist."  Wayman's  male  friends, though  numerous, do  not  seem  capable of   touching  his   life   into   significance, while women,  children, and  family mem­ bers are  almost  wholly  absent. In  one of the  more  introspective of  these  on-the­ road   poems,   entitled  "Pulling   Out   to Pass," the autobiographical persona muses
that  "as  I grow  older  I nothing I get  is
what   I thought it  would   be  I when   I
wanted   it."
The title of the  book comes from a line in one of its best poems, which bears the unwieldy  heading, "Listening to Country Music   in  the   Cabin  of  a  CP   Air  747
Jumbo en  route  Toronto to Vancouver."
Country music,  with  its woeful  themes,  is the  ostensible   subject. The  music,  "de­ spite the banality of the words  I and  pre­
dictable tune" catches "the  harshness  I in
ordinary things" and  resonates  with Way­
man's own  unhappy mood,  his

disappointment in all
that  was  promised,  that  even  some of the songs
promise;   how it  was  to  have  been
 to  have  finished  school,  to marry, to have  steady  work, own a  house, to have children....

The music,  "ephemeral, but  enduring," sums   up   for   him   "what  it  so  often   is
like  I living  on  the  ground."
As if to illustrate this generalization by
particular   example   come    the    eleven poems  of "D"-poems about Wayman's poet-friend Dennis Wheeler, his suffering with  leukemia, and  his  premature death in  Vancouver  in   1977.  The   series  cul­ minates  in   an   open   letter,  the   poem "Farewell  to   Wheeler  without   Saying  Goodbye" and   the  elegy  "La  Lluvia de tu  Muerte" ("He died  in  the  rain  and  the  world  got  smaller") , a  quietly   mov­ ing poem  influenced by one of Wayman's constant heroes,  Pablo Neruda.
The final   section, "The  Uses  of  the
Country," returns to  scrutinize the  rural Canadian  scene   as  one   of  the   various settings for   that   random  mix   which   is everyday   life-violence,  ignorance,   in­ tolerance, hard  work  for  inadequate  re­ turns,  madness, death, and  a pitiably few redeeming touches of tenderness and love. When  he  attempts  objective  descriptions of  nature,  Wayman often  produces still life  canvasses,   devoid   of  accurate, pithy  detail.   But    starkness  of    style   merges splendidly  with   steeliness  of   subject   in "The  Calf,"  whose   theme   of   wanton slaughter,  as  well  as  its  central  image,  recalls  Layton's  "Bull  Calf" of  the  war years. The main character is Pat Howard, a  likeable  misfit  who  moves  between  life on his father's farm in Saskatchewan and in  the  construction industry of  Vancou­ ver.  While   showing great   tenderness  in nurturing a maimed calf (which  is eventu­ ally  shot  for  being  "out of the ordinary"
-a  victim  of  the  rural  neighbourhood's
customary, hard-nosed insistence  on con­ formity), Pat  grows ruthlessly  and  wildly destructive towards himself; he  commits suicide  in the end.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"The Calf" is  a  compelling,  compas­ sionate,  and  finely observed narrative, but pride  of place  is reserved for "Teething." This   is  a  rare   poem  on   the  subject   of fatherhood,  of   nurturing   manhood;  it offers  a  startling  contrast  to  stories  of boozing,   jogging,   fuclcing,  fighting,   and camping-the full   run   of  macho  sub­ jects  I equate with  Wayman-but  it  is not   without  precedent  in   his   work. "Teething" has  connections  with   "The Kiss and  the Cry" from  Money  and  Rain which first articulated "the  hoarse mascu­  line agony" a lover  experiences  when  his two-year  relationship to a woman is term­  inated. The man  reborn from  the crucible  of his pain  seems to be given  another in­ carnation as father, rocking  with a fretful  infant in  a  winter  night.  Here  Wayman ultimately finds  a  haunting voice  for  his tragic  vision  of  lost  youth,  lost  idealism,  the  hopefulness  of  the  sixties,  all  temps perdu.

the  chair
rocks out  a decade of meetings, organizations, sit-ins.
It rocks  out  Chicago, and  Cook  County Jail.
It rocks out  any  means necessary
to  end  the  War, fight  racism, abolish  the
draft.
It rocks  out  grad school  and   marriage. It rocks  out   Cambodia, and   at last
jobs, a new country, and  a child.
But the chair
 cribing  the rural  west of Canada, nor be­ cause   he  was  connected  with   Winkler, Manitoba,  the   destination  of   the   trip  Wayman depicts in   "Travelling   Com­ panions," but  because  both  men  seem  to be questing,  in  their  separate ways, for  a domestic  island  in the   wilderness.   The poet   who,   badin 	I973,   wrote,   "You want  to go somewhere and  call  it  home and  lie down," so far  has  not  got  there.

WENDY KElTNER


ANALYST

NAIM   KATTAN,  Le   rivage. Editions Hurtubise
HMH.
NAIM  KATTAN,  Ecrivains des  Ameriques, tome III  (!'Amerique !atine). Editions Hurtubise HMH.

IN THESE TWO BOOKs, Nairn Kattan con­ tinues his two-fold  contribution to literary life in Canada. In  the third volume of his very personal  analysis of  the works of the Ecrivains des Ameriques, Kattan the liter­  ary   critic   turns   his  attention  to   Latin America   (the  two  previous volumes  are devoted   to  the  literatures of  the  United States and English Canada). Unlike  most critics  who  are  interested  in  the  litera­ tures  of  the  Americas,   Kattan brings  to
his  critical   activities   the   view-point  of

falls  back  each   time
to  the  centre of  things....

Suddenly in  the  dark   winter  night,   the cry of the child  in pain  becomes  the "Cry of the world."
Living  on  the  Ground   may  be  Way­ man's  Rasselas:   human   dissatisfaction casts   its   shadow   everywhere. There  is not  much   humour  in  this  work  (though no one  should  miss the  hilarious "Metric Conversion") .  The   work   of   Frederick Philip  Grove  comes to mind,  not only be­ cause  the  precise  prose  sketches  of  Over Prairie Trails  compare  favourably with some of the loose poetry  of Wayman des-
 someone who  was not born  in  this hemis­ phere  and  who  is therefore in  a  position to analyze  objectively that  which  is truly  American   in   the   literatures  of   North, Central  and    South   America.   Born   in Baghdad, Kattan  studied  in   Paris   and  his  view of  literature  has  been  enriched by his varied  international  experience of literary creation and  criticism. The cos­ mopolitan  nature   of   Kattan's  literary background also comes out  very clearly  in his  third  collection  of  short   stories   en­ titled   Le  rivage. The  subject-matter of the  stories  in  this  collection is, however, much  more  Canadian than, for example,

I5I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that of his two novels, Adieu, Babylone (1975)   and  Les Fruits arraches (1977), or of his two previous volumes of short stories. These  new stories are set primarily in various  Canadian cities from  Wolfville to Vancouver. However, an international flavour  is maintained because most of the characters are  either   immigrants or  na­ tive-hom  Canadians  who   travel   exten­ sively. In  the final analysis, Kattan's main theme   in  these  stories  is  communication on a very  personal, human level, and  the problems which  human  interaction  can cause,  regardless of the cultural origins of the  individuals involved.
In his survey of Latin-American writers, Nairn   Kattan  examines works  by  well­ known   writers   such   as  the   Colombian Gabriel Garda  Marquez and  the Guate­ malan Miguel  Angel  Asturias, as well as by lesser-known  figures from  many  coun­ tries,  including  Brazil  and  Cuba. It is at the same  time  a wide-ranging survey and a  very  selective  analysis  of  Latin-Ameri­ can  prose  fiction and  autobiography. Al­ though all the works discussed are quoted  in  the  French translation, Kattan  often provides a perceptive and  sensitive analy­ sis  of  the   work  of  the  authors  he  has selected.  While  he does frequently discuss aspects   of  these  works  relating  to  style and  narrative techniques, he is interested primarily in  the  thematic  preoccupations of  these  writers,  particularly as  they  re­ flect    Latin-American   culture.   Kattan points out  the differences  between  Latin­ American and   other "American"  litera­ tures,  noting that North-American litera­ ture  in English  reflects a culture which  is essentially  Protestant,  Anglo-Saxon, and Germanic, and  Latin-American literature a  culture  which   is  Latin   and   Catholic, with strong Indian and even Arabic  influ­ ences. Many  of the themes and  other ele­ ments  of the  works  analyzed  are  remark­ ably  similar   to  those  found   in  Quebec literature. The themes  of exile, alienation, and  the  links  between  sexuality  and  vio-
 lence are very familiar to the reader  of contemporary Quebec literature, as is the idea  that  poetry is in many  ways "une tentative revolutionnaire."
At  the end  of the introduction to Ecri­ vains  des  Ameriques   (III),  Kattan ex­ presses the hope  that  by following him  in his literary travels,  the reader  will be able
to understand better not  only the  culture of the  Americas south  of the Rio Grande but also "our" own  America.  Throughout this survey of modern Latin American literature,  he   consistently  presents    the texts  he  has  chosen  as  reflections  of  the society in which  they were produced (this task  is facilitated by  the  fact  that  many of the  works  discussed  could  be classified as novels of social protest). In his attempt to outline the  principal characteristics of Latin-American literature, as opposed  to North-American literature, Kattan  tends to  de-emphasize the  creative and  vision­ ary  aspects   of  some  of  the  works,  and several  times  runs  the  risk of  succumbing to  the  referential  fallacy.  Only  occasion­  ally does  the  concept of  a  created world,  an  univers  romanesque,  come  into  play, and  each  work  is examined almost  exclu­ sively from  the point  of view of the repre­ sentation of  reality.  Despite  such  limita­ tions,  this  third   volume  of  Ecrivains  des Ameriques is a significant contribution to our understanding of an important litera­ ture which  has much  in common with Quebec literature.
The title of Kattan's latest  collection  of short  stories  is  an   allusion   to  the  main thread  which   runs   through  all   of   the stories, as well as a continuation of the biblical  allusions  in  the  titles  of  the  pre­ vious  collections, Dans  le  desert  ( 1974) and   La  Traversee   ( 1976).  All   of   the twelve   stories  in   this  collection  recount what  are  often  very short episodes in the lives of characters who meet  and  who are later   driven  apart  by   their   inability  to communicate with each other. Unable to express  their  feelings  and  needs,  they  re-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



main,  metaphorically, on   "the  shore." The first three stories, "Les  Adieux," "Le M:edecin,"  and  "Une Femme genereuse," are  all variations on the theme  of marital infidelity.  In "Les Adieux," the  most  in­ teresting  of   the   three,   the   protagonist George   goes  to  Paris   with   his  cousin's  wife.  Despite   the  mutual  attraction, the relationship  ends   sadly   at   Charles-De­ Gaulle  airport,  where  the   two  separate without  really  knowing  why.   A  similar situation  is  the  basis  of  "Les   Murs   de Berlin," the  story  of  the  misunderstand­ ings and conflicts  between  a man  and  his mistress   which   surface  while   they   are sightseeing in Berlin at the  time of the murder of the  West-German industrialist Schleyer.  The two most  technically inno­ vative    stories   are    "Les   Comptes,"  in which   a  brother and   a  sister   reminisce about the  jealousies and  rivalries  of their childhood and   "Le  Sommeil," in  which an  elderly  woman  daydreams about   the marital  problems   of   her   children  and grandchildren.  Both  stories  use  point  of view   much   more   successfully   than   the rest of the stories in the  volume. The  last two  stories,  "Les   Edifices"   and   "L'At­ tente,  emphasize the solitude which  every individual in modem society  experiences. "Nous sommes  seuls,"  says the  self-made millionaire named   Sam to  the  Narrator of "Les  Edifices."  Throughout the collec­ tion,  the  difficulties  of  interpersonal rela­ tionships,   even  among  sensitive   human beings,   are   constantly illustrated in  a moving  manner, unmarred by sentimen­ tality or sermonizing.
The  settings  of these  twelve  stories are so varied  that  one almost  has  the impres­ sion  that   Kattan is  trying   to  take   the reader on a cross-country tour, with occa­ sional  excursions  to other countries. Only three   of  the  stories   are  set  in  Quebec (primarily  Montreal,   the   Laurentians, and  the  Eastern  Townships); three  take place  in  the  nation's capital, one  in To­ ronto,  the  others in  various locations in-
 side and  outside Canada. The  characters come  from  equally   diverse   backgrounds and    professions,    ranging  from    Julian Bard,  the aging  classics professor  who re­ ceives  a  series  of  enigmatic letters  from relatives   and    former   acquaintances   in "Les  Messages"  to  Mimi,  the  Egyptian­ born   salesgirl  who  works  in  Eaton's  in Vancouver,  and who  has  lived  in  Paris, Buenos Aires, and  Rio, in "L'Attente." At the level of narrative techniques, most of the stories  are  in  many  ways more  tradi­ tional    than    some   of   Kattan's   earlier works, such as a number of the stories in Dans le desert, in which  he experimented with   a  variation  of   the   stream-of-con­ sciousness technique. The  significance  of Kattan's short  stories, and  particularly of his  latest  collection,  lies less in  the  area of technical innovation or stylistic experi­  mentation than  in the area  of psychologi­ cal analysis. In what  are  often  very short, carefully   constructed narratives, Kattan analyzes  some  of  the  fundamental  prob­ lems  of  human  relations,  providing the reader   with  fiction  which  is both  enter­ taining  and  thought-provoking.

RICHARD  G. HODGSON



RICH AND DANGEROUS TOM  MARSHALL,  The   Elements. Oberon. ROSALIND MACPHEE,  Maggie. Coach  House.
ALLAN  SAFARIK,   The  Naked   Machine  Rides
On.  Blackfish.

ToM   MARSHALL,  in   the   preface   to  an earlier   book  of  poems,  The  White  City, insists that  "the world  remains,  as always, rich  and  dangerous," adding that   many "are  now at  home,  frightened no  longer
... content to  be  dust  here." This  sense of  a  strange, fearsome, vital  world  em­ erges in Marshall's poetry  (gathered here from  his previous four  volumes)   and  in the  poetry  of  relative  newcomers  Rosa-


153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



lind  MacPhee and  Allan  Safarik. What affirmation there   is is tentative and  un­ presumptuous,  acknowledging the   dan­ gers.
In The  Elements, Marshall selects large
portions  of the four connected books, The Silences   of   Fire,   Magic    Water,   The Earth-Book  and  The  White  City,  which
have  appeared since  rg6g.  (Incidentally, since  this is a  collection, a  table  of  con­ tents or index  would have been welcome.)  The  four  elements-"the driving  fire of vision," "the cruel  sanity  of  the sea,"  the harsh  physical  realities  ("the  crack-up") of earth, and  the  transcendence of air­ provide   an   organization  for   Marshall's mental  universe,  without always explain­ ing  (as is apparently intended) the  pres­ ence  of  individual  poems  in  particular parts   of  the   book.  Marshall  is  a  poet haunted by  scraps  of  memory  and  par­ ticularly   by  impressions   of  the  physical landscape,  of  trees,  parks,  islands,  sun, and  snow. This  is imagery,  though, used with   intellectual  precision,  pressed  into  the service of definition, with  its lushness in some ways curtailed, as Marshall builds a  complex,  all-encompassing,  ultimately mystical vision of the universe. The  world he   creates,   for   all  its  defeats,   is  large, serene, and  full of grace. Despite obscuri­ ties or,  at  the  other extreme,  occasional  complacencies in the poetry, one attributes a coherence and  profundity to this vision. One   accepts,  even,   the   assertions   of  a transcendent harmony, unity, and  mean­  ing   in   reality.   Marshall   achieves   this through the  honesty  and  delicacy  of  his images-"a  single  room  made  of  many
windows  I opening and closing  their eyes
of cold snow"; through humour-"(Cool as a basilisk, I I descend,  gin and  tonic in hand)"; and  particularly through  a  con­
fident,  at  times  exultant serenity  of  tone
-"History  is  real,  do  not   I misunder­
stand  me, but  history  is also unfolding, a rearrangement, a I complex flowering within  this good  and  simple light."

154
 'The  Elements  contains a large  propor­ tion  of the earlier works, including many poems  favourably received when  they ap­  peared.   Excerpts   from    several   of   the longer,  less  successful  poems  for  several voices,  while  disconcerting as  fragments from  larger wholes,  do  have   their  own coherence here.  As the  cover  proclaims, this is Tom Marshall at his best. And yet,
I have  reservations. Marshall mocks  the
young lyric poet for his "bungled agonies" that  parody real  pain; his own  poetry sometimes lacks  emotional power.  It can be oblique or downright obscure, demand­ ing persistent intellectual effort but  yield­ ing  sometimes only  an  intellectual com­  prehension and  so, despite  its  real  merit,  reducing its  power  to  compel   once   the book is closed.
By its very nature, Rosalind MacPhee's Maggie is not susceptible to the same weakness. Here  we have the interior mon­ ologue  of  Maggie Tupling as she  moves towards breakdown, turns  away from  her thesis on black  holes, her doctor-husband, and   her  two  girls,  and  towards suicide; and  recuperates in  a  mental hospital, all the  while  irreverently challenging a finite and  childish  God  whom  she sees as hav­  ing  retreated to  his own  black  hole.  Un­  like  her  husband, Maggie cannot accept chaos  as a necessary evil. Her monologue, characterized by a manic energy and sprinkled with scientific  metaphors reflec­ tive  of  her  graduate  work,  conceals   an undercurrent of despair beneath sceptical bantering  and   rueful  self-mockery.   The weakness  of  Maggie  is  the  other side  of its  strength; the  wit,  defiance,    and   in­  tractability   which   establish    a   complex and  engaging protagonist and  keep   the maudlin at  bay  can   create   problems of tone,  heavyhanded attempts at cleverness and  humour:

And  the house? 	I'd  mail it
to the  children
but  there's the  problem  of string
and  paper.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The irony   can   become   heavy,   the  evi­ dence  of schizophrenic incoherence some­ times  lacks  subtlety, and,  most  seriously, the  expression   of  Maggie's  anguish   can be excessively flippant:

please  God, Mr.  Ticket Master, one  ticket
on  the   Go-As-You-Please-Train.

Nevertheless, the  obliqueness by which MacPhee characterizes Maggie's situation simply  through her   random  thoughts is on  the  whole  successful   and   suggestive. The author wisely concentrates on the subjective   experience   of    being    over­
whelmed  even  by "the methodologies I of
washing   my  face,  brushing  I my  hair"
rather than  attempting to define objective
causes. The sadness  does edge  out  poign­
antly  from  under the  flippancy:

Are  there some
who  never make it? I ask. It  happens, he  replies.

Maggie,  and  MacPhee, perceptively iden­ tify   false   destinations  on   the   road   to recovery-the self-consciousness of mop­ ing   adolescence, fearful  of   reprimands, for  instance -and  lyrically  capture the psyche's tentative gropings back to reality:

I need   to  squat on  a  runway each   morning before  7 : oo slowly  filling with   sun.
Yet  I look  into your  eyes and  tell you
my  wings
are caught up  in  my sleeves.

MacPhee has chosen  a subject matter and a point  of view which  run  the  risk of  de­ rivativeness, self-indulgence, and banality, and   has  achieved instead an  originality  demonstrated, for instance, by the quirky extended image  of  Maggie  climbing the spiral   staircase  of  DNA   in  quest   of  a miracle, with  God following at a respect­  able  distance.
Allan  Safarik, in The  Naked  Machine
Rides  On,  has  much   more   in  common
with  Marshall  than  with  MacPhee.
 Strong, like Marshall, in physical descrip­ tions  of nature, he  uses images  that   are more  detailed and  particularized,  evoca­ tively  depicting a  summer city  storm   in "Marijuana Flowers," or the end of sum­  mer stars in  a poem  by that  name,  or the West  Coast   shoreline. There  is  a  wary watchfulness in Safarik's approach to his subject, whether the  natural world  or (more rarely)  domestic realities, which highlights  the freshness rather than  the familiarity of  whatever he  is  document­ ing.  Influenced by imagism,  he  runs  the risks of  being  too  elliptical,  even  syntac­  tically confusing, and  of  pursuing origin­ ality  of  perception and  metaphor to  ex­ cess, so that  the  reader  must  run  to keep up   with   the   flood   of   revelations.  Like Marshall, Safarik can be excessively cere­  bral  and  enigmatic,  dangers exemplified by "Between a  Man  and  a  Woman Was a Sail of Skin":

for  BTB

Ocean & sky have  empathy as  bird  and bird  have common wing

A fire after dark
is a  hole  is  a  star
is an  illusion
as clear  as wind

the  stone  is as  the  fossil inside was  alive
a shape   imprinted

an  uncommon fragment in  a  well
deeper than its  water.

And  yet, in  another poem,  at  the  end  of a  series of exotic  and  striking metaphors for fireflies and  a description of a child gathering them  in a  jar, we can  also find the  restraint and simplicity of

He could   not   keep   them   long; The sadness shone through him.

All  three   poets,   Marshall,  MacPhee, and  Safarik, show  promise  in  their  skill

155

BOOKS IN REVIEW



with  word,  line, and  image,  in their awareness  of complexity.
HELEN  HOY


NAVEL-GAZERS IN ACADEME

BAROS COWASJEE,  Nude  Therapy. Borealis.
M.    T.   KELLY,  The  More Loving One. Black
Moss Press.
JOHN  METCALF, General  Ludd. ECW  Press.

NuoE THERAPY, by Saros  Cowasjee,  does not deliver the flesh promised  in its bizarre cover story and  provocative picture cover. Its  dozen  stories  are  a random collection of  rags  and  bones,  the  narrative  experi­ ence  of the  outsider in exile. They  are  a record   of  never   belonging  at   home   or away,  but  the  narrator is  never  realized as  a  focus  for  sympathy.  He  is  absurd,  angry,  and  outraged, but  never  engaged.
Caught as he is between  east and  west, the  narrator, who  changes   his  skin  but never  his point  of view, becomes his own metaphor for alienation. His formal, ana­ chronistic English  points  to the inner man struggling  with    cultural   estrangement. Even  the Indian stories are rendered with the  exile's  foreign  vision.
Although the short  story form demands a telescoping of the  longer  narrative, Cowasjee wrestles  clumsily  with  the  con­ ventions  of reduction. The  inventor is too obvious,  making   loose  with  the  obvious kinds  of  ironies  that   some  find  hard   to forgive   even   in   the   novels  of   Thomas Hardy.
The stories in Nude Therapy  are  based on  the  premise  that  "our  problems  lie in
the  betrayal   of  the  primal  state  of man. We drape ourselves  in a tower  of clothes which  leads to personal isolation...." No argument there,  although the  words  are just  another  tower   of  clothes   obscuring our  experience of this  primal  exercise.
 I am  not  sure if this novel  and  the  two following were intended for review as a piece  for  reasons  of  economy  or  because the  central character in each  happens to be an  academic, that  peculiar breed  that teaches between grants to support a word habit. I  wonder how  much   fascination university politics  and  the  sex life of  lec­ turers  holds  for  the  general  reader.
Reading The  More  Loving One  is like looking   through a window   on  a sunny
winter day  and   discovering  the  glass  is
greasy  and  covered  with  fly specks. Anti­ cipating a white  radiance, we are treated instead  to   a   minutely   observed,   ulti­  mately  repulsive  landscape. Kelly's  is an almost  Swiftian  view of the universe  seen up   close   and   ugly,  saved   from   misan­  thropy only by tolerance. We are what  we are, like it or lump  it. No formula for sal­ vation   is  even  suggested. We  persevere.
The More Loving One consists of a novella,   the  title  story,  and   three   short stories  with  a common theme,  human  re­ lationships  forming  and   dissolving   like amoeba   reproducing,   almost    without
design.  Loose  contracts of  the  flesh  are made and   broken   as  reality  intrudes on
sexual  idealism. In  the  novella, John, our horny    academic,  splits   with   his   over­ bearing sculptress wife, Judith, to pursue  the  chimera that  is  Anna.   Once  Anna  takes  a gander at  the  boil on  his  behind  (the  vicissitudes  of a sedentary lifestyle), it's  all  over.  And  so on  and  so  forth   in the ensuing stories; always the disillusion­  ment.
Kelly  gives us the  compulsive's view of reality,  life  observed   beyond  the abstrac­ tions  of  love  and  loyalty,  on  the  edge  of madness. Ugliness  is a dangerous fascina­ tion.  It kills  love  and  compassion. This  book is a hard  read because one image  is driven   in  after  another, possibly  to  the detriment of the narrative. The senses are bombarded in prose coiled as tight as a spring, particularly in  the  novella,  which is  held   together  by  the   clean   lines   of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Judith, the  deserted  wife who betrays  her husband's intention to portray her  as the too solid antithesis of his dreamlike (read vapid)  Anna.
In  General  Ludd  we have  a  professor of a different colour. John Metcalf  is able to make  the  big jump  from  the particular to the universal, making James Wells, his poet,   teacher,  and   shit   disturber   really heroic   in  his  refusal   to  conform  to  the heartbreaking demands of modern society. Humour is the vehicle  of the poet's  de­ scent   through  the   ivy  corridors  to  the crazy  ward   (Loony   Toons). Finally,  we recognize   laughter  as  insanity    and   in­ sanity  as reason in an unreasonable world.  The title,  for  our  information,  comes from   the   Luddite  Movement  of   nine­ teenth-century syndicalists  who took their name  from  an  apparently  crazy  villager  who  thought he could  oppose  the  Indus­
trial  Revolution singlehanded.
Jim  is crazy  the same  way. He  defends the privacy  of his own mind,  choosing  his colleague Kate   (plastic-coated defender of the status quo for her own reasons)  for his  inamorata and  chief  adversary. It is Kate who  finally  has  him  committed.
In   the   right   tradition  of   the   tragic mode,  drunken comedy   with  Kathy  de­ generates into  pathos as Jim discovers  he is the  last  idealist  in  the  world  of Loony Toons, which  is everywhere except  in the decent  rural existence  she rejects  because it is an  uncomfortable anachronism. Her  world  is  fast  food  and  tenure.
General  Ludd  is  a  savage  and   funny satire  of Canadian academic and  literary
life  with   its  necrophilic  dependence on
the inert  body of government, the not-so­ benign   Big  Brother of  all   who  require money  in exchange for  art.  Jim  does not fit, ergo  he is eliminated. He  is the  sensi­ tive  man  who  is caught in  the  machine, whilst  he is putting sugar  in  it; he is the certifiable prophet,  ultimately made  sane by his intelligent observation that  we are all living  in  a comic  strip.
 It is the leaven  of malice  that  separates this ivory tower  epic  from  the  rest.

LINDA  ROGERS


LYRIC AND SOCIAL

DENNIS   COOLEY,  Leaving. Turnstone,  $g.oo.
TERRENCE HEATH,  Interstices  of Night.  Turn­
stone, $s.oo.
DOUGLAS SMITH,  Scarecrow.  Turnstone, $s.oo.
GORDON TURNER,  No  Country  for White Men.
Turnstone, $s.oo.
TOM   WAYMAN,   A  Planet   Mostly   Sea.   Tum­
stone, $s.oo.

IN  ITS BRIEF  HISTORY,  Turnstone  Press has established  a reputation based on two things:  the fine quality of its production, and  its dedication to prairie  regionalism. In  this selection  from  its recent  publica­ tions,   there    have   been    some   changes  made.  The  showpiece   books,  with   their beautiful paper   and  commissioned illus­ trations,    are   gone  - sacrificed    to   in­ creased  production.  And  the  publication of  Tom  Wayman's latest   lot  of  "indus­ trial  poetry"   and   Gordon  Turner's   ex­ ploration of life  in  native  settlements in northern B.C. and  the  North West Terri­ tories  signals  a  willingness   to  relax   the regional  concentration of  past  offerings,  though Heath,  Smith   and  Cooley   con­ tinue   to  carry   the   banner   of   "prairie poetry."  As  what   Kroetsch  has   called "the hovering care  of  place" can  easily wear  thin  through  sheer  repetition, it  is to  the  editors'  credit  that   this  thinness  has  not  yet  plagued  their   offerings.  In Smith's Scarecrow, Heath's Interstices of Night, and  Cooley's   Leaving,  "the harp  is   strung  with   grass"    (to   use  Heath's phrase), but  the  poets'  distinctive  voices and  varying  skills reshape their  common song.  Still,  the  broader range   of  theme and   subject-matter  in   these   books  is  a positive  step,   and,   if  Turnstone's   claim

I 57

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that  they  are  "as  proud  of  the  design  of these  books as  they  are  of the  poetry"  is no longer  quite  appropriate, the less elab­ orate  formats set off the verse adequately. Dennis Cooley's  Leaving  (in the Chap­ book series  designed  as a  forum for  new poets)   is  very  much   a  first  volume: its imagery  often  straining  the  limits  of  the page  in  an  attempt to take  the metaphy­ sical leap necessary, for example,  to relate solar   eclipse   to  an  italic   subtext,  or  a child's   tentative  exploration  of  a  piano
keyboard  to "DNA unravelling I its acid
sentence" in the months before  her  birth.
Cooley is less self-consciously artistic  (and more successful)  in charting memory pic­ tures   of  his  father  ("you   a  sunburned
farmer born  to the prairies  I held  hard  to
the  place"), or  the  scene  at  his  uncle's
funeral,  for   in   these   poems   he   comes more  directly  to the central theme  of the book-a    theme    acknowledged  in   the title  chosen  for  the  volume.  The  book is full  of  "leavings":  light  leaves  and   re­ turns  with  the eclipsed sun  ("the solution  delivered   from   lunar  tug") ;  the  poet's  daughter leaves  the  womb  to enter  "the
hardened grammar  I of  our  lives";   his
uncle,  in  death, leaves an  aging  group  of
friends   and   family   who,  in  tum,  leave
"the earth to swallow this man  I this man
to swallow  the  earth." And  the  poet  de­
mands,  with  the  British  sojourner in  the title poem ("A Poem for You: Leaving Winnipeg") "some words to wear"-a reading of these patterns, which  in the parable of an  October garden in  the  last poem  of  the  book  is finally  seen  to  be implicit  in   the   relentless   cycle   of   the year.
Robert  Kroetsch observes  in  the  pro­ motional  blurb    on   the   back   cover   of Scarecrow  that   "Landscape  for  Douglas  Smith   is a  kind  of  musical  instrument," and,  given  the  potential  and  limitations of  such  an  instrument,  he  plays  it  with some  mastery. The   key  to  Smith's tech­ nique  here  is an  almost surrealistic atten-
 tion to sensual  impressions-sound, sight, taste, touch. Morning is "a bruised  I finger
of wind" ("Bird Lake") ; neon  "pulls  our eyes up  the  side of  tall  buildings"  ("Nu­ trition") ; and,  in a fresh variation of that  favourite  illustration  of   the   geometric simplicity  of   the   prairie,   rails   do   not merely  define  perspective  but  hold  "the  sun at spearpoint on the horizon" ("Walk­ ing ... by Railway  Tracks"). In  "On the Road  to  the  Last  Dry  Town in  Mani­ toba,"  this   same   fine   fingering  creates whimsical  visions  of  gin  and   tonic  in  a prairie sunset; in  "Driving North in  the Winter," details "lacquer the air  with ex­ quisite  desire"; in "City Limits," the sen­ sations  of  a  summer day,  and   the  ever­
present  wind,  "convert silence  I into  the
voice  of  my  childhood." At  other   times,
the result  is less satisfying  because  less completely realized. We  are  given  sparks of poetry  rather than fully developed lyric statements: Blakean proverbs (e.g., "Trust
the stone  I He  who knows nothing knows
this,"  "Women and  worms  both  love ap­
ples"), and  the verbal  equivalent of watercolour sketches.
However, it  is in  the  final  (and   title) sequence that Smith will  either   hold  or lose his  readers. Here, with  the  same  in­ tensity  which  characterizes the  rest of  his poems,  he  has  written a dramatic  mono­ logue  for  a  scarecrow. More  properly, it is a  passion  play about the "saint" of the prairies,  a   new   Christ   (and,  to  quote  Camus, "perhaps  the  only  one  that   we deserve") : "made in  the image  of man," "his  failed  miracle."
Heath in The  Interstices of Night, like Smith   in  his  "Scarecrow" sequence,   has ambitious plans  which,  however  success­
fully executed, demand and  hold  (or lose) our   attention  by   their   sheer   intricacy. Some   may   give   up   before   the   code   is broken, and  in  Heath's case  this  will  be particularly lamentable. As the title of his book  indicates, Heath is concerned  here with  the "interstices" of experience-the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"intervening spaces,  chunks, crevices"  in which  we live so much  of our lives despite our  devotion to  clarity.   Accordingly, he explores the  dissonance between  day  and night,  birth  and  death, life and  dreams; and  the alarming sense that  "the passing things  are  forever"  ("Now")  dominates the  book.
Perspective in these poems seems slightly off-lcilter as  the  poet-"time-consumer"
-wonders what  the  world  would  be like
"if" ...

If I did  not  have  to  remember
Where people had  wanted to  go,  did  go
If I could   reconstruct no  point
That should be reached or  left, If everything could be as it  is Here
("Prairie Trail")

But   this  is  not   as  esoteric   as  it  might sound,   as  Heath's philosophical  conclu­ sions    are,    almost    without    exception, grounded for  us in  some  concrete image or situation, or in  the middle sequence  of the  book  ("black  j  white sonnets") in  a series of sketches,  of  a single  room  (with a  window,   flowers,  a  cat)    which   serve gradually to  "recode" both   the  speaker  and  his audience to an  awareness that  "I control  the  paradoxical powers," "I  am a  thin grey line  between  day  and  night." The  tight-rope walk  between  abstraction and experience is both  part  of the fascina­ tion of the  book and  an illustration of the poet's  theme.
Now, in a complete change of tack, we come to the  poetic  journalism of Tom Wayman, whose purpose (in the words of the manifesto included in A Planet Mostly Sea)   is to portray accurately "the condi­ tions  and   quality  of  our  contemporary
life."  In  the first of the  two sequences  in
this   volume,    "Asphalt   Hours,  Asphalt
Air,"  Wayman offers his readers a poetic
documentary on  the factory-based society of Windsor, Ontario. For  Wayman's fans this will be nothing new;  the dehumaniz­ ing  effects  of  our  industrial  society,  the
 manipulation of the individual by govern­ ment,  management and  unions, is one  of his favourite topics. In this respect, George  Orwell  has been an obvious influence, and the  master's  obsession  with   drawing an accurate  portrait  of  the  common   man,  and  with analysing his potential for man­ ipulation has become  the student's. Thus, Wayman's credo,  included in a postscript to  the  book,  is a  slightly  revised  version of "Politics  and  the  English  Language." And   the  painfully exact   picture of  the lives of automobile workers  in "Asphalt Hours" culminates with  a  description of a politician  speaking at a public rally (but willing to desert  ideology  for convenience at  the earliest  opportunity), and  with  an image  borrowed  from  Orwell's nightmare prophecy  of life under the benevolent guidance of Big Brother:

Perhaps I loath them
because  they  are  that part of ourselves
that keeps  us  children,
looking   to  someone other  than  ourselves,
bigger  than ourselves, to  redeem us.


And  yet  when we  turn to  each  other,
many  times  we  recognize only  the  powerless
and  lash  out: what we  offer  ourselves is a human fist
smashing into a  human face
-male or female -a tiny  model of what  our  days  feel  like.

This realization -that the  juvenile be­ haviour of  the  men  in  the  factories,  the violence and  strict  observance of  rules  at home  and  at  work,  grows  out  of  a sense of  helplessness -is  the  centre  of  the  se­ quence. As the details accumulate, we are made  aware  of  the  pressures  exerted   by the  perpetual   noise,  and   the   perpetual surveillance by  the  company.  Wayman's response, predictably, is to sound  the  bat­  tle-cry of  "solidarity":

Out of  all  our  imperfections, fears, distrust, we must  for our own lives stand together against the  owners  of  our
time.

159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Heavy going, but effective. This is what Wayman does best, and the preaching is carried by the voices of the people he describes -individual  and   true.
In  the second  sequence,  however,  he is less successful.  The  description (here  of Long   Beach)    is  detailed   and   accurate, and   the   identification  of  the   sea  as  a
"furious washerwoman I throwing out  I
pail  after   pail" is attractively  whimsical.
But these bear the weight of Wayman's philosophizing badly.  He  is still  striving for  an  "accurate knowledge  of what  this world  is like,"  but  the  chosen  target­ the sea in "a  planet mostly sea" -is per­ haps  too  broad to be considered  without an  element of bathos sneaking  in.
Finally, Turner's No Country  for White Men  is the  prize  of  this group of  books. In  saying   this,  I  by  no  means   wish  to underrate the  craftsmanship of Smith  or Heath, or  Wayman's documentary skills. Turner's book does not presume  as much as these: it is simply a grouping of poems, roughly  chronological in order,  in  which
the   poet    recreates  his   experiences  in
northern Indian and  Eskimo settlements. There are no carefully contrived sequences here.   But   what   there   is  is  a  carefully drawn picture of  another culture,  effec­ tive largely  because  Turner does not  pre­ tend  complete  understanding.  He  is  an
outsider throughout-"another explorer  I
rediscovering memory  in an  alien  land";
he is "the teacher" trying  to instill in  his students an appreciation of their own cul­ ture   according  to   the   requirements  of school  curriculum.
In  these  roles, he  witnesses the  chang­ ing values,  the  decaying  hopes, as dreams  are  exchanged for  "the  jabbering of vil­ lage  dogs"  in  "The  Cabin," and  the  old ways  are  remembered  with  nostalgia  in "Each  Mouthful of  Forget." The   white man's  culture is  feared   and   nonetheless accepted, manifesting itself in "oil on snow,"  "bought jeans," and  children em­ barrassed  by  their   heritage.  Sometimes,


160
 Turner seems  to  capture the  vocabulary
-simultaneously  concrete and   mystical
-of the   people   he   describes.   For   in- stance,   in  "I  Watch an   Eskimo   Girl Dance," the  dance  becomes  a  seal  hunt, the girl a hunter, the  "I" a hunter of the girl.  In the  lovesong  "I Want the  Whole Bird," he is aware of the  possibility  of integration: "Death of my  South   would free  me  for   the  Spring." Yet,  at   other times,  he is painfully aware  of his limita­ tions,  his inability to  dance  naked down the  street,   "though I  sensed  that   naked
and  dance I were a must." In the book as
a  whole,  a  pattern is  traced   from  awk­
ward    description, through  attempts  to assimilate and  interpret, to an acceptance of differences, fear  and  withdrawal, and (perhaps) a measure  of  understanding made possible  for  us in  the  subtle  blend­ ing  of  Smith's lyricism  and   the  strident social  consciousness  of  a  Wayman.

ELIZABETH POPHAM



TUNING WORDS

STUART  MCKINNON,  Mazinaw. McClelland &
Stewart.
ANN   YORK,   In   This    House   There   Are   No
Lizards.  Sono  Nis, $5.95.
BERT  ALMON,  Blue   Sunrise. Thistledown,
$q.oo; pa.  $6.g5.
KENNETH  MCROBBIE, Hole. Fiddlehead, n.p.

BOOKS ONE IS GIVEN TO REVIEW inevitably line   up  for   comparison.  One   measures their  stature, weight  and   so on.  Pairing takes  place  if  one  has  a  set  of  four.  In this  case,  Mazinaw   and   In  This   House There   Are  No  Lizards  go  together. At least,  both  boos
get  them  underway.
M azinaw is a  poetic  history  set  in  the town   of   that   name.   It  starts with   the title  poem,  giving  us setting and  context. "Mazinaw is  the  Algonquin  for  Picture

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Writing Book" we're  told. The next poem gives us the pictographs of Rabbitman, Skink,  Turtle, and  Heron, and  after  that the  rest  of  the  book  is coloured in  with the  lives of  notorious or  celebrated  citi­ zens:  Mary  (the  mystic)   Merrill and her husband,  George;  finally   it  centres  on Mary's formidable sister,  Flora  of Mazi­ naw,  "the  stout  bride  of  the  ballot  box," Canadian suffragette and activist. The in­ gredients guarantee  Canadian interest­ all  those  mythopoeic  elements and  first citizens   (stolid    George  and    starcrazed Mary,  suffragette  Flora -feminist   and socialist) -the  book  is both  topical  and historical at once. But the boon is also the bane  of  the  book.  Documentary  interest is often  allowed  to  take  the  place  of the poetry.
It could  be argued that  the  events,  or
the  historical and  human matter itself  is enough -thus transferring to poetry  the criteria so often  applied to prose: that  it be a clear window  in terms of style, giving direct  access to what's inside or outside. Stuart  McKinnon intends this  to  a  de­ gree,  but  basically   he  wants   to  use  the pace  and  texture of  poetry  and  prose  to offset each  other, giving  it  all  the multi­ faceted advantages of  both  (diary  form, letter,  speech; plus stanza and verse) . But it   does  succumb  to   the  danger  of  the prose,  of the  content  consuming it, leav­ ing it locked  between  passable  pedestrian poetry   and  very  interesting history,   the language dulled   by the  dogged  reportage of  facts:  "Though he  lost  Mary, money and   family /  down   fantastic  shafts   of Billa's mine  / George kept  going  back  / to hills north  of bridgewater / looking for good specimens  / in bald rock lately / uncovered by lumber barons."
The poet   shines   when   he  does  what only  poetry  can  do  best -tunes  the  lan­ guage  for  maximum effect,  making tonal and   thematic sweeps  between   the  social and  spiritual plains  and  podiums. But it's the inclusion  of the other stuff  that needs
 questioning-the flat  veracity  of  quasi­ history,  those  exercises  in selective  detail  only, that  haven't the mouth-to-mouth of language or  imagination  to  make   them  move.
Overall the  book  has a simple  and  sat­
isfying structure. It gives  the  same  sense of  unity  that   Ann  York  has  in  In  This House There  Are No  Lizards. Not  all  of Ms. York's  book  has it,  I'm  sorry  to say, but  it  is definitely  there  in  Part  I,  which carries  the main  title of the  volume.  Part II is another matter, almost  another book in  terms  of accomplishment.
That first  cycle  of  poems -from  the legendary creation  of  night  and  day  by the  Australian  aborigine goddess  of  the sun,   Bela,  up   to  the   white   man's   first setting  up his campfires in starry  space - is superb.  Sinuous, alert,  focused, like the lizard   which   is  its  central  image.   It's when   York   gets   into   the   more   diffi­ cult  area  of the  emigrant/immigrant  ex­ perience that  the  book  becomes  jumbled  between  a strong  and  understandable de­  sire  to  fix personal  landmarks (death of
a mother, a brother) and  to record powerfully  and  truthfully the sense of dis­ tance  and  displacement  which  straddles two  continents-Australasia  and  North America.
Not that  the personal  poems don't con­ tribute to that  sense of being cut adrift in space,  of  loneliness,   but   I  believe   Ann York   made   a  strategic   mistake   by  be­ ginning  Part   II  with  "Family  Album." "Distances" is  the  correctly   chosen   title
to the section. But I feel "The Man  With Ocean In  His  Eyes"  might  have  been  a more  appropriate poem  for setting  it  up. It ends: "I know  that  look, I thought, / as vast and  rambling as the oceans/ you'll forever cross, along whose shores / the shadows  of  great  evergreens subdue the sands."  With  this  poem  providing the beginning and  the  poem, "Distances," the end,  the thematic linkage  would  be made intact  and   unbreakable.  The  personal

161

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



migration could  then  have fitted  into  the larger   perspective,  with   the  book's  last
lines resonating as they do:  "And  yet I it
isn't  new  to  me  I this  distance between minds  I the  country I have  left  I is also
vast."
The effect  of  this and  other  poems  on me  rivals that  of V. S. Naipaul's work in prose. York has this and other sterling qualities:  a  sharp eye, wit,  charm, and lines  that   are  repeatable for  their  truth and  simultaneously sinuous  and  sensitive beauty.
It's  interesting to note the stylistic shift
between   the   prairie and   the  Pacific  in Ann York's work. She arrived in Edmon­ ton and  has been in Victoria for this past number of  years.  I  say  this  because  cer­ tain   poems   ( "This  Alberta,  Will  It Be Love")  might  have been written by Bert Almon, who sets up his decent, wholesome (prairie?)  sensibility  in the  first  poem  of Blue  Sunrise  (appropriately  designed  in blue   and   white).  The   poem    is   "For Nancy  Going  to  War." He  picks  her  up hitching with  her  dog,  Maggie,  and  he senses  the  temper and   the  tastes  of  our time  already   passing  with  her  ("Do  you like  brown   rice?" she  asks) .  When   he leaves   her   off,  he   worries   about    "the
pirates I slave  merchants on  the  roads"
and  "wishes  Nancy  had  more  armour  I
Maggie was a little  fiercer."  You  can  be
sure  of small,  meticulous and  feeling ob­ servances from   Bert  Almon   in  the  rest of  Blue  Sunrise.
The second  poem  gives us the titie and the  theme,   the  care  for  the  small  inter­ connected elements of life:  human, ani­  mal, mineral; huge and small. The  fourth poem  gives us the poetic credo  affixed  to the work of a potter: "you  might  call his pains  excessive,  but   he'd  call  them   just enough." Modest, painstaking poems might   be  the   total   prospect   then -a crushing congruency of  blue  from  cover to cover. And true, he can opt for careful adequacy. "A  Man  in a Small  Town" is
 exactly  that. But  many  of the  poems  are too fine  to fall flat.  Among  such, "Reme­ dial  English" -one of the  best  I've  read on  the  Boat   People  and  Chinese   immi­
grants: "Marking- I the  red  pencil  is
an  oar   blade   coming   down   hard   I on
hands that cling  to  the side of this small
boat."
However,  in   the   second   half   of  the book, an  increasing number of poems become  forgettable because  of  the  mon­ otony  of  tone  and  form.  He  has a  poem about himself  escaping into monochrome, and  there  is the  accompanying danger of the  book  doing  just  that.
If Bert  Almon  and  Kenneth McRobbie
were to pair  off, they'd be the odd  couple indeed.  McRobbie  is  as  dramatic  and dark   as  Almon   is blue  and   predictable. What fable  then  does  McRobbie see for our time? Is it all in the first poem, "The Politics  of  Jaws"?-"Let's get  on  with
it.  I The big money's  in horror. I It's  got
our  vote."
But  it  isn't  all  black  hole  hysteria, or even  as  gimmicky   as  it  appears-with the  attempt to  fit a  hole  into  everything and  every  poem  whether it  needs  one  or no.  In  fact,  the  first  poems  state  sensa­ tionally   what   he  pursues  elliptically and  elegantly elsewhere. The horror of eating and  being  eaten by the  voracious void  is redone    beautifully   in   "Ring  of   Clear
Moisture":  "the  motion of  my  hand   I responsive, yet  unwilled   I in  an  ellipse, that's all  of  nature's I to  and  from  my
face."
"Even the Hole  Burns Away''  takes the lengthening white  hot  hole  that  is a can­ dle and  follows it all the way down for the bright way it tells the same truth: "Easiest said  of  a  candle, that growth  is  down­ ward."  McRobbie is  as  close  to  Henry  Vaughan and  the  metaphysicals  as he  is to Edgar Allan Poe or Francis  Ford  Cop­  pola.
The  book  has  a happy   end.  Descent
into  the  hole  has  its regeneration on  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



other side. We come out "with more mass energy   than  before,"  "for   every   half­
particle that  plunges in  I the  other  half escapes  I back  I to infinity."
The  elliptical turn  of  mind   can  tor­
ture  and  tease, but it is never complacent, and   McRobbie  is  capable of  achieving high contemplation in the middle  of his maelstrom. On  average, he's  more  diffi­ cult, dramatic and daring, everything that  his partner in  this  review  isn't.  Yet  both are  writing  to  us  out  of   the  great  flat­ lands-which would destroy any budding thesis  I  may  have  had   earlier, that   all writers  on  the prairie grow  to sound  like each  other.
GEORGE MCWHIRTER



MOWAT COUNTRY

PETER  DAVISON, ed.,  The  World  of Farley Mowat: A  Selection   from His  Works.  Mc­ Clelland  & Stewart, $r6.gs.

"MowAT   couNTRY,"  writes  Peter  Davi­ son  in  introducing this  anthology,  "is  a land  of isolated  men and tiny settlements, and   of  entertainment   and   laughter  as predatory  as  the   need  for  food." It  is "distinctively   northern,"   ranging  from the  icy  Arctic  islands  to  the  wind-swept tundra   of   Keewatin.  Yet   it   is  also  a "world"   which    encompasses   a   dog's  rambles  in  Saskatchewan,  a  young  sol­ dier's   initiation  to   battle  in  Italy,   the exploits  of   salvage   tugs   in   the   North Atlantic,  the   suffering and   death  of  a whale   off  Burgeo,   Newfoundland, and much  else besides. Above all, it is a world of  rugged  adventure and  comic  hi-jinks, brought to life  by the  pen  of an  exuber­ ant  storyteller.
For   nearly   thirty   years  Farley Mowat has  been  one  of  Canada's most  popular writers.  Sales  of his books number in the millions   across   North  America  and   in some   eighty   foreign   language  editions.
 Television   and   film  adaptations  of  his work   testify  further  to  his  commercial success. Despite  his popularity,  however, Mowat  has received  scant  attention as a serious   writer:  brief   studies   by  Sheila Egoff   (of  his  children's  books)   and   by Alec  Lucas   (of  his  oeuvre)  are  notable exceptions,  inasmuch as each critic argues convincingly about the  body of ideas and craftsmanship in the author's work.  More commonly,  academic reviewers  regularly charge   that   Mowat  misuses   facts,   ad­ vances  outrageous opinions,   writes  in  a graceless style, and  recycles  his old  work between  new  covers.  Mowat, of  course, disputes  these  charges  with  considerable panache, and  shows much  the  same sort of  disdain   for   pundits  as   he  does   for boondoggling politicians and bureaucrats.
For  his part,  Davison  believes  the  best way  to evaluate Mowat the  author is to understand Mowat the  man.  By  arrang­ ing  his selections-excerpts  from  about  half of Mowat's twenty-six books-in the order  of the  "actual  experiences" rather than  in  the  order  of  writing or  publica­ tion,  he hopes  to give  the  reader a kind of   autobiographical portrait  of  Farley's personal  growth, of his motivations as a writer,  and  of  the  nature of his  passion­
ate concerns.
For   instance,    the   opening   selection from   The   Dog  Who  Wouldn't  Be  not only  recalls  a  part  of  Mowat's youth  in Sas atchewan
consistent   theme   in  his  work:   his  very real  sympathy  for  the  underdog! It may well  be  true,   as  Davison   suggests,  that the  sobering  experience of  war  and   his brief  sojourn   living  in  the   Barrenlands among   the   Ihalmiut  people   were   the spurs  to  Mowat's  decision   to  write.   In any  case,  when   he  launched  his  career with  People  of the  Deer  in  1952,  it  was with  the  intention of exposing negligent and  short-sighted policies which  had  per­ mitted   starvation and  disease  to  kill  off the   native peoples, and   which   had

BOOKS IN REVIEW



allowed  the  North  to be pillaged  by avaricious  southerners.  Clearly,   Mowat had   become   an   advocate for  the  com­ mon   man,   a   fervent  ecologist,   and   a prophet of northern  development.
Over  the  years  Mowat  has  conducted his  campaign of  expose-cum-plea with considerable skill.  Never  losing  sight  of the  popular writer's need to entertain his audience, he  has  usually  used intelligent means to achieve  his ends. In  the 'north­ ern'  books, such  as  Never Cry Wolf, the
'Top of the  World' trilogy, and  Sibir, he has made  use of humour, scientific obser­ vation, clever  editing and  commentary, and   a   personal   '!-was-there'  point   of view  to  forward  his objective  of educat­ ing his readers -not merely alarming or pacifying  them.  And  in  the  two  books he  wrote  for  a  salvage  company, Grey Seas  Under and  The  Serpent's  Coil, he
did  more  than   just capitalize on a history of routine (if hazardous) commercial operations: he  told  thrilling  tales of  ad­ venture at  sea,  involving   real  heroes­ such  as  Captain Harry  Brushett and  his Newfy  crew-and in the event reminded us of the marvellous integrity of ordinary life.
Many  readers of  Mowat   quite  natu­ rally  associate  his work  with  Newfound­ land,  especially  in  the light of his success with  A Whale   for the  Killing. Davison's view of the  matter is  that  the  I967  trag­  edy   of   the   trapped   whale   "deepened [Mowat's]  sense  of  mystery  about   the animal   world   and   darkened  his  disen­ chantment with  his fellow man." But the fact  remains that   the  author has  always been  conscious of the plight- and some­ times,  the  bathos -of  living  organisms. Creatures and  things  as disparate as  the whale,   Newfoundland sealers,  the  'boat who   wouldn't  float,'   and   the   Eskimo woman, Soosie,  are,  in  Mowat's  world, avatars  of   primordial  existence   which deserve  our  respect,  and  love. This  is the serious aspect  of his work.
 As  an   introduction  to  Mowat,  Davi­ son's collection is uneven  and  not  totally  representative; for  example, there are  no selections   from  his  children's  book<s. On  balance, however, it is a book  which  will likely  be  appreciated  by  both   the  avid Mowat  fan   and   the   casual   reader. A final   point:  it   is   supplemented  by  an unusually detailed  bibliography of Mow­  at's  works.
ERIC THOMPSON


DANS L'OUEST

DONATIEN  FREMONT,  Les Franyais  dans l'Ouest
Canadien. Les  Editions du  Ble.
HELENE   CHAPUT,  Donatien Fremont:   journa­
liste   de   l'ouest    canadien. Les   Editions du
me.

DANS  SON INTRODUCTION   au   livre   de
Fl'emont, HeU ne
que  Ia re-edition de !'ouvrage Les  Fran­
fais  dans  L'Ouest   Canadien   celebre   le
756  anniversaire des provinces-soeurs, Ia Saskatchewan et  I'Alberta. Paru  d'abord en  I959,  ce livre  reunissait une  serie d'articles  publies   dans   deux   hebdoma­ daires: Le  Patriote  de  l'Ouest  de  Prince  Albert et  La Liberti de Winnipeg.
Fremont avait   fait  partie  de  Ia vague de  colons  franc;;ais venus  au  pays au  de­ but  de  siecle. D'abord defricheur au nord Winnipeg pendant une  dizaine d'annees, il se toume vers le  journalisme ou  il fait carriere pendant un quart de siecle avant de   quitter !'Ouest  en   I94I.  C'est   done en  connaissance de  cause  et avec  un cer­ tain  recul  qu'il  assume  Ia  tache  de  faire l'histoire de  ses  compatriotes-colons. En remontant    jusqu'a    I854,    il recueille  patiemment   leurs   noms,   celui   de   leur epouses,  de  leurs  enfants de  Ia  ville  ( et departement) de leur  provenance, et en­ fin, de  Ia paroisse  canadienne ou  ils s'in­  stallent. (Tres utiles  sont  les  cartes  pro­ vinciales  et  de  l'epoque  situees  au  cours

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



du  dicit.)   Fremont suit  de  pres  les  peri­ peties  de  ces  families   en  prise  avec  les elements  rebelles  d'une  nature  d'autant plus  implacable qu'elle leur  etait incon­  nue.  Il donne, quand il le peut,  les noms et  domiciles  des  descendants.
Eu  meme  temps,  Fremont illumine  le role-clef des missionnaires: fondateurs de paroisses,  tels  le P. Caire dans les prairies, le  P.  Pandosy   en  Okanagan,  historiens­ ethnologues  tels  les  PP.  Maurice et  Le Jeune en Colombie-Britannique, et l'abbe E.   Petitot,   savant  du   Grant-Nord.  I1 n'oublie pas pour  autant l'apport des intellectuels.  La  polemique acerbe qu'il avait    lancee    contre   Constantin-Weyer (qui  s'est  vu  decerner le  Prix  Goncourt en  1928)   ne l'empeche pas d'avouer que celui-ci  avait  porte  "l'Ouest canadien sur le  plan   de   la  litterature  franc;aise."   Il signale  aussi Georges  Bugnet, qui,  a force de courage  et de tenacite, reussit a mener de  pair  la  vie d'agriculteur et  celle d'ecrivain.  (Cet   homme remarquable a ete  decore  a !'occasion de  son centenaire en   1979  par   sa  province  d'adoption-
1'Alberta.)
Le  pionnier, s'il  n'est  pas  heros  de  par sa  nature, risque  bien  de  le devenir. Le recit  fidele  de  sa vie  journaliere devient, sous une plume  habile,  une aventure pas­ sionnante. Aussi Fremont tient-il son lec­ teur  en  haleine, mais  on  le sent soucieux de  n'oublier  rien  ni  personne.   (Ses  ap­  pendices    suppleent  aux    quelques   la­ cunes.)   Les  noms  et  les  evenements s'en tassent,  appuyes  d'hyperboles, ce qui  fait que   les  grands   actes   sont   parfois   sub­ merges.  Une  pecadille, car  malgre   tout, Fremont  charme  par   la  limpidite et  le brio  de sa chronique. Elle fixe, remarque Chaput,   dans   son   livre   sur   Fremont, "une atmosphere ... que  les ans auraient infalliblement  estompee." En  dotant  la re-edition de ce livre d'un Index et d'une Table  des   Matieres, Chaput  l'a   trans­ forme  en  une  veritable  encyclopedie qui plaira    non   seulement   aux   descendants
 des   protagonistes-des  deux   cotes  de
!'Atlantique-mais  aussi   a   l'historien­ sociologue   et   a   tous   ceux   qui   aiment l'aventure vecue.
Le  public  de  Chaput  (Donatien  Fre­
mont:  journaliste  de  l'Ouest   canadien),
sera  sans  doute  plus  restreint, mais  ceux qui  s'interessent  a  l'histoire du   journa­ lisme   francophone  de   l'Ouest   ou   a l'oeuvre  et   a  la   pensee  de  Fremont  y trouveront   une   source   abondante.  La documentation  est impeccable, et surtout, bien  organisee.  Chaput  trace   la  genese du   journal  francophone  dans  l'Ouest  a partir de l'ephemere Courier  de la Nou­ velle-Caledonie (Victoria, 1858)   jusqu'a La   Liberte   qui   celebre   bientot  ses  70 ans.   Voila   le   cadre   ou   Fremont  fera carriere pendant 25 ansa partir de 1916. Redacteur  de   La   Liberte    il   fait   non seulement   !'editorial, mais  il  redige  sous plusieurs   pseudonymes  presque    tout   le
journal.    Il   a  quelquechose  a  dire   sur
!'agriculture, la  politique, la  langue,   les
ecoles,  la  famille; il  fait   la  critique  de livres,  de  conMrences   et  de  theatre.  11 donne   lui-meme  des  centaines  de  con­
ferences  a 1'Alliance  Franc;aise, .a  la  So­
ciete   Royale    ( qu'il   presida   un   certain
temps)    et  a  la  radio-dont une  cen­ taine seront  diffuses Outre-Mer. Bref, cet apotre de  la   plume   et  de  la  parole   se rend  partout ou  on  l'appelle.
Entre  temps  il publie  une foule d'arti­
cles  dans  diverses   revues,  une  brochure et  cinq  livres,  dont   un-Sur  le  Ranch de   Constantin-Weyer  ou   il   vint   a   la defense  de ses compatriotes, des Metis  et de  Louis  Riel  en  particulier -lui valut une  querelle   litteraire  qui  se  repercuta des  deux   cotes  de  1'Atlantique  pendant pres d'une annee.
£n 1941 -il a  maintenant  6o  ans­ Fremont quitte l'Ouest pour  Ottawa ou il s'occupera de  publications  et  de  radio au Service de !'Information, puis enI 947 il  passe  a   la  redaction du  Canada   de Montreal. Entre 1949 et 1951  il participe

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a une  enquete pour  la  Commission  Ro yale et  en  I959  il publie  son demier ou­ vrage,   Les  Fran ais
dien. II meurt a Montreal en  I967.
Fremont, on  l'a  vu,  s'est  prononce sur
une  multitude de  sujets  et  Chaput, par le  truchement  de  citations et  de   para­ phrases,   nous   presente  l'eventail   de  sa pensee -un  tour  de  force,  vu  l'enonne
matiere qu'elle  avait  a manier. A la  lec­
ture   suivie,  cette   partie   importante  du
livre s'etend  en longueur malgre  le ton allegre   qui  releve  le  recit.  Mais  Helene
Chaput ale don  par excellence de !'orga­
nisation, ce qui  donne   a !'ensemble une
certaine  souplesse;    on   a   vite   fait   de
trouver le chapitre et la reference  voulus. Inutile, toutefois,  de  chercher une  ana­ lyse critique, car  c'est  le  panegyrique du disciple.
Une   bibliographie detaillee de   qua­
rante-cinq pages  ci<lt le livre.  Chaput y fait  le  bilan  de  l'oeuvre entiere  de  Fre­ mont:  livres,  articles   de  revues,  manu­ scrits  de conferences et de causeries. Elle a  meticuleusement  fouille  la  critique lit­ teraire   faite  sur  les  livres  de  !'auteur et cette    liste,   dressee   chronologiquement, donne  un aperc;:u du rayonnement de son oeuvre.  Enfin,  et  surtout, dans  sept  ap­  pendices   thematiques  elle   a   recueilli,  intitule  date  et classe chacun des articles  de  jo  al
et onereux qui fixe une oeuvre ephemere. Ce   livre   merite  bien  le  Prix  Cham­
plain  qui  lui a ete deceme en  I977· Non seulement  il  permet  d'observer  !'evolu­ tion  de  la  pensee  de !'auteur, mais  aussi
il  donne   acces  a  une  tranche  d'histoire
d'un pays  en  pleine  effervescence  de  de­
veloppement. Ce  que  Fremont avait  fait pour   ses  compatriotes, Chaput  l'a   fait pour  ce  joumaliste-pionnier. Ces deux livres ajoutent une  pn cieuse
tion   aux   sources   historiques  et  sociales
qu'on  est en  train  de  recueillir  aujourd'­
hui.
SIMONE KNUTSON

166
 TURNED TRIADS

VALERIE  RAOUL,   The   French   Fictional   jour­ nal:   Fictional   Narcissism/Narcissistic   Fic­ tion.  Univ.  of  Toronto, $I 2.50.

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  Romance Series  continues its  distinguished career with  this  meticulous and  exact  study  of the sub-genre of the fictional  journal. Dr. Raoul's  book   is  a  model   of  logic  and clarity, drawing fine  discriminations among categories in  terms of  the  "sub­ jugation of one  se.t of  conventions,  those of the  diary,  to another set, those  of the novel    and   the  interference  of  each   of these' 'codes'   in   the   functioning  of  the other."
The  journal form   is seen  as  intrinsi­
cally metafictional: "the fictional  journal has  to  show  the  production of  the  writ­ ten  text   (the  diary) , as  well as  the  end
product.  Whereas the   monol ':
rieur  disguises  the  process  of wntmg .m­
volved   the   fictional    journal  emphasises
it."
gain
triadically to cover every logical and empirical  possibility.   The  gr:unma cal model    of   nominative-accusative-dative, lie
ships,  I-me-to myself, are  triangularly diagrammed, as imaged  in  mirrors  or  in the 'dedoublement' of the narrator. "The instances of  self-reading  fall  into   three main  categories"  (italics   mine). "The journal may, of course, be intended for someone by whom it is read, actually be read   by  someone  within   the   recit   for whom  it  was not intended, or be intended for   someone  who   does   not   read    it." "Three types  of  diary-novel emerge,  ac­ cording to  which  temporal aspect  is em­ phasized."
Though the  apparatus and  the  critical
dialect  are   not   as  overwhelming as  in many    books   of   this   type,   .the  reader would    be   well-advised   to   refresh    his

BOOKS IN REVIEW



memory   on   the   various   compounds  of "diegetic," all  essential  to  the  argument, in  senses  largely  derived   from  Genette's theory  of  narrative. The  'narcissism' of the   title,   incidentlly,  is  more   a   catch­ word  than  an  analytic principle.
The analyses  of texts  are  subordinated to  the  description of the  mode; any  one text   will   be  referred  to  under  several different headings. Some of these descrip­ tive sections  seem a little dry, either shorn of   examples,  or   with    the   reinforcing examples tucked   away  in  footnotes; the one  consecutive analysis, of  Chardonne's Eva, illustrates the  theory  (as intended), rather than  analyzing the text. The  works discussed  are  in  any  case of very  uneven  quality and  interest-a common danger in generic  studies.
1The  last   section   in   the   body  of  the work,  "Variants," opens  up  the  real  pos­ sibilities  of  these   analytical   devices  for criticism    of   texts:    complex   examples from   Beckett   and  Sagan   raise  problems  less convenient for  establishing the  theo­ retical   scheme   than  the   "purer" cases dealt  with  up  to  this  point,  but  for  that  very  reason,  providing a  more  challeng­ ing test of  its value.  Further development of them  might  have  given  a more  dyna­  mic  conclusion to  what, by its  nature, is a  somewhat static,  schematic topic, but essentially  the  reader is left  to follow out these possibilities  for himself.
·A slight  hint  of a sequel,  to deal  with the  apparently both   numerous and  sig­ nificant   Quebecois examples of   the  fic­ tional   journal,  raises  great  hopes,  com­ bined  with  a touch  of  regret that  a mode
by  no  means  confined  to  francophone
literature cannot be discussed in slightly more  comparative terms.  So  rigorous   is the  author's exclusion  of the  non-franco­ phone   that   she  will  not  even  name  (in her  amazingly thorough and  useful bibli­ ography  of  secondary   material  on  the fictional   journal)  the  English   and  Ger­ man   texts  that   one  critic   has  chosen  to
 compare with  Butor's L'Emploi du temps. Were  this principle made more  elastic  in the   hoped-for  companion  volume,    the basic  scheme   might   prove  helpful  with the  rich  ambiguities of,  for  instance,  As for Me and My House.
P. MERIVALE


****  ANTHONY ALPERS,  The  Life  of  Kather­ ine   Mansfield.    Viking  Press,   $16.g5.   This is  perhaps the  best  hook  on  Katherine  Mans­ field  yet  written, almost  obsessively  researched and    packed  with   interesting  and    revealing detail, not  all  of  it  well-assimilated. Yet  it  is far   from   a   perfect   book.   Alpers, himself    a New   Zealander  like   his   subject  (though  he has  long  taught at  Queen's University), pro­  duced  an  earlier  book  on  his  present subject
-Katherine   Mansfield, a   Biography-in
1953;  and   he   is  good   on   Mansfield's   New Zealand  origins and   the   claustrophobic  colo­ nial   world   in   which    she   grew   up.   But  his rootedness in  that very  society. has  made him rather obtuse   in  understanding the  expatriate phases  of  Mansfield's life  and  of  her English and   European  associations. He  has  almost no conception of  the  complexity  of   English class relations. For  example, he  talks of  Mansfield's husband,   John    Middleton    Murry,   whose father  was   a   minor  civil   servant, as   being  "proletarian" in  origin; Murry, of course,  was lower-lower-middle class,  but  D.  H.  Lawrence was  "jumped-up" proletarian, and this,  more than Alpers' suggestion of  a  frustrated  homo­ sexual    urge   on   DHL's  part,   explains   their eventual  mutual  antagonism.   Still,  Alpers  is fairer  to  Murry, and   more  understanding of the  predicament of  anyone  married to  a  way­ ward, insecure, and   dying  genius  like  Mans­ field,  than most  other  writers have   been, and  his  fairness  shines   in  comparison  with-say
-Huxley's   brutal treatment of   Murry   in Point   Counter   Point.   Having  known  Murry in  the   later years  of  his  life,   this   writer  be­ lieves  Alpers  must  be commended for  his com­  passion, to Murry and  to Katherine  alike. His pompousness  of  style   is  another   matter, and  less to be appreciated.
G.W.






CRAWFORD'S MOVE TO TORONTO

DOROTHY  FARMILOE STATES in her recent note:   "I.   V.  Crawford:  the   Growing Legend"   (Canadian   Literature,  8I,   p. I 44)   that  the date of Crawford's removal from  Peterborough to Toronto is still un­ certain. In  this  regard, I would  like  to call   the  attention  of  your  rea:ders  to  a significant  piece  of   information  that   I published (although  without calling  at­  tention  to  its  biographical  significance) in  my  note  "Crawford and  'The Fleshly School  of  Poetry'" (Studies  in  Scottish Literature,  I 3, p.  278).  This  is the  date
June  20,   1876,  when   Crawford   joined the  Toronto  Mechanics' Institute,  pre­ curser   of  the   Toronto  Public   Library. The significance  of this date  in establish­  ing  when  Crawford arrived  in  Toronto becomes  apparent  upon  considering the suggestion   by  both  Farmiloe and   Mary  F.  Ma:rtin   ("The  Short   Life  of  Isabella  Valancy  Crawford," Dalhousie  Review,
52, no. 3, p. 395)  that  Isabella  Valancy moved  with  her mother to Toronto after the  death of the  poet's  sister Emma Naiomi. Emma  died  in Peterborough on January 20, 1876, and  was buried  on January 22. That the move to Toronto occurred about four  to five months after Emma's death, close to  the  date  of June
20, 1876, is strongly  indicated by several considerations. Crawford  is  unlikely   to have  joined  the  Mechanics' Institute  be­ fore   permanently  settling   in   Toronto, some  seventy   miles  from  Peterborough. Nor,   given   Crawford's  literary  inclina­ tions   and   her  straitened  economic cir­ cumstances,  would   the  poet   have   long

r68
 delayed   gaining access  to  a  library  once she  was  in  Toronto. Thus we  can  con­ clude   with  some  confidence that  Craw­ ford  arrived in  Toronto at  some  time  in May   or   June  of   1876.   Such   a   date  squares    with    the   likelihood   that   two women  experiencing financial difficulties  in  Canada in  the  187o's  would if  at  all possible wait  for  the onset of warm  wea­ ther  before  moving to a new city.

JOHN  OWER


NEW LIGHT ON CRAWFORD'S EARLY YEARS

And  many know  full  well
The busy  busy  cell
Where I toil  at  the  work  I have  to do:
Nor  is the  portal fast
Where stand phantoms of the  past
Or  grow  the  bitter plants of darksome rue.
-Isabella  Valancy Crawford, "The Hidden Room"

WHERE  DO  A    WRITER's  images come from?  What  soil  nourished  the  "bitter plants of darksome rue" in  Isabella  Val­ arrey  Crawford's  life,  a  bitterness  that, however  modified, crept into  her poetry? In "The  Hidden Room," the  poet hints  at  revelation, then   gently   changes   the subject, leaving  us to speculate about the identity of the phantoms in her  past. She left  nothing of  a  personal nature  to sat­  isfy our curiosity-no diaries or journals, no  letters  to  or  from   friends,   no  auto­ biographies. Almost  all of what  we know of Crawford's private life while  she lived in  Paisley  and  Lakefield has  come  from handed-down accounts left  us by persons who  lived  near  her  at  that  time  but  who did  not  necessarily  know  her  well. Such reminiscences, written  years  later,   were bound   to  be  affected  by  time   and   the poet's  later  reputation, which  leaves their

OPINIONS & NOTES



objectivity  and   accuracy open   to  ques­
tion.
The picture "Antrim" gives us of  Isa­ bella  during the  Paisley  years is one of a pretty  little  girl  dressed  in  "hoop skirt of tartan  plaid   with   dainty  frilled   panta­ lettes,   beaver   cloth   coat   and  blue  satin  hat"  skipping along   beside  her equally well-dressed  parents   on   their  way   to church while  Maggie the  faithful nurse brought  up   the   rear   with   a   younger child.1  The  Crawfords  appeared  to  be affluent.   They  lived   in   a   new   house "much larger" than  most of  the other  40 dwellings  on  the main street .When death visited  the  household  to claim  one of the children-very  few  pioneer  families escaped this  experience-there were  kind  friends  and  neighbours to  help  the Crawfords  through  their   period   of  sor­ row.   From   the  first  day   to  the  last  of their  stay  in  Lakefield, insists  the  writer,  Dr. Crawford and  his family  enjoyed  the "friendship, sympathy and  regard of the villagers." This article, and  others like it, is  misleading -not  for  what   it  tells  us but   for   what   it   leaves   out.   It  evades, with  misdirected protectiveness, the start­ ling   truth  of   why   the   Crawfords   left Paisley.
A more  realistic note  appears in this Letter to the  Editor which  was published in  The Paisley  Advocate in  Ig28:

With  reference  to the late  Miss Isabella Valancy  Crawford, one of Canada's gifted poets,   who   was  a   resident   of  Paisley   70 years  ago,  and  of whom  E. S. Caswell  soli­ cits   information  regarding  the   family:    I would  like  to  say  that,  having  been  one of the  doctor's patients, I  remember  well and have  not  forgotten the  day  he  was  called from  town   to  place  shingles   on  a  broken arm  of mine.  I was  then  eight  years of age,
... I was  too  young  to  remember   any  of the doctor's troubles.2

It has been assumed, up  to now, the doctor's "troubles" consisted  of his drink­ ing and  his incompetence as a physician,  both  of which -again, this is an assump-
 tion-accounted  for the family's poverty and   the  fact   that   they   moved   a  great deal.  They  left  Paisley  in  the summer  or fall  of  I 86I 8   and   we  know  from  credit entries  in the  Sherin day  book4  that  they were in Lakefield by November of the following  year. There some of Dr. Craw­ ford's  problems were common knowledge  according to  the  anecdotes in  the scrap­ book    compiled   by    Florence   Atwood,  granddaughter of  Catharine Parr  Traill who knew the Crawfords in Lakefield:

Dr.  Crawford was the first  doctor  to reside in  Lakefield  and  from  what  I can  gather, not   a  first   class  one.   There  was  a   Mr. Squire  who  got  shot  in  the  leg while draw­ ing  his gun  from  his  canoe.  Dr.  Crawford attended him  and,  it  is said,  made  a great  bungle of it -eventually  he amputated the leg and  then  higher  up.  After a great  deal of  suffering   Mr.   Squire   died.   Mother  ... thinks  Dr.   Crawford   took   too  much  milk punch.5

("Putting it  mildly!" added Mary  Traill in  an  aside  to  the  entry.)  This  account gives  us a  glimpse  of one  of  the  "phan­ toms of the  past" in Isabella's childhood: the  alcoholism of  her  doctor-father who was  not  very  highly  regarded by his fel­ low townspeople. Now, for  the first time, another of those phantoms can  be exam­ ined,  this  time  not  through hearsay  ac­ counts  but  in  the  cold  hard  light  of evi­ dence  taken  from  the  newspaper files of I86s-67.  What the  evidence discloses  is that  Dr.  Stephen Dennis   Crawford was an embezzler  of public  funds.
Documentation  to  support  this  state­ ment  begins  with  a  writ  of  Fi Fa  dated December I 5, I 863.  The date   is  noted on  a  deed  poll   registered  at  Goderich, Ontario some  two years later:

Whereas  by virtue  of Her  Majesty's writ  of Fiere  Facias  issued   out   of  the   Court   of Common   Pleas  for  Upper   Canada in   the suit of the  Corporation of the  Township of Elderslie  against Stephen D.  Crawford, F. H. Lynch  Staunton, Enoch  C. Dowling  and Robert  Gilmour dated   the  fifteenth  day  of

169

OPINIONS & NOTES



December A.D.   1863, and   delivered  to  me the   same   day,   I was   commanded  among other  things that  of   the   lands  and   tene­ ments of  the   said   defendants in  my  Baili­  wick  I should cause  to  be made the sum  of one  hundred and nineteen pounds, nineteen shillings and  eight pence-being  the  darn­ ages   and   costs   awarded and  taxed  to  the said  plaintiffs in  the  said suit.6

It  is evident  from  this document that  the Township  of  Elderslie,  which   includes the  village  of  Paisley, was suing Dr. Crawford and   the  other defendants for the recovery of monies and damages amounting to something over $soo,  the pound   being  worth  about  five dollars  at that  time.  No transcript of the court  case has  been  found. If, as is possible,  a  cir­ cuit  judge  presided, a transcript may not have   been   preserved.  We   may   never know  all  the  details  of the  case,  but  the shock waves from  it were recorded  in the old   newspapers  of   the   era.   The   story began  to  leak  into  print  four  years  after  the doctor and  his family left  Paisley.
While   the  Crawfords were  struggling
to  establish   themselves in  Lakefield  and not  making much  of a go of it, a weekly newspaper, The  Paisley Advocate, began appearing  in  Paisley.  Scattered  among the birth  and  death announcements, cur­ rent   market  prices   and   a   sentimental poem  or  two,  were   the  minutes   of  the various    village    and    township    council  meetings. At  a  meeting held  on  March
15, r865, the  proceedings of the Elderslie Township council  contained a  reference to a report  submitted by a commission appointed sometime earlier  to investigate the  township accounts. No details  of the report   were   made  public   at  that   time, but  several  other references  to it showed up  in  the  minutes of  subsequent  meet­ ings.  During  the   council  meeting   that  took  place  on  March  15,  r865,  the  fol­ lowing motion  pertinent to the Crawford case was made:

Moved  by  Mr. Bearman, seconded by  Mr. Dobbin, that  the   Reeve be and   is  hereby
 instructed  to   communicate  at   once   with Mr. Cameron, our  solictor in  the  Crawford suit, to postpone the  sale  of the  securities' property in  satisfaction of  the  judgment on said   suit   until  the   fifteenth  day   of   June next    by   reason  of   the   distressing   circum­ stances  of   Mrs.   Dowling's   present   condi­ tion, and  in  the  meantime  that every  avail­ able  effort be  made to  satisfy the  claims of said   judgment out  of  any  portion of  Craw­ ford's property  comeatable in  the  prelnises, so far  as said  proceedings will  not  be preju­ dicial  to  the  claims   of  judgment  in  ques­ tion. Carried.7

On  April  ro,  I86s, an  interim report compiled by the  investigating committee was  submitted to  council. This account was   published  in   The  Advocate  four weeks later:

Your  committee  of   Council appointed at last  meeting to  report upon and  recommend the  most  advisable course to  pursue in  con­ nection  with    the   report  submitted   by   the  Commission appointed to   investigate  the township accounts.  1.  Having carefully ex­ amined  the   report   in  question,  your   com­  mittee  find   that   the   absence  of  necessary documents  to   pursue  the    investigation  is much  complained of  to  arrive at  any  accu­ rate  conclusion. Therefore your  committee concluded to  correspond with  the  late Treasurer, S.  C.  Crawford Esq.; the   Prov. and United Counties Treasurer and  theRe­ ceiver Generals department  for  the  purpose of  obtaining those   documents,  the  want of which is complained of;  and as much other information as  possible.
Being    now   in   receipt  of   several   docu­ ments, amongst which your  committee find  the    Collector's  Roll  of    1859,   containing valuable  information  on   the   subject, your  committee  would   recommend that  the   re­ port be  returned  to  the  Commissioners for amendment,   accompanied   by   said    docu­ ments,  with   instructions  to   make    out    a new   report  as  concise  and   pointed  as  cir­ cumstances   perlnit, for   publication at  the earliest opportunity.
In  conclusion, your  committee would  state
that in  the  event of  further documents  be­ ing   required  to  enhance  the  investigation, they   will   spare  no   effort to  comply with
the  request.
All of which is respectfully submitted, John Gillies, Chairman. B

OPINIONS & NOTES



:Two pieces of the puzzle now fit into place.  Dr.  Crawford was treasurer of Elderslie  Township (this  is firmly  estab­ lished  in  a  following quotation)   and  he evidently  went  off with  the account book or books when  he left Paisley. If we read  between   the  lines  correctly, he  later  re­ turned them  at the request  of the investi­ gating committee. It was not  unusual for record  keepers   to  take  such   documents away   with    them.    Mr.    F.   Fetherston­ haugh, church warden and  friend  of the Crawfords, disappeared from Paisley with  the records  of the Anglican Church, making  its early  history  difficult  to  trace with  any  accuracy. And  Richard Goldie, first editor of The  Paisley Advocat,e, kept only  one  copy  of  each   issue,  which   he took to Sioux  City, Iowa, when  he moved there  after   selling  the  newspaper.  How­ ever, the early  copies were later returned, most  fortunately for  us, for  they  contain the  history   being  recounted  here.
The two excerpts from  the council proceedings (the  record books have again disappeared) do  not  tell  us nearly enough  of what was going on in the background  of  the  Crawford  case.  Ap­ parently the editor of The Advocate, who was   not   native  to   the   region   having  moved   there   only  when   he  established the  newspaper, felt  the  same  way. After much  prodding and  digging  on  his part,  he  came  up  with  the  following  editorial published  in  The  Advocate, September
I 4,  I 866,  under the  caption, "Dr.  Craw­
ford's  Defalcations":

It  appears from   what   we  can   leam   that
Thomas  Orchard was treasurer in 1858 and I 859.  At   the  close  of   the  latter   year,  he desired   an   increase   of  salary,   and   threa­ tened   to  resign  if  he  did  not  get  it.  The  council  took  him  at  his word,  accepted  his resignation,   and    advertised    for    another
treasurer. Dr.  Crawford was the only appli­ cant.   He  was  appointed  to  the  office and proposed    as   his   sureties,   Messrs.   F.   L. Lynch  Staunton, Robert Gilmour and  E. C. Dowling,   who  were  accepted  as  such  and
 bonds  duly  executed. With   such  an  array of worth,  it  might  have  been  thought that the   township   was  secure   to  any  amount. But  after   two  years  service  Dr.  Crawford left  the  village,  and  it was found,  after  an investigation, that  he  was owing  the  town­ ship  something  like $5oo.  His  sureties hav­ ing   practically    repudiated   their   responsi­ bility,  the  Council  employed   a  lawyer   to sue  for  the  amount  and   after   paying   the whole  of   the   law  expenses  amounting to over  $2oo,  and  obtaining judgment  against the  parties   concemed,  the  entire   result  is that  a  lot  of land  belonging  to  Dr.  Craw­ ford  has  been  turned   over  to  the  council and   is  now  held   in  trust   by  the   lawyer. Why  it  is not  at  once  sold,  and  the  actual loss  to  the   township   from   the   default  of the treasurer and  the repudiation of their obligations   by his  sureties  ascertained, it  is for  the council  to make known.

Going  back  now to the council  minutes of  March  I 5,   I 865,  we  note   that,  al­ though the  writ  was issued  in December I 863,   the   sale  of  Dowling's   properties was ordered postponed until  June I865, due  to the  "distressing circumstances" of Mrs.  Dowling's  condition. The   circum­ stances  referred  to are  a  human interest story  in  themselves.  Enoch Dowling,  Dr. Crawford's former  friend, was ruined. Following the custom of going after  the wealthiest   bondsman,  all   his  properties
were  seized  to  satisfy   the   judgment  in the   Crawford  case.   His   holdings   were extensive.  They   are   listed   on  the   deed poll as consisting  of an  entire subdivision along  with  a number of other properties, some  on  the  main  street  of  Paisley.  All of it was seized by the sheriff  and  sold to Lewis  A. Moone, a Goderich lawyer,  for the  sum of $225.  When  we consider  that Sidney  Crawford, the doctor's wife, mort­ gaged   one  property for  $sao   (more of this   in  a   moment)  and   knowing   that  property  was  not   cheap  in  Bruce   and  Huron Counties following  the  land  rush of  the  'so's, we are  probably justified  in concluding that  some collusion  was  tak­  ing  place  behind the scenes  between  the sheriff   and  lawyer   Moone. Mrs.  Dowl-

OPINIONS & NOTES



ing's distress, referred to in the council minutes,  was occasioned by her husband's recent  death. It is thought, in Paisley, he committed suicide.9
A  few  other references   to  the  Craw­
ford affair were mentioned in The Advo cate, and  then,  at  the  regular  meeting  of the  Elderslie  Township council,  held  on April   I ,I 867, the  following  motion  was made  and  carried :

Moved by A. E. Nobel, seconded by N. McKechnie, that  the  action  of the  reeve in the sale of Dr.  Crawford's lot be confirmed.

1That  might   have  been  the  end  of  the Crawford affair as far  as the  village  was concerned, except   for  one  other   detail. In  the  fall of  I866, Mr.  W. C. Bruce was nominated  for   the   position   of   deputy reeve of Elderslie  Township. His was not an  auspicious beginning for  a  career   in politics. He  was forced  to defend  himself in   the   pages   of  The  Advocate against charges    of   election    irregularities. He denied   he  had  ordered whiskey  brought to  the   nomination  meeting;  denied   he had   been   implicated  in   a   road   grant scheme  involving fraud;  denied   he  had earlier   received   money  from  Dr.  Craw­ ford  knowing  it to be township funds.  In his   refutation  he   appended   this   note purportedly written to him  by F. Fether­ stonhaugh:

Dear  Sir:
In   a   conversation  held   some  years  since
with  Dr.  Crawford, he told me that  he was
wrongfully   accused   of  having   paid   town­
ship   money   to   you  and   that   the   money which   he  had   paid   you  was  the  proceeds
of a  mortgage, and  I think  also, as well as my  memory  serves, that  he had  some  of it from  the old country.1o

W. C. Bruce  was, among  other  things, a   moneylender.  His   advertisements in The Advocate scream  "MONEY!  MONEY! MONEY! to lend." It is possible-highly probable, even-Dr. Crawford had  bor­ rowed  money  from  him  to  maintain the style  of   living   noted   in   the   "Antrim"
 article.  Dr.   Crawford's  income,   taking into  account the  fact  that   country  doc­ tors   were   paid   mainly in   potatoes  or other farm  produce, could not have  been large -and  the  township  funds  were  at his  disposal.   In   the  suit  against   Craw­ ford,   the   township  lawyer   would   have had    no   trouble   putting  two   and   two together with those facts.
From first to last, however,  the entire episode  involving Dr. Crawford and  the township  funds  raises   more    questions than it answers.  How  much,  for example, did  the doctor's "defalcations" actually amount to?  There are  a  number of  dis­ crepancies in  the  two  separate and  very lengthy   reports compiled by  the  investi­ gating  committee and  published  in  full in  The  Advocate on  September 7,  I866. The figures  in  these  reports do  not  add  up  to the $soo quoted  by the editor  who evidently accepted the  amount set by the court. It  might   be  noted   in  Dr.  Craw­ ford's  defense  that   the  keeping  of  town­ ship   accounts  in  a  pioneer   community was  a   hit   and   miss  affair   at   best.  No audit  of  the  books was done  at  the  time they  were  handed over to him by Thomas Orchard and some of the shortages may have  been  passed  on  at  that  time.  Short of a reopening of the entire  case, we may never  know  for  sure  just  how  much  Isa­ bella  Valancy Crawford's father actually misappropriated,  but  it  seems certain he was  responsible for  some  of  the  missing funds.
'A number of the unanswered questions centre on  the  court case itself.  Was there a   trial?  Did   Dr.   Crawford  appear  in court   to  defend himself,  or  did  he  bolt and  run  before  the case was heard, leav­ ing   his   bondsmen  to   face   the   conse­ quences?  According  to   the I 905  com­ memorative  issue    of   The   Advocate (which made  no  mention of  the  scandal we  have   been  investigating)   the  Craw­ fords   left  Paisley  in  August  or  Septem­ ber  of   I86r.   The  deed  poll  was  dated

OPINIONS & NOTES



December I 5,  I 863. If these  dates  are correct, and  if  the  court  case  was  heard  between   these   two  dates,   it  looks  very much   as  if  Dr.  Crawford  did   not  wait around  to  answer   the  charges. In  any event,  the  judgment went  against him.   ' One   other  puzzling    item   connected with  the  episode  is the  $soo  Mrs.  Craw­ ford  received  for  the  property she mort­  gaged   in   March  of   I 86 I to   a   Thos.  Brighty  of  Southampton. What happened to  this sum  of money,  coincidentally the same  amount as  The  Advocate accused Dr.  Crawford  of  embezzling?  Was  this the   mortgage  money    Fetherstonhaugh maintained the  doctor gave  to Bruce?  If
Dr. Crawford-assuming his wife placed the  money  at  his disposal -had $soo  in cash,   why  were  his  benefactors not  re­ imbursed? Was  he  so deeply  in  debt  he could   not   extricate  himself   even   with that   amount?  Why  did   the   Crawfords callously   abandon  their  former  friends,  the   Dowlings? The   implications  here concerning Dr. Crawford's character are disturbing, to say the least.
Finally,    where    were   the    Crawfords
during the  winter of  I86I-62 before  they were  discovered  poorly  off  at  a  country inn   north   of  Kingston  and   invited   to move to Lakefield ?11
·As fate  would  have  it,  the  Crawfords resettled  in the  one place  in Upper Can­ ada  with  strong  ties to  Paisley.  Many  of the   Paisley   pioneers -the   McDonalds, McGregors, Balfours and  others -came originally from  the  Peterborough area.12
In her  diary,  Mrs.  Traill wrote  that  Isa­
bella  came   to  call  with   a  Miss  Valen­ tine13;  the  Valentines of   Paisley  owned the   first   mill   there.   As  the   roads   im­ proved,  there  were  bound  to  be  trips  by Paisleyites   to  visit   relatives  and   friends  "back   home." It is  my  guess  the  shock­ ing   news   of   Dr.   Crawford's  "defalca­ tions"  eventually  followed   him  to  Lake­  field  to  spell   finis to  a  career that   was already faltering.
 Did  Isabella, just entering adolescence in  I86I-62, know of her father's disgrace? She  was  an   intelligent girl;  the  family was  close-knit.   It is  difficult   to  believe she could  have  remained ignorant of the affair  for very long. She certainly experi­ enced,  along  with  the  other  members  of her  family,  the  disastrous  effects  of  her father's actions. The  few  short  reminis­ cences about  the Crawfords passed down to  us  mention  the   poverty   and   the  re­ peated  moves to ever smaller  and meaner living  quarters. These two  factors,   plus the  deaths  of a  large  number of siblings, seemed more  than  enough to account for the "sorrows" obliquely referred to in Crawford's poetry.  But  now we have another and   much   more   cogent   reason to account for  the  images  that  appear in lines like the following:

What  is there in this blossom hour should knit
An omen in with every simple word? Should  make yon willows with their
hanging  locks
Dusk sybils muttering sorrows to the air?
-"Curtius"

The  temptation is strong to analyze other  poems in the light of the disclosures above.  Except  for  those  who  believe  the poem   should   stand   alone   without  bio­ graphical  references, the   new  informa­ tion  will  help  explain the  curiously  flat air   of  dismissal   in  "His   Clay"   written just  after   the  death of   her  father. The  weaknesses  of  the  speaker in  the   poem (Dr.  Crawford)   can  be  seen  in  a  new light.
One  of the strangest aspects of Dr. Crawford's mishandling of  the  township
funds   is  the   conspiracy  of  silence  sur­
rounding   the    whole    episode    in   later years.  When   Maud  Miller   Wilson  pre­ pared   her   biographical  sketch   for  The Globe,14 she interviewed persons who had  known  the Crawfords in Paisley and  who  must   have   known   of  the   doctor's  dis­ grace.  Did none  of them  talk about  it, or

173

OPINIONS &  NOTES



was  it  Mrs.  Wilson's  decision  not  to  in­ clude  any  mention  of  it  in  her  article? The   same   questions arise  regarding the "Antrim" article. It is as  if  these  early biographers did  not  want  to darken the poet's  bright image  in  any way after  her death  by  dragging up  ghosts  from   the past.  Ghosts,   however,  usually  refuse  to stay  out  of  sight  in hidden  rooms.  They  return, in  this case not  to haunt Isabella  Valancy  Crawford's  poetry,  but  to  illu­ minate it.

NOTES

1 "Old   Paisley  Landmark   Once   Writer's Home," London Free Press (July 2, 1927), n.p.   "Antrim" was  the   pen   name of  Mrs. Annie Sutherland whose  grandfather, Sam­ uel  Rowe, built   the  large  house  the  Craw­ fords  lived  in  on  the  main  street of  Paisley.
2  R.   W.   McMorran, The   Paisley  Advocate
(November 5, 1928), n.p.
3  An  article in  a commemorative issue of The Advocate   (February    20,    1890)   states: "Early in  1861  Dr. Hill  came  to share with him   [Dr. Crawford] the  honor of  keeping the  settlement in  good  health, and  in  Sep­ tember  of   the    same   year   Dr.   McLaren. When Dr.  McLaren  came   to  Paisley,   Dr.  Crawford had  just  left."
4   The Sherin Papers in  the  Bata   Library at Trent  University list  purchases made at Sherin's store   by  Dr. Crawford in  Novem­ ber  and  December 1862.  This indicates the Crawfords were  in  Lakefield then, although the   date of  their arrival  has  not  been  de­  termined. Trent  University Archives, Sherin Papers   (B-81-002),  Day   Book   2,  5  Dec.
1862.
5  A  copy  of  the  original quotation was  sent to me by Mary Forster Martin, Brentwood Bay,   B.C.,    who    received  the   copy   in   a letter  from    Mary  Traill,  another   grand­ daughter  of   Catharine  Parr   Traill.  The present whereabouts of  the  Atwood scrap­ book  are  uncertain. Mr.  John Twist, histo­ rian   of  the   Anglican  Church in  Lakefield, assumes    they   were  sent,   on   the   death  of Miss   Florence   Atwood,  to  the   public  ar­  chives  in Ottawa.
6   A  copy   of  the   deed   poll  was  given   to  me by  Mr.  Eric Parker, chairman of  the  Pais­ ley   Heritage  Advisory Committee.  Credit for  uncovering the  story  of  Dr. Crawford's

174
 embezzlement  must   go  to  Mr. Parker. He came across  it while  going  through old newspapers and  very  generously shared the information with me.  He  also  made  avail­ able   to   me   microfilm  copies   of   the  early  issues of The Paisley Advocate.
7   The Paisley  Advocate   (May 12,  I86s),  p. (I].
8   Ibid., p.  [3].
9  This opinion was  passed   on  to  me  by  Mr. Parker who  has  extensively researched  Pais­ ley's  early  years.
1°  The   Paisley  Advocate (January  11,  1867), p.  (I].
11 The two   brothers  who   discovered the Crawfords at  the  country inn  north of Kingston  are   thought  to   be   the   sons   of Colonel Samuel Strickland, brother of Catharine Parr Traill. The incident is  con­ tained in  a  letter included with  documents collected by Frank H.  Dobbin in  the  Peter­ borough  Medical   Association   records (Peterborough, 192 1-2 2).
12  Norman Robertson, History  of the  County of Bruce  (1906), p. 367; The Bruce Coun­ ty  Historical Society is located at  Eskadale Farm, Tiverton, Ontario.
13   Entry  for   November  20,   1863.   Mr. John Twist of  Lakefield  has  a  copy   of  the  un­ published, unpaginated diary.
14   "Isabella Valancy Crawford," The   Globe
(April 22, 19o5), p. 2.

DOROTHY FARMILOE


LA MORT ET L'INHUMATION DE LOUIS HEMON

UN  TRAIN DE   MARCHANDISES   quittait la gare  du  Canadien  Pacifique a Chapleau, Ontario le  soir  du  huit   juillet   I9I3. Le
mecanicien de  la  locomotive se dirigeait vers le village  ferroviaire de White  River
situe  a quelques centaines de  kilometres
au   nord-ouest  de  Chapleau. Louis   He­
rnon,  !'auteur de  Maria  Chapdelaine, se promenait le  long  de  la  voi  ferree avec
son  compagnon de  voyage  Harold Jacl  ­
son.  Les  deux   jeunes  gens  tentaient  de

OPINIONS & NOTES



rejoindre  un   chantier  de   construction afin   d'obtenir  du   travail.  Ils  causaient quand le train  est passe dans  un virage. N'ayant  pas  eu   le  temps   de  quitter  la voie,  Hernon   et  Jackson furent  frappes par  le train  et  tues  instantanement.
A  la  suite  d'une breve  enquete  medi­ cale  et  judiciaire, le village  de  Chapleau et  la  Compagnie du  Canadien  Pacifique  ont  enterre, le dix  juillet,  les  victimes  de
!'accident  dans   les  deux   cimetieres  lo­ caux.  Louis  Hernon, ayant un  nom fran­ ais,
indigents du  cimetiere catholique de Chapleau. On  a enterre Jackson dans  le cimetiere protestant parce  qu'il  avait  un nom  anglais.  Apres  tout,  il ne s'etait  agi que   de  deux   chemineaux etrangers qui
avaient sejourne pendant quatre  jours  a
Chapleau avant leurs  morts.  Telle  fut  la
fin tragique de  Louis  Hernon, aventurier et  romancier, qui  avait   voulu  se rendre
a Winnipeg au Manitoba.
Les mysteres qui ont  circule  autour des
circonstances de  la  mort  et  de  l'enterre­
ment  de Louis Hernon ont pose des problemes aux  historiens de  la  vie et  de
!'oeuvre du  romancier. M. F. W. Osborne et  Alfred  Ayotte  ont  fait  des  recherches
sur  ces  problemes enI 938  au  cours  des celebrations  a  Chapleau  du   vingt-cin­
quieme   anniversaire de  la  mort   de  He­ rnon.  Osborne  a   publie   !'article   "How  Hernon   Died"  dans   le  Winnipeg   Free Press en   octobre,   I939·  Ayotte   et  son continuateur  Victor   Tremblay  ont   fait une etude  minutieuse et tres complete de la   question    dans   le   chapitre  XV   "A Chapleau et ses suites" qui  fait  partie  de L' Aventure  Louis H emon, ouvrage publie
en  I974·
Dans    cette   biographie  definitive    de
!'auteur de  Maria  Chapdelaine, Ayotte
et Tremblay citent et etudient plusieurs temoignages d'individus  qui   ont  eu  af­
faire   a  la  mort   et   a l'enterrement. Ils
analysent de  plus,  la  correspondance de
la  famille   Hernon  qui  se  rapporte  aux
 
obseques de Louis. Malheureusement, Ayotte  et Tremblay n'ont pu  terminer, a
la fin de leur  biographie, l'etude de quel­
ques  details   sur  la  mort   du   romancier. Alfred   Ayotte   est   mort    avant    d'avoir
complete  ses recherches. II existe a la fin
de L'Aventure Louis Heman quelques lacunes et obscurites quant a la redaction de  l'acte  de  deces  et  quant .a !'emplace­
ment  exact  de  la  tombe  de !'auteur. Cet article   tentera de  preciser,  de  completer et   d'eclaircir  quelques-unes  de   ces   la­ cunes et de ces obscurites.
Dans  les dernieres pages de L'Aventure
Louis  Hernon, Victor Tremblay declare
que le texte  redige  par  Ayotte  se termine brusquement. II pose  par   la  suite,   des questions   au  sujet   des  demarches faites par  Felix Hernon, le pere  de Louis, apres la  mort   de  son  fils.  Tremblay cite  une lettre   de  Monsieur Hernon   qui  indique que  ce dernier ne comprenait pas claire­ ment  toutes  les circonstances qui  ont  eu lieu  au  cours  des  funerailles de  Louis.1
Dans   cette   lettre   du   4  fevrier  I 9I 6
provenant de Paris et adressee  au Consul general  de France a Montreal, Monsieur
Felix Hernon  declare que:
mon  fils Monsieur  Louis  Hernon  est  mort
... le 8 juillet  1913 pres de Chapleau  (On­ tario)  ... II  a  peri  en  meme  temps  qu'un jeune  homme  nomme  Harold  Jackson.
Le   Ministere   des   Affaires   Estrangeres nous  a  rernis  copie  de  l'acte   de  deces  de mon  fils, et  M. Sheahan, coroner  de Chap­ leau,  nous a envoye egalement un  certificat  de son deces.2
Monsieur  Hernon   ajoute dans   sa  lettre au  consul  que  le docteur Sheahan s'etait
mis  a la  disposition de  la  famille  "pour
faire  eriger   une  tombe   au  cimetiere de
Chapleau."3     II n'a    malheureusement jamais  obtenu de reponse  du  coroner qui avait   examine  les  corps  de  Louis  et  de
Jackson  pendant l'enquete  judiciaire.
Par  consequent, Monsieur Hernon a tente  d'entrer en  communication avec  le Pere   Gascon,   le   cure    de   l'Eglise    du Sacn -Coeur

I75

OPINIONS & NOTES


cede  a la  ceremonie religieuse  des  fune­ railles  de  Louis.  Il  resume  la  reponse  du cure  comme  suit:

Le  Pere  Gascon   nous  repond ... qu'on   ne retrouve  pas l'acte  de deces de mon fils sur les registres  de  l'etat civil de  Chapleau, et qu'il  est  impossible  de connaitre !'emplace­ ment exact de Ia tombe.4

Le  pere  de  Louis  affirme  qu'il   ne  peut pas comprendre cet  etat  de  fait  puisque les  certificats de  deces  qu'il  detenait de la  part  du  Ministere des Affaires  Etran­ geres et  du  coroner Sheahan indiquaient que  Chapleau etait   le lieu  de sepulture.
En  terminant sa  lettre,  Monsieur  He­
rnon avoue qu'il  trouve ces difficultes penibles.   Il   se  demande d'ou   pourrait venir le probU:me:

Peut-itre  Ia  difficulte   provient-elle  de  ce qu'on    aurait  enterre  mon   fils  en   meme temps que  Harold  Jackson.s

Il  avait  fait  ces  demarches, explique-t-il au   consul,    parce    qu il   voulait    qu'un monument   funeraire  fllt   erige   sur   la tombe de Louis.6
Victor Tremblay fait les remarques suivantes sur  le  contenu de  la  lettre  de Felix Hernon:
 
Pacifique avec la lettre qui accompagnait le  manuscrit de  Maria  Chapdelaine. Le jeune  ecrivain avait  adresse  ce manuscrit au   journal   Le   Temps  deux   semaines avant sa mort.8  La  pierre tombale qui  se trouve sur  la  fosse de  Louis  a  ete  posee
en  1920  par  la  Societe  St. Jean-Baptiste de   Montreal  a  l'endroit  du   cimetiere
catholique de  Chapleau  indique  par   le Pere  Gascon  et  ses souvenirs personnels. La  documentation recherchee par  Mon­ sieur   Felix   Hernon    n'a   jamais  ete   de­  couverte.
L'auteur de cet article  a essaye de resoudre les problemes mentionnes plus haut par  Ayotte  et  Tremblay en  faisant
recemment  des  recherches  a  Chapleau.
Il  a  examine les  registres  mortuaires du
village  de  Chapleau, de  l'eglise  unie Trinity et  de  l'eglise  anglicane St. John's afin  de  verifier  si les noins  de  Louis He­ rnon  et  de  Harold Jackson y  etaient  ins­ crits.  Les  registres   de  l'eglise  catholique du  Sacre-Coeur ont ete verifies pour  voir si le  nom  de  Louis  Hernon  avait  ete  en­  registre.
L'administration  du   village   de  Cha­
pleau  n'a  pas inscrit  les morts  de Hernon et   de   Jackson  dans   les  archives   de   la


Le silence  du  medecin   (Sheahan) est  pour
 mairie.9
 Selon   Monsieur  W.   Simpson,

le  moins   etrange;  quant   a !'absence   de l'acte   d'inhumation  dans  le  registre  d'etat civil   de   Chapleau,   elle   est   bien   vraie, comme ecrit  le cure  Gascon  et comme nous
l'avons   constate,  mais  elle  est  due  a  une
negligence  de  Ia part  de celui-ci ... 7

Le Pere  Gascon  avait  le devoir  d'inscrire l'enterrement dans  le registre  d'etat civil selon Tremblay. La  famille  Hernon  avait done  raison  d'etre etonnee et  de  rien comprendre aux  evenements qui  avaient
eu lieu a Chapleau.
1Monsieur  Hernon   n'a   jamais  reu
reponse  satisfaisante de  la  part   du  cure
Gascon.  Il  a  du  prouver de  fa<;on sure l'identite  de  sons  fils  en  confrontant  a
Paris,  des  ecrits  trouves  sur  la  personne de Louis  par  la Compagnie du Canadien

q6
 greffier   adjoint  de   Chapleau  en   1976,
c'etait la responsabilite du coroner ou du
medecin et non celle du  pasteur religieux d'envoyer  les  renseignements  necessaires
a la mairie. Le greffier devait  par  la suite
transcrire ces renseignements, accompag­
nes de  la signature du  medecin en  ques­ tion,  dans  les registres  locaux. Enfin,  tout  cela  devait   etre  transmis au  Bureau   des Archives   provinciales des  actes  de  l'etat
civil  pour  la   province d'Ontario  a
Toronto.
Les  registres   mortuaires de  la  mairie du village de Chapleau contiennent les rubriques suivantes: Nom,  Raison  de  la mort,  Certificat medical. Beaucoup d'en­ registrements trouves dans le Livre Deux,  I909-I922 portent  la  signature  du  doc-

OPINIONS & NOTES



teur   J.  J.  Sheahan,  le  medecin   qui   a examine les  depouilles mortelles   de  He­ rnon  et de  Jackson. On  peut  trouver  des inscriptions de  mortalite qui  se  rappor­ tent   aux   mois  de   juin,   juillet  et  aout,  Igi3.  Plusieurs   morts   causees   par   des accidents  sont  notees  soigneusement entre   les  annees   I gog  et  lg I7.  II  existe meme  un enregistrement anonyme inscrit en   I g I I   intitule:  "Homme  inconnu­ Tue  sur  la  voie ferree  par  un  train."10
Ces recherches des archives mortuaires de Chapleau indiquent clairement que le
docteur J. J. Sheahan, medecin pendant
l'enquete  medicale de  Louis   Hernon,   a
neglige  de completer toutes  ses fonctions. C'etait son devoir  et non celui du Pere Gascon   d'adresser la  documentation  re­ quise   au   bureau  des  registres   de  l'etat civil du  village.  II se peut  alors, que cette erreur  de  detail   commise   en   I g I 3,  ex­ plique   le  silence  du  medecin  envers   les demandes  repetees de  M.  Felix Hernon  entre 1gi3 et  Igi6.
Personne ne soupc;onnait  que Louis Hernon  deviendrait un  romancier celebre apres  sa mort.  Chapleau n'etait au  debut du   vingtieme  siecle,  qu'une  gare  d'em­ branchement ferroviaire perdue  dans  Ia foret   boreale   du   nord   de   la   province
d'Ontario.11    Plusieurs    personnes   mou­ raient  avec  violence  au  cours d'accidents de  chemin   de  fer  dans  cette  region.  La Compagnie du  Canadien  Pacifique, avec
!'assistance  du   coroner  Sheahan,  avait
averti   Ia  famille   Hernon de  la  mort  de
Louis.   Le  verdict  de  l'enqete  medicale avait   ete   envoye   a  M.   Felix   Hernon. Quant a eux,  Ia mort  d'un vagabond  in­
connu  avait  peu  d'importance et la ques­
tion fut vite oubliee.
Le    Pere    Gascon,    qui   selon   Victor
Tremblay avait eu  Ie devoir  d'inscrire le nom  de Louis  Hernon dans  le registre  de l'etat civil  de  Chapleau, n'a  pas, d'autre part,   enregistre le  nom  du  defunt dans les dossiers  de  sa  paroisse.  Une  verifica­ tion   des  livres  d'enregistrement   parois-
 siaux   met   ce  fait   en   evidence.12   C'est dans  l'exercice  de  cette  fonction que  le Pere Gascon a manque d'assiduite. D'apres le  Pere  Dube,   pretre  paroissial de  l'eglise  du   Sacre-Coeur  en   I 976,  il n'existe   aucun  acte   de   sepulture  pour Louis  Hernon.
Enfin, !'auteur de  cet  article a  scrute
les registres  des deux  eglises protestantes de Chapleau pour  voir, surtout, si les pasteurs   de   l'epoque  avait    documente
!'inhumation de Harold Jackson, le com­ pagnon   de  Louis.  Comme  nous  l'avons  dit,  les autorites du  Canadien  Pacifique  et  du  village  de  Chapleau  avaient  fait enterrer  les   deux    hommes   en   meme temps.  II s'agissait  d'etablir  un  lien  pos­ sible entre  les deux  evenements.13
Qui   etait   le  nomme   Harold  Jackson qui fut  tue avec !'auteur de Maria Chap­ delaine?  Personne   ne  sait  ou  et  quand Louis  a  rencontre ce  compagnon.  Allan McAndrew  a  fait   mention  de  Jackson dans  son  livre  sur  la  vie  et  !'oeuvre de
Louis  Hernon,  publie  a Paris  en  1g36.14
II  n'a  pas  donne de  precisions.  D'apres
Ayotte et Tremblay, les dossiers du Cana­ dien   Pacifique   sont   demeures   presque  muets  sur cet homme.  On  le disait  d'ori­ gine   australienne.15    Jackson   parlait  un franc;ais  appris au  Canada. D'apres un des villageois de Chapleau interviewe par Alfred  Ayotte,  le  compagnon de  Hernon  connaissait   les  villes  de  Montreal et  de Quebec  et   en   plus,   la   region   du   Lac Saint-Jean:

C'etaient deux   types   (Hernon et  Jackson)
du  meme  calibre, faits   pour  s'entendre.16

II n'existe  aucune mention de la sepul­ ture  de Harold Jackson  dans  les registres paroissiaux de  l'eglise  unie  Trinity17  ou dans  ceux   de   l'eglise   anglicane  St.  John's18  les deux  eglises  protestantes qui
se   trouvaient   a   Chapleau   en    lg I 3·
D'apres  Ie  Reverend  lvey,   pasteur  de
l'eglise  St.  John's en   I976,  il  etait  pos­
sible d'inhumer un  individu, sans un ser-

OPINIONS & NOTES



vice confessionnel, dans le cimetiere  pro­ testant.19   II  se  peut   alors   que   Harold Jackson ait  ete  enterre   par  un  laic.  De toutes  fa ons,
est presque detruite par  l'oubli. Personne
n'a  erige de monument sur sa tombe  dans le cimetiere protestant de Chapleau. Seul le   fait   d'avoir  ete   le  dernier  ami  de
!'auteur  de  Maria  Chapdelaine  nous  le
rappelle aujourd'hui. Ainsi, la  poursuite du  rapport possible entre les enterrements des  deux  hommes,  mentionne par  Mon­ sieur  F. Hernon  dans  sa lettre  au consul, ne jette  aucune lumiere sur !'inhumation de Louis.
Faute  de   documents  de  sepulture a
Chapleau, on peut  conjecturer que Louis Hernon  et Jackson, etant  des indigents inconnus, ont  ete ensevelis dans  les fosses communes du  cimetiere  catholique et du cimetiere protestant.20    11 existe  en  effet un  bon  nombre de  ces fosses sans  signes d'identite dans  les deux  cimetieres. Une serie de fosses anonymes  et sans delimita­ tions  precises se trouvent a la gauche de la  tombe  de  Louis  Hernon.  Aucun  plan de  !'ancien  cimetiere  catholique n'a  ete dresse   par    les   autorites  religieuses   de l'eglise du Sacre-Coeur. Puisque  la pierre tombale  que  l'on  trouve  de  nos jours sur la  fosse  de  !'auteur de  Maria  Chapde­ laine a eue situee  d'apres les remoignages de  l'abbe Gascon; il se  peut   en  conse­ quence, qu'on l'ait  posee au  mauvais en­ droit.  De  plus,  il  est  tout  a  fait  possible qu'on ait  enterre Louis Hernon  dans  une fosse qui  contenait les restes  d'une autre personne. On  inhumait  souvent,  a la  fin du   dix-neuvieme  siecle  et  au  debut  du vingtieme siecle  dans  le  nord  de  la  pro­ vince   d'Ontario,  deux  ou   trois  chemi­  neaux  dans  une seule fosse.21
·En somme,  les rapports qui  documen­ tent   la  mort   de  Louis  Hernon   sont  de caractere  prive   plutot    que   public. D'abord, A.  McAndrew a  cite  en  rg36, la traduction du verdict  redige en anglais  par  le coroner Sheahan et la Compagnie
 du  Canadien Pacifique. II a puise le texte de  ce  rapport classique  dans  !'article de D.   Potvin   intitu1e   "La   MausoJ.ee   He­ rnon,"  publie  en  aoO.t rgrg  dans  Le Ter­  roir de Quebec.22   Ensuite, Alfred  Ayotte a  decouvert et  verifie  le restant  des  rap­ ports  composes   au  Canada  sur  la  mort  de  Hernon dans  les bureaux  de  la  Com­ pagnie   du   Canadien  Pacifique .a  Mon­ treal.23  Ces  documents  font   partie   des dossiers prives de la compagnie.
La  mort  et l'enterrement de Louis He­ rnon   n'ont  pas   ete   documentes   d'une maniere formelle  et  rigoureuse au  Cana­ da   par   les  autorites   responsables.  Les archives publiques et  paroissiales  du  vil­ lage  de  Chapleau,  tout  en  ne  devoilant rien  au  chercheur  qui   veut   preciser   les circonstances de !'inhumation de Hernon, mettent   en   lumiere  les   faits   suivants. D'une  part,   l'abbe   Romeo  Gascon    a neglige  d'inscrire l'enterrement de  Louis Hernon    dans    les   registres    mortuaires paroissiaux.  D'autre   part    et   de   plus grande importance, le manque  d'inscrip­ tion  dans   les  registres  de  l'etat civil  de Chapleau  provient non  pas  de  la  negli­ gence  du  Pere  Gascon,  mais  de  celle  du
docteur  J. J.  Sheahan, coroner de   la
region.   Puisque   le  medecin  Sheahan  a
manque d'application,  le  gouvernement de  !'Ontario n'a   pas  enregistre la  mort de  Louis  Hernon dans  les  archives  pro­ vinciales.24
Les   particularites  de   la   mort   et   de
!'inhumation de  Louis  Hernon  demeure­ rant  sans doute  a  jamais obscures  et con­ testables.  Cependant, cette fin mysterieuse  convient  tout   a  fait  a  la  vie  de  Louis, aventurier taciturne que l'inconnu attirait et  qui  aimait etre en route.  On  n'a  qu'a lire  la  biographie  d'Alfred  Ayotte  et  de Victor Tremblay, les deux  chercheurs qui n'ont  pas  eu  le  temps  de  determiner la negligence du  docteur Sheahan, si l'ont  veut  se  renseigner sur  l'existence fort  in­ teressante de !'auteur de  Maria Chapde­ laine.

OPINIONS & NOTES



NOTES

1  Alfred  Ayotte  et Victor  Tremblay, L'Aven­ ture   Louis   Heman  (Montreal:   Editions  Fides, 1974), pp. 372-73·
2    Ibid.,  p. 372.
3 Ibid.,  p. 372.
4  Ibid.,  p. 373·
5   Ibid.,  p. 373·
6   Ibid.,  p. 373·
7  Ibid.,  p. 373·
8   Ibid.,  p. 374·
9   Births, Marriages, Deaths, Book Two, 1909-
1922,  Town  of  Chapleau, District  of  Sud­
bury, Chapleau, Ontario.
10  On  peut  trouver   d'autres inscriptions  ano­ nymes ou quasi-anonymes dans  les  registres de Chapleau. Elles sont  souvent  accompag­  nees  du  nom  du  medecin  qui  a  certifie  Ia mortalitk    en   question.  Louis   Hernon   et Harold    Jackson    port.aient   avec   eux   des documents d'identire quand  ils sont  morts. II est   alors   surprenant   que   leurs   noms n'aient  pas  ere   inscrits   dans   les  registres publics  de  Chapleau en  1913.
u Le   village   de   Chapleau,   demeure  meme de  nos  jours  un endroit isole. II est situe le long  de  Ia  voie  ferree   du  Canadien  Paci­ fique   entre    Sudbury,  Ontario  et   White River   (pres  du  Lac  Superieur),  Ontario.
12 Registre   des  baptemes,   mariages   et  sepul­
tures,  Volume   III, Ie  22  octobre,   191 1-le
30  decembre,   191 7, Eglise  du  Sacre-Coeur de Chapleau, Ontario.
13 M.   Felix   Hernon    avait   signale   dans   sa Iettre de 1916 au consul de France que ses difficultes  seraient   peut.etre  provenues  du fait  qu'on  aurait enterree son fils en  meme temps que  Harold  Jackson.
14  Allan  McAndrew, Louis  Heman, sa vie  et son  oeuvre    (Paris:  Jouve   et  Cie,   1936), pp. So et 81.
15 Ayotte et Tremblay, p. 345·
16   Ibid.,  p. 352.
17 Church  Record   Book,  1911-1917,   Trinity
United  Church, Chapleau, Ontario.
18  Church Records,    1911-1917,  St.   John's
Anglican  Church, Chapleau, Ontario.
19 "II n'y   avait   pas   de   cimetiere    public   a
Chapleau  en   1913.  Le  nouveau   cimetiere
de  Chapleau a ere  fonde  en  1936."
 2o  "L'ancien  cimetiere   protestant est  situe  a cote  de !'ancien cimetiere   catholique dans Ia  partie  est  du  village  de  Chapleau,  pres de Ia riviere Nebskwashi."
2 1 Vincent  Crichton, Pioneering  in  Northern Ontario, History  of the  Chapleau   District (Belleville:     Mika    Publishing    Company,
'975), p. 3'4·
22   Allan McAndrew, p. So.
23  Ayotte et Tremblay, pp. 358-65.
24  Office  of  the  Registrar  General,   Province of  Ontario, Search   Notice   201452,  Index
-Death,  Period    1911-12-13-14-15,  Gov­ ernment    of   Ontario,  April    18th,   1977, Toronto, Ontario.

BERNARD LANGDON-LEMIEUX






DRUMMOND -THE LEGEND & THE LEGACY

ON APRIL   8,  I907, in its obituary tribute to Dr. William  Henry  Drummond, The Montreal  Daily  Star  cites   "the   quaint humor and  tender pathos of his poems."1
That  summary phrase,   with   one  major exception,  typifies almost  the complete canon   of  critical  analysis   devoted  to  a poet    (I854-I907)   whose   dialect   verse was read  with  interest and  delight  in the United States,   England, and,  according to the  newspapers, across  the  length  and breadth of Canada. The sensitivity of the interest   and   the   nature  of  the  delight were not an  issue to Anglo-Saxon readers in   Drummond's era;  they   were   eager, from  all  reports, for  the  habitant  stereo­ type. At a Drummond reading in  Massey Hall,  December 20,  rgos, President Lou­  don  of  the  University  of  Toronto "said he would  rather be the author of 'Johnny Courteau' than   the owner  of  the  richest silver mine in Cobalt." To  be sure, Louis Frechette, the best-known of the French-

179

OPINIONS & NOTES



Canadian  poets,   assured   readers   (in   a French Introduction to Drwrunond's first volume)    that   Drummond's  representa­ tion  of "my  unlettered  compatriots" was "accurate"  and    without   "the    faintest stroke  of the  caricaturist."  Moreover, he went  on  to say that  Drummond "cannot fail   to  benefit   them   [the   habitants] - and    consequently  their   countrymen­ with  a most  desirable increase  of esteem on  the  part   of  our  English  compatriots who  have  not  studied  them  so clearly  as Dr. Drummond."
In   retrospective  view,  however,  Fre­
chette's leap  of esteem from  habitant "consequently" to  all  French-Canadians is surely suspect; the Montreal Star's obituary tribute labels Drummond the "Poet Laureate of French  Canadians," a designation that  obliterates in one phrase the work  of Frechette and  all his French compatriots. Toronto's Mail and Empire obituary comment praises Drummond's receptivity "to the silent appeal of a primitive   people" -i.e.,   French-Cana­ dians.  And  the  New  York  Evening  Sun managed to extend  the  pejorative sweep slightly  by its declaration that Drummond put  into  his  books  "everything that  was characteristic of the  most interesting side of the  old  life  of the  Dominion."
About  Drummond's 'close study'  of the habitant, even  the contemporaneous obit­ uary   articles express  divergent  opinion.  The   Montreal  Star,  whose  editor   had been a friend  of the  poet, noted  that  Dr. Drummond's medical  practice had  been in  Montreal  mostly,  that  his scant  coun­  try   experience    "was  not    among    the French-Canadians but  among  the  High­ land  Scottish."

He   spent   some   time   among   the   lumber camps  and  in  the  woods, but  it is said  that in  those  places  he  did  not  come in contact with   the   people   he   described   with   such perfect   fidelity.  Therefore, it  must  be  said that   Dr.  Drummond,  like  all   true   poets, was inspired.

r8o
 In  far-off  England, nonetheless, the Lon­ don   Spectator   was   able   to   inform   its readers: "Both   the  matter of  his poems and   the   manner  of  their  diction  were collected and  collated  during the  never­  ending  journeys   of   a  country-doctor  in Quebec." And  in Boston, an  unidentified newspaper declared : "They [the  poems]  were  originally  scribbled   on  a  block  of paper  held  on  the  author's knee,  often  by a campfire ... "
Irrespective  of   the   way   .they  came about,   the    responses    to   Drummond's
poems  and  to the stereotype of the habi­ tant   were  overwhelmingly  positive.  The Boston  newspaper that evoked  the camp­ fire  muse   was  basically  accurate in  re­ porting:  "later, begged,  borrowed or pur­ loined   by  friends,  many   of  them    [the poems]   drifted  into   print  and   became  popular  without the  author's name  and  with  no  trace  of their  parentage. It was the  poet's  wife  who  carefully  collected  all  these  earlier  poems ... and  so  made possible  one  of  the  best-selling   books  of poetry  in recent  years."
The  popularity of  the  poems  encour­ aged   public comment which in its breadth of   enthusiasm  tends   to   reveal  various  biases  of  the  time  that  otherwise would be unnoticed or unrecorded. Surprisingly, however,    the  summation  of  the   poet's  significance for  his own  era,  and  perhaps ours,  is  generally consistent throughout an  amalgam of  Drummond's press  clip­ pings,  the  unpublished biography of  his wife,  and   the  most  sustained academic analysis  of Drummond's verse  (by  R. E. Rashley in  the  Dalhousie Review, 1949).
Perhaps it was the  sheer  popularity of
the   poems   that    preserved   them    from what   seems  now  to  be  the  questionable associations of their  exponents. The Folk­ lore  Club of  Montreal, for  example, for its meeting of January  I6, 1896, matched "Dr. Drummond's  reading of seven  new poems" with  a "Dr. Johnson" (Montreal Star)    talking   "on   superstitions  of   the

OPINIONS & NOTES



Negro  race" in Africa  and  Jamaica. In a brief report, the  Montreal Herald  said: "Every distinctive trait and  characteristic of   this   people    [the  French-Canadian] was  shown   to  perfection by  Dr.  Drum­ mond   and  splendidly rendered."  As for the  talk  by "Dr. Johnston" [sic]  the sub­ headline told  of "caterpillars a  favourite diet,  and   the  doctor had   to  eat  them." Further  afield,   an   example  of   selective reading provides  an  interesting imperial­ istic inversion  of  "The Habitant's Jubilee Ode." In  the  poem,  the  habitant advo­  cates   regarding   England   as   a   foster mother:  "Is   it  right   you  don't call  her moder,  is it right  you don't love her too?" A British  comment in a letter, from  Lees Knowles,  in the Cambridge Review, is reprinted in  Toronto's The World, June r6, rgo7:   "The poem which,  I think, appealed to us most  was 'The Habitant's Jubilee Ode' which  beautifully describes the   kindly   feeling   of  England  towards the   French-Canadians.... " Selectivity of   another  kind    is   practised   by   the Boston  Globe  which,  for  a conclusion to its obituary feature, believed  it  fitting  to quote   the   kindly   feelings   of  one  of  its feature writers who  had  once  toured Quebec's habitant area  and  reported the praise   of  a  village   priest,  an   Irishman, for Drummond:

No other  man has ever pictured the real habitant, no one has understood the simple, trusting, childlike  nature  of  these  people, their  love of the  river,  the  rapids,  the  birds, and   all  the   beautiful  things   about   them. Those   poems  have  been  an  inspiration to me. I know  them  by heart,  every  one, and I'll  venture to  say  that   you  can't   visit  the room of a village priest  throughout the province  of Quebec without finding  Dr. Drummond's poems somewhere about the place.

What  in 1907  the  Globe  omitted was the distinction that   its writer, Ellene  Foster, had  made  in the  original article six years earlier   (April ro,  rgor), a  distinction between   the   picture of  "the real  habi-
 tant" she  obtained in  her  pleasant tour of  rural   Quebec and   the  experience of the French-Canadians "who find employ­ ment  in  the  factory towns  of  New  Eng­  land." Of  these  latter, she says:

We  have studied  his characteristics, we are familiar  with  his patois,  and  when  the habitant is mentioned   we shrug  our  shoul­ ders. Ah, that  is where  we are mistaken,  for as   widely   different    as   the   time-honored chalk  is from  the  cheese  are  the  habitant and  the  French-Canadian in  our  mills.

A gloss on the  village  priest's view of the habitant, as quoted by Ellene  Foster,  is provided, for  those  who  wish  it,  by  an­ other   Irish   priest,   "Rev. Father  Frank O'Sullivan" who  told  the  Catholic  Lite­ rary  Association  of  Peterborough:

The   French-Canadian  farmer  belongs   to the  good  old  Catholic stock  that  came  out with  Champlain ... He  may  not  know very much,   it   is  true,   about    geometry,   trigo­ nometry, zoology and  the  other  ologies that  our   Ontario  educationalists   try   to   cram into  children's heads  before  they  can  read and  spell, but  I will venture  to say that  he can  tell  more  about  God  and  his own  im­ mortal  soul, and  say his prayers  better, 1han many  a  graduate  of   our  Collegiate  Insti­ tutes.2

A  politician-journalist  of  the   time   is one  of  the  few  commentators to  betray some sensitivity, initially at least, to the French fact.  In  a column in the Toronto Sunday World   (January 2,  r8g7), about Drummond's first volume,  The Habitant, he begins:

I do  not  know  that   all  my  French-Cana­ dian   fellow-countrymen   will   give  me   the credit  of being  more  than  friendly  to  their  race  and   a  lover  of   their   province.   They  have   seen  me  and   others   with   me,  from the   English   provinces,  opposing   the   pas­ sage   in   Parliament  of   an   act   regarding education  coercive  of Manitoba.

Before  getting  to his review,  however,  he says, "let  me  tell a story"-a story, as it turns   out,   about  meeting a  New   Eng­ lander  on  a  sleeper   train  to  Montreal who   said   he  liked   "Lower  Canada ...


181

OPINIONS &  NOTES



because   you  can  get   there  a  sixteenth­
century civilization with  a feudal  service
... The people  are  so different and  yet so hospitable and  friendly." rJbe  writer, one "W.F.M." goes on blandly:

The  statement, 'a sixteenth-century with  a feudal  service'  was certainly  a  striking  off­ hand  deliverance and  made  a great impres­ sion  on  me,  partly   by  reason  of  its  force, partly  as confirming my own  observations.

Drummond's  focus  on   the   habitant, whether  as   feudal    or   angelic,   was   a breakthrough in  Canadian literature. As the  Globe  of  Toronto said  on  February I 6, I 8gg  (and  as Professor  R. E. Rashley
would  argue more  extensively  and  speci­
fically fifty years later)  :

he  succeeds   in   making   a  most  charming picture  of   materials   hitherto  despised   as far as literary  purposes are concerned. His habitant speaks  the  broken  English  dialect, helplessly and hopelessly incorrect  in its grammar and  syntax,  but  in  the  hands  of Dr.   Drummond  an   admirable  instrument for  the  realistic  delineation of  the  charac­ ter of his types.
That Drummond's characters were  types
-special   cases   in particular   circum­ stances-and not   the   type  of   French­ Canada  was  discerned more  readily   in Quebec than  elsewhere  in  the world.  An editorial  in  the  News  and   Advocate  of St.  Johns, Quebec   (February  3,  18gg), noted:

Dr. Drummond has given us a type, but a passing  type. It is local and  temporary, and is  dependent  upon   boundary    and   atmo­ sphere   and   environment. It  is  fascinating to a  degree,  and  we owe the  doctor  a debt of   gratitude   for    his    charming   studies, which  are  at  once  whimsical  and  pathetic and  undeniably veracious.

The  editorial  writer    proceeds   to   find fault   not  with  the  potential for  miscon­ ception    in   Drummond's   portraits  but with  their  regional  limitations:

What   we  should   seek  for   is  the   abiding type  which  will stand  for the  vital  features of  a  single  nationality. How  long  must  we
 wait for this conunon type which, whether limned  in  prose and  verse, shall be instantly and   universally   recognized  as  standing for what  is essentially  Canadian! Are  we  sing­ ing  localities  while  awaiting that  amalgam  which    shall    create    the    strong   national  figure ... -courageous, facing  the  future with   confidence,    containing   within    itself the   best   features  of   the   Celtic   and   the Anglo-Saxon, and  illustrating, in  physique and  mentality, the  grandeur of our  moun­ tains,   the   poetry   of  our   lakes  and   rivers, the wholesomeness,  (moral  as well as physi­ cal), of our  bracing  climate!

This  nationalist opposition to "singing localities" was,  one  suspects,   not  wide­ spread; Goldwin Smith's  comment  in  a letter    to   Drummond    (July  I 6,   I go2) gives   the   counter-view.   After   praising Drummond's poetry  for its creation of interest  in   a   small   nationality,  Smith says:   "I believe  in  variety  and  free  de­ velopment,   not    in   having   everything rolled  flat."3
Comments   in    the    French-language
press  of  the  time  focus  much  more  pre­ cisely on  the  linguistic and   racial  issues. "Mme.  Dandurand"   in    La    Patrie (December I5,  Igoi) saysofthehabitant characters of Drummond:

There is,  it  seems,  this  fear   that   the  lan­ guage  used  by them  will  by its  nature  cre­ ate   for   outsiders   a  false  impression.   This very  special  language is  confined  to  a  par­  ticular group  in  our  population  (which  is) merged  in common  employment  with  work­ ers  of  the  English  race  lacking  the  abil.ity or  the  will  to  understand  the  French   laTJ­ guage.  (my  translation)

The point,  obvious  but  unacknowledged in  the  English   press,  is still  not  pressed home   here:  the   habitant-"unable to read   his  own   language," as  Frechette's Introduction says,  "helplessly  and  hope­ lessly incorrect" in  English  as  the Globe said -nonetheless   had    learned   to  be understood  by   his   Anglo   companions, whereas  the   Anglo   incompetence  was total.  From  this,  Mme. Dandurand ulti­  mately   draws  the   conclusion  that   "cet

OPINIONS  & NOTES



idiome   batard" is  a   victory   of  a  kind since it has invaded and  "crippled the language of the conqueror":
This  jargon  has for  the  ear  a strange  fasci­ nation   and   a  certain  musical  fantasy  and parody.   It   has  the  attraction  of  the  com­ edy   of   travesty.    It  should   be   said   that  nothing in  the  world  is  less  classical.  Now the   extraordinary  vogue   of   the   books  of M.  William  H.  Drummond  in  the  United  States  as well as in  Canada  causes some of us to fear  lest everyone impute to the  mass of French  people in  the province  of Qm•bE'c that  bastard  idiom.
Sincerely   we  believe  there  is  no  place  for alarm  on  that  subject. The  crippling of the language  of  the  conqueror-after  a  cen­ tury    and   a   half   of   contact-by    Jean·  Baptiste   Canayen,  marks   instead   the   in­ alienability  of  his  French   spirit,  his  faith­ ful attachment to the speech of his brothen:.

Mme.  Dandurand sees Drummond's work as an  attention-getter: for  the  French in North America, and, therefore, an opportunity for  New  France writers to extend   the  Anglo-Saxon's education:
r
nie  Courteau call  to American   attention 1
the  existence  of  the  French-Canadian  peo­
ple.  Since  the  days  when  the  name  of  the
French-Canadian nation  rang in the four corners  of  the  continent like  a  thunderbolt
which   accompanies  the  light  of  a  formid­ able   sword,   there   has   been   a   period   of obscurity.    Our    ancient    rivals   may   have thought  that  we  also  had  sunk  into  obscu­ rity  or  had  been  assimilated.  The   wall  of forgetfulness  and    indifference   which   the years   have   raised   between   us   and   them, M.  Drummond  attacks   with   a   noble  ges­ ture.   The   popular  stories   of   New  France  open   hearts    for   us,   conquer   sympathies for  us. The  breach  is  now open; it is for  us to enlarge  it. It is for  us of the French  with our   works  and   our  masterpieces  to  follow the  friend   of  the  French-Canadian.

After  Drummond's death, La  Patrie is quoted   (presumably  in   translation)   by the Toronto News  (April  13, 1907) , and again  there is greater precision  about Drummond's subject  matter and  more restraint in the  praise:
 It is interesting to note  the  opinion  of the French-Canadian  press.  La  Patrie  says  of his  work:   'He   succeeded   in  sketching   in verse,   half-English,  half-French,   some   of the   better   types   of   our   country    people, showing  their  frankness,  sincerity  and  abil­ ity  in  his truly  French-Canadian  heroes. A great  admirer   of  our  race,  he  exhibited  in his verse their  attractive  qualities  and  their inexhaustible good-nature  and  vivacity. For this  we owe  him  certainly an  acknowledge­  ment.'

A  stronger   note  of  grateful  apprecia­ tion   runs   through a   general-summary article   by  "Pierre   Lorraine"  that    ap­  peared   in  a  series  of  installments in  Le Journal de Francoise. The article empha­ sizes the general  notion  that  Drummond's dialect verse was his best:

each  time  that  he was unfaithful to the  bi­ zarre language  that  he had created initially; each   time   that    he   wished   to  clothe   his more   general   ideas   in   a   more   chastized form, the spirit  of his subject matter is lost; and   he   does   not   gain   in   elegance   that which  he  has  lost  in emotion   and  pictur­ esqueness.  The   same   thoughts  are   there, but  the expression  that  refurbishes  them  no longer  moves  us.  It is  as  if  a  marvelous bagpipe-player  who   controls    at   will  our tears and  laughter undertook to execute  the same   melodies    on    an    instrument   with which  he  is  not  familiar; we  remain  un­ warmed.
The   English   poems   of  Drummond are
certainly   beyond   the   ordinary,  but   if  he had  written  only  that,  he  would  remain  in
amateur's clothing instead  of that  of a national  poet.  (my translation)

In  the  only  major analysis  of  Drum­ mond's  work  that  I located, R. E. Rash­ ley, in  a  1949  Dalhousie  Review   article, similarly   upholds the   value   of  Drum­ mond's use of  habitant patois,  suggesting  that  the poet's  deliberate choice  and  sus­ tained   practice   demonstrates "that  the patois  satisfied  a  felt  need."4  The care­  fully    controlled   manipulation   of   the patois  enabled Drummond  "to  translate the  rude  life  into  an  equally  rude  verse with  a  possibility  of  equal vigour." The result  was an  "escape from  a  damaging

OPINIONS & NOTES



conventionality of language that  had  re­
duced  poetry  to insignificance":
His   needs   are   certainly  restricted, but   he gains   a  style  very  adequate to  those  needs, and, indeed much more  adequate  than  his own   English  style.   It is  a  freshened,   re­ newed  language, a genuine discovery  and  a successful  escape  from   a   predicament. It denied   Drummond    exactly  what  was  achieved  by  the   other  poets  of  the  period, grace,  elegance,   polish;   but    it   gave   him  humanized    substance,  exactly  what    they  were denied.
Drummond's refurbishing of poetry:
was   not   done    without  the   application  of some  intelligence on  Drummond's part. He did   not,  as  his  Preface suggests,  simply  let his  friends  'tell   their own  stories   in  their own   way'.  There was,  of  course, no  'way'; the  overlappings of  the  two  tongues varied even   in   the   individual  from   time   to  time and    from    subject  to   subject.  Drummond found in the  patois as it was spoken  a new emphasis  in  words,   an  increment of   senti­ ment, perhaps, or  of  humour, an  animation that   was   attractive,  and    in   working  for these   effects   he  took  the  patois  as  a  guide but   followed  his  own  needs  in  creating his speech. Spellings and   pronunciations,  the percentage of  French, and  degree of distor­ tion   vary   from  poem  to  poem   and   within poems.  There  is  evidence of  control ... the accent  is   softened,  the   explosive   and   em­  phatic   elements  of   French  are   reduced, and  what is  retained is usually   the  slurred or    broken   consonants   and    the    changed vowels; and  in his best poems, not  in large proportion.
Rashley   argues   that   poets  such  as  Car­ man,  Lampman and  Duncan  Campbell Scott  escaped  from  the limitations of the era's  dignified  poetic conventions in ways "that lead  them further and further away from  the  needs of a flesh-and-blood world to  the   borders  of  humanity." He   cites "Lampman's  escape   into  a  formal   style
... Carman's  into  music ... Duncan
Campbell Scott's into  austerity." Drummond's escape into  patois, Rash­
ley  says,  is  accompanied  by  a  focus  on
"the   conventionalized group-reaction":
it  is  only   in   communal material, in  situa­
tions  where the  group spirit  is alive,  where
 man   1s  m  contact  with  man, or   with   na­ ture  through  the   group  senses,   that   this  style   takes   on  life  and   becomes  something more   than  broken English ... The  restric­ tion   imposed  is   that   Drummond  can   ap­  proach  his  material  only  through  a  gener­ alized   concept,  through the  group consent.
The biography of the  poet  written by his widow   corroborates in  the  main  Rash­ ley's implications about Drummond's pre­  dilection for  the  group spirit,  and,   per­ haps,    the   distancing  he   achieved    by patois.  The  biography reports that  for  a number of  years, Drummond, as an  inde­  pendent  adult and medical  doctor, shared adjoining  houses  in   Montreal  with   his mother  and   two  married  brothers.  His immersion in habitant and  voyageur lan­ guage   and   lore  appears  to  have  begun when   he  was  fifteen   and   was  stationed as  a  summertime telegrapher  at  Bord-a­ Plouffe.   He   worked   there  six  summers and,  one  can  speculate from  casual  scat­ tered   references in  his  later   letters  and  from   a   phrase   or   two  of  May   Drum­ mond's that expressions  in dialect  became  a playful mode of domestic discourse.  (In  a  letter  from   Vancouver, September  g,
1go 1,  for  example, he  tells  his  wife  of meeting a man  who "I remember when  I was  a   'small   boy  on   de   farm' ";  and when  his  popularity as a  writer  forced  a decision  as to whether he continue as a doctor :rvlay Drummond writes  that  "he must  choose,  as  he  himself  said:   'which side de cat  she jomp  on de fence'."5
Nevertheless, a nUinber of references makes clear that, like most wirters, Drummond wrote  from  personal  experi­ ence  and  emotion-even   when   the  resultant  poem   is  alive   with   habitant language and   setting.  "'Little Bateese',  almost  as popular as the famous 'Wreck', was  inspired  by  his  son  Barclay,  a  mis­ chievous youngster  of  five  who  was  also the  prototype  of  'Dominique'.... "6   The account  in   "The   Last   Portage"  of   a lumberman  being  led  by the  ghost  of his son  through  a dark  night  to "de  boss on

OPINIONS  & NOTES



de  camp" was  written after   "our   little son William  Harvey died of tubercular meningitis at  the  age  of  three   and   [a] half   years.  The  blow  almost   broke  his father's heart, for  he  worshipped the beautiful child,  so quiet, gentle and affec­ tionate." The little  boy, according to his mother,  had   "shadow   playmates" with whom   he   played   and   talked.   "He was always  surprised  when  I  was  unable   to see the  'little  blue  girl' who accompanied him  on  all  his  walks,  or  the  other  chil­ dren  with  whom  he played  games on the floor."7

'An' oh! mon Dieu! w'en he turns hees head
I'm  seein' de face of ma boy is dead­
Dead  wit' de young blood in hees vein­ An' dere  he's comin'  wance more again
Wit'  de curly hair,  an'  dark-blue eye, So lak de blue of de summer  sky -
(The Last  Portage)

A dog owned  by William Henry   Parker, Drummond's partner  in  a  hunting  and fishing   club    in   the   Laurentians,   was named  'Boule'; "beloved of the  Commo dore    [Parker]  it   was   despised   by  the Doctor by whom  it  was  nevertheless im­ mortalized  in   the   poem   of   the   same name."8
"Le  Vieux  Temps" (of which  the Midland  Review, Louisville, Kentucky, said,  "For  truth, sincerity,  simplicity  and idealization  no  such   poem   as  this   has ever been written in America"), "was composed  during my convalescence from a serious illness which  ... lost us our first child,   a  boy."9  "Little  Lac  Grenier," of the   poem  so  entitled, was  Drummond's own  favourite fishing  spot,  even  though the   fish  there   were   small.   His   widow thought he  liked,  more  particularly, the solitude and   the  setting -"a  tiny  sheet of water  set like a gleaming jewel on the summit  of  a  high   hill.   Surrounded   by tall  pine  trees.... "10
Along  with  Drummond's sincerity  in a
number  of   his   poems,    the   biography
 offers  evidence   about his  sincerity,  and consequently identity, as a Canadian. He emigrated from  Ireland with  his parents at  the  age  of  IO;  but  it  was  thirty-eight years  later,   1902, before  Drummond, as a  poet  and  physician  of some  eminence, took advantage of an  offer of a free pas­ sage  to  visit  England  (for   the  Corona­ tion), Scotland and  Ireland. In his letters  to  his wife, he  expresses  dislikes of most things  English: the meat, the mushrooms, the   peaches   (too  expensive), London's Strand-"all   pleasure   and   vice ... My God,  what  a  beautiful thing  purity  is, or even   comparative purity"11 -the   rail­ way  accommodation-"the  worst, I think,  in  the  world"12 -and the  silent unhelpful   passengers.    In   Scotland,  he admired the  vigorous  health of the  men, though   not   the  general   humourlessness, and  found   all  the  women   ugly.  Ireland was  "priest-ridden to  an  extent   I never dreamed  of. ... I  can't  go  any  further touring,  not  even  to  my own  birthplace; would  be too  painful -let me dream of it as it seemed  in my boyhood  days."13
1As  Drummond summed   it  up  in  one letter:  "the   trip will  have  taught me  a lot, but  all  the same  Je dis Canada   pour moi, and   you  can   tell  that   to  anybody you like."14  In  another letter,  he said:

I don't  believe  the  English  people  will ever appreciate my things-they are  really  very slow to see humour  in anything outside England.  Clever  people  too,  these  London­ ers,  and  just  as  eager  to  grasp  a  dollar  as any  Yankee,  but  in  some way  they  are  be­ hind  the times.15

"I am  glad  we live  in  Canada," he said
-"haven't seen any place on this side I prefer  to  Montreal and  I'd   rather  have my  boys brought up  in  a  country where for  practical purposes  all are  equal."16
After  his    death,   Drummond   was praised-perhaps undeservingly, since he earned   his  living  as  a  physician-by  a Toronto  newspaper  for  not   moving   to the  United States  "as,  alas,  so  many  of

OPINIONS & NOTES



our  Canadian writers have done,  moving over  to  the  great   republic   to  be nearer
their  nourishment."17 For Drummond, it
seems   clear,    the    nourishment   for   his poetry   came   from   all  the  things  in  his life that he prized. In general, there was Canada, the  outdoor life, and  the  inde­ pendent unlettered farmers and  lumber­ men on the Quebec frontier, his paternal concern   for   his  own  young  family  and his  physician's  concern  for   all   human  beings. In  particular, there was the patois he  heard   in   the   summers  of  youth   at Bord-a-Plouffe  as  well  as  the  emotions  he experienced in common with all races and  classes. It  seems not too much  to say that  the consensus  of  Rashley's  academic analyses,   May   Drummond's  biography, and   the  obituary notices  in  newspapers  at  home  and  abroad agrees  with  E.  W. Thompson's line  in  his commemorative poem which labels the poet "Everybody's friend."18  That Drummond also managed to produce some enduring poems is a pleasant  testimony  that   literature  and life can  draw  strength from  each  other without  either   delving   deeply   into  an­ guish.
Drummond's  general   theme   was  de­
scribed  in the "Book and Beaver "column in   the   Montreal   Standard    (April   go,
1907)   as  "man, and   the  primary  sanc­ tities  of  the   home" in  contrast   to  the "note of refinement" in Lampman, Rob­  erts,  Carman,  Campbell, the  Scotts ... " "and    their   theme   generally   is  nature­ worship,  pure  and  simple,  the  delight  of the few."

That is why his [Drummond's] verse comes home   to   the   business  and   bosoms  of  all men.  He  has  the  sympathetic insight  that comes  from  the  true  brotherly   affection  of a living man for living men. He  has humor, that  presence of  sanctity and   balance, whereas  our  Canadian muse is too dignified or   too  sad  to  glance   in  the   direction   of Burns'  old  crony,  Fun. . . . The  'net  result' is  that    'The   Wreck   of  the   Julie   Plante' gives   pleasure    to   thousands,    for   whom

r86
 [Lampman's  first   volume,   1888]   Among the  Millet   is  a  book  with  seven  seals.  It would  be a narrow-minded critic  who could think  this a matter of regret."

To   what   extent  Drummond  himself would   agree   with   the   priority   in   this summation is doubtful. According to  his wife,  the   doctor  was  reluctant  to  con­ sider   himself  a  literary man.  "He  often expressed regrets   that   Archibald  Lamp­ man   was  obliged   to  slave  in  a  govern­  ment   office  instead of  employing all  his time   and   genius   to  the  glory  of  litera­ ture."19 Nonetheless, the widespread pop­  ularity   of   Drummond's verse-miners in Cobalt could  quote  poems from  mem­ ory20 -made its   own   contribution   by helping  to  break   up   the   stereotype  of poetic   convention  at   the   beginning  of the  twentieth century. Although  Drum­ mond    and    his   poems   may   not   have moved   critics   to  much   comment,  both were   front-page news  at  his  death  and both   broadened the  general public's no­ tion   of  poetry   and  extended  for   many readers their  receptivity to  literature.


NOTES

1 The    press   clippings    referred    to   in   this article,   unless  otheiWise  specified,  are  con­ tained  in  May  Harvey  Drummond's  scrap­  book in  the  Osler  Library,  McGill  Univer­ sity, Montreal.
2  Reported in  the  Daily  Evening   Review, Peterborough, April  16, 18g8 in  the  Drum­ mond  scrapbook.
3   Collection of  Drummond letters,  Osler  Li­
brary,  McGill.
4  R. E. Rashley,  "W.  H. Drummond and  the Dilemma  of  Style,"  Dalhousie   Review   28, No.4  (Jan. 1949), 387-96).
5 May   Harvey   Drummond's  unpublished biography of her  husband, p.  130 (Osler Library, McGill).
6  Biography,  p. 141.
1 Biography, p. 238.
8  Biography, p.  1 77·
9   Biography, p. 97.
10  Biography,  p. 145.

OPINIONS & NOTES



11   Biography, p.  I89.
12   Biography, p.  I97·
13   Biography, p. 207.
14   Biography, p. I90·
15   Biography, p.  I97·
16   Biography, p. 207.
17   The clipping, unidentified, is labelled:  To­ ronto, April 8, I 907; in  Drummond  scrap­ book.
18 Thompson's poem  is included in The  Great Fight,  the  posthumous volume containing Drummond's last  works.
19   Biography, p.  131.
2o  J. F.   Macdonald,   William  Henry   Drum­ mond    (Makers   of    Canadian    Literature series), Ryerson, n.d., p.   1 1 I.  Macdonald's work   is  a   thorough   appreciation.  He   ob­ serves  that "dialect,  like  stage-costume, re­  moved   an   inhibition" from   the   poet    (pp.
92-93)   especially  in   regard   to   his   own dead  son   and  "The  Last    Portage"  (pp.
106-07).
 who  lured  you 	to  a  new  man   (back to the  fatal earth) 	inventing (beyond America) a  new  world... 1

In  this poem Kroetsch conjures up  the image of Grove as pioneer  not in any con­ ventional sense  but  as  a  discoverer  of  a new realm  of the imagination where  em­ pirical   reality   becomes   the   material  of fiction.  "Inventing  (beyond   America)  a new  world" -this  is a  picture which  is rather  different from   what   literary  his­ torians  usually give us. Grove inaugurates modern Canadian literature, we are  told: his novel Settlers  of the Marsh ( 1925)  is the  first  example of   realism   in  Canada abandoning the conventions of historical romance and regional  idyll. In  describing life in the prairies from  a new view-point Grove  links a  new  kind  of social  realism  with  psychological  analysis. He  is a quin­

GERALD NOONAN


THE DILETTANTE IN EXILE: GROVE AT THE CENTENARY OF HIS BIRTH

IN A RECENT POEM BY Robert Kroetsch, entitled "F.  P. Grove: the  Finding," we find  the following lines:

Dreaming the  well-born    hobo  of  yourself against the  bourgeois father    dreaming
Europe
if only  to  find 	a  place  to  be  from
the  hobo  tragedian 	;pitching bundles riding a freight   to the  impossible city the  fallen archangel		of  Brandon or
Winnipeg
in  all  your  harvesting    real
or  imagined	did  you  really  find
four aged   stallions   neigh
in  your   cold   undertaking  on those  trails north
in  all  the   (dreamed)  nights   in  stooks
in haystacks   dreaining the  purified dreamer
 tessentially  Canadian writer.
That realism  won't  take  us very far, biographically, has become increasingly clear  since D. 0. Spettigue published his article   "The Grove   Enigma Solved" in
1972, and  later  his substantial biography FPC: The  European Years  ( 1973). It has since become  common knowledge that  in fact  F. P. Grove is identical with  the Ger­ man  author Felix  Paul  Greve,  who faked  a suicide  in  1909. It is interesting,  how­ ever,  to consider  the  differences  between the two lives which  at first glance may not seem  spectacular.  Obviously  Grove -in his  two  "autobiographies" A  Search   for America and  In  Search  of Myself-does not  invent  an  entirely  new  identity. Ra­ ther,  his  self-mystification is  based  on  a subtle shift of nuances: the farming back­ ground of his parents makes  way for  the landed  gentry; his restless travels  through Europe are  magnified into  Grand Tours through  several   continents;  his  fleeting encounters with  literary celebrities of his time   become   meaningful  relationships; important  formative  years   in   Imperial Germany are  relocated in  North  America so that  Grove's  early  cosmopolitan years

OPINIONS & NOTES



in   fin de  siecle Europe  are   nicely  bal­ anced  by twenty  years of acquiring prac­  tical skills.
Grove's biography thus  takes  on  a striking symbolic  dimension. The  Euro­ pean  observer  is strongly reminded of the figure  of the  bourgeois liberal  who  turns  his  back  on  reactionary  Europe placing  his revolutionary hopes on the new world. A  famous nineteenth-century example of the  type  is Moorfeld, the  protagonist of the popular novel Der Amerika-Mude, published  in  1855  by  Ferdinand  Kiirn­ berger.  Moorfeld emigrates to the United States   where   his  enthusiastic  ideals   are S<X>n frustrated as he begins to realize that  the  country's  seemingly  unlimited  possi­ bilities   are   merely   a   romantic  illusion. Moorfeld  discovers  capitalist  greed  and brutality behind   a  rigid  puritan fa<;ade. Here   the  similarities between   Moorfeld and  Grove  end:  Kiimberger's hero  tires of  America (hence the  title), of  the  in­ human societies  in the cities as well as of the  frightening and  impassable  forests  of Ohio,  and  in  the  end  returns to  Europe as a broken  man.  GrevejGrove, who undergoes a similar  process of  disillusion­ ment,  leaves the United States in another direction : in   the   north  he  discovers   a better America  where  the  evils of a ma­ terialistic civilization may yet be averted.
It is not  easy  to  understand  nowadays why Grove's fictional  version of his Euro­ pean   years   wasn't   seriously   questioned much  earlier-despite  its  archetypal quality and  the  lack of  documentary evi­ dence.  This may  have  something  to  do with   the  state  of  literary   studies  in  the twenties  and  thirties. It may also be that  Grove's  autobiographical fiction   (or  fic­ tional   autobiography)   provided  exactly  the  kind  of myth  which  appealed to  the imagination of  Canadians in  those  days. Even  as late  as the fifties, an example like Malcolm  Ross's   introduction   to   Over Prairie Trails, republished in 1957 as the first  volume   of  the   New  Canadian  Li-

188
 brary,  reflects the  willingness  to see Grove as the symbol of a specifically Canadian union   of  the   cosmopolitan  and   the  re­ gional, of  European culture and  Cana­ dian  nature. Ross writes: "... he came  to this   country  after    tours    (large   if   not grand)  from  the  Sahara to  Madagascar to  the  Antipodes to  America. Frederick Philip   Grove  is  yet  the  typical,   perhaps even  archtypical Canadian.... He  was a Canadian writer, wholly  absorbed  by the Canadian scene and  by the pioneer  drama of a diverse  yet single  people."2
Three decades after  Grove's death, his life and  personal history  have  been  thor­ oughly  explored. The same cannot be said of  his work! and  his literary  background, although  both   have   moved   once   more into  the  centre of critical  interest. While never  objecting to becoming part  of Can­ adian   mythology,   Grove  carefully  con­ cealed  not  only his personal but  his liter­ ary  ancestry. He  wanted his  work  to  be regarded as unique and  original, even if it meant fiddling with  the chronology.
However, it has never been a secret that Grove  in his youth  had  been strongly  in­ fluenced  by the  French naturalist writers,  notably  Zola,  and  by the  great  Russians.  Moreover, he  was  familiar with  contem­ porary  European  literature  around  the turn of the century. The wide range of his translations from  English  and  French­ Browning,  Flaubert,    Gide,    Meredith, Pater, Symons, Wells, and  Wilde,  to name  only a few-testifies to the heterogeneous influences  which  he absorbed: the  realist tradition and contemporary symbolism. It is  important  to  note-as  Anthony  W. Riley has pointed out-that young Greve disappeared from  the  European scene  in
1909,  i.e.,  the   year   before   the   Expres­ sionist decade is said  to begin, and  Rainer Maria   Rilke's    M alte    Laurids    Brigge demonstrated  new  possibilities  of psycho­ logical  narrative.  Instead, Grove  surfac­ ing  in  the  United  States switches  to  the great representatives of American realism

OPINIONS & NOTES



reading novels  by  Theodore  Dreiser, Frank Norris,  Sinclair Lewis, which  leave their  traces  in  his concept of realism.
Future interpretations of Grove's Can­
adian work must  take a closer look at this mixed   literary  heritage.  An   interesting case in point  is Over Prairie Trails (1922) which  is still fairly  close to the  European experience but  at   the  same   time  estab­ lishes  the  pattem of  much   of   the  later  work.  Of  course,  Grove's  description of his  seven  trips  across  the  prairie during the  autumn and   winter   of  1917/18 can be  called   naturalistic:  not  only  because the  narrator  provides a  detailed account of  the   changing  landscape  and   of  the weather  conditions, of  his  own  physical hardships  and  his  mental  frustrations­ but  also  because  the  dominant theme  is man's struggle  against   nature, or  more specifically  the  struggle  between the  planning intellect and  the  brutal force  of the circumstances which  determine man's fate.
But  there   is another  aspect. In  Over
Prairie Trails,  for  the  first  time,  Grove's
archetypal hero  emerges.  He  is  an  out­ sider  who  is  pitting himself   against  na­  ture  and  society  alike,  not  really  because he expects  to win  but  because  he sees the challenge as  a  supreme  test  of  his  own personality. This individualist challenge is usually  taken up  against all  odds,  and  it ends  in  failure. It cannot be entirely ex­ plained   in   naturalist  terms   because   it emerges as a lcind of aesthetic experience: the  arrogant denial of the  human condi­ tion.   It is  the  absurd   insistence  on  the freedom of the artist who flatly refuses to surrender  to   the   elements   which   may make  us wonder about  Grove's natural­ ism-even  though  Grove's main  novels, overburdened  with  involved   plots,  con­ trived  characters  and  didactic comment as  they  are,  display   a  deterministic ap­  proach  to  reality.
In  his  heyday    during  the   twenties, Grove  indulged in  a  rather odd  mixture
 of ill-concealed pride  and  self-irony. In  a letter  to his wife  from  one  of his lecture tours  across  Canada,  he  wrote:  "Well, my deah!  Drat it  all!  I can't sleep when
I  have  these  ovations ... 'The  Greatest Canadian' I  was called.  Plup,  plup!  But they all know that  the rest of Canadian writers  are  pygmies  by my side;  and  they say so."3 There is an aura of alienation surrounding Grove  from  the  very  begin­ ning;  it becomes more  pronounced as the exuberant mood  fades, and  the econmnic and  cultural crisis  of  the  thirties crushes his optllnistic expectations. I  quote  from another  letter:   "No,   my  works  did   not grow out of the  milieu  of what  was being done by others  in Canada, I neither  knew of it nor cared for it. That a few of them,  of  late,  have  sought  me out  is no matter. I   have  helped many;  nobody   has  ever helped  me. People  like Callaghan or de la Roche have  gone  out   of  their   way  not to meet  me."4
Grove's  contempt of his fellow  writers
-"nincompoops" he called  them  on  an­ other  occasion -is,  of  course,  based  on a grossly distorted picture of  reality. How­  ever,  it  reveals  an  important side  of  his enigmatic personality, as does his lack of a  sense  of  humour and   his  almost  dog­ matic claim  to  be recognized as an  abso­ lute authority in matters of literary  taste. Grove's pessimism, on the other  hand, was at  times just as radical as his intellectual arrogance: "I  am   just  a dilettante," he writes,  in  1927,  to  Watson  Kirkconnell, one  of his few  close acquaintances.5
In the light of what  we have said about Grove's hovering between realism and symbolism,  the  term  "dilettante" has im­ plications beyond   being  a  simple  admis­ sion  of failure. Significantly,  Grove  uses it after  discussing  (in the same letter) the philosophies   of  Plato  and Bergson.  The  aesthetic charm of a  system  of ideas,  he argues,  exists  irrespective of  its inherent truth-a  thought  common among   the decadent  movement. This movement-

189

OPINIONS & NOTES



to  one  of  its  important  representatives, Paul  Bourget, Grove  refers in  his letters
-defines  the  dilettante as  the man  who continually  masks   himself,   who  experi­ ments  with  different moral  systems, who "tries   on"   various  philosophies   without subscribing to any. The dilettante sees his supreme  achievement as an  artist  in  this playful change of identities.
The  strain   of  Grove's  protean  mind
which  emerges  here  is less obvious  than his realistic side but may nevertheless pro­ vide a clue to his dual  personality and  his elusive work. Again,  we have to lookt back to  Greve's European  years. Greve's pen­ chant for  Oscar  Wilde-as  person  and  artist-is    well   documented.  In    I gog, the  young  German writer  published   his translation  of  Wilde's Intentions  ( I8gi) under the  title Fingerzeige. Wilde  attacks  realism  and  naturalism as perversions of the  fundamental  principle that  Life  fol­ lows Art. The reality  of Art, he claims, is the only true  reality -artificial, invented, ahistorical. Wilde  says in his famous dia­ logue   on   "The decay  of  lying":   "The only real people are  the people who never existed; and  if a novelist is base enough to go to life for  his personage, he should  at least  pretend that  they are creations, and  not  boast  of them  as copies."
It seems  likely  that  Grove,  one  of  the father figures of realism in Canada, never forgot  the  lesson  of  the  master  of  deca­ dence   which   young   Greve   had   learnt. Oscar  Wilde  treated art as reality, but  he also  regarded life as an  aesthetic  experi­  ence  and  stuck  to  his  persuasion -even though his  trial  and  subsequent  term  in prison  eventually broke  him.  Felix  Paul Greve created "Frederick  Philip  Grove" to carry out  an  even  more radical artistic  experiment with  reality.  His  struggle   to create Canadian   literature  single-hand­ edly  has  the  makings of a  decadent at­  tempt to subordinate the real world  to an artistic concept.
Seen  from  this  point  of  view,  there  is
 no genuine contradiction between  Grove's highly-developed self-esteem  and  his life­ long  concern to camouflage his  true  ori­ gins. On  the contrary, in inventing a new identity for  himself, Grove  turns  life into art,  casting off  all  restrictions which  his own   past,   the   historical  situation,  and current literary  conventions would  have placed  on  his existence.
Neither  biographically nor  artistically
did  this experiment turn  out  as successful as Grove  might have  anticipated. Reality proved   stronger  in  the  end.  What  had started  as  a  fascinating adventure soon became   a    fierce    battle    for    survival. Grove's resignation in  later  years  reflects the    growing   disillusionment   with    his ability to come  to  terms  with  forces out­ side  his control: "One day," he writes  in Igg6,  "I wish  to  write  the  tragedy   of  a Canadian writer; the tragedy of the  man  who  has something  to say but  cannot do so for sheer poverty. My personal tragedy  has   been   that   I  have,   throughout  the forty-four   years  of  my  life  in  Canada, lived   in  exile  from   the  realm   of  litera­ ture."'6
The case  of  Frederick  Philip  Grove, seen against the background of Canadian literature in the  twenties  and  thirties, has comic   and   tragic   aspects.   Comic -be­ cause    Grove    refused    to   abandon  his Lebensliige  even  when  he  had  become  a public figure  in  his own right  and  had  to be  constantly on  his  guard   with  inquisi­ tive   people;  tragic -because,   as   man and  writer, Grove  paid  dearly  for  his  ti­ tanic   ambitions.   His   work   is  strangely anachronistic in  more  than one  sense. It comes too late in the  sense that  Canadian literature of the  twenties  was no longer  a kind   of  tabula  rasa  ready   for   the   first seminal  ideas.  The  classic  examples  of realism   in  North  America, as  we  have  pointed out, had  been  published long  be­ fore  Grove's  Settlers  of the  Marsh  ap­ peared. Grove's work  comes too early because the contemporary Canadian pub-

OPINIONS & NOTES



lie was not  yet prepared to appreciate the extraordinary literary and  intellectual challenge which  Grove  offered; it was unable   to   provide  the   strong  response which  Grove  would  have  needed.
Frederick Philip Grove  remains a con­ troversial figure.  It seems likely, however,  that  his future reputation will  rest not  so much   on  his  realistic  novels  as  on   his stubborn  refusal   to  accept   the   reality  principle. We  may  even  feel  that  young Greve's verdict on  Oscar  Wilde,  written in  1903, is a  fair  judgment  on  Grove  in
1981.  Greve   wrote:  "Was Wilde  schuf,
... war selten  ersten  Ranges. Nur  wenige seiner Schopfungen bestehen vor der Kri­ tik  als  reine  Ki.instwerke.   Und  doch  ist Wildes  Werk  als  Ganzes  wertvoll. Es ist die  Hieroglyphenschrift einer grossen Tragodie im Leben  eines modemen Men­ schen,  eines  Menschen, der Kiinstler sein wollte  und  nicht   sein  konnte, der  leben wollte  und  es  nicht  konnte, wei! er  das Leben  mit  dem  Traum verwechselte."7
These  prophetic sentences take us back to Kroetsch's phrase "Inventing  (beyond America)  a  new  world":  Kroetsch the post-modem  writer  joining   hands   with the dilettante in exile-a hundred years after  FPG's birth, the Grove  enigma  may not  be completely solved  after  all.

NOTES

1 "F.  P. Grove: the Finding," Horizon. Writ­ ings  of the  Canadian Prairie, ed. Ken  Mit­ chell  (Toronto: Oxford, I977), pp. I3I·32·
2    P. v.
3  The Letters  of Frederick  Philip  Grove,  ed. Desmond   Pacey   (Toronto:  Univ.   of   To­ ronto  Press, I976), pp.  I 25 ff.
4   Letters, p. 383  (I /4/I 940). s  Letters,  p. 58  (7/3/1927).
a  Letters, p. 3I7   (I5/6/I936).
1 Felix   Paul   Greve,   Oscar   Wilde  (Berlin: Gose & Tetzlaff, I 903), p. 43·

WALTER PACHE
 REFERENCES

New   reference   books  of  several   kinds   bear upon  Canadian writing; these  are  biographi­ cal,  critical, and  bibliographical,  and  like  all useful   reference   books  serve  as   guidebooks, sources   to   dip    into    rather    than   to   read through. The  inveterate Gale  publishers  offer several  new volumes in various series. In  Con­ temporary   Authors there  appear   portraits of a   range   of  Canadian   writers-Ray  Smith,  George  Whalley,  Rachel  Wyatt,  Janis   Rapo­  port,  and  David  Williams  in  vol. 97-100; and Seymour  Mayne,  Stan   Persky,  Walter  Baker, and   Markoosie   Patsauq  in  vol.  IOI   ($62.00  each).  These  volumes  also  offer  some  longer pieces:     interesting   biographical   interviews  with  Pat  Lane   and   F.  R.  Scott  in  the  first, and  with  Barry  Callaghan in  the  second; In CA   3   (new  revision   series)   there   also  ap­  pears  a  sketch  of  Margaret Atwood  by David Guy. Gale's  Jewish  Writers  of North  America, ed.  Ira Nadel   ($34.00) offers another  kind  of research  guide: a  selective  primary  listing  of Jewish-American  and   Jewish-Canadian   writ­ ers'  works, with  notes  of some  secondary  ma­ terials.  And   also  from   Gale  comes  Contem­ porary  Literary   Criticism, a  serial  anthology of  snippets  from  criticism;  CLC   18  includes  excerpted   material  on   a   swath   of  writers: Bissett, Finch,  Gallant, Gotlieb,  Nichol,  Page, Richler,   and   Webb-material  that   provides more of a glimpse  than  a guide  to the  writers, but  can  be  helpful   to  those  seeking  to follow the  reception   writers  have  been  given.  Gale's Book   Review   Index   is  enumerative  only   in providing   a  similar   service;   Twentieth  Cen­ tury   Literary   Criticism, vol.  4,  with   a  long section  of  material  on  Grove,  parallels  more closely the  CLC. Of  less help  is  Gale's  Child­  hood  in Poetry,  3rd.  supp.  ($75.00): a list of poems   that    relate    to   childhood,    including references  to Lee and  Carman. It seems legiti­ mate  as  far  as  one  can  tell -and  will  be  of some  use to  the  school  librarian and  the  har­  ried primary  teacher.
Paul  W. Bennett's Rediscovering   Canadian
History:    A    Teacher's  Guide   for   the   80's
(OISE, $10.50)  is  something   of  a  model  of its  kind:   a  valuable book for  teachers  of  his­ tory   and   for   literary  people   who   want   to know  how  things  have  been  changing in  his­ torical  studies  and  where  to  look  to  find  out more  about   them.  It  also  includes  suggested unit  organizations: key questions  to ask, peda­  gogical   assistance   if   such   is  required.  But though  it acknowledges  regional  splits in Can­  ada,  it  seems curiously   unaware of  how  they

OPINIONS & NOTES



affect   its  own  structure:  Toronto newspapers and   P.  Whalley  are   his  only  source of   con­ temporary illustration; his  suggested list  of  24 visiting   speakers   includes   only    3   west    of Waterloo and   none  east  of  Montreal; and  his map   puts   Vancouver somewhere near  Ocean Falls.   Despite  which,  the   concept  is  a  good one,  and   the  book  better than  anything com­ parable which has  to  do  with  Canadian liter-  ature.
In  more  familiar   reference  format  is Donald  M.   Tupling's  Canada:   A   Disserta­ tion   Bibliography    (Univ.   Microfilms Inter­ national),   a    business    catalogue   of   what's available  from   Accounting  to   Zoology,   with  Cinema,   Folklore,  History,  Literature,   and  "Theater"  in  between; one  valuable feature: the  inclusion  of  material  relating to  Canada as  well  as  produced in  Canada. The new  edi­ tion  of the Concise  Oxford  English-French, French-English Dictionary  ($19.95) omits  the illustrations and  the  archaisms of the  earlier edition, giving   itself   room   for   more  contem­ porary idioms   and   illustrations, but  it  still,  as it  says,  prefers the  well-tried, and   it  does  not include  all   the   variations  one  requires, read­ ing  the  French  of  North  America. The  Brit­ annica   Book   of  English   Usage   (Doubleday,
$22.50)   is   a   combination  of   an    updated Fowler and   a  guide to  after-dinner  speaking, with   conservative advice on  how  to  use  com­ mas   and    when    to   tell   funny   stories.   And finally,   in  Justin  Wintle's fascinating  Makers of Modern  Culture (Oxford, $35.00),  we find
a  series   of  biographical accounts of  political,
literary,  philosophical, and   economic  special­ ists  who  have  shaped modern times. Everyone is  there  from   Lenin  and   Timothy   Leary  to Mansfield   and    Mao  to   Tagore   and   Dylan  Thomas.  But   among  Canadians?   Only   Mc­  Luhan.
w.N.


NOW IN PAPER

Recent reprints from  Fides include Pamphile Lemay's Contes  uraies, Yves  Theriault's  Ashi­ ni,  Lionel  Groulx's  L'Appel de  la  race, Ger­ maine Guevremont's  Marie-Didace, and  Felix  Leclerc's  Le  Fou  de  l'Ue-a  range of  styles and   topics   from   the  whole  history of  Quebec writing. From   Oberon   come   two  volumes of Raymond  Souster's eloquent Collected  Poems, a   testament to  voice  and  to the  constant watchfulness of a  poetic mind, a  poet's  eye. Macmillan has  released Mavis  Gallant's  From
 the   Fifteenth District, a  superb collection, as Laurentian  Library  No.  67;    Boreal    Express has  brought out   for  the  first  time  a  full  ver­ sion   of  Maria   Chapdelaine, edited  from   the  author's  manuscripts;  Field   Notes,   subtitled
1-8  of  a  continuing poem,  of  "The  Collected
Poetry  of   Robert  Kroetsch"  has    appeared
from  General Publishing at  $9.95, making available a  substantial body  of  work,  an  inte­ gral part of  Kroetsch's questing canon.  Lerici of  Rome has  published a  collection of  Irving Layton's  poems   in   an   Italian   translation  by Alfredo   Rizzardi:    In    un'eta    di    ghiaccio
( 15,000 lira).  Les   Editions  des   plaines  has released  a   photographic  reproduction  of   an interesting 1890   travel book,  Georges Dugas's Un   Voyageur  des  pays  d'En-Haut. Room   of One's   Own   (vol.   6,  nos.   1-2)   published the late   Susan   Wood's   collection  of    women's science  fiction,  a   collection which  illustrates the  sublimated rage  against  current  pressures, and   the  dreams of  an  egalitarian future, that women lately  have   rendered  through  fantasy.

W.N.



ON THE VERGE

***  ANDREW  BIRRELL,  Benjamin Baltzly. Coach  House, $24.50.   Baltzly's photographs follow  in  an  established tradition. Baltzly, one of   Notman's   photographers,   accompanied  a CPR survey   party that embarked into rugged territory when  B.C.  joined  Confederation. And he struggled to capture the width of alpine panoramas, the   depth of  river   chasms, the sparseness of  the  arid country, and   the  speed of  the  rapids, and   waterfalls, all  with   limited success.   But   it   is  less  the   contrast  with   the present than the  particular views which  should strike Baltzly  as  interesting which ought to concern  us.   All   travellers  know    that   moot strange sights  can  rapidly seem familiar. These photographs, and   the   1872   journal reprinted here    along  with    them,  offer    a   tantalizing glimpse  of  the   way  in  which   the   camera  de­ veloped  just  in   time   to  catch these   first  new views  in  black-and-white and  half-tone.
W.N.


*** Liures et auteurs quebecois 1979.   An important  annual  guidebook to the year's work m  Quebec studies, this  work  includes  reviews of  fiction, poetry, drama,  and   criticism, and includes  indexes  to   related  articles  and    re-



views   in   other   journals.  Highly  useful,   too, are  the  lists of  relevant addresses.
W.N.

**  GORDON GIBSON  with  CAROL RENISON,  Bull of   the    Woods:  The   Gordon  Gibson    Story. Douglas &  Mcintyre, $16.95.   "The people  of the west coast  of Vancouver Island, both  native and  white, were  a special breed," says  Gordon Gibson, and   his  book,  which   is  really   an  oral narrative  taken  down    and   edited  by   ghost­ writer Carol Renison, is there to  prove  it.  It is a  well-flowing, lively  story  of the  life  of  a  man  who   was   logger, ship's captain,  construction boss, pioneer hotel-keeper on  Maui,  and  popu­ list  politician before  he  decided that his career was  worth recording  for  its  own  sake  and  as a descriptive account of  the  largely vanished way of  life  on  British  Columbia's inlets and  in  the first  three-quarters of the  present century, when individualism and  a natural anarchy flourished there. Entertaining biography and  good folk history, vigorously told.
 dian, with  recipes  for Tourtiere and  maple mousse,  as  you   might   expect,  and   other   de­ lights  called  CP  Stuffed  Pears,  Lister  Sinclair
Chicken Special, Mother's  Way   with   Duck   a
!'orange,  Manitoba  Special,  Haytime   Fresh­
ener,   Moniques  April   Fool   Applesauce,  Cur­
ried  Eggs  a !a  Poonah, and   Easy  Chop Suey.
Recommended for  sampling.
W.N.

G.W.

**  PAULA  GUSTAFSON,   Sa/ish  Weaving. Douglas   &    Mcintyre,   $24.95.   Though coupled with  photos of  and  comments on  tra­ ditional  weaving  techniques,  this   is   not   an anthropological  text  but  more  of  an  objective enthusiast's account of  the  revival   of  weaving techniques and   practice in  the  Fraser  Valley. With     accompanying   information   on    dyes, methods, and   designs, it  is practical as well as beautiful.  Reading  G.   W.   Reed's  edition  of George  Angas's Early   Paintings of the  Maori (Reed, n.p.)  at   the   same   time,   I was  struck by   the    recurrence-but   the    difference  in handling-of	geometrical   pattern.    Angas's comments,  from    the    184o's,  complete  with handsome paintings, include, incidentally, the expressed  belief   that    the   Maoris  came   from Mexico; it  is  a  theory long  since  eroded, but Angas's   illustrations   of    flax    weaving  and fingerweaving  (i.e.,   without  loom) -and his comments on  the  symbolic  significance of  geo­ metrical patterns-still  have   relevance.
W.N.

**  Madame Benoit   Cooks  at  Home.    Paper­ jacks,   $3.95.    Some   years   ago,   asked   to  list the   1 o  best  Canadian  books,  I  put  The  En­ cyclopedia   of   Canadian   Cooking   on,   moti­ vated   at  least   a  little by  Hugh  MacLennan's essay   that   avers   "ye   shall   know  a  people   by its   food."  My   gesture  was   regarded  as  flip­ pant, but  that's by  the  way.  This new  book  is a   delightful  declaration  of   something Cana-
