$1.00 per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·10








Views of.Hugh  MacLennan
BY GEORGE  WOODCOCK AND  PAUL GOETSCH


A Reading  of Anne Wilkinson
BY A. J. M. SMITH


Emile Nelligan

BY PAUL WYCZYNSKI


Anne Hebert ·  .

BY PATRICIA PURCELL




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







THE  MUSE
OF POLITICS






DURING THE  1940's  Gem)le Orwell  touched m sevcral
essays on  the  deleterious  effects which  political  propaganda could  have - and
seemed to him to be having  at that  time -on  English language  and  literature. Contemporary politics, he suggested, deliberately debases the coinage of words, deliberately  blurs  meaning,  deliberately  restricts the spontaneity  of the imagina­ tion - and  "unless spontaneity  enters at some point or another, literary creation is  impossible,  and   language   itself  becomes ossified." On  another   occasion  he claimed  that: "Political  language-and with variations this is true of all politi­ cal  parties,  from  Conservatives  to Anarchists - is  designed  to make lies sound truthful  and  murder  respectable,  and  to give an  appearance of solidity to pure wind."
Canadian  Literature  is not  a  journal of politics, but  as a literary  magazine it is bound  to be interested  in the literature of politics as distinct from mere political writing. It is political writing  that Orwell attacks;  his attack  belongs to the litera­ ture  of  politics. If Orwell  had  been  a  Canadian, or  if some latter-day  Milton were  to speak  out  of the  prairies  in  Areopagitican  tones on some such  subject as the  absurdities  of the Canadian obscenity laws, we would find what  they had to say within our province.
But we have no Orwell  and  no Milton, and during Canadian  Literature's two­ and-a-half  years of existence only one book has come in for review that seemed clearly to belong to the literature of politics. It is Frank  H. Underhill's In Search of  Canadian   Liberalism   (Macmillan, $5.oo), a collection  of essays - some of them  remarkable - concerning  many  aspects of the  political  past  and  present in our country.


3

EDITORIAL



The  poverty  of Canadian political  writing is one  of Professor  Underhill's own favourite themes:

Where  (he  asks)  are  the  classics of our  political  literature which  embody our Canadian version  of liberalism  and  democracy?  Our  party  struggles  have  never been  raised  to  the  higher  intellectual  plane  in  which  they  become  of  universal interest  by  the  presence of  a  Canadian   Jefferson  and  a  Canadian Hamilton   in opposing  parties.  We have had  no Canadian Burke or Mill to perform  the social function  of the  political philosopher in action.  We have had  no Canadian Carlyle or Ruskin or Arnold to ask searching questions about  the ultimate  values embodied in  our  political  or  economic  practice.  We  lack  a  Canadian  Walt  Whitman   or Mark  Twain  to give literary expression to the democratic  way of life. The student in search  of illustrative  material  on the growth  of Canadian political ideas during the great  century  of liberalism and democracy  has to content  himself mainly  with a  collection  of extracts  from  more or less forgotten  speeches and  pamphlets  and newspaper  editorials.  Whatever  urge may have,  at  any time,  possessed any Cana­ dian  to  philosophize  upon  politics did  not  lead  to much  writing  whose  intrinsic worth helped to preserve it in our memory.

Professor  Underhill's comment is all too evidently just. It is true  that  in French Canada the struggle  for national identity  produced a few writers  and  a few works that   remain  in  the  memory  of French-reading people.  Bourassa  lingers  as some­ thing  more  than   a  mere  politician,  the  Abbe  Groulx as something more  than  a separatist prophet. But  in  English-speaking Canada,  once  we have  paid  custom­  ary  homage to the  melancholy  spirit  of Goldwin Smith, who is there  to acknow­ ledge?  What political  idealist in English Canada has written a speech  or a treatise  that  can  stir  the imagination a generation -or even  a decade -or even a year
- afterwards? We  have  some  excellent  biographies of  political  leaders,   but  it is  the  biographies  and  not  the  utterances of  their  subjects that   belong  to  our literature.
Even in a field that has at times been so fruitful in England and  France-that
of political  writing by the engaged  novelist or dramatist -Canada has produced nothing outstanding. We  have  had  no  Shaw   or  Huxley or  Wells,  no  Malraux or  Camus, or  even  any  writer   approaching them  in  the  power  to  give  viable literary form  to  political  ideas.  Canadian novelists  and  poets,  writing  on  politics, become as dull as the experts.
In  recent  months the  advent  of the  New  Democratic Party  produced a small
freshet  of books and  pamphlets celebrating the venture. There has been The  New Party by Stanley Knowles  (McClelland & Stewart, $2.50) ; there  has been  justice through  Power by Thomas Boyle ( Longmans, Green, $4.50), which  approaches

4

EDITORIAL



the  Party  from  a  trade unionist  point  of view;  there  has  been  Social  Purpose  in Canada  (University of Toronto Press, $4.95), an  ambitious symposium  by  left­ of-centre   academics who  seek  a  basis of argument and  fact  on  which  to  found  the  economic, social  and  political  thinking  of a new social-democratic movement in Canada.
Rarely  in  these  books  does  one  find  the  inspired  touch  that  characterised, for
example, the literature which  accompanied the early social movement in England during the  188o's  and  18go's.  There is none  of the golden  eloquence that  comes from   passion  and  artistry combined. One  chews  disconsolately at  sentences  like these:

Even  at  a time when  it is accepted  that  change  is the order  of the day, Cana­ dians  hold fast not only to their belief in democracy, but  to the conviction that  in and  through   the  workings  of  our  parliamentary   system we can  build  a  society that  will  preserve  freedom,  achieve a high level of economic  development,  esta­ blish security,  and  provide  for  the  educational,  social, and  cultural development of our people.
(Stanley Knowles in The New  Party.)

The  dynamic  force  that  seems to be the main source of the creative  and  con­ structive  changes  that  are  manifesting  themselves in  these emerging  countries  is nationalism.
(H. Scott Gordon in Social  Purpose  for Canada.)

The mental palate is clogged,  and  not only with the suetty  texture of the prose. There is an  almost  obsessive  tendency  in almost  all  these  writers  to deal  in  ab­ stractions to such  an  extent  that  one completely  loses sight  of the  individual  men to whom  all this good  is to be done  and  of the concrete earth on which  they live.
In  this  respect  Mr.  Boyle's  justice  through Power  is somewhat better  than  the
other  books.  Mr.  Boyle has  been  both  a teacher  and  a worker  on  the  bench; he has  the  kind   of  abundant general   knowledge   which  suggests  an  old-fashioned education through copious  reading, and  he can  alternate reminiscences of factory life  with  apt   quotations from  Cicero  and   Rabelais. He  sees  the  world  a  little romantically,  and   indulges in  Sorelian   panegyrics on  perpetual conflict  as  the desirable  state  for  society;  he is not  afraid  of his own  prejudices and  frequently gives them  their  head. The result  of all this is that  he not  only  presents  an  idea, which  we  can  accept or  reject; he  also  projects  the  temperamental image  of a man   who  holds  that   idea  with  a  great  deal  of feeling  because  he  has  reached it through thought tempered by much  experience.

5

EDITORIAL



Mr. Boyle may not have produced the best of political literature, for individual talent  in  the  end  determines  quality,  and  he may  not  make  many  converts for the  New  Party.  But  he writes on  the  right  track;   he talks about  men  and  not about  stereotypes. And  here,  perhaps,  is at  least one  of the qualities  that  mark off the literature  of politics from mere political  writing.  The  best political prose writer  is as conscious as a novelist that  he is dealing  with  people in a real and tangible  world,  and  he  never  gets far  away  from  that  vision. Thomas   More, William  Morris, John  Ruskin, Shelley, Shaw  - how anxious  they were to keep before their  mental  eyes the image of life going on in a believable landscape  - and how rarely they fell into the trap of relying solely on the abstractions of politi­ cal theory, of thinking  of Man  instead of men. Some of their kind might imbue our political life with the vision that is necessary if  Canada is to accept the moral responsibilities the age now offers, and offers no one knows how briefly.

















6



A NATION'S ODYSSEY

The  Novels of
llugh AfacLennan




(;eorge oodcock





HUGH MACLENNAN's  FIRST  NOVEL, Barom''" Ri>ing,
appeared  in  1941.  During  the two decades since then  he has reached  a position
of uneasy prominence  in Canadian letters. Other  Canadian writers, like Stephen Leacock, Mazo de la Roche  and  Morley Callaghan,  have established wider inter­ national   reputations;  others  again,  like Thomas  B. Costain  and  the  ineffable Ralph  Connor,  have gained  more of the ambiguous popularity  of the best seller. And  during the  past  twenty years  a  number of novels have  been  written  in Canada which are recognized as individually superior to the best of  MacLennan; Malcolm  Lowry's Under  the Volcano, Sinclair Ross's As  for Me  and  My  House, Brian  Moore's   judith   Hearne  and  Ethel  Wilson's  Equations  of  Love  come  at once  to mind.  Yet many  Canadian critics, if they were asked  what  novelist-in terms  of total  achievement-seemed to them  most significant  in  Canada today, would  probably   name  MacLennan, and   would   agree  with  Professor  Hugo McPherson's statement  in  a recent essay that "Barometer  Rising  marks a major advance in Canadian fiction."
The  reason for MacLennan's reputation, and for his undoubted  importance  as
a  novelist, are  to be found  in the original  way in which  he has interpreted the Canadian  scene  to  his  fellow   countrymen rather than in  any  originality  of approach to the art of the  novel itself. Indeed, if we are concerned  with fictional technique,  one of the most striking characteristics of Barometer  Rising and  Mac­ Lennan's four  later  novels is their  relative conservatism. They  are  unashamedly didactic; they  rely heavily  on environmental  atmosphere  and  local  colour;  their characterisation is over-simplified  and  moralistic in  tone;  their  language  is des-

7

A NATION'S  ODYSSEY



criptive  rather  than  evocative; and  their action  tends to be shaped  externally  by a Hardyesque use of circumstance  and  coincidence.  What  does distinguish  them is MacLennan's combination of theme and symbol-his development of the prob­ lems of individuals  in an emerging nation  by means of action  built on a  simple but powerful foundation  of universal myth.
The  myth is that of Odysseus translated  into terms of modern living; the Odys­
sey itself was the  product  of a people in the  process of becoming aware  of itself, and,  appropriately, the  theme  which  MacLennan uses it  to  illuminate   is the growth  of a Canadian national  consciousness. Indeed,  the most striking-and in some  ways  the  most  jarring-feature of  MacLennan's books is  the  degree  to which  the national  theme in its various aspects forms an imposed pattern  within which the lives of the characters tend to be worked out rather  than working them­ selves out.  In  Barometer  Rising  it  is the  leap  into  a sense of national  identity which  MacLennan sees emerging among Canadians during  the first  World  War;  in Two Solitudes  ( 1945)  it is the clash of English and  French traditions; in The  Precipice  ( 1948)   it  is the impact  of American  social  mores  on  the  Canadian consciousness; in  Each  Man's  Son  ( 1951)  it is the lingering  power in  Canada of  the  Calvinist  conscience; in  The  Watch that  Ends  the  Night   ( 1959), Mac­ Lennan's most recent and massive novel, it is the dual influence-destructive and creative  at once-of the social idealism of the Thirties. This predominance of the national theme  is a  factor  that  must  be  taken into  account  in  any  attempt   to understand  MacLennan's work, since it  bears  a  close relationship  to  his most evident  weaknesses as a novelist, and  also since its progressive assimilation into a fictionally  viable form  runs  parallel  to his  growth  towards  maturity  as a writer.
The  expression  of  the  theme  in  terms  of  the  constant  mythical  structure  is
evident  already  in  MacLennan's first novel. The  setting  of Barometer  Rising is Halifax  during  the  first World  War.  The  novel opens as a  young man  returns secretly  to the  Nova  Scotian capital.  As the action  progresses, it is revealed  that he is an  officer, Neil MacRae,  whom  his uncle  Geoffrey Wain,  also the colonel of his battalion  in France,  had  attempted  to blame  for the failure  of an attack. By chance  MacRae  was bombed on the night  before his court  martial,  given up for  dead,  but  found  by a  relieving  battalion  and  patched  up  without  his real identity  being discovered. Now he returns home, risking execution for cowardice, in the hope of collecting the evidence that  will clear his name.  Meanwhile,  there still lives in Halifax  the cousin, Penelope Wain,  with whom he was in love before he  went  away  to  the  wars;  she,  besides  being  a  capable  ship  designer,  is the daughter of Neil's enemy.

8

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



Wain  and  Penelope  both  learn  of MacRae's  presence in  Halifax  and,  while the  Colonel-who has  been  sent  home  in  disgrace  because  of the  unsuccessful attack-sets out  to frustrate  Neil's efforts and to get rid of him as quietly as pos­ sible, Penelope  and  a drunken  but good-hearted  M.O.,  Angus Murray,  do their best to see that  MacRae  vindicates  himself. But the situation  reaches its climax, not through  the efforts of the two parties, but through the great Halifax explosion of 1917,  which  overshadows  the latter  part  of the novel. MacRae  and  Murray recover their  self-respect by superhuman  feats of endurance in  relieving the vic­ tims,  while  Colonel  Wain  is  providentially  among  the  dead.  Meanwhile,  Alec MacKenzie,  a primitive giant  of a Cape Breton fisherman, gives on his death bed the evidence that  will clear Neil MacRae and enable him to marry  Penelope and assume parenthood of the child which, unknown to Neil, she had born him while he was away in France.
The  deliberate  adaptation of the Odyssey, if it were not  otherwise evident, is admitted  by MacLennan not  only in the name of his heroine,  but  also in  Mac­ Rae's  remark  in the  final chapter: "Wise  Penelope!  That's what  Odysseus said to his wife when  he got  home.  I don't  think  he ever told  her he loved her. He probably  knew  the  words  would sound too small."  But  MacLennan not merely establishes in  Barometer  Rising  a  Homeric  plot of the  wanderer  returning  to a mysteriously changed  homeland.  He  also uses for the first time a group  of sym­ bolic characters  which will recur  in various  permutations in his later  novels; the returning  wanderer, the  waiting  woman,  the  fatherless child,  the  wise doctor­ sometimes  transformed   into  the  wise  old  man,  and  the  primitive,  violent,  but essentially good  giant.  If we  wish to  seek a  Homeric parallel, the  quintet  of Odysseus,  Penelope,  Telemachus,  Mentor  and  Euma:us seems obvious,  though MacLennan is too good a writer  to follow the pattern  slavishly, and  we shall see the relationships of these five basic characters changing from novel to novel until, in The  Watch that  Ends the  Night, the wanderer,  the wise doctor and the primi­ tive giant  are finally united  in that super-Odysseus, Jerome  Martell.
There  are  some satisfying  things in  Barometer  Rising. The  atmosphere-the very  physical feeling-of Halifax  four  decades ago is admirably  recreated,  and the  action  moves  with  the  right  momentum  towards  the  grand  climax  of the explosion. And  this event is celebrated  in a passage of fine reconstructive report­ ing  which  establishes  at  the  outset   the  power  of  describing action  in  which MacLennan has  always  excelled. The  later  chapters  narrating  the  rescue work are  maintained at  a level of sustained  vigour, and  the  diminuendo  from  catas­ trophe  to the saddened  realisation  of human  happiness when  Neil and  Penelope

9

A  NATION'S  ODYSSEY



are  finally  and fully reunited gives  the  appropriate last  touch  to  the  novel's balance.
But  these  virtues,  which  make  Barometer Rising a constantly interesting book,
are  balanced  by  defects  which  are  due  partly to  deficiencies  in  technique and partly  to MacLennan's view of life and  the  world.  For  example, the  relationship between   the  lovers  is  the  least  convincing of  all  the  relationships in  the  novel because  of  a  curiously  embarrassed clumsiness  which  makes  MacLennan  incap­ able of dealing with  any aspect  of sex except  in high-mindedly sentimental terms.  It would  be  hard  to find anything more self-conscious,  in an  otherwise  naturally written book, than  these paragraphs with which  it draws  to an end:

Suddenly  Penny  required his tenderness so greatly  that  it was though all her life she  had  been  starving  for it.  She  wanted  him  to  take  her  in  his arms  and  hold her as he had  done that  unbelievable night in Montreal  when nothing had existed but  sounds  in  the  darkness  and  the  sense that  each  of  them  had  been  born  for that  moment.  All this she wanted,  but  the habit  of restraint,  the cold control  she had trained  herself to acquire, was still unbreakable.
Neil made  no effort  to move up  the  road.  He  stood  watching  her,  then  came
closer and  his fingers touched her hair where it escaped over her temples. He gave a sudden smile, and all strain vanished from his face  . . .
Tears  welled  up in her eyes and  receded  without  overflowing. And  her fingers closed over  his. He  looked over  her  head  to the  patch  of moonlight  that  broke and  shivered  in  the  centre  of the  Basin, and  heard  in  the  branches  of the forest behind him the slight tremor of a rising wind.

This  does  not  strike  one  as felt emotion; it  is too obviously  cobbled  in  the  mind of an embarrassed author out of the stock cliches of romanticist fiction-tears, moonlight, sudden smiles, fingers  touching temples  and  wind  rising in  the forest. Here,  at any rate,  MacLennan learnt  little from  Homer.
More  serious,  because  it seems to spring  from  a philosophic fatalism  perennial
in  MacLennan's attitude, is the  mechanical impetus that  at  times-and particu­ larly  during the  explosion-takes the  action   wholly  out  of  the  hands of  the characters. MacLennan was a Classical scholar  before  he became  a novelist,  and a  Calvinist   before  he  became  a  Classicist,  and   the  inexorable pattern of Greek tragedy  still  broods  over  his writing. Beyond  a  certain point,  Penelope and  Neil and   Angus  can  no  longer  shape  their  fates,  and  it  is not  so much   through the actions   of  the  characters that the  plot  is  finally  worked out   as  through the apparent  accident of  the  explosion,  which   takes  on  life  and  power  to  such  an extent  that  Neil is really released  from  danger, not  by proving his innocence, but

IO

A NATION'S  ODYSSEY



because  of  the  fortuitous justice  of  Geoffrey  Wain,   a  man  whose  life  was  one extended hubris1  being killed in a falling house.
The final  flaw  of  Barometer   Rising  comes from  the  too  articulate concern  of
the   major   characters  with   the  destiny  of  Canada. There are  times  when  this theme  assumes  a crude  and  abstract form  which  tears  like a  jagged  spur  into  the unity  of both  feeling  and  style. When,  for instance,  Neil and  Penelope are leaving the devastated city, at a time  when we might  expect the warmly  personal thoughts of two  young  people  united   after  so many  vicissitudes,  we are  all  at  once  faced with this passage in Neil's thoughts.

Why was he glad  to be back? It was so much more than  a man could ever put into  words.  It was more  than  the  idea  that  he was young  enough  to see a great country  move  into  its destiny. It was what  he felt inside  himself, as a Canadian who  had  lived  both  in  the  United  States  and  England.  Canada   at  present  was called  a  nation  only because a few laws had  been passed and  a railway  line sent from one  coast  to the other.  In  returning  home he knew that  he was doing more than  coming  back  to familiar  surroundings.  For better  or  worse he was entering the  future,   he  was  identifying himself   with   the  still-hidden   forces  that  were doomed  to shape  humanity as certainly  as the  tiny states  of Europe  had  shaped the  past.  Canada was still hesitant  . . .  But if there were enough  Canadians like himself,  half-American   and  half-English,  then  the  day  was inevitable   when  the halves  would  join and  his country  would  become the  central  arch  which  united the new order.

Perhaps these are  worthy  sentiments of an awakening patriotism, but  their expres­ sion  at  this  particular point  of fulfilment  in Neil's emotional life makes him seem an inhumanly and  improbably cold lover.




MACLENNAN's  SECOND  AND    THIRD  NOVELs,   Two  Soli­ tudes  and  The Precipice)  are even more dominated than  Barometer Rising by the effort  to create the  arch  of Canadian unity,  and,  because  everything else in  them is eventually subordinated to the  elaboration of the  national theme,  they  are  the least  successful  of  MacLennan's novels,  in  human understanding  and  formal cohesion alike.
Two Solitudes begins  in a little Quebec village dominated partly  by the  priest, Father Beaubien, and  partly  by the seigneur,  Athanase Tallard. Tallard is a poli­ tician  with  anti-clerical leanings  who  would  like  to see  the  material  progress  of

II

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



western Canada  spreading  into Quebec. The  latent  conflict between him and the anti-English  priest,  a man  of massive figure  and  obstinate  mind,  only becomes acute  when  TaBard  is the  means, first of bringing  wise old  Captain Yardley to one of the local farms, and  then of interesting English Canadian financiers in the possibility of starting  a  rniB in  the  village. The  conflict is complicated  by  Tal­ lard's  relationship  with  his elder  son, a  French Canadian  nationalist  who is arrested  as a deserter during  the  1914-18 war and  helps to arouse local hostility to his father.  Finally, goaded  by Father  Beaubien's  inflexible prejudices, Tallard  renounces  his Catholicism;  he is boycotted by his neighbours,  his old friends, even his employees, and  his English industrial  partners  desert him when  they see that his unpopularity will harm  their financial interests. Bankrupt  and  worn out with grief,  he dies in  Montreal; on  his deathbed  he returns  to the  Church-and his neighbours  accept  him again  when  he returns,  a failed  Odysseus, to lie in their midst.
This  first part  of Two  Solitudes has a close unity;  it is bound  together  by the
common  anxieties  of war  and  by the  virtual  identity  of the  larger  problem  of racial  conflict with the actual  lives and relationships of the characters. The prob­ lem seems to grow  with the story rather  than  the story  being fabricated  to suit the problem, and  the characters,  Father  Beaubien, Captain Yardley, the financier Huntly   McQueen,  Athanase  himself, are  up  to  this  point  weB-knit  and  self­ consistent. If Two  Solitudes had ended with Tallard's death,  it would have been a moving  and  cohesive book. But up to this point it merely presents the problem of racial  relations;  it does not have the logical completeness of  presenting a solu­ tion, and  this MacLennan seeks, at the expense of his novel, in its later chapters.
After  TaBard's   death  the  central  character   becomes his second  son,  Paul,  a
Telemachus fated  to complete his father's  unfinished  Odyssey. Paul  was sent to an  English school when  his father  broke with  the  Church; as he points out, he can  speak   English without  a  French  accent  and  French  without  an  English accent,  and so personifies racial reconciliation. Later, as a merchant  seaman, Paul wanders  far from  Canada,  but he returns,  on the eve of the second World  War, to marry  his childhood  friend,  Captain  Yardley's  grand-daughter Heather.  Fin­ aBy, to show  his hard-won  sense of Canada   as a  united  country,  he  defies his nationalist  brother and volunteers.
MacLennan is so anxious to make his point  that  he is not  content  merely to show  Paul  as the obvious human  symbol of two traditions  united; at the end of the novel he actually  steps out of the novelist's garment  and  assumes that  of the social historian  to deliver a final chapter  of authorial  reflection,  not on the fate

12

A NATION'S  ODYSSEY



of his characters,  but on the destiny of the Canada  they represent.
The  conclusion  of Two  Solitudes  is in fact contrived  to fit a nationalist  mes­ sage, and  this divides it so sharply from the earlier chapters  that,  while the story of Athanase  seems written  by a novelist acutely sensitive to concrete human  pre­ dicaments,  the story of Paul  reads as if it were written  by a man  in whom this very kind of sensitiveness had  been wholly submerged  under  the abstractions of a destiny-ridden  view of history.
The  same rather  startling  dichotomy is evident in The  Precipice, MacLennan's
worst  novel. In  The  Precipice  the life of a sleepy and  narrow-minded Ontario town,  intended   to  represent  Canada   between  the  wars,  is shown  in  opposition to the  "precipice" of New York, which attracts  so many  innocent  Canadians to moral destruction. This is the only novel in which MacLennan's principal charac­ ter is a woman,  and  his inability  to penetrate  the feminine  with  any  profundity (an  inability  that  may  well be linked with Calvinist inhibitions  he later  analyses so well in  Each  Man's  Son)   is undoubtedly  one of the  principal  reasons for its failure.  The  heroine,  Lucy  Cameron,  is a mousy Jane  Austenish  young woman, caught  in  the  narrow  interests  of her  community  and  apparently  destined  to a perpetual  spinsterhood  in the company of her two sisters. But she meets a visiting American  business man,  Stephen  Lassiter, and  under  his influence she blossoms astonishingly-for plainness changing  under stimulation  into breathtaking beauty is a  predictable  attribute of the  MacLennan  heroine.  Eventually  she runs away from  her disapproving  elder sister  and marries Stephen  in New York. They  con­ tinue to live in that dangerous  city, where Stephen becomes involved in the adver­ tising  world,  until-despite Lucy's  efforts  to  counter  the  baleful  influence  of urban  life-the  marriage  breaks  up.  Lucy retires to Ontario with  her  children, while  Stephen  sets off on  his miserable  Odyssey, succumbing to  over-educated sirens,  running  on to the  rocks of business failure,  until  his nerve breaks and he is reunited  with Lucy in a happy ending of excruciating banality.
Like Two  Solitudes, The  Precipice begins well; the early chapters  on the small town life of the three  sisters are alive, self-consistent and  perceptive.  But in New York, among the brassy glitter of familiar cliches on city life, the sense of an origi­ nal world disappears,  and  the novel slumps into a stock romance  in which Lucy, now  a  smug  and  irritating paragon,  loyally supports  Stephen,   changed  into  a comic caricature of the  ulcered  adman,  and finally, after  many  betrayals, nobly forgives all and  consoles him in his downfall. As a tract it is doubtless admirable; as fiction it is extremely dull.
Again,  the fault  lies in  the  attempt  to force a lesson, and  one notices in The

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



Precipice, as in Two Solitudes, how far the effort to work out a social problem in logical terms tends to weaken the mythical structure that  MacLennan brings for­ ward  from  Barometer  Rising. In each of these intermediate novels we encounter  again  the Odyssean  pattern  of journey and  return,  and  also, at least in  part,  the Homeric  group  of characters.  But both  plot  and  characters  lose  strength  when the author  seeks to state explicitly what should  be suggested figuratively. And so the return  of Paul Tallard  and Stephen Lassiter are less moving and less convinc­ ing than  the return  of Neil MacRae  because they contain  no element of mystery; nothing  can  grow from  them  because we know  far  too clearly what  the author  wishes them to mean.




IN CONTRAST TO  the novels that  preceded it, Each Man's  Son is a tensely constructed  and well-unified book, in which the balance of theme and mythical  structure  is re-established. Central  to  the  novel is the  tragedy  of the failing  boxer,  Archie  MacNeil,  and  in  the  portrayal  of Archie's  world  of prize fights and  shabby  gymnasia MacLennan writes with an extraordinary descriptive power. But Archie's fate, the fate of a basically good primitive in an environment of cynical exploitation,  does not suggest the only theme of the novel; there is also the even stronger  theme of Calvinist guilt, which afflicts Archie and  all the other people of the  little  Cape  Breton  mining  town from  which  he comes, but  which appears  most  dramatically  in  the conflicts that  plague  Dr.  Ainslie, the  brilliant local  surgeon  whom  conscience prevents from  ever fulfilling his promise  as a doctor and a man.
The  structure within which MacLennan develops these two themes differs con­ siderably  from  that  used in Two  Solitudes and  The  Precipice. There  he allowed the statement of a problem to be followed in chronological  sequence  by its solu­ tion, and  the result was a linear pattern  whose lack of inner  tension  undoubtedly  contributed to  the  anti-climax  into  which  both  books eventually  fell.  In  Each Man's  Son  MacLennan returns  emphatically   to  the  counterpointed pattern   of the Odyssey. Life in the Cape Breton village, where Archie's wife Mollie and  his son  Alan  await  his  return,  alternates  with  Archie's  own  wandering  adventures  just as life on Ithaca alternates  with the distant  adventures of Odysseus. Mollie, like Penelope,  is subject  to many  temptations.  On  one side there  is Dr.  Ainslie, whose mental  agony is complicated by an emotional  conflict with his wife, arising largely from  their lack of children. He meets young Alan  MacNeil  and,  realising

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



his exceptional gifts,  begins  to  take  an  interest  in him,  to educate him,  until  the child  assumes in  his mind  the  position of the son his wife cannot bear.  Eventually, fearing Ainslie's  influence will alienate Alan  from  her,  Mollie  opposes  a continu­ ation  of the  education plan,  and  listens to her other  tempter, Camire, a glib little Frenchman who has settled  in the village.
But  the  night  Mollie  gives herself to Camire is also the  night  on which  the  two
paths  of the  novel  run  together, and  the wanderer returns, a wrecked  man  going blind,  but  not  too  blind  to see what  is going on when  he opens  the  cottage door. So the  slaughter in  the  great  hall of Ithaca is repeated in miniature. Archie  kills Camire,  mortally  wounds  Mollie,  and  falls  in  a  stroke  from  which   he  quickly dies.  Alan,  the  terrified  witness  of it  all, is left completely alone,  and, now  that all the intervening characters have so providentially been swept  away,  Ainslie can at last claim  the boy as his own.
The  tragedy  is almost  grotesquely  inevitable. As in his earlier  works, MacLen­
nan   cannot avoid  seeing  life  running in  the  lines of  Greek tragedy, and  the mechanics of  a  classical  destiny  grind  their  pattern all  too  heavily  and  harshly on  the  human weakness  of his characters. Yet  this incorporation of destiny,  with its  corresponding  weakening of  the  sense of  human freedom, is not  entirely  in­ appropriate in a novel so permeated with the ambient darkness of Calvinist guilt.  For  the  people  MacLennan creates,  destiny  is an  inner reality,  and  so for  once the  novelist's  own  fatalism  accords  with  his subject.  MacLennan  suggests  with powerful effectiveness  the  fear  that  always  seems  to  overtop hope  in  the  hearts  of  his  Cape   Bretoners, and   he  portrays   equally  effectively  the  relationships of classes  and   persons  in  a  little  society  bound  together   by a  common faith  in  its own  damnation. MacLennan himself  comes  from  Cape  Breton,  and  it  is likely that  the  immediacy one  feels in  this  novel,  the  tension  that  unites  structure and  theme  and  myth,  and  makes  the characters convincingly human even  when  they are most the slaves of circumstance, stems from its closeness to his own experience.




WEN WE  COME TO   The Watch that   Ends  the  Night, MacLennan's largest  and  most  ambitious novel, we are  reminded immediately of Barometer  Rising,  for  here  again  a  revenant comes  back  from  the  battles  of life and  the  shadow of death to the  haunts of his youth.  But,  once  beyond  this  com­ mon  starting-point, MacLennan's first and  his most recent  novel diverge on  their separate errands. In  Barometer  Rising the action  really  centres  around the efforts

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



of Neil MacRae to claim  his rightful  place among the living. But Jerome Martell in  The  Watch that  Ends the  Night comes home  from  the  Nazi  torture chambers
-by way of a long  pilgrimage through Russia  and  China-only, like the original Odysseus,  to  renew  his wanderings. His  return, in  fact,  is important most  of all for its effect on his former  wife Catherine, and  on George  Stewart, the lover from childhood whom  she  married after  hearing the  false  reports of  Martell's death. For   years  Catherine and  George  have  lived  in  the  quiet   campus security  of  a present  which  seems sealed  off from  the more  destructive acids  of memory. And then  George  rings  up  a number which  the  college  porter has given  him  and-as he  hears  Jerome's forgotten voice-finds  himself  in the  echoing tunnel that  leads towards a past he had  thought done with for ever.
By  this  means  The  Watch  that  Ends the  Night  becomes  a  novel  constructed
in receding vistas of time, and in handling the leaps of memory  MacLennan's craftsmanship is  unobstrusively  sure.  We  retreat with  George-who in  his  role of narrator acts as a sensitive intermediary recording the effects of Jerome's return on  others  as  well  as  himself-first into the   childhood in  which,  by  regarding Catherine as a girl  rather than  an invalid,  he gives her  the confidence of her own femininity. Time surges  forward to  the  Thirties, the  Depression and  Spain  and the  Leftist  Dream, and   Jerome appears with  them, an  idealistic  surgeon, deft with a scalpel  and  crushing with an argument, a figure  larger  than  life who bursts dramatically into  George's memory  in  the  middle of that  fateful  telephone  con­ versation.

He  was  right  in  front  of  me  now, Jerome  Martell   in  the  mid-Thirties,  ugly­ handsome  with  muscular  cheeks, a  nose flattened   by an  old  break,  hair  cropped short  because it defied a brush, a bulldog jaw, nostrils ardent  like those of  a horse, mouth   strongly  wide  and  sensual,  but  the  eyes  young,  hungry  and  vulnerable, quick to shame as a boy's, charming  with children  and  the weak, quarrelsome  with the strong. There  he was, that oddly pure sensualist so many experimenting women had  desired,  the man so many of us had  thought  of as wonderful  in those depres­ sion years when we were all outcasts.

Jerome, though not  technically the  hero  of The  Watch that  Ends the  Night, is a figure  in the heroic  mould, the wanderer and  the giant  and  the medicine man all in  one,  an  energumen in the  thirties,  a man  of sorrows  and  saintly  wisdom  in the fifties, who seems for most of the novel too far  above  common clay to be either true  or  tolerable unless we accept  him  as myth  incarnate. Yet  there  is one  point at  which  even Jerome becomes authentically human; that  is when  another tunnel of time  opens  up  and  takes us back into  the  New  Brunswick woods, to the child-

A  NATION'S ODYSSEY



hood of a boy born of an illiterate Central  European  immigrant  and  brought  up in  the  primitive  tum-of-the-century logging camps  where  his mother  works  as cook. The  mother  is murdered by one of her lovers; the boy escapes downriver and  is adopted   by a simple-minded  pastor who finds him starving  on a railway station.  This  part  of the  book is written  as admirably  as MacLennan has ever written  of  primitive  action;  the  woods of  New  Brunswick take shape  in  one's mind  as a distinct  physical presence, different from any other woods one has ever read  of or  walked  in,  and  the  night  scene in  the sleeping camp  when  the  boy escapes from the murderer  is powerfully thrilling.
At  the  end  of The  Watch that  Ends the  Night  Jerome  dispenses his wisdom
and  departs  for  the west. The  shock of his return  has shortened  Catherine's life so that  she is now an  obviously dying woman,  but Jerome  has enabled  her and George  to find  themselves, to face their  pasts, and  to wait  tranquilly  in a world of gathering  shadows  for death.  In  fact, in a sense he has passed them  through death,  and  so the  three  main  characters  become united  at that  key point of the Odysseus myth,  the  descent  into  the  underworld  that  precedes  rebirth  into  the sunlight.
There  is a  flavour  of  pietistic smugness about  this ending  which  is hard  to
accept; there is also, throughout The  Watch that  Ends  the  NightJ  a suave mawkishness in talking about sex which amounts almost to diplomatic  evasion. MacLennan still suffers from his Calvinist background.  But, granting  such short­ comings, granting  also the difficulty one experiences in really believing in Jerome, The  Watch that  Ends the  Night  is still a novel that  impresses one for a  number  of reasons-its craftsmanly  construction, its descriptive power, its ambitious grasp of the variety  of Canadian social situations, from the primitive logging camp  to the set of fellow-travelling  academics, from the Halifax  manse to the Anglophile boarding  school and the C.B.C. and the Ministry of External Affairs.
In  mid-career,  MacLennan is still clearly developing as a novelist. His didacti­
cism, which  will probably  never leave him, is at least presented  now with a dis­ creet  indirection; his  fatalism  has  largely acquired  meaning in  terms  of  the content of his novels-it is a fatalism proceeding rather from within his characters  than  from  the world outside. He has, in other words, largely neutralised  some of his most evident  defects as a writer of fiction. It is true that  his handling  of any kind of sexual relationship  remains almost as clumsily  romanticist  as ever it was; indeed,  in this respect The  Watch that Ends the  Night is a regression from Each ManJs Son.  On  the other  hand,  in his three successful novels, Barometer  Rising) Each  ManJs Son  and  The  Watch that  Ends  the NightJ he has steadily widened

A NATION'S ODYSSEY



and  varied  his portrayal  of the character  of Canadian life. Ultimately,  perhaps, he is best as a social novelist, using his central myth to demonstrate  the underlying universality of the personal and  national  experience  he re-creates.  And doubtless it is this function  that really explains the consideration  we accord him. Few Cana­ dian  critics, even among  those who praise him,  would seriously claim  him as a great  writer adept at exploring the intricacies of the human  heart  and mind;  most accept  him  as the  best example  of a  kind  of novelist that  may  be  necessary in Canada today,  the kind of novelist who interprets a rapidly  maturing  society to its own  people in the same way as Dickens and  Balzac interpreted the society of the  industrial   revolution  to  the  English  and  the  French a  hundred   years ago. MacLennan may not have the variety or the abounding vigour or the sheer great­ ness of  texture  shared  by these imperfect  giants,  yet in  his way he is of their kind and  no writer has yet come nearer than  he to writing a Canadian Comedie Humaine.










TOO LONG TO
THE COURTLY  MUSES

Hugh MacLennan as a
Contemporary Writer




Paul  Goetsch






CRITICAL STATEMENTS  about  Canadian w'ite" tend  to fall into three categories. Literary  nationalists hasten to root the writer to a Cana­ dian   tradition. Self-conscious  cosmopolitan  critics see the  colonial  time-lag  at work.  And  a  few sober  academics  rest satisfied with  a thorough  analysis, after the modem  fashion, of the author's achievement, and suggest his place in literary history only incidentally.
In  the case of Hugh  MacLennan such diverging approaches  have led to some
confusion. Do his first three  novels "sum  up nicely the main stream  of Canadian fiction in  its first century"?•   Or  is a work like Barometer   Rising  "a  remarkably fresh  and  stimulating book  to  read"  only because the  attitudes  and  techniques of the Georgian  writers  are  applied  "to  a new environment and  historical situa­ tion"?• Or  is it true  that  "one  need only consider the widely contrasted  works of Virginia  Woolf and  Franz  Kafka  to visualize the diverse areas which  Mr. Mac­ Lennan is now [in Each  Manjs Son]  attempting  to synthesize"?3
We must admit  that  all these judgements have some foundation in fact. Mac­ Lennan's   treatment  of  nationalism,  for  instance,  bears  a  resemblance,  even  if superficial,  to the Confederation novel, and  a number  of the devices he employs
-the omniscient point of view, the explicit commentary on action, and the labell­ ing  characterization - derive from   an  older  tradition. To  arrive  at  a  truly balanced   historical  estimate,   however,  we  have  to  describe  the  characteristic  blend of contemporary and traditional  elements rather  than  pick out, and pigeon­ hole, single aspects of the writer's work.

19

TOO  LONG TO  THE COURTLY MUSES



MacLennan's first  novel,  Barometer  Rising,  appearing in  I 94 I, was  surpris­ ingly  late  as a work  on the  First  World  War. But,  besides offering  a fresh  inter­ pretation of  the  Canadian experience  from  a  nationalistic point  of  view, it gives a  new  aspect  to  the  war  novel.  MacLennan starts  out  from  the  premises  which many   major  Anglo-Saxon  writers  accepted in  the   twenties  and   thirties.   To  Hemingway, Dos  Passos  and  others,   the  war   meant the  end  of  the  old  social order, an  initiation into  violence  that  isolated  the soldier  from  the  civilian,  made  him  regard  traditional values  as a mockery,  and  deprived him  of any  impulse  to cope  with  the  future. For  a while  this seems  to apply  to  MacLennan's hero  Neil Macrae. He  returns to  Halifax,  disillusioned, lonely,  vainly  trying  to observe  in the  town  the  same  changes  the  war  has  caused  in  himself.  "He might  as well be dead  as the  way he was, since the chief loss in  death was the ability  to communi­ cate." But  on his solitary  walks through  Halifax he gradually finds himself.  Even before  the  climax  of the novel is  reached,  he dismisses, as self-hatred, the  idea  of avenging himself  on  his uncle,  who  betrayed him  in France and  still threatens to have  him  tried  for  desertion.  And  when  the  explosion  of  an  ammunition boat destroys   part   of  Halifax,  he  participates in  the  rescue  work,  without  thinking about   securing his  position  legally.  In   his  conscience  he  feels  that   the  young generation need  not  justify itself;  the colonial  society has  been  blown  wide apart, and  Canadians may now concentrate on the tasks of the future:

... if there  were enough Canadians  like himself, half-American  and  half-English, then  the  day  was inevitable  when  the  halves  would  join and  this country  would become the central  arch which united the new order.

Here   MacLennan  manipulates the  cliches  of  Canadian  nationalism to  motivate Neil  Macrae's final,  positive  reaction   toward the  war.  Neil  is set  free  from  his disillusion  at the  moment  he is forced,  by  the  explosion,  to  re-live  and  view  his oversea  combat experience within  a Canadian context. He  realizes  that:

(Canadians] were  not living out  the  sociological  results of  their  own lives when they crawled  through the trenches of France.

Questionable  as  the  sociological  theory   that   Canada came   of  age  in  the  First World   War   may  be,  it becomes  almost  credible in  the  novel  because  there  it  is largely  conceived  in  terms  of character and  action; so much  so that  nationalism remains a secondary motive,  which  serves to localize  a story  of universal implica­ tions.  While  the explosion  images  the fact  of war,  the ensuing rescue work,  which is carried out  by members  of both  the old and  young  generations, suggests that, in

20

TOO  LONG TO  THE COURTLY MUSES



the face of chaos, a new group spirit asserts itself. Throughout the novel, the pro­ cess of self-discovery and  rebirth  is further  objectified by a technique  of  mystifi­ cation loosely patterned  on the account of Ulysses' return  to Ithaca. Like Ulysses, Neil remains  anonymous  for some time and  has to prove himself  through action before he may mention  his name again and rejoin Penelope Wain.
Fusing  the  motives  of war  and  homecoming  by means  of a  highly contrived,
parabolic plot, MacLennan manages in Barometer  Rising to bring the personal problems  of his typical  characters  to a satisfying resolution  and  also to convey, through  them,  a sense of the social questions involved. In  his second and  third novels this technique  breaks down as social documentation and  nationalistic con­ siderations take precedence over character  and action.
The  earlier  part  of Two Solitudes  seems at first to reproduce  the trappings  of the  social  world  presented  in  the  English  regional  novel  before  and  about  the tum  of the  century.  As in Hardy's   jude  the  Obscure)  the principles of a closed society, as upheld  by typed  and  slightly satirized characters,  are challenged  by a few individuals,  who, in turn,  are ostracized by the society and suffer a fate near to tragedy.  At a second  glance,  however, it becomes clear  that  the social reality MacLennan  depicts  is more   complex and   more  modern. The  values  of  the French-Canadian village  are  not  only questioned  by its well-meaning  seignieur1
Athanase  Tallard, but  also by a rival social edifice, as rigid and as prejudiced­
the  Anglo-Canadian  community.   MacLennan's point  of  departure is, then,  a society at war with itself, on the verge of fragmentation.
His theme,  the union  of the two halves of Canada, is developed in three steps. Athanase  Tallard, unlike  the  Anglo-Canadian  Captain   Yardley,  tries  to  make the  adjustment a  political  and  social,  rather  than  a  human,  one.  He  loses his friends  and  finally  himself  when,  as a  result of his quarrel   with  the  Catholic church,  he  chooses to  become  a  Presbyterian.  His  death-bed   return  to  his  an­ cestral faith is, as Claude  Bissell puts it,


... a dramatic  way of saying that with nations, as with individuals, there are deep instinctive urges that cannot be forced into a common mould.4


Tallard's son,  Paul,  is better prepared to  resist  the  pull  of  the  two  "race legends" since  his education  at  English schools has rid  him of the  prejudices  of his group.  But the economic depression alienates him entirely from society and disenchants  him  as the  war  had  disenchanted   Neil Macrae.  Only  after  a  long stay abroad  does Paul  realize what it means to be a Canadian. His marriage  to


21

TOO LONG TO THE COURTLY MUSES



Heather  Methuen, an  Anglo-Canadian, is meant   to  indicate   the  only  kind  of union possible for Canada, a unity in diversity:

Now as she [Heather]  watched him sleeping she knew that in spite of loving her he had never lost the sense of himself. She was not  jealous of the part she could not  touch.  What  she did  have was a hundred  images of him engraved  on her mind, all different.

If to  be a  Canadian means,  however, that  the  French-Canadian has  to be  bi­ lingual,  cut off from  his own group,  and a member,  in turn,  of the Catholic and Presbyterian  churches,  the marriage  is not  a  union  of equal  partners.  MacLen­ nan's  novel  of symbolic  reconciliation  in  this  respect  resembles  the  best-selling minority  novels in  which  the  dice are  always loaded  against  the  minority.  His failure  to come to a clear conception is paralleled  by an uneven execution  of the three  movements  of his theme, a fact  which Hugo  McPherson,  to whose discus­ sions of MacLennan this essay is much indebted,  has well described.






IF Two   Solitudes  is partly  redeemed  by  the  importance of its theme  and  the imaginative,  though contrived  and  non-realistic  account  of the clash  of opposing  group  values in its earlier  part,  MacLennan's third  work of
fiction, The  Precipice, is the least successful of his novels. As a study in the con­ trasting  sensibilities of two peoples, of Americans  and  Canadians, it recalls those novels of W.  D.  Howells and  Henry  James  in  which  the international  theme  is interwoven  with  the question of the  Puritan's inhibition,  innocence, and  experi­ ence. But while Howells and James introduce  us to sharply individualized  people and  imply   national   characteristics  and  differences,  MacLennan is not  able  to translate,  into an original story, the generalizations he has drawn  in his essays on American-Canadian relations.
When, in 1938, the American engineer, Steve Lassiter, comes to Grenville, one of many Victorian  small towns in Canada, he is confronted  by society still adher­ ing  to the  Calvinistic  code of belief and  behaviour.  He  himself is  plagued  by a sense of guilt.  In  contrast  to Jane  Cameron,  who  may  be said  to  represent  the collective conscience of Grenville,  he no longer  believes in  the  possibility of be­ coming one of the "elect."


22

TOO LONG TO  THE COURTLY MUSES



Because Stephen   had  always feared  his father,  he  thought  of  him  as  infallible, like God.  Therefore it  was inevitable  that  he thought  of the depression  as a sort of cosmic accident.

Lassiter  tries  to  forget   his  own  difficulties  and  marries  Jane's younger  sister, Lucy,  who  is glad  to  escape  from  her  crippling environment. Up  to  this  point, The   Precipice  resembles  The   Old  Wives'  Tale  both  in  its  plot-line and  in  the detached treatment of  a  small-town background, though  not  of course,  in  moti­ vation, for  the  resolution  of  the  novel  is not  at  all anti-romantic. It is  true  that  Lucy,  like  Sophia Scales,  is left  by her  husband and  returns disillusioned to her home  town.  But  there  she  is released  entirely  from  her  Puritan heritage, recog­ nizes  the  importance of love  and  forgiveness,  and  rejoins  her  husband at  a time he  most  needs  her.  Lucy's  reaction  seems to mirror  the  therapy which  the author prescribes   for  nations  as  well  as  individuals on  the  basis  of  an   unconvincing diagnosis.   According  to  MacLennan, the  differences   between   the   two  North­ American nations are  to  be  explained  by  Canada's retarded development and,  more  especially,  by  the  continuing  influence of Puritanism. Yet, since  the  Cana­ dians  have  not  turned their  backs  on  religion  altogether, they  are,  it seems, in a position   to  help   their   American  neighbours, who  have   been  driven, by  their pursuit  of material values, to the edge of a precipice.
The  odd  mixture of  nationalistic and  religious  considerations, and  the  cliche­ ridden  action, are  equally  responsible  for the novel's failure, and  mark  it a transi­ tional   piece.  For  The   Precipice is  at  least  indicative of   MacLennan's  growing  awareness that   certain  personal problems  - those  of  Steve  and   Lucy   (and   of Athanase  in  the  previous   novel)   - cannot be  solved  in  terms  of  society  but demand a  private, that  is, religious  solution.  In  Each  Man's  Son  the  necessary shift  in emphasis takes place.  Puritanism is still dominant and  carries  social impli­  cations; but  in  spite  of the  author's unhappy  "Prologue", it is no longer  a socio­ logical  abstraction. It stands  rather for  a  religious  attitude, for  a faith  subjected to critical  examination and  found wanting.
The   main   strand of  action   is concerned with  Dr. Ainslie's spiritual crisis. Brought up  a  strict  Calvinist, Ainslie  considers  himself  and  the  people  on  Cape Breton  haunted by an ancient curse, by

. . .  the  belief  that  man  has inherited  from  Adam  a nature  so sinful  there  is no hope for  him and  that  furthermore, he lives and dies under  the wrath  of an  arbi­ trary God  who will forgive only a handful  of His elect on the Day of  Judgment.

Since  his abilities  are  thwarted on  the island,  Ainslie feels guilty  and  lonely.  Un-


23

TOO LONG TO  THE COURTLY MUSES



like the miners, he cannot identify himself with the boxer Archie  MacNeil,  whose fights in the United  States make up the second strand  of action. But perhaps,  he thinks, he may be able to find a new meaning  in life by centering  his hopes and ambitions  on  the  prizefighter's son, Alan. This  attempt  fails. Trying  to win the boy for  himself, he erects a barrier  between  him  and  his mother  and  drives her into  the  arms of the Frenchman Camire.  Ainslie has yet to learn  that  one must not love selfishly. He has to learn also that  he, himself, is searching  not for a son but,  as  McKenzie  tells him,  for  a  God.  When  he  realizes that  his fear  of the ancient  curse has caused him to fear love itself, his spiritual  evolution is complete. And  by mere  chance  he may now even prove  himself a  truer  "father" to Alan than  Archie MacNeil ever was; for the boy is left an orphan  when Archie returns home, slays his wife and her lover, and dies of a brain-hremorrhage.
Critics have been quick to question the unity of Each Man's  Son and to charge
MacLennan with failing to relate Ainslie's reflections to the action. On a closer reading,   however,  we  discover  that   the  author   has  projected  a  second,  more objective  point of view which enlarges the narrow  rationalizations of Dr. Ainslie and  his friend  McKenzie. It is the point of view of the eight-year-old  Alan  Mac­ Neil. Alan serves MacLennan  as the pivotal character  about  whom the two parts of the plot revolve. To the boy, who has no knowledge of Puritanism, or even of the  meaning  of sin, the events appear  as a struggle  between  two kinds of father figure-between the boxer, who is the "strongest  man" in the world but indiffer­ ent  to  his son,  and  Dr.  Ainslie, who  "know  everything"  and  can  explain  the nature  of the stars. Alan keeps comparing  the  two. He  recognizes Ainslie's love without  knowing  anything  about  his Puritan  scruples,  and  hopes  that  one day the  boxer will return  and  chase his mother's  lover away, so that  Dr. Ainslie will become  their  friend  again. Horribly  enough,  his wish comes true.  He flees from Archie  MacNeil  and, in due course, will accept Ainslie as his "father". If we see Alan  as the  focus of the action,  the novel assumes something  of the quality  of legend  and  mirrors structurally  Dr.  Ainslie's  development.  In  fact,  Ainslie, for a moment,  thinks he is Alan and  then realizes that  his inner conflict is one between two different kinds of God images:

The  theologians, not Jesus, have tried to convince us that God, out of His infinite loving-kindness and  tender  mercy, out  of His  all-wise justice, has decided  that nearly all human  beings are worthless and  must be scourged in  the hope that  a few of them, through a lifetime of punishment, might become worth saving. Now he had something specific to be angry about, and  Ainslie let his rage build upon itself.

24

TOO LONG TO THE  COURTLY MUSES



It seems  that  Dr.  Ainslie  does not  so much  have  to emancipate himself  from  his Puritan environment as to find  his true self. When  doing  his work in the  hospital, he has  always  demonstrated unselfish love and  self-sacrifice;  and  hence  it is small wonder   that   he  has,  for  Alan, embodied the  principle  of love  all  the  while.
If the  two  points  of view  do  not  quite  coalesce to make  the  novel  a fully inte­ grated  whole,  this is due  to the fact  that,  as in Barometer Rising, the technique of the  omniscient narrator does  not  go well with  a parabolic plot.  What the  action  suggests  has  to  be  commented on  ad nauseam  by  the  characters to  show  they have  come  to the  same  conclusions  as the  reader.  MacLennan needs  an  narrator who can  both  act  and  interpret the action.  His fifth novel, where  "the story-teller  and  the  self-explorer are  one"5  is, therefore, a  major  advance.




IN The  Watch That  Ends the  Night  MacLennan gives us a study  of  the  character of  George  Stewart, but  beyond  it  he  creates  a  symbolic
structure akin  to allegory.  On  the  first level, the  novel  deals  with  various  phases of  Stewart's development, phases  which,  thanks  to  his  wide  range   of  interests and  many  contacts with  other   persons,  come  to serve  as  pegs for  an  account of the  major  social  experiences of people  living in our  time.  The  miraculous return from   the  dead   of  Jerome Martell in I 95 I releases in  the  narrator a  flood  of memories   presented  in  a  series  of  carefully   worked-out regressions,  and  juxta­ posed  to,  and   thus  indirecdy interpreted by,  Stewart's opinions and  actions  at the  time  of  the  Korean War. From  this  re-assessment  of both  past  and  present emerge   two  pictures unlike  each  other  in  outline.  As  Stewart  demonstrates by stressing  the  prevailing passions  at  the  expense  of naturalistic  detail, life during the  Great Depression  was quite  different  from  life in the  post-war world.
It is Jerome Martell who  seems  to  represent  the  pre-war period. Jerome, on whom  childhood experiences in  the  New  Brunswick  woods  and  the  shock of the First   World   War   have  left  their  mark,  is forever  restless,  reacting violently  on the  spur  of a  moment, unbelieving but  searching for  a belief;  he leaves  his wife Catherine and  goes  to  participate in  the  Spanish  War  because  he  thinks  a man must  belong  to something larger  than  himself and  commit himself  even  to a lost cause.  George,  on  the  other  hand, views himself as a typical  representative of the time  after  the  war.  He  has  married Catherine, his boyhood  sweetheart, has got a  well-paid job  as a  radio  commentator, is cautious,  if not  complacent, distrusts

TOO LONG TO THE COURTLY MUSES



passionate  emotions,  and,  above  all, longs to  keep  his hard-won  economic  and social security. He thinks he has come to terms with life.
After  Martell's  return,  George  realizes how  insecure,  in  a spiritual  sense, his
position really is; for there is one point after  all in which past and  present meet. If the  depression  has meant  living in  the  face  of an  imminent war,  life in  the fifties means living in the shadow of the atomic  bomb. This idea is effectively presented  in  terms  of Catherine's  two marriages.  In  reaction  to the threat  of a diseased  heart,   Catherine  has  from  her  childhood   chosen  to  affirm  life in  ex­ tremity;  she has the strength to do so even when Jerome  Martell's  return reminds her how little time remains. The  wisdom she has always possessed, which Jerome has acquired  in  the  European  concentration  camps,  "and  which George  tries to understand and share is the book's religious core."6
If the spiritual  problems underlying two different  phases in history and  a solu­
tion  couched  in  the  form of a  message were  all  MacLennan intended  to point out, we should, indeed, fail to understand  why he regarded  his novel as an experi­ ment.7 But MacLennan also uses his version of the flashback technique to convey thematically   and  structurally  the  fact  of  George  Stewart's   religious  initiation; except  for  the  Everyman  passages toward  the  end  of the novel, the whole state­ ment is rendered through imagery and action.
Since the passages above referred to paraphrase and even mention  major con­ cepts of Jung's  psychology, it is convenient  to interpret the novel, on its second level of  meaning,  as analogous  to Jung's  analytic  technique-as  an  individu­  ation  process, in  which  the  contents  of the  unconscious  is  assimilated  with  the conscious to effect a harmonization  of the psyche. When  George are lost in him­ self, given up to his memories, two persons he knows in actuality  loom larger than life and  take on the character  of archetypal  figures. Catherine seems a "queen," "a  rock,"  "a  saint," "a  spiritual  force".  Hers  is the  beauty  of an  "angel". Her "strength," her  "essence,"  and  her  "mystery"  have  attracted  George  so much that,   occasionally,  he  has  "almost  drowned" in  her  "spirit". But  at  the  same time,  she  has  kept  eluding  him. Catherine  resembles  what  J ung  would  call the anima  archetype.  Jerome,  for his part,  is called  "a force of nature," "a  martyr," and  George's  "spiritual  father".  He is the  geist  figure which,  as Jung  says with reference  to  the  old  man  in  the  fairy-tale,  appears whenever  the  hero  is in  a dilemma  and  needs guidance. Thus,  Jerome has strengthened Catherine's will to live,  has  helped  George  to get  a  job, and  has  miraculously  come  back  before Catherine's death  to force Stewart  to adopt a  new attitude  toward  life (and  cure Harry  Blackwell of his obsession with  Norah). Jerome's  flight by boat from  the

TOO  LONG  TO  THE  COURTLY MUSES



murderer of his mother is made  to equate Stewart's perilous  situation:

Then  a  man  discovers in  dismay that  what  he believed  to  be his identity  is no more than a tiny canoe at the mercy of an ocean.

And  his return from  the  bottom of the ocean,  as it were,  his dying  into  life after dreadful years  in  concentration camps,  externalizes  George's mystical  experience that  culminates in the recognition of "the last harmony."
In  a  way,  the  structure of the  novel is paradoxical. What on  the  factual level
appears to be  the  worst  time  of Stewart's life - the  depression  -is, in his self­ analysis,  a  place  of danger, and  yet of regeneration. Correspondingly, Catherine, the  woman George  loves, is also the  woman  he hates  for  the  power she  has over him.  And  if Jerome's departure for Spain  seems a  bad  decision  in  1938, it ulti­  mately  leads  to  his salvation. All  this suggests  not  only  that  many  facets  of life resist logical  analysis,  but  also that  MacLennan is attempting in a work of fiction what, according to George, "the musicians  alone seem able to record":

One  musical idea uttered  in the minor in a certain tempo is surrender,  despair and suicide. The  same  idea  restated  in  the  major  with  horns  and  woods becomes an exultant  call to life.

If this  interpretation is  just,  the  success of The  Watch That   Ends  the  Night as  a  work  of  art  obviously  stands  and  falls on  the  credibility of  its  narrator, George  Stewart. One  reviewer  has said  of him  that  "his  mania for  handing out crashing  complacencies on   almost   every  imaginable  major  consideration  in life  .  . . is in  curious  contrast to  his other  mania  for  emphasizing his many  in­ sufficiencies."8  This  is putting a  basically  correct  observation in  negative  terms.  George   belongs   to  the  stock  type  of  the  naive  narrator. Like  the  high  school teacher Serenus Zeitblom in  Thomas Mann's Dr. Faustus, he is in  everyday  life a  shrewd   but  not  exceptional observer  of events  political and  social. But,  as he knows  very  well,  not  everything can  be interpreted in  his  usual  manner. Again  like  Serenus  Zeitblom, he is a  newcomer  to the  emotional  and  irrational part  of life;  it  is  in  keeping   with  his  character when  he  depreciates himself  in  talking  of  Catherine or  Jerome, persons  he cannot  fully  understand. Although he is an intellectual, he  has  "the grace   to  wonder".9   His  self-devaluation  reveals his humility.
By choosing  this  narrator, MacLennan seems to  have  made  a  virtue  of what used  to  be  glaring faults  in  his  previous  novels. A  man  like George  will like  to generalize glibly  about major issues and  offer explanations of what  makes  people

TOO  LONG TO  THE COURTLY MUSES



tick. But MacLennan achieves distance between himself and his story-teller by showing  how Stewart's  rash  judgments are  corrected  by the  passage of time or rendered  relative by his new religious insights. In the final part of the novel, how­ ever, MacLennan seems to identify himself so much  with the narrator that many readers  will find  Stewart's  remarks,  rhetorical  and  painfully  emotional  as  they are, hard to accept.




As Hermann  Boeschenstein has  recently  pointed  out, Hugh  MacLennan is a highly versatile writer,  conversant  with a host of psycho­
logical problems and sociological questions, commanding a variety of devices and techniques.10    Yet,  there is a family resemblance  between  his novels, and  if The Watch  That  Ends The  Night seems an epitome  of its predecessors, this is due to the limited  number  of motives in which  MacLennan's artistic  vision crystallizes. The  return  of  a  man  believed dead  is the  mainspring of  action  in  Barometer Rising and  The  Watch  That  Ends The  Night.  Adultery  is made  the vehicle of protest against  a narrow-minded environment  in Two  Solitudes, and is an escape from  personal difficulties in all the other novels. Leading  characters  either  tend to drop  the  burdens  of civilization and  go off by themselves, or, in the manner  of Thomas  Wolfe's figures, have to go abroad  before they recognize what their home­ country means to them.
There  is, however, one recurring cluster of motives that,  more than  any other, gives expression  to  the  triadic  structure  of  MacLennan's vision and  lends itself to historical interpretation. The  starting-point for  MacLennan's novels is incom­ plete man  and  his stifled, unduly  restricted  life. Man,  at this stage, is seen to be determined   by his environment  or by a  traumatic shock suffered  in  early  youth or during  the war.  In  his best works MacLennan telescopes this fact,  which has been treated  at  length  in  the modem  novel, into  the  brief  moment  of a sudden catastrophe and  views man as a child running  away in fright. Thus,  ten-year-old Roddie   Wain  flees from  the  scene  of  disaster;  Alan  MacNeil   hides  from  his father; Jerome  Martell  escapes in his canoe from  the lumber  camp;  and  Marius Tallard is shocked  into  becoming  an enemy of his  father  when  he watches  him commit  adultery.  The  second   stage  of  development is characterized by the "farewell-to-arms"  mood   (Hemingway's  work  is  mentioned   and  discussed  in three  novels).  Released  from  the pressures of his environment and  having  gone

TOO LONG TO THE  COURTLY MUSES



through an  ordeal, man  is lonely, disheartened, and  homeless. This  period  is like­ wise dealt  with  as briefly  as possible. George  Stewart's five-year  stay  at  Waterloo is, for  instance, glossed  over  in a couple  of pages. And  in The  Precipice it is not Steve  Lassiter,  whose  disillusion  is growing  from  day  to day, but  Lucy  Cameron who  is in  the  centre  of attention. For  what  MacLennan is,  above  all, interested in  is how  man   reaches  the  third  stage  where  he  accepts  life  as it is and  is able to  make  a  quiet  affirmation. As Stewart says about  the  political  situation in  the thirties:

... why waste time explaining  the pattern? It is obvious now, and  dozens of books have been written  about  it. Less obvious have been some of the attendant passions that  went  along  with  this  neo-religious faith.  Passion has  a way of spilling  over into all aspects of the human  mind and feelings.

Early  in  his career, MacLennan took  issue with  the  notion  that  historical  pro­ cesses  are   rigidly   determined.r'  In   his  literary   criticism,   he  has  charged  such writers  as  Joyce,  Faulkner, and  Hemingway with  reacting "in  extreme and  pri­ vate  fashion   against the  change in  mental climate  which  differentiates our  time from  the  past."12   The   mature man  is to  MacLennan one  who  faces  violence  or a  narrow  environment  squarely and  does  not  permit   himself  to  be  defeated or cramped by  it.  In  contrast to  the  children, Neil  Macrae and  the  adult Jerome Martell testify  to  the  capacity of  grown-up human beings  to  pass  through an ordeal  and   assume  their  responsibility  to  themselves  and  to society,  whereas  Dr. Ainslie  learns   how  to  integrate even  terrible  accidents   and  catastrophes with  a belief in love and  God.
MacLennan, then,   does  not  take  a  tradition for  granted. Though the  body
of  experience incorporated  in  the  so-called  modern novel  is  not  denied   but  is partly  accepted  as  valid,   MacLennan, as  a  contemporary writer,   wrestles  for  a positive solution. In  this respect,  all of his novels are experiments, for few modern writers  have  dared to  encompass, in  one  work,  the  movement from  violence  to such a full affirmation as made  in Dr. Ainslie's statement:

Life  was  never  so vivid  as when it  was in danger,  nor  was a  human  being ever so vitally  himself as when  he had  passed through  pain  and  emerged  on the other side of it.

To  see  MacLennan's  achievement in  proper   perspective, we  have  to  admit, however,   that   he  has  benefited   from  his  quarrels with  the  American  novelists. First  of all,  his frontal assault  on the  complex  of violence,  by means  of a stylized

TOO LONG TO THE COURTLY MUSES



story,  aligns  him  with  the  major   American writers. Secondly, MacLennan  has fallen  back,  in method, on the  major  American tradition. It is the romance, with its  air  of  probability in  the  midst  of improbability and  its  proximity to  mythic and  allegoric  forms of order,  which  enables  him  to blend  catastrophe and affirma­ tion  successfully.  Thirdly, MacLennan is close to the  American  writers  when  he deals  with  the  third  stage. His affimation  in Barometer  Rising and  Two Solitudes seems  to  be  a  nationalistic variant  of  the  collective  humanism  typical  of  many  novels  of the  thirties,  such  as, for example Hemingway's For Who  the  Bell Tolls.
Yet even  when  MacLennan seems  consciously to echo  Hemingway, he is characteristically  different. Both  he  and   Hemingway  (In   Our  Time)  see  the effects  of the  First  World  War  anticipated by Jerome's and  Nick  Adams' child­ hood  experiences in  the  New  Brunswick  and   Michigan woods,  respectively. But while   Nick  retreats  behind   the  Hemingway code  of  "You  got  to  be  tough", Jerome responds more fully as a human being of his age would: he is truly afraid of the murderer of his mother  and  flees.
I suggest,  then,   that   MacLennan's successful  works  of  fiction  are  influenced by,  and   a  reaction   against,  the  American tradition  of  novel  writing. This  con­ clusion  is borne  out  by MacLennan's own statements, for inI 946 he said:

. . . is it natural for Canadians  to adhere  to the decaying  Renaissance  culture  of Europe,  or  to the  American  branch  cycle? There can  only be one answer. Cana­ dians  must  write  for  the  American  market  because  it  is the  cultural  pattern   to which  they naturally  belong. It is their only avenue  to a world audience. And yet by doing so, they must compete on equal terms with American writers.'•

Since  he  believed,  however,  that  the  American writers  were  aping the  decadent experiments of European novelists, he demanded that  "American literary  critics should   cease  looking   to  Europe  as  a  model,"'3   and   thus   repeated  Emerson's famous thesis, "We have  listened  too long to the  courtly  muses of Europe."




NOTES

1  W. H.  Magee,  Trends  in the  English Canadian  Novel  in the  Twentieth Century,
PhD thesis, Toronto, 1950, p. 303.
•  G. Woodcock, "Hugh MacLennan," Northern  Review, Apr.-May  1950, p. 5·
3  H.  McPherson,   "The   Novels of  Hugh  MacLennan," Queen's  Quarterly, LX,
1953, p. 198.

TOO LONG TO THE  COURTLY MUSES



4   Two Solitudes, ed. by C. T. Bissell, Toronto, 1951, p. xviii.
5   R.  Davies,   "MacLennan's Rising   Sun," Saturday  Night,  LXXIII,  March 28,
1959, p. 30.
6  F. W. Watt, "Fiction," University of Toronto Quarterly, July, 1960, p. 462.
7  H. MacLennan, "The Story  of  a  Novel,"  Canadian Literature, 3,  Winter  1960, pp. 35-9·
8   W. Tallman, "An  After-Glance at  MacLennan," Canadian Literature, r, Summer
1959, p. 8r.
9   W. O'Hearn, "A  Sense  of Wonder Preserved  and  Shared," The New  York  Times
Book  Review, Feb. 25, 1959, p. 5·
Io  H.  Boeschenstein, "Hugh  MacLennan, ein  kanadischer Romancier,"  Zeitschrift fur Anglistik  und  Amerikanistik, VIII, r96o, p.   I17.
II   "Roman History  and  To-Day," Dalhousie  Review, XV,  1936, pp. 67-78.
I>    "Changing Values  in  Fiction," The Canadian Author  and  Bookman, XXV, 1949 p. 14.
I3   "Canada Between   Covers," The  Saturday Review   of Literature, XXIX, Sept  7,
1946, p. 6.



A	READING	OF
ANNE	WILKINSON




A. ]. M. Smith






W..N1HEARD last sp1ing of the death  of Anne  Wilkin­
son I read  once again, and  at a single sitting,  all the poems she had  written -her
first  small   collection   Counterpoint  to  Sleep   published  just  ten  years  ago,  the volume  of 1955 The Hangman Ties the Holly, her three lyric sequences in The Tamarack  Review  numbers 5  and  18, and  an  as  yet  unpublished  typescript of pieces written mostly in the last year of her life.
I seemed to  be  reading them for   the  first  time.  And  I read  with  a  newly sharpened  awareness of small,  immensely  significant details  of  imagery, music, language, and  emotion. There is a stanza  of Emily  Dickinson  which  describes  the strange clarification brought  about  by death, and  it kept  running in my head  as a sort of counterpoint to what  I was reading:

We noticed smallest things, Things overlooked before,
By this great light upon our minds
Italicized, as it 'twere.

I could  not  help  thinking how  well these lines  applied not  only  to my own  state of  mind  but  to one  of the special  qualities and  peculiar virtues  of Anne  Wilkin­ son's  poems  - their  being  saturated, as it  were,  with  light,  a  radiance of  the mind,   cast  often  on  small,  familiar things,  or  things  overlooked  before,  and  re­ flected  back into  the mind  and  heart.
"The poet's  eye is crystal,"  she  noted  in  one  of  the  few  poems'  that  state  an


' "Lens," The  Hangman Ties the Holly, 5

A READING OF  ANNE WILKINSON



explicit  resthetique, and  her  "long  duty" and  "daily  chore" is to keep and  cherish her  good  lens. The  crystal  eye, the craftsman's lens, the light  that  animates them, and  the  green  world  on  which  it falls:  these  are  the  instruments and  materials, and  the colours  and  lights that flash through her verse. She never  knew the trage­ dy of not living in a sensual  world. It is a sensuousness of the eye that  most vividly brings  her  world  to life, but  the rether through which this light vibrates is a tremor  of the  mind  and  the  vision of her green  world is made  fruitful by love.
In  the  first  lines  of  the  first  poem  in  The  Hangman  Ties  the  Holly  she  an­
nounces  one of the two main  themes of her book:

Who has the cunning to apprehend
Even everyday easy things
Like air and wind and a fool
Or the structure and colour of a simple soul?

New laid lovers sometimes see
In  a passion of light ...

Light  is everywhere here  a  symbol  of truth, reality,  and, above  all,  life. Green signifies  Nature,  sensation, happiness, grace,  and  again   life.  If these  aspects  of her  sensibility  make  one  think  of Vaughan or  Traherne in  the  one  case  and  of Andrew  Marvell in the other, the newness, freshness, and  uniqueness of her vision are not diminished but  enhanced.
A  traditional background is a  help,  not  a  hindrance, when  it  is entered  into with  all  one's   wits  about   one  and   purified  by  the  senses.  Earth, air,  fire,  and water   have  an  immediate sensational significance  in  the  poetry  of Anne  Wilkin­ son - as well as a  medieval and  metaphysical one. In  a poem  that  develops  out of an  aphorism by Empedocles - I was born a boy, and a  maiden, a plant and a bird,  and  a darting   fish in  the  sea" - she  enters,  through the  twin  gates  of sensation  and  wit,  into  the  phenomenal world  and  becomes  a  part  of its life:

Yet always I huff out the flame with breath as live
And green as Irish grass, recalling the gills
Of my youth when I was a miner
Deep in the hills of the sea.

The  union  of the  four  elements and  her own identification with  them  is every- " The  Hangman, 2
33

A READING OF  ANNE WILKINSON



where   assumed,   but   occasionally   it  is  explicitly,  concretely,  and   dynamically
stated, as in the  fiat of the last stanza  of "Poem in Three Parts": 3


The  stone in my hand
IS my hand
And stamped with tracings of A once greenblooded frond, Is here, is gone, will come,
Was fire, and  green, and  water,
Will be wind.


This  is as  close  perhaps as this  poet  has  come  to a  religious  statement - or  at least  to a religious statement untouched by irony-but hers is the classic religion of  Empedocles, Heracleitus, and  Lucretius. What it celebrates is a  metamorpho­ sis. Over   and  over  again  she  descends  into  the  earth like  Flora  or  Eurydice or merges  white  flesh, red blood, into  the leafy green  of a tree like Daphne:


Let the world go limp, put it to rest, Give it a soft wet day and while it sleeps Touch  a drenched leaf; ...

Before you turn
Uncurl  prehensile fingers from the tree, Cut  your name on bark, search
The  letters for your lost identity.4


A  complete poem,  though  not  a  very  long  one,  must  be  quoted as perhaps the easiest  and  most striking  illustration of the  theme of metamorphosis. It is entitled "The Red  and   the  Green",5  and  it  will serve  as  a  kind  of epitome of  qualities defining  Anne  Wilkinson's special  and  indeed   unique poetic  sensibility:

Here, where summer slips
Its sovereigns through my fingers
I put on my body and go forth
To seek my blood.


3  The  Hangman, 52
4   The  Hangman, 32
5  The  Hangman, 23


34

A READING OF ANNE WILKINSON



I walk the hollow subway Of the ear; its tunnel Clean of blare
Echoes the lost red syllable.


Free from cramp  and chap of winter
Skin is minstrel, sings
Tall  tales and shady
Of the kings of Nemi Wood.


I walk an ancient path
Wearing  my warmth  and singing
The  notes of a Druid song
In the ear of Jack-in-the-Green.


But the quest turns round, the goal, My human  red centre
Goes whey in the wind,
Mislaid in the curd and why of memory.


Confused,  I gather  rosemary
And stitch the leaves
To green hearts on my sleeve; My new green arteries


Fly streamers from the maypole of my arms, From head to toe
My blood sings green
From every heart a green amnesia rings.


My  blood  sings  green:   this  is one  aspect  of  her  poetry  - its intimate  sensuous identification with  life  as a  growth  out  of the  earth; and  it implies  a  Pan-ic  or Lawrencian forgetfulness of the  non-living  dry  and  essentially  irrelevant  intellec­ tion  of much  of our  routine living. But  knowledge,  intellect, and  the  motions  of thought are  by  no  means  absent  from  these lines. They are seen of  course  in the buried literary  allusions  and  the  puns.  The  former  are  perhaps not essential,  but  they  are  not  merely  ornamental or snobbish  either  - they  italicise  and  connect rather than   make  an  initial  or  final  assertion  - and  it's  good  to  find  confirma­ tion  of one's  feelings  in  Sir  James  Frazer,   Mother  Goose, Shakespeare, and  the

35

A READING OF ANNE WILKINSON



author  of "Greensleeves."  The  puns,  as elsewhere in  this poetry,6   not  only give an impression of liveliness, sharpness, and  wit, but  convey with greater  precision and  intensity,  and  immensely greater compactness,  a relationship  that  might take clauses and  sentences instead  of a single word  to get across. The  curd  and  why of memory, for instance,  presents the mental  gropings  after  something  forgotten with  an  almost  physiological suggestion of  the  tremblings  of the  membrane  of nerves and brain.
This  poetry of green thoughts in a green shade  is connected  also with the red
of the earth  and  of blood. The  identification  of the poet with  nature  is sensuous and  emotional.   It  is achieved  in  love, and  it  is achieved  in  death.  These  two themes -and a union of them both in a sort of love-hate relationship  with death
- are found  in some of the earliest of the poems as well as in some truly terror­ inspiring  poems which give a sombre intensity to The  Hangman Ties the  Holly. They  are found  too, as might have been expected, in the last, uncollected, poems.



LovE, IN  THE  POETRY of Anne Wilkinson, is sometimes, as in
"Strangers,"7  a game  of wit, but  it is always also a senuous involvement,  not  a
twining  of bodies and  minds only but  a mingling  with  the green sap of Nature in a wholly holy communion.  This is the significance of the delightful  and lovely poem beginning "In  June and gentle oven ..."8

In June and gentle oven Summer kingdoms simmer As they come
And flower and leaf and love
Release
Their sweetest juice ...

The  music is impeccable.  Presently there is one faintly sinister image, which soon we realize is intended  to hint at the necessary serpent in every Eden,-

An adder of a stream
Parts the daisies.

6  The  Hangman:  "new laid lover," I; "mother tongue" 2; "the  warm gulf seam of love" I I ; "happily lived ever waterward" I I; -to cite only a few.
7   The  Hangman, 8
8   The  Hangman, I7

A READING OF  ANNE WILKINSON


But lovers are  protected by Nature, instinct, and  joy, and  are  "saved": And where, in curve of meadow,
Lovers, touching, lie,
A church  of grass stands up
And walls them, holy, in.

The   closing  stanza of  this  poem  is one  of  the  most  beautiful expressions  in  the whole  field  of  modern  poetry  of  the  divinity  of love  achieved   in  the  sensuous community of the green  world:

Then  two in one the lovers lie And peel the skin of summer With  their teeth
And suck its marrow from a kiss
So charged  with grace The  tongue, all knowing Holds the sap of June
Aloof from seasons, flowing.

Something of this fertile  richness is found  in a later  love poem- the sequence of five lyrics entitled  "Variations on a Theme" in The  Tamarack Review, No.5· Here,   however,   the  pure and innocent religion of  love  and   nature has  been clouded  by an  intense  awareness, amounting almost  to a foreknowledge, of death, and   there  is an  air  of faint   desperation in  the  spells and  magic  rituals  that   (I cannot feel successfully) are tried as exorcisms.
The   poem  is a  series of  variations on  a sentence  of Thoreau: "A  man  needs only  to  be  turned around once  with  his eyes shut  to be lost in  this  world." The key words  are  turned  and  lost. Each  of the five lyrics explores one of the  ways of being  lost.  Thoreau thought of  losing the   world in  the  Christian sense  of  a spiritual achievement, but  there  are  many  ways of being  lost-some  are  a kind of ecstasy  and  all  are  bewildering. In  the  first of the  variations it is childhood's "first  flinging  of the  blood  about  in circles",  a recollection  of games  in the green meadow  when  the  child  spins round  and  round  in dizzying  circles until  the world and  its own  name are  lost. The  second  and  fourth  lyrics are  visions of horror - the second of death, the fourth of madness.

From arteries in graves, columns Rose to soil the sky; and down Their  fluted sides the overflow Slid to earth,  unrolled and spread On stalk and stone its plushy red.


37

A READING OF  ANNE WILKINSON



The   elegance  of  the  writing  enhances the  horror  of  this  second  section,  but  the intensity increases still more in the nightmare-like fourth:

where above me one black crow
Had  cawed my spring, two dirty doves
Sang daintily. I stoned the birds
But no stone hit, for of white gloves My hands were made; I stole a stick To break the sky; it did not crack;
I could not curse -though I was lost,
Had  trespassed on some stranger's  dream ...


The  third  section,  like the  first,  is a happy  one.  It deals  with  the  magical  trans­ formation of being  'lost'  in love. Significantly, it is the only  poem  in the sequence in which  the  protagonist is we not I. It is a very beautiful poem,  and short enough  to quote  in full:

We shut our eyes and turned once round And were up borne by our down fall. Such life was in us on the ground
That  while we moved, earth ceased to roll, And oceans lagged, and all the flames Except our fire, and we were lost
In  province that no settler names.

The   fifth  poem  rises almost  directly  out  of  this  one  and  develops  the  theme  of death more  simply  and  traditionally than  it  had  been  treated in the  second  and fourth:

Death  turned me first, will twirl me last And throw me down beneath  the grass And strip me of this stuff, this dress
I am, although its form be lost.



IF THE  GREEN, light-riddled poetry  in which  Anne  Wilkinson celebrated life and  the love of life makes one  think  of Marvell and  Vaughan, she
is also, like Webster   (and  not in  her  last poems  only)   much  possessed by death. I  mentioned earlier   the  love-hate   relationship with  death that seems  almost  in-

A READING OF  ANNE WILKINSON



herent  in  her sensibility and  that  animates  in a truly terror-inspiring way a few of her  most powerful  poems, "The  Pressure of Night,"9 "Strangers,"10    "Topsoil to the Wind,"" as well as the recent deceptively light and witty "Notes  on Robert Burton's  The  Anatomy of  Melancholy"•and  the  brilliant  «A   Cautionary Tale."' 3   These  place  Anne  Wilkinson  among  the small  group  of women  poets who  have  written  of  love  and  death  with  a  peculiarly  feminine  intuition,  an accuracy,  and  an  elegance  that  does not  hide  but  enhance  the intensity  of the emotion  - Emily   Dickinson, Christina  Rossetti, Elinor  Wylie,  and  Leonie Adams.  Her  work as a whole puts her, certainly, in the forefront  of contemporary Canadian  poets.  Like  Reaney  and  Macpherson  and  Avison she  has  helped  us to be a little more aware and  hence a little more civilized. Her poems are a legacy whose value can never be diminished.

9   The Hangman, 4
10   The Hangman, 8
" The Hangman, 3I
•The Tamarack Review, No. 18, 36-40
•3  The Oxford Book of Canadian Verse, no. 2II
















39



EMILE NELLIGAN

Poete de l' Inquietude






Paul M)cqnski










fran aise
 LEST SUPERFLU de rappeb que Ia littirature canadienne­

premieres  reuvres de qualite.  Mais ce qu'on  n'accentue peut-etre  pas assez, c'est que  vers la fin du  XIXe  siecle, elle a deja  pu se vanter  d'un  poete qui,  brulant les etapes, se fit valoir par son experience poetique et l'art  de ses vers. Emile Nelli­ gan  ( 1879-1941)   prend  place parmi les meilleurs poetes canadiens.  Dans l'espace de trois ans il a decouvert  un monde  poetique  qui  allait  devenir  celui  de Saint­ Denys Garneau, d'Alain  Grandbois et d'Anne  Hebert.
En  1899· a I'age de dix-neuf ans, Nelligan  a "sombre  dans l'abime  du  reve". Cet  euphemisme  fut  invente par le poete lui-meme:   c'est la chute  de son  "Vais­ seau  d'or" sonnet qui  resume la derniere etape  de sa destinee tragique. L'expres­ sion  a fait  fortune  depuis le moment  ou Dantin  la fit employer,  dans un article en  1902,  pour  rendre  moins cruelle la reclusion de son jeune ami, terrasse par la demence. Destinee tragique, certes, mais pas moins feconde en reves et experiences. Charles Gill a tres bien remarque que cet enfant  fut touche par !'amour des muses des le berceau et que rien ne put le ramener a la vie ordinaire d'un  citadin moyen. Quelques vacances passees a Cacouna,  un voyage a Liverpool, une annee d'etudes  manquees au  College Sainte-Marie, quelque  moments  de satisfaction  au sein de
!'Ecole  Litteraire  de Montreal,  voila les faits saillants correspondant a l'age de sa
lucidite.  Ce serait  un  procede  peu  heureux  que  de chercher  dans  la  biographie du poete le meilleur de son message: on le trouvera  annonce  dans ses cent-soixante poemes  ou  la solitude et la souffrance,  le reve et !'inquietude font  gonfler  mots et images.

EMILE  NELLIGAN



Nous  voulons  aujourd'hui sander   cette  ceuvre douleureusement tronquee par le destin,  afin  d'y  saisir  quelques moments  d'une arne  tourmentee. Ceux  qui  ne s'eloignent pas  des  preceptes de  Boileau  reprochent a Nelligan d'avoir ecrit  une
"ceuvre  morbide", "sans   idees".   Etrange objection   qui  ne  pourrait etre  refutee que  par  une  autre, a sa voir: reprocher a un  tailleur de  ne  pas  etre  cordon­
nier. 11 faudrait dire  plutot que sans etre un traite  de philosophie ou de morale,  la poesie de  Nelligan  se fait  surtout valoir  par  ses qualites de temoignage. Ce  jeune auteur ne nous eblouit  pas par ses idees, mais plutot  par sa presence; cette chaleur ajoutee au  mot,  cette  vibration qui  anime  les images.  N'est-ce  pas  Nelligan  lui­ meme  qui  a  defini  sa  maniere de  sentir  et  de  voir:  "Ma pensee  est  couleur de lunes  d'or  lointaines"? Ainsi,  l'esprit  de Nelligan  n'est  pas absent  dans son ceuvre, mais  il  a  sa  propre   fa<;on d'exister dans  le flou  des  fievres,  des  reves  et  des in­ quietudes: il voltige  comme  un  papillon, egare  dans  la  prairie  de sa riche  sensi­ bilite.
Ce qu'on doit surtout decouvrir dans les poemes de Nelligan  ce sont les invisibles antenes qui  captent et transfigurent les pleurs etouffes du cceur et les cris de l'ame inquiete. La  poesie ne s'infiltre dans  les mots que  par  le van  d'une sensibilite sur­ excitee.  Et  la  parole  et  le trope  ne s'expliquent autrement qu'au-dessus d'un de­ nominateur de duree  subjective. A quelques  exceptions  pres, le monde poetique de Nelligan  ne  pourrait done  subir  d'autres mesures que  celles qui  permettent d'ap­ precier  la complexite psychologique d'un  homme  qui souffre.
L'inquietude de  Nelligan est  l'un   des  principaux stimulants de  son  processus
createur. Elle  est  nee  de  sa  curiosite  d'enfant, de cette  observation innocente de l'ecoulement du  temps,  du  changement continue! des chases.  Cette  prise de  con­
science,  qui   a  marque en  profondeur la  poesie  romantique, est  propre a tout
homme  avide  de scruter  le mystere de son existence. Mais !'inquietude de Nelligan est, des le debut, plus  dynamique et plus feconde.  Elle assure  a son reve une sorte
de magnetisme qui  unit  en  un meme delire sens, cceur et esprit.  La vision de notre poete s'elance ainsi  vers cette  vaste perspective  dont  il ne retient que  deux  motifs: berceau et  cercueil. Le  temporel baigne  dans  une  tristesse sans  cause: la vie qui s'inscrit  dans   les  fleurs  qui  se  £anent,  dans  les feuilles  qui   jaunissent, dans  les rayons  qui  s'estompent, offre  au  jeune artiste  la meilleure  illustration de la condi­ tion  humaine. Alors,  la  craintes et !'esperance se heurtent, l'une contre  l'autre, comme  des chauves-souris auxquelles l'ombre n'a  pu  procurer  assez d'espace pour exister.
L'itineraire des  inquietudes de  Nelligan  se  compose  de  nombreuses attitudes ou  le  poete  voudrait retrouver sa  place  dans  l'univers, et  devant !'invisible. 11 se

EMILE NELLIGAN



cherche aussi dans  le monde  des apparences, a  jamais  triste.  Ecoutons cette musi­ que  de soupirs  et de larmes, deja si bien nuancee dans  son devoir  de classe; Nelli­ gan l'a ecrit le 8 mars  r8g6, alors qu'il  n'etait age que de seize ans:
... Les feuilles tombent,  tombent  toujours,  le sol est jonche de ces presages a la fois tristes et lugubres.... La  jeunesse, helas!  du  jeune malade  s'est evanouie comme la fteur des champs qui se meurt, faute  de pluie, sous les ardents  rayons d'un solei! lumineux.  Que  la  nature,  le bois, les arbres,  la  vallee  paraissent  tristes  ce jour-la, car c'etait  l'automne  ... et les feuilles tombaient  toujours.

Rien   de  plus  facile  que  de  reconnaitre  dans  le  texte  les  accents  elegiaques de Millevoye  et  de  Lamartine. Mais,  dans  ces reminiscences s'abrite  deja  l'ame de Nelligan, arne effrayee par Ia fuite du temps.
Theme romantique, soit!  Mais il appartient, par  Ia force  d'une necessite intime
a  tous  Ies grands poetes  du  monde.  Les distances entre  l'aube et le couchant, le printemps et l'automne, entre  le bourgeon  et Ia £leur ne ressemblent-elles pas, en effet,  a  Ia duree  qui  unit  le berceau  au  cercueil?  Nelligan  a reussi ce  rapproche­ ment  dans  un de ses poemes, intitule "Devant mon  berceau" :
Avec !'obsession d'un sanglot etouffant
Combien rna souvenance eut d'amertume en elle, Lorsque, rememorant  la douceur  maternelle, Hier, j'etais penche sur rna couche d'enfant!

Quand  je n',etais qu'au  seuil de ce monde mauvais, Berceau, que n'as-tu fait pour moi de tes draps funebres? Ma vie est un blason sur des murs de tenebres,
Et mes pas sont fautifs ou maintenant je vais.

Cette  confidence embrasse  a Ia fois le passe, le present  et l'avenir. L'assimilation et  Ia  metaphore du  septieme  vers  convergent vers  une  rotation douleureuse de sentiments;  le  souvenir   et  Ia  meditation s'appuieront  desormais sur  des  objets tangibles pour  renforcer  ainsi Ia perspicacite du regard introspectif.
L'emprise de  ce  sentiment se fait  sentir  dans  bien  des  poemes: il est comme
l'ecume des vers, musical omement des mouvements rythmiques:

Et bien loin, par les soirs revolus et latents, Suivons la-bas, devers les ideales cotes,
La fuite de l'Enfance  au Vaisseau de Vingt ans.

Au  contact du  passe  le  reve  de  Nelligan  se fait  fecond. Sa  vision  y trouve   une cohesion  organique. C'est  aussi  Ia  que  reside  le  nerf  vital  de  son  oeuvre.  Dans le  regard pensif  de  Nelligan,  dans  son  soupir  nourri de  tristesse,  nous  devinons

EMILE  NELLIGAN



deja  un  engagement "aux seules frontieres  de son etre", expression  qui  est celle d'Alain Grandbois mais  qui  rend  justice a 1'experience de son predecesseur.
La  chanson  qui  convient a l'age  juvenile, exerce  sur  Nelligan  peu  d'inftuence. Le  poete  cherche dans  les mots  une  musique  qui  ferait  plutot  penser  a  Chopin, une  musique intermediaire  entre  les "Mazurkas" et  la  "Marche funebre". Son "Jardin d'antan" traduit a  merveille  toutes  les metamorphoses que  subissent  les souvenirs  dans I'enceinte de I'esprit inquiet:
Rien n'est plus doux aussi que de s'en revenir
Comme  apres de longs ans d'absence, Que de s'en revenir
Par le chemin du souvenir Fleuri de lys d'innocence, Au jardin de l'Enfance.

Au jardin clos, scelle, dans le jardin muet
D'ou  s'enfuirent  les gaietes £ranches, Notre  jardin muet
Et la danse du menuet
Qu'autrefois menaient sous branches
Nos cceurs en robes blanches....

Mais rien n'est plus amer que de penser aussi
A tant  de choses ruinees!
Ah! de penser aussi Lorsque nous revenons ainsi Par des sentes de fteurs fanees,
A nos jeunes annees.

Lorsque nous nous sentons nevroses et vieillis, Froisses, maltraires et sans annes,
Moroses et vieillis,
Et que, surnageant  aux oublis, S'eternise  avec ses charmes
Notre  jeunesse en larmes!

Le "Jardin d'antan" vaut  surtout par  son contour musical: fluctuations des rap­ pels,  magie  des  images   ambivalentes, effets  incantatoires des  rythmes.  Nelligan  vient  d'effectuer un  audacieux enjambement englobant le temps  et  le  cceur:  la tristesse  n'est  pas  separation, mais  un  puissant  trait  d'union. Le  lecteur  ne  peut  que  se  laisser  emporter par  cette  musicalite   admirable,  consequence immediate du rayonnement symbolique.

43

EMILE  NELLIGAN




LUJOURS AU   TOURNANT des  reves,  Nelligan ouvrira a son  in­ quietude une  avenue  nouvelle:  Ia  mort.  Louis-Joseph De  La  Durantaye  a  tres bien  remarque qu'il ne s'agit  pas Ia d'une idee  de  Ia mort,  mais  d'un  sentiment "ce  qu'il  [Nelligan] appelait: Ia fuite de l'enfance, Ia jeunesse en larmes, le regret de  vivre,  l'effroi  de  mourir, le frisson sinistre  des choses".  Ceci se resume  dans  un
quatrain que le poete a conu

... Revant a l'avenir, Je songe a mon printemps qui tombe,
Mon passe n'est qu'un  souvenir, Mais helas! il sera rna tombe.

Le  sentiment de  Ia mort  se fera  encore  plus  puissant a  mesure  que  sa  reverie connaitra des experiences  dans  Ia solitude  qui,  d'apres Yves Theriault, est le bien unique de l'homme.
Ma  jeunesse est pareille a la pauvre  passante: Beaucoup la croisent ici-bas dans la sente
Ou la vie a la tombe aprement  nous conduit;

Tous la verront passer, feuille seche a la brise Qui  tourbillonne, tombe et se fane en la nuit; Mais nul ne l'aimera, nul ne I'aura comprise.

S'echappant par  toutes  les fissures du  creur,  Ia tristesse suscite  un rapprochement avec  celle de  Nietzsche.  Celui-ci  distinguait deux  sortes  de solitude:  "Verlassen­ heit" et  "Einsamheit". La  premiere nait  d'un conftit  de !'artiste avec son milieu; Ia  deuxieme est  le  resultat   d'une inclination qui implique  un  repliement de l'homme sur  lui-meme. Au  sein  de  sa famille, a !'ecole,  Nelligan   ne  fut  jamais  compris a  sa  juste  valeur; parmi les  membres  de  !'Ecole Litteraire, il  attirait
!'attention par  ses apparences bien  plus que  par  les qualites de son don  poetique.
II  ne  lui  restait  qu'a se faire  conduire par  les lectures et  les reves, a  repenser  Ie triste  sort  de  Chatterton. Dans  de telles circonstances, il est facile  de  prevoir  une rapide fusion de Ia tristesse et de Ia solitude: il en naitra une inquietude plus dou­ loureuse,   plus  obsedante qu'on devrait  appeler  angoisse. Bientot,   un  etrange tumulte remplira le cerveau; toute  sensation, a son  tour,  provoquera une poussee sans  mesure  de sang  et de fievre. Deja  l'ame  n'est  plus assujettie au  recueillement ni au silence.  Inondee de visions, elle se communique par  le truchement des images qu'elle engendre en consequence:

44

EMILE NELLIGAN



Ecoute!  o ce grand soir, ernpourpre  de coleres, Qui, galopant,  vainqueur  de batailles solaires, Arbore l'Etendard triornphal des Octobres!

La  perspective toute  en  mouvement possede  ici  l'ampleur de  certaines toiles de Van   Gogh.   La   blancheur  d'aube,  l'harmonie de  couchant  n'existent plus:   le pourpre les remplace auquelle noir du soir ajoute une note plus aigue.
Scruter l'angoisse est, au  dire  de Barres,  vouloir  descendre au  plus profond des
hommes,   suivre les  cheminements d'un esprit qui  se sent  menace. Selon  les Memoires  interieurs  de  Mauriac, l'angoisse  est comme  "les  yeux  grands ouverts dans   la  chambre sans  lumiere". Guitton, enfin,  ne  la  voit   dangereuse qu'au moment ou elle depasse la mesure.  Celie de Nelligan a depasse, en 18gB, la mesure de sa resistance physique.
Avant de  toucher a !'hallucination, nous  voyons la  necessite  de  consacrer un
peu  de place  a !'inquietude religieuse de Nelligan.  L'auteur est catholique parses
origines  et  par  ses convictions. L'espoir  et  la  priere  ne seront   jamais  deloges  de son arne:
D'avoir  une arne douce et rnystiquement tendre, Et cepen.dant, toujours, de tousles  maux souffrir, Dans le regret de vivre et l'effroi de rnourir,
Et d'esperer,  de croire ... et de toujours attendre!

Miracle de  confidence directe  et sincere! L'ame du  poete  voudrait s'immobiliser dans  un  bonheur sans ombre. Ceci reste, cependant, au  niveau  du  desir.  Une  fois ajustee  aux  notions  du  present  et de l'avenir, la voix interieure tremble comme  les feuilles que le vent agite.
Devrait-on rappeler-et Charles Peguy l'avait  si bien souligne !-que le pecheur
et le saint  font  partie integrante du systeme de chretiente? Que  le cceur soit secoue par  la  crainte, que  la  conscience  subisse le vertige  du  peche,  ceci est inscrit  dans le grand   livre  de  la  condition humaine. Souvent  !'inquietude religieuse  ressuscite les ames  mortes,  reveille  les ames  tiedes  ou  froides.  Nelligan, lui  auSSl, a connu les horreurs du peche et de la tentation:

Pretre,  je suis hanue, c'est Ia nuit dans la ville, Mon arne est le don jon des rnortels peches noirs,
11 pleut une tristesse horrible aux promenoirs
Et personne ne vient de la plebe servile.

Tout  est calme et tout dort. La solitaire ville
S'aggrave  de l'horreur  vaste des vieux manoirs.


45

EMILE NELLIGAN



Pn'!tre, je suis hantJe, c'est la nuit dans la ville; Mon arne est le don jon des mortels peches noirs!

On  se croirait dans  la  rue  solitaire  ou  Nerval  va  a  la  mort. Nelligan  n'attenue point  sa crainte  bien que  les paroles  et les images  suggerent a peine  l'etendue du drame.
Sa crise religieuse evoluera  en s'aggravant. Elle portera l'empreinte de ses trajets
imaginaires et de ses lectures  hatives.  Bien differente de !'inquietude de Gide, celle de  Nelligan   n'exclue nullement la  possibilite  du  retour. Le  jeune  poete,  malade et sensible,  faible  certes,  accepte  les epreuvres en  pensant a la  victoire.  Ainsi,  au dela  de la "chapelle ruinee", du "vitrail brise",  la "croix en decombres", nous decouvrirons plus souvent  un homme  qui lutte  qu'un homme qui succombe.
D'autre part,  il serait  exagere  de chercher dans !'inquietude religieuse  de Nelli­ gan  des  preuves  d'authentique mysticisme.  De nos  jours,  on est trop  porte a voir dans  ce  mot  le synonyme  d'une reverie  intense, prolongee. On  n'y  trouvera pas, non   plus,  cette  idee  forte,  nourrie d'une longue   meditation, qui  s'accroche au dogme  ou ala metaphysique. L'etat d'ame vaut  ici plutot par sa sincerite  d'enfant, par  la hantise  de garder en soi ce qui est pur,  beau,  harmonieux.
Ainsi  voit-on  progresser  !'inquietude du  poete  vers le monde ou  chaque chose devient l'embleme du  noir.  Jean-Pierre Richard remarque, dans  Poesie  et  Pro­ fondeur, que  la fusion  complete de la pensee et du  reve ne peut  qu'amener  ''l'in­ finie fecondite du  gouffre". Que  dire  de Nelligan  chez qui  la sombre realite,  sous
!'influence d'une maladie incurable, decele a profusion les phenomenes etranges,
substance de !'hallucination et  du  cauchemar! Son  engouement pour  Edgar Poe et Rollinat ne pouvait  qu'aggraver ce desarroi. Alors la solitude se veut complete:
J'ai  toujours adore, plein de silence, a vivre
En des appartements solennellement clos,
Ou mon arne sonnant des cloches de sanglots, Et plongeant dans l'horreur, se donne a suivre,
Triste comme un son mort, close comme un vieux livre, Ces musiques vibrant  comme  un eveil de ftots.

Ainsi seul, dans la chambre obscure qui lui procure les frissons d'angoisse, Nelligan vit ses etranges visions.
Impossible d'expliquer le mystere  d'une intelligence qui  sombre. Que  la poesie de Nelligan nous en fasse plutot  deviner  la nature:

... Mon reil aux soirs dantesquement embrasse
Quelque feu fantastique errant  aux alentours,

EMILE  NELLIGAN



Alors que je revois la lugubre terrasse
Ou d'un  chateau  hante se herissent les tours. Nul retour  possible! Des cris se multiplient sans recours:
Pitie! quels monstrueux  vampires
Vous suc;ant man coeur qui s'offusque!
0 je veux etre fou ne flit-ce que
Pour narguer  mes Detresses pires!

La vie?-Voici le portrait de cette "vierge  noire":
Elle ales yeux pareils a d'etranges flambeaux
Et ces cheveux d'or faux sur ses maigres epaules,
Dans des subtils frissons de feuillages de saules, L'habillent comme font les cypres des tombeaux.

Elle porte toujours  ses robes par lambeaux
Elle est noire et mechante.

Hors  de tout  controle, le reve cede a !'hallucination:

Or,  j'ai la vision d'ombres sanguinolentes
Et de chevaux fougueux piaffants,
Et c'est comme des cris de gueux, hoquets d'enfants, Rales d'expirations lentes.
L'emprise du noir dicte a I'esprit la loi du tragique abandon: Je plaque lentement  les doigts de mes nevroses,
Charges des anneaux  noirs de mes degouts mondains
Sur le sombre clavier de la vie et des chases.

L'aboutissement  a !'hallucination est  chez  Nelligan  la  derniere consequence du reve  qui  se  voulait   plus  puissant  que  sa nature emotive.  L'ete  de  r8gg  marque pour  le poete  la  fin de ses espoirs.  Pres d'un  demi-siecle  se sera  ecoule  avant que la mort  le delivre  de la triste vie d'hOpital.




LE NAUFRAGE DE  L'INTELLIGENCE a ete  pressenti  et annonce par  le poete  lui-meme. Il s'y voyait  des  r8g8,  comme  dans  un  miroir  sans reflets, comme  dans  un  cha.teau  abandonne et rempli  de spectres.  I1 accepta d'avance ce denouement fatal. Qu'on  ne  s'y  trompe pas,  cependant, en  pretant au  sort  de

47

EMILE NELLIGAN



Nelligan   une  interpretation facile.  Son  arne  fut  tentee   par  !'ideal et  toute  son experience interieure fut  orientee  vers  la  conquete du  Beau  supreme. Son  mal­ heur, s'il en est, est plutot celui d'un  alpiniste qui, attire par la vertigineuse hauteur de la cime, glisse du versant  vers l'abime, faute  d'appui et de forces. La "Romance du vin" et le "Vaisseau d'or" nous en diront davantage.
La  "Romance du  vin"  a ete composee  au  printemps de  r 8gg  avec  ce desir de donner  poetiquement une  reponse  a  un  critique malveillant. Elle  a  ete  lue  par le poete  lui-meme, au cours de la quatrieme seance  publique de !'Ecole Litteraire de  Montreal, le  26  mai  de  la  meme  annee. La  recitation terminee, le  public accorda au  jeune poete de chaleureux applaudissements. Mais a-t-on  reellement compris la  signification   profonde   du  poeme?  A-t-on  saisi  le sens  cache  dans  les images  polyvalentes?-Non.  L'auditoire fut  charme par  la sonorite  de la voix du poete,  par  ses attitudes prestigieuses,  !'incantation des  rythmes  ... L'inquietude atroce   qui  coule  comme  un  torrent souterrain dans  les stances  demeura le  bien exclusif de Nelligan.
Bien  situee  dans  le contexte  biographique, "La Romance du  vin"  est surtout
un defi lance  ala societe qui meprise !'effort artistique. L'auteur a conc;u un cadre attrayant pour  faire  mieux  exploser  son  cc:eur. La  verdure de  mai  n'est  qu'un rideau  factice  qu'un souffle interieur balance au  rythme des sanglots  et de la rage. C'est  ainsi  que  le theme  de  la solitude  peut  cheminer librement dans  les stances en  frayant au  coeur  incompris  un  nouvel  espace  pour  exister.  La  croisee ouverte pourrait done  se definir  comme  une  invitation a !'evasion, un  elan  du  reve,  une tentative de depassement.
L'hantise de  l'inconnu  trouvera sa  meilleure traduction  dans  le  "Vaisseau d'Or". Comme celui de Rimbaud, !'esprit de  Nelligan  voudrait s'enivrer de l'im­ mensite  de  la  mer  sous un  solei! eclatant. Avec  la fierte  des anciens  conquerants Vaisseau-Nelligan fera sa demiere experience: celle du gouffre.


Ce fut un grand Vaisseau taille dans l'or massif: Ses mats touchaient  l'azur, sur des mers inconnues; La Cyprine d'amour, cheveux epars, chairs nues,
S',etalait a sa proue, au soleil excessif.

Mais il vint une nuit frapper  le grand ecueil Dans l'ocean trompeur  ou chantait la Sid:ne, Et le naufrage horrible inclina sa crene
Aux profondeurs du Gouffre, immuable  cercueil.

EMILE  NELLIGAN



Ce fut un Vaisseau d'Or,  dont les ftancs diaphanes Revelaient  des tresors que les marins profanes, Degout, Raine et Nevrose, entre eux ont disputes.

Que  reste-t-il de lui dans la tempete breve? Q'est  devenu  mon coeur, navire deserte? Helas! 11 a sombre dans l'abime du Revel


A  nous  s'adressent  les  interrogations et  les  exclamations du  dernier tercet.   Le treizieme   vers  donne a l'allegorie les dimensions  du  symbole.  Voila  reunis  dans
un  sonnet   expressif  !'inquietude  dechirante et  le  pressentiment de  sa  condition future.
Quai qu'on puisse dire  de  cette  experience  poetique, il reste qu'elle affiche une
tres  forte  adhesion au  monde du  mystere.  La  poesie de  Nelligan, puissant  cres­ cendo  de  la  tristesse  et  de !'inquietude, accentue a  tout  moment la  presence  de l'etre. Et  entendons bien  qu'elle se refuse  de  jaillir  comme  idee  ou  concept  tout  fait: elle  est  plutot un  brasier   de  sentiments, un  enchevetrement  d'etats d'ame, sang  et  fievre  refondus dans  les mots.  Ceux-ci,  pour  mieux  souligner   la  valeur  subjective, devraient  etre   appeles   "les  paroles". Car   le  mot  communique  une verite  generale, semantiquement  definie  et  circonscrite,  tandis que  la  parole  poetique decele une verite intime  qui se communique musicalement.
On  ne  pourrait rendre justice  a l'effort  de  Nelligan  qu'en cherchant dans  son a:uvre   un  temoignage direct   sur  le  mystere  et  le  temps.  Ces  deux  termes  con­ stituent la  doublure de  ses vers. A ce point  de vue l'effort de l'auteur du  "Vais­ seau d'or" est particulierement revelateur.
Ce  jeune  poete  a saisi, en effet, la portee subjective de la duree  tout  en depouil­
lant  son esprit  du  fatras qui  definit  l'homme historique. La  vie qui se reflete dans ses poemes  n'a  aucun interet si on  veut  la  mesurer  horizontalement, c'est-a-dire a l'aide  de  dates,  d'evenements, de contacts. Elle sera  toute  autre  dans  sa dimen­ sion  verticale! La,  le  moment devient  un  elan  d'intensite toute  bergsonienne, la verite  de  souffrir   devient le  coefficient  de  l'etre,  l'etat ·  d'ame  se  libere  du  creur et  de  la  conscience en  pulsations precipitees.   La,  toujours dans  la  profondeur, s'effectue le  contact avec  !'invisible.   Et  la  duree  subjective  se  multiplie-quasi­ ment  a l'infini !-par une  eternite mysterieuse,  si lointaine  et  si proche  a la  fois. L'intuition est plus forte  que  le raisonnement. L'homme malade dechiffre souvent  mieux  le mystere  que  celui qui fait sa sieste dans  un fauteuil confortable.
Jugee  de la hauteur de notre  temps, l'a:uvre  de Nelligan ne pourrait que gagner en actualite. Nous dirons avec le pere Angers que la critique moderne doit "dilater

49

EMILE NELLIGAN



ses horizons, etendre son effort de reflexion au domaine  de Ia vie interieure". Nous sommes un  peu egares dans le bruit d'un  siecle ou l'on  construit  souvent  dans le
vide. Et  pourtant, si on applique  une etude  attentive   a Ia "saintete  sans Dieu"
de Camus, au "temps  perdu" de Proust, aux "nausees" de Sartre  on regagne vite, par  une voie de detour,  Ia hierarchie  des valeurs fondamentales. Et Ia condition humaine,  malgre les nouvelles formules factices de Ia liberte, se heurte indubitable­ ment aux eternelles notions du mystere et du temps. Nelligan en a fait une experi­ ence  profonde,  maladroit  parfois dans l'etat  de surexcitation,  mais toujours  sin­
cere  dans ses confidences. A ce point  de vue, il est peut-etre  superieur  a Saint­
Denys Garneau  chez qui !'effort  de !'analyse extreme  gache,  par  moments, l'au­ thenticite  du temoignage immediat.  En tout cas, !'experience  de Nelligan toujours en communion  avec !'inquietude universelle, laisse dans ses poemes bien  des ves­
tiges qui donnent  a reftechir.










so



THE AGONIZING SOLITUDE

The Poetry of
Anne Hebert



Patricia  Purcell

LWRITING  OF   Anne  Hebert  <eco'd' an  inteme intedo'
drama of poetic  and  spiritual evolution, though  in volume  her  poetic  output has
been quite  small: Les Songes en Equilibre ( 1942), Le Tombeau des Rois ( 1953)
and  Poemes ( 1960).
Miss  Hebert's first  volume  of poetry,  Les Songes en Equilibre,  reveals  to  us a young  girl  in the  first stages  of physical,  artistic  and  spiritual evolution. The style likewise is as yet  unformed; on  the  whole  it is thin  and  frail,  but  occasionally it gives a  foretaste of  the  clearcut, unadorned style of  Miss Hebert's more  mature poetry.
The  girl evoked  in the  pages of Les Songes en Equilibre is one  who, like Saint­
Denys-Garneau, deeply  loves the  natural joys of life, but  who, like him,  feels that her  salvation and  her  inspiration lie in  renouncing these  joys and  embracing the anguish   of  solitude. She  has  been  capable of suspending herself  in  the  present moment, of experiencing a  joy not overcast  by the awareness of eternity, a  joy in

Un  enfant
Qui  chante,
Un  homme qui passe; Tout le tendre
Et doux  matin ... Cette grace
Posee
Dans  l'instant.	("Instant")

With   the  stirrings of  maturity, however,  comes  the  realization of  poetic  and spiritual duty. She  wonders at  her  audacity in  believing  that   the  things  of  the

51

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



world  existed  to  amuse  her;  suddenly  natural joys fade  at  the  arrival of a calm figure which  usurps their place:
C'est mon creur triste
Qui prend toute la place, En premier plan.
Toute  la f,eerie
Devenue figurante
A l'air triste aussi,
Derriere mon creur. 	( "Le Miroir")

Still, however,  she has enough  of the child in her  to rebel  at  the frightening pros­
pect of maturity:

Delivrez mon arne
Des paysages lunaires
Que  le solei!n'atteint plus! 	("Terre")

In  a  series  of  unequal poems  Miss Hebert traces  the  gradual  growth within her of the sorrow of the adult, the poet, and  the saint:

Que ne puis-je la faire sortir! Mais qui remplirait
Alors de vide de sa p11esence
Dedans moi?
Le plaisir y serait mal a l'aise, Et moi aussi avec lui
Depuis le temps qu'on se connait
Ma douleur et moi . . .	( "Minuit")

At  this stage at least,  the spiritual and  poetic development of the poet are parallel. The   final  departure of  the  fairies  of childhood is painted vividly  in  a poem  en­
titled  "Mort":

Une a une Ala file, Mes fees
M'ont  quittee,
Et je suis resree seule Avec un grand Christ Entre  les bras.

The  evocation of  the  spiritual m  such  concrete terms  comes  as  a  shock  to  the reader, who has  been prepared for it, if at all, only in the most  veiled of allusions.

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



But  from  this  point  on  in  Les Songes en Equilibre, spirituality assumes  a role of prime  importance in  the  poetry.  The  poetic  mission is seen as a spiritual mission, and  the poet prays to become  as a pencil in the hand  of God:

Mon Dieu, j'ai peur, J'ai peur d'ecrire ... Guidez rna main,
Soyez la main elle-meme,
Moi, je veux bien etre le crayon. 	("Communion")

Certain key  images  are  employed   in  Les Songes en  Equilibre,  images  which will  become  symbols  of  profound meaning in  Le Tombeau des Rois. In  one  of the  earliest  poems,  "Les  Deux  Mains", Miss Hebert  introduces the image  of the outstretched  hands, representing self-oblation. At  this  stage  of  her  development, the giving of self is incomplete and only one hand  is extended:

Ces deux mains qu'on  a ... Celie qu'on  donne
Et celle qu'on  garde ... Cette main d'enfant,
Cette main de femme ... Ah! qui me rendra
Mes deux mains unies?	( "Les Deux Mains")

The  tree  image,  so prominent yet so obscure  in Le T ombeau  des Rois, is clarified by Les Songes en Equilibre,  and  takes on a spiritual connotation by being identi­ fied with the cross :

Il me faut  apprendre
Toute la Croix,
Pied a pied, pouce a pouce;
Y grimper
Comme a un arbre difficile.	( "Devant  le Crucifix")

The last  poem  of the  volume,  "L'Oiseau du  Poete", introduces the  bird  symbol of the later  volume.  The bird  is the poet, as well as the  poem  produced:
Alors le ciel n'a pas ee
Pour le premier vol
De cet oiseau triomphant, Sorti de l'argile et du mystere D'un  poete en 'etat de grace.

The choice  of  this  last  line  to  close  the  volume 1s ample indication of  Miss


53

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



Hebert's  identification of  the  poetic  and  spiritual  vocation at  the  time  of  Les
Songes en Equilibre.




A READER OF  Les Songes en Equilibre  who opens  Le Tom­
beau  des  Rois  interested  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  intervening eleven  years  will
probably notice  first of all a radical  tightening of style. In  his introduction to the volume,  Pierre  Emmanuel describes it thus:

Un  verbe  austere  et  sec, rompu,  soigneusement  exclu  de  la  musi­ que;  des poemes comme  traces  dans  l'os  par  la  pointe  d'un  poig­ nard  ... Aucun adjectif,  aucune  image flamboyante  ou simplement ornementale,  aucune  arabesque  sonore,  aucun  developpement  lyri­ que,  aucun  theme  intellectuel: partout  Ia  discontinuire   apparente d'un  symbolisme epars.

Les Songes en Equilibre  has traced  the  path  of the  poet  into  solitude; the  poems of  Le  Tombeau des Rois are  songs  of  this  solitude - its sweet  sadness  and  its unbearable anguish.
Anne  Hebert's isolation  is invariably likened  to  that  of Saint-Denys-Garneau. There is,  however,   a  basic  difference. Their  development can  be  paralleled up to a  certain point: both  delight  in  the  joys of the  world  but  are  drawn to reject them   and   enter  into   the  suffering  of  solitude. Both  are   attracted to  mystical experience, which  is attained only by the denial of all that  we commonly call experience. And it is at this point that  their  paths  diverge.
It seems  to me  that  there  is here  a  basic  problem to be treated - that  of the relationship of  mysticism  and  art.  Certainly there  can  be  no  real  dichotomy  be­ tween  the  two, for  both  aspire  to union  with  the  Absolute  Good.  But  there is an important  difference, in  that   the  mystic  reaches   a  point   where   his  experience becomes  incommunicable; only union  with  God  matters. For  the artist, however,  the  need  to communicate his experience to men  never  ceases to be a driving  force; if  he  isolates  himself  completely   he  finds  the  springs   of  inspiration drying   up. Saint-Denys-Garneau's mystical  experience progressed up  to  the  point  where  he no  longer  felt  the  need  or  possessed the  ability  to  communicate it. That is why it was  necessary  for  him  to cease  writing: he  had  made his choice  between  mysti­ cism and  art.

54

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



Anne  Hebert in  Le Tombeau des Rois portrays  the agonizing experience of the artist  who  must  live in solitude in order  to comprehend fully her vision of reality, and  who  in  her isolation  from  the  world suffers artistic  dryness.  In  the first poem the  poet  visualizes  the  solitude she  is entering as  a  calm,   clear  body  of  water stretching before  her, concealing she knows not what:

Sur l'eau egale
S'etend
La surface plane
Pure a perte de vue
D'une  eau inconnue. 	( "Eveil au Seuil d'une  Fontaine")

The second   poem,  "Sous  la  Pluie", communicates the  peace  and   protection of solitude; but  already   in  the  third   poem  we detect  traces  of a  nascent bitterness at  the  drying up  of  poetic inspiration - the  days  and   the  trees  around  this fountain  of  solitude   form   no  reflection  in  its  clear  surface. Still,  however,   the poet's  isolation is a "consecrated marine vocation", and  her interior tears are accompanied by patience.
In   this  context, the  obscure  symbolism  of  "Les  Pecheurs d'Eau"  takes  on  a
profound significance. The  fishermen   (Christ, religion,  spirituality)  have  caught the  bird  who  is poetry  in  their  nets. The  tree  still resounds with  connotations of the  cross from  the  preceding volume,  and  the striking  image  of the  woman at the foot of the tree now becomes  clear:

Cette femme qui coud Au pied de l'arbre Sous le coup de midi

Cette  femme assise
Refait,  point a point,
L'humilite du monde,
Rien qu'avec  Ia douce patience
De ses deux mains brulees.

The recurring image  of  the  outstretched hands  representing the  giving  of self is a pivotal  one at this stage of Miss Hebert's development:

Ellene les referme  jamais Et les tend toujours ... D'elle  pour nous
Nul lieu d'acceuil et d'amour


55

THE AGONIZING SOLITUDE



Sans cette offrande impitoyable
Des mains de douleurs parees
Ouvertes au solei!.	( "Les Mains")

The poet,  then,  has felt called  to isolation,  and  while  realizing  it is a vocation of  sorrow, has  embraced it  as her  mission.  From the  beginning, however,  there are  indications that  her salvation  lies not  purely  in the mystical  but in the  artistic sphere. She  does  not  seek  her  inspiration in  spiritual experience as did  John of the  Cross;   nor  does  she  cease  to  attempt  communication, as  did  Saint-Denys­ Garneau.  Instead she  seeks to  perpetuate her  inspiration  by  recalling   memories of her  childhood (or  the period  she spent  in communication  with  the world) . As these memories gradually fade, she begins to despair.
Her  despair at first is only a "petit  desespoir"- more  accurately, it is a feeling
of profound sorrow. It is not despair,  for the  poet,  while she can  no longer  rejoice in the pleasures  of the moment:

Mon creur est rompu
L'instant ne Ie porte plus,	("Petit  Desespoir")

still  has  an  awareness of the  purpose in her sorrow. She  can  still feel the consola­ tion  that  comes  from  giving  herself  and  therefore she  desires  the  darkness of her solitude to continue:

A chaque eclat de lumiere
Je ferme Ies yeux
Pour  Ia continuite  de Ia nuit
La perpetuite du silence
Ou  je sombre. 	("Nuit")

The poems that  follow this one portray an ever increasing torment. Isolation becomes  stifling,  and  a new symbol  is introduced, one  that  will be vital  to Anne Hebert's thought -the closed chamber. The poet  is surrounded by a wall, which she  could   jump  over  or  remove  without  effort, except  that  she  feels imprisoned by her own fidelity  to her present state:
un mur a peine Un signe demur Pose en couronne Au tour de moi.
Je pourrais bouger,
Sauter  Ia haie de rosiers, ...

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



Seule rna fidelite me lie
0 liens durs
Que  j'ai  noues
En  je ne sais quelle  nuit secrete
Avec la mort!	("Un Mur  a Peine")


Someone  has led her to this closed room where she sits with arms outstretched in the form  of a cross ("La Chambre  fermee"), and  she will be capable  of  sur­ viving there  as long as she can retain  the memories of her childhood  and of  the world  outside   ("La  Chambre de  Bois"). Miss Hebert   occasionally  achieves heights of startling  power in describing the agony of her state:

Midi  brUle aux carreaux d'argent
La  place  du monde  flambe comme  une forge
L'angoisse me fait de l'ombre
Je suis nue et toute  noire sous un arbre  amer.
("La Chambre de Bois")


The  atmosphere  in  the  closed rooms becomes less and  less bearable  in each successive poem  until  we reach  "Nos  Mains au Jardin". Again  Miss Hebert  has used  the  hands  symbol  to  mark  a  significant stage  in  her  evolution.  The  poet conceives the  idea  of  planting  her  hands  in  the garden, in  the  hope  that  they will produce  fruit.  However  after  waiting a whole day and  seeing no results she realizes that

Pour  une seule fleur
une seule minuscule etoile de couleur
U n seul val d'aile calme Pour  une seule note pure Repetee trois fois

Il faudra la saison prochaine
Et nos mains  fondues  comme  l'eau.

Here again a poem of obscure symbolism is clarified by referring it to the symbol­
ism of Christianity. Is this not a poetic echo of John XII.24?


Believe me  when  I tell you this:  a grain  of wheat  must  fall  into  the ground and   die,  or  else  it  remains   nothing more   than   a  grain   of wheat; but  if it dies, then  it yields rich fruit.

57

THE AGONIZING SOLITUDE



A  period  of self-annihiliation, of spiritual and  poetic  dryness,  a dark  night  of the soul,  is necessary  before  any  fruit  can  be produced. And  this  period  is what  the poet  now  enters  into,  and  what  she calls ''l'envers du monde". Now  there  is real dryness  - the  imagery  becomes  that  of salt,  of blindness and  groping, of death
in life:
II y a certainement  quelqu'un
Qui m'a tuee
Puis s'en est alle . . .
A oubM d'effacer Ia beaute du monde
Autour de moi
A oubM de fermer mes yeux avides
Et permis leur passion perdue. 	("II y a certainement quelqu'un")

The   poem  entitled "L'Envers du  Monde" is  a  powerful cry  of  pain  from  the abyss  in  which  the  poet  is foundering. She  recalls  the  early  consolations of  her solitude:
Hier
Nous avons mange les plus tendres feuilles du sommeil
Les songes nous ont couchees
Au sommet de l'arbre de nuit

However, the consolations  do not last:

Notre fatigue n'a pas dormi ...

and   the  only  hope  of survival  now  for  the  poet  is in  drawing inspiration from memory:
La voix de l'oiseau
Hors de son cceur et de ses ailes rang,ees ailleurs Cherche 'eperdument  Ia porte de Ia memoire Pour vivre encore un petit souffle de temps.

The   combined spiritual and  poetic  dark  night  is evoked  by  the  combination of spiritual and  poetic symbols in the phrase "arbre  de parole":
Aucun arbre de parole n'y pousse ses racines silencieuses
Au cceur noir de Ia nuit. C'est ici l'envers du monde
Qui done nous a chassees de ce cote?

The depths of  despair  are  reached  in  "Paysage", where  love and  giving  have completely dried  up,  the  memory  of childhood has  become  meaningless, and  the cry of the bird once so vitally alive now seems only imaginary:

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



L'amour change en sel
Et les mains a jamais perdues.

Sur Ies deux rives fume mon enfance
Sable et marais memoire fade
Que  hante le cri rauque
D'oiseaux  imaginaires chaties par le vent.

"Un Bruit  de Soie",  the  last  poem  in the section  entitled L'Envers  du Monde, is dominated by an  image  of the  merciless heat  and  blinding light  of noon  which is  reminiscent  of  Camus'  L'Etranger. The   poet  is  groping  blindly, arms  out­ stretched, unable to  see  the  person  for  whom  she  is searching because  the  sun is so bright. The  closing lines of the poem  reveal that  the dark  night  has ended  - the  shadow of the  tree-cross  at last brings  merciful  relief, and  the  poet,  now able to see, realizes that  her hands have produced fruit:

Mes mains 'ecartent le jour comme un rideau
L'ombre  d'un  seul arbre etale la nuit a nos pieds
Et decouvre cette calme immobile distance
Entre  tes doigts de sable et mes paumes toutes fieuries.

The final  poem  in the  volume,  "Le  Tombeau des Rois",  sums  up metaphoric­ ally  the  whole  course  of experience traced  in the  book,  as a  horrible but  fruitful dream of patient tragedy and  self-oblation. The  poet on waking  has freed  herself, has cast  out  of her  the  dead  who have  had  possession of  her. The  blind  bird,  hav­  ing recovered his sight, looks hopefully  toward the dawn:

Livide et repue de songe horrible
Les membres denoues
Et les morts hors de moi, assassines, Quel refiet d'aube s'egare ici?
D'ou  vient done que cet oiseau fremit
Et tourne  vers le matin
Ses prunelles crevees?



LATE IN     1g6o  Anne   Hebert  published her  Poemes,  which contains the  whole  of Le Tombeau des Rois plus a collection  of new  poems,  most
of which  appeared in  periodicals between  1953 and  1g6o.  In  the  preface to these


59

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



later   poems,  Miss  Hebert describes  the  function of  poetry  as a  breaking of  soli­ tude. This provides  a clue  to  the  difference  between   Le Tombeau des  Rois and  the  poems  that  follow it. The  period  of solitude necessary  for  poetic  and spiritual formation  has  been  broken  by  the  act  of  poetic  creation, and   now  the  poet  is united  in a real way with all men.
Thus the  main   difference   between   the  poems  of  Le  T ombeau  des Rois  and
the  later   poems  is  that   the  latter   are  written  on  a  much   broader scale.  They express  not  only the  anguish  of the  poet but  that  of entire  cities and  countries. In the  later   poems  Miss  Hebert participates in  French-Canadian literature's  grow­ ing revolt against  long-standing restriction.
In   "La Ville  tuee"  she  evokes  a  city  stifling   under authority. The   bird  of
poetry  is  held  captive, and   all  emotion, passion  and  imagination are  banished, and  replaced by dogma  and  morality:

On  etancha   le  marais,  l'oiseau  de  proie  fut  capture,   toutes  ailes deployees, le plus doux d'entre  nous assura qu'il  le ferait  dormir  en croix sur la porte . . .

However, poetry  not  only  breaks  solitude   but   brings   joy,  and   the  liberation promised in the closing lines of Le Tombeau des Rois has proved  a reality. The oppressed   refuse  to  submit   to  the  stagnation imposed   on  them.  Their tunic  of unhappiness becomes so tight  that  overnight it splits from  top  to bottom, and  they
awaken naked  and  alone,  exposed  to the  beauty of the  day  ("Trap a l'Etroit").
The images  in  these  poems  are  those  of  the  earlier  volumes - the  bird,  the salt,  the  brilliant sunlight   and   dark  night,  the  sea,  the  closed  room,  the  house and   the  doorstep - but  all  appear in  new  and  significant contexts,  singing  of boldness and  hope and  a new joy:

Voici que la saison des eaux  se retire;  la ville se seche comme une greve, u che

Le printemps  brUle le long des fas;ades grises, et les lepres de pierre au solei! ont J',eclat splendide des dieux peles et victorieux.
( "Printemps sur la Ville")

This   triumphant  liberation in  thought brings  a  change in  style.  Gone  is the short  clipped  line of hard  anguish; lines are long, flowing, confident. Colours inter­ play  boldly  and  vividly.  All  the  senses of the  reader are  brought into  play,  and  disparate elements  are  juxtaposed in  violent  and  startling image:

6o

THE  AGONIZING SOLITUDE



0 toi  qui  trembles dans  le vent,  ayant  hisse la beaute de ton  visage au mat  des quatre saisons...             ("Alchimie du Jour")
La  joie se mit  a crier,  jeune  accouchee  a l'odeur sauvagine sous les
jones...                      ("Mystere de la Parole")

In these  poems, poetic and spiritual experience are  still  as  closely  related as in Les  Songes  en  Equilibre  and  Le  Tombeau des  Rois. Now   Miss  Hebert,  like Claudel, sees  the  poet  as  spokesman between men  and God. To the  poets  of the ages,  intensely loving and  sensitive, has been  entrusted the  "passion of the  world". Theirs is a Christlike mission, working with  Him toward the  world's redemption:

Ah  nous  sommes  vivants,  et  le  jour  recommence a !'horizon! Dieu peut   naitre a son  tour,  enfant bleme,  au  bord  des  saisons  mis  en croix; notre  reuvre  est deja  levee, coloree  et poignante d'odeur!
( "Naissance du  Pain")

The poets  speak for  the  multitude of  men  who  experience the  joys  and  sorrows of created beings, but  cannot express them:

Fronts  boucles   ou  croupit  le  silence  en   toisons  musquees,  toutes grimaces, vieilles tetes, joues d'enfants, amours, rides,  joies, deuils, creatures, creatures, langues  de feu au solstice de la terre

0 mes  fr.eres les plus  noirs,  toutes  fetes  gravees  en  secret; poitrines humaines, calebasses  musiciennes  ou  s'exasperent des  voix  captives

Que  celui  qui  a  rer;u fonction   de !a  parole  vous  prenne en  charge comme   un  creur  tenebreux de  surcroit, et  n'ait  de  cesse que  soient justifies  les  vivants   et  les  morts  en  un  seul  chant  parmi l'aube et les herbes
("Mystere de la Parole")

The  three volumes of  Anne Hebert's poems,  then, record her  evolution from carefree childhood through an agonizing solitude of  poetic and spiritual  forma­ tion   to  a  freedom in  which she  embraces her  French-Canadian  people  and   all humanity- a triumphant development of thought through poetry.




chranicle



THE PRESS
AND LITERATURE

Canadian Book Pages



Donald Stainsby


NOT VERY  LONG AGO   a  majo' Canadian  new•papcr de­
voted  three-quarters of a column on its book page to reviewing a volume on the
raising  of  mushrooms.  More  recently,  another  newspaper of  equal  standing wasted  half a column  on a book about  rock gardens.  And  a third  paper,  whose book editor  has four  tabloid pages at his disposal, gave pride of place in a recent issue to an unsparkling  review of an uninteresting collection of talks with promin­ ent  Americans  by  the  British  journalist  Henry  Brandon,   while it  found  space only  on  the  fourth   page  for  a  bright,  intelligent  review  of a  new  book  about Louis Riel.
These  are  random  examples of the fault  I  chiefly criticise in  Canadian  news­ paper   book  pages;  that  they  lack  even  the  most  elementary  editing.  No  good publication   just  happens.  Excellence  is  the  result  of  skill, devotion  and  plain worry  on  the  part  of an  editor. This  is as true  of a  newspaper  book  section as it  is of  any  other  publication,  and  the lack of these three  essentials is  apparent in the review pages of many otherwise excellent newspapers.
The  book pages of most Canadian newspapers  fall into one of two categories. First,  a  class to  be  described, condemned,  and  dismissed, are  the  papers  which run  syndicated   reviews. These  are  available  from   several sources, often  very cheaply,  and  the quality of their reviewing is usually reflected in the price. News­ papers   which  run  them  confine  their  book  pages  automatically to  American books, for  there  is,  perhaps  fortunately,  no  Canadian syndicate  which  deals in

CHRONICLE



book  reviews.  The   newspapers which  subscribe  to the  syndicates do  little  service to  their  subscribers and   positive  harm  to  Canadian  writers by entirely  ignoring them.
The  other  considerable group of Canadian book pages includes  those produced by  publishers' secretaries,  by  semi-retired deskmen,  and   by  magazine editors  in their  odd  moments. These  are  little  better  than  the  syndicated pages, since they are  almost  invariably passive,  unselective  productions. Any  book  - every  book indeed   - which  is submitted by  a  publisher  "must be  reviewed", regardless  of its  merit  or  interest. The reviews in such  pages  are  distinguished by phrases  like "this modern novel" (whatever that  may mean) and  "this book will be of interest to all  those  interested in  the  sea, the  mountains, history, fine food  and  adultery." Typically, they  display  the  inadequacy of their  reviewers  by avoiding all expres­ sion of opinion.
The  job of the  newspaper book page editor  (significantly, there  are no "literary
editors" on  Canadian newspapers) is to present  information and  comment on as wide a range  as possible of books of fairly wide interest  as soon as possible after publication. Fiction, biography, memoirs, current events,  history, are his fare; mushroom culture and  such  similarly  unliterary subjects  as boating, cooking  and fashions  belong  on  the gardening or other  appropriate pages. Yet, since the news­ paper   is  a  mass  medium, there  is little  justification  for  discussion  of   the  more technical  aspects   of  literature;  this  has  its  place  in  magazines  like  Canadian Literature.
To  carry  out  its functions satisfactorily, the  newspaper book  page  needs  more
continuity of  interest   than is provided   by  reviews  themselves,  yet  there  are  few Canadian papers which  have  regular  columnists  presenting comments on writers, publishers, and  literary topics  in  a general  way.  Even  Robertson  Davies' syndi­ cated   column   does  not   come  within   this  class, since  it  is  becoming  more  and more  a general column  which  at  times revels in the  oddities  of  literature but  has little  to  say  about current writers.  This  is unfortunate,  since  the regular column  commenting on  matters of  current literary   interest  performs  a  useful  service  to the  world  of letters  by providing its only mass forum  in  print. At the same  time, the  regular  column  should  not  be the  only  means  by  which  the  scope  of a  book page  is extended  beyond   the  routine   tasks of  reviewing current  books. To  give examples from  my  own  practice when  I acted  as a book  page  editor, I gathered such  items  as  a  report  from  Russia  on  Canadian literature as it is known  in  the Soviet  Union, reports from  the  P.E.N. international meeting in  Rio  de  Janeiro, and  regular  correspondence from  French Canada. Information of this kind  helps

6g

CHRONICLE



readers  to see the  books which  are  reviewed in  a much  wider  context.  But few newspapers provide it.




WAT CAN ONE  SAY  of Canadian book pages as they exist? I  do  not see all of them all the time, but  I do see most of them  a good deal of the time, and  there  are certain comments which it may be useful to make.
The  Montreal   Star  seems the  only  English-language  newspaper  in  Canada that  is willing to give more than  token space to the reviewing of new books. The use of the space  it  does give is generally  good;  though  one  regrets the  absence of a column about  local writers and writing, the Star must be given credit for Goodridge  MacDonald's London  Letters. It  also carries  Robertson  Davies regu­ larly,  and  maintains a  continuity  among  its  reviewers  which  helps  the  readers to compare  and  assess reviews. The Gazette of Montreal  presents a review section where  books have  to  compete  with  notices of  the  fine  arts;  the  appearance of the  page  is conservative,  and  so are  the contents,  which  tend  to  be so carefully balanced  in  their  comments  as  to  lose meaning; this  is a  widespread  fault  in Canadian book pages.
The  Toronto   Star  now  prints  Robert  Fulford's   valuable  daily  column,  but
this innovation  has led to the virtual elimination  of the Star's weekly book section, which is now confined mainly to Robertson  Davies' column  and frequent  contri­ butions  by Robert   Weaver.  The  Toronto  Globe  and  Mail,  on  the  other  hand,  is looking  more  likely than  in  the  past.  It  still  carries  W.  A.  Deacon's  Flyleaf and  occasionally  a  review with  bite in it.  More  than  most  other  newspapers  in this country,  it acknowledges Canadian  topicality  in  selecting its leading  reviews. Its  book  page  suffers mostly from  a tendency  to  equate  length  with  excellence, authority  with readability.
At the opposite pole lies the Toronto  Telegram, which has fallen a prey to the
cult  of  readability,   the  fallacy  that  newspaper   items  must  be  kept  extremely simple and extremely short. The result is a series of snippets, opinionated  and meaningless blurbs, a hodgepodge of untidy headlines.
The  Hamilton Spectator  produces a better  than  average  review page, and it is to be commended  for A.  M. Hunter's weekly column,  and  for its willingness to print  features  about  books as well as reviews. Ottawa, on the other  hand,  fares badly. The   journal's  page is lacklustre, and  mingles its own reviews with others acquired  from  the  Manchester  Guardian,  calling  them  "Journal-Guardian"  re-

CHRONICLE



views. Where,  in all this, is Mr. Grattan  O'Leary  with his concern for "Canadian opinion"?  The  Ottawa   Citizen  allots less than  two tabloid  pages to books, and much  of that  space is taken  up with lists of acquisitions in the public library  and of bestsellers from  an American  syndicate, a typical space-filling device of the unenterprising  book page editor.
Among  the papers of the West, the Winnipeg  Free Press has the merit of pay­
ing close heed to books of Canadian interest, though  it often declines to criticise them sufficiently when they are bad, and its reviews tend to be somewhat  verbose. The  Vancouver Sun  has built up in recent years a good group of reviewers, most of them  from  outside  its own staff. On  the other  hand,  the space it  devotes to books is severely limited, and  much of this is taken up by borrowing from other­ usually British or American  - journals. For some years it carried  a locally writ­ ten  column  on  literary  events,  but  this  has  recently  been  dropped. Finally,  to cover  a  possible gap  in  my own  knowledge,  I  should  say  that  I  have  received good reports of the book page in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, though  I have not yet been able to investigate it.
This  list - short  as it is - covers all the review sections in Canadian  news­
papers that  have any claim to serious consideration. Most of the remaining  papers carry syndicated  reviews, presented execrably, or no reviews at all.
It makes  up  to  a  depressing  survey. Canadian newspapers  clearly  play little serious part  in the literary  life of the country.  But at least some of the  blame for their  failure  lies with  the  people who believe literature  is important but  who do not protest the inadequacies of the Canadian as compared  with the better  British and  American  press with  enough  vigour to convince the newspapers of a public interest that  might  justify an attempt  to achieve an adequate standard of literary editing.





review articles




RIEL RECONSIDERED


Alan Wilson



E.  B.  OSLER. The  Man  who  Had  to  Hang:   Louis  Riel.  Longmans Green.  $s.oo.


THE   CHALLENGES of   land settlement, of adjustment of an older wilderness to a new frontier, of replacing "squatter" with "settler" have  been among Canada's  most  serious,  continu­ ing  problems.  Adjustment of  the Eskimo to    a   new   cultural  and   economic  at­  mosphere   is   only   the   latest    example. Coureurs de  bois, Selkirk  settlers,  P.E.I. tenants,   and   homesteaders  have  all  offered   fresh  enigmas  to  Canadian  ad­ ministrations.  One   of  the  most  compre­ hensive   and   explosive   of  these  conflicts was that over the  absorption of the Metis
'nation' of the old North  West into the territorial empire of Canada during the second   half   of   the   nineteenth  century. Louis  Riel,  the  central figure  in  that  dis­ pute,   was  fired   by  the   dream   of   safe­ guarding   "the   ancient  rights    of    the Metis  nation".
Unfortunately, in  this latest  biography of   Riel,    we   are   given   only   the   most cursory   introduction  to  Riel's  early  life, to  the  influence of his father, and  to  the "ancient  traditions" of  the   Metis   with their  sense of independence from  both American and Canadian forms of western   imperialism. Indeed,  "imperial-

66
 ism" seems a dirty word in Mr. Osler's vocabulary. One  must say 'seems', for by employing the  dramatic devices  of  inter­ polated   fictional  dialogue  and   of   fre­  quent soliloquies,  Mr.  Osler  has  at  many points    left   us   in   serious   doubt   as   to whether he or  Riel  is speaking.
Macaulay, in  his  Essay on  History, re­ marks    that    "a   perfect   historian   must possess an  imagination sufficiently  power­  ful  to  make   his  narrative  affecting and picturesque". But  Macaulay  was  talking  about the  imagination  producing orna­ mentation  in  style  and   narrative.
There is another sort of historical imagination  - structural  rather  than ornamental, as Collingwood observes - and  it  is used  to  work  inferentially from certain  fixed   points   already  marked  by fairly  clear  evidence. It may  be  used  to reconstruct undocumented events in a continuum   lying   between    two   known events   in  a  subject's  life;  or,  as  in  the present   work,  it  may   be  called  upon   to provide a picture of the  working  of the subject's mind,  of  the   ambitions and dreams that  may have lain behind  Riel's acknowledged   actions.   Such    a    recon­ struction  has   become   a   legitimate   part

REVIEW ARTICLES



of the  historian's craft, and  as the under­ standing of  the   human  mind  and   one's personal  experience are   enlarged   and  matured, such  imagination  plays  a  use­ ful  role  in  the  process  of  reconstructing the  past.
But here the necessary lines between historian   and     novelist    must    not    be allowed   to  become   blurred. It becomes more   important  than   ever   to   acknow­ ledge   authorities and   evidence  in  order  to   avoid   any   kind   of   ambiguity.  And here  Mr.  Osler  has  done  us  no  good  by dismissing   entirely   the   device   of   foot­  notes   as   a   mere   academic  rite.   Aca­ demics   do   abuse   this   device   very  fre­ gently,   but   the  fault   lies  with  the  indi­  vidual    scholar    not    with    the    practice itself.   Perhaps   no   one    will    impute motives   of   bad   faith   or   dishonesty   to Mr.   Osler,    and    to   other  recent    non­ academic  writers   of  history   in   Canada who  have  dispensed   with  the  apparatus of  footnotes  and   critical  bibliographies. But   what   is  ignored  here   is  the   vital need  of  stating the  kind  of  evidence on which   the  narrative is  based  so that   the critical reader can   judge  for  himself  the value   of  the  author's  statements and   of these  imaginative reconstructions of  con­ versations and   musing,S. What  might   be accepted  readily   in  Mr.  Osler's  account is thus  left  in  the  realm  of baseless asser­ tion.    And    in   the   present    work    these remarks  apply    only   to   those   areas   in which  we suspect  Mr.  Osler  to  be  right.  But  what   a  lot  he  ignores!
There has  always   been   a  question  in the  mind  of the  professional historian whether biography should  be considered history   at   all.   But   individuals  are   the agents,   often   the  prime  movers,  of   his­ tory, and  cannot be ignored. Collectively, the  biographies of many  individuals con-
 cemed in a single historical period  or movement   can  offer  insight   and  illumi­ nation   into  the  leadership,  membership, or   opposition    to   that   movement.  The  great  danger,  of course,  lies in  the  tend­  ency   to  make   of   one's   subject  a  hero and   to  write   of   "his   times"   as  if  they were  "the   times".  Mr.  Osler  has  set  out "frankly"  to  achieve   this.
Broad economic forces, powerful springs  of Canadian nationalism,  Ameri­ can  annexationism, a  tragic  coincidence of political  and  ecclesiastical  weakness  in the   Red   River   colony,   and   chance  all contributed  to  the  success  of   the  Metis uprising   of  186g-7o.   Yet  some  of  these factors   are   neglected or   misrepresented here.   American   annexationist  pressures reached  even  to  the  councils  of the  Hud­ son's  Bay  Company in  London, yet  they are  only  mentioned  as  personal idiosyn­ cracies   of    William  O'Donoghue.   The  absence of Bishop Tache on a legitimate ecclesiastical  mission to Rome and  the weakness  of  the   ailing   Governor   Mac­ tavish  are  made to seem  parts  of  a  sinis­ ter  Canadian plot. Indeed, in his account of  the  1870  uprising, Mr.  Osler  gives  us a  'Western' in familiar style:  the  numer­ ous  "bad   guys"  include John   A.  Mac­  donald     (contemptuously    described   as "the   great   man"),  William   McDougall, Thomas  Scott,   Donald  Smith,  Colonel  Dennis,  Captain  Boulton, Charles Mair, and  Dr.  Schulz;  the  "good  guys"  include  the whole of the Metis  "nation",  English­ speaking  moderates  like  A.  G.  B.  Ban­ natyne,  the  courageous Governor  Archi­  bald,  and  pre-eminently, of  course,  Riel himself.   It is  good   theatrics,  but   is  it good  history?
In  his  account of  the  1885  Rebellion, Mr.  Osler   no  longer   divides   his  princi­ pals  into   Angels  of  Light   and  Demons

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  Darkness.  He   is  certainly   more   per­ suasive   here.   Yet   he   seriously   suggests that   the   newest   troubles   arose  "for   al­ most   indentical  [sic.]   reasons"  to  those at   Red   River.   He  ignores  the  fact   that  much   of  Riel's  support  came  from   per­ sons  who   had   long  since  received   and  dissipated  their   land   grants   under   the Manitoba   Act,    and    that    Riel's    own claims  were  forfeited  at  the  time  of  his banishment.  Riel   showed   a   tragic    in­ sensitivity    to   the   realities   of   the   new political and  economic situation in  I885, but   we  are  given  an  equivocal   account of  his  responsibility for  the  senseless and monstrous tactic  of arousing the  Indians. For   this,   Gabriel  Dumont  is  made   to bear   much   of   the   blame.   One   of   the most  remarkable claims  is that  concern­ ing   Riel's   demands  in   1885.  Included among  these   was   one  calling   for   new
 land  grants to Metis descendants every eighteen  years   and   a  perpetual  subsidy to   the   West's   native   inhabitants   based on  an  evaluation of the  territory's total acreage,  the   proceeds  to  be  distributed in the curiously  inverted proportion of twenty-five  cents   an   acre   to   the   half­ breeds,   and   fifteen   to  the  Indians.  Yet Mr.  Osler  omits  these  details,  describing Riel's   extortions  as  "sensible   demands". Some   of   them   were,  but   not   even   the Loyalist  grants  were  as ridiculous as  this proposal.
Canadian   historical  studies   have   al­ ready   come   some  way  from   the  period  and  atmosphere of  what D. G. Creighton once   called   "the  authorized   version   of Canadian  History".  Whether   that   ver­ sion  was  too  Liberal or  too  shortsighted, it  is  being  replaced  by  revisionist   works of  varying degrees  of  usefulness  and  pre-




SPOIL  THE CHILD BY LUCIE STREET.
School  manager,  school   governor  and   lately  a   teacher,  Lucie  Street  is perturbed about  teaching methods, particularly as applied to writing and reading. She  has  written a  book  for  teachers, and  for  parents who  dismally wonder  why   their   children  seem   so  nearly  illiterate,  with   a   consequent inability to  learn  or  communicate on  any  subject.                      Price $4.25

RUSSIANS  AS PEOPLE BY WRIGHT MILLER.
Recommended  to  anyone  who   would   really  like   to   know   what   Russian people are   like.                                                                                            Price $5.00

CHRISTMAS
IN CANADA  FLORA  MCPHERSON AND  M.  J. BARBER, EDITORS.
This beautiful and  interesting anthology gives  a  clear   picture of  Christmas in  Canada over  the  years  from   1535 to  the  present day.  The  editors have chosen   selections  from   the  writings of  many famous Canadians  and   have produced a  collection of  delightful stories and  chronicles.          Price $4.00


J.  M.  DENT &  SONS    (CANADA)  LIMITED
100 SCARSDALE RD., DON MILLS, ONTARIO	1300  ROBSON ST., VANCOUVER 5, B.C.



68

REVIEW ARTICLES



judice.  Mr.  Osler's contribution seems to lie in  the  second  category. If it  is, as its dust-jacket  claims   it   to   be,   "the    first frankly   sympathetic  biography  of  Louis Riel   by   an   English   Canadian",  it   has been  more  fully,  more  competently, and more  "frankly"  preceded  by   several "sympathetic"  American studies  of  Riel, all   of  them    available  in   Canada.   Mr. Osler  has  probably written the  best short narrative  of   some   of   the   publicly   im­ portant  stag,es  of  Riel's   career,   but   he has  neither written a full-scale  biography  nor   a  comprehensive, analytic   study   of Riel's   place  in  these  two  Western upris­ ings.   Certainly,  in   one's   sympathy  for Riel,   one   may   feel   that   his  opponents were   unjust  and   that   historians   have
 been misguided. But to ignore  whatever reason  and  justice  lay  in  that  opposition is surely  to  try  to  right  a  wrong  by  com­ mitting   the   same   error   one's  self.  This  is  not  good   revisionist   history  but  vigi­ lante  justice.
Moreover,  the   book  falls  far  short  of
being  classed  as literature. The narrative often  has force  and  flow, but  it is marred by tiresome cliches, slang, and awkward constructions.  It is  written in  a  conver­ sational  style without art  or  careful edit­  ing.   Further,  the   absence   of  any   map  of   the   North    West   is  a   serious   flaw, particularly  since  the   book   is  obviously designed  for  the  general  reader. He  will be stirred  by  this  book,  but  it  should   be only  a  beginning.




THE  MEANJNG  AND PURPOSE  OF  MAN
 




Roderick  Haig-Brown



ERNEST s. DODGE. Northwest  by Sea. Oxford  $6.so.


EvEN  THE MOST CASUAL STUDENT   of   history   is  aware  that   the search   for   a   northwest  passage   to   the Orient played  a very large part in the exploration of the northern hemisphere. Pacific Coast  historians are  particularly aware    of   the   efforts   of   Vitus   Bering, James  Cook  and  George   Vancouver  (all of  whom  sailed  under orders  to  look for the   western    entrance  to   the   passage) since  their   journeys  led  in  the  end  to  a full  examination  of  the   whole  intricate north  Pacific coastline. Most Canadians recognise  such  names  as  Frobisher,  Hud­ son,   Ross,   Parry,    Franklin,   Amundsen
 and  others  as geographical features of the Canadian Arctic  associated  with famous explorers;  but   perhaps  few   people   re­ member   today   that   all   these   explorers were primarily in search  of the northwest passage.
It is difficult  for  a  modern individual, however  romantically inclined, to  realize fully  the   power   with   which   this  search gripped the  imagination of  men  - not merely  explorers, but  the  general public as  well - through several  centuries.  At first it was a search  for  wealth  and  trade, a   short   sea-way   to   the   riches   of   the Orient; the  shoreline   of  North   America

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



was  simply   an  obstacle   in  this,  a  mon­ strous   unyielding stretch   of  land,  whose extent   no  one   then   dreamed  of,  incon­  veniently   planted   between   Europe  and  Asia.
The search, supported by  dreams, hopes,    misinformation,   faulty    calcula­ tions  and   the  varied  personalities of  the searchers,  persisted   through  three   cen­ turies.  By the  end  of  the eighteenth cen­ tury,  Cook's   and  Vancouver's work  had made   it  certain   that   no  passage   could exist   anywhere   below   the   high   arctic,  and   the  efforts  of  those  who  had  made  their   difficult  ways  into  the  eastern   ap­  proaches of   the  polar  seas  had  made   it equally   clear   that   any  passage  that   did exist  could   not   be  commercially  useful. But   the   challenge  was   only   increased  and    the    nineteenth   century    was   the period  of  greatest endeavour. Expedition after  expedition, most  of them  well plan­  ned,  well  equipped  and   under   the  aus­ pices of the British  Admiralty, were sent forward to  push  farther and  farther into the ice-choked channels and narrow  seas beyond  the mouth of Hudson  Bay. Even though  no  one  succeeded   in  forcing   it, it  became   clear   that   a  sea  passage  did exist  and   actual  confirmation was  pro­ vided   by  the  land   and   sea  parties  that  searched  for   the   lost  Franklin   Expedi­ tion   of   I845·   It  remained   for   Roald  Amundsen  to  complete the  first  passage in  four  seasons,  from   I903  to  I9o6,  and  for  Henry Larsen   with  the  RCMP ves­ sel  St. Roch, forty   years  later,   to  make it  look  almost  simple  by  completing the first  west to east  passage in three  seasons, returning from   east   to  west  in  a  single season.
Ernest  S.   Dodge's  book   is  an   as­ tonishingly complete  catalogue  of   these voyages,   from   Cabot's  first  in   I497   to
 that  of   the    United  States   nuclear­ powered  submarine  Seadragon  in   I96o. He   skilfully   extracts  from   journals,  let­ ters   and   other   accounts  to  bring   each voyage  to  life  and  fit  it  into  the  account of  his  real  hero,   the  Northwest  Passage itself.  The  result  is  swift,  generally easy and  quite  fascinating reading, as  well  as a  sharp   impression   of  the  courage and persistence  of   man   in   the   face   of   in­ credible  hardships  and    difficulties.   No voyage  of  the  hundred or  more  listed  in the   book   was  a  direct  commercial  suc­ cess, though many  won  honour and  glory for  their   leaders and  participants. Many  ended in  disaster.  Not  a  few  left  leaders discredited  in   spite   of   prodigies    per­ formed.   Yet    there    were    always    new leaders,   new   seamen,    new   adventurers willing   to   take   up   the   challenge  and,  perhaps   more    surprisingly,  new   sup­ porters   willing   to  assume   the   financial risk.
The stories  of  the  discredited leaders
are   especially   touching  and,   somehow, typical    of   the   enormous  gulf   between action   and   administration.  Baffin,   who was  inadvertently  betrayed  by  Purchas, Foxe  who  satisfied  himself  there   was  no passage    westward  out   of   Hudson   Bay and   was  not  believed,   Middleton  whom Dobbs   mistrusted,  Ross   who   saw   non­ existent  mountains   across   Lancaster Sound,  all    these  and    many   others  achieved  greatly  in   the   field   yet  were easily   discounted  by   theorists   at   home.  No  allowance  was  made  for  the  tensions and    responsibilities    and    problems     of command, or  for  the  enormous  difficul­ ties   of   judging   unmapped    land,    un­ charted seas  and   constantly  shifting  ice masses.   Rose,    whose   mistake   was   the most   obvious,   had   to  wait  fifteen   years for  another command  and  the  chance  to

REVIEW ARTICLES



prove   himself    not   merely    one   of   the greatest leaders but  possibly the most advanced   and    constructive  thinker  of them  all and  a man  of immeasurable bravery   and   determination.
Though the  author has been extremely
skilful  in   selecting   the   details   that   dis­
tinguished  each   voyae
carne  before  it  and   after   it  and   though he  has  woven  these  into  a  story  with  its own  excitements and suspense,  most readers wil  experience a  recurring  sense of  disappointment as the principal figures succeed  each  other. One  has  scarcely become     familiar   with     a    new    hero, Barents or  Bering,  Frobisher or Davis, Hudson or  Baffin,  Ross  or  Parry   before his  brief  chapter is  over   and   it  is  time to settle  in for  a few  pages  with  another. The  remedy   is  obvious,   of  course:  one need    only    turn    to   Dodge's   excellent eight-page  bibliography,  select   the  pro­ per  source   and   go  to  it  for   deeper  in­ volvement. The  rewards can be consider­  able,   for   many   of   the   explorers  wrote competently  and   the  material  they  had at   hand    was  full   of   the   most   intense qualities  of   excitement   and   adventure, which  hold  their  values  even  to-day.
Essentially   Northwest   by   Sea   is   the story   of   high   human  success   repeated again  and  again within  the  limits of practical failure. Quite clearly,  the earlier voyages  had   no  possible  chance of  sue-
 cess.  Just   as   clearly   the   later   voyages were  able  to  advance as  far  as  they  did only  because  of  knowledge   and  experi­ ence  gained  in  previous  failures.  But one is left  wondering at  the  end  whether the  passage  has  ever  been  a  possibility  for  a square-rigged sailing  vessel and  yet again  whether  it   has   become  progressively easier  through  the  ice  retreat during the  four  and  a half  centuries since it was first attempted.
Even   to-day,   with  all  the  technologi­ cal  resources   of  the  second  half  of  the twentieth century,  there   is  no  commer­ cially  useful  Northwest  Passage.  Trading and   supply  vessels  make formidable  in­  cursions  from  each  end,  as they  have  for many   years;  the  RCN  ice-breaker Lab­  rador   has   made   it   clear   that   she  can pass  more  or   less  at   will  by  the  sheer power    of    her    6soo    tons.    The  U.S.  nuclear    submarines   have    shown    that  ways can  be found  under  the  ice, though even   these   are   not   without  their   diffi­ culties   and   dangers.  But   there   is  little doubt   that   the   search   for   ways  to  use the   passage   will  continue.  This   simple and  straightforward history of its past should   be  of  interest   to  all  Canadians. As a  story  of  the  meaning and   purpose of   man,   or   at   least   one   of  his   many meanings,   this  book  provides   more  ma­ terial   for  reflection   than   many   philoso­ phical  studies.


PERIOD  PIECES

Marion Smith



SARA    JEANETTE  DUNCAN,  The   Imperialist; FREDERICK   PHILIP   GROVE, The   Master of  the   Mill;    MARTHA OSTENso,    Wild   Geese,  McClelland  and   Stewart,  New Canadian Library,  $1.25.


THE REPUBLICATION of such titles  as  the  three  recently  added   to  Mc­ Clelland  and   Stewart's   New   Canadian Library Series  brings  up  once  again   all the  hoary  old  questions about  the  nature and  status  of Canadian  Literature. That these  questions have  been  chewed   over for   years   without   receiving    any   satis­ factory answers  does  not  make  them  less relevant to  those  who  hope  that  the  cur­  rent   boom   will   not   tum   out   to  be  a bubble.  A lively awareness  of literary tradition is an important element  in a cultural climate favourable to the growth of a national literature. Why, then, the widespread  uneasiness   about   the  multi­ plication of  courses  in  Canadian  Litera­ ture   in  our   universities? about  publica­  tions  such  as  the  New  Canadian  Library paperbacks? even  about  such  periodicals as  Canadian  Literature?  Is  it  all  to  be dismissed  as  a  reflection   of  the  national inferiority  complex or  of  academic old­ fogeyism?
The problem is essentially one  of critical attitudes. Is a book to be read, studied, written about  for  its literary qualities or  for  its  Canadian-ness? Is  it to  be  evaluated in  terms  of  other   works of its own  time  and  type or  of Canadian works of its own  time  and  type?  If both, how  much  of which?  Of  a given  author, which   is  the  more   significant   - a  su­ perior    work   which   is  not   distinctively
 Canadian  or  an   inferior  one  which   is? Where   is  the   line   to  be  drawn  by  the critic   who   is   striving  to   see  literature steadily  and  see it  whole?
The  Imperialist, Wild   Geese, and  The
Master  of the  Mill  are  novels  which,  for one    reason    or   another,  are    of   some interest  to  the student of Canadian Liter­ ature.  Although  their   original   publica­ tion   dates   come   close   to  spanning  the first   half   of  this  century,  all   three   are alike   in   being   in   some   sense  regional novels,   in   being   pioneers   in   different types  of  realism,  and  in  being  noticeably "dated".
Of  the  three,  the  processes of  weather­ ing  have  dealt  most  kindly  with not  the best  nor  the  one  which  is  technically the most   interesting,  but   with   the   earliest.  Sara Jeanette  Duncan's  The  Imperialist, though   published   more    than    a   dozen years  after  the  author had   left  Canada to   become   the   wife  of  an   Indian  civil servant, is firmly  anchored in  the  Cana­ dian    scene.   Elgin,   its   citizens,   and   its social,    ethical   and    political    conflicts,  constitute  a  microcosm the  significance  of  which   is  not  confined   to  tum-of-the­ century Brantford.  Nor  has  the  dialectic of  the  relationships  between  that   micro­  cosm    and    the    Empire-Commonwealth microcosm  entirely lost  its  relevance for the   present-day  reader,  however   much  the  physical   nature of  both   worlds  may

REVIEW ARTICLES



have  changed.
It is in capturing the great  Canadian ambivalence  of  sentimental  attachment to Britain and  touchy  defensiveness of national identity that  The  Imperialist is most    successful.    It  is   least    successful when   its  insistence   on   this   theme   gets in  the  way  of  the  novel.  When   it  does, the  hero  becomes  less a  political  prophet than  a precocious prig, and  the reader's interest  shifts   to  the   secondary  charac­ ters,   not   merely   because   they   are   very well  drawn but  because  they  do  not  talk at   such   inordinately  Jamesian   length. But,  except  for  one  long,  dull  stretch   in the  middle  of  the   book,  such  occasions are  mercifully rare.
Though for the most part  the author maintains the  scrupulous detachment appropriate to  a  disciple  of  the  Howells
 school  of  realistic   fiction,  she  displays  a certain  ambivalence towards her  charac­ ters, a  mingling  of tenderness and critical examination.  Several   of   them   serve   as vehicles  of  mild  satire  directed  towards  small-town pettiness,   self-importance, and  snobbery,  but  even  the  main  charac­ ters give the impression  that  their  author does  not   take   them   nearly   so  seriously as  they  take   themselves.   Sometimes, in­ deed,  she comes  perilously  close  to shat­ tering a carefully built-up mood  by inviting  us to laugh  at their most serious perplexities.
In   view  of  her   avowed   scorn   of  the pat  happy  ending, it  is perhaps this  pro­ pensity  to  levity  which   leads  her  to  use an  almost  literal deus  ex  machina, in  the person   of  the   Presbyterian   minister,  to unravel  plot  complications of  the  highest






A 	HANDJFUL
0JF	R.IC.E WILLIAM ALLISTER


A novel  of great  power  and  perception by a Canadian:

"Allister does   an   outstanding  job  in  developing  the  characters of his  main   subjects. With   force  and  knowing insight-as  a  former POW himself-he  sketches how  strong  men  become weak,  greedy and   self-interested under  the  pressure of  fear   and   hunger-and how  men  can   also  rise  to  great   heights of courage ... one  of  the best  books  of  life  in  a  prisoner-of-war camp." Winnipeg Tribune.

$4-50 AT  YOUR BOOK STORE


BRITISH  BOOK  SERVICE





73

REVIEW ARTICLES



ethical  importance   to   the   parties   in­ volved.  When  Dr.  Drummond  decides to take  a  supernumerary  fiancee  off  young Mr.   Finlay's  hands,   one  can  only  echo Quiller  Couch's  comment  on   the   mar­ riage   of  the   Duke   and   Isabella   at   the end  of  Measure  for Measure: "We  know very  well  what   the  author is up  to,  and  a  scandalous  proceeding it  is."
But    Sara    Jeanette  Duncan   demon­ strates  her    negative  capability   by   es­ chewing any  such  easy out  for  her  hero. At   the   conclusion  of  the   novel   Lorne  Murchison is a  failure both  in  love  and  in  the   war  of  politics,  but  since  this  is no   tragedy    he   is  not   so   much   disillu­ sioned  as  enlightened. He  has  learned   a good   deal   about   shallowness   and   self­ seeking  in  both  areas,  and  next  time  his judgements    will   be   less  credulous,  his devotion less  easily  exploited.
The  self-consciousness   evident   in   in­
congruity of  tone and attitude is reflected in  the  style,  which  is sometimes  succinct and    vivid,    sometimes    easy,   sometimes coy,  sometimes derivative, sometimes clumsy,  but  never  involved.  On  a  single page   one   can   find   such   disparities  as the  following:

The best  of  it  was  there   [in  the  market place],  the    enduring  heart  of   the    new country already old  in  acquiescence. It  was the    deep    root    of   the   race    in   the    land, twisted  and   unlovely, but   holding the  pro­ mise  of all.

and   a  few  lines  later:

"Hello, Lorne," he  said.  He   had   smiled all  the  way,  anticipating the  encounter. He was   obviously  in   clothes that  he   did   not put    on   every   day,   but   the   seriousness  of this   was  counteracted  by  his  hard   felt  hat, which   he    wore    at    an   angle  that    disre­ garded convention.

Like  the  country which  in  her  theme, Sara   Jeanette Duncan in  The   Imperial-

74
 ist is feeling  her  way towards an  identity. It is  not   her  best  novel  and   one  might wish   the   editors   had   chosen   her   later and   more   skilful  treatment of  a  similar subject in Cousin  Cinderella, or A Cana­ dian   Girl   in   London, though   to  do  so would  have  been  to sacrifice  the  element which   chiefly   gives   interest   to   The Imperialist, its  remarkably  lively  evoca­ tion   of  one  aspect   of  Canadian  life.
As  Professor   Carlyle  King's  excellent
introduction   reminds  us,   Martha   Os­ tenso's    Wild    Geese   is  truly   a   pioneer  among novels  about pioneers.  Winner of the  first   prize  in  their   jointly-sponsored first-novel  competition,  it was  published serially   in   Pictorial   Review  and   subse­ quently  by  Dodd,  Mead   and   Company in I 925.  Among   realistic   treatments of the    Man-against-the-land theme,  it is contemporaneous with Ellen Glasgow's Barren    Ground  and   antedates  by   two years   Ole   Rolvaag's  classic,   Giants   in the   Earth. Certainly  its  earliest   readers found Wild  Geese  pretty strong  meat, al­ though Pictorial   Review was  a  woman's magazine  of   some   literary   pretensions, publishing  Edith  Wharton   and   other  writers  of  similar  quality. To  the  present  writer, reading it  surreptitiously  after   a juvenile    romp   through  Zane    Grey,   it was   not    only   a   shatterer  of   illusions about the  romantic West  but  a  haunter of    nightmares,  in   which    its   land-lust obsessed   patriarch  assumed   the   all-too­ recognizable features of  tyrannical grand­ father.
Subsequent developments,  historical and   fictional,  have   robbed   the   book  of much   of  its  impact and  made  its  weak­ nesses more  apparent.  Accidental  illegiti­  macy   no  longer  seems  sufficient  motiva­ tion    for   the    servitude   and   suffering  endured  by Caleb Care's  wife  and  chil-

REVIEW ARTICLES



dren. Caleb  himself,  in  comparison with any  number of concentration camp  com­ manders for  example, seems not  so much  an  emanation of  primal evil  as  a  bush­ league   bully  hoist  with   his  own  petard. The  brooding atmosphere of  frustration and  death so effectively  evoked  and  con­ sistently  maintained    suffers,    in    the  absence  of  adequate  and  clearly-defined motivation,   from   a   melodramatic  aura  of   soap-opera   before   soap-opera.  Why, one  wonders,  should   a  great, strapping., rebellious   girl   like  Judith  have   waited so long  before  heaving   a  hatchet at  this pocket  Holofernes?
Yet,  in  spite  of  its  awkward shifts  of point of view, its imperfectly realized characters, and  the  excessively  poetic justice  of its  denouement, Miss  Ostenso's first novel keeps the reader's interest throughout. Her  central character is no mere ogre but an understandable human being  of  tragic  stature,  however warped by his twin  lusts for  land  and  for  power. Her  style  is  at  its  best  in  sketching the setting,   as   in   the   school-teacher's   first view  of  the  farm:

The cattle sheds  and  shelters for other animals   were    all    of   grey    logs,   the    low roofs    sodded   and    showing  faintly   green now,  though it  was  still  cold  and   raw.  The ruts   of  the   cow  pen, since   there had   been no   rain   or   snow   for   weeks,   were   hard   as cement,  and    reminded  Lind  of   the   relief maps   children  made  at   school. The  deep tracks   of    the    cattle  were    almost    indis­ tinguishable  from   the   human  tracks  inter­ mingled  with    them.  The  cold    of    winter had   fixed   them    there  and    only   the   rains  of  spring would   wash   them  away.

There, in  little,  is the  whole  theme  of
Wild   Geese.
Frederick  Philip   Grove's The  Master of the Mill  is interesting as a technical experiment. Published in  1944,  but  writ­
ten  in  large  part fifteen  to  twenty  years
 earlier, this treatment of the theme  of industrial expansion is  seen  through the eyes of  one  of  the   three   owners  of  the flour  mill as, in a combination of reverie, conscious  recall  and   fugitive  association, he casts  up  the  accounts of his days and years  in  the  last  few  weeks  of his life.
The   story   begins   with   Senator  Sam Clark   regarding  from   his   window   the vast,   completely  mechanized  mill   of
I 938,  seventeen   storeys  of  floodlit  con­ crete  towering   over   the  darkness  of   the lake  and  town   below.  A  few  days  later,  a  second  view  of  the  structure  lashed  by a  rain-squall carries  his  mind   back  fifty years   to  his   father's  first   expansion   of the   pioneer   enterprise   his   own   father had   founded.  Grove's  interest   does  not lie  in   the  successive   expansions  of  this industrial  colossus,  in  spite  of  their  ob­ vious    social    symbolism,    but    in   their  effects   upon   those   who   worked   at   the mill  and  lived  by it,  and  especially  upon the   three   owners    who   controlled  and  were controlled by it. He  does not, there­ fore,  progress  chronologically from I 888 to 1938 but  interrupts his  time-sequence, moving in one direction by means of flashbacks  and  in  the  other by revealing plans  and   hopes   and   visions,  until   the




1(
uv1 1ttf/l
\ I1J 1 (I  llfi)J



75

REVIEW ARTICLES



still shrewd  but half-senile old man has completed his assessment  of the  meaning of  the  mill.
This  seemingly  sing.Ie point  of  view nevertheless carries  with  it  its own  dual­ ity,  for,   unlike   his  father  and   his  son, Sam  Clark   has  been  associated  with  the development  of   the    family   business rather than  identified with  it. He is both a  participant in  and   an  observer  of  the story  of  the   mill.   To  old  Rudyard  the mill   had    been    a   means    of   personal  aggrandisement, to   young   Edmund  it was   an   instrument   for   gaining   power over  others,   but  Sam,  who  had  a  vision of  the  mill  as  the  source  of a  better  life for   the   townspeople,  was   never   in   a position    to    implement  his    dreams. Though  his  father  pre-empted and   put  into   effect without  acknowledgement
 young    Sam's   plans   for   increasing the mill's  efficiency,  he  never   took  him  into his  confidence nor  gave  him  any  respon­ sibility  in  the  management of  the  mill's affairs.   Soon    after    Rudyard    Clark's death, Sam's son  Edmund  managed  to manceuvre  him   out   of  his  controlling interest in  the  company.  When   Sam   re­ sumed   control  after   his  son's   death  he found  it   too   late   to   alter   the   course  which   the  other  two  had   set  and   time and    change  had   fixed.  Not   only   the operation of  the  mill  but  its  pattern of growth  had   become    wholly   automatic and    totally    soulless.   He    had    become  master   of   the  mill  at   last  only  to  find it  grown  beyond  his  mastery.
The other side  of  Sam's   life  is  repre­ sented  by  three   women  - his  wife,  his secretary, and   his  daughter-in-law. Each





STRATFORD  PAPERS  ON



edited  by B.  A. W. JACKSON,
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH, MCMASTER  UNIVERSITY

C. J. Sisson:  KING JOHN:  A history  play  for Elizabethans

John  Cook:   SHAKESPEARE  AND MUSIC

R. A. Huber: On  looking  over SHAKESPEARE's "sECRETARIE"

C. J. Sisson:  SHAKESPEARE THE WRITER: A dramatist finds his way

Robertson Davies: SHAKESPEARE OVER THE  PORT

PRICE : $2.50

W. J. GAGE  LIMITED, BOX  550, SCARBOROUGH, ONTARIO

REVIEW ARTICLES



is the mirror of a particular stage in his emotional development   and  each  is named Maude. Together, the  three might   have  made   one  interesting and satisfying  heroine; apart, they  exist  only as symbols. Neither this nor the other narrative devices  of  the  novel  are  parti­ cularly   successful.   The   management  of time,   while  logical   and  credible seen  as an  old  man's searching  of  his experience for   the  meaning  of   life,  is  made   need­ lessly clumsy  and  cumbersome. Many  of the    interruptions    seem    arbitrary   and even  whimsical,  motivated  not  so  much  by  a  conscious  narrative  purpose   as  by the    desire   to   reproduce  the    wool­ g,atherings   of   senility.
As  a  whole,   the   novel   gives  the  im­ pression   of  being   out   of  its  period.   Its theme,  its  characters, and  its  society  be­ long   to  the   trust-busting  era  associated with   the   novels   of    Frank   Norris.    Its characters do  not  talk,  act  or  think  like Canadians, and  they  live  with  a  formal­ ity  more   likely   to  have   been  found   on an   upper-middle-class country  estate   in Sweden   at  the  turn   of  the  century   than
 anywhere  between  the  Lakehead and Kenora during the  twenties.  Is this an example of  Northern Ontario opulence?

Clark   House, with   its  thirty guest   rooms as   well    as   the    Palace   Hotel   was   filled to  overflowing; some  fifty  local  guests, a hundred from   distant centres, were  invited, with    their    wives'.  Even   in   the   large   ball­ room  of  Clark  House, in  the  four  drawing rooms,   and   in   the   great  hall,  there  was   a crush.

We  have   here,  then,   three   mildly  in­ teresting   novels   which   were   once   well worth    publishing.   Whether,   except   as period   pieces,  they  are  worth  republish­ ing is the  question which gave rise to the doubts  expressed  at  the  beginning of this review.   Perhaps  they   are,   but   perhaps this  is  the   cream-line  and   it  might   be wise, in adding future  titles  to this series, not   to  dip   any   farther  into   the   milk. Perhaps  also,   McClelland  and   Stewart might   consider  publishing in  their   New Canadian   Library,  moderately  good  Canadian   novels   which   are  new  rather than   moderately  good   ones   which   are old.























77



IN THE WINTER  ISSUE OF


:J\(_grthwest
7\§view








POETRY FICTION ARTICLES
BOOK   REVIEWS

NORTHWEST  ART AND  FOLKLORE
 









Twelve poems by MALCOLM LOWRY with an introduction
by Earle Birney
of the University of
British Columbia.


Charles 0. Porter on Red China.


In the year of Love and unto Death,  the fourth
-an Elegy on the Muse.


John  Livingston
on Unilateral Disarmament.


The sculpture of
GEORGE   LAISNER




:l(Jrthwest 	iew

Fifty cents a copy in  the United States  and  Canada. One dollar  and  fifty cents  a year.
Published  at  the University of Oregon,  Eugene,  Oregon.
Write  for complimentary copy.





VIOLENT SEASON

ROBERT GOULET.   The  Violent Season.
S. J. Reginald Saunders. $4.50.

RoBERT GOULET  (no  kin  to  Sir  Lancelot of Camelot) is a  French Canadian from Trois   Rivieres.   At  36  he  has  lived  and worked  in  Canada, England, France and the  U.S.A.,   where   he  now  teaches  at  a prep.   school   in   Connecticut;  but   it   is obvious   from   this,   his  first   novel,   that though  he   has   abandoned  his  country and   his   first   language,  his   native   soil still  clings  to  his  boots,  and  in  trying  to knock  it  off  he  has  kicked  a  few  shins. The Church Spiritual, the  Church Tem­ poral,  the  Church Psychotic  and  Neuro­ tic  are   on   view;   the   French  Canadian village  female  with   (if  we are  to believe Goulet)  her   narrowness,  her   lust   for flesh,  power,  heaven   and   hell,  and   her inability    to   rise   above   the   venality   of the  village  or  look  beyond  it  because  of the  all-embracing Church, is here  to see; and  the  smalltown Canadian, henpecked, henchased, drunk,  disorderly, fearful  of the  female  and   her  mentor the  Church, affords   motivation  and  most of the comic relief.  Yet  this  book is not  nasty for evil's sake,  nor  brutal just  to  be sensational - nor  is it  funny only  to  provide  comedy. Goulet  has   a   hold   on   something  here that    is  brutal,  evil,   twisted    and   even comic,  if  his  vision  is clear  and   true  - and  nowhere in  the  book  could  I  hear  a false  note   struck   by  any   of  the   people or  by  the  life  they  led.  He  even  made,
 for me, that old wheeze, the whorehouse versus the  Church and its Women's Auxiliary,   carry   the   weight    of   senous fiction.
The story  takes  place   in  and   around
La  Buche,  a  village  on  the  edge  of  the forest  and   beside  the  river  down   which logs float on their  way to Trois Rivieres. There is a  factory   in  town,  with  girls  to work  in  it; there   are  the  loggers  in  the forest  who  come   twice  a  year  on  their way  to  Montreal. The  girls  are  seduced; they  have  babies;  the  babies  are  sent  to Trois   Rivieres   to   the   orphanage;  and the   numbers  being   sent   there    are   in­ creasing  yearly.  Monsieur Le  Cure, criti­  cized  by  the  Archbishop and   in  danger of  losing  his  parish,  allows  a  brothel to open  in  town  under  the  guise of a rosary factory  in  order   to  try  to  stem this  tide of  illegitimacy. Les  Dames  de  la  Grace, led   by  the   ambitious Madame  Dupre, find   out   what's  going   on   in   "the   red house"  and raise  a  lot  of  hell  in  God's  name.  In   the   end   they   catapult   them­ selves  into  a Charivari. In Quebec Chari­ varis  are,  says author  Goulet, "raised by women   and   the   purpose  is  righteous", and  the  result  is  blood.  This  is  the  vio­ lent  season.  The   men   of  the  town,  the loggers,  and   Monsieur  Le  Cure  fight  it, but  they  lose terribly.
Meanwhile, Madame Gautier, whose husband died years ago  in  another brothel  fire  set  by another Charivari,  re­ signs her  presidency of  Les  Dames  de la Grace,  watches over  her  tubercular  and  dying  son and  is trapped  by the  Church Psychotic    into    thinking    him    a   saint.  Father Boulanger, of  the  local  seminary, dreams  of the  young  man's Beatification, his  being   raised   to  Sainthood,  and   the building   of  a   shrine   on   the   hill  over­  looking  La  Buche  that  will  rival  that   of

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW





Bousille and the Just
GRATIEN GELINAS

"Here is  wonderful theatre. The performance of Gratien Gelinas in  the  English adaptation of his own  play must  rank  as one  of the most moving in  this  city's theatrical history. The Gelinas play presents something distinctly, uniquely, Canadian." -The Vancouver Sun. 	$2.50


The Rainbow Bridge
and Other  Essays on Education
SIR  RICHARD LIVINGSTONE

A  selection of  Sir  Richard's essays on education and  a summing-up of his philosophy.
$4.00


The Liquidation of the
British Empire
C.  E. CARRINGTON, B.A., M.A.

A concise  and  timely  discussion  of  the  transformation of the British  Empire into  the  Common­ wealth. The first  Harvey T. Reid Lecture on Current Affairs,  at Acadia  University.	$3.00


The Rule of Law on the International Plane JOHN E. READ, Q.C., B.C.L.

His  experience as a Judge of  the International Court of Justice is reflected in  Dr.  Read's treatment of this  timely  and  topical  subject.
$3.00


CLARKE   IRWIN

TORONTO -VANCOUVER



8o
 Ste.  Anne  de Beaupn.
Claude, appraises his delirium and finds him  more   saintly.   Daily   he  preaches to the   women   at   Mass   about    "the   little saint,"  and   when,   during  the   time   the women are  shouting for  Charivari, Claude  seems   to   predict   the   time   of his  own  death,  Father  Boulanger quiets them  by  telling  them   that  a great   event is  going   to   happen.  They   wait   for   it, half-appeased  by  this   and   the   promise by  Monsieur  Le  Cuve   that   the   brothel keeper   will   pay   Les   Dames   $200   and leave  town.  Then Claude's brother, a logger   just   out   of   the   woods   (and    a character  too  flat  because  he  is  used  by the  author as  a  mouthpiece), finds  that his  brother  could   perhaps  be  cured   by an operation. He  tells the nearly resigned Claude about   this,  and   Claude  staggers out  into   the  crowded  street   to  find  his girl  (he  does  not  know  she  is from  "the red  house") ;  at  the  same  moment  some of  the   children  of  the   town   chase   and stone  the  madam of  the  brothel  and  her body   falls   into   the   river.   With   blood already spilled and  their miracle  not happening, the  women  of the  town  raise their Charivari spontaneously. The brothel  is burned with  its inmates as the crowd    stands    horrified   while    Claude rushes   into   the   flames   to  find   his   be­ loved.  They  do  not  see his brother  bring him  out.  After  the  fire  they  find  a  char­ red   body  of  a  Jewish   logger   who   they think  is Claude and  he  is  borne back  to the  Church with  great  reverance. Thus they  have   burned the  devil   out   of  the town  and  found  themselves a  saint.  God is  in   his   Heaven,  all's   right   with   the world.
This   outline  is  perhaps  unfair   to  the novel.   It seems  melodrama; and   yet  it is not.  There are  excesses in  the  book -

BOOKS IN REVIEW



some  comic sequences are  too hackneyed, and occasionally the  writing is moralistic and  declamatory - but   the   anger that propels  the   author  to   his   work   is  con­ trolled, pointed and unabashed. There is no    hint   here  of   the   narrowness  and caution now  fashionable  in  fiction. Gou­ let   is   not    sensitive,   style-ridden,  intro­ spective or  aware.  He   is  individual and he   is  his   own   man.  He    particularises, generalises and  symbolises with   the  kind  of abandon that  is infectious. The reader
- this   one   at   any   rate - is  dragged, pushed  and  bounced  around  his   land­ scape and among his  people so  that  after the  book's few  days  are  past  The Violent Season has   been   lived   and   is  closer   to experience than memory.  This is  a  good novel    that   should  be   read  by   a   good many Canadians, and  a  lot  of  would-be Canadian authors.
ROBERT HARLOW


AN UNSKILLED SKATER

ADAM   GILLON.  The  Eternal Solitary:  A  Study of  Joseph   Conrad.  Bookman  Associates.
$4-95·

SINCE IT IS DIFFICULT to find  anything to praise  in   this   book,   I shall   not   try.   Its author  received a Ph.D. from Columbia University  in   1954   for   the   thesis   from which it  has   been   formed. The  subject, a study of  "isolation as a dominant  motif in  the  life  and  works  of  Joseph Conrad", has   received quite a  bit  of  attention  in the  recent flood  of books  on  Conrad. Mr. Gillon  has   added  practically nothing to the   subject; it  is  therefore  to  his  credit that  he   has   cut   his   thesis down  before having it  published. Some scar  tissue  has
 resulted,  however:   two   paragraphs  on pp   61-62   reappear  without  change  on pp. 96-97.  There are  other evidences of surgical untidiness. How else  explain the way  on  p. 69  Winnie Verloc, the  wife  of the    Secret   Agent   has    been    carelessly placed in  Under  Western  Eyes?
More prosaically, on  p.  83  an  ostensi­ ble  quotation  begins with  almost  a  full  line  that   is actually a  paraphrase by  Mr. Gillon. Conversely  and  more irritatingly he  constantly  paraphrases  Conrad  with­ out   warning  the   reader  ( cf.  pp.   20,  22,
8o,  84,  137,  I49). For  instance, speaking of   Mr. and  Mrs. Hervey in   "The  Re­ turn," he  says  "they  have  skimmed  over  the  surface of  life,  ignoring its  dark,  hid­ den    stream."  Conrad   wrote  of    "two skilful  skaters cutting  figures on  thick ice for  the  admiration of  the  beholders, and disdainfully ignoring  the  hidden  stream, the  stream restless  and  dark; the  stream of   life,   profound  and   unfrozen." In  a like   manner, Mr.   Gillon  has   not   seen much  (and has  communicated none)  of the  depth, the  power and  excitement of Conrad's  novels.  Partly this   may   follow  from   his   determination  not   to  skate   in any  of  the patterns that other critics have  made.  As a  result he  is frequently forced to  pretend to  ignore them, or  in  the  case of  Thomas Moser to argue minor matters as  if  they   were   major. In his  treatment of  Moser's book  Joseph  Conrad, Achieve­ ment  and  Decline, Mr. Gillon's penchant for   over-simplifying  results  in   frequent distortions. The  irony   is  that  Moser has dealt  with   a  potentially  sensational  sub­ ject  in  an  informed and reasonable man­ ner,    and    with    clarity. The   essentially fuzzy  quality  of   Mr.  Gillon's  writing is well  indicated  in his  attempted  dismissal of  Moser's thesis. "Perhaps it  is true that Conrad fails  in  his  presentation of sexual

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



love  between   man   and   woman, but  this does not  mean  an  artistic failure of the novelist."
It might  have  been  the  saving  grace of the   book   that    the   author  knows   and refers  to  Polish  literature. But  his  refer­ ences  take  him  away  from  his  ostensible topic,   his  summaries  are   too   slight   to have  intrinsic interest, and   he  does  not relate   them   thoroughly enough  to  Con­  rad.   Still,   he   has   the   virtue,   as  some consider   it,   of   not   being   a   new  critic  (his   references  to  symbols  are  few  and  crude,   d. pp.   64,   102) .   But   whatever  else may  be said  of textual  analysis,  it at least    increases    the   critic's   chances    of making   contact  with  the  material. This  book  never  stays  on  any  one  topic  long enough   to  become  engaged.  But  like  a slick  sophomore's  essay,  it  is  careful   to end  with a paternal and  affirmative state­  ment  which moves  noticeably beyond  the scope  of  the   study:  "The  discerning student,  however,  will   regard  his   best novels  and   tales  as  the  work  of  a  great tragic  writer."
E.B.GOSE


PAST OR PERMANENT

THOMAS   MCCULLOCH.   The Stepsure   Letters.
McClelland & Stewart. $ 1 .oo.

H.  NORTHROP  FRYE,  in  his  Introduction to  this  latest  addition to  the  New  Cana­ dian  Library Series,  reflects  that  a study of  such   thing;s  as  The  Stepsure  Letters  "helps to  distinguish for  us  what  is past from   what   is  permanent". He  goes  on to  say  that    the   society   McCulloch  de­ picts  is  gone,  even  in  the  Maritimes. It is  gone   in   such   places  as  Halifax and
 Saint John;  but, and perhaps  fortu­ nately,  it  remains in  places  like  Melan­ son  in  Nova  Scotia,   and  Hatfield  Point  in   New   Brunswick.  The   people  still  gather  in  the   local  country  store,   with cracker    barrels    and   salted   fish  in   the corner, lawn  and  muslin  in  bolts  on  that  table   in  the  comer, and   talk  about  the
'govment', and  how  since things are slack they   will   have   to   cunge   next   winter. These   things   are   not   affected   as   they often  are  in  New  England; rather, it  is a  part  of life which  does continue in  the same   way  in  places  where  many   things have   not   changed  because  the   old   is easier   and   more   comfortable  than   the new.  In  this  case  what   is  permanent   is also  past.  It has  been  Thomas Chandler Haliburton's historical position  in  Cana­ dian  literature to  be  the  recorder  of life in   Nova   Scotia,   and   often   he   is   ack­ nowledged  as   the   leader   of   Canadian humour.  The  writings of   McCulloch show   how   shaky   this   reputation  really is;  this  new  book  in  the  New  Canadian Library disturbs one  reputation  and   af­ firms  another.
The Stepsure Letters  is a collection of letters   written  by  McCulloch under the name   of  Mephibosheth   Stepsure, first published   in   1821  in  the   Acadian   Re­ corder.  It is a series of letters  about  local problems  and  ideas,  firmly  spiced  with  a quiet   humour whose  tone  has  been  cul­ minated  in   the   works  of   Stephen  Lea­  cock.  Stepsure has  a  remarkable person­  ality,  and   the  letters  are  filled  with  his ideals,  beliefs,  and  desires. Stepsure drifts  along   with   what   happens  in   his  com­ munity,  and  is sometimes  inconvenienced by  the  after   effects  of  the   enterprises there.  But   the   ease   is  there,  though occasionally   there   are moments of formal and  stilted  prose.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It is a  great   achievement  on  McCul­ loch's   part   to  keep  up  one's  interest   in the   ordinary  happenings  of   ordinary people   in  an  ordinary  town,  and   there is  nothing  but   admiration   for   the   skill with   which   he  does  it.   Mephibosheth's awareness to  what   is  happening around him,  his  ease  in   retelling   the   battle   of Captain  Shootem  and   the   pigs,  his  use of  far-from-coarse   language  in   the   ac­ count   of   Hodge,.   all   add   to   the   final impression  of  the  book.  McCulloch  has made   the  reader  interested in  all  facets of   the   book,   the   action,   the   dialogue,  and   the   narrator.   Often   it  is  only   the action   which  attracts.  McCulloch seems to  ask  his  readers to  be  like  the  specta­  tors  at   a   football   game   and   to  attach their   support  to  the   ball  as  well  as  to the  teams.
Though  the   book   seems  to   be   con­
structed firstly by chronology, it is more often   done  by  topic,  and  is exceedingly well  written. The  "Leisure of  tone"   (as Frye  calls  it)   is the  book's  most  remark­ able  feature, along  with  the  undetached reporting  about   conditions  and   happen­ ings  that  have  good general applicability. The   most   memorable  episodes   in   the letters   are  the  ones  that   are  filled  with slapstick,  a  kind  of humour that  mellows and  grows  - the  humour of  Leacock.
But   what   the   book  does  do  is  show how  pale  the  tales  of  Haliburton  really are.  They  are  a  part   of a  past  that   has gone,  but  McCulloch has  dealt   both  in story   and   theme   with   things   that   last. Sam   Slick   is  too   slick;   Haliburton   is always  too  obvious,  even  to  the  point  of using italics if he thinks something is particularly good.  But McCulloch eases along   and   tells   his   stories   slowly  and surely.  The New  Canadian Library  ack­ nowledged  Haliburton  with   an   edition
 of  The  Clockmaker some  time  ago.  But they   have   also  brought  McCulloch out from  his hiding place,  and  the  new  posi­ tion   should   make   most   readers   realize that  here  are  the  beginnings of a  distinct Canadian  humour  that  has  survived along   with   the   cracker  barrels  and   the salt  herring in  little  places  like  Hatfield Point. The  Stepsure Letters  creates nos­ talgia   for   the   past   in  its  readers  (as  it did   for   Frye,  as   seen   in   the    Intro­ duction) ;  the    most   remarkable  thing,  however,  is   that    the   life   depicted  by McCulloch still  exists  in  the  Martimes.
DONALD STEPHENS



AN INDIAN TRAGEDY

YVES  THERIAULT.    Ashini.  Fides    (Montreal).

M.  THERIAULT    harps again   on   an   old grim theme,  the casual  destruction of traditional pride by  civilized  inability   to feel   back   in   time.   The  victims   in   this tragedy   are   the North American Indians, represented   in   the    person    of   an   un­ redeemed Montagnais.
Ashini   tells   his   own   story :  how   his family  one  by one  were  taken  from  him by  the  cruelty  of  nature or  the  cruelty of  the   white   men,   alike  devoid   of   per­ sonal   malice   yet   devastatingly   destruc­ tive;   how   he   refused the   degrading comforts of  the   reservation,  though the presence   of  white   men   had   driven   the few  remaining animals into  the  northern wilderness; of  his  vision  of  freedom for his  people,   his   attempt   to   parley   with the  Great White Chief  from  Ottawa, his pathetic failure and  his  death.
The author shows  the  shortcomings of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the civilized, even those fundamentally sympathetic  to  the  Indians; and   damns with faint  praise that  paternalism which condemns great  hunters to the spiritless dragging out of a pensionary existence. Ashini   is  doomed  because   his  point   of view  is so far  removed  that  there  can  be no  common meeting-place. The ultimate irony  comes  when,   home   at  last  in  the happy   hunting  ground,  he   learns   that his  messages   in   blood   were   never   for­ warded  to  the  Great  White  Chief.  His ritual   death has  earned him  a  few  lines on  the  official  death  certificate:  Ashini, Montagnais, 63  years,  committed suicide while  temporarily  mentally  derang,ed.
Like  all of Theriault's work,  this novel is written in clear  and  straightforward French, and  says what  it  has  to say with disarming  simplicity.   It is  less  effective than  either   Aaron  or  Agaguk, partly  be­ cause  of  a  conscious  exaggeration of  the author's usual  forthright style.  The  pub­  lisher's   blurb   claims   that    the   result   is poetic,   but   if  so  it   is  a   clipped,  bare poesy     somewhere    halfway   between Hemingway and  the  Authorised Version.  The  style   is  not   unpleasant,  but   it   is affected and  occasionally monotonous.
Judged as a  novel,  the  book is inferior to  the  earlier  works  mentioned; at  an,y rate   if  one   agrees   that   a  novel   should tell a good story against an interesting background. The,re  are  fine  moments in Ashini, but  too many  pages  are  taken  up with  the  musings  of  the  central  charac­ ter.   Though  it  is  not   quite  fair   to  say that   none  of  the  minor  characters have life,   they   are   certainly   fewer   and   less alive    than    one   might    have    expected from  an  author with  Theriault's talents.  The book,  containing  just I 73  pages  of large   (and  attractive)   type, gives an  im­ pression   of  having  been  spread   a  little,
 so as to give it  reasonable bulk.  It might have  been  more  satisfying  if  the  author had  written  in  the  third   person,  leaving out  some of  the  philosophy, and  putting in  more  of  the  nature lore  which  added so much  to  the  interest of  Agaguk.
Theriault, however,  has  made  a  point of  trying  to  avoid  repetition in  his  tech­ nique.  He  had  displayed   a  good  deal  of versatility  between   Le  Dompteur  d'Ours  and  Agaguk, and  was  doubtless  eager  to carry  on the  tradition. The  attempt does not  quite   succeed  in  this  case,  yet  it  is to  be  hoped   that   the  criticism   offered will  not  discourage  potential  readers.
GILBERT FARTHING



VIEWS OF A DAILY LIVING

DOROTHY  ROBERTS.   Twice to  Flame.  Ryerson.
$g.so.

THE  POEMS   IN  Dorothy Roberts' Twice to  Flame  present  views of a  daily  living. Their tone  is quiet,   their   material  ordi­ nary,  so that  we may  read  them, at  first, in   the   light   of   one   of   our   strangest  assumptions,  that   we  know   what   daily living   is.   With    curious   ease   we   can accept   juxtapositions of  cars and cicadas,  housing    developments   and    space,    the intermingling   of   discordant  past  and  present.  And  because  of  this  acceptance, the   peculiar   daily   event   can   persist  in our  awareness, like a name  said  over and over, until  it moves out of familiarity, through   utter    strangeness,   to   idiosyn­ cracy.
Some  occurences and  recurrences may both    threaten   and    bear    meaning,   es­ pecially   for    a   woman.   Many    of    the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



poems  in  Twice  to  Flame are  concerned with  generation  and  decay, possibly meaningless patterns,  possibly significant chaos,   and   the  dominance of  the  mere thing.  In  "Early Morning", for  instance, "The  tool   that   is  a  stiff  extension   of
the  hand, I The light  that  comes  slowly
over  the   land I . . . find   me  in   the
moming ... " and   the  sense  of  them  is "I  do   not   know   how   else  to   have   a day I That brings   me  out   of  the   night
and   the   uncertainty I And   sets  me   up
among things  where  I live I . . . . I live in  these   hard   things   and   the  way  they look  ...." "First   Spring"  and   "The Tombstone I"  are   other   poems   which arise  from  deliberate   acceptance   of
peculiar   daily   experience,  whose   ap­ parent  disparities move  to  "That  is  my vision  and   there   is  no  use I To   try   to
make  it  otherwise. We  live."
The  restrictions of  both  subject  mat­ ter  and   tone  are   devices  for  shaping  a particular  view.   Many   of   these   poems show    extraordinary    imaginative   reach  and   generosity. In   one   of   the   several poems   about    the   strict,   devout   grand­ parents, there  is  room  for the early  awed subjection  of   the   child,   for   her   later  "quite   proper"  growing   away,   and   for the  adult's present   looking  back  to  "see
them     grow I Bigger    and    bigger    with
their   Book  aglow."   The   poem  is  short, an,d made precisely of this arc of view. Again,  in  the  sequence  called  "The  Set­ ting", the  terrible, dark,  cold  passion  of the  grandparents is a  way, not  an  obsta­ cle,  to  apprehending their  vision.  In  the poems    called    "Sisters",   "The  Apple", "Two  Children",   "Veranda  Spinsters" there  is  an   interaction  of   detachment and tenderness which  seems to have  come from  a  refusal   to  limit  conscious  experi­ ence   by  calling  it unimportant or bizarre,

86
 ironic  or  non-existent.
The  techniques of  repetition  and   the simple  statement of wonder in fact  which give   these   poems   their    strength   occa­ sionally   fail,   and   then   the   poems  are weakened  by  sentimentality.  A  line  like "Up,  up,   up,   up"   in   "Dazzle" is  hard to  pull  off, as  is the  frequen,t  use  of  the exclamatory "oh".  But   the   view  which seems   to   require   these   devices   is  the same  view  which  shapes  "A  pattern  sits,
a   pattern  says   it's   ready,  I A   pattern
perambulates  among  its   outposts I And colors    all    its    doings    with    the    fixed
centre."
H. W. SONTHOFF

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE LEAN AND THE LUSCIOUS

LEONARD  COHEN.    The Spice-Box    of   Earth.
McClelland  &  Stewart. Cloth   $g.oo.  Paper
$1.50.


THIS  BOOK  CONTAINS   some  fifty  poems on  various   aspects   of  sexual   love.  One of  the  most  successful  of  them   is called simply  "For   Anne".

With  Annie  gone, whose eyes to compare with  the morning sun?

Not  that  I did  compare, But  I do compare
Now that  she's  gone.

There  is  here   none   of   the   delight   in language  for   its   euphonic   sake   alone which  enhances and  mars  the companion pieces;  there is only  a clear, rueful state­ ment  of a  widely-felt truth.  But  so  clear is   the   statement  that    it   gives   rise   to doubts  concerning the   authenticity  of the  other   poems.  The  poet declares that  he  is  not   in   the   habit   of  appreciating the greenness of  his own  fields -a com­ mon    failing.   Yet   most  of   the    book consists  of  the  expression   of  such  appre­ ciation. Here  may  be  a  clue  to  the  im­ pression  of  artificiality one  gathers from The   Spice-Box   of  Earth.  One   suspects that    at   times    the    ornateness  of   the language  obscures   a   paucity  - not   of feeling  - but  of  communicative  matur­ ity.  The emotion is there, but the emotive  thought  has  not  crystallised; it  lies  dis­ persed  in  abstract nouns  and  adjectives.
A poet,  if he  wishes  to keep  his poems
alive,  must  watch closely for  those  words whose meanings have  decayed, and  drive them   away   from   his   work.   These   are
 words  like  "heart",  ruined by  bad  poets and  successful  song-writers; like  "lovely" and  "splendid", destroyed by advertising media.  Leonard  Cohen  is  obviously aware  of the  obsolescence  of "heart", for it  can   be  no  accident  that   it  does  not appear once.  But  other   ruined words  - "beauty", "golden", and   "glory", for example  - frequently recur.   And  when a  poet  as  perceptive as  Leonard Cohen uses   these    words    and    others    of   like ambiguity,  there   are   grounds for  belief in  his  partial lack  of  creating  conscious­ ness. But  only  partial.
For   in   every   poem   that   repeats   the hard  simplicity  of  "For Anne" he  is successful.  In poems of the other, luscious mode,   he   is  less  often    so.  After   "For Anne", the  terse  ballad, "I Long  to Hold Some  Lady" is the  best:

I long to hold some lady
For my love is far  away,
And will not come tomorrow
And was not  here  today.

There is no flesh so perfect
As on my lover's  bone,
And yet it seems so distant
When I am all alone  . . . .

But I long  to hold  some lady, For flesh is warm  and  sweet. Cold skeletons go marching Each  night  beside my feet.

On   the   other    hand,  "When  I   Un­ covered  Your  Body"  seems to  mean  very little:

... I thought I could  bestow beauty like a benediction ...
. . . the   real   and   violent   proportions  of
your body
made obsolete old treaties of excellence, measures  and  poems,
and   clamoured   with   a  single  challenge   of personal  beauty,
which cannot be interpreted or praised:
it must be met.

This   is  an   argument-poem; the  poet   IS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



arguing with   his  misapprehensions. It  is doubtful,  however,   whether  the  dialec­ tic,  depending  on  words  as  amorphous as "beauty", "real", "excellence", and  on Audenesque turns  of  speech  as hollow  as "treaties  of   excellence",  can   sustain   so strong   an  en.ding.  In  fact,  the  intended largeness  of   "it   must   be  met"   assumes the  characteristics, after  much  inflation, of   a  barrage-balloon  which  floats  away, lost  to  understanding.
There  are   poets,   passionate   men   by definition, who  can   never  communicate
- in  their   poetry   - sexual  passion.   I do  not  believe  Leonard Cohen  is among them.   "Beneath  my  Hands",  "Celebra­ tion", and   "The Priest  Says  Goodbye", speak  of  his  possibilties.  But  for  these  to become  actual, he  will  probably  have  to write   less  about   love,  and   think   about  it longer.
Cohen's  poetic   nerve   cannot,  in   the
end,   be  competely  hidden   by  the  flesh of words.  His  fine perception is apparent in   "Before  the   Story",  "As   the   Mist Leaves  no  Scar", and  "Summer Haiku"
-"Silence I and  a deeper  silence I when
the  crickets I hesitate". When  his sensual
insight  escapes petrification by lack of thought,  or   by  the   alchemy   of  golden words,  he  produces, "When  he  puts  his
mouth against her  shoulder I she is  un­
certain whether her  shoulder  I has  given or   received    the    kiss."   Above   all,   he brings  the  impression  of good  health   to his   poetry.    The  afflictions   mentioned here   are   curable, and   once  Cohen   has freed    his   sensibility    from   what    West called    "the  thick   g,love  of   words"   he will  be  able   to  sing  as  few  of  his  con­ temporaries can.
DAVID BROMIGE




88
 TEARS FOR A GOLDEN AGE

JOHN   RICHMOND:  A   Tearful  Tour  of   To­
ronto's  Riviera  of   Yesteryear.  Macmillan.
$7·50.

ToRONTo's  RIVIERA  of  Yesteryear  is  for the   most   part   its   Island,  and   this   ex­ tremely  charming picture book shows you the   Golden  Age   past   in   ravishing   old photos   taken  about   the  turn  of  the  cen­ tury; the  Mildew Age present  appears in Lorraine  Surcouf's  egg   tempera  visions of   chalky   white   Colonel's  cottages  all deserted, old willows whose leaves are egg yolk and other pleasure domes  crumbling sweetly  away.  The photos  are  by William  James,  an  early  Canadian  photographer of  genius,  and  what  with  a  text  that  lets itself go, this is altogether a most  unusual book  and  must  not  be missed.
The  camera pictures here   reveal   not
a  world   of  fake   nostalgia  but   a  world that  was a genuine Golden  Age. Toronto was a happier place then  than  now, just pastoral enough, just urban  enough. My favorite  pictures  are   the   old   ladies   on the  Tug of War  team,  the egg and  spoon race,   and   the   boy   wandering  about  a rushy foreshore. By some magic  or other William James was  able  to  give  his  pic­ tures  a depth of sug  estion:
the  summer  breeze,  imagine  the  tug  of war   ladies   back   in   their   Brunswick   St. hideouts and  see the  green  of  those  bul­ rushes.
John Richmond's text  is engagingly enthusiastic  and   a  complete contrast  to the   usual   text   for   a  Canadian  picture book.  You   know:   ''Here  is  the   largest slag  pile  in  the  British  Empire just  out­ side  of  Sudbury." His  arrangement  and  editing of the  pictures gives  the  reader a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



complete day  at  the  Island in 1908: early morning, cool; hot  afternoon and  then waiting  at   the   pier   for   the   ferry   with Toronto in  industrial sunset splendour across the bay. Incidentally Toronto looks much better without the  Royal York  and the  Bank  of  Commerce.
JAMES  REANEY



PALATABLE HISTORY

ERIC  KOCH  AND   VINCENT  TOVELL, WITH JOHN T.   SAYWELL.  Success of  a  Mission..  Clarke, Irwin.  $1.25.

THE  TITLE of  this  television play  applies not  merely to  the  contents of  the  drama, the   achievement  of   Lord Durham, but to  the  play  itself, if  we  regard the  inten­ tion   of  the   playwrights  to   be  primarily educational  rather than  entertaining, in­  formative  rather    than    dramatically  moving.
The  authors, Eric Koch, Vincent  To­
vell  and John T. Saywell, have managed to  compress  a  great  deal   of  historically accurate information  about  the   person­ ality  and  character of  Lord  Durham and  the   complexities and  the  significance of the    issues    confronting   him  in    British  North America during  the   crises  of  the  late   183o's. They   present  these   facts   in a  series   of   loosely-knit  scenes   linked   by many  expository passag,es-largely com­  ments  by  a narrator, or interviews carried on   by   him    of   leading   figures  on   the political scene.   Though the   presentation is  lucid   and  the   historical moment  dra­ matic  and  significant, the   play   for   the  most  part cannot be considered  dramatic literature:   the   events narrated   do   not constitute  a  plot,  nor   is  there  any  vital  development  of  character   through  con-
 frontation  with   inner  dilemmas  or   ex­
ternal  circumstances.
This  criticism is  not   intended  to  sug­ gest   that  the    play    fails   to   achieve   its purpose.  Indeed,  the    authors   frankly state in  the   preface  that  their intention was  to  "present  Durham and  his achieve­ ment to  a  wider public than that found in  the  confines of  the  classroom and  lec­ ture  hall." This  they   have managed  to do  in a kind of imaginatively conceived "documentary", for which television lends    itself   admirably. In  view   of   the proved competence of  the  authors,  how­ ever,   it  seems  unfortunate that  they   did  not   attempt  more than  the   mission   of presenting  history in  a  palatable form.
M. W. STEINBERG



WHERE SOLITUDES JOIN

Canadian  Dualism:  La Dualite Canadienne, edited  by  Mason   Wade,  University   of  To­ ronto  Press, $8.50.

Canadian Dualism>   which is  sub-titled Studies in  French-English Relations and bears both title   and sub-title in  our   two languages,  is  an   ambitious  symposium jointly  published by Laval University and the   University  of   Toronto;  the   central idea   of  a  wide   and  varied  study of   bi­ culturalism was  developed by  a  Commit­ tee of the Social Science Research Council of   Canada,  under  the   chairmanship  of Jean-C. Falardeau, and  the   editing was entrusted  to   Mason   Wade of   the   Uni­ versity    of   Rochester,   one   of   the   most knowledgeable  American  authorities  on things Canadian;  finally, the   component essays  were   written  by  a  group of   one

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Franco-American and twenty Canadian scholars,  divided  with  rough  equality  be­ tween  those  who  write  French and  those who  write  English.
Canadian Dualism is on the whole suc­ cessful,  though  I am  not  sure  its  success is  of  the  kind  originally   aimed  at. The  initiators of the  project sought  "to reveal the   nature  of  biculturalism   in   Canada and  to  ascertain the  various  social  tech­ niques  which  the  Canadian  people  have worked  out  for  the resolution  or contain­ ment  of   the   inner  tensions of   their country."  Many  aspects  of  biculturalism
-its manifestations in education and  the arts,  for  instance-were deliberately  ig­ nored   in  the  hope   (which  Iecho)   that  there    would    be   a   call   for   a   second volume,   and   the   studies   presented  in Canadian  Dualism  concern   social,  re­ ligious and  philosophical attitudes, popu­ lation   and   economic  factors,   forms   of social  organisation and-in a  fascinating group  of  five  final  essays-the situation of  French Canadians outside  Quebec.
Generally  speaking, one  cannot  com­ plain  of the quality of the essays. Perhaps a quarter of them  are  too stiffly academic in   tone   or   too  obsessively  statistical  in content to appeal to  the averagely  enter­ prising  reader. But  that  is a  respectably  small   proportion  in  a  collection   of  this kind,  particularly in Canada, and  the rest range  from  acceptable clarity  and  infor­  mativeness  to  the  kind  of  vital  provoca­  tion of interest which  one feels on reading George  Stanley's "French and  English  in Western  Canada", George  F.  Theriault's "The Franco-Americans in Western Can­ ada",  Pierre    Elliott  Trudeau's   "Some  Obstacles to Democracy in  Quebec" and Jean-C. Falardeau's  "Les  Canadiens franc;ais  et  leur  ideologie".
Yet Canadian Dualism, interesting as it go
 is,  does  not   really   fulfil  its  original  in­ tent,   for   little   attention  is  paid   to   the Anglo-Canadian side of the dualistic pat­ tern.  Almost  every  essay-as  the  titles  I have  quoted suggest-is  focussed  mainly  on  French rather  than   English  Canada. This  seems  to indicate that  in  the  minds  of cultured Canadians it  is  French Can­ ada's   relationship  to   the   rest   of   the country that   presents  the  more  intricate, the   more   insistent  and-in the   last  re­ sort- the  more interesting problem. The problem of the English  Canadian attitude to French Canada is all too often  the dull problem   of   indifference,  which   nobody finds it easy to write  about. One  can  only hope  that   books  like  Canadian  Dualism will  help  to  dispel  the  mists.
GEORGE WOODCOCK






PROTECTION
OF MEDIOCRITY

The Royal Commission on Publications

l)onald Stephens

CoNTINUING A TRADITION usual  with  Royal  Commissions, the  con­ troversial O'Leary  Commission of  Publi­  cations has added little  but  vague recom­ mendations and  trite  observations  to  the problem of  the  survival   of  magazines   in Canada. The   Government   apparently
thinks  this  is so, for  it  has  indicated that it  is  in   no   hurry  to  use  the   sweeping proposals  aimed  at  the  restriction of American magazines in  Canada. The Commission  urges   that   periodical   pub­ lishing  in  Canada  should   be  Canadian, competitive  and    healthy.    Ideal    state­  ments   such   as   this   have   a   value,   but publishing  in  Canada   should   be  Cana­ dian   only  if  the   best  is  Canadian. And if   better    writing,   better    thinking,  and  better   magazines   come   from   elsewhere,  surely   the   reader   in   Canada c     has   the right   to  make   the  choice.
The point  that  this recent  Royal Commission has  overlooked is that magazines   in  Canada  continue a  Cana­ dian   trend   to  be  imitative and   deriva­ tive, based  on  the  feeling  that  the best in magazines  comes   from  outside  Canada. Indeed,  the   magazines   in   Canada  are inferior.  And    putting   restrictions  on American   magazines,    encouraging   the
 advertiser to use Canadian publications, ensuring some economic security  to magazines   through  these  channels,  does not automatically mean  that  Canadian magazines  will then  become  the  best that can  be  found.   Economic encouragement does  not in  fact  mean  that  "our  periodi­ cal  press"  will  add  to  "the  richness  and  variety  of  Canadian  life"  and   that   this must  "be  considered  if   'the  culture and unity  of Canada' are  to be preserved and  extended."  This   kind   of   statement  re­ curs   throughout   the   Commission's   re­ port,   and   makes   it   read   more   like  an endorsement for  something "truly Cana­ dian"   (which   the   commissioners admit cannot   be  defined)    than   an  attempt  to bring   the  best  into   the  world  of  Cana­ dian  periodicals.
Recommendations  such   as  the  Com­ mission  does make  can  hardly  strengthen the   position  of  the  Canadian   magazine either    economically  or   artistically.  On  the  other  hand, some  obviously  practical suggestions   have   not  been   taken   up.   A simple  economic  device  of  free  mailing  service  (or  mailing at two cents a pound) for  the  promotion of  Canadian  periodi­ cals  brought   to  Canadian homes  would help  many  magazines to  survive   if  only one   per   cent   of   the   letters   distributed brought in  subscriptions. If the  Federal Government, in  its  wish  to  "spread  in­ formation  about   Canada" or   to  ensure  that    "people   in   other  countries   should be given  a chance to see Canada through Canadian  eyes",   would    buy   copies   of Canadian   magazines  to   be   sent  to  all embassies  and  consulates  abroad  (as  re­ commended   by   the   brief    sent   in   by Canadian   Literature),   the    security    of the  smaller  magazines  with   deliberately limited  appeals could   be  increased.
Canadian  publications  of   a   popular

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



type   do  not  enjoy   large  audiences, and this  is not  because  of  the  lack  of  adver­ tising    in   them.    Admittedly   money    is made  with  advertising, and  more  money would  make  it  possible  to send  out  more reminders of the  presence of some maga­  zines.  But   new  taxes  on  advertisers are not  going  to  improve  the  situation. The  Commission's   recommendations  on   this point   are  a  kind  of  punishment for  the business  man  who  naturally wants  to use the   magazine   which   promises   the   best return   for    his   product.   The    obvious thing  for Canadian popular publications who   want   larger   circulations  is  to   im­ prove    their    quality.    Improvement    in quality would  bring  the  larger  audiences which   are   needed  for  magazines   of  this kind   to   survive.   But   there   can   be  no justification for  the  protection of  medio­  crity.
 The  improvement in   the   quality  of the  magazines will come  when  Canadian writers    and    publishers remember that they  are  men  as well  as Canadians. The world  is too small for Canadians to be interested only in finding  a "national identity", one  relating  (as  the  Commis­ sion calls it)   the  "Canadian  experience". Surely,   when   the   adolescent  search   for finding   oneself  is developed into an inter­ national  consciousness, Canadian  maga­ zines   will   produce  writing  of  a  quality that  will  be  read  throughout the English­ speaking world,  in opposition to the American magazines of  which  the  Com­ mission  seems  particularly  afraid-Time and   The   Reader's  Digest!   Surely   some­ where  and  some  time  - and  soon - the quality  of  Canadian   magazines  will  go beyond  the  "quality"  of  these!









92
