$2,so per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·75
Winter, 1977


N]ITION]ILISM


Articles

BY GILLES MARCOTTE, DEANE E. D. DOWNEY, CALVIN L. SMILEY, ROBERT MAJOR, WARREN STEVENSON, T. D. MACLULICH

Poems

BY ALEXANDRE A. AMPRIMOZ, J. A. WAINWRIGHT,  JOYCE CAROL OATES


Review Articles  and  Reviews

BY  GEORGE WOODCOCK, PETER  QUARTERMAIN,  ALEXANDER GLOBE, JEAN WILSON, PAT  BARCLAY, CLYDE HOSEIN, LORRAINE VERNON, PAUL M.  ST. PIERRE, KEITH GAREBIAN, W. H. NEW, CYRIL DABYDEEN, CALVIN L. SMILEY, BARRY  CAMERON, L. T. CORNELIUS

Opinions and  Notes

BY  MERRITT CLIFTON, REYNOLD SIEMENS


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW

e it"rial 	







THE LOSS OF ZED







TAKE   CANADIAN CHILDREN  to a parade  these days and  watch to see which clowns delight them: the cheers go up when Ronald  McDonald  and the Great  Root Bear pass by. Or Big Bird and Oscar. The children,  of course, are showing their customary  discernment,  however much we might  deplore  this fur­ ther evidence of the Americanization of their imaginations. For the simple fact is that  Big Bird and Ronald  McDonald, through  television and corporate industrial expansion,  have  become  part  of their  daily  Canadian  lives, culture  symbols­ and some of the liveliest culture  symbols at that-by which they gauge some of the subtler  values of their society:  what's funny, what's friendly, what's  just.
There  have been some adaptations of American television material  to the Cana­
dian  scene, of course, and  Canadian writers  are  the verbal  wits  behind  much American  television comedy.  But  there  is little  point  in  asserting  as a  kind  of cultural  talisman  that  Walt  Disney's father  was Canadian-born; and  it can only be perceived as ironic that  Superman and The  Hardy Boys books were begun by Canadians. Transformed, particularly  by television, they and  Disney Enterprises have become voices of United  States values. The  myth of the perfect society, the cult of the hero, confrontative sports metaphors, and the implicit assumption  that crises are resolved by violence are  the stuff of American  pop culture.  Star Wars is nothing  so much  as an  interstellar  Western in which Good  is preserved  by a galactic  Marine  Corps.  Hence  these images are  tangible  evidence  of American ways of thinking  about  America.  They  fascinate  Canadians.  Mordecai  Richler makes the point in Hunting  Tigers  Under  Glass that  the flamboyance  of 194o's American  comic books sustained  the romantic  imaginations  of Canadian  youths of a quite different  generation.  But there is a difference between  reading  for the vicarious thrills that  heroic mythologies provide, and accepting  another  culture's rituals  as local  truth.  A  Canadian  businessman,  trying  in  a  CBC  radio  inter-

2

EDITORIAL

view recently to speak of one-to-one relationships, spoke of one-on-one  relation­ ships instead. The difference between egalitarian  and confrontative tactics couldn't  be clearer.  It  is a sign of a  particularly  virulent  cultural  malaise,  all  the  more insidious when it alters the way we speak. The  moment  American  pop culture's  zee replaces several generations'  worth of Canadian zeds, things have gone too far.
The  problem lies not with the children. It lies with the curious way that Cana­ dian  children  have been either  ignored  or patronized  by Canadian  media.  The recent surge of interest  in children's  writing is, therefore,  despite  the  unevenness of the writing itself, welcome. Magazines  with the vigour of Owl  and  Canadian Children's  Magazine, publications  with the quality  of design that  May  Cutler's  Tundra Books have, lyrics with the sprightliness of Alligator Pie  and stories with common sense and complex syntax:  these are signs of intelligent concern for chil­ dren. And in order  to gauge further  the merits and  implications  of these works, Canadian  Literature will devote a future issue to more extended  commentary  on writing for children. For the moment, there are other ramifications of the concern for children's  publishing and cultural  survival which warrant  attention.
We evaluate  works designed for a children's  market  in various  ways:  seeking the quality of imagination, the quality of mind, the quality of design that  appears in  the  work-but  always quality.  That   works of  quality  have  intrinsic  merit ought  to be  axiomatic.  We  appreciate   Peter Pan,  Huckleberry   Finn,  Le  Petit Prince, Pinocchio, and Midnite, whatever their cultural  background. But we can­ not,  while making  this assertion,  lose sight of the  twentieth  century.  Children's  classics are no longer presented solely in book form, and film -the chief optional form-has a singular  force. We underestimate  its impact  at  our  own  cost. We cannot afford, therefore, to ignore the degree to which film exposes children, inten­ tionally or not, to cultural  propaganda, or the extent to which the presence of such "propaganda" is actually intensified by the absence of a cultural alternative. Here we come to a key issue:  it is by relaxing in the global  "alternative" which  we represent by the very fact that  we exist, that we communicate to another  genera­ tion the kinetic values which as Canadians  we have come to share.  We are  our own  model, and  we are still building  it. To stop now, and  to accept  American,  French,  English or any other systems as our model, is both culturally suicidal and plain  downright  unimaginative.  There  is  plenty of imagination  in  Canada, but the curious fact is that it takes a lot of effort to relax.
Television  programming  is a case in point. Faced  with  a dearth  of money, a
dearth  of inventiveness, or  a  combination  of the  two,  both  major  networks - CBC and CTV-have bought  programmes from United  States  networks rather than  exercise the  constant  effort  to  develop sprightly  programmes   themselves. "Popular" programming is somehow equated with bad taste, with offensive results. And Canadian children's programming has too often suffered from an absence of personality,  an absence of narrative,  an  absence of movement.  It's  talky, static,

3

EDITORIAL

and -in contrast  to documentary programming -seems to strive  to be bland; its struggle to avoid offending  offends even more. Often when efforts are made to be dynamic, problems still ensue, for in these cases it is an imitation  American pro­ gramme  that  has been designed. Even many of the Glowing Tributes  to Canada  to  which  the  CBC  annually  gives birth  are  cast in  the  American  mould-ad agency hoopla, which celebrates  Canada  in the same way as Americans celebrate their world-thereby implicitly apologizing for the fact that  Canadian society is different,  transforming it  by media  methodology into  a  second-rate  State.  Why should  we wonder  then  that  the Great  Root Bear is becoming  a culture  symbol for the young? If we don't  care enough to represent ourselves in our own terms­ which are  neither  provincial  nor  restrictive, just  ours:  capable  of producing  an "international" classic as much  as anyone else's terms are-then  we will get the colonial mediocrity we invite. Other  Canadian generations had  radio experiences to share with each other; today's Canadian children, unless there are changes soon in the  direction  of  programming, will as  adults  be more likely to  be sharing  a vision of McDonaldland, to have learned  their dialect from  Sesame's  New York Street, to have lost at least for a generation the fundamental ability  to recognize themselves.
The issue is not one of de fining identity-that's (in the way Canadians use the
term)   "American." It's  one of resisting definition. It's  not therefore  a matter  of denying children  access to Sesame Street or any other American  programme; it's one of ensuring  that  the culture  represented  by American  programmes  does not replace  everything  else in  order  to  become  Canadian   children's  sole model  of private behaviour and social possibility.
Two  recent  books  provide  an  indirect  commentary  on  this  dichotomy.  The
first is Dennis  Lee's new  collection of verses, called Garbage  Delight  ( M  & S,
$6.95); the title poem particularly,  and a squib called "The Big Malice Pan and the  Bertie Dumb," are  delightful,  a welcome addition  to the  inventive  maze of literary  nonsense. But  it  is disappointing to find  Lee imitating  "received"  chil­ dren's  verses (whether  Dr. Seuss' or A. A. Milne's)  so often. The  echoes sound hollow. The second book, designed to entertain  more adults than  children, is Eric Nicol's  latest,  called  Canada  Cancelled  Because of Lack  of Interest   (Hurtig,
$8.gs).  It  is a set of characteristically  ironic reflections on Canadian life, some­ times trenchant and  sometimes  unhappily  self-indulgent;  but  under  all  its flip­ pancy it is troubled by this same concern for cultural drift. One of Peter Whalley's illustrations, in a chapter  on The  Arts, suggests one of the reasons why  this drift exists. It shows, simply, a figure contemplating  its own navel;  the navel, however, is creased in the shape of the CBC's current logo. The cartoon epitomizes the self­ preoccupation   which  inhibits  relaxed  self-expression,  whether  in  television pro­ gramming or in literature, and  which provides a fertile environment  for imitation to flourish in.

4

EDITORIAL

Self-assurance  does not spring  full-blown in  minds  assailed  by self-doubt; it grows when people recognize that they don't  have to imitate others in order  to be good at  being themselves. They  have instead  to develop the strengths  that  they themselves value. If we ensure that  every generation  has the chance to appreciate Canadian local truths,  to  have  ready  access to books and  magazines  and  tele­ vision programmes,  both in English and in French -works that  let their  Cana­  dian  perspectives come naturally  and don't  artificially force them-then  we are setting about  actually encouraging  the future  in which tacitly we have been plac­ ing our faith. Apologies inhibit the imagination.  We have to turn  the imagination  on again, in our children and in ourselves, if we want to reinherit  our own home.

W.H.N.










)IMONG WOMEN ONLY

Alexandre L. Amprimoz


The  star stings your memory and her step caresses
the gravel road again.

The  wind decides where the seeds fall and if the nests
are to go
before the leaves.

The star might already be dead;
what pollen can give birth to an alternative  past?

Could poetry put a fence around  a Proven  al
and marry the olive tree to the unreal woman?

5

NATIONALISM AND LITERATURE IN QUEBEC


Gilles Marcotte


Ino NOT  LIKE  the word nationalism.  And I su.peet  that  no one likes it, really. I have friends in Quebec who are in favour of independence for
Quebec,  but at the same time contend  that  they are not nationalists. Or,  if they agree to a certain  amount  of nationalism  in their separatism,  they say that  they want  to see Quebec  become independent  so that  the nationalist  question  will, at last, be settled, dead,  and  then  Quebec  will be free to talk about  and  deal with more interesting,  more crucial  problems. An example of this dichotomy  is to be found in Rejean  Ducharme's latest novel, Les Enfantomes (The Ghostchildren), where the main character, Vincent  Falardeau, says that he is "against  every kind of nationalist sentimentality, but at the same time for the strong common sense of independence  for  Quebecois."  So, nationalism  is a  dirty  word.  And  it  is even dirtier  when it is applied  to literature.  Every intellectual  knows that  the  associa­ tion of literature  and  nationalism,  at least in its traditional  form, has  never pro­ duced  a single good book, and  that  it is, for the writer, a sort of  straitjacket,  an insistence on esthetic conformity, a sacrifice of the creative self to the laws of the group. Every programme of literary nationalism, during the last two centuries, has been, of course, oriented  towards  preservation,  rather  than  innovation.  Let's see, for instance, what an important critic, Ferdinand  Brunetiere, had to say about the nationalization  of French literature, at the end of the nineteenth  century. A litera­ ture,  he said, becomes national  when it frees itself  from foreign influences, and develops in itself those internal  qualities which a stranger  does not see, or feel. It must submit itself, to achieve this, to didactic and moral purposes, "in  the highest and the widest sense of these two words." This is not a very exciting programme,  and  I must add  that  in  France,  in French  literature,  it didn't  have  any lasting success. But  it  is significant  that  it  became,  in  French  Canada, the  dominant  literary theory for at least half a century.
Why is this so? Is it because French Canadians  didn't  go to school long enough,
because  they  were,  as  we said  in  English  Canada, an  ignorant,   priest-ridden people? That  is too simple an explanation.  The same phenomenon  has appeared in every new-born  literature -in  North  or South  America,  or  in  Australia­ which has to use the same language  as an  already  great  European  literature,  in

6

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

answer  to  a  very  practical problem: how  to  distinguish itself  from  the  mother­ country, to assert  its own  individuality. In  a letter  to his friend  l'abbe  Casgrain, in 1867, Octave Cremazie, the  most intelligent  and  widely  read  man  of  letters  of French Canada at the time, stated  the problem  very clearly:

The  more I think about  the fortunes of Canadian literature, the less I think  that it will have any chance  of leaving its imprint  on history. What  Canada is lacking, is a language of its own. If we spoke Iroquois or Huron,  our literature would live. Unfortunately, we speak and  write, rather  badly, to tell the truth,  the language  of Bossuet and  Racine.  Whatever   we may say and  do,  we will  never  be  anything more, in literature, than  a simple colony; and even if Canada became independent and  had  its own flag shining  under  the sun of nations,  we would  still  be simple literary  pioneers. Think  about  Belgium, which  uses the same language  as we do. Is there a Belgian literature? Unable  to compete with France  in the perfection  of form, Canada  might  have won a place among Old  World  literatures, if one of its children, a writer, had  been able to initiate  Europe,  before Fenimore  Cooper  did, to the grandiose scenery of our forests, to the legendary deeds of our  trappers  and voyageurs. Today,  even  if  a  writer  as gifted  as the  author   of  The   Last  of the Mohicans  appeared   among  us, his  works would  not  produce   any  sensation  in Europe,  because his irretrievable  fault would be to have arrived  second, that  is to say too late.

Octave Cremazie was a realist: not only did he write poems, he also sold books, he was a bookseller  by trade. Besides that,  he was a connoisseur  of the  literature of the day,  and  of its ideological foundations. He  knew  that  since  the  end  of the eighteenth century, the literatures of Europe had  become  national (French, Eng­ lish, German), which  was not the case before, at the time of Voltaire for example. He  knew  that  the  Romantics -and  he felt  himself  to  be  a  Romantic - strove to recapture the  very  roots  of their  national cultures: Victor Hugo  reviving  the Middle Ages, the Age of Cathedrals, in Notre-Dame de Paris; the German roman­ tics  returning to  the   traditional  tales  of  their   folklore.   Of   course,   there   are two levels of reality  here,  which  must be separated clearly, even if they  both  refer to some  kind  of nationalism: at  the  first level,  people  are  preoccupied with  the problem  of creating a  new  literature, which  has  to  be  distinguishable from  the existing ones, and  at  this level literature is linked  with the  politics  and  the  econo­ mics of nationalism; at  the  second  level, I hesitate  to  use the  word  nationalism, because  one  is not  concerned with  frontiers and  things  like  that, or  even  with cultural frontiers,  but  with  an active force which works within  literature itself. As a bookseller, as a man  who wanted to see the birth of a distinctive  Canadian litera­ ture,  recognized  "under the  sun  of nations," Octave Cremazie spoke  about the former; as a writer,  a poet, he referred  to the latter.
Let's examine  these two interpretations a little further: first, the implications of the  bookseller's point  of view. And  by bookseller, here,  I mean, not  only  the  man who sells books, but  the  whole  complex  of the  literary  establishment:  publisher,

7

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

critic, and  even the poet or novelist, inasmuch  as he feels himself to be a part of a common, a national  literature. Every respectable, well-functioning  nation  needs a literature, just as it needs a banking  system and  a railway  network. It is said that  the first major  work of French-Canadian literature,  the  History  of Canada by Franc;ois-Xavier Garneau, was written  in answer to the famous  judgment  of Lord Durham  defining the French  Canadians  as a people without  a history and without  a literature. I  am  not sure  that  the anecdote is true,  but  it serves as a good illustration  of the motivation  which lies at the root of all the new literatures that were created - some of them in name only -during the nineteenth century. When a need like that  is felt, you cannot escape a certain amount  of  nationalism. In  the great  European literatures,  during  the same period, nothing  really impor­ tant  was said about  literary  nationalism,  because literary  traditions were strongly established before the national concept evolved. To speak about  a "national litera­ ture,"  or the "nationalization of the literature," is to admit  that  your literature  hasn't  really begun to exist, or that it is a minor one-a chip off the block of the Great  literature  from  which  it  has  not  yet  gained  its autonomy.  A  "national" literature  is a project,  much  more than  an object;  and we might even say, going to the limit, that a literature of that kind could exist without poems or novels (but not without  criticism) , by the virtue of  the emotions and  hopes that  are invested in it. In French Canada, of course, the concept of a "national literature" was pro­ pounded  much earlier, and  with greater  passion and consistency, than  in English Canada. Why  was this? The  most obvious reason is that,  among  the  industries that  a  nation  needs to be  respectable,  or  to survive, or to  keep itself occupied, none, or almost none, was within  the grasp of French Canadians. Industrial and economic development was entirely due to English Canadians-with a little help from their fellow Americans, later on. I will not try to say who was responsible; it is a very  complex question. The  fact is that  we were left out, or  that  we didn't  want  to  participate. Instead  of industrialists, of entrepreneurs,  of merchants,  we had lawyers, notaries, politicians and  priests: all kinds of people who had  to rely on the powers of speech to do their  job. We became experts in politics, in religion
-and  in literature. That is not to say that  we produced  better  politics, better
religion, or better  literature  than  English Canada  or other  colonies, but  that  we put a stronger stress on speech, on the expression of ourselves, thereby establishing an essential link between our  collective existence and  the expression of that  exis­ tence  and  the  expression of that  existence through  speech -and  primarily  by the written speech of literature. We were-and still are, up to a point-nomin­ alists: we believed that  by naming things we possessed them. It is not an entirely false assumption. There  is a good case to be made for nominalism. English Cana­  dians are beginning  to understand that; Margaret Atwood's book, Survival, and the acclaim it received, are signs that  they, too, are coming to see their  literature as a collective mirror  and as a means of securing a collective consciousness.

8

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

IWILL  NOT   TRY   to give a· detailed  history  of the  Great  Na­ tionalist  Debate  about  literature which  occupied  Quebec  intellectual   life  from Octave  Crimazie and  his friend  l'abbe  Casgrain,  to its latest  manifestations in,
let's say for example, Victor-Levy Beaulieu's articles for the newspaper  Le Devoir. The  programme  goes, roughly, like this. We need a national  literature-a litera­ ture that  would represent, foster and impose our national  identity.  What  subjects should such a literature  deal with? Does it have to portray our day-to-day  life, as Louis Hernon did in Maria Chapdelaine, or is it free to deal with any of the sub­ jects which are the common  bread  of the writers of a given  period?  Must  it  be open  to the  various influences of Western  Literature-primarily,  French?  Or, should it try to attain  originality  by rejecting those influences? What  kind of  lan­ guage will it use: international French  (or Parisian  French,  as they say cutely in Toronto), "joual" or that  new brand of French that some writers call "le Quebe­  cois"? There are a number of possible variations to be played on these themes, but the basic structure  of the music remains the same throughout our  history. And I insist, again, that you don't  hear that music in French Canada alone. It  has been played very loudly, at certain  times, by the various bands of  our  Southern  neigh­ bours. And, as I said before, Margaret  Atwood's harmonica and  a few other  in­ struments are being heard, these days, playing some of these tunes across our land. In many ways-and not only in the literary field-Quebec books and life repro­ duce the various aspects of the evolution of  the modern  world with  a particular vividness, and this vividness is perhaps due to the fact that  we, French  Canadians, are entering the global village or the electronics age, as Marshall  McLuhan would say, without  having first to divest ourselves of a strong industrial  tradition.
But there is a paradox  in the association of nationalism  and literature, which I alluded  to briefly earlier.  While it is quite easy to discover a lot of critical  essays advocating  a national literature, or pretending  to discover national  or nationalist aspects of an existing literature, it is much more difficult to find writers, novelists, poets, to whom the epithet  "national" could be applied.  From  the middle  of the nineteenth  century to, say, 1950, during the period which was dominated by the pretensions of literary nationalism  in our criticism, there is only one major  work in French-Canadian literature  which could be interpreted  safely as an expression of the nationalist emotions and struggles of Quebec, and that is Monseigneur Savard's novel, Menaud  maltre-draveur. It  is not a novel in the conventional  sense; it is more like an epic, with its roughly drawn characters,  bearing  uncommon  names, engaged in heroic actions and  neatly divided between black and  white, bad  and good, treachery and patriotism. Epics as a genre-I mean epics like The  Odyssey, La Chanson de Roland-are made precisely for the exaltation  and confirmation of the existence of a certain  collectivity. They  prove the value of a specific Ian-

9

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

guage as a bond  between  the  members of the nation. More  than  that,  epics are the  birth  certificates  of nations.  It is quite  evident  that  the  novel, the  modem novel, does not play the same role. It is interested in the individual, in his struggle within and  almost always against  society, including  the nation.  Epics are  collec­ tivist; novels are liberal. The  best novels of the period, those of Albert Laberge and Claude-Henri Grignon,  have nothing  to do with the nationalist sentiment  which inspires  Monseigneur  Savard's book. Claude-Henri Grignon  himself  was a  na­ tionalist;  but,  because he wanted  to be a novelist in the  tradition  of Balzac and Zola, he wrote  the story  of a  very particular  character,  Seraphin   Poudrier,  the miser, who  could  in  no  way  become  the symbol of the  national  aspirations  of French  Canada. Poetry,  on  the  other  hand,  could  lend  itself very well to  the expression of the national sentiment, and it is easy to find, during  the same period, dozens  of  patriotic   poems-including some  by  the  above  mentioned   Octave Cremazie -all bad of course, all heavy with that kind of leaden rhetoric which is the  trademark of  patriotism   in  literature.  The  first  important  poet  of  French Canada, and  the only one of that  period who is still  widely read  today,  Emile Nelligan,  didn't  speak  about  anything  national-except perhaps  snow,  but  it snows too  in  Russia,  Poland,  Germany  and  even  in  France.   His  subjects,  his images, were drawn  from the stock of  images and subjects which belonged to the French  poets of his time. His friend Louis Dantin  reproached  him, at first, for his lack of interest in national  subjects; but  he had to admit,  later  on, that  it would have  been  impossible  for  Nelligan,  with  the  kind  of poetic  genius  he  had,  to impose on himself any kind of  national  pretext. There  is again  a paradox  here: Emile  Nelligan  has become  a  national  symbol, or legend, in  Quebec  literature,  and  I would tend  to think  that  it is precisely because he didn't  write about  na­ tional subjects. He built a house of words, of symbols, large enough,  rich enough, to  accommodate   the  dreams,  individual  or  collective, of  many  generations  of French  Canadians.




Now, WHAT no wE SEE, at  the beginning  of the  modem era of French  Canadian literature-say, from 1935 or 1940 to the fifties? First, a complete  black-out  of the nationalist  intent  in the works of the major  writers, novelists and  poets, of that  period -and  they still count as the major  writers of our  literature. Ringuet's  30  arpents, Gabrielle  Roy's Bonheur  d'occasion, Roger Lemelin's  Les Plouffe,  Germaine  Guevremont's  Le Survenant, are  novels in the full sense of the word,  and  that  means, among other things, that  they are com­ pletely devoid of any kind of preaching,  unlike what we find in M enaud  maitre­ draveur.  It  is possible to  read  them  in  the  light  of the  nationalist  struggle  of French  Canada, and  they have quite often been read this way, but  then  you can

10

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

read  anything  that  has been written  anywhere  this way, if you are  determined enough.  The  intent  of these  novels-I do  not  bother  with  the  intents  of  the novelists themselves-is to depict life in its complexity, without  trying  to impose on the reader  any particular  point of view. What  you read in these novels is the Human  Comedy in French-Canadian attire. In  poetry, the movement away from nationalist  inspiration is even clearer, inasmuch as poetry is not expected to depict ordinary  life, as the  realistic novel must do. Alain  Grandbois,  Saint-Denys-Gar­ neau,  Rina  Lasnier, Anne  Hebert  deal with  the most general subjects;  they are read  as poets of the  human  drama,  not the  French-Canadian  drama; they  are recognized  as poets of universal  interest,  rather  than  as loudspeakers  for  some particular, regionalist or nationalist movement. And, again, these poets -like the novelists of their  time-undoubtedly  reveal something, and  something  essential, about  French Canada's mentality  or spiritual  history, but they do that  at a level which  cannot  be that  of nationalism.  There  were  nationalist  crises during   the same  period-I have only to mention  conscription,  which  a  majority  of Que­ becois opposed fiercely-but they didn't  find their way into the major  works of prose or poetry. French  Canada  was entering the modern era, and the new  prob­ lems it faced,  social and  literary  problems,  urbanization,  industrialization, pro­ letarization,  intellectual and spiritual  renewal, could not be contained  in a strictly national  perspective.
Of course, this separation  between social, spiritual  and national  problems didn't
last very long. We see that  clearly these days. Yet, I hesitate to use the word  na­ tionalism in defining the new directions which Quebec  literature  has taken  from the beginning of the fifties to this day. In  the introduction  to his anthology,  The Poetry of French  Canada  in  Translation,  John  Glassco wrote  a  few  years ago about  the new Quebec  poets:  "Brilliant,  eloquent, impassioned and  exploiting all the resources of new and exciting techniques, they seem too often preoccupied  by political and national ideas, by the incandescent ideal of a beleaguered Quebec - and it is a truism that  politics and  nationalism  have somehow never managed  to make  really good  poetry."  I  am  ready  to  recognize some kind  of truth  in  that statement.  It  is true  that  "le  theme  du  pays" -the  theme  of homeland -has played an  important role in Quebec  poetry from  the middle  of the fifties to the middle of the sixties. But, then, as is almost always the case with nationalism  and literature, it was more consistently and explicitly stated by critics, than by the poets themselves in their  poems. Among  the principal  poets of that  period,  I  can see only a few who may  truly  be called "poetes  du  pays",  poets of the  homeland: Gaston  Miron,  Paul  Chamberland, Gatien  Lapointe,  Pierre  Perrault, Yves Pre­ fontaine.  Others  have touched  upon  the subject  occasionally; and,  more signifi­ cantly, some of the most important poets of the period, like Paul-Marie Lapointe, Fernand  Ouellette,  Roland  Giguere,  Jacques  Brualt,  were  counted  among  the poetic liberation  Army of Quebec,  not because they wrote about  "le  pays," but


II

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

because the whole of the  poetry of that  period  was read, willy-nilly, in the light of the national  aspirations  of French  Canada. I confess to have contributed, per­ sonally, to that  kind of conscription -with the attenuating circumstances that  it is extremely difficult to write about  a body of poetry without  taking into account its immediate  social context.  Besides, a most important question must  be  asked: are we right in assuming that  "le theme du pays" is equivalent  with  politics and nationalism, as John  Glassco seems to suggest? At least, we will have to give a new meaning  to the word  nationalism,  and to distinguish it from the meaning  it had in  Ferdinand   Brunetiere's   theory.  Traditionally,  nationalism  or   patriotism   is founded  upon a given reality, geographical  and  spiritual,  to be seen and  felt by all;  it thinks about  frontiers,  defence, exclusions. It is firmly assertive. It doesn't bother with differences between individuals. On the contrary, "Ia poesie du pays"
-which might better  be called "Ia recherche du pays" -is interrogative, hope­
ful, and  thinks  essentially about  what  is coming, the  future.  The  homeland,  in that  perspective, is what is to be done, rather  than what is simply to be defended; it is seen not in isolation, but as a part of the world where the most general forces of the world are asked to play their role. A good example of that attitude is found in Gaston Miron's  poem, "Heritage de Ia tristesse." At the end of the poem, after having described the sad state of "le pays," the poet asks the winds of the world, the "universal winds," to regenerate the country and give it new movement. I will quote the poem in French  first, and then a translation  by Fred Cogswell:
les vents changez les sorts de place Ia nuit
vents de rendez-vous, vents aux prunelles solaires
vents telluriques, vents de l'ame, vents universels
vents ameutez-nous, et de vas bras de fteuve ensemble
enserrez son visage de peuple abime, redonnez-lui
Ia chaleur
et Ia profuse lumiere des sillages d'hirondelles

Now, the translation:

winds that shuffie the lots of precedence by night winds of concourse, winds with solar eyes
telluric winds, winds of the soul, universal winds come couple, o winds, and with your river arms embrace this face of a ruined people, give it the
warmth
and the abundant light that rings the wake of swallows

You see that  in  these verses Quebec's  cause is not  isolated, it is universal  in its appeal; it  joins voices with  countries  as diverse as Aime Gesaire's  Martinique, Senghor's  Senegal,  Pablo  Neruda's  Chile and  many  others. If this is nationalist poetry, I would  disagree  completely with John  Glassco's assertion that  "politics and  nationalism  have somehow never managed  to make really good  poetry." But


12

NATIONALISM IN  QUEBEC

I  prefer  to say that  this is not  nationalist  poetry. In  Miron's  poem,  as in  many Quebec  poems similarly oriented,  pity and  love for the  homeland  transcend  the narrow limits of nationalism.
I have noted earlier that the novel does not lend itself to that  kind of passionate expression of the homeland,  because it is more  preoccupied  with  the  individual than  with the group,  or society, or nation. But Quebec's  contemporary novel, on the whole, is not any more a novel in the classical sense, and  we may  hear  in it, from time to time, echoes of Gaston Miron's  voice: in Hubert Aquin's  Prochain episode, for example, in which there is a merger, as well as a clash, between  the theme  of homeland,  borrowed  from  poetry, and  the form  of the  novel;  in  An­ tonine Maillet's work, which is nearer to the folktale and the epic (her novels deal with Acadia, but the problem is the same as in Quebec)  ; in a few of  Victor-Uvy Beaulieu's  books, which  equally  veer towards  the  epic -an  epic  of  misery  of doom, implying a renaissance from the depths it describes; and, finally, in all of the tales, novels, plays and various tidbits of writing by Jacques Ferron, who stands today as one of the most important, and certainly the most abundant prose writer in Quebec  during  the last quarter of the century. Jacques Ferron's  work is some­ times limited  by nationalism,  by his almost exclusive  interest  in  the  hopes and drama  of Quebec;  and  this limitation  reveals itself in  the fact  that  it seems diffi­ cult for a non-Quebecker to read his books-his Tales of the Uncertain Country  has met with only mild success in English Canada, and the only one of his novels published in France  has passed almost  unnoticed. But, still, I am convinced  that he is -almost-a  great  writer. And  I  propose to end this paper  by taking  an example from one of his best novels, Le Saint-Elias, an example which shows how the "winds of concourse," as Miron said, can blow through traditional nationalism and  open it  to the  reality  of the vast  world. "Le  Saint-Elias" is the  name  of a vessel, a beautiful  vessel, which was built in Batiscan, near  Trois-Rivieres,  on the St. Lawrence. To  his bishop, who  asks why the villagers of Batiscan  have  built such a beautiful, such a big vessel as le Saint-Elias, the curate  replies:

I will answer you that it was to break the nut of the Gulf. It was all right to keep ourselves secluded as long as we were not a people. But we have become a people: let the nut of the Gulf be broken! let the impediments of childhood disappear! We have built the Saint-Elias to go beyond Newfoundland, on the big ocean, towards Bermuda and the West Indies, and if necessary the old countries.... Who are we, people of Batiscan? We are the equals of the discoverers from Saint-Malo, able to discover Europe, and to set the Cross there.

This is a good trick:  reversing the course of history, colonizing  the  colonizer. The Americans have had some success with it. But for us, Canadians, English or French,  it is easier said  than  done. The  striking  fact  about  le Saint-Elias,  the beautiful vessel, is that  the only collectivity, the only people with whom its sailors will  establish  a  real  contact,  is  an  African  tribe,  and   they  will  come  back

NATIONALISM IN QUEBEC

from  their  voyage with  an  idol  to  be put  up  in  the cemetery  of their  country parish. Thus le Saint-Elias  succeeds in linking Batiscan to the world, but  the link is between villages, skipping  the great  capitals of culture;  not a vertical  link, but horizontal.  I see there a symbol of a new state of affairs in the relations  between cultures and literatures,  whereby the smaller ones, like ours, will perhaps  be able to escape the nationalist  obsession without  being engulfed, to the  point  of  disap­ pearance,  in the main  currents  of international literature.  Nationalism, as I said before, is bred by an inferiority complex; you are forced to be a nationalist  when, to exist in your own eyes, you have to compare yourself, explicitly or implicitly, to some father image. I think that we live in a world, now, where regional differences, regional cultures, regional literatures, are beginning to see themselves as legitimate expressions of humanity, and  not only as subproducts of two or three dominating powers.











FROM THERE TO HERE

Alexandre L. Amprimoz


Decoration of narrow streets:
cats and torn papers.

From the brittle night the sun roots out
the espresso echo
of coffee cantatas.

These are rare dreams, lonely ladies
hiding in the ruins.

But I walk along wider streets carved in ice and snow
and my fountainless piazzas leave me thirsty.

THE CANADIAN IDENTITY
& AFRICAN NATIONALISM

A




MODEST BUT  NONETHELESS   NOTEWORTHY  tributary flowing into  the mainstream  of recent  Canadian fiction is composed  of several novels set in Africa. These novels examine some of the conflicts almost inevitably present in a newly independent  nation-conflicts emanating  from the inordinate enticements  of power inherent  in a fledgling nationalism, or from  disruptive  but deeply  ingrained  tribal  allegiances, or  from  the  difficulty of  capitalizing   upon opportunities  for economic growth  without capitulating  to the forces that  would attempt  to exact ideological or political remuneration  in return.
Surely the tendency for some Canadian writers to be drawn  to this sort of  con­ flict is much more than a conspiracy to prove that Canadian fiction can go beyond the limits of solely Canadian experience. In my view a very plausible explanation  for Canadian fascination  with African nationalism  can be found  in  the fact that many of the conflicts present in a newly independent  African  country  have their clearly identifiable  counterparts in  recent Canadian  experience.  The  threat  to a firm conception of national  identity  posed by conflicting tribal, racial, or regional loyalties; the continual  onslaught  on national self-confidence that  emanates  from forces that have capitulated to the assumptions of colonial inferiority; the need for perpetual  resistance against  economic,  ideological and  political  domination  by larger powers -all of these consequences of being caught between two worlds are familiar  components  of  Canadian national  life. Perhaps  Canadian  writers  are attracted by the  prospect  of greater  dispassion in  the  examining   of these  very Canadian concerns in a non-Canadian context. Dave Godfrey indicated  his aware­ ness of   this  opportunity   for  greater  objectivity  in  an  interview   with  Graeme Gibson:

I think  the  best thing  I do is get outside  myself, or at  least split  off some segment of myself that's close to someone  else, and  expand it  into  their  life and  ... write about them,  write  about other people.  In  The  New  Ancestors, that kind  of  big structure forced  me to do  that.1

The  best-known Canadian explorer  of African  nationalism  through  fiction is surely Margaret  Laurence.  In her first novel, This Side ]ordan  (I g6o), as well as her  volume  of short stories, The  Tomorrow-Tamer and  Other  Stories  (I g63), Laurence  shows how deeply ingrained  assumptions about  the superiority  of the

CANADIAN IDENTITY

white man and the childlike inadequacy  of the African have to be abandoned by both the colonizer and the colonized as the process of "Africanization" proliferates. Nathaniel  Amegbe, the sensitive central figure in This  Side  Jordan, is most  con­ scious of the opposing  forces within  him -the difficulty of espousing a sense of values that  is anything  but  European  while simultaneously  recognizing  that  he must move beyond the sense of identity that he has acquired  because of his African background.  Nathaniel feels guilty about  forgetting, or avoiding,  his past origins, but he also recognizes that  Ghana  will have to move ahead into the future, taking advantage of educational and  economic opportunities,  if it  is to  resist the  on­ slaughts of neo-colonialism.
Most of Laurence's  writing about  Africa's response to independence is optimis­ tic-or at the worst, provisionally hopeful. Such is not the case with three Cana­  dian novels about  Africa published during the last five years:  Dave Godfrey's The  New  Ancestors, David  Knight's Farquharson's Physique and What  It Did to His Mind, and Hugh  Hood's  You  Can't  Get There  From Here. While these authors' handling  of the difficulties arising from African independence  is, like Laurence's, compassionate, all three  novels are very pessimistic indeed about the prospect for resolving these difficulties.2  I would suggest that this refusal to minimize the threats to a strong assertion of national  identity by ethnic or regional loyalties on the one hand  and  threats  of economic  and  cultural  if not  outright  political  domination on the other  is influenced  by these writers' awareness of analogous  difficulties in our own country.
The  New  Ancestors is an  intricate  but impressive work that  focuses upon  the
disillusionment gripping  the fictional African country of Lost Coast  (a thinly dis­ guised Ghana,  where  Godfrey  spent  some time  as a  CUSO  volunteer)  several years after it has been granted  its independence. The collapse of ancient loyalties, the  persistence of tribalism,  and  the  intrusion  of neo-colonialism  have  all con­ tributed  to the  collapse of aspirations  embodied  in  the  once-popular  slogans of "Free-dom" and "Work  and  Happiness."
Godfrey  demonstrates  how  independence   produces  uncertainty   about  one's
own identity. The  ancient securities of family ancestry and tribal loyalty are urged into  insignificance  by new ancestors-national rather  than  tribal  leaders,  gov­ erned  by presumably  national  rather  than  regional aspirations.  When  these  new ancestors fail, identity  recedes, requiring  re-definition by compromise and  realign­ ment of loyalties. First Samuels, an important official in Kruman's government, is the prime focus of Godfrey's  analysis in this respect. He maintains a public image as the most visible supporter of Kruman's Freedom  People's  Party,  but secretly joins forces with  Core, a counter-revolutionary movement  committed  to demon­ strations  against  the government, blackmail, sabotage, and even murder.  It is as a member  of this group  that  First Samuels, in the most suspenseful scene in the novel, murders  Gamaliel  Harding as he is being  attacked  by a  mob  of market

J6

CANADIAN IDENTITY

women   who  have  recognized  that   the  achievement  of  peace   and   plenty   that Gamaliel has promised  may  be forever  delayed.  It is ironic  that  Gamaliel loses his life because  of his inflexibility  in  refusing  to change  ancestors; to First  Samuels, Gamaliel had  become  "a  mere bourgeois  reactionary who had  adapted the  papery words  of  the  revolution, had  eaten  its  idealism  raw,  had  lived  off  its  silver  of betrayal-without ever  changing his inner  being." The   revolutionary Marxist rhetoric in which  he thinks  of Gamaliel leaves no doubt  as to who First  Samuels' new ancestors are  now.
The  immense  difficulty  of  reducing inter-tribal intolerance in  the  interests  of national solidarity is another aspect of African  nationalism portrayed in this novel. A proper  awareness of tribal  identity  is a legitimate component in  one's  sense of selfhood,  but  when  that  awareness is assumed  to be the  basis not  just for  unique­ ness but  for  superiority, the  achievement of the  degree  of co-operation  required to realize  the  goals  of as tribally  diverse  an  entity  as a  nation   becomes  virtually impossible.  Canadian writers  cannot help  but  be  acutely  aware of the  problems emanating from  an inordinate preoccupation by any segment  in this country with either  its racial  or regional  identity, which,  I would  argue,  makes  their  handling of similar  situations elsewhere  that  much  more  astute  and sympathetic. Margaret Laurence has  demonstrated her  understanding of the  dangers of  tribalism, par­  ticularly  the  problems  that  ensue when  it becomes exclusivist, as follows:

I feel we can't  say them of Africans. What  one has come to see, in the last decade, is that  tribalism  is an inheritance of  us all. Tribalism  is not such  a  bad  thing,  if seen as the  bond which an individual  feels with  his roots, his ancestors,  his  back­ ground.... Where tribalism becomes ... frighteningly dangerous is where the tribe
-whatever it is, the Hausa, the Ibo, the Scots Presbyterians, the Daughters of the American  Revolution,  the in-group-is seen as "the  people,"  the  human  beings, and  the others, the  un-tribe,  are seen as sub-human.  This is not Africa's  problem alone; it is everyone's.

During the euphoria ensuing  from  the granting of independence to Lost Coast, expectations had  been  high  that  such  abuse  of tribalism  was a thing  of the  past. The  main  exponent of this hope was Mr. Pobee-Biney,  a government minister  who had  devoted   much   of  his  energy  to  trying  to  reconcile  two  feuding tribes,  the Akante  and  the Akras.  He  was convinced  that  tribalism  was "A  feudal remnant. A crumb beneath the new broom.  The  nation  would sweep such  feudal  jealousies into the dust." His optimism gains a substantial following at first, but soon, under­ estimating the  potency  of human jealously and  hatred, he  becomes  the  object  of animosity  from  not only the feuding tribes he was attempting to reconcile, but  also the Redeemer, Kruman, who construes  Pobee-Biney's popularity to be a threat to his own. He is first stripped of his membership in the party,  then  denied  access to party  funds,  and  shortly  thereafter, jailed.
In  the  Georgetown prison  where  Pobee-Biney  is confined,  further demonstra-

CANADIAN IDENTITY


tions of the  persistence of tribalism become  evident. No prisoner  ever  has a guard from  his own  tribe.  Not  surprisingly, this  leads  to all kinds  of abuses,  especially when  the  guards are  bushmen who  take  out  their  inferiority   complex  on  their victims.
Pobee-Biney is finally  released,  a wiser but  greatly  embittered man. In  a scene portraying First  Samuels supervising the  burning of the  huts  of some  rebellious fishermen  on the Silla outskirts, Pobee-Biney  laughs  to scorn several  demonstrating students who  display  a sign, "End Tribalism Now." For  him,  the  very suggestion is nothing more  than  an  exercise in futility.
In  the same  scene,  First  Samuels reveals  that  he too  underestimates the  dura­ bility of inter-tribal intolerance. In  an  attempt to arouse  the  spectators  he  casti­ gates the demonstrators as follows:

End  Racism, they say. Fine, I say. Let them wipe out their  obruni  methods,  their obruni  slogans begged from  their  foreign obruni  masters. Lost Coast is our  tribe, let us hear them admit  that, this nation is our tribe, this nation-not the ones who buy them with confusion and disorder and shame.

It takes the minister  of Roads and  Energy,  Mr.  Eban, a hard-headed realist whose political  survival has  been  due  to his adeptness at  compromise  and  accommoda­ tion,  to  reveal  to  First  Samuels the  folly of assuming  tribal  prejudices could  be abandoned so gracefully:

You still believe, do  you, after  all  these years of . . . counter-evidence,  Samuels, your old theory that  the governing group  can toss three leopards,  twelve baboons, a flock of vultures  and  what?  Some pigs?-into the correct  ... theoretical struc­ ture, and  come out with a peaceful collection of, of what, Mr. Samuels? Of  some­ thing  sane, similar,  loving, non-greedy,  hard-working?  Cows? There  are  no cows in Africa, Samuels. Termites  perhaps. A society of termites?



E             to a newly independent nation's self-determination is that   posed  by neo-colonialism, defined  rather succinctly  on one of First Samuels' propaganda tapes:

The  essence of neo-colonialism is that  the state which is subject  to it is, in theory, independent and  has all  the  trappings  of sovereignty. In  reality  its economic sys­ tem and  thus its political  policy is directed  from the outside.

Here  is another problem which  Canadian writers  are  likely to  understand more fully  than   their  British  or  American counterparts at  least.  In  a  country  whose very constitution can  be altered only by the action  of the  British  parliament, and at the same  time  whose culture and  economy  is dominated by American interests, such a sensitivity  to pseudo-sovereignty is not unexpected.
In  The  New  Ancestors Godfrey  examines  this problem  of neo-colonialist  inter-

I8

CANADIAN IDENTITY

ference in some depth. Occasionally  his animosity towards such outside influences is so consistently intense as to impair  the credibility of his analysis. The  only out­ sider in the novel with any  redeeming  virtues is Michael  Burdener,  the  English biology professor, whose sympathy  with Mrican  causes has been confirmed  by his marriage to Ama Harding, sister to Gamaliel, the Lost Coastian  patriot  eventually murdered   by First  Samuels.  Burdener  devotes a  great  deal  of  his  pedagogical energy  to  exposing for  the  benefit  of his students  the  modus operandi  of  im­ perialists  and  neo-colonialists.  The  following  remark  is  representative   of  such disclosures :

You must seek questions. You were taught  to seek answers because with answers you could be beaten. Stress their inferiority old chap, or you'll get nowhere. And if you run across a bright one, fill him so full of the encyclopaedia he'll not have time to think. That's  what the school bosses say to us.

All other foreigners are neo-colonialists to a greater or lesser extent;  their prime and consistent distinguishing characteristic is a repulsive superiority  complex. Geoffrey Firebanks is a good example. A representative of the British Council  in Lost Coast, we are informed  that  he "considered  his position in dependent  Africa as somewhat  analogous  to that  of a first century  Greek expatriate, spreading  his ideas and wisdom not in Rome but in some distant  province."
In "The London Notebook" section a cricket game at Bishop Adisa School acts as a recurrent  motif that  further  develops this uncomplimentary depiction of  neo­ colonialism. The representatives  of two countries wishing to influence  Lost Coast, Ling Huo, the Chinese ambassador,  and Clarence Hathaway, his British counter­ part, have mistakenly shown up to watch the proceedings-"Caught, the pair of them, by WAWA and forced to break a mutually stainless rule:  never the twain shall meet." They  proceed to sit as far apart  as possible on the spectator's  stage, but the ironic similarity of their motives brings them in fact very close together.
Godfrey  reserves his most venomous anti-neo-colonialist  sentiments,  however, for the Americans. Anyone even casually familiar with Godfrey's writings both fictional and otherwise knows that  he makes no secret of his disenchantment with the  American  dream.  Godfrey  wastes very little  time  in  revealing  his  attitude towards American do-gooders. Geoffrey Firebanks passes a couple of Peace Corps Volunteers, the male member  of whom nasally refuses the offer of a lift to Silla. "One  of those American  PCV's," Firebanks thinks. "Down  in the dirt getting the job done. And pulling others down in the dirt with them."
Shortly thereafter,  Godfrey makes clear that this is more than  the expression of jealousy on the part  of one imperialistically-minded  intruder  towards  another. Switching to the omniscient narrative mode, he reveals the arrogance  of this young American,  Ricky  Goldman  by  name.  While  on  the  make  in  Silla  for  a  black woman, Goldman  thinks to himself:

19

CANADIAN IDENTITY

This government  was roo per cent botch ... Boy, if this was socialism in operation no wonder  the old man  [Goldman's father]   ran from redness and  became a  psy­ chiatrist.  No  brains  anywhere.  Name  a  ministry  with  a  brain?  ... Boy, if  they wouldn't  let Ricky G., a  Red-diaper baby if the Birchers ever  labeled  one,  teach these miserable kinkheads English nor History, he'd show them American ingenuity. He'd  get the  message across. Even  in  Maths  or  French  they'd  learn  it  ... Who cared  if Ricky the Tricky  flunked  French  and  Maths at  ole NYC?

His  misapprehension of  his  total  lack  of discretion  is capitalized  upon  by  First Samuels and  Burdener, who surprise him in the  midst  of a coupling session with a  local  prostitute. Even  then, his  naive  chauvinism refuses  to  desert  him  as  he screams,  "Stop it, you guys. I'm  an  American. Americans are  the  most  powerful good  people in the world."
A rather more important role in the novel is played by the American lieutenant,
Richard Rusk. A powerful symbol  of unthinking imperialistic interference in Lost Coastian affairs,  Rusk  remains throughout the  novel  a  hollow  caricature. The reader  is in perpetual doubt as to whether the man  is capable of thought; his forte is action  -most of which  is in response  to orders  from  his anonymous superiors. Michael Burdener records  the  audacious quality  of this  tendency when  he  first meets Rusk  at Gamaliel's Grog  Shop.  Deciding  he would  like to play some chess, Rusk  marches over to borrow  a board  and a set of men from some Russian  players nearby. Michael is not certain whether Rusk  is simply unaware of the social con­ ventions  that  should  govern  relationships with one's enemies, or merely choosing to ignore  such  niceties.  Burdener cannot help  but  secretly  admire  "such  brashness.  The  Americans would  ask God  for a cigarette and  the devil for  a light."
Rusk drops out of sight  until the complex surrealistic section of the novel entitled "In the Fifth  City." This segment  of the novel has no clear relationship to the rest, for it is set in the actual region  of sub-Saharan Mali  rather  than  the  fictional  Lost Coast,  and  with  the exception of Lieutenant Rusk,  a whole  new set of characters is introduced. Godfrey  makes  explicit  the  typicality  of this  American as follows:

there  is something  truthfully  if indefinably  American about  him:  an  assurance, a willingness  to smile, a  lust  after  quantification,  a  competitive  strength,  a  simple purity, a repetition  of certain  key phrases and ideas in all situations, a limited understanding of the  ignobly  tragic, a solidness to the body, a  taste  for  steak, a shallowness of comprehension  of other  modes of social interaction   than  his own.

The author then  proceeds  to describe,  in impressionistic prose  that  is nothing short  of a nightmare to follow, several  imaginative modes in which  Rusk  is mur­ dered.  He  is shot  by  a  Daga  slave  on  the  order  of three  Tuareg  tribesmen and summarily buried  in the sand, poisoned  by a beautiful woman, killed, along  with four others, by an exploding pineapple in a bar, and  destroyed by a booby-trapped basketball.
The  simplest  response  one  could  make  to  this  section  is to  propose  that  it  is


20

CANADIAN IDENTITY

redundant and  should  be excised. It  advances  the  central  action  of  the  novel not one  jot, and  in style it departs  almost disruptively from  the  Lost Coast  ma­ terial. A more useful response, however, is to see this section as the culmination  of this theme that is of such central concern in Godfrey's art-the intolerable  inter­ ference of one country in the affairs of another. At this stage in the novel we have not yet been informed  of the damage  Rusk has initiated  in  Lost  Coast;  we only know that  here in Mali he is attempting to "stir up trouble in the army  and  pre­ pare for a rightist coup by the Bamako colonels." Burdener does reveal in the final section of the novel that Rusk has been responsible for the deaths of fifteen mem­ bers of  Core,  the  militant  counter-revolutionary  organization   with  which  First Samuels was associated. Godfrey's assumption  about  the inherent  insensitivity to violence historically evident in the American  psyche is altogether  evident:

And how did he [Rusk]  think? Was it simple for him. The actual death of those fifteen young men. It must have been. An algebraic nothing. Fifteen Lost Coastians. Nothing  more  than  fifteen  Mohawks.  Fifteen  Pasquemoddys.  Fifteen  Crows. Fifteen Floridas. That  doesn't enter it; that's foreordained. The blood and slaugh­ ter causes of his raciality.

Burdener  concludes  that   there  is  no  possible justification  for  the  man   being allowed to stay alive.
The style of the "In  the Fifth City" section, then, underscores the profound pointlessness and  frequent  lack  of direction  of imperialistic  interference   in  the affairs of Africa. The  inordinate risks of such an undertaking  are emphasized; it is not clear whether Rusk is actually  killed, but at the very least the  multiplicity of potential  threats to his life is conveyed. And for what cause does he engage in such activities? Not only is the wealth of this part  of Africa  highly suspect,  but its entire  history is one of constant  tribal warfare, so what  does another  military coup matter?4 The foreigners to a man are ill at ease, dissatisfied, and out of place. That the whole undertaking is an exercise in madness this section by both its style and its content makes abundantly clear.


A RATHER  MORE CONVENTIONAL and yet similarly absorbing treatment of the difficulties attendant on the acquisition of national  independence is to be found  in David  Knight's  novel with the unwieldy title of Farquharson's
Physique and What  It Did to His Mind. Godfrey's novel provides evidence of its Canadian origin primarily  in  terms of its themes, although  Knight  supplements this relationship  by making his central character  a Canadian university  professor, Henry John  Farquharson, who with his wife and small son has come to the Uni­ versity of Ibadan  in  Nigeria  to teach  English literature  for  one  year.  With  the exception of the Introduction, to which the author  adds the anomalous designa-


21

CANADIAN IDENTITY

tion "Prologue  or Epilogue,"  the narrative line is carefully chronological;  indeed, the chapter titles consist exclusively of dates, giving the novel very much of a docu­ mentary  quality.  The  period  covered, September  14, 1965,  to July  29,  1966, is approximately  the same as that  of Godfrey's novel-February 1965 to February
1966. Most of the  political events and  the political figures in Knight's  novel are factual,  however, adding  an  additional  element of authenticity  to the narrative.
Farquharson's wife Joan   joins a long line of wives in  the  Canadian  fictional tradition  who are unwillingly constrained to participate  in their husbands' expedi­ tions into the unknown.  Joan  seems resolved to dislike Africa right from the start
-its dirt, its cheating,  its absence of conveniences, its domestic servants, its per­
petual atmosphere  of insecurity. Farquharson  comes to see her as "a  prying, mis­ erable woman  who should  have stayed in Canada." Refusing to disbelieve in his ability to notonly adapt to Africa but also to contribute something to its develop­ ment, he establishes a vigorous sexual liaison with Gail Johnston, a former student of his from Toronto now teaching  drama  at the University of  lbadan, in order to compensate for the progressively deteriorating  relationship with his wife. This rela­ tionship with Gail acts as a useful index of the degree of  his adaptation to African cultural  mores, for it symbolizes the elimination of  inhibition that  is an important component of his concept of acculturation.
One  striking  characteristic shared  by all three  of the  novels under  discussion
here is their unusual  preoccupation with violence. Farquharson's increasing recog­ nition of the common  heritage  of savagery he shares with the Africans is the key discovery he makes during  his voyage from innocence to experience. As in God­ frey's novel, tribal  intolerance provides the motive for the expression of  violence. Political parties capitalize upon tribal affinities; as History professor Edward  Eayrs tells Farquharson, "There didn't  use to be this kind of hatred  and  organization.  God  damn  it, the  tribal  organizations  were cultural." Once  in power, a  party freely resorts to intimidation, election-fixing, and  even  murder  to  perpetuate  its existence.
Farquharson persists in attempting to preserve a stance of patient neutrality. He is rudely awakened  to the fact that fence-sitting is impossible in Africa when, returning  from  observing a student  anti-government  demonstration, he kills two partisan  thugs  who are  ransacking  his house, and  later  that  night  discards their bodies into a ditch.
At first, Farquharson does not recognize that in trying to become more immune
to the violent consequences of tribalism,  he is becoming less human.  He  tries to convince  himself that  "Sympathy ... was a  useless, interfering,  and  degrading privileged tourist's quality." He even goes so far as to admit  that  he had enjoyed committing  murder.  Then  just a couple of weeks before the Farquharsons are to leave  Nigeria,  Henry  is suddenly  awakened  to the  inhumanity of tribal  hatred when several lbos are  pointlessly slaughtered  during  a trip  he and  his son Jamie

22

CANADIAN IDENTITY

take to Akure. He finally admits that he can hardly wait to return  to Canada. His relationship  with Gail, which up to that point had symbolized his rejection  of the former inhibitions of his Canadian lifestyle, now begins to decline into emptiness.
In  the  meantime  Joan,  having  discovered that  Henry  was  a  murderer and deciding that  he was no longer a fit father for her son, secretly flees to Lagos with Jamie.  Farquharson goes in  pursuit  courtesy of Oscar  Nwonkwo,  the  Nigerian patriotic  poet who lived next door. Oscar tries to convince him that  the violence he had witnessed was about  to end:

that what he had seen was one of the death spasms of the First Republic, inevitable perhaps, but essentially meaningless, and something which had already ceased to happen in the North. "We have turned the corner," he said. "We have put our Time of Trouble behind us. Now it is in truth 'One Nigeria'."

Oscar does not realize it, but the current hostilities were just the beginning of what was to lead  eventually  to that  bloody attempt  at  tribal  genocide  known  as the Biafran  War.
Airport  authorities  refuse  to  allow Joan  and  Jamie  to  leave  Lagos  without Henry. On the way to an anticipated  reunion  with his son, Farquharson is asked by Oscar, "Do you want to leave our country so very much?" He replies:

I can't think of that. I want Jamie safe in my hands, and to know what to do with his mother. What's Nigeria? I want to get out before anything else happens here. I'm tired of bodies. The next body I want is my own, thank you very much.

That  wish is tragically granted.  Just as he is about to be reunited  with his family, soldiers appear,  bent  on commandeering the  airport.  When  Farquharson  inter­ venes as an Ibo clerk is being bayoneted, he is wounded in the stomach, and then, to avoid  the  embarrassment of an  investigation,  a soldier  blows  Farquharson's brains out.
The compelling portrayal of the potentially destructive consequences of bigoted tribalism is the chief success of this novel. My thesis is that the Canadian writer is particularly  sensitive to such issues because of similar threats  in his own country.




LE LEAST succESSFUL of these three novels about Africa is Hugh  Hood's  You Can't Get There  From Here. Although  it is hampered  by a marked  preference for narration  in lieu of dramatization, and  by characters  who are far  too representative  to engage our  sympathies,  the  novel still manages  to examine  rather  closely the  issues of tribalism  and  neo-colonialism  in  the  newly independent  fictional African  state of Leofrica. It opens in the office of the new prime minister designate, Mr. Anthony  Jedeb,  as he makes preparations for the

23

CANADIAN IDENTITY


first cabinet meeting. He  clearly  is the  most suitable Leofrican for this office; not only does he possess the  highest  educational qualifications of anyone  in the coun­ try,  but  his  background of  having   been  born  in  the  Ugeti  highlands  and   yet having  lived most of his life among the  Pineallowlanders qualifies  him  as the one most  likely  to  succeed  in  bringing about a  resolution  of  the  smoldering  atmos­ phere  of mutual hostility  that  governs  relationships between  the  two groups.  Like a  pedantic school-teacher, the  narrator reveals that there  is no  rational basis for the  Ugeti  hatred of the  Pineals,  for the latter  have  a long history of being  agree­  able and  unwarlike:

The  foreign anthropologists who have made studies of the Leofrican  peoples have always been puzzled by the fear felt by the Ugeti of their placid  neighbours.  It  is one  of  the  most  striking  instances  in  cultural  anthropology   of  a  mass  delusion without  any  historical  base. Yet  this delusive, almost  hallucinatory  terror  felt  by one tribe for the other  is a real social fact in Leofrica, and  has to be dealt  with as such, not as a childish fancy.

In  his  inaugural address,   Jedeb faces  squarely  this  social  fact,   but   he  also believes that  sweetness  and  light  will prevail  in helping  them  to surmount it:

In our country  a man is first of all a herdsman of the highlands or a planter  of the lowlands. That is the first fact  we have to recognize in the founding  of our united state. There  are  two peoples here.
But I  tell you, fellow Leofricans, from  this day onward  these two peoples can, must and  will grow toward  union and  mature  statehood.

He  goes on to  promise  full representation of all tribal, local,  economic and  ideo­ logical  interests  in  his government. In  order  to do  this  he  appoints four  Ugetis, four  Pineals,  and  three  non-indigenous Leofricans  to his cabinet. The inadequacy of Jedeb's idealism  is shortly  thereafter revealed,  for  bickering  along  tribal  lines breaks  out  almost  immediately at  the  first  cabinet meeting,  and   the  appointees demonstrate an  almost  universal  unwillingness  to rise above  a preoccupation with their  own selfish interests  of salary  or personal aggrandizement.
Like Dave  Godfrey, though, Hood  reserves his most caustic  satirical  talents  for
his  depiction of  those  imperialistic forces  that   seek  to  manipulate and   exploit Leofrica  in  keeping  with  their  particular ideological  goals.  Ralph  MacSweyn is the  head  of Interfoods, an  American company devoted  to the shameless exploita­ tion  of Leofrica's sole exportable commodity-nut oil. Fatuous and  myopic,  he is completely  incapable of assessing matters from  any value  system other  than  his own.  The  narrator ironically describes  his simplistic  approach to  life as follows:

He was one of a new kind of man who can envisage real social institutions deriv­ ing from  American  models, extended  on a global scale. He  was among  the  first true  world-citizens,  without  affection  for any particular place or set of  local cus­ toms. He  thought  mostly about  technical  matters,  usually related  to  communica-

24

CANADIAN IDENTITY

tions, in a new kind of language as close to pictures as possible. His logic and his function alike dictated his characteristic contempt for complex syntax and peculi­ arity of expression.

The  ostensible  head  of  the  Soviet  presence  in  Leofrica,  the  uxorious  Mr. Leontiev, is presented somewhat  more sympathetically  than  either  MacSweyn  or the American ambassador, Fenton Ruggles. Genuinely committed  to aiding in Leofrica's technical development,  Leontiev hopes to attract  the country into the Russian sphere of influence by diplomacy rather  than  intrigue.
The  insidious nature  of power  politics is soon revealed,  however, for  it turns out  that  the real motive of both  Soviet and  American  foreign  policy is to drive Leofrica  into  the  unwilling  arms  of  the  opposite  major   power.  This   plan  is revealed to Leontiev by the beautiful spy Amelie de Caulaincourt, who by means of her abundant charms has been successful in worming her way not only into the good graces of the power-mongers in the country, but into a portfolio of the Leo­ frican  cabinet  itself. It  is Amelie,  Leontiev  discovers, who  has  engineered  the destruction  of  the  expedition   of  Soviet scientists  and   technicians   which  had journeyed  to  the  Ugetiland   interior  for  the  purpose  of   building  a  road.  This inhuman  deed was deemed to be a justifiable means of  providing the Soviets with a basis for withdrawing  from Leofrica.
The  Americans  naturally  have their secret agent  in Leofrica  also;  he is Clive Maharaj, Prime  Minister  Jedeb's  naive  confidential  secretary,  whose  CIA  su­ periors have equipped  him with a sophisticated electronic  device for sending six five-minute messages on Leofrican  activities to a mysteriously omnipresent  receiv­ ing station.  That  station  turns  out to be a  U.S. submarine  that  has  been  com­ pletely immobilized for ten weeks in order to receive Clive's innocuous  messages. In what is obviously meant  to be an example of  typical Yankee overkill, the sub­ marine captain  triggers a self-destruct device in Clive's set right after the last mes­ sage, which blows to pieces not only Clive but also his Pineal landlord,  nine other lodgers in the tenement  house, and two whole families living adjacent  to the ill­ fated establishment. This  does not occur  before Clive has single-handedly  sabo­ taged  the  lnterfoods  complex  and  blown  it sky-high to  provide  the  Americans with a good alibi for withdrawing from the country.
Not to be outdone, the Albanian  trade commissioner Zogliu gets one up on both his capitalist and  revisionist counterparts  by engineering  the secession of  Ugeti­ land from Leofrica. He accomplishes this with the aid of Lance-Major Abdelazar,  a Ugeti official attached  to the Defence ministry, who in the  process murders  the Cultural  Affairs minister for refusing to go along with the plot.
It hardly needs to be added  that  against these odds, Leofrica of course does not survive. Prime Minister Jedeb manages to escape to the Ugeti River in the ensuing revolution, but when partisans  on both sides start  shooting at  him  he does what

25

CANADIAN IDENTITY

any self-respecting defeated mediator would do and  dives to  permanent refuge  at the  bottom of the  river.
Cynicism  and  anger  occasionally pervert  the  artist's intention in  these  novels. The   credibility   of  the  American  neo-colonialists   in  both   the  latter  novels,  for example, is certainly reduced because  of this tone of outrage. Margaret Laurence, in a recent  conversation with  Robert Kroetsch, made  a comment about her Afri­ can  writing that  has an  important bearing  here. She  recognized  that  as a  Cana­ dian  in Africa  she remained the  perpetual detached outsider:

You were in a sense, even  though  you were involved with  the  experience,  cared about  it, and all the rest of it ... in some way you were a tourist. You could quit. You  could  get  out.  But  with  your  own experience,  your own  background,  your own roots, you have to come to terms.5

As I see it, coming  to terms involves not only the sensitive delineation of problems, which  these writers  certainly do;  it also requires  the  working  out  of some sort of synthesis  (solution  is too facile  a  word). Anger  is understandable but  ultimately unproductive. As Canadian writers, in spite  of their  recognition of the similarity of these  African situations to the  Canadian experience, these  novelists can  avoid the  demands of  resolution  -can  get  out,  as  Laurence puts  it. That is exactly what  they do, and  this, if anything, is their  shortcoming.

NOTES

1 Eleven Canadian  Novelists  (Toronto: Anansi, I973),  pp. I6I-62.
2  Laurence  herself has recognized  how inappropriate her earlier  spirit  of hope  was. See "Ten  Years' Sentences,"  Canadian  Literature,  No. 4I  (Summer  I969),  p. I2.
3 "Ten  Years' Sentences," p. I3.
4  See Donald  Cameron,  "The Three  People Inside Dave Godfrey,"  Saturday  Night,
86 (September  I97I), 22.
5  Robert  Kroetsch, ed., Creation  (Toronto: New Press, I97o),  p. 61.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS/228-4741

GODFREY'S PROGRESS




Calvin L. Smiley








DESPITE THE <NTEREST and  P'ruse gencrated by its publi­ cation  in  rg7o,  Dave  Godfrey's  novel The  New  Ancestors has  received  limited critical  attention.  W.  H.  New  has  presented  some  perceptive  comments  in  his essay "Equatorial Zones and  Polar Opposites,"1  but no one has attempted to sug­ gest a comprehensive approach  to its complex thematic  and  technical  problems. The  novel is so richly textured,  so far-reaching  in its reference  and,  in  part,  so obscure in its meaning  that  anyone wishing to understand  it fully could  be easily confused  or  discouraged.  For  this reason,  the short  stories  written  by  Godfrey prior to his novel are particularly  useful as guides to the themes which interest him and the literary means he uses to explore these subjects. Because Godfrey's stories are much  more stylistically conventional  than his novel, one can  more easily dis­ cover in them the thematic  problems and fictional techniques which re-appear  in The  New  Ancestors.
Godfrey's short stories, fourteen  of which  are  collected in  Death  Goes Better with Coca-Cola, concentrate  on social and cultural issues rather  than  problems of individual   physchology. The  theories  of such  behavioural  scientists  as  Konrad Lorenz seem to exert considerable influence on Godfrey as he examines  the con­ ditioning  effects of culture  on  the responses of an individual.  He  explores  most thoroughly  the relationship between an individual and his social context,  the roots of human  violence and the role of the family in creating  and sustaining culture.  Much of Godfrey's commentary  on these issues is embodied in the predominantly ironic tone he establishes in each of his stories. Intersecting  prose styles, narrative  perspectives and  time settings  are  the characteristic  devices  used  by Godfrey  to control the  reader's  response to the events depicted.
Armed  with this knowledge of Godfrey's thematic  interests  and  literary  tech­ niques,  one  can  more successfully come to grips with The  New  Ancestors. Not only can one discover these same characteristics in the novel but one can also gain some insight into Dave Godfrey's development as a writer of  fiction. Most of his stories appear  to be constructed  out of personal experiences  re-shaped  to exhibit

GODFREY'S PROGRESS


his thematic concerns. He  adopts a pronounced reportorial distance from  his material, and  he frequently emp oys
viewpoint. The  New  Ancestors, on  the  other  hand,  is less concerned with  a life­
like  plot  than   with  an  imaginative  re-creation of  essential  human  experiences. Irony  is still the  major stylistic feature, but  the  language is now  rich  and  evoca­ tive  rather than  stark  and   precise.  By overcoming his tendency to  re-shape   his own experience into fictional  form,  Dave Godfrey  has shown  a greater confidence in his imaginative potential and  his artistic  capacity.
For  Godfrey,  man  is very  much  the  product of the social  group in  which  he lives, and  an  individual's instincts  and  actions  can  be explained and  understood only  by reference  to  this larger context.  Culture is firmly  rooted  in social  condi­ tioning-an historical process  in  which  each  generation transmits its  attitudes to the  next  and  consequently creates  an  apparently inevitable cultural  evolution. One  major  influence on  Godfrey  appears to  be Konrad Lorenz.  In  an  essay on CUSO entitled   "Doomsday  Idealism" Godfrey   refers  favourably   to  Lorenz's theories:

Rather  than  reason, he finds it is instinctive behaviour  mechanisms  which  provide the  dynamic  source  of  friendship  and  love, warmth  of  feeling,  appreciation of beauty  and  the  curiosity  that  strives toward scientific enlightenment. Our  danger lies not in failing  to defeat  our  "animal  nature" but  rather  in denying  causality, denying  the effects of race  history on our  behaviour,  in  favour  of an  unproven, idealistic free will.2

In  rejecting explanations of  man's actions  which  rely  on  concepts of  universal rationality Godfrey  in turn  emphasizes  the uniqueness of individual cultures  which have each developed a distinct  set of behaviour characteristics. For this reason,  the interaction between  two  cultures is an especially important problem for  Godfrey, as he indicates  in the  quotation from  Lorenz  used as an epigraph for  Death Goes Better with Coca-Cola:

The  balanced  interaction between all the single norms of social behaviour charac­ teristics of a culture  accounts  for the fact that  it usually proves highly  dangerous to mix cultures. To  kill a culture,  it is often sufficient to bring it into contact  with another,  particularly if the latter  is higher, or is at least regarded  as higher, as the culture  of a conquering nation  usually is. The  people of  the  subdued  side  then tend to look down upon everything  they previously held sacred and  to ape customs which they regard  as superior.

The meeting  of two  persons from  different  cultural groups  or the  introduction of an  outsider  into  a  foreign  society  is thus  more  than  a  meeting   of  individuals: each  person  brings  with  him  the  essence of his whole  cultural group, its history and  prejudices, character and  instincts.
The influence  of  these  theories  can  be seen  throughout  Godfrey's stories.  In
"It's Going  to be a Good  Surruner There's a Wedding Every  Night  and  Mostly's

GODFREY's PROGRESS

Two" Godfrey re-creates the internal functions and relationships of a Manitoba railway  gang.  The  interloping  narrator   (a  teacher  with  Frontier  College)   des­ cribes the characters'  pleasures, desires and  ambitions  so as to suggest the  com­ pleteness and  consistency of their social and cultural  group.  In fact, the narrator is primarily  concerned  with  the  possibility that  he may  destroy  their  society by educating  them in the values of the larger Canadian society. "The Generation of Hunters" examines  the  relationship  between a father  and  a son  through  which values and  attitudes  are transmitted  from one generation  to the next. The  father  instructs his son, the future soldier, in the morality of hunting  by means of aphor­  isms: "Heart or head for hellshots; legs for the lazy; stomachs for sadists." This process of  moral  instruction  serves to  rigidify  behavioural  patterns   within  the society to such an extent  that,  as the narrator states at the end,  "there  are times when  you seem  conscious of observing inevitability."  "The  Hard-Headed Col­ lector," Godfrey's most anthologized story, is a very clear illustration  of the Lorenz theory  cited  in  the  epigraph  to  Godfrey's  collection  of stories.  A self-sufficient group  of  men  from  one  culture  gradually  distintegrates   as  the  group   passes through  the land  of a more technically advanced  people. A fruitful  mingling  of the  two  cultures  is  impossible. The  artisans  from  the  Queen  Charlotte Islands are  destroyed  before  they  can  employ  their  skills on  the  giant  tree,  Egsdrull, belonging  to  the other  civilization in order  to create  a  totem,  the  symbol  of a cultural identity.3
One of the most important aspects of these cultural  theories is their implication for the relationship  between an individual  and  his society, between  the  "I" and the "we."  In an early story entitled "Fragment" Godfrey  re-creates fictionally the day of Thomas  Scott's  execution  by Louis  Riel. Scott  is shown  to be a  person, not just an historical figure, but Godfrey preserves the episode's wider social signi­ ficance  by embodying  in  Scott  the  prejudices  of  a  culture  which  views  Riel's people as "savages."4  "Gossip:  The Birds that Flew, the Birds that  Fell" examines more closely the forces which  limit and  control  the  response of the  individual. Mrs. Wagwood, the small town gossip, personifies the vigilance of  social expecta­ tions as she watches over Mr. Courtney,  predicts  his reactions  to  the apartment development  and  interprets  all of his actions in the light of her own suppositions about  him. The  destruction  of the bush, the political machinations of the Reeve, the wife swapping  games of his son and  daughter-in-law and  his daughter's  plan to marry a Jew all coincide to bring the pressures of society to bear on Mr. Court­  ney. He cannot  defeat or escape from  these forces, and  he can  only respond  by shooting the two pheasants  in order  to save them from  a lingering  death  at  the hands of an encroaching  civilization.5
Hunting,   violence,  death   and  slaughter  are  central   to  many   of  Godfrey's stories. He seems to find in these irnages some key to the specific nature  of the conditioned  mentality  of his time.  Because he traces an  individual's instinct  for

29

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

violence  to  the  society  from  which  he  comes,  his  treatment of  these  subjects appears  extremely cold and analytical. The  title of his collection of stories, Death Goes Better with Coca-Cola,  reworks an advertising  jingle to juxtapose ironically two aspects of modern  culture: killing and  big business. This seemingly flippant attitude toward  death  appears  in such stories as "Mud  Lake:  If Any":

It is one of the  strangenesses of youth  that  you can  treat  a specific chance of death with  no  more  care  than  you'd  give  to your  old  Dinky  Toy,  that  one-inch,  green­ camouflaged British  Army  troop  lorry.

In  addition,  Godfrey  shows how individual  acts of violence may be sanctioned by a society. "Up in the  Rainforest" illustrates this point  by drawing  a  parallel between the assassination attempt  on the "Redeemer" and the white hunter beat­ ing his African  wife. In  "A  Python  of the Gaspe"  Godfrey  uses a small  fishing party as a miniature society to show how guilt feelings can be alleviated. Having  failed  to catch  any  large fish, the  men decide to kill some ducks which  eat fish eggs. Instead,  they  kill fourteen  of another  type.  Old  Alex,  the  guide  soothes their  pangs of conscience by placing the ducks in a fishing net and  telling them that  there is no reason to be excited:  " 'Now  if we were to see a  python  or an elephant,  that  might  be something  unusual.' "
It is by such  means that  cultural  characteristics  are re-inforced,  and  Godfrey
views the  relationship   between  generations  as  a  key to  their  transmission.  In "River  Two  Blind  Jacks"  a  "tall  tale"  told  by the  narrator's grandfather to a group  of children  serves to  teach  them  about  their  land  and  to  make  them  a part of a continuing  tradition. Likewise, in "Newfoundland Night"  a teacher comments on the futility of teaching children who are "only temporarily  students, permanently  the shadows and  rebirths of their fathers."  Because the family serves this function,  Godfrey  treats  parents  in his stories with special concern. To some extent,  they can  control  what  qualities of their culture will be communicated  to the next generation. Godfrey, however, usually shows parents acting in an  unfor­ tunate  manner.  Mr.  Courtney,  in "Gossip,"  tries to communicate  anti-Semitism to  his daughter, and  the soldier's  father  in  "The Generation  of  Hunters" only passes on bits of folk wisdom on hunting. Thus,  the one hope for change  Godfrey holds out is being abused in this generation.  Effective change can occur only by altering  the conditioned  behaviour  of a society, and  Godfrey  can see no one at­ tempting  to do this  through  the  only means  possible -the  creation  within  the family of a new system of values.



GODFREY most effectively conveys his attitude  to these pat­ terns of social behaviour  through  an ironic tone. A story such as "Fulfilling our Foray"   abounds   in  ironies:   the  white  hunter   in  modern  Africa;   the  "pure

GODFREY's PROGRESS

socialist" who brings back "an  object of worth and  beauty"; and  the  preference of young Africans for a musical group  that  plays electric guitars  bought  by the Minister  of Defence. Frequently,  he uses irony to undercut  the  reader's  reaction to an earlier part  of a story. In  "The  Winter Stiffs" the frankness  and  vulgarity of Finn's story may lead the reader to a harsh  judgment of his character, but  the narrator, back in the ostensibly more civilized Toronto,  points out  the hypocrisy which exists in the language  of cultured  people:

You know that gentle tone with which we in Toronto can say lady, when we mean, really, something entirely different.

Many of his ironic comments  arise from similar juxtapositions. In  "Fragment" Scott's story is interspersed  with  selections (ironic  in  their  optimism)   from  the journal  he is writing.  Mr. Courtney  in "Gossip" is reading  from  a history of the persecution of the Jews in fourteenth  century Strasbourg  while he himself is being persecuted. "The  Hard-Headed Collector" is interspersed  with selections from  a newspaper story about a more practical man of arts. Sometimes the intersection is achieved  by having a character  tell another story, as Mrs. Mier does in "On the River,"  or by framing  the story  with separate  pieces at  the  beginning  and  end, such as Godfrey does in "Two  Smiths," "Mud  Lake: If Any" and "The Genera­ tion of Hunters." Godfrey  does not dwell on these contrasts  or  comparisons;  he does not pedantically  explain  them.  Rather,  he allows the  reader  to search  out their significance.
The fact that many of these stories were written for the "Outdoors" column of Saturday  Night  may  help to account  in part  for the degree to which  they draw on personal experience.6  In  reviewing Death Goes Better with Coca-Cola  George Woodcock said that  the stories were on the "borderland between the factual  and the imagined," and  he referred  to Godfrey's "illuminated  realism" and  "lapidary craftsmanship."7   Robert  Cockburn  called  them  "short  stories  in  name  only."8
Not only does Godfrey  make  use of personal experience,  but  the  reader  usually
becomes aware of this and,  not surprisingly, identifies Godfrey  with  one of the characters,  usually the  narrator. "It's  Going to be a Good  Summer" draws  on Godfrey's experiences with  Frontier  College,9   and  the cynical  narrator  probably contains  some self-portraiture. The  narrator   of  the  framing  sections  of  "Two Smiths" reminds one of Godfrey's own assistance to draft evaders.10  The  narrator of "The Way We do it Here"11 helps to organize a lumber  camp strike in much the same manner  as Godfrey  did.12 This is not to say that  such  associations are always accurate or even productive. But the fact that they arise so readily indicates the extent to which Godfrey has reworked his own experience into fictional form. Whether or not he has avoided all the pitfalls of such a method is another  matter.
In a sense, one might consider Dave Godfrey's short stories to be the equivalent of another  writer's first novel:  the fictionalization  of personal  experience  in  an

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

intriguing  but  basically unsatisfying  manner.  Phyllis Grosskurth  approaches  this view when she comments on Godfrey's stories:

Technically  very competent,  they all seemed written  to a  formula,  the sort of writing which seems to emerge from creative writing courses.13

One senses an artificial manner  in many of the stories when the cool tone becomes frigid and  the patterned  structure turns stiff and  unwieldly. In  part  this may be due  to some difficulties with  language,  especially an  uncertainty in  the  use of images. As Alden Nowlan says, there are "bits of bad Hemingway," and  "many almost  embarrassingly  bad  similes and  metaphors."14   Such  phrasing  as, "I  felt like I lived in a house with a stopped-up toilet,"15  or "It  changed  as quickly as the sun-glints  off a  Finnish  girl shaking  out  her  hair  after  pulling  off a  hat  of fox fur,"16  is more  confusing  than  enlightening.  Imagery  can  be startling,  but  one wonders if in these instances  it was fully understood  or if all of its implications were considered.  Godfrey simply seems too self-conscious in many  of his stories. His use of personal experience,  his constant concern for the moral  position of the narrator (especially in "The Winter  Stiffs" and  "It's Going to be a Good Sum­ mer")   and  his highly idiosyncratic  use of images prevent him from stepping out­ side his stories and  achieving  the distanced  perspective he seems  to desire. Only in "The Hard-Headed Collector"  does he begin to gain this distance.  By creating an imaginative  world of parable  and allegory, he permits the reader to accept the story  as an  objective  literary  entity,  open  to  investigation  and  discussion. The unsolved problem in many of his short stories, however, is to gain this perspective while still employing  materials  gathered  from  personal experience:   to unite  the immediacy  of experience with  the objectivity of  the literary artifact.

0AVE GODFREY  accomplishes this, and  much  more, in The New Ancestors. The same general thematic concerns found in the short stories are present in the novel, but  Godfrey greatly expands and  clarifies them.  Moreover,
he displays a technical  mastery of the large-scale, complex patterns  of the longer novel form. In part,  Godfrey accomplishes this by employing a wider imaginative scope  and  richer,  more  expressive  language.  Both  the  reportorial   attitude   to experience and the stark, Hemingway-like language of the short stories are almost entirely eliminated.  Instead,  Godfrey has written a totally imaginative  work based on a confident, evocative prose style.
The  influence of the cultural  theories of Konrad  Lorenz can again  be found in
Godfrey's work. The  importance of instinctive behaviour, the conditioning  power of history and  the weaknesses of reason and  idealism are  illustrated  in  the  con­ flicting  political  philosophies  propounded  by the politicians of Lost Coast.  Both Michael  Burdener  and  First  Samuels  believe that  the  road  to  the  ideal  Lost

32

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

Coast  state  lies in rational analysis  and  empirical action.  Burdener, as a scientist, tells his students not  to act  according to myth:

'But if you probe, if you question and act according to discoveries not according  to myths, you can construct  a civilisation which will make theirs look like the mask it is.'

Being an  idealist,  he, along  with  First Samuels,  is not satisfied  with  the slow  pro­ gress of historical  forces. First  Samuels,  impatient with  the government, longs for the  continuation of the  revolutionary struggle:

'Our  brothers  have  become too tame,  too comfortable,  too quickly.... What  we need, it seems to me ... is a new series of direct confrontations, direct  actions,  to rekindle the struggle.'

In  the  long  run,  he wishes to sever  the  country's historical  roots,  as  he  indicates when  he speaks  of the students who  oppose  him:

'If they lived in this town for  twenty years-if  they have lived for  twenty  years free of their  ancestors-they would be more serious, you know,'

and  then  to establish  new ancestral lines:

'Perhaps  the  thing  to do is to start  many  families, Biney. Start  many  families.  I
am serious.'

On  the other  hand, Kofi Kruman, the Redeemer, has attempted to associate him­ self with  the myths and  religion of ancient  Africa,  and  even First  Samuels experi­  ences  the  effectiveness  of the  technique:

it was the attack  upon  the old man which went somehow-no matter how easily his mind accepted  the necessity-went against some fear and  restraint  which  had been cored  into  his very being, as though  they would  be breaking  creation  itself by breaking  Kasepreko.... It was only a  trick of dialectics,  this  trick  by which Kruman had linked himself up with that sense of deification for the  past.

By the end  of the novel it is evident  that  only through the acceptance and  utiliza­ tion of these cultural forces will the  lives of the  people  be altered. As the cabinet  minister  Obatala states,  the  real  threat  to  Kruman comes  from  the  tribal  chiefs and   their  sons  who  " 'trace their  ancestors   back  as  far  as  any  Englishman.' " Myth  and  religion  will prove  more  powerful  than  reason  and  idealism.
The implications of these  theories  are  again  embodied in  the  relationship  be­ tween  individuals and  their  society. The novel  is  designed  to  explore both  the personal  agony  of an  Ama  Burdener and  the  political  situation of a newly  inde­  pendent country. In  fact,  Godfrey  implies  that  the  personal  and  social  levels are indivisible: Ama's suffering  stems  directly  from  her  associations  with  the  major political  figures.
In  this regard, the concept of synergy is very important for  Dave  Godfrey. He


33

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

has described a high synergy society as one in which "the  individual  by the same act and at the same time serves his own advantage  and that  of the group."17  Such a society is non-aggressive, as opposed to a low synergy society (like the  United States)  which is obsessed with winners and losers and in which one man succeeds only at the expense  of another's failure.  Furthermore, Godfrey  holds that  "any colonial situation  . . . represents  the  imposition  of low-synergy conditions  upon the colonized.ms Lost Coast,  therefore, is a society attempting to shift from low to high synergy, to create a state in which an individual acts for the benefit of the whole.  Gamaliel  Harding, as  spokesman  for  the  movement,  tells  the  market women about  what  "we  must"  do, but they see it only in terms of their  historic individualism:

History  went  far  back  for  them  and  it was always  the  same.  'We  must'  meaning you must. Chiefs  declaring war  for sport,  war  for  slaves. White-frocks explaining slavery in terms  of the  expansion of civilisation.

The  Redeemer  cult  and  the  plan  for  African  union  indicate  the  government's desire to bring  the "I" into  an  ever closer relationship  with  the  "we."  But the key opposition figures continue  to respond as individuals.  Michael  Burdener is a foreign parasite who lives off the energy of Africa:

And so I will return to Africa,  because there is something there  I can say yes to.... And  I need  to say yes to something at  this  moment. I need  to say yes. After  all, now, finally,  I know  myself.

More importantly, First Samuels leads a counter-revolution  based ultimately on personal greed, not social consciousness:

This  time  he would  not  be left behind  by the Gamaliels and  the  Azaccas. The  past would  not  hold  him  back  again....

He hated  all this luxury. But why should  fate  hand  it out  to Eban  and  not  to him?

Even Ama Burdener,  who is opposed to both political groups, places her hope in an individualistic  solution,  personal love, rather  than social salvation.
A low-synergy society, based on aggression, is especially conducive  to violence.
Godfrey  no  longer  works  through  the  hunting  metaphor  found  in  his stories. Instead,   he  presents  directly  the  conflicts between  human   beings  which  arise from  their  instinct  for  violence. The  primary  source of violence in  the  novel is not  the  government  but  the  low-synergy group  led by First  Samuels. They  use assassination and  bombing  to gain their ends, and  the government  only responds to their actions. The  fundamental tendency to violence in the society appears  in the three mob scenes in which someone is beaten:  Burdener,  Frantz  and  Gama­ liel. In  each  instance,  the  mob,  conditioned  by life in  a  low-synergy,  colonial society, attacks  in order  to defend  the individual  interests that  it feels  are being endangered.

34

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

Thus,  violent action  always emerges from the depths  of an  individual's  being, not from rational intent. First Samuels and Burdener seem to abandon their politi­ cal shrewdness as they enter into plans for direct action. For Samuels, his relations with Norah,  which parallel his plans for violence, indicate  his surrender to blind, instinctive passions:

he made love to her violently ... so that he could slide back into the past and be overcome by her again, so that he could sing into the blindness.

Likewise, Burdener  says, "Let  perception flee -it had  fled before-and simply act." Phyllis Grosskurth has described the effect of the novel as being "sucked into a maelstrom":

into the inner volcano of man's darker being to a level where sunlight never pene­ trates; where we are forced to acknowledge that hell bears a startling resemblance to commonplace reality.19

The  manner  in which Godfrey links violence to man's  inner  drives and  passions is in large  part  responsible for this  effect. Unlike  the  world  of his short  stories, where violence is cold and dispassionate, violence in Godfrey's novel is deeply emotional, at times almost hypnotically ritualized. In the section entitled  "In  the Fifth  City," for example,  the repeated  killing of Rusk  becomes an act  detached from physical, historical  reality and transformed  into imaginative,  mythic  ritual. The  reader  cannot  even be certain  that  any of the  acts of violence described  in this section actually  occurred,  because the possibility that  Rusk left the  country by plane is never discounted.
As in his stort stories, Godfrey shows how the family operates to transmit  social
instincts. He  has stated  that  he brought  back from Africa a sense of "the deter­ minism that is built up in a family from generation to generation,"20 and his novel contains a complex web of family relationships, a web drawn  even tighter  by the late revelation that Samuels may be Gamaliel's and Ama's half-brother. The  very title of the  book, The  New Ancestors, indicates the  centrality  of the  problem  of ancestry of Godfrey. None of the main characters can trace  his ancestry very far back. In fact, no one can get beyond his own parents. Michael Burdener  has only an  insane  father   (called  Mr.  Buxton)  for  a  family,  and  Ama  points  out  the consequences:

One man, his whole family only one man;  no wonder he's mad....  What  is a man without elders, without ancestors? ... where is the man, where is the society he has ever respected?

But Ama herself is cut off from her ancestors because she "adopted" Mr. Awot­
chwi as her father  and  because she is unable to see beyond her mother:

what did she know of herself, of her ancestors, of her inner trickeries? Nothing....

35

GODFREY'S PROGRESS


She couldn't get  beyond  her  own  mother. Delicacy  was time. Delicacy  was a long, high,  thick  wall against time.

First Samuels cannot  even be sure of his father's  identity, and  Gamaliel  Harding became an outcast from his family when he ran away to America.
Even more importantly, these characters are cut off from the future generations. Burdener's  first son, Cricket,  dies young, and  he appears  to abandon Ama  with his other children  who never seem to register on his consciousness. Gamaliel dis­ owns his son, Kwame  Bird, who later  runs away in a manner  reminiscent  of his father. This latter  case is made especially pointed by Gamaliel's earlier regard  for his son as the fulfilment  of ancestral  hopes:

Gamaliel smiles  at  this  display  of  memory,   as  though   Delicacy   has  been  made whole again, recreated in the image  of her grandson, her long  years of deprivation and  struggle  rewarded with  gold and  flesh rather than  madness.




l:E TITLE, The  New  Ancestors, is, therefore, open to a dual interpretation. It  refers both to the new ancestry the characters  create  for  them­ selves and to the fact that  they will become ancestors for future generations.  The  people of Lost Coast have broken from their colonial past  through  a revolution, and  now they seek to re-establish their cultural  identity in the ideals  of African union, the Redeemer cult, political action or personal love. For them, "new ances­ tors" must  remain  a  paradox  because they attempt  to  use something  "new" to replace something  which only time can create. But while searching  for their own ancestors they are at the same time becoming the ancestors of future  generations. After their break from a colonial past, they have the opportunity  to establish new ancestral  lines, but  the  opportunity is largely  ignored or  abused.  Both Burdener and  Gamaliel  place hope in the sons they eventually destroy; even the Redeemer is insistent that  Ama  not bear  any children by him. At the end of the novel, we have  no hope for the future  of  Lost Coast and  its people:  they  are  all trapped  within  paradoxes.  Those  representing  the forces of individualism,  who seek im­ mediate, ideal solutions  ( Burdener, Samuels),  are defeated by the forces of ances­ tral and social cohesion  (e.g., the Kruba  dam workers). Those who are attempt­ ing  to  create  a  high-synergy  society  through   association  with  ancient   Mrica  (Gamaliel, Kruman) are confronted  by the strong instinct for individualism  and social pluralism still present in the people (e.g., the market women and the tribal chiefs). Nor can the problems simply be ignored, as Ama Burdener discovers when political  affairs  destroy the  safety island  of personal love she  has  created.  The people of Lost Coast, therefore, are both destroying their old ancestors and failing to create new ones.

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

An ironic  tone continues  to be Godfrey's primary  technique  for  commenting on his material. The  theme of ancestry is put in this perspective by passages such as Burdener's  description  of Peggy Neal's room:

Three wigs sitting  on plastic  heads  about  the silent room. Like statues of her ances­ tors. But faceless, mysteryless. One black. One  silvery. One  lank  and  asiatic.... Is that  her  past?  Where is his.

Similarly, the "new ancestors" of the people of Lost Coast are  plastic and  sterile in their  newness, despite the  devotion  given to them.  Lesser ironies appear as a recurring  motif throughout the novel:  the strident  nationalism  of politicians,  but their  dependence  and  pride  in  "Pepsi",  "Carnation" and  light  standards  "Im­ ported from Germany"; Kofi Kruman, the Redeemer, acting the role of  an Afri­ can slave dealer;  Gamaliel Harding, the spokesman of the new Africa, acting  the role of General Stanley; and  Ama's description of Michael as "the David  Living­ ston of the Liberation  movement". Godfrey's concept of the entire political situa­ tion is fundamentally ironic. First Samuels states his belief that it is through  action, not words, that  the revolution will succeed:

He  had  learned  and  Gamaliel hadn't; it was that  simple.... He  knew  the  people now would  respond  only to actions; all you could  set up against Kasepreko's lying, greedy  actions  were your own  unlying,  ungreedy  actions.

The irony here is that  both rhetoric and action fail:  Gamaliel's words are rejected by the market women and Samuels' act of bombing is opposed  by the workers. It is also evident that  Samuels'  potential  revolution would not have  made  any sub­ stantial  change in Lost Coast, that  he was motivated  by a  "counter-greed"  and not a "counter-pride." Godfrey wishes to emphasize the complexities of the situa­ tion,  the  difficulty of ever  believing entirely what  any  one  character states.  He does not want to present Lost Coast as an ideal revolutionary state;  he emphasizes instead  its  inner  contradictions and  imperfections.  While  teaching   in  Ghana,  Godfrey says that  he felt "driven  to encourage cynicism as well as understanding, the  sardonic  as well as the  interpretative remark."21   The  ironies  of  The  New Ancestors bring the reader to much the same attitude.
Just as in his short stories, Godfrey achieves many of these ironic effects through the use of intersection.  For example, the  presentation  of Ama's  point  of view in "A  Child  of  Delicacy"  put   Michael  Burdener  into  a  sharper   focus  than   he appeared  in "The  London  Notebook."  The frequent  use of epigraphs  also serves to clarify some events and  make others more complex. The  whole purpose of the opening section, "A  Prologue," is summarized in the epigraph  from  David  Levy, "Dullness, after all, is the garment of  nightmare," which indicates  that  there  is turmoil  and  anguish  under  the calm exterior witnessed by the  British expatriate community.  The  use of untranslated African language  in the epigraphs  and  the text may at first seem rather  arrogant  and unfair. But it does suggest the integrity

37

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

of  the  culture  being  described  and  the  deeper  levels of  mystery  in  the society which the outsider cannot  penetrate. These texts are effective even if they are not enlightening.
One section of the novel which may also appear  to be more effective than en­ lightening  is "In  the  Fifth  City."  Its  hallucinatory,  surrealistic  quality  is  highly suggestive of a dream  or a drugged  experience  (the  graphic  symbol  attached  to the  section  appears  to  be a  poppy). Time  and  event  are  warped  and  multi­ layered:

think only of the voyage which awaits you, which searches for you, which lusts for you, and yet which possesses you tomorrow as it possesses you yesterday as it  pos­ sesses you today.

The section is given no date,  and a number  of events, most notably the killing of Rusk, are presented in terms of a series of possibilities rather  than  a definite state­ ment. The  recurring  camera  images help to create the sense in which events can be run  backward  or forward, or, as in a movie, restaged and filmed in a different manner.   This  is  particularly  emphasized   with  Rusk  watching   "the  delayed sequence television screen" and the earlier description of Rusk's mind in cinematic terms:
Rusk's thoughts as the throng moves toward him remain caught where they were;
the reel will not turn forward anthe film begins to burn.

When  placed in  the  context  of the novel as a whole, the  region of the  Fifth City  appears  to  be some  form  of parallel,  imaginative  reality to  the  reality  of Lost Coast.  It is located  in  Mali,  the  historically significant  area  of " 'the  old kingdoms of this continent,' " containing  " 'the  knowledge depositories of  Tim­ buctoo.' " In  fact,  a rather  curious set  of parallels is drawn  between  the  major characters  of  the  novel  and  the  characters  in  the  Fifth  City.  The  Englishman Burr  obviously  relates  to  Michael  Burdener;  Donalda  has some  parallels  with Ama;  El Amaliel possesses some of the characteristics of Gamaliel Harding; and Effez parallels  First Samuels.  "In  the Fifth  City",  therefore, offers the  reader  a totally imaginative  commentary  on the "realistic"  actions of  the characters  in the main  body of the novel. It  possesses an allegorical power similar  to that  of "The  Hard-Headed Collector", in which the imagined  experiences of the artists com­ ment  upon the factual  material  in the newspaper story.
Thus,  Dave  Godfrey  makes  different  use of  his personal  experiences  in  this novel than he did in most of his short stories. In 1968 he wrote in an introduction to three of his stories:

I'm bored with plots in stories.... I dream a lot of language now, just language, not character  or  background  or  narrative  flow, just language.  And  experience doesn't really teach you anything, I can see that now.... And so I try and grab hold of language.22

GODFREY'S PROGRESS

The  New Ancestors is not an example  of "completely  invented  fiction,"23   but  it does reveal a more  imaginative  use of experience. One  cannot  identify  Godfrey with  any  of the  novel's  characters  because  he establishes a  considerable  ironic distance  between himself and  all of them, especially Michael  Burdener.  Godfrey also takes the considerable risk of attempting  to portray African minds, to present a  perspective   which   he  cannot   have  experienced   personally.   Shifting   time sequences and the appearance of the conclusion as a prologue effectively undercut the  plot  with  a sense of  the  inevitable.  "In   the  Fifth  City",  in  fact,  makes  a mockery of conventional  plot structures  by presenting one character  dying in five different  ways.
But it is the quality of the language  in the novel which truly sets it apart  from the short  stories. Godfrey  abandons cold, terse, unadorned   prose for  an  impas­ sioned,  richly  textured,  expressive means of communication. A  keener  sense  of prose rhythms, a delight in the accumulation  of detail, an invocation  of  meaning  through  repetition  and  a linking of incident  through  the association of  words all serve to create Godfrey's personal style. He uses words much more freely, without imposing some foreign standard of starkness on his active imagination. He  now gives us a series of phrases rather  than one or two coldly analytical  words:

The  justified, justified, justified, final, fear-ending, awe-ending, hatred-ending, love-ending, betrayal-ending, life-ending, shame-ending blow is struck  with  the sphere a dead weight in his hand, up into the air and then hard down upon the neck-joining-head flesh and gristle and Gamaliel's flesh joined in the death-blow that  sends soothing pain  from  his bruised knuckles, his torn  palm,  shuddering through his shoulder backward, inward against the empoisoning to his dissolving fury, his dissolving heart.

Godfrey has gained control over his images;  they are no longer embarrassing  or confusing. Even such  an  "embarrassing" image  as Ricky Goldman's  description of the girl's legs as "the  colour of melted Hershey bars",  reflects the character of the speaker  rather  than  of the author. The imaginative  power of Dave Godfrey's language  in this novel is the surest indicator  of his escape from  the  confines of personal experience and introspection. Stark, reportorial prose would be incapable of embodying the possibilities Godfrey has imagined.
The  New  Ancestors, therefore,  marks an  important point  in  Dave  Godfrey's
career as a writer. His earlier short stories show us his concern for man's  position within his culture and Godfrey's technique of ironic commentary,  but these stories also reveal the limited scope of his imagination  and  the restricted  quality  of his prose. The  New  Ancestors picks up  the same  fundamental cultural  and  social themes and employs many similar ironic devices, but the range of Godfrey's ima­ gination  beyond his personal experiences and  the power of the language  he  uses to express himself indicate  the considerable achievement  this novel  represents.

39

GODFREY'S PROGRESS


NOTES

1 Articulating  West  (Toronto: new press, 1972), pp. 216-33·
2  In  Bill McWhinney and  Dave  Godfrey,  eds., Man  Deserves Man:  CUSO   in De­
veloping Countries  (Toronto: Ryerson  Press,  rg68), p. 423.
3 Dave  Godfrey has  commented extensively  on  this  story  in  two  recent  interviews. See,  "Dave Godfrey:  Myths  and  Gardens," in  Donald   Cameron,  Conversations with Canadian  Novelists:  Part Two  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1973), pp.  34-47;  and Graeme Gibson,  Eleven  Canadian  Novelists  (Toronto: Anansi,  n.d.), pp.  151-79· See also, W. H.  New, "Godfrey's Uncollected Artist," Ariel, 4, No.3 (July  1973),
5•15-
4  Canadian  Forum, No. 39  (January rg6o), pp.  228-30.
Tamarack  Review, No. 30  (Winter rg64), pp. 3-22.
6 Eight  such stories  appeared between  November rg66 and  November rg67. All but two were reprinted in Death Goes Better with Coca-Cola.
1 Canadian  Literature, No. 38  (Autumn rg68), pp. gr-g3.
8 Robert Cockburn, rev. of  Death Goes Better with  Coca-Cola, Fiddlehead,  No. 76 (Spring rg68), pp.  78-79·
9  See Graeme Gibson,  Eleven Canadian  Novelists, p. 164.
10 See Donald  Cameron, "The Three People  Inside  Dave  Godfrey," Saturday  Night,
September 1971, p. 22.
11 In  Death Goes Better, pp.  93-102.
uSee Cameron, "The Three People  Inside  Dave  Godfrey," p.  22.
13 Canadian  Forum, No. 51  (April-May 1971), p.  r6.
14 Rev.  of  Death  Goes  Better  with  Coca-Cola, Canadian  Forum,  No.  47    (March rg68), p. 282.
15 "The Generation of Hunters," p. 13.
16 "An  Opening Day," in Death Goes Better, p. 17.
11  "Doomsday Idealism," p. 424.  See  also  his comments in  Donald Cameron, Con- versations with  Canadian  Novelists: Part Two, pp. 40-42.
18  "Doomsday Idealism," p. 425.
19  Grosskurth, p.  r6.
2° Cited  by Robert Weaver, rev. of The  New  Ancestors, Macleans,  February  1971,
p. 57·
21 Dave  Godfrey, "Letter from  Africa  to an  American Negro," Man  Deserves Man, p.  212.  Ths   article  originally appeared  in  Tamarack   Review,   No.  38   (Winter rg66), pp. 57-80.
zz New Canadian  Writing  1968 (Toronto: Clarke  Irwin, rg68), p. 140.
23   Weaver, p. 59·

LE JOUAL  COMME LANGUE LITTERAIRE


Robert Major



AVANT MiME QUE  n'existe  nne littiratme quCbecoise, IO<
ecrivains d'ici mettaient  en question la langue de nos futurs ecrits. Nous avons, en
effet,  toute  une  tradition  d'interrogations angoissees sur  la  langue  litteraire  a
employer au Canada fran<;ais. Puisque nous ne parlions  ni iroquois  ni huron  et
puisqu'il etait  impossible d'avoir  une langue  bien a nous, le probleme  s'est  tou­ jours ramene  aux  difficultes d'incorporer  des particularismes  d'ici  a  une  norme venue  d'ailleurs.   Les  classes  instruites  canadiennes-fran<;aises  ayant   toujours pratique le nationalisme comme une vertu et ce nationalisme s'etant pendant  long­ temps manifeste, en litrerature,   par le souci de maintenir  ou  de  ressusciter des traditions,  ou de raconter  les us et coutumes de la classes  populaire  (la  paysan­ nerie),  on s'est continuellement heurte  au dilemme  du  realisme litteraire: com­ ment faire parler ces gens d'une  fa<;on vraisemblable.
Jusqu'a un certain  point, la querelle du  joual n'est que la continuation de ce vieux debat  de la langue  litteraire  a employer au Quebec.  Mais cette querelle a
ceci de particulier  qu'en  changeant  declasse sociale, en quittant la  paysannerie pour inregrer la proletariat, la langue  populaire  a perdu  l'appui des classes diri­ geantes. Le  noble  parler  du  paysan  a  cede la  place  au  jargon  meprisable  des ouvriers qui s'attire  la persecution  des milieux d'enseignement,  des libraires,  des divers organismes d'etat. C'est done dire que !'utilisation  du  joual comme langue litteraire  est plus qu'un probleme  litteraire  ou linguistique.  Jasmin  dira  que  les "fr!lllcophilimaniaques  sont genes, non par la langue  de  certains  livres de Parti pris, mais par les themes, les sujets, le paysage de la  pauvrete.  'Cachez  done  ce sein .. .' "1 Cette opinion a le merite d'insister sur la dimension socio-politique de la querelle du  joual  (les beaux  mots sont  apres  tout une  fa<;on d'exorciser  une realite deplaisante)' mais  elle oublie  trop  facilement  que  la  langue  que  nous parlons a ere et est toujours  un veritable complexe national.

Definition  du  joual

LE TERME a ete invente  par Andre  Laurendeau  dans un editorial  du  Devoir  du
2 r  octobre 1959, et vraiment  lance par le frere  Untel  dans ses Insolences. Pour

LE  JOUAL

celui-ci, "joual" est  un  tenne de  mepris  pour  designer  la  pauvrete   du  parler fran ais
eclatante,  notre inaptitude .a nous affinner, notre refus de l'avenir,  notre obsession du  passe, la faiblesse de notre culture. Grace au frere Untel, le mot a connu  une fortune  extraordinaire, mais aussi une extension qui l'a presque vide de tout con­ tenu. Le joual est devenu  tout  ce qui n'est pas du "bon" fran ais.
une  definition  aussi vague  et  aussi vaste  on  ne s'entend  pas,  car  Victor-Levy
Beaulieu affirme que, pour lui, "le  joual, c'est toute, y compris le fran  ais."2   Cette confusion regrettable  est a la source de bien des malentendus.  Les linguistes ont
bien raison d'eviter ce terme. Comment une metonymie pourrait-elle fonder un discours scientifique?
Dans  cette etude,  le joual designera !'utilisation  litreraire  du  parler  populaire des classes ouvrieres du  Quebec  mais surtout  de la ville de Montreal,  parler  qui a certes des racines paysannes et qui manifeste les caracteristiques  de tout  parler populaire,  mais qui a aussi subi la forte influence de l'adstrat  americain.

Grandeurs et miseres du  joual

LA 6E  RENCONTRE des Ecrivains,  en mais  1968, fut !'occasion  pour  un  certain nombre  d'ecrivains  et  de critiques  de  reflechir ensemble sur  la  phenomene  du joual. L'interet  de cet echange  est qu'il s'est fait entre ceux qui sont  a l'origine du  mouvement  du  joual et qui  en sont, encore aujourd'hui, les meilleurs theori­ ciens. Les redacteurs  de Parti  pris, apres avoir lance le mouvement,  ont pu expli­ quer  clairement  sa nature  ideologique et ne se sont pas fait d'idees sur sa portee litteraire.  La surestimation  du  joual sera surtout  le fait  d'une  autre  generation d'ecrivains et de toute  une serie de badaucls de la litterature.  11 est a noter egale­ ment que cette reflexion n'avait  rien de definitif, bien que la  plupart  des partici­ pants  a  cette  rencontre  aient  parle  du  joual comme d'un  phenomene  deja  au passe. Cette  meme  annee,  Michel  Tremblay  devait  relancer  le debat  avec  Les Belles Soeurs.
La  litterature pour  le  groupe  Parti   pris avait  un  "role  eminent   a  jouer": "eclairer  la situation  reelle:  d'une  part les gens du peuple quebecois et deuxieme­ ment  la  langue  qu'ils  parlaient.   ( ... )  11 s'agissait  de montrer  les  chases  telles qu'elles etaient,  d'utiliser  la langue  telle qu'elle se parlait."3  Le joual avait  done un double  but. Tout  d'abord   d'essayer de faire le lien entre l'homme  d'ici, son milieu et la langue  qu'il  parle,  et ensuite de provoquer une  reflexion socio-poli­ tique. C'est ainsi que Gaston  Miron,  reflechissant sur sa  propre  experience dans le milieu ambivalent  de Sainte-Agathe,  decrit  le divorce  alienant  qui  existe, au niveau de la langue  et de la culture  quebecoises, entre le "dedans", la vie intime et familiale en fran($ais, et le "dehors"' le monde exrerieur et anglais.

Ou bien on continue de former des hommes comme a,

42

LE JOUAL

eux-memes, ou bien on les rend adequats a la realite. Le joual a ete justement cette espece de solution de desespoir et aussi de compassion, d'amour, pour  rendre ade­
quat  un  homme a son milieu et a sa realite ... on a essaye d'objectiver, de faire
voir, de montrer  aux gens ce qu'ils etaient.  Ils etaient  vus:  ou ils s'acceptaient ou ils devaient  changer  et on en est toujours a se demander  si on doit  s'accepter ou
changer.4

Mais  Miron  estime que le Quebec n'a  pas la masse linguistique pour  pousser  dans le sens  du  joual.  C'est  aussi !'opinion du  sociologue  Jean-Charles Falardeau qui estime qu'il  doit y avoir,  au  Quebec, dialectique du  joual et du  franc_;ais.

Nous sommes dans une aventure  de recherche d'une  identite.  Le phenomene  joual represente  un  effort  ultime  de  possession du  fond  de  nous-memes,  ce  qui  nous exprime  de  fac;on viscerale, de  fac;on tres spontanee.   ( ...)   Et  je vois le  pheno­ mene  de !'utilisation  et  de la civilisation  du  joual  comme  une  sorte  de  therapie  collective, d'une  psychanalyse que nous avons faite de nous-memes, qui nous a fait
voir, a partir  du  fond  de nous-memes,  notre  fond  d'ou  il faut  surgir,  qu'il  faut
assumer mais qui n'est pas une fin en soi, qui est un cui de sac si l'on s'y compla.lt,
si l'on y demeure.5

Ainsi le  joual  serait  une  espece  de  catharsis entreprise par  un  groupe de  jeunes ecrivains. 11 y aurait, toutefois,  le danger de surestimer le joual,  ainsi  que  le fait Michele   Lalonde lorsqu'elle dit  que  le  joual  "est  ce  qu'on a  de  plus  precieux cornme materiau en tant  qu'ecrivain du point de vue de !'invention et du langage"6
et qui cite a l'appui la merveilleuse invention verbale  que peut faire  Hubert Aquin
a partir du  juron.  Les ecrivains de  Parti pris ne s'etaient jamais  livres  a une  telle
surestimation. Ils avaient conscience  qu'ecrire en  joual, cetait  poser  un geste poli­ tique,  c'etait avant  tout  dresser  le poing. Le joual etait  politique avant  d'etre lit­ teraire. Parti pris affirmait  avec force que vouloir  changer la langue sans changer la societe  ou  sauver  la  langue sans  le peuple  etait  une  fumisterie.7    Le  probleme etait  politique avant tout  et !'alienation quebecoise  exigeait  une reponse  radicale: socialisme,  independance, laicisme.
Realisme litteraire, catharsis, recherche et  mise  a nu,  en  blasphemant, d'une identite douleureuse et d'une existence malheureuse, geste politique: c'est  a Gerald
Godin  qu'il  revient  d'exprimer cela de la fac_;on la plus lapidaire:

cette langue etait en positif et est encore en positif le decalque  de notre  originalire en terre d'Amerique.  Et en negatif le reflet de notre situation  de colonises.8

jacques Renaud

CELUI QUI  ETAIT en grande partie responsable  de toute  la querelle du  joual  avant que  Tremblay ne devienne le plus  illustre  Joualonais etait  Jacques Renaud. En
1964,  avec son petit  livre  Le Casse, il avait  non setllement  fait  sensation, il avait
aussi  cree  une  oeuvre  d'une reelle  valeur  litteraire. On  sait  peu  de  chases  de
Renaud lui-rn.Cme. Dans  une  interview avec  Jean  Bouthillette, toutefois,  il s'est


43

LE  JOUAL

explique sur l'epoque du  Casse et son etat  d'esprit au  moment de sa composition. C'etait avant tout, pour  lui,  une  periode  tragique, chargee d'angoisse. Bien qu'il n'ait pas participe comme tel aux  evenements de ce temps, il avait  une conscience aigue  des  heures  troubles et  des dechirements penibles  de  la societe  quebecoise: chOmage, bombes du  FLQ, alienation de la jeunesse.

Et  pendant  trois jours et  trois nuits, j'ai ecrit, ne m'arretant que pour  manger. Et ta sorti d'un  jet, comme dans le livre:  mon horreur  de la societe, rna solitude, rna misere physique et  morale,  rna revolte contre  le fait  qu'il  y ait  des riches et des pauvres, contre  la femme  et !'amour  irrealisable. J'ai  tout  crache.  J'etais  le Casse et  je frappais.  Si  je n'avais  pas ecrit ce livre, le vrai Bouboule  je l'aurais  tue. Et d'autres . . . [...]  J'etais  au  bout de mon rouleau. J'avais  tout mis dans le Casse, qui fut comme !'experience de l'enfer.9

Andre Major a done  raison  d'insister sur le fait que  Le Casse soit en grande partie une catharsis qui  a valeur  de document social.

Renaud,   lui,  voulait  non  pas  renouveler  la  langue  fran taise,  ce  qu'il  n'eut  ose faire, mais temoigner d'une  realite sociale qui l'ecoeurait.  Qu'on fasse de son livre une  oeuvre  de  styliste  l'agacerait beaucoup.   Il  a  produit   un  document   social,
comme Lemelin, mais a cette difference pres qu'il ecrit comme parlent  ses person­
nages.10

Laurent Girouard l'affirme aussi,  d'une fa($on un  peu  plus  brutale: "La  marde depouillee de son exotisme  dans  la face des bourgeois. Sans distinction." 11  Renaud lui-meme, d'ailleurs, n'a  guere  insiste sur la langue  ou le style du Casse:

Avec le recul, je dirais que Le Casse est une oeuvre maudite.  C'est de l'art,  mais  a rebours, si je puis dire. C'est  de l'art  parce qu'il  y a creation,  recuperation  de la realite  par  l'imaginaire. Mais  en meme  temps c;a  nie l'art.  Le Casse est nihiliste. C'est  un  moment  de rna vie. Et  quant  au  joual, sur lequel  on a  beaucoup  glose, ce n'est surtout  pas un  style mais un  mode de penser, un  mode  d'etre.  Le  joual, c'est plus que le seul langage  du Casse, c'est sa condition  de paria.  Le joual est le
langage a la fois de la revolte et de la soumission, de la colere et de !'impuissance.
C'est un non-langage  et une denonciationY

Mais  il ne  faut   pas  toujours se fier  revelations  des ecrivains, surtout  lorsqu'­
ils parlent d'eux-memes. Car  d'un core, Renaud voudrait nous  faire  croire  qu'il n'a  guere  reflechi  a Ia  langue de  son  recit  qui  s'est  imposee  d'elle-meme, tout
naturellement:

On a pense que j'avais premedite  un livre en joual. Je ne m'etais meme pas apen;u que c'etait  en  joual. C'etait un livre en plusieurs languesY

Mais  par  ailleurs,  il admet que !'elaboration de Ia langue  du  Casse fut  un labeur conscient, une  recherche de styliste qui  essayait d'atteindre un objectif,  d'obeir a
des imperatifs de  realisme  psychologique et litteraire et d'honnetete  intellectuelle.


44

LE  JOUAL

J'ai commence a ecrire par reaction a tout ce qui etait etranger ici. ( ...)  Le lien se faisait mal entre ce que j'entendais tous les jours, dans la rue et au restaurant,
et ce que j'ecoutais a la radio ou lisais. Alors je me suis mis a transcrire phonetique­
ment les conversations, a traduire du fran ais
qui etait volontaire est devenu nature!. A cette epoque, je n'aurais pas pu ecrire en
bon fran ais.14

Des fois je m'avance voluptueusement dans une phrase bien tourm!e, tout ce qu'il
y a de bien fran ais,
lune en Gaspesie, beaux comme une fille de seize ans. Puis je me retracte.  Je la
triture, je la brise, je la concasse la phrase, je ne sais pas pourquoi. C'est peut-etre
la peur que j'ai de plonger dans le crachoir du faux. Parce que les beaux mots, on
s'en sert surtout pour amadouer ses futures victimes. Vous connaissez le true. Et si
c'etait de l'hypocrisie, les beaux mots, les belles phrases, l'esthetisme, les catins? 15

Deliberement,  Renaud  a done  essaye de trouver  le mot  juste, le style precis qui ferait  le mieux  vivre ses personnages, les exprimerait  avec le plus de  vigueur  et forcerait le lecteur a vivre de l'interieur  leur revolte, leur soumission, leur douleur. S'identifiant a eux, i1 reclame d'ailleurs pour lui le droit ala meme langue qu'eux, puisque lui aussi est montrealais  et que sa revolte ne s'exprime  pas naturellement dans  la  "langue de  Camus".16  Dans  cette  recherche  d'un  langage  authentique, Renaud  reconnait  certains  devanciers,  Laberge surtout,  mais aussi Gauvreau et Richard  qui ont produit  des oeuvres fortes et valables. Ces ecrivains ont transche le pseudo-dilemme  de la langue  litteraire  a employer au Quebec  en faisant  con­ fiance a leur  poussee creatrice  et en se disant  que le talent  precede  toujours  Ia correction  jusqu'a  ce qu'un grand  ecrivain vienne resoudre la question.
Les trois jours et trois nuits de la redaction  du Casse furent  done  un moment de cristallisation:  sous l'effet d'une  crise profonde, I'oeuvre est sortie "comme  un jet",  mais pendant  assez longtemps  Renaud  avait  muri  et prepare  son outil,  un
outil qui devait  repondre  a certains imperatifs. Cette langue  devait  exprimer vis­
ceralement  des parias;  elle devait mettre a nu leur pauvrete,  leur alienation, leur misere. Elle devait etre aussi brutale mais aussi expressive qu'un juron, et  provo­ quer  les memes  reactions.  Elle devait, en somme,  repondre  a  trois  criteres  que Renaud   prend  soin  d'annoncer dans  I'introduction   du  Casse:   Ia  concision,  Ia verite, la  vitalite.  D'ailleurs  le seul fait  qu-il fasse preceder  son  recit  d'un   bref expose sur  les difficultes d'ecrire  vrai  et  juste et sur  l'impossibilite de  cerner  Ia vie avec les mots nous indique  jusqu'a  quel point il avait  hautement conscience de faire  oeuvre d'ecrivain,  de travailler  un  texte  avant  tout,  de faire  face  a  un probleme d'ecriture.
11 convient  done d'analyser  de pres l'ecriture  de Renaud  pour  voir comment  il
a fait !'utilisation  litteraire  de la langue qu'il a trouvee dans la rue et qui colle a
la peau de tout Quebecois. Un court extrait  de quelques pages11  nous permet  de voir l'essentiel de Ia langue  de Renaud.

45

LE JOUAL

La langue de Ti-lean

IL Y  A,   dans  cet extrait  comme  tout  au  long de  la nouvelle, deux  niveaux  de langue: celui des personnages,  et  les interventions  du  narrateur. Le monologue de Ti-Jean  d'abord.
A la lumiere  de cet extrait,  le joual litteraire  obtiendrait  ses effets de verisme en jouant sur deux plans surtout: le vocabulaire et la prononciation. L'utilisation des diminutifs ou des sobriquets  (Ti-Jean, Bouboule, Memene)  cree un climat de
familiarite  qui est propre a tousles parlers populaires;  cette familiarite,  toutefois,
ne va pas sans une certaine  volonre d'hennetisme (les sobriquets  ne sont connus
que des inities) , et  a aussi son cfM de vulgarite  gouailleuse. A certains  moments, Ti-Jean   s'appelle   lui-meme  "Ti-Cul Ti-Jean"  (p.  76).   De  plus,  au  Canada franc;ais, il faut  noter  que la passion des diminutifs est un veritable  reflexe condi­
tionne, qui obeit a des lois mysterieuses, surtout dans le cas des prenoms masculins.
On  ajoute  habituellement "Ti-" devant  ces prenoms, mais quelquefois la  trans­
formation  est plus subtile:   ainsi tous les Jacques  au  Canada franc;ais portent  le nom Coco a un moment  donne. 11 n'est  pas Surprenant  non plus que  Philomene
devienne spontanement Memene,  meme pour Berthe qui ne la connait  pas et qui est instruite: "Philomene ... c'est rare ... Memene ... Oui, c'est c;a ... Memene
... C'est  beaucoup plus joli ..." (p. 20.)
Puisque le Casse est un  paria,  il n'est  pas etonnant  qu'il  fasse un  usage  judi­
deux  de grossieretes et  d'obscenites.  Plus que tout  autre  trait  linguistique, l'ob­
scenite marque  a la fois la pauvrete  de la langue  d'un  personnage  et  la vigueur
d'un  comportement rebelle et iconoclaste. Dans ce texte de deux pages on compte
environ 14 jurons, surtout  d'origine  religieuse ( 7), dont "crisse" 3 fois et "hostie"
2  fois, mais aussi d'origine  animale,  avec predilection  pour "chien" ou "chienne" ( 3  fois).  Quelquefois   il s'agit  tout  simplement  de  vulgarites   ( "morviat")  et, ailleurs dans l'oeuvre,  de termes scatologiques ( "gorgotons",  "pisser",  "chier") ou relies aux  parties  genitales  ( "plote", "poche", "botte", "boite", "pelotes",  "gas­
ses" ...) . Ce  vocabulaire   particulier  accomplit,  a volonte,  toutes  les fonctions
grammaticales dans la phrase:  en apostrophe  ("L'hostie,  j'lai pi.tchee dehors ...", "La   chienne"), comme  epitethe   ( "un   petit  crisse de  morviat"),  exclamation
( "C'est  c;a, calvaire  ..."), attribut  ("Pis  est cochonne  ..."). Le sacre  dans  le parler  de Ti-Jean est dynamique, eclatant  et bien senti, mais il n'est  pas particu­  lierement original et n'a  pas tellement de verdeur. Bouboule dans  La  Bagarre de
Bessette manifest plus de vitalite linguistique a cet egard.18
Le joual de Renaud fait aussi appel aux anglicismes et aux canadianismes,  mais en nombre  plutot  limite.  Les anglicismes dans  ce texte sont  "pitchee" ( 2   fois), "bomme", "dope" et les canadianismes: "maquereau" au sens de coureur  de  ju­ pons plutot  que  de  proxenete,  "prelart", "regardable", et  peut-etre  "morviat". Mais il est interessant de noter que les mots anglais trouvent  une orthographe plus

LE  JOUAL

ou moins fran<_;aise ( "bomme", "dope") et meme se plient a Ia syntaxe fran<_;aise
( "j'lai  pitchee ..."). II y a done effort pour incorporer  des elements etrangers  a
un ensemble qui est essentiellement fran<_;ais.
Mais si l'orthographe sert  ainsi a donner  un visage fran<_;ais a  quelques  mots anglais,  il faut  dire  que  l'orthographe plus  ou  moins  phonetique  qu'emploie
Renaud vise davantage a une desarticulation  de Ia prononciation fran<_;aise. Cela
est normal: toute  orthographe phonetique  dans  une oeuvre  litteraire signale  la
volonte de recreer le parle  par opposition  a I'ecrit, done choix niveau "inferieur"
de langue. Par l'orthographe, Renaud  insiste sur un relachement  articulatoire, une
paresse verbale qui est peut-etre  le signe le plus distinctif du  joual  ( c'est ainsi que cheval est devenu joual, d'ailleurs). Les procedes ici sont assez simples et quelques­ uns meme ne sont pas particuliers  au  joual mais se retrouvent  dans tout  fran<_;ais parle.  Ainsi  pour I'elision  du  e en  position interconsonantique  ("<;a m'fait  du bien",  "on  dirait  qu'<;a vide",  "j'lai", "<;a fait  pas d'bruit" ...) . L'elision  du  l dans "plus" et dans les articles "Ia" et "les" ( "casser a yeule", "peter a face", "tous e deux")' I'elimination d'un  certain  nombre de diphtongues  ("pis" pour  "puis"' "ben" pour "bien"), Ia compression des pronoms "il" et "lui" en "y" et du  pro­
nom "elle" en "a"' le oi qui se prononce toujours  we ( "voueyons"' "moe''' "toe")'
le un qui se prononce  in, plus nasal et  plus mou,  et surtout  les fausses liaisons
( "chus-t'in   maquereau"), les interrogations  avec un  "tu" abusif  ( "chus-tu  ja­
loux?")  et des compressions articulatoires  particulieres  (je vais lui > "m'as d'y")
semblent plus caracreristiques  du  joual. Mais aucun  de ces procedes n'est  revolu­
tionnaire,  ni meme  propre  au  joual. lis se retrouvent  tous dans  Trente  arpents sauf l'emploi abusif du pronom deuxi<:me personne en inversion lorsqu'il s'agit d'interrogations a Ia premiere ou a Ia troisieme personne. Mais est-ce Ia vraiment un canadianisme  ou quelque chose de particulier au  joual. Dans le fran<_;ais popu­ laire il y a Ia particule interrogative ti, tiree du t de Ia troisieme personne verbale combine  avec le pronom  il  ( vient-il)  qui  est employee a  Ia  premiere  personne ( J'y  va-ti) . Au Canada, selon les diflerences regionales, ce ti se  prononcerait tu ou ti, sans plus:  plutot  tu selon Renaud,  plutot  ti selon  Ringuet  ( "C'est-y  toe, Charis?"19 ). II y a evidemJ;Ilent dans  Le  Casse une  accumulation qu'on  ne  re­ trouve pas dans des oeuvres anterieures,  mais pour comprendre les violentes con­ traverses qui ont entoure  cette oeuvre, il faut sans doute  regarder  au-dela  de sa langue  vers Ia realite qu'elle  decrit.  Elle  charrie,  certes,  un  certain  nombre  de grossieretes, mais Ia representation  qu'elle  donne  de  Ia  prononciation   n'est  pas absolument nouvelle.
Au niveau de Ia syntaxe, il n'y a presque rien. Laurent  Girouard  a parle d'une "desarticulation des structures grammaticales",20  mais de fait,  dans cet extrait,  il n'y  a que !'elision du  "ne" negatif  comme dans  le fran<_;ais  parle  ailleurs  et les interrogations avec ce tu abusif. Ces "erreurs" sont causees par le relachement  de Ia prononciation  plus que par les pourrissement total de Ia langue des personnages.

47

LE  JOUAL

11 y a, ailleurs  dans  la  nouvelle,  un  certain  nombre  de calques  comme  "cas.. " "faire  du  pouce",  "casser  avec lui",  mais le plus grand  nombre  d'anglicismes se situent  au niveau du lexique:  des mots simples qui sont incorpores  a la langue et francises, tant  dans leur  prononciation que dans leur orthographe ( trenche,  ma­ chemallo, djobbe,  roffe, spitche,  bomme, tchesteurfilde, sprigne,  pitche ...) . Les phrases dans cet extrait  comme  ailleurs dans le texte sont simples, depouillees et s'accumulent par simple  juxtaposition.  L'absence  de charnieres  et  de complexire grammaticale cree l'effet d'une  pauvrete  navrante  au niveau de la conceptualisa­  tion et de !'articulation mais on ne peut guere reprocher  a ces  phrases d'obeir  a une syntaxe qui ne soit pas fondamentalement franc;aise. Ces  phrases obeissent a l'art  d'ecrire  de Renaud: un style colle a la vie, concis et  vrai, depouille de tout embellissement, un style appauvri volontairement  pour decrire avec verite des per­ sonnages qui sont de pauvres etres.
En somme, le joual de Renaud, quand  il fait parler ses personnages, se situerait
au  niveau  du vocabulaire  et de l'orthographe qui  vise a la transcription la  plus phonetique possible d'une  langue parlee. Cette langue parlee n'est pas absolument differente de celle qu'on  retrouve dans les meilleurs romans du terroir  ecrits trente ans auparavant et consacres depuis. La valeur de choc du  joual  residerait  done avant   tout  dans  l'emploi   judicieux  d'un   vocabulaire  vulgaire  et  scandaleux: jurons, grossieretes, "sacres".
11 faut  noter,  en  terminant cet aperu
joual  n'est  pas  toujours  operatoire.  Renaud  francise  un  bon  nombre  de  mots anglais et habituellement cela ne cause pas de problemes particuliers  au lecteur. Toutefois,  a cause de l'identite du son et du signe dans un mot, quelquefois cette francisation  produit  une  confusion  qui  n'existerait  pas si le  mot  etait  ecrit  en anglais.  C'est  le cas pour  "gagne" (p.  27)   qui  deroute  un  peu,  d'autant  plus qu'on  trouvait  "gang" a la page g. Le meilleur exemple se trouve  a la page 29, avec le mot "bonneseur": "une  espece de bonneseur  a defonce la  porte de l'ap­ partement". Cette  francisation   est trop  pres de  "bonne  soeur"  et  le  lecteur  se demande  bien ce qu'une  religieuse vient faire dans cette histoire. La confusion est d'autant plus aisee qu'auparavant Bouboule pense de Ti-Jean: "il y en a pour qui le cul remplace l'hostie. 11 n'y en a qu'un  qui a le droit  d'y  toucher.  Ce sont des cures manques." (p.  27). Est-ce que Ti-Jean  qui  etait  compare  a  un cure serait maintenant compare  a une religieuse? Non, car il s'agit de "bouncer", fier­ a-bras.

La langue de narrateur

N'EN  DEPLAISE a  M.  Bessette, la  langue  du  narrateur   ne saurait  se confondre avec celle des personnages.21   C'est  une langue, sinon chatiee,  du  moins correcte et assez evocatrice  dans cet extrait: "le froissement tiede d'une  auto  qui monte la

LE  JOUAL


cote"; "petite grele de tabac, petite  grele imperceptible, bruine  de tabac blond sur le prelart". Ailleurs,  dans  la  nouvelle,  son  choix  de  mots  n'est  pas  du  tout   a la
portee   de  ses  personnages:  "on   recidive"  ( p.  9),  "bruine" ( p. I 4),  "porte­ persienne" (p.  14),  "plancher concave", "strapontin" (p.  x6), "glapir"  (p.  22), "craquelures" (p.  37), et  meme  on  pourrait le dire  recherche dans  un  contexte quebecois: "stoppe"  (p.  I7,  23)   et  "parking" (p.  27), par  exemple, sont  d'un  usage  beaucoup plus  fran ais
d'employer la meme  langue que  ses personnages  mais de fait  sa  langue se  main­
tient  a un  autre  palier.  On  y retrouve  sensiblement les memes  qualites de style:
rythme hache,  vivace,  depouille, et  phrases  procedant par  simple   juxtaposition, mais les seules veritables concessions  au  joual sont  quelques mots anglais  ici et Ia, la transcription phonetique de  quelques autres  mots,  quelques canadianismes  et
!'elision  presque  constante du  "ne" negatif.  Le text  d'introduction, qui  se situe  a
l'exterieur de la nouvelle,  va un peu  plus loin avec la contraction de "il  n'y a pas" en  "y  a  pas".  Si l'on  examine, par  exemple,  le debut  de  la  nouvelle,  dans  trois pages de texte  narratif  il n'y a que  deux mots obscenes  ( "cul", "crisser"), un mot anglais  ("plywood"), quelques canadianismes ( "piasses",  "coquerelle", "bebite"), l'elision  d'un e ("d'partir") et !'elimination d'une diphtongue ("pis"). Mais  le "ne" negatif  n'est  elide  que  deux  fois alors  qu'il  est conserve  cinq  fois.  De  plus,
uncertain  nombre de mots choisis situent  ce texte  a un niveau  d'articulation que
ne  peuvent atteindre les  personnages: "literie",  "repue",  "porte-persienne"  ( 4 fois),   "bruine", "partance",  "encastre", "delayer", "bruineuse", "concave" ...
Renaud maintient done volontairement une distance  entre  le narrateur et les personnages. Cette  distance  n'est  pas creee seulement par  une  reelle difference de niveau  de style. Elle se cree aussi et se renforce  par  les interventions du  narrateur dans le recit.  Au nombre de cinq,  ces interventions sont soit une interpellation du lecteur   ( 4 fois), soit une interpellation du  narrateur lui-meme.
Vous pouvez-vous les procurer  dans les restaurants, les cigares a Philomene.  (p. 25.) Le  lecteur  s'attend  sans doute  a une  description  cochonne.  Qu'il  se refere  a ses experiences personnelles ou a defaut  de celles-ci, qu'il sacre. (p. 25.)
Le lecteur  s'attend  sans doute  a une conversation  Iascive et perverse suivie d'une orgie lesbienne dans un appartement. Qu'il  sacre. (p. 26.)

Le Iecteur s'attend  sans doute ace que je lui dise que Ti-Jean  a Ia nostalgic d'une certaine  securite mab::rielle. Ou plus exactement  d'une  certaine  stabilite. Ca lui est impossible. ( p. 30.)

Mais Ti-Jean  n'est  pas le genre  a raconter  sa vie a tout  le monde.  Le  narrateur devrait  se meier de ses affaires. C'est  ce qu'il  va faire. II est ecrivain.  (p. 31.)
Ces intrusions brisent !'atmosphere du  recit.  Elles sont  d'autant plus  habiles  a le faire  qu'elles sont  groupees  ensemble,  au  debut  du  recit,  ce qui  le depart ferme


49

LE  JOUAL

cet univers au lecteur,  installe celui-ci comrne exterieur  au  monde  decrit  et brise toute velleite d'insertion  psychologique. Le lecteur est defini comme temoin.
L'utilisation  que fait Renaud du  joual est d'un  grand  interet  et marque reelle­ ment  un  moment   important  dans  l'histoire  de  la  litterature  quebecoise.  Non seulement  parce  que  sa  tentative  s'appuie  sur  un  fondement  ideologique  precis (le mouvement  Parti  pris, qui a la fois fonde,  justi.fie, et explicite ce qu'il  y a de revolutionnaire et de valable dans ces oeuvres en joual) , mais aussi parce que son oeuvre est d'une  grande  authenticite. Ayant choisi  d'aller  jusqu'au  bout de son parti  pris de verite  et de realisme dans la description  de ses personnages-tant dans  leur  parler  que  dans  leur  vecu-il n'accepte  aucun  compromis  et  jamais on ne sent, dans  cette  oeuvre,  une  tentative  d'edulcorer  cette  realite accablante.
Malheureusement, le decalage  entre  le narrateur et  les personnages,  entre  les
deux niveaux de style, et les hiatus du recit causes par les intrusions  du narrateur brisent l'unite  de !'oeuvre  et  reduisent sensiblement son impact.  Le narrateur ne s'identifie  pas aux  personnages:  ils sont des cas, il est le clinicien. Le joual pour eux  est  une  condition  d'existence,  mais  pour  lui  une  arme,  un  etendard qu'il peut  brandir  a volonte,  la  defroque  qu'il  peut  choisir de  revetir  ou non. 11 y a done  une alternative pour  le critique.  Voir  Le Casse  comme  un  pamphlet  qui
s'adresse  aux  intellectuels  et bourgeois pour les "faire  ch .. :•zz, les ecoeurer: a
ce moment, l'entreprise litteraire  n'est pas primordiale  et on ne saurait  reproc.her
a Renaud  de  prendre  tous les moyens pour aiguillonner  ses lecteurs et les faire reagir. Mais il est evident  que  Le Casse est plus que cela, qu'il  y a ici "creation, recuperation  de la  realire  par  l'imaginaire"' oeuvre litteraire.  Le decalage entre les deux styles et les interprellations du narrateur sont done de graves defauts d'ecriture. Ils empechent le lecteur  de vivre pleinement  de l'interieur  ce monde de misere, et tendent  a ramener  le joual ace qu'etait  le parler  populaire  dans les oeuvres anterieures  a Parti  pris:  une technique  d'ecriture  qui  cherche  non  plus des effets de pittoresque  ou de verite romanesque,  mais plutot  des effets de scan­ dale assez faciles.
En effet, c'est ce que nous avons pu constater en examinant  l'ecriture  du Casse. Le joual ici, malgre valeurs de choc, n'est pas absolument different de ce que l'on trouve dans des oeuvres qui  precedent de trente  ans Le Casse. 11 y a simplement beaucoup  plus de sacres, et il y est beaucoup  question de sexe en termes crus et violents. 11 semble  done  que  le  joual, dans !'esprit  du  public  qui  a si mal  ret;u Le Casse/ 3   soit  davantage une  question  de  realite decrite  que  d'habitudes linguistiques.

NOTES

1 Claude Jasmin, Jasmin, Montreal, C. Langevin, 1970, p. 97·
2  Martial  Dassylva, Victor-Levy Beaulieu aux  prises avec le theatre  et le  joual, La
Presse, 26-1-1974, D4.

LE  JOUAL

8  Gerald  Godin, dans  Liberte, mai-juin Ig68, X, 3, p. 92.
4 Gaston  Miron, dans  Liberte, op. cit., p.  101.
5  op. cit., p. g8.
6  op. cit., p. 95·
1  Cf.  surtout G.  Godin, Le  joual politique, Parti  pris, vol.  2, no.  7, mars   I965,  p.
57-59, et Andre  Brochu, D'un  faux dilemne, Parti pris, vol. 2, no. 8, avril  I965,  p.
58-59.  On  a toujours cherche a ignorer  ce truisme.  Il  ne se passe  pas  un  congres
regroupant des Canadiens franc;ais sans que  l'on  fasse appel  a la "purification" de
la langue. Le rapport de la Commission  no. 23:  Le milieu  ouvrier, au  I 3e congres de 1'ACELF  ( I g6o) , est,  a  ce  su jet, exemplaire. Dirigee   par  Jean   Marchand et Fernand Jolicoeur, cette  commission  note  que  toute  la vie economique au  Quebec est  anglaise   mais  invite   les  congressistes  a  y infuser   du  franc;ais  avec  ce  pieux souhait: "il faut  croire  au  miracle".
8  G. Godin, Liberte, op. cit., p. 94·
9  Jean Bouthillette, Le Casse, c'etait l'enfer, Perspectives, La Presse, I I   nov.  I967.
10 Andre  Major, Le Petit Journal, 8 aout  I965.
11 Laurent Girouard, En lisant le Casse, Parti pris, vol. 2, no. 4, dec.  I964,  p. 62.
12  Jean  Bouthillette, op. cit.
13 Luc  Latour, Quoi et Jacques Renaud,  Le Quartier  Latin,  23 fev.  I967.
14  Jean Bouthillette, op. cit.
H Jacques Renaud, Comme  tout  le monde ou le postscriptum,  Parti  pris, vol.  2, no.
5, janv.  I965, p. 2I-22.
16 loc. cit.
11 Jacques Renaud, Le Casse, Montreal, Parti pris, I964 et  Ig68,  (3e  edition), p. 42-
45· Quand il sera  necessaire,  pour  eclaircir   un  point  ou  completer un  aperc;u,  de
sortir  des cadres  de cet  extrait, la page de reference  suivra  immediatement la  cita­
tion entre  parentheses.
18 "R'marque ben c'que j'te  dzis, Bill:  si c;a contsinue, ils vont  les remplir de  marde, nos chars,  pis ils vont  nous  faire  netteyer  c;a avec  not'e  langue. Du  goudron, c;a entre  dans  l'bois, c;a enfonce  creux,  t'a  pas d'idee, sarpent! ... Pis v'la-t-y  pas  que c'maudit raleux  de liche-cul de Levesque,  v'la-t-y  pas qu'il  vient  me dire  que  c'est pas assez net. Il faudrait, mon  cher,  passer un  mal  chie comme  c;a dans  l'omulin a viande! ... "
Gerard Bessette, La Bagarre, Montreal, Le cercle du livre de France, I958, p. 44-45.
111  Ringuet, Trente  arpents, Montreal, Fides, Coli. du  Nenuphar, Ig66,  p. 23.
20   op. cit.
21  G. Bessette dit  de  V.-L. Beaulieu  qu'il  est "moins  audacieux que  Jacques Renaud qui, dans  Le Casse, joualise autant dans  la partie  narrative (ala 3e personne) que dans  les dialogues." (Trois  romanciers quebecois, Montreal, Ed.  du  Jour, I973•  p.
I IO). M. Bessette a manifestement oublie  Le Casse.
22  Normand Cloutier, Le scandale du  joual, Le Magazine Maclean,  vol. 6, no. 2, fev.
Ig66, p. 30.
zs I1 y a meme  une  "affaire" Le Casse. Cf. Robert Barberis,  De la clique des Simard
a Paul Desrochers ... en  passant  par le  joual, Montreal, Ed.  quebecoises, 1973,
159 p.

iiFTER THE INCiiS

]. A. Wainwright


The hatunruna's* still-life is silent  jungle-deep
and  just around the mountain-side from  this  articulated  railway
that  slowly climbs  to Machu Pichu bearing its inveterate load
of touristes  imperialismos
who  have  always  climbed  mountains because  they're there

and  when  they  read  you had no horses, cows, or pigs
they  are  surprised
and  think  you vegetarian no wheels to travel  over
no glass through which  to view
the absent  arch  they frown and  hope  you not  uncivilized but  when  they learn  you tied your  ropes  in  knots
to keep  the  score
and  could  not  write  your names they smile relieved  and  point
to Machu Pichu  where
three  thousand Indians once died beneath a single rock

and  sagely nod
at this deciphered rune
the  length  of rope  involved and  ultimate X
(forged  face of gods)
true  signature in stone


* the common  people









52

A NEGLECTED THEME
IN Two Solitudes




ft'arrenStevenson





IT HAS BECOME almoot a commonplace  of critici= of Hugh MacLennan's Two  Solitudes  to say that  the novel succeeds brilliantly  up to the end of the twenty-ninth  chapter,  portraying the death  of Athanase  Tallard, but is
less convincing in the last twenty-three chapters portraying the symbolic resolution of the theme in the education  and maturation of the members of the second generation, Paul  Tallard and  Heather Methuen,  and  their  eventual  marriage. The  following quotation  from  critic George Woodcock is in this respect typical: "If Two  Solitudes had ended  with Tallard's death,  it would have been a moving and  cohesive book. But  up to this point it merely presents the  problem  of racial relations;  it does not  have the logical completeness of presenting  a solution,  and this MacLennan seeks, at the expense of his novel, in its later  chapters."1  I think the time has come for a reassessment of this position. To my knowledge, the only critic  who  has dissented from  the  majority  view of the  concluding  chapters  of Two  Solitudes is Robert  D. Chambers,  who observes:

The second half of Two  Solitudes  has been criticized as over-written and  uncon­ vincing, and it is interesting to note that  MacLennan has allowed some  pruning for the paperback and school editions. Nevertheless, the latter  parts of  the novel carry through his vigorous assault on the pillars of Canadian  respectability, and his closing picture of intelligent Canadian  youth facing with  tolerance and  hu­ manity the problems of their generation seems made of stuff  that  will adhere.2

It has also become a commonplace  of criticism of Two  Solitudes that  "the  idea of Canadian unity becomes the  main symbolic theme,"3   which  MacLennan  at­ tempts  to embody in the lives of his characters.  Without  pretending  to deny  the primacy of the theme of Canadian self-awareness and  unity, I would like to sug­ gest that the novel contains an important subsidiary theme which most critics have overlooked and which helps to unify the novel. I refer to the theme  of  individual  self-awareness, worked out  in terms of a contrast  between  two types of persons; those who learn to come to terms with what MacLennan calls "the  ultimate  soli-

53

TWO SOLITUDES

tude" and those who don't. The  title thus has another dimension than  the French­ English dichotomy to which it is usually applied. The quotation  from Rilke which constitutes the novel's epigraph  is an important  clue to its meaning:  "Love  con­ sists in this, that  two solitudes  protect, and  touch, and  greet  each  other."  Rilke was almost  certainly  referring  to individuals,  not societies, though  it  would  be pedantry  to attempt  to limit the range of applicability of the quotation; and  the novel's  dedication   which   precedes  the  epigraph,   "To  Dorothy   Duncan   with admiration and love," suggests that  MacLennan  was also thinking  of individuals and  their personal relationships.


ToANTICIPATE  my argument  briefly: those characters  in the novel who learn  to come to terms with "the  ultimate solitude"  are  most notably
Captain Yardley, Paul Tallard, and Heather  Methuen,  who becomes Paul's wife. The characters who most dramatically  fail to come to terms with the ultimate soli­ tude are Athanase  Tallard, his second wife Kathleen,  his son by his first marriage Marius,  such satiric  figures as Huntly  McQueen,  General  Methuen,  et  al, and Janet  Methuen. Of Captain Yardley MacLennan writes:

Though Yardley had never had an academic education, he had slowly learned how to read books and how to think. As a sailor, and then as a ship's master, he had known solitude in strange places. He was persuaded that  all knowledge is like a painted curtain  hung across the door of the mind to conceal from it a mystery so darkly suggestive that  no one can face it alone for long. Of ultimate solitude he had no fear, for he never let himself think about it. But he knew that if  he once started, fear would be there.

With its overtones ofT. S. Eliot's concept that most people cannot bear very much reality, this passage may seem to contradict  rather than confirm my argument. But clearly, Yardley  has  learned  how  to  handle  solitude  and  the  fear  which  lurks within the recesses of the human  mind surrounding  the "mystery."
The  passage  I  have  quoted   is followed  by a  longer  one  in  which  Yardley
reminisces about  an experience in the tropics, when he spent an afternoon  leaning over the taffrail and watching sharks and barracuda "gliding through  ten fathoms of sunlit water below.... Self-centred, beautiful, dangerous and aimless: that was how they had been, and  he could never forget it." In this symbolically important passage,  the  sharks  and   barracuda  represent  the  undirected   passions.  One  is reminded  of the  beautiful,  dangerous  (for  Athanase), and  fundamentally  self­ centred  and  aimless  Kathleen, gliding  about  the  Tallard   seignory  house.  Like Athanase,  she  is basically  lacking  in  self-knowledge. One  is also  reminded  of Marius   Tallard,  who  is  described  as  follows  addressing  an  anti-conscription  meeting:

54

TWO SOLITUDES

Marius Tallard  was drunk with a new knowledge of himself. He stood in the big hall before the meeting with his feet apart, swaying from the hips, his arms folded across his chest. Now and then his right arm shot out and the long fingers of his hand wove gestures in the air. His white teeth flashed rare and bitter smiles in his white face. His black hair was loose on his long, narrow skull. He pulled emotion out of the crowd and threw it back at them.

Marius'  white teeth and  "long, narrow skull" remind one of the sharks and  bar­ racuda.  His "new  knowledge of himself" is spurious, a dangerous  and  deceptive substitute  for  the  true  self-knowledge of  a  Captain   Yardley.  Like  the  anglais capitalist  Huntly  McQueen, Marius  remains fixated on the memory  of his dead mother.  His  Oedipus  complex  leads  him  into  conflict  with  his  father  and  the social authority  his father  represents.
Marius'  opposite number  is of course his half brother  Paul,  who in the latter part of the novel reaches a truer understanding  of himself as a result of his travels and writing. Yardley's words to Paul on the occasion of his father's  death  pick up the theme of solitude and the failure of Athanase to come to terms with it:  "I tell you how it is, Paul. Your father being a Catholic again-if that's  what it means, the candles and the things by the bed-well it means he got lonely and wanted to be what  he'd  been all his life, I guess. Or  maybe it means something  else so big I can't  understand  it." The only hint of self-knowledge on the part of Athanase  is the extent to which he seems to have consciously brought  Paul  up as a synthesis of the two cultures.
Following the death of his father, Paul makes a symbolic ascent of Mount  Royal which  represents  by anticipation his quest  for  true  knowledge,  including  self­ knowledge. The  attainment of vision (in  the deepest sense of the  term)   is  por­ trayed symbolically in  the  panoramic  view of Montreal  which greets Paul  from the summit, in the paragraph beginning:  "He  was breathless from his climb, but now he was on  top  of the  mountain  and  could see the  whole  city  spread  out beneath  him."  This  passage  anticipates  Paul's  attainment of  a  comprehensive overview of Canadian society as it is to be expressed in his as-yet-unwritten  second novel. At the end of the chapter  in which this passage occurs, MacLennan indi­ cates that  an important ingredient  in Paul's continuing maturation is the  "lone­  liness" which "struck  right through  him." In  this respect he is contrasted  to his mother:  "And  he knew now that  although her smile was as sincere as possible, it was still somehow automatic, a gesture as natural  and  unconscious as the sway of her hips when she walked, and that behind it her mind was a stranger."
Parallel  to  Paul's   development  is that  of  Heather, who  impulsively  leaves Huntly  McQueen's pretentious  dinner  party  and  the company  of the  predatory Fletchers ( cf. the sharks and barracuda) to make her own ascent of Mount  Royal, which is contrasted to Paul's climb by being made in an automobile  at night and taking her to a lower eminence of the mountain. The beneficent effects of solitude

55

TWO SOLITUDES

are  again  suggested:  "It was wonderful  to be alone."  At  twenty-three  Heather feels she  has reached  a crisis in  her  life. So far  she has  followed the  Methuen pattern,  attending school in  Lausanne  for two years and  studying  French  as a social accomplishment  rather  than  as a  help to her in the  province  of Quebec. She  has also had  her  debut  and  picked  up  a  college degree.  Unlike  her  sister Daphne,  she  has  not  rushed  into  a  prestigious  marriage,  and   her  mother  is beginning to consider her a social liability. Her painting, paralleling Paul's interest in writing,  is her  only asset other  than  the  Methuen  money, which she has  not helped to earn. Unwilling to become a St. James Street wife, she finds that Cana­ dian  discrimination  against  women  stands  in the  way of any  career  she  might choose for herself except the most conventional. Her vision from the  Westmount summit  of the mountain, from which "only a portion of the city could be seen," parallels  Paul's  more  comprehensive  vision in  its symbolic  connotations  and  is really different  rather  than  inferior to his, as her exclamation  "Oh, lovely!" and the delicate description  of the moon-coloured scene suggest.




WEN KATHLEEN  MARRIES the American  Henry  Clayton, thus merging her identity in the American melting pot, Paul experiences the most intense loneliness of his life thus far:  "If loneliness is a man's inability to share his feelings with another,  Paul had never been as lonely in his life as he was now. The whole ceremony seemed shocking to him." As for Kathleen,  whose possession represents  "the  only real  purpose  Henry  Clayton  had  ever known,"  her  fading physical charms  are  portrayed  as a surrogate,  a sweet substitute  for  a  sense of inner  purpose  which  Clayton  lacks and  Paul  is in the  process of acquiring.  As MacLennan remarked  earlier apropos of Athanase: "Incredible, that  for most of a lifetime a  man  could  imagine  that  beauty  was enough, or that  women  could satisfy the ultimate solitude."
In contrast to Athanase, to whom women were "necessary," Paul undergoes a lengthy period of relative sexual abstinence during his European  venture.  Heather similarly sees through  the "cold  surface beauty"  and  "mechanical sensuality" of Daphne  and  Noel Fletcher. The  intellectual  pursuits of Paul and  Heather   (she is reading  the  post-war  novelists as well as painting; he wants to be a writer)   are paralleled  by those of their  spiritual  mentor,  Captain  Yardley, who is interested in astronomy  and,  with  Paul's  help, begins studying Greek at  seventy-six.  Mac­ Lennan  suggests that  both Yardley and  Paul  are learning to come to  terms with the  ultimate  solitude,  and  that  for Paul  the  process involves physical  as well as mental effort  (he is a graduate of the University of Montreal  and has had a brief career as a hockey player) :

TWO SOLITUDES

For a long time now it had been growing, all through his teens, and getting steadily tighter.  It  woke him  nearly  every morning,  except  when  he  was  physically  ex­ hausted  after  a hard  game. It  was more than  a physical state  of nerves;  it  was a quality of mind, breeding a kind of solitude of its own.

This  may  be compared with  a  passage earlier  in the  novel in  which  MacLennan remarks of  the  Canadian soldiers  returning home  from  the  First  World   War: "Some had  learned  peace through an ultimate knowledge  of themselves."
The  loneliness within  Paul the acceptance of which leads to self-knowledge finds its objective correlative in  the  sense of  desolation  in  the  northern forests  as  he recalls a trip  to Lake Superior on a lake boat:

A sunset burned  through  Fort  William and  Port Arthur  and  hurled  gigantic sha­ dows of the grain elevators forward on to the trembling waters of Thunder Bay.... As night  closed over  the ship  the colour  had  died, and  nothing  was left  but  the sounds of millions of shallow  waves turning  over  in  the  darkness,  an  astringent  wind  keening blindly out  of the  empty  forest to the  north,  the  quick  spatterings  of lifeless fresh water whipped  by the wind over the waist of the ship and  wetting the  deck. It  was only a few days later,  away from  this sense of  desolation  in the heart  of a continent,  that  they were passing so close to shore in eastern  Ontario he could look into the windows of houses when the lights were on after  dark. He had seen  men  reading  in  arm  chairs  and  children  going  to  bed,  and  once  a  naked woman  thoughtfully  combed  her  hair  before a window, her  lips open  as though she  were  singing  to  herself.  The  ship  had  passed and  left  her  there,  strangely transfigured.

Here  the  description of  the  landscape reminds  one  of  certain Group of  Seven paintings, such  as  J. E.  H.  MacDonald's "The Lonely  North," and   the  naked woman   combing  her  hair  before  the  window  and  singing  like  a  mermaid or  a
wood-nymph symbolizes the spirit of the land. The  result is what  Robertson Davies has somewhere  called  a kind  of northern mysticism  In  coming  to terms  with  the inner  loneliness,  Paul  is also coming  to terms  with  the  outer  loneliness,  and  the growth of MacLennan's protagonist towards  self-knowledge parallels  a similar development in the young  nation.
In  The  Watch That  Ends The  Night  George  Stewart makes  a  canoe  trip  to
Lake  Superior and  likewise  confronts the  spirit  of the  lonely  land, which  Mac­ Lennan explicitly compares to Group of Seven  paintings. This  spirit  finds its indi­  vidual  parallel  in that  of Catherine, who was "strangely solitary  in her core," and in  that  of Jerome Martell, who  as a  boy  confronted the  loneliness  of  the  New Brunswick  forests. The  repetition of the  quotation from  Rilke  in  the  later  novel, and  George  Stewart's statement that  "She  [Catherine] and  I had  protected and touched and  greeted  each  other  reasonably well in the  past nine years, but  Jerome was a part  of her core," show  that  each  of the  three  protagonists is invested  with a measure  of the solitude  that  characterizes the  theme  of the  earlier  novel.  And when Jerome tells George  that  Catherine "must be enabled  to live her own death"

57

TWO SOLITUDES

and  makes it  possible for  George  "to  live her  death  with  her,"  the  concept  of losing one's life in order  to gain  it is given a radically Christian  emphasis which contrasts with the more existential treatment  of the theme in Two Solitudes.




EN PAUL  SHIPS   OUT    of  Halifax   harbour   aboard   a merchantman, he seems to  be trying  to emulate  Captain  Yardley,  his spiritual father. But Paul's travels are also a kind of preparation  for his vocation as a writer, a self-chosen period of solitude. They are also a way of testing his love for Heather. In  a hotel bar  in Athens  Paul  witnesses a scene involving a German  seducing a French  woman  which seems symbolic of the changing face of European society, and may be contrasted  to the nude Canadian woman singing to herself. Following this scene, MacLennan describes Paul's  recurring  feeling of loneliness:  "the  city surrounded him like a giant  presence of loneliness. It was no new feeling; most of his life he had known it, and now it was recurring again like a periodic disease.... He wondered if Heather had ever felt as he did now. Two solitudes in the infinite waste of loneliness under  the sun." This is the only occurrence  in the novel other than the title and the epigraph of the phrase "two solitudes";  and  it is significant that,  in its context,  it refers not primarily to the fact that  Paul  is of French  and Heather   of English  extraction,   but  to  the  existential  and  individual   aloneness which both  characters  are learning  independently  to face as part  of maturation. The  passage from  which I have  just quoted  ends with Paul  rejecting  the oppor­ tunity  to have a casual  affair  with  a  woman sitting  at a  nearby  table,  and  the statement: "He  wasn't  equal to that  kind of loneliness today." Again, there is the solitude of those who learn  to come to terms with their existential loneliness, and the solitude of those who don't. MacLennan suggests that  the latter kind of soli­ tude is potentially dangerous,  causing wars and other social upheavals:

Athens could be London, Rome, New York, Paris, Berlin or any other great city. This was where it had started. In the city. Any city.... the new city-hatred  (con­ tempt for all things but cleverness) of the slum man for the Jew, the owner for the worker, the worker for his fear of himself, the bourgeois for his own  thoughts in the dark, the hatred of them all for the old men washing their hands.

These  thoughts  are  directly  related  to the novel Paul is trying  to write, "Young man  of 1933." The  chapter  ends with the theme of solitude taking  on overtones portentous of the coming catastrophe:

Below in the Hodos Stadiou isolated figures still prowled with the furtive urgency of single men alone in a city after  dark. In  the far distance, somewhere in  the streets beyond the Place de la Constitution, the horn of a taxi with a short circuit in its ignition system howled like a wolf in the darkness.

TWO SOLITUDES

When  Paul  returns  to Canada  and marries  Heather,  MacLennan  emphasizes the solitude of the lovers in a way that reminds one of a line from Kahlil  Gibran: "Let  there be spaces between your togetherness." A good example of this is when Paul spends an hour talking with some French-Canadian fishermen, and  Heather feels temporarily  bereft. The  description of the gulls and  gannets  at  Perce  Rock parallels that of the sharks and barracuda earlier:

The  gulls must be diving like mad down the line of the cliffs. She remembered them as she had seen them yesterday wheeling out over the water about the rock; beautiful, aloof, cruelly competent, and farther  out were the gannets with  wing­ spread wider than a swan's and rusty eyes. When the gannets dipped  their  wings they plunged to the water like bombs.

Again  there  is a symbolic suggestion of the destructive course of the  undirected passions and a hint of the impending war.
Brooding about  his book "Young  man of 1933" and the as-yet-unrealized sub­ ject of his next novel-the changing shape of Canadian society -Paul contrasts the state of affairs in Canada  with that in Europe:  " 'The same brand of  patriot­  ism is never likely to exist all over Canada.  Each race so violently disapproves  of the tribal  gods of the other.  I can't  see how any single Canadian  politician  can ever imitate Hitler-at least, not over the whole country.'" Rabid nationalism of the  Hitleresque  variety  finds  its  Canadian  counterpart  in  Paul's  half  brother Marius, who claims he is not a fascist, but is obsessed by thoughts of  "a  pure race, a pure language," and seems to Paul to be binding himself in a strait-jacket.
Opposed  to  the  failure  of self-knowledge leading  to  disaster  is the  sense of
wonder and  ability to grow which Captain  Yardley retains until  his death -an event which leaves his daughter  Janet "prostrate with grief, not knowing that grief is always for the self." Now Janet  feels things falling away from her, "leaving  her solitary in the way of life to which she had bound  herself.'' Hers is the loneliness of those who have not learned to come to terms with their solitude. This failure of self-knowledge manifests itself objectively in her opposition to the love of Paul and Heather. The same is true of Janet's  sole remaining  prop, Huntly  McQueen, who attempts  to separate  Paul from Heather  by shunting  him off to an obscure teach­ ing job in British Columbia.
The  conflict between the older and younger generations is integrated  with the
wider theme by the suggestion that the generation of Janet  Methuen  and  Huntly McQueen  and Sir Rupert  Irons is responsible for permitting the rise of Hitler, and hence for the coming war. "Had there ever been a time in human  history like the present, when the older generation  was blind to nearly every vital issue for which their  children  were  prepared   to  fight  and  die?"  Another  anticipation  of  The Watch That  Ends The Night. When Janet fakes a heart-attack  upon learning  that Heather  is married  to Paul,  the old bridge-playing  doctor  who attends  her  and

59

TWO SOLITUDES


gives equivocal answers  to  Heather's questions  also seems to  represent the  older generation and  its failures. When  Paul  confronts the doctor,  demanding the  truth about  Janet's health, it  is as  though the  younger  generation is  confronting the older  generation with  its mistakes  which  have led up to Munich. And  when  Paul confronts Janet with  the news that he is going to enlist, it's as though he is empha­ sizing  the  need  for  the  generations to stand   together  in  this  time  of  crisis:  " 'I don't want  to do it. Everything that's in me cries out  against  the waste of the only talent  I've  ever  had.  But  I've  got  to go. And  when  I'm  gone,  I'd  like to  know that  you and  Heather are together.'" The  impending war emits sparks  which  are jumping the  gap  between  the  two  different  kinds of solitude. But  Paul's kind  of solitude  is also protecting and  touching and  greeting  Janet's.
The  concluding chapter  departs from  the  private lives of  the  novel's  human characters to emphasize the  coming  together  of the  nation's energies  to  meet  the wartime crisis. The portrayal of  the  autumnal face  of the  Canadian  landscape reminds us that  the country both  human and  natural is the  real hero of this novel. The theme of solitude-what MacLennan previously described  as ''race memories lonely in great  spaces" -is also evident, along  with  its counterpart, the  theme  of self-awareness :

Then,  even  as  the  two  race-legends  woke again  remembering  ancient  enm1t1es, there woke within  them also the felt knowledge that  together  they had fought and survived  one  great  war  they  had  never  made  and  that  now  they  had  entered another  ... And  almost  grudgingly, out of the instinct to do what  was necessary, the  country  took  the  first  irrevocable  steps  towards  becoming  herself,  knowing against her will that  she was not unique but like all the others, alone with  history, with science, with the future.

Canada in relation to the  European countries  is like Paul  and  Heather in relation to the older generation: neither has made  this war, but both  recognize  the impor­ tance  of seeing it through. And  like Paul  and  Heather, Canada is  approaching self-knowledge and  the self-sufficiency that  comes from  an  acceptance of the  ulti­ mate  solitude.

NOTES

1 "A Nation's  Odyssey:  The  Novels of Hugh  MacLennan," Odysseus Ever  Return­ ing (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  I970),  p. I7. Cf. Peter Buitenhuis, Canadian Writers & Their  Works:  Hugh MacLennan (Toronto: Forum House, 1969), p. go.
2   "The Novels of Hugh  MacLennan," in Hugh  MacLennan, ed. Paul Goetsch  (To­ ronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  I973),  p. 65;  reprinted  from  the  Journal of  Cana­ dian Studies,  2 (August  1967),  pp. 3- I I.
3 George Woodcock, "Hugh MacLennan," in Hugh MacLennan, ed. Goetsch, p. I7;
reprinted  from  Northern  Review,  3 (April-May  I95o),  pp. 2-10.



6o

THE EXPLORER AS HERO
Mackenzie and Fraser


T.D. MacLulich




ALEXANDER MACKENZIE and Shnon  Fmser a<e the Cana­ dian  examples,  par excellence,  of  the  kind  of  explorer  who  knows  where  he wants  to go and  eventually  gets there  after  overcoming  innumerable  obstacles. Once  they  begin  their  narratives,  Mackenzie  and  Fraser  are  almost  as  single­
minded in their literary  pursuits as they are in their actual  voyages. They seldom allow digressions on  Indian  habits  or on scenery or animals  to divert  their  tales from being unremitting accounts of the hardships and difficulties they faced, and their modes of overcoming  those obstacles. They  rarely allow a  hint  of personal emotion to colour their accounts: especially they allow no suggestion of fear, doubt or discouragement to sully the pages of their narratives. Yet, for all their utilitarian single-mindedness-and  often  because  of  this  quality-their stories  have  a grandeur  and  inevitability  that  approaches  the massive sweep of a heroic tale or romance.
Mackenzie's  accounts  of his journeys are  cast in the form  of  journal  entries; they have not been reworked into a full-scale narrative  in the manner  of Samuel Hearne's  book. Instead,  the original  journals have been edited  by the eighteenth­ century literary figure, William  Combe. Roy Daniells asserts that  "Combe's dis­ tortions of Mackenzie's meaning are so few and so slight they have to be searched for.m  True,  if one  understands "distortions" in the sense of  gross alterations  in meaning, emphasis, and  the order of ideas, and not simply as changes in the text. Combe's task was considerable, although for the most part quite simple.
His changes can be assessed by comparing a manuscript  version of Mackenzie's
journals of his first voyage, a copy of which is preserved in the British Museum, with the final published version. Combe has expanded  Mackenzie's  numerous abbreviations and turned  his frequent sentence fragments, often written in the compressed  style of  a  diary  or  a  log book,  into  readable   English  prose.  For example, Mackenzie wrote:

Rain'd  hard since early afternoon last Night till this Morning. We embarked at
4 oClk A.M. at 8 we landed, at 3 lodges of Indians.2

Combe rendered this as:

61

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO


It rained from the preceeding evening to this morning, when we embarked at four o'clock. At eight we landed at three large Indian lodges.3

As well as removing errors and expanding  contractions, Combe often contributes subordinations which smooth out  Mackenzie's style, as he does in the above pas­ sage. He makes some alterations  in sentence structure,  usually in the direction  of increased  euphony  and  variety;  and  he is responsible for quite  a few  changes in vocabulary,  which tend  to give the narrative  a less colloquial, more latinate  and educated  flavour. Mackenzie wrote:

Close by the land is high and covered with short Grass and  many plants, which are in Blossom, and has a beautiful appearance, tho' an odd contrast, the Hills covered with Flowers and Verdure, and Vallies full of Ice and Snow. The Earth is not thawed above 4 Inches from the Surface, below is a solid Body of Ice. The Soil is a Yellow Clay mixed with Stones. (] 199)

Combe gave this passage a slight elevation in tone by a change or two in vocabu­
lary and by introducing new constructions based on Mackenzie's original  phrases:

The  adjacent  land is high and covered with short grass and flowers, though the earth  was not thawed above four inches from the surface; beneath which was a solid body of ice. This  beautiful  appearance,  however, was strangely contrasted with the ice and snow that are seen in the valleys. The soil, where there is any, is a yellow clay mixed with stones. (V  x8s-86)

Ideas are shifted here more than  is usual in Combe's work; and  one qualifying phrase, which adds  an  air of literate  deliberation  to the last sentence,  is entirely his own contribution. Nonetheless, the observations and  the attitudes are  true  to Mackenzie's. And, since the effect of the Voyages depends chiefly on the step-by­ step  unfolding  of the story, both  in large and small details, we can  fairly  assign most of the credit for the final result to Mackenzie rather than to Combe. Without a good basic story, well told, Combe's talents for polishing the  prose would have been wasted. But the final literary  finish he gave to  Mackenzie's  journal  entries, although  preserving the day-by-day  entry form, gives the book a smoother,  more appealing,  flow of language.
That Mackenzie  was not devoid of a literary sense of his own is proved by his
"Preface," which must be presumed to represent his own ideas, if not entirely his own exact words. His apology for the lack of detailed scientific observations in his narrative  shows that  he is aware of the expectation, fostered by the Royal Society since its inception in x66o, that  a travel account should contain scientific notes, or at least exact observations of specific details about the things the traveller has seen. His description of the peculiar qualities of his own narrative shows that  he is aware of the general reader's usual motive for reading books of travel and exploration - namely a thirst for the exotic, the extreme, and the unusual. His own narrative, he admits, does not provide these fabulous elements; nor does it provide the pleasant,

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

pastoral scenes, or the descriptions of highly cultivated  native peoples that  narra­ tives like Cook's had led readers to expect. Nonetheless, he insists that  his story has its own particular virtues, which will not disappoint  the open-minded  reader:

The events which compose my journals may have little in themselves to strike the imagination of those who love to be astonished, or to gratify the curiosity of such as are enamoured of romantic adventures; nevertheless, when it is considered that I explored those waters which had never before borne any other  vessel than  the canoe of the savage; and  traversed those deserts where an  European  had  never before presented himself to the eye of its swarthy native; when to these considera­ tions are added the important  objects which were pursued, with the dangers that were encountered, and  the difficulties that were surmounted  to attain them, this work will, I flatter myself, be found to excite an interest, and conciliate regard, in the minds of those who peruse it. (] 59)

The  chief purpose of Mackenzie's  book was in fact commercial. The  accounts of the  two  voyages, which  comprise the  heart  of the  book, are  preceded  by a description of the fur trade and followed by a brief concluding statement in which Mackenzie interprets the significance of his voyages, and urges the utility to British commerce of his favourite project, a union of the Hudson's Bay Company  with the Northwest  Company.  But for the  modern  reader,  these considerations  no longer matter. For  literary  purposes, the  important parts  of  Mackenzie's  book  are  the "Preface," which  makes some revealing statements  about  his conception  of his journeys and  his conception  of authorship,  and  his accounts  of the  two voyages themselves. Moreover, although  Mackenzie's historical significance may be equally divided between his roles as the first explorer of the Mackenzie River and the first man  to  cross the  continent  north  of  Mexico,  his literary  reputation  must  rest primarily  on the account of his second voyage, which is a much  longer and  more substantial  piece of writing than  the story of the first voyage.




l:E VOYAGE   DOWN   THE  MACKENZIE RIVER   was, everything considered, a remarkably  uneventful  journey. The  chief problem  was the finding of the river, hitherto known only by Indian  report. Once launched  on the new waterway,  Mackenzie  and  his voyageurs were borne swiftly along with  the  cur­ rent  to their  eventual  stopping  point  on  Garry  Island  in  the  Mackenzie  Delta. The   journey  upriver,  although   longer  and  more  laborious  than   the  descent, involved few of the difficulties and  uncertainties  which lend so much  interest  to Mackenzie's second voyage. The  second voyage, in contrast  to the  first, was one continual  succession of difficulties. Mackenzie  met  and  overcame  almost  all the obstacles which could confront  a canoe voyageur in the northern wilderness, from raging rivers to nearly impassable terrain  to reluctant  and  timorous  companions,

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

insufficiency of supplies and  lack of game in the countryside, hostile Indians  and failures  of his own  equipment. Given  this intrinsically  suspenseful  story  and  a variety  of exciting  incidents,  Mackenzie's  talents  were well suited  to recounting in a clear, simple manner  how he persevered and overcame  every obstacle to his progress.
Fortunately,  from a literary  point of view, the events of Mackenzie's second expedition  form  a pattern  which gives an effective dramatic shape  to his  narra­ tive. The  story begins slowly but satisfactorily, with  Mackenzie's departure from Fort Chipewyan  and  his journey to the place where he built the establishment  he called Fort  Fork, his winter  headquarters and staging-point  for  his spring depar­  ture. The  winter is quickly passed over, so that the narrative impetus is not lost in a mass of day-to-day  detail.  Such  incidents as are  given  help to give the reader the minimum  of knowledge about  the Indians and  the wilderness necessary to an appreciation of the events of the later narrative.  When the  journey is begun next spring  the  difficulties seem to occur in ascending  order, so that  Mackenzie sur­ mounts  one impossible obstacle only to be faced  with an  even  more impassable barrier. The  worst crisis comes when Mackenzie and  his men find it necessary to retrace their steps partway  back up the Fraser River  (as it came to be known)  in search of an Indian  route through  the coastal mountains. At the same time, Mac­ kenzie faces a  potential  rebellion among  his  men,  who have  grown  increasingly tired  and  discouraged  in  the  face of  apparently  endless obstacles, and  are  now frightened  by the apparent hostility of  the natives in the area through  which they are passing.
This  crisis is surmounted by a combination  of Mackenzie's  determination to
continue and his forceful eloquence, both of which he uses to persuade his people to  continue  to support   him,  and  by the  discovery that  the  difficulty  with  the natives  is all a  misunderstanding which  quickly  resolves itself. After  a  further series of difficulties and  adventures,  the  climax  of the story  comes when  Mac­ kenzie and his men reach an arm of the Pacific and, despite the incipient hostility of the natives of the area, succeed in taking an astronomical  observation for posi­ tion and in making their mark  (in vermillion and grease)  on the rock where they are encamped.  The  return  journey is much  more briefly described  than  the out­ ward  trek.  It  is an  easier  trip,  but  nonetheless  has  its own  difficulties, chiefly uncertainty  over the food supply, which keep it from  being an  anti-climax.  Not until  Mackenzie  is almost  all  the  way  back  to  his starting  point  is the  reader certain  that  he will keep his heroic posture to the end, and  not suffer an absurd and ignominious humiliation  on the return  journey.
Incidents  of extreme  hardship,  discouragement,  or resourcefulness make  up  a
good part of the Voyages, and are linked together by many other incidents which are only relatively less dramatic. Here is how Mackenzie describes one of the mis­ haps which were an almost daily occurrence:

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

Here  the  river  narrows between  steep  rocks, and  a rapid  succeeded, which  was so violent  that   we did  not  venture to run  it.  I  therefore ordered  the  loading to  be taken  out  of the  canoe,  but  she was now become  so heavy  that  the  men  preferred running the  rapid  to carrying her  overland. Though I did  not  altogether approve of  their  proposition, I  was  unwilling  to  oppose  it.  Four  of  them   undertook  this hazardous expedition, and  I hastened to the  foot  of the  rapid  with  great  anxiety, to wait  the  event,  which  turned out  as I expected. The  water  was so strong, that although they  kept  clear  of the  rocks, the canoe  filled, and  in  this state  drove  half way down  the  rapid, but  fortunately she did  not  overset; and  having got  her  into an  eddy,   they  emptied  her,   and   in  a  half-drowned  condition  arrived  safe   on shore.  (] 3 11 )

The prose  here  is clear  and  readable. Mackenzie's doubt about the  safety of  this undertaking, yet his  unwillingness to forbid it for  fear  of discouraging his men  by imposing a  too  heavy task  on  them, is well  portrayed. The reader is  reminded, without being  told  directly, that Mackenzie's desire  to  forward the  journey is far keener  than that of his men. Mackenzie's anxiety over  the  outcome is suggestively brought out  by  the  report that he  "hastened to  the  foot  of  the  rapid with great anxiety" to observe the  outcome.
One of the  most  vivid  adventures in  the  entire narrative occurs at  a  rapids on
a  tributary of  the  Fraser. The  clearness with   which Mackenzie  can   recall and enumerate the  successive stages of the  peril  through which he and  his men  passed gives  his  circumstantial account an  impact  usually associated with  a  much more deliberately evocative kind  of writing:

We ... had  proceeded but  a very short  way when  the  canoe  struck,  and  notwith­ standing all our  exertions, the violence  of the current was so great  as to drive  her sideways  down  the  river,  and  break  her  by the  first bar,  when  I  instantly  jumped  into  the  water,  and   the  men  followed  my example; but  before  we could  set  her straight, or  stop  her,  we  came  to  deeper  water,  so  that   we  were  obliged   to  re­ embark  with  the  utmost  precipitation. One  of the  men  was  not  sufficiently  active,  and   was  left  to  get  on  shore  in  the  best  manner in  his  power.  We  had   hardly regained our  situations when  we drove  against  a rock  which shattered the  stern  of the  canoe  in such  a manner, that  it held  only  by the gunwales, so that  the  steers­ man  could  no  longer  keep  his  place.  The  violence  of this  stroke  drove  us  to  the opposite  side of the  river,  which  is but  narrow, when  the  bow  met  the  same  fate  as the stern.  At this moment the  foreman seized on some  branches of a small  tree in the hope of bringing up the canoe,  but such was their elasticity  that, in a manner not  easily  described, he  was  jerked  on  shore  in  an  instant, and  with  a  degree  of violence  that  threatened his destruction. But we had  no time to turn  from  our  own situation to inquire what  had  befallen  him; for, in a few moments, we came  across a cascade  which  broke  several  large  holes in  the  bottom  of the  canoe,  and  started all  the  bars,  except  one  behind  the scooping  seat.  If this  accident, however, had not  happened, the  vessel must  have been irretrievably overset.  (] 297)

The wreck, now  almost flat  on  the  water, finally  came to rest  "from the  weight of the  canoe resting on  the  stones, rather than from any  exertions of our  exhausted

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

strength" (]  298). Despite  the  somewhat   abstract   vocabulary   and   typically eighteenth-century use of generalized expressions, the passage succeeds in convey­ ing the danger  and  violent action  the men  passed through.




T.IE CHIEF  CHARACTER of Mackenzie's narrative  is, of course, the  author   himself.  His  self-portrait   is not  a  rounded  characterization  but  is instead  a  highly selective picture  of the explorer  as hero. He  depicts  himself as the  originator  of and  leading  participant   in  the  expedition.  His  determination inspires the men to emulation; his resourcefulness finds a way around  each diffi­ culty and discovers the best route  to follow whenever choices present  theinselves; his bravery and  quick-wittedness  overcome the hostility of the Indians and secure their  co-operation.  Mackenzie  presents himself almost totally  in this  public  role. Glimpses of his private  thoughts  and  feelings are  rare. It  comes as a mild shock when  he reports  his sorrow  at  losing the  dog  they  had  brought  with  them  for almost  the entire  journey.  The  surprise  is increased  because  Mackenzie,  unlike almost  any  other  writer,  has  resisted any  temptation  to  include  amusing  anec­ dotes of  the  dog's  behaviour  on  the  trip.  The  dog's  presence  is not  even  an­ nounced  when the expedition sets off on the journey; he is never mentioned  until Mackenzie  tells us, "we  had  lost our  dog, a  circuinstance  of no small  regret  to me"  (] 372). Yet this is more emotion than  he has shown over any of the suffer­ ings of his men.
Mackenzie  casts himself almost exclusively as the man of single-minded  vision
and  determination. Yet there is a self-effacing quality to Mackenzie's depiction of his own efforts, for he never seems to act  purely from self-interest but  always in the  best  interest  of  the  expedition,  the  completion  of  which  assumes  all  the urgency of a mission. During  the crisis on the Fraser River, when it is feared the Indians  have turned  hostile, Mackenzie tells his readers:

These perplexing circumstances made a deep impression on my mind, not as to our immediate safety, for I entertained not the least apprehension of the Indians I had hitherto seen, even if their whole force should have been combined to attack  us, but these outward  events seemed to threaten the prosecution of my journey; and I could not reflect on the possibility of such a disappointment but with sensations little short of agony. (] 326)

The  completion  of the  journey  has become a moral  imperative.  When  his men begin to waver, Mackenzie seeins to try to win them back to his cause by attempt­ ing to imbue them  with a desire to do what he feels is no less than their duty:

I brought to their recollection, that  I did not deceive them, and  that  they were made acquainted  with the difficulties and dangers they must expect to encounter,

66

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

before  they engaged  to  accompany  me.  I  also urged  the  honour  of conquering disasters, and  the disgrace  that  would attend  them on their  return  home, without having attained  the object of the expedition. Nor did I fail to mention  the courage and  resolution that  was the peculiar boast of the North  men:  and  that  I depended on them, at that moment,  for the maintenance  of their character. (]  299)

In  this speech,  as elsewhere,  Mackenzie's shrewd  handling of  his own  men  is made evident; simply  by giving  a paraphrase of his speeches  he is able  to convey the  way he manipulates the  men,  without  offering  an  intrusive explanation of his state  of mind  or of the  reasoning behind  his arguments. Sometimes, as above,  he appeals to their  pride. At other  times it is plain that  he exploits their  sense of being inferiors  on a fixed social scale, and  comes close to intimidating them  by the sheer force of his avowal  of the desire  to continue:

I informed  him  that  I  was not  altogether  a stranger  to  their  late  conversations, from whence I drew the conclusion that  they wished to put an end  to the voyage. If that  were so, I expressed  my wish that  they would  be explicit,  and  tell me at once  of  their  determination to  follow me  no  longer.  I  concluded, however,  by assuring him, that  whatever  plan  they had  meditated  to pursue,  it  was my fixed and  unalterable  determination to  proceed, in spite of every difficulty  that  might oppose, or danger  that  should  threaten  me. The  man  was very much  mortified at my addressing this remonstrance particularly  to him;  and  replied,  that  he did  not deserve my displeasure any more than the rest of them. My object  being answered, the conversation dropped,  and  the work went on. (]  333)

He  is also able  to  confront the  Indians when  necessary,  or  to  conciliate them and  win them  over  to serving  his  purposes.  Near  the  coast,  for  example, as they approach a village  on  the  Bella  Coola  River,  they see that  the  Indians are  run­ ning about  "as if in a state  of very great  alarm."

This  very unpleasant  and  unexpected  circumstance,  I  attributed to  our  sudden arrival,  and  the very short  notice of it which had  been given them.  At all events, I had but one line of conduct  to pursue, which was to walk resolutely up to them, without  manifesting  any  signs of apprehension  at  their  hostile  appearance. This resolution produced  the desired effect, for as we approached the houses, the greater part of the people laid down their weapons, and came forward  to meet us. (] 364)

His manipulation of the Indians by more subtle  means is often  also well described. At  one  point  an  Indian chief  wishes to  borrow  Mackenzie's canoe  to  transport his family  across a river,  a circumstance which  would  delay  the  expedition and might  expose the  canoe  to the  danger  of accident  or  theft.  However, Mackenzie knows  it  would  be impolitic to  refuse  outright, without offering  an  explanation the  Indians can  understand. "Several plausible  reasons,"  Mackenzie says,

suggested themselves for resisting his proposition; but when I stated  to him, that, as the canoe  was intended  for  a  voyage of such consequence,  no  woman  could  be permitted  to be embarked  in it, he acquiesced in the refusal.  (]  260)

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

At  other  times  Mackenzie must  allow  his European sense of delicacy, surpris­ ingly strong  for a man  of his profession,  to take a back seat  to the  need for retain­ ing  a reluctant Indian as their  guide  and  sponsor  to the  next  village.  On  several occasions,  the  expedient he  uses is to share  the  sleeping  robes  of  the  refractory Indian, thus  ensuring his presence  on the  morrow:

These  people  have  no covering  but  their  beaver garments,  and  that  of my  com­ panion was a nest of vermin. I, however, spread it under us, and  having laid down upon it, we covered ourselves with my camblet cloak. My companion's hair  being greased with fish-oil, and  his body smeared with red earth,  my sense of  smelling, as well as that  of feeling, threatened to interrupt my rest;  but  these  inconveniences yielded to my fatigue, and  I passed a night of sound repose. (]342)

Mackenzie's single-minded determination  to succeed,  his subordination of all other  considerations to  that  end,  becomes  the  repeated theme   of  the  narrative. He  contrasts his purposeful way  of thinking with  the  less disciplined outlook  of the  members  of his crew  and  with  the  chaotic  behaviour of the  Indians. In  the end  the crooked  is made  smooth, and  Mackenzie achieves  his goal. In  the  process, the  modern reader may  think,  opportunities for  valuable  insights  into  himself or the  people he passed  among have  been lost. But whatever the  ultimate judgment may  be, it is difficult  to deny  that  the spectacle  of the  powerful Scotsman, Alex­ ander  Mackenzie, prevailing single-handed (or  so  it  seems)   over  raging  rivers and  precipitous mountains is an  impressive  and  exciting  one.  The climax  of his labours, the  moment when  he "mixed up some vermillion  in  melted  grease, and inscribed, in  large  characters ... this  brief  memorial  -'Alexander  Mackenzie, from  Canada, by land, the  twenty-second of July,  one  thousand  seven  hundred and  ninety  three'" (] 378), is a suitably  evanescent emblem of  the  power  and mastery  he thought his journey  embodied. Yet the scene is nonetheless  both  digni­ fied and  moving.




ALTHOUGH, IN    FACT,  Simon   Fraser's  journey   down   the Fraser  canyon  may  have  been  a  match  for  Mackenzie's journey  in  danger   and excitement, the  written accounts of the  two voyages are  not  equal. Fraser's  jour­ nal is in diary  form, and  is characterized by brief reports  of the  day's events, sel­ dom  very detailed, and  by no attempt at narrative continuity other than  that  pro­ vided  by the  events  of the  voyage  itsel£.4 Fraser's account  reveals great  potential for heroic  character portrayal, but  the materials are not developed sufficiently for the  reader to form  a clear  picture of Fraser  or of the  magnitude  of  his achieve­ ments.  Fraser's journal remains a document of primarily  historical interest, with secondary value as an account of an exciting  adventure. But  Mackenzie's account,

68

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

by contrast,  is clearly seen to  have  values which  transcend  its  purely  historical significance, and which make it a piece of writing with intrinsic  merits.
Nevertheless, Fraser's  journal  provides an  interesting  comparison  with  Mac­
kenzie's  narrative. Fraser's   journey  was  in  many  ways similar  to  Mackenzie's
1793 western voyage, so that in Fraser's diary of his journey we have a document similar in nature  to the lost original  journal of Mackenzie's second voyage, upon which the final narrative  was based. By examining Fraser's  journal, we can obtain a fuller  appreciation of the  powers of analysis and  expression which  must  have been displayed in Mackenzie's original manuscript. From a literary viewpoint, a reading  of Fraser's  account  serves chiefly to  reveal  how greatly  the  way  Mac­ kenzie's story is told -not simply its skeleton of events -contributes  to its final impact.
In  basic structure,  and  in  the  nature  of  the  materials  of  the  story,  Fraser's journal closely resembles Mackenzie's narrative.  The story is composed of a series of adventures and  hardships,  involving near-disasters in the  rapids,  difficult  ter­ rain,  hostile or recalcitrant   Indians,  and  rebellious members  of  the  expedition. These are also the materials of Mackenzie's  narrative.  But Fraser's presentation  is different.  For one thing,  he does not keep attention  focused  rigidly on  himself; instead,  he usually speaks of "we,"  referring  to his whole  party. As a result, the reader  is not  made  constantly  aware  of a single will  driving  the  party  forward,  although  from  occasional  incidents  we can  infer  that  Fraser  does  need  all  his resourcefulness and  persuasive powers at times to keep his men committed  to the journey. But generally in his account  some of the sense of dramatic isolation and forceful  endeavour  that  is ever-present  in  Mackenzie's  narrative is missing.
The  descriptions of encounters  with the Indians  are also frequently  lacking  in
the  drama  and  suspense which  Mackenzie  infuses into  his stories of such  inci­ dents. Where  Mackenzie's  account  is circumstantial  and  clear,  Fraser's  tends  to be general and vague, giving least detail where the reader  would most  like to be informed:
I applied to the Chief  in consequence of his promise  of yesterday  for his canoe,  but he paid  no attention to my request. I, therefore, took the canoe  and  had  it carried to the water  side. The  Chief  got it carried  back.  We again  laid  hold  of it. He  still resisted,  and  made  us understand that  he was the greatest  of his nation and  equal in  power  to  the  sun.  However as  we could  not  go  without  [the   canoe]  we  per­ sisted and  at last gained  our  point. (L 104)

The  means, so lightly passed over in the final sentence, by which  Fraser  and  his men "gained  our  point"  is the very thing the reader  would most like to be told at  length.  But  the  dramatic details  of the  confrontation   are  omitted.  Likewise, when  forced  by policy to bed  down  with  one of the  Indians,  Fraser  omits  the personal details which  made  Mackenzie's  account  so vivid:  "Apprehensive that the old man  might  regret  his undertaking  and  give us the slip in  the  course of

6g

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO


the  night," Fraser   reports in  his undemonstrative way, "I had  his  bed  made  in my tent  by way of security" ( L 67).
Nonetheless,  even  the  laconic Fraser  is at  times moved  by the extremity of the perils through which  he passes:

It being absolutely impossible to carry the canoes by land, yet sooner than  to aban­ don them, all hands without  hesitation embarked, as it were a corp perdu upon the mercy of this Stygian  tide. Once engaged the die was cast, and  the great  difficulty consisted in keeping  the canoes in the medium, or  fil d'eau, that  is to say, clear of the precipice  on one  side, and  of the gulphs formed  by the  waves  on  the  other. However, thus skimming along like lightning,  the crews cool and  determined,  fol­ lowed each other  in awful silence. And [when]  arrived at the end  we stood gazing on our narrow escape from perdition.  (L 76)

The  precarious spiderweb of  Indian  ladders, upon  which   he  must   rely  when climbing up and  down  the canyon  walls, calls forth  this understated yet evocative description:

We had to pass where no human  being should venture. Yet in those places there is a regular  footpath impressed, or rather  indented,  by frequent  travelling  upon  the very rocks. And  besides this, steps which are formed  like a ladder,  or the shrouds of a ship, by poles hanging  to one another  and  crossed at  certain  distances with twigs and withes, suspended  from the top to the foot of precipices, and fastened at both  ends  to  stones  and  trees,  furnished  a  safe  and  convenient   passage  to  the Natives-but we, who had  not the advantages  of their experience,  were often in imminent  danger,  when obliged to follow their example.  (L g6)

These   passages,  however, are  the  rhetorical high  points  of  Fraser's account. They  are  almost  the  only  places  where  he  writes  with  an  attempt to  create  an effect,  or  tries  to  convey  something of  his own  mental state  in  other   than   the most general  and  neutral terms.  In  addition, he seldom  expands on  the  incidents he  describes.  The only  lengthy  account  of an  adventure is a story,  given  in  the words  of the  man  to  whom  it happened, telling  of an  upset  in one  of the  rapids in  which  the  man   was  swept  downstream for  three  miles  clinging   to  an  over­ turned canoe  ( L go-g r ) . This  account, however,  does not  come  anywhere  near the excitement of Mackenzie's story of canoe-wreck and  near disaster.
Usually, Fraser's story  is couched  in quite  undramatic terms.  Yet  the  potential for  exciting  scenes  like  Mackenzie's is  present  in  Fraser's account. Like  Mac­ kenzie,  upon  occasion  he  can  express  a single-minded determination to  succeed.  When  the  Indians suggest  an  overland detour  to the easier  Thompson  River,  he announces: "But going  to  the  sea  by an  indirect way  was  not  the  object  of the undertaking. I therefore would  not deviate  and  continued our  route according to my  original  intention" ( L 6g). And  Fraser's sense of  the  isolation  of  his  party  amid   hostile  peoples,  and   of  their  utter  dependence on  their  own  resources,  is sometimes as strong as Mackenzie's:

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

Here  we  are,  in  a  strange  country,  surrounded   with  dangers,  and   difficulties, among  numberless tribes of savages, who never saw the face of a white man. Our situation  is critical  and  highly  unpleasant; however  we shall  endeavour   to  make the best of it: what cannot  be cured, must be endured. ( L 8I -82)

Fraser's shrewd  and  bold handling of the Indians is often evident. At one  point when  the  Indians appear to  be  on  the  point  of  commencing hostilities  of  some kind,  he reports:

Sensible from our critical  situation  that  mild measures would be improper  and  of no service, I pretended  to be in a violent passion, spoke loud, with  vehement  ges­ tures  and  signs exactly  in  their  own way;  and  thus  peace  and  tranquility  were instantly  restored. (L 108)

At times  Fraser  too must shore  up  the flagging  spirits  of his men:

I remonstrated  and  threatened by turns. The  other  gentlemen  joined  my  endea­ vours in  exposing  the  folly of  their  undertaking   [to  go another   way] ,  and  the advantages  that  would accrue  to us all by remaining  as we had  hitherto  done  in perfect  union  for  our  common  welfare. After  much  debate  on  both  sides,  our deliquents  yielded and  we all shook hands,  resolving never to separate during  the voyage; which resolution  was immediately  confirmed  by the  following  oath  taken on the spot by each  of the  party:  "I  solemnly swear before Almighty God  that  I shall  sooner  perish  than  forsake  in distress any  of  our  crew  during  the  present voyage." (L I I3)

Interesting as such  an  account is, it still lacks the  immediacy of Mackenzie's sug­
gestive paraphrases of his own speeches  to his men  on similar  occasions.
Although  Fraser   never   revised  his  narrative for  publication, we  nonetheless have  an  opportunity of observing him  at  work  as an  editor. The  only  complete journal  extant of  his  voyage  is a  shortened account  which  he  prepared for  his superiors in  the  fur  trade  from  his original  notes.  A section  of  what  appears to be the original diary  entries  made  at  the  time  of the  journey  have  also survived, and show how  Fraser  altered  his original  version in preparing his revised account. Fraser's  revisions  actually lessen the  literary  impact of  his writing. Although he introduces a great  variety of sentence  structure and  phrasing, he eliminates most of the  details  of day-to-day (and sometimes  minute-by-minute)  difficulties  with the erratic and  changeable Indians. He eliminates many  of the  comments which indicate the  perplexed state  of mind  of his  men  and  his exasperated impatience to get moving  again. In short,  he loses many  of the  human details  which  could give his story colour  and  depth. The most notable  losses are  the  repeated observa­ tions on  the  strength and  danger  of the  river,  which  by sheer  repetition give  to the diary  fragment, despite  its unsophisticated form,  a profound sense of the  awe which  the powers of nature inspired  in Fraser,  and  an acute sense of the smallness  of man  before such  prodigies  of nature.

THE EXPLORER AS HERO



MACKENZIE AND   FRASER are,  when  all  is said,  heroes  in an  old-fashioned mould. At least  that  is how  they appear when  seen  through the lens of their  own  writings. It is too easy and  perhaps too tempting for the  modem reader  to impose  a layer  of irony  onto  the  basically  simple  vision  of  writers  like Mackenzie and  Fraser; too easy to remember that  Mackenzie did  not,  after  all, really find a practical fur  trade route,  and  that  Fraser  did  not follow  the  Colum­ bia  River  to the  sea,  as he  had  hoped  to  do;  too easy to introduce the  modem distrust   of  unambiguous statement  and   black-and-white  vision;  especially   too easy to invoke  our  distrust  of unquestioned self-sufficiency and superiority.
The  worlds  of  Mackenzie and  Fraser  seem  to contain   no ambiguities or  sha­ dows.  Every  event  is clearly  either  a  step  towards  the  goal,  or  a  setback  to the quest.  We know  that  the raw  nature which  Mackenzie and  Fraser  appear to have mastered is in fact  stronger than  any individual human  being.  Yet, in  reading the narratives, we suspend  for  a  time  our  awareness  of this  truth. If  the  simplicity  and  narrowness of  Mackenzie's and  Fraser's vision  prevents  their  writing from achieving elaborate literary effects,  nonetheless  the  very  simplicity  and   narrow­ ness of their  concerns create the  strengths of their  stories -strengths  which  are considerable.
The  first issue of that  formidable periodical, the Edinburgh Review, carried an article  on  Mackenzie's Voyages  from  Montreal which,  as  Victor   Hopwood  has observed, "touches shrewdly   upon  the  attraction of  Mackenzie's Voyages": 5

There  is something  in the idea of traversing  a vast and  unknown  continent, that gives an agreeable  expansion  to our conceptions;  and  the imagination  is insensibly engaged and  inflamed  by the spirit of adventure,  and the  perils and  novelties that are implied in a voyage of discovery.

The author of the  article  goes on  to  describe  the  single-mindedness with  which
Mackenzie pursues  his journey:

He followed a painful  course, through  difficulties and dangers, to an unknown termination; and  went steadily forward,  without  knowing where  he  was to issue, amidst  the roaring  cataracts,  and  the solitude of mountains; exposed  to the daily hazard  of shipwreck,  and  famine,  and  mutiny;  and  to the danger  of treachery  or assault from  the melancholy  savages that  roamed across his course, or reluctantly consented  to direct it.6

This  description makes  plain  the  romantic aura  with  which  a sympathetic reader can  surround  Mackenzie's story,  and  suggests  the  heroic  dimensions which   the author and  chief  protagonist has assumed  by the end of his tale.
Today we tend  to dislike the  man  who sets out  to impose  himself  on others  or
on nature. But Mackenzie and  Fraser  did not share our  prejudices against simpli­
city or dogmatism. Nor did  they share  the contemporary ironic  distrust  of success.

THE EXPLORER AS  HERO

Mackenzie feels he has gained  his objective,  and  says so. He  does  not  assert  that he  is a hero,  but  his  narrative makes  him  one.  He  and  Fraser  tell stories  which are,  in  underlying form,  closer to the heroic  tale or romance than  to the  modern novel.  Their deeds  and  their  determination make  them  seem  to  be greater men than the  reader  imagines himself  to be. Their limited  outlook  gives every step  of their   journeys  a  greater significance   than   the  reader   feels  exists  in  the  world around him.  They   appear to  have  achieved   more  than   common mortals can aspire  to do.

NOTES

1 Roy Daniells, "The  Literary Relevance of Alexander Mackenzie," Canadian Litera­
ture, No. 38 (Autumn  1968),  p. 20.
2   W. Kaye Lamb, ed., The Journals  and  Letters  of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie  (Cam­ bridge:   Cambridge University   Press, 1970),  p.  21 r. Subsequent   references  are given in the text and are identified by the abbreviation J.
3  Voyages from  Montreal  (Toronto:  Radisson Society, 1926),  p.  206. Subsequent references are given in the text and are identified by the abbreviation V.
4  W. Kaye Lamb,  ed., The Letters  and  Journals  of Simon Fraser,  1Bo6-I8o8  (To­ ronto:   Macmillan,  1960).  Subsequent  references  are  given  in  the  text  and are identified by the abbreviation L.
Carl
Press, 1965),  p. 29.
6  Edinburgh Review, I (1802), 141,142.










THE BURIED SELF

Joyce Carol Oates


innocent  as lace it is froth groping gumming  its speech
its small measured  breaths mimic yours

wading enormous in the Everglades stinging like nicotine in your sight the Arctic of its appetite  appalls

73


review articles




TO THE PAST VIA THE FUTURE


George Woodcock


MATT COllEN,  The  Colours  of War. McClelland & Stewart, $1o.oo.


THEODORE  BEAM, the  central figure  of Matt Cohen's new novel, The Colours  of War, travels  through the  fu­ ture  to return to the past,  and  as he  jour­ neys, past,  present  and  future mingle  like the  colours  of a  shaken  kaleidoscope.
Theodore, son  of  the  Jewish  editor of a newspaper in the rural Ontario town of Salem, has  left  home  and   wandered to Vancouver, where   he  lives  the   kind  of easy  existence -life without  destination
-that  is possible on  the  Coast.
Social life, as he is rather dimly  aware, is breaking down  all over  North America, for hunger has at last begun  to afflict even the  formerly affiuent  lands,  and  disorder follows hunger; the  governments react  in the  only  way  that  governments can:

Every  day  it  seemed  there   were  new  dec­ larations  of  emergencies   and   martial  law. Not  exactly   a  new  law;   things   being  the same as always but  carried one step further.

One  day the irrational hand of power reaches  out  to  Theodore, when  two  de­ tectives  invade his flat, rough  him  up and ransack  his rooms. He is not sure whether they  have  come  because  of the  packet  of cocaine   which   his  Chinese  landlady ex­ pertly   removes   from   their  sight,   or  for something mysterious  which  he  does  not in fact  possess.
The day is his birthday, and  that  night his father rings up from  Salem. Theodore

74
 
decides  to  accept   Jacob Beam's  sugges­ tion that  he return home. But the journey  that   takes  him  back  into   his  past,  and  also  in  a  sense  into  Canada's  past,  goes by way of a future that  may await  us all. When  he  reaches  the  station  he  finds  it packed   with   people   responding  to  ob­ scure  fears  and  self-preservatory  urges.

Not  only were  the  departing trains  com­ pletely  booked,  but  the  station   was  further  swollen  with  those  who  were  arriving. And for every one of us who was fleeing  to some more  certain   home  in  the  East,  it  seemed there  were several  who  hoped that  the mild wet winters of the  Coast  would  be easier  to survive. I was  reminded again  of old stories of the depression and the vast armies of the unemployed crisscrossing the country: when nothing  else is possible, motion  promises  to fill the stomach.

Theodore manages to book a roomette on  one  of the  trains that  are  leaving,  to find eventually  that  it is no ordinary train. True, there are coaches  where  bonafide travellers,  unaware of the  real  purpose  of the   journey,  are   crowded together and give an appearance of ordinariness to the train.  But  there  are  also sealed  vans, and these  are  filled  with  arms  and  ammuni­ tion, and  are in the  control of  a group  of guerillas.  Theodore has  already encoun­ tered    the   partisan   leader  Christopher Perestrello  by  chance  in  the  station   res­ taurant.   "There  was   a   certain  power about  him. His  voice  and  features  were

REVIEW ARTICLES



so  strong  he  seemed   almost   dangerous, even  cruel: not  the careless cruelty  of the police  but something more  purposeful." Perestrello is attacked by a  stranger and when  the two are escorted  out of the restaurant by  the  police  Theodore  picks up an envelope Perestrello has left on the table.  It contains a map  of the  route the train  will   traverse,  marked  at   certain spots  with   mysterious  signs,  and  Theo­ dore's possession of it leads  him into  con­ tact  with  the  partisans, for in  the  bar  car on  the  train he  meets  a  girl  named Lise who  takes  him  to her  room  on  the  train,  and   then   pulls  a  revolver  and   demands the  map.
Theodore becomes  Lise's  lover,  learns
of  her  long  connection with   an  under­ ground group  seeking  to  undermine the established governments of  North Ameri­  ca  and  also  realizes  the  true  purpose of the train, which Perestrello has organized through his railway  union  contacts to dis­ tribute  arms to  partisan groups  all  over the country and  to spread  rebellion  in its wake.  Theodore is accepted into  the par­ tisan  group, and  is present  when the citi­ zen  soldiers  of  Regina,  mobilized by  the government to preserve order,  go over  to Perestrello's cause,  and  the  one  farmer who opposes  is shot  in  the square outside  the  hotel  as Theodore  watches.

And  standing at  this  window,  looking  out at   this   scene,  we   might   have   been   any­ where,  in  any  of  the  dozens  of  cities  that have  seen  revolutions   and  coups,  reprisals and  executions....
... I had always thought that  the external world  would  plod along forever,  unchanged,
a comfortable and amorphous bureaucracy, surrounding  my  life   like   a  giant   marsh­ mallow,  a giant  excuse.  Now  that  was fad­  ing  and  I was beginning  to feel  responsible for  every moment  I lived.

The  train  goes  on,   stopping  several times  every  night  for  crates  of  weapons to be hurriedly unloaded. Theodore feels "as  if  the  train   was  now  turning itself into  a long metal  arrow drawing together
 the endless years of strikes, shortages, summer riots,  outbursts of  violence,  into one spectacular collision." He  is not  sure whether the partisans are  involved in a general  uprising  in which  the  unions  and the army will combine to take over the country, or  whether Perestrello is merely hoping   his  journey   will   coincide  with other events to make a revolutionary situation. The latter seems  in  fact  to  be the  case.
All  through  this   journey,    in   dreams and  reveries, Theodore is returning to the past  that  Salem-daily drawing nearer
-represents  for  him.  Perhaps the  most
evocative memory  is that   of  a  visit  as a child to his ancient orthodox Jewish grandfather. He  looks at  the  strange, gnome-like,  ancient man,  and  shining out of a withered face sees "the pale blue eyes that  I recognized  as my eyes but  a  thou­ sand   years  old,  my  eyes  shining  out   of his face...."

As I lay in bed and  waited  for sleep,  I held a secret  in my mind-that my grandfather and   I were  the  same   person,   that   I  had seen myself in  the  mirror  of the  glass door, and   then   the   door   had   opened    and   he stepped  out: me in disguise.

The whole  interlude reveals  the  same in­ tense  concern   with   tradition and   con­ tinuity   that   emerged  in  Cohen's  earlier  novel, The Dispossessed, and  it is signifi­ cant  that  the  grandfather's gift  to Theo­ dore should  be that  of time, objectified in a gold watch, thin  and  old.
Even  Perestrello-and this assessment
of the revolutionary mind  is certainly one of the  thematic notes  of  The Colours  of War-is   really  entering  the   future  to find the past.  (And  what  else, indeed, did either  Marx  or Bakunin attempt?)  In the last scene in which  he is actually present, Perestrello talks  about "pure force," not merely as the urge of modern  revolution­ aries,  but  also  as  the  urge  that   brought the  people  of  the  old  world  to  the  new world.  Men  had  destroyed Europe;  they

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



came  to the Americas where: "Before  we came,  men  lived  here  as  true  men,  and every  human being  knew  the  meaning of his  own  life."  The land  was  waiting, to "take for  our  own."

Perestrello shrugged and  leaned further over   the  table  and the  map this  world   had become. "Of   course, we  were   wrong. The future was only  the  past  in  an  elaborate dis­ guise.  The continent was  ruined as  easily  as a  child or  a  wife.  With the  slaves  and   the killings  we  poisoned ourselves. We  began  to realize   that the  new  world had  already be­ come  the  old.  There was  no  place to  receive  us.  We   could  only   go   round  and    round, repeating ourselves.
"I still  have  hope,"  Perestrello said. "Somewhere inside  us  there's  a  place   that has   never   been   touched, and   is  still  inno­ cent, waiting to  be  discovered. When  we've  suffered, when   the  violence is  over  and the false  governments  have   fallen,  when we're simple   men  and women again,  standing on the  face  of  the  earth, there'll  be  something we  can  reach for,   something   noble   inside  us."

In  fact,  Perestrello is a creature of the time  of violence,  and  never  survives  into an   age   of  innocence  regained.  As  the train  continues on  its  journey,  it becomes evident that  all is not so completely in his control as it  appeared at  the  beginning. His companion, Felipa, is attacked on the train  by double  agents; he himself is wounded by an  unknown gunman at  the last  rendezvous for  the  delivery  of arms; news comes  that  government troops  have suppressed   the  insurgents in  Regina  and Vancouver; finally,  the  train  reaches  a railway   yard   where   government  troops are  awaiting it  with  artillery, and  in  the skirmish   Perestrello  is  killed.   Theodore and   Lise  escape   and   so,  independently, does Felipa.
Theodore and  Lise  make  their  way  to Salem,  which  is filled with  government soldiers whom  Theodore fears. Neverthe­ less,  there   are   some   hilarious   bibulous  interludes  with   Jacob  Beam   and   other  town characters, before Theodore decides to  take   refuge   in  an   abandoned  stone
 church, converted into  a dwelling,  which lies in  the  countryside near  Salem  and  is the property of an octagenarian lady, Katherine Malone, who  had  delivered Theodore's mother. When  he  goes  there to ask her  pennission to live in the house, he  sees  a  picture of  Katherine  on  her twenty-first birthday, sixty years  before.

In those  days  she  had  been  immortal; her bones  slender  and   long,   her  eyes  tinted  so they  shone like  bright beacons of  rural  con­ fidence. The  house  in  the  background  had  been  almost a  mansion in  that era  of  pros­  perity.   Although   now    it    shambled   and sagged, the  wood  coming  through the  paint, in   those   days   it  was  gleaming  white  with hedges   and   flower   bushes   that  grew   thick  around the  stone  foundation walls.

Katherine still lives as a personification of  a  simpler   world,   the  old  house  still stands,   and   the  old  church  even   more solidly. There Theodore lives, after  Felipa has  appeared and   led  Lise  away   to  be­ come an  urban  guerilla. Hiding from  the soldiers, he writes  the book we have  been reading, hunting  his  food  in  the  woods around him  with  an  old  gun  Katherine has given  him,  until,  in  the  last  pages of the novel, Lise returns.

Once we  dreamed of  being   citizens of  a perfect  state.  The  cells   of  our   body   ran wild  with faith, pushing us  through  child­ hood   to  this  place we  have  reached.  I re­ member the  dreams; but  sometimes it  can't be  helped-I hear   not   music   but   armies moving in  the  night.
The earth will  try  to  feed  us,  no  matter how  foolish  we  are.  Soon   Jacob Beam  will sit out  in  the  garden in  the  afternoons, feel­ ing   his  eyes  go  blind, the  sun  crossing  his face.
Old   words  flood  through me.  This hand
records them-my  hand, my father's hand.
The sky is clear and  the  sun  is out. I can see  Lise  walking across   the  field   a  rifle  in
her  arms. For  this  day  there is  food  again.
We  will  go on  living  here.

It is Theodore, in his action, who has returned to the  innocence Perestrello sought  in  vain  through action.
There are  features of The Colours  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



War   that,   if we  consider  the  book  as  a novel, seem exasperatingly ineffectual. Perestrello is a figure  we never  enter; in­ deed,  encased  in his impeccable blue uni­ form,  he  is remote even  from  the  other  characters,  and   we  do   not   witness  his death, which  is narrated with offhand in­ direction. Lise and  Felipa are type figures of   naive    and    cynical   radicalism,  the sacred  and  profane  poles  of political  en­ thusiasm. All three might  be members  of a  dream   of which  the  great   train   is the vehicle,   and   one   reviewer   has   already  accused   Matt  Cohen   of  populating his book with  mannequins.
The criticism   would   be  valid   if  one were  indeed  thinking of The Colours  of War  as a novel in the ordinary sense. But by the same  criterion, the  King  of  Brob­ dingnag in  Gulliver's Travels  and  even O'Brien in  rg84  might  also  be  dismissed as mannequins, because  they  are not  de-
 veloped   and   credible  as  human  beings. However,  their    function  is   something quite  different, as is the function of  Peres­ trello and  the two women  in The Colours  of War. Theodore is  in  fact   a  kind  of latter-day Candide, set  to  wander  as  an innocent through the  man-made jungles of  the  present, and  to  find  that   all  the promises   of  the   future  are   illusory   in comparison with  the  rediscovery of roots and  of  Matt  Cohen's wry  equivalent of Voltaire's   cultivation  of   one's   garden. Despite  appearances, it  is,  as  Voltaire's was,  a  counsel   of  defiance rather  than  defeat,   of  life  continuing  its  tenacious way  in  the  ruin  of  social  order   and   of political  idealism.  Considered as a novel, The Colours of War  may seem a madden­ ing  failure;  considered as  a  parable­ which  I believe  is what  Cohen   intended
-it is direct  and  luminous and  salutary.



ROMANTIC OFFENSIVE: Tish

Peter Qyartermain

FRANK  DAVEY, ed.,  Tish  No.  1-19. Talonbooks, $12.95·
c.  H.  GERVAis, ed.,  The   Writing   Life:   Historical  & Critical   Views   of the  Tish
Movement. Introduction  by Frank Davey. Black  Moss  Press,  $4.25.
KEITH   RICHARDSON,  Poetry  and  the   Colonized   Mind:  Tish.  Preface  by   Robin
Mathews. Mosaic Press/Valley Editions, $3.95.

"I RUBBED MY EYES A LITTLE," Emerson   wrote   to  Whitman, "to   see  if this ... were  no illusion"; yet such  work "must have  had  a long foreground some­ where." It  would   not   do   to  push   the parallel  between  Tish  in  Ig6I   and  Leaves of Grass in  I855 (and besides, who would play  Emerson?), but  it  is  tempting in­ deed  to suggest a parallel  between  Robin Mathews  and   the  Boston   Intelligencer, which saw  Leaves of  Grass originating in lunacy.    Professor   Mathews  and   Keith  Richardson, in  Poetry  and  the  Colonized  Mind, see Tish as originating in what  for them   amounts   to   the   same   thing,   the
 
Black  Mountain "school." The influence of poets like Greeley,  Duncan, and  Olson on Tish need  not  be denied, nor  do I  be­ lieve it need  be attacked; the  "long fore­  ground" of Tish, however,  lies elsewhere.
In a recent  (Spring I977)  issue of Contemporary Verse  Two, Frank Davey listed  as  sources  for  Vancouver writing such  writers  as Pound, Bunting, Stein, Butor,  Merleau-Ponty, and  H. D., among others; in the  "Introduction" to  The Writing Life he says that  "the Tish move­ ment   has  its  roots  in  Matthew  Arnold's view of the writer  as cultural custodian." Perhaps it does. The first  nineteen issues

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  Tish, certainly,   are  insistent  on   re­
deeming  men's  vision  through  language
-and  that  idea  has  a  long  history  in­ deed. I would like to point,  though, to a couple   of  things   about   Tish's   origins, forebears -for  there  is  something  very curious about  that magazine, which needs an accounting: for a crummily  produced,  fragile,  rubbishy-looking   piece  of  ephe­ mera,  filled  with  goopy  statement   after goopy   statement,  facetious,   irreverent,  and sometimes downright  rude, not to say crude, Tish had a lot of power and a considerable influence. How come? What is the source and  nature  of that  power? And after some sixteen or so years, that power  is  still  there  to  be  felt:   reading back issues of old magazines certainly  has its  politely   boring   moments,    yet Tish seems  to  have  fewer  of  them  than  one might   perhaps   expect.  One   need  read only a few pages of Tish  to recognize that it offers  a  disturbance  or  challenge   to something  far  deeper  than  Richardson's
currently  fashionable   jingoistic  national­
ism. Tish, I  suspect,  offends  a  sense of order  and  propriety  deep-rooted  in  gen­ teel Canadian letters.
Aside from  the  youth  of its  contribu­ tors, Tish  draws  its energies  and  power from,  I  think,  two  main  circumstances. The  first  that   I  would  point  to  is that Tish  is a part  of the legacy of Romantic­ ism; and second, that  it is a magazine  of the contemporary City, offers a poetry of the  City   (and   I   believe  it  is  the  first Canadian  magazine  to do so) . The  Ro­ mantic   artist    reinvents    his   art    from scratch,  he  makes  it  new, as  though  no one  had  written  or  painted  before  him; he forgets his history, he ignores conven­ tion, he devises his own technique.  Keats runs the risk of Blackwood's and the Quarterly;  Blake runs the risk of arrest. Lyrical Ballads is scorned, Byron loses his private life, is the first film star, and Whitman   is  driven  to  pen  his  own  re­ views. (The  opening  issues of Tish  con-
 tinually   ask  "What  is  a   Poem?"   and come up with weird answers-e.g., "all poetry is spontaneous.")  I would  talk of the  Romantic   Offensive,  were  the  pun not too crude. The  offence is to succumb to  the  tempting   notion-which  easily becomes an assumption-that sensibility is enough, is adequate equipment  for the writing of poetry  (or the painting  of  pic­ tures),  that  poems are  made out  of  feel­ ings, or out of ideas or even  convictions. Yet as he persists in his work, the Roman­  tic   discovers   (and   the   discovery  may make  him  give up)   that  the  pursuit  or service  of  the   Mallarmean  Work   de­ mands  a  very  great  deal  of  solid  hard labour and of very hard  thought: writing is not sensibility only, or thought,  or feel­ ing-it is Something More.  (And as you read  the first issues of Tish, you see this discovery   dawn   on   the   contributors: poetry   needs  work,  is  craft -and the tone    of	the    editorials,    the    reviews, changes.  It  is  not  till  the  fourth   issue that  one of those seemingly interminable
'statements of poetics' at last includes the word   work,  when   Fred   Wah   reminds Frank  Davey  that  writing  involves  dis­ cipline.  And  this,  I  think,  also  offers a clue to part of the magazine's power:  we see the editors learning as they go along.) This  century  is notable,  among other things, for its invention  of  new forms  (as well as for its revival of  old ones),  for its willingness to experiment,  to exploit. We seem to see  ourselves as so absurd,  per­ haps, that  it  does not  matter  if we look stupid:  perhaps,  even,  that  it  is impos­ sible to  be anything  else! Tristan Tzara,  say,  is  willing  to  compose  a  poem  by reading words drawn  out of a hat;  John Cage will perform a silent concerto;  Ray­ mond   Queneau   will  write   Cent   Mille Milliards  de Poemes, a book of flip-strip sonnets. ( Tish, in fact, looks at  times not only somewhat stupid,  but  also astonish­ ingly  conservative  in  its  literary   preju­ dices and  judgments.  Frank  Davey,  for

REVIEW ARTICLES



example,  in  Tish   4   ["The  Problem of Margins"] dismisses  George Herbert's "The Altar" and  Dylan  Thomas' "Vision and  Prayer" as "dead, unreal," precisely because  they are shaped like an  X on the page.)
Perhaps we have discovered that knowl­
edge   is  a  form   of  ignorance, and   that
-if so-then    ignorance  might   well be,   perhaps,  a   kind   of   knowledge or, more  accurately, a  way  of  knowing. Writing,  in   the   last   century  and   this, has continually distinguished between looking  and  seeing, implying that  the act of look  includes  the  preposition  for, and thus  carries   its  own  preconceptions,  ex­ pectations. Thoreau with his "seeing with­  out  looking" follows Blake,  and  in  his in­ sistent  moral  tone  brings  me  back  to the Romantic  Offensive:  there  is  an   arro­  gance  involved,  and   it  is  the  arrogance of  the  man  who  would  throw   over  the conventional  world   if   by   doing   so  he might   clarify   his   vision,   and   thus   see what   might   be  called   the   Really   Real. On  30 August,  I856, Thoreau wrote   (a shade  pompously)  in  his Journal:

Let  not  your  life be  wholly  without an  ob­ ject,  though  it  be only  to ascertain the  fla­ vour  of a cranberry, for  it  will  not  be  only the  quality   of  an   insignificant  berry   that you will have  tasted,  but  the flavour  of  your life  to   that   extent,   and   it  will  be  such  a sauce as no wealth  can  buy.

Whitman insisted  that   poetry  should  in­ clude  the  apparently trivial; Lyrical  Bal­ lads  is -according  to  one  critic anyway
-an exercise   in   "sentimental   democ­
racy."    Thoreau's,   Whitman's,    Words­ worth   and   Coleridge's point,  surely,   is something else altogether, has  to  do  not with  the  subject  of  poetry   but  with  the source:   that  one's  life, one's  work,  one's seeing and  one's  thought derive  from  the immediate, from  the particular, and  from the  local-not,  that  is to say, most  em­ phatically not, from a predetermined sys­ tem of ideas or expectations of the world.
 "Enjoy an  original relation  to  the  uni­ verse,"  Emerson  said.   Be  responsive  to the  world.
It is small  wonder, then, that  in reac­
tion   against   a   neo-classic   or   Augustan age, sentiment or sensibility  might  be thought adequate equipment for the poet. There is an  arrogance  involved. And  as I  said  before,  the  first  nineteen issues of Tish   are   insistent   on   redeeining  men's vision  through language. And  in  issue 4, with its attack on Milton Acorn, Tish declares  war  on  the  poets  of  the  rest  of Canada.  Indeed,  reading  through  all these   issues,  virtually at  a  sitting,  one wonders: will they  never  write  a  favour­ able  review?  One   needs   to  know  what  the  nature of  that vision   is  that   leads Tish  writers  to make  war.
In   I944,  the   poet   H.  D.  wrote   that "we  are  here  today  in  a  city  of  ruin,  a world  ruined, it  might seem,  almost  be­ yond  redemption." Her   words  were  not published   until    I956,  two  years  before  Warren Tallman, in  a  well-known  essay on   Kerouac  which   has   just   been   re­ printed, wrote  that  "if  our  cities  are  in something like   ruins,   there   have   been survivors." If  our  cities  survive,   or  are peopled  by  survivors, they  have  survived  not  a war  between  man  and  the  wilder­  ness,  between  man  and  "nature"  (what­ ever that  is),  but  between  man  and  man,  man and  his made  environment, man  and himself. There can  be few  New  Yorkers, in  I977, who  do  not  feel  that  somehow the city has  turned  against  its citizens. It has  been  a  war  of  forms.  In  the  age  of the junkie  (and  Vancouver is Canada's Junkie City), in the struggle to stay alive, one   uses   whatever   resource  comes   to hand. "We  can only use what  we've  got," says Robert Duncan. Including junk.  So Andy  Warhol  makes   endless   movies  of men dressed to look like Jean Harlow, languidly eating a  banana, or  films Billy Linich's haircut  parties in endless   and detailed repetition. To say such  things are

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  drag   might   be  to  pun   unnecessarily, were  it not  that  "drag" itself, as a word, suggests   the   conditions  the   ruined  city imposes   if   one   would   therein   survive. Whatever "story" might  be  there, is not very interesting, and  it is no  more  Eliot's Unreal City  (for  those  struggling to sur­ vive,  it  is all  too  real!)    than   it  is  Saint  Augustine's City  of  God-though  both remain possibilities.  Ruined  houses  make gaps,  leave  space: one  would  rebuild. In a city of ruins,  a  tar-paper  shack  affords  shelter. In  a world  without  tar-paper, or where  tar-paper will no longer  work, one has  to  improvise. It  has  been  a  conflict with  made  things:  a  time  of  confusion.
The collapse, of course,  was more  than of the city. It was of made things,  poems; it  was of the  meanings of words,  of  syn­ tax; it  was of  language: and   in  a  time of   instability  in  language  and    in   the world,  innovation can  be at  home. That instability, however,  can  be the source  of desperation, and  the innovation the result of  dire  need.  Certainly  this  century has been a time of continuing crises, in which the  language, like  the  city  and   like  the poem,  has  needed   to  be  rebuilt by start­ ing virtually from scratch. William Carlos  Williams  reconstituted the  world   of  ob­ jects  by  writing about  roses  as  though they  had  never   been  written  about  be­ fore,  thus  freeing   North American lan­ guage  from its heavy dependence on Eng­ lish   antecedents   and    associations.    In Canada, in the fifties, Dudek, Layton and  Souster   learned,  from  Williams, how  to talk  of  their  own  experience  in  a  lan­  guage   which   would   not   carry   with   it overlays of meaning drawn from  another culture.
Similarly, the  contribution of Louis Zukofsky   (another American)  was  (and still is, for that  matter: he is still writing) to  strip  words  of  their   meaning so  that no  meaning will  come   through -or  so that  all meaning will, and  this most diffi­ cult  of poets showed  writers like Duncan

8o
 and  Greeley  how  to let  the  movement of words  generate a  play  and   discovery  of meaning,  by  paying   attention  to   their music  so  that   the  language might   sing. Meaning became  a matter of relationship among  words,  and   words,  language,  be­ came   the   matter  of   the   poet.   Names would  no longer  do: Gertrude Stein  was bored  by  them   ("Why after  a  thing   is named   write  about  it" she  asked), and  linguists and  philosophers showed  that  no adequate  account  of   meaning  can   be given in terms of names. Yet Robert Dun­ can was insisting that  the poet was Namer as   well   as   Maker,  and    Wittgenstein, earlier,  had  outlined  a  world   in  which the  only  reality  was   fact, and   fact  was known  by its name. A time  of confusion, in  which  it  becomes  possible  to  talk  in­ telligibly  of  words  as  a  congregation  of sounds and  figures previous to dictionary meanings, yet  also  a  time  in  which  one might   be  driven   to  put   one's   trust   in names: Tish, which  Richardson ascribes to an "excremental vision."  Michael Mc­ Clure,  when   Tish   was  in   its   third   or fourth month, wrote  in  Kulchur   (No. 8,
1962)   that   "a  man  names  what   he sees and   then   puts  away   the  fear   of  it."  In times  of  uncertainty,  one   must   experi­ ment: one  has  to  improvise.
One  has to  improvise. Wordsworth wrote, we have been told,  to the sound  of the linnet  and  the  thrush; Greeley, to the sound  of John  Coltrane and  Charlie Parker. Basil Bunting (who  calls  himself a traditional poet)   has  defined  poetry  as a sequence of repetition and  variation making  a pattern; meaning may  or  may not  be a  part  of that  pattern, and  sound must   be.   The  stating  of   propositions about  the  world,  that  is to say, or  about the  writer, is not  a  function of  poetry: such statements exist in the  poem  for the sake  of  the  pattern. A  poem  by George Bowering  in Tish  4 about a bicycle lean­ ing on a wall, or  about  smoking  a  cigar­ ette  in  the  car  and   thinking  about   his

REVIEW ARTICLES



girl  friend, hardly gives  us  information about  the  world   or  even  about   George Bowering,     but    both    are    nevertheless strong  poems of the city. Reading a poem for  the  content is like  listening   to  John Coltrane for  the  tune, and  we  have  la­ boured  long  under  the  notion  that  music should   have   tunes   and   poem   content. (Keith Richardson, incidentally, seems in addition to  believe  that  it is the  business of  the  poet  to write  quotations.)  Such  a notion  carries  with  it certain  presupposi­ tions about form, and  may very well sup­ pose  that  form  and  content are  in  some way  separable. It  is  interesting to  note, here,   that  Richardson, in  his  insistence  on a Canadian "tradition" which  he sees Tish  as  betraying,  leaves  his  reader  to guess what  that  tradition might  be:  I am led  to guess  that  it is embodied in  Mark Twain's  friend   and   neighbour  in  Con­ necticut  for  some  ten-odd   years,  Emer­  son's    relative,   Bliss   Carman,    writing  poems of a recognizable (because named) Canadian  content. "When a  poet," Wil­ liam   Carlos   Williams  wrote,  "begins  to devote   himself   to  the  subject   matter   of his  poem  ... he  has  come  to the  end  of his poetic  means." It  is not  entirely clear whether Richardson  views literature and tradition in  terms  of  set  themes,  set sub­ ject  matter, or  not.
It is clear,  however,  that  Tish   writers do   not.  "It is  not   for   man   to  order," Frank Davey  wrote  in  Tish  5· One  can­ not   "order" one's   theme   as  one  might order   a  made-to-measure suit  or  a  bat­ talion.  One   can  only  write,  "not  trying to make  anything more  of  life  than  it is" (Tish 8). One   can  improvise,   discover not   one's   theme,   but   the   theme    that emerges    (in   the   second   issue  of  Tish  Jamie Reid  writes  about Philip   Whalen  in  just such  terms)  and  which  is a phen­  omenon  parallel to, but  in no sense more important  than,  the  sensory,  emotional, or  linguistic  data  which  gave  rise  to  it. To   rebuild   the  city,   the  language,  the
 poem, demands co-operation with  the materials which  are   at  hand, and   with one's fellows. A co-operation of the senses, of language, of  thought, of  feeling.  The great  strength of Tish, its  vigour,  comes at  least  in  part  from  the  sense  one  has, reading it, that  here are a number of  (ad­ mittedly feisty)   young  men  wholeheart­ edly, earnestly,  and  jointly grappling with a  problem   that   is  of   great  urgency   to them.   The   writers   of   Tish  view   their activities   as  a  shared   and   a   shareable endeavour: to be at home in the language and  in one's  own  experience.
And  one  great  weakness,  of  the  early issues  especially,   is  that   the   writers  in Tish   are   not  able   to  correlate,  clearly, their  insistence  on  testimony,   on  obedi­ ence  to the  (emotional or  felt,  perceived  anyway)  event,  with  questions  of  form.  There is, in these early numbers, no clear exploration  of  form,  but  a  lot  of  fum­  bling.  In  the first  four or  five issues,  the writers   themselves   do   not   seem   aware that  their apparently  thematic concerns ("the  poem  must   be  testimony") ,  their programmatic statements about  the  con­ tent  and   activity   of  poetry,   are   in  fact formal  concerns. It is, then, instructive to read   the  first  dozen  issues,  and   observe the  dawning of this  realization, the  real­  ization,  as Frank  Davey  was  to  put  it  in From  There to  Here  in  1973,  that  "ulti­ mately,  only  the  form  of a  writer's work speaks  to us," for

the   rightly controlled, formalistic, and  ele­ gant   poem  shares   formal  assumptions  with a  company directorship,  while   the   loosely structured  film  or   lifestyle   shares  assump­ tions  with  the  commune.

The goopy statements in Tish, incompre­ hensible   as   they   sometimes   are    ("that percussive  and   reverberating  energy   re­ leased  from  a  cathexis   of   the   poet   on contemporary  reality" -Tish     1)    are goopy  because  they  are  fumblings. And the  fumblings   themselves   contribute  to the   magazine's   strength:   these   young

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



turks,  thumbing their  noses at  the  rest of the world, taking themselves seriously, taking   their  work  seriously,  cracking  in­ jokes,  setting   themselves  up   as  an   in­ group  ("WE  pioneers, . . . WE  know," they  seem  to be  saying), sneering at  the east, littering their  magazine with  (dread­ ful)   slogans  and  injunctions  ("Poems in Tish  Are  Intended For  Reading Aloud"
-Tish 4; Tell  us what  You are doing, "especially  if  you're   making   it" -Tish
2),   offering   incomprehensible  formulae and   equations  ("Margin   =    Locus"­
Tish 3), hopelessly in love with a jargon derived mainly  from  Olson  and  Williams,
poeticizing ad nauseam  (how  relieved readers  must   have   been   when   in   Ig62
Tish  offered  a  Valentine's Day  present:
no   more   poeticizing;  and   how   disap­ pointed when  it continued to appear, dis­ guised   as  book  reviews) ,  making gran­ diose  and   pretentious  claims   ("keeping you  informed on  what  is  happening in Vancouver-its   writings,   its  tastes"­ Tish   4)  while  castigating almost   every book they reviewed  (with  George  Bower­ ing  as  chief   hatchetman),  these   young turks,  wanting so  much   to  say what   is real   (so  desperately aware  were  they  of what  seemed  to  them   unreal-the  aca­ demic-humanist tradition),  these  young turks  gathered strength  and   energy   not through their  love of labels or  names  but through their  preparedness to puzzle over what  the world  knows is obvious, through their  determination, like children, to find out,  through their  complete lack of fear: if  they   looked   foolish,   very   well,   they looked  foolish. There is not one  truculent word  in  the  first  nineteen issues of Tish
-at least,  not  by one  of  the  editors­ though there  is quirkiness  and cockiness by the  pound. The strengths of Tish?  It was  a  family   newspaper. What  a  sigh must  have  gone  round Vancouver when George Bowering  at last got together with his girl.
Marianne Moore says somewhere that
 the  study  of rhyme  and  metre  is a  dan­ gerous  activity.   Robert Duncan,  follow­  ing  the  lead  of  Keats   if of  no-one  else, talks  of  the  perilousness   of  poetry.  The five  editors  of  Tish  were  not afraid  to take  risks,  either   public  or  private, and  were  not  afraid  to  be  honest.   An  issue attacking   Gwendolyn   MacEwen's  The  Drunken  Clock is  followed  by two issues which   print   her   work.  In   a  rationalist world,  such  behaviour would  be thought inconsistent. But  the  world  of Tish  is not rational, it  is  Romantic, and   it  is  con­  cerned  with  the  poem  and   its  craft, its form.  "Being   Canadian," says  the  Edi­ torial  in  Tish  8, "must never  be  treated as an  end in itself." Many of the poems, nevertheless,  record  what  it is to be Can­ adian: George  Bowering's "Radio Jazz," for example, in Tish  I, captures precisely the record  of life in  the  Interior  (of B.C. and  of Bowering), just as his later "Con­ fessions  of  a  Failed   American" and   A Short  Sad  Book  record, and  record  with wry  humour,   not   what   Richardson  or Mathews would  like Canadian life to be, but  what one  particular Canadian life is. Tradition  is made   up  of  what  happens, which  may  be desirable  and  which  may not.  A   concern   with   tradition,  in  any case,  lies  outside  the  work,  the  working,  of  art, of the poem.
This   leads  me,  inevitably and   neces­ sarily, to a brief consideration of  Richard­ son's   book.   It  is   tempting   to   dismiss Poetry and the Colonized  Mind:  Tish  as merely   silly   (what,   by   the   way,   is  a colonized  mind?    The   invasion    of   the body-snatchers?), but  the  book  deserves more   attention  than   that   simple   blunt  judgment provides.  Basically  accurate in its   facts    (Richardson  has   done   some homework) ,  the  book  is not  so  much  a study  of  Tish  as  it  is  a  series  of   com­ plaints  about  the sell-out  of an  ( unspeci­ fied)   Canadian  tradition  to  a   pack   of American invaders and  conspirators, led by   Warren  Tallman   and    abetted   by

REVIEW ARTICLES



Robert  Duncan.  Filled   with   misprints and spelling mistakes, the book is utterly humourless   (witness    for   example   the grave attention paid  to Tish  40's "banana smoke-in")  and  at  times  is so anxious  to grind   its  axe  that   it  distorts   its  data  by offering  selective "evidence." We are  told on page 66, for example, that  Tish's "suc­ cessor," Writing, devoted a complete issue to Jack  Spicer. This  is true. What we are not   told,   is  that   at   least   three   of  the issues  of   Writing   published   Canadian writing  only, while one issue was devoted  entirely   to  the  work  of  the  English  poet Basil  Bunting.  And  it  is strange to  read on  page  30 -and  I quote,  square brac­ kets and all -"the area  [in] which  man has   had   the   most   chance  to   become aware   of."   Richardson  is   accurate, I think,  in  devoting the  bulk  of his atten­ tion  to Tish   1-19,  but   he  misses  com­ pletely  the  cheekiness  of it.  "!!FLASH!!
. . . arrival in  Vancouver of  Brian  Finn
and   Sydney   Aster.   Who   next,   fellers?" (Tish  B). Tish's power  lies in part  in its astonishing ability  to lure  fools out  of the woodwork.
The  strength of Tish?  Theoretical, in­ furiating, a bunch  of young  kids with  the temerity  to re-invent or rebuild the  poem
-with the   ignorance,   if  you   like,   to think  that   they  are  doing  so. An  act  of
gall? But an act of gall does not last for eighteen  months:   there   were   so  many issues  ( I 9!)   that  you  had  to  take  them seriously-or at  least  pay  attention. If a  man  says "It's all  rubbish!" once,  you shrug.  But when  he says it once  a month  for a year and  a half, when  he says it for
409 pages,  you begin  to pay attention, or (like  the  Boston  Intelligencer) think  the man  lunatic. (The moon  is, traditionally, a figure of the  Muse.)
The difficulty with Richardson's "argu­ ment," if I may  thus  dignify  his book, is that  Tish  published so  many  interesting and   so  many   good   poems.   In  Tish   2
Jamie Reid  articulated, clearly,  what  all
 


Leacock Symposium


The  Department of English,  Uni­ versity  of  Ottawa,  announces the Leacock   Symposium,  its   sixth annual   conference  on   a   major Canadian writer, to be held Satur­ day,  May  6th  and  Sunday,  May
7th, 1978.

The 1979  Symposium will  be  on
Duncan Campbell Scott.
For  further information write  to: LEACOCK SYMPOSIUM
Department of English University of Ottawa Ottawa, Canada  K1N 6N5





SUBSCRIPTIONS U NAVO I DAB LE INCREASE!

Increased production and  mailing costs since  we  last  adjusted our subscription rate are forcing us to mcrease    our   rates   in   the   near future.

From 1  January 1978
the annual  subscription  will be
$10.00 in Canada

$11.00 in all  other countries

Single  copies  will cost
$3.00

REVIEW ARTICLES



five editors  believed:  "The  most  impor­ tant  thing  to  [the  poet]  is not  what  he will know, not  what  he  has  known,  but what he knows NOW, at this moment  in time,  at  this  place in  space."  Such  in­ sistence on  the  local,  on  the  immediate,  on  the experienced, goes back not  to an American  like  Williams  ("No  ideas  but in  things"),  nor  to a British traditional­ ist like Bunting  ("If I talk about  rubbing gravestones,  I've   rubbed   bloody  grave­ stones"), but a Protestant impulse. Works like Tish  have, as Emerson reminds us, a long foreground, and at  the beginning of these pages I remarked  that the first nine­ teen  issues  of  Tish   are  insistent  on  re­ deeming man's  vision through  language: one must experience  the Real, the Really Real, directly, without  the  intermediary, the priest.
The  poet, then,  grasps, comes to grips
with,  the  local.  Read  the  first  nineteen issues of Tish  and  you will see a  bunch of  poets  writing  what   I  can  only  call "geographical poems";  and  they discover that  the  poem of place,  of  the  local, of Vancouver,  is not  achieved  by dropping local  names,  reciting  local  history,  dis­ covering  local  "themes." It is, as  Frank Davey  and  David  Dawson  clearly  show, a  matter   of  discovering   the  history  of one's  own  desire  or  anguish  enacted  in the  history  and  landscape  of  the  world around  one  (Frank  Davey's  more  recent The  Clallam comes to mind as an exem­ plar), or  it is a matter  of  wry narrative  (of one's amours?  perhaps)  or of simple (to  read)   but  difficult,  painstaking   (to write)   and  tightly  focussed narrative  of observation  (like Fred  Wah's  poems). It is not in  naming:  there,  Gertrude Stein was right, and  our  politicians  are wrong. Somewhere in Tish  5 Frank  Davey talks of  the  poem  as  "a  series  of  temporally connected events," where cause and effect have   disappeared.  Werner   Heisenberg and  Niels  Bohr  tell  us  that  in  physics,
 "cause"  and  "effect"  have  not  been  in­ telligible terms for fifty years or  more. I notice that  the syntax of The  Clallam  is paratactic,  or   at   least   appositional.  I notice   in   Tish   that   David   Dawson's "Tentative   Coastlines,"   Frank   Davey's "Bridge Force," George Bowering's "Sun­ day  Poem," Fred  Wah's  "The Woman"  or  "For  R.D.,"  all of  these  propose few cause and  relationships:  the  connections are  temporal.  Men  do  not  feel  for  rea­ sons,  but   they  do  feel   in   time.   "We learn,"  says Thoreau, "by  converse  with things."  Meaning  is discovered,  not  for­ warded   by  thesis.  Converse.  Converse.
I  would  say that  the  history  of  Tish is yet to be written. The  Writing  Life usefully reprints documents about Tish (some of them, like Carol Berge's, a waste of time and ink) . It is designed as a com­
panion  to Tish  1-19. It is a supermarket book,  which  provides  the   reader   with some of the materials  for a history;  it is not, by and large, critical.  Poetry and the Colonized Mind:  Tish, like the magazine it attacks, is sloppily produced  (and  in its remarks on Robin Blaser is quite  possibly actionable,  were one  to  take  them  seri­ ously).  It is also, despite  its  homework, the product  of slovenly  intellect. Tish  r-
19 is more than  welcome, for it  reprints a body of work which, like it or not, had an effect, has an effect still, and is yet to be understood.  Poetry and the Colonized Mind:  Tish  is, I believe, at the very least a misguided and  dangerous  book, for it suggests, in  its  continued   polemic,  that what one does not like must be dismissed or  denied.  The  history of Tish  is yet to be written, but it must be written by some­ one who has the  discrimination  and  the sense  not   to   lump   everyone   together, automatically,  as  members  of  an amor­ phous  but  somehow  all  inclusive  Black Mountain "school"  and  its "adherents." To  do  that   is  like  calling  Canada  "a Christian  country."

REVIEW ARTICLES



THREE POETS
 


Alexander Globe


MARVYNE JENOFF, Hollandsong. Oberon  Press, cloth $5.95,  paper  $2.95·
LAURENCE HUTCHMAN, Explorations. DC Books, paper  $2.50.
LEONARD GASPARINI, If You  Laue. Borealis Press.


THE HOLLAND OF Marvyne Jenoff's title  is her  man; the  song  is her celebration of the things  they share, from carrots to showers, from  the first blush of joy  to  a  few  latter   day  confrontations. Most of the poems deal with ordinary situations experienced by two  normal people   in  love.  Because   the  book  is so close to the reality we see around us every day, it might  appear banal to some. It probably won't  please  ardent women's libbers or equally  dedicated male chauvi­ nists. This  is a pity, since Jenoff  shows in "Wrapping Up"  that   she   can   observe three    generations  meticulously.   She   is aware   of  all  of  the  old  stereotypes  and even   plays  with   them,  but  she  is  never strangled. The  same  is  true  of her  proso­ dy:    her   ability   to  write   in   traditional metres  gives her  a sure sense of what  will work in her  own  brand  of free  verse. She has succeeded  in a most difficult  task:  re­ cording   contemporary  urban   life   both poetically and naturally.
H ollandsong  is filled with  feminine in­
sights,   uncompromisingly  rooted   in  ex­ perience, untempted by easy poetic tricks. One  is struck  by recognition after  recog­ nition,  not  only  about  love  and  personal  relationships, but also about  a wide  range of  incidental subjects,  like  an  intelligent woman's ironic  awareness of her  clothes, or an awareness  of people out of her own age bracket, like

... the three boys whose next  year promises something entirely different, three
boys with a bicycle in the shade
of the library,
or the description of how habit  eventually
 
dulls  the cacophony of new surroundings
("The New Bathroom").
Jenoff  has an objectivity that  can,  with sympathy, penetrate  points  of  view  that are  obviously  not  her  own.  This  quality gives her  book a refreshing breadth of reference and  maturity. Closely related  is a sense of humour that  not only saves the collection    from    the   claustrophobia  of many autobiographical confessions, but often  has one smiling  with  pleasure.
The  cover of Explorations, with  its enlarged view of  the  small  intestine, couldn't be more  unfair to Laurence Hutchman, whose poems  usually  begin  in the world  at large, from  Ireland, London, Amsterdam and  Paris,  to eastern Canada. He  even  tries  to  link  general statements to particular situations and  to escape  the cage  of self through universal statement. Thus "La meme maison" tackles the issue of biculturalism not with abstract slogans, but in a bilingual  poem where a house in cosmopolitan Montreal is shared  with  a Dutch landlord and  his Japanese wife: "enough  of  this  separation in  the  base­ ment"!
Like Wordsworth and his successors (including the contemporary socially and politically   aware),   Hutchman  searches for poetry in the lives of ordinary people, often  on  the  fringes  of society,  like  Irish and  Spanish  expatriates slogging  in  Lon­ don restaurants, or a retired boxer in New Brunswick,   whose  "strange  kindness" is contrasted to "Lord  Beaverbrook's smug bust."  Too  many  of  these  poems  are  like hurriedly taken,  poorly  developed  snap­  shots,  lacking  in  general interest. Hutch-

REVIEW ARTICLES



man  seems  to feel  the  deficiency   himself, since  he  often  uses  the  final  stanza of a poem  for a mythopoetic statement to heighten  or   contrast  the    realistic   ap­ proach  of the  rest of the  poem. Unfortu­ nately   the  results   are   not  always  poeti­  cally  coherent, nor  are  the  ramifications always    thought    through.   Despite   his social  awareness,  he  can  be  condescend­ ing,  whether  culturally ("Smells")  or on the personal level. "Cafe in Amsterdam," for    example,    presents     a    sympathetic sketch  of an old  man  trying  to communi­ cate:

Tears
fall  across  the  veins  of  his eyes.
"It's cold," he  says, smiling and  tugs  at his sleeve
showing me an  unsealed scar,
a white  slash across  his life ...

and  in  my country the  world  is silent insects hum  through the  apple groves through petals of bright orange flowers.

The   contrasts  between   age   and   youth, pain  and  comfort, cold  white  and  gaudy spring orange, and the movement from external reality  to the  mythologizing con­ sciousness  of  the   poet   are   the  stuff  of poetry.  But  the  last  stanza   leads  one  to suspect   the   limit   of   the   sympathy  so endearingly delineated in  the first part  of the poem.  Perhaps travellers (particularly young ones)  normally feel sympathetic in inverse  proportion to  their  responsibility, and  one should  be thankful to find this characteristic  so   successfully    sketched. But  it  would  be more  comforting to feel that  the poet  understood the implications of the last three  lines of the  poem.
"Perseus," with  its fantasy on  the stain on  the  ceiling  of  a  rented  room,  shows
that    Hutchman  can   write   a   powerful poem,  but  few  of  the  pieces  in  Explora­ tions approach its coherence. A  tradition­ al metre  sags after  a few lines on  the first page.  Although Hutchman  can echo  the oracular  voice   of   his   favourite  Yeats ("dreams  move  out   of   night  j into   the

86
 blueness  of  the  morning"), the  symbols in "Autumn Sunday" are  not successfully integrated with  the  images  from ordinary Irish   life.  The   ambitious  six-page   long "The  Highway" needs  a  firmer  organiz­ ing principle than  the  red  line on a map,  linking    London (Ont.),   Toronto  and Montreal.  The   random   images   of  city and  countryside,  interspersed with  reflec­ tions on the history of central Canada, do not  form  the  microcosm   one  finds,  for example,  in  Walt   Whitman's  catalogues that evoke American life so surely.
If You   Love  presents  a selection  from
Len  Gasparini's six  previous   volumes  of poems.  The  first  eleven  pieces  deal  with love, ranging  from  romantic lyricism and the    celebration   of		"adultery   without guilt" to  the  less  predictable  reflections on  the  family  circle  and  the  meaning of Christmas. The  poems reflect characteris­ tic  masculine  attitudes,  whether the sen­ suous   lyricism   of   "Morning  Worship," the  pugnacious report of a lovers' quarrel in  "Written  on  a  Paper  Napkin," or  a father's	feelings,	deftly 	recorded	in "Jimmy": "His   young  muscles  swell  the pride  I feel  j as he selects a baseball  bat." A full third  of the collection  consists of nature  poems.   Where    the   poet   knows what   he  wants   to  do,  the  result  is well focused,  like "Weeds," with  its rhetorical argument directing the narrator's outrage and  wonder  at  their  "lack  of  restraint." "Pastorale I" is typical  of another type of poem   where   the   images   become  meta­ phors    (e.g.,  "apple-light  of   autumn"), producing a  rich   texture  that  is poetic, rather than  merely descriptive. Too often, though, the  poems  remain  content with recording  simply  another  snapshot, an­  other   simile.  "Recitative" points   in  the direction of  something more  original, the use of  nature imagery  to convey intensely personal  experience, but  this  mode  is as
yet in embryo.
The  middle   section,   about  half   the
poems, accepts  the  challenge of recording

REVIEW ARTICLES



contemporary urban life, primarily in Windsor, overshadowed by Detroit, with its junkies  ("Jazz  Requiem", "Junkball") and   black   ghetto  (the   ferocious,   funny "Soul  Poem" and lyrical "Mood Ebony"). These   are   the   most   interesting   pieces, since  there  are  no  long  pedigrees  to  fall back on. Gasparini often  chooses North American  popular  forms   as  his  model. Thus  a  prostitute is out  earning the  rent while moaning the "Streetwalkin' Woman Blues." Such  forms  can  be turned to the poet's  personal experience, like his job as a truckdriver. Here  again  he is less inter­ ested  in  the  merely  personal than  in  the collective    experience  that    lies   behind  legends,   like   those   of  Paul   Bunyan. A modified   ballad   stanza  (not   always   in metrical control)  in  "Truckdriver Blues" mixes tall  tales with  the  required machis­  mo crudities:
Once  blew  out  a tire  a[t] midnight And  bottled some  fireflies  for  a flare; There were  rubbers in my tool  box, So I used 'em  all  to make a spare.
Other poems  celebrate the  archetypes of popular culture, whose lineage stretches back    through   TV    to   the    radio    and movies.   Sometimes  the   pieces  are  dan­ gerously  close  to  the  sophomoric -like "Bela  Lugosi." At  their  best,  they crisply mimic   the   language  and   situations  of Hollywood    productions,   while   keeping the  objective distance of  parody. "Pick­ up",  for example, reduces  the  element of suspense    in    the    undercover   detective genre  to  slapstick.  Gasparini also  adapts these conventions to shoot  his own scenes from  contemporary  life.  "Tunnel Bus  to Detroit," for  example, spares  neither the
young  secretaries "dressed for  romance I
instead  of work"  nor  the young man  who
politely  offers his seat  while  secretly hop­ ing for a mechanical failure that will give him an  opportunity to ravish  the girls.
Gasparini is a child  of the times, build­
ing a "theatre that  projected our  youth  I
onto  its screen", as "Theatre Piece"  puts
 it.  He  is  well  aware   that   he  is  dealing with  poses  (see  "The  Marginal Man") and succeeds where he limits himself to dramatic parody  or celebration of the current postures.  Unfortunately, when  he moves outside  the conventions to make critical    comments,   the    reins    tend    to loosen. The  deficiency  shows most  clearly in "Emily Carr," where  he says all of the obvious things woodenly, especially by comparison  with   Carr's  best   paintings and  writing. In  the end  one  feels that  the poet's   vision   has   been   too   limited    by popular  forms:  he   does   not   assimilate and   transcend  them.  The youthful  pos­ tures  are simply multiplied, like a succes­ sion of TV  shows, where synthesis is un­  known.
To recognize  a limitation that  in future might  prove  crippling is not,  however, to claim  that  If You  Love  is without merit. The  range  of subject matter and  tone  is no mean  achievement: Gasparini is not going  to  be  trapped  into   repeating  the same  thing  ad  nauseam. If the 51 poems were   the   product  of  a  vigorous   year's work, one would  be more  willing  to over­ look  the   faults.   But   only  seven  of   the poems  appear in  book  form  for  the  first time.  In  fact,  only eight  of them  did  not appear an10ng the 65 poems  of  One  Bul­ let  Left   ( 1974) ; over  two-thirds of them (35)  have  been  published in at  least  two of his volumes since 1970.
Revision  is the rationale for  this indus­
trious repetition. Occasionally it improves a poem dramatically. Thus the alterations to  the  third   stanza   of  "Grapes"  (Gutty Sark;   One   Bullet   Left;  If  You  Love) introduce a  quiet  allusion   to  the  garden of Eden  that  is in keeping with  the  tact­ ful   contrast  between    the   unconscious sensuousness  of  an  Italian  girl  and   boy, and   the  religious  values  of  their  milieu.  The    rewriting   also   shows   Gasparini's preference for the common word  and  the commonplace  image   that   he  can   rem-

REVIEW ARTICLES



vigorate  by  extending  the   metaphorical content.  But   most   of   the   adjustments amount to a  word  or  two,  hardly  justifi­ cation   for   printing  them   two  or   three times  in  five years. The more  radical  re­ writing  of  the   nature   pieces   results   in different poems,  but  not necessarily better  ones.   Too   often   they   reflect   simply   a different  set  of   external  stimuli, rather
 than  a controlling poetic  vision. Better  to set such efforts aside as incomplete drafts. Gasparini offers  some  interesting fare, but  he  should   resist  the   temptation  of squandering so much creative energy both on  rewriting and  on  the  annual  reprint­ ing   of    so   many    previously    collected  poems. The Borealis Press needs an astute
proofreader.




LIFE AND CLAUSTROPHOBIA

Jean Wilson

LINDA ROGERS, Some  Breath. Fiddlehead  Poetry  Books, $4.00.
FREDERICK  CANDELARIA, Liturgies. Sono Nis Press, $3.95 paper,  $10.95 cloth.
FLORENCE MCNEIL, Emily. Clarke,  Irwin, $5.95.


SoME   BREATH is  what the poems   in   Linda  Rogers'    book   hardly allow. These  taut, incisive,  jarring poems rarely   loosen   their   grip   on   the   throat. Between  the airlessness  of the glass jar of the  title  poem  and  that  of the world out­ side it in which  even a lovers' bed is "like a   coffin"   and   "rain  and   cold   fingers/  strangle our  green  summer" there is little extra   oxygen.   Words   hammer   at   each other  -"trails    of   mushroom    explode roomfuls    of   coupling  ants";   " ... this foetid  wash  spits  out  of  slick/basement"
--with a  relentlessness  only  occasionally
relieved  by a poem like "Hands are For'':

Hands  are for
climbing  trees, touching the
sun,
peeling oranges,  picking
flowers, turning
pages, buttoning buttons  and
holding  the rain.

Hands  are for loving.

This  poem  and  a few others  are  so start­ ingly simple  and  lyrical  that  it is a shock to  drop   to  such   an   untortured  level  of experience.

88
 
Images in this collection  are more often possessed,  dark,   sinister.   Neither nature nor  human existence  is benevolent or, at least, very comfortable. Stars  and  seeds "explode  in  fire,"   a  river   in   winter   is quiet because "its roaringjwashed the deadjaway their/eggs buried  in  gravel," "the real  blood  in communion cup/spills into  openjpits and  earth/swallows." Life "only  hurts  when we breathe"; "we dance on razors." Even when "we lurch alive, explode  the quietjbirdsong fan  of wings/ cocksalt  of spring" and  "our  crazy laugh­ ter  echoes  in frog  weddings," it  is  not  so much   the  aliveness  that   strikes  home,  it is the  "lurch" of it, the "crazy  laughter." Not an easy aliveness.
Occasionally  in   this   staccato  poetry
there   is  a  note  of  sane   laughter,  as  in
"November Tea":

Only the king of the sun and  the stars came to the kangaroo
tea,
sharpened his teeth on her china
cup
and frightened  the baby
away.

REVIEW ARTICLES



They sat in the fog by the river, drinking  and  banging
their  spoons. Then  he
jumped  in her pouch and  he stayed  there
until after  the honey moon.

But invariably, rather monotonously, images  of  decay  reappear, of  death,  de­ struction, the  cold  and  empty, devouring time,  the  dark  and  damp, madness. This is not  a  book  to be taken  lying  down.  It compels  you  to  grapple  with  its  images and  sounds,  and  although  the  experience is  claustrophobic, it is generally worth­ while.
Liturgies, by Frederick Candelaria, is occasionally   claustrophobic,  too,  but much  more  breath is allowed. The  book
is divided   into  nine  sections,  each  a  lit­ urgy  of  some  sort,  a  confrontation  with illusion    and    a   recognition   of    reality. "Take  care,"  warns   "Valediction,"  the last  poem  in  the  book;  liturgies   can  be frightening to explore.
The    distance    between    illusion    and reality   may  be  only  as  great   as  that  in Circe's    house,    described   in    "Fugue," where   "you   became   your  desires/EVERY WISH  GRANTED,"  only  to  have  "hard  X­
rays"  reveal  "illusions burning in  the brain."  Self-deception can   be  practised only  "for  a while." But  although  Cande­ laria  grimly warns  about  "the silent green slaughter  house"    where    "an   immense school   of   small   flat   fish/hangs  doubly suspended, surprised in brine/like pickled tongues  tom  from lying mouths," a meta­  phor  for the sensual  and  spiritual slaugh­ ter  house  of  human life, he often  dissects illusions with wit  and  grace.  Even  in  the slaughter house there  is some room for breath.
Sometimes  he simply  plays  with  found
poetry,   a  form   which   at  least   in  small doses can  be fun,  as in  "Where It's  At"; and  Candelaria is adept at  the  wry twist,
 too, as in "Skinny Dip." Yet  some of the best poems in Liturgies describe  the sinis­ ter.  The crow   in  "In this  Year  of  the Crow," who  lands  on  the  TV  antenna, claims  the  screen  with  his  image,  "owns  our  eyes/and then  our  minds." He's  like the gulls in "Icarus on Poetry  and  Poets,"  whose

Fragile  feathers
in ranks and  rows
symmetrically  balance
air and  flight in silent music the colour  of sea,
sky, and sand

but  each  of whose  "greedy body /is  badly attached" and essentially  "all raucous gut/demanding the  garbage/of floating acclaim."
This  is a book of many  moods.  Poems such  as  "With Songs  Full  of  Sunlight" check  the sinister,  disillusioning ("these woods are still/full of birds/who always awaken   the   dew/and  rescue   you/from the edge  of dream's deepest/silence/with songs full  of  sunlight"). So does  the  de­ light  in language which  runs through  the whole  collection: "a  feather /falls   thun­ dering  in the desert"; the sky "holds more thunder /than   it's    gripped    in   years"; "words   I  watched you   sharpen  with   a nervous    urge/to  a   scalpel's  homicidal edge";  the  landscape's  colours   "change and  fade/in  the  arpeggio of flight." Per­ haps  because  it  has  so  many   moods,  so many  fragments, Liturgies  doesn't leave mr  breathless, but   it  nevertheless  in  its best  poems  accurately measures the  dis­ tance between  illusion  and  reality.
The  form  of Florence  McNeil's Emily is narrative, a reconstruction of the stages, events,  and   themes  of  Emily  Carr's  life
and  work. This is more  comfortable, less
demanding poetry  than that  of the  other two  collections reviewed   here,  which  is not  intended to  downgrade Emily's achievement. The  spirit  of Emily  Carr is in this book, not an easy thing  to capture.

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



The main   expression   of  that   spmt  is the  "surge of sea  and  wind  and  rain" in the  opening poem,  "Waves," that  moves through  the   book,   as  it   did   in   Emily Carr's own  life.  In  "Corners of  Kitwan­ cool Village," "liquid lifejsurges  through me."  In  "France II,"  Emily  Carr paints  "lines  and  fragments/adding up  tojbold strokes/that   set/  a  village/on  its  head/ the sun  like a child's  hoop/rolling out of/ the landscape." "Discoveries I" is a verit­ able  eruption onto  paper  of Emily Carr's vision  as  expressed   on  canvas  and  cap­ tures its excitement:

Take that tree  above  the cliff  and  br eak up  the  trunk	find  wrestling pul p
put  that seething and  Ii quid
r
u
 and  emotional landscapes. There  is  Vic­ toria,    "squarely  British";   France   and  London; the  House   of  All  Sorts,  where the  painter tells  "splattering  old  ladies"  she is merely  resting  while "I sharpen my brush";  the  B.C.  wilderness  where   her fingers "growing patient by/ the centuries/ play  with  trees"; the  hospital   where  she lies "like  a  wounded  animal," her  heart  "burst from  living."  There are  the  per­ sonalities  of her  world-her father, who "lived  more  stiffly than   the  wicker  chair  we  prayed  around"; her  mother, "who  sewed   us   together with patience"; the uncomprehending Canadian public; even the Carr menagerie, "proof  of my kindly fertility."
I could  go on  rolling  out  lyrical  words and   phrases   that   bring   Emily   Carr  so vividly to life, the boisterous, flamboyant,

n
n
ing
on  your  brush.

Emily  Carr of  the  poems  climbs  moun­ tains   with   her   eyes,   rushes   them  into colour  ("Home"), is "possessed" by totem spirits  ("Totems II"), can  feel "the swirl of thejraven," "the arithmetic of the sea­ gulls," and "go exuberantly ahead" ("Dis­  coveries III"). Even  when  exhausted, she longs   to   "run  to  the   forest/shake  rain drops from  the willing  trees/roll with  the tangle  of  moss  and  fern" ("In the  Hos­ pital I"). She is never vanquished, despite  all  the art  society  ladies,  souls "hatched/ in   genteel   egg  crates,"  and   "bald  and tubular" school  teachers with  their  "seg­ mented minds  seeing nothing."

I tum around the  mirrors
say  to  my landscapes	You  reflect  me
there is some spirit here and  life.
("1945")

These  mirrors reflect not only the whirled forests and omnipresent ravens in her paintings, but  also  Emily  Carr's physical

go
 pugnacious, gentle  Emily  Carr. But that's
unfair. Meet her for yourself  in this book.















D. C. SCOTT

Sir,

I am  working  on a  biography of  Dun­ can   Campbell  Scott    ( I 862-I 947)    and  would   be  grateful  for   any   information your  readers  might   supply  which  would help me to locate  letters  or  to gain  access to useful  biographical information.

ROBERT L.  MCDOUGALL,
Carleton University.





VICTIMS
OF BIGOTRY

HARRY POLLOCK,  Gabriel.  McGraw-Hill  Ryer­
son,  $8.gs.
IAN      MACNEILL,   The    Battle    for   Saltbucket
Beach.  McClelland &  Stewart,  $8.gs.
JAMIE  BROWN,  Stepping Stones. Clarke,  Irwin,
$7·95·
PERHAPS THE MOST  intriguing aspect  of these    three    first   novels   is   their    very marked difference from  one another. Gabriel, by Harry Pollock,  is the  story of a  Toronto Jewish  boy as  he  fumbles  his way   to  sexual   maturity  in   the   I 93o's. Written,  on   the   average,  in   sentences four    words   long,   Gabriel   explores  its hero's  environment  with  relentless   zeal. Few  stones  are  left  unturned, and   what Pollock  finds under most of them  will not amuse  Auntie  Maud.
Ian   MacNeill's The  Battle    for   Salt­ bucket   Beach,  by contrast, is a  debonair satire   about  a  Toronto  real  estate   de­ veloper   who  attempts  to  turn  a  prime area  of Cape Breton  into  a sea-side  play­ ground for the rich. MacNeill's other  tar­  gets  include  federal  politicians and   the sort   of   police   officer   who   sees  a   Red under every  bed.
Stepping  Stones, by  Jamie  Brown,  is the first volume of a trilogy aimed at chronicling "the rise and  fall  of a  Cana­ dian    family's    fortunes   through    three generations."   Volume   One    traces    the early  career   of  Grandfather John Mon­  crief£, from  his birth  on an  impoverished Manitoba farm  in  x88o to  his  marriage to a millionaire's daughter in Shrewsbury, Ontario,  in   1912.   Author Brown   ob­ viously  sees  Grandfather John as  a  ro­ mantic hero,  yet he  has written  his story
 with  economy  and  restraint, interspersing just  enough   historical detail   to  keep  the saga convincing. We have  a genuine storyteller here, as opposed  to a researcher with a yen to write  novels.
What  links   the   three    books   despite their evident  differences is the common environment with  which  each  set of  char­ acters   has  to  cope.  The  physical  land­ scapes may vary-from big city  to small town  to rural  countryside-but  the  psy­ chological   climate   remains   oppressively the   same :   the   ordinary   Canadian,  all three   novelists  point  out,  is likely  to  be victimized  not  by Nature  but  by bigotry.
Harry  Pollock, writing out of a deep consciousness  of Jewish  tradition and  ex­ perience, is the most insistent  of the three.  Gabriel,  his protagonist, was born  in  the Polish  town  of Opatow and  emigrates to Leonard  Avenue,   "an   abrasion  in   the backside  of the  Toronto  Western Hospi­  tal,"  at  the  age  of  five.   ("Leonard was a  cauldron in  which  the  differing races simmered  without yielding  up  their  indi­  vidual  biases.")   By early  adolescence he is  playing  Sir  Joseph Porter in  Pinafore at   the  local   social   services   centre  and sneaking  into  a vaudeville theatre where he  falls in  love with  a  striptease dancer. The neighbourhood teems around him, throwing  up   an   attempted  gang   bang here,    a    wild    Polish    wedding   there. Chunks of  prose  distinct from  the  main narrative and  headlined as  in  old  news­ reels  convey  the  onrush of  the  Depres­ sion, social  upheaval and  World  War  II. Every now and  then  a solemn description of a Jewish  ritual  (Gabriel's Bar Mitzvah, Grandfather Judah's  funeral)  interrupts the naturalistic flow. The book ends with Gabriel's  successful  visit  to  a  prostitute signalling  the beginning of his manhood, and  a  brief  sentence announcing  the  in­ vasion  by  Germany of Poland. Through­ out,  the  reader's  awareness of  omnipre­ sent racial  and  religious  friction is seldom allowed  to  relax.

gx

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Harry  Pollock's prose style is various, ranging   from   clipped    ("Separate  fish from  chips. . . . Pour  on  brown  vinegar. Let soak in. Pour more vinegar") to evocative   ("The City  Hall  clock  tolled the  half-hour.   The   reverberations  can­ nonballed  across  the  city  in  hollow  di­ minuendos. They  called  to Gabriel: Sad and  lonely. Sad  and  lonely")   to  relen­ lessly precise ("Aunt Sadie stood, stared, withdrew  her right index finger from her nostril and  pulled  with  it a  gob of mu­ cous.  She   regarded   its  color,  contem­ plated  its  texture. She wiped the  jelly on her  blouse,  returned  the  finger  to  her gaping mouth and  sucked in imitation  of the infant") .
The  style of this  novel, in  fact,  is su­ perior  to  its  subject   matter.  Gabriel  is like an  ugly urban   parody  of  Who   Has Seen  the  Wind, played   to  background music  from  Ten   Lost  Years  as  orches­ trated  by James Joyce.  It's  also inexcus­ ably  dirty,  for  it  lacks  the  wit  and  hu­ mour  which  might  have  redeemed  it. It is  well  matched   in  a  cover  illustration which  shows a  partly-clad  girl  with  her legs spreadeagled  above a church  steeple and a rooster crowing at her feet. Subtle, it's  not.
Ian  MacNeill  is a screenwriter  for the National  Film Board, and his first novel contains several earmarks of the popular screenplay.  It  has  an  extraordinary  cast of characters, including  a group  of  teen­ aged  Maoists,  a  pratfalling  RCMP  in­
spector  a  la  Peter  Sellers  as  Inspector
Clouseau,   a  collection   of  canny   Cape
Bretoners,  a  handful   of  city  slickers, a pair  of young lovers and  a  wicked  cari­ cature   of  a  Canadian  Prime   Minister
whose name everyone is careful  not to mention.   Its  settings  include   a  general store and  a small hotel, a lobster boat at sea,  the  bedroom   of  a  rich   American widow  and  a  Maritime  Museum.  And, last but  not least, it has a happy  ending.
The  Battle  for Saltbucket  Beach is flip,
 witty and rooted in the conservationist conviction that  to be 50 years behind  the times is really  to  be 50  years ahead.  It also offers a few choice suggestions for Canadian political  and  social reform. These are so submerged in a sea of comic dialogue, however, that  they are unlikely to disturb  the peace of the casual reader. (Others  will find them inartistically  close to propaganda.)
Initially,  MacNeill's  handling  of  char­ acterization  is very skillful  indeed. Once his federal  politicians  enter  the  picture, he  virtually   jettisons  his  entire   cast  in favour  of  broad  satire. Such   a  course might work well enough  in a film, where the kidnapping of a Prime Minister  by a gang of  I5-year-olds would make up for in spectacle what it lacked in credibility, but in print  it is barely successful.
Still, The   Battle  for Saltbucket   Beach
displays a fine wit  ("I  cracked  my  muf­ fler  on  an  ox-trail,  got  attacked   by  a mongrel  called  Baron -Baron!   for Christ's  sake-got  shafted   by  a  Cape Breton  Okie,  got  shit  from  Ames,  and spent   about   twenty  bucks  getting   no­ where  with  Mr.  Archie  McPhee.  Jesus! They  deserve  all  the  regional  disparity coming to them")   and  a nice perception of rural-urban hostility. As a first novel, it is an impressive debut.
James Moncrieff, the hero of Jamie Brown's Stepping  Stones, discovers more than  one  kind  of prejudice  in his  mete­ oric career. There  is the hostility of race and  nationality,  as evidenced  by  Winni­ peg's immigrant  community when he at­  tempts to move among  it freely from his safe base on the right  side of the  tracks, and  the  hostility  of  class, which  he  en­ counters as a labourer  attempting to join the Shrewsbury tennis club.
Along the way Brown also manages  to
work in a few sly digs at the blinkered timidity of Canadian bankers and  the in­ justice of preferential  freight  tariffs. But his main business is to describe the birth

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  growth of  the  Moncrieff   Moth, the innovative  horseless   carriage  which   his hero  designs  and  builds  in  1901. His des­ cription of  a  1908  Auto   Race  between Toronto and  Montreal, in which the tiny Moth  competes against the best that  New York  and  Europe have  to  offer,  is well sustained and  the  highlight  of  the  book. Stepping   Stones  may   not   have   been written expressly  for  young  people,  but there  is no  doubt that   it  would  prove  a useful  addition  to  courses  in  Canadian Studies.  It's  a story  in  the  Horatio Alger mould,   granted,  but  Brown's   prose  pos­ sesses a  saving  degree   of  sophistication and  his  portrait  of John Moncrieff   as a romantic  hero  and   a   successful   entre­ preneur who  makes  his name  in  Canada
is, to say the  least, refreshing.

PAT  BARCLAY


HOLLYWOODEN

PIERRE   BERTON,   Hollywood's Canada: The Americanization of Our National Image. McClelland &  Stewart, $13.95·

THIS   BOOK   EXAMINES   the   575   Holly­ wood  films over  1907  to 1960 whose plot is set entirely  or mainly  in Canada. Hav­  ing  viewed  or  read   the  scripts  of  all  of them   Berton   concludes  that   Hollywood  hid  a  Canadian  national  image   "under a celluloid  mountain of misconceptions." Thus  he  insists   that   the   whole   world, Canadians   included,  was   brainwashed into   believing   and   handing  down   this false Hollywood's Canada. It is a  mythi­ cal country, he says, a snowbound waste speckled  with  pine jungles and  populated by   classical   "western"  characters  who make  a  mockery  of  the  Canadian way.
In  repetitious Yankee melodramas six­ guns-ablaze, Mounties metamorphize into sheriffs,    "sneaky,    grasping,   cowardly,  dirty" Metis  replace  Mexicans, and  Na­ tive   Nations,  like  American "Indians,"
 scalp-hunt and  wagon-burn  through  life with  gusto.
But  while Berton  correctly repudiates these  depredations, he  fails  to  recognize that  there  are  two distinct Canadas. The Canada to which  he devotes  most  of the book is immigrant colonial  Canada whose attitude to Native  Canadians bears strik­ ing   resemblance   to   Hollywood's.   The other, the  secondary  Canada of  Native Peoples,  stands  helpless   in   the  sin  and  shame   of  the  less-than-human  "image" Hollywood ascribes  to it. It is this second Canada that has  borne  the  brunt of "dis­ tortion"  at   the   hands  of  Hollywooden film-makers. Whole  nations and  their cultures have  been  wiped   out,  not  only on  the  screen,  but  also  in  the  "reality" that  Berton  eagerly  seeks.
Yet Berton  has not treated the desecra­ tion of second Canada's world image with the detail  with  which  he invests  Mountie lore.   He   focuses   here   on   the   line   of RCMP Commissioners  as  they  fight  off Hollywooden  production  men  from  fur­  ther    besmirching  of  the  Force, e.g. Hollywooden redcoats actually sing in Rose   Marie    ( 1929);  some   wear,    oh horrors, stetsons  with  too  many  dents.
Alas,  why  does   not   Berton   raise   an albeit belated voice to ask why Canadian governments and  social institutions failed to intercede on the  Native's behalf? Why did  they  too, like the  Mounties, not  have access to  political  power  to rescue  them­ selves  from   Hollywood's   insidious  ma­ chinery? The absence  of  an  answer  takes away   much   of  the  validity  of  Berton's arguments.
Also, he bases his thesis on an assump­ tion: that   Hollywooden  films  "blurred" the  national identity of   immigrant  col­ onial  Canada. This is not true.  Certainly, in Britain and  the Commonwealth (where Hollywood  found  its  largest  market out­  side America)  Canada's vital  associations with  British  history  and  institutions were well  known.  To   even   less  literate  mass

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



publics,   returning  immigrants, students, the  royal  mail  and  books  like  Beckoning Trails  articulated  the  Canadian  reality. Wherever  Canadian   missionaries went, foreign  school-children became  aware of Albertan oil,  prairie grain,  Helen  Keller, the   Laurentian  Shield,   Wolfe,   Ottawa, winter,  maple,  beavers,   Quebec,   Mac­ Kenzie  King  and  majesty  of the  Rockies. Commonwealers  did   not   allow   asinine acetate to  block  out   Banting  and  Best, the    true    RCMP,  John    McCrae's  In Flanders Fields, the  RCAF  or  Ernest  C. Manning's Back to the  Bible  broadcasts. They  were  not  allowed  to because  exten­  sively  travelling  Canadians-from  ad­  men  to  ambassadors, from   zoologists  to zitherists-preached a Canadian way of life  that  had  preciously  little  to  do  with Hollywood.
Whom  then  did  Hollywood deceive about the Canadian national image? Not Canadians,  argues   Berton.   The  French had  their  own  Quebec story,  talkies  ap­ peared   in  the  late  I g2o's,  and   transla­ tions  and  sub-titles  are comparatively re­ cent  developments.  All  things   thus  con­ sidered,  the conclusion is that  Hollywood  deceived  itself  only.  Americans  fell  for their  own  propaganda.
So  if  Americans  still  turn   up  at   the
border with  skis and  toques  in  midsum­ mer why should  we fear?  Better that  than  high   velocity   shells,   napalm   and   anti­  personnel	fragmentation    bombs    with which  they  are  entering  other countries. If Gary  Cooper, not  the  political order  that   dehumanized  the  Metis,   put  down the   Riel  Rebellion;  if Randolph Scott,  not foreign navvies, built  the CPR; and if Jimmy  Stewart, not  the  Mounted  Police, set down  Klondike law it was all done  in the  general interest of  greed  and  seduc­ tion.  Canada merely  extended  the loca­ tional     range    of	the    money-spinning, mindless   but   appealing  western   movie. Avalanches replaced  tornadoes and  tum-

94
 bleweed. Mounties replaced sheriffs. So what?
If there  were  doubts about the  depic­
tion of the world of immigrant colonial Canada they have all gone  now. What remains   is  the  racist   fate  of  the  Black­ foot, the Cree, the Athapascan, the Mon­ tagnais  and  the Metis. Hollywood did not invent  that  filth  or  have  a  monopoly on its   production.   School   books,   made   in Canada,   still   circulate  the   same   fare.  Hollywood's  Canada  begs  the  question: Now  that  Canada has  its  own  film  in­  dustry  what  has  it  produced to  put  the records   straight?  Especially    for   those Canadians who perish  every day in living rooms and streets under  the guns of the swinging,  ever-winning cowboys?

CLYDE HOSEIN


MUSEUM PIECE

Winnipeg Stories, edited  by Joan  Parr.  Queen- stan  House, $2.25.
IN  HIS INTRODUCTION to Winnipeg Stories, David   Amason    speaks   of   a   Winnipeg style. "Just  what  the style is," he declares, "will come to you as you read the stories themselves".  I  don't doubt   the  sincerity and  devotion  of his statement, but  I  dis­ agree  with  him. After  reading the sixteen short   stories,  I   am   unable   to  find   any connecting link between  the stories except  land  and weather. I may have begun with a bias, but  I am  not  sure I believe  in the regional  concept  of writing.
Winnipeg  Stories, published in  Winni­
peg  in  I974,  was aided  by a  grant from the  Winnipeg Centennial Celebrations Committee, and  is a  thoroughly regional operation, allowing  contributions only from  Winnipeggers and  ex-Winnipeggers. This  may  keep  the  collection  pure,  from the   viewpoint   of  origin,   but   it  doesn't assure  an  even level  of quality. Regional stories  are  always in danger of becoming

BOOKS IN REVIEW



an  affectionate collection, rather than  an anthology of stories chosen  as examples of good Canadian writing.
I felt the affection in the book for "the city," as Amason  calls it, a disturbing response,   making   me   feel  almost   alien as a British  Columbian. I couldn't say in reading about  a particular incident or remembering a  town,   place   or  custom, "Yes,   it   was  like   that,    I   remember it well,"  shaking my  head  in  the  comfort­ able  knowledge or gratification of having  been  there.  The  best short  stories  deal  in their  subject   matter with  a  deeper than average   insight,   and   are  technically in­ tact.
From  this viewpoint, there are five out­
standing stories. "Westward 0 Pioneers!" is  the  liveliest  and   most  contemporary. Written in  first  person  by Edward  Klei­ man  in the voice of a Yorkshireman awk­ wardly    adapting    to    North    American behaviour, it shatters middle-class respec­ ability  with  triumph, delight   and   a  su­ preme   irony.   "Up  and   Down    in   the Depression,"  by  Chester Duncan,  com­ bines  the  deprivation of the  hungry-thir­ ties with  the  spiritual  elevation of music and  has  the authenticity of a knowledge­ able musician and  writer. W. D. Valgard­ son's "The  Baseball  Game" is not  really about   baseball,  which  is only  a  catalyst, but  reveals  an  obsessive character and  a troubled marriage. "That Sensual Music," by  Fredelle Bruser  Maynard, relates  the difference between  two  sisters in  person­ ality  and  outlook  during  teen-age years, and  ends  with  a  remarkable acceptance of  the  differences.  "My  Uncle's Black­ Iron  Arm" by  Mort   Forer   depicts   "an  artist  in  black  iron," and   is  written in metal. Uncle  Solomon  is a superb charac­ ter  whose  tragic  history  illustrates moral­ ity,  ethics,  the  brutality of  war  and  de­ pression.  Forer's  black-iron  prose says of Solomon:   "Every   year   his   giant   arm strengthened and blackened like his black­ iron  art.  His muscles bulged and  valleyed
 and  his hands  slowly grew  a thick leather crust. On his face, over the million burn marks,  deep  lines furrowed up,  even  into his coarse, dark  hair."
The other stories fall dimly into varying degrees  of  depth  and   technical  compe­ tence.   Miriam  Waddington's   "Summer At  Lonely  Beach" is  a  pleasantly  remi­ niscent,  wistful  account of loneliness,  and "Willie" by  Jim   Burke  strikes  a  similar  note  of  sadness,  although it's  concerned with  the innocence of a retarded boy and the ignorance of his oppressors.
As for  Rossa  Williamson's "The  Pink
Hat," previously  published in "various European  magazines", I  doubt  whether any  self-respecting woman's  magazine in North  America  would  print such  a story anymore,  or even Playboy for that  matter. There are  no  boy-meets-girl, pink-hat stories  anymore. "The  Pink  Hat" has its charm, but  it's  nevertheless a  relic,  and the  best  example in  the  book  of  Winni­ peg's affectionate past.
I  liked   the  cover   by  Ross  Sundmark
and   Solveig   Borgford,  but   I   can   only regret  that  Winnipeg Stories  is more  of a museum piece than a consistently good collection of short fiction written and published  in Canada.

LORRAINE VERNON


A SEDENTARY OVATION

FRED  EURINGER,  A  Dream of  Horses. Oberon, cloth  $6.95; paper $3.50.
JOYCE   MARSHALL,   A   Private  Place.   Oberon,
cloth  $6.95; paper $3.50.
JOHN    METCALF,  The  Teeth  of  My    Father.
Oberon, cloth $6.95; paper $3.50.
IN "Feuille d'Album," the  master of the short  story, Katharine Mansfield, renders the quintessential conclusion of the genre and  the  supermundane nature of artifice in   the  symbol  of  an   innocent, shatter-

95

BOOKS IN REVIEW



proof   egg.  "The  Strange Aberration of Mr.  Ken  Smythe," opening story  of John Metcalf's collection  The Teeth of My Father, 	concludes   considerably   more truculently,  but   no   less  glibly:  with   a bottle  in a character's face, and  indeed  in the reader's. What seems initially a highly comic  piece  concerning the  reception of a  touring German boys'  band  by an audience of inebriated British  World  War II veterans and  picture-snapping Ameri­ can  tourists  proves  to be a harshly hyper­  bolical   picture of   reality.  The  audience hurls  more   than  invective. The  photog­  raphers capture  a  plethora of  hcemorr­ haging   life-switching    to   colour   film when life really begins to flow. Here  Met­  calf  shocks  the  reader in order  to inform him   that   his  subjects   elsewhere  in  this well-composed collection transcend  the grotesque. The  author does not  put all his amvre in one basket.
The  most moving  piece in the collection is the title story, in which  is depicted with remarkable precision  and  warmth a son's belated    realization  of   his   love   for   his deceased  father. The "teeth" are  just one of the son's memories of his father which, at  the opening of the  story,  he is relating to  a  drinking  companion.  But   like  the teeth   this  nostalgia   is  false,  and   in  the rest   of  the   story   the   son,   through  an examination of  memories and   of  stories he has composed-like most of Metcalf's characters this one is an  artist -attempts to arrive  at the truth of the filial relation­ ship,  a  ten-year-long process  culminating in  a  scalding   tear   of   unrequitable  love.
More psychologically complex  is "The Years  in  Exile," which  records  the  remi­ niscences  of  an  old  Canadian  writer   as he  awaits  an  interviewer from  a literary journal and   considers   the  sorting of  his corpus  of  manuscripts and  letters prom­  ised  to  Queen's  University. Metcalf   ar­  ranges    his   narrative   in   an    ostensibly itinerant  manner which  reflects  the  wan­  derings   of   an    antiquarian   mind.    Of

g6
 course,  the  seemingly  extemporaneous  is the most highly contrived, and  such a mundane symbol  as  a  lawn   chair,   with which  the story opens,  is highly evocative of a sedentary, contemplative existence. Indeed it is the seat of exile. The old man dislikes the chair and thinks of the more satisfactory  thrones   of  his  boyhood, thereby   inaugurating a  descent   into  the past  in search  of order, similar  to that represented  in  the  title  story.  The aged exile  sorts  through manuscripts and memories,  the tangible and  intangible documents of life. Not  until  old age does this "pilgrim" realize  that  his destination had  been  reached  in  his  youth; and  in trying to recapture the memories of childhood  he  reconstructs thought  into the short story we are told could not accommodate it, written by a writer  who considers himself too old to write. The pilgrim  continually returns to  the  reality of the present,  but,  motivated by the associations inherent in his surroundings invariably abandons it and  returns to his British   childhood. The  mind   moves  in pictures:
I stare at my wrist as it lies along the aluminum  arm  of  the  chair,  the  blue veins. The  left side of the  wrist might  be the river Avon  and  its  estuary,   the  right  side  of the sea.  And   then   my  fist,   the   bulge  of  the headland.

And  just  as  the  present   recalls  the  past, the  past invokes the  present; hence this temporal vacillation:

I wonder  if my room smells, if I smell?  I often  remarked  it in  old people  when  I was younger.  I can  remember   stiil  the  smell of my  grandmother. Thank  God  I  wiil  never know. I can, at least, still bathe without assistance  though  she  insists  I do  not  lock the  door.  Some  I remember  smelled  medi­ cinal, some of mothballs, some  just a  musti­ ness. I have  not  shaved   today.  I  must  re­ member   to  shave   before   evening   for   the young  man  is  coming  to  ask  me  questions.

Whereas  the exile  could  not  often  find an  "adequate structure" for  his  stories,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Metcalf   has  structured well  the  associa­ tions  of  ideas.  The   other  stories  in  The  Teeth of My   Father  are  not  only  well­ written   but    related    structurally   and thematically, forming a  collection which assumes  its  highest  literary value  collec­ tively.
Fred  Euringer's A Dream of J-1orses  is a collection  not  as well unified,  but  some of  its  stories   are   still  highly   successful.
Occasionally, though-as in "One More for  the Practical Cats," about a man haunted  scatalogically by  the  ghost  of a cat   he   destroyed   years   earlier,  and   in "The Rat and  the  Goose," about the destruction of a gander both  in its hutch, by a nibbling rat,  and  at the dinner table, by the youth who avenges the foul and verminous deed -the  stories  are  except for  their  grotesque, cinematic detail scarcely interesting. At times Euringer simply  fumbles with  awkward,  inappro­ priate  language:

... I've  never   been  able  to  watch  a  news­ reel   of  German   soldiers   doing   what   they call  the  "goose-step" without  feeling  that  I had  some  sort  of  secret  private knowledge that  shed  semantic   light  on  the  derivation of that  otherwise  none-too-accurate descrip­ tive  nomenclature.

Yet this descriptive overreaching is not disturbingly prevalent. The  remaining stories   in   the   collection  are   generally well-executed. In  one,  an  interesting literary   experiment  entitled  "A  Christ­ mas   Pageant,"  Euringer  even  seems  to recognize   his  stylistic  weakness  and,   by articulating it,  transcend it. The  story  is an attempt to articulate a recurrent vision which  the  narrator  has  never  been  able to  express  adequately.  Both   the  author and   his  persona  recognize  the  causes  of inarticulateness:

... either  my skill with  words is inadequate, or the medium  itself is inappropriate for the embodiment  of this vision.

Ironically, this story  is an  admirable and
 original  exploration of a universal artistic predicament, scrivener's palsy.
More conventionally self-conscious,  but even more successful as a short story, is "Homer's  Door," a  futuristic  examina­ tion  of  the  artist  both  as  creator and  as destroyer. In   Iggg,  at  the  age  of  sixty­ five,  David   is  forced   to  vacate his  resi­ dence,   and   hence   to  sort  out   his  books and   manuscripts.  Among   the  latter is a collection  of  poems composed  thirty  years earlier.  "The  Homer Poems" documents David's pathetic relationship with  Homer, who   occupies the fiat across the hall. Adventitiously, David  begins to observe Homer through a tiny  hole  in their com­ mon  wall.  He  soon  becomes  an  aesthetic scopophiliac and  composes  "The  Homer Poems."  Euringer renders  a  fine  picture of the  artist  who,  at  the  barrier between  reality    and    fiction,    "with   a   darning needle,  penetrates the opening impercep­ tibly,  to  make  it  larger, widen   his  per­  spective."  After   completing  the   poems David  tacks  them  to  Homer's door.  This  confession  results  in  a  temporal  suspen­ sion; not of art, but of life, viz. the suicide  of  Homer.   The   reader  himself   is  sus­ pended   somewhere  between    the   years Ig6g  and  1999,  and   Euringer thus  con­ cludes  a satisfyingly  disturbing story.
In A Private Place Joyce Marshall concerns  herself with  a variety  of subjects
-solitude, separation, death, friendship,
vicarious   experience,  mutual  confession, innocence -and   artistic  approaches to them,   but   still   manages  to  produce a balanced, unified  work  of art.  Like  Met­ calf   and    Euringer,  Marshall   has   the twentieth century obsession  with  observ­  ing  the  observer.  In  the  title story,  Lars,  after  renting the  fiat  of a dead man,  be­ gins to receive letters from Margaret, the deceased's   mistress,  who   is  unaware  of the  change of  occupant. Lars  eventually reads  the  letters and  finds,  in  a relation­ ship much  more warm  than  that  between

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



him and  his estranged wife, a bizarre, vicarious   solace.  In  the  end   this  episto­ lary   voyeurism   proves   to  inhibit   Lars's  future   success   with    other    more    real women.
In   "Salvage," a  woman's  attempt  to
help a girl, Sylvia, to recover from an attempted suicide proves to be more therapeutic  to  the   philanthropist -like Lars  she is separated -than  to  the  girl. Rhoda,  this  maternal  "do-gooder,"  ap­ propriately nicknamed "Goose," finds the solutions  to some  of her  own  psychologi­ cal   problems   and,   ultimately,  discovers that,  while  neither  she  nor  Sylvie  knows herself,  each  knov.rs  the  other, and   this precarious  knowledge  is  the   basis  of  a mysterious  "covenant between  them."
A simple and  entertaining story is "The
Old   Woman",  a  fantastic  tale  about   a power  house  attendant in  northern  Que­ bec  who  eventually, though the  decision causes  his mental breakdown,  chooses  to attend  rather  to  his   machine   (the   old woman  of the title)  than  to his wife. The  fantasy   is   well-controlled,  an   effective tonal  break  in  a  demanding progression of  stories.   Perhaps  the   most   successful story is "The Little  White  Girl," in which the  narrator recalls a vision of supernal innocence through the  medium of  recur­ rent   dream. Subtle  Dantesque  allusions suggest   the   angelic   nature of   the  little white   girl,   and   elevate   the   story,  and indeed  the collection, to a celestial  sphere of excellence.
These  three  interesting collections pub­
lished  by  Oberon are  entertaining, stim­ ulating, and occasionally  edifying explora­ tions    of	human    existence,    from    the mundane, to the  grotesque, to  the  super­  mundane.   Their   deviations   from    the circle  of artistic perfection  are  usually  of the   artificial,  ovoid   variety;   not   mind­ shattering, but  delicate and  precious.  In the  contemporary Canadian  short   story the  aesthetic egg  breaks,  but  in so doing

g8
 allows  the  emergence  of  life  not   to  be avoided  by the curious  reader.

PAUL M. ST. PIERRE



TWO PARABLES FOR THEATRE

ROBERT GURIK,  Api  2967. Translated by Marc F. Gelinas.  Talonbooks,  $s.oo.  The  Trial  Of Jean-Baptiste  M. Translated by Allan Van Meer. Talonbooks,  $s.so.

RoBERT GURIK's Api 2967 and  The  Trial Of  Jean-Baptiste  M. are  parables about man's   place   in   two   types   of  insidious society.  Api  2967,  set  a  thousand   years into  the  future from  the  time  it  was first performed, recreates the  Adam  and  Eve story  to  make  the  point   man's   scientific propensity  and   ultramodern  technology will be the  eventual death of civilization. The  play's thesis is obvious,  and  dialogue, situations,  and   characters  all  appear  to emanate from  a  jejune  imagination. Api
2967  resembles  the  exercises  improvised in   developmental  drama   courses,    for
science fiction  of this  type is easy to con­
trive.
What  has  gone  wrong?   Well,  for  one thing,  the satiric  machinery shows little originality. The  Adam  and  Eve myth  has virtually  had   its  day.   What  is  left   to satirize   in  it?   Gurik   does  not   seem   to know,  so he elects to  play  it  safe  by giv­ ing us a laugh  or two about a Computer­ Age Eve  (called E. for contrived symbolic effect)   who  is filled  with  fear  upon  first seeing   an   apple   (called   Api   for   sci-fi buffs  who appreciate this  type  of cryptic  strain). E. and  the  Professor   (a  unique, scientific  Adam)   live in  a world  of plas­ tics  and  mechanical programming.  The  Api,   therefore,  confuses   them,   so  until  they  have  tasted  it,  they  know  it only by its  smooth, plexiglass  texture and  by the Professor's   anatomical  description  of  it

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


as  "a cross  between  spherical and  ovoid volumes,   truncated  in   both   extremities with  swellings  and   internal poles  of  at­ traction."  The   scientists   have   reversed the   scale  of  values   familiar   to   human beings, thereby providing a new dimension  to acts and  life. Their world  is a place of pre-established and   scientifically  calcu­  lated   diets,  of   research   on  longevity, of population   controls,   of   Huxleyan  test­ tubes.  It  is  a  world   where   all  acts  are regulated   by  quotas   to  conserve   energy so that longevity  may be extended. But it is also a world of death-in-life for though the  common   salutation is "Let there  be life" there  is no life as we know  it in  this new  world.  The  lighting, set design,  and movements are  meant to suggest  the Garden of Eden's  serenity,  but  this world is a Paradise only to programme-happy scientists.  By tasting  the  Api,  E. reverses some  of  the  implications of  the  Biblical myth   for  instead   of  merely   introducing pain,  turmoil, and  death into  her  world, she lets in emotion  and  life as well.
Of course,  this is not altogether a novel idea; even  John  Milton  conceived  of the Genesis story as a conflict between  the appetite for  knowledge and   life  on  one hand   and   the  divine   injunction  against total    freedom    and    experience  on   the other. Nevertheless,  it leads into  Gurik's thesis  that   science  and   history   have  re­ versed   the  meanings of  life  and  death. Until  E.  tastes  the  apple  (for  which  she predictably develops  a  keen  hunger)  life on   the   Professor's   planet   is   a  kind   of elongated  death  where  immobility  is  a prime  stance  and  monotonous repetition a  solemn  decree. Once  the  Api  has  been tasted,  E. and  the  Professor  remove  their jackets  and  hoods  (in a parallel to Adam and  Eve's  nakedness)   and  discover  each other's  metallized   skin  in  the  first  warm flush  of  lust.  But  again   the  parallels be­ tween   Gurik's   fictive  situation  and   the Genesis   myth   are   obvious   and   stereo­ typed  and  it would  take  a most ingenious

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



production to make these scenes work on stage  for  audiences to  feel  other than  a sense of deja-vu.
The final  statement of  the  play,  once
E.  and   the   Professor   are   nearing  their end,  is  that  feeling  is what  counts   most of  all -even  more   than   language, that humanizing idiom.  Ironically, however, Gurik's play lets us feel so little for its characters. They   are  puppets, well  pre­ served  in  white  plastic,  and  accordingly they  cannot but  fail  to elicit  our  deepest feelings.  There  is  a  resulting  alienation between    audience   and  characters  that  goes  beyond  artistic  distance. This  unre­ solved  gap  between  play  and  audience is not  at  all  like  Brecht's V erfrumdung  or "estrangement" effect,   for   Gurik's  play does not arouse  in its audience a desire to alter  the object  of recognition.
This point opens up the second major reason   for  the  failure of  Api  2967. Al­ though Gurik  has  taken  care  to spell out
a   technical  style   for   his   play,   he   has
failed    to   create    a   truly   surprising  or "dangerous"   environment.   Despite  its use of various  media, the  play  looks out­ moded   and  fails  to  achieve in  its  audi­ ence  the  psychological synchronization so essential   to  any  type  of   theatre that   in­ tends   to   extend    its   scope   beyond   the realist   tradition.  Gurik's  scenography is kinetic  in a restrained way:  it allows light to   float   around,  furniture  to   be   self­ propelled, and  animated film  to  explode on screens,  but  its motion  does  not offset the  depersonalization of E. and  the  Pro­ fessor,  and   the   play,  as  a  result,  has  a static   quality   which   hardly  succeeds   in being  exotic,  much  less an assault  on our minds   and   nerves.  Gurik's  sci-fi  fails  to vibrate around us or to hit  us with  bursts that  could  even  faintly  resemble  futurist synthetic expressions  of  cerebral energy. The rhythm (of sound  and  gesture)  and conflict are not aggressive  enough and  do not  create  a strong atmosphere of cruelty on  stage.  After   Marinetti  and   Artaud,


100
 Jarry  and  Ionesco,  this  play  is decidedly
passeist.
But   Gurik   still   remains  a  significant playwright, for his Trial  Of Jean-Baptiste M.  succeeds, where  Api  fails, in bringing life  and  power  to  art.  Ostensibly   an  in­ vestigation  into  the causes for its protago­ nist's  crimes against  society, the  play is a powerful  indictment of a  corporate soci­ ety  which   denies   a  male  his  manhood. But  it  is also more  than  this,  for  it  lives its  subject   rather  than   contemplating it. Jean-Baptiste  M.  uses  the  full  exten­  sions of its subject  by both  an  intelligible language of words and  a strong  emotion­ ality.   As  such,   it   aligns   itself   with   all those  plays  by  O'Neill and  Ibsen  which attempt to go beyond  mere  narrative and touch   the  wellsprings   of  universal   emo­ tions. Textually, the language of this play hardly   exceeds   that   of  Api,   but   Jean­ Baptiste  M.  shows  much  more  than   Api
ever does.
One   reason  might   well  be  its  subject.
Jean-Baptiste M. is a Canadian of mixed background,   having    been    born    to   a French-Canadian father and  an  English­ Canadian mother. His Christian  name  is that  of Quebec's patron saint  but  his sur­ name  is  incomplete and   this  mixture of allusiveness  and   anonymity  adds   to  the character's instability. Like John the Bap­ tist, J. B. (as he is sometimes called)  tries to make  smooth  the  way for moral  right­  eousness but  he is thwarted  by corporate society  which   is  capable   of   sacrificing anyone  who is a  real  or  imagined threat
to its bureaucracy. So,  J. B., hardly  cap­
able of being a first-class citizen much  less
his dream   of  Prime  Minister, goes from job to  job and  this flux  reaches  a height after   his  dishonourable  discharge  from the  Canadian  army   for  having   given  a recruit   a  haircut during initiation. J. B. initially   treats   life  as  a  game   but  dis­ covers  to  his  regret   that   this  playfulness is  out  of  place  in  an  aggressive  society

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that   demands strict  obeisance   to its  nar­
row laws.
The   naturalist current clearly  intends us to see the destructive power of the corporate industry. Dutron, "the greatest chemical empire in the  world," is the industry which  controls this  society,  and
J. B. has to contend with  its emasculating
force.  He  discovers  he cannot ever find a
worthy  place  in this world  and  since he is a  passionate man,  he  reacts  passionately to his failure. Like  Camus' existentialists, he  discovers  his final  choice  comes  down to  murder or  suicide,  and  he  chooses  to kill   his   bosses  in   a   disruption  of   the accepted order.
But  this  is  not  a  play  about   murder, for  the dominant question is one of  man­ hood.  Where the  apple was a key symbol in   Api,   genitals  figure   in   Jean-Baptiste M. Right  from  his birth,  there  is an  un­
certainty concerning J. B.'s  identity. He
is  passed   around  from   hand    to   hand
while the usual comments are made  about his  complexion, physique, and  potential.
One  witness  puts  a hand  on J. B.'s  geni­
tals as if to affirm  that  the  boy is a male,
and   in  due   course   there   are   threats to
J. B.'s  manhood. When   he  fails  in  his
army  career, his father mocks him  bitter­
ly for not being a man,  and J. B. discovers
how difficult  it is to be a man  in a society
which  fosters the delusion  of equal oppor­ tunity    for   all.   In   short,   it   is   he,   the perennial  aspirant  to   a   just   place   in society, who is the victim  of  psychological  castration-a fact  that  is  made  explicit
in a scene  where  J. B. screams  and  holds
his genitals after  his rifle breech  has been
pulled  out.  The metaphorical contract between    the   rifle  and   manhood   works well,  for  Gurik   obviously   intends  us  to
see how society impels J. B. into a violent
defence  of his virility.
The  play  is  replete   with   ironies   and
one  of the  largest  is the  very ambition of
J. B. Instead of wanting to be a rebel, he
wishes to belong to society. He never  tries
 to reject society even though he is accused time  and  again  of  being  anti-social.  All
his life J. B. seeks to do something useful
and  to be respected, but  meets with noth­
ing  other   than  a  series  of  rejections and indictments. He  misreads his society  as a democratic one when  it is really, as Willy Loman could have  informed him, an economic  one.  His  aspiration for  dignity is doomed  for  he is a second-class citizen whose  identity is  incomplete. Ironically, he compounds his doom  by embracing Dutron, the very force  that  is designed  to suppress  him.  As a further irony,  it is he and  not  Dutron that   becomes  the  desig­ nated  enemy of society.
J. B.  is  caught  in   the   powerful  ma­
chinery   of  corporate  society   and   he  is
crushed  in a manner not  unworthy of O'Neill's intensity. However, the  play refuses to sentimentalize its passion for surely one of its ironies is that  life is fundamentally a useless passion  in an industrial society. As such,  then,  Gurik's sense of  protest  is restrained by a  philo­ sophic  realism  or,  as  some  might  prefer  to call it, cynicism.
Whatever the  merits  of Gurik's  philo­ sophic  attitude, The  Trial   of  Jean-Bap­ tiste  M. has  a  dynamism   which   is  the very  symbol   of  life.   In   his   production notes   the  author  stresses  an   improvisa­ tional   quality and  suggests   how  several "readings"  can   be   made   of   the   play. These   notes  reinforce  the  impression we obtain  from  the  text  of a  type  of  theatre which  lives by reason  of its flexible struc­ ture.  The  drama begins  with  a  montage of noises  and  has  a  strong  filmic  quality for  its  scenes  dissolve  into  one  another, and  lines of time  braid  together in a way that   approaches  the   cinema's  sense  of mobility.  All  these  things  help   the  play attain  a   workshop   quality  that    would probably     have    delighted	a    Copeau, Meyerhold,  Piscator, or  Brecht-all  of whom  subscribed   to  and   encouraged  in different  ways  the  idea  of  theatre as  a

I 0 I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



liberating experiment on the hidden emo­
tional  life of man.

KEITH  GAREBIAN



CULTURAL TACTICS

ROWLAND  SMITH,    ed.,   Exile   and   Tradition.
Africana    Publishing    Company  and   Dal­
housie University  Press. $r8.oo, paper  $7.00.

SIX OF THE THIRTEEN articles  collected  in Rowland Smith's Exile and Tradition appeared in  the  Winter  I973-74 issue of the  Dalhousie Review. All  thirteen  were first delivered as papers at two Dalhousie Conferences on African and  Caribbean literature. Gathered here,  they  are  a forceful   reminder  of  the  social  engage­ ment   in  African  writing  and  a  helpful  introduction  to   the   tactics   of   African  criticism.
There are  essays here  on  and  by  indi­ vidual  figures like Kofi  Awoonor, Chinua Achebe,   and   Wole   Soyinka;  there   are thematic  surveys    (alienation   in   North  Africa,  exile in  West  Africa and  Martin­ ique)  ;  there   are   political  polemics,  lin­ guistic  analyses,  critical  credos.  Such  an observation  hides,   however,    the   extra­ ordinary  degree  of   coherence  these  dis­ parate  essays  achieve. Smith's  title   de­ clares  a  thematic overlap. But  the  obser­ vations of exile and  tradition also convey a  collective  overview   of  African  experi­ ence.  This   perspective involves  not   just Black   Consciousness     (Donatus   Nwoga gives negritude  a moderate defence)' but also a respect  for the cultural continuities which    the   apparent   discontinuities in African   life  (slavery,  colonialism, exile) seem to deny. The criticism  of the colonial presence  in Africa  and  government policy in South Africa  is sharp and  clear; even severer  is the  criticism   levelled  at  critics (Western  or   African)   who   impose   a Western bias  in  their  reading. The mes-


I02
 sage is direct: listen  to Africa  before  you try  to  interpret Africa.  The   positive  ex­ ample  which  the essays set shows the vir­  tue of listening  closely.
Donatus Nwoga's  explicit   rejection of cultural "universality" and  Peter  Okeh's insistence   upon   cultural  "authenticity" are  both  attempts to distinguish between patterns  of  cultural  tradition  and   the kinds  of  distortion which  modern  inter­ pretations have  imposed  upon  them. The other  half  of  their  argument  appears in the observations of Isaac  Yetiv and  Row­  land    Smith    about    North    and    South Africa  respectively,  where "cultural schiz­ ophrenia" -giving  the  lie  to  Canada's exclusive   national claim   to  it-is  seen as a contemporary norm. Douglas  Killam, too,  notes  the  danger  involved   in  a  so­ ciety "trying to get  rid  of  [its]   gods and  demons." African and Caribbean societies all  have  their  own  problems. The  argu­ ment,    however,    turns   .out    to   favour  neither  colonial  imposition nor  wholesale recidivism,  but  rather the  power  of  cul­ tural  survival.  "The state  of exile," writes Max  Dorsinville  about Senghor  and Ce­  saire,  "was  always  wedded  to  the  native  land,   the  consciousness  of  the  deep  self identified   with   the  accidents  of   history and    contingency."    Furthermore:	cul­ tures  "from their   first  contact  with  the Other  . . . tactically    [redefine]   them­ selves." This is a process of renewal  rather than  of  negation, which  allows  the  "con­ quered" to be the  ultimate victor  and  lets survival  express  a  certain unquenchable joy. Art  serves a  social  function in  these instances. It faces  the  exigencies  of  pol­ itical   life,  yet-here  becoming of   par­ ticular  relevance to the Canadian literary  scene-manages still  to maintain  a per­  spective towards  experience, affirming  the persistence   of  respected  cultural  values, the  power  of  the  artist  to communicate them,  and  the  capacity  of  the  people  to appreciate and understand.
W. H. NEW

BOOKS IN REVIEW



WILL TO LIVE

WALTER  BAUER,  A  Different   Sun. Translated from  the  German by Henry Beissel. Oberon,
$S.gs.

IN   HIS  INTRODUCTION   to   this   volume Henry  Beissel describes Walter Bauer as Canada's immigrant poet  par excellence. Bauer  may  very well be just  that, despite the  fact  that  he has  written primarily in German, his native  tongue. What should be  underlined, as is so often   the  case, is the role immigrants have  played,  and continue to play, in  the  life of Canadian literature. This   is  not   altogether   unex­ pected, especially  since it has been recog­ nized, not least by Margaret Atwood, that  Canada is really  a  nation of  immigrants, and  also,  that  one  of her  currently most talked-about writers  is  F.  P.  Grove,   the immigrant novelist  par  excellence-one might  say.
Be that  as it  may,  Bauer  is  unique  as
a  poet.  He  brings  to  his  writing a  sensi­ tivity and  experience shaped by the vicis­ situdes   of  his  seventy-two  years,  during which   he  has  been  imprisoned  in  Nazi Germany and  has  lived  a life of "double exile."  No  wonder,  in  these  poems,  we find   him   brooding  on   such   themes   as exile, loneliness, the struggle of the immi­ grant, self-doubt, political   revolution, workers in a factory, and the continual exploration of the landscape of the mind. These   themes  are  inevitable as  the  ima­ gination tries to come  to grips  with  pain, disappointments, and  the  general wish to dramatize the  human condition.
An extremely  prolific  writer, Bauer  has written over  sixty  books,  nine  of  which are  about  Canada. Strangely enough Bauer  has not  been given  the  recognition he  deserves,  considering the  fact  that  he has  been  living  in  Canada for   twenty­ four  years.  In  Germany  itself,  where  he has  won  the  Albert  Schweitzer  prize,  his reputation continues to  grow.
 A  schematic preoccupation  in  this volume is seen in the continual  juxtaposi­ tion of the Old  World  with  the New:  the ambivalences of pain, suffering and  "des­  perate    love"   of    the   former  with    the awareness  of hope in  the  latter. But  very often  the  holocaust  that  Bauer  witnessed during  the  Second   World   War,  and   the stirrings of  revolutionary impulses  in Europe form an ironic  undertone in his cogitations about Canada.  Thus  in  one of his best poems, "The Sun  Here " he wntes:

	.	'
From   the  one  under which I used  to  live. The sun  here  has  seen  forests and   rivers The long  crawl of  primeval ages,  . . .	'
Not  the  end   of  cities   burning to  ashes  like useless toys....

Against  this  image  of  innocence he  says the Canadian sun  is one  "without depth WI"thout  shame,  without  guilt,   without'
shadows," as  if,  as  Beissel  reminds  us,
the Indians have been  treated without shame.
The   poems  are   all   journeys   into  ex­ perience,   tinged   with   brooding  melan­ choly  and  self-assessment, but  never  pes­ simism:   the   persona   preferring  to  live with  equanimitas  than  with  self-destroy­ ing turmoil. Thus in the poem "Toronto," which  Bauer  reminds us means   meeting place, not only has he changed his habits,  or  learnt  a  new  language, but  "Here I steeled  my  NofHere I  heated my  Yes." Whether  the   poems   are   aesthetically pleasing   it  is  difficult   to  judge,   mainly because  the  nuances and  rhythms of  the original  German suffer  in  translation. As they are,  in  English,  quite  a  few  tend  to be  flat:   the  resonances  are   never   deep enough  to help  us make  the  imaginative leap  from  the  particular to the  universal. Others, too, tend  to be trite  or sentimen­ tal;  but  beyond  this  they  express  a time­  less  truth   about   human   existence,  of man's  will to live, despite  holocausts and  exiles.  This  perhaps  is  where   the   solid


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



resonances of Bauer's poems lie, and  why it  is essential   for  us  to  be  able   to  read them  in English.

CYRIL DABYDEEN



THREE TRADITIONS

ROBERT  OLVER,  The   Bicycle  Tree. McClelland and  Stewart,  $8.gs.
JOHN  BUELL, Playground.  Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.
CAROL SHIELDS,  Small  Ceremonies. McGraw- Hill  Ryerson, $8.gs.

CoNSCIOUSLY or unconsciously, most novelists work  within the  framework of a tradition.  Robert  Olver's  The   Bicycle Tree, for example, recalls  the rural  novels of such  writers  as Frederick Philip  Grove, Robert   Stead    and    Ernest   Buckler    in which   the     relationships    among   a family  or  a  community  develop   against an  agricultural background. In  his latest novel,   Playground, John  Buell  analyzes man's  confrontation with wilderness,  a subject  previously explored by, among others,  Susanna Moodie, Charles G. D. Roberts  and   Margaret  Atwood. These writers  describe  characters isolated  from their  familiar society  who  are  forced through life in the wild to reassess nature, society   and   self.  Small    Ceremonies   by Carol  Shields  is a  psychological domestic comedy  in  the  manner of  Margaret Laurence, or  the  earlier   Frances  Brooke and  Rosanna Leprohon, in which  the protagonist  (frequently female) ,  caught at a moment of acute  awareness of the problems  in her relationship to her family and   her   society,   achieves   a   re-ordered vision of life.
To   place   a  novel  within  a  tradition does  not  assign  it  to  a confining  pigeon­ hole.  Rather, the  process is a recognition that   other    authors  have   attempted  to write    on   similar   subjects.   Ideally,  an author  should  write so  as  to  make   the
 reader   forget,   at   least   temporarily,  the other  works; an author should  achieve individuality  within   the   tradition. The three  novels  under   review  here  illustrate a full range  of possibilities-dismal fail­ ure,  modest  achievement  and  solid  suc­ cess. Robert  Olver  slavishly  adheres  to a formula; John   Buell  handles  the  genre competently  but    without   distinction; Carol   Shields  remodels   the   tradition  in her own image.
The   story  of  Handy  Rice  as  told  by Robert   Olver   in  The Bic•ycle Tree  pos­ sibly contains  every cliche  associated with a  rural   novel:   a  hailstorm, a  frustrated artist,  a  rape,  a  vengeful  town,  a grand project   to  irrigate the  land,   a  bullying father and  a  tragic conclusion. Even  the epigraph from  the  Book of Deuteronomy
-"To  me belongeth vengeance, and  re­ compense" -suggests   a   tired   rehearsal of  tired  material. Handy  Rice  has  mar­  ried  Leslie  McGowan  with   full  knowl­ edge that  she was raped by her stepfather when  she  was  fourteen,  that   she  had   a child  and  that  she will  never  again  bear children. They  adopt  a son, Matthew, but Handy continues to feel  that   he is being punished   for   the   stepfather's  act.   He either   ignores  or  terrorizes his  son,  and he allows his friend Dickie  (the frustrated artist)   to grow in  his wife's  and  his son's affections  while  he  devotes  himself  to  a plan   to   divert   a  creek   with   dynamite. Olver's characters, scenes and symbols are clumsy and  heavy-handed to the  point  of embarrassment. The  ironic   tragedy   of the  ending,  the  son's  death in  the explo­ sion,   sparks    derisive    laughter    at    the author's   perpetuation   of    a    formula. Robert  Olver  either  has  no  awareness  of previous  novels on similar subjects,  or he has  intentionally imitated  them  with  his lesser talent.
In  Playground  John Buell has adopted
an  equally  traditional subject, but  he handles  it much  more competently. Spen­ cer  Morison,  a wealthy Montreal  profes-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sional, flies off course when  he is heading toward  a  campsite in  northern Quebec. A  thunderstorm  forces  him  to  land   the plane  on  a  lake,  but  the  plane  sinks and he is left stranded in the bush without equipment. His struggle  to survive teaches him  that  nature is not a "playground," as he had  come  to see it, and  that  his life in Montreal had   been  "a  closed  system,  a self-contained illusion,  a  routine that would be deadly in the long run." Buell develops   his  points   with   some  subtlety, but   he   draws   back   from   presenting a personal view. He does not specify the permanent  change in  Spencer Morison; he only shows his character's sense of  kin­ ship   with   the   Indians  who  rescue  him rather than   with  the  anthropologist  who studies  them.  The  absence  of an  inform­ ing pattern of ideas matches the weakness of the  characterization. Except  for  a few incidental  details,    Spencer   Morison  is the  same  character who appeared as Joe Grant  in   Buell's   previous    novel,    The  Shrewsdale Exit.  The   limitations of  this character   become   clear   in   Playground  because   the  subject   matter demands a prolonged examination of his mental functions. Unfortunately, Buell's  charac­ ter  is too shallow  to sustain  the  analysis, and    the   author  must   resort   to   vague generalizations  to  describe   the  protago­ nist's  responses.  Buell  handles  the  tradi­ tional   plot   of  wilderness  survival    with professional skill, but  he  lacks the  power to make it fresh and original.
Carol  Shields  understands the  dangers and  the  potential of traditions in  fiction. In  Small  Ceremonies, her first  novel, she includes  a satirical  abstract of the  Cana­ dian  rural  novel that  should  destroy  for­ ever  the credibility  of such  novels as The  Bicycle  Tree. The   first  person   protago­ nist,  Judith Gill, is  engaged  in  writing a biography   of   Susanna  Moodie,  and Shields  suggests some subtle  parallels be­ tween  their lives. The  element of pioneer
 struggle   is  absent,   however,  for  Shields sets her  story  in  what  appears to be con­ temporary Ottawa. Judith  Gill  is  a  suc­ cessful   but   unsatisfied   biographer,  the wife of a professor who specializes  in Mil­ ton   and   the   mother   of   two   teenaged children. Shields  selects  a  modest   scope for  her  story:  the  lives  of  the  members  of this  family and  their  friends over  one academic year. No great  calamities occur and  no  cosmic  revelations are  made,  but the  author holds  and  increases the  read­ er's attention with a clear focus on details. Still, the novel is not a simple,  amusing portrait, for Shields  uses the image of biography to examine some substantial issues. Judith Gill  is dissatisfied  with  her career  as a biographer both  because  facts limit her creativity and  because she cannot resolve her questions by speaking with her subjects.  Her  problems  increase  when  she tries  to  apply   her   biographical  skills  to her  family  and  friends,  for  she  discovers the inadequacy of these techniques to explain   the  people  she  really  knows.  She had attempted to write  fiction  and  failed, but fiction appears to be the only solution to  her  problem. Furlong Eberhart,  the otherwise satiric figure of the fraudulent western  novelist,  tells her,  " 'People must be preserved with their mysteries intact. Otherwise,  it's  not   real.'"  The  writer's goal is to express  real  knowledge without reducing life to a simplistic  pattern.
Robert  Olver  has missed  the essence of his subject  in  The Bicycle  Tree  because he has reduced  everything into  a formula. John Buell has  not  simplified  his subject in  Playground, but   he  does  not  express any  valuable  knowledge. Only  Carol Shields, a much more competent novelist than  her heroine,  combines perceptive in­ telligence   with   an   appreciation   of   the complexities  of   human   life.   In   Small  Ceremonies she unites  a control over  de­ tails  with  a  sure  knowledge of  their  sig­ nificant  pattern.
CALVIN L. SMILEY


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



POETIC HISTORIANS

TOM  WAYMAN,  Money  and   Rain: Tom  Way­
man  Live! Macmillan. $5-95·
MILTON   ACORN,   The   Island  Means  Minago.
NC  Press,  $3·95·
BECAUSE   Wayman  and   Acorn   are   de­ clared    "political"  poets,   and   therefore presumably conceive  of  the  poem   as  a moral  or social instrument, these two col­ lections    immediately   conjure  up    that  never  to  be  laid  to  rest  rhetorical prob­  lem  of  the  decorum and   efficacy  of  di­ dactic or  paraenetic verse. As Keats once said, "we hate  poetry  that  has a palpable design upon  us.... Poetry  should  be great
& unobtrusive, a  thing which  enters  into one's   soul,   and   does   not   startle  it  or amaze  it with  itself but  with  its subject."
In   this  context, Keats's objection,  how­ ever, is not to didactic poetry  as such, but to poetry  that  employs  less than  subtle  or overt  propagandistic rhetorical  strategies of persuasion, to  deliberative  poetry  that  draws  attention to  its  suasory  rhetorical designs. Being very perceptibly concerned with  the  fundamental  moral, social,  and political  life of  man,  both  Wayman and Acorn   declare  that    their    intention  as poets  is  to  be  honest. As  Wayman says, "to  see  the  truth of what  is is to want  to change  it."  But  honesty  in  poetry -like sincerity-can never be more than a rhetorical ethos,  the  reader's sense of the "character" (in all senses)  of the speaker. Such  political   poetry  need  not  be  offen­ sive  if  the  didactic strategies are  subtle,  if the  appeal or  address   to  the  reader  is indirect, and  if rhetorical mode  is medi­ tative  rather than  sententious or declama­ tory.
Both   Wayman  and   Acorn   have   had
varying  degrees  of  trouble with  their  di­ dactic    modes.   In   Wayman's  For   and Against  the  Moon and  in  Acorn's  More Poems  for People,  their immediately pre-

106
 ceding volumes, there are considerable "ethical" problems -a strong  sense, in many   cases,  that   the   poems   do  indeed have  palpable designs  upon  us.  But  the voice of the  poems  in  both  the  new  col­ lections    is   less   sentimental,  less   self­ righteous, less strident, and  more  reflec­ tive. Although the  persistent  tension  be­ tween   the   lyric   and   the   hortatory  in Acorn  and  between  the narrative and  the moralistic in Wayman is still present,  both  new collections  restore in  their  range  the balance between the poem as artifact and  the poem as utterance so abundantly evi­ dent   in  Waiting  for Wayman and   I've Tasted   My  Blood.  Yet  running through both  new volumes  is what  seems to me to be a slight  but  significant shift  in  mood, a new lower key or discontent-dissatis­ faction, yes, with  moral,  social,  and  pol­ itical  structures of man,  perhaps with the very  terms  of  human  existence;  but  the discontent  neither  descends  emotionally to  despair   nor  rises  fervently  to  an  ab­  solute  belief in  the perfectability of man.  Both  extremes  are  evident   in  Wayman's previous  verse, and  the  latter in  Acorn's.  Wayman,  despite   his  conscious   knowl­ edge of the misery  and  pain  of the econ­  omically  and  politically  oppressed  every­ where,  has  come  to  the  realization,

If my sorrow  added to yours  could  help,   ... I  would  give  up  joy.
I  swear   that, if  I could, I would   go  right now  to  live  in  a  different world:
some  planet without this  constant unhappi­
ness.
But  I  no longer believe  my  pain will  help  another human being.

Acorn  still  writes  out  of love  and  anger, but  he  no  longer  "shouts love",  and  his anger  is subdued; a  sense  of  mellowness pervades the volume despite its political subject   matter. Both  poets,  however,  re­ main   stylistically   loquacious;  both  need to  speak  in  an  effort   to  come  to  terms with  life as they perceive  it.
For Wayman, that  need is fulfilled  pri-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



marily  by the  poetic  anecdote, a  funda­ mental mode of history or storytelling that reflects his sense of the poet  as a recorder  of  the  experiences  of   ordinary  men   in everyday  life and  of  the  poet's  own  par­  ticular place  and  time.  As poetic  histor­ ian,  Wayman  wishes  to  record   "what is happening  to  myself,  and   my  friend, as we  move  through  our   time   alive   here, through the only part of history  in which we can live". Because of this desire,  Way­ man's voice never seems idiosyncratic but communal as it weaves and  modulates through the four  relatively self-contained sections   of  the   book:    "Friends," "The Factory Hour," "The Chilean Elegies," and    "The  Kiss   and    the   Cry."  "The Chilean Elegies,"  meditations on  the sig­ nificance   of  the  overthrow  of  Salvador Allende's    government  and   the   impor­ tance  of  Pablo  Neruda  to  the  poet,  are the   most   overtly    political   and    moral poems  in  Money  and  Rain;  but  because they   drift   towards   the   moralistic,  they are,  in  my  judgment,  the  least  satisfying in   the   volume.   The   brief   section   en­ titled  "The Kiss and  the Cry," consisting  of only  three  poems,  is much   more  suc­ cessful  in  its  communication  of  moral and  fundamental political   attitudes.
Like Wayman, Acorn  in The  Island Means Minago is also concerned with recording the  history  of  ordinary  people
-the "forbidden history," as he calls it,
of   Minago,  the   aboriginal   (Micmac) word   for   "The  Island"  referred  to  as Prince Edward Island  only in, as Acorn would  say, official  histories.  The   book  is an  unusual  mixture  of  archival   photo­ graphs,  prose  essays and  fragments, brief dramatic scenes from  a  play  in  progress, and   an   extraordinary   range   of   poems (some  unrevised   and  revised   from   pre­ vious  volumes)   in  a  variety   of  modes:  love  poems,  portrait  poems,  satires,  dia­ logues  with  historical figures,  and   land­  scape  or  seascape   poems.   Most   of  the selections  focus  on  the  forbidden  history
 of the tenants struggle  against absentee landlords dating  roughly   from   I 785  to
I 8g6  and  the  continuity of  that  struggle
as it  relates  historically and  symbolically to  the  present  moment, but  other poems not  specifically  concerned with  this  issue are analogous in mood  and  tone, if not in subject  matter. Ironically, as in  the  case of  Wayman, the  most  efficacious  poems in  the  book  are  those  that   are  not  of  a blatant  political   nature -for example, "A  Shard   of  Steel," "The  Squall," and "The Wind  Rustles  the  Forest."
Both  Money and Rain and  The  Island
Means  Minago  are,  because  of  their political   concerns,  rare   volumes   within
the  context  of the  general poetic  output
in  this  country. So  far  as  I  can  see,  we really  do  not  have  an  established  tradi­ tion  of worthwhile political  poetry.  Both these  books  should  therefore  be  perused  because  they extend and  enrich  the range  of the  poetic practice in Canada.

BARRY CAMERON



PLAYWRIGHTS

A   NEW    SERIES   IS   Profiles in   Canadian Drama,  edited  by  Geraldine C.  Anthony and published   by   Gage    at  $3.25  softcover and
$5.95 hardcover. The  first   three  volumes are Robertson  Davies  by  Patricia  Morley, Gratien Gelinas by Renate Usmiani, and  James Reaney by  J.  Stewart Reaney, the   dramatist's   son. They are  all  quite short, the  longest just  over
100  pages   with   apparatus,  but   such   studies, even   if  they   are-as   these   appear  to   be­ written  with    an   eye   to   the   undergraduate market, are  likely  to  be  widely  useful  in  view of   the   fact   that,  unlike   poetry   and   fiction, Canadian drama has  been  the  object of  rela­  tively  little critical  attention. All  of  the   pres­  ent   texts   are   rather  flatly   written,  and    one cannot say  that  they  sparkle with   critical in­  sights,   but   they   are   informative, sensibly   or­  ganized  and acceptable as introductory guides. Further  volumes on  George Ryga, John  Her­ bert  and Michel Tremblay are  planned.
L.T.C.


107





THE GREAT WHITE HOAX

FIFTY YEARS  AGO   literary people   in  the United States  found  it fashionable to dis­ cuss   an   imminently  expected   messiah called    "The  Great    American   Novel,"  which  would  for once and  for all give the diverse  American states  and  territories a single  sense of identity,  telling  the  world precisely  what Americans consist  of. Like "The   Great   White    Hope"  in   boxing, a   mythical   blend    of   supposed    Polish strength,    German   science,    and     Irish fighting  spirit,  who  would  knock  out  all black   champions  to  establish   white   su­ premacy, "The  Great  American  Novel" became  a  cultural fixation. Just  as every new  white   fighter   was  hurled   straight­ away  into  the  ring  with  first  Jack  John­ son, then  Joe Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson, and   Muhammed  Ali,   regardless  of  his skill and  stamina, so every young  novelist was  measured up  against  critical   great  expectations that had  in truth never  been met   by  anyone,   and   never   would   be. Theodore  Dreiser  offered   An  American Tragedy, Gertrude Stein  The  Making  Of Americans, Sinclair  Lewis  Main  Street, John  Dos  Passos his U.S.A. trilogy,  John Steinbeck  East  Of  Eden,  and   William Carlos  Williams  even  titled  his effort The Great  American   Novel,  but   none   quite blended   Nathaniel Hawthorne and  Her­ man   Melville's  vision   of   the   east   and colonial   beginnings  with   Mark  Twain's vision  of  the  west  and  Manifest  Destiny with  Stephen Crane's  vision  of  the  Civil War   with   William  Faulkner's  vision  of the south  and Reconstruction; none quite  combined  Upton  Sinclair's  consciousness

ro8
 
of  the  immigrant, working   poor  with  F. Scott   Fitzgerald's  insight   into   the  nou­ veau  riche;  and  so all  ultimately  failed,  not  because  they  were  not  great  writers
-all  were, beyond  doubt-but  because
they  were expected   to speak  for  an  ima­ gined   collective,   rather  than   for   them­ selves as  artists  and   thinkers,  with indi­  vidual outlooks and individual limitations.
Gradually  it   dawned   on   American critics  that  "The Great American Novel" was  a  "Great White  Hoax" -and  that had   it   existed,   it   would   have   contra­ dicted   every  principle of  America's real identity:  not  a  melting-pot, but  a  vast, free-wheeling   marketplace,   filled   with every  kind  of  product and  every  kind  of producer,  turning out  not  just  one  con­ cept  of  quality  but  myriads  of them,  that  every  buyer  might seek his  own  satisfac­  tion.   Frank  Norris   wrote    "The  Great American  Novel"    for   California's  San Joaquin Valley  with  The  Octopus;  Jack London wrote it for Oakland with Martin Eden; Ernest Hemingway wrote  it for ex­ patriates with The  Sun  Also Rises; Ralph Ellison  for  Harlem blacks  with  Invisible Man,  unless James   Baldwin  did  it  with Go  Tell   It  On   The   Mountain-and for  Chicago blacks  Richard  Wright did it  with  Native  Son.  A  different "Great American  Novel"  came   to  be  for  each and  every small segment  of the American population, as  individual authors found their   individual  voices,  writing  well  of what  they knew instead of badly  about  a group   so  vast  and   so  diverse   no  single author -or  artist   of  any   kind -could possibly hope  to  capture it  all  within   a single work. Representative cross-sections, American creators came  to realize, belong to  polls  and  surveys;  result  in  statistics, not  literature. The real  American  sense of identity  lies in  having  the  freedom to choose   one's   own   identity,   completely different, if one  wishes, from  that  of any other. "The Great American Novel,"  if it ever  did  come, would  like "The Great

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



White Hope" destroy  a large  measure of freedom, wiping  out  diversity  and oppor­ tunity,  establishing in their  places narrow ethnic  chauvinism  and    a   catholicized, canonized   social    hierarchy.    It  would throw  at least a major element of Ameri­  can  culture back into  the dark  ages, with one  book,  the  Bible  or  equivalent, and one  god,  to be found  within  it  or  else.
Canadians understandably hate  to be accused   of  following  in  American  foot­ steps,  but  half  a  century behind.  None­ theless,  the  current and  continuing intel­  lectual   quest   for   a   uniquely Canadian literature  repeats  "The  Great  American Novel"   fallacy-and   like   it,   prevents great  Canadian authors from  developing and   expressing    their    individuality.  In hindering individual growth, Canadian literary chauvinism actually kills  the  art it would  nurture. And it has done so, con­ tinuing to  do  so, ever  since  "The  Great American  Novel"   era;  while  American critical  attitudes  broadened,   Canadian critics  have  rigidly  maintained  concepts  equating a nation's writing with flag, an­ them,   and   boundaries,   all   sterile   sym­ bols  and  arbitrary  lines  having nothing, in  final  analysis,  to  do  with   the  essence of   the   nation   adopting   them.    Stated  Douglas   Bush  in  The  Canadian  Forum, December 1926:

In  the  literary way  Canada is  probably the most  backward country, for  its  population, in  the  civilized  world, and   the  quickest way to get  rid  of  this  unpleasant  family skeleton is  to  abolish critical standards  and  become a booster. We  don't know  what to  write  but by  jingo  if we do  we have  the  pen,  we have the  ink,  we  have  the  paper too.  And  so we have  bulky  histories of Canadian literature appraising the  product of  every  citizen who ever  held  a  pen; bulky  anthologies  preserv­ ing   every   thing  metrical  that   has   sprung from   a  Canadian brain;  little   books   cele­ brating the  genius  of people who in  another country  would   not   get   beyond    the   poetry corner  of  the  local  newspaper; reprints of Canadian  'classics' which  not  even  antiquity can  render  tolerable ... in  short, an  earnest
 and  sincere desire  to establish a completely parochial scale  of  values.

As Ken   Norris  says  in  The   New  Earth Review  # 4, "What's depressing to note is that  it  can  be quoted fifty  years  later  as a statement about Canadian writing and still be relevant."
Bush, Norris,  and  May  Cutler of  Tun­ dra  Books all agree  that  lack  of  qualita­ tive  judgment by  Canadian  critics  is to blame. "There is no good Canadian criti­ cism",  Norris  says.

One  outspoken short story  writer and  novel­ ist,  Clark  Blaise,   has   made  the   comment that at  a  conference dealing with  Canadian writing, he   heard  every   bad   book   he   had  read  in  the  last   ten  years  praised  by  some­  one   as  a   masterpiece.   Sad   but   true.  The critics are   playing it  safe,  afraid to  take   a chance and  damn a  book  because some  day  it   may   be   a   Canadian  classic    and    they  wouldn't want  to  be in  the  wrong.

Carrying on  the  same  argument, Cutler said in Maclean's,  December 1974:

Creativity hasn't developed more in Canada because  the  universities fail  to establish high critical standards....  any  country that does not  respect excellence of  performance  is doomed to  be  second, third, or  fourth rate.
. . . There must    be   only   one   standard­ that     of    excellence.  Once    protectionism comes   in-once   we   start   to   protect  the
status  quo-then    we   are    finished. This goes on  a  great deal  in  Canadian literature.

With   the  Parti   Quebecois attempting to  divide  the  Canadian  nation, we  hear nationalist critics crying  all the louder  for writing   that   will  bring   us  together into the homogeneous mass the French -and other  cultural minorities-justifiably fear as the end of their individual identity. Searching for a scapegoat, some easily targeted reason  why such  a literary  melt­ ing-pot  has not emerged yet and shows no sign of emerging now,  poet  Robin   Mat­ hews leads  a contingent  blaming Ameri­  can   influence. He   would    drum  such American poets-in-residence as Tom Way­ man  and  Joyce  Carol  Oates from  Cana-

109

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



dian  universities, replacing them  with native   Canadians  apparently   regardless of achievement, as if solitary  confinement rather than  free intellectual exchange initiated the creative impulse.
Indeed, the  two  best-respected  Cana­ dian   authors on  the  international  scene are non-nationalist critics: Northrop Frye, whose theories  on Shakespeare are absurd  but   much-echoed,   and    Hugh  Kenner, who almost  single-handedly restored Ezra Pound   to  his  rightful  place   of  honour among twentieth-century authors, along­ side T. S. Eliot,  W. C. Williams, and  the many   other   greats   who   borrowed  and promulgated his  aesthetic  insights.  Both Frye and  Kenner-and Atwood, for that  matter,  and   Saul  Bellow,   of  Canadian birth-enjoy   their  greatest  reputations in the  United States, which  seems to suf­ fer   no   such   literary  identity  crisis   as Canada's  nonetheless.
We  might   well  begin  to  question the whole  concept of a national literature. Is there   indeed   any   feature  of   living   in Canada that  should  naturally mold  Can­ adian  books   into   something   obviously different from  American  books,  or  Eng­  lish   books,  or   Australian   books,   even?  Apart from  our  monomaniacal quest  for national  identity,  the  answer   is no.  The Maritime  provinces   have   more  in  com­ mon with Scotland, Ireland, or New Eng­ land   than    with   the   prairie   provinces,  which   have   more  in  common  with   the American midwest  or  Australian or  even Russian   plains  than  with  British  Colum­ bia  and  the  Yukon,  which  in  turn  have more   in   common  with    the   American Northwest   and    Alaska   than  with   any other   part   of  Canada.  The  Canadian people  are,  like  the  American and  Aus­ tralian people,  composed of numerous immigrant groups,  principally northern European but  coming  from  dozens of  dis­ tinctive  ethnic traditions now  widely  in­ termingled, exchanged,  partially  forgot­  ten,  and   partially  reinvented. Except  in

110
 Quebec, we speak English  predominantly, the  same  language used  in  England, the United States,  Australia, and  New  Zea­ land -and  consequently  deal  with  the same basic set of linguistic principles,  the same  requirements for  effective   literary  style. There is no reason  whatever why a good Canadian book should  not also be a good  English   book,  American  book,  or Australian book;  if it  is good,  it  deals  in depth  with  universal  human themes  and  a  specific  environment  that   nonetheless  shares   certain    features  with   other   en­ vironments   all   over   the   world.   Con­ versely,  we lose  nothing by  reading and  appreciating   books    from    the    United States,  England, Australia, New Zealand, and  even  South  Africa,  if  books  emerge  from  those  places  touching  us  emotion­ ally,  stimulating  us  intellectually, bring­  ing  us into  spiritual kinship  with  a  few more   real   or   imaginary  fellow   human beings.
A uniquely  national literature is not, cannot  be, and  must  not become a symbol like a flag, anthem, or borders,  simply be­ cause   great    literature  must    live,   not merely  exist.  Any  nation can  have  sym­ bols, and  many  do  that   have  no  litera­ ture:  Communist China is a  classic case in  point.  Only  a  nation  affording indi­  vidual   breathing  room,  respecting indi­  vidual  difference, can  produce literature
-and in  that  respect  the  Soviet  Union,
which   only   banishes   cultural  rebels   to Siberia  and  mental  wards,  is vastly ahead of Canada, which from  doodling exercises in  kindergarten on  strives  to  mold  indi­ vidual  consciousness into  collective repre­ sentation. An  Alexander  Solzhenitzyn or Boris  Pasternak can  stand in  the  Soviet Union, come  the  hell  that   may,  and  be respected.  In Canada he would  either  be ignored   utterly,   until   forced   into   exile among  Americans, Englishmen, Austral­ ians,  or  even  Israelis  better appreciating him;  or  praised   to  high  heaven   for  his first  feeble  works,  never   criticized, and

OPINIONS AND NOTES



thereby   be  kept  from  even  approaching creative maturity.
Because  we belong  to the British Com­ monwealth,  we   may   tend    to   measure  Canadian   literature   against   that  vast assemblage taught in  universities as Eng­ lish  literature. This  august   body   made England great, we  are  told,  inspiring the Elizabeths and  Victorias, educating  the Drakes,   Raleighs,  Gladstones,  Disraelis, Lloyd  Georges   and   Winston   Churchills; and  when  we boast  a comparable  assem­ blage,  we  might   think,  we  too  will  gain similar   ascendency. We  forget   or  never notice   how   heterogeneous  and   diverse supposedly "English" literature  really  is. It  borrows   from   three   great   linguistic strains,   Anglo-Saxon German,  Norman French, and  classical Latin, introduced at intervals of  approximately two  hundred years.  Geoffrey  Chaucer made   no  secret of  Dantean  influence, Shakespeare drew heavily  upon  Italian romance, and  Alex­ ander Pope's  contemporaries  made  emu­ lation  of the Greeks  and Romans a prime literary  objective for   three   generations, before,  inspired by  the  Spaniard Miguel Cervantes,   Daniel    Defoe    and    Henry  Fielding   popularized   novels   using   the prose  vernacular. The master  of  English satire,  Jonathan Swift,   was  actually an Irishman, as were later  "English" masters including George   Bernard Shaw,   W.  B. Yeats, and  James  Joyce. Rudyard Kipling became   voice  of  the   British   empire  by writing about and  from  India,  Afghani­ stan,  and  other   points  east.  His  contem­ porary   Joseph   Conrad  was  a  Polish  sea captain, who  took  up  English   composi­ tion  at  age  35,  and  their  rivals  included the  American-born  Henry  James, and  E. M.  Forster, another  writing of and  from India. In  the  twenties England adopted more   American    expatriates,  including Pound  and   Eliot,  even   as  it  exiled  the native-born D. H. Lawrence, whose work was   largely    repatriated   after    winning American  acceptance.  In  short,   the  so-
 called  English  national literature is  actu­ ally  an  international  literature-and a similar  case can  be  made  for  the  Ameri­  can,  produced  by  expatriates more  often  than  not, but criticized  and appreciated as American  nonetheless.
Only  when  Canada develops  similarly
broad  critical perspective, learning to re­ ject the narrowly nationalistic in favour of the  powerfully  universal,  will  Canadian writers  feel free to pursue individual aims and  destinies.  Only  when Canadian writ­ ers  do  pursue  individual  aims  and   des­ tinies,  and  Canadian critics  forget  about  finding  a national literature, will Canada develop  a  national  literature-a para­ dox only  to the  provincial.

MERRITT CLIFTON



REACTIONS TO SARAH

SOME THIRTY YEARS   have   passed   since Paul Hiebert's Sarah  Binks1  was first pub­ lished. The immediate critical reaction to it   was   almost   exclusively   approbative; Sarah   Binks  was  heralded  in  Canadian publications as  a  new  and  welcome   ad­  junct  to the  three  or four genuinely "hu­ morous books produced in Canada ... that  is, books  intentionally  humorous." 2    Hie­  bert's  work  was rated  by some  on  a level with   Stephen   Leacock's  writing  at   its finest, to wit,  his Sunshine Sketches of a Little  Town. Of  the  twenty-two reviews of Sarah Binks that  appeared in late  1947 and earlyI 948 only  two were  censorious in  the main; the  remaining twenty  were enthusiastic in  their  commendation.
Its initial  acceptance by critics notwith­
standing, Sarah  Binks  has  received  little additional attention from  either its early reviewers or from  the younger  generation of Canadianists. An exception is A. Lloyd Wheeler,   whose  "Up from   the  Magma and  Back Again  with  Paul  Hiebert" 3 was


II  I

OPINIONS AND NOTES



followed  up by his insightful Introduction to the McClelland & Stewart reprint. The Literary History of Canada gives less than a  sentence to  Paul   Hiebert  and   Sarah Binks combined;4   and  Canadian  Litera­
ture, in a  note  by C. C.  J. Bond  entitled
"A  Haunting Echo,''5  is the  only  journal
devoted  to Canadian letters  that  contains any examination of the book, however cursory.  It  remained for  Hiebert himself, in   an   article    in   Mosaic   named    "The Comic  Spirit   at Forty   Below  Zero,"11   to alert  contemporary scholars  again  to its existence. Because  of  this  relative dearth of writing on Sarah Binks since its recep­ tion,  it  seems  that   a  survey  of  the  early reactions  to  it   might   serve   to   remind  readers  of the  place  this work  of humour occupies  in Canadian literature.
Quoted above  is Roy  Daniells' notion of this book as outstanding Canadian humour. Earle  Birney,  whose  review  ap­ peared  in  the  Vancouver Sun,  is  equally  commendatory,  describing   Sarah   Binks as "the first funny  book  about Canadian poetry.... recommended reading for any­ one   with   a  sense  of   humour,  and   re­ quired  reading for  all  English  professors, reviewers,  and  members of the  Canadian Authors' Association." 7 Also writing from Vancouver, now in  the  Vancouver Daily Province, is one  R.  M.  S., who  sees  Hie­ bert's  book as causing the  reader to "give way  to  helpless  convulsions and  screams of maniacal mirth."8   Further, "The Ob­  server" of the Family Herald  and Weekly  Star praises  the  book  as "one of the  fun­  niest  I have  read  for  years. It  is equal  to anything  Stephen  Leacock   wrote,   with the  exception of two  or  three  of his best books. . . . The   humour  lies  in  the  con­ trast   between    the   ponderously  solemn treatment and  the ludicrously inadequate subject  of the eulogies."9
All reviewers see Sarah Binks as a work of  humour,  which   it  obviously   is,  and
most,   with    the   singular  exception  of
Daniells,  describe  it  as a satire-usually


112
 on  the  academic mind  which  takes  itself too seriously. Hiebert, speaking to me  in an  interview I conducted at  his home  in Carman, Manitoba on  15 January  1975, takes exception to the label of satire given his work. I quote:

I protested   greatly  to  the  publishers   when they began to promote my book as a clever satire. I don't  think  it's a satire  at all. Noth­ ing,  and  nobody,  is  being  taken  off   there.  It's  simply  that  when  you  are  writing  in  a humorous  vein, you are always, more or less, parodying  human  nature.... No one  person is ever  kept in mind.  Sarah  Binks  is simply not  satirical. . . . Parody   is  something   else again.  It's  a kindly  fellow  feeling  in  which you say, well let  us not  laugh  at  people  but laugh  together  with  people.

Mavis Gallant, writing in the Montreal Standard, also cites Hiebert on  this ques­ tion.   " 'The  academic  mind,'  he   com­  plains,  'just cannot see things  as they are.  Face   value   is  unacceptable  to   them­ they must  look deeper. But  there is noth­ ing deeper.... The heavy academic mind  which sees deep trends and undercurrents in   every   bit   of   writing  is   . . . being kidded.' "10   Gallant  adds: "Hiebert gets fairly irritable over  the  idea  that  he  was trying  to satirize  anything."
Hiebert's objections have  nevertheless been in vain, for on the cover  of the cur­ rent  printing of the  McClelland & Stew­  art  edition  appear the  following  words:  "[Sarah  Binks is]  a satirical gem  for  the world's    storehouse    of   comedy   master­ pieces."  To  further underscore  the  belief that   it  is  widely  regarded  as  a  satire   I provide   two   typical   quotations.  Birney writes that  it "is probably the most amus­ ing  prolonged  satire  in  Canadian litera­ ture.  It is also a satire  on Canadian litera­ ture,   on   our   tendency  to  find   literary swans in every village goose." W. G. Con­ rad,   writing   in   the   Montreal   Gazette, probably gets a trifle  closer  to  Hiebert's original intention by calling  it  "a  hilari­ ous  but  good-natured satire  on  the  aca­  demic  mind."11

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Parody,  and   not   satire,   is  of  course what   Hiebert intended, and   I will  here lay  before  the  reader   statements  by  re­ viewers   who   do  in   fact   see  it   also  as parody    and,     occasionally,     burlesque. Mavis  Gallant describes  Sarah  Binks  as a   book   which   "parodies   the   academic mind  probing into life and  literature, and which  one professor  of English  has called
'a  perfect    imitation  of   a   second-year
essay.' "  Further, she  says  it  is  a  "full­ dress burlesque ... of the  whole wind-in­ the-wheat   school    of    Canadian   writ­ ing.... " Edith  Fowke, whose  review ap­  pears  in  the  Canadian  Forum, lists poets Hiebert  is  parodying,  and   according to her   they   include   Wordsworth,   Keats, Longfellow and   Kipling  among  many others.12   Hiebert,  in  my  interview  with him,  told  me  that  this writer was merely "showing off .... There's only one parody,  and   that   is  the  one  called   'Hiawatha's Milking'.... I don't  think  there's a single other  poem in the book that  can  be called a  parody."
Yet,  if Hiebert has  not  parodied  par­ ticular poets other  than  Longfellow, what or  whom  has  he  parodied?  A  review  in the Ottawa Citizen, by one A. C. C., puts it as follows:  Hiebert "has  parodied and pilloried    that    bane    of   the   newspaper editor's life-the Bad Canadian Poetess." He goes on to quote examples other  than Sarah's of such  "Bad" verse,  "the range of    [which]   is   astonishing -patriotic, personal,   pastoral,  tragic,    martial  and even    religious."13       Much   "good    bad poetry," as Hiebert defines  it  in  the  In­ troduction   to   Sarah   Binks,   is   found  throughout the book, and  A. C. C.'s cate­ gories  together with  others,  with  the  ex­ ception  of the  religious,  are  represented. Birney,  who  praises  Hiebert  as  "master of ... sustained parody," sees a wealth  of it  in  Sarah  Binks. He  expresses  himself this way:

The  hundred  or more ditties  ... which Hie­
bert   has  sprinkled   throughout  his   "biog-
 raphy"  probably  constitute a larger  body of metrical  parody  and  burlesque  than  can  be found  in all  the  rest of Canadian literature.
... [Hiebert is ingenious]  in  building   and toppling  rhythms and meaning to produce something  uncannily like  the  verse which  is written    in   all   seriousness   in   this   bardic country  of ours.

B. K. Sandwell, in  Saturday  Night,  finds different targets for Hiebert's parody. He says:

[Hiebert] maintains a high  level of parody.
... imbedded  in  a  prose  text  written in  an
exact  and  merciless  imitation of the  style of
the  portentously  serious  literary   critic  and
biographer; and  this  text  is adorned by yet
further   parodies     of    the    more    gushing
tributes  of  Miss  Rosalind   Drool,  the  inter­ national   vaporings   of  Dr.  Taj  Mahal, the meticulous   delvings  of  Horace  B. Marrow­ fat,   "Professor    Emeritus  of    English   and
Swimming"   at   St.   Midget's  College,   and finally  the  kind  of geological  scientific  writ­ ing composed  by those  whose main  purpose is   to   persuade    the   citizenry    to   put   up enough  money  to  drill  for  oiJ.14

Relatively few critics  write about the quality  of  Hiebert's "good   bad  poetry"; the  few  that  do,  maintain, for  the  most part,   that   the   poetry  is  parodying bad verse  which   their   creators  think   to  be good. Among  these  reviewers  there  is one notable  exception, however. I  indicated above  that  Fowke  sees, mistakenly,  paro­ dies  of Keats, Wordsworth,  Kipling and others  in  Sarah's poems.  She  continues:

[Hiebert] fails to reveal  the extent  to which [Sarah's]  poems  run   the   whole  gamut   of English   and   American  literature.  Such   is their  depth  and  breadth that  we may almost say that she has rendered all previous poets obsolete.... The  attempt to quote  freely  in confirmation of those contentions is almost irresistible....

One  cannot but  wonder what  poems in­ spired by what  authors Fowke would have  come  up  with.  Hiebert would  be sure  to have a chortle, knowing there  is only one parody   among   Sarah's  verses.  Fowke  is nevertheless  generous in her  praise  of the quality   of   the   poetry.   She   says:   "the


113

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



author has obviously  failed  to realize  the true  greatness  of Sarah's genius."
Hiebert's characterization is lauded  by the  few critics  who  mention it.  R.  M. S. in  the  Vancouver  Daily  Province  states that  "the characters come  alive  in  bright clarity,    especially   for   the   reader   who knows the prairie." In a review in the Hamilton  Spectator,  one  S. A. G.  writes the  following: "Without  reservation, the reviewer  believes Sarah, 'the  sweet  song­ stress of Saskatchewan,' to be one  of the most brilliantly amusing creations of some time."15   It   might   be  valuable   here   to quote   Hiebert on  the  question  of  Sarah the  character. When   I  asked  him  if  he thought   Sarah   Binks   would    live   he replied:

I think  what  will  live  is Sarah   as  a  char­ acter.  I like Sarah  very much  because  she's so  very   confident.    She   has   no   sense   of humour. And she  has  no end  of confidence in  her  own  ability   and   that   she  has  her definite  place  in the  literature  of Saskatche­ wan.  I think   that   will  keep  her  going  or nothing  else will.

Nothing is said about the larger meaning of Sarah Binks except  in Daniells' review. It is as if other  critics  were  chary  about committing  themselves   on   this  issue  or else did  not see in Sarah Binks any greater significance. Daniells,  however, says:

there   subsists  in  Sarah   Binks  a  secondary and concealed  current of significance.  As the reader  lays down  Don  Quixote he suddenly feels what his conscious mind has hitherto missed -the supreme   virtue   and   rightness of the  foolish old  knight,  so above  the  deli­ cious  fooling  and  sharp  wit  of Sarah  Binks there   is  audible   a  deep   and   serious  over­ tone,  the  author's cry  of  love  and  admira­ tion  for  the  fortitude  and   the  courage   of those  who  in  the  early  decades  of  the  cen­ tury  fought  the  hardships of  the  Canadian climate   and   of  the   frontier  and   made   in defiance  of all  difficulties  a  way  of  life for themselves  and  for  us.  It is  this  that   lifts the  book  above  the  level of  the  simply  hu­ morous....

Finally,  I wish  to bring  to the  reader's


114
 attention  the  few  adverse  criticisms   of Sarah Binks. Hiebert discusses two in Mosaic.  Suffice  it  to  say  that   they  ap­ pear   in  the  Victoria   Colonist  and   the Saskatoon  Star-Phoenix;   the  former  ex­ coriates   Sarah  Binks  on   what   Hiebert calls  "moral grounds," while  the  latter  condemns  it  because   it   is   not   literally  true.16    More   constructive   and    incisive analysis  is found  again  in  Daniells' com­ ments:

The   book  has  perhaps   a  weakness  in  that the rural scene and the pseudo-academic comment  fall  apart a  little.  It might  have been   better   to   reduce    the   number    and oddity  of  Sarah's   critics.  Occasionally,  too, the humour  shifts into farce as when Grand­ father  Thurnow, "stuffed  and  mounted  and presented   to the  nation,"  subsequently was accepted  as a candidate by both  Liberal  and Conservative  parties.  Fine as some of the in­ cidental   shots  are,  they  fall  a  trifle  beside the  main  target.  The  extremely  careful  fo­ cus  which   Leacock   achieved   in   Sunshine  Sketches    (and   seldom   elsewhere)    is  not quite  achieved  here.

I trust that this resume of the initial reactions  to Sarah Binks will move Can­ adianists to  read   the  book  with  a  fresh eye and  provide  new  assessments  of it in the  light   of  other  Canadian   literature, especially  humour  published  since  1947. This  might  well be an onerous task; hov­ ering  over  them  will  be  Hiebert's spirit chuckling at  the  academic mind   taking itself  so  seriously.  But  Hiebert's spectre  notwithstanding,  readers   must   have   the courage and  diligence  to  re-examine  a classic of  Canadian humour.

NOTES
1 Sarah Binks (Toronto: McCleiland & Stew­
art,  1971 ).
2  Roy   Daniells,    "Sarah   Binks,"    Winnipeg
Free Press, 13 January  1948.
3  "Up  from the Magma  and  Back Again with Paul   Hiebert,"  Manitoba  Arts,   6,  No.   1 (Spring  1948),  3-14.
4  Literary   History   of  Canada, ed.   Carl   F. Klinck  et  al.  (Toronto:  University  of  To­ ronto  Press, 1965), p.  720.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



5  Canadian Literature, No. I6  (Spring   I963),
83-84.
6  Mosaic, 3, No.3 (Spring   I970), 56-68.
1 "Canadian Bards    Cleverly    Burlesqued,"
Vancouver Sun, 24 January  I948.
s "His   Tongue  in  His  Cheek?" Vancouver
Daily  Province, 13 March  1948.
9  Family Herald and  Weekly Star, I4 January
I948.
10   "Sarah  of  Saskatchewan," Montreal   Stan­
dard, I 7 April  I 948.
11  "Songstress of   Saskatchewan -Hilarious
Satire,''  Montreal   Gazette,   13  December
1947·
12  "Sarah Binks,''     Canadian  Forum,   March
1948.
13   "The  Deathless   Lure   of   Verse,''    Ottawa
Citizen, 30  March  1948.
H "Cultural Must,'' Saturday Night, 20 March
I948.
15   "Prairie  Laughs," Hamilton  Spectator,  2 I February  1948.
16  Hiebert, "The Cornie Spirit  at  Forty  Below
Zero," 60-62.

REYNOLD SIEMENS



REFERENCES

Two RECENT  ADDITIONS to the increasing shelf of  Canadian  reference   books  both   belong  to series.  Canadian  Essay  and   Literature Index
1975   (University of  Toronto Press,  $35.oo), compiled  by Andrew  D. Armitage and  Nancy Tudor, is  the  latest  in  a  series  of  annual  au­ thor-title-subject indexes  to  English-Canadian periodicals and  collections  which  are  not  in­ dexed  in  the  Canadian  Periodical Index. This is  a  laudable  goal-though one  wishes  tilat tile  two  enterprises would  get  together. CELl waits every year  to find out  what  CPI has left out,  and  fills in  tile  gaps;   the  gaps  vary  an­ nually  as CPI   adds  to  the  number  of works it indexes;   yet   both   of  them   leave  out   news­ papers,  leaving  the  many  useful  essays  in  the Toronto  Star,  for   example,   still   unindexed  That said,  CELl offers  an  authoritative and clear  guide  to  the  works  it  has  indexed, and warrants praise.
To   find   lists  of  Canadian  material   pub­ lished  outside  Canada, interested  readers  still have no single authority, although  the selective
annual  bibliography in  the  Journal  of  Com-
 monwealth  Literature  remains   the  first  place to look. Such  a procedure is becoming increas­ ingly  necessary,  moreover,  for  there  are  more and  more  commentaries on  Canadian  culture being    written    and    published     outside    tile country.    Special   issues   of   Modern   Fiction Studies  (in  the  United  States)  and   Akzente (in  Germany)  appeared in  I976; further spe­ cial  issues  have been  planned in  Italy  and  in Belgium   (Revue  des   langues vivantes);  still other studies appear in journals  like the French Commonwealth and  Caliban, and  the  Danish Common Wealth, and  other   publications  con­ cerned   with   Commonwealth   Literature.   Re­ cently   two   new   journals   devoted    solely   to Canadian  studies   have   begun:   in   Scotland  (Bulletin of Canadian  Studies, from  the  Cana­ dian  Studies  School  at  Edinburgh-the first issue  of  which  contains   an  interesting article  by  Wreford  Watson  reflecting,  from  the  van­ tage  point of  the historical  geographer, on  the implications  of  literary   images  of  Canada), and   in   France    (Etudes   canadiennes,  under the  editorship  of Regis  Durand at  the  Univer­ sity of  Lille). They  are  signs  of  a  developing international interest  in Canada, of which Can­  adian  critics  should  be constantly  aware.
The  other  recent  reference  work  is  the  7th volume   of   Contemporary  Literary   Criticism
(Gale  Research  Co.,  Detroit), which  excerpts critical  comment  on  the  work  of various  writ­ ers from a number  of different  countries. Can­  adians  who  appear  in  this  current volume  in­ clude  Robertson  Davies,  Mavis  Gallant, Brian Moore,  P. K. Page, and  Audrey  Thomas; they join others   (like  Avison,  Nichol,  Munro, Bir­ ney,  and   Richler)   who  were   represented  in earlier  volumes in  the  series. The  editors  have excerpted   fairly  from  books,  articles,   and   re­ views,  and   widely  from   a  range   of  interna­ tional   sources.  What   the   series  gains   by  its breadth   of   coverage-a   sampling   of  inter­ national  reception   and   range  of  approach­ it  loses  by its inevitable superficiality. Like  so many  other  reference  works  it  is useful  to  be­ ginning   students   once   they   have   read    tile primary  works, as a place  to begin  their  secon­ dary  enquiries.

W.H.N.







115

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



REPRINTS

OF  THE  FIVE LATEST New  Canadian  Library titles, two  are  designed for  a  popular market: Thomas Raddall's  swashbuckling historical romance  His  Majesty's Yankees (introduced by James Gray, who  summarizes the  historical events on  which   the  novel  draws), and  Ernest Thompson   Seton's   Wild    Animals    I    Have Known  (with  Alec   Lucas' affectionate  intro­ duction, asserting the  conservationist  intent of the  stories and  decrying attempts to  turn them  into nationalist beast  fables).
Like   these   two,   the   other  three  also  focus
on  the  past,  and  are  more interesting as  social documents than  as   works   of  fiction. Indeed, it   is  hard  to  know   how   to  describe  Andrew Macphail's The   Master's Wife   ( 1939):  more or  less autobiography, it  tells  how  family tradi­ tion    and    community  experience    develop   a Prince Edward Island  boy's educated imagina­ tion. Because  it  is  his mind  on  display, it  war­  rants attention-for  its  particular detail, cer­  tainly, but   more  because  of  Macphail's  other contributions to  Canadian  intellectual  history. By contrast,  Antoine Gerin-Lajoie's  z862  book
Iean  Rivard   (translated here   by  Vida  Bruce,
complete   with    sections   deleted   from    later
French editions),  which pretends not  to  be  a
novel-narrative ostensibly written as  history
-tells a  more  direct story. Again, however, it is  the   stance rather  than  the   story   which  at­ tracts attention, and here   the  stance is  that of
agrarian  conservatism. The  novel   asserts themes that have   since  become familiar in Quebec  writing:  notions about  independence and   self-reliance, tempered  by  collective   be­ liefs  in  family   solidarity  and   religious  affilia­  tion. John Galt's Bogle Corbet  (1831)  offers  a stylish  contrast as  well  as a  fast  change of cul­
tural attitude; comic and  succinct, where  Iean
Rivard   is  leisurely and  earnest, Bogle  Corbet
revels   in   scene   and    character  while   at  the
same   time  it  gives  evidence of  a  precise  social eye.  Galt, a  transplanted  outsider, brought to
Ontario a  keen  wit  and an  able  pen. His  novel deserves a  wider   audience.
Yet  another group of  works  is  more  openly
historical: T. C.  Haliburton's seven  1839  let­ ters   to   the   Times, for   example,  constituting A Reply  to the  Report  of The Earl of Durham  (Golden Dog,  $2.95), with  a  careful introduc­ tion   by  A.  G.  Bailey,  underscores the   impor­ tance  of   Haliburton's   political  views   to   his whole  body of  work.  And  in  William Bleasdell Cameron's Blood Red the Sun  (Hurtig, $4.95), we  find  history written  as  narrative. Cameron
-who with  Theresa Gowanlock and   Theresa

II6
 Delaney   survived  the    Frog    Lake    encounter with   Big  Bear   and   wrote   about  it-revised his work  late  in  his  life.  Though the  Cameron work,  together with  the  Gowanlock-Delaney memoir  and    a   series   of   historical   commen­ taries, appeared  in   the   Carleton  Library  (as  The   Frog  Lake  "Massacre")  in  1976,   edited by Stuart Hughes, the  Hurtig  reprint contains an  additional chapter. The availability of these  perspectives, along  with  the  recent translations of Riel's diary and  further interest in  Dumont and  Big  Bear, should enable renewed study of an  event that  Canadians for  generations have found  persistently fascinating. It also  offers  an open   invitation  for   further  reflection on   the intricate relation between historical narrative and  narrative history.

W.H.N.







ON THE VERGE

***  GRATTAN O'LEARY. Recollections of People, Press and Politics. Macmillan, $12.95. Canada has    had    few    classic    Tories,   but    Grattan O'Leary  was  one   of  them, an   intensely  con­ servative  man   with   a   high   sense   of   honour and-as  he  says -"the  fascination  of  great words,  great ideas  ... engraved on  my  mind." Born  into   a  poor   Irish  community  in  Gaspe, he spent most  of his  life  as an  Ottawa journal­ ist  and editor, but   not   until  he  was  old  and expecting death  did   he   decide  to   write   the  memoirs of  a  long   life,  and   the   result is  far  briefer than one  might  have  hoped, though it is  filled   with   vivid  character  sketches of  the  notable  figures   of   the    Canadian  past    from  Laurier's age  to  Trudeau's. O'Leary was  dis­ criminating   in   his   friendships  and    loyalties and  tended to  pick  out  men  lacking the  usual qualifications  for   popularity, men   doomed  to be   brilliant   failures,  and    this   inclination  is exemplified   particularly in   his  attachment  to Arthur   Meighen.  For    their  sympathetic re­ assessment of  Meighen's character  alone, these Recollections    would    be   worth  reading,  but there is  much   more  and, despite his  consider­ able  pudeur  regarding  self-revelation, the  por­ trait  of  O'Leary that  emerges  almost  by  de­  fault is an  attractive one.

o.w.
