$1.25  per copy



CANADIAN
liTERATURE N°0     39






THE RELEVJINCE OF HUMOUR

Articles

BY CLAUDE  T. BISSELL, JOHN REID,  W. H. MAGEE, PETER STEVENS, L. A. A. HARDING

Translations

BY RINA  LASNIER, JOHN  GLASSCO

Reviews

BY GEORGE  BOWERING, PETER STEVENS, TONY KILGALLIN, WILLIAM H. NEW, ELI  MANDEL, LEN GASPARINI, AUDREY THOMAS,
H. R. PERCY, AL PURDY, GREGORY  M. COOK,  ROY DANIELLS, JAMES A. HART

Note

BY DESMOND PACEY


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW




e it(Jrial 	






CENTRIFUGAL PUBLISHING






FEw INDUSTRIES are more subject  to centralization, with its attendant ills, than   publishing. Little  important  publishing in  England, France or Japan goes on outside  the capitals of these countries,  and, in the United States, Little  Brown  of  Boston  are  merely  the  exception  which  seems  to  prove  the  rule that  important publishing is concentrated in New York, though the  big American university  presses,  like  those  of  California and  Chicago, do  help  to  counter the centripetal  tendency  for  commercial  houses  to  cluster  in  the  same  city.  Some countries  with  strong   regionalist  traditions, like Italy  and  Germany, do  not  cen­ tralize  to anything like the same  extent,  and  here  the  publishing industry appears to be  more  versatile,  more  flexible, and  more  alive to  unfashionable  possibilities.
Canada is a case of dual  centralization rather  than  decentralization. Publishing
in   French   is  mainly   concentrated  in  Montreal,  and   publishing  in  English   in Toronto; even  the  one  important university  press is Toronto-based. Small,  non­ profit  presses have  appeared in other  centres,  particularly Vancouver, and  there  are  regional   printers who  have  dabbled in  publishing  to  the  extent  of  bringing out  books of local interest  which  have  assured markets.  General commercial pub­  lishing,  however,  has  rarely  been  tried  outside  Toronto, and  this is why  the  ap­  pearance of  a  new  and  vigorous  publishing   house  in  the  West  is so  especially welcome.
The  man  behind this venture is Mel Hurtig of Edmonton, one of the  two best
booksellers in western  Canada. His firm, M.G. Hurtig Ltd., with one large book­ store  already  established, considered the alternatives of opening a chain  of  branch stores  and  going  into   publishing. Against  a  great  deal  of  friendly  advice,  they chose  the  latter,  entered  into   association   with   the  Tokyo   publishers, Charles Tuttle, and  went  into  business.

3

EDITORIAL



From   the  start, they  intended  to  avoid  the  temptation to  pursue  exclusively the  sure  money  that  is to  be  earned  from  local-appeal publishing. At  the  same time,  they  did  not  ignore  this field as a support to  their  other  books;  they  sold, for  example, 33,000  copies of a  Natural  History of  Alberta.  Another supporting activity  which  has  performed   a  particularly useful  service  to  those interested in Canadian history is the reprinting of classic western  travel  narratives; Paul  Kane's Wanderings  of an  Artist, and  William  Francis Butler's  two  pioneer  books, The Great  Lone  Land  and  The  Wild  North  Land  are  among the  titles  that   have already   appeared.
But the books by which  Mel Hurtig wishes to be most widely known  are literary works like Eli  Mandel's An  Idiot  joy, which  won  the  Governor-General's poetry award, and,   even  more,  "books  of  national interest and   a  social  or  political nature". The  first  of these is The  New  Romans, edited  by A. W.  Purdy, which has  not  only sold 4o,ooo  copies, but  has also stirred  up  a great  deal of discussion on  the  burning questions  arising  out  of  Canada's  relationship with  the  United States.

Many  of our  future publications [says Mel  Hurtig] will advocate a more inde­ pendent  Canada.  In   this  category   will  come   books  on  NATO  and   NORAD, foreign  investment and  the  future role for  Canada in  international  affairs.... In fact,  this is the kind of book we intend  to concentrate on, even if it means  reducing the  number of  titles  we  publish  each  year  (seven  our  first  year in  1967, fourteen in 1968).

No-one  can  fail to welcome  a policy with such  aims.  At the same  time it seems an  equally  important aspect  of Mel  Hurtig's venture  that, while  concerned with the  independence of Canada, it also asserts in a very practical way the possibility of a healthy  decentralization in Canada's literary life. This  has happened during the last decade in the field of journals  (Mala hat, Prism International, Mosaic and Canadian  Literature  all having  appeared in  the  West  to compete with  Toronto and  Montreal publications) ; it happened for  a brief  period  in the  CBC  early  in the I g6o's,  when  there  was  an  extraordinary regional  flowering  in  radio  broad­ casting  from  Vancouver, later  snuffed  out  by  the  policy  decisions  and  personnel  shifts  dictated by  Ottawa. If it happens in  publishing, we  may  at  last  have  the physical  basis for  regional  literary  centres  where  writers  choose to remain without feeling the  need  to establish themselves in or near  megalopolis.






4




HALIBURTON, LEACOCK	AND THE AMERICAN
HUMOUROUS TRADITION


Claude T Bissell





EDMUND WILSoN's  STUDY of Canadian lite<ature, 0 Can­ ada) An  American)s  Notes  on  Canadian  Culture,  a  slight  book  that  was  not received  in  Canada with  hosannas, justifies itself, nevertheless, by its  very  exis­ tence:  it is the only extended comment on Canadian literature by a major Ameri­  can  writer.  This  would  seem  to imply  that  literary  relations between  Canada and the  United States,  not  to put  too despairing a face on it, are tenuous. This  would be true  if we confined  ourselves  to critical  comment. But if we shift our  attention to the imaginative writers,  a nobler  prospect opens up. The intermingling of people that  has  marked the growth  of the two countries  is matched by an  intermingling of ideas  and  attitudes. The  movement is, of course,  heavily  from  south  to north, modified   recently   by  the  impact on  American  writers  of  the  two  philosophical critics,  Northrop Frye  and  Marshall McLuhan.
I shall  look at  Thomas Haliburton and, at greater  length, at Stephen  Leacock
in   the  light   of  the   intermingling  of  Canadian  and   American  ideas.   Leacock developed  in close relationship to American traditions, but  his sense of being a Canadian, which  was sharply felt  and  eloquently  expressed,  gave  him  a sense of separateness. A  study  of  his  relationship to  American cultural  traditions  reveals the  pattern that   can  be  expanded indefinitely-a  pattern of indebtedness and independence, of similarity and  differentiation, of sympathy and  withdrawal. We can  see this  pattern clearly  in  terms  of Leacock's  attitude towards  the  American tradition of humour and  satire,  specifically  in the  use he made  of two  American writers,  Mark  Twain and  Thorstein Veblen,  who, in different ways and  different degrees,  belong  to that  tradition. A similar  pattern emerges  when  we look at  the work  of Haliburton.
There can  be  no  doubt  of  the  centrality of the  humourous tradition in  nine­
teenth-century America. Humour  was  indeed,  as Stephen   Leacock  pointed  out,


5

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



"one  of the  undisputed  national  products  of the  new republic."  He  went on  to observe:  "of American literature  there was much doubt  in Europe; of American honesty, much  more;  of American  manners,  more still. But  American  humour found  a place alongside of Germany  philosophy, Italian  music, French wine, and British banking.  No one denied its peculiar excellence and its distinctive national stamp."' The  centrality of American  humour  is not simply a question of a long parade  of self-conscious funny  men,  most of them,  including  the  greatest,  ab­ sorbed  into  their  pseudonyms; it is a question  of the most durable  strand  in the main  tradition.  Miss Constance  Rourke,  in her  classical study  of  American hu­ mour,  uses as a  subtitle  "A  Study  of the  National  Character."  The  book is a subtle  and  eloquent  demonstration  of how the qualities generated  by humourous folk art entered  into the imagination  of the major shapers of  American  literature,  writers as diverse as Henry James, Emily Dickinson and  Edwin Arlington Robin­ son. She explains that the humourous  tradition  was bound  up with the search for national  unity and cohesiveness, given momentum and confidence by the Revolu­ tionary  War  and  by the full realization  that  the  country  won from  Europe  was one  of  incredible  richness. Miss Rourke  quotes  from  Bergson  that  "the  comic comes into  being  just when society and  the  individual,  freed  from the worry of self-preservation,  begin to regard themselves as works of art." g  Post-revolutionary America had  entered upon this phase. There was a sense of boundless confidence in the egalitarian  faith that  had nourished the revolution and could now be given an  immense  scope. Here  was  a  positive  shining  norm  to  be  set  against  effete Europe,  or  later,  with  the  opening  of  the  West, against  an  East  that  had  not sufficiently shaken off European  ways. The American  idea was so triumphant and so universally  accepted  that  it could  be presented  in  an  exaggerated,  even fan­ tastic way, without inviting ridicule. There  emerged a composite character, whose base was the shrewd practical Yankee and whose super-structure was the western teller of tall tales. The character was a theatrical  creation who had a special lingo, costume  and  mask.  Mark  Twain's  A Connecticut Yankee at  the  Court  of King  Arthur was a late, sophisticated  version of the  type. Hank  Morgan  had  all the New  Englander's  shrewd  practicality,  his disdain  for  what  seemed  pretentious and  unfamiliar,  and  his unflinching  confidence in his own  ability. Mark  Twain  has,  however, stripped  his Yankee of the colourful garb  of the early part  of the century, and  has clothed him in the sober suit of the businessman. When Morgan  finally  achieves a  position of power  at  the  Court  of King  Arthur,  he is by his own  request  known  as the  boss, the designation  that  for  him  confers the maxi­ mum combination  of respectability and  power.  Morgan  has also become an elo-

6

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



quent  exponent  of  the  theory  of republicanism  and  individualism,  and  thereby loses a good deal of his appeal  as a humourous character. He is, nonetheless, conceived of in the great  tradition,  a symbolic American  who triumphantly and exuberantly  exposes the ignorance  and cruelty of those who dwell in  non-Ameri­ can darkness.
Canada produced  nothing  comparable  to this tradition; no national  character
emerged to  become a symbol of triumph  and superiority. The  reason for this lies on the very surface of the social and political development  of Canada during  the nineteenth   century.  For  the  apocalyptic  revolution,  Canada substituted  a  pro­ tracted, largely invisible revolution that stretched from the 179o's when the Loyal­ ists first arrived  to the  1 8so's  when the principle of responsible government  was finally recognized.  Responsible government,  which, in  brief, is  the responsibility of the executive to the elected assembly and  through  them  to the electorate, was a victory of the centre.  In  the  process two extremes were  avoided,  although  not eliminated -toryism,  a  transplanting of  English ideas  of  an  elite  based  upon property,  privilege, and  education; and  republicanism, American  variety, which was the communism  of the day. The  triumph  of the solid centre  did  not mean any  break  with  European traditions.  Indeed,  it  meant  a strengthening of them, since  the  ideas  were  derived  from  British  liberalism, and  these ideas  were  not incompatible,  for the time being, with colonial status in the Empire. The opening up of the  West did  not  modify the ideology. The  West was not, as it was in the United  States, a gradually  advancing frontier-a front  line against  the wilder­ ness; it was rather  a series of hinterlands  or semi-colonies to be settled by careful arrangement  and  exploited   by systematic  plan.  The  settlers  were  not  usually adventurers  from  the settled  east;  they were more likely Americans  attracted  to free land  who  had  already  passed through  the frontier stage, or Europeans  who brought  with  them  a heavy  baggage of traditions.
What  emerged  in Canada, then, was not a single triumphant idea  that  nour­ ished  a  confident  self-reliance  in  a  new and  paradisiacal  land.  It was  rather  a consciousness of a variety of traditions  that had beenlinherited from older societies, from  Britain,  France,  colonial  America, and  the Republic  itself. We have a key here to understanding the nature  of the humourous traditions in the two countries.



IN THE  UNITED STATES the humourous  tradition  permeates the  works of a host of minor  writers  and  has its great  classical embodiment  in Mark  Twain. There   is  nothing  comparable  in  Canada to  the  steady  flow of

7

HALIBURTON,  LEACOCK



American  humourous writing  with  its  vast  undergrowth of  folk  humour. The Canadian tradition is largely  embodied  in  two  writers; who  were,  however,  two major   English-Canadian  writers.  The   first  was  Thomas Chandler Haliburton, who  was born  in  1796  and  died in  1865;  and  the second  Stephen Leacock,  who was born  in  1867  and  died in  1944.
Leacock  was  in  no sense a disciple of Haliburton. Indeed in  his references  to
Haliburton, he is uniformly  condescending and  disparaging. To  him,  Haliburton was  a historical phenomenon of some minor  significance. I suspect,  indeed, that Leacock   never  even  bothered   to  read  Haliburton; he  simply  accepts  the  image of a stuffy colonial  Tory  who exploited  a popular device, but who had  no genuine literary   power.  Haliburton was  a  much  better   writer   than   Leacock  thought he was,  and  Leacock  had  an affinity with  him  of which  he was not  aware.
There were  a number  of similarities  in the backgrounds and  careers  of the two
men.  Each   was  a  conscious  humourist and  is  remembered chiefly  as such,  but each  devoted  most of his energies to serious historical and  social studies  that  have now  been  forgotten. By family  background, each  was in  a position  to understand and  value  the  multinational nature of the  Canadian tradition. Haliburton grew up in  a tight  little  privileged society in Nova  Scotia,  but  he was always conscious of the  existence  of a great  North  Atlantic community of which  Nova  Scotia  was a minor  part. His  father  was a Scotsman  who  had  married into  a Boston family before  coming   to  Canada, and  his  mother   was  a  daughter of  a  British  officer who  had   been  killed  during the  American  Revolutionary  Wars.  The   Leacock family  traditions had  a similar  amplitude. His family  had  come  to Canada  from England in  1876  when  he was seven  years  old.  His  parents belonged  to  two  of the  basic  types  of  English  immigrants to the  colonies.  His  father was  a younger son of a family  of some means who was, in effect,  a ne'er-do-well remittance man. His  mother was  a daughter of a Church of England clergyman, and  the  family had   numerous ties  both  with  the  church   and  with  the  universities.  There  was never  any  doubt about  Leacock's  attachment to  Canada; but  he  never  lost  his sense  of  sentimental  identification with  England  and,   up  to  the  very  last,  he retained a  touchingly robust  belief  in  the  indestructibility of the  British  empire. But  as  his  literary fame  broadened, he  became increasingly well  known  in  the United States; and  he  accepted  the  role of the  American humourist who  was  a lineal  descendant of Mark  Twain. In his biography of Charles Dickens he sharply criticized  the great  man  for his failure  to see the epic quality of American civiliza­ tion.  Leacock   had  no such  insensitivity  to  the  United States,  as did  Haliburton before  him.  Both  Haliburton and  Leacock,  then,  had  a multinational  conscious-

8

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



ness;  they  were  simultaneously spiritual  citizens  of  Great   Britain, the  United States,  and  Canada. They   had  a sympathetic understanding of  the  qualities of each; they,  therefore, avoided  national absolutes  and  adopted an  attitude of  cul­ tural  and  political  relativism. It was an  attitude that  provided the  basis for  their humour.
Today Haliburton is remembered only for The  Clockmaker, which  is made  up
of a series of sketches  that  were brought together  in book form  in  18g6. He intro­ duced   the  character of  Sam  Slick,  a  Yankee  pedlar  travelling in  colonial  Nova Scotia,   and   finding   the  lazy,  unprogressive   Bluenoses  easy  victims  of  his  "soft  sawder" and   devious  ways.  Haliburton had  a  simple  propagandistic motive  in writing   the  book.  He  wanted  to  arouse  his  countrymen  to  the  need  for  some agricultural and  commercial reforms.  But  the  purpose  is not  obtrusive  and  does not stand  in  the  way  of contemporary enjoyment. What is left-and it is by far the  greater and  more  important part  of  the  book-is the  humourous commen­ tary  on national traits.  Despite  his profound  English Toryism, Leacock  was never guilty  of  naive  anti-Americanism.  In  a long  historical  study  called  The  English in  America,  he  later  argued that  American democracy and  republicanism were not an outgrowth of the Revolution, but were implicit in the first colonial  charters. What had  developed in the  United  States  then  was peculiarly  appropriate to that  country. He  begins  his  study  of  the  English  in  America in  this  way:   "I shall endeavour to explain  briefly  the complicated mechanism and  simple action  of the American Federal  Constitution, and  the  balances  and  checks  that  have  been  so skillfully  contrived  by  the  great  statesmen  who  constructed it;  and  also  to  point  out  the wonderful  combination of accidental causes that  contributed to its success, and   the  ability,  unity,  energy   and  practical skill of  the  people  who  work  the machine and  keep  it  in  order   and  repair." 3  His general   attitude to  the  United States  is that it  has  a point  of view that  works well within  its own boundaries but is  not  exportable.  Although  Haliburton  is by  nature more  sympathetic to  the English  point  of view, especially  as it is embodied in Toryism, he realizes  that  it, too,  is  unattractive in  a  foreign  setting.  He  fought   fiercely  against   giving  the British-American  colonies   a  greater  degree  of  independence from   the  mother country, but  this did  not  prevent  him from  inveighing  against  the  arrogance and stupidity of British  governors in the  colonies.
Sam  Slick  is the  vehicle  by which  Haliburton's critical   judgments of  national traits  are  made. The  criticism  is triggered  in the minds of the reader  by the extra­ vagance with   which   Sam   expresses  himself.  Here   are  two  passages  of  soaring self-confidence that   turn  into  self-ridicule:

9

HALIBURTON,  LEACOCK



I like  to look up  at  them  'ere  stars, when  I am  away  from  home; they  put  me in mind  of  our  national flag,  and  it  is generally  allowed  to  be  the  first  flag  in  the univarse now.  The British  can  whip  all  the  world,  and  we  can  whip  the  British. It's  near  about  the  prettiest  sight  I know of, is one  of our  first-class frigates, man­ ned  with  our  free  and  enlightened citizens,  all  ready  for  sea;  it  is like  the  Great  American Eagle,  on  its perch,  balancing itself for  a start  on  the  broad  expanse  of blue  sky, afeared  of nothin' of its kind,  and  president of all it surveys.4

* 	* 	*
No,  I believe  we  may  stump   the  univarse; we  improve on  everything, and   we
have  improved on our own species. You'll  search  one while,  I tell you, afore  you'll find  a man  that,  take him  by and  large, is equal  to one of our  free and  enlightened citizens.  He's  the  chap  that  has  both  speed,  wind,  and  bottom; he's  clear  grit­ ginger  to the  backbone,  you may depend. It's  generally  allowed  there ain't the  beat of them  to be found  anywhere.  Spry as a fox, supple  as an eel, and cute as a weasel. Though I say it,  that  shouldn't say it, they fairly  take  the  shine off creation; they are  actilly equal  to cash.5

At  other times,  Sam is the  humourous protagonist and  critic; his racy  colloquial­ isms  and   homely figures  of  speech drive  home the  critical  judgment. Here is  a passage where  he  talks  about the  absurdities of  English  travel literature about America:

Ensigns  and   lieutenants, I  guess, from the   British marchin'  regiments in  the Colonies,  that   run  over  five thousand miles  of country in  five weeks, on  leave  of absence,  and  then  return, lookin'  as wise as the  monkey  that  had  seen the  world. When   they  get  back  they  are  so chock  full  of  knowledge of  the  Yankees  that  it runs  over of itself; like a hogshead  of molasses rolled  about in hot weather, a white froth and  scum  bubbles out  of the bung-wishy-washy trash  they call tours,  sketches, travels,  letters,  and  what  not;  vapid  stuff,  jist sweet,  enough to catch  flies, cock­ roaches,  and  half-fledged  gals.6

And, at  times,  Sam Slick  has  a  premonition of some  of  the  problems inherent in the  American nation, and  it  carries him  beyond humourous comment to  realistic
VISIOn.


You  have  heerd   tell  of  cotton  rags  dipped in  turpentine, haven't you,  how  they produce combustion? Well,  I guess we have  the  elements of spontaneous combus­ tion  among  us in  abundance; when  it does break  out,  if you don't see an eruption of  human gore  worse  than   Etna   lava,  then   I'm   mistaken. There'll  be  the  very devil to pay, that's a fact.  I expect  the blacks will butcher the Southern whites, and  the  Northerners will have  to turn  out  and  butcher them  again; and  all  this shoot, hang,  cut,  stab,  and   burn   business  will  sweeten  our  folks'  temper,  as  raw  meat

10

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



does that  of a dog;  it fairly  makes me sick to think  on it. The explosion  may clear the  air  again, and  all  be  tranquil once  more,  but  it's  an  even  chance if it  don't leave  us  the  three  steamboats options-to be  blown  sky-high,  to  be scalded   to death, or drowned.7




STEPHEN LEACOCK  did  not  make use  of  a  spokesman like Sam Slick  to  express his  views  about national traits. He  is his  own  spokesman; we  can  see  him  smiling ironically or  chuckling with  enormous relish.  One of  the sketches in  his  first  humourous book,  Literary  Lapses,  which appeared in I 910, the  year  of  Mark Twain's death, was  a  parody of  the  English romance of  high life.  Lord   Oxhead's daughter confesses  that she  proposes to  marry an  American. The passage continues as follows:

"You  surprise me indeed," answered  Lord  Oxhead; "and  yet," he continued, turn­ ing  to  his  daughter with  the  courtly  grace  that  marked  the  nobleman of  the  old school,  "why  should  we not  respect  and  admire the Americans? Surely there  have been  great   names  among   them.  Indeed, our  ancestor  Sir  Amyas  Oxhead was,  I think,  married to  Pocahontas-at least  if not  actually  married" -the  earl  hesi­ tated  a moment.
"At  least they loved one another," said Gwendoline simply.
"Precisely," said  the  earl,  with  relief, "they  loved one another, yes, exactly." Then, as  if  musing   to  himself,  "Yes,  there  have  been  great  Americans. Bolivar  was  an American. The two  Washingtons-George and  Booker-are both  Americans."  8

It is difficult to  know   whether the  fun  is at  the  expense of  the  English or  the
Americans.
The balancing of  the  qualities of  England and  America is the  whole basis  of one  of Stephen Leacock's best  books,  Afy Discovery of England, which was  writ­ ten  following his  tour  of the  British  Isles in I 92 I. The observer  throughout is the  visiting  colonial, the  writer from Canada who  has  managed surprisingly to attract the  attention of the  literary world. Stephen Leacock relaxes maliciously and  plays  the  two  great  transatlantic  powers against each  other.  Here is a  passage where extravagant humour  and  sharp critical judgment  agreeably jostle  each other:

The terrible ravages  that  have  been  made  by the  Americans on  English  morality are  witnessed   on  every  hand. Whole  classes  of  society  are  hopelessly  damaged. I have  it in  the  evidence of the  English  themselves  and  there  seems to be no doubt of  the  fact.  Till  the  Americans came  to England the  people  were  an  honest, law­ abiding race,  respecting their  superiors  and  despising  those  below them. They had


I I

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



never   been  corrupted  by  money  and   their   employers   extended  to  them   in  this regard   their   tenderest   solicitude.   Then the  Americans  came.  Servants ceased  to be  what   they  were;   butlers   were  hopelessly  damaged; hotel   porters   became   a wreck; taxi drivers  turned  out  thieves;  curates could  no longer  be trusted  to handle money; peers  sold  their  daughters at  a  million   dollars  a  piece  or  three  for  two. In   fact  the  whole  kingdom   began  to  deteriorate till  it  got  where  it  is now.  At present  after  a  rich  American has stayed  in any  English  country house, its owners find  that  they  can  do nothing with  the  butler; a wildness  has come over  the  man. There is a  restlessness in  his demeanour and  a strange wistful  look in his eye as if seeking  for  something. In  many  cases, so  I  understand, after   an  American has stayed  in a country house, the  butler  goes insane.  He  is found  in his pantry count­ ing  over  the  sixpence  given  to  him  by a  Duke,  and  laughing to himself.  He  has to  be taken  in  charge  by the  police.  With  him  generally  go the  chauffeur, whose mind  has  broken  down  from  driving  a  rich  American twenty  miles;  and  the  gar­  dener,  who  is found  tearing  up  raspberry  bushes  by the  roots to see if there  is any money  under   them; and  the  local  curate whose  brain  has  collapsed  or expanded, I forget  which,  when  a rich  American  gave  him  fifty dollars for  his soup  kitchen.9

The point   of  this  passage   is  not  that the   Americans are  corrupt but   that the
English are  corruptible.
Leacock was  usually  the  innocent Canadian  observing the  qualities of the  two great Anglo-Saxon powers,  but   he  also  liked   to  turn his  humourous eye  on  the national obsessions  of his  native country. In Sunshine Sketches of a Little  Town, Leacock's nostalgic recollections of small  town  life in southern Ontario, the  action is set  against the  election of I gI Iin  which   the  dominating issue  was  reciprocity with   the  United States. It was  an  issue  that  aroused lively  nationalistic feelings and  great fears  of being swallowed up  by the  Republic to the  South. The Liberals, who   supported  reciprocity, were  defeated. There  was  a  feeling in  the   country stimulated by  the  fervent conservative propaganda, that  Canada once  again had been  saved   from the  Yankees. Leacock himself   was  a  devoted conservative and rejoiced in  the  results  of the  election. But  as a  humourist he sensed  the  absurdity that was  just  below  the  surface of the  national emotion. In the  book,  he has John Henry Bagshaw, the  old  liberal warhorse of  the  local  constituency, give  this  sad farewell speech. "I  am  an  old  man now,   gentlemen, and   the  time must   come soon   when I must   not  only  leave   politics,  but   must take   my  way  towards that goal   from   which  no  traveller returns. There  was  a  deep hush   when  Bagshaw said   this.  It was  understood  to  imply   that he  thought of  going   to  the   United States." 10
Later on  when Stephen Leacock ceased  to use Canadian place  names and  gave an  American setting to his books,  he could  parody the  American well-intentioned

I2

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



condescension   to  Canada. Thus, in    Arcadian  Adventures  with  the  Idle  Rich, the fashionable doctor recommends that  his wealthy  patients should  go for a visit to Canada, "perfectly quiet,  not a soul there and  I believe nowadays quite fashion­ able."" Like  Shaw,   Leacock   knew  that  a light-hearted display  of  contempt for one's  own  country is a sure  way of getting  a laugh.
Humour in  Haliburton  and   Leacock  then  depended  upon  ironic  balance as
opposed   to  the  triumphant contrast   that  was  the  main  spring  of  American  hu­ mour.   But  the  American manner  was  not  without  influence in  Canada.  Hali­ burton adopted it even  though  at  the same time he made  fun  of it. And  Leacock, especially  as he became in  the  'thirties the unofficial spokesman for the American humourous tradition, was  attracted to the  robust  humour of sharp  contrasts. Of Mark  Twain he said  that  "his  was that  characteristic American attitude, at  least for the America  of his day, of alternating between  prayer  and profanity, emotional belief and  iconoclastic denial,  asceticism  and  a spree, hard  work and  a bust,  cold water   and   raw  rum-with  nowhere  a  happy   medium,  an  accepted  path   and  way.  Out  of this  national phase  of development is spun  much  of  the  legisla:tion of  the  United  States; and  most of the worst of it. Mark Twain was in this, as in all else, a  true  American." The  admiration is that  of  an  outsider who  stands  in wonder   but  finds  it  impossible   to  participate. Yet  with  one  side  of  his  nature, Leacock  wanted to participate. He greatly admired, for instance, the Mark  Twain book  that  he  realized  was  at  the  very heart  of the  robust  American tradition of contrast and  extravagance, A Connecticut  Yankee  at the Court  of King  Arthur. He  recognized   that   Huckleberry  Finn was  the  masterpiece, but,  in  many  ways, he  preferred the  later  book.  To  him,  it was a  more satisfying  artistic  whole  than  Huckleberry  Finn. He  revelled  in  the  machinery by which  Yankee  inventiveness and  individualism were  made  to shatter the feudal  world  of Europe. In  an intro­ duction   that   he  wrote  for  the  book,  he  praised  its high  purpose   and  said  that "it  was  inspired   by  a  passion  for  righteousness  and  justice  which  blazes  out  at times in  a  flame  of  indignation." ,, Yet despite  his admiration for  the  emotional intensity   with  which  the  book  was  written, and  for  its  success  both  as  artistic whole  and  political  statement, he  had  strong  reservations  about its  ultimate im­  plications,  particularly about the  unqualified endorsement of political  democracy and  the faith  in technological progress. In  his final estimate  of the  book, he wrote  as  follows:   "Such criticism  of  England, past  and  present,  from  a  citizen  of  the American Republic, was a little  too much  like a child of light  reproving the chil­ dren  of darkness.  Against  the  tyranny of aristocracy could  be set the rising tyranny of the  trust; the  criminals and  bandits  of King  Arthur's time  (whenever it was)

HALffiURTON, LEACOCK



were soon to be overmatched  by the gangsters of the United  States;  against  the power of the  church  stood the social tyranny  of puritanical  America; denuncia­ tions of slavery came  ill from  a writer  brought  up  in  a slave-holding family in the greatest slave state the world ever saw and  the rack  and stake of the Middle Ages could be paralleled in the hell-fires of the Southern lynchers. At best, it was Satan  rebuking sin, the fire calling the kettle black. Undemeath was the insult that Mark  Twain  really thought America a far superior  place to England,  a fact  of which  the  next  generation  were  not  so  assured.  But  the  illusion  of American freedom  died hard." •3
Leacock's  enthusiasm  for  the  structure  and  literary  effect  of  A  Connecticut Yankee, as well as his serious reservations about  its political  philosophy, can  be understood  in  the  light of his finest book,  Arcadian  Adventures   with  the  Idle Rich,  which  appeared  in 1914· It  was Leacock's  attempt  to embody in one  co­ herent structure  his comments on the flourishing industrial  state that had suddenly arisen in Canada in the opening years of the twentieth  century. It was in a sense Leacock's reply to Mark Twain's  exuberant  response to the flourishing American industrial  state  that  had  preceded  Canada's by several  decades.  (Leacock  did not see that  A Connecticut  Yankee  was a confused book, in which Mark Twain's  sense of despair  was beginning to emerge.)
For  the idea and structure  of the book, Leacock may well have been indebted to Thorstein  Veblen's  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class that  appeared  in  18gg. Leacock had  read  Veblen's book when he was contemplating graduate work and he had  been delighted to find that the social sciences were not incompatible  with wit. No doubt  the presence of Veblen on the faculty of the University of Chicago was a strong influence in attracting  Leacock there.
Arcadian  Adventures  with  the  Idle  Rich  was  almost  a  fictional  companion
piece  to  The   Theory   of  the  Leisure Class. The  argument   of Veblen's  book is briefly  this:  In  a  modem,  industrial  society, the  main  function  of the  wealthy is ownership, along with various subsidiary functions all concerned with the acquisition  and  accumulation  of wealth.  The  respectable  activities are  banking, since it carries the suggestion of large ownership,  and law which, although  it has no  necessary  relationship  to  ownership,  has  "no   taint of  usefulness." '4  The wealthy are driven by a passion to assert their superiority to others in some clearly observable  and  recognizable way. This  can  be achieved  by doing  nothing  con­ spicuously and  spending money lavishly. To  be conspicuous expenditure must be on superfluities. Expenditure  on the church  and  higher education  qualify because their  buildings  "are  constructed  and  decorated  with  some  view to  a  reputable

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



degree of  wasteful expenditure." '5    "The priestly   vestments are   notoriously  ex­ pensive, ornate  and   inconvenient." ' 6  In both   church  and   university there  is a great emphasis on  "form, precedent, graduation of rank, ritual, ceremonial vest­ ments, and  learned paraphernalia."'' The clergy  and  the  academic staff  are part of  the  retinue of  the  rich, and   expenditure on  them   by  the  wealthy is essentially a  form of self-indulgence.
In Arcadian  Adventures the  dominating theme is the  conspicuous expenditures
of  the   very   rich -on  clubs, ornate  summer homes, and   bogus   religions. The church  and   the   university  are   useful  appendages to  this  world. The  university indeed  becomes  a  great  business   corporation. Leacock's humour  swells  into a prophetic vision  of  the  multiversity:

The university,  as everyone knows, stands  with its great  gates  on Plutoria Avenue, and  with  its  largest  buildings, those of the  faculties  of industrial and  mechanical science,  fronting full  upon  the  street.
These  buildings are  exceptionally fine, standing fifteen stories  high  and  comparing favourably with  the  best departmental stores or factories  in  the  city. Indeed, after nightfall, when  they  are  all  lighted  up for  the  evening  technical classes and  when their  testing  machinery is in full swing and  there  are students going in and  out  in overall  suits,  people  have  often  mistaken  the  university,  or  this  newer  part  of it, for  a  factory. A  foreign   visitor  once  said  that  the  students looked  like  plumbers, and  President Boomer  was so proud of it that he put the phrase into his next Commencement address; and  from  there  the  newspapers  got it and  the  Associated Press  took  it  up  and  sent  it  all  over  the  United States  with  the  heading, "Have Appearance of  Plumbers; Plutoria University  Congratulated on Character of Students," and  it was  a  proud  day  indeed  for  the  heads  of  the  Industrial  Science faculty.
But  the  older  part  of the  university  stands  so quietly  and  modestly at  the  top  end of the  elm  avenue, so hidden by the leaves of it, that  no one could  mistake  it for a factory. This,  indeed, was  once  the  whole  university,  and   had  stood  there  since colonial  days  under   the  name  Concordia College.  It  had  been  filled  with  genera­ tions  of  presidents and   professors  of  the  older  type  with  long  white  beards  and  rusty  black  clothes,  and  salaries  of fifteen  hundred dollars.
But  the  change both  of  name  and  character from  Concordia College  to  Plutoria University was  the  work  of  President   Boomer.  He  had   changed it  from  an  old­ fashioned college  of the  by-gone  type  to a  university  in  the  true  modern sense. At Plutoria  they   now  taught  everything. Concordia College,  for  example,  had   no teaching of  religion  except  lectures  on  the  Bible.  Now  they  had  lectures also on Confucianism, Mohammedanism,  Buddhism, with  an  optional course  on  atheism  for  students in  the  final  year.
And,  of course,  they  had  long  since admitted women,  and  there  were now  beauti-

HALIBURTON,  LEACOCK



ful  creatures  with  Cleo de  Merode  hair  studying  astronomy  at  oaken  desks and looking up at  the  teacher with eyes like comets. The  university  taught  everything and  did everything.  It had  whirling machines  on the  top of it that  measured  the speed of the wind, and deep in its basements it measured  earthquakes  with a seis­ mograph; it held classes on forestry and dentistry  and  palmistry;  it sent life classes into  the slums, and death  classes to the city morgue.  It offered such a vast variety of themes, topics, and subjects to the students, that there was nothing that a student was compelled  to learn, while from its own presses in its own press-building it sent out a shower of bulletins and monographs like driven snow from a rotary plough.'8


The climactic incident in the book is the business-like  merger  between  the Presby­ terian   and   the   Episcopalian  churches.   All  society  has  become   a  vast  business corporation whose  motto  is profits and  conspicuous waste.




IT couLD BE   SAID then  that  Leacock  had  presented a picture of industrial society in the  Arcadian Adventures  which  was no less damning than
Mark  Twain's picture  of feudalistic  Europe. If we  ignore  the  tone  of the  book and  simply  concentrate on  what  happens, we  could  summarize the  argument of the  book  in  this  way:  Society  is based  upon   wealth, and  wealth   derived  from inheritance,  promotion or  speculation, rather than  from   useful  manufacturing. The upper  classes are unaware of the world outside  their  circle and insulate them­ selves from  poverty.  Success in this world depends upon  cajolery, deception, deceit and  simple  graft. Among  the  very  rich,  there  is no  intellectual  distinction, only an  infinite   capacity for  being  impressed   by  the  false  and   the  pretentious. The  professions  are  slavishly dependent upon  the  very  rich;  doctors develop  a reputa­ tion  by  advocating what  the  patients  most  desire -that  they  be  kept  quiet  in some  distant and   exotic  summer   resort;   university  presidents play  the  game  of separating the  rich  from  their  money  by  flattery  and   a  display  of  conspicuous  knowledge; university  professors are  content to  work  in genteel  poverty  provided they  are  respected  and  are  free  to neglect  their  classes;  clergymen  are  experts  in graceful ritual  or  are  pompous,  self-important  expositors  of an  antique and  dis­ credited  theology. This  society seeks its pleasures in expensive  and  useless ways­ in  building grotesque and  expensive retreats, in  fostering  absurd  religious  move­  ments,  and  in  the  process is duped  by its servants and  victimized  by those whom  it  admires.

16

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



Such   a  summary  makes Leacock a  dark satirist   of  a  much more forbidding nature than even   the  later  Mark Twain. But  actually the  book  leaves  no  such impact. For  the  tone is relaxed; the  activities of the  very  rich  are  seen  as comic extraganzas, and   not   as  venal indulgences. Only  occasionally does  the   relaxed smile  of  the  humourist give  way  to  indignation. The  bitterness lurks  far  below the  surface. The  opening paragraph sets  the  mellow, ironic tone,   and   the  con­ cluding paragraph  pronounces a  slightly   tart benediction.

The   Mausoleum Club  stands  on  the  quietest  corner  of  the  best  residential street in  the  City.  It is a  Grecian building of white  stone.  About  it  are  great  elm  trees with  birds-the most  expensive  kind of birds-singing in the  branches.'9

* 	* 	*
Thus   all  night   long,  outside  the  club,  the  soft  note  of  the  motor  horns  arriving
and  departing wakened the  sleeping  leaves of the  elm  trees  with  their  message of gocxl tidings.  And  all  night  long, within  its lighted  corridors, the  bubbling cham­ pagne   whispered  to  the  listening   rubber   trees  of  the  new  salvation of  the  city. So  the  night  waxed  and  waned   till  the  slow day  broke,  dimming with  its cheap prosaic  glare  the  shaded beauty  of the artificial light, and  the people of  the city­ the  best  of  them -drove home  to  their  well-earned sleep,  and   the  others -in the  lower  parts  of the  city-rose  to their  daily  toil. 20

What I  think accounts for  the  quality of  this  book,   potentially so  bitter an attack upon   the  status quo, actually so  genial a  recollection of  an  era  that was passing   away   is  the   nature of  Leacock's social   convictions. Here  again, as  in Leacock's treatment  of  national  traits, it  is  a  matter of  recognizing variety, of avoiding absolutes and   embracing  relativism. Leacock had   a  lively  faith in  the businessman  and   the   beneficent  powers of  individualism. Indeed,  he  could   at times   sound  like   an   apologist  for   unreconstructed  competitive individualism. When he reviewed the  economic conditions of Great Britain in  the early  'twenties, he  called  for  a  revival of tough business  enterprise.

The  next  thing  to be done,  then,  is to "fire"  the government officials and  to bring back  the  profiteer. As to which  officials are  to be fired  it doesn't matter much.  In England  people   have  been  greatly  perturbed as  to  the  use  to  be  made   of  such instruments as the  "Geddes Axe": the edge of the axe of dismissal seems so terribly sharp.  But  there  is no  need  to worry.  If the  edge of the  axe is too sharp, hit  with the back of it.
As to  the  profiteer, bring  him  back.  He  is really  just the  same  person  who  a few
years ago was  called  a Captain of Industry and  an Empire Builder  and  a  Nation Maker.   It is the  times  that   have  changed, not  the  man.  He  is there  still,  just  as greedy  and  rapacious as ever,  but  no greedier: and  we have  just  the  same  social

17

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



need of his greed as a motive power in industry as we ever had, and indeed a worse need than before.
We need him  not only in  business but in the whole setting  of life, or if not him personally, we need the eager, selfish, but reliant  spirit of the man who looks after himself  and  doesn't  want  to have  a spoon-fed  education   and  a government  job alternating with  a  government  dole, and  a  set of  morals  framed  for  him  by a Board of Censors. Bring back the profiteer:  Fetch  him from  the Riviera, from his country  place on the Hudson,  or from whatever  spot to which  he has withdrawn with his tin box full of victory bonds. If need be, go and  pick him out of the peni­ tentiary,  take  the  stripes off him  and  tell  him  to get  busy again.  Show  him  the map of the world and ask him to pick out a few likely spots. The  trained greed of the  rascal will find them in a moment.  Then  write  him out  a concession for coal in  Asia Minor  or  oil in  the  Mackenzie  Basin or  for  irrigation  in  Mesopotamia.  The  ink will hardly  be dry on it before the  capital  will begin to  flow in:  it will come  from  all  kinds of  places whence  the  government   could  never coax it  and where  the tax gatherer  could never find it. Only  promise that  it is not going to be taxed  out  of existence and  the  stream  of capital  which  is  being  dried  up  in  the sands of government  mismanagement  will flow into  the  hands  of private  industry like a river of gold.
And incidentally,  when the profiteer has finished his work, we can always put him back into  the  penitentiary  if we like. But we need him  just now?'


Leacock   was  always  severely  critical  of  socialism.  His  argument was  that  it would  not  work;  that  it  depends  upon  an  nonexistent motive  power;  that  it  ig­ nores the inevitable corruption of all governments; and  that, anyway, its vision of the  good society was like the fundamentalist's vision of heaven, dull, desolate  and depressing.   But  Leacock   would   balance  this  indictment with   a  strong   critical attack  on  the  dangers   of  unrestricted private  enterprise. He  was  a  passionate  humanist who believed  that  human life must  be placed  above economic  doctrine, and  he did  not  hesitate  to recommend strong  state intervention to protect  society from  the  greed  of individuals and  corporations.
Leacock's political  and social position is thus central and  flexible;  he recognizes that  truth may  rest simultaneously in opposed  doctrines, and  that  there  is an in­ evitable tendency for abstract ideas to foster injustice and  a disregard  for  human emotions. His  social  criticism,  then,  is similar  in  tone  to his criticism  of  national traits.  He  uses an  ironic  balance rather  than  sharp contrast, relaxed  irony  rather than   intense  indignation. The  Arcadian  Adventures   with  the  Idle  Rich  might  have  been a burning indictment; given Leacock's point  of view and temperament, it  was  a  series  of  humourous and  exaggerated  recollections,  with  the  criticism muted   and  softened.

HALIBURTON, LEACOCK



Leacock's position,  like Haliburton's, is individualistic and  uncommitted. He is aware   of  the  tensions   between   appearance and  reality;   but  he  keeps  them  in playful  suspension; he does not  resolve them  in a burst  of indignation. He  writes not  satires  but   pastorals with  a  satirical   element.  His  point  of  view  is  not  dis­ tinctively   Canadian -there  are   plenty   of  English   predecessors-but   it  is  a posture  congenial to  Canadians. Our  political  and  social  traditions have decreed  reconciliation rather than  polarization, diversity  rather than  integration, a willing suspension  of  conviction. This  point  of  view  has  many  political  advantages; as both  Leacock   and   Haliburton demonstrate, it  has  a  number of  literary advan­ tages as well.


FOOTNOTES
' Mark  Twain (New York:  Appleton), 2.
•  American Humor  (New York: Doubleday,  I953),  22.
3 English  in  America (London: Colburn,  I85I), I, 5·
4   The  Clockmaker (Toronto: McClelland   &  Stewart,   I958;  New  Canadian  Li- brary), 48.
5  Ibid., 70-71.
6  Ibid., 45·
7  Ibid., 44-45·
8  Literary   Lapses   (Toronto:  McClelland  &  Stewart;   New  Canadian Library), 7·
9   My  Discovery  of England (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart,  Ig6I; New Canadian
Library), 58-59.
10  Sunshine Sketches of a Little  Town (Toronto: Collins, I944), I74·
" Arcadian   Adventures with  the  Idle  Rich  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  I 959; New Canadian Library), 84.
10  "An   Appreciation," The  Stormfield edition  of  The  Writings of  Mark   Twain
(New York:  Harpers,  I929), Vol. XIV, ix.
13 Mark  Twain, I04-05.
'4  The Theory of The Leisure  Class  (New York:  B. W. Huebsch,  Igrg),  231.
!5  Ibid., I I g. rS  Ibid., I21. l7  Ibid., 367.
rB  Arcadian  Adventures, 38-40.
l9  Ibid., I.
•o  Ibid., I57·
01    My  Discovery  of England, I 29-30.







19



JOURNEY OUT OF ANGUISH



John Reid



IN THE FIRST WEEK of the second wodd  wa<, going on thiTty
years now,  Wyndham Lewis followed  me, in ignorance, to Canada. We  had  met
in  the  last summer of simulated peace,  because  I  had  sent  him  the  manuscript of  a  novel  which  I had  finished  that  I might  do  just  that: send  it  to  him.  He had  begun  to read  and  ceased to write; the  pages of There  Was  A Tree  mounted beside his chair,  an intidy  pile, while The  Hitler Cult  remained a neat  unfinished thesis on  a successful  paranoiac; a book  by which  he hoped  to redeem  his  repu­ tation   after  a disastrous  and  naive  error  in  judgement seven  years  before,  when he  had  sided  with  a man  whose  merit  was  that  he,  too,  was  an  Outsider. The  Hitler Cult  brought Lewis out  on  the side of his adopted  country.
I had  come from  the land  he had  left about  fifty-two  years  earlier.  From  time to  time  he  had   written   to  relations  in  Oakville,  who   were  aware   that   Uncle Charlie's deserted  son,  young  Percy,  had  become  an  artist  in  the  Old  Country. What I had  brought from  Canada was a native  talent  and  a vision of a pulp  and paper  mill town  as no different  in essence from  a state-run community or nation. Like  most insights,  it had  blinded  me to much  of reality: one  had  a thesis, also; the  characters were  victims of it. The  simpliste  certitudes came  easily, since out­ side  them  I knew so little.  My English  neighbour was a fascinating alien; English literature was  left-wing  ridden, and  I  had  an  endemic dislike  of  the  cashing  in on  sensibility  of  many  English  writers-a  Stephen Spender  of   their  hoarded inner  agonies.
It would  have  taken some dishonesty  not  to have  become  in those days a Lewis
fan.   I  needed  him.  Tree,   River,  Mill:  so I divided  the  novel.  And  to show,  in the  final  part, the  apparent nature of a mechanized environment, I mechanized the  prose, glad  of the  Lewis exemplar.
So  I sent  off  to  him  the  typewritten corpse.  He  responded: in  a  flat  I was visiting  within  five minutes  walk of Notting Hill,  the  phone rang,  a voice was in my  ear,  declaring that  it belonged  to Wyndham Lewis. If I had  been  less naive, I would  have  refused  to  believe  it: some  catarrhal Indian colonel  was  putting


20

JOURNEY OUT OF  ANGUISH



me on. Witness the directions  to his studio, designed to instruct  an idiot or some blind angel who had never visited the earth,  and who must be taught  to put one foot forward  in that  alien body and then, with agonized patience  (you do follow me?),  the next.  Later,  I would suspect it was a role he was forced  to play, and that  he would find in it an exacerbated  humour  which one could share  at one's peril.
Next afternoon  I was, beard  and Daks suit and orange shirt, at the end of the long corridor, listening to a dog bark on the other side of the studio door. I heard the scuffle, the whimper,  and  the lock being released; I saw  the  broad-brimmed black hat,  and  under it the stranger  who that  day invented  the myth  that  I  dis­ liked dogs.
Lewis survived  the sight  of me.  We drank  gin, flavoured  with  bitters,  while
Stephen Spender stared  at us from blank eyes: this was the external  world. Lewis showed  me other  paintings,  including  reproductions  for  a  volume  of  drawings that  never appeared. He told stories of Augustus John; he offered to write an Introduction for  my  novel;  he  assured  me  that  with  the  autumn harvest  war would come.
He  had  known  another  war.  One  fruit  of it was The  War  Baby,  which  had appeared  twenty years before in a magazine edited by the Sitwells. The story had been buried  beneath  much  activity and  a series of timed  quarrels,  including  one with  the Sitwells. Pressures of a Catholic  upbringing  moved  where  no one saw them. And for a period he had  fled that moment of sanity that  is The  War  Baby, "developing  his intellect",  as he said, and seeking conflict.




OM THE  ULTIMATE CONSEQUENCES he  was Saved, I believe, by a very pretty  girl called  Gladys Anne. For  twenty years, when  we first met, her  loyalty and  support  had  worn  away  at  the fortress  Lewis had  constructed. In  illness he  had  surrendered, a  few years before, to  acknowledgement of  her faithfulness -not  to the genius, but to a man who knew he could die.
Gladys Anne was Froanna Lewis, the name an anglicizing of the "Frau Anna"
that  she  was  called,  on  an  inauspicious  trip,  by a  German   landlady.   Margot Stamp  in The  Revenge   for Love  is not Froanna; neither  is the  Hester  Harding of Self Condemned; but she was a window through which Lewis saw these char­ acters,  that  they  might  impose  upon  him a  humanity  which  Lewis  recognized, without sneering, that  they accepted.

21

JOURNEY OUT OF ANGUISH



Of  women  in general he was too critical,  being  repulsed  perhaps  by his own needs. Shortly after  we met he decided to go to Canada. I sent to see him a girl I knew who belonged to the Family Compact  that still rules Toronto. I liked her; she told Lewis the truth about me, which he could not accept; she provided introductions. If he had  not been Wyndham  Lewis, I  would  have  fought  back when he described  her after her visit. Adulation  is a flaw in character.
T.  S. Eliot's was the face that  launched  the  Lewises, eleven days after  I  had left, on their way to Canada: the portrait  had  been sold to a South African gal­ lery. On  the thirteenth  of September  they arrived  at  the  King  Edward  Hotel  in Toronto. They  brought  the dog;  Lewis left behind  his Hallowe'en  hat. He sug­ gested that  I shave off my beard, as it made  me conspicuous.
Froanna possessed still an  extraordinary beauty.  That   first  afternoon  we  all went  to tea at  the  Muirhead's,  where the decor  was, I  considered,  modern,  but which  Lewis diagnosed more accurately  as sterile -"like an operating  theatre". That   night  in  the  main  dining  room we began  our  exile. Lewis tried  to  make their Atlantic  crossing sound funny, but it was the account  of a roundabout  jour­ ney into  frigid  waters, that  the  enemy might  be avoided.  He  would  caricature unwanted  encounters  in the liner's  bar  and  thus  come  to grips  with-well,  at least his own caricatures  of them. It was a way, perhaps,  of  bringing  under  con­ trol  an  inexplicable  world, in  which  one  had  learned  to  put  forward  one foot and  then  another.  All that  was hollow around  him  he  dined  on  with  a certain empathy.  Because he understood his analysis, he believed  he understood  the thing analyzed -even  when  that  thing  was a  person.  Yet,  since  there  was so much hollowness around  him there was much he understood, and  the analysis matched the  unreality.  The   truths  grasped  seemed  something  innate  in  himself;  it  was there that  value lay, a Cartesian essence; the rest was material,  at best, for art.
Lewis  needed  opposition  in  order  to  function. Knowledge  can  wall  one  in against  chasms of ignorance.  In  Toronto   the  target  was to  become  a  city  and country  he could  not  understand  because  he  could  not  ( 0,  Canada!) like it; the dross was his; the native  product  for ever out of reach.
If a plot was needed, so that he might oppose the enemy, one was immediately forthcoming: at  a nickel a remaindered  copy one of the downtown  department stories attacked  him with John  Gawsworth's  Apes,  ]apes and  Hitlerism,  a fawn­ ing book that  presented Lewis's vices for admiration. Perhaps  telling him of this made  me in his eyes part of the plot to render  him unacceptable in his homeland.  Soon he left for Buffalo.
On the Canadian Thanksgiving weekend I visited the Lewises there. A portrait


22

JOURNEY OUT OF  ANGUISH



of the chancellor  of the local university was still unfinished, yet it was what  he could do best:  a gelid El Grecoesque elongation of the head,  the bird-like hands placid  against  the  held  mortar-board, gave it a timeless dignity  possibly greater than  its subject.  "I am  trying  to make it as academic  as possible and  still keep it a work of art," Lewis stated.  The view through the window, to one side of the figure, he later changed.
In  Buffalo he was hemmed  in by despicable acquaintances. Hence  his depres­
sion, in  a  place  with  no future  for  him.  Back in Toronto, I  arranged   through
T. W. L. MacDermot a meeting with the meat-packer  millionaire,  J. S. McLean.
Lewis arrived  on St. Andrew's  Day. Arriving in a taxi  to the York Club,  his account  of an  afternoon  ordeal  at  Hart  House was funnier  than  the  version in America, I Presume, where he had time and  the necessity to falsify it. At dinner that  night  were  A.  Y.  Jackson,  Charles  Comfort,  Carl  Schaefer,  Terry  Mac­ Dermot  and  our  host. Later  we drove to the  McLean  estate.  Finland  had  been invaded  by Russia,  and  amid  the  alcoholic hilarity  there  was an  air  of gloom. Lewis left  late,  displaying  his  newly-acquired  boxer's  victory-shake  of   clasped hands above his head. Next day he returned  to darkest Buffalo.
In April 1940 I accompanied  my manuscript  to New York. The  Lewises were at the Hotel Stuyvesant,  and as I knocked on their door my nose began to bleed. It was Dan  Boleyn, the  idiot  protagonist  of The  Apes  of God,  not  I  who  had nose bleeds-through pages monotonous  with  wasted  blood. To  Lewis it  may have been one more expected and unpleasant  blow. He sensed now that  America was a land of inopportunity. So he told me that  good books had  no chance;  he described  me to someone  on  the  phone  as incredibly  naive;  he assured  me my future  was a blank.




T.rAT FALL, the Lewises were forced  back to Toronto. I  had written  one good story, lived off friends,  been tossed out  of  the  National  Film Board,  and  begun  a  novel,  Puppet's  Dream,  which  Lewis  refused  to  look  at: reading  one  of  my  books had  done  him  enough  harm.  On  my  birthday   that December  he endured  his twenty-five-year-old fan, while the walls pressed in on our ultimate festivities.
It was the end. Lewis, painting  at  22 Grenville Street,  was too busy to see me in  the  new  year.  I  worked  less, lost direction,  phoned  periodically.  At  last  in February  I  walked  to  the Tudor Hotel  on Sherbourne  Street.  Froanna   was on

JOURNEY OUT OF  ANGUISH



her knees, cutting  out the pattern  of a new black dress. I could wait for  Lewis: there  was nothing  else to do. I  noted that  Froanna  had  done  a drawing  of her work  basket;  she  had  been  an  art  student  when  young.  Eventually  Lewis  re­ turned,  complaining  of the  cold. Yet he  was willing to  walk back  with  me  to Grenville Street  (a  couple of miles or more)  that  I might  see his  paintings:  the offer was the first light in three months of winter  darkness. I  turned towards the studio  as towards  the Beatific Vision.
On  the blustering street Lewis suddenly turned  on me:  I was to blame for all his troubles;  behind  his back I had spread stories about  his life in England.
Eliot had forgiven at least as much. I, too, had  been a prisoner of the know­
ing  mind,  and  these false accusations were the  beginning  of a lengthy  and  un­ finished  purgation. Long since, when  it  no  longer  mattered, I  have  seen  that the  quarrel  he  was compelled  to  pick with  me  was  a  punishment  he  endured. Through it I began to know, as I left Lewis at the comer  of Church  and  Bloor Streets, opposite a drug store then called Star, the need to find a way out of exile.
Looking back  was no cure. Twice  again  I saw  Lewis. He  begged to buy my
copy of The  Lion and the Fox, for some academic  acquaintance, but  could not resist making  me sign a  receipt  of payment,  since  I was a  dishonest  man.  Oh well, it made me feel wronged, a useful and dangerous  sensation. And yet, a year later,  when he came into the office of B. K. Sandwell  at Saturday  Night,  where I was then  working, I could not hate him. Sandwell  paid  Lewis double  the nor­ mal rates, because he felt sorry for him. When introduced, I said, "We have met before,"  and  was silent. Lewis sat on the  edge of a straight-backed  chair  while B. K. rolled a cigarette-a thing he only did when there were visitors; it always, for some reason, shortened  their stay.
Ill at ease, "I call this my Tudor  period,"  Lewis said,  his hands  clasped  be­
tween spread  knees, dark  eyes defensive behind  glasses, talking  around  the  in­ evitable cigarette  in his mouth. In his grey sports  jacket, he was a man one might pass three  times a day without  noting it. The  sense of loneliness came  through.  There was for me no triumph,  which I had  begun  to realize was the self's petty masquerade  to disguise defeat.
The  article  he  had  brought  was on  Morley  Callaghan's collection  of short stories, Now  That   April's Here. "Apart from  the literary  merits of the stories it contains,"  he wrote, "this book is beautifully replete with a message of human tolerance   and   love.  Every  one -or  almost  all -of   these  discreet  miniature dramas  ends softly and gently. At the end of some anguish  there is peace:  at the end of some bitter  dispute there is reconciliation.

JOURNEY OUT OF ANGUISH



"All of these creatures  are dimly aware  that  the parts  they play-for  all the sound  and  fury into  which they may be led by the malice of nature,  by the  de­ mands  of the instinct  for animal  survival, or by our  terrible  heritage  of  original sin -the roles which they are called upon to take are played according to some great  law, within  the bounds of rational  order."
It was a Lewis no one had seen before. Without  the intense loneliness he might never have yielded to truths  so foreign to his stance, nor was it likely he would have written  these things where those who knew him could have read  them.
Suffering  is often  approved  of, for  the  artist,  because it  is believed  that  ex­
perience exists to be turned  into  art -an invitation  to exploit one's  pain.  That makes the true subject  of any novel the writer's sensibility. Few can  master  the act of writing  because it is a gift given to the simple;  one can  no more  think  a story into  being than  one can  think oneself into  being. Lewis kept  notebooks of his Toronto  days, which ended  after two and  a half years in which he produced many good paintings, because he had a draughtsman's hand  and  the white paper bade  him speak. Back in England,  his exile ended;  he was home at last, and  he acquired  in  his final decade  an  unaccustomed,  if somewhat  frigid,  geniality.  It had  been for him, too, a long  journey, in which at last the man  Lewis was born into himself.




EVENTUALLY,  TWO  YEARS  AFTER   COMPLETION,  Self  Con­ demned was published.  It  was marred,  perhaps,  by self-laceration,  but it  was all he could do with that  barren  sojourn:  put it down, an askew vision.  Some have
called it a roman a clef,  yet one hardly  recognizes the city  (it  was a composite,
including  a few inapposite  details from my first novel), and if it was his intention to portray certain  persons who claim to be in the book, he failed to sketch a true likeness.
No, it was a work of fiction, of which the central  plot has been suppressed. If it  had  been written  out  of sheer  vindictiveness, or as an  act  of self-therapy   (a conviction  the sterile  have  about  art), I would  have been there,  for  more  than anyone else except  Wyndham  Lewis I was to blame for his coming  to Toronto.
Perhaps  it  would  have  helped  him if he had  known,  as I learned  years later
from one of his cousins, that  his secretiveness and suspicions were family  traits: he resembled  most  an  uncle  whom  he had  never met.  He  resembled,  also, his father.  Uprooted, he married  the image of himself, through  his talent,  creating

25

JOURNEY OUT OF ANGUISH



a sealed-in false absolute;  but he married,  as well, a woman.  In his blindness the mirror  angel withered, and  he learned  to live, as well as he could, with  himself and  others.  He  helped  the young;  he did  not  desert  Pound; he kept  going  till the end.
The  best work was to come after Self Condemned, when he realized that some­ times he had tried to make an idol of his talent,  and  although  he viewed  his age without  enchantment, he discovered before the end  that  he also was part  of the human  race, a man  sometimes led by the malice of nature,  enduring  a  terrible heritage,  who  played out  his role finally within  the  bounds  of  rational  order, moving after many bitter disputes towards some semblance  of that  peace replete with  human  tolerance  and  love, which  to  me  at  least  is more  important  than literary  merits. The War  Baby  shows that  art  and  understanding cure  no one;  it shows, also, that  Lewis was an honest artist when  not blinded  by his mind.  In the decade since his death,  Gladys Anne Lewis has  not  deserted  his memory or his cause:  that  is a sign of a merit more than literary.



POEMS   BY
fl. J. M. SMITH



Translated by Rina Lasnier




Avant-dire
 



JE  NE   CROIS   PAS   que !'on puisse comparee Ia traduction de

la  prose a  celle de  la  poesie. De  la  premiere on  requiert  surtout  la fidelite et
l'aisance  de !'expression.  De la seconde, on exige d'abord  qu'elle se separe nette­ ment  de  la  lettre  du  poeme  pour  n'en  saisir que !'esprit,  l'esprit  de  nouveaute puisque le poeme est tou jours "naissance".  Et voici la marche  ardue:  transporter  un feu, peut-Ctre eblouissant, et ne pas trebucher, ne pas permettre a son propre souffle de le reduire,  encore  moins de laisser le prosai:sme le  mouiller, en alterer l'intensite.
Si le risque  a  courir  reste grand  entre  lecteur et  po·ete, combien  plus grand celui de  poete  a poete, et  combien  plus passionnant.  Le  traducteur devient  un
peu ce voyeur, emerveille et indiscret par fascination, qui cherche dans le mystere d'un  autre  cette interiorite,  cette alterite ala fois si proche et si irr.eductible; ainsi l'ombre  tournant  autour  d'un  corps, comme pour y penetrer  et n'arrivant  jamais
a l'inventorier, a l'inflechir,  sinon  dans  la marche  du soleil.
Traduire c'est  aussi une  fa on
ploie  le metal  aux  arabesques  d'un  dessin;  c'est entrer  dans  une  connaissance spirituelle differente,  et plus profondement  sans doute que l'acteur  de theatre qui brime son ego pour structurer une p:resence tout ensemble etrangere  et familiere.
C'est  aussi effectuer  un  voyage sideral,  car  tout  se passe en  hauteur et tout
differe:  la scansion,  le rythme,  l'ordre,  et pourtant  la traduction ne doit  jamais oublier qu'elle  reste la servante-satellite  du poeme magnetique  a transposer.
Transposer,  voila !'expression  juste, car  comment s'approprier le mouvement
de l'esprit  d'un  autre  sans se deprendre  du langage fruste et dedouble  de la tra-

POEMS BY  A.  J. M. SMITH



duction? Et  c'est  par !'intuition que  s'effectue la saisie d'un chant et ce qu'il  y a d'essentiel  dans  le poeme  a exprimer.
Plus  profonde sera la correspondance, la sympathie, plus heureuse  sera la transposition. Ainsi  l'oiseau-femelle,  aussi race  que  le male  mais  moins  colol'e, se laisse-t-il  entraine dans  les courants d'un  exil  temporaire, mais  harmonieux et fecond.



LE ROI DE L:zt   P:ztR:ztBOLE

Ce roi dans l'ire de sa fuite et de son amertume,
loin de !'adulation courtisane et de l'entichement de la reine, qu'il  rejette le sceptre vide et la couronne surdoree;
tous ces liens verts des terres rattachees a lui
qu'illes brise pour en faire un pl'e de pierre;
que l'espace de l'air  invio1e soit son souffle
et le site de son coeur mieux  chantant que le cygne;
que son sommeil soit pur et sa joie solitaire
quand il prend  pour seule amante sa fierte hautaine.
Ce roi amer, qui m'en  dira  le nom?  Non, non, ce n'est pas moi! Pere,  je t'en supplie, laisse-moi me detoumer
et mourir  de cette royaute  excessive et rassasiee,
aussi nu que l'epoux  dans la proximite de la jeune epouse;
que  je garde  pour gisante la froide reine de la gloire.

Je chanterai alors le chant nu de la pierre denudee
et le chant ,epousera la sonorite hauturiere du coeur, ainsi du vieux roi dresse dans la demesure de sa fable.

(Like  an old proud king in a parable)

POEMS BY  A.  J, M.  SMITH



Jl   UN JEUNE POETE

Si le jour ne leve point Ie vent suis le vaisseau a reflets de metal
et son sillage ordonne et grave:
-Iphigenie dans sa Iegende -

Meme  si des yeux de pierre te regardent que  ta danse soit grace et fatalite
mais pure  de toute ruse scintillante;
plus depouillee de toute exaltation

que  n'en  montre le visage severe d'Artemis dans }'impassible automne,
afin que  tu connaisses a ton tour
Ia cruaute de la grace reprimee.

Pose ta trace  dans I'espace etonne et Ie marque de l'ceuvre achevee avec cette  aisance  souveraine
d'un fils de divin Iignage.





JEUX D'OMBRES
 (To  A Young Poet, for C. A.M.)


Toutes ces ombres  a peine froissees d'ombre sont Ie tissu de l'esprit  a ramages imaginaires
gonflement de I'esprit ou sa dure  tourmente.

Je Ies ai vues ces ombres affouillant Ia mienne
j'ai vu }'horrible flottaison  de leur neant  dans  I'air.

En vain je tends mon esprit pour  predire quelle ombre formee  me cernera  au passage,
Ies ombres prennent I'eclat tranchant du verre.

(Shadows There  Are)



29

POEMS BY A.  J. M.  SMITH



RUMEURS

Si deja le phenix agonise pour une mort
sans 11emission, ainsi que le dame le messager, si Ia renommee refuse et denie Ia rumeur,

qui done me depecha cet annonciateur
me declarant  par Ia bouche d'un  faussaire le peril conjure par Ia mort du phenix?

(News of the  Phoenix)



CHEMINEMENT

Un pas et puis 1' autre
de plus en plus appesanti sous un solei!plombe et bas.

De plus en plus lourd sauf la tete haut levee cheminement de solitude.

Inconnu le lieu dernier,
sous chaque main le mur parallele.

De !'issue assmee et menant le sort
Ia mort allonge sa foulee.

A la rescousse, o coeur, tourne-toi contre elle
fortifie-toi de sa proximite!

Mais le coeur cede sans lutte
et le souffle passe au silence ...

(journey)

POEMS BY A.  J. M.  SMITH



JE ME  SOUVIENDR]II

Toujours, toujours, je me rappellerai l'hirondelle et sa solitude derivante sur Ia face obscure de Ia riviere
et I'arc grave de son vol circulaire
ne troublait en rien le ruisseau paisible.

Ainsi de ton sourire
a peine incurve d'un calme reve
au long moment de ton ensommeillement dans le survol apaise de ton esprit
lorsque rien ne le vient troubler
ni le moindre souffle d'une pensee
ni meme !'image de l'oiseau solitaire.

(I Shall Remember)







Lil MilLEMilR

by Rina Lasnier


Translated  by John Glassco



I will descend to the bed of the Undersea where night lies close by night­
to the crucible where the sea wreaks her own affliction,
to the amnesic night of the Undersea no longer remembering  the embrace of earth,
nor the embrace of Light when the waters were born into air's meandering
chaos,
when God covered the firmament  with his two hands -before the contradiction  of the breathing  upon the waters,

gr



before that  kiss laid on the sea to disjoin sea from sea-before the Word spawned fish in the womb of the shallows,
before the division of waters by the blade of light-before the contention of waters  through the restraint  of light.

* 	* 	*
All swallowed  spittle of silence-- I will taste once more  the accursed  waters
of my birth;
faulty  water  of birth  ringing  the blood's innocence -you hang  from life like the fruit  of the tree of discord;
is there  a night  newer than  birth-is there a day older than  the soul?
mysterious  motherhood of the flesh-shelter open  to the doors of the first cry, and  death  more maternal still!

* 	* 	*
Betrothed face of the open sea poised on the breath's spiral-Undersea lodged  in the sea-pits of fecundity,
open sea! eye painted  with the blue of legends -moire of images and burnt-out stars;
water  blithe in the deadfall of the brooks-dancer in listless fountains;
plastic flesh of your dance -daring word of your dance and  phoenix of your roving spirit in the green flame of the dance;
lover surrendered to the vertigo of cataracts and  the slow nuptials on river­
beds -faithful to the one zodiacal union  as to your primal stature;
circling water  with no rein but the play of your circular roads-you are the spoor of our fables and the dryness of our mouth;
reversed clouds, we have seen your metamorphoses-and your sleep of
crystal, o mummy couched  on the poles;
ascensiona!water-I have  heard  the murmur of your falsehood  redescending the narrow ear of the sea-shell;
you play at knucklebones  with the shellfish -your hands play with the dead wood of corpses on all the shores of the world;
on all the tables of sand-you take the measure of your own might  and of your breaking combers;
raider  of the sentinel-cliffs-I have seen the girlish shouldering of your tide abrade their stony denial;
fluent  fiancee of the hard  and  precarious  winds-how will you escape the
doom  of your obedience?


32




Purified  by the farthest water-how will you cleanse yourself of the saltness of the dead?
Open sea! I reject  your rose of silver strewn  on the sands -and your aerial
passage dispersed  in foam;
I will be no longer  the seamew of your mirrors-nor the erect sea-horse of your surging Parnassi;
open sea!  I hail the Southern Cross spilled on your breast-and bitterly
I descend  to the oceanic  night of the Undersea!

* 	* 	*
Undersea, sea changeless  and impervious to the lightning as to the bird's wing-sea heavy with young  and  blind to what you bear,
carry  me far from  the current of remembering -and from the long
drift of memories;
tow me into  your tactile  night-into your darkness deeper  than  the double blindness of eye and  ear;
undersea, you that  no longer  climb the flowery hummock  of the meadows - like a thought weary  of images,
you that  no longer  plough  the shore in a clashing of pebbles-a stirring of thought at the whim of vocables,
you no longer  chained by the tides -nor by the shortlived  honour of vertical  revolts,
let me become  your ritual  and  recumbent swimmer-like a secret swathed in the folds of soundless cloth,
with an unfettered step-may I walk your shoreless roads,
undersea-erase my features and  drown  this tear where  the clarities are reviving,
may  I forget in you the wavering frontiers of my own day -and the lucid range  of the sun.













33



STEPHEN LEACOCK


Local Colourist


W.H.Magee






MosT OF STEPHEN  LEACOCK's smprisffigly few dmable pieces of humour  gain their solidity from characters  and themes of the type prom­ inent  in  the  tradition  of  local  colour   fiction. In  turn, his  unique  blend   of humour, as well as a rare insight into life, make his version of local colour memor­ able.  Both  the  local  colour  tradition   and  his  special  strengths  contribute,  for example,  to the success of "My  Financial  Career", the first story in his first vol­ ume of humour,  Literary  Lapses  (I 9 I o). The  timid young man who momentarily loses his wits during  his first visit to a bank  reflects the small  town dread  of big city sophistication  which underlay  both American  and  Canadian local colour at the turn  of the century. Henceforth  he will save money, but he will keep his sav­ ings in a sock. He represents all the virtues admired  by the tradition,  which treated naivete   as  innocence,  stubbornness  as  perseverance,  dullness  as  sobriety,  and moral  conformity  as integrity.  Consequently  Leacock does not look on  the hero as a fool at all. Instead  he presents him to us as a friend,  a companion  for genial humour  rather  than  a  target for satire.
Local colour dominates only the one story in Literary  Lapses,  which is a med­ ley of  jokes, sketches and stories - some genial spoofs and  some sharp satires - drawn  from  literature  as well as from  real life. In  his second volume, Nonsense  Novels   (I 9 I I ) , Leacock  devotes  himself to  one  type  and  one  topic  only,  the spoofing of literary  fads. These  parodies  are  by nature  totally  unrelated  to real life in general  or local colour in particular.  In such  a context  it  therefore  comes as quite  a  surprise  to find  a  direct  reflection  of two  dogmas  dear  to the  local colourists in  "Caroline's  Christmas: or,  the  Inexplicable  Infant". Although  this parody  spoofs the  Victorian  melodrama  of a villain  harrying  a heroine with  an expiring  mortgage,  it becomes briefly something  more  than  that  when the Good Book turns  out  to  be Euclid,  and  a fearsome  temperance roots out  buttermilk:

34

LEACOCK, LOCAL  COLOURIST



"'John,' pleaded  Anna,  'leave  alone  the  buttermilk.  It  only maddens  you. No good ever came of that'." Here  Leacock is enjoying, but not satirizing,  the auto­ matic religion and Puritanical morality of the little towns dear to the local colour­ ists. Temperance is after  all in great degree a fad, like that  of the health  addicts who  idolize buttermilk,  and  fads delight  Leacock. What  delights  him  still more is the comfortable  seriousness of the whole way of life of the small towns in which such  fads  flourished,  and  to  this delight  he devotes his third  book of humour,  Sunshine Sketches of a Little  Town.




LocAL coLOuR, as developed by Maria  Edgeworth  and other Irish and Scottish novelists early in the nineteenth century, had attracted novelists of manners  who  wanted  to exploit  the  untried  literary  topic of special  ways of life  as opposed  to  the  typical  manners  of  London  society. Later  novelists like Anthony Trollope  in the Barsetshire series revelled in a local way of life as superior to that of London.  In the works of the masters the artistic dangers of a concentra­ tion on local manners  and  a theme of local perfection were overcome and hence not  evident.  Both  new  interests  in  fact  resulted  in a  totally  new kind  of story­ telling, one  which stressed peculiar  rather  than  representative  traits.  As a result characters  by design look provincial  rather  than universal. In principle at least, the incidents   which  provide  them  with  conflicts  should  involve  distinctively  local concerns. Descriptions  need to point  up the  unique, which  usually means  taking pride  in  the  manmade environment   rather  than  the  natural.  Themes  typically show the way to a "perfect" society, in  which, as it is pictured,  pastimes only too often  cause  more  concern  than  work,  and  moral  dogmatism  underlies  the  por­ trayal  of manners.
As developed  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  late in the last century,  local colour told of the life of the many small towns in countrysides where the frontier had  been  closed for  at  least  a  generation.  In  the  United  States  hosts of local colourists described  all the older  regions of the country in the last generation  of the nineteenth  century.  Writers like Sarah  Orne Jewett brought out the distinctive features of New England  life, and George Washington Cable recreated  the special life of  the  Creoles  in  the  Old  South.  In  Canada  too  the  local  colourists  were numerous  and  prolific. L.  M.  Montgomery  idolized the quiet  life of Prince  Ed­ ward  Island  in more than  a dozen novels. Duncan  Campbell  Scott wrote In the Village  of Viger in praise of the self-contained life of a French-Canadian  village

35

LEACOCK, LOCAL COLOURIST



soon  and  lamentably to be swallowed  up  by Montreal. In  Ontario E. W. Thom­ son  and  Ralph Connor   praised  the  manliness and  moral integrity of  Glengarry folk,  and  many   another   local  colourist  ransacked the  rest  of  Southern  Ontario for ideal  small  towns. So pervasive  was this preoccupation in life and  in literature that   Hugh   MacLennan a generation later  chose  the  small  town  outlook  and  its moral Puritanism as his distinctive  Canadian trait  in The  Precipice.
In the  local  colour  fiction  the small  towns  appear as islands  of perfection  in  a generally undirected or  even  misdirected   civilization. Behind   this  pride  and  op­ timism  centred  on  small  town  life, there  lurks  in  the  more  perceptive  writings  a dread of the  changes  appearing in the new big cities. No doubt, industrial routine  and  mass  housing  seemed  to the  small  town  onlookers  to  banish  happiness,  and,  worse still, to lead  to a flexible morality. Storytellers took two approaches to their topic.   Militant local  colourists  like  Ralph  Connor  used  their  fiction  as a  pulpit  to preach  the way of perfection  to less fortunate people in the cities, or sometimes  on  the  frontier. They  wrote  vigorous  stories  tightly  unified  by  their  underlying sermons, so  that   often  their  works  understandably  became best-sellers  in  those Puritanical times,  even  outside  the  small  towns. The other  local  colourists,  like L. M.   Montgomery, D.  C.  Scott,  and   E.  W. Thomson, were  complacent and gently  humorous. They  crammed their  stories  with  the  placid  atmosphere of the society  they  loved. They  were  the local colourists  who  had  no moralizing motives to interfere with  a purely  artistic  aim.
As  artists  these  complacent local  colourists  faced   two  dilemmas. First,  their absorption with  features  peculiar  to a way  of life invited  them  to stress the local rather than   the  universal,  and  usually  they  chose  the  superficial rather than  the essential   and   permanent. In  characterization they  often  stressed  the  quaint, in customs  the  bizarre. They  were  content   with  the  charming in  scenery  and  the dogmatic in  morality.   Ministers   and  housewives  also  were  drawn   as  charming rather than  devoted, except when  the perfection  of their  lives was stressed. Special customs  like gathering maple  syrup  provided  incidents and  scenery  at  once,  and so did  special  moral  problems  like the  tavern, or social  phenomena like the Sun­ day  School.
As a second  dilemma, the  complacent local  colourists  lacked  any  obvious  pat­
tern  or  device  to  unify  their  stories. The  staple  unit  of local  colour  fiction  is the self-contained  anecdote or  vignette,  in  which   an  odd  character does something peculiar. The   most  obvious  structure  is  a  volume   of  independent sketches  or loosely connected stories, which  when  bound  together  can radiate the desired atmosphere of  a  charming  and  unchanging way  of life.  But  the  novel  with  its

LEACOCK, LOCAL  COLOURIST



larger   plot  requires  a  dynamic development rather   than  a  series of static situa­ tions.  A plot  depends on  conflict  and  its conflict  must .lead to change. Neither  is inherent in  complacent local  colour,  and  few if any of the  writers  who  practised it at the  turn  of the century had  the ingenuity to invent  an appropriate large-scale plot  on  their  own.  Traditional if  alien  patterns were  of  course  available. The  tried  plots  of  Victorian fiction  tempted   many  a local  colourist,  but  they  shifted rather  than   solved  the  problem of  unity.  They  belonged   to  conventions which were  at  odds  with  local  colour,  since  they stressed the  representative rather than the  eccentric in  human behaviour. Nor  were  their  typically  melodramatic con­ flicts a suitable  mode  for  the  complacent local colourists. Duncan Campbell Scott spoiled  much  of  the  unity  of  In  the  Village  of  Viger  by concocting plots  about  madmen  and   murderers  which   clashed  incongruously  with   the  charm   of  his atmosphere and  his French-Canadian  characters.
The   local  colourists  wanted  to  record  a society in  which  neither  disaster  nor
evil  occurred. Tragic patterns were  unthinkable, and  so too  was  robust  satire: there  were  no evils, it seemed,  to attack.  For,  luxuriating in  the  best of all com­ fortable  worlds,   genial   humour  naturally became   the  staple   mode.  Again   the local   colourists   were  tempted  into   a  difficult  artistic  form.   Genial  humour is fairly  rare  in  literature; it  is  much  more  elusive  than  satiric   wit.  Several  local colourists,  like L. M.  Montgomery, managed plot and  humour  nicely at  the level of  children's stories,  particularly when  growing  up  was  the  unifying  device.  But most, including L. M.  Montgomery, were childish  when  they turned to adult  life. It took a great  genial  humourist to meet  the varied challenges- a Mark  Twain or  a  Stephen  Leacock.






SuNSHINE SKETCHES  OF   A   LITTLE  TOWN  contains all  the familiar ingredients of  typical  local  colour,  although in  this  version  they  look a little  strange because  the  most  memorable characters are  more  elaborated and more  integrated into  a  larger purpose  than  usual.  Yet  in  the  background there are several  quaint characters who have  not been developed. The village drunk­ here  schoolteacher  Diston   who  never  gets  a  raise-is  a  staple  of  local  colour fiction;  and  the  undertaker Golgotha Gingham is similarly extraneous to plot and theme.  More  developed  but still peripheral vignettes include Yodel the auctioneer, Mullins   the  banker, and   fiery  Judge  Pepperleigh.  A  local  custom  which  comes

37

LEACOCK, LOCAL COLOURIST



right out of the tradition  appears in the opening  chapter,  when the steam merry­ go-round   comes  to  Mariposa  town  and  the  calculating  innkeeper  Josh  Smith treats all the children. Such characters and incidents  justify the claim of the open­ ing sentence that  there are "a dozen towns just like it",  but they also recall Cana­ dian literature  as much as Canadian life. They  help to evoke the familiar  golden atmosphere  of "a  land of hope and sunshine",  as Leacock  put it in his preface. But  the  atmosphere  gains  much  more  strength  from  the  more  developed  inci­ dents, which  are  all Leacock's own.
From the first Leacock presents Mariposa not so much in the usual formless collection of odd  characters  and  bizarre  incidents  as through  a  pervading  sense of a whole life. With  a typical sense of being  at  the centre  of the  universe, the townsfolk talk of "main  street"  and  the "lake"  from  the  first page on, ignoring the proper  Indian  names. They display their self-centred  pride even more actively by  comparing   the  width  of  Main  Street  favourably   with  that  of  Wall  Street. These  mannerisms  are merely amusing,  but  Leacock  uses other  special customs and  features  of  the environment  to  help  define  the four  seasons of the year in Mariposa.  By winter  the  electric light  is as strong  as coal oil lamps,  by spring the farmers from  Missanaba County stroll through  Mariposa like dangerous lumbermen, by summer the seven cottages on the lake are rented,  and by autumn the Salvation  Army sings on street comers  under  naphtha lamps. In such a des­ cription  Leacock goes beyond typical local colour, and beyond his typical humour  too, using both  as a means of comprehending a whole society.
In  terms  of characterization,  the simply quaint  figures like Diston  the drunk
schoolteacher  merely lurk  in  the  background   of  the  stories. For  the  two  bank clerks, in  contrast,  Leacock uses a sort  of inverted  quaintness  by stressing their city-like similarity  (the one with the cameo  pin and  the face of a horse, and  the other  one  with  the other  cameo  pin and  the face  of another  horse) . A central figure like Josh  Smith may look at first like "a  character" (and  "an  over-dressed pirate"), but he quickly becomes a rounded,  vigorous and  amiable  representative of the small  town  at its best. Most unexpected  of all, the town  barber  Jefferson Thorpe  plunges right through  the layers of quaintness  and  reveals a pathetic man of high  principles who automatically  assumes the money losses of townsfolk who have speculated  foolishly on his advice.
This example of exceptional integrity indicates both a final trait which Leacock shares  with  the  lesser local  colourists and  at  the  same  time  the  insight  which makes  his version  great.  Like them  he  assumes that  no evil or  tragedy  worthy of the label is possible in the small town of the story. Leacock can  be funny  on

LEACOCK, LOCAL  COLOURIST



this topic  too, putting  the  perspective of humour  between  himself and  the small town. When  the Mariposa Belle sinks in six feet of mud in the "lake",  he tells us that  disasters such as mass drownings never occur in Mariposa.  The  quip sounds satiric,  but  in effect it is whimsical. Leacock clung to his love of the small towns for a lifetime  just because dreadful  things really did  not happen  in the "land  of hope and sunshine".  Yet he had the insight to recognize that  men can be double­ faced in Mariposa  just as they can be anywhere. The  most successful citizens are in  fact  hypocrites:  Judge   Pepperleigh  orders  the tavern  shut  down  because he was kept out  after  hours, and Josh Smith ensures that  it keeps operating  by ban­ queting  the  leading  citizens daily in his restaurant  until  his  liquor  license is re­ newed. Leacock laughs at  both  men, but he laughs with  kindness. He  recognizes human   traits  which  almost  every local colourist  pretended  did  not  exist in  his town, yet they do not infuriate  him as they do most humourists,  who unlike him are satirists. To him they do not, cannot, constitute evil.
There  is in fact a rare  perception in Sunshine  Sketches  that  has fundamentally nothing  to do with humour, which is only the means of expressing it. In  contrast to  the  typical  thin  glimpses of small town life, Leacock's  view comprehends  all of small town life, giving us for example a sense of the whole town,  rather  than just a family  at  play, on  the  occasion  of the annual  picnic of the  Knights  of Pythia.s. At a more serious level, nothing fires interest in a real small town more than  an  election, but  very few storytellers besides Leacock  have  told  about  one. Josh Smith wins the riding of Mariposa with a typical double-dealing  trick, but deservedly, for he is also the  ablest candidate.  Smith is in fact  a hypocrite  using his talents to serve the  best interests of Mariposa,  as when  he solves the crisis of the  church  building  fund  by setting  fire to  the  old  building  for  the  insurance money. In  drawing  him  Leacock  has indeed  made  hypocrisy a  neutral  quality, which  can  even end  in  benevolence, as when Smith  keeps the lavish restaurant open after his liquor license has been renewed.
This  local  colour  is in  fact  both  positive and  mature.  For  Leacock  the small
town  offered  the  best of  all  practical worlds. The  sad,  ruined  Jeff  Thorpe  is really fortunate  not to have gained the means to leave Mariposa:

It  seemed to spoil one's idea of Jeff that copper and  asbestos and  banana lands should form the goal of his thought when, if he knew it, the little shop and the sunlight of Mariposa was so much better.

The  real  tragedy  is that  of the old boys who have left and,  in  their  prosperous old  age in  the  city, long  for small  town life. Sunshine  Sketches in fact  ends on

39

LEACOCK, LOCAL COLOURIST



this  unhappy scene,  with  their  dissatisfied  dreams of a  better  way of life back  in
Mariposa, and  of the trainmen calling out  the station:
And,  as we listen, the cry grows fainter  and  fainter  in our ears and  we are sitting here again in the leather chairs of the Mausoleum  Club, talking of the little Town in  the  Sunshine  that  once we knew.
Independence and   Leisure  were  the  keystones  of  Leacock's philosophy   of  life, and  he  tells  us  in  his "Preface" that  he  enjoys  "more in  the  four  comers of  a single  year  than  a business man  knows in his whole  life".  That is why he escaped as often  as he could  from  Montreal to his country home  near  Orillia.
When applied   to  such  a  heart-felt   purpose, the  nonsense  humour is also  un­ usually   positive  and  mature. Although   a  few  of  the  quips  and  brief  character sketches  in  Sunshine  Sketches are  as gratuitous as some  of the background local colour,  most  of  them  serve  the  larger  purpose. The  humour  itself can  penetrate the  degrees  of  pettiness  in  the  citizens, but  its genial  tone  provides  for  an  accep­  tance  of them  all. Thus  the sinking of the Mariposa Belle reveals the shallow  faith  of the  lesser citizens,  as when  the student minister  in  the lifeboat  assures the  pas­ sengers  that   they  are  "in  the  hands  of  Providence",  but  "he  was  crouched and ready   to spring  out  of  them  at  the  first  moment".  Meanwhile Josh  Smith  with his more  practical faith  corks the hull, lets the ship float,  and  sails it home  before the  lifeboat   passengers  can  walk  back.  In  the  same incident, Leacock  with  his nonsense  combinations extends  his  perspective  momentarily to  make  fun  of  the national image: the  boat  began  to sink  just as  everyone  was singing  "0-Can­ a-da";  but  those  who  stay  with  the  ship  are  still  singing  it  when  Smith  steers the  refloated   Mariposa  Belle into  harbour.  Here a  rare  symbolism  adds  to  the maturity of the  humour. At the same  time the  sense of latent  determination here and  in  almost  every  sketch,  however  oddly  implied, builds  up  the  mood  of sta­  bility  necessary  for  a  positive  presentation  of  the  small-town way  of  life,  and gives  an  exception to Carl  Van  Doren's sound   criticism:
The  local  colourists  were  not  very realistic  observers.  Ordinarily provincial,  but without   the  rude  durability  or  homely  truthfulness of  provincialism  at  its  best, they  studied  their  world  with  benevolence  rather   than  with  passion.  Nor  were they much  differentiated  among themselves by highly individual  ideas or methods.
And  yet at  the  same  time  technically  Leacock's humour is still the same  com- bination of incongruous extremes  as in his score  of other  books. Anthologists can select  individual sketches  from   Sunshine  Sketches  and   print   them  side  by  side with ones from  all the other  books without jarring a single tone of humour. Never­ theless  the   anthologists do  injustice   to  Sunshine   Sketches.  It  does  develop   an

LEACOCK, LOCAL  COLOURIST



over-all unity  which goes far  beyond the unity of tone in Nonsense Novels. Lea­ cock's philosophy of the happiest way of life makes the chief contribution to this larger  unity. Yet although  the special Leacock humour  produces a  unified  tone, and  the sense of wholeness in the local colour scene a unified  atmosphere,  both are  essentially static,  and  although  a single set of characters  and  incidents  may unify as many  as three sketches for a change, and Josh  Smith and  others  recur in several different  stories, Sunshine  Sketches is still  episodic. Nor does Leacock show  any  inclination  to  develop original  plots in  the individual  stories. Chiefly he borrows conventional  patterns  like those he had parodied  in Nonsense Novels,  still inverting  them amusingly.  Not only does the sinking ship fail to sink, but  the bank robbery is after all not a robbery, and the hopeless romance of young lovers turns out to have been prearranged  by the parents. The  effect just suits Sunshine  Sketches  with  its happy  balance  of many  interests, but it  promises little help for future  books.  Leacock  created  a  great  book  because  his concern  for  his  topic absorbed  his regular  talents  and  gave  them  direction.  He  did  not  hit on  a  plot pattern  or a philosophy which offered  a means to overcome his continuing  prob­
lem of disunity  and  shallowness.




E ANTHOLOGISTS
 also do injustice  to  Arcadian  Adventures

with  the  Idle  Rich  ( 1914)  when  they isolate its separate  sketches. This  volume too has an over-all unity of atmosphere, this time the sense of city rather  than  of small-town  life. Yet,  with  the  larger  scope, Leacock did  not create  so  compre­ hensive a sense of varied  sections of society as in Sunshine  Sketches. Instead  he concentrated  on the life of the plutocrats in their twin bastions of the Mausoleum Club  on  Plutoria  Avenue  and  the Grand  Palaver Hotel  downtown. Nor  did  he suggest the  bustle  of  city life, but  only the slumbering  leisure of  the  Club,  the Avenue,  and  the  Church  of the  rich with  rooks in  the elm trees.  What  he did suggest admirably  is the economic essence of big city success. The financiers, and their  financial  manipulations of their social, educational,  religious  and  political lives, provide  stories  through  which  Leacock both  comprehends  urban  life and laughs  at  it. This  time,  however, the laughter  is  unfriendly,  harsh,  satiric.  Lea­  cock saw plenty of evil in the city: in dishonest finance, in materialistic ministers, in ruthless politicians. The  city leaders are hypocrites, and in this context Leacock is not gentle with  hypocrisy. Arcadian  Adventures offers only a negative attitude to  the life it  depicts,  and  so it  achieves none of the deeper  insight of Sunshine  Sketches.

41

LEACOCK, LOCAL COLOURIST



Indeed,  Arcadian  Adventures shows up in every way the brilliance of Sunshine Sketches. The  negative attitude  to city life lacks the intensity  which the positive philosophy gives to the earlier book. Nor is there any advance in formal unity, although  once  again  characters  recur from sketch  to sketch, and some plots run through  several sketches. Most damaging  of all, Leacock lost control of the tone of his humour, in a situation in which, given his satirical  perspective, he could not afford  to  be  affable  or  sentimental. Tomlinson,   the  farmer   whose simplicity fools the tycoons into  regarding  him as a wizard  of finance, looks absurd  in his thousand-dollar-a-day suite  in  the  Grand  Palaver  Hotel,  but  there  is  no satire directed at him. He is really as sad as a Jeff Thorpe who succeeds in getting away to  the  big  city and  finds it  appalling.  He  is the  product  of a different  literary outlook from that  which exposes the arid materialism  of the business leaders who dominate  most of the sketches, and it is an anomaly  to find him in the same book with  them.  When  the satire  and  the  nonsense humour   appear  inside the same sketch the  jolt is even greater  and  the result may indeed  be nonsense. The  spoof of  the  religious fads of  bored  wealthy  housewives in  "The Yahi-Bahi  Oriental Society  of  Mrs.  Rasselyer-Brown"  is merely  silly. The   women  really  want  to escape  from  their  unhappy  city life, and  so does Tomlinson,  who is contented when he can in the end return  to his dear old farm. Ultimately,  Arcadian Adven­ tures shows up Leacock's dread  of big city life just as thoroughly  as all  his most earnest  writing does, starting  with the timid young man of "My Financial Career".
Arcadian  Adventures  provides a measure of the limits of Leacock's ability. He had  tried his hand  at a second study in depth,  and  he had  failed in comparison with his earlier triumph  in Sunshine Sketches. Afterwards  he abandoned  himself to being an incidental  funny man without much of a philosophy or a theme. As a result his twenty later  volumes of humour  lack  both  the depth  of vision and  the formal  unity which gave substance to Sunshine  Sketches. By his last volume My Remarkable  Uncle,  the small towns are only a sad  memory, sad because modern Canada is so much  less comfortable than  they were  ( cf. "The Old Farm  and  the New Frame"). Even in Sunshine  Sketches the love of the small town way of life sounds  a little  nostalgic, a longing for  a  way  of life which  is already  past, the same  sad  love  which  dominates  Ralph  Connor's Glengarry   (in  the  preface  to The  Man   from Glengarry). But in Sunshine  Sketches  Leacock still had  enough faith  in his theme for it to intensify his people and  plots and  humour  and so pro­ duce  a living book. Ultimately,  Leacock could be great  only when his characters  and  his  jests were  vitalized by the ideals, and  even  the quaintness,  of  the local colour  tradition.

42



ON	W. W. E.  ROSS


Peter Stevens



LDEDICATION of N'w  Wav' Canada by its edito,,  Raymond
Souster,  to  W.  W.  E.  Ross as Canada's first modem  poet  confirms  to a  large
extent the recognition  of Ross as a pioneer in Canadian poetry, a fact which was recognized  by Souster  in  1956 when he published some of Ross's early work in the  volume,  Experiment. With  the renewed interest in imagism by the  younger poets of the 196o's it is obvious that  any Canadian poet who seems to grow out of imagist ideas and  apparently  uses the American rather  than  the English voice­ box will be hailed  as a  hero and  fore-runner.  Frank  Davey's article  in a  recent Tamarack   Review  (Spring  1965)  assembles a glorious and  very mixed  array  of Canadian poets whose careers have been influenced by Black Mountain, a move­ ment  arising  in  part  from  imagism,  W. C. Williams, Ezra  Pound  and,  latterly, Creeley, Olson and  Duncan. Davey casts a wide net and lands many strange  fish in the  Black  Mountain catch;  Daryl Hine,  Milton Acorn  and  Alfred  Purdy  all apparently   have  fallen  under  its influence. Davey's chronology  seems sadly mis­ placed, for he also includes the careers of F. R. Scott and  W. W. E. Ross.
Both of these poets, of course, have used imagist techniques, and Scott has been receptive recently to new ideas in poetics. Ross's contribution  to Canadian poetry, when he has been "placed", has nearly always been in the field of imagism;  only in this sense can Ross be linked with the Black Mountain  movement, and we shall see that  Ross attempted many  different  things in his poetic career.  Experiment, although  an  important collection of his work, is misleading, as Ross maintained that Souster was only interested  in his "native" side. Time and again,  Ross states that  those poets now  revered  by the  younger poets of Canada, were never  real influences on  his work.  "I felt hostile to, and  irritated  by William  Carlos  Wil­ liams".'  The  patterns  of verse he uses in Laconics he himself "felt consciously ... as antagonistic  to the tone and form -if  any -of  the poems by  William Carlos Williams I saw in The  Dial," so that  any influence came from  "Williams  some­ what adversely, Pound quite adversely."

43

ON W. W. E. ROSS



However, Ross  insists on  things  in  his  poetry; a  hard  straight look  at  things around him as part  of a search  for reality is present  in many  of his poems. He was really  the first poet  in Canada to use real factual things  unadorned by metaphor. The I 9 I 4- I 8  War  taught  some  poets  to look  objectively  at  the  facts  of war  but according to most  text-books  and  anthologies  Canada managed to  produce only the  Brooke-ish  "In  Flanders Fields"  and  a  few  patriotic poems  by  F.  G.  Scott. Certain English  poets managed to look at landscapes ravaged by war in an objec­ tive and  factual way;  it can  be seen in some poems  by Edmund Blunden, Robert Nichols  and  Robert Graves.  The  nearest  approach to  this  kind  of  writing by  a Canadian was  "The Village   I9I5" by  H.  Smalley  Sarson   which  appeared in Soldier  Poets  (I9I6):

The  nave, choked with charred  rafters from the roof, Pleads untended  to the wind and rain
Mutely; shelter even bats despise.

Standing stricken, the weary shrapnelled  houses Seem skeletons, grim and ghastly shapes Beckoning with scraggy fingers to the sky

Ross  wrote  a  poem  of this  kind,  "Poperinghe I 9I 7",  indicating his early search for a hard  reality in his poetry:

Night in the town and not a light, but a glimmering
behind drawn blinds
and gleams for a moment from opened doors ...

The street paved with cobblestones winds narrowly across the town ; this street leads up to the line
to Passchendaele,
and the battle in mud.

One characteristic tone  runs  through this  piece;  the  scene  is pared  down  to  its basic  simplicities.  Each  line is self-contained, yet each  line elaborates, or qualifies the  preceding line so that  although on the surface  the  poem  is presenting a static


44

ON W. W. E. ROSS



scene,  it,  m  fact,  is  a  constantly shifting  pattern with  the  focus  moving  in  to pick  up  a detail,  then  altering to a different  viewpoint,  in order  to show  a wider panorama, making the  poem  specific and  general  at  the  same  time.  The  move­ ment  of this poem  is also characteristic of Ross. Essentially each  line has two beats but   the  stresses  are   variable, appropriate  to  the  changing  perspectives  within the  poem.
His early  verse arose out  of an admiration for E. E. Cummings and  Marianne
Moore: "it  was  these  two  that   really  excited  me  most  keenly  among  contemp­ porary   poets  (though I  was  already   acquainted with  Lindsay,  Frost,  Pound   (a little), Amy  Lowell  and  Sandburg, not  to  mention  the  Untermeyers  and  Sara  Teasdale!)" He  first  submitted  poems  to  The  Dial as  a  result  of  seeing  some Cummings poems in that  magazine in January 1926,  and  his poems appeared in the  April  and  August  issues of 1928.  At first, there  seems to be  little  connection between  the  verse of Cummings and  Ross but  perhaps  Robert Graves' and  Laura Riding's phrase  about   Cummings-"a  deadly  accuracy""-helps to show  the connection. Many   of  Ross's  early  poems  have  a  kind  of  exactitude, centred   in unfrilled  reality and  they are expressed in strict patterns of variable metre. Graves and   Riding illustrate in  their  book  that  Marianne  Moore's concern  in  poetry is  with   discipline,   an   attempt to  reduce  poetry's   mystery:  "enigmas  are  not poetry." This  must  have   been  why  her  poetry  appealed to  him.  Ross's  poems, then,  are statements of hard  accuracy  rigidly disciplined.  Time and  again, in his attitudes to poetry,  he maintains he is looking for "cleanliness  (aesthetically speak­  ing)   from  the  Canadian poetry  mess." He  objects  to "prettified" verse and  finds it a "disheartening experience" to read  through the collected  poems of Sir Charles Roberts. Of  his own  contemporaries in  the  2o's  he liked  only  Raymond Knister and  in  recent  years  he seems  to have  admired Daryl  Hine  and  Jay  Macpherson. Of  the  older  poets  he  thought Heavysege  underrated, for  in  him  he  found   the "sharpness" and  "cleanness" he  himself  reached  in some  of his  poelllS:


Tree  tops  move
to and fro in the afternoon  breeze, delicately covered
with small new green leaves,

against the white
of rounded  clouds, slow-passing across the great blue
expanse of the sky

45

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



sunlight-filled
and filled with moving air
invisible
yet strong to sway the tree-tops.

This  poem uses the method of self-containment  within each line, and yet each line is adding  a further  detail to the one preceding.  We have noted this method in  the  poem, "Poperinghe 19 q", but  this poem also shows an extension of this technique.  The  poem is circular  in its movement,  for the same detail opens and closes the poem. The  movement of the tree tops has been set in relation to differ­ ent segments of the motion:  the breeze turns  the leaves, the colour of  the leaves is set  against  the  white  of the  clouds which  in  tum  move  across the  blue sky, bright  with  sun,  an  indefinite brightness contained  in  the invisible air  which is causing  the  movement  of  the  tree-tops.  Each  separate   word  carries  an  equal amount  of weight  within the meaning  of the  poem, although  the rhythm  of the poem  varies between  two- and  three-beat  lines to suggest the  rocking motion of the  trees. Our  attention  is fixed in the  first stanza  by the  equally  heavy stresses on  all the syllables of the opening line and  those in the last  line of the stanza  in "small  new green leaves." These stand  out  against  the other  details in the poem until they are caught in the sense of flux of the whole scene and the trees' motion is "placed" by the more regular rhythm of the closing line. Thus, it is not a mere return  to the same detail but a coherent extension to make us see the whole simul­ taneously.  Here  again  we can see the connection  between  Ross and  Cummings in their  search for simultaneity, Cummings  by  fragmenting  syntactical  elements, Ross  by fragmenting  the scene itself to  re-assemble it in  a  new presentation  to the  reader.  This  is obviously connected  with  part  of the technique  of the Black Mountain group,  but Ross was already  doing this in the 192o's. Many of Ross's poems in Experiment and  Laconics use this method  including  such anthologized pieces as "The Fish"  (Penguin)   and  "Pine  Gum" (Oxford), and such  a poem as "A  Night":

A summer night, a tall pine
black against
the cold starlight ...

After  these opening  lines the poem adds  details of the tree outlined  against  the sky. Silence and  cold prevail  and  the scene is reflected in  the quiet  lake. These details then lead into the closing stanza:

ON  W.  W. E.  ROSS



The sky, star-brilliant, is doubled  below
in the still water of the lake;
the  pine-tree stands
against  the sky; through its branches are seen the stars.


It  is this kind  of writing  which  led Raymond  Souster, quite  correctly, in  his remarks  "About  The  Author" in Experiment, to link Ross with W. C. Williams, for  as a later  critic  has suggested about  Williams:  "Many actions are going on at once in a perpetual  present, the poetic space, and though  the images are neces­ sarily sequential  they form  a  chord  which exists in  a single moment." 3



BuT ROSS ARRIVED at these ideas independently and through a reading  of other  poets. He mentions in a letter that  he had  been influenced  to
some  extent  by a  minor  French  poet, Femand   Divoire, who is described  in  a survey of modern  French  poetry as working with the principles of "simultaneism," which  had  been formulated  by Martin  Barzun  in  rgr2.4  Ross also tried  other methods  of achieving simultaneity  by fragmenting  the lines themselves, building delaying pauses into  the structure  of the poem, as can  be seen in various  poems from  Experiment:  "Flowers", "Lions",  "Spring", "Stars", "Death" "The End", "In  The  Ravine" (Penguin) and  a few others. In two poems in Experiment  he split  his poem  into  two  distinct  columns:   "Good  Angels"  and  "Spring  Song". Both of these poems can  be read  in separate  columns, but  each column  adds  a further  detail  when  read side by side, apparently  in an effort to break  down the sequential   nature   of  poetry.  This  method  works particularly   well in  "Spring
Song"  which opens:

One  day walking along
the track
I passed a pond slimy greenish
 in the spring walking
the railroad track
near the town looking at
a pond
of greenish  water a large pond.


47

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



Another  technical  aspect of Ross's search for cleanness and accuracy is his deliberate  lining in one or two poems to give equal  weight  to all words, for, he seems to suggest by this method, if all aspects of a scene are of equal importance in presenting the whole experience, then every word must have equal value. Thus, lines can end  with  prepositions and definite articles for they must have the same emphasis  as all the  naming  and  acting  words. Such  a method  also involves the reader  more in the poem as an action itself, running  the sense of the words from line to line, opening  a moment  into a larger  poetic space:  Ross tries to capture sound,  not  by  alliteration,  but  by this method  in  "Pines." It can  be seen  at  a relatively simple level in "The  Creek";  it is used well in Experiment  in "Wander­ ing",  "Winter Scene"  and  "Butterfly."  It is particularly  suited  to  the subject of this last poem:

Butterfly making for flowers to
suck the sweet juice of the
blossom

how great then is your pleasure in all your wandering

course among colors and greenery
through the sweet­
scented
aerial

path of your fluttering wings-
now in the languorous summer!

He  also uses a longer-lined  pattern  to present  his view of certain  scenes. Again there is an element of splitting by a kind of staggering of the lines, perhaps slightly similar  to the staggering of lines we find in some of the later  poems of Williams.

ON W. W. E. ROSS



There are several  poems  of this nature in  Experiment, including his presentation of Sunnyside:

A train goes rumbling on along
the viaduct.    Across the bridge of gaunt  black iron people pass
in autos or in streetcars, packed, for this is Sunday afternoon
and everybody out of doors.

Not  all of Ross's  poems  of this early period  are concerned with simultaneity of experience. Sometimes the sequence  of events is a necessary part  of the experience. His  most-anthologized poem,  "The Diver" (Penguin and  Oxford), falls into  this category and  he has  written several  others  like it. He  was an admirer of Wallace Stevens  and  perhaps this  method  of writing  is related  in  some  way  to Stevens's insistence  on  continuing change  and  fluidity.  In  "The Diver" the  poet  searches the  various   levels,  "into  the  green" the  "strange light", drifting "among the cooler  zones"  finally  breaking

from the green glimmer

Into  the light,
White and ordinary of the day.

This  insistence  on  colour  is  also  reminiscent   of  Stevens,  and  in  his search   for reality,  Ross  uses similar  images  to Stevens:  the  moon,  water,  mirror-reflec­ tions,  clouds,  and  sky  among others.  Ross seems  to sense  other  worlds  beneath the intensely  factual world  of much  of his poetry and  this may explain  the change that  comes over his verse after  Experiment and  Laconics.
Before  examining that   later  verse, however,  there  are  still other  things  to  be said  about  these  two  volumes.  I  have  already  indicated that  it is a simplification to  label  Ross  an  imagist, because  of  the  experimental nature of  his  verse,  par­ ticularly  in  the  direction of technical innovation. Most of his anthologized  poems tend  to be what  could  be called  scenic or descriptive  pieces and  indeed  many  of the  poems  of  interest   technically speaking   can  be  classed  in this  way.  But  the two  volumes  under discussion  contain other  material. There are  one  or  two  re­ flections  on  mankind in  a Stephen Crane manner:

It appears  that our fears are well placed, are well based ;

49

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



we must now kill one another because Cain  killed Abel his brother.

There  are  translations  from  Greek  and  Latin  that,  without  being outstanding, stand  up  well in  comparison  with  other  translations  appearing   in  anthologies. These  translations  are  related  to  his interest  in  classical themes  and  there  is a section  of poems in  Laconics  concerned  with  classical figures. Ross had  always tried  to adapt  classical metres to his own verse; the movement of his poems does not  necessarily come out of the imagist demand  "to  compose in the sequence of the  musical  phrase,"  although  he always kept in  mind  the oral  rhythms  within poetry.  He  always  read  "poems  simply  by  the  natural rhythm,  or  stresses, of the language." I remember  him, when I visited him in July  1966, getting heated about  stress in  verse and  demonstrating  what  he  meant  by making  me read  a poem by Goethe,  then reading  it himself. Many  of his metrical  experiments  are based  on  Greek  metrics. The  series of  poems,  of  which  "Sunnyside"   (quoted earlier)  is a part, was written in 1925 as a "middle stage between Greek metres­ Aristophanes,  I think, and  the 'Laconics' form which  I have always called 'Two­ beat'." He  also  wrote  a  series of  about  a  hundred   poems  he  called  "Allegro" in  an  adaptation of Greek hexameters which  he called  "light sixes". The  poem, "Narcissus",  is one of the poems in this series and  although  it is printed  in short lines in  Experiment, each stanza  an approximate hexameter, I  will print  it here in hexameter form :

Now you are  reaching to grasp  it,  now touching the unruffied  water. Ah! but the image is gone and  the water  lies ruffied and  broken. Where,  where  now is the image  that  held  you thus silent in rapture? Gone is that  vision.    You could  not attain to the  joy of its capture Know  now that  image was only your own face  Narcissus.

There  are other sections in Laconics devoted to the city and machinery, includ­ ing "The  Saws Were Shrieking"  (Penguin), a poem arising out of his experience in a sawmill when  he was a student in his last year of high school, and a section he later  named  "Garden" (in copies of Laconics, the last section is called "Vari­ ous",  but  Ross asked booksellers to ink in the title "Garden" in its place)  which contains his view of art, and presumably his view of poetry:

What  is it, then, a work of art?

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



A work of art
is a consistency
among incommensurables, or it is that
which remains equal to itself.

But  it  is  probably  the  opening  section  of  Laconics, entitled   "North", which most  readers in  Canada accept   as  the  truly  Canadian note  in  Ross.  It is  this opening  section  that  seems  to  fit his concern  with  "North American" style  and "the sharper tang  of Canada" that  he mentions  in the  Foreword to the  volume.
These  poems  are  full  of  rocky  and  wind-swept landscapes, akin  to  A. J. M.
Smith's "The Lonely  Land":

The iron rocks slope sharply down into the gleaming
of northern  water

and

Harsh, stern this tree whose branches are bare and  twisted by the savage wind
of northern  winter.

Ross's  knowledge of  northern Ontario was gained  on  two surveying  trips  in  the summers  of  I9I2 and   I9I3. The  first  trip  took  him  to Algonquin, to  the  area from  which  Tom  Thomson had started  his first canoe  trip into  the wilderness  the year  before.  In I 9I 3 Ross  went  to the  area  to be made  famous  in  the  paintings of  the  Group of  Seven-the northern shore of  Lake  Huron in  the  Algoma  district.  The  poems  themselves  were  written, according to Ross, on a single night  in  April   I928, after  he  had  had  a  long  conversation about  Canadianism with some  friends.  However, it  is obvious  that  he found  this subject-matter congenial to the  kind  of verse he was trying  to write  at that  time. The  hardness and  clean­ ness of landscape fitted  his conception of verse, free but controlled, close to natural speech  rhythms but  "deliberately patterned" on  Greek  metrical systems. In  fact, the  first  poem  in  this  series  of northern poems  is at  one  and  the same  time  an invitation to  the  reader into  this  new clean  world  of  both  poetry  and  the  north,

ON  W. W. E.  ROSS



to be accepted for what it is, devoid of romanticism  and enjoyed as a novel ven­
ture  into  undiscovered realms:

Plunging into
the shining water one will feel
a shock of coldness, sudden, striking
his body's every
part,  with  the coldness of northern water.

There  is delight in the sudden  awareness here, akin to the new realms expressed in  "The Diver."  It is close to D. H.  Lawrence's  remark  in  his essay "Making Pictures": "It  is like diving into a pond -there you start frantically  to swim.... being rather  frightened  and very thrilled ... The  knowing eye watches sharp  as a needle; but the picture comes clean out of instinct, intuition  and  physical action." There  is fear and  thrill in these poems. His eye sharp  as a needle is firmly on the object.  His  reactions  are  clean out  of instinct,  and  the  land  holds within  it, as the poems do by the nature of their technique, physical action:

As one plunges venturesome into, timorously into
the beautiful water
invitingly lying-
the northern water - the water  is chill,
but what does it matter?




Ross's TRAINING  As A  SCIENTIST    helps  him  to  avoid  any discursive  material.  He  is trying  to gauge  his own  sensations  to  these external scenes  as  accurately  as  possible, so that  the  movement  of  the  poems not  only lends itself to direct  and  simple naming of things but  also is sensuous enough  to include  personal  reactions.  He  may  have the eye of a scientist, but it is an  eye which is also aware of itself and what it records. Marianne Moore's review of Laconics  in  Poetry  (August  1931)  contains several statements  that  best sum up Ross's work up to 1930:  "these  poems ... are evidently  disciplines in the art of poetic  exactitude.... Science's  method  of  attaining  to  originality  by  way  of

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



veracity  is pleasing,  and  it is here enhanced by the considering conscience  which feels as  well  as sees; ... The   artist's  tendency  is always  to  be seeking  better  ex­ plicitness  and  simpler   simplicities,  and  the  studious  imagination that   Mr.  Ross has gives pleasure, besides suggesting a method." (pp.  280-1).
Marianne Moore  also reviewed  Ross's next volume, Sonnets ( 1932), for Poetry
(May 1933) and  found  it a good  volume  with  just "an  occasional  defect." This is a  very  kind  view of  this  volume;  even  Ross hiinself  regarded it  in later  years as a mere series of technical exercises, although there are times when  the language and   movement of  a  poem retains some flavour  from   his  earlier   verse,  as  in
"Andromeda":

The large sun sinks.	Across the wide calm sea
Its red reflection creeps toward the rock
Where, pale as a narcissus on its stalk, Is bound the maiden gazing fearfully.
In  "Sappho" there is a command of sonnet  structure in the description of Sappho herself in  the  octave  emphasized by the  restlessness of the  metre  contrasted to the closing calm  of the sextet. There are occasional  arresting  lines;  when,  for instance, the  human soul  is described   as being  "Soft-hidden deep  in  matter as in  wool." Marianne Moore  quoted  the whole of "Prometheus" as an example of Ross's son­ net  writing  but  this is the  best sonnet  in  the volume. There are  too many  poems in  it  which  are  loose in  structure, wordy,  repetitious,  full  of strained  inversions  for  the  sake of  rhyme,  and  sometimes  heavy  with  tinkling  adverbs.
It  is interesting to note,  however,  that  Ross was writing  some  of  these  poems at  the  time  he was writing  the "native" ones; obviously he was keeping  his poetic mind  open.  The publishing history of Sonnets  is a little unusual: in the early part of  the  Depression, the  Heaton Publishing  Co. kept on  a few  printers to do  day­ to-day   jobs and  to  keep  the  machines  in  operation. A director of  the  company asked  Ross for  some  poems  to print  as a  book to keep his printers  busy  between  ordinary printing jobs. Ross's decision  to publish  a selection of the sonnets  at that  time  is illustrative of his character, quirky  and  slightly crabby  in  a good-natured way. He  said  the  poems  were  "a  sort  of reaction  from  a  'North  American' style after  the  Declaration of  Westminster  (in  1932?)."
One   group of  these  sonnets,  however,   does  give  a  clue  about   the  direction Ross's poetry  was taking  in the early 193o's.  This group  is concerned with spiritu­ alism  (using  the  word  in  a  very general  sense)  and  it was  this  aspect  of Ross's poetry  that  John Sutherland singled  out  for  attention in  his Preface to  the  pro­  jected  publication of some of Ross's poems  by Ryerson  in  1953:

53

ON W. W. E. ROSS



Mr.  Ross thinks of the natural  world, not as the embodiment  of spirit, but as one medium  through  which spirit  may make itself known.... His  method  is to  com­ bine  motion  with  stillness, the  melodic  run  with  the  hushed  pause, in a  kind  of ritual  of silence. In a spell of silence, enhanced  by ripples of movement, we estab­ lish  communion  with  the  "kindly  daemons"  who  are  "ever  near  and  ever real." And  through  silence we are led again  to motion.

Ross himself  did  not  agree with  much  of what Sutherland said  about his poetry: "As  an enthusiastic R.C.  convert  he almost sees me as one, which  is quite  wrong." The sonnets  Sutherland is alluding to  here  were  based  on  a  drawing by Blake, but  there  is no doubt  that  Ross was intrigued by  the  relations between  spiritual states  and  the world of reality, and  the connections between  the unconscious  mind and   what   images  emerge  from  it  beyond  our  conscious  control. He  maintained that   he  was  "much closer  to  the  medicine  man  than Diderot." And  indeed  by
1932   he  was  intensely  preoccupied  with  the  movement of  surrealism. He  was indirectly associated  with a surrealist  magazine in the States,  Fifth Floor Window, which  only  ran  for  four  issues in  1932.  It published two  of  his poems  (transla­ tions  from  Max  Jacob) in the  May  issue.
A group he published  in Poetry (July  1934) bears  the general title of  "Irrealis­
tic Verses", even  though  it contains poems  to be  printed later  in  Experiment or in   anthologies: "Reciprocal", "If  Ice"    (Oxford), "The  Flower" and   "The Diver." The   other   three  poems  in  this group are  all  related   to  the  spiritual or surrealistic side  of  Ross.  The surrealism   does  not  emerge  in  the  form  of  these poems;  two  of them  are,  in fact,  regular  in  rhythm and  rhymed but,  in a  para­ doxical  way, this regularity  tends  to emphasize the strange states  he is attempting to indicate in  the  poems. Two  are  very slight: "Love's Silver  Bells" touches  on mysteries  in terms  of music,  but  it is a kind  of inner  music,  a music that  appeals  to something intuitive  in man :
For, bound within a hollow cell
And older custom's chain,
He did not hear the silver bell - His deafness was in vain!
The poem,  "A  Death", however,  is worth  quoting in full. It has the simplicity  of a  Blake  lyric  and  it is a  poem  that  seemed  to be important to  Ross himself,  for when  he  talked  to  me about  spiritualism, he showed  me  a copy  of this poem  in one  of  his  copybooks,  explaining that  he  himself  found  it  a  very  strange poem, implying that  it was a kind of automatic poem  and  that  he was not too sure of its meaning himself.

54

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



Often in times before
He wandered through that  wood. He entered it once more.
His path  was red with blood.

Some mystery  there must be­ Solution is not known.
He entered carelessly, At set of sun, alone.

Mysterious things  were seen In  the shadow  of the night, And leaves no longer green In  the feeble failing  light;

While  spirits from  the tomb Gathered around his way­ "You  too will come to us soon, And you have come today."

No signs of life were seen
But signs of death  were known. The night came down between. The  hunter was alone.

His side was wet with blood
In the bitter  chilling  air,
And he lay with  side all bare
In  that  murderous dark  wood.
Ross has  caught  that  indefinite  sense of deja  vu, of repetitions  in  life carrying resonances into  the inner  life  (or  vice-versa).  The  place is perhaps  like Blake's "forests  of  the  night".  This  is a  poem like "The  Diver"  concerned  with other zones but  there is no breaking  out into the white and ordinary  light of day here. The  figure in the poem accepts his place "in that murderous dark wood" ; he has been there before but, this time, he dies into the wood. He has had glimpses before of this region, he has gained knowledge previously but darkness envelops him and the  hunter   has  become  the  hunted,  with  "His  side ... wet  with  blood/In  the
bitter  chilling  air."

Ross WAS  WRITING  prose poems indebted  to  Max  Jacob and  Franz  Kafka  at this time. His method of writing prose poems was somewhat
unusual.  They  started  as ordinary  poems in  the Laconics  manner  but  then  he


55

ON  W.  W. E. ROSS



wrote  them  out  as  prose. He  gave  them  the  general tide  of  "Distillates" and  it was  under   this  name  that   they  were  published  in  Canadian   Accent  in  1944, although they  actually  date  from  1932  and  first  appeared in  New  Directions in
1937.  I have  the  original  manuscript of "The Spring", "The Animals All",  "The Boat  Ride" and  "The Tower" in their  Laconics form,  all dated  February 1932. Here  are  the  opening  lines of "The Spring" as they appear in this form:

I watched the spring come flowing down the steep hillsides over the stones turning here
and there among
the masses of moss by the roots of trees

These "Distillates" still are  recognizably  written by Ross in the  clarity  of some of the  images,  most  notably  in "The Boat  Ride", "The Spring", "The Voices"  and occasionally in  "The Fact" :

The tree spreads itself in the sunlight unknowing.... Let us find if we may the philosopher's stone. Perhaps it is at
the bottom of a mud-puddle  somewhere along the road to the farthest  country where the moon shines backward  and the grass is black.

Even  the  rhythm of this  piece is characteristic of the  early  Ross  poems,  yet the subject-matter has  undergone change. He  is  dealing   with  "unreal" states,  "the farthest country", so that,  although these prose pieces contain straight-forward language and  images  usually  associated  with  his verse, they  also abound in  deli­ berately and  vaguely  evocative  scenes and  descriptions: a ruined  castle, a  tower, a  band   of  sufferers   emerging   "into   the  secrecy  of  the  startling night  and  the stinging stars." They  also contain  cryptic,  rather epigrammatic phrases in much  more  abstract terms,  as if these  unknown states  cannot be  correctly  named   but in some  way can  be fastened  to abstractions, coloured perhaps by words  carrying  symbolic  associations: "Water is a  profound and  secret  thing,"  "Regret, regret will  come  and  may  return  like old  year's  pain," "Yet  death is a  white  night,  a wide  night," "Let the  rope  no longer  hang  suspended," "Be  dutiful   toward  the demons of gloom  and  doubt" and

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



But there are some who may deny all reality, even the plainest, preferring to keep themselves within the rigid contours of outmoded seats of thought,  where thought dwelt
once but no longer; where the
acute eye can perceive now
only remnants,  dust, and a dullness too.
These   prose  poems  Ross  labelled  as  "hypnogogisms," coming  to  him  during the  clairvoyant state  between  sleeping  and  waking.  He  wrote  some  (although, to my knowledge,  these have  never  been published) which  were  pieces of automatic writing. The interest  in these irrealistic  states remained with  him; five of a group of six of his poems  published in  Northern Review   (April- May  1951) draw  to a greater or  lesser degree  on  this source.  (These  poems  may  have  been  written at roughly  the  same  time  as "Distillates," of course,  but  the  fact  that  he  chose to submit   them  for  publication in  r 95I suggests  that  his mind  was still fascinated by  these  problems.)  These   poems  I find  more  successful  than the  "Distillates" because  he  links  the  ideas  to  a  more  specific  landscape; even  in  "The Creek" (Oxford) there  is a glancing reference  to these unknown states  at  the end  of the poem.  "View" is  a  poem  which  suggests  that  things  exist  "to  the  eye  of  man forbidden" but  our  other  senses, in  this poem  our  hearing, can  take  cognizance of those things.  This  same  idea  is taken  up in "The Spring", perhaps the  best of Ross's poems dealing with  these states.
At  the  opening of the  poem,  the spring  is invisible but  in  darkness  and  silence "The ear  extends its  view/Deep into  regions  not  attained by  day." However, these  sources  of  unseen  states  do  not  come  always  unasked: the  ear  must  be a "searching heedful  ear." On  such  occasions  a  new  world  of  possibilities  opens; "the ear  knows  a flow begun/Under an  earlier  sun."  This  may  lead  to a further search,  and  the  poem  continues with  a description of a boat-ride to find, in order to understand, the source  of  the sound.  There is an  obvious  connection between this  part  of  the  poem  and  the  search  for  the  Naiad   in  the  prose  poem,  "The Spring"; in  that  poem  the  spring  may  hold  the  answer  but  to the  ear  of man  it is "obscure syllabification" and  "confused   utterance." In many  ways  both  these pieces arise out  of the same  kind of experience,  if not the same  actual experience. In  the  poem in  Northern Review, the sound  is still not understood well, and  what in  the  prose  poem  is expressed  merely  as the  spring  "striving" to  communicate with  man,  here  is developed and  made  more  explicit:

57

ON W. W. E. ROSS



Not understood well

As of some creature held in a spell and striving To  be free of that  bondage,  impotent however, And uttering a complaint
Although its means are faint,

As if attempting to speak and  not succeeding
But strangled  in utterance, making that  utterance vain; Yet only brief must be
This  disability

Of words enchanted to meaninglessness, yet once
Filled with meaning, and  perhaps once again
These syllables of fire
To  meaning  may aspire,

Be understood.   Ours is the lack of hearing.

If we become really receptive to these messages from  "the  farthest  country,"

We again  may understand
The  springs beneath the land.

Ross once  thought  of writing a long study  in verse, "On  Dreams"  but  as far as I  know, none of this has been published. I don't  know how much  was com­ pleted,  although  I  have a manuscript  version of the opening,  confusedly dated; one date,  Fall '36,  has the '36 crossed out and it has been replaced  by '45? Ross also sent me a legible copy of the original manuscript but dated it only Fall '45? The  poem begins:

Dreams are an inconvenient reminder
of something  that  is being overlooked  in
the straight-line
rationalistic view of things.

They seem to be on  the edge
of other  regions that  are of greater significance
and  depth.

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



Here  is another  poem, then, in the Laconics manner,  and  Ross might eventually have decided to write it out in rhythmic prose in the manner  of "Distillates."
Another  little-noticed  side of Ross also comes out in the prose poems. One  of
them  is a  rather  bitter  humourous  parable  called "The Animals  All," and  it is interesting  to note that  the last poems Ross had  published in his lifetime were a set of humourous  poems, including a parody of Robert Frost and a long sequence, "Air   With  Variations,"  (Canadian   Forum,  April  1957), a  series of  "squibs" (Ross's own term)  based on versions of a stanza from "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"  ("Water,  water,  everywhere"  etc.)   supposedly  written  by  different poets. The  range of his reading is well illustrated  by this sequence, for the names include many contemporary Canadians  as well as Pope and  Wordsworth,  Crabbe and  Pound.  This  is his "version"  by W. C. Williams:

I must show you the ocean
salt
not seen but it's there
it is just what it is
salt. He even parodies himself:
Day after day with weary eye
We searched the sea and searched the sky, Fearing we'd made a bad mistake,
For this was no fresh water lake.

This  element  of humour is also apparent in a straightforward little poem, "The
Hart  House Theatre" in Northern  Review  (Summer  rg56).
Ross submitted  nothing  to magazines from 1938 until about  1952, apart  from material solicited for various anthologies and by John Sutherland for Northern Review, although  he did write a few book reviews for Canadian  Forum  between
1944  and  rg58  as well as two short essays on poetry for Northern  Review. He confided to me in a letter  that  "I've done nothing  (that  I think of any value)  at poetry since  r 958  and  completely lost touch  wi'th what is going on,"  and in  an­ other  letter, "recendy I've  done nothing but satirical bits," the kind of thing that appeared  in the last issue of Delta and  this one he included  in a letter last year:

With Lester's vacuous face
Plastered all over the place

59

ON  W. W. E. ROSS



I find it a relief
To  watch the demoniac Die£

I have  tried  to  show  that  it  is an  over-simplification to  label  Ross  a  minor imagist. There is more in his poetry than  a species of Canadian imagism,  although his early  work  will still perhaps be his most important poetry. There is a mass of unpublished material, and  it  is very  good  news  for  Canadian poetry  that  Ray­ mond   Souster   and   John Colombo   are  preparing a  selection  of  his  poetry  for future publication. This  selection  should  give a  much  clearer  insight  into  Ross's place  in  Canadian  poetry.5  It is time  that  not  only  the  best  of  his  unpublished poetry  should  be collected  in book form  but  also those  poems  in  periodicals, the majority of which  I have  tried  to mention  in this article, should  be given  a more  permanent life.  Copies  of  the  short-lived   Here and  Now  are  fairly  rare; one  of Ross's  best  later   (?)  poems,  "Cotton Mather," was  published  in  this  magazine and  although he  did  record  it for  inclusion  on  a  Folkways record  of  Canadian poetry, it has not been collected elsewhere. The second section  of this poem reads:

Whenever he heard
the wind rushing in the forest he muttered  "The  devil
is abroad !"

He trembled at
thought of this strange land and its strange
dwellers among

deep woods hiding
from the white man's honesty. He longed to burn
the forest and all within it

where, thinking, he saw, driven by the wind witches flying
like dried leaves.

It is  this  note  of sharply  defined  clarity  and  non-discursive exactness  that  Ross bequeathed to Canadian poetry  and  that  makes  his work  an  example of his own definition of a work  of art:   "a  consistency/among incommensurables."





6o

ON  W. W. E.  ROSS



FOOTNOTES

' Information about his  poetic  career  and  all  prose quotations from  Ross about  his work   (unless  otherwise stated)  are  taken   from  letters  written to  me  in  1966  or written to Ralph Gustafson over the period  1940 to 1957, in the Gustafson Literary Papers  in  the  University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. Where one  of his poems  has appeared in  The Penguin   Anthology of Canadian Verse, or  The Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse, I  have  indicated  that  fact  by  including the  words  Penguin   or Oxford in  parenthesis after  the  title  of the  poem.
•  A Survey  of Modernist Poetry, p. 63.
3  J. Hillis Miller, Poets of Reality, p. 301.
4  Marcel  Raymond, Baudelaire  to Surrealism, p. 247·
5   Since  this article was  accepted for  publication, the  volume  of selections  from  the poems of W.  W. Ross has  appeared. It is Shapes  and  Sounds, Poems  of W. W. E. Ross, selected  by Raymond Souster  and  John Robert Colombo. (Ed.).






































61



YANKEE AT THE COURT OF JUDGE HALIBURTON


L. A. A. Harding







MUCH OF   HALIBURTON's  HUMOUR deriv01  from his constant  and skilful use of the anecdote, retailed  almost always by Sam Slick, the critical and knowledgeable Connecticut  clockmaker. The  anecdote is bent-and often  bent  a long way, pleasure-bent  one might  say, to the ends of Haliburton's humour, and  then  again to the Judge's  satire,  and  it is often  masterfully ironic.
One  should  never despise the anecdote,  because  it gives a sudden  glimpse, as when  a  flare  explodes,  into  the  past, or  into  character, or  into  manners  and mores, such as one rarely gets in the history books or in official biographies. The same is true  of the  anecdotes about  or of any  famous  man-collect  them  and one  has a close-up of him, and  his life and  time, which  may  not  necessarily be the true  picture, but which will have much  truth  in it and  that of a very human kind.  One  thinks,  for  instance,  of  the  revelation  of  character  in the  Duke  of Wellington's  famous "Publish  and be damned!" to a blackmailing  mistress. They are  also interesting in themselves. Sam Slick himself appreciated  ·them, saying of Harriet  Martineau: "... she seemed mighty fond  of anecdotes  (she wanted  'em for her book, I guess; for travels without anecdotes is like a puddin'  without plums
-all dough)."'
The  anecdote  is defined, in the  plural  ( anecdota) as being  the "unpublished details  of history",  and  more broadly  as "things  unpublished". This  however is not quite adequate for our purposes. The  anecdote  ranges through  seven possible definitions, from  the trivial detail of biography  to the barnyard joke (not always purified  by Haliburton's humour)   to the "tall" tale beloved of the Yankee, and all are  put to use by Haliburton. Obviously then the term is fairly inclusive, and is meant  to be, since the anecdote,  thus loosely defined, forms much of the basis of Haliburton's humourous  observations of character and  life, and  indeed of his whole method  of, and  approach  to, writing.

YANKEE AT THE COURT



Sam Slick, the travelling salesman, would never have held his huge public (comparable  contemporaneously  to  that   of  Dickens)   without   the  anecdotes sprinkled so liberally and  seemingly haphazardly  through  his adventures,  for the Slick  books are  built  upon  Sam's  remembered  experiences  and  he is the  only unity.  For  instance  the  celebrated  tale of  the  Elder  Grab  trying  to  pass off a toothless,  thirty-year-old   horse  on  what  he  thought  was  an  ignorant  French­ Canadian farmer  and  getting  a blind horse in exchange, is told by Sam Slick at Tattersall's Horse  Market  in  London." On  the wings of the  anecdote,  however, we are suddenly  and  illogically transported  from London  to Acadia  for the rest of the  chapter  and  the  Haliburton reader  realizes it is  almost  always the anec­ dote  which is important, not  Tattersall's,  or wherever  Sam  and  the Squire  may happen  to  be. If Haliburton was congenitally unable  to leave  a  pun  alone­ there is, for instance, one whole, unseemly chapter of  nerve-wracking  punning in The Letter  Bag of the Great  Western3-he was also a connoisseur, and amateur,  of the humourous  anecdote,  and  he does much better with it;  he has Sam Slick express his own  point  of view:  "Truth is, Squire, I  never could let a  joke pass all my life without  having a lark with it. I was fond of one ever since I was knee­ high to a goose ..."4  Many of these humourous anecdotes are very skilfully worked in with both  point and  humour  and often  with delightful irony. If one feels that for  the  former  he deserved  the critical punishment  he has received, one cannot accuse him of anecdotage.  For sometimes he will illustrate a character, or a na­ tional  character  or  characteristic,  or criticize British, American  or  Nova Scotian society, or footnote  a period  in  history, and  at the same  time amuse  the reader with one skilfully  turned,  and  often shockingly slanted, anecdote.
Anecdotes then  have a fascination  for most readers and  yet surprisingly, litera­ ture, apart  from certain  genres, does not make as much use of them as one would expect.  They  interrupt the  main  flow of the  narrative  and  they  are  therefore generally inartistic,  an  offence to the unity of the chapter  in  hand,  or even the book. There  are, of course, as always some exceptions:  one  thinks of Chaucer,  Fielding,  Sterne,  the  picaresque  novelists especially, and  biographies  in general, but  a scrutiny  of a few great  novels will show that  the  anecdote  is a  rare  phe­ nomenon  because,  Haliburton excluded,  it  takes the  reader's  attention  off the main themes, characters  and action. However there are doubtless many incidents, or ideas, or characters  worked into the latter, which came to the author  originally in anecdotal  form.  In  other  words, if he did not believe them  to be true or even partly true when  he heard  them,  he considers them "fictionally  true"  or likely­ they  could   have  happened-and  Haliburton for  one  puts  them  in  entire  as

YANKEE AT THE COURT



part  of  the  lively, legal,  civic, political, social  background,   and  general  Nova Scotian-U.S. folk tradition,  which  he  knew,  shaping   them,  sometimes  bril­ liantly, to whatever satiric or humourous  point he has in mind.
The  Judge,  a  natural  raconteur, knew hundreds  of them;  in fact he collected them,  knowing how interesting they were to others like himself for the sidelights they  threw  on  "human natur' ". (He  appears  typically  before us, for  instance, lighted  up  by  a  single anecdote  when,  on  being  told  in  court  that  one  of his jurymen  could  not sit because of the  chronic  itch,  he gave  the  judicial  order: "Scratch   that  man!" The  Judge  was found  guilty once again-of  a  pun.)  He also  put  his beloved  anecdotes,  appropriately enough,  in  the  mouth  of a  man who would  be of all people most likely to have heard  a wide and  varied  assort­ ment  of  tales  of  other  people's  lives-a  mercurial   and  ubiquitous  travelling salesman  of loquacious and gregarious nature,  who possessed a highly developed sense of the  ridiculous  and  a critical  appreciation of character  and  psychology, before the latter  was known as such.


Now TO   CONSIDER  some  specific  examples.  One  of  the simplest  is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by  the  plain  anti-American anecdote.  The
Honourable Alden Gobble, the newly-appointed  American Secretary to the Lega­ tion at the Court  of St. James in London,  a very wily, wide-awake Yankee diplo­ mat, almost sharp  enough to cut himself, has been suffering from "great oneasiness arter  eatin' ", or "dyspepsy", as he calls it, and  he goes to the famous  Dr. Aber­ nethy of London  town for a cure, only to  be told that  his troubles are over. The  Hon.  Alden  Gobble  is surprised:   "I don't  see that  'are  inference,"  said Alden. "It don't  foller from what you predicate at all, ..." "But I tell you it does foller," said the doctor;  "for in the company you'll have to keep, you'll have to eat like a Christian." 5
This is obviously one of the simplest ways to use the anecdote against the much­ despised but  much-feared,  wily and  aggressive Yankee  republicans  to  the south. It is really nothing more than an anti-Yank story, but it reflects the contemporary  Loyalist and  British disapproval of Yankee manners  as shown also by Dickens in his American  Notes. It is not very subtle, and  perhaps grossly unfair, but amusing enough  if  you happened  to be Nova  Scotian  or  British -both of which  Hali­ burton  was. One  point worth noting is 'that Haliburton manages  to  tell the story through  Sam  himself. He  does this by having  Sam  pour  it  out  while seething

YANKEE AT  THE COURT



with  indignation  against British  manners, and  British  disrespect  for  the  "ever­
lastin'  republic".
Another kind  of Haliburtonian  anecdote concerns  Sam's expedition from Slickville,  Connecticut, to Italy,  in search  of quick,  "instant" culture in  the form of Italian art. The Governor of Connecticut and  the local General have  just come into  Sam's   clockmaking workshop where  he  is  painting on  his  clocks  angels equipped with  rifles, led by one tall, distinguished angel, with  a bowie knife. They are  leaving  Heaven to  emigrate down  to the  United  States-where conditions are  better. His  visitors  ask what  the  mystic letters  "AP" and  "HE" stand  for in the  painting and   are  told  that   "AP" stands  for  "Airthly Paradise" and  "HE" stands   for   "Heavenly  Emigrants". The   emigrating  angels  evidently   see  more future in  the  States,   and  have  come  fully  equipped   for  the  country.  (If  Hali­ burton had  Milton  in mind,  they could  represent  a second  wave, descending into Hell.)   The   Governor and  the  General then  offer  Sam,  as  an  artist  in  his own right,  the  job  of  going  to  Italy  and  buying  up some  real  good  art,  the  genuine stuff, for the  Slickville Art  Gallery; but  the Governor cautions him  that, since the statues  imported the  year  before  were  all stark  naked,  and  therefore had  to  be clothed  from  head 'to foot  before Slickville could study  them, Sam  must be careful  in  his  selection  of  Italian  masterpieces: "So  none  of  your  Potiphar's wives, or Susannahs, or sleepin' Venuses; such  pictures  are  repugnant  to the  high  tone  of moral feelin'  in  this  country."
Sam  then  tells the  Squire how  he put  it over  the Italian art dealers:

"A  very good man  the Governor,  and  a genuwine patriot  too," said Mr. Slick. "He  knowed a good deal about  paintin'  for he was a sign-painter  by trade; but he often  used to wade  out  too deep, and  get over his head  now and  then  afore  he knowed  it.  He  warn't the  best o'swimmers  neither,  and  sometimes  I  used to  be scared to death  for fear  he'd  go for it afore he'd touch bottom agin. Well, off J sot in  a  vessel to  Leghorn,  and  I  laid  out  there  three  thousand  dollars  in  pictur's. Rum-lookin'   old  cocks  them  saints,  some  on  'em  too,  with  their  long  beards, bald  heads  and  hard  featur's,  bean't  they?  but  I got a lot of 'em,  of all sizes. I bought two Madonnas, I think they call them-beautiful little pictur's  they were too;  but  the child's  legs were so naked and  ondecent,  that  to please the Governor and  his factory  gals, I had  an  artist  to  paint  trousers and  a pair  of lace boots on him, and  they look quite  genteel now. It improved 'em  amazin'ly;  but  the best o' the  joke was those Macaroni rascals, seein' me a stranger,  thought  to do me nicely (most  infarnal cheats  them  dealers  too -walk  right  into  you afore  you know where  you  be) .  The   older  a  pictur'  was, and  the  more  it  was  blacked,  so you couldn't  see the figur's, the more they axed for it; and they'd  talk and  jabber away about  their  Tittyan tints  and  Gauido  airs  by the  hour.  "How  soft we are, ain't

YANKEE AT  THE COURT



we?" said I. "Catch  a weasel asleep, will you?" Second-hand farniture don't  suit our  market.  We want  pictur's  and  not things  that  look a plaguy sight more like the shutters  of an  old smoke-house than  paintin's,  and  I hope I may be shot if I didn't  get bran  new ones for half the price they axed for them  rusty old veterans. Our  folks were well pleased with the shipment,  and  I ought  to be too, for I made a  trifle in  the  discount  of fifteen per cent.,  for  comin'  down  handsum'  with  the cash on the spot. Our  Atheneum is worth seein' I tell you; you won't ditto it easy, I know; it's actilly a sight to be behold.6
This  needs no comment, except  perhaps  that  the satire  on Slickville, Connecticut, would  have  applied equally  well to Haliburton's countrymen in Windsor or Hali­ fax,  or  in fact  to  Montreal in  1g66,  where  Michelangelo's David had somewhat the  effect  of a fox  in a hen-roost.  One  is also reminded of Samuel Butler's  "Oh, God! oh,  Montreal!"
After  the  previous  anecdotes,  the  anti-Yankee story,  and  the satire  on  Yankee jingoism  and  philistinism  in  art,  we next see Haliburton on  the  now  threadbare theme  of  the  almighty   dollar  and  the  consequent slave-driving of  the  ignorant Irish  immigrant who  is democratically called  a  gentleman -and  then  worked to death for  a canal contract. He gives us a typically  propagandistic and  didactic anecdote describing what  happens to  Pat  Lannigan, an  Irish  immigrant as yet imperfectly metamorphosed into  a  Nova  Scotian, who  had  been  tempted by the greener   grass  on  the  other  side  of the  American-Canadian fence  and  had  gone to the  land  of opportunity to make  his fortune, as Pugnose,  the lazy and  shiftless Bluenose  innkeeper, had   just  been  talking  of  doing. Pat  Lannigan has  now  re­ turned to  Nova  Scotia.  This  story  is typical  of  one  of  the  main  trends  of  Hali­ burton's  patriotic,  anti-American satire,  of  which   the   central theme  might  be defined: "There is no place like home-as long  as you work hard. And at home they're a lot  more  honest."
Sam   is talking   about   Pugnose's  plan  to  sell  his  inn  and  go  to  the  States,  a common idea  then  as  now.  Nova  Scotia,  Sam   opines,  is fine, farming country compared to  the  cold,  thin  soil of  New  England. The  land  between  Salem  and Boston  would  "starve a flock of geese", and  yet the stout  and  prosperous inhabi­ tants  of Salem,  through hard  work  and  thrift, have  made  so much  money  they figure  they might  as well buy Nova Scotia  from  the  King,  whereas the Bluenoses, rather than   buckle  down  to  work,  can  think  of  nothing but  emigrating to  the Land  of Promise  in order  to live an easier life, like the  ambitious Angel  with  the bowie  knife.  They   had  better  not,  says Sam,  who  has  himself  left  the  "Airthly Paradise" of Connecticut for  Nova  Scotia,  where  the  pickings  are  easier,  and  he underlines his  point  with  an  illustrative   anecdote:

66

YANKEE AT  THE COURT



I met  an  Irishman, one  Pat  Lannigan,  last week, who  had  just returned  from the States.  "Why,"  says I,  "Pat,  what  on airth  brought  you back?" "Bad  luck to
'em," says Pat, "if I warn't  properly bit. 'What  do you get a day in Nova Scotia?' says Judge  Beier  to  me.  "Four  shillings, your Lordship,"  says I. 'There are  no lords  here,'  says he, 'we are  all free. Well, says he, 'I'll  give you as much  in one day as you can  airn  there  in two;  I'll  give you eight shillings'. "Long  life to your Lordship,"  says I. So  next  day  to  it  I went  with  a  party  of men  a-diggin'  of a piece of canal,  and if it wasn't  a hot day my name is not Pat Lannigan. Presently I looked  up  and  straightened   my back. Says I to a comrade  of mine:  "Mick," says I, "I'm very dry".  With  that says the overseer:  'We don't  allow gentlemen  to talk  at  their  work in this country.'  Faith,  I soon found  out for my two days' pay in one I had  to do two days' work in one, and pay two weeks' board in one, and at the end of the  month  I found  myself no better off in pocket than  in Nova Scotia; while the devil a bone in my body that  didn't  ache with pain;  and as for my nose it  took  to  bleedin'  and  bled day and  night entirely. "Upon  my soul, Mr. Slick," said  he,  "the  poor  labourer  does not  last  long in your  country;  what  with  new rum,  hard  labour,  and  hot weather,  you'll see the graves of the Irish each side of the  canals, for all the  world like two rows of potatoes in a field that  have forgot to come up." 7

Sam  agrees  that  America is a land  of hard  work, and  Pat's  migration gives us an interesting, historical glimpse   behind   the  scenes  at  this   work. One is  always amazed  at  the  vast  labours of our grandfathers without the machinery which  we
now  accept  like electric  light  without  comment. Unknown men  laboriously built the  canals  and   railroads by  the  sweat  of  their  brows  and  a hundred  thousand
horses of one-horse power  each.  The  only slaves available  were wage-slaves,  who were  largely  Irish; they  were  expendable and  they died,  of course, in their  thou­ sands,  finding  the  hot  American summer very  different  from  the  mild  summers of  Ireland or  Nova  Scotia  and,  if the  anecdote gives a true  picture,  also finding  American working conditions twice  as hard.
The  moral of the story is obvious,  as usual in Haliburton, particularly since he is here  addressing an  unsophisticated audience made  up of many  Pugnoses.  The New  Englanders had  got  what   they  had  got  through hard  work  and  initiative and  the  Nova  Scotians could  do  the same,  and  better,  if they  would  only  bestir themselves.  It is the  old,  sound  advice  but  like most sound,  old  advice  it is not very entertaining to the  man  who is getting  it; nor was it to the frustrated  work­ ingman of  Nova  Scarcity, thinking of  emigrating to  the  States  where  the  sun shone  gold.  What does stand  out  clearly, however,  is the  character of the simple,  rather pathetic Irishman, and  the  glimpse  of  two other  characters, Judge  Beler, and  the  foreman of the  American bull-gang, with  rts mixed  bag  of  immigrants,

YANKEE AT THE COURT



mostly no doubt  Irish. The  foreman,  one notices, speaks as very few gang-bosses have ever spoken in this rough world; unless they were intending some ponderous sarcasm  at  the  unfortunate labourer's  expense.  When  Pat  straightens  his back and  says to  his comrade  Mick,  "I'm very  dry",  the  overseer,  the  slave-driver employed by the nineteenth-century  Yankee Pharoahs,  cracks his whip gently, informing  Pat  that  "gentlemen"  are  not allowed "to  talk at  their  work".  Pat  is called a "gentleman" in the land of promise, but  he is working twice as hard  as he ever  worked  in  Nova Scotia, or  Ireland, making  twice as much  money and being  charged  twice as much  to live. He  is, moreover,  helping  to bury  rows of his fellow-workers beside the canal as it pushes across the enormous  country-so different from their small green island. And, with the pathos always underlying humour, their  graves  grotesquely  resemble  the  troughs  and  hills of  a  blasted potato  field.
The   word  "gentleman", applied  to  Pat  Lannigan by  a  Yankee  gang-boss, seemed  more  amusing  to Haliburton's contemporaries than  it does to us in the middle of the twentieth century, and it demonstrates  what  Haliburton considered the  lunatic  topsy-turviness of the great  American  social experiment.  His  use of such a term was a mockery of the American so-called classless society where Jack was supposed to be as good as his master and where every Jack  became a gentle­ man and every Pat became a Jiggs, complete with top hat and cigar. He therefore satirically shows Pat finding that fine words do not make a democracy any easier on  the  man  with  the shovel. Haliburton asserts that  American  democracy,  that would-be  league  of gentlemen,  observing all the forms  of  equality  between  Pat and  his gang-boss, and between the "gentlemen" who were working on the canal and  Judge   Beler,  nevertheless buries  great  numbers  of   the gentry  as  they  go along;   but  not  the  Judge   Belers, and  probably  not  many  "overseers"  either. Americans,  he intimates,  are calling each  other  cito en
spite  of its connotations  in  that  post-guillotine age, translated into  English, is a favourite   word  of  Sam  Slick's-but working  their  less fortunate citizens  to death ...:__  for the dollar-in  practice. In  the  anecdote  citizens ironically become "gentlemen", an absurd idea to Haliburton; even today, one would rather expect "Hey, you there!"
However, though the justice of the story does not much concern us, its psychol­ ogical, historical, and satirical implications do. America  was the second  Promised Land  where the streets were all paved with gold;  but only the strong and fit and the  unencumbered  were able to pick some of it up, and  button  it up firmly in a hip  pocket. Thousands,  Haliburton warns,  find  early  democratic  graves in  the

68

YANKEE AT THE  COURT



slums  or  beside  the  canals  and  railroads. The  satire  has  humour, pathos, irony, and  considerable truth. One   notices  the  American  judge,  of  which   class  Hali­ burton thought little  as we shall see in the next  and final anecdote, standing upon  the letter  of democracy ("there are no lords here")  while "sweating" Pat  Lanni­ gan  and  his  comrades into  an  early  grave; one  also  notices  that  Judge Beier is contracting, or sub-contracting, for  the  building  of  part  of  the  canal, instead  of occupying himself  exclusively  and  more enthusiastically with  the  maintenance of the laws of the great  republic. The  law is therefore  also engaged  with  gusto in the pursuit  of happiness and  the  dollar, instead  of keeping  a closer eye on  how other  citizens  obtain theirs.  The picture  presented, heightened by such  Biblical  terms as "overseer", is of another land  of  the  Pharoahs, where  the slaves are  paid,  and by implication of course  Nova Scotia is a much  more  civilized  place  to live.




HALIBURTON THOUGHT  very  little  of  American courts,  of their  procedures or  of  their  judges,  as the  following  ironic anecdote shows. Sam is attending a  court  in  Nova  Scotia  with  the  Squire,  and   a  Yankee is on  trial for  theft.  Sam  says:
We  have  a  great  respect  for  the  laws, Squire;  we've  been  bred  to  that,  and always  uphold  the  dignity  of  the  law.  I recollect once  that  some of  our  young citizens away above Montgomery  got into a flare-up with a party  of boatmen  that lives on  the  Mississippi; a desperate  row it was too, and  three  Kentuckians  were killed as dead  as herrin's.  Well, they were had  up for it afore Judge  Cotton.  He was one of our  revolutionary  heroes, a starn  hard-featured old man, quite a Cato; and  he did  curry  'em  down  with  a  heavy hand,  you may  depend-he  had  no marcy on 'em. There  he sot with his hat on, a cigar in his mouth,  his arms folded and  his feet over the rail, lookin' as sour as an onripe lemon. "Bring  up them cul­ prits",  said  he,  and  when  they were  brought  up  he told  'em  it  was  scandalous, only fit for English and  ignorant  foreigners that sit on the outer  porch of darkness, and  not highminded, intelligent  Americans. "You are a disgrace," said  he, "to  our great  nation,  and  I hope I shall never hear the like of it agin. If I do, I'll  put you on your trial  as sure as you are  born;  I hope I may be skinned alive  by wild cats if I don't." Well, they didn't  like that  kind o'talk  at  all so that  night  away  they goes to the  judge's house, to teach him a thing or two with a cowskin, and  kicked up  a deuce  of a row;  and  what  do you think  the neighbours did?  Why, they  jist walked  in,  seized the  ring-leaders  and  lynched  them, in less  than  ten  minits,  on one of the  linden  trees afore  the  judge's door.B

This  lynching episode  is couched  in  broad  but  very amusing irony  which  both

6g

YANKEE AT  THE COURT



explains  the immediate  and early popularity  of The  Clockmaker  and  anticipates Twain's style. From  the first words, where Sam  proudly claims that  his country­ men  have a "great  respect for the law",  we see a caricature  of what Haliburton considered the Americans' attitude  to the law:  no understanding of it, no dignity in its administration, no qualified men to uphold it and, when in doubt, a marked propensity  to speed things up with  a lynching.  A Shakespearean disorder  reigns supreme.  (The  justice of this picture  once again  does not  concern us of course, but  November   22,  1964,  in  Dallas,  and  particularly  its  aftermath, springs  to mind.  In  any case that  was the way Haliburton saw it. One  can hear  him say: "Of  course ... I  told you so.")
In  this anecdote several citizens are on trial for  the peccadillo of killing three fellow-citizens in a brawl. There  follows an exquisite  picture of about  as unlikely a  judge  as one could wish for, our  Judge  Catton-"quite a Cato", in Sam's opinion. He has no legal illusions about listening to the evidence, or wasting time weighing the pros and cons of the case. "Bring  up them culprits,"  he says, quickly knocking the law and legal ethics into a cocked hat. He is as severe in tone as we have been led to expect, though  not quite  a "Hanging Judge", since he is satis­ fied with giving them a sharp  browbeating  and  warning  them  that  if  they do it "agin", that is, kill any more people, he will certainly put them on trial next time. Once is quite enough. He is distinctly testy about  the three killings. A browbeating  however, in such harsh words, offends the citizens who feel that  their breach  of decorum  does not merit such language  or such threats, and they go up that night with  a "cowhide"  to teach the  judge what  democracy  means. However,  as Sam points out,  all's well that  ends well;  the dignity  of the law  is  upheld  and  once again  American  justice prevails;  order  is quickly  restoreJd  with  the  help  of the linden  tree "afore  the judge's door."
Sam, in the first anecdote, discounts the killings, he is impressed by the appear­ ance of the  judge, he appreciates  the firm way the  judge tells them to stop it; in fact he feels that perhaps the judge was a little hard  on them, and that the lynch­ ing  settled  everything  nicely and  demonstrated   the  law-abiding  qualities  of his fellow-countrymen. It  was, in fact in Sam's  own  phrase, "a  caution  to sinners", and  oddly  enough such a point  of view is not  absolutely  incredible.  In  a small country  town  where education  was lacking  and  passions  were apt  to run  high, about  not  very much,  a home-spun  judge might  perhaps  be unwilling  to make much  fuss about  mere outsiders  (Kentuckians)  who  got  themselves killed in  a routine Saturday-night brawl. After all it was not murder, but only manslaughter  multiplied  by three, and hanging  was not the  punishment for fighting, even with

YANKEE AT THE COURT



bowie knives. There  are  all the elements of farce in the anecdote,  although  it is
close to tragic farce.
Haliburton, as a  judge in  his civilized and  peaceful colony, is comparing  the British or  Nova  Scotian  legal system with what  he considers an  adolescent  and violent system of punishing the wrong-doer. Much of his comedy stems from a comparison  between  the  two societies, the one  basically conservative,  the other revolutionary,  and  Haliburton, being  a  humourist,  was perhaps  doubly  a  con­ servative,  as conversely, revolutionaries,  taking  themselves with  the  utmost  seri­ ousness, are  unhumourous. There  was a long tradition  of swift  and  sometimes rough  justice in  the  United  States, which was founded  on  necessity where there was no machinery  to enforce ordinary  law. People pushed  on ahead  of the law, and  if one of them stole a horse and  got caught,  he might  well end  up inside a noose, which  to Haliburton, from  the comparative  peace of  Nova Scotia, was a travesty of the law.
Haliburton  ingeniously  interweaves  and  contrasts  two  anecdotes  to  demon­ strate  how much  better  was the British, or Nova Scotian,  court  procedure  than Judge  Cotton's  tradition. The  second about  the Yankee thief, Expected  Thorne,  is also of  course  recounted   by Sam,  and  Sam's  observations  on  the  two  legal procedures point up the contrast  ironically. Haliburton  says a great  deal with the careful  juxtaposition  and  interweaving  of the two incidents.
Sam  tells the Squire  how an  "almighty,  cantin'  rogue"  and  a countryman of his, Expected  Thorne, is arrested for stealing a watch in Annapolis, Nova Scotia, from one Captain Billy Slocum. The  court does not at all come up to Sam's democratic  ideas  of a  court.  There  is far  too much  dignity, far  too much  cere­ mony, and  althogether  too much  respect is shown for the judge;  the lawyers are all got up in black gowns with white bands, and when the Sheriff  calls for order, instead  of the  familiar,  gradual, democratic  subsidence of noise,  all is suddenly "still as moonlight." This  is altogether  too much  pandering  to authority  for Sam and  it is  just  not  "free-and-equal" enough.  It  strikes Sam  as  very formal  and rather  mediaeval; like the black and white bands:

Them sort  of  liveries  may  do  in  Europe, but  they  don't convene  to our  free  and enlightened citizens.  It's too  foreign  for  us, too  unphilosophical, too feudal, and  a remnant o'  the  dark  ages.  No  sir;  our  lawyers  do as they  like. Some  on  'em  dress in  black,  and  some  white; some  carry  walkin'  sticks, and  some  umbrellas, some whittle sticks  with  pen-knives, and  some shave  the  table,  and  some  put  their  legs
under  the  desks and  some  put  'em  a-top  of them,  jist as it suits  them.  They  sit as
they  please,  dress  as  they  please,  and  talk  as  they  please;  we are  a free  people.' 0

7I

YANKEE AT THE COURT



Haliburton  uses  irony  to  deal  with  such   democratic  obnoxiousness. His  dual nature, his two characters which  come out  constantly in the  Judge and  Squire  on the  one  hand  and  Sam  on the other,  and  his two sympathies for the  New  World and  for  the  traditional British Old  World, merged  into  one  when  it came  to the Law.  The Law  was sacrosanct and  British  Law  was  the  best  law,  even  if  the guilty  man  walked  away  whistling.
Expected   Thorne is brought   before  the  Nova  Scotian judge  and  Sam  notices that   the  wily  Expected    (anyone familiar  with   Haliburton  will  note  the  "dis­ senting" name) has dressed  for the  role:

He  had  his hair  combed down  as straight  as a horse's mane;  a little  thin  white cravat,  nicely plaited  and  tied plain, garnished  his neck, as a white  towel does a dish  of calv.e's [sic]  head;  a standin'-up collar  to  his coat  gave  it  the  true  cut, and  the  gilt buttons  covered with  cloth eschewed  the gaudy  ornaments  of sinful, carnal  man.  He  looked as demure  as a harlot  at  a christenin' -drew  down  the corners of his mouth, so as to contract  the  trumpet of his nose and give the right bass twang  to the voice, and  turned  up the whites of his eyes, as if they had  been in the  habit  of lookin' in upon  the inner  man  for self-examination and  reproach.
0, he looked like a martyr;  jist like a man  who would suffer death  for conscience sake, and  forgive his inemies with his dyin' breath."

The judge  finds insufficient evidence  to convict, though Sam  saw immediately that  his compatriot was guilty, and  on his acquittal Expected  boasts  to Sam  how he  pulled  the  wool over the eyes of the "onsarcumcised colonials", little  realizing that   his  countryman was  deeply  shocked  at  any  free-and-enlightened citizen  of the  univarsal everlastin' United  States  descending to stealing  when  there  were so many  other  ways  of getting  Slocum's  watch, if he felt  he  really  needed  it.  Sam Slick's  comments ironically  underline the theme  which  Haliburton uses the two anecdotes, in  skilful  combination  and  contrast, to  demonstrate-that there  is very  little  regard   for  or  understanding of  law  and  order  south  of  the  border, compared with  the dignified and  scrupulously just procedure of the Nova  Scotian courts   where  insufficient  evidence  is enough   to  free  a  criminal on  the  principle that  it is better  that  ten guilty men go free than that  one innocent man  be hanged. Haliburton's double  sympathies for the  New  World  and  the  Old,  in other  words roughly  for Sam's viewpoint  and  the Squire's, are  dearly single here.
Sam  however  does reprimand Expected  Thorne, underlining the irony :

... they  ain't  such  an  enlightened  people  as we are,  that's  sartin,  but  that  don't justify you a  bit;  you hadn't  ought  to have  stolen  that  watch.  That  was wrong, very wrong indeed. You might  have traded  with  him, and  got it for half nothin';

YANKEE AT THE COURT



or bought it and failed, as some of our importin'  marchants sow up the soft-horned British;  or  swapped  it  and  forgot  to  give the  exchange,  or  bought  it  and  give your note, and  cut  stick afore  the  note became due.  There's  a thousand  ways of doin'  it  honestly  and  legally, without  resorcin', as foreigners  do,  to stealin'.  We are  a  moral  people;  a  religious, a high-minded,  and  a high-spirited  people;  and can  do  any  and  all  the  nations  of  the  univarsal  world  out  of  anything,  in  the hundreds  of millions of clever shifts there are in trade.I>

The   anti-American irony  is adroit, even  though  the  final  code  of conduct with which  Sam  chides  Expected Thorne becomes  pure  farce.
Both  of these  anecdotes demonstrate character. Sam  Slick's  character is clear,
of course,  with  every  word  he says and  every tale he tells, as is the  Squire's; but clear  also is that  "onripe lemon", Judge Cotton, and  the free-and-easy democratic characters of  the  judge's  law-abiding, local supporters who  irritably lynch  those citizens  whom  the  judge  had  injudiciously failed  to hang, thus setting  everything right   again.   One  sees  as  well  the  character of  Expected   Thorne, and   the  im­ partial, anonymous and  dignified  character of the Nova  Scotian  Judge and court  who  did  not  find  evidence  enough  to convict.  The  anecdotes also  underline the contrasting situations: in  the  American scene, three  deaths, an undisciplined law court,   an  illegal  acquittal, followed  by  a  well-meant,  neighbourly lynching; in the  Nova  Scotian court  a stolen  watch,  a dignified court, aiJ. ultra-legal acquittal, followed  by the  admission  of guilt  by the  thief. Haliburton gets a great  deal into an  anecdote.
Never  in  fact  has  a  writer  used  the  anecdote more  creatively-or more  des­
tructively.

FOOTNOTES
I T. C. Haliburton, Sam  Slick, the  Clockmaker (Toronto: The  Musson Book Com­
pany, I 9 I 8), p. I 70.
2   T.  C. Haliburton, The  Attache (New York:  Stringer  and  Townsend,  I85o),  pp.
I 62-75.
3  T. C. Haliburton, The  Letter  Bag (New York:  William Collyer, I84o), pp. 37-41.
4   Haliburton, The  Attache, p. I28.
5   Haliburton, Sam  Slick, pp. 23-24.
6  Ibid., p. 2oo.
7  Ibid., p.  I I.
s  Ibid., pp. I9I-I92.
9   Mody C. Boatright,  Folk  Laughter on the  American Frontier  (New York:  Collier
Books, I96I), p. I25.
Io    Haliburton, Sam  Slick, p. I93·
II  Ibid., p. I95·
IO     Ibid., p. I96.

73



review articles



Ell AND IRVING

George Bowering


ELI  MANDEL, An  Idiot   joy. M. G. Hurtig Publishers.
IRVING  LAYTON,  The  Shattered   Plinths.  McClelland &  Stewart. Cloth  $5.00, paper
$2.50.


IT's  HARD to realize that  Eli Mandel has  published only  3 1 I3  books, and   it  is  all  too  easy  to  remember that
Irving   Layton    has    published     19 1I3. Mandel's  latest,    An   Idiot   Joy,   justly
shared   1967's  Governor General's award in   poetry   with   Alden   Nowlan's   Bread, Wine  and Salt. Layton's The  Shattered Plinths could  be the worst book published in Canada in  1968.
There are  other differences  too.  Man­ del's  book  is  remarkable for  a  language and  thought that  seek to strip  away any­ thing  of rhetoric or  metaphor in order  to arrive at  pure  honest  disclosure,  of emo­ tions,  of  ideas,  of   the  poet's   condition. Layton's language  is a  careless  and  ego­ bound   betrayal  of   the  poet's   charge   to care  for  the  words  and  remind  others  to care   for   the  sanctity  of  each   other   as people.
Maybe one  reason  for  the  difference is that   Mandel  is  still  trying   to  find  out what  he  wants  to say, and  how  to say it. The received  Canlit image  of  Mandel  is probably still  the   195o's  U.  of  T.  Nor­ throp Frye image  of the poet as assembler and  interpreter of classical myths-post­
Graves,  post-Jung.   In   what   the   jacket


74
 blurb  calls  his "new   rhetoric," he  moves here  deeper into  the  first-person  medita­ tion,  striving with   open   forms  to  bring  forth   not   only  strikingly    personal thoughts, but   also  their  cadences,  their  singular contours as they  touch  the  mind  and  tongue:

the  book speaks:  arrange yourself in  the form
that  will arrange  you

In   paying   so  much   attention  to  the poet's craft as a way of understanding himself,  he  often   writes  about the  busi­ ness of making poems, something  readers  often   object   to-without   remembering Shelley   and   his  way  of   getting  to  the world  that   way.  It is a  little  embarrass­ ing  to  hear  Mandel  say  "I am  crazed  by poetry," or maybe  it is that  he sounds  too unembarrassed. But  the sharpened atten­ tion  to  language  pays off. I can  hear  his curious  deliberate  voice,  seeking   not  to persuade or  perform, but  to comprehend his own  arrivals and  expose  them  for  the view  of  others.
Not that he always succeeds. The book gives evidence in its quarrel with  itself of his desire  to tear  away from the cloistered

REVIEW ARTICLES



poetry  of Eli  Mandel's Sunday Castle,  to break   open   fresh   places,   even   if   they exude   terrible  odours,   to   wrest   poetry from  vulgar  life, but  to ask life to reveal its  poetry   to  his  faithful practice. The shaman, after   all,  does  not  arrange  lit­ erary    allusions,    but    actual   sticks   and stones.  The poet  starts  with  simple  and honest  first  person   declarations:   "But  I have  always  wanted to  be a good  man." So he does still  approach the  mystical, but  now  through the  materials  of suste­
nance:

the  grass  is scripture ...
I speak  of  what I know  .. .
It is  metaphor I distrust .. .
Although  sometimes  he  still  uses  meta­ phor   bravely,   he   reminds   himself:    "I wish there  were  no allegories/ I wish the doctors   could   do  something  about   my forked    tongue."   In   the   longer   poem, "Pictures  in   an    Institution,"  we   can watch   him  as  he  struggles   to  put   phe­ nomenal human  care before metaphorical detachment.
He is beginning to sound  like a biblical prophet-poet, using at-hand objects,  most simple  metaphor, and  incantatory  struc­ tures -not abstracting,  but  generalizing from   the    concrete,    as   Jesus   and    the earlier  spellbinders did. Sometimes he in­ vokes his Jewishness  overtly; other  times he  imitates the  most  graceful  of  Jewish literature. Only  rarely  in  the  book  (and  I suspect,  partly  from  their  prosody,  that  these  are  the  earliest   poems  here)   does he  sound  like  the   U.  of  T. poets,  past­ ing  up  a  scrapbook of  mythologies. See "House of  Candy". I am  also a little  put off  by  his  oldtime  habit   of  placing   an adjective between  the  noun  and  the verb. But   he's   winning  the   struggle.   And along   with   the   opening  toward  unem­  bellished   speech   and   at-hand   materials
 comes a desire, in many  of the  poems, to turn  the ammunition of literature against the  public  enemies  of the spirit   (Mandel has always been strongly  aware of Blake) such  as the  Alberta  government, the  new colonialist masters, the false authoritarian evangelists.  So  his message  to  the  Cana­ dian   Poets:   "my   spoiled   beautiful  girl­ boys  singing  your  songs,  come  with  me to the farm  of the premier and  the  house of the  prime  minister,  let  us together set bonfires,  let  us  no  longer   be  syntactical and  grammatical. [I  understand his im­ pulse   here,   but   disagree    with   him   as surely  as EP  is my  teacher.], let  us  un­ encumbered  embrace  the   grace   of   our frenzy  and  recite  to  children the  solved riddles  of our  being.... "
Irving  Layton's solution   is  rather  to send hate literature and  bullets  after any­ one  wearing   Russian   or  Arab  uniforms and  names.  Eli  Mandel is a  private man  who wants  to be free of institutional cant,  who wants  to bring  it down.  He  says "let  us save our  country."
Mandel  has  the  Canadian poet's  habit of  composing   short   poems   on   (or   ad­ dressed  to)   momentary subjects,  such  as here  a  girl  on  a  high  wire,  an  African carving,   a  streetlight.  But   here,   not   to impose  his will on them-rather  to give witness  to  his  curiosity   and   the  gentle  bond  it  makes  between  poet  and  subject.
M. G. Hurtig, who already runs  the country's  best  bookstore,   is  to   be   con­ gratulated on his new publishing venture, and  for  having  the  sense to get  his  book printed by the  Coach  House  Press. They  have   made   a   book  of   poems   that   de­ mand attention-you  know  you're  being offered  something  more  than   meat   and potatoes.  Eli  Mandel realizes and  teaches  the  most  important  job  for  the  poet­ that  as  the mind  and  body  practice great


75

REVIEW ARTICLES



care for the art will the spirit be opened honestly    to   the   world   in   which   it   i!' formed. Mandel says it more  truly:

poetry is crime   when we  legislate against perception:
the  doors  of  perception become  mouths of
police   chiefs  mayors premiers ministers of
public health
but  poems  belong to  young  singers who
lie  down
to  see who  they  might become  in earth upon
earth and  speak  hebrew and  chinese in  the  criminal west  and
teach the  romans love

Irving Layton   is  not  much   interested in  perception. In  fact,  his ends are served when    perception   is  dulled.  The   pub­ lisher's   blurb  on  the  dust  jacket  of  The Shattered Plinths   says:   "Irving  Layton  is  a  celebrity   in  his  own  right.  He  is  a frequent contributor to  letters- to- the­ editor columns  of daily  newspapers,  and  often   appears  on   radio   and   television programs as  a  panelist  and  personality." I was struck  by  that,  and  I hope  it  was conceived   in  irony,   unlike  Layton's sin­ cere  dedication  of  the  book  to  Lyndon  B. Johnson.
Yesterday's favourite  iconoclast   offers
his standard  Foreword, first,  this  time, reasoning  that   the   brutalization  of   hu­ man   feelings   since   World   War   II   re­ quires    a   parallel    insensitivity   in   our poetry.  He  then  sets out  to illustrate. We are  treated to the  usual slapdash  couplets  with  the ever-increasingly ridiculous  end­  rhymes, the patent awkward  abab stanzas, and  other cranky  rhyme  schemes  usually found in  volumes  of comic  verse. One  of the   results  is  "The Red   Moujhik," the worst  poem  ever  published  in Canada, in terms  of  both  poetics  and  sentiments. In addition,  Layton   is  still  fond   of  using
 words  such  as "peruse," though this time
I didn't see any  references  to "phalli." There is  a  lot  of  prose  in  which   the
author  describes   himself   with   arbitrary
similes,  usually   flattering  (and   as  usual the  book  is  festooned  with   photographs of  the  author). Pieces  such  as  "Iroquois in Nice" are successions of pedestrian thoughts not  moved  by any lyric sense or feel   for   prosody.    The    grammar   isn't much  better: "A  general's brains/ is  be­ ing  auctioned."
But  in  these  days  no one  expects  Lay­ ton  to be an  artist. The more interesting thing   is  that   he  proves   Mandel's  posi­ tion,   that   poor   use  of   language  makes for  inadequate and  sometimes   immoral thought.   On    the   milder    side,   Layton  makes  the  point  made by most  middle­ aged   security-folk, that  nature teaches competitive  private   enterprise    ("Hera­ clitos"). The trouble is that  he  goes fur­  ther  than  that-he  calls for  hatred and  killing   in   the   name    of    property   and  patriotism.  A  number of   the  poems  are hideously   extreme  in  support  of  Israeli expansion; many  of  them  celebrate kill­ ing  and   maintain  that   killing  with  gun or knife  is a  poet's act.  In  this he sounds like  Hideo  Kobayashi, the  Japanese phi­ losopher  used  by  the  Imperial Army  in its  mobilization for invasion  of Japan's neighbours in  the  thirties.  Kobayashi wanted to swing  artists  behind  the  army, so  he said  that the  soldier  and   the  poet were   almost   identical.  For   similar   rea­ sons, Layton seems  to agree  with  him.  It gets  most   disturbing  when   Layton   also commingles murder and  sex.
I guess  with  all  those  knives  and  ma­ chine  guns,  Layton is still thinking of his phalli.



THE POETIC VOCATION


Peter Stevens



LOUIS  DUDEK, Atlantis. Delta Canada.  $4.00.
ELDON GRIER,  Pictures  On  The  Skin. Delta Canada. $4.50.
D.   G. JONES,  Phrases From  Orpheus.  Oxford University Press.  $4.50.


Atlantis DESCRIBES a journey through "a  wild  turbulence of   possibili­ ties"  in  a  search   below   the  surface   in order   to  make  life  anew.  The  reality  of life  is a  making to  break  through chaos to the  "laws  of freedom". Thus, the  poet undertakes the  voyage  to  find  the  secret that   will  disclose  the  reality   of  human nature  and   the   reality   of   poetry,   "an  epic  mode unrevealed".
These  ideas  are  mentioned in  the  Pro­ logue   and   are   elaborated  in   the   three  central sections   of  the   poem,  each  one devoted  to speculations about  and  details of Italy, France and  England. The  poem is  unified   by  constant   reference  to  the theme   of   reality,   but   it   sags   into   too much  theorizing and moralizing, particu­ larly  in  the  section  dealing with  France.
Reality  is  presented in  the  poem  by a series of catalogues in a Whitmanesque fashion: catalogues of  the  abundant  life of  Naples,  of  an  aquarium, of  trees,  of plants,  of animals. The  poem  works from this surface  to find  the  Atlantis of  mean­ ing,  which  in  simple  terms  is a  belief  in living  life  to  the  full  in  the  present. In spite  of  degradation,  slums,  inequalities, the pressures  of the  past, absolute slogans, class  structure,  man   continues  to  exist, love  and   art   persist  and   the   poet,  like most  men,   must  rummage through  th twin  realities  of  good  and   evil  to  strive for  their  Ideal  to live  by.
 But Louis Dudek  is no Platonist: "I've never   liked  Plato",  he  says.  The   Ideal can   be  reached   only  through  the   real, and  reality  is in  flux,  "change is all  we ever know".  Thus, the form  of the  poem, loosely lined  to suggest irregular currents of  thought  and   life  and   spaced   on  the page  to fall  readily  into  a  breathed  pat­ tern,  suits the  theme.  The  poem's length, however,  militates against  its  succeeding, for  one  comes  away  from  the  poem  ad­  miring    certain    sections,   mainly    those about   the  insistently  'real'  things   within  the  poem:

We  lean  in  a shadowy world when the  organ   peals
like  a slain  bull
and   the  great  windows bleed.

But the ideas behind the things too often develop  into  rather  abstract meditations and  thus, set against  the  reality  of detail, seem   somehow   vague.   At   only   a   few times in the poem do the meditative statements rise to the  level of poetic statements:
Someday, in  the  great future, perhaps
there will  be men no  longer   torn,
for  whom  time  is one  eternal now
and  change an  ever-changing change, who  see the  permanent in  the  impermanent and  the  same  rose  in  every  dying  rose.
Atlantis is an  uneven  poem,  filled with sections of sweep and movement, pulled down  by rather prosaic,  meandering and

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



haphazard  intellectualization. And  yet  it is  almost   saved   by  its  summation   con­ tained in  the  Epilogue, which  is  full  of hard direct  images,  gathering the  central theme  and   ideas   together    into   a   few pages.   It is  the  best  sustained   piece  of writing  in   the   poem   and   makes   the reader wish  that   the  poet  had  managed to  succeed   at  this  level  throughout  the poem.
Eldon Grier  speaks of the  influence  on
him  of "the chaotic permissiveness of the Twenties".  By  this   I   take   it   that    he means a kind of general surrealism  works through  his   poetry,   particularly  as   he also maintains that  "poetry  is basically  a perversion of language". Certainly the Surrealists broke down time, space and conscious    logic   but    their    objects,   al­ though  existing   in  a  dream  or  chaotic landscape, were  nearly  always  clear  and precisely  outlined. Think   of   the objects in  paintings by  Dali,  Magritte, Tanguy and  Ernst. In  comparison, the  poems  in Pictures   On   The    Skin   are    curiously blurred.  There  are   few  precise  images. Illogical   juxtapositions  make   their   own kind  of  sense  but  often  the  succession  of images  seem  mere   collocation   of  things with  little   real  associative   power   either  singly   or   in   juxtaposition.   Occasional memorable phrases  stick in the  mind: in one  poem  Picasso  is described  as  having eyes "perpetually awake like a pair of perching owls"  and  an  "old  man's  tom­ cat   head".  There  is  one   succinct   and clear  surrealist poem :

it would  be a  joke
if I managed  to live beyond some  terrible  physical  upheaval
the  floors gone
the  stars  invisible  until  further notice
the  helmets  of beauty  parlors  pushing  out
of the  mud
 However, the  effect  of the  book, hand­ somely   printed  with   collages,   coloured  pages  and  drawings interleaved  with  the poems, is one of blur  and fuzziness, a col­ lection  of fragments  that  never  focus  on any  kind  of  reality   (surrealist or  other­ wise) ;  even   the   poems   on  some  other  artists  and  musician9-Giacometti, Mor­ rice,  Messiaen,   who   work   in   terms   of reality  - become    vague    figures.    The photographs and  collages  concentrate on negatives and  pieces of the human face. There are  no  real  features;  everything is masked  and  isolated  but  it is not  an  iso­ lation   which   suggests   the  alienation   of the  artist   fighting  desperately  to  uphold  an   anarchic   vision   of   the   world    but rather  an   isolation    which    arises   from chopped-up   experience,  the   reader   cut adrift  in   a   muddy  and   blurred  world with   little  indication given   by  the  poet just how  the poems,  in his terms,  "reflect  the  curious   slides  and   sequences   which lie  behind   the  printed word."
The title  of D.  G. Jones'  volume  indi­ cates  that   the  poet  is speaking  with  an Orphic voice,  with   the  tone,  if   not  the manner, of someone  like Robert Duncan,
"making  private  worlds    public    and I
digesting  the  public I privately-making
them  real". The poet  sings about  his per­ sonal   grief,   the   resulting  poems   being rather like  a  tongue   probing the  cavity of   a   decayed    tooth,  an    excruciating search  "to  find words for what  we suffer"  and  finding some delight  in the  sensation of  suffering  and   the  discovered   words, "to   enjoy   what   we  must   suffer". The  poetic  vocation  becomes  human fate,  for an  Orpheus now must  insist that  the  uni­  verse  and  its elements, perhaps doomed, must   sing  in  spite   of  fate,   in  spite   of

like Easter  eggs.
 pain  and  death, like hunters:

REVIEW ARTICLES



Happy, they grieve The  dead  birds, and  everywhere  round them The  universe  bleeds into  darkness.

Human love  existing  in  this  process  cre­ ates  both  happiness and   pain,  often  in­ extricably mixed: "And  death/ foraging  galactic wastes/ is but  a door/ open/ to
love, makes  I love dear".
The   poet  as  Orpheus investigates the lower  depths of his own  life, dredges  up his losses and  griefs and, examining them, retains  some sense of life, so that  the poet can   bitterly   reject   his  Eve,  leaving   the garden   as "ember and   ash  and   scarred rock", yet still haunted by "a memory of flowers"; thus,  when  Eve  returns in  an­ other   poem,  he  can  rejoice,  for  there  is nothing to fear,

Because you are  beautiful, dying, And  because  there  is nothing -

The  Orphic attitude is central to  this collection,   but  the  first  few  poems  in  it make   it  difficult   for   the   reader  to  im­ merse  himself  in  this  world.  There  is a curious  poem to begin  with; it establishes the  idea  of loss and  the  tone  of lament:
"For the  mind   in  time I Is  a  perishing
bird, /It sings and  is still",  but  it  seems somehow   too  derivative, containing  un­ assimilated    fragments   of	other    poets (Blake,  Yeats,  Stevens), as  if  the  poet's own  Orphic stance  is nothing but a pose. Once    into    the    volume,   however,   the reader  finds  that   the  stance is  not  as­ sumed,  although the  long  title  poem,  an attempt  to  weld   together  separate  ele­ ments   by  staggered  indentations,  is  too difficult  to  read.  There are  short  sections within   the  poem  that work  but  I think the  four  real sections  of  the  poem  could be  printed  separate!y as  a  linked   series and  the  reader  would  not be confused  by
 


. 	.



English-speaking Theatre in  Eastern  Canada
from the  187o's to  rgr4

MURRAY  D. EDWARDS


The  Marks  Brothers,  the  Taverniers, Ida  Van  Cortland-
these are  some  of the  personalities from  the  early days of
Canadian theatre when  the  stage was a saloon, a fire-hall  or
a field. They  all appear
in Dr. Edward's excellent book, a study  unique in its combination of a serious look at  the  development of
theatre in this country, and
its picture of the life
and  ways of Canada in those years.

Fully  illustrated with  contemporary photographs and  posters, and  written by one of the foremost
authorities in  Canadian theatre.

$12.50


University of Toronto  Press

Toronto/Buffalo

the  typographical  layout. Because his per-	 	

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



sonal universe is bleak, the insistence on images   of  the  four   elements   and   stone works better in the shorter poems. The doubleness     (and    duplicity)   of   life   is caught in the shorter poems like "At  The Edge  of the  Garden", "Putting on the Storms", "The  Stream Exposed",  "Pas­ toral" and  "For Spring" with  their  terse phrasing and  sparse  images. In  the land­  scape   of  these  poems  the  poet  sees  his own  fate  and  the  fate  of  all humans and human  relationships.
The  breaking of  his  personal   life  re­ leases  some   kind   of   poetic   energy,   an energy   as  timeless  and  indestructible  as the  elements of earth. A  "two-bit creek"
 suddenly  makes   sense   because   in   any final   act   of  universal  destruction  "The water will  remain f And  rock". It is  in these   shorter,  more   direct   poems   that D.  G.  Jones'  Orphic vision  of  the  world seems  genuine as  poetry.   In the   longer poems  and  those  in which  the  lining  and
the   use  of  capitals seems  arbitrary  and even  whimsical, the poetic stance seems merely   a  pose  when   placed   against   the terse impressive  statement in the short poems  I have  mentioned. It  is in  these, not  in  the  rambling, worked-up rhetoric of the title poem and some other longish poems,  that  the  real  strength of  the  vol­ ume  resides.

PETER STEVENS



LOWRY  POSTHUMOUS


Tony Kilgallin


MALCOLM  LOWRY, Lunar  Caustic.  Clarke  Irwin. Hard  cover, $3.20; paper, $1.50.
Dark  as the Grave Wherein My  Friend  is Laid. General  Publishing. $6.gs.


LowRY  WAS  25 when  he  be­ gan   to   write   Lunar   Caustic   and   dead before    the    work    attained   its   present shape.   He   had   put   Ultramarine  and   a few   leftover    short   stories   behind   him to  follow  his  newly  married  and   newly deserted   wife, Jan  Gabrial, to  New York in  I 934· Here  he  entered   Bellevue  Psy­ chiatric Hospital, voluntarily he claimed,  for  research material, but was discharged as  a  foreigner and   as  a  fraud, since  he was  only  a  drunkard. As  the  friend   of a   fellow-Englishman,  Eric   Estoick,   he shared his New York apartment while completing  a  rough   draft entitled The


8o
 Last    Address.    This   was   published in French  in  three   issues of  the  magazine Esprit    in   I956.    "It's  not   very   good", Margerie Lowry  told  me,  "but  Malcolm didn't want   to  risk  losing  it  as  he  had already lost the first draft of Ultramarine and   the  2,ooo  page  novel-in-progress In Ballast  to the  WhiteSea." Before he died, a  year   later,   he  had   changed  the   title first  to  Swinging the  Maelstrom then  to its  present title  to link it with  Under the Volcano and  Ultramarine. For  war  cor­ respondents   like   Hugh   Firmin    lunar caustic consisted  of silver  nitrate  formed  into  pencils  which  were  used  for  cauter-

REVIEW ARTICLES



1zmg.  But  he  was  unable  to  use  it  on the  wounded Indian  and  thus  could  not be  the  needed  Samaritan.
Sigbjorn   Lawhill  with   Moby Dick  in
his pocket  enters  the  Psychiatric Hospital under  his own steam, or rather liquor,  in The    Last   Address. His   hysterical   sense of  identification with  Melville   (who fathered a  Malcolm)  increases  upon spotting from  a window  28th  Street, Melville's   last   address, where   he  wrote Billy  Budd. Lawhill's potential  Samari­ tan  is  the  psychiatrist  Claggart,  but  like Hugh he  is unable to  save  Lawhill from himself.  "Drop  by caustic drop", to quote Hart Crane,  Lawhill's dependency upon alcohol  increases.
Lowry changed Lawhill's name to Bill Plantagenet, a  character the  Consul  re­ members    in   Under  the   Volcano  from Cambridge, where  he  too identified  him­ self  with  Melville.   The theme of  Lunar Caustic  in  embryo  form  Lowry  found  in a Chekhov letter  to  Suvorin  wherein  the latter is advised  to write of  how a "young  man   squeezes  the  slave  out  of  himself, drop    by   drop,    and   how   waking   one beautiful morning he feels that  he has no longer  a  slave's  blood  in  his  veins  but  a real  man's."
Plantagenet's   unsuccessful  pilgrimage to  freedom   frustrates  his  desire  for  re­ birth.   Instead  he  turns his  attention  in the  hospital  to a young  boy who  reminds him  of "Rimbaud at  twelve", Garry,  the murderer of  a  little  girl,  and   to  Garry's father figure,  Mr.  Kalowsky, "the Wan­  dering  Jew".  But   these   two  eventually spiral  away  from  him  until  they  are  lost, while   Plantagenet  only   reverts    to   his whisky  bottle  after   leaving the  hospital.
Lowry   lost   all   the   notes   for   Lunar
Caustic's expansion when his cabin burned  to  the   ground. Thus  the   work
 which  was  to  have  been  Purgatory perished with the intended Paradiso, In Ballast to the  White Sea, while  ironically the Inferno, Under the Volcano, never faced  the  flames.  Lowry  wrote  in  I952: "I can  believe Lunar  Caustic  was too gruesome   for   anyone's  consumption.  I can   even   now   believe   my   unconscious made  it  too  gruesome for  anyone  what­ ever   but   I  cannot believe   there  is  no merit  in  it."
There is no doubt  of the  work's  merit.
It stands  with  Joyce's  short  story  Grace, Charles Jackson's novel  The Lost  Week­ end   and   Faulkner's  little   known   story Mr. Acarius as an honest and frightening descent  into  the  black  hole  of  an  unreal  reality  where  to  drink  life  to  the  lees is to  be  a  "lonely   soul  falling   featherless into  the  abyss":   where  to  imitate Rim­ baud's   descent   into   hell  one   must   run  the  risk of never  resurfacing to a normal  life.  Like  his  kindred spirits  Baudelaire, Poe   and   Melville,  Lowry  fathomed depths  that  eventually cost  him  his life. With his dead  hand  upon them, Margerie Lowry   and    Earle    Birney   have   repro­ duced   in   this   Cape   Edition  of   Lunar  Caustic   the   text   they   edited   for   The Paris  Review   in  I963.  The  introduction is  by   Conrad   Knickerbocker,   Lowry's onetime biographer before  his regrettable suicide.
Dark   As   The  Grave   Wherein My Friend  Is  Laid  shares  some  of  the  flaws of Lunar Caustic. Posthumously and post­ humourously  spliced   together   by   Mar­ gerie  Lowry  and  this  time  Douglas  Day, Knickerbocker's successor  as the "official"  Lowry  biographer, it fails  to measure  up to  the  Everest  proportions  of  Under the Volcano. The  sequel  is  never  as good  as the  original  especially  when  it  lacks  the finishing   touches   of   its  creator. In  this

8!

REVIEW ARTICLES



case  Lowry  risked  this  failure   by  choos­ ing  to  return to the  setting  of  Under  the Volcano where  he sought  to  exorcise  the ghosts of his past.
Sigbjorn   (sea-horn)   Wilderness is Lowry's   persona   who   returns  to   Cuer­ navaca and  Oaxaca with his second wife, Primrose,   who  is  seeing  Mexico  for  the first  time.  His  novel,  The  Valley of the Shadow of Death, has yet to be accepted by a publisher and  he fears  that  his writ­  ing days are  over. The return trip  is thus both  flashback  and feedback, with echoes, overtones and   anecdotes  of  Under  the Volcano   throughout.   To    apply    Mc­ Luhan, the 1947 novel is the old environ­ ment   which   becomes   the   content   and context  for  this  new  novel.
The   title,   as  Day  fails  to  point   out,
is a line from  an elegy by the British poet Abraham Cowley  for  his boyhood  friend at Cambridge, Lowry's alma mater also. Sigbjorn's friend   is one  Juan  Fernando, a   six   foot   three    inch   Zapotecan  who served   as  a  Good   Samaritan  to  Lowry in   Mexico   in   the   thirties.   He   was  the original for Juan Cerillo  and  Dr.  Vigil in Under the  Volcano, though  still a young man  of 24. He  is both  the  beginning  and the  end  of  the  novel  as  the  fixed  focus for  Sigbjorn's quest.
The book  opens  very  slowly  with  the plane  trip  south  from  Vancouver  where the  wandering two  have  settled   in  Eri­ danus (Dollarton). The  flat character of Primrose    and   the   stilted   dialogue   are offset  by  Sigbjorn's  musings.  "Wrapped in   the   tentacles  of   the  past,  like  some gloomy  Laocoon",  he  is  doomed   to  ob­ serve  life  as  "lost  prose  sliding  past  the window". As  a  Rip Van   Winkle  figure he  prepares  himself  for  Under the  Vol­ cano  Revisited.
The descent  into  Mexico  then  is simul-
 taneously   a   descent    into    self,   and    a descent  into  the  past  for  Sigbjorn, while for  Primrose it is little  more  than  a vaca­ tion   with   a   knowledgeable  guide.   Un­ fortunately this  story  is  little more  than  the   thinly   veiled   diary  of  the   Lowrys' trip  to  Mexico in  1945-6  when  he wrote his famous letter   to  Jonathan Cape  and  shortly thereafter  attempted  suicide. When   the  Wildernesses finally  learn  that  Fernando  had   been   killed  several   years ago  the  book  attains only  the  weakest  of climaxes.   Basically   then   Lowry's   drafts for  this  novel  were  still  little  more  than a transcription of life rather than  a dramatization  of  it.  The  transmutation of life into  art  has  not  materialized as it did  so well  in  Under the  Volcano.
The    book   is  closer   to   Mann's The
Story  of a Novel, his account of the writ­ ing   of   Doctor   Faustus,   than   to  Gide's The  Counterfeiters, Huxley's Eyeless  in Gaza   and   other  novels  about   novelists. It is also comparable with Aiken's Ushant as    an    autobiographical   exegesis    and
roman   a  clef.  But  unlike  Aiken,  Lowry
died  while  still  in  the  midst  of  life  with half  of  his  total  works  still in  fragments. To  his  first  master he  once  said,  "Con­ rad,    you   ought  to   decorate   the   page more", an  embellishment he practised  on Under the   Volcano for  ten  years.  Here lies  one  of  the  faults   of   Dark   As  The Grave's  allusions:  they provide few depth  charge explosions   in  the  reader's mind,  as  they   did   in   Volcano. Similarly,   the absence  of  the  unities  of  time  and  place associated    with    Volcano  prevent   the reader   from   firmly   stabilizing   himself. Passages of beautiful prose alternate with banal  conversational links. The editors' problems are  evident here  for  they  had to choose  among variant versions of sentences  time   and   time  again   without

REVIEW ARTICLES



using  any   non-Lowry  originated  words. One   might   wish  for   the  alternative­ that  is the  705 page "bolus" of three  dis­ tinct  texts-but  the  publishers chose an ungelled    novel   rather  than  the   work frozen  in  progress.
Under  the Volcano  remains as the sun
in   Lowry's    solar   system.   Ultramarine,
 Lunar    Caustic,   Dark   As   the    Grave
Wherein   My   Friend  Is  Laid,  Hear  Us
0 Lord From Heaven  Thy  Dwelling Place, La Mordida  and  October  Ferry to Gabriola are  the  planets,   each   different and  fascinating yet  all  part  of  one  plan and  one man.





COCK	AND BULL STORIES


William H. New


JACK  LUDWIG, Above  Ground. Little,  Brown. $6.95.
ROBERT HUNTER,  Erebus. McClelland & Stewart.  Paper,  $2.95.
MORDECAI RlCHLER,  Cocksure. McClelland & Stewart.  $5·95·


AT  FIRST GLANCE  Jack  Lud­ wig's  most  recent   novel,  Above  Ground, reads  like  In  Praise of Older  Women re­ written  in  order   to  praise  only  slightly older    women.    The   central   character/ narrator is  a  young  man,   Joshua,  who recalls   his  early   ill   childhood  and,   be­ ginning with  the hospital nurses, recounts his   subsequent   flight   from   woman    to selected   woman.  He   exempts   a  spastic  girl  from   his  attentions; and   Ludwig  is a   little    unclear   about   the    extent    of Joshua's  relations with  the  mad  sister  of his friend  Gersh; and  if we add  the fairy chemistry   professor    to   the   list,   it   still leaves Joshua with  a lot of running room for  his  active   organs.   There is  Maggie,  whom he marries; Zora,  the  dark  passion of his  life,  who  grows  older; Alvira,  the fat  girl  who  obsessively  loses  weight  for him, and when  he is not permanently attracted,  puts   it   back   on   in  order   to hate  him  adequately enough; Nina,  who
 abandons him  for  politics; Gyla,  who  is all women  and  all suffering Russian  Jews to  his all  guilty   (because of  Hiroshima) American   maleness; and   Mavra, a  curi­ ously wistful  sad  case of a woman, whom,  like  the  others,  Joshua says he  loves. So goes the  book, and  it  would  be  magnifi­  cently  forgettable if  all  there  was  to  it were  these  (what   the  book  jacket  calls) "stunning   characterizations".   Some   of them   are  clever,  certainly, and   Ludwig  knows  a  smart   phrase   when   he  sees  it, even if  more of them  should  have  waited for another book. But "stunning"?
What  the many  portraits are  supposed
to  do,  if  we   judge   from   Ludwig's  re­ curring use of  a word  like  "palimpsest", among   other   things,  is  join  together  to illustrate the  Eliotian  epigraph:  "so  all women  are  one  woman". The trouble  is that   even   Joshua  knows   it   isn't   true; they   all  grow   old  separately,  and   they all  must  die  alone.  Even  the  spastic  girl,

REVIEW ARTICLES



who first seems a casual aside, apparently haunts Joshua's imagination through the course of the book, till he is forced into announcing as  a  kind  of  expiation that she died long ago, in her sleep. Death frightens Joshua; he  doesn't  like  talking of  it.  And  so  his  father's sudden  death, and  the  spastic  girl's  unplanned one, and the   fat   girl's   reckless  fatness,   and   the birth of his own child all force him to recognize  his own age. And age can seem as   much   of  a   trap   as  the   hospital   in which   his  youth   was  expended.  Hence the   present    hectic   activity.   Hence   the girls.
All of this is told at a breathless pace, which  is admirably sensitive to Joshua's frantic transcontinental life. Dangerously, however,  it   tempts    readers   to   parody. The very first page produces  passages like "The first  strange man  in  my  life  was a doctor. He  came  to ask me what  hurt. I said  my  throat." and  "My  father came in.   I  was   bleeding.   He   fainted."  The Dick-and-Jane  innocence  is  so  real   by the  end  of page  one that  we expect  Spot and   Puff   to   bound   into   the   novel  on page  two. Fortunately they don't, and though it  is  predictable that  Joshua  re­ mains  "above ground" at  the  end  of  the story,   hoping  to   welcome   the   sunrise, having encountered the  problems  of  life but   not   having   solved   them,   Ludwig's overlong book is still one of those rarities  that   a  second  reading  will improve.
Difficulty    with    cliched    situation    is what   also  affiicts  Robert   Hunter's  first and    (that  unfashionable epithet)   pro­ mising  first  novel,  Erebus.  It  amasses,  in fact,   just  about   every  variation  of  the Bildungsroman  that  the  twentieth  cen­ tury  has  contrived.  A young  man  recalls his   first   sexual   experience;  he   partici­ pates  in  a gang  bang;  he gets drunk; he
 almost   has   a   homosexual  relationship; he does have assorted  heterosexual ones, including a  Great Fulfilling one  with  an Older Woman; he manfully withstands a seductive attempt by  an  attractive drunken  Indian  girl,   who   later   thanks him; he  saves  the  marriage of  a  friend, who   subsequently  writes   him   a  confes­ sional   letter; he  is  desolated   when   an­  other  friend, a  gentle  political  liberal,  is viciously   blinded    by   some   small-town reactionary hulking  hicks;  he  runs  home to  Mama,  which   is  No  Good; and   he finally  commits  himself  to  teaching in  a Progressive  school,  learning what  he  can from   his  sensitive  blind  friend, Konrad, and   plunging  forward  through  the   icy water.  So   this   is  Winnipeg?  And   the reader   is  left   at   the   end   of  the   book conscious  of  all  the  cliches,  conscious  of all   the   sentiment,  and   wondering  why the  Dickens  he's  been  so moved!
Obviously    what   Hunter  wants   from his  readers   is  a  gutsy  reaction, so  (pre­ sumably)  he  uses  the  situations  he  does because   for   all   their   triteness  they   are humanly  true.   What  most   disturbs   his characters and  himself  is  not  the  animal part  of  man  at  all,  though that  alone  is not   much -a   small   and    insignificant "spastic   shudder",  the   narrator  thinks. The  narrator is shown  to  be  both  sensi­ tive and  insensitive  to other people,  dirty  and  concerned about  cleanliness,  lustful  and moral, stupidly jealous and  conscious of  friendship, or  in  other   words  normal. "Realism" doesn't deny aspiration here, however,   nor   does  license   replace  free­ dom;  for   all   the   impoliteness   of   the novel,  it  doesn't advocate  immorality or chaos.
What   does   disturb  these   people    is
rigidity,   in   its   many   forms:  masks   of piety  and  righteousness, which  hide  nar-

REVIEW ARTICLES



row  minds  and  inhibit sympathy; or  in­ tellectualism   which    in   the    throes   of categorization  grows   sterile;   or  "phil­ osophic,  political, emotional, and ethical" refusals    "to   accept   change";  or   sight which   is  blind.  Konrad  when   blinded,  for   example,  becomes   even   more  sensi­ tive   to  the  world   than   he  was  before;  Darryl   when  he  finds  his  marriage more important  than   his  book  of criticism  be­ comes  more  of an  intellectual giant; the narrator  himself   when   he  tries  to  help others  to  see the  world  can  see it  better too.   Hunter  would   probably  feel   that these statements themselves  were  "rigid", that   the   "life" of  the   book  lay  in  the response  to it, rather than  in the  attempt to  talk  about  it  or  in  any  attempt  intel­ lectually   to  comprehend one's  response. So  be it,  for  one  does  respond.  But  that  doesn't   make  the  book  better  than  it  is; it still leaves  us conscious  of  huge  purple patches of  prose,  largely  in  the  first half of   the   book,   when   the   "ovate  orange  sun"  rises, the  "day  batters itself  into  a stunned  silence",   the  sunrise  "stains   the sky into  a great  red  membrane", and  the narrator "floats  belly-up  in  the  steaming red-soup of  dawn". Maybe  so, but all the characters sound  like the  same  character, and   hopefully  in   his   next   novel,   Mr.
 Hunter will  make  his  people  speak  like the individuals he says they  are.
Then there is Mordecai Richler's new novel,  Cocksure, which  from  its title sounds  as though it  ought to  turn  into  a similar sort of book, a Great Quest  for Initiation,  phallus  leaving    Wonderland for a Happy Hunting Ground. Yet Rich­ ler,  whatever   else  he  does,  eschews  the cliche.  His  central  character  is  a  good­ looking   married   father,  beyond   adoles­ cence,  who  has  discovered  that  his mod­  erately  liberal  views make him thoroughly square   in  a   with-it   world.   So  Richler  has  it  out   with   with-it-ness.  Mortimer Griffin,  denying  he  is a  Jew,  is charged  with   anti-semitism;  his   wife,   conscious of   his  good  looks  and   morality, attacks him for being an unliberated product of Madison   Avenue   standards.  Their   pre­ teen  child  is sent  to  a  school  so  progres­  sive  that   sex  and   swearing  are  on  the curriculum  and   the   Christmas  play   is MaratjSade.  And  Mortimer's old  strait­ laced  school-teacher, Agnes  Laura Ryer­  son,  turns  out  to  be giving  her  little  boy students blow  jobs  to  keep  them  in  line (but  is fired because  this encourages competition), while his boss, a saintly publisher  who  excuses  the  Nazis  because of   their   tenderness,   sells  out   to   Star




Write  or Phone

THE   UNIVERSITY BOOK  STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

REVIEW ARTICLES



Maker,  an   American  mogul   whose  im­ mortality  is  guaranteed  because  of   the efficacy  of  kidney,  heart,  skin,  eye,  and other     transplants.    Mortimer   is   being eyed  for   his  "marvy  lymph  system",  in fact,  and  the  novel  ends with  him  being besieged,   his  one  hope  for  survival   de­ pending on a  recently-acquired girlfriend summoning the  police in time. She won't, because  she  lives in  a  Hollywood  world,  more  conscious  of  the  reel  than  the  real and  so  unable   to  appreciate a  personal threat. There are  even  more  characters, all  eloquently  differentiated, and   all  in the same extravagant vein. And all ought to  be  gloriously   comic,  whereas  after   a while  the   book  just  wears.  Richler,  ob­ viously   having  a  go  at  assorted   sacred Canadian cows, mostly succeeds  in  milk­ ing  them  dry,  and  the  readers who  have already encountered bits of  the  novel  in Tamarack  Review may find  them  better  the  first  time  round.
The difficulty   about   the   book  is  the sort   that   the  ironic  ending   of  Richler's
1959 work,  The  Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz, implies.  At  that  point,  Duddy's unorthodoxy has  got  him  some  land; he becomes   an   Owner,  wins  Recognition, and  presumably for  all his idiosyncrasies obtains a  seat  in  the  establishment. But to  extrapolate further: what  then?  Is he contented with  himself, does he rock con­ servative  boats,  or  does  he  become  the resident  joker,   accepted    and   despised? Richler's  stinging  satire,   brilliant    as  it can    be,    swings    in    two    directions - against  the  old  conservative world  which









86
 he's  had  to  do  battle with,  and  against the  new crowd  of pseudo-sophisticates whose  very  with-it-ness is simply  a  new brand    of   narrow  conservatism. Robert Hunter can  see  this;  so  can  Jack  Lud­ wig,   though  he's   a  little   more  cynical about it.  Richler seems  a lot  more trap­ ped   than   either  of  them,  for   his  book suggests  that  he's at once conscious of the recognition  he   wants,   aware   of   where the  "important"  recognition comes from, attracted by that  group, and  repelled  by even   the  genuine  tinsel  that   lies  under  its shallow  false  surface.
In  "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape",
Abraham Klein  talks about the poet's predicament  and   the   temptations that face  him:
Fame, the  adrenalin:	to be  talked about;
to be a verb; to be introduced as The:
to smile  with  endorsement from  slick paper....
It has  its attractions, but  is not  the thing.....
Rather it is stark  infelicity which stirs  him ...
to walk  upon roofs  and  window-sills and
defy
the  gape of gravity.
Either  way   it's   a   vulnerable  pos1t10n. Richler's book, which  will  prove scream­ ingly  funny among the  cocktail  set  and be The  Richler to appear on shelves and side  tables,  is  neither as  human a  book as  Hunter's,   as   comic   as  anything  by Gunter  Grass,  nor  as stirred   by stark  in­ felicity  as  Bellow or Barth. Maybe  in the short   run   this   doesn't   matter,  but   for those  who  walk  constantly through slick paper, a  different gape  of gravity  awaits.







POET OF
THE OBVIOUS


DAVID   HELWIG, Figures in  a Landscape. Ober­
on  Press   (Ottawa, 1967), pp.   217.  $g.oo

To  BEGIN with  a line about doilies guard­ ing  chairs:  there   must   be  some  sort  of risk in  that. And  riskier  still  to go  on  to Auntie   Cis  and   Uncle  Will,   to   picnic chairs  and  dragon-flies, to Katie and  the carousel,  samplers, perch and  teal, grape­  fruit  trees in art galleries, and  the Orange Lodge   parade.  It all  sounds  dreadfully like   low-grade   Betjeman,  or   minor­ Reaney,   or   the  inverse   snobbishness  of Larkin and  "the Group". Precious  stuff. Yet,  this  is  the  stuff  out  of which  David  Helwig  chooses  to  make  his  poems,  and in  Figures in  a  Landscape,  a  collection of  82  poems  and  three plays,  he  shows, among  other things,  what  a  poet  can  do with  seasons and  memories. Surprisingly, for  all its  domestic, Victorian clutter ("Bisque Figurines in  a Landscape",  one is tempted to retitle  it), and  despite  a confusing five-part organization,  Figures in  a Landscape  leaves  the  impression of lucid   poetic  intelligence and   a  sharply­ defined    sense   of   particular    time   and place.
Helwig  is a  poet  of  the  obvious:  fall­ ing  leaves  speaking of  the  transience of all things; the  loneliness  of  broken  fences and   backyards; mutability  in   the  sand.  But   he   has   his   reasons   for   reworking traditional  themes  and  courting a home­ town    muse.    Presumably,   he    seeks   a
 ground  for  poetry  in imperfection rather than   in  prophecy,  in  the  impermanent rather than  in  an  absolute, in  a  resolute, if sometimes  clownish,  self rather than  in wayward  distortion. If any one poem  can serve as an  example, Helwig's fine medi­ tation   on  "A  Shaker Chair"  might   do. For  here,  refusing  "To turn  away  to  the light  of God's  solitude", he  puts  against  the "stillness  turning, stillness moving" of the  Shakers'  prophetic  creed   his  "scrap of  sense",  his  "now   and   never,  one  un­ perfect  love".  The   powerful   oxymorons run  throughout the  poem  for  more  than technical  exercise  or  display:   imperfec­ tions  yoke together as many opposites  as we might  find  in  the  paradoxes of  per­  fection,   and   "plain   speaking",  itself   a pun   on  the  planed   wood   of  the  chair,  provokes   equally   the   tensions   of  inner  light and of sense experience. Plain speak­ ing, then, the language of wood  or silence or  sense,  is   the   virtue Helwig   seeks  so that  he might  play out  his themes  of flux and  stasis, desire  and  loss, innocence and experience.  And  if the  plain  world  is the ground  of poetry,  it can  be made  present only   in   a  language  appropriate  to   its homely objects,  homeliness,  and  homilies.
For his uncles and aunts, then, for his Maggie  and  Kate, or  for  his Liverpudd­ lian  scenes  of  scrabbling  landladies and cold  babies, Helwig  employs,  deliberately and  skilfully,  a  clear,  simple,  active  lan­  guage.  I  haven't counted words,  but  I'd guess  he  almost  invariably chooses  com­  mon adjectives   ("black", "white", "soft",

"slow"  "neat" "warm" "green") and simple 'action  v'erbs   ("dr'op",  "poured",
"climbed", "clutched",  "stare",  "runs", "stand", "wash") . The  impression,  cer­ tainly,  is of a clean,  supple  line, of  direct  perception, and   open   awareness.  Water and  fire,  images  of  motion   and  flowing,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



appear obsessively, along with softness, wind,  and  dark. But  Helwig  does  not re­ lax  into  comfortable Ovidian  metamor­ phoses,   "locked  in   the   soft   prisons   of aphrodite". If his world  burns in a trans­  forming  fire,  it  is  still  a  world  of  dry, brittle,   reedy  matter. If  "Old Eden  was an  unknown, unthought  sea"  of  eternal moments, there   is  a  "staying   light",   a "world of paradigms and  greed".  And  if all things  plunge down the mill race, still it is "stone  and  beam"  that  are  moved  by "the heavy currents of air  and  water".
I am  trying  to  suggest  how  in  his  lu­ cidity  and  directness, and  as the  justifica­ tion   of  his  apparent   plainness,  Helwig manages   to   generate   terrific    tensions. Partly  a matter of  language, the  tensions derive   as  well  from  the  constant inter­ play of  motion  and  stillness, painted and  live figures, memory  and  sense. Curiously, Helwig  is not  unlike  Edward Hicks,  an­ other   preacher  of  the  "inner  light"  to whom  he turns  more  than  once. Like the "stiff   animals  gentle"   in  the  peaceable  kingdom painted  by  Hicks'   "violent hands", Helwig's figures  stiffen  into  the artificial  life   of    paintings;   alternately, they  move  out  of  stiff art  into  life itself:  stuffed   birds   live   secret   lives;   a  vixen freezes  into  the  "still,  hard   fire"  of  the sun;  a  great  lion  stands  in  the  park  un­ moved:

all  bronze  his mane,  eye and  bag of seed, dead  to the sun's  folly.

Out of forests or from  east of Eden  come strange  creatures,  naked    and   soft,   or fuzzy   and    shambling.  In   the   Orange Lodge  parade marchers become ghosts, move  like  dead   men.  So  it  is, too,  that against the merely local and personal, domestic    and   quaint,  Helwig   balances



88
 poems  of  art   (from   the  Baroque,  Cana­ letto,  Matisse), and sometimes with extra­ ordinary effect,  poems  of  madness,  arti­ fice,  and  dream, as  in  "Mad Songs", or "Warning" in  which  a  lover  becomes  a dynamite-man, an  anarchist, or  "Reflec­ tions"   in  which  we  encounter  a  blood­  chilling  arsonist.  And  while   two  of  the plays,  The   Dream  Book  and   the  ambi­ tious   A  Time   of Winter, suggest  some reticence about  peculiarity and  bohemi­ anism,   the   third, The  Dancers  of  Col­ beck, shows  a gift  for  the  grotesque that  one  would  gladly  see developed further.
It is probably unfair to suggest  that vision  and   life  are   at  odds  in  Helwig's poetry. He might  well say that  madness, dream, and  art  are  simply  ways  of  per­ ceiving,    equal  to,   not   different   from,  one's  sense  of  the   plain,   burning  world of   Ontario-and  there   are   poems   to prove  this.  Anyhow,  his point is precisely not  to  use  a  fashionable  rhetoric of  vio­ lence   or   to  seek  out  single-minded  ex­ cesses. Still,  I, for  one,  would  be  happy to see the  Flemish  realist  in  Helwig  turn  into  that  "thin  man", John  Bunyan, who "walks  like  a  heron  / in  the  swamp   of decay".  Enough  of  "chrome kettles  that  hold   the   kitchen"  and   Helwig    as   an "empty cup". If there's a Shaker in him, or  a  Breughel, crying  to  get  out  and  be heard, let  him  be heard. Meanwhile, I suppose, we  must  have  nothing but  ad­ miration for  a  young  writer  whose  craft  is so  sure  that   he  can  write  with  equal  skill   a   simple   lullaby,   a  mad   song,   a dream  vision,   or   a   lament, or   tell   us plainly  of a fire great  enough to burn  the world   and   all   the   trembling   creatures in  it.
ELI MANDEL

BOOKS IN REVIEW



POP POETRY


F. R. scoTT, Trouvailles. Delta  Canada. $2.50.

THE   TITLE oF  F.  R.  ScoTT's book  of poems   from   prose   is  Trouvailles-the French   word    for    "discovery"   in   the plural. (Why  didn't he just simply  call it Eureka! Found Poems?)  In  any case, be­ fore   I   naively  succumb to  circumlocu­ tions   I  would   first  like  to  quote   Louis Dudek's definition of  the  "found  poem"  in   his   pragmatic   Introduction  to   this book. "The  found  poem  is really  a  piece of   realistic   literature, in   which   signifi­ cance  appears inherent in  the  object­ either  as extravagant absurdity or  as un­ expected worth. It  is like  driftwood,  or pop  art,  where  natural  objects  and  utili­ tarian  objects   are  seen  as  the  focus  of generative   form   or   meaning."   Good!  Very  relevant  in  view of its realistic  con­ notations-but    so   is  technology.    The  "found   poems"   in  Scott's   volume   are taken   from   magazines   and   newspapers, and  they  make  dull  reading  indeed.   Not even  one sex scoop.  Mr.  Scott,  however, finds   it   necessary   to   add    a   Foreword wherein   he   theoretically  constructs  the few  fundamentals of "found poem"  aes­ thetics.  Are  there  any?  "There are  vari­ ous ways of presenting a found  poem.  In the   strict   manner  no  words  should   be added or  subtracted; the  original  should be reprinted with  only a change  from  the prose to a free verse form."  Is he serious? He   must   be  putting  us  on.  As  a  poet, who  believes  in  the  gift  of  the  Word, I am  naturally  opposed  to "concretism" in poetry,  and  the  foolish,  decadent fad  of finding  poems in  the  pages of the fourth estate.   Moreover,  I   am   not   only   dis­ gusted, but  bored.  I have  an  uneasy feel-

go
 ing that  McLuhan and his cohorts  are conspiring  to  launch a  literary  fall-out. I can  hear  them  laughing in  their  book­ walled  shelter. "Found  poems"  are  soon lost.  They   are   quickly   written,  quickly  read,  and   quickly   forgotten.  Scott's   dis­ coveries  are  no  exception.  At  best,  they rank   among  such   entertaining  parlour games  as Scrabble and  charades. If you're  fed  up  with  the  TV routine and  would like to exercise your intellect  for a change
-find a  poem  in  your  local  newspaper. It's  inexpensive, and  more  than  one per­ son   can   play.   Perhaps  "found   poetry" may  replace poker  on the husband's night  out.
Mr. Dudek  calls F. R. Scott  a positivist and   a   rationalist.  I   agree.   He   is  the Thomas  Paine   of  cerebral  pleasure. He is also one  of our  first modern poets, and his  books,  Events  and  Signals, The   Eye of the  Needle  substantially testify  to  his witty  and   satirical originality. It  would be   an   unpardonable  blunder  to   cross­ examine his  integrity as an  artist  in  this review,   but   as   for   buying   his   Do-It­ Yourself   Poetry   Kit-well,    I'd   rather
translate the  haiku  of contemporary Jap­
anese  dreamers. I don't dig  the commer­ cial  brainwash. It  doesn't  turn  me  on. It's  funny jpun-ny, but  it's  disappointing too. As a proletarian who dropped out  of high-school,   I   personally   advocated   a new  kind   of  poetry   for  my  colleagues; poetry    that    truck-drivers   and    factory  workers   could   easily   understand.  This  was  a  few  years  ago-I'm  sorry   now. Why   drag   poetry   down   to  their   level? Let's  keep  it  esoteric   but   not  pedantic; let  the  imaginative  magic   remain.  And what  I've  been    saying   is   apropos  of "found  poetry";  it's   too  damned  easy! Like pop art  and  popsickle sticks and whatnot. Because  we  have  more  leisure

BOOKS IN REVIEW



time, credit, hospital insurance, etc. Scott must  discipline himself  anew.  He's  a masterful satirist,  but reprinting obvious inanities won't help.  The other Canadian practitioners of this sort of thing  are fool­ ing  themselves.  They  possess a  great  ap­  petite   for  the   printed  word,  and   when they  find  themselves   unable  to produce
-they  start  finding   poems.   There  are also   poets   who,   like  Rimbaud,  remain silent.  And  sometimes   silence  is the  dis­ covery  of  its own  voice.  Tragic to  think that   there   are   journalists who  unknow­ ingly  fulfil  the  role of Muses.
LEN GASPARINI


"SHE'S ONLY A GIRL," HE SAID


ALICE   MUNRO,   Dance   of  the   Happy  Shades.
Ryerson.  $6.gs.

OF  THE FIFTEEN  STORIES in  this  collec­ tion  only  one  is told  by a man, or, to be exact,  by a  small  town  hood  who'd   like to  think  that's what  he is. It  is, perhaps, the  least  successful  story  in  the book.  Of the   other    fourteen  twelve   are   actually  narrated  by  a  feminine   "I", and   two, "A  trip   to  the  Coast"'  and   "The Time of Death" (to  my mind  two  of the  best) are  told  about  women  or  definitely  from a  woman's point   of  view.  In this  sense Hugh Garner's incredible remark (meant as  a  compliment of  course)   that   "these  are  women's stories,"  has  a  modicum of relevance. And  true  it also is that  women seem   to   write    more   exclusively   about women   than   men  do  about   men.   (And maybe   worry   about    it   less-can    one think,   quickly,   of  a  masculine  counter­ part   to  Emma Bovary?)
 But  to  say  these  are   women's   stories is  to  say  very  little   indeed   and   at  the same   time    to   imply,    perhaps,   things about   these  stories   that   simply   are   not true.  In  actual fact  the tone  of the stories is  curiously   detached  and   un-feminine, un-emotional and  un-involved. And the work is never sentimental or sentimental­ ized.  On  the  contrary, it  struck  me  that  this  may  be  the  one  weakness  here:   one is almost  aware, sometimes,  of the  writer  consciously  holding herself  in,  too  much afraid   that   if  her   voice   becomes   pas­ sionate,  even  for  a  moment, she  will  be accused of writing "women's stories"  and told   to  get   thee   to  Chatelaine, or  the Ladies'   Home    Journal    (which  is  why Mr.   Garner's  fatuous  conclusion  is  so funny-and  so dangerous to  this  parti­ cular  writer.)
But  first and  foremost  Alice  Munro is a  stylist  and   a  professional   in  the  very best  sense of  the  word.  One   reads  these stories  with  awe  and   (as  a  writer)  with not  a  little  envy.  Listen  to  this  descrip­ tion   of  the   unmarried  daughter   in  "A Trip  to the Coast":

She  had  a  trunk full  of embroidered  pillow­ cases    and     towels     and     silverware.    She  bought a  set  of  dishes  and  a  set  of  copper­ bottomed  pots   and   put  them  away   in  her  trunk; she    [the  young   girl   in   the   story] and    the   old   woman   and   May    continued to  eat  off  chipped  plates and   cook  in  pots so  battered  they  rocked   on   the   stove.

and  of the  old  grandmother in  the  same story:

She   got  a  pitcher  of  milk   out   of  the  ice­ box,  sniffed   at it  to  make   sure   it  was  still all   right    and   lifted  two   ants  out   of   the sugar   bowl   with   her   spoon.

Neither  of these is an actual  physical description of the  character, but  the secondary  characteristics enable  us to see both  May  and  the  grandmother just the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



same.  And  the  sentences  as sentences  are beautiful in themselves.  (Indeed, if one were  a purist,  it might  be possible to love Mrs.    Munro  for   her   sentences   alone, they are so carefully considered and so beautifully  in  balance.)
She  also  has  a  keen eye for  significant detail: the  party  dresses of the  retarded girls  in  the  title  story  are  of "grey-green cotton   with  red  buttons  and  sashes"  (as if red sashes can hide the institutional dreariness  of  that   terrible   grey-green); the  portrait of the  terrible  Mr.  Malley  in "The Office",  a huge thing  "with  its own light  and  gilded  frame" and  yet  also  in the  room  one  of those  awful  photos  of a poodle  and  a bulldog  "dressed  in  mascu­ line  and  feminine clothing."  (We know Mr.   Malley   from   these  details -or   at least  we  have  some  uneasy  suspicions.) The children on  the  fox farm  find  their feet  "incredibly  light"  after  a  winter   of heavy   galoshes  and   "the   shaggy  bushes along  the  fences" are "thick" with  birds. The   writer's  outer   and   inner   eye  keep pace   throughout,  and   if   there   is  any conscious symbolism (the blood-streak on Laud's arm   in  "Boys  and  Girls"  or  the Star   of  Bethlehem  quilt  in  "The  Time of Death"?), it seems to flow directly  out of  the  story  and  never  obtrudes.
Mrs.  Munro refers  to  the  "crumbling
world" of  the  ageing   piano   teacher  in "Dance  of   the   Happy Shades." In  a sense this phrase  could also be used about the  traditional forms  and   techniques of literature. In fact  the short  story may  be one  of  the  last  bastions  of the  sequential beginning,  middle   and   end.   And   there has  not  been  very  much  significant  ex­ perimentation in  this  genre.  Garner  calls Alice  Munro a  "literary artist"  because she  has  mastered the  classic  short  story. It would   be  hard   to  disagree  with  any-


92
 thing   here   except   the   curious   termin­ ology. I would,  however,  like to see what  she  could  do  if she  really  let  herself  go. In "The Time  of Death", with its sudden and  disturbing plunge  into  the middle  of things   (the  opening paragraph  is almost Faulknerian)   she   gives  us   an   exciting  hint  of  what  might   happen  if she  tried.
But   this   book   is  very   fine   and   the stories are good reading always. I don't however,   recommend  the  introduction.
AUDREY THOMAS


COLD AND WARM
TRUTHS

GEORGE JONAs,  The Absolute  Smile. House  of
Anansi.  $1.95.
Collected  Poems  of Red  Lane.  Very  Stone
House.
FRED WAH,  Mountain. Audit/East-West.

BooKS  THAT ARRIVE   in  batches   always seem  to  do  so  fortuitously, as  if  to  con­ vey  a  message  which   severally  they  do not  contain; as if  to  lend  perspective to enthusiasm and  depth to  judgment; even to act  as antidotes, as do the lyrical aban­ don   of  Fred   Wah  and   the  compassion  of  Red   Lane   to  the  clinically-controlled acerbity  of   George  Jonas.   For  certainly the  enthusiasm  of  one's   first  encounter with   the   work   of  Jonas   needs   pulling into  perspective.  And   just  as  certainly, emerging shaken  from  his spell, drenched in   his  raw   and   mordant  cynicism,   one needs  an  antidote.
There can  be  no doubt  that  Jonas  far outruns the  other two.  He  outdoes  them in  the  skill  with  which   he  wrings  from his  adopted language the  last  acid  drop of  nuance, in  his  artistic   self-assurance, and  above  all in the sureness of his irony,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



honed  to such  an  edge  that  the  cut often passes unnoticed until another atrophied limb  of  smug   certitude  falls   away.  He creates  the impression of a nihilistic St. George, slaying resolutely and with great vigour   all  the  dragons of  folly  and  fu­ tility   but   without  knowing  why,  seeing no prospect  of  reward (there are  no fair damsels  left  in  his  world) , and  discover­ ing  at  last  that   the  dragons  are  within  himself:

I  hurl  sharp  poems  at  the  world
And keep looking  at  the  wounds  in my skin
At their  point  of penetration.

One  is carried along  with  all  this,  ex­ cited  by the  sparks  of cold  truth  that  fly off in every direction, nodding agreement with  every  line   (but   not  too  vigorously lest  one's   head   fall   off) ;  and,  though  Jonas   resents   being   understood,  under­ standing him  up  to the  hilt.
Only  in surfacing from  these depths, where  the  cold is refreshing but  mortally chill  if  over-indulged, and  clutching for a little respite at the other books, did I remember that  Jonas speaks  only for himself,  that   other part   presumed  dead from   the  abrasions  of  a  wartime  Hun­ garian childhood. Within the   range   of perception of his living  part he writes  as well as anyone  in  Canada. Could he but revive  the  dead,   the   part   that   feels  as well  as sees, he  would  write  better  than  any.
Everything  in   Jonas    is  dispassionate and  low-key, as if written in post-coital depression. This  makes  for  superb irony, but  it leaves out  of account the  fact  that the inverted emotions it awakens have meaning only  in  relation to  the  feelings they  lacerate. Such  a  line  as:  "But  it  is against  the  law  for  some  people  to  hurt me"  is only  significant if one  believes in
 the   possibility  of   justice.   And   one  can arrive  at  a  condition to  feel  the  sting  of "It makes  sense  for  me  to  die  for  Bar­ bara" only  by  travelling the  emotional road  the  poet  took  to get  there.

Perhaps  my coloured  pebbles will rise to significance
but  it is equally  possible  that  money is
of value,

wives are  to love  and  parents to  obey.
I eat. 	But  first I look at  my food with compassion  every day.

If a little of that compassion  could  be saved  for  people,  saved  perhaps even for the   poet   himself,   the   coloured   pebbles might   rise  to  even   greater  significance. For this quality it is, too precious  to be squandered on  food,  that  makes  the  dif­ ference   between  a  Jonas   and  a  Tagore. "I  am   past   certainties,"   writes   Jonas.  And  this  is  admirable:   too  much   dam­  age has been done  by  people's  certainties. But  cynicism  and  despair  are  themselves forms of certainty, no less damaging than  those others.
It is possible to overstress  all this, how­ ever. Jonas  will write  as Jonas must.  Let us be thankful for  a very good  book, and hope    (though  the   word   is   not   in   his vocabulary)  that   he  will  find  the  resili­ ency to write  a great one.
In  turning to  the  work  of  Red  Lane, it is the similarities to Jonas  that  first im­ press:   then,   more   slowly  and   lastingly, the   differences.    Often  on   the   surface  there  is the  same  cynicism  and  the  same low-key  tragedy.  There  is  also a  hint  of the  self-pity  that   Jonas  betrays.  But  al­ most  in  spite  of  himself,  it  seems,  Lane  extends  to humanity the  compassion  that  Jonas  reserves  for  his  food.  And  in  the extremity of  his  despair   there   is  still  a place  for  hope,  for  search:


93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  only the  night  brings hope of the  new land
I search  for.

And even when hope languishes, there is undying resolve:

And  Iam saving  my feces and  fingernail  clippings and  building a stairway
to the  top  of the  wall.

Perhaps what  emphasizes  their  differ­ ence  most  is  that   Lane  was  capable of writing  for   children.  God   forbid   that  George  Jonas  should  ever  try!
The   knowledge of  Red  Lane's  youth­
ful  death conditions one's  reading  of his work,  even  to  the  extent  of  persuading one that  the  event  is there  foreshadowed. It is easy  and   perhaps even  trite  in  the circumstances  to   proclaim    his  promise and  say that  had  he lived, he would  have gone  on  to  produce important work, but it   is  probably true.  There  are   a   few poems in the book that amply justify the efforts  of  the  poets  who  gave  their  time and  talents  to  make  publication  possible.
Fred   Wah's  long   poem   "Mountain" tends   to  reduce all  the  weighty  subjec­ tivities   of   the   other  two   to   molehills. Man   and   his  sickly  problems  are  thrust  aside  by a  joyful  word-orgy.  It  is a  sort of Black  Mountain "Kubla  Khan", con­ tent  to  be  its  own   justification,  its  own message.  The  Mountain stands  immense, many-facetted,  its  sudden   chasms  some­ times inducing vertigo,  and  man gets into the  act  only  by identifying with it:

stand  in it  turn  cover the ground
take  off the  thought's eyes
go in
 stand  through the  twist in desire  the gravelled  road  inward
to  the  base  of the  upright Mountain

It is  not   a  great   poem   but   it  offers beauty  and  a sort  of existential joy, and in  these  days  of  lost  bearings  and  foun­ dering faiths   these  things  may  be  more important than  we know.
H. R. PERCY



POET BESIEGED


MARGARET   ATWOOD,    The    Animals    in   That
Country, Oxford,  $5.00.

J  READ  A   REVIEW   of  this  book  a  short time   ago   which   ended   with:  "Being   a woman  can't be that  awful": meaning, I suppose,    menopause  et   purgatorio,  or mea  culpa  sansculotte, etc.
But   these  are   not  "women's  poems,"
not   in   the   way   that   term   is  generally applied anyhow. Certainly not about babies,  kitchen  sinks and  ding-dong  hus­ bands.   But   they   are   pretty   black,   yes. The writer  seems  besieged  from  without by her  own  inner  perceptions.
In    connection  with    these   poems    I think  of  those  old  western  movie  meller­ drammers:  the  ones  where   all  the  de­ fenders  of  the  frontier  fort  are  messily killed  by anti-WASP Indians, except  one. This  lone  survivor  runs  around like mad on the log stockade, re-loading and  firing the  rifles of his  dead  comrades one  after  the  other,  giving an  illusion   to  the  In­ dians  that  the  fort  is fully  manned and
bristling   with    defenders. In   the    real

go in
 
go in  the  flaming base
 world  this  lone  survivor  dies  like  a dog;

sink in  the  skins of the  Mountain's earth along  the  road
far  from  the  road
in  gravel


94
 in   movies   the   U.S.   Cavalry  (Vietnam
Regiment)  rescues  him  with  appropriate ta-ra-boom-de-ay, and the lights come up.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Well,   in   Atwood's  poems   the   lights stay  down   and   will  finally  go  out  alto­ gether, as they  should  and  must for  both Indians   and    ephemeral    settlers.   And the  writer   is  besieged  from  both  within  and  without:

The idea  of an  animal patters across  the  roof.
In the  darkness the  fields
defend themselves with  fences
in  vain:
everything
is getting in.

But  the  animals in  "that country" are obviously at  home  in this country, though their   name-tags  are   missing.  Simplistic­ ally,  all  you  have  to  do  is  fit  the  poems over  ordinary situations  with  people,  but stereotyped  labels  on  the  real-life  situa­  tions    won't    help    identify    the    poem­ situations:  and   we  have   not  been  here before.
Did  Margaret Atwood  once  say to me
that  in  my  poems  I made  simple  things complicated,  whereas   she  made  compli­ cated   things   simple   in  hers?  Or did   I say that  to her?  I  guess it  hardly  matters which  said  what   to  whom,  but  the  idea has   relevance.   In   a   poem    about    the tourist   centre   in   Boston,   Atwood   talks about   the  model  of  Canada under   glass
 there,   and   speculates  that   there's   more to  her  country   than   this  indicates,  sug­ gests that  the simple  model  is really com­ plicated.   Which    is   a   switch    (and    if you're  getting  dizzy, so am  I).
I suggest that  most  of Atwood's poems
really  do make complicated things simple, and   people   being   animals  do  have   the same   simple   motivations  of   animals­ except  that  the  Atwood-animal is pretty  damn   self-conscious    about    the    whole business.  In  "What Happened" the  At­ wood-animal says to others  in  the  mena­  gerie  that  they   (read   we)   are  just  that, and   our   communications  don't  amount to more  than  a grunt on a  row of beans, a  delayed  reaction grunt,  probably mis­ interpreted first  and  last.  As animals we are  unaware of the possible results of our actions   in   "It   is   Dangerous  to   Read  Newspapers." And in "Arctic Syndrome: dream  fox,"  the  Peggy-animal metamor­ phosis   is   complete  as   she   attacks  the man-animal,  tearing  at   his  throat  with her  teeth  (as  I  suspect  she wanted   to do all  along).
"Backdrop  Addresses  Cowboy" might be about  the  animal territorial idea,  na­ turalists  affirming that  birds  and  animals occupy and  defend  a particular territory: the   unsapient  man-animal  also  defends






RJChaRb aset & company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN  FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK




95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



his territory, but  attacks and destroys that of others  as well. Or  the  poem  might  be about   the  U.S.   Marines, or  technology. Take  your  pick.
There isn't  a  belly-laugh  or  even  a sly
chuckle in any of these poems. I think Atwood   has  not   yet  really  fired  off  all the muskets in the stockade she defends. Perhaps she is too terrified  of the  Indians (animals,  dammit!)   on   the   outside   of her  stockade  (skin) . Perhaps sooner  or later   she'll   begin   to  laugh   helplessly  as the  seventh   or  seventeenth musket  mis­ fires, and  the  Indians will all  run  away, scared  to death by the silence.
The imagery  in  the  poems  amounts to
the  poems  themselves,  and  no  vivid  dis­ tortions  of   reality    are   undertaken   in brief-only in the  total poems. No com­ plicated rhetoric either,  if you  take  rhe­  toric  as a series of  piled-on  exaggerations. Almost  any  prose  writer   uses more.  But these  are  poems, and  very good  ones-: tremendous,  soul-stirring, awesomely ana­ lytical,   penetrating,  complicated -uh, simplicities?
A. W. PURDY

THE SUBJECT
OF POETRY

JOHN   NEWLOVE, Black  Night   Window.  Mc­ Clelland   and  Stewart. $4-95·

REVIEWERS  TEND  TO   ALIGN   young  poets in the context of a few of their  familiar national predecessors with  a  brief  nod  to Eliot, Williams or Greeley; but John Newlove's   Black  Night   Window   repre­ sents   perhaps  the   most   important  evi­ dence  in Canada of  Wallace  Stevens'  in­ fluence   (from  "Poems of Our  Climate",
1942) :

g6
 There would  still  remain  the  never-resting mind,
So that  one  would  want  to escape,
come  back
To  what  had  been  so long  composed.
The  imperfect is our  paradise.
Note  that,  in  this  bitterness,  delight, Since  the  imperfect is so hot  in  us,
Lies  in  flawed  words  and  stubborn sounds.
There   is    Stevens'     "Domination   of Black"  in  these   70  poems  by  Newlove. The unmistakeable tone  of  negativism  is set  by  the  title  poem.  From   his  window (one of Newlove's  displaced  poses) all appears to  be dead  or  dying  "in  this  val­
ley, I in  this  recession"    ("Mendelism") .
The title   poem   signifies  the   perspective of the  poet: he is not "an  outsider", look­ ing  into  windows, but  a man  disengaged enough  to  find  his  special  vision  and  to make   his   judgement.  Newlove   achieves this  same  distance, of  the  displaced per­  son  or  stranger, when  he strikes  his pose "on  that  black  highway" as "The Hitch­ hiker" en  route  from   Montreal to  Van­ couver,  through  dreams   and   along   the  route   of   his  own   genealogy.   These are the  poses  of  the  autobiographical  poet, but  there   is  more   here  than   the  hobo's dashes of local colour or the confessional poet's subjectivism. He usually remains disengaged enough to achieve smooth transition from  the  subjective to  the  ob­ jective,  with  a  concentration that  is  un­ relenting, yet well-composed, as in  "The Drinker" : " ... There are  things  I  like.
I Like   not   confessing.   Or   the   phrase  I
from   some   book ... ", or   as   in   "She
Grows  Older",
•.. & history-frigid   me, I could  not  help  thinking  through her
hurting flesh
of the  aged  imperator  Augustus
dying  in  Nola, ..
Although his tone may be dark and negative, it is not defeatist in purpose. Echoing Plato, Diogenes and   Nietzsche,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Newlove  admits in  "Show   Me  a  Man" that   "there are   too  many   liars, / myself among them." This  "dithyrambic"  poem to   destruction,  defilement  and   debase­ ment  of all human stature and innocence, from   which  no  restoration  seems  appar­ ent,  concludes:

the  death
that  surrounds us,
believe  that,
but  do not  love it.

In  a   poem   that   contains  the   poet's central statement, Newlove  dismisses a stance  of  Eliot   (as  he  does  in  "Lacking Any  Plan"); he  writes  "In This  Reed",

there  there  is life, though
once  I should  have  denied  it, thinking my somnolence  clever  evidence
of a wearied  intellectuality;

and then he picks up the Stevens "order" theme:



0
 it is imperfection the  eyes see, it is impreciseness  they  deserve,

but  they desire  so much  more, what they  desire,  what  they  hope, what  they invent,

is perfection,  organizing
all  things  as they  may  not  be,
it is what  they  strive  for

unwillingly,  against  themselves, to see a perfect  order, ordained reason-
and   he  concludes  with   an   implication that   the  imagination  grasps   reality   and its order,  despite  itself.
But  Newlove  has  overcome one  of the
weaknesses  of  Stevens: he  is not  prima­ rily a  philosophical poet  whose  language is  abstract.  He   is  an   autobiographical poet  who believes  that  poetry  is the  sub­ ject of poetry  and  he  is perhaps a more  effective  example  of   Stevens'   own   die-







bitterly  pointed  book" -Nevill Coghill

"Carnival  is a brilliant and  remarkable story, full  of clear,
,.>...._


"A  marvellous, slightly spooky fantasy" written "with an intoxicating wit and  range of language quite startling
i

"What has  to  be said  is that  Nigel  Foxell  can  write,  and that  he writes for keeps"-John Robert Colombo

"Carnival  is a fine achievement"-George Woodcock



Carnivalfa novel  by Nigel Foxell/2nd printingfsoftcover/ $2.50


Oberon Press


97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tum:  "There can  be  no  poetry  without the personality of the poet."  Newlove's language is concrete, immediate, precise and   particular, as  he  writes  in  the  ex­ ceptionally  fine   "The  Double - Headed Snake":

As one  beauty
cancels another, remembrance
is a  foolish   act,  a double-headed snake
striking in  both  directions, but  I
remember  plains and   mountains, places
I come  from, places  I adhere and  live in.

Perhaps no poem  in  the collection  better demonstrates his  ability  to make  transi­ tion  from  the  immediate act  of  writing, to personal  recollection,  to his immediate perspective,  to   myth   (Canadian  here)  than  "Crazy Riel",  which  opens  naively,

Time to  write  a  poem or  something.
Fill  up  a  page.
The creature noise,

and   progresses  convincingly  to  the  pro­
found conclusion:

The  knowledge waxing.
The wax  that paves  hell's  road, slippery as  the  road to  heaven. So  that as  a  man  slips
he  might as  easily  slide
into being  a saint as  destroyer. In his  ears  the  noise  magnifies. He forgets men.

There are  surprises  in Black Night Window; all  is  not   Stevens.  There  are short-line  poems,   pounding  out   the rhythm of their  drama (like "Indian Women"), the image-expanding "The Pride" and  the  long  dramatic narrative, "Letter  Two". Occasionally Newlove  re­ minds  the  reader  of painters, such  as  the shadowless dimensions of  "Palazzo  Vec­ chio''  (Picasso). Throughout the   book there  are   surrealistic  overtones  - no­ where   more   startlingly  than   in   "Like  Counting Sheep", "tribes  of  wild indians

g8
 / telling   time   by  jello  clocks",  which  is reminiscent of Dali's  "The Persistence  of Memory".
There are  touches of humour in  New­ love's  book,  but  they  are  not  light. The main    weight    of   the   book   is   strongly moral. As Stevens  argues  in  The  N eces­ sary   Angel,   "the   consciousness   of   his function, if  he  is  a  serious   artist,   is  a measure of  his  obligation." One   of  the statements  of    "function"  is   made    in "Ride Off  Any  Horizon":
it  is  not  unfortunately

quite enough to  be  innocent, it  is not  enough merely
not  to  offend-

at times  to  be  bom is enough, to  be
in  the  way  is too  much -
John Newlove's sixth, but first major commercial, collection of poems is simply designed    and   highly   priced,    but   it   is worth   the  $4.95,  not  only  because  these are   poems   of  a  legacy  left  by  Wallace Stevens,   but    because    they    are    truly "Poems of  Our   Climate" -the climate of  Newlove,  Canada and  Western  civil­ ization.
GREGORY M. COOK



PURGED WITH PITY  AND  FEAR

The    Collected    Poems   of   Anne    Wilkinson,
edited   by   A.   J.  M.    Smith.  Macmillan.
$4·95·

READING ANNE  WILKINSON's   POETRY without benefit  of  personal   recollections of her, without impulse to apply the dry wringing of  the  New  Criticism, without preconceptions or  premature  hypothesis,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



reading for the  pure  pleasure  of it, if that is any  longer  permissible, -what do  we make  of the  poems  in  this  collected edition?
They  are  without doubt   persuasive,  if
only in keeping  one's  finger  always under the  next  page.  We  do  not  want  to leave this path  so gently  skirting so many potentialities. A retreating love and  an approaching death appear among the trees of the garden, this changed paradise of remembered sensuous  pleasure and  the certainty  of   impending  pain.   There  is some   recollection    of   peace,    but   many heavy  perplexities and  doubtful portents.
There is also a certain progression  and clarification of mood  as we read  on from poems  of  her  earliest   volume,  Counter­ point  to  Sleep    (1951)    to  those  written closer to the  time  of her  death, ten  years later.   At  first  we  note  a  constant sense of identity with  the  cyclic  life  of  nature and  so with  ancestors  and  with  the same falling  leaves  and  flowing  waters  they in their  own  time  knew:

My skin is the leaf of the willow,
My nerves are the  roots of the  weeping willow tree.
My blood is a clot in the stone,
The  blood of my heart  is fused to a pit in the  rock....

Yet much  of this sense of identity is with things   fading  and   dying.   There is  not much  free  soaring   or  careless  shepherd­ ing  or  unclouded  gaiety  or  golden  hope in  Anne  Wilkinson's world.  Relations of parent and  child  are  disturbed:

"You're bruised  near  to dying,  my school­
boy, my son,
Your   nose  is  all   bloody;   who  bullied  my
man?"
"The girls  are  so  rough; Mother, wash my face  clean
And   stay   close   beside   me   and   feed   me ice-cream."
 Relations of lovers  are  even  less  reassur­
ing:
When last I'd  news of them
One   lover  looked  to  morning,   one  looked
west.
When  one lay down  to sleep, the  other  fell.
For  all  I  know  they  lie there  yet.
On  the  home  sweet  hearth  of hell.

In  later  poems, these griefs deepen:

Who   killed   the   bridegroom?  I, said  the bride,
With   a   nail   in   his   pride,    I  killed   the
bridegroom.
Who  killed  the   bride?   I,  said  the  groom, I fashioned   her   tomb,  I killed  the  bride.

And  a  first-draft stanza,  later  cancelled:

Who'll  bear  the  pall?  We, said the children, Heirs   to  their   burden,   We  bear  the  pall.

Love  without true  happiness, children without  real   pleasure,   life  without  sub­ stantial   hope,-such    is  the   world   of Anne Wilkinson's imagination.  (We must not, of course, jump  to the inference that  these  are  dominant in  her  actual   biog­ raphy.)   What, then,  is  her  imaginative escape?  Certainly in  poetry  itself, in  the act  of writing:

I damp  the  fire  with  purposeful   breath, Stare  at  ash,  sharpen
My  pencil  on  stone  at  a  cold  hearth.

Very occasionally  there  is a  projection of ideal  happiness, generalized  rather than given  as  experience or  expectation. On the  shores  of  a  "Greek  Island",  hungry children are  seen  casting  their  nets for  a fabulous   catch,  "Scenting, in  fumes   of
salt  and  honey,   I Things  to  come  and
the  NOW  in  all  things  past."  Or,  in  the fields of an Ontario farm, "Lovers, touch­
ing, lie,  I A church of grass stands  up  I
And  walls them, holy, in."  But  these are the  objectifications of  desire  and  happi­ ness and  the  world  of  inward  grief  per­ sists.  "Around  my  neck"  concludes her


99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Christmas carol,  "The hangman ties the holly",  and   this  phrase  gives  its  title  to her  second, I 955,  volume.  A  brief  poem called  "Italian  primitive" gives a clue  to these  painful struggles  with  life:

A narrow  virgin  droops
In  newborn  blue,
Lips folded  in, lines following
The  path  of stilted  tears,
Medieval  mother  of men
Holding in her inept  hands
Her  little  mannikin.
Enamel  butterfly  and  bee, The  polished  pear,  sing
Beside the  bearing  olive tree.

This  image  of life is intensified  by its remoteness  from   our   own  scene,  by  its use of  the  ready  symbolism  of Christian faith    and    Italian  painting. It   has   a cameo  clarity.  Yet  neither  virgin  mother nor  divine  child  offer  any  abundance of life. The painter's symbolic accessories of insect, leaf and shining fruit provide it. Intensely  visual   and    tactile,    they   are both  real  and  representative.
Reaching into  history  or  to  the  Cana­ dian    landscape,  to   the   Mediterranean world   or   back   to   earliest   recollections, Anne   Wilkinson   perceives   this   shining  fruit  in  "Countries  where  the  olive/And the  orange   ripen." She  desires  a  world of   Keatsian  sensation    and   thinks   she should  have  said  to  her  children, "Mind the  senses and  the  soul/Will take care of itself."  But what  a heavy weight  of hours l:as  chained and   bowed  this  spirit  desir­ ing freedom. There is such sadness in her realizations of herself: a boy and girl are seated   with   her  in  the  park,-

They  yawned  and  rose
And  walked  away. I moved
To go but death  sat down.
His cunning  hand
Explored  my skeleton.

She  is  beyond   measure   wearied   by  the


100
 pain   of  life:   "so  tired   I do  not  think/ Sleep   in  death  can   rest  me."   She  and God  miss each  other or when,  like seven­ teenth-century   poets,    she   has    fought against God  and  come  to the limit of her strength, her  end  is not  like  theirs,  but  a terrifying  transformation  of   being.   She sees herself God's  falcon, tamed at last:

Regard  me now;  I quiet  sit, Brooding  on the skulls I'll  split.
Or  watch  my flight;  its easy pause, Angle  of incidence inclined
Against  the bitter  wind
Before I dive, God's  mercy in my claws.

Mter  such   knowledge,  what  forgive­ ness?  What shall  we make  of a  poet  for whom,   when  the  clock  strikes,

It strikes,  'NOW  is forever.'
These  are  the sounds  that  murder....

for  whom

Time  is tiger.
NOW  is wooly-witted  lamb....

for   whom   death  is  "ultimate  defeat"? She  has  passed  God  on the  stair,  yawned and  seen him  fade  away; she meets  no comforter,  but   only   "The  striped,  dis­ cerning  tiger   of  anxiety." Her   remem­ brance  of   pleasant  things   is   of   things departed and  irrecoverable.

Children wet with  birth Remember to their  dying dust The  lost aquarium of Eden.

Our appreciation of this  poet  is in the pity.  Though neither pitiable nor  piteous nor  pitiful, she does evoke that  enriching emotion understood in the phrases "The poetry  is in  the  pity"  and  "purged with pity  and   fear". She  never  pities  herself, being   totally  free   of   self-purveying  or self-regarding egotism.
She  is  also  quite   free  of  stridency,  of
the  tone  of explanation and  advice,  and of all desire  to shock.  Free also of "social

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



significance", of puerile protest  and of useless outcry. A pleasing  decorum, not inconsistent with  frankness; a faithful correspondence between  expression and experience; a superb discrimination among the  shades  of colour  of her some­ what   narrow   band   in  the  spectrum  of life:   these  are  her  virtues.  She  concedes that   "the   white   radiance  of  eternity" is not  for  her.
Honesty,    clarity,  persistence,   detach­ ment; some  care  for  the  reader,  so that  self-expression becomes  true  communica­ tion;   great   courage,  the courage of  one who,   whether  as  poet  or  person,   must have   been  much   alone.   Our  thanks   to Macmillans and  to  Arthur Smith   for  a volume  to  be  kept on  a  close, accessible shelf,  to  be  reached down  whenever our sensibility  to  life  is dulled.
ROY  DANIELLS


THE FICTION OF WAR

STANLEY  COOPERMAN,   World War  I  and  the
American Nouel. Johns  Hopkins   Press.
$6.so.

THE    TITLE    OF      Stanley    Cooperman's study,  World   War  I  and  the  American Novel, may suggest  only another examin­ ation  of a handful of famous  war  novels, but  the author attempts much more  than  this.  He   first  summarizes the  historical  and    sociological   background   of   the  period  and  then  discusses  with  consider­  able   acumen   not   only   the   well-known  A Farewell to  Arms  and  Three  Soldiers, but    also   such    lesser-known   works   as Theodore Fredenburch's Soldiers March! and  Elliot Paul's Impromptu. Even when discussing  the  classic novels,  he  has fresh
 things  to say. Indeed, the subsection deal­ ing   with   Frederic  Henry,   "Death   and Cojones,"  is  particularly  illuminating.
He   is  also  successful   in   relating  the World  War  I novels to earlier  war  books, such  as The  Red  Badge of Courage, and to the literature of World  War  II. He confirms, for  instance, the common opin­ ion that  whereas  the writers  of the period I 9 I 4 to  I 9 I 8 express  a  strong  sense  of
outrage and  horror, in  the  later  conflict
these reactions  are  less evident, perhaps through  numbness   or  cynicism.
Less successful are  the first and  second
chapters, "The Bold Journey" and  "The Broken   World."  Here   the   use  of   mis­ leading,  if   not   inaccurate,   statements may  result either  from  a deliberate inten­ tion    to   provoke    discussion -a   good seminar   technique-or  a  fondness   for generalization and simplification. (E.g. "Once the  war  was given  an  ideological basis there  was no room  for  chivalry, for any   concept    of   the   'gallant  foeman'; and   this  ideological  basis  was  the  only one  which   the   American  people   would accept   in  the  year  I9I4 [sic]   to  I9I8". The   alert   reader   wiii   then   surely   ask, who  were  "the  American people?")  At times, Professor Cooperman succeeds in reshaping an  accepted, even axiomatic judgment of popular behaviour into pro­ nouncements  that   are   both   provocative and  illuminating. For  instance, "Perhaps the   most  memorable-and pathetic­ selections are  those written by the literary men   like   Belloc,   who   from   a   sort   of medievalism  and  equally  obsolescent  ro­ manticism,   blamed     the    Germans   for ending  the  image  of war  as a  recreation for  gentlemen ..." At  other  times,  how­  ever,  the  author falls  victim  to  his  own rhetoric. It  is also  disturbing to  find  the  writer  of a scholarly book quoting evalu-


IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ations   from  Dissertation   Abstracts, or statesmen's opinions  from  secondary sources.
It may  be churlish to voice these com­ plaints    since   the   author  has   read   ex­ tensively  and  intensively  in  the fiction  of the   time   to   provide   numerous   sound literary   evaluations  in   the   succeeding  chapters, and  it is for these chapters that  most  students of   literature will  use  the book. He  is able  to relate  a minor  work (e.g.   Faulkner's   Soldier's   Pay)   to   the rest  of  a  writer's  canon,   and   to  be  as critical   and   informative  about   the  oft­ despised  pro-war  novels  as  the  anti-war works. As he rightly points out, both kinds are   bad   when    unassimilated  material, whether a panegyric of France or a bitter record   of  trench   fighting   is  used.  War and   sex  are   meaningfully  entwined   in this   pronouncement:   "Despite  her   in­ ability   to  deal   with   army   and   combat  realities  far  removed   from  her  own  ex­ perience,   Willa  Cather in  One  of Ours created a study  of erotic  war  motivation unequalled until  John  Hersey's  The  War  Lover  appeared in I 959".
Thus, in  spite  of  the  somewhat  reck­
less style of the early chapters and  an excessively reiterated attack  on John  W. Aldridge  and   other   critics  in  an  other­ wise very  good  concluding  chapter, Pro­ fessor  Cooperman  has  provided   as fresh and  sound  an  evaluation of  World  War I fiction  as  we  can  have  at  the  present; and   it  will,  I  believe,  remain   the  stan­  dard  work  for  some  time.
JAMES A. HART


ON THE VERGE

*****  This Rock  Within the  Sea:  A  Heri­ tage   Lost   by   Farley  Mowat  and   John  de Visser,   McClelland  &  Stewart,  $10.00. John


102
 de  Visser  has  made a  remarkable photographic record  of   the   Newfoundland  outports.  It  is by  far  the  best  visu:1l account of  their   way  of life  yet  assembled,  and   it  is  likely   to  remain so,  since,   as  Farley  Mowat  points out   in   his brief   text,    the   outports  are   being   killed   off by   a   governmental  policy    of   concentrating the   population  in   larger  centres.  From  now on   any   celebration  of  Newfoundland's   tradi­ tional existence is  bound to  become  an  elegy. A   more    splendid  elegy   than   these   sombre, humane  and   moving  photographs of   sea  and  land and   men  one  cannot imagine.
*****  Birds  of the  Eastern  Forest:  I, paint­
ings   by  J.  F.   Lansdowne,  text   by  John  A.
Livingston,  McClelland   &   Stewart,   $2o.oo.
Like   its   predecessor,  Birds  of  the   Northern
Forest,    this    is    easily    the    most    handsome
book   of  the   season. Lansdowne's  impeccable
draughtsmanship is  not  only  immensely  pleas­ ing,   but  also  more evocative and  informative than   most    ornithological   photographs,   and Livingston's  commentary is economical, packed with    information  and    conservationist   pole­  mics,   and    always   interesting.  A   book   for   a triple   public:    bird    lovers,    connoisseurs   of good    figurative   painting  and    drawing,  and  bibliophiles, for  it  is  magnificently produced.
****  Guns in Paradise by Fred  McClement. McClelland &  Stewart, $6.gs. The first  full account  in    English  of   the   exploits  of   the German cruiser Emden as a raiding warship during the  First World War. It gives  the bittersweet flavour  of  a  world   where   chivalry in  war  was  still  possible,  and  still  appreciated. Good   research, good   popular writing.
****  journey to Power by Donald Peacock. Ryerson, $6.so. The  best  book  so  far   on  the New    Canadian   Politics.  Mr.  Peacock  traces with  great clarity the  leadership crises in the Conservative   and    Liberal   parties,   and    the ways  in   which   Stanfield fell  from   a  peak   of seeming success  to overwhelming defeat by Trudeau.   Peacock  is   a   Trudeau   man,  but he  does  not  let  it  colour his  writing, which  is fluent without declining into  the  more  annoy­ ing   kinds  of   journalese.  A  sound   guide  for the   times.
****  The  Stratford Scene,  rgs8-rg68, with an introduction by  Michael Langham, Clarke Irwin,  $15.00. An   elaborate  souvenir  of  the activities  of   Canada's   ranking  festival  over the   past   ten   years.   Lavishly  produced,  with excellent photographs,  recollections by  partici­ pants, and  appreciations by admirers. Some  of the   content, when   it discusses  the  works  per-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



formed or the problems of performance, is excellent. But  one  misses  the  voice  of  the  real critic. It  is  too  cosy  and   contained, a  family party,  like   so   much  in   the    Canadian  arts. But,  as  family   parties go,  a  good  one.
***   Politics     in   Saskatchewan,   edited   by
Norman Ward and   Duff  Spafford, Longmans,
$7.50. As do  all  books  by many  hands, Politics in   Saskatchewan  suffers   from   extreme   varia­ tion    in   interest   and    quality-clear-sighted intelligence to    academic    fatuousness.   Still,  prairie  politics-    particularly  minority  poli­ tics-are a fascinating subject, and  there is enough information here on  their growth and variations  to   make  it,   on   the   whole,  an  en­ lightening  book   to   read   and   a  good   one   to keep  for  reference.
***   Ghosts   Have Warm  Hands by  Will   R. Bird.  Clark  Irwin,  $5.50.  Will   R.   Bird   was never   impressive  as   a   novelist,  but   here   he has  written a  good  narrative, moving,  horrify­ ing,   of   experiences  in   World  War   I. Fifty  years  afterwards, such   first-hand  accounts are becoming  rare,   and     Ghosts    Have   Warm Hands, written from  a  vivid  memory, reminds one   that Viet   Nam   has  been   no  worse   than Passchendaele in  its  revelations of  what   man  can  do  to  man.  Whether the  author intended it   or   not,   this   book   should   shake  militarists and   strengthen   pacifists   into   certainty.
***   New    France:  The  Last    Phase,  I744· I76o  by  George F.  G.  Stanley, $ro.oo.  Vol­ ume  5  in  the  admirable Centenary  History of Canada.   Very     competently    done,    with     a wealth of  relevant fact, but  Dr.  Stanley is  no Parkman,  and   the   prose,   heavily  armoured with   detail,  rarely  lifts  from  the  ground. Ex­  cept    for   the   chronological  line,   there  is  no compelling  form   to  the  narrative. A  book  one  will   constantly  refer    to,   but    never  read    a second  time   with   the   expectation of  pleasure.
**  Ensign   Prentiss's Narrative:  A  Castaway on    Cape    Breton,   edited   by   G.    Campbell. Ryerson, $4·95· A reprint, with  reasonably elaborate  notes,  of   the    diary  of   a   British officer  cast  away on  Cape Breton Island  dur­ ing   the   American  War   of   Independence.  A minor   piece     of     Canadiana:    Prentiss   was more concerned to  present a  slightly falsified picture  of   his   own   gallantry  and   enterprise than to  describe  the  country or  its  people.
**  Alberta  by  Robert  Kroetsch. Macmillan,
$6.g5. The second in  Macmillan's series,  "The
Traveller's  Canada",  markedly inferior to  its predecessor,   Edward   McCourt's    Saskatche­ wan.  The  manner  is   sheer   journalese,   cosy
 and   breathless by  turn, and   most  irritating  to read,  particularly  as   much   time    is   wasted with  completely uninteresting  personal  experi­ ences.  The   book's   one  redeeming  feature is a wealth  of  out-of-the-way  facts.
** Minutes of the  Sixties by James Eayrs. Macmillan, $6.95. A  good  author's  comments on   events   in   the   world   around  him   are  in­ teresting at  the   time,   and   may   be  interesting in   fifty   years,   when    they   take   on   historical patina.  But   there  is  a   dead  time   for   such journalism, which   begins   a  few  months after it  was  written, and   lasts   usually  for   at  least two   decades. James  Eayrs   has   collected  his commentaries at   just  the   time  when they  are  least   interesting.  Appearing   as   little  as   two years    after    the    events   they    describe,   they  seem   immeasurably   dated.
** The Smug Minority by Pierre Berton. McCelland & Stewart, $5-95· A little  of the Vancouver Town  Fool   goes  a  long   way,  and the  same  might be said  of  Pierre Berton in  his muckraking manner.  He   spoils   many a  good case  by cutting a  caper at the  wrong  time. Eliminate  the   fooling,  and   this   might  make a  moving long   essay  on  stagnation  in  Cana­ dian society-Porter  popularized as  he  needs  to  be.  A  good  chance lost!
G.W.


A NOTE ON MAJOR JOHN RICHARDSON


lN THE  BIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION which   A.  C.   Casselman contributed  to his  edition  of  Major John  Richardson's
War of  IBI 2   (Historical Publishing Co.,
Toronto, 1902)  there  occur  the following paragraphs:

After  the publication of The Canadian Brothers, Richardson  made  preparations  to start  for   his   home  in   Sandwich.  He   de­ cided   to  travel by means of  his  own  equip­ age,   a   method  affording greater   freedom and   more  ease  and   convenience.  He there­ fore   purchased a sleigh, a  team  of spirited French Canadian  ponies,   and  suitable har­ ness  and   robes,   and   engaged   a  servant  to care   for   the   ponies at   all  stopping places. He   set  out   from   Montreal  during the  last


I03

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



days   of  February.  In   Cornwall  he   stayed some  days,  rehearsing old  times  with  Judge G.   S.  Jarvis,  an   old   fellow-officer  of  8th (Kings).  His    fondness  for    being    enter­ tained  by  his  old  friends on  the  way,  and  an   accident in   the   early  part of  the   jour­  ney,  delayed  him,   and   by  the  time   Brock­  ville   was   reached  it  was  impossible  to  go farther  by  sleigh.
While  waiting  here   some  days   to  make the  necessary changes  to  travel   by waggon, he  was  advised to purchase a  piece  of land, beautifully  situated  on   the   high   banks   of the   St.   Lawrence,  on  which   were   a  good house    and   barn  and   other   out   buildings. The journey, which  occupied about two months,  the    greater  part    of   which    time was  spent in  visiting at  Kingston, Toronto and   London,  ended about  the last of April.•

Since  The   Canadian  Brothers was written in  1839  and  registered  in  Mon­ treal    on   January  2,   1840,  this   would suggest   that   it   was  in   the   late   winter  or  early  spring  of  1840 that  Richardson purchased the  Brockville  property which was  to   be  his  home  for   the   next   few years,   and   from   which   he   issued   his newspaper, The  New  Era. Confirmation of  this  date  has  lately  been  provided   by the  discovery  of  the  "Indenture of  Bar­ gain   and   Sale"  between  William   Hayes and   John   Richardson, dated   March  7,
I 840-the  discovery  having  been  made
in  the  Brockville  Register  office by Miss Effie Cowan of Brockville,  with  whom  I had   been  corresponding about  Richard­ son's  Brockville  sojourn.
As this  agreement will form  an  essen­ tial   document  for   anyone   who   under­ takes  to write  the first full scale biography of  Richardson, I  think  it  is  worth   re­ producing  in  full.   As  the  ink  is  badly faded, some  of  the  readings  below  are subject  to  error:
Liber 2
No. 268
Indenture of
Bargain & Sale from

104
 William Hayes to
John Richardson
I hereby certify that the
within named Richard
Duncan Fraser upon his
oath before me  proved the signing and  sealing of the within memorial and  the execution of the  deed to which  it  relates
Oliver Jones ( ? )
Register
The within named Richard Duncan Fraser
maketh oath and  saith that he was personally
present and saw  the  within memorial signed
and  sealed  and  the  deed  to which  it  relates duly
executed.
R.  D.  Fraser
Sworn before me  at Brockville
ThisI 7th  day  of March I 840
Oliver Jones
Register
And  this  memorial thereof   is hereby required { ? )
to be registered by me  the  said  John Richardson the  grantee herein named. As witness  my hand and  seal  this
seventh day  of March in  the  year  of our  Lord  one  thousand eight hundred and  forty.
Signed and  Sealed
In  presence of	J. Richardson
R.  D.  Fraser
D.  M.  Quinn ( ?)

According  to  Miss  Cowan, the  prop­ erty   was  a  large   one,  including   house, land    and   outbuildings,  and   the   price paid -a  very  high  one  for  those  times
-was   £soo. It was   situated  at   the
corner of  Ann  and King Streets in Brock­ ville,  and   ran  from   the  highway   (King Street)  to  the  St.  Lawrence River.  The impulsive   buying  of  such   an   expensive  property, probably  at  a  price  far  beyond its  actual value,  is  quite  in  keeping  with what   we  know  of   Richardson's  imperi­ ous,   romantic   and   extravagant  person­  ality.
DESMOND  PACEY
